'«^^jfi^ 


/v 


^) 


^iSc^v-:.: 


m: 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE: 


ANECDOTES,  SIMILES,  EMBLEMS,  ILLUSTRATIONS,  EXPOSITORY, 

SCIENTIFIC,  GEOGRAPHICAL,  HISTORICAL,  AND  HOMILETIC, 

GATHERED    FROM    A    WIDE    RANGE    OP    HOME    AND 

FOREIGN  LITERATURE,  ON  THE  VERSES 

OF  THE  BIBLE. 


KEY.   JOSEPH   S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


THE  ACTS. 

VOL.  L 


NEW  YORK: 
ANSON    D.  F.  RANDOLPH   &  COMPANY, 

182   FIFTH   AVENUE. 


INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE   APOSTLES. 

I.  The  title  of  the  Book. — The  title  "  Acts  of  the  Apostles,"  although  not 
given  to  it  by  its  author,  is  of  high  antiquity,  being  found  in  the  oldest  MSS.  and 
versions  either  as  it  stands,  or  with  the  articles  omitted  ("  Acts  of  Apostles  "). 
The  book  is  often  quoted  by  Early  Fathers  as  "  Acts  "  ;  but  apparently  as  a  compen- 
dious form  for  a  well-known  title.  The  propriety  of  the  designation  has  been  often 
questioned.  The  book  does  not  profess  to  record  the  acts  of  all  the  apostles,  nor 
all  the  acts  of  those  most  prominent  in  the  narrative,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  gives  full  notices  of  disciples,  who  were  not  apostles.  But,  taking 
the  title  in  its  earliest  form,  we  find  in  it  a  certain  fitness.  As  the  Gospel  records 
acts  and  words  of  our  Lord,  so  this  book  records  acts  of  the  apostles  by  which  His 
last  injunction  and  promise  were  fulfilled.  But  the  Gospel  is  one  of  four,  whereas 
this  work  stands  alone,  and  is  the  only  source  from  which  we  derive  knowledge  of 
the  most  momentous  facts  which  belong  to  the  foundations  of  the  Christian  faith. 
Without  it  the  first  twenty  years  would  be  a  blank  as  regards  the  history  of  the 
first  Christians — a  blank  with  some  rays  of  scattered  light  from  the  Epistles,  of 
which  the  earliest  was  written  a.d.  52.  Of  the  events  on  which  two  great  Christian 
festivals — Easter  and  Pentecost — are  based,  we  have  the  record  of  the  latter  in  this 
book  alone.     (Canon  Cook.) 

II.  Its  Authorship. — 1.  Its  author  was  the  same  who  wrote  the  Gospel  according 
to  St.  Luke.  (1)  The  literary  style  is  the  same.  This  is  observable  in  the  use  of 
the  Greek  language,  which  differs  materially  from  that  found  in  the  other  books  of 
the  New  Testament.  It  is  more  classical,  especially  in  those  portions  where  the 
writer  speaks  in  his  own  person,  or  narrates  events  not  recorded  elsewhere  ;  and 
where  the  style  is  less  classical,  it  supplies  another  proof  of  curious  and  interesting 
resemblance.  The  writer  of  the  Gospel  inserts  large  portions  either  common  to  the 
Synoptists,  or  taken  from  written  documents  or  oral  traditions.  The  writer  of  the 
Acts  as  certainly  uses  documents  or  traditions,  which  he  adopts  without  any 
material  alteration.  This  is  a  striking  peculiarity,  and  without  any  near  parallel 
in  ancient  writers.  It  was  reserved  to  one  of  our  own  time  (M.  Thierry)  to  give 
life  and  variety  to  his  narrative  by  the  insertion  of  long  passages  differing  in  style 
and  local  colouring  from  his  own  composition.  "What  is  not  less  striking  is  the  fact 
that  in  these  portions  the  language  is  full  of  Hebraisms  and  pecuUar  forms  of  ex- 
pression common  to  the  Gospel  and  the  Acts,  but  found  not  at  all,  or  rarely,  in  other 
books  of  the  New  Testament.  The  idioms  peculiar  to  both  are  most  numerous.  Tc 
take  a  single  instance,  the  word  x«s'e  is  especially  significant.  It  does  not  occur  at 
aU  in  the  first  two  Gospels,  and  in  St.  John  it  only  occurs  thrice  (chap.  i.  14-17) ; 
but  in  Si.  Luke  it  occurs  eight  times,  and  in  the  Acts  seventeen ;  in  St.  Paul's 
Epistles  it  comes  before  us  hundreds  of  times,  being  the  keystone  of  his  teaching. 
The  verb  xati^ovai  is  found  twice  in  the  Goppel,  thrice  in  the  Acts,  often  in  St.  Paul, 
and  nowhere  else.  Another  characteristic  of  the  Gospel  is  the  peculiar  stress  which 
the  author  lays  on  all  notices  of  physical  suffering,  and  his  hearty  sympathy 
with  the  deep  tenderness  which  breathes  in  the  words  and  acts  of  the  Saviour,  as 


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

shown  in  his  selection  of  parables  and  miracles.  The  same  is  observable  in  the 
Acts.  The  poverty  and  sufferings  of  the  first  Christians,  contrasting  with  a  liberality 
so  far  transcending  all  ordinary  manifestations  of  charity  as  to  have  given  rise  to 
cavilling  and  perplexity,  occupy  a  foremost  place  in  the  narrative.  The  frequent 
miracles  of  healing  are  described  with  the  care  natural  to  a  physician,  and  in  each 
case  accompanied  Nvith  words  and  acts  expressive  of  liveliest  sympathy.  (2)  The 
doctrinal  system  is  the  same.  The  Pauline  character  of  the  Gospel  is  a  matter  of 
general  notoriety  ;  that  of  the  Acts  is  equally  demonstrable — a  point  which  will  come 
out  more  distinctly  when  we  consider  the  relations  of  the  book  (Ibid).  (3)  Both 
were  wriiten  to  the  same  person  (c/.  Luke  i.  3  ;  Acts  i.  1),  and  the  latter  distinctly 
refers  to  the  former.  (4)  Both  are  parts  of  one  continuous  history.  The  latter 
portion  of  "  the  former  treatise  "  deals  with  an  event  (the  Ascension)  with  which 
the  Acts  begins,  the  one  narrative  exactly  dovetailing  into  the  other.  Moreover, 
the  Gospel  is  an  account  of  what  "  Jesus  began  to  do  and  teach  " — and  the  Acts  is 
obviously  the  story  of  what  Jesus  continued  to  do  and  teach.  Some  expositors, 
not  without  reason,  have  regarded  the  abbreviated  title  of  the  book  given  by  Patris-' 
tic  authors  to  be  the  true  one — "  the  Acts  " — i.e.,  not  so  much  of  the  apostles  as  of 
the  risen  and  glorified  Christ  through  the  apostles.  At  any  rate,  the  speeches  of 
the  apostles  are  on  the  same  lines  as  the  teaching  of  our  Lord,  and  their  miracles 
are  of  a  similar  character.  The  promised  Spirit  of  Christ  endowed  the  apostles 
with  the  requisite  qualifications  to  perpetuate  the  work  which  Christ  had  begun. 
(J.  W.  Burn.)  2.  Its  author  tvas  "  the  beloved  physician"  the  companion  of  St. 
Paul.  (1)  Its  author  was  a  physician.  There  are  abundant  indications  of  this, 
both  in  tBe  Gospel  and  in  the  history,  from  the  way  in  which  he  notes  diseases  and 
their  cure.  He  describes  more  minutely  than  the  other  evangelists  physical 
ailments,  and  in  doing  so  employs  precise  and  technical  words.  "  A  great  fever" 
(Luke  iv.  38)  is  the  same  expression  as  that  used  by  Galen.  The  word  denoting 
"  blindness"  (Acts  xiii.  11),  is  used  in  a  similar  way  by  the  old  medical  writers. 
There  is,  again,  a  correctness  indicative  of  one  versed  in  surgical  knowledge  in  his" 
account  of  the  healing  of  the  lame  man  (Acts  iii.  7).  Note  also  the  technical  accuracy 
of  his  account  of  the  illness  of  Publius  (Acts  xxviii.  8).  (2)  This  physician  was  the 
medical  attendant  of  St.  Paul.  The  first  direct  intimation  of  his  being  in  Paul's 
company  occurs  (chap.  xvi.  10)  at  Troas.  Now,  at  this  time  Paul  had  been 
apparently  detained  in  Galatia  by  sickness,  and  had  just  passed  through  that 
country  and  Phrygia.  It  is  hardly  probable  that  he  had  visited  Colossa,  as  it  lay 
so  far  out  of  his  route,  but  he  may,  in  the  then  uncertainty  of  his  destination,  have 
done  so  ;  because  it  is  remarkable  that  in  sending  Luke's  salutation  to  the  Colos- 
sians  (iv.  14)  he  calls  him  "  the  beloved  physician."  This  designation  might 
recall  to  their  minds  the  relation  in  which  Luke  had  stood  to  Paul  when  in  their 
country  ;  or,  more  probably,  may  have  been  an  effusion  of  the  warm  heart  of  Paul, 
on  recollection  of  the  services  rendered  to  him  on  that  journey  by  his  loving  care. 
We  find  him  in  the  apostle's  company  no  further  than  Philippi,  the  object  of  his 
attendance  on  him  having  been  then  fulfilled.  If  we  seek  for  any  previous  connec- 
tion we  have  only  the  slightest  hint  in  chap.  xiv.  21,  22,  where  the  "  we"  may  be 
indicative  of  the  writer's  presence.  Certainly,  in  the  account  of  the  events  in  that 
place  (Acts  xiii)  there  is  remarkable  particularity,  and  one  little  notice  in  ver.  52 
looks  very  like  the  testimony  of  one  who  was  left  behind  at  Antioch.  Tradition 
says  that  Luke  was  born  at  Antioch  in  Syria.  Was  he  converted  in  Antioch  in 
Pisidia?  After  the  second  junction  with  Paul  and  his  company  we  find  him 
remaining  with  the  apostle  to  the  end.  It  would  not  be  necessary  to  suppose  this. 
second  attachment  to  him  to  have  the  same  occasion  as  the  first.  That  which 
weakness  of  body  at  first  made  advisable,  affection  may  have  subsequently  renewed. 
And  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  this  was  the  case  (Col.  iv.  14 ;  2  Tim.  i.  15, 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  vii 

iv.  11).  See  also  St.  Luke  and  St.  Paul  in  their  mutual  relations  in  the  Expositor 
(vol.  iv.  p.  134).  3.  Other  notices  of  St.  Luke.  Though  the  name  (Aoj;icac,  the  con- 
tracted form  of  Aovicavog)  is  not  a  sufficient  indication  that  he  was  of  Greek  parent- 
age, since  it  was  not  unusual  for  Jews  to  bear  Greek  and  Roman  names,  yet  he  is 
enumerated  by  St.  Paul  among  those  who  were  not  of  the  circumcision  (Col.  iv.  14). 
Many  circumstances,  each  small  in  itself,  but  the  whole  weighty,  as  accumulative 
proof,  add  support  to  this.  He  was  evidently  acquainted  with  classical  literature. 
Both  his  books,  written  as  they  were  for  a  Roman  of  distinction,  commence,  in 
accordance  with  classical  models,  with  a  Prooemium,  and  not  after  the  manner  of 
Hebrew  writers.  Again,  in  calling  the  Maltese  "  barbarians,"  he  does  not  mean  un- 
civilised, but  makes  use  of  a  term  which  the  Gi'eeks  used  of  all  who  did  not  speak 
the  Greek  language,  and  one  which  the  Romans  applied  to  all  who  were  not  citizens 
of  Rome,  and  even  to  the  Greeks  themselves.  Thus  Juvenal  calls  even  Herod 
Agrippa  a  barbarian.  The  Greek  of  the  Gospel  and  the  Acts  is  comparatively  pure, 
and  Davidson  considers  the  former  to  be  the  work  of  "  a  critical  historian."  This  is 
an  indication  of  the  superior  education  and  position  of  St.  Luke,  or,  according  to  some, 
betrays  his  connection  with  a  place  in  which  the  written  Greek  was  purer  than  in 
some  parts  of  Asia.  To  this  we  must  add  the  tradition  that  he  was  a  proselyte. 
Another  tradition  tells  us  that  Luke  was  one  of  the  Seventy  disciples,  which  receives 
some  support  from  the  circumstance  that  he  alone  has  preserved  an  account  of  their 
mission,  as  though  he  had  a  personal  interest  in  it.  Nor  is  this  invalidated  by  the 
manner  in  which  (Luke  i.  2)  he  seems  to  distinguish  between  himself  and  eye- 
witnesses. For  the  emphasis  there  is  on  "from  the  beginning" — i.e.,  witnesses  of 
the  marvels  which  attended  His  birth,  &c.  As  to  the  birthplace  of  St.  Luke, 
Scripture  says  nothing.  Ecclesiastical  writers  tell  us  that  he  was  a  native  of 
Antioch  in  Syria ;  modern  writers,  however,  assign  to  Philippi  the  honour  of  being 
his  birthplace,  and  others  the  Alexandrian  Troas.  Hug  notes  that  "he  could  not 
want  opportunities  to  perfect  himself  in  a  knowledge  of  medicine  in  a  scientific  city 
like  Antioch;  and  Renan,  that  he  might  have  acquired  his  nautical  knowledge  at 
Phihppi,  or  its  port  Neapolis.  If,  however,  Antioch  was  really  his  birthplace,  it 
seems  likely  that  Philippi  was  his  home ;  for  the  companion  of  Paul,  who  writes  in 
Acts  xvi.  in  the  first  person,  must  have  parted  from  the  apostle  at  the  latter  place. 
inasQiuch  as  in  ver.  19  the  "  we  "  ceases,  and  the  names  of  Paul  and  Silas  are 
introduced  ;  and  it  is  not  until  Paul  reaches  Philippi  again  (chap.  xx.  5,  6)  that 
Luke  reappears.  {TV.  Denton,  M.A.)  After  the  death  of  St.  Paul  the  acts  of  his 
faithful  companion  are  hopelessly  obscure  to  us.  It  is,  as  perhaps  the  Evangelist 
wishes  it  to  be  :  we  only  know  him  whilst  he  stands  by  the  side  of  his  beloved 
Paul :  when  the  master  departs  the  history  of  the  follower  becomes  confusion  and 
fable.  As  to  his  age  and  death  there  is  the  utmost  uncertainty.  It  seems  probable 
that  he  died  in  advanced  life,  but  whether  naturally  or  by  martyrdom  ;  whether  in 
Bithynia  or  Achaia,  or  some  other  country,  it  is  impossible  to  determine.  That  he 
died  a  martyr  between  a.d.  75  and  a.d.  100  would  seem  to  have  the  balance  of 
suffrages  in  its  favour.     {Abp.  Thomson.) 

III.  To  WHOM  IT  WAS  WRITTEN. — To  a  Certain  Theophilus,  of  whom,  beyond 
his  name,  we  know  nothing  certainly.  Internal  evidence,  however,  supports  tbe 
truth  of  the  tradition  that  he  was  a  Roman  resident  in  Italy.  For  Luke,  whilst 
careful  in  referring  to  the  geography  of  countries  which  would  be  bat  little  known 
to  a  native  of  Italy,  and,  as  to  the  customs  of  Palestine,  hastens  over,  as  though 
details  were  unnecessary,  points  of  Italian  geography.  Thus  he  adds  that  the  hour  of 
prayer  was  "  the  ninth  hour  " ;  that  the  party  of  the  High  Priest  was  of  "  the  sect  of  the 
Sadducees."  A  Jew  would  not  have  needed  to  be  told  that  Gamaliel  was  "  a  doctor 
of  the  law  "  &c.,  nor  would  he  have  been  interested  in  knowing  that  Cornelius  was 


viii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

"  a  centurion  of  the  Italian  band."  Theophilus  was  evidently  no  native  of  Pales- 
tine, or  he  would  not  have  been  informed  with  such  particularity  the  locality  ol 
certain  cities  and  places,  and  the  number  of  stadia  between  Emmaus  and  Jerusalem. 
He  was  certainly  no  Cretan  (Acts  xxvii.  8,  12),  nor  was  he  a  resident  in  Greece, 
otherwise  he  would  not  have  required  the  information  given  in  Acts  xvi.  17.  A 
native  of  Antioch,  too,  could  hardly  be  so  ignorant  of  the  geography  of  Palestine, 
which  was  so  near  that  city.  That  he  was  not  an  Alexandrian  is  clear,  otherwise 
the  Alexandrian  teachers  would  have  appropriated  his  reputation  to  their  Church. 
The  testimony  of  the  Alexandrian  patriarch,  Eutychicus,  which  decides  in  favour 
of  an  illustrious  person  in  Eome  or  Italy,  was  something  to  be  said  for  it.  For  as 
soon  as  Luke  approaches  Italy  he  puts  down  all  the  places  as  though  they  were 
known  to  Theophilus, — e.g.,  Syracuse,  Ehegium,  Pozzuoli  (on  the  name  of  which 
Josephus  was  obliged  to  make  comments  for  Greek  or  Oriental  readers),  and  even 
still  less  things,  such  as  Tres  Tabernae,  Via  Appia,  &c.     (JF.  Denton,  M.A.) 

IV.  Its  Sooeces. — The  principal  inquiry  relates  to  the  first  part  (chaps,  i.-xiii). 
After  that  the  narrative  follows  St.  Paul,  from  whom  the  incidents  might  be  derived 
when  the  writer  was  not  present.  Here  something  will  depend  on  the  date  when 
Luke  was  engaged  in  drawing  up  the  book.  I  proceed  on  the  hardly  deniable 
inference  that  of  the  last  voyage  a  journal  was  kept,  probably  set  down  during  the 
winter  months  at  Malta.  It  must  then  be  evident  that  at  this  time  the  purpose  of 
writing  a  second  treatise  was  ripened  in  his  mind.  But  how  long  had  this  pui-pose 
been  in  his  mind  ?  Was  it  not  with  this  purpose,  among  others,  that  he  became  one 
of  Paul's  company  on  the  return  to  Asia  (chap.  xx.  4,  5)  ?  Whether  the  Gospel  was 
written  in  the  interval  or  afterwards  in  Palestine,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  Acts 
was  at  this  time  already  designed  either  as  a  sequel  to  the  Gospel  already  finished, 
or  simultaneously  as  its  future  sequel.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  design  may 
have  grown  under  his  hand,  suggested  little  by  little  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  He 
may  have  intended  on  leaving  Philippi  with  Paul  only  to  draw  up  a  diijyijaig  of  their 
travels,  to  serve  as  a  record  of  his  acts  and  sayings  in  founding  the  Churches  of 
Europe  and  Asia.  So  we  find  him  recording  minutely  every  circumstance  of  this 
voyage,  which  was  probably  the  first  written  portion  of  the  book.  At  any  time 
during  that  or  subsequent  travels,  or  during  the  two  years  at  Ri)me,  he  may  have 
filled  in  those  portions  of  the  narrative  which  occurred  during  his  absence  from 
Paul  from  the  apostle's  own  lips.  Let  us  now  suppose  the  apostle  in  custody  at 
Caesarea.  The  narrative  has  been  brought  down  to  that  time.  The  apprehension 
Paul's  defence  before  the  Jews ;  their  conspiracy,  his  rescue  and  transmission  to 
Felix,  have  been  duly  and  minutely  recorded — even  the  letter  of  Claudius  Lysias 
having  been  obtained,  probably  by  acquaintance  with  some  one  about  Felix.  An 
intention  similar  to  that  announced  in  Luke  i.  3  is  here  evidently  shown.  But 
now  Paul  is  laid  aside  for  two  years.  What  so  natural  as  that  Luke  should  avail 
liimself  of  this  important  interval  to  obtain  information  that  might  complete  hia 
fragmentary  notices.  His  main  source  of  information  would  be  the  Clmrch  at 
Jerusalem.  Then  from  those  who  had  been  on  the  spot  from  the  first  he  would 
learn  more  fully  about  the  Ascension,  and  the  events  of  the  day  of  Pentecost.  In 
constructing  this  part  of  the  Acts  Luke  may  have  used  written  documents.  Detailed 
memoirs  of  some  of  the  most  important  events  may  have  been  drawn  up.  If  so, 
chap.  ii.  would  in  all  probability  be  such  a  memoir.  The  letteis  (chap.  xv.  23-29, 
xxiii.  26-30)  must  have  been  of  this  kind;  some  of  the  discourses,  as  that  of  Peter 
(chap.  xi.  5-17),  containing  expressions  unknown  to  Luke's  style  :  more  or  less,  the 
other  speeches  of  Peter,  containing  many  points  of  similarity  to  his  Epistles.  At 
the  same  time,  from  the  similarity  of  ending  of  the  earlier  sections  (c/.  chaps,  ii. 
46,  47,  iii.   32,  iv.  42,  ix.  31,  xi.   13),  from  the  occunence  of  words  and  phrases 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  ix 

peculiar  to  St.  Luke  in  the  speeches,  the  inference  is  that  such  documents  were  not 
adopted  until  their  language  had  been  revised,  where  necessary,  by  the  author  him- 
self. The  very  careful  detail  of  chap.  xii.  must  have  been  the  result  of  diligeut 
inquiry  on  the  spot  from  the  parties  concerned.  But  one  very  important  section  is 
concerned  with  events  which  happened  at  Csesarea,  and  derived  from  information 
obtained  there.  There  dwelt  Pliilip  the  Evangelist  (chap.  xxi.  8) :  a  most  important 
authority  for  the  contents  of  chaps,  vi.  and  viii,  if  not  also  for  some  events  previous 
to  chap.  vi.  There,  too,  we  may  well  believe,  still  dwelt,  if  not  Cornelius  himself, 
yet  some  of  those  mentioned  in  chap.  x.  27.  Connected  with  this  part  of  the 
history  is  one  minute  touch  of  accuracy,  interesting  as  pointing  to  careful  research 
and  information  of  the  most  trustworthy  kind.  Of  the  Sidonian  embassy  on  the 
occasion  of  the  awful  death  of  Herod  Agrippa  I.  (chap.  xii.  20),  the  Jewish  historian 
knows  nothing.  But  Luke,  who  had  made  careful  inquiries  on  the  spot,  who  had 
spent  a  week  at  Tyre  (chap.  xxi.  4-7),  and  Paul,  who  had  friends  at  Sidon  (chap. 
xxvii.  3),  were  better  acquainted  with  the  facts  tban  to  overlook,  as  Josephus  did, 
the  minute  details  in  the  general  character  of  the  festival.  One  or  two  sections  in 
the  former  part  of  the  Acts  require  separate  consideration.  Where  did  Luke  get 
the  report  of  the  apology  of  Stephen  from  ?  Doubtless  largely  from  Paul,  who  was 
so  deeply  implicated  in  the  deacon's  martyrdom,  and  who  shows  by  his  own  reference 
(chap.  xxii.  20)  to  the  part  taken  by  him,  how  indelibly  it  was  fixed  in  his  memory, 
and  who  in  more  than  one  place  reproduces  Stephen's  thoughts  and  expressions. 
At  the  same  time  it  is  improbable  that  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  should  have 
preserved  no  memorial  of  so  important  a  speech  as  that  of  her  first  martyr.  The 
narrative  of  Saul's  conversion  in  chap.  ix.  can  hardly  fail  to  have  been  derived  from 
himself.  We  now  come  to  the  inquiry,  How  far  we  have  indications  of  the  lacuna;  in 
the  author's  personal  testimony  in  the  latter  part  having  been  filled  in  by  that  of 
Paul.  Chaps,  xvii,  16-xviii.  5  relate  to  a  time  when  Paul  was  left  alone,  and  here 
\re  discover  traces  of  an  unusual  hand,  for  in  vers.  16-21  we  have  no  fewer 
than  eleven  expressions  foreign  to  Luke's  style,  or  nowhere  else  occurring,  and  no 
fewer  than  twenty  in  the  speech.  Now  of  these  thii4y-one  expressions,  five  are 
either  peculiar  to,  or  employed  principally  by,  Paul ;  and  besides  that  we  find  the 
phrase  to  Trvevfia  avrou,  so  frequently  used  by  him  of  his  own  spirit  and  feelings. 
Here  we  can  hardly  fail  to  trace  the  hand  of  the  apostle.  Again  at  xviii.  5,  Silas 
and  Timotheus  joined  Paul  at  Corinth.  One  at  least  of  these,  Timotheus,  was 
afterwards  for  a  considerable  time  in  Luke's  company.  But  on  his  arrival  at 
Corinth  no  alteration  in  the  style  is  perceptible.  It  remains  the  mixed  diction  of 
Paul  and  Luke  :  the  apax-legomena  are  fewer,  while  we  have  some  remarkable 
traces  of  Paul's  hand.  Further,  vers.  24-28  it  would  be  natural  to  suppose  were 
furnished  by  Apollos,  or  if  not  by  Aquila  and  Piiscilla,  to  Paul  on  his  return  to 
Ephesus.  And  so  it  seems  to  have  been.  The  general  form  is  Luke's  :  the 
peculiarities  are  mostly  Paul's.  It  yet  remains  to  examine  the  speeches  reported  in 
the  latter  part  of  the  Acts.  (1)  The  discourse  to  the  Ephesian  Elders  in  chap.  xx. 
18-35  is  a  rich  storehouse  of  phrases  and  sentiments  peculiar  to  Paul.  Very  faint 
traces  are  found  of  Luke,  while  hardly  a  line  is  without  unmistakeable  evidences 
that  we  have  the  very  words  of  Paul.  (2)  The  apology  before  the  Jews  (chap.  xxii. 
1-32)  was  spoken  in  Hebrew.  Did  Luke  then  understand  Hebrew,  and  report  the 
speech  as  delivered?  or  was  it  afterwards  communicated  by  Paul?  Now — (a)  The 
speech  is  full  of  Hebraisms,  which  leads  us  to  infer  that  Paul  was  not  the  translator 
into  Greek,  but  that  it  is  the  work  of  one  who  felt  himself  more  strictly  bound  to  a 
literal  rendering  than  the  speaker  himself,  who  would  be  likely  to  give  his  own 
thoughts  a  freer  and  more  Grecian  dress,  (b)  While  it  contains  several  expressions 
occurring  nowhere  else  but  in  Luke's  writings,  not  one  is  found  in  it  peculiar  to 
Paul.     Our  inference  then  is  that  Luke  himself  has  rendered  this   speech  from 


X  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

having  heard  it  delivered ;  and  consequently  that  he  was  acquainted  with  Hebrew. 
(3)  The  short  apology  before  Felix  (chap.  xxiv.  10-21)  contains  some  traces  ol 
Paul's  manner,  but  still  they  are  scanty,  and  the  evidences  of  Luke's  hand  pre- 
dominate. Its  very  compendioas  character  makes  it  probable  that  it  wa?  drawn  up 
by  Luke  from  Paul's  own  report  of  the  substance  of  what  he  said.  (1)  The  impor- 
tant apology  before  Agrippa  (chap.  xxvi.  1-29)  is  full  of  Paul's  peculiar  expressions. 
It  was  spoken  in  Greek,  and  taken  down  nearly  as  spoken.  Some  phrases,  however, 
occur  in  it  which  seem  to  belong  to  Luke ;  just  enough  to  show  the  hand  which  has 
committed  the  speech  to  writing.  Our  conclusion  therefore  is — (a)  That  in  all 
cases  the  diction  of  the  speeches  was  more  or  less  modified  by  Luke's  hand,  (b) 
That  they  are  not  in  any  case  composed  by  him  for  the  speaker,  but  were  really  in 
substance,  and  for  the  most  part  in  very  words,  uttered  as  written,  (c)  Th  it  the 
diiJerences  apparent  in  editorial  diction  remarkably  correspond  to  the  alleged 
occasions  and  modes  of  their  delivery  ;  where  Paul  spoke  Hebrew,  hardly  any  traces 
of  his  own  style  being  discernible,  as  also  where  only  a  short  compendium  of  bis 
speech  is  given  ;  while  on  the  other  hand  speeches  manifestly  reported  at  If^ngth, 
and  which  were  spoken  in  Greek  originally,  are  full  of  the  characteristic  pecuUaritiea 
of  Paul.     {Dean  Alford.) 

V.  The  Date  and  Pl\ce  of  its  PcBLiCAxioy. — In  one  conclusion  almost  all 
critics  agree,  viz.,  that  the  Acts  and  the  third  Gospel  are  from  the  same  pen.  If 
then  the  latter  is  early  quoted,  and  of  this  there  is  no  doubt,  this  is  proof  also  of 
the  early  existence  of  the  former.  Now  from  tha  tims  of  St.  Paul,  who  quotes  this 
Gospel,  and  calls  the  quotation  Scripture  (1  Tim.  v.  18),  down  to  recant  times,  there 
is  hardly  a  Christian  writer  who  does  not  mike  use  of  it  and  name  it  a^  the  source 
from  which  he  is  quoting  :  and  as  to  the  Acts,  Polycarp,  in  his  Epistle  to  Philippi, 
where  Lake  long  abode,  cites  it,  and  it  appsars  la  the  earliest  list  of  books  of 
acknowledged  authority.  Then  again  the  nainber  of  "  Acts  "  written  in  imitatiDn  of 
this  book  early  in  the  second  and  some  even  in  the  first  century,  must  be  taken  as  an 
additional  presumptioa  of  its  early  date,  which  the  best  critics  fix  within  the  years 
58  to  70.  Were  we  discussing  the  date  of  an  ordinary  book  no  objection  would  be 
raised  to  the  earliest  date.  The  abrupt  conclusion,  whilst  Paul  is  a  prisoner  at 
Eome,  does  not  admit  of  our  believing  that  it  was  written  after  many  other 
important  events  in  the  life  of  this  apostle  had  happened.  If,  as  some  have  suggested, 
it  was  written  to  extend  and  strengthen  the  reputation  of  St.  Paul,  the  book  would 
not  have  ended  without  recording  his  subsequent  labours  and  martyrdom.  That 
no  notice  is  taken  of  anything  after  his  arrival  in  Rome  is  sufficient  indicatioQ 
that  it  was  written  during  St.  Paul's  imprisonment  or  immediately  after  its  close — 
i.e.,  about  the  year  a.d.  63.     (IF.  Denton,  31. A.) 

VI.  It8  Genuineness  and  AuTnENTiciTY. — This  has  been  ever  recognised  in  the 
Church.  It  is  mentioned  by  Eusebius  among  the  generally  acknowledged  portions 
of  Holy  Scripture.  It  is  first  directly  quoted  in  the  Epistle  of  Lyons  and  Vienne  to 
those  of  Asia  and  Phrygia  (a.d.  177);  then  repeatedly  and  expres-ly  by  Irenieus, 
Clement  of  Alexandria,  Tertullian,  and  so  onwards.  (Abp.  Thomson.)  Its 
credibility  is  unquestion  ibly  proved  by — 1.  Many  undesigned  coincidences  between 
the  Acts  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  and  profane  history.  2.  Several  particiilir  circum- 
stances recorded.  Thus — (1)  When  Paul  was  sent  fio>n  Ctesarca  to  Home  he  was 
committed  to  the  care  of  Julius,  officer  of  the  Augustan  Cohort.  Now  from 
Joseph  us  we  learn  that  the  Roman  garrison  at  Cresaiea  was  composed  chiefly  of 
Syrians  ;  but  there  happened  to  be  then  a  small  body  of  Roman  soLiiers  stationed 
there  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  Augustan  Cohort.  So— (2)  Sergius  Paulus 
(Acts  xiii.  7),  "  the  deputy,"  is  designated  by  a  Greek  title  {dvOviruToi^),  v\hich  was 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  xi 

given  only  to  those  governors  who  were  invested  with  proconsular  dignity — i.e., 
appointed  not  by  the  emperor  but  by  the  Senate.  Now  we  learn  that  Cyprus  was 
once  praetorian  and  its  governors  appointed  by  the  emperor,  but  according  to  Dion 
Cas«ius  it  was  now  proconsular,  and  he  designates  the  governor  by  the  same 
title  as  the  Acts.     {Bp.  Marsh.) 

VII.  Its  Chaeacteeistics. — 1.  Its  representative  character.  Looking  at  it  as  a 
•whole,  what  a  representative  book  it  is !  What  varieties  of  character  ;  what  miracles 
of  friend-hip ;  what  bringiag  together  of  things  between  which  cohesion  is,  from 
our  standpoint,  simply  impossible  !  We  wonder  how  the  characters  ever  came 
together,  how  any  one  book  can  hold  them ;  and  yet,  as  we  wonder,  we  see  them 
complement  one  another  so  as  to  furnish  out  the  whole  circle  with  perfect  accuracy 
of  outline.  We  belong  to  one  another.  The  hand  cannot  say  to  the  foot,  "  I 
have  no  need  of  thee  "  ;  nor  can  the  ear  say  to  the  eye,  or  the  eye  to  the  ear,  "  I 
have  no  need  of  thee."  The  human  race  is  not  one  man  ;  one  man  is  not  the 
human  race.  The  difficulty  we  have  with  ourselves  and  with  one  another  is  that 
of  not  perceiving  that  every  one  of  us  is  needful  to  make  up  the  sum  total  of  God's 
meaning.  The  men  in  the  Acts  belong  to  one  another.  Think  of  Peter  and  Luke  : 
Peter  all  fire ;  Luke  quiet,  thoughtful,  contemplative,  musing,  taking  observations 
and  using  them  for  historical  purposes.  Think  of  Paul  and  Barnabas ;  think  of 
all  the  names  that  are  within  the  record  and  see  how  wondrous  is  the  mosaic. 
There  are  only  two  great  leaders — "  Peter  and  Paul."  They  seem  to  overshadow 
everybody;  their  names  burn  most  ardeutly  and  lustrously  on  the  whole  record. 
That  is  quite  true  ;  but  where  would  they  have  been  but  for  those  who  supported 
them,  held  up  their  arms,  made  up  their  following  and  their  companionship  ?  If 
they  are  pinnacles,  the  pinnacle  only  expresses  the  solidity  and  massiveness  of  the 
building  that  is  below.  You  see  the  pinnacle  from  afar  ;  but  that  pinnacle  does 
not  exist  in  itself,  by  itself,  for  itself ;  it  is  the  upga  he -ing  of  the  great  thought, 
and  represents  to  the  farthest-off  places  tbe  sublime  fact  that  the  tabernacle  of  God 
is  with  men  upon  the  earth.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  2.  Its  catholic  spirit.  If 
the  Gospel  of  Luke  is  distinguished  by  its  large-hearted  and  human  spirit, 
its  sequel  the  Acts  perfectly  corresponds  with  this  c^iaracteristic ;  for  what 
is  in  the  Gospel  only  prophecy,  indication,  type  and  pa  able,  is  in  the  Acts 
converted  into  fulfilment,  fact  and  history.  If  in  the  Gospel  the  Saviour 
recognised  the  gratitude  of  a  Samaritan,  and  related  the  p  irable  of  the  good 
Samaritan  ;  in  the  Acts  the  apostles  witnessed  the  joy  with  which  the  gospel 
was  received  by  that  people.  If  in  the  Gospel  not  a  few  of  the  sayings  of  Jesus 
point  to  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  and  their  admission  into  the  kingdom  of 
God,  the  Acts  relate  how  the  Word  of  God  gradually  reached  the  Gentiles,  and 
how  they  became  naturalised  citizens  of  the  kingdom.  If  the  Gospel  is  distinguished 
as  the  human  gospel,  the  same  wide  range  embracing  the  human  race  is  also 
recognised  iu  the  Acts ;  it  was  composed  for  a  Gentile,  and  its  largest  portion  is 
devoted  to  the  history  of  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  Nevertheless  Gentile  history 
is  not  the  chief  object  of  the  book :  St.  Luke  has  as  much  at  heart  the 
conversion  of  the  Jews.  And  it  is  precisely  the  union  of  Jewish  and  Gen- 
tile Christianity,  the  harmony  of  Peter  and  Paul,  which  is  the  centre-point 
of  the  book.  What  our  Lord  says  in  chap.  i.  8  is  its  peculiar  theme.  The 
effective  testimony  of  the  apostles  anointed  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
from  Jerusalem  to  the  end  of  the  earth,  or  the  progress  of  the  Church  of 
Chri  t  from  the  Jews  to  the  Gentiles  forms  its  contents.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.) 
3.  Its  fearless  candour.  Nothing  is  kept  back;  there  is  no  desire  to  make  men 
appear  better  than  they  really  were ;  all  the  sin  is  here,  all  the  shame,  all  the 
vii'tue,  all  the  honour — everything  is  set  down  with  an  impartial  and  fearless  hand. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


That  is  one  of  the  strongest  incidental  proofs  of  the  inspiration  of  the  whole  book. 
Tliis  is  not  a  series  of  artificial  curves  or  carvings ;  the  men  we  have  to  deal  with 
are  men  of  flesh  and  blood  like  ourselves  wholly.     Here  is  a  record  of  selfishness  : 
the  story  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  is  not  kept  back.     "How  much  better,"  soma 
would  have  said,  "  to  omit  it."     As  well  omit  the  story  of  Ad^m  and  Eve.     In 
every  book  there  is  an  Adam  and  Eve,  if  it  be  a  faithful  portraiture  of  human 
life;  in  every  soul  a  fall,  an  expulsion,  a  day  of  ch  rubic  fire  that  asserts  the 
sovereignty  of  outraged  righteousness.     These  are  not  inventious,  but  they  are 
representations  of  oui selves  as  we  know  ourselves,  and  therefore  we  can  confirm 
the  book.    The  accident  varies,  the  substance  is  constant.    Dissensions  are  reported : 
Paul  and  Barnabas  separated  ;  Paul  withstood  Peter  "  to  the  face,  because  he  was 
to  be  blamed."     Peter  to  be  blamed  1     That  was  an  honest  book!     There  is  no 
man-painting  here  ;  there  is  no  attempt  to  get  up  a  Christian  exhibition  with  the 
motto,  "  Behold  the  perfect  men !  "   There  is  a  stern  reality  about  this  that  compels 
the   attention  which  it  charms.      Christianity  is  not  represented  here  as  to  its 
earthly  lot  in  any  very  attractive  way.     Who  would  say,  after  reading  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  were  we  to  judge  by  the  fate  of  its  apostles  and  teachers,  "  Let  us  also 
be  Christians  "  ?     There  was  hardly  a  man  in  the  whole  brotheihood  that  could 
trace  his  ancestry  beyond  yesterday.     If  you  wanted  to  join  an  unf^ishioniib'e  sect, 
the  Christiin  sect  would  have  presented  to  you  innumerable  and  overwhelming 
advantages  ;  if  you  wanted  to  suffer,  Christianity  would  find  the  opportunity.     We 
thought  that  towards  the  last  surely  we  should  hear  some  better  account  of  it ; 
but  in  the  last  chapter  Christianity  is  represented  as  the  sect  which  is  everywhere 
"  spoken  against."     All  of  these  circumstances  and  instances  illustrate  the  iutense 
honesty  of  the  record.     Human  authors  study  probabilities.     It  is  a  canon  amongst 
literary  men  that  even  in  a  romance  nothing  shall  be  put  down — though  it  may 
actually  have  occurred — which  exceeds  ihe  bounds  of  avei age  probability.     There 
is  no  study  of  parts,  proportions,  colours  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles ;  there  is  no 
poetry-making,  no  romance  elaboration ;  things  are  put  down  every  night  as  they 
occurred  every  day — there  stands  the  record,  with  all  blotches,  blemishes,  faults,  all 
heroisms  and  nobilities,  all  endurances  and  glorious  successes ;  nothing  is  extenuated ; 
the   whole  tale  is  told   exactly  and  literally   as  it  occurred.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
4.  It  is  pre-eminently  a  Gospel  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost.     At  every  stage  His  action  is 
emphatically  recognised.     Jesus,  after  His  resurrection  (chap,  v.),  had  "  through 
the  Holy  Ghost  given  commandment  to  the  apostles,"  who  are  to  be  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Ghost "  and  to  "  receive  power  after  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  thim." 
The  Holy  Ghost  had  "spuken  through  the  mouth  of  David."     Then  comes  the 
wonder  of  Pentecost  (chap,  ii.),  when  all  the  disciples  were  "  filled  with  the  Huly 
Ghost,"  and  the  prophecy,  "  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh,"  brought  to 
the  verge  of  fulfilment.     Jesus  has  "  received  from  the  Father  the  promise  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."     Once  again  (chtip.  iv.)  all  were  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."     The 
fcin  of  Ananias  (chap,  v.)  is  a  "  lie  unto  the  Holy  Ghost,"  who  has  been  "  tempted  " 
by  himself  and  his  wife.     The  "  Holy  Ghost  whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that 
obey  Him  "  is  a  witness  that  the  Christ  is  exalted  at  the  right  hand  of  God.     The 
seven  who  are  chosen  in  chap,  vi  are  "  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  wisdom," 
and  Stephen  is  pre-eminently  "  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."     His  leading 
charge  against  priests  and  Scribes  (chap,  vii.)  is  that  they  "  do  always  resist  the 
Holy  Ghost."     Peter  and  John  go  down  to  Samaria  (chap,  viii.)  that  those  who 
have  been  baptized  by  Philip  "might  receive  the  Holy  Ghost"  ;  and  the  sin  of 
Simon  is  that  he  thinks  this  g  ft  of  God  can  be  purchased  with  money.     It  is  the 
Spirit  that  impels  Philip  to  join  himself  to  the  Ethiopian,  and  carries  him  away 
after  his  baptism.     Ananias  is  to  lay  hands  on  Saul  of  Tarsus  (chap,  ix.)  that  he 
may  be  "filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."     The  Churches  in  their  interval  of  rest 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  xiii 

are  "  walking  ...  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  admission  of  the 
Gentiles  (chap,  x.)  is  attested  when  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  poured  out  on 
Cornehus  and  his  friends,  and  Peter  dwells  on  that  in  his  address  (chaps,  xi. 
15-17;  XV.  8).  Barnabas  when  sent  to  Antioch  (chap,  xi.)  is  described  as  "full 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith."  It  is  the  Holy  Ghost  who  "  separates  Barnabas 
and  Saul  for  the  work  of  the  ministry"  (chap,  xiii.),  and  they  are  sent  forth  by 
Him.  Saul,  roused  to  indignation  by  the  subtlety  of  Elymas,  is  "  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost."  It  is  He  who  (chap,  xv.)  guides  the  decision  of  the  Council,  and 
directs  (chap,  xvi.)  the  footsteps  of  Paul  and  his  companions  on  their  mission 
journey.  The  twelve  disciples  of  John  (chap,  xix.)  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  when 
Paul  lays  his  hands  on  them.  He  it  was  who  witnessed  (chaps,  xx.  ;  xxi.)  in  every 
city  that  bonds  and  imprisonment  awaited  the  apostle  in  Jerusalem,  and  it  was 
the  Holy  Ghost  who  had  made  the  elders  of  Ephesus  overseers  of  the  Church  of 
God.  Well  nigh  the  last  words  of  the  book  are  those  which  "  the  Holy  Ghost  had 
spoken  by  Esaias,"  and  which  Paul,  in  the  power  of  the  same  Spirit,  applies  to 
the  Jews  of  his  own  time  (chap,  xxviii.  25).  (Dean  Plurnptre.)  5.  It  is 
a  continuation  of  the  life  of  Chriat.  The  Acts  is  but  the  history  of  Christ  in 
His  disciples.  He  it  is  who  appoints  the  twelve  witnesses  (i.  24),  who,  after  He 
has  received  the  Spirit,  sends  Him  down  on  the  Church  (ii.  33),  who  adds  to  His 
Church  (ii.  47),  and  is  ever  near  His  people,  turning  them  away  from  their 
iniquities  (iii.  26).  He  it  is  who  works  miracles  both  of  healing  and  destruction 
in  testimony  to  His  apostles'  preaching  (iii.  6,  10,30,  ix.  84,  xiii.  11,  xiv.  3,  xix.  13). 
To  Stephen  He  reveals  Himself  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God  (vii.  55,  56). 
His  augel  speaks  unto  Phihp  (viii.  26),  and  it  was  His  Spirit  that  caught  him  away 
(ver.  31).  He  appears  to  Saul  (xix.  5,  27,  xxii.  8,  26).  His  hand  established  the 
first  Church  among  the  Gentiles  (xi.  27).  His  angel  delivers  Peter  (xii.  7,  11,  17), 
and  strikes  the  hostile  Herod  (xii.  23).  He  it  is  again  who  appears  to  Paul  in  the 
temple,  and  commits  to  him  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  (xxii.  17,  21).  To  Him 
the  apostles  and  brethren  address  themselves  on  the  occasion  of  the  first  mission 
to  the  Gentiles  (xiii.  2  ;  v.  47).  To  Him  are  the  infant  Churches  commended  (xiv. 
23).  His  Spirit  prevents  the  missionaries  from  preaching  in  Bithynia  (xvi.  7).  He 
calls  them  by  the  voice  of  the  Man  of  Macedonia  into  Europe  (xvi.  10).  He  opens 
the  heart  of  Lydia  (xvi.  14),  comforts  and  encourages  Paul  at  Corinth  (xviii.  9,  10), 
strengthens  him  in  prison,  and  informs  him  of  his  journey  to  Rome  (xxiii.  11). 
These  mterventions  of  Jesus,  so  numerous,  express,  and  decisive,  are  a  sufiScient 
warrant  for  our  ascribing  all  to  His  influence,  even  in  those  instances  when  His 
name  is  not  expressly  mentioned.     (Baumgarten.) 

VIII.  Its  Scope  and  Objects. — 1.  To  record  the  history  of  the  Church.  Looking 
at  the  contents  of  the  book  it  would  be  well  described  as  the  "  Acts  of  Peter  and 
Paul,"  the  f(u-mer  occupying  a  prominent  place  in  chaps,  i.-v.,  x.-xii.,  xv.,  the 
latter  being  the  central  figure  in  chaps,  vii.  58,  ix.,  xi.  25-30,  xiii.-xxvii.  From 
another  point  of  view  a  yet  more  appropriate  title  would  be  that  of  Origines 
Ecclesiee — the  history  of  the  growth  and  development  of  the  Church  and  of  its 
mission  work  among  the  Gentiles.  The  starting-point  and  close  of  the  book  are  in 
this  respect  signiricaut.  It  begins  at  Jerusalem;  it  ends  at  Rome.  When  it  opens, 
circumcision  is  required,  as  well  as  baptism  ;  the  Church  is  outwardly  but  a  Jewish 
sect  of  some  120  pers ms.  When  it  enJs  every  barrier  between  Jew  and  Gentile  has 
been  brok-n  down,  and  the  Church  has  become  catholic  and  all-embracing.  To 
trace-  the  stages  of  that  expansion  botb  locally  and  as  affecting  the  teaching  of  the 
Church  is  the  dominant  purpose  of  the  book.  The  "  acts  "  of  those  who  were  not 
concf-rned  in  it,  or  played  but  a  subordinate  part,  are  deliberately  passed  over. 
Some  p:ira;,'raph  of  selection  is  clearly  involved  in  the  structure  of  such  a  book  as 


xiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

this,  and  without  going  beyond  its  four  corners  we  may  safely  affirm  that  the  main 
purpose  of  the  writer  was  to  inform  a  Gentile  convert  of  Kouie  how  the  gospel  had 
been  brought  to  hioi,  and  how  it  had  gained  the  width  and  freedom  with  which  it 
was  actually  presented.  (Ibid.)  As  in  the  Gospels  we  see  the  grain  of  wheat 
falling  into  the  earth  and  dying,  in  the  Acts  we  have  it  represented — for  the  Church 
is  the  body  of  Christ — springing  up  and  bearing  fruit  abundantly,  spreading  into 
all  parts  of  the  world,  and  enriching  human  nature  with  the  gifts  of  Divine  grace. 
As  in  the  Gospels  the  human  means  are  not  brought  into  prominence  in  order  that 
our  attention  should  not  be  diverted  from  the  central  figure,  our  Incarnate  Lord, 
so  in  the  Acts  it  is  not  man  that  is  foremost,  but  the  work  which  by  man  was 
wrought  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  the  "  acts  "  which  He  enabled  the 
apostle  of  Christ  to  accomplish,  and  which,  though  done  by  man's  instrumentality, 
was  yet  done  by  God,  for  "  neither  is  he  that  planteth  anything  .  .  .  but  God  that 
giveth  the  increase."  (W.  Benton,  M.A  )  2.  To  vindicate  and  elucidate  St. 
Paul : — We  do  not  dispute  that  St.  Luke's  history  may  have  been  written  with  an 
irenical  puipose.  St.  Paul,  to  whom  he  was  strongly  attaohed,  had  been  more 
perversely  misrep  esented  and  assailed- than  anyone  of  the  servants  of  Christ; 
and  tlierefore  he  wrote  to  exhibit  the  harmony  of  St.  Paul's  Christianity  with  that 
of  the  earlier  apostles,  as  well  as  the  process  by  which  he  had  been  led  to  take  a 
wider  scope  of  thought  and  ministiy,  and  the  wise  resolution  with  which  he  had 
rescued  the  Church  from  the  trammels  of  Jewish  restriction.  The  book  of  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  tells  us  exactly  what  it  is  indispensable  for  us  to  know  in  order 
to  understand  and  ajipreciate  the  epistles  which  f  How.  It  is  a  wonderful  tale,  well 
told ;  and  all  the  more  satisfactory  that  it  allows  the  apostles  Peter  and  Paul  to 
speak  for  themselves,  and  so  allows  us  to  catch  their  sentiments  in  their  own 
words,  while  we  seem  to  see  their  gestures  and  hear  their  tones.     (D.  Fraser,  D.D.) 

IX.  Its  Eelations  to  the  Epistles. — 1.  The  Acts  greatly  help  us  in  under- 
standing ttie  Epistles;  the  latter  add  much  itnportant  historical  information  ;  and 
the  agrct'ment  between  the  two,  extending  even  to  many  minute  details,  strongly 
confirms  the  truth  of  both  the  Epistles  and  the  Acts.  Imagine  that  we  had  to 
study  the  Epistles  without  the  history  ;  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  to  determine 
anything  as  to  the  time  and  place  of  their  composition,  to  fix  tht-ir  historical 
surroundings,  and  to  perceive  the  precise  adaptation.  By  the  help  of  Acts  xvii., 
xviii.  we  can  readily  locate  1  and  2  Thess.  as  having  certainly  been  written  at 
Corinth,  and  almost  certainly  in  a.d.  52  or  53  ;  and  we  much  better  understand 
those  pre  ious  relations  I  etween  the  apostle  and  the  persons  addressed.  We 
perceive  thnt  these  were  the  first  writings  of  the  great  apostle,  and  that  they 
contain  the  germs  of  that  great  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  which  he 
developed  some  years  lattr  in  Gal.  and  Horn.  By  the  help  of  Acts  xix.  and  xx., 
we  perceive  that  the  second  and  chief  group  of  Paul's  Epistles  (1  and  2  Cor.,  Gal., 
and  Rom.)  were  all  written  between  a.d.  57  and  a.d.  58.  It  also  b(>comes  clear  that  1 
Cor.  was  written  before  leaving  Ephesus,  2  Cor.  in  Macedonia,  during  the  summer 
or  fall;  and  llom.  during  his  three  months'  stay  in  Corinth.  As  to  the  third 
group  (Phil.,  Phil  m..  Col.,  Eph.),  the  Acts  give  us  less  assistance,  for  they 
were  written  after  ifs  history  closes,  while  the  apostle  was  a  prison-r  at  Rome. 
Yet  even  here  no  little  I'glit  is  thrown  on  Ph'lippians  by  the  history  of  Paul's  first 
labours  at  Philippi ;  while  the  fact  that  Paul  had  laboured  long  and  successfully  at 
Ephesus  brings  into  more  striking  contrast  with  other  Epistles  the  absence  of 
affectionate  salutation  to  mdividuals  in  the  Epistle,  and  concurs  with  other  circum- 
stances to  work  the  conviction  that  th's  whs  des'gned  as  a  circular  letter  to  the 
various  cities  in  the  district  of  which  Ephjsus  was  the  capital.  (2)  The  Epistles 
afford  a  valuable  sup|)leinent  to  the  history  contained  in  the  Acts.  Thus  the  brief 
account  of  Paul's  labours  in  Thessa'onica  (Acts  xvii.  1-',))  may  be  greatly  t^nlargt-'d 
by  interesting  recollections  given  in  1  Thess.  ;  and  that  of  his  labours  in  Corinth 
(Acts  xviii.  1-17),  by  similar  recollections  in  1  Cor.     The  bare  statement  in  Acts 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  xv 

xvi.  6  that  Paul  -went  through  Galatia,  turns  to  a  vivid  picture  of  a  warm-hearted 
Celtic  reception  when  we  compare  Gal.  iv.  12-15.  The  priority  and  prommence 
of  women  in  the  Church  at  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  12-40)  receives  further  pleasing 
illustration  from  the  general  excellence  of  that  Church  and  its  special  generosity 
in  contributions  for  Paul's  support,  of  which  we  read  in  the  Epistle.  The  barely 
mentioned  three  months  in  Greece  (Acts  xz.  2,  3)  become  warm  with  activity  and 
zeal  as  we  read  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomans.  And  so  with  m;iny  otlier  points 
throughout  the  liistory.  One  exceedingly  important  part  of  Paul's  hi-^tory  comes 
out  in  the  second  group  of  Epistles,  to  wliich  only  a  single  slight  referf^nce  is  made 
in  the  book  of  Acts  (xxiv.  16).  This  is  the  great  collection  which  Paul  made 
among  his  Gentile  Churches  for  the  poor  Christians  at  Jerusalem.  This  occupied 
much  of  his  thouyht  during  two  years  of  his  third  missionary  journey.  For  this 
he  directed  the  Galatians  and  the  Corinthians  so  set  apart  something  on  every  first 
day  of  the  week  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2),  and  sent  witli  Titus  (2  Cor.  viii.  6)  the  stronge.-t 
argument  and  warmest  appsal  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).  But  he  knows  that  there  are  those 
wbo,  if  he  liimself  take  charge  of  the  money,  will  delight  in  saying  that  nobody 
knows  whetlier  that  money  ever  got  to  Jerusalem  ;  so  he  declares  (1  Cor.  xvi.  3,  4) 
that  it  is  to  be  carried  by  persons  of  their  own  selection.  The  good  name  of 
Christianity,  in  connection  with  benevolent  funds,  much  oftener  suffers  through 
imprudence  or  negli,i,'ence  than  through  hone-ity.  The  apostle  evidently  expected 
this  contribution  to  open  the  hearts  of  the  Je^ush  Christians  towards  the  Gentile 
Churches,  and  thus  prevent  a  schism.  The  Judaisers  were  doing  their  utmost  to 
kindle  bitter  feeling  at  Jerusalem  towards  Paul  and  his  Churches.  The  Jews  in 
foreign  countries  had  long  been  accustomed  (as  the.v  are  to  this  day)  to  send  money 
for  the  support  of  their  poorer  brethienat  Jerusalem  ;  and  when  Gentile  Cliristians 
gathered  this  liberal  contribution,  nothing  could  be  better  suited  to  call  forth  the 
affection  and  contidence  of  the  Jewish  Ciiristians.  The  rapid  restoration  of  pood 
feeling  in  the  Southern  States  of  America  towards  the  North  has  bet-n  not  a  little 
promoted  by  the  generosity  of  Northern  Christians  towards  Southern  enterprises. 
The  later  Ep  sties  carry  on  the  history  after  the  conclusion  of  Acts.  What  an 
intere-ting  light  is  thrown  ujion  Paul's  life  as  a  prisoner  at  Koine,  by  various 
allusions  in  Poil.,  Philera.,  Col.,  and  Eph.  We  learn  something  even  of 
his  outer  life  as  he  goes  abont  in  the  Prgetorian  camp,  chained  to  a  soliiier,  and 
talkingupon  every  occasion  concerning  Christ,  until  his  bonds  in  Christ  are  known 
in  all  the  Praet"rium  ;  or  as  he  searches  for  souls  in  the  slums  of  the  great  city,  and 
a  runaway  slave  from  Asia  Minor  becomes  his  son  in  the  faith;  or  as  he  joyfully 
receives  a  fresh  contribution  from  Philiiipi  for  his  support,  or  lovingly  visits  the 
brother  who  brought  it,  in  that  perilous  illness  which  the  sii^k'y  climate  of  Eome 
has  inflicte)  up  'U  him.  Still  more  is  the  apostle's  inner  life  brought  before  us  in 
these  Epistles,  until  we  see  right  clearly  his  anxieties,  his  consolations,  his  hopes 
for  time  and  for  eternity.  The  closing  group  of  letters  to  his  two  companions  for 
years  past  reveal  anew  the  most  t'-nder  aspects  of  the  erear.  apostle's  character, 
mingled  with  feailess  courage,  until  at  last  the  curtain  slowly  descends  upon  hita 
as  he  sits  t'li^iking  of  old  friends  who  are  absent,  and  rejoicing  in  other  friends 
whom  the  Lord  has  raised  up  for  him,  ready  to  be  offered,  and  waiting  for  the 
crown  of  righteousness— s'o-vly,  slowly  the  curtain  descends,  till  we  see  his  face  no 
more.     (J.  A.  Druadus,  D.D.) 

XT.  PavcncAL  l^,sso^s  from  its  histoky. — It  is  said  of  Abel  that  "  being  dead  he 
yet  speaketh,"  though  no  word  uttered  by  Ijim  has  been  recorded.  So  the 
eaily  Church  speaks  to  us  throuyh  its  works  more  than  tlnough  any  message  of 
written  language.  1.  Its  sjjirit  of  devotion,  and  /ts-  love  of  public  wnr.-ihip  should 
he  tons  a  holij  inspiration.  On  the  evening  of  the  Sabbath  of  the  Eesuirection,  the 
discioles  met  in  an  upper  room  and  also  on  the  fo'lowing  Sabbath.  After  the  Ascen- 
sion "  they  were  daiL  in  the  temple  praising  and  blessing  God."  Nor  did  the  descent 
of  the  Spirit  on  Pentecost  change  their  habits  of  public  worship.  Peter  and  John 
still  "  went  up  at  the  ninth  hour,  being  the  hour  of  praver."  And  when  th« 
number  of  the  disciples  h^id  vastly  increased,  "  they  continuing  daily  with  oi  e 
ac'-ord  in  the  temple."  The  fact  that  the  descent  of  the  Spirit,  o'-curred  on 
the  anniversary  of  the  giving  of  the  law  seems  to  indicate  the  perfect  union 
between  the  le^al  and  spiritual  requ'remcnts.  The  duly  of  public  wo  ship  »as 
enjoined  by  that  law,  was  sanctioned  by  the  baptism  of  fire,  and  was  voiced  in 
the  actions  of  the  early  Cliurch,  saying  with  the  anostle,  "  Forsaking  not  the 
assembling   of  j ourselves   together."     It   must  not    be  forgotten   also   that   this 


xvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

attendance  on  public  worship  was  not  free  from  danger.  In  their  llrst  meetings 
"  the  door  was  shut  for  fear  of  the  Jews."  2.  hi  their  unity  of  spirit  and  close 
affection  for  each  other,  theij  gave  a  brir/ht  example  of  Christian  duly.  This  union 
may  have  been  caused  partly  through  fear  of  the  bigoted  Jews,  and  as  being 
sharers  of  the  cooim  )n  reproach  ;  but  the  chief  tie  was  love.  Their  great  attach- 
ment was  to  their  risen  Master.  They  loved  Him,  and  through  Him  they  loved 
each  other.  The  test  of  discipleship  was  "  J3y  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are 
My  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another."  This  love  was  manifest,  not  only 
in  their  union  in  public  service,  but  also  in  their  supplying  each  other's  needs.  A 
mutual  love  overcame  their  selfishness  and  their  love  of  property.  That  love  is 
farther  evinced  by  the  provision  which  was  early  made  for  the  support  of  widows. 
This  led  to  the  selection  of  seven  laymen  to  superintend  this  ministration,  vrhich 
gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  relative  value  of  the  spiritual  and  the  temporal  economy 
of  the  Chuich.  The  serving  of  tables  was  necessary,  but  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  was  more  essential.  This  ever  remains  God's  order  :  The  preaching  of  the 
Cross  precedes  the  humanitarian  efforts  to  elevate  man.  3.  In  the  history  of  the 
early  Church  toe  mark  its  care  in  reference  to  organisation.  One  of  its  first  acta 
was  to  fill  the  place  of  the  fallen  Judas.  We  have  also  the  institution  of  the  order 
of  deacons  for  serving  tables.  What  their  peculiar  organisation  was  may  be  a 
matter  of  doubt ;  but  all  agree  that  there  was  an  organisation,  in  which  the 
members  were  closely  united  ;  which  received  members,  administered  the 
ordinances,  and  expelled  the  unworthy;  which,  by  proper  adjudication,  settled 
difficulties,  and  selected  its  officers.  To  these  organised  Churches  the  writings  of 
the  apostle  were  sent.  This  organisation  was  not  formed  to  interfere  with  great 
national  movements ;  but  simply  to  preserve  its  own  existence,  to  advance  its 
members  in  holiness  and  usefulness,  and  to  extend  amongst  men  the  knowledge  of 
the  Lord.  As,  however,  this  organisation  might  need  to  be  modified  to  meet  the 
condition  of  various  lauds  and  coming  ages,  its  special  form  is  not  given  us  in  the 
Holv  Scriptures.  It  has  been  left  to  men  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
\o  car  y  out,  as  seems  best  to  them,  the  great  principles  laid  down  in  the  Word  of 
Go^..  4.  Notice  the  example  of  the  Christian  Church  in  exciting,  and  finding 
proper  objects  for,  human  activity.  Duties  were  enjoined,  not  upon  ministers 
merely,  or  on  prominent  members,  but  on  the  entire  body.  These  members  differed 
from  each  other  in  office  and  qualifications,  as  the  head  from  the  hand  or  the  foot. 
All  Christians  were  urged  to  be  co-workers  with  God,  to  have  the  spirit  of  Christ, 
and  to  labour  for  their  fellow-men.  They  were  described  as  an  army  of  soldiers 
fighting  against  the  enemies  of  Christ.  They  were  enjoined  to  "  work  while  it  is 
called  to-day  "  ;  "  to  be  diligent  in  business,  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord." 
The  activity  of  the  early  Christians  appeared  in  the  midst  of  their  persecutions* 
and  when  they  were  scattered  abroad  they  went  everywhere  preaching  the  Word. 
5.  Wf.  have  exemplified  in  the  early  Church  the  power  of  the  gospel  to  triumph  over 
all  circumstances.  It  commenced  in  the  age  of  universal  corruption.  Outside  of 
Judaea  idolatry  reigned  supreme  ;  licentiousness  prevailed  ;  murder  and  suicides  were 
frequent ;  the  power  and  wealth  of  the  State  were  in  a  few  hands  ;  the  mass  of 
the  people  were  without  means,  learning,  protection,  and  a  large  part  was  held  in 
slavery.  Yet  in  the  midst  of  all  these  vices,  without  a  Bible  in  the  hands  of  the 
people,  without  a  Sabbath,  and  without  church  edifices,  the  gospel  made  wonderful 
conquests.  Nor  were  these  triumphs  secured  by  any  external  aid  ;  the  disciples 
received  no  assistance  from  the  governments  or  established  institutions.  The 
literature,  the  schools,  the  influence  of  society,  were  against  them.  Yet  the  power 
of  God  made  them  conquerors.  If  the  gospel  had  such  power  then,  why  not  now  ? 
{Dr.  M.  Simpson.) 

The  works  of  the  late  Reverend  C.  H.  Spurgeon  are  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  volume  bj 
penmssion  of  Mesars.  Pasaraore  and  Alabaster. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTKATOE. 

THE    ACTS    OP    THE    APOSTLES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Vees.  1-12.  The  formar  treatise  have  I  made. — A  true  commencement  must  have 
respect  to  what  has  gone  before: — In  any  new  beginning  of  study  or  work,  it  is 
important  to  have  in  mind  what  has  been  done  before  in  the  same  line.  No  one 
can  learn  or  do  to  advantage,  unless  he  avails  himself  of  what  others  have  learned 
and  done  before  him.  Any  other  plan  would  utterly  forbid  progress.  The  world 
would  be  full  of  new  begiunings — and  nothing  else.  He  who  would  study  the  New 
Testament  wisely,  must  know  what  the  Old  Testament  has  disclosed.  He  who 
would  get  good  from  the  Book  of  Acts  must  have  in  mind  at  the  stirt  the  facts  and 
teachings  of  the  former  treatise  by  the  same  author.  (H.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.) 
The  Gospels  and  the  Acts : — I.  Their  relation.  In  determining  this  it  is  not  enough 
to  say  that  while  the  Gospels  contain  the  history  of  the  Master's  ministry,  the  Acts 
record  that  of  the  apostles.  Both  alike  narrate  the  work  of  the  Lord  :  the  Gospels 
what  He  did  in  Person,  the  Acts  what  He  did  by  His  chosen  witnesses.  This  rela- 
tion is  marked  at  its  outset.  If  the  former  treatise  records  "  all  that  Jesus  began," 
then  the  present  relates  what  Jesus  continued.  His  incarnation,  death,  &c.,  were 
only  the  foundation.  In  the  Acts  He  rears  a  lofty  temple  on  that  foundation.  Nor 
does  the  work  cease  with  the  abrupt  conclusion  of  the  Acts.  In  a  city  map  you 
mark  the  road  which  leads  to  another  city  a  little  beyond  tbe  wall,  when  it  breaks 
off.  To  trace  it  further  you  require  another  map.  So  our  Lord's  path  breaks  off 
on  the  map  of  inspiration  and  is  continued  on  the  map  of  providence.  II.  Their 
POINT  OF  UNION.  The  latter  treatise  does  not  begin  precisely  where  the  former  ends. 
By  design  they  overlap  each  other — both  recording  theEesurrection  and  the  Ascen- 
8ion.  Thus  where  a  bridge  of  two  arches  spans  a  river,  both  arches  lean  on  one 
piUar  which  rises  in  the  middle  of  the  flood.  In  the  midst  of  the  gulf  which 
separated  God  and  man,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  tide  of  time  stood  Jesus — on  Him 
rests  the  Old  Dispensation  and  the  New.  In  the  end  of  the  Gospel  history  we  found 
the  first  hemisphere  of  the  Divine  dispensation  terminating  in  Christ  crucified  and 
ascended.  Here  we  find  the  second  arch  springing  where  the  first  was  finished. 
Resting  there,  it  rises  into  heaven,  and  stretches  away  into  the  future.  We  lose 
sight  of  it  as  we  lose  sight  of  the  rainbow,  in  mid-heavens ;  but  we  know  assuredly 
that  it  wiU  traverse  all  the  intervening  space,  and  lean  secure  on  the  continent  of  a 
coming  eternity.  {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  St.  Luke  a  model  for  the  Bible  student: — I. 
He  collected  his  facts  with  care  and  diligence  (Luke  i.  1-3).  This  complete 
knowledge  of  all  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  to  teach  suggests  the  importance 
of  endeavouring  to  gain  a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  the  Word  of  God.  There  is  a 
great  readiness  in  quoting  certain  texts  or  favourite  portions,  but  the  fulness  of 
which  St.  Luke  speaks  is  rare.  The  Word  of  God  cannot  be  said  to  be  unknown, 
but  it  does  not  "  dwell  richly  in  us  in  all  wisdom."  Hence  truths  are  magnified 
into  undue  proportions,  and  important  doctrines  are  passed  over  slightly,  because 
they  do  not  well  enter  into  some  peculiar  system.  II.  His  collection  was  limited 
BY  THE  boundaries  OF  REVELATION.  It  did  not  go  beyoud  what  God  made  known 
by  His  Son.  Here,  again,  we  may  learn  the  importance  of  not  going  beyond  the 
revealed  Word  whenever  we  attempt  to  review  God's  dealings  with  mankind,  and 
especially  of  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  Christ.  If  there  be  danger  in  a  partial 
knowledge  of  God's  truth,  there  is  perhaps  more  in  adding  to  the  things  which  God 

VOL.   I.  1 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  i. 

has  revealed.  It  is  this  which  has  caused  so  much  superstition.  III.  He  recog- 
nised that  a  knowledge  of  "all  that  Jesns  began  to  do  and  to  teach,"  however 
comprehensive  and  however  free  from  mixture,  will  not  prove  a  saving  knowledge 
unless  it  be  conveyed  to  the  soul  by  the  power  of  God.  St.  Luke  describt's 
the  commandments  of  Jesus  as  given  unto  the  apostles  by  the  Spirit.  It  is 
possible  for  any  man  to  learn  these  commandments.  The  letter  of  the  law  and 
the  facts  of  the  gospel  are  within  the  reach  of  the  poorest  capacity.  But,  in 
order  to  make  the  knowledge  avnilable,  the  Spirit  of  God  must  lake  of  the  things 
so  learnt,  and  show  them  to  the  soul.  "No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  It  is  impossible  to  read  the  Acts  without 
seeing  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  the  acting  Guide  of  all  the  sayings  and  actions 
of  the  first  teachers  of  Christianity.  Looking  upon  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel 
as  a  medicine  to  heal  our  spiritual  sicknest^,  we  must  suppose  tliat  the  medicine 
is  taken,  and  that  it  penetrates  through  the  constitution  of  the  sick  soul.     IV.  It 

REQUIRES      strong     CONVICTIONS      OF     THE     TRUTHS     WE     BELIEVE     IN      ORDER     TO     BE 

DILIGENT  IN  THE  PROPAGATION  OF  THEM.  Our  zeal  for  the  cause  of  the  Eedeemer, 
our  desires  for  the  advancement  of  His  glory,  our  prayers  for  the  prevalence  of  His 
truth,  will  all  be  in  proportion  to  the  depth  of  our  conviction  that  this  is  the 
Word  of  God.  The  earliest  impressions  are  liable  to  be  effaced  by  time,  by  the 
world  and  its  cares,  by  the  changes  of  our  own  views,  by  the  speculative  views  of 
others,  &c.  We  have  need,  therefore,  of  w5,tchfulDess,  lest  that  which  is  within 
us  lose  its  power  and  freshness,  and  we  begin  in  the  routine  of  duty  and  form  to 
think  less  and  less  of  the  power  of  godliness.      (i?.  Burgess,  B.D.)  Literary 

histories : — Luke  was  the  Haydon  of  the  sacred  scribes  ;  he  sketched  the  perfect 
Man  and  drew  in  heroic  size  the  figures  and  scenes  of  the  new  kingdom. 
Historians  often  become  interested  in  a  single  character  and  turn  aside  to  give 
us  a  mon'^graph  or  biography  on  the  object  of  their  enthusiasm.  Motley,  after 
writing  "The  Eise  of  the  Dutch  Eepublic"  and  "The  History  of  the  United 
Netherlands,"  published  "John  Barneveld."  Bancroft  left  his  chosen  field,  the 
"History  of  the  United  States,"  to  make  us  better  acquainted  with  Abraham 
Lincoln.  Froude  has  added  to  his  "History  of  England"  a  "Life  of  Lord 
Beaconsfield."  Wi  iters  of  history  describe  the  movements  of  an  age  as  centring 
about  their  heroes.  The  records  of  a  given  period  are  seen  to  bear  the  stamp 
of  a  distinct  personality.  But  Luke  begins  with  a  great  character.  His  bio- 
graphy precedes  his  history  and  is  the  inspiration  of  it.  There  was  a  life  which 
was  the  key  to  the  Acts,  and  our  writer  was  in  touch  with  it.  He  did  not  gild 
an  earthlv  tyrant  and  set  him  up  like  Nebuchadnezzar's  image  in  the  plain  of 
Dura  to  fill  the  wastes  of  godless  history,  but  he  traces  the  way  of  the  Church 
through  the  fiery  furnnce  of  events  with  a  form  "  like  a  son  of  the  gods."  Guizot 
wrote  a  "History  of  Civilisation  in  Europe  and  in  France,"  and  gave  to  the 
world  as  one  of  his  latest  works  "  Meditations  on  the  Christian  Ileligion." 
Edwin  Arnold,  after  following  the  "Light  of  Asia "  till  it  led  him  to  a  dim 
Nirvana,  came  back  for  another  guide  and  traced  the  path  of  tlie  "  Light  of  the 
World."  Gounod  composed  operas  in  his  youth,  and  afterward  turned  his  atten- 
tion to  such  serious  works  as  the  oratorios  of  "The  Eedemption"  and  "St. 
Paul."  It  thus  not  infrequently  happens  that  in  later  life  men  are  led  to  dwell 
upon  and  portray  that  great  personality  they  have  passed  by  in  search  of  the 
world's  truth  ;  but  the  Bible  writers  all  had  their  study  fires  kindled  by  the  rays 
of  that  Sun  which  illuminates  the  past  and  future,  before  they  became  scribes  of 
Divine  truth.  The  ancient  penmen  were  friends  of  God,  and  those  of  the  New 
Testament  were  disciples  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  before  they  essayed  to  describe 
the  powers,  the  laws,  and  the  institutions  of  redemption.  (W.  R.  Campbell.) 
The  Gospels  the  living  picture  of  Christ : — The  whole  value  of  the  Gospels  to 
Erasmus  lay  in  the  vividness  with  which  they  brought  home  to  their  readers  the 
personal  impression  of  Christ  Himself.  "  Were  we  to  have  seen  Him  with  our  own 
eyes,  we  should  not  have  so  intimate  a  knowledge  as  they  give  us  of  C'irist, 
speaking,  healing,  dying,  rising  again,  as  it  were  in  our  very  presence.  If  the  foot- 
prints of  Christ  are  shown  us  in  any  place,  we  kneel  down  and  adore  them.  Why 
do  we  not  rather  venerate  the  living  and  breathing  picture  of  Him  in  tht-se 
Books  ?  It  may  be  the  safer  course,"  he  goes  on,  with  characteristic  irony,  "  to 
conceal  the  state  mysteries  of  kings,  but  Christ  desires  His  mysteries  to  be  spread 
abroad  as  openly  as  was  possible."  {Litfle^s  ^'Historical  Lights.")  Tlie  "  Memora- 
bilia "  of  Christ : — Xenophon,  the  loving  disciple  of  Socrates,  has  given  nn  account 
of  the  last  sayings  of  that  great  man,  after  he  was  imprisoned  and  condemned  to 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  3 

death  ;  and  in  all  ages  the  "  Memorabilia  "  has  been  regarded  as  one  of  the  most 
precious  records  which  classical  antiquity  has  sent  down  to  us.  But  sublime  and 
heroic  as  they  were,  how  immeasurably  do  these  last  utterances  of  the  Grecian 
stage  fall  balow  the  moral  grandeur  and  the  deathless  interest  inspired  by  the  last 
words  of  Jesus.  The  nearer  we  stand  to  the  Cross,  and  the  more  we  enter  into  the 
spirit  of  its  great  central  character,  the  more  do  we  feel  the  force  of  Rousseau's 
eloquent  eulogium,  "  Socrates  lived  and  died  like  a  philosopher  ;  but  Jesus  Christ 
like  a  God."  The  pre-eminence  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  incarnate: — We  have 
seen  in  mountain  lands  one  majestic  peak  soaring  above  all  the  rest  of  the  hills 
which  cut  the  azure  of  the  horizon  with  their  noble  outline,  burning  with  hues  of 
richest  gold  in  the  light  of  the  morning  sun  ;  and  so  should  the  doctrine  of  Christ 
incarnate,  crucified,  risen,  and  reigning,  be  pre-eminent  above  the  whole  chain  of 
fact,  doctrine,  and  sentiment  which  make  up  the  sublime  landscape — the  magnifi- 
cent panorama — which  the  Christian  preacher  unfolds,  and  makes  to  pass  in  clear 
form  and  brilliant  colour  before  the  eye  of  his  people's  faith.  {Evangelical 
Magazine.)  Theopbilus. — Theophiliis  : — Not  an  ideal  person  with  a  name  expres- 
sive of  his  religious  character.  That  must  have  been  Philotheus  (of,  2  Tim.  iii.  4). 
Probably  a  Gentile  convert,  not  resident  in  the  Holy  Land,  or  he  would  not  have 
heeded  the  many  explanations  of  places  and  usages.  He  is  said  by  Theophylact  to 
have  been  of  senatorial  rank ;  and  the  title  prefixed  in  the  Gospel  has  been 
thought  to  imply  that  he  was  a  provincial  governor  (cf.  chaps,  xxiii.  26  ;  xxiv.  3). 
The  address  here  is  less  ceremonious,  indicating  that  Luke's  friendship  had 
become  more  intimate.  {Bp.  Jacobson.)  Of  all  that  Jesus  bega,n. — Teaching  to 
be  combined  with  doing  : — If  it  were  not  for  the  fact  of  a  Christian  life  manifested 
in  the  holy  lives  of  believers,  Christian  doctrine  would  command  no  attention 
beyond  that  of  a  speculative  system.  God  begins,  but  never  finishes.  His  works 
and  His  teachings  are  only  movements  in  the  march  of  intiinte  advance.  But  one 
thing  we  know  is  finished,  and  that  is  the  redemption  work  of  Christ,  which  He 
declared  accomplished  when  He  bowed  His  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost ;  but  even 
this  gives  birth  to  a  progressive  work  of  salvation,  based  upon,  and  springing  out 
of,  that  foundation.  Jesus  intimated  to  His  disciples  that,  through  them,  He 
would  do  greater  works  after  He  went  to  th3  Father  than  while  He  was  on  the 
earth,  and  that,  as  they  became  able  to  bear  them,  He  would  give  them  other 
teachings.  In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  find  both  of  these  promises  being 
literally  fulfilled.  (G.  F.  Pentecost.)  Aspects  of  Christ  on  the  earth : — 1.  A  Founder. 
He  "  began  to  do  and  teach,"  like  an  architect  who  draws  the  plan  of  a  magnifi- 
cent cathedral,  and  lays  its  foundations,  then  leaves  it  for  others  to  finish.  The 
Church  of  to-day  at  its  best  is  only  carrying  out  the  purpose  of  its  Founder.  2.  A 
Lawgiver.  Giving  His  commandments  through  the  Holy  Ghost  to  His  apostles. 
His  laws  were  not  written  on  tables  of  stone,  like  those  of  Mount  Sinai,  but  on  the 
hearts  of  His  disciples.  Whoever  becomes  a  follower  of  Chiist  pledges  himself  to 
obey  His  commands.  3.  A  Sufferer.  "His  Passion"  is  not  omitted  from  this 
summary,  brief  as  the  summary  is,  for  the  death  of  Christ  is  far  more  important 
to  us  than  was  His  life.  His  Passion  brought  to  us  our  salvation.  4.  A  Conqueror. 
He  was  dead,  He  was  buried,  but  He  lived  again ;  "He  showed  Himself  alive  after 
His  Passion."  But  for  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  the  world  would  never  have  heard 
of  His  name.  5.  A  Revealer.  "Speaking  of  the  things  pert«ining  to  the  king.lom 
of  God."  Notice  what  was  the  theme  of  conversation  during  those  forty  days.  The 
same  subject  is  the  object  of  all  Christ's  interest  on  the  earth  now.  He  cares  little 
for  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires,  except  as  they  affect  the  salvation  of  men.  One 
soul  outweighs  all  the  politics  of  a  continent.  Tlie  unchanged  plan: — The  lines 
of  the  kingdom  run  before  the  crucifixion  were  not  changed.  Christ's  assumption 
of  authoiity  was  the  same  as  of  old.  His  words  were  those  of  command.  He 
had  no  mistakes  to  rectify,  nor  did  He  withdraw  any  offer  or  retract  any  promise. 
The  scenes  He  had  passed  through  had  not  shaken  His  mind  in  its  loves,  its 
powers,  or  its  purposes.  The  old  commissions  were  renewed,  but  there  must  be  a 
halt,  not  for  orders  or  drill,  but  for  power.  Not  as  the  heathen  legionaries  waited 
for  the  auguries  from  dead  beasts,  but  for  a  descent  of  the  Spirit  from  on  high 
were  these  men  to  linger  at  Jerusalem.  The  moulds  were  set  and  the  wicks  were 
already  dipped  for  the  men  who  were  to  be  the  candles  of  the  Lord,  and  onlv  the 
spark  of  the  Spirit  was  needed  to  light  them.  (W.  R.  Campbell.)  The  ministry 
of  Jesm  a  beginning : — I.  It  was  a  new  thing  among  men.  1.  His  miracles. 
"We  have  seen  strange  things  to-dav."  2.  His  teaching.  "Never  man  spake 
as  this  Man.''    3.  His  character.     "  Which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of  sin?  "     This 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

originality  presents — (1)  An  example  for  all  time.  (2)  An  argument  for  the  Divine 
origin  of  Christianity.  II.  It  was  introductohy  to  the  work  op  the  apostles. 
1.  He  prepared  them  for  their  work  by  instruction.  He  made  them  to  feel  that 
they  could  have  no  other  Master.  They  were  assured  that  to  learn  of  Him  was  to 
find  the  truth.  This  relation  continued  during  His  presence,  but  they  had  to  be 
prepared  for  His  absence.  2.  Accordingly  He  brought  them  to  a  conviction  of 
His  abiding  supremacy  in  the  Church.  Though  when  with  Him  they  in  a  degree 
lived  by  sight,  even  then  faith  was  required ;  and  after  His  departure  faith  was 
their  chief  directive  principle.  And  how  realising  was  the  faitli  in  which  they 
carried  on  their  work  (chap.  ii.  33 ;  iv.  10).  III.  It  was  introductor-y  to  the 
WORK  OF  the  Church  in  succeeding  ages.  Centuries  have  rolled  by,  and  Chris- 
tianity has  not  fulfilled  all  the  desires  of  its  friends.  Yet  the  name  of  Jesus  has 
never  ceased  to  be  spoken,  and  His  Holy  Spirit  has  wrought  by  means  of  the  truth 
however  partially  known.  Of  His  living  ministry  we  have  abundnnt  proofs  in 
buildings,  institutions,  and  saved  souls.  And  provision  is  made  for  the  perpetual 
continuance  of  the  work  of  Jesus.  The  Gospel  history  furnishes — 1.  An  inexhaust- 
ible theme.  2.  An  all-powerful  motive.  Conclusion  :  See  here — 1.  How  to  under- 
stand the  history  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  presents  the  truth  of  Jesus  in 
incessant  contention  with  error,  the  world,  and  Satan,  and  it  points  hopefully  to 
the  time  when  the  kingdoms  Of  this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God, 
&c.  2.  The  magnificence  of  a  right  influence.  The  work  which  Jesus  began  has 
never  ceased.  Some  of  His  followers  have  begun  movements  which  have  continued 
to  bless  the  world  ages  after  they  have  gone.  If  your  life  is  short  and  sphere 
narrow  you  have  the  opportunity  of  beginning  what  may  bless  many.  8.  The 
dignity  of  Christian  effort.  It  is  an  honour  to  Lave  distinguished  associates,  how 
much  more  to  have  your  name  in  the  long  list  headed  by  Jesus  !  (IF.  Hudson.) 
The  ever-active  Christ : — 1.  Luke's  Gospel  is  confessedPy  but  an  imperfect  sketch  of 
an  absolutely  perfect  life.  Yet,  in  his  Gospel,  every  beneficent  act  seetns  well- 
rounded  off,  every  miracle  seems  complete,  every  parable  seems  to  havereceivcl  its 
finishing  touches.  And  yet  Luke  says  that  his  Gospel  is  only  a  narrative  of  what 
Jesus  "  began  both  to  do  and  teach."  There  were  greater  things  to  follow — miracles 
of  grace  far  surpassing  the  opening  of  blind  eyes,  the  cleansing  of  lepers,  or  even 
the  raisinc;  of  the  dead  to  life  again.  2.  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  contains  an  ac- 
count of  those  greater  works  which  were  done  in  tbe  name  of  Christ.  In  the  Gospels 
Chiist  begins  to  do  and  teach ;  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  He  continues  to  do  and 
teach  ;  but  His  doing  and  teuching  are  not  now  restricted  and  limited,  but  assume 
larger  and  grander  proportions.  3.  Our  Lord's  beneficient  activity  did  not  cease 
when  the  last  of  the  apostles  fell  as'eep.  Christ  has  been  doing  and  teaching  ever 
since,  and  never  more  than  during  the  last  hundred  years.  Christ  is  with  iis  still, 
and  He  is  not  inactive.  He  is  keenly  alive  to  all  that  goes  on  in  His  Church. 
Indeed,  it  is  the  Christ  in  you  that  prompts  to  tbat  noble  deed,  or  to  lay  upi^n  His 
altar  that  costly  sacrifice.  Apart  from  Christ  you  can  do  nothing.  The  Gospels 
are  full  of  beginnings.  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the  Epistles  are  also  full  of 
beginnings.  Now,  if  the  beginnings  are  so  glorious,  what  will  the  endings  be  ? 
If  tbe  Spirit  of  Christ  abides  in  the  Church,  leading  us  into  all  truth,  then  we  ought 
to  possess  a  larger  and  richer  spiritual  heritage  than  our  forefathers  possessed. 
The  Cliurches  of  the  New  Testament  were  only  the  beginnings  of  Christ's  redemp- 
tive activity.  His  influence  on  the  world  is  immeasurably  greater  than  it  was  when 
He  died  upon  the  cross,  and  immeasurably  greater  than  it  was  when  the  Books  of 
the  New  Testament  were  written.  We  know  that  He  who  in  the  time  of  His 
humiliation  began  to  do  and  teach,  until  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed 
and  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together,"  and  "  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the 
earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  migbty  deep."  Mr.  Beecher  somewhere  speaks  of  "a 
Christ  a  thousand  times  more  glorious  than  Jerusalem  ever  saw  ;  a  Christ  a  thou- 
sand times  freer  and  fuller  of  the  manifestation  of  love  than  any  bistorical  Christ ; 
a  Christ  larger  in  every  way  thnn  the  Christ  of  the  past ;  a  Christ  enwrapping  every 
soul  as  tbe  whole  atmospbere  of  a  continent  broods  over  each  particular  flower;  a 
Christ  conceived  of  as  living  near,  as  overhanging,  as  thinking  of  each  one,  and  as 
working  for  Him."  Do  we  know  anything  of  this  Christ  ?  The  same  Christ  as  we 
have  in  the  Gospels,  and  yet  not  the  siiine  :  for  a  man  may  know  tbe  Christ  of 
histoiy  and  yet  be  unsaved,  but  to  know  tbe  risen,  ascended,  ever-present  Christ 
is    salvation    itself.      (A.    Verran.)  The    be(jiniiin(j    of  apostoUcity    (I.)  : — 1. 

This  Book  is  a  letter  addressed  to  one  man.  God  always  speaks  to  indi- 
viduals.     He    does  not  address    the    great    seething    throng.      He  made  Adam, 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  5 

called   Abram,    selected    Mary ;    all   through    history   God    has    called    out    the 
one  person,  and    has  started   His    kingdom    oftentimes  from   very  insignificant 
beginnings.     2.  But  great  letters  cannot  be  kept  private  :  where  there  is  anything 
in  a  letter  it  burns  its  way  out.     There  are  some  letters  which  exercise  a  secret 
and  wonderful  power  over  the  receiver,  and  he  says  the  whole  world  must  be  taken 
into  his  confidence;  to  keep  it  back  from  others  would  amount  to  j^ractical  felony. 
We  cannot  hide  gospels  permanently.     What  is  in  a  book  and  not  what  is  said 
about  it,  determines  its  fate  in   the   long  run.     Luke   wrote   a  long   account  of 
Christ's  ministry  to  Theophilus,  and  the  whole  world  has  Luke's  narrative  in  its 
hand  to-day  !     So  Luke  undertook  further  to  write  the  Acts  to  this  same  man,  and 
to-day  the  Acts  are  read  in  every  school,  perused  by  all  students  of  history,  and  in 
it  are  the  fundamentals  of  the  most  influential  commonwealths.     3.  Luke  divides 
the  great  life  into   two  portions — action  and  doctrine,  miracles  and  truth.     All 
Christian  life  admits  of  precisely  the  same  division.     If  we  do,  but  fail  to  teach, 
we  shall  be  but  barren  puzzles.     If  we  teach,  and  fail  to  do,  we  may  incur  the  just 
imputation  of  being  theorists  and  fanatics,  or  devotional  sentimentalists.     I.  And 
yet  Jesus  Christ  only  began.      1.  There  can  be  no  ending  in  anything  that  God 
does.     Though  it  may  appear  to  end  in  itself,  yet  itself  is  related  to  some  other 
and  broader  self,  and  so  the  continuity  rolls  on  in  ever-augmenting  accretion  and 
proportion.     There  are  no  conclusions  in  truth ;  there  may  be  resting-places,  a 
punctuation  of  statement,  so  that  we  may  take  time  to  turn  it  into  beneficent 
action,  but  God's  hand  never  wrote  the  word  "fiuis";  though  the  Bible  be,  in  point 
of  paper  and  print,  a  measurable  quantity,  it  opens  a  revelation  that  recedes  from 
us  like  the  horizon.     2.  So  then  life  becomes  a  new  thing  from  this  standpoint. 
Men  talk  about  foi'mulating  Christian  truth  :  you  might  as  well  attempt  to  formu- 
late the  light  or  the  atmosphere.  You  cannot  formulate  quantities  that  are  infinite. 
We  have  organised  geology,  botany,  astronomy,  why  not  theology  ?     The  answer  is 
that  geology,  <&c. ,  represent  finite  and  therefore  measurable  quantities.     We  can 
begin  a  theology,  and  in  doing  so  we  shall  do  well,  provided  that  we  never  mistake 
beginnings  for  endings.     As  to  verbal  statements,  we  may  never  agree  ;  the  action 
of  the  mind  is  in  advance  of  the  action  of  the  tongue.     We  know  always  more  than 
we  can  tell.     3.  So  we  may  well  be  charitable.     If  Jt^sus  only  began,  men  can  only 
do  the  same.     No  man  has  the  wbole  truth.     The  Book  itself  is  not  a  full-grown 
garden,  it  is  a  seed-house.     We  are  all  beginners.     The  old  grey-haired  student 
lifts  up  his  wrinkled  brow  from  the  glowing  page  and  says,  "  I  have  hardly  begun 
it."     Who,  then,  are  we,  fifty  years  his  juniors,  who  should  start  up  and  say,  "  We 
have  reached  the  goal "  ?    Let  us  not  account  ourselves  to  have  attained,  but  let 
us  press  forward,  and  ever  say,  "  God  hath  yet  more  light  and  truth  to  bring  forth 
from  His  Holy   Word."     II.  Though   Jesus   Christ   only  began.  His  beginnings 
HAVK  ALL  THE  FORCE  AND  URGENCY  OF  COMPLETE  ENDINGS.      He  gave  "  Command- 
ments," He  did  not  oiJer  mere  suggestions  for  their  consideration,  to  adopt  or 
reject  on  further  inquiry.     Jesus  Christ  was  never  less  than  royal.     "  Ye  are  My 
friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you."     We  are  then  the  slaves  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  therefore  the  Lord's  freemen.      We  do  not  make  the  command- 
ments, we  obey  them — we  do  not  walk  under  the  loose  rule  of  license,  we  are  kept 
within  the  limits  of  a  specific  moral  gravitation,  and  we  have  come  to  know  that 
there  is  no  liberty  without  law,  that  life  without  law  is  chaos.     III.  These  begin- 
nings PERTAIN  TO  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GoD.     Jesus  Clirist  had  but  one  subject.     He 
never  talked  about  anything  less  than  a  kingdom  that  rose  above  all  other  empires 
and  enclosed  them  in  its  infinite  sovereignty.     The  disciples  never  could  get  away 
from  their  little  "  kingdom  "  any  more  than  Christ  could  detach  Himself  from  His 
great  royalty.     So  we  often  find  ourselves  talking  Christian  language  without  the 
full  Christian  meaning.     The  terms  are  identical  with  those  Chiist  used,  and  yet 
the  mieanings  are  separated  by  the  diameter  of  infinity.     Let  us  know  that  the 
lai-ger  meaning  is  always  the  right  one.     Yet  Jesus  chided  the  apostles  very  gently. 
He  told  them  that  they  were  as  yet  incomplete  men;  but  "  ye  shall  receive  power," 
&c.     They  were  unbaptised  in  soul  :  the  s^ymbolic  water  had  done  its  initial  work, 
but  they  stood  there  without  the  sacred  fire,  the  insfiiring  afflatus.     Into  what  bap- 
tism have  we  been  baptised?     We  have  not  received  the  Holy  Ghost  if  we  are  con- 
ducting a  narrow  ministry.     Jesus  Christ  said  so  much  when  He  added,  "  Ye  shall 
be  witnesses  both  in  Jerusalem,"  &c.     No  power  but  the  Holy  Ghost  could  take  a 
man  through  those  regions.     The  man  who  has  been  baptised  with  water  only  will 
choose  his  own  parish,  but  the  man  in  whom  is  the  burning  of  the  Holy  Ghost  will 
say  with  Wesley,  "  My  parih  is  the  world."     You  will  know  whether  you  ara 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

inspired  or  not  by  the  vastness  of  your  labours.  If  we  are  waiting  until  we  ba 
properly  equipped  and  duly  sent  out,  then  know  that  we  have  been  baptised 
with  ice.  IV.  We  now  pass  fbom  the  visible  ministry  of  Christ — a  cloud 
received  Him  out  of  their  sight.  Nothing  more.  Not  out  of  hearing,  sympathy, 
nor  helpful  ministry — only  out  of  sight.  We  are  not  out  of  His  sight,  nor  out  of 
His  memory  !      (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  beginning  of  apostoUcity  (11.)  : — 1.  Who 

could  have  told  beforehand  that  Christ  would  be  the  first  to  go  ?  Our  conception 
would  rather  have  been  that  He  would  remain  until  the  last  lamb  had  been  enfolded 
and  the  last  pilgrim  entered  into  rest.  Instead  of  this,  He  Himself  said,  "  It 
is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away."  2.  Being  about  to  go,  His  last  interview  with 
the  apostles  took  place.  Last  interviews  are  notably  pathetic.  The  words  that 
would  be  common  on  any  other  occasion  acquire  a  new  and  significant  acrent. 
Little  things  that  would  not  be  noticed  under  ordinary  circumstances,  start  ui  in  a 
unusual  prominence.  We  should  always  listen  as  if  in  a  last  interview.  "What  I 
say  unto  one,  I  say  unto  all — Watch."  We  lose  so  much  through  inattentiveness. 
3.  Jesus  Christ  is  about  to  go — how  will  He  go  ?  He  cannot  be  allowed  to  die  : 
that  would  be  a  fatal  disappointment  to  the  attention  which  He  has  strained  and 
to  the  expectation  He  Las  excited.  Dogs  die  :  and  if  this  Man  die.  He  will  contra- 
dict by  one  pitiful  commonplace  all  that  was  phenomenal  in  His  life.  How  will  He 
go?  Luke  tells  us  that  He  was  "  taken  up."  In  other  places  we  learn  that  He 
"  ascended."  He  entered  within  the  action  of  another  gravitation,  into  His  own 
place  in  the  heavens.  It  is  enough  :  the  mind  is  satisfied  by  the  grand  action. 
Were  I  reading  this  upon  a  poet's  page,  I  would  applaud  the  poet  for  one  of  the 
finest  conceptions  that  ever  ennobled  and  glorified  human  fancy.  4.  Jesus  Christ 
then  "  ascended,"  and  in  r'oing  9o  He  but  repeated  in  one  final  act  all  the  miracles 
which  had  made  His  previous  ministry  illustrious.  From  tlie  very  beginning  He  had 
been  ascending,  so  that  when  He  took  the  final  movement,  it  was  but  completing 
that  which  He  had  been  continuing  for  years.  Our  life  should  be  an  ascent !  We 
should  not  be  to-day  where  we  were  ten  years  ago.  Not  that  we  are  to  ascend  by 
sharp  steeps  that  attract  the  attention.  There  are  ascents  so  gradual  that  they  do 
not  seem  to  be  ascents ;  yet  looked  at  as  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  we  see 
that  tbe  gradient  has  evermore  lifted  itself  up  until  the  very  next  th'ng  to  do  is  to 
step  into  heaven  !  You  may  know  how  you  w-ill  die  by  knowing  how  you  really 
live.  If  your  life  is  a  life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God  maiked  by,  at  all  events,  the 
desire  to  be  Christ-like,  then  you  shall  "  ascend."  All  that  drops  away  from  you 
will  be  the  flesh  and  the  bones,  that  have  been  a  distress  to  you  for  many  a  day. 
Your  self,  your  liberated  spirit,  shall  "as-cend. "  Who  ever  saw  fire  going  down- 
ward ?  It  is  in  fire  to  go  up,  to  seek  the  parent  sun  out  of  which  it  came.  W^e, 
too,  living,  moving,  and  ever  having  our  being  in  God  shall  not  die  as  the  dttgs  die, 
but  "rise"  to  our  fount  and  origin  "with  Christ."  5.  If  the  final  interview 
was  pathetic  to  Christ,  it  was  also  pathetic  to  the  disciples.  They  had  their 
question  to  ask  as  certainly  as  He  had  His  commandments  to  give.  "Loid,  wilt 
Thou  "  ?  &c.  (1)  Mark  how,  after  His  resurrection,  He  had  become  "  Lord  "  and 
the  Restorer  of  kingdoms.  Everything  rests  upon  the  resurrection  of  Chi ist:  "if 
Christ  be  not  risen,"  &c.  No  matter  what  He  did,  taught,  or  appeared  to  be :  if  it 
was  in  the  power  of  men  to  kill  and  keep  Him  in  the  grave,  all  His  protestations 
were  lies  and  His  promises  vanity.  Hence,  Luke  and  all  the  apostolic  writers 
insist  that  Jesus  "  showed  Himself  alive  by  many  infallible  proofs."  The  inquiry, 
then,  that  was  put  to  Christ  in  this  instance  was  put  to  a  Man  who  had  risen.  It 
was  this — "  Wilt  Thou  restore?  "  &c.  There  are  times  when  everything  depends 
upon  one  man,  crises  which  sum  themselves  up  in  the  judgment  of  one  thinker: 
we  look  to  him,  he  carries  the  keys,  he  speaks  the  final  word,  and  from  him  we 
expect  the  policy  which  alone  can  ennoble  and  save  the  life.  (2)  We  learn  from 
this  inquiry  how  long-lingering  and  ineradicable  is  the  influence  of  first  impressions. 
The  disciples  had  got  it  into  their  minds  very  early  that  this  Man  had  come  to 
liberate  the  Jews  and  to  give  them  back  their  lost  kingdom.  What  is  so  long-lived 
as  prejudice?  Therefore  take  care  what  impression  you  make  upon  the  young 
mind  about  the  Christian  Sabbath,  Book,  Church,  idea.  "Who  can  wonder  that 
some  men  can  hardly  open  the  Bible  with  sympathy  or  hopefulness,  because  they 
remember  that  in  early  days  it  was  the  task-book  ?  Are  there  not  those  who  dread 
going  to  church,  because  their  action  is  associated  with  early  impressions  of  gloom 
and  dreariness?  6.  Christ's  answer  may  be  read  in  a  tone  of  rebuke,  but  it  was  not 
spoken  in  that  tone.  You  cannot  report  a  tone — hence  it  is  possible  to  express  the 
very  words  the  syeaker  said  and  jet  entirely  to  misrepresent  him!      Features  can 


CHAP.  I,]  THE  ACTS. 


be  photographed,  but  not  life.  Jesus  Christ  spoke  in  a  tone  that  was  instructive, 
and  followed  with  utterances  of  the  largest  and  tenderest  encouragement.  "  Ye 
shall  receive  power,"  &c.  There  is  no  gift  equal  to  the  gift  of  power.  When  a  man 
in  distress  comes  to  you,  if,  instead  of  answering  his  immediate  necessity,  you  could 
give  him  power  to  answer  his  own,  you  would  bestow  the  most  precious  of  treasures. 
(1)  The  gift  of  Christ  to  the  Church  is  a  gift  of  power — (a)  Not  intellectual  only, 
though  Christ  has  indeed  sharpened  every  faculty  of  the  mind,  and  blessed  the 
Church  with  penetrating  insight — but  that  is  not  the  power  referred  to  here,  {h) 
Nor  social  power — the  power  usually  associated  with  the  idea  of  kingdom,  rule,  and 
authority,  (c)  But  the  power  of  holiness — ■"  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon 
you."  Know  yourselves  to  be  powerful  by  the  measure  of  your  holiness,  and 
contrariwise  know  yourselves  to  be  weak,  though  your  mind  covers  the  whole 
register  of  intellectual  possibility.  We  have  lost  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  betake  our- 
selves now  to  Church  questions  and  not  to  soul  inquiries.  The  problem  of  to-day 
is  ecclesiasticism,  not  evangelisation.  We  are  building  structures,  arranging 
mechanics,  instead  of  being  carried  away  with  the  whirlwind  of  Divine  inspiration, 
and  displaying  what  the  world  would  call  supreme  madness  in  consecration  of 
heart.  A  grand,  or  learned,  or  rich  Church — these  may  be  but  contradictions  in  terms, 
but  a  holy  Church,  an  inspired  Church,  would  go  forth  "  fair  as  the  moon,"  &c. 
The  world  can  answer  our  argument  so  as  to  confuse  the  listener,  but  it  can  have 
no  reply  to  an  unimpeachable  purity.  (2)  The  power  which  Christ  gave  was  to  be 
used.  When  He  puts  the  staff  into  my  hand.  He  means  me  to  walk  with  it ;  when 
He  gives  me  opportunities,  He  means  me  to  use  them.  (3)  This  power  was  to  be 
used  gradually — "Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Me  both  in  Jerusalem,"  &c.  Do  not 
begin  at  the  end  :  grow  little  by  little,  but  see  to  it  that  your  motion  is  constant. 
It  is  not  some  dashing  triumph  that  strikes  beholders,  but  that  subtle,  quiet,  imper- 
ceptible growth  that  proceeds  night  and  day  until  a  culmination  is  reached  that 
surprises  not  by  its  violence  but  by  its  completeness  and  tenderness  of  its  working. 
(4)  The  power  was  to  be  used  enlargingly,  from  Jerusalem  to  Judea,  to  Samaria, 
to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,  until  there  was  no  more  ground  to  be  covered. 
This  is  our  Christian  mission,  and  nothing  so  enlarges  and  emboldens  the  mind  as 
sympathy  with  Christ.  The  Christian  man  cannot  be  a  small-minded  man.  Find 
a  sectarian  and  you  find  no  Christian  ;  pick  out  a  man  who  says  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  ends  here,  and  he  is  a  man  who  has  stolen  his  position  in  the  sanctuary. 
All  Christians  are  great  men,  great  souls ;  all  who  are  crucified  with  Christ  see  all 
men  drawn  to  the  Cross.  Christianity  never  bends  the  head  downward  towards 
little  and  dwindling  spaces  :  it  always  says,  "  The  whole  world  for  Christ."  If  men 
would  have  their  minds  enlarged,  ennobled,  inspired,  it  can  only  be  by  direct  fellow- 
ship with  Him  who  is  the  Head  of  all  things,  who  fills  all  things,  who  ascended 
that  Ho  might  rule  by  a  longer  line  and  by  a  more  comprehensive  mastery.  7. 
Christ's  last  words  were  about  Himself.  "  Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Me."  What 
sublime  audacity  I  What  magnificent  confidence !  The  Church  has  one  Lord,  one 
thing  to  say — Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  and  went  out  of  the 
world  to  pray  for  His  Church  and  sustain  His  servants  in  all  the  stress  of  life  and 
in  all  the  anxiety  of  service.     (Ihid.)  Christ's  finished  and  unfinished  work  : — 

Compare  Acts  xxviii.  30,  31.  So  begins  and  so  ends  this  Book.  The  reference  to 
"  the  former  treatise  "  implies  that  this  Book  is  to  be  regarded  as  its  sequel.  la 
not  the  natural  inference  that  the  latter  treatise  will  tell  us  what  Jesus  continued 
"  to  do  and  teach  "  after  He  was  taken  up?  I  think  so.  And  thus  the  writer  sets 
forth  at  once,  for  those  that  have  eyes  to  see,  what  he  means  to  do,  and  what  he 
thinks  his  Book  is  going  to  be  about.  So,  then,  the  name  "  The  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,"  which  is  not  coeval  with  the  Book  itself,  is  somewhat  of  a  misnomer. 
Most  of  the  apostles  are  never  heard  of  in  it.  But  our  first  text  supplies  a  deeper 
reason  for  regarding  that  title  as  inadequate.  For,  if  the  theme  of  the  story  be 
what  Christ  did,  then  the  Book  is,  not  the  "  Acts  of  the  Apostles,"  but  the  Acts  of 
Jesus  Christ  through  His  servants.  He,  and  He  alone,  is  the  Actor ;  and  the  men 
that  appear  are  but  the  instruments  in  His  hands.  It  is  the  unfinished  record  of 
an  incomplete  work.  The  theme  is  the  work  of  Christ  through  the  ages,  of  which 
each  successive  depository  of  His  energies  can  do  but  a  small  portion,  and  must 
leave  that  portion  unfinisbed,  the  Book  does  not  so  much  end  as  stop.  It  is  a 
fragment  because  the  work  of  which  it  tells  of  is  not  yet  a  whole.  If,  then,  we  put 
these  two  things — the  beginning  and  the  ending  of  this  Book — together,  I  think  we 
get  some  thoughts  about  what  Christ  b^gan  to  do  and  teach  on  earth ;  what  He 
continues  to  do  and  teach  in  heaven  ;  and  how  small  and  fragmentary  a  share  in 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

that  work  each  individual  servant  of  His  has.    Let  us  look  at  these  things  briefly. 
I.  We  have  here   the   suggestion    of   what   Christ  began  to  do  and  teach  on 
EARTH.     Now,  at  first  sight,  the  words  of  our  text  seem  to  be  in  startling  contradic- 
tion to  the  solemn  cry  which  rang  out  of  the  darkness  upon  Calvary.      Jesus  said, 
"  It  is  finished !  and  gave  up  the  ghost."    Luke  says  He  "  began  to  do  and  teach." 
Is  tbere  any  contradiction  between  the  two  ?     Certainly  not.     It  is  one  thing  to  lay 
a  foundation ;  it  is  another  thing  to  build  a  house.      And  the  work  of  laying  the 
foundation  must  be  finisbed  before  tbe  work  of  building  the  structure  upon  it  can 
be  begun.    It  is  one  thing  to  create  a  force  ;  it  is  another  thing  to  apply  it.   It  is  one 
thing  to  compound  a  medicine ;  it  is  another  thing  to  administer  it.   It  is  one  thing 
to  unveil  a  trutb  ;  it  is  another  to  unfold  its  successive  applications,  and  to  work  it 
into  a  belief  and  practice  in  the  world.     The  former  is  the  work  of  Christ  which 
was  finished  on  earth  ;  the  latter  is  the  work  which  is  continuous  throughout  the 
ages.     "He  began  to  do  and  teach,"  not  in  the  sense  that  any  should  come  after 
Him  and  do,  as  the  disciples  of  most  great  discoverers  and  thinkers  have  had  to  do : 
systematise,  rectify,  and  complete  the  first  glimpses  of  truth  which  the  master  had 
given.    But  whilst  thus  His  work  is  complete  His  earthly  work  is  also  initial.    And 
we  must  remember  that  whatever  distinction  my  text  may  mean  to  draw  between 
the  work  of  Christ  in  the  pnst  and  that  in  the  present  and  the  future,  it  does  not 
mean  to  imply  that  wh-n  He  ascended  up  on  high.  He  had  not  completed  the  task 
for  which  He  came.     The  revelation  is  complete,  and  He  that  professes  to  add  any- 
thing to,  or  to  substitute  anything  for,  the  finished  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  con- 
cerning God,  and  man's  relation  to  God,  and  man's  duty,  destiny,  and  hopes,  is  a 
false  teacher,  and  to  follow  him  is  fatal.      In  like  manner  that  work  of  Christ, 
which  in  some  sense  is  initial,  is  comjilete  as  redemption.      "  This  Man  has  offered 
np  one  Sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever."      And  nothing  more  can  He  do  than  He  has 
done  ;  and  nothing  more  can  any  man  do  than  was  accomplished  on  the  Cross  of 
Calvary  as   a  revelation,  as  effecting  a  redemption,  as  lodging  in  the  heart  of 
humanity,  and  in  the  midst  of  human  history,  a  purifying  energy,  sufficient  to 
cleanse  the  whole  black  stream.     Eesurrection  and  Ascension  needs  no  sujiplement, 
and  can  have  no  continuation,  world  without  end.     II.  But  we  have  to  notice  what 
Christ  continues  to  do  and  to  teach  after  His  ascension.     The  theme  of  this 
Book  of  the  Acts  is  the  continuous  work  of  the  ascended  Saviour.    There  is  nothing 
more  remarkable  than  the  way  in  which,  at  every  turn  in  the  narrative,  all  is 
referred  to  Jesus  Christ  Himself.     For  instance,  to  cull  one  or  two  cases  in  order  to 
bring  the  matter  more  plainly  before  you.     'When  the  apostles  determined  to  select 
another  apostle  to  till  Judas'  place,  they  asked  Jesus  Christ  to  show  which  "of 
these  two  Thou  hast  chosen."     When  Peter  is  called  upon  to  explain  the  tongues 
at  Pentecost,  he  snys,  "  Jesus  hath  shed  forth  this  which  ye  now  see  and  hear." 
When  the  writer  would  tell  the  reason  of  the  large  first  increase  to  the  Church,  he 
Bays,  "  The  Lord  added  to  the  Church  daily  such  as  should  be  saved."     Peter  and 
John  go  into  the  Temple  to  heal  tbe  lame  man,  and  their  words  to  him  are,  "Do 
not  think  that  our  power  or  holiness  is  any  factor  in  your  cure.      The  Name  hath 
made  this  man  whole."      It  is  the  Lord  that  appears  to  Paul  and  to  Ananias,  the 
one  on  the  road  to  Damascus  and  the  other  the  city.     Tlie  same  point  of  view 
is  suggested  by  another  of  the  characteristics  of  this  Bonk,  which  it   shares  in 
common  with  all  Scripture  narratives,  and  that  is  the  stolid  indilYerence  with  which 
it  picks  up  and  drops  men,  according  to  the  degree  in  which,  for  the  moment,  they 
are  the  instruments  of  Christ's  power.    As  long  as  electricity  streams  on  the  carbon 
point  it  glows  an  1  is  visible,  but  when  the  current  is  turned  to  another  lamp  we  see 
no  more  of  the  bit  of  carbon.    As  long  as  God  uses  a  man,  the  man  is  of  interest  to 
the  writer  of  the  Scripture.     When  God  uses  another  one,  they  drop  the  first,  and 
have  no  more  care  about  him,  because  their  theme  is  not  men,  and  their  doings 
but  God's  doings  through  men.     On  us,  and  in  us,  and  by  us,  and  for  us,  if  we  are 
His  servants,  Jesus  Christ  is  working  all  through  the  ages.     He  is  the  Lord  of 
Providence,  He  is  the  King  of  history.      And  thus  He  continues  to  teach  and  to 
work  from  His  throne  in  the  heavens.     He  continues  to  teach,  not  by  the  commu- 
nication of  new  truth.     That  is  done.    But  the  application  of  the  completed  reve- 
lation is  the  work   that   is   going  on  to-day  and   that    will    go  on  till  the  end 
of  the  world.     Now  these  truths  of  our  Lord's  continuous  activity  in  teaching 
and  working  from  heaven  may  yield  us  some  not  unimportant  lessons.     What  a 
depth  and  warmth  and  reality  the  thoughts  give  to  the  Christian's  relation  to  Jesus 
Christ.     We  have  to  think,  not  only  of  a  Christ  who  did  something  for  us  long  ago 
in  the  past,  and  there  an  end,  but  of  a  Christ  who  to-day  lives  and  reigns  to  do  and 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS. 


to  teach  according  to  our  necessities.  What  a  sweetness  and  sacredness  such 
thoughts  impart  to  all  external  events,  which  we  may  regard  as  b  'ing  the  opera- 
tion of  His  love,  and  moved  by  the  hands  that  were  nailed  to  the  cross  for  us, 
and  now  hold  the  scejDtre  of  the  universe  for  the  blessing  of  mankind  ! 
The  forces  of  good  and  evil  in  the  world  seem  very  disproportionate,  but 
■we  forget  too  often  to  take  Christ  into  account.  Great  men  die,  good 
men  die,  Jesus  Christ  is  not  dead.  He  lives  ;  He  is  the  Anchor  of  our 
hope.  What  a  lesson  of  lowliness  and  of  diligence  it  gives  us  I  "  Be  not  wise 
in  your  own  conceits."  You  are  only  a  tool,  only  a  pawn  in  the  hand  of  the 
great  Player.  If  you  have  anything,  it  is  because  you  get  it  frum  Him.  III. 
Lastly,  we  note  the  incompleteness  of  each  man's  share  in  the  geeat  work. 
As  I  said,  the  Book  which  is  to  tell  the  story  of  Christ's  continuous  work  from 
heaven  must  stop  abruptly.  There  is  no  help  for  it.  If  it  was  a  history  of 
Paul,  it  would  need  to  be  wound  up  to  an  end  ;  but  as  it  is  the  history  of  Christ's 
working,  the  web  is  not  half  finished,  and  the  shuttle  stops  in  the  middle  of  a  cast. 
The  Book  must  be  incomplete  because  the  work  of  which  it  is  the  record  does  not 
end  until  He  shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  the  Father,  and  God  shall  be 
all  in  all.  So  the  work  of  each  man  is  but  a  fragment  of  that  great  work.  Every 
man  inherits  unfinished  tasks  from  his  predecessors,  and  leaves  unfinished  tasks 
to  his  successors.  It  is,  as  it  used  to  be  in  the  Middle  Ages,  when  the  men  that 
dug  the  foundations  or  laid  the  first  courses  of  some  great  cathedral  were  dead  long 
generations  before  the  gilded  cross  was  set  on  the  apex  of  the  needlespire,  and  the 
glowing  glass  filled  in  to  the  painted  windows.  Enough  for  us,  if  we  lay  a  stone, 
though  it  be  but  one  stone  in  one  of  the  courses  of  the  great  building.  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D  )  The  permanence  of  Christ  in  history  : — The  mists  of  gathering  ages  wrap 
in  slowly-thickening  folds  of  forgetfulness  all  other  men  and  events  in  history,  and 
make  them  ghostlike  and  shadowy ;  but  no  distance  has  yet  dimmed  or  will  ever 
dim  that  human  form  Divine.  Other  names  are  like  those  stars  that  blaze  out  for 
a  while,  and  then  smoulder  down  into  almost  complete  invisibility ;  but  Christ  is 
the  very  Light  itself,  that  burns  and  is  not  consumed.  Other  landmarks 
sink  below  the  horizon  as  the  tribes  of  men  pursue  their  solemn  march 
through  the  centuries,  but  the  cross  on  Calvary  "  shall  stand  for  an  ensign 
of    the  people,   and    to    it   shall   the  Gentiles   seek."      [Ibid.)  The  unique- 

ness of  Christ's  earthly  ministry  : — Two  facts  here  mark  it  off  from  every 
other.  I.  It  was  original.  1.  His  works  were  original — done  in  His  own  strength. 
The  best  deeds  of  the  holiest  men  are  done  in  the  strength  of  heaven.  2.  His 
teaching  was  original,  not  derived  from  others.  He  was  "  the  Truth."  His 
doctrines  emanated  from  Him  as  living  streams  from  a  fountain  of  life.  3.  His  life 
•was  original.  Such  a  life  was  never  lived  before  ;  so  blending  the  weak  with  the 
strong,  the  fleeting  with  the  eternal,  the  human  with  the  Divine.  His  whole  life 
was  a  new  fountain  in  earth's  desert,  a  new  light  in  earth's  darkness,  4.  His 
ministry  was  initiatory.  Luke's  Gospel  was  the  commencement  of  a  life  here 
developed.  Christ,  absent  corporeally,  is  with  us  always  by  His  Spirit.  II.  It  was 
rosTHDMOus.  Christ  did  not  leave  the  world  before  He  had  made  effective  arrange- 
ments for  the  working  out  of  His  grand  purpose.  What  He  did  He  did  through 
the  Divine  Spirit.  It  was  in  this  might  that  He  rose  and  continued  for  forty  days. 
The  ministry  after  the  Passion  was — 1.  An  undoubted  reality  (ver.  3).  (1)  His 
appearances  were  themselves  infallible  proofs.  Nothing  is  better  attested.  They 
took  place  at  ten  different  times,  and  before  single  disciples  and  hundreds,  and  in  a 
veritable  corporiety  who  could  be  touched,  and  could  eat  and  drink.  (2)  The 
witnesses  of  these  appearances  were  indisposed  to  belief  in  the  resurrection  (John 
XX.  9  ;  Luke  xxiv.  11 ;  see  also  the  case  of  Thomas).  Yet  in  spite  of  this  they  were 
thoroughly  convinced.  They  proclaimed  it  publicly  and  before  the  very  Sanhedrim. 
2.  Confined  to  the  disciples.  Before  His  death  He  spoke  to  promiscuous  crowds  ; 
but  now  only  to  those  between  whom  and  Himself  there  was  a  vital  spiritual 
connection.  Henceforth  He  would  deal  with  the  unconverted  world  through  them. 
Observe  here  :  (1)  The  grand  subject  of  His  ministry  was  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Science,  philosophy,  politics,  were  left  behind  for  "things"  of  a  higher  type; 
things  compared  with  which  the  greatest  realities  of  earth  are  but  as  passing 
shadows  ;  things  which  restore  apostate  spirits  to  God.  Before  His  death  He  spoke 
much  of  His  kingdom,  and  death  had  not  changed  His  views.  (2)  The  grand 
endeavour  of  His  ministry  was  to  prepare  propagandists,  (a)  By  giving  them  distinct 
impressions  of  the  work  He  required  them  to  discharge  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20  ;  Mark 
xvi.  15,  16).     (b)  By  giving  them  an  immovable  conviction  of  His  resurrection,     (c) 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [otap.  i. 

By  preparing  them  for  the  reception  of  their  great  Helper,  the  Holy  Spirit.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  Until  the  day  in  which  He  was  taken  up. — Jesus  lives: — We 
can  never  forget  a  long  corridor  in  the  Vatican  Museum,  exhibiting  on  the  one 
side  epitaphs  of  departed  heathens,  and  on  the  other  mementoes  of  departed 
Christians.  Opposite  to  lions  leaping  on  horses,  emblems  of  destruction,  are 
charming  sculptures  of  the  Good  Shepherd  bearing  home  the  lost  lamb,  with  the 
epitaph,  "Alexander  is  not  dead,  but  lives  above  the  stars."  (J.  Stoiighton.) 
The  ascension  :  its  central  position : — Luke  narrates  the  ascension  twice — showing, 
the  importance  of  the  event.  The  first  mention  is  at  the  end  of  the  Gospel — 
forming  the  keystone  to  the  life  of  Jesus ;  the  second  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Acts — forming  the  keystone  for  the  edifice  of  the  Church,  [N esselmann.)  The 
Ascension  of  Christ : — I.  The  fact.  Seneca  said :  "  The  ascent  from  earth  to 
heaven  is  not  easy."  But  Seneca  was  an  atheist,  if  we  may  believe  his  adversaries. 
The  atheist  will  not  receive  the  witness  of  men.  And  Jesus  said  :  "  How  shall  ye 
believe  if  I  tell  you  of  heavenly  things  ?  "  The  difficulties  concerning  super- 
naturalism  are  all  difficulties  of  disbelief.  To  the  mind  of  the  believer  there 
appears  nothing  that  is  difficult  to  Jesus  in  His  miracles.  The  ascension  of  Jesus, 
like  the  resurrection  or  birth  of  Jesus,  was  only  natural  supernaturalism.  It  "  was 
a  necessary  consequence  of  the  resurrection,"  as  it  was  the  consummation  of  the 
series  of  His  redemptive  miracles.  It  was  natural  with  Him  ;  it  would  have  been 
unnatural  with  His  disciples.  The  time,  the  place,  the  nature,  and  the  witnesses  of 
the  ascension  will  corroborate  the  supernatural  claim.  The  time  was  opportune. 
"  After  having  lived  awhile  on  earth  ;  after  having  offered  His  body  as  a  sacrifice 
for  sin  ;  after  having  been  raised  from  the  dead  ;  after  having  shown  Himself  alive 
to  His  disciples  by  many  infallible  proofs,  then  He  led  them  out  as  far  as  Bethany, 
and  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  Church  tlien  collected  together  He  was  taken  up 
into  heaven."  Equally  interesting,  fitting,  and  convincing  was  the  locality  of  the 
ascension.  The  nature  of  the  ascension  is  evidence  of  the  fact  of  the  ascension. 
Jesus  simply  arose  from  the  earth  to  go  into  the  heavens.  He  had  brought  His  body 
from  the  grave,  and  it  belonged  no  more  with  corruptible  things.  It  was  not  subject 
to  the  conditions  or  limitations  of  the  earth.  To  go  away  was  all  that  remained  to 
be  done.  There  was  nowhere  else  to  go  but  into  the  heavens.  The  witnesses  of 
the  ascension  were  not  deceived,  and  could  not  be  deceivers.  They  were  the  friends 
of  Jesus.  It  accorded  with  their  faith  to  expect  that,  like  Enoch  and  Elijah,  He 
should  be  caught  up  in  the  air.  They  were  overcome  with  their  sorrow  when  He 
was  crucified.  But  now  they  had  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy.  The  angels 
who  had  announced  His  birth  and  proclaimed  His  resurrection  were  present  to 
confirm  His  ascension.  Stephen,  when  permitted  to  answer  to  the  accusation  of 
blasphemy  in  his  apology,  uttered  in  the  very  article  of  death,  said :  "  Behold,  I  see 
the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  And 
among  his  last  words  were  :  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  And  John,  from  the 
isle  of  Patmos,  saw  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks  the  Son  of  Man, 
whom  he  heard  saying:  "  I  am  the  First  and  the  Last:  I  am  He  that  liveth,  and 
was  dead  ;  and,  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore,  Amen  ;  and  have  the  keys  of  hell 
and  of  death."  So  also  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  God  hath  sent,  is  a  witness.  Hia 
presence  in  the  hearts  of  men  is  the  greatest  witness.  "  He  shall  testify  of  Me.'* 
If  Jesus  had  not  ascended  the  Holy  Spiiit  would  not  be  here.  II.  The  doctrine. 
The  ascension  of  Jesus  was  essential  to  the  plan  and  work  of  redemption.  It  was 
necessary  to  relate  again  the  work  which  Jesus  had  come  to  do  in  the  earth  with 
the  world  from  whence  He  came.  He  had  accomplished  a  virtual  redemption.  He 
was  thenceforth  to  make  it  actual.  It  was  prophesied  that  He  would  ascend  on 
high,  lead  captivity  captive,  and  receive  gifts  for  men.  He  himself  had  foretold 
that  He  should  go  away.  The  ascension  was  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  and  the 
verification  of  His  own  words.  Without  the  ascension  the  world  could  not  have 
understood  Him.  It  was  the  explanation  of  His  character  and  work  on  the  earth. 
Christianity  was  triumphant  at  the  ascension.  Sin  was  mastered,  death  was  dead, 
and  man  was  free.  In  the  ascension  of  Jesus  there  was  given  to  all  believers  the 
surety  of  their  ascension.  The  heavens  are  now  the  pledge  of  another  advent  of 
the  Son  of  Man.  III.  The  results.  There  were  both  direct  and  indirect  results 
of  the  ascension.  The  ascension  was  the  dividing  point  between  the  gospel  and 
the  apostolic  histories.  It  concluded  the  one  and  introduced  the  other.  The 
peasant  becomes  a  prince.  He  is  given  a  name  which  is  above  every  name.  He  is 
returned  to  the  honours  which  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was.  The 
last  act  of  Jesus  as  He  ascended  was  to  lift  up  His  hands  and  bless.     In  the  very 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  11 

sight  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary,  "  with  malice  toward  none  and  charity  for  all," 
He  went  away  blessing  the  cruel  world  which  had  received  Him  not,  and  dispensing 
gifts  not  to  His  friends  only,  but  to  the  rebellious  also.  Of  the  great  gift,  in  which 
aU  other  gifts  are  included — the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  came  on  all  men — 
we  are  all  witnesses  and  partakers.  The  indirect  influences  of  the  ascension  have 
been  and  are  multifarious  as  the  intellections  and  emotions  of  men.  With  the 
ascension  the  personal  element  of  the  Christ  who  had  gone  about  doing  good  was 
taken  from  the  eai'th,  and  it  no  longer  excited  malefactors  to  persecute  Him.  His 
disciples  were  exalted  with  Him.  They  were  raised  "into  union  and  fellowship 
with  a  higher  nature."  The  Father  and  the  heavenly  world  were  brought  nearer 
and  made  dearer  to  the  children  of  men.  It  is  now  the  aspiration  of  all  Christians 
to  explore  with  the  Son  of  Man  the  heavenly  spaces.  (J.  W.  Hamilton.)  The 
ascending  Lord : — I.  The  preparation  of  the  witnesses.  You  cannot  lay  hands 
on  any  man  at  random,  and  ask  him  to  bear  testimony  even  to  undisputed  facts. 
He  must  have  seen  the  things,  and  be  a  man  of  truthful  spirit.  What  Christ  did 
that  day  before  their  eyes  gave  them  knowledge  of  the  final  fact  which  was  to  com- 
plete the  circle  of  their  testimony.  It  is  the  consummation  of  His  resurrection. 
But  what  He  said  was  needful,  too.  It  was  essential  that  their  spiritual  vision 
should  be  illumined,  and  so  the  Holy  Spirit  was  promised  to  complete  what  their 
outward  vision  had  bcRun.  Through  the  mere  vision  they  might  have  light :  only 
through  the  spiritual  baptism  could  they  have  power ;  but  not  to  be  warriers,  but 
witnesses.  "  All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  go  ye,  therefore, 
and" — not  fight,  not  reign,  but — "teach."  This  is  ever  the  divinest  thing  that 
men  can  do,  and  is  the  work  of  the  disciples  in  every  age.  For  this  the  Master 
Himself  came  into  the  world.  II.  The  limitation  of  the  witnesses.  "  While  they 
beheld,  a  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight."  1.  Tbere  was  clear  virion  for  a 
while,  and  then  a  mystery.  So  all  our  knowledge  ends.  The  strength  of  the 
witnef^sing  of  the  early  disciples  lay  in  this  that  they  testified  up  to  the  limits  of 
their  knowledge,  and  then  relapsed  into  utter  silence.  It  will  be  well  for  tbe  later 
witnesses  to  follow  their  example.  Many  an  earnest  witness  has  lost  his  power 
because  there  was  no  clear  line  between  things  known  and  things  fancied  ;  because 
the  unfaltering  testimony  was  not  contrasted  with  the  emphasis  of  silence,  but 
dribbled  off  into  vague  surmisings.  2.  But  because  a  cloud  hides,  it  need  not  cast 
a  shadow  upon  us.  The  cloud  which  underlies  the  mysteries  of  heavenly  truth  is 
not  black  with  thunder,  nor  scarred  with  lightning,  but  edged  at  least  with  the  silver 
glory  which  it  hides,  and  only  laden  for  us  with  showers  of  peace  and  plenty.  The 
cloud  is  the  condescension  of  Divine  love  to  our  weak  sight.  As  the  rainbow 
repeats  the  promise  of  the  early  covenant,  so  the  cloud  tells  us  of  hope  and  reminds 
us  o'f  our  risen  and  returning  Lord.  III.  The  attitude  of  the  witnesses.  They 
stand  gazing  after  Him  up  into  heaven ;  long  enough,  it  is  evident,  to  lead  to  the 
rebuke  and  reassurance  of  the  two  angels.  While  they  could  look  at  Jesus  they 
were  best  fitting  for  their  witnessing;  but  gazing  at  the  cloud  would  only  make 
them  less  strong  and  confident.  Note — 1.  Their  obedience.  Christ  had  told  them 
to  go  to  Jerusalem  and  witness  first  where  it  is  hardest  and  most  perilous  to  do  so; 
and  where  their  testimony  will  reach  the  thousands  of  Pentecost.  It  is  not  by 
peering  into  mysteries  that  we  gain  grace  to  be  faithful  witnesses,  but  by  un- 
questioning obedience  to  plain  commands.  They  who  are  willing  to  do  His  will 
sball  know  His  teaching.  2.  Their  fellowship.  Christ  had  appointed  them  a 
common  mission  and  promised  a  common  gift.  And  so  they  stayed  together  till  it 
should  come.  As  it  is  in  the  way  of  obedience  that  we  learn  the  truth,  it  is  in  the 
way  of  fellowship  that  we  most  often  receive  the  richest  spiritual  gifts.  3.  And 
then,  of  course,  they  prayed  ;  not  of  necessity  only  for  that  which  He  had  promised, 
but  quite  as  much,  perhaps,  for  patience  to  wait  for  it,  and  then  for  grace  to  use  it. 
Obeiiient  souls,  waiting  together  for  the  promised  gift  of  Christ,  will  always  pray. 
These  three  things  sball  make  you  strong  to  be  witnesses,  martyrs  if  need  be,  unto 
Him.      (Monday   Chih.)  The   resurrection  and  ascension   of  Christ  : — I.    The 

eesdrreotion.  1.  The  proofs  of  the  fact.  They  are  said  to  be  not  only  many,  but 
of  infallible  certainty.  (1)  The  number  of  the  witnesses  was  very  sufficient  (1  Cor. 
XV.  5,  6).  (2)  They  had  all  proper  advantages  and  opportunity  of  knowing  tbe 
certainty  of  the  matter.  (3)  They  were  very  unwilling  to  be  deceived  (Luke  xxiv. 
11).  (4)  They  published  it  as  soon  as  the  thing  was  done.  (5)  The  effect  which 
their  testimony  had.  («)  Upon  themselves  :  they  gave  the  best  proofs  that  they 
firmly  believed  it;  for  they  preached  it  at  the  hazard  of  their  lives,  and  many 
sealed  their  testimony  with  their  blood,     (h)  On  others.     Though  these  witnesses 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i 

were  but  poor  illiterate  fishermen,  and  tbe  story  which  they  told  ungrateful  to  the 
Jews,  and  contemptible  to  the  Gentiles.  Yet  their  testimony  was  presently  received 
by  many  thousands,  and  nothing  could  po  sibly  give  a  check  to  it.  2.  The  manner 
and  circumstances  of  His  resurrection.  (1)  The  time  is  particularly  recorded — the 
third  day  ;  not  immediately,  lest  any  should  doubt  whether  He  had  been  quite  dead. 
Therefore,  when  He  had  lain  in  the  grave  long  enough  to  satisfy  everybody  that  His 
death  was  real,  He  arose  (Acts  x.  40;  Matt.  xii.  40).  (2)  The  ministry  of  angels 
in  the  affair  (Matt,  xxviii.  2).  (3)  Christ  was  accomi^anied  in  His  resurrection  by 
several  of  the  saints  departed  (Matt,  xxvii.  52,  53).  3.  The  uses:  (1)  To  establish 
our  faith  in  Christ's  doctrine  and  religion  (Matt.  xii.  39,  40).  (2)  To  encourage  our 
trust  in  Him,  and  our  hope  of  salvation  by  Him  (1  Pet.  i.  21 ;  Eom.  iv.  25 ; 
1  Tlies.  iv.  14;  1  Cor.  xv.  16;  1  Pet.  i.  3,  4).  H.  The  time  of  Chiust's  stay  in 
THIS  world  aftee  His  eesueeection,  and  of  what  He  did  dueing  that  time.  Our 
Saviour's  ascension  was  delayed  so  long :  1.  To  confirm  the  truth  of  His  resurrection. 
When  He  first  appeared  to  His  disciples  they  were  so  transported  that  they  hardly 
believed  the  thing  was  real  (Lukexxiv.  41),  and  therefore,  if  they  had  not  seen  Him 
again  and  again,  very  likely  it  would  have  passed  for  a  vision  only.  2.  His  love  to 
and  care  of  His  disciples  detained  Him  with  them.  IH.  The  ascension.  1.  The 
manner  and  circumstances.  (1)  Where  He  ascended  unto — Heaven  (vers.  9,  11; 
Eph.  iv.  10).  (2)  From  whence  He  ascended — Olivet  (ver.  12).  (3)  The  manner 
was  very  honourable — as  a  triumphant  Conqueror  (Psa.  Ixviii.  17,  18  ;  Eph.  iv.  8). 
(4)  The  witnesses  who,  besides  the  angels,  were  His  own  disciples.  There  was  no 
need  of  their  seeing  Him  rise,  for  it  was  proof  enough  of  His  I'esurrection,  that  they 
saw  Him  alive  ;  but  as  they  could  not  see  Him  in  heaven,  it  was  more  necessary  that 
they  should  see  Him  ast-ending.  (5)  He  departed  with  a  blessing  (Luke  xxiv.  50, 
51).  2.  'J  he  ends  and  purposes.  (1)  That  He  might  receive  the  due  reward  of  His 
own  past  labours  and  sufferings  (Puil.  ii.  8,  9).  (2)  For  the  encouragement  and 
comfort  of  His  disciples.  "  Ye  cannot  follow  Me  now,  but  ye  shall  follow  Me 
afterwards  ;  and  where  I  am,  there  shall  My  servant  be."  (3)  As  the  Forerunner 
(Heb.  vi.  20;  John  xiv.  2).  (4)  To  appear  iu  the  presence  of  God  for  His  people, 
and  to  be  their  Advocate  with  the  Father.  3.  Inferences.  Since  Christ  is  ascended 
into  heaven — (1)  It  is  an  absurd  thing  to  look  for  His  bodily  presence  anywhere  in 
this  world.  (2)  Let  us  follow  our  dear  Saviour  with  our  frequent  thoughts,  and 
with  our  warmest  affections.  (D.  Jennings.)  The  coronation  of  Christ: — Jesus's 
resurrection  might  have  been  regarded  as  a  private  return  to  a  select  circle,  had  it 
not  been  followed  by  the  assumption  of  the  symbols  of  world-wide  and  heavenly 
authority.  The  Czar  of  Eussia  begun  to  reign  on  the  death  of  his  father,  but  there 
was  an  interval  of  two  years  before  he  was  crowned.  Then  it  was  at  Moscow,  the 
ancient  seat  of  the  rulers  of  the  realm,  where  representatives  of  the  empire  and  the 
world  were  gathered  iu  unwonted  splendour.  Tlie  coronation  signifies  something. 
It  is  a  time  for  renewing  old  constitutions  and  cementing  the  different  parts  of 
the  dominion.  Christ  was  formally  to  connect  the  dispensation  of  the  chosen 
people  with  that  of  a  universal  sovereignty.  There  were  new  states  to  be  added  to 
His  rule.  Instead  of  remaining  an  illustrious  citizen,  He  receives  and  wields  an 
imperial  sceptre.  ( IF.  R.  Camphdl.)  Christ  preceding  His  apostles  to  hearen  : — 
As  one  who  precedes  a  mighty  host,  provides  and  prepares  rest  for  their  weariness, 
and  food  for  their  hunger,  in  some  city  on  their  line  of  march,  and  having  made 
all  things  ready,  is  at  the  gates  to  welcome  their  travel-stained  ranks  when  they 
arrive,  and  guide  them  to  their  repose  ;  so  Christ  has  gone  before,  our  Forerunner, 
to  order  all  things  for  us  there.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Christ  directs  thought  to 
heaven:  — II  is  said  that  S'icrates  brought  men  down  from  heaven  to  earth  because 
be  diverted  attention  from  astronomy  to  a  philosophy  that  considered  the  duties 
and  relations  of  man  in  this  life.  Christ,  on  the  other  hand,  exalts  the  thoughts 
and  purposes  of  men  from  earth  to  heaven.  The  last  dags  of  the  Gospelperiod: — 
The  crucifixion  had  seemed  to  put  an  end  to  Jesus's  ministry.  But  not  so :  the 
period  of  Gospel  history  was  yet  forty  days  from  its  end.  Consider — I.  How  the? 
RESEsiitLED  I'UEVious  DAYS.  1.  In  the  visiblc  presence  of  Jesus.  2.  In  the  personal 
ministry  of  Jesus.  No  one  else  could  have  done  what  was  required.  3.  In  the 
verbal  instruction  of  Jesus.  •'  The  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God  "  had 
been  Christ's  themes  at  the  commencement  (Matt.  iv.  17  ;  John  iii.  3),  and  through- 
out His  public  life.  4.  The  exercise  of  the  authority  of  Jesus.  Long  agi>  He  had 
chosen  them,  now  He  gave  them  commandments.  They  were  to  understand  that 
death  had  not  broken  His  authority.  6.  In  the  mysterious  agency  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  (Matt.  iii.  16 ;  John  iii.  34 ;  Heb.  ix.  14).    II.  How  they  differed.     1.  He 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  13 

who  was  now  seen  had  bepn  hidden  in  the  grave.  Here  was  a  testimony  to  the 
reality  of  the  invisible.  Then  He  could  be  present  with  them  in  thought,  though 
not  to  sense  when  He  returned  again  to  the  unseen,  2.  The  voice  now  heard  had 
been  silent  in  death.  Surely  then  His  words  must  have  been  listened  to  with  the 
deepest  reverence.  3.  Strange  experiences  had  increased  the  fitness  of  the  disciples 
to  receive  Christ's  instructions.  Their  misunderstandings  had  been  rectified,  and 
their  attachment  deepened.  When  attention  has  been  secured  a  speaker  can  say 
more  in  a  minute  than  in  an  hour  otherwise.  4.  The  visible  presence  of  Jesus  was 
not  constant.  To  give  His  disciples — (1)  Intervals  for  reflection.  (2)  Evidences  of 
His  permanent  interest  in  them.  III.  Their  leading  impression.  That  Jesus 
was  alive.     He  still  lives,  and  because  of  that  we  shall  live  also.     (W.  Hudson.) 

Ver.  3.  To  whom  also  He  showed  Himself  alive  after  His  Passion. — He  rose  again 
from  the  dead : — I.  The  fact  itself,  ob  the  notion  op  a  resurrection  in  general. 
Admitting  the  power  and  providence  of  God,  there  can  be  nothing  in  it  repugnant 
to  reason,  or  incredible.  1.  To  raise  a  dead  man  to  life  surpasses  the  power  of  any 
creature  ;  but  no  reason  can  be  assigned  why  it  should  be  beyond  the  Divine  power  ; 
since  the  doing  it  involves  no  contradiction.  He  that  first  inspired  the  soul  into 
the  body,  may  surely  be  supposed  capable  of  reuniting  them.  2.  Nor  was  it 
apparently  in  its  design  unworthy  of  God,  or  inconsistent  with  His  holy  will :  for 
the  ends  thereof,  such  as  were  pretended  by  its  attesters,  were — (1)  Important. 
(2)  Good.  (3)  Eeasonable.  II.- The  witnesses.  1.  General  considerations:  (1) 
As  to  their  number,  it  was  not  one  or  two,  but  many,  who  conspired  in  asserting  it. 
(2)  They  were  no  strangers  to  Jesus,  but  persons  by  long  conversation  familiarly 
acquainted  with  Him.  (3)  They  did  aver  themselves  to  be  eye  or  ear-witnesses  of 
the  matter,  as  fully  informed  about  it  as  senses  could  make  them,  (4)  The  chief 
of  the>^e  witnesses,  the  apostles  themselves,  were  at  first  so  far  from  being  credulous 
in  this  matter,  that  they  took  it  for  a  fiction,  gave  no  credence  thereto,  and  were  at 
last  with  difficulty  persuaded  of  it.  (5)  On  thege  grounds  they  boldly  and  con- 
currently aver  the  fact :  "  they  spake  the  Word  of  God'  with  boldness  "  ;  and  "  with 
great  power  gave  witness  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Which  things 
being  weighed,  it  appears  impossible  that  the  attesters  of  this  fact,  supposing  them 
in  their  wits  and  senses,  could  be  ignorant  therein,  or  mistaken  about  it.  2.  The 
chai'acter  of  the  witnesses.  (1)  They  were  persons  who  did  (with  denunciation  of 
God's  heavy  judgments  on  the  contrary  practice)  preach  and  press  earnestly  all 
kinds  of  goodness,  sincerity,  modesty,  and  equity,  as  main  points  of  that  religion 
which  by  this  testimony  they  confirmed.  (2)  Their  practice  was  answerable  to 
their  doctrine,  being  exemplary  in  all  sorts  of  virtue  and  sincerity,  whereby  they 
did  in  effect  conciliate  much  respect  and  authority  to  their  words  :  the  life  they  led 
was  not  the  life  of  wicked  impostors,  but  worthy  of  the  divinest  men  ;  fit  to  carry  on 
the  best  de.-ign.  (3)  They  were  persons  of  good  sense  ;  very  wise  and  prudent; 
not  in  the  way  of  worldly  or  fleshly  wisdom,  to  compass  projects  of  gain  or 
pleasure  to  themselves  ;  but  endued  with  a  wisdom  far  more  excellent,  and  suitable 
to  the  characters  they  sustained.  (4)  As  to  their  purposes  in  this  case  :  profit, 
honour,  pleasure,  or  any  worldly  advantage  they  could  not  have  in  view  ;  for  they 
willingly  abandoned  all  those  things,  for  the  sake  of  this  very  testimony  incurring 
loss,  disgrace,  and  pain.  (5)  And  all  such  atflictions,  as  they  knowingly  exposed 
themselves  to  them,  they  did  endure  with  contentedness  and  juy.  (6)  Whence  it  is 
evident  enough  that  the  satisfaction  of  their  conscience,  and  expectation  of  future 
reward  from  God  for  the  discharge  of  their  duty,  was  all  the  argument  that  induced 
them  to  undertake  this  attestation,  all  the  reason  that  could  support  them  in  it; 
neither  of  which  could  be  consistent  with  the  resolved  maintenance  of  a  falsehood. 
(7)  And  how  is  it  conceivable  that  such  persons  should  be  bewitched  with  so 
passiimate  an  atTection  toward  a  man,  who  died  as  a  malefactor,  that  merely  for  his 
sake,  or  rather  a  vain  opinion  about  him,  they  should  with  such  obstinacy  defy  all 
the  world,  with  its  persecutions,  and  the  punishment  of  hell  itself.  (8)  Again,  we 
may  consider  these  witnesses  to  have  been  peisons  very  unlikely  to  devise  such  a 
plot,  very  unfit  to  undertake  it,  very  unable  to  manage  and  carry  it  through.  III. 
Their  testimony.  1.  How  could  such  a  cheat,  if  contrived,  bave  so  easily  prospered, 
and  obtained  so  wonderful  a  progress?  2.  The  matter  of  their  testimony,  and  its 
drift,  were  very  implausible,  such  as  no  impostors  would  be  likely  to  foi'ge,  and  no 
hearers,  without  great  evidence  of  truth,  be  ready  to  admit.  3.  One  would  indeed 
think  that  this  report,  had  it  been  false,  might  easily  have  been  disproved  and 
quashed  ;  they  who  were  mightily  concerned,  and  as  eagerly  disposed  to  confute  it, 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTUAToE.  [chap.  i. 

wanting  no  means  of  doing  it.  4.  As  also  this  testimony  had  no  human  power  to 
sustain  it,  so  it  used  no  sleight  to  convey  itself  into  the  persuasions  of  men :  it 
craved  no  blind  faith  :  it  dared  all  adversaries  and  powers  to  withstand  it,  relying 
on  the  patronage  of  heaven  alone.  5.  Furthermore,  the  thing  itself,  had  it  been 
counterfeit,  was  adapted  to  fall  of  itself;  the  witnesses  clashing  together,  or 
relenting  for  their  crime.  The  advice  of  Gamaliel  on  this  point  had  much  reason 
in  it.  6.  He  then  who  doubts  the  sincerity  of  this  testimony,  or  rejects  it  as 
incredible,  must  instead  of  it  admit  stronger  incredibilities.  7.  To  these  things  we 
may  add  that  God  Himself  did  signally  countenance  and  ratify  this  testimony,  by 
extraordinary  powers  and  graces  conferred  on  the  avowers  thereof,  as  well  as  by  a 
wonderful  success  bestowed  on  them.  {I.  Barrow,  D.D.)  Christ  risen,  yet  not 
ascended: — There  is  a  strong  disposition  to  reverence  that  which  has  been  connected 
with  the  great  and  good.  If  the  wood  of  the  true  Cross  had  been  preserved,  few 
could  look  upon  it  but  with  the  deepest  interest.  It  is  remarkable,  however,  that 
we  have  few  relics  of  Christ's  days ;  while  the  museums  of  all  civilised  lands  are 
filled  with  well-authenticated  fragments  from  Greece,  Eome,  Babylon,  Egypt. 
God  has  wisely  ordered  this  to  check  the  tendency  to  superstii  ion  and  idolatry.  But 
can  no  good  use  be  made  of  this  law  of  our  nature?  Our  Church  has  judged  that 
there  can,  and  she  teaches  us  not  to  seek  for  relics,  but  to  remember  events  in 
Christ's  life,  and  then  leads  our  thoughts  to  the  instruction  they  convey.     I.  How, 

OK  IN  WHAT  FORM,  DID  OUR  LoRD  "  SHOW  HiMSELF  AFTER   HiS  PaSSION  "  ?       There  WaS 

evidently  some  change  in  His  body  and  some  difference  in  His  manner  of  appearing. 
He  ate,  indeed,  with  His  disciples,  yet  not  as  one  who  needed  food,  but  only  to 
convince  them  of  His  corporeal  existence.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  lived  with 
them  familiarly  as  He  had  before  done,  but  came  to  them  occasionally  ;  and  the 
forms  of  expression  intimate  something  miraculous.  "  He  showed  Himself  "  as 
one  was  invisibly  prf-sent,  but,  at  will  revealing  Himself,  like  the  sun  shining  from 
a  cloud.  Then,  "  He  vanished  out  of  their  sight."  At  other  times  He  would  come 
when  "  the  doors  were  bolted."  The  disciples  regarded  Him  far  otherwise  than  in 
His  former  state.  Their  accustomed  free  intercourse  was  changed  for  the  deepest 
reverence.  All  questions  concerning  the  nature  of  Christ's  body  must  remain 
unanswered  till  we  know  for  ourselves  what  a  spiritual  and  glorified  body  is.  II. 
Where  ?  Chiefly  in  Galilee.  There  had  been  the  favoured  scene  of  His  earthly 
ministry,  and  there  His  followers  were  most  numerous.  With  what  intense  interest 
must  those  lowly  followers  have  flocked  together  when  the  summons  was  to  meet 
their  risen  Lord  1  He  offers  to  meet  us  in  His  sacraments,  house,  word,  prayer, 
yet  how  carelessly  we  regard  the  summons  I  He  has  carried  the  same  loving, 
compassionate  spirit  with  Him  to  heaven,  and  we  may  share  with  His  disciples  in 
His  Divine  consolations,  if  we  seek  them  aright.  III.  For  what  purpose.  To  speak 
•'  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God,"  i.e.,  His  Church,  They  had  been 
hitherto  very  dull,  and  Christ  in  these  meetings  gave  them  fuller  instructions.  It 
is  probable  that  we  have  the  substance  of  our  Lord's  con\ers!itions  in  the  Acts  and 
Epistles,  for  in  these  they  would  naturally  embody  and  carry  out  their  Master's 
directions.  It  is  also  very  likely  that  many  of  the  customs  of  the  primitive  Church 
were  nothing  more  than  our  Lord's  instructions  reduced  to  practice.  Hence  we  see 
the  importance  of  appealing,  for  our  own  guidance,  to  primitive  usage.  If,  for 
instance,  we  find  immediately  after  the  apostles'  times,  that  infants  were  baptised, 
and  nothing  to  oppose  this  in  the  New  Testament,  we  might  be  strengthened  in  our 
conclusions,  that  this  was  a  practice  settled  by  our  Lord  Himself.  How  many 
points  there  are  in  civil  law  which  are  decided  by  such  an  appeal  to  established  usage, 
and  are  not  found  in  any  written  code  1  Many  points,  however,  upon  which  our 
Lord  dwelt  in  these  interviews,  are  recorded.  He  promised  to  send  them  the 
Comforter,  &c.  IV.  Its  certainty.  ♦'  By  many  infallible  proofs,  being  seen  of  them 
forty  days.''  Our  faith  and  hopes  rest  then  on  infallible  proofs.  And  the  certainty 
of  the  gospel  increases  the  guilt  and  danger  of  those  who  neglect  it.  Are  you  living 
as  if  you  believed  it  true?  {W.  II,  Lewis,  D.D.)  Many  infallible  proofs. — 
Sense  evidence  given  of  Christ's  resurrection  : — As  the  faith  of  the  Church  depends 
on  the  Resurrection  God  has  given  ample  evidence  of  the  fact.  But  He  gave  none 
other  than  that  which  appeals  to  the  senses — the  only  way  of  proving  any  fact. 
Even  our  Maker  could  not  give  us  better  evidence  without  changing  radically  our 
nature.  Observe  how  this  bears  on  the  Romish  dogma  of  transubstantiation.  The 
pillar  on  which  that  rests  is  the  assumption  that  the  senses  deceive  and  cannot  be 
trusted.  But  this  assumption  would  leave  the  Resurrection  incapable  of  proofs. 
Either  the  evidence  of  the  senses  is  a  valid  proof  of  a  fact  or  it  is  not.     If  it  id 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  15 

transubstantiation  is  false ;  if  it  is  not  the  Eesurrection  is  unproved.  .  The  very 
same  evidence  which  proves  that  Christ  has  risen  proves  also  that  the  bread  and 
wine  are  not  changed  into  Christ's  body  and  blood.  Thus  the  Roman  apostasy 
cannot  sustain  its  fundamental  superstition  without  destroying  the  proof  that  the 
Kedeemer  has  risen.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Being  seen  of  them  forty  days. — The 
forty  daijs  : — I.  For  the  lord.  The  period  of — 1.  The  Sabbath  rest  after  the 
completion  of  His  work  of  redemption.  2.  The  last  care  of  the  Shepherd  for  His 
disciples.  3.  The  joyful  expectation  of  His  approaching  exaltation.  II.  For  the 
DISCIPLES.  The  period  of — 1.  The  last  blessed  intercourse  with  their  Divine  Master. 
2.  Quiet  communion  with  their  own  heart  ("  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou 
Me  ?  ").  3.  Earnest  preparation  for  their  apostolic  mission.  III.  Fi>r  us.  An 
emblem  of — 1.  The  blessed  life  of  faith  with  Christ  in  God,  concealed  from  the 
world  (Cot.  iii.  3).  2.  The  blessed  work  of  love  in  the  hearts  of  our  friends  in 
looking  forward  to  our  approaching  separation.  3.  The  expectation  of  hope  of 
our    heavenly    perfection.      (J.    P.    Lange,    D.D.)  The  forty   days  : — Mark, 

I.  How  CAREFUL  OUR  SaVIOUR  WAS  TO  HAVE  THE  FACT  OF  HiS  RESURRECTION  CERTI- 
FIED TO  His  DISCIPLES  BEYOND  THE  POSSIBILITY  OF  DOUBT.  Strictly  Speaking,  one 
meeting  was  enough.  But  proofs  were  multiplied,  as  His  visits  were  repeated. 
They  grew  familiar  with  His  look  and  aspect ;  heard  Him  talk,  &c. ;  and  after  all 
this,  they  could  never  suppose  that  a  vision  had  been  imposed  upon  them.  The 
positiveness  with  which  they  always  spoke  on  this  subject  was  an  important 
element  in  their  preaching,  and  it  was  their  Lord's  pui'pose  to  build  them  up  in  a 
confidence  which  should  never  be  shaken.  Through  the  "  forty  days  "  a  work  of 
education  was   going   on  the  fruits  of  which  were  seen  in  the  next  forty  years. 

II.  This  period  was  not  one  of  uninterrupted  intercourse,  but  of  brief  meetings, 
followed  somf>times  by  days,  or  possibly  weeks,  of  separation.  Very  graciously  the 
Lord  condescended  to  His  friends,  very  bles-^ed  were  these  seasons  when  they  came, 
but  there  was  not  the  companionship  of  former  days.  Now  Christ  stood  forth  in 
His  proper  character  as  the  Divine  Mediator,  to  whom  all  power  was  committed  in 
heaven  and  earth.  The  apostles  had  to  learn  this  truth,  and  act  upon  it.  Their 
approaches  to  the  Mercy-seat,  while  bold,  were  to  be  marked  with  that  solemn 
reverence  without  which  all  worship  is  a  mockery.  III.  Time  was  given  to  teach 
the  apostles  much  of  their  Lord's  will,  and  to  send  them  forth  well  equipped 
FOR  their  future  WORK.  1.  Particular  directions  given  from  time  to  time.  They 
were  to  tarry  at  Jerusalem,  where,  judging  from  past  experience,  they  would  sow 
their  seed  as  upon  a  rock,  and  peril  their  lives  for  nought.  From  that  centre  light 
was  to  radiate  over  the  wide  surface  of  this  fallen  world.  2.  Special  gifts  were 
promised  to  them  for  their  work  and  "  power  from  on  high."  3.  Mistakes  and 
prejudices  were  corrected.  4.  The  great  truth  was  enforced,  explained,  and 
illustrated,  that  their  Lord's  death  was  the  world's  life.  Learn — 1.  A  lesson  of 
patience.  Think  what  was  before  Him,  and  how  contentedly  He  waited  for  it.  No 
ha.sting  to  His  crown  till  all  was  ready.  We  may  well  suppose  that  there  was 
eagerness  on  the  part  of  the  heavenly  hosts.  Their  harps  were  ready  strung,  and 
the  song  was  on  their  lips,  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  0  ye  gates,"  &c.  But  their  King 
has  work  to  do  in  this  lower  world  ;  and  the  march  of  triumph  must  be  deferred. 
Let  us  then  not  only  put  up  with  our  crosses,  but  wait  patiently  for  the  good  things 
to  come.  What  M'e  sow  in  faith  we  shall  reap  one  day  ;  and  God's  harvest-time  is 
the  be-t.  We  long  to  see  the  Church  advancing  faster  in  her  march  of  triumph,  to 
see  Christ's  name  more  honoured  among  ourselves.  Let  us  not  wish  less  fervently, 
but  let  us  wait  more  humbly.  Centuries  rolled  away  before  the  Son  of  God  was 
manifested,  and  many  more  may  come  and  go  before  He  shall  come  back  again  in 
glory.  Ten  thousand  unconscious  agents  in  different  lands  are  doing  His  work, 
and  fulfilling  His  pleasure.  2.  To  think  of  Christ  as  the  apostles  thought  of  Him. 
They  knew  Him  well  before  as  the  human  Friend,  but  now  as  the  Divine  Eedeemer. 
In  both  characters  may  we  think  of  Him  as  ascended  to  His  throne,  and  realise  His 
presence  with  ourselves  I  You  must  not  so  degrade  the  Saviour  as  to  think  of  Him 
only  as  the  world's  great  Prophet,  or  as  the  perfect  Pattern  ;  nor  in  your  attempts 
to  exalt  Him,  lose  sight  of  the  truth  that  He  carried  His  human  nature  with  Him 
to  heaven.  "  Such  an  High  Priest  became  us,"  &c,  (J.  Hampden  Gurney,  M.A.) 
The  best  proof  of  Christ's  resurrection  : — The  best  proof  of  Christ's  resurrection  is  a 
living  Church,  which  itself  is  walking  in  a  new  life,  and  drawing  life  from  Him  who 
hath  overcome  death.  (Christlitb.)  The  identification  of  the  risen  Christ: — Luke, 
the  writer  of  our  twofold  gospel  of  the  resurrection,  was  a  physician,  who  would 
have  been  inclined  and  able  to  sift  the  evidences  of  our  Lord's  bodily  presence  and 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

identity  among  His  followers.  The  longest  and  best  accounts  of  Christ's  return  to 
earth,  except  those  of  John,  are  by  a  medical  expert.  Special  past  events  were 
referred  to  by  the  Lord,  which  were  familiar  to  the  disciples,  such  as  the  baptism  of 
John,  Stanley  carried  a  boy  back  up  the  Congo  who  had  been  taken  from  there 
when  quite  small.  Coming  into  the  vicinity  of  the  dwelling  place  of  his  tribe,  a 
canoe  rowed  out  to  meet  the  steamer.  In  the  boat  the  lad  recognised  his  elder 
brother,  but  the  latter  was  sceptical,  and  cried,  "Give  me  some  sign  that  I  may 
know  you."  The  boy  who  had  been  away  answered  at  once,  "  Do  you  remember 
the  crocodile  ?  His  scar  is  there  on  your  right  arm."  So  Christ  to  His  disciples 
gave  many  proofs.  His  lines  of  thought  and  speech  during  His  forty  days' 
residence  among  them  were  in  the  familiar  phrase  of  the  past,  such  as  the  "  things 
concerning  the  kingdom  of  God."  There  might  have  been  good  evidences  of  Jesus's 
resurrection  if  He  had  appeared  in  China  or  under  the  Southern  Cross  or  in  the 
clearings  of  the  Dauubian  forests.  Had  He  gone  there  after  He  came  from  the 
grave,  by  the  by  the  tidings  would  have  reached  the  outer  world  of  some  strange 
and  illustrious  personage  who  manifested  Himself  at  one  place  and  another,  just  ag 
a  comet  is  reported  in  the  sky.  Yet  we  should  always  be  grateful  that  the  Lord 
showed  Himself  alive  to  those  apostles  "whom  He  had  chosen."  There  was  the 
possibility  of  verification  which  we  so  often  ask  for.  {W.  R.  Campbell.)  The 
forty  days: — A  host  of  reasons  suggest  themselves  as  to  why  He  should  at  once 
enter  into  His  glory.  I.  Eakth  at  best  could  have  been  but  a  very  i>heary 
HOME  FOR  Him  who  had  come  from  the  Paradise  of  God.  For  Him,  the  high 
King  of  Glory,  we  could  find  no  fit  entertainment.  What  society  was  there  for 
Him,  the  all-wise  ?  Thou  hast  given  Thy  life,  0  Lord,  0  glorious  Son  of  God. 
Thou  caust  give  no  more.  And  where  upon  this  guilty  eanh  is  any  rest  for  Thee 
now  since  that  dreadful  Cross  has  cast  its  shadow  over  all  the  land !  II.  The.»t 
Christ  Himself  longed  for  rest.  He  who  dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  was 
an  exile  here.  IIL  Then,  again,  there  waited  for  Christ  His  great  triumph, 
that  to  which  He  has  looked  forward  during  all  His  life-work,  finding  in  it  strength 
and  consolation.  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him  He  endured  the  Cross, 
despii-ing  the  shame."  IV.  Delay  would  be  worse  than  unfitting.  If  His 
reign  means  the  world's  salvation,  gifts  for  men,  the  proclaiming  of  the  gospel  with 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  dare  He  linger  still  upon  earth?  No,  it  is  not  human, 
this  delay.  Not  our  thought  nor  our  way  is  this.  It  is  all  Divine — just  like  our 
blessed  Lord.  This  lingering  for  the  forty  days  is  the  crowning  j^roof  of  His  tender 
regard  for  His  little  fiock.  He  who  had  laid  down  His  life  for  them  is  loath  to 
lenve  them.  He  must  tarry  with  them  till  He  has  made  them  feel  that  He  is  just 
the  same  friendly,  brotherly  Jesus  that  He  has  ever  been,  caring  for  them  in  their 
work,  watching  them  with  a  yearning  pity,  siotiping  to  kindle  a  fire  for  their  warmth 
and  to  cook  the  fish  for  their  meal,  and  then  to  bid  them  come  and  dine.  V.  Then 
again,  these  days  were  the  necessary  preparation  for  the  Ascension.  A  very 
tender  and  beautiful  upleading  of  the  disciples.  Then  with  this  exalted  vision  of 
their  glorious  Lord  filling  all  their  soul  they  went  back  to  Jerusalem.  Now  they 
were  able  wortldly  to  celebrate  the  Ascension.  They  returned  to  Jerusalem  with 
great  joy.  Now  all  the  familiar  songs  of  triumphs  come  in  to  tell  of  the  coronation 
of  the  King.  Now  they  heard  the  rapturous  anthem  of  the  angels,  "  Lilt  up  your 
heads,  0  y--  gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  and  the  King  of  Glory 
shall  come  in."  So  we  must  know  Him.  And  thus  does  He  seek  to  lead  us  in  our 
weakness  and  dimness  of  faith  into  the  knowledge  of  Himself.  So  day  by  day  does 
He  lead  us  on  our  way,  ordering  our  steps  that  life  may  make  more  room  for  Him, 
and  that  He  may  give  us  Himself  as  our  salvation  and  our  strength.  {M.  G.  Pearse.) 
Forty  dayx  with  Jesus  : — Men  now-a-days  yearn  for  a  repetition  of  Pentecost  without 
the  trouble  of  preparing  for  it.  The  text  teaches  that  that  must  be  preceded  by 
prolonged  communion  with  Jesus.  I.  This  communion  gave  the  disciples  the 
FULL  persuasion  THAT  Christ  WAS  THE  SoN  OF  GoD.  They  held  such  a  thought 
before,  but  the  crucifixion  had  shaken  it.  The  resurrection  however  restored  it 
and  the  fortv  days  intercourse  confirmed  it.  No  Pentecost  without  the  mastering 
conviction  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  with  power.  II.  Along  with  these  great 
thoughts  of  Christ's  Godhead  the  intercourse  brought  the  most  delightfoii 
consciousness  THAT  Jesus  WAS  STILL  THEIR  Brothef.  He  Called  them  by  that  name, 
and  demonstrated  his  Brotherhood  by  many  mfallible  proofs.  The  realisation  of 
this  relationship  by  love-begetting  certitude  of  Christ's  presence  is  necessaiy  to 
Pentecost.  The  Holy  Spirit  simply  gives  us  power  to  bear  witness  to  facts  of  which 
we  are  sure.     III.  The  character  of  this  intercourse.     1.  It  was  discriminating. 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  17 

Christ  dealt  with  each  man  as  each  required  Peter,  Thomas,  John,  &c.  2.  It  was 
self-discovering.  Unsuspected  faults  were  revealed  and  hearts  were  moved  to  self- 
renunciation.  3.  It  was  educational.  4.  It  was  encouraging.  Knowing  what  we 
do  of  the  disciples  Pentecost  would  have  been  an  impossibility  before  the  forty  days. 
So  now  we  all  need  to  be  dealt  with  one  by  one,  to  know  ourselves,  to  be  humbled, 
taught,  and  inspired.  IV.  The  subject  dwelt  upon.  "  The  kingdom  of  God  " — 
its  spirituality,  glory,  universality,  final  triumph.  This  was  the  matter  which  they 
had  by  the  Spirit's  inspiration  to  preach.  Hence  they  must  know  about  it  from  the 
King.  Hence  Christ  must  fire  our  minds  with  the  same  thought  before  tbe  Spirit 
can  fire  our  hearts  to  proclaim  it.     (J.  P.  Gledstone.)         After  the  resurrection  : — 

1.  Jesus  had  come  back  from  the  mysterious  change,  but  He  had  forgotten 
NOTHING — neither  the  places,  the  dear  familiar  shores,  the  roads,  the  mountain 
paths,  the  lake,  and  the  hills,  the  hallowed  spots  of  His  life-work.  Now,  as  to  the 
persons,  Martha  and  Mary,  and  Peter,  and  the  other  disciples,  were  not  only  still 
remembered,  but  still  loved.  It  will  be  so  with  us  when  we  also  come  back  from 
the  mysterious  regions  of  the  grave.  The  present  life  will  be  something  more  than 
a  dream.  It  will  be  a  living  reality.  II.  Jesus  had  come  back  from  the  mysterious 
CHANGE,  BUT  His  LOVE  REMAINED  THE  SAME.  It  will  be  the  Same  with  us.  When  we 
have  crossed  to  the  other  side,  we  shall  still  bear  with  us  the  fond  remembrances 
of  past  love.    The  affections  will  not  be  destroyed.     III.  Jesus  had  come  back  from 

THE    MYSTERIOUS    CHANGE,    BUT    HiS    PHYSICAL   NATURE    REMAINED.        Aud   His   humaU 

nature  was  visible,  tangible,  capable  of  taking  food.  Our  physical  powers  will,  in  a 
certain  manner,  remain  with  us  after  death.  There  will  be  conversation  and  action 
in  the  same  way  as  at  present.  Wherein,  then,  wiU  be  the  change  ?  Our  human 
bodies  will  not  be  destroyed,  but  they  will  be  changed.  We  may  gather  some 
particulars  from  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord.  1.  It  will  be  the  same  body  fully 
developed.  It  is  evident  to  all  that  our  human  bodies  are  cramped  and  dwarfed  by 
circumstances.  They  are  but  elementary,  imperfect  organisations.  If  they  were 
perfect  they  would  not  change.  If  they  were  perfect  they  could  not  deteriorate. 
If  perfect  they  could  not  die.  That  they  are  undeveloped  is  observable  from  the 
capacities  which  they  possess.  How  strong  and  mighty  the  body  may  become  ! 
What  we  call  maturity  of  character  is  in  reality  only  its  commencement.  With 
regard  to  the  body,  take  its  power  of  progression,  limited  to,  say,  four  miles  an 
hour — a  rate  which  would  require  millions  of  years  to  reach  the  nearest  star.  The 
same  body  wUl  have  all  its  powers  fuUy  developed  to  their  utmost  capacity.  2.  It 
will  be  the  same  body  rendered  immaterial.     [Homilist.)  The  significance  of  the 

forttf  days  : — The  period  is  a  significant  space  of  time  in  Scripture,  aud  is  frequently 
allotted  as  a  term  of  probation  before  some  great  event  which  concerned  God's 
kingdom.  For  forty  days  and  forty  nights  rain  was  sent  upon  the  earth  as  the 
prelude  to  the  Deluge.  Before  the  giving  of  the  law  Moses  was  in  the  Mount  forty 
days  and  forty  nights  ;  and  when  after  the  destruction  of  the  first  tables,  the  law 
was  renewed  again,  Moses  was  with  the  Lord  forty  days  and  nights.  The  same 
space  of  time  was  spent  by  the  spies  who  were  sent  forth  to  survey  Canaan  the  type 
of  the  spiritual  inheritance  of  the  people  of  God.  For  forty  days  and  nights  Elijah 
journeyed  before  he  came  by  Divine  direction  to  Horeb  the  Mount  of  God.  The  time 
of  probation  and  repentance  given  to  Nineveh  was  a  like  space  of  time.  When  we 
come  to  the  New  Testament  we  note  the  same  phenomenon.  Forty  days  after  His 
birth  our  Lord  was  presented  in  the  Temple.  Before  He  entered  on  the  work  of 
His  ministry  after  His  baptism  He  was  forty  days  tempted  in  the  wilderness.  So 
now  He  abode  on  earth  forty  days  before  His  ascension.  What  significancy  there 
may  be  in  the  number  we  are  not  informed :  the  recurrence,  however,  of  this  space 
of  time,  usually  in  connection  with  events  of  extraordinary  importance,  would  lead  us 
to  believe  that  there  is  a  mystery  in  the  number.  Nor  is  this  diminished  when  in 
parallelism  with  the  forty  days'  wandering  (Numb,  xiv.  33,  34)  Jerusalem  had  its 
forty  years  of  trial  and  space  for  repentance  after  the  Crucifixion ;  and  not  until 
that  period  had  been  accomplished  was  it  destroyed  by  the  Romans.  For  forty  days 
during  which  He  showed  Himself  alive  they  were  obdurate,  and  forty  years  after- 
wards each  day  for  a  year  came  the  destruction  of  the  nation.  (J.  Lightfoot,  D.D.) 
The  Epiphanies  of  the  forty  days: — 1.  To  Mary  Magdalene  (Mark  xvi. ;  John  xx.) 

2.  To  the  women  who  had  first  visited  the  sepulchre,  by  whom  the  disciples  were 
summoned  to  meet  Christ  in  Galilee  (Matt,  xxviii.  1-10).  3.  To  Peter  (Luke  xxiv. 
33-35  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  5).  4.  To  Cleophas  and  another  on  the  way  to  Emmaus  (Mark 
xvi.  12 ;  Luke  xxiv.  13-32).  5.  To  the  eleven  in  the  absence  of  Thomas,  at 
Jerusalem  (Luke  xxiv.  36-43  ;  John  xx.  19-25).     6.  "Eight  days  afterwards"  to 

VOL.    I.  2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i. 

the  disciples,  Thomas  being  present  (Mark.  xvi.  14  ;  John  xx.  26-29 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  6). 

7.  To  certain  of  the  disciples  when  fishing  on  the  lake  of  Galilee  (John  xxi.  1-24). 

8.  To  James  (1  Cor.  xv.  7).     9.  To  the  apostles,  and  probably  the  whole  body  of 
disciples  on  a  certain  mountain  in  Galilee  (1  Cor.  xv.  6).     10.  On  the  morning  of 
tbe  ascension  (Luke  xxiv.  43-51,  and  text).      Speaking  of  the  things  pertaining  to 
the  kingdom  of  God.     I.  Of  the  Church  militant — the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth. 
1.  Its  governance.     2.  The  means  of  its  exteu!-ion.    II.  Of  the  Church  triumphant 
— the  kingdom  of  Godin  beaven.     1.  Its  glories.     2.  The  means  of  obtaining  them. 
(IF.  Denton,  M.A.)         The  kingdom  of  God:—^l.  Its  Founder  (ver.  1).     2.  Its  laws 
(ver.   2).     3.  Its   privilege,   the  personal  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (vers.  4,  5). 
4.  Its    extent,    tlie   whole   world    (ver.  8).      5.  Its    King,  a  risen    and    ascended 
Saviour    (ver.    9).      6.  Its    bope,    a    returning    Christ.  The   conversations   of 
the   great  forty    dags : — Let    us    reflect    for    a    little    on    the    cbaracteristics   of 
Christ's  risen  appearances  to  His  disciples.     I  note  then  in  the  first  place  that 
they  were  intermittent,  and  not  continuous — here  and  tbere,  to  Mary  Magdalene 
at  one  time ;  to  the  disciples  journeying  to  Emmaus,  to  the  assembled  twelve,  to 
five  hundred  brethren  at  one,  at  otber  times.     In  one  place  in  the  Gospel  narrative 
we  read  tbat  our  Lord  replied  thus  to  a  section  of  His  adversaries :  "  In  the  resur- 
rection they  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in  marringe,  but  are  as  angels  in  heaven." 
Now  we  often  read  of  angelic  appearances  in  Holy  Scripture,  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testament  alike.     We  read  too  of  appearances  of  Old  Testament  sainis,  as  of  Moses 
and  Elias  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.     And  they  are  all  like  those  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  after  His  resurrection.     They  are  sudden,  independent  of  time  or 
space  or  material  barriers,  and  yet  are  visible  and  tangible  tbough  glorified.     Such 
in  Genesis  was  Abraliam's  vision  of  angels  at  the  tent  door,  when  thsy  did  eat  and 
drink  with  him.     I.  Now  let  us  here  notice  the  naturalness  of  this  query  con- 
cerning THE  restoration  OF  THE  KINGDOM,     Tile   apostles   evidently  shared  the 
national  aspn-ations  of  the  Jews  at  that  time.     We  can  scarcely  realise  or  under- 
stand the  force  and  naturalness  of  this  question,  "  Dost  Thou  at  this  time  restore 
the  kingilom  to  Israel  ?  "  as  put  by  these  Galilean  peasants  till  one  takes  up  Arch- 
bisbop  Laurence's  translation  of  the  book  of  Enoch,  and  sees  how  this  eager  expec- 
tation dominated  every  other  feeling  in  tbe  Jewish  mind  of  that  period,  and  was 
burned  into  the  very  secrets  of  their  existence  by  the  tyranny  of  R  anan  rule.    They 
were  thinking  simply  of  such  a  kmgJom  as  the  book  of  Enoch  foretold.     This  very 
point  seems  to  us  one  of  the  special  and  most  striking  evidences  for  the  inspiration 
and  supernatural  diiection  of  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament.     Their  natural, 
purely  human,  and  national  conception  of  the  kingdom  of  God  was  one  thing  ; 
their  final,  their  divinely  taught  and  inspired  conception  of  that  kingdom  is  quite 
another  thing.     Some  persons  maintain  that  Christianity  in  its  doctrines,  organisa- 
tion, and  discipline  was  but  the  outcome  of  natural  forces  working  in  the  world  at 
that  epoch.     But  take  this  doctrine  alone,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,"  an- 
nounced by  Christ  before  Pilate,  and  impressed  upon  the  apostles  by  revelation 
after  revelation,  and  experience  after  experience,  which  they  only  very  gradually 
assimilated  and  understood.     Where  did  it  come  from?     How  was  it  the  outcome 
of  natural  forces?     The  whole  tendency  of  Jewish  thought  was  in  the  opposite 
direction.     Nationalism  of  the  most  narrow,  particular,  and  limited  kind  was  the 
predominant  idea,  specially  among  those  Galilean  provincials  who  furnished  tbe 
vast  majority  of  the  earliest  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ.     How  could  men  like  them 
have  developed  the  idea  of  the  Catholic  Church,  boundless  as  the  earth  itself, 
limited  by  no  hereditary  or  fleshly  bonds,  and  trammelled  by  no  circumstances  of 
race,  cUmate,  or  kindred  ?     The  magnificence  of  the  idea,  the  grandeur  of  the  con- 
ception, is  the  truest  and  most  sufficient  evidence  of  the  divinity  of  its  origin.     If 
this  liigher  knowledge,  this  nobler  conception,  this  spiritualised  ideal,  came  not  from 
God,  wheuce  did  it  come  ?    I  do  not  think  we  can  press  this  point  of  the  catholicity 
and  universality  of  the  Christian  idea  and  the  Cliristian  society  too  far.    We  cannot 
possibly  make  too  much  of  it.     There  were  undoubtedly  Christian  elements,  or  ele- 
ments whence  Christian  ideas  were  developed,  prevalent  in  the  current  Judaism  of 
the  day.     But  it  was  not  among  these,  or  such  as  these,  that  the  catholic  ideas  of 
the   pospel  took   their   rise.     II.  In  this  passage  again  there  lies  hiuden   the 
WISEST   practical   TEACHING  FOR  THE  CuuRCH  OF  ALL   AGES.     We   have   warnings 
against  tlie  folly  which  seeks  to  unravel  the  future  and  penetrate  tbe  veil  of  dark- 
ness by  which  our  God  in  mercy  shrouds  the  unknown.      We  have  taught  us  the 
benefits  which  attend  the  uncertainties  of  our  Lord's  return  and  of  the  end  of  this 
present  dispensation,     "It  is  not  for  you  to  know  times  or  seasons."    1.  The  wis- 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  19 

dom  of  the  Divine  answer  will  best  be  seen  if  we  take  the  matter  thus,  and  suppose 
our  Lord  to  have  responded  to  the  apostolic  appeal  hxing  some  definite  date  for  the 
winding-up  of  man's  probation  state,  and  for  that  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God 
which  will  take  place  at  His  appearing  and  His  kingdom.  Our  Lord,  in  fixing 
upon  some  such  definite  date,  must  have  chosen  one  that  was  either  near  at  hand 
or  else  one  that  was  removed  far  off  into  the  distant  future.  In  either  of  these 
■cases  He  must  have  defeated  the  great  object  of  the  Diviue  society  which  He  was 
founding.  That  object  was  simply  this,  to  teach  men  how  to  lead  the  life  of  God 
a,mid  tlie  children  of  men.  The  Christian  religion  has  indeed  sometimes  been 
taunted  with  being  an  unpractical  religion.  But  is  this  the  case?  Has  Chris- 
tianity proved  itself  unpractical  ?  If  so,  what  has  placed  Christendom  at  the  head 
of  civilisation  ?  Compare  Christendom  and  India  from  the  simply  practical  point 
of  view,  and  which  can  show  the  better  record?  2.  Our  Lord's  answer  to  His 
apostles  was  couched  in  words  suited  to  develop  this  practical  aspect  of  His  religion. 
It  refused  to  minister  to  mere  human  curiosity,  and  left  men  uncertaini  as  to  the 
time  of  His  return,  that  they  might  be  fruitful  workers  in  the  great  field  of  life. 
And  now  behold  what  ill  results  would  have  followed  had  He  acted  otherwise  !  The 
Master  in  fact  says,  It  is  not  well  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  seasons,  because 
such  knowledge  would  strike  at  the  root  of  practical  Christianity.  Uncertainty  as 
to  the  time  of  the  end  is  the  most  healthful  state  for  the  followers  of  Chiist.  3. 
There  are  in  the  New  Testament,  taken  as  a  whole,  two  contrasted  lines  of  prophecy 
concerning  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  If  in  one  place  the  Lord  Jesus  speaks  as 
if  the  date  of  His  coming  were  fixed  for  His  own  generation  and  age,  "  Verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  this  generation  shall  not  pass  away  till  all  these  things  shall  be  fulfilled," 
in  the  very  same  context  He  indicates  that  it  is  only  after  a  long  time  that  the  Lord 
of  the  servants  will  return,  to  take  account  of  their  dealings  with  the  property 
entrusted  to  them.  Suppose  Christ  had  responded  to  the  spirit  of  the  apostolic 
query,  "  Dost  Thou  at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel  ?  "  and  fixed  the 
precise  date  of  His  coming  ?  He  would  in  that  case  have  altogether  defeated  the 
great  end  of  His  own  work  and  labour.  Suppose  He  had  fixed  it  a  thousand  years 
from  the  time  of  His  ascension.  Then  indeed  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  second 
■coming  would  have  lost  all  personal  and  practical  power  over  the  lives  of  the 
generation  of  Cliristians  then  living,  or  who  should  live  during  the  hundreds  of 
years  which  were  to  elapse  till  the  date  appointed.  The  day  of  their  death,  the 
uncertainty  of  life,  these  would  be  the  inspiring  motives  to  activity  and  devotion 
felt  by  the  early  Christians  ;  while,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  St.  Paul  never  appeals  to 
either  of  them,  but  ever  appeals  to  the  coming  of  Christ  and  His  appearing  to 
judgment  as  the  motives  to  Christian  zeal  and  diligence.  But  a  more  serious 
danger  in  any  such  prediction  lurks  behind.  What  would  have  been  the  result  of 
any  such  precise  prophecy  upon  the  minds  of  the  Christians  who  lived  close  to  the 
time  of  its  fulfilment  ?  It  would  have  at  once  defeated  the  great  end  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion,  as  we  have  already  defined  it.  The  near  approach  of  the  great  final 
catastrophe  would  have  completely  paralysed  all  exertion,  and  turned  the  members 
of  Christ's  Church  into  idle,  useless,  unpractical  religionists.  We  all  know  how  the 
near  approach  of  any  great  event,  how  the  presence  of  anv  great  excitement,  hinders 
life's  daily  work.  4.  Again  and  again  has  history  verified  and  amply  justified  the 
wisdom  of  the  Master's  reply,  "It  is  not  for  you  to  know  times  or  seasons."  It 
was  justified  in  apostolic  experience.  The  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalunians  is 
a  commentary  on  our  Lord's  teaching  in  this  passage.  The  language  of  St.  Paul 
completely  justifies  our  line  of  argument.  He  tells  us  that  the  spirits  of  the 
Thessalonians  had  been  upset,  the  natural  result  of  a  great  expectation  had  been 
experienced  as  we  might  humanly  have  predicted.  The  beginning  of  the  second 
chapter  of  his  Second  Epistle  proves  this  :  "  New  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  touching 
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our  gathering  together  unto  Him ;  to 
the  end  that  ye  be  not  quickly  shaken  from  your  mind,  nor  yet  be  troubled,  either 
by  spirit,  or  by  word,  or  by  epistle  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  pre- 
sent." See  here  how  he  dwells  on  mental  perturbation  as  the  result  of  high-strung 
expectation  ;  and  that  is  bad,  for  mental  peace,  not  mental  disturbance,  is  the  por- 
tion of  Christ's  people.  III.  Christ,  after  He  had  reproved  the  spirit  of  vain 
curiosity  which  strikes  at  the  root  of  all  practical  effort,  then  indicates  ths  sodrcb  T 

OP   THEIR   STRENGTH   AND   THE    SPHERE     OF   ITS   ACTIVITT.       "  Ye     shall     rCCCive    pOWCF 

after  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you."  [G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D. )  Christ's  conception 
of  His  kingdom : — His  thought  and  teaching  concerning  the  kingdom  was  mani- 
festly different  from  theirs.    Their  idea  was  narrow,  small,  and  limited  to  Israel  after 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  flesh,  while  His  idea  was  large,  and  universally  included  all  peoples,  nations,  and 
languages.  It  is  always  difficult  for  us  to  rise  out  of  our  own  narrow  limitations, 
and  take  in  God's  great  thoughts  and  purposes.  This  narrowness  of  mind  on  our 
part  is  always  obtruding  itself  on  God's  great  thoughts  ;  indeed,  they  are  higher 
than  ours  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth.  God's  thoughts  and  purposes 
of  mercy  have  in  them  a  wideness  like  the  wideuess  of  the  sea,  while  ours  are 
bounded  by  local  surroundings.  As  we  come  into  a  closer  and  more  intimate 
fellowship  with  Jesus,  we  shall  also  come  into  a  larger  and  more  godlike  view  of 
things,  both  in  heaven  and  earth.  Things  pertuining  to  the  kingdom  of  God: — 
Now  that  Jesus  was  about  to  depart,  it  might  reasonably  be  expected  that  His 
parting  instructions  would  be  concerning  that  kingdom  which  He  was  to  rule  as  the 
Invisible  Head,  and  they  were  to  administer  as  the  visible  agents.  I.  The  Church 
or  Chkist  is  a  kingdom.  With  Christ  and  His  apostles  it  was  never  less.  Christ 
did  not  come  as  an  ecclesiastic  to  found  a  new  sect,  nor  as  a  philosopher  to  con- 
struct a  new  school  of  thought,  nor  as  a  democratic  leader  to  form  a  new  social  club 
or  to  draw  up  a  new  social  programme.  He  came  as  a  sovereign  to  establish  a  new 
Kingdom  of  Truth,  of  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  Hence  the 
aposstles  felt  that  they  had  more  to  do  than  to  secure  a  place  for  Christianity  side  by 
side  with  Judaism  and  Paganism — they  claimed  universal  sovereign  supremacy. 
Hence,  again,  they  had  no  philosophy  to  set  over  against  the  school  of  Hillel  or  the 
school  of  Aristotle.  True  they  reasoned,  but  that  was  only  because  the  kingdom 
rested  on  a  rational  and  not  on  a  military  basis,  and  its  subjects  were  to  be  won  by 
the  force  of  persuasion  and  not  by  the  force  of  arms.  And  hence  lastly  the  apostles 
entered  into  no  revolutionary  plots,  nor  asked  any  man  to  rise  above  or  turn  aside 
from  the  secular  occupation  ;  but  told  slave  and  governor  alike  to  abide  in  the 
callings  wherein  they  weie  called  as  servant^!  of  the  Lord  Christ.  Note  1.  The 
grandeur  of  this  conception.  Sects,  systems,  programmes  are  all  limited,  and  one 
after  another  pass  away.  Christians  are  citizens  of  a  commonwealth  which  transcends 
space  and  outlives  time.  Compared  with  the  dignity  of  the  Christian  that  of  the 
proudest  autocrat  is  mean.  Here  all  subjects  are  royal.  The  divine  right  of  kings, 
a  mA  th  elsewhere,  is  a  reality  here.  Christ  "  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto 
God."  2.  The  responsibility.  Noblesse  oblige  : — Kings  by  virtue  of  their  office  are 
under  an  obligation  to  live  royally.  Let  us  then  walk  worthy  of  Him  who  hath 
called  us  to  His  kingdom  and  glory.      II.  The  things  pertaining  to  this  kingdom. 

1.  The  King.  Christ  Jesus.  God  and  man  who  occupies  the  throne  because  He 
became  obedient  to  the  death  of  the  Cross  (Phil.  ii.).  2.  The  means  of  entrance 
into  this  kingdom — the  new  birth  (John  iii.)  3.  The  conditions  of  continuance  in 
the  kingdom.  (1)  Loyalty  to  the  King.  (2)  Love  to  our  fellow  subjects.  (3) 
Endeavours  to  extend  the  boundaries  of  the  realm.  4.  The  glorious  prospects  of 
the  kingdom.  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our 
God,"  Ac.  "He  shall  reign  from  sea  to  sea,"  &c.  {J.  W.  Burn.)  The  unfolding 
oj  the  Divine  kingdom  throughout  the  ages : — The  patriarchal,  the  Jewish,  and  the 
Christian  dispensations,  are  evidently  but  the  unfolding  of  one  general  plan.  In 
the  first  we  see  the  folded  bud  ;  in  the  second  the  expanded  leaf;  in  the  third  the 
blossom  and  the  fruit.  And  now,  how  sublime  the  idea  of  a  religion  thus  com- 
mencing in  the  earliest  dawn  of  time;  holding  on  its  way  through  all  the  revolutions 
of  kingdoms  and  the  vicissitudes  of  the  race ;  receiving  new  forms,  but  always 
identical  in  spirit ;  and,  finally,  expanding  and  embracing  in  one  great  brotherhood 
the  whole  family  of  man  1  Who  can  doubt  that  such  a  religion  was  from  God  ? 
(Mark  Hopkins.) 

Vers.  4-8.  And  being  assembled  together  with  them,  commanded  them  that 
they  should  not  depart  from  Jerusalem. — Last  words  : — Before  ascending  Christ 
had — I.  A  Misco.NCEPTiON  to  remove — respecting  the  date  and  character  of  the 
Messianic  Kingdom.     II.  A  promise  to  bestow.     1.  The  Father  made  the  promise. 

2.  Christ  was  to  bestow  it.  3.  The  Holy  Spirit  was  the  subject.  They  were  to 
receive  a  baptism,  copious,  cleansing,  consecrating,  and  be  endowed  with  spiritual 

J^  power.  III.  A  commission  to  entrust.  1.  Its  nature — "  witnesses  unto  Me."  2. 
Its  sphere  ever  widening  till  it  reached  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth.  (J".  R. 
Thomson,  M.A.)  The  Lord's  last  command  to  His  disciples  : — I.  The  command 
WAS  op  a  trying  nature.  "  Not  to  depart  from  Jerusalem."  This  would — 1. 
Becall  painful  sympathies — the  agony  and  crucifixion  ;  the  rejection  by  the  Jews. 
2.  Suggest  personal  unfaithfulness  in  the  denial  by  Peter,  the  defection  by  all.  3. 
Bring  the  fear  of  man.    The  Jerusalemites  had  slain  the  Master  ;  what  might  tha 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  21 

servants  ex^ject?  Why  did  Christ  give  such  hard  orders?  Discipline  was  needed, 
and  Christ's  own  sovereignty  must  be  asserted  and  accepted.  II.  A  gracious 
PROMISE  ACCOMPANIED  THIS  TRYING  COMMAND.  If  the  commaud  Set  forth  the  bitter 
severity  of  law,  the  promise  had  tbe  sweet  gentleness  of  the  gospel.  Thus  God 
gives  His  servants  mingled  portions.  Duty  and  p'ivilege  go  together.  Of  the 
promise,  observe — 1.  It  was  of  ancient  date  (Isa.  xliv.  3  ;  Joel  ii.  28).  2.  The 
Lord's  recent  utterance  of  it  had  made  its  terms  familiar,  "Which  ye  have  heard 
of  Me  "  (Luke  xxiv.  49).  3.  It  whs  the  promise  of  the  greatest  possible  good. 
When  the  Messiah  had  done,  the  next  best  thing  was  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

III.  The  meaning  of  this  promise  could  be  fully  apprehended  only  by  ex- 
perience. They  had  heard  the  terms,  and  some  of  them  had  seen  the  "  form  of  a 
dove  "  at  Christ's  baptism,  but  neither  would  make  the  promise  clear.  They  must 
wait  for  a  new  blessing.  It  is  so  still.  Experience  reveals  what  must  else  be  for 
ever  unexplained.  Of  what,  then,  were  the  disciples  to  have  experience?  1.  Of 
the  utmost  possible  nearness  to  God.  The  Incarnation  had  brought  God  near;  but 
the  Spirit  was  to  unite  the  believer  to  God,  and  make  Him  a  living  temple.  2.  Of 
an  abundance  of  blessing.  They  were  to  have  that  which  baptism  represents — 
purity,  refreshment,  health.  3.  Of  a  deep  acquaintance  with  Divme  truth.  Christ 
had  promised  that  the  Spirit  should  bring  to  their  remembrance  what  He  had  said. 

IV.  The  command  and  promise  were  a  test  of  discipleship.  1.  Patience  was 
exercised  by  remaining  at  Jerusalem.  There  are  times  and  places  in  which 
witnessing  for  Christ  is  easy.  Such  a  place  was  not  Jerusalem.  Disciples  prove 
their  fidelity  by  abiding  in  the  way  of  duty  in  spite  of  hardship.  2.  Faith  was  tried 
by  uncertainty  of  time  "  not  many  days  hence."  3.  But  past  experience  encouraged 
confidence  and  perseverance.  Some  of  Christ's  promises  had  been  already  fulfilled, 
and  in  some  cases  beyond  all  expectation.  Conclusion  :  See  here — 1.  The  gentle- 
ness of  the  Lord's  discipline.  2.  The  condition  on  which  He  fulfils  His  promises. 
{W.  Hitdaon.)  The  Saviour^s  last  charge: — There  attaches  a  deep  interest  to 
this  commandment  of  our  Lord,  from  whatever  point  of  view  it  is  regarded. 
Tender  associations  cluster  and  cling  about  it.  I.  A  grave  charge.  "He  com- 
manded," &c.  Revised  version,  "  charged."  The  gravity  of  the  charge  is  seen — 1. 
In  what  it  was  He  asked  them  to  do.  2.  In  tbe  issues  of  it.  What  was  it  they 
were  to  wait  for  ?  The  great  promise.  Generally  this  applied  to  the  outpouring 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  It  was  a  promise.  It  was  the  promise 
of  the  Father.  All  that  the  Church  needs  is  embraced  in  this  promise.  If  a 
promise  be  of  the  Father,  we  may  be  sure  it  is  inviolable,  and  the  thing  it  indicates 
invaluable.  How  differently  we  are  inclined  to  think  of  matters  from  the  view  God 
takes  of  them.  Our  first  thought  is,  probably,  "  Why  not  strike  iron  while  it  is 
hot,  and  follow  up  just  now,  while  the  fame  of  Jesus  is  ringing  out  its  praises,  with 
the  preaching  of  the  truths  for  which  He  laid  down  His  life  ?  "  God  says  "  tarry  " 
till  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high.  "  My  thoughts,  not  your  thoughts," 
&c.  II.  An  inspired  attitude.  "To  wait."  This  meant  three  things — 1.  A 
looking  for  something  under  a  profound  conviction  of  its  necessity.  2.  A  pleading 
for  the  object  in  prayer  ;  and  this  they  were  doing  for  ten  whole  days.  Show  what 
prayer-meetings  should  be,  and  their  place  in  the  success  of  the  Church.  3.  The 
attitude  of  patient  expectation,  of  prospective  sufBciency.  They  took  hold  of  God 
in  prayer  and  waited  round  about  Him  until  He  should  satisfy  their  longings  and 
fill  them  with  the  glory  of  His  praise.  III.  A  specific  commandment.  They  were 
to  wait  at  Jerusalem.  This  appointed  place  no  haphazard,  but  a  design  of  the 
infinite  mind.  Becall  a  few  things  of  Jerusalem  to  see  this.  1.  It  was  the  city 
of  solemnities.  Here  Jews  gathered — feasts  and  fasts  held.  Here  stood  the 
Temple,  there  it  fell — there  was  to  begin  the  building  of  a  new  and  better  temple 
that  should  stand  for  ever.  2.  The  city  of  sublime  figure.  "  Thou  art  comely,  O 
my  love,  as  Jerusalem."  "If  I  forget  thee,  let  my  right  hand  forget  its  cunning." 
"  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  is  Mount  Zion,"  *c.  3.  It 
was  the  concentration  of  all  prophecy.  •'  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and 
upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication,  and  they 
shall  look  upon  Me  whom  they  have  pierced."  4.  How  full  it  was  of  historic 
associations.  City  of  Melehizedek,  place  of  Abraham's  offering,  and  the  metropolis 
of  David's  kingdom,  &c.  5.  It  was  the  place  of  danger.  Here  met  «ll  the  rage 
and  malice,  envy  and  hatred  of  the  time-honoured  Scribes  and  Pharisees.  Then 
why  tnrry  here  ?  To  honour  the  people  whose  ancestors  were  worthy  soldiers  of 
the  faith ;  to  preach  mercy  and  forgiveness  where  was  found  the  most  sin.  (IF.  Halls.) 
The  gospel  first  tested  at  Jerusalem  : — At  the  village  near  which  I  reside,  there  is  a 


\ 


X 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

foundry  for  casting  cannon.  After  cannon  are  cast  they  are  tes-ted  by  the  founders. 
1  hey  first  put  in  a  single  charge.  If  the  cannon  can  bear  that  they  put  in  the 
double  charge.  If  the  cannon  can  bear  that  without  bursting,  then  they  are  pro- 
nounced fit  for  the  field  of  battle,  or  for  the  deck  of  a  man-of-war.  The  casters  act 
wisely,  for  should  there  be  one  flaw  it  is  better  that  it  should  be  detected  in  the 
foundry-yard  than  when  in  the  act  of  being  fired.  Now  the  gos|  el  was  a  new  and 
untried  instrument.  It  had  to  be  tested,  and  where  better  than  at  Jerusalem  ?  If 
it  could  stand  the  test  there  it  could  stand  it  anywhere.  Peter  fired  the  first  gun, 
and  three  thousand  were  converted  in  one  day.  Moreover  a  great  multitude  of  the 
priests  were  obedient  unto  Christ.  The  apostles  could  not  but  have  faith  in  the 
power  of  the  gospel  when  they  saw  the  men  who  mocked  and  crucified  Christ,  and 
gloried  in  what  they  did,  exclaiming,  "Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?" 
(Williams  of  Wei-n.)  But  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father. — The  promise  of 
the  Father: — 1.  The  great  promise  of  the  Father  was,  that  He  would  send  His 
Spirit  into  the  hearts  of  men.  2.  The  promise  is  worth  waiting  for.  Tarry  ye, 
&c.  3.  The  fulfilment  of  the  promise  always  brings  power  with  it,  and  will  make 
witnesses  for  Christ  of  all  those  who  receive  it.  4.  When  the  promise  is  to  be- 
claimed,  let  no  ambitious  desires  turn  one  away  from  receiving  its  baptism.  5. 
The  Father,  in  His  own  good  time,  will  fulfil  His  declaiatiftns  concerning  the 
universal  sway  of  His  kingdom.  (S.  S.  Times.)  The  promise  of  the  Spirit : — 
The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  the  foundation  of  religion.  The  Father  elects,  the 
Son  redeems,  the  Spirit  sanctifies.  The  Son  came  in  execution  of  the  covenant  of 
redemption,  and  having  fulfilled  its  conditions,  was  entitled  to  its  promises.  One 
of  these  was  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  (chap.  ii.  33),  which  Christ  again  and  agaia 
repromised.      I.    The    Holy   Ghost   is    secured   for   the  Church  only  by  the 

MEDIATION  OF    ChRIST.       II.    ChRIST    IS    THE    IMMEDIATE    GiVER    OF    THE    HoLY    GhOST. 

He  sends  Him  to  whom  He  pleases,  and  bestows  through  Him  what  blessings  He- 
pleases.  Therefore  men  must  seek  the  Spirit  specially  from  Christ  as  our 
Mediator.  III.  Election  by  the  Father,  and  redemption  by  the  Son  avail  only 
IN  virtue  of  the  Spirit's  work.  Until  the  Spirit  is  received,  the  elect  do  not  differ 
from  the  non-elect,  the  redeemed  from  the  unredeemed.  Hence  our  obligations  to- 
the  several  persons  of  the  Trinity  are  the  same.  And  as  the  Son  acted  voluntarily 
in  redeeming  those  whom  the  Father  chose,  the  Spirit  is  voluntary  in  apply- 
ing the  redemption  purchased  by  the  Son.  IV.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  is 
— 1.  To  renew  or  quicken  those  dead  in  sins.  2.  To  illuminate.  To  reveal  the 
glory  of  Christ,  the  holiness  of  God,  the  justice  and  extent  of  the  law,  the  evil  of 
sin,  the  certainty  of  judgment,  the  truth  and  authority  of  the  Word  of  God.  8.  To 
work  repentance  and  faith,  i.e.,  turning  from  sin  to  God.  4.  To  guide  in  the 
knowledge  of  truth  and  duty.  5.  To  qualify  for  special  duties  and  offices.  6.  To 
sanctify.  7.  To  comfort.  8.  To  glorify  soul  and  body.  V.  The  dependence  op 
THE  individual  AND  THE  Church  ON  THE  Spirit  IS  ABSOLUTE.  Nothing  can  be 
experienced  or  done  but  by  Him.  Analogous  to  the  dependence  of  the  cteatures 
on  the  Creator  for — 1.  Existence.  2.  Faculties.  3.  Activity.  4.  Results  or  suc- 
cesses. But  not  in  any  one  of  these  is  our  agency  superseded ;  in  all  the  need  of 
effort  is  the  same.     (C.  Hoiigp,  D.D.)  Our  need  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — What  the 

light  is  to  the  mariner's  compass,  or  the  wind  to  the  sail  of  the  ship,  or  the  oil  to- 
the  lamp,  or  the  sap  to  the  tree,  rising  up  softly  and  diffusing  its  life  to  the  farthest 
leaf  of  the  remotest  branch,  that  the  Spirit  is  to  the  Christian  in  every-day  life.  I 
should  as  soon  attempt  to  raise  flowers  if  there  were  no  atmosphere,  or  produce 
fruits  if  there  were  neither  light  nor  heat,  as  to  attempt  to  regenerate  men  without 
the  Holy  Ghost.  (H.  W.  Bcecher.)  The  jiower  ofthk  Holy  Spirit : — 1.  A  promised 
power,  "the  promise  of  the  Father."  2.  A  coming  power,  "  not  many  dayshence."^ 
3.  A  power  in  testimony,  "  Ye  shall  be  witnesses."  4.  An  abiding  power,  to  remain 
until  "  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth "  shall  have  heard  the  gospel.  The 
ascnmo7i  of  Christ : — It  will  be  interesting  to  note  the  reasons  why  Jesus  did  not 
ascend  into  heaven  immediately  after  His  resurrection  from  the  dead,  but  remained 
forty  days  longer  on  earth.  1.  He  wished  His  disciples  to  know  beyond  all  perad- 
venture  that  He  was  not  dead,  but  living,  and  alive  for  evermore.  To  this  end 
"  He  showed  Himself  alive  after  His  passion  by  many  infallible  proofs."  Wliatever 
His  disciples  may  have  thought  of  Him  previously,  they  must  henceforth  know 
Him  as  the  Conqueror  of  death  and  hell.  As  to  His  Divine  character  and  work, 
they  could  no  longer  cherish  a  shadow  of  doubt.  2.  He  desired  to  teach  His 
disciples  some  things  which  hitherto  they  had  been  unable  to  receive.  In 
particular  He  wanted  theui  to  understand  about  His  kingdom,  to  which  they  had 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  23 

previously  attached  all  sorts  of  carnal  notions.  So  it  is  written,  "  He  spoke- of  the 
things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God."  3.  During  these  forty  days  He  planned 
the  campaign  which  is  to  result  in  the  conquest  of  all  nations  to  the  glory  of  His 
name.  We  cannot  place  too  strong  an  emphasis  on  the  parting  injunctions  here 
delivered  to  the  disciples — and  to  us — by  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  I. 
"  He  commanded  them  that  they  should  not  depart  from  Jerusalem,  but  wait." 
This  was  not  an  easy  thing  for  them  to  do.  Flushed  with  the  memory  of  the 
glorious  things  which  the  Master  had  been  revealing  to  them,  they  were  doubtless 
in  a  mood  to  go  everywhere  proclaiming  His  kingdom.  But  return  to  Jerusalem, 
said  He,  "  and  wait."  There  were  good  reasons  for  this  requirement.  1.  It  was 
proper  that  Jerusalem  should  be  geographically  the  point  of  departure  for  the  new 
order  of  things.  "Salvation  is  of  the  Jews."  "Go  ye  everywhere,  beginning  at 
Jerusalem."  Here  is  the  metropolis  of  redemption  (Micah  iv.  2).  It  begins  in 
Jerusalem,  the  capital  of  Jewry,  and  proceeds  to  Home,  the  capital  of  the  world. 

2.  The  disciples  needed  a  season  of  mutual  conference  and  prayer.  To  hasten  to 
their  work  fitfully  and  each  for  himself  would  be  to  court  despondency  and  failure. 

3.  They  were  to  "  wait  "  for  a  special  preparation.  They  were  not  yet  ready  for 
their  work.  It  pays  to  be  well  prepared  for  anything,  most  of  all  for  the  work  of 
the  kingdom  of  Christ.     II.  Our  Lord  in  this  last  interview  with  His  disciples 

GAVE  them,  with  RENEWED  EMPHASIS,  THE    GLORIOUS    PROMISE    OF    THE    HoLY    GhOST. 

This  was  "  the  promise  of  the  Father  "  (John  xiv.  16  ;  also  xv.  26).  The  man  who 
imagines  that  he  can  set  about  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  righteousness  in 
strength  of  his  own  will  make  a  lamentable  failure  of  it.  Let  him  tarry  a,t 
Jerusalem  until  he  has  received  the  promise  of  the  Father.  When  the  fire  descends 
upon  him,  and  he  is  endued  with  power  from  on  high,  nothing  will  seem  impossible 
to  him.  III.  In  this  last  conference  of  Jesus  with  His  disciples  He  disclosed  to 
them  the  plan  of  future  operations.  Had  the  attention  of  a  passer-by  been 
directed  to  the  six-score  or  thereabouts  who  were  gathered  on  Olivet  on  this 
occasion  with  the  remark  that  these  few  working,  people — this  feeble  folk  like  the 
conies — were  being  organised  for  universal  conquest,  he  would  have  pronounced  it 
the  wildest  scheme  that  was  ever  heard  of.  Jesus  not  only  gave  the  disciples  to 
understand  that  He  Himself  was,  through  the  influence  of  His  ever-present  Spirit, 
to  take  charge  of  the  propaganda,  but  He  issued  clear  and  specific  directions  as  to 
how  it  should  be  carried  on.  1.  For  reasons  already  noted,  they  were  to  make 
Jerusalem  their  starting-point.  2.  They  were  to  wait  for  the  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  This  was  to  mark  their  initiation  into  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  or 
new  order  of  things.  3.  They  were  to  proceed  in  their  work  with  a  clear  under- 
standing of  the  fact  that  their  only  power  was  from  God.  4.  The  followers  of 
Christ  were  to  be  "  witnesses  unto  Him."  Words  in  due  season,  spoken  from  the 
pulpit  or  anywhere  else,  are  like  apples  of  gold  shining  through  the  meshes  of  a 
silver  basket ;  but  a  Christlike  life  is  like  a  lighthouse  on  a  rocky  coast :  multitudes 
are  saved  by  it.  All  lives,  indeed,  are  testimonies  ;  every  man  on  earth  is  lending 
his  influence  in  behalf  of  truth  or  falsehood,  for  Christ  or  against  Him.  Character 
will  out.  Our  creed  is  the  thing  we  live  by.  5.  This  witnessing  must  be  universal. 
"  Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Me  both  in  Jerusalem  and  in  all  Judaea,  and  in 
Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth."  Observe,  the  disciples  are 
not  made  responsible  for  the  conversion  of  the  world,  but  only  for  its  evangelisa- 
tion. They  are  to  see  that  the  story  of  redemption  is  told  everywhere ;  and  God 
Himself  will  do  the  rest.  IV.  Then  cometh  the  end.  "  He  shall  so  come  in  like 
manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go  into  heaven."  The  consummation  of  the  Divine 
plan  for  the  deliverance  of  our  sinful  race  is  to  be  signalised  by  the  second  coming 
of  Christ.  1.  When  ?  *'  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and  seasons  which 
the  Father  has  put  in  His  own  power."  This  ought  Lo  be  enough.  The  kingdom 
of  God  Cometh  not  with  observation.  The  appointed  time  is  a  state  secret,  and  we 
cannot  guess  within  a  thousand  years  of  it.  2.  How?  "In  like  manner  as  ye 
have  seen  Him  go  into  heaven."  In  like  manner  His  re-coming  is  to  be  a  real 
personal  advent.  3.  What  then?  It  behoves  us  to  watch.  Not  to  watch  as  do 
certain  wiseacres,  who  lean  indolently  out  of  their  windows  with  eyes  towards  the 
east,  but  as  the  Lord's  faithful  workmen,  who  have  much  to  do  and  know  that  the 
husbandman  may  return  at  any  moment.  "  Why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven  ?  " 
(D.  J.  Bitrrell,  D.D.)  Waiting  for  the  j>ro>nise  of  the  Father  : — I.  What  the 
disciples  were  commanded  to  wait  for — "the  promise  of  the  Father,"  i.e.,  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise.  1.  Not  that  the  Spirit  of  God  had  been  absent  at  any 
time  from  the  Church.     There  could  be  no  Church  without  Him.     We  find  David 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

praying,  "  Take  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me,"  &c.  Now  that  Christ  had  finished 
the  work  of  redemption,  the  Holy  Ghost  was  to  be  given  on  a  scale  so  new  that  we 
are  told  "the  Huly  Ghost  was  not  yet  given,  because  that  Jesus  was  not  yet 
glorified."  2,  "  Which  ye  have  heard  of  Me  "  sends  us  back  to  the  promises  in 
John  xiv.-xvi.  3.  But  why  did  Christ  call  this  emphatically,  "t/ie  promise,"  as  if 
there  had  never  been  another."  Because — (1)  Of  the  large  place  which  the  promise 
occupied  in  the  Old  Testament,  the  Father's  word  (Prov.  i.  23;  Isa.  xxxii.  15, 
xliv.  3;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  27,  xxxvii.  9;  Joel  ii.  28;  Zech.  xii.  10).  (2)  Of  the  all- 
comprehensive  character,  of  the  promise — as  inclusive  in  fact,  of  all  the  Father's 
promises.  "  If  ye  then,  being  evil  .  .  .  how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly 
Father  give  the  Hol.y  Spirit " — comprehensive  of  all  good  gifts  together — all  that 
the  Church  needs  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  ordinary  and  extraordinary,  all 
that  the  individual  soul  requires — life  from  the  dead.  Union  to  Christ  by  faith, 
justification,  holiness,  prayer,  grace,  glory.  (3)  Of  the  Father's  peculiar  delight  in 
this  promise,  that  it  is  a  promise  specially  dear  to  tlie  Father's  heart,  so  lending  a 
new  emphasis  of  encouragement  to  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  If  ye,  being  evil,"  &c. 
II.  The  import  of  the  waiting  fob  the  promise.  1.  Looking  for  it  under  a 
profound  conviction  of  its  absolute  necessity,  and  its  full  sufficiency.  Once  and 
again  Christ  had  taught  this  when,  after  they  had  toiled  all  night  and  taken 
nothing,  immediately  on  the  putting  forth  of  His  power,  they  enclosed  a  great 
multitude  of  fishes  ;  and  when  He  said  to  them,  "  Greater  works  than  these  shall 
he  do,  because  I  go  unto  My  Father,"  "  He  will  convince  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment."  They  were  to  wait  at  Jerusalem  somewhat  in 
the  Spirit  of  God's  prophet,  when  the  Lord  set  him  down  in  the  midst  of  the  valley 
of  dry  bones.  2.  Pleading  for  it  with  the  Lord  in  prayer.  The  best  comment  on 
this  is  the  actual  waiting  (vers.  12-14).  And  in  the  same  attitude  we  find  them,  at 
the  opening  of  the  second  chaj^ter.  It  evidently  never  entered  their  minds  that, 
having  the  promise,  they  might  abide  its  fulfilment  in  listless  indolence.  They 
had  drunk  into  the  spirit  of  those  words,  "  I  will  yet  for  this  be  inquired  of  by  the 
house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  them."  None  of  those  disciples  said,  "  Oh,  it's  only  a 
prayer-meeting  1  "  Assuredly,  if  there  were  addresses  at  these  meetings,  yet  the 
business  was  prayer.  I  doubt  not  that  the  drift  of  any  exhortations  would  simply 
be,  to  call  up  examples  of  "  the  promise  of  the  Father,"  and  to  impress  the  more 
deeply  on  every  heart  its  glorious  certainty — its  urgent  necessity — its  all-compre- 
hensive preciousness  and  sufficiency.  The  scope  of  them  all  would  be,  "  Ye  that 
are  the  Lord's  remembrancers,  keep  not  silence,  and  give  Him  no  rest,  till  He 
establish,  and  till  He  make  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth."  What  definiteness 
of  aim  would  characterise  these  prayers  !  How  would  they  exemplify  the  words  of 
Jesus,  "  If  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth,"  &c.  3.  Intense  longing  desire  and 
patient  believing  expectation.  The  term  "wait "  signifies  to  wait  round  about  a 
thing,  as  in  anxious  expectation.  "  They  continued  " — "  stedfastly  persisted  with 
one  accord  in  prayer  and  supplication,"  Agreed  together  as  touching  that  which 
they  should  ask,  how  would  they  "  fill  their  mouths  with  arguments,"  drawn  from 
their  own  utter  insufficiency,  from  the  world's  ungodliness  and  misery,  from 
Jehovah's  power,  and  grace,  and  faithfulness  to  His  own  pre-eminent  promise  in 
Christ  1  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldt*t  rend  the  heavens,"  would  be  their  spirit,  if  not 
their  language,  "that  Thou  wouldst  come  down,  that  the  mountains  might  flow 
down  at  Thy  presence  1"  They  had  only  the  naked  promise;  but  it  was  enough. 
If,  in  respect  of  longing  desire,  they  were  as  when  Elijah  said  to  his  servant,  "Go 
up  now,  look  toward  the  sea" — in  respect  of  patient  believing  expectation,  they  were 
as  when  the  servant  went  up  and  looked,  and  said,  "  There  is  nothing,"  and  Elijah 
said,  "  Go  again  seven  times."  III.  The  commandment  to  wait.  This  was  quite 
as  express  as  the  promise — the  means  no  less  necessary  than  the  end.  To  whom 
was  it  given  ?  It  is  very  clear  that  the  apostles  did  not  regard  it  as  belonging 
exclusively  to  them.  We  find  associated  with  them  the  private  members  of  the 
Church.  Did  it  then  belong  exclusively  to  tihe  disciples  of  that  age  ?  This  question 
turns  on  a  very  simple  issue.  If  the  transactions  of  the  Pentecostal  period  ex- 
hausted the  riches  of  "the  promise  of  the  Father";  or  if  the  Church  and  the 
World  now  no  longer  stand  in  need  of  them,  then,  doubtless,  the  commandment 
must  have  ceased.  But  if  only  the  first-fruits  of  the  promise  were  reaped  in  the 
apostolic  age,  if  darkness  yet  to  a  mournful  extent  covers  the  earth,  if  the  dispen- 
sation of  the  covenant  of  grace  under  which  we  live  is  termed  expressly  "  the 
ministration  of  the  Spirit,"  if  that  word  abides  the  inheritance  of  the  Church,  "  I 
will  pour  out  of  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh,"  with  numberless  words  like  the^e,  "  The 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  25 

earth  sliall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  and  glory  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the 
sea  " — then  it  can  admit  of  no  doubt  that  the  commandment  belongs  to  ns  at  this 
hour.  Then  we,  no  less  than  the  apostles,  are  not  warranted  only,  but  com- 
manded "  to  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father."  Then  it  is  ours  to  meditate  on 
all  that  that  expression  implies ;  to  plead  for  it  with  longing  desire  and  patient 
believing  expectation  in  secret,  in  the  family,  in  the  social  meeting,  in  the  public 
assembly.     (C.  J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Waiting  upon  God  in  His  ordinances  : — It  is 

usual  for  ships  to  ride  a  long  time  in  a  roadstead,  when  they  might  be  in  the 
haven  ;  and  wherefore  do  they  so  ?  but  that  they  may  be  in  the  wind's  way,  to  take 
the  first  opportunity  that  shall  be  offered  for  their  intended  voyage.  Even  thus 
should  all  good  Christians  do,  anchor,  as  it  were,  in  the  house  of  God,  even  then 
when  they  seem  to  be  becalmed,  that  they  cannot  stir  and  move  themselves  about 
holy  duties  as  they  were  wont  to  do ;  yet,  even  then,  ride  it  out,  hearken  what  God 
wiU  say  to  their  souls,  wait  upon  Him  in  the  use  of  means ;  not  in  an  Anabap- 
tistical  phrensy,  refusing  to  attend  upon  duty  till  the  Spirit  move  them  ;  but  look  up 
unto  God  for  life,  and  seek  it  from  Him  in  their  attendance  upon  His  holy 
ordinances.  The  disciples  waiting  at  Jerusalem  for  the  promise  of  the  Father: — 
Conversion  to  the  individual  and  revival  to  the  Church,  is  God's  great  end  in  the 
dispensation  of  grace.  The  means  are  the  manifestation  of  Jesus  Christ,  through 
the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Hence  the  personal  reception  of  the  truth  and 
the  personal  presence  of  the  Spirit  are  alike  essential.  Hence  in  every  case  the 
first  and  most  promising  symptom  is  increasing  thirst  for  the  Word,  with  increas- 
ing dependence  on  the  Spirit.  Where  the  Word  of  God  is  set  aside  or  undervalued, 
whatever  else  is  substituted  in  its  place,  there  will  be  no  depth  or  reality  in  spiritual 
exercises.  There  may  be  abundance  of  bustling  activity  about  the  things  of  God, 
but,  apart  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  there  will  be  no  real  conversion  or  revival.  You 
may  have  Herod,  hearing  gladly  and  doing  many  things,  but  retaining  his  besetting 
sin — Simon  Magus,  asking  in  his  terrors  an  apostle's  prayers,  but  persisting  in  the 
way  to  heresy  and  perdition — Felix,  trembling,  but  stifling  conviction.  These 
disciples  were  waiting  in — I.  Devout  expectancy.  They  had  been  commanded  to 
wait ;  and  expectation  is  essential  to  a  patient  waiting  upon  God.  It  is  far  easier 
to  do  much  than  to  wait  long.  The  disciples'  hearts  must  have  burned  to  go  out 
upon  the  world  with  unhesitating  confidence  in  their  miraculous  powers,  and  in 
the  strength  of  their  marvellous  message.  But  they  had  learned,  amid  recent 
events,  a  lesson  of  self-distrust.  So,  day  after  day,  they  waited  on  in  silence, 
though  charged  with  a  message  fitted  to  convert  the  world.  "  He  that  believeth 
shall  not  make  haste."  He  will  judge  nothing,  do  nothing  before  the  time.  Till 
in  the  Spirit  Himself,  He  will  not  attempt  to  force  the  Spirit's  work.  Such  a  st  ite 
of  expectancy  is  essential  to  a  patient  continuance  in  well-doing.  Without  t^pec- 
lation  there  will  be  no  truth,  no  prevailing  power  in  prayer.  Thus  it  is  that, 
because  men  have  ceased  to  expect  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  the  heavens  have 
become  as  brass.  Because  they  see  no  cloud  above  their  head,  they  will  not  climb 
the  mountain-top  to  watch  the  little  cloud  that  faintly  fringes  the  horizon.  They 
expect  nothing,  wait  for  nothing,  and  that  is  all  they  get.  For  the  law  of  God  is, 
according  to  thy  faith,  so  shall  it  be  unto  thee.  Delight  thyself  also  in  the  Lord, 
and  He  will  give  thee  all  the  desires  of  thine  heart.  Plead  the  Father's  promise, 
and  be  assured  of  the  Father's  performance.  For  the  promise  is  to  yon,  and  to 
your  children,  and  to  all  that  are  afar  off.  II.  Eaknest  desire.  It  is  in  the  heart 
of  the  believer,  in  the  bosom  of  the  Church,  that  the  promise  of  the  Father  first 
takes  effect,  and  the  first  symptom  of  it  generally  is  the  panting  of  the  soul  after 
God — the  longing  of  God's  weary  heritage  for  a  season  of  refreshins;  and  revival. 
And  such  a  season  awakening  new  desires,  communicates  a  new  impulse  to  the 
entire  body  of  Christ.  In  her  deadness  it  comes  and  tells  of  reviving  life,  in  her 
weakness  of  returning  power,  in  her  hopelessness  of  opening  prospects  of  success. 
Thus  we  cannot  but  long  for  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  in  Pentecostal  fulness. 
In  His  absence  we  can  work  no  deliveraijce,  communicate  no  life,  have  no  comfort, 
enlargement,  nor  refreshing  fellowship  with  God.  III.  Earnest  and  united 
PRATER  (ver.  14).  Prayer  is  the  spont2,neous  offspring  of  expectation  and  desire. 
It  is  hope's  utterance  before  God.  It  is  faith  recognising  God  as  the  Giver  of  every 
good  and  perfect  gift,  and  asking  whatever  it  wants.  Give  faith  a  promise,  and 
immediately  it  wiU  transform  it  into  a  prayer.  Hence,  wherever  faith  exists  the 
special  promise  of  the  Father  becomes  the  object  of  special  prayer.  As  promised, 
it  is  expected ;  as  good,  it  is  desired ;  as  freely  given,  it  is  frankly  asked.  Secret 
prayer  is  the  life  of  the  individual ;  social  prayer,  of  the  community ;  congregational 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

prayer,  of  the  Church.  The  soul  that  lives  in  the  neglect  of  secret  prayer  is  dead. 
Family  prayer  is  no  substitute — cannot,  indeed,  exist  without  close  personal  inter- 
course with  God.  And  as  for  social  meetings  for  prayer  to  be  of  any  avail,  they 
must  be  inspired  by  a  life  derived  in  secret  communion  from  Jesus.  WTiat  meetings 
ye  might  have,  though  but  two  or  three  of  you  together,  were  each  to  bring  the  life, 
the  fervour,  the  heaven-breathing  spirituality  of  soul,  just  come  down  from  meeting 
alone  with  God  upon  the  mount.  The.'^e  are  the  united  prayers  that  have  power 
with  God.  For  so  soon  as  the  people  of  God  in  any  neighbourhood  are  baptised 
with  the  spirit  of  prayer,  they  wid  come  to  know  each  other  by  a  secret  sympathy. 
The  FatLer  rejoices  over  such  meetings,  for  it  opens  up  to  Him  a  channel  for 
pouring  down  the  streams  of  life,  for  meeting  their  largest  desires  with  a  still 
larger  outpouring  of  His  Spirit ;  and  Jesus,  how  He  rejoices !  for  He  knows  what 
blessings  they  will  get ;  and  the  Spirit  Himself  rejoices,  for  He  is  ever  on  the  wing 
to  hasten  down  and  join  such  companies.  IV.  Seclusion  from  unnecessary 
INTERCOURSE  WITH  THE  WORLD.  There  are,  indeed,  duties  which  we  owe  in  the 
various  relations  of  society  from  which  it  is  not  the  will  of  God  to  call  us  away. 
With  all  this,  however,  there  mast  be  habitual  separation  unto  God.  The  Holy 
Dove  will  not  come  to  us  in  the  crowd.  It  is  when  the  doors  are  closed  and  the 
world  is  shut  out  that  Jesus  comes  with  power  upon  His  lips,  and  love  in  every 
tone  of  His  voice,  aud  breathes  on  us  and  says,  "  Eeceive  the  Holy  Ghost."  V. 
The  fellowship  with  one  another  (ver.  12-14,  ii.  1).  1.  The  Lord  loves  to  see 
His  family  dwelling  together  in  unity.  Parents,  can  you  not  understand  our 
Father's  feeling  in  this  ?  If,  then,  ye  being  evil,  &c.  God  is  doubtless  to  be  found 
wherever  there  is  a  humble  and  believing  heait,  but  nowhere  surely  in  such  mani- 
fested love  as  in  the  bosom  of  His  loving  family,  met  together  to  wait  for  the 
promise  of  their  Father  (Song  i.  7,  8  ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  11,  12).  2.  It  is  our 
strength  and  safety  to  walk  together  through  the  wilderness,  to  keep  together 
on  the  battlefield.  (W.  Cousin.)  The  Spirit  essential  to  the  establishment 
of  the  Christian  Church  : — In  the  Old  Testament  the  doctrine  of  the  Spirit 
had  been  revealed  in  its  great  outlines.  In  the  Gospels  the  subject  is 
more  fully  treated  in  connection  with  the  person  and  history  of  Christ.  In 
the  Acts  there  is  a  great  advance,  for  full  and  distinct  testimony  is  borne  to  Him 
in  sixteen  out  of  its  twenty-eight  chapters.  His  path  in  the  Scriptures,  like  that 
of  the  sun,  "  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  In  tbe  text  He  is 
called  "  the  promise  of  the  Father."  To  Him  tbe  attention  and  hope  of  the  Church 
had  been  long  directed  as  the  largest  gift  of  a  Father's  love.  The  Old  Testament 
writers  had  taught  believers  to  look  forward  to  Him  as  the  consummation  of  their 
hope,  and  for  Him  the  disciples  were  now  bidden  to  wait.  This  command  was — I. 
Seasonable.  1.  The  circumstances  of  the  disciples  were  peculiarly  trying.  They 
had  scarcely  recovered  from  the  shock  of  their  Lord's  death.  His  presence  was 
now  very  occasional,  and  was  about  to  terminate.  In  their  discouragement  they 
needed  to  have  their  hopes  assured.  2.  Besides  on  what  a  stupendous  enterprise 
they  were  about  to  be  engaged.  Moses  trembled  to  undertake  His  mission.  Jonah 
fled  when  commanded  to  go  to  Nineveh.  Jeremiah  excused  himtself  by  saying,  "  I 
am  a  child."  What,  then,  must  the  apostles  have  felt  ?  (1)  They  were  to  be  the 
founders  of  a  new  dispensation,  against  which  the  prejudices  of  their  countrymen 
and  the  enmity  of  mankind  would  be  aroused.  (2)  One  feature  of  this  dispensation, 
creating  the  utmost  difficulty  with  Jew  and  heathen,  was  its  spirituality.  Gorgf  ous 
economies  were  to  be  supplanted  by  that  which  had  no  attraction  for  the  carnal 
eye.  (3)  Their  one  business,  which  as  exclusive  Jews  must  have  been  very  repug- 
nant, was  to  bring  the  whole  world  under  the  power  of  this  dispensation.  How 
seasonable  then  the  command.  We  read  in  Eevelation,  that  before  a  mi^^hty  work 
was  to  be  dene  in  the  earth,  "  there  was  silence  in  heaven  about  the  space  of  half 
an  hour."  In  like  manner  our  Lord  claimed  the  attention  of  His  disciples.  Their 
minds  were  brought  into  the  most  desirable  attitude.  They  were  made  to  feel  that 
they  and  their  cause  were  in  God's  hands,  and  were  drawn  to  constant  prayer. 
They  obeyed  His  word,  "  Wait  on  the  Lord  ;  be  of  good  courage,  and  He  shall 
strengthen  thy  heart."  II.  Necessary.  Without  this  promise  they  were  entirely 
disqualified.  1.  They  were  few.  2.  They  were  destitute  of  those  outward  qualifi- 
catinns  of  station  and  influence,  which  are  generally  thought  to  promise  success. 
3.  Tht  y  laboured  under  its  greatest  mental  and  moral  disqualifications.  They  were 
— (1)  SU)W  to  learn  the  truth.  (2)  Timid  in  the  extreme.  (3)  Worldly  in  their 
ambition.  (4)  Contentious  in  their  int('rcourse.  All  this  considered,  no  wonder 
thc3  had  been  hitherto  unsuccessful.     They  little  understood  their  ministry,  had 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS,  27 

not  much  heart  in  it,  and  wanted  anity.  How  fitting,  then,  that  they  should  have 
to  "  wait  for  the  promise  "  !  III.  Effectual.  The  command  had  a  mighty  in- 
fluence. They  did  wait,  and  engaged  in  exercises  becoming  sucli  a  period. 
Already  there  were  indications  of  what  would  be  done  for  them  by  the  Spirit.  But 
the  earnest  was  small  compared  with  the  realisation  of  the  promise.  1.  The 
slow  of  understiinding  were  made  quick  of  apprehension.  2.  The  cowardly  were 
made  bold.  3.  The  earthly  were  made  heavenly  mmded.  4.  Their  only  rivalry 
now  was  who  should  bear  to  do  most  for  the  common  cause.  5.  The  effects 
were  such  as  might  be  excepted.  Their  "word  was  with  power."  "Mightily 
grew  the  Word  of  God  and  prevailed."  IV.  Instructive.  The  great  lessons  are 
as  appUcable  to  us  as  to  them.  1.  Without  the  Spirit  we  are  disqualified  for  the 
work  of  God.  2.  We  should  engage  in  every  special  work  only  in  His  strength. 
It  is  not  enough  that  we  have  the  Spirit.  We  need  to  be  enriched  afresh  by  His 
grace.  3,  Hence  He  must  be  diligently  sought.  Conclusion;  1.  How  inexcusable 
we  are  if  we  do  not  obtain  "the  promise  of  the  Father."  "Ask  and  ye  shall 
receive."  2.  How  great  the  influence  which  this  doctrine  should  exercise  over 
us.  How  pure,  heavenly,  and  energetic  we  ought  to  be.  {J.  Morgan,  D.D.) 
The  need  of  ivaiting  : — No  wise  man  or  woman  will  enter  hastily  upon  any  great 
work.  In  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  the  work  is  the  amount  of  thought,  care, 
and  training  necessary  for  its  successful  accomplishment.  History  will  teach  us 
that  those  enterprises  have  usually  been  most  successfully  accomplished  for  which 
the  workers  have  been  most  carefully  trained.  We  know  that  the  higher  the  class 
of  work  the  more  skill  is  required  in  the  worker,  great  delicacy  is  required  in  the 
treatment  of  the  raw  material ;  time  and  care  and  skill  must  be  used  in  its  manipu- 
lation, otherwise  no  high  degree  of  perfection  can  be  looked  for  in  the  fabric  to  be 
produced.  We  often  find  that  nothing  is  easier  than  to  spoil  or  damage  that  which 
we  are  trying  to  improve  or  refine.  And  the  more  we  study  the  matter  the  more 
shall  we  be  convinced  that  what  the  world  terms  ability  or  power — in  other  words, 
the  possession  of  skill — is  not  so  often  an  innate  gift,  as  a  faculty  gained  by  much 
study  and  practice.  These  truths  are,  if  we  rriay  use  the  expression,  true  in  the 
highest  degree  with  regard  to  Clmrch  workers  and  all  kinds  of  Church  work.  The 
material  upon  which  they  work,  and  with  which  they  work,  is  the  most  delicate 
and  the  most  easily  spoiled  in  the  whole  world ;  for  that  material  is  the  heart, 
will,  mind,  conscience,  character  of  man.  The  fabric  they  are  endeavouring — by 
the  aid  of  God's  Holy  Spirit — to  produce  is  human  nature  refined,  purified,  en- 
nobled, brought  by  long  and  careful  training  into  Christlikeness,  continually  made 
more  and  more  to  approach  and  resemble  the  perfect  Example,  Type,  and  Pattern 
of  the  Divine  humanity.  But  ere  the  active,  aggressive  missionary  work  to  which 
the  apostle  had  been  called,  commences,  there  is  to  be  a  solemn  period  of  pause, 
during  which  they  may  at  once  meditate  upnn  the  experiences  of  the  jDast  and  fit 
themselves  to  receive  the  promised  gift.  Through  haste  we  often  fail  together, 
and  preserve  the  results  of  experiences  through  which  we  have  passed  ;  through 
haste  we  also  often  fail  from  want  of  preparation  to  use  aright  an  opportunity  when 
it  presents  itself  to  us.  The  loss  is  then  double,  for  it  is  the  loss  both  of  harvest  and 
of  seed-time.  We  forget  to  reap  ;  we  are  not  able  to  sow.  [W.  E.  Chadwick,  M.A.) 
John  truly  baptized  with  water,  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 
I'rue  baptism : — Last  words  of  our  Lord  Dispensation  of  John :  baptised  with 
water,  not  in.  I.  John's  use  of  water.  Baptism.  1.  A  sign  of  universal  pollu- 
tion, from  the  womb.  Kepentance.  2.  Acknowledgment  of  guilt,  and  need  of 
pardon.  3.  Acknowledgment  of  corruption,  and  need  of  holiness.  4.  Profession 
of  thirst  after  refreshing  comfort.  5.  Profession  of  helplessness.  None  baptised 
themselves.  6.  Profession  of  cleansing  the  outside.  II.  Insufficiency  of  John's 
BAPTISM.  1.  Material  water  cannot  cleanse  the  soul.  2.  It  is  not  saving,  witness 
Simou  Magus.  "  You  shall  be  baptised,"  &a.  3.  The  water  flows  off,  dries  up ; 
the  effect  superficial.  4.  The  testimony  of  John  himself:  "I  indeed."  5.  The 
declaration  of  Christ  in  the  text.  III.  General  necessity  of  the  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  1.  All  tainted  with  original  sin,  must  be  born  again.  2.  All  guilty, 
must  be  pardoned  (chap.  ii.  and  x.).  3.  All  unholy,  must  be  sanct'fied.  Catechism 
(Bora.  viii.).  4.  The  corruption  is  spiritual  and  deep.  Fire  refines.  5.  All  are 
miserable,  and  need  the  Comforter  and  kingdom.  6.  All  helpless  and  Christless 
till  then.  "  If  any  man,"  &c.  7.  All  are  unfit  for  heaven  and  bliss,  without  love, 
melting  — uniting.  8.  Particular  necessity  for  ministers  :  To  preach  the  Word  with 
power.  To  bear  up  under  troubles  and  persecutions.  To  be  directed  into  all 
truth,  and  to  testify  of  Jesus,  though  not  to  work  miracles  and  speak  with  tongues. 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

IV.  The  season.  "  Not  many  days  hence."  When  prepared  with  prayer  and 
faith,  united,  in  one  accord  and  tried.  The  day  is  not  fixed,  that  we  may  expect 
daily  and  yet  not  faint.  Application — 1.  Unconverted.  Best  iu  no  baptism,  but 
that  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  tire.  Water  baptism  will  condemn  you  alone.  2.  John's 
disciples.  Promised,  the  thing  promised,  the  time.  Oh,  continue  praying  with  one 
accord !  3.  Believers.  You  want  fresh  baptism,  till  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  grace, 
fill  your  soul.  (Preacher's  Analyst.)  The  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost : — The  same 
shower  blesses  various  lands  in  different  degrees,  according  to  their  respective  sus- 
ceptildlities.  It  makes  the  grass  to  spring  up  in  the  mead,  the  grain  to  vegetate  in  the 
field,  the  shrub  to  grow  on  the  plain,  and  the  flowers  to  blossom  in  the  garden  ;  and 
these  are  garnished  with  every  hue  of  loveliness — the  lily  and  the  violet,  the  rose  and 
the  daisy  :  all  these  work  by  the  same  Spirit  who  renews  the  face  of  the  earth.  The 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  descending  on  the  moral  soil,  produce  "  blessing  in 
variety  " — convictions  in  the  guilty,  illumination  in  the  ignorant,  holiness  in  the 
defiled,  strength  in  the  feeble,  and  comfort  in  the  distressed.  As  the  Spirit  of 
holiness,  He  imparts  a  pure  taste ;  as  the  Spirit  of  glory,  He  throws  a  radiance 
over  the  character  ;  as  the  Spirit  of  life.  He  revives  religion ;  as  the  Spirit  of  truth. 
He  gives  transparency  to  the  conduct ;  as  the  Spirit  of  prayer,  He  melts  the  soul 
into  devotion  ;  and,  as  the  Spirit  of  grace.  He  imbues  with  benevolence,  and  covers 
the  face  of  the  earth  with  the  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love.  (T.  W.  Jenkyn, 
D.D.)  No  better  for  the  baptism  of  fire : — In  some  parts  of  the  world  there  are 
certain  boiling  springs,  called  ge.vsers.  Their  peculiarity  is,  that  at  irregular 
intervals  they  send  up  spurts  of  boiling  water,  and  then  are  silent  for  a  consider- 
able time.  Travellers  will  tell  you  that  at  the  time  when  they  are  silent  you 
would  find  it  very  difficult  to  believe  that  water  would  ever  issue  out  of  such  an 
orifice  at  all.  There  was  a  revival  some  years  ago,  was  there  not  ?  The  gracious 
rain  came  down  upon  God's  inheritance.  How  earnest  you  were — how  active! 
But  the  revival  passed  away,  and  your  warmth  and  fervour  and  energy  passed 
away  with  it,  and  those  who  look  on  you  find  it  very  difficult  to  believe  that  you 
have  ever  been  zealous  in  God's  service  at  all.     {W.  M.  Punshon.)  A  witjiessing 

Church — a  Church  baptised  xcith  the  Holy  Ghost : — 1.  The  last  interview  with  a 
dear  friend,  and  his  last  words,  are  wont  to  be  embalmed  in  fragrant  remem- 
brance. 2.  A  comparison  is  made  between  the  baptism  with  the  Holy  Gh  'St,  and 
John's  baptism.  Such  as  truly  turned  from  sin  to  God  were  prepared  as  a  dwelling 
for  the  Spirit.  Kepentance  from  dead  works  went  before — the  new  unction  from 
above  came  after.  3.  Notice  also  the  time — "not  many  days  hence."  God  is 
sovereign  in  fixing  a  fulness  of  time,  and  we  m^y  not  ask  why  tliat  time  was 
appointed.  But  on  our  part  it  is  necessary  to  know  our  want  of  the  Spirit,  and  to 
feel  it,  that  we  may  welcome  Him  with  the  more  delight  to  testify  of  Je^us.  Often, 
alas  I  have  we  returned  with  nothing  but  the  toil  for  our  pains,  because  we  did  not 
wait  to  pray  down  the  Spirit.  In  opening  up  the  doctrine,  consider — I.  The 
BAPTISM.  1.  Its  natui'e.  That  more  is  meant  than  renewal  is  plain  from  this,  that 
the  disciples  were  already  in  Christ.  This  bnptism  is  the  great  promise  of  New 
Testament  times.  Before  Pentecost,  God's  children  were  not  wholly  exempt  from 
the  spirit  of  bondage  ;  but  in  the  days  of  the  apostles  the  saints  in  general  seem  to 
have  enjoyed  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  through  faith.  The  Holy  Gbost  is  the  first 
fruits  of  glory.  Are  we  baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Then — (1)  Not  only  con- 
demnation ceases,  but  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  is  realised.  (2) 
Then,  forgiven  much,  we  love  much,  and  give  ourselves  to  Him  who  gave  Himself 
for  us.  (3)  It  is  the  nature  of  tire  to  send  forth  Lght ;  and  when  the  Sjjirit  comes, 
truth  is  shed  abroad  upon  our  hearts.  (4)  Fire  warms,  and  the  Spirit  kindles  our 
cold  souls  into  a  flame  of  love  to  God  and  man.  (5)  The  approach  of  this  genial 
spring  to  the  barren  winter  of  our  hearts,  opens  the  blossoms  of  new  life,  of 
humility,  and  godliness.  (6)  It  is  the  nature  of  fire  to  spread  abroad.  And  when 
the  Spirit  comes  the  words  of  Jesus  spread  like  a  conflagration  from  mouth  to 
mouth.  2.  Its  marks.  (1)  The  unction  of  heavenly  knowledge,  whereby  we  know 
all  things — for  no  sooner  did  the  Spirit  come  upon  them  than  they  who,  a  few  d  lya 
before,  Christ  reproved  as  slow  of  understanding,  came,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
to  a  clear,  vivid  understanding  of  the  things  of  God.  (2)  Self-denied  humility  :  for 
however  envy  and  a  proud  thirst  for  honour  held  possession  of  their  minds  before, 
they  now  discover  a  single  eye  to  the  Bedeemer's  glory.  If  we  are  filled  with  t-elf- 
complacency,  as  if  we  stood  in  need  of  nothing — if  we  cannot  bear  to  be  wholly 
laid  in  the  dust,  we  have  not  seen  the  Spirit,  neither  known  Him.  (l!)  Boldness*. 
Tor  however  timid  before,  the  disciples   no    sooner  recnvc  the  Spirit  than  they 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  29 

come  forth  like  different  men,  to  speak  the  Word  without  fear.  If  we  can  sit 
in  easy  fellowship  with  sinners,  not  seeking  to  save  souls,  not  daring  to  en- 
counter the  adversary  face  to  face,  we  show  that  we  are  not  baptised  as  with 
fire  !  (4)  Decision.  For  however  the  disciples  might  be  diverted  from  prayer 
and  the  work  of  Christ  before,  no  sooner  did  the  Spirit  come  than  they  gave 
themselves  wholly  to  these  things.  How  can  we,  then,  have  received  the  heavenly 
baptism,  if  we  are  without  the  habit  of  religion,  if  our  efforts  are  but  fitful,  if 
we  neglect  present  duty,  and  yet  cherish  the  romantic  hope  of  future  service  in 
a  post  which  God  has  not  required  us  to  fill  ?  3.  How  shall  we  obtain  this 
baptism,  and  on  what  occasions  is  it  given?  Such  as  ^.Iready  enjoy  the  baptism 
of  repentance  for  the  remission  of  sins  may  obtain  supplies  of  the  Spirit  a 
thousand-fold  greater  than  any  they  have  ever  known.  Are  we  faithful  in  a 
little  ?  God's  rule  is,  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have 
abundantly.  This  heavenly  unction  is  conferred — (1)  When  we  keep  the  Lord's 
word,  and  show  a  humble,  penitent  compliance  with  His  will.  Behold  this  in 
the  disciples  who  were  enjoined  to  tarry  in  Jerusalem  till  the  Spirit  came — who 
were  neither  to  return  home  to  Galilee,  nor  to  distract  their  minds  with  worldly 
cares.  (2)  When  some  heavy  trial,  some  arduous  duty,  is  laid  on  us  for  the 
sake  of  Christ.  Witness  John  in  the  spirit  amid  the  wilds  of  Patmos,  or  Paul 
glowing  with  the  love  of  Christ,  and  singing  praises  in  the  inner  prison.  (3) 
When  we  are  unceasing  in  the  prayer  of  faith.  Ten  days  had  the  disciples  con- 
tinued, when,  of  a  sudden,  the  Spirit  came.  The  prayer  which  brings  down  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  not  that  which  ceases  if  not  heard  at  once,  that  is  content  to  stop 
with  praying  out  some  Uttle  enjoyment  of  God's  presence.  Every  day  would  be  a 
Pentecost  if  we  prayed  like  a  CorDelius — if  we  heard  the  Word  like  the  three 
thousand,  and  prized  it  like  the  eunuch.  II.  A  Church  is  only  so  far  a  witness- 
ing CHtFRCH  AS  IT  IS  THUS  BAPTISED  WITH  THE  HoLT  Ghost.  "  After  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  come  upon  you  ...  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Me."  1.  The  Eedeemer 
does  not  send  skilful  orators,  but  witnesses,  suuh  as  have  seen  with  spiritual  eyes 
and  heard  with  spiritual  ears.  A  witness  must  know  what  He  testifies  ;  he  believes 
and  therefore  speaks.  Many  have  nothing  they  can  testify.  Can  he  be  a  witness 
of  the  Cross  of  Christ  who  does  not  daily  look  to  it  for  pardon  ?  Can  he  be  a 
witness  of  the  Lord's  abiding  with  His  people  who  knows  not  in  his  heart  a  daily 
intercourse  with  Jesus — who  has  not  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  that  he  is  a  child  of 
God  ?  2.  Christ  makes  it  plain  that  a  new  unction  must  visit  His  followers  before 
the  blessing  spreads  to  the  impenitent.  A  Church  cannot  long  continue  to  display 
a  living  testimony,  unless  this  baptism  is  repeatedly  renewed ;  and  to  hold  forth, 
like  many  declining  Churches  of  the  Keformation,  a  form  of  sound  words,  when 
the  Spirit  is  sinned  away,  is  but  like  a  removed  sign-post  carried  down  a  swollen 
river.  For  it  is  not  protests,  or  creeds,  or  formularies,  but  living  souls  under  the 
baptism  of  the  Spirit,  that  makes  a  witnessing  Church.     (G.  Smeaton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-8.    Wilt  Thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  to  Israel? — 

Before  the  Ascension : — I.  The  question  of  the  apostles.  1.  The  great  awe  pro- 
duced by  the  first  appearances  of  the  risen  Christ  has  worn  off  during  the  forty 
days.  He  and  His  are  engaged  in  familiar  converse  as  in  days  of  old.  2.  The 
apostles  are  not  backward  to  ask  a  question ;  and  it  reveals  their  old  notions  of 
Messianic  dominion  still  indulged.  They  still  think  of  the  restoration  of  "  the 
kingdom  to  Israel."  3.  But  their  expectations  are  now  high  and  eager.  (1)  They 
feel  the  power  of  God's  kingdom  in  their  heaits.  (2)  They  have  been  told  of  the 
" promise  of  the  Father"  (ver.  4),  of  a  "baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  (3)  They 
expect  now,  "  at  this  time,"  a  glorious  manifestation  of  "  the  kingdom."  (a)  How 
prone  we  are  to  mistake  God's  times  and  God'sways,  which  are  not  as  ours  (Isa.  Iv.  8,  9). 
(b)  How  anxious  we  are  to  hurry  on  God's  dispensations;  not  considering  the  Divine 
slowness  (1  Pet.  iii.  9),  which  waits  for  our  salvation,  though  we  are  so  impatient 
for  manifestations  of  great  results  in  the  work  of  His  kingdom.  Apply  this  to  mis- 
sionary efforts,  (c)  How  careful  we  ought  to  be,  not,  as  it  were,  to  suggest  or  dictate 
to  Him  ihe  how  or  the  when,  since  "  He  doeth  all  things  well."  II.  The  answer 
OF  OUR  Lord  was — 1,  A  concealment  (ver.  7).  It  is  not  for  the  ajjostles  to  pry  into 
the  "secret  things"  of  God.  These  are  "put  in  His  own  power,"  and  even  Jesus, 
as  Son  of  Man,  may  not  possess  them  (Mark  xiii.  32).  Learn — (1)  Ascension-tide 
and  the  Second  Advent  are  closely  connected  in  many  points.  The  moment  Jesus 
had  gone,  the  minds  of  the  apostles  were  to  be  fixed  on  His  return  (ver.  11).  He 
was  then  to  them  what  He  has  been  to  Christians  in  all  ages,  6  ipxafityoe.     (2)  We 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

stand  at  the  threshold  of  the  Second  Advent,  as  they  did  at  that  of  the  Ascension. 
Our  curiosity  in  religious  things  often  centres  on  it.  And  of  it  Jesus  answers  just 
as  He  did  to  the  apostles  (Matt.  xxiv.  36).  (3)  The  fact  is  certain,  the  time  is  con- 
cealed from  us.  2.  A  revelation  (ver.  8),  in  which  Jesus  gives— (1)  A  reminder  of 
His  departure,  because  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  to  come  until  He  had  gone.  (2)  A 
promise  of  spiritual  strength.  A  certain  "  power  "  was  to  be  given  them.  (3)  A 
prediction  of  the  spread  of  the  gospel,  by  a  set  progress  in  a  definite  order, 
beginning  at  Jerusalem,  ending  only  at  the  compass  of  the  globe.  Learn  :  1.  There 
are  ceitain  things  put  in  man's  "power,"  just  as  there  are  some  kept  in  God's.  2. 
These  are,  chiefly,  to  know  the  mind  and  will  of  God  by  the  teaching  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  which  He  has  promised,  and  which  He  gives.  3.  In  receiving  the  Holy 
Ghost,  we  "  receive  power,"  not  only  to  know,  but  to  do  God's  will  (see  Dent.  xxix. 
29).  Spiritual  knowledge  and  strength  are  that  we  may  work,  not  speculate.  4. 
We  are  to  be  "witnesses"  of  the  ascended  Jesus — (1)  By  our  own  heavenly  lives 
(Col.  iii.  1,  2) ;  (2)  by  our  realisation  of  His  mediatorial  work  (Heb.  vii.  23)  ;  (3) 
by  our  co-oijeration  in  all  efforts  for  the  making  ready  of  His  way  to  return 
and  take  to  Him  His  great  power  and  reign.  {T.  H.  Barnett.)  Tlie  disciples' 
que<tion  :—I.  Authorised  as  a  question  of — 1.  Strong  faith  which  expects  the 
kingdom.  2.  Tender  love  which  wishes  the  salvation  of  the  vkorld.  3.  Holy 
grief  which  feels  for  the  miseries  of  the  times.  II.  Unauthorised  as  a  question 
of — 1.  Carnal  impatience  which  wishes  to  see  the  Kingdom  of  God  coming  with 
external  show.  2.  Spiritual  curiosity  which  will  pry  into  what  the  Father  has 
reserved  for  Himself.  3.  Pious  indolence  which,  with  folded  hunds,  looks  at  the 
clouds  instead  of  working  for  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  the  calling  entrusted  to  it. 
{J.  P.  Laiige,  D.D.)  Chrisfs  la^t  words  to  His  disciples : — Frequent  were  the 
interviews  which  Christ  had  with  them  i^revious  to  His  death  ;  ten  times  He  was 
with  them  after  His  resurrection  ;  but  here  is  the  final  interview.  The  best  things 
on  earth  must  come  to  a  close.  The  Divine  drama  is  now  over.  These  are  weirds  of 
— I.  Correction.  The  old  prejmlice  came  up — the  making  of  Jerusalem  imperial 
mistress  of  the  world.  This  had  been  the  brilliant  dream  of  their  race  for  ages. 
1.  The  question  indicated  the  working  of  several  wrong  elements.  (1)  Materialism. 
It  was  asked  in  spite  of  the  spirituality  of  their  Master's  teaching.  The  empire  of 
trutb  and  love  which  Christ  came  to  establish,  compared  with  which  all  earthly 
kingdoms  were  passing  shadows,  had  not  yet  penetrated  them  with  its  transcendent 
glory.  (2)  Prejudice.  Such  temporal  dominion  they  had  been  taught  in  their 
childhood  to  anticipate.  The  idea  was  reached  not  by  conviction  but  tradition  ;  and 
without  examination  it  had  been  allowed  to  grow  with  their  growth.  Christ's  teaching 
which  bore  directly  against  it  had  failed  to  shatter  it.  (3)  Ambition.  Probably 
they  expected  to  be  leading  ministers.  (4)  Curiosity.  They  were  prying  into  that 
which  lay  out  of  their  province,  and  should  have  directed  tlieir  inquisitiveness  not 
to  kingdoms,  but  to  duties.  2.  Christ  corrects  this  morally  mistaken  state  of  mind. 
He  does  not  say  that  there  shall  be  no  restoration ;  He  leaves  that  with  the 
enlightening  Spiiit  about  to  descend.  His  words  served — (1)  To  check  the  spirit 
of  idle  curiosity  concerning  the  future.  Let  the  future  alone ;  that  is  to  reveal 
itself  in  history,  and  is  not  to  be  ascertained  by  human  inquiry.  Your  duty  is  with 
the  present,  out  of  which  the  future  grows.  Would  that  modern  prophet-mongers 
would  listen  to  this.  (2)  As  a  ground  for  unbounded  trust,  "The  Father  hath  put 
in  His  own  authority."  All  futurities  are  in  a  Father's  hands,  and  are  hidden  out 
of  love.  Were  the  veil  to  be  withdrawn,  our  social  arrangements  would  be  shattered, 
our  free  agency  destroyed,  our  powers  of  action  parHlysed.  II.  Encouragement. 
"But  ye  shall  receive  power."  1.  Miraculous.  2.  Moral — the  power  that  made 
them  brave,  faithful,  magnanimous,  self-sacrificing,  successful — the  greater  of  the 
two.  This  encouragement  was  opportune  coming  as  it  did  after  His  caustic  rebuke. 
The  power  promised  transcends  the  political  power  of  kingdoms.  It  is  a  power  to 
change  th'-  heart  of  kinus,  to  regulate  the  springs  of  empire,  to  mould  the  govern- 
ments of  the  world.  The  old  theocratic  kingdom  of  Israel  was  but  a  faint  type  of 
Christ's.  III.  Direction.  "  Ye  t-hall  be  witnesses."  1.  The  nature  of  their 
ministry — "  witnasses."  Hence  their  preaching  at  first  was  little  more  than  a 
honest  and  fervent  declaration  of  facta  (chaps,  ii.  22-3G ;  iii.  12-33  ;  iv.  8-12 ;  v. 
29-32).  These  men  left  all  the  theorising  for  weaker  but  more  pretentious  men  of 
later  ages.  2.  Its  universality  and  its  philanthropy  embraces  the  world.  3.  Its 
method.  "  Beginning,"  &c.  This  they  followed  (chaps,  ii.,  viii. ;  Rom.  x.  18 ;  Col.  i. 
6-23).  In  this  method  we  see — (1)  Unexampled  mercy.  Offering  the  pospel  tp 
His  greatest  enemies.     (2)  Consummate  policy.    IV.  Benediction  (see  Luke  xxiv. 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  31 

50).      (D.   Thomas,  D.D.)  Christ's   last  instruction   to  His   apostles  .•— I.    The 

QUESTION  OF  THE  DISCIPLES  discloscd — 1.  Their  ignorance.  2.  Their  beUef  that 
there  was  a  king^iom  of  God.  They  could  not  forget  the  Theocracy,  nor  lose  the 
conviction  that  it  would  be  restored.  Why,  then,  not  now,  and  by  the  King  ?  3. 
Their  benevolence  and  patriotism.  4.  Their  inquisitiveness  and  impatience.  II. 
The  ANSWER  of  the  Master  suggests — 1.  That  He  can  bear  the  inevitable  ignorance 
of  the  good.  2.  That  His  followers  should  check  vain  curiosity.  3.  That  there 
are  times  and  seasons,  eras  and  epochs,  in  the  development  of  the  affairs  of  the 
kingdom  of  God.  The  meaning  of  this  is  plain  now,  to  a  degree  impossitde  then. 
Pentecost,  the  dpath  of  Stephen,  the  conversion  of  Saul,  were  "time?."  The 
apostolic  age,  with  its  wonderful  diffusion  of  the  gospel,  was  a  "season,"  This 
age  with  its  revivals,  scientific  spirit,  and  scepticism  is  also  a  "season."  Other 
times  and  seasons  have  yet  to  follow.  How  wonderful  the  wisdom  which  could 
plan  them,  and  the  authority  which  can  put  and  hold  tlipm  under  full  control.  4. 
That  the  pre-visionof  these  times  and  seasons  is  withheld  from  man.  The  wonders 
of  Pentecost  had  to  be  waited  for  and  felt  and  seen  before  their  nature  could  be 
known.  So  with  other  epochs.  (IF.  Hudson.)  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the 
times  or  the  seasons. — Times  and  seasons  : — I.  The  faith  of  the  first  disciples,  in 
A  BRIGHTER  FUTURE  FOR  THE  WORLD.  That  faith  was  foundcd  on  the  predictions  of 
the  Old  Testament  and  of  our  Lord.  Patriotism  and  philanthropy  inspired  them 
to  hope  for  great  things  for  their  countrymen  ;  but  piety  lifted  them  into  the  faith 
that  a  new  kingdom  would  be  set  up  and  Jesus  be  all  in  all.  The  Christian  Church 
has  never  lost  faith  in  the  dawn  of  a  better  day  for  the  world,  and  has  labouied  and 
prayed  for  it.  We  show  ourselves  unworthy  of  the  apostles — in  whose  steps  we 
profess  to  tread — if  we  do  not  "  attempt  great  things  for  God,  and  expect  great 
things  from  God."  Christ  his  promised  a  golden  age,  and  though  earth  and 
heaven  pass  away.  His  words  shall  not  pass  away ;  "  The  kingdom  of  this  world 
shall  become  the  kingdom  of  our  God,"  &c.     II.  The  error  of  the  first  disciples, 

IN  ALLOWING  THEIR  FAIIH  IN  A  BRIGHTER  FUTURE    TO    LEAD    THEM    INTO    PRESUMPTUOUS 

CURIOSITY.  The  disciples  sought  to  be  endowed  with  the  faculty  of  pre-vision,  but 
such  an  endowment  was  denied  them.  The  old  prophets  were  inspired  to  make 
known  coming  events,  but  the  day  and  hour  were  hidden ;  and  the  apostles,  no 
more  than  the  prophets,  could  know  when  the  events  predicted  concerning  Israel 
and  the  world  would  occur.  The  error  of  the  apostles  has  been  repeated  down  to 
the  present  day.  But  age  after  age  ".would-be  propbets  "  have  had  to  revise  their 
dates,  and  shift  their  scenes,  and  own,  with  shame  that  they  had  ventured  out 
of  their  depth.  The  "second  coming  of  Christ"  and  the  "end  of  the  world," 
they  are  events  about  which  even  the  angels  in  heaven  do  not  know ;  the  Father 
has  them  in  His  own  hands,  and  they  are  safe  there,  and  sure  to  be  brought  about 
in  His  own  good  time  and  way.     III.  The  duty  of  the  first  disciples  in  relation 

TO  their  FAITH  IN  A  BRIGHTER  FUTURE  FOR  THE  WORLD  AS  SHOWN  BY  THE  REPLY  OF 
THEIR  MASTER  TO  THE  QUESTIONING    OF   THEIR   PRESUMPTUOUS    CURIOSITY.       Their    duty 

was  to  be  "  witnesses,"  to  speak  of  what  they  had  seen  and  heard,  and  not  of  what 
was  hidden  from  them.  It  must  have  been  a  great  joy  to  them  to  know  that  the 
future  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Father,  who  is  too  wise  to  err  and  too  good  to  be 
unkind.  And  it  ought  to  calm  and  cheer  us  that  the  times  and  seasons  are  not  in 
the  hands  of  a  demon  or  an  angel ;  and  not  in  the  clumsy  and  capricious  hands  of 
men,  but  in  the  hands  of  Him  who  can  make  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him,  and 
cause  all  things  to  work  together  for  good.  (F.  W.  Brown.)  Times  and  seasons 
not  to  he  knmun  by  the  best  of  men : — I.  What  is  implied  in  the  text.  That  there 
are  times  and  seasons  which  God  hath  appropriated  to  Himself,  both  to  order  and 
to  dispose  them.  1.  The  times  and  seasons  of  the  world  in  general.  As  God  first 
made  it,  so  He  governs  it.  He  set  a  time  for  the  beginning  and  for  the  ending  of 
it.  And  He  orders  all  its  affairs  (Acts  xvii.  24,  26,  31).  2.  The  times  and  seasons 
of  States  in  particular.  These  are  also  appointed  by  God.  He  gives  them  being 
and  continuance  (Job  xii.  23  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  8 ;  Dan.  ii.  20,  21 ;  iv.  17,  25,  32).  And 
when  He  has  once  written  vanity  upon  them  tbey  come  to  nothing.  3.  The  times 
and  seasons  of  individuals  (Psa.  xxxi.  15,  xxxix.  4;  Job  xiv.  5).  All  men's  times 
are  put  in  God's  own  power,  in  regard  of  their  space  and  quality,  whether 
prosperous  or  afflicted.  All  this  is  to  show  us  what  great  cause  we  have  to  wait 
upon  God  upon  all  occasions.  He  who  is  the  Lord  of  our  times  should  have  the 
command  of  our  services.  II.  What  is  expressed.  That  it  is  not  for  you  to  know 
these  times  and  seasons.  1.  It  is  not  your  busines"?.  For  the  right  understanding 
of  this  we  must  be  mindful  of  the  context.     It  is  not  said,  it  is  not  for  you  to  know 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

any  times  or  seasons  but  those  "which  the  Father  hath  put  in  His  own  power." 
Consider — (1)  How  far  it  is  proper  for  us  to  know  the  times  and  seasons,  (a)  Take 
it  in  a  natural  sense.  It  is  proper  for  us  to  know  the  times  and  seasons  of  day  and 
night,  seedtime  aud  harvest,  winter  and  summer,  and  the  like.  These,  it  is  true, 
God  hath  put  in  His  own  power,  but  they  are  not  sach  as  He  hath  kept  to  Himself, 
and  accordingly  we  may  take  notice  of  them,  for  the  improving  of  the  opportunities 
of  them,  (b)  Take  it  in  a  civil  sense — the  times  for  buying  and  selling,  war  and 
peace  (Eccles.  iii.  8).  (c)  Take  it  in  a  spiritual  sense — the  seasons  of  gracp,  the 
opportunities  of  salvation,  the  times  of  improvement  (Luke  xix.  43;  Jer.  viii.  7; 
so  Eccles.  ix.  12  ;  1  Chron.  xii.  32).  To  speak  distinctly  on  this  point,  it  concerns 
all  men  to  know  the  sins  and  the  miscarriages  of  the  times  (2  Pet.  iii.  17).  The 
judgments  and  calamities  of  the  times  (Prov.  xxviii.  5;  Isa.  xxvi.  11).  The  duties 
and  engagement  of  the  times  (Rom.  xii.  11).  (2)  The  sense  in  which  it  is  imper- 
tinent. The  change  of  affairs  in  States,  the  end  and  consummation  of  the  world, 
&G. :  such  times  and  seasons  as  these  it  is  not  for  you  to  know  (Deut.  xxx.  20).  2. 
It  is  not  profitable  for  you.  It  might  please,  as  a  matter  of  speculation,  and  so 
there  are  divers  that  busy  themselves  about  it,  but  it  cannot  profit  to  edification. 
Nay,  it  is  rather  prejudicial  and  inconvenient :  partly  as  it  perplexes,  and  partly  as 
it  takes  men  off  from  their  duty.  3.  It  is  not  within  your  reach.  The  Futher  hath 
put  them  in  His  own  power,  and  so  out  of  ours  (Mark  xiii.  32).  It  is  not  for  you, 
that  is,  for  you — (1)  As  men,  by  the  strength  and  power  of  reason  (Eccles.  vii.  27). 
(2)  As  Christians,  by  supernatural  illumination.  There  are  many  things  which  are 
not  known  by  the  light  of  nature,  which  yet  are  known  by  the  light  of  the  Spirit; 
but  this  is  not  known  by  either  (1  John  ii.  20,  27).  Refers  to  things  necessary  to 
salvation,  whereof  this  is  none.  (3)  As  apostles,  by  Divine  inspiration,  or  extra- 
ordinary revelation.  As  Christians  have  knowledge  of  more  things  than  ordinary 
men,  so  apostles  bad  knowledge  of  more  things  than  ordinary  Christians ;  and  yet 
for  all  that  they  had  not  the  knowledge  of  this.  Consider  this  point — (a)  As  it 
meets  with  men's  vain  curiosity  and  affectation.  There  are  many  who  trouble  both 
their  own  and  other  men's  heads  with  such  questions.  But  this  answer  of  our 
Saviour  puts  them  off  from  such  scrutinies  ;  for  if  it  be  not  for  you  to  know,  then 
it  is  not  for  you  to  inquire.  There  are  many  things  which  are  necessary — the 
deceitfulness  of  our  hearts,  the  depths  of  Satan,  the  will  of  the  Lord.  Therefore 
seek  to  know  these,  (b)  As  with  men's  curiosity  in  inquiring,  so  with  their  pre- 
Bumption  in  resolving.  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  it,  therefore  it  is  not  for  you  to 
determine  it.  There  are  a  great  many  persons  who  not  only  make  a  search  into 
this  mystery,  but  also  positively  fix  it.  Conclusion  :  It  is  not  for  you  to  know,  but 
— 1.  It  is  for  you  to  believe;  not  to  know  the  time,  but  to  believe  the  thing;  to 
believe  that  this  day  will  come,  though  we  know  not  when  it  will  come  (2  Pet.  iii. 
3,  4).  2.  It  is  for  you  to  expect ;  not  to  know  when  it  will  be,  but  to  wait  for  it ;  to 
be  always  upon  our  watch  and  in  readiness  against  the  coming  of  our  Master  (Job 
xiv.  14 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  11-14).  3.  It  is  for  you  to  pray  ;  not  to  know  when  it  will  be, 
but  to  pray  that  it  may  be ;  and  to  desire  that  it  may  be  as  soon  as  may  be  (Rev. 
xxii.  17;  Cant.  viii.  14).  4.  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and  seasons  which 
God  hath  put  in  His  own  power,  but  it  is  for  you  to  know  the  times  and  seasons 
■which  God  hath  put  in  yours.  The  times  and  seasons  of  affliction  and  correction, 
to  be  troubled  for  them*;  and  the  times  and  seasons  of  mercy  and  deliverance,  to 
be  thankful  for  them.  (T.  Hortoii,  D.D.)  Times  misinterpreted: — If  not  for 
them,  then  for  whom  ?  Yet  every  age  has  had  those  who  profess  to  be  in  the  secret. 
They  were  in  the  Thessalonian  Church,  and  Paul  had  to  warn  the  disciples  there  to 
be  on  their  guard  ag  linst  them.  When  Gallus  renewed  the  persecution  carried  on 
by  Decius  Cyprian  thought  the  judgment  close  at  hand,  and  Milnor  remarks  on  this, 
•'  God  hath  made  the  present  so  much  the  exclusive  object  of  our  duty  thHt  He  will 
scarce  suffer  His  wisest  aud  best  servants  to  gain  reputation  for  skill  and  foresight 
by  any  conjectures  concerning  the  times  and  seasons  which  He  hath  reserved,"  &c. 
More  than  a  generation  ago  an  Edinburgh  reviewer  was  not  speaking  without  cause 
when  he  said  of  men  who  could  see  in  the  Apocalypse  the  current  condition  of 
Europe,  and  who  told  a  British  statesman  to  adopt  that  book  for  a  political  manual, 
that  they  were  carrying  on  madness  "  upon  too  sublime  a  scale  for  our  interference. 
We  were  brought  up  in  the  humble  creed  of  looking  at  the  prophecies  chiefly  in 
connection  not  with  the  future,  but  with  the  past ;  where  a  cautious  divinity,  looking 
backward,  might  shadow  out  marks  of  anticipation  and  promise,  and  lead  our  faith 
by  marks  of  Divine  foreknowledge,  to  an  apparent  accomplishment  of  the  Divine 
will.     But  to  use  them  as  this  year's  almanack  ;  to  put  the  millennium  backwarda 


CHAP.  «.]  THE  ACTS.  S3 

and  forwards,  according  as  the  facts  of  the  last  twelvemonth  have  falsified  the 
predictions  of  the  last  edition  ;  to  jeopardise  the  State  rather  than  tolerate  a  policy 
which  might  spoil  a  favourite  criticism  on  some  ambiguous  text  is  to  turn  the 
apocalyptic  eagle  into  the  cuckoo  of  the  spring."  Horace  Smith  had  his  fling  at 
"  Dr.  C. ,  who  one  month  writes  a  book  to  expound  the  Apocalypse,  and  next  month 
Another  to  refute  his  own  argument."  The  thoughtful  and  erudite  author  of 
"Small  Books  on  Great  Subjects"  professes  an  ever-increasing  disinclination  to 
the  study  of  prophecy,  further  than  in  its  great  features,  remarking  that  man  is  not 
formed  for  the  knowledge  of  futurity,  and  that  it  is  seldom  that  he  knows  how  to 
make  use  of  it,  being  too  apt  to  put  himself  in  the  place  of  God,  and  instead  of 
looking  on  the  affairs  of  the  world  as  a  course  of  things  directed  to  the  final 
amelioration  of  the  human  race,  to  denounce  this  or  that  measure  or  man  as 
impious,  this  or  that  event  as  a  judgment  on  evildoers.  Wycliffe  and  Luther  both 
expected  the  judgment  in  their  century,  Napier  at  the  close  of  the  nineteenth,  and 
Sir  David  Lindsay  at  the  close  of  the  twentieth.  These  ventures  serve  to  bring  to 
nought  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,  and  to  show  what  false  steps  may  be  confidently 
taken  in  a  darkness  that  is  not  felt ;  for  if  felt  it  would  crave  warier  walking.  (J. 
Jacox,  B.A.)  The  benefits  to  character  of  ignorance  of  the  future: — I.  Man's 
IGNORANCE  OF  THE  FUTURE.  One  department  of  knowledge  God  has  in  part  spread 
before  us,  and  is  leading  us  continually  further  into  His  deeper  counsels.  The  laws 
of  nature,  when  we  have  once  gathered  them  from  the  examination  of  the  past, 
become  our  almost  certain  guides  for  the  future.  But  even  here  all  things  are  not 
naked  and  open.  The  phenomena  of  the  atmosphere  cannot  be  predicted  with 
unerring  accuracy,  and  the  earth  still  contains  many  secrets  which  may  never  be 
reached.  There  is,  however,  another  department,  where  knowledge  cannot  be 
reduced  to  simple  laws,  and  where  the  future  is  hidden.  This  is  the  department  in 
which  the  agencies  of  God  and  man  meet,  where  the  plan  of  the  great  Euler  and 
the  plans  of  countless  finite  beings  run  across  one  another.  So  many  agents  and 
interactions  create  a  confusion  and  comphcation  which  none  but  infinite  skill  can 
disentangle,  the  results  of  which  only  God  can  foresee.  In  illustration  of  this,  note 
— 1.  That  we  find  in  our  own  experience,  that  the  times  and  seasons  of  human  life 
God  has  put  in  His  own  power.  All  of  us  can  testify  that  an  unexpected  future 
has  been  unrolling  itself.  We  make  new  acquaintances,  and  they  affect  our  condi- 
tion and  prospects.  Our  plans  are  ever  interrupted  by  events  wholly  unforeseen. 
Disease,  misfortune,  prosperity,  and  joy  are  as  much  hid  from  us  as  if  the  lot 
determined  them.  2.  The  strange  mistakes  of  the  most  practised  men,  as  they 
stand  on  the  threshold  of  great  events.  There  are  vast  revolutions  which  alter  the 
course  of  the  world,  and  must  have  had  deep  foundations  in  the  past ;  yet  the 
statesmen  and  philosophers  of  the  time  are  slumbering  without  anxiety  on  the  sides 
of  the  volcano.  Nay,  if  some  one,  confident  in  the  sway  of  general  law,  assured 
that  the  Divine  government  will  have  its  way,  ventures  to  predict  in  vague  terms  a 
coming  disaster,  the  men  of  his  time  laugh  at  him.  But  the  storm  has  come,  and 
has  left  desolations  which  the  predicter  himself  did  not  anticipate.  Thus  how 
little  did  the  Senatorial  party  augur,  when  they  required  Cossar  to  resign  his  com- 
mand, that  they  were  urging  on  measures  which  would  destroy  the  power  of  the 
aristocracy,  change  Eome  into  an  empire,  and  bring  on  a  revglution  in  society,  law, 
and  government !  How  little  did  Caiaphas  or  Pilate  dream  of  the  power  that  would 
go  forth  from  that  submissive  man  who  lay  under  their  hand  !  How  httle  did  Leo 
X.  and  the  leading  ItaUans  imagine  that  Martin  Luther  would  make  an  era,  and 
start  a  movement  that  would  never  stop  1  Who  thought  a  little  before  the  French 
revolution,  unless  some  dreamer  regarded  as  wild,  that  all  the  thrones  of  Europe 
would  be  shaken,  or  that  a  man  of  Corsica  would  hold  half  the  continent  under  hia 
foot  ?  "  It  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  3.  The  prophets  and 
apostles  were  kept  to  a  great  degree  in  ignorance  of  the  future,  so  that  the  times 
and  seasons  were  not  brought  within  their  view.  Some  persons  imagine  that  a 
prophet  acquired  a  telescopic  sight  which  penetrated  all  the  details  of  the  future. 
But  Paul  says,  "  We  prophesy  in  part,"  i.e.,  imperfectly.  II.  The  moral  uses  which 
THIS  ARRANGEMENT  IS  INTENDED  TO  SERVE.  1.  In  the  proviucc  of  individual  effort 
uncertainty  as  to  the  future,  united  with  probabihty  of  success,  taxes  the  energies 
of  man  and  develops  his  character  in  a  desirable  way.  (1)  The  man  who  is  certain 
of  future  good  feels  no  impulse  to  secure  it  by  his  own  exertions.  The  man  who  is 
uncertain  has  every  motive  to  prevent  ill-success,  and  will  avail  himself  of  all  helps 
and  guard  against  those  faults  which  can  obstruct  his  way.  Thus  are  we  hardened, 
made  wary  and  careful ;  and  the  virtues  of  prudence,  forethought,  diligence,. 
VOL.    I.  3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {cane.  t. 

vigilance,  courage,  &c.,  are  cherished  in  our  souls.  (2)  But  how  does  this  Ip.w  aet 
in  respect  to  our  spiritual  and  eternal  interests?  It  is  flain  that  entire  inability  to 
estimate  the  course  of  our  future  life  would  cut  off  motive,  and  entire  certainty 
might  plunge  us  into  despair  if  the  foreseen  end  were  evil,  and  into  carelessness  if 
it  were  good.  But  now  we  have  the  highest  motives  to  exertion— a  probatdlity  of 
success,  if  our  efforts  are  commensurate  to  the  greatness  of  the  issue,  and  a  cer- 
tainty of  failure  if  we  let  earthly  things  take  the  control  of  our  lives,  ('i)  As  for 
the  interests  of  the  kingdom  of  God — as  long  as  the  law  is  that  nothing  is  brought 
to  pass  but  by  the  co-operation  of  God  and  man,  that  nothing  but  ultimHte  success 
and  no  immediate,  sudden  triumph  is  held  out;  it  is  plain  that  all  this  is  most 
favourable  to  strenuous  exertion.  2.  It  is  well  that  we  cannot  foresee  the  mass  of 
(iifQculties  which  may  discourage  us,  and  that  all  our  trials  do  not  press  on  us  at 
once.  Suppose  that  ignorance  were  exchanged  for  certainty  ;  is  it  not  evident  that 
the  mass  of  them  would  teem  too  great  for  human  strength  to  move?  Ignorance, 
then,  is  a  great  blessing,  and  without  it  we  should  not  have  courag3  to  undertake 
anything  good  and  great.  We  now  encounter  our  toils  and  anxiedes  one  by  one  ; 
we  conquer  them  in  detail,  and  sweet  hope  lives  through  all  the  eilorts.  (1)  If  a 
successful  inventor  could  have  taken  one  clear,  full  look  of  his  long,  dreary  conflict 
with  difficulties,  would  he  not  have  fled  from  such  a  career  ?  and  thus  is  not  the 
world  indebted  for  much  of  its  progress,  for  many  improvements  in  science  and 
art,  to  man's  ignorance  of  the  future  ?  (2)  Before  a  victorious  war,  if  we  had  fore- 
seen its  length,  its  costliness  in  money  and  life  ;  if  the  soldiers  could  have  foreseen 
their  hardships,  wounds,  defeats,  is  it  not  more  than  probable  that  the  majority 
would  have  shrunk  from  tlie  contest,  although  certain  of  ultimate  success?  Of 
how  many  public  and  private  efforts  the  same  thing  can  be  said.  (3)  So  also,  when 
a  man  has  devoted  himself  to  the  v/ork  of  preaching  Christ's  gospel,  it  is  best  for 
him  to  live  in  ignorance  of  the  future.  The  apostles  saw  trials,  etc.,  before  them, 
but  it  was  a  mercy  that  they  did  not  see  the  slow  rate  at  which  Christian  truth  has- 
moved,  the  days  of  Mohammed,  of  papal  darkness,  of  a  divided,  distracted  Church. 
(4)  Who  of  us  is  not  painfully  conscious  of  fruitless  struggles  against  sins,  of  a 
slow  and  fitful  jjrogress,  of  frequent  declensions,  Ac.  Now  if  all  this  hud  been 
foreseen,  who  could  have  collected  courage  enough  to  endure  so  much  for  the  attain- 
ment of  so  little?  3.  Mans  ignorance  of  the  future  aids  the  spirit  of  piety,  (1); 
It  helps  us  to  realise  that  God  has  a  plan  for  us  and  for  the  world.  (2)  It  sugq;est3 
to  us  our  dependence  and  awakens  our  faith.  Conclusion  :  1.  According  to  analo^'y, 
prophecy  will  never  shed  more  than  a  dim,  uncertain  light  upon  the  future  before 
its  fulfilment,  Christ  gave  no  satisfaction  here,  and  when  Peter  asked  what  should 
befall  John,  he  received  but  an  ambiguous  answer — "  If  I  wiU  that  he  tarry,"  &c. 
And  so  Paul  went  to  Jerusalem,  not  knowing  the  things  that  should  befall  him 
there,  &c.  And  the  history  of  interpretation  shows  that  thus  far  the  Church  has 
made  little  progress  in  applying  prophecies  to  particular  events.  2.  He  who  gains 
character  out  of  the  uncertainties  of  life  is  a  great  gainer.  He  has  learned  in  the 
dark  not  only  those  qualities  of  character  which  make  him  a  good  actor  in  these 
earthly  scenes  and  which  generally  insure  success  ;  but  he  has  learned  also  how  to 
depend  on  God,  to  trust  in  His  providence,  and  to  secure  His  co-operation.  He  is 
.thus  fitted  for  eternal  life,  for  its  employment,  for  its  revelations,  (T,  D.  Woolsey, 
D.D.)  Limitation  of  human  knotoledge  : — Dr.  Ludlow,  my  professor  in  the  Theo- 
logical Seminary,  taught  me  a  hsson  I  have  never  forgotten.  While  putting  a 
variety  of  questions  to  him  that  were  perplexing,  he  turned  upon  me  somewhat  in 
sternness,  but  more  in  love,  and  said,  "  Mr.  Talmage,you  will  have  to  let  God  know 
some  things  that  you  don't."  (T.  Be  Witt  Tahnage.)  God's  plans  are  in  His  oivn 
keeping: — You  cannot  set  the  world  right,  or  the  times,  but  you  can  do  something 
for  the  truth ;  and  all  you  can  do  will  certainly  tell  if  the  work  you  do  is  for  the 
Master,  who  gives  you  your  share,  and  so  the  burden  of  responsibility  is  lifted  off. 
This  as.«urance  makes  peace,  satisfaction,  and  repose  possible  even  in  the  partial 
work  done  upon  earth.  Go  to  the  man  who  is  carving  a  stone  for  a  building  ;  ask 
him  where  is  that  stone  going,  to  what  part  of  the  temple,  and  how  is  he  going  to 
get  it  into  place,  and  what  does  he  do  ?  He  points  you  to  the  builder's  plans.  This 
is  only  one  stone  of  many.  So,  when  men  shall  ask  where  and  how  is  your  little 
achievement  going  into  God's  plan,  point  them  to  your  Master,  who  keeps  the  plans, 
and  then  go  on  doing  your  little  service  as  faithfully  as  if  the  whole  temple  were 
yours  to  build,  {PkilUps  Brooks.)  God  has  His  own  plans  : — At  this  time,  all 
over  the  trees,  and  throughout  the  grass,  is  deposited  the  condensed  moisture  of 
the  air ;  and  silent  dewdrops  are  on  every  flower  and  every  leaf.    If  you  go  and 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  35 

look  at  them  in  the  darkness  of  to-night,  there  is  no  form  or  comeliness  in  them ; 
but  by  and  by  God  will  have  wheeled  the  sun  in  its  circuit  so  that  it  shall  look  over 
the  horizon  ;  and  the  moment  its  light  strikes  these  hidden  drops,  small  and 
scattered,  every  one  shall  glow  as  if  it  were  a  diamond,  and  all  nature  shall  be 
lighted  up  with  myriad  fires,  each  reflecting  something  of  the  Divine  glory.  God 
has  His  own  plans.  He  never  told  us  in  full  what  tbey  are.  We  know  this,  how- 
ever :  that  we  are  fragmentary  in  our  lives ;  that  it  takes  many  to  make  the  one 
idea  of  God  ;  that  the  work  of  past  generations  is  hinged  upon  this,  and  that  the 
■work  of  this  generation  is  hinged  upon  that  of  generations  to  come;  and  that  God 
sits  in  sublimity  of  counsel,  putting  part  with  part,  so  that  when  we  see  the  con- 
nected whole,  the  things  that  now  seem  most  insignificant  will  shine  out  in  won- 
derful beauty  and  magnificence.  (H.  W.Beecher.)  Human  knoicledge  limited  : — 
There  are  things  in  every  life  which  we  cannot  understand  now — troubles, 
disappointments,  sickness,  poverty,  death — but  the  time  will  come  when  all  will  be 
plain.  I  suppose  no  one  at  the  beginning  knows  the  full  meaning  of  his  life,  or 
for  what  some  of  his  experiences  are  training  him.  Kobert  Eaikes  had  no  vision  of 
the  millions  studying  in  Sunday  schools  every  Sunday ;  he  only  saw  his  present 
work  and  duty.  John  Bunyan,  shut  up  in  prison  for  the  best  twelve  years  of  his 
life,  while  longing  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  thousands  were  eager  to  hear  him,  had 
no  conception  that  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  would  enable  him  to  preach  to  millions 
instead  of  thousands,  and  for  centui-ies  instead  of  years.  So  we,  in  our  feeble 
beginnings,  our  narrow  circumstances,  our  trials  and  disappointments,  may  know 
that  if  we  are  faithful  we  shall  understand  hereafter  the  meaning  of  all,  and  rejoice 
in  the  way  God  has  led  us.  (F.  N.Peloubet.)  God's  decisions  unknown: — I  remember 
once  sailing  over  the  crystal  waters  of  Lake  Superior.  We  had  come  out  of  the 
muddy  waters  of  Lake  Huron  during  the  night,  and  early  in  the  morning  I  came 
on  deck,  and  looking  over  the  prow,  started  back  in  instinctive  terror,  for,  looking 
down  into  the  clear  waters  of  that  lake,  it  seemed  to  me  as  though  our  keel  was 
just  going  to  strike  on  the  sharp-pointed  rocks  below  ;  but  I  was  looking  through 
fifty  or  sixty  feet  of  Clearwater  at  the  great  rock  bed  of  the  lake  over  which  we  were 
sailing.  Now  we  endeavour  in  vain  to  fathom  God's  judgments.  As  by  a  great 
deep  they  are  hidden  from  us.  But  by  and  by,  through  the  mystery  we  shall  see 
and  shall  understand.  [Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.)  Ensnared  by  inquisitiveness  : — 
How  actively  inquisitive  are  some  people  :  and  into  what  strange  predicaments  does 
this  their  strong  propensity  land  them  !  They  remind  us  of  the  crested  anolis 
(Xiphosurus  velifer),  a  species  of  the  lizard  tribe.  It  is  a  timid  yet  restlessly 
inquisitive  animal ;  for  although  it  hides  itself  with  instinctive  caution  on  hearing 
the  approach  of  a  footstep,  it  is  of  so  curious  a  nature  that  it  must  needs  poke  its 
head  out  of  its  hiding-place,  and  so  betray  itself  in  spite  of  its  timidity.  So 
absorbed,  indeed,  is  the  anolis  in  gratifying  its  curiosity,  that  it  will  allow  itself  to 
be  captured  in  a  noose,  and  often  falls  a  victim  to  the  rude  and  inartificial  snares 
made  by  children.  (Scientific  Illtisti-ations.)  The  sufficiency  of  human  know- 
ledge : — Here  on  earth  we  are  as  soldiers  fighting  in  a  foreign  land,  which  understand 
not  the  plan  of  the  campaign,  and  have  no  need  to  understand  it,  seeing  well  what 
is  at  our  hand  to  be  done.  Let  us  do  it  like  soldiers,  with  submission,  with  courage, 
with  a  heroic  joy:  "Whatever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might." 
Behind  us,  b  hind  each  one  of  us,  lie  six  thousand  years  of  human  effort,  human 
conquest :  before  us  is  the  boundless  Time,  with  its  as  yet  uncreated  and  uncon- 
quered  continents  and  Eldorados,  which  even  we  have  to  c  jnquer,  to  create ;  and 
from  the  bosom  of  Eternity  shine  for  us  celestial  guiding  stars.  (T.  Carlyle.) 
My  slides  in  nature : — Do  not  understand  me  at  all  as  saying  that  there  is  no  mystery 
about  the  planets'  motions.  There  is  just  the  one  single  mystery — gravitation ; 
and  it  is  a  very  profound  one.  How  it  is  that  an  atom  of  matter  can  attract 
another  atom,  no  matter  how  great  the  distance,  no  matter  what  intervening  sub- 
stance there  may  be — how  it  will  act  upon  it,  or,  at  least,  behave  as  if  it  acted 
upon  it,  I  do  not  know,  I  cannot  tell.  Whether  they  are  pushed  together  by 
means  of  an  intervening  ether,  or  what  is  the  action,  I  cannot  understnnd.  It 
stands  with  me  along  with  the  fact  that  when  I  will  that  my  arm  shall  rise,  it 
rises.  It  is  inscrutable.  All  the  explanations  that  have  been  {iiven  of  it  seem  to 
me  merely  to  dark>-n  counsel  with  words  and  no  understanding.  They  do  not 
remove  the  difficulty  at  all.  If  I  were  to  say  what  I  really  believe,  it  would  be 
that  the  motions  of  the  spheres  of  the  material  universe  stand  in  some  such  relation 
to  Him  in  Whom  all  things  exist— the  ever-present  and  omnipotent  God — as  the 
motions  of  my  body  do  to  my  will ;  I  do  not  know  how,  and  never  expect  to  know. 


-T 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

(Prof.  C.A.  Young.)  Prophecy:  purpose  of: — I  am  profoundly  affected  by  the 
grandeur  of  prophecy.  God  unveils  the  frescoed  wall  of  the  future,  not  so  much 
that  we  may  count  the  figures,  and  measure  the  robes,  and  analyse  the  pigments  ; 
but  that,  gazing  upon  it,  our  imaginations  may  be  enkindled,  and  hope  be  inspired, 
to  bear  us  through  the  dismal  barrenness  of  the  present.  Prophecy  was  not 
addressed  to  the  reason,  nor  to  the  statistical  faculty,  but  to  the  imagination  ;  and 
I  should  as  soon  think  of  measuring  love  by  the  scales  of  commerce,  or  of  admiring 
flowers  by  the  rule  of  feet  and  inches,  or  of  applying  arithmetic  to  taste  and 
enthusiasm,  as  calculations  and  figures  to  these  grand  evanishing  signals  which 
God  waves  in  the  future  only  to  tell  the  world  which  way  it  is  to  march.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Prophecy  :  fantastic  interpretation  of: — All  along  the  Oker  Thai,  in 
the  Hartz,  there  are  huge  rocks  towering  up  among  the  fir-clad  hills,  to  which  the 
peasants  have  appended  names  according  as  they  fancy  them  to  bear  resemblance 
to  chairs,  horses,  cobblers,  or  cocked  hats.  The  likeness  in  most  cases  is  such  as 
only  fancy  can  make  out  when  she  is  in  her  most  vigorous  mood  ;  nevertheless  this 
rock  must  needs  be  called  a  man,  and  that  a  church,  and  there  has  no  doubt  been 
many  a  quarrel  between  rival  observers  who  have  discovered  each  a  different  image 
in  the  one  pile  of  rock ;  yet  the  stones  are  not  churches,  chairs,  or  cobblers,  and 
the  whole  business  is  childish  and  nonsensical.  Interpreters  of  prophecy  during 
the  last  few  centuries  have  been  most  of  them  in  the  same  position  ;  one  of  them 
sees  in  the  sublimities  of  the  Eevelation  the  form  of  Louis  Napoleon,  where  two 
or  three  hundred  years  ago  half  Christendom  saw  the  Pope,  and  the  other  half 
Martin  Luther.  The  other  day  one  of  the  seers  saw  Sebastopol  in  the  prophecies, 
and  now  another  detects  the  Suez  Canal,  and  we  feel  pretty  sure  that  the  Council 
at  Eome  will  soon  be  spied  out  in  Daniel  or  Ezekiel.  The  fact  is,  when  fancy  is 
their  guide  men  wander  in  a  maze.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Speculations  versus 
duty  : — While  a  minister  was  riding  in  a  railway  carriage  he  was  saluted  by  a 
member  of  an  exceedingly  litigious  and  speculative  sect.  "  Pray,  sir,"  said  the 
sectary,  "  what  is  your  opinion  of  the  seven  trumpets  ?  "  "I  am  not  sure,"  said  the 
preacher,  "  tbat  I  understand  your  question  ;  but  I  hope  you  will  comprehend  mine. 
What  think  you  of  the  fact  that  your  seven  children  are  growing  up  without  God 
and  without  hope  ?  You  have  a  Bible-reading  in  your  house  for  your  neighbours, 
but  no  family  prayer  for  your  children."  The  nail  was  fastened  in  a  sure  place  ; 
enough  candour  of  mind  remained  in  the  professor  to  enable  him  to  profit  by  the 
timely  rebuke.    {Ibid.) 

y  Ver.  8.  But  ye  shall  receive  power  when  the  Holy  Ghost  Is  come  upon  you. — The  gift 
ofpoiver: — At  firist  sight  this  promise  seems  to  be  Cbriht's  response  to  a  universal 
craving.  There  is  nothing  which  so  awakens  man's  ambition  as  power.  It  isv 
sweeter  to  him  than  bread  to  the  hungry,  or  home  to  the  wanderer,  or  sunrise  ta\ 
the  benighted ;  of  all  the  Divine  attributes  this  is  the  one  he  most  intensely  and 
inoessantly  covets.  The  old  classic  fable  of  Prometheus,  who  made  a  figure  and 
shaped  it  after  the  beauty  of  a  man,  and  then  animated  it  with  fire  which  he  had 
dared  to  steal  from  heaven,  is  only  the  thinly -veiled  record  of  man's  fierce  ambition 
v/to  create.  Powerless  to  create,  he  seeks  control.  He  has  summoned  almost  every 
/\known  element  and  force  in  nature  to  his  service,  and  compelled  them  to  do  for  him 
what  he  cannot  do  for  himself.  He  has  blasted  the  rock  unsbaken  by  the  ages,  and 
hurled  its  ponderous  masses  into  the  air  as  easily  as  a  child  throws  up  its  tennis  ball. 
He  has  tunnelled  the  mountain  and  bridged  the  river  to  make  way  for  his  flying 
locomotive.  He  has  engirdled  the  earth  with  a  belt  of  wire,  and  through  it  swifter 
than  thought  flashed  his  messages  from  pole  to  pole.  From  the  masterful  school- 
boy to  the  statesman  on  the  topmost  ladder,  and  the  monarch  of  a  hundred  isles, 
this  passion  for  power  is  all  pervading.  The  very  apostles,  to  whom  these  words 
were  addressed,  were  in  this,  as  in  other  respects,  "  men  of  like  passions  with  our- 
selves." Observe,  this  love  of  power  may  be  as  legitimate  as  it  is  natural.  Its 
quality  is  determined  by  its  motive.  Still  power  may  be  beneficent  as  well  as 
baneful.  Now,  mark  the  power  with  which  Christ  promises  to  endow  His  disciples. 
1.  Not  phvsical  power.  Not  like  that  possessed  by  Samson  when  he  carried  upon 
his  back  the  gates  of  Gaza,  or  with  the  jaw-bone  of  an  ass  slew  the  Philistines  heaps 
upon  heaps.  It  had  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  bone,  and  muscle,  and  sinew.  Men 
have  sometimes  forgotten  this.  They  once  thought  that  they  could  resist  the  spread 
of  the  gospel  by  physical  means.  The  very  efforts  which  men  have  employed  to 
suppress  the  truth  have  been  made  the  means  of  exalting  it  to  supremacy.  Just  as 
4,^  the  blast  which  rocks  the  giant  oak  makes  it  strike  its  roots  deeper  and  wider  in  the 


<JHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  37 

earth ;  or,  just  as  the  tempest  which  beats  down  the  tree  carries  its  winged  seeds 
•over  land  and  sea  to  distant  continents,  there  to  take  root  and  become  trees  them- 
selves, so  persecution  has  this  twofold  tendency — it  makes  the  persecuted  cling 
closer  than  ever  to  the  truth  for  which  they  are  assailed,  and  prompts  them  to 
spread  it  more  widely  abroad  than  ever.  On  the  other  hand,  brute  force  can  no 
more  help  the  gospel  than  hinder  it.  Persecution  never  made  saints  yet.  If  you 
want  to  infuse  new  life  into  a  tree  you  do  not  smite  it  with  an  axe,  but  expose  it  to 
the  genial  breath  of  spring.  The  weapons  of  their  warfare  were  not  to  be  carnal. 
2.  Nor  was  it  the  power  of  logic.  The  disciples  were  to  convert  souls,  and  mere 
argument  cannot  do  this.  You  have  all  seen  sheet  lightnings ;  they  flash,  they 
dazzle,  but  they  do  not  kill.  And  arguments,  after  all,  are  only  sheet  lightnings, 
dazzling,  enlightening,  but  seldom  or  never  killing  in  the  sense  in  which  Paul  says 
be  was  killed.  3.  Nor  was  it  the  power  of  eloquence,  though  that  is  not  to  be 
despised.  Oh,  yes!  there  is  a  tremendous  power  in  words.  They  breathe,  they 
burn,  they  fly  about  the  world  charged  with  electric  fire  and  force  ;  but  there  is  one 
thing  they  cannot  do— they  cannot  regenerate  a  soul.  You  may  electrify  a  corpse. 
By  bringing  it  into  contact  with  a  battery  you  may  make  it  imitate  the  living  ;  but 
it  is  after  all  only  the  semblance,  not  the  reality  of  life.  4.  It  was  spiritual  power 
— the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "We  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which 
strengtheneth  us."  In  other  words,  it  was  the  power  of  a  living  union  with  a  living 
■God.  Need  I  say  that  this  promise  of  Christ  is  as  much  ours  as  it  was  the  apostles'  ? 
It  has  been  fulfilled,  but  not  exhausted.  There  is  an  essential  difference  between 
the  two.  "  A  postage  stamp  once  used  can  be  used  no  longer ;  but  it  is  not  so  with 
a  bank  note.  The  note  may  be  old  and  torn,  stained  and  soiled  ;  it  may  have  been 
<3ut  in  halves  and  pasted  together  again.  It  does  not  matter  ;  whoever  holds  it  can 
present  it  and  demand  its  equivalent  in  sterling  gold.  So  is  it  with  a  Divine 
promise.  It  may  pass  from  lip  to  lip,  and  from  age  to  age,  and  be  fulfilled  a 
thousand  times  ;  still  you  may  present  it  and  plead  it  before  God  in  the  assurance 
of  success."  The  light  of  the  sun  may  fail,  the  waters  of  the  ocean  maybe  dried  up, 
but  the  riches  of  Christ's  fulness  are  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  And 
we  need  this  promised  power  as  much  as  the  apostles  did/'  Nothing  else  can  supply 
its  place.  It  is  to  the  Church  what  steam  is  to  the  ma;chinery.  Suppose  you  are 
examining  the  propelling  powers  of  the  Majestic  or  the  leutonic — the  two  most 
magnificent  specimens  of  naval  architecture  the  world  has  ever  seen.  You  look 
down  into  the  engine-room  on  the  polished  levers,  and  cranks,  and  shafts,  and  the 
innumerable  wheels  made  to  revolve  there ;  and  you  go  home  amazed  at  the  inven- 
tive power  which  they  represent.  And  yet  in  reality  you  have  seen  no  power.  There 
must  be  put  into  that  machinery  a  power,  a  hidden  power,  and  then,  and  not  till 
then,  will  those  wheels  revolve  majestically,  and  the  vessel  speed  over  the  water 
lightly  and  swiftly  as  a  bird  with  outspread  wings.  Who  amongst  us  dare  assert 
that  the  Church's  successes  are  equal  to  her  opportunities?  Why,  then,  is  it  we 
are  making  so  little  impression  on  the  world?  Is  it  not  because  we  are  too  much 
under  its  influence  ?  The  fabled  giant  Antseus  was  invincible  so  long  as  he  was  in 
direct  communication  with  his  mother  earth.  Overthrown  by  the  wrestler,  the 
moment  he  touched  the  ground  out  of  which  he  was  born  his  strength  revived. 
Hercules  discovered  the  secret  of  his  invigoration,  and,  lifting  him  from  the  earth, 
crushed  him  in  the  air.  We  are  in  the  same  danger  from  the  world,  and  to  escape 
it  we  must  get  nearer  to  the  source  of  our  spiritual  strength.  Away  from  Christ  she 
is  like  an  army  without  ammunition  and  cut  off  from  its  base  of  operations.  Near 
to  Him  she  will  breathe  the  air,  and  walk  in  the  light,  and  wield  the  might  of 
lieaven.  She  shall  receive  power — power  to  overcome  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil.  And  does  not  the  Church  need  more  pnwer  to  deal  with  the  manifold  evils 
^nd  enemies  by  which  she  is  surrounded  ?  There  is  scepticism.  We  live  in  an  ' 
age  of  doubt — doubt  all  the  more  dangerous  because  it  is  courteous  rather  than  f~ 
coarse.  Well,  then,  another  evil  with  which,  as  Churches,  we  have  to  contend  is 
indifference  to  spiritual  truth.  Men  are  absorled  in  mateiial  pursuits  and  enjoy- 
ments. It  is  sometimes  argued  that  the  Church  is  trying  to  do  too  much ;  that  she 
is  unequal  to  the  work  she  is  undertaking  ;  that  Christian  service  is  already  so 
overgrown  that,  like  a  man  with  a  large  frame  and  a  feeble  heart,  we  are  staggering 
undsr  the  weight  of  the  tasks  we  have  undertaken ;  that  the  spiritual  power  of  the 
Church  is  unequal  to  the  vast  and  varied  machinery  it  has  to  keep  in  motion. 
This  is,  douhtless,  true  when  the  resources  which  the  Church  possess  in  itself  are 
alone  considered  ;  but  add  Christ  to  them,  and  then  the  disproportion  is  turned  the 
other  way.  "  All  power  " — power  of  every  kind  and  without  limit — is  given  unto  Him. 


33  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

There  cannot  be  too  much  work  when  there  is  so  much  Divine  power  to  sustain  it. 
When  the  tide  is  out  the  estuary  seems  far  too  wide  for  the  tiny  scream  which 
crawls  through  the  centre ;  but  when  tlie  tide  comes  in  the  whole  expanse  is  covered 
and  the  water  rushes  right  up  to  the  greensward.  Brethren,  do  we  desire  thispowei:  ? 
Then  let  us  ask  for  it.  Kemember  that  it  has  its  source  outside  the  Church  and 
human  life  altogether.  "Ye  shall  receive  power  " — receive  it  as  a  gift ;  not  gene- 
rate it  from  withiu  ;  not  attain  it  by  straining  present  powers  or  enlarging  present 
caiiaeity.  Sometimes  we  forget  this,  and  talk  about  getting  up  a  revival.  You 
might  as  well  talk  about  getting  up  a  thunder  shower.  Having  this  power,  let  us 
use  it.  The  disciples  received  it  that  they  might  be  "witnesses  unto  Christ." 
Divinely  bestowed  power  always  biings  responsibility ;  it  is  always  given  for  use. 
Keep  any  of  God's  gifts  for  jour  own  selfish  purposes,  and  they  will  speedily  get  the 
canker  and  the  rot.     [J.  Le  Huraij.)  The  Lord's  last  promise  to  the  apostles  :  — 

Christ's  last  words  are  a  promise  atid  declare  the  vocation  of  all  Christians  of  eveiy 
station  and  class.  They  are  all  called  to  testify  to  Christ,  but  they  are  not  all  equally 
qualified  for  the  duty.  The  text  shows — I.  That  there  is  a  condition  of  attachment 
TO  Christ  in  which  due  fitness  for  this  vocation  does  not  exist.  The  apostles 
were  in  this  condition.  They  had  personal  acquaintance  with  Christ,  believed  in 
Him,  had  knowledge  of  the  facts,  and  had  natural  ability.  Still  these  did  not  confer 
the  testify  ing  "  power."  So  with  many  Christians  now.  They  know,  believe,  desire, 
are  eloquent,  &c.,  but  lack  the  mystic  energy  in  the  absence  of  which  sermons  fail 
to  conveit.  II.  That  due  fitness  for  the  great  vocation  comes  by  a  Divine 
bestowal.  "  After  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come."  The  bestowal  came  in  a  miraculous 
manner  but  in  answer  to  prayer.  Thereupon  the  apostles  were  constrained' to  do 
what  the  Lord  had  commanded.  So  nowadays.  When  God  has  given  special 
ability,  and  adds  an  influence  which  constrains  to  its  exercise,  no  wonder  that 
striking  results  follow.  III.  That  this  power  should  be  exercised  when  and 
where  it  is  received.  They  were  to  wait  at  Jerusalem  until  they  received  a  Divine 
gift,  and  there  employ  it.  Had  they  been  permitted  to  seek  their  own  pleasure  they 
would  have  chosen  another  place.  So  we  must  begin  where  and  when  God  blesses 
us,  however  disagreeable  the  effort  may  be.  IV.  The  manner  of  spreading  the 
GOSPEL.  Here  we  have  a  plan  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  1.  Jerusalem  (chaps, 
iii.  1-vi.  7).  2.  All  Judsea  (vi.  8-viii.  3).  3.  Samaria,  which  had  long  been 
"White  unto  harvest"  (viii.  4-40).  4.  The  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  (ix.  to 
close).  This  view  suggests  the  importance  of  evaugelising  cities.  If  Paris  were 
made  Christian  how  great  would  be  the  blessing  to  Europe  ;  if  London  how  easy  the 
conversion  of  the  world.  (W.  Hudson.)  The  call  to  apostleship  : — This  verse  is 
of  interest  as  involving  the  condition  of  all  success,  which  in  every  line  of 
occupation  is  made  out  of  power  converged  upon  an  object.  Means  in  oul-  hard,  an 
end  in  our  eye,  resources  and  purposes,  are  the  alpha  and  omega  of  success.  Our 
failures,  therefore,  are  due  sometimes  to  our  attempting  too  much,  but  our  saddest 
failures  are  due  to  the  indecision  of  our  aim.  Men,  especially  in  the  higher  rela- 
tions of  life,  are  unproductive,  not  because  they  are  feeble,  but  because  they  are 
purposeless.  A  purpose  lying  athwart  the  track  of  a  man's  energies  is  what  a 
burning  glass  is  lying  across  the  path  of  tLie  sunbeam,  a  means  of  tension  and  the 
pledge  of  result.  At  this  solemn  moment,  then,  in  which  Christ  turns  over  man- 
kind into  the  hands  of  the  eleven.  His  last  service  is  to  tell  them  of  the  power  which 
shall  be  wrought  in  them  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  what  they  shall  do  with  it.  Christ 
had  spent  three  years  and  a  half  in  making  Himself  the  most  real  of  all  real  things, 
and  now  as  He  ascends  He  says,  "  What  is  real  to  you,  go  out  into  the  midst  of  men 
and  make  real  to  them  ;  and  so  soon  as  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon 
you,  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Me,"  &c.  On  this  basis  there  are  some  things  proper 
to  be  addressed  to — I.  Christians  as  individuals.  The  science  of  mechanics  is 
reducible  to  statics  which  concerns  itself  with  forces  in  equilibrium,  and  dynamics 
which  treats  of  forces  in  motion.  One  gives  us  physical  condition ;  the  other 
physical  agency.  The  New  Testament  is  an  inspired  treatise  on  spiritual  mechanics, 
and  expounds  the  doctrines  of  spiritual  statics  and  dynamics,  and  exhibits  to  us 
Christianity  as  a  splendid  equilibrium  of  the  soul,  and  as  an  energy  that  upsets 
equilibrium.  The  trouble  with  a  great  many  of  our  Christians  is  that  they  never 
get  beyond  the  statics.  They  stop  with  Christianity  as  an  inward  composure. 
They  do  not  reach  the  point  of  seizing  Christ's  peace,  and  hurling  it  in  all  its  holy 
equipoise  into  the  midst  of  unholy  men  to  their  unutterable  discomposure.  They 
stop  with  reading  the  Four  Gospels  of  condition  without  going  on  to  read  tlie  fifth 
Gospel  of  "Acts."     And  if  we  have  not  the  serenity  of  spirit  which  the  apostles  had, 


CHAP.  I,]  THE  ACTS.  39 

and  the  same  passionate  ambition  to  make  Christ  a  reality  in  the  minds  and  hearts 
of  those  about  us,  it  is  not  because  we  are  not  their  equals,  but  because  we  have  not 
let  Christ  become  as  real  to  us.  If  they  had  stopped  with  being  disciples,  then  we 
should  have  said  that  Christianity  meant  nothing  but  discipleship.  But  inasmuch 
as  they  went  on  from  being  absorbent  disciples  to  radiant  apostles,  then  Christianity 
means  purpose  as  much  as  power;  making  others  Christians  as  much  as  being 
Christians  ourselves.  These  things  when  prayerfully  considered  will  create  a  deep 
sense  of  individual  responsibility.  The  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sets  each  one  of 
us  in  the  line  of  the  true  apostolic  succession  ;  and,  as  after  the  ascension  of  Christ 
mankind  lay  in  the  hands  of  the  original  apostles  for  them  to  convert,  so  to-day 
the  conversion  of  the  world  pertains  to  us  as  their  spiritual  successors.  If  each  \ 
Christian  were  to  make  one  convert  each  year,  within  eight  years  the  whole  popula- 
tion of  the  globe  would  be  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross  !  II.  Cheistians  in  the  associate  ' 
RELATION  OF  A  Church.  Individual  Christianity  means  individual  apostleship. 
What  advantage  does  Christianity  gain  by  being  organised  ?  1.  Negatively.  A 
church  does  not  exist,  properly — (1)  for  the  sake  of  its  sanctuary  ministrations. 
Supposing  that  after  the  ascension  the  apostles  had  made  the  Church  to  consist  as 
a  permanency,  in  praying  and  singing  and  preaching  to  each  other  once  a  week  ? 
But  there  are  churches  where  spiritual  laziness  is  induced  by  excess  of  sanctuary 
nourishment,  and  who  do  not  bestir  themselves  sufficiently  to  prevent  even  the 
bread  of  life  from  working  within  them  as  a  slow  and  subtle  poison.  There  are 
churches  that  have  had  the  gospel  preached  to  them  for  fifty  years,  and  yet  have  not 
begun  to  produce  such  a  flame  as  was  kindled  within  fifteen  days  after  the  Lord's 
ascension.  (2)  For  the  sake  of  sustaining  its  weaker  members.  Oi  course  there  is 
a  great  deal  that  it  ought  to  do  in  that  direction.  Christ  said  to  Peter,  "  When 
thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren."  But  a  large  number  of  those  who 
now  apply  for  admission  to  the  Church  want,  not  to  strengthen  the  brethren,  but 
to  have  the  brethren  strengthen  them.  When  an  army  is  quartered  in  the  enemy's 
country,  the  safest  place  is  inside  of  the  camp ;  but  a  regiment  recruited  for  the 
purpose  of  having  its  members  protect  each  other  is  a  poor  addendum  to  the  fighting 
resources  of  the  brigade.  We  learn  heroism  in  the  face  of  danger ;  children  learn 
to  swim  by  being  thrown  into  the  water ;  and  the  original  Church  never  flinched 
after  once  it  had  taken  up  its  position  in  the  open  field.  (3)  For  the  sake  of  its 
denomination.  Denomination  is  harness  worn  by  us  for  the  purpose  of  dragging 
the  chariot  of  the  gospel.  It  may  chafe  some — all  harness  is  liable  to — but  it  is 
a  necessity.  Still  the  harness  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  chariot,  and  not  the  chariot 
for  the  sake  of  the  harness ;  and  he  serves  his  denomination  best  who  serves  the 
Church  of  Christ  best.  2.  Positively.  By  indicating  what  the  Church  does  not 
exist  for,  we  have  already  implied  the  object  for  which  it  does  exist.  A  Church,  as 
an  efficiency  of  God  for  the  conversion  of  men,  is  the  interweaving  of  the  individual 
strands  of  strength  fused  into  a  solid  bolt  of  force  and  hurled  at  the  adversaries  of 
the  Lord  ;  and  no  desultory  skirmishing  of  individual  Christians  will  begin  to  take 
the  place  of  the  grand  concentrated  bombardment  of  a  confederate  Church.  We 
regularly  proceed  upon  that  principle  in  the  achievement  of  large  secular  results. 
We  organise  for  purposes  of  government,  warfare,  improvement,  revolution,  and 
discovery.  Why  not  for  Christ?  (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  Power:—!.  The 
PREPARATION  FOB  POWER  (vcrs.  1-3).  1.  The  training  which  they  bad  received. 
They  were  with  Jesus  when  He  "  began  both  to  do  and  to  teach."  2.  The  facts 
that  made  their  faith  in  Him  unwavering,  courageous,  conquering — "  He  also 
showed  Himself  alive  after  His  passion  by  many  proofs,"  &c.  Faith  in  a  risen 
Christ  gave  to  their  preaching  a  tremendous  power.  3.  Special  instruction  "  speak- 
ing the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God."  Samples  of  this  speaking  may  be 
found  in  Luke  xxiv.  25-28,  45-49.  II.  The  baptism  of  power  (vers.  4,5).  1.  Thii 
was  the  baptism  that  long  had  been  promised.  It  was  "  the  promise  of  the  Father  " 
(Isa.  xliv.  3  ;  Joel  ii.  28,  &c.)  2.  This  was  that  which  had  been  promised  by  Chri-t, 
when  He  said  it  was  "  expedient  that  He  should  go  away"  (John  xiv.  16,  26  ;  xv. 
26;  xvi.  7-15).  3.  This  was  to  be  unlike  the  baptism  of  John.  Water  was  the 
symbol — this  the  reality.  4.  For  this  baptism  the  apostles  were  to  wait.  The  ship 
can  afford  to  wait  for  its  sails,  the  army  for  its  general,  the  traveller  for  his  compass. 
Why  at  Jerusalem  ?  (Isa.  ii.  1-4  ;  Micah  iv.  1-3).  III.  The  source  of  power  (vers. 
6-8).  1.  The  false  idea.  "Lord,  dost  Thou  at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom  of 
Israel  ?  "  The  old  thought  of  a  temporal  kingdom  still  uppermost  1  2.  The  true 
idea.  "  But  j'e  shall  receive  power,"  not  temporal  such  as  they  had  coveted,  but 
spiritual  and  supernatural.     That  power  is  worth  coveting  and  waiting  for.    IV. 


y 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

The  eesult  of  power  (ver.  8).  "  Ye  shall  be  My  witaesses."  There  is  no  success- 
ful witnessing  for  Christ  without  this  power.  Christ's  disciples  are  all-po  iverf ul 
with  it.  V.  Ascending  to  power  (vers.  9-11).  1.  The  ascension.  The  reception 
of  power  by  the  disciples  depended  upon  His  ascension  (Luke  xxiv.  49 ;  see  also 
Acts  ii.  33  ;  John  xvi.  7).  2.  The  return.  "  Shall  so  come,"  &c.  No  need,  how- 
ever, to  stand  idly  gazing  into  heaven.  Before  He  went,  Christ  gave  "  to  each  one 
his  work"  (Mark  xiii.  34).  Three  watchwords  He  has  given — watch,  pray,  work.  *,^ 
Tlje  harvest  is  hastened  by  cultivation— not  by  counting  the  days  from  the  time  the'^V 
seed  was  sown.  VI.  PRAYrao  for  power  (vers.  12-14).  The  disciples  had  the 
promise  of  power,  "  not  many  days  hence,"  but  they  did  not  wait  in  idleness  for  it 
to  be  fulfilled.  The  promise  is  ours  to-day  as  much  as  then  it  was  the  disciples'. 
Praying,  as  they  did,  a  Pentecost  may  come  to  us  as  certainly  and  as  bounteously 
as  it  came  to  them.  (S.  S.  Times.)  Poioer : — The  Church  to-day  has  many 
things,  but  she  lacks  one  thing — power.  Peter  bade  the  lame  man  rise  and  walk. 
To-day,  Christian  men  say,  "  Gold  and  silver  have  I ;  such  as  I  have  give  I  thee." 
We  buy  crutches  for  cripples,  and  write  apologetics  for  Christianity.  Peter  gave 
strength,  and  the  man  was  an  argument  no  one  could  answer.  I.  We  feel  this 
WANT  OF  power  IN  OUR  OWN  LIVES ;  wc  lack  grip  when  we  seize  a  great  subject,  or  a 
sinning  soul.  This  consciousness  of  weakness  palsies  action,  compels  compromise, 
cautions  delay.  Paul  lived,  yet  no  longer  he  but  Christ  in  him.  We  live,  but  not 
Christ.  When  the  heart  is  weak  in  its  action,  the  members  sui?er,  lack  warmth 
and  vigour ;  all  we  come  in  contact  with,  home,  business,  city,  nation,  feel  our  lack 
of  power ;  children  grow  up  uncontrolled,  business  leans  to  the  side  of  dishonesty, 
government  is  corrupt.  The  type  of  Christianity  of  to-day  is  that  of  the  disciples 
before  Pentecost — "  in  the  temple  praising  and  blessing  God,"  and  intellectually 
busy  about  times  and  seasons.  In  the  business  world  everything  is  quiet ;  men  say 
manufacturing  has  been  overdone  ;  the  mills  have  glutted  the  markets.  So  in  the 
religious  world,  some  tell  us  the  market  is  overstocked  with  creeds  and  denomina- 
tions; there  is  no  call  for  religion.  That  is  not  true;  the  needs  are  as  many  and 
as  real  as  ever.  The  Chur,:h  is  like  a  great  mill  by  the  river  side — machinery,  raw 
material,  market  all  right,  but  the  water-courses  are  dry — the  power  is  wanting.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  the  business  of  Christianity  to  make  a  market,  not  wait  for  one. 
The  Shepherd  sought  the  lost  sheep.  Salt  and  light  are  to  be  aggressive,  making  a 
market.  Plant  a  post ;  you  wouldn't  suppose  there  is  anything  in  the  soil  to  furnish 
a  market,  a  mass-meeting  of  posts  would  decide  there  is  no  call  for  us  here.  Take 
up  the  post  and  plant  a  tree  ;  what  a  commotion  there  is  below  the  surface  ;  the 
rootlets  push  out  in  every  direction  and  lay  hold  of  the  properties  of  the  soil ;  above 
the  soil  buds  broaden  into  leaves,  the  air  is  broken  into  currents  and  eddies,  beasts 
of  the  field  gather  under  the  helpful  shadows,  birds  are  able  to  find  building  sites. 
The  tree  finds  a  market  in  earth  and  air  and  animals.  A  measure  of  meal  finds 
no  market ;  a  handful  of  leaven  makes  one.  We  are  not  simply  to  be  stirred  up 
and  mixed  with  the  world,  as  lifeless  and  dry  as  others,  but  are  to  carry  leavening 
power  with  us.  An  iron  post  placed  in  a  public  park  does  not  disperse  darkness. 
String  the  electric  wire  across  it,  fix  the  carbon  points,  now  it  is  a  fountain  of  light. 
•'  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world."  Light  compels  recognition,  all  hail  it,  it  meets  a 
need.  The  first  sign  of  power  in  the  tree  is  life  in  itself,  in  the  post,  of  light  on 
itself;  the  first  proof  of  power  in  a  disciple  is  power  over  himself.  From  this 
nerve-centre  of  self  the  power  thrills  along  the  family,  and  business  and  body  politic. 
The  word  power,  dunamis,  carries  the  thought ;  from  the  word  comes  dynamics, 
the  science  of  moving  forces.  Another  word  comes  in  here  too — dynamite.  A 
glance  at  the  family  of  words  will  show  us  what  is  bound  up  in  the  promise.  In  a 
Wesleyan  chapel  a  mighty  revival  was  in  progress.  A  visitor  scandalised  by  the 
pxcitement  rebuked  the  zealous  Weslcyans,  saying,  "  This  is  all  wrong.  When 
Solomon  built  his  temple  there  was  heard  neither  the  sound  of  hammer,  nor  saw, 
nor  chisel.  You  make  too  much  noise  here."  The  preacher  made  reply,  "  Oh,  but 
we  ain't  building,  we  are  blasting."  The  preacher  was  right ;  he  was  using  dyna- 
mite, destroying  the  kingdom  of  darkness.  Oh  for  the  promised  dynamite  of  the 
Ho!y  Sjiirit  1  II.  This  power  has  its  source  outside  the  Church  and  human  life. 
"Ye  shall  receive  power";  not  generate  it,  nor  attain  to  it  by  straining  present 
powers,  or  enlarging  present  capacities.  We  cannot  whip  ourselves  into  a  state  of 
power,  as  thongli  we  were  eggs,  strike  the  fire  from  ourselves  by  any  flint  and  steel 
arrangement,  lift  ourselves  into  it  by  force  of  will,  educate  ourselves  into  it  by  culture 
of  heart  or  head.  HI.  The  conditions  of  realising  the  power.  The  great  dis- 
covery of  modern  science  is  law.     By  the  study  of  phenomena  we  learn  the  law,  by 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  41 

obeying  the  law  we  control  phenomena.  Studying  the  api^earance  of  the  Spirit,  the 
conditions  of  the  appearance,  we  can  learn  the  law  of  His  appearing;  conforming 
to  the  law  thus  learned  we  can  receive  the  power.  There  are  two  instances  of  His 
appearing  of  special  interest ;  1.  W'hen  Christ  received  tbe  Holy  Ghost.  Christ 
stands  unique  in  His  power.  His  thoughts  give  life  to  every  language  embodying 
them ;  His  teachings  transform  every  character  embracing  them.  All  this  is  true 
of  Him  after  the  Spirit  came  upon  Him,  not  before.  John  Baptist  knew  Him  not 
until  he  saw  the  Spirit  descending.  Two  simple  facts  give  us  the  key :  Obedience 
and  prayer.  When  John  rebuked  Him,  He  replied,  "  Thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil 
all  righteousness."  "  Jesus  also  being  baptised  and  praying,  the  heaven  was  opened, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  descended."  2.  In  the  ease  of  the  disciples  we  read  that  Christ 
commanded,  "Tarry  ye  in  Jerusalem,"  and  they  obeyed;  and  "all  continued  in 
prayer  and  supplication."  Then  when  Pentecost  came  they  were  all  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Here  we  touch  a  law  of  nature  as  well  as  of  spiritual  power.  He  who 
obeys  known  law  and  communes  with  nature,  masters  her  secrets.  In  the  home  the 
obedient,  sympathetic  child  has  power  given  it  by  the  parents.  In  your  stores  the 
clerk  who  obeys  and  communes  with  you  is  the  one  to  whom  you  give  power.  To 
the  obedient  and  prayerful  now  as  truly  as  then,  will  the  Holy  Ghost  be  given,  and 
after  that  power  will  come.  IV.  When  the  poweb  comes  it  mdst  use  us.  Christ 
is  driven  into  the  desert,  and  the  disciples  are  scattered,  sown  broadcast  in  the 
wait  ng  world-field  of  thought  and  action.  Simon  Magus  offered  money  for  Peter's 
power.  We  cannot  control  this  power ;  it  must  control  us,  (0.  P.  Gifford.)  The 
might  of  the  gospel : — The  gospel  is  a  mighty  engine,  but  only  mighty  when  God 
has  the  working  of  it.  [T.  Adams.)  Christianity  diffused  by  the  apostles  : — How 
wonderful  is  God,  in  that  He  can  accomplish  great  ends  by  insignificant  means  ! 
Christianity,  for  example,  diffused  through  the  instrumentality  of  twelve  legion  of 
angels,  would  have  been  immeasurably  inferior  as  a  trophy  of  omnipotence,  to 
Christianity  diffused  through  the  instrumentality  of  twelve  apostles.  When  I 
Burvey  tbe  heavens,  with  their  glorious  troop  of  stars,  and  am  told  that  the  Almighty 
employs  to  His  own  majestic  ends  the  glittering  hosts,  as  they  pursue  their  ever- 
lasting march,  I  experience  uo  surprise ;  I  seem  to  feel  as  though  the  spangled 
firmament  were  worthy  of  being  employed  by  the  Creator ;  and  I  expect  a  magnifi- 
cent consummation  from  so  magnificent  an  instrumentality.  But  show  me  a  tiny 
insect,  just  floating  in  the  breeze,  and  tell  me  that,  by  and  through  that  insect,  God 
will  carry  forward  the  largest  and  most  stupendous  of  His  i^urposes,  and  I  am  indeed 
filled  with  amazement;  I  cannot  sufficiently  admire  a  Being  who,  throut-'h  that 
which  I  could  crush  with  a  breath,  advances  what  I  cannot  measure  with  thought. 
{H.  Melvill.)  Power  indescribable  but  appreciable : — All  power  is  indescribable, 
but  at  the  same  time  appreciable.  What  it  is,  where  it  is,  how  it  came,  where  it 
goes,  its  measure,  movement,  nature,  form,  or  essence,  no  human  skill  can  discover. 
We  may  ask  the  sunbeam  which  has  such  power  to  fly  and  to  illuminate,  the  light- 
ning which  has  such  power  to  scathe,  the  dew-dr<ip  that  has  power  to  refresh,  the 
magnet,  the  fire,  the  steam,  the  eye  that  can  see,  the  ear  that  can  hear,  the  nerve 
that  can  convey  the  messages  of  will,  we  may  ask  all  the  agents  we  see  exerting 
power  to  render  us  an  account  each  of  its  own  power,  and  all  will  be  dumb.  Not 
the  cannon  ball  on  its  flight,  or  the  lion  in  his  triumph,  not  the  tempest  or  the  sea, 
not  even  pestilence  itself,  can  tell  us  what  is  power.  If  we  ask  Death  who  has  put 
all  things  under  his  feet,  even  he  has  no  reply  ;  and  after  we  have  passed  the  ques- 
tion, "  What  is  power  ?  "  round  a  mate  universe,  we  must  say,  "  God  has  spoken 
once,  yea,  twice  have  I  heard  this,  that  power  belongeth  unto  God,"  Yet  power,  in 
itself  so  hidden  and  indescribable,  is  ever  manifest  by  its  effects.  An  effect  demon- 
strates the  presence  of  a  power.  Where  gunpowder  explodes,  there  must  have  been 
fire  ;  where  water  shoots  up  through  the  atmosphere  in  steam,  there  must  have 
been  heat;  where  iron  moves  without  mechanical  force,  a  magnet  must  be ;  and 
the  absence  of  the  effect  is  conclusive  evidence  of  the  absence  of  the  power  from 
which  the  effect  would  have  followed.  The  intellect  at  once  recognises  the  presence 
of  intellectual  power.  The  feelings,  also,  faithfully  tell  whenever  an  emotional 
power  is  brought  to  bear  upon  them;  and  no  less  surely  does  the  conscience  of  a 
man  feel  when  a  moral  power  comes  acting  upon  it.  {W.  Arthur,  M.A.)  Power 
Inot  in  meclianismbut  in  fire: — Suppose  we  saw  an  army  sitting  down  before  a 
I  granite  fort,  and  they  told  us  that  they  intended  to  batter  it  down  :  we  might  ask 
them,  "How?"  They  point  to  a  cannon-ball.  Well,  but  there  is  no  power  in 
tliat;  it  is  heavy,  but  not  more  than  perhaps  a  hundred  weight :  if  all  the  men  in 
the  army  hurled  it  against  the  fort,  they  would  make  no  impression.     They  say, 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  i. 

'  "  No ;  but  look  at  the  cannon."  Well,  there  is  no  power  in  that.  A  boy  may  ride 
upon  it,  a  bird  may  perch  in  its  mouth  ;  it  is  a  machine  and  nothing  more,  "But 
I  look  at  the  powder."  Well,  there  is  no  power  in  that;  a  child  may  spill  it,  a 
isparrow  may  peck  it.  Yet  this  powerless  powder,  and  powerless  ball,  are  put  into 
the  powerless  cannon  ;  one  spark  of  fire  enters  ;  and  then,  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye,  that  powder  is  a  flash  of  lightning,  and  that  ball  a  thunderbolt.  (Ibid.) 
Prayer  the  means  of  obtaining  sjnritual  power  : — When  John  in  the  Apocalypse  saw 
the  Lamb  on  the  throne,  before  that  throne  were  the  seven  lamps  of  fire  burning, 
"  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth  "  ;  and  it  is  only 
by  waiting  before  that  throne  of  grace  that  we  become  imbued  with  the  holy  tire. 
When  a  lecturer  on  electricity  wants  to  show  an  example  of  a  human  body  sur- 
char^ied  with  his  fire,  he  places  a  person  on  a  stool  with  glass  legs.  The  glass 
serves  to  isolate  him  from  the  earth,  because  it  will  not  conduct  the  electric  fluid ; 
■were  it  not  for  this,  however  much  might  be  poured  into  his  frame,  it  would  be 
carried  away  by  the  earth ;  but,  when  thus  isolated  from  it,  he  retains  all  that  enters 
him.  You  see  no  fire,  you  hear  no  fire  ;  but  you  are  told  that  it  is  pouring  into 
him.  Presently  you  are  challenged  to  the  proof — asked  to  come  near,  and  hold 
your  hand  close  to  his  person  ;  when  you  do  so,  a  spark  of  fire  shoots  out  towards 
you.  If  thou,  then,  wouldst  have  thy  soul  surcharged  with  the  fire  of  God,  so  that 
those  who  come  nigh  to  thee  shall  feel  some  mvsterious  influence  proceeding  out 
from  thee,  thou  must  draw  nigh  to  the  source  of  that  fire,  to  the  throne  of  God  and 
of  the  Lamb,  and  shut  thyself  out  from  the  world.  As  this  is  the  only  way  for  an 
individual  to  obtain  spiritual  power,  so  is  it  the  only  way  for  churches.  (Ibid.) 
Spiritual  power  recognised  : — Often  when  I  have  had  doubts  suggested  by  the  infidel 
I  have  been  able  to  fling  them  to  the  winds  with  utter  scorn  because  I  am  distinctly 
conscious  of  a  power  working  upon  me  when  I  am  speaking  in  the  n  ame  of  the  Lord, 
infinitely  transcending  any  personal  power  of  fluency,  and  far  surpassing  any  energy 
derived  from  excitement  such  as  I  have  felt  when  delivering  a  secular  lecture  or 
making  a  speech — so  utterly  distinct  from  such  power  that  I  am  quite  certain  it  is 
not  of  the  same  order  or  class  as  the  enthusiasm  of  the  politician  or  the  glow  of  the 
orator.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Natural  gift  no  substitute  for  spiritual  power: — No 
natural  gift  can  sufiice,  and  when  any  men  have  the  power  of  God,  failure  is  im- 
possible. Yet  do  not  let  us  suppose  there  is  no  room  for  gifts.  If  some  people 
make  the  Cross  of  Christ  of  none  effect  through  wisdom  of  words,  others  make  it  of 
none  effect  through  lack  of  wisdom.  There  are  some  persons  who  put  dulness  for 
piety.  Of  the  wise  man  we  read  that  he  "  sought  to  find  out  acceptable  words  " — 
"  words  of  delight,"  as  it  is  literally.  And  of  a  greater  than  Solomon  it  is  recorded 
that  the  people  heard  him  gladly.  Christianity  invites  and  consecrates  every  gift 
of  God  and  every  grace  and  art  of  which  man  is  capable.  There  is  room  for  money, 
enterprise,  methods,  learning,  and  genius.  All  gifts  are  good  when  they  are  lost  in 
the  great  purpose  of  the  gospel ;  but  any  gifts  are  perilous,  just  in  proportion  as 
preacher  or  people  are  conscious  of  them.  In  a  sham  fight  everybody  admires  the 
uniforms,  the  music,  the  horses,  the  precision  of  the  march.  But  in  a  real  fight 
there  is  a  desperate  earnestness  that  cannot  stay  to  admire  any  thing — that  just  girds 
itself  up  for  death  or  victory.  If  there  be  the  intensity,  the  downright  earnestness, 
the  baptism  of  fire,  which  longs  to  make  Christ  the  conqueror,  then  the  more  gifts 
the  better.  But  if  that  baptism  be  lacking,  gifts  are  a  peril  and  a  snare,  (il/.  G.  Pearse.) 
The  reception  of  spiritual  poiver : — I  was  in  the  train  some  time  ago,  and  was  think- 
ing of  this  higher  life,  and  it  seemed  so  bright  and  beautiful — like  a  star  far  above 
me — and  my  eye  fell  on  the  word  "  receive,"  and  I  saw  it  was  not  my  climbing  up 
but  the  Lord  coming  down.  It  was  early  spring,  and  as  we  stopped  at  a  station  it  was 
raining,  and  I  noticed  a  little  cottage  where  an  old  woman  had  put  out  a  pitcher  to 
catch  the  water,  and  it  was  filled  to  the  brim  ;  I  said  to  myself,  "  My  poor  heart  can 
never  make  a  garden  for  my  Lord,  but  at  least  He  can  take  my  broken  pitcher  of  a 
heart  and  fill  it  abundantly."  "  Ye  shall  receive  power."  Do  you  see  that  this  is 
His  purpose?  Then  surrender  yourself.  (Ibid.)  The  pleasure  of  realised 
power: — There  are  few  things  more  pleasant  than  to  work  with  power.  A  little 
child  balancing  itself  upon  its  tiny  feet  and  running  alone,  a  schoolboy  making  the 
treasures  of  knowledge  his  own,  a  lad  learning  a  trade  easily  and  yet  accurately,  a 
tradesman  conducting  an  extensive  concern  with  complete  system  and  perfect  order, 
an  artist  colouring  canvas  or  chiselling  marble,  a  man  of  letters  writing  books  that 
shah  never  die,  a  man  of  science  unlocking  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge, 
an  orator  taking  captive  by  his  words  the  eyes,  ears,  thoughts,  and  souls  of  a  multi- 
tude of  hearers,  diplomatists  and  politicians  ai'ousing  and  hushing  the  voice  of  the 


^ 


CHAP.  I,]  THE  ACTS.  43 

people  and  turning  the  hearts  of  princes  whither  they  will,  the  commander  leading 
a  fleet  or  an  army  to  victory,  are  illustrations  of  working  power,  upon  which  we 
cannot  look  without  interest,  and  of  which  we  cannot  speak  without  excitement. 
And  as  more  power  is  needed  to  deliver  than  to  direct,  to  redeem  than  to  sustain,  we 
look  with  greater  interest  upon  the  physician  healing  sickness,  and  upon  the  surgeon 
removing  diseased  flesh  or  bone.  It  is  a  glorious  sight,  power  employed  to  save  ! 
A  fireman  entering  a  burning  dwelling  and  plucking  the  sleeping  inmates  from  the 
flames,  even  the  water-dog  snatching  a  child  from  a  watery  grave,  are  great  and 
glorious  illustrations  of  power  put  forth  for  salvation — but  a  greater  than  these,  a 
greater  than  all,  is  here.  (<S'.  Martin.)  Power  from  on  high: — Let  us  look  upon 
the  subject — I.  On  its  negative  side.  It  is  not — 1.  Physical  power.  Current 
literature  speaks  of  "muscular  Christianity";  but  that  is  not  the  Christianity 
of  the  New  Testament.  Subsequently,  men  thought  they  could  assist  the 
gospel  by  bringing  it  into  alliance  with  political  organisations.  But  no.  Perse- 
cutions never  made  saints  yet.  The  axe  can  never  infuse  new  life  into  the 
tree.  But  the  spring  can.  2.  Miraculous  power.  They  were  already  endued 
with  this.  But  this  cannot  save  men.  Men  saw  Jesus  performing  miracles,  and 
still  remained  in  their  unbelief.  3.  The  power  of  eloquence.  I  have  seen, 
under  powerful  sermons,  stout-hearted  sinners  weep  and  pray,  but  when  the  elec- 
tric current  which  flowed  from  the  preacher  subsided,  they  fell  back  to  their  former 
torpor.  Mauy  so-called  revivals  are  but  electric  shocks  disturbing  the  dead,  but 
leaving  them  dead  notwithstanding.  Eloquence,  like  the  wind,  moves  the  sea  from 
without,  but  that  which  saves  must  move  it  from  its  own  depths.  Eloquence  works 
upon  the  soul ;  that  which  saves  must  work  in  the  soul.  One  can  compose  a  ser- 
mon in  which  the  most  critical  hearer  cannot  detect  a  flaw :  but  he  will  forget  it  in 
half  an  hour.  It  is  so  refined  that  it  shoots  right  through  the  soul  instead  of  enter- 
ing into  it  and  remaining  there.  Polish  is  commendable  up  to  the  point  of  showing 
instead  of  concealing  the  material  underneath.  I  never  like  to  see  an  article  of 
furniture  so  highly  polished  that  I  cannot  say  of  what  timber  it  is  made.  4.  The 
power  of  logic.  Conquer  a  man  in  argument,  and,  as  a  rule,  you  only  confirm  him 
in  his  error.  I  saw  a  picture  entitled,  "  Conquered  but  not  Subdued."  The  young 
lad  was  evidently  conquered  by  his  mother.  There  he  stood,  with  his  face  half- 
turned  towards  the  wall :  but  there  was  determination  in  the  mouth,  defiance  in  the 
eye,  auger  in  the  nostrils.  Drive  a  sinner  in  argument  to  a  corner,  so  that  he  can- 
not move,  yet  he  can  sink,  and  sink  he  will  to  his  own  hell.  Sheet-lightnings 
dazzle,  but  never  kill.  And  arguments  after  all  are  only  sheet-lightnings.  5.  The 
power  of  thought.  The  Bible  does  not  claim  superiority  on  account  of  its  ideas, 
although  it  contains  the  sublimest.  You  may  be  the  best  Biblical  scholar  in  the  land, 
and  be  at  last  a  castaway.  The  history  of  preaching  abundantly  proves  this.  Bead  the 
sermon  by  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  it  will  not  astonish  you  with  the  pro- 
fundity of  its  thoughts.  The  sermons  on  the  Mount  and  on  Mars'  hill  stand  higher  on 
the  intellectual  side ;  and  yet  they  made  but  few  converts.  Look  again  from  the  pulpit 
to  books.  Take  the  "  Analogy  "  by  Butler  ;  no  book  perhaps  displays  more  intellectual 
power  ;  yet  who  can  point  to  it  as  the  means  of  bringing  him  to  Jesus  ?  But  read 
the  "  Dairyman's  Daughter,"  or  the  "Anxious  Inquirer,"  without  a  millionth  part 
of  its  mental  power ;  but  there  are  thousands  who  trace  their  conversion  to  these  books. 
I  do  not  wish  to  cast  discredit  on  any  of  these  excellences.  They  are  very  valuable  in 
their  own  places.  If  a  man  is  possessed  of  them  he  can  do  nothing  better  than  con- 
secrate them  on  the  altar  of  Christianity.  But  if  man  is  to  be  saved,  a  new  power  must 
come  to  the  field.  II.  On  its  positive  side.  In  the  Gospel  it  is  called  "  power  from 
on  high."  1.  The  great  want  of  the  world  was  a  power  to  uplift  it  out  of  its  state  of 
degradation  and  sin.  Previous  to  Pentecost  the  world  was  sinking  lower  and  lower 
in  the  scale  uf  morals.  But  since  humanity  has  been  gradually  ascending.  Physi- 
cally we  know  that  this  earth  is  subject  to  the  attraction  of  other  planets.  The 
same  fact  holds  true  spiritually.  There  is  a  power  working  mightily  in  the  children 
of  disobedience,  and  the  source  of  it  is  in  darker  regions  than  our  own.  But  another 
power  has  come  to  the  field,  a  power  from  on  high  ;  the  contest  must  be  long  and 
terrible ;  but  the  higher  power  is  gradually  winning,  and  will  deliver  the  world  from 
the  grasp  of  evil.  Here  it  is  called  "  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  We  often 
picture  God  as  looking  down  pitifully  upon  us  from  His  heaven.  But  we  are  also 
taught  that  the  great  God  has  descended  upon  men,  and  thrown  into  their  hearts 
the  infinite  impulse  of  His  own  eternal  nature.  The  disciples,  as  we  see  them  in  the 
Gospel,  are  cowards  ;  in  the  Acts  they  are  heroes.  The  Christian  life  is  Divine, 
Christianity  is  not  a  remembrance  of  the  supernatural  in  the  past,  but  its  perpetua- 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

tion  throughout  all  ages.  Every  true  ministry  is  heavy  with  supernatural  influences. 
We  do  not  perform  miracles,  but  if  our  ministry  is  not  a  continuation  of  the  super- 
natural in  the  realm  of  matter,  it  is  a  continuation  of  it  in  the  realm  of  mmd  ;  and  of 
the  two,  the  latter  is  the  higher  kind.  Luke  tells  us  that  in  his  Gospel  he  narrated 
what  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  to  teach  ;  here  he  goes  on  to  tell  what  Jesus  con- 
/  tinued  to  do  and  to  teach  through  men ;  and  Church  history  continues  the  tale. 
"  The  works  that  I  do  ye  also  shall  do,"  &c.  2.  What  was  the  effect  of  this  Divine 
baptism  on  the  disciples  ?  (1)  It  made  them  pre-eminently  sj^iritual.  Spirituality 
should  be  the  distinctive  badge  of  every  Christian,  and  especially  of  the  ambassa- 
dors of  Christ.  "  A  bishop  must  be  blameless."  All  well  and  good  if  he  is  learned 
and  eloquent,  but  he  must  be  blameless.  (2)  It  filled  them  with  Divine  enthusiasm, 
with  "  fire."  The  Bible  speaks  much  about  this  fire.  Jeremiah  had  a  message,  but 
having  been  insulted  and  incarcerated,  he  made  up  his  mind  not  to  open  his  mouth 
again.  "  I  said  I  will  not  make  meution  of  Him,  or  speak  any  more  in  His  name." 
Well,  how  did  he  fare  ?  "  His  word  was  in  my  heart  like  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in 
my  bones,  and  I  was  weary  with  forebearing,  and  could  not  stay."  It  was  hard  to 
speak — it  was  harder  to  be  silent.  It  is  difiicult  enough  to  stand  up  here  and 
preach ;  it  would  be  more  difficult  to  sit  down  tbere  and  be  mute.  The  apostles 
evinced  such  fervour  that  many  supposed  they  were  under  the  power  of  .'-trong 
drink.  No,  says  Peter,  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost  working  in  us.  "  The  love  of  Christ 
constraineth  us,"  says  St.  Paul.  Some  dared  to  brand  him  as  a  fanatic.  "Whether 
we  be  beside  ourselves,"  said  he,  "  it  is  to  God,  or  whether  we  be  sober  it  is  for  your 
cause."  The  secret  of  Baxter's  power  was  his  unbounded  enthusiasm.  His  bio- 
grapher says  be  would  have  set  the  world  on  fire  while  another  was  lighting  a 
match.  It  is  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  will  make  men  eloquent.  A  preacher 
in  his  study  ought  to  gather  his  thoughts,  to  collect  his  materials  ;  and  ascending 
the  pulpit,  he  ought  to  set  them  all  ablaze  with  fire  from  off  the  altar.  Havini? 
built  the  altar,  digged  the  trenches,  slain  the  sacrifice,  he  should  join  Elijah  and 
cry,  "  O  God,  send  the  fire,  send  the  fire ! "  3.  What  is  the  effect  upon  the 
congregatioQ  ?  Many  are  turned  to  God.  On  the  consecration  of  the  Temple  of 
Solomon,  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister  by  reason  of  the  cloud ;  much  less 
could  the  people  stand  to  criticise  the  work  of  art,  or  to  admire  the  amount  and 
richness  of  the  gold.  In  the  same  manner  the  power  from  on  high  hides  every- 
thing but  itself.  Many  a  critic  went  to  hear  Whitefield  with  hostile  intentions  ;  but 
in  less  than  five  minutes  they  had  totally  forgotten  their  sinister  art.  (./.  Cynddy- 
lan  Jones,  D.D.)  Power  from  on  hifih : — I.  The  Being  to  be  manifested.  1.  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  represented  as  having  all  the  attributes  of  Deity,  distinct  from,  yet 
united  with,  the  Father  and  the  Son.  This  is  not  sufliciently  dwelt  upon.  In  the 
apostulic  age  there  were  those  who  did  not  "so  much  as  know  whether  there  were 
any  Holy  Ghost."  This  is  not  your  case,  but  it  is  needful  to  remind  you  lest  you 
{should  withhold  from  Him  His  proper  homage.  That  He  is  God  is  matter  of  explicit 
revelation — not  in  the  Arian  or  t-  abellian  sense — not  an  illumination  but  an  essence, 
not  an  influence  but  a  Person.  And  to  the  blasphemers  who  deny  His  Divinity  we  hurl 
the  thunderbolt,  "Ananias,  why  hath  Satan  put  it  into  thy  heart  to  lie  nnto  the 
Holy  Ghost?  Thou  hast  not  lied,"  &c.  2.  It  is  to  the  Spirit,  thus  Divine,  that 
belongs  the  right  of  induction  to  the  holy  ministry  ;  and  however  men  may  place 
their  pretentions  or  trace  their  geneaology  they  are  intruders  without  the  call  and 
unction  of  the  Spirit.  3.  As  the  Spirit  is  thus  the  originating  source,  so  is  His  per- 
petuating grace  the  means  of  success  in  the  ministry.  This  is  everywhere  asserted 
in  the  proj^hets.  "Not  by  might,"  &c.  II.  The  result  of  His  manifestation. 
•'  Ye  shall  receive  power."  1.  The  power  of  God  is  the  attribute  which  is  earliest 
to  impress  the  mind.  It  is  impossible  to  send  the  thought  out  into  the  universe 
without  discovering  its  manifestations.  It  lurks  in  the  minutest  and  is  exhibited  in 
the  mightiest  phenomena.  2.  And  as  it  is  the  earliest,  so  it  is  the  attribute  of 
which  men  are  most  keenly  coveteous.  The  fable  of  Prometheus,  who  made  the 
figure  of  a  man,  and  then  animated  it  with  the  fire  which  he  had  dared  to  steal 
from  heaven,  is  only  a  thinly  veiled  record  of  man's  fierce  ambition  to  create.  Man, 
the  master-mind,  would  stand  in  the  midst  of  the  elements  and  say,  "  Ye  are  vassals : 
work  for  me."  And  it  from  the  world  of  nature  you  pass  up  into  the  world  of 
mind  you  find  the  same  coveteousness  from  the  chdd-dictator  of  the  nursery  to  the 
monarch  of  a  hundred  isles.  Now  as  the  apostles  were  men  of  like  passions  with 
ourselves  they  were  under  the  influence  of  this  desire.  There  was  an  effort  to  re- 
serve seats  on  either  side  of  the  Redeemer  in  His  kingdom  for  tVie  sons  of  Zebedee. 
And  here  was  asked,  "  Lord,  wilt  Thou,"  &c.     Now  this  love  of  power,  as  it  is  an 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS. 


instinct,  is  not  criminal.  The  God  who  implanted  it  had  wise  purposes  in  view. 
The  gospel  does  not  annihilate  a  solitary  passion,  only  it  directs  those  which  were 
vehicles  of  rebellion  into  instruments  of  blessing.  The  Saviour  therefore  hei  e  re- 
bukes unhallowed  curiosity,  but  answers  prayer.  "Ye  shall  receive  power,"  that  is 
■what  you  want  and  ye  shall  have  it.  When  Pentecost  came  they  saw  how  infinitely 
superior  to  all  royalties  was  the  kingdom  they  were  to  establish.  Without  this 
power  the  most  perfect  organisation  and  the  most  exquisite  appliances  are  valueless. 
But  give  us  this  and  the  stammerer  shall  be  an  Apollos,  and  the  stripling  with  the 
sling  and  stone  shall  be  as  an  angel  of  the  Lord.  III.  The  design  of  this  mani- 
festation. 1.  That  the  Church  may  testify  to  the  world.  Power  Divinely  given 
is  to  be  used  for  Divine  ends.  God  imprisons  no  force  in  aimless  bondage.  There 
is  power  in  the  lightning,  but  it  is  not  to  dazzle  but  to  purify.  There  is  power  in 
the  frantic  breaker,  and  in  the  careering  cloud ;  but  they  are  all  true  and  loyal 
servants  in  the  vast  palace  in  which  the  King  of  the  universe  has  lodged  His  favour- 
ite creature  man.  And  as  in  the  physical  so  in  the  moral  sphere.  God's  gifts  are  not 
given  to  be  hoarded,  despised,  or  abused.  Every  endowment  of  mind — the  athle- 
tic reason,  the  lordly  will,  the  creative  fancy,  the  eloquent  utterance,  every  com- 
mnnication  of  grace,  and  every  attainment  of  privilege  are  all  conferred  upon  as 
individually  to  minister  as  the  rest  of  the  universe  ministers.  2.  We  are  witnesses 
for  Jesus.  A  crucified,  risen,  and  exalted  Christ  will  charm  the  heart  of  the  nine- 
teenth as  it  charmed  the  heart  of  the  first  century  ;  and  though  scoffers  deride  it, 
cowards  hesitate  about  it,  and  traitors  betray  it ;  it  is  the  only  testimony  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  will  endorse  with  power.  (W.  M.  Punslwn,  LL.D.)  Poiuer  from  on 
high  : — I.  The  chabactekistics  of  the  Holt  Spirit  in  His  descent  on  the  apostles 
AND  the  Church.  He  was  given  as  a  Spirit  of — 1.  Knowledge  and  understanding. 
Witness  the  change  in  the  apostle's  views  of  Christ's  Messiahshlp  and  death  before 
and  after.  So  now  truth  like  a  transparent  dial  becomes  illuminated.  The  eunuch 
was  perplexed  till  Philip  joined  him.  Compare  one  frequent  expression,  "  I  see." 
2.  Faith.  A  great  difference  between  knowing  and  believing.  A  man  may  come 
and  see,  but  go  away  without  faith.  Not  so  at  Pentecost.  Noah  did  not  stand  out- 
Bide  to  admire  the  ark.  He  entered  in  and  was  safe.  3.  Holiness  and  prayer. 
Holiness  is  separateness  from  the  world  to  God,  More  than  ever  at  Pentecost  the 
disciples  proved  this.  So  now  men  are  holy  in  proportion  as  they  are  endured  with 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  in  proportion  to  their  holiness  will  be  their  power  in  prayer. 
4.  Courage,  The  boldness  of  Peter  was  conspicuous.  And  now  the  Spirit  works 
such  conviction  that  the  most  timid  become  the  most  brave.  II.  The  experiences 
OF  POWER  answering  TO  THEIR  CHARACTERISTICS.  The  power  of — 1.  Witness  for  the 
truth.  A  sense  of  their  sincerity  was  inspired  in  the  hearers.  "  We  believe  and 
therefore  speak."  2.  Steadfastness  in  Christian  life  notwithstanding  human  or 
Satanic  opposition.  They  were  proof  against  tempting  bribes,  seductive  philosophy, 
fierce  persecution.  3.  Great  example.  Men  could  hate,  but  could  not  charge  them 
with  inconsistencies.  On  them  was  imprinted  the  likeness  of  their  Master.  4.  Un- 
tiring zeal.  (G.  McMlchael,  B.A.)  Spiritual  power  for  missionary  work  : — The 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  source  of  all — I.  Spiritual  illumination.  The  Bible,  written  by 
holy  men  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  our  only  standard  of  revealed  truth  ;  but 
even  the  Bible  is  not  enough.  The  spirit  of  scepticism  is  abroad,  and  men  hardly 
know  what  or  what  not  to  believe.  Hence  the  feeble  faith  and  the  shallow  convic- 
tion and  extreme  worldliness  of  the  Church.  But  the  missionary,  as  a  teacher  of  a 
religion  Divine  in  it  origin,  requires  absolutely  the  power  of  clear  vision  and 
deep  conviction.  Doubt  to  him  is  paralysis,  so  it  is  to  every  teacher,  or  woik  be- 
comes a  fruitless,  burdensome  task.  Nor  can  there  be  any  development  of  a  noble, 
manly  Christian  character  without  Divinely  illumined,  soul-transforming  appre- 
hension of  truth.  How,  then,  is  the  Church  to  protect  herself  against  a  noxious 
intellectual  atmosphere,  and  obtain  a  clear  vision  of  Divine  things?  There  can  be 
but  one  answer.  The  Spirit  that  guided  holy  men  of  old  in  recording  Divine 
truths  is  the  same  Spirit  that  reveals  to  the  reader  their  deep  significance.  The 
fully  illuminated  soul  is  beyond  the  re  ich  of  doubt,  for  the  Spirit  so  shows  the 
things  of  Christ  that  the  inward  eye  beholds  them  with  open  vision.  II.  Holiness. 
This  is  a  mighty  and  indispensable  power.  The  ideal  Christian  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment is  a  "  saint,"  and  so  long  as  that  ideal  is  not  embodied  in  the  lives  of  Chris- 
tians, the  progress  of  the  gospel  must  be  slow  and  unsatisfactory.  The  world  must 
be  convinced  that  Christianity  is  a  practical  reality,  and  not  a  mere  system  of  be- 
lief before  it  will  bow  to  its  authority.  Books  on  evidences  are  useful  in  their  way. 
But  few  will  read  them  or  be  convinced  by  them.     The  one  argument  that  wiU. 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTIiATOR.  [chap.  i. 

command  attention  is  the  holy  life,  not  of  ancient,  but  of  modern  saints  (Isa.  Ixii. 
1-3).  How  long  are  we  to  wait  for  this  ?  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  wait 
at  all.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Author  of  all  holiness.  III.  Spiritual  unity.  This 
also  is  indispensable  to  evangelisation — not  uniformity,  but  such  unity  in  variety 
that  we  see  in  the  works  of  God.  "There  are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same 
Spirit."  What  does  it  matter  to  the  Chinese  whether  I  am  an  Independent  and 
my  brother  is  an  Episcopalian,  if  we  manifest  the  same  Christ-like  spirit  ?  But 
this  is  only  produced  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  There  is  nothing  more  disastrous  to  mis- 
sionary and  every  form  of  Christian  work  than  the  want  of  unity.  Before  Pentecost 
the  apost'es  had  their  childish  rivalries  and  jealousies ;  but  the  baptism  of  fire 
burned  all  that  out  of  them.  IV.  Spikitual  joy.  There  are  different  kinds  of  joy. 
1.  Natural.  It  may  be  ethical,  inspired  by  an  approving  conscience  ;  or  intellectual, 
springing  from  the  consciousness  of  superior  gifts  and  culture  ;  or  animal,  flowing 
from  a  fulness  of  bodily  health  or  animal  spirits  ;  or  the  joy  of  harvest,  the  result 
of  success  in  worldly  pursuits.  2.  The  unnatural,  which  consists  in  the  exhilara- 
tion produced  by  stimulants.  3.  The  spiritual — the  joy  of  conscious  pardon,  de- 
liverance from  sin,  fulness  of  spiritual  life,  which  flows  from  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Without  this  work  is  a  burden.  An  unspiritual  missionary  must  be  a  joyless  mis- 
sionary, and  a  joyless  missionary  is  a  pitiable  object.  V.  The  power  of  deai-ing 
WITH  S'  'TJLS.  Some  men  are  richly  endowed  with  this.  They  may  or  may  not  be 
profound  thinkers  or  eloquent  speakers,  but  when  they  speak  their  hearers  feel  a 
supernatural  power  grappling  with  them.  VI.  Prayer.  (GrifithJohn.)  The  old 
gospel  ineached  with  -new  npiritual  poiver  : — When  I  was  preaching  at  Farwell  Hall, 
Chicago,  I  never  worked  harder  to  prepare  my  sermons  than  I  did  then.  I 
preached  and  preached  ;  but  it  was  beating  against  the  air.  A  good  woman  used  to 
say,  "  Mr.  Moody,  you  don't  seem  to  have  power  in  your  preaching."  Oh,  my 
dssire  was  that  I  might  have  a  fresh  anointing !  I  requested  this  woman  and  a  few 
others  to  come  and  pray  with  me  every  Friday  at  four  o'clock.  Oh,  how  piteously 
I  prayed  that  God  might  fill  the  empty  vessel !  After  the  fire  in  Chicago,  I  was  in 
New  York,  and  going  into  the  Bank  on  Wall  Street,  it  seemed  as  if  I  felt  a  strange 
and  mighty  power  coming  over  me.  I  went  up  to  the  hotel,  and  there  iu  my  room 
I  wept  before  God,  and  cried,  "Oh,  my  God,  stay  Thy  hand  !  "  He  gave  me  such 
fulness  that  it  seemed  more  than  I  could  contain.  May  God  forgive  me  if  I  should 
seem  to  speak  in  a  boastful  way  ;  but  1  do  not  know  that  I  have  preached  a  sermon 
since  but.  God  has  given  me  some  soul.  I  seem  a  wonder  to  you,  but  I  am  a 
greater  wonder  to  myself.  These  are  the  same  sermons  I  preached  in  Chicago  word 
for  word.  They  are  not  new  sermons  ;  it  is  not  a  new  gospel ;  but  the  old  gospel 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  of  power.      {D.  L.  Moadi/.)  The   Holy   Ghost  awakens 

ability  as  well  as  communicates  a  power : — The  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  powers, 
the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  source  of  power.  I  see  a  man  hungry,  and  I 
give  him  money  :  that  money  is  a  power  to  buy  bread  ;  but  the  hungry  man  is  des- 
titude  through  lack  of  ability  to  earn  his  bread.  I  devote  myself  to  that  man, 
awaken  a  spirit  of  self-dependence  and  self-respect,  arouse  his  dormant  energies, 
quicken  his  whole  nature,  and  lead  him  into  a  path  of  honest  industry,  and  now  I 
have  given  him  not  a  power,  but  power.  An  ignorant  man  applies  to  me  for  en- 
lightenment on  some  particular  subject ;  I  answer  hs  questions,  and  the  knowledge 
I  have  given  him  is  a  power,  but  I  awaken  a  thirst  for  all  knowledge  in  that  man, 
and  I  leid  him  to  fountains  of  information,  and  now  I  have  endowed  him  not 
with  a  power,  but  with  power.  I  see  a  man  timid  and  feeble  in  his  whole  nature, 
I  draw  near  to  him,  I  quiet  his  fears,  awaken  hope  and  inspire  him  with  courage, 
and  he  bee  nies,  under  my  influence,  sanguine  and  brave.  To  this  man  I  give 
no  powers  or  a  power,  but  power.  And  thus,  while  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  endowing 
men  with  knowledge,  wisdom,  ability  to  work  miracles  and  to  speak  with  tongues, 
bestows  paiticular  powers,  by  entering  into  fellowship  with  tliem  He  communicates 
vital  energy  and  general  ability.  Hitherto  the  Hidy  Spirit  had  not  entered  into  full 
fellowship  with  the  spirits  of  men,  but  now  He  is  to  dwell  with  all  Christ's  disciples. 
Now  if  he  who  waiketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise,  if  as  iron  sharpf^neth  iron  so  doth 
the  countenance  of  a  man  his  ftiend,  what  must  be  the  effects  to  Christ's  witnesses 
of  communion  with  the  Holy  Ghost!  (S.  Martin.)  Divine  poiver  to  he  carefully 
transmitted: — Here  at  one  end  is  the  g-eat  fountain  ever  brimming.  Draw  from  it  ever 
so  much,  it  sinks  not  one  hair's-breadth  in  its  pure  basin.  Here,  on  the  other  side, 
is  an  intermittent  flow,  sometimes  in  scanty  driblets,  sometimi  s  in  painful  drops, 
sometimes  more  full  and  free,  on  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness.  Wherefore  these 
jerks  and  spasms  ?   It  must  be  something  stopping  the  pipe.   Yes,  of  course.    God's 


CHiP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  47 

might  is  ever  the  same,  but  our  capacity  of  receiving  and  transmitting  that  might 
varies,  and  with  it  varies  the  energy  with  which  that  unchanging  power  is  exerted 
ni  the  world.  (.-1.  Maclaren,  D.  D.)  Power  in  excess  of  organisation : — Machinery 
saves  manual  toil,  and  multiplies  force.  But  we  may  have  too  heavy  machinery  for 
what  engineers  call  the  boiler  power — too  many  wheels  and  shafts  for  the  steam  we 
have  to  drive  them  with.  What  we  want  is  not  ^,ess  organisation  or  other  sorts  of 
it,  but  more  force.  Latent  power  in  the  Church: — It  is  impossible  to  overestimate, 
or  rather  to  estimate,  the  power  that  lies  latent  in  our  Churches.  We  talk  of  the 
power  latent  in  steam — latent  till  Watt  evoked  its  spirit  from  the  waters,  and  set  the 
giant  to  turn  the  iron  arms  of  machinery.  We  talk  of  the  power  that  was  latent  in 
the  skies  till  science  climbed  their  heights,  and  seizing  the  spirit  of  the  thunder, 
chained  it  to  our  service — abolishing  distance,  outstripping  the  wings  of  time,  and 
flashing  our  thoughts  across  rolling  seas  to  distant  contiueuts.  Yet  what  are  these 
to  the  moral  power  that  lies  asleep  in  the  congregations  of  our  country  and  of  the 
Christian  world  ?  And  why  latent  ?  Because  men  and  women  neither  appreciate  their 
individual  influence,  nor  estimate  aright  their  own  individual  I'espon-ibilities.  They 
cannot  do  everything ;  therefore  they  do  nothing.  They  cannot  blaze  like  a  star, 
and,  therefore,  they  won't  shine  like  a  glow  worm  ;  and  so  they  are  content  that  the 
few  work,  and  that  the  many  look  on.  Not  thus  the  woods  are  clothed  in  green,  but  by 
every  little  leaf  expanding  its  own  form.  Not  thus  are  fields  covered  with  golden  corn, 
but  by  every  stalk  of  gram  ripening  its  own  head.  Not  thus  does  the  coral  reef  rise 
from  the  depths  of  ocean,  but  by  every  little  insect  building  its  own  rocky  cell. 
(T.  Guthrie.)  And  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Me. —  Witnesses  : — Our  Lord  did  not  cut  y/^ 
short  the  apostles'  speculations  to  stop  there  ;  he  gathered  up  the  broken  ends  of  their 
energy  and  fastened  them  to  our  immediate  work.  If  the  planets  were  to  stand  still, 
they  would  be  drawn  into  the  central  fire  and  consumed.  It  is  necessary  to  their 
well-being  that  they  sbould  be  flung  with  all  their  force  on  a  path  of  activity.  So, 
unless  Christians  are  thrown  out  into  a  course  of  vigorous  action,  they  will  be 
drawn  into  an  orbit  so  narrow  that  action  will  be  no  longer  possible.  I.  The 
QUALIFICATION  FOE  THIS  SEKvicE.  1.  Although  the  apostles  were  saved,  they  were  *^ 
not  fit  to  work  any  deliverance  in  the  eaith  by  their  own  wisdom  or  strength. 
Their  demand  for  fire  might  have  consumed  the  adversaries,  but  it  could  not  have 
converted  them.  Wanting  the  Spirit  even  they  were  inclined  to  persecute,  and  for 
the  same  reason  their  self-styled  successors  have  persecuted  in  all  subsequent  times. 
2.  The  Spirit  is  like  the  air.  We  could  not  live  without  air — the  sun  would  not 
warm  ns  but  for  it.  The  sun's  h^at  sustains  life ;  but  the  atmosphere  communi- 
cates that  heat.  The  earth,  again,  is  dependent  for  its  supply  of  water  on  the  air, 
which  obtains  it  from  the  ocean  and  pours  it  on  the  land.  So  the  disciples  in 
every  age  obtain  grace  from  the  Lord  through  the  ministry  of  the  Spirit.  II.  The 
NATURE  OF  THIS  SEBVicE.  1.  Whom  Christ  saves  from  sin  He  employs  in  the  world. 
The  liberated  captive  is  sent  to  fight  against  his  former  master.  Christians  have 
I  need  of  Christ  and  Christ  has  need  of  them.  The  simple  fact  that  they  are  on 
iearth  not  in  heaven  is  proof  that  there  is  something  for  them  to  do  here,  and 
they  are  not  doing  it  they  are  either  no  Christians,  or  Christians  that  grieve  Christ 
'A  broken  limb  hurts  more  than  a  severed  one,  and  Christ  is  hurt  by  those  membersi 
of  His  who  do  not  witness  for  Him.  2.  This  is  an  honourable  but  difficult 
function.  In  tbe  case  of  a  witness  the  real  strain  comes  in  cross-examination. 
You  are  set  down  in  the  market-place  having  lately  worshipped  in  the  house  of 
prayer.  Those  whom  you  meet  know  this,  so  that  there  is  no  need  for  you  to  ^)>^ 
preach.  The  cross-examination  takes  place  here.  It  is  not  now,  what  do  you  ^ 
believe  ?  but  is  yourjifsjimiaialeilt  ?  The  cross-examiner  generally  begins  on  some 
apparently  in<iifferent  theme,  but  the  questions  are  so  linked  to  the  main  subject 
that  if,  in  answering  them,  anything  escapes  which  clashes  with  the  original 
evidence  the  good  confession  of  the  witness  is  thereby  destroyed.  Over-reaching, 
unfairness,  unkindness  to  dependents,  untruth,  evil-speaking,  expose  the  Christian 
profession  to  scorn.  III.  The  sphere.  "  Beginning  at  Jerusalem."  1,  The  charity 
that  will  convert  is  one  that  begins  at  home,  but  does  not  end  there.  If  it  essay  to 
reach  the  heathen  by  leaping  over  many  ranks  of  unslain  enemies  in  our  own 
hearts,  and  of  blasphemers  in  our  own  streets,  it  will  never  reach  its  mark,  or  reach 
it  with  a  force  already  spent.  The  gospel  is  like  a  fire  ;  it  must  be  out ;  but  like 
light  and  heat  it  cannot  reach  the  distant  circumference  without  passing  through 
the  intermediate  space  and  kindling  all  that  it  touches  on  its  way.  Unless  our  love 
greatly  disturb  a  godless  neighbourhood  at  home,  it  will  not  set  on  fire  a  distant 
continent.      2.    Besides,  while  a    great    mass  of  our   home   community    remain 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAP.  t. 

unchristian,  specimens  of  our  population,  cast  up  in  foreign  lands  like  drift-wood, 
will  counteract  missionary  effort.  A  preacher  with  the  pure  gospel  will  not  influ- 
ence much  tlie  native  mind  if  followed  by  a  fellow-countryman  with  poisoned  rum. 
(W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Ni'cessary  variety  anong  the  apostles : — Because  Christ  Him- 
self was  so  truly  and  deeply  the  Wonderful,  it  was  necessary  that  His  witnesses, 
who  were  also  to  be  the  future  organs  of  His  Spirit,  should  be  men  of  broadly 
varied  nature — not  copies  one  of  another,  like  images  of  clay  cast  in  kindred  mould, 
but  differing  in  mental  constitution,  experience,  spiritual  affinities,  and  faculty  of 
vision.  No  single  man  could  take  in  His  whole  image,  or  apprehend,  in  its  com- 
pleteness, unity,  and  infinite  reaches  of  application,  the  truth  revealed  in  Him ; 
and  therefore  the  "  chosen  witnesses "  were  many  and  many-natured.  And 
further,  as  no  single  flower  can  show  forth  all  that  is  in  the  sun — as  it  takes  the 
whole  bloom  of  the  year  to  do  so,  from  the  first  snowdrop  that  pierces  the  dark 
earth  to  the  latest  flower  of  autumn — so  He  needed  them  all  for  the  adequate 
forthtelling  of  His  holy  personality.  (J.  Culross.)  Witnesses  for  Christ : — ■ 
I.  All  Cheistians  are  appointed  to  be  Christ's  witnesses.  These  words 
were  spoken  to  the  Church,  not  merely  to  eleven  members  of  it.  You  are  all 
subpoenaed  to  appear,  and  must  all  be  ready  when  you  are  wanted  to  depose.  II. 
Christians  are  made  Christ's  witnesses  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Any  poor  weakling  might  say,  "la  witness  1  I  cannot  speak,  I  am  a  child  !  "  or 
like  the  poor  woman,  "  I  could  die  for  Christ,  but  I  cannot  speak  for  Him.''  He 
might  say,  "I  shall  be  puzzled,  contradict  myself,  not  hold  out  all  through  the 
cruel  cross-examination;  besides,  I  am  nobody,  who  will  take  notice  what  I  say?  " 
But  our  loving  Master,  to  still  this  trepidation,  has  left  to  each  witness,  the  promise 
of  necessary  power.  But  power  is  of  various  kinds,  and  this  is  not  of  the  kind  that  you, 
perhaps,  think  necessary.  There  is  physical  power,  the  power  of  knowledge,  and  the 
power  of  wealth,  and  rank  ;  these  would,  you  think,  help  to  make  you  influential  wit- 
nesses. But  its  most  influential  witnesses  have  been  totally  without  these.  Instead, 
He  gives  the  power  of  faith,  love,  prayer,  courage,  all  powers  in  one,  in  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Let  me  but  have  the  Holy  Ghost  helping  me  to  realise  the  life  of  Christ  y^ 
in  my  hfe,  and  I  am  unconquerable,  for  who  can  resist  God  ?  III.  All  Christians  ^ 
are  Christ's  witnessfs  to  tell  what  they  personally  know  about  Him.  Your 
mission  is  to  speak  "  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth."  If 
you  only  tell  what  another  man  knows,  and  so  merely  circulate  second-hand  im- 
pressions, you  may  stand  down,  for  these  things  are  not  evidence.  Not  as  echoes, 
reflectors,  copying  machines,  are  you  worth  anything,  but  simply  as  yourselves. 
The  first  disciples  had  to  give  out  from  their  own  personal  knowledge  information 
of  those  facts  respecting  Christ  on  which  all  the  saving  value  of  the  Cross  depends, 
and  the  truth  of  their  testimony  has  passed  successfully  through  the  test  of  the 
most  suhtle  and  searching  cross-examination.  No  more  evidence  is  wanted  as  to 
these  facts  ;  but  we,  the  successors  of  these  same  witnesses,  being  under  the  same 
law,  have,  on  the  same  principle,  to  tell  all  the  truth  that  we  personally  know  of 
"  this  same  Jesus."  The  world  says  in  a  thousand  ways  to  each  one  of  us  :  "  What 
has  He  done  for  you?"  "Do  you  know  Him?"  Yes.  "Is  He  real?"  Yes. 
"  Where  does  He  live  ?  "  With  me.  "  When  did  you  speak  to  Him  last  ?  "  Just 
now.  "When  did  you  meet  Him  first?"  Many  a  long  year  ago.  Oh  1  "I  know 
whom  I  have  believed,"  and  He  knows  me.  One  of  the  later  Puritans  was  one  day 
catechising  a  row  of  \oung  disciples.  When  they  had  answered  the  question  on 
"Effectual  Culling,"  he  said,  "Stop;  can  any  one  say  this,  using  the  personal, 
pronoun  all  throngh  ?"  Then  with  sobbing,  broken  breath,  a  man  stood  up  and 
said  :  "  Effectual  calling  is  the  work  of  God's  own  Spirit,  whereby  convincing  me  I 
of  my  sin  and  misery,  enlightening  my  mind  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and! 
renewing  my  will,  He  doth  enable  and  persuade  me  to  embrace  Jesus  Christ  freely' 
offered  to  me  in  the  gospel."  Let  but  each  Christian  personally,  and  from  his 
\  heart  say  the  same,  then  "  One  will  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  will  put  ten 
thousand  to  flight,"  and  one  single  congregation  would  have  in  it  the  life  to  shake 
London.  IV.  We  are  witnesses  for  the  purpose  of  repeating  the  words 
which  we  believe  Christ  has  spoken.  The  witness  does  not  make  the  message 
any  more  than  the  telegraphic  wire  makes  the  telegram ;  all  he  has  to  do  is  to 
transmit  it  in  its  integiity.  V.  We  are  to  be  Christ's  witnesses,  not  only  by 
WHAT  WE  SAY,  BUT  BY  WHAT  WE  ARE.  What  are  you  ?  If  you  are  only  a  ceremony, 
or  an  insipid  imitation,  or  a  manufactured  article  ;  if  some  man  of  the  world  with 
whom  you  do  business  can  show  some  excuse  for  saying  of  you,  "  That  a  Christian  1 
it  needs  no  Christ  to  make  a  Christian  like  that, — I  could  make  as  good  a  Christian 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  49 

myself,  any  day  1  "  then,  whatever  you  are,  you  are  of  no  use  to  a  "  Christian  i 
I  Evidence  Society."    A  good  farm  is  the  best  witness  to  a  farmer;  a  good  painting  " 
1  to  an  artist ;  a  good  book  to  the  author ;  cures  are  the  best  witnesses  to  doctors ;  and 
IChrist's  cures,  His  miracles  wrought  in  souls,  are  His  most  effective  witnesses.     It 
us  but  fair  and  reasonable  to  expect  that  His  people  should  bear  this  kind  of  witness. 
VI.  Christians  ake  to  witness  by  veebally  preaching  the  gospel.     Preach  in 
the  house,  in  the  nursery,  in  the  schoolroom :  all  who  can.     Preach  as  Brownlow 
North  was  said  to  preach,  like  one  who  had  just  escaped  from  a  sacked  and  burning 
city,  his  ear  still  stung  with  the  yell  of  the  dying  and  the  roar  of  the  flame ;  his  ' 
heart  full  of  gratitude  at  the  thought  of  his  own  wonderful  escaiae.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  ] 
The  Church's  work  and  power  : — I.  The  work  of  the  Church.     "Ye  shall  be  My 
witnesses."    A  witness  is  one  who  knows,  and  who  is  summoned  to  tell  what  he 
knows.     The  first  preachers  of  the  gospel  had  personal  knowledge  of  all  the  facts  I 
to  which  they  were  called  to  bear  witness.     They  had  been  with  Christ  from  the 
beginning,  and  so  could  witness  to  His  life,  His   death.  His  resurrection  and 
ascension.     That  was  their  business,  and,  with  certain  modifications  in  form,  it  is 
ours  to-day.    All  the  truth  that  we  personally  know  of  "  this  same  Jesus  "  we  are 
under  an  obUgation  to  tell.     1.  What,  then,  is  the  manner  of  testimony  that  de- 
volves upon  us  ?     In  the  first  place,  we  are  to  witness  by  our  lives.     On  this  living 
witness  Cbrist  depends  in  a  very  serious  and  important  way.    Professing  Christians 
are,  in  fact,  the  only  Bible  that  the  majority  of  unconverted  people  read.     You  see; 
then,  how  much  depends  upon  the  testimony  of  our  lives.     Let  Christ  Himself  be 
seen  in  them — let  them  exhibit  the  magnetic  power  of  the  Cross — let  them  manifest 
His  spirit.  His  love,  His  deep  compassion  for  men  in  their  misery,  and  His  readi- 
ness to  help  and  save  them,  and  through  them,  without  word  or  deed,  prejudice 
will  be  melted  down,  hatred  will  be  subdued,  and  men  and  women  will  be  won  to 
hght  and  love.     2,  Let  me  now  call  attention  to  another  department  of  testimony 
which  belongs  to  every  one  of  us — the  witness  of  personal  expaiience.     "  You  call 
yourself  a  Christian.    What  is  Christ  to  you  ?.     Is  He  to  you  a  real  Saviour, . 
Brother,  Helper,  and  Comforter?  "     You  need  no  eloquence,  no  genius,  no  Intel- 1 
lectual  grasp  of  the  doctrinal  side  of  Christian  truth,  to  go  to  a  brother  and  say,JI  • 
"  I  have  found  Christ  to  be  the  Bread  of  Life  to  my  soul,  will  you  not  help  your-|')\^ 
self?  "     You  need  nothing,  except  honesty  and  experience.     If  you  have  these,  go*  ' 
•and  bear  witness.     And  then,  still  further,  let  me  remind  you  that  if,  having  the 
facts  to  attest,  you  can  go,  you  ought  to  go.     You  are  under  an  obligation  to  make 
known  to  others  what  Christ  has  done  for  your  soul.     You  have  received  His  grace 
that  you  may  share  it  with  others,  and  not  that  you  may  go  by  yourselves  into  a, 
solitary  heaven.     II.    The   power   which  the  witnesses  need  for  their  work. 
They  need  such  power  as  is  received  in  splendid  measure,  when  the  heart  is  opened 
widely  to  receive  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  His  presence  is  prized  and  enjoyed,  and 
duty's  commands  are  joyfully  fulfilled.     The  apostles  needed  this  power.     No  doubt 
they  were  new  creatures  in  Christ.     They  loved  and  served  Plim.     But  if   you 
consider  the  mistakes  that  they  made  regarding  Christ's  kingdom,  their  prejudices, 
their  fears,  the  shock  which  they  had  received,  and  the  pani(^into  which  they  had 
been  thrown  by  Christ's  death,  you  will  admit  that  they  were  not  fit,  as  they 
afterwards  were,  to  found  the  Church.     "Ye  shall  receive  power,"  and  power  did 
they  receive.    For,  mark  that  strong  unwavering  faith  which  lifted  them  out  of 
the  dark  valley  of  speculation  and  doubt,  and  so  laid  hold  of  the  truth  to  which 
they  were  testifying  that  it  possessed  their  souls  and  controlled  their  lives.     Mark 
that  growing  love  to  Christ  which  kindled  the  flame  of  holy  devotion  in  their 
hearts,  and  made  them  forget   themselves  in  their   daily  efforts  to   exalt  and 
honour  Him.     Mark  their  enthusiasm  for  Him   and  His  cause,  their  splendid 
courage,  their  loyalty  to  truth,  and  that  singleness  of  purpose  which  governed  all 
their  thoughts  and  actions.     The  power  which  the  first  witnesses  needed  is  just  the 
power  we  need  to-day.     Is  it  possible  to  deny  this  ?     Many  hard  things  are  said 
against  the  Christianity  of  the  present  day,  with  which  I  have  no  sympathy,  but  I 
fear  this  much  must  be  granted,  that  it  is  sadly  lacking  in  power.    Its  vital  truths 
are  accepted  by  many  who  do  not  practise  what  they  profess  to  believe.     Men  go 
over  the  points  of  their  faith,  and  having  assured  themselves  that  they  are  sound, 
they  never  trouble  themselves  with  the  question,  "  What  does  it  all  come  to  in  the 
matter  of  character?  "    They  believe  only  in  a  kind  of  way,  for  men  believe  truly 
only  what  they  practise.     Is  it  not  a  sad  fact  that  there  is  so  much  of  that 
Caristianity  among  us  that  does  not  shine  with  the  beauty  of  holiness — that  never 
attempts  a  great  achievement,  that  has  no  emotions  to  express,  and  that  allowa. 
VOL.    I.  _  4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

men  and  women  to  live  without  caring  a  broken  straw  for  the  soul  of  anybody?  If 
it  is — and  you  know  it  it — do  we  not  need  a  liaptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit?  Let  Him 
enter  our  hearts  as  the  Spirit  of  power,  and  then  shall  we  not  only  bear  witness  for 
our  exalted  Lord,  but  be  His  witnesses.  We  shall  he  what  every  Christian  is  meant 
to  be — the  strongest  argument  for  Christ  that  exists.  By  being  what  Christ  was, 
and  by  doing  what  Christ  did,  we  shall  bear  witness  to  the  fact  that  He  lives  and 
reigns  in  the  hearts  of  men  and  women  whom  He  hts  redeemed  by  His  blood. 
{Jas.  Cameron,  M.A.)  Witne'^ses  for  Christ : — I.  Our  Lokd  Himself  is  the  glorious 
REALITY  TO  WHICH  His  SERVANTS  ARE  TO  BEAR  THEIR  WITNESS.  Witnesses  unto  Me  I 
"  Others  might  witness  to  My  miracles,  they  were  wrought  in  the  face  of  day  ; 
others  might  repeat  My  discourses,  '  spoken  in  the  temple,'  and  you,  in  witnessing  to 
Me,  will  witness  to  them  likewise  ;  but  they  are  but  the  rays  which  prdceed  from  My- 
self, and  it  is  to  this  and  to  all  that  this  implies,  that  I  bid  you  witness."  Contrast  this 
with  what  we  should  expect  from  a  great  man.  We  should  expect  him  to  tell  us 
that  his  endowments  or  achievements  were  the  unmerited  gift  of  heaven.  If  he 
should  claim  honour  for  himself,  then  our  good  opinion  would  be  outraged,  and  we 
should  proclaim  him  unworthy  of  His  greatness.  Our  Lord  defies  this  rule  and  the 
conscience  of  mankind  justifies  Him  in  dsfying  it.  He  who  could  say,  "  Which  of 
you  convinceth  Me  of  sin  ?  "  "I  and  the  Father  are  one,"  could  truly  feel  that  it 
was  impossible  for  Him  to  eclipse  any  higher  greatness  by  drawing  attention  to 
Himself.  His  words  and  works  were  His  own.  As  God,  He  was  the  author  of  the 
gifts  which  He  received  as  Man.  And  therefore  He  thought  it  not  robbery  to  draw 
the  eyes  of  men  away  from  the  miracles  and  words  to  Himself,  who  gave  their 
greatness  to  both.  II.  How  can  we  bear  witness  to  a  person  ?  We  can  witness 
to  that  which  we  know,  a  miracle  or  sermon  ;  but  how  can  we  know  so  impalpable 
a  thing  as  a  person  ?  especially  how  can  we  witness  to  a  superhuman  person  ?  1. 
But  let  me  ask,  can  we  be  witnesses  to  each  other  ?  Yes,  for  we  can  know  each 
other.  Not  merely  the  form  and  colour  of  the  body  or  features,  but  that  which 
gives  to  features  and  to  form  their  interest,  the  soul.  We  cannot,  indeed,  see 
the  soul  with  the  eye  o^  the  body.  But  with  the  eye  of  the  mind  we  can  see  it,  and 
form  a  very  clear  conception  of  it,  which  we  call  "  character."  (1)  When  a  man 
speaks,  we  read  in  his  language,  in  its  very  accent,  the  movement  of  an  undying 
spirit,  the  strength  or  weakness  of  an  understanding,  the  warmth  of  a  heart,  the 
vigour  or  feebleness  of  a  will.  (2)  And  as  through  language  the  soul  speaks  to  the 
ear  of  man,  so  by  action  the  soul  addresses  itself  to  the  eye  of  man.  When  a  man 
acts,  specially  under  circumstances  of  responsibility  or  of  difficulty,  then  his  true 
passions,  capacities,  littlenesses,  greatness,  come  to  the  surface.  (3)  Once  more,  the 
soul  is  too  active  and  imperious  a  tenant  not  to  leave  its  mark  npon  the  texture  of 
the  body,  which  it  has  inhabited  for  a  term  of  years.  Every  humnn  face,  not  less 
by  its  reserves  than  by  its  disclosures,  records  the  play  of  thought  and  passion 
within  a  subtle  immaterial  spirit.  Fear,  joy,  pride,  lust,  rage,  sadness,  shame,  love, 
patience,  each  by  reiterated  throbs  leaves  its  mark  upon  the  flesh,  till  at  length  the 
soul  has  moulded  the  ductile  matter,  so  that  it  shall  truly  portray  its  tale  of  base- 
ness or  of  beauty.  2.  Now  in  Jesus  Christ,  God  made  use  of  this  provision  to  enter 
into  communion  with  His  creatures.  Eeason  may  discover  God's  existence  and 
attributes,  and  under  favourable  conditions  may  attain  to  a  cold  and  partial  appreci- 
ation of  His  glory.  But  to  reason,  unaided  by  Kevelation  outside  the  soul,  and  by 
grace  within  it,  God  must  ever  seem  abstract  and  remote.  Therefore,  that  He 
might  embrace  His  fallen  creatures  with  a  revelation  of  His  beauty,  the  Most  High 
robed  Himself  in  a  human  body  and  a  human  soul.  The  thoughtful  Gentile  might 
have  learnt  something  concerning  Him  in  the  natural  world  ;  the  devout  Jew  might 
have  read  more  of  His  true  character  in  the  Mosaic  law ;  but  a  living  personal 
revelation  of  what  He  is  was  reserved  for  the  faith  of  Christendom.  There  are 
strangers,  alas  !  to  our  faith,  who  yet  confess  that  in  the  Gospels  they  encounter  a 
form  of  unapproached  grace  and  power.  In  the  last  age  infidel  writers  like  Diderot 
and  Rousseau  challenged  the  sceptics  of  the  time,  in  language  which  has  since 
become  classical,  to  match,  if  they  could,  the  moral  beauty  of  the  gospel.  For  in 
the  gospel  we  meet  with  one  who  in  His  pre-eminent  humanity  is  perfectly  one 
with  us,  yet  also  most  mysteriously  distinct.  So  rare  and  refined  is  His  type  of 
manhood.  He  escapes  the  peculiarities  of  either  sex.  He  is  tied  to  no  one  form  of 
human  existence,  yet  adapt  that  Himself  to  all.  He  is  born  in  extreme  poverty,  yet 
He  has  no  grudge  against  wealth  :  He  is  claimed  as  their  representative,  by  Geeek 
and  Roman,  and  African  and  Teuton,  uo  less  truly  than  by  the  children  of  His 
people.    No  class  professional,  or  national  prejudice  has  le.t  its  taint  upon  that 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  51 

ideal  Form,  so  as  to  make  it  less  than  representative  of  pure  humanity.  Yet,  so 
far  is  He  from  being  a  cold,  passionless  statue,  divested  of  all  interests,  strictly 
human,  that  there  is  a  warmth  and  vividness  in  His  character  which  none  who 
have  truly  love  or  wept  can  fail  to  understand  and  to  embrace.  He  hates  evil,  and 
denounces  it ;  but  He  is  never  betrayed  into  an  unbalanced  statement ;  Herod  does 
not  make  Him  a  revolutionist,  nor  the  Pharisees  an  Antinomian.  His  triumphs 
cannot  disturb,  and  His  humiliations  do  but  enhance  the  serene,  self-possession  of 
His  soul.  Well  might  we  surmise  that  such  a  character  as  this  was  more  than 
human.  We  know  ourselves  too  well  to  suppose  that  human  nature  would  con- 
ceive the  full  idea,  much  less  that  it  could  create  the  reality.  Even  to  the  Eoman 
ofiScer  the  truth  revealed  itself.  "  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God."  Nay,  Jesus 
Himself  used  language  which  no  intimacy  between  God  and  holy  souls  would 
warrant  if  it  were  not  literally  true.  Either  we  must  resign  that  vision  of  beauty 
which  we  meet  in  the  character  of  Jesus  as  an  untrustworthy  phantom,  since  it  is 
daslied  with  a  pretension  involving  at  once  falsehood  and  blasphemy,  or  we  must 
confess  that  Jesus  is  Divine.  Jesus  i/  God ;  and  in  His  acts,  words,  and  very 
physiognomy  the  Apostles  came  face  to  face  with  the  Perfect  Being  of  beings.  He 
had  taken  our  nature  as  an  instrument  through  which  to  act  upon  us,  but  also  as 
an  interpreter  who  should  translate  His  own  matchless  perfections  into  audible 
words  and  visible  actions  (1  John  i.  1-3).  An  enthusiasm,  of  which  the  object  is 
merely  human,  must  pass  away,  since  its  object  is  necessarily  transient  and  im- 
perfect. As  you  sit  with  the  ashes  of  Wellington  beneath  your  feet,  you  little 
dream  of  the  warmth  with  which  Englishmen  named  their  great  general  on  the 
morrow  of  Waterloo.  One  only  has  succeeded  in  creating  an  impression,  which  is 
as  fresh  in  the  hearts  and  thoughts  of  His  true  disciples  at  this  moment  as  it  was 
eighteen  centuries  ago  ;  and  as  we  listen  to  His  words,  and  watch  His  actions,  and 
almost  seem  to  gaze  on  His  face,  irradiated  with  superhuman  beauty  in  the  pages 
of  the  Gospels  v/e  feel  that  He,  as  none  other,  had  a  right  to  say  to  unborn  gener-  / 
ations,  "  Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Me."    IH.  Is  there  anything  in  our  con-  \ 

DUCT,    OR   our   words,    THAT    REALLY   BEARS    WITNESS    TO     THE     SaVIOUR  ?        Or    are    We 

living,  speaking,  feeling,  acting,  thinking,  much  as  we  might  have  done  if  He  had 
never  brightened  our  existence.  Or  are  we  bearing  Him  what  our  conscience  tells 
us  is  a  partial  witness  ;  a  witness  of  language  but  not  of  conduct ;  a  witness  which 
attests  those  features  of  His  work  and  doctrine  which  we  prefer,  rather  than  all 
that  we  know  or  might  know  about  Him  ?  This  witness  is  the  debt  which  all 
Christians  owe  to  Christ.  No  class,  or  sex,  or  disposition,  or  age,  or  race  can  claim 
exemption.  We  cannot  delegate  it  to  our  clergy.  It  is  not  merely  that  we  are 
bound  to  witness  to  Him.  If  we  are  living  Christian  lives,  we  cannot  help  doing 
so.  Be  Christians  indeed,  and  you  will  forthwith  witness  for  Jesus — you  who  are 
at  the  summits  of  society,  and  you  who  are  at  its  base  ;  you  who  teach,  and  you 
who  learn  ;  you  who  command,  and  you  who  obey.  In  the  lower  and  feeble  sense 
they  who  practise  the  natural  virtues,  witness  to  Him,  who  is  the  source  of  all 
goodness.  And  thus  courage  uader  difficulties,  and  temperance  amid  self-indul- 
gent livers,  and  justice  truly  observed  between  man  and  man,  are  forms  of  witness. 
They  bear  this  witness  who  are  in  power,  and  who,  renouncing  selfish  purposes, 
aim  at  the  good  of  others.  They  too  bear  it,  who  have  wealth,  and  who  spend  it 
not  in  perishing  baubles,  but  in  relieving  bodily  or  spiritual  suffering.  But  they, 
especially,  who  know  our  Lord  in  His  pardoning  mercy  will  hardly  be  content 
with  a  silent  witness.  For  the  disease  which  He  heals  is  universal,  and 
the  efficacy  of  His  cure  is  undoubted.  The  redemptive  love  of  Jesus,  like  the 
sun  in  the  heavens,  is  the  inheritance  of  all  who  will  come  to  have  a  sl'are 
in  it,  and,  as  with  the  heart  that  love  is  believed  in  unto  righteousness,  so  with 
the  mouth  confession  of  it  is  made  unto  salvation.  (Canon  Lidclon.)  Christ's 
witni'sses : — I.  Our  function  as  witnesses  for  Christ.  In  our  courts  of 
law  a  witness  is  pledged  under  oath  to  "  speak  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and 
nothing  but  the  truth,"  and  in  our  capacity  of  witnesses  a  similar  obligation  rests 
upon  us.  Our  duty  is  to  bear  witness  to  what  we  know,  and  to  all  that  we  know 
of  the  facts  of  the  gospel,  as  contained  in  God's  Word,  and  which  we  have  verified 
by  such  means  of  verification  as  the  nature  of  the  case  admits  of — objective  or 
subjective,  as  the  case  may  be,  external  or  internal  evidence,  which  observation  or 
experience  supplies.  With  fancies,  conjectures,  speculations,  or  even  matters  of 
heaisay  which  we  have  not  verified,  we  have  as  witnesses  nothing  to  do.  Our  ■ 
duty  is  to  "  speak  that  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  we  have  seen."  The  effect  of 
our  testimony  depends  greatly  on  the  certainty  with  which  it  is  borne.     We  must 


si 


4 


53  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

speak  with  the  accent  of  conviction  if  men  are  to  be  convinced  and  converted  and 
saved.  II.  The  sphere  in  which  we  ark  to  perform  oor  functions  :  "  both  in 
Jerusalem  and  in  all  Judaea,  and  Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth."  According  to  this  it  is  manifest  that  whatever  may  be  our  testimony, 
there  is  no  country,  or  province,  or  city,  or  locality  in  which  it  can  possibly  be 
borne,  from  which  it  can  be  intentionally  withheld,  or  by  arrangement,  or  compact, 
even  temporarily  suppressed.  We  may,  of  course,  use  discretion  as  to  the 
localities  in  which  it  should  first  be  borne.  Being  unable  to  enter  every  field 
at  once,  we  may,  as  wise  men,  give  our  first  and  chief  attention  to  that  in 
which  as  a  whole  it  is  most  required.  But  we  cannot,  in  loyalty  to  our  Lord, 
consent  that  men,  in  any  locality,  should  either  arbitrarily  or  to  suit  the  con- 
venience of  parties  be  left  in  ignorance  of  it.  III.  The  testimony  we  have  to 
BEAR.  This  consists  of  all  that  the  Lord  hath  made  known  to  us — the  things  we 
have  seen  and  heard  and  verified.  The  most  important  part  of  our  testimony 
is  not  that  on  which  we  differ  from  our  fellow-Christians,  but  that  which  relates 
to  the  Divine  feelings  towards  sinful  men  ;  and  to  that  we  ought  to  give  the  first 
and  most  prominent  place.  There  is  a  fulness  of  meaning  in  the  gospel  which 
we  have  not  unfolded  yet — a  note  of  music  in  it  more  capable  of  charming  the  ear 
than  has  ever  yet  been  heard  —  a  power  to  thiill  the  hearts  of  men  such  as  has 
never  yet  been  felt.  IV.  The  endowment  which  fits  us  for  our  work.  "  Ye 
shall  receive  power  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you."  It  is  by  the  light 
the  Divine  Spirit  supplies  that  we  know  what  part  of  our  testimony  is  most 
required.  It  is  the  firm  conviction  He  imparts  that  gives  authority  and  persuasive- 
ness to  our  word.  The  whirlwind  spreads  devastation,  the  thunder  shakes  the 
sphere,  the  earthquake  convulses  and  overthrows ;  but  it  is  through  the  still  small 
voice  that  the  power  of  God  enters  the  soul  of  the  derelict  prophet,  and  produces  a 
mighty  and  beneficent  revolution.      {W.  Landels,   D.D.)  The  vdtness-hearing 

injured  by  inconsistencies : — A  train  is  said  to  have  been  stopped  by  flies  in 
the  grease-boxes  of  the  carriage- wheels.  The  analogy  is  perfect ;  a  man,  in  all 
other  respects  fitted  to  be  useful,  may  by  some  small  defect  be  exceedingly  hindered, 
or  even  rendered  utterly  useless.  It  is  a  terrible  thing  when  the  healing  balm 
loses  its  efficacy  through  the  blunderer  who  administers  it.  You  all  know  the 
injurious  effects  frequently  produced  upon  water  flowing  along  leaden  pipes  ;  even 
so  the  gospel  itself,  in  flowing  through  men  who  are  spiritually  unhealthy,  may  be 
debased  until  it  grows  injurious  to  their  hearers.  We  may  be  great  quoters  of 
elegant  poetry,  and  mighty  retailers  of  second-hand  wind-bags ;  but  we  shall  be 
like  Nero  of  old,  fiddling  while  Eome  was  burning,  and  sending  vessels  to  Alexan- 
dria to  fetuh  sand  for  the  arena  while  the  populace  starved  for  want  of  corn. 
(C  H.  Spiirgcon.)  Noble  ivitn  esses  for  Christ: — Two  brave  boys  in  Armenia,  at 
Hoghe,  near  the  supposed  site  of  the  old  Garden  of  Eden,  attended  the  Mission 
School  there,  and  became  Christians.  Being  anxious  for  the  conversion  of  others, 
they  organised  with  other  converts  what  they  called  a  "  Home  Missionary  Society." 
All  who  were  members  went  from  house  to  house  to  read  the  Bible  to  the  people, 
and  tell  them  of  the  way  of  salvation.  These  two  boys,  though  only  fourteen  years 
old,  said  "  Why  should  we  labour  in  our  own  village  merely  ?  Why  not  go  on  a 
foreign  mission  ?  "  So  taking  their  Testaments,  they  started  one  Sabbath  morning 
for  the  village  of  Ghoorbet  Mezereh,  about  two  miles  distant,  to  preach.  On  enter- 
ing the  village  they  met  a  company  of  Mohammedan  Turks,  who  decided  to  try  the 
courage  of  these  Christians,  and  said  to  them,  "  Well,  boys,  who  is  Jesus  ?  "  "  He 
is  a  prophet  of  God,"  they  replied.  But  when  they  were  returning  home,  they  were 
both  troubled  because  they  felt  they  should  have  confessed  Him  to  be  the  Son  of 
God.  So  kneeling  down,  they  asked  the  Lord  Jesus  for  courage  to  confess  Him, 
and  they  went  back  to  do  so.  On  re-entering  the  village  they  found  the  Turks  still 
assembled,  and  they  asked,  "  Boys,  why  have  you  come  back  ?  "  "  We  have  come 
back,"  they  replied,  "to  confess  our  Saviour.  We  told  you  He  is  a  prophet  of  God. 
He  is  so,  and  more  ;  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  only  Saviour  of  men."  The 
followers  of  the  false  prophet  respected  their  courage,  and  were  not  displeased  ;  and 
the  boys  returned  home  with  light   hearts.  Christianity  a  living  toitness : — 

Christianity  in  the  books  is  like  seed  in  the  granary,  dry  and  all  but  dead.  It  is 
not  written  but  living  characters  that  are  to  convert  the  infidel.  (D.  Thomas.) 
Religion  an  effective  witness : — ^Lord  Peterborough,  speaking  on  one  occasion  of 
the  celebrated  F^nelon,  observed :  "  He  is  a  delicate  creature.  I  was  forced  to  get 
away  from  him  as  fast  as  I  could,  else  he  would  have  made  me  pious."  Would  to 
God  that  all  of  us  had  such  an  influence  over  godless  men  1     Some  one  has  said 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  53 

that  it  is  not  so  much  the  words  as  it  is  the  "  Acts  of  the  Apostles  "  that  convince 
us  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.         The  life  the  best  sermon:^-!  would  not  give  much       / 
for  your  religion  unless  it  can  be  seen.     Lamps  do  not  talk,   but  they  shine.     A     v 
lighthouse  sounds  no  drums  ;  it  beats  no  gong  ;  and  yet  far  over  the  waters  its 
friendly  spark  is  seen  by  the  mariner.     So  let  your  actions  shine  out  yonr  religion.  , 

' Let  the  main  sermon  of  your  life  be  illustrated  by  all  your  conduct,  and  it  shall  not      \// 
fail  to  be  illustrious.     (C.   H.  Spuigeuii.)         Experimental  ivitness-henriiirj  : — "A  ' 

report  of  a  report  is  a  cold  thing  and  of  small  value  ;  but  a  report  of  what  we  have 
witnessed  and  experience  d  ourselves  comes  warmly  upon  men's  hearts."  So  a  mere 
formal  description  of  faith  and  its  blessings  falls  flat  on  the  ear ;  but  when  a 
sincere  believer  tells  of  his  own  experience  of  the  Lord's  faithfulness,  it  has  a  great 
charm  about  it.  We  like  to  hear  the  narrative  of  a  journey  from  the  traveller  him- 
self. In  a  court  of  law  they  will  have  no  hearsay  evidence.  Tell  us,  says  the 
judge,  not  what  your  neighbour  said,  but  whut  you  saw  yourself.  Personal  evidence 
of  the  power  of  grace  has  a  wonderfully  convincing  force  upon  the  conscience.  "I 
sought  the  Lord,  and  He  heard  me,"  is  belter  argument  than  all  the  Butler's 
Analogies  that  will  ever  be  written,  good  as  they  are  in  their  place.  The  witness  / 
of  a  good  life  : — Faith  that  is  lived  is  whiit  gives  efficacy  to  faith  professed.  Eev. 
Dr.  Deems  is  accustomed  to  relate  some  feeling  incident  before  the  first  hymn  in 
church,  on  Sunday  morning.  Eeceutly  he  told  this :  "  A  Christian  man  one  day 
said  to  a  friend,  'Under  whose  preaching  were  you  converted?'  'Nobody's,' 
was  the  answer ;  '  it  was  under  my  aunt's  'practising.'  "  He  then  made  an  earnest 
appeal  to  aunts  to  examine  their  characters  and  lives,  to  see  if  these  contained 
converting  power.  Witnessinr/  for  Christ : — Witness  Cbrist,  means  nothing  if  it 
be  not  a  witness  to  righteousness  of  life.  It  was  the  glorious  function  of  ancient 
Israel  to  be  a  witness  to  righteousness.  She  was  incomparably  less  brilliant  than 
Greece;  she  was  feebleness  itself  compared  with  Kome  ;  she  whs  a  lamb  in  the 
midst  of  wolves  compared  with  the  fierce  nations  of  Assyria,  Babylon,  and  Egypt, 
pressing  round  her  on  every  side.  Why  was  she  nevertheless  greater  and  more 
enduring  than  the  mightiest  of  them  ?  It  was- by  virtue  of  her  conduct.  And  the 
Church  has  borne  this  witness  for  righteousness  before  kings  and  not  been  ashamed. 
As  Nathan  witnessed  before  David,  and  John  before  Herod,  so  did  Paul  before 
Felix,  and  Athanasius  before  Constantine,  and  Ambrose  when  he  drove  Theodosius 
back  from  the  Cathedral-gates  of  Milan  because  he  came  with  his  hand  red  from 
the  massacre  of  Thessalonica.  So  did  Savonanda  when  he  refused  to  absolve 
Lorenzo  de  Medici  on  his  death-bed  unless  he  set  Florence  free  ;  so  did  John  Huss 
when  he  called  up  the  burning  hue  of  shame  upon  the  cheek  of  the  perjured 
Sigismund ;  so  did  Luther  when  he  faced  kings  and  cardinals  at  Worms ;  so  did 
Massillon  when  he  made  Louis  XIV.  wince  before  his  warnings  ;  so  did  Kerr  when 
he  rejected  the  command  of  Charles  II.  to  receive  Nell  Gw.vnne  at  Winchester  ;  so 
did  the  London  clergy  when  they  refused  to  read  in  their  churches  the  treacherous 
edict  of  James  II. ;  so  did  the  Court  chaplain  when  he  openly  rebuked  Frederick 
William  I.  on  his  death-bed.  No  age  can  do  without  the  Church's  witness  for 
righteousness ;  certainly  not  in  ours,  and  the  Church  will  fail  of  her  duty  in  her 
witness  for  Christ  if  she  do  not  rebuke  the  startling  inadequacy  of  charity, 
the  selfish  accumulation  of  wealth,  the  ostentatious  luxury  of  fashion,  the 
heartless  indifference  of  middle-class  prosperity,  the  falsotne  development  of 
puffery,  the  widespread  of  gambling,  the  adulterations  of  manufacturers, 
ttie  scandalmongering  of  society,  the  intiigues  of  religious  parties,  the  curse  of 
drink.  Oh,  let  the  Church  denounce  these  works  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil  in  no  timid  half  utterance  :  let  her  not  fight  with  graceful  sham  blows  which 
only  beat  the  air  I  are  there  no  owners  of  rotting  houses  to  be  braniled  with  the 
infamy  they  deserve  ?  Are  there  no  sweaters'  dens  to  be  purified,  and  the  owners  of 
them  taught  what  a  curse  are  ill-gotten  riches?  Are  there  no  reeking  liells  of  vice 
t)  be  torn  out  of  the  greedy  hands  of  rich  oppressors?  Salt  is  good;  but  if  the 
salt  hath  lost  its  savour,  <fec.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Witnessing  for  Christ: — 
While  Colonel  Wilayat,  an  English  officer  who  used  to  preach  at  Delhi,  was 
speaking,  a  number  of  Sepoys  on  horseback  rode  up  to  his  house,  and  knowing 
him  to  be  a  Christian,  s^id,  "  Kepeat  the  Mohammedan  creed,  or  we  will  shoot 
you."  But  he  would  not  d-ny  his  Lord.  "  Tell  us  what  you  are  "  said  one.  "  I 
am  a  Christian,  and  a  Christian  I  will  live  and  die."  They  dragged  him  along  the 
ground,  beating  him  about  the  head  and  face  with  their  shoes.  Not  being  soldiers, 
they  had  no  swords.  "  Now  preach  Christ  to  us,"  some  one  cried  out  in  mocking 
tones.     Others  said,  "  Turn  to  Mohammed,  and  we  will  let  you  go."    "  No,  I  never 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOIt.  [coap.  i. 

never  will!  "  the  faithful  martyr  cried  ;  "my  Saviour  took  up  His  Cross  and  went 
to  God,  and  I  will  lay  down  my  life  and  go  to  Him."  The  scorching  rays  ot  the 
8un  were  beating  on  the  poor  sufferer's  head.  With  a  laugh  one  of  the  wretches 
exclaimed,  "  I  suppose  you  would  like  some  water."  «'  I  do  not  want  water, "replied 
the  martyr.  "  When  my  Saviour  was  dying  He  had  nothing  but  vinegar  mingled 
with  gall.  But  do  not  keep  me  in  this  pain.  If  you  mean  to  kill  me,  do  so  at 
once."  Another  Sepoy  coming  up,  lifted  his  sword;  the  martyr  called  aloud, 
"  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit !  "  and  with  one  stroke  his  head  was  nearly  cut  off. 
Witnessing  for  Christ : — It  became  the  most  sacred  duty  of  a  new  convert  (among 
the  early  Christians)  to  diffuse  among  his  friends  and  relations  the  inestimal  le 
blessing  which  he  had  received,  and  to  warn  them  against  a  refusal  that  would  be 
severely  punished  as  a  criminal  disobedience  to  the  will  of  a  benevolent  but  all- 
powerful  Deity.  (T.  Gibbon.)  Christian  wit7iess  : — The  sweet  gospel  singer,  Mr. 
Peter  Bilhorn,  of  Chicago,  who  was  at  one  time  a  well-known  saloon  concert  singer, 
was  passing  by  a  gospel  service  a  few  years  ago.  When  he  came  opposite  to  the 
gathering  of  Christians?,  the  testimony  of  a  young  man,  "  Christ  saves  the  worst  of 
sinners,"  fastened  itself  on  his  heart,  and  Jed  him  to  Christ.  He  never  saw  the 
young  man  afterward — never  has  been  able  to  find  him,  but  his  words  so  came 
home  to  him  that  he  changed  his  course,  and  is  now  devoting  his  life  to  God's 
sei  vice.  Oh  !  the  power  of  a  life  that  is  not  ashamed  to  make  Christ  known  to  the 
world !  How  beautiful  the  feet  of  them  that  never  tire  of  witnessing  before  the 
•I  world  the  riches  of  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus  1  What  glory  awaits  the  soul  that 
■  I  J  y  daily  walks  so  near  to  Christ  that  others  see  Christ  through  him  1  The  loitness  of  the 
^  ^  ^  Church,  its  importance : — Christ  was  about  to  be  seen  no  more  among  men.  What 
memorial  had  He  left?  The  kings  of  Egypt  built  mighty  pyramids  to  immortalise  their 
fame.  Those  of  Assyria  have  left  on  chiselled  column  and  even  on  the  bold  sides  of 
their  native  cliffs  the  hieroglyphics  that  should  commemorate  their  wonderful  deeds.' 
The  Eoman  emperors  have  bequeathed  to  us  triumphal  arches  which  even  now  bring 
before  us  the  splendour  of  their  victories.  But  Christ  left  no  such  memorial.  He 
did  not  commit  a  single  line  to  writing.  His  only  record  in  Scripture  is  the  one 
He  traced  with  His  finger  upon  the  sand.  He  left  no  parchment,  pillar,  pyramid, 
I  arch,  or  temple.  On  that  farewell  day  He  was  without  the  slightest  trace  of  a 
Irecord,  except  that  written  on  the  heart  of  His  disciples.  Whatever  impression 
Itherefore  He  was  to  make  upon  the  world  depended  on  the  courage  and  fidelity  of 
these  men.  If  they  had  given  one  uncertain  sound,  oblivion  would  have  settled 
like  a  pall  upon  Gethsemane,  Calvary,  and  Olivet.  They  were  the  one  living  link 
between  Christ  and  the  world  He  came  to  save.  And  it  is  so  still.  Christ  is  not 
here.  We  have,  it  is  true,  the  printed  witness  of  the  apostles ;  but  the  world  does 
not  get  its  ideas  of  Christ  and  Christianity  from  that,  but  from  the  living 
testimony  of  professing  Christians.  How  important  then  the  function  of  the 
humblest  1  He  is  Christ's  representative  and  memorial  before  men.  (H. 
Pedley,  M.A.)  Our  vocation: — I.  With  its  glory — Witnesses  of  the  exalted 
King.      II.    With   its    loveliness  —  Witnesses   nothing    of    and   for    ourselves. 

III.  With    its    suffekings  —  Witnesses    of    the    Ltrd    in     a    hostile    world. 

IV.  With  its  promises — Strength  from  above.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Both 
in  Jerusalem. — Witnessing  in  Jerusalem : — A  difficult  service  was  to  be  per- 
formed in  Jerusalem  that  day.  Had  it  been  desired  to  find  a  man  in  London  who 
would  go  down  to  Whitehall  a  few  weeks  after  Charles  was  beheaded,  and,  addressing 
Cromwell's  soldiers,  endeavour  to  persuade  them  that  he  whom  they  had  executed 
•was  not  only  a  king  and  a  good  one,  but  a  prophet  of  God,  and  that,  therefore,  they 
had  been  guilty  of  more  than  regicide — of  sacrilege:  alth'>ugh  England  had  brave 
men  then,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  any  one  could  have  been  found  to  bear 

J  such  a  message  to  that  audience.  The  service  which  had  then  to  be  performed  in 
Jerusalemwas  similar  to  this.  (W.Arthur,  M.A.)  Oiirsphcre: — There  is  also  for  us  a 
"Jerusalem,"  a  "  Judaea,"  a  "  Samaria,"  if  not  an  "  uttermost  part  of  the  earth  " — 
some  well-dresfed  city  with  its  ragged  fringe  of  want  and  wickedness,  some  country 
district  with  its  neglected  families,  some  sophisticated  brain  that  has  gone  astray 
from  the  old  standards  at  home  of  the  faith  and  set  up  its  Gerizim  rivahy — some 
that  you  can  minister  to  by  your  charity,  and  win  back  by  your  witnessing,  if  that 
•witnessing  is  only  as  zealous  as  Peter's  and  as  patient  as  Paul's,  and  as  loving  as 
John's.     {Bp.   Huntington.)  Apostolic  missions  :  their  order  : — Jerusalem,  the 

place  of  the  reception  of  the  Spirit,  was  also  to  be  the  place  where  the  witness  of 
the  Spirit  commences  ;  and  in  the  land  of  promise  was  the  promise,  the  fulness  ot 
epuitual  bkssing  to  find  its  first  native  soil.     Samaria,  the  mission  field  white  for 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  55 

harvest  (John  iv.  35),  our  Lord  mentions  as  the  middle  station  between  Judsa  and 
the  land  of  the  Gentiles ;  and  the  end  of  the  earth  was  Eome,  for  there  all  nations 
were  united  in  the  capital  of  the  world.  We  shall  find  that  the  order  of  the  history 
perfectly  corresponds  with  the  order  of  testimony.  Jerusalem  (chaps,  i.-vii.); 
Judffia  (ix.-xii.);  Samaria  (viii.);  the  world  (xiii.  to  end).  {R.  Besser,  D.D.) 
Apostolic  missions  :  their  evidential  value  : — How  came  these  humble  and  hated 
persons,  these  slaves  and  artisans,  these  unlearned  and  ignorant  men  to  get  the 
start  of  the  majestic  world,  and  bear  the  palm  alone  ?  How  came  it  that  the 
greatest,  the  most  advanced,  the  splendid  and  prominent  races  of  the  whole  world 
have,  one  after  another,  embraced  Christianity  ?  How  comes  it  that  at  this  very 
moment  one  out  of  every  four  of  the  one  hundred  thousai^d  millions  of  human  beings 
is  a  professing  Christian  ?  Securus  judical  orbis  terrarum.  Is  the  world  so  silly,  is 
all  its  best  intellect  so  anile,  is  the  genius  of  humanity  so  wretched  a  fool  as  to  be 
duped  by  a  mere  fraud  and  illusion  preached  by  wandering  beggars,  blindly  to 
embrace  with  all  its  heart,  to  enshrine  in  its  stateliest  temples,  to  enrich  with  its 
most  splendid  offerings,  to  set  forth  in  its  most  brilliant  hues  of  imagination  and 
intellect,  a  faith  so  intrinsically  feeble  that  after  nineteen  centuries  of  beneficent 
victory  it  can  only  tumble  down  like  a  pack  of  cards  at  the  touch  of  any  smart  de- 
claimer  who  chooses  to  say  it  is  a  lie  ?  Because  it  was  a  truth  and  no  lie.  We 
have  been  well  reminded  that  the  babes  and  striplings  of  the  world  prevailed  over 
the  serried  army  of  emperors,  aristocracies,  statesmen,  institutions.  Is  this  solemn 
voice  of  the  ages,  is  this  cogent  mass  of  human  testimony  to  go  for  nothing  ?  Is  it 
nothing  that  Christianity  has  prevailed  over  the  banded  union  of  the  powers  of  evil, 
and  that  even  in  spite  of  the  corruptions  which  have  gathered  round  it ;  in  spite  of 
the  crimes,  negligences,  and  ignorances  of  its  own  professing  followers  that  it  should 
still  triumph  and  prevail.  I  say  that  if  Christianity  be  a  lie,  then  everything  and 
all  human  Ufe  is  a  lie,  and  "  the  pillared  firmament  is  rottenness,  and  the  earth's 
base  built  on  stubble."  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Missionary  work  commanded: — 
During  the  American  war,  a  regiment  received  orders  to  plant  some  heavy  guns  on 
the  top  of  a  steep  hill.  The  soldiers  dragged  them  to  the  base  of  the  hill,  but 
were  unable  to  get  them  farther.  An  ofiicer,  learning  the  state  of  affairs,  cried, 
"  Men  !  it  must  be  done  !  I  have  the  orders  in  my  pocket."  So  the  Church  has 
orders  to  disciple  the  world.  Love  first  to  fall  on  objects  near  and  then  to 
diffuse  itself: — As  radii  in  a  circle  are  closest  near  the  centre,  and  towards  the 
circumference  lie  more  widely  apart,  the  affections  of  a  human  heart  do  and 
should  fall  thickest  on  those  who  are  nearest.  Expressly  on  this  principle  the 
Christian  mission  was  instituted  at  first.  Love  in  the  heart  of  the  first  disciples 
was  recognised,  by  Him  who  kindled  it,  to  be  of  the  nature  of  fire  or  light.  He  did 
not  expect  it  to  fall  on  distant  places  without  first  passing  through  intermediate 
space.  From  Jerusalem,  at  His  command  and  under  the  Spirit's  ministry,  it 
radiated  through  Judtea,  and  from  Judaea  to  Samaria,  and  thence  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth.     (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  Church  engaged  in  the  renovation  of  the 

world: — The  Church  must  grope  her  way  into  the  alleys  and  courts  and  purlieus 
of  the  city,  and  up  the  broken  staircase,  and  into  the  bar-room,  and  beside  the 
•  loathsome  sufferer.  She  must  go  down  into  the  pit  with  the  miner ;  into  the  fore- 
castle with  the  gailor ;  into  the  tent  with  the  soldier ;  into  the  shop  with  the 
mechanic ;  into  the  factory  with  the  operative ;  into  the  field  with  the  farmer,  into 
the  counting-room  with  the  merchant.  Like  the  air,  the  Church  must  press  equally 
on  all  surfaces  of  society ;  like  the  sea,  flow  into  every  nook  of  the  shore-line  of 
humanity,  and  like  the  sun,  shine  on  things  foul  and  low,  as  well  as  fair  and  high  ; 
for  she  was  organised,  commissioned,  and  equipped  for  the  moral  renovation  of  the 
world.  (Bishop  Simpson.)  Kingdom  of  Christ:  more  permanent  than  earthly 
kingdoms  : — I  shall  soon  be  in  my  grave.  Such  is  the  fate  of  great  men.  So  it  was 
with  the  Caesars  and  Alexander.  And  I,  too,  am  forgotten  ;  and  the  Marengo  con- 
queror and  emperor  is  a  college  theme.  My  exploits  are  tasks  given  to  pupils  by 
their  tutor,  who  sit  in  judgment  over  me.  I  die  before  my  time  ;  and  my  dead 
body,  too,  must  return  to  the  earth,  and  become  food  for  worms.  Behold  the  destiny 
now  at  hand  of  him  who  has  been  called  the  great  Napoleon  1  What  an  abyss 
between  my  great  misery  and  the  eternal  reign  of  Christ,  who  is  proclaimed,  loved, 
and  adored,  and  whose  kingdom  is  extending  over  all  the  earth!  (Napoleon  I.) 
Evangelism  a  law  of  self-preservation : — Evangelism  is  not  merely  a  work  of  love. 
It  is  the  sheer  law  of  self-preservation.  The  heathenism  which  is  creeping  along 
the  fences  of  society  is  scattering  its  seeds  on  both  sides.  As  we  love  our  neighbour, 
we  must  try  to  do  him  good  ;  but  if  we  love  only  ourselves  and  our  homes,  we  must 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  i. 

I  be  at  work  to  make  the  world  better.  If  Christians  do  not  make  the  world  better, 
•the  world  will  surely  make  the  Church  worse.  {C.  H.  Bolder.)  The  hcathtn  may 
reach  heaven  without  the  gospel,  hut  better  with  it : — A  man  may  make  his  way  across 
the  Atlantic  in  a  skiff,  for  all  I  know,  but  if  you  are  intending  to  cross  the  sea,  take 
my  advice,  and  secure  passage  in  a  first-class  steamer,  and  you  will  be  more  likely 
to  get  Ihere.  So  it  is  with  these  heathen  millions.  I  do  not  know  but  some  of 
them  may  drift,  and  we  shall  find  them  in  the  city  of  God.  But  I  do  know  that  by 
(.'iving  them  the  gospel,  by  building  up  and  supporting  among  them  a  Christian 
Church,  we  shall  greatly  multiply  their  chances  of  heaven.  (Ibid.)  A  good  man 
seeks  to  malce  others  good  : — "  A  good  man  is  always  seeking  to  make  others  good,  as 
lire  turneth  all  things  about  it  into  fire."  You  cannot  make  fire  stay  where  it  is  ; 
it  will  spread  as  oj  portunity  serves  it.  It  will  subdue  all  its  surroundings  to  itself. 
Carlyle  says  tbat  "  man  is  emphatically  a  proselytising  creature,"  and  assuredly  the 
new  creature  is  such.  Life  grows,  and  so  invades  the  regions  of  death,  and  spiritual 
life  is  most  of  all  intense  in  its  growing  and  spreading.  Liberty  to  hold  our  opinions 
but  not  to  spread  them  is  no  liberty :  for  one  of  our  main  opinions  is,  tliat  we 
should  bring  all  around  us  to  Jesus  and  to  obedience  to  the  truth.  Lord,  help  us 
ever  to  be  doing  this,  subduing  the  earth  for  Thee  by  spreading  on  all  sides  the 
-.y[  name  of  Jesus  !     Let  our  Hfe  burn  till  the  whole  world  is  on  a  blaze. 

Vers.  9-12.  And  when  He  had  spoken  these  words,  while  they  beheld.  He  was 
taken  up. —  Taken  vj) :  —  How  we  talk  about  "  up,"  took  "  up  "  !  What  eager,  earnest 
faces  are  looking  up  through  the  clouds  of  sorrow.  The  atmosphere  above  us  seems 
palpitant  with  the  hopes  and  aspirations  of  hearts  below.  The  secret  of  this  is, 
God  is  "  up,"  and  Jesus  was  taken  "  up."  Note — I.  That  the  depaeted  good  are 
"  TAKEN  UP."  Jbsus  promised  tbat  the  disciples  bhould  follow  Him  (John  xiv.  2-5) ; 
and  all  good  spirits  find  their  higher  level.  Heaven  is  the  rendezvous  of  all  good- 
ness, the  barn  of  God  into  which  He  gathers  His  grain.  Our  loved  ones  are  not  far 
away,  only  the  cloud  separates  us.  But  Jebus  was  not  taken  up  until  "He  had 
spoken  these  things,"  i.e.,  finished  His  work.  When  we  have  done  that,  like  Him 
we  shall  be  taken  up  to  our  reward.  II.  That  God  supplies  the  place  of  the 
TEPARTED  GOOD  (ver.  10).  Jesus  went  up  and  the  angels  came  down  ;  and  they  took 
His  place  beside  the  desolate  disciples,  and  who  knows  but  that  they  hovered 
about  until  the  Holy  Ghost  supplied  the  Master's  place.  So  it  is.  If  God  takes 
Moses,  He  brings  up  Joshua;  if  He  takes  up  Elijah,  Elisha  catches  his  falling 
mantle.  This  law  of  compensation  is  seen  all  through  nature,  human  life,  and 
religion.  III.  That  the  departed  good  shall  come  again  (ver.  11).  This  was  the 
disciples'  comfort  in  regard  to  the  departed  Christ.  "  This  same  Jesns."  So  "  they 
that  sleep  in  Jesus  shall  God  bring  with  Him."  Do  not  grieve  then  that  the  grave 
has  closed  upon  them.  {W .  Johnso7i.)  The  ascension : — I.  The  Lord  was  taken 
HP  into  heaven.  1.  Fact  of  the  ascension :  stated  here  (Luke  xxiv. ;  Acts  i.)  2. 
Also  implied — e.g.,  John  vi. '62;  xx.  17.  3.  And  in  Acts  and  Epistles  asserted 
— e.g.,  Eph.  iv.  10 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  16  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  22.  Also  in  tbe  Acts  and  Epistles, 
implied  passim  (the  Saviour  being  ever  referred  to  as  living,  invisible,  glorified,  and 
to  come  again  from  heaven).  See,  e.g.,  Acts  vii.  55,  56  ;  Phil.  iii.  20  ;  1  Thess.  iv. 
16.  4.  (1)  An  absolute  miracle.  (2)  And  also  a  consoling  and  teaching  truth,  in 
what  it  says  of  the  reality  of  heaven  and  as  aiding  us  in  grasping  thai  reality  (Col. 
iii.  1).  Heaven  is  where  He  is.  II.  He  sat  on  the  eight  hand  of  God.  1.  The 
metaphor  (from  an  Oriental  throne,  a  seat  admitting  more  than  one  occupant)  im- 
phes  the  share  of  the  incarnate  Lord  in  the  supreme  glory — more  than  mere  near- 
ness to  it.  2.  See,  in  support  of  this.  Rev.  xxii.  1,  &c.  ("  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb  ") ;  and  especially  Johnxvii.  5  (where  N.B.  that  "with  Thine  own  self"  is  wapa. 
a((ivT<{i,  "  by  Thine  own  side  "  ;  and  so  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  ry  fo^y  y  iTxov  npb 
Tov  Tuv  KofTfiov  elvcit  TTapd  ooi).  3.  Eeflect — "  the  Son  of  Man  (chap.  vii.  55)  is  at 
the  right  hand  of  God."  Not  only  is  Christ  there  as  God  the  Son  (John  i.  1,  &c.), 
but  as  man — as  Jesus  (Acts  i.  11 ;  Heb.  iv.  14).  What  a  pledge  for  His  brethren 
(John  xvii.  24,  Ac).  III.  After  that  He  had  spoken  to  them.  1.  Merciful  pre- 
lude. The  clear,  spoken  revelation  given  before  the  mysterious  removal.  We  see 
Him  not  (1  Pet.  i.  8),  but  He  has  spoken — (1)  In  human  speech.  (2)  In  visible  life. 
(3)  In  atoning  death  (see  Heb.  xii.  24).  2.  Apphcation  of  this  and  the  whole 
ascension  truth  (John  xvii.  13).  Hehas  spoken.  Heisthere.  (II.C.G.Monle,M.A.) 
The  ascension  of  Christ  and  its  lessons  : — I.  The  ascension  of  our  Lord  is  a  topic 
whereon  familiariti  has  worked  its  usual  results  ;  it  has  lost  for  most  minds 
the  sharpness  of  its  outline  and  the  profundity  of  its  teaching  because  universally 


CHAP.  I.]  TEE  ACTS.  57 

accepted  by  Christians  ;  and  yet  no  doctrine  raises  deeper  questions,  or  will  yield 
more  profitable  and  far-reaching  lessons.  First,  then,  we  may  note  the  place  this 
doctrine  holds  in  apostolic  teaching.  Taking  the  records  of  that  teaching  contained 
in  the  Acts  and  the  Epistles,  we  find  tbat  it  occupies  a  real  substantial  position. 
The  ascension  is  there  referred  to,  hinted  at,  taken  as  granted,  pre-supposed,  but 
it  is  not  obtruded  nor  dwelt  upon  overmuch.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  the 
great  central  point  of  apostolic  testimony ;  the  ascension  of  Christ  was  simply  a 
portion  of  that  fundamental  doctrine,  and  a  natural  deduction  from  it.  If  Christ 
had  been  raised  from  the  dead  and  had  thus  become  the  first-fruits  of  the  grave,  it 
required  but  little  additional  exercise  of  faith  to  believe  that  He  had  passed  into 
that  unseen  and  immediate  presence  of  Deity  where  the  perfected  soul  finds  its 
complete  satisfaction,  St.  Peter's  conception  of  Christianity,  for  instance,  involved 
the  ascension.  Whether  in  bis  speech  at  the  election  of  Matthias,  or  in  his  sermon 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  or  in  his  address  in  Solomon's  porch  after  the  healmg  of 
the  crippled  beggar,  his  teaching  ever  presupposes  and  involves  the  ascension. 
He  takes  the  doctrine  and  the  fact  for  granted.  Jesus  is  with  him  the  Being 
"  whom  the  heavens  must  receive  until  the  times  of  restoration  of  all  things."  So 
is  it  too  with  St.  John  in  his  Gospel.  He  never  directly  mentions  the  fact  of  Christ's 
ascension,  but  he  always  implies  it.  So,  too,  with  St.  Paul  and  the  other  apostolic 
■writers  of  the  New  Testament.  Is  he  exhorting  the  Colossians  to  a  supernatural 
life  :  it  is  because  they  have  supernatural  privileges  in  their  ascended  Lord.  "  If 
ye  then  were  raised  with  Christ,  seek  the  things  above,  where  Christ  is  seated  on 
the  right  hand  of  God."  II.  But  some  one  may  eaise  cueious  questions  as  to 
THE  facts  of  the  ASCENSION.  Whither,  for  instance,  it  may  be  asked,  did  our 
Lord  depart  when  He  left  this  earthly  scene  ?  The  cbildith  notion  that  He  went 
up  and  up  far  above  the  most  distant  star  will  not  of  course  stand  a  moment's 
reflection.  The  Book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  does  not  describe  our  Saviour  as 
thus  ascending  through  infinite  space.  It  simply  describes  Him  as  removed  from 
ofif  this  earthly  ball,  and  then,  a  cloud  shutting  Him  out  from  view,  Christ  passed 
into  the  inner  and  unseen  universe  wherein  He  now  dwells.  The  existence  of  that 
inner  and  unseen  universe,  asserted  clearly  enough  in  Scripture,  has  of  late  years 
been  curiously  confirmed  by  scientific  speculation.  Scripture  asserts  the  existence 
of  such  an  unseen  universe,  and  the  ascension  implies  it.  The  second  coming  of 
our  Saviour  is  never  described  as  a  descent  from  some  far-off  region.  What  a 
solemn  light  such  a  Scriptural  view  sheds  upon  life  !  The  unseen  world  is  not  at 
some  vast  distance,  but,  as  the  ascension  would  seem  to  imply,  close  at  hand, 
shut  out  from  us  by  that  thin  veil  of  matter  which  angelic  hands  will  one  day  rend 
for  ever.    III.  The  ascension  was  A  fitting  and  a  natural  termination  of  Christ's 

EARTHLY  MINISTRY,  CONSIDERING  THE  CHRISTIAN  CONCEPTION  OF  HiS  SACRED  PER- 
SONALITY. The  departure  of  the  Eternal  King  was,  like  His  first  approach,  a  part 
of  a  scheme  which  forms  one  united  and  harmonious  whole.  The  Incarnation  and 
the  Ascension  were  necessarily  related  the  one  to  the  other.  IV.  Again,  we  may 
advance  a  step  further,  and  say  that  not  only  was  the  ascension  a  natural  and 
fitting  termination  to  the  activities  of  the  Eternal  Son  manifest  in  the  flesh,  it  was  y' 
A  NECESSARY  COMPLETION  AND  FINISH.  "  It  is  expedient,"  said  Christ  Himself,  y 
"  that  I  go  away  ;  for  if  I  go  not  away  the  Comforter  will  not  come  to  you."  Let 
us  take  the  matter  very  simply  thus.  Had  our  Lord  not  ascended  into  the  unseen 
state  whence  He  had  emerged  for  the  purpose  of  rescuing  mankind,  He  must  in 
that  case  (always  proceeding  on  the  supposition  that  He  had  risen  from  the  dead, 
because  we  always  suppose  our  readers  to  be  believers)  have  remained  permanently 
or  temporarily  resident  in  some  one  place.  He  might  have  chosen  Jerusalem. 
There  would  have  been  nothing  to  tempt  Him  to  Antioch,  or  Athens,  or  Alexandria, 
or  Kome.  Nay,  rather  the  tone  and  temper  of  those  cities  must  have  rendered 
them  abhorrent  as  dwelling-places  to  the  great  Teacher  of  holiness  and  purity. 
At  any  rate,  the  risen  Saviour,  if  He  remained  upon  earth,  must  have  chosen  some 
one  place  where  His  presence  and  His  personal  glory  would  have  been  manifested. 
All  interest  in  local  Churches  or  local  work  would  have  been  destroyed,  because 
every  eye  and  every  heart  would  be  perpetually  turning  towards  the  one  spot  where 
the  risen  Lord  was  dwelling,  and  where  personal  adoration  could  be  paid  to  Him. 
All  honest,  manly  self-reliance  would  have  been  lost  for  individuals,  for  Churches, 
and  for  nations.  Judaism  would  have  triumphed  and  the  dispensation  of  the 
Spirit  would  have  ceased.  The  whole  idea,  too',  of  Christianity  as  a  scheme  of 
moral  probation  would  have  been  overthrown.  Christ  as  belonging  to  the  super- 
natural sphere  would  of  course  have  been  raised  above  the  laws  of  time  and  space. 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  I. 

Sight  would  have  taken  the  place  of  faith,  and  the  terrified  submission  of  slaves 
would  have  been  substituted  for  the  moral,  loving  obedience  of  the  regenerate  soul. 
The  whole  social  order  of  life  would  also  have  been  overthrown.  The  ascension  of 
Jesus  Christ  was  absolutely  necessary  to  equip  the  Church  for  its  universal  oiission, 
by  withdrawing  the  bodily  presence  of  Christ  into  that  unseen  region  which  bears 
no  special  relation  to  any  terrestrial  locality,  but  is  the  common  destiny,  the  true 
fatheiland,  of  all  tbe  sons  of  God.  V.  "We  have  now  seen  how  the  ascension  was 
needful  for  the  Church,  by  bendering  Christ  an  ideal  object  of  worship  for  the 

WHOLE  HUMAN    KACE,    THUS    SAVING   IT   FEOM  THAT  TENDENCY  TO  MERE  LOCALISM   WHICH 

WOULD  HAVE  UTTERLY  CHANGED  ITS  CHARACTER.  We  cau  also  trace  another  great 
blessing  involved  in  it.  The  ascension  glorified  humanity  as  humanity,  and  en- 
nobled man  viewed  simply  as  man.  The  ascension  thus  transformed  life  by 
adding  a  new  dignity  to  life  and  to  life's  duties.  This  was  a  very  necessary  lesson 
for  the  ancient  world,  especially  the  ancient  Gentile  world,  which  Christ  came  to 
enlighten  and  to  save.  Man,  considered  by  himself  as  man,  had  no  peculiar 
dignity  in  the  popular  religious  estimate  of  Greece  and  Eome.  A  Greek  or  a 
Boman  was  a  dignified  person,  not,  however,  in  virtue  of  his  humanity,  but  in 
virtue  of  his  Greek  or  Eoman  citizenship.  The  gladiatorial  shows  were  the  most 
striking  illustration  of  this  contempt  for  human  nature  which  paganism  inculcated. 
We  leave  to  science  the  investigation  of  the  past  and  of  the  lowly  sources  whence 
man's  body  may  have  come  ;  but  the  doctrine  of  the  Ascension  speaks  of  its 
present  sanctity  and  of  its  future  glory,  telling  of  the  human  body  as  a  body 
of  humiliation  and  of  lowliness  indeed,  but  yet  proclaiming  it  as  even  now,  in 
the  person  of  Christ,  ascended  into  the  heavens,  and  seated  on  the  throne  of  the 
Most  High.  It  may  have  been  once  humble  in  its  origin  ;  it  is  now  glorious  in  its 
dignity  and  elevation  ;  and  that  dignity  and  that  elevation  shed  a  halo  upon  human 
nature,  no  matter  how  degraded  and  wherever  it  may  be  found,  because  it  is  like 
unto  that  Body,  the  first-fruits  of  humanity,  which  stands  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 
(G.  r.  Stokes,  D.D.)  Taken  tip  : — So  many  of  the  events  of  our  Lord's  incarnate 
life  are  connected  with  OUvet  that  it  might  almost  be  called  the  mountain  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  It  was  His  closet,  His  pulpit,  the  place  of  intercourse  with  His  disciples. 
Betbany  at  its  base  was  their  home.  Underneatb  it  was  Gethsemane,  and  there  from 
its  crest  He  rose.  Consider — I.  Several  attendant  circumstances  of  the  ascension. 
1.  As  to  the  manner  of  it,  it  was  visible.  These  things  were  not  done  in  a  corner. 
>His  crucifixion  and  burial  were  public.  It  was  requisite  that  His  resurrection  should 
be  so.  Forty  days  did  He  accumulate  proofs  of  it,  and  then  in  the  broad  open  day  He 
ascended  up  on  high.  2.  The  place  where  it  happened  is  worthy  of  notice.  "  He 
led  tliem  out  as  far  as  Bethany."  There  was  a  peculiar  fitness  in  this  selection. 
Prophecies  had  fixed  the  place  of  His  ascension  as  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  Bethany 
was  at  its  base.  We  can  imagine  the  feelings  of  the  disciples  as  they  trod  the 
familiar  road.  It  is  fitting  that  the  Conqueror  should  pass  by  Gethsemane,  that  He 
should  pass  the  place  where  He  wept  over  Jerusalem,  and  that  His  triumph  should 
take  place  in  view  of  the  house  of  sorrow.  3.  The  act  during  the  performance  of 
which  He  was  lifted  up  on  high.  "  Blessed  them."  This  was  His  daily  work,  for 
which  He  became  incarnate,  and  for  which  He  returned  to  His  glory.  He  blesses 
now,  not  from  the  mountain,  but  from  the  throne.  II.  The  purposes  op  the 
ascension.  1.  Tlie  personal  results  were  the  publicity  of  the  scene  and  the  triumph 
of  His  entrance  into  His  primal  glory.  It  was  a  witness  which  all  the  world  could 
understand  that  His  woik  on  earth  was  done.  It  was  only  the  complement  of 
Calvary,  the  ovation  of  the  triumph  actually  won  on  the  Cross.  Moreover  it  was  a 
part  of  the  consequences  of  redemption  that  the  Father  should  not  only  sustain 
the  Son  in  His  sutferings,  but  because  of  them  He  should  exalt  Him  to  pre-eminence 
of  government  and  honour.  2.  There  were  representative  results.  Christ  is  the 
federal  Head.  By  His  exaltation  our  own  race  derives  surpassing  honour. 
Humanity  is  throned  in  the  highest.  3.  There  were  mediatorial  results.  "He 
received  gifts  for  man."     (W.  31.  Punshon,  LL.D.)  The  ascension  : — 1.  Was  as 

indubitable  as  any  act  of  His  life—"  As  they  were  looking,  He  was  taken  tip."  2. 
Brought  angels  to  the  earth  immediately  with  a  message  of  comfort.  3.  Is  no 
excuse  for  standing  idly  gazing  into  heaven.  There  is  work  here  to  be  done,  the 
doing  of  which  will  quickest  hasten  His  return.  4.  Is  only  for  a  while.  He  will 
return  again,  and  come  in  great  power  and  great  glory.  5.  Has  given  to  us  an 
advocate  on  higb — He  ever  livetli  to  make  intercession  for  us.  (S.  S.  Times.) 
The  ascension  : — We  have  three  narratives  of  the  ascension,  each  of  which  presents 
it  in  a  8omewh>it  different  applica.ion.     1.  In  St.  Mark  the  aspect  of  faith  is  pre- 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  59 

dominant.  It  sets  before  Christian  people,  in  their  life  of  faithful  labour,  the  form 
of  Him  who,  though  now  out  of  sight,  is  still  and  evermore  working  with  them,  and 
confirming  His  words  by  signs  following.  2.  St.  Luke  presents  it  in  its  aspect  of 
love  ;  sets  before  Christians,  in  their  hours  of  loneliness  or  of  depression,  the  form 
of  Him,  who,  when  He  left  this  world,  left  it  with  hands  uplifted  in  blessing.  3.  In 
the  Acts  we  have  the  aspect  of  hope.  As  St.  Luke's  Gospel  closed  with  the  narrative 
of  the  Ascension,  so  the  Acts  opens  with  it.  It  was  not  more  naturally  the  close  of 
the  gospel  ihan  it  was  the  beginning  of  the  history  of  the  Church.  It  was  the  event 
which,  while  it  withdrew  from  personal  work  below,  introduced  Him  into  that  life 
above,  and  the  power  of  which  He  works  through  others.  And  we  are  to  regard  it 
as  a  fact  full  of  hope.  The  words  of  the  two  angels  give  it  this  aspect.  Learn — I. 
That  the  posture  of  those  who  love  Christ  must  henceforth  be  one  not 
MORE  OF  retrospect  THAN  OF  EXPECTATION.  It  is  Well  indeed  that  you  should  treasure 
the  thought  of  Him  as  He  was  on  earth.  His  wonderful  works.  His  perfect  example. 
His  Divine  words.  And  to  look  up  after  Him  into  heaven,  and  see  Him  there  the 
High  Priest  of  man ;  the  Eesurrection  and  the  Life,  first  of  the  soul,  and  hereafter 
also  of  the  body  ;  to  ascend  thither,  in  heart,  after  Him.  Thus  it  is  that  men  are 
made  strong  for  conflict,  victorious  over  temptation,  and  at  last  fit  for  heaven.  But 
all  this  is  a  different  thing  from  vain  regret  and  idle  contemplation.  To  gaze  up 
into  heaven  not  after  One  who  is  gone,  but  for  One  who  shall  come  is  our  work. 
And  in  those  few  words  lies  the  whole  of  the  vast  difference  between  two  states  and 
lives ;  those  of  a  true,  and  wise,  and  diligent,  and  those  of  a  dreamy,  and  gloomy, 
and  torpid  Christian.  II.  But  how  does  the  ascension  foster  this  hope  or  sug- 
gest THIS  DUTY?  The  words  of  the  angels  will  answer  that  question.  The 
ascension  was  intended  to  make  real  the  thought  of  Christ's  return.  He  might 
have  simply  disai^peared,  and  left  them  to  form  their  own  conjectures  what  had 
become  of  Him.  Perhaps  even  then  thpy  might  have  formed  the  right  conjecture 
from  His  own  words.  But  it  would  have  fallen  far  short  of  the  conviction  inspired 
by  the  actual  sight.  There  would  have  been  a  mystery  which  might  well  have 
diminished  the  comfort  and  impaired  the  satisfaction  of  His  disciples.  But  now 
they  would  feel  that  they  could  trace  Him  in  His  glory,  and  expect  Him  to  come 
again.  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  than  the  personal  hope  of  the  personal  return 
of  Christ,  which  cheered  the  first  ages  of  the  Church.  It  is  no  good  sign  when  the 
language  of  Scripture  is  read  as  an  allegory,  but  a  sign  of  the  decay  of  faith.  It 
was  in  the  dark  and  cold  ages  of  the  Church,  when  even  the  wise  virgins  too  often 
slumbered  and  slept,  that  this  definite  hope  of  the  Bridegroom's  coming  was  lost 
sight  of.  And  was  it  not  by  a  just  retribution  that  they  who  refused  to  infer  the 
Advent  from  the  Ascension,  came  at  last  from  denying  the  Advent  to  deny  the 
Ascension  also?  If  ever  the  faith  of  the  Church  is  bi'ought  back  to  its  simplicity 
in  matters  of  doctrine,  it  must  be  by  its  being  brought  back  to  its  simplicity  in 
matters  of  fact.  Take  one  of  the  Gospel  miracles  by  itself,  and  of  course  it  is  im- 
probable. But  take  each  one  in  connection  with  the  proofs  Christ  gave  of  His 
holiness,  truth,  and  goodness,  and  thus  of  His  Divinity,  and  we  shall  find  it  not 
only  credible,  but  natural  also  ;  consistent,  harmonious,  and  to  be  expected.  Even 
thus  is  it  with  the  hope  of  which  we  are  speaking.  It  might  be  in  itself  hard  to  be 
understood,  that  God  should  bring  this  dispensation  to  a  close  by  the  personal 
advent  of  the  Mediator  as  Judge.  But  view  that  purpose  in  the  light  of  the  Incar- 
nation, and  the  Advent  in  the  light  of  the  Ascension  ;  and  all  shall  become  sym- 
metrical. The  disciples  saw  Him  go :  why  should  it  be  incredible  that  He  should 
likewise  come?  "  A  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight  "  :  even  so  shall  a  cloud 
be  the  sign  when  they  who  look  for  Him  watch  His  appearing.  Conclusion  :  What 
to  us  is  our  Lord's  ascension  ?  1.  Do  we  know  anything  of  the  assurance  that  we  have 
in  heaven.  One  who  knows  our  frame  and  has  felt  our  infirmities  ?  One  who  ascended , 
that  He  might  intercede  for  us,  minister  to  us  the  Spirit,  and  prepare  a  place 
for  us  ?  2.  If  there  is  One,  up  there,  who  sees  and  will  judge ;  what  manner 
of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness !  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
The  ascension : — I.  The  circumstances.  1.  While  blessing  His  disciples  (Luke 
xxiv.  50,  51;  c/.  Lev.  ix.  22).  The  first  tidings  of  our  Saviour's  birth  were  attended 
with  blessings  to  men ;  and  when  He  died.  He  breathed  out  His  soul  in  blessings 
to  His  enemies.  So  now  He  is  translated  into  heaven  with  a  blessing  in  His 
mouth.  And,  indeed,  His  whole  life  was  a  blessing  to  mankind — a  blessed  pattern 
to  us ;  in  imitation  whereof  we  should  endeavour  that  our  whole  life  may  be  a 
blessing  too.  2.  In  the  view  of  His  disciples.  After  the  apostles  were  fully  con- 
vinced  by  several  appearances  that  He  was  indeed  risen  ;  that  they  might  be  fully 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

satisfied  that  He  came  from  God  and  went  to  Him,  He  was  in  their  sight  taken 
up.  And  this  is  no  small  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  our  religion.  3.  In  a  cloud 
fitly  represents  the  law.  Elias  was  carried  up  by  a  whirlwind  in  a  fiery  chariot, 
witli  hors^es  of  fire :  but  our  Saviour  in  a  cloud  ;  to  signify  to  us  the  coolness  and 
calmness  of  the  gospel  dispensation,  in  comparison  of  that  of  the  law ;  which 
difference  our  Saviour  had  before  observed  to  His  disciples  upon  a  remarkable 
occasion  (Luke  ix.  54,  55).  And  there  is  likewise  another  difference.  The  blessing 
which  Elijah  left  to  Elisha  is  conceived  in  very  doubtful  words  (2  Kings  ii.  9). 
This  was  suitable  to  the  obscurity  of  the  law ;  but  our  Saviour  makes  a  plain  and 
absolute  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  answerable  to  the  clearness  and  grace  of  the 
gospel  (ver.  8).  4.  luto  heaven  (ver.  11).  And  this  is  elsewhere  more  particularly 
expressed,  by  declaring  the  dignity  to  which  He  was  exalted  (Mark  xvi.  19).  This 
exaltation  of  Christ  was  conferred  upon  Him  as  a  reward  of  His  great  humiliation 
and  sufferings  (Heb.  xii.  2 ;  Phil.  li.  9,  10).  II.  The  consequent  benefits.  1. 
The  sending  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  miraculous  powers  and  gifts  upon  the  apostles, 
to  qualify  them  for  the  speerly  and  effectual  propagation  of  the  gospel,  and  to  give 
credit  to  them  in  the  preaching  of  it  (John  xvi.  7).  2.  His  powerful  intercession 
for  us  at  the  right  hand  of  God  (Helb.  ix.  24).  3.  A  mighty  confirmation  of  our 
faith.  (1)  As  to  the  truth  of  His  doctrine  in  general.  If  after  all  the  miracles  of 
His  liie,  and  His  resurrection  from  the  dead,  any  man  can  doubt  whether  He  came 
from  God  ;  >et  this  is  evidence  beyond  all  exception  that  God  took  Him  to  Himself. 
(2)  As  to  His  coming  again  to  judge  (x.  42).  Conclusion  :  The  consideration  of  our 
Saviour's  ascension  is  very  comfortable  to  all  true  Christians.  1.  In  respect  of 
our  condition  in  this  world.  The  Church,  and  every  particular  member  of  it,  is 
exposed  to  trouble  and  danger ;  but  it  is  a  great  comfoit  that  we  are  under  His 
patronage  and  protection,  who  hath  "  all  power  given  Him  in  heaven  and  earth  " 
(Heb.  iv.  14,  15).  2.  In  resiject  of  the  happiness  which  we  hope  fur  in  the  next 
world.  No  religion  hath  given  men  so  sensible  a  demonstration  of  a  blessed 
immortality  as  Christianity  by  the  ascension.  The  reasonings  of  the  philosojihers 
concerning  immortality  besid<-s  their  uncertainty  are  only  calculated  for  the  more 
refined  and  speculative  part  of  mankind  ;  but  every  man  is  capable  of  the  force  of 
this  argument,  that  He  who  declared  to  the  world  another  life  after  this,  and  the 
happy  condition  of  good  men  in  another  world,  was  Himself  visibly  taken  up  into 
heaven.     {Abp.  Tillotson.)  The  ascension: — I.  The  ascension  of  oue  Lord  is 

IN    PERFECT    HARMONY   WITH    THE    OTHEB   PORTIONS    OF    HiS    HISTORY.       His     birth,    the 

voice  from  heaven  at  His  bajitism.  His  works,  His  words,  were  all  supernatural. 
When  He  was  crucified  the  earth  trembled,  on  the  third  day  He  rose,  and  then,  in 
opposition  to  the  laws  of  gravity.  He  ascended  up  to  His  Eatlier.  All  this  is 
perfectly  harmonious.  Of  old  His  name  was  called  "  Wonderful  " ;  and  if  you 
reject  what  is  wonderful  in  the  history  of  Christ,  then  there  is  no  Christ  whatever. 
It  is  the  light  of  the  sun  that  makes  that  luminary  what  it  is.  Extinguish  the 
light  of  the  sun,  and  it  becomes  a  dark,  invisible  bofly,  revolving  uselessly  in  the 
depth  of  heaven.  After  the  sun  has  set  th^re  is  twilight.  But  it  grows  feebler  and 
feebler  every  minute,  and  by  and  by  all  is  enveloped  in  the  darkness.  Now  you 
may  eliminate  from  Christianity  the  supernatural  facts  of  it,  and  after  you  'have 
done  that  for  centuries,  very  likely,  the  twilight  of  the  setting  sun — the  after  effects 
of  what  Christianity  once  had  been — would  remain  here  ;  but  as  for  the  Christian 
religion  and  Church,  and  the  Christ  of  history,  without  the  supernatural  they 
cannot  be.      II.    The    conduct   of   ouk   Lord   at    the    time    of    His   ascensio?^ 

HARMONISES   WITH    ALL   THAT   IS   WRITTEN     OF    HiM     BEFORE    THAT    TIME.       "  While    He 

blessed  them."  That  was  His  work.  He  was  like  Himself  to  the  end.  His  heart 
was  not  embittered  by  the  Cross.  His  last  look  was  one  of  sympathy  and  love.  It 
was  the  same  at  the  end  as  at  the  beginning.  III.  The  ascension  is  connected 
WITH  THE  CARRYING  ON  OF  His  OWN  WORK.  1.  He  asccuded  "that  He  might  fill 
all  things" — that  is,  the  hearts  of  men,  the  governments  of  the  world,  all  literature, 
art,  science,  philosophy,  commerce,  courts  of  law,  pulpits,  with  His  infiuence. 
The  facts  of  the  history  of  the  Eedeemer,  the  truths  embodied  in  these  facts — have 
saved  Europe  from  animalism,  or  materialism,  or  downright  atheism.  These 
facts,  like  leaven,  are  put  into  the  hearts  of  men  everywhei-e.  2.  Christ  has  left  the 
spirit  of  His  life  here.  Fragrance  is  on  the  rose,  but  distinct  from  the  rose.  The 
rose  is  the  fact,  the  fragrance  is  something  over  and  above  the  rose.  The  lindscape 
is  one  thing,  its  beauty  of  another.  There  are  truths  in  the  Book,  but  the  genius 
with  which  those  truths  are  treated  is  another  thing.  There  are  the  facts  of  the 
Piedeemer's  life,    but  there   also   is  the    spirit   of  His   life   upon   those  facts — a 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  61 

fragrance,  a  beauty,  a  genius,  a  tenderness,  an  atmosphere,  a  divineness  which 
belong  to  no  other  facts  in  the  world.  It  is  not  the  salvation  of  your  souls  only 
that  you  owe  to  Him — He  has  humanised  humanity,  and  He  is  rectifying  and 
consecrating  Europe  by  the  influence  of  the  spirit  of  His  life.  Let  any  artist  here 
say  if  I  am  wrong.  He  has  beautified  art,  and  pagan  art  can  never  exist  again. 
3.  He  ascended  that  He  might  send  the  Holy  Ghost  down  among  men.  By  Holy 
Ghost  I  do  not  mean  a  mere  influence,  or  power,  or  energy  going  forth,  but  a 
personality,  come  down  to  regenerate  the  heait  and  create  in  it  a  noble  ambition, 
strengthen  it  for  brave  purpose,  and  consecrate  it.     IV.  The  ascension  inspieed 

THE   NOBLEST    FEELINGS    IN    THE    HEARTS    OF   HiS    APOSTLES     (Lukc    Xxiv.    52).       While 

they  looked  at  the  glorious  vision  they  instinctively  felt  a  reverence  and  admiration 
that  could  not  be  expressed.  These  feelings  are  not  to  become  extinguished 
in  Christian  hearts.  The  lowest  state  of  mind,  in  regard  to  the  Redeemer,  is  stolid 
indifference.  The  highest  state  to  which  many  people  attain,  is  inquiry  concerning 
Christ.  Inquire  by  all  means,  but  there  is  a  higher  state  than  that.  A  great 
number  seem  never  to  attain  to  anything  higher  than  simply  believing  on  Jesus. 
But  our  religion  means  more  than  knowledge,  faith,  awe,  hope.  It  means  reverence, 
admiration,  transcendent  wonder.  How  many  of  us  are  content  to  hve  without 
elevated  moments  when  the  soul  is  lost  in  wonder,  love,  and  praise?     V.  The 

ASCENSION    TEACHES   THAT    VIRTUOUS    SUFFERINGS   LEAD    TO    AND  END  IN  GLORY.      It    WaS 

becoming  that  Jesus  Christ  should  have  ascended  from  the  Mount  of  Olives.  At 
the  foot  of  that  mountain  was  the  place  of  His  sorrow  and  agony.  The  death  of 
a  gocd  man  is,  by  far,  more  an  ascension  to  heaven  than  a  descent  into  the  grave. 
It  is  very  little  after  all  that  the  grave  shall  possess  of  us.  Take  a  tree,  consume 
it,  and  then  look  at  the  small  quantity  of  ash  left.  That  is  the  only  thing  that  tree 
derived  from  the  earth.  Where  are  the  other  elements  ?  They  belonged  to  the 
skies  and  have  returned  to  the  skies  to  mingle  with  their  brother  elements.  Death 
is  the  consuming,  and  the  little  heap  of  ashes,  when  the  burning  is  over,  is  all  that 
the  giave  shall  have  of  us;  but  the  intellect,  the  will,  the  conscience,  the  affections, 
the  imagination,  the  spirit,  the  man  returns  to  God  who  gave  it.  {Thomas  Jones.) 
The  ascension : — I.  Its  historical  circumstances  and  character.  1.  As  to  the 
historical  fact.  If,  like  Matthew  and  John,  the  other  evangelists  had  omitted 
to  tell  us  of  the  ascension,  yet  we  could  not  have  conceived  of  any  other  sequence 
of  the  resurrection  ;  we  could  not  have  imagined  the  life  of  Christ  to  have  wasted 
away  in  old  age  or  sickness,  much  less  to  have  died  a  second  time.  It  was  needful 
— (1)  To  His  redeeming  trimmph,  that  His  conquest  over  death  should  be  final. 
(2)  To  His  redeeming  reward,  that  glory  should  follow  His  humiliation.  (3)  As  a 
soothing  to  our  Christian  feeling,  that  His  body,  broken  and  bleeding  on  the  Cross, 
should  be  uplifted  and  glorified.  (4)  As  an  historical  basis  for  apostolic  preaching, 
and  as  a  doctrinal  element  of  most  important  practical  influences.  And  that  which 
our  reason  must  have  concluded.  Scriptural  testimony  confirms,  not  to  mention 
the  allusions  of  the  Prophecies,  the  Psalms,  and  the  Epistles,  and  our  Lord's  own 
predictions  in  John,  which  can  only  be  understood  of  a  bodily  enthronement;  we 
have  here  the  explicit  declaration  of  two  inspired  writers,  and  all  the  disciples  were 
witnesses  of  this  departure  ;  while  three  only  beheld  His  transfiguration,  and  none 
His  resurrection.  2.  As  to  its  circumstances — (1)  The  time  selected  was  the 
fortieth  day  after  His  passion,  the  mystic  period  of  Moses'  abode  on  the  Mount,  of 
Elijah's  sojourn  in  the  wilderness,  and  of  the  Redeemer's  own  temptation — an 
interval  after  His  resurrection  long  enough  to  furnish  indubitable  proof  of  it,  to 
restore  the  agitated  disciples  to  calmness,  and  to  instruct  them  in  the  truths 
associated  with  His  death  and  resurrection.  (2)  The  place.  Once  more  our  Lord 
accompanied  the  eleven  across  the  brook  Kedron,  and  along  the  path  which  He 
traversed  to  His  passion.  Once  more,  as  He  ascended  the  well-known  track  to 
Bethany,  the  guilty  city  would  rise  to  His  view,  until  perhaps  they  reached  the  spot 
where  He  had  sat  down  and  wept  over  it ;  there  the  temple  reared  its  head  ;  there 
was  the  scene  of  His  trial,  and  "  the  place  that  is  called  Calvary,  where  they 
crucified  Him  " ;  immediately  at  His  feet  was  the  garden  of  Gethsemane ;  while 
not  far  distant  was  the  scene  of  His  tenderest  human  friendships.  (3)  There  was 
doubtless  a  studied  adaptation  to  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  disciples  in  the 
mode  of  this  leave-taking.  There  is  always  a  gloom  about  final  separation  from 
those  we  love;  but  its  circumstances  greatly  determine  the  character  of  our 
recollections.  We  see  through  the  wasting  and  parting  tabernacle,  the  beamings 
and  breakings  through  of  celestial  glory,  the  moral  glory  of  faith,  and  hope,  and 
triumph  overpowering,  the  pain  and  dissolution  ;  then  the  recollection  is  not  so 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

much  of  earthly  life  departing  as  of  heavenly  life  commencing.  And  thus  we  may 
imagine  the  Eedeemer  selecled  the  circumstances  of  His  final  departure,  and  we  do 
not  wonder  that  "  they  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy."  We  might  easily 
have  imagined  grander  circumstances.  Tliere  was  not,  as  at  His  birth,  a  multitude 
of  the  heavenly  host;  no  chariots  of  fire,  nothing  that  could  divert  attention  from 
His  own  identity  and  glory.  The  disciples  would  probably  have  been  dazzled  and 
confounded  had  it  been  otherwise.  Arid  tbere  is  delicacy  and  encouragement  in 
His  parting  attitude ;  He,  their  Saviour  and  friend,  without  any  array  of  terrible 
magnificence,  leaves  them,  aud  enters  heaven  in  the  act  of  blessing.  And  thus  the 
most  timid  is  taught  to  have  confidence  in  our  great  High  Priest.  Let  us  not,  then, 
think,  when  conscious  of  His  departure,  that  it  is  necessarily  in  anger.  The  cloud 
that  receives  Him  may  but  be  the  vail  that  hides  the  richer  blessings  still  which 
He  is  preparina;  to  pour  out  upon  us.  H.  Irs  medtatorial  and  doctrinal  im- 
portance. 1.  The  Ascension  is  the  final  historic  attestation  of  the  validity  and 
acceptance  of  the  Atonement.  A  moral  attestation  is  continually  going  on  in  the 
effects  which  the  preaching  of  the  Atonement  produces.  But  the  Ascension  is  a 
direct  personal  attestation  to  the  sufficiency  of  Christ's  expiatory  death.  2.  The 
Ascension  was  the  necessary  introduction  of  the  Mediator  to  the  scene  and  reception 
of  His  mediatorial  reward.  Mark  tells  us  that  "  He  was  received  up  into  heaven, 
and  sat  at  the  right  hand  of  God."  "  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him."  3.  Christ 
ascended  that  He  might  bestow  the  promise  of  the  Father,  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  4.  He  ascended  that  He  might,  as  our  High  Priest  and  Intercessor, 
"appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us."  5.  He  ascended  to  reign  as  Mediatorial 
King,  to  superintend  the  providence  of  the  world,  to  be  "head  over  all  things  to 
His  Church,"  and  to  "expect  until  His  enemies  shall  be  made  His  footstool." 
6.  He  ascended  according  to  His  promise,  to  "  prepare  a  place  "  for  His  disciples 
in  His  "Father's  house."  Conclusion  :  learn — 1.  How  to  conceive  of  the  spiritual 
world,  a  world  in  which  human  nature  shall  he  glorified  as  it  has  been  glorified  in 
Christ.  2.  How  precious  the  encouragements  of  our  Christian  life.  We  have 
"  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus."  "  We  have  not 
a  High  Priest  who  cannot  be  touched,"  &c.  3.  The  attitude  and  temper  of 
our  Christian  life.  The  effect  on  the  disciples  was  an  effect  not  of  sorrow  but 
of   joy.      (H.  Allon,  D.D.)  The   aKcension: — I.  The  circdmstances.      1.  The 

place.  It  is  only  natural  that  a  sacred  interest  should  attach  to  ttie  spot  which 
received  the  last  print  of  the  Kedeemer's  footsteps.  No  doubt  the  honour  accorded 
to  particular  places  may  open  the  door  to  much  of  fraud,  and  folly,  and  suporstition. 
But  the  Mount  of  Olives  was  a  fit  scene  for  the  ascension.  Around  no  other  spot 
does  there  gather  such  a  cluster  of  hallowed  associations.  2.  The  witnesses. 
Eomulus  is  said  to  have  gone  up  into  the  clouds  in  a  thunderstorm,  and  of 
Mahomet  it  is  pretended  that  he  was  miraculously  taken  up  into  heaven  ;  but  no 
witnesses  were  ever  produced  who  saw  these  events.  Our  Lord  was  careful  to  have 
chosen  and  competent  witnesses.  He  did  not  challenge  all  Jerusalem  to  see  what 
•was  going  to  take  place ;  nor  invite  the  five  hundred  asembled  at  Galilee.  The 
miracle  is  not  harder  to  believe  than  that  eleven  holy  and  loving  men  should  be 
miiitaken  in  the  identity  of  one,  with  whom  they  had  eaten  and  discoursed  after 
He  rose  from  the  dead.  3.  The  form  of  transport.  A  cloud :  that  emt)lem  of 
mingled  obscurity  and  light  which  Deity  often  employs  as  a  medium  through  which 
to  converse  with  man.  Thus  Jehovah  "  maketh  the  clouds  His  chariot."  Of  the 
glory  which  settled  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  the  characteristic  feature  is 
that  it  was  "  a  bright  cloud."  It  was  a  pillar  of  cloud  which  went  before  Israel  in 
the  wilderness,  and  it  wns  the  descendi'ig  cloud  at  the  dedication  of  the  Temple 
which  told  of  an  accepted  sacrifice,  and  an  approving  and  present  God.  Most 
fitting  was  it,  therefore,  that  such  a  substance  should  enshrine  the  glorified 
humanity  of  Jesus.  It  spoke  of  His  Deity.  It  connected  Him  more  directly  with 
the  symbolisms  and  revelations  of  the  heavenly  world.  It  preserved  the  weak 
vision  of  the  disciples  from  being  confounded  and  dazzled.  It  prefif^ured  the 
method  of  their  Lord's  return.  4.  Ttie  manner.  It  was  mild,  merciful,  and 
majestic.  Like  a  conqueror,  wreathing  his  brow  with  trophies— like  a  priest, 
lifiing  up  his  hands  to  bless — like  a  parent,  gathering  his  loved  ones  round  to  give 
them  a  parting  charge.  He  gave  thetn — (1)  a  charge  :  "  Go  ye  theiefore  and  teach 
all  nations,"  &e.  (2)  A  parting  promise  :  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway."  (3)  A  bene- 
diction: "And  He  lifted  up  His  hands  and  blessed  them."  And  thus,  in  the  mode 
of  the  Saviour's  parting,  we  cannot  fail  to  see  a  blending  of  His  three  offices.  A3 
a  Prophet,  He  provides  for  the  future  evangelisation  of  the  world.     As  a  King,  He 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  63 

engages  for  the  perpetual  preservation  of  His  Church.  As  a  Priest,  He  scatters 
from  the  throne  of  His  ascension  all  the  treasures  of  heavenly  benediction.  II. 
The  lessons.  1.  Tlie  grandeur  of  the  scheme  of  redemption,  as  seen  in  the  joy 
of  the  heavenly  host  iu  this  its  earthly  consummation.  When  God  brought  His 
only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  it  was  said,  "  Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship 
Him."  How  gladly  would  they  welcome  Him  back  to  their  own  pure  courts  when 
His  work  was  done.  "  God  is  gone  up  with  a  merry  noise,  and  the  Lord  with 
a  sound  of  a  trumpet."  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates,"  &c.  2.  The  special 
honour  put  upon  our  nature — upon  His  humanitv,  and  upon  ours.  3.  The  cementing 
and  hallowing  of  those  ties  which  subsist  betwixt  Himself  and  His  Church — in 
their  several  relations  of  King  and  subject.  Advocate  and  client.  Head  and  members. 
Bridegroom  and  bride.  4.  A  recognition  of  Christ's  title  to  universal  empire.  It 
is  the  solemn  investiture  of  the  Saviour  with  authority  over  all  worlds,  times, 
economies,  intelligences.  "  He  must  reign  till  He  hath  put  all  enemies  under  His 
feet."      (D.  Moore,  31. A.)  The  ascension: — 1.  Jesus  retired  from  Jerusalem  for 

this  final  act  of  His  earthly  life.  Great  deeds  are  better  done  in  solitude,  when 
one  is  shut  up  to  the  Father  alone.  A  man's  piety  cannot  be  very  deep,  if  it  does 
not  sometimes  have  a  few  personal  and  unutterable  reserves  in  it.  2.  Christ  chose 
a  spot  hitherto  full  of  only  debased  memories ;  Bethany,  "  house  of  the  poor." 
This  ascension  made  it  historic,  more  even  than  the  august  march  of  the  Shekinah 
over  the  same  plot  of  ground  (Ezek.  xi.  23).  Very  much  of  our  earthly  geography 
will  be  famous  in  heaven  to  those  who  love  Jesus.  3.  Our  Lord  took  with  Him 
only  His  humble  circle  of  disciples  as  witnesses.  Those  simple  fishermen  had 
seen  His  humiliation;  now  t\\ej  saw  its  offset.  "Not  many  mighty,  not  many 
noble  are  called."  Lady  Huntington  once  wrote  that  she  was  accustomed,  every 
time  she  met  this  verse,  to  "  thank  God  for  the  letter  M."  What  she  meant  was 
that,  she  (being  a  woman  of  rank)  was  not  necessarily  excluded  from  Divine  grace, 
as  she  would  have  been,  had  the  word  been  "  any,"  not  "  many."  4.  Christ  paused 
at  tlie  final  moment  for  a  priestly  act.  He  extended  His  hands ;  but  there  is  no 
hint  of  His  imposing  them.  He  was  blessing  His  disciples;  He  was  in  no  sense 
mysteriously  ordaining  them.  If  any  one  asks  what  He  said  there  is  room  for 
conjecture  (Num.  vi.  23).  5.  There  was  great  grace  of  suggestion  in  the  gesture. 
When  His  hands  were  extended,  all  would  see  plainly  the  prints  of  the  nails  in  His 
resurrection  body.  It  was  a  most  in5tructive  lesson  to  learn;  the  Son  of  God 
showed  "  the  marks — stigmas — of  the  Lord  Jesus "  at  the  moment  of  His 
coronation  and  advance  to  His  throne.  6.  Jesus  left  the  field  of  His  vast 
triumph  without  any  display  or  fuss.  All  the  pageants,  all  the  hallelujahs,  were 
reserved  for  the  celestial  city  when  the  lawful  Prince  of  glory  came  in.  It  is  not 
everv  body  who  is  great  enough  to  disappear  when  in  the  moment  of  success.  7. 
When  our  Lord  returns,  it  will  be  with  the  same  form  of  greeting  (ver.  11). 
Then  let  all  believers  learn  that  the  crown  of  a  religious  and  Christ-like  life  is 
blessing;  the  symbol  of  Jesus'  gospel  is  blessing;  the  very  prediction  of  His  coming 
again  is  blessing ;  the  attitude  He  chooses  is  the  silent  grace  of  benediction.  {C. 
S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  ascension  :  its  purposes  : — Christ  ascended — I.    That 

MEN  ivnoHT  BELIEVE  IN  HiM.  For  three  years  He  had  taught,  and  with  what 
result  ■?  Most  of  those  who  believed  trusted  in  Him  not  so  much  for  S[>iritual 
blessings  as  for  the  conquest  of  the  heathen  invader  or  for  the  "  loaves  and  fishes." 
Now  contrast  this  failure  to  awaken  the  faith  of  men,  while  He  lived  on  earth,  with 
the  success  of  His  apostles  after  the  ascension.  The  first  sermon  was  followed  by 
the  conversion  of  three  thousand  souls.  The  reason  of  this  contrast  is  not  hard  to 
find.  While  Jesus  lived  a  human  life,  and  performed  miracles,  He  called  forth 
admiration  and  wonder,  but  this  only  prevented  a  deep  spiritual  movement  in 
men's  hearts.  In  the  Gospels  we  seldom  come  across  narratives  of  men  convicted 
of  sin  and  crying  for  redemption,  but  offer  the  ascension  Christ  began  to  move  upon 
the  conscience  of  the  world  as  "  The  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world."  II.  That  men  might  know  Him  and  commune  with  Him.  Men  were 
won,  indeed,  by  the  beauty  of  His  character.  But  who  knew  Him?  Whose  heart 
throbbed  in  sympathy  with  His?  Where  will  you  find  the  record  of  any  real 
communion  on  the  great  themes  that  were  nearest  His  heart  ?  When  He  addressed 
them  they  but  half  understood  Him.  But  contrast  these  disciples  after  the 
ascension.  Then  they  began  to  know  Him.  They  grasped  the  significance  of  His 
coming,  His  labour  and  His  death.  Knowing  Him  now  in  the  spirit  and  aim  of 
His  great  mediatorial  life,  they  communed  with  Him,  and  illumined  with  this 
new  knowledge  and  inspired  by  this  communion,  they  went  forth  to  preach  the 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

gospel,  and  it  proved  itself  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  We  easily 
understand  this.  The  daily  life  of  men  serves  as  often  to  conceal  as  to  reveal 
them.  How  often  a  great  statesman  is  not  seen  in  his  true  proportions  until  he 
has  been  received  "  out  of  sight  "  !  How  often  the  child  knows  not  the  meaning 
of  a  father's  or  a  mother's  life  until  death  has  separated  the  parent  from  them ! 
So  it  was  with  the  disciples.  III.  In  order  that  His  people  might  truly  follow 
Him.  While  He  was  with  them  on  the  earth  the  disciples  sought  to  imitate  His 
outward  life,  to  repeat  His  miracles,  and  His  judgments.  I  cannot  detect  a  single 
sign  that  the  mind  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus  was  in  one  of  them.  The  result 
was  that  they  never  became  independent  of  His  physical  presence.  But  how 
different  when  He  had  ascended  !  The  impetuous  and  ambitious  Peter  la\  s  down 
his  life,  like  his  Master,  for  the  redemption  of  men.  The  "son  of  thunder" 
breathes  forth  the  spirit  of  Christ  in  the  words,  "  Little  children,  let  us  love 
one  another."  Instead  of  attempting  to  imitate  Christ's  outward  life,  they  sought 
to  drink  into  His  spirit.  And  so  it  is  with  us.  IV.  That  he  might  be  thr 
SPIRITUAL  Redeemer  of  the  whole  world.  The  Church  and  the  world  are  to 
become  one ;  the  spirit  of  Christ  is  to  become  the  dominant  spirit  of  the  world's 
life.  In  order  to  achieve  this  Jesus  removed  Himself  from  the  limitations  of  place 
and  time  ana  nationality ;  and,  ascending  on  high,  Feated  Himself  on  the  throne  of 
universal  dominion.  And  thus  it  was  that  when  Christ  had  gone  the  Church  moved 
forward  on  the  path  of  universal  conquest.  (J.  De  Witt,  D.D.)  Christ's  way  to 
heaven  unclosed : — It  has  been  said  that  in  the  early  ages  an  ^.ttempt  was  once 
made  to  build  a  chapel  on  the  top  of  the  hill  from  which  Christ  ascended  into 
heaven  ;  but  that  it  was  found  impossible  either  to  pave  over  the  place  where  He 
last  stood,  or  to  erect  a  roof  through  the  path  through  which  He  ascended — a 
legendary  tale,  no  doubt,  though  perhaps  intended  to  teach  the  important  truth 
that  the  moral  marks  and  impressions  which  Christ  has  left  behind  Him  can  never 
be  obliterated ;  that  the  way  to  heaven  through  which  He  passed  can  never  be 
closed  by  human  skill  or  power  ;  and  that  He  has  before  us  an  open  door  which  no 
man  shall  be  able  to  shut.  (-/.  A  lexander,  D.D. )  The  trail  of  the  ascending  Saviour : 
— Sometimes,  when  the  sky  is  beclouded,  we  do  not  see  that  across  the  garden  path 
there  swnys  a  ladder  of  gossamer,  lirjking  tree  with  tree  ;  but  when  the  sun  shines 
it  is  revealed  by  its  silver  sheen.  So,  as  the  intidel  looks  upwards,  he  can  see  no 
bend  of  union  between  this  atom  of  star-dust  and  the  metropolis  of  the  universe, 
until  his  eyes  are  opened,  and  he  sees  the  ladder  left  by  the  trail  of  the  departing 
Saviour.  Thank  God,  we  are  not  cut  adrift  to  the  mercy  of  eveiy  current ;  this 
dark  coal-ship  is  moored  alongside  the  bright  ship  of  heavenly  grace  ;  yes,  and 
there  is  a  plank  between  them.     {F.  B.  Meyer.)  Christ  in  hcaviu: — Christ's 

ascension  lights  up  our  thought  of  heaven.  Says  one:  "The  presence  of  the 
gloiitied  humanity  of  Christ  seems  a  necessary  preliminary  and  condition  of  our 
prestnce  in  heaven.  We  could  not  be  at  home  among  those  august  and  terrible 
splendours  unless  we  saw  Him,  our  Brother,  in  the  heart  of  all.  As  Joseph's 
brethren,  who  had  been  all  their  lives  wild  Arab  shepherds,  would  have  felt  ill 
at  ease  indeed  in  the  proudest  court  in  the  world  had  it  not  been  that  their  brother 
was  there  upon  the  throne,  so  we  would  not  have  found  heaven  to  be  our  home 
unless  we  found  it  to  be  the  place  of  the  presence  of  Jesus  Christ.  Heaven  ia  no 
place  for  us  unless  Christ  Jesus  be  there  : 

"  My  knowledge  of  that  life  is  small, 
The  eye  of  faith  is  dim  ; 
But  'tis  enough  that  Christ  knows  all, 

And  I  shall  be  with  Him."         {(?.  H.  James.) 

The  angels  watchinrj  Jesus : — It  takes  a  spiritual  nature  to  see  the  spiritual  facts 
of  this  world.  Doubtless  there  were  thousands  in  Galilee  and  Judffia  who  passed 
tbe  Messiah  without  a  glance.  Let  us  have  a  walk  of  two  miles  through  the  heart 
of  any  metropolis  with  any  man,  and  we  would  not  care  for  any  further  exposition 
of  his  character.  He  is  to  be  judged  by  what  He  himself  "  sees."  Around  the 
display  in  the  window  of  the  diamond -broker  there  gathers  a  certain  number  by  the 
silent  process  of  natural  selection.  At  the  toy  store  a  different  crowd  augments 
itself.  Before  the  bulletin  board  of  tho  stock  exchange  a  third  company  collects ; 
and  at  a  bookseller's  shop  a  fourth.  Wtiile  men  were  watching  the  movements  of 
Herod  or  the  campaigns  of  Caesar  the  angels  were  watching  Jesus.  They  hovered 
over  the  manger  at  Bethlehem  ;  minstered  to  His  fainting  frame  in  the  wilderness ; 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  ^    65- 

guarded  the  tomb  in  the  garden,  and  followed  with  glad  eyes  His  form  as  it  disappeared 
in  the  clouds  above  Olivet.  It  is  a  crucial  test  of  character  whether  we  see  or 
slight  the  living  Christ  in  the  men  and  women  of  our  own  day.  [Christian  Age.) 
The  ascension :  its  moral  uses : — I.  Odr  faith  in  Christ's  Divinity  is  made  sure. 
He  who  said,  "  I  came  down  from  heaven,"  spoke  also  of  the  Ascension  as  the 
means  whereby  the  doubts  of  His  disciples  should  be  removed  (John  vi.  88,  51,  61- 
62).  II.  Our  hope  in  His  promises  is  strengthened.  Where  He  is  gone  we 
shall  also  go,  since  He  is  gone  as  our  first-fruits,  and  to  prepare  a  place  for  us. 
III.  Our  love  is  inflamed.  By  His  going  up  into  heaven  our  hearts  are  raised  in 
expectation  to  the  same  place,  and  our  love  is  kindled  by  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
He  sends  down  from  thence.  (W.  Denton,  31. A.)  The  Ascension:  /t-i  diffusive 
benefits : — So  long  as  a  lamp  in  a  room  is  placed  on  a  low  level  its  light  may  be 
intercepted  by  the  bodies  of  persons  around  it,  and  so  prevented  from  reaching 
others  who  are  in  the  remoter  corners.  But  let  it  be  lifted  up  to  the  ceiling,  and  it 
sheds  its  beams  down  on  all  who  are  below.  Our  Lord,  while  on  earth,  was  circum- 
scribed by  place  and  earthly  relationships ;  but  since  His  ascension.  His  presence 
and  influence  are  diffused  everywhere  through  the  spiritual  world,  as  the  rays  of 
the  sun  are  through  the  natural.     (Dean  Goulburn.)       The  Ascension  :  its  lessons: — 

I.  Heavenly-mindedness.  He  went  as  the  great  Forerunner  of  His  people,  and  we 
must  follow  in  His  course.  Where  the  Head  is  there  should  the  members  be  ;  and 
our  treasure,  life,  affection  are  meant  to  be  with  Him  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

II.  Simple  duty.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  which  is  emphatically  the 
Epistle  of  the  Ascension,  this  is  the  aspect  of  the  doctrine  which  is  always  urged. 
Because  Christ  is  highly  exalted  and  we  are  raised  up  together  with  Him,  therefor© 
we  are  to  be  lowly  and  meek,  and  to  forbear  one  another  in  love  ;  to  put  off  the  old 
man,  &c.  It  is  the  same  lesson  which  is  taught  in  two  of  the  Psalms  appointed  for 
the  service  of  Ascension  Day,  "  Lord,  who  shall  dwell  in  Thy  tabernacle,  or  who  shall 
rest  upon  Thy  holy  hill  ?  "  Is  it  only  the  lofty,  the  devoted  ?  No,  but  common  men 
who,  by  God's  grace,  have  lived  their  common  lives  in  the  paths  of  purity  and  duty, 
the  lowly,  the  undeceitful,  the  unmalicious,  the  uncorrupt.  III.  Holy  fear.  How 
are  you  living  ?  As  Christ  ascended,  so  shall  He  one  day  descend  to  awful  judg- 
ment. If  you  be  a  hardened  sinner,  and  will  continue  so,  then  fear  ;  for  then  to 
you  the  lesson  of  Christ's  ascension  is  a  lesson  of  wrath  and  doom.  IV.  But  if  you 
be  living  in  justice  and  mercy,  and  walking  humbly  with  your  God,  then  the  lesson 
is  one  of  hope.  It  is  a  pledge  to  us  of  that  forgiveness  which  Christ  died  to  win. 
For  Christ  is  our  Intercessor.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  Ascension :  the  Saviour's 
gifts  : — It  was  the  custom  of  the_  Eoman  emperors,  at  their  triumphal  entrance, 
to  cast  new  coins  among  the  multitudes  :  so  doth  Christ,  in  His  triumphal  entrance 
into  heaven,  throw  the  greatest  gifts  for  the  good  of  man  that  were  ever  given.  (2*. 
Goodwin,  D.D.)  The  ascension  of  Christ  and  of  Elijah : — While  the  going  up  of 
Elias  may  be  compared  to  the  flight  of  a  bird  which  none  can  follow,  the  ascension 

of  Christ  is,  as  it  were,  a  bridge  between  heaven  and  earth,  laid  down  for  all  who       ^ 
are  drawn  to  Him.     (j.  Baumgarten.)  The  Ascension  and  the  Second  Advent    y^ 

practically  considered  : — 1.  Four  great  events  shine  out  in  our  Saviour's  story — His 
birth,  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension.  These  make  four  rounds  in  that  ladder 
of  light,  the  top  whereof  reacheth  to  heaven.  We  could  not  afford  to  dispense  with 
any  one  of  them.  That  the  Son  oi  God  was  born  creates  a  brotherhood  ;  that  He 
died  is  the  rest  and  life  of  our  spirits ;  that  He  rose  is  the  warrant  of  our  justification, 
and  an  assurance  of  the  resurrection  of  all  His  people.  Equally  delightful  is  the 
remembrance  of  His  ascension.  No  song  is  sweeter  than  this — "  Thou  hast  ascended 
on  high;  Thou  hast  led  captivity  captive,"  &c.  2.  Each  one  of  those  four  events 
points  to  another,  and  lead  up  to  it :  the  Second  Advent.  Had  He  not  come  a  first 
time  in  humiliation  He  could  not  have  come  a  second  time  in  glory  "  without  a  sin- 
offering  unto  salvation."  Because  He  died  we  rejoice  that  He  cometh  to  destroy 
the  last  enemy.  It  is  our  joy  that  in  consequence  of  His  rising  the  trump  of  the 
archangel  shall  sound  for  the  awaking  of  all  His  slumbering  people.  As  for  His 
ascension.  He  could  not  a  second  time  descend  if  He  had  not  first  ascended.  3.  We 
will  start  from  the  ascension.  Picture  our  Lord  and  the  eleven  walking  up  the  side 
of  Olivet.  They  come  to  a  standstill,  having  reached  the  brow  of  the  hill.  While 
the  disciples  are  looking,  the  Lord  has  ascended  to  the  clouds.  They  stand  spell- 
bound, and  suddenly  a  bright  cloud,  like  a  chariot  of  God,  bears  Him  away.  They 
are  riveted  to  the  spot,  very  naturally  so ;  but  it  is  not  the  Lord's  will  that  they 
should  long  remain  inactive  ;  their  reverie  is  interrupted.  Two  messengers  of  God 
appear  in  human  form  that  they  may  not  alarm  them,  and  in  white  raiment  as  if  to 
VOL.    I.  5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOIt.  [chap.  r. 


remind  them  that  all  was  bright  and  joyous.  As  they  had  once  said  to  the  women, 
"  "Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead  ?  He  is  not  here,  but  is  risen  " ;  fo  did 
they  now  say,  "  Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  beaven?  this  same 
Jesus,"  &c.  Their  reverie  over,  the  apostles  at  once  gird  up  their  loins  for  active 
service;  they  hasten  to  obey  the  command,  "  Tarry  ye  at  Jerusalem."  Here  is — 
I.  A  GENTLE  CHIDING.  1.  What  thesc  men  were  doing  seems  at  first  sight  to  be — 
(1)  Very  right.  If  Jesus  were  among  us  now  we  would  fix  our  eyes  upon  Him,  and 
never  withdraw  them.  When  He  ascended  up  into  heaven  it  was  the  duty  of  His 
friends  to  look  upon  Him.  If  it  be  right  to  look  up  into  heaven,  it  must  be  still 
more  right  to  louk  up  while  Jesus  rises  to  the  place  of  His  glory ;  but  they  went 
further — they  stood  "  gazing."  "  Look  "  is  ever  the  right  word.  "  Look  unto  Me, 
and  be  saved."  Be  your  posture  that  of  one  "  looking  unto  JeSus,"  alwavs  through- 
out life.  But  it  is  not  commendable,  when  the  look  is  not  that  of  worship,  but  of 
curiosity.  If  infinite  wisdom  had  withdrawn  the  object,  what  was  their  gazing  but 
a  sort  of  reflection  upou  the  wisdom  which  had  removed  their  Lord  ?  Yet  it  did 
seem  very  right.  Thus  certain  things  that  you  and  I  may  do  may  appear  right,  and 
yet  we  may  need  to  be  chidden  out  of  them  into  something  better.  A  steadfast 
gaze  into  heaven  may  be  to  a  devout  soul  a  high  order  of  worship,  but  if  this  filled 
up  much  of  our  working  time  it  might  become  the  idlest  form  of  folly.  (2)  Very 
natural.  I  should  have  done  the  same.  Hearts  are  not  to  be  argued  with.  You 
stand  by  a  grave.  You  cannot  help  it,  the  place  is  precious  to  you ;  yet  you  could 
not  prove  that  yon  do  any  good,  and  deserve  to  be  gently  chidden  with  the  question, 
"  Why?  "  It  may  be  the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world,  and  yet  it  may  not  be  a 
■wise  thing.  The  Lord  allows  us  to  do  that  which  is  innocently  natural,  but  He 
will  not  have  us  carry  it  too  far.  We  must  not  stand  gazing  here  for  ever,  and 
therefore  we  are  aroused  to  get  back  to  the  Jerusalem  of  practical  life,  where  we 
may  do  service  for  our  Master.  (3)  But  was  not  after  all  justifiable  upon  strict 
reason.  While  Christ  was  going  up  it  was  proper  that  they  should  adoringly  look 
at  Him.  But  when  He  was  gone,  still  to  remain  gazing  was  an  act  which  they 
could  not  explain  to  themselves  nor  justify  to  others.  I  remember  a  woman  whose 
only  son  was  emigrating.  The  train  came  up  and  he  entered  the  carriage.  After 
the  train  had  passed,  she  ran  along  the  platform  and  pursued  the  flying  train.  It 
was  natural,  but  what  was  the  use  of  it  ?  We  had  better  abstain  from  acts  which 
serve  no  practical  purpose.  2.  What  they  did  we  are  very  apt  to  imitate.  "  Oh," 
say  you,  "  I  shall  never  stand  gazing  up  into  heaven."  I  am  not  sure  of  that. 
(1)  Some  Christians  are  very  curious,  but  not  obedient.  I  remember  one  who  was 
great  at  apocalyptic  symbols,  but  he  had  no  family  prayer.  By  all  means  search 
till  you  know  all  that  the  Lord  has  revealed  concerning  things  to  come  ;  but  first 
see  that  your  children  are  brought  to  the  Saviour,  and  that  you  are  workers  in  His 
Church.  (2)  Others  are  contemplative  but  not  active — much  given  to  the  study  of 
Scripture,  but  not  zealous  for  good  works.  When  a  man's  reli>.'ion  all  lies  in 
enjoying  holy  things  for  his  own  self,  there  is  a  disease  upon  him.  When  his  judg- 
ment of  a  sermon  is  based  upon  the  one  question,  "  Did  it  feed  me  ?  "  it  is  a  swinish 
judgment.  (3)  Some  are  impatient  for  some  marvellous  interposition.  We  get  at 
times  into  a  sad  state  of  mind,  because  we  do  not  see  the  kingdom  of  Christ  advanc- 
ing as  we  desire.  The  Master  is  away,  and  we  cry,  "  When  will  He  be  back  again  ? 
Why  tarries  He  through  the  ages  ?  "  In  certain  cases  this  uneasiness  has  drawn  to 
itself  an  intense  desire  for  sign-seeing.  VVhat  fanaticisms  come  of  this  1  If  I  were 
introduced  into  a  room  where  a  large  number  of  parcels  were  stored  up,  and  I  was 
told  that  there  was  something  good  for  me,  I  should  begin  to  look  for  that  which 
had  my  name  upon  it,  and  when  I  came  upon  a  parcel  and  I  saw  in  pretty  big 
letters,  "  It  is  not  for  you,"  I  should  leave  it  alone.  Here,  then,  is  a  casket  of 
knowledge  marked,  "It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons," d'c.  Cease 
to  meddle  with  matters  which  are  concealed,  and  be  satisfied  to  know  the  things 
which  are  cleaidy  revealed.  II.  A  cheering  description — "  This  same  Jesus."  I 
appreciate  this  the  more  because  it  came  from  those  who  knew  Him.  "  He  was 
seen  of  angels."  1.  Jesus  is  gone,  but  He  still  exists.  As  surety  as  He  did  hang 
upon  the  Cross,  so  surely  does  He,  the  self-same  Man,  sit  upon  the  throne  of  God. 
Jesus  lives;  mind  that  you  live  also.  "  Jesus  "means  "  a  Saviour."  Oh,  ye  anxious 
sinners,  the  name  of  Him  who  has  gone  up  into  His  glory  is  full  of  invitation  to 
you  1  Will  you  not  come  to  "  this  same  Jesus  "  ?  2.  He  who  is  to  come  will  be  the 
same  Jesus  that  went  up  into  heaven.  He  will  be  "  the  same  Jesus  "  in  nature 
though  not  in  condition :  He  will  possess  the  same  tenderness  when  He  comes  to 
judge.     Go  to  Him  with  your  troubles,  as  you  would  have  done  when  He  was  here. 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  67 

Look  forward  to  His  second  coming  without  dread.  On  the  back  of  that  sweet  title 
came  this  question,  "  Why  stand  ye  here  gazing  into  heaven  ?  "  They  might  have 
said,  "We  stay  here  because  we  do  not  know  where  to  go.  Our  Master  is  gone." 
But  oh,  it  is  the  same  Jesus,  and  He  is  coming  again,  so  go  down  to  Jerusalem  and 
get  to  work  directly.  Do  not  worry  yourselves  ;  it  is  not  a  disaster  that  Christ  has 
gone,  but  au  advance  in  His  work.  Dcspisers  tell  us  nowadavs,  "Your  Divine 
Christ  is  gone ;  we  have  not  seen  a  trace  of  His  miracle-working  hand,  nor  of  that 
voice  which  no  man  could  rival."  Here  is  our  answer :  He  lives ;  and  it  is  our 
delight  to  turn  our  Leavenly  gazing  into  an  earthward  watching,  and  to  go  down 
into  the  city,  and  there  to  tell  that  Jesus  is  risen,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him 
shall  have  everlasting  life.  His  ascension  is  not  a  retreat,  but  an  advance.  His 
tarrying  is  not  for  want  of  power,  but  because  of  the  abundance  of  His  long-suffer- 
ing. III.  A  GREAT  PRACTICAL  TRUTH,  which  will  not  keep  us  gazing  into  heaven, 
but  will  make  us  render  earnest  service.  1.  Jesus  is  gone  into  heaven  ;  up  to  the 
throne,  from  which  He  can  send  us  succour.  Is  not  that  a  good  argument — "  Go 
ye  therefore  and  teach  all  nations,"  &c.  ?  2.  Jesus  will  come  again.  A  commander 
has  not  given  up  the  campaign  because  it  is  expedient  that  he  should  withdraw  from 
your  part  of  the  field.  Our  Lord  is  doing  the  best  thing  for  His  kingdom  in  going 
away.  3.  He  is  coming  in  like  manner  as  He  departed.  He  will  descend  in  clouds 
even  as  He  went  up  in  clouds;  and  "  He  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the 
earth  "  even  as  He  stood  aforetime.  Do  not  let  anybody  spiritualise  this  away. 
Jesus  is  coming  as  a  matter  of  fact,  therefore  go  down  to  your  sphere  of  service 
as  a  matter  of  fact.  Jesus  is  literally  and  actually  coming,  and  He  will  literally 
and  actually  call  upon  you  to  give  an  account  of  your  stewardship.  4.  Be  ready  to 
meet  your  coming  Lord.  I  called  one  day  on  one  of  our  members,  and  she  was 
whitening  the  front  steps.  She  got  up  all  in  confusion,  and  said,  "  Oh  dear,  sir, 
I  did  not  know  you  were  coming  to-day,  or  I  would  have  been  ready."  I  replied, 
"Dear  friend,  you  could  not  be  in  better  trim  than  you  are:  you  are  doing  your 
duty  like  a  good  housewife,  and  may  God  bless  you.  When  Jesus  comes,  I  hope 
He  will  find  me  doing  as  you  are  doing,  namely,  fulfilling  the  duty  of  the  hour." 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  apostles'  last  sight  of  Jesus : — Note  here — I.  The  Master 

OF  ALL  resources    MAKING  USE  OF    NATURAL  MEANS  IN    CONNECTION  WITH  A    STUPENDOUS 

MIRACLE.  Jesus  showed  Himself  superior  to  natural  laws,  yet  up  to  the  highest 
point  possible  He  made  use  of  natural  means  on  the  way  to  His  glorious  end.  He 
might  have  ascended  from  the  valley,  but  since  He  made  hills  so  much  nearer 
heaven.  He  would  not  neglect  the  benefit  of  His  own  creation.  He  who  could  always 
have  walked  on  the  sea  did  so  but  once,  and  He  to  whom  the  highest  mountains  are 
but  valleys  would  walk  up  a  hill  to  ascend  into  heaven.  This  should  teach  us  to 
bless  God  for  means  when  we  have  them,  and  to  trust  Him  for  means  when  we  have 
them  not.  II.  The  great  Master  going  to  His  rest  when  His  work  was  done. 
He  had  overcome,  and  must  therefore  now  go  to  His  throne.  He  had  shown  His 
sovereign  power  over  the  sea  by  walking  on  it  and  making  it  pay  His  tribute  ;  over 
the  earth  by  raising  the  dead  and  forsaking  His  own  tomb  ;  over  hell  by  conquering 
Satan ;  and  He  must  now  show  His  power  over  the  air  by  a  local  ascending  into 
heaven.  III.  Christ  served  by  other  beings  than  men.  The  cloud  might  be  a 
multitude  of  heavenly  attendants.  Certainly  celestial  messengers  instructed  the 
apostles  about  "  this  same  Jesus."  How  great  is  His  dignity  who  has  such  servants, 
and  what  an  honour  to  serve  Him.  IV.  That  even  Christian  contemplation 
must  be  regulated  with  reference  to  other  duties.  It  was  but  natural  that  the 
disciples  should  gaze  after  Jesus ;  but  the  angel's  word  called  them  off  from  an 
object  engrossing  and  delightful  to  their  work.  To  neglect  the  shop  for  the  prayer- 
meeting,  to  allow  your  cattle  to  hunger  that  you  may  hear  a  sermon,  to  make 
private  devotion  an  excuse  for  refusing  to  visit  the  sick  and  needy,  is  what  God 
cannot  bless;  and  when  a  Christian  is  called  from  such  dangerous  ways  he  ought 
to  feel  deeply  grateful.  V.  That  the  Ascension  is  a  pattern  of  the  Second  Advent. 
It  will  be — 1.  Personal.  2.  With  clouds.  3.  With  angelic  attendants.  (W. 
Hudson.)  A  cloud  received  Him. — The  Ascension  cloud: — Lovers  of  nature  find 
almost  as  much  pleasure  in  watching  the  clouds  as  in  gazing  upon  a  landscape  ;  in 
some  respects  even  more,  for  the  colouiing  is  far  more  splendid,  and  the  whole 
scene  is  one  of  perpetual  change  and  variety.  We  read  very  much  of  clouds  in  Holy 
Scripture.  The  one  before  us  is  the  Ascension  cloud.  A  last  thought  is  the  extent 
and  amount  of  the  change  involved  in  the  Ascension.  "  A  cloud  received  Him." 
That  is  all.  This  and  no  more  is  the  chauge  made  by  the  Ascension.  Bebind, 
above  the  cloud,  is  the  Person  who  a  moment  ago  was  visible,  was  audible,  was 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  i. 

conversing  and  communing  with  us,  was  here,  and  answering  our  questions ;  waa 
speaking  of  things  pertaining  to  Hid  kingdom.  There  is  now  just  a  cloud  betwe^n 
us — between  us  and  Him.  That  is  all.  No  other  change  has  had  place  or  room. 
We  are  still  gazing  into  heaven,  only  a  cloud  has  intercepted  the  view.  His  last 
act  was  benediction :  while  He  blessed  He  was  taken  from  us.  The  hand  is 
stretched  out  still.  It  is  to  leave  His  peace  with  us  which  passeth  understanding. 
The  Ascension  cloud  has  nothing  but  benediction  in  it.  It  was  that  He  might  fill 
earth  and  heaven,  St.  Paul  tells  us,  that  He  went  away.  In  other  words,  it  was 
that,  being  out  of  sight,  and  because  He  was  out  of  sight,  He  might  be  to  us  that 
spiritual  presence  which  alone  profits,  satisfies,  comforts,  or  saves.  The  Ascension 
cloud  is  all  blessing.  The  mystery  which  it  involves  is  no  illusion.  It  is  true  and 
wholesome  doctrine.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  reality,  and  the  activity,  and  the 
nearness  to  us  of  that  spiritual  presence  which  is  our  life.  Alas  !  it  is  quite  other- 
wise with  other  clouds  which  intercept  the  view  of  the  Ascended,  "Earth-born 
clouds  "  our  evening  hymn  speaks  of.  They  are  of  all  kinds.  There  is  the  cloud 
of  simple  indiiSerenee.  The  heart  feels  no  want  which  earth  cannot  supply.  The 
heart  sees  no  beauty  in  spiritual  satisfaction.  Christ  is  out  of  sight ;  the  cloud  is 
between,  and  we  care  not  to  pierce  it.  Let  it  hide  the  Invisible ;  we  do  not  want 
Him.  And  then  there  is  the  cloud  of  unbelief.  We  have  heard  of  the  sneer  of  the 
infidel ;  alas  !  we  have  listened  to  it.  All  things  are  dared  in  these  days,  even  if  it 
be  to  the  parodying  and  caricature  of  the  Bible.  Wheresoever  the  soul  has  no  God 
in  it,  there  clouds  are,  and  their  name  is  legion.  There  is  the  earth-born  cloud 
of  sinning.  Yes,  for  one  cloud  of  worldliness,  or  levity,  or  conscious  unbelief, 
there  are  in  the  individual  skies  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  damp,  dark, 
heavy  clouds  of  sin ;  and  each  one  of  these  hides  Jesus  Christ  from  view.  If 
it  be  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand  it  is  enough.  Each  one  of  these  little  clouds 
places  Him  at  a  measureless  distance.  Him  the  holy,  the  undefiled,  the  sepai'ate 
from  sinners.  He  cannot  dwell  where  sin  is,  either  as  guest  or  host.  "  A  cloud 
receiveth  Him  out  of  their  sight,"  It  was  one  of  the  earth-born  clouds.  It  was  not, 
the  sweet  Ascension  cloud,  for  that  while  it  intercepts  the  view  of  sense  only 
quickens  the  view  of  faith,  which  is  the  eye  of  the  soul.  {Dean  Vauglwn.) 
Comfort  in  a  cloud : — A  friend  of  mine  told  me  of  a  visit  he  had  paid  to  a  poor 
woman  overwhelmed  with  trouble.  "  Mary,"  said  he,  "  you  must  have  very 
dark  days  ;  the  clouds  must  overcome  you  sometimes."  "  Yes,"  she  replied, 
"when  I  am  very  dark  and  low  I  go  to  the  window,  and  if  I  see  a  heavy  cloud 
I  think  of  those  precious  words,  '  A  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight,'  and 
I  look  up  and  see  the  cloud  sure  enough,  and  then  I  think,  '  Well,  that  may 
be  the  cloud  that  hides  Him';  and  so  you  see  there  is  comfort  in  a  cloud." 
The  intervening  cloud : — A  minister  says:  "I  once  visited  an  invalid  lady  who  for 
a  long  time  had  been  confined  to  her  bed,  and  she  said  to  me,  '  The  Lord  has 
forgotten  me  altogether.'  I  replied,  '  Supposing  a  heavy  mist  should  fall  so  that 
you  could  not  see  that  lighthouse  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  would  you 
believe  it  was  there  ? '  '  Oh,  yes,'  she  said,  '  because  I  had  seen  it  before,  and 
I  should  all  the  time  hear  the  whistle  which  warns  mariners  of  danger.' 
'  Yes,  and  in  the  same  way  you  may  know  that  th«  Lord  is  near.  Your  bodily 
weakness  is  the  cloud  between  you  and  your  God.  His  Word  still  speaks  to  you, 
and  the  eye  of  faith  can  surely  see  through  this  cloud  as  clearly  as  through  an 
earthly  mist.'    This  led  her  to  a  life  of  faith  and  comfort." 

Vers.  10,  11,  And  while  they  looked  steadfastly  toward  heaven  as  He  went  up. — 

Too  viuch  mere  sentiment  in  religion: — It  may  be  that  the  same  two  angels  who 
rolled  away  the  stone,  and  appeared  at  His  open  sepulchre,  were  present  now.  Or 
were  they  the  "  two  men,"  Moses  and  Elijah,  who  had  appeared  at  the  Transfigura- 
tion ?  Whoever  they  were,  they  were  glorified  beings,  sent  to  do  honour  to  Christ. 
The  words  may  be  taken  as  a  rebuke  for  the  indulgence  of  too  much  sentiment  in 
connection  with  religion.  Sentiment  in  religion  is  not  only  good,  but  essential ; 
without  the  sentiments  of  love,  hope,  gratitude,  adoration,  there  could  be  no 
religion.  But  if  it  continue  merely  as  sentiment,  and  takes  no  practical  form, 
sways  not  the  actions  and  shapes  not  the  life,  it  is  rather  pernicious  than  useful, 
I,  Thit  too  much  sentimental  interest  in  the  marvellous  in  religion  is  not  good. 
Eeligion  has  its  marvels,  supernatural  events  crowd  the  Word  of  God  ;  but  to  yield 
our  minds  too  much  to  the  influence  of  the  wonderful,  is  not  good.  The  sentiment 
of  wonder  has  its  beneficent  mission ;  it  tends  to  take  us  out  of  ourselves,  to  break 
the  monotony  of  our  experience,  and  to  give  a  passing  freshness  to  life.     But  the 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  -    69 

indulgence  of  this  sentiment  of  wonder,  apart  from  religion,  is  a  great  evil.  The 
religionists  who  are  always  gazing  after  signs  and  wonders  become  dreamy  mystics 
and  the  dupes  of  priestly  imposture.  The  wonder  which  the  marvellous  in  religion 
excites,  becomes  only  useful  as  it  lifts  us  to  a  higher  plane  of  practical  life,  only  as 
it  tends  to  make  our  lives  sublime.  II.  That  too  much  sentimental  interest  in  the 
OBJECTIVE  in  religion  is  not  good.  The  disciples  were  looking  outside  of  themselves, 
fixing  their  gaze  on  the  heavens.  We  do  well  so  to  gaze  upon  the  outward,  as  to 
reduce  the  whole  into  a  science  that  sball  become  the  richest  inheritance  of  the 
intellect.  In  religion,  too,  we  must  be  interested  in  the  outward.  The  soul  is 
neither  self-sustaining  nor  self-directing;  its  elements  of  life  must  be  derived  from 
without ;  its  lessons  of  direction  must  come  from  without.  But  to  have  all  our 
interests  absorbed  in  the  externals  of  religion  is  a  terrible  evil,  and,  alas  !  a  preva- 
lent one.  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteousness  and  joy 
and  peace  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  III.  That  too  much  sentimental  interest  in  the 
TEMPORARY  in  religion  is  not  good.  There  is  a  natural  tendency  in  these  souls  of 
ours  to  linger  with  interest  over  departed  objects  that  were  once  dear  to  the  heart. 
"  We  cling,"  says  one,  "  to  the  shell,  the  husks,  the  garments,  after  the  kernel,  the 
essence,  and  the  life  have  gone."  To  indulge  in  this  sentiment  in  natural  things,  is  not 
good  ;  tlie  mourner  whose  sentiments  are  always  absorbed  in  the  dear  ones  that  are 
gone,  grows  moody  and  diseased.  The  permanent  was  with  them — the  eternal 
principles  of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  Christ,  these  did  not  depart ;  it  was  a  mere 
temporary  manifestation  that  went ;  and  to  have  their  sentiments  engrossed  in 
that,  was  not  good.  There  are  those  around  us  in  all  directions  whose  sympathies 
are  taken  up  with  the  mere  temporary  forms  of  religion.  (Homilist.)  Words  to 
the  spectators  of  the  ascension  ; — I.  The  chiding  element.  "  Why  stand  ye  gazing?  " 
There  is  undoubtedly  reproof  in  these  words.  1.  "  Why  stand  ye?  " — you  need  not 
lament  that  which  is  a  blessing.  All  that  is  necessary  on  earth  for  your  spiritual 
culture  and  well-being  He  has  accomplished,  and  now  He  enters  heaven  in  order  to 
give  efficiency  to  all  the  spiritual  instrumentalities  which  He  has  set  in  operation 
Hmongstyou.  You  should  rejoice,  rather  than  lament — rejoice  at  what  He  has  done 
for  you,  rejoice  that  He  has  triumphed  over  His  enemies,  rejoice  that  He  is  leaving 
His  degradation,  sorrows,  and  enemies  for  scenes  of  dignity,  blessedness,  and  love. 
Ah,  how  often,  through  our  ignorance,  we  lament  over  events  which  should  fill  us 
with  rejoicing.  2.  "Why  stand  ye" — you  gain  much  by  His  departure.  It  is 
"expedient"  for  you  that  He  goes  away,  for  if  He  goes  not  away  "the  Comforter 
will  not  come."  When  He  is  gone  you  will  be  thrown  back  upon  yourselves  and  be 
made  self-reliant.  3.  "  Why  stand  ye" — He  has  given  you  a  commission  to  work. 
"  Go  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  beginning  at 
Jerusalem."  II.  The  cheering  element.  This  same  Jesus  which  is  taken  from 
you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go  into  heaven." 
1,  He  will  return  to  you  "  in  like  manner."  How  unexpectedly  He  went  away.  It 
is  said,  "while  they  looked"  He  went.  "In  like  manner"  He  will  come:  unex- 
pectedly. 2.  He  will  return  to  you  identical  in  personality.  "  This  same  Jesus." 
yame  loving  Brother,  tried  Friend,  mighty  Lord,  &c.  Whatever  changes  take  place 
in  the  universe,  they  will  not  touch  Him.  3.  He  will  return  to  you  in  great  glory. 
He  went  up  in  great  glory,  "  a  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight."  What  cloud 
was  that?  It  was  that  luminous,  mystic  flame  which  was  ever  regarded  as  the 
symbol  of  the  Divine  Presence.  That  which  gleamed  in  the  bush  to  Moses,  in  the 
pillar  that  conducted  the  Children  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness,  over  the 
mercy-seat  in  the  holy  of  holies,  which  glided  through  the  heavens  like  a  star  and 
conducted  the  wise  men  to  the  place  where  Jesus  was  born ;  that  which  spread 
over  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  and  made  the  scene  so  transporting.  "In  like 
manner"  He  will  come.  "I  beheld  a  great  white  throne,  and  Him  that  sat 
thereon,"  &c.  Conclusion:  Such  is  what  seems  implied  in  this  angelic  language 
and  from  it  three  general  truths  may  be  drawn.  1.  That  what  we  deem  our  greatest 
losses  are  often  our  greatest  gain.  2.  That  we  indulge  too  much  in  the  sentiments 
of  religion  when  they  detain  us  from  earnest  work."  3.  That  the  destinies  of 
men  in  all  worlds  and  ages  are  bound  up  in  Christ.  "  This  same  Jesus."  (Ibid.) 
Why  stand  ye  gazing  : — There  is  reproof  in  the  question.  We  might  have  thought 
that  the  question  answered  itself.  Would  it  not  have  been  strange  if  they  had  not 
stood  gazing  ?  Less  wonderful  spectacles  than  that  have  drawn  together  a  crowd 
of  gazers,  and  no  one  thinks  of  arguing  with  them.  Curiosity  alone  will  account 
for  gazing  upon  this  spectacle;  ascent  into  heaven  by  one  in  human  form,  unaided 
by  any  visible  appliance.    Who,  I  say,  would  not  gaze  up  into  heaven  to  watch  this? 


73  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i. 

But  how  much  more,  if  the  person  thus  ascending  was  a  friend — a  friend  closer 
tlian  a  brother.  The  disciples  gazed  as  though  they  were  looking  theh  last  upon, 
the  departed  form.  To  be  reminded,  then,  that  this  was  by  no  means  their  last 
sight  of  Him  was  to  be  recalled  at  once  to  thoughts  of  peace,  and  hope,  and 
blessedness;  to  be  reproved  for  this  gazing  by  the  assurance  which  followed,  that 
"  this  same  Jesus  shall  come  again  in  like  manner  as  ye  now  see  Him  go,"  had 
healing  in  the  very  wound.  Interpreted  by  the  teaching  of  the  Last  Supper,  the 
reproof  said  this  to  them  :  "  Bemember  how  He  said  to  you  while  He  was  yet  with 
you,  '  A  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  see  Me ;  and  again  a  little  while  and  ye  shall 
see  Me.'  "  One  fulfilment  of  that  saying  you  have  already  witnessed :  He  went  fronx 
you  by  death,  and  He  came  back  to  you  by  resurrection.  Another  fulfilment  of  the 
same  saying  is  now  in  development :  He  goes  from  you  by  ascension,  and  He  shall 
come  back  to  you  in  the  Advent.  This,  then,  was  the  meaning  for  the  first  disciples 
of  the  "  Why  stand  ye  gazing?  "  which  is  our  text.  Within  tea  days  they  under- 
stood it.  On  the  instant  it  comforted  them,  for  St.  Luke  expressly  says,  that  they 
returned  to  Jerusalem  that  very  hour  with  great  joy.  The  idea  of  parting  was 
swallowed  up  for  them  in  the  idea  of  meeting.  But  now,  let  us  hear  this  question 
addressed  to  ourselves:  "Why  stand  ye  here  gazinu;?  What  mean  ye  by  this 
silence?  "  and  let  us  think  what  we  shall  answer.  "  Why  stand  ye  to-night  in  this 
church  gazing  on  the  ascension  ?  "  We  take  an  onward  step  when  we  reply.  I. 
Because  it  helps  us  to  realise  a  world  beyond  this  world,  a  life  above  this  life, 
a  substantial  rock  that  is  higher  than  we,  on  which  we  would  firmly  stand  our  feet 
amidst  the  billows  and  storms  of  the  temporal  and  the  transient.  To  fix  a  steadfast 
gaze  upon  the  ascending  Lord,  till  a  cloud  comes  between  and  intercepts  the  view, 
to  which  flesh  and  blood  are  unequal,  of  that  glorious,  that  mysterious  transition 
from  the  material  into  the  immaterial  universe — we  find  it  helpful,  we  find  it  com- 
forting, under  the  heavy  pressure  of  sense  and  time,  whether  our  circumstances  at 
this  present  are  joyous  or  giievous,  weighted  with  care  and  sorrow,  or  but  too- 
jubilant  with  pleasure  and  prosperity.  It  is  not  easy  to  believe  in  a  world  out  of 
sight.  We  want  every  help  that  a  religious  life  can  give  to  it,  we  want  the  aid  of 
prayer,  we  want  the  discipline  of  providence,  we  want  the  experience  of  years,  we 
want,  first  and  above  all,  a  revelation  such  as  God  gives  in  His  Son,  commending 
itself  to  man's  conscience  and  resting  upon  a  basis  of  impregnable  fact.  I  know  not 
what  would  become  of  us  in  dajs  such  as  these — days  of  unrest  and  disquietude, 
days  of  anxiety  bursting  sometimes  into  horror,  days  of  failing  hearts  and  almost 
despairing  hopes,  for  the  future  of  our  own  and  other  lands,  if  we  could  not  gaze 
upward  after  the  ascended  Saviour  and  infer  the  certainty  of  a  better  country,  that 
is  a  heavenly.  II.  The  desiee  to  realise  the  life  of  Christ  Himself  as  gone  into 
heaven  for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation.     III.  That  we  are  all  learning  in 

HEART  AND  MIND  TO  ASCEND  AFTER  HiM,  AND   THERE  WITH  HiM  CONTINUALLY  TO  DWELL. 

There  are  many  counterfeits  of  this  grace,  there  are  also  some  substitutes  for  it> 
counted  as  good  or  better,  sometimes  even  by  the  Cliurch  of  this  age.  It  is  an  age 
which  makes  activity  everything  ;  measures  religion  by  its  tangible  effects  ;  leaves 
itself  no  inner  life,  as  it  were ;  itself  depends  on  the  outward,  and  thinks  little  even 
of  the  industry  which  has  nothing  to  show  for  itself.  The  Church  too  much 
humours  and  pampers  this  temper  of  the  times.  Now,  the  ascent  of  our  Lord  is 
the  protest  against  this  whole  system.  They  who  would  witness  for  Him  must  find 
time  to  track  His  ascending  ;  they  who  would  reproduce  Him  in  His  reality  to  this 
nineteenth  age  must  first  have  gazed  steadfastly  up ;  there  must  be  leisure  found  or 
made  for  this,  leisure  for  meditatiou,  leisure  for  study,  leisure  for  communing.  Let 
each  one  fix  his  gaze  upon  the  ascending  Lord,  that  he  may  follow  Him  where  the 
Ascended  rests  in  that  calm  heaven,  the  heaven  of  holiness  and  the  heaven  of  love. 
Let  him  dwell  with  the  Ascended,  having  boldness  to  enter  into  the  Holiest.  Let  us 
draw  nigh  ;  let  it  be  a  purified  entering,  and  let  it  be  a  purified  return  also.  That 
is  the  spiritual  mind  whose  home  is  heaven.  "  Why  stand  .ve  gazing  up  into 
heaven  ?  "  Because  we  would  follow  where  He  has  led,  live  the  life  of  heaven 
here,  and  at  last  be  with  Him  for  ever  where  He  is.  (Dean  Vaiiahan.)  The 
disciples  at  the  Ascension : — I.  Men  overpowered  and  dispossessed  of  self- 
control  IN  the  presence  of  a  wondrous  revelation.  There  are  moments 
in  which  men  are  not  themselves.  Great  events  suddenly  happen  and  the 
spectators  lose  all  presence  of  mind,  however  sagacious  they  may  ordinarily  be. 
Sometimes  they  cannot  speak  for  joy,  sometimes  for  terror,  sometimes  for  simple 
amazement.  This  is  the  case  sometimes  with  children,  and  often  with  men  when, 
e.g.,  a  leticr  is  received  containing  unexpected  news.     The  thing  to  be  remembered 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  71 

here  is  that  this  is  the  natural  effect  of  Christian  revelation.  When  the  angels 
came  to  Bethlehem  the  shepherds  were  afraid,  so  were  the  women  to  whom  the 
angels  spake  at  the  sepulchre.  And  no  man  ought  to  receive  Divine  communications 
or  see  Divine  effects  without  sensibility.  Nor  ought  we  to  look  on  the  sublimities 
of  nature  or  the  wonders  of  art  as  if  they  were  nothing.  This  is  one  of  the  perils 
of  familiarity.  A  rustic  thinks  little  of  the  mountain  under  whose  shadow  he  was 
born,  but  is  struck  dumb  when  he  gazes  on  St.  Paul's.  A  Londoner  passes  the 
cathedral  without  knowing  that  it  is  there,  but  looks  at  Snowdon  for  hours  during 
his  summer  holiday.  II.  Men  recalled  from  enfeebling  reverie.  It  was  good 
for  them  to  look  upward,  but  there  was  something  more  to  be  done.  We  can  waste 
time  in  the  sublimest  contemplation.  When  a  man  is  naturally  inclined  to  ecstasy 
he  ought  to  fight  against  his  inclination  so  as  to  bring  it  into  harmony  with  other 
powers.  There  are  persons  to  whom  Christianity  is  so  sublime  a  thing  that  they 
fail  to  see  it  in  practical  life.  It  is  right  to  have  hours  of  rapture,  but  a  man  cannot 
live  so  always.  So  the  disciples  were  interrogated  by  the  two  men  in  white  apparel 
— Moses  and  Elias,  I  think ;  for  there  is  something  Mosaic  in  the  inquiry,  and 
something  of  the  power  and  passion  of  Elijah.  We  too  are  matched  by  the  old 
master-workers  of  the  world.  Seeing  then  we  are  encompassed  by  so  great  a  cloud 
of  witnesses,  why  should  our  Ufe  be  a  gazing  when  we  are  called  to  work  ?  When 
the  women  looked  down  into  the  sepulchre,  the  angel  said,  "  Why  seek  ye  the  living 
aimong  the  dead  ?  "  So  we  are  not  always  to  be  looking  down.  The  lesson  of  the 
text  is  that  we  must  not  always  be  looking  up.  What  then  is  to  be  our  attitude  ? 
Look  about  you  ;  and  look  up  only  to  gain  inspiration  for  the  work  nearest  to  hand. 
III.  Men  instructed  and  comforted  by  a  promise.  "This  same  Jesus."  Who 
wants  an  amended  Christ  ?  "  This  same  Jesus  "  who  knows,  has  taught,  has  died 
to  save  you  "  shall  come  again."  One  would  like  to  see  Jesus ;  but  one  would  not 
like  Him  to  be  so  changed  that  those  who  knew  Him  first  know  Him  no  longer. 
We  want  such  elements  of  identity  as  shall  enable  the  disciples  to  gladly  recognise 
Him  as  the  same  Christ.  He  is  promised  to  come  again  in  the  same  sublime 
fashion,  sovereign  in  will,  gentle  in  spirit,  pure  as  God,  tenderer  than  woman.  The 
world  cannot  live  without  that  promise.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Gazing  into  heaven : — 
There  is  here — I.  An  affectionate  expostulation  with  those  who  are  under 
personal  bereavement.  When  Jesus  had  kept  telling  these  friends  of  His  that 
He  purposed  to  leave  them  before  long,  they  received  no  settled  impression  from  it. 
It  is  of  no  use  to  attempt  to  become  prepared  for  the  loss  of  one  whom  we  love. 
Now  they  looked  after  their  ascending  Lord  with  unutterable  dismay.  When  any 
one  has  parted  with  some  precious  object  of  aifection,  the  wounded  spirit  remains 
just  broken,  gazing  up  into  vacancy,  sometimes  even  wishing  it  might  fly  away  and 
be  at  rest.  But  this  cannot  be  indulged.  These  disciples  are  told  to  report  imme- 
diately for  duty.  The  mourner's  eyes  should  be  fixed  upon  work,  and  not  upon  loss. 
See  the  promise  (Psa.  cxxvi.  5,  6.).  II.  An  earnest  incitement  to  the  laggard 
OR  LISTLESS.  The  great  world  needed  the  gospel  without  delay.  Christ  was  gone, 
but  the  Comforter  was  coming.  Just  as  soon  as  they  advanced  to  duty  the  day  of 
Pentecost  dawned.  There  are  men  who  stand  gazing  up  into  heaven  after  a  revival. 
Now,  nowhere  does  God's  Word  bid  us  wait  for  any  special  outpouring  of  spiritual 
influence.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  in  the  Church.  III.  A  clear  counsel  for  those  in 
EARNEST  IN  THE  SEEKING  OF  Christ  FOR  THEIR  soDLS.  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to 
stand  gazing  up  into  heaven  for  a  course  of  years,  and  then  suddenly  discover  that 
what  he  has  been  looking  for  was  an  experience,  and  not  a  Saviour.  Salvation  is 
not  a  thing  to  be  vacantly  gazed  alter.  Eepent  of  your  sins  now.  Put  your  trust 
in  Christ  now.  The  entire  work  of  turning  unto  a  new  hfe  usually  begins  with  some 
commonplace  step  of  commitment  of  one's  self  before  others.  A  public  word  in  a 
prayer-meeting,  the  asking  of  a  blessing  at  the  table,  a  checking  admonition  to  a 
comrade,  a  mere  refusal  to  do  a  wrong  or  worldly  act,  will  never  make  a  man  a 
Christian,  but  it  may  show  he  has  become  one.  IV.  A  comfort  for  such  Christians 
as  are  in  bondage  through  fear  of  death.  Let  us  think  of  our  departure  as  an 
ascension  like  Christ's.  One  may  habituate  himself  to  melancholy  foreboding 
until  all  looks  dark  and  frightful  on  ahead.  Or  he  may  accustom  his  mind  to 
regarding  a  change  of  worlds  as  only  a  sweet,  bright  journey  along  the  path  the 
Saviour  went  from  the  Mount  of  Olives.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Indolence  : — 
Nothing  is  more  dangerous  than  idleness.  He  who  has  nothing  to  do  will  soon  be 
doing  something  wrong.  "Our  idle,"  says  an  eminent  divine,  "are  Satan's  busy 
days.  If  the  mind  is  properly  eng  iged,  there  is  little  room  for  the  entrance  of 
temptation  ;  but  when  the  mind  is  empty  and  open,  the  enemy  can  throw  in  what 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


he  pleases.  Stcagnant  waters  produce  thousands  of  noxious  insects  that  are 
unknown  in  flowing  streams."  Looking  after  it  is  vseless  : — How  true  to  nature 
is  that  gazing  "  steadfastly  into  heaven  "  after  gazing  was  useless  1  So  we  look  at 
the  spot  on  the  horizon  where  the  last  gleam  of  a  sail  that  bears  away  dear  ones 
]ias  faded.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Unjnofitable  gazing  : — The  "  two  men  in  white 
apparel  "  make  a  part  of  the  grand  supernatural  array  which  the  common  scenery 
of  the  earth  put  on  as  the  Lord  was  leaving  it.  From  the  entrance  of  the  Saviour 
into  the  garden,  on  through  the  following  forty-three  days,  the  spiritual  world  and 
the  material  seemed  to  have  the  doors  between  them  swung  open,  and  to  become 
one.  If  we  believe  the  history,  or  credit  the  incarnation,  at  all,  is  not  this  just  as 
we  should  expect  ?  He  in  whom  the  realities  of  both  heaven  and  earth  were 
united;  He  who  could  say — "The  Son  of  Man  is  now  in  heaven,"  He  is  passing 
back  personally  into  the  unseen  communion,  where  all  His  friends  are  to  follow 
Him.  I  believe  in  miracles  because  I  see  the  greater  miracle — Christ — grander 
than  all  this  world's  men,  and  yet  lowlier,  saying  that  He  comes  forth  from  God, 
and  goes  to  God,  as  simply  as  my  child  shows  me  the  flower  found  in  the  garden — 
yet  so  saying  it  that  all  the  philosophers  and  critics  of  eighteen  hundred  years  have 
not  been  able  to  break  the  authority  or  explain  the  secret.  The  question  is — I,  A 
CALL  I'KOM  CONTEMPLATION  TO  ACTION.  Only  &  little  breathing  space  was  to  be  given 
them  first  to  gather  up  their  energies  ;  and  even  that  was  not  to  be  an  interval  of 
idleness.  They  were  to  go  at  once  to  Jerusalem,  and  their  waiting  there  was  to  be 
like  the  waiting  of  the  still  midsummer  elements,  before  the  mountain  winds  sweep 
down  and  the  tongues  of  fire  leap  out — a  busy  waiting — a  preparation  for  this  long 
campaign  of  many  ages.  They  were  to  be  earnest  and  constant  in  prayer  and 
prai^e  ;  to  settle  in  their  minds  the  doctrines  and  directions  of  their  Master,  per- 
taining to  the  kingdom  ;  to  fasten  and  cement  the  bonds  of  unity  with  one  accord, 
and  to  fill  up  the  vacant  place  in  the  apostolate.  Thus  their  business  had  been 
maiked  out  as  every  Christian's  is.  But  the  apostles  are  not  turning  to  that 
business  ;  they  are  still  renting  in  a  kind  of  sentimental  trance  between  their  com- 
mission and  their  ministry.  They  were  living  as  some  Christians  do  nowadays — 
in  their  feelings  more  than  in  their  convictions  and  their  will,  in  fruitless  memories, 
not  in  daring  hopes.  Indulged  any  longer,  this  would  become  a  mere  life  of 
religious  sentiment,  not  a  life  of  religious  service- — and  so  not  a  healthy  life  at  all. 
If  those  men  that  had  companied  so  long  with  Christ  needed  to  be  startled  out  of  a 
false  indulgence  in  the  mere  idle  luxury  of  feeling,  most  of  us  need  it  much  more. 
I  hear  a  man  say  it  makes  him  "  feel  better  "  to  say  his  prayers  ;  so  far  so  good  ; 
but  how  far  does  the  feeling  go,  and  the  power  of  the  prayer  keep  him  company,  as 
a  law  of  regulation  to  his  lips  and  a  purifier  of  his  conduct  ?  Lacordaire  says,  "  I 
desire  to  be  remembered  only  as  one  who  believed,  who  loved,  and  who  prayed." 
But  why  only  these  ?  Ought  there  not  to  be  an  equal  desire  to  honour  the  Lord  in 
an  active  following  of  His  steps  and  proclaiming  Him  in  life?  ,11.  A  summons  to 

WALK,  HENCEFORTH,  NOT  BY  THE  LIGHT  OF  AN  OUTWARD  LEADER,  BUT  BY  A  SECRET  AND 
STEADFAST  TRUST   IN    HiM   WHO   IS    FOR   EVER  WITH    US  BY  AN    INWARD    POSSESSION.       If, 

then,  the  question  of  the  heavenly  men  be  put  into  some  paraphrase  for  ourselves 
here,  this  would  be  its  import.  Eeduce  your  privileges  to  Christian  practice,  and 
your  faith  to  action.  Life  is  not  given  us  for  speculation,  or  gazing,  or  mere 
delight,  even  though  the  relish  be  religious — not  for  reverie  and  dreaming,  even 
though  it  were  the  reverie  of  devotion,  or  a  dream  of  Paradise.  This  world,  our 
own  little  corner  of  it,  wants  sacrifice  and  labour,  running  feet  and  open  hands, 
busy  thoughts  and  gentle  tongues.    HI.  A  demand  that  our  Christian  life  should 

BE  INDEPENDENT  OF  EXTERNAL  SUPPORT,  SO  THAT  IT  MAY  BE  ONLY  DEPENDENT  ON  GoD. 

Not  that  we  are  to  cast  away  any  outward  prop  so  long  as  God's  providence  holds 
it  in  its  place  and  comforts  us  by  letting  us  lean  upon  it ;  but  that  we  should  not  be 
perplexed  or  disheartened  when  any  such  help  is  taken  away  by  Him,  or  enfeeble 
ourselves  by  letting  our  integrity,  or  our  purity,  or  our  prayers  depend  on  it  instead 
of  depending  directly  on  Him.  There  is  no  danger  that  our  eyes  or  our  hearts  will 
be  turned  too  much  upwards,  heavenwards — provided  we  look  there,  in  faith  and 
prayer,  for  the  light  and  the  strength  to  do  our  Christian  service  here.  At  present 
this  is  our  place  ;  and  the  judgment  before  us  is  a  judgment  for  deeds  done  in  the 
body.  These  men,  when  they  were  bidden  to  stop  gazing  into  heaven  and  go  to 
their  work  were  not  turned  away  from  heavenly  things  to  earthly  things,  but  the 
opposite.  They  were  to  stop  looking  into  the  air,  that  by  a  truer  and  God-appointee 
road  they  might  travel,  in  God's  time,  higher  up  into  the  Christian  heaven.  They 
were  to  rouse  themselves  from  a  dreum,  that  they  might  work  out  their  salvation 


cnAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  -     73 

and  the  salvation  of  the  world.  To  that  end,  the  present  line  of  living,  however 
agreeable  and  prosperous,  the  present  resitieuce  or  occupation,  however  delightful, 
or  the  present  apparent  helps,  however  prized,  as  soon  as  they  become  temptt-rs  to 
sluggishness,  must  be  given  up — a  sacrifice  to  Him  wLose  sacrifice  to  us  is  the  only 
assurance  of  life.  Hence  God's  providence  is  continually  pushing  us  on,  displacing 
one  or  another  scheme,  or  vision,  or  staff,  or  companion.  He  does  it  for  what  he 
would  make  of  us — better  men.  (Bp.  Huntington.)  Idle  emotion  useless  : — Love 
to  God  is  no  idle  emotion  or  lazy  rapture,  no  vague  sentiment,  but  the  root  of  all 
practical  goodness,  of  all  strenuous  efforts,  of  all  virtue,  and  of  all  praise.  That 
strong  tide  is  meant  to  drive  the  busy  wheels  of  life  and  to  bear  precious  freightage 
on  its  bosom;  not  to  flow  away  in  profitless  foam.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Go  ^ 
about  your  business  ; — Some  years  ago,  a  new  clock  was  made  to  be  placed  in  the 
Temple  Hall.  When  finished  the  clockmaker  was  desired  to  wait  upon  the  Benchers 
of  the  Temple,  who  would  think  of  a  suitable  motto  to  be  put  under  the  clock.  He 
applied  several  times,  but  without  getting  the  desired  information,  as  they  had  not 
determined  on  the  iuscription.  Continuing  to  importune  them,  he  at  last  came 
when  the  old  Benchers  were  met  in  the  Temple  Hall,  and  had  just  sat  down  to 
dinner.  The  workman  again  requested  to  be  informed  of  the  motto.  One  of  the 
Benchers  who  thought  the  application  ill-timed,  and  who  was  fonder  of  eating  and 
drinking  than  inventing  mottoes,  testily  replied,  "  Go  about  your  business  !  "  The 
mechanic  taking  this  for  an  answer  to  his  question,  went  home  and  inserted  at  the 
bottom  of  the  clock,  "  Go  about  your  business  ! "  and  placed  it  in  the  Temple 
Hall,  to  the  great  surprise  of  the  Benchers,  who,  considering  the  circum- 
stances, argued  that  accident  had  produced  a  better  motto  than  they  could 
think  of,  and  ever  since  the  Temple  clock  has  continued  to  remind  the  lawyer 
and  the  public  to  go  about  their  business.  {Christian  Herald.)  This  same 
Jesus  .  .  .  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go. — Christ's 
second  coming : — I.  Its  time.  1.  Unknown  (Matt.  xxiv.  36  ;  Mark  xiii.  32).  2. 
The  times  of  restoration  (chap.  iii.  19).  3.  The  latter  day  (.Job  xix.  25).  4.  "  Such 
an  hour  as  ye  think  not"  (Matt.  xxiv.  44).  5.  "After  that  tribulation,"  &c.  (Mark 
xiii.  24-26).  6.  A  falling  away  first  (2  Thess.  ii.  3).  H.  How  charactekised.  1. 
The  times  of  restoration  (chap.  iii.  19).  2.  The  day  of  God  (2  Pet.  iii.  12).  3.  The 
last  time  (1  Pet.  i.  5).  4.  The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  (1  Pet.  i.  7,  13).  5. 
Appearing  of  the  glory  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  (Tit.  ii.  13).  6.  The  day  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (1  Cor.  i.  8).  7.  The  day  of  Jesus  Christ  (Phil.  i.  6).  8. 
The  appearing  of  the  chief  Shepherd  (1  Pet.  v.  4).  III.  Its  manner.  1.  Suddenly 
and  unexpectedly  (Matt.  xxiv.  44  ;  Mark  xiii.  36  ;  Luke  xii.  40).  2.  As  a  thief  in 
the  night  (1  Thess.  v.  2  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10 ;  Eev.  xvi.  15).  3.  As  the  lightning  (Matt. 
xxiv.  27).  4.  As  the  flood  (Matt.  xxiv.  37-39).  5.  As  He  ascended  (ver.  11). 
6.  In  clouds  (Matt.  xxiv.  30,  xxvi.  64;  Eev.  i.  7).  7.  With  a  shout  and  the  voice 
of  the  archangel  (1  Thess.  iv.  16).  8.  With  angels  (Matt.  xvi.  27,  xxv.  31  ;  Mark 
viii.  38  ;  2  Thess.  i.  7).  9.  With  His  saints  (1  Thess.  iii.  13  ;  Jude  14).  10.  In 
the  glory  of  His  Father  (Matt.  xvi.  27).  11.  In  His  own  glory  (Matt.  xxv.  31 ; 
Luke  ix.  26).  12.  In  flaming  fire  (2  Thess.  i.  8).  13.  With  power  and  great  glory 
(Matt.  xxiv.  30.)  IV.  Its  purposes.  1.  To  be  glorified  in  His  saints  (2  Thess.  i. 
10).  2.  To  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness  (1  Cor.  iv.  5).  3.  To 
reign  (Isa.  xxiv.  23 ;  Dan.  vii.  14  ;  Eev.  xi.  15).  4.  Gather  His  elect  (Matt.  xxiv. 
31;  1  Thess.  iv.  15-17).  5.  To  judge  (Matt.  xxv.  31).  6.  To  reward  (Rev. 
xxii.  12).  V.  Duties  relative  to  it.  1.  Should  consider  as  at  hand  (Eom. 
xiii.  12  ;  Phil.  iv.  5  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  7).  2.  Be  prepared  for  (Matt.  xxiv.  44,  46 ; 
Luke  xii.  37,  38,  40).  3.  Should  love  (2  Tim.  iv.  8).  4.  Look  for  (Phil, 
iii.  20;  Tit.  ii.  13).  5.  Wait  for  (1  Cor.  i.  7;  1  Thess.  i.  10).  6.  Watch  for 
(Matt.  xxiv.  42 ;  Mark  xiii.  35-37 ;  Luke  xxi.  36).  7.  Be  patient  unto  (2 
Thess.   iii.    5;    James  v.    7,    8).      {S.   S.   Times.)  Christ's    coming: — Love 

makes  the  tears  of  farewells  sparkle  into  welcomes,  and  if  we  could  retain  the 
same  impression  of  Christ's  loss,  His  return  would  be  as  nigh.  It  is,  moreover,  in 
the  New  Testament  the  great  event  which  towers  above  every  other.  The  heaven 
that  gives  back  Christ  gives  back  all  we  have  loved  and  lost,  solves  all  doubts  and 
ends  aU  sorrows.  His  coming  looks  in  upon  the  whole  life  of  His  Church,  as  a 
lofty  mountain  peak  looks  in  upon  every  little  valley  and  sequestered  home  around 
its  base,  and  belongs  to  them  alike.  Every  generation  lies  under  the  shadow  of  it, 
for  whatever  is  transcendently  great  is  constantly  near,  and  in  moments  of  convic- 
tion it  absorbs  petty  interests  and  annihilates  intervals.  {J,  Ker,  D.D. )  Waiting  v 
for  Christ's  return : — The  Eev.  T.  Brown,  in  The  Watchword,  tells  of  a  gentleman. 


74  rilE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

accompanied  by  his  little  son,  having  an  errand  at  the  East  India  House,  who  left 
the  boy  upon  the  steps,  telling  him  to  wait  till  he  returned.  Shortly  afterwards, 
being  much  engrossed  with  the  businebS  which  he  had  in  hand,  he  left  the  building 
by  another  door,  and  went  home,  entirely  forgetting  his  son.  When  the  family 
assembled  at  dinner  the  mother  notic'ed  the  child's  absence,  and  made  anxious 
inquiry  for  him.  Then  the  incident  of  the  morning  flashed  upon  the  father's  mind. 
He  hurried  back  to  the  East  India  House,  and  there  he  found  the  little  boy,  tired 
and  hunjjry,  waiting,  as  he  had  been  told  to,  at  the  door.  He  had  been  there  four 
hours.  "  I  knew  you  would  come,  father,"  said  he  ;  "  you  said  you  would."  Such 
secure  and  childlike  trust  is  the  faith  of  all  who  die  "  in  Christ."  All  who  fall 
asleep  in  Jesus,  know  that  Jesus  will  come  for  them  again,  for  He  said  He  would, 
and  He  never  forgets.  In  like  manner  the  living  believer  should  anticipate  His 
second  coming.  The  Second  Advent : — Note  here— I.  Odb  Loed's  unchanged 
IDENTITY.  After  having  been  separated  by  years  of  time  and  leagues  of  space  from 
a  familiar  friend,  if  a  reunion  is  anticipated  each  will  probably  speculate  on  the 
change  which  the  interval  has  wrought  in  the  other.  •'  He  will  have  formed  new 
friendships  and  contracted  fresh  habits ;  another  generation  has  sprung  up  since 
we  were  companions,  and  the  old  links  no  longer  exist ;  he  can  hardly  feel  for  me 
as  he  once  did."  But  no  such  surmises  can  mingle  with  our  thoughts  of  Jesus. 
"  There  is  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and  but  one.  The  ascended  and  coming  Saviour 
is  the  same  who  came  and  suffered  (Eph.  iv.  9).  A  native  Indian  preacher  was 
met  on  his  way  to  Church  by  two  young  English  officers  bent  on  sport.  They 
asked  him,  "  How  is  Jesus  Christ  to-day?  "  Astonished  that  two  young  men  from 
the  country  who  sent  the  Bible  should  take  the  sacred  name  in  vain,  he  gently 
rebuked  them,  but  added,  "  If  you  really  want  to  know  how  Jesus  Christ  is.  He  is 
the  '  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever ' " — a  word  fitly  spoken  which  led  the  young 
men  to  the  Saviour.  1.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  in — (1)  The  perfections  of  His 
nature.  (2)  The  tenderness  of  His  sympathy.  (3)  The  plenteousness  of  His 
grace.  (4)  The  extent  and  perpetuity  of  His  rule.  Since  His  ascension  those  who 
have  seen  Him  declare  that  He  retains  His  identity — Stephen,  Paul  (1  Cor.  ix.  1), 
John  at  Patmos.  As  He  still  bears  the  marks  of  His  suffering,  so  He  retains  sym- 
pathy for  every  member  of  His  body.  Although  "  by  seraph  hosts  adored.  He  to 
earth's  lowest  cares  is  still  awake."  2.  So  it  is  with  our  friends  who  have  gone 
home.  They  have  not  lost  their  individuality — only  their  mortality  and  sin.  They 
have  not  melted  into  the  infinite  azure.  Moses  and  Elias  on  the  Mount  of  Transfigu- 
ration were  the  same  as  in  Hebrew  story.  II.  The  certainty  and  mannek  oe  His 
BETURN.  1.  He  continually  revisits  His  people.  (1)  Spiritually.  "  The  King 
Himself  draws  near  and  feasts  His  saints."  (2)  Eepresentatively.  The  angel  of 
death  is  His  messenger  calling  His  people  home.  2.  He  is  coming.  (1)  Personally. 
(2)  Visibly.  (3)  Gloriously.  Not  as  first  He  came,  a  helpless  infaut,  but  a  glorious 
conqueror  (Dan.  vii.  13  ;  Rev.  i.  7,  xiv.  14).  {R.  Lewis.)  The  Second  Advent: — 
V  These  words  cannot  refer  to  Pentecost,  nor  to  Christ's  spiritual  communion  with 
His  people,  because  other  references  point  to  the  Second  Advent  as  in  the  future, 
and  far  more  glorious  than  any  manifestations  in  the  past.  I.  Christ  will  comb 
AGAIN.  In  the  Early  Church  the  expectation  of  soon  seeing  Christ  was  strong.  But 
when  this  was  disappointed  the  thought  fell  into  the  background.  Yet  error  as  to 
time  does  not  affect  the  fact.  The  world  waited  many  ages  for  the  First  Advent,  but 
"in  the  fulness  of  time  God  sent  forth  His  Son."  Why,  then,  should  the  Church 
despair  if  she  must  wait  ages  for  the  second  ?  II.  Christ  will  come  in  glory. 
He  ascended  in  triumph ;  He  will  return  in  triumph.  In  the  prophets  we  have 
visions  of  glory  and  humiliation  associated  with  the  Messiah,  and  the  Rabbis 
expected  two  Messiahs,  one  suffering  and  the  other  conquering.  We  now  see  that 
one  man  can  be  both  in  successive  perinds.  Christ  fulfils  prophecy  by  degrees. 
Had  the  whole  of  Christ's  career  fallen  in  the  days  of  Tiberius  the  Jews  might 
properly  have  rejected  Him.  We  look  for  the  final  fulfilment  of  prophecy  to  the 
future  glory  of  Christ.  III.  Christ  will  cojie  to  reign.  His  glory  will  not  be 
an  empty  pageant.  They  who  look  for  a  visible  throne  and  a  secular  government 
fall  into  the  error  of  the  Jews.  How  He  will  appear  we  know  not,  but  we  know 
that  His  kingdom  will  be  always  spiritual,  and  when  it  comes  "  all,men  shall  know 
the  Lord  from  the  least  to  the  greatest."  This  hope  should  stimulate  the  Church's 
diligence.  As  she  carries  out  her  mission  His  lull  reign  draws  nearer.  {IV.  F. 
Adeney,  M.A.)  The  Second  Advent:  the  different  feelings  aicahened  hy  it : — Did 
you  ever  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpets  which  are  bb)wn  before  the  judges  as  they 
come  into  the  city  to  open  the  assizes  ?    Did  you  ever  reflect  how  different  are  the 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  ^     75 

feelings  which  those  trumpets  awaken  in  the  minds  of  different  men  ?  The  inno- 
cent man,  who  has  no  cause  to  be  tried,  hears  them  unmoved.  They  proclaim  no 
terrors  to  him.  He  hstens  and  looks  on  quietly,  and  is  not  afraid.  But  often  there 
is  some  poor  wretch  waiting  his  trial,  in  a  silent  cell,  to  whom  those  trumpets  are  a 
knell  of  despair.  They  tell  him  that  the  day  of  trial  is  at  hand.  Yet  a  little  time, 
and  he  will  stand  at  the  bar  of  justice,  and  hear  witness  after  witness  telling  the 
story  of  his  misdeeds.  Yet  a  little  time  and  all  will  be  over — the  trial,  the  verdict, 
■{he  sentence ;  and  there  will  remain  nothing  for  him  but  punishment  and  disgrace. 
No  wonder  the  prisoner's  heart  beats  when  he  hears  the  trumpet's  sound  !  So  shall 
the  sound  be  of  the  archangel's  trump.  (Bishop  Byle.)  The  Second  Advent :  the 
uncertainty  of  its  date : — The  cloud  that  enveloped  our  Saviour  still  shrouds  His 
expected  presence  on  the  throne  of  judgment.  It  is  a  purposed  obscurity,  a  wise 
and  merciful  denial  of  knowledge.  In  this  matter  it  is  His  gracious  will  to  be  the 
perpetual  subject  of  watchfulness,  expectation,  fear,  desire,  but  no  more.  To 
cherish  anticipation  He  has  permitted  gleams  of  light  to  cross  the  darkness;  to 
baffle  presumption  He  has  made  them  only  gleams.  He  has  harmonised  with  con- 
summate skill  every  part  of  His  revelation  to  produce  this  general  result — now 
vspeaking  as  if  a  few  seasons  more  were  to  herald  the  new  heaven  and  the  new 
tiarth,  now  as  if  His  days  were  as  thousands  of  years ;  at  one  moment  whispering 
into  the  ear  of  His  disciple,  at  another  retreating  into  the  depth  of  infinite  ages. 
It  is  His  purpose  thus  to  live  in  our  faith  and  hope,  remote  yet  near,  pledged  to  no 
moment,  possible  at  any ;  worshipped  not  with  the  consternation  of  a  near,  nor  the 
iindifference  of  a  distant  certainty,  but  with  the  anxious  vigilance  that  awaits  a 
»sonlingency  ever  at  hand.  This,  the  deep  devotion  of  watchfulness,  humility,  and 
awe.  He  who  knows  us  best  knows  to  be  the  fittest  posture  for  our  spirits  ;  therefore 
Joes  He  preserve  the  salutary  suspense  which  ensures  it,  and  therefore  will  He 
determine  His  advent  to  no  definite  day  in  the  calender  of  eternity.  And  yet  this 
uncertainty  is  abused  to  security  ;  and  exactly  as  the  invisibility  of  the  Creator, 
which  is  His  perfection,  produces  the  miserable  creed  of  the  atheist,  the  obscurity 
that  veils  the  hour  of  judgment,  though  meant  in  merciful  warning,  persuades  the 
angodly  heart  that  none  is  ever  to  arrive.  (IV.  Archer  Butler,  M. A.)  The  two 
Advents :  contrast  hetiueen  them : — Christ  came  the  first  time  in  the  guise  of 
humanity  ;  He  is  to  come  the  second  time  in  brightness,  as  a  light  to  the  godly,  a 
terror  to  the  wicked.  He  came  the  first  time  in  weakness.  He  is  to  come  the 
second  time  in  might ;  the  first  time  in  our  littleness,  the  second  time  in  His  own 
majesty  ;  the  first  time  in  mercy,  the  second  in  judgment  ;  the  first  time  to  redeem, 
the  second  to  recompense,  and  that  all  the  more  terribly  because  of  the  long- 
suffering  and  delay.  (A.  Hildebert.)  The  two  Advents :  the  humiliation  of  the  first, 
the  glory  of  the  second : — The  stable  of  Bethlehem  disappears,  and  behold  the 
clouds  are  His  chariot.  That  lonely  wanderer  amid  the  hills  of  Palestine,  who  was 
forsaken  by  all,  persecuted  by  many,  is  now  attended  by  thousands  of  angels.  The 
hand  which  held  the  reed  now  sways  the  sceptre  of  universal  dominion.  He  has 
left  the  Cross  and  ascended  the  great  white  throne  ;  and  many  crowns  now  sparkle 
on  the  head  around  which  thorns  were  wreathed.  He  was  crucified  then  amid  the 
execrations  of  the  mob  ;  now  He  comes  amid  the  hallelujahs  of  the  skies  to  be 
glorified  in  His  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe.  (IF.  Landels, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  12-14.  Then  returned  they  \mto  Jerusalem. — The  return  to  Jerusalem : — 
The  distance  was  a  "Sabbath-day's  journey";  not  that  Moses  had  limited  a 
journey  on  the  Sabbath ;  but  the  Kabbins  derived  the  rule  from  the  prohibition  to 
depart,  on  the  sacred  day,  from  the  camp,  which  was  supposed  to  be  two  miles 
square.  The  return,  had  it  not  been  for  the  promise  of  the  Father,  would  have 
been  like  turning  from  the  gates  of  heaven  to  the  antechamber  of  hell.  I.  The 
PLACE.  "An  upper  room."  This  could  hardly  have  been  in  the  temple,  for  the 
ecclesiastical  authorities  were  too  hostile  to  suffer  such  a  company  within  the 
sacred  precincts.  It  was  probably  the  room  in  which  our  Lord  ate  His  last  supper, 
and  which,  from  His  manner  of  pointing  it  out,  seems  to  have  belonged  to  a  disciple. 
The  Jews  had  such  an  upper  room  for  their  devotions,  as  we  read  of  Peter  going  up 
to  one,  for  prayer  ;  and  of  Paul  holding,  in  an  upper  room,  a  meeting  of  the  Church 
at  Mil  tus.  In  the  houses  of  Jerusalem  such  apartments  were  provided  for  those 
whi>  came  up  to  keep  the  feasts.  Here  the  disciples  "  abode,"  i.e.,  probably  spent 
the  day  there  ;  retiring  to  separate  lodgings  at  night.  What  reflections  must  have 
rushed  into  their  minds  on  coming  to  the  scene  of  the  Last  Supper  1     How  much 


/ 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

better  they  now  understood  our  Lord's  discourse,  and  how  soothing  must  hav3  been 
the  remembrance  of  His  prayer  !  After  seeing  Him  make  the  clouds  His  chariot, 
what  must  they  have  thought  of  His  condescension  in  washing  the  disciples'  feet ! 
In  that  room,  after  a  few  days,  descended  the  Spirit,  of  which  Jesus  said  not  in 
vaio,  "  He  shall  glorify  Me."  II.  The  company.  As  if  to  show  how  important  it 
is  for  us  to  know  who  the  apostles  were,  Luke,  after  giving  the  list  ia  the  Gospel, 
here  repeats  it.  "  The  women  "  seem  to  be  those  who  came  up  with  our  Lord 
"from  Galilee,  and  who  ministered  to  Him  of  their  substance."  "Mary,  the 
mother  of  Jesus,"  not  of  God,  as  she  has  been  impiously  called,  is  there  ;  and  this 
is  all  that  the  inspired  history  says  of  her  whom  "  all  generations  shall  call 
blessed."  "Verily  the  Scriptures  are  not  chargeable  with  Mariolatry.  By  "the 
brethren"  of  Christ  being  there,  we  conclude  that  it  could  no  longer  be  said, 
"  neither  did  they  believe  on  Him."  The  "  hundred  and  twenty  "  included  probably 
the  seventy  evangelists ;  some  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  who,  like  the  master  of 
the  house,  believed,  and  such  persons  as  Joseph  of  Arimathea.  This  upper  room 
was  the  cradle  of  the  Christian  Church,  now  an  infant,  but  soon  to  become  a  giant 
and  stride  over  a  conquered  world.  Who  then  would  "  despise  the  day  of  small 
things"?  III.  Their  employment.  1.  Their  harmony  was  secured  by  the  dis- 
courses which  they  had  heard  and  the  scenes  they  had  witnessed,  which  had 
extinguished  self,  that  fire-brand  of  discord.  With  a  world  ready  to  rise  in  arms 
against  them,  their  strength  lay  in  union ;  and  now  that  the  traitor,  the  discordant 
one,  was  gone,  we  may  say,  "  Behold,  how  good  and  pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to 
dwell  together  in  unity  I  "  2.  They  were  commanded  to  wait,  but  not  to  be  idle; 
and  their  business  was  prayer  for  that  Spirit  who  was  to  fit  them  for  their  work. 
They  came  from  this  retirement,  to  live  in  the  view  of  a  world,  eyed  by  enemies  as 
the  butt  of  persecution,  and  by  friends  as  examples  and  guides.  Not  the  least  of 
the  blessings  which  resulted  from  tiiese  days  of  prayer  was  the  lesson  given  to 
public  men  to  prepare  for  great  doings  by  secret  devotions.  {J.  Bennett,  D.D.) 
The  ten  days :— The  interval  between  Ascension  and  Whitsuniide  repres-ents  an 
exceptional  portion  of  the  history  of  the  Church,  and  may  be  compared,  or  rather 
contrasted,  with  the  three  days  during  which  our  Lord  rested  in  the  tomb  ;  in  each 
Christ  was  gone  and  the  Comforter  was  not  come ;  in  each  the  Church  had  received 
a  part  of  her  endowments  but  not  the  whole  ;  in  each  the  discij^les  waited  patiently 
till  they  should  obtain  a  more  complete  commission,  though  in  the  one  case  they 
waited  with  sad  hearts  and  disappointed  hopes,  while  in  the  other,  notwithstanding 
the  absence  of  their  Lord,  they  experienced  gieat  joy,  and  were  continually  praising 
and  blessirg  God.  (Bj).  Harvey  Goodwin.)  The  first  assembly  of  the  Cliristian 
Church  : — This  assembly  was  marked  by — I.  Separation  fkom  the  world.  The 
work  was  unworldly,  and  therefore  separation  was  necessary.  This  sepaiation  w«s 
— 1.  Local.  Worldly  business  was  not  likely  to  come  to  the  "  upper  room,"  as 
there  were  no  attractions  for  buyers  and  sellers.  Every  Church  should  have  a 
place  of  meeting  set  apart  for  its  own  use.  2.  Mental.  No  worldly-minded  man 
could  have  anything  in  common  with  their  mental  state.  They  were  waiting  for 
the  bestowal  of  what  no  outsider  had  ever  s<  en  or  heard.  Does  this  mental  distinc- 
tion exist  to-day?  3.  Moral.  They  had  given  themselves  up  to  be  directed  by 
Jesus.  Such  renunciation  marks  all  true  Christians.  It  cannot  co-exist  with  the 
pride  and  self-sufficiency  which  mark  unregenerate  men.  II.  Unity.  The  separa- 
tion would  not  have  answered  its  purpose  without  this.  All  present— 1.  Becognised 
one  Head.  Attachment  to  a  chief  often  unites  men  of  varying  gifts,  tastes,  and 
ambitions.  So  high  and  low,  educated  and  illiterate,  Ac,  are  united  in  Christ. 
The  light  of  the  sun  illumines  planets  of  different  magnitudes  in  various  orbits,  and 
each  reflects  the  light  of  the  ruling  orb.  So  Christ  is  the  centre  of  the  Christian 
system,  binds  each  member  of  the  system  to  Himt^elf,  and  freely  sheds  His  light  on 
all.  Discord  in  a  Church  is  therefore  unchristian.  2.  Had  oneness  of  spirit. 
They  all  stood  in  the  same  J  elation  to  Christ,  agreed  in  the  exercises  to  which  they 
were  now  devoted,  and  had  grace  to  love  one  another.  This  oneness  has  often 
appeared  where  personal  elements  have  been  of  very  diverse  kinds.  Such  unity  in 
diversity  is  one  of  the  beautiful  effects  of  Christianity.  3.  Were  of  one  purpose — 
viz.,  to  know,  experience,  and  do  the  Divine  will.  For  this  end  they  conferred, 
waited,  and  prayed.  In  the  abolition  of  slavery  men  of  opposite  opinions,  &c.,  were 
united  by  a  common  purpose.  Such  union  will  ever  be  shown  where  men  aim  at 
Christian  ends.  III.  Confident  expectation.  They  persevered  in  the  woik  to 
which  they  had  given  themselves.  They  had  strong  faith  in  Him  whose  words  had 
brought  and  now  kept  them  together.     Whea  that  faith  was  tried  Ly  delay  it  boie 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  .     77 

the  test.  Continuance  in  prayer  would  increase  the  sense  of  power  at  the  throne 
of  grace ;  and  this  would  intensify  the  longing  for  the  promised  blessing.  This 
confident  expectation  'ought  to  appear  in  all  Christian  assemblies,  for  there  are 
Divine  promises  yet  to  be  fulfilled.  (W.  Hudson.)  The  loaiting  time  : — Was — I. 
A  TEANsiTioN  PERIOD.  It  stood  midway  between  Christ's  completed  work  on  earth 
and  the  unopened  work  of  the  Spirit  from  heaven.  In  the  history  of  redemption 
the  first  chapter  closed  on  the  day  of  the  Incarnation.  A  long,  dreary,  chequered 
period  that  had  been,  but  it  was  succeeded  by  one  in  all  respects  the  reverse — 
brief,  bright  with  heaven,  and,  though  ending  tragically,  bringing  life  and  immor- 
tality to  light.  But  it  was  reserved  for  the  Spirit  to  make  this  good,  and  His  dis- 
pensation, the  last  chapter,  was  now  to  open.  But  ei-e  the  curtain  should  be  drawn, 
a  breathing  time  of  ten  days  was  in  the  wisdom  of  God  to  take  place.  It  was  like 
the  "  silence  in  heaven,  for  the  space  of  half  an  hour  "  between  the  breaking  of  the 
"  seals "  and  the  appearance  of  the  angels.  II.  A  time  of  felt  need.  The 
eleven  were  told  that  they  were  to  be  their  Master's  witnesses,  but  they  had  no  clear 
comprehension  of  the  tale  they  were  to  tell,  and  could  not  but  feel  that  they  had 
neither  position,  culture,  influence,  nor  any  ground  to  hope  for  success  save  in  their 
assurance  of  the  truth  of  their  story,  and  the  help  they  might  receive  in  telling  it. 
As  they  thought  of  this  what  sinkings  would  come  over  them,  which  would  rather 
be  intensified,  as  day  after  day  found  them  in  the  upper  room,  but  for  some  counter- 
active. III.  A  TIME  OF  EXPECTANCY.  How  oftcu  would  they  recall  and  find  it 
indispensable  to  recall  the  promise  of  the  Father — ill  as  they  understood  what  it 
meant.  Yet  being  charged  not  to  stir  till  it  was  fulfilled,  they  could  not  but  hope 
that  it  would  bring  a  full  qualification  for  their  arduous  mission.  But  it  was  no 
time  of  silent  waiting,  for  it  was — IV.  A  time  of  prayer.  Who  can  doubt  that 
the  burden  of  the  supplication  was  the  promised  power.  But  besides  this  it  was — 
V.  A  TIME  OF  FRATERNAL  CONFERENCE.  They  could  hardly  have  prayed  without 
intermission  ;  and  it  is  only  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  intervals  would  be  filled 
up  with  the  interchange  of  recollections  and  encouragements.  VI.  It  was  a  time 
OF  ACTION  (vers.  15-26.)  (D.  Broivn,  D.D.)  Waiting  for  the  promise  : — It  is  on 
Thursday,  probably  in  the  evening,  that  the  disciples  return  to  Jerusalem.  Dirt 
they  expect  to  receive  it  that  very  night?  This  we  know  not ;  but  we  do  know  that 
then  opened  a  new  era  in  the  intercourse  of  man  with  heaven.  As  they  began  to 
pray,  how  would  they  find  all  their  conceptions  of  the  Majesty  on  high  changed  ! 
The  glory  of  the  Father  encompassing  a  human  form,  a  beaming  from  a  human 
brow  !  Mingling  with  this  first  joy  for  the  Master's  exaltation  would  be  the  feeling, 
"  He  has  entered  for  us  within  the  veil !  He  maketh  intercession  for  us  !  "  Hush  ! 
which  of  the  twelve  is  it  that  says  to  the  brethren — "Let  us  ask  the  Father  in  His 
name  "  ?  (John  xvi.  23-24).  The  angels  had  often  sung  together  over  the  prayer  of 
repenting  sinners.  Now,  for  the  first  time,  they  hear  prayers  authorised  and 
accredited  by  the  name  of  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father.  That  name  has  just 
been  set  "above  every  name  "  ;  and  as  it  echoes  through  the  host  on  high,  with  the 
solemn  joy  of  a  hundred  believing  voices,  "  things  in  heaven  "  bow.  What  must 
have  been  that  moment  for  the  saints  in  Paradise,  who  had  seen  the  Saviour  afar 
off,  but  never  known  the  joy  of  praying  directly  in  His  name  !  Father  Abraham 
had  "rejoiced  to  see  His  day."  What  would  be  His  gladness  now?  David,  what 
would  be  "the  things"  which,  in  that  wonderful  moment,  his  voice  would  sing, 
"  touching  the  King"  ?  Oh,  the  joy  of  that  first  hour  of  praying  in  the  name  of 
Christ !  What  short  and  burning  petitions  would  go  up  from  the  lips  which  first 
quoted,  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  My  name,  He  shall  give  it  you !  " 
But  the  Spirit  has  not  seen  it  good  to  hand  down  the  strong  and  tender  collects  of 
these  ten  days.  Then  surely  it  is  unlawful  to  impose  good  forms  of  prayer  upon  all 
men,  because  ancient  saints  wrote  them.  He  who  will  never  use  a  form  in  public 
prayer  casts  away  the  wisdom  of  the  past.  He  who  will  use  only  forms  casts  away 
the  hope  of  utterance  to  be  given  by  the  Spirit  at  present,  and  even  shuts  up  the 
future  in  the  dead  hand  of  the  past.  Does  anyone  of  the  hundred  and  twenty  up 
to  this  moment  forget  that  Thursday  night  ?  The  Friday  morning  dawns  :  the  day 
the  Lord  had  died.  Would  He  not  send  His  promised  Substitute  to-day  ?  Novv 
came  back  all  His  words  about  the  death  "  which  He  should  accomplish."  Yet  the 
Friday  wears  away,  and  no  "  baptism  of  fire  "  !  The  Saturday  sets  in  ;  its  hours 
are  filled  up  as  before,  with  prayer ;  but  no  answer.  And  now  dawns  the  first  day 
of  the  week,  the  day  whereon  He  rose,  the  first  Lord's  day  He  had  passed  on  His 
throne  of  glory.  Surely  they  would  expect  that  the  blessing  be  delayed  no  longer. 
But  the  evening  steals  on,  and  all  their  prayers  might  have  risen  into  a  heaven  that 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

could  not  hear.  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday  pass.  Their  faith  does  not  fail ; 
still  in  the  temple  "  praising  and  blessing  God,"  or  in  the  upper  room  in  "prayer 
and  supplication,"  they  continue  of  one  accord.  Though  He  tarry,  yet  will  they 
wait  for  Him.  This  is  waiting.  Some  speak  of  waiting  for  salvation  as  if  it  meant 
making  ourselves  at  ease,  and  dismissing  both  effort  and  anxiety.  Who  so  waits 
for  any  person,  or  any  event  ?  When  waiting,  your  mind  is  set  on  a  certain  point ; 
you  can  give  yourself  to  nothing  else.  You  are  looking  forward  and  preparing; 
every  moment  of  delay  increases  the  sensitivene.-^s  of  your  mind  as  to  that  one  thing. 
A  servant  waiting  for  bis  master,  a  wife  waiting  for  the  footstep  of  her  husband,  a 
mother  waiting  for  her  expected  boy,  a  merchant  waiting  for  his  richly-laden  sbip, 
a  sailor  waiting  for  the  sight  of  land,  a  monarch  wailing  for  tidings  of  the  battle  : 
all  these  are  cases  wherein  the  mind  is  set  on  one  object,  and  cannot  easily  give 
attention  to  another.  To-morrow  will  be  Thursday,  a  full  week  from  the  Ascen- 
sion ;  that  will  be  the  day.  The  Thursday  finds  them,  as  before,  "  of  one  accord  in 
one  place  "  :  no  Thomas  absent  through  unbelief.  How  the  scene  of  that  day  week 
would  return  to  their  view  !  How  they  would  over  and  over  again,  in  mind,  repeat 
the  occurrences  of  a  week  ago  1  But  the  day  wears  on,  and  no  blessing.  Is  not 
the  delay  long  ?  "  Not  many  days  !  "  Does  the  promise  hold  good  ?  They  must 
have  felt  disappointed  as  the  evening  fell.  Now  is  the  hour  of  trial.  Will  their 
faith  fail?  Will  some  stay  at  home,  or  "  go  a-fishing,"  saying  that  they  will  wait 
the  Lord's  time,  and  not  be  unwarrantably  anxious  about  what,  after  all,  does  not 
depend  on  them,  but  on  the  Lord  ?  Or  will  they  begin  to  find  out  that  the  cause 
lies  in  the  unfaitlifulness  of  their  companions?  Happily  the  spirit  of  faith  and 
love  abides  upon  them.  Happy  for  them  that  none  fancied  He  could  fix  upon 
others  the  cause  of  their  unanswered  prayers  !  The  Thursday  is  gone ;  eight  days ! 
The  Friday  and  the  Saturday  follow  it,  marked  by  the  same  persistency  in  union, 
in  praise,  in  prayer,  and  by  the  same  absence  of  encouragement.  Ten  days  gone! 
the  promise,  "  Not  many  days,"  is  all  but  broken.  The  final  proof  given  by  Peter, 
that  he  was  waiting  indeed,  making  all  preparation  for  the  event,  was  in  calling 
upon  his  brethren  to  fill  up  the  number  of  apostles.  (W.  Arthur,  M.A.)  Wait- 
ing for  the  promise : — They  were  waiting  in  quiet  expectation  and  hope,  as  little 
children  sitting  together  on  a  Christmas  Eve  in  a  dark  room,  while  ia  the  next 
room  the  Christmas  presents  are  preparing ;  for  it  was  again  the  time  of  Advent, 
of  the  Advent  of  the  Lord  in  the  Spirit.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Waiting  for  the 
promise: — As  those  who  dye  cloth  first  prepare  the  cloth  to  receive  the  dye 
which  it  is  to  take,  so  does  God  ordain  that  the  soul  which  is  to  receive 
His  grace  must  be  fitted  for  the  sanctifying  Spirit.  (Chrysostovi.)  Waiting 
for  the  promise :  the  duty  of  ministers  and  churches : — It  may  be  asked 
whether  we  are  to  expect  that  in  all  ages,  a  sufficient  number  of  men  will  be  raised 
up,  bearing  the  primitive  marks  of  a  call  from  God,  and  of  gifts  from  God  ;  and 
our  reply  would  be  simply,  "  Eemember  the  ten  days."  There  we  see  men  whose 
commission  had  come  from  the  lips  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  whose  training  has  been 
under  His  own  eye,  who  have  forsaken  houses,  and  lands,  and  all  that  could  bind 
them  to  secular  avocations,  who  are  ready  to  set  forth  upon  the  work  of  calling  and 
warning  a  world  that  is  "  lying  in  the  wicked  one  "  ;  and  yet  day  after  day  the  inhi- 
bition lies  upon  them,  that  they  are  to  tarry  until  they  are  endued  with  power  from 
on  high.  As  we  look  at  that  spectacle — sinners  dying,  time  rolling  on,  the  Master 
looking  down  from  His  newly-ascended  throne  on  the  world  which  He  has  redeemed, 
seeing  death  bear  away  its  thousands  while  His  servants  keep  silence — there  is  in 
that  hilence  a  tone  which  booms  through  all  the  future,  warning  us  that  never, 
never,  under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  are  men  to  set  out  upon  the  embassy 
to  Christ,  be  their  qualifications  or  credentials  what  they  may,  until  first  they  have 
been  endued  with  power  from  on  high,  been  baptized  with  tongues  of  fire.  Better  let 
jhe  Church  wait  ever  so  long— better  let  the  ordinances  of  God's  house  be  without 
perfunctory  actors,  and  all,  feeling  sore  need,  be  forced  to  cry  with  special  urgency 
for  fresh  outpourings  and  baptisms  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  raise  up  holy  ministers, 
than  that,  by  any  manner  of  factitious  supply,  substitutes  should  be  furnished  — 
substitutes  no  more  ministers  of  God,  than  coals  arranged  in  a  grate  are  a  fire ;  or 
than  a  g«)lden  candlestick  with  a  wax  taper,  never  kindled,  is  a  light.  (W.  Arthur, 
M.A.)  The  first  prayer -meeting  after  the  Ascension : — I.  The  scene.  "Upper" 
does  not  mean  a  room  above  the  lower  floor,  much  less  a  garret  or  inferior  apart- 
ment, but  one  comparatively  spacious — reserved  in  Greek  and  Jewish  houses  for 
the  use  of  guests,  or  for  unusual  occasions.  "  Upper  rooms  were  a  kind  of 
domestic  chapels  in  every  hou^e.     There  they  assembled  to  read  the  law,  and  to 


cnAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  '      79 

transact  religious  affairs."     In  returning  to  Jerusalem  the  disciples  showed — 1. 
Their  obedience  to  Christ.      2.  Their  fearless  faith.     II.  The  attendance.     The 
roll  of  names  reminds  us  of — 1.  The  sociality  of  Christ's  system.     If  you  would 
unite  men  in  social  affection,  you  must  get  them  to  love  supremely  your  common 
object.     Christianity  alone  supplies  an  object  that  all  hearts  can  love  supremely  ; 
and  therefore  of  all  systems  it  is  the  most  social.     2.  The  tiiumph  of  grace.     Here 
is  Peter  no  longer  fearful,  and  Thomas  no  longer  incredulous,  &c.    Women  are  also 
here  :  their  presence  being  noted  in  strong  contrast  which   assigned   a  separate 
court  in  the  temple,  and  kept  women  fapart  in  the  synagogue.     la  Christ  there 
is  neither  male  nor  female.    Christianity  has  raised  woman  to  her  present  position, 
and  woman  has  ever  proved  most  loyal  to  the  system  that  has  made  her  what  she  is. 
3.  The  ravages  of  sin.     Where  is  Judas  ?     He  was  present  at  the  supper,  perhaps 
in  this  very  room.     IH.  The  Spirit  was  a  spirit  of — 1.  Union.     They  were  not  only 
assembled  in  the  same  place  and  for  the  same  purj^oi^e  ;  but  there  was  a  great  una- 
nimity of  sentiment  amongst  them.     They  agreed  in  the  blessings  they  sought,  and 
in  the  mode  of  seeking  them.      2.  Perseverance.      Cf.  Parable  of  unjust  judge. 
Conclusion  :  Would  that  all  prayer-meetings  were  something  like  this.     We  must 
go  back  to  apostolic  times  for  our  models  of  devotion.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         A 
model  j)rayer- meeting  : — If  the  prayer-meeting  is  the  thermometer  of  the  Church, 
then  the  first  Christian  prayer-meeting  registers  a  high  degree  of    spiritual  life 
existing  just  after  tbe  departure  of   Christ.      This  was  a  model  in  point  of— I. 
Attendance.    There  were  one  hundred  and  twenty  present.    1.  All  the  office-bearers 
were  there.    Are  modern  elders  and  deacons  as  exemplary  ?    2.  The  male  members 
were  there.     Business  or  pleasure  did  not  hinder  them.     3.  The  female  members 
were  there.     "The   women"    still  form  a  large  proportion  of  the  attendants  at 
prayer-meetings.     II.  The  Spirit.     Peace  and  unity  prevailed.     The  day  of  "  mur- 
muring "  had  not  yet  come  (chap.  vi.  1.)     Union  is  strength.     A  divided  Church 
cannot  long  remain  a  praying  Church.     God  answers  prayer  when  it  is  offered  by 
few  or  many  "  with  one  accord."     The  promise  is  addressed  to  those  who  are 
"agreed."     III.  The  results  (see  chap.  ii. ).     The  Church  was  born  at  a  prayer- 
meeting,  which  should  encourage  us  to  sustain  our   often  thinly  attended   and 
cold-spirited  prayer-meetings.     The  prayer-meeting  is  more  tha;a  the  thermometer 
of  the  Church,  it  is  the  source  of  her  spiritual  power.     There  is  as  intimate  a 
relation  between  the  prayer-meeting  and  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  as  between 
the  gathering  of  the  cloud  and  the  downpour  of  the  shower.     Pentecostal  revivals 
must  be  preceded  by  ante-Pentecostal  prayer-meetings.      (T.  8.  Dickson,  M.A.) 
The  meeting  for praxjcr preparatory  to  the  day  of  Pentecost: — This  passage  refers  to 
the  most  interesting  period  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  the  results  of  which  will 
be  felt  to  all  eternity.     In  one  point  of  view  the  infant  Church  was  in  a  bereaved 
condition.     Still  their  glorified  Lord  had  given  to  them  words  of  promise  which 
inspired  them  with  the  confident  expectation  of  coming  glory.    And  never  was  there 
a  more  interesting  congregation.     No  Jewish  ruler,  no  Eabbi,  no  Roman  senator 
was  there.    It  was  a  select  and  happy  group  of  holy  men  and  women,  who  had  met 
for  the  most  important  purpose,  to  agonise  in  prayer.     They  were  not  acting  under 
a  momentary  impulse  ;  nor  as  the  result  of  a  transient  excitement,  but  under  the 
influence  of  that  deep  personal  piety  that  needs  n^  other  impulse  but  what  is 
supplied   by   a    sense    of   duty,    or    by  its  own    spontaneous   energy;      I.    The 
FEATURES  BY  WHICH  THEY  WERE  DISTINGUISHED.     1.  They  contemijlatccl  the  attain- 
ment of  a  special  object.    The  Saviour's  promise,  so  far  from  inducing  indifference, 
awoke  attention,  urged  to  duty,  and  gave  a  specific  character  to  prayer.     During 
the  greater  part  of  the  Saviour's  ministry  they  seem  to  have  known  little  of  the 
doctiineof  Divine  influence.     But  at  its  close  the  Lord  dwelt  mainly  upon  this 
fundamental  truth;    and  now  the  doctrine  inspired  their  hopes,  warmed   their 
hearts,  and  must  have  formed  the  subject  of  their  prayerful  appeal  to  heaven.    This 
blessing  is  as  important  for  us  as  for  tbem.     The  doctrine  of  Divine  influence  is 
admitted  as  an  article  of  our  faith,  but  it  fails  to  exert  the  amount  of  influence 
over  us  which  its  importance  demands.     Yet,  upon  the  prayers  of  the  Church  is 
made  to  depend  the  bestowment  of   the   Spirit  in  any  enlarged   degree.      And 
what  else  can   secure  the    salvation  of   the  perishing  ?  or  warm  the  hearts  of 
slumbering  saints  ?  or  reclaim  the  backslider  from  his  wanderings  ?  or  correct  the 
existing  errors  of  the  Church?     2.  The  prayers  were  presented  in  concert  and 
union.     The  place  was  humble,  but  it  served  the  purpose.     It  was  not  enough  that 
that  each  one  separately  should  have  been  endued  with  the  spirit  of  prayer.     Ee- 
ligion  is  social.     Like  gravitation,  its  tendency  is  to  bring  its  recipients  into  con- 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  i, 

tact ;  and  the  wants  of  the  Church  make  it  necessary  for  its  members  to  meet  that 
they  may  blend  their  affections  and  unite  in  service.  3.  These  devotional  exercises 
were  continuous  and  persevering.  The  disciples  laid  aside  for  several  days  their 
ordinary  occupations  and  gave  themselves  to  the  uninterrupted  pursuit  of  spiritual 
things.  This  course  was  as  true  to  philosophy  as  it  was  consistent  with  religion. 
It  is  by  oft-repeated  strokes  that  the  artisan  produces  the  desired  impression  on 
the  metal ;  and  that  the  heart  may  be  subdued  and  elevated,  it  must  be  brought  into 
continuous  contact  with  spiritual  realities.  It  is  partly  on  such  grounds  that  extra- 
ordinary religious  services  may  be  adopted  and  justified.  A  state  of  things  may 
exist  in  a  Church  such  as  to  call  for  some  special  effort.  It  may  have  lost  its 
fir.st  love,  and  the  things  that  remain  may  be  ready  to  die.  All  ordinary  effort  to 
revive  its  piety  seems  to  be  in  vain.  It  may  be  necessary,  therefore,  to  resort  to 
extraordinary  measures  and  give  ourselves  to  special  prayer.  4.  These  exercises 
must  have  been  marked  by  fervency  and  sustained  by  faith  and  hope.     II.  The 

INFLUENCE  AND  RESULTS  BY  WHICH  THESE  DEVOTIONAL  EXERCISES  WOULD    BE   ATTENDED. 

1.  They  would  improve  personal  piety.  That  indeed  bad  progressed  considerably. 
Still,  in  point  of  depth,  comprehensiveness,  and  power,  it  was  susceptible  of  im- 
provement. And  if  the  first  disciples  needed  an  improvement  in  spiritual  charr.cter, 
how  much  more  we  ?  What,  then,  shall  accomplish  it?  United,  as  well  as  private 
prayer.  2.  They  would  prepare  the  disciples  to  receive  the  promised  effusion 
of  the  Spirit,  and  for  their  future  vocation.  A  fixed  rule  in  the  Divine  government 
is  that  the  minds  of  men  must  be  prepared  by  a  suitable  course  of  discipline  for  the 
recei^tion  of  any  special  token  of  the  favour  of  God.  Isaiah  was  not  called  to  wit- 
ness before  the  live  coal  from  the  altar  touched  his  lips.  Moses  was  instructed  by 
immediate  communion  with  the  Most  High,  preparatory  to  his  mission.  "Would  you 
be  endued  with  power  from  on  high  and  win  souls  to  Christ  ?  Then  pray  in  unison. 
3.  They  sustained  an  intimate  relation  to  the  events  of  the  day  of  Pentecost.  May 
they  not  be  regarded  as  a  most  gracious  answer  to  the  prayers  of  the  suppliant 
Church?  (IF.  A.  Hnrndall.)  Prayer-meetings  not  to  he  given  up: — A  pious 
woman,  when  it  was  decided  to  close  the  prayer-meeting  in  a  certain  village, 
declared  that  it  should  not  be,  for  she  would  be  there  if  no  one  else  was.  True  to 
her  word,  when,  the  next  morning,  some  oue  said  to  her  jestingly,  "  Did  you  have  a 
prayer-meeting  last  night  ?  "  "  Ah,  that  we  did,"  she  replied.  "  How  many  were 
present  ?  "  "  Four,"  she  said.  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  I  heard  that  you  were  there  all 
alone."  "  No,"  she  said  ;  "  I  was  the  only  one  visible ;  but  the  Father  was  there, 
and  the  Son  was  there,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  was  there,  and  we  were  all  agreed  in 
prayer."  Before  long  others  took  shame  themselves  at  the  earnest  perseverance 
of  this  poor  woman,  the  prayer-meeting  was  revived  and  the  church  prospered, 
(ir.  Bdxendale.)  Prayer-meetihg-i,  Snndaij  morning  : — I  have  been  endeavouring 
to  establish  among  us  what  are  called  Aaron  and  Hur  Societies ;  i.e.,  little 
collections  of  four  or  five  or  more  persons,  who  meet  before  service  on 
Sabbath  morning,  to  spend  an  hour  in  prayer  for  a  blessing  on  the  minister 
and  the  ordinances.  They  began  on  New  Year's  Day  and  we  seemed  to  have  an 
immediate  answer,  for  the  meeting  was  unusually  solemn;  and  we  have  reason  to 
hope  that  the  Word  was  not  preached   in  vain.     (K.  Piiyson,   D.D.)  Social 

prayer : — By  this  is  meant  such  meetings  as  are  held  pre-eminently  for  the 
purpose  of  prayer,  praise,  and  revival.  I.  Impohtance.  1.  The  inauguration  of 
the  Christian  Church  was  pireceded  and  attended  with  social  prayer.  The  Day  of 
Pentecost  followed  a  ten  days'  prayer-meeting  of  the  one  hundred  and  twenty 
disciples.  2.  Seasons  of  joy  or  danger  were  marked  by  meetings  for  prayer  (chaps, 
iv.  23-31 ;  xii.  12  ;  xvi.  13).  3.  Eevivals  of  religion  are  closely  connected  with 
them.  "Wiien  Zion  travails  in  prayer  she  brings  forth  her  spiritual  children  (Isa. 
Ixvi.  8).  4.  Great  movements  have  been  originated  in  them.  The  first  foreign 
missionary  society  had  its  inception  in  the  meeting  for  prayer  held  by  five  young 
men — Mills.  Richards,  Bobbins,  Loomis,  and  Green — under  a  haystack  at  Williams- 
town    in    180G.      II.    DlFFEKENT    KINDS   OF    MEETINGS    FOR    SOCLVL    PURPOSES.       1,    The 

■weekly  Church  prayer-meeting.  2.  Ladies'  prayer-meetings.  3.  Business  men's  noon- 
day meetings.  4.  The  week  of  prayer.  5.  Neighbourhood  or  cottage  prayer-meetings. 
6.  Conventions  or  convocations  for  prayer  and  revival.  III.  Scripture  promises. 
1.  That  Christ  will  make  one  in  their  company,  whether  they  be  few  or  many 
(Matt,  xviii.  20).  2.  That  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  be  answered  (Matt,  xviii.  19  ; 
John  xvi.  23,  24).  3.  That  their  rewards  shall  be  sure  (Matt.  iii.  16).  IV.  How 
MAY  THE  EFFiciKNCY  OF  such  MEETINGS  BE  ENLARGED?  1.  By  preceding  them  with 
secret  prayer.     2.  By  regular  and  prompt  attendance,     3.  By  labouring  to  secure 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  '    61 

the  attendance  upon  them  of  every  able-bodied  Church  member  and  others.  (L. 
0.  Tlwmpson.)  An  assembly  of  Christians  : — You  know  those  hghts  which  we 
use  in  pubhc  places,  where  you  have  a  ring  pierced  with  a  hundred  tiny  holes,  from 
each  of  which  bursts  a  separate  flame ;  but  when  all  are  lit  they  run  into  one 
brilliant  circle,  and  lose  their  separateness  in  the  rounded  completeness  of  the 
blended  blaze.  This  is  like  what  Christ's  Church  ought  to  be.  We  each,  by  our 
own  personal  contact  with  Him,  by  our  individual  communion  with  our  Saviour, 
become  light  in  the  Lord,  and  yet  we  joyfully  blend  with  our  brethren  and  fused 
into  one,  give  forth  our  mingled  light.  (A.  Blaclaren,  D.D.)  Prayer  meetings  : — 
One  of  the  greenest  spots  upon  earth  was  the  parish  of  St.  Peter's,  Dundee,  when 
the  lovely  M'Cheyne  was  its  pastor.  He  thus  records  in  his  diary  the  spirit  of 
prayer  which  prevailed  among  his  people  :  "  Many  prayer-meetings  were  formed, 
some  of  which  were  strictly  private,  and  others,  conducted  by  persons  of  some 
Christian  experience,  were  open  to  persons  under  concern  at  one  another's  houses. 
At  the  time  of  my  return  from  the  mission  to  the  Jews  I  found  thirty-nine  such 
meetings  held  weekly  in  connection  with  the  congregation.  The  social  •power  of 
prayer : — Akin  to  the  moral  are  the  social  effects  of  prayer.  Prayer  makes  men  as 
members  of  society  different  in  their  whole  being  from  those  who  do  not  pray.  It 
gilds  social  intercourse  and  conduct  with  a  tenderness,  an  unobstructiveuess,  a  sin- 
cerity, a  frankness,  an  evenness  of  temper,  a  cheerfulness,  a  collectedness,  a  con- 
stant consideration  for  others,  united  to  a  simple  loyalty  to  truth  and  duty,  which 
leavens  and  strengthens  society.  {Canon  Liddon.)  Result  of  united  prayer : — 
There  was  an  old  deacon  in  a  city  in  Michigan  who  was  connected  with  a  church 
which  had  no  conversion  for  sixteen  years.  He  came  to  his  death-bed,  and  felt  that 
he  could  not  die  in  peace.  He  sent  for  the  minister,  but  he  had  been  too  long 
accustomed  to  the  darkness  to  be  easily  awakened.  Failing  with  all  the  male  mem- 
bers of  the  church  he  sent  for  the  ladies,  and  pleaded  with  them  to  piay  for  a  re- 
vival. They  prayed  and  fasted  before  God.  In  a  little  while  the  whole  church 
was  moved.  I  received  a  despatch  from  the  minister.  On  my  arrival  he  took  me 
into  a  room  filled  with  these  ladies  praying  that  the  Lord  would  reveal  His  power. 
I  felt,  as  soon  as  I  entered,  that  God  was  there.  The  next  night  the  power  came, 
and  in  forty-eight  hours  there  was  scarcely  a  young  man  or  young  woman  who  was 
not  converted  to  God,  or  anxious  to  be  saved.  (Z).  L.  Moody.)  The  substance  of 
the  Church : — There  is  a  mine  near  Plymouth,  where  the  men  work  in  it  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  feet  belov>r  the  surface,  have  a  little  shelf  for  their  Bibles  and  their 
hymn-books,  and  a  httle  place  where  every  morning,  when  they  go  down  in  the 
black  darkness,  they  bow  before  God,  and  praise  Him  whose  tender  mercies  are  over 
all  His  works.  You  never  heard  of  thsse  miners,  perhaps,  and  do  not  know  them  ; 
but  possibly  some  of  them  are  the  very  substance  of  the  Church.  There  sits  Mr. 
Somebody  in  that  pew ;  oh,  what  a  support  he  is  to  the  Church  !  Yes,  in  money 
matters,  perhaps ;  but  do  you  know  there  is  poor  old  Mrs.  Nobody  in  the  aisle  that 
is  most  likely  a  greater  pillar  to  the  Church  than  he,  for  she  is  a  holier  Christian, 
one  who  lives  nearer  to  her  God  and  serves  Him  better,  and  she  is  "  the  substance 
thereof  "?  Ah,  that  old  woman  in  the  garret  that  is  often  in  prayer,  that  old  man 
on  his  bed  that  spends  days  and  nights  in  supplication,  such  people  as  these  are  the 
substance  of  the  Church.  (C  if.  Spurgeon.)  The  duty  of  prayer: — I.  The 
CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  1.  They  had  just  been  visited  with  a  very  afflict- 
ing dispensation.  We  all  know  something  of  the  pangs  of  separation,  but  how 
trying  must  have  been  separation  from  the  Eedeemer  Himself  !  Amidst  the 
experience  of  the  pain  which  separation  inflicted,  however,  they  betook  themselves  to 
prayer,  and  in  the  exercise  they  sought  and  found  consolation.  Have  you  such  a 
salve  for  the  experience  of  trials  ?  2.  They  had  just  met  with  disappointment  in 
reference  to  their  worldly  views  and  expectations.  How  did  they  act  ?  did  they 
exhibit  symptoms  of  chagrin  or  hesitate  about  persevering  in  the  service  of  Christ  ? 
No,  they  betook  themselves  to  prayer.  Let  us  follow  their  example.  3.  They  were 
placed  in  circumstances  of  great  trial  and  perplexity.  Not  only  were  they  now  de- 
prived of  their  Adviser  and  Friend,  not  only  were  their  worldly  expectations  blasted, 
but  they  were  taught  to'look  for  the  experience  of  difficulty,  persecution,  and  death. 
And,  besides  this,  there  was  perplexity  as  to  the  duties  they  were  to  discharge  (ver. 
8).  How  were  they  qualified  then  to  go  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  to 
appear  before  the  learned,  the  great,  and  the  wise  ?  But  in  the  midst  of  all  this 
they  went  to  Him  who  could  comfort  them  ;  and  they  did  not  repair  to  Him  in 
vain.  4.  A  promise  had  been  made  to  them,  and  their  prayers  had  a  very  special 
reference  to  this.  There  are  many  who  contend  that  prayer  is  useless  because  it  is 
VOL.    I.  6 


J 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

impossible  that  it  can  alter  the  decrees  of  the  Almighty.  There  are  some  who  con- 
demn it  for  the  same  reason.  But  the  aposlles  were  made  aware,  not  only  of 
God's  decrees,  but  they  had  a  promise  actually  made  to  them,  yet  they  prayed  for  the 
very  things  which  Christ  had  declared  should  be  be>towed.  True  it  is  that  no  one 
can  resist  the  will  of  the  Almighty ;  but  God  works  by  means,  and  prayer  is  one  of 

them.     II.  The  SPIRIT  AND  TEMPER  THAT  CHARACTEKI -ED  THEIR  SUPPLICATIONS.     1.  They 

doubtless  prayed  in  the  name  of  Christ  (John  xvi.  22).  When  we  go  to  God  never  let 
us  forget  that  the  name  we  mention  is  that  of  Him  who  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  Father.  2.  They  prayed  in  a  spirit  of  obedience.  We  read  here  of  their  sup- 
plication, but  notice  their  practice  :  "  They  returned  unto  Jerusalem."  Let  us  be 
taught  by  this,  that  if  we  expect  our  prayers  to  be  heard  we  must  not  only  go  to 
God  in  the  name  of  Christ,  but  we  must,  go  seeking,  and  praying,  and  aspiring 
after  obedience.  3.  They  showed  also  the  spirit  of  love.  We  do  read  of  their 
disputes,  but  we  shall  read  of  these  no  more.  They  are  met  with  one  accord.  4. 
They  united  together.  And  this  teaches  us  the  importance  of  public  worship.  (/. 
Marshall.)  Church  attitudes  :  unity : — To  separate  ourselves  from  our  brethren 
is  to  lose  power.  Half-dead  brands  heaped  close  will  kindle  one  another,  and  flame 
will  sparkle  beneath  the  film  of  white  ashes  on  their  edges.  Fling  them  apart  and 
they  go  out.  Eake  them  together  and  they  glow.  Let  us  try  not  to  be  litile,  feeble 
tapers,  stuck  in  separate  sockets,  and  each  twinkling  struggling  rays  over  some 
inch  or  so  of  space  ;  but  draw  near  to  our  brethren,  and  be  workers  together  with 
them  that  there  may  rise  a  glorious  flame  from  our  summed  and  collective  bright- 
ness which  shall  be  a  guide  and  hospitable  call  to  many  a  wandering  and  weary 
spirit.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Church  attitudes:  expectancy  : — The  suushine  flows 
into  the  opened  eye,  the  breath  of  life  into  the  expanding  lung — so  surely,  so 
immediately,  the  fulness  of  God  fills  the  waiting,  wishing  souls.  (Ibid.)  Church 
attitudes  :  receptivity  : — If  the  Church  is  to  receive  tbe  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  she 
must  cultivate  the  receiving  frame  of  mind— she  must  place  herself  in  right  atti- 
tude toward  the  gift  she  would  receive.  The  thirsty  man  who  comes  to  the  foun- 
tain must  hold  his  cup  the  right  side  up  if  he  is  to  receive  ihe  refreshing  water, 
then  the  water  will  fill  it ;  but  if  he  holds  the  cup  the  wrong  side  up  the  water  will 
flow  over  and  dash  away  from  it,  and  thus  his  thirst  will  not  be  quenched.  Peni- 
tence, unity,  prayer,  earnestness,  constitute  the  receptive  attitude  of  the  soul ;  to 
such  the  Spirit  will  be  given  without  measure.  ^^  Peter,  James,  and  John  "  : — A 
curious  text  was  once  used  by  the  Kev.  J.  Thain  Davidson,  D.D.,  in  his  first  minis- 
terial charge  in  Scotland,  for  the  purpose  of  securing  a  large  gathering  of  children 
whom  he  was  anxious  to  address.  The  text  was  "  Peter,  James,  and  John  " — from 
which  he  sought  to  show  the  individualising  love  of  Christ.  Fifteen  jears  passed 
away  and  he  heard  nothing  of  that  sermon ;  but  one  day,  after  he  was  settled  in 
London,  a  young  man  called  upon  him  :  "  Do  you  remember  me,  sir  ?  "  "  No  ;  I 
do  not."  "  Do  you  remember  the  sermon  you  preached  years  ago  on  Peter,  James, 
and  John  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  I  was  but  a  boy  then,  but  I  walked  six  miles  to  hear  you, 
and  God  blessed  that  sermon  to  my  conversion."  Since  then  the  young  man  has 
devoted  himself  to  the  ministry,  and  he  is  now  a  useful  minister  of  Christ  in 
America.  This  illustrates  the  importance  of  prepenting  to  children's  minds  Bible 
truth  in  the  most  striking  manner.  Prayer,  yatience  in  : — How  many  courtiers  go 
a  hundred  times  a  year  into  the  prince's  chamber  without  hope  of  once  speaking 
with  him,  but  only  to  be  seen  of  him  1  So  must  we  come  to  the  exercise  of  prayer, 
purely  and  merely  to  do  our  duty  and  to  testily  our  fidelity.  (St.  Francis  de  Sales.) 
Prayer,  persevering  : — Two  CLristian  ladies,  whose  husbands  were  unconverted, 
feeling  their  great  danger,  agreed  to  spend  one  hour  each  day  in  united  prayer  for 
their  salvation.  This  was  continued  for  seven  years  ;  when  they  debated  whether 
they  should  pray  longer,  so  useless  did  their  prayers  appear,  and  decided  to  perse- 
vere till  death,  and,  if  their  husbands  went  to  destruction,  it  should  be  loaded  with 
prayers.  In  renewed  strengtb  they  prayed  three  years  longer  ;  when  one  of  them 
was  awakened  in  the  night  by  her  husband  who  was  in  great  distress  for  sin.  As 
soon  as  the  day  dawned  she  hastened,  with  joy,  to  tell  her  praying  companion  that 
God  was  about  to  answer  their  prayers.  What  was  her  surprise  to  meet  her  friend 
coming  to  her  on  the  fame  errand !  Thus  ten  years  of  united  and  persevering 
prayer  was  crowned  with  the  conversion  of  both  husbands  on  tbe  same  day.  (E. 
Foster.)  Prayer,  the  secret  of  strength : — There  is  an  old  story  of  mythology 
about  a  giant  named  Antajus,  who  was  born  by  the  earth.  In  order  to  keep  alive 
this  giant  was  obliged  to  touch  the  earth  as  often  asjDnce  in  five  minutes,  and  every 
time  he  thus  came  in  contact  with  the  earth  he  became  twice  as  strong  as  before. 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  83 

The  Christian  resemhles  Antfeus.  In  order  to  become  and  continue  a  truly  living 
Christian,  the  disciple  of  Christ  njust  often  approach  his  Father  by  prayer. 
{Preacher's  Lantern.)  Prayer,  the  secret  of  usefulness  : — Spurgeon,  being  asked  as 
to  the  reason  of  his  marvellous  and  blessed  usefulness  for  God,  pointed  to  the  floor 
of  the  tabernacle  saying,  "  In  the  room  beneath  you  will  find  three  hundred  praying 
Christians.  Every  time  I  preach  here  they  gather  together,  and  uphold  my  hands  by 
continuous  prayer  and  supplication — there  you  will  find  the  secret  of  all  the  blessing. 
Prayer,  faith  in  : — Prayer  is  the  bow,  the  promise  is  the  arrow  ;  faith  is  the  hand 
which  draws  the  bow,  and  sends  the  arrow  with  the  heart's  message  to  heaven.  The 
bow  without  the  arrow  is  of  no  use;  and  the  arrow  without  the  bow  is  of  little 
worth ;  and  both,  without  the  strength  of  the  hand,  to  no  purpose.  Neither  the 
promise  without  prayer,  nor  prayer  without  the  promise,  nor  both  without  faith, 
avail  the  Christian  anything.  What  was  said  of  the  Israelites,  "  They  could  not 
enter  in  because  of  unbelief,"  the  same  may  be  said  of  many  of  our  prayers  :  they 
cannot  enter  into  heaven  because  they  are  not  put  up  in  faith.  {H.  G.  Salter.) 
Prayer  and  revivals: — The  great  revival  in  New  York  in  1858-9  began  in  answer  to 
the  earnest  believing  prayers  of  one  man.  After  long  waiting  upon  God,  asking 
Him  to  show  him  what  He  would  have  him  to  do,  and  becoming  more  and  more 
confident  that  God  would  show  him  the  way  through  which  hundreds  might  be 
influenced  for  their  souls'  good,  he  at  last  began  a  noon-day  pra\er-meeting.  The 
first  half-hour  nobody  came,  and  he  prayed  through  it  alone.  At  half-past  twelve 
the  step  cf  a  solitary  individual  was  heard  on  the  stairs  ;  others  came,  until  six 
made  up  the  whole  company.  His  record  of  that  meeting  was,  "  The  Lord  was 
with  us  to  bless  us."  Of  those  six,  one  was  a  Presbyterian,  one  a  Baptist,  another 
a  Congregationalist,  and  another  a  Eeformed  Dutch."  [The  Power  of  Prayer.) 
Church  minify  ; — They  were  "  all  together  in  one  mind."  How  graphic  this  sketch 
of  true  union ;  and  of  union  for  the  attainment  of  a  definite  object !  The  expres- 
sion implies  not  only  concord,  union  of  heart,  but  concert,  agreement  of  will,  pre- 
arrangement,  and  design.  "  All  together  in  one  mind."  How  fair  a  model  for  the 
imitation  of  the  expectant  Church  in  every  age — for  "  sure  His  after-comings  will 
be  like  to  His  first,  to  them  that  are,  and  not  to  any  but  them  that  are  '  of  one 
accord.'  "  "  AH,"  comprising  every  diversity  of  mental  and  moral  constitution,  in 
every  degree  of  development,  each  retaining  his  proper  individuality,  yet  each  in 
vital  sympathy  and  unison  with  all  the  rest.  Various  yet  one,  and  the  more  com- 
pletely one  because  various.  "  All  together,"  the  individual  influencing  the  com- 
munity, and  the  whole  community  influencing  each  individual ;  each  communicating 
something  to  all ;  and  all  communicating  something  to  each  ;  Peter's  quickness  and 
vigour  acting  upon  Thomas's  sober  considerateness ;  and  Thomas's  quiet  considerate- 
ness  keeping  Peter's  impetuous  enei-gy  under  wholesome  restraint ;  the  serene 
fervour  of  John  blending  with  the  activity  of  Andrew,  and  the  unhesitating 
openness  of  Bartholomew ;  Martha's  vivacity  combining  with  her  sister  Mary's 
thoughtfulness,  and  the  subdued  and  tender  seriousness  of  M^iry,  the  motber  of  the 
Lord ;  each  simultaneously  active  and  passive,  and  all  sensibly  quickened,  by  their 
union,  +o  increasing  earnestness  and  confidence.  "  All  together,  and  of  one  mind," 
that  single  mind  centring  all  its  hopes,  exercising  all  its  energies  on  one  object — 
the  immediate  descent  of  power  from  on  high.     {F.  W.  Briggs.) 

Ver.  15.  And  in  those  days  Peter  stood  up  in  the  midst  of  the  dis'iples. — 
Peter's  attitude : — Mark  the  bearing  of  Peter  towards  his  fellow-believers.  No 
priestly  attitude  does  he  assume.  Though  he  leads,  he  associates  the  whole  assembly 
with  himself.  He  will  have  them  to  choose  candidates  for  the  apostleship  ;  he 
accepts  their  nomination  ;  and  though  it  is  all  but  certain  that  in  laying  these  two 
before  the  Lord,  he  was  the  spokesman,  this  is  not  said.  Nor  was  it  only  on  this 
first  occasion,  when  he  might  be  supposed  rather  to  shrink,  that  he  thus  acted,  but 
on  every  subsequent  occasion  his  procedure  was  in  keeping  with  this.  So  little 
ground  is  there  not  only  for  the  lordly  assumptions  of  those  who  call  themselves 
successors  of  "  the  prince  of  the  apostles,"  but  for  that  ecclesiastical  ambition  which 
has  proved  the  bane  and  blight  of  many  who  repudiate  Eomish  pretensions. 
{D,  Brown,  D.D.)  A  model  church  meeting  : — This  was  a  meeting — I.  To  tran- 
sact BUSINESS  OF  VERY  GRAVE  IMPORTANCE.  To  clcct  an  apostlc— an  eye-witness 
of  the  resurrection — in  the  place  of  Judas.  The  resurrection  is  the  key-stone  of 
the  Christian  system.  The  fact  was  so  extraordinary,  and  clashed  so  mightily 
with  popular  prejudices  that  no  one  would  dare  to  proclaim  it  who  had  not  been 
deeply  convinced  of  it  by  irresistible  evidence.     To  be  able  to  do  this  was  necessary 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIt.  [chap.  i. 

to  constitute  an  apostle.  II.  In  which  the  assembled  meiibers  had  a  duty  to 
FULFIL,  and  all  of  them,  male  and  female,  were  called  upon  to  exercise  their  best 
judgment,  and  to  give  their  conscientious  vote.  The  candidates  were  set  up  not 
by  the  apostles,  but  by  the  whole  body  of  disciples.  The  appointment  of  ministers 
is  not  the  right  of  an  individual,  however  distinguished  in  Church  and  state,  but 
by  the  assembled  Church.  III.  Competent  in  itself  to  dischakoe  the  business. 
They  sought  no  counsel  from  any  body  of  men  external  to  themselves,  nor  would 
they  have  submitted  to  dictation  from  any  person  or  society  outside,  however 
dignified.  The  power  of  a  Church  for  its  own  business  is  in  itself  inspired  and 
guided  by  Christ  its  Head.  IV.  Superintended  by  its  ablest  member.  Peter's 
conduct  shows  that  he  was  the  most  competent — the  man  to  direct  affairs. 
Observe — 1.  His  sketch  of  the  miserable  man  who  had  once  occupied  the  vacant 
post.  2.  His  counsel  as  to  present  duty.  Peter's  principle  was  that  the  new  apostle 
should  be  selected  from  those  who  were  most  intimate  with  the  Master — a  principle 
to  be  for  ever  observed.  He  only  is  qualified  for  the  highest  office  in  the  Church 
whose  alliance  with  Christ  is  most  vital.  V.  In  which  they  engaged  in  united 
prayer  to  heaven  for  direction.  The  prayer  implies — 1.  A  recogniticin  of  the 
Divine  omniscience.  A  deep  impression  of  God's  acquaintance  with  all  hearts  is 
essential  to  devotion.  2.  A  desire  to  have  their  choice  regulated  by  the  Divine. 
"We  only  desire  to  vote  for  Him  whom  Thou  hast  ordained."  Conclusion: 
Would  that  all  church  meetings  had  ever  been  ruled  by  this  model.  Gathered 
not  for  trivial  but  important  business ;  recognising  the  right  of  every  member  to 
a  voice ;  holding  the  power  to  transact  all  its  affairs  independently  of  external 
authority,  &c.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Preparing  for  ecclesiastical  busiiiess  : — Notice 
that  the  company  was — 1.  Comparatively  small.  But  it  was  the  first  part  of 
Christ's  mighty  kingdom.  Despise  not  the  day  of  small  things.  2.  Business-like. 
"  Names  "  suggests  that  a  list  was  probably  drawn  up — a  sign  of  intelligence  and 
earnestness.  'S.  Imperfect.  One  place  was  vacant,  and  the  company  could  not 
be  content  till  it  was  filled.  4.  Every  member  of  it  acknowledged  the  authority  of 
Holy  Scripture.  The  company  was  prepared — I.  By  being  adequately  instructed. 
Peter's  speech  showed — 1.  That  the  place  of  Judas  must  be  filled  up.  Tlie  number 
of  apo.-tles  followed  that  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  They  were  commonly 
designated  as  "  the  Twelve,"  both  before  and  after  the  death  of  Judas.  2.  That  the 
whole  assembly  must  take  part  in  filling  up  the  vacancy.  3.  That  the  Word  of 
God  was  to  give  the  assembly  present  direction,  4.  That  definite  qualifications 
were  required  in  an  apostle.  5.  That  a  definite  work  had  to  be  done  by  the 
apostles.  This  instruction  probably  cleared  up  vague  thinkings  for  many  a  member 
of  the  company.  II.  By  being  biRONGLY  warned  against  sin.  In  the  case  of 
Judas  they  saw — 1.  Sin  working  in  one  who  had  held  office  under  Jesus — the  Saviour 
from  sin.  What  qualifications  had  they  which  Judas  had  not  had?  Yet  sin 
turned  him  out  of  his  office.  Then  let  all  beware.  2.  Sin  working  in  one  who 
had  been  chosen  for  office  by  Jesus  Himself.  3.  Sin  growing  to  great  enormity. 
4.  Sin  making  its  perpetrator  infamous.  5.  Sin  ending  in  a  doom  of  darkness. 
Conclusion  :  Here  we  see — 1.  The  true  primacy  of  Peter.  He  led  in  preparation, 
interpretation  and  prayer.  The  fulfilment  of  the  words,  "  Thou  art  Peter,"  &c.,  is 
here  begun.  The  foundation  is  not  the  confession,  but  the  man  (Gal.  ii.  9;  Eph. 
ii.  20;  1  Tim.  iii.  15;  1  Pet.  ii.  4-6).  Christ  is  the  one  foundation  stone  (1  Cor. 
iii.  11) ;  but  there  is  also  a  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  and  this  is 
laid  in  Peter.  Accordingly  he  founded  the  Jewish  portion  of  tbe  Church,  as  we 
see  in  the  early  chapters  of  this  book.  On  him,  standing  on  Christ,  were  laid  in 
one  day  three  thousand  souls.  And  he  also  founded  the  Gentile  portion  (chaps. 
X.,  xi.).  But  Peter  had  no  special  primacy  of  rank  after  his  own  special  work  was 
completed.  And  he  could  have  no  successor.  2.  The  true  functions  of  the 
preacher.  Peter  gave  the  sense  of  Scripture,  and  applied  it  to  the  circumstances 
of  the  time  so  directing  the  hearers.  The  Acts  is  the  best  treatise  on  homiletics. 
3.  A  good  example  for  all  Christians.  Under  Peter's  direction  the  company 
prayed,  considered  their  duty,  and  so  proceeded  to  action — prayer,  meditation, 
work,  describe  the  whole  sphere  of  Christian  duty.  {W.  Hudson.)  The  prematiire 
election: — 1.  "  In  those  days  "  Peter  "  stood  up."  It  was  a  pity  he  did  so,  for  he 
had  been  told  to  sit  down.  But  who  can  wait  ten  days?  Yet  those  periods  of 
waiting  are  interposed  in  every  life,  for  the  trial  of  patience  and  for  the  perfecting 
of  faith.  "  They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait."  "  Stand  still  and  see  the 
salvation  of  God."  "Your  strength  is  to  sit  still."  But  Peter  was  a  man  who 
could  not  wait.    He  was  always  more  or  less  of  a  talkative  man.    Instead  of 


CHAP,  I.]  THE  ACTS.  .    85 

embodying  it  iu  patience  and  endurance  his  energy  evaporated  in  speech.  He  will 
become  a  better  man  by  and  bj' ;  yes,  even  in  this  opening  speech,  he  begins  to 
show  tliat  delieaey  of  touch  which  made  him  conspicuous  amid  all  the  apostolic 
writers.  It  was  to  be  feared  that  he  would  begin  with  a  mistake,  because  he  ended 
with  one  (John  xxi.  21).  The  fussy  church  must  be  doin^  something,  if  it  is  only 
mischief  ;  the  mechanical  church  cannot  stand  still ;  they  consider  that  if  they  are 
walking  up  and  down  very  much,  they  are  doing  something,  but  if  they  be  sitting 
quietly  still  in  expectancy  and  eager  love,  they  are  doing  nothing.  Peter  will  have 
a  vote  taken,  or  a  ballot ;  he  will  complete  the  broken  circle — he  who  broke  the 
circle  most.  2.  Peter  begins  where  all  wise  teachers  begin,  if  they  would  continue 
efficiently,  and  conclude  beneficently.  He  founds  what  he  has  to  say  upon  the 
Scriptures.  This  is  the  peculiarity  of  Christian  teaching :  it  founds  itself  upon 
the  Written  Word.  Even  where  there  may  be  differences  of  interpretation,  it  rests 
upon  something  deeper  than  merely  verbal  exposition.  Herein  is  that  sublime 
possibility  of  all  Christian  sections  being  substantially  and  integrally  right.  It  is 
the  spirit  that  unites,  it  is  the  letter  that  divides  and  kills.  It  is  quite  possible  for 
a  heterodox  man  to  have  an  orthodox  spirit,  and  it  is  by  his  spirit  that  he  will 
be  saved,  and  not  by  his  letter.  3.  Grounding  himself  upon  Scripture,  and  only 
partially  interpreting  it,  Peter  proceeded  to  take  a  ballot  for  an  apostle  to  succeed 
the  apostate  Judas.  Who  asked  him  to  rise  and  address  the  disciples  at  all  ?  The 
disciples  were  told  to  wait  for  the  baptism  of  power.  '  Peter  was  not  endued  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Pentecostal  sense  when  he  made  this  speech.  The  conditions 
of  succession  to  the  apostulate  are  very  beautiful  (vers.  21,  22).  That  is  the  law 
of  the  ministry  to-day.  "  Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man."  The  Christian 
ministry  must  be  composed  of  men  who  have  "  companied  with  us  "  and  known  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  all  the  time.  You  cannot  make  ministers  ;  they  must  be  born, 
not  of  blood,  &c.  This  is  the  mischief  against  which  we  have  to  guard,  that  you 
can  buy  ministers  with  money.  This  genius  is  not  in  the  market.  4.  Having 
elected  two  men  for  choice,  the  disciples  prayed  :  they  left  the  case  in  the  hands 
of  God,  but  unfortunately  they  had  first  taken  it  into  their  own.  Never  take  your 
own  case  into  your  own  hand.  Persons  say,  "  Be  prudent  " — if  ever  you  can  for  a 
moment  sit  yourself  down,  resolving  to  be  prudent,  God  has  forsaken  you  I  Persons 
say,  "Beware  of  exaggeration,  of  enterprises  that  are  dangerous" — those  persons 
never  did  anything  for  the  world  ;  they  cannot ;  cold  water  never  drove  an  engine, 
and  a  body  without  wings  never  knew  the  danger,  the  mystery,  the  joy  of  flight. 
Seek  an  inspired  life.  So  the  apostles  committed  themselves  in  prayer  to  God  for 
guidance.  So  would  I  take  every  matter  to  God  day  by  day.  5.  The  disciples 
gave  forth  their  lots.  How  pitiful.  In  a  few  more  days  they  will  have  had  the 
Holy  Ghost.  There  are  men  now  who  would  decide  everything  by  lot :  it  seems 
a  short  and  easy  method,  but  it  is  no  method  in  the  house  of  God ;  we  are  now 
under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  is  no  such  way  of  discovering  God's 
thought.  We  do  not  decide  things  by  lot  in  onr  own  narrow  spl:iere,  nor  do  we 
camy  things  unanimously  ourselves.  Thus,  these  are  the  voters  that  live  in  you 
— Judgment,  Self-interest,  immediate  Success,  Curiosity,  Speculation,  Family 
considerations.  Health,  Time,  and  some  twenty  more  voters  all  have  a  seat  in  the 
council  of  your  mind.  Now  those  who  are  in  favour  of  this  course  say,  "  Aye," 
those  who  oppose  say,  "  No,"  and  then  you,  that  innermost  You,  says,  "  The  ayes 
have  it — or  the  noes,"  so  that  in  reality  you  do  not  carry  your  own  personal 
decisions  unanimously.  Sometimes  your  judgment  does  not  vote  at  all,  then  the 
resolution  is  said  to  be  carried  nevi.  con.  Sometimes  you  carry  your  resolutions 
unanimously,  the  whole  man  stands  up  and  says,  "  Let  it  be  done."  When  I  have 
wished  in  critical  hours  to  know  what  was  right,  I  have  submitted  myself  to  three 
tests — (1)  What  is  my  own  deepest  conviction.  (2)  What  is  the  concurrent  voice 
of  my  most  trusted  counsellors.  (3)  What  is  the  fair  inference  from  conspiring 
circumstances  ?  With  these,  I  have  said,  "  There  is  none  other  than  God's  will : 
if  it  be  not.  Lord,  stop  me.  Not  my  will  but  Thine  be  done."  6.  In  the  case  before 
us  the  lot  fell  upon  Matthias,  and  you  hear  no  more  about  him.  I  do  not  want  to 
be  a  balloted  minister  :  here  because  I  had  six  votes,  and  another  man  had  only 
five :  I  want  to  stand  in  my  ministry  by  right  Divine,  by  credentials  not  written  by 
men  and  that  cannot  be  expunged  by  men.  That  is  the  calling  of  the  whole  Church : 
do  not  imagine  that  Episcopalianism,  Congregationalism,  &c.,  will  save  you.  We 
are  not  saved  by  name,  nor  are  we  an  influential  Church  because  we  bear  an 
illustrious  name.  Every  day  needs  its  own  inspiration,  as  every  day  requires  its 
own  bread.     (J.  Parktr,  D.D.)         The  Christian  life  organic  :^ -I.  The  suicide  of 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Judas  created  a  vacancy  in  the  number  of  the  twelve  apostles.  Christ  does 
not  seem  to  have  spoken  concerning  this,  but  leaves  it  to  be  tilled  by  the  Church. 
Aud  this  is  the  duty  to  which  Peter  summons  them.  The  little  handful  of  believers 
were  waiting  for  "  the  promise  of  the  Father."  They  were  called  not  to  activity, 
but  to  stillness  and  expectancy.  But  Peter  at  once  organises  a  council  and  proceeds 
to  an  Episcopal  election.  And,  unquestionably,  Peter  was  right,  and  the  disciples 
recognised  it  to  be  their  first  duty  to  fill  up  the  ranks  and  perfect  the  organisation, 
and  so  enlarge  the  influence  and  increase  the  working  power  of  that  Divine  agency 
which  Christ  had  committed  to  their  charge.  II.  Let  us  admit  fieely  that 
organisation  is  not  life,  but  without  organisation  there  can  be  no  life.  In 
nature  we  know  of  life  at  all,  only  as  it  exhibits  itself  under  organised  forms,  and 
so  St.  Paul  affirms  must  the  life  of  Divine  truth  in  the  world,  be  an  organised  life 
with  a  head,  and  hands  and  feet — in  other  words  with  that  which  governs  and  that 
wbich  communicates  and  that  which  obeys.  When  a  farmer  iu  the  Salt  Lake 
Valley  constructs  that  ingenious  system  of  sinuous  and  interlacing  tile  water- 
courses by  which  the  melting  snows  of  the  Wausatch  Mountains  are  conducted  ta 
every  remotest  corner  of  his  vineyards  and  cornfields,  he  has  not  thereby  secured 
the  smallest  guarantee  that  the  snow  will  fall,  or  that  it  will  melt,  or  that  it  will 
obey  the  law  of  gravitation  and  run  down  hill  into  his  tanks.  These  things  ar& 
ordered  by  God,  and  his  orchards  blossom  aud  his  corn  sprouts,  not  because  he 
has  laid  to  many  feet  of  drain-pipe,  but  because  God  has  put  into  the  melted  snow 
or  the  chance  shower  some  mysterious  power  of  making  that  arid  desert  of  sand 
with  its  silex  and  potash  to  burst  forth,  straightway  so  soon  as  the  water  has 
touched  it,  and  bud  and  blossom  as  a  rose.  But  none  the  less,  as  things  are,  that 
arid  and  desert  valley  would  never  have  burst  into  flower  if  the  farmer's  simple 
machinery  had  not  so  organised  and  utilised  these  forces  of  nature  that  the  baptitun 
of  ihe  one  became  the  new  birth  and  resurrection  of  the  other.  III.  And  this,  at 
any  rate,  is  the  lesson  of  such  a  parable,  as  it  is  of  all  history.  The  Church  of 
God  is  in  the  world,  not  as  a  human  invention,  but  as  a  Divine  appointment 
TO  BE  APPLIED  BY  HUMAN  HANDS.  Its  fellowship  is  Hot  salvatiou,  but  it  is  a  means 
of  salvation.  Its  sacraments  are  not  grace,  but  they  are  channels  of  grace.  Its 
Bible  is  not  a  charm  or  a  talisman,  but  it  is  a  teacher  and  guide.  Its  services  are 
not  spells,  but  they  are  helps  and  refreshments.  I  honour  with  my  whole  soul 
that  protest  against  the  formalism  of  the  Church,  which  resents  the  tendency  to 
make  of  these  tidngs  the  whole  of  religion.  I  honour  no  less  that  vthement  and 
robust  indignation  which  denounces  the  temper  that  hands  over  all  men  who  do 
not  belong  to  your  Church  or  mine  or  some  other  of  equal  historic  pretensions,  to 
the  uncovenanted  mercies  of  God.  But  all  this  does  not  affect  in  the  smallest 
degree,  the  question  whether  or  no  Christ  has  founded  a  Church,  whether  or  no 
you  and  I  have  sought,  and  found  its  fellowship.  The  Church  exists  in  the  world 
not  to  enjoy  our  patronage,  to  invite  our  criticism,  to  gratify  our  taste,  but  to  accept 
our  discipieship.  Her  organised  life,  her  ministry,  her  sacraments,  her  worship, 
the  proclamation  of  her  Lord's  message — all  these  things  are  not  less  essential 
to-day,  than  when  in  the  beginning  Peter  convened  the  hundred  and  twenty 
disciples  to  choose  Matthias.  This  Christian  organisation  is  Divine,  and  as  such 
it  speaks  its  message  and  holds  forth  its  ministrations.  It  may  be  that  some  of 
us  have  come  to  regard  the  Church  as  a  kind  of  social  appendage,  a  rather  more 
dignified  marrying  and  burying  and  baptising  association,  which  we  are  to  make 
use  of  when  tradition  or  custom  or  decorum  constrains  us  to,  and  at  other  times 
conveniently  forget.  But  the  moment  that  we  look  into  it  we  find  that  it  asserts 
of  itself  nothing  less  than  a  Divine  origin,  and  it  demands  a  definite  obedience. 
We  may  say  that  that  authority  is  groundless,  but  until  we  have  proved  it,  our 
allegiance  is  not  an  option,  it  is  a  debt.     IV.  And  so  I  plead  with  parents  to  train 

CHILDREN    IN    WA\S    OF   REVERENT    FAMILIARITY   WITH    God'S    WoRD,  God's  HOUSE,  AND 

God's  day.  Let  them  understand  that  something  higher  than  your  taste  or 
preference  makes  these  things  sacred  and  binding.  And  that  you  may  do  this  the 
more  effectually,  give  them,  I  entreat  you,  that  mightiest  teaching  which  consists 
in  your  own  consistent  and  devout  example.  And  iu  your  holidays  remember  that 
wherever  you  go,  you  are  a  baptised  member  of  the  Church,  and  treachery  to  your 
baptismal  vow  is  as  disloyal  under  a  foreign  flag  as  it  would  be  under  your  own. 
{Bp  .II.  C.  Fatter,  D.  D.)  Lessons  from  the  pre- Pentecostal  period : — In  this  paragraph 
we  have — I.  The  law  of  leadership  in  Christian  communities.  1,  Society 
without  leadership  sinks  into  confusion.  2.  In  the  long  run  leadership  resolves 
itself  into  a  question  of  personal  qualification.     Sooner  or  later  unquahfied  men 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  ,    87 

have  to  resign  positions  they  ought  never  to  have  assumed,  3.  In  a  great  leader 
many  elements  are  combined.  Others  may  excel  him  in  detached  points,  but 
taken  as  a  whole,  he  rules  not  by  one  dominant  faculty,  but  by  a  noble  proportion 
of  gifts.  4.  The  position  of  leader  is  not  so  easy  as  it  seems  to  unreflecting  observers. 
Men  see  the  elevation,  not  the  strain  and  responsibility.  5.  The  only  sound  rule 
for  promotion  is  wisdom  which  should  be  recognised  irrespective  of  age  or  position. 
6.  He  leads  best  who  knows  the  art  of  wise  following.  The  leader  is  often,  as  here, 
but  the  mouthpiece  of  the  whole  community.  7.  All  human  leadership  is  to  be 
subjected  to  the  Headship  of  the  Divine  Redeemer.  II.  The  consteuction  of  the 
Christian  ministry.  1.  It  was  required  that  the  successor  to  the  vacant  bishopric 
be  a  man  who  had  known  Christ.  Those  who  now  sustain  the  office  of  witnesses 
for  Christ  must  be  men  whose  spiritual  intimacy  with  Him  is  intense  and  fully 
tested.  Every  minister  must  have  seen  Christ  and  known  the  power  of  His 
resurrection.  2.  It  is  clear  from  the  election  of  Matthias  that  there  is  in  the 
Scriptures  a  distinct  claim  to  apostolic  succession.  Who  then  are  in  this 
succession?  Those  who  are  animated  by  the  apostolic  spirit.  It  is  not  a 
question  of  ecclesiastical  descent,  but  of  spiritual  illumination  and  sympathy. 
3.  The  twelfth  minister  was  chosen  by  the  whole  Church  subject  to  a  distinct 
expression  of  the  Divine  Will.  The  election  was  not  determined  by  personal 
taste,  much  less  by  the  industrious  canvassing  of  ambitious  candidates.  The 
minister  was  sought  by  prayer  and  as  a  consequence  was  received  with  submission 
and  thankfulness.     [J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16-20.  Men  and  brethren,  this  Scripture  must  needs  have  been  fulfilled 
.  .  .  concerning  Judas. — The  subserviency  of  crime  to  the  purposes  of  God: — We 
know  not  a  more  remarkable  expression  than  "The  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  Thee, 
the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  Thou  restrain."  The  manner  in  which  God  over- 
rules wickedness,  and  by  which  crime  is  as  much  an  instrument  in  His  hands  as 
obedience,  evidences  our  Maker's  greatness  as  well  as  His  unlimited  dominion. 
God  is  able  to  reckon  with  thorough  certainty  upon  the  commission  of  a  crime, 
and  yet  leave  men  quite  free  in  the  commission.  We  are  so  accustomed  to 
denounce  the  traitor  for  his  crime,  that  we  are  apt  to  overlook  tbe  important  ends 
which  are  eventually  subserved.  It  will  be  our  object  to  exhibit  generally  the 
testimony  to  Christianity  which  is  furnished  by  the  treason  of  Judas.     I.  Let  ds 

PKEMISE    ONE    OR   TWO    OBSERVATIONS    UPON    THE    CHARACTER   OF  JuDAS  ;    for  bad  aS  this 

was,  it  may  by  possibility  be  misrepresented.  We  see  no  reason  to  believe  that 
Judas  had  any  design  on  the  life  of  his  Master,  for,  seeing  the  consequences  of  his 
treachery,  he  was  torn  with  mortification  and  remorse.  He  might  have  supposed 
it  highly  improbable  tbat,  by  placing  Christ  in  the  hands  of  His  enemies,  he  would 
have  been  instrumental  in  His  death ;  for  the  Jews  had  then  no  legal  power  of 
putting  to  death  ;  and  it  was  not  likely  that  the  Romans  would  pay  attention  to  their 
accusations.  Judas  then  may  have  calculated  that  all  that  could  be  done  to  Christ 
would  be  putting  some  restraint  upon  His  person,  and  preventing  Him  from  further 
propagating  the  religion,  by  whose  precepts  he  himself  was  condemned.  II.  We 
shall  proceed,  on  this  supposition,  in  tracing  the  ends  which  the  treachery 
SUBSERVED.  You  may  imagine  that  the  traitor  seized  a  favourable  opportunity  of 
indulging  his  avarice,  and  of  stopping  the  diffusion  of  a  religion,  wl»ich,  as  a  money- 
grasping  man,  he  must  have  cordially  disliked.  Now,  if  he  had  been  possessed  of 
any  information  which  at  all  tended  to  invalidate  its  truth,  how  eagerly  would  he 
have  adduced  it,  and  the  chief  priests  have  received  it !  The  mei'e  putting  to  death 
was  as  nothing  compared  with  the  proving  Him  a  deceiver.  And  yet  Judas,  eager 
as  he  was  for  money,  and  anxious  to  crush  the  new  religion,  has  no  intelligence  to 
give  which  may  disprove  Christ's  pretensions.  This  is  amongst  the  stroligest  of 
proofs  that  Christ  was  "  a  teacher  sent  from  God."  1.  Our  Loi'd's  pretensions 
rested  chiefly  on  His  miracles,  so  that  to  show  deceit  in  the  one  would  have  over- 
thrown the  other.  Infidelity  will  sometimes  argue  that  there  might  have  been 
collusion  in  the  miracles.  Now,  had  this  been  the  case,  Judas  must  have  known 
it,  and  if  Judas  must  have  known,  this  would  have  been  a  fine  piece  of  intelligence 
to  have  sold  to  the  chief  priests,  and  by  communicating  it  he  would  at  once  have 
enriched  himself  and  destroyed  Christianity.  Nay,  he  would  have  done  a  righteous 
deed ;  and  while  gratifying  his  avarice,  he  would  have  laid  up  no  food  for  remorse. 
2.  The  infant  religion  might  have  been  assailed  with  at  least  equal  power  through 
the  moral  character  of  its  Founder.  And  one  of  the  most  beautiful  arguments  by 
which  we  may  defend  Christianity  is  derived  from  the  more  than  human  purity  of 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Christ.  And  if  it  were  possible  to  invalidate  in  the  least  degree  the  truth  that 
Christ  "  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth,"  the  whole  system 
would  fall  to  the  ground.  Mark,  that  "  the  chief  priests  and  all  the  council 
sought  for  witness  against  Jesus  to  put  Him  to  death  ;  and  they  found  none."  Yet 
they  were  bargaining  with  Judas,  one  of  His  intimate  associates,  who  must  have 
been  accurately  acquainted  with  all  the  flaws,  if  such  there  were,  in  His  character. 
In  the  silence  of  this  traitor  in  selling  his  Master,  we  find  irresistible  attestation 
to  the  fact  that  Christ  Jesus  was  indeed  "  a  lamb  without  blemish  aud  without 
spot."  3.  The  prophecies  might  have  been  frustrated.  It  had  been  declared,  in 
Zechariah,  tbat  the  Messiah  should  be  sold  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  this 
price  be  given  to  the  potter.  Now  had  the  chief  priest  and  scribes  offered  more 
than  thirty  pieces,  or  had  Judas  been  contented  with  fewer,  or  had  the  price  of 
blood,  when  returned  by  the  traitor,  been  spent  on  the  land  of  any  but  a  potter, 
there  would  have  been  a  defect  in  the  evidence  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.  And 
the  infatuated  rulers  could  not  see  this.  Perhaps  they  drove  a  hard  bargain  with 
Judas,  beating  him  down  till  they  reached  the  exact  sum  which  prophecy  specified 
as  tbe  number  of  the  pieces  of  metal.  They  never  thought,  when  exulting  that 
they  had  bought  Jesus  at  the  price  of  a  slave,  that  they  had  completed  the  evidence 
of  His  being  their  king.  The  like  may  be  said  of  the  potter's  field.  With  all  their 
profligacy,  they  were  scrupulous  in  touching  the  money ;  and  therefore  will  they 
use  it  in  proving  Jesus  the  Christ.  It  shall  buy  the  potter's  field — the  only  pur- 
pose to  which  it  can  be  turned  ;  and  after  being  the  price  of  His  blood  it  shall 
serve  to  prove  His  commission.  The  only  piophecies  with  which  infidelity  could 
be  successfully  pressed  are  those  in  which  it  is  impossible  that  the  parties  pro- 
fessedly interested  should  have  planned  or  procured  the  accomplishment.  Nothing 
can  more  directly  answer  this  commission  than  those  which  have  reference  to  the 
compact  with  Judas.  Conclusion:  This  is  our  consolation  whilst  "  the  heathen 
rage  and  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing  " — we  know  that  the  will  of  our  Creator 
shall  take  effect.  Hostility  and  malice  and  treachery  shall  prevail  nothing  against 
the  Lord  and  His  Christ.  They  shall  but  defend  and  consolidate  the  Church. 
Judas  Iscariot  vindicates  the  Master  he  betrayed,  and  sustains  the  cause  from  which 
he  apostatised.  Therefore  need  we  be  nothing  dismayed  if  the  wicked  combine  to 
oppose  Christianity.  There  is  one  that  sits  above  the  tempest,  and  so  directs  it, 
that  its  fury  shall  be  spent  on  those  by  whom  it  has  been  raised.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Judas  :  his  sin  : — He  was  guide  to  them  that  took  Jesus.  I.  There  are  two  wats 
TO  TAKE  Christ.  1.  Faith  takes  Jesus.  It  takes  Christ  at  His  word.  (1)  In  His 
promises.  (2)  In  His  warnings,  when  He  directs  the  life  by  those  careful  provisions 
and  restrictions  which  are  found  everywhere  in  His  Word.  (3)  In  His  precepts, 
when  it  strives  to  obey  that  which  He  commands,  to  submit  to  that  which  He 
appoints.  (4)  In  His  person.  (5)  In  His  covenanted  presence  in  this  world  by 
the  Spirit.  2.  Falseness  takes  Christ.  Inspired  by  hatred  of  His  words,  by  rest- 
lessness under  His  control,  by  uncongeniality  with  His  spirit,  it  cries,  "  I  will  not 
have  this  man  to  reign  over  me."  And  when  that  spirit  of  opposition  is  developed 
there  is  no  mode  of  destruction  too  vile  for  falseness  to  accept.  The  world  is  full 
of  those  who  are  controlled  by  this  hostility.  Opposition  to  Jesus  among  men 
only  lacks  leadership ;  and  whensoever  such  a  guide  is  found  they  covenant  with 
him  even  to  a  costly  sacrifice  if  he  will  deliver  the  Jesus  of  the  Church  into  their 
hands.  Pilate's  timidity,  and  Herod's  overweening,  weak  curiosity,  are  bad  enough 
in  condemning  Christ ;  but  He  says,  "  He  that  delivered  Me  unto  thee  hath  the 
greater  sin."  It  is  not  enough  that  the  Judas  who  guides  this  hostility  shouLl 
plead  his  own  freedom  from  violence.  He  adds  meanness  to  his  other  sins  wlien 
he  shirks  the  responsibility  he  has  assumed.  There  are  multitudes  who  need  no 
accusers  before  God's  throne.  There  are  those  who  confess  that  they  are  opponents, 
and  mean  to  be  such,  and  whose  only  apology  is,  "  At  all  events,  we  do  not  profess 
to  be  anything  belter,"  and  in  God's  book  of  remembrance  their  apology  becomes 
their  accusation.  Then  there  are  those  who  say,  "  We  know  the  truth  perfectly." 
Then,  brother,  if  thy  life  is  still  against  Christ,  when  thou  shalt  stand  before  that 
terrible  bar  thine  own  faith  shall  testify  against  thee.  Of  all  dooms  there  is  none 
80  dreadful  as  that  of  him  who  strives  to  hold  the  privilege  of  professed  disciple- 
Bhip,  and  yet  is  a  guide  to  them  that  take  Jesus.  II.  Three  steps  which  such  a 
GUIDE  MUST  TAKE.  Only  three  ?  How  short  a  journey  it  is  1  David  sums  it  up  with 
other  words  in  his  first  Psalm.  The  likeness  of  Judas'  life  in  these  three  respects 
can  be  traced,  I  fear,  in  that  of  some  of  us.  1.  He  counsels  with  Jesus'  enemies.  2. 
He  reveals  His  hiding.   3.  He  perverts  a  proftssion  of  affection.   {S.  H.  'Tyng,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  .    89 

God's  forekJiowlfidge  practically  considered  : — Foreknowledge  and  predestination  are 
not  subjects  for  a  careless,  trifling,  or  cavilling  mind  to  grapple  with.  Neither  are 
they  subjects  which,  under  any  circumstances,  admit  of  being  treated  in  an  abstract 
or  mere  speculative  way.  That  God  foreknows  all  actions,  and  all  occurrences,  we 
cannot  deny,  without  at  once  stripping  Him  of  an  essential  attribute  of  His  being. 
That  His  foreknowledge  comprehends  the  final  destiny  of  every  human  being,  is 
clear.  In  order,  however,  to  get  rid  of  this  inevitable  conclusion,  the  doctrine  of 
contingencies  is  sometimes  resorted  to ;  and  we  are  asked  how  a  thing  can  be  certainly 
foreknown  which  is  dependent  upon  oecurrencies  that  may  or  may  not  take 
place.  This  is  a  mere  evasion — the  raising  of  a  second  difficulty,  in  order  to 
dispose  of  the  first.  Is  it  more  difficult  for  God  to  foresee  the  working  con- 
tingencies, and  the  specific  movements  of  pure  volition,  than  it  would  be  to  foresee 
those  results  if  they  were  suspended  upon  an  absolute  decree  ?  But  we  are  told 
that  by  pressing  the  doctrine  of  foreknowledge  we  place  ourselves  on  the  threshold 
of  predestination ;  inasmuch  as  a  thing  definitely  foreknown  is  as  certain  as  a 
thing  positively  foreordained.  I  have  neither  the  power  nor  the  will  to  resist  this 
inference,  because  I  believe  it  to  be  a  legitimate  conclusion  arising  out  of  undeniable 
premisses.  But  then  we  are  told,  further,  and  by  another  class  of  persons,  that  fore- 
knowledge and  predestination  involve  in  them  the  execution  of  a  decree,  whereby  a 
large  portion  of  mankind  are  reprobated  and  doomed  to  eternal  misery;  and  the 
case  of  Judas  is  referred  to  as  an  instance  in  point.  Here  we  are  completely  at 
issue  with  them,  and  for  this  plain  reason — that  the  Bible  speaks  a  different 
language  from  that  which  they  see  fit  to  employ  on  the  subject.  The  Bible  repre- 
sents the  door  of  mercy  as  being  wide  open  for  tbe  admission  of  every  son  and 
daughter  of  Adam.  If  the  language  actually  employed  by  tbe  inspired  writers  does 
not  tell  me  that  Christ  died  for  all,  could  any  other  language  have  been  adopted  by 
them,  calculated  to  convey  the  idea  more  forcibly,  admitting  that  they  wished  to 
convey  it  at  all?  A  second  thought  which  presses  itself  upon  the  attention,  as  the 
result  of  a  fair  survey  of  the  book  of  God,  is, — that  where  the  offers  of  mercy  are 
rejected,  such  rejection  is  altogether  voluntary :  in  other  words,  that  obstacles  to 
salvation  rest  entirely  with  man;  and  that  every  sinner  who  perishes  under  a  blaze 
of  evangelical  light,  is,  to  all  intents,  a  self-destroyer.  Still,  however,  though  the 
theory  of  absolute  unconditional  reprobation  is  disproved  by  the  testimony  of 
Scripture,  there  is  a  rebounding  echo  which  says  that  foreknowledge  is  certainty; 
and  that  if  God  foreknows  who  of  His  creatures  will  he  finally  saved,  and  who 
of  them  will  be  eternally  lost,  it  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  so  far  as  the  single 
point  of  destination  is  concerned,  as  if  He  had  positively  decreed  life  to  some 
and  death  to  others.  This,  again,  is  a  position  which  I  shall  not  attempt 
to  controvert;  and  yet  it  is  a  position  requiring  to  be  taken  in  connection 
with  the  elucidation  of  certain  principles  which  are  constantly  and  practically 
operating  in  the  affairs  of  human  life.  God  foieknows  everything;  and  yet 
man  acts  as  if  He  foreknew  nothing.  Volition  is  as  perfect,  the  will  is  as 
unfettered  in  the  one  case  as  it  would  or  could  be  in  the  other.  Simple  foreknow- 
ledge, as  distinguished  from  absolute  predestination,  is  founded  on  free  agency,  and 
in  no  way  does  ic  influence  or  control  it.  The  very  certainty  by  which  it  is  charac- 
terised is  the  result  of  free  agents  acting  as  they  please,  of  rational  intelligences 
ranging  at  large  in  the  wide  field  of  unrestrained  liberty.  If  men  are  not  saved,  it 
is  because  they  refuse  to  be  saved,  and  for  no  other  cause  ;  and  hence  we  may  well 
ask,  Where  is  the  humility,  where  is  the  wisdom,  where  is  the  piety,  of  persons 
disquieting  their  minds,  because  their  Creator  is  an  omniscient  Intelligence,  and 
because  the  attribute  of  omniscience  involves  foreknowledge  and  certainty  ?  You  will 
observe  that  I  have  confined  myself  to  the  point  of  foreknowledge,  leaving  that  of 
predestination,  excepting  incidently,  untouched.  I  have  done  so  because  I  consider 
it  as  irrelevant  to  the  case  of  Judas,  and  not  propounded,  either  directly  or  by  impli- 
cation, in  the  text.  Predestination  stands  closely  connected  with  sovereignty ;  and 
sovereignty  has  exclusively  to  do  with  the  bestowment  of  good ;  exerting  itself  solely 
in  acts  of  beneficence  ;  decreeing  blessings,  not  curses  ;  ordaining  men  to  life,  not 
dooming  them  to  destruction.  At  the  same  time,  I  cannot  refrain  from  saying,  in 
reference  to  predestination,  that,  in  a  practical  point  of  view,  it  pi-esents,  so  far  as 
I  can  judge,  no  greater  difficulties  to  the  mind  than  those  connected  with  fore- 
knowledge. It  is  equally  consistent  with  the  freedom  of  man  as  a  rational  agent, 
with  the  universality  of  gospel  offers,  and  with  the  fulness  of  gospel  grace.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  The  subject  we  have  considered  constitutes  a  loud  chII  to  humanity. 
Instead  of  cavilling  at  difficulties,  let  us  resolve  them  into  the  imperfection  of  mortal 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

vision  ;  and,  instead  of  boasting  our  mental  powers,  let  us  lie  prostrate  at  the 
Divine  footstool,  as  those  who  feel  their  own  littleness,  and  are  sensible  how  blind 
and  ignorant  they  are,  in  reference  to  heavenly  things.  2.  The  subject  should 
guard  us  against  the  error  of  suffering  ourselves  to  be  fettered  by  any  human 
system.  Let  promises  and  precepts,  doctrines,  and  duties,  decrees  and  responsi- 
bilities, occupy  the  places  assigned  to  them  on  the  page  of  Scripture ;  and  what 
God  has  joined  together  let  not  the  presumptuous  hand  of  man  dare  to  put  asunder. 
3.  The  contemplation  of  God's  foreknowledge  should  never  be  engaged  in  other- 
wise than  in  close  connection  with  gospel  promises  and  gospel  precepts.  God 
knows  no  such  character  as  a  sincere  inquirer  shut  out  from  mercy's  gate ;  and 
sooner  shall  the  sun  be  shorn  of  its  beams — sooner  shall  the  rainbow  discharge  its 
beauteous  colours — than  a  praying  soul  shall  perish,  because  Divine  foresight  takes 
cognizance  of  human  destination.  4.  The  doctrine  of  Divine  foreknowledge,  as 
taught  in  Scripture  directly  and  inferentially,  tends,  when  duly  apprehended, 
through  a  spiritual  medium,  both  to  impart  comfort,  and  to  prompt  exertion.  In 
proportion  as  faith  and  hope  ripen  into  assurance,  the  soul  is  perceptibly 
strengthened  for  the  performance  of  its  active  duties ;  and  on  the  same  principle,  the 
certainty  of  Divine  foreknowledge,  irradiated  with  the  bright  beams  of  evangelical 
promise,  so  stimulates  the  believer's  energies  chat  he  becomes  "  ready  to  evei'y  good 
work  " — "  steadfast,  unmoveable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord." 
[Wm.  Knight,  M.A.)  Judas^s  iniquity  and  its  consequences : — From  these  learn — 
1.  How  great  a  sin  avarice  is,  and  to  what  a  depth  of  wickedness  it  precipitates  a 
man.  2.  How  deep  the  fall  of  those  who  fall  from  great  grace  and  from  high 
privileges.  3.  How  grievous  the  sin  of  despsration.  It  was  this  which  made  the 
difference  between  the  sin  of  the  traitor  and  that  of  the  denier.  (Cornelius  a 
Lapide.)  Judas :  his  fate  : — He  fell  headlong,  or,  rather,  flat  on  his  face  (cf. 
Josephus,  "Jewish  Wars,"  vi.  1-6),  a  fact  not  contradictory,  but  additional,  to  the 
circumstances  mentioned  in  Matt,  xxvii.  5,  where  the  word  is  the  same  as  that  used 
by  the  LXX.  concerning  Ahithophel.  Theophylact  explained  that  the  rope 
broke,  Judas  having  flung  himself  off  some  height.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
ten  thousand  Idumean  captives,  cast  down  from  the  top  of  a  rock,  after  Amaziah's 
victory,  "were  all  broken  in  pieces"  (2  Chron.  xxv.  12).  [Bp.  Jacohson.)  A 
traitor^s  death: — The  Duke  of  Buckingham,  having  by  an  unfortunate  accident 
lost  the  army  which  he  had  raised  against  the  usurper  Eichard  III.,  was  forced  to 
flee  for  his  life  without  page  or  attendant.  At  last  he  took  refuge  in  the  house  of 
Humphrey  Bannister  at  Shrewsbury,  who,  being  one  of  his  servants,  and  having 
formerly  raised  him  from  a  low  condition,  would,  he  trusted,  be  ready  to  afford  him 
every  possible  protection.  Bannister,  however,  upon  the  king's  proclamation, 
promising  £1,000  reward  to  him  that  should  apprehend  the  Duke,  betrayed  his 
master  to  John  Merton,  high  sheriff  of  Shropshire,  who  sent  him  under  a  strong 
guard  to  Salisbury,  where  the  king  then  was,  by  whom  he  was  condemned  to  be 
beheaded.  But  Divine  vengeance  pursued  the  traitor  and  his  family  ;  for,  on 
demanding  the  £1,000,  that  was  the  price  of  his  master's  blood.  King  Eichard 
refused  to  pay  it,  saying,  "  He  that  would  be  false  to  so  good  a  master  ought  not 
to  be  encouraged."  He  was  afterwards  hanged  for  manslaughter :  his  eldest  son 
fell  into  a  state  of  derangement,  and  died  in  a  hog-sty ;  his  second  son  became 
deformed  and  lame  ;  his  third  son  was  drowned  in  a  small  pool  of  water,  and  the 
rest  of  his  family  perished  miserably.  The  potter's  field:- — At  Jerusalem  traces 
of  an  ancient  gateway  have  been  discovered,  apparently  that  known  as  "  The  Gate 
of  the  Potters,"  the  quarter  where  earthenware  was  manufactured.  Opposite  to 
this  lies  the  "Potter's  Field,"  slill  called  Aceldama,  on  which  rises  an  old  ruin 
thirty  feet  long  and  twenty  feet  wide,  the  whole  forming  a  flat-roofed  cover  to  a 
dipmal  house  of  the  dead.  Two  caverns  open  in  the  floor,  their  rocky  sides  pierced 
with  holes  for  bodies;  and  galleries  of  holes  run  into  the  hill  from  the  bottom. 
Holes  in  the  roof  are  still  seen  thiough  which  the  corpses  wire  let  down  by  ropes, 
and  there  are  maiks  of  the  steps  by  which  the  tombs  were  entered.  (C.  Geikie, 
D.D.)  Aceldama,  the  field  of  blood: — Bought  with  the  price  of  blood  (Matt, 
xxvii.  8),  and,  according  to  received  tradition,  stained  with  the  blood  of  Judas. 
The  name  would  remind  Jewish  readers  of  that  bloodshedding,  the  consequences  of 
which  had  been  invoked  on  themselves  and  on  their  children.  The  place  com- 
monly shown  as  Aceldama  has  ever  been  famous  on  account  of  the  SHrccphagus 
virtue  possessed  by  the  earth  in  hastening  the  decoy  of  dead  bodies.  Shiploads  of 
it  were  carried  to  the  Campo  Santo  in  Pisa.  {Bp.  Jacohson.)  Aceldama  : — The 
gambling  spirit,  which  is  at  all  times  a  stupendous  evil,  ever  and  anon  sweeps  over 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  '91 

the  country  like  an  epidemic,  prostrating  uncounted  thousands.  There  has  never 
been  a  worse  attack  than  that  from  which  all  the  villages,  towns,  and  cities  are 
now  suffering.  1.  This  sin  works  ruin,  first,  by  providing  an  unhealthful  stimulant. 
2.  Again,  this  sin  works  ruin  by  killing  industry.  3.  Furthermore,  this  sin  is  the 
source  of  dishonesty.  4.  Notice  also  the  effect  of  this  crime  upon  domestic 
happiness.  (T.  de  WittTalmage.)  The  prophecies  in  Peter's  speech: — The  first 
quotation  (ver.  20)  down  to  "  therein"  is  taken  substantially  from  Psa.  Ixix.  25, 
with  some  compression  of  LXX.,  and  a  variation  in  the  number  of  the  pronoun 
from  plural  to  singular,  by  which  Judas  is  taken  as  a  representative  of 
Christ's  enemies.  This  Psalm,  quoted  in  the  New  Testament  oftener  than 
any  other,  except  xxii.,  is  pre-eminently  Messianic.  Ver.  9  is  applied  to  Christ  by 
John  (ii.  17) ;  the  words  immediately  following  by  Paul  (Eom.  xv.  3) ;  and  the  ful- 
filment of  ver.  21  is  noted  by  John  (xix.  28-30).  The  second  quotation  is  taken 
with  verbal  exactness  from  LXX.,  Psa.  cix.  8 — the  Iscariot  Psalm.  The  conduct 
of  Judas  warranted  the  identifying  him  with  Doeg  and  Ahithophel.  David  and  his 
enemies  are  treated  as  types  of  Christ  and  His  euemies.  And  after  the  exposition 
given  by  our  Lord  (Luke  xxiv.  44),  it  is  out  of  the  question  to  impute  to  Peter  mis- 
understanding or  misapplication.     (Bp.  Jacobson.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  Wherefore  of  these  men  which  have  companied  with  us  all  the 
time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among  us. — The  jamiliar  side  of  Christ's 
life  : — There  are  many  ways  of  regarding  the  life  of  Christ :  e.g. ,  the  philosophical 
or  ideal,  as  in  John's  Gospel ;  the  historical,  in  its  larger  world  relation,  as  in  Luke 
and  St.  Paul's  Epistles ;  or,  as  here,  the  familiar.  A  proverbial  touch  may  be 
detected  in  the  phraseology  of  the  text  recalling  Psa.  cxxi.  8.  Such  an  expression 
indicates  "  the  daily  round  "  as  distinguished  from  the  special  occasions  of  life. 
Note  two  or  three  reflections  upon  the  great  fact  of  the  dwelling  amongst  us  of  God's 
Son.  I.  This  contact  must  be  a  ground  fob  the  most  complete  sympathy 
BETWEEN  Him  and  us.  1.  How  thoroughly  He  shared  the  occupation,  interest,  and 
outlook  of  man.  He  entered  into  human  thought,  and  looked  upon  the  universe 
as  it  appears  to  the  human  eye  and  mind.  Nothing  human  was  indiiiferent  to 
Him.  All  questions  of  labour,  of  the  family,  of  social  or  political  affairs,  were  and 
are  of  concern  to  Him.  He  is  one  with  us.  2.  He  was  a  partaker  in  the  suffering 
and  shame  of  men.  Pain,  sorrow,  disappointment,  formed  the  alphabet  of  His 
experience  as  of  ours.  These  were  for  Him  a  discipline  as  well  as  for  us,  and  He 
regarded  them   and   the  problems   they  present  as  one   of   ourselves.     II.   How 

INDEPENDENT     ChRIST     WAS    OF     EXTERNAL     CIRCUMSTANCES    AND    ASSOCIATES.       It    haS 

been  said  that  "  no  man  is  a  hero  to  his  valet."  Familiarity  breeds,  if  not  con- 
tempt, at  any  rate,  loss  of  reverence.  Can  we  conceive  of  Jesus  losing  in  moral 
dignity  or  the  esteem  of  men  by  daily  intercourse  ?  Here  He  receives  the  title 
"  Lord,"  and  His  going  in  and  out  is  "  over"  His  people,  i.e.,  authoritatively,  as  a 
shepherd  over  his  sheep.  He  chose  a  life  least  calculated  to  produce  social  or 
political  effects,  yet  His  influence  was  enhanced  by  that  fact.  His  work  so 
absolutely  depended  on  Himself  that  political  influence  or  high  social  position 
would  have  injured  it.  But  was  He  Himself  affected  by  His  station  in  life? 
Carlyle's  vices,  we  are  told  by  Froude,  were  to  be  looked  for,  considering  his  nature 
and  upbringing  as  a  Scottish  peasant,  and  even  his  virtues  were  those  of  people  of 
humble  circumstances.  Were  the  virtues  of  the  Peasant  of  Galilee  subject  to  this 
drawback  ?  Nay ;  for  we  see  how  He  towers  above  His  contemporaries  and 
followers.  To  such  an  age  He  could  owe  nothing,  and  the  best  of  all  ages  have 
done  Him  homage  and  tried  to  imitate  Him.  III.  It  is  just  this  "daily 
round"  of  life  that  needs  saving.  Five-sixths  of  life  consists  of  rouiine,  and 
what  would  be  the  use  of  a  religion  that  could  not  affect  this  ?  There  is  a  constant 
tendency  to  detach  the  common  things  of  life  from  moral  considerations.  Christ's 
parables  discovered  the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  that  was  latent  in  men's 
daily  lives.  Who  shall  tell  how  much  the  childhood  of  Jesus  has  done  to  purify 
home  life,  or  His  work  as  a  carpenter  to  ennoble  labour?  (A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.) 
The  election  of  Saint  Matthias  considered  and  applied :  —On  the  day  which  is 
appointed  to  commemorate  the  Apostle  Matthias,  our  Church  has  selected  for  the 
Epistle  a  portion  of  Scripture  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  only  i^ortion  of 
Scripture  in  which  his  name  is  to  be  found.  Whatever  else  is  related  of  him  in 
uninspired  authors  is  attended  with  uncertainty,  however  worthy  of  remembrance. 
One  circumstance  is  mentioned  concerning  him  by  two  respectable  writers  among 
the  early  Christians,  viz.,  that  he  was  one  of  the  seventy  disciples  whom  the  Lord 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Christ,  during  His  earthly  ministry,  sent  forth  to  work  miracles  and  to  pr-sach  in 
His  name.  This  circumstance  proves  that  he  was  known  to  Christ,  and  Christ  to 
him  ;  and  tliat  Christ  had  distinguished  him  among  His  followers.  I.  The  first 
piece  of  instruction  which  I  think  we  mny  learn  from  this  portion  of  Scripture 
histoiy  is  that  among  the  good  and  taithful  servants  of  God  bad  and  unfaithful 
MEN  MAY  BE  FOUND.  Judas  Iscariot  was  a  traitor  among  the  twelve  aposiles.  Satan, 
as  we  read  in  the  Book  of  Job,  was  among  the  sons  of  God  when  they  came  to  pre- 
sent themselves  to  Jehovah.  Among  the  early  converts  to  tlie  faith  of  Christ, 
Ananias  and  Sapphira,  and  Simon  Magus,  were  discovered  to  be  insincere.  Our 
Saviour's  parables  of  the  wbeat  and  tares  growing  in  the  same  field,  and  of  the 
good  and  bad  fish  caught  in  the  same  net,  give  us  the  like  view  of  His  Church  here 
on  earth.  We  know  that  His  Church  triumphant  will  be  presented  to  Him  "  a 
glorious  Church,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  but  holy  and  with- 
out blemish."  The  ministers  of  Christ's  Ciiurch,  though  especially  called  to  be 
examples  to  the  people  whom  they  are  aj^pointed  to  teach  and  lead,  are  certainly 
not  exempt  from  this  corrupting  influence  :  neither  is  it  to  be  expected  that  they 
should  be.  They  are  still  but  men,  liable  to  temptation  as  the  rest  of  mankind, 
and  subject  to  the  peculiar  temptations  of  their  calling.  H.  But  another  piece  of 
instruction  which  we  may  learn  from  this  portion  of  Scripture  history  is  that, 

THOUGH     WICKEDNESS    BE     FOREKNOWN,    FORETOLD,    AND     PREDETERMINED     BY     GOD,    IT 

IS  WICKEDNESS  NOTWITHSTANDING.  To  God,  who  knows  all  things,  it  was  certainly 
known  that  Judas  would  act  the  part  which  history  relates  he  did.  Was  Judas, 
then,  innocent  on  this  account?  Mark  the  language  of  the  historian  in  writing  of 
it :  "  This  man  [Judas]  purchased  a  field  with  the  reward  of  his  iniquity."  Take 
another  instance  of  tlie  like  kind  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  "Him,"  says  St. 
Peter,  "  being  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  ye 
have  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands  have  crucified  and  slain."  Let  no  Christian, 
therefore,  set  the  foreknowledge  and  predestination  of  God  against  the  willing 
agency  and  responsibility  of  man,  as  if  they  were  inconsistent  and  at  variance  with 
each  other,  and  could  not  both  be  true.  And  let  those  who  would  excuse  their 
impieties,  by  pretending  a  fatal  necessity,  be  told  thsit,  if  their  sins  be  decreed  and 
inevitable,  so  also  is  their  punishment ;  and  if  they  cannot  but  choose  the  one, 
they  must  equally  choose  the  other.  III.  A  third  piece  of  instruction  which  we 
may  learn  from   this  portion  of   Scripture  history  is   that  when,  by  death   or 

OTHERWISE,  A  MINISTER  OF  ChRIST's  ChURCH  IS  REMOVED  FROM  HIS  CUSTOMARY 
SPHERE  OF  SPIRITUAL  LABOUR,  IT  IS  THE  DUTY  OF  THE  BISHOP,  PATRON,  AND  PEOPLE, 
AS    FAR   AS   LIES    IN   THEM,    TO    APPOINT    A    GOOD   AND    WELL-QUALIFIED    MINISTER   IN    HIS 

PLACE,  We  may  notice,  however,  in  the  election  of  Matthias  what  was  thought 
particularly  necessary  for  his  ofiice.  "  Wherefore  of  these  men  which  have  com- 
panied  with  us  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among  us, 
beginning  from  the  baptism  of  John  unto  that  same  day  that  He  was  tal^en  from 
us,  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness  wiih  us  of  His  resmrection."  It  was  an 
accurate  knowledge  of  Jesus,  from  the  beginning  of  His  public  ministry,  which 
was  from  the  time  of  His  being  baptised  by  John  to  the  day  of  His  ascension  into 
heaven.  And  this  knowledge  was  to  qualify  the  apostle  to  be  a  witness  of  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus.  Next,  therefore,  to  honesty  of  character  and  sincerity  of 
affection  to  Jesus,  this  information  was  a  needful  quality  in  a  preacher  of  the 
gospel.  The  same  quality  is  still  needed  in  preachers  of  the  gospel,  though  not  to 
be  obtained  from  visible  intercourse  with  the  holy  Jesus.  They  ought  to  be  well 
acquainted  with  the  history  of  His  life;  wiih  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament 
concerning  Him ;  with  the  manner  of  their  fulfilment,  as  far  as  they  have  been 
fulfilled  ;  and  with  all  the  evidences  which  clearly  prove  Him  to  be  "  the  Christ, 
the  Saviour  of  the  world."  To  state  this  knowledge  properly  and  effectually,  their 
hearts  also  ought  to  be  warmed  with  love  to  Jesus,  and  to  the  sinners  whom  He 
came  "  to  seek  and  to  save."  IV.  A  fourtli  piece  of  instruction  which  we  may 
learn  from  this  portion  of  ScrijDtiire  history  is  the  duty  of  prayer  in  the  case  of 

THE  ordination  OF  MINISTERS  GENERALLY,  AND  ON  THE  APPOINTMENT  OF  ANY  INDI- 
VIDUAL   MINISTER   TO    SOME    PARTICULAR    FIELD    OF    LABOUR     IN     THE     ClIURCH    OF    GoD. 

This  duty  was  carefully  performed  by  the  apostles  and  disciples  of  Christ  in  the 
instance  before  us.  Let  private  prayer  be  added  to  that  which  is  public,  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  may  direct  the  minds  and  hearts  of  all  parties  concerned  in  the  ordina- 
tion of  ministers.  Having  thus  prayed  in  faith,  they  should  receive  the  minister 
sent  to  them  as  Christ's  ambassador,  to  be  reverenced  for  the  sake  of  the  King,  his 
divine  Master.     But,  more  than  tliis,  their  prayers  should  be  seconded  and  followed 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  .93 

up  by  active  and  cheerful  efforts  to  help  him  in  the  great  work  to  which  he  is 
called ;  to  unite  with  him,  in  their  several  spheres  and  stations,  in  promoting  and 
extending  his  labour  of  love,  in  teaching  the  young  and  ignorant,  in  strengthening 
the  weak,  in  correcting  those  who  fall  into  error ;  and,  by  their  own  bright  and 
consistent  example,  glorifying  God,  and  causing  God  to  be  glorified  by  others, 
through  them.  {W.  D.  Johnston,  M.A.)  The  reality  and  requirements  of  the 
Christian  ministry  (Ordination  Sermon) : — 1.  Here  was  one  of  the  noblest  ventures 
of  faith  ever  made  by  man.  Viewed  from  the  world's  side,  it  was,  as  great  faith 
always  is,  frivolous  trifling  or  daring  madness.  A  little  company  of  ignorant  men, 
in  a  small  province  of  the  Eoman  world,  had  for  three  years  followed  up  and  down 
their  land  a  new  teacher,  who  professed  to  come  from  God,  but  had  been  crucified 
and  slain.  They  had  been  terrified  and  scattered,  and  now  they  gather  together  in 
an  upper  room,  and  talk  of  choosing  one  in  the  traitor's  stead  to  complete  their 
broken  number.  They  speak  great  words :  they  seem  to  look  forth  into  the  wide  world 
around,  as  though  it  waited  for  them,  as  though  they  had  a  message  for  it,  and 
power  over  it.  Either  their  minds  were  full  of  the  darkest  delusions,  or  they  were 
acting  in  the  very  might  of  God.  And  which  was  the  truth  the  event  may  tell  us. 
From  that  completed  company  a  voice  awoke  to  which  the  world  did  listen,  and 
before  which  it  fell.  No  visible  strength  dwelt  in  them  as  they  went  forth  on  their 
errand.  They  were  scourged,  imprisoned,  slain.  Their  weapons  were  endurance, 
submission,  love,  faith,  martyrdom — and  with  these  they  triumphed.  They 
preached  "  Jesus  and  the  resurrection,"  and  hard  souls  yielded  and  were  gathered 
into  the  new  company,  and  wore  its  cross  and  carried  on  its  triumphs,  until  the 
world  trembled  at  the  change  which  was  passing  on  itself.  And  so  they  have 
advanced  with  unfaltering  step  from  that  day  to  this,  until  all  that  is  mightiest 
in  power,  and  greatest  in  noblene-s,  and  highest  in  intellect,  has  bowed  down  in 
adoration  before  that  witness  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  2.  The  acts  which  we 
are  here  this  day  to  do  are  but  the  carrying  out  of  those  which  then  were  wrought, 
and  we  may  see  in  the  course  of  their  work  what  should  be  the  issue  of  ours. 
Here  is — I.  The  strength  in  which  each  one  of  those  sent  forth  is  to  labour, 
AND  the  spirit  IN  WHICH  HE  IS  TO  BE  RECEIVED.  Here  is  his  strength — he  is 
called  by  God  to  this  office  (and  woe  be  to  him  if  he  rush  into  it  uncalled),  and 
goes  about  God's  work  :  he  may  be,  he  ought  to  be,  conscious  of  weakness,  and 
therefore  he  may  be  strong  ;  for  conscious  feebleness  may  drive  him  from  himself 
to  God  in  Christ.  In  spite  of  appearances,  at  all  times  in  his  ministry  there  is 
strength  for  him :  "  I  witness  not  of  myself,  but  of  the  resurrecti<m  of  my  Lord ; 
my  words  are  not  mine,  but  His  ;  I  witness  not  by  strength,  but  by  weakness, 
glorying  in  infirmities,  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  me."  And  as  having 
such  an  office  they  are  to  be  received,  not  for  their  natural  eloquence  or  power, 
not  for  their  acquired  skill  or  learning,  but  for  the  supernatural  presence  which 
will  make  their  weakness  strong.  H.  The  nature  of  their  charge — they  are 
.  sent  to  bear  the  witness  of  Christ's  resurrection.  All  is  shut  up  in  this.  They 
come  from  God  to  the  world  with  the  message  of  reconciliation  ;  and  this  message 
is  the  incarnation  of  the  eternal  Son,  His  death.  His  rising  again,  and  from  this 
the  truth  of  the  ever-blessed  Trinity,  and  man's  restored  relation  to  his  God.  This 
is  what  man's  heart  longs  for  unconsciously,  and  what  tlie  asceticism  of  the  natural 
man  is  so  restlessly  craving  for  where  it  can  never  find  it.  Ill,  How  are  we  to 
discharge  this  great  vocation  ?  1.  We  must  be  deep  students  of  God's  Word. 
Where  else  are  we  to  learn  our  witness  of  Christ's  resurrection?  Here  it  is  written 
clear  and  full — in  the  Old  Testament  in  type,  prophecy,  and  promise ;  in  the  New 
in  fulfilment,  act,  history,  and  grace.  In  it,  day  by  day,  we  must  live  with  Him. 
Thus  must  our  message  sink  into  our  own  hearts.  Even  as  they  "who  companied 
with"  Him  "all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among  them," 
learned  unawares,  day  by  day,  the  truth  they  needed,  so  must  it  be  with  us.  2. 
We  must  be  men  of  prayer.  The  union  of  these  two  is  the  essence  of  the  apostolical 
character.  "We  will  give  ourselves  continually  to  prayer,  and  the  ministry  of  the 
Word"  ;  and  without  prayer  we  cannot  bear  this  burden.  How  without  it  shall 
we  have  an  insight  into  Scripture?  how  turn  what  we  read  to  pi'ofit?  how  have 
power  with  God  or  with  our  brethren  ?  In  prayer,  in  real,  hearty,  earnest  prayer, 
all  things  around  us  are  set  into  their  proper  places.  In  prayer  our  minds  are 
armed  for  the  coming  temptations  of  tlie  day ;  they  are  cooled,  refreshed,  and 
calmed  after  its  vexations,  fatigues,  and  anxiety.  On  our  knees,  if  anywhere,  we 
learn  to  love  the  souls  of  our  people  ;  to  hate  our  own  sins  ;  to  trust  in  Him  who 
shows  us  then  His  wounded  side  and  pierced  hands,  and  to  love  Him  with  our 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

whole  heart.  Nothing  will  make  up  for  the  lack  of  prayer.  The  busiest  ministry 
without  it  is  sure  to  become  shallow  and  bustling.  To  come  forth  from  secret 
communing  with  Him,  and  bear  our  witness,  and  to  retire  again  behind  the  veil 
to  pour  out  our  hearts  before  Him  in  unceasing  intercessions  and  devout  adorations, 
this  is,  indeed,  the  secret  of  a  blessed,  fruitful  ministry.  Nor  let  us  suppose  that 
at  once,  and  by  the  force  of  a  single  resolution,  we  can  become  men  of  prayer.  The 
spirit  of  devotion  is  the  gift  of  God ;  thou  must  seek  it  long  and  earnestly ;  and 
His  grace  will  work  it  in  thy  heart.  Thou  must  practise  it  and  labour  for  it. 
Thou  must  pray  often  if  thou  wouldest  pray  well.  3.  V/e  must  be  men  of  holiness. 
(1)  Because  without  this  there  cannot  be  reality  in  our  witness.  We  cannot  testify 
of  the  resurrection  of  Christ  unless  we  ourselves  have  known  its  power.  Even 
though  our  lives  be  correct,  yet  our  lives  must  be  unreal  unless  the  truths  we  speak 
have  thoroughly  pervaded  our  own  souls.  If  we  have  for  ourselves  no  living  faith 
in  a  risen  Saviour,  we  cannot  speak  of  Him  with  power  to  others.  We  must  be 
great  saints  if  we  would  have  our  people  holy.  The  pastor's  character  forms,  to 
a  great  degree,  the  character  of  his  flock.  We  must  show  them  in  our  risen  lives 
that  Christ  indeed  is  risen.  This  is  a  witness,  from  the  force  of  which  they  cannot 
escape.  (2)  Because  we  are  in  the  kingdom  of  God's  grace,  and  to  us  is  committed 
a  dispensation  of  His  grace.  Every  act  of  ours  will  be  real  and  effectual  only  so 
far  as  God  s  grace  goes  with  it ;  and  though  He  may  be,  and  is,  pleased  to  work  by 
His  grace  even  at  the  hands  of  the  unholy,  yet  who  can  say  how  greatly  such  un- 
faithfulness does  mar  His  work,  how  much  is  lost  which  might  be  gained  ?  How 
can  the  other  necessities  of  our  character  be  supplied  if  we  fail  here?  How  can 
we  be  students  of  God's  Word  without  God's  grace  ?  How  can  they  pray  for  them- 
selves or  their  people  who  have  not  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication?  How 
can  they  draw  down  the  blessed  dew  on  others  who  even  repel  it  from  themselves? 
Who  can  have  daily  audience  of  our  King  but  those  who  dwell  within  His  courts  ? 
(Bp.  S.  Wilberforce.)  Witnesses  of  the  resurrection : — The  fact  of  Christ's  resur- 
rection was  the  staple  of  the  first  Christian  sermon.  The  apostles  did  not  deal  so 
much  in  doctrine  ;  but  they  proclaimed  what  they  had  seen.  There  are  three  main 
connections  in  which  the  fact  is  viewed  in  Scripture.  It  was — 1.  A  fact  affecting 
Him,  carrying  with  it  necessarily  some  great  tiuths  with  regard  to  His  chaiacter, 
nature,  and  work.  And  it  was  in  that  aspect  mainly  that  the  earliest  preachers 
dealt  with  it.  2.  Then,  as  the  Spirit  led  them  to  understand  more  and  more  of  it, 
it  came  to  be  a  pattern,  j^ledge,  and  prophecy  of  their  own.  3.  And  then  it  came 
to  be  a  symbol  of  spiritual  resurrection.  The  text  branches  out  into  three  con- 
siderations. I.  The  WITNESSES.  Here  we  have  ihe  "  head  of  the  Apostolic  College," 
on  whose  supposed  primacy — which  is  certainly  not  a  "  rock  " — such  tremendous 
clain)s  have  been  built,  laying  down  the  qualifications  and  the  functions  of  an 
apostle.  How  simply  they  present  themselves  to  His  mind.  The  qualifications 
are  only  personal  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  in  His  earthly  history,  because  the 
function  is  only  to  attest  His  resurrection.  The  same  conception  lies  in  Christ's 
last  designation,  "Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Me."  It  appears  again  and  again  in 
the  earlier  aildress  reported  in  this  book.  "  This  Jesus  hath  God  raised  up, 
whereof  we  all  are  witnesses,"  &c.,  &c.  How  striking  the  contrast  this  idea  pre- 
sents to  the  portentous  theories  of  later  times.  The  work  of  the  apostles  in  Curist's 
lifetime  embraced  three  elements,  none  of  which  were  peculiar  to  them — to  be  with 
Christ,  ti  preach,  and  to  work  miracles;  their  characteristic  work  after  His  ascen- 
sion was  this  of  witness-bearing.  The  Church  did  not  owe  to  them  its  extension, 
nor  Chri>tian  doctrine  its  form,  and  whilst  Peter  and  James  and  John  appear  in 
the  liistory,  and  Matthew  wrote  a  Gospel,  and  the  other  James  and  Jude  are  the 
authors  of  brief  Epistles,  the  rest  of  the  twelve  never  appear  afterwards.  This 
book  is  not  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  It  tells  the  work  of  Peter  alone  among  the 
twelve.  The  Hellenists  Stephen  and  Philip,  the  Cypriote  Barnabas — and  the  man 
of  Tarsu«,  greater  than  they  all— these  spread  the  name  of  Christ  beyond  the 
limits  of  the  Holy  City  and  the  chosen  people.  The  solemn  power  of  "  binding 
and  loosing  "  was  not  a  prerogative  of  the  tw-dve,  for  we  re.id  that  Jesus  came 
where  "the  disciples  were  assembled,"  and  "He  breathed  on  them,  and  said, 
Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  soever  sins  ye  remit  they  are  remitted."  Where 
in  all  this  is  a  trace  of  the  special  apostolic  powers  which  have  been  alleged  to  be 
transmitted  from  them  ?  Nowhere.  Who  was  it  that  came  and  said,  "Brother 
Saul,  tl  e  Lord  hath  sent  me  that  thou  mightest  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  "  ? 
A  simple  "  layman."  Who  was  it  that  stood  by,  a  passive  and  astonished  spectator 
of  the  communication  of  spiritual  gifts  to  Gentile  converts,  and  could  only  say, 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  .     95 

"  Forasmuch,  then,  as  God  gave  them  the  like  gift,  as  He  did  unto  us,  what  was  I 
that  I  could  withstand  God  ?  "  Peter,  the  leader  of  the  twelve.  Their  task  was 
apparently  a  humbler,  really  a  far  more  important,  one.  They  had  to  lay  broad 
and  deep  the  basis  for  all  the  growth  and  grace  of  the  Church  in  the  facts  which 
they  witnessed.  To  that  work  there  can  be  no  successors.  II.  The  sufficiency 
OF  THE  TESTIMONY.  Peter  regards  (as  does  the  whole  New  Testament)  the  witness 
which  he  and  his  fellows  bore  as  enough  to  lay  firm  and  deep  the  historical  fact 
of  the  resurrection.  1.  If  we  think  of  Christianity  as  being  mainly  a  set  of  truths, 
then,  of  course,  the  way  to  prove  Christianity  is  to  show  the  consistency  of  its 
truths  with  one  another  and  with  other  truths,  their  derivation  from  admitted 
principles,  their  reasonableness,  their  adaptation  to  men's  nature,  and  the  refining 
and  elevating  effects  of  their  adoption,  and  so  on.  If  we  think  of  Christianity,  on 
the  other  hand,  as  being  first  a  set  of  historical  facts  which  carry  the  doctrines, 
then  the  way  to  prove  Christianity  is  not  to  show  how  reasonable  it  is,  &c.  These 
are  legitimate  ways  of  establishing  principles ;  but  the  way  to  establish  a  fact  is 
only  tme — that  is,  to  find  somebody  that  can  say,  "  I  know  it,  for  I  saw  it."  And 
my  belief  is  that  the  course  of  modern  "apologetics"  has  departed  from  its  real 
stronghold  when  it  has  consented  to  argue  the  question  oa  these  lower  and  less 
sufficiug  grounds.  The  gospel  is  first  and  foremost  a  history,  and  you  cannot  prove 
that  a  thing  has  happened  by  showing  how  very  desirable  it  is  that  it  should  hai^pen, 
Ac. — all  that  is  irrelevant.  It  is  true  because  sufficient  eye-witnesses  assert  it. 
2.  With  regard  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  specific  evidence — (1)  Suppose  you  yield 
up  everything  that  modern  scepticism  can  demand  about  the  date  and  authorship 
of  the  New  Testament,  we  have  still  left  four  letters  of  Paul's  which  nobody  has 
ever  denied,  viz.,  the  Epistles  to  the  Eomans,  Corinthians,  and  Galatians,  whose 
dates  bring  them  within  five-and-twenty  years  of  the  alleged  date  of  Christ's  resur- 
rection. Now  we  find  in  all  of  them  the  distinct  allegation  of  this  fact,  and  side 
by  side  with  it  the  reference  to  his  own  vision  of  the  risen  Saviour,  which  carries 
us  up  within  ten  years  of  the  alleged  fact.  It  was  not  a  handful  of  women  who 
fancied  they  had  seen  Him  once,  very  early  in  dim  twilight  of  morning,  but  it  was 
half  a  thousand  of  them  that  had  beheld  Him.  He  had  been  seen  by  them,  not 
once,  but  often  ;  not  far  ofi,  but  close  at  hand ;  not  in  one  place,  but  in  Galilee 
and  Jerusalem  ;  at  all  hours  of  the  day,  abroad  and  in  the  house,  walking  and 
sitting,  speaking  and  eating,  by  them  singly  and  in  numbers.  He  had  been  seen  too 
by  incredulous  eyes  and  surprised  hearts,  who  doubted  ere  they  worshipped ;  and 
the  world  may  be  thankful  that  they  were  slow  of  heart  to  believe.  (2)  Would  not 
this  testimony  be  enough  to  guarantee  any  event  but  this  ?  And  if  so,  why  is  not 
it  enough  to  guarantee  this,  too  ?  If  the  resurrection  be  not  a  fact,  then  the  belief 
in  it  was — (a)  A  delusion.  But  it  was  not ;  for  such  an  illusion  is  altogether  un- 
exampled. Nations  have  said,  "  Our  king  is  not  dead — he  is  gone  away  and  he 
will  come  back."  Loving  disciples  have  said,  "  Our  Teacher  lives  in  solitude, 
and  will  return  to  us."  But  this  is  no  parallel  to  these.  This  is  not  a  fond 
imagination  giving  an  apparent  substance  to  its  own  creation,  but  sense  recognising 
the  fact.  And  to  suppose  that  that  should  have  been  the  rooted  conviction  of 
hundreds  of  men  that  were  not  idiots  finds  no  parallel  in  the  history  and  no  analogy 
in  legend,  (h)  A  myth  ;  but  a  myth  does  not  grow  in  ten  years.  And  there  was 
no  motive  to  frame  if  Christ  was  dead  and  all  was  over,  (c)  A  dec^-it ;  but  the 
character  of  the  men,  and  the  absence  of  self-interest,  and  the  persecutions  which 
they  endured,  made  that  inconceivable.  (3)  And  all  this  we  are  asked  to  put  aside 
at  the  outrageous  assertion  which  no  man  that  believes  in  a  God  can  logically 
maintain,  viz.,  that — (a)  No  testimony  can  reach  to  the  miraculous.  But  cannot 
testimony  reach  to  this :  I  know,  because  I  saw,  that  a  man  was  dead,  and  I  saw 
him  alive  again  ?  If  testimony  can  do  that,  I  think  we  may  safely  leave  the  verbal 
sophism  that  it  cannot  reach  to  the  miraculous  to  take  care  of  itself,  (b)  Miracle 
is  impossible.  But  that  is  an  illogical  begging  of  the  whole  question,  and  cannot 
avail  to  brush  aside  testimony.  You  cannot  smother  facts  by  theories  in  that 
fashion.  One  would  like  to  know  how  it  comes  that  our  modern  men  of  science 
who  protest  so  much  against  science  being  corrupted  by  metaphysics  should  commit 
themselves  to  an  assertion  like  that  ?  Surely  that  is  stark,  staring  metaphysics. 
Let  them  keep  to  their  own  line,  and  tell  us  all  that  crucibles  and  scalpels  can 
reveal,  and  we  will  listen  as  becomes  us.  But  when  they  contradict  their  own 
principles  in  order  to  deny  the  possibility  of  miracle,  we  need  only  give  them  back 
their  own  words,  and  ask  that  the  investigation  of  facts  shall  not  be  hampered  and 
clogged  with  metaphysical  prejudices.     III.  The  importance  of  the  fact  which 


9l5  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

IS  THos  BORNE  WITNESS  TO.  1.  With  the  Eesurrection  stands  or  falls  the  Divinity 
of  Christ.  Clirist  said,  "  The  Son  of  man  must  suffer  many  things,  and  the  third 
day  He  shall  rise  again."  Now,  if  Death  holds  Him  still,  then  what  becomes  of 
these  words,  and  of  our  estimate  of  the  character  of  Him,  the  speaker?  Let  us 
hear  no  more  about  the  pure  morality  of  Jesus  Christ.  Take  away  the  Kesurrection 
and  we  have  left  beautiful  precepts,  and  fair  wisdom  deformed  with  a  monstrousj 
self-assertion,  and  the  constant  reiteration  of  claims  which  the  event  proves  to  have 
been  baseless.  Either  He  has  risen  from  the  dead  or  His  words  were  blasphemy. 
"Declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power  by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead," 
or  that  which  our  lips  refuse  to  say  even  in  a  hypothesis  !  2.  With  the  Eesur- 
rection stands  or  falls  Christ's  whole  work  for  our  redemption.  If  He  died,  like 
other  men,  we  have  no  proof  that  the  Cross  was  anything  but  a  martyr's.  His 
resurrection  is  the  proof  that  His  death  was  not  the  tribute  which  for  Himself 
He  had  to  pay,  but  the  ransom  for  us.  If  He  has  not  risen,  He  has  not  put  away 
sin ;  and  if  He  has  not  put  it  away  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  none  has,  and  it 
remains.  We  come  back  to  the  old  dreary  alternative  :  if  Christ  be  not  risen  your 
faith  is  vain,  and  our  preaching  is  vain,  &c.  And  if  He  be  not  risen,  there  is  no 
resurrection  for  us  ;  and  the  world  is  desolate,  and  the  heaven  is  empty,  and  the 
grave  is  dark,  and  sin  abides,  and  death  is  eternal.  Well,  then,  may  we  take  up 
the  ancient  glad  salutation,  "  The  Lord  is  risen  "  ;  and  turning  from  these  thoughts 
of  the  disaster  and  despair  that  that  awful  supposition  drags  after  it,  fall  back 
upon  the  sober  certainty,  and  with  the  apostle  break  forth  in  triumph,  "  Now  ia 
Christ  risen  from  the  dead  and  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept."  {A, 
Mactaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23-26.  And  they  appointed  two. — An  election  sermon  : — This,  the  earliest, 
stands  remarkably  distinguished  from  the  episcopal  elections  of  after  ages.  Every 
one  acquainted  with  history  knows  that  the  election  of  a  bishop  was  one  of  the 
fiercest  questions  which  shook  the  Church  of  Christ.  Appointment  by  the  people. 
Presbyters.  Various  customs.  Anecdote  of  Ambrose  of  Milan.  Appointment 
by  the  Emperor  or  Bishop  of  Eome.  Quarrel  of  ages  between  the  Emperor  and 
the  Pope.  Consider — I.  The  object  of  the  election.  To  elect  a  bishop  of  the 
universal  Church.  It  might  be  that  in  process  of  time  the  apostle  should  be 
appointed  to  a  particular  city — as  St.  James  was  to  Jerusalem.  But  his  duty  was 
owed  to  the  Church  in  general,  and  not  to  that  particular  city;  and  if  he  had 
allowed  local  interests  to  stand  before  the  interests  of  the  whole,  he  would  have 
neglected  the  duty  of  his  high  office,  and  if  those  who  appointed  him  considered 
the  interest  of  Jerusalem  instead  of  the  Church  universal,  they  would  have  failed  in 
their  duty.  In  the  third  century  Cyprian  stated  this  principle  :  "  The  Episcopate, 
one  and  indivisible,  held  in  its  entirety  by  each  bishop,  every  part  standing  for  the 
whole."  The  political  application  is  plain.  Each  legislator  legislates  for  the 
country,  not  for  a  county  or  town.  Each  elector  holds  his  franchise  as  a  sacred 
trust,  to  be  exercised  not  for  his  town,  or  faction,  or  himself,  or  his  friends,  but  for 
the  general  weal  of  the  people  of  England.  We  are  not  to  be  biassed  by  asking 
what  charity  does  a  candidate  support,  nor  by  his  view  of  some  local  question,  nor 
by  his  support  of  Tractarian  or  Evangelical  societies.  We  are,  in  our  high 
responsibility,  selecting,  not  a  president  for  a  religious  society,  nor  a  pati'on  of  a 
town,  nor  a  subscriber  to  an  hospital,  but  a  legislator  for  England.  II.  The  mode 
OF  the  election.  It  was  partly  human,  partly  Divine.  The  human  element  is  plain 
enough  in  that  it  was  popular.  The  Divine  element  lay  in  this  that  it  was  over« 
ruled  by  God.  Tlie  selected  one  might  be  the  chosen  of  the  people,  yet  not  the 
chosen  of  God.  Hence  they  prayed,  "  Thou  Lord,  which  knowcst  the  hearts  of  all 
men,"  &c.  The  common  notion  is,  voxpopuli  vox  Dei — i.e.,  a  law  is  right  because  it  is 
a  people's  will.  We  have  not  quite  gone  to  this  length  in  England.  On  the  Continent 
it  has  long  been  prevalent.  Possibly  it  is  the  expression  of  that  Antichrist  "  who 
showeth  himself  that  he  is  God"  ;  self-will  setting  itself  up  paramount  to  the  will 
of  God.  The  vox  poprili  is  sometimes  vox  Dei,  sometimes  not.  It  was  so  when 
the  people  rescued  Jonathan  from  his  father's  unjust  sentence  ;  and  when,  after  the 
contest  between  Elijah  and  the  prophets  of  Baal,  they  cried,  "The  Lord  He  is 
God."  But  not  when,  in  Moses'  absence,  they  required  Aaron  to  make  them  a 
golden  calf  for  a  god.  Or  when  they  shouted,  "  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians  1 " 
or  "  Crucify  Him  I  "  Politicians  eagerly  debate  the  question,  how  best  to  secure  a 
fair  representation  of  the  people's  voice — a  question  not  to  be  put  aside.  But  the 
Christian  sees  a  question  deeper  far  than  this — how  the  popular  will  shall  truly 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  '    97 

represent  the  -will  of  God.  And  we  shall  attain  this,  not  by  nicely  balancing 
interest  against  interest,  much  less  by  manceuvring  to  defeat  the  opposite  cause ; 
but  by  each  doing  all  he  can  to  rouse  himself  and  others  to  a  high  sense  of  respon- 
sibility. It  is  a  noble  thought,  that  of  every  elector  going  to  vote,  as  these  men 
did,  for  the  Church,  for  the  people,  for  God,  and  for  the  right,  earnestly  anxious 
that  he  and  others  should  do  right.  Else  this  was  an  appeal  to  chance  and  not  to 
God  ;  and  every  election,  by  ballot  or  by  suffrage,  is  else  an  appeal  to  chance. 
III.  The  spieit.  1.  A  religious  spirit.  "  They  prayed,"  &c.  Now,  we  shall  be  met 
here  by  an  objection.  This  was  a  religious  work — the  selection  of  an  apostle  ;  but 
the  choice  of  a  representative  is  only  a  secular  one.  Bat  it  is  not  the  occupation, 
but  the  spirit  which  makes  the  difference.  The  election  of  a  bishop  may  be  most 
secular ;  the  election  of  a  representative  may  be  religious.  St.  Paul  taught  that 
nothing  is  profane.  Sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer,  St.  Peter  learned 
that  nothing  is  common  or  unclean.  Many  relics  remain  to  us  from  our  religious 
forefathers  indicative  of  this  truth.  Grace  before  meals.  Dei  gratia  on  corns  of 
the  realm  ;  "  In  the  name  of  God,"  at  the  commencement  of  wills  ;  oaths  in 
court  of  justice — all  proclaim  that  the  simples [;  acts  of  our  domestic  and  political 
life  are  sacred  or  profane  according  to  the  sp:rit  in  which  they  are  performed  ;  not 
in  the  question  whether  they  are  done  for  the  Siate  or  the  Church,  but  whether 
with  God  or  without  God.  Observe  :  It  is  not  the  preluding  such  an  election  with 
public  prayer  that  would  make  it  a  religious  act.  It  is  religious  so  far  as  each  man 
discharges  his  part  as  a  duty  and  solemn  responsibility.  If  looked  on  in  this  spirit 
would  the  debauchery,  which  is  fostered  by  rich  men  of  all  parties  among  the  poor 
for  their  own  purposes,  be  possible  ?  Would  they,  for  the  sake  of  one  vote,  or  a 
hundred  votes,  brutalise  their  fellow  creatures  ?  2.  It  was  done  conscientiously. 
Each  Christian  found  himself  in  possession  of  a  new  right — that  of  giving  a  vote 
or  casting  a  lot.  Like  all  rights,  it  was  a  duty.  He  had  not  a  right  to  do  what  he 
liked,  only  to  do  right.  And  if  any  one  had  swayed  him  to  support  the  cause  of 
Barsabas  or  that  of  Matthias  on  any  motives  except  this  one — "You  ought" — he  had 
so  far  injured  his  conscience.  The  worst  of  crimes  is  to  injure  a  human  con- 
science. Now  bribery  is  a  sin.  Not  because  a  particular  law  has  been  made 
against  it,  but  because  it  lowers  the  sense  of  personal  responsibility.  And  whether 
you  do  directly  by  giving,  indirectly  by  withdrawing,  assistance,  or  patronage — you 
sin  against  Christ.  3.  It  was  not  done  from  personal  interest.  If  the  supporters 
of  the  two  candidates  had  been  influenced  by  such  considerations  as  blood- 
relationship,  or  the  chance  of  favour  and  promotion,  a  high  function  would  have 
been  degraded.  In  secular  matters,  however,  we  do  not  judge  so.  A  man  generally 
decides  according  to  his  professional  or  his  personal  interests.  You  know  almost 
to  a  certainty  beforehand  which  way  a  man  will  vote,  if  you  know  his  profession. 
Partly  no  doubt,  this  is  involuntarily — the  result  of  those  prejudices  which  attach  to 
us  all  from  association.  But  it  is  partly  voluntary.  We  know  that  we  are  thinking 
not  of  the  general  good,  but  of  our  own  interests.  And  thus  a  farmer  would  think  him- 
self justified  in  looking  at  a  question  simply  as  it  affected  his  class,  and  a  noble  as  it 
affected  his  caste,  and  a  working  man  as  it  bore  upon  the  working  classes.  Brethren, 
we  are  Christians.  Something  of  a  principle  higher  than  this  ought  to  be  ours. 
What  is  the  law  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  ?  The  sacrifice  of  the  One  for  the  whole,  the 
cheerful  surrender  of  the  few  for  the  many.  Else,  what  do  we  more  than  others  ? 
These  are  fine  words — patriotism,  public  principle,  purity.  Be  sure  these  words  are 
but  sentimental  expressions,  except  as  they  spring  out  of  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
{F.  W.  Bobertson,  M.A.)  The  election  of  Matthias  : — Let  us  pause  a  little  to 
meditate  upon  an  objection  which  might  have  been  here  raised.  Why  fill 
up  what  Christ  Himself  left  vacant?  some  short-sighted  objector  might  have 
urged ;  and  yet  we  see  good  reason  why  Christ  may  have  omitted  to  supply 
the  place  of  Judas,  and  may  have  designed  that  the  apostles  themselves 
should  have  done  so.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  gifted  His  apostles  with  corporate 
power ;  He  bestowed  upon  them  authority  to  act  in  His  stead  and  name ;  and 
it  fa  not  God's  way  of  action  to  grant  power  and  authority,  and  then  to 
allow  it  to  remain  unexercised  and  undeveloped.  When  God  confers  any 
gift  He  expects  that  it  shall  be  used  for  His  honour  and  man's  benefit.  The 
Lord  thus  wished  to  teach  the  Church  from  earliest  days  to  walk  alone. 
The  apostles  had  been  long  enough  depending  on  His  personal  presence  and 
guidance,  and  now,  that  they  might  learn  to  exercise  the  privileges  and  duties 
of  their  Divine  freedom,  He  leaves  them  to  choose  one  to  fill  that  position  of  super- 
natural rank  and  ofiice  from  which  Judas  had  fallen.  The  risen  Saviour  acted  in 
VOL.   I.  7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

grace  as  God  ever  acts  in  nature.  He  bestowed  His  gifts  lavishly  and  generously, 
and  then  expected  man  to  respond  to  the  gifts  by  making  that  good  use  of  them 
which  earnest  prayer,  sanctified  reason,  and  Christian  common-sense  dictated. 
((?.  T.  Stokes,  M.  A.)  Readiness  and  preimredness  : —The  Church,  like  a  line  of 
soldiers  in  action,  must  have  no  vacant  places  ;  each  gap  in  the  line  must  be  made 
good.  The  unfilled  post  is  a  point  of  weakness  in  the  sy-tem  and  the  work,  and 
the  enemy  against  whom  we  strive  is  not  slo.v  to  take  advantage.  The  weak  place 
is  soon  detected,  and  the  gap  in  the  line  will  soon  be  still  funher  enlarged.  A  rent 
unmended  rapidly  grows  greater.  The  apostles  felt  this.  So  at  once  they  proceed 
to  fill  the  vacant  place.  Two  thoughts  meet  ua  here.  If  a  place  has  to  be  filled, 
two  requirements  must  be  satisfied.  First,  we  must  have  one  prepared,  one  fit  to 
fill  the  position ;  secondly,  we  must  have  one  ready  and  willing  to  take  up  the  work. 
Matthias  was  a  disciple  of  experience.  He  was  not  a  recent  convert,  no  novice. 
Hitherto,  we  may  conclude,  he  had  filled  no  official  position.  But  by  attendance 
on  the  Lord's  ministry  he  had  been  preparing  himself  to  take  up  the  work  when  a 
call  should  come.  He  was  probably  quite  unconscious  as  to  when  or  how  it  would 
come  ;  but  as  a  Christian,  as  a  soldier  of  Christ,  as  a  servant  of  his  Master,  he  was 
always  liable.  The  summons,  "  I  have  need  of  thee,"  might  come  at  any  moment. 
Would  the  summons  find  hira  fitted  to  obey  it?  He  had  "  companied  " — come 
along  together — "  with  tliem."  He  had  listened  to  Christ's  teaching,  watched 
Christ  live  and  work  ;  he  could  speak  from  experience.  Is  there  not  here  a  lesson 
for  all  ?  We  do  not  know  \\hen  Christ  may  need  us  ;  we  do  not  know  exactly  how 
He  may  wish  that  we  should  be  employed.  But  the  summons  may  come.  When 
it  comes,  in  what  state  will  it  find  us  ?  Shall  we  know  from  experience  anything 
of  what  a  Christian  life  really  is  ?  A  knowleilge  of  Christian  truth  and  Christian 
life  is  indispensable  for  Church  workers.  They  must  be  prepared.  And  as  a 
modern  writer  has  said,  "  preparation  is  not  preparedness,"  but  it  is  the  secret  of 
it,  the  means  whereby  it  is  obtained.  Preparation,  constant,  ever  going  on,  is  the 
way  to  be  prepared.  But  the  worker,  besides  being  prepared,  must  be  also  ready, 
that  is,  willing  to  obey  the  call  when  it  comes.  Hovv  often  has  a  clergyman  to 
lament  the  sorrowful  fact  that  those  who  might  be  of  the  greatest  service  are 
sometimes  the  least  willing  to  take  up  work.  Yet  to  whom  "  much  is  given,  of 
liim  sball  be  much  required."  According  to  our  means,  abilities,  opportunities, 
shall  we  be  judged.  Notice  the  example  of  Matthias  and  Joseph.  Tiiere  is  not 
a  word  of  hesitation  or  excuse.  They  knew  not  upon  which  the  lot  might  fall,  but 
either  was  willing  and  ready  ;  it  was  sufficient  that  the  call  had  come,  they  must 
not  dream  of  disobedience.  They  did  not  know  what  might  lie  before  them — 
danger,  toil,  persecution,  in  all  probability  a  martyr's  death.  But  there  is  no 
shrinking,  no  attempt  to  excuse  themselves  or  find  reasons  why  they  should  not 
take  office.  It  has  been  of  the  nature  of  a  national  boast  thtt  Englishmen  sought 
rather  than  shunned  the  point  of  danger,  the  Hfe  of  active  service  and  toil. 
How  often  have  we  read  of  the  soldier  chafing  under  the  circumstances  which 
cast  his  lot  in  the  reserve  rather  than  in  the  midst  of  the  action  which  was 
progressing  at  the  front !  Should  there  not  be  a  like  spirit  exhibited  by  the 
soldiers  of  the  Cross?  The  life  of  action  and  the  life  of  danger  is  surely  in 
some  measure  the  life  of  honour.  (IF.  E.  Ghadicick,  M.A.)  Ministers  should 
he  picked  men  .-—It  is  said  of  the  Egyptians  that  they  chose  their  priests 
from  the  most  learned  of  their  philosophers,  and  then  they  esteemed  their 
priests  so  highly  that  they  chose  their  kings  from  them.  We  require  to 
have  for  God's  ministers  the  pick  of  all  the  Christian  host  ;  such  men, 
indeed,  that  if  the  nation  wanted  kings  they  could  not  do  better  than 
elevate  them  to  the  throne.  {C.  H.  Spnryeon.)  God  knows  the  heart : —When 
Samuel  Wilberforce,  afterwards  Bishop,  went  to  his  first  charge,  some  of  the 
parishioners  complained  that  the  bishop  had  sent  them  a  boy.  They  condemned 
him  before  he  spoke  because  of  his  looks.  But  after  they  had  huard  his  first 
sermon  they  withdrew  their  first  statement,  and  said,  "We  find  he  is  a  man." 
This  illustrates  the  way  in  which  too  oftsn  we  judge  men,  but  we  must  remem1)er 
that  although  man  looketh  on  the  outward  appearance  the  Lord  looketh  on  the 
heart.  Workers  indicated  by  God: — "  One  night,  a  week  before  we  got  to  Colombo, 
Mr.  Millard  and  I  were  praying  to  God  for  special  guidance  in  Ceylon,  and  I  said 
to  him,  '  The  Lord  has  told  me  to  bring  on  from  Ceylon  Mr.  Campbell,  Mr.  Horan, 
Mr.  Jackson,  and  David.'  'Well,'  said  he,  'if  you  bring  on  any  one,  these  are 
the  four  names.'  So  day  by  day  we  prayed,  'Oh,  Lord,  is  it  Thy  will  that  we 
should  bring  them  on  ?  ''    We  had  a  fortnight  in  Ceylon,  and  we  spent  the  greater 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  ,    99 

part  of  it  in  prayer  to  be  perfectly  certain  of  God's  will.  We  were  staying  at  a 
house  a  little  distance  out  of  Colombo  that  a  friend  very  kindly  put  at  our  disposal, 
and  there  we  gathered  to  wait  on  God  in  prayer.  One  day  Mr.  Millard  and  Mr. 
Campbell  were  there  praying.  They  said  nothing  to  me  about  it.  They  prayed, 
'  Now,  Lord,  we  will  put  Thee  to  the  test:  wilt  Thou  send  up  into  this  room  those 
who  are  to  go  to  Australia,  and  only  those  ? '  They  waited.  The  door  opened, 
and  Mr.  Jackson  went  in  and  knelt  with  the  other  two.  Mr.  Horan  was  at  his  tea, 
but  somehow  he  thought  to  himself,  '  I  must  go  up  ' ;  so  he  left  his  tea  and  went 
upstairs,  and  went  into  the  room  and  knelt  down  with  the  others.  I  also  was 
downstairs,  and  said  to  myself,  'I  will  go  up  and  have  a  little  prayer.'  I  went 
into  the  room  and  found  these  friends  there  before  me.  But  where  was  David  ? 
Was  he  to  come  or  not  ?  He  was,  at  the  time,  in  Colombo,  fi  ve  miles  away.  He 
knew  nothing  about  the  prayer  in  the  upper  room.  As  David  was  walking  along 
the  street  of  Colombo  he  lifted  up  his  heart  to  God  and  said,  '  Where  am  I  to  go 
now,  and  what  am  I  to  do  ?  '  The  Lord  told  him  to  take  a  carriage  and  drive  out 
to  Dellagama  House  at  once.  David  got  into  a  conveyance  and  drove  out.  He 
appeared  with  his  black  face  all  shining  with  glory.  Now  we  were  certain  that 
David  was  to  go  with  us  to  Australia.  So  we  sailed,  and  arrived  at  Melbourne." 
{Q.  G.  Gruhb.)  The  beginning  of  ecclesiastical  Misiness  : — 1.  The  requisite  quali- 
fications of  apostleship  were  discerned  in  two  members  of  the  company.  The 
claims  of  the  two  were  probably  equally  balanced  and  superior  to  those  of  the  rest. 
2.  The  whole  matter  was  referred  to  the  Head  of  the  Cuurch  in  prayer.  3.  They 
prayed  Him  to  settle  for  them  what  they  could  not  settle  for  themselves.  No 
choice  of  theirs  could  make  a  man  an  apostle.  4.  They  looked  for  the  expression 
of  the  Divine  decision  in  the  best  way  known  to  them.  The  lot  had  been 
sanctioned  by  God  under  the  Old  Dispensation ;  but  it  is  significant  that  no  more  is 
heard  of  it.  The  unction  of  the  Holy  One  rendered  it  unnecessary.  5.  The 
decision  asked  tor  was  cordially  accepted.  This  beginning  of  eccle<^iastical 
business  presents  to  us — I.  Right-minded  people  not  yet  filled  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  truth  had  had  its  effect  upon  them,  but  like  many  now  they  were 
only  in  a  course  of  preparation  for  the  fulness  of  Divine  knowledge.  Such  now 
should  do  the  will  of  God  as  they  know  it  as  these  did,  and  seek  the  promised 
blessing  in  prayer.  II.  Eight-minded  people,  though  not  yet  filled  with  the 
Spirit,  yet  directed  by  their  confidence  in  Christ.  They  believed  that  He,  the 
Searcher  of  hearts,  was  surveying  them;  that  prayer  to  Him  would  be  answered; 
that  they  had  a  work  to  do  for  which  He  must  fit  them  ;  and  though  one  had  fallen 
another  would  be  found  for  his  place.  So  now  there  are  servants  of  Christ  who, 
though  not  assured  of  sonship,  are  yet  on  the  road  to  assurance.  Let  such  main- 
tain their  confidence  in  Christ,  and  they  will  reach  the  goal  as  the  disciples  did. 
III.  The  apostolic  staff  completed  in  proper  time.  The  proper  time  was  during 
the  ten  days.  The  disciples  were  expectant,  but  their  confidence  was  increased 
when  they  felt  that  they  had  done  their  duty.  Seamen  are  the  more  hopeful  when 
the  breeze  strikes  on  the  spread  canvas,  and  physicians  when  they  have  used  all 
the  resources  of  their  science.  So  congregations  should  be  ready  for  what  God 
waits  to  give,  by  a  full  cordial  acceptance  of  His  will.     (W.  Hudson.)  The  hoh/ 

choice: — They  begin  with  praj'er ;  this  was  the  usual  manner  in  the  Church  of  God 
(Numb,  xxvii.  16;  John  xvii.  27 ;  Acts  vi.  6).  It  is  not  fit  he  that  is  chosen  for  God 
should  be  chosen  without  God.  But  for  this,  Samuel  himself  may  be  mistaken  and 
choose  even  wrong,  before  he  hit  upon  the  right.  This  prayer  re^pects  two  things  : 
I.  The  person  is  described — 1.  By  His  omnipotence.  "  Lord  " — (1)  Of  what  ?  Not 
Lord  of  such  a  county,  barony,  seigniory ;  nor  Lord  by  virtue  of  office,  but  most 
absolute.  His  lordship  is  universal :  Lord  of  heaven,  the  owner  of  those  glorious 
mansions  ;  Lord  of  earth,  disposer  of  all  kingdoms  and  principalities;  Lord  of  hell, 
to  lock  up  the  old  dragon  and  his  crew  in  the  bottomless  pit ;  Lord  of  death,  to 
unlock  the  graves.  (2)  To  the  Lord  of  all  they  commend  the  cho'ce  of  His  own 
servants.  Every  mortal  lord  hath  this  power,  how  much  more  that  Lord  which 
makes  lords  !  Who  so  fit  to  choose  as  He  that  can  choose  the  fit  ?  Who  so  fit  to 
choose  as  He  that  can  make  those  fit  whom  He  doth  choose  ?  It  is  He  alone  that 
cin  give  power  and  grace  to  the  elected,  therefore  not  to  be  left  out  in  the  election. 
It  is  happy  when  we  do  remit  all  doubts  to  His  decision,  and  resign  ourselves  to 
His  disposition.  We  must  not  be  our  own  carvers,  but  let  God's  choice  be  ours. 
When  we  know  His  pleasure,  let  us  sh<iw  our  obedience.  2.  Omniscience  :  it  is 
God's  peculiar  to  be  the  searcher  of  the  heart.  But  why  the  heart?  Here  was  an 
apostle  to  be  chosen  :  now  wisdom,  learning,  eloquence,  might  seem  to  be  more 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

necessary  qualities.  No,  they  are  all  nothing  to  an  honest  heart.  I  deny  not  but 
learning  to  divide  the  word,  elocution  to  pronounce  it,  wisdom  to  discern  the  truth, 
boldness  to  deliver  it,  be  all  paits  requirable  in  a  preacher.  But  as  if  all  these  were 
scarce  worth  mention  in  respect  of  the  heart,  they  say  not,  which  is  the  greater 
scholar,  but  which  is  the  better  man  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7).  (1)  Why  do  they  not  say, 
Thou  that  knowest  the  estates  of  men,  who  is  rich,  and  fit  to  support  a  high  place, 
and  who  so  poor  that  the  place  must  support  him  ?  Because,  at  the  beam  of  the 
sanctuary,  money  makes  not  the  man,  although  it  often  adds  some  metal  to  the 
man  ;  makes  his  justice  the  bolder,  and  in  less  hazard  of  being  vitiated.  But  if  the 
poor  man  have  "  wisdom  to  deliver  the  city  "  (Eccles.  vi.  15),  he  is  worthy  to  govern 
the  city.  I  yield  that  something  is  due  to  the  state  of  authority.  But  wise  govern- 
ment, not  rich  garment,  shows  an  able  man.  (2)  Why  do  they  not  say,  Thou  that 
knowest  the  birth  or  blood  of  men  ?  I  know  it  is  a  reverend  thing  to  see  an 
ancient  castle  or  palace  not  in  decay,  or  a  fair  tree  sound  and  perfect  timber.  But 
as  foul  birds  build  their  nests  in  an  old  forsaken  house,  and  doted  trees  are  good 
for  nothing  but  the  fire;  so  the  decay  of  virtue  is  the  ruin  of  nobility.  To  speak 
morally,  active  worth  is  better  than  passive  :  this  last  we  have  from  our  ancestors, 
the  first  from  ourselves.  Let  me  rather  see  one  virtue  in  a  man  alive,  than  all  the 
rest  in  his  pedigree  dead.  It  is  not  the  birth,  but  the  new  birth  that  makes  men 
truly  noble.  (3)  Why  do  they  not  say.  Thou  that  knowest  the  wisdom  and  policy 
of  men?  Certainly,  this  is  requisite  to  a  man  of  place.  But  a  man  may  be  wise  for 
himself,  not  for  God,  not  for  the  public  good.  A  cunning  head  without  an  honest 
heart  is  but  like  a  house  with  many  convenient  stairs,  entries,  and  other  passages, 
but  never  a  fair  room.  II.  The  matter  entreated.  "  Show  whom  Thou  hast 
chosen."  1.  What  kind  of  hearts  God  will  not  choose.  (1)  A  distracted  heart; 
part  whereof  is  dedicated  to  the  Lord,  and  part  to  the  world.  He  that  made  all  will 
not  be  contented  with  a  piece.  Aut  CcBsar,  aut  nihil.  Many  divisions  followed  sin. 
(a)  It  divided  heart  from  God  (Isa.  Hx.  2).  (ft)  It  divided  heart  from  heart. 
God  by  marriage  made  one  of  two,  sin  doth  often  make  two  of  one.  (c)  It  divided 
the  tongue  from  the  heart.  So  Cain  answered  God,  when  He  questioned  him  about 
Abel,  {d)  It  divided  tongue  from  tongue  at  the  building  of  Babel,  {e)  It  divided 
the  heart  from  itself  (Psa.  xii.  2) :  one  for  the  Church,  another  for  the  change  ;  one 
for  Sundays,  another  for  working  dajs.  (2)  A  stony  heart.  A  rock,  which  all  the 
floods  of  God's  mercies  and  judgments  cannot  soften ;  a  stithy,  that  is  still  the 
harder  for  beating.  It  hath  all  the  properties  of  a  stone  :  it  is  as  cold,  heavy,  hard, 
and  senseless  as  a  stone.  Were  it  of  iron  it  might  be  wrought ;  were  it  of  If  ad,  it 
might  be  molten,  and  cast  into  some  better  form  ;  were  it  of  earth,  it  might  be 
tempered  to  another  fashion ;  but  being  stone,  nothing  remains  but  that  it  be 
broken.  What  was  Pharaoh's  greatest  plague  ?  His  hard  heart.  He  that  knows 
all  hearts,  knows  how  ill  this  would  be  in  a  magistrate  or  minister;  a  heart  which 
no  ci'ies  of  orphans,  no  tears  of  widows,  no  mourning  of  the  oppressed,  can  melt 
into  pity.  (3)  A  covetous  heart,  the  desires  whereof  are  never  tilled.  A  handful 
of  corn  put  to  the  whole  heap  increaseth  it ;  yea,  add  water  to  the  sea,  it  hath  so 
much  the  more  ;  but  "he  that  loveth  silver  shall  never  be  satisfied  with  silver."  This 
vice  is  in  all  men  iniquity,  but  in  a  minister  or  magistrate  blasphemy  ;  the  root  of 
all  evil  in  every  man,  the  rot  of  all  goodness  in  a  great  man.  2.  What  kind 
of  hearts  God  will  choose.  (1)  A  wise  heart  (1  Kings  ii,  9).  There  is  no  trade  but 
a  peculiar  wisdom  belongs  to  it,  without  which  all  is  tedious  and  unprofitable ;  how 
much  more  to  the  highest  and  busiest  vocation.  (2)  A  meek  heart.  The  first 
governor  that  God  set  over  His  Israel  was  Moses,  a  man  of  the  meekest  spirit.  How 
is  he  fit  to  govern  others,  that  hath  not  learned  to  govern  himself?  He  that  can- 
not rule  a  boat  upon  the  river  is  not  to  be  trusted  with  steering  a  vessel  on  the 
ocean.  Nor  yet  must  this  parience  degenerate  into  cowardliness :  Moses,  that  was 
so  meek  in  his  own  cause,  in  God's  cause  was  as  resolute.  So  there  is  also — (8)  A 
heart  of  fortitude  and  courage.  The  rules  and  squares  that  regulate  others  are  not 
made  of  lead  or  soft  wood,  such  as  will  bend  or  bow.  The  principal  columns  of  a 
house  had  not  need  be  heart  of  oak.  The  spirit  that  resolves  to  do  the  will 
of  heaven,  what  malignant  powers  soever  would  cross  it  on  earth,  is  the  heart  that 
God  chooseth.  (4)  An  honest  heart.  Without  this,  courage  will  prove  but  legal 
injustice,  policy  but  mere  subtlety,  and  ability  but  the  devil's  anvil  to  forge 
mischiefs  on.  Private  men  have  many  curbs,  but  men  in  authority,  if  they  fear  not 
God,  have  nothing  else  to  fear.  If  he  be  a  simple  dastard,  he  fears  all  men;  if  a 
headstrong  commander,  he  fears  no  man  :  like  that  unjust  judge  (Luke  xviii.  2). 
3.  Why  God  will  choose  men  by  the  heart.    Because— (1)  The  heart  is  ihe  primum 


<!HAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  .  101 

'mobile  that  sets  all  the  wheels  agoinpr,  and  improves  them  to  the  right  end.  When 
God  begins  to  make  a  man  good,  He  begins  at  the  heart.  And  as  naturally  the  heart 
is  first  in  being,  so  here  the  will  (which  is  meant  by  the  heart)  is  chief  in  command- 
ing. If  it  say  to  the  eye,  See,  it  seeth ;  to  the  ear,  Hear,  it  hearkeneth,  &c.  If 
the  heart  lead  the  way  to  God,  not  a  member  of  the  body,  not  a  faculty  of  the  soul, 
-will  stay  behind.  (2)  No  part  of  man  can  sin  without  the  heart ;  the  heart  can  sin 
without  all  the  rest.  The  heart  is  like  a  mill :  if  the  wind  or  water  be  violent,  the 
mill  will  go  whether  the  miller  will  or  not ;  yet  he  may  chose  what  kind  of  grain 
it  shall  grind,  wheat  or  darnel.  (3)  The  heart  is  what  God  specially  cares  for  : 
"  My  son,  give  Me  thy  heart  "  ;  and  good  reason,  for  I  gave  My  own  Son's  heart  to 
■death  for  it.  It  is  not  less  thine  for  being  Mine  ;  yea,  it  cannot  be  thine  comfort- 
ably unless  it  be  Mine  perfectly.  God  requires  it  principally^  but  not  only  ;  give  Him 
that,  and  all  the  rest  will  follow.  He  that  gives  me  fire  needs  not  be  request"d  for 
light  and  heat,  for  they  are  inseparable.  (4)  All  outward  workfe  a  hypocrite  may  do, 
•only  he  fails  in  the  heart ;  and  because  he  fails  there,  he  is  lost  everywhere.  Who 
will  put  that  timber  into  the  building  of  his  house  which  is  rotten  at  the  heart? 
Man  j  udgeth  the  heart  by  the  works ;  God  judgeth  the  works  by  the  heart.  Therefore 
God  will  excuse  all  necessary  defects,  but  only  of  the  heart.  The  blind  man  cannot 
serve  God  with  his  eyes,  he  is  excused ;  the  deaf  cannot  serve  God  with  his  ears,  he 
is  excused,  &c.,  but  no  man  is  excused  for  not  serving  God  with  his  heart. 
(5)  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  Therefore  David  prays, 
"  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart."  The  Lord  rested  from  the  works  of  His  creation 
the  seventh  day ;  but  so  dearly  He  loves  clean  hearts,  that  He  rests  from  creating 
them  no  day.  As  Jeiiu  said  to  Jehonadab.  "  Is  thy  heart  right  ?  then  give  me  thy 
hand,  come  up  into  my  chariot "  ;  so  this  is  God's  question.  Is  thy  heart  upright  ? 
then  give  Me  thy  hand,  as'^end  My  triumphant  chariot,  the  everlasting  glory 
of  heaven.  Conclusion  :  Because  there  is  such  difference  of  hearts,  and  such  need 
of  a  good  one,  they  put  it  to  Him  that  knows  them  all,  and  knows  which  is  best  of 
all.  A  httle  living  stone  in  God's  building  is  worth  a  whole  quarry  of  the  world. 
One  honest  heart  is  better  than  a  thousand  other.  Man  often  fails  in  his  election ; 
God  cannot  err.  (T.  Adams.)  Festival  of  St.  Matthias  : — We  look  back  upon  the 
career  of  Judas,  who  by  transgression  fell  from  "  this  ministry  and  apostleship  "  ; 
and,  secondly,  see  what  is  to  be  learnt  from  the  election  of  Matthias.  I.  Judas  has 
been  described  as  "  one  of  the  standing  moral  problems  of  the  gospel  history."  He  is 
not  a  lay  figure,  draped  in  the  historical  dress  provided  by  the  Psalter,  a  mythical 
personage.  His  portrait  stands  out  from  the  canvas  of  tbe  Gospels  life-like,  vivid, 
terrible.  He  is  no  creation  of  the  imagination,  no  mere  foil  to  bring  out  into 
stronger  relief  the  transcendent  virtues  of  the  Christ;  but  a  real  man,  who  betrayed 
his  Master,  and  then  hung  himself.  He  illustrates  the  possibilities  of  evil,  and  the 
doctrine  that  "  the  corruption  of  the  best  becomes  the  worst."  And  first  it  must  be 
remembered  that  Judas  "  fell."  He  is  sometimes  depicted  as  though  he  had  always 
had  the  heart  of  an  alien  ;  and  when  chosen  by  our  Lord  to  be  one  of  His  apostles, 
was  then  a  traitor  in  spirit.  This  is  a  mistake.  When  our  Lord  said,  "  Have 
I  not  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil  ?  "  He  says  "  is  a 
■devil."  He  does  not  say  "was."  Judas  Iscariot  had  a  genuine  vocation  to 
the  apo«tolate ;  that  is,  he  had  in  him  the  makings  of  an  apostle ;  otherwise, 
our  Lord  would  not  have  chosen  him.  But  vocations  may  be  lost.  Judas  fell 
through  yielding  to  temptation.  Two  sins  mark  the  stages  of  his  downward  course 
— avarice  and  despair.  It  may  be  asserted,  that  however  hardening  may  be  the 
effect  of  this  vice  of  avarice,  when  it  has  led  to  the  committal  of  some  heinous 
crime  the  benumbed  conscience  is  often  painfully  and  suddenly  aroused  from  its 
state  of  torpor,  and  filled  with  dismay.  The  sinner  is  startled  at  the  lengths  which 
he  has  gone.  Judas,  doubtless,  had  tampered  with  the  moral  faculty,  and  persuaded 
himself  that  though  he  had  betrayed  his  Master,  Christ  would,  after  all,  escape  from 
the  hands  of  His  enemies.  His  remorse,  when  he  saw  the  effects  of  his  treachery, 
bear  witness,  not  to  the  absence  of  covetousness,  but  to  the  power  of  conscience, 
whose  voice,  though  it  may  be  for  a  time  smothered,  will  assert  itself  in  terrible 
tones  at  last.  The  disciple  was  not  subjected  to  the  trial  without  sufficient  helps 
and  cautions  to  enable  him,  had  he  willed,  to  vanquish  his  dominant  passion,  and 
to  grow  into  the  likeness  of  his  Master.  But  a  greater  sin  than  covetousness 
followed — ^that  of  despair.  The  sins  which  are  opposite  to  those  great  virtues, 
Faith,  Hope,  and  Love,  which  have  God  for  their  Object,  are  sins  of  a  deep  dye. 
They  are  unbelief,  despair,  and  hatred  of  God.  Among  these,  despair  is  especially 
fraught  with  danger  to  us,  because  it  takes  away  the  hopj  "  which  recalls  us  from 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

our  sins  and  lead  us  to  good."  Despair  is  a  sin  against  Divine  mercy,  that  attri- 
bute in  the  exercise  of  which  God  is  said  to  "  delight."  If  Judas  had  sought 
for  mercy,  he  would  have  found  it.  He  had  the  semblance  of  repentance 
without  its  spirit.  He  had  no  hope  ;  and,  so  in  a  frenzy  of  despair,  he  fled  from 
the  temple,  and  ended  his  life — in  the  strange  and  awful  language,  "that  he 
might  go  to  his  own  place."  II.  We  turn  now  to  brighter  thoughts.  Our  Lord 
chose  twelve  apnstles.  It  seems  to  have  been  important  that  this  number  should 
be  preserved.  It  has  been  called  "  emphatically  the  Church  number."  It  occurs 
again  and  again  in  Holy  Scripture.  There  were  twelve  patiiarchs,  twelve  altars, 
twelve  precious  stones  in  Aaron's  breastplate,  twelve  judges,  twelve  wells  at  Elim, 
twelve  loaves  of  show-bread.  In  the  Book  of  the  Revelation  there  are  twelve  stars 
round  the  head  of  the  woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  twelve  foundations  and  gates  of 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  The  first  act  of  the  apostles  after  the  ascension  of  Christ 
is  to  fill  up  the  gap  in  their  number.  Matthias  was  more  than  a  successor  of  Judas  ; 
he  was  to  take  his  place,  to  be  invested  with  the  dignity  of  an  original  apostle.  But 
note  how  this  vacancy  was  supplied.  First,  by  united  prayer — prayer,  mark  you,  to 
Christ — they  sought  to  know  His  choice.  Who  is  the  discerner  of  hearts  ;  and  then 
they  cast  lots;  "and — the  lot  fell  on  Matthias,  and  he  was  numbered  with  the 
eleven  apostles."  The  Holy  Spirit  was  not  yet  given,  and  thus  they  resorted  to  a 
method  which  had  often  been  adopted  for  settling  doubtful  questions  by  different 
nations,  that  of  casting  lots,  not  as  any  precedent  for  the  Church  in  the  future ;  but 
as  a  means  for  discovering  the  mind  of  God  in  that  interim  between  the  missions  of 
Divine  persons,  when  they  were  left  without  a  guide.  Many  are  the  lessons  which 
may  be  drawn  from  our  subject.  Many  are  the  warnings  which  it  suggests.  The 
excess  of  hope  is  presumption ;  its  defect,  despair.  The  history  of  Judas  shows  the 
peril  of  both.  "Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear."  No  office  or  position  can  insure 
us  against  falling.  We  see  those  who  have  had  the  highest  privileges  fall  from  God. 
Lucifer  and  the  angels,  Adam  and  Eve,  David,  Solomon,  Peter,  and  Judas. 
Secondly,  let  us,  on  the  other  hand,  never  despair.  There  is  no  evil  in  the  creature 
which  the  mercy  of  God  cannot  remedy — "  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they 
shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool." 
Despair  is  worse  than  covetousness  :  for  "  with  the  Lord  there  is  mercy  "  ;  it  has  its 
home  andorigin  in  the  Divine  character,  and  "with  Him  is  plenteous  redemption." 
{W.  H.  Hutchings,  31. A.)  Judas  by  transgression  fell  that  lie  might  go  to  his 
own  place. — Judas : — It  seems  very  strange  that  Jesus,  who  knew  the  hearts  of  men, 
should  have  admitted  as  one  of  the  twelve  a  thief,  a  devil,  a  traitor,  one  who  had 
better  never  been  born.  Gifts  of  some  kind  he  must  have  had,  rendering  the  choice 
of  him  not  strange  to  others,  not  unfit  in  itself.  Was  it  that,  though  our  Lord  dis- 
cerned the  germs  of  evil  in  his  character,  He  saw  also  germs  of  good,  and  hoped 
that,  as  a  result  of  association  with  Himself,  these  might  prevail  ?  If  we  suppose 
so,  new  force  is  given  to  many  of  Christ's  sayings.  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and 
mammon."  What  a  truth  for  Judas,  if  he  were  vainly  trying  to  follow  both!  The 
destructive  power  of  "  the  cares  of  this  world,"  and  "  the  deceitfulness  of  riches," 
Judas  heard  of.  He  heard  of  the  fate  of  the  unfaithful  steward,  &c.  If  Jesus  had 
this  merciful  desire,  not  least  among  the  griefs  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows  must  have 
been  the  deepening  conviction  that  His  eliorts  were  in  vain,  and  tbat  He  was  but 
adding  to  the  condemnation  of  one  from  whom  "  so  much  would  be  required,"  as  so 
much  had  been  given.  What  a  pang  each  evidence  of  this  must  have  given  to 
Jesus !  E.g.,  the  objecticm  to  the  costly  ointment  with  which  Mary  anointed  the 
Lord.  At  last  Jesus  said,  "  One  of  you  shall  betray  Me,"  and  Judas,  "  having 
received  the  sop,  went  immediately  out."  It  has  been  suggested  that  motives  other 
than  base  actuated  Judas,  but  these  contradict  the  narrative  and  every  probability. 
I.  Considerations  on  the  Scripture  doctrine  of  fdtdre  penalties.  Amidst  much 
obscurity  two  things  are  clear :  1.  That  the  consequences  of  evil  will  be  felt  after 
death;  that  what  is  sown  here  shall  be  reaped  there,  and  that  the  "  indignation  and 
wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish  "  felt,  and  inflicted  by  God,  will  be  of  such  a  sort 
that  the  strongest  and  most  dreadful  images  are  not  too  strong  or  dreadful  to 
express  it.  2.  That,  whatever  the  reality,  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  only 
right ;  so  that  no  suspicion  of  injustice,  or  distress  because  of  it,  need  or  ouglit  to 
have  place  in  our  minds.  II.  Each  going  to  his  own  place.  Whether  the  apostles 
had  clearer  knowledge  about  the  fate  of  Judas  than  they  here  express,  we  know  not. 
At  least  there  is  singular  moderation  and  reverence  in  what  they  said.  One  might 
well  have  excused  sterner  language  about  the  betrayer.  Their  refraining  is  a 
pattern  to  us  all.    But  this  statement  fits  every  case  as  well  as  that  of  Judas.     It  is. 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  103 

not  a  mere  confession  of  ignorance,  which  says  nothing.  See  how  exactly  true  it 
is  of  the  material  world.  The  two  are  so  mysteriously  allied  that,  to  an  extra- 
ordinary degree,  what  is  true  of  the  one  is  true  of  the  other ;  and  it  is  most  useful 
to  study  the  one  to  gain  hints  about  God's  government  of  the  other.  We  should 
avoid  many  errors  if  we  recognised  this  oftener.  The  position  of  each  mass  of 
matter  is  exactly  determined  by  its  quantity  and  condition  in  relation  to  the  forces 
around  and  within  it.  No  pebble,  no  star,  can  be  in  a  place  one  hair's  breadth 
different  from  that  to  which  it  is  guided  by  its  peculiar  character.  Every  difference 
of  character  involves  a  difference  of  position.  The  same  is  true  of  each  of  those 
millions  of  invisible  atoms  of  which  each  atom  is  composed.  The  place  each  fills 
is  not  determined  by  chance  or  by  caprice,  but  by  its  very  nature.  Is  not  that 
indication  of  a  Divine  order,  allied  to  morality  and  justice  ?  And  so  no  mere 
caprice  will  determine  the  position  of  spiritual  beings  in  the  future  world,  but 
each  will  "  go  to  his  own  place  "  there,  by  a  law  as  true  and  an  order  as  beautiful 
as  that  which  regulates  the  position  of  each  material  particle.  The  true,  the  pure, 
the  loving  and  unselfish,  will  they  not  tetid  necessarily  towards  Him  who  is  truth, 
and  purity,  and  love,  as  the  nearest  planets  live  in  the  radiance  of  the  sun  ?  The 
untrue,  the  impure,  the  selfish,  will  they  not  as  necessarily  be  repelled  from  the 
Divine  light  by  their  very  condition  ?  So  with  every  intermediate  description 
of  character.  Conclusion  :  In  view  of  these  sublime  laws  of  Divine  order  and 
fitness,  what  a  pitiable  and  monstrous  delusion  is  it  that  mere  profession  will 
avail;  that  to  say  to  Christ,  "Lord,  Lord,"  is  enough;  that  to  be  duly  baptized 
and  buried  by  a  priest  is  to  be  safe  for  ever.  What  we  are,  or  by  Christ's 
help  become,  that  is  everything — not  what  we  profess  to  be.  So  Christ  and  Judas 
went  "  each  to  his  own  place  "  ;  so  you  and  I  shall  do  also.  {T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.) 
The  place  for  Judas,  and  for  others  like  him : — A  zealous  partisan  of  the  notion  that 
there  is  no  future  punishment  was  telling  his  children  the  story  of  "  The  Babes  in 
the  Wood,"  when  a  shrewd  little  boy  looked  up  and  asked,  "  What  became  of  the 
little  children  ?  "  "  Oh,  they  went  to  heaven,  of  course  !  "  was  the  prompt  reply. 
"And  what  became  of  the  horrid  old  uncle?"  It  was  a  poser;  and  for  some 
moments  the  universalist  looked  confused.  His  favourite  hobby  must,  however, 
be  sustained  at  all  costs,  and  he  answered  as  composedly  as  he  could,  "Why,  he 
went  to  heaven  also  !  "  "I  am  so  sorry,"  said  the  child,  "  for  I  am  afraid  the  bad 
man  will  kill  them  again  !  "  Here  was  logic  in  a  nutshell,  which  no  theories  could 
overturn.  President  Nott  had  preached  a  sermon  setting  forth  the  everlasting 
punishment  of  the  impenitent,  when  a  man  of  the  same  class  rudely  said,  "  Wt-U, 
sir,  I  have  been  to  hear  you  preach,  and  now  I  want  you  to  prove  your  doctrine." 
"  I  thought  I  had  proved  it,"  was  the  mild  reply,  "  for  I  took  the  Bible  for  testi- 
mony." "  Well,"  persisted  the  assailant,  waxing  valiant,  "  I  do  not  find  it  in  my 
Bible,  and  I  do  not  believe  it."  "What  do  you  believe?"  asked  Dr.  Nott,  in  a 
quiet  and  unconcerned  tone.  "  Why,  I  believe  that  mankind  will  be  judged 
according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  and  those  that  deserve  punishment  will  be 
sent  to  a  place  of  punishment  for  awhile,  and  remain  there  until  the  debt  is  paid, 
when  they  will  be  taken  out  and  carried  to  heaven."  "  I  have  but  a  word  to  say  in 
reply,"  observed  Dr.  Nott,  "  and  first,  for  what  did  Christ  die  ?  and  lastly,  there 
is  a  straight  road  to  heaven ;  but  if  you  are  determined  to  go  round  through  hell 
to  get  there,  I  cannot  help  it."  The  man  took  his  leave,  the  wiser  for  the  interview, 
and  a  more  careful  study  of  the  Bible  led  him  to  adopt  the  orthodox  belief.  If  any 
one  were  askei3,  "  Where  do  you  suppose  Judas  went  after  death?  "  could  he,  in  his 
sober  senses,  answer,  "  To  heaven  ?  "  The  thing  is  utterly  preposterous  ;  and  we 
are  prepared  to  read  in  the  text  that  he  went  to  "  his  own  place  " — a  place  suited 
to  one  who  had  proved  himself  a  child  of  the  devil.  Every  student  knows  that  the 
significant  expression  is  used  by  ancient  writers  to  denote  going  to  one's  eternal 
destiny.  Thus  the  Jewish  Targum,  in  Numb.  xxiv.  25,  where  it  is  said  of 
Balaam  that  he  "  went  to  his  own  place,"  adds,  that  this  "place"  was  Gehenna, 
the  place  of  final  torment.  The  Chaldee  paraphrase  of  Eccles.  vi.  6  declares, 
"  Although  the  days  of  a  man's  life  were  two  thousand  years,  and  he  did  not  study 
the  Law,  and  do  justice,  in  the  day  of  his  death  his  soul  shall  descend  to  hell,  to 
th.8  one  place  where  all  sinners  go."  St.  Ignatius,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Mag- 
nesians,  wrote,  "  Because  all  things  have  an  end,  the  two  things  death  and  life 
shall  lie  down  together,  and  each  one  shall  go  to  his  own  place."  Without 
referring,  then,  to  many  passages  of  Holy  Scripture,  the  brief  allusion  to  the  doom 
of  Judas  is  enough  to  settle  the  question.  Hell  is  not  a  mere  arbitrary  appoint- 
ment of  the  Almighty,  but  as  the  polluted  would  not  be  fitted  for  heaven,  and  could 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

not  enjoy  it,  there  must,  of  necessity,  be  some  place  adapted  to  their  condition,  and 
God  teaclies  us  that  hell  is  that  place.  The  guilty  and  impenitent  accordingly  will 
have  no  ground  of  complaint  if  a  just  God  appoints  for  him  precisely  such  a  place 
as  his  own  conduct  in  life  has  prepared  him  for.  An  eloquent  speaker  was 
attempting  to  show,  from  garbled  passages  of  Scripture,  that  the  gospel  is  peace 
and  good-will,  and  not  terror  nor  hell  fire,  when  a  young  man  rose  and  said  :  "  Did 
Paul  preach  the  gospel  before  Felix?  "  "  Yes."  "  And  did  Felix  tremble?  "  "  He 
did."  The  young  man  took  his  hat,  bowed  politely,  and  retired,  the  rest  of  the 
people  going  out  with  him.  The  simplest-minded  present  could  not  but  understand 
that  the  gospel  which  the  apostle  preached  must  have  had  some  reference  to  future 
punishment,  or  the  wicked  and  the  haughty  Felix  would  hardly  have  thus  lost  his 
self-command.  It  is  useless  to  attempt  to  obviate  the  necessity  for  future  punishment 
by  insisting  that  we  suffer  for  our  sins  in  this  life.  There  are  such  cases,  it  is  true, 
but  they  are  the  exception,  and  not  the  rule.  What,  then,  becomes  of  the  rest  ? 
The  pirate  Gibbs,  whose  name,  for  so  many  years,  was  a  terror  to  those  who  sailed 
among  the  West  Indies,  when  tried  and  condemned,  confessed  that  the  first  few 
murders  did  occasion  him  some  twinges  of  conscience,  but  that  in  course  of  time  he 
could  cut  the  throats  of  a  whole  ship's  crew,  and  then  eat  his  supper  and  lie  down  and 
sleep  as  quietly  as  a  babe  !  It  seems  from  this  that  if  remorse  in  this  life  is  God's 
way  of  punishing  crimes,  then  the  more  horrible  deeds  that  bad  people  commit  the 
less  He  punishes  them  1  If  one  act  of  sin,  as  in  the  case  of  Eve,  Uzziah,  Miriam, 
Nadab  and  Abihu,  and  thousands  more,  draw  down  the  wrnth  of  God,  what  must 
a  whole  life  of  sin  !  Think  of  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  then 
call  to  mind  the  Saviour's  words,  "  It  shall  be  more  tolerable,"  &c.  Wicked  people 
need  no  "  sending  to  hell,"  since  they  go  there  of  their  own  accord.  The  gulf 
which  divides  heaven  from  hell  is  one  of  moral  unlikeness,  and  as  people  have  sought 
the  company  that  suited  them  here,  so  they  will  find  themselves  in  congenial  society 
hereafter.  The  sinner  makes  bis  own  damnation,  and  he  cannot  blame  God  with  it. 
"  Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself !  "  There  is  still  another  objection,  viz.,  that  eternal 
punishment  is  too  long  as  the  penalty  for  the  sins  of  a  short  life.  A  just  God  is  the 
best  judge  of  this.  The  only  question  is.  Was  the  transgressor  duly  forewarm^d?  A 
man  who  proposes  to  embark  on  a  steamer  does  not  expect,  after  he  has  been  told  the 
hour  of  departure,  that  the  bell  will  be  rung  for  half  a  day,  or  even  an  hour,  in  ac- 
commodation to  his  dilatory  habits.  He  may,  by  losing  the  voyage,  change  the 
prospects  of  a  whole  life,  and  even  a  few  seconds  may  decide  the  case.  A  day  is  not 
too  short  a  space  for  a  crime  which  will  be  punished  by  imprisonment  for  life,  and  if 
a  note  is  due  at  the  bank,  the  loss  of  credit  is  not  escaped  because  the  promisor  had 
received  but  one  notice.  Did  any  person  ever  object  to  eternal  salvation,  that  it  is 
too  long  to  be  the  reward  of  this  short  life  ?  Dante  described  both  heaven  and  hell 
most  wonderfully,  for  he  had  been  in  both.  Once,  as  the  servant  of  sin,  he  had 
known  shame  and  doubt  and  darkness  and  despair, — which  are  certainly  the  grim 
portal  of  hell ;  and  then,  through  God's  forbearing  mercy,  he  had  found  peace  in 
believing,  and  love  to  God,  which  casteth  out  fear — and  here  was  the  beginning  of 
heaven.  And  so,  when  timid  people  saw  him  as  he  glided  along  the  street,  they 
said,  with  a  shudder,  "  There  is  the  man  who  has  been  in  hell  1  "  If  we  would  not 
go  where  Judas  has  gone,  we  must  begin  our  heavenly  life  on  earth.  {J.  N.  Norton, 
D.D.)  The  soul  in  "his  oivn place" : — I.  Evert  being  must  have  its  own  place. 
Nothing  can  be  more  obvious  than  the  exact  adaptation  to  each  other  and  to  the 
region  in  which  they  dwell,  of  the  objects  and  beings  of  this  world.  1.  Everything 
which  is  earthly,  whose  being  belongs  to,  and  will  terminate  with  earth,  is  in  its 
own  place.  Who  can  doubt  that  the  bird,  with  its  curious  mechanism  of  eye  and 
wing,  was  intented  to  exist  in  air  ;  or  that  the  tish  has  been  expressly  formed  for 
its  watery  abode  ;  or  that  the  beast  of  prey  is  at  home  in  its  forest  haunts  ;  or  that 
man  himself,  physically  corhsidered,  was  intended  for  his  abode  and  position  here, 
and  that  if  removed  to  another  world,  differing  at  all  in  its  constitution  from  the 
present,  they  must  either  cease  to  exist,  or  exist  only  in  a  state  of  disorder  and 
distress?  2.  We  may  extend  the  observation  to  the  world  itself;  and  say,  that  our 
globe  moves  year  after  year  along  its  own  path,  that  it  revolves  in  the  very  orbit  for 
which  it  was  designed.  3.  And  certainly  it  is  true  of  the  human  intellect,  that  it 
has  been  provided  with  proper  objects  and  occasions  for  the  exercise  of  its  powers, 
that  it  is  placed  in  the  midst  of  circumstances  which  are  fitted  to  educate  its  faculties. 
It  is  required  for  earthly  uses ;  and  it  has  been  accurately  adapted  to  the  purposes 
for  which  it  is  required.  4.  Spiritual  beings  have  likewise  their  "  own  place  "  ;  that 
although  it  may  not  be  the  case  here,  yet  elsewhere,  moral  natures  will  find  their 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  105 

own  appropriate  abode,  will  move  amidst  scenes  and  society  with  the  spirit  of  which 
they  can  truly  sympathise.  The  being  who  loves  holiness  and  truth,  must,  in  its 
perfect  and  proper  condition,  consort  only  with  beiugs  who  love  holiness  and  truth, 
and  dwell  in  a  region  of  holiness ;  and  the  being  who  loves  evil  and  error,  must,  in 
its  final  and  proper  condition,  consort  only  with  beings  who  love  evil  and  error,  and 
dwell  in  an  abode  of  evil.  And  the  Scriptures  uniformly  represent  the  final  abodes 
of  men,  as  being  severally  adapted  to  the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  But  it  is 
evident  that  these  separate  states  can  never  exist  on  earth,  nor  be  entered  by  tliose 
■who  are  yet  in  the  flesh.  The  infirmities  of  the  body,  as  well  as  the  influeuce  of 
external  things,  must  hinder  a  consummate  manifestation  of  holiness,  as  well  as  a 
perfect  development  of  evil.  11.  The  light  which  this  peinciple  thkovvs  upon  our 
PRESENT  state.  Like  Judas  while  still  on  earth,  we  are  not  now  in  our  own  place, 
but  we  are  going  there.  Our  position  is  temporary  and  imperfect.  And  its  diffi- 
culties can  be  explained,  only  by  regarding  it  as  introductory  to  our  perfect  and 
permanent  condition.  The  evil  and  the  good  are  now  joined  together  in  a  confused 
and  discordant  mass.  They  are  travelling  in  companies  along  the  same  road,  and 
strange  appears  the  disorder  and  disunion  in  which  they  now  proceed ;  but  their 
common  path  will  soon  branch  into  two  avenues,  along  which  they  will  move  in 
separated  groups,  each  in  its  proper  character,  and  each  perfectly  united  in  its 
course.  Think  of  Judas  associating  with  his  fellow  apostles  and  with  his  Lord ; 
his  utter  want  of  sympathy  with  them ;  the  irksome  restraint,  of  which  he  must 
have  been  ever  conscious.  He  is  a  type  and  example  to  ourselves.  Are  there  any 
who  have  a  love  for  holiness  ?  Then  earth  is  not  their  home,  and  cannot  be  their 
abiding  place.  Like  Judas,  they  are  living  amidst  circumstances  in  which  they 
have  no  delight ;  among  companions  with  whom  they  have  no  fellowship.  Are 
there  any  who  have  a  love  for  evil  ?  Like  Judas,  they  must  often  come  among  the 
true  disciples  of  our  Lord  ;  but  then,  like  Judas,  they  would  rather  be  away.  They 
are  not  now  in  their  own  place.  III.  The  light  which  this  principle  throws 
UPON  OUR  FUTURE  STATE.  Thls  principle  is  applicable  to  the  explanation  of  the 
difficulty,  that  while  the  varieties  of  moral  character  are  almost  innumerable,  we 
should  be  told  of  only  two  states  after  death.  With  respect  to  the  holy  or  the 
utterly  depraved,  there  is  no  difficulty.  Heaven  is  plainly  fitted  for  the  one,  and 
hell  for  the  other.  But  the  majority  of  mankind  occupy  a  medium  position  ;  we  can 
hardly  affirm  that  they  belong  to  the  one  or  the  other,  displaying  continually  as 
they  do  the  characteristics  of  both.  There  seems  no  reason  why  they  should 
spend  their  eternity  with  saints ;  nor  in  the  outer  darkness  "  preiDnred  for  the 
devil  and  his  angels."  Then,  again,  there  are  vast  numbers  who  may  more  easily 
be  described  by  saying  what  they  are  not,  than  by  saying  what  they  are.  These, 
again,  appear  to  be  without  fitness,  as  without  merit,  for  an  abode  either  with 
angels  or  with  fiends.  Now  to  this  difficulty,  our  text,  taken  in  connection  with 
other  Scriptures,  seems  to  give  a  decisive  explanation.  Judas  is  represented  as 
going  unto  "his own  place,"  as  if,  when  his  soul  after  death  came  at  once  under 
the  dominion  and  influence  of  a  spiritual  law,  which  removed  it  to  the  sphere 
which  was  properly  its  own.  And  the  difficulty  will  be  at  once  removed,  if  we  can 
assign  this  law,  and  showtbat  it  must  take  effect  on  every  spirit  dividing  the  souls 
of  men  into  two  classes,  according  to  one  decisive  characteristic  which,  whatever 
be  their  varieties  of  moral  character,  either  is  or  is  not  clearly  inscribed  upon  them 
all.  This  law  our  Lord  has  Himself  asserted.  Of  every  being  it  may  be  affirmed 
either  that  it  does  or  does  not  love  God.  And  according  to  their  possession  or 
their  want  of  this  affection  will  some  go  away  to  the  kingdom  prepared  for  them, 
and  others  to  that  "  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  There  are  some  souls 
in  a  state  of  indifference,  and  some  in  a  state  of  hatred  to  God.  But  both  these 
want  the  principle,  which  alone  can  make  heaven  their  own  place.  And  there  are 
other  souls  which  love  God  and  are  in  affinity  with  Him ;  such,  when  they  leave 
earth,  must  proceed  at  once  to  heaven.  It  is  •'  their  own  place,"  for  God  is  there, 
and  tliey  are  spiritually  united  unto  Him ;  for  Christ  is  there,  and  where  He  is, 
there  must  they  also  be  ;  for  it  is  an  abode  of  holiness,  and  they  have  been  sancti- 
fied by  Almighty  grace,  they  have  been  made  meet  for  that  inheritance  of  light. 
(6r.  S.  Drew,  M.A.)  Men  sorted  in  the  future: — Men  will  be  sorted  yonder. 
Gravitation  will  come  into  play  undisturbed;  and  the  pebbles  will  be  ranged 
according  to  their  weights  on  the  great  shore  where  the  sea  has  cast  them  up,  as 
they  are  upon  Chesil  beach  down  there  in  the  English  Channel,  and  many  another 
coast  besides  ;  all  the  big  ones  together  and  sized  off  to  the  smaller  ones,  regularly 
and  steadily  laid  out.     {A.   Maclaren  D.D.)         Where  would  ue  be  ? — I  was  in 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

America  a  few  months  ago,  and  went  down  the  Alleghany  Mountain  on  a  railway 
train.  It  was  a  thing  to  remember  to  see  the  speed  at  which  we  went  down  the 
incline.  A  nervous  passenger  asked  the  conductor  :  "  What  would  happen  to  us  if 
the  brake  gave  way?  "  "  We  have  a  spare  one  which  we  would  apply  at  once,"  he 
answered.  "  If  it  also  gave  way,  what  then?  "  again  queried  the  passenger.  "We 
have  one  on  the  last  van,  which  we  can  put  on."  "  If  it  gave  way,  where  would  we 
be?"  The  conductor  looked  him  in  the  face,  and  said  gravely:  "Friend,  that 
depends  upon  the  way  you  have  lived."  The  fall  of  Judas: — God  does  not 
predestinate  man  to  fail.  That  is  strikingly  told  in  the  history  of  Judas.  "  From  a 
ministry  and  apostleship  Judas  fell,  that  he  might  go  to  his  own  place."  The 
ministry  and  apostleship  were  that  to  which  God  had  destined  him.  To  work  out 
that  was  the  destiny  appointed  to  him,  as  truly  as  to  any  of  the  other  apostles.  He 
was  called,  elected  to  that.  But  when  he  refused  to  execute  that  mission,  the  very 
circumstances  which,  by  God's  decree,  were  leading  him  to  blessedness,  hurried 
him  to  ruin.  Circumstances  prepared  by  eternal  love  became  the  destiny  which 
conducted  him  to  everlasting  doom.  He  was  a  predestined  man — crushed  by  his 
fate.  But  he  went  to  his  own  place.  He  had  shaped  his  own  destiny.  So 
the  ship  is  wrecked  by  the  winds  and  waves — hurried  to  its  fate.  But  the  wind 
and  waves  were  in  truth  its  best  friends.  Eightly  guided,  it  would  have  made  use 
of  them  to  reach  the  port ;  wrongly  steered,  they  became  the  destiny  which  drove 
it  on  the  rocks.  Failure — the  wreck  of  life,  is  not  to  be  impiously  traced  to  the 
will  of  God.  God  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
truth.  God  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  (F.  W.  Robertson.)  Hi/pocrisy 
does  not  disprove  the  reality  of  religion  : — Will  you  say  that  there  are  no  real  stars, 
because  you  sometimes  see  meteors  fall,  which  for  a  time  appear  to  be  stars  ?  Will 
you  say  that  blossoms  never  produce  fruit,  because  many  of  them  fall  off,  and 
some  fruit  which  appeared  sound  is  rotten  at  the  core  ?  Equally  absurd  is  it  to  say 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  real  religion,  because  many  who  profess  it  fall  away  or 
prove  to  be  hypocrites  in  heart.  {E.  Pay  son.)  A  place  for  every  man:— 1.  Every 
man  has  his  own  place,  here  and  hereafter.  II.  Every  man  siakes  his  own  place, 
here  and  hereafter.  III.  Every  man  finds  his  own  place,  here  and  hereafter.  IV. 
Every  man  feels  that  it  is  his  own  place  when  he  gets  there.  (A.Dickson,  D.D.) 
Every  man  in  his  oivn  place: — When  you  know  (where  you  will  most  likely  find  a 
man  for  whom  you  are  looking,  you  commonly  know  also  what  to  expect  of  the 
man  himself  when  he  is  found.  Nobody  would  select  for  a  position  of  trust  a  youth 
whom  everybody  would  say  was  to  be  looked  for  at  the  drinking-saloon  or  at  the 
idler's  corner.  A  fair  question  to  ask,  in  the  case  of  any  man  about  whom  you 
would  learn,  is  :  Will  he  probably  be  found — at  the  race-course,  or  in  some  place 
of  honest  business,  during  the  daytime  ;  at  the  club-room  or  in  his  library,  in  the 
evening ;  at  the  theatre,  or  at  the  prayer-meeting  ?  That  is  also  a  fair  question 
for  every  one  to  ask  of  himself  :  Wheie  may  those  who  know  me  best  most 
reasonably  expect  to  find  me?  The  answer  to  that  question  tells  a  great  deal 
regarding  personal  character  ;  not  because  the  place  makes  the  man,  but  because 
the  man  chooses  his  place,  and  sooner  or  later  he  will  find  the  place  which  is  likest 
to  himself.  Scripture  need  say  no  more  regarding  the  spiriiual  fate  of  Judas 
Iscariot  than  that  he  went  to  his  own  place.  (H.  C.  Trumball,  D.D.)  The  law  of 
spiritual  gravitation: — 1.  No  event  in  the  history  of  science  more  widely  known 
as  that  of  Sir  I.  Newton  and  the  fall  of  the  apple.  From  thence  the  law  of  gravita- 
tion in  the  law  of  matter.  2.  Similar  law  in  the  world  of  mind.  3.  Tlie  text 
teaches  us  that  there  is  such  a  law  in  the  world  of  spirit.  I.  It  is  indepkndent 
OF  A  man's  position.  There  is  no  royal  road  in  gravitation  by  which  tbe  delicate 
flower  shall  need  no  support  because  of  its  beauty  ;  or  by  which  success  shall  be 
secured  to  an  idle  man  ;  or  in  the  spiritual  life  a  man  be  kept  secure  because  his 
privileges  are  preat.  Law  is  inexorable.  The  higher  the  privilege  the  greater  the 
fall,  if  the  conditions  are  not  observed.  1.  The  high  position  of  Judas  did  not  save 
him.  Think  of  the  probable  effects  of  such  a  position  as  that  of  apostle,  com- 
panion of  Christ.  But  behold  the  actual  effects.  His  advantages  were  but  the 
instruments  of  his  fall.  2.  It  is  so  with  us.  No  man  is  out  of  the  reach  of  law. 
In  the  matter  of  privilege  our  case  in  many  respects  analogous.  Trace  the  history 
of  a  soul ;  let  it  hate  what  God  loves  and  love  what  God  hates :  during  all  that 
time  it  is  gravitating  to  its  own  place,  with  all  the  certainty  of  law.  And  when  he 
dies  the  man  does  not  leave  himself  behind,  the  man  and  his  character  constitute 
the  undying  self.  II.  It  is  accelehatino  in  its  pkogress.  Nature  is  full  of 
instances  of  this.     Things  and  events  tend  to  a  climax ;  the  sun  passes  on  to  its 


CHAP.  I.]  THE  ACTS.  107 

meridian,  the  river  to  the  full,  the  avalanche  to  its  final  crash.  1.  Watch  this  with 
Judas.  His  downward  course  was  hastened  by  his  reigning  sin  (John  xii.  4,  xiii. 
2,  27  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  15),  and  by  the  feeling  of  isolation  (Matt,  xxvii.  3-5),  for  he  was 
cut  off  from  the  good  and  spurned  by  the  evil.  2.  It  is  so  with  all  men  similarly 
placed.  By  the  growing  strength  of  a  given  tendency,  and  by  its  power  to  employ 
all  the  mind.  For  life  tends  to  a  unity.  More  and  more  one  purpose  or  passion  or 
set  of  purposes  or  passions  govern  the  life.  Let  the  backslider  and  impenitent  lay 
this  to  heart.  III.  It  determines  the  future  by  the  present.  You  can  see  the  ill 
effects  of  some  things,  but  this  great  law  works  more  quietly.  In  Judas  it  is  worked 
before  our  eyes.  His  use  of  opportunity  and  position  made  his  place  for  him.  "  He 
was  a  thief,"  and  that  is  the  cause  "  he  went  to  his  own  place  "  ;  that  is  the  effect. 
"We  are  architects  of  our  own  fortunes.  Apart  from  repentance  and  faith  there  is 
no  cleansing,  and  it  is  worse  than  madness  to  think  that  life  hereafter  will  be  other 
than  the  outcome  of  the  life  here.  IV.  It  leads  to  a  self-made  destiny.  He  was 
not  doomed  to  sin,  and  his  destiny  was  but  the  natural  outcome  of  such  a  life.  It 
did  not  need  a  Judas  to  save  the  world,  though  his  is  but  the  greatest  out  of  a 
thousand  cases  in  which  man's  evil  is  made  to  work  out  the  saving  purposes  of  God. 
The  destiny  of  Judas  was  of  his  own  making,  and  not  of  Christ's.  It  is  so  with 
ourselves  (note  difference  between  Matt.  xxv.  34  and  41).  (G.  T.  Keehle.)  And. 
they  gave  forth  their  lots. — The  lot: — As  interpreted  by  ver.  24  and  by  the  word 
"fell  "here  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  passage  speaks  of  "  lots  "  and  not 
"  votes."  The  two  were  standing,  as  far  as  they  could  see,  on  the  same  level.  It 
was  left  for  the  Searcher  of  hearts  to  show,  by  the  exclusion  of  human  will,  which  of 
the  two  He  had  chosen.  The  most  usual  way  of  casting  lots  in  such  cases  was  to 
write  each  name  on  a  tablet,  place  them  in  an  urn,  and  then  shake  the  urn  till  one 
came  out.  {Dean  Plumptre.)  The  lot: — The  only  instance  of  an  appeal  to  lots 
occurs  between  the  departure  of  our  Lord  and  Pentecost.  The  Church  could 
dispense  with  them  after  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  was  to  guide  into  all 
truth,  through  whom  we  are  encouraged  to  hope  for  a  right  judgmpnt  in  all  things. 
No  recourse  was  had  to  lots  in  the  appointment  of  deacons.  But  the  Church 
regards  the  appointment  as  Divine  (collect  for  St.  Matthias'  day).  Under  the  Old 
Testament  lots  were  regarded  as  divinely  directed  (Prov.  xvi.  33),  and  therefore 
conclusive  (xviii.  18).  They  distinguished  the  scapegoat  (Lev.  xvi.  8),  convicted 
Achan,  designated  Saul  to  the  monarchy,  and  distributed  the  promised  land  (Numb. 
xxvi.  55,  56).  Lots  also  assigned  their  several  duties  among  the  priests  in  the 
temple  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  5,  xxv.  8  ;  Luke  i.  9).  Augustine  deemed  it  lawful  to 
determine  by  lot  what  ministers  of  the  Church  should  remain  and  who  should  seek 
safety  by  flight,  when  prosecution  threatened.  The  Moravians  in  1464  had 
recourse  to  lots  for  deciding  the  question  of  their  having  a  ministry  of  their  own, 
and  in  1467  for  the  appointment  of  their  first  three  ministers.  As  late  as  1731, 
the  retention  of  their  own  discipline  instead  of  incorporation  with  the  Lutheran 
Church,  was  detemiined  in  like  manner.  Wesley  also  had,  and  indulged,  a 
predilection  for  sortilege.  (Dp.  Jacohson.)  The  lot:  its  lawfulness  for  Christians  : — 
When  two  courses  are  open  to  a  man,  and  he  is  in  doubt  as  to  the  election  of 
either  of  them,  why  should  he  not,  after  due  religious  preparation,  involving  as 
this  must  the  entire  subordination  of  his  will  to  God,  risk  the  decision  of  the  case 
on  the  casting  of  lots  ?  Is  there  anything  in  such  a  course  inconsistent  with  the 
simplicity  of  the  Christian  religion?  The  man,  it  is  presumed,  is  most  deeply 
anxious  to  know  what  God  would  have  him  do ;  he  is  willing  to  make  any 
sacrifice  the  Divine  will  may  impose  on  him,  and  however  the  decision  may 
oppose  his  own  choice  he  is  prepared  to  accept  it.  Under  such  citciimstances 
surely  the  lot  may  be  uf?ed  with  advantage.  But  everything  depends  upon  the 
spirit  of  the  inquirer.  For  he  may  almost  unconsciously  manipulate  the  lot  so  as 
to  gratify  a  wish  he  would  hardly  confess  even  to  himself.  In  almost  all  cases  of 
doubt,  the  perplexed  man  has  more  or  less  of  a  choice.  At  that  point  the  battle 
has  to  be  fought.  The  man  has  a  leaning  towards  a  certain  course,  yet  he  would 
not  pur  sue  it  if  he  knew  it  to  be  opposed  to  the  Divine  will ;  at  the  same  time  he 
would  be  most  thankful  were  the  lot  to  confirm  his  secret  bias.  That  man  is  not 
prepared  to  go  to  the  lot  until  he  has  divested  himself  of  every  suggestion  of  his 
own  will.  We  are  not  prepared  to  teach  that  upon  every  occasion  we  should  turn 
the  decisions  of  our  life  upon  the  casting  of  lots.  We  are  not  prepared  to  con- 
demn their  use,  thus  guarded,  in  very  special  cases  of  difficulty.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Matthias. — Aftir  life  of  Matthian : — We  know  no  particulars  of  the  after  life  of 
Matthias.    He  was  of  course  partaker  with  the  rest  of  the  twelve  of  the  miraculous 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.ii. 

effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  and  afterwards  of  their 
labours  and  distresses,  at  first  in  Judasa,  and  then  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  But 
wlieie  St.  Matthias  went  is  uncertain;  some  say  Macedonia,  some  say  Ethiopia, 
some  say  Cappadocia.  All  authorities,  I  believe,  are  agreed  that  he  won  the  crown 
of  a  martyr  ;  but  how  he  died,  or  where,  or  when,  we  cannot  certainly  tell.  One 
account  says  that  he  was  taken  by  tbe  Jews,  and  stoned,  and  afterwards  beheaded 
on  a  charge  of  blasphemy  ;  another,  that  he  was  crucified,  "  as  Judas  was  h  mged 
upon  a  tree,  so  Matthias  suffered  upon  a  cross."  {A.  M.  Loring,  3LA.)  Obscure 
lives  of  saZ/ii-f ; — Clement  of  Alexandria  recounts  for  us  some  sayings  traditiomiUy 
ascribed  to  St.  Matthias,  all  of  a  severe  and  sternly  ascetic  tone.  But  in  reality 
we  know  nothing  of  what  he  either  did  or  taught.  The  vast  majority  even  of 
the  apostles  have  their  names  alone  recorded,  while  nothing  is  told  concerning 
their  labours  or  their  sufferings.  Their  one  desire  was  that  Chiist  alone  should 
be  magnified,  and  to  this  end  they  willed  to  lose  themselves  in  the  boundless  sea 
of  His  risen  glory.  And  thus  they  have  left  us  a  noble  and  inspiriting  example. 
We  are  not  apostles,  martvrs,  or  confessors,  yet  we  often  find  it  hard  to  take  our 
part  and  do  our  duty  in  the  spirit  displayed  by  Matthias  and  Joseph  called 
Barsabas.  We  long  for  public  recognition  and  public  reward.  We  chafe  and  fret 
internally  because  we  have  to  bear  our  temptations  and  suffer  our  trials  and  do  our 
■work  unknown  and  unrecognised  by  all  but  God.  Let  tlie  example  of  these  holy 
men  heljj  us  to  put  away  all  such  vain  thoughts.  Gi  d  Himself  is  our  all-seeing 
and  ever-present  Judge.  The  Incarnate  Master  Himself  is  watching  us.  The 
angels  and  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect  are  witnesses  of  our  earthly 
struggles.  No  matter  how  low,  how  humble,  how  insignificant  the  story  of  our 
spiritual  trials  and  struggles,  they  are  all  marked  in  heaven  by  that  Divine  Master, 
■who  will  at  last  reward  every  man,  not  according  to  his  position  in  the  world,  but 
in  strict  accordance  with  the  iDrinciples  of  infallible  justice.  (G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.) 
He  was  numbered  ■with  the  eleven  apostles. — The  election  of  Matthias : — The 
Greek  word  is  not  the  same  as  in  veis.  17,  and  implies  that  Matthias  was  "  voted 
in,"  the  suffrage  of  the  Church  unanimously  confirming  the  indication  of  the 
Divine  wUl  what  had  been  given  by  the  lot.  It  may  be  that  the  new  apostle  took 
the  place  that  Judas  had  rendered  vacant,  and  was  reckoned  as  tlie  last  of  the 
twelve.  (Dean  Plumptre.)  A  Divine  appointment : — The  validity  of  the  appoint- 
ment, ■which  has  been  que'stioneil,  is  incidentally  recognised  in  chap.  ii.  14,  vi.  2; 
the  Twelve  must  have  included  Matthias.  The  appointment  being  directly  Divine 
superseded  the  laying  on  of  hands.     {Bp.  Jacobson.) 


CHAPTEK  II. 


Vees.  1-4.  And  when  tli3  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come. — The  day  of  Pente- 
coxt : — I.  In  the  occdkeences  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  we  discover  evidence  of 
A  SPECIAL  Divine  influence.  This  idea  is  too  prevalent,  that  the  agency  of  the 
Supreme  is  only  of  a  general  character — that  the  repentance  and  salvation  of 
sinners  are  brought  about,  independently  of  any  direct  agency  on  the  part  of  God. 
They  spake  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance.  Most  convin- 
cing evidence  of  a  special  Divine  influence  is  found  also  in  the  effects  produced 
upon  the  day  of  Pentecost.  II.  The  occurrences  op  the  day  of  Pentecost  con- 
firmed THE  Divine  mission  of  Jesus  and  the  truth  of  Christianity.  Whilst  on 
earth  the  Lord  Jesus  gave  abundant  evidence  that  He  was  from  God.  Jesus  en- 
couraged His  disciples  to  expect  that  they  would  be  endued  with  special  power  from 
on  high.  III.  The  occurrences  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  exhibit  the  folly  of 
OPPOSITION  TO  THE  KINGDOM  OF  Christ.  The  day  of  Pentecost  assures  us  that  Jeho- 
vah regards  the  kingdom  of  His  Son  with  supreme  affection,  and  that  all  His  per- 
fections are  engaged  for  its  defence  and  enlargement.     IV.  The  occurrences  of 

THE  DAY  OF  PeNTECOST  EXHIBIT  THE  GRAND  MEANS  OF  ADVANCING  THE  CAUSE  OF    ChRIST 
AND    SAVING    SINNERS.       V.    ThE    OCCURRENCES    OF   THE  DAY  OF  PeNTECOST  EXHIBIT  THE 

Christian  minister's  grand  source  of  encouragement.     VI.  The  occurrences  of 

that     day    exhibit     the     reality    and     importance    of    revivals    of    REIilGION.       By 

a  revival  of  religion  we  understand  an  unconniion  and  gcuer  il  interest  in  the  sub- 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  109 

ject  of  palvation,  produced  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  the  instrumentality  of 
Divine  truth.  Such,  substantially,  was  the  revival  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Do 
you  say  that  the  excitement,  denominated  a  revival  of  religion,  occurs  in  connec- 
tion with  the  special  efforts  of  Christians?  We  answer, that  the  excitement  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost  occurred  in  a  similiar  connection.  Do  you  say  that  the  Divine 
influence  to  which  we  allude,  as  to  the  mode  of  its  operation,  is  enveloped  in  the 
darkness  of  mystery  ?  So  it  was  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Do  you  say  there  is 
enthusiasm  connected  with  the  excitement  denominated  a  revival  of  religion? 
Fanaticism  there  may  have  been.  But  does  such  a  fact  prove  the  entire  absence  of 
genuine  religion  ?  Does  it  prove  that  no  revival  is  a  sober,  rational  work  ?  Do  you 
say  that  in  a  time  of  general  excitement  there  will  be  instances  of  gross  imposition 
on  the  Church?  So  it  was  in  the  Pentecost  revival,  when,  in  awful  warning  to 
hypocrites,  Ananias  and  Sapphira  fell  down  dead.  Do  you  say  that  the  excitement 
denominated  a  revival  of  religion,  is  often  succeeded  by  instances  of  apostacy  ?  We 
answer,  that  apostacies  have  likewise  occurred  under  other  circumstances.  The 
occurrences  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  exhibit,  likewise,  the  importance  of  revivals  of 
religion.  In  a  single  day  it  gave  to  the  Christian  Church  a  weight  of  influence 
more  than  a  hundredfold  greater  than  it  had  previously  possessed.  It  is  impor- 
tant to  individual  happiness  and  to  the  community  at  large.  {Baxter  Dickinson.) 
Pentecost — the  first-fruits  : — But  why  was  tbegift  of  the  Spirit  delayed  until  the  day 
of  Pentecost  was  fully  come  ?  No  man  must  irreverently  pry  into  the  purposes 
of  Deity.  I.  Pentecost  m'as  the  feast  of  fiest-fkuits  ;  thebefoee  symbolical  of 
THE  first-feuits  OF  THE  Cheistian  Chuech  (Lov.  xxiii.  15,  17  ;  Deat.  xvi.  9).  The 
Sist  sheaf  of  the  Christian  harvest,  the  first  fruit  of  the  Christian  reaping  was 
there  ingathered.  II.  Pentecost  was  associated  in  the  Jewish  woeship  with  the 
giving  of  the  law  from  Sinai.  Fifty  days  after  the  exodus  from  Egypt,  the  Israel- 
ites received  the  law  from  Sinai.  To  this  day  the  gift  of  the  law  is  kept  in  view  in 
the  Jewish  observance  of  Pentecost.  1.  Conviction  of  sin  is  the  prominent  idea  of 
the  apostolic  Pentecost.  Peter's  sermon  resulted  in  the  cry,  "Brethren,  what  shall 
we  do  ?  "  Conviction  of  sin  is  the  prelude  to  a  reformed  life.  In  our  Christian 
families  and  amongst  our  young  people,  trained  from  infancy  in  Christian  virtue, 
we  need  not  always  look  for  the  intense  conviction  of  sin  which  is  apparent  on  this 
first  day  of  the  Christian  Pentecost.  No  I  God's  ways  are  often  gentle.  2.  The 
first  gift  of  the  Paraclete  on  the  day  of  Pentecost — the  day  which,  in  Jewish 
thout^ht,  was  specially  consecrated  to  the  giving  of  the  law  from  Sinai — was  specially 
fitted  to  the  mission  of  Him  "  who  will  convict  the  world  in  respect  of  sin."  III. 
The  fiest-fedits  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  aee  typical  of  the  ingatheeing  of  all 
NATIONS  TO  Christ.  More  foreign  Jews  attended  the  Pentecost  than  any  other  Jew- 
ish feast.  And  in  the  light  of  Pentecost  we  look  forward  hopefully  to  the  time 
when  the  "  great  multitude,  whom  no  man  could  number,  out  of  every  nation,  and 
of  all  tribes,  and  peoples,  and  tongues  "  shall  stand  before  the  throne  and  before  the 
Lamb,  and  shall  cry  with  a  great  voice,  saying,  "  Salvation  unto  our  God  which 
sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  "  (Eev.  vii.  9,  10).     17.  Pentecost 

TEACHES  THE  UNION  OF  VAST  SpIEITUAL  POWEE  WITH    FEEBLE    HUMAN    AGENCY.      {GeorgC 

Deane,  D.Sc.)  Whit-Sunday  : — I.  What  the  day  op  Pentecost  gave  indisputable 
PEOOF  OF.  1.  The  truth  of  Old  and  New  Testament  prophecies  (Isa.  xliv.  3  ;  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  27 ;  Joel  ii.  28  ;  Zech.  iv.  6  ;  John  xiv.  16,  xv.  26,  xvi.  7  ;  Acts  i.  5,  &c.), 
2.  The  reality  of  the  Messiahship  and  mission  of  Christ.  The  Holy  Ghost  would 
bring  to  the  remembrance  of  the  disciples  the  words  they  had  heard  their  Master 
utter,  and  reveal  the  meaning  of  the  things  of  Christ  unto  them.  The  Spirit  bears 
witness  with  our  spirits  to-day  that  Jpsus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  3.  The 
person,  presence,  and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  II.  What  the  day  op  Pentecost 
gave  infallible  pledge  op.  The  success  of  the  preaching  of  Peter  on  that  day  was 
the  earnest  of  the  successive  victories  the  gospel  would  achieve  over  error  in  the 
world  down  to  tbe  end  of  time.  Those  victories  would  be  won — 1.  In  spite  of  the 
paucity  of  numbers  on  the  side  of  the  gospel.  2.  Ini  spite  of  the  poverty  of  the 
preachers  of  the  gospel.  3.  In  spite  of  the  antagonism  of  the  enemies  of  the  gos- 
pel. 4.  In  spite  of  the  unfaithfulness  of  professors  of  the  gospel.  HI.  What 
the  day  op  Pentecost  gave  ieeevocable  pattern  of.  The  primitive  Church  had  to 
— 1.  Wait  for  the  day,  2.  Work  for  the  day.  Human  agony  linked  with  Divine 
power.  (F.  TV.  Brown.)  Pentecost : — I.  The  season  when  the  Spirit  was  given. 
1.,  In  Gnd's  appointed  time.  There  is  a  set  time  to  favour  Zion,  both  to  try  our 
faith  and  to  prove  God's  sovereignty.  If  every  drop  of  rain  has  its  appointed  birthday, 
every  gleam  of  light  its  predestinated  pathway,  and  every  spark  of  fire  its  settled 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

hour  for  flying  upward,  certainly  the  will  of  God  must  have  arranged  and  settled  the 
period  and  place  of  every  gracious  visitation.  2.  After  the  ascension.  The  Spirit  was 
not  given  till  after  Jesus  had  been  glorified.  Various  blessings  are  ascribable  to  differ- 
ent parts  of  Christ's  work.  His  life  is  our  imputed  righteousness ;  His  death  brings  us 
pardon  ;  His  resurrection  confers  upon  us  justification  ;  His  ascension  yields  to  us  the 
Holy  Spirit.  "  When  He  ascended  up  on  high,"  &c.  It  was  the  wont  of  the  Koman 
conqueror  as  he  rode  along  to  scatter  large  quantities  of  money  among  the  admiring 
crowd.  So  our  glorified  Lord  scattered  gifts  among  men.  3.  At  Pentecost.  Some 
say  that  at  Pentecost  the  law  was  proclaimed  on  Sinai.  If  so,  it  was  very  signifi- 
cant that  on  the  day  when  the  law  was  issued  amid  thumlers  and  lightnings,  the 
gospel — God's  new  and  better  law — should  be  proclaimed  with  mighty  wind  and 
tongues  of  fire.  We  are  clear,  however,  that  Pentecost  was  a  harvest-festival.  On 
that  day  the  sheaf  was  waved  before  the  Lord  and  the  harvest  consecrated.  The 
passover  was  to  our  Saviour  the  time  of  His  sowing,  but  Pentecost  was  the  day  of 
His  reaping,  and  the  fields  which  were  ripe  to  the  harvest  when  He  sat  on  the  well, 
are  reaped  now  that  He  sits  upon  the  throne.  4.  When  there  was  most  need.  Vast 
crowds  were  gathered.  What  would  have  been  the  use  of  the  many  tongues  when 
no  strangers  were  ready  to  hear  ?  Whenever  we  see  unusual  gatherings,  whenever 
the  spirit  of  hearing  is  poured  out  upon  the  people,  we  ought  to  pray  for  and  ex- 
pect an  unusual  visitation  of  the  Spirit.  5.  Where  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in 
one  place.  Christians  cannot  all  now  be  in  one  place,  but  they  can  all  be  of  one 
accord.  When  there  are  no  cold  hearts,  no  prejudices  and  bigotries  to  separate,  no 
schism  to  rend  the  one  sacred  garment  of  Christ,  then  may  we  expect  to  see  the 
Spirit  of  God  resting  upon  u's.  6.  When  they  were  earnest  about  one  grand  object. 
II.  The  manner.  Each  word  here  is  suggestive.  1.  Suddenly.  It  is  the  glory  of 
God  to  conceal  a  thing,  and  so,  though  the  Spirit  may  have  been  secretly  preparing 
men's  hearts,  yet  the  real  work  of  revival  is  done  suddenly  to  the  surprise  of  all  ob- 
servers. 2.  There  was  a  sound.  Although  the  Spirit  of  God  is  silent,  yet  His 
operations  are  not  silent  in  their  results.  8.  As  of  wind.  In  Greek  and  Hebrew 
the  word  used  for  wind  and  for  Spirit  is  the  same.  The  wind  is  doLibtle>*s,  chosen 
as  an  emldem  because  of  its  mysteriousness  :  "  Thou  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh 
nor  whither  it  goeth  " ;  because  of  its  freeness  :  "  It  bloweth  where  it  listeth  "  ;  be- 
cause of  diversity  of  its  operations,  for  the  wind  blows  a  gentle  zephyr  at  one 
moment,  and  anon  it  mounts  to  a  howling  blast.  The  Holy  Spirit  at  one  time 
comes  to  comfort,  and  at  other  times  to  alarm,  &c.  4.  It  was  ru-hing.  This  pour- 
trayed  the  rapidity  with  which  the  Spirit's  influences  spread— rushing  like  a  torrent. 
Within  fifty  years  from  Pentecost  the  gospel  had  been  preached  in  everv  country  of 
the  known  world.  5.  It  was  mighty,  irresistible,  and  so  is  the  Spirit  of  God; 
where  He  comes  nothing  can  stand  against  Him.  6.  It  filled  all  the  place  where 
they  were  sitting.  The  sound  was  not  merely  heard  by  the  disciples.  When  the 
Spirit  of  God  comes,  He  never  confines  Himself  to  the  Church.  A  revival  in  a 
village  penetrates  even  the  pot-house.  The  Spirit  of  Gud  at  work  in  the  Church  is 
soon  felt  in  the  farm-yard,  work-room,  and  factory.  7.  But  this  was  not  all.  I 
must  now  mention  what  was  the  appearance  seen — a  bright  luminous  cloud 
probably,  not  unlike  that  which  once  rested  in  the  wilderness  over  the  tribes  by 
night — which  suddenly  divided,  or  was  cleft,  and  separate  tongues  of  fire  rested 
upon  the  head  of  each  of  the  disciples.  They  would  understand  that  thus  a  Divine 
power  was  given  to  them.  Heathens  represent  beams  of  light  or  flames  of  fire  pro- 
ceeding from  their  false  deities,  and  the  nimbus  with  which  Roman  Catholic 
painters  always  adorn  the  heads  of  saints,  is  a  relic  of  the  same  idea.  It  was  said 
by  the  ancients  of  Hesiod,  the  first  of  all  the  poets,  that  whereas  he  was  once 
nothing  but  a  simple  neat-herd,  yet  suddenly  a  Divine  flame  fell  upon  him,  and  he 
became  henceforth  one  of  the  noblest  of  men.  We  feel  assured  that  so  natural  a 
metaphor  would  be  at  once  understood  by  the  apostles.  (1)  It  was  a  tongue,  for 
God  has  ben  pleased  to  make  the  tongue  do  mightier  deeds  than  either  sword 
or  pen ;  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  deliver.  (2)  It 
was  a  tongue  of  fire,  to  show  that  God's  ministers  speak,  not  coldly  as  though 
they  had  tongues  of  ice,  nor  learnedly  as  with  tongues  of  gold,  nor  arrogantly 
as  with  tongues  of  brass,  nor  pliantly  as  with  tongues  of  willow,  nor  sternly 
as  with  tongues  of  iron,  but  earnestly  as  with  the  tonuue  of  flame ;  their  words 
consume  sin,  scorch  falsehood,  enlighten  the  darkness,  and  comfort  the  poor.  (3) 
It  sat  upon  them.  So  the  Spirit  of  God  is  an  abiding  influence,  and  the  saints  shall 
persevere.  (4)  It  sat  upon  each  of  tt  em,  so  that  while  there  whs  but  one  fire,  yet 
each  believer  received  his  portion  of  the  oue  Spirit.     There  are  diversities  of  opera- 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  Ill 

tions,  but  it  is  the  same  Lord.  III.  The  result.  After  all  this,  what  are  you  ex- 
pecting ?  Shall  the  wind  blow  down  dynasties — the  fire  consume  dominions  ?  No  ; 
Spiritual  and  not  carnal  is  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  result  lies  in  three  things. 
1.  A  sermon.  The  Spirit  of  God  was  given  to  help  Peter  preach.  You  turn 
with  interest  to  know  what  sort  of  a  sermon  a  man  would  preach  who  was  full  to 
the  brim  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  You  expect  him  to  be  more  eloquent  than  Eobert  Hall, 
or  Chalmers ;  more  learned  than  the  Puritans.  You  expect  all  the  orations  of 
Cicero  and  Demosthenes  to  be  put  in  the  shade.  No  such  thing  !  Never  was  there 
a  sermon  more  commonplace.  It  is  one  of  the  blessed  effects  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
make  ministers  preach  simply.  2.  The  people  were  pricked  in  the  heart,  and  cried, 
"  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?  "  What  a  disorderly  thing!  Blessed  dis- 
order which  the  Spirit  of  God  gives.  Men  then  feel  that  tbey  have  heard  some-, 
thing  which  has  gone  right  into  their  inmost  nature  and  receive  a  wound  which 
only  God  can  heal.  3.  Faith  and  the  outward  confession  of  it  in  baptism.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  The  descent  of  the  Spirit: — The  circumstances  connected  with 
the  event.  I.  The  time.  "  When  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come."  It  was 
the  fiftieth  day  after  the  Passover,  and  beginning  of  the  harvest  festival.  Harvest 
home  !  Surely  it  was  no  blind  chance  that  made  this  appointment  for  the  inaugu- 
ration of  the  dispensation  of  spiritual  ingathering  (Rev.  xiv.  15).  II.  The  place. 
It  was  "  a  house,"  the  noteworthy  fact  being  that  it  was  not  the  temple.  Up  to  this 
time  the  temple  had  monopolised  the  formal  worship  of  Jehovah ;  but  to-day  a  new 
order  begins.  The  piivileges  of  worship  are  to  be  everywhere  and  for  all  sorts  and 
conditions  of  men.  III.  The  dramatis  persons.  Here  were  a  hundred  and  twenty 
feeble  folk,  none  mighty  or  noble  among  them,  distinguished  from  the  multitudi- 
nous rank  and  file  of  common  people  only  by  the  fact  that  God  had  chosen  them  to 
be  the  nucleus  of  the  Christian  Church.  Thus,  kneeling  together,  they  held  the 
coign  of  vantage.  They  were  sure  of  the  blessing.  May  it  not  be  taat,  under' 
similar  conditions,  the  Church  of  our  times  would  be  similarly  blest?  IV.  The 
ONLOOKERS.  There  came  together  to  witness  this  strange  occurrence  a  motley  and 
polyglot  assemblage  of  "  Parthians,  Medes,  and  Elamites,  dwellers  in  Mesopotamia 
and  in  Judaea  and  Cappadocia,  in  Pontus  and  Asia,  Phrygia  and  Pamphylia,  in 
Egypt  and  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about  Gyrene,  and  strangers  of  Rome,  Jews  and 
proselytes,  Cretes  and  Arabians."  Was  ever  a  more  representative  body  of  people  ? 
And  this  was  as  it  should  have  been,  for  the  thing  about  to  happen  was  of  universal 
importance,  and  the  power  about  to  descend  was,  like  the  sceptre  in  Balaam's  vision, 
to  smite  even  to  the  remotest  corners  of  the  earth.  The  time  had  come  for  the  pro- 
pagation of  a  catholic  gospel ;  and  this  heterogeneous  company  of  people  was  the 
first  representative  Christian  congregation  that  ever  assembled  on  earth.  Those 
who,  on  this  occasion,  were  "  sojourning  at  Jerusalem  out  of  every  nation  under 
heaven,"  carried  back  to  their  countrymen  the  announcement  of  the  new  religion  ; 
and  thus  tbe  seed  was  sown  whose  full  and  glorious  fruition  will  be  seen  at  the  close 
of  history,  when  "  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  can  number,"  &c.  (Rev.  vii. 
9).  V.  What  they  saw  and  heard.  At  this  point  everything  is  significant.  1.  The 
"  sound  as  of  a  mighty,  rushing  wind."  This  mu^t  instantly  have  recalled  to  the 
minds  of  the  disciples  their  Master's  word,  "The  wind  bio weth  where  it  listeth, 
and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither 
it  goeth ;  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."  In  Ezekiel's  vision  in  the 
valley  of  dry  bones  we  have  a  similar  association  of  the  wind  or  breath  (Hebrew 
runch)  with  spiritual  influence  :  "  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  breath,  and  breathe 
upon  these  slain,  that  they  may  live  !  "  The  symbol  is  appropriate,  suggesting  an 
influence  so  elevating  and  inspiring  as  to  mark  the  beginning  of  a  new  life.  2. 
The  fire.  This  would  instantly  recall  the  words  of  John  the  Baptist,  "  He  shall 
baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire."  Fire  burns,  subdues,  purifies, 
penetrates,  illumines,  energises.  Fire  is  power.  The  heart  that  has  received  the 
baptism  from  on  high  is  "  set  on  fire  "  with  a  passion  for  all  things  true  and  right. 
3.  Cloven  tongues.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  symbol  used  to  designate  the  power 
of  the  gospel  dispensation  was  not  an  iron  rod,  nor  a  sword,  nor  a  pontifical  mitre, 
but  a  cloven  tongue — the  symbol  of  speech,  of  argument,  of  "the  foolishness  of 
preaching."  The  victory  by  which  the  world  is  to  be  subjugated  to  the  gospel  is  to 
be  a  luoi'al  victory  ;  and  the  power  which  is  to  accomplish  it  is  the  simple  story  of 
the  Cross.  Jehovah  is  not  in  the  storm  nor  in  the  earthquake,  but  in  the  still, 
small  voice.  VI.  The  significance  of  this  event.  1.  It  marked  the  reformation 
and  reorganisation  of  Judaism  into  the  Christian  Church.  In  this  company  of  a 
hundred  and  twenty  persons — like-minded  ae  to  the  ruling  principle  of  life  and  en- 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  ii. 

gaged  with  one  accord  in  prayer  for  a  specific  blessing — we  behold,  in  seed  and 
promise,  a  mighty  cr^^anism  which  is  destined  to  survive  all  shocks  and  oppositions, 
gathering  meat  out  of  the  eater  and  sweetness  out  of  the  strong,  until  at  length  it 
shall  bring  the  world  and  lay  it  before  its  Master's  feet.  This  is  the  living 
mechanism  that  Ezekiel  saw  by  the  river  Chebar,  "a  whirlwind  out  of  the  north 
and  a  fire  infolding  itself  and  winged  creatures  going  straight  forward:  whither  the 
spirit  was  to  go  they  went,  and  they  turned  not  when  they  went "  (Ezek.  i.  4-10). 
This  working  Church  of  Jesus,  inspired  by  a  purpose  above  all  carnal  ambitions 
and  endued  with  power  to  accomplish  it,  is  at  this  moment  incomparably  the  great- 
est force  on  earth.  2.  The  miracle  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  marked  the  beginning 
of  a  new  epoch.  The  old  economy  of  types  and  shadows  was  over;  the  dispensa- 
•  tion  of  the  Spirit  was  at  hand.  Thenceforth  the  Holy  Ghost  was  to  rule  in 
human  affairs.  It  was  a  transitional  point  in  history.  Let  us  thank  God  that  we 
live  on  the  hither  side  of  it.  Nay,  rather,  let  us  thank  God  over  and  over  that  we 
are  permitted  to  take  part  in  the  splendid  achievements  of  these  days.  3.  This 
Pentecostal  effusion  of  the  Spirit  marked  the  beginning  of  the  end.  At  that  mo- 
ment God  Himself  made  bare  His  arm  and  said,  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall 
be  Mine  1  Those  who  looked  on  "  were  amazed  and  were  in  doubt,  saying  one  to 
another,  What  meaneth  this  ?  "  In  answer  they  were  referred  by  Peter  to  the  pro- 
phesy of  Joel :  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,  saith  God,  that  I  will 
pour  out  of  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh  ;  and  your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  pro- 
phecy, and  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams." 
It  is  scarcely  to  be  believed  that  God  will  wait  upon  the  slow  processes  which  His 
people  are  using  for  the  conversion  of  the  world.  He  has  mighty  forces  in  reserve 
which  we  in  our  poor  philosophies  have  never  dreamed  of ;  and  who  can  tell  at  what 
moment  He  may  bring  them  into  requisition?  (D.  J.  Bttrrell,  D.D.)  Pente- 
cost : — 1.  "  Ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost  not  many  days  hence."  The 
exact  day  was  not  specified,  and  still  less  the  precise  nature  of  the  gift.  Expectation 
has  always  been  the  posture  of  the  Church.  For  ages  the  expectation  was  that  of 
the  Messiah's  coming ;  and  no  sooner  did  the  Messiah  appear  than  a  new  season  of 
expectation  set  in ;  the  expectation  of  His  second  coming.  Nowhere  is  there,  nor 
ought  tbere  to  be,  mere  retrospection  or  satisfaction.  Many  chief  graces  can  only 
be  exercised  by  looking  forward  and  upward.  2.  The  condition  of  the  disciples 
between  Ascension  and  Pentecost  was  one  of  expectation  in  a  double  sense.  They 
were  taught  by  the  angels  to  look  for  their  Lord's  return.  But  there  was  a  near 
return  as  well  as  one  more  remote.  When  our  Lord  said  "  I  will  see  you  again," 
&c.,  He  said  so  in  three  senses — in  His  own  lesurrection  ;  in  their  resurrection  ;  but 
between  these  two  there  lay  a  spiritual  but  not  therefore  an  unreal  advent.  3.  The 
feast  of  Pentecost  was  one  of  the  three  great  festivals  of  Israel.  It  was  so  called 
from  one  particular  point  in  the  celebration  of  the  Passover ;  the  waving  of  the 
sheaf  of  the  first-fruits  of  the  harvest  on  the  morrow  after  the  Passover-Sabbath. 
From  that  day  they  were  to  number  seven  complete  sabbaths,  and  then  arrived  the 
feast  of  weeks  or  of  Pentecost ;  on  which  occasion,  as  at  the  earlier  Passover,  and 
the  later  Tabernacles,  all  the  men  were  required  to  appear  before  the  Lord  at  His 
sanctuary  in  Jerusalem.  The  Passover  had  already  found  its  antitype  in  that 
season  at  which  Christ  the  Paschal  Lamb  was  sacrificed  for  us.  The  feast  of 
Tabernacles,  the  celebration  of  the  completion  of  harvest  and  vintage,  and  of  the 
rest  which  followed  the  entrance  into  Canaan,  is  to  find  its  antitype  in  that  rest  which 
remains  for  the  people  of  God  in  heaven.  The  intermediate  festival  of  Pentecost 
was  to  have  its  autitji^e  in  that  gift  which  this  chapter  describes.  Jewish  tradition 
marked  out  the  feast  as  the  commemoration  of  the  giving  of  the  law.  And  peculiar 
significance  is  therefore  given  to  the  choice  of  the  day  for  the  giving  of  that  new 
law,  of  the  Spirit  of  life,  by  which  the  commandments  of  God  were  to  be  written,  not 
on  tables  of  stone,  but  on  the  tablets  of  a  renewed  and  willing  heart.  At  all  events 
the  festival  of  the  first-fruits  was  now  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  heavenly  inheritance.  Two  things  in  the  narrative  need  to  be  dis- 
tinguished. I.  The  origin  of  the  gift.  1.  Men  are  slow  in  understanding  and 
stubborn  in  disputing  spiritual  or  supernatural  influences ;  resolving  everything  into 
workings  of  nature,  chance,  or  imagination.  There  is  no  spiritual  influence  which 
the  philosophers  and  theologians  of  this  age  would  not  explain  away,  or  laugh  down. 
It  is  well,  perhaps,  that  the  gospel  was  established  in  men's  convictions  iu  an  age 
of  greater  simplicity  and  of  less  presumption.  2.  But  if  God  would  make  it  eri- 
dent  that  He  is  at  work,  I  know  not  how  it  can  be  done  without  miracle.  If  our 
Lord  would  convince  common  men  that  He  had  all  the  power  of  God,  was  there  any 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  ACTS.  113 

mode  so  really  decisive  as  that  which  the  Gospels  describe  to  us?  Those  who  had 
actually  seen  Him  still  a  tempest,  raise  a  corpse,  &c.,  must  have  felt  that  God  had 
given  them  evidence  of  the  Messiahship  of  Christ.  Even  thus  was  it  with  the 
coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Hearts  might  have  been  influenced,  lives  might  have 
been  changed,  and  men  might  have  ascribed  it  to  natural  causes ;  but  if  it  was  to 
be  made  plain,  beyond  gainsaying,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had  descended  to  make  His 
abode  in  the  Church  and  in  the  hearts  of  men,  there  must  be  some  sign  of  which 
the  senses  could  take  cognisance,  and  from  which  but  one  inference  could  be  drawn. 
3.  Such  a  sign  was  that  marvellous  power  of  which  we  have  here  the  first  example. 
If  unlettered  men  were  heard  to  utter  sounds  recognised  by  men  of  diverse  nations 
as  their  native  speech,  what  other  explanation  could  be  given  save  that  which 
Peter  gave  ?  4.  And  is  there  anything  irrational  in  the  supposition  that  God  should 
come  in  direct  personal  communication  with  man,  or  should  make  it  plain  whence 
that  communication  was  derived  ?  It  can  be  no  reproach  to  a  revelation  that  its 
utterance  is  decisive  and  its  proofs  intelligible  to  unlettered  men.  5.  In  the  signs 
which  accompanied  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  can  recognise  all  the  emblems 
by  which  He  had  been  foretold.  (1)  The  rushing  mighty  wind,  "blowing  where  it 
listeth,"  audible  in  its  sound,  inscrutable  in  its  source  and  destination.  (2)  The 
fiery  flame  which  had  been  taken  from  the  first  as  the  description  of  the  Saviour's 
baptism.  (3)  The  voice  which  bore  witness  to  the  informing,  instructing,  and  coun- 
sellihg  presence  within.  II.  The  gift  signified.  1.  We  read  of  it  in  its  prediction 
and  in  its  experience.  Look  for  the  one  to  John  xiv.-xvi.,  and  for  the  other  to  Eom. 
viii.,  Gal.  v.  Study  those  and  you  will  see  how  little  they  can  enter  into  the  ful- 
ness of  the  promise,  who  either  imagine  it  to  have  been  designed  for  apostles  only, 
or  as  consisting  principally  of  miraculous  gifts.  The  Holy  Spirit  was  promised  as 
the  Comforter,  the  Kemembrancer,  the  Teacher,  the  Guide,  the  inward  Advocate, 
the  Representative  of  Christ,  the  Presence  of  God  and  of  Christ  in  the  soul,  whose 
coming  was  to  make  it  a  gain  even  that  the  Saviour  should  depart.  And  what  then 
was  the  experience  of  this  great  gift  ?  How  did  they  describe  it  who  had  found  it 
for  their  own  ?  Hear  what  Paul,  who  was  not  present  at  Pentecost,  but  only  re- 
ceived the  gift  afterwards  as  any  one  of  you  might  receive  it  in  answer  to  prayer, 
tells  how  the  Holy  Ghost  within  had  set  him  free  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  death  ; 
how  He  had  turned  his  affections  from  things  below  to  things  above  ;  how  he  had 
found  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  indeed  a  Spirit  not  of  fear  but  the  Spirit  of  adoption, 
&o.  2.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  one  half  of  the  whole  need  of  man.  We  need 
forgiveness  first.  But  there  is  a  need  behind,  without  which  forgiveness  would 
be  a  mockery — the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  pledged  in  baptism — promised  in 
the  Word  of  life.  We  are  ignorant,  poor,  weak,  sad,  and  lonely  in  heart,  until 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness  rises  upon  us  with  that  healing  in  His  wings,  which  is 
first  the  joy  of  a  free  forgiveness,  and  secondly  the  joy  of  an  indwelling 
Spirit  I  And  be  we  well  assured  that,  if  we  are  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  other  words  of  the  text  will  be  realised  in  us ;  we  shall  also  speak  with 
another  tongue,  the  Spirit  giving  us  the  utterance.  How  transforming  is  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  human  lips  I  Can  we  live  with  a  man  in  whom  God 
dwells  and  not  perceive  it  in  his  words  ?  Let  us  pray  for  the  gift  of  that  new 
Divine  speech,  in  the  power  of  which  he  who  once  opened  his  lips  only  to  trifle,  to 
defame,  or  to  deceive,  has  begun  to  breathe  the  sounds  of  love  and  joy  and  peace,  of 
gentleness  and  goodness  and  faith  and  meekness.  Thus  shall  men  take  knowledge 
of  us  that  we  have  been  with  Jesus.  Thus  shall  we  bear  that  testimony,  not  of  word 
only  but  of  sign,  by  which  minds  are  convinced  and  hearts  opened,  by  which  God's 
name  is  made  known  on  earth,  His  saving  health  among  all  nations.  {Dean 
Vaughan.)  Pentecost  a  spiritual  spring  feast : — I.  The  spring  bkeezes  which 
BLOW  :  stoi-my  blasts  and  soft  zephyrs.  II.  The  spking  voices  which  ake  heard  : 
the  inspired  tongues  of  the  apostles  praising  the  mighty  acts  of  God,  and  the 
timid  voices  of  awakened  consciences  inquiring  after  salvation.  III.  The  spring 
BLOSSOMS  WHICH  APPEAR :  childlike  faith  and  brotherly  love.  (Gerok.)  The  Pente- 
costal outpouring : — I.  The  preparation  fob  the  gift  of  the  Spirit.  1.  The 
ascension.  Christ  had  taught  that  His  going  away  was  essential  to  the  Spirit's 
coming.  2.  The  attitude  of  the  disciples.  (1)  Patient  waiting.  (2)  Union.  (3) 
Prayer.  (4)  Fellowship  with  the  risen  Christ.  II.  Its  sensible  accompaniments. 
The  elements  of  nature  were  now,  as  so  often,  symbolical  of  spiritual  realities.  1. 
The  sound  like  wind  indicating  the  immediacy,  secrecy  and  swiftness  of  the  Divine 
action.  2.  The  appearance  like  fire  symbolising  warming,  quickening,  cleansing. 
III.  The  gift  itself.  The  Spirit's  influence  was — 1.  In  its  nature  adapted  ta 
VOL.    I.  8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [coap.  ix. 

affect  men's  minds  and  hearts,  2.  In  its  measure  as  vast  as  human  capacities 
could  receive.  3.  In  its  extent  universal,  being  designed  for  Christ's  whole  Church. 
IV.  The  immediate  consequences.  1.  The  apostles  were  empowered  to  speak  with 
other  tongues,  which  was  a  sign  of  Divine  energy.  2.  PreaclJing  was  made  power- 
ful to  the  conversion  of  many ;  enemies  of  Christ  became  friends.  3.  The  Church 
was  established  upon  a  sure  and  lasting  foundation.  (Family  Churchman.)  The 
ijift  of  Pentecost  the  best  gift  of  God,  in  virtue  of — I.  Its  root — the  merits  of  Christ, 
His  humiliation  and  exaltation.  II.  Its  nature — the  union  of  the  Spirit  of  God  with 
man.  III.  Its  operations — the  new  creation  of  the  heart  and  of  the  world.  (Gerok.) 
Fentecost ;  or,  the  first  Christian  day  : — Next  to  the  day  of  Christ's  death,  Pentecost 
was  the  greatest  day  that  ever  dawned.  It  was  "  the  birth-day  "  of  the  Church, 
the  first  day  of  the  new  creation,  in  which  chaos  began  to  be  fashioned  and 
arranged  by  the  plastic  power  of  the  Spirit,  the  day  of  the  grand  and  solemn  open- 
ing of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  after  the  completion  of  the  Christ's  preparatory  work, 
the  day  on  which  the  fountain  was  unsealed,  whose  waters  should  flow  forth  for 
the  healing  and  purifying  of  the  natious.  And  as  it  was  the  first  of  Christian  diiys, 
so  was  it  a  type  of  Christian  days.  Note — I.  The  history.  1.  The  season  was 
the  Pentecost,'  a  Jewish  festival.  2.  The  hour,  "the  hour  of  prayer."  3.  The 
l^lace  was  one  of  the  apartments  of  the  temple.  If  we  put  these  things  together, 
we  shall  have  two  results.  (1)  They  secured  a  large  and  fitting  audience.  Great 
numbers  of  Jews  and  proselytes  visited  Jerusalem;  and  the  temple  was  just 'the 
place  where  they  could  most  easily  become  parties  to  the  introduction  of  the  new 
dispensation.  (2)  It  was  strikingly  taught  that  the  old  state  of  things  was  giving 
place  to  another,  which  should  change  its  form  but  perfect  its  spirit.  The  shell 
was  being  broken  to  yield  a  new  life  ;  the  beautiful  fly  was  being  developed  fiom 
the  worm.  Judaism  was  to  be  displaced  by  that  which  should  spiritualise  and 
ennoble  its  truths  and  principles.  The  temple  was  to  become  a  church,  and 
Pentecost  to  witness  a  new  celebration  of  harvest,  the  ingathering  of  souls.  4.  The 
antecedents.    The  apostles  "  continued  with  one  accord,"  A'C.    II.  The  occurrences 

AS    STRIKINGLY    SUGGESTIVE    OF    IMPORTANT    TRUTHS    IN    RELATION    TO    THE    DISPENSATION 

THUS  INTRODUCED.  There  was — 1.  A  new  Spirit.  Whatever  spiritual  influences 
had  been  shed  forth  in  former  periods,  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  New  Testament 
sense,  was  to  be  the  gift  of  the  glorified  Saviour,  the  characteristic  blessing  of  His 
kingdom.  We  must  beware  of  restricting  this  fact  to  miraculous  endowments.  The 
gift  of  tongues,  &c.,  were  but  signs  and  seals  of  the  spiritual  power  intended  to 
draw  attention  to  the  inward  gift,  only  as  the  thunder  and  lightning  of  the  new 
spiritual  world,  occasional  and  impressive  incidents  of  powers  and  processes  whose 
constant,  silent  operation  is  the  very  life  of  men.  (1)  Thejworldjieeded  tlie_S£h*it. 
It  was  not  a  case  merely  for  new  religious  opinions,  habits,  or  institutions ;  the 
need  was  of  life  from  above ;  the  nature  required  to  be  restored  and  quickened. 
Sin  had  cut  off  the  supplies  of  Divine  grace,  had  converted  the  temple  into  a 
tomb.  It  was  the  grand  design  of  the  gospel  to  engraft  humanity  upon  Deity,  to 
breathe  into  our  dead  souls  the  breath  of  life.  (2)  The^apostles  needed  theSpirit. 
Much  as  they  had  been  with  Jesus,  they  were  still  strangers  to  His  inner'^heing, 
the  deeper  meaning  of  His  acts  and  words,  the  glory  of  His  Cross  ;  they  were  like 
the  skeletons  in  the  valley  of  vision,  very  dry,  till  at  the  prophet's  bidding  they 
became  living  men.  2.  A  new  truth.  "  We  do  hear  them  speak  in  our  tongues 
the  wonderful  works  of  God,"  the  same  as  composed  the  subject  of  Peter's  discourse  ; 
the  history  of  Christ.  True,  they  knew  that  He  had  died,  and  risen  again,  and 
ascended  :  but  all  this,  though  familiar  as  history,  was  new  as  truth.  And  just  as 
a  man  who  has  travelled  in  the  dark,  looks  back  at  break  of  day  and  admires  the 
objects  that  he  passed,  aware  only  of  their  existence,  or  deeming  them  objects  of 
fear,  so  the  disciples  recalled  the  events  of  their  Master's  life,  and  rejoiced  in  much 
which  had  perplexed  and  grieved  them.  The  death  and  departure  of  Christ  were 
to  His  followers  like  the  fabled  statue  of  Memnon,  which  sent  forth  sounds,  mourn- 
ful in  the  night,  but  melodious  at  the  rising  of  the  sun  :  when  God's  morning  light 
arose,  how  sweet  the  notes  those  facts,  once  only  sad,  emitted!  Chiistianity  is 
essentially  historical.  It  does  not  set  men  on  arduous  inquiries,  nor  answer  them 
by  logical  expositions ;  but  it  points  us  to  the  incarnate  Son  of  God ;  tells  us  how 
He  lived  and  suffered  and  arose  to  glory  ;  tells  us  that  He  was,  that  He  is  :  He  is 
the  object  of  its  faith,  its  love,  its  obedience  and  its  joy.  Such  was  evidently  Peter's 
ihou'^ht  when  he  used  "the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven"  to  opi^n  it  to  the 
Jewish  world  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  Such  was  also  Paul's  (I  Cor.  xv.  3,  4). 
This  was  the  truth  which  they  pr.>pounded  to  men  of  every  class  and  ia  every 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  115 

condition — to  Greek  (1  Cor.  ii.  2) ;  to  Jew  (Gal.  vi.  14) ;  to  Eoman  (Rom.  viii.  3,  4) ; 
and  it  proved,  in  the  case  of  all,  the  power  of  God  unto  every  one  that  believeth. 
The  declaration  of  this  truth  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  therefore  not  an 
exceptional  thing ;  it  was  a  specimen  of  the  kind  of  moral  instrumentality  which 
should  be  characteristic  of  Christianity.  3.  A  new  vehicle.  "  They  began  to  speak 
with  other  tongues."  (1)  Had  a  Jew  been  told  that  God  was  about  to  introduce  a 
new  and  transcendent  dispensation  in  a  style  worthy  of  its  superior  excellence,  he 
would  probably  have  expected  a  grand  ceremonial.  But  he  was  here  taught  that 
Christianity  would  be  a  system,  not  of  ceremonialism,  but  of  moral  agency,  and 
that  its  chief  means  would  be  uttered  thought  and  feeling,  man  coming  into  contact 
with  man,  reason  with  reason,  heart  with  heart.  No  system  of  religion  has  made 
such  use  of  the  voice  as  Christianity,  and  its  purest  forms  have  always  been 
connected  with  the  largest  use  of  the  voice.  (2)  The  manner  as  well  as  the  fact  of 
the  use  of  the  tongue  was  instructive.  In  the  pubUcity  and  indiscriminateness  of 
Pentecostal  preaching  there  was  something  different  from  all  that  had  appeared  in 
the  best  types  of  heathen  wisdom.  The  philosophers  universally  disrcKarded  the 
poor  ;  their  discoveries  were  confined  to  those  who  sought  and  could  purchase  them. 
But  the  gift  of  tongues  declared  not  only  that  speech  would  be  the  most  appropriate 
organ  of  the  gospel,  but  that  it  would  "  speak  to  the  people"  withoat  exception, 
"  all  the  words  of  this  life."  4.  A  new  world.  No  power  on  earth  could  have 
brought  together,  at  that  time,  so  typical  a  congregation.  And  herein  was  there 
an  expression  of  the  catholicity  of  the  gospel.  It  not  only  declared  that  the  world 
might  enjoy  the  privileges  of  the  true  religion,  but  it  spoke  to  the  world  in  its  own 
language  ;  it  destroyed  every  "middle  wall  of  partition  "  between  Jew  and  Gentile, 
and  made  the  common  possession  of  eveiy  race  the  rich  inheritance  of  "  tbe  gospel 
of  the  grace  of  God."  The  confusion  of  tongues  (Gen.  xi.  7)  was  reversed,  and  it 
was  proclaimed  that  the  effect  of  the  gospel  would  be  the  destruction  of  all  that 
divided  and  alienated  men ;  that  its  purpose  was  to  form  a  new  "  body,"  into  which 
all  should  be  "  baptized  by  one  Spirit,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  whether  bond  or 
free,"  so  creating  a  "  new  man,"  in  which  there  should  be  "  neither  Greek  nor 
Jew,"  &c.  5.  A  new  impression  (vers.  37,  41-42).  (1)  There  had  been  mighty 
religious  movements  among  Jews  and  Gentiles,  but  there  had  been  no  seasons 
similar  to  Pentecost.  Not  that  we  are  to  dissociate  that  time  from  times  preceding. 
"  Other  men  had  laboured,  and  the  disciples  entered  into  their  labours."  Christ 
had  no  Pentecost ;  but  He  was  always  doing  that  without  which  no  Pentecost 
could  have  been.  He  was  breaking  up  the  fallow-ground,  and  sowing  seed ;  the 
ingathering  was  to  come.  It  is  a  far  greater  thing  to  make  a  gospel  than  to  preach 
a  gospel.  And  when  Peter  with  quickening  energy  spake  to  the  people,  and 
thousands  confessed  the  sovereignty  of  truth,  he  was  only  the  instrument  of  bring- 
ing to  bear  the  virtue  and  power  of  Christ's  redemption.  "  The  corn  of  wheat  had 
fallen  into  the  ground  and  died,"  but,  having  died,  it  now  "  brought  forth  much 
fruit."  (2)  But  however  men  had  been  moved  or  changed  before,  they  had  never 
been  moved  or  changed  thus.  The  sense  of  guilt  was  not  strange,  but  penitence 
had  never  possessed  the  depth  and  the  tenderness  wiiich  belonged  to  theirs  who 
"looked  on  Him  whom  they  had  pierced,  and  mourned  for  Him."  Moral  and 
religious  reformation  had  often  rewarded  the  labours  of  the  wise  and  good,  but 
never  had  it  taken  so  Divine  a  type  as  in  those  who  now  "  gladly  received  the  Word." 
Men  had  often  associated  themselves  together  at  the  bidding  of  outward  law  or 
inward  love,  but  organisation  and  fellowship  had  never  known  thcr  truest  life  and 
strongest  bonds  till  the  thousands  of  Pentecost  joined  the  Church  at  Jerusalem. 
III.  Application  :  1.  Let  us  recognise  the  fact  that  this  is  Ihe  dispensation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  now  given  because  Jesus  is  glorified.  It  is  the 
time  of  spiritual  life,  "  the  day  of  Christ's  power."  2.  The  means  whereby  "  the 
power  from  on  high  "  may  be  obtained  for  ourselves  and  others.  These  are  prayer 
and  truth.  It  was  the  supphcating  Church  that  was  filled  with  the  Spirit ;  it  was 
the  speaking  Church  that  received  the  addition  of  three  thousand  souls.  This  is  a 
union  that  evermore  prevails,  and  without  which  there  can  be  no  realisation  of 
Pentecostal  times.  3.  The  pouring  forth  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  the  present,  the 
universal,  the  urgent  necessity  of  men.  The  main  misery  of  the  world  is  its  carnal 
life,  its  separation  from  God  :  it  will  never  be  whole  and  happy  till  it  be  possessed 
and  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God.  (A.  J.  Morris.)  The  day  of 
Penti'cost: — The  occunences  of  the  day  exhibit — 1.  Evidtnce  of  a  special  Divine 
influence.  2.  The  Divine  mission  of  Jesus  and  the  truth  of  Christianity.  3.  The 
folly  of  opposition  to  Christ's  kingdom.     4.  The  grand  means  of  advancing  Christ's 


11(5  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOE.     .  [chap.  n. 


cause  and  saving  sinners.  5.  The  Christian  minister's  great  source  of  encourage- 
ment. 6.  The  reality  and  importance  of  revivals  of  religion.  {B.  Dicki7ison,  M.A.) 
The  day  of  Pentecost  .-—The  disciples— I.  Began  to  speak.  Hitherto  they  had  kept 
silence.  They  were  learners  and  asked  questions.  True,  they  were  sent  by  Christ 
to  try  their  "  'prentice  hands  "  ;  but  their  discourses  could  not  have  been  much  to 
boast  of,  or  they  would  have  been  recorded.  But  no  sooner  were  they  filled  with 
the  Spirit  than  they  began  to  speak  out.  A  man  may  have  a  little  of  the  Spirit  and 
be  able  to  observe  silence  ;  but  if  he  is  filled  he  cannot  hold  his  peace.  "  Necessity 
is  laid  upon  me."  From  their  irrepressible  desire  to  speak,  many  concluded  they 
were  '*  full  of  new  wine."  And  herem  there  is  a  superficial  likeness  between  "  being 
filled  with  wine  "  and  "  being  filled  with  the  Spirit " :  in  either  case  there  is  a 
powerful  desire  to  speak,  A  few  chapters  further  on  in  reply  to  the  magistrates, 
they  said,  "We  cannot  but  speak."  The  Holy  Spirit  was  fermenting  within  them 
and  bursting  through  all  restraints  (see  Job  xxxii.  17-20,  and  Marg.).  II.  With 
OTHER  TONGUES.  1.  This  is  a  power  inherent  in  all  men.  Men  speak  with  new 
tongues  every  year.  Some  can  converse  in  many  languages.  Here  the  Spirit 
quickened  this  power.  The  first  miracle  of  Christ  was  the  turning  of  water  into 
wine.  There  is  nothing  unnatural  in  that.  Do  we  not  see  it  every  year  in  the 
vintages  of  Europe  ?  The  supernatural  consisted  in  its  instantaneousness.  And 
so  the  first  miracle  of  the  Holy  Ghost  consisted  in  the  rapidity  with  which  the 
knowledge  of  other  tongues  was  acquired.  2.  Some  acquire  knowledge  with  much 
greater  rapidity  than  others.  Who  can  tell  how  quickly  the  human  intellect  may 
acquire  it  when  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Sir  William  Hamilton  tells  us  of  a 
servant  girl  who,  under  the  excitement  of  fever,  repeated  long  and  intricate  passages 
from  Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew  authors,  which  §he  had  occasionally  overheard 
her  old  master  read  as  he  was  walking  up  and  down  in  his  house.  If  that  be  the 
case  under  the  excitement  of  fever,  is  it  incredible  that  the  disciples  spoke  with 
foreign  tongues  under  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  Man  is  only  a  degenerate 
specimen  of  what  he  once  was.  Adam  could  learn  more  in  five  minutes  than  we 
can  in  five  years.  He  could  instinctively  make  language,  a  much  more  formidable 
task  than  to  learn  it.  Let  the  wound  which  sin  has  inflicted  on  the  mind  be  healed 
up,  and  man  will  learn  a  new  language  with  as  much  facility  as  Adam  made  one. 
3.  The  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  admitted,  ennobles  other  faculties  ;  then  why  not  this? 
He  made  Bezaleel  and  AhoUab  skilful  workmen,  and  still  endows  men  ^yith  the 
knowledge  necessary  to  the  successful  prosecution  of  art.  When  Christianity 
appeared,  the  arts  and  sciences  were  at  a  very  low  ebb.  But  before  long  the  new 
religion  poured  a  new  spirit  into  society,  and  began  to  ennoble  the  intellect  of  the 
race.  Just  as  you  have  seen  a  tree,  after  being  well  manured,  budding  out  in  early 
spring  with  fresh  vitality,  so  Christianity  enriched  the  human  mind.  Poetry  revived 
under  it— the  best  poetry  of  the  world  is  Christian.  Painting  grew  under  the 
shadow  of  its  wing— the  grand  pictures  are  nearly  all  representations  of  scenes  in 
the  life  of  the  Saviour.  Music  and  architecture  also  have  chiefly  flourished  on 
Christian  soil  and  in  immediate  connection  with  Christian  worship.  And  so  with 
the  sciences.  The  revival  of  learning  was  coincident  with  the  revival  of  Christianity. 
Science  did  not  make  the  discovery  that  the  sun  is  the  centre  of  our  system  until 
Luther  discovered  that  Christ,  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness,  is  the  centre  of  religion. 
Stephenson  was  once  asked,  What  was  the  power  that  pulled  the  train  along  the 
rails  ?  He  answered,  The  sun.  The  sun  was  not  the  immediate  power— that  was 
the  fire  under  the  boiler  ;  but  he  knew  that  science  could  trace  back  the  fire  of  the 
coal  to  tlie  fire  of  the  sun.  And  the  power  that  is  now  working  in  the  heart  of 
civilization,  that  is  pushing  upward  and  forward  all  that  is  good  and  true  is  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  4.  As  sin,  which  lies  like  an  incubus  on  the  heart 
of  humanity,  hindering  free  movement,  will  be  expunged,  we  may  expect  corre- 
sponding celerity  in  our  acquisition  of  knowledge.  Possibly  the  lofty  mental  state 
of  the  apostles  is  the  normal  state  of  man.  Daniel  was  thrown  to  the  lions'  den, 
and  the  lions  hurt  him  not.  That  we  call  supernatural  :  yet  it  is  perhaps  the  true 
natural— the  state  in  which  man  was  placed  in  Paradise,  and  in  which  he  will  find 
himself  again  by  and  by.  The  three  young  men  in  Babylon  were  cast  into  the 
fiery  furnace,  and  the  flame  did  not  singe  a  hair  of  their  heads.  That  we  call 
supernatural :  yet  it  may  be  the  true  natural.  Man  was  not  subject  to  death 
either  natural  or  accidental  before  the  entrance  of  sin  into  the  world ;  and  man 
redeemed  will  go  through  the  fire  and  not  be  burnt.  Christ  walked  the  sea,  that 
we  call  supernatural :  yet  I  am  not  sure  but  it  is  the  true  natural— the  state  in 
■which  man  found  himself  in  the  Paradise  of  old,  and  in  Paradise  regained  he  will 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  117 

walk  through  rivers  and  they  will  not  overflow  him.  Paul  took  hold  of  serpents, 
and  they  did  not  bite  him,  nor  did  tht^y  bite  man  in  Eden,  and  they  will  not  bite 
him  in  the  future.  And  the  disciples  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  spoke  with  other 
tongues.  The  family  of  man  once  spoke  the  same  language  ;  and  who  knows  but 
the  partition  walls  between  nations  as  the  result  of  the  confusion  of  languagt's  will 
be  totally  removed  by  a  vast  display  of  intellectual  power  on  the  part  of  the  race 
baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  The  mirarde  of  Pentecost  will  gradually  neutralise 
the  miracle  of  Babel.  Men  travel  now  with  greater  speed  than  of  old  ;  they  corre- 
spond with  greater  rapidity  ;  and  who  can  tell  but  that  learning  will  move  with 
greater  ease,  relieved  to  a  certain  extent  from  the  present  drudgery?  "  There  is 
a  royal  road  to  learning."  Let  sin  be  purged  out,  and  man  will  learn  by  intuition. 
Ill,  The  wonderful  wouks  of  God.  1.  His  ordinary  works  are  the  Creation  in  its 
various  ramifications.  He  makes  the  snn  to  rise  and  to  set;  His  wonderful  works 
are  as  Peter's  sermon  shows,  the  life,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
only  subjects  worthy  of  the  pulpit  are  not  the  arts  and  sciences,  but  the  gospel — • 
a  thing  specially  lacking  in  the  sermons  of  some  leading  preachers.  2.  It  is 
truly  remarkable  that  the  wonderful  works  of  God  are  easily  translatable.  Science 
is  not  suitable  for  every  language  ;  it  caunot  speak  Welsh,  e.g.  ;  but  the  gospel 
•can.  A  minister  insisted  on  the  importance  of  knowing  Greek  to  understand  the 
New  Testament.  "  I  do  not,"  remarked  an  old  lady,  "perceive  the  necessity,  for 
my  Saviour  k  lows  Welsh  as  well  "as  I  do.  It  is  in  Welsh  that  I  always  speak 
to  Him,  and  that  He  always  speaks  to  me.  He  knew  Welsh  when  I  was  a  little 
girl,  and  we  have  talked  Welsh  together  ever  since."  3.  But  the  words  intimate  that 
the  disciples  spoke  in  foreign  languages  with  a  thorough  command  of  their  peculiar 
idiom  and  accent.  Not  only  in  their  languages  but  in  their  "  tongues  "  they  had 
the  very  twang  of  natives.  Native  tongue  has  very  great  influence  over  man.  The 
•same  truths  uttered  in  another  language,  though  well  understood,  exercise  not 
the  same  charm.  "  Can  an  Ethiopian  change  his  skin?  "  Yes,  as  soon  as  he  can 
change  his  tongue.  When  St.  Paul  addressed  the  enraged  multitude  in  Jerusalem 
in  Hebrew,  they  grew  calm  and  attentive.  Latin  and  Greek  would  only  excite 
them.  4.  Seeing  that  language  is  the  only  weapon  in  the  propagation  of  the  gospel, 
it  is  of  great  importance  that  its  ministers  should  know  how  to  use  it  deftly  and  well. 
The  sword  of  Cromwell  was  mighty  ;  all  Eurojie  feared  the  flash  of  it.  But  the 
tongue  and  pen  of  Milton  did  more  to  ensure  liberty  of  conscience.  The  pen  is 
stronger  than  the  sword— the  tongue  can  drown  the  roar  of  cannon.  5.  And  the 
Church  leads  the  van  in  the  study  of  languages.  Commerce  and  love  of  learning 
have  done  a  little  in  that  direction  ;  but  they  generally  follow  in  the  wake  of  the 
gospel.  Who  aie  the  first  to  learn  the  languages  of  distant  nations,  to  write  their 
grammars,  to  compile  their  dictionaries  ?  Missionaries  of  the  gospel.  What  book  is 
the  first  to  speak  in  the  barbarous  tongues  of  the  earth?  The  Bible ;  but  the  moment 
the  Bible  speaks  in  those  tongues  they  forthwith  cease  to  be  barbarous.  Sin  has 
left  its  deep,  black  marks  upon  language.  Open  your  English  dictionary  and  you 
will  find  in  the  first  loage  that  three-fourths  of  the  words  owe  their  existence  and 
significance  to  sin.  But  these  words  must  gradually  grow  obsolete,  and  language 
be  refashioned — the  gospel  will  leave  its  mark  upon  the  dictionary.  The  Church 
of  the  present  day  is  richly  endued  with  the  gift  of  tongues,  every  fresh  effusion 
of  the  Spirit  being  followed  by  the  certain  acquisition  of  a  new  language.  Go  to 
the  Bible  Society  House,  where  the  Church  speaks  in  no  fewer  than  two  hundred 
and  fifty  languages.  The  disciples  only  began ;  the  Church  continues  and  will 
continue  till  all  nations  shall  have  heard  in  their  own  tongues  the  wonderful  works 
of  God.  6.  But  we  are  not  taught  languages  miraculously  now.  True ;  and  for 
valid  reasons — (1)  One  is  the  printing  press.  What  the  gift  of  tongues  did  for 
the  Church  of  Pentecost,  the  printing  press  has  done  for  the  Church  of  the  Eeforma- 
i;ion.  (2)  Another  is  the  abundance  of  the  labourers.  In  the  primitive  Church 
there  were  only  a  few,  whereas  there  was  a  whole  world  to  evangelise.  So  God 
gave  them  their  tools  ready  made — sickles  sharpened  for  work.  But  the  need  for 
this  no  longer  exists.  There  are  Christians  enough  in  England  alone  to  learn  all 
the  languages  of  the  earth,  and  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  in  less  than 
ten  years,  without  in  the  least  disturbing  the  ordinary  course  of  business  at  home. 
God,  therefore,  has  withdrawn  the  mirncle.  To  continue  it  would  be  to  patronise 
indolence,  and  do  for  believers  what  they  can  easily  do  for  themselves.  7.  The 
miracle  has  ceased,  but  the  blessing  enveloped  in  the  miracle  remains.  (1)  The 
necessity  for  miracles  arises  out  of  the  want  and  not  of  the  wealth  of  the  age. 
Hence  Jesus  turned  water  into  wine,  multiplied  loaves  and  fishes  and  healed  the 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

sick,  because  there  were  no  other  means  of  supply  and  effectual  medicine.  It  is- 
different  now.  (2)  The  miraculous  ages  are  always  the  most  spiritually  im- 
poverished. The  deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egypt  is  marked  by  miracles.  But 
the  necessity  for  them  arose  out  of  the  moral  dearth  of  the  times.  As  the  con- 
sciousness of  God  grew,  the  miraculous  continued  to  wax  smaller,  till  in  the  reigns 
of  David  and  Solomon — the  richest  period  materially,  intellectually,  and  spiritually 
— it  ceased  altogether.  But  in  subsequent  reigns  spiritual  religion  rapidly  declined  ; 
therefore  the  gift  of  miracles  was  again  revived  in  the  persons  of  Elijah  and  Elisha, 
When  the  Saviour  appeared  the  epoch  was  the  most  degraded  in  the  annals  of  the 
race.  The  gift  of  miracles  was  therefore  granted  once  more.  Miraculous  is  always 
in  inverse  proportion  to  spiritual  power  ;  where  the  latter  grows  the  former  declines. 
Will  miracles  be  again  revived  in  the  Christian  Church?  Not  unless  spiritual 
religion  be  threatened  with  speedy  extinction.  IV.  To  jien  of  other  nations. 
1.  Increased  life  always  demands  increased  scope  for  its  exercise.  There  was  no 
power  to  spread  itself  in  religion  under  the  Old  Testament.  The  Spirit  whs  given 
in  very  scanty  measures,  just  enough  to  preserve,  but  not  to  multiply  life  and 
replenish  the  earth.  That  Judaism  should  cover  only  a  small  portion  of  the  globe 
was  an  absolute  necessity,  for  it  could  maintain  its  life  only  by  concentration.  If 
the  fire  be  small,  it  can  only  be  kept  burning  by  being  heaped  close  together.  Let 
the  coals  be  scattered,  and  the  fire  will  die  out.  And  under  the  Old  Testament 
only  a  few  sparks  came  down  from  heaven  to  earth ;  hence  it  was  necessary  to 
gather  them  together  within  the  narrow  confines  of  Palestine.  And  in  the  days 
of  the  Saviour  the  fire  was  nearly  extinguished.  Fire  was  the  great  need  of  ttie 
age.  "  I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water,"  exclaims  the  Baptist ;  but  water  can  only 
cleanse  the  surface,  but  He  will  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire. 
And  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  the  prediction  is  fulfilled.  The  fire  first  burns  inta 
the  hearts  of  the  disciples,  then  it  begins  to  extend  its  area,  and  now  it  thi'eatens 
to  burn  up  all  the  stubble  of  the  world.  2.  This  increased  life  reveals  itself 
instinctively  in  a  desire  to  enlarge  its  circumference.  Whenever  the  presence  of 
the  Spirit  is  powerfully  felt  in  the  Church,  it  is  invariably  followed  by  a  renewed 
effort  to  evangelise  the  world.  Let  the  spring  impart  new  life  to  the  roots  of  the 
trees,  and  the  life  will  at  once  be  transmitted  to  the  branches,  covering  them 
with  abundant  foliage.  Let  the  warm,  genial  months  come  round,  reviving  the 
drooping  nature  of  the  bii'd  after  the  long  dreary  winter  cold,  and  the  bird  shows 
it  immediately  in  his  song.  He  does  not  sing  iDecause  he  tliinks  he  ought;  he 
sings  because  he  must.  And  it  is  a  poor  way  of  promoting  the  evangelistic  zeal 
of  the  Church  to  demonstrate  constamly  what  she  ought  to  do.  It  is  useless  to 
lay  down  rules  for  the  guidance  of  the  Churches  unless  we  supply  them  with  motive 
power.  (1)  I  do  not  cry  down  organisations  ;  they  are  very  valuable  in  their  proper 
place.  But  they  are  only  cisterns,  and  cisterns,  though  of  the  most  appioved  pattern, 
are  not  of  much  use  to  quench  thirst.  The  Pentecostal  Church  had  few  organisa- 
tions ;  but  she  had  the  water  of  life  to  give  freely  to  all  who  were  in  need.  The 
modern  Church  can  boast  of  multitudinous  organisations ;  and  so  far  she  can 
claim  superiority  to  the  early  Church,  for  cisterns  after  all  are  serviceable.  What 
glorious  cisterns  are  missionary  societies !  They  have  silver  pipes  connecting 
them  with  every  country  under  heaven  ;  the  waterworks  are  laid  to  convey  the  water 
of  life  to  every  thirsty  soul.  But  the  results  are  seldom  proportionate  to  the 
expenditure.  The  cisterns  too  often  run  dry.  How  few  the  triumphs  of  Christianity 
at  home  and  abrond  !  How  tardy  its  onward  march  1  Why  ?  Lack  of  funds, 
answer  our  secretaries.  Nay,  lack  of  life,  piety,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  Had  the 
apostles  funds  to  ba(!k  their  efforts?  (2)  Keflection  on  the  part  of  the  Church  is 
not  to  be  discouraged.  But  stock-taking  will  not  clothe  the  naked.  We  spend  too 
much  time  in  surveying  our  property,  and  meanwhile  our  enthusiasm  considerably 
abates.  The  Greek  Church  took  stock  of  all  the  Christian  doctrines  and  reduced 
them  into  carefully  worded  articles.  But  in  reflection  she  lost  her  ardour,  in 
speculation  evaporated  all  her  life.  The  most  orthodox  church  became  practicfllly 
a  dead  church.  I  have  not  heard  of  her  sending  out  missionaries  to  evangelise 
the  heathen.  What  then  is  required  to  awaken  within  her  the  old  life  and  incite 
her  to  new  adventures?  What  is  wnntingtomake  Roman  and  Protestant  Churches 
more  powerful  for  good  in  the  world  ?  Another  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
We  have  cisterns  enough,  pray  for  the  living  water;  machinery  enough,  pray  the 
Spirit  of  the  living  creatui'e  to  enter  the  wheels,  and  then  it  will  do  more  work  and 
make  less  noise.  V.  That  they  also  MmnT  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 
•'Ilepent  and  be  baptized,"  &c.     1.  Truth,  though  it  be  Christian  truth,  cannot 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  119 

till  and  satisfy  our  nature.  God  alone  can  do  that.  This,  of  course,  implies  that 
human  nature  is  capacious  enough  to  take  in  the  Spirit.  God  is  too  great  for  our 
powers,  but  not  for  our  wants ;  too  vast  for  our  reason,  but  not  for  our  hearts. 
Our  abilities  are  limited  enough,  but  our  necessities  are  verily  boundless.  "  Let  us 
make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  Ukeness  ";  and  He  made  him  in  the  similitude 
even  of  His  infinitude.  I  have  infinite  wants  within  me,  and  through  the 
Infinite  within  I  can  know  the  Infinite  without,  and  receive  Him  in  the  ample 
plenitude  of  His  power  and  grace  into  my  soul.  How  does  the  infant  know  his 
mother  ?  By  his  wants.  He  knows  not  whether  she  is  rich  or  poor,  accomplished 
or  unlearned,  beautiful  or  plain ;  but  he  thoroughly  knows  her  when  he  is  hungry, 
for  she  feeds  him  ;  when  he  is  cold,  for  she  warms  him ;  when  he  is  in  pain,  for 
she  soothes  him.  We  know  God  just  in  the  same  way.  2.  We  may  be  filled 
with  Him  so  as  to  convince  unbelievers,  not  only  that  we  have  been  with  God,  but 
that  He  dwells  in  us  of  a  truth.  There  is  a  curious  invention  to  fill  the  human 
body  with  electricity.  If  you  only  approach  the  body  so  filled,  it  will  shoot  forth 
sparks  of  wild  lightning.  But  all  connection  between  the  body  and  the  earth  must 
be  severjpd ;  the  man  must  stand  on  a  non-conducting  material,  else  the  electric 
fluid  will  flow  out  as  fast  as  it  flows  in.  In  like  manner  we  may  be  recipients  of 
the  Divine  fire.  And  sometimes  we  feel  as  if  we  were  getting  full,  we  emit  Divine 
sparks  at  the  approach  of  others — they  are  convinced  that  God  is  in  us  of  a  truth. 
But  ere  many  days  pass,  the  hallowed  influences  have  all  flowed  out.  Worldliness 
is  the  great  sin  of  the  Church  ;  it  robs  us  of  the  Divine  in  Christian  experience. 
Oh  for  another  Pentecostal  baptism  !  We  need  the  Spirit  now  as  much  as  ever 
to  convert  unbelievers,  and  to  stir  up  the  dormant  energies  of  the  Church.  Why  is 
it  that  Christian  workers  see  so  little  fruit  to  their  labours  ?  That  the  success  is 
not  commensurate  with  the  organisations  ?  Some  answer,  The  poverty  of  your 
sermons.  But  that  cannot  be  the  reason  for  every  preaching  qualification  met  in 
Christ,  and  yet  He  made  but  comparatively  few  converts.  "  He  could  not  do 
many  mighty  works  there,  because  of  their  unbelief."  A  cold  church,  an  unbeliev- 
ing church  robs  itself  of  the  choicest  blessings  of  heaven.  Let  it  not  blame  its 
ministers  for  its  non-success — roses  will  not  grow  in  Greenland,  trees  will  not 
blossom  at  the  North  Pole.  [J.  Cynddylan  Jones,  D.D.)  The  day  of  Pentecost : 
— I.  The  religious  history  op  the  world  has  been  marked  by  great  steps  or 

PERIODS,  SEPARATED  BY  STRIKING  EVENTS  OR  EPOCHS,  AND  CONSTITUTING  DISPENSA- 
TIONS OR  ERAS.  1.  Thus  the  creation  of  man  inaugurated  an  era  which  continued 
until  the  Flood ;  the  covenant  with  Noah  inaugurated  another,  which  continued 
until  the  Exodus  ;  the  delivery  of  the  law  another,  which  continued  until  Christ's 
ascension ;  and  the  day  of  Pentecost  another,  in  the  course  of  which  our  own 
generation  finds  its  place.  This,  too,  will  be  superseded  by  the  Second  Advent. 
And  it  is  well  for  us  to  connect  the  little  day  of  our  life  with  this  magnificent  pro- 
gression. As  an  independent  thing  our  life  is  utterly  insignificant ;  as  a  contribut- 
ing item,  it  becomes  almost  sublime.  2.  Up  to  the  day  of  Pentecost  every  dispensa- 
tion was  preparatory.  Christianity  is  final ;  and  therefore  surpasses  in  importance 
every  other  that  preceded  it.  All  the  constituent  elements  of  Christianity  were 
now  provided ;  the  life  of  Christ  had  demonstrated  the  practicability  and  holiness 
of  God's  law ;  His  death  had  constituted  an  atonement  for  transgressors  ;  His 
resurrection  had  attested  it ;  His  ascension  had  consummated  His  incarnate  life  ; 
and  then,  after  seven  or  eight  days,  as  if  to  mark  by  a  solemn  pause  the  broad 
boundary  line  of  Judaism  and  Christianity,  the  Holy  Spirit  was  palpably  bestowed  ; 
and  the  spiritual  religion  of  Christ  inaugurated.  3.  Amongst  the  anniversaries  of 
the  Church,  therefore,  the  day  of  Pentecost  must  ever  occupy  an  august  position, 
Christianity  was  a  completed  system  stereotyped  for  all  men  to  the  end  of  the 
world  in  a  historical  form.  II.  The  dispensational  change  which  the  day  op 
Pentecost  marked  and  consummated.  The  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  stands  in 
natural  and  logical  order  amongst  the  Divine  dispensations  looked  at.  1.  As 
manifestations  of  God.  Of  these  there  have  been  three  successively  presented,  and 
corresponding  with  the  triune  distinction  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  First, 
the  revelation  of  the  Father — the  manifestation  of  those  ideas  of  the  Divine 
nature  which  we  associate  with  the  Father — such  as  power,  wisdom,  holiness,  and 
law.  Secondly,  the  revelation  of  the  Son — the  manifestation  of  those  ideas  of  the 
Divine  nature  which  we  associate  with  the  Son — such  as  teaching,  mediation, 
sacrifice,  love.  Lastly,  the  revelation  of  the  Spirit — as  the  Source  of  life,  the 
Enlightener,  the  Sanctifier,  the  Comforter.  And  these  correspond  in  their  order  to 
the  spiritual  education  of  men.     In  their  ignorance  and  guilt  they  need  first  to  be 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  ii. 

tanght  the  idea  of  GoJ.  Convinced  of  sin,  they  then  need  to  be  taught  a  way 
of  reconciliation;  and  under  the  dispensation  of  the  Son,  they  have  the  great  saving 
plan  revealed.  Under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  a  provision  is  made  for  the 
efficiency  of  the  plan  ;  spiritual  life  is  quickened;  they  are  not  only  forgiven,  but 
sanctified.  So  with  their  education  in  worship.  Under  the  dispensation  of  the 
Father,  they  learn  the  first  rudiments  of  worship,  through  material  symbols  and 
pictures  ;  under  the  dispensation  of  the  Son  they  worship  the  spiritual  God,  but 
in  connection  with  the  living  body  of  the  Incarnate  One ;  under  the  dispensation 
of  the  Spirit,  they  worship  without  any  material  medium  in  "  spirit  and  in  truth," 
The  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  assumed  two  distinct  forms, 
and  produced  two  distinct  effects.  (1)  As  miraculous  endowment  it  was  peculiar 
to  the  apostles.  This  was  indicated  by  material  symbols.  But  such  endowment 
was  incidental  and  subordinate.  Just  as  the  miracles  of  Christ  are  not  to  be 
confounded  with  His  moral  mission,  so  the  miraculous  endowments  of  the  Spirit 
are  not  to  be  confounded  with  His  moral  or  sanctifying  influences.  The  miraculous 
element  in  both  cases  is  simply  the  credential  or  attestation  of  the  moral.  It  soon, 
therefore,  ceased.  As  moral  evidence  for  Christianity  accumulated,  and  the 
written  records  of  the  New  Testament  were  completed,  miraculous  testimony  was 
withdrawn.  (2)  But  the  deeper  and  abiding  manifestation  was  that  moral  and 
regenerating  influence  of  it  of  which  Christ  discoursed  to  Nicodemus,  and  is  known, 
therefore,  only  by  its  effects.  The  former  was  an  endowment  of  the  preacher; 
this  is  an  endowment  of  the  hearer,  qualifying  and  disposing  him  to  receive  it  in 
the  saving  love  and  power  of  it.  2.  As  a  saving  provision  for  man.  (1)  This  dis- 
pensation of  the  Spirit  abides  with  the  Church  for  ever,  and  is  bestowed  upon  all 
believers.  And  this  is  the  grand  and  transcendent  characteristic  of  Christianity, 
whereby  it  provides  for  the  efficacy  of  its  own  religious  teaching.  Other  religions 
give  laws,  and  leave  men  unaided  with  the  stern  requirement ;  but  Christianity 
gives  dispositions  as  well  as  laws.  It  puts  a  new  spirit  into  those  whom  it  calls 
to  its  diseipleship.  (2)  We  cannot,  therefore,  exaggerate  the  importance  of  this 
provision.  Without  it,  all  that  Christ  has  taught  or  done  would  have  been  in  vain  ; 
we  should  for  lack  of  spiritual  discernment  have  failed  to  discern  spiritual  things, 
and  for  lack  of  spiritual  affection  failed  to  have  embraced  them.  (3)  Of  course 
spiritual  influence  of  this  kind  must  have  been  in  operation  before.  No  holy  man 
ever  became  such  save  through  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  allusions  to 
which  are  very  numerous  in  the  Old  Testament.  But  just  as  the  work  of  Christ 
was  in  efficacious  operation  before  Christ  Himself  was  historically  manifested,  so 
was  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  Just  as  the  first  pardoned  man  was  justified  by  faith 
in  Christ,  so  the  first  holy  man  was  renewed  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  just  as  the  Nativity  was  the  manifestation  of  the  atoning  Christ,  so  the  day 
of  Pentecost  was  the  manifestation  of  the  renewing  spirit.  As  much  of  the  character 
and  work  of  the  Son  were  revealed  as  the  world  could  receive ;  and  as  much  of  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Spirit  was  exerted  as  the  moral  condition  of  the  world  would  admit  of. 
Hence  we  may  understandhow  there  should  be  a  greater  amount  of  spiritual  influence 
operating  in  the  Christian  Church  than  in  the  Jewish  Church.  {H.  Allon,  D.D.) 
The  fitness  of  the  day  of  Pentecost : — It  is  natural  to  assume  a  purpose  in  the  Divine 
choice  of  the  day  on  which  the  disciples  were  thus  to  receive  the  promise  of  the 
Father.  That  choice  may  have  been  determined,  if  one  may  so  speak,  either  in 
view  of  the  circumstances  of  the  feast,  or  of  its  history  and  symbolic  fitness.  1.  Of 
all  the  feasts  of  the  Jewish  year  it  was  that  which  attracted  the  largest  number  of 
pilgrims  from  distant  lands.  The  dangers  of  travel  by  sea  or  land  in  the  early 
spring  or  late  autumn  (cf.  chap,  xxvii.  9)  prevented  their  coining  in  any  large 
numbers  to  the  Passover.  At  no  other  feast  would  there  have  been  representatives 
of  so  many  nations.  It  was  Pentecost  that  St.  Paul  went  up  to  keep  once  and 
again,  during  his  mission-work  in  Greece  and  Asia  (chaps,  xviii.  21 ;  xx,  16).  So 
there  was  no  time  on  which  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  was  likely  to  produce  such  direct 
and  immediate  results.  2.  Each  aspect  of  the  old  Feast  of  Weeks,  now  known  as 
Pentecost,  or  the  "  Fiftieth-day  "  Feast,  presented  a  symbolic  meaning  which  made 
it  typical  of  the  work  now  about  to  be  accomplished.  (1)  It  was  the  "feast  of 
harvest,  the  feast  of  the  first-fruits  " ;  and  so  it  was  meet  that  it  should  witness  the 
first  great  gathering  of  the  fields  that  were  white  to  harvest  (Exod.  xxiii.  16).  (2)  It 
was  one  on  which,  more  than  on  any  other,  the  Israelite  was  to  remember  that  he 
had  been  a  bondman  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  had  been  led  forth  to  freedom  (Deut. 
xvi,  12),  and  on  it,  accordingly,  they  were  to  do  no  servile  work  (Lev.  xxiii.  31) ; 
and  it  was,  therefore,  a  fit  time  for  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  of  whom  it  was  emphatic 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  121 

cally  true  that  "  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  17), 
and  who  was  to  guide  the  Church  into  the  truth  wliich  should  make  men  free 
indeed  (John  viii.  32).  (3)  It  was  a  day  on  which  sacrifices  of  every  kind  were 
offered — burnt-offerings,  and  sin-offerings,  and  meat-offerings,  and  peace-offerings 
— and  so  represented  the  consecration  of  body,  soul,  and  spirit  as  a  spiritual  sacri- 
fice (Lev.  xxiii.  17-20).  (4)  As  on  the  Passover  the  first  ripe  sheaf  of  corn  was 
waved  before  Jehovah  as  the  type  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  of  the  corn  of  wheat 
which  is  not  quickened  except  it  die  (Lev.  xxiii.  10;  John  xii.  24),  so  on  Pentecost 
two  wave-loaves  of  fine  flour  were  to  be  offered,  the  type,  it  may  be,  under  the  light 
now  thiown  on  them,  of  the  Jewish  and  the  Gentile  Churches  (Lev.  xxiii.  17).  And 
these  loaves  were  to  be  leavened,  as  a  witness  that  the  process  of  the  contact  of 
mind  with  mind,  which — as  the  prohibition  of  leaven  in  the  Passover  ritual  bore 
witness — is  naturally  so  fruitful  in  evil,  might  yet,  under  a  higher  influence,  become 
one  of  unspeakable  good :  the  new  life  working  through  the  tbree  measures  of 
meal  until  the  whole  was  leavened  (Matt.  xiii.  83).  8.  The  Feast  of  Pentecost  had 
— traditionally,  at  least — also  a  commemorative  character.  On  that  day — so  it  was 
computed  by  the  later  Eabbis,  though  the  Book  of  Exodus  (xix.  1)  seems  to  leave 
the  matter  in  some  uncertainty — the  Israelites  had  encamped  round  Sinai,  and 
there  had  been  thunders,  and  darkness,  and  voices,  and  the  great  Laws  had  been 
pi'oclaimed.  It  was,  that  is,  an  epoch-making  day  in  the  religious  history  of  Israel. 
It  was  fit  that  it  should  be  chosen  for  another  great  epoch-making  day,  which, 
seeming  at  first  to  be  meant  for  Israel  only,  was  intended  ultimately  for  mankind. 
(Dean  Plmnptre.)  The  feast  of  harvest: — I.  The  consecrated  harvest  of  the 

FIELD.  It  may  seem  somewhat  singular  that  we  sh(juld  be  talking  of  harve-it  on  the 
first  of  June,  but  in  Palestine  the  harvest  is  much  earlier  than  where  the  climate  is 
more  severe.  At  the  beginning  of  the  barley  harvest  the  first  ripe  ears  were  pre- 
sented to  the  Lord  in  due  order,  but  at  the  fuller  festival  they  brought  into  God's 
house,  not  the  ears  of  wheat,  but  two  large  loaves — the  fruit  of  the  earth  actually 
prepared  for  human  food.  What  did  that  mean  ?  1.  That  all  came  from  God. 
We  regard  our  bread  as  the  fruit  of  our  own  labour  ;  but  who  gives  us  strength  to 
labour,  and  gives  the  earth  the  power  to  bring  forth  her  harvest  ?  I  fear  in  many 
houses  bread  is  eaten  and  the  Giver  is  forgotten.  Let  us  by  grateful  offerings  to 
the  Lord  express  our  thankfulness  for  all  the  comforts  we  enjoy.  2.  That  all  our 
possessions  need  God's  blessing  upon  them.  Without  a  blessing  from  God  His  gifts 
become  temptations,  and  bring  with  them  care  rather  than  refreshment.  It  was  a 
joyous  sight  to  see  the  loaves  and  the  fishes  multiplied ;  but  the  best  part  of  it  was 
that  the  Master  looked  up  to  heaven  and  blessed  them.  If  thou  bast  little,  yet  if 
God  has  blessed  thy  little  there  is  a  flavour  in  it  which  the  ungodly  cannot  know 
when  tbey  fill  themselves  with  stalled  oxen.  If  thou  hast  ample,  yet  if  thou  hast 
more  blessing,  thy  riches  shall  not  be  a  snare  to  thee.  8.  That  all  we  have  we  hold 
under  God  as  His  stewards.  These  two  loaves  were  a  kind  of  peppercorn  rent 
acknowledging  the  superior  landlord  who  was  the  true  owner  of  the  Holy  Land. 
We  farm  our  portions  and  gather  the  fruit  as  stewards  for  the  Most  Higli,  and 
bring  a  part  thereof  to  His  altar  in  token  that  we  would  use  the  rest  to  His  glory. 
Have  we  all  done  this  with  our  substance  ?  Where  is  that  one  talent  of  thine,  0 
slothful  servant?  Where  are  those  five  talents,  0  thou  man  of  influence  and  of 
wealth  ?  4.  That  they  were  afraid  they  might  commit  sin  in  the  using  of  what 
God  had  given.  The  first  thank-offering  was  of  barley,  fresh  plucked  from  the 
field ;  but  this  second  offering  of  the  first-fruits  was  not  wheat  as  God  made  it. 
Why  was  it  ordained  that  they  should  present  leaven  to  God  ?  To  show  us  that 
common  life,  with  all  its  imperfections,  may  yet  be  used  for  God's  glory.  We 
may,  through  our  Lord  Jesus,  be  accepted  in  shop-life  as  well  as  in  sanctuary-life, 
in  market-dealing  as  well  as  in  sacramental  meditation.  Yet  do  not  fail  to  notice 
that  they  brought  also  a  burnt-offering :  so  the  precious  blood  of  Christ's  sacrifice 
must  fall  upon  our  leavened  loaves,  or  they  will  be  sour  before  the  Lord.  "  He 
hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  Nay,  that  was  not  all.  In  consideration 
of  the  loaf  being  leavened,  they  brought  with  it  a  sin-offering  as  well  (Lev.  xxiii. 
19),  Confessing,  as  each  one  of  us  must  do,  that  however  hearty  our  dedication  to 
God,  there  is  still  a  faultiness  in  our  lives,  we  are  glad  to  be  cleansed  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus.  5,  All  this  was  done  as  an  act  of  joy.  A  new  meat-offering  was  offered 
unto  the  Lord  with  peace-offerings,  which  two  always  signify,  among  other  thing's, 
a  quiet,  happy  communion  with  God,  In  addition  to  all  this  they  presented  a 
drink-offering  of  wine,  which  expresses  the  joy  of  the  offerer.  Pentecost  was  not  a 
fast,  but  a  festival.    When  thou  givest  anything  to  God,  give  it  not  as  though  it 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

were  a  tax,  but  freely  ;  or  it  cannot  be  accepted.  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver.  His 
service  is  perfect  freedom ;  to  give  to  Him  is  rapture ;  to  live  to  Him  is  heaven. 
II.  The  consecrated  harvest  of  ouk  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  taught  by  the  events 
of  the  great  Christian  Pentecost.  Our  Lord  is  the  greatest  of  all  sowers,  for  He 
sowed  Himself.  "  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground,"  &c.  Had  He  not 
said,  "  The  fields  are  white  already  to  harvest "  ?  and  now,  when  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost was  fully  come,  the  fruit  was  seen  of  them,  and  joyfully  gathered.  Learn — 1. 
That  the  first  harvest  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  through  the  Holy  Ghost.  There 
were  no  three  thousand  converts  till  first  of  all  was  heard  the  rushing  of  mighty 
wind.  Till  the  cloven  tongues  had  rested  on  the  disciples  there  were  no  broken 
hearts  among  the  crowd.  Until  the  believers  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
the  minds  of  their  hearers  were  not  filled  with  conviction.  If  you  desire  to  save 
your  class  you  must  yourselves  be  endowed  with  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  You 
cannot  burn  a  way  for  the  truth  into  tbe  heart  of  another  unless  the  tongue  of  fire 
is  given  to  you  from  on  high.  2.  That  day  may  be  considered  to  be  the  ordering  of 
the  Christian  dispensation.  It  was  exactly  fifty  days  after  the  original  Passover 
that  the  law  was  given  on  Mount  Sinai.  At  the  commencement  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment dispensation  the  Lord  gives  the  Spirit.  Under  the  old  covenant  the  command 
was  given  ;  but  under  the  new  the  will  and  the  power  to  obey  are  bestowed  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Moses  on  the  mount  can  only  tell  us  what  to  do,  but  Jesus  ascended 
on  high  pours  out  the  power  to  do  it.  Now  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under 
gi-ace,  and  the  Spirit  is  our  guiding  force.  3.  This  Pentecost  was  also  the  beginning 
of  a  great  harvest  of  Jews  and  Gentiles.  Were  there  not  two  loaves  ?  Not  only 
shall  Israel  be  saved,  but  the  multitude  of  the  Gentiles  shall  be  turned  unto  the 
Lord.  If  the  first-fruits  were  so  great,  what  will  the  ultimate  harvest  be  ?  (1)  The 
filling  of  the  apostles  with  the  Holy  Ghost  was  a  part  of  the  first-fruits.  A  man  full 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  rejoices  the  heart  of  Christ.  (2)  Still,  the  major  part  of  the 
Pentecostal  first-fruits  will  be  found  in  the  great  number  that  were  that  day  con- 
verted. 4.  The  Christian  Pentecost  is  to  us  full  of  instruction.  (1)  The  disciples 
had  to  wait  for  it.  "  The  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth." 
Sow  on :  Pentecost  will  yet  yield  its  loaves  unto  the  Lord.  (2)  They  obtained 
nothing  until  they  began  preaching  the  gospel,  and  then  in  one  day  the  Church 
was  multiplied  by  twenty-five.  (3)  Of  all  those  people  saved  it  was  acknowledged 
that  they  belongt  d  unto  the  Lord  alone.  (4)  Even  if  we  should  see  three  thousand 
converted  in  a  day  we  must  not  reckon  that  such  first-fruits  would  be  absolutely 
perfect.  In  all  our  successes  and  additions  there  will  sure  to  be  a  leaven.  Do  not 
wonder  if  some  converts  go  back.  It  will  always  be  so  ;  tares  grow  with  the  wheat, 
and  bad  fish  are  taken  in  the  same  net  with  the  good.  III.  The  consecrated 
HARVEST  FROM  EACH  PARTICULAR  PERSON.  In  Deutcronomy  xxvi.  you  will  find  there 
a  form  of  service  which  I  pray  may  serve  your  turn  to-day.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
A  Whitsunday  vieditation : — There  is  a  Christian  as  well  as  a  Jewish  year ;  we 
ought  not  to  be  unmindful  of  the  changes  which  illustrate  God's  holy  counsel  and 
tender  conduct.  The  Author  of  natural  and  spiritual  life  is  one,  and  He  gives  many 
a  hint  of  His  gracious  purpose  in  the  changes  of  the  year.  Christ  has  taught  us  to 
see  in  seed-sowing  a  symbol  of  the  Cross,  and  a  call  to  Christian  sacrifice.  The 
"  harvest,"  the  solemn  fruitful  autumn-time,  reminds  us  of  "  the  end  of  the  world," 
and  has  its  strangely  blended  influences  of  mournfuluess  and  hope.  Spring  is  a 
type  of  the  resurrection  ;  life  bursting  out  of  the  grave.  Of  all  symbols  of  the 
Christian  life,  this  early  summer-time  is  the  most  blessed.  Calm  as  the^e  warm 
and  not  yet  sultry  days  ;  peaceful  as  early  June  mornings  ;  fresh  as  the  dews  and 
showers ;  rich  as  the  verdure  of  our  landscape,  it  is  given  us  to  know  that  our 
Christian  life  is  under  the  silent  energy  of  the  Spirit.  I.  The  Passover  and  Pente- 
cost WERE  INTIMATELY  CONNECTED.  1.  The  injuuctiou  to  keep  the  feast  of  first-fruits 
concludes,  "  and  thou  shalt  remember  that  thou  wast  a  bondman  in  Efzypt  "  ;  the 
rejoicing  followed  the  commemoration  of  the  deliverance.  The  Jews  call  the  day 
of  Pentecost  the  "  concluding  festival " ;  i.e.,  the  festival  that  concludes  the  Pat^chal 
celebration.  Tlie  association  is  not  difficult  to  trace.  The  national  life  of  Israel 
was  the  sequel  to  their  deliverance  from  Egypt.  It  was  not  enough  for  them  to  be 
set  free  and  to  be  led  into  the  desert.  God  had  prepared  a  land  for  them  needing 
greater  labour  and  more  careful  cultivation  than  Egypt,  but  yielding  better  fruits. 
The  feast  of  Pentecost  was  their  memorial  that  God  had  fulfilled  His  promise. 
They  brought  the  fruits  of  the  land  which  He  had  given  them,  and  remembered 
year  by  year  that  He  blessed  their  toil,  and  was  nourishing  the  men  He  had 
redeemed.     2.  Spiritual  life  is  the  sequel  of  Christian  redemption  ;  the  gift  of  the 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  123 

Holy  Ghost  was  God's  purposed  supplement  of  Calvary.  Spiritual  history  begins 
with  the  Cross,  but  it  does  not  end  there.  It  sometimes  happens  thtt  the  first 
gladness  and  gratitude  of  a  forgiven  soul  are  followed  by  a  strange  restlessness  and 
dissatisfaction,  as  was  the  deliverance  of  Israel.  But  the  Paschal  time,  of  haste 
aud  scarce-quelled  anxiety,  of  girded  loins  and  unleavened  bread  and  bitter  herbs, 
are  followed  by  the  Pentecost  of  life,  love,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is 
not  till  tins  Divine  life  is  formed  within  us  by  God's  Spirit,  strong  as  the  forces  that 
clothe  the  earth  with  summer  beauty,  that  we  can  fully  commemorate  the  death  of 
Christ  which  is  our  redemption.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  needed  by  the  men  who  were 
to  be  preachers  of  the  Cross.  He  not  only  unfolded  to  them  its  meaning  ;  He  dwelt 
in  them  an  energy  tender,  earnest,  and  strong,  like  that  of  Christ  the  Eedeemer. 
They  had  life  in  them  ;  and  nothing  could  suppress  their  faith,  their  gladness,  or 
their  labours ;  and  by  all  the  genial  force  of  life,  men  were  constrained  by  their 
influence,  and  drawn  into  their  communion.  And  so  now,  if  Christian  teaching  is 
ineffective,  it  is  because  it  lacks  the  force  of  Christian  life.  Our  teaclnng  may  be 
scrupulously  orthodox,  yet  very  repellent  and  cold.  Our  efforts  may  be  unnumbered, 
and  our  plans  most  wisely  organised  ;  yet,  without  the  love,  the  earnestness  that 
only  life  can  give,  they  will  be  all  in  vain.  There  is  something  for  us  besides  pray- 
ing for  the  Divine  life;  it  is  to  live  it.  Christians  sometimes  ask  that  "  the  Spirit 
may  be  poured  out."  He  has  been  poured  out.  II.  Pentecost  was  a  memorial  op 
God's  constant  presence  and  power.  The  feast  was  ordained  to  remind  the  Jews 
who  it  was  who  gave  them  their  corn  and  wine  and  oil.  They  were  not  permitted 
to  eat  of  the  year's  harvest  till  the  first  sheaves  had  been  waved  before  the  Lord,  and 
the  two  loaves  offered  to  Ilim ;  lest  they  should  think  that  the  earth  brought  forth 
fruit  of  itself,  lest  they  should  be  undevout,  and  gluttonous,  and  drunken  in  their 
feasts.  This  was  the  consecration  of  the  "  first-fruits  "  which  would  hallow  the 
"  whole  lump  "  of  which  they  were  daily  partaking.  The  Jews,  like  Englishmen, 
were  prone  to  practical  atheism ;  they,  like  Englishmen,  only  recognised  God  in 
signal  events  of  their  history,  unmindful  of  the  care  that  was  daily  mindful  of 
them,  and  the  bounty  which  daily  made  them  glad.  All  piety  decays  when  we 
forget  that  the  "  Father  "  is  "  ever  working."  Body  and  soul,  as  well  as  spirit,  have 
been  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  Food  and  raiment,  house-room  and  friends, 
have  been  given  us  by  the  same  Father  who  gave  us  His  Son.  The  jDower  that 
quickened  the  world  from  the  Cross  is  ruling  over  it  still;  the  love  that  shines  in 
the  Cross  giVes  summer  flowers  and  autumn  fruits.  Men  who  see  nothing  more 
than  forces  of  nature  in  the  power  that  yearly  clothes  the  hill-sides,  and  makes  the 
valleys  fruitful,  see  too  in  the  Christian  life  nothing  more  than  human  nature  under 
new  developments.  The  day  of  Pentecost  is  the  witness  of  a  Divine  person  abiding 
near  us,  and  working  in  us  all  the  energies  and  influences  of  a  Christian  life.  It 
prevents  our  falling  into  that  despondency  which  must  be  our  lot  if  we  have  none 
to  trust  in  but  ourselves.  Where  we  are  powerless.  He  imparts  life  ;  and  then  truth 
becomes  plain,  and  motives  are  felt  that  we  could  not  awaken.  Earnest  Christian 
people  need  the  teaching  of  the  day  of  Pentecost.  There  are  many  who  connect 
the  Holy  Ghost  only  with  their  conversion,  and  with  periods  of  high-wrought 
emotion  ;  but  in  the  whole  range  of  Christian  life,  however  varied  to  our  feeling, 
the  Spirit,  the  source  of  life,  is  working.  Yes,  and  in  hearts  that  have  not  yet 
yielded  themselves  to  Jesus ;  in  children  born  into  godly  households,  and  abandoned 
ones  listening  wonderingly  to  new  words  of  hope  and  love ;  in  providential  circum- 
stances ;  by  words  of  kindness  and  deeds  that  flow  from  a  heart  of  love  ;  in  every- 
thing that  hrts  a  Christian  tendency,  in  every  influence  that  comes  from  Christ  and 
moves  towards  Him,  "  worketh  that  one  and  the  self-same  Spirit,  dividing  to  every 
man  severally  as  He  will."  A  few  weeks  ago,  and  though  we  knew,  we  did  not  feel 
that  summer  was  nigh.  The  trees  were  bare,  and  the  earth  was  hard,  and  we 
shivered  beneath  the  chilling  blast.  But  God  was  working ;  the  spirit  of  life  was 
moving  ia  the  sluggish  sap,  the  sun  was  gathering  force,  and  the  western  winds 
were  on  their  way  to  us  with  refreshing  showers.  And  lo  !  the  summer  is  here. 
Let  us  work  according  to  God's  will,  and  we  shall  one  day  see  the  glad  and  genial 
life  that  the  Divine  Spirit  is  accomplishing;  for  He  is  near  us  and  is  in  us  still. 
"I  have  planted,  ApoUos  watered,  and  God  gave  the  increase, "  (A.  Mackennal, 
D.D.)  The  White  Sunday  {children's  sermon) : — 1.  Two  reasons  for  the  name. 
(1)  On  Whitsunday  people  used  to  come  to  be  baptized,  dressed  all  in  white. 
Why  ?  Because  they  wanted  to  feel  that  they  were  going  to  be  made  clean.  And 
so  it  came  to  be  called  "  White  Sunday,"  or,  shortened,  "Whit  Sunday."  (2)  If 
you  count  Easter  Sunday  one,  and  then  count  on  to  this  Sunday,  you  will  find  that 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

this  is  the  eighth.  Now  the  French  word  for  "  eight "  is  »'  Miit.^'  You  know  a 
great  many  French  words  came  into  English,  but  people  did  not  know  how  to  spell 
some  of  them,  so  they  spelt  this  word  "  huit^'  as  if  it  were  "white."  2.  What 
happened  on  Whitsunday  ?  The  Holy  Ghost  came  down.  I  cannot  explain  to  you 
all  about  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  very  deep  and  mysterious.  Perhaps  you  have 
heard  about  the  monk  who  was  trying  to  explain  all  about  God.  He  went  down  to 
the  seaside,  and  found  a  man  with  a  little  shell  in  his  hand  scooping  up  the  sea. 
He  said  to  the  man,  "  What  are  you  doing  ?  "  He  replied,  "  I  am  going  to  put  the 
sea  into  this  shell."  "  You  cannot  do  it,"  said  the  monk.  Then  the  man  replied, 
"  My  task  is  easier  than  yours.  You  are  trying  to  put  the  great  God  into  your 
little  mind."  3.  What  does  "Holy  Ghost"  mean?  Holy  Spirit.  Sometimes, 
when  we  cannot  look  at  the  sun,  we  look  at  a  sunbeam  ;  or  we  look  at  the  rellection 
of  the  sun  in  a  looking-glass.  We  cannot  see  the  sun  in  his  full  lustre.  Now  I 
want  to  speak  about  the  Holy  Ghost  by  emblems.  I.  What  is  that  you  can  feel, 
but  cannot  see?  The  wind.  You  can  feel  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  you  cannot  see  Him. 
"  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,"  &c.  The  Saviour  likened  Him  to  that,  and 
said,  "  Except  a  man  be  born,"  &c.  Now — 1.  Nobody  can  go  to  heaven  unless  they 
are  "born  again."  A  man  was  once  asked,  "  Where  were  you  born?"  He  said, 
"In  London,  and  in  Salisbury."  "What!  born  in  two  places?  "he  was  asked. 
He  explained,  "  My  body  was  born  in  London,  and  my  soul  was  born  in  Salisbury." 
Now  what  does  it  mean  ?  Did  you  ever  see  a  new-born  baby  ?  What  a  new, 
strange  world  it  has  come  into.  When  you  become  a  real  Christian,  you  enter  a 
new  world,  and  all  will  be  so  new  to  you.  Poor  little  baby  !  Somebody  must  feed 
it,  clothe  it,  carry  it.  So  when  you  become  a  Christian  you  must  feel,  "  Jesus  must 
carry  me,  clothe  me,  feed  me."  When  you  are  "  born  again  "  you  will  have  new 
thoughts,  new  feelings.  2.  Does  everybody  know  when  they  are  "  born  again  "  ? 
Some  do ;  but  very  few.  There  is  a  great  palm-tree  called  the  Palm  Azaleum,  and 
when  the  blossom  comes  out  of  the  shield,  the  flower  breaks  the  shield  with  a  noise 
as  loud  as  a  cannon.  Everybody  can  know  when  that  flower  comts  dut.  Some 
conversions  are  like  that,  but  most  are  as  quiet  as  when  the  little  grain  comes  out  of 
the  grass,  or  when  the  flower  comes  out  in  the  bud ;  you  can  hardly  tell  when  it 
happens.  One  day  there  was  a  wicked  man  driving  his  cart  along  a  road,  and 
suddenly  the  wind  blew  a  tract  to  his  feet.  Where  that  tract  came  from  he  never 
knew.  He  took  it  up  and  read  it,  and  a  word  there  changed  the  man,  made  him  a 
Christian.  The  Holy  Ghost,  like  the  wind,  turned  his  hf^art.  3.  Did  you  ever  see 
an  ^olian  harp  ?  It  is  a  very  wonderful  thing,  a  little  harp  with  a  few  strings. 
No  human  tingers  play  upon  it.  If  you  ke<  p  it  in  your  room  it  won't  play  ;  but  if 
you  put  it  just  outside  the  window,  on  a  wiudy  day,  it  will  i^lHy  such  sweet  music. 
A  gi-eat  writer  has  said,  "  The  human  heart  is  a  harp  of  a  tliousand  strings."  All 
the  thoughts  and  feelings  in  your  heart  are  all  strings.  If  the  Holy  Spirit  comes 
they  will  play  very  sweet  music.  But  your  heart  won't  play  without  the  Holy 
Spirit.  II.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  like  wateb.  When  you  were  baptizt-d  some  water 
was  poured  over  your  head  to  tell  you  that  the  Holy  Ghost  can  make  the  heart 
clean.  There  was  a  good  man  who,  v\hen  he  wanted  to  think  about  hol,\  tilings, 
jjut  before  himself  three  words,  "  black,"  "red,"  and  "  white."  He  looked  at  the 
word  "black,"  and  he  thought,  "  That  is  my  heart,  which  is  very  black."  Then 
he  looked  at  the  word  "red,"  and  thought,  "The  blood  of  Jesus  can  make  the 
black  thing  white."  And  then  he  looked  at  the  word  "  white,"  and  thought,  "  I 
hope  my  heart  has  been  washed,  and  made  white  through  the  Holy  Ghost."  III. 
When  the  Holy  Ghost  came  down  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  He  appeared  as  a  dove. 
And  a  dove  is  considered  an  emblem  of  something  very  gentle.  The  Holy  Ghost 
comes  very  gently,  and  He  makes  us  gentle.  I  knew  two  little  girls  who  were  going 
out  of  a  church,  and  one  little  girl  pushed  by  the  other,  and  she  made  way  for  her 
to  pass,  saying,  "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers."  That  was  gentle,  like  a  dove.  As 
a  boy  was  once  going  to  throw  a  stone  at  a  little  bird,  the  bird  sang  so  sweetly  that 
the  boy  could  not  throw.  Another,  passing,  said,  "  Why  don't  you  throw?  You 
will  hit  it."  "  I  cannot,"  he  said  ;  "  the  little  bird  is  singing  so  sweetly."  If  you 
know  anybody  who  is  unkind  to  you,  you  sing  like  the  little  bird,  and  then  see  if 
anybody  will  hurt  you.  IV.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  like  dew.  "  Dew  "  is  to  be  seen  in 
the  morning  and  evening.  It  is  very  pretty  and  makes  everything  so  fresh  where  it 
comes.  Now,  if  you  wish  to  be  good  and  please  God,  take  care  that  every  morning 
and  evening  you  get  a  little  of  the  dew  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  you  ;  it  will  make 
everything  fresh  and  nice.  You  are  in  the  morning  of  life.  Now  is  the  time  to 
have  dew,  and  may  it  always  abi.le  in  and  upon  you,  not  like  the  natural  dew,  that 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  125 

Boon  passes  away.  V.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  like  fike.  Supposing  I  were  to  give  you 
a  piece  of  iron,  and  ask  you  to  make  an  image  out  of  it,  what  would  you  do  ?  If 
you  got  a  hammer  and  chisel,  and  worked  ever  so  hard,  it  would  not  make  it  into 
an  image.  What,  then,  would  you  do  ?  Put  it  into  the  fire,  then  it  would  get  soft ; 
then  you  could  make  it  into  almost  any  shape  you  like.  Tour  hearts  are  like  iron. 
You  have  tried  to  make  them  good,  but  you  cannot  do  so  ;  but  put  them  into  "  the 
fire,"  the  Holy  Spirit  will  make  them  soft  and  make  them  into  right  shapes. 
Supposing  I  saw  two  girls  quarrelling,  and  I  wanted  to  make  them  at  one,  how  can 
I  do  it?  Supposing  I  gave  you  two  bits  of  iron,  and  asked  you  to  make  them  one, 
how  would  you  do  it  ?  You  must  weld  them  together.  You  could  not  do  it  till  you 
put  them  into  the  fire.  So  if  I  find  two  persons  quarrelling,  and  I  want  to  make 
them  one,  I  should  try  to  do  it  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  VI.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  seal. 
Now,  supposing  a  person  had  got  some  very  precious  jewels,  and  was  going  abroad, 
and  he  wanted  to  be  quite  sure  that  they  would  be  safe  when  he  came  back  again. 
He  would  lock  them  up,  and  put  a  seal  upon  the  lock,  that  nobody  might  be  able  to 
break  the  lock.  You  are  Christ's  jewels,  and  He  has  gone  abroad.  By  and  by  He 
will  come  back  again.  He  has  "  sealed  "  you  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  you  take 
care  not  to  break  that  "  seal,"  then  you  are  quite  safe  ;  but  if  you  trifle  with  it,  i.e., 
if  you  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  "  seal"  will  be  broken  ;  then  what  wiU  become  of 
the  jewels  ?  But  keep  the  Holy  Spirit  in  your  heart,  then  you  will  be  safe  when 
Christ  comes  back.  In  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Tiberius,  there  was  a  law  in  Eome 
that  anybody  who  carried  a  particular  ring  on  his  finger  must  never  go  into  any 
dirty  or  wrong  place.  You  have  got  the  seal ;  keep  it  holy  !  {J.  Vaughan,  31. A.) 
Holy  Spirit :  The  method  of  His  bestoivment  iinrevealed : — It  is  the  doctrine  of  the 
interworking  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  the  souls  of  men.  I  have  no  philosophy 
about  it.  All  I  say  is  this  :  that  God  knows  what  is  the  secret  way  in  which  mind 
reaches  mind.  I  do  not — you  do  not.  I  do  not  know  why  words  on  my  tongue  wake 
up  thoughts  corresponding  to  those  words  in  you.  I  do  not  know  why  the  soul 
of  man,  like  a  complex  instrument  of  wondrous  scope,  is  played  upon  by  my  words, 
so  that  there  are  waked  up  in  it  notes  along  the  whole  scale  of  being.  I  do  not 
understand  why  things  are  so,  but  unquestionably  they  are  so.  I  do  not  know  how 
the  mother  pours  her  affection  on  the  child's  heart,  but  she  does.  Two  stars  never 
shone  into  each  other  as  two  loving  souls  shine  into  each  other.  I  know  it  is  so, 
but  I  do  not  know  why  it  is  so.  I  do  not  know  how  soul  touches  soul,  how  thought 
touches  thought,  or  how  feeling  touches  feeling,  but  I  know  it  does.  Now  that 
which  we  see  in  the  lower  departments  of  life — that  which  exists  between  you  and 
your  friends,  and  me  and  my  friends — that  I  take,  and  by  my  imagination  I  lift  it 
up  into  the  Divine  nature,  and  give  it  depth  and  scope  and  universality  ;  and  then 
I  have  some  conception  of  the  doctrine  of  God's  Spirit  poured  upon  the  human 
soul.      (H.  IF.  Beecher.)  The  Holy  Spirit  needed  : — It  is  as  if  you  saw  a  loco- 

motive engine  upon  a  railway,  and  it  would  not  go  ;  and  they  put  up  a  driver,  and 
they  said,  "  Now,  that  driver  will  just  do."  They  try  another  and  another.  One 
proposes  that  such  and  such  a  wheel  should  be  altered ;  but  still  it  will  not  go. 
Some  one  then  bursts  in  amongst  those  who  are  conversing,  and  says,  "  No, 
friends  ;  but  the  reason  why  it  will  not  go  is  because  there  is  no  steam.  You  have 
no  fire  ;  you  have  no  water  in  the  boiler  :  that's  why  it  will  not  go.  There  may  be 
some  faults  about  it :  it  may  want  a  bit  of  paint  here  and  there  :  but  it  will  go  well 
enough  with  all  those  faults  if  .you  do  but  get  the  steam  up."  But  now  people  are 
saying,  "  This  must  be  altered,  and  that  must  be  altered."  But  it  would  go  no 
better  unless  God  the  Spirit  should  come  to  bless  us.  That  is  the  Church's  great 
want ;  and,  until  that  want  be  supplied,  we  may  reform  and  reform,  and  stiU  be 
just  the  same.  We  want  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  then,  whatever  faults  there  may  be 
in  our  organisation,  they  can  never  materially  impede  the  progress  of  Christianity 
when  once  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  in  our  midst.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 

Holy  Spirit  indispensable  : — Here  is  a  noble  ship.  .  .  .  The  forests  have  masted 
her ;  in  many  a  broad  yard  of  canvas  a  hundred  looms  have  given  her  wings. 
Her  anchor  has  been  weighed  to  the  rude  sea-chant ;  the  needle  trembles  on  her 
deck  :  with  his  eye  on  that  friend,  unlike  worldly  friends,  true  in  storm  as  in  calm, 
the  helmsman  stands  impatient  by  the  wheel.  And  when,  as  men  bound  to  a 
distant  shore,  the  crew  have  said  farewell  to  wives  and  children,  why,  then,  hes 
she  there  over  the  self-same  ground,  rising  with  the  flowing  and  falling  with  the 
ebbing  tide  ?  The  cause  is  plain.  They  want  a  wind  to  raise  that  drooping  pennon 
and  fill  these  empty  sails.  They  look  to  heaven ;  and  so  they  may ;  out  of  the 
skies  their  help  must  come.    At  length  their  prayer  is  heard.  .  .  .  And  now,  like 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

a  steed  touched  by  the  rider's  spur,  she  starts,  bounds  forward,  plunges  through 
the  waves,  and,  heaven's  wind  her  moving  power,  is  otf  and  away,  amid  blessings 
and  prayers,  to  the  land  she  is  chartered  for.  Even  so,  though  heaven-born,  heaven- 
called,  heaven-bound,  though  endowed  with  a  new  heart  and  new  mind,  we  stand 
in   the  same   need   of    celestial    influences.      (T.    Guthrie,  D.D.)  Revivals — 

occadonal  things : — Revivals  are  not  constant,  but  occasional  things;  they  are  like 
the  showers  that  water  the  earth.      (T.  H.  Skinner.)  The  n eliding  of  the  Holy 

Ghost : — We  are  tbis  day  to  celebrate  the  yearly  memory  of  the  sending  down  of 
a  benefit,  so  great  and  so  wonderful,  as  there  were  not  tongues  enough  upon  earth 
to  celebrate  it,  but  there  were  fain  to  be  more  sent  from  heaven  to  help  to 
sound  it  out  thoroughly.  I.  The  time.  The  day  of  Pentecost.  Why  that  day  ? 
Pentecost  was  a  great  feast  under  the  law  ;  and  meet  it  was  this  coming  should  be 
at  some  great  feast.  The  first  dedication  of  Christ's  Catholic  Church  on  earth,  the 
first  publishing  the  gospel,  the  first  proclaiming  the  apostles'  commission,  were 
so  great  matters,  as  it  was  not  meet  they  should  be  done  in  a  corner.  II. 
Manner.  1.  On  their  parts  on  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  came.  It  is  truly  said  by 
the  pbilosopher,  that  if  the  patient  be  prepared  aright,  the  agent  will  have  his 
work  both  the  sooner  and  the  better.  And  so,  consequently,  the  Spirit  in  His 
coming,  if  the  parties  to  whom  He  cometh  be  made  ready.  And  this  is  three- 
fold :  (1)  Unity.  Can  any  spirit  animate  or  give  life  to  members  dismembered  ? 
A  fair  example  we  have  in  Ezekiel  (chap,  xxxvii.  7-9).  Now  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
the  very  essential  unity,  love,  and  love-knot,  of  the  two  Persons,  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  even  of  God  with  God.  And  He  is  sent  to  be  the  union,  love,  and  love- 
knot  of  the  two  Natures  united  in  Christ,  even  of  God  with  man.  And  can  we 
imagine  that  He  will  enter  (essential  unity)  but  where  there  is  unity?  There 
is  no  greater  bar  to  His  entry  than  discord  and  disunited  minds.  (2)  Not  only  of 
one  mind,  that  is,  unanimity,  but  also  in  one  place  too,  that  is,  uniformity ;  both 
in  the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  that  is  inward,  and  in  the  bond  of  peace  too,  that  is,  out- 
ward. God's  will  is,  we  should  be  as  upon  one  foundation,  so  under  one  roof  (Psa. 
Ixviii.  6).  Therefore  it  is  expressly  noted  of  this  company  where  they  prayed,  they 
prayed  all  together  (chap.  iv.  24).  When  they  heard,  they  heard  all  together  (chap, 
viii.  6).  When  they  biake  bread,  they  did  it  all  together  (ver.  46).  Division  of 
places  will  not  long  be  without  division  of  minds.  (3)  A  disposition  in  them, 
whereby  they  held  out,  and  stirred  not,  even  till  the  fifty  days  were  fulfilled.  That 
former,  unanimity;  this  latter,  longanimity.  There  is  in  us  a  hot,  hasty  sprit, 
impatient  of  any  deluy.  2.  On  His  part.  He  came  sensibly,  a  rare  comim;,  since 
the  Holy  Ghost,  an  invisible  Spirit,  cometh,  for  the  most  part,  invisibly.  Yet  here 
it  was  meet — first,  that  no  less  honour  done  to  this  law  of  Zion  than  to  that  of 
Sinai,  which  was  public  and  full  of  majesty;  and  secondly,  it  pleased  Him  to 
vouchsafe  to  grace  the  Church,  His  queen,  with  like  solemn  inauguration  to  that  of 
His  own,  when  tlie  Holy  Ghost  descended  on  Him  in  likeness  of  a  Dove.  This 
coming,  then,  of  His  thus  in  state,  is  such  as  it  was  both  to  be  heard  and  seen.  To 
the  ear,  which  is  the  sense  of  faith;  to  the  eye,  which  is  the  sense  of  love.  The 
ear,  that  is  the  ground  of  the  word,  which  is  audible  ; .  the  eye,  which  is  the  ground 
of  the  sacraments,  which  are  visible.  To  the  ear  in  a  noise  ;  to  the  eye  in  a  show. 
The  noise,  serving  as  a  trumpet,  to  awake  the  world,  and  give  them  warning  He  was 
come.  The  fiery  tongues,  as  so  many  lights,  to  show  them  and  let  them  see  the  day 
of  that  their  visitation.  (1)  There  comes  a  sound.  Which  is  to  show  that  the 
spirit  is  no  dumb  spirit  but  vocal.  The  sound  thereof  is  gone  into  all  lands,  and 
hath  been  heard  in  all  ages.  (2)  It  was  the  sound  of  a  wind.  For  first,  of  all 
bodily  things  it  is  the  least  bodily,  and  cometh  nearest  to  the  nature  of  a  spirit, 
invisible  as  it  is  ;  and  secondly,  quick  and  active,  as  the  spirit  is.  Now,  this  wind 
that  came  and  made  this  sound  is  here  described  with  four  properties :  (a) 
It  fell  suddenly,  so  doth  the  wind.  It  riseth  often  in  the  midst  of  a  calm, 
giveth  no  warning ;  and  even  so  doth  the  Spirit,  for  that  cometh  not  by 
observation,  neither  can  you  make  set  rules  of  it:  you  must  wait  for  it  as  well  when 
it  cometh  not  as  when  it  comes.  Many  times  it  is  found  of  them  that  seek  it  not. 
It  creeps  not  like  motions  that  come  from  the  serpent.  And  therefore  sudden, 
eaith  Gregory,  because  things,  if  they  be  not  sudden,  awake  us  not,  affect  us  not. 
And  therefore  sudden,  saith  he  again,  that  men  may  learn  not  to  despise  present 
motions  of  grace,  though  suddenly  rising  in  them,  and  though  they  can  give  no 
certain  reason  of  tbem,  but  take  the  wind  while  it  bloweth  as  not  knowing  when 
it  will  or  whether  ever  it  will  blow  again,  (b)  It  was  a  mighty,  or  vehement,  wind. 
Although  the  wind  is  nothing  else  but  a  puff  of  air,  the  thinnest,  the  poorest,  and 


CHAP,  II.]  THE  AC  IS.  127 

to  our  seeming,  of  the  least  force  of  all  creatures,  yet  groweth  it  to  that  violence 
which  pulls  up  trees,  blows  down  huge  piles  of  building,  hath  most  strange  and 
wonderful  effects,  and  all  this  but  a  little  thin  air.  And  surely  no  less  observable 
or  admirable,  nay,  much  more,  have  been  and  are  the  operations  of  the  Spirit. 
Even  presently  after  this,  this  Spirit,  in  a  few  poor  weak  and  simple  instruments, 
waxed  so  full  and  forcible  as  it  cast  down  strongholds,  brought  into  captivity  many 
an  exalting  thought,  made  a  conquest  of  the  whole  world,  even  then,  when  it  was 
bent  fully  in  main  opposition  against  it.  (r )  It  came  from  heaven.  Winds  naturally 
come  not  from  thence,  but  move  laterally  from  one  coast  or  climate  to  another. 
To  come  directly  down  from  heaven,  that  is  supernatural,  and  points  us  plainly 
to  Him  th  it  is  ascended  up  into  heaven,  and  now  sendeth  it  down  from  thence  tbat 
it  may  fill  us  with  the  breath  of  heaven.  To  distinguish  this  wind  from  others  is 
no  hard  matter.  If  our  motions  come  from  above  it  is  tbis  wind,  which  came 
thence  to  make  us  heavenly-minded,  (d)  It  filled  that  place  where  they  sat.  That 
place,  not  the  places  about.  The  common  wind  blls  all  places  within  his  circuit 
alike.  And  this  is  a  property  very  well  fitting  the  Spirit.  To  blow  in  certain  places 
where  itself  will;  and  upon  certain  persons  and  they  shall  plainly  feel  it,  and  others 
about  them  not  a  whit.  (2)  This  wind  brought  down  with  it  tongues  to  be  seen. 
Here  is  not  only  sent  a  wind  which  serveth  for  their  own  inspiration,  but  tongues 
■which  serve  for  elocution,  that  is,  to  impart  the  benefit  to  more  than  themselves. 
It  showeth  that  the  Holy  Ghost  cometh  and  is  given  rather  to  do  others  good  than 
to  benefit  themselves.  Charity  poured  into  their  hearts  would  serve  them  ;  grace 
poured  into  their  lips  was  needful  to  make  others  partakers  of  the  benefit.  This  alt?o 
standeth  of  four  parts,  as  did  the  former,  (a)  There  were  tongues,  and  God  can 
send  from  heaven  no  better  thing,  nor  the  devil  from  hell  no  worse.  The  best 
member  we  have  (Psa.  cviii.  1).  The  worst  member  we  have  (James  iii.  6).  Both, 
as  it  is  employed.  (/))  Cloven  tongues — and  that  very  cleaving  of  right  necessary 
use  to  the  business  intended,  viz.,  that  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel  might  be 
dispersed  to  every  nation  under  heaven.  If  there  must  be  a  calling  of  the  Gentiles, 
they  must  have  the  tongues  of  the  Gentiles  wherewith  to  call  them.  But  with  their 
many  tongues  they  spake  one  thing,  (c)  They  were  tungues  as  of  fire  to  show  that 
they  were  not  of  our  elementary  fire.  As  the  wind,  so  the  fire  from  heaven,  of  the 
nature  of  that  which  made  the  bush  burn  and  yet  consumed  it  not.  The  tongues 
were  as  of  fire  to  teach  that  the  force  of  fire  should  show  forth  itself  in  their  words, 
both  in  the  splendour,  which  is  the  light  of  knowledge  to  clear  the  mist  of  their 
darkened  understanding,  and  in  the  fervour,  which  is  the  force  of  spiritual  elficacy, 
to  quicken  the  dulness  of  their  cold  and  dead  affections.  With  such  a  tongue  spake 
Christ  Himself,  when  they  said  of  Him,  "  Did  not  our  hearts  burn  within  us  while 
He  spake  unto  us  by  the  way  ?  "  With  such  a  tongue  St.  Peter,  here  in  this 
chapter ;  for  sure  there  fell  from  Him  something  like  fire  on  their  hearts,  when 
they  were  pricked  with  it  and  cried,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  But 
this  is  not  always,  nor  in  all  with  us ;  no  more  was  it  with  them,  but  in  those  of 
their  hearers  which  had  some  of  the  anointing,  and  that  will  easily  take  the  fire, 
in  them  good  will  be  done ;  or  at  least,  where  there  was  some  smoking  flax,  some 
remainder  of  the  Spirit,  which  without  any  great  ado  will  be  kindled  anew,  (d) 
These  sat  upon  each  of  them.  In  which  sitting  is  set  down  unto  us  their  last 
quality — of  continuance  and  constancy.  They  did  not  light  and  touch  and  away, 
after  the  manner  of  butterflies.     {Bp.  Andrewes.)  The  advent  of  tlie  Spirit : — I. 

That  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  Church  will  certainly  be 
FDLFiLLED.  1,  The  Holy  Spirit  is  promised  to  the  Church  (John  xv.  26;  xvi.  7; 
Joel  ii.  28,  29).  2.  The  promise  is  not  always  understood  in  its  full  meaning  as  it 
ought  to  be.  The  disciples  did  not  understand  it,  nor  does  the  Church  of  our 
own  age.  It  would  not  rest  a  day  without  its  fulfilment  (John  iv.  10).  3.  The 
promise  will  certainly  be  fulfilled.  This  is  seen  in  the  history  of  the  Church  at 
Pentecost.  There  was  delay,  but  not  denial.  Then  as  now  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given 
to  the  Church  at  the  best  and  most  appropriate  time.  We  must  wait,  for  it  is 
determined  by   infinite   wisdom.     II.  That  the  Church  must  put  itself  into  a 

PROPER  MORAL  ATTITUDE  IN  ORDER   TO    RECEIVE    THE    HoLY  SpIRIT.       The  Church  mUSt 

be — 1.  Frequent  in  its  meetings.  2.  United  in  its  spirit.  3.  Prayerful  in  dis- 
position (chap.  i.  14).  4.  Patient  in  temper.  5.  Catholic  in  sentiment.  Not 
merely  the  disciples  were  present,  but  many  strangers.  They  had  come  to  the  feast, 
and  got  a  better  feast  than  they  expected.  Some  Churches  are  so  narrow  and 
sectarian  in  their  spirit,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  shut  out  fro'n  them.     III.  That 

THE    ADVENT   OP    THE    HoLY    SpIRIT    TO     THE     ChORCH    IS    ACCOMPANIED    BY    W0NDR0U3 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  il 


PHENOMENA  AND  SUBLIME  MORAL  EESULTS.  Tlie  acTvent  of  the  Holj  Spirit — 1.  Is 
set  foith  under  appropriate  emblems.  2.  Affects  the  speaking  of  the  Word.  When 
men  receive  thu  Holy  Spirit  it  is  always  evident  in  their  conversation,  which  is  aglow 
with  heavenly  fire  and  feeling.  True  eloquence  is  a  spiritual  gift.  3.  Is  designed  to 
fill  the  human  soul  with  Divine  and  ennobling  influences.  As  the  wind  filled  the 
house,  so  the  Spirit  filled  the  men,  every  crevice  of  their  being.  The  heart  of  man 
must  be  filled  with  something ;  if  God  does  not  fill  it  the  world  will.  The  Divine 
filling  is  the  most  ennobling  and  blessed.      (The  Stiuhj  and  the  Pulint.)  The 

comiiifi  of  the  IIolij  Spirit : — I  am  sitting,  on  a  summer's  day,  in  the  shadow  of  a 
great  New  England  elm.  Its  long  branches  hang  motionless  ;  there  is  not  breeze 
enough  to  move  them.  All  at  once  there  comes  a  faint  murmur  ;  around  my  head 
the  leaves  are  moved  by  a  gentle  current  of  air ;  then  the  branches  begin  to  sway 
to  and  fro,  the  leaves  are  all  in  motion,  and  a  soft,  rushing  sound  fills  my  ear.  So 
with  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit.  I  am  in  a  state  of  spiritual  lethargy,  and 
scarcely  know  how  to  think  any  good  thought.  I  am  heart-empty,  and  there  comes, 
I  know  not  where  or  whence,  a  sound  of  the  Divine  presence.  I  am  inwardly  moved 
with  new  comfort  and  hope,  the  day  seems  to  dawn  in  my  heart,  sunshine  comes 
around  my  path,  and  I  am  able  to  go  to  my  duties  with  patience.  I  am  walking 
in  the  Spirit,  I  am  helped  by  the  help  of  God,  and  comforted  with  the  comfort  of 
God.  And  yet  this  is  all  in  accordance  with  law.  There  is  no  violation  of  law 
when  the  breezes  come,  stirring  the  tops  of  the  trees  ;  and  there  is  no  violation  of 
law  when  God  moves  in  the  depths  of  our  souls,  and  rouses  us  to  the  love  and' 
desire  of  holiness.  (James  Freeman  Clarke.)  The  descending  Spirit : — Notice — I. 
Some  featukes  of  the  event  here  related,  1.  It  is  interesting  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  should  have  been  conferred  at  Jerusalem,  the  capital  of  the  old  faith.  It  ia 
not  God's  way  to  inaugurate  the  new  by  any  harsh  abandonments  of  the  old.  The 
Christian  is  only  the  Jewish  Church  led  forth  into  a  new  stage  of  development. 
As  the  two  lay  in  Christ's  mind  there  was  no  break  between  tbem.  "  I  came  not 
to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil."  It  was  suitable,  then,  that  where  the  old  Church  had 
matured,  the  new  Church  should  germinate.  2.  It  is  impossible  to  say  with  exactness 
where  in  Jerusalem  the  disciples  were  gathered.  It  is  barely  possible  that  it  was 
in  some  portion  of  the  temple  edifice.  If  that  were  the  case  it  would  only  be  in  the 
line  of  what  has  just  been  said.  3.  This  first  giving  of  the  Spirit  was  at  Pentecost. 
Still  another  proof  of  this  is  that  God  would  like  to  have  us  consider  Christianity 
as  a  graft  upon  an  old  stock.  4.  As  to  the  nature  of  the  miracle.  Was  it  a  gift  of 
"  tongues,"  or  a  gift  of  "  ears  "  ?  The  most  casual  perusal  is  sufficient  to  convince 
that  it  was  the  disciples  that  were  inspired  to  speak.  The  hearers  were  not  in  a 
mood  to  be  insnired.  The  Holy  Ghost  works  iiispiringly  upon  those  who  are  in 
sympathy  with  Him ;  and  this  these  foreign  residents  at  Jerusalem  were  not.  II.  The 
LESSONS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  EVENT,  1.  The  Christian  Church  was  born  at  Pentecost. 
The  materials  were  already  present,  but  standing  out  of  organic  relation  with  each 
other.  It  was  the  brooding  of  the  Spirit  that  produced  the  formless  elements  of 
things  into  a  shapely  and  prolific  world.  It  was  the  inbreathing  of  God  into  the 
being  of  our  first  parent  that  developed  him  into  a  living  soul.  It  was  the  influx 
similarly  of  the  Divine  Spirit  that  composed  the  discii:)les  of  Christ  into  an  organised 
and  living  Church.  2.  This  was  the  first  Christian  revival  of  religion.  The 
Church  was  born  in  a  revival,  and  the  survival  of  the  Church  has  been  along  a 
continuous  line  of  revival.  There  is  nothing  in  the  whole  New  Testament  narrative 
more  startling  than  the  transformation  which  the  Twelve  suddenly  underwent  on 
the  fiftieth  day  after  Calvary.  A  cultivated  ministry  and  well-appointed  churches 
are  well  enoujzh  in  their  way;  they  are  suitable  for  the  conveyance  of  power,  but 
are  not  themselves  power.  They  are  to  positive  spiritual  efficacy  only  what  river- 
beds are  to  the  floods  that  are  set  to  roll  in  them.  The  early  Church,  as  compared 
with  the  modern,  was  poor  in  appliances ;  but  one  sermon  then  converted  three 
thousand  men,  and  now  it  takes  three  thousand  sermons  to  convert  one  man.  The 
difference  between  the  times  is  largely  difference  of  power.  3.  The  Spirit  descended 
upon  the  disciples  when  they  were  together.  The  full  meaning  of  Christianity  is 
not  exhausted  in  any  relation  in  which  it  sets  us  individually  to  Christ.  There  are 
blessings  that  accrue  to  Christians  only  by  their  standing  in  fellowship  with  each 
other.  The  first  Christian  revival  was  inaugurated  in  a  prayer-meeting.  It  is  easy, 
and  rather  common,  to  treat  prayer-meetings  with  disparagement.  But  it  is 
generally  found  that  when  a  revival  comes  it  begins  in  God's  revelation  of  Himself 
to  saints  that  draw  near  to  one  another  in  prayer.  4.  This  first  revival  of  religion 
began  with  the  spiritual  replenishment  of  those  already  Christian.     It  is  time 


CHAP.  n.J  THE  ACTS.  129 

wasted,  and  runs  counter  to  the  Divine  order  of  things,  for  a  Church  that  is  not 
itself  revived  to  attempt  revivalistic  operations  among  the  unconverted.  Christianity, 
to  the  degree  in  which  it  extends  itself,  does  so  as  a  kind  of  contagion.  The  result 
of  "  gotten-up  "  revivals  is  only  man-made  Christians ;  and  man-made  Christians 
stand  in  the  way  of  their  own  conversion  and  add  to  the  inertia  of  tiie  Church. 
5.  After  the  Ascension  the  disciples  simply  waited  for  Pentecost.  There  was  no 
further  work  that  needed  to  be  wrought  in  them  before  its  bestowment.  And  we 
shall  always  receive  the  Divine  baptism  just  as  soon  as  there  is  nothing  on  our  part 
that  hinders  it.  "  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse,  and  prove  Me  now 
herewith,"  &c.  6.  The  Holy  Spirit  descended  upon  all  the  disciples.  So  far  as  we  are 
Holy  Ghost  Christians,  all  substantial  distinctions  in  this  respect  between  the  laity 
and  the  clergy  are  erased.  7.  The  Holy  Spirit  revealed  Himself  outwardly  in  the 
shape  of  tongues.  This  was  prophetic  of  the  way  in  which  revealed  trulh  was  to  be 
disseminated.  It  does  not  suffice  that  men  should  simply  live  lives  of  Christian 
constancy.  Christ  not  only  lived,  He  preached.  The  first  revival,  then,  opened 
men's  mouths  and  set  men  talking.  There  is  no  place  for  silent  Christians  under 
the  administration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  pressure  of  God  upon  the  heart 
inevitably  finds  escape  at  the  lip.  (C.  H.  ParkJmrst,  D.D.)  "  It's  no'  bilin'  ": — 
The  late  Dr.  William  Arnot,  of  Edinburgh,  used  to  tell  of  his  being  at  a  railway 
station,  where  he  grew  weary  of  waiting  for  the  train  to  move.  He  inquired  if  the 
trouble  was  want  of  water.  "Plenty  of  water,"  was  the  quick  reply,  "but  it's  no* 
bilin'."  We  have  no  lack  of  religious  machinery  in  Church  and  Sabbath-schools  and 
benevolent  societies.  The  engines  are  on  the  track,  and  the  trainmen  are  in  their 
places.  If  there  is  little  or  no  progress,  may  it  not  be  that  the  water  is  "no' 
bilin'  "  ?  Sudden  revivals  explained  : — I  looked  recently  at  a  very  remarkable 
sight,  the  burning  of  a  huge  floorcloth  manufactury.  I  was  just  about  returning 
home  from  my  Master's  work  when  I  saw  a  little  blaze,  and  in  an  incredibly 
short  space  a  volume  of  fire  rolled  up  in  great  masses  to  the  skies.  Why  blazed 
it  so  suddenly  ?  Why,  because  for  months  before  many  men  had  been  busily 
employed  in  hanging  up  the  floorcloth  and  in  saturating  the  building  with  com- 
bustible materials ;  I  do  not  mean  with  the  intention  of  making  a  blaze,  but  in 
the  ordinary  course  of  their  manufacture  ;  so  that  when  at  last  the  spark  came 
it  grew  into  a  great  sheet  of  flame  all  at  once.  So  sometimes  when  the  gospel 
is  faithfully  preached  a  sinner  gets  present  peace  and  pardon,  and  he  is  so 
full  of  joy  his  friends  cannot  make  him  out,  his  progress  is  so  rapid.  But  be  it 
remembered  that  God  has  been  mysteriously  at  work  months  before  in  that  man's 
heart,  preparing  his  soul  to  catch  the  heavenly  flame,  so  that  there  was  only  a 
spark  needed,  and  then  up  rolled  the  flame  to  heaven.  Oh  that  I  could  be  that 
spark  to  some  heart  in  whom  God  has  been  working  this  morning,  but  He 
alone  can  make  me  sol  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Spiritual  influence  from  another 
world: — The  Gulf  Stream  in  its  beneficent  and  hidden  influence  may  be  taken  as 
a  sort  of  parable  of  spiritual  influence.  This  England  of  ours  should  be  naturally 
and  properly  a  land  of  almost  eternal  winter.  For  some  eight  months  of  the  year 
our  very  seas  ought  to  be  frozen  over,  so  that  no  ship  could  approach  our  shores. 
Our  islands  should  be  a  rough  rude  tract  of  country,  where  only  the  hardiest  forms 
of  life  could  survive — a  land  of  forests  where  wild  beasts  should  roam,  whose  furs 
should  give  to  the  place  almost  its  only  value,  and  where  the  deep  snows  should 
make  agriculture  almost  impossible.  This  should  be  Great  Britain — a  proud  name 
for  so  desolate  a  tract.  What  mystery  is  this  which  delivers  us  ?  Away  in  the 
distant  southern  world,  in  the  fierce  heat  of  the  tropics,  starts  the  Gulf  Stream. 
It  gathers  the  warmth  of  the  sun,  and  sends  it  for  thousands  of  miles  across  the  seas 
to  lave  our  shores.  And  thus  the  arctic  winter  is  driven  from  us  ;  and  our  ports  are 
open  all  the  year  round ;  over  us  stretch  the  kindlier  skies  ;  about  us  blow  the 
gentler  winds ;  our  fields  are  covered  with  grass,  the  valleys  are  thick  with  corn  ; 
the  pastures  are  covered  with  flocks  and  herds,  and  this  favoured  land  is  shut  off 
from  extremes,  and  has  the  summer  of  the  North  with  the  winter  of  the  South. 
Now  think  of  some  shivering  native  of  Labrador,  who  has  heard  of  this  Gulf 
Stream,  and  scornfully  shnkes  his  head — "I  do  not  believe  it,"  says  he;  "it  is 
impossible  and  absurd."  Well,  I  would  not  argue  the  subject.  I  would  only  invite 
him  to  come  and  see.  "  But  where  is  this  Gulf  Stream  which  does  such  wonders  ? 
Can  you  see  it  ?  "  No,  we  cannot  see  it,  but  it  is  there — hidden,  noiseless,  mingling 
with  our  waters  and  transforming  our  climate.  The  parable  is  a  many-sided 
illustration  of  the  truth.  Of  nature,  of  ourselves,  we  do  dwell  in  a  land  of  winter — 
frozen  and  well-nigh  dead,  without  the  energy  to  put  forth  any  life  of  God.  But^ 
VOL.    I.  9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOn.  [chap.  ii. 

lo,  about  us  do  flow  gracious  influences  from  another  world.  We  know  not  how, 
hut  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  there  is  breathed  about  us  and  within  us  the  love 
of  God,  softening,  transforming,  bringing  to  us  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  And 
now  do  grow  and  flourish  blessed  things  which  before  we  knew  not.  (M.  G.  Pearne.) 
The  outpoiLring  of  the  Spirit  (first  sermon) : — I.  Mark  the  very  critical  care  of  the 
Divine  Head  of  the  Church,  in  fixing  special  times  fob  the  communication  of 
SPECIAL  blessings.  Here  we  have  the  largest  possible  opportunity  which  God 
Himself  could  have  secured  for  the  communication  of  His  supreme  gift.  Pentecost 
was  a  harvest  festival ;  about  that  time  people  could  come  with  the  least  degree  of 
danger  from  various  outlying  countries  and  districts.  There  are  opportunities  even  in 
Divine  providence.  The  days  are  not  all  alike  to  God.  We  bind  Him  dowu  to  one 
day,  whereas  is  there  in  reality  a  single  day  in  our  life  that  He  has  not  a  lien  upon  ? 
Does  He  not  come  in  upon  birthdays,  days  of  deliverance,  of  surprise,  of  unusual 
sorrow  and  joy  ?  God  is  not  the  God  of  one  day  only  ;  He  takes  up  the  one  day 
and  specially  holds  it  before  us,  but  only  symbohcally.  What  He  does  with  that 
He  wants  to  do  with  all  the  others.  II.  On  this  occasion  we  have  the  largest 
POSSIBLE  UNION — 1.  Of  nationalities.  2.  Of  desire.  Note  the  word  "  accord."  The 
instruments  were  all  in  tune  together,  without  mental  distraction  or  moral  discord. 
God  has  promised  nothing  to  disunion ;  the  man  that  creates  disunion  in  the 
Church  must  instantly  be  put  away — he  is  worse  than  an  infidel.  3.  They  were 
also  gathered  in  one  place  :  that  is  the  transient  word.  The  place  is  nothing,  the  ' 
accord  is  everything.  Neither  in  this  mountain  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem  will  men 
worship  the  Father,  but  the  accord,  the  rhythmic  fellowship — this  is  the  eternal 
quantity,  and  he  who  meddles  with  it  is  a  violator  within  the  very  shadow  of  the 
altar.  Yet  who  thinks  of  this?  If  a  poor  moral  cripple  should  be  caught  suddenly 
in  some  moral  fault,  then  is  the  imperfect  and  blind  Church  enraged  with  him,  but 
the  man  who  is  speaking  ungracious  words,  making  unlovely  statements,  breathing 
a  spirit  of  dissension  in  the  Church — who  takes  note  of  him  ?     III.  Then  we  have 

THE    LAKGEST   POSSIBLE   BESTOWMENT  OF  THE   DiVINE  GIFT.       The  WOrd  "  aU  "  iucludeS 

the  followers  of  Christ  of  every  name  and  degree.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  popes, 
prelates,  preachers,  ministers,  leaders,  alone  have  this  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We 
must  not  imagine  that  a  minister  merely  as  such  has  greater  spiritual  privileges 
than  a  mechanic.  We  are  all  equally  priests  before  God,  our  priesthood  has  no 
standing  but  in  our  holiness.  As  to  the  Church  all  meeting  in  one  place,  do  not 
believe  in  a  place-church.  God's  Church  is  everywhere.  Many  of  you  belong  to 
God's  Church  and  may  not  know  it.  What  is  your  heart,  what  is  your  heart's 
desire,  what  is  the  sovereign  purpose  of  your  life  ?  If  you  can  say  it  is  to  know 
God's  will  and  do  it,  then  you  are  in  the  Church,  whatever  particular  place  you  may 
occupy.  Jesus  Christ  made  a  great  promise  to  His  disciples  when  they  asked  Him 
whether  at  that  time  He  would  restore  the  kingdom  unto  Israel.  The  very  great- 
ness of  the  promise  necessitates  that  the  fulfilment  of  it  shall  be  upon  a  scale  pro- 
portioned to  itself.  Now  how  will  He  fulfil  the  promise  of  enduement  with  power 
from  on  high?  That  would  be  no  commonplace  realisation  of  that  promise,  nor 
was  there  one  (vers.  1-4).  Imagination  says,  "It  is  enough."  God  always  takes 
care  to  satisfy  the  imagination,  and  often  to  confound  it.  Specially  does  He  take 
care  to  satisfy  the  moral  nature,  and  to  call  upon  conscience  to  say,  "It  is  right." 
IV.  We  see  from  this  revelation  how  heijpless  we  ake  in  the  matter  of  spiritual 
REVIVALS.  What  did  the  apostles  do  towards  this  demonstration  of  Divine  power  ? 
They  did  nothing  but  wait,  pray,  hope,  expect — what  the  world,  so  fond  of  action, 
would  call  nothing.  That  is  all  we  can  do.  Have  nothing  to  do  with  those  persons 
who  organise  revivals,  with  any  mechanised  resurrection  of  spiritual  life.  We  need 
to  know  the  power  of  waiting.  There  are  those  who  tell  us  we  ought  to  be  doing 
something  practical,  and  they  degrade  that  word  into  a  kind  of  mechanical  exercise. 
Is  he  doing  nothing  who  continues  steadfast  in  prayer?  or  he  who  speaks  great 
words  of  wisdom,  and  who  calms  the  heart  in  the  midst  of  its  searching  trouble? 
To  be  practical  is  not  to  be  demonstrative,  to  be  building  wood,  hay,  stone,  and 
metal,  it  may  be  to  give  thought,  to  offer  suggestion,  to  stimulate  the  mind,  to 
check  the  ambition,  to  elevate  the  purpose  of  life.  The  disciples  and  apostles, 
previous  to  Pentecost,  did  everything  by  doing  nothing.  V.  We  see  how  unmis- 
takable FIRE  is.  The  difference  between  one  man  and  another  is  a  difference  of 
heat.  The  difference  between  one  reader  and  another  is  a  difference  of  fire ;  the 
difference  between  one  musician  and  another  is  that  one  man  is  all  fire,  and  the 
other  man  all  ice.  The  difference  between  one  preacher  and  another  is  a  difference 
of  fire,     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)        The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  (second  sermon) : — I.  Ii 


CHAP  IL]  THE  ACTS.  131 

IS   IN   THE    PRESENCE    OF     THE     HoLT   GhOST    THAT    WE    FIND    THE    TBUE    UNION   OF   THB 

Church.  There  are  diversities  of  operation,  and  must  always  be,  but  such  diversity 
does  not  impair  the  unity  of  the  Spirit.  There  is  one  faith,  though  there  be  many 
creeds,  one  baptism,  though  there  be  many  forms  of  it,  one  Lord,  though  He  shine 
in  a  thousand  different  hghts.  We  have  been  vainly  looking  for  union  in  uniformity. 
Consider  how  irrational  this  is.  Is  the  human  race  one  or  many  ?  is  theie  any 
difficulty  in  identifying  a  man  whatever  his  colour,  form,  stature,  language? — yet 
are  there  any  two  men  exactly  alike  ?  Man  has,  say,  some  seven  features,  forehead, 
eyes,  nose,  mouth,  chin,  form  or  contour,  colour  or  complexion,  yet  out  of  those 
seven  notes  what  music  of  facial  expression  has  God  wrought  ?  It  is  so  in  the 
Christian  Church.  That  is  split  up  into  a  score  of  sects,  but  the  Church  itself  is 
one.  To  those  who  look  u^jon  thmgs  from  the  outside  merely,  it  would  seem  im- 
possible that  the  Arminian  and  the  Calvinist  can  both  be  readers  of  the  same  Bible, 
and  worshippers  of  the  same  God.  But  their  unity  is  not  found  in  formality,  in 
creedal  expression,  in  prepositional  theology,  in  ecclesiastical  arrangement ;  down 
in  the  centre  of  the  heart  lies  the  common  organic  nerve  that  unites  Chiistendom 
in  its  worship  and  in  its  hope  ;  and  when  the  Cross  is  touched,  the  defence  never 
comes  from  any  one  section,  the  whole  Church  with  unanimous  love  and  loyalty 
rushes  to  the  vindication.  This  has  been  illustrated  by  the  diversities  which  occur 
in  the  expressions  of  sorrow,  worship,  and  loyalty.  The  Eastern  sufferer  lies  pros- 
trate, crying  piteously  and  vehemently.  The  Western  is  silent  and  self-controlled. 
The  difference  is  not  in  the  sorrow,  but  in  the  manifestation  of  the  sorrow.  So  the 
Oriental  before  his  king  falls  flat  on  the  ground,  anft  the  Briton  before  his  God  only 
kneels.     Is   there,  then,    a   difference   in   the   spirit  of  worship?     II.    Have   we 

RECEIVED   THE    HoLY    GhOST  ?       ThE    QUESTION    DOES    NOT    ADMIT    OF    HESITATION   AS    TO 

ITS  ANSWER.  1.  No  man  can  mistake  the  summer  sun  when  he  sees  it ;  he  will  not 
come  home  with  a  half  tale  of  having  seen  some  kind  of  light,  but  is  not  quite  sure 
whether  it  was  a  gas  jet,  or  the  shining  of  an  electric  light,  or  a  new  star.  The  ^un 
needs  no  introduction,  has  no  signature  but  its  own  glorj',  and  needs  take  no  oath 
in  proof  of  its  identity.  The  shadows  know  it,  and  flee  away ;  the  flowers,  and 
open  their  little  hearts  to  its  bles^iing  ;  all  the  hills  and  valleys  know  it  and  quiver 
with  a  new  joy.  2.  We  may  have  the  form,  and  not  the  spirit.  People  say  the 
great  thing  after  all  for  a  man  to  do  is  to  do  good.  That  is  correct.  But  what 
would  you  think  of  me  if  I  said  the  great  thing  after  all  is  for  a  train  to  go,  when 
the  train  has  not  been  attached  to  the  engine  ?  You  are  perfectly  right  m  saying 
that  the  train  is  useless  if  it  does  not  go,  and  if  the  train  is  going  it  is  all  right. 
But  you  must  bring  within  your  argument  the  fact  that  the  engine  could  not  go 
without  the  fire,  that  the  train  cannot  go  unless  attached  to  the  engine,  that  the 
engine  and  the  train  move,  vibrate,  fly,  under  the  power  of  light — the  light  that  was 
sealed  up  in  the  bins  of  the  earth  ten  thousand  ages  ago  is  driving  your  great 
locomotives  to-day  I  When,  therefore,  you  tell  me  that  a  man  must  do  good,  and 
that  is  enough,  you  omit  from  your  statement  the  vital  consideration  that  we  can 
only  do  these  things  as  we  are  inspired  by  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God.  I  see  before 
me  at  this  moment  certain  pieces  of  cord.  What  is  wanted  is  but  to  connect  these 
cords  with  a  motive  power,  but  until  the  connection  is  established  they  are  but 
dead  useless  things.  Connect  them,  set  the  engine  going,  let  it  cause  the  necessary 
rotations  to  fly,  and  presently  an  arrangement  may  be  made  by  which  from  these 
cords  we  shall  receive  a  dazzling  glory.  They  are  nothing  in  themselves,  and  yet 
without  them  the  engine  might  go  for  a  thou  and  ages  and  we  should  get  no  light. 
It  is  even  so  with  us.  We  are  here,  men  educated,  intelligent,  well-appointed,  and 
what  is  it  that  we  need  but  connection  with  the  heavens,  direct  communication 
with  the  source  of  light  and  fire.  III.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  is  communicated 
TO  the  Church,  we  must  not  imagine  that  we  shall  be  other  than  ouhselvrs, 
ENLARGED,  ENNOBLED,  AND  DEVELOPED.  The  Spirit  will  not  merge  our  individuality 
in  a  common  monotony.  Whatever  your  power  is  now,  the  incoming  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  will  magnify  and  illuminate,  so  that  your  identity  will  be  caixied  up  to  its 
highest  expression  and  significance.  And  more  than  that,  there  will  be  a  develop- 
ment of  latent  faculties,  slumbering  powers,  the  existence  of  which  has  never  been 
suspected  by  our  dearest  friends.  Look  for  surprises  in  the  Church  when  the  Holy 
Ghost  falls  upon  it :  dumb  men  will  speak,  ineloquent  men  will  attract  and  fa-^cinate 
by  the  sublimity  of  their  new  discourse,  timid  men  will  put  on  the  lion,  and  those 
who  had  hidden  themselves  away  in  the  obscurity  of  conscious  feeb'eness  will  come 
out  and  offer  themselves  at  the  Lord's  altar  to  help  m  the  Lord's  service.  The 
resources  of  the  Church  will  be  multiplied  in  proportion  as  the  Church  enjoys  tua 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  „; 

piesence  and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     How  the  old  earth  has  continued  to  keep 
pace  with  all  uur  civilisation  and  science.     The  electric  light  was,  as  to  its  possi- 
bilities, in  Eden,  as  certainly  as  it  is  in  the  metropolis  of  England  to-day.     The 
locomotive  has  not  created  anything  but  a  new  combination  and  a  new  application 
and  usf'.     It  is  even  so  in  the  Bible.     The  Church  knows  nothing  yet  about  the 
possibilities  of  revelation.     No  new  Bible  will  be  written,  but  new  readers  will  come. 
We  have  learning  and  ability  and  industry  enough  ;  what  we  want  is  the  baptism 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.    (Ibid.)         The  baptism  of  the  Spirit  experienced: — As  I  turned, 
and  was  about  to  take  a  seat  by  the  fire,  I  received  a  mighty  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.     Without  any  expectation  of  it,  without  ever  having  the  thought  in  my  mind 
that  there  was  any  such  thing  for  me,  without  any  recollection  that  I  had  ever  heard 
the  thing  mentioned  by  any  person  in  the  world,  the  Holy  Spirit  descended  upon 
me  in  a  manner  that  seemed  to  go  through  me,  body  and  soul.     I  could  feel  the 
impression  like  a  wave  of  electricity,  going  through  and  through  me.     Indeed,  it 
seemed  to  come  in  waves  and  waves  of  liquid  love,  for  I  could  not  express  it  in  any 
other  way.     It  seemed  like  the  very  breath  of  God.     I  can  recollect  distinctly  that 
it  seemed  to  fan  me  like  immense  wings.     No  words  can  express  the  wonderful  love 
that  was  shed  abroad  in  my  heart.     I  wept  aloud  with  joy  and  love.  .  .  .  These 
waves  came  over  me  and  over  me  and  over  me,  one  after  the  ohter,  until  I  recollect 
I  cried  out :  "  I  shall  die  if  these  waves  continue  to  pass  over  me."     I  said,  "  Lord, 
I  cannot  bear  any  more";  yet  I  had  no  fear  of  death.     (C   G,   Finney,  D.D.) 
The  baptism  of  the  Spirit :  its  effects  : — It  was  that  baptism  which  made  the  might 
of  weakness  irresistible  ;  it  was  that  which  sent  a  few  poor  fishermen  and  publicans 
to  conquer  and  regenerate  the  resisting  world.     In  the  might  of  that  Spirit  Peter 
broke  down  the  old  wall  of  partition,  and  admitted  the  Gentiles  into  the  Church  of 
God.     By  the  earthquake  of  that  Spirit  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent,  and  free 
access  was  given  to  all  in  the  holiest  place.     Convicted  by  the  might  of  that  Spirit 
the  Kabbi  of  Tarsus  sent  the  gospel  flashing  like  a  beacon  fire  from  Jerusalem  to 
Antioch,  from  Antioch  to  Ephesus,  from  Ephesus  to  Eome.     The  might  of  that 
Spirit,  working  among  the  Koman  legionaries  subdued  their  fierce  and  stubborn 
hearts  ;  the  might  of  that  Spirit  dilated  the  humble  intellects  of  the  apologists  of 
Christianity,  made  ridiculous  the  wit  of  Lucian,  the  taunts  of  Celsus,  the  logic  of 
Porphyry,  the  satire  of  Julian.     That  Spirit  leapt  with  Telemachus  into  the  Coli- 
seum, and  put  an  end  for  ever  to  the  hideous  butchery  of  the  gladiators  in  the 
arena;  it  emancipated  the  wretched  millions  of  ancient  slaves;  it  made  childhood 
sacred  with  the  seal  of  baptism,  and  gave  to  trembling  womanhood  the  rose  of 
chastity  and  honour.     The  might  of  the  Spirit  again  dissipated  the  radiant  glamour 
of  Pagan  fancy,  broke  the  wand  of  the  enchantress,  hushed  the  song  of  the  Syren, 
branded  with  shame  the  flushed  face  of  Bacchus,  and  the  harlot  brow  of  Aphrodite. 
The  might  of  that  Spirit,  abasing  the  Koman  eagles,  wove  its  cross,  the  symbol 
which  heathenism  loathed  as  the  gibbet  of  the  malefactor,  in  gold  on  the  banners 
of  armies,  and  in  gems  on  the  diadems  of  kings.     Touched  with  that  Spirit,  the 
rude  northern  barbarians  bowed  their  heads  before  the  meek  white  Christ.     Clothed 
in   that    Spit  it,   the    missionaries    went    forth    from    St.    Thomas    to    Ulphilas, 
from    Ulphilas    to    Boniface,    from    Boniface    to    Henry    Martin    and    Coleridge 
Pattison,  until  the  great  Angel  stood  with  one  foot  upon  the  land  and  one  upon  the 
sea,  with  an  everlasting  gospel  in  His  hands.     In  the  might  of  that  Spirit  the 
Crusaders  gave  up  their  lives  for  their  fair  Captain,  Christ.     It  was  the  love  which 
that  Spirit  kindled,  like  a  pure  flame  on  the  altar  of  their  hearts,  which  made  the 
philanthropists,  from  Fabula  to  St.  Francis,  from  St.  Fi'ancis  to  St.  Vincent  de  Paul 
and  John  Howard  and  David  Livingstone  and  Lord  Shaftesbury,  strong  to  confront 
the  menacing  monopolies,  and  to  smite  the  hoary  head  of  inveterate  abuse.     So 
the  descending  flame,  the  rushing  mighty  wind  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  the  secret  of  all 
that  Christianity  has  done  for  the  love  of  Christ  its  Lord.   Look  forward  for  three  poor 
centuries  from  the  first  Pentecost,  and  on  Whitsundiiy  a.d.  337  died,  in  the  white 
robe  of  baptism  which  he  had  just  received,  Constantine  the  Great,  the  first  Chris- 
tian emperor  of  Eome.     Look  forward  for  six  centuries,  and  it  was  on  Whitsunday 
of  A.D.  597  that  the  conversion  of  Saxon  England  began  with  the  baptism  of  King 
Ethelbert.    Look  forward  for  seven  centuries  and  a  half,  and  it  was  on  Whitsunday 
A.D.  755  that  St.  Boniface  was  martyred,  the  great  apostle  of  the  Germans.    Look 
forward  nearly  nineteen  centuries,  and  to-day,  in  tens  of  thousands  of  Christian 
Churches,  from  the  snows  of  Greenland  to  the  rocky  Falkland  Isles,  from  dawn  to 
Bunset,  and  again  from  sunset  to  dawn,  in  every  single  spot  where  there  are  gathered 
the  representatives  of  any  portion  of  civilised  peoples,  there  is  being  preached  that 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  ACTS.  133 

very  same  gospel  in  every  essential  particular  which  was  preached  nearly  two 
millenniums  ago  in  Nazareth  and  Bethlehem.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  A  neio 
vianifestation  of  the  Divine  Spirit ;— 1.  Though  we  canuot  regard  Pentecost  as  the 
birthday  of  the  Church,  since  the  Cliurch  was  boi-n  centuries  before,  we  are  bound 
to  regard  it  as  the  grand  crowning  period  in  the  development  of  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion. Periods  in  the  working  out  of  this  plan  mark  the  history  of  four  thousand 
years,  one  leading  to  another.  From  Adam  to  Abraham,  from  Abraham  to  Moses, 
and  from  Moses  to  Christ,  and  now  from  Christ's  Advent  to  Pentecost.  To  this  all 
the  others  pointed,  and  in  it  they  were  all  crowned  with  glory.  2.  But  we  are  not 
to  suppose  that  this  was  the  first  time  the  Divine  Spirit  visited  this  world.  He 
strove  with  the  antediluvians,  inspired  old  prophets,  and  dwelt  in  old  saints.  But 
He  never  came  in  such  a  demonstration  and  plenitude  of  power  before.  Before  He 
had  distilled  as  the  dew,  now  He  comes  down  as  a  shower ;  before  He  had  gleamed 
as  the  first  rays  of  morning,  now  He  appears  as  the  brightness  of  noon.  Note  His 
action — I.  Upon  the  disciples.  1.  Upon  their  ear.  "Wind,"  an  emblem  of  the 
Spirit.  (1)  Invisible.  (2)  Mysterious.  (3)  Powerful.  (4)  Kefreshing.  Great 
epochs  are  usually  marked  by  extraordinary  phenomena — e.g. ,  the  giving  of  the  Law ; 
the  Advent ;  the  Crucitixion,  and  now  Pentecost.  2.  Upon  their  eye.  "Fire  "is — 
(1)  Purifying.  (2)  Consumiug.  (3)  Transmuting.  (4)  Diffusive.  Perhaps  these 
supernatural  appeals  to  the  senses  were  intended  to  express  the  relation  of  the 
Divine  Spirit,  (a)  To  life — "wind"  or  air  is  vital,  the  breath  of  life.  (6)  To 
speech — "  tongues  "  would  intimate  that  the  Spirit  had  given  men  new  utterances, 
(c)  To  purity — "  fire  "  would  indicate  that  the  Spirit  had  to  consume  all  the  corrup- 
tions of  the  soul.  II.  In  the  disciples.  "  They  were  fiUed  with  the  Holy  Ghost." 
He  took  possession  of  their — 1.  Minds,  and  made  them  the  organs  of  Divine  thought. 

2.  Hearts,  and  filled  them  with  Divine  emotions.  3.  Bodies,  and  made  them  His 
living  temples.  4.  Wills,  and  made  them  the  organs  of  Divine  resolutions. 
Kothing  but  the  Divine  will  fill  the  soul.  Without  God  there  will  be  a  boundless 
vacuum  within.  HI.  Through  the  disciples.  Your  things  are  observable  concern- 
ing their  speech.  1.  It  followed  their  Divine  inspiration.  It  was  not  until  the 
Spirit  had  given  them  the  right  thoughts  and  feelings  that  utterance  came.  Better 
be  dumb  than  express  the  sentiments  of  the  unrenewed  soul.  It  is  when  the  Spirit 
comes  that  we  want  speech,  and  shall  have  it.  A  Divinely  filled  soul  must  break 
forth  in  Divine  language.  2.  It  was  mh-aculous.  The  coming  at  once  into  the 
possession  of  a  new  language  is  as  great  a  miracle  as  the  possession  of  a  new  limb. 

3.  It  was  unspeakably  useful.  It  served  to  impress  the  multitude  with  the  Divinity 
of  Christianity,  and  enabled  the  disciples  to  proclaim  without  preparation  the 
gospel  to  every  man.  Without  it  the  first  age  of  the  Church  would  have  had  a 
different  history.  4.  It  was  profoundly  religious.  This  wonderful  gift  was  employed 
to  speak  of  God's  wonderful  works.  May  the  day  soon  come  when  God-given 
language,  instead  of  being  the  vehicle  of  erroneous  thought,  impure  feeling,  depraved 
purpose,  shall  convey  to  men  nothing  but  holiness,  goodness,  and  truth.  (D.  Tliomas, 
D.D.)  The  time  of  the  Spirit's  outpouring  proves  the  unity  of  the  two  dispensations  : — 
The  time  when  the  Spirit  was  poured  out  on  the  body  of  Christians,  and  the  Church's 
foundations  laid  deep  and  strong,  revealed  profound  reverence  for  the  old  dispensa- 
tion, raising  by  anticipation  a  protest  against  the  heretical  teaching  which  become 
current  among  the  Gentiles  in  the  second  century,  and  has  often  since  reappeared, 
as  amongst  the  Anabaptists  of  Germany  and  the  Antinomians  at  the  Eeformation. 
This  view  taught  that  there  was  an  essential  opposition  between  the  Old  and  the 
New  Testament,  some  holding  that  the  Old  Testament  was  the  production  of  a 
spiritual  being  inferior  and  hostile  to  the  eternal  God.  The  Divine  Spirit  guided 
St.  Luke,  however,  to  teach  the  opposite  view,  and  is  careful  to  honour  the  elder 
dispensation  and  the  old  covenant,  showing  that  Christianity  was  simply  the  per- 
fection and  completion  of  Judaism,  and  was  developed  therefrom  as  naturally  as  the 
bud  of  spring  bursts  forth  into  the  splendid  blossom  and  flower  of  summer.  We 
trace  these  evidences  of  the  Divine  foreknowledge,  as  well  as  the  Divine  wisdom, 
in  these  Pentecostal  revelations,  providing  for  and  forecasting  future  dangers  with 
which,  even  in  its  earher  days,  the  bark  of  Christ's  Church  had  desperately  to  struggle. 
(G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.)  Effect  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — "  Tell  me,"  said  a  father  to  his  son, 
*•  what  difference  you  can  detect  between  two  needles — one  of  which  has  received 
an  electric  shock,  whilst  the  other  has  not.  And  yet  the  one  has  hidden  virtues, 
which  occasion  will  show,  of  which  the  other  has  none.  The  electric  shock  has 
rendered  the  one  needle  a  magnet,  which,  duly  balanced,  will  enable  man  to  find 
his  way  across  the  trackless  ocean.     As  this  needle,  so  may  that  soul  be  which  has 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  irJ 

received  the  electric  shock  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  on  the  ocean  of  a  sinful  world,  it 
shall  point  wanderers  to  the  heaven  of  everlasting  rest."  Revivals  of  relijion:  — 
I.  Theie  nature.  Keligion  in  the  soul  is  sometimes  in  a  lower,  sometimes  in  a 
higher  state.  The  passage  from  the  one  to  the  other  is  more  or  less  rapid.  So  in 
a  commnnity  or  church.  There  were  periods  of  decline  and  refreshing  under  the 
Old  Testament,  in  the  time  of  Christ,  in  the  time  of  the  Reformation,  in  the  time 
of  Edwards  and  since.  The  phrase  has  now  acquired  the  meaning  of  a  sudden 
change  from  inattention  to  attention  in  regard  to  religions — to  those  seasons  when 
Chrisiian  zeal  is  manifestly  increased,  and  converts  multiplied.  II.  Their  keality, 
1.  This  has  been  denied — (1)  By  rationalists,  and  all  who  deny  the  supernatural 
operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (2)  By  those  who  deny  that  the  converting  influ- 
ences of  the  Spirit  are  ever  exerted  except  in  connection  with  the  sacraments.  (3) 
By  those  whose  theory  of  religion  does  not  admit  of  instantaneous  or  rapid  conver- 
sions ;  who  hold  that  the  germ  of  piety  imi^lanted  in  baptism  is,  by  an  educational 
process,  to  be  nurtured  unto  conversion.  (4)  By  those  who,  while  admitting  the 
facts  of  the  Bible  on  the  subject,  seem  disposed  to  regard  them  as  belonging  rather 
to  the  miraculous  than  to  the  normal  state  of  the  Church.  2.  But  granting  the 
fact  of  supernatural  influence,  there  is  no  objection  to  the  theory  of  revivals. 
There  is  nothing  in  them  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  religion,  or  with  the  modes 
of  Divine  operation.  It  is  a  question  of  fact,  and  both  Scripture  and  history  are 
decisive  on  the  point.  3.  In  regard  to  the  question  whether  any  religious  excite- 
ment is  a  revival  or  not,  note — (1)  It  is,  of  course,  not  to  be  taken  for  granted  that 
every  such  excitement  is  a  work  of  God.  It  may  be  nothing  but  the  product  of 
human  acts  and  eloquence,  and  consist  in  the  excitement  of  mere  natural  feelings. 
Much,  no  doubt,  which  passes  for  revival  is  more  or  less  of  that  character.  (2)  The 
criteria  for  the  decision  between  true  and  false  revivals,  and  true  and  false  religion 
is  the  same,  (a)  Their  origin.  Are  they  due  to  the  pleaching  of  the  truth?  (b) 
Their  character.  Is  the  excitement  humble,  reverential,  peaceful,  benevolent, 
holy ;  or  is  it  proud,  censorious,  schismatical,  irreverent  ?  (c)  Their  permanent 
fruits.  This  is  the  only  certain  test.  (3)  Perfection  is  not  to  be  expected  in 
revivals  any  more  than  in  the  religion  of  individuals,  and  they  are  not  to  be  con- 
demned because  of  some  evils.  III.  Their  IMPORTANCE.  1.  This  maybeestimated^ 
proximately,  in  two  ways — (1)  By  the  importance  of  the  end  which  they  are 
assumed  to  answer— the  salvation  of  many  souls  and  the  elevation  of  the  piety  of 
the  Church.  (2)  Historically,  i.e.,  by  a  reference  to  the  effects  they  have  produced. 
Pentecost,  the  Eeformation,  the  Mission  of  Wesley,  &c.  Estimated  by  these 
standards  their  impoi'tance  is  incalculable.  2.  But  there  arc  false  views  of  their 
importance,  viz.,  (1)  That  they  are  the  only  ways  in  which  religion  can  be  promoted. 
Many  expect  nothing  except  during  a  revival,  and  consequently  do  nothing.  (2) 
That  they  are  the  best  way.  They  are  great  mercies,  but  there  are  greater.  When 
there  have  been  years  of  famine  a  superabundant  harvest  is  a  great  blessing.  But 
it  had  been  better  had  each  harvest  been  good.  General  permanent  health  is  better 
than  exuberant  joyousness  alternating  with  depression.  IV.  Their  dangers. 
These  may  be  learned — 1.  From  their  nature.  Excitement  in  proportion  to  its 
intensity  in  an  individual  or  a  community  calls  into  vigorous  exercise  both  the  good 
and  bad  elements  which  maybe  extant.  It  makes  the  self-righteous,  the  censorious, 
the  vain,  more  so.  It  sets  men  on  new,  unauthorised  or  improper  means  of  pro- 
moting religion ;  and  the  evil  elements  often  mingle  with  the  good,  so  as  to  be  far 
more  apparent  than  the  good.  The  desolations  of  storm  or  flood  are  often  more 
apparent  than  their  benefits.  2.  From  experience  we  find  the  following  evils  are 
apt  to  attend  revivals.  (1)  False  teachers,  doctrines,  measures,  as  in  the  apostolic 
age.  (2)  False  views  of  religion,  fanaticism.  (3)  Contempt  of  the  ordinary  means 
of  grace,  and  neglect  of  them.  (4)  Disparagement  of  religion  in  the  eyes  of  serious, 
reflecting  men.  (5)  Denunciation  and  schisms.  (6)  False  views  of  the  proper 
kind  of  preaching,  and  neglect  of  the  instruction  of  the  young.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.) 
Revival  preceded  by  prayer : — In  the  winter  of  1875,  we  were  worshipping  in  the 
Brooklyn  Academy  of  Music  in  the  interregnum  of  churches.  We  had  the  usual 
great  audiences,  but  I  was  oppressed  beyond  measure  by  the  fact  that  conversions 
\?ere  not  more  numerous.  One  Tuesday  I  invited  to  my  house  five  old,  consecrated 
Christian  men — all  of  them  gone  now,  except  Father  Petirson,  and  he,  in  blindness 
and  old  age,  is  waiting  for  the  Master's  call  to  come  up  higher.  These  old  men 
came,  not  knowing  why  I  had  invited  them.  I  took  them  to  the  top  room  of  my 
house.  I  said  to  them  :  "  I  have  called  you  here  for  special  prayei-.  I  am  in  an 
agony  for  a  great  turning  to  God  of  the  people.     We  have  vast  multitudes  in 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  135 

attendance  and  they  are  attentive  and  respectful,  but  I  cannot  see  that  they  are 
saved.  Let  us  kneel  down  and  each  one  pray,  and  not  leave  this  room  until  we  are 
all  assured  that  the  blessing  will  come  and  has  come."  It  was  a  most  intense 
crying  unto  God.  I  said,  "Brethren,  let  this  meeting  be  a  secret,"  and  they  said  it 
would  be.  That  Tuesday  night  special  service  ended.  On  the  following  Friday 
night  occurred  the  usual  prayer-meeting.  No  one  knew  of  what  had  occurred  on 
Tuesday  night,  but  the  meeting  was  unusually  thronged.  Men  accustomed  to  pray 
in  public  in  great  composure  broke  down  under  emotion.  The  people  were  in  tears. 
There  were  sobs  and  silences  and  solemnities  of  such  unusual  power  that  the 
worshippers  looked  into  each  other's  faces  as  much  as  to  say,  "  What  does  all  this 
mean?"  And,  when  the  following  Sabbath  came,  although  we  were  in  a  secular 
place,  over  four  hundred  arose  for  prayers,  and  a  religious  awakening  took  place 
that  made  that  v/inter  memorable  for  time  and  for  eternity.  There  may  be  in  this 
building  many  who  were  brought  to  God  during  that  great  ingathering,  but  few  of 
them  know  that  the  upper  room  in  my  house  in  Quincy  Street,  where  those  five  old 
Christian  men  poured  out  their  souls  before  God,  was  the  secret  place  of  thunder. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Belief  in  the  Holy  Ghost : — "  I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost," 
is  not  with  us  a  mere  formal  expression  ;  but  the  utterance  of  our  heartfelt  convic- 
tion. I  have  heard  of  a  Cburch  school  in  which  the  children  were  taught  the 
Apostles'  Creed,  and  each  child  had  to  say  a  sentence.  One  day  the  clergyman 
came  in,  and  asked  them  to  repeat  it  to  him.  They  managed  all  right  for  a  time, 
but  all  of  a  sudden  there  was  an  awkward  silence.  The  clergyman  said,  "  Why 
don't  you  go  on  ?  "  One  trembling  little  voice  replied,  "  Please,  sir,  the  boy  that 
believes  in  the  Holy  Ghost  isn't  here  to-day."  I  fear  that  is  true  of  many  churches, 
and  msny  pulpits ;  those  who  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost  are  not  there  I  His  very 
name  is  scarcely  heard  in  some  places  of  worship  ;  and  all  ascription  of  glory  and 
honour  to  Him  is  lost  in  the  mention  of  an  "  influence."  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Waiting  where  the  Spirit  is  likely  to  come: — "That  ship  does  not  seem  to  stir; 
there's  not  a  breath  of  wind  to  move  her  sails  " ;  said  one  of  our  little  company. 
*•  No,"  replied  another,  "  but  she  is  where  she  will  get  the  wind  as  soon  as  it 
begins  to  blow."  And  so  it  proved ;  for  presently  her  canvas  began  to  fill,  and  ere 
long  she  was  speeding  towards  her  desired  haven.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  be  in  the 
way  of  any  blessing  that  may  be  coming.  Perhaps  you  are  not  yet  a  Christian  ;  but 
you  say  that  you  long  to  be  one.  Then  seek  to  get  where  the  sacred  wind  is  likely 
to  blow.  The  Spirit,  like  the  wind,  "  bloweth  where  it  listeth  "  ;  but  there  are 
special  times  and  places  in  which  His  gracious  influences  are  usually  manifested. 
See  that  you  are  where  you  may  expect  the  heavenly  breeze.  Prayer-meetings, 
Bible-classes,  special  services,  and  places  of  worship  where  the  gospel  of  the  grace 
of  God  is  preached  in  all  its' fulness,  are  the  spots  where  the  Spirit  delights  to  work  ; 
go  there,  and  may  the  Divine  afflatus  fill  thee,  and  speed  thee  on  thy  heavenward 
voyage!  {J.  W.  Harrald.)  Are  ice  ready  for  spiritual  poicer : — This  power  is 
what  we  want ;  but  the  question  is,  are  we  ready  for  it  ?  Are  we  fit  to  be  used, 
willing  to  be  used,  to  be  used  anywhere,  to  be  apparently  unused,  to  be  nothing, 
that  Christ  may  be  all  ?  The  possession  of  power  is  a  great  responsibility  ;  perhaps 
the  self-will  and  self-esteem  of  some  of  us  would  make  the  possession  of  such  power 
a  very  deadly  thing.  Andrew  Murray  says,  "  We  want  to  get  possession  of  the 
power,  and  use  it ;  God  wants  the  power  to  get  possession  of  us,  and  use  us.  If  we 
give  ourselves  to  the  power  to  rule  in  us,  the  power  will  give  itself  to  us  to  rule 
through  us."  We  are  waiting  here  this  morning  to  be  filled  with  power.  Perhaps 
we  had  better  wait  first  to  be  emptied.  (T.  J.  Longhurst.)  Awaking  to  truth : — 
The  Holy  Spirit  comes  like  a  rushing  wind  upon  the  disciples,  and  in  an  hour  they 
are  new  men.  The  jailer  hears  and  believes  in  a  night.  Luther,  while  toiling  up 
the  holy  stairs  of  the  Laterau,  holding  to  salvation  by  works,  drops  that  scheme  on 
the  way,  and  lavs  hold  of  the  higher  one  of  salvation  by  faith.  Ignatius  Loyola,  in 
a  dream,  has  sight  of  the  Mother  of  Christ,  and  awakes  a  soldier  of  Jesus.  It  is 
often  so.  We  do  not  so  much  grow  into  the  possession  of  new  spiritual  truths  as 
we  awake  to  them.  Their  coming  is  not  like  the  sunrise,  that  slowly  discloses  the 
shapes  and  relations  of  things,  but  is  like  the  lightning,  that  illuminates  earth  and 
sky  in  one  quick  flash,  and  so  imprints  them  for  ever  on  the  vision.  {Theodore  T. 
Hunger.)  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  dependent  upon  conditions  : — How  to  realise  the 
immanence,  or  possess  ourselves  of  the  indwelling  of  this  Holy  Spirit,  is  purely  a 
question  of  conditions.  Let  me  illustrate  my  meaning.  To  a  man  in  perfect  health 
an  atmosphere  impregnated  with  disetse-germs  is  comparatively  harmless ;  but 
should  he  approach  a  typhus -stricken  patient  with  a  body  exhausted  by  exercise,  or 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

faint  from  want  of  food,  the  probabilities  are  that  he  will  fall  a  prey  to  the  disease. 
Again,  as  a  man  brings  himself  into  harmony  with  all  the  laws  of  his  being,  life 
assumes  a  bright  and  joyous  aspect.  Forms,  tints,  sounds,  the  shouldering  hill,  the 
roseate  hues  of  dawn,  the  sweet-voiced  song  of  birds,  rouse  in  him  the  spirit  of 
devotion,  and  appeal  to  him  as  revelations  of  a  hand  and  mind  Divine.  But  if  his 
eye  be  jaundiced,  his  liver  torpid,  his  pulse  irregular,  bis  brain  congested,  then 
creation  becomes  a  blank,  the  world  a  wilderness,  and  life  a  weariness  and  a  woe. 
Or,  once  more,  take  mental  conditions.  Have  you  never,  in  reading  a  book,  marked 
with  pencil  some  passage  that  suddenly  flashed  its  meaning  in  upon  your  mind ; 
and  then,  some  six  months  later,  in  re-reading  the  same  passage,  wondered  how  it 
was  you  failed  to  re-experience  the  inspiration  of  the  former  time  ?  There  was  no 
change  in  the  book  ;  the  change  was  in  your  mental  condition.  Have  you  never, 
in  hearing  some  strain  of  music,  felt  that  it  led  you  into  a  world  of  fancy,  a  realm 
of  strange  unutterable  delight,  and  yet,  forsooth,  when  on  a  later  day  the  same 
chords  have  been  touched  by  the  same  hands,  to  your  astonishment  they  languidly 
and  meaninglessly  floated  past  your  ear  without  rousing  the  imagery  of  your  soul  ? 
There  was  no  change  in  the  music,  the  change  was  in  the  mental  conditions  of 
your  life ;  at  one  time  you  were  responsive ;  at  the  other,  dull  and  inert.  In  all 
spheres  of  our  existence,  joy,  truth,  love,  are  proportioned  to  conditions.  And  so 
in  the  realm  of  the  Spirit.  Fulfil  the  Divine  conditions  and  you  are  en  rapport 
with  the  Divine  life.  Permit  those  conditions  to  go  unfulfilled,  and  the  Divine 
life  will  be  to  you  as  though  it  were  not.  And  oh !  how  simple  these  conditions 
are !  They  do  not  consist  in  lashing  yourself  into  a  frenzy,  nor  in  shouting  your- 
self into  hoarseness,  nor  in  mutilating  yourself.  No.  The  conditions  are  prayer 
and  supplication  from  hearts  one  in  accord.  It  is  prayer,  and  prayer  only,  that 
fits  us  for  Divine  indwelling ;  it  is  prayer,  and  prayer  only,  that  puts  us  in  touch 
with  God.  A  prayerless  life  can  no  more  draw  to  itself  the  Holy  Spirit  than 
glass  can  draw  the  electric  fire ;  nor  can  a  prayerless  Church  bring  forth  the 
fruits  of  holiness  any  more  than  the  frigid  zone  can  call  forth  and  perfect  a 
tropical  growth,  "  Ye  have  not  because  ye  ask  not ;  and  ye  have  not  because 
ye  ask  amiss."  Live  in  the  atmosphere  of  prayer ;  for  therein,  and  therein 
only,  will  you  fit  yourself  for  the  Divine  indwelling ;  therein,  and  therein 
only,  will  you  be  vigorous  with  the  life  of  God.  (J.  Marshal  Mather.)  All 
with  one  accord  in  one  place. — The  outward  unity  of  the  Pentecostal  Church: — 
There  was  unity  of  spirit  and  unity  in  open  manifestation  to  the  world  at  large. 
Christ's  disciples,  when  they  received  the  gifts  of  heaven's  choicest  blessings,  were 
not  split  up  into  dozens  of  different  organisations,  each  of  them  hostile  to  the 
others,  and  each  striving  to  aggrandise  itself  at  the  expense  of  kindred  brotherhoods. 
They  had  keenly  in  remembrance  the  teaching  of  our  Lord's  great  Eucharistic  sup- 
pUcation  (John  xvii.  21).  There  was  visible  unity  among  the  followers  of  Christ ; 
there  was  interior  love  and  charity,  finding  expression  in  external  union  which 
qualified  the  disciples  for  the  fuller  reception  of  the  spirit  of  love,  and  rendered 
them  powerful  in  doing  God's  work  amongst  men.  What  a  contrast  the  Christian 
Church  presents  to  this  no}v  1  There  are  some  persons  who  rejoice  in  the  vast 
divisions  in  the  Church ;  but  they  are  shortsighted  and  inexperienced  in  the 
dangers  and  scandals  which  have  flowed,  and  are  flowing,  from  thenf.  It  is  indeed 
in  the  mission  field  that  the  schisms  among  Christians  are  most  evidently  injurious. 
When  the  heathen  see  the  soldiers  of  the  Cross  split  up  among  themselves  into 
hostile  organisations,  they  very  naturally  say  that  it  will  be  time  enough  when  their 
own  divergencies  and  difliculties  have  been  reconciled  to  come  and  convert  persons 
who  at  least  possess  internal  union  and  concord.  Then,  again,  these  divisions  lead 
to  a  wondrous  waste  of  power  both  at  home  and  abroad.  If  men  believe  that  the 
preaching  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  and  that 
millions  are  perishing  from  want  of  that  blessed  story,  can  they  feel  contentment 
■  when  the  great  work  of  competing  sects  consists,  not  in  spreadmg  that  salvation, 
but  in  building  up  their  own  cause  by  proselytising  from  the  neighbours,  and 
gathering  unto  their  own  organisation  persons  who  have  already  been  made  par- 
takers of  Christ  Jesus?  And  if  this  competition  of  sects  be  injurious  and  wasteful 
within  the  bounds  of  Christendom,  surely  it  is  infinitely  more  so  when  various  con- 
tending bodies  concentrate  all  their  forces,  as  they  so  often  do,  on  the  same  locality 
in  some  unconverted  land,  and  seem  as  eagerly  desirous  of  gaining  proselytes  from 
one  another  as  from  the  mass  of  paganism.  Then,  too,  to  take  it  from  another 
point  of  view,  what  a  loss  in  generalship,  in  Christian  strategy,  in  power  of  concen- 
tration, results  from  our  unhappy  divisions  !   The  united  efforts  made  by  Protestants, 


CHAP.  II.1  THE  ACTS.  137 

Eoman  Catholics,  and  Greeks,  are  indeed  all  too  small  for  the  vast  work  of  converting 
the  heathen  world  if  they  were  made  with  the  greatest  skiU  and  wisdom.  How 
much  more  insufficient  they  must  be  when  a  vast  proportion  of  the  power  employed 
is  wasted,  so  far  as  the  work  of  conversion  is  concerned,  because  it  is  used  simply 
in  counteracting  and  withstanding  the  efforts  of  other  Christian  bodies.  How 
different  it  was  in  the  primitive  Church  !  Within  one  hundred  and  fifty  years,  or 
little  more,  of  the  ascension  of  Christ,  and  the  outpoining  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  a 
Christian  writer  could  boast  that  the  Christian  Church  had  permeated  the  whole 
Boman  empire  to  such  an  extent  that  if  the  Christians  abandoned  the  cities  they 
would  be  turned  into  howhng  deserts.  This  triumphant  march  was  simply  in 
accordance  with  the  Saviour's  promise.  The  world  saw  tl;at  Christians  loved  one 
another,  and  the  world  was  consequently  converted.     (G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  And  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  from  heaven. — The  sound  from 
heaven  an  ansxver  to  prayer : — The  united  prayer  of  the  apostles  was  a  cry  to 
heaven,  well  pleasing  to  God,  and  this  sound  was  a  delightful  answer  and  counter- 
cry  from  heaven ;  thus  was  this  ijxoQ  at  the  same  time  an  echo.  So  faithful  is 
God  to  His  children,  their  cry  presses  into  heaven  to  His  heart,  and  there  results 
from  that  the  return  of  prayer  from  heaven  (Apostolic  Pastor.)  The  echo  : — Our 
truest  prayers  are  but  the  echo  of  God's  promises.  God's  best  answers  are  the 
echo  of  our  prayers.  As  in  two  mirrors  set  opposite  to  each  other,  the  same 
image  is  repeated  over  and  over  again,  the  reflection  of  a  reflection,  so  here,  within 
the  pi'ayer,  gleams  an  earlier  promise,  within  the  answer  is  mhrored  the  prayer. 
(A  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Symbols  of  the  Spirit : — The  Holy  Ghost  as — I.  Wind.  In 
His — 1.  Secret  coming.  2.  Powerful  shaking.  3.  Purifying  blowing.  4.  Soft  re- 
freshing. II.  FiKE.  In  His — 1.  Bright  shining.  2.  Genial  warming.  3.  Destruc- 
tive burning.  4.  Eapid  spreading.  {Gerok.)  Pentecostal  seasons  : — 1.  That 
came  in  fulfilment  of  Divine  promises — the  promises  of  the  Old  Testament. 
2.  The  first  Pentecostal  season  came,  also,  in  direct  answer  to  prayer — united, 
earnest  prayer.  3.  Yet  further,  the  first  Pentecostal  season  came  to  meet  urgently 
and  profoundly  felt  necessities.  4.  Then,  lastly,  the  first  Pentecost,  in  its  im- 
mediate results,  was  a  special  and  very  extraordinary  revelation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit's  power  in  the  souls  of  men.  It  demonstrated  at  once  His  presence  as  the 
great  Convincer  and  Renewer,  and  the  ease  with  which  He  could  change  the  hearts 
of  men  and  dispose  them  to  welcome  Christ  and  the  great  salvation.  {Ray  Palmer, 
D.D.)  Whitsunday  : — I.  The  essential  virtue  of  the  Divine  communica- 
tion. "  They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  What  is  it  that  God  does  for 
us  wben  He  thus  acts  upon  us  ?  He  has,  in  His  heavenly  wisdom  and  in  His 
parental  love,  left  a  way  open  between  Himself  and  ourselves  by  which  He  can  act 
upon  us  not  indirectly,  but  directly,  not  mediately,  but  immediatply  ;  this  is  by  the 
gentle,  gracious,  efficient  action  of  His  own  Spirit  on  our  spirit.  1.  It  is  surely 
natural  that  He  should  do  so ;  most  likely,  most  credible  it  is  that  the  Infinite 
Father  of  mankind  should,  while  giving  to  His  children  a  large  measure  of  free- 
dom, responsibility,  and  so  of  spiritual  dignity,  hold  Himself  free  to  touch,  to 
quicken,  to  restrain,  to  incite,  to  restore,  to  ennoble.  2.  It  is  surely  desirable  in 
the  last  degree  that  He  should  do  so.  Whence,  otherwise,  should  we  gain  the 
spiritual  force  which  gives  life  to  the  dying,  energy  to  the  languishing,  sanctity 
and  peace  to  the  stained  and  struggling  spirit  ?  II.  Its  manifestations.  1.  This 
manifestation  was  remarkable  ;  it  excited  a  large  amount  of  attention.  2.  It  was 
also  beneficent.  3.  It  will  be  abundantly  evident  to  all  that  God  is  with  us  and  in 
us  ;  our  new  and  nobler  life  will  make  that  clear,  and  will  not  only  invite  but 
compel  attention.  4.  And  the  influence  will  be  beneficial ;  we  shall  lead  men's 
thoughts  upwards,  Godwards.  III.  The  conditions  under  which  we  may  look 
FOR  THE  Divine  outpouring.  {W.  Clarkson,  B.A.)  Pentecost : — The  crucifixion 
coincided  with  the  Passover ;  the  resurrection  with  the  feast  of  the  first-fruits ; 
the  giving  of  the  Spirit  with  the  feast  of  the  gathering  in  of  the  harvest.  There 
was  another  application  of  the  feast  which  had  come  into  force  in  the  time  of  our 
Lord,  according  to  which  the  day  of  Pentecost  commemorated  the  giving  of  the 
law.  Whilst  Jews  were  rejoicing  over  a  law  which  could  not  give  righteousness, 
because  it  could  not  give  life,  the  little  band  of  Christians  were  being  vitalised  and 
sanctified  by  the  descent  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  The  whole  difference  between  a  dis- 
pensation of  hard  law,  with  all  its  burdens  and  impotence,  and  that  of  a  living 
spirit,  with  all  its  buoyancy  and  power,  is  expressed  by  the  occurrence  of  the 
Jewish  festival  and  the  Christian  miracle  in  the  same  city  at  the  same  hour.     The 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

incident  as  it  lies  before  us  has  three  distinct  steps,  the  keeping  well  apart  of  which 
is  necessary  in  order  either  rightly  to  conceive  the  extern'al  features  or  to  appre- 
hend the  sj)irit  and  meaning  of  the  scene.  These  three  are  the  symbols  and  pre- 
cursors of  the  gift ;  the  gift  itself ;  and  its  consequences.  The  first  and  the  last 
are  transient,  the  central  one  is  permanent.  When  the  symbols  had  prepared 
the  hearts  there  came  the  actual  bestowment,  and  on  it  followed  the  speaking  with 
tongues.  I.  We  have,  first,  then,  to  consider  the  transient  btmbols  of  the 
ABIDING  GIFT.  Now  the  story  is  often  somewhat  erroneously  conceived,  and  it  may 
be  worth  our  while  to  try  to  get  a  clear  idea  of  what  really  was  seen  and  heard 
before  we  ask  what  was  meant  thereby.  We  are  to  conceive,  then,  of  the  whole 
group  of  120  disciples  gathered  together  in  their  usual  place  of  resort,  possibly  the 
very  same  upper  chamber  as  that  in  which  He  had  said,  "  If  I  depart  I  will  send 
Him  unto  you  "  ;  and  there  waiting,  with  the  tension  of  expectation,  which  the 
wondrous  events  through  which  they  had  passed  and  the  closing  promises  of  their 
Master  had  now  made  to  be  the  habitual  attitude  of  their  spirits — waiting  in  con- 
cord, hope,  and  prayer.  And  what,  I  suppose,  happened  was  this.  The  rushing 
wind  came  and  passed,  the  mass  as  of  fire  flashed  and  glowed  and  parted  yet  re- 
maining united,  and  hovered  over  their  heads  and  disappeared.  And  then  they 
were  filled  with  the  Spirit,  and  then  they  spake  with  tongues.  And  after  that  the 
multitude  entered,  and  heard  no  wind,  and  saw  no  fire,  and  only  discerned  that 
the  men  were  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  "  because  they  heard  them  speak  with  ' 
tongues.  The  symbols,  therefore,  were  simply  intended  as  premonitory  of  what 
was  immediately  to  ensue,  and  as  preparing  the  disciples  for  the  gift  by  quickened 
anticipation  and  attention  and  insight.  The  signification  of  the  symbols  needs 
little  elucidation.  The  Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  German,  English,  and  other  tongues 
express  the  immaterial  part  of  man  by  analogous  words,  having  the  original  mean- 
ing of  breathing  or  breath.  The  breath  is  the  life,  and  the  symbol,  inherent  in 
the  word  spirit,  carries  the  truth  that  the  gift  at  Pentecost  was,  in  its  deepest  con- 
ception, the  communication  of  a  Divine  life.  We  are  forgiven  and  accepted 
in  order  tbat  a  new  Divine  life  may  be  imparted  to  us,  and  we  get  heaven 
because  that  life  has  been  imparted.  I  need  not  remind  you  how  there  are 
subordinate  felicities  and  beauties  in  this  emblem,  which,  however,  must 
never  be  allowed  to  disturb  the  prominence  given  to  the  central  idea  in  it, 
such  as  those  which  our  Lord  hinted  at  when  He  said,  "  The  wind  bloweth 
where  it  listeth ;  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence 
it  Cometh  nor  whither  it  goeth."  The  depth  and  mystery  of  the  source,  the 
height  and  mysterious  glory  of  the  end,  the  liberty  wherewith  it  makes  them 
who  possess  it  free  when  the  impulses  of  the  spirit  are  in  harmony  with  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Lord — all  these  things,  and  many  more,  are  suggested  by  this 
great  metaphor.  Nor  must  we  forget  how  the  same  motion  of  the  same  atmosphere 
stirs  the  young  leaves  on  the  summer  trees  and  fans  the  hot  cheek,  and,  gathering 
force,  devastates  cities  and  sweeps  all  before  it.  The  variety  in  the  operations  and 
the  might  of  the  agent  are  wonderfully  expressed  in  the  symbol.  The  fire  that 
parted  itself  into  flames,  and  yet  was  all  one,  howsoever  divided,  is,  too,  a 
familiar  emblem  which  needs  little  expansion.  Fire  is  death ;  but  fire  is  life  too. 
And  it  is  the  vital,  quickening,  purifying,  transforming  energy  of  fire,  not  its  con- 
suming and  annihilating  force,  which  is  expressed  for  us  in  this  emblem.  We 
speak  of  warm  affections,  fiery  impulses,  hearts  glowing,  spirits  flaming  with  zeal, 
and  metaphors  of  the  like  sort.  Where  God's  Spirit  is  there  will  be  no  coldness ; 
where  His  Spirit  is  there  will  be  no  dead,  hard  obstinacy,  as  of  black  coal  and 
green,  smoky  wood;  where  His  Spirit  is  it  will  turn  all  into  its  own  fiery  likeness; 
and  out  of  the  most  unpromising  material  will  evoke  shooting  flames  that  aspire 
upwards  to  their  source.  The  condition  of  all  goodness  is  enthusiasm,  and  the 
author  of  all  holy  enthusiasm  is  that  fiery  Spirit  which  v/ill  sit  upon  each  of  us. 
II.  That  brings  me  to  the  second  stage  here — viz.,  the  abiding  gift.  Let  us 
take  the  liberty  of  inverting  the  words  of  the  clause  which  describes  it.  "  They 
were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  "Holy  Ghost."  That  designation,  coupled 
with  the  other  which  is  kindred  to  it,  the  Spirit  of  Truth"  makes  the  ditference 
between  the  sobriety  of  the  Christian  idea  of  inspiration,  and  the  extravagances 
and  immoralities  which  have  honeycombed  all  other  forms  of  belief  that  God 
breathes  Himself  into  men.  If  Christian  people  would  only  remember  that  all 
high-flying  pretences  to  spiritual  illumination  and  eminent  religiousness  and 
endowments  are  to  be  measured  by  this  sharp  test,  *'  Do  they  make  better  men?  " 
there  would  have  been  less  to  weep  over  in  some  pages  of  the  history  of  tha 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  ACTS.  139 

Church;  and  men  would  have  been  saved  from  fancying  that  any  spirit  is  a  spirit 
of  God  unless  the  manifestations  of  it  are  love,  joy,  peace,  righteousness.  Let 
us  remember,  "  They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  Further,  mark  the 
abundance  of  the  gift.  The  word  "  filled  "  is  not  to  be  passed  lightly,  as  if  it  were 
merely  a  favourite  phrase  of  Luke's.  It  cannot  mean  anything  else  than  that  a 
man,  according  to  the  height  of  his  capacity  to  receive,  was  under  the  influence 
of  that  Divine  Spirit,  and  that  all  the  nature — thought,  affection,  will,  practical 
energy — in  all  its  manifestations,  in  daily  life  and  common  secular  things,  as  well 
as  in  waiting  on  God  in  prayer  and  what  we  call  religions  exercises,  was  an  inspired 
nature.  "  Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost "  1  Filled  ?  And  most  of  us  have  a  little 
drop  in  the  bottom  of  the  reservoir ;  a  trickle  of  water  down  the  dry  bed ;  a  cats- 
paw  of  wind  that  dies  before  it  moves  the  flapping  sails  ;  a  spark  of  fire  in  one 
corner  of  a  cold  grate.  And  we  talk  about  being  "filled  with  the  Spirit  "  1  And 
then  there  is  the  universality  of  the  gift.  "  They  were  all."  Not  the  eleven 
apostles  only,  as  people  sometimes  fancy,  but  the  whole  120  of  them.  Now,  then, 
Christian  people,  "  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His." 
III.  Lastly,  notice  the  teansient  results  of  the  abiding  gift.  That  speak- 
ing with  tongues,  the  supernatural  expression  of  Christian  truth  and  devout 
emotion,  in  languages  learned  by  no  ordinary  method,  lasted  but  for  a  little 
while.  What  was  its  significance?  It  was  a  lesson,  at  the  beginning,  of  the 
universal  adaptation  and  intention  of  Christ's  work  and  gift.  It  was  a  lesson 
of  the  solemn  duty  of  the  Church  in  all  lands,  and  to  all  ages.  But  beyond 
that,  there  is  another  lesson  which  I  desire  to  leave  on  your  hearts.  "  They 
were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  they  began  to  speak."  Of  course  ! 
Christian  people  who  have  learned  with  any  passionate  affection  to  love,  and 
with  any  depth  of  intelligence  to  understand,  Christ  and  His  gospel,  must 
needs  speak  it  forth.  Do  you  see  to  it  that  you,  first  of  all,  receive,  and  then 
you  will  not  be  lacking  in  the  impulse  to  impart,  that  great  gift.  There  is 
only  one  way  to  get  that  Pentecostal  gift.  The  precursors  of  it  in  the  upper 
room  are  the  precursors  of  it  still.  Patient  hope,  expectance,  concord,  prayer. 
These  brought  Pentecost,  and  these  will  bring  the  Spirit.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  fourfold  symbols  of  the  Spirit  (text  and  ver.  17 ;  and  1  John  ii.  20) .- — Wind, 
fire,  water,  oil — these  four  are  constant  Scriptural  symbols  for  the  Spirit  of  God. 
In  our  texts  we  have  the  breath,  the  fire,  the  water,  and  the  anointing  oil  of  the 
Spirit  to  all  Christian  souls.  I.  *'A  bushing  mighty  wind."  Spirit  is  breath. 
Wind  is  but  air  in  motion.  Breath  is  the  synonym  for  life.  Spirit  and  life  are 
two  words  for  one  thing.  So  in  the  "  rushing  mighty  wind,"  we  have  the  highest 
work  of  the  Spirit — the  communication  of  a  new  and  supernatural  Ufe.  1.  We 
are  carried  back  to  the  vision  of  the  valley  of  dry  bones.  It  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth.  The  Scripture  treats  us  all  as  dead,  being  separated  from  God. 
"  They  which  believe  on  Christ  receive  "  the  Spirit,  and  thereby  receive  the  life 
which  He  gives,  or  are  "  born  of  the  Spirit,"  who  is  the  Spirit  of  life.  2.  Ee- 
member,  "  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  If  there  be  life  given  it 
must  be  kindred  with  the  life  which  is  its  source.  (1)  "  The  wind  blowelh  where 
it  listeth."  That  spiritual  life,  both  in  the  Divine  source  and  in  the  human 
recipient,  is  its  own  law.  The  wind  has  its  laws,  but  these  are  so  complicated  and 
undiscovered  that  it  has  always  been  the  symbol  of  freedom,  and  poets  have 
spoken  of  the  winds  as  "  chartered  libertines  "  ;  and  "free  as  the  air  "  has  become 
a  proverb.  So  that  Divine  Spirit  is  limited  by  no  human  conditions  or  laws. 
Just  as  the  lower  gift  of  "genius  "  is  above  all  limits  of  culture  or  position,  and 
falls  on  a  wool-stapler  in  Stratford-on-Avon,  or  on  a  ploughman  in  Ayrshire,  so 
the  Spirit  follows  no  lines  that  churches  or  institutions  draw.  It  falls  upon  an 
Augustinian  monk  in  a  convent,  and  he  shakes  Europe.  It  falls  upon  a  tinker 
in  Bedford  gaol,  and  he  writes  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  It  falls  upon  a  cobbler  in 
Kettering,  and  he  founds  modern  Christian  missions.  And  so  the  life  that  is 
derived  from  the  Spirit  is  its  own  law.  The  Christian  conscience,  touched  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  owes  allegiance  to  no  regulations  or  external  commandments  laid 
down  by  man.  Under  the  impulse  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  the  human  spirit  "  listeth" 
what  is  right,  and  is  bound  to  follow  the  promptings  of  its  highest  desires.  Those 
men  only  are  free  as  the  air  who  are  vitalised  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  for  where 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there,  and  there  alone,  is  liberty.  (2)  In  this  symbol  there 
lies  also  the  idea  of  power.  The  wind  was  not  only  mighty  but  "  borne  onward  " 
— fitting  type  of  the  strong  impulse  by  which  "  holy  men  spake  as  they  were 
•borne  onward'  (the  word  is  the  same)  by  the  Holy  Ghost."    There  are  diversi- 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

ties  of  operations,  but  it  is  the  same  breath  which  sometimes  blows  in  the  softest 
pianissimo  that  scarcely  rustles  the  summer  woods  in  the  leafy  month  of  June, 
and  sometimes  storms  in  wild  tempest  that  dashes  the  seas  against  the  rocks.  The 
history  of  the  world  since  has  been  a  commentary  upon  these  words.  With  view- 
less, impalpable  energy  the  mighty  breath  of  God  swept  across  the  ancient  world 
and  laid  paganism  low.  A  breath  passed  over  the  whole  civilised  world,  like  the 
breath  of  the  west  wind  upon  the  glaciers  in  the  spring,  melting  the  thick-ribbed 
ice,  and  wooing  forth  the  flowers,  and  the  world  was  made  over  again.  In  our 
own  hearts  and  lives  this  is  the  one  power  that  will  make  us  strong  and  good.  "  As 
many  as  are  impelled  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God."  Is  that 
the  breath  that  swells  all  the  sails  of  your  lives,  and  drives  you  upon  your  course? 
If  it  be,  you  are  Christians ;  if  it  is  not  you  are  not.  II.  "  Cloven  tongues  as 
OF  EIRE."  Tlie  Baptist  contrasted  the  cold  negative  efficiency  of  his  baptism  with 
the  quickening  power  of  Christ's  baptism  of  fire.  Our  Lord  Himself  employs  the 
same  metaphor  when  He  speaks  about  His  coming  to  bring  fire  on  the  earth.  In 
this  connection,  the  fire  is  a  symbol  of  a  quick,  triumphant  energy,  which  will 
transform  us  into  its  own  likeness.  There  are  two  sides  to  that  emblem,  one 
destruction,  one  creative ;  one  wrathful,  one  loving.  There  are  the  fire  of  love, 
and  the  fire  of  anger ;  the  fire  of  the  sunshine  which  is  the  condition  of  life,  and 
the  fire  of  the  lightning  which  burns  and  consumes.  1.  Fire  is  selected  to  express 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  by  reason  of  its  leaping,  triumphant,  transforming  energy. 
See  bow,  when  you  kindle  a  pile  of  dead  wood,  the  tongues  of  fire  spring  from 
point  to  point  until  they  have  conquered  the  whole  mass,  and  turned  it  all  into  a 
ruddy  likeness  of  the  parent  flame.  And  so  this  fire  of  God,  if  it  falls  upon  you, 
will  burn  up  all  your  coldness,  and  make  you  glow  with  enthusiasm,  working  your 
intellectual  convictions  in  fire,  not  in  frost,  making  your  creed  a  living  power  in 
your  lives,  and  kindling  you  into  a  flame  of  earnest  consecration.  The  same  idea 
is  expressed  by  the  common  phrases  of  every  language.  We  talk  about  the 
fervour  of  love,  the  warmth  of  aii'ection,  the  blaze  of  enthusiasm,  the  fire  of 
emotion,  the  coldness  of  indifference.  One  of  the  chief  wants  of  the  Church  is 
more  of  the  fire  of  God  !  We  are  all  icebergs  compared  with  what  we  ought  to  be. 
Look  at  yourselves ;  never  mind  about  your  brethren.  Is  our  religion  flame  or 
ice  ?  Listen  to  that  solemn  old  warning :  "  Because  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot 
I  will  spue  thee  out  of  My  mouth."  We  ought  to  be  like  the  seraphim,  the 
spirits  that  blaze  and  serve  ;  like  God  Himself,  all  aflame  with  love.  2.  The 
metaphor  suggests  also — purifying.  "  The  Spirit  of  burning  "  will  burn  the  filth 
out  of  us.  No  washing  or  rubbing  will  ever  clear  sin.  Get  the  fire  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  into  your  spirits  to  melt  you  down,  and  then  the  scum  and  the  dross 
will  come  to  the  top,  and  you  can  skim  them  off.  Two  things  conquer  my  sin  ; 
the  one  is  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  waslies  me  from  all  the  guilt  of  the 
past;  the  other  is  the  fiery  in Huence  of  that  Divine  Spirit  whic-h  makes  me  pure 
and  clean  for  all  the  time  to  come.  III.  "  I  will  pour  out  of  My  Spiuit.  " — Cf.  such 
texts  as  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water,"  &c,  "  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  out  of 
his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water,"  "  A  river  of  water  of  life  proceerling 
from  the  throne,"  and  the  expre-sions,  "pouring  out"  and  "sheildint;  forth." 
The  significHuce  of  this  is  that  the  Spirit  is — 1.  Cleansing.  2.  Refreshing,  and 
satisfying.  There  is  only  one  thing  that  will  slake  the  immortal  thirst  in  your 
souls.  The  world  will  never  do  it ;  love  or  ambition  gratified  and  wealth  possessed, 
will  never  do  it.  You  will  be  as  thirsty  after  you  have  drunk  of  these  streams  as 
ever  you  were  before.  There  is  one  spring  "  of  which  if  a  man  drink,  he  shall 
never  thirst "  with  unsatisfied,  painful  longings,  but  shall  never  cease  to  thirst 
with  the  longing  which  is  blessedness,  because  it  is  fruition.  The  Spirit  of  God, 
drunk  in  by  my  spirit,  will  still  and  satisfy  my  whole  nature,  and  with  it  I  shall 
be  glad.  "  Ho  !  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters  !  "  3.  Proiluctive 
and  fertilising.  In  Eastern  lands  a  rill  of  water  is  all  that  is  needed  to  make  the 
wilderness  rejoice.  Turn  that  stream  on  to  the  barrenness  of  your  hearts,  and  fair 
flowers  will  grow  that  would  never  grow  without  it.  IV.  "  Ye  have  an  unction 
FROM  THE  Holy  One.  "  In  the  old  system,  prophets,  priests,  and  kings  were  anointed 
with  consecrating  oil,  as  a  symbol  of  their  calling,  and  of  their  fitness  for  their 
special  offices.  The  reason  for  the  use  of  such  a  symbol  would  lie  in  the  invigora- 
ting and  health-giving  effect  of  the  use  of  oil  in  those  climates,  and  the  meaning 
of  the  act  was  plain.  1.  It  was  a  preparation  for  a  specific  and  distinct  service. 
(1)  I'ou  are  anointed  to  be  prophets  that  you  may  make  known  Him  who  has 
loved  and  saved  you.     (2)  That  anointing  calls  and  fits  you  to  be  priests,  mediators 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  ACTS.  141 

between  God  and  man ;  bringing  God  to  men,  and  by  pleading  and  persuasion, 
and  the  presentation  of  the  truth,  drawing  men  to  God.  (3)  That  unction  calls 
and  fits  you  to  be  kings,  exercising  authority  over  the  little  monarchy  of  your  own 
natures,  and  over  the  men  round  you,  who  will  bow  in  submission  whenever  they 
come  io  contact  with  a  man  all  evidently  aflame  with  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  filled  with  His  Spirit.  2.  And  then  do  not  forget  also  that  when  the  Scriptures 
speak  about  Christian  men  as  being  anointed,  it  really  speaks  of  them  as  being 
Messiahs.  "  Christ  "  "  Messiah  "  means  anointed.  And  when  we  read  "  Ye  have 
an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,"  we  cannot  but  feel  that  the  words  are  equivalent 
to  "  As  My  Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  so  send  I  you."  By  derived  authority,  and 
in  a  subordinate  and  secondary  sense,  we  are  Messiahs,  anointed  with  that  Spirit 
which  was  given  to  Him  not  by  measure,  and  which  has  passed  from  Him  to  us. 
"  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  (Ibid.)  And 
there  appeared  iinto  them  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire. — The  tongues  of  fire  : — 
It  may  be  said  generally  that  at  Pentecost  the  reign  of  symbols  closed  ;  not,  how- 
ever, that  worship  was  to  be  absolutely  released  from  visible  signs — witness  the 
in^stitution  of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper — but  a  great  change  passed  over  the 
relations  of  the  signs  and  the  reality.  Formerly  the  symbols  disguised  the  things 
signified,  now  they  have  either  been  displaced  by  or  simply  illustrate  the  manifested 
reality.  I.  Light  diffused  oe  condensed  as  fire  had  been  from  the  beginning 
THE  elect  token  OF  THE  PRESENCE  OF  GoD.  1.  A  light  drawn  from  no  material 
source  hovered  over  Paradise,  rested  on  patriarchal  altars,  irradiated  the  camp, 
trembled  over  the  mercy-seat  and  was  the  glory  of  God  filling  His  temple.  Now 
when  the  new  temple  is  consecrated  by  the  advent  of  the  Spirit  the  emblem  ap- 
pears for  the  last  time  and  marks  by  the  manner  of  its  appearance  a  change  which 
carries  with  it  the  essence  of  the  Christian  privilege.  (1)  Over  the  whole  company, 
before  it  was  distributed  into  fragments,  there  rested  for  one  brief  moment  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  as  the  sudden  token  that  Jehovah  had  transferred  His  dwelling 
place  from  the  holiest  to  the  upper  room.  But  specially  the  Holy  Ghost  signified 
that  the  Trinity  was  no  longer  a  mystery  hidden  from  the  people.  Within  the 
veil  the  glory  of  God  had  symbolised  the  Three-One  God.  The  Son  had  come 
and  fulfilled  His  part  of  the  symbol,  "  We  beheld  His  glory,"  &c. ;  and  now  the 
Spuit  descends  to  fulfil  His  part  also,  and  when  the  Church  was  "  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost "  it  became  a  temple  or  "  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit." 
We  are  not  in  tlie  court  without  conscious  only  that  there  is  within  the 
curtain  an  awful  mystery  of  light.  The  Triune  God  is  in  our  midst.  (2)  The 
diffused  glory  presently  disparted  "and  sat  upon  each  of  them."  In  ancient 
times  this  light  of  the  Lord's  was  never  known  to  rest  upon  any  individual 
— it  was  reserved  for  the  congregation.  Now  the  order  is  inverted,  and  imported 
that  God  accepted,  sealed  and  set  apart  for  Himself  every  one  of  them  without 
exception.  (3)  But  the  symbol  went  as  suddenly  as  it  came.  It  could  not 
remain,  otherwise  the  conditions  of  probation  would  be  changed.  Who  could  sin 
under  the  irradiation  of  that  heavenly  token  ?  And  how  could  the  world  go  on  if 
the  elect  carried  about  with  them  this  signature  of  heaven  ?  But  the  reality 
remains,  "  they  were  all  filled,"  &c.  What  the  evanescent  light  taught  for  a 
moment  the  New  Testament  now  teaches  for  ever :  that  the  penitent  believer  is 
released  from  condemnation  and  knows  it,  being  sealed  by  the  Spirit  of  consecra- 
tion. (4)  The  sign  departed,  but  if  restored  on  whom  would  it  rest  now?  Whom 
would  it  leave  unvisited  ?  Over  whom  would  it  waver  and  then  retire  ?  What 
melancholy  separations  would  it  make  between  husband  and  wife,  brother  and 
sister,  d'C.  Let  every  one  ask,  Would  it  rest  upon  me?  Such  tokens  of  accept- 
ance or  rejection  we  cannot  expect,  but  we  may  turn  with  confidence  to  the  sacred 
reality.  Never  live  without  the  thing  which  this  symbol  signifies.  2.  But  this 
light  was  the  light  of  a  sacred  fire.  This  introduces  another  novelty.  In  the 
ancient  temple  the  two  were  distinguished.  The  light  was  behind  the  veil  or  was 
only  diffused  through  the  courts ;  the  fire  burned  continually  on  the  altar  without. 
But  now  the  light  is  the  fire,  and  the  fire  the  light.  The  Holy  Ghost  sealed 
believers  for  God  by  an  outward  token,  and  then  filled  their  hearts  as  the  refiner 
and  sanctifier  from  sin.  (1)  Throughout  the  symbols  and  prophecies  of  Old  Testa- 
ment fire  was  an  emblem  of  the  purifying  energy  of  the  Spirit.  Wherever  the 
li^ht  of  God's  accepting  presence  rested,  hard  by  was  the  altar  on  which  fire  con- 
sumed what  God  could  not  accept.  And  whether  by  the  sharp  discipline  of 
affliction,  or  by  the  sweet  and  gentle  influences  of  His  grace  ;  whether  by  the 
fire  that  burns  or  the  fire  that  melts,  the  Spirit's  work  must  be  wrought  in  us  unto 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iii 

perfection.  The  fire  must  burn  on  until  it  is  quenched  through  having  nothing 
more  to  consume.  (2)  But  in  its  other  meaning  it  is  a  fire  that  never  can  be 
quenched.  The  meauing  of  the  fire  upon  the  altar  was  this — the  refu-e  was 
purged  out  that  the  rich  essence  of  every  offering  should  ascend  trembliug  to  God 
with  perfect  acceptance.  Our  whole  being  must  be  for  ever  ascending  in  abiding 
consecration.  Interior  religion  makes  the  Spirit  a  "  whole  burnt-offering,"  the 
principle  of  which  is  being  "tilled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  (3)  Note  the  con- 
nection between  the  light  and  the  fire  ;  between  the  Divine  acceptance  through  the 
atonement  and  our  interior  meetness  for  it  through  the  Spirit.  (4)  The  tire  is 
kindled  from  heaven,  but  it  must  be  kept  burning  from  below.  The  Eternal  High 
Priest,  by  His  Spirit,  puts  the  fire  on  your  altar  ;  you  must  be  the  Levite  to  bring 
the  perpetual  offering.  Feed  it  with  -^  our  vanities,  idols,  sins,  until  these  being 
destroyed,  it  shall  be  quenched.  Feed  it  with  your  best  affections,  words,  actions, 
^^hole  life,  until  your  whole  being  shall  be  ready  for  the  perfect  sacrifice  of 
heaven;  and  then  it  never  shuU  be  quenched.  (5)  And  remember  tlje  awful 
counterpart.  For  all  who  refuse  the  grace  th^re  is  prepared  a  fire  which  in 
another  sense  "  never  shall  be  quenched."  II.  That  which  sat  on  each  of  the 
DISCIPLES  ASSUMED  THE  FOBM  OF  A  TONGUE.  This  was  its  most  characteiistic  novelty. 
Never  before  did  it  so  appear  and  never  again,  and  we  must  look  for  its  interpre- 
tation to  the  subsequent  history.  1.  The  Spirit  gave  to  the  Church  anew  utterance. 
The  tongue  signified  that  to  the  whole  company  was  given  the  Spirit  of  wisdom 
and  revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  From  that  hour  the  Spirit  has 
been  the  Supreme  teaching  authority.  2.  The  voice  of  the  Church  was  lifted  up 
in  two  ways.  (1)  In  the  utterance  of  praise  of  the  wouderful  works  of  God.  The 
Spirit — the  tongiie  of  Gud  to  man — made  known  the  wonders  of  the  incarnate 
Saviour  as  they  had  never  been  made  known  before.  And  the  same  Spirit — the 
tongue  of  the  Church  to  God — dictated  a  hymn  woithy  of  the  revelation.  And 
tl'C  Spirit  ordered  that  it  should  be  a  type  of  the  great  future.  The  worship  was 
offered  in  many  languages  which,  as  heard  by  God,  were  blended  into  one.  Hence 
our  assemblies  are  above  all  worshipping  assemblies  inspired  by  the  Spirit.  (2)  But 
in  due  time  the  new  tongue  was  heard  in  preaching  also.  Peter  was  a  representa- 
tive of  the  great  company  of  preachers  in  his  subject,  his  zeal,  the  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit  which  accompanied  him,  and  his  greit  success.  But  the  distributed 
symbol  tenches  tbat  in  the  whole  work  each  individual  must  take  a  part.  There 
is  a  strong  tendency  to  introduce  such  music,  <fcc.,  as  must  reduce  many  a  po  ir 
member  of  the  congregation  to  a  mere  spectator.  Bemember  also  that  you  must 
take  your  part  in  the  preaching  service,  if  not  as  a  professed  preacher,  as  a  faithful 
servant  of  Christ,  ready  to  defend  His  name,  and  recommend  His  salvation  both 
by  voice   and  by  life.      (W.   B.  Fope,  D.D.)  Tongues  of  fire: — I.  Tongues. 

Because — 1.  Tliey  were  to  declare  by  the  tongue  the  message  of  God  to  every 
creature.  2.  They  who  had  been  unlearned  and  ignorant  men,  unapt  to  teach,  and 
powerless  to  convince,  were  from  henceforth  to  teach  and  convince.  3.  The 
Church  was  not  to  be  confined  to  men  of  their  own  language,  but  was  to  embrace 
men  of  every  language  under  ht-aven.  II.  As  of  fike.  Because  fire  was  an 
emblem  of — 1.  Purity.  2.  Enlightenment.  3.  Warmth.  4.  The  power  with  which 
the  Word  world  burn  its  way  into  the  human  heart  (Luke  xxiv.  82).  5.  Tbe  fiery 
trials  whi<h  awaited  them.  III.  Were  distributed  to  each  that  each  mi^ht 
know  that  he  had  his  distnct  gift,  and  that  none  might  exalt  himself  above  his 
bi other.  IV.  Sat  upon  them,  teaching  them  to  do  their  work  constantly  and  un- 
tirinjily.  (W.  Denton,  M.A.)  Tongues  of  fire  : — Richard  Sheridan  said  he  often 
went  to  heiir  Rowland  Hill  preach,  because  his  words  flowed  hissing  hot  from 
his  heart.  Chalmers's  main  loite  as  a  preacher  and  college  professor,  it  is  said, 
was  his  "blood-earneslness."  "What  we  want,"  remarked  a  Chinese  convert 
OBce,  "  is  men  with  hot  hearts  to  tell  us  of  the  love  of  Christ."  Be  earnest,  be 
enthusiastic,  and  the  fire  of  your  own  soul  will  kindle  a  flame  in  the  souls  of 
others.  (J.  C.Jones,  D.D.)  Tongues  of  fire  : — Rabbinic  writers  show  that  it 
was  a  common  belief  of  the  Jews  that  an  appearance  like  fire  oft  encircled 
the  heads  of  distinguished  teachers  of  the  law.  God  has  often  been  pleased  to 
reveal  Himself  to  men  in  conformity  with  their  own  conceptions  as  to  the  mode 
in  which  it  is  natural  to  expect  communications  from  Him,  as  by  star  to  magians. 
{Bp.  Hacket.)  Tongues  of  fire  :  different  kinds  of: — As  the  tongue  kindled  of 
hell  is  a  tire  that  consumes  everything  with  its  wickedness,  so  tongues  when  they 
are  kindled  of  heaven  are  converted  into  torches  by  which  a  Divine  fire  can  be 
kindled  in  many  souls  (James  iii.  6).   (R.  Steer,  D.D.)      The  necessity  oj  the  fire : — 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS,  143 

Suppose  we  saw  an  army  sitting  down  before  a  granite  fortress,  and  told  us  they 
intended  to  batter  it  down.  We  might  asked  them,  How  ?  They  point  us  to  a 
cannon-ball.  Well,  but  there  is  no  power  in  that.  It  is  heavy,  but  not  more  than 
a  hundredweight,  or  half  a  hundredweight.  If  all  the  men  in  the  army  were  to 
throw  it,  that  would  make  no  impression.  They  say.  No,  but  look  at  the  cannon. 
Well,  but  there  is  no  power  in  that ;  it  is  a  machine,  and  nothing  more.  But 
look  at  tbe  powder.  Well,  there  is  no  power  in  that ;  a  child  may  spill  it,  a  spar- 
row may  pick  it  up.  Yet  this  powerless  powder  and  this  powerless  ball  are  put  into 
this  powerless  cannon ;  one  spark  of  tire  enters  it,  and  then,  in  the  twinkling  of 
an  eye,  that  powder  is  a  flash  of  lightning,  and  that  cannon-ball  is  a  thunderbolt, 
which  smites  as  if  it  had  been  sent  from  heaven.  So  is  it  with  our  Church 
machinery  of  the  present  day.  We  have  our  instruments  for  pulling  down  the 
strongholds,   but,   oh,    for   the   baptism   of    fire.       (IF.   Arthur,   31. A.)  True 

eloquence : — It  is  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  will  make  men  eloquent.  Many 
of  us  think  it  consists  in  a  power  to  rattle  vowels  and  consonants  togeiher,  and  make 
language  ring  like  a  tinkling  cymbal.  No  ;  that  is  not  eloquence,  it  is  counterfeit ; 
that  man  has  not  command  over  language — language  has  command  over  him. 
What  is  eloquence?  According  to  Gilbllan,  "Eloquence  is  logic  set  on  fire." 
But  where  is  the  fire  to  come  from  ?  From  tbe  great  heart  of  God.  A  preacher 
in  his  study  ought  to  gather  his  thoughts,  to  collect  his  materials,  and  ascending  the 
pulpit  he  ought  to  set  them  all  ablaze  with  fire  from  off  the  altar.  (J.  C.  Jones.) 
The  building  up  oj  the  family  (text  and  Gen.  xi.  4): — I.  The  Old  Testament  text 
carries  us  back  to  the  period  when  "  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  language  and  of 
one  speech."  1.  At  that  period  the  human  race  had  begun  to  so  multiply,  that  it 
became  necessary  for  them  to  lengthen  the  cords  of  their  habitations.  A  consider- 
able horde  journeyed  westward,  with  the  view  of  settling  wherever  the  advantages 
I  of  pasture  might  tempt  them  to  fix  their  residence.  Faction,  however,  soon  began 
to  divide  them,  and  it  became  evident  that  such  a  spirit,  if  some  effectual  remedy 
I  were  not  appUed  to  it,  would  issue  in  their  dispersion  over  the  earth's  surface. 
'  Such  a  prospect,  it  appears,  was  intolerable.  Even  in  the  infancy  of  the  race  it 
was  felt  that  union  was  strength — that  to  disperse  the  family  was  to  debilitate  it. 
Possibly  there  was  another  motive.  The  deluge  was  fresh  in  the  memory,  and  a 
guilty  dread  of  some  similar  judgment  drew  them  near  to  one  another  for  shelter 
and  support.  It  was  the  period  when  man  was  beginning  to  awake  to  self-con- 
sciousness and  a  knowledge  of  his  own  resources.  Might  not  those  resources,  wisely 
applied,  enable  him  to  hurl  defiance  at  the  Most  High,  and  serve  to  secuie  him 
a'-'ainst  a  second  deluge  ?  This  presumptuous  horde  then  laid  aside  for  a  while 
their  petty  differences,  and  exclaimed,  as  with  one  voice,  "  Go  to,  let  us  build  us  a 
city,"  (fee.  Do  not  such  thoughts,  widely  different  as  to  outward  shape,  find  an 
echo  in  the  minds  of  men  of  the  present  generation  ?  There  never  was  a  generation 
which  possessed  a  fuller  consciousness  of  the  physical  resources  at  its  command, 
and  a  higher  estimation  of  the  results  which,  wisely  applied,  those  resources  may 
achieve.  And  never  was  there  a  stronger  yearning  after  union.  Men  recognise  the 
evils  which  are  incidental  to  partisanship  and  division,  and  profess  to  deplore  even 
where  they  cannot  remedy  them.  But  to  return  to  our  narrative,  2.  The  people 
had  proceeded  some  way,  when  "the  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  city  .  .  .  Let  us 
go  down,  and  there  confound  their  language."  The  mii-acle  seems  to  have  con- 
sisted of  two  parts — first,  their  language  was  confounded  on  the  spot — secondly,  an 
instinct  of  dispersion  was  sent  by  God  among  the  builders.  Without  such  an 
instinct  the  confusion  of  tongues  would  have  failed  to  effect  its  object.  "  So  the 
Lord  scattered  them  abroad  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth,"  which  points  to  the  effects 
of  such  an  instinct.  Each  little  band  took  its  own  path,  and  finally  settled  down 
in  a  separate  district,  placing  between  them  and  their  former  companions  the 
natural  barriers  of  mountains  and  rivers.  Here,  in  this  state  of  isolation,  national 
character  began  to  develop  itself.  Those  who  lived  much  abroad  in  a  sunny  and 
genial  climate  became  keenly  alive  to  the  various  forms  of  beauty,  and  susceptible 
of  a  high  refinement ;  those  whose  allotted  district  was  a  northern  and  a  cold 
country,  became  rude  in  their  manners,  and  adopted  superstitions  of  a  ferocious 
cast,  in  which  was  blended  a  strong  element  of  the  mysterious.  Language,  too, 
declined  more  and  more  from  its  original  model,  and  assumed  in  each  case  certain 
great  distinguishing  features.  And  thus  were  the  members  of  the  human  family 
effectually  separated,  and  their  design  of  establishing  one  great  central  institution 
baffled,  while  God's  counsel  of  dispersing  them  stood  for  ever.  3.  Now  this  narra- 
tive is  fraught  with  admonition  to  those  who,  under  the  conviction  that  man  can 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

only  be  strong  and  happy  in  union  with  his  fellows,  desire  to  compass  that  noblest 
of  all  ends,  the  universal  brotherhood  of  the  race.  It  testifies  that  genuine  unity  is 
only  to  be  compassed  by  striking  at  the  original  root  of  discord.  To  bring  men  to 
recognise  one  another  as  brethren  is  a  noble  aim ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  achieved  by 
a  fundamental  alteration  of  the  arrangements  of  property  or  rank,  while  we  leave 
untouched  those  springs  of  selfishness  which  lead  to  the  accumulation  of  property 
in  certain  hands.  To  make  wars  to  cease  in  the  world  is  indeed  the  very  pr<-roga- 
tive  of  Deity  ;  but  assuredly  it  is  not  otherwise  to  be  effected  than  by  aiding  those 
spiritual  influences  which  modify  and  repress  the  unruly  wills  and  affections  of  sin- 
ful men.  That  Christians  should  agree  in  the  truth  of  God's  Holy  Word,  and  live 
together  in  unity  and  godly  love — this  were  the  very  realisation  of  Christ's  prayer — 
but  it  is  an  end  which  CJinnot  be  otherwise  furthered  than  by  the  more  effectual 
propagation  of  the  gospel  of  love  and  peace,  an  end  which  no  uniformity  of  ecclesi- 
astical discipline  on  the  one  hand,  no  sinking  or  waiving  of  distinguishing  tenets 
on  the  other,  will  avail  to  secure.  That  all  nations  should  recognise  their  common 
fellowsLip  in  one  world-embracing  community — this  is  the  very  consummation  to 
which  true  believers  are  looking  forward  ;  but  then  it  cannot  otherwise  be  brought 
about  than  by  a  spiritual  agency,  and  its  attempted  achievement  by  the  wider 
establishment  of  commercial  relations,  or  by  any  other  method  of  the  kind,  will 
issue  most  assuredly  in  failure.  To  counteract  this  instinct,  by  diffusing  one  of  an 
opposite  tendency,  is  the  only  sure  method  of  success  in  such  a  work.  II.  Let  us  now 
TURN  OUR  THOUGHTS  TO  THE  New  TESTAMENT  TEXT.  1.  It  pleased  God,  in  His  own  good 
time  and  manner,  to  realise  the  presumptuous  design  of  the  Babel  builders.  In  the 
mediation  of  His  Son,  which  unites  heaven  to  earth,  He  hath  reared  up  a  tower 
whose  top  reaches  to  heaven,  while  its  base  is  accessible  to  the  heirs  of  sinful  flesh 
and  blood,  whereby  the  communications  of  prayer  and  praise  may  pass  upwards  to 
Him,  and  those  of  grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  may  descend  to  His  creatures.  Cluster- 
ing round  the  base  of  this  tower  is  a  city  which  He  hath  founded,  and  which  is 
designed  to  be  world-embracing.  The  members  of  the  community  thus  formed  are 
united  together  by  strong  and  efficacious  bonds,  although  such  as  are  invisible  to 
the  eye  of  sense.  They  have  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,  one  God  and  Father 
of  them  all,  who  is  above  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  them  all.  The  same  hope 
animates,  the  same  Word  guides,  the  same  bread  feeds,  the  same  providence  directs, 
the  same  blood  cleanses,  the  same  grace  quickens  and  consoles  thfm.  Aye,  and 
their  fellowship  extends  its  ample  bounds  beyond  the  barriers  of  the  world  of  sense. 
It  embraces  within  its  fair  girdle  an  innumerable  company  of  angels  and  the  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect  (Heb.  xii.  22,  23).  This  community,  so  constituted,  is  the 
appointed  centre  of  union  for  mankind.  There,  within  its  invisible  precinct's,  the 
families  of  the  human  race  may  meet  and  recognise  one  another,  as  all  claiming  by 
faith  a  common  interest  in  Christ.  There,  at  length,  the  dusky  Moor  and  the 
frozen  Laplander,  the  rude  Goth  and  the  refined  Greek,  may  acknowledge  their 
oneness  of  blood.     In  Christ  all  national  distinctions  are  annihilated  (Col.  iii.  11). 

2.  It  was  in  order  to  gather  the  nations  into  this  world-embracing  community,  that 
the  apostles,  after  the  Holy  Ghost  had  fallen  upon  them  at  Pentecost,  went  forth  as 
ambassadors  of  reconciliation.  As  an  outward  token  that  the  Spirit,  whose  opera- 
tion should  re-unite  in  one  mystical  body  the  scattered  families  of  man,  was  issuing 
forth  to  the  moral  world,  the  physical  impediment  obstructing  union  was  removed. 
The  apostles  "  spake  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  ihem  utterance."  It 
was  not,  however,  this  miraculous  faculty  which  was  the  secret  of  their  success : 
rather  it  was  their  burning  love  to  Christ,  their  burning  conviction  that  His  word 
was  truth,  their  burning  zeal  in  the  cause  of  perishing  and  benighted  souls,  so  aptly 
emblematised  by  those  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire,  which  sat  upon  each  of  them. 

3.  Nor  has  the  spirit  and  power  of  apostles  failed  in  the  Church,  although  the 
extraordinary  gifts  which  attended  their  mission  have  been  withdrawn.  The 
Church  has  now  gained  a  firm  footing  in  the  earth,  and  accordingly  is  left 
to  work  her  way  with  that  spiritual  power  which  is  still  alive  and  vigorous 
within  her.  As  with  the  spirit  of  love  any  triumphs  of  Christianity  may  be 
achieved,  so  without  it,  let  us  not  think  to  do  anything.  This  is  the  only 
spirit  by  which  we  can  be  instrumental  in  repairing  the  breaches  of  mankind, 
and  building  up  the  family  again  in  the  second  Adam.  (Dean  Goulburn.) 
The  tongues  of  fire  : — The  sign  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  presence  was  a  tongue  of  fire.  It 
was  a  most  suitable  emblem,  pregnant  with  meaning,  and  indicative  of  the  large 
place  which  the  human  voice  was  to  play  in  the  work  of  the  new  dispensation,  while 
the  supernatural  fire  declared  that  the  mere  unaided  human  voice  would  avail 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  145 

nothing.  The  voice  needs  to  he  quickened  and  supported  hy  that  Divine  fire,  thatf 
superhuman  energy  and  power,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  alone  can  confer.  The 
tongue  of  fire  pointed  on  the  Pentecostal  morn  to  the  important  part  in  the  Church'a 
life,  and  in  the  propagation  of  the  gospel,  which  prayer  and  praise  and  preaching 
would  hereafter  occupy.  It  would  have  been  well,  indeed,  bad  the  Church  ever 
remembered  what  the  Holy  Ghost  thus  taught,  specially  concerning  the  propagation 
of  the  gospel,  for  it  would  have  been  thereby  saved  many  a  disgraceful  page  of 
history.  The  human  tongue,  illuminated  and  sanctified  by  fire  from  the  inner 
sanctuary,  was  about  to  be  the  instrument  of  the  gospel's  advancement — not  penal 
laws,  not  the  sword  and  fire  of  persecution ;  and  so  long  as  the  divinely-appointed 
means  were  adhered  to,  so  long  the  course  of  our  holy  religion  was  one  long-con- 
tinued triumph.  But  when  the  world  and  the  devil  were  able  to  place  in  the  hands 
of  Christ's  spouse  their  own  weapons  of  violence  and  force,  when  the  Church  forgot 
the  words  of  her  Master,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,"  and  the  teachings 
embodied  in  the  symbol  of  the  tongue  of  fire,  then  spiritual  paralysis  fell  upon 
rehgious  effort  ;  and  even  where  human  law  and  power  have  compelled  an  external 
conformity  to  the  Christian  system,  as  they  undoubtedly  have  done  in  some  cases, 
yet  all  vital  energy,  all  true  godhness,  have  been  there  utterly  lacking  in  the  religion 
established  by  means  so  contrary  to  the  mind  of  Christ.  Very  good  men  have  made 
sad  mistakes  in  this  matter.  Archbishop  Ussher  was  a  man  whose  deep  piety 
equalled  his  prodigious  learning,  yet  he  maintained  that  the  civil  sword  ought  to  be 
used  to  repress  false  doctrine ;  the  divines  of  the  Westminster  Assembly  have  left 
their  opinion  on  record  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  magistrate  to  use  the  sword  on 
behalf  of  Christ's  kingdom ;  Richard  Baxter  taught  that  the  toleration  of  doctrines 
which  he  considered  false  was  sinful ;  and  all  of  them  forgot  the  lesson  of  the  day 
of  Pentecost,  that  the  tongue  of  fire  was  to  be  the  only  weapon  permissible  in  the 
warfare  of  the  kingdom  whose  rule  is  over  spirits,  not  over  bodies.  (G.  T.  Stokes, D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  And  they  "were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost. — The  historic  movement 
towards  spirituality : — The  succession  which  is  indicated  by  the  words  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  is  neither  nominal  nor  accidental,  it  is  a  philosophical 
progress  and  culmination.  1.  When  we  go  back  towards  the  origin  of  things, 
we  are  dissatisfied  with  all  mere  critical  terms,  and  yearn  for  something  for 
which  we  cannot  hit  the  exact  word.  Then  is  suggested  the  Biblical  word. 
Father,  and  with  it  comes  a  promise  of  satisfaction  in  spite  of  all  its  diffi- 
culties. 2.  But  fatherhood  is  an  inclusive  term,  suggesting  the  idea  of  childhood, 
and  childhood  is  realised  most  impressively  in  the  sonship  of  Christ ;  but  son- 
ship  such  as  this,  involving  visible  expression,  is  beset  with  peculiar  risks.  So 
He  withdrew  Himself  immediately  that  He  had  secured  for  His  personality  an  un- 
questioned place  in  history,  as  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  gained  by  His  visible 
continuance  on  earth.  3.  But  what  of  the  future  of  His  work  ?  Then,  according 
to  Christian  teaching,  was  to  come  manifestation  without  visibility ;  instead  of 
bodily  presence,  there  was  to  be  a  new  experience  of  life  and  spirituaUty.  In  one 
word,  the  holy  Man  was  to  be  followed  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  idea  of  a  philo- 
sophical rather  than  a  merely  arbitrary  succession  is  strictly  consistent  with  the 
fact  that  the  whole  movement  of  history,  in  all  that  is  vital  and  permanent,  is  a 
movement  from  the  outward  and  visible  to  the  inward  and  spiritual.  I.  The  order 
of  CREATION.  The  succession  runs  thus :  Light,  firmament,  dry  land,  seas,  the  fruit- 
tree  yielding  fruit,  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  the  moving  creature  that  hath  life,  and 
fowl  flying  in  the  open  firmament  of  heaven,  cattle,  creeping  thing,  and  beast  of 
the  earth  ;  if  we  pause  here  we  shall  be  dissatisfied,  because  of  a  sense  of  incom- 
pleteness ;  but  to  crown  the  whole  "  God  said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image  and 
in  our  likeness. "  II.  The  order  of  human  kecoveky.  Beginning  with  the  Levitical 
ritual,  what  could  be  more  objective  ?  The  sin-offering,  the  trespass-offering,  the 
incenses,  &c.,  represent  the  most  sensuous  and  exhausting  system  of  media- 
tion ?  Could  aught  be  farther  from  the  point  of  spirituality  ?  In  moving 
forward  to  the  incarnation,  we  take  an  immense  step  along  the  line  whose  final 
point  is  spirituality,  yet  even  there  we  are  still  distinctly  upon  the  carnal 
line.  The  final  representative  of  sensuous  worship  must  Himself  be  the  revealer 
of  spiritual  life.  Jesus  Christ  ascended,  and  henceforth  we  know  not  even  Him 
"  after  the  flesh,"  for  the  fleshly  Christ  has  Himself  placed  mankind  under  the 
tuition  of  a  spiritual  monitor.  III.  The  order  of  written  testimony.  From 
picture  and  symbol  we  pass  to  spiritual  meanings  ;  through  the  noise  and  fury  of 
war  we  pass  into  the  quietness  and  security  of  moral  civilisation  ;  through  the 

VOL.    I.  10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

porch  of  miracles  and  mighty  signs  and  wonders  we  enter  the  holy  place  of  truth 
and  love.  The  quality  of  John's  Gospel  requires  tbe  very  place  that  has  been 
assigned  to  it  in  the  New  Testament.  John  seems  to  say,  "  You  have  beard  what 
the  Evangelists  have  had  to  tell,  and  have  seen  tbe  wonderful  things  of  their  Master's 
ministry  ;  now  let  me  explain  the  deep  meaning  of  tbe  whole."  From  Malachi  to 
Matthew  is  but  a  step ;  but  to  get  from  Malaobi  to  John,  you  have  to  cross  the 
universe.  Matthew  shows  the  fact ;  John  reveals  the  truth  ;  Matthew  pourtrays  on 
canvas  ;  John  puts  his  word  into  the  heart.  IV.  The  whole  law.  From  the 
minuteness  of  microscopic  bye-laws  men  have  passed  to  a  spiritual  sense  of  moral 
distinctions.  Every  moment  of  the  Jew's  time,  and  every  act  of  his  life,  was 
guarded  by  a  regulation.  Amidst  our  spiritual  light,  such  regulations  could  net  be 
re-established  without  awakening  the  keenest  resentment.  The  great  tables  of  bye- 
laws  have  been  taken  down,  because  the  spirit  of  order  and  of  truth  has  been  given. 
What  is  true  of  law  is  equally  true  of  all  institutionalism.  V.  Precisely  the  same 
movement  takes  place  in  the  experience  of  eveey  pkogeessive  life.  Every  man 
can  test  this  doctrine  for  himself — the  doctrine,  namely,  that  the  growth  of  man- 
hood is  towards  spirituality.  The  child  grows  towards  contempt  of  its  first  toys  ; 
the  youth  reviews  the  narrow  satisfactions  of  his  childhood  with  pity  ;  the  middle- 
aged  man  smiles,  half-sneeringly,  as  he  recalls  the  conceits  of  his  youth  ;  and  the 
hoary-haired  thinker  lives  akeady  amid  the  peace  and  joy  of  invisible  scenes,  or  if 
he  go  back,  living  in  memory  rather  than  in  expectation,  it  is  so  ideally  as  to  divest 
his  recollections  of  all  that  was  transient  and  unlovely.  The  spiritual  world  of  the 
wise  man  increases  every  day.  These  suggestions  point  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  reasonable  completion  of  revelation,  and  as  such  His  ministry  is 
an  impregnable  proof  of  the  reasonableness  of  Christianity.  In  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ  truth  was  outward,  visible,  and  most  beautiful ;  in  the  person  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  truth  is  inward,  spiritual,  all-transfiguring.  By  the  very  necessity  of  the  case 
the  bodily  Christ  could  be  but  a  passing  figure  ;  but  by  a  gracious  mystery  He  caused 
Himself  to  be  succeeded  by  an  eternal  Presence,  "even  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  which 
abideth  for  ever."  It  is  claimed,  then,  on  behalf  of  Christianity,  that  there  is  a 
Holy  Ghost,  and  to  this  doctrine  is  invited  not  only  the  homage  of  the  heart  but 
the  full  assent  of  the  most  robust  and  dispassionate  understanding.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Filled  ivith  the  Spirit:— I.  They  were  tilled  wiih  the  Spikit.  1.  Men  may  be  filled 
but  not  with  the  Spirit  (ver.  13).  The  audience  confessed  they  were  full,  but  with 
wine,  a  liquor  though  full  of  spirit,  yet  no  spirit.  It  was  false,  yet  if  the  Spirit  may 
be  taken  for  a  humour,  why  not  a  humour  for  a  spirit.  Isaiah  says  (xxix.  9)  that 
men  may  be  drunk  but  not  with  wine.  A  hot  humour  is  tnken  for  this  fire  and 
termed,  though  untruly,  a  spirit  of  zeal,  and  men  imbued  with  it  are  ever  mending 
churches,  states,  superiors,  and  all  save  themselves.  2.  Not  every  spirit.  "There 
is  a  spirit  in  man,"  i.e.  our  own  spirit,  and  many  there  be  who  follow  their  own 
ghost,  and  not  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  even  that  ghost  taketh  upon  it  to  inspire,  and 
we  know  its  revelations  (Matt.  xvi.  17).  3.  Not  the  world's  spirit  (1  Cor.  ii.  12). 
4.  But  the  Holy  Spirit,  i.e.  His  gifts  and  graces.  And  because  these  be  of  many 
points  they  are  all  included  under  these  two— (1)  Under  the  wind  is  repre- 
sented saving  graces ;  as  necessary  to  our  spiritual  life  as  breath  is  to  our  natural. 
This. is  meant  for  us  personally.  Of  this  Spirit  there  are  nine  points  (Gal.  v.  22). 
(2)  Under  the  tongues  are  set  forth  the  grace  meant  for  tlie  benefit  of  others. 
Tongues  serve  to  teach  and  fire  to  warm  ;  and  of  this  spirit  the  points  are  reckoned 
up  in  1  Cor.  xii.  7,  &c.  II.  They  were  filled  with  the  Spirit.  1.  It  was  not  a 
wind  that  blew  through  them,  as  it  do^s  through  many  of  us,  but  that  filled  them. 
2.  Not  that  they  were  devoid  of  the  Spirit  before.  Christ  had  not  breathed  upon 
them  (John  xx.  22)  in  vain.  This  shows  us  that  there  are  diverse  measures  of  the 
Spirit,  some  single,  some  double  portions  (1  Kings  ii.  9).  As  there  are  degrees  in 
the  wind— a  breath,  a  blast,  a  gale,  so  there  are  in  the  Spirit.  It  is  one  thing  to 
receive  the  Spirit  as  at  Easter  and  to  be  filled  with  Him  as  at  Whitsuntide.  Then 
but  a  breath  ;  now  a  mighty  wind  ;  then  but  sprinkled  as  with  a  few  drops  (Ezek. 
XX.  46),  now  baptized  with  that  which  was  plenteouslv  poured  out  (Joel  ii.  20). 
III.  In  sign  that  they  were  filled  they  ran  over.  The  fire  was  kindled  in  them 
bv  this  wind,  and  in  sign  thereof  they  spoke  with  their  tongue  (Psa.  xxxix.  3).  The 
wind  would  have  served  them  as  Christians,  but  as  apostles,  i.e.  ambassadors,  they 
must  have  tongues.  1.  They  were  filled  and  then  they  began  to  speak.  Some 
speak,  I  will  not  say  before  they  are  full,  or  half  full,  but  while  they  are  little  better 
ihan  empty,  if  not  empty  quite.  2.  This  betjinning  to  speak  argues  courage.  Any 
mu,n  might  see  that  there  was  a  new  spirit  come  into  them.     Before  they  were 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  147 

tongue-tied.  A  damsel  did  but  ask  Peter  a  question,  and  he  faltered.  But  after 
this  mighty  wind  blew  up  the  fire,  and  they  were  warmed  with  it,  then  they  were  not 
afraid  to  testify  before  magistrates  and  kings.  {Bp.  Andrewes.)  Filled  ivith  the 
Spirit : — The  new  era  opened  at  Pentecost  was  one  in  which  all  God's  people  wei'e 
to  have  God  abiding  in  them  always,  the  Guest,  Comforter  and  Friend  of  evcy 
Christian  heart.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  this  Divine  ideal  has  been 
very  inadequately  realised.  Let  us  consider  some  of  the  results  which  may  be 
expected  to  flow  from  a  fuller  baptism  of  the  Spirit.  I.  Spiiutual  mindedness.  1. 
This  does  not  mean  that  our  thoughts  should  be  perpetually  running  on  the  future, 
that  we  should  ever  be  debating  theological  questions,  but  that  we  shall  have  the 
power  to  appreciate  those  great  and  eternal  realities  that  are  about  us.  2.  This 
spiritual  mindedness  will  reveal  itself— (1)  In  the  estimate  we  form  of  our  fellow 
men.  (2)  In  our  appreciation  of  tlie  great  spiritual  end  we  ought  ever  to  be  seeking 
in  order  to  do  Christian  work.  (3)  In  our  appreciation  of  Christian  doctrine  caring 
more  about  the  spiritual  substance  than  the  particular  foim  or  fashion  by  which  the 
truth  may  have  been  expressed.  For  instance — («)  In  all  our  thought  about  the 
death  and  atonement  of  Christ,  the  imagination  will  not  dwell  on  the  phv  sical  blood 
that  was  shed,  or  upon  the  physical  agony  that  was  endured,  but  upon  the  majesty 
of  God's  righteousness,  the  wonder  of  God's  love,  the  mystery  of  that  great  sacrifice 
on  the  Cross,  and  the  awf  alness  of  the  sin  which  made  that  sacrifice  necessary,  {b) 
When  we  think  about  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  our  thoughts  will  not  be 
taken  up  with  the  external  circumstances  of  pomp  and  splendour,  but  rather  with 
the  triumph  of  good  over  evil,  and  truth  over  falsehood,  which  is  the  consummation 
to  which  all  devout  souls  must  ever  be  looking,  (c)  In  thinking  about  inspiration 
we  shall  not  trouble  ourselves  about  theories  of  it,  or  about  the  mere  letter,  but  our 
care  will  be  mostly  for  the  Divine  truth  itself,  which  will  lift  us  up  in  our  despond- 
ency, and  guide  us  in  our  perplexity  when  we  come  to  the  sacred  page.     II.  An 

ACCESS  OF  POWER  BY  WHICH  THE  NATURALLY  TIMID  WILL  BE  ENABLED  TO  DO  THINGS  WHICH 

WOULD  BE  OTHERWISE  IMPOSSIBLE  TO  THE  STRONGEST;  in  regard  to — 1.  Testimony  for 
Christ.  2.  Endurance  of  sufi'ering.  3.  Philanthropic  work.  III.  A  change  of 
DISPOSITION.  1.  The  cessation  of  "  jealousies,  strifes,  and  divisions,"  which  Paul 
includes  amongst  the  "  works  of  the  flesh."  2.  The  preval*^nce  of  a  spirit  of  mercy 
and  kindness  towards  others.  (1)  To  those  who  in  our  midst  are  compelled  to  live 
very  hard  lives.  (2)  For  those  multitudes  all  over  the  world  who  are  without  the 
knowledge  of  God  as  revealed  in  Christ.  IV.  An  enthusiasm  of  holy  fervour  in 
ALL  work.  1.  In  worship.  2.  In  Church  life.  3.  In  evangelism.  (H.  Arnold 
Thomas,  M. A.)  Filled  with  the  Spirit : — I.  The  fulness.  There  was  no  part  of 
the  complex  nature  of  man  that  was  not  pervaded  by  the  Spirit.  1.  The  intellect 
was  illumined  to  know  the  truths  of  the  Spirit.  2.  The  affections  were  purified  and 
inflamed  with  desires  after  heavenly  things.  3.  The  will  was  strengthened  to  obey 
the  motions  of  the  Spirit.  II.  Its  manifestation.  Those  who  are  so  filled  give  out 
only  the  language  of  the  life-giving  Spirit.  Even  when  they  speak  of  earthly  things 
it  is  with  a  tongue  reminding  men  of  the  wisdom  and  simplicity  of  the  children  of 
God.  When  they  do  aught  in  the  common  busmess  of  life,  their  example  recalls 
the  thought  of  a  higher  life.  All  they  say  or  do  is  to  edifying.  (Cornelius 
a  Lapide.)  Filled  with  the  Spirit  and  receiving  the  Spirit : — The  difference  is 
not  of  kind,  but  of  degree.  In  the  one  case,  the  light  of  heaven  has  reached  the 
dark  chamber,  dispelling  night,  but  leaving  some  obscurity  and  some  deep  shadows. 
In  the  other,  that  light  has  filled  the  whole  chamber,  and  made  every  corner 
bright.  This  state  of  the  soul — being  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost" — is  the  normal 
antecedent  of  true  prophetic  or  miraculous  power,  but  may  exist  without  it ;  with- 
out it,  in  individuals  who  are  never  endowed  with  the  gift  either  of  prophecy  or  of 
miracles ;  without  it,  in  individuals  who  have  such  powers,  but  in  whom  they  are 
not  in  action,  as  in  John  the  Baptist,  before  his  ministry  commenced.  (IF.  Arthur, 
M.A.)  Fulness  of  the  Spirit  not  necessarily  miraculous  : — E.yesight  is  the  necessary 
basis  of  what  is  called  a  painter's  or  a  poet's  eye ;  the  sense  of  hearing,  the  neces- 
sary basis  of  what  is  called  a  musical  ear ;  yet  eyesight  may  exist  where  there  is  no 
poet's  or  painter's  eye,  and  hearing  where  there  is  no  musical  ear.  So  may  the  human 
soul  be  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"  having  every  faculty  illuminated,  and  every 
affection  purified,  without  any  miraculous  gift.  On  the  other  hand,  the  miraculous 
power  does  not  necessarily  imfdy  the  spiritual  fulness  :  for  Paul  puts  ihe  supposition 
of  speaking  with  tongues,  prophesying,  removing  mountains,  and  yet  lacking  charity, 
that  lore  which  must  be  shed  abroad  in  ever  V  heart  that  is  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (Ibid.) 
The  fulness   of    the  Spirit   the  need  of  the  Church : — I.  We  are  apx  xo  fix  ou» 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ir, 

THOUGHTS  AND  DESTKES  ON  SOBOBDINATE  INSTEUMENTALITIES.  1.  Good  Organisa- 
tion. Many  are  chiefly  anxious  to  perfect  the  ecclesiastical  apparatus  of  the 
Church  ;  but  without  speaking  disparagingly  of  this,  yet  perfect  machinery  is 
useless  without  motive  power.  A  Church  may  be  organised  to  death,  and  may  be 
only  like  a  stately  tomb.  The  Church's  finest  triumphs  were  gained  in  days  when 
it  had  no  elaborate  organisation.  2.  Orthodoxy.  Many  are  distressed  by  the 
present  unsettlement  of  theological  opinion,  and  regard  uniformity  of  belief  as  the 
great  desideratum.  Correct  thinking  is  much  to  be  desired,  and  in  proportion  as 
any  Church  departs  from  fundamental  Christian  truth  it  emasculates  its  moral 
force.  But  an  orthodox  Church  may  be  a  scene  of  mental  and  spiritual  stagna- 
tion. It  may  have  a  perfect  creed  and  yet  be  'loveless,  lifeless,  helpless.  3.  Intel- 
lectual equipment.  Of  scholarship  and  disciplined  thought  it  is  impossible  for  a 
Church  to  have  too  much,  but  a  Church  that  prides  itself  on  its  culture  may  be  as 
cold  as  an  iceberg  and  exclusive  as  a  coterie.  It  may  virtually  say  to  any  candi- 
date who  cannot  be  classed  among  its  "thoughtful,"  or  who  does  not  rise  to  a 
certain  standard  of  wealth  and  social  status,  what  a  deacon  is  reported  to  have 
said  to  an  unwelcome  applicant,  •'  There  is  no  vacancy  in  our  church  just  now." 
4.  Liberty,  fearless  independence  of  thought  and  expression.  But  liberty  may 
degenerate  into  license  quite  as  easily  as  zeal  for  truth  may  pass  into  bigotry,  and 
in  its  sacred  name  deadly  errors  and  worthless  speculations  and  conceits  may  be 
passed  off  as  current  coin  of  the  realm  of  truth.  II.  What  we  want  supremely  is 
THE  FULNESS  OF  THE  Spirit.  1.  Organisation,  &c.,  are  good  things,  but  there  is 
something  more  essential.  Might  not  the  Master  say  to-day  as  He  did  of  old,  "  Ye 
are  careful  about  many  things,  but  one  thing  is  needful."  With  the  fulness  of  the 
Spirit  our  organisation  will  be  filled  with  power,  our  orthodoxy  pulsate  with  love, 
our  culture  have  in  it  no  Phariseeism,  and  our  liberty  always  serve  the  interests 
of  truth  and  godliness.  2.  "Filled  with  the  Spirit."  (1)  The  Church  will  be 
guided  into  all  truth,  for  a  fuller  tide  of  the  Spirit  means  finer  spiritual  discern- 
ment and  discrimination,  and  deeper  insight  into  eternal  verities.  (2)  The  Church 
will  be  "  glorious  in  holiness,"  for  wherever  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  He  is  as  the 
refiner's  fire.  (3)  The  peace  and  harmony  of  the  Church  will  be  insured,  for 
brotherly  love  will  reign  supreme,  and  fidelity  to  truth  will  carry  no  bitterness 
with  it.  (4)  The  Church  will  be  preserved  from  selfishness,  and  made  missionary 
and  philanthropic.  (5)  The  Church  will  not  descend  to  carnal  and  unworthy 
methods  of  spreading  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  will  cease  to  bow  at  the  shrine  of 
mammon,  disdain  the  expedients  of  worldly  wisdom,  and  not  measure  its  success 
by  statistical  tables  or  worldly  standards.  (6)  The  Church  will  have  an  attractive 
power.  We  look  too  much  to  the  mere  accessories  of  religion — to  music  and  ritual, 
intellectual  brilliance  and  senfational  services,  forgetful  of  the  fact  that  the  mag- 
netic spell  of  the  Church  is  the  beauty,  intensity,  and  fulness  of  its  spiritual  life. 
When  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  abound  men  will  be  drawn  as  bees  to  the  apple  blos- 
som, or  steel  filings  to  the  magnet.  (7)  The  Church  will  exert  a  mighty  power  to 
perform  greater  miracles  than  tbose  of  Christ,  and  in  their  presence  the  voice  of  the 
caviller  will  be  silenced.  Preaching  will  be  "  in  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit 
and  power,"  and  we  shall  rejoice  in  constant  accessions.  III.  How  shall  we 
obtain  this  fulness  of  the  Spirit  ?  There  have  been  seasons  when  the  Spirit 
has  swept  in  mighty  tides,  and  we  -are  tempted  to  think  that  the  supply  of  the 
Spirit  is  according  to  some  capricious  or  arbitrary  arrangement.  But  the  super- 
natural has  its  laws  as  well  as  the  natural.  1.  Everything  that  grieves  the  Spirit 
must  be  put  away,  "  all  malice  and  all  guile  and  hypocrisies,"  &c.,  and  "  all  unbelief, 
worldly-mindedness,  pride,  selfishness  " ;  everything  opposed  to  the  simplicity,  the 
charity  and  purity  of  Christ,  or  there  will  be  fatal  hindrances.  2.  Earnest, 
importunate  prayer — prayer  that  is  not  a  mere  repetition  of  conventional  phrases, 
that  has  in  it  the  utmost  intensity  of  desire,  that  links  together  the  whole  com- 
munion of  the  faithful,  and  knows  no  cessation  till  the  answer  comes.  The  ex- 
perience of  the  disciples  before  Pentecost,  and  in  chap.  iv.  31,  is  a  lesson  for  all 
ages.  3.  There  must  be  avenues  for  the  Spirit's  entrance,  a  large  measure  of 
receptivity,  sensitiveness  to  His  influence,  fidelity  to  the  truth.  He  requires  cheer- 
ful response  as  He  calls  to  duty  or  sacrifice,  and  an  implicit  obedience  to  His 
commands.  Lutber  once  said  that  people  cried,  "  Spirit,  Spirit,  Spirit !  "  and 
then  struck  down  all  the  bridges  by  which  the  Spirit  might  enter.  At  the  moment 
of  his  ordination  Whitefield  says,  "  I  offered  up  my  whole  spirit,  soul  and  body,  to 
the  service  of  God's  sanctuary,"  and  the  result  we  know.  If  the  sacrifice  be  upon 
the  altar,  the   fire  from  heaven  will  come  down.      (2*.  G.  Tarn.)         The  soul 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  149 

filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost : — A  piece  of  iron  is  dark  and  cold  ;  imbued  with  a  certain 
degree  of  heat,  it  becomes  almost  burning  without  any  change  of  appearance  ; 
imbued  with  a  still  greater  degree,  its  very  appearance  changes  to  that  of  solid  fire, 
and  it  sets  fire  to  whatever  it  touches.  A  piece  of  water  without  heat  is  solid  and 
brittle  ;  gently  warmed,  it  flows  ;  further  heated,  it  mounts  to  the  sky.  An  organ 
filled  v/ith  the  ordinary  degree  of  air  which  exists  everywhere  is  dumb  ;  the  touch 
of  the  player  can  elicit  but  a  clicking  of  the  keys.  Throw  in  not  other  air,  but  an 
unsteady  curi'ent  of  the  same  air,  and  sweet,  but  imperfect  and  uncertain,  notes 
immediately  respond  to  tbe  player's  touch :  increase  the  current  to  a  full  supply, 
and  every  pipe  swells  with  music.  Such  is  the  soul  without  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
such  are  the  changes  which  pass  upon  it  when  it  receives  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
when  it  is  "filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  In  the  latter  state  only  is  it  fully  imbued 
•with  the  Divine  nature,  bearing  in  all  its  manifestations  some  plain  resemblance 
to  its  God,  conveying  to  all  on  whom  it  acts  some  impression  of  Him,  mounting 
heavenward  in  all  its  movements,  and  harmoniously  pouring  forth,  from  all  its 
faculties,  the  praises  of  the  Lord.  {W.  Arthur,  M.A.)  Power  of  a  man  when 
Hod  works  by  him : — Look  at  the  artist's  chisel ;  the  artist  cannot  carve  without  it. 
Yet  imagine  the  chisel,  conscious  that  it  was  made  to  carve,  and  that  it  is  its 
function,  trying  to  carve  alone.  It  lays  itself  against  the  hard  marble,  but  it  has 
neither  strength  nor  skill.  Then  we  can  imagine  the  chisel  full  of  disappoint- 
ment. "  Why  cannot  I  carve?"  it  cries.  Then  the  artist  comes  and  seizes  it. 
The  chisel  lays  itself  into  his  hand,  and  is  obedient  to  him.  Thought,  feeling, 
imagination,  skill,  flow  down  from  the  deep  chambers  of  the  artist's  soul  to  the 
•chisel's  edge.  The  sculptor  and  the  chisel  are  not  two,  but  one ;  it  is  the  unit 
which  they  make  that  carves  the  stone.  We  are  but  the  chisel  to  carve  God's 
statues  in  this  world.  Unquestionably  we  must  do  the  work.  But  the  human 
worker  is  only  the  chisel  of  the  great  Artist.  The  artist  needs  his  chisel ;  but  the 
chisel  can  do  nothing,  produce  no  beauty  of  itself.  The  artist  must  seize  it,  and 
the  chisel  lay  itself  into  his  hand  and  be  obedient  to  him.  We  must  yield  our- 
selves altogether  to  Christ,  and  let  Him  use  us.  Then  His  power.  His  wisdom.  His 
skill.  His  thought.  His  love,  shall  flow  through  our  soul,  our  brain,  our  heart,  our 
fingers.  (Bp.  Phillips  Brooks. )  And  began  to  speak  with  other  tongues. — The  nno 
tongue  lohich  ought  to  fall  to  our  lot  by  the  Spirit  of  Pentecost : — I.  Wherein  it  con- 
sists. 1.  Not  in  a  miraculous  gift  of  languages.  2.  Nor  in  a  formal  repetition  of 
pious  expressions.  3.  But  in  a  heart  and  mouth  opened  to  thankful  praise  of  Divine 
grace  and  joyful  confession  of  the  Lord.  II.  Whence  it  proceeds.  1.  Not  from 
our  natural  state.  2.  Nor  from  the  arts  and  sciences.  3.  But  from  above,  from 
the  Spirit  of  God,  who  touches  heart  and  lips  with  fire  from  heaven.  III.  What 
PURPOSE  IT  SERVES.  Not  to  vaiu  self-glorification  or  worldly  delectation,  but  to 
the  praise  of  God  and  to  the  message  of  salvation  to  the  world.  {K.  Gerok.)  As 
the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance. — Characteristics  of  Spirit-inspired  speech.  They 
spoke — I.  Wisely,  as  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  moved  them.  II.  Powerfully,  as  the 
Spirit  of  power  strengthened  them.  III.  Purely,  as  the  Spirit  of  holiness  sancti- 
fied them.  (Cornelius  a  Lapide.)  The  gospel  for  all  nations  : — The  apostles' 
speaking  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  to  the  people  in  their  respective  languages,  was 
to  us  a  plain  intimation  of  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  that  the  sacred  records 
should  be  preserved  by  all  nations  in  their  own  tongue  ;  that  the  Scriptures  should 
be  read,  and  public  worship  be  performed,  in  the  vulgar  language  of  the  nations. 
{M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  5-11.  And  there  were  dwelling  at  Jerusalem  Jews,  devout  men,  out  of 
•every  nation. — The  first  congregation  appealed  to  by  the  apostles  : — I.  It  con- 
sisted OF  MEN  OF  MANY  LANDS.  The  fifteen  countries  remind  us  of  the  dispersion 
of  the  Jews.  They  had  been  scattered  on  account  of  their  sins  ;  but  the  mercy  of 
God  was  shown  in  making  this  punishment  a  way  for  the  gospel.  Jews  and  prose- 
lytes would  return  and  tell  their  kindred  of  the  wonders  of  this  day.  Some  without 
•design  would  convey  to  the  heathen  saving  truth ;  just  as  fugitive  traitors  may 
build  a  bridge  over  which  the  saviours  of  their  country  afterwards  pas^  others 
doubtless  saw  here  the  fulfilment  of  their  prayers  that  they  might  benefit  the 
perishing  Gentiles  among  whom  they  dwelt.  II.  It  represented  the  whole 
•world.  When  the  glorious  news  which  God  designed  for  all  had  to  be  declared 
for  the  first  time,  it  was  fitting  that  all  should  thus  be  represented.  But  on  the 
ground  of  the  unity  of  the  race  every  congregation  represents  the  whole  world,  and 
lie  who  leads  one  soul  to  the  Saviour  makes  a  contribution  to  the  aggregate  of 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

human  goo.l.     What  value  does  this  put  on  the  work  of  Christian  agents  of  every 
class.     III.  It  exemplified  various  moral  characteristics.     1.  The  God-fearing 
and  worthy.     They  looked  on  the  wonders  with  careful  and  devout  inquiry.     In 
seeking  the  salvation  of  sinners  it  is  necessary  to  elicit  the  question,  "  What  may 
this  be  ?  "     2.  The  frivolous.     They  preferred  the  vain  charge  of  drunkenness. 
No  doubt  the  excitement  in  part  accounted  for  it,  but  it  is  probable  that  jesting  was- 
resorted  to  tbat  the  impressions  of  the  moment  might  be  resisted.     This  obvious 
way  of  grieving  the  Spiiit  is  sometimes  exhibited  in  criticisms  on  preachers.     3. 
The  haughty  who  could  not  bear  the  idea  of  being  taught  by  Galileans.     So  David 
had  doubt  cast  on  his  ability  to  show  any  good,  and  our  Lord  was  received  with 
suspicion  because  He  belonged  to  Nazareth.     But  a  servant  has  sometimes  been 
able  to  teach  his  master  the  truth  of  God,  and  an  illiterate  preacher  has  often 
convinced  men  of  leai'ning  whom  their  equals  had  failed  to  reach.     ( W.  Hudson.} 
Hoio  the  seed  of  the  Word  is  spread  : — 1.  In   the  cotton  factories  of  Lancashire 
there  is  a  huge  piece  of  machinery  fifty  feet  in  length,  and  containing  hundreds  of 
spindles,  which  moves  steadily  backward  and  forward  from  one  side  of  the  room 
to  the  other.     It  is  a  great  triumph  of  skill  to  insert  within  the  machine  a  power 
by  which  it  shall  move  a  certain  distance  and  then  stop  and  go  back  again.     There 
was  a  similar  contrivance  in  Judaism  which  retained  the  Word  of  God  at  Jerusalem 
till  a  certain  time  and  then  sent  it  forth  from  Jerusalem.     This  contrivance  was 
the  regulation  that  all  the  people  should  repair  to  the  capital  to  celebrate  their 
appointed  feasts  ;  and  this  regulation  was  observed  even  after  the  Jews  had  been 
scattered  all  over  the  world.    Hence  the  gathering  at  Pentecost.    Up  to  that  period 
the  arrangement  seemed  devised  to  keep  the  worship  of   God  in  one  place  and 
to  forbid  the  spread  of  true  religion.     But  now  it  seemed  expressly  invented  for  the 
universal  diffusion  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.     2.  In  a  still,  sultry  autumn  day,  aa 
you  walk  through  the  fields,  your  attention  is  arrested  by  a  tiny  sound  at  intervals, 
like  an  explosion  in  miniature,  and  a  few  seconds  after  a  shower  of  tiny  balls  falls 
upon  the  ground.     It  is  the  bursting  of  seed  pods  in  the  sun.     The  casket  that 
contains  the  seed  of  some  plants  is  composed  of  four  or  five  long  narrow  staves, 
joined  together  like  cooper  work,  but  without  the  staves.     The  staves  are  glued 
together  at  the  edges,  and  the  vessel  so  constructed  is  strong  enough  to  contain  the 
seed  till  it  is  ripe.     But  if  the  seeds  were  retained  beyond  that  the  purposes  of 
nature  would  be  thwarted.     Accordingly  at  this  stage  there  is  a  turning  point,  and 
the  action  of  the  machinery  is  reversed.     The  same  qualities  in  the  vessels  that 
hold  fast  the  seed  while  it  is  green  jerk  it  to  a  distance  after  it  is  ripe.     The  staves 
of  the  little  barrel  are  bent,  the  bursting  force  overcomes  the  adhesion  and  opens 
them  with  a  spring  that  flings  the  seed  as  if  from  a  sower's  hand.     By  this  con- 
trivance, though  no  human  hand  were  near,  a  whole  field  would  soon  be  sown  by 
seed  from  a  single  plant.     Thus  the  law  in  Israel  that  confined  the  sacrifices  to  a 
single  spot,  and  so  brought  Jews  from  all  parts  at  Pentecost,  threw  the  seed  of  the 
Word  as  by  a  spring  out  from  Jerusalem  into  all  the  neighbouring  nations.     These 
Parthians,  &c. ,  were  the  vessels  charged  with  precious  seed  at  Jerusalem,  and  then 
thrown  back  on  the  several  countries  whence  they  had  come.     In  this  way  the 
gospel  was  in  a  single  season  brought  to  regions  which  otherwise  it  might  not  have 
reached  in  a  century.     (IF.  Arnot.)         The   visitors  at  Jerusalem: — The  list  is 
characteristic  of  the  trained  historian  and  geographer — trained,  it  may  be,  in  the 
school  of  Strabo — who  had  carefully  inquired  what  nations  were  represented  at 
that  great  Pentecost,  who  had  himself  been  present,  at  least,  at  one  later  Pentecost 
(chap.  xxi.  15),  and  knew  the  kind  of  crowd  that  gathered  to  it.     There  is  a  kind  of 
order,  as  of  one  taking  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  Eoman  Empire,  beginning  with  the 
great  Parthian  kingdom,  which  was  still,  as  it  had  been  in  the  days  of  Crassus,  the 
most  formidable  of  its  foes  ;  then  the  old  territory  of  the  Medes,  which  had  once 
been  so  closely  connected  with  the  history  of  their  fathers;  then,  the  name  of  the 
Persians  having  been  thrown  into  the  background,  the  kindred  people  of  Elam 
(commonly  rendered  Persia  in  the  LXX.),  whom  Strabo  speaks  of  as  driven  to  the 
mountains  (xi.  13,  §  6) ;  then  the  great  cities  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  where 
the  "  princes  of  the  captivity  "  still  ruled  over  a  large  Jewish  population  ;  then 
passing  southward  and  westward  to  Judaaa  ;  then  to  Cappadocia,  in  the  interior  of 
Asia  Minor  ;  then  to  Pontus,  on  the  northern  shore  washed  by  the  Euxine  ;  then 
westward  to  the  Proconsular  Province  of  Asia,  of  which  Ephesus  was  the  capital. 
From  Ephesus  the  eye  travels  eastward  to  the  neighbouring  province  of  Phrygia  ; 
thence    southward  to  Pamphylia ;    thence  across  the  Mediterranean   to  Egypt ; 
■westward  to  Cyi^ene  ;  northward,  re-crossing  the  Mediterranean,  to  the  great  capital 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  151 

of  the  empire  ;  then,  as  by  an  after-thought,  to  the  two  regions  of  Crete  and  Arabia 
that  had  been  previously  omitted.     The  absence  of  some  countries  that  we  should 
have  expected  to  find  in  the  list — Syria,  Cihcia,  Cyprus,  Bithynia,  Macedonia, 
Achaia,  Spain — is  not  easy  to  explain,  but  it  is,  at  any  rate,  an  indication  that 
what  we  have  is  not  an  artificial  list  made  up  at  a  later  date,  but  an  actual  record 
of  those  whose  presence  at  the  feast  had  been  ascertained  by  the  historian.     Pos- 
sibly they  may  have  been  omitted,  because  Jews  and  converts  coming  from  them 
would  naturally  speak  Greek,  and  there  would  be  no  marvel  to  them  in  hearing 
Galileans  speaking  in  that  language.     The  presence  of  Judasa  in  the  list  is  almost 
as  unexpected  as  the  absence  of  the  others.    That,  we  think,  might  have  been  taken 
for  granted.     Some  critics  have  accordingly  conjectured  that  "  India  "  must  be  the 
true  reading,  but  without  any  MS.  authority.    Possibly  the  men  of  Judaea  are  named 
as  sharing  in  the  wonder  that  the  Galileans  were  no  longer  distinguished  by  their 
provincial  patois  (cf.    Matt.  xxvi.  73).     {Dean  Plumptre.)         We  do  hear  them 
speak  in  our  tongues    the    wonderful   works    of   God. — The    thousand-tongued 
hallelujah  of  the  world  in  honour  of  God : — I.  Begun  on  the  morning  of  creation 
in  the  kingdom  of  nature.     II.  Eenewed  at  Pentecost  in  the  kingdom  of  grace. 
III.  Perfected,  but  never  finished,  on  the  day  of  manifestation  in  the  kingdom  of 
glory,     (Gerok.)         The  wonderful  works  of  God : — I.  The  subject  itself.     And 
where  shall  we  begin  ?    All  that  God  does  is  wonderful.    Let  us  enter — 1.  The 
field  of  creation.     Here,  how  wonderful  are  the  works  of  God  I     Think  of — (1) 
Their  number.     Look   at  the   heavens.      Though   infidelity  has   mocked  at  the 
idea  of  comparing  them  to  the  sands  of  the  sea  shore,  the  discoveries  of  astro- 
nomy have  proved  it  to  be  a  fact.     Look  on  the  face  of  the  world,  how  many 
inhabitants  are  there,  visible   and  invisible !      (2)  Their   diversity  1      How  large 
are  some,  and  how  minute  are  others !      Take  up  the  microscope  and  the  tele- 
scope.   What  vastness  in  the  sun  1  what  smallness  in  the  mite  !     And  yet  there 
are  creatures  less  than   these,  and   all   of   them  have   their   peculiar   qualities, 
tribes,  families,  birth,  breeding,  education,  government.     Only  observe  the  com- 
monwealth of  the  ants  and  the  queendom  of  the.  bees!     (.3)  Their  support.     They 
are  all  provided  for.    There  is  sufficient  for  all  and  for  all  seasons,     (4)  Their 
structure.     Take  only  one  of  the  vegetable  tribes  ;  how  miraculous  its  growth,  how 
simple   its  form,  and  yet  how  beautiful  I      "'Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not 
arrayed  like  one  of  these."    What  man  contrives  man  may  comprehend  ;  whereas 
in  the  works  of  God  we  find  that  we  are  in  the  region  of  infinity.     2.  The  field 
of  providence.     Here  all  is  wonderful !     Nothing  comes  by  chance.     (1)  What  an 
astonishing  series  of  events  are  displayed  in  the  history  of  one  single  country  ! 
What  mighty  movements  proceed  from   causes   almost  imperceptible  !      (2)  The 
history  of   every  individual  is  equally  wonderful.      3.  The  field  of  grace.     How 
wonderful  is  the  work  of  redemption  and  its  application  to  the  soul  1     How  won- 
derful the  history  of  the  believer  from  conversion  to  glorification!     Angels  desire 
to  understand  these  things,  and   the  more  they  discern   the  more  they  are  sur- 
prised, and  at  each  discovery  they  sing  new  sungs,  "  Great  and  marvellous  are 
all  Thy  works.  Lord  God   Almighty."     II.  The  way  in  which  the  subject  was 
ANNOUNCED.     "  We  do  hear  them  speak,"  said  the  audience,  diversified  as  it  was, 
"in  our  tongues."      It  is  the  duty  of  ministers   to  tell  the  people  in  their  own 
tongue  the  wonderful  works  of  God.     "  The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto 
them,"  said  Christ.     "  The  common  people  heard  Christ  gladly,"  says  the  evan- 
gelist.    What  are  philosophical  expressions   and  learned  disquisitions  to  these  ? 
I  fear  we  may  apply  what  the  apostle  says  of  speaking  in  an  unknown  tongue  to 
many  of  them.      Ministers  should  use  "  great  plainness  of  speech."     But  this 
speaking  to  men  of  various  languages  is — 1.  Nothing  less  than  a  real  miracle. 
Two  things  are  essential  to  a  miracle.     (1)  There  must  be  something  addressed  to 
the  sense  as  well  as  to  the  reason.     These  are  called  "  signs,"  and  it  would  be 
wonderful   if  signs  could  not  be  seen.     (2)  It  must  be  above  all  known  second 
causes.     God  only  could  have  stored  the  minds  of  these  men  with  such  a  multitude 
of  merely  arbitrary  signs,  and  have  given  them  power  and  ability  to  utter  such  a 
variety  of  distinct  sounds.     2.  The  truth  of  it  is  evident  also.     It  was  undeniable, 
(1)  These  men  were  well  known.     (2)  Their  judges  were  competent  to  detect  im- 
posture.   (3)  They  did  not  go  to  a  distance  to  tell  their  tale;  they  began  amongst 
their  enemies.     (4)  The  time  was  when  large  multitudes  were  present.     (5)  Mark 
their  boldness ;    they  charged   the   Jews    around  them  with  the   murder   of  an 
innocent  young  man.     (6)    Note    the    result.     3.    This   miracle    was    expressly 
predicted.     Christ  said,  "  They  shall  speak  with  new  tongues."    4.  This  miracle 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

was  necessary  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  vrorld-wide  mission.  5.  This 
gift  of  tongues  was  continued  for  years.  6.  The  want  of  this  gift  in  the 
work  of  evangeUsing  the  world  must  now  be  supplied  by  human  learning.  And  we 
ought  to  be  very  thankful  to  God  that  His  Word  is  translated  into  so  many  tongues. 
III.  How  THIS  SUBJECT  WAS  HEARD.  1.  Somc  heard  with  wonder.  So  it  is  now. 
And  tliis  is  not  surprising ;  for  the  natural  man  discerns  not  the  things  of  God. 
Christians  are  "  men  wondered  at "  ;  the  men  of  the  world  wonder  that  you  run  not 
to  the  same  excess  of  riot  with  themselves,  not  knowing  that  you  have  meat  to  eat 
which  they  know  not  of.  And  this  is  often  attended  with  a  good  effect,  for  it  in- 
duces them  to  examine,  and  truth  always  gains  by  investigation.  But  then,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  wonder  often  dies  away,  and  he  who  woudered  comes  within  the 
number  of  those  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and  perish !  " 
2.  Some  heard  in  mockery.  And  so  it  is  now.  That  which  devils  believe,  and  the 
belief  of  which  makes  them  tremble,  furnishes  such  men  with  matter  for  mirth. 
(1)  Some  of  these  mockers  were  once  professors ;  the  apostate  is  seldom  found 
neuter.  (2)  Some  mock  from  the  affectation  of  greatness.  These  things  may  be 
well  enough  for  the  common  people,  but  will  not  do  for  men  of  taste.  (3)  Some 
mock  from  the  affectation  of  wisdom.  "What  will  this  babbler  say?"  "We 
preach  Christ  crucified,  to  the  Greeks  foolishness."  (4)  Some  mock  from  ignor- 
ance. They  mock  at  what  they  do  not  understand,  at  what  they  never  read. 
Many  are  afraid  to  hear  or  to  read  the  truth  lest  it  should  destroy  their  peace.  (5) 
Some  cannot  deny  certain  facts  which  are  before  them  ;  but  then  they  show  their 
malignity  by  accounting  for  them.  They  ascribe  the  zeal  of  the  Christian  to  dis- 
appointed love — to  ambition — to  a  sanguine  complexion — to  a  heated  imagination 
— to  enthusiasm,  &c.  So  here,  the  multitude  ascribed  the  phenomena  to  drunken- 
ness.   3.  Some  heard  and  believed.     [W.  Jay.) 

Vers.  12, 13.  And  they  were  all  amazed. — Whit  Sunday,  or  ichat  our  Churches  veed : 
— Notice — I.  Three  things  immediately  preceding  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit 
— things  which  if  not  the  direct  cause  of  a  revival,  always  herald  it — the  shadows 
cast  by  the  coming  blessing.  1.  A  complete  congregation.  "  They  were  all  in  one 
place."  No  absentees.  This  betokened  earnestness,  for  it  was  in  fact  an  early 
Sunday  morning  prayer-meeting  with  every  one  present.  Always  before  a  great 
blessing  there  will  be  a  revived  interest  in  sanctuary  services.  The  half  truth,  "I 
can  worship  God  as  well  at  home  "  (which  is  a  lie  when  the  man  is  able  to  come  to 
the  sanctuary  and  does  not)  will  not  be  heard.  Indifference  to  public  worship  is  a 
fatal  sign.  Things  that  would  never  be  permitted  to  interfere  with  business  or 
pleasure  are  reckoned  sufficient  to  warrant  "  staying  at  home  to-day."  You  found 
eleven  o'clock  this  morning  too  early  to  come  to  worship,  but  I  will  guarantee  you 
catch  the  eight  o'clock  excursion  train  to-morrow  morning.  2.  A  congregation  one 
in  desire  and  motive;  "  With  one  accord."  No  two  motives  had  drawn  them. 
They  came  to  receive  the  promised  blessing.  Is  not  the  want  of  this  spirit  of 
accord  the  weakness  of  the  Churches  of  the  present  day?  Unbelief  is  not  the  only 
thing  that  keeps  Christ  from  doing  many  mighty  works.  It  might  with  equal 
truth  be  said  of  many  a  Church  :  "  He  did  not  many  mighty  works  there  because  of 
their  squabbling,  petty,  selfish  spirit."  There  are  men  who  will  be  nothing  unless 
they  are  everything,  and  will  without  compunction  sacrifice  a  whole  Church's 
prosperity  upon  the  wretched  little  altar  of  their  own  unsanctified  ambition. 
Instead  of  all  being  baptized  into  one  spirit,  it  looks  more  as  if  every  one  had  been 
baptized  into  a  different  spirit  and  every  spirit  an  evil  one.  But  when  all  differences 
become  drowned  in  one  overwhelming  passion  of  saving  souls,  then  let  the  Church 
lift  up  her  head,  for  the  day  of  her  revival  draweth  nigh.  3.  A  congregation  steeped 
in  the  spirit  of  prayer.  They  had  a  ten  days'  prayer-meeting.  Do  you  wonder  they 
had  a  Whit  Sunday  ?  I  should  have  wondered  if  they  had  not.  The  general 
prayerlessness  of  the  Church  is  simply  deplorable.  Here  and  there  the  huniJreds 
come  to  prayer.  But  take  the  general  run  of  prayer-meetings.  It  is  not  an 
uncommon  thing  for  Churches  to  have  to  give  them  up  because  so  few  come. 
Whilst  all  this  is  so  it  is  of  no  use  talking  about  having  a  revival.  II.  The 
KLESSiNG  ITSELF.  1.  It  Came  at  an  appointed  time.  "  When  the  day  of  Pentecost 
was  fully  come."  God  has  a  time  for  everything.  The  disciples  doubtless 
expected  the  blessing  sooner.  They  had  to  learn  that  there  is  a  sovereignty  in 
revivals.  Man  has  no  power  to  command  one.  He  can  but  cry  and  wait.  Over 
one  Church  a  cloud  of  blessing  hangs,  continually  letting  fall  showers  of  refresh- 
ment.    Beneath  its  influence  all  is  verdant,  fiesh  and  lovely.     But  yonder  ifl 


cnAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  153 

another  Church  the  very  contrast  to  this.  The  heavens  above  it  seem  as  brass. 
The  piety  of  its  members  seems  to  lack  freshness  and  their  leaf  withers.  Converts 
are  almost  unknown.  Let  not  those  Churches  that  have  the  blessing  despise  those 
that  lack  it.  The  only  difference  is  that  the  time  to  favour  them  "  has  come  and 
the  time  to  favour  the  others  shall  come."  2.  It  came  suddenly  and  in  a  moment. 
Eevivals  very  often  do.  With  man's  work  the  prooess  as  well  as  the  result  is 
visible.  Is  a  temple  to  be  built,  the  plans  are  exhibited,  the  foundations  dug  out, 
the  scaffolding  reared,  and  for  months  tbe  chipping  of  the  chisel  and  the  clicking 
of  the  trowel  are  heard.  God  can  build  His  temple  in  a  night,  and  like  Solomon's, 
no  sound  of  tool  be  heard.  At  any  moment,  without  any  previous  warning,  tbe 
revival  may  come.  3.  It  spread  far  and  wide.  From  the  upjDer  room  it  soon  flew 
along  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  like  an  electric  current.  There  is  no  telling  where 
the  influence  of  a  revival  in  a  Church  may  spread.  It  creeps  into  homes  shut 
against  the  tract  distributor.  It  glides  into  darkest  places  of  vice.  A  revived 
Church  will  be  certain  to  draw  the  multitude  together.  This  is  the  secret  of  getting 
at  the  masses.  III.  The  question  of  our  text.  "  What  meaneth  this  ?  "  Why, 
it  means — 1.  That  Christ  is  ascended,  and  has  received  gifts  for  men.  An  ascended, 
glorified  Christ  warrants  the  Church  in  expecting  any  measure  of  blessing,  any 
number  of  conversions.  "  What  meaneth  this  "  ?  2.  That  all  instrumentality  is 
nothing  without  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  that  the  meauest  instrumentality  with  the 
Spirit  is  mighty  enough  to  accomplish  anything.  Alas,  what  an  amount  of  power- 
less machinery  we  have  in  the  so-called  "religious  world,"  because  it  has  no 
unction,  because  it  is  the  work  of  man,  not  the  working  of  God  througli  the  man, 
because  it  is  dry  and  official.  Instrumentality  is  almost  worshipped,  whilst  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  well-nigh  ignored.  3.  That  God  is  pleased  to  work  on  the  world 
through  the  Churcb.  Far  be  it  from  us  to  call  in  question  the  good  that  has  been 
accomplished  by  many  of  our  *'  societies,"  but  we  believe  that  half  of  them  could 
be  spared  with  ease  did  a  greater  unction  but  rest  upon  the  Church.  4.  That  these 
are  the  seasons  God's  Church  is  to  seek  at  His  hands.  I  will  close  with  an 
illustration.  Once  upon  the  sea-shore,  watching  the  "  getting  off  "  of  a  fishing 
smack,  I  saw  in  it  a  union  of  work  and  dependence  that  charmed  me.  The 
fishermen  brought  the  craft  down  the  beach  as  far  as  they  could  and  then  left  her 
awhile  until  the  tide,  which  was  flowing,  neared  her.  Meantime  two  anchors  had 
been  cast  out  to  sea,  from  which  were  ropes  to  a  windlass  in  the  centre  of  the 
vessel.  Soon  the  surf  (for  the  sea  was  fresh)  began  to  run  round  her  as  she  lay  a 
dead  weight  upon  the  shore.  Then  the  waves  began  to  curl  over  and  break  upon 
her  side.  The  men  at  the  windlass  took  a  turn  and  made  the  rope  fast.  And  now 
every  moment  the  tide  had  more  power  over  her.  She  was  never  still.  Twenty 
times  did  I  say  "  now  she  is  off  "  ;  and  twenty  times  did  she  settle  down  again  upon 
the  shore,  and  twenty  times  did  the  men  at  the  windlass  put  on  the  strain.  At  last 
one  wave  swept  higher  than  any  before ;  she  shook — rose — glided  down  towards 
the  deep — the  men  turning  the  handle  of  the  windlass  quickly  as  possible.  A  wave 
she  met  threatened  to  sweep  her  back  upon  the  shore,  but  the  anchors  held  her, 
and  right  through  the  surf  the  men  wound  her,  and  half  an  hour  after  she  was 
flying  away  before  the  breeze,  a  very  contrast  to  the  dead  weight  she  looked  upon 
the  beach.  That  vessel  is  the  Church.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  tide.  The  ropes 
and  the  windlass  are  human  agencies  only  to  be  used  in  dependence  on  the  tide. 
The  tide  is  coming  in.  The  Church  feels  its  power.  She  moves — she  rises.  Oh 
God  send  the  billow  that  shall  float  her  now,  and  send  her  careering  on  her 
course,   with  the  breeze  of  the   Spirit.     {A.    G.   Brown.)  The  multitude  in 

amazement : — I.  A  multitude  gathered  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  II.  A 
MULTITUDE  GATHERED  FOR  RELIGIOUS  PURPOSES.  They  had  come  to  the  feast  of 
Pentecost.  III.  A  multitude  astonished  by  a  miracle.  The  subject  was  one,  the 
languages  many.  So — 1.  In  the  gospel  we  have  proof  that  by  the  foolishness  of 
preaching  God  confounds  the  wisdom  of  the  world.  2.  Note  the  wonderful 
adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  the  entire  world.  It  appeals  to  all  natures  and  disposi- 
tions, and  equally  meets  the  wants  of  all.  IV,  A  multitude  variously  affected. 
All  were  amazed.  Some  inquired,  some  mocked.  Some  said  (probably  the  devout 
men  mentioned  in  ver,  5),  "  What  meaneth  this  ?  "  This  language  betokened  a 
desire  to  learn.  Others  (ver.  13)  said,  "  They  are  full  of  new  wine  " ;  regarding 
the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  as  fanaticism.  How  does  the  gospel  affect  us? 
{F.  Wagstaff.)  A  miracle  the  object  of  derision : — Of  all  the  expressions  of  our 
distaste,  a  scoff  is  the  worst.  Admonition  may  be  physic,  a  reproof  balm,  a  blow 
ointment ;  but  derision  is  as  poison  and  a  sword.      It  was  the  height   of  Job's 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

complaint  that  persons  made  jests  on  him ;  and  it  was  the  depth  of  Samson's 
calamity  (Judges  xvi.  25).  That  which  raises  our  anger  presents  some  magnitude 
to  our  eyes ;  but  that  which  we  scorn  is  less  than  nothing.  But  now  everything 
is  not  always  as  it  appears,  especially  to  the  eye  of  tbe  scoffer;  for  here  we  see 
things  of  excellency  may  be  submitted  to  jests.  Note  I. — The  object  of  their  deei- 
siON.  A  miracle.  In  every  miracle  there  is  "  the  thing  done,"  which  must  transcend 
the  course  of  nature,  and  "  the  end,"  which  is  also  supernatural.  In  respect  of  the 
power  of  God  there  is  no  miracle  ;  but  in  His  goodness  He  was  pleased  to  work 
wonders,  not  for  show,  but  for  our  instruction.  And  as  He  had  borne  witness  to 
His  Son  by  miracles,  so  doth  He  here  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  was  the  end  of  this 
miraculous  operation.  II.  The  persons.  1.  What  entertainment  finds  the 
miracle?  What  welcome  hath  the  Holy  Ghost?  No  other  than  what  befals  all 
extraordinary  events.  Every  man  lays  hold  of  it  and  shapes  it  in  such  a  form  as 
he  may  please.  To  some  it  is  a  matter  of  wonder  ;  to  others,  of  mirth.  2.  We 
should  account  it  a  strange  stupidity  in  any  one  not  to  be  more  affected  at  the  sight 
of  the  sun  than  of  a  taper,  and  to  esteem  tbe  great  palace  of  heaven  but  as  a 
furnace.  But  when  God  stretcheth  forth  His  hands  to  produce  effects  which  follow 
not  the  force  of  secondary  causes,  then,  not  to  put-on  wonder,  not  to  conclude  that 
it  is  for  some  great  end,  is  not  folly,  but  infidelity,  the  daughter  of  malice  and  envy 
and  affected  ignorance.  3.  Miracles  are  signs  ;  and  if  they  signify  nothing  it  is 
evident  that  a  stubborn  heart  and  froward  mind  will  not  understand  the  meaning  of' 
them.  And  then  what  are  miracles  but  trifles,  matter  of  scoff  and  derision? 
"  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  man  approved  of  God  by  miracles  "  (ver.  22),  a  juggler ; 
a  voice  from  heaven,  but  "  thunder  " ;  to  make  the  blind  to  see,  &c.,  witchcraft ;  to 
be  full  of  the  Spirit,  "to  be  full  of  drink."  When  Julian  had  read  a  Defence  of 
Christianity,  he  remarked,  "I  have  read,  understood,  and  condemned  it."  To 
which  St.  Basil  replied,  "  Had  you  understood  it,  you  would  never  have  condemned 
it."  The  same  befalls  men  prepossessed  and  too  far  engaged  in  the  world,  and  the 
father's  reply  will  reach  home  to  them.  4.  To  this  day  our  behaviour  is  little 
better  than  mocking.  Our  lust,  which  waits  for  the  twilight,  mocks  at  God'3 
Omniscience  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  11) ;  our  distrust  argues  against  His  power  (Psa.  Ixxviii. 
20 ;  2  Kings  viii.  2) ;  our  impatience  questions  His  truth  ;  and  those  who  acknow- 
ledge Him  to  be  the  Giver  of  life,  have  confined  His  goodness  to  a  few.  His  mercy 
"  triumpheth  over"  His  justice;  yet  Novatian  made  every  fall  as  low  as  hell:  and 
what  is  despair  but  a  mocking  of  God's  mercy  ?  5.  The  ground  of  all  is  infidelity, 
the  proper  issue  of  obstinate  and  wilful  ignorance.  Plato  well  observeth,  that  none 
can  taste  and  judge  of  that  sweetness  which  truth  affords  but  the  philosopher, 
because  they  want  that  instrument  of  judgment  which  he  useth  ;  and  that  cannot 
be  applied  by  covetousness,  ambition,  and  lust ;  "  the  philosophfr's  instrument  is 
reason."  So  in  Divine  mysteries  and  miracles,  we  cannot  reach  the  meaning  of 
them  without  a  humble,  pure,  and  free  spirit,  the  best  instrument  of  a  Christian. 
6.  Indeed,  reason  might  have  taught  these  men  that  this  was  a  miracle.  For  rude 
and  illiterate  men  to  speak  on  a  sudden  all  languages,  was  more  than  all  the 
linguists  in  the  world  could  teach.  And  from  no  other  principle  arose  the  question 
of  ver.  12.  But,  to  "  read  the  riddle,  we  must  plough  with  another  heifer"  than 
reason  (Judges  xiv.  18).  To  dive  into  the  sense  of  the  miracle  can  proceed  from 
no  other  Spirit  than  that  whose  miracle  it  was,  even  Him  who  enliKliteus  them 
that  sit  in  darkness,  and  who  makes  the  humble  and  docile  soul  both  His  school 
and  His  scholar.  Reason  is  a  light,  but  obnoxious  to  fogs  and  mists,  till  this  gi'eat 
light  dispel  and  scatter  them.  Julian  was  a  man  as  well  furnished  as  any  ;  yet  he 
wounded  religion  more  with  his  scoffs  than  with  his  sword.  When  he  had  received 
his  death's  wound,  he  confessed  it  came  from  the  power  of  Christ,  in  a  phrase  of 
scorn,  '*  The  day  is  Thine,  0  Galilean !  "  Indeed  the  greatest  scoffers  have  been 
for  the  most  part  eminent  in  natural  abilities,  whose  reason,  notwithstanding, 
could  not  show  them  their  own  fluctuations,  the  storms  and  tempest  of  their  souls, 
she  being  eclipsed  with  her  own  beams.  III.  The  scoff  itself.  1.  It  was  not 
only  a  scoff,  but  an  accusation,  and  there  be  divers  reasons  which  make  men  accusers, 
ambition,  hatred,  hope  of  reward.  (Ecumenius  tells  us  it  was  here  that  perverse- 
ness  which  indifferently  passeth  censure  upon  any  cause,  or  "  no  cause  at  all." 
And  this  is  bred  by  opinion,  and  not  by  truth.  If  they  understood  not  what  the 
apostles  spake,  how  could  they  say  they  were  drunk  ?  and  if  they  did  understand, 
why  did  they  scoff  ?  They  were  men  settled  in  the  very  dregs  of  error  and  malice ; 
and,  having  taken  up  an  opinion,  they  would  not  let  it  go,  no  not  at  the  sight  of  a 
miracle.     2.  But  yet  though  there  were  no  reason  nor  probability  to  justify  their 


CHAP.  II,]  THE  ACTS. 


scoff,  some  show  there  was  to  countenance  it.  The  apostles,  after  this  gift  of 
tongues,  talked  much  :  they  were  fuU  indeed  with  the  wine  of  the  New  Testament ; 
and,  as  drunken  men,  they  were  merry  and  cheerful;  they  publish  secrets,  they 
fear  no  face,  regard  no  power,  regard  not  themselves.  3.  This  hath  always  been, 
and  to  this  day  is,  the  great  error  of  the  world — to  make  shadows  substances, 
similitudes  indentities,  the  faintest  representations  truth  (1  Sam..i.  13,  14  ;  2  Sam. 
vi.  20  ;  Mark  iii.  21),  Upon  this  ground  faith  is  called  "  presumption  "  because  it 
is  like  it;  Christianity  is  called  "  madness  ";  for  when  we  mortify  the  flesh,  and 
estrange  ourselves  from  the  world,  most  that  behold  us  think  us  not  well  in  our 
wits.  At  this  day  true  devotion  goes  for  fancy,  reverence  for  superstition,  bowing 
for  idolatry.  Onr  Saviour's  counsel  is,  "  Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance  " 
(John  vii.  24).  For  how  easy  is  it  to  paint  and  present  things  as  we  please  I  Many 
times  an  evil  eye  makes  an  evil  face,  puts  horror  upon  religion  itself,  and,  where 
devotion  shines  out  in  the  full  beauty  of  holiness,  draws  a  Pope  or  a  devil.  As 
"charity  covei's  a  multitude  of  sins"  (James  v,  20),  so  doth  malice  cover  a 
multitude  of  virtues  with  the  black  mantle  of  vice.  {A.  Farimlon,  D.D.)  What 
meaneth  this  ?  (text  and  ver.  37). — Tivo  great  questions  : — These  questions  are  the 
outcome  of  two  widely  different  but  intimately  associated  states  of  experience — the 
one  intellectual,  the  other  moral.  The  first  is  an  inquiry  of  the  mind  in  the  face 
of  a  problem  which  unassisted  it  cannot  solve  ;  the  second  is  an  inquisition  of 
the  soul  in  the  presence  of  a  danger  from  which  unaided  it  cannot  flee.  An 
extraordinary  event  had  taken  place  at  which  the  perplexed  beholders  exclaimed 
"What  meaneth  this?"  When  the  reply  came  it  was  found  to  involve  such 
tremendous  issues  that  they  cried  in  despair  "What  shall  we  do?  "  I.  What 
MEANETH  THIS  ?  The  inquiry  was — 1.  Natural.  The  mind  instinctively  rebels 
against  the  unexplained.  It  was  made  for  and  is  fed  by  knowledge.  Just  as  the 
animal  instincts  are  urged  by  thirst  and  hunger  to  search  for  food  and  drink,  so 
the  intellect  is  stimulated  by  a  sense  of  void  to  inquire  for  the  knowledge  that  will 
fill  and  satisfy  it.  These  men  were  confronted  by  a  mysterious  fact,  and  were 
"  troubled  in  mind  "  until  it  was  accounted  for,  2.  Eight.  The  liberty  to  inquire 
is  one  of  the  inalienable,  inborn,  and  crown  rights  of  humanity.  That  it  may 
exercise  this  funccion,  God  has  endowed  it  with  the  requisite  faculties.  Tbe 
hunger  of  the  mind  for  knowledge  is  a  stamp  of  its  Divine  original,  and  a  prophecy 
of  its  immortality.  Inquiry  makes  all  the  difference  between  savagedom  and 
civilisation,  between  weakness  and  strength.  The  feeble  and  superstitious  shun  it, 
and  perish  in  darkness  ;  the  strong  and  wise  welcome  it  and  are  rewarded  by  the 
ligbt.  We  must  carefully  distinguish,  however — (1)  between  aimless  inquiry,  i.e., 
curiosity,  and  the  search  for  true  wisdom,  and  (2)  between  legitimate  and  illegitimate 
inquiry,  "  The  secret  things  belong  unto  God."  The  present  inquiry  was  in  many 
respects  legitimate  and  commendable.  3.  Was  addressed  to  the  wrong  persons 
with  unsatisfactory  results.  Twice,  we  are  told,  they  questioned  one  to  another. 
They  were  prevented  by  a  too  hasty  generalisation  and  by  prejudice  from  asking 
those  on  whom  these  wonders  were  wrought  what  they  meant.  (1)  It  was  enough 
for  "  strangers  "  to  know  that  they  were  "  Galileans,"  a  name  which  embodied  all 
that  was  ignorant  and  vile.  (2)  Tbe  "  dwellers  at  Jerusalem  "  would  recognise 
them  as  the  fanatical  followers  of  one  who  was  set  down  as  "  a  man  gluttonous  and 
a  winebibber."  These  manifestations,  therefore,  were  treated  as  the  ravings  of 
men  excited  with  enthusiasm  or  with  drink.  But  Galileans  as  they  were,  drunk  or 
mad  as  they  considered,  there  was  the  phenomenon.  They  could  not  account  for 
it,  but  they  felt  it  must  be  accounted  for.  And  instead  of  asking  those  from  whom 
only  a  re^jly  could  be  obtained,  they  engaged  in  a  fruitless  inquiry  among  them- 
selves. How  like  modern  scepticism  !  4.  Suggests  an  important  line  of  argument 
in  favour  of  Christianity,  There  are  certain  facts  equally  inexplicable  to  the 
human  mind  to-day.  We  do  not  see  cloven  tongues,  &c.,  but  we  are  witnesses  of 
events  even  more  wonderful.  (1)  The  conversion  of  infidels.  Lord  Lyttleton, 
Gilbert  West,  and  some  within  personal  knowledge,  (2)  The  conversion  of  men 
immoral  and  profane,  Bunyan  and  John  Newton,  &c.  (3)  The  conversion  of  men 
of  merely  moral  habits.  John  Wesley  and  William  Wilberforce.  Each  case  forces 
the  question  upon  us.  They  are  not  isolated  but  common  occurrences.  How  are 
they  to  be  accounted  for  ?  On  the  score  of  weakness,  wrought  upon  by  terror  or 
excitement,  or  on  the  score  of  ignorance?  The  known  character  of  these  men 
forbid  these  explanations.  These  wonders  should  set  us  inquiring,  and  the  inquiry 
is  as  natural  and  proper  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other,  and  furthermore  by 
inquiring   matters  will   be   disclosed    that    seriously  concern   us  all.     II.  What 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

SHALL  WE  DO  ?  Although  not  invited  Peter  undertook  to  reply  to  the  first 
question.  The  general  explanation  was  vers.  14-21 ;  the  particular  application 
vers.  22-36.  So  with  the  modern  facts  adduced.  Does  this  explanation  satisfy  ?  Is 
this  explanation  taken  home  ?  Then  both  will  now  as  of  old  lead  to  the 
second  question.  This  inquiry — 1.  Expressed  a  sense  of  utter  helplessness. 
"What  shall  we  do?"  These  men  were  convinced  of  the  crime  and  mistake 
of  a  whole  life,  and  of  the  human  impossibility  of  rectification.  2.  Was  to  the 
point,  "What  shall  we  do?"  Not  like  the  other  question  theoretical,  but 
practical.  They  felt  that  they  were  in  an  unsatisfactory  state,  and  that  some- 
thing must  be  do7ie.  What?  3.  Was,  like  the  first  inquiry,  answered.  (1) 
Eepent.  Change  your  mind,  forsake  your  sins.  (2)  Be  baptized  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus ;  implying  faith,  union  with  the  Church  and  public  profession. 
Conclusion :  Both  inquiries  were  at  length  crowned  with  blessed  results.  Three 
thousand  received  forgiveness  for  the  past,  comfort  for  the  present,  hope  for  the 
future  (vers.  38-47).     (J.  W.  Burn.) 

Vers.  14-40.  But  Peter  standing  up  with  the  eleven. — The  scene : — Never  was 
such  an  audience  assembled  as  that  before  which  this  poor  fisherman  appeared: 
men  of  different  nations,  rapidly  and  earnestly  speaking  in  their  different  tongues  ; 
one  in  Hebrew,  mocking  and  saying,  "  These  men  are  full  of  new  wine  " ;  another 
inquiring  in  Latin;  another  disputing  in  Greek;  another  wondering  in  Arabic;' 
and  an  endless  Babel  beside  expressing  every  variety  of  suiprise,  doubt,  and 
curiosity.  Amid  such  a  scene  the  fisherman  stands  up ;  his  voice  strikes  across 
the  hum  which  prevails  all  down  the  street.  He  has  no  tongue  of  silver ;  for  they 
say,  "  He  is  an  unlearned  and  ignorant  man."  The  rudeness  of  his  Galilean  speech 
still  remains  with  him  ;  yet,  though  "  unlearned  and  ignorant  "  in  their  sense — as 
to  polite  learning — in  a  higher  sense  he  was  a  scribe  well  instracted.  On  whatever 
other  points  the  learned  of  Jerusalem  might  have  found  Peter  at  fault,  in  the 
sacred  writings  he  was  more  thoroughly  furnished  than  they  ;  for  though  Christ 
took  His  apostles  from  among  the  poor.  He  left  us  no  example  for  those  who  have 
not  well  learned  the  Bible,  to  attempt  to  teach  it.  Yet  Peter  had  no  tongue  of 
silver,  or  of  honey,  no  soothing,  flattering  speech,  to  allay  the  prejudices  and  to 
captivate  the  passions  of  the  multitude.  Nor  had  he  a  tongue  of  thunder ;  no  out- 
bursts of  native  eloquence  distinguished  his  discourse.  Indeed,  some,  if  they  had 
heard  that  discourse  from  ordinary  lips,  would  not  have  hesitated  to  pronounce  it 
dry — some  of  a  class,  too  numerous,  who  do  not  like  preachers  who  put  them  to 
the  trouble  of  thinking,  but  enjoy  only  those  who  regale  their  fancy,  or  move  their 
feelings,  without  requiring  any  labour  of  thought.  Peter's  sermon  is  no  more  than 
quoting  passages  from  the  Word  of  God,  and  reasoning  upon  them ;  yet,  as  in  this 
strain  he  proceeds,  the  tongue  of  fire  by  degrees  liurns  its  way  to  the  feelings  of  the 
multitude.  The  murmur  gradually  subsides;  the  mob  becomes  a  congregation; 
the  voice  of  the  fisherman  sweeps  from  end  to  end  of  that  multitude,  unbroken  by 
a  single  sound  ;  and,  as  the  words  rush  on,  they  act  like  a  stream  of  fire.  Now, 
one  coating  of  prejudice  which  coveted  the  feelings  is  burned,  and  rends  away: 
now,  another  and  another  :  now  the  fire  touches  the  inmost  covering  of  prejudice, 
which  lay  close  upon  the  heart,  and  it  too  gives  way.  Now,  it  touches  the  quick, 
and  burns  the  very  soul  of  the  man  1  Presently,  you  might  think  that  in  that 
throng  there  was  but  one  mind,  that  of  tbe  preacher,  which  had  multiplied  itself, 
had  possessed  itself  of  thousands  of  hearts,  and  thousands  of  frames,  and  was 
jjouring  its  own  thoughts  through  them  all.  At  length,  shame,  and  tears,  and  sobs 
overspread  that  whole  assembly.  Here,  a  bead  bows ;  there,  starts  a  groan  ; 
yonder,  rises  a  deep  sigh  ;  here,  tears  are  falling ;  and  some  stern  old  Jew,  who 
will  neither  bow  nor  weep,  trembles  with  the  effort  to  keep  himself  still.  At 
length,  from  the  depth  of  the  crowd,  the  voice  of  the  preacher  is  crossed  by  a  cry, 
as  if  one  was  "  mourning  for  his  only  son  "  ;  and  it  is  answered  by  a  cry,  as  if  one 
was  in  "  bitterness  for  his  first-born."  At  this  cry  the  whole  multitude  is  carried 
away,  and,  forgetful  of  everything  but  the  overwhelming  feeling  of  the  moment, 
they  exclaim,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  must  we  do  ?  "  {W.  Arthur,  M.A.)  St. 
Petefs  first  sermon: — Here  we  have  the  report  of  a  sermon  preached  within  a 
few  days  of  Christ's  ascension,  addressed  to  men  many  of  whom  knew  Jesus  Christ, 
all  of  whom  had  heard  of  His  work.  His  life,  and  His  death,  and  setting  forth  the 
fipostolic  estimate  of  Christ,  His  miracles,  His  teaching.  His  ascended  condition 
and  glory.  We  cannot  realise,  unless  by  an  intellectual  effort,  the  special  worth  of 
these  apostolic  reports  contained  in  the  Acts.     Men  are  sometimes  sceptical  about 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  167 

them  asking,  How  did  we  get  them  at  all?  how  were  they  handed  down?  This  is, 
however,  an  easier  question  to  answer  than  some  think.  If  we  take,  for  instance, 
this  Pt-ntecostal  address  alone,  we  know  that  St.  Luke  had  many  opportunities  of 
personal  communication  with  St.  Peter.  But  there  is  another  solution.  The 
ancients  made  a  great  use  of  shorthand,  and  were  quite  well  accustomed  to  take 
down  spoken  discourses,  transmitting  them  thus  to  future  ages.  I.  The  congrega- 
tion assembled  to  listen  to  this  first  gospel  discourse  preached  by  a  human  agent 
WAS  A  NOTABLE  AND  EEPRESENTATiVE  ONE.  They  WCTC  all  Jews  or  Jcwish  proselytes, 
showing  how  extremely  wide,  at  the  epoch  of  the  Incarnation,  was  the  dispersion  of 
God's  ancient  people.  The  Divine  seed  fell  upon  no  unploughed  and  unroken 
soil.  Pure  and  noble  ideas  of  worship  and  morality  had  been  scattered  broadcast 
throughout  the  world.  Some  years  ago  the  judgment  of  Solomon  was  found 
depicted  on  the  ceiling  of  a  Pompeian  house,  witnessing  to  the  spread  of  Scriptural 
knowledge  through  Jewish  artists  in  the  time  of  Tiberius  and  of  Nero  A  race  of 
missionaries,  too,  equipped  for  their  work,  was  developed  through  the  discipline  of 
exile.  The  thousands  who  hung  upon  Peter's  lips  needed  nothing  but  instruction 
in  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  together  with  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  finest, 
the  most  enthusiastic,  and  the  most  cosmopolitan  of  agencies  lay  ready  to  the 
Church's  hand.  While,  again,  the  organisation  of  synagogues,  which  the  exigencies 
of  the  dispersion  had  called  into  existence,  was  just  the  one  suited  to  the  various 
purposes  of  charity,  worship,  and  teaching,  which  the  Christian  Church  required. 
II.  The  brave,  outspoken  tone  op  this  sermon  evidences  the  power  and  influence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  St.  Peter's  mind.  Chrysostom  notes  the  courageous  tone 
of  this  address  as  a  clear  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  resurrection.  HI.  Again,  the 
tone  of  St.  Peter's  sermon  was  remarkable  because  of  its  enlarged  and  enlightened 
spirituality.  It  proved  the  Spirit's  power  in  illuminating  the  human  conscious- 
ness. St.  Peter  was  rapidly  gaining  a  true  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  kingdom 
of  God.  He  enunciates  that  conception  in  this  sermon.  He  proclaims  Christianity, 
in  its  cathohc  and  universal  aspect,  when  he  quotes  Joel  as  predicting  the  time 
when  the  Lord  would  pour  out  His  Spirit  upon  all  flesh.  IV.  Let  us  look  somewhat 
farther  into  the  matter  of  this  earhest  Christian  sermon,  that  we  may  learn  the 
apostolic  view  of  the  Christian  scheme.  What  was  the  conception  of  Christ's 
life,  work,  and  ascended  state,  which  St.  Peter  presented  to  the  astonished  multi- 
tude ?  We  must  not  expect,  indeed,  to  find  in  this  sermon  a  formulated  and 
scientific  system  of  Christian  doctrine.  St.  Peter  was  as  yet  far  too  near  the  great 
events  he  declared,  far  too  close  to  the  superhuman  personality  of  Christ,  to  co- 
ordinate his  ideas  and  arrange  his  views.  Yet  his  discourse  contains  all  the  great 
principles  of  catholic  Christianity  as  opposed  to  that  low  view  which  would  represent 
the  earliest  Christians  as  preaching  the  purely  humanitarian  scheme  of  modern 
unitarianism.  St.  Peter  taught  boldly  the  miraculous  element  of  Christ's  life, 
describing  Him  as  "  a  man  approved  of  God  by  mighty  works,"  &c.  Yet  he  did  not 
dwell  as  much  as  we  might  have  expected  upon  the  miraculous  side  of  Christ's 
ministry.  And  that  for  a  very  simple  reason.  The  inhabitants  of  the  East  were 
so  accustomed  to  the  practices  of  magic  that  they  simply  classed  the  Christian 
missionaries  with  magicians.  The  apostles  had,  however,  a  more  powerful  argu- 
ment in  reserve.  They  preached  a  spiritual  religion,  a  present  peace  with  God, 
a  present  forgiveness  of  sins  ;  they  pointed  forward  to  a  future  life  of  which  even 
here  below  believers  possess  the  earnest  and  pledge.     V.  Again,  the  sermon  shows 

THE    method    of   INTERPRETING   THE    PSALMS    AND  PROPHETS  popular    among  the  pioUS 

Jews  of  St.  Peter's  time.  St.  Peter's  method  of  interpretation  is  identical  with  that 
of  our  Lord,  of  St.  Paul,  and  of  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  He 
beholds  in  the  Psalms  hints  and  types  of  the  profoundest  doctrines  of  the  Creed. 
He  finds  in  the  sixteenth  Psalm  a  prophecy  of  the  intermediate  state  of  souls  aud 
of  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord.  (G.  T.  Stohes.  D.D.)  .  St.  Peter  to  the 
vmltitude: — 1.  We  are  struck  first  with  the  calmness  and  concentrated  force 
of  this  address.  How  difficult  the  task  which  St.  Peter  undertook  1  He  had 
to  speak  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  and  to  a  crowd  excited  as  only  an  Eastern 
crowd  can  be.  It  is  not  easy  for  the  most  practised  orator  to  catch  the  ear,  and 
hold  the  attention  of  a  confused  and  hostile  crowd.  Shakespeare  means  us  to 
recognise  consummate  skill  in  Mark  Antony's  handling  of  the  Roman  citizens  at 
Caesar's  funeral ;  but  he  used  flattering  words,  and  be  spoke  in  order  to  rouse  the 
people  against  the  assassins  of  Caesar,  not  against  themselves.  St.  Peter  had  to 
address  the  crowd  on  a  theme  which  could  not  be  welcome,  and  to  stir  them  to  self- 
condemnation.     Yet  we  see  no  trace  of  hesitation  or  embarrassment.     The  speech 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

was  as  well  conceived  and  compacted  as  if  it  had  been  premeditated  for  weeks.  It 
soothed  the  tumult  of  unfriendly  excitement,  and  stirred  a  tumult  of  convicted 
conscience.  2.  An  opening  for  the  address  was  made  by  the  rude  jeering  of  some 
as  to  the  soui'ce  of  that  ardour  which  glowed  in  the  faces  and  uttered  itself  in  tbe 
words  of  the  brethren.  This  charge  was  easily  disposed  of.  It  was  a  fair  specimen 
of  the  capacity  of  carnal  men  to  judge  spiritual,  (1)  But  St.  Peter  brushed  it  away 
with  a  sentence.  It  was  enough  that  it  was  but  the  third  hour  of  the  day.  What 
Jew  would  have  diunk  wine  at  all  on  such  a  morning,  and  before  the  morning 
sacrifice !  And  even  if  one  or  two  could  be  so  lost  to  sbame,  how  absurd  to  accuse 
one  hundred  and  twenty  !  Even  the  heathen  reckoned  it  disreputable  to  drink 
strong  wines  in  the  morning.  Cicero  tells  us  indeed  tbat  the  revelry  at  Antony's 
villa  began  at  nine  o'clock ;  but  this  was  regarded  as  the  foolish  excess  of  de- 
bauchfes.  (2)  But  the  complete  refutation  of  it  was  the  whole  tone  and  tenor  of 
the  address,  which  was  calm  and  well  considered  to  a  marvel.  It  showed  that  he 
and  his  companions  were  certainly  "not  filled  with  wine,  wherein  is  excesr.." 
They  were  "  filled  with  the  Spirit."  The  apostle  gave  this  as  the  true  explanation, 
and  proceeded  at  once  to  illustrate  and  support  it  by  a  felicitous  quotatiou  from 
one  of  the  ancient  prophets.  He  knew  that  in  order  to  convince  it  was  necessary 
to  proceed  on  the  common  ground  of  Scripture.  No  one  in  that  multitude,  how- 
ever prejudiced  or  impatient,  could  object  to  the  citation  from  Joel.  What  St. 
Peter  taught  was  the  beginning  of  a  fulfilment  of  Joel's  prophecy.  It  was  the  sign' 
of  a  new  era  ;  the  inauguration  of  a  time,  the  length  of  which  no  man  could  define, 
but  ending  with  a  "great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord."  Such  was  the  exordium 
of  St.  Peter's  spef  ch.  We  can  see  the  mockers  silenced,  some  of  them,  let  us 
hope,  ashamed.  The  crowd  ceased  to  sway  and  shout,  listening  to  the  calm,  clear, 
strong  statement  which  carried  with  it  such  a  ring  of  certainty.  3.  Then  the 
speaker,  pursuing  his  advantage,  addressed  himself  to  the  main  theme.  The 
Spirit  had  come  upon  them,  that  they  might  preach  Christ  with  power.  The 
apostles  never  dragged  in  their  great  theme  abruptly  or  awkwardly.  Here  St. 
Peter  found  a  starting-point  for  preaching  Jesus  in  the  concluding  words  of  the 
passage  he  had  cited  from  Joel,  "  Whosoever  should  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  saved."  Who  was  the  Lord,  whose  "great  and  notable  day"  should 
terminate  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  ?  St.  Peter  and  his  colleagues  were  pre- 
pared to  say  and  prove  that  it  was  Jesus.  And  then  for  the  first  time  the  sin  of 
the  crucifixion  was  charged  on  the  confcience  of  the  Jews,  the  fulness  of  the 
gospel  made  known.  Not  a  few  of  those  present  liad  joined  in  tbe  cry,  "  Crucify 
Him !  "  That  had  not  been,  however,  spontaneous  ;  but  had  been  stirred  up  by 
the  rulers.  And  now  that  hot  blood  had  coolod  there  must  have  been  sore  mis- 
givings, which  the  ap  stle  soon  deepened.  He  reminded  his  hearers  of  "  the 
mighty  works  and  wonders  and  signs  "  by  which  God  had  accredited  His  prophet. 
He  appealed  to  their  own  knowledge  of  those  things  ;  and  their  silence  intimated 
that  they  could  not  dispute  the  fact.  4.  Having  gained  the  point,  St.  Peter  pro- 
ceeded to  show  who  the  prophet  Jesus  was — (1)  ]3y  reference  to  His  crucifixion. 
Was  this  fatal  to  a  claim  of  Messiahship  ?  Peter  would  once  have  said  so ;  but 
now  he  stood  there  prepared  to  show  that  it  formed  an  essential  part  of  the  proof 
that  He  was  indeed  the  Christ.  It  was  God's  purpose,  and  was  predicted  in  the 
ancient  oracles.  Jewish  teachers  had  turned  away  from  a  suffering  to  an  exclu- 
sively glorious  Messiah.  But  none  the  less  was  He  so  predicted,  and  none  the  less 
was  the  fulfilment  secured  by  God's  "  determinate  counsel."  Therefore  was  Jesus 
delivered  into  the  hands  of  those  who  hated  Him,  who  crucified  Him  by  the  hand 
of  "  men  without  the  law  " — the  Roman  soldiers.  But  it  was  really  on  the  Jews 
and  their  children  that  the  blood  of  the  Just  One  lay — "Ye  did  crucify  and  slay." 
(2)  Then,  in  a  breath,  the  speaker  announced  a  fact  which  gave  a  new  turn  to  the 
whole  history  in  the  resurrection  of  the  Crucified  One.  "Whom  God  raised  up," 
&c.  This,  indeed,  had  been  announced  immediately  after  ;  but  a  counter  story  liad 
been  set  afl<  at  that  the  body  had  been  stolen.  These  conflicting  rumours  had  left 
the  whole  matter  in  a  haze  of  doubt.  But,  before  adducing  witnesses,  St.  Pt-ter 
refei-red  again  to  the  Old  Testament.  With  a  fine  skill  which  the  Holy  Ghost  had 
taught  him,  he  prepared  the  Jews  for  receiving  evidence,  by  showing  that  it  was 
far  from  incredible,  since  it  had  been  clearly  foretold  in  one  of  the  prophetic 
Psalms.  Of  course  this  did  not  prove  that  Jesus  was  that  Christ.  But,  if  it  could 
be  proved  that  Jesus  had  risen,  His  fulfilment  of  this  oracle  would  go  far  to  place 
it  beyond  doubt  that  He  was  the  Messiah.  And  then  the  proof  was  adduced. 
Pointing  to  the  Christian  company,  St.  Peter  said  boldly,  "  This  Jesus  did  God 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  1-59 

raise  up,  whereof  we  all  are  witnesses."  How  could  any  fact  of  the  kind  have 
better  attestation  ?  (3)  The  argument  had  to  be  carried  oue  step  further  ;  and  the 
speaker,  not  knowing  how  long  the  crowd  might  continue  to  Jiaten,  proceeded  at 
once  to  say  that  the  risen  Jesus  was  exalted  by  the  right  hand  of  God.  On  this 
point,  too,  St.  Peter  found  support  in  the  Old  Testament — "  Jehovah  said  to 
Adonai "  (Psa.  ex. ).  Everyone  knew  who  was  meant  by  Jehovah  :  but  who  was 
Adonai  ?  David  could  not  have  meant  himself,  for  he  was  not  his  own  Lord  ;  far 
less  could  he  have  given  such  a  title  to  any  of  the  kings  of  tlie  earth.  The  Spirit 
had  inspired  him  to  sing  thus  of  the  Lord  Christ,  and  the  proof  of  His  ascension 
was  before  the  eyes  of  the  multitude.  On  the  followers  of  Jesus,  and  on  them  only, 
had  descended  the  new  energy  from  heaven.  5.  Thus  the  proof  was  completed  at 
every  point.  There  was  no  declamation  but  compact  statement  and  close  reason- 
ing, leading  up  to  the  conclusion  that  God  had  made  the  crucified  Jesus  both  Lord 
and  Christ.  And  now  the  Christians  beheld  the  crowd  no  longer  mocking,  but 
subdued,  ashamed,  conscience-stricken.  Pricked  in  their  hearts,  many  cried  out, 
"What  shall  we  do?"  A  welcome  interruption!  It  showed  St.  Peter  that  he  had 
struck  the  right  chord,  and  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  speaking  tbro  igh  him  to  the 
people.  It  enabled  him  to  follow  up  his  address  with  a  very  pointed  application, 
and  a  very  earnest  appeal.  They  could  not  undo  their  own  act,  but  God  had  done 
that  already.  Q'his,  however,  they  might  and  should  do  without  delay  :  (1) 
"  Eepent." — It  was  not  enough  to  be  pricked  in  heart.  Eepentance  is  more  than 
vexation  with  one's  self,  or  even  poignant  sorrow.  The  apostle  bade  them  recon- 
sider the  wLole  matter,  and  so  change  their  minds  regarding  the  Nazarene,  and 
consequently  their  attitude.  (2)  "  And  be  baptised  every  one  of  you  unto  the  re- 
mission of  sins."- — This  implied  that  they  sbould  believe,  and  confess  their  faith — 
for  faith  is  always  allied  with  repentance  unto  life,  and  is  the  instrument  of  for- 
giveness. Those  who  sincerely  repented  of  their  rejection  of  Jesus,  must  now 
believe  in  Him  as  the  Christ ;  and  in  token  thereof  were  called  to  join  the  company 
of  His  followers  by  openly  receiving  that  baptism,  which  Christ  had  authorised 
them  to  administer.  The  consequence  of  this  would  be,  that  they  would  obtani 
not  only  pardon,  but  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  the  promise  was  to  their  nation  first, 
though  also,  God  be  p'aised,  to  the  Gentiles — "  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall 
call."  6.  Such  was  the  speech  of  St.  Peter;  and  the  result  was  glorious.  The 
fisher  of  men  let  down  a  go  >d  net  into  the  deep,  and  caught  a  great  draught — drew 
to  the  shore  of  faith  and  peace  three  thousand  souls.  He  wrought  no  miracle  to 
astonish  and  impress  them.  It  was  better  that  no  sign  or  prodigy  performed  by 
the  apostles  should  interfere  with  the  direct  and  solemn  application  of  truth  to  the 
conscience.  He  performed  no  ceremony.  The  notion  of  a  Christianity  that  trusts 
to  ceremonial  and  celebration  was  quite  foreign  to  the  apostolic  conception.  The 
speaker  prevailed  by  the  word  of  his  testimony.  The  three  thousaud  felt  the 
power  of  the  truth  and  yielded  to  it — the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  disposing  and  enabling 
them  so  to  do.  Thus  they  repented,  believed,  were  baptized,  were  pardoned,  were 
quickened  to  newness  of  life.  7.  In  one  day  !  It  was  the  typical  and  significant 
day  of  our  dispensation,  a  day  which  should  be  expected  to  repeat  itself.  True, 
there  cannot  be  a  second  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  any  more  than  there  can  be  a 
second  incarnation  of  the  Son.  But  the  Church  should  ask  and  look  for  a  con- 
tinuance of  the  mighty  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  for  conversions  by  thou- 
sands. The  Church  wants  no  other  means  of  increase  than  those  by  which  it  was 
founded — (1)  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  (2)  the  testimony  of  anointed  wit- 
nesses in  sound  speech  that  cannot  be  gainsaid,  testifying  to  Jesus,  the  Saviour, 
that  He  is  the  Christ  of  Israel,  and  the  Lord  of  all.  (Z).  Eraser,  D.D.)  The  first 
apostolic  appeal  to  the  multitude: — The  wondering,  the  questioning,  and  the 
mockery  compelled  the  apostles  to  explain.  So  have  young  Christians  often  been 
constrained  by  what  they  saw  or  knew  to  attempt  work  for  which  they  had  little 
inclination.  In  making  this  appeal  the  apostles — I.  Had  a  leader.  All  had  been 
speaking  with  tongues,  and  wben  that  sign  had  answered  its  first  purpose  it  was 
necessary  for  one  to  appeal  to  the  intelligence  of  all.  Peter  now  "  stood  np."  1. 
A  man  of  confidence  and  quick  decision.  What  a  change  since  his  denial.  2.  A 
man  who  could  command  attention.  For  this  end  he  "lifted  up  his  voice." 
Having  to  plead  for  Christ  and  truth,  he  gladly  used  his  best  powers.  3.  A  man 
of  knowledge  ;  "  be  it  known  unto  you."  Some  were  guessing  and  misinterpreting, 
and  honesty  demanded  a  hearing  for  one  who  said  he  had  certain  knowledge.  4. 
A  man  of  words.  "  Hearken  to  my  words."  He  proceeded  to  prove  what  he  had 
boldly  afiiimed.     In  this  he  is  an  example.     He  gave  the  sense  of  Scripture,  and 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

did  bis  work  with  f5obriety  and  earnestness,  and  without  reflections  on  the  spirit  of 
the  crowJ.  II.  Had  to  rebut  error.  There  were  misconceptions  which  had  to 
be  removed,  and  in  doino;  this  Peter  did  not  mock  the  mockers,  or  show  irritation. 
He  calmly  and  kindly  rooted  out  error  that  truth  might  take  its  place.  Note  that — ■ 
1.  Peter  denied  the  false  charge  of  drunkenness,  but  not  as  a  malicious  calumny, 
but  as  the  actual  opinion  of  intelligent  men.  "As  ye  suppose."  In  this  way  we 
may  introduce  an  argument  against  the  false  doctrines  of  the  day.  But  denial  was 
not  enough,  so — 2.  He  gave  a  clear  reason — the  hour  was  too  early  and  too  sacred 
for  intoxication.  Eeligious  controversy  ought  to  be  based  on  undeniable  facts. 
Yet  this  was  not  enough,  so  Peter — 3.  Interpreted  the  facts  which  the  mockers  had 
misinterpreted.  It  was  the  fulfilment  of  Joel's  prophecy.  Would  that  all  preachers 
■would  meet  the  demand  for  facts  by  the  positive  truth  of  the  Word  of  God.  III. 
Bealised  that  there  is  given  to  believers  what  men's  natural  suppositions 
MISREPRESENT,  It  was  natural  for  men  to  think  that  they  could  explain  the 
strange  signs ;  but  the  error  was  brought  home  in  due  time.  How  many  to-day 
are  like  this  multitude.  They  observe  the  profession  and  zeal  of  Christians,  and 
hear  about  their  experiences,  but  put  it  all  down  to  superstition,  weakness,  or  delu- 
sion. (IF.  Hudson.)  Preaching  on  the  day  of  Pentecost : — The  restoration  of  Peter 
was  fully  recognised  by  his  brethren.  They  felt  bound  to  imitate  Christ's  conduct. 
He  knew  what  underlay  the  weakness  of  His  servant,  and  having  received  him  to 
favour,  sent  him  forth  with  fresh  power  to  feed  the  lambs,  &c.  Whom  God  receives, , 
let  no  man  refuse.  A  tempted  Christian  may  fall,  but  if  he  repent,  his  fellow 
Christians  should  receive  him  back.  Let  us  contemplate — I.  The  circumstances 
IN  which  Peter  preached.  1.  He  preached  upon  the  day  of  Pentecost.  All  the 
memories  of  God's  goodness  in  seedtime,  summer,  and  autumn,  were  then  occupy- 
ing the  minds  of  the  Hebrews.  And  Peter  rose  to  appropriately  publish  God's 
glorious  gospel  of  mercy.  2.  His  audience  was  peculiarly  stimulating.  Like 
Simeon  they  waited  for  the  consolation  of  Israel.  They  had  come  from  distant 
parts,  and  pi-esented,  in  their  diversified  wants,  a  type  of  the  world's  necessities. 
Following  the  law  they  found  the  gospel.  The  law  was  a  schoolmaster  that 
brought  them  to  Christ.  An  appreciative  assembly  has  a  stimulating  effect  upon 
any  orator  ;  and  this  audience,  composed  of  devout  inquirers,  anxious  to  learn  the 
whole  truth  about  Christ,  was  suf3ficient  to  give  the  eloquence  of  true  earnestness  of 
Peter's  preaching.  3.  His  position  was  that  of  spokesman  for  and  defender  of  his 
brethren.  4.  He  preached  under  the  immediate  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and 
with  a  tongue  of  fire.  II.  The  sermon  that  Peter  delivered.  We  cannot  say 
it  was  a  great  sermon,  in  the  modern  sense.  There  is  no  profound  and  far-reaching 
grasp  of  Divine  truth  ;  no  display  of  mental  and  spiritual  genius ;  no  soaring  flight 
of  imagination ;  none  of  those  marvellous  revelations  which  are  given  in  Isaiah 
and  Ezekiel ;  none  of  those  mighty  sentences,  lightning-like  in  their  flash,  thunder- 
like in  their  sound,  that  rolled  from  the  mouth  of  Cicero  or  Demosthenes ;  and 
certainly  none  of  that  loud-coloured  grandiloquence,  which  is  so  much  admired  by 
a  sensation-loving  world.  The  preaching  of  Peter,  or  Paul,  or  Christ,  is  usually 
destitute  of  these  ai'tistic  qualities,  and  yet  conspicuously  fitted  to  serve  its 
heavenly  purpose.  The  characteristics  of  Peter's  sermon  are  very  distinct.  1.  It 
was  Scriptural.  His  subject  was  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  brings  a 
text  from  Joel  (chap.  ii.  28-32),  to  show  that  the  Spirit  was  promised,  and  should 
have  been  expected  in  pome  such  way  as  that  in  which  He  had  actually  come. 
The  use  which  Peter  makes  of  his  proof-text  is  simple,  yet  skilful ;  displays  good 
powers  of  reasoning,  and  above  all,  reveals  a  clear  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures ; 
and  the  finishing  stroke  brings  out,  most  happily,  the  grand  design  of  God  in  His 
wonderful  promise,  and  its  more  wonderful  fulfilment — "That  whosoever  shall  call 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  2.  Most  faithful.  The  trumpet  at  his 
mouth  gave  no  uncertain  sound.  He  spake  no  smooth  things,  and  minced  no  truth 
to  suit  fastidious  tastes.  Speaking,  though  he  was,  against  the  great  men  of  his 
nation,  and  among  an  excited  populace,  who  had  a  few  weeks  ago  destroyed  his 
Master,  the  earnest  preaciier  was  unconscious  of  timidity,  and  he  did  not  hesitate 
to  tell  them  plainly,  that  they  had  taken  with  wicked  hands  and  crucified  and  slain 
the  Lord's  anointed.  Harsh  words,  no  doubt ;  but  words  like  the  hammer  that 
breaks  the  rocky  heart.  And  the  man  who  would  preach  the  Word  of  God  with 
true  faithfulness  to  his  fellow-sinners  must  be  prepared  at  any  risk  to  expose  and 
condemn  every  sort  of  wickedness.  8.  Evangelical.  It  contained  very  pro- 
minently the  three  R's  which  Rowland  Hill  has  made  proverbial  in  our  country : 
(1)  Euin  by  the  fall.    The  apostle  gave  prominence  to  the  ruinous  effects  ol  sin. 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  IGl 

Jerusalem  sinners  had  committed  an  awful  crime  in  killing  the  Son  of  God.  (2) 
Eedemption  through  the  death  of  Jesus.  (3)  Eegeneration  through  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Kepent,  and  be  baptized,"  &c.  III.  The  success  of  Peter's 
SERMON.  We  find  it  very  difficult  to  realise  the  impression  produced.  There  is 
nothing  like  it  in  modern  times.  People  assemble  in  great  crowds  to  hear  the  best 
of  preachers,  and  go  away  in  a  state  of  stolid  indifference.  From  week  to  week  the 
■whole  preaching  of  the  Christian  sabbath,  in  every  village  and  town,  passes  over 
without  the  smallest  degree  of  spiritual  excitement.  We  surely  need  more  of  that 
earnest,  heaven-reaching  prayer,  that  will  bring  the  Spirit  of  God,  like  a  rushing 
mighty  wind,  to  fill  our  house  and  every  heart  with  spiritual  animation.  This  was 
the  prime  result  of  Pentecostal  preaching.  Thousands  of  sleeping  souls  were 
awakened.  We  have  heard  of  men  sailing  towards  the  rapids  of  Niagara,  all  uncon- 
scious of  danger,  until  they  felt  their  boat  quiver  in  the  struggling  water,  and  start 
away  with  alarming  speed.  In  a  moment  they  were  filled  with  anxiety,  and  began 
to  pull  and  cry  with  all  their  might  for  safety.  So  with  Jerusalem  sinners  under 
the  sermon  of  Pentecost.  The  whole  crowd  was  shaking  like  fields  of  corn  in  the 
autumn  wind,  or  tossing  like  troubled  waves  upon  the  stormy  ocean.  And  with 
one  loud  cry  that  went  ringing  through  the  holy  city,  and  up  to  the  Holy  God, 
they  said,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  Blessed  question  from  a 
sinner's  heart  I  And  the  question  must  have  gone  with  a  grateful  thrill  to  the 
preacher's  heart,  as  it  surely  went  Uke  a  shout  of  triumph  to  the  heart  of  Jesus  on 
the  throne.  We  have  read  somewhere  of  a  Eussian  prince,  coming  in  the  course 
of  bunting  to  a  river's  side,  where  a  few  peasants  had  brought  to  the  bank  a  person 
appirently  drowned.  The  prince  had  previously  been  reading  some  directions 
which  had  been  issued  by  a  humane  society,  about  the  mode  of  restoring  animation 
to  people  who  have  been  rescued  from  under  water.  He  leaped  from  his  horse, 
stripped  off  his  flowing  robes,  gave  instructions  to  the  peasants  how  to  assist,  and 
commenced  the  work  of  rubbing  the  cold  limbs  of  the  unfortunate  man  with  all  his 
might.  The  work  was  continued  by  the  prince  for  a  whole  hour,  without  any 
appearance  of  success.  At  length  the  lifeless-looking  bosom  bagan  to  heave  and 
give  signs  of  animation.  On  seeing  which,  the  prince  looked  up,  with  beaming 
countenance,  and  exclaimed  :  "  This  is  the  happiest  moment  of  my  life."  He  had 
saved  a  man  from  death.  Not  less  would  it  be  a  happy  moment  for  the  heart  of 
Elisha,  when  he  felt  t"he  flesh  of  the  Shunamite's  child  waxing  warm,  and  saw  him 
open  his  eyes  in  life  and  happiness.  But  we  can  believe  it  was  even  a  happier 
moment  for  the  apostle  of  Christ  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  the  people  cried, 
"  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  and  so  gave  signs  of  being  raised  from  spiritual  death  to 
Christian  vitality.  No  time  was  lost  in  telling  the  inquirers  their  path  of  duty. 
"Look  to  Jesus  and  be  saved."  (J.  Thompson,  A.BI.)  A  varied  ministry  blessed 
by  the  Holy  Spirit: — Mark  the  course  of  a  river  like  the  Thames ;  how  it  winds 
and  twists  according  to  its  own  sweet  will.  Yet  there  is  a  reason  for  every  bend 
and  curve :  the  geologist,  studymg  the  soil  and  marking  the  conformation  of  the 
rock,  sees  a  reason  why  the  river's  bed  diverges  to  the  right  or  to  the  left ; 
and  so,  though  the  Spirit  of  God  blesses  one  preacher  more  than  another,  and 
the  reason  cannot  be  such  that  any  man  could  congratulate  himself  upon  his 
own  goodness,  yet  there  are  certain  things  about  Christian  ministers  which 
God  blesses,  and  certain  other  things  which  hinder  success.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  first  sermon: — 1.  The  gospel  is  not  a  system  of  doctrines,  a  code  of  laws,  still 
less  a  fabric  of  fancies  or  theories :  it  is  a  record  of  facts.  It  is  this  characteristic 
which  makes  it — (1)  So  satisfactory;  we  can  plant  the  foot  firmly  upon  it,  for  it 
is  founded  upon  a  rock.  (2)  So  universal :  not  the  religion  of  a  few  philosophers, 
capable  of  arguing  out  deep  truths  or  of  rising  to  lofty  mysteries,  but  the  religion 
of  a  world,  as  suitable  to  the  simple  as  to  the  learned.  2.  And  as  the  gospel  rests 
upon  fact,  so  also  it  prompts  to  action.  No  sooner  is  the  persecutor  of  the  Church 
struck  to  the  earth  by  the  bright  light  of  the  Divine  presence  than  we  hear  him 
asking,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  And  no  sooner  does  the  jailer 
at  Philippi  recognise  in  his  prisoners  the  servants  of  the  Most  High  God,  than  he 
asks  the  practical  question,  "  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved?  "  And  no  sooner 
does  the  astonished  multitude  hear  from  Peter's  lips  the  explanation  of  the 
marvellous  sign  which  has  gathered  them  to  hsten,  than  they  exclaim,  "  Men  and 
brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  What  they  heard  was  a  narrative  of  facts  :  what 
they  understood  by  it  was  a  summons  to  action.  God  grant  to  us  also  a  spirit  of 
faith  in  gospel  fact,  a  spirit  of  readiness  for  gospel  action!  3.  St.  Peter  sets  us  the 
example  of  repeating  a  text  for  his  seimon.  The  Bible  then  was  the  Old  Testa- 
VOL     I.  11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 


ment.     Out  of  it  Christian  teachers  were  able  to  plead  for  God  and  to  prove  the 
gospel.  In  our  thankfulness  for  the  New  Testament  we  must  never  learn  to  despise 
the  Old.    St.  Peter's  text  was  taken  from  Joel.    That  Book  was  probably  composed 
850  years  before  Christ.     The  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  were  not  instructed 
to  reveal  the  long  interval  which  should  elapse  between  the  two  advents.     The 
delay  of  the  second  coming  was  not  even  a  revelation  of  the  gospel.     Each  age 
was  to  expect  it.    The  taunt,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming?  "  was  to  have 
scope  to  operate,  because  no  generation  was  to  be  made  aware  that  the  advent 
might  not  take  place  within  its  duration.     And  thus  it  is  that  Joel  here  speaks  of 
the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  as  a  sign  of  the  last  days.     The  gospel  age,  however 
long  it  has  continued  or  may  continue,  is  the  dispensation  of  the  last  times  :  after 
it  comes  none  other,  and  itself  is  to  be  viewed  as  one  whole,  from  the  redemption 
which  contained  in  itself  not  the  promise  only  but  the  germ  of  all,  until  the  coming 
of  the  very  kingdom  of  heaven  in  power  and  great  glory.     "  In  the  last  days,  saith 
God,"  &c.     4.  After  this  quotation  the  discourse  addresses  itself  pointedly  to  the 
audience.     "  Ye  men  of  Israel,  hear  these  words.    A  Man,  as  you  deemed  Him,  and 
as  He  was,  has  within  these  few  weeks  been  put  to  death  by  you  ;  the  blood  of  that 
Man  is  at  this  moment  upon  your  hands  !  "     But  was,  then,  that  murder  effectual? 
No  ;  "  God  raised  Him  up  because  it  was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of 
death."     Not  possible,  by  reason  of  His  Divine  nature.     Not  possible,  because  the 
voice  of  inspired  prophecv  had  declared  the  contrary  (Psa.  xvi.).     Could  words  like , 
these  have  found  their  full  accomplishment  in  their  human  author?     The  words 
which  David  thus  sp  ike,  he  spake  as  God's  prophet.     For  himself  the  words  could 
only  express  that  assurance  of  a  life  beyond  death,  the  hope  of  the  saints.     But  in 
relation  to  Christ  tbe  words  have  a  fuller  meaning.     His  soul  was  recalled  fi'om  its 
brief  sojourn  in  Hades,  before  it  had  taken  up   its  abode  there  as  a  recognised 
inmate.    Of  this  revival  from  death  we  His  apostles  are  the  witnesses.    Now,  there- 
fore, the  events  of  this  day  become  intelligible  and  natural.     The  risen  Saviour 
hath  fulfilled  His  promise.     He  promised  to  send — He  hath  sent— His  Holy  Spirit 
upon  His  disciples.     And  hereunto  agree  those  other  words  of  the  Psalmist,  "  The 
Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,"  &c.     That  prophecy,  like  the  former,  points,   not  to 
David,  but  to  David's  Son  ;  even  to  Him  who  is  as  truly  tbe  Lord  of  David  in  right 
of  His  Godhead,  as  He  is  the  Son  of  David  by  reason  of  His  manhood.     "  There- 
fore let  every  family  of  Israel  know,"  &c.     5.  Such  was  the  discourse,  to  which  a 
blessing  was  vouchsafed  such  as  has  been  granted  to  no  other.     God  works  where 
and  as  and  by  whom  He  will ;  choosing  oftentimes  the  weak  things  of  the  world 
to  confound  the  mighty.     We  may  read  St.  Peter's  words  unmoved.     But  not  so 
did  they  to  whom  he  addressed  himself.     Compunction  was  the  first  fruit  of  his 
preaching.     Conscience  now  awoke.     The  sign  before  them  was  a  sign  of  power  : 
how  could  this  be,  save  by  the  hand  of  God  ?     But  beyond  this,  it  was  a  sign 
foretold  by  Jesus.     All  things  had  come  to  pass,  even  as  He  had  said  to  them. 
Yes,  all  is  now  clear  and  consistent,  though  the  inference  is  one  of  shame  and 
condemnation  for  themselves.     "  When    they  heard,  they  were  pricked  in  their 
heart,  and  said  unto  Peter,"  &c.     We  will  not  answer  the  question  now,  rather  let 
it  press  upon  us  as  a  question  of  deep  moment  for  ourselves.     Hearing  of  Christ 
caused — I.  Cojiptjnction.    What  tbey  heard  was  extremely  simple.    It  was  nothing 
more  than  what  we  have  all  heard  ten  thousand  times.     The  words  of  Zechariah 
were  fulfilled,  "  They  shall  look  upon  Me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall 
mourn."     They  had  pierced  Him,  and  now  the  arrow  of  conviction  pierced  them. 
1.  I  know  not  that  any  words  of  man  could  bring  to  our  minds  the  same  conviction 
of  sin  without  the  grace  of  God  by  His  Holy  Spirit.     And  yet  we  do  read  of  such 
a  crime  as  that  of  "  crucifying  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  putting  Him  to  an  open 
shame."     The  Epistle  to  the   Hebrews   even  says  of    such   persons  that  "  it  is 
impossible  to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance."    God  grant,  therefore,  that,  in 
its  worst  form,  that  of  actual  apostasy,  none  of  us  may  yet  have  committed  it  ! 
But  there  are  approaches  to  that  crime.     There  are  those  who  make  very  light  of 
the  purposes  for  which  Christ  died,  who  contradict  and  go  against  the  very  object 
of  that  death ;  that  He  might  put  away  sin ;  that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all 
iniquity.     Is  there  no  one  here  who  ever  helped  to  undo  Christ's  d.ving  work  in 
another  person's  soul  ?  who  ever  tempted  another  person  to  commit  sin ;  either  by 
ridiculing  his  scruples,  or  by  making  the  way  to  sin  known  to  him,  or  by  suggesting 
to  his  mind  sinful  images,    or  raising  in  his  mind  sinful   desires?     That   man, 
whoever  he  is,  has  done  worse  things  than  even  the  Jews  who  gave  Jesus  to  be 
crucified.     Nothing,  however  cruel,  done  to  the  body,  can  be  so  heinous  as  the 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  163 

least  injury  done  to  the  soul.     Alas  !  there  are  tho=e  now  amorgst  us  who  have 
more  cause  to  be  "  pricked  in  their  heart"  than  ever  had  those  men  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost.     2.  And  if  not  in  this  f^ravest  sense,  yet  which  of  you  has  not  cause 
to  be  sorrowful  when  he  thinks  of  Lis  Lord  and  his  God?     What  is  a  day  to  you 
but  one  succession  of  sUghts  done  to  your  Saviour?     How  did  it  begin?     Was 
not  your  moruing  prayer  a  poor,  cold,  reluctant  service?     And  so  the  day  went 
full  of  anything  and  everything  rather  than  the  thought  and  tbe  love  of  Christ ; 
full  of  the  world,  of  vanity,  of  self.    Then  have  not  you,  have  not  we  all,  cause  to  feel 
•compunction,  and  to  cry,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  "  ?     II.  This  com- 
punction MAY  WELL  WORK  IN  US  ANXIETY ;  the  couvictiou  of  sin  the  desire  for  direction. 
"  What  shall  we  do?  "     It  is  the  want  of  this  desire  which  make  our  meetings  for 
worship  too  often  cold  and  lifeless.     What  would  preaching  be,  if  it  were  in  deed 
And  in  truth  addressed  to  a  number  of  human  hearts,  every  one  of  which  was 
inwardly   asking,    "What  must   I  do?     Preaching  is  a  finger-post   marking  the 
traveller's  way,  and  saying  to  wayfaring  men,  "This  is  the  way  ;  walk  ye  in  it !" 
Xiet  us  come  together,  Sunday  by  Sunday,  in  this  spirit ;  crying,   "  What  shall 
I  do  ?  "  and  doubt  not  but  your  cry  will  be  heard  :  if  man  should  fail  you,  God 
Himself  will  be  your  preacher  ;  your  inward  ear  shall  hear  the  voice  of  His  Spirit, 
warning,  counselling,  comforting,  according  to  your  need.     (Dean  Vaiighan.)        A 
new  style  of  religious  ministry  : — Peter's  sermon  is  something  strikingly  fresh  in 
the  history  of  preaching.     Moses,  Joshua,  the  prophets,  the  Baptist,  Christ  bad 
preached,  but  this  preaching  was  in  many  respects  a  new  thing  in  the  earth.     1. 
The  occasion  was  new — the  spiritual  excitement  of  the  disciples,  produced  by 
Divine  influence  and  leading  to  strange  thoughts.     2.  The  substance  was  new.    It 
was  not  a  prophetic  or  a  present,  but  an  historic  Christ  who  had  risen  from  the 
grave  to  the  throne  of  the  universe.     No  one  had  ever  preached  Christ  in  this 
form   before.      3.  The  impression   of  the  sermon  was   new.      In  analysing  the 
discourse  we  find — I.  A  statement  for  refuting  the  charge  op  the  scoffer.     1. 
The  negative  part  includes  three  distinguishable  points.     (1)  A  categorical  denial: 
"  These  men  are  iiot  drunken."    It  is  a  libel.    (2)  An  intimation  of  the  groundless- 
ness of  the  charge :  "  As  ye  suppose."     It  was  a  mere  empty  assumption.     (3)  A 
suggestion  of  high  improbability :  "  Seeing   it  is  but  the  third  hour."      2.    'Tiie 
positive  part  asserts  that  the  phenomenon  was  the  effect  of  Divine  insi^iration  :  "  It 
shall  come  to  pass,"  &c.     Tlie  days  of  the  Messiah  are  "  the  last  da\  s  "  ;  no  other 
dispensation  of  mercy  will  succeed  them.     The  passage  teaches  that  these  last 
days — (1)  Would  be  connected  with  an  extraordinary  effusion  of  the  Spirit,  not 
limited — (a)  To  any  class,   (h)  To  any  sex.  (c)  To  any  age.  (2)  Would  be  connected 
with   prodigious   revolutions.      The   words    "  I    will  show   wonders,"   &c.,    may 
probably  be  regarded  as  a  highly  poetic  representation  of  what  would  follow,  in 
government  and  churches,  the  working  out  of  Divine  ideas  and  spiritual  influences 
(Isa.  xiii.  10,  xxxiv.  4).     (3)  Would  be  succeeded  by  a  notable  day — probably  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  as  a  type  of  the  Judgment.     (4)  Would  be  connected  with 
a  possibility  of  salvation  to  all  who  seek  it.     II.  An  argument  for  convicting  the 
hearts  of  the  hardened — an  argument  resolving  itself  into  four  facts.     1.  That 
Jesus  had  wrought  miracles  among  them  while  living.     2.  That  His  crucifixion 
was  only  the  working  out  of  the  Divine  plan.     So  great  is  God  that  He  can  make 
His  greatest  fnemies  serve  Him.     3.  That  His  resurrection,  which  they  could  not 
deny,  was  a  fact  which  accorded  with  their  Scriptures.     In  this  quotation  from 
the  Psalms  Peter — (1)  Assumes  that  the  document  which  h*^  quotes  will  be  admitted 
by  them  as  of  Divine  authority.     (2)  Takes  for  granted  that  the  document  refers 
to  the  resurrection  of  some  one  of  distinguished  excellence.     (3)  Keasons  that  the 
resurrection  of  the  distinguished  one  predicted  could  not  be  David.     (4)  Concludes 
that  the  resurrection  predicted  must  have  referred  to  Christ.     III.  An  exhortation 
TO  the  awakened.     Peter  directs  them — 1.  To  the  only  blessings  that  could  meet 
their  case  :  Divine   pardon   and  Divine  influence.     2  To  the  course  of  conduct 
essential  to  the  attainment  of  those  blessings.     3.  To  the  precious   promise  of 
heaven  to  encourage  them  in  the  course  of  conduct  required.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Ehvients  of  power  in  Peter's  sermon: — I.  Adaptation  to  circumstances.     There 
wa^  a  startling  event :  the  sermon  applied  its  lessons.     It  was  spontaneous  :  Peter 
had  no  time  to  prepare  a  MS.  or  even  notes.     II.  A  Scriptural  basis.     The  main 
points  were  proved  by  the  Bible.     Nature  and  experience  are  important,  but  do 
not  caiTy  conviction  like  the  living  Word.     III.  Unsparing  rebuke  of  sin.     Their 
guilt  was  so  pressed  home  that  they  were  "  pricked  in  their  hearts."     IV.  Christ 

AT    the  beginning,     IH    THE    MIDDLE,  AND    AT    THE    END.      V.    ThE    PRESENCE    OF    THE 


1(U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Holt  Ghost.  (Hoiuiletic  Montlihj.)  Petefs  impulsiveness  useful  because  uisclij 
directed: — Turn  water  into  a  proper  receptacle,  and  its  power  is  well-nigh 
overwhelming.  Turn  fire  into  its  proper  channel,  and  it  proves  an  unparalleled 
power.  And  these  elements  thus  controlled  and  brought  into  their  legiti- 
mate course,  will  prove  a  blessing  to  man,  but  left  uncurbed,  though  still  a 
power,  it  is  destructive  in  its  character.  Even  so  it  is  with  impulsiveness,  if 
sanctified  by  God's  grace,  and  thus  turned  within  the  divinely  appointed  channel 
of  redemption,  it  will  ^srove  a  great  blessing  to  an  individual  and  those  with  whom 
he  associates ;  but  left  uncurbed,  it  becomes  a  destructive  power  to  happiness, 
peace,  usefulness,  and  real  success.     (IF.  H.  Blake.)  The  power  of  tlie  human 

voice  : — The  true  preacher  has  nothing  to  fear  from  any  rival,  for  the  human  voice 
has  no  adequate  substitute.  Even  a  gospel  written  is  not  equal  to  a  gospel  spoken. 
The  h'^art  will  not  disdain  any  instrument  of  expression,  but  the  instrument 
which  it  loves  with  all  its  love  is  the  human  voice — all  instruments  in  one,  and  all 
inspired.  (J.  Parker.)  A  sermon  to  prick  the  conscience: — If  a  man  is  able 
to  produce  beautiful  roses  and  delight  his  congregation  with  them  Sunday  after 
Sunday,  by  all  means  let  him  produce  them  :  only  let  him  take  care  to  make  his 
roses  as  God  makes  His — never  a  rose  without  a  thorn,  to  prick  the  conscience  of 
the  hearer,  and  to  spur  him  onward  in  his  Divine  life.  Let  the  sermon  please  if 
possible  ;  but,  like  Peter's  sermon  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  it  ought  to  prick  the 
consciences  of  men.  (J.  C.  Jonas.)  Plain  preaching: — In  some  churches  the 
creed  and  commandments  are  painted  so  grand,  in  such  fantastic  characters,  and  ' 
with  such  perplexing  convolutions,  that  a  plain  man  cannot  possibly  make  them  out; 
and  the  truth  is  sometimes  treated  in  the  pulpit  by  the  preacher  as  the  painter  has 
painted  it — the  language  is  so  grand,  and  the  rhetoric  so  gorgeous,  that  the  people 
fail  to  realise  the  truth  it  may  be  supposed  to  embody.  Different  styles  of 
preaching : — We  are  often  told  with  great  earnestness  what  is  the  best  style  for 
preacliing;  but  the  fact  is,  that  what  would  be  the  very  best  style  for  one  man 
would  perhaps  be  the  worst  possible  for  another.  In  the  most  fervid  declamation, 
the  deepest  principles  may  be  stated  and  pressed  home  ;  in  the  calmest  and  most 
logical  reasoning,  powerful  motives  may  be  forced  close  upon  the  feelings ;  in 
discussing  some  general  principle,  precious  portions  of  the  text  of  Scripture  may 
be  elucidated  ;  and  in  simple  exposition,  general  principles  may  be  effectively  set 
forth.  Let  but  the  powers  given  to  any  man  play  with  their  full  force,  aided  by 
all  the  stores  of  Divine  knowledge  which  continuous  acquisition  from  its  fountain 
and  its  purest  channels  can  obtain  for  him,  and,  the  fire  being  present — the  fire  of 
the  Spirit's  power  and  influence — spiritual  effects  will  result.  The  discussion 
about  style  amounts  very  much  to  a  discussion  whether  the  rifle,  the  carbine,  the 
pistol,  or  the  cannon,  is  the  best  weapon.  Each  is  best  in  its  place.  The  great  point 
is,  that  every  one  shall  use  the  weapon  best  suited  to  him,  that  he  charge  it  well, 
and  see  that  it  is  in  a  condition  to  strike  fire.  The  criticisms  which  we  often  hear 
amount  to  this  :  We  admit  that  such-an- one  is  a  good  exhortational  preacher,  or 
a  good  doctrinal  preacher,  or  a  good  practical  preacher,  or  a  good  expository 
preacher  ;  but  because  he  has  not  the  qualities  of  another — qualities,  perhaps,  the 
very  opposite  of  his  own — we  tbink  lightly  of  him.  That  is,  we  admit  that  the 
carbine  is  a  good  carbine ;  but  becaus^e  it  is  not  a  rifle,  we  condemn  it ;  and 
because  the  rifle  is  not  a  cannon,  we  condemn  it.     (W.  Arthur,  M.A.) 

Vers.  17-21.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days. — The  gospel  age : — 
Four  things  tautiht  here  determine  the  gospel  age.  I.  It  is  connected  with 
an  EXTiiAOEDiNAEY  cffusiou  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  "I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit." 
II.  It  is  connected  with  peodigious  eevolutions,  "  I  will  show  wonders,"  &c.  III. 
It  is  connected  with  an  ultimate  ceisis,  "The  notable  day  of  tbe  Lord."  IV.  It 
is  connected  with  the  possibility  of  a  tjniveesal  salvation,  "  Whosoever,"  &c, 
(Homilint.)  The  pouring  out  of  God's  Spirit: — In  this  highly  interesting  chapter 
we  find  an  account — 1.  Of  the  Divine  testimony  borne  to  tiie  truth  of  the  gospnl  by 
tbe  descent  of  tbe  Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  2.  Of  the  different  effects 
which  this  event  produced  on  the  different  characters  who  witnessed  it.  In  the 
devout  it  excited  amazement,  which  led  thera  to  make  serious  inquiry  respecting 
what,  was  occurring  (ver.  5-12).  In  the  can  less  it  excited  contempt.  But  the 
wrath  of  man  turned  to  the  praise  of  God;  for  in  the  sequel  we  find  an  account — 
3.  Of  Peter's  discourse  in  reply  to  those  aspersions  thus  cast  on  the  works  of  God 
bv  His  wicked  opposors.  1.  Some  obseevations  on  thksb  woeds.  Here  we  may 
noti>:e — 1.  The  blessing  promised  :  God's  Spirit.     '*  I  will  pour  out  of  My  Spirit, 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  ACTS.  165, 

saith  God."  By  the  Spirit  here  promised  is  meant  both  His  miraculous  and  saving 
influence.  2.  The  manner  of  its  dispensation;  it  will  be  poured  out.  This 
indicates  the  prerogative  of  God  ;  that  the  influences  of  His  Spirit  are  at  His 
disposal.  The  pouring  out  of  God's  Spirit  also  indicates  the  special  properties 
of  the  blessing  promised.  For  instance,  that  it  will  be  gratuitous,  abundant, 
perpetual.  3.  The  extent  of  its  influence  upon  all  flesh.  By  all  flesh  is  meant 
the  whole  liuman  race,  however  distinguished,  by  descent,  by  circumstances,  or  by 
sex.  4.  The  season  of  its  communication — the  last  days.  By  the  last  days  are 
certainly  meant  the  days  in  which  we  now  live.  5.  The  certainty  of  its  effusion. 
It  shall  come  to  pass,  saith  God,  in  the  last  days,  "  I  will  pour  out  of  My  Spirit." 
This  event  is  certain — for  it  is  predicted,  and  it  will  be  fulfilled.  It  is  promised, 
and  will  be  performed.  II.  Some  application  of  them.  1.  The  strong  claims 
which  this  subject  has  on  our  attention.  It  claims  attention  by  the  importance  of 
the  blessing  which  it  exhiliits.  2.  The  duties  to  which  this  subject  urges  us.  It 
particularly  urges  us  to  apply  for  the  saving  influences  of  God's  Spirit,  as  He 
requires  us  in  His  Word.  By  repentance  (Acts  ii.  38,  39)  ;  by  faith  in  Christ 
{John  vii.  39;  Gal.  iii.  14) ;  and  by  earnest  importunate  prayer  (Luke  xi.  13).  3. 
The  hopes  with  which  this  subject  inspires  us.  On  engaging  in  the  duties  to  which 
our  text  urges  us,  it  encourages  us  to  hope — for  the  saving  influence  of  God's 
Spirit  in  our  own  souls :  for  the  general  effusion  of  God's  Spirit  on  the 
human  race.  [Theological  Sketch  Book.)  The  sending  of  the  Holy  Ghost : 
— The  occasion  of  Peter's  sermon  was  a  lewd  surmise  touching  the  gift  of 
tongues.  As  soon  as  God  from  heaven  sent  His  fiery  tongues  upon  His  apostles, 
the  devil  from  hell  put  his  into  the  mouths  of  his  apostles.  Note — I.  The  Spirit's 
TOUEiNG.  1,  The  Spirit  is  here  the  author  of  prophecy.  (1)  Propliecy  can  come 
from  no  nature  not  rational;  so  the  Spirit  is  natiira  rationalis,  i.e.,  a  person. 
(2)  Effusion  is  a  proceeding  of  that  which  is  poured ;  as  inspiration,  in  the  very 
body  of  the  word  "  spirit."  So  the  Spirit  is  a  person  proceeding.  (3)  No  person, 
angel  or  spirit,  can  be  poured  out,  least  of  all  "upon  all  flesh."  God  only  can  be 
that :  hence  the  Spirit  is  God,  (4)  But  Peter  saith,  "  of  My  spirit."  The  whole 
Spirit  flesh  could  not  hold,  not  even  "  all  flesh  "  ;  and  parts  He  hath  none.  The 
phrase,  then,  indicates  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit — beams  of  this  light, 
•streams  of  this  pouring — here  the  gifts  of  prophecy  and  tongues.  2.  The  act: 
"pour."  (1)  The  quality.  That  which  is  poured  must  be  a  liquid.  But  this 
fieems  improper  to  the  occasion  when  we  should  have  looked  for  fire.  But  Peter 
perhaps  refers  to  their  slander,  "  that  it  was  nothing  but  new  wine,"  a  liquor;  and 
certainly  the  metaphor  was  frequently  used  by  Christ  (John  vii.  89  ;  Acts  i.  5), 
Further,  this  quality  falls  well  within  the  graces  here  given — (a)  Prophecy, 
likened  by  the  great  prophet  (Deut.  xxxii.  2)  to  the  "  dew  falling  upon  the  herbs." 
(b)  Invocation,  which  is  the  pouring  out  of  prayer,  and  of  the  very  heart  in  prayer. 
(2)  The  quantity.  Pouring  is  a  sign  of  plenty.  The  Spirit  had  been  given  before 
but  never  with  such  a  largess  ;  sprinkled  but  not  poured.  (3)  Pouring  tells  us  that 
the  Spirit  came  not  of  Himself,  not  till  He  was  thus  poured  out ;  that  so  order 
might  be  kept  in  Him,  and  we  by  Him  taught  to  keep  it,  i.e.,  not  to  start  out  till 
we  be  sent,  not  to  leak  or  run  over,  but  stay  till  we  be  poured  out.  (4)  Pouring  is 
not  as  the  running  of  a  spout,  but  the  voluntary  act  of  a  voluntary  agent  who  has 
the  vessel  in  his  hand,  and  pours  or  not  at  will,  and  when  he  pours  strikes  not  out 
the  head  of  the  vessel  and  let  all  go,  but  moderates  his  pouring.  So  here  the 
Spirit  dispenses,  (a)  To  divers  parties,  [b)  divers  gifts,  (c)  in  divers  degrees. 
3.  On  whom  this  pouring  is.  (1)  Flesh,  i.e.,  men.  But  we  are  spirit  as  well  as 
flesh.  Yes,  but  to  magnify  His  mercy  ttie  more  that  part  is  chosen  which  seems 
farthest  removed  (Isa.  xl.  6;  Eora.  viii.  3).  (2)  Upon  this  flesh.  But  had  not 
"  into  "  been  better  ?  The  Spirit  is  given  both  ways.  At  Christ's  baptism  the  dove 
came  "  upon  Him  "  ;  at  His  resurrection,  "  He  breathed  into  "  them.  And  so  He 
has  parted  His  sacraments — baptism  is  upon  us,  the  Eucharist  enters  into  us.  But 
both  come  to  one.  If  it  be  poured  on  it  soaks  in ;  if  it  be  breathed  in  it  works 
forth.  But  it  is  "upon  "  here — (a)  That  we  may  know  that  the  graces  of  the  Spirit 
are  from  without,  and  grow  not  from  our  flesh ;  and  not  only  from  without  but 
"  from  above,  from  the  Father  of  lights."  (b)  Because  "  upon  "  is  the  preposition 
proper  to  initiation  into  any  new  office,  as  in  the  case  of  anointing,  investing  with 
a  robe,  imposition  of  hands,  &c.  (c)  To  inure  the  apostles  to  the  preposition,  which 
so  many  hate.  No  "  super,"  no  superiority  ;  "  the  right  hands  of  fellowship,"  if 
jou  will,  but  no  imposition  of  them;  if  "super"  then  "sub"  follows;  and  no 
**sub"  with  those  who  submit  neither  head  nor  spirit  to  any.     (3)  Upon  all  flesh. 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  ii. 

None  is  excluded — no  sex,  age,  condition,  nation.  Yet  not  promiscuously :  the  text 
limits  the  promise  to  such  as  will  be  "  My  servants,"  i.e.,  as  will  "  believe  and 
be  baptized."  This  gives  them  the  capacity,  makes  them  vessels  meet  to 
receive  the  effusion,  all  which  effectually  exclude  unbelievers  and  counterfeit 
Christians.  II.  The  end  whereto.  The  Spirit  is  given  to  many  ends,  but  one 
last — the  salvation  of  mankind.  Mankind  was  on  the  point  to  perish,  and  the  Spirit 
was  pc  ured  as  a  precious  balm  to  recover  and  save  it.  1.  Means  to  that  end.  That 
men  may  be  saved  they  are  to  call  on  the  naine  of  the  Lord  ;  that  they  may  call  to 
purpose  they  are  to  be  called  on  to  it,  and  directed  in  it  by  prophesying.  (1)  Prophecy 
stands  first,  for  without  that  the  people  must  needs  jjerish  (Prov.  xxix.  18 ;  Isa.  xxxii. 
14,  15).  Not,  however,  in  the  sense  of  foretelling,  but  preaching  (Rom.  x.  13-15), 
as  Peter  prophesied  here.  But  is  this  gift  poured  upon  all  flesh?  No  !  It  is  not 
promised  that  all  God's  sons  and  servants  shall  prophesy ;  for  there  must  be  some 
to  be  prophesied  to.  "  All  flesh  "  may  not  be  cut  into  tongues  ;  some  must  be  left 
for  ears.  Else  a  Cyclopean  Church  would  grow  uj^on  us,  where  all  were  speakers 
and  none  hearers.  (2)  How  then  shall  the  Spirit  be  poured  out  upon  all  tlesh  ? 
The  spirit  of  prophecy  is  not  all  God's  Spirit.  If  that  be  upon  some,  the  spirit  of 
grHce  and  of  supplication  (Zech.  xii.  10)  is  upon  the  rest.  2.  The  end  itself — 
Salvation.      {B}).    Andrewes.)  The    dispensation    of  the   Holy   Ghost   and  its 

distinctive  character : — I.  The  commencement  of  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  By  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  mean  a  certain  period  during' 
which  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  vouchsafed  in  a  peculiar  manner,  as 
contrasted  with  other  ages.  Now,  that  such  a  dispensation  was  to  be  looked  for  is 
perfectly  clear  from  the  passage  before  us.  We  are  distinctly  told  that  there  shall 
be  a  particular  time,  called  the  last  days,  when  God  will  pour  out  the  Spirit  upon 
all  flesb.  The  same  truth  is  necessarily  implied  in  the  Lord's  own  promise,  "  It  is 
expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away,"  &c.  So  again  with  the  remarkable  statement, 
"  The  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given  because  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified."  Of  this 
dispensation  the  Day  of  Pentecost  was  the  commencement,  for  which  there  are  two 
reasons.  1.  The  first  is  seen  in  the  covenant  transaction  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son.  The  Father  covenanting  to  give  the  Son  a  people,  and  all  that  was 
needful  for  their  sajvation,  on  condition  that  the  Son  fulfilled  the  law  of  works. 
The  law  of  works  was  never  abrogated ;  it  pressed  completely  and  eternally  on 
man,  or  on  man's  representative.  Christ  was  that  representative,  and  the  con- 
dition was  absolute  that  He  should  fulfil  the  law,  or  salvation  never  could  visit 
man's  lost  race.  But  salvation  is  dependent  on  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The 
first  effect  of  the  great  covenant  work,  therefore,  must  be  the  gift  of  the  Spirit. 
Till  that  was  accomplished,  Christ  had  no  claim  upon  the  Father  for  the  gift  of 
the  Spirit.  Hence  we  read,  "  The  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given  because  Jesus 
was  not  yet  glorified."  2.  It  relates  to  the  work  that  the  Holy  Ghost  himself  had 
to  do.  "  He  shall  glorify  Me,"  said  Jesus,  "  for  He  shall  take  of  Mine  and  shall 
show  it  unto  you."  Now,  the  things  of  Christ  are  the  very  things  He  accomplished 
on  earth,  whereby  He  purchased  that  Spirit.  However  the  Holy  Ghost  might  in 
olden  times  have  given  a  sort  of  foretaste  and  instalment  of  what  was  to  result 
from  the  finished  work  of  Christ  it  was  not  until  that  work  was  accomplished, 
either  that  the  Father  was  disposed  to  give,  or  Christ  entitled  to  claim  the  Spirit, 
or  that  the  Holy  Sjiirit  had  the  materials  to  work  with,  which  He  now  employs  for 
the  enrichment  of  the  soul,  the  introduction  of  it  iuto  union  with  Jesus,  and  its 
final  exaltation  into  everlasting  glory.  II.  The  character  of  the  operations  op 
the  Holy  Ghost.  1.  In  regard  to  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  during  this 
dispensation  generally,  we  have  an  illustration  in  our  text,  "  I  will  pour  out  My 
Spirit  upon  all  flesh."  Another  illustration  is,  "  I  will  open  rivers  in  dry  places." 
Look  at  the  pouring  out  of  the  streams  from  heaven  when  the  rain  comes  down, 
how  varied  in  its  measure  and  its  operation  !  Sometimes  it  comes  down  in  a 
gentle,  soft,  tiny  shower.  Then  again,  the  windows  of  heaven  seemed  to  be  opened, 
and  we  have  a  deluge.  Or  trace  the  course  of  a  river  through  the  valley.  Now  it 
is  reduced  to  a  small,  silvery  thread,  and  then  it  opens  out,  expands,  overflows  its 
banks,  and  irrigates  the  country  all  round.  Then  it  narrows  itself,  and  you  have 
the  silvery  thread  again  ;  but  the  stream  still  runs  on.  The  difference  is  in  the 
measurement,  degree,  and  expansion.  Now  what  has  been  the  fact  in  regard  to 
the  Holy  Ghost  under  this  dispensation  ?  Has  it  not  been  precisely  that  which  is 
illustrated  by  a  river?  Look  back  to  the  very  commencement  of  it  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost.  The  Holy  Ghost  came  down  on  the  twelve,  and  three  thousand  were 
added  to  the  Church.     There  the  river  was  broad  and  expansive,  the  shower  coming 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  167 

down  from  heaven  copiously.  Shortly  after  that  we  have  two  thousand  more. 
Then  we  read  no  more  of  this  kind  of  thing — the  river  narrows.  "  Some  believed 
the  word  spoken,  and  some  believed  not "  ;  "  some  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
some  blasphemed."  And  so  it  went  on  for  a  considerable  time,  varying  in  degree 
and  expanse,  till  the  time  of  the  Dark  Ages.  Then  it  ran  like  a  little  silvery 
thread ;  the  mass  of  the  world  was  overrun  with  darkness,  and  evil  and  super- 
stition. Still,  in  some  valleys  and  out-of-the-way  places,  we  know  that  the  work 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  was  progressing.  The  river  never  ceased  to  flow,  however 
narrow  it  was.  Thus  it  ran  on  for  some  centuries ;  and  what  followed  ?  The  great 
Reformation.  The  river  then  broke  out  into  an  immense  expanse,  overflowed  the 
country  all  around,  and  irrigated  the  neighbourhood.  Then  again  did  the  river 
condense,  and  then  came  the  time  of  the  Puritans  ;  a  mighty  movement  there  was, 
and  multitudes  were  gathered  into  the  fold  of  Christ.  Again  did  this  genial  shower 
apparently  cease,  or  the  river  narrowed,  and  so  it  continued  for  some  time.  But 
once  more  did  the  gracious  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  break  out  in  the  days  of 
"Whitfield  and  Wesley,  and  Venn  and  Newton  ;  there  was  a  mighty  outpouring  of 
the  grace  of  God,  and  multitudes  were  gathered  into  the  Church.  The  river 
narrowed  again,  but  it  has  gathered  strength  once  more,  and  now  we  stand  amazed 
at  what  the  Lord  is  doing  at  home  and  abroad.  2.  In  regard  to  His  particular 
operations  as  contrasted  with  those  of  former  times ;  under  this  dispensation,  and 
the  legal  dispensation.  The  dispensation  of  the  law  closed  at  the  ascension.  That 
lasted  till  Christ  had  fulfilled  all  its  requirements  when  He  said,  "It  is  finished," 
and  brought  in  an  everlasting  righteousness,  and  made  an  end  of  transgression. 
Now,  this  being  the  case,  we  should  expect  to  find  that  the  experience  of  holy  men 
up  to  that  very  time  was  exceedingly  distinct  from  that  of  holy  men  after  that 
time.  So  Paul  forcibly  contrasts  the  Spirit  of  adoption  with  the  spirit  of  bondage, 
and  says,  "  But  we  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba, 
Father."  Now,  did  any  one  under  the  Old  Testament  ever  cry  "Abba,  Father  "  ? 
There  is  no  question  that  they  knew  God  as  God,  as  Jehovah,  as  Almighty ;  but 
they  did  not  know  God  as  Father.  Until  humanity  had  been  consecrated  by  the 
indwelling  of  Deity — until  the  Son  of  God  had  taken  to  His  nature  humanity,  and 
invested  that  humanity  with  power,  and  made  it  a  son  with  Himself — no  other 
human  being  could  become  a  son.  The  sonship  was  dependent  upon  Christ  coming 
into  the  world ;  and  when  He  came  and  accomplished  His  great  work  the  Spirit  of 
God  then  came,  and  the  Spirit  of  adoption  with  it.  Hence,  again,  "  The  Spirit 
bears  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  children  of  God."  Where  did  they  have 
that  assurance  under  the  Old  Testament?  Hence,  again,  "  The  earnest  of  our 
inheritance  "  ;  after  we  have  beheved,  we  are  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise. 
Where  was  that  the  case  under  the  Old  Testament  ?  Did  it  never  strike  you,  in 
examining  the  experience  of  Old  Testament  saints,  what  terror  and  alarm  they 
displayed  in  regard  to  death  ?  There  is  another  point,  viz.,  that  blasphemy  against 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  spoken  of  under  this  dispensation  as  a  damning  sin,  because  in 
proportion  to  the  pi-ivileges  is  the  responsibility  and  condemnation.  A  man  sins 
against  the  Father,  and  blasphemes  ;  there  is  the  blood  of  Christ  to  blot  it  out : 
a  man  sins  against  the  Son,  and  blasphemes;  there  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  bring  him  to  repentance  :  a  mau  sins  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  he  puts 
away  the  only  power  whereby  the  soul  can  be  made  penitent  and  brought  back  to 
Jesus,  in.  The  close  of  the  dispensation.  At  the  end  of  the  prophecy  we 
have  the  close  of  the  dispensation,  "  I  will  show  wonders  in  the  heavens  and  in  the 
earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke."  These  are  the  same  signs  that  are 
spoken  of  by  our  Lord  in  Matthew  xxiv.  and  Luke  xxii.  I  do  not  mean  to  say 
tint  the  Holy  Ghost's  operations  will  not  continue  through  all  eternity ;  they  un- 
questionably will.  All  lioliness  in  the  creature  for  ever  and  ever  must  depend  upon 
the  sanctifying  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  as  soon  as  the  body  of  Jesus 
shall  be  quite  complete,  and  the  bride  formed  in  her  integrity,  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  will  be  done.  But  that  runs  on  necessarily  to  the  very  advent  of  Christ,  for 
we  cannot  exclude  the  glorification  of  the  bodies  of  His  people.  Christ  is  glorified 
in  His  body,  and  every  one  of  His  mystical  body  must  be  like  Him ;  but  He  changes 
them  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Rom.  viii.).  When  that  shall  be  done,  that 
will  be  the  end  of  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Church  will  then  be 
the  monument  of  the  eternal  love  of  the  Father,  of  the  all-sufficient,  perfect  work 
of  Jesus,  and  of  the  life-giving,  sanctifying,  and  God-glorifying  operations  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  {Capel  Mohjneux,B.A.)  Features  of  the  new  dispensation.  I.  The 
PERIOD  OF  THE  NEW  DISPENSATION. — "In  the   last  days,"    an    expression    which 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

covers  an  indefinite  length  of  time.  It  also  marks  a  "  new  departure "  in  the 
•world's  all'airs.  Up  to  this  all  had  been  preparatory,  and  the  privileges  of  God's 
people  only  partially  apprehended.  It  is  to  end  in  "  the  notable  day  of  the  Lord  " 
which  will  wind  up  one  portion  of  Christ's  administration.  II,  The  univers.mity 
OF  ITS  PKiviLEGES.  The  Spirit  is  given  to  all  mankind.  This  discloses  the 
rationale  of  Christian  missions.  He  is  already  where  missionaries  desire  to  be. 
This  also  discloses  the  grounds  of  confidence  for  those  who  seek  the  salvation  of 
tlie  young,  for  the  Spirit  is  already  graciously  working  before  they  can  grasp  the 
simplest  truths  of  the  gospel.  The  text  proceeds  to  apply  this  principle  par- 
ticularly to  men  and  women,  old  and  young,  and  all  classes  of  society  are  thus 
reached  again,  and  the  great  privileges  of  the  gospel  placed  within  the  reach  of 
every  class.  This  universality  is  a  great  rebuke  to  the  vanity  which  sets  up 
castes  and  distinctions.  III.  The  spiritual  equality  which  marks  it.  The  gift  of 
the  spirit  is  bestowed — 1.  On  women  as  well  as  men.  "Your  sons  and  your 
daughters,"  &c.  In  heathenism  woman  has  generally  been  oppressed.  Under 
Judaism  she  had  but  partial  privileges.  Miriam,  Deborah,  &c.,  were  exceptions 
which  with  other  things  seemed  to  indicate  that  woman  was  on  her  way  to  her 
true  position.  But  under  Christianity  she  attains  equality  with  man  (Gal.  iii.  28). 
2.  On  the  young  as  well  as  the  old.  Many  forms  of  heathenism  have  neglected  the 
aged,  and  ill-treated  parents  advanced  in  years ;  Christianity  regards  them  with 
veneration.  Equally  distinctive  of  Christianity  is  the  practical  recognition  of  the 
piety  of  childhood.  3.  On  servants  as  well  as  on  masters.  In  Christianity  there 
is  no  difference  between  bond  and  free.  IV.  It  is  a  period  of  waiting.  It  is  to 
continue  till  "  the  notable  day  of  the  Lord."  During  this  period  the  Church  waits 
for  the  Lord's  coming,  and  for  the  final  subjection  of  all.  The  end  v/aited  for  will 
be  marked  by  prodigies.  There  were  wonders  when  Christ  first  came,  there  will  be 
greater  when  He  comes  the  second  time.  V.  It  is  distinguished  by  a  glorious 
EVANGEL  (verse  21).  Here  we  have — 1.  A  recognition  of  man's  great  need.  2.  An 
offer  made  on  a  condition  which  is  natural.  "  Whosoever  shall  call."  Sin  causes 
misery,  and  misery  a  cry  for  help.  3.  A  sure  promise  of  salvation.  (TF.  Hudson.) 
The  promise  kept : — The  events  of  this  chapter  are  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of 
our  Saviour  in  Luke  xxiv.  49  ;  Acts  i.  4.  But  Peter  recognises  here  the  fulfilment 
of  an  earlier  promise  (ver.  16).  The  same  Spiiit  which  spake  in  the  tongues  of  the 
apostles,  and  wrought  effectually  in  the  hearts  of  their  hearers  also  spake  by  the 
prophets.  The  promise  was  thus  fulfilled,  but  not  exhausted;  it  was  but  the 
beginning  of  that  work  of  preaching,  and  that  mighty  answering  work  in  men's 
hearts  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit  was  just  as  much  the  life  and  the  secret  as  of  tho 
wonders  of  Pentecost.  I.  The  promise  and  its  fulfilment.  1.  "  Promise,"  is  one 
of  the  most  distinguished  features  of  this  Book  ;  so  that  if  you  want  to  contrast  in 
the  strongest  way  the  Scriptures  with  the  sacred  books  of  other  natit)ns  you  might 
pitch  upon  this  and  say,  "  The  Scriptures  are  the  Book  of  God's  promises  to  men." 
And  "  promise,"  you  know  also,  is  the  main  link  of  human  life  and  society.  "  I 
promise  to  pay  " — if  the  breath  of  suspicion  could  dim  those  words  upon  a  thin 
strip  of  paper  the  whole  fabric  of  commerce  and  social  life  would  be  shaken.  The 
bride  and  the  bridegroom  stand  side  by  side  in  God's  house,  and  when  the  manly 
"  I  will  "  has  been  echoed  by  the  softer  but  not  hss  earnest  and  serious  "  I  will  " 
what  has  happened  ?  Two  lives  which  a  few  minutes  ago  were  separated  are  now 
bound  together,  "until  death  do  them  part."  The  little  child  says,  "Promise 
father,  promise  mother,"  and  when  the  father  or  the  mother  has  promised  the  little 
child  soon  learns  to  know  that  it  has  a  hold  that  cannot  be  broken.  Well,  then, 
when  we  say  that  the  Bible  is  the  Bonk  of  God's  promises,  we  mean  that  God 
has  come  down  into  the  circle  of  human  duty ;  that  you  can  go  and  present  a 
cheque  payable  at  demand  on  the  treasury  of  infinite  mercy  and  almighty  power  ; 
that  the  child  of  God  can  go  to  God  and  say,  "  My  Father,  Thou  hast  promised, 
now,  therefore,  do  as  Thou  hast  said."  There  is  a  bond  between  the  Eternal  God 
and  the  feeblest  soul  that  trusts  Him,  stronger  than  the  bond  which  holds  our 
world  to  its  central  sun.  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  His  word  shall 
not  pass  away.  2.  W^e  cannot  fix  the  exact  date  of  this  promise  of  Joel ;  but  we 
gather  from  the  fact  that  Amos,  in  the  reign  of  King  Uzziah,  begins  by  a  quotation 
from  Joel  that  Joel  was  an  older  projihet.  The  substance  of  his  prophecy  had  been, 
in  a  sense,  anticipated  perhaps  eight  hundred  years  or  more  by  Moses,  when  he  said, 
••  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were  prophets,  and  that  the  Lord  would 
pour  out  His  Spirit  upon  them  " ;  but  to  Joel  was  given  the  high  honour  of 
announcing  that  so   it   should  be,  that   God  was   going  to   answer  that   prayer. 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  169 

A  generation  later  we  find  the  promise  beautifully  and  bountifully  enlarged  by 
Isaiah  (xliv.  3-5) ;  but  to  Joel  seems  to  have  been  given  this  signal  honour  to  be 
the  first  to  sound  out  sweet  and  clear  this  note  of  promise.  Perhaps  eight 
hundred  years  passed  away,  and  that  promise  stood  there  upon  the  page  in  what 
was  becoming  a  dead  language,  unfulfilled  and  unexplained — as  long  as  from  the 
days  of  William  the  Conqueror  to  the  days  of  Queen  Victoria — and  the  unbeliever 
could  point  to  it  and  say,  "What  do  you  make  of  that?  What  is  the  value  of 
a  promise  that  is  never  accomplished,  a  propliecy  that  the  centuries  bring  no 
nearer  to  fulfilment  ?  "  Generations  came  and  went,  aud  pruphets  greater  than 
Joel  rose  up,  fulfilled  their  course,  and  departed.  Great  religious  revolutions, 
reforms,  revivals  took  i^lace,  then  they  were  followed  by  fresh  outbursts  of  irreligion, 
fresh  victories  of  unbelief  and  profligacy,  and  atheism.  Alas !  the  whole  structure 
seems  to  have  broken  down.  But  all  this  meant  no  delay,  no  unfaithfulness.  In 
the  fulness  of  time  Peter  was  able  to  point  to  this  glorious  fulfilment,  and  to  say, 
♦'Jesus,  whom  you  have  crucified,  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted,  hath 
shed  forth  this  which  you  now  see  and  hear — 'this  is  that  which  was  spoken 
by  the  prophet  Joel.' "  3,  And  so,  across  the  long  ages  God  reaches  out 
the  closed  hand  of  promise,  filled  with  sealed-up  blessings  to  keep  faith  from 
fainting,  to  encourage  patience  and  hope.  Then,  just  at  the  appointed  moment, 
when  the  dial  points,  when  the  hour  of  His  purpose  strikes,  He  opens  it,  and  gives 
a  fresh  starting  point  for  new  faith.  Unfulfilled  prophecy  Peter  compares  to  a 
light  shining  in  a  dark  place,  a  light  that  tries  our  eyes  almost  as  much  as  it 
enlightens  tbem — we  pore  in  vain  over  the  dimly-illuminated  truth,  The  fulfilled 
word  the  same  apostle  compares  to  the  sunrise,  the  dawn  of  the  day,  and  the  rising 
of  the  day-star.  Time  and  experience  at  the  appointed  hour  set  their  seal  to  the 
declaration  that  God  is  true.  4.  Let  me  say  a  word  to  my  younger  friends.  Let 
me  urge  you  to  give  great  attention  to  this  practical  evidence  of  the  truth  and  inspira- 
tion of  God's  Word,  which  you  may  find  in  the  actual  fulfilment  of  God's  promises. 
A  distinct  prediction  pointing  for  hundreds  of  years  to  an  event  that  could  not  be 
foreseen  by  mere  human  reasoning,  and  then  the  fulfilment  in  God's  providence 
of  that  prediction  betokens  a  power  above  and  behind  and  within  man.  Now  is 
not  this  perfectly  plain,  that  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  did  claim  to  pledge 
God  to  these  two  things — viz.,  the  sending  of  a  Saviour  in  whom  all  nations  should 
be  blessed,  and  the  bestowment  upon  all  flesh  of  His  Holy  Spirit  ?  The  New 
Testament  is  just  the  record  of  the  fulfilment  of  those  two  promises ;  and  so  is  the 
whole  history  of  the  Church.  II.  God  is  fulfilling  His  promise  to-dat.  Not 
that  we  see  such  proofs  as  we  here  read  of  ;  our  senses  are  not  amazed  with  the 
wonders  like  those  of  the  days  of  Pentecost ;  but  do  not  forget  that  one  soul  really 
converted  to  God  is  just  as  much  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  one  thousand  or 
three  thousand.  To  pray  the  prayer  of  faith  ;  to  understand  God's  truth  ;  to  have 
in  reality  the  temper  of  humility,  penitence,  and  unreserved  consecration ;  these 
are  just  as  truly  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  tongues  of  fire  and  all  the 
miracles  that  followed.  I  am  sometimes  afraid  that  we  may  offer  prayers  for  the 
fulfilment  of  this  very  promise,  which  are  rather  the  prayers  of  unbelief  than  the 
prayers  of  faith.  Do  we  not  err  often  in  our  expectations  of  the  limits  in  which 
God  will  fulfil  His  promise  ?  His  promise  is  so  wide,  taking  in  the  whole  Church 
and  all  mankind ;  it  is  so  far-raaching,  running  down  the  whole  channel  of  human 
history,  that  we  have  no  business  to  expect  it  to  be  exhausted  in  our  time,  in  our 
nation,  in  our  parish  ;  and  yet  if  it  be  not,  do  not  we  sometimes  pray  as  if  God 
were  forgetting  His  promise,  or  were  unfaithful  to  it  ?  Thus  we  dishonour  God 
and  discourage  our  brethren  and  ourselves.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  think  we  ought 
to  shut  our  eyes  to  any  of  the  facts  that  are  around  us,  even  the  darkest,  or  our 
ears  to  the  bitter  cry  that  may  rise  from  the  great  city,  or  from  the  lonely  village  ; 
but  do  not  let  us  shut  our  eyes,  either,  to  what  God  is  doing  amongst  us.  If  we 
look  only  at  the  tendencies  of  human  nature,  only  at  the  set  and  tide  and  drift  of 
events,  it  is  pretty  easy  to  make  a  dark  forecast,  easy  to  say  that  the  signs  of  the 
times  denote  the  prevalence  and  triumph  of  those  masterly  evils,  superstition, 
atheism,  anarchy — that  is,  if  you  leave  out  of  sight  God's  promise  and  God's  Spirit. 
But  that  is  just  what  you  must  not  do,  and  have  no  right  to  do.  We  are  crying  with 
the  prophet,  "  Oh,  that  Thou  wouldst  rend  the  heavens  and  come  down,  and  that 
the  mountains  would  flow  down  at  Thy  presence."  But  when  He  only  touches  the 
hills  and  they  smoke — that  is  the  finger  of  God.  Perhaps  we  are  looking  for  the 
earthquake,  the  fire,  the  tempest;  but  we  fail,  it  may  be,  to  hear  the  "  still,  small 
voice  " ;  yet  that  is  the  voice  of  God's  Spirit.     Whence  comes  the  gentle,  quiet, 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

but  yet  mighty  and  irresistible  outburst  and  continual  growth  of  missionary  zeal 
and  missionary  labour  and  missionary  sacrifice,  which  is  carrying  the  gospel  from 
year  to  year  more  completely  into  the  most  central  foitresses  of  heathenism  ?  Zeal 
and  labour,  which  have  made  the  Bible  already  a  known  book  in  all  the  leading 
lauf^uages  of  the  world — what  is  this  ?  Is  not  this  the  very  breath  and  presence 
of  God's  Spirit  ?  Then,  in  what  we  call  the  outside  world,  there  are  great  waves  of 
sympathy  with  this  Christian  work  ;  and  whence  come  they  but  from  the  contagion 
of  Christian  love  and  faith  and  hope,  the  very  breath  of  God's  Spirit?  III.  God 
WILL  FULFIL  His  PEOMisE.  "  The  last  days  "  are  a  wide  margin.  It  is  not  for  us 
to  measure  how  far  that  season  of  fulfilment  may  stretch  out,  or  grow  weary  or 
unbelieving  because  of  its  stretching  out  longer  than  we  expect.  When  that  morn- 
ing broke  over  the  waters  of  Galilee,  and  the  disciples  looked  weary  and  sadly  at 
one  another  and  at  their  dripping  and  empty  nets,  supposing  one  had  said  to  them, 
"Priends,  in  less  than  half-an-hour  that  empty  net  will  be  so  full  that  you  won't 
be  able  to  draw  it  on  board" — why,  they  would  have  said,  "If  God  would  send  an 
angel  from  heaven  to  be  our  fisherman  perhaps  it  might  be  so."  But  who  is  that 
walking  on  the  shore  ?  A  stranger  ?  Hark !  He  speaks.  "  Cast  on  the  right  side 
of  the  ship,  and  ye  shall  find."  If  it  had  not  been  for  the  night  of  toil,  do  you 
think  there  would  have  been  any  morning  of  joy  ?  No.  It  is  not  for  us, 
to  say  how  long  the  night  of  toil  is  to  be.  We  serve  the  same  Master,  our 
faith  rests  upon  the  same  promise ;  we  have  the  same  work,  and  we  are  responsible  ' 
for  toil,  for  faithfulness,  for  prayer,  for  patience,  not  for  results ;  the  results  are 
God's.  Can  you  say,  "I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost?"  Why,  then,  fear  not, 
doubt  not.  Let  us  bring  to  God's  treasury  not  the  mere  tithes  of  corn  and  wine 
and  gold  and  silver,  but  that  which  will  make  all  these  seem  just  little  gifts  thrown 
in  by  the  way — the  tithes,  the  first-fruits  of  consecrated  hearts,  and  hallowed  lives,  and 
affections  aglow  with  the  love  of  Christ,  and  then  we  may  prove  Him  and  see  if  He 
will  not  pour  out  a  blessing  so  that  there  should  not  be  room  to  contain.  {E.R.Conder, 
D.D.)  The  jMssibilities  of  life  : — There  are  two  gifts  or  faculties  which  every  one  who 
would  be  a  power  among  their  fellows  must  do  their  utmost  to  cultivate.  The  first  is 
the  power  of  insight  into  the  circumstances  of  their  own  time  and  place.  The  second 
is  the  power  of  foresight.  After  we  have  convinced  ourselves  of  how  and  ivhat  things 
are,  we  shall  then  try  to  see  what  they  may  become ;  how  and  to  what  extent  they 
may  be  changed  for  the  better.  To  see  the  world  as  it  is,  is  only  to  convince  our- 
selves that  it  is  very  different  from  what  it  ought  to  be.  To  begin  with  ourselves. 
No  true  Christian  can  be  contented  with  his  present  spiritual  condition.  Like  St. 
Paul,  the  more  we  know  of  ourselves  the  more  reason  shall  we  have  to  confess  that 
"  we  have  not  already  attained,  neither  are  already  made  perfect."  And  if  the  fact 
is  true  of  ourselves,  it  is  no  less  true  of  the  men  and  things  around  us.  We  learn 
that  the  lives  and  circumstances  of  others  stand  in  need  of  more  or  less  improve- 
ment. Let  us  notice  how  the  text  brings  thepe  thoughts  before  us.  The  apostles 
had  been  very  intimate  with  Jesus.  The  standard  of  life  inculcated  by  Him  was  an 
extremely  lofty  one  ;  to  have  had  that  standard  constantly  before  them  must  have 
shown  the  disciples  how  terribly  everything  around  them  fell  short  of  it.  But 
merely  to  see  this  great  gulf,  this  awful  difference,  might  lead  tlrem  to  despair. 
How  was  the  chasm  to  be  bridged  ?  How  was  the  actual  to  be  made  the  ideal  ?  It 
will  help  us  to  answer  this  question  if  we  remember  that  St.  Peter  uttered  the 
words  of  the  text  on  the  very  day  on  which  God  poured  out  upon  the  apostles  the 
great  gift  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  They  had  now  received  the  promised  gift,  a  new 
energy,  a  new  life,  the  spirit  of  truth,  the  spirit  of  love.  The  spirit  of  truth  put 
everything  in  its  true  light.  They  saw  how  dark,  how  sad,  how  imperfect,  how 
sin-staiued  was  life  and  conduct.  But  the  spirit  of  love  came  with  the  spirit  of 
truth,  and  impelled  them  at  once  to  try  to  rectify  what  needed  alteration.  Notice, 
the  method  they  employed  was  the  same  as  that  of  their  Master — first  to  teach,  and 
then  to  put  their  teaching  into  practice.  And  with  what  sort  of  reception  were  they 
met  ?  With  very  much  the  same  kind  that  has  generally  fallen  to  -the  lot  of  the 
reforaier.  Men  listened  to  them,  and  then  derided  them.  They  were  regarded  as 
idle  visionaries,  as  wild  and  foolish  dreamers.  St.  Peter  steps  forward  as  the 
apologist  of  his  brethren.  The  present  was  but  witnessing  the  fulfilment  of  an 
ancient  Jewish  prophet's  prediction.  Drunk  the  apostles  were  not— 7«e/c  dreamers, 
mere  visionaries  they  were  not.  But  they  had  dreamt  a  dream,  and  seen  a  vision. 
They  saw  things  as  they  were,  and  as  they  might  be.  They  saw  that  to  the  great 
majority  of  their  fellow  countrymen  religion  was  little  better  than  a  hollow  mockery ; 
something  almost  wholly  external,  and  having  little  connection  with  their  lives  and 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  Ill 

conduct.     This  they  saw,  but  they  also  saw  a  vision  and  dreamt  a  dream  of  a  better 
day,  of  a  brighter,  holier,  and  happier,  future,  of  a  more  real  religious  tone,  of  a 
higher  and  nobler  morality.     They  were  not  mere  dreamers,  mere  visionaries — the 
dream  and  the  vision  were  useful  only  as  revelations  of  an  ideal  which  they  must 
endeavour  to  realise.     To  receive  a  vision  of  better  things  was  only  a  call  to  turn 
the  vision  into  a  reality.     The  gift  of  insight  issued  in  the  call  to  repentance  ;  the 
gift  of  foresight  was  the  summons  to  work.      It  may  have  been  the  lot  of  some  of 
us  to  have  seen  a  vision  made  a  reality ;  we  may  even  have  had  the  blessing  and 
privilege  to  have  been  in  some  small  degree  instrumental  in  its  realisation.     We 
may  have  known  one  who  was  formerly  intemperate,  now  living  a  sober  life  ;  one 
formerly  impure,  now  feeling  from  experience  the  truth  of  the  words,  "  Blessed" — 
that  is,  happy — "  are  the  pure  in  heart"  ;  one  formerly  dishonest,  now  getting  his 
or  her  living  by  hard  and  honest  labour,  and  able  to  look  the  world  in  the  face. 
Yet  if  some  little  has  been  done,  the  unaccomplished  is  almost  beyond  measure. 
We  must  try  to  realise  what  humanity  was  meant  to  be,  whHt  Jesus  would  have  it 
to  be.     The  words  of  the  old  prophet  can  never  be  too  often  in  our  ears,  "  I  will 
make  a  man  more  precious  than  fine  gold,  even  a  man  than  the  golden  wedge  of 
Ophir."      To   have  realised    that    that    awful    threat  was   becoming  verily  the 
promise   of    a    blessing,   is  in    itself    to    have    seen   a   vision.      Man   is   indeed 
precious ;    each  human   soul,   each    human    heart    and    character    is    infinitely 
precious  in  God's   sight,  for   the   Lord   Jesus   died   to    save   it.      (IF.  E.    Chad- 
wick,   M.A.)  Your  young   men    shall  see   visions. — A   young    man's  vision 
(missionary  sermon) : — 1.  Many  visions  have  led  to  the  most  disastrous  results. 
When  Napoleon  had  a  vision  of    a  universal  monarchy   over  which  he    should 
preside,     he     drenched     the     lands      in     blood.       Many     visions     have     been 
wretchedly  delusive.     Men  have  dreamed  of  finding  the  fairy  pleasure  in  the  dark 
forest  of  sin.     Many  dreams  have    been  enervating.     Many  pass  all  their  days 
building  castles  in  the  air.     With  fine  capacities  they  have  drivelled  away  existence : 
as  their  theory  of  life  was  born  of  smoke,  so  the  result  of  their  lives   has  been 
a  cloud.     2.  For  all  this,  good  and  grand  visions  are  not  unknown  which  came 
from  the  excellent  glory,  and  which,  when  young  or  old  men  have  seen  them,  have 
fiUad  them  with  wisdom,  and  grace,  and  holiness.     Such  visions  are  given  to  men 
whose  eyes  have  been  illumined  by  the  Holy  Spirit.     3.  All  Divine  things,  when 
they  first  come  to  men  from  the  Lord,  are  as  visions,  because  man  is   so   little 
prepared  to  believe  God's  thoughts  and  ways,  that  he  cannot  think  them  to  be  real. 
They   appear  •to   us  to   be   too  great,  too  good  to  be  real.     It  must  be  so  while 
Jehovah's  ways  are  higher  than  our  ways,  and  his   thoughts  than  our  thoughts. 
We  must  take  care  that  we  do  not  neglect  heavenly  monitions  through  fear  of  being 
considered  visionary  ;    we  must  not  be  staggered  even  by  tbe  dread  of  being  styled 
fanaticul,  for  to  stifle  a  thought  from  God  is  no  mean  sin.     4.  How  much  of  good 
in  this  world  would  have   been  lost  if   good  men  had   quenched  the  first  half- 
fashioned  thoughts  which  have  flitted  before  them.     Suppose  Luther  had  taken  the 
advice  of  his  teacher  when  he  said  to  him,  "Go  thy  way,  silly  monk!  and  pray 
God,  and  if  it  be  His  will  He  will  reform  the  abuses  of  this  Church,  but  what  hast 
thou  to  do  with  it  "  ?     And  George  Fox,  that  most  eminent  of  dreamers,  where  had 
been  all  the  testimonies  for  a  spiritual  religion,  all  the  holy  influences  for  benevo- 
lence, for  peace,  for  anti-slavery,  which  have  streairied   upon  this  world  through 
the  agency  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  if  the  wild   Quaker  had  been  content  to  let 
his  imx^ressions  come  and  go  and  be  forgotten  ?     These  things,  which  nowadays  are 
ordinary  Chiistian  doctrines,  were  considered  in  his  day  to  be  but  the  prattle  of 
fanatics  ;  even  as  the  reforms  wbich  some  of  us  shall  live  to  see  are  denounced  as 
revolutionary,  or  ridiculed  as  Utopian.     5.  Many   suggestions  which  come   from 
God  to  men,  are  not  so  much  visions  to  them  as  they  are  to  the  outside  world. 
And  need  we  wonder  at  this  ?     Why,  men  of  science  and  art  have  to  endure  the 
same  ordeal.     Stephenson  declares  that  he  will  make  a  machine  which  will  run 
without  horse-power,  at   the   rate   of  twelve   miles  an  hour — and  how  the   Tory 
ben-hes  of  the  House  of  Commons  roared  at  the  man  as  a  born  fool !     6.  I,  too, 
have  seen  a  vision.     I  have  seen  missionary  spirit  in  England,  awakened,  and  re- 
vived.    I  have   seen — the  wish   was  father  to  the  si^ht — the   ardour  of  our  first 
missionary  days  return.  I.  Let  us  justify  ouk  vision.  That  which  we  have  dreamed 
of  is — 1.  Evidently  needed.     There  is  a  general  flagging  in  missionary  inteiest; 
and  albeit  ttjat  the  funds  may  not  much  have  fallen  off,  yet  the  annual  recurrence 
of  a  debt,  together  with  other  matters,  goes  to  show  that  missionary  zeal  needs 
rekindling.     This  results  partly  from  the  fact  that  the  novelty  of  the  thing  has 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

gone  off,  and  partly  because  we  have  had  few  very  startling  incidents  of  late  to 
evoke  a  display  of  enthusiasm.  That  the  missionary  fire  exists  is  certain,  for  the 
heart  of  the  Church  is  alive  ;  but  it  is  slumbering,  somehow.  If  there  be  any  one 
point  in  which  the  Christian  Church  ought  to  keep  its  fervour  at  a  white  heat,  it  is 
concerning  missions.  How  can  we  expect  in  such  an  enterprise  that  we  shaU  ever 
succeed  if  any  of  our  strength  be  left  unused  ?  Depend  upon  it,  that  the  flagging  of 
zeal  at  home  acts  like  a  canker  abroad,  and  when  the  heart  of  Christianity  ia 
England  does  not  throb  vigorously,  every  single  limb  of  the  missionary  body  feels 
the  decHne.  2.  It  is  very  possible  that  it  may  be  realised.  It  is  not  a  thing  too 
hard  to  look  for.  It  is  far  harder  surely  to  establish  missions  than  to  revive  them. 
If  we  will  but  inquire  into  the  causes  of  decline  we  shall  not  find  them,  I  think,  to 
be  very  deep,  nor  to  be  difficult  of  remedy.  Lovingly  correcting  errors,  carefully  re- 
moving excrescences,  and  boldly  advancing,  the  stone  shall  be  rolled  away  from 
the  S'  pulchre  before  we  reach  it,  or  if  not,  in  God's  name,  and  by  His  strength,  we 
will  roll  it  away  ourselves.  3.  It  is  very  probable  ;  for  so  it  always  has  been.  If 
ever  God's  Church  has  declined  for  a  little  while,  unexpectedly  there  has  been 
yielded  a  season  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  He  is  great  at 
surprises :  His  best  wine  last  amazes  us  all.  When  the  devil  is  most  secure  upon 
his  throne,  then  God  springs  a  mme,  and  blows  his  empire  into  atoms.  4.  It  is 
solemnly  required  of  us.  What  are  our  personal  obligations  to  the  Crucified  ? 
Did  our  Saviour  slumber  in  His  life-work  ?  Was  He  tardy  in  His  service  for  our 
redemption  ?  Then  might  we  grow  lax.  But  He  claims  of  i;s,  according  to  our 
measure,  the  same  steadfastness  of  resolve,  and  perseverance  of  purpose,  and 
sacrifice  of  self.  II.  Let  us  peoceed  to  elaborate  the  vision.  My  dream 
seemed  to  take  this  shape.  1.  In  order  that  missionary  work  should  be  reformed, 
revived,  and  carried  on  with  energy  and  with  hope  of  success,  it  seemed  necessary 
that  especially  among  our  young  members  there  should  be  a  revival  of  intense  and 
earnest  prayer,  and  anxious  sympathy  with  the  missionary  work.  The  power  of 
prayer  can  never  be  overrated.  They  who  cannot  serve  God  by  preaching,  need 
not  regret  it  if  they  can  be  mighty  in  prayer.  The  true  strength  of  the  Church  lies 
there.  If  a  man  can  but  pray,  he  can  do  anything.  He  that  knows  how  to  over- . 
come  the  Lord  in  prayer,  has  heaven  and  earth  at  his  disposal.  2.  Next,  if  our 
young  men  who  see  visions  will  follow  up  their  prayers  with  practical  effort,  then 
we  shall  see  in  our  Churches  a  larger  and  more  efficient  staff  of  collectors  and  con- 
tributors. We  should  then  find  men  who  would  give  of  their  substance  as  a  matter 
of  principle,  so  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  should  never  have  an  empty  exchequer. 
3.  Up  till  now  my  dream  has  been  reasonable,  yuu  will  say.  I  will  now  be  more 
visionary.  If  we  were  all  praying  for  missions,  and  all  giving  for  their  support,  it 
might  be  very  well  asked  of  us,  "What  do  ye  more  than  others?"  for  what 
Eomanist  is  there  who  is  not  zealous  for  the  spread  of  bis  religion  ?  What 
heathen  is  there  who  does  not  give  quite  as  much  as  any  of  us  give,  ay,  and  a  great 
deal  more  than  we  give,  to  his  superstitions  ?  But,  supposing  next  to  this,  that 
there  should  be  a  number  of  yonng  men  who  have  been  trained  in  the  same 
sanctuary,  nurtured  in  the  same  Church,  who  should  meet  together  and  say  to  one 
another,  "  Now,  we  are  in  business,  and  God  is  prospering  us,  but  stiil  we  trust  we 
are  never  going  to  permit  ourselves  to  be  swallowed  up  in  a  mere  worldly  way  of 
living;  now,  what  ought  we  to  do  for  missions?"  And  suppose  the  inquiry 
should  be  put,  "  Is  there  one  amongst  us  who  could  devote  himself  to  go  and  teach 
the  heatheu  for  us?  As  we,  most  of  us,  may  not  have  the  ability,  or  do  not  feel 
called  to  the  work,  is  there  one  out  of  twelve  of  us  young  men  who  feels  called  to 
go?"  Let  us  make  it  a  matter  of  piayer,  and  when  the  Holy  Ghost  saith, 
"  Separate  So-and-So  to  the  work,"  then  we,  the  other  eleven  who  remain,  will  say 
to  him,  "  Now,  brother,  you  cannot  stop  at  home  to  make  your  fortune  ;  you  are 
now  giving  yourself  up  to  a  very  arduous  enterprise,  and  we  will  support  you ;  you  go 
down  into  the  pit,  we  will  hold  the  rope,  and  bear  the  expense  among  ourselves."  I 
wish  we  had  such  godly  clubs  as  these.  Why,  on  such  a  plan  as  that,  I  should  think, 
they  would  give  a  hundred  times  as  much  as  ever  they  are  likely  to  give  to  an  im- 
personal society,  or  to  a  man  whose  name  they  only  know,  but  whose  face  they 
never  saw.  4.  Further,  I  have  dreamed  also  that  there  would  spring  up  in  our 
Churches  a  very  large  number  of  young  men  who  would  count  it  to  be  the  very 
highest  ambition  to  give  themselves  up  to  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ  abroad,  and 
who  will  say,  "  The  missionary  society  is  in  debt,  and  cannot  take  us ;  very  well, 
send  me  out,  and  let  me  exercise  my  faith  in  God,  only  having  this  for  my 
comfort,  that  you  will  stand  at  my  back  and  give  me  what  you  can,  while  I  will 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  173 

only  draw  upon  you  for  what  I  cannot  get  for  myself."  I  set  Paul  before  you, 
young  men.  He  was  a  tent-maker,  and  he  earned  his  own  living.  Ate  there  no 
occupations  in  these  days  by  which  a  man  may  earn  his  living,  and  yet  preach  the 
gospel  ?  Are  there  not  to  be  found  physicians  who,  in  China  and  in  India,  would 
not  only  procure  a  subsistence,  but  much  more,  and  might  proclaim  the  gospel  at 
the  same  time?  But  are  there  no  other  occupations?  I  find  men  going  out  to 
India  by  scores,  to  make  their  fortunes,  and  ruin  their  constitutions.  Have  we  no 
young  men  and  women  who  will  preach  the  gospel,  intending  to  use  their  com- 
mercial pursuits  as  a  means  of  introduction  and  support?  HI.  The  realisation 
OF  THIS  vision  ?  It  must  be — 1.  By  each  individual's  own  personal  piety  mounting 
to  the  very  highest  degree  of  elevation.  If  holy  work  be  a  mere  diversion  for  your 
leisure  moments,  you  will  do  nothing ;  you  must  make  a  solemn  occupation  of  it. 
When  the  Christian  Church  glows  in  this  fashion,  it  will  swell  with  an  intense  heat 
like  a  volcano,  whose  tremendous  furnaces  cannot  be  contained  within  itself,  but 
its  sides  begin  to  move  and  bulge,  and  then  after  a  rumbling  and  a  heaving,  a 
mighty  sheet  of  fire  shoots  right  up  to  heaven,  and  afterwards  streams  of  flaming 
lava  run  from  its  red  lips  down,  burning  their  way  along  the  plain  beneath.  Oh  ! 
to  get  such  a  fire  for  God's  cause  into  the  heart  of  the  Christian  Church,  till  she 
bet<an  to  heave  and  throb  with  unquenchable  emotion,  and  then  a  mighty  sheet  of 
the  fire-piayer  should  go  up  towards  heaven,  and  afterwards  the  burning  lava  of 
her  all-conquering  zeal  should  flow  over  all  lands.  2.  By  young  men  and  young 
women  feeding  the  flame  of  their  zeal  with  greater  information  as  to  the 
condition  of  the  world  in  reference  to  our  mission-work.  You  may  not  have 
time  to  get  through  it  all,  but  if  you  read  some  of  it,  I  think  you  will  feel  a  great 
accession  to  your  zeal.  3.  By  keeping  yourselves  right  in  this  matter  by  constant, 
energetic  efforts  in  connection  with  works  at  home.  Those  who  do  not  serve  God 
at  home,  are  of  no  use  anywhere.  It  is  all  very  well  to  talk  about  what  you  would 
do  if  you  could  speak  to  the  Hindoos.  You  will  be  of  no  use  whatever  in  Calcutta, 
unless  you  are  of  use  in  Poplar  or  Bermondsey.  The  human  mind  is  the  same 
everj  where.  See  what  you  can  do  for  Jesus  Christ  in  the  shop,  and  in  that  little 
Bible-class  of  which  you  are  a  member.  Rest  assured  that  no  missionary  ardour 
really  burns  in  the  breast  of  that  man  who  does  not  love  the  souls  of  those  who 
live  in  the  same  house  and  neighbourhood.  4.  But  oh  !  do  make  sure  that  you 
are  saved  yourselves.  Do  make  sure  that  you  yourselves  know  the  Christ  whom 
you  profess  to  teach.  That  missionary-box,  what  is  it  but  an  infamous  sham  if 
you  put  into  it  yrur  offering,  but  withhold  your  heart?  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  visionary  aspect  of  Christianity  (a  sermon  to  young  men): — There  are  two 
periods  in  human  life  to  which  dreams  and  visions  belong — dreams  and  visions,  at 
least,  of  any  persistence  and  depth.  Young  men  naturally  see  visions,  and  old  men 
dream  dreams.  This  visionary  power  is  not  to  be  neglected  or  thought  lightly  of. 
It  is  a  beneficent  power.  It  feeds  practical  efficiency.  All  the  great  enterprises  we 
have  were  once  visions  in  the  brain  of  some  man  or  men.  It  is  the  mighty  dreamers 
who  have  become  the  great  doers.  In  the  listless,  1  e  ivy  eye  of  Chalmers  there  often 
seemed  no  power  of  volition.  He  was  brooding  over  his  visions ;  yet  for  all  this 
brooding — nay,  largely  by  virtue  of  it — he  moved  men,  and  swayed  his  time  as  no  con- 
temporary  Scotchman  did.  It  is  the  enthusiasm  bego'tenin  the  region  of  visions  that 
ultimately  moves  the  machinery  of  the  world.  I.  Visions  that  no  not  come  from 
Christ.  1.  There  are  visions  that  sense  brings  us,  very  bright  and  seductive  at 
times.  They  are  often  dangerous,  but  we  do  not  know  that  they  are  so,  because  we 
love  the  strong  colouring  in  which  they  are  put  before  us.  The  force  of  youthful 
life  tends  to  the  outward  and  sensible,  and  the  sensible  sometimes  lowers  into  the 
sensual.  As  you  love  your  souls,  as  you  love  purity,  as  you  fear  God  and  your 
conscience,  put  these  dreams  of  the  flesh  away  from  you  in  whatsoever  form  they 
come.  2.  Mammon  again  paints  visions  for  a  young  man,  and,  of  course,  with 
unusual  clearness  and  persistence  in  a  commercial  community  like  this  of  ours.  It 
is  foolish  to  speak  disparagingly  of  money.  It  is  a  power  which,  wisely  wielded, 
has  almost  no  limits  in  its  beneficence.  But  it  is  a  very  dangerous  thing.  There- 
fore, if  you  feel  tempted  to  dream  of  bank-notes  and  shares  and  big  speculations,  to 
make  these  your  visions,  I  beseech  you  for  the  sake  of  your  higher  nature  to  beware. 
They  say  that  money  nowadays  can  command  anything,  can  accomplish  wonders. 
It  is  quite  true  ;  but  the  most  wonderful  thing  that  it  does  is  to  metallise  a  human 
Boul.  3.  Closely  allied  to  the  dreams  which  Mammon  weaves  for  us  are  the  visions 
cf  success  in  life.  But  they  are  distinct.  There  are  men  who  are  not  avaricious, 
and  yet  are  ambitious  ;  and  a  young  man  insensible  for  the  most  part  to  bank-notes 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

may  long  for  distinction.  He  has  brain  force  and  nerve  force,  which  give  him  a 
good  hope  of  rising.  Granting  that  such  an  ambition  can  be  honourably  pursued, 
is  it  fit  to  be  our  vision?  What  is  the  typical  si  0  essful  man  generally' like — tender, 
scrupulous,  sympathetic  ?  Is  he  true,  large-hearted  ?  I  don't  think  so.  4.  Many 
of  «s  may  have  had  visions  of  intellectual  eminence,  and  these  are  sometimes  very 
attractive.  We  dream  of  laying  in  stores  of  information,  of  mastering  this  subject 
or  that.  Or,  it  may  be,  we  have  become  absorbed  in  social  questions,  in  politics, 
in  art.  We  feel  our  faculties  expanding,  and  delight  in  their  exercise.  Well, 
those  visions  are  high  and  fair,  but  again,  are  they  the  best  ?  Have  they  power  to 
lift  our  lives,  to  fill  them  to  the  very  end?  Do  they  bring  light  and  healing  in 
trouble  or  sorrow  ?  5.  Then  there  are  visions  of  domestic  happiness.  Such  dreams 
rise  before  our  minds  if  we  have  known  what  love  and  truth  are.  But  is  this 
sufficient  ?  Are  these  best  things  of  earth  good  enough  for  us  ?  They  are  legitimate, 
of  course,  but  not  lasting.  II.  The  inspired  visions.  1.  Christ  brings  visions  of 
purity.  Until  the  world  has  blinded  a  young  man's  eyes  so  that  he  cannot  see, 
there  are  now  and  then  flitting  before  him  images  of  unearthly  purity.  An  unflecked 
garment  in  which  to  clothe  the  soul  he  feels  is  the  most  princely  possession.  Had 
he  only  singleness  of  eye,  a  nature  true  at  the  core,  a  mirror  of  thought  from  which 
the  blots  of  foul  fancy  were  all  away,  his  heart  would  be  strong.  Christ  comes  to 
tell  him  that  this  purity  which  he  sees  glimpses  of  is  no  mere  fancy,  but  a  celestial 
vision  which  has  had  an  embodiment  on  earth,  one  which  may  have  it  again.  2. 
Christ  brings  visions  of  strength  and  heroism.  Nothing  is  fairer  to  drt-am  of  than 
the  power  to  get  out  of  ourselves  and  rise  to  higher  ranges  of  courHge  and  resnlve. 
Christ  brmgs  before  us  a  vision  of  exalted  manhood,  a  dream  of  daring  and  doing 
what  average  men  cannot  do.  Heroism  is  that  quality  of  the  soul  by  virtue  of 
which  a  man  can  carry  the  movements  cf  his  thought  and  will  away  from  the  touch 
of  mean,  self-degrading  motives,  so  that  people  cannot  measure  his  actions  by  the 
standard  of  every-day  life  — by  virtue  of  which  a  man  can  stand  alone  a-.'ainst  the 
world,  if  need  be,  as  Christ  Himself  stood  alone  against  the  world.  This  is  a 
faculty  Christ  Himself  gives  to  men.  3.  But  our  better  dreams  have  more  than 
strength  and  manhood  in  them ;  they  have  self-conquest,  self-denial.  Amid  the  vulgar 
contentment  and  self-seeking  of  society,  we  sometimes  envy  a  life  like  that  of  Living- 
stone, given  for  Africa  and  the  slaves.  But  what  will  give  to  the  faint  outline  of 
these  dreams  substance  and  shape  ?  The  approach  of  Christ  will.  He  makes  cross- 
bearing  and  the  strain  of  the  higher  service  an  easy  thing,  so  that  those  inspired 
by  Him  think  it  unnatural  when  they  have  not  some  difficulties  for  His  sake  to 
meet,  some  cross  for  His  sake  to  bear.  4.  Another  vision  that  sometimes  visits  a 
young  man  is  the  vision  of  usefulness — the  thought  of  exerting  a  wide,  beneficent 
influence.  When  we  do  good  we  find  we  are  blessed.  But  no  man  can  rightly  do 
good  until  Christ  has  taught  him.  Christ  gives  us  ends,  methods,  power.  5.  We 
dream  of  the  future — not  a  future  here  merely,  by  beyond,  elsewhere.  We  refuse 
to  stop  short  at  the  barriers  earth  and  time  erect.  Our  visions  project  themselves 
past  these.  Such  visions  i  tfen  get  very  faint  as  men  grow  older,  and  sometimes  die 
away  altogether.  Thoughts  that  once  soared  towards  the  setting  sun  come  down 
to  earth  like  a  bird  grown  weary  of  the  wing.  It  is  Christ  alone  who  gives  per- 
manence to  such  visions.  We  g^t  from  Him  sudden  flashes  of  the  glory  of  the  new 
Jerusalem.  He  brings  immortality  to  light  in  our  hearts.  {J.  F.  Kioing,  M.A.) 
Visions  realised : — The  vision  of  a  pure  England,  of  a  temperate  England,  of  an 
England  without  grinding  poverty,  heartrending  distress,  ami  free  from  crimes,  the 
very  mention  of  which  make  one's  blood  run  cold,  is  a  noble  vision.  Need  it 
remiia  altogether  a  vision  ?  Was  the  vision  of  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  North 
America  allowed  to  remain  a  vision  ?  Was  the  vision  of  a  system  of  universal 
education  for  our  own  nation  allowed  to  remain  a  vision?  Think  again  of  ihe 
visions  of  the  reformer,  the  scientist,  the  engineer — how  many  of  these  visions 
have  been  realised !  Faith,  energy,  patience,  and  perseverance  have  wrought 
wonders.  Why  should  not  oicr  visions  also  be  realised  ?  What  is  required  is  that 
we  claim  for  ourselves  a  fuller  measure  of  God's  Holy  Spirit — the  spirit  of  love, 
hope,  self-sacrifice,  whereby  we  shall  attain  the  substance  of  the  things  we  hope  for, 
and  shall  witness,  possess,  and  enjoy  the  evidence  of  things  as  yet  unseen  by  the 
natural  mnn,  but  awaiting  in  all  their  glory  to  be  revealed  among  us.  {W.  E. 
Chadwick,  31. A.) 

Ver.  20. — The  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness. — Downfall  of  Christianity  : — 
Solar  eclipse  is  here  proj  he  ied  to  take  place  about  the  time  of  the  destruction  of 


CHAP.  11.]  TIIK  ACTS.  175 

ancient  Jerusalem.  Josephus  says  that  the  prophecy  was  literally  fulfilled. 
Christianity  is  the  sun  of  our  time,  and  men  have  tried,  with  the  vapours  of 
scepticism  and  the  smoke  of  blasphemy,  to  turn  this  sun  into  darkness.  Suppose 
tlie  archangels  of  malice  and  hormr  should  be  allowed  to  extinguisli  and  destroy 
the  sun  in  the  natural  heavens.  They  would  take  the  oceans  from  other  worlds 
and  pour  them  on  this  luminary,  and  the  waters  go  hissing  down  among  the 
ravines  and  the  caverns,  and  there  is  explosion  after  explosion'until  there  are  only 
a  few  peaks  of  fire  left  in  the  sun,  and  these  are  cooling  down  and  going  out  until 
the  vast  continents  of  flame  are  reriuced  to  a  small  acreage  of  fire,  and  that  whitens 
and  cools  off  until  there  are  only  a  few  coals  left,  and  these  are  whitening  and 
going  out  until  there  is  not  a  spark  left  in  all  tlie  mountains  and  valleys  and 
chasms  of  ashes.  An  extinguished  sun.  A  dead  sun.  Let  all  wo"lds  wail  at  the 
stupendous  obsequies.  Of  course,  this  withdrawal  of  the  solfir  light  and  heat 
throws  our  earth  into  a  universal  chill,  and  the  tropics  become  the  temperate,  and 
the  temperate  becomes  the  arctic,  and  there  are  f  oen  rivers,  lakes,  and  oceans. 
Trorn  the  arctic  and  antarctic  regions  the  inhabitants  gather  in  towards  the  centre 
and  find  the  equator  as  the  poles.  The  slain  forests  are  piled  up  into  great  bon- 
fires, and  around  them  gather  the  shivering  villages  and  cities.  The  wealth  of  the 
coal  mines  is  hastily  poured  into  the  furnaces  and  stirred  into  rage  of  combustion, 
but  soon  the  bonfires  begin  to  lower  and  the  furnaces  begin  to  go  out,  and  the 
natives  begin  to  die.  The  great  volcanoes  cease  to  smoke,  and  the  ice  of  hail- 
storms remains  unmelted  in  their  craters.  All  the  flowers  have  breathed  their  last 
breath.  Child  frosted  and  dead  in  the  cradle.  Octogenarian  frosted  and  dead  at 
the  health.  Workman  with  frozen  hands  at  the  hammer  or  frozen  foot  on  the 
shuttle.  Winter  from  sea  to  sea.  The  earth  an  ice-floe,  grinding  against  other 
ice-floes.  The  archangels  of  malice  and  horror  have  done  their  work,  and  now  they 
may  take  their  thrones  of  glacier  and  look  down  upon  the  ruin  they  have  wrought. 
What  the  destruction  of  the  sun  in  the  natural  heavens  would  be  to  our  physical 
earth,  the  destruction  of  Christianity  vpould  be  to  the  moTal  world.  The  sun 
turned  into  darkness.  Infidelity  in  our  time  is  considered  a  great  joke.  I  propose 
to  take  infidelity  out  of  the  realm  of  jocularity  into  one  of  tragedy,  and  show  you 
what  these  men,  if    they  are   successful,  will  accomplish.     It   will   be — I.  The 

COMPLETE     AND     UNUTTERABLE     DEGRADATION     OF     WOMANHOOD.       In    all      Communities 

where  Christianity  has  been  dominant,  woman's  condition  has  been  ameliorated 
and  improved,  and  she  is  honoured  in  a  th')usand  things,  and  every  gentleman  takes 
off  his  hat  before  her.  You  know  that  while  woman  may  suffer  injustices,  she  has 
more  of  her  rights  in  Christendom  than  she  has  anywhere  else.  Now  compare  this 
with  woman's  condition  in  lands  where  Christianity  has  made  little  or  no  advance. 
The  Burmese  sell  their  wives  and  daughters  as  so  many  sheep.  The  Hindoo  Bible 
makes  it  an  outrage  for  a  woman  to  listen  to  music,  or  look  out  of  the  window  in 
the  absence  of  her  husband,  and  gives  as  a  lawful  ground  for  divorce  a  woman's 
beginning  to  eat  before  her  husband  has  finished  his  meal !  Her  birth  a  mis- 
fortune. Her  life  a  torture.  Her  death  a  horror.  Now  compare  those  two  con- 
ditions. How  far  toward  this  latter  condition  would  woman  go  if  Christian 
influences  were  withdrawn?  If  an  object  be  lifted  to  a  certain  point  and  not 
fastened  there,  and  the  lifting  power  be  withdrawn,  how  long  before  that  object 
will  fall  down  to  the  point  from  which  it  started  ?  Christianity  has  lifted  woman 
up  from  the  very  depths  of  degradation  almost  to  the  skies.  If  that  lifting  power  be 
withdrawn  she  falls  back  to  the  depth  from  which  she  was  raised,  not  going  any 
lower  because  there  is  no  lower  depth.  And  yet  I  have  read  that  notwithstanding 
all  that,  there  were  women  present  at  a  meeting  in  a  Brooklyn  theatre  at  which 
Christianity  was  outrageously  assailed  and  our  Lord  blasphemously  maligned. 
II.  The  DEMORALiSATiONf  OP  SOCIETY.  The  one  idea  in  the  Bible  that  infidels  most 
hate  is  the  idea  of  retribution.  Take  away  that  idea  from  society,  and  it  will 
begia  very  soon  to  disintegrate,  and  take  away  from  the  minds  of  men  the  fear  of 
hell,  and  there  are  a  great  many  of  them  who  would  very  soon  turn  this  world 
into  a  hell.  I  have  heard  this  brave  talk  about  people  fearing  nothing  of  the 
consequences  of  sin  in  the  next  world,  and  I  have  made  up  my  mind  it  is  merely 
a  coward's  whistling  to  keep  his  courage  up;  for  when  they  came  to  die  they 
shrieked  until  you  could  hear  them  far  enough.  The  mightiest  restraints  to-day 
against  crime  of  all  sorts  are  the  retributions  of  eternity.  Men  know  that  they  can 
escape  the  law,  but  down  in  the  offender's  soul  there  is  the  realisation  of  the  fact 
that  he  cannot  escape  God.  Take  this  out  of  the  hearts  and  minds  of  men,  and  it 
would  not  be  long  before  our  great  cities  became  Sodoms.     III.  Suppose  now  these 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap.  ii. 

generals  of  infidelity  got  the  victory,  (liey  will  first  attack  the  churches.  Away 
with  those  houses  of  worship.  They  have  been  standing  there  so  long  deluding 
the  people  with  consolation  in  their  bereavements  and  sorrows.  Turn  the  St. 
Peters  and  St.  Pauls  and  the  temples  and  tabernacles  into  club-houses.  IV. 
Next  they  scatter  the  Sabbath-schools,  filled  with  bright-eyed,  bi'ight-cheeked 
little  ones  who  are  singing  songs  on  Sunday  afternoon  and  getting  instruction 
when  they  ought  fo  be  on  the  street  corners  playing  marbles  or  swearing  on  the 
commons.  V.  They  destroy  Christian  asylums,  the  institutions  of  mercy  sup- 
ported by  Christian  philanthropies.  Never  mind  the  blind  eyes  and  the  deaf  ears 
and  the  crippled  limbs  and  the  weakened  intellects.  Let  paralysed  old  age  pick  up 
its  own  food,  and  orphans  fight  their  own  way,  and  the  half-reformed  go  back  to 
their  evil  habits.  VI.  They  come  to  the  great  picture  galleries,  and  tear  down 
the  pictures,  for  they  are  Bible  pictures — Claude's  "Burning  Bush,"  and 
Eemlirandt's  "Christ  in  the  Temple,"  and  Paul  Veronese's  "Marriage  in  Cana," 
and  Michael  Angelo's  "  Last  Judgment."  Down  with  the  pictures  ;  they  are  Bible 
pictures.  And  away  with  the  oratorios  of  Handel  and  Haydn  and  Beethoven,  for 
they  speak  of  the  Messiah  and  the  Creation,  and  of  Jephthah,  and  of  Samson,  and 
of  other  Bible  heroes.  VII.  Now  they  come  to  the  graveyards.  Pull  down  the 
sculpture,  for  it  means  the  resurrection.  On,  ye  great  army  of  infidels  where  you 
see  "  Asleep  in  Jesus,"  cut  it  away,  and  where  you  find  a  marble  story  of  heaven 
blast  it  ;  and  where  you  find  over  a  little  child's  grave,  "  Suffer  little  children  to 
come  unto  Me,"  substitute  the  words  "delusion"  and  "sham";  and  where  you 
find  an  angel  in  marble  strike  off  tbe  wing ;  and  when  you  come  to  a  family  vault 
chisel  on  the  door :  "  Dead  and  dead  for  ever."  The  place  of  Christian  burial 
turned  into  a  place  for  the  burial  of  the  whole  family  of  Christian  graces.  Prayer 
dead.  Faith  dead.  Hope  dead.  Charity  dead.  Self-denial  dead.  Honesty 
dead.  Happiness  dead.  VIII.  They  will  attempt  to  scale  heaven.  On  and  on 
until  they  blow  up  the  foundations  of  jasper  and  the  gates  of  pearl.  They  charge 
up  the  steep.  Now  they  aim  for  the  throne  of  Him  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever. 
IX.  There  is  only  one  more  height  to  scale.  They  assail  the  eternal  Father 
and  they  want  Him  to  feel  the  combined  force  of  human  and  Satanic  spite.  A 
world  without  a  head,  a  universe  without  a  king.  Orphan  constellations. 
Fatherless  galaxies.  Anarchy  supreme.  A  dethroned  Jehovah.  An  assassinated 
God.  Patricide,  Eegicide,  Deicide.  That  is  what  they  mean,  and  what  they  will 
have,  if  they  can.  Civilisation  hurled  back  into  semi-barbarism,  and  semi- 
barbarism  driven  back  into  Hottentot  savagery.  The  wheel  of  progress  turned 
the  other  way,  and  turned  towards  the  Daik  Ages.  The  sun  turned  into 
darkness.  Has  Christianity  received  its  death-blow  ?  "  Yes,  when  the  smoke  of 
the  city  chimney  arrests  and  destroy  s  the  noonday  sun.  Josephus  says  about  the 
time  of  the  destruction  of  Jeiusalem  the  sun  was  "  turned  into  darkness  "  ;  but 
only  clouds  rolled  between  the  sun  and  the  earth.  The  sun  went  right  on.  At  the 
beginning  God  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  and  light  was,  and  light  is,  and  light 
shall  be.  So  Christianity  is  rolling  on,  and  it  is  going  to  warm  all  nations,  and  all 
nations  are  to  bask  in  its  light,  and  all  nations  are  to  be  kindled  with  its  joy.  Men 
may  shut  the  window-blinds  so  they  cannot  see  out,  or  they  may  smoke  the  pipe  of 
speculation  until  they  are  shadowed  under  their  own  vapouring  ;  but  God  is  a  sun. 
(r.  De  IVitt  Talmage,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  Whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved. — Salva- 
lion: — I.  Its  nature.  1.  Deliverance  from— (1)  The  guilt  of  sin.  (2)  The 
power  of  sin.  (3)  The  punishment  of  sin.  2.  Deliverance  to— (1)  Acceptance  with 
God.  (2)  Conquest  of  evil.  (3)  Heaven.  II.  Its  condition.  Calling  on  the  name 
of  the  Lord,  involving — 1.  A  sense  of  helplessness.  A  man  in  the  water  will  not 
cry  if  he  can  wade  to  dry  land,  but  only  when  he  feels  in  danger  of  drowning  with- 
out assistance.  2.  A  conviction  of  His  power  to  help  on  whom  we  call.  A  beggar 
will  not  waste  time  in  asking  alms  of  another  beggar ;  a  sick  man  will  scarcely 
rouse  himself  to  seek  medical  help  from  one  in  the  same  condition.  3.  An  assur- 
ance that  He  on  whom  we  call  will  help  us  when  we  call.  This  is  faith.  Tbe  call 
should  be  earnest  and  persevering.  III.  Its  scope.  "  Whosoever."  1.  Poor  as 
well  as  rich.  2.  Ignorant  as  well  as  learned.  3.  Bad  as  well  as  good.  What  an 
encouragement  to  convinced  sinners,  Sunday-school  teachers,  preachers,  and 
missionaries.  (J.  W.  Btirn.)  Calling  on  Christ:— There  is  a  story  concerning 
the  father  of  Thomas  k  Becket,  who  went  into  the  crusades  and  was  taken  prisoner 
by  the  Saracens.     While  a  prisoner,  a  Turkish  lady  loved  him,  and  when  he  was 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  177 

set  free  and  returned  to  England,  she  took  an  opportunity  of  following  him.  But 
she  knew  not  where  to  find  him  she  loved  :  and  all  she  knew  about  him  was  that 
his  name  was  Gilbert.  She  determined  to  go  tlurough  all  the  streets  of  England 
crying  the  name  of  Gilbert  till  she  found  him.  She  came  to  London  first,  and 
passing  every  street  persons  were  surprised  to  see  an  Eastern  maiden  crying,  Gilbert ! 
Gilbei  1 1  And  so  she  passed  from  town  to  town,  till  one  day  as  she  pronounced 
the  name  the  ear  for  which  it  was  intended  caught  the  sound,  and  they  became 
happy.  And  so,  sinner,  to-day  thou  knowest  little  perhaps  of  religion,  but  thou 
knowest  the  name  of  Jesus.  Take  up  the  cry  as  thou  goest  along  the  streets,  and 
say  to  thy  heart,  "  Jesus !  Jesus ! "  And  when  thou  art  in  the  chamber, 
say  it  still,  "  Jesus  1  Jesus!"  Continue  the  cry  and  it  shall  reach  the  ear  for 
which  it  was  meant.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  secret  cry  to  God: — Some  years 
ago  a  young  man  was  going  home  one  night  from  the  house  of  business  in  whicli 
he  was  engaged.  The  thought  occurred  to  him  that  he  was  becoming  more  careless 
each  year  about  his  soul's  salvation,  and  that  he  would  soon  become  utterly  hardened. 
And  he  said  to  himself,  "  Why  should  this  be?  Why  not  seek  the  Lord  now  ?  " 
So  he  lifted  up  his  cry  secretly  as  he  walked  through  the  street,  "  Lord,  forgive  me, 
and  help  me  to  love  and  serve  Thee."  The  Holy  Spirit,  to  whose  voice  he  was  then 
listening,  inspired  the  cry  for  mercy;  and  the  prayer  thus  offered  was  answered. 
The  sleeper  was  awakened,  and  Christ  gave  him  life.  Let  your  conduct  be  like  that 
young  man's,  for  the  Holy  Spirit  is  calling  you  now.  If  hitherto  you  have  rejected 
the  message,  now  determine  to  hear  and  obey  it.  An  effectual  cry  : — I  heard  of 
two  millers  who  used  to  keep  the  old  mill  going  day  and  night,  and  at  midnight  one 
miller  would  go  down  the  stream,  pull  his  boat  up  two  or  three  yards  above  the 
dam,  and  the  other  miller  would  come  along  the  other  way.  One  night  the  miller 
was  going  down  as  usual,  and  he  fell  asleep,  and  when  he  awoke,  it  was  tbe  water 
over  the  dam  that  woke  him.  He  knew  that  if  he  went  over  he  would  be  dashed 
to  pieces  on  the  rocks  below.  He  seized  his  oars  and  he  tried  to  pull  back,  but  he 
found  that  it  was  too  late.  But  he  got  hold  of  a  little  twig  between  the  rocks.  It 
began  to  give  way ;  and  if  that  twig  had  come  away  he  would  have  been  swept  over 
the  dam  and  lost  ;  but  there  was  just  enough  strength  in  the  root  to  hold  him ;  and 
so  he  sat  there  in  that  boat  and  held  on,  and  he  cried,  "  Help  !  help  !  help  !  "  and 
he  kept  crying,  until  at  last  the  cry  of  distress  was  heard  by  the  brother  miller,  and 
he  found  out  the  situation,  and  he  got  a  rope  and  threw  it,  and  the  man  let  go  of 
the  twig  and  laid  hold  of  the  rope,  and  they  pulled  him  out  of  the  jaws  of  death. 
He  saved  his  life  because  it  was  an  honest  cry  for  help.  And  there  is  not  a  man  or 
woman  in  this  house  to-night  bub  that  shall  be  eternally  saved  if  he  or  she  will  send 
the  cry  up  to  heaven,  *'  Lord,  help  me.  Lord,  remember  me.  Lord,  save  me,  or  I 
perish."  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  whosoever  calleth  on  the  name  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  saved. "    Put  the  promise  to  the  test.     (J.  McNeill.) 

Vers.  22-36.  Ye  men  of  Israel,  hear  these  words. — Personal  preaching  : — One  of 
the  old  English  worthies  said  that  a  great  many  sermons  were  like  carefully 
written  letters  dropped  into  the  post-office  without  any  address  written  upon  them. 
They  were  not  intended  for  any  one  in  particular,  and  they  never  reached  anybody. 
The  effect  of  Pentecost  upon  Peter  : — If  we  see  the  effect  upon  Peter,  we  shall  have  a 
true  idea  of  the  effect  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the  entire  Church. 
Fix  your  minds,  therefore,  upon  Peter.  We  know  what  he  has  been  up  to  this  time, 
ardent,  impulsive,  unbalanced,  enthusiastic,  cowardly.  Since  we  last  saw  him  he 
has  been  the  subject  of  Pentecostal  influence.  We  have  therefore  to  look  on  that 
picture  and  on  this  ;  and  upon  the  change  discoverable  between  the  two  pictures 
you  may  found  your  estimate  of  the  value  of  spiritual  inspiration.  Notice — I.  His 
HEROIC  ELOQUENCE.  It  is  uot  cuough  to  spcak — you  may  teach  an  automaton  to 
speak.  This  man  is  not  only  speaking  words,  he  is  speaking  them  with  unction, 
with  fire,  with  emphasis,  never  heard  in  bis  tone  before.  You  have  not  the  whole 
speech  in  the  words.  You  must  be  enabled,  by  a  kind  of  semi-inspiration  of  your 
own,  to  read  between  the  lines,  in  order  to  get  hold  of  all  the  force  and  weight  of 
this  burning  oration:  there  are  palpitations  which  cannot  be  reported,  and  tones 
which  have  no  typal  representation.  It  carries  everything  before  it  like  a  fire 
marching  through  dry  stubble.     II.  Not  only  was  he  transformed  into  an  orator, 

but  into  A  PROFOUND  EXPOSITOR  OF  THE  DiVINE  PURPOSE  IN  THE  CREATION  AND  EDUCA- 
TION OF  THE  Church.  He  speaks  like  a  philosopher.  He  sees  that  the  ages  are  not 
unrelated  days,  broken  and  iucohesive  nights,  but  that  the  ages  are  one,  as  the  day 
is  one,  from  its  grey  dawn  to  the  time  of  the  hghting  of  the  evening  star.     Thij 

VOL.    I.  12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.u'.  ii. 

always  follows  deep  acquaintance  with  the  mysteries  of  God  and  high  fellowship 
with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  One  ;  we  are  delivered  from  the  vexation  and  +orment 
of  daily  details,  and  are  set  in  the  great  currents  and  movements  of  the  Divine 
purpose,  and  thereby  do  we  acquire  the  balance  which  gives  us  rest  and  serenity, 
which  often  glows  into  courageous  joy.  III.  Peter  shows  us  how  prophecy  is  ful- 
filled. The  fulfilment  of  prophecy  is  not  something  which  God  has  been 
arduously  trying  to  do  and  has  at  last  barely  accomplished  ;  it  is  a  natural  process, 
and  it  comes  to  express  a  natural  end.  Prophecy  is  not  to  God  a  mere  hope,  it  is  a 
clear  vision  of  what  must  be,  and  of  what  He  Himself  will  bring  to  pass.  It  is 
prophesied  that  the  whole  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  It 
is  not  a  mere  hope,  it  is  the  sure  outcome  of  the  Divine  way  of  doing  things. 
Christ  must,  by  the  necessity  of  righteousness  and  light  and  truth,  reign  till  He 
hath  put  all  enemies  under  His  feet.  Prophecy  is  God's  note  of  hand  that  He  will 
yet  give  His  Son  the  heathen  for  an  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth  for  a  possession,  signed  in  every  ink  in  the  universe,  signed  iu  heaven  before 
the  earth  was  formed,  signed  on  Calvary  by  the  blood-ink  of  the  Cross.  We  must 
rest  in  this  assurance ;  the  word  of  the  Lord  will  prevail,  not  by  means  of  education, 
eloquence,  or  mechanical  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  Church,  but  the  world  will  be 
converted  unto  Christ  because  God  has  said  it  will  be  so,  and  when  His  word  has 
gone  forth  it  cannot  return  to  Him  void.  IV.  Peter  startled  the  Church  by 
BECOMING  its  MOST  SOLID  AND  CONVINCING  BEASONER.  Observe  wherc  and  how  Peter 
begins  his  address.  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  man,"  there  is  no  appeal  to  theological 
bias  or  prejudice.  Had  he  begun  by  saying,  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  incarnate 
God,"  he  would  have  lost  his  audience  in  his  first  sentence.  He  began  where  bis 
hearers  could  begin,  and  he  who  begins  otherwise  than  at  the  point  of  sympathy, 
how  eloquent  soever,  will  lose  the  reins  ere  he  has  time  to  put  one  sentence  to 
another.  Already,  therefore,  this  inspiration  is  beginning  to  tell  in  the  mental  force 
and  astuteness  of  this  unlettered  fisherman.  He  gives  up  the  Deity  of  Christ,  does 
he?  Note  the  argumentative  skill.  Had  Peter  broken  off  his  speech  in  the  fiist 
sentence,  the  coldpst  Socinian  could  have  endorsed  his  utterance,  but  Peter  makes 
way  through  Scriptural  quotations  and  through  inspired  exposition,  until  he  con- 
cludes with  this  burning  breath,  "  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus  whom  ye  have 
crucified  both  Lord  and  Christ."  Notice,  too,  how  Peter  stands  without  equivoca- 
tion upon  the  historical  fact  of  the  resurrection.  He  was  not  talking  to  people  who 
lived  a  century  after  the  reported  rising  again  of  Christ :  he  was  talking  to  men  who 
knew  perfectly  well  what  had  happened.  Does  he  put  any  gloss  upon  the  matter — 
does  he  seek  to  make  it  a  parable,  a  typal  instance,  a  quasi  resurrection?  He 
talks  with  the  absolute  frankness  of  a  mun  who  is  relating  facts,  which  every  child 
in  the  assembly  knew  to  be  such,  and  could  instantly  have  contradicted  the  state- 
ments which  he  made,  had  they  bten  false.  Does  Peter  separate  Christ  from  the 
wonderful  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  which  had  been  granted?  On  the  contrary, 
he  connects  the  Pentecost  with  the  risen  and  glorified  Son  of  God.  This  enables 
him  to  use  another  "  therefore."  I  refer  to  these  "  therefores  "  in  this  connection 
because  we  are  trying  to  show  how  inspiritedly  argumentative  tlie  apostle  had 
become.  "  Therefore  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted,"  &c.  This  is  His 
last  miracle,  the  spiritualisation  of  all  the  miracles,  the  marvel  to  which  all  signs 
and  wonders  were  leading  up,  the  capital  without  which  the  column  would  have 
been  unfinished,  the  revelation  of  the  purpose  which  moved  His  heart  when  He 
came  to  save  the  world  and  found  His  Church.  V.  It  was  also  a  great  evangelical 
SPEECH  which  Peter  made.  He  gave  the  house  of  Israel  a  new  chance.  "  There- 
fore let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly  " — it  is  as  if  Peter  would  say,  "Now 
you  have  the  opportunity  of  escaping  all  the  past  and  beginning  a  new  and  glorious 
future."  This  is  the  continual  speech  of  Christianity.  Every  morning  Christianity 
says,  "  You  can  make  to-day  better  than  yesterday."  Conclusion.  1.  We  have  in 
Peter  a  standard  whereby  to  measure  ourselves.  When  the  Holy  Ghost  falls  upon 
us  we  shall  go  to  the  Bible  with  a  new  reading  power,  and  we  shall  see  wonders 
where  before  we  saw  nothing  because  of  our  spiritual  blindness.  Under  the 
enlightenment  of  the  Spirit  we  shall  see  that  everything  grand  in  thought,  thrilling 
in  poetry,  tragic  in  experience,  noble  in  heroism,  is  in  the  Bible.  There  is  nothing 
in  literature  whose  root  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  inspired  volume.  This  is  the 
Book  out  of  which  all  other  books  are  made,  as  the  earth  is  the  quarry  out  of  which 
all  its  palaces  have  been  dug,  and  as  there  are  grander  palaces  in  the  rocks  and 
woods  than  have  yet  been  built,  so  there  are  more  glorious  visions  in  the  Bible  than 
•we  have  yet  beheld.     2.  As  the  earth  owes  nothing  to  any  other  world  but  her 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  179 

light,  so  God  has  made  men  that  we  carry  everything  in  us  but  our  own  inspiration. 
He  does  not  make  us  new  men  in  the  sense  of  losing  our  old  identity,  He  makes  us 
new  by  His  inspiration  in  the  sense  of  lifting  us  up  to  the  full  expression  of  His 
own  holy  purpose  in  our  original  creation.      "We  cannot  inspire  ourselves.      The 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  gift  of  God.     We  have  wondrous  faculties  as  the  earth  has 
wondrous  treasures — all  these  are  the  gift  of  God,  all  these  we  hold  in  stewardship 
for  God.     But  these  will  be  in  us  so  many  weights  and  burdens,  curses  rather  than 
blessings,  unless  there  fall  upon  us  the  mighty  Pentecostal  Holy  Spirit.     Then  shall 
we  be  our  true  selves,  eloquent,  wise,  argumentative,   strung,  evangelical,   sym- 
pathetic, new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus,  through  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been 
shed  abroad  in  our  hearts.     {J.  Parkei-,  D.D.)         The  first  Christian  apoloffy  : — 1. 
The  present  confusion  of  theological  opinion  is  not  wholly  to  be  regretted.     It  is 
sad  enough,  no  doubt,  if  you  look  at  it  on  one  side,  that  men  should  still  be  asking 
the  question,  "  What  is  Christianity  ?  "  and  giving  to  that  question  the  most  contrary 
answers.     Grave  and  able  men  tell  us  thiU  the  virtue  of  Christianity  lies  in  an 
order  of  men,  is  transmitted  by  one  man  putting  his  hand  on  another  man's  head, 
and  reaches  the  rest  of  the  world  through  water,  wine,  and  bread.     Other  men  as 
grave  and  able  assure  us  there  is  in  the  system  no  supernatural  virtue  at  all,  only 
certain  religious  instincts  which  long  ago  attached  themselves  crudely  to  a  few  more 
or  less  mythical  facts,   the  real  value  of  which  we  can  hardly  now  make  out. 
Betwixt  them  an  iulinite  variety  of  not  less  inconsistent  opinions  finds  room,  and 
for  each  of  them  intelligent  and  honest  advocates  may  be  heard  to  plead.     2.  But 
sad  as  this  bewilderment  is  in  some  aspects,  it  surely  betrays  at  least  a  desire  to 
get  at  the  heart  of  Christianity,  and  to  do  so  by  disentangling  its  essentials  from  its 
accretions.     No  one  can  pretend  that  such  disentangling  is  unnecessary.     Christi- 
anity, in  the  course  of  her  nineteen  centuries,  has  had  her  own  central  and  proper 
truths  so  sorely  overlaid  by  external  forms  of  Church  life ;  has  seen  her  simple 
doctrines  pressed  into  shapes  determined  by  changing  fashions  of  thought,  specu- 
lated on,  debated  over,  worked  up  into  s\ stems,  and  deduced  into  syllogisms;  has 
entered  also  into  alliance  with  so  many  other  influences,  with  art,  with  politics, 
with  social  systems ;  that  in  no  land  of  Christendom  does  she  offer  to  us  to-day  the 
features  she  wore  when  she  began  her  mission,  or  speak  in  the  voice  with  which 
she  first  spoke  when  she  won  the  world.     To  get  at  the  kernel  of  our  faith,  and 
know  it  as  it  is,  there  is  need  for  some  unwrapping.     And  if  the  critical  tendency 
which  has  thrown  the  theology  of  educated  men  into  such  confusion   has  any 
raison  d'etre  at  all,  it  is  this,  that  it  is  bent  on  getting  at  the  kernel  of  what  we  call 
Christianity.     3.     It  would  be  a  blunder  for  the  Church  to  suppose  that  criticism 
has  only  a  hostile  tendency.     Men  who  hate  our  holy  faith  are  to  be  found  in  this 
as  in  every  age  ;  and  they  take  advantage  of  the  prevaihng  uncertainty,  as  they 
would  do  of  anything  else,  to  create  a  prejudice  against  religion.     But  there  are 
multitudes  of  inquirers  who  mean  no  ill  to  Christianity,  and  numbers  more  who 
revere  and  trust  it  as  their  only  hope  or  guide  in  the  p^-rplexities  of  our  present 
condition.     4.  In  these  circumstances  a  timid  distrustful  clinging  to  traditional 
forms  of  truth,  with  a  nervous  desire  to  defend  the  farthest  and  most  doubtful  out- 
posts of  orthodoxy  is  an  utterly  mistaken  policy.      It  is  so,  whether  the  critici.'-ms 
we  are  called  to  face  be  hostile  or  friendly.     (1)  If  it  be  hostile,  it  seems  unwise 
tactics  to  spend  our  strength  in  defending  outworks,  which  are  either  barely  defen- 
sible or  of  inferior  moment,  when  the  enemy  we  fear  is  already  thundering  at  the 
central  citadel  of  the  faith.     The  question  which  the  Church  must  gird  herself  to 
answer  is,  whether  there  is  any  living  Christ  at  all.     For  strategic  reasons,  there- 
fore, the  field  to  be  defended  needs  to  be  contracted,  that  the  stiength  of  all  gallant 
advocates  of  the  faith  may  be  concentrated  on  those  main  positions  which  are  as  a 
key  to  the  whole  situation.     (2)  Nor  is  a  narrow  dogmatism  any  better  policy  if 
our  critics  are  friendly.     It  is  better,  surely,  and  hopeluHer,  to  meet  the  new  spirit 
with  the  frank  admission  that  where  human  reason  has  manipulated  things  of  God, 
and  forms  of  words,  beaten  out  in  hot  controversy,  have  been  forged  to  set  forth 
infinite  truth,  there  something  may  need  correction.     5.  In  what  shape  the  religious 
faith  of  Christendom  shall  emerge  after  this  time  of  doubt  shall  have  woiked  itself 
out,   no  man  can  foretell.     Yet  the  creed  of  the  future  is  not  likely  to  be  very 
different  in  substance  from  the  creeds  of  the  pa^t.    There  is,  if  any  one  care  to  look 
for  it,  a  solid  body  of  Christian  verity  which  has  been,  with  hardly  any  change,  the 
possession  and  life  of  the  Church  at  every  period  of  her  history,  and  tie  secret 
nutriment  of  her  true  life  through  her  impurest  periods — the  "  faith  once  delivered 
to  the  saints."     6.  Whatever  may  be  the  issue  within  the  Church  of  such  revision 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

of  her  ancient  belief,  in  our  contest  with  outside  scepticism  we  find  ourselves  thrust 
back  upon  our  centre,  and  driven  to  do  battle  there  for  the  first  principles  of  our 
faith,  just  as  the  apologists  of  the  earliest  age  of  Christianity  had  to  do.  Not 
against  the  same  sort  of  doubters,  nor  altogether  with  the  same  arguments,  yet  the 
essentials  of  the  Gospel  we  must  make  good  as  they  did.  In  this  first  Christian 
apology,  and  in  all  other  reported  addresses  of  St.  Peter  in  the  Acts,  I  find  the  gospel 
defended  in  its  germ.  Back  to  this  earliest  kernel  of  gospel  fact  and  truth  the 
controversy  of  onr  day  is  again  pressing  us.  We  may  borrow  a  lesson,  therefore, 
from  the  apologist  of  Pentecost.  How  does  he  conduct  his  defence  ?  In  this  and 
the  other  sermons  of  that  first  period,  the  Christian  cause  is  made  to  rest  on  two 
pillars  of  supernatural  histoiical  fact  bearing  on  its  Founder's  life.  These  are  not 
two  isolated  facts,  however,  but  two  periods  of  supernatural  history.  The  first  is 
His  earthlj'  life  of  ministry  and  passion,  the  supernaturalness  of  which  was  sealed 
mainly  by  the  fact  of  resurrection  after  death.  The  second  is  the  later  celestial  life 
of  Jesus,  the  supernatural  relation  of  which  to  human  experience  is  proved  by  a 
series  of  spiritual  facts  which  began  at  Pentecost  and  have  not  yet  ceased.  Of 
course,  when  the  Church  asserts  this  double  claim  for  -a  continuous  Divine  history 
from  her  Master's  birth,  she  is  met  by  a  denial  from  those  who  hold  any  direct 
intercourse  betwixt  highest  God  and  us  earthly  men  to  be,  on  philosophical  grounds, 
a  thing  impossible.  But  she  has  no  right  to  be  so  met  by  the  inductive  science  of 
our  day.  It  is  the  boast  of  modern  science  to  have  no  prejudices,  but  to  accept 
without  misigiving  whatever  is  established  on  its  proper  evidence.  It  therefore 
cannot  bar  Christianity  in  her  attempt  to  prove  her  facts.  For  the  Christian 
apologist  in  the  Acts,  and  all  wise  Christian  apologists  since,  profess  to  establish 
the  two  supernatural  facts  on  the  self-same  sort  of  evidence  on  which  the  most 
ordinary  facts  of  a  like  order  are  established.  (1)  The  audience  whom  St.  Peter 
addressed  were  familiar  with  the  main  outlines  of  Jesus'  life  as  recent  and  notorious 
events.  We  assume  them  also.  We  owe  it  to  the  historical  criticism  of  late  years 
that  no  one  now  doubts  the  existence  of  Jesus  and  the  leading  features  at  least  of 
that  biography  which  we  have  in  the  holy  Gospels.  It  is  when  we  try  to  look 
bel)ind  the  external  events,  and  to  explain  their  spiritual  value,  that  the  Church's 
faith  and  the  unfaith  of  our  age  part  company.  That  the  Jewish  teacher  of 
Nazareth  whom  the  Komans  crucified  was  in  very  literal  deed,  God,  a  Divine 
Persou,  come  among  us  to  do  a  Divine  work  ;  that  on  His  life  and  death  rest  the 
hopes  of  every  man  to  be  redeemed  from  sin  and  recovered  to  the  favour  and  like- 
ness of  our  heavenly  Father :  this  is  the  Christian  theory  for  the  explanation  of 
such  historical  facts  as  all  admit.  For  the  truth  of  this  theory  the  Church  offers 
one  test-proof — the  resurrection.  Virtually,  St.  Peter  does  so  in  these  early  sermons 
of  his.  Expressly,  St.  Paul,  the  ablest  of  all  her  defenders,  does  so  in  his  second 
letter  to  Corinth.  If  God  did  raise  Jesus  from  the  dead,  as  no  other  man  ever  was 
raised,  then  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God  as  He  claimed  to  be,  His  life  as  Divine  as  it 
professed  to  be.  But  if  God  did  not  raise  this  Man,  the  Christian  advocate  throws 
up  his  case,  our  faith  is  false,  our  fancied  Saviour  an  impostor,  and  we  are  in  our 
sins  like  other  men.  So  the  case  stood  when  Peter  preached  and  Paul  wrote.  So 
it  stands  still.  But  the  question,  whether  a  given  man  was  dead  and  became  alive 
again,  is  one  which  nothing  can  help  us  to  answer  but  the  witness  of  such  as  saw 
what  happened.  It  is  a  question  of  evideuce,  and  it  has  pleased  God  that  this 
crownins<  seal  put  to  His  Son's  life  should  be  sustained  and  guarded  by  an  amount 
of  proof  such  as  no  otlier  fact  in  history  can  boast ;  so  that  no  honest  searcher  for 
truth  might  be  left  in  doubt  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  has  been  declared  to  be  the  Son 
of  God  with  power,  has  risen  the  first  fruits  of  an  innumerable  harvest  of  Christian 
sleepers,  and  by  His  resurrection  has  begotten  us  also  unto  a  living  hope.  (2) 
Even  a  Christ  who  became  alive  is  not  enough,  if  He  has  so  withdrawn  Himself 
that  in  His  absence  He  cannot  help  us.  Our  Christ  is  not  out  of  reach.  We 
believe  with  St.  Peter  that  the  re-ascended  Son  has  been  exalted  by  God's  right 
hand  to  receive  of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  by  the 
special  mission  of  this  second  Paraclete,  He  maintains  a  closer,  more  equal,  and 
more  fffective  cent  ict  with  human  souls  now  than  ever.  Say  that  there  is  no 
Holy  Ghost,  or  say  that  He  is  not  otherwise  present  in  Christian  men  than  we 
know  He  is  in  all  natural  human  life ;  and  the  Church  is  a  delusion,  and  the  word 
we  preach  as  powerless  for  the  spiritual  cure  of  men  as  any  socialistic  or  other 
earth-born  sclieme  for  the  improvement  of  mankind.  But  how  is  it  to  be  proved 
that  through  Christian  agencies  there  does  work  a  veritable  Divine  Agent?  We 
have  here  the  advantage  over  an  apologist  so  early  as  St.  Peter.     In  proof  that  hia 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  181 

newly-departed  Master  had  sent  down  the  Holy  Ghost,  Peter  had  nothing  to  appeal 
to   but   one   unique   and   startling   phenomenon   just   happening   in  his  hearers' 
presence.     We  have  the  gathered  spiritual  experience  of  eighteen  centuries.     Not 
an     age    has    parsed    since    without    leaving    somewhere    tokens    that    to    the 
gospel  belongs  a  heavenly  power.     It  is  quite  true  that  infinite  discredit  has  been 
over  and  over  again  done  to  the  Church's  claims.     But  enough  remains  to  us. 
Christianity  is  not  now  so  new  or  so  small  a  thing  that  it  should  be  hard,  for  any 
man  who  tries,  to  track  its  working  in  detail  on  innumerable  men  and  gather  up 
even  its  secret  fruits.     Whoever  honestly  does  this  will  satisfy  himself,  I  think,  of 
such  facts  as  these :  That  where  the  gospel  of  Christ  has  been  made  known  with 
tolerable  correctness  to  numbers  of  men,  it  has  been  always  followed,  in  the  case  of 
individuals,  by  spiritual  and  moral  changes  of  a  uniform  type.     Conclusion:  To 
this  ever-gathering  evidence,  each  Christian  must  contribute.      And  you,  who  can 
bear  no  witness  for  Chris-t,  because  you  have  never  let  His  Spirit  in  within  your 
heart  to  change  and  cleanse  you,  be  sure  there  is  a  risen  living  Christ  who  saves; 
be  sure  there  is  a  present  Holy  Ghost  who  changes  us ;  be  sure  the  kingdom  of 
Ood  is  come  upon  you.     (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)       Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  Man  approved 
of  God  among  you. — The  gospel  in  its  simplicity  : — We  have  here — I.  A  distinct 
AFFiKMATioN  OF  THE  PKOPER  HUMANITY  OF  Jesus.     "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,   a  Man." 
Under  this  name  He  had  been  "  among  "  them.     They  had  not  to  think  of  Him  as 
a  recluse,  but  as  one  who  had  frequented  the  common  walks  of  life.     This  would 
prepare  the  audience  to  think  of  His  sympathy  and  compassion.      But  they  knew 
that  He  had  not  been  an  ordinary  man.     Around  His  person  had  gathered  most 
remarkable  circumstances  that  had  to  be  accounted  for.     Accordingly  we  find  in 
the  text — n.  A  distinct  assertion  of  the  extraokdinaky  credentials  of  Jesus. 
He  had  been  "approved  of  God  by  miracles"  &c.     These  had  demonstrated  Him 
to  be  what  He  professed  to  be.      Such  things  revealed  the  mind  of  God,  and  Peter 
now  affirmed  chat  the  life  of  Jesus  was  full  of  God.      This  was  a  new  thought  to 
some   who  heard  it.      It  followed  that  certain  impressions  of   Jesus  had   to   be 
corrected.     For  the  present  it  was  enough  to  make  the  hearer  feel  that  Jesus  was 
God's  messenger.     More  would  follow.     III.  Peter  declares  that  even  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ  were  included  in  the  Divine  plan.     He  had  been  apprehended  and 
nailed  to  the  Cross  by  the  lawless,  the  repres^-ntatives  of  Eoman  power ;  but  in 
delivering  Him  up  the  Jews  had  been  the  greatest  criminals,  and  this  charge  was 
now  urged  home  upon  them.     Yet,  as  Peter  explains,  this  was  only  in  accordance 
with  the  Divine  decree.     Observe,  then,  that  men  are  held  accountable  though  they 
do   not   act   with   uncontrolled  power,    and   that   there   is   no  excuse  for  sin  in 
the   mysterious   blending    of    the   Divine   and    the   human  in   the  working   out 
of   God's   decrees.     If  we   could  adequately  survey   all   the   facts,   we   might   be 
able  to  remove  the  apparent  disagreement  between  Divine  sovereignty  and  human 
freedom  :  but  we  are  ignorant.     IV.  Peter  affirms  that  in  spite  of  appearances 
Jesus  HAD  GAINED  A  complete  victory.     "Whom  God  raised  up."     IW.  Hudson.) 
Miracles  and  wonders  and  signs. — HJiracIes  : — The  first  of  these  words,  as  more 
correctly  rendered  in  the  Eevised  Version,  means  "  powers,"  or  "  mighty  works."  By 
Peter,  therefore,  the  "  miracles  "  recorded  in  the  Gospels  are  refeired  to  the  three 
heads  of  "  powers,  wonders,  and  signs,"  and  the  same  terms  are  used  by  Luke  to 
represent  those  wrought  by  the  apostles  and  early  Christians  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
The  word  "powers"  intimates   to   us   the   source   of  miraculous   gifts,  and  the 
superhuman  power  manifested  in  their  exercise.     The  second  term,  "wonders," 
which    corresponds  more   nearly   with   our    word    "  miracles,"   intimates    their 
•effect   in   producing  wonder  or  astonishment,  leading   to  conviction  and  belief; 
and    the    third    term    "  signs,"    indicates    their    value   as   proofs   of    a  Divine 
mission.     All  these  aspects  may  be  more  or  less  presented  in  different  miracles, 
or  may  appear  in  different  degrees  in  the  same  miracle,  and  in  considering  the  re- 
lations of  miracles  to  nature  they  should  all  be  kept  in  view.     More  especially  we 
should  bear  in  mind  that  our  word  "  miracle,"  derived  from  the  Latin,  and  mean- 
ing merely  something  wonderful,  does  not  express  the  whole  nature  of  the  Biblical 
miracles,  nor  indeed,  perhaps,  their  most  important  feature.     There  may  be  great 
miracles  which  excite  but  little  wonder  or  astonishment,  though  they  may  produce 
important  effects,  as,  for  instance,  some  of  those  miracles  of  deliverance  wrought 
for  the  apostles,  and  little  known  or  thought  of  among  their  contemporaries.     On 
the  other  hand,  there  are  many  wonderful  phenomena  which  are  not  miracles.     A 
more  important  aspect  is  that  of  powers,  or  mighty  works,  which  indicate  the  pre- 
sence of  superhuman  power,  capable  of  controlling  natural  agencies,  and  of  modi- 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ii. 

fying  or  rearranging  the  laws  of  the  universe.  In  this  respect  miracles  bring  u» 
face  to  face  with  God  as  the  only  true  nairacle-worker.  But,  perhaps,  the  most 
important  aspect  of  all,  more  especially  in  connection  with  the  apostolic  history,  is 
that  signs,  or  proofs,  of  the  Divine  character  or  mission  of  those  who  possess  sucli 
powers,  or  to  whom  they  are  given.  It  is  this  aspect  that  they  are  most  frequently 
referred  to,  and  in  which  they  approach  most  nearly  to  those  moral  and  spiritual 
characters  on  which  I  am  not  to  enter,  any  further  than  to  say  generally  that 
miracles  must  conform  in  their  natural  relations  to  the  higher  moral  and  spiritual 
character  of  the  message  which,  as  signs,  they  authenticate.  {Priiicipal  J. 
W.  Dawson.)  The  miracles  of  Christ  appealed  to  on  the  day  of  Pentecost : — 
These  words  contain — I.  An  impoetant  appeal.  It  was  addressed  to  the  Jews, 
and  its  subject  is  the  promised  Messiah.  1.  The  name  by  which  He  is  designated. 
"Jesus  of  Nazareth."  2.  The  character  under  which  He  is  set  forth.  "A  Man 
approved  of  God."  3.  The  conclusive  manner  in  which  His  claims  were  established. 
" By  miracles  and  wonders  and  signs."  II.  A  solemn  charge.  "Him  being  de- 
livered," &c.  1.  The  unparalleled  crime  of  which  they  were  guilty.  2.  It  was  no 
extenuation  of  their  conduct  that  what  they  had  done  accomplished  the  Divine  pur- 
poses. III.  A  BLESSED  ANNOUNCEMENT.  It  referred  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ. 
1.  To  whom  this  great  event  is  here  ascribed.  "  Whom  God  hath  raised  up."  2. 
The  manner  in  which  it  was  performed.  "  Having  loosed  the  pains  (or  bonds)  of 
death."  3.  The  necessity  of  its  accomplishment.  "Not  possible  that  He  should 
be  holden  of  it."  IV.  A  striking  quotation.  "  For  David  speaketh  concerning 
Him,"  &c.  1.  The  feelings  evinced.  Those  of  confidence  and  joy.  2.  The  grounds- 
on  which  they  rested.  Because  Jesus  died  and  rose  again.  (Expository  Outlines.) 
Him  being  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  y& 
have  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands  have  crucified  and  slain.  —  Christ  crucified 
according  to  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God: — I.  Who  was 
DELIVERED  ?  I.  Jctus  of  Nazarcth  had  at  once  a  name  of  ignominy,  and  a  name 
of  renown.  He  was  called  a  Nazarene  by  the  Jews  because  He  was  brought  up  at 
Nazareth  ;  and  they  availed  themselves  of  that  fact  to  fasten  upon  Him  what  they 
thought  would  be  an  indehble  stigma.  Jesus  is  a  name  of  glory.  It  was,  indeed, 
a  human,  a  common  name,  borne  by  many  before ;  bat  when  it  was  once  put  on 
Him  it  never  was  put  on  any  other.  You  do  not  hesitate  to  call  your  children 
by  the  names  of  the  apostles,  but  no  father  dares  to  call  his  sou  Jesus,  becaus& 
God  has  called  His  Son  Jesus.  "  This  is  the  name  to  sinners  dear,  the  name 
to  sinners  given,"  the  name  above  every  name.  2.  The  particular  feature 
of  His  character  here  developed  is  the  power  of  working  miracles,  A 
miracle  has  been  defined — "  a  suspension  or  counteraction  of  the  laws  of 
nature."  And  what  are  the  laws  of  nature?  They  are  the  agencies  of  God,  by 
which  He  employs  certain  causes  to  the  production  of  certain  effects.  What 
philosophers  signify  by  the  essential,  inflexible,  eternal  laws  of  nature,  is  nothing 
but  the  will  of  God  acting  in  a  definite  way ;  and  these  laws  Jesus  of  Nazareth  broke 
in  upon,  disturbed  them  when  He  pleased.  He  showed  that  He  was  the  Author  of 
nature,  and  that  all  these  laws  were  of  His  own  making ;  and,  therefore,  as  He 
produced  the  effects  apart  from  the  usual  associated  causes  He  was  the  God  of 
nature.  His  miracles  are  called  wonders,  because  they  filled  the  spectators  with 
wonder;  and  signs,  because  they  were  indexes  of  the  properties,  and  prerogatives, 
and  character  of  Him  that  wrought  them.  II.  To  what  was  He  delivered  ?  To 
a  death  the  most  extraordinary  in  its  nature,  and  the  most  dolorous  in  its  circum- 
stances, if  you  consider  : — 1.  The  place  where  He  died.  We  all  hope  to  die  in  our 
own  homes  and  beds.  But  your  Lord  and  Master  died  at  Calvary,  a  place  putrid 
with  blood  ai:id  bones — the  atmosphere  of  which  was  impregnated  with  a  blasphem- 
ous breath.  2.  Among  whom  He  died.  He  was  crucified  between  two  malefactors; 
He  had  the  middle  place  as  though  He  was  worse  than  either  of  them.  3.  The 
death  itself.  Crucihxion  was  the  most  lingering  and  painful  mode  of  death,  and 
the  most  infamous.  "  Cursed  is  he  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  What  part  of  Hia 
body  was  exempt  from  anguish  ?  Was  it  His  hands  and  His  feet  ? — they  were 
pierced  with  nails.  Was  it  His  temples  ? — they  were  punctured  with  thorns.  Was 
it  His  back? — that  was  lacerated  with  scourges.  Was  it  His  side?— that  was 
broken  by  the  hostile  spear.  Was  it  His  boues  ? — they  were  all  as  it  were  out  of 
joint.  Was  it  His  muscles? — they  were  stretched  upon  the  gibbet.  Was  it  Hia 
veins? — they  were  deprived  of  their  purple  fluid.  Was  it  His  nerves,  those  canals 
of  feeling,  those  rivers  of  sensation  ? — they  were  wrung  with  anguish.  And  all  this 
was  as  nothing  compared  with  the  sorrows  of  His  soul.     Though  He  had  been  3k 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.  183 

man  of  sorrows  and  a  child  of  grief,  yet,  when  He  came  to  be  delivered  up.  He  said, 
"Now,  noio  is  My  soul  exceeding  sorrowful."  The  weight  of  mental  anguish  may 
be  alleviated  by  three  sources.  (1)  The  sympathies  of  affectionate  friends.  But 
when  Christ  died.  His  disciples  forsook  Him  and  fled ;  He  was  surrounded  with 
grim  guards — by  hostile  bands.  (2)  By  the  holy  angels,  who  are  ministering  spirits 
sent  forth  to  minister  unto  them  who  are  heirs  of  salvation  ;  and  perhaps  the  most 
important  part  of  their  ministration  is  rendered  to  us  just  when  the  immortal  spirit 
is  on  tbe  confines  of  eternity.  Our  Saviour  had  Himself,  during  His  life,  been 
ministered  to  by  angels  ;  but  when  delivered  up  to  death,  the  angels  afforded  Him 
no  sympathy.  He  drank  the  wine-press  alone,  with  Him  was  none,  neither  man 
nor  angel  could  sympathise  with  Hioi  in  His  suffering.  (3)  By  the  consolations  of 
our  heavenly  Father.  But  Jesus  of  Nazareth  when  delivered  up  to  death  was  with- 
out these.  The  Father  that  had  honoured  His  birth  by  a  new  star,  and  His  baptism 
by  the  sound  of  a  more  than  mortal  voice  from  the  excellent  glory,  that  had 
honoured  Him  when  He  performed  the  miracles  to  which  I  have  alluded,  forsook 
Him  upon  the  Cross.  IH.  By  whom  was  He  ijeliveeed  ?  I  notice — 1.  The  human 
agents.  It  was  the  Jews  that  did  it ;  their  high  priest  had  said  it  was  expedient 
for  Christ  to  die ;  it  was  their  Pontius  Pilate  that  condemned  Him  ;  it  was  their 
Judas  that  betrayed  Him  ;  their  priests  that  plotted  it ;  their  Scribes  and  Pharisees 
that  hailed  it ;  their  populace  that  shouted  for  it.  But  let  not  the  Jews  imagine 
that  their  guilt  is  at  all  diminished  by  the  fact  of  the  death  of  Christ  being  "  ac- 
cording to  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God."  Their  actions  were 
not  at  all  influenced  by  the  determinate  counsel  of  Jehovah  ;  the  apostle  tells  them 
they  were  not ;  he  says,  "  Ye  have  done  it."  2.  But  there  is  another  agency  in  this 
transaction  (a  God  appears  in  this  amazing  scene).  Lift  up  the  eyes  of  your  mind  to 
the  throne  of  the  heavens,  to  the  Majesty  on  high,  and  see  God  delivering  up  His 
own  Son  to  this  accursed  death.  They  could  have  had  no  power  against  the  Son  of 
Man  except  it  had  been  given  to  them  from  above.  The  death  of  Christ  was  not 
casual,  it  was  not  accidental,  it  was  according  to  the  certain  councils  entered  into 
between  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  abyss  of  a  past  eternity.  In  these 
counsels  it  was  agreed  that  one  of  the  persons  of  the  Trinity  should  become  incar- 
nate for  lost  human  nature  ;  that  one  should  die  for  our  guilty  world.  According 
to  the  contract  entered  into,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  delivered  up  unto  death. 
How  amazing  that  such  deliberations  should  be  followed  by  such  results  I  Hear  the 
declaration  of  the  apostle  on  the  subject,  "  He  spared  not  His  only  Son,  but  freely 
gave  Him  up  for  us  all."  IV.  The  design  on  account  of,  and  the  end  foe  which, 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  delivered.  He  was  delivered  up  for  what  ?  for  whom  ? 
Not  for  His  own  iniquity,  for  He  had  none  ;  not  for  Himself,  for  He  was  no  trans- 
gressor. He  could  challenge  the  bitterest  of  His  enemies  and  say — "  Which  of  you 
convinces  Me  of  sin  ?  "  Now,  we  are  only  acquainted  with  the  iniquity  of  angels 
and  men,  and  the  question  is  narrov^ed  to  this  :  If  Jesus  were  not  delivered  for  His 
own  iniquity — having  none  at  all — He  was  delivered  for  the  iniquity  of  angels  that 
sinned,  or  for  ours.  Now  then,  for  which  was  it?  He  passed  by  the  angels.  He 
took  not  hold  of  their  nature,  He  never  was  found  in  fashion  as  an  angel.  I  love 
the  angels,  because,  among  other  reasons,  they  do  not  envy  man  the  grandeur  and 
glory  of  his  being  redeemed  by  the  Son  of  God,  while  part  of  their  own  species  was 
not  taken  hold  of  by  the  Son  of  God.  When  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  born  the  angels 
sang — "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest  " — and  in  bell  peace  ?  No  ;  and  because  they 
could  not  sing  in  hell  peace,  did  they  refuse  to  sing  on  earth  peace  ?  They  could 
not  Fay,  and  they  did  not  say,  "Goodwill  to  devils,"  to  our  lost  brethren  ;  but  could 
say,  and  they  did  say,  "  Good  will  to  man."  Jesus  of  Nazareth  took  hold  of  our 
nature  and  was  dehvered,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  to  God. 
Why  He  felt  for  us,  rather  tban  for  angels  that  sinned,  I  know  not.  It  is  enough 
for  me  to  know  that  He  loves  me,  and  loves  you,  and  that  He  loves  all  our  apostate 
race.  Here  comes  in  the  old,  good-for-nothing  objection  to  the  innocent  suffering 
for  the  guilty.  WTiy,  then,  did  Christ  suffer  ?  Oh,  they  say.  He  suffered  to  give 
us  an  example  of  magnanimity  and  patience  under  suffering.  And  they  talk  about 
justice.  Why,  if  there  is  injustice  in  His  dying  to  save  a  world  from  the  curse  of 
God,  there  is  a  million  times  more  monstrous  injustice  in  His  dying  merely  to  teach 
us  how  to  suffer.  He  died  by  His  own  consent.  What  bound  Him  to  the  Cross  ? 
Was  it  the  nails?  If  He  had  never  been  fastened  by  anything  but  nails.  He  had 
never  been  fastened  at  all.  It  was  love  that  led  Him  to  go  to  the  high  altar,  and  it 
was  love  to  us  that  fastened  Him  to  that  allar.  Conclusion  :  It  is  not  enough  to 
hear  of  this  Saviour,  and  of  this  salvation,  and  the  love  that  prompted  it ;  there 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

must  be  a  personal  appropriation  of  the  benefit  of  the  death  of  Christ.  {J.  Beau- 
mont, D.D.)  The  nature  and  quality  of  the  death  Christ  died  upon  the  Cross  : — 
I.  The  kind  or  nature  of  His  death.  1.  It  was  a  violent  death  in  itself,  though 
voluntary  on  His  part  (Isa.  liii.  8 ;  John  x.  17) .  And  indeed  He  must  either  die  a 
violent  death  or  not  at  all,  partly  because  there  whs  no  sin  in  Him  to  open  a  door 
to  natural  death,  partly  because  His  death  had  not  been  a  sacrifice  satisfactory  to 
God  for  us.  That  which  died  of  itself  was  never  offered  up  to  God,  but  that  which 
was  slain  when  it  was  in  its  full  strength  and  health.  2.  A  most  painful  death. 
Indeed  in  this  death  were  many  deaths  contrived  in  one.  The  Cross  was  a  rack  as 
well  as  a  gibbet.  3.  A  shameful  death.  One  appointed  for  the  vilest  of  men.  4. 
A  cursed  death  (Gal.  iii.  13 ;  Deut.  xxi.  23).  6.  A  very  slow  and  lingering  death, 
6.  A  helpless  death.  II.  The  rkasons  why  Christ  died  this,  rather  than  any  other 
kind  of  death.  1.  Because  Christ  must  bear  the  curse,  and  a  curse  by  law  was 
affixed  to  no  other  kind  of  death  as  it  was  to  this.  2.  To  fulfil  the  types.  All  the 
sacrifices  were  lifted  up  from  the  earth  upon  the  altar.  But  especially  the  brazen 
serpent  prefigured  this  death  (Numb.  xxi.  9  ;  John  iii.  14).  3.  Because  it  was  pre- 
dicted of  Him  (Psa.  xxii.  16,  17 ;  Zech.  xii.  10).  Inferences :  Did  Christ  die  the 
death  of  the  Cross  ?  Then — 1.  There  is  forgiveness  with  God,  and  plenteous  re- 
demption for  the  greatest  of  sinners,  that  by  faith  apply  the  blood  of  the  Cross  to 
their  poor  guilty  souls  (Col.  i.  14  ;  1  John  i.  7).  Two  things  this  will  make  demon- 
strable. (1)  That  there  is  sufiicient  efficacy  in  the  blood  of  the  Cross  to  expiate 
and  wash  away  the  greatest  sins  (1  Pet.  i.  18 ;  Acts  xx.  28).  On  the  account  of  its 
invaluable  preciousness,  it  becomes  satisfying  and  reconciling  blood  to  God  (Col. 
i.  20),  and  having  enough  in  it  to  satisfy  God  it  must  needs  have  enough  in  it  to 
satisfy  conscience  (Heb.  x.  22).  (2)  As  there  is  sufficient  efficacy  in  this  blood  to 
expiate  the  greatest  guilt,  so  it  is  as  manifest  that  the  virtue  of  it  is  intended  by 
God  for  the  use  of  believing  sinners  (Acts  xiii.  39).  2.  Though  there  be  much  of 
pain  there  is  nothing  of  curse  in  the  death  of  the  saints.  Death  poured  out  all  its 
poison  and  lost  its  sting  in  Christ's  side  when  He  became  a  curse  for  us.  3.  How 
cheerfully  should  we  submit  to,  and  bear  any  cross  for  Jesus  Christ.  What  feathers 
are  ours  compared  with  His  !  (1)  We  shall  carry  it  but  a  little  way.  (2)  Christ  bears 
the  heaviest  end  of  it.  (3)  Innumerable  blessings  and  mercies  grow  upon  it.  (J. 
Flavel.)  Whom  God  hath  raised  up,  having  loosed  the  pains  of  death;  because 
it  was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it. — The  resurrection : — I.  Its 
CAUSE.  It  was  such  an  action  as  proclaimed  an  omnipotent  agent.  Death  is  a 
disease  which  art  cannot  cure :  and  the  grave  a  prison  which  delivers  back  its 
captives  upon  no  human  summons.  To  restore  life  is  only  the  prerogative  of  Him 
who  gives  it.  Physic  may  repair  and  piece  up  nature,  but  not  create  it.  Neither 
is  it  in  the  power  of  a  spirit  or  demon  to  inspire  a  new  life ;  for  it  is  a  creation,  and 
to  create  is  the  incommunicable  prerogative  of  a  power  infinite  and  unlimited.  But 
I  suppose  nobody  will  be  very  importunate  for  any  further  proof  of  this,  that 
if  Christ  was  raised,  it  must  be  by  God  who  raised  Him.  The  angel  might  roll 
away  the  stone  from  the  sepulchre,  but  not  turn  it  into  a  son  of  Abraham  ;  and  a 
less  power  than  that  which  could  do  so  could  not  effect  the  resurrection.  II.  The 
MANNER  BY  WHICH  GoD  WROUGHT  IT.  With  what  propriety  Can  God  be  said  to  "  loose 
the  pains  of  death,"  when  those  pains  continued  not  till  the  resurrection,  but  ex- 
pired in  the  death  of  His  body?  1.  Some  have  affirmed  that  Christ  descended 
into  the  place  of  the  damned  and  suffered  the  pains  of  hell.  But  this  could  not  be  ; 
for  if  Christ  suffered  any  of  those  pains  it  was  either  in  His  Divine  nature,  or  in 
His  soul,  or  in  His  body.  But  the  Divine  nature  could  not  suffer  as  being  wholly 
impassible:  nor  yet  could  He  suffer  in  His  soul ;  forasmuch  as  in  tbe  very  same 
day  of  His  death  that  passed  into  paradise  ;  nor  in  His  body,  for  that  being  dead, 
and  consequently  for  the  time  bereaved  of  all  sense,  could  not  be  capable  of  any 
torment.  2.  Now  can  we  make  out  the  reason  of  this  expression  upon  some  other 
or  better  ground.  The  word  rendered  "pains,"  in  the  Hebrew  signifies  also  a  cord 
or  band  ;  according  to  which  it  is  very  easy  and  proper  to  conceive  that  the  resur- 
rection disch\rged  Christ  from  the  bands  of  death;  besides  "  having  loosed,"  is 
properly  applicable  to  bands  and  not  to  pains.  But— (1)  The  words  contain  in 
them  a  Hebraism,  viz.,  the  pains  of  death,  for  a  painful  death ;  as  it  is  said  (Matt. 
xxiv.  15),  the  abomination  of  desolation,  for  an  abominable  desolation ;  and  so  the 
resurrection  loosed  Christ  from  a  painful  death,  not  as  if  it  were  so  at  the  time  of 
His  release  from  it,  but  in  a  divided  sense  it  loosed  Him  from  a  continuance  under 
that  death ;  which,  relating  to  the  time  of  His  suffering  it,  was  so  painful.  (2)  But 
though  the  pains  of  death  ceased  long  before  the  resurrection,  so  that  this  could 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  185 

not  in  strictness  of  sense  be  said  to  remove  them;  yet,  taken  in  a  metonymy  of  the 
cause  for  the  effect,  the  pains  of  death  might  be  properly  said  to  have  been  loosed 
in  the  resurrection,  because  that  estate  of  death  iuto  which  Christ  was  brought  by 
those  foregoing  pains  was  then  completely  triumphed  over.     Captivity  under  death 
and  the  grave  was  the  effect  and  consequent  of  those  pains,  and  therefore  the  same 
deliverance  which  discharged  Christ  fi'om  the  one,  might  not  improperly  be  said  to 
loose  Him  from  the  other.     HI.  Its  grounds,  M'hich  was  its  absolute  necessity.     1. 
The  hypostatical  union  of  Christ's  human  nature  to  His  Divine  rendered  a  per- 
petual duration  under  death  absolutely  impossible.     For  how  could  that  which  was 
united  to  the  great  source  and  principle  of  life  be  finally  prevailed  over  by  death, 
and  pass  into  an  estate  of  perpetual  darkness  aud  oblivion  ?  It  was  possible,  indeed, 
that  the  Divine  nature  might  for  a  while  suspend  its  supporting  influence,  and  so 
deliver  over  the  human  nature  to  pain  and  death,  but  it  was  impossible  for  it  to  let 
go  the  relation  it  bore  to  it.     A  man  may  suffer  his  child  to  fall  to  the  ground,  and 
yet  not  wholly  quit  his  hold  of  him,  but  still  keep  it  in  his  power  to  recover  and  lift 
him  up  at  his  pleasure.  Thus  the  Divine  nature  of  Christ  did  for  a  while  hide  itself 
from  His  humanity,  but  not  desert  it ;  put  it  into  the  chambers  of  death,  but  not 
lock  the  everlasting  doors  upon  it.     The  sun  may  be  clouded  and  yet  not  eclipsed, 
and  eclipsed  but  not  stopped  in  his  course,  and  much  less  forced  out  of  its  orb. 
Surely  that  nature  which  diffusing  itself  throughout  the  universe  communicates  an 
enlivening  influence  to  every  part  of  it,  and  quickens  the  least  spire  of  grass,  would 
not  wholly  leave  a  nature  assumed  into  its  bosom,  and,  what  is  more,  into  the  very 
unity  of  the  Divine  person,  dismantled  of  its  prime  and  noblest  perfection.     2. 
God's  immutability.  Christ's  resurrection  was  founded  upon  the  same  bottom  with 
the  consolation  and  salvation  of  believers,  expressed  in  that  full  declaration  made 
by  God  of  Himself  (Mai.  iii.  6).     Now,  the  immutability  of  God,  as  it  had  an  in- 
fluence upon  Christ's  resurrection,  was  twofold.     (1)  In  respect  of  His  decree  or 
purpose.     God  had  from  all  eternity  designed  this,  and  sealed  it  by  an  irreversible 
purpose.     For  can  we  imagine  that  Christ's  resurrection  was  not  decreed,  as  well 
as  His  death  and  sufferings  ?  and  these  in  the  23rd  verse  of  this  chapter  are  ex- 
pressly said  to  have  been  determined  by  God.     It  is  a  known  rule  in  divinity,  that 
whatsoever  God  does  in  time,  that  He  purposed  to  do  from  eternity ;  for  there  can 
be  no  new  purposes  of  God,  since  he  who  takes  up  a  new  purpose  does  so  because 
he  sees  some  ground  to  induce  him  to  such  a  purpose,  which  he  did  not  see  before ; 
but  this  can  have  no  place  in  an  infinite  knowledge,  which  by  one  comprehensive 
intuition  sees  all  things  at  present,  before  ever  they  come  to  pass :  so  that  there 
can  be  no  new  emergency  that  can  alter  the  Divine  resolutions.     (2)  In  respect  of 
His  word  and  promise,  for  these  also  were  engaged  in  this  affair  (Psa.  xvi.  10).   And 
Christ  also  had  frequently  foretold  the  same  of  Himself.     Now  when  God  says  a 
thing  He  gives  His  veracity  in  pawn  to  see  it  fully  performed.     Heaven  or  earth 
may  pass  away  sooner  than  one  iota  of  a  Divine  promise  fall  to  the  ground.     3. 
God's  justice.      God  in  the  whole  procedure  of   Christ's  sufferings  must  be  con- 
sidered as  a  judge  exacting,  and  Christ  as  a  person  paying  down  a  recompense  or 
satisfaction  for  sin.     The  punishment  due  to  sin  was  death,  which  being  paid  by 
Christ,  Divine  justice  could  not  any  longer  detain  Him  in  His  grave.  For  what  had 
this  been  else  but  to  keep  Him  in  prison  after  the  debt  was  paid  ?    Satisfaction  dis- 
arms justice,  and  payment  cancels  the  bond.     Christ's  release  proceeded  not  upon 
terms  of  courtesy  but  of  claim.     The  gates  of  death  flew  open  before  Him  out  of 
duty.   4.  The  necessity  of  His  being  believed  in  as  a  Saviour,  and  the  impossibility 
of  His  being  so  without  rising  from  the  dead.     As  Christ  by  His  death  paid  down 
a  satisfaction  for  sin,  so  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  be  declared  to  the  world 
by  such  arguments  as  might  found  a  rational  belief  of  it ;  so  that  men's  unbelief 
should  be  rendered  inexcusable.  But  how  could  the  world  believe  that  He  fully  had 
satis6ed  for  sin,  so  long  as  they  saw  death,  the  known  wages  of  sin,  maintain  its 
full  force  and  power  over  Him  ?    Had  not  the  resurrection  followed  the  crucifixion, 
that  scoff  of  the  Jews  had  stood  as  an  unanswerable  argument  against  Him  (Mark 
XV.  31,  32).     To  save  is  the  effect  of  power,  and  of  such   a  power  as  prevails 
to  a  complete  victory  and  a  triumph.     5.  The  nature  of   the  priesthood  which 
He  had  taken  upon  Him.    The  apostle  (Heb.  viii.  4)  says,  that  "  if  He  were 
upon  earth  He  should  not  be  a  priest."     Certainly  then  much  less  could  He 
be  so,  should  He  continue  under  the  earth.     The  two  great  works  of  His  priest- 
hood were  to  offer  sacrifice,  and  then  to  make  intercession  for  sinners,  corre- 
spondent to  the  two  works  of  the  Mosaical  priesthood.     Christ,  therefore,  after 
that  He  had  offered  Himself  upon   the   Cross,  was  to  enter  into  heaven,  and 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  u. 

there  presenting  Himself  to  the  Father  to  make  that  sacrifice  effectual 
to  all  the  intents  and  purposes  of  it  (Heb.  vii.  25).  Had  not  Clirisi  risen 
again,  His  blood  indeed  might  have  cried  for  vengeance  upon  His  murderers, 
but  not  for  mercy  upon  believers.  Ever  since  Christ  ascended  into  heaven 
He  has  been  pursuing  the  great  work  begun  by  Him  upon  the  Cross,  and  appl.ving 
the  virtue  of  His  sacrifice  to  those  for  whom  it  was  offered.  {R.  South,  D.D.) 
The  necessity  of  Christ's  resurrection  : — It  was  not  possible  that  death  should  hold 
our  Divine  Lord  and  Saviour.  Why  ?  I.  Was  it  simply  because  of  His  power? 
Is  the  victory  that  He  gained  when  He  came  forth  from  the  grave  only  the  preva- 
lence of  a  stronger  force  over  a  weaker  ?  The  love  of  power,  the  delight  in  wielding 
it  and  in  witnessing  its  exercise,  the  joy  of  battle,  the  elation  of  victory — how  much 
of  human  energy  finds  vent  in  tliese  great  passions !  Is  this  spectacle  of  the 
triumphing  of  Christ  over  death  only  another  exhibition  of  strength  ?  Doubtless 
we  must  see  in  the  resurrection  a  proof  of  superhuman  energy.  "  No  man  taketh 
My  life  from  Me,"  &c.,  said  our  Lord.  Here  is  the  sign  of  a  strength  superior  to 
nature  ;  of  an  energy  that  is  not  confined  by  the  uniformities  of  physical  law  ;  of 
a  force  that  is  stronger  than  the  strongest  of  the  forces  with  which  our  science 
deals.  But  is  this  all  ?  No  ;  this  is  the  least  of  the  truths  disclosed  to  us  upon 
the  Easter  day.  Men  had  faith  enough  in  physical  power  before  Christ  rose  from 
the  dead.  Worshippers  of  power  most  of  tbem  were.  Men  believed  quite  enough 
in  the  power  of  God  ;  as  a  revelation  of  the  fact  that  there  is  a  Will  behind  nature 
superior  to  nature,  the  resurrection  was  not  needed.  II.  Was  it  logical  ?  Does 
the  apostle  mean  that  Christ  could  not  have  been  left  in  the  grave,  because  the 
Divine  plan  and  purpose  made  His  resurrection  necessary  ?  Doubtless  this  is  true. 
The  success  of  His  mission  required  Him  to  rise  from  the  grave.  It  was  necessary 
as  a  practical  measure,  for  the  confirmation  of  His  claims,  and  the  verification  of 
His  gospel.  But  is  this  all  ?  No.  IH.  The  impossibility  was  moral.  It  was  not 
might  nor  policy  but  love  and  right  that  conquered.  1.  The  apostle  expresses  in 
this  phrase  one  of  the  strongest  and  most  persistent  of  the  instinctive  moral  feel- 
ings of  man,  viz.,  that  virtuous  being  ought  to  continue.  It  is  sometimes  said 
that  man  has  an  instinctive  faith  in  immortality,  and  it  is  doubtless  true.  But  the 
feeling  to  which  I  refer  is  much  deeper  and  more  dominant  than  this.  I  am  not 
speaking  now  of  the  testimony  of  revelation  concerning  future  existence,  but  of  the 
conclusions  to  which  our  own  instinct  and  judgment  would  lead  us.  And  I  think 
that  if  we  had  to  depend  wholly  on  these  for  our  light  upon  this  great  question, 
while  each  one  might  hope  for  lite  beyond  the  grave  as  his  own  inheritance,  we 
should  hesitate  to  affirm  it  confidently  respecting  all  our  neighbours.  Here,  for 
example,  is  one  whose  life  has  steadily  gravitated  downward ;  who  has  grown  more 
sordid,  sour,  brutish,  with  every  passing  year.  So  he  lives,  and  so  living  he  goes 
down  to  death.  If  we  had  no  other  guide  tlian  our  own  reason  and  moral  instincts, 
should  we  confidently  affirm  of  such  a  man  that  there  would  be  life  for  him 
beyond  the  grave  ?  I  do  not  think  so.  I  think  we  should  be  more  likely  to  say 
of  him,  pityingly  and  mournfully  :  "  If  there  were  any  prospect  that  his  character 
could  be  mended,  then  we  would  hope  that  he  might  have  life  beyond ;  but  if  his 
life  is  to  go  on  in  this  strain,  theie  is  no  reason  why  his  existence  should  be  pro- 
longed. If  this  universe  is  built  on  righteousness,  the  continuance  of  such  lives 
is  illogical  and  inexplicable."  That  is  what  the  moral  reason  would  say  about  it. 
But  here  is  another  of  different  quality.  His  life  has  been  full  of  faithful  and 
loving  service  of  his  kind ;  the  contact  of  his  spirit  made  every  man  more  manly 
and  every  woman  more  womanly.  Steadily  as  the  years  have  gone  by  his  character 
has  been  ripening,  and  now  in  the  midst  of  his  years  he  suddenly  falls,  and  among 
men  no  more  is  seen.  Is  not  our  feeling  about  such  a  man's  departure  quite 
different  from  that  with  which  we  noted  the  passing  out  of  life  of  the  other  ?  Do 
we  not  say  at  once,  that  if  this  universe  means  righteousness  such  a  man  ought 
not  to  cease  to  be  ;  that  the  discontinuance  of  such  a  life  would  be  as  illogical  and 
inexplicable  as  the  continuance  of  the  other  would  lie  ?  Death  has  stized  upon  our 
friend,  we  say,  but  it  is  not  possible  that  death  should  hold  him  fast.  2.  In  cases 
of  many  that  we  have  known  we  have  felt  that  this  impossibility  was  strong, 
almost  invincible ;  but  how  much  stronger  should  it  have  been  in  the  minds  of 
those  who  had  been  the  companions  and  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  all  their  livas  I 
Might  they  not  have  said,  with  far  clearer  emphasis,  when  the  hand  of  death  was 
laid  on  Him,  "  It  is  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it  "  ?  Recall  some 
faint  outline  of  the  life  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Remember  the  clear  truthfulness  of 
His  speech.  His  courage.  His  friendship  for  the  outcasts  and  the  despised,  the  grand 


CHAP,  u.]  THE  ACTS.  187 

independence  with  which  He  brushed  aside  the  conventional  estimates,  the  tireless 
beneticence  and  boundless  sympathy  of  His  life.  And  now  suddenly  this  life 
terminates.  By  wicked  hands  this  Prince  of  Life  is  crucified  and  slain !  Is  it 
possible  that  such  a  life,  so  pure  and  perfect  and  benignant,  should  end  like  this  ? 
You  could  not  affirm  that  it  would  reappear  on  this  earth  ;  on  that  paint  experience 
could  give  you  no  encouragement ;  but  you  could  say  that  there  ought  to  be  and 
must  be  given  to  that  life,  somewhere,  glory  and  immortality.  3.  The  force  of  this 
conclusion  respecting  all  highest  and  noblest  life  it  is  hard  to  evade.  The  expecta- 
tion of  future  existence  in  the  abstract  may  be  more  or  less  shadowy ;  but  the 
expectation  that  virtuous  hfe  will  continue  rests  on  the  very  foundation  of  our 
moriil  nature.  And  there  is  a  great  word  of  science  that  reaffirms  this  verdict  of  our 
moral  s^nse.  It  is  the  fitte-t  that  survive,  we  are  told.  And,  in  a  moral  universe, 
it  is  the  righteous,  surely,  who  are  fit  to  survive.  You  stand  upon  some  elevated 
spot,  where  you  can  see,  far  down  the  valley,  a  railway  train  approaching.  The 
pennant  of  smoke  is  lifted  by  the  wind  as  the  train  draws  nearer  and  nearer, 
bending  round  the  curves,  speeding  swiftly  along  the  straight  alignments,  its  first 
faint  murmur  deepening  into  an  audible  roar,  until  it  rushes  past  you  swift,  majestic, 
resistless,  the  very  incarnation  of  motion  and  of  might.  Quickly,  almost  before 
your  nerves  have  ceased  to  thrill  with  the  onset  of  its  power,  it  is  out  of  sight  behind 
an  embankment,  and  out  of  hearing  beyond  a  hill ;  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  it  is  gone.  Would  it  be  easy  for  yon  now  to  believe  that  that  wonderful 
power  has  vanished  out  of  being ;  that  when  it  passed  beyond  your  sight  it  suddenly 
ceased  to  be ;  that  all  which  you  saw  and  felt  but  for  a  moment  ago  is  now  nothing 
but  a  memory  ?  No  ;  that  would  not  be  possible.  You  are  sure  that  the  glory  of 
going  on  still  belongs  to  that  wonderful  mechanism,  though  it  is  now  beyond  your 
sight.  And  it  seems  to  me  that  the  reasons  for  believing  in  the  persistence  of  a 
great  moral  force  after  it  has  disappeared  from  these  scenes  of  earth  are  far  stronger. 
Of  such  a  power  we  say,  more  confidently  than  of  any  physical  energy,  "  It  cannot 
be  blotted  out ;  it  must  continue  to  be."  4.  It  was  to  strengthen  this  conviction, 
to  demonstrate  its  truth  and  its  reason,  to  give  the  world,  in  a  great  object  lesson, 
the  proof  that  virtue  does  not  die,  that  our  Lord  came  back  to  earth.  It  was  not 
only  to  show  His  own  Divinity ;  it  was  also  to  show  that  virtue  and  holiness  are 
immortal.  And  as  it  was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  death,  so 
neither  is  it  possible  that  any  of  those  who  have  His  life  in  them  should  be 
detained  in  that  prison-house.  This  is  no  arbitrary  decree  by  which  a  future  life 
is  assured  to  the  disciples  of  Christ ;  it  is  the  law  of  the  universe.  Over  such  cha- 
racters as  His  death  has  no  power ;  and  they  who  by  faith  in  Him  are  brought  into 
harmony  with  Him  in  this  life  can  never  be  the  prey  of  the  spoiler.  "  He  that 
believeth  in  Me,"  said  the  Master,  "hath  everlasting  life."  He  who  is  one  with 
Christ,  who  has  the  spirit  of  Christ,  hath  eternal  life.  What,  to  him,  are  all  the 
vicissitudes  and  perils  of  our  mortal  state,  all  the  sullen  and  ominous  noises  of  the 
flood  of  years  whose  tides  steadily  gather  round  the  narrow  neck  of  land  whereon 
he  calmly  waits  ?  There  is  a  hope  within  him  that  many  waters  cannot  quench. 
His  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  {W.  Gladden,  D.D.)  The  resurrection 
inevitable  : — St.  Peter's  way  of  accounting  for  Christ's  resurrection  is  the  first 
apostolic  statement  on  the  subject.  And  certainly,  even  if  the  point  were  only  one 
of  antiquarian  interest,  it  would  be  full  of  attraction  to  know  how  the  first  Christians 
thought  about  the  chief  truths  of  their  faith ;  considering  the  influence  which  that 
faith  has  had  and  still  has  on  the  development  of  the  human  race.  But  for  us, 
Christians,  concern  in  this  matter  is  more  exacting.  Our  hopes  or  fears,  our  de- 
pressiions  or  enthusiasms,  our  improvement  or  deterioration,  are  bound  up  with  it. 
"  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  our  preaching  is  vain,  your  faith  is  also  vain."  I.  St. 
Peter  states  the  fact  that  Christ  had  risen  fkom  the  dead.  "  Whom  God 
hath  raised  up,  having  loosed  the  pains  of  death."  He  is  preaching  in  Jerusalem, 
the  scene  of  the  death  and  resurrection,  and  to  some  who  had  taken  part  in  the 
scenes  of  the  crucifixion.  Not  more  than  seven  weeks  have  passed.  And  in  Jeru- 
salem, we  may  be  sure,  men  did  not  live  as  fast  as  they  do  in  an  European  capital, 
in  this  age  of  telegraphs  and  railroads.  An  event  like  the  crucifixion,  in  a  town  of 
that  size,  would  have  occupied  general  attention  for  a  considerable  period.  It  was 
then  to  persons  keenly  interested  in  the  subject,  and  who  had  opportunities  of 
testing  its  truth,  that  St.  Peter  states  so  calmly  and  unhesitatingly  the  fact  of  the 
resurrection.  He  states  it  as  just  as  much  a  fact  of  history  as  the  crucifixion,  in 
which  his  hearers  had  taken  part.  Some  twenty-six  years  later,  when  St.  Paul 
wrote  his  first  letter  to  Corinth,  there  were,  he  says,  more  than  two  hundred  and 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

fifty  still  alive  who  had  seen  Jesus  Christ  after  His  resurrection.  The  number  of 
witnesses  to  the  fact,  to  whom  St.  Peter  could  appeal,  and  whom  his  hearers  might 
cross-question  if  they  liked,  will  account  far  the  simplicity  and  confidence  of  his 
assertion.  In  those  dnys  men  had  not  learnt  to  think  more  of  abstract  theories 
than  of  well-attested  facts.  Nobody,  it  may  be  added,  who  professed  to  believe  in 
an  Almighty  God,  thought  it  reverent  or  reasonable  to  say  that  He  could  not  for 
sufficient  reasons  modify  His  ordinary  rules  of  working,  if  He  chose  to  do  so.  St. 
Peter  then  preached  the  resurrection  as  a  fact,  and,  as  we  know,  with  great  and 
immediate  results.     But  how  did  he  account  for  it  ?     II.  He  savs  that  Christ 

WAS    KAISED    "BECAUSE     IT     WAS     NOT     POSSIBLE     THAT     He     SHOULD     BE     HOLDEN     OF " 

DEATH.  Thus  St.  Peter's  first  thought  about  this  matter  is  the  very  opposite  to 
that  of  many  perS'  ms  in  our  day.  They  say  that  do  evidence  will  convince  them 
that  Christ  Las  risen,  because  they  hold  it  to  be  antecedently  impossible  that  He 
should  rise.  St.  Peter,  on  the  other  hand,  almost  speaks  as  if  he  could  dispense 
with  any  evidence.  In  point  of  fact,  he  had  his  own  experience  to  fall  back  upon 
(Luke  xxiv.  34).  But  this  evidence  only  fell  in  with  the  anticipations  which  he  had 
now  formed  on  other  and  independent  grounds.  It  will  do  us  good  to  consider  the 
reasons  of  this  Divine  impossibility.  1.  It  was  not  possible,  "  for  David  speaketh 
concerning  Him."  Prophecy  forbade  Chiist  to  remain  la  His  grave.  As  to  the 
principle  of  this  argument  there  would  have  been  no  controversy  between  St.  Peter 
and  the  Jews.  When  once  God  had  thus  spokfn.  His  word,  it  was  felt  by  Jews  and 
Christians,  stood  sure.  It  could  not  return  empty ;  it  must  accomplish  the  work 
for  which  God  had  sent  it  forth ;  since  it  bound  Him  to  an  engagement  with  those 
who  uttered  and  with  those  who  heard  His  message.  Obviously  enough,  the  true 
drift  of  a  prophecy  may  easily  be  mistaken.  God  is  not  responsible  for  eccentric 
guesses  as  to  His  meaning.  But  where  a  prediction  is  clear,  it  does  bind  Him  who 
is  its  real  Author  to  some  fultilment,  which,  in  the  event,  will  be  recognised  as 
such.  And  such  a  prediction  of  the  resurrection  St.  Peter  finds  in  Psalm  xvi.,  where 
David — as  more  completely  in  Psalm  xxii. — loses  the  sense  of  his  own  personal 
circumstances  in  the  impetus  and  ecstasy  of  the  prophetic  spirit,  and  desciibes  a 
Personality  of  which  indeed  he  was  a  type,  but  which  altogether  transcends  him. 
The  meaning  of  the  Psalm  was  so  clear  to  some  Jewish  doctors,  that,  unable  as 
they  were  to  reconcile  it  with  David's  history,  they  invented  the  fable  that  his 
body  was  miraculously  preserved  from  corruption.  David,  however,  was  really 
speaking  in  the  person  of  Messiah.  And  his  language  created  the  neces-^ity  that 
Messiah  should  rise  from  the  di  ad.  Observe,  here,  that  St.  Peter  had  not  always 
felt  and  thought  thus.  He  had  known  this  Psalm  all  his  life.  But  long  after  he 
had  followed  Jesus,  he  had  been  ignorant  of  its  true  meaning.  Only  liitle  by  little 
do  any  of  us  learn  God"s  truth  and  will.  And  so  lately  as  the  morning  of  the  resur- 
rection, the  apostles  "knew  not  the  Scripture,  that  He  must  rise  again  fri'm  the 
dead."  Since  then  the  Holy  Spirit  had  come  down,  and  had  poured  a  flood  of 
light  into  their  minds  and  over  the  sacred  pages  of  the  Old  Testament.  And  thus 
a  necessity  for  the  resurrection,  which  even  Jews  ought  to  recognise,  was  now 
abundantly  plain.  2.  A  second  reason  lay  in  the  character  of  Christ.  Now,  of 
that  a  leading  feature  was  its  simp'e  truthfulness.  He  was  too  wise  to  predict  the 
impossible.  He  was  too  sincere  to  promise  what  He  did  not  mean.  But  Christ 
had  again  and  again  said  that  He  would  be  put  to  a  violent  death,  and  that  after 
dying  He  would  rise  again  (John  ii.  19 ;  Matt.  xii.  40,  xvi.  21 ;  Mark  ix.  31,  x. 
32-34).  Thus  He  was  pledged  to  this  particular  act — pledged  to  the  Jewish  people, 
and  especially  to  His  own  followers.  He  could  not  have  remained  in  His  grave — 
I  will  not  say  without  dishonour,  but — without  causing  in  others  a  revulsion  of 
feeling  such  as  is  provoked  by  the  exposure  of  baseless  pretensions.  It  may 
indeed  be  urged  that  the  resurrection  foretold  by  Christ  was  ni>t  a  literal  resur- 
rection of  His  dead  body,  but  only  a  recovery  of  His  credit,  His  authority ;  ob- 
scured as  these  had  been  for  a  while  by  the  crucifixion.  The  word  **  resurrection," 
according  to  this  supposition,  is  in  His  mouth  a  purely  metaphorical  expression. 
Socrates  had  had  to  drink  the  fatal  hemlock ;  and  the  body  of  Socrates  had  long 
since  mingled  with  the  dust.  But  Socrates,  it  might  be  said,  had  risen,  in  the 
intellectual  triumphs  of  his  pupils,  and  in  the  enthusiastic  admiration  of  succeeding 
ages;  the  method  and  words  of  Socrates  had  been  preserved  for  all  time  in  a 
literature  that  will  never  die.  If  Christ  was  to  be  put  to  death  by  crucifixion, 
He  would  triumph,  even  after  a  death  so  shameful  and  degrading,  as  Sncrates  and 
others  had  triumphed  before  Him.  To  imHgine  for  Him  an  actual  exit  from  His 
tomb  is  said  to  be  a  crude  literalism,  natural  to  uncultivated  ages,  but  impossible, 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  189 

when  the  finer  suggestiveness  of  human  language  has  been  felt  to  transcend  the 
letter.  An  obvious  reply  to  this  explanation  is,  that  it  arbitrarily  makes  our  Lord 
use  literal  and  metaphorical  language  in  two  successive  clausf^s  of  a  single  sentence. 
He  is  literal,  it  seems,  when  He  predicts  His  crucifixion ;  but  why  is  He  to  be 
thought  metaphorical  when  He  foretells  His  resurrection  ?  Why  should  not  His 
resurrection  be  preceded  by  a  metaphorical  crucifixion  ;  a  crucifixion  of  thought,  or 
will,  or  reputation — not  the  literal  nailing  of  a  human  body  to  a  wooden  cross  ? 
Surely  He  meant  that  the  one  event  would  be  just  as  much  or  just  as  little  a  matter 
of  fact  as  the  oiher.  Those  who  cling  to  His  human  character,  yet  deny  His  resur- 
rection, would  do  well  to  consider  that  they  must  choose  between  their  moral 
enthusiasm  and  their  unbelief ;  since  it  is  the  character  of  Christ,  even  more  than 
the  language  of  prophecy,  which  made  the  idea  that  He  would  not  rise  after  death 
impossible  for  His  first  disciples.  3.  Not  that  we  have  yet  exhausted  St.  Peter's 
reasons.  In  the  sprmon  which  he  preached  after  the  healing  of  the  lame  man, 
he  told  his  hearers  that  they  had  "  killed  the  Prince  of  Life,  whom  God  raised  from 
the  dead."  Kemark  that  striking  title.  Not  merely  does  it  show  how  high  above 
all  earthly  royalties  was  the  crucified  Saviour  in  the  heart  and  faith  of  His  apostle. 
It  connects  his  thought  with  the  language  of  his  Master  on  the  one  side,  and  that 
of  His  apostles  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  upon  the  other  (John  xiv.  6,  v.  26,  40,  i.  4  ; 
Col,  iii.  4).  Wliat  is  life?  We  do  not  know  what  it  is  in  itself.  We  only  register 
its  symptoms.  We  see  growth,  movement ;  and  we  say,  "  Here  is  life."  It  exists 
in  one  degree  in  the  tree  ;  in  a  higher  in  the  animal ;  in  a  higher  still  in  man.  In 
beings  above  man,  we  cannot  doubt,  it  is  to  be  found  in  some  yet  grander  form. 
But  in  all  these  cases  it  is  a  gift  from  another:  and  having  been  given,  it  might  be 
modified  or  withdrawn.  Only  the  Self-Existent  lives  of  right.  He  lives  because 
He  cannot  but  live.  This  is  true  of  the  Eternal  Three,  who  yet  are  One.  Hence 
our  Lord  says,  "  As  the  Father  hath  life  in  Himself,  so  hath  He  given  to  the  Son 
to  have  life  in  Himself."  Thus,  with  the  Eternal  Giver,  the  Eternal  Beceiver  is 
Fountain  and  Source  of  life.  With  reference  to  all  created  beings,  He  is  the  Life — 
their  Creator,  their  Upholder,  their  End  (Col.  i.  16,  17).  This  then  is  the  full  sense 
of  St.  Peter's  expression,  "  The  Prince  of  Life."  How  could  the  very  Lord  and 
Source  of  life  be  subdued  by  death  ?  If,  for  reasons  of  wisdom  and  mercy,  He  sub- 
jected the  nature  which  He  had  made  His  own  to  the  king  of  terrors,  this  was 
surely  not  in  the  course  of  nature  ;  it  was  a  violence  to  nature  that  this  should  be. 
And  therefore  when  the  object  had  been  achieved.  He  would  rise,  St.  Peter  implies, 
by  an  inevitable  rebound,  by  the  force  of  things,  by  the  inherent  energy  of  His 
irrepressible  life.  From  St.  Peter's  point  of  view,  the  real  wonder  would  be  if  such 
a  Being  were  not  to  rise.  The  pains  of  deatb  were  loosed — not  by  an  extraordinary 
effort,  as  in  your  case  or  mine — but  because  it  was  impossible  that  He,  the  Prince 
of  Life,  should  be  holden  of  it.     III.  This  necessity,  while  in  its  original  form 

STRICTLY   proper   TO    HiS    CASE,    POINTS   TO    KINDRED    NECESSITIES    WHICH   AFFECT    HiS 

SERVANTS  AND  His  Church.  Notc — 1.  The  impossibility,  for  us  Christians  too,  of 
being  buried  for  ever  in  the  tomb  in  which  we  shall  each  be  laid  at  death.  In 
tliis,  as  in  other  matters,  "as  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world."  To  us  as  to  Him, 
although  in  a  different  way,  God  has  pledged  Himself.  In  Him  an  internal  vital 
force  made  resurrection  from  death  necessary ;  in  us  there  is  no  such  intrinsic 
force,  only  a  power  guaranteed  to  us  from  without.  He  could  say  of  the  temple  of 
His  body,  "  I  will  raise  it  up  in  three  days  "  :  we  can  only  say  that  God  will  i:aise 
us  up,  we  know  not  wh^^n.  But  this  we  do  know  (Rom.  viii.  11),  The  law  of 
justice  and  the  law  of  love  combine  to  create  a  necessity  which  requires  "a  resur- 
rection of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  of  the  unjust."  Death  is  not  an  eternal 
sleep;  the  tomb  is  not  the  final  resting-place  of  the  bodies  of  those  wbom  we  have 
loved.  The  empty  sepulchre  at  Jerusalem  on  Easter  morning  is  the  wan-ant  of  a 
new  life,  strictl.v  continuous  with  this,  and,  if  we  are  faithful,  much  more  glorious. 
2.  The  piinciple  of  moral  resurrections  in  the  Church.  As  with  the  bodies  of  the 
faithful  so  it  is  with  the  Church.  The  Church  is,  accordirg  to  St.  Paul's  teaching, 
Christ  Himself  in  history  (1  Cor.  xii.  12 ;  Eph.  i.  22,  23).  But  the  force  of  this 
language  is  limited  by  the  fact,  equally  warranted  by  Scripture — that  the  Church 
has  in  it  a  buman  element,'  which,  unlike  the  humanity  of  Christ,  is  weak  and 
sinful.  Again  and  again  in  the  course  of  her  history  large  portions  of  the  Christian 
Church  have  seemed  to  be  dead  and  buried.  But  suddenly  the  tomb  has  opened  ; 
there  has  been  a  moral  movement,  a  new  spirit  of  devotion,  social  stir,  literary 
activity,  conspicuous  self-sacrifice ;  and,  lo !  the  world  awakes  to  an  uneasy  sus- 
picion that  "John  the  Baptist  has  risen  from  the  dead,  and  that  mighty  works  do 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

show  forth  themselves  in  him."  The  truth  is  that  Christ  has  again  burst  His  tomb 
and  is  abroad  among  men.  So  it  was  after  the  moral  degradation  of  the  Papacy  in 
the  tenth  century  ;  so  it  was  after  the  recrudescence  of  Paganism  by  the  Eenais- 
sance  in  the  fifteenth ;  so  it  was  after  the  triumph  of  misbelief  and  profanity  in  the 
seventeenth,  and  of  indifference  to  vital  religion  in  the  eit;hteenth.  3.  Wiiat  is  or 
ought  to  be  the  governing  principle  of  our  own  personal  life  ?  If  we  have  been  laid 
in  the  tomb  of  sin,  it  ought  to  be  impossible  that  we  should  be  holden  of  sin.  I  say 
"  ought  10  be,"  because,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  not  impossible.  God  only  is 
responsible  for  the  resurrection  of  the  Christian's  body,  and  for  the  perpetuity  of 
the  Christian  Church  ;  and  therefore  it  is  impossible  that  either  the  Church  or  our 
bodies  should  permanently  succumb  to  the  empire  of  death.  But  God,  who  raises 
our  bodies  whether  we  will  or  not,  does  not  raise  our  souls  from  sin,  unle-s  we 
correspond  with  His  grace  ;  and  it  is  quite  in  our  power  to  refuse  this  correspon- 
dence. That  we  should  rise  then  from  sin  is  a  mornl,  not  a  physical,  necessity ; 
but  surely  we  ought  to  make  it  as  real  a  necessity  as  if  it  were  ph\  sical  (Eom.  vi.  4). 
4.  A  real  lesurreetion  with  Christ  will  make  and  leave  some  definite  traces  upoa 
life.  Let  us  resolve  this  day  to  do  or  leave  undone  some  one  thing  whioh  will  mark 
a  new  beginning:  conscience  will  instruct  us,  if  we  allow  it  to  do  so.  {Canon 
Liddon.)  The  inevitahl enrss  of  Christ's  resurrection  : — I.  The  fact  here  stated. 
"  Him  hath  God  raised  up,"  &c.  Note — 1.  That  Jet-us  did  experience  everything 
which  death  is  able  to  iuflict  upon  mortal  man.  It  was  not,  as  some  ancient 
heretics  pretended,  the  mere  appearance  of  death,  but  the  reality,  which  He  under- 
went. He  felt  "  the  pains  of  death."  And  so  fearful  and  rapid  was  the  opeiation 
of  His  sufferings,  that,  of  the  three  who  were  crucified  together,  He  alone  was  dead, 
when  the  hour  arrived  for  removing  the  bodies.  And  death  had  then  full  dominion 
over  Him.  2.  That  He  was  set  free  from  the  power  of  death  by  being  raised  to  life 
asain.  To  all  human  appearance  the  hop»s  of  His  cause  were  for  ever  bu'ied  with 
Him.  But  at  this  point  the  power  of  death  was  broken,  and  the  grave  is  robbed  of 
its  victory.  "  Death  has  no  more  dominion  over  Him."  He  is  raised — not  as  the 
widow's  son  at  Nain  or  Lazarus,  again  to  die— but  to  wear  for  ever  that  s(!arred  body 
which  He  has  brought  with  Him  out  of  the  sepulchre.  3.  That  this  eveit  was 
etfected  by  Divine  power  :  "  Him  hath  God  raised  up."  This  circumstHuce  may 
excite  no  wonder  in  your  minds  ;  for  who  can  raise  the  dead  but  God  only  ?  Un- 
questionably, He  alone,  who  first  "  breathed  into  man's  nostrils  the  breath  of  life," 
can  restore  it  after  He  hath  taken  it  away.  Call  to  mind,  however,  what  He  Him- 
self bad  openly  declared  long  before  His  death,  "  No  man  taketh  My  life  from  Me," 
<fec.  Sciiptuie  teaches  us  that  each  Person  in  the  blessed  Trinity  took  His  ^hare  in 
effecting  ihis  glorious  resurrection.  (1)  The  Father  (Heb.  xiii.  20).  (2)  The  Son 
(John  ii.  19).  (3)  The  Holy  Ghost  (Eom.  i.  4  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18).  These  would  be 
contradictory  statements  were  it  not  for  that  mysterious  doctrine,  that  our  God  is 
one  God  in  three  Persons.  That  doctrine  reconciles  all ;  while  it  still  calls  upon  us 
to  wonder  and  adore.  II.  The  reason  assigned  for  it.  Had  Jesus  so  willed, 
death  could  not  have  taken  hold  of  Him  ;  nor  could  it  keep  its  hol  I  one  moment 
long'  r  when  God  commanded,  "  Loose  Him  and  let  Him  go."  The  impossibility 
here  dwelt  upon,  however,  seems  to  mean  something  more  than  that  arising  from 
God's  irresistible  power.  It  could  not  be,  because^!.  Prophecy  had  long  ago  fore- 
told that  it  should  not  be  ;  "  and  the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken."  2.  No  good  end 
would  have  been  answei'ed  by  the  continuance  of  Christ  under  the  power  of  death. 
All  that  He  had  suffered  was  in  order  to  His  being  "  the  propitiation  for  our  sins." 
Now  those  agonies  needed  not  to  be  eternal,  although  they  were  an  equivabnt  to 
that  eternal  punishment  which  is  our  desert.  The  Sufferer  being  infinite,  the  merit 
of  His  sufferings  was  so  likewise.  And  for  the  same  reason,  the  humiliation  of  the 
grave  once  submitted  to  was  enough,  since  it  was  the  infinitely  glorious  Son  of  God 
who  condescended  to  endure  it.  Just  as  *'  one  offering  "  sufficed  for  "  ihe  sins  of 
many,"  so  one  short  sojourn  in  the  tomb  of  dishonour  was  sufficient  to  earn  its 
infinite  reward.  More  was  not  required — and  God  does  nothing  unnecessarily.  3. 
Satan's  apparent  triumph  would  then  have  been  a  real  one.  The  chief  end  of 
Christ's  coming  was  to  "  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  Of  this.  Sat  in  himself 
was  fully  awnre  ;  and  to  prevent  his  own  defeat  left  no  effort  untried.  He  assailed 
the  mind  of  Jesus  with  temptations :  he  stirred  up  enemies  against  His  life. 
Defeated  in  the  former  by  Christ's  lioly  nature,  he  appeared  to  succeed  in  the  latter, 
and  possibly  began  to  boast  that  he  had  now  triumphed  over  the  only  Eedeemer  of 
men.  And  had  Jesus  still  lain  in  the  corruption  of  the  grave,  who  could  liave  gain- 
said this  boast  ?    St.  Paul  himself  allows  tuat  it  would  have  been  the  ruin  of  our 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  191 

hopes  (1  Cor.  xv.  17).  Jesus,  therefore,  must  needs  rise  again.  4.  He  had  still 
one  perpetual  work  to  perform  on  behalf  of  His  people,  which  required  His  entire 
presence  as  perfect  Man  before  God.  As  our  Priest  He  had  offered  the  sacrifice  for 
sins;  in  the  same  character  He  had  now  to  make  continual  "  iutercession  for  us." 
"He  might  have  done  this,"  you  say,  "  in  His  Divine  Person,  or  by  His  human 
soul  in  glory. "  Why  not  as  well  say  He  might  have  made  atonement  without  a 
human  body?  No — the  presence  of  that  living  body  is  indispensable,  as  an  evidence 
of  His  merit,  as  the  pledge  of  His  claims.  {J.Jowett,  M.A.)  Christ  still  escaping 
from  entombment : — Dead,  and  yet  not  able  to  continue  dead.  A  stone  sepulchre, 
and  yet  not  equal  to  the  strain  of  the  strange  body  that  was  entombed  in  it.  "Not 
possible  "  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it.  It  is  just  that  "  not  possible  "  that  we 
are  going  to  think  about.  The  world  has  never  made  a  great  deal  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Lazarus,  or  of  the  widow's  son  of  Nain,  or  the  ruler's  daughter,  or  the 
Shunammite's  son.  There  are  two  kinds  of  resurrection  :  there  is  a  natural  resur- 
rection and  there  is  an  artificial  resurrection.  Something  roused  Lazarus.  Elisha 
roused  the  Shunammite's  son.  Jesus  has  had  His  death-sleep  out.  Artifice  versus 
nature.  It  never  could  have  been  said  of  the  ruler's  daughter  that  God  raised  her 
up,  loosing  the  pains  of  death  because  it  was  not  possible  that  she  should  be  holden 
of  it.  It  was  possible,  most  possible.  In  the  rending  of  the  Lord's  sepulchre  we 
are  dealing  with  a  distinct  matter.  It  is  an  event  on  another  plane.  At  any  rate, 
people  have  never  pinned  their  hope  of  immortality  to  Lazarus'  resurrection,  and 
they  have  to  the  Lord's.  And  something  of  tbe  core  of  the  case  lies  in  this  particular 
clause  we  are  upon  :  "  Because  it  was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it." 
We  gain  from  Christ's  instance  a  sense  of  resurrection  power  working  from  within 
outward ;  in  other  instances,  tbe  sense  of  resurrection  power  working  from  without 
inward.  Here  it  is  something  indigenous.  Here  it  is  like  the  wheat-grain  growing 
up  out  of  the  ground  because  there  is  intrinsic  impulse  malting  it  grow  up  ;  resur- 
rection inheres  in  its  nature  ;  it  is  not  possible  that  it  should  be  holden  ;  rising  is 
a  part  of  its  genius.  The  Lord's  life  was  somehow  in  His  own  hands.  His  life 
was  such  a  thing  that  limitations  did  not  limit  it;  obstructions  were  no  embarrass- 
ment to  it;  death  was  not  fatal  to  it.  Life  underany  circumstances,  life  of  any  kind 
is  a  wonderful  thing,  spiritual  life,  animal  life,  yea,  even  vege'able  life.  We  cannot 
say  much  about  it,  only  wonder  at  it.  An  acorn  lying,  for  months,  still,  brown  and 
insensible,  with  a  slight  change  of  environment,  begins  to  become  dimly  conscious 
of  itself ;  and  waking  up  into  a  mighty  tree  that  fills  the  air,  gi'eens  and  withers, 
and  greens  and  withers  while  children  grow  old  and  generations  pass  away.  It  is 
a  long  way  from  the  buried  acorn  cracking  in  the  da>k  to  the  rending  of  the  tomb 
of  tbe  Son  of  God  in  the  morning  twilight  of  the  world's  first  Easter  ;  and  yet  our 
thought  to-day  is  upon  the  same  feature  in  the  two  instances — the  life  element, 
vegetable  in  one,  Divine  in  the  other,  but  working  out  with  an  easy  expanse, 
shattering  confinement  by  the  native  tension  of  its  own  energy ;  with  facile 
sufficiency  disrupting  its  own  confinement  and  crushing  its  own  bonds.  "It  was 
not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it."  It  seems  to  me  we  can  almost  see  the 
very  steps  of  the  transaction.  Divine  life  in  the  grave  unnerving  the  clasp  of  death 
and  striving  to  fracture  the  meshes  of  futality ;  and  all  of  that,  not  by  virtue  of 
extrinsic  reinforcement,  but  out  of  the  abundance  of  its  own  easy  sufficiency,  the 
exuberance  of  its  irresistible  fulness  of  Divine  life.  Now  all  of  that  brings  almost 
to  our  very  senses  the  event  of  Divine  resuriection  which  the  great  Church  catholic 
on  earth  celebrates.  But  not  only  is  there  a  great  historic  meaning  in  this  resur- 
rection emergence  of  Christ  from  the  sepulchre,  but  it  seems  to  me  there  is  a 
picture  in  small  of  what  Divine  life  on  earth  is  everywhere  and  always  doing.  1. 
That  is  the  grand  meaning  of  history,  slow  resurrection  of  the  Divine  life  tl  at 
is  buried  in  it,  and  that  every  day  strains  a  little  more  the  gritty  sepulchre ;  net 
because  you  and  I  try  to  drive  into  the  enshrouding  rock  the  wedges  of  our  holy 
endeavour,  not  because  liberating  power  is  borne  in  upon  it  from  any  outward 
source ;  but  because  of  the  strengthening  tension  and  growing  push  of  its  own 
resistless  life  that  is  eternally  destined  to  break  loose  from  the  confinement  of 
death  because  it  is  not  possible  that  it  should  be  holden  of  it.  All  the  sin  that  is 
in  the  world,  and  the  wpathy  and  the  obstinacy,  and  tbe  ignorance  and  the  hope- 
lessness, what  is  it  but  so  much  vast,  cold  granite  tomb  in  which  the  immanent 
buried  life  of  God  is  Wdrking  itself  forth  day  and  night,  century  after  century,  as 
the  dawn  slowly  reddens  toward  the  perfect  glory  of  the  full  day  and  the  ushered 
kingdom  for  whose  coaiing  we  reverently  pray.  Oh,  in  how  many  ways  the  Divine 
Spirit  of  all  truth  has  been  working  through  all  the  ages  of  the  world  and  giving 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

even  pagan  minds  a  presentiment  and  suspicion  of  the  deep  things  of  man  and 
history  of  God !  As  geologists  delight  to  lay  bare  the  rocks  and  track  the  pathway 
upon  tbem  worn  by  the  archaic  forces  of  fire  and  flood,  so  it  seems  to  me  there  is 
no  grander  effort  of  which  human  mind  in  the  range  of  immaterial  things  is 
capable,  than  to  trace  the  movements  of  human  histoi-y,  considering  those  move- 
ments always  as  being  steadily  marshalled  by  the  generalship  of  God's  ordering 
Spirit,  and  every  advance  toward  freer  living,  truer  thinking,  sweeter  acting,  and 
holier  worshipping  as  being  one  more  blow  with  which  the  rising  Lord  of  Life 
strikes  the  grim  casing  of  His  tomb,  and  shatters  Himself  a  pathway  out  into  the 
light  a7id  splendour  of  the  world's  final  Easter.  2.  TLi  ik  again  of  this  Sime 
confined  Spirit  of  God,  as  struggling  in  quiet  resurrection  against  the  barriers  of  sin, 
ignorance,  and  prejudice  that  hinder  the  evangelisation  of  the  world.  Eemembering 
how  the  claims  of  the  gospel  cut  directly  athwart  the  stalwart  passions  of  every 
human  heart,  I  cannot  undeistand  how  any  man,  with  a  mind  that  is  apprecia- 
tive, and  that  has  a  grasp  upon  the  history  of  the  victories  achieved  by  the 
Cross,  can  escape  the  conclusion  of  a  God-Spirit  striving  in  the  midst  of  it  all, 
and  rending  its  way  out  like  an  entombed  Jesus  breaking  forth  into  the  light  and 
liberty  of  full  resurrection.  There  is  no  argument  for  the  Divmeness  of  Christianity 
like  the  steady,  irresistible,  onward  march  of  Christianity.  It  is  the  same  thing  over 
again,  a  sepulchre  entombing  a  waking  Divine  Lord,  and  it  was  not  possible  that 
He  should  be  holden  of  it ;  antagonism  compacted  to  granitic  hardness  ;  sin  rolled 
as  a  stone  against  the  door  of  the  sepulchre  and  sealed  with  malignity  and  cruelty  : 
cunning  posted  as  a  watch  upon  it.  But  the  night  is  going  by,  it  is  a  Divine 
presence  that  is  straining  at  the  grave  clothes  and  struggling  out  from  entombment, 
and  every  new  tribe  that  has  the  gospel  brought  to  it,  every  new  island  out  in  mid- 
ocean  that  is  vocal  to-day  with  Easter  praises,  every  new  dialect  that  this  April 
spells  ont  "  resurrection  "  to  the  wondering  eye  of  the  untaught  pagan,  is  one  more 
blow  with  which  the  rising  Lord  of  Life  strikes  the  grim  casing  of  His  tomb  and 
shatters  Himself  a  pathway  out  into  the  light  and  splendour  of  the  great  world's 
Easter.  3.  And  then,  again,  an  imprisoned  Divine  Lord  is  struggling  to  full  resur- 
rection within  the  entombing  religion  of  the  world.  One  of  the  unappreciated 
marvels  of  our  very  Bible  is  the  way  in  which,  from  the  beginning  of  it  to  the 
end,  it  marks  the  steady  rise  of  that  current  of  Divine  truth  which  it  channels. 
There  is  not  a  greater  mistake  made,  nor  a  sadder  one,  than  the  habit  of  treating 
the  Bible  as  a  dead  level  of  Divine  revelation.  Its  first  lessons  are  but  the  seed- 
corn  out  of  which,  through  the  successive  seasons  of  four  thousand  years,  the 
primary  germ  hns  been  unfolding  into  to-day's  blossomed  and  fruited  Tree  of 
Life.  It  was  a  Divine  thing  then;  Divine  in  its  inception  as  it  is  in  its  finish; 
just  as  the  confined  germ  is  as  live  a  thing  as  the  great  air-filling  elm  after  a 
growth  of  two  hundred  years.  But  away  back  there  it  was  a  Divine  thing  per- 
petually  striving  and  strnggling  forth  into  unsepulchred  lifengainst  the  constraints 
and  confinements  that  human  small-mindedness  and  false-heartedness  put  upon  it. 
Divine,  but  Divineness  bandaged!  Eternal  Spirit,  but  Eternal  Spirit  in  a  vault. 
Four  thousand  years  of  resurrection  in  the  domain  of  truth!  The  Word  which  in 
the  beginning  was  with  God  and  was  God,  breaking  off  year  by  year  and  century 
by  century  the  coarse  integuments  of  human  stuiiidity  and  carnality  with  which, 
forsooth,  even  Divineness  requires  to  come  into  the  world  encased.  4.  The  Lord, 
too,  is  sepulchred,  and  has  always  been  most  gloomily  sepulchred,  in  the  theology 
of  His  Church.  To  disparage  theology  is  to  forget  the  Divme  Spirit  of  truth  which 
the  pettiness  and  faultiness  of  human  conception  encases ;  and  to  ignoreor  lightly  to 
pass  over  the  history  of  theologic  thouglit  for  the  i^ast  forty  centuries  is  to  be 
oblivious  of  the  slow,  steady  process  of  resurrection  through  which  the  confined 
Spirit  of  God  is  straining  and  crushing,  age  by  age,  the  tough  integument  by 
which  He  is  so  jealously  guarded,  the  tomb  of  petrified  opinion  around  which  His 
lovers  keep  tearful  vigil,  and  to  which  in  the  grey  light  of  the  early  morning  they 
gather  with  linen  bandages  and  spices  "  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is  to  bury." 
Theological  controversy  thus,  so  far  as  it  is  the  cracking  away  of  ai'chaeological 
deposit  and  dogmatic  stratification  is  but  the  emergence  of  the  God-Spirit  into 
freer  air  and  wider  liberty,  and  therefore  can  no  more  be  stamped  out  or  whistled 
down  by  a  dogmatic  constabulary  than  you  could  stop  the  growth  of  a  California 
pine  by  girdling  its  trunk  with  cotton  yarn,  or  than  the  resurrection  of  the  Soa 
of  God  at  Jerusalem  could  have  been  delayed  by  piling  more  granite  upon  the 
roof  of  the  sepulchre  or  posting  more  Eoraan  police  at  its  door.  5.  And  then, 
jutt  in  a  word,  the  irrepressible  Lord  of  Life  is  immured  and  struggling  inside  the 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  ACTS.  193 

ethics  of  the  world.  There  is  nothing  in  the  history  of  the  human  race  more 
calculated  to  amaze  us  than  its  improvement  in  morals ;  especially  when  you 
remember  that  every  step  of  such  improvement  is  taken  in  the  teeth  of  every  man's 
native  tendency  and  original  passion.  No  man  ever  becomes  better  except  as  he 
has  Divine  power  given  him  to  trample  on  himself.  And  to  deny  that  there  has 
been  moral  improvement  is  to  be  ignorant  of  history  or  to  give  the  lie  to  history. 
As  I  say,  it  is  all  of  it  a  growth ;  and  the  hindered,  entombed,  struggling  life  of 
the  Lord  is  the  Divine  sap  that  permeates  that  growth.  History,  from  the  begin- 
ning of  it  to  the  end  of  it,  is  all  resurrection  ;  the  straining,  tenser  and  tenser 
straining,  of  the  immured  life  of  God  in  the  world.  Here  is  our  hope.  We  praise 
God  for  the  irrepressible  and  irresistible  life  that  is  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  We 
celebrate  the  empty  grave  with  songs  of  loud  acclaim.  But  while  in  this  we  are 
memorially  celebrating  the  past,  we  would  also,  0  God,  by  the  same  act  anticipate 
and  celebrate  that  greater  coming  Eastertide,  when  every  bandage  that  human 
pettiness  and  ignorance  wind  about  our  risen  Lord  sball  be  sundered,  when  the 
whole  sepulchre  of  world-sin  in  which  He  is  yet  entombed  sball  be  rent,  and  the 
Lord  of  Life  move  forth  a  free  Lord  over  a  free  earth — a  glorified  Lord  in  the  midst 
of  a  redeemed  world.  (C  H,  Parklmrst,  D.D.)  Bonds  which  could  not  hold : — 
1.  Our  Lord  felt  the  pains  of  death  truly  and  really.  His  body  was  in  very  deed 
dead,  yet  there  was  no  corruption.  (1)  It  was  not  needful :  it  could  have  borne 
no  relation  to  our  redemption.  (2)  It  would  not  have  been  seemly.  (3)  It  was 
not  demanded  by  the  law  of  nature ;  for  He  was  sinless,  and  sin  is  the  worm 
which  causes  corruption.  2.  But  from  the  pains  of  death  His  body  was  loosed  by 
resurrection.  I.  Ix  was  not  possible  that  the  bands  of  death  should  hold 
OUR  LoKD.  He  derived  His  superiority  to  the  bondage  of  death — 1.  From  the 
command  of  the  Father  that  He  should  have  power  to  take  His  life  again  (John 
X.  18).  2.  From  the  dignity  of  His  human  person.  (1)  As  in  union  with  God- 
head. (2)  As  being  in  itself  absolutely  perfect.  3.  From  the  completion  of  His 
propitiation.  The  debt  was  discharged :  He  must  be  freed.  4.  From  the  plan 
and  purpose  of  grace  which  involved  the  life  of  the  Head  as  well  as  that  of  the 
members  (John  xiv.  19).  5.  From  the  perpetuity  of  His  offices.  (1)  Priest  (Heb. 
vi.  20).  (2)  King  (Psa.  xlv.  6).  (3)  Shepherd  (Heb.  xiii.  20).  6.  From  the 
nature  of  things,  since  without  it  we  should  have — (1)  No  assurance  of  our 
resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.  17).  (2)  No  certainty  of  justification  (Eom.  iv.  25).  (3) 
No  representative  possession  of  heaven  (Heb.  ix.  24).  (4)  No  crowning  of  man 
with  glory  and  honour,  and  exaltation  of  him  over  the  works  of  God's  hands.  II. 
It  IB  not  possible  that  any  other  bands  SHOULD  HOLD  His  KINGDOM.  1.  The 
firm  establishment  of  error  shall  not  prevent  the  victory  of  truth.  The  colossal 
systems  of  Greek  philosophy  and  Eoman  priestcraft  have  passed  away ;  and  so 
shall  other  evil  powers.  2.  The  scholarship  of  His  foes  shall  not  resist  His 
wisdom.  He  baffled  the  wise  in  His  life .  on  earth  ;  much  more  will  He  do  it  by 
His  Holy  Spirit  (1  Cor.  i.  20).  3.  The  ignorance  of  mankind  shall  not  darken  His  ' 
light.  "  The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them  "  (Matt.  xi.  5).  Degraded 
races  receive  the  truth  (Matt.  iv.  16).  4.  The  power,  wealth,  fashion,  and  prestige 
of  falsehood  shall  not  crush  His  kingdom  (chap.  iv.  26).  5.  The  evil  influence 
of  the  world  upon  the  Church  shall  not  quench  the  Divine  flame  (John  xvi.  33). 
6.  The  rampant  power  of  unbelief  shall  not  destroy  His  dominion.  Though  at 
this  hour  it  seems  to  bind  the  Church  in  the  bands  of  death,  those  fetters  shall 
melt  away  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  III.  It  is  not  possible  to  hold  in  bondage  anything 
that  is  His.  1.  The  poor  struggling  sinner  shall  escape  the  bonds  of  his  guilt, 
his  depravity,  his  doubts,  Satan,  and  the  world  (Psa.  cxxiv.  7).  2.  The  bondaged 
child  of  God  shall  not  be  held  captive  by  tribulation,  temptation,  or  depression 
(Psa.  xxxiv.  19 ;  cxvi.  7).  3.  The  bodies  of  His  saints  shall  not  be  held  in  the 
grave  (1  Cor.  xv.  23  ;  1  Pet.  i.  3-5).  4.  The  groaning  creation  shall  yet  burst 
into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  (Eom.  viii.  21).  Conclusion. 
Here  is  a  true  Easter  hymn  for  all  who  are  in  Christ.  The  Lord  is  risen  indeed, 
and  the  happiest  consequences  must  follow.  Let  us  rise  in  His  rising,  and  walk 
at  large  in  His  loosing.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  25-28.  For  David  speaketh  concerning  Him. — A  prophetic  panorama  of  the 
life  of  Jesus: — These  words  of  David  show  Jesus — I.  In  His  relation  to  the 
Father.  1.  He  had  a  constant  recollection  of  God.  "  I  saw  the  Lord  always," 
<feo.  In  His  early  life  He  said,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's 
business?"    And  when  the  end  drew  near  He  said,  "1  must  work,"  &c.    His 

VOL.   I.  13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

faithful  people  are  in  this  respect  like  Him  in  their  degrees.  2.  He  had  a  constant 
assurance  of  the  Divine  presence — "  He  is  on  My  right  hand."  He  could  speak  to 
the  Father  anywhere,  and  be  sure  that  He  was  always  heard.  It  is  granted  also  to 
His  true  disciples  to  have  like  gracious  freedom  of  access.  3.  He  fully  accepti-d 
and  entered  into  the  Divine  purpose  as  to  His  life.  He  was  not  to  "  be  moved." 
The  evils  through  which  He  had  to  pass  would  have  sliaken  one  less  fixed  in  soul. 
So  may  each  of  us  overcome  in  the  day  of  conHict.  II.  In  a  state  of  delight. 
"  Therefore  did  My  heart  rejoice."  Of  this  delight  note — 1.  That  it  was  reasonable. 
"  Therefore."  Why  ?  Because  Jesus  stood  in  a  proper  relation  to  God.  Some  seek 
delight  when  they  are  not  right  towards  God.  This  is  irrational.  2.  Affected  the 
whole  man.  The  heart  rejoiced,  and  the  tongue  was  glad,  and  the  flesh  rested. 
So  His  servant  Paul,  though  always  sorrowful,  was  always  rejoicing.  Oh,  blessed 
paradox !  3.  Tinged  the  dark  future  with  light.  "  My  flesh  also  shall  rest  in 
hope."  An  unknown  experience  lay  before  Him  in  prospect,  and  He  naturally 
shrank  from  it ;  but  such  was  His  delight  that  He  could  steadily  go  forward  to  His 
appointed  lot.  He  knew  that  no  evil  could  befall  Him,  though  He  must  pass 
through  the  kingdom  of  the  dead.  So  are  His  servants  upheld  and  comforted  in 
death  by  thoughts  of  heaven.  4.  Was  brought  to  its  fulness  by  His  resurrection 
and  ascension.  "  Ways  of  life  "  were  made  known  to  Jesus  by  experience  when  He 
laboured  among  men.  When  men  thought  He  had  goue  finally  in  the  way  of 
death,  the  way  of  victorious  life  was  made  known  in  His  resurrection.  Thus  was 
His  joy  enhanced  in  ways  and  degrees  known  only  to  Himself.  And  that  joy 
reached  its  fulness  when  He  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high. 
"  Full  of  joy  with  Thy  countenance."  His  people  are  to  sit  with  Him  upon  His 
throne,  as  He  sits  on  the  Father's  throne.  Then  "  they  shall  hunger  no  more," 
&c.  Conclusion :  See  here — 1.  The  unity  of  Holy  Scripture.  Christ  is  its  chief 
subject.  Its  main  purpose  is  the  setting  forth  of  the  truth  concerning  Him.  Peter 
pointed  out  allusion  to  Him  where  it  had  not  been  previously  seen  ;  and  from  His 
Person  there  shines  a  light  in  which  many  obscurities  disappear.  2.  The  privileges 
of  those  who  are  complete  in  Christ.  By  His  grace  they  are  brought  into  proper 
relations  to  God,  and  have  thenceforward  meat  to  eat  which  the  world  knows  not 
of.  His  salvation  transcends  all  other  good.  (IF.  Hudson.)  Thou  shalt  not 
leave  My  soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  Thou  suffer  Thy  Holy  One  to  see  corruption.  — 
Christ's  descent  into  hell  and  rising  again  from  the  dead  .-—St.  Peter,  in  a  short 
but  notable  sermon,  demonstrates  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah.  The  Holy  One  of  God, 
the  Lord,  the  Christ.  1.  From  the  miracles  He  did  in  His  lifetime,  they  being 
witnesses  of  the  same  (ver.  22).  2.  By  the  fulfilling  of  prophecy.  In  being  not 
only  rejected  by  His  own,  but  crucified  by  them,  according  to  the  determinate 
counsel  of  God  (ver.  23).  3.  From  the  wonders  He  did,  not  in  life  only,  but  in 
death.  He  brake  through  the  bonds  of  it ;  the  grave  could  not  detain  His  body, 
nor  Hades  His  soul.  And  this  according  to  prophecy  and  promise  (Psa.  xvi.  10), 
which  is  the  apostle's  quotation  and  my  text.  In  discussing  this  doctrine,  I  will 
show — I.  What  is  the  meaning  or  Christ's  soul  being  in  hell?  For,  with 
respect  to  His  Godhead,  we  may  say  of  Him  in  the  words  of  the  Psalmist  (Psa. 
cxxxix.  7,  8).  But  our  discourse  is  of  the  soul  of  the  Messiah,  and  that  was  for  a 
while  in  hell ;  not  in  a  state  of  torment.  But  the  soul  of  the  Messiah,  when  He 
gave  up  His  ghost,  passed  into  the  receptacle  of  blessed  souls,  into  that  paradise 
where  the  redeemed  and  pardoned  are  lodged,  and  where  with  Him  went  the 
repenting  thief  on  the  cross  (Luke  xxiii.  43).  It  is  this  receptacle  of  good  souls, 
this  paradise  for  those  that  die  in  Christ,  that  is  called  Hades ;  that  is,  an  invisible 
state,  a  being,  though  in  a  remote  region,  which  eye  cannot  reach  or  penetrate.  I 
confess  it  is  a  hard  matter  to  beat  out  of  the  vulgar  heads  the  gross  conception  of 
the  word  hell,  which  sounds  to  them  no  other  than  horror,  and  blackness  of  dark- 
ness, and  fire  and  brimstone.  "  A  place  very  improper  to  look  for  the  soul  of 
Christ  when  departed  out  of  His  body,  for  Him  and  His  betrayer  Judas  to  meet  in 
the  same  place.  He  that  had  by  death  purchased  heaven  for  others,  Himself  after 
death  to  descend  into  hell.  This,  therefore,  cannot  be ;  no,  is  not  the  meaning  of 
the  word  hell  where  Christ  went.  He  came  not  near  that  abyss,  nor  was  at  all 
among  those  reprobated  crew."  The  true,  easy,  and  natural  sense  of  Hades  is  an 
invisible  region.  Objection :  If  Hades  means  paradise,  why  should  Christ  pray  against 
His  being  left  in  Hades,  as  He  hopes  His  body  shall  not  see  corruption  ?  Answer : 
He  doth  not  pray  thus,  as  if  it  were  not  well  with  His  soul  in  Hades,  as  to  what  He 
enjoyed.  For  His  soul  was  the  soul  of  the  Messiah,  the  soul  of  a  Eedeemer,  a  soul 
that  was  to  conquer  death,  and  not  to  stay  any  considerable  time  from  His  body 


■CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  X95 

born  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  He  had  work  to  do  which  other  souls  had  not ;  He  was 
to  rise  for  others'  jnstiiication.  He  was  to  ascend  into  the  holy  of  hoUest,  as  the 
great  High  Priest  of  our  souls ;  and  therefore  He  mufit  return  to  His  body,  that  He 
may  as  God-Man  in  human  flesh  for  ever  enter  into  glory.  As  if  He  should  say, 
Thou  wilt  not  leave  Me  unto  death  ;  that  is,  My  soul  in  separation.  This  would  be 
the  triumph  of  the  devil.  II.  The  occasion  and  reason  of  this  article  being 
INSERTED  in  OUR  CREED.  Not  that  it  was  there  at  first,  but  it  came  in  afterward, 
and  that  occasioned  by  a  new  heresy  that  started  up  in  the  Church  ;  and  therefore 
to  obviate  that  this  article  was  added  as  a  truth  provable  from  Scripture,  that 
Christ  went  into  Hades.  The  error  was  this,  that  Christ  had  no  proper  intellectual 
-or  ratioual  soul.  Which  heresy  was  begun  and  propagated  by  one  Apollonius  and 
his  followers.  That  the  Word  or  the  Divinity  supplied  the  place  of  a  soul,  and 
that  therefore  He  was  not  properly  dead  when  His  body  was  in  the  grave.  But  in 
opposition  to  this  error,  the  Christians  assert  that  Christ  bad  a  human  soul,  that  it 
underwent  all  the  offices  of  one  in  the  body  and  out  of  the  body.  And  when  He 
was  crucified,  and  by  the  pains  of  that  disposed  for  a  resignation  of  His  Spirit,  He 
gave  it  up  to  God,  and  waited  upon  His  disposal  of  it.  For  all  souls  are  to  return 
to  the  Father  of  sj^ints,  to  be  consigned  to  the  state  or  place  they  are  meet  for. 
And  the  soul  of  the  Messiah  went  to  the  apartment  of  separated  souls,  that  is,  of 
good  and  righteous  ones.  1.  That  we  are  assured  that  we  are  when  we  go  hence. 
And  the  disciples  of  Christ  go  to  Paradise,  as  He  did.  I  do  not  say  they  go  into  the 
heaven  of  heavens,  for  that  Christ  did  not  Himself  until  He  reassumed  His  body. 
But  when  they  are  not  as  to  mortal  eye  they  shall  be.  "  This  day  shalt  thou  be 
with  Me  in  Paradise."  Thy  soul  and  Mine  shall  go  together  to  the  assembly  of  the 
firstborn.  The  dissolution  of  our  bodies  shall  not  break  o&  our  being ;  the  soul, 
the  better  part,  is,  even  in  the  state  of  separation.  They  enter  into  rest,  not  a 
cessation  of  being  or  a  rest  of  sleep.  But  they  rest  in  hope,  they  live  in  a  joyful 
expectation  of  a  more  glorious  appearance.  Our  Saviour's  return  to  reassume  His 
body  gave  an  ocular  demonstration  of  the  immortality  both  of  body  and  soul.  2. 
A  God  incarnate  takes  actual  care  both  of  our  bodies  and  souls,  in  every  state  after 
■we  come  into  the  body  ;  in  life,  in  death,  and  after  death.  A  God  incarnate,  I  say; 
for  so  was  the  Lord  of  glory  that  was  crucified  for  us,  that  died,  and  rose  again 
from  the  dead  (John  x.  17,  18).  And  this  power  He  exerts  not  only  for  Himself, 
but  all  His  followers.  He  is  with  them  in  life,  in  death,  in  the  body,  and  out  of 
the  body.  He  dwells  with  them  by  His  Spirit  while  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  flesh  ; 
and  when  out  of  the  body  they  are  with  the  Lord.  He  beams  His  light  of  glory 
into  the  regions  they  are  in,  for  a  v/hile,  as  separate  from  the  body.  He  never 
leaves  them  nor  forsakes  them.  St.  Stephen,  under  a  shower  of  stones,  looked  up 
stedfastly  into  heaven,  and  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing  on  the  right 
hand  of  God  (chap.  vii.  55).  And  some  such  like  manifestations  separate  souls 
have  of  their  glorified  Saviour,  which  makes  them  wait  with  joy  for  a  farther 
salvation.  3.  That  a  separation  hereafter  will  be  ever  made  betwixt  the  righteous 
and  unrighteous.  Our  Saviour  in  the  state  of  separation  had  nothing  to  do  with 
the  damned;  He  gave  them  no  visit.  He  went  not  into  hell  in  this  sense.  4. 
Nothing  shall  withhold  us  from  returning  unto  the  body  when  the  time  of  reunion 
comes.  III.  The  incorruptibility  of  His  body.  It  was  not  to  see  corruption. 
Though  the  soldiers  gave  Him  His  death  wounds,  yet  they  did  not  fester,  nor  His 
body  see  corruption.  The  immaculate  Lamb  was  without  spot ;  He  was  pierced, 
but  He  was  not  putrified ;  He  was  butchered,  but  not  blemished.  His  body  was 
cast  into  the  grave,  but  it  did  not  see  corruption.  Worms  were  neither  His 
brothers  nor  sisters.  His  body  was  of  a  purer  make,  and  had  none  of  that  taint  that 
could  attract  such  vermin.  I  shall  represent  to  you  some  considerations  why  Christ's 
body  was  not  to  see  corruption.  1.  Because  He  was  in  three  days  to  reassume  it, 
according  to  promise,  and  His  own  prediction.  His  body  was  not  to  be  a  mortal 
body  as  ours,  to  return  to  dust.  That  was  the  melancholy  sentence  pa'fsed  on 
the  posterity  of  Adam,  but  not  to  reach  him  that  is  the  second  Adam,  who  was 
though  the  son  of  Adam,  as  says  St.  Luke,  yet  not  according  to  an  ordinary 
generat  on.  He  had  said,  "Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it 
up  again  " ;  and  He  spake,  says  the  t^-xt,  of  the  "  temple  His  body "  (John 
ii.  21).  2.  His  body  was  not  to  see  corruption  because  He  was  the  second 
Adam,  and  was  not  under  the  guilt  of  the  first.  He  was  the  Lord  from  Leaven 
and  the  Lord  of  glory ;  and  His  body  was  to  be  a  glorious  l-ody.  His  body  was 
never  stained  by  sin  or  sickness,  and  His  death  wounds  only  opened  a  pas-^age 
for  His  Spirit ;  but  the  cabinet,  though  broken  or  bruised,  was  not  disjointed.    The 


1S6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

temple  was  destroyed  witliout  dislocation  of  any  part.  The  first  Adam  brought  in 
Bin  and  death  into  the  world ;  the  second,  life  and  immortality.  An  argument 
which  the  apostle  jjursues,  in  1  Cor.  xv.  47,  "  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy  \ 
the  second  Man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven."  Our  natures,  as  derivative  from  a  sinner, 
are  decreed  to  death  and  dissolution,  and  must  sink  into  the  same  principle  of 
which  they  are  compounded,  but  the  second  Man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven — the 
Lord  of  life  and  immortality.  And  therefore,  in  ver.  45,  the  apostle  styles  Him  a^ 
quickening  Sp'rit,  keeping  His  body  tenantable,  though  He  went  out  of  it ;  and  not 
only  so,  but  He  was  Lord  of  His  own  body,  and  none  other  had  power  and  dominion 
over  it.  None,  nor  anything,  could  assault  His  body  lf\id  up  as  in  a  repository  for 
His  returning.  3.  His  body  was  not  to  see  corruption  because  He  was,  as  the 
Christian  High  Priest,  to  enter  into  the  Holy  of  Holiest,  as  the  firstfruits  of  the 
dead.  So  our  apologist,  St.  Peter,  ver.  29,  &c.  This  spiritual  High  Priest 
must  enter  into  the  Holy  of  Holiest,  with  all  His  body  and  soul  clean,  and  clear, 
pure  and  perfect,  radiant  and  glorious ;  the  trne  regalia  that  adorned  the  inves- 
titure of  this  High  Priest.  The  Christian  High  Priest  was  to  be  a  freeman, 
not  a  i>risoner.  He  was  not  to  enter  with  shackles,  but  rather  with  the  armature 
of  a  glorious  Victor  (Eph.  vi.  13).  The  doctrinal  part  of  this  sermon  speaks 
comfort  to  us  all  that  should  enliven  us  and  fill  us  with  joy  in  believing.  1.  The 
same  Lord  Jesus  that  raised  and  reassumed  His  own  body,  shall  raise  ours, 
and  make  them  like  His  glorious  body  (Phil.  iii.  21).  2.  Because  Christ  is  our  Lord, 
He  hath  redeemed  our  bodies  by  His  precious  blood,  and  He  sacrificed  His  body  for 
ours,  and  we  have  dedicated  our  bodies  to  Him,  and  He  is  Lord  of  our  bodies.  Not 
only  our  souls,  but  our  bodies  are  redeemed  by  Him  from  the  grave,  and  here  is  the 
state  of  the  dead.  3.  That  Christ  raised  His  own  body.  But  I  am  not  preaching 
to  infidels,  but  believers  :  and  we  know  that  because  Christ  is  risen  we  also  shall 
arise,  and  our  bodies  shall  be  made  like  Christ's  body.  For — 4.  Christ  will  do  this 
great  work  by  taking  away  all  those  corruptible  qualities  and  infirmities  to  which 
our  bodies  are  liable,  both  living  and  dead.  That  this  vile  body  may  be  refined, 
and  free  from  decay,  being  made  like  the  glorified  body  of  Jesus  after  the  resurrec- 
tion. 5.  The  instrument  by  which  our  Lord  shall  effect  this  wonder,  even  by  His 
omnipotence.  "  Why,"  says  the  same  apostle,  "  should  it  be  thought  impossible 
that  God  should  raise  the  dead  ?  "  6.  We  conclude  that  a  spiritual  resurrection  in 
this  life  must  precede  the  blessed  and  glorious  resurrection  to  eternal  life.  It  is  for 
the  sake  of  a  raised  mind  that  the  body  shall  be  like  Christ's  glorious  body ;  for 
we  must  not  expect  to  hnve  a  part  in  the  resurrection  of  the  just,  unless  in 
this  life  we  commence  such  men.  [W.  Allen,  D.D.)  Thou  hast  made  known 
to  me  the  ways  of  life. — The  experience  and  prospect  of  a  real  Cltristian: — 
This  exulting  language  (quoted  from  Psa.  xvi.  11)  may  be  adopted  by  those  who 
believe  in  Clirist,  and  have  a  lively  sense  of  interest  in  His  salvation.  I.  The 
LANGUAGE  OF  DEVOUT  GRATITUDE.  "  Thou  hast  made  known,"  &c.  Compared 
with  such  a  communication,  every  other  kind  of  knowledge  is  insignificant. 
The  ways  which  are  worthv  to  be  called  "ways  of  life"  are  "made  known"  by 
none  except  the  Almighty.  The  "  life  "  to  which  they  lead  us  is  the  life  of  faith, 
holiness,  and  peace  in  the  present  world,  and  the  life  of  inconceivable  excellence 
and  delight  in  the  world  to  come.  "The  ways  of  life"  may  therefore  justly  be 
called  "the  ways  of  God."  He  has  prepared  these  ways  ;  in  the  gospel  He  reveals 
them  ;  and,  by  the  influence  of  His  Spirit,  He  conducts  into  them.  Nor  are  these 
"  ways  "  merely  "  made  known  "  to  a  Christian — he  occupies  them,  and  recom- 
mends them  ;  they  are  his  delight ;  in  them  he  meets  God,  and  communes  with 
Him.  Thus  he  grows  in  grace  and  likeness  to  the  Divine  image.  IL  The 
LANGUAGE  OF  DEVOUT  EXPECTATION.  "  Thou  shalt  make  me,"  &c.  1.  Christians 
already  find  that  sin  has  lost  its  commanding  influence ;  but  they  anticipate  its 
entire  extinction  and  their  complete  deliverance  from  all  evil.  2.  Christians  antici- 
pate a  removal  out  of  the  world.  3.  Christians  anticipate  the  successful  termina- 
tion of  their  conflict  with  invisible  principalities  and  powers.  4.  Christians 
anticipate  eternal  intercourse  with  each  other,  and  with  all  the  angels  of  God. 
6.  Hence  we  are  led  to  the  richest  view  of  the  prospect  with  which  Christians  are 
indulged — they  anticipate  a  vision  all  Divine.  "  Thou  shalt  make  me  full  of  joy 
with  Thy  countenance."    (0.  A.  Jcary.) 

Vers.  29-32.  Men  and  brethren,  let  me  freely  speak  unto  you  of  the  patriarch 
David. — An  anti-rationalist  argument: — Peter  avers  —  I.  That  David  could  not 
HAVE  SAID  OF  HIMSELF  THE  woBDs  HERE  QUOTED.     For  this  he  states  the  threefold 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  197 

•reason,  that  David  had  died,  that  he  had  been  buried,  and  that  his  tomb  was  still 
£hown.     No  one  had  ever  heard  of  his  returning  to  life ;  his  soul  was  still  in  the 
kingdom  of  the  dead,  and  bis  flesh  must  long  since  have  returned  to  dust.     Yet  he 
had  spoken  the  truth  in  the  words  quoted.     Then  those  words  must  refer  to  some 
other  than  himself.     To  whom  could  they  refer  ?     For  an  answer  to  this  question 
Peter  asks  his  hearers  to  consider — II.  That  David  was  wont  to  think  and  speak 
•OF  THE  Messiah.     God  had  sworn  to  David,  and  told  him  concerning  the  Messiah 
— 1.  That  He  would  be  His  descendant.     Tbe  descent  could  be  traced  to  the  Lord's 
mother,  who  was  now  present.     2.   That  He  would  succeed  him  on  the  throne  of 
Israel.     David's  line  was  to  be  restored  and  completed  in  Christ,  though  the  dis- 
obedience of  his  posterity  caused  the  kingdom  to  pass  to  another  family  for  a  time. 
■3.   That  He  would  die.     Tliis  is  assumed  in  the  apostle's  quotation,  and  must  be 
included  in  the  meaning  of  David's  words.     And  therefore — 4.  That  He  would  rise 
from  tbe  dead.     For  tbe  prophecy  points  to  a  sitting  on  the  throne  of  David  which 
should  follow  tbe  death  and  the  resurrection  of  the  Messiah.     All  these  things  had 
been  foretold  by  David,  with  conscious  reference  to  the  promises  of  the  covenant. 
We  need  not  suppose  that  he  saw  the  full  meaning  of  what  he  said ;  but  that  which 
he  said  of  himself,  and  which  exceeded  what  was  true  concex'ning  himself,  was 
proper  in  allusion  to  Christ,  and  ultimately  found  its  explanation  in  the  events  of 
His  course.     And  Peter  take-^  this  position  without  apology.     What  is  his  reason 
for  so  acting  ?     It  is — III.  That  events  well  known  had  fulfilled  the  pkophecy 
OF  David.     The  most  striking  event  of  the  series  is  put  forward  in  confirmation  of 
the  whole,  and  the  vouchers  for  it  are  produced.     "  This  Jesus  hath  God  raised  up, 
whereof  we  all  are  witnesses."     They  knew  who  "  this  Jesus  "  was,  and  what  was 
His  descent.     They  knew  that  He  had  died  but  a  few  v.'eeks  before  at  Jerusalem, 
and  had  been  buried.     Probably  all  the  disciples  now  present  had  seen  Him  after 
His  resurrection.     All  the  mixed  multitude  now  present  were  witnesses  that  His 
resurrection  was  affirmed  by  His  friends,  and  that  His  enemies  could  not  otberwise 
account  for  the  disappearance   of    His   body.      They  were  all,  therefore,  God's 
witnesses.    The  inevitable  conclusion  was  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  Messiah  ; 
and  this  conclusion  involved  His  kingship  and  His  succession  to  David.     This  last 
was  the  only  point  yet  remaining  to  be  proved.     We  admire  the  precision  and 
steady  progress  of  this  argument.     Conclusion :  Let  us  pause  here  and  reflect  on 
Peter's  way  of  disposing  ot  rationalism.     Those  whom  he  addressed  followed  reason 
and  judged  by  appearances.     He  met  them  by  an  appeal  to  facts.    Whatever  reason 
■might  have  said  beforehand,  David,  under  Divine  direction,  had  recorded  certain 
predictions,  and  those  predictions  had  been  fulfilled.     "  Let  God  be  true,  and  every 
man  a  liar."     How  else  can  the  rationalism  of  this  day  be  dealt  with?     1.  The 
character  of  Christ  as  sketched  beforehand  in  prophecy  is  presented  in  the  Gospels. 
.2.  The  course  of  Christianity  as  foretold  by  the  Lord  and  His  apostles  has  been 
witnessed  thus  far  through  the  ages.     3.  The  promises  made  to  those  who  repent 
and  believe  are  clearly  fulfilled  from  day  to  day.     And  in  tbe  character  of  Christ, 
the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  and  the  Cbristian  life,  with  its  blessed  fellowship  with 
God  and  power  of   virtuous  conduct,    there   are   unanswerable  "  evidences "  for 
Christianity.     (TF.  Hudson.)         This  Jesus  hath  God  raised  up,  whereof  we  all 
are  witnesses. —  The  witness  of  the  disciples  : — The  only  possible  issue  to  the  life  of 
-our  Lord  was  His  standing  up  again  in  life,  and  His  entrance  visibly  as  a  risen 
Man  into  the  spiritual,  eternal  world.     In  that  world  He  had  lived  wbile  still  a 
mortal  Man.    "  The  Son  of  Man  which  is  in  heaven"  is  the  sentence  which  contains 
the  key  to  the  innermost  shrine  of  His  life.     This  life  which  on  earth  was  lived  in 
heaven,  brought  to  bear  on  man's  earthly  state  all  the  influences  of  the  eternal 
world.     And  as  the  life  of  Christ  could  only  fulfil  itself  in  its  most  quickening  core 
of  force  by  resurrection,  so  in  all  His  pi'evisions  and  predictions  about  His  death, 
He  included  the  idea  of  resurrection.     For  precisely  such  a  phenomenon  our  Lord's 
language  should  have  prepared  the  disciples  ;  and  their  record  is  the  more  signifi- 
cant inasmuch  as  He  was  wholly  misapprehended  by  them,  and  only  when  they 
were  compelled  by  overwhelming  evidence  to  accept  it  as  a  historical  fact,  did  they 
begin  to  realise  the  regenerative  power  with  which  it  might  be  charged  for  the 
world.     For  the  resurrection  was  entirely  transcendent,  though,  like  all  Divine 
facts,  when  it  was  revealed  it  fitted  the  place  in  history  which  was  vacant  for  it — it 
explained  and  completed  the  whole  movement  of  the  ages,  and  keyed  the  arch 
■which,  but  for  it,  would  have  become  a  wreck.     But  the  gospel  is  not  a  philosophy 
of  resurrection,  but  a  proclamation.     It  says  nothing  about  antecedent  probabilities, 
secular  preparations,  or  aspirations  and  hopes.     These  we  investigate  and  discuss, 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

and  are  right  in  so  doing.  But  what  the  gospel  proclaims  is  the  historical  fact 
of  the  resurrection,  and  through  this  proclamation  the  whole  world  of  civilisation 
has  come  to  believe  it.  But  all  rests  on  the  original  proclamation,  the  credibility 
and  sufficiency  of  the  original  witnesses ;  the  character  and  amount  of  the  testi- 
mony which  is  behind  the  affirmation.  We  have  a  very  clear  and  succinct  state- 
ment of  the  evidence  in  the  words  of  Paul  (1  Cor.  xv.  3-8),  and  it  seems  as 
complete  as  can  well  be  conceived.  The  Epistle  was  written  within  the  genera- 
tion which  followed  the  resurrection.  The  majority  of  the  witnesses  were  alive 
when  it  was  written.  There  is  no  question  of  the  moral  honesty  of  the  testimony. 
This  thing,  remember,  was  not  done  in  a  corner.  There  was  a  powerful  national 
party  at  Jerusalem  whose  very  existence  was  staked  on  proving  it  a  fiction. 
Any  flaw  in  the  harness,  any  weak  link  in  the  chain,  keen  eyes  would  have' 
hunted  out  and  exposed.  But  there  is  not  a  trace  anywhere  of  an  answer  tO' 
the  apostle's  "precis  of  testimony ;  not  a  hint  that  this  argument  on  the  resur- 
rection had  been  answered  by  denying  it  as  a  fact.  The  witnesses  are  amplfr 
in  number,  character,  and  opportunity  of  knowledge,  and  their  testimony  is  that  of 
men  who  had  not  the  faintest  idea  that  there  was  any  one  who  could  raise  a  valid 
doubt  on  the  subject  anywhere  about  the  world.  This  leads  me  to  the  features  of 
the  evidence.  I.  Surely  the  most  prominent  thing  which  strikes  one  about  it  is  its- 
PEEFECT  SIMPLICITY  AND  NATURALNKss.  Pascal  notes  "  the  uaturaliiess  (naivete) 
with  which  Jesus  Christ  speaks  of  the  things  of  God  and  of  eternity."  With  the 
same  naturalness  do  the  apostles  speak  of  the  resurrection.  In  the  account  of  the 
meeting  at  the  sea  of  Tiberias  (John xxi.),  the  naturalness  of  their  communion  with 
the  risen  Saviour  is  the  wonderful  thing.  Transcendently  wonderful,  as  it  was, 
they  write  about  it  quite  as  simply  and  naturally  as  about  the  Sermon  on  the- 
Mount,  or  the  journey  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  instead  of  spending  all  their  strength  on 
parading  the  evidence  of  it,  they  are  more  reticent  and  more  artless  about  it  thsn 
about  many  another  far  less  momentous  fact  in  the  history  of  our  Lord.  The 
manner  in  which  the  resurrection  brought  itself  at  once  so  perfectly  into  the  natural 
order  of  the  disciples'  lives,  is  to  me  an  absolute  proof  that  they  knew  they  were 
dealing  with  a  simple  though  profound  and  far-reaching  fact.  They  write  as  if 
the  restoration  of  their  Lord  to  them,  when  they  had  once  grasped  the  fact,  was  the 
most  natural  thing  in  the  world.  The  only  key  to  this  is  its  truth.  II.  It  is 
entirely  the  evidence  of  disciples,  of  those  who  had  a  deep  personal  interest  in 
establishing  the  resurrection  as  a  truth.  Understand  what  the  word  "  interest  "■ 
means.  The  notion  of  a  company  of  interested  followers  of  Christ,  conspiring  for 
their  own  purposes  to  palm  this  tale  upon  the  world,  is  abandoned  on  all  hands  as 
utterly  inadequate.  These  were  true  men,  whatever  else  they  might  be.  The 
witnesses  had  the  deepest  interest  in  the  truth  of  the  resurrection,  but  it  would 
have  been  quite  worthless  to  them  except  as  truth.  They  had  nothing  to  gain  but 
everything  to  lose  by  the  proclamation,  except  in  as  far  as  the  power  of  the  resur- 
rection as  a  fact  lay  behind  it.  They  were  the  best  of  all  possible  witnesses ; 
witnesses  whose  supreme  interest  is  truth.  We  can,  however,  well  imagine  evidence- 
of  a  different  character,  which  we  are  tempted  to  think  would  have  at  once  forced 
conviction  home  on  every  rational  mind.  If  it  had  been  proved,  say  to  the  full 
satisfaction  of  the  Roman  procurator,  after  a  review  of  all  the  evidence  for  and 
against  it,  that  would  have  immediately  established  it  as  an  unquestionable  fact  in 
history,  and  the  whole  world  would  have  been  filled  wilh  wonder  and  adoration. 
But  the  actual  evidence  is  a  striking  contrast  to  this.  It  made  no  attempt  to  impose 
itself  as  a  fact  forced  by  the  overwhelming  weight  of  evidence  on  an  unwilling 
world.  Like  the  Incarnation,  it  was  to  be  a  power,  and  not  a  portent.  In  this, 
too,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  came  not  with  observation  ;  its  mission  was  to  open 
minds  and  believing  hearts  alone.  The  spirit  which  seeks  a  sign,  and  the  faith 
which  is  nourished  on  a  sign,  are  alike  worthless  in  that  spiritual  order  which  the 
Lord  came  to  establish.  The  spirit  which  is  turned  to  God,  by  the  word  and  the 
work  of  the  Saviour,  is  inestimably  precious  in  His  sight,  and  is  a  power  in  His 
kingdom  of  heaven.  The  Lord  put  deliberately  from  Him  through  life  the  homage 
which  He  might  ha^e  won,  and  the  power  which  He  might  have  wielded,  by 
portents  and  splendours  ;  and  obeying  the  Divine  necessity  to  trust  to  the  truth 
alone,  He  put  them  from  Him  also  in  death  and  in  resurrection.  "  My  kingdom  i» 
not  of  this  world,"  He  said  through  all — birth,  life,  death,  and  resurrection.  The 
fact,  then,  that  the  evidence  is  entirely  of  the  kind  described,  the  evidence  of 
disciples,  of  men  in  spiritual  fellowship  with  it,  and  on  whose  lips  and  in  whose 
Jives  it  would  be  not  a  portent  but  a  power,  is  in  entire  and  beautiful  harmony  with, 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  199 

the  whole  spirit  and  method  of  the  Divine  dispensations,  and  lies  in  the  true  line 
of  the  spiritual  culture  and  development  of  mankind.  III.  Granting,  then,  that  the 
evidence  must  be  that  of  spiritual  witnesses  to  a  fact  whose  whole  virtue  was 
spiritual,  can  anything  be  more  explicit  and  complete  than  the  testimony  which 
they  bear?  We  have  not  the  witness  of  a  single,  possibly  hysterical,  or  fanatical, 
follower.  The  evidence  was  offered  again  and  again  to  individuals,  to  companies, 
to  a  great  crowd  of  disciples,  with  opportunities  of  tactical  satisfaction,  leaving 
actually  nothing  to  be  desired.  Words  were  spoken  and  are  recorded  which  none 
but  the  risen  Man  could  have  uttered.  And  the  demonstration  is  crowned  by  the 
actual  effect  of  the  resurrection,  in  the  instant  and  complete  transformation  which 
it  accomplished  in  the  lives  of  the  witnesses.  We  cannot  read  John  xxi.  and  Acts 
ii.  without  the  conviction  that  some  such  fact  as  the  resurrection  is  absolutely 
needed  to  account  for  the  contrast  in  the  narratives.  The  disciples  were  not  in  a 
mood  even  to  think  about  inventing  such  a  fact.  They  accepted  the  decease  as 
a  death-blow  to  their  hopes.  Nothing  was  further  from  their  thoughts  than  to 
lead  a  movement  which  would  reconstruct  and  save  society.  And  yet,  in  a  few 
days,  the  work  is  in  vigorous  progress.  As  by  the  touch  of  some  mighty  creative 
Hand,  these  men  are  re-made.  They  are  preaching  the  resurrection  with  a  power 
which  is  to  shake  the  whole  structure  of  society,  and  they  are  kindling  hearts  like 
flame,  in  the  very  city  where  the  events  were  trans  icted.  Peter,  heart-broken, 
going  back  bravely  to  his  fisherman's  toils — Peter,  standing  out  as  an  incomparable 
teacher  and  leader  of  men,  founding  a  Church  which  at  this  day  is  the  strongest 
institution  upon  earth — Peter  the  disciple,  who  denied  his  Master,  Peter  the  apostle, 
who  won  for  Him  the  homage  and  worship  of  mankind — what  links  the  two  bat  the 
fact  of  the  resurrection  ;  the  fact  that  a  risen  and  reigning  Christ  was  behind  him, 
lending  heaven's  own  force  to  every  action,  and  heaven's  own  emphasis  to  every 
word  ?  And  what  happened  to  them,  through  the  resurrection,  happened  to  the 
world.  It  began  to  work  instantly  as  a  tremendous  force  in  organising  and  uplifting 
human  society.  It  is  said  of  a  city,  "  There  was  great  joy  in  that  city  when  these 
evangelists  came  to  it."  It  is  the  feature  everywhere.  Joy,  strength,  hope,  vital 
activity,  all  by  which  men  and  societies  grow,  sprang  up  like  willows  by  the  water- 
courses, wherever  the  sound  of  that  gospel  of  the  resurrection  was  heard.  For 
nenrly  two  thousand  years  that  order  has  been  strengthening  its  foundations  and 
widening  its  circuit,  and  its  unquestioned,  unquestionable  basis  has  been  and  is  the 
resurrection  and  reign  of  the  risen  Lord.  And  this  you  ask  me  to  believe  is  an 
imposture  or  a  delusion  1  Well,  I  may  believe  it  when  I  am  driven  to  believe  that 
everything  is  imposture  or  illusion  ;  that  I  am  illusion ;  that  the  great  world  around 
me  and  the  great  heaven  above  me  is  ilhision  ;  that  all  which  man  holds  noble  and 
beautiful,  all  that  he  thinks  worth  living  for,  worth  dying  for,  is  illusion  ;  and  that 
a  mocking  demon  is  the  master,  the  ruler,  and  the  tormentor  of  the  world.  Till 
then  I  believe  and  preach  Jesus  and  the  Resurrection.  {J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.) 
The  witness  nf  the  Church : — Nothing  that  our  Lord  did  on  earth  was  enough  to 
establish  a  faith  in  Himself  which  should  survive  His  death.  At  the  end  of  His 
career,  nut  even  the  Twelve  retained  their  conviction.  If  the  Lord  had  only  left 
us  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  and  the  memory  of  a  martyrdom,  there  would  never 
have  been  a  Church.  The  risen  and  ascended  Christ  is  the  only  intelligible  account 
that  can  be  given  of  the  existence  of  our  faith.  From  beyond  the  grave  the  living 
Master  works.  And  how  ?  By  a  Spirit.  But  for  that  Spirit  to  act  firmly,  en- 
duringly,  there  must  be  given  an  instrument,  an  organic  body,  and  the  office  of 
Ihat  body  is  clearly  determined  for  it  by  the  conditions  of  its  existence.  "  The 
Spirit  of  truth  proceeding  from  the  Father  sViall  bear  witness  of  Me,  and  ye  also 
shall  bear  witness,"  and  so  the  apostles  say,  "  We  are  witnesses  of  these  things." 
I.  The  Church  is  the  witnessing  body  ;  it  proves  Christ's  case.  1.  Before 
God  the  Father.  It  manifests  His  glory  by  justify  ing  His  method  of  redemption  ; 
it  bears  witness  before  God  that  He  has  not  sent  His  Son  in  vain.  2.  In  the  face 
of  men.  It  is  to  convince,  so  that  even  an  unbelieving  world  may  believe  that  the 
Father  sent  the  Son.  II.  In  ACCOiiPLisniNO  this  conversion  of  the  world,  the 
Church  has  to  prove  and  testify.  1.  That  Christ  is  alive  and  at  work  to-day  on 
earth,  and  that  He  can  be  found  of  them  that  believe,  and  manifest  Himself  to 
those  that  love  Him.  2.  That  He  is  so  by  virtue  of  the  deed  done  once  for  all  at 
Calvary.  III.  What  proofs  can  the  Church  offer  for  these  points?  1.  Its 
own  actual  life.  Its  one  prevailing  and  unanswerable  proof  is,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I, 
but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  2.  This  personal  life  of  Christ  in  His  Church  verifies 
and  certifies  to  the  world  the  reality  of  His  life,  death,  and  resurrection.     The  fact 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

that  the  man  at  the  Beautiful  Gate  has  this  perfect  soundness — this  makes  it  certain 
that  God  did  send  His  Son  Christ  Jesus  to  be  a  Prince  of  Life.  And  therefore  the 
Lving  Church  bears  a  book  about  with  it,  the  gospel  book,  the  witness  of  tliose  who 
beheld,  tasted,  handled  the  Word  of  Life.  "  This  book,"  the  body  of  Christ, 
declares,  "is  true,  and  we  know  that  these  apostles  spoke  true;  we  are  here  to 
prove  it,  in  that  we  have  tasted  the  present  power  of  that  Word  whose  story  they 
saw  and  recorded."  3.  And  again,  the  body  carries  with  it  the  apostolic  rite,  the 
act  commanded  by  the  dying  Christ  to  be  done  for  ever  as  a  memorial  and  a  witness 
until  His  coming  again.  IV.  By  believing  in  a  body,  a  Church,  ouk  faith  lays 
UPON  us  responsibilities.  It  gives  us  a  call ;  it  sets  us  each  a  task.  And  is  not 
this  just  what  our  religion  most  lacks?  There  is  so  little  sense  of  purpose  in  our 
reliyious  life.  Eeligion  is  a  comfortable  habit,  a  refreshment  in  weariness,  a  solace 
and  security  in  the  face  of  death.  Yes,  but  is  it  the  one  thing  that  gives  us  a  living 
reason  for  being  alive  ?  Is  it  that  which  sets  us  on  an  aim  worthy  and  enkindling, 
for  which  it  is  well  worth  while  to  live  ?  Does  it  come  to  us  as  something  which 
lays  upon  us  a  service  of  delif^htful  freedom  under  the  eye  of  a  Master  who  waits 
ever  to  say,  "  Well  done,  well  done,  thou  faithful  servant  "  ?  Is  not  this  exactly 
what  we  lack  ?  If  Christ  established  a  Church,  this  means  that  every  member 
has,  by  believing,  a  definite,  an  urgent,  a  glad  and  proud  task  set  before  him.  That 
task  is  to  witness ;  and  do  you  doubt  whether  you  have  any  call  to  witness  for 
Christ  ?  For  what  is  this  witness  ?  It  is  the  evidence  you  can  give  by  active 
personal  union  with  your  Lord,  now  alive  at  God's  ri^ht  hand,  of  the  authority  of 
the  gospel  record  and  of  the  gospel  Eucharist.  And  is  there  no  one,  then,  who 
needs  that  evidence  from  you  ?  1.  Can  you  find  no  one  near  you  who  is  struggling 
with  doubt  and  perplexity  as  he  reads  that  gospel  story  ?  It  is  your  witness  and 
your  evidence  that  alone  can  recover  him  his  footing.  2.  Is  there  no  one  who 
looks  out  upon  the  scenery  of  this  bewildered  earth  and  who  can  see  nothing  but 
confused  suffering  and  unjust  penalties  ;  who  can  but  cry  out  his  bitter  protest, "  Is 
God  indeed  to  be  fouud  there  ?  Is  there  a  Divine  Judge  of  all  the  earth  ?  Whei'e 
are  the  signs  of  His  love  ?  "  What  if  your  witness  were  ready  at  hand  ? — if  you 
could  but  whisper,  "  I  know  that  the  love  of  God  has  been  manifested  to  all  who 
believe  Christ  Jesus,  every  one  that  so  believeth  hath  the  witness  in  him"? 
3.  Or  you  may  find  yourself  standing  by  one  whom  some  strong  sin  has  fast  bound 
in  misery  and  iron.  Now  is  your  time  to  speak,  to  cry  to  him,  to  deliver  your 
testimony — "  My  brother,  j'ou  may  be  free,  for  Christ  is  not  dead — He  is  risen  ;  He 
the  great  breaker  of  bonds.  He  is  strong  as  of  old  to  set  free  the  captives."  Con- 
clusion :  It  is  for  us  to  be  sure  that  we  know,  by  blessed  experience,  that  Christ  was 
manifested  to  take  away  our  sins;  and  that  is  the  message  that  you  have  to  carry 
on  jour  lips — "  We  know  that  it  is  true."  It  would  be  a  miserable  thing  to  find 
yourself  standing  over  some  biother,  with  your  human  heart  indeed  yearning  to  help 
him,  and  yet  to  find  yourself  speechless  and  impotent  just  because  you  ha  I  never 
taken  the  trouble  to  learn,  when  you  had  time,  the  happy  lesson  which  would  enable 
you  to  say  to  him  the  one  word  that  can  now  save  him.  [Canon  Scott  Holland.) 
Our  witness  to  the  resurrection  : — Let  us  see  whether  it  is  not  a  fact  that  just  after 
the  same  manner  that  the  angel,  the  guard,  the  women,  and  the  apostles  did  testify 
in  the  beginning  to  this  cardinal  truth  of  our  holy  religion,  so  in  our  own  time  like 
testimony  is  afforded.  Daily  an  angel  sitteth  at  the  door  of  Christian  hearts  with 
tl  e  message  that  Christ  is  risen  1  Daily  do  the  careless  and  indifferent  among  man- 
kind find  themselves  forced  to  confess  that  there  are  thoughts  of  the  future  which, 
if  tl  ey  admit  them  into  their  minds,  cause  them  to  feel  as  dead  men  in  the  midst  of 
all  lh3  business  of  the  world.  Daily  do  the  godly  who  seek  Christ  rejoice  in  the 
sure  signs  and  tokens  of  His  resurrection.  First,  then,  there  is  such  a  witness  to 
the  resurrection  supernaturally  present  in  our  hearts.  In  all  this  assembly  what 
man  or  woman  can  say  they  have  never  heard  a  voice  whispering  within  tljeir 
hearts  the  solemn  assurance  that  Jesus  hath  risen,  and  that  we  shall  rise  with 
Him  ?  To  take  an  illustration.  Are  there  not  many  here  who  have  known  what  it 
is  to  miss  from  their  home,  from  their  daily  walk  in  life,  the  face  of  parent,  of 
brother,  of  friend,  of  husband,  of  wife,  of  child  ?  And  as  you  have  bent  with 
breaking  heart  over  the  sepulchre  of  your  buried  affection,  has  no  angel  spoken  to 
you  :  "  It  is  not  here,  the  object  of  your  tender  love  and  sorrow.  All  that  is  true 
and  real  lives  still  I  He  is  risen.  Behold  He  goeth  before  you  into  the  courts  of 
the  heavenly  mansions,  there  shall  ye  see  Him  !  "  There  is  not  a  bitter  sorrow  that 
is  not  rolled  away  together  with  that  stone  from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus. 
And  thjugh  the  traces  of  our  grief  be  left,  though  the  earthly  garments  in  which 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  201 

vre  had  wrapped  all  that  was  lovely  in  our  lives  are  lying  there  in  a  place  by  them- 
selves, yet  do  we  know  by  that  same  angelic  voice  that  the  joys  that  we  have 
experienced  in  the  past  we  shall  possess  again  in  the  future,  and  that  in  the  land 
whither  our  Saviour  Christ  is  gone  before  we  shall  know  and  be  known  once  more  ! 
The  dawn  of  hope  which  we  see  to  succeed  the  dark  night  of  sorrow  in  these  deep 
water-floods  of  affliction  enables  us  to  perceive  that  the  stone  has  been  rolled  away 
from  the  heart,  and  that  an  angel  of  God  is  seated  upon  it.  In  our  hearts,  then, 
there  is  a  witness  to  the  truth  of  the  resurrection.  This  Jesus  hath  God  raised  from 
the  dead,  whereof  our  hearts  are  witnesses.  Bat  although  God  hath  His  own 
witness  in  the  hearts  of  men,  to  His  own  Divine  truth,  yet  (since  He  has  ever  been 
pleased  to  work  through  human  instruments)  it  is  manifestly  required  by  Him  that 
we  should  feel,  every  one  of  us — yes,  the  w^eakest,  the  poorest — that  our  whole  life 
and  conversation  is  intended  to  be  a  witness  to  the  resurrection :  that  we  should  so 
live  that  men  may  know  that  we  live,  yet  not  we  ourselves,  but  Christ  Uveth  in  us, 
and  that  the  life  which  we  now  live  in  the  flesh  we  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of 
God,  who  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us.     (T.  L.  ClauglUon,  M.A.) 

Vers.  33-36.  Therefore  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted. — The  right 
hand  of  God : — The  phrase  imports — I.  The  dnspeakable  felicity  into  which 
Chbist's  human  nature — for  it  is  of  Christ  incarnate  that  this  is  said,  and  as  the 
reward  of  His  sufferings  as  a  man — had  now  entered  ;  for  "  in  Thy  presence  is 
fulness  of  joy,"  &c.  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  II.  The  glorious  majesty  to  which  He  had 
beached  (Heb.  i.  3  ;  viii.  1).  III.  The  fulness  of  power  with  which  He  is 
invested  who  has  declared,  "All  power  is  given  unto  Me,"  &c.  (Matt,  xxviii.  18). 
(See  Psa.  xx.  6;  Ixxxix.  13;  Matt.  xxvi.  64).  IV.  The  judicial  throne  on 
which  He  sits  (Rom.  xiv.  9,  10).     (D.  Whitby,  D.D.)  Tlie  ascension  and  its 

meaning  : — Peter  shows — I.  That  it  had  taken  place  in  fulfilment  of  pro- 
phecy. Again  the  particular  prediction  is  taken  from  David.  It  is  a  passage 
applied  by  Jesus  to  Himself,  to  the  confusion  of  the  Pharisees,  whose  silence  was  a 
confession  of  its  Messianic  character  (Matt.  xxii.  42-46).  Its  fulfilment  was  by  the 
power  of  God.  The  hand  is  that  part  of  the  body  by  which  man  puts  forth  his 
strength,  and  the  right  hand  is  superior  to  the  left ;  and  God,  condescending  to 
human  ways  of  speech,  represents  the  exercise  of  His  power  as  the  work  of  His 
right  hand.  Creation  was  done  by  a  word  ;  but  this  concluding  act  of  redemption 
demanded  the  putting  forth  of  Jehovah's  power.  II.  That  it  had  taken  the 
Redeemer  to  His  heavenly  condition.  He  was  exalted,  that  He  might  "  sit  at 
the  right  hand  of  God"  (c/.  Matt.  xxvi.  64;  Eom.  viii.  34;  Heb.  i.  3,  viii.  1). 
This  condition  is  marked  by — 1.  A  continuous  quiet  dominion.  (1)  He  has 
dominion,  being  "at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,"  and  that  dominion 
involves  "  all  authority  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  (2)  But  He  rules  in  quietness 
and  rest.  Having  finished  His  great  work,  He  "  sits."  Angels,  being  evermore  on 
duty  (Heb.  i.  14),  stand  about  the  throne.  God  says  not  to  them,  "  Sit  on  My 
right  hand."  (3)  This  dominion  will  continue  until  its  Mediatorship  has  answered 
its  purpose.  2.  Perfect  happiness  (Psa.  xvi.  11).  The  great  joy  had  been  set  before  ' 
Him,  and  had  sustained  Him  in  sorrow.  Let  His  consummate  blessedness  show  U3 
the  good  placed  within  the  reach  of  man.  3.  The  subduing  of  His  foes.  The 
aUusion  is  to  the  ancient  custom  of  conquerors  to  set  their  feet  upon  the  necks  of 
the  vanquished.  Who  are  His  foes  ?  1.  The  Jews,  who  were  subdued  when  their 
nationality  was  destroyed.  2.  The  Eomans,  who  were  subdued  when  their  empire 
was  comprehended  in  Christendom.  3.  The  pagans,  that  still  remain.  These  will 
be  subdued  when  the  gospel  has  been  preached  to  all  nations  for  a  witness.  4. 
Men  and  women  in  Christendom  who  still  reject  Him.  They  also  will  see  their 
folly  and  sin,  and  acknowledge  Him  either  too  soon  or  too  late.  5.  Sin  and  Satan, 
but  these  will  be  cast  out.  6.  Death.  "  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is 
death."  111.  That  it  was  declared  to  have  taken  place  by  events  now  trans- 
piring. "  He  hath  shed  forth  this,"  &c.  These  events — 1.  Showed  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  had  been  given.  This  Peter  does  not  tire  of  repeating.  Its  importance 
demanded  its  repetition,  and  does  so  still.  But  Jesus  had  said  that  unless  He  went 
to  the  Father  the  Holy  Spirit  would  not  come.  Therefore  His  manifest  presence 
proved  the  ascension.  2.  Were  a  fulfilment  of  the  Father's  promise.  The  promise 
made  through  the  prophets  had  been  repeated  to  Jesus,  and  by  Him  to  the  apostles ; 
and  He  was  now  gone  to  receive  what  was  promised.  This  was  the  simple,  straight- 
forward explanation  of  what  was  happening.  3.  Were  brought  about  by  Jesus 
Himself.     "He  hath  shed."    During  His  ministry  He  had  wrought  unnumbered 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

miracles,  every  one  of  which  displayed  Divine  power,  and  He  was  but  continning 
what  He  had  begun  (Eph.  iv.  8).  4.  Were  in  themselves  wonderful.  "  This  which 
ye  now  see  and  hear."  Explanation  was  not  attempted.  What  was  seen  and  heard 
was  enough  to  work  conviction.  IV.  In  the  ascension  Peter  finds  the  concludino 
POINT  OF  HIS  AEGUMENT — VIZ.,  that  Jcsus  was  Lord  and  Christ.  Then  they  had 
crucified  the  Messiah.  No  wonder  they  were  pricked  in  the  heart.  In  conclusion, 
see  here — 1.  The  means  to  be  employed  by  preachers  :  the  facts  of  history  and 
experience,  with  interpretations  from  the  Word  of  God.  2.  The  end  to  be  aimed 
at  by  preachers — tliat  j^ersonal  conviction  which  prepares  sinners  to  accept  Christ, 
(W.  Hudson.)  The  exaltation  of  Christ : — He  is  there  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 

above  all  principality  and  power,  and  every  name  that  is  named.  He  is  not  there 
among  the  patriarchs  ;  He  is  higher  up.  He  is  not  there  among  the  martyrs ;  He 
is  higher  up.  He  is  not  there  among  the  prophets ;  He  is  higher  up.  He  is  not 
there  among  the  four  and  twenty  elders  ;  He  is  higher  up.  He  is  not  there  with 
the  four  living  beings  that  are  immediately  surrounding  the  throne  ;  He  is  higher 
up.  He  is  at  the  right  hand,  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  literally  over  all,  God- 
blessed  for  ever.  That  throne  will  never  be  called  the  throne  of  God  and  the 
patriarchs,  or  the  throne  of  God  and  the  prophets,  or  the  throne  of  God  and  the 
angels,  or  the  throne  of  God  and  the  martyrs,  but  it  will  evermore  be  called  the 
throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  ;  for  He  that  giveth  not  His  glory  to  another  has 
taken  Him  unto  that  throne,  and  at  that  throne  He  stands  as  the  Lamb  that  was 
slain,  bearing  upon  Him  in  the  central  seat  of  glory  and  brightness  the  dark  tokens 
of  death  :  the  dear  tokens  of  His  passion  still  His  dazzling  body  bears,  and  from 
that  centre  of  authority  He  hath  poured  out,  "  He  hath  shed  forth  that  which  now 
ye  do  see  and  hear."      {W.  Arthur,  M.A.)  He   hath   shed   forth  this,  which 

ye  now  see  and  hear. — The  effusion  of  the  Sjyirit : — I.  The  peomises  of  the 
Spieit,  undee  peeceding  dispensations.  As  the  prophecies  of  Christ  served 
to  identify  the  Messiah  on  His  manifestation  in  the  iiesh,  and  prove  His  Divine 
mission,  so  these  predictions  of  the  coming  and  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  the  ancient  Scriptures  of  the  Jewish  people,  conspire,  with  the  facts  after- 
wards to  be  noticed  as  the  accomplishment  of  them,  to  show  that  it  is  a  Divine 
energy  from  on  high  which  is  now  amongst  us  of  a  truth.  II.  The  coMMriNicATioN 
OF  THE  Holy  Ghost  feom  the  hands  of  the  exalted  Redeemer.  1.  The  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  essentially  connected  with  the  work  of  Christ.  Of  old  the  Spirit 
was  given  to  foretell  it,  but  His  greater  province  was  to  attest  and  apply  it.  2.  This 
communication  of  the  Spirit  from  the  hands  of  the  exalted  Saviour  makes  distinctly 
manifest  what  is  everywhere  implied  in  Scripture — that  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  a  purely  gratuitous  and  gracious  bestowment.  HI.  What  is  stated  to  be  the 
NATDEE  OF  THE  woEK  OF  THE  HoLY  Ghost  IN  THE  Chuech.  What  Were  those 
manifestations  thus  dispensed  from  the  hands  of  the  Eedeemer,  of  which  we  read  in 
Scripture,  and  some  of  which  are  matters  of  observation  or  of  consciousness  still  ? 
1.  There  were  those  supernatural  endowments,  called  in  Scripture  "  Spiritual 
gifts,"  which  first  proclaimed  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Church.  2. 
With  this  stands  closely  connected  the  inspiration  of  the  apostles.  The  system  of 
truth  which  the  spiritual  gifts  were  to  attest  was  that  of  which  they  were  the  pro- 
fessed expositors  ;  and  it  was  in  the  train  of  their  ministry  that  these  manifesta- 
tions appeared.  3.  We  have  further  to  advert  to  that,  to  which  all  that  we  Lave 
been  dwelling  upon  is  but  subservient,  as  means  to  the  end — the  manifestation  of 
that  new  element  of  spiritual  life  which  sprung  up  in  connection  with  the  exhibition 
of  apostolic  truth,  and  which  is  ascribed  in  Scripture  to  the  application  of  tbat 
truth  to  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  first  work  of  the  Spirit,  of  which  we 
have  spoken,  was  chiefly  for  attestation  ;  the  second,  for  instruction  ;  this  third,  for 
regeneration  and  salvation.  And  if  the  Spirit  appears  glorious  in  His  gifts  and 
diversities  of  miraculous  working,  and  as  the  source  of  inspiration  in  the  apostles 
and  prophets,  much  more  is  it  so  when  we  view  Him  as  "  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ 
Jesus,"  and  as  establishing  "  a  law  "  within  the  renewed  soul,  which  makes  it "  free 
from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  (E.  T.  Prust.)  Therefore  let  all  the  house  of  Israel 
know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crucified, 
both  Lord  and  Christ. — The  Lordship  of  Christ : — I.  The  apostle  applies  himself 
TO  HIS  ADDiTOEY  IN  A  FAiE,  GENTLE  MANNER.  We  have  a  word  amougst  us  in 
familiar  use — "  compliment  "  ;  and  for  the  most  part  in  an  ill  sense,  for  the  heart 
of  a  speaker  does  not  always  answer  his  tongue.  But  God  forbid  but  a  true  heart 
and  a  fair  tongue  might  very  well  consist  together.  He  aggravates  his  condemna- 
tion who  gives  me  fair  words  and  means  ill ;  but  he  gives  me  a  rich  jewel  in  a 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  2,03 

choice  cabinet,  precious  wine  in  a  clean  glass,  who  intends  and  expresses  his  good 
intentions  well.  II.  So  the  apostle  is  civil  here  ;  but  his  civility  does  not  amount 
to  flattery  ;  and  therefore,  though  he  gives  his  audience  their  titles,  he  puts  home 
TO  THEM  THE  CRUCiFTiNG  OF  Chbist.  How  hoDOurably  soever  they  were  descended, 
he  lays  that  murder  close  to  their  consciences.  It  is  one  thing  to  sew  pillows  under 
the  elbows  of  kings,  as  flatterers  do,  and  another  to  pull  the  chair  from  under  them, 
as  seditious  men  do.  When  inferiors  insult  over  their  superiors,  we  tell  them  they 
are  the  Lord's  anointed  ;  and  when  such  superiors  insult  over  the  Lord  Himself, 
■we  must  tell  them,  "  Though  you  be  the  Lord's  anointed,  yet  you  crucify  the 
anointed  Lord  ■' ;  for  this  was  Peter's  method,  though  his  successor  will  not  be 
bound  by  it.  III.  When  he  hath  carried  the  matter  thus  evenly  between  them,  he 
ANNOUNCES  A  MESSAGE.  "  Let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly."  Need  the 
house  of  Israel  know  anything  ?  Need  the  honourable  to  be  instructed  ?  Yes,  for 
this  knowledge  is  such  that  the  house  of  Israel  is  without  a  foundation  if  it  be 
without  it.  Let  no  Church  or  man  think  that  he  hath  done  enough  or  known 
enough.  The  wisest  must  know  more,  though  they  be  the  house  of  Israel;  and 
then,  though  you  have  crucified  Christ,  you  may  know  it.  St.  Paul  says,  "  If  they 
had  known  it,  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  Glory"  (1  Cor.  ii.  8) ;  but 
he  never  says  they  are  excluded  from  the  knowledge.  The  wisest  have  ever  some- 
thing to  learn ;  they  must  not  presume.  The  sinfullest  have  God  ever  ready  to 
teach  them  ;  they  must  not  despair.  Now  the  universality  of  this  mercy  God  has 
extended  very  far,  in  that  He  proposes  it  even  to  our  knowledge  :  "  Let  all  know 
it."  And  therefore  it  is  not  enough  for  us  to  tell  you  except  you  believe  all  this 
you  shall  be  damned,  without  we  execute  that  commission  before,  "  Go  and 
preach  "  ;  and  it  is  not  enough  for  you  to  rest  in  imaginary  faith  and  easiness  of 
believing,  except  you  know  what,  why,  and  how  you  believe.  The  implicit  believer 
stands  in  an  open  field,  and  the  enemy  will  ride  over  him  easily ;  the  understanding 
believer  is  a  fenced  town,  and  hath  outworks  to  lose  before  the  town  be  pressed — 
i.e.,  reasons  to  be  answered  befi.re  his  faith  be  shaked.  Let  all  men  know — 
i.e.,  inform  themselves  and  understand.  IV.  The  particulae  which  all  were  to 
KNOW  was  that  this  same  Jesus  whom  they  crucified  was  exalted.  Suppose  an  im- 
possibility :  if  we  could  have  been  in  paradise,  and  seen  God  make  of  a  clod  a  body 
lit  for  an  immortal  soul — fit  for  God  the  Son  to  dwell  in,  and  fit  for  a  temple  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  should  we  not  have  wondered  more  than  at  the  production  of  all  other 
ere  itures  ?  It  is  more  that  this  same  crucified  Jesus  should  be  exalted  to  the  right 
hand  of  the  glorious  God.  Let,  then,  sinners  pass  through  their  several  sins,  and 
remember  with  wonder  and  confusion  that  the  Jesus  whom  they  have  crucified  is 
exalted  above  all.  How  far  exalted  ?  Three  steps  carry  Him  above  St.  Paul's  third 
heaven.  1.  God  made  Him  so,  not  nature.  The  contract  between  the  Father  and 
Him  that  all  He  did  should  be  done  so — this  is  what  hath  exalted  Him,  and  us  in 
Him.  2.  God  made  Him  Christ — i.e.,  anointed  Him  above  His  fellows.  3.  God 
made  Him  Lord.  But  what  kind  of  Lord,  if  He  had  no  subjects?  God  hath  given 
Him  these  too  (Rom.  xiv.  9).  (J.  Donne,  D.D.)  Jesus  as  Lord: — We  are  apt  to 
let  this  idea  slip.  As  soon  as  we  have  apprehended  Christ  as  Saviour,  we  suppose 
sometimes  that  the  work  is  done ;  whereas  it  is  but  just  begun.  Christ  is  Saviour 
in  order  that  He  may  be  King.  He  saves  us  first,  because  that  is  the  only  effective 
way  of  ruling  over  us.  He  cannot  capture  man  and  bring  him  into  subjection, 
except  by  laying  hold  of  man's  heart.  It  is  love  that  changes,  and  love  that  rules. 
One  of  our  best  story-tellers  has  taken  us  into  a  Californian  camp.  They  were  a 
hard,  fighting,  swearing  set,  those  gold-diggers.  But  a  baby  was  born  into  the 
camp,  and  these  rough  men  were  allowed  to  go  and  look  at  the  little  babe  ;  and 
there  was  one  man  put  his  finger  down,  and  the  baby's  hand  wound  round  it,  and 
seemed  to  thrill  his  rough,  coarse  nature  with  a  new  love.  The  man  was  changed; 
the  camp  was  changed.  It  was  love  that  did  it.  Love  is  Christ's  method ;  rule 
His  end.  If  Christ  does  not  rule  men,  He  has  failed  in  the  purpose  that  called  Him 
here.  All  living  things  need  a  ruling  force.  The  body  is  useless  wilhout  the  brain 
to  direct  its  movements  ;  the  family  fail  when  father  and  mother  die  ;  an  army  is 
powerless  when  there  is  no  one  to  give  orders  ;  a  state  is  the  home  of  miserable 
factions  when  th»re  is  no  recognised  authority;  and  humanity  itself  is  but  a  series 
of  disjointed  individuals,  until  Christ  is  crowned  Lord  of  man  and  King  of  the 
•world.  Christian  men  are  forgetting  Christ's  world-wide  Lordship  and  universal 
claims  ;  and  these  claims  must  be  pressed  home  on  the  hearts  and  consciences  of 
men  until  they  fully  acknowledge  Jesus  as  Lord.  I.  Lord  of  man.  1.  Euling 
man's  body,  with  its  passions  and  inchnations.     2.  Guiding  man's  mind,  preserving 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

the  intellect  from  sophistry,  the  conscience  from  error,  the  heart  from  corruption. 
II.  Lord  of  woman.  1.  Touching  her  tender  heart  with  a  deeper  pathos  for  the 
sufferings  of  the  world.  2.  Making  her  man's  helpmeet  in  all  that  is  pure  and 
ennobling.  3.  Enabling  her,  with  man,  to  deal  with  all  that  is  evil  in  society  and 
degrading  in  public  sentiment.  III.  Lord  of  the  child.  1.  Alluring  the  young 
life  along  paths  of  obedience  and  self-denial  and  thoughtfulness.  2.  Yet  hlhng  the  lap 
with  butiercups  and  daises,  and  merriment  and  laughter.  "  Suffer  little  children," 
&c.  IV.  Lord  of  the  home.  Determining  its — 1.  Expenditure.  2.  Giving.  3. 
Habits.  4.  Prayers.  6.  Purposes,  and  binding  parents,  children,  servants,  into 
one  holy  fellowship.  V.  Lord  of  the  Church.  Giving— 1.  Truth  to  feed  the 
mind.  2.  Grace  to  support  the  life.  3.  Wisdom  to  guide  tfje  judgment.  4.  Ee- 
vereuce  to  lift  up  the  soul  in  worship.  5.  Enthusiasm  to  inspire  tbe  work.  6.  A 
peaceful  spirit,  binding  all  together  by  our  golden  chain  of  loving  brotherhood.  VI. 
Lord  of  the  State.  1.  Decreeing  justice  to  all.  2.  Bringing  law  into  harmony 
with  Divine  teaching.  3.  Lifting  up  the  poor  and  abasing  tbe  proud.  4.  Eebuking 
the  evil  doers,  and  overturning  all  iniquity.  VII.  Lord  of  the  world.  1.  Driving 
back  the  darkness.  2.  Destroying  false  religion  and  bringing  in  the  true.  3.  Making 
the  world  like  heaven.  Conclusion :  That  Lordship  of  Christ  will  not  let  us  put  on 
and  put  off  religion  with  our  Sunday  clothes.  It  bids  us  take  Clirist  with  us,  not 
merely  to  religious  work,  but  so  to  take  Him  that  all  work  should  be  religions.  It 
calls  upon  Christians  to  be  the  subjects  of  Christ  everywhere  ;  to  obey  Christ  in 
business,  in  the  home,  in  politics,  in  reading,  in  talking,  in  laughing,  in  giving,  in 
dying.  There  is  a  majesty  about  this  name  that  men  have  not  yet  felt.  {S.  Fear- 
son,  M.A.)  The  name  above  every  name: — These  names,  to  us  very  little  more 
than  three  proper  names,  were  very  different  to  these  men  who  listened  to  Peter. 
It  wanted  some  courage  to  proclaim  on  the  housetop  what  he  had  spoken  in  the  ear 
long  ago.  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God  1  "  To  most  of  his 
listeners,  to  say,  "Jesus  is  the  Christ  "  was  folly,  and  to  say  "  Jesus  is  "the  Lord  " 
was  blasphemy.  I.  The  name  Jesus  is  the  name  of  the  Man,  which  tells  us 
OF  A  Brother.  1.  There  were  many  who  bore  it  in  His  day.  We  find  that  one  of 
the  early  Christians  had  it  (Col.  iv.  11).  Through  reverence  on  the  part  of 
Christians,  and  horror  on  the  part  of  Jews,  the  name  ceased  to  bfe  a  common  one. 
But  none  of  all  the  crowds  who  knew  Him  supposed  that  in  His  name  there  was 
any  greater  significance  than  in  those  of  the  "  Simons,"  "  Johns,"  and  "  Judxhs  " 
in  the  circle  of  His  disciples.  2.  The  use  of  Jesus  as  the  proper  name  of  our  Lord 
is  very  noticeable.  In  the  Gospels,  as  a  rule,  it  stands  alone  hundreds  of  times, 
whilst  in  combination  with  any  other  of  the  titles  it  is  rare.  "  Jesus  Christ "  only 
occurs  twice  in  Matthew,  once  in  Mark,  twice  in  John.  But  in  the  later  books, 
the  proportions  are  reversed.  There  you  have  hundreds  of  such  combinations  as 
♦'  Jesus  Christ,"  "  Christ  Jesns,"  "  The  Lord  Jesus,"  "  Christ  the  Lord,"  and  not 
frequently  the  full  solemn  title,  "  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  But  "  Jesus  "  alone 
only  occurs  some  thirty  or  forty  times  outside  of  tlie  four  evangelists  ;  and  in  these 
tlie  writer's  intention  is  to  put  sti-ong  emphasis  on  the  Manhood  of  our  Lord.  (1) 
We  find  phrases  like  this  :  "  Jesus  died,"  "  the  blood  of  Jesus,"  which  emphasise 
His  death  as  that  of  a  man  like  ourselves,  and  bring  us  close  to  the  reality  of  His 
human  pains  for  us.  "  Christ  died"  makf-s  the  puipose  and  efficacy  of  His  death 
more  plain;  but  "Jesus  died  "  shows  us  His  death  as  the  outcome  of  His  human 
love.  I  know  that  a  certain  school  dwells  a  great  deal  too  much  for  reverence 
upon  the  mere  physical  aspect  of  Christ's  sufferings.  But  the  temptation  with 
most  of  us  is  to  dwell  too  little  upon  it,  to  think  about  it  as  a  matter  of  speculation, 
a  mysterious  power,  an  official  act  of  the  Messiah,  and  to  forget  that  He  bore  a 
human  life,  which  naturally  shrank  from  the  agony  of  death.  (2)  When  our  Lord 
is  set  before  us  in  His  humanity  as  our  example,  this  name  is  used — e.g.,  "Looking 
unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Perfecterof  faith" — i.e.,  a  mighty  stimulus  to  Christian 
nobleness  lies  in  the  realisation  of  the  true  manhood  of  our  Lord,  as  the  type  of 
all  goodness,  as  having  Himself  lived  by  faith,  and  that  in  a  perfect  degree  and 
manner.  Do  not  take  poor  human  creatures  for  your  ideal.  Black  veins  are  in 
the  purest  marble,  and  flaws  in  the  most  lustrous  diamonds  ;  but  to  imitate  Jesus 
is  freedom,  and  to  be  like  Him  is  perfection.  Our  code  of  morals  is  His  Ufe.  The 
secret  of  all  progress  is,  "  Eun,  looking  unto  Jesus."  (3)  We  have  His  manhood 
emphasised  when  His  sympathy  is  to  be  commended  to  our  hearts.  "  The  great 
High  Priest  "  is  "  Jesus  "  .  .  .  "  who  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are." 
To  every  sorrowing  soul  there  comes  the  thought,  "  Every  ill  that  flesh  is  heir  to  " 
He  knows  by  experience,  and  in  the  man  Jesus  we  find  not  only  the  pity  of  a  God, 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  205 

but  the  sympathy  of  a  Brother.     The  Prince  of  Wales  once  went  for  an  afternoon 
into  the  slums,  and  everybody  said  deservedly,  "  right "  and  "princely."     I'his 
Prince  has  "  learned  pity  in  the  huts  where  poor  men  lie."     (4)  And  then  you  read 
Buch  words  as  these  :  "  It  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them 
also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him."     How  very  much  closer  to 
our  hearts  that  consolation  comes,  "Jesus  rose  again,"  than  even  the  mighty  word, 
"  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead."     The  one  tells  us  of  the  risen  Redeemer,  the  other 
tells  us  of  the  risen  Brother.    And  wherever  we  follow  our  dear  ones  into  the  dark- 
ness with  yearning  hearts,  there,  too,  the  consolation  comes;  they  lie  down  beside 
their  Brother,  and  with  their  Brother  they  shall  rise  again.     (5)  So  again,  most 
strikingly,  in  the  words  which  paint  most  loftily  the  exaltation  of  the  risen  Saviour, 
it  is  the  old  human  name  that  is  used,  as  if  to  bind  together  the  humiliation  and 
the  exaltation,  and  proclaim  that  a  Man  had  risen  to  the  throne  of  the  universe. 
What  an  emphasis  and  glow  of  hope  there  is  in,  "  We  see  not  yet  all  things  put 
under  Him,  but  we  see  Jesus " — the  very  Man  that  was  here  with  us — "crowned 
with  glory  and  honour."     So  in  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  the  chosen  name  for 
Him  that  sits  amidst  the  glories  of  the  heavens,  and  settles  the  destinies  of  the 
universe,  and  orders  the  course  of  history,  is  Jesus.     As  if  the  apostle  would  assure 
us  that  the  face  which  looked  dowu  upon  him  from  amidst  the  blaze  of  the  glory 
was  indeed  the  face  that  he  knew  long  ago  upon  earth,  and  the  breast  tbat  "  was 
girded  with  a  golden  girdle  "  was  the  breast  upon  which  he  so  often  had  leaned  his 
happy  head.     3.  So  the  ties  that  bind  us  to  the  Man  Jesus  should  be  the  human 
bonds  that  knit  us  one  to  another,  transferred  to  Him,  and  purified  and  strengthened. 
All  that  we  have  failed  to  find  in  men  we  can  find  in  Him.     (1)  Human  wisdom 
has  its  limits  ;  but  here  is  a  Man  whose  word  is  truth,  who  is  Himself  the  truth. 
(2)  Human  love  is  sometimes  hollow,  often  impotent ;  it  looks  down  upon  us,  as  a 
great  tbinker  has  said,  like  the  Venus  of  Milo,  that  lovely  statue,  smiling  in  pity, 
but  it  has  no  arms.    But  here  is  a  love  that  is  mighty  to  help,  and  on  which  we 
can  rely  without  disappointment  or  loss.     (3)  Human  excellence  is  always  limited 
and  imperfect ;  but  here  is  One  whom  we  may  imitate  and  be  pure.     4.  So  let  us 
do  like  that  poor  woman,  bring  the  precious  alabaster  box  of  ointment — the  love  of 
these  hearts  of  ours,  which  is  the  most  precious  tbing  we  have  to  give.     The  box 
of  ointment  that  we  have  so  often  squandered  upon  unworthy  heads — let  us  come 
and  pour  it  upon  His,  not  unmingled  with  our  tears,  and  anoint  Him,  our  Beloved 
and  our  King.      II.  The  name  "Chbist"  is  the  name  of  office,  and  brings  to 
vs  A  Redeemer.     It  is  the  Greek  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  Messias,  both  meaning 
the  Anointed.     I  cannot  see  less  in  the  contents  of  the  prophetic  idea  of  the  Messias 
than  these  points  :  Divine  inspiration  or  anointing  ;  a  sufferer  who  is  to  redeem ; 
the  fulfiUer  of  all  the  rapturous  visions  of  psalmist  and  of  prophet  in  the  past. 
And  so,  when  Peter  stood  up  amongst  that  congregation  and  said,  "  The  Man  that 
died  on  the  Cross,  the  Rabbi-peasant  from  half-heathen  Galilee,  is  the  Person  whom 
all  the  generations  have  been  looking  forward  to,"  no  wonder  that  nobody  believed 
him  except  those  whose  hearts  were  touched,  for  it  is  never  possible  for  the  common 
mind,  at  any  epoch,  to  believe  that  the  man  that  stands  beside  them  is  very  much 
bigger  than  themselves.     Great  men  have  always  to  die,  and  get  a  halo  of  distance 
around  them  before  their  true  stature  can  be  seen.     And  now  two  remarks  are  all  I 
can  offer.      1.  The   hearty  recognition  of   His  Messiahship  is  the  centre  of   all 
discipleship.     The  earliest  and  the  simplest  Christian  creed,  which  yet — like  the 
little  brown  roll  in  which  the  infant  beech  leaves  lie  folded  up— contains  in  itself 
all  the  rest,  was  this  :  "Jesus  is  Christ."     He  who  contents  himself  with  "Jesus" 
and  does  not  grasp  "  Christ,"  has  cast  away  the  most  valuable  and  characteristic 
part  of  the  Christianity  which  he  professes.     Surely  the  most  simple  inference  is 
that  a  Christian  is  at  least  a  man  who  recognises  the  Christship  of  Jesus.     And  it 
is  not  enough  for  the  sustenance  of  your  souls  that  men  should  admire,  howsoever 
profoundly,  the  humanity  of  the  Lord  unless  that  humanity  leads  them  on  to  see 
the  office  of   the  Messiah,  to  whom  their  whole  hearts  cleave.      "  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  "  is  the  minimum  Christian  creed.     2.  The  recognition  of  Jesus  as  Christ  is 
essential  to  giving  its  full  value  to  the  facts  of  the  manhood.     (1)     "  Jesus  died  ! 
Yes  !     What  then  ?     If  that  is  simply  a  human  death,  like  all  the  rest,  I  want  to 
know  what  makes  it  a  guspel?     What  more  interest  I  have  in  it  than  I  have  in  the 
death  of  any  men  or  women  whose  names  were  in  the  obituary  column  of  yester- 
day's newspaper  ?     "  Jesus  died  "     That  is  the  fact.     What  is  wanted  to  turn  the 
fact  into  a  gospel?     That  I  shall  know  who  it  was  that  died,  and  why  He  died. 
*•  I  declare  unto  you  the  gospel  which  I  preach,"  Paul  says,  "  how  that  Christ  died 


206  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

for  our  sins,  according  to  the  Scriptures."  The  belief  that  the  death  of  Jesus  was 
the  death  of  the  Christ  is  needful  to  make  that  death  the  means  of  my  deliverance 
from  the  burden  of  sin.  If  it  be  only  the  death  of  Jesus,  it  is  beautiful,  pathetic, 
as  many  another  martyr's  has  been  ;  but  if  it  be  the  death  of  Christ,  then  "  my 
faith  can  lay  her  hand  "  on  that  great  sacrifice,  and  know  '•  her  guilt  was  there." 

(2)  So  in  regard  of  His  perfect  example.  To  only  see  His  manhood  would  be  as 
i:)aralysing  as  spectacles  of  supreme  excellence  usually  are.  But  when  we  can  say, 
"  Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,"  and  so  can  deepen  the  thought 
of  His  Manhood  into  that  of  His  Messiahship,  and  the  conception  of  His  work  as 
example  into  that  of  His  work  as  sacrifice,  we  can  hope  that  His  Divine  power  will 
dwell  in  us  to  mould  our  lives  to  the  likeness  of  His  human  life  of  perfect  obedience. 

(3)  So  in  regard  to  His  resurrection  and  ascension.  If  it  were  only  "  Jesus,"  those 
events  might  be  as  much  to  us  as  the  raising  of  Lazarus,  or  the  rapture  of  Elijah — 
namely,  a  demonstration  that  death  did  not  destroy  conscious  being,  and  that  a 
man  could  rise  to  heaven.  But  if  "  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead,"  He  is  "  become 
the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept."  If  Jesus  has  gone  up  on  high,  it  may  show 
that  manhood  is  not  incapable  of  elevation  to  heaven,  but  it  has  no  power  to  draw 
others  up  after  it.  But  if  Christ  is  gone  up.  He  is  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  us, 
and  His  ascension  is  the  assurance  that  He  will  lift  us  too  to  dwell  with  Him,  and 
share  His  triumph  over  death  Hnd  sin.  III.  "  The  Lord  "  is  the  name  of  dignity, 
AND  BRINGS  BEFuRE  US  THE  KiNG.  There  are  three  grades  of  dignity  expressed  by 
this  word  in  the  New  Testament.  Tlie  lowest  is  tlmt  in  which  it  is  almost  the 
equivalent  of  "  Sir  " ;  the  second  is  that  iu  which  it  expresses  dignity  and  authority ; 
the  third  is  that  in  which  it  is  the  equivalent  of  the  Old  Tt  stament  "  Lord  "  as  a 
Divine  name  ;  and  all  are  applied  to  Christ.  The  central  one  is  the  meaning  of 
the  word  here.  1.  "Jesus  is  Lord" — i.e.,  the  manhood  is  exalted  to  supreme  dignity. 
It  is  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament,  that  our  nature  in  the  Child  of  Mary  sits 
on  the  throne  of  the  universe  and  rules  over  all  things.  Trust  His  dominion  and 
rejoice  in  His  rule,  and  bow  before  His  authority.  2.  Christ  is  Lord — i.e.,  His  sove- 
reign authority  and  dominion  are  built  upon  the  fact  of  His  being  Redeemer  and 
Sacrifii'e.  His  kingdom  rests  upon  His  suffering.  "  Wherefore  God  also  hath 
exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a  name  that  is  above  every  name."  It  is  because  He 
bears  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood,  that  on  the  vesture  is  the  name  written,  "  King  of 
kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  Because  He  has  given  His  life  for  the  world.  He  is 
Master  of  the  world.  Conclusion  :  Do  not  content  yourselves  with  a  maimed 
Christ.  1.  Do  not  tarry  in  the  Manhood;  do  not  be  content  with  an  adoring 
reverence  for  the  nobility  of  His  soul,  the  wisdom  of  His  words,  the  beauty  of  His 
character,  the  tenderness  of  His  compassion.  All  that  will  be  of  small  help  for 
your  needs.  There  is  more  in  His  mission  than  that — even  His  death  for  you  and 
for  all  men.  2.  Take  Him  for  your  Christ,  but  do  not  lose  the  Person  in  the  work, 
any  more  than  you  lose  the  work  in  the  Person.  And  be  not  content  with  an  intt^l- 
lectual  reeogniiion  of  Him,  but  bring  Him  the  faith  which  cleaves  to  Him  and  His 
work  as  its  only  hope  and  peace,  and  the  love  which,  because  of  His  work  as  Christ, 
flows  out  to  the  beloved  Person  who  has  done  it  all.  3.  Thus  loving  Jesus  and 
trusting  Christ,  you  will  bring  obedience  to  your  Lord  and  homage  to  your  King, 
and  learn  the  sweetness  and  power  of  the  name  that  is  above  every  name — the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     (.-1.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  37-42.  Now  when  they  heard  this  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart. — The 
effectx  of  ff^-'  el  pre  ichiin) : — 1.  Peter  having  explained  the  events  of  Pentecost,  an  im- 
mediate effect  was  produced.  "They  were  pricked  in  their  hearts."  So  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  poured  out  upon  them  as  He  had  been  poured  out  upou  the  assembly  of  the  Church. 
We  see  here,  therefore,  the  double  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  is  poured  out  upon 
the  Church  to  sanctify  and  to  confirm  in  the  faith  ;  and  upon  those  who  are  out- 
side that  He  may  alarm  and  quicken  and  direct  to  right  conclusions.  2.  This  was 
the  first  Christian  sermon  that  had  been  preached.  Jesus  Chi  ist  was  no  longer 
present  in  the  body.  Now  we  are  curious  to  know  how  the  truth  will  make  its  way 
upon  its  own  merits,  apart  from  that  magnetic  influence  which  attached  to  the 
audible  voice  of  the  Divine  Master.  Will  the  truth  make  its  way  by  sheer  force  of 
its  celestial  beauty  and  grace,  and  comfort,  or  will  it  perish  under  other  voices  than 
Christ's  own  ?  So  we  wait,  we  hear  the  discourse,  and  when  it  is  concluded  we  read 
— that  when  the  people  heard  this  they  were  pricked  in  their  hearts.  3.  OnserVe 
the  peculiarity  of  that  effect.  Not,  they  were  awed  by  the  eloquence,  excited  in 
their  imagination ;  gratified  in  their  taste ;  the  result  was  infinitely  deeper  and 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  207 

grander.  An  arrow  had  fastened  itself  in  the  very  centre  of  th°ir  hfe.  In  their 
conscience  was  inserted  the  sting  of  intolerable  self-accusation.  This  was  the  grand 
miracle.  Truly  we  may  say  this  was  the  beginning  of  miracles  of  the  higher, 
because  the  spiritual  kind.  Great  effects  are  produced  by  great  causes.  4.  A  reflec- 
tion of  this  kind  would,  however,  have  a  very  remote  interest  for  us  were  it  confined 
to  an  ancient  incident.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  apostle  Peter  preached  the  only 
sermon  that  any  Christian  minister  is  ever  at  liberty  to  preach.  This  is  the  model 
sermon.  No  change  must  be  made  here  or  a  corresponding  change  will  be  made  in 
the  effect.  Men  may  be  more  eloquent,  literary,  technical,  and  philosophical ;  they 
may  use  longer  words  and  more  abstruse  arguments,  but  the  effect  will  be  like  other 
talk,  pointless,  and  there  will  be  no  answer  in  the  great  human  heart — no  consci- 
ence will  accuse,  no  eyes  will  be  blinded  with  tears,  none  will  cry,  *'  What  shall  we 
do  ?  "  Let  us  look  at — I.  The  sermon  and  see  how  it  is  made  up.  1.  It  is  full  of 
Scriptural  allusions,  as  is  every  sermon  that  is  worth  listening  to.  The  reasoa  why 
our  preaching  is  so  powerless  is  that  we  do  not  impregnate  it  with  the  inspired 
■word.  Peter  did  not  make  the  sermon.  He  quoted  David  and  Joel,  the  Psalms  and 
the  prophets,  and  set  these  quntations  in  their  right  relations  to  what  had  just 
happened,  and  whilst  he  was  talking  history  he  made  history.  Faithful  to  God's 
word,  God's  Spirit  was  faithful  to  him,  and  herein  was  realised  "My  word  shall 
not  return  unto  Me  void."  Peter's  word  would  have  returned  void,  but  God's  word 
is  as  a  sower  in  the  eventide  bringing  back  his  sheaves  with  joy.  2.  It  is  full  of 
Christ.  But  for  Christ  it  never  could  have  been  delivered.  From  end  to  end  it 
palpitates  with  the  Deity  and  glory  of  the  Son  of  God.  3.  It  is  full  of  holy  unction. 
It  was  not  delivei'ed  as  a  schoolboy  might  deliver  a  message.  The  great  strong 
rough  frame  of  the  fisherman-preacher  quivered  under  the  feeling  of  the  sacred 
message  which  the  tongue  was  delivering.  4.  It  is  full  of  patriotic  and  spiritual 
tenderness,  and  all  the  while  without  art  or  trick  or  mechanical  skill,  it  led  up  to  a 
vehement  and  solemn  demand.  When  that  demand  was  thundered  upon  the  people 
they  did  not  applaud  the  man,  they  were  concerned  about  themselves  ;  they  were 
not  pleased,  they  were  pierced  ;  and  they  were  not  gratified,  they  were  convicted. 
II.  But  even  this  great  sermon  of  Peter's  does  not  explain  the  full  result.  The 
PBEACHER  must  have  had  something  to  do  with  the  effect.  He  had  just  received  the 
Holy  Ghost.  An  inspired  doctrine  demands  an  inspired  ministry.  The  Book  is 
inspired,  but  when  uninspired  readers  read  it  they  kill  the  very  fire  of  heaven  when 
it  touches  their  reluctant  tongues.  It  is  there  that  the  holy  influence  is  lost. 
When  the  Holy  Ghost  is  both  in  the  doctrine  and  in  the  people  who  profess  it,  the 
mountains  of  difficulty  will  fly  away  like  dust  upon  the  mocking  wind.  III.  Nor 
have  we  read  the  full  account  yet  of  the  production  of  this  mighty  effect.  The 
PEOPLE  were  prepared  for  vital  statement ;  anything  that  was  beautiful  in  nature, 
or  in  music  would  not  have  satisfied  them.  They  would  have  resented  any  dis- 
course that  bristled  with  merely  clever  allusions  or  curious  conceits  of  expression. 
The  fire  fell  upon  prepared  material,  therefore  the  Word  of  the  Lord  had  free  course 
and  was  glorified.  How  can  we  preach  to  a  people  unprepared  to  hear  ?  The  work 
is  too  great  for  any  man.  A  prepared  pulpit  should  be  balanced  by  a  prepared  pew, 
•'  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."  To  the  unthirsty  man  the 
Bible  spring  is  without  attraction,  but  to  the  thirsty  traveller,  sun-smitten  and 
weary,  how  like  the  music  of  running  streams  I  A  very  solemn  reflection  occurs 
here.  Where  the  heart  is  unaffected,  Christian  service  is  more  mischievous  than 
benefifial.  What  if  our  notions  be  increased,  if  our  motives  be  left  uubaptized  ? 
And  what  if  we  have  been  flattered  and  cajoled  and  "  daubed  with  untempered 
moitar,"if  the  Word  has  not  reached  the  very  seat  of  the  disease?  Pray  for  a 
ministry  that  shall  affect  the  heart.  He  who  seeks  after  a  comforting  ministry 
only,  and  a  restful  one  that  shall  give  him  no  disturbance,  wounds  his  own  life. 
IV.  The  EFFECT  was  grand  in  every  aspect.  1.  Three  thousand  souls  were  sa^ed. 
And  this  will  be  the  effect  of  Christian  teaching  everywhere  under  the  right  condi- 
tions. Again  and  agHin  we  read  that  the  people  who  beard  the  apost'  lie  preaching, 
•'  cried  out."  We  have  lost  that  cry  :  we  nave  succumbed  to  the  cold  and  benumb- 
ing spirit  of  decorum.  And  whilst  it  is  perfectly  true  that  there  may  be  an  irra- 
tional excitement  which  ought  to  be  subdued  and  controlled,  it  is  also  true  that  there 
is  a  spiritual  enthusiasm,  without  which  the  Church  may  be  but  a  painted  sepul- 
chre. 2.  The  people  continued  steadfastly  in  the  apostle's  doctrine,  and  in  fellow- 
Bhip,  in  breaking  of  bread  and  in  prayers.  (1)  The  flock  kept  well  together  for  fear 
of  the  wolf.  Were  we  ourselves  in  heathen  lands  we  should  realise  the  joy  of  keep- 
ing closely  together.    But  living  in  a  Christian  land  where  Christianity  has  become 


203  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

a  luxury,  or  in  some  instances  even  an  annoyance,  what  wonder  that  we  do  not; 
realise  the  primitive  enthusiasm,  and  enter  with  delight  into  the  original  fellow- 
ship and  union  of  the  Church  ?  (2)  The  people  continued  in  the  right  teaching. 
Until  our  teaching  be  right  our  life  must  be  wrong.  We  must  ask  for  the  pure 
bread,  the  pure  water,  the  undefiled  Bible,  and  live  on  that ;  out  of  such  nutritious 
food  there  will  come  proper  results  such  as  fellowship,  sacrameutal  communion,  and 
common  prayer.  A  man  says,  "  I  can  pray  by  myself,"  that  is  perfectly  true,  but 
you  should  realise  that  you  are  something  more  than  yourself ;  you  are  part  of  a 
sum  total.  A  man  is  not  at  liberty  in  the  Christian  sense  of  manhood  to  detach 
himself  from  the  common  stock  to  which  he  belongs.  Herein  is  the  advantage  of 
common  prayer  and  common  praise.  "  Forsake  not  the  assembling  of  yourselves 
together."  There  is  inspiration  in  sympathy,  there  is  encouragement  in  fellow- 
ship. It  does  the  soul  good  to  see  the  hosts  gathered  together  under  the  roval 
banner  stained  with  blood  ;  to  see  the  great  army  mai-ching  shoulder  to  shoulder 
under  the  blast  of  the  great  trumpet.  "  No  man  liveth  unto  himself  "  who  lives 
aright.  (3)  They  had  all  things  common.  This  is  the  sternly  logical  outcome  of 
true  inspiration.  But  having  regard  to  all  the  social  conditions  under  which  wa 
live  this  mechanical  form  of  union  is  impracticable.  But  having  lost  this  form, 
which  broke  down  under  the  eyes  of  apostles  themselves,  we  still  re-erve  the  spiri- 
tual outcome  and  meaning.  My  strength  is  not  my  own,  it  belongs  to  the  weakest 
child  that  I  may  see  groaning  under  oppression.  If  I  interfere,  and  the  oppressor 
say  to  me,  "What  have  you  to  do  with  him — he  is  not  yours  ?  Christianity  obliges 
me  to  say  he  is  mine.  If  you  see  an  animal  ill-used  and  ill-treated,  though  it  be 
not  yours  in  any  technical  or  legal  sense  of  the  term,  you  are  called  upon  to  inter- 
fere by  an  earlier  right,  and  by  a  diviner  law.  Whoever  has  strength  owns  it  for 
the  benefit  of  those  who  have  none.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Evangelical  preacli' 
ing : — Preaching  has  ever  been  the  principal  means  used  for  diffusing  a  know- 
ledge of  Christianity.  It  was  the  method  adopted  and  enjoined  by  the  great 
Author  of  our  religion  (Matt.  iv.  17,  x.  7 ;  Mark  xvi.  15).  A  striking  instance 
of  its  early  success  is  recorded  in  the  chapter  before  us ;  and  we  are  led  by  our 
text  to  inquire  into  the  nature  of  that  preaching  which  was  so  successful ;  and 
into  the  effects  which  followed  such  preaching.  I.  The  nature  of  the  preachino 
may  be  understood  from  the  context.  1.  The  subject  was  Christ.  The  preacher's 
name  evidently  was  to  prove  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  true  Messiah.  2.  The 
subject  was  of  the  hit^hest  importance  ;  it  was  perfectly  suitable  to  the  audience ; 
3.  And  the  manner  of  treating  it  was  excellent.  The  discussion  was  plain — concise 
— clear.  The  mode  of  address  was  courageous.  4.  The  preacher  who  thus  con- 
ducted himself,  demands  our  consideration.  It  was  Peter,  a  late  fisherman  of 
Galilee,  he  was  Divinely  called  to  preach  the  gospel ;  and  thus  quHlified,  he  preached ; 
power  from  above  attended  the  word.  II.  And  the  effects  which  followed  well 
deserve  onr  attention.  "  They  were  pricked  in  their  heart."  Hearers  treat  the 
Word  preached  with  indifference;  or  feeling  its  force  they  resist  it ;  or  happily,  like 
those  whose  case  is  before  us,  they  yield  to  its  convincing  influence.  The  address 
was  made  to  their  understanding — their  judgment— their  conscience;  and  being 
accompanied  by  the  power  of  Divine  grace,  they  were  rationally,  Scripturally,  and 
feelingly  convinced  of  the  error  of  their  ways  ;  and  said  to  Peter  and  to  the  rest  of 
the  apostles,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  We  may  consider  this  as — 1. 
The  language  of  religious  concern.  2.  The  language  of  religious  distress.  3.  The 
language  of  humble  inquiry.  Think  on  their  former  prejudices.  Such  was  the 
preaching,  and  such  were  the  effects.  Our  minds  are  farther  led  to  the  following 
improvement.  1.  Christ  crucified  is,  and  ever  should  be,  the  grand  subject  of  the 
Christian  ministry.  2.  Tlipre  is  salvation  in  no  other — there  is  no  other  name 
whereby  we  can  be  saved  (chap.  iv.  12).  3.  In  religion,  it  is  of  the  utmost  import- 
ance that  the  heart  be  affected  ("  they  were  pricked  in  their  hearts  ") ;  See  Gen. 
vi.  5 ;  Jer.  xvii.  7 ;  Joel  ii.  13  ;  Mark  vii.  21 ;  Prov.  iv.  23  ;  Psa.  li.  10,  17.  Sin 
hath  its  seat  in  the  heart — there  the  change  should  begin.  4.  Persons  may  be  so 
affected  on  account  of  their  sin  and  danger,  that  ihsy  cannot,  in  some  cases,  avoid 
strongly  expressing  what  they  feel.  5.  The  essential  importance  of  Divine  influence 
to  render  the  word  preached  successful  is  another  idea  suggested  by  the  circum- 
stances connected  with  the  text.  {Theol"gical  Sketch-book.)  Conversion: — I. 
Refers  to  what  they  heard.  They  heard — 1.  An  explicit  statement  of  the  truth. 
2.  Enforced  by  solid  reasoning.  3.  Brought  home  to  their  own  consciences  with 
fidelity.  II.  It  describes  what  they  felt — "  They  were  pricked  in  their  heart." 
The  expression  denotes  a  sudden,  deep,  strong,  anguished  feeling.     1.  Agonised 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  ACTS.  209 

astonishment — at  this  ignorance  amid  so  much  light — at  the  error  committed 
against  such  evidence.  They  see  that  Jesus  was  no  impostor.  2.  Inexpressible 
conviction.  They  felt  the  guilt  of  rejecting  a  Divine  Teacher.  3.  Terrified 
apprehension.  Could  they  forget  their  treatment  of  Jesus?  Think  of  the 
alarm  that  now  seizes  them  when  the  tumult  of  rage  gives  way  to  the  conviction 
of  guilt.  III.  It  kecokds  what  they  said.  1.  What  shall  we  do  ?  This  explana- 
tion is  the  utterance  of  concern — concern  which  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  lan- 
guage to  express.  2.  It  is  the  utterance  of  ingenuous  confession.  3.  It  is  the 
language  of  surrender.  They  abandon  unbelief.  4.  The  language  of  anxiety 
for  salvation.  (Homilist.)  The  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit: — "Son  of  man,  I 
send  thee  to  the  children  of  Israel,  to  a  rebellious  nation.  .  .  .  They  will  not 
hearken  unto  thee  ;  for  they  will  not  hearken  unto  Me  ;  .  .  .  yet  thou  shalt  speak 
unto  them,  and  tell  tbem,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  whether  they  will  hear, 
or  whether  they  will  forbear ;  .  .  .  and  they  shall  know  that  there  hath  been  a 
prophet  among  them."  Thus  God  formerly  forearmed  Ezekiel  against  the  greatest 
discouragement  that  he  was  to  meet  with  in  his  mission,  I  mean  the  unsuccessfulness 
of  his  ministry.  For  they  are  not  only  your  ministers,  who  are  disappointed  in  the 
exercise  of  the  ministry:  Isaiah,  Jeremiahs,  Ezekiels,  are  often  as  unsuccessful  as 
we.  In  such  melancholy  cases  we  must  endeavour  to  surmount  the  obstacles,  which 
the  obduracy  of  sinners  opposeth  against  the  dispensations  of  grace.  If  "  the  angels 
of  God  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,"  what  pleasure  must  he  feel  who  hath 
reason  to  hope,  that  in  this  valley  of  tears  he  hath  had  the  honour  of  opening  the 
gate  of  heaven  to  a  multitude  of  sinners,  that  he  hath  "  saved  himself  and  them  that 
heard  him."  This  pure  joy  God  gave  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  to  St.  Peter.  In 
order  to  comprehend  what  passed  in  the  auditory,  we  must  understand  the  sermon 
of  the  preacher.  There  are  five  remarkable  things  in  the  sermon,  and  there  are 
five  correspondent  dispositions  in  the  hearers.  I.  We  have  remarked  in  the  sermon 
of  St.  Peter  that  noble  freedom  of  speech,  which  so  well  becomes  a  Christian 
preacher,  and  is  so  well  adapted  to  strike  his  hearers.  How  much  soever  we  now 
admire  tbis  beautiful  part  of  pulpit-eloqnence,  it  is  very  difficult  to  imitate  it. 
Sometimes  a  weakness  of  faith,  which  attends  your  best  established  preachers; 
sometimes  worldly  prudence  ;  sometimes  a  timidity,  that  proceedeth  from  a  modest 
consciousness  of  the  insufficiency  of  their  talents  ;  sometimes  a  fear,  too  well 
grounded,  alas  !  of  the  retorting  of  those  censures,  which  people,  always  ready  to 
murmur  against  them  who  reprove  their  vices,  are  eager  to  make ;  sometimes  a 
fear  of  those  persecutions,  which  the  world  always  raiseth  against  all  whom  heaven 
qualifies  to  destroy  tLe  empire  of  sin  ;  all  these  considerations  damp  the  courage  of 
the  preacher,  and  deprive  him  of  freedom  of  speech.  But  none  of  these  considera- 
tions had  any  weight  with  our  apostle.  And,  indeed,  why  should  any  of  them  affect 
him  ?  Should  the  weakness  of  his  faith  ?  He  had  conversed  with  Jesus  Christ 
Himself ;  he  had  accc  mpanied  Him  on  the  holy  mount,  he  had  "  heard  a  voice  from 
the  excellent  glory,"  saying,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 
Could  he  distrusthis  talents  ?  The  Prince  of  the  kingdom,  the  Author,  and  Finisher 
of  faith,  had  told  him,  "  Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  My  Church." 
Should  he  dread  reproaches  and  recriminations  ?  The  purity  of  his  intentions,  and 
the  sanctity  of  his  life  confound  them.  Should  he  pretend  to  keep  fair  with  the 
world  1  But  what  finesse  is  to  be  used,  when  eternal  misery  is  to  be  denounced,  and 
eternal  happiness  proposed?  Philosophers  talk  of  certain  invisible  bands  that 
unite  mankind  to  one  another.  A  man,  animated  with  any  passion,  hath  in  the 
features  of  his  face,  and  in  the  tone  of  his  voice,  a  something  that  partly  communi- 
cates his  sentiments  to  his  hearers.  Error  proposed  in  a  lively  manner  by  a  man, 
who  is  affected  with  it  himself,  may  seduce  unguarded  people.  Fictions,  which 
we  know  are  fictions,  exhibited  in  this  manner,  move  and  affect  us  for  a  moment. 
But  what  a  dominion  over  the  heart  doth  that  speaker  obtain,  who  delivers  truths, 
and  who  is  affected  himself  with  the  truths  which  he  delivereth  !  To  this  part  of 
the  eloquence  of  St.  Peter,  we  must  attribute  the  emotions  of  his  hearers  ;  "  tliey  were 
pricked  in  their  heart."  II.  A  second  thing  which  gave  weight  and  dignity  to  the 
sermon  of  St.  Peter,  was  the  mieacle  that  preceded  his  pbeaching,  I  mean  the  gift  of 
tongues,  which  had  been  communicated  to  all  the  apostles.  The  prodigy  that  accom- 
panied the  sermon  of  St.  Peter  had  three  characteristic  marks  of  a  real  miracle.  1.  It  was 
above  human  power.  Every  pretended  miracle,  that  hath  not  this  first  character,  ought 
to  be  suspected  by  us.  But  the  prodigy  in  question  was  evidently  superior  to  human 
power.  Of  all  sciences  in  the  world,  that  of  languages  is  the  least  capable  of  an 
instant  acquisition.  Certain  natural  talents,  a  certain  superiority  of  genius,  some- 
VOL.    I.  14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

times  produce  in  some  men  the  same  effects,  which  long  and  painful  industry  can 
scarcely  ever  produce  in  others.  We  have  sometimes  seen  people  whom  nature 
seems  to  have  designedly  formed  in  an  instant  courageous  captains,  profound 
geometers,  admirable  orators.  But  tongues  are  acquired  by  study  and  time.  The 
acquisition  of  languages  is  like  the  knowledge  of  history.  It  is  not  a  superior 
genius,  it  is  not  a  great  capacity,  that  can  discover  to  any  man  what  passed  in  the 
world  ten  or  twelve  ages  ago.  The  monuments  of  antiquity  must  be  consulted,  huge 
folios  must  be  read,  and  an  immense  number  of  volumes  must  be  understood, 
arranged,  and  digested.  In  hke  manner,  the  knowledge  of  languages  is  a  knowledge 
of  experience,  and  no  man  can  ever  derive  it  from  his  own  innate  fund  of  ability. 
Yet  the  apostles,  and  apostolical  men,  men  who  were  known  to  be  men  of  no 
education,  all  on  a  sudden  knew  the  arbitrary  signs  by  which  different  nations  had 
agreed  to  express  their  thoughts.  Terms,  which  had  no  natural  connection  with 
their  ideas,  were  all  on  a  sudden  arranged  in  their  minds.  2.  But  perhaps  these 
miracles  may  not  be  the  more  respectable  on  account  of  their  superiority  to  human 
power.  Perhaps,  if  they  be  not  human,  they  may  be  devilish  ?  No,  a  little 
attention  to  their  second  character  will  convince  you  that  they  are  Divine.  Their 
end  was  to  incline  men,  not  to  renounce  natural  and  revealed  religion,  but  to 
respect  and  to  follow  both  ;  not  to  render  an  attentive  examination  unnecessary, 
but  to  allure  men  to  it.  3.  The  prodigy  that  accompanied  the  preaching  of  St. 
Peter  had  the  third  character  of  a  true  miracle.  It  was  wrought  in  the  presence  of 
those  who  had  the  greatest  interest  in  knowing  the  truth  of  it.  The  miracle  being 
granted,  I  affirm  that  the  compunction  of  heart,  of  which  my  text  speaks,  was  an 
effect  of  that  atiention  which  could  not  be  refused  to  such  an  extraordinary  event, 
and  of  that  deference  which  could  not  be  withheld  from  a  man,  to  whose  ministry 
God  had  set  His  seal.  They  instantly,  and  entirely,  surrendered  themselves  to  men, 
who  addressed  them  in  a  manner  so  extraordinary,  "  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart, 
and  said  unto  Peter,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles.  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall 
we  do?"  III.  We  remark,  in  the  discourse  of  the  apostle,  an  invincible  poweb  of 
REASONING,  aiid,  in  the  souls  of  his  hearers,  that  conviction  which  carries  along  with 
it  the  consent  of  the  will.  Of  all  methods  of  reasoning  with  an  adversary,  none  is 
more  conclusive  than  that  which  is  taken  from  his  own  principles.  But  when  the 
principles  of  an  adversary  are  well  grounded,  and  when  we  are  able  to  prove  that 
his  principles  produce  our  conclusions,  our  reasoning  becomes  demonstrative  to  a 
rational  opponent,  and  he  ought  not  to  deny  it.  Christianity,  it  is  remarkable,  is 
defensible  both  ways.  The  first  may  be  successfully  employed  against  pagans; 
the  second  more  successfully  against  the  Jews.  It  is  easy  to  convince  a  heathen 
that  he  can  have  no  right  to  exclaim  against  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel,  because 
if  he  have  any  reason  to  exclaim  against  the  mysteries  of  Christianity,  he  hath 
infinitely  more  to  exclaim  against  those  of  paganism.  The  second  way  was  employed 
more  successfully  by  the  apostles  against  the  Jews.  They  demonstrated  that  all 
the  reasons,  which  obliged  them  to  be  Jews,  ought  to  have  induced  them  to  become 
Christians ;  that  every  argument,  which  obliged  them  to  acknowledge  the  Divine 
legation  of  Moses,  ought  to  have  engaged  them  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  St. 
Peter  made  use  of  this  method.  What  argument  can  ye  allege  for  your  religion, 
said  they  to  the  Jews,  which  doth  not  establish  that  which  we  preach  ?  Do  ye 
allege  the  privileges  of  your  legislator?  Your  argument  is  demonstrative  ;  Moses 
had  access  to  God  on  the  holy  mountain.  Do  ye  allege  the  purity  of  the  morality 
of  your  religion?  Your  argument  is  demonstrative.  The  manifest  design  of  your 
religion  is  to  reclaim  men  to  God,  to  prevent  idolatry,  and  to  inspire  them  with 
piety,  benevolence,  and  zeal.  But  this  argument  concludes  for  us.  Do  ye  allege 
the  miracles  that  were  wrought  to  prove  the  truth  of  your  religion  ?  Your  argu- 
ment is  demonstrative.  But  this  argument  establisheth  the  truth  of  our  religion. 
What,  then,  are  the  prejudices  that  still  engage  you  to  continue  in  the  profession  of 
Judaism  ?  Are  they  derived  from  the  prophecies  ?  Your  principles  are  demon- 
strative ;  but,  in  the  person  of  our  Jesus,  we  show  you  to-day  all  the  grand  charac- 
ters which,  your  own  prophets  said,  would  be  found  in  the  Messiah.  Close  reason- 
ing ought  to  be  the  soul  of  all  discourses.  I  compare  it  in  regard  to  eloquence  with 
benevolence  in  regard  to  religion.  Without  benevolence  we  may  maintain  a  show 
of  religion  ;  but  we  cannot  possess  the  substance  of  it  (1.  Cor.  xiii.  1,  &c.).  In  hke 
manner  in  regard  to  eloquence  ;  speak  with  authority,  display  treasures  of  erudition, 
let  the  liveliest  and  most  sublime  imagination  wing  it  away,  turn  all  your  periods 
till  they  make  music  in  the  most  delicate  ear,  what  will  all  your  discoursf-s  be  if 
void  of  argumentation  ?  a  noise,  sounding  brass,  a  tinkling  cymbal.    Ye  may  sur- 


CHAP.  11.3  Till!:  ACTS.  211 

prise,  but  ye  cannot  convince  ;  ye  may  dazzle,  but  ye  cannot  instruct ;  ye  may, 
indeed,  please,  but  ye  can  neither  change,  sanctify,  nor  transform.     IV.  There  are, 
in  the  sermon  of  St.  Peter,  stinging  eepkoofs  ;  and,  in  the  souls  of  the  hearers,  a 
pungent  remorse  (ver.  22).      And  who  can  express  the  agitations  which  were  pro- 
duced in  the  souls  of  the  audience  ?     What  pencil  can  describe  the  state  of  their 
consciences?     They  had  committed  this  crime  through  ignorance.     St.  Peter  tore 
these  fatal  veils  asunder.     He  showed  thf  se  madmen  their  own  conduct  in  its  true 
point  of  light ;  and  discovered  their  parricide  in  all  its  horror.     "  Ye  have  taken,  and 
crucified  Jesus,  who  was  approved  of  God."  The  apostle  reminded  them  of  the  holy 
rules  of  righteousness,  which  Jesus  Christ  had  preached  and  exempliiied ;  and  the 
holiness  of  Him,  whom  they  had  crucified,  filled  them  with  a  sense  of  their  own 
depravity.     He  reminded  them  of  the  benefits  which  Jesus  Christ  had  bountifully 
bestowed  on  their  nation.     He  reminded  tliem  of  the  grandeur  of  Jesus  Christ.     He 
reminded  them  of  their  unworthy  treatment  of  Jesus  Christ ;  of  their  eager  outcries 
for  His  death  ;  of  their  repeated  shoutings.     The  whole  was  an  ocean  of  terror,  and 
each  reflection  a  wave  that  overwhelmed,  distorted,  and  distressed  their  souls.     V. 
In  fine,  we  may  remark  in  the  sermon  of  St.  Peter  denunciations  of  Divine  venge- 
ance.    The  most  effectual  means  for  the  conversion  of  sinners,  that  whirh  St, 
Paul  so  successfully  employed,  is  terror.     St.  Peter  was  too  well  acquainted  with 
the  obduracy  of  his  auditors  not  to  avail  himself  of  this  motive.     People,  who  had 
imbrued  their  hands  in  the  Mood  of  a  personage  so  august,  wanted  this  mean.     St. 
Peter  quoted  a  prophecy  of  Joel,  which  foretold  that  fatal  day,  and  the  prophecy 
was  the  more  terrible  because  one  part  of  it  was  accomplished  ;  because  the  remark- 
able events  that  were  to  precede  it  were  actually  come  to  pass  ;  for  the  Spirit  of 
God  had  begun  to  pour  out  His  miraculous  influences  upon  all  flesh,  young  men 
had  seen  visions,  and  old  men  had  dieamed  dreams  ;  and  the  formidable  prepara- 
tions of  approaching  judgments  were  then  before  their  eyes.     Such  was  the  power 
of  the  sermon  of  St.  Peter  over  the  souls  of  his  hearers !     Human  eloquence  hath 
pometimes  done  wonders  worthy  of  immortal  memory.     Some  of  the  ancient  orators 
have  governed  the  souls  of  the  most  invincible  heroes,  and  the  life  of  Cicero  affords 
us  an  example.     Ligarius  had  the  audacity  to  make  war  on  Caesar.     Cfesar  was 
determined  to  make  the  rash  adventurer  a  victim  to  his  revenge.     The  friends  of 
Ligarius  durst  not  interpose,  and  Ligarius  was  on  the  point,  either  of  being  justly 
punished  for  his  offence,  or  of  being  sacrificed  to  the  unjust  ambition  of  his  enemy. 
What  force  could  control  the  power  of  Cfesar?    But  Caesar  had  an  adversary,  whose 
power  was  superior  to  his  own.     This  adversary  pleads  for  Ligarius  against  Caesar, 
and  Caesar,  all  invincible   as  he  is,  yields   to   the   eloquence  of   Cicero.     Cicero 
pleads,    Caesar   feels ;    in   spite   of   himself,   his   wrath   subsides,   his   vengeance 
disappears.     The   fatal  list   of   the   crimes   of  Ligarius,   which   he   is    about    to 
produce  to  the  judges,  falls  from  his  hands,  and  he  actually  absolves  him  at  the 
close  of  the  oration,  whom,  when  he  entered  the  court,  he  meant  to  condemn.    But 
yield,  ye  orators  of  Athens  and  Bome  1     Yield  to  our  fishermen  and  teut-makers. 
Oh,  how  powerful  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  in  the  hands  of  our  apostles  I     But  will 
ye  permit  us  to  ask  you  one  question?     Would  ye  choose  to  hear  the  apostles,  and 
ministers  like  the  apostles  ?     Would  ye  attend  their  sermons  ?  or,  to  say  all  in  one 
word.  Do  ye  wish  St.  Peter  was  now  in  this  pulpit  ?  Think  a  little,  before  ye  answer 
this  question.     Compare  the  taste  of  this  auditory  with  the  genius  of  the  preacher  ; 
your  delicacy  with  that  liberty  of  speech  with  which  he  reproved  the  vices  of  his 
own  times.     One  wants  to  find  something  new  in  every  sermon  ;  and,  under  pi-e- 
tence  of  satisfying  his  laudable  desire  of  improvement  in  knowledge,  would  divert 
our  attention  from  well-known  vices  that  deserve  to  be  censured.     Another  desires 
to  be  pleaded,  and  would  have  us  adorn  our  discourses,  not  that  we  may  obtain  an 
easier  access  to  bis  heart,  but  that  we  may  flatter  a  kind  of  concupiscence,  which 
is  content  to  sport  with  a  religious  exercise,  till,  when  Divine  service  ends,  it  can 
plunge  into  more  sensual  joy.     Almost  all  require  to  be  lulled  asleep  in  sin.     Ah  I 
how  disk^rreable  to  you  would  the  sermons  of  the  apostles  have  been  I    Eealise 
them.     Ah !  methinks  I  hear  the  hol.v  man  ;  methinks  I  hear  the  preacher,  ani- 
mated with  the  same  spirit  that  made  him  boldly  tell  the  murderers  of  Jesus  Christ, 
"  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  Man  approved  of  God  among  you,  by  miracles  and  wonders, 
and  signs,  ^  e  have  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands  have  crucified  and  slain."    Methinks 
I  see  St.  Peter,  the  man  who  was  so  extremely  affected  with  the  sinful  state  of  his 
auditors;  methinks  I  hear  him  enumerating  the  various  excesses  of  this  nation, 
and  saying.  Ye  !  ye  are  void  of  all  sensibility  when  we  tell  you  of  the  miseries  of 
the  Church,  when  we  describe  those  bloody  scenes,  that  are  made  up  of  dungeons 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

and  galleys,  apostates  and  martyrs.  (J.  Saurin.)  The  results  of  revivals  not  all 
known : — A  revival  is  as  when  a  sportsman  goes  out  with  his  gun,  and  sends  its 
charge  into  a  flock  of  pigeons.  Some  fall  dead  at  once,  and  he  sees  and  secures 
them  ;  but  others,  sorely  hurt,  limp  off  and  hide,  to  die  among  the  bushes.  The 
best  part  of  this  revival  is,  that  while  you  can  only  see  those  who  are  shot  dead,  and 
fall  down  before  you,  there  are,  thank  God,  thousands  in  all  parts  of  the  land,  being 
hit  and  wounded,  to  go  off  unnoticed  to  their  own  homes,  and  God  heals  them  there. 
Revival  preachers : — Kevival  preachers  make  their  sermons  like  a  lens,  to  concen- 
trate the  rays  of  truth,  and  exhibit  them  with  unflinching  hand,  in  near  connection 
with  the  sinner,  till  they  burn  and  inflame  his  heart.     {J.  Jenkyn.)  A  sermon 

without  an  application : — A  sermon  without  an  application  does  no  more  good  than 
the  singing  of  a  skylark :  it  may  teach,  but  it  does  not  impel ;  and  though  the 
preacher  may  be  under  concern  for  his  audience,  he  does  not  show  it  till  he  turns 
the  subject  to  their  immediate  advantage.  (Bishop  Home.)  The  operations  of 
truth : — Divine  truth  exerts  on  the  mind  of  man  at  once  a  restorative  and  a  self- 
manifesting  power.  It  creates  in  the  mind  the  capacity  by  which  it  is  discerned. 
As  light  opt'us  the  close-shut  flower-bud  to  receive  light,  or  as  the  sunbeam,  playing 
on  a  sleeper's  eyes,  by  its  gentle  irritation  opens  them  to  see  its  own  brightness  ;  so 
the  truth  of  God,  shining  on  the  soul,  quickens  and  stirs  into  activity  the  faculty 
by  which  that  very  truth  is  perceived.  It  matters  little  which  of  the  two  operations 
be  first ;  practically  they  may  be  regarded  as  simultaneous.  The  perception  rouses 
the  faculty,  and  yet  the  faculty  is  implied  in  the  perception.  The  truth  awakens 
the  mind,  and  yet  the  mind  must  be  in  activity  ere  the  truth  can  reach  it.  And 
the  same  two-fold  process  is  carried  on  in  the  whole  subsequent  progress  of  the 
soul.  (Professor  Caird.)  Aivakened  simmers: — Peter's  bearers — I.  Were  in  a 
STATE  OF  DISTRESS.  "  Pricked  to  the  heart. "  The  Holy  Spirit  did  this  by  means 
of — 1.  What  they  saw ;  the  wrong  and  folly  of  their  action  towards  Jesus.  2. 
What  they  felt ;  that  their  folly  and  wrong-doing  were  sinful  in  the  sight  of  God. 
3.  What  they  feared  ;  that  they  might  have  to  endure  dreadful  consequences.  II. 
Uttered  a  cry  of  distress,  which  meant — 1.  That  something  must  be  done.  The 
misery  of  self-condemnation  must  Ije  ended  by  some  means.  It  is  a  joy  to  an 
evangelist  when  hearers  have  this  feeling.  2.  That  the  apostles  wei'e  able  to  tell 
them  what  to  do.  Peter  had  led  them  into  that  state,  and  it  was  natural  to  expect 
that  he  could  deal  with  them  in  that  state.  3.  That  they  were  ready  to  do  what 
was  required.  The  mark  of  true  penitence  is  submissiveness.  So  long  as  a  seeker 
lays  down  his  own  terms  he  is  not  fit  to  be  saved.  III.  Received  an  apostolic 
ANSWER.  1.  Turn  from  your  sins.  They  were  already  convinced  of  sin  aud  sorry 
for  it,  and  were  therefore  ready  for  the  direction.  2.  Openly  declare  that  you  have 
turned  from  your  sins.  At  this  time  baptism  meant  a  great  deal,  viz.,  that  the 
service  of  Christ  was  chosen  at  the  risk  of  certain  suffering.  3.  Fulfil  the  appointed 
conditions  of  pardon.  "  Eepent  &c.  with  reference  to  the  remission  of  sms."  So 
long  as  these  are  unfulfilled  the  sinner  is  morally  unfit  to  receive  pardon.  4.  The 
Spiiitwho  has  given  you  this  distress  will  give  you  joy.  "  Ye  shall  receive  the 
gift,"  &c.  The  fulness  of  the  Spirit's  work  always  brings  fulness  of  joy.  IV. 
Learned  the  ground  of  the  answer.  "The  premise  is  unto  you,"  A'C.  How 
wonderful  that  their  awful  sin  did  not  invalidate  this  promise.  Who  is  not  the 
subject  of  the  Divine  call  ?  The  call  to  repentance,  faith  and  virtue  comes  by 
many  means  :  by  providence,  the  Word,  the  Spirit.  Have  you  not  beard  it?  V. 
Receive  a  final  direction  (ver.  40).  1.  The  generation  was  wicked.  This  had 
been  abundantly  proved.  Is  it  not  so  with  the  present  generation?  What  else 
mean  the  frauds,  vices,  and  blasphemies  of  every  class  of  society.  2.  It  was 
necessary  for  the  followers  of  Jesus  to  be  separate  from  the  wt)rld.  Reason, 
interest,  and  Christian  philanthropy  required  it  then  and  require  it  now.  Jesus 
was  separate  from  sinners ;  His  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world ;  and  true 
Christianity  and  worldliness  cannot  coalesce.  He,  then,  who  wishes  to  be 
saved  must  renounce  the  world.  3.  This  direction,  therefore,  is  properly  the  last  to 
penitent  inquirers.  To  leave  the  world  is  to  give  decisive  proof  of  the  genuineness 
of  repentance  and  faith.  (If.  Hudson.)  The  great  question  and  the  inspired 
answer: — I.  The  qukstion.  1.  To  this  question  they  were  led — (1)  by  the  Spirit; 
(2)  by  the  Truth ;  (3)  by  their  conscience — a  view  of  sin  leading  to  a  consciousness 
of  many.  2.  This  (juestion  indicates  their — (1)  fepline; ;  (2)  condition ;  (3)  desire, 
3.  This  question  was — (1)  honest,  (2)  searching,  (3)  inspired.  II.  A  suitable  and 
significant  answer.  1.  Consider  who  gives  the  answer — (1)  apostles,  (2)  inspired, 
{3)  speaking  with  authority.  2.  The  answer  urges  to — (1)  repentance,  (2)  profession 


<JHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  213 

of  Christ.  (3)  yielding  to  the  Spirit's  control.  3.  The  answer  rests — (1)  not  on 
human  wisdom,  (2)  not  on  human  goodness,  (3)  not  on  human  efforts,  (4)  but  on 
the  promise  of  God  (ver.  39),  which  is  as  wide  as  the  world.  III.  To  a  right 
reception  comes  a  blessed  consummation.  1.  In  personal  experience — (1)  peace, 
(2)  goodness,  (3)  singleness  of  heart  (ver.  46).  2.  Relatively — (1)  favours  with  God, 
(2)  and  man  (ver.  47).  {J.  M.  Allis.)  Rightly  dividing  the  icord  of  truth: — 
1.  The  word  had  wounded,  now  the  word  heals.  A  little  religion  is  a  painful 
thing,  but  more  takes  the  pain  away.  The  word  is  a  hammer  to  break  and  a  balm 
to  heal.  Its  first  effect  is  to  convince  a  sinner  that  he  is  lost ;  its  next  to  make  the 
lost  rejoice  in  his  Saviour.  2.  It  is  important  to  keep  these  two  functions  distinct. 
To  preach  a  healing  gospel  when  there  is  no  wound  on  the  conscience  is  hke  press- 
ing cold  water  on  those  who  are  not  thirsty.  There  is  nothing  sweeter  to  the 
thirsty ;  nothing  more  insipid  to  the  satisfied.  3.  The  apostle  rightly  divided  the 
word  of  truth.  Peter's  aim  all  through  is  to  produce  conviction  of  sin,  and  for 
this  appeals  to  Scripture  to  bring  home  the  guilt  of  the  crucifixion.  It  was  not 
•with  gladness  that  they  received  that  word  but  with  grief,  shame,  remorse.  When 
the  preacher  saw  that  his  first  word  had  taken  effect  he  delivered  the  second.  He 
had  succeeded  in  wounding  ;  and  at  the  cry  of  the  suffering  patient,  he  comes 
forward  to  heal.  The  old  stem  had  been  cut  off  and  the  tree  was  bleeding  ;  he 
turns  the  knife,  and  with  its  other  side  inserts  the  new  graft,  that  there  may  be  a 
tree  of  righteousness  the  planting  of  the  Lord,  You  pour  some  burning  drops  upon 
a  sore  ;  their  first  effect  is  to  increase  the  pain  ;  but  knowing  the  sovereign  power 
■of  the  remedy  you  continue  to  pour,  sparing  not  for  the  patient's  crying.  At 
length  continued  application  of  that  which  caused  the  pain  takes  all  pain  away. 
"When  the  word  wounds,  still  ply  the  word  until  the  sword  becomes  a  balm. 
Then,  in  this  second  stage,  the  hearer  will  receive  the  word  with  joy.  He  who 
really  receives  the  word  receives  it  gladly,  for  those  who  do  not,  will  not  long  con- 
tinue to  receive  it  at  all.  3.  The  believers  were  immediately  baptized.  It  is  clear 
that  regeneration  was  not  the  result  of  baptism,  but  vice  versa.  It  was  when  they 
received  the  word  with  gladness  they  were  baptized.  The  order  of  events  is 
that  which  the  master  enjoined  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20).  Peter  and  his  companions 
first  laid  themselves  out  to  make  disciples.  Then,  when  by  the  successive  pain  and 
gladness  produced  by  preaching,  they  perceived  that  disciples  were  made,  they 
baptized  them.  Lastly,  the  newly  accepted  members  of  the  Church  were  taught  to 
observe  all  the  commandments,  for  they  abounded  in  faith  and  love.  4.  But  a  dash 
of  sadness  is  thrown  upon  the  happy  scene.  "Fear  came  upon  every  soul."  But 
this  points  to  the  outer  circle.  The  conversions  startled  the  onlookers,  and  they 
*were  smitten  with  a  sudden  fear  lest  they  should  be  left  outside  and  perish.  From 
the  apostles  view  point,  however,  this  was  a  hopeful  symptom.  The  example  of 
behevers  had  begun  to  tell.  It  is  a  good  sign  when  those  living  without  God  begin 
to  be  uneasy ;  especially  when  it  is  at  the  sight  of  multitudes  pressing  into  the 
kingdom.  When  mea  are  delivered  from  the  horrible  pit  many  shall  see  it  and  fear 
(Psa.  xl.).  The  Christian  community  in  the  freshness  of  its  first  faith  was 
suddenly  thrown  into  society,  and  disturbed  it  by  its  unwonted  presence.  If  a  new 
planet  should  be  projected  into  our  system,  it  would  make  the  old  worlds  stagger. 
Bodies  in  contact  reciprocally  affect  each  other,  especially  in  respect  of  tempera-, 
ture.  Pour  hot  water  into  a  cold  vessel ;  the  water  contributes  to  heat  the  vessel, 
but  the  vessel  also  contributes  to  cool  the  water.  But  if  a  constant  stream  of  hot 
water  is  supplied,  it  will  bring  up  the  vessel  to  its  own  temperature.  A  process  like 
this  goes  on  continually  between  the  Church  and  the  world.  Fervent  disciples, 
particularly  those  in  their  first  love,  affect  with  their  own  warmth  the  society  into 
which  they  are  poured  ;  but  society,  on  the  other  hand,  affects  them  with  its  own 
coldness,  and  being  the  larger  body  will  soon  cool  the  disciples'  hearts,  unless  they 
maintain  constant  contact  with  Christ.  5.  A  word  to  those  who  are  without  Christ. 
I  confess  that  the  Church  in  contact  with  you  is  more  or  less  cold.  The  disciples 
are  not  so  manifestly  like  heaven  as  to  seird  a  thrill  of  terror  through  you  lest  you 
should  fail  to  join  their  company.  But  if  you  stumble  over  their  coldness,  to 
blame  them  for  their  lukewarmness  will  not  save  you  when  yon  are  lost.  A  man 
on  inspecting  a  new  house  he  was  having  built  found  one  of  the  men  lighting  his 
pipe  in  the  midst  of  dry  shavings.  So  he  said  to  him,  "If  my  house  is  burnt  the 
blame  will  rest  on  you."  Thinking  over  what  he  had  said,  he  added,  "  The  blame 
will  be  yours,  but  the  loss  will  be  mine."  He  saw  the  risk,  and  went  away  and 
insured  his  house.  Go  thou  and  do  likewise.  The  Church  deserves  blame ;  but 
4he  loss  is  yours.     Hide  your  imperilled  soul  "with  Christ  in  God."      (fF.  Arnot, 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

D.D.)  On  being  pricked  to  the  heart : — I.  When  we  hear  God  eepeove  sin  we 
SHOULD  BE  PRICKED  AT  THE  HEART.  1.  So  as  to  be  sensible  of  sin.  (1)  The  guilt 
of  it  (Psa.  li.  3,  4).  (2)  Of  our  defilement  with  it  (Psa.  Ivii.  5).  2.  So  as  to  be 
troubled  for  our  sins.  (1)  Tlieir  sinfulness.  (2)  Their  multitude  (Ezra  ix.  6). 
(3)  Their  greatness ;  as  being — (a)  Against  knowledge  (John  iii.  19).  {b)  Against 
mercies,  (c)  After  judgments  (Isa.  i.  5 ;  Amosiv.  9).  .  (d)  Contrary  to  our  promises.. 
(e)  Agiiinst  the  checks  of  conscience  (Rom.  ii.  15),  the  motives  of  the  Spirit,  the 
reproofs  of  the  word.  3.  Uses :  Be  pricked  at  your  hearts  when  sin  is  reproved 
considering — (1)  Who  is  it  that  reproves  (Amos  iii.  8  ;  Jer.  v.  21,  22).  (2)  Eeproofs 
without  this  effect  do  more  harm  than  good  (Prov,  xxix.  1).  (3)  God  may  reprove 
no  more  (Ezek.  iii.  26  ;  Hos.iv.  17).  (4)  You  must  answer  for  all  the  reproofs  you 
hear.  II.  Such  as  are  pricked  to  the  heart  should  be  very  inquisitive  what  to- 
DO.  1.  We  are  all  capable  of  holiness  and  happiness  (Gen.  i.  20).  2.  But  full  of  siu 
and  misery  (Eph.  ii.  3).  3.  It  is  one  part  of  our  sin  and  misery  that  we  are  not 
sensible  of  (1)  sin.  This  appears — (a)  In  that  we  have  not  grieved  for  it 
(Ezek.  vii.  16).  {b)  Nor  fear  to  commit  it  (Psa.  xviii.  23).  (c)  Nor  strive  to  get  it 
subdued  (Psa.  Ivii.  2).  (2)  Misery.  This  appears — (a)  In  that  we  rejoice  in  it» 
{b)  We  do  not  strive  to  get  out  of  it.  4.  The  first  step  to  holiness  and  felicity  is 
sensibleness  of  sin  and  misery.  5.  There  is  none  so  sensible  of  this,  but  he  will  be 
very  inquisitive  what  to  do  (Acts  xvi.  30).  This  is  essential  because — (1)  Our  ever- 
lasting happiness  depends  upon  it.  (2)  Unless  we  inquire  we  shall  never  know  what 
to  do.  6.  Whom  must  we  inquire  of  ?  (1)  God.  (2)  The  Scriptures  (Luke  xvii.  29). 
(3)  Ministers.     (Bp.   Beveridge.)  Being  pricked  to  the  heart: — Whitefield  was 

preaching  at  Exeter.  A  man  was  present  who  had  filled  bis  pockets  with  stones  to- 
throw  at  the  preacher.  He  heard,  however,  the  prayer  with  patience,  but  no  sooner 
was  the  text  named  than  he  pulled  out  a  stone,  and  waited  for  an  opportunity  to 
throw  it.  But  God  sent  the  Word  into  his  heart,  and  the  stone  fell  from  his  hand. 
After  the  sermon  he  went  to  Whitefield,  and  said,  "  Sir,  I  came  to  hear  you  with  a 
view  to  break  your  head,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  through  your  ministry  has  given  me 
a  broken  heart."  The  man  proved  to  be  a  sound  convert,  and  lived  an  ornament 
to  the  gospel.  Heart-work  God's  work : — Heart-work  must  be  God's  work.  Only 
the  great  heart-maker  can  be  the  great  heart-breaker.  (R.  Baxter.)  The  gospel  to 
be  preached  to  the  heart : — "  I  have  an  ear  for  other  preachers,"  Sir  John  Cheke 
used  to  say,  "  but  I  have  a  heart  for  Latimer."  Here  is  a  very  clear  and  main 
distinction.  Too  often  men  hear  the  Word  sounding  its  drums  and  trumpets  out- 
side their  walls,  and  they  are  filled  with  admiration  of  the  martial  music ;  but  their 
city  gates  are  fast  closed  and  vigilantly  guarded,  so  that  the  truth  has  no  admit- 
tance, but  only  the  sound  of  it.  Would  to  God  we  knew  how  to  reach  men'a 
affections,  for  the  heart  is  the  target  we  aim  at,  and  unless  we  hit  it  we  miss  alto- 
gether. The  truth  the  sword  of  the  Spirit : — It  is  not  the  drapery  in  which  Divine 
truth  may  be  clothed,  nor  the  force  and  beauty  of  the  illustrations  with  which  it 
may  be  presented,  but  it  is  the  truth  itself — the  bare,  naked,  unvarnished  truth — 
that  is  the  instrument  of  the  Spirit's  power.  That  is  tbe  sword  of  the  Spirit;  and 
it  is  the  sword  that  does  the  work,  not  the  scabbard  in  which  it  is  sheathed.  The 
scabbard  may  be  finely  fitted,  and  beautifully  embellished,  bound  with  the  finest 
gold,  and  glittering  with  jewels  of  polished  diamonds  ;  but  it  is  not  the  garnished 
scabbard,  it  is  the  drawn  sword  which  the  Spirit  wields,  and  which,  when  wielded 
by  Him,  is  quick  and  powerful,  piercing  evtn  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  the  soul  and 
spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  marrow,  and  discerning  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the 
heart.  (J.  A.  Wallace.)  A  famous  conversion : — 1.  It  is  remarkable  in  the  very  first 
order  of  it.  It  is  the  first  conversion  that  was  wrought  by  the  apostles  in  the  Christian 
Church  ;  the  first-fruits  of  the  gospel ;  the  first  handful  of  ripe  ears  of  corn  offered  up- 
to  God  to  sanctify  the  whole  harvest ;  the  goodly  bunch  of  Eskol  gathered  by  these  first 
spies,  the  apostles,  betokening  the  Church's  fruitfulness.  2.  It  is  remarkable  for  the 
time  at.d  season  when  these  converts  embrace  the  faith  and  profess  religion.  We  all 
know  it  was  a  sad  time  of  persecution,  3.  It  is  remarkable  in  the  condition  and 
quality  of  the  persons  :  a  mixed,  confused  company  of  men,  strangely  disposed  and 
affected  before  their  conversion.  They  run  together,  and  flock  about  the  apostles^ 
with  no  very  religious  purpose,  but  merely  to  gaze  and  wonder  at  them.  Nay, 
worse  than  so,  they  fall  a-scoffing  and  deriding  the  apostles.  Oh,  the  greatness  of 
God's  mercy  that  He  would,  and,  oh,  the  power  of  Christ's  grace  that  it  could, 
convert  such  converts  as  these  I  4.  It  is  remarkable  in  the  great  number  and 
multitude  of  converts.  Not  a  cluster,  or  two,  but  a  plentiful  vintage.  Such  was 
the  power  of  religion  in  those  primitive  times  ;  so  mightily  grew  the  Word,  and  pre* 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  215 

vailed.  5.  It  is  remariiable  for  the  complete,  entire  fulness  of  their  conversion. 
They  are  troubled  for  their  sins,  "  pricked  at  their  heart."  They  repent,  believe, 
and  are  baptized.  They  are  dihgent  in  all  the  duties  of  God's  service,  and  worship 
(ver.  24).  Their  religion  is  not  confined  to  the  Church  only,  but  they  are  fruitful  in 
aU  works  of  charity  (ver.  45).  They  live  together  in  all  Christian  love  (ver.  46). 
Here  is  an  exact  pattern  of  a  through-conversion,  a  complete  and  perfect  frame  of  a 
holy  Church.  I.  The  means  that  wrought  this  anguish  and  compunction.  It  is 
St.  Peter's  sermon  :  "  When  they  heard  this."  The  text  tells  us  of  a  wound  that 
was  given  them,  that  pierced  their  heart.  Here  we  see  both  the  weapon  that  made 
it,  and  the  place  where  it  entered.  In  bodily  strokes,  he  that  means  to  hit  the 
heart  must  take  another  aim,  not  run  his  weapon  in  at  the  ear  ;  but  he  that  means 
to  wound  the  heart  spiritually,  his  directest  passage  is  through  the  ear.  In  this 
case  there  is  an  immediate  conveyance  from  the  ear  to  the  heart.  Men  may  as 
well  expect  good  corn  on  their  land  without  ploughing  and  sowiug,  as  true  sorrow 
and  repentance  without  hearing  and  attending.  The  passage  and  entrance,  then, 
is  the  ear  ;  but  what  is  the  weapon  St.  Peter  uses  to  pierce  and  wound  them  ?  1. 
God's  Word  in  the  general,  that  is  the  means  that  works  this  compunction,  that  is 
the  choice,  sanctified  instrument  appointed  by  God  for  this  sacred  work.  The 
speaking  to  exhortation  and  doctrine  is  the  way  to  convince  and  convert  souls. 
2.  It  is  verbum  convictivum.  St.  Peter  makes  choice  of  that  Word  of  God  that  was 
most  fit  to  detect  and  convict  them  ;  and  he  doth  manage  it  so  that  they  could  not 
avoid  the  edge  of  it.  And  this  he  does  by  a  close  application  of  it  to  their  sinful 
condition.  3.  It  was  verbum  convictivum  de  his  peccatis.  He  charges  them  in  a 
special  manner  with  these  and  these  sins  as  those  that  are  likeliest  to  perplex  their 
soul  and  bring  them  to  compunction.  As,  in  course  of  law,  general  accusations  will 
ground  no  action  ;  if  we  come  to  accuse  a  man,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  lay  to  his 
charge  that  he  is  a  malefactor,  but  we  must  charge  him  with  particulars.  So,  would 
a  sinuer  arraign  his  conscience  before  God's  tribunal,  he  must  frame  an  indictment 
against  himself  of  his  more  notorious  and  personal  impieties.  If  we  trouble  and 
disquiet  and  perplex  your  souls,  we  have  our  warrant  from  St.  Peter's  example.  St. 
Peter  was  even  now  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  the  first  vent  that  it  found  is 
intbis  sharp  reprehension.  This  kind  of  dealing  is  warranted  by  the  great  success 
that  God  gave  unto  it.  Peter  hath  saved  thousands  with  it,  and  Paul  his  ten 
thousands.  This  is  to  cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship,  as  Christ  directs 
Peter  ;  he  shaU  not  miss  of  a  plentiful  draught.  He  that  means  to  fish  for  souls, 
let  him  bait  his  hook  with  this  worm  of  conscience,  and  he  will  take  them  presently. 
II.  The  paroxysm  itself,  the  anguish  and  compunction  they  were  brought  into. 
1.  It  is  exceeding  sharp  ;  their  soul  is  embittered  in  them.  The  Scripture  sets  out 
this  compunction  of  spirit  in  terms  of  extremity  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  10  ;  Prov.  xviii.  14; 
Kom.  ii.  9  ;  Psa.  li.  17).  And  it  is  the  sense  of  God's  displeasure  causes  this  break- 
ing by  three  apprehensions,  as  by  so  many  strokes.  (1)  As  most  deserved  and  due 
to  us.  We  eat  the  bitter  fruit  of  our  works.  (2)  As  most  heavy  and  unsupportable 
by  us.  Who  knows  the  power  of  His  auger  ?  Who  can  dwell  with  everlasting 
burnings  ?  (3)  As,  of  ourselves,  unavoidable  by  us.  How  shall  we  flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come?  A  poor  sinner,  beset  with  these  anxieties,  tortures  himself  with 
these  pensive  thoughts :  "  What  have  I  done  ?  "  "  What  danger  have  I  run  into  ?  " 
"How  bitter  are  mine  anguishes?"  "Whither  shall  I  turn  myself  for  ease  and 
comfort  ?  "  2.  Consider  the  goodness  of  these  men's  compunction ;  and  it  will 
appear  observable  for  our  imitation  in  these  four  respects  : — (1)  Their  compunction 
is  the  more  observable,  because  it  is  wrought  in  them  without  the  help  and  con- 
currence of  any  outward  affliction,  only  by  the  dint  of  St.  Peter's  sermon.  (2)  Their 
compunction  is  the  more  observable  because  wrought  into  them  by  the  hearing  of 
one  sermon  of  St.  Peter ;  no  sooner  charged  with  sin  but  they  are  convinced 
presently,  and  cry  out  for  sorrow.  (3)  Tlieir  compunction  is  the  more  observable 
as  being  wrought  in  them  only  by  conviucing  them  of  sin,  not  by  threatening  or 
denouncing  of  judgments.  (4)  This  compunction  is  the  more  observable  because, 
ye  see,  it  is  a  full  yielding  to  the  accusation.  St.  Peter  charges  them  with  horrid 
sin,  and,  without  more  ado,  they  plead  guilty  to  all,  confess  the  whole  indictment. 
They  are  not  enraged  against  the  apostle  for  this  sharp  reproof.  They  take  no 
exception  against  the  accuser.  They  make  no  defence  of  the  fact.  They  excuse  it 
not.  They  demur  not.  None  of  all  these  shifts,  but  they  accept  of  the  accusation ; 
they  confess  themselves  guilty,  and,  with  sorrow  of  heart,  acknowledge  they  are 
murderers  of  the  Lord  of  glory,  (a)  Such  power  and  such  strength  was  in  the 
Word  of  God  preached  by  Peter.     His  words  are  like  bharp  arrows  in  the  hand  of 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ii. 


a  giant :  they  return  not  empty.  (6)  Such  prevalency  hath  the  Grace  of  God  in 
the  hearts  of  this  people.  Like  a  sovereign  antidote  that  served  to  drive  the  poison 
of  sin  from  the  heart  into  the  outward  parts  by  an  open  confession.  That  is  the 
second  particular  of  the  text — their  anguish  and  perplexity ;  and  it  briefly  affords 
us  a  threefold  meditation,  (i.)  It  lets  us  see  the  outfall  of  sin  ;  the  issue  and  end 
of  it  is  sorrow  and  vexation.  It  may  be  sweet  in  the  mouth,  but  it  will  be  bitter  in 
thy  bowels,  (ii.)  It  shows  the  inlet  and  first  entrance  of  grace ;  it  begins  with 
sorrow  and  sharp  compunction.  The  first  physic  to  recover  our  souls  are  not 
cordials,  but  corrosives ;  not  an  immediate  stepping  into  heaven  by  a  present 
assurance,  but  mourning,  and  a  bitter  bewailing  of  our  former  transgressions,  (iii.) 
It  irhows  us  the  downfall  of  despair.  Are  these  converts,  whom  God  means  mercy 
to,  thus  sharply  tortured?  How  bitter  are  their  torments  whom  He  plunges  into 
perdition !  HI.  The  course  they  take  for  ease  and  remedy.  They  repair  to 
Peter  and  the  apostles,  crave  their  help  and  direction  :  "  Men  and  brethren,  what 
shall  we  do  ?  "  And  this  course  of  theirs  is  qualified  with  three  conditions.  1. 
They  lake  a  speedy  course.  As  soon  as  the  wound  is  given  and  felt,  they  presently 
seek  for  help  and  direction.  They  put  it  not  off  till  some  other  time,  as  Felix  did 
when  he  felt  the  first  shiverings  and  grudgings  of  contrition.  Nor  think  they  that 
thev  shall  outgrow  it  in  time,  tlat  their  hearts  are  like  good  flesh  that  will  heal  of 
itself.  No ;  delays  in  this  kind  breed  a  double  danger.  (1)  Good  motions,  if  not 
cherished,  will  vanish  away,  and  then  the  heart  grows  harder.  (2)  Hath  God 
pricked  thine  heart  ?  Take  the  wound  timely,  lest  it  grow  worse.  2.  It  was  an 
advised  and  proper  course  they  make  choice  of  St.  Peter  and  the  rest  of  the 
apostles.  And  the  wisdom,  shall  I  say,  or  the  happiness  of  this  choice  will  appear 
in  four  particulars.  (1)  Tbey  are  spiritual  men,  physicians  for  the  soul.  A 
wounded  -spirit  cannot  be  cured  but  by  spiritual  means.  (2)  They  repair  to  the 
apostles.  Whv,  Peter  was  he  that  wounded  them  !  Best  of  all,  none  like  him  to 
cure  them.  What  Hosea  speaks  of  God  is  true  of  His  ministers  in  a  due  sub- 
ordination. "  They  have  wounded,  and  they  heal  us  ;  they  have  smitten,  and  they 
will  bind  us  up."  (8)  They  repair  to  Peter  and  the  rest ;  they  come  to  men  of 
practice  and  experience.  These  apostles  knew  what  it  was  to  have  a  wounded 
spirit ;  these  had  crucified  Christ ;  Peter  had  denied  Him,  the  rest  had  forsaken 
Him,  and  it  cost  them  dear  ere  they  could  be  recovered.  None  like  these  to  direct 
their  conscience.  They  do  it — (a)  more  skilfully,  {h)  more  humbly,  (c)  more 
tenderly.  (4)  They  are  unanimous,  all  here  in  a  joint  consent  and  concurrence  of 
judgment.  3.  It  proves  successful,  "Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?"  It 
discovers  a  threefold  §ffect  that  this  compunction  hath  already  wrought  in  them  to 
help  forward  their  conversion.  (1)  It  represses  their  censoriousness.  A  man  truly 
sensible  of  his  own  sins  will  have  httle  lift  or  leisure  to  censure  and  judge,  much 
less  to  reproach  or  slander  others.  It  will  make  him  judge  himself,  and  condemn 
himself,  and  think  worst  of  himself  of  all  other  men.  (2)  This  compunction  and 
perplexity  makes  them  reverent  and  respectful  to  St.  Peter  and  the  other  apostles. 
God's  ministers  are  never  in  season  with  the  world  till  men  come  to  distress  and 
perplexity.  In  the  time  of  ease  and  jollity  a  minister  is  but  a  contemptible  man  ; 
he  and  his  pains  may  be  well  spared.  But  when  sorrows  surprise  you,  and  your 
hearts  are  wounded,  then  one  leaf  from  the  Tree  of  Life  to  stanch  the  bleeding  will 
be  precious  to  you.  This  is  the  honour  of  our  ministry  to  be  able  to  help  in  such 
helpless  times.  (3)  It  makes  them  inquisitive.  "  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  Surely  it 
is  the  voice  of  anguish  and  perplexity.  They  speak  as  men  at  a  loss  ;  they  know 
not  how  to  shift.  But  they  were  men  acquainted  with  the  law ;  nay,  devout  zealots 
of  the  Jewish  traditions  (ver.  5)  ;  and  yet  we  see  they  are  now  to  seek  how  to  ease 
themselves  in  that  great  perplexity.  Whence  arises  this  sudden  amazement? 
Was  it  from  the  surcharge  of  sorrow  that  had  overwhelmed  their  spirits  and 
darkened  that  light  which  was  formerly  in  them  ?  It  often  proves  so.  It  shadows 
out  the  insufficiency  of  the  law  to  bread  peace  and  comfort  to  us.  It  may  perplex 
us,  but  it  cannot  quiet  us ;  discover  our  sins,  but  not  remove  them.  Or  was  it  not 
they  placed  all  their  religion  in  some  outward  observations,  without  the  life  and 
piety  of  inward  devotion.  Rituals  with  substantials  are  the  beauty  of  religion,  but 
severed  and  divided  will  breed  but  cold  comfort  to  us.  2.  It  makes  them  docile 
and  tractable,  willing  and  desirous  to  receive  instruction.  Compunction  bores  and 
opens  the  ear,  and  makes  it  capable  of  direction.  3.  It  begets  a  readiness  to  under- 
take any  course  that  shall  be  prescribed  for  relief  and  comfort.  In  our  ease  heaven 
must  fall  into  our  laps,  or  we  will  none  of  it.  If  it  put  us  to  pains  or  cost  it  is  too 
dear  a  bargain  for  us  to  deal  withal.    But  when  our  souls  are  in  perplexity  we  will 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  217 

be  glad  to  accept  of  mercy  upon  any  terms  ;  we  will  take  heaven  at  God's  price  then. 
"  I  will  do  anything,  Lord,  I  will  suffer  anything  to  get  hell  out  of  my  soul  now,  and 
to  keep  my  soul  out  of  hell  hereaft  ^r."  (Bj).Broivnri(](j.)  Life-wounds: — 1.  Peter's 
sermon  was  not  a  fine  display  of  eloquence.  2.  Neither  was  it  a  very  pathetic  plea. 
3.  Nor  a  loud  but  empty  cry  of  "Believe,  believe!  "  4.  It  was  simple,  a  plain  statement, 
and  a  soberly  earnest  argument.  5.  Its  power  lay  in  the  truthfulness  of  the  speaker,  his 
appeal  to  Scripture,  the  concurrence  of  his  witnessing  brethren,  and  his  own  evident 
faitn.  6.  Above  all,  in  the  Holy  Spirit  who  accompanied  the  Word.  I.  Saving 
IMPRESSION  IS  A  PEicK  IN  THE  HEART.  To  be  cut  to  the  heart  is  deadly  (Acts  v.  33) : 
to  be  pricked  in  the  heart  is  saving.  1.  All  true  religion  must  be  of  the  heart.  With- 
out tbis — (1)  Ceremonies  are  useless  (Isa.  i.  13).  (2)  Orthodoxy  of  head  is  in  vain 
(Jer.  vii.  4).  (3)  Profession  and  a  constrained  morality  fail  (2  Tim.  iii.  5).  (4) 
Loud  zeal,  excited  and  sustained  by  mere  passion,  is  useless.  2.  Impressions 
which  do  not  prick  the  heart  may  even  be  evil.  They  may  (1)  Excite  to  wrath  and 
opposition.  (2)  Lead  to  sheer  hypi  crisy.  (3)  Create  and  f osier  a  spurious  hope. 
3.  Even  when  such  superficial  impressions  are  good,  they  are  ti  ansient :  and  when 
they  have  passed  away,  they  have,  often  hardened  those  who  have  felt  them  for  a 
season.  4.  They  will  certainly  be  i-'cperative.  As  they  have  not  touched  the  heart, 
they  will  not  affect  the  life.  Thtj  will  not  lead  to  (1)  Confession  and  inquiry,  nor 
(2)  Eejientance  and  change  of  life.  (3)  Glad  reception  of  the  Word,  nor  (4) 
Obedience  and  steadfastness.  Heart-work  is  the  only  real  work.  II.  What  truths 
PRODUCE  such  a  PRICK  ?  1.  The  truth  of  the  gospel  has  often,  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  produced  an  indelible  wound  in  minds  sceptical  and  opposed.  2.  A 
sense  of  some  one  specially  startling  sin  has  frequently  aroused  the  conscience 
(2  Sam.  xii.  7).  3.  Instruction  in  the  nature  of  the  law,  and  the  consequent 
heinousness  of  sin,  has  been  blessed  to  that  end  (Rom.  vii.  13).  4.  The  infinite 
wickedness  of  sin,  as  against  Ihe  very  being  of  God,  is  also  a  wounding  thought 
(Psa.  li.  4).  5.  The  exactness,  severity,  and  terror  of  the  judgment,  and  the  conse- 
quent punishment  of  sin,  are  stirring  thoughts  (Acts  xvi.  25-30).  6.  The  great 
goodness  of  God  has  led  many  to  see  ihe  cruel  wantonness  of  sin  against  Him 
(Eom.  ii.  4).  7.  The  death  of  Christ  as  a  Substitute  has  often  been  the  means  of 
revealing  the  greatness  of  the  sin  which  needed  such  an  atonement,  and  of  showing 
the  true  tendency  of  sin  in  having  slain  One  so  good  and  kind  (Zech.  xii.  10).  8. 
The  abundant  grace  and  love  revealed  in  the  gospel  and  received  by  us  are  sharp 
arrows  to  wound  the  heart.  III.  What  hand  makes  these  painful  pricks  ?  1.  The 
same  hand  which  wrote  the  pieicing  truths  also  applies  them.  2.  He  is  well 
acquainted  with  our  hearts,  and  so  can  reach  them.  3.  He  is  the  Quickener,  the 
Comtorter,  the  Spirit  helping  our  infirmities,  showing  to  us  the  things  of  Jesus: 
His  fruit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  &c.  We  need  not  utterly  despair  when  wounded  by 
such  a  tender  Friend.  4.  He  is  a  Spirit  to  be  sought  unto,  who  acts  in  answer  to 
His  people's  prayers.  We  turn  for  healing  to  Him  who  pricks.  IV.  How  can 
these  pricks  be  healed  ?  1.  Only  One  who  is  Divine  can  heal  a  wounded  heart. 
2.  The  only  medicine  is  the  blood  of  His  heart.  3.  The  only  hand  to  apply  it  is 
that  which  was  pierced.  4.  The  only  fee  required  is  gladly  to  receive  Him.  Con- 
clusion :  Let  us  ask  the  question,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?"  Let  us 
then  obey  the  gospel,  and  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  (C  H.  Spitrgeon.)  Honest 
2)reaching  : — No  doubt  it  is  a  high  and  difficult  task  to  preach  with  success ;  far  be 
it  from  us  to  teach  that  no  pains  should  be  used  to  gain  men's  ears ;  but  the  preacher 
who  gains  their  ears  should  use  his  conquest  to  reach  their  consciences — and  it  is 
his  business  to  give  them  pain.  They  are  sinners,  and  they  know  it,  even  better 
than  the  preacher.  He  will  not  become  their  enemy  by  telling  them  the  truth,  and 
so  telling  it  that  their  ears  will  tingle  with  shame  and  their  consciences  cry  out  with 
remorse.  At  all  events,  enemies  made  in  that  way  may  become  tbe  preacher's  best 
friend ;  and  if  they  do  not,  they  will  carry  his  credentials  as  stigmata  burnt  into 
their  memories.  A  man  riding  with  his  friend  past  a  country  church  fell  to  musing 
with  himself,  and  presently  said  :  "In  that  house,  thirty  years  ago,  I  passed  the  most 
uncomfortable  hour  of  my  life.  It  seems  but  yesterday,  and  my  pain  seems  as  keen 
as  it  was  then."  The  other  laughed  and  said  :  "  I  suppose  it  was  some  coquettish 
maiden."  "  No.  It  was  an  honest  preacher  who  got  hold  of  my  very  soul."  Such 
memories  in  the  hearts  of  sinners  are  the  best  credentials  they  can  give  to  preachers 
of  the  gospel.  Beaching  the  heart : — Jerome  used  to  say,  "  It  is  not  the  clamour  of 
praise  but  the  groans  of  conviction  that  should  be  heard  whilst  the  minister 
preaches."  And  again,  "  The  tears  of  the  congregation  form  the  highest  praises  of 
the  pulpit  orator,"    The  anecdote  of  Dean  Miluer  and  Eowland  Hill  here  is  appo- 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

site.  Dean  Milner  had  a  great  objection  against  extemporaneous  preaching,  think- 
ing that  it  warred  against  the  precise  and  orthodox  mode.  However,  being  attracted 
by  the  great  fame  of  Rowland  Hill,  he  was  led  to  indulge  his  curiosity  by  once 
going  to  hear  him.  After  the  sermon  the  Dean  was  seen  forcing  his  way,  in  much 
haste,  to  the  vestry-room,  when,  seizing  the  hand  of  the  preacber,  in  his  enthu- 
siasm, he  cried  out,  "  Well,  dear  brother  Eowland,  I  perceive  now  that  your  slap- 
dash preachers  are,  after  all,  the  best  preachers ;  it  went  to  the  heart,  sir  ;  it  went 
to  the  heart,  sirl"  {Scottish  Christian  Herald.)  Powerful  preaching  : — John 
Elias  was  called  to  preach  a  great  association  sermon  at  Pwllheli.  In  the  whole 
neighbourhood  the  state  of  religion  was  very  low,  and  distressingly  discouraging  to 
pious  minds,  and  it  had  been  so  for  many  years.  Elias  felt  that  his  visit  must  be 
an  occasion  with  him.  It  may  almost  be  said  of  that  day  that  "  he  prayed,  and  the 
heaveus  gave  rain."  He  went.  He  took  as  his  text,  "  Let  God  arise,  let  His  enemies 
be  scattered."  It  was  an  astonishing  time.  While  the  preacher  drove  along  with 
his  tremendous  power,  multitudes  of  the  people  fell  to  the  ground.  Calm  stood 
the  man,  his  words  rushing  from  him  like  flames  of  fire.  There  were  added  to  the 
churches  of  that  immediate  neighbourhood,  in  consequence  of  the  impetus  of  that 
sermon,  two  thousand  five  hundred  members.  (E.  Paxton  Hood.)  Only  God 
can  heal  the  wounds  He  makes  : — When  a  man  is  wounded  with  a  barbed  arrow,  the 
agonies  he  suffers  will  cause  him  to  toss  about  in  pain;  but  the  harder  be  strives  to 
release  the  weapon  from  his  flesh,  the  more  does  it  become  entangled  in  his  sinews, 
the  wound  becomes  enlarged,  and  the  torture  increased.  When,  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  a  man  is  wounded  on  account  of  sin,  and  the  arrows  of  the  Most  High 
tear  his  soul,  he  frequently  tries  to  pluck  them  out  with  his  own  hand,  but  finds 
that  the  misery  becomes  worse,  and  the  inflaming  wounds  at  last  cause  faintness 
and  despair.  Only  the  Good  Physician  knows  how  to  relieve  the  pain  without 
tearing  and  festering  the  spirit.  (Handbook  of  Illustration.)  A  true  saving  con- 
victionof  dn  : — I.  The  instrument  by  which  it  was  peoduced,  namely,  the  preach- 
ing of  St.  Peter.  The  Holy  Spirit  was  the  Author,  but  He  emploved  the  preaching 
of  the  apostle.  It  is  by  the  Word  of  God,  and  usually  by  the  preaching  of  that 
Word,  that  the  heart  is  awakened,  enlightened,  and  impressed.  See  why  Satan  is 
such  an  enemy  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  He  knows  that  it  is  the  appointed 
instrument  for  overturning  his  kingdom.  He  would,  therefore,  gladly  pievent 
preaching,  but  wlien  he  cannot  do  this  he  tries  to  keep  men  from  hearing.  II.  The 
DESCBiPTiON  HERE  GIVEN  OF  A  SAVING  CONVICTION  OF  SIN.  They  "  Were  prfcked  ia 
their  hearts."  The  Word  of  God,  in  order  to  be  of  any  real  use,  must  reach  the 
heart.  It  is  not  enough  that  it  enlighten  the  understanding,  or  please  the  fancy, 
or  warm  the  affections.  Nor  is  merely  reaching  the  heart  sufficient.  It  must 
touch  it.  And  what  is  the  way  in  which  it  touches  the  heart?  We  read  of  some 
•who  were  "  cut  to  the  heart."  Their  hearts  were  deeply  affected;  but  instead  of 
any  saving  conviction  being  wrought  in  them,  they  were  only  the  more  exasperated 
and  hardened  against  the  truth.  A  prick  in  the  heart,  though  a  small  wound, 
would  be  fatal.  III.  The  way  in  wbich  such  a  conviction  will  show  itself  ; 
namely,  in  an  application  for  relief.  Take  notice  to  whqm  they  made  this  appli- 
cation :  to  those  very  persons  through  whose  preaching  the  wound  had  been 
inflicted.  Not  that  the  preacher,  by  hin  own  power,  can  heal  the  wound,  any  more 
than  he  could  at  first  inflict  it.  The  same  Holy  Spirit,  which  alone  produces  con- 
viction, can  alone  administer  consolation.  But  in  both  cases  He  works  by  means. 
Atteml,  then,  to  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  and  you  will  find  it  a  life-giving  Word, 
mighty  to  heal  as  well  as  to  wound,  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  IV.  The 
HUMILITY  PRODUCED  BY  A  SAVING  CONVICTION  OF  SIN.  Such  a  convictiou  disposes  men 
to  use  the  remedy  prescribed.  "  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  indicates  that  they  were  not 
only  in  deep  trouble  as  not  knowing  what  course  to  take,  but  also  that  they  were 
willing  to  follow  any  directions  which  the  apostles  might  point  out.  To  this 
question  there  is  but  one  answer,  that  of  Peter.  (E.  Cooper.)  We  must  preach 
to  the  consciences  of  men: — Inspector  Byrnes  of  New  York  says,  "The  great 
lieutenant  of  every  police  officer  is  that  mysterious  thing  called  conscience.  You 
let  a  man  trv  to  deceive  himself  and  lie  to  himself  ai'out  himself,  and  that  some- 
thing comes  knocking  up  against  the  shell  of  his  body,  and  thumping  on  his  ribs 
with  every  heart-beat,  and  pounding  on  his  skull  until  his  head  aches  and  he  wishes 
he  were  dead,  and  groans  in  agony  for  relief.  It  is  the  same  conscience  that  makes 
a  criminal  *  give  himself  away,'  if  one  only  knows  how  to  awaken  it,  or  stir  it  into 
activity.  I  never  let  a  man  know  for  what  he  is  arrested.  He  may  hnve  committed 
a  dozen  more  crimes  of  which  I  know  nothing.    If  I  lock  him  up  alone  and  leave 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  219 

him  to  the  black  walls  and  his  guilty  conscience  for  three  or  four  hours,  while  he 
pictures  the  possible  punishment  due  to  him  for  all  his  crimes,  he  comes  presently 
into  my  hands  like  soft  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter.  Then  he  is  likely  to  tell  me 
much  more  than  I  ever  suspected."  So  the  conscience  is  the  great  lieutenant  of 
every  preacher  of  the  gospel,  and  this  is  not  a  lesson  for  the  pulpit  alone,  for  one 
of  the  most  suggestive  features  of  the  Pentecost  revival  is  that  the  Church  members 
were  all  preachers  that  day.  This  picture  ought  to  lead  us  to  have  courage  to 
expect  immediate  results  from  the  faithful  preaching  of  the  gospel.  One  of  the 
most  dangerous  errors  that  ever  was  propagated  by  the  enemy  of  souls,  an  error  that 
paralyses  the  tongue  of  the  preacher  and  the  prayer  of  the  Church,  is  that  Christi- 
anity is  only  a  system  of  culture,  and  that  souls  are  to  be  ransomed  by  gradual 
stages.     (L.  A.  Banks.) 

Ver   37.  Now  when  they  heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and  said 
unto  Peter  and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ? — 

It  is  the  preaching  that  pricks  men^s  consciences  that  saves  them : — It  may  not  be  well 
that  some  of  you  should  be  pleased.  Sometimes,  when  a  man  grows  outrageously 
angry  with  a  sermon,  he  is  getting  more  good  than  when  he  retires  saying,  "  What 
an  eloquent  discourse  !  "  I  have  never  yet  heard  of  a  salmon  that  liked  the  hook 
which  had  taken  sure  hold  of  it ;  nor  do  men  admire  sermons  which  enter  their 
souls.  When  the  Word  of  God  becomes  as  an  arrow  in  a  man's  heart,  he  writhes ; 
he  would  fain  tear  it  out ;  but  it  is  a  barbed  shaft.  He  gnashes  his  teeth,  he  grows 
indignant;  but  he  is  wounded,  and  the  arrow  is  rankling.  The  preaching  which 
pleases  us  may  not  be  truth ;  but  the  doctrine  which  grieves  our  heart  and  troubles 
our  conscience,  is,  in  all  probability,  true;  at  any  rate,  there  are  grave  reasons  for 
suspecting  that  it  is  so.  It  is  not  the  way  of  truth  to  fawn  on  guilty  men. 
I  say,  the  Lord  uses  ministries  of  a  cutting  kind  to  make  men  uneasy 
in  their  sins,  and  cause  them  to  flee  to  Christ  for  peace.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Conviction  of  sin :  its  naturalness  : — If  a  man  really  saw  an  angel,  or  one  "risen 
from  the  dead,"  we  should  expect  that  all  consideration  of  bystanders  would 
forsake  him  in  the  awe  of  the  moment.  And  so,  if  in  an  instant  a  supernatural 
power  opens  the  unseen  world  to  the  soul,  with  its  one  eternal  Light,  its  heaven  and 
Its  hell,  although  the  view  of  these  must  be  imperfect  and  confused,  yet  if  it  is  a 
view,  a  sudden  view,  it  must  shoot  fear,  wonder,  awe,  through  and  through  the 
soul,  till  man  and  man's  opinion  are  as  little  thought  of,  as  fashion  by  a  woman 
fallen  into  a  steamer's  foaming  wake.  (W.  Arthur,  M.A.)  Conviction  of  sin  : 
instantaneous  : — An  unconverted  man  sat  down  to  read  the  Bible  an  hour  each 
evening  with  his  wife.  In  a  few  evenings  he  stopped  in  the  midst  of  his  reading, 
and  said,  "  Wife,  if  this  book  is  true,  we  are  wrong."  He  read  on,  and  a  few  days 
later  said,  "  Wife,  if  this  book  is  true,  we  are  lost."  Eiveted  to  the  book,  and  deeply 
anxious,  he  still  read,  and  in  a  week  more  joyfully  exclaimed,  "Wife,  if  this  book 
is  true,  we  may  be  saved !  "  A  few  weeks'  more  reading,  and,  taught  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  through  the  exhortations  and  instructions  of  a  city  missionary,  they  both 
placed  their  faiih  in  Christ.  Repentance: — I.  The  inquiry  made.  Men  always  want 
to  know  what  they  are  to  do  when  conviction  of  sin  is  on  them.  This  was  Paul's 
excited  cry  when  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  and  that  of  the  Philippian  jailer.  And 
until  a  sinner  is  willing  to  do  anything  that  he  may,  if  possible,  undo  what  he  has 
done  amiss,  little  evidence  of  a  contrite  state  of  heart  does  he  afford.  But  how 
blessed  is  God's  plan  of  salvation.  We  have  not  to  do  or  to  undo  ;  another  has 
done  for  us  what  is  required,  and  whnt  we  could  not  do.  Jesus  has  died,  the  just 
for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.  All  left  for  us,  therefore,  is  repentance  which 
leads  to  the  avoidance  of  sin  in  future,  by  submitting  to  His  ordinances,  and 
present  realising,  appropriating  faith.  "Men  and  brethren!"  Previously  any 
contemptuous  terms  were  good  enough  for  the  followers  of  the  Nazarene  ;  but  see 
how  the  cliange  of  heart  affects  the  speech.  A  sinner  under  conviction  will 
naturally  become  more  guarded  in  language  than  before.  How  many  ways  has  the 
Spirit  of  God  of  producing  conviction  ;  and  how  many  ways  has  a  convicted  sinner 
of  showing  the  conviction  which  is  thus  produced  1  Not  only  do  men  adopt  new 
modes  of  action,  but  new  stales  of  speech.  II.  The  reply  given.  How  ready  is 
the  apostle  to  respond.  1.  "Eepent,"as  if,  he  would  say,  do  not  go  about  to 
establish  a  righteousness  of  your  own  ;  do  not  suppose  that  by  costly  sacrifices  or 
penal  suffering  you  shall  be  saved.  Hate  your  sin  and  flee  from  it.  Eepent ; 
sincerely,  instantly,  earnestly  ;  seek  mercy,  for  it  is  awaiting  you.  2.  Be  baptized, 
as  an  expression  of  your  determination  henceforth  to  be  enrolled  under  the  banner 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  tbe  Messiah,  thus  publicly  admitting  His  claims,  and  showing  yonr  faith  in  Him, 
and  obedience  to  Him.  3.  Do  this  in  refeience  to  the  remis^sion  of  your  sins;  not 
supposing  that  baptism  will  save  you,  but  rather  that  it  will  symbolise  the  regene- 
rative power  of  the  Spirit  by  which  you  have  been  awakened,  and  then  you  shall 
receive  the  gilt  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  ( W.  Antliff,  D.D.)  Sham  repentance : — Con- 
fession of  sin  is  not  a  mere  abandonment  of  sin  as  a  losing  game.  That  was  a  shrewd 
but  not  a  very  flattering  estimate  found  on  record  in  the  private  thoughts  of  an 
old  divine.  "  I  believe,"  he  says,  "that  it  will  be  shown  that  the  repentance  of 
most  men  is  not  so  much  sorrow  for  sin  as  sin,  or  real  hatred  of  it,  as  sullen 
sorrow  that  they  are  not  allowed  to  sin."  When  any  individual  surrenders  an 
iniquitous  occupation  because  he  perceives  public  opinion  is  setting  against  it,  and 
that  eventuail.\  he  will  be  injured  by  its  continuance,  it  is  simple  mockery  for  him 
to  try  to  make  moral  capital  out  of  the  relinquishment.  When  a  young  man 
forsakes  dissipation  because  it  endangers  his  place  with  his  employer ;  when  a 
merchant  gives  up  dishonest  trade-marks  because  his  tricks  are  becoming  trans- 
parent, and  hnnesty  seems  the  best  policy — this  is  nut  penitence  for  sin  ;  it  is  only 
the  hypocrisy  of  worldly  wisdom.  The  work  of  coiwersion : — Conversion  is  a  work 
of — I.  Argument,  for  the  judgment  is  gained  by  the  truth.  II.  Conviction,  for 
the  awakened  are  pricked  to  the  heart.  III.  Enquiry,  for  they  ask,  "  Wliat  must 
we  do?"  IV.  Comfort,  for  its  subjects  have  received  remission  of  sins  and  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (Joseph  SutcUffe.)  Salvation: — 1.  Men  must  be  pricked 
in  their  heart  before  they  can  have  the  joy  of  salvation  in  their  heart.  2.  The  con- 
ditions of  salvation^how  easy  !  Salvation  has  only  to  be  accepted.  3.  TLe  con- 
ditions of  salvation — how  hard !  Each  one  must  repent ;  that  is,  turn  from  his 
sin ;  and  that  is  no  easy  matter.  4.  Salvation  is  accompanied  with  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Without  His  help,  no  one  could  conquer  sin.  5.  The  promise  of 
salvation  and  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  all  men  of  all  peoples.  6.  The 
promise  of  salvation  is  a  family  covenant,  extending  through  the  father  to  the 
children.  7.  The  exhortation,  now  as  ever,  is :  "  Save  yourselves  from  this  crooked 
generation."      (Sunday    School     Times.)  Converting   potver  permanent   in    the 

Church  : — To  suppose  that  it  has  been  withdrawn  is — I.  To  suppose  that  the  one 

PRACTICAL   END    OF    CHRISTIANITY   HAS  BEEN  VOLUNTARILY  ABANHONED.       If  Christianity 

cannot  renew  men  in  the  image  of  God,  she  ceases  to  have  any  special  distinction 
above  other  religious.  Her  mission  here  wa-i  to  overcome  Satan  in  the  realm  in 
which  he  had  hitherto  triumphed,  to  re-establish  the  empire  of  God.  II.  Not  only 
would  this  practical  end  be  abandoned,  but  the  standing  evidence  to  Chris- 
tianity WOULD  BE  discontinued.  The  miracles  and  prophecies  are  past,  and  no 
accumulation  of  arguments  can  demonstrate  to  our  neighbours  at  this  moment 
that  Christianity  is  a  power  which  can  actually  make  men  superior  to  their  own 
circumstances  and  sins.  The  only  real  and  effective  evidence  is  living  men  who 
have  been  legenerated.  Wherever  men  can  be  pointed  to  whose  lives  aie  a  mani- 
fest example  of  salvation  from  sin,  there  is  the  standing  evidence  that  Christianity 
is  ''the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  Is  it  supposable  that  Christ  has  withdrawn 
or  diminished  that  power  which  would  show  continually  that  He  "saves  His 
people  from  their  sins  "  ?  III.  The  converting  power  is  also  the  Church's  great 
ATTRACTION.  It  is  true  that  some  would  attract  men  by  ceremonies,  or  talent,  or 
the  charms  of  architecture  or  music, — attract  them  that  they  may  convert  them; 
whereas  the  true  order  is.  Convert,  that  you  may  attract.  The  one  is  the  order  of 
the  charlatan,  who  trusts  to  factitious  allurements  for  attracting  the  public,  in  the 
hope  that  he  may  cure  some  ;  the  other,  the  order  of  the  true  physician,  who  trusts 
to  the  fact  of  his  curing  some  as  the  means  of  attracting  others.  Whenever  the 
Church  sends  into  a  family  one  new  convert  glowing  with  love  and  joy,  she  kindles 
a  light  which  will,  in  all  probability,  give  light  to  all  that  are  in  the  house.  When- 
ever she  is  the  means  of  making  one  shopman  turn  from  his  sins,  and  exhibit  to 
his  comrades  a  picture  of  holy  living,  in  all  probability  she  will  soon  have  others 
from  that  shop  at  her  altars.  Whenever  she  brings  one  factory-girl  to  sit,  like  Mary, 
at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  very  probably  in  a  little  while  other  Marys  will  be  v.ith  her. 
IV.  The  converting  power  is  also  the  principal  lever  which  Christianity  can 
use  for  raising  the  standard  of  morals  in  nations.  1.  Instruction  is  the  basis 
of  all  moral  operation ;  but  instruction  in  morals,  as  in  science,  is  of  little  force 
unless  backed  by  experiment.  One  tradesman  converted,  and  manfully  taking 
ground  among  his  companions  against  trade  tricks  once  used  by  himself,  casts 
greater  shame  upon  their  dishonesty  than  all  the  instructions  they  ever  heard  from 
pulpits ;  or,  rather,  gives  an  edge,  a  power,  and  an  embodiment  to  them  all.     One 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  221 

youth  whom  religion  strengthens  to  walk  purely,  among  dissipated  companions, 
sends  lights  and  stings  into  their  consciences,  which  mere  instruction  could  not 
give,  because  it  shows  them  that  purity  is  not,  as  temptation  says,  unattainable. 
And  so  with  all  the  virtues;  it  is  but  by  embodying  them  in  the  persons  of  men 
that  they  become  thoroughly  understood  by  the  public  mind.  2.  Just  in  proportion 
as  the  number  of  converted  men  is  great  or  small,  will  be  the  amount  of  conscience 
in  the  community  generally.  Each  new  convert  adds  somewhat  to  the  existing 
moral  influence,  and  weakens  the  ties  which  bind  men  to  sin.  Where  no  one  is 
godly,  moderately  correct  persons  are  almost  ashamed  of  their  lack  of  badness ; 
where  a  tenth  of  the  adults  are  godly,  even  ordinary  sinners  are  ashamed  of  their 
lack  of  goodness  ;  and  where  a  fifth,  or  a  third,  of  the  adults  are  so,  the  hin- 
drances to  the  conversion  of  the  rest  are  as  nothing,  compared  with  those  that  exist 
where  the  great  masses  are  still  living  in  their  sins.     V.  The  converting  power  is 

also  THE  ONLY  MEANS  WHEREBY  CHRISTIANITY  RAISES  UP  AGENTS  FOB  HER  OWN  PROPA- 
GATION. 1.  That  which  is  wanted  in  an  agent,  above  all,  is  zeal,  burning  desire  to 
save  sinners.  This  zeal  is  never  a  matter  of  mere  conviction,  but  always  a  matter 
of  nature.  It  is  "Christ  in  you."  It  is  "the  love  of  Christ  constraining  you." 
Agents  with  this  nature  we  can  have  only  by  successive  outpourings  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  by  constant  accessions  of  new  converts.  2.  When  they  who  have  been  great 
sinners  are  themselves  converted,  having  been  forgiven  much,  they  love  much,  and 
frequently  become  mighty  instruments  of  winning  others  to  Christ.  When 
"numbers  turn  to  the  Lord,"  snying,  "  We  have  redemption  in  His  blood,  even  the 
forgiveness  of  sins," — then  some  will  assuredly  appear  with  plain  marks  that  the 
spirit  of  the  prophets  is  in  them,  and  that  they  are  called  to  spread,  far  and  wide, 
the  glorious  salvation  of  which  they  themselves  partake.  3.  Nothing  so  re-animates 
the  zeal  of  old  Christians  as  witnessing  the  joy  and  simplicity,  the  gratitude  and 
fervour,  of  those  who  have  been  lately  born  of  God.  While  the  old  disciple  is  to 
the  young  one  an  example  of  moderation  and  strength,  the  young  is  to  the  old  an 
example  of  fervour;  the  one  shedding  upon  the  other  a  steadying  influence,  while 
he  receives  in  return  a  cheering  and  an  impelling,  one.  4.  It  is  also  wonderful  how 
much  the  occurrence  of  conversions  heightens  the  efficiency  of  men  already 
employed  in  the  ministry,  or  in  other  departments  of  the  work  of  God.  The 
preacher  preaches  with  new  heart,  the  exborter  exhorts  with  revived  feeling,  he 
that  prays  has  double  faith  and  fervour ;  and  the  joy  of  conquest  breathes  new 
vigour  into  all  the  Lord's  host.  (W.  Arthur,  M.A.)  Want  of  ministerial  results 
to  be  d  precated  : — A  farmer  who  all  his  lifetime  has  been  sowing,  but  never 
brought  one  shock  of  c^rn  safe  home  ;  a  gardener  who  has  ever  been  pruning  and 
training,  but  never  brought  one  basket  of  fruit  away;  a  merchant  who  has  been 
trading  all  his  life,  but  never  concluded  one  year  with  profit ;  a  lawyer  who  has 
had  intrusted  to  him,  for  years  and  years,  the  most  important  causes,  and  never 
carried  one  ;  the  doctor  who  has  been  consulted  by  thousands  in  disease,  and  never 
brought  one  patient  back  to  health ;  the  philosopher  who  has  been  propounding 
principles  all  his  life,  and  attempting  experiments  every  day,  but  never  once  suc- 
ceeded in  a  demonstration  ; — all  these  would  be  abashed  and  humiliated  men.  They 
would  walk  through  the  world  with  their  heads  low,  they  would  acknowledge  them- 
sehes  to  be  abortions,  they  would  not  dare  to  look  up  among  those  of  their  own 
professions  ;  and  as  for  others  regarding  them  with  respect,  pity  would  be  all  they 
could  give.  Yet,  alas  !  are  there  not  cases  to  be  found  wherein  men  whose  calling 
it  is  to  heal  souls,  pass  years  and  years,  and  seldom,  if  ever,  can  any  fruit  of  their 
labours  be  seen  ?  Yet  they  hold  up  their  heads,  and  have  giod  reasons  to  give  why 
they  are  not  useful ;  and  those  reasons  generally  lie,  not  in  themselves,  but  some- 
where else, — in  the  age,  the  neighbourhood,  the  a  atation  or  the  apathy,  the  ignor- 
ance or  the  over-education,  the  want  of  gospel  light,  or  the  commonness  of  gospel 
light,  or  some  other  reason  why  the  majority  of  those  who  hear  them  should  con- 
tinue unconverted,  and  why  they  should  look  on  in  repose,  without  smiting  upon 
their  breasts  and  crying  day  and  night  to  God  to  breathe  a  power  upon  them 
whel•e^•v  they  might  awaken  those  that  sleep.  Probably  they  have  wise  things  to 
say  about  the  undesirableness  of  being  too  anxious  about  fruit,  and  about  the 
advantage  of  the  work  going  on  steadily  and  slowly,  rather  than  seeking  for  an 
excitement,  and  a  rush  of  converts.  But  while  they  are  dozing,  sinners  are  going 
to  hell.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  38.  Then  Peter  said,  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus. — Peter's  directions  : — In   getting  the  exact  meaning   of 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

— I '■ . . 

Peter's  directions   to  these  inquirers,   observe — (1)  "  Eepent "  is  literally  to  per- 
ceive afterwards,  and   hence  to   change  the  mind,  including  one's  view   of  life 
and   truth,    and    Lence   one's   purpose.     Here  it  means  an    entire    change    of 
opinion  respecting  Jesus  Christ,  from  regarding  Him  as   an    impostor    to    reve- 
rencing Him  as  both  Lord  and  Christ ;  but  it  also  includes  aU  that  change  of 
inner  life  and  purpose  which   follows    thereon.     The    tioman   Catholic   transla- 
tion, "Do  penance,"   making  the    direction    merely    the    observance  of    certain 
legal  rites,  is  equally  inconsistent  with  the  original  Greek  and  with  the  spirit  of 
the  entire  passage.     (2)  "Be  baptized"  follows  in  order  the  direction  to  repent. 
Baptism  is  not  a  regenerating  ordinance,  but  a  sign  and  symbol  of  repentance,  and 
a  pubhc  confession  of  Christ.     (3)  "  Each  of  you,"  shows  tljat  the  repentance  and 
baptism  must  be  a  personal  act.     The  multitude  could  not  have  been  baptized 
under  this  direction,    as   some   of  the   converts  under  Xavier's  preaching  were 
bapcized  in  India,  by  being  sprinkled  altogether  in  a  multitude,  or  as  some  of  the 
northern  people  were  baptized  in  earlier  times,  by  being  made  to  pass  through  the 
river  in  a  great  host.     (4)  "In"   (upon)   "the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,"  is  upon 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  foundation  of  the  baptism,  i.e.,  with  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  Him  in  that  act  as  being  what  His  name  means,  the  sinner's  only 
hope,  his  Eedeemer,  Justifier,  Lord,   and  Final  Judge.     (Lyinan  Abbott.)         St. 
Peter's  prescription : — I.  The  means  he  presckibes.      1.  Eepentance ;  that  is  the 
first  ingiedient  in  the  cure.     It  is  the  primitive  original  grace,  even  before  faith 
itself,  as  it  serves  to  justify.     All  the  promises  are  made  only  to  the  penitent.     (1) 
See  the  necessity  of  this  spiritual  medicine.     As  when  a  loving  father  shall  com- 
mand his  sick  child  to  use  such  a  medicine  to  save  his  life,  should  the  child  refuse 
it,  he  sins  not  only  as  a  disobedient  child  against  his  father,  but  as  a  desperate 
creature  against  his  own  life.     Impenitency  is  the  damning  sin.     All  sins  deserve 
damnation,  but  it  is  impenitency  which  ddth  actually  cast  us.     As  he  that  hath 
eaten  poison  hath  done  that  which  in  itself  is  deadly  ;  but  yet  there  is  an  antidote 
that  can  cure  it ;  now  to  refuse  the  antidote  is  more  desperate.    Other  sins  are  against 
our  duty;  but  impenitency  is  against  our  recoveiy.     Still  the  Scripture  promises 
this  as  a  necessary  condition  for  obtaining  mercy  (chap.  v.  3).    (2)  It  is  a  proper  cure 
for  fin  this  penitential  sorrow.     To  speak  truly,  sorrow  and  remorse,  it  is  good  for 
nothing  but  to  destroy  sin.     God,  when  He  implanted  this  affection  in  our  souls, 
intendeil  it  only  for  this  purpose,  to  purge  and  cure  our  spiritual  maladies     (3) 
See  the  efficacy  of  this  prescript,  the  strength  and  virtue  of  this  balm  of  Gilead. 
It  is  able  to  work  strange  cures,  to  recover  men  of  desperate  maladies.     As  no  siu 
is  so  small  but  it  needs  repentance,  so  no  sin  so  great  but  may  be  done  away  by 
this  grace  of  repentance.     (4)  Take  notice  of  the  sensonableness  of  this  prescrip- 
tion.    They  were  already  deeply  cast  down  with  sorrow  and  anguish,  they  were 
pricked  at  the  heart,  pierced.     One  would  think  some  other  course  were  more 
seasonable.     No,  no  ;  St.  Peter  is  right,  he  sees  their  souls  are  in  perplexity,  and 
yet  he  calls  upon  them  to  repent ;  they  are  in  sorrow,  and  yet  they  must  sorrow  if 
they  mean  to  be  eased.     There  is  indeed  a  large  difference  betwixt  that  sorrow 
which  they  already  felt  and  that  penitential  sorrow  which  St.  Peter  enjoins  them. 
Their  former  sorrow,  it  was  a  legal  sorrow,  wrought  into  them  by  the  terrors  of 
God's  law  and  the  sense  of  their  sin  ;  but  the  sorrow  St.  Peter  commends  to  them 
is  an  evangelical  sorrow,  a  sorrow  wrought  by  the  gospel  and  a  gift  of  Christ.     (5) 
Their  former  sorrow  and  compunction,  it  was  a  pang  and  passion  of  sorrow  that 
seized  them,  whether  they  would  or  no;  but  the  penitential  sorrow  that  Peter  ex- 
horts them  to,  it  is  a  voluntary,  wil  iiig  sorrow  to  which  they  must  stir  up  and 
provoke  themselves,     (a)  Look  upon  it  in  the  original,  it  is  a  grace,  and  that  is 
seated  in  the  will,  it  serves  to  enable  it  and  to  make  it  willing,    (b)  Look  upon  it  in 
the  exercise,  so  it  is  a  duty;  God  requires  and  expects  repentance.     Now,  God 
requires  our  actions.     Sufferings  aie  not  commanded  but  inflicted;  but  duties  are 
enjoined,  and  we  must  willingly  perform  them,     (c)  Look  upon  it  in  the  use ;  so  it 
is  a  condition  upon  the  performance  of  which  God  doth  covenant  with  us.    A  true 
penitent  must  provoke  liimself  to  sorrow,  praying  that  he  may  sorrow ;  grieving 
that  he  cannot  grieve,  never  repenting  that  he  hath  repented.    (6)  The  sorrow  they 
felt  before,  when  their  hearts  were  pricked,  differs  from  the  sorrow  to  which  St. 
Peter  exhorts  them;  that  was  dolor,  the  pain  of  tlie  disease  ;  but  this  he  requires 
of  them,  it  is  the  smart  that  comes  by  the  cure  and  medicine.     It  is  not  every 
stroke  of  conscience,  nor  every  pang  of  sorrow,  that  is  true  repentance  ;  we  may 
feel  all  these,  and  feel  them  in  extremity,  and  yet  the  bitter  pill  of  repentance  must 
be  taken  down  for  all  that.    That  is  the  first  means,  a  spiritual  purgiug.    Come  we 


CHAP,  n.]  THE  ACTS.     ■  223 

— 2.  To  the  second  means  which  St.  Peter  prescribes  them,  that  is  a  spiritual 
bathing;  that  is  the  sacrament  of  baptism.  (1)  The  sacramental  action;  they 
must  be  baptized.  This  outward,  external,  bodily  ceremony  of  washing  in  water, 
it  is  of  Divine  institution,  and  so  necessary.  Let  the  means  be  what  it  will,  if 
Christ  sends  us  to  it,  it  shall  be  effectual.  Purposely  Christ  uses  these  bodily  means 
as  special  conveyances  of  spiritual  grace;  even  amongst  men  we  see  outward  evi- 
dences and  seals  are  accounted  strong  assurances.  We  are  not  content  to  have 
estates  passed  over  to  us  bj  bare  word  ;  but  writings  and  seals,  livery  and  seisin, 
are  all  requisite.  Purposely  God  employs  very  mean  instruments  that  our  faith 
may  only  depend  upon  His  power,  and  tbat  our  thankfulness  may  ascribe  it  only  to 
His  glory.  In  particular,  Christ  prescribes  this  sacrament  of  baptism,  and  washing 
in  water,  that  element  fitly  resembling  those  spiritual  effects  which  are  wroufjht 
in  baptism,  (a)  Water  hath  a  force  of  drawing  and  killing  and  suffocating  any  breath- 
ing thing.  And  this  quality  of  water  is  a  fit  resemblance  of  the  grace  of  baptism. 
A  sinner,  coming  to  this  sacrament,  hath,  all  his  sins  drowned  and  abolished. 
{b)  Water  hath  a  power  of  quenching ;  and  such  a  spiritual  virtue  there  is  in 
baptism,  it  allays  the  heat  of  our  natural  concupiscence,  quenches  and  extinguishes 
the  boilings  and  inflammations  of  our  sinful  lusts,  (c)  Water,  it  is  a  cleansing 
element,  it  washes  away  filthiness,  and  so  doth  baptism  ;  it  purges  a  sinner  from 
all  defiltments  of  flesh  and  spirit  (Eph.  iv.  26).  (d)  Water  hath  a  fructifying 
virtue  in  it ;  it  is  a  fruitful  element,  and  makes  other  things  fruitful  (Gen.i.  20).  So 
this  sacrament  by  Divine  institution  and  benediction,  it  is  a  fountain  of  living 
water,  a  font  and  laver  of  regeneration.  See  how  abundantly  these  waters  brought 
forth.  Three  thousand  were  baptized  and  renewed  in  one  day.  That  is  the  action. 
Then — (2)  The  relation  of  it,  which  enlivens  the  action  and  makes  it  effectual,  is 
that  it  must  be  done  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  What  means  that?  In  His 
name,  that  is,  by  His  authority.  He  alone  can  institute  a  sacrament,  He  alone  can 
make  the  seal  that  must  confirm  His  covenant.  In  His  name  ;  that  is,  be  baptized 
in  the  faith  of  Jesus  His  name,  through  faith  in  His  name  (chap.  iii.  16).  A  sac- 
rament without  faith  is  a  seal  to  a  blank.  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  is, 
in  the  solemn  and  holy  profession  of  Christ  into  His  religion,  into  the  fellowship 
and  communion  of  His  holy  profession.  In  baptism  we  tnke  upon  us  Christ's  cog- 
nisance and  livery,  II.  The  benefits  which  upon  the  use  of  this  means  He  doth 
ASSURE  THEM.  1.  EemissioH  of  sins.  And  this  will  appear — (1)  A  seasonable 
benefit.  Men  in  their  case  and  perplexity  had  rather  hear  of  the  pardon  of  their 
sins,  then  that  all  the  goods  of  the  world  should  betide  them.  This  mercy, 
it  is  the  sinful  soul's  city  of  refuge.  Other  means  may  stupefy  and  benumb  our 
conscience,  and  lay  it  asleep ;  only  this  assurance  can  truly  and  effectually 
quiet  and  comfort  it,  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.  (2)  This  mercy  here  promised 
is  a  full  complete  comfort ;  it  is  remission  of  sins  in  the  plural  number.  As 
in  bodily  cures,  when  Christ  cast  out  one  devil.  He  cast  out  all :  spven  devils 
out  of  Mary  Magdalen ;  a  whole  legion  of  devils,  left  not  one  remaining.  So 
when  He  pardons  one  sin  He  forgives  all,  (a)  God's  love,  it  is  not  partial  and  im- 
perfect, p'lrdoning  some  and  retaining  others,  (b)  And  then  repemance,  though, it 
be  occasioned  by  some  one  sin,  yet  it  bewails  all,  detests  all,  fors^ak  ;s  all.  A  good 
Christian  will  leave  no  sin  unrepented  of.  (c)  The  grace  of  baptism  doth  not  only 
seal  up  the  actual  remission  of  our  by-past  sins ;  but  it  hath  a  force  even  for  the 
pardoning  of  the  sins  of  our  whole  life.  Not  that  all  our  sins  past,  present,  and  to 
come  are  actually  all  forgiven  in  baptism,  but  because  in  our  baptism  God  seals 
up  that  covenant  by  which  He  assures  us.  He  will  pardon  all  our  sins  upon  our  re- 
pentance ;  and  thus  the  force  of  baptism  reaches  to  the  pardon  of  future  sins.  2. 
The  receiving  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (1)  Grace  is  a  gift  not  inbred  in  us,  not 
deserved  or  purchased  by  us,  (2)  We  must  receive  it ;  we  are  only  passive  and  re- 
ceptive of  grace.  The  Spirit  is  the  only  agent,  we  are  but  receivers  of  the  gift  of 
grace.  To  pass  by  these,  consider  only  these  two  things:  the  order,  Bepent  and 
be  baptized,  and  then  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  First,  here  is  cleansing 
required,  and  then  beautifying.  The  Holy  Ghost  abhors  uncleanliness,  will  not 
come  near  to  a  defiled  soul.  The  nature  of  this  gift.  The  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
■were  of  two  sorts.  3.  Those  that  are  usually  called  gifts  tending  to  edification  of 
others ;  as  tongues  and  other  ministerial  enablements.  They  were  the  gifts  of  this 
day,  but  not  the  only  gifts.  4.  Others  are  gifts  of  personal  concernment,  for  the 
good  of  the  receivers  to  further  their  salvation.  And  these  were  promised  and 
bestowed  on  this  day.  (1)  The  grace  of  sanctifi cation  ;  that  was  the  gift  and  ben  fit 
of  this  day.     (2)  The  grace  of  obsignations  and  sealing,  that  was  the  work  and  gift  of 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  Spirit  that  came  this  day.  This  is  one  great  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  ratify  and 
seal  up  to  us  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  and  all  the  benefits  of  our  redemption 
(Eph.  i.  13,  iv.  30).  (3)  The  grace  of  consolation;  that  is  another  work  and  gift 
of  the  Spirit,  that  was  also  the  gift  of  this  day.  (a)  In  regard  of  our  sanctilication, 
so  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  gift  of  grace  enabling  us.  (b)  In  respect  of  our  assurance, 
so  He  is  a  seal  confirming  us.  (c)  In  respect  of  comfort  and  consolation,  so  He  is 
the  kiss  of  love  and  peace  to  rejoice  and  comfort  us.  And  this  assurance  that  Peter 
gives  them  of  their  receiving  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  will  afford  us  a  threefold 
meditation.  See  here — 1.  His  earnest  desire  to  have  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  communi- 
cated to  them.  2.  The  bounty  of  God  ;  whom  He  pardons,  those  He  enriches  and 
stores  with  grace.  3.  Learn  here  the  duty  and  obligation  of  a  penitent.  If  God 
bestows  this  rich  gift  on  us,  that  very  gift  obliges  us  to  use  it.  We  must  not  be 
content  to  have  our  sins  pardoned,  but  we  must  set  ourselves  to  perform  better 
obedience.       (Bp.   Broionrigg.)  Tlie    go»]pel  : — The    crowd,    convinced   of    sin 

and  fearful  of  its  consequences,  cried  out  in  an  agony  of  remorse  and  despair, 
"  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  Meaning,  of  course,  what  the  jailer  meant  in  the  full 
evangehcal  question.  They  wanted  to  know  how  they  should  escape  the  penalty 
incurred.  Very  full  is  this  condensed  reply  of  Peter's.  The  whole  gospel  of 
man's  salvation  is  included  in  it.  No  director  of  a  stricken  and  bewildered 
conscience  can  improve  upon  it.  I.  The  nature  of  salvation.  1.  Eemissioa 
of  sins.  Sin  had  run  them  into  danger ;  continuance  in  sin  would  involve 
them  in  ruin.  The.  first  thing,  therefore,  was  that  sin  should  be  remitted. 
When  a  disease  breaks  out  it  exposes  its  victims  to  a  possible  or  probable  death. 
To  check  its  ravages  does  not  mean  absolutely  health ;  but  there  is  no  averting  that 
fatality  until  the  progress  of  the  disease  receives  a  check.  In  our  case  sin  exposes 
us  to  punishment  on  account  of  its  guilt ;  to  death  because  of  its  power.  To  forgive 
the  guilt  and  to  counterwork  the  power  is  therefore  the  first  requirement.  It  is  not 
fuU  salvation,  but  it  is  necessary  to  it.  2.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is 
the  positive  side  of  that  which  remission  is  the  negative  side,  and  completes  the 
idea  of  salvation.  To  receive  the  Spirit  is  for  the  sick  soul  to  be  restored  to  full 
health  ;  it  is  to  lay  ourselves  open  to  His  gracious  work,  which  is  (1)  Eegeneration, 
the  gift  of  a  new  nature.  (2)  Adoption,  translation  into  the  Divine  family  and 
acceptance  in  the  Beloved.  (3)  The  witness  to  our  sonship.  (4)  Progressive  sancti- 
fication.  (5)  The  earnest  of  all  the  glory  and  the  joy  of  heaven.  II.  The  means 
OF  OBTAINING  SALVATION.  1.  Eepcntance.  Change  of  mind  about  sin,  self,  Loliness, 
and  God,  with  endeavours  after  a  corresponding  change  in  the  life  and  conduct. 
Thia  will  involve  a  hatred  of  sin,  a  true  measurement  of  our  own  weakness  and  un- 
wortMness,  an  endeavour  after  holiness,  a  desire  after  God  as  the  supreme  good. 
2.  Baj^tism.  Here  the  rite  was  a  symbol — (1)  Of  trust  in  Christ.  "  In  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ."  (2)  Of  the  purity  to  which  the  Christian  is  pledged.  (3)  Of  con- 
fession of  Christ  before  men.  (4)  Of  separation  from  the  old  life  of  the  world,  and 
consecration  to  Christ.  These  conditions  are  as  inexorable  to-day  as  they  were 
then.  All  that  the  baptism  we  have  already  enjoyed  in  infancy  means  is  obliga- 
tory on  every  baptized  man.  Our  baptism  is  vain  and  our  salvation  non-existent 
unless  "  the  life  we  live  in  the  flesh  be  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God"  ;  unless 
our  lives  are  pure,  unless  our  confession  of  Christ  be  unmistakable,  and  unless  we 
are  fully  consecrated  to  our  Master's  service.  Conclusion :  1,  How  simple  the 
conditions  on  which  God  grants  His  greatest  boon.  2.  How  essential  that  we 
should  comply  with  them  before  the  gift  is  withdrawn.  [J.  W.  Hum.)  Repen^ 
tance  : — This  is  a  turning  from  sin  to  God.  When  genuine  it  is  a  fruit  of  the 
Spirit,  and  secures  the  further  gift  of  the  Spirit.  In  its  widest  sense  it 
includes  the  whole  process  of  conversion.  It  has  been  weU  defined  to  be  "a 
saving  grace  whereby  a  sinner,  out  of  a  true  sense  of  his  sin  and  apiirehen- 
sion  of  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  doth  with  grief  and  hatred  of  his  sin  turn 
from  it  unto  God  with  full  purpose  of,  and  endeavour  after,  new  obedience."  I. 
Its  MEANS.  1.  From  a  due  sense  of  sin.  This  includes — (1)  A  knowledge  of  sin. 
(2)  A  conviction  of  our  own  sinfulness.  (3)  A  proper  sense  of  our  own  guilt  and 
pollution.  The  knowledge  of  sin  supposes  proper  views  of  the  holiness  and  justice 
of  God,  and  therefore  of  the  greatness  of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  that  we  are  absolutely 
at  God's  mercy.  2.  It  is  with  apprehension  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ.  Repentance 
is  not  possible  as  long  as  we  think  we  are  without  hope.  For  despair  excludes 
repentance.  We  must  apprehend,  i.e.,  believe — (1)  That  God  is  merciful.  (2)  That 
He  can  consistently  exercise  His  mercy.  (3)  That  we  are,  or  may  be,  its  objects. 
(4)  That  this  is  through  Christ ;  because  out  of  Christ  conscience  and  Scriptura 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  225 

teach  Him  to  be  a  consuming  fire.  II.  The  attending  ciecumstances.  1.  Grief, 
i.e.,  sincere  sorrow  for  having  sinned  ;  including — (1)  Eemorse.  (2)  Self  abhorrence* 
(3)  Self-condemnation,  (4)  Shame.  2.  Hatred  of  sin,  which  includes — (1)  Disapproba- 
tion. (2)  Disgust.  III.  The  act  itself.  1.  Turning  from  sin :  from  its  (1) 
Approbation.  (2)  Indulgence.  (3)  Promotion.  2.  Turning  to  God — (1)  As  an  object 
of  excellence.  (2)  As  an  object  of  enjoyment.  IV.  Its  efforts.  1.  Purpose.  A 
decision  of  the  will  to  obey  God  in  all  things.  2.  Endeavour  to  do  so.  (1)  Con- 
tinued. (2)  Sincere.  (3)  Effective.  {G.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Repentance:  itsnature: 
— It  consists  in  the  heart  being  broken  for  sin  and  from  sin.  (IF.  Nevins.)  Repen- 
tance :  its  beginning  and  end  :-y-li  begins  in  the  humiUation  of  the  heart,  and  ends 
in  the  reformation  oruhe  life.  [J.  M.  Mason,  D.D.)  Repentance :  its  double 
aspect : — True  repentance  looks  upon  things  past  with  a  weeping  eye,  and  upon  the 
future  with  a  watchful  eye.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  Repentance,  thorough : — I  pray  you 
dig  deep.  Christ's  palace-work  and  His  new  dwelling,  laid  upon  heU  felt  and  feared, 
is  most  firm  ;  and  heaven,  grounded  and  laid  upon  such  a  hell,  is  sure  work,  and 
wiU  not  wash  away  with  winter  storms.  (S.  Rutherford.)  Repentance,  universal : — 
If  a  ship  have  three  leaks,  and  two  be  stopped,  the  third  wiU  sink  the  ship. 
If  a  man  has  two  severe  wounds,  and  cures  one,  the  neglected  one  will  kill  him. 
(J.  Spencer.)  Repentance  :  a  change  of  course : — A  captain  at  sea  discovers 
that,  by  some  mistake,  the  steersman  is  steering  the  ship  directly  for  the  rocks. 
How  is  the  danger  to  be  avoided  ?  By  scrubbing  the  decks,  or  setting  the  men  to 
the  pumps  ?  No  1  these  things  are  good  enough  in  their  own  time,  but  if  the  ship 
is  to  be  saved,  one  thing  must  be  done — her  course  must  be  changed.  So  the  captain 
utters  a  few  quick  words,  and  the  ship  turns  and  speeds  away  from  the  danger. 
Repentance  produced  by  God  : — You  feel  that  you  cannot  repent,  but  cannot  Jesus 
make  thee  repent  by  His  Spirit  ?  Do  you  hesitate  about  that "  question  ?  See  the 
world  a  few  months  ago  hard  bound  with  frost,  but  how  daffodil,  and  crocus,  and 
snowdrop  have  come  up  above  that  once  frozen  soil,  how  snow  and  ice  have  gone, 
and  the  genial  sun  shines  out !  God  does  it  readily,  with  the  soft  breath  of  the 
south  wiud  and  the  kind  sunbeams,  and  He  can  do  the  same  in  the  spiritual  world 
for  thee.  Believe  He  can,  and  ask  Him  now  to  do  it,  and  thou  shalt  find  that  the 
rock  of  ice  shalt  thaw,  that  huge,  horrible,  devilish  iceberg  of  a  heart  of  thine 
shall  begin  to  drip  with  showers  of  crystal  penitence,  which  God  shall  accept 
through  His  dear  Son.  Repentance  before  joy  : — As  certain  fabrics  need  to  be 
damped  before  they  wUl  take  the  glowing  colours  with  which  they  are  to  be  adorned, 
so  our  spirits  need  the  bedewing  of  repentance  before  they  can  receive  the  radiant 
colouring  of  dehght.  The  glad  news  of  the  gospel  can  only  be  printed  on  wet 
paper.  Have  you  ever  seen  clearer  shining  than  that  which  foUows  a  shower  ? 
Then  the  sun  transforms  the  raindrops  into  gems,  the  flowers  look  up  with  fresher 
smiles  and  faces  glittering  from  their  refreshing  bath,  and  the  birds  from  among 
the  dripping  branches  sing  with  notes  more  rapturous,  because  they  have  paused 
awhile.  So,  when  the  soul  has  been  saturated  with  the  rain  of  penitence,  the 
clear  shining  of  forgiving  love  makes  the  flowers  of  gladness  blosscm  all  round. 
The  steps  by  which  we  ascend  to  the  palace  of  dehght  are  usually  moist  with  tears. 
Grief  for  sin  is  the  porch  of  the  House  Beautiful,  where  the  guests  are  full  of  "  the 
joy  of  the  Lord."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  magnitude  of  repentance : — Eepentance  is 
an  old-fashioned  doctrine,  which  in  these  days  has  been  despised ;  but,  if  I  stand  alone, 
I  will  bear  testimony  for  it.  They  say  that  repentance  is  nothing  at  all — that  it  is 
merely,  according  to  the  Greek,  a  change  of  mind.  That  shows  what  a  little  Greek 
they  know.  A  httle  of  such  knowledge  is  a  dangerous  thing.  A  pity  that  they  do 
not  learn  more,  Eepentance  is  a  change  of  mind  ;  but  do  you  say  that  it  is  only  a 
change  of  mind  ?  That  is  a  pretty  big  "  only,"  A  change  of  mind,  a  radical 
change  of  mind,  from  the  love  of  sin  to  the  love  of  holiness,  is  that  a  small  affair  ? 
It  is  always  attended  with  sorrow  and  regret  for  past  sin :  and,  if  there  is  a  man 
here  who  thinks  that  he  will  get  to  heaven  by  a  dry-eyed  faith,  he  will  be  mistaken. 
He  that  never  mourned  for  sin  hath  never  rejoiced  in  the  Lord.  If  I  can  look 
back  upon  my  past  Hfe  of  sin  and  say,  "  I  have  no  grief  over  it,"  why,  then  I 
should  do  the  same  again  if  I  had  the  opportunity  :  and  this  shows  that  my  heart 
is  as  perverse  as  ever  it  was,  and  I  am  still  unregenerate.  Dear  Mr.  Eowland  Hill 
used  to  say  that  faith  and  repentance  were  his  daily  companions  as  long  as  he 
lived,  and  that,  if  he  had  any  thought  of  regret  at  entering  heaven,  it  would  be  to 
think  that  he  might  have  to  part  with  his  dear  friend  Eepentance  as  he  went 
through  the  gate.  [Ibid. )  A  repentance  not  so  earnest  as  it  seems : — The  gondoliers 
at  Venice,  when  we  were  sojourning  in  that  queen  of  the  Adriatic,  frequently 
VOL.   I,  15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

quarrelled  with  each  other,  and  used  such  high  words  and  ferocious  gestures  that 
we  were  afraid  murder  would  come  of  it ;  vet  they  never  came  to  blows,  it  was 
only  their  rough  way  of  disputing.  Often  and  often  ijave  we  heard  men  upbraiding 
themselves  for  their  sins,  and  crying  out  against  the  evil  which  their  follies  have 
wrought  them,  yet  these  very  people  have  continued  in  their  transgressions,  and  have 
even  gone  from  bad  to  worse.  They  barked  too  much  at  sin  to  fall  to  and  destroy 
it.  Their  enmity  to  evil  was  mere  feigning ;  like  the  sword-play  of  the  stage, 
which  looks  like  earnest  fight,  but  no  wounds  are  given  or  received.  Let  those 
who  play  at  repentance  remember  that  they  who  repent  in  mimicry  shall 
go  to  hell  in  reality.  {Ibid.)  Legal  and  evangelical  repentance  : — There  is 
many  a  wounded  conscience  that  is  wounded  like  a  sheet  of  ice  shivered  on  the 
pavement,  which  yet  is  stiff  and  cold.  But  let  the  sun  shiAie  forth,  and  the  ice  is 
melted,  and  melted  completely ;  so  is  it  with  legal  and  evangelical  repentance. 
For  the  remission  of  sins. — Remission  by  God  only  : — As  the  prince  or  ruler 
only  has  power  to  pardon  treason  in  his  subjects,  so  God  only  has  power  to 
forgive  sin.  As  no  man  can  forgive  a  debt  but  the  creditor  to  whom  the 
debt  is  due,  so  God  only  can  forgive  us  our  debts,  whose  debtors  we  are 
to   an  incalculable   amount.  Remission   for  the  greatest  sinners  : — There  was 

once  a  man  who  was  a  very  great  sinner,  and  for  his  horrible  wickedness  was  put 
to  death  in  the  town  of  Ayr.  This  man  had  been  so  stupid  and  brutish  a  fellow, 
that  all  who  knew  him  thought  him  beyond  the  reach  of  all  ordinary  means  of' 
grace  ;  but  while  the  man  was  in  prison  the  Lord  wonderfully  wrought  on  his 
heart,  and  in  such  a  measure  discovered  to  him  his  sinfulness,  that,  after  much 
serious  exercise  and  sore  wrestling,  a  most  kindly  work  of  repentance  followed,  with 
great  assurance  of  mercy,  insomuch  that  when  he  came  to  the  place  of  execution 
he  could  not  cease  crying  out  to  the  people,  under  the  sense  of  pardon  and  the 
comforts  of  the  presence  and  favour  of  God,  "  Oh,  He  is  a  great  forgiverl  He  is  a 
great  forgiver  !  "  And  he  added  the  following  words,  "  Now  hath  perfect  love  cast 
out  fear.  I  know  God  hath  nothing  to  lay  against  me,  for  Jesus  Christ  hath  paid 
all;  and  those  are  free  whom  the  Son  makes  free."  (J.  Fleming.)  Remission 
gives  confidence  under  the  accusations  of  the  law  : — A  man  was  once  being  tried  for 
a  crime,  the  punishment  of  which  was  death.  The  witnesses  came  in  one  by  one, 
and  testified  to  his  guilt ;  but  there  he  stood,  quite  calm  and  unmoved.  The  judge 
and  the  jury  were  quite  surprised  at  his  indifference ;  they  could  not  understand 
how  he  could  take  such  a  serious  matter  so  calmly.  When  the  jury  retired,  it  did 
not  take  them  many  minutes  to  decide  on  the  verdict  "  Guilty  "  ;  and  when  the 
judge  was  passing  the  sentence  of  death  upon  the  criminal  he  told  him  how  sur- 
prised he  was  that  he  could  be  so  unmoved  in  the  prospect  of  death.  When  the 
judge  had  finished  the  man  put  his  hand  in  his  bosom,  pulled  out  a  document, 
and  walked  out  of  the  dock  a  free  man.  Ah,  that  was  how  he  could  be  so 
calm ;  it  was  a  free  pardon  from  his  king,  which  he  had  in  his  pocket  all 
the  time.  The  king  had  instructed  him  to  allow  the  trial  to  proceed,  and 
to  produce  the  pardon  only  when  he  was  condemned.  Now,  that  is  just 
what  will  make  us  joyful  in  the  great  day  of  judgment ;  we  have  got  a  pardon 
from  the  Great  King,  and  it  is  sealed  with  the  blood  of  His  Son.  (D.  L.  Moody.) 
And  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.— T/)e  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;— 1. 
Among  the  various  reasonable  grounds  and  ends  of  observing  festival  solemnities, 
the  principal  are  these  :  (1)  The  occasion  which  they  afford  to  instruct  our- 
selves and  others  in  the  mysterious  doctrines  of  our  religion.  (2)  The  engaging  us 
seasonably  to  practise  that  great  duty  to  God,  the  remembering  and  praising  Him 
for  His  great  favours  and  mercies.  2.  For  these  purposes  chiefly  did  God  Himself 
appoint  the  Jewish  festivals  :  e.g.,  the  Passover.  In  compliance  with  which  design 
the  Christian  Church  has  recommended  to  her  children  the  observation  of  her  chief 
festivals,  continuing  the  time  and  name,  though  changing  or  improving  the  matter 
and  reason  of  those  ancient  ones.  The  effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost  corresponded  with  the  time  when  the  Jews  were  obliged  to  "  rejoice 
before  the  Lord,"  for  the  harvest  newly  gathered  in,  and  the  earth's  good  fruits 
bestowed  on  them;  and  then  did  God  bountifully  impart  the  first-fruits  of  His  Holy 
Spirit.  The  benefit,  therefore,  and  blessing,  which  at  this  time  we  are  bound  to 
commemorate,  is  in  effect  the  pubHcation  and  establishment  of  the  evangelical 
covenant,  the  foundation  of  all  our  hopes,  and  claims  to  happiness  ;  but  more 
immediately  and  directly — I.  The  donation  of  the  Holt  Spikit  to  the  Chkistian 
Church,  and  to  all  its  members.  1.  God's  gracious  design  was  to  reclaim  man- 
kind from  their  ignoraxice,  errors,  and  sins,  and  to  reconcile  them  to  Himself  by 


«HAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  227 

the  mediation  of  His  Son,  whom  He  sent  to  instruct  them  in  their  duty.  2.  To 
render  this  successful  according  to  the  capacities  of  human  nature,  it  was  requisite 
to  provide  convincing  arguments  to  persuade  men  of  the  truth  of  these  things ; 
means  to  excite  their  attention  to  them ;  motives  to  accept  them ;  and  a  power  also 
to  retain  them  firm  in  their  belief,  and  uphold  them  in  the  performance  of  the  con- 
ditions required.  3.  To  prevent,  therefore,  the  disappointment  of  His  merciful 
intentions,  God  to  the  ministry  of  His  eternal  wisdom  adjoined  the  efficacy  of  His 
eternal  love  and  blessed  Spirit,  the  which  not  only  conducted  our  Divine  Saviour 
into  His  earthly  tabernacle,  but  did  continually  reside  with  Him,  and  attend  Him 
in  the  performance  of  His  miraculous  works,  attesting  the  truth  of  His  quality, 
commission,  and  doctrine,  and  exciting  men  to  notice  these  things.  Nay,  fartlier, 
to  induce  them  to  comply  with  these  gracious  overtures.  He  faithfully  promised  that 
He  would  impart  the  same  blessed  Spirit,  as  the  continual  guide  and  comforter  of 
aU  who  should  sincerely  embrace  them,  and  conform  their  lives  to  His  righteous 
laws.  4.  Now  although  the  natural  and  ordinary  manner  of  this  Divine  Spirit's 
operation  is  not  by  violent  and  sensible  impressions,  but  rather  in  way  of  imper- 
ceptible penetration,  hardly  discovering  itself  except  by  its  results ;  and  though  its 
proper  and  principal  effects  relate  to  the  furthering  our  performance  of  the  condi- 
tions of  our  salvation  ;  yet  more  fully  to  satisfy  the  doubtful,  confound  the  obsti- 
nate, and  confirm  the  faithful,  God  was  pleased,  after  our  Lord's  ascension,  to  dis- 
pense both  to  teachers  and  disciples  more  liberal  and  extraordinary  communication 
of  that  Holy  Spirit,  attended  with  wonderful  effects.  5.  The  Christian  Church 
therefore  obliges  us  at  this  time  to  commemorate  that  incomparable  gift,  then  con- 
ferred more  visibly  on  the  Church,  and  still  really  bestowed  on  every  particular 
member  who  is  duly  incorporated  into  it.  It  is  so  bestowed,  that  is,  on  each 
member  ;  for  the  evangelical  covenant  extends  to  every  Christian,  and  a  principal 
ingredient  thereof  is  the  collation  of  this  Spirit.  This  is  the  teaching  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture, the  doctrine  constantly,  and  with  very  general  consent  delivered  down  in  the 
Cathohc  Church.  II.  The  worth  and  excellency  of  this  Divine  gift.  That 
it  is  transcendently  valuable,  we  may  hence  generally  collect ;  that  even  in  our 
Lord's  esteem  it  did  not  only  countervail,  but  in  a  manner  surmount  the  benefit  of 
His  presence.  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away,"  &c.  But  to  take  a  more 
distinct  survey  of  its  benefits.  1.  We  owe  to  the  Holy  Spirit  our  spiritual  state  and 
being;  our  spiritual  life,  freedom,  and  honourable  condition.  (!)  By  virtue  of  this 
*'  quickening  Spirit  "  we  are  raised  from  death  to  an  immortal  state  of  life,  being 
"quickened  together  with  Christ."  (2)  We  are  enfranchised  from  intolerable 
slavery,  from  "  the  spirit  of  bondage  unto  fear,"  &c.  (3)  We  are  also  advanced  to 
an  honourable  condition,  ennobled  with  illustrious  relations,  and  entitled  to  glorious 
privileges  :  for  thence  "we  have  access  unto  the  Father,  and  are  no  more  strangers, 
but  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God."  2.  Neither  only 
relatively  and  extrinsically  is  our  estate  thus  bettered,  but  we  ourselves  are 
answerably  changed  and  amended  by  the  same  Holy  Spirit ;  being  "  renewed  in 
the  spirit  of  our  mind";  becoming  "  new  creatures,  created  according  to  God  in 
righteousness."  Such  doctrines,  as  that  our  happiness  consists  not  in  affluence  of 
temporal  enjoyments,  but  in  a  disposition  of  mind  curbing  our  appetites  and  quell- 
ing our  passions  ;  in  conformity  of  practice  to  rules  distasteful  to  our  sense ;  in 
gaining  and  retaining  the  love  of  an  Infinite  Being  ;  that  naked  goodness  is  to  be 
preferred  before  all  the  pomp  and  glory  of  this  world,  &c. ;  such  doctrines  are 
indeed  hard  and  harsh  to  us,  absurd  to  our  natural  conceits,  and  abominable  to  our 
carnal  minds  :  of  our  own  accord,  without  Divine  attraction,  we  never  should  come 
to  Christ.  His  own  disciples  struggled  against  such  doctrines,  and  without  the  aid 
of  the  Spirit  would  scarcely  have  admitted  many  evangelical  truths.  As  for  the 
mighty  sages  of  the  world,  "  the  wise  men  according  to  the  flesh,"  they  were  far 
more  ready  to  deride  than  to  admit  them.  Though  some  few  sparks  of  Divine 
knowledge  may  have  been  driven  out  by  rational  consideration  and  philosophical 
study,  yet  no  external  instruction,  no  interior  discourse,  could  remove  the  mists  of 
ignorance,  and  awaken  the  lethargic  stupidity  of  their  souls.  Thus  is  the  light  of 
spiritual  knowledge,  together  with  a  temper  of  mind  disposed  to  receive  it,  com- 
municated by  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  farther  than  this,  by  the  same  Divine  power  is 
imparted  vital  heat  and  vigour,  active  strength  and  courage.  Though  our  spirit 
should  be  willing,  yet  our  flesh  is  weak  :  knowledge  therefore  and  willingness  to  do 
good  are  not  alone  sufficient.  3.  The  continued  subsistence  and  preservation  of 
our  spiritual  being,  and  active  powers,  the  actual  use  and  exercise  of  them,  all  our 
discreet  conduct,  all  our  good  practice,  rely  on  the  Holy  Spirit.     It  is  true  of  our 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [cHAP.n. 

spiritual  no  less  than  of  our  natural  life ;  "  if  He  doth  avert  His  face  we  are 
troubled,"  &c.  On  all  occasions  we  need  His  direction,  aid,  and  comfort;  for  "the 
way  of  man  is  not  in  himself,"  &c.  We  are  vain  and  ficlde  in  our  purposes,  slow 
in  our  proceedings ;  apt  to  faint  and  stumble  in  our  practice  ;  we  need  therefore 
this  sure  oracle  and  faithful  friend,  to  guide,  encourage,  and  support  us  ;  to  guard 
us  in  trials  ;  comfort  us  in  afflictions  ;  and  impart  to  us  joy  unspeakable  in 
believing  and  weU-doing.  So  many  and  great  are  the  blessings  which  He  imparts 
to  us.  Conclusion.  1.  Let  us  earnestly  invite  this  Holy  Guest  unto  us,  by  our 
prayers  unto  Him,  who  hath  promised  to  bestow  His  Spirit  on  those  which  ask  it, 
to  impart  this  living  stream  to  every  one  which  thirsteth  after  it.  2.  Let  us 
willingly  receive  Him  into  our  hearts,  let  us  treat  Him  with  all  kind  usage,  with  all 
humble  observance.  Let  us  not  exclude  Him  by  supine  neglect,  or  rude  resistance; 
let  us  not  grieve  Him  by  our  perverse  and  froward  behaviour  towards  Him  ;  let  us 
not  tempt  Him  by  our  fond  presumptions,  or  base  treacheries  :  let  us  not  quench 
His  heavenly  light  and  heat  by  our  foul  lusts  and  passions  :  but  let  us  admit  gladly 
His  gentle  illapses  ;  let  us  hearken  to  His  faitliful  suggestions  ;  let  us  comply  with 
His  kindly  motions  ;  let  us  demean  ourselves  modestly,  consistently,  and  officiously 
toward  Him.  (J.  Barrow,  D.D.)  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  : — I.  The  Holy 
Spirit  is  given  to  renew  and  ptjbify  the  moral  feelings.  He  awakens 
the  conscience  to  a  sense  of  guilt  and  danger.  He  opens  the  eyes  to  see 
the  exhalted  purity  of  the  moral  law,  and  to  feel  the  justice  of  its  righteous 
condemnation.  He  affects  the  heart  with  the  tidings  of  a  Saviour's  love, 
and  creates  within  the  soul  that  godly  sorrow  which  worketh  repentance  to 
salvation,  needing  not  to  be  repented  of.  The  work  thus  begun  in  the  soul  is 
carried  on  through  the  same  Divine  agency,  for  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Sanctifier  of 
all  the  elect  people  of  God.  It  is  through  Him  that  we  die  daily  unto  sin  and  live  unto 
righteousness,  that  the  old  man  with  his  corrupt  deeds  is  put  off,  and  that  the  new 
man  is  put  on,  which,  after  God,  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  Nor 
are  these  the  only  influences  which  the  Holy  Spirit  exerts  on  man's  moral  nature. 
Our  Lord  has  promised  that  He  shall  be  present  with  His  people  under  the  en- 
dearing character  of  the  Comforter.  It  is  His  special  work  to  heal  the  broken- 
hearted, to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised,  and  to  comfort  all  that  mourn.  11. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  given  to  enlighten  and  govern  the  intellectual  powers.  It 
should  never  be  forgotten  that  the  Spirit  bestowed  upon  the  first  disciples  was  "  the 
Spirit  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind  " ;  and  that  He  is  promised  to 
us  also  for  these  great  ends  that  we  may  attain  to  a  right  judgment  in  ail  things, 
and  have  power  to  accomplish  the  will  of  God.  It  is  thus  that  man  is  to  present 
himself  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  to  God,  and  is  to  become  a  temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  consecrated  in  aU  his  faculties  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  yielding 
the  powers  of  his  mind,  the  energies  of  his  body,  and  tbe  affections  of  his  heart, 
■  to  the  service  of  Him  who  is  the  Creator,  the  Eedeemer,  and  the  Preserver  of  men, 
and  to  whom  alone  all  honour,  and  power,  and  glory  belong.     (IF.  Niven,  B.D.) 

Ver.  39.  For  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children. — Why  Christianity 
has  failed : — 1.  One  of  the  earliest  and  most  vital  errors  into  which  the  Church  fell 
was  the  conception  that  the  Church's  power  is  proportionate  to  her  wealth.  2.  The 
second  great  error  of  the  Church  was  made  when  it  began  to  depend  upon  political 
power  as  a  means  of  effecting  spiritual  ends.  3.  The  third  great  error  which  has 
delayed  the  realisation  of  the  blessings  of  Pentecost  by  the  Universal  Church  has 
been  the  conception  that  education  and  culture  could  do  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Let  us  consider  briefly  what  were  the  different  features  foreshadowed  in 
this  promise.  1.  First  and  foremost,  undoubtedly,  was  what  we  may  term  evange- 
listic power,  the  power  of  leading  men  to  Christ,  of  so  influencing  them  that  they 
should  abandon  their  sins  and  put  their  trust  in  a  crucified  Redeemer.  2.  Closely 
allied  with  this  element  in  the  promise,  and  yet  distinct  from  it,  is  the  power  of 
conquest  which  it  involves.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact — in  many  respects  an  incom- 
prehensible fact — that  Judaism,  with  all  its  great  revelations  of  the  truth,  with  all 
its  wonderful  striving  after  righteousness  and  its  profound  reverence  for  the  unity 
of  the  Godhead,  nevertheless,  was  by  no  means  an  aggressive  religious  force,  and 
its  converts  at  no  time  in  its  history  were  an  important  factor  in  its  life.  Moham- 
medanism spread  by  the  power  of  the  sword,  and  owed  its  victory  to  material, 
rather  than  to  spiritual  causes.  Christianity,  on  the  other  hand,  has  ever  spread, 
and  wijt  continue  to  spread,  in  virtue  of  a  special  power  bestowed  upon  its  apostles 
in  answer  to  believing  prayer.    3.  The  next  element  in  the  promise  is  the  element 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  ACTS.  229 

of  boldness.  4.  It  only  remains,  in  concluding  our  consideration  of  this  subject,  to 
point  out  with  all  emphasis  that  this  promise  was  not  limited  to  the  apostles  and 
their  proximate  or  remote  successors.  (H.  S.  Lunn.)  The  three  covenunts  : — I. 
The  NATIONAL  covenant,  "to  you."  II.  The  family  covenant,  "  to  your  children." 
III.  The  UNIVERSAL  covenant,  "to  as  many,"  <fec.  How  wide  was  the  outlook  of 
the  gospel  upon  the  day  of  Pentecost.  {M.  C.  Hazard.)  The  promise  of  the  Holy 
Ghost: — Every  dispensation  has  its  present  duties  and  privileges:  it  has  also  its 
peculiar  promise  ;  and  according  as  men  have  apprehended  the  promise  and  the 
privileges,  has  been  the  ardour  of  their  devotion.  1.  In  the  patriarchal  dispensa- 
tion men  had  the  privilege  of  presenting  to  God  an  accepted  service,  and  living 
under  His  guidance  and  protection.  But  their  promise  was  that  the  seed  of  Jacob 
should  inherit  the  land  of  Canaan.  2.  After  the  chosen  people  had  been  brought 
into  their  possession  they  were  blessed  with  the  privileges  of  the  Mosaic  code,  and 
God  gave  them  the  promise  of  the  Messiah.  It  was  the  privilege  of  the  Israelite  to 
take  part  in  the  worship  of  God  with  the  feeling  of  holy  anticipation  that  He  would 
come  whom  their  rites  symbolised.  3.  When  Christ  came  He  said  that  the  privi- 
leges of  His  disciples  were  greater  than  those  of  the  greatest  man  of  the  former  dis- 
pensation, and  gave  them  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  the  last  promise 
characteristic  of  the  last  times  ;  beyond  this  dispensation  there  will  be  no  other, 
and  its  promise  will  be  succeeded  by  no  other.  Notice — I.  Its  nature.  It  implies 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  be  given.  1.  For  the  of3ficial  qualification  of  the 
preacher.  The  words  suggest  the  exclusive  power  and  right  of  Divine  selection. 
"  I  will  pour  out  ...  of  My  Spirit."  The  selection  includes  teachers  of  different 
grades  in  society  and  of  both  sexes.  And  for  their  qualification  the  Spirit  is  abso- 
lutely necessary.  It  is  universally  recognised  that  whatever  else  a  man  may  possess, 
talent,  power,  wealth,  or  learning,  he  must  possess  the  Spirit.  This  was  taught  by 
Ghrist  when  He  said,  "  Tarry  ye  at  Jerusalem,"  &c.  (1)  The  Spirit  was  to  give 
them  correct  views  of  truth,  "  He  will  guide  you  into  all  truth."  These  right  views 
are  necessary  to  preserve  men  from  heresy.  All  revivals  in  the  history  of  the 
Church  liave  been  connected  with  the  revival  of  spiritual  truth.  Witness  Pente- 
cost, Luther,  the  Puritans,  Wesley,  (fee.  The  Word  of  God  comes  out  with  clear- 
ness and  power,  and  error  recedes  before  it.  (2)  Something  more,  however,  is 
needed  than  to  be  saved  from  heresy.  The  teacher  must  have  spiritual  views  in 
relation  to  the  Word  of  God  such  as  those  suggested  by  the  expressions,  "lively 
■word,"  "the  lively  oracles,"  "  the  unction  of  the  Holy  One."  A  man  must  not 
speak  merely  in  a  way  free  from  inaccuracy  ;  but  his  words  must  be  clothed  with 
energy  breathed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  that  wbeiever  they  come  they  may  com- 
municate that  power.  (3)  The  affections  must  be  touched.  'J  here  must  be  a 
yearning  for  souls  which  will  not  let  the  preacher  rest  unless  they  are  brought  to 
God.  (4)  The  Holy  Ghost  is  necessary  for  the  resistance  of  unworthy  motives 
such  as  would  lead  men  to  court  popularity  and  indulge  spiritual  pride.  (5)  He 
only  again  is  an  effectual  preservative  against  bigotry.  2.  To  dispose  the  heart  of 
the  hearer  to  deiive  full  advantage  from  spiritual  teaching.  He  (1)  convinces  of 
sin.  (2)  Inspires  living  faiih.  (3)  Eegenerates.  (4)  Bears  witness  to  the  believer's 
adoption  into  God's  family.  (5)  Preserves  from  sinning.  (G)  Sanctities.  (7) 
Consoles.  (8)  Guides.  II.  Its  extent.  1.  "  To  you."  All  piety  is  out  of  place  if 
it  be  not  first  of  all  practised  at  home.  Your  own  salvation  is  of  more  importance 
to  you  than  that  of  any  one  else.  To  save  others  and  after  all  be  lost  yourself 
would  greatly  aggravate  your  misery.  2.  "  To  your  children."  These,  next  to 
yourself,  should  claim  your  most  earnest  attention.  The  man  who  devotes  himself 
to  others  and  neglects  his  own  family  inverts  the  order  of  things.  It  is  a  monstrous 
evil  to  be  engaged  from  early  Sunday  morning  to  late  at  night  in  a  constant  suc- 
cession of  services,  and  to  have  not  a  single  half-hour  to  spare  for  one's  own  chil- 
dren. 3.  "  To  them  that  are  afar  off."  (1)  Morally.  (2)  Geographically.  (3) 
Chronologically.  (S.  D.  Waddy,  D.D.)  Christianity  a  religion  of  promise : — 
I.  The  PROsnsE  spoken  of.  1,  The  promise  of  Christ  which  includes — (1)  The 
remission  of  sins  through  His  atonement  and  merit.  (2)  Full  justification.  (3) 
Peace  with  God  and  our  own  conscience,  "Christ  is  our  peace."  (4)  Adoption 
into  the  family  of  God.  (5)  Eternal  life.  Think  of  these  and  other  like  blessings, 
and  their  connected  hopes  and  consolations,  and  behold  them  all  centred  in 
Christ,  Himself  the  great  promise  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  then  rejoice  to  receive 
Him  for  yourselves,  and  to  recommend  Him  to  others  as  the  promise  of  revelation, 
the  desire  of  all  nations,  and  the  consolation  of  Israel.  2.  As  Christ  was  pre- 
eminently the  promise  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  pre-eminently  the 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

promise  of  the  New.     We  are  not  to  look  for  that  miraculous  agency  which  was 
given  in  apostolic  days.     This  was  not  even  then   intended  to  supersede   that 
ordinary  gracious  influence,  which  the  Scripture  declares  to  be  essential  to  every 
one  for  the  state  of  salvation.     "If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  he  is 
none  of  His  " — "  Except  a  man  be  born  again  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,"  &c.     Our 
Lord  speaks  of  sending  the  Spirit  as  the  promise  of  the  Father.     No  promise  can 
be  more  plainly  expressed  than  this,  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  have  " ;  and  it  is  in  refe- 
rence to  the  Holy  Spirit  that  this  promise  is  given.     Christianity  is  the  very  dis- 
pensation of  the  Spirit ;  its  whole  life,  energy,  and  beauty  depend  on  the  commu- 
nication of  spiritual  influence.     The  promise  of  the  Spirit,  like  that  of  the  Saviour, 
includes  many  other  promises.     (1)  Repentance.     (2)  Faith.     (3)  A  new  heart  and 
a  right  spirit.     (4)  Strength  in  every  season  of  weakness.     (5)  Comfort  in  every 
trial.     (6)  Joy  amidst  sorrow.     (7)  Patience  under  tribulation.     (8)  Perseverance 
amidst  difficulty.     Christianity  is  throughout  a  religion  of  promise.     It  began  with 
the  first  promise  to  fallen  man  ;  its  promises  expanded,  like  the  stream  of  holy 
waters  in  the  vision  of  Ezekiel,  till,  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  they  formed 
that  river  of  life  which  is  rolling  its  salubrious  tide  throughout  a  thirsty  world. 
II.  For  whom  is  the  promise  meant  ?    1.  The  Jews ;  for  St.  Peter's  auditory  con- 
sisted entirely  of  Jews.     Our  Lord  confined  His  personal  ministry  to  the  Jews.     "  I 
am  not  sent,"  He  said,  "but  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel."     Sending 
forth  His  apostles  at  first.  He  said,  "Go  not  in  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,"  &c. 
After  His  resurrection,  when  He  enlarged  their  commission,  so  that  its  extent  was 
to  be  the  world,  yet  they  were  still  to  begin  at  Jerusalem  ;  and  in  every  city  were 
first  to  address  Jews,  a-nd  then  to  turn  to  the  Gentiles.    And  is  there  not  encourage- 
ment for  us,  from  the  circumstance,  that  the  Jews  were  to  have  the  first  offers  of 
the  promises  of  the  gospel  ?     There  is  this  ;  the  history  of  the  Jews  is  a  history  of 
a  most  perverse,  ungrateful,  and  rebellious  people,  who  at  length  consummated 
their  guilt  by  crucifying  the  Lord  of  life  ;  yet  to  them  first  was  the  promise  sent. 
Now  surely  that  fact  speaks  volumes  as  to  the  freeness  of  the  promise,  as  to  the 
mercy  of  our  God,  as  to  the  efficacy  of  the  Redeemer's  merits.     2.  "  The  promise 
is  unto  you."     If  these  brought  joy  home  to  the  hearts  of  the  Jews  who  heard  the 
apostle,  then  surely  His  next  words,  "And  to  your  children,"  must  have  touched 
another  like  chord,  or  rather,  the  same  chord  over  again ;  for  hard  must  be  that 
parent's  heart  that  does  not  rejoice  quite  as  much  in  benefit  to  his  children  as  in 
benefit  to  himself.     Christianity  most  fully  recognises  that  principle  of   natural 
affection,  which  the  God  of  nature  implanted  in  breasts  of  parents.     The  God  of 
nature  and  the  God  of  grace  is  one  and  the  same.     No  sooner  do  parents  discover 
the  promise  sent  to  themselves,  than  it  says  to  them,  I  am  sent  unto  you  and  to 
your  children,  introduce  me  to  them,  and  them  to  me.     I  come  to  tell  them  that 
their  father's  God  is  willing  to  be  their  God  also.     It  is  remarkable  how  the  Scrip- 
tures throughout  encourage  the  promotion  of  the  training  up  of  children  in  the 
knowledge  and  belief  of  the  promises  of  God.     For  tbis  Abraham  was  bo  com- 
mended, "  For  I  know  him,  that  he  will  command  his  children,"  &c.     This  was 
the  determination  of  Josbua.     "  Let  others  choose  as  they  may,  as  for  me  and  my 
house  we  will  serve  the  Lord."     This  was  the  lamentation  of  David.     "  Although 
this  mine  house  be  not  so  with  God."     This  was  the  pious  study  of  the  ancient 
Lois,  and  the  maternal  anxiety  of  Eunice,  to  train  young  Timothy  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  Scriptures,  which  were  able  to  make  him  wise  unto  salvation.     This  again 
was  the  care  of  Lydia,  whose  heart  the  Lord  op:-ned  to  attend  to  the  things  spoken 
by  Paul,  immediately  after  to  have  them  addressed  to  her  household  also.     The 
same  was  the  effect  on  the  jailer.     Thus  these  examples  from  the  Old  and  New 
Testament  show  that  God  encourages  efforts  to  make  known  His  promises  to  the 
young.     What,  then,  can  we  think  of  parents  who  are  anxious  enough  that  their 
children  should  be  well  off  for  this  world,  should  be  accomphshed,  or  learned,  or 
rich — should  form  good  connections,  shine  and  sparkle  in  society,  be  admired  and 
venerated  in  this  world,  but  who  have  no  care  for  their  safety  and  happiness  in  the 
next  ?     3.  •'  To  all  that  are  afar  off,"  this  means  the  Gentiles.     St.  Paul,  writing  to 
Ephesians,  gives  the  very  best  comment  on  these  words  of  St.  Peter,  "  Wherefore 
remember,  that  ye  being  in  time  past  Gentiles  in  the  flesh,"  &c.    Thus  the  Gentiles 
afar  off  from  God,  from  peace,  from  hope,  and  from  salvation  :  but  Christ  hath 
broken  down  the  middle  wall  of  partition  between  Jew  and  Gentile.     The  same 
God  over  all,  is  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  Him.     The  same  promise  which 
sounded  in  the  ears  of  the  three  thousand  Jews  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  is  now  gone 
forth  to  the  ends  of  the  world.    It  is  the  voice  of  the  good  Shepherd  seeking  after 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  231 

His  lost  sheep ;  and  is  the  promise  of  Himself  and  His  Spirit  to  give  us  a  full  salva- 
tion. This  promise  is  to  be  addressed  to  all ;  it  has  a  message  to  every  human 
being;  and  yet,  though  the  outward  call  is  thus  general  and  universal,  our  text 
adds,  4.  "  Even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call."  Hence  it  is  necessary  well 
to  understand,  that  beside  the  general  call  to  be  addressed  to  all,  there  must  be  the 
gracious  and  effectual  calling  of  God.  What  the  minister  speaks  to  the  ear,  God 
speaks  to  the  heart.  The  general  call  is  so  large,  so  rich,  and  so  free,  as  to  leave 
all  without  excuse  who  rest  in  the  mere  hearing  of  it  with  the  ear,  and  do  not  seek 
to  enter  into  it  with  their  souls.  The  general  call  should  stir  us  up  to  pray  much 
for  the  gracious  call.  (J.  Hambleton,  M.A.)  The  children  may  be  converted: — 
There  was  in  my  ancestral  line  an  incident  so  strangely  impressive  that  it  seems 
more  like  romance  than  reality.  It  has  sometimes  been  so  inaccurately  put  forth 
that  I  now  give  you  the  true  incident.  My  grandfather  and  grandmother,  living  at 
Somerville,  New  Jersey,  went  to  Baskingridge  to  witness  a  revival,  under  the 
ministry  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Fiuney.  They  came  home  so  impressed  with  what  they 
had  seen  that  they  resolved  on  the  salvation  of  their  children.  The  young  people 
of  the  house  were  to  go  off  for  an  evening  party,  and  my  grandmother  said,  "Now, 
when  you  are  all  ready  for  the  party  come  to  my  room,  for  I  have  something  very 
important  to  tell  you."  All  ready  for  departure,  they  came  to  her  room,  and  she 
said  to  them,  "  Now,  I  want  you  to  remember,  while  you  are  away  this  evening, 
that  I  am  all  the  time  in  this  room  praying  for  your  salvation,  and  I  shall  not  cease 
praying  until  you  get  back."  The  young  people  went  to  the  party,  but  amid  the 
loudest  hilarities  of  the  night  they  could  not  forget  that  their  mother  was  praying 
for  them.  The  evening  passed,  and  the  night  passed.  The  next  day  my  grand- 
parents heard  an  outcry  in  an  adjoining  room,  and  they  went  in  and  found  their 
daughter  imploring  the  salvation  of  the  gospel.  The  daughter  told  them  that  her 
brothers  were  at  the  barn  and  at  the  waggon-house  under  powerful  conviction  for 
sin.  They  went  to  the  barn.  They  found  my  uncle  Jehiah,  who  afterwards 
became  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  crying  to  God  for  mercy.  They  went  to  the 
waggon-house.  They  found  their  son  David,  who  afterwards  became  my  father, 
imploring  God's  pardon  and  mercy.  Before  a  great  while  the  whole  family  were 
saved ;  and  David  went  and  told  the  story  to  a  young  woman  to  whom  he  was 
affianced,  who,  as  a  result  of  the  story,  became  a  Christian,  and  from  her  own  hps 
— my  mother — I  have  received  the  incidents.  The  story  of  that  converted  house- 
hold ran  through  all  the  neighbourhood,  from  family  to  family,  until  the  whole 
region  was  whehned  with  religious  awakening,  and  at  the  next  communion  in  the 
village  church  at  Somerville  over  two  hundred  souls  stood  up  to  profess  the  faith 
of  the  gospel.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  As  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall 
call. — Effectual  calling: — From  whence  observe — I.  That  all  men  till  called 
BY  God  aee  afar  off  from  Him.  1.  In  regard  of  the  knowledge  of  God  in  a 
true  and  saving  wa^'.  They  are  as  little  children,  no  more  apprehensive  in  a  right 
manner  of  God  than  the  children  in  the  dark  are  perceiving  of  the  things  of  reason. 
Even  Christians  by  birth  are  also  far  off  from  God  till  they  have  this  spiritual 
eye-salve  ;  and  therefore  in  two  respects  men  may  be  said  to  be  far  off  from  God. 
(1)  First,  both  in  respect  of  inward  grace  and  the  outward  means  of  salvation;  and 
thus  all  the  heathenish  jDart  of  the  world  is  afar  off  God.  (2)  Or  secondly,  in  respect 
of  the  inward  grace  only.  When  men  do  enjoy  the  outward  means  of  salvation, 
and  in  this  sense  of  their  duties  are  said  to  draw  nigh  to  God,  but  in  respect  of  any 
saving  work  of  grace  are  as  far  ofif  as  heathens  and  pagans  ;  and  this  is  the  con- 
dition, as  is  to  be  feared,  of  many  thousands.  They  are  nigh  God  in  respect  of  the 
Christian  faith  they  profess  in  respect  of  the  duties  and  ordinancies  they  exercise 
themselves  in,  but  in  respect  of  their  affections  and  heart,  so  they  are  at  as  great 
distance  from  God  and  His  holy  ways  as  heathen  and  publicans.  This  distinction 
must  be  attended  unto,  that  we  do  not  vainly  deceive  ourselves  as  the  Jews  did 
with  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  2.  In  respect  of  God's 
special  and  gracious  love  to  justify  their  persons  to  pardon  their  sins.  Do  not 
thou  please  thyself  with  the  thought  that  thou  hast  free  access  to  the  presence  and 
into  the  favour  of  great  ones  on  earth  ;  for  if  thou  art  far  off  from  God,  if  He  re- 
gard thee  not,  if  His  displeasure  be  towards  thee,  thou  art  in  the  state  of  gall  and 
wormwood.  3.  We  are  by  nature  afar  off  from  Christ  the  Mediator  between  God 
and  man.  And  this  indeed  is  the  foundation  of  all  calamity ;  for  as  in  Christ  we 
are  blessed  with  all  heavenly  blessings,  so  without  Him  we  are  cursed  with  all 
spiritual  and  temporal  curses.  4.  Such  as  are  afar  off  have  no  hope.  They  are 
a  hopeless  people ;  which  way  soever  they  look  everything  curseth  and  condemneth 


232 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 


them ;  and  no  marvel,  for,  if  without  the  promise,  they  have  not  the  ground  of 
hope,  and  if  without  Christ,  the  object  of  hope.  5.  Such  are  afar  off  in  respect  of 
God  and  an  universal  constant  obedience  to  His  holy  will.  As  God  loveth  not 
them,  so  neither  do  they  love  God.  As  God  is  not  gracious  in  His  promises  to 
them,  so  neither  are  they  obedient  to  His  precepts.  II.  That  not  all  of  mankind, 
BUT  some  only,  doth  God  call  with  a  loving  call.  The  apostle  plainly  makes  a 
difference  of  these  that  are  afar  off,  and  this  only  to  come  from  God;  some  are  so 
afar  off  that  they  never  hear  the  voice  of  God  in  the  Word  calling  them  to  repent 
and  believe  in  Christ.  Others  again  have  salvation  brought  unto  their  house  ;  and 
if  thou  ask  why  God  calls  such  and  not  others,  do  not  curiously  pry  in  this  mys- 
tery ;  God's  ways  are  just,  even  when  they  are  hidden  to  us.  Too  much  gazing  on 
this  Sun  may  quickly  blind  us.  1.  That  there  is  a  general  and  common  invitation 
even  of  all  in  the  world  by  God  ;  and  there  is  a  special  gracious  one.  The  former 
invitation  is  by  the  creatures,  by  the  works  of  God.  (1)  This  invitatioA  and  call 
by  the  creatures  doth  not  nor  cannot  reveal  anything  of  Christ,  the  only  cause  of 
salvation.  (2)  The  call  by  the  creatures  is  not  saving,  because  it  discovers  not  the 
way  of  salvation  no  more  than  the  cause — viz.,  faith.  (3)  This  call  could  not  be 
saving,  for  the  farthest  and  utmost  effect  it  had  upon  men  was  only  outwardly  to 
reform  their  lives.  But  you  may  say,  To  what  purpose  is  this  call  of  God  by  the 
creatures  and  the  work  of  His  providence,  if  it  be  not  to  salvation  ?  Yes,  it  is  much 
every  way.  (a)  Hereby  even  all  men  are  made  inexcusable.  (&)  God's  purpose  in 
these  calls  is  to  restrain  sin  and  to  draw  men  on  further  than  they  do.  There  is  no 
man  that  hath  no  more  than  this  remote  and  confused  call  that  doth  what  he  may 
do  and  can  do.  He  doth  not  improve,  no,  not  that  natural  strength  that  is  in  him. 
I  do  not  say  to  spiritual  good  things  ;  for  so  he  hath  no  natural  strength,  but  to 
such  objects  as  by  nature  he  might.  He  wilfully  runneth  himself  in  the  commit- 
ing  of  sins  against  his  conscience  and  knowledge.  Now  God  calleth  by  these 
natural  ways  to  restrain  him  to  put  a  bound  to  these  waves.  For  if  there  were  not 
these  general  convictions,  no  societies,  no  commonwealth  could  consist.  2.  Take 
notice  of  a  twofold  saving  calling.  The  one  is  only  external  and  saving  in  respect 
of  the  ability  and  sufficiency  ;  the  other  is  saving  effectually  and  in  respect  of  the 
event.  3.  That  God  doth  not  call  all  men  with  this  saving,  gracious  call  will  evi- 
dently de  facto  appear  if  you  consider  the  ways  of  God  ever  since  there  was  a 
Church  till  now.  4.  It  is  no  injustice  in  God,  though  He  does  not  give  this  uni- 
versal call  of  grace  to  all  men.  (1)  If  we  could  not  satisfy  the  reason  and  disputes 
of  men  in  this  Divine  dispensation,  yet  if  the  Scripture  be  clear  in  this  point  we 
must  all  stop  our  mouths  and  not  gainsay.  Doth  not  the  apostle  (Rom.  ix.)  ex- 
pressly bring  these  carnal  reasonings  ?  "  Who  hath  resisted  His  will  ?  and  why  then 
doth  He  find  fault  ?"  But  see  how  he  rebukes  this  unrulinet^s  in  man,  "  Who  art 
thou,  0  man,  that  disputest  against  God  ?  "  If  then  Scripture  and  experience  saith 
thus  much,  we  must  conclude  God's  ways  are  just,  though  hidden  to  us.  (2)  Even 
reason  enforced  out  of  Scripture  may  satisfy  us  in  many  things  ;  for  it  is  no  in- 
justice in  God  if  He  had  not  called  any  man  in  the  world  with  a  gracious  call ;  for 
seeing  man  by  his  fall  had  broken  the  covenant  with  God,  all  things  became  for- 
feited into  His  hand  ;  He  was  not  bound  to  set  up  man  with  a  new  stock  after 
bis  first  breaking.  (3)  There  can  be  no  injustice  where  all  that  is  done  is  done 
wholly  out  of  grace  and  mere  favour.  The  devil  he  thinks  God  is  gracious  too 
much  and  calls  too  many ;  he  is  tormented  with  malice  because  so  many  escape  out 
of  his  jaws.  (4)  Although  God  doth  not  call  every  man  with  this  immediate  call 
of  grace,  yet  no  man  is  damned  merely  because  he  wants  this.  The  apostle  saith, 
"  That  those  that  are  without  the  law  [viz.,  written  and  revealed  to  them] ,  shall  be 
judged  without  the  law."  And  thus  those  that  are  without  the  gospel,  that  have  not 
the  means  of  grace  they  shall  not  be  judged  because  they  did  not  believe  in  Christ, 
because  they  did  not  submit  to  Him,  but  because  they  did  not  walk  in  the  practice 
of  those  things  they  did  know.  (5)  God  is  not  unjust,  no,  not  to  those  that 
are  afar  off,  because  none  among  them  have  done  what  they  might  do  in  a  natural 
and  moral  way ;  for  although  no  man  hath  power  in  a  gracious  manner  to  any 
spiritual  good  thing,  yet  they  may  restrain  from  the  outward  actings  of  many  gross 
sins.  (6)  Though  God  do  not  call  all  men,  and  thereby  they  are  wholly  impotent 
and  unable  to  any  good ;  yet  they  do  not  sin  so  much  because  they  want  power 
as  because  they  have  a  willing  delight  in  it ;  and  this  indeed  doth  mainly  remove 
all  objections ;  for  it  is  not  a  man's  impotency  so  much  as  his  wilful  consent  to 
Bin  that  damneth  him.     (A.  Burgess.) 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  233 

Ver.  40.  Save  yourselves  from  this  untoward  generation. — 3h(ch  exhortation 
is  needed : — Concerning  salvation,  we  need  only  preach  one  sermon  by  way  of 
explanation,  but  men  need  ten  sermons  by  way  of  exhortation.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Save  yourselves  ! — Let  the  word  of  God  be  like  one  who,  during  the  great  flood  in 
America,  rode  on  a  white  horse  down  the  valley,  crying  out,  as  he  rode  along,  "  To 
the  hills,  to  the  hills,  to  the  hills  !  "  The  waters  were  following  fast  behind  him, 
and  he  would  have  the  people  escape  to  the  mountains,  lest  they  should  be 
destroyed.  Oh,  precious  Book,  thus  bid  me  seek  the  hiUs !  Eing  the  alarm  bell  in 
my  ear,  and  compel  me  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  Day  and  night,  wherever 
I  may  be,  may  a  word  from  the  oracle  of  God  sound  in  my  ears,  and  keep  me  from 
sleeping  on  the  bank  of  the  abyss  !  May  no  enemy  be  able  to  steal  upon  us  when 
Bleeping  in  false  security,  for  it  is  high  time  that  we  awake  out  of  sleep,  and 
this  Book  teUs  us  so.  {Ibid.)  Save  yourselves — Why? — 1.  Because  of  the 
danger  in  which  every  unforgiven  sinner  stands.  2.  Because  ample  means  have 
been  provided  for  the  salvation  of  every  one.  3.  Because  the  providing  means  are 
unavailing  unless  we  use  them.  4.  Because  in  this  important  matter  each  one 
must  act  for  himself.  5.  Because  if  you  suffer  yourself  to  be  lost  it  will  be  delibe- 
rate spiritual  suicide.  {J.  Z.  Tyler.)  Vntoicardness : — Untoward  is  said  of  any- 
thing which  wiU  not  go  toward,  that  is  straight  onwards,  but  will  go  now  on  this 
side,  now  on  that,  making  a  crooked  path.  The  beast  that  rebels  against  the  hand 
of  its  driver,  pushes  now  in  this  direction,  now  in  that,  instead  of  that  in  which  he 
is  required  to  go.  The  slimy  serpent  that  crawls  along,  never  in  one  line,  but  from 
this  side  to  that  side.  The  man  who  knows  not  his  road,  takes  a  path  now  to  the 
right  hand,  now  to  the  left,  and  goes  not  straight  forward.  The  drunkard  who  reels 
and  staggers  from  side  to  side,  instead  of  going  forward.  All  these  are  examples 
of  untowardness.  And  now  is  not  sin  untoward  ?  The  path  of  the  command- 
ments of  God  leads  straightforward,  but  their  transgressor  is  not  found  in  that 
path.  He  has  the  wilfulness  and  rebelliousness  of  the  beast  that  will  not  be 
driven.  He  is  a  true  and  close  follower  of  the  crooked  ways  of  the  old  serpent, 
and  walks  in  his  slime  of  sin.  He  is  ignorant  and  blind  with  vanity,  and  chooses 
his  own  crooked  road.  He  is  drunk  with  pride  and  evil  desires,  and  cannot  keep 
the  straight  paths  of  godliness.  Such  is  the  character  of  an  untoward  generation. 
In  it  are  found  the  drunkard,  the  unchaste,  the  swearer,  the  Sabbath-breaker, 
the  thief,  the  covenant-breaker,  the  forswearer ;  and  not  only  these,  but  all  who 
hold  not  the  truth  in  righteousness,  all  who  abide  in  any  practice  which  (they 
know)  is  not  according  to  the  will  of  God  ;  all  who  continue  in  the  neglect  of 
any  known  duty,  all  who  give  God  but  lip-service  instead  of  life-service,  all  the 
careless,  aU  the  indifferent,  aU  the  selfish.  {R.  W.  Evans,  B.D.)  Salvation 
from  an  untoward  generation  : — I.  Peter's  attestation.  What  is  a  generation  ? 
AU  that  are  contained  in  one  list  of  time— fixed  :  Seridas  under  reckons  it  at  seven 
years,  but  the  ordinary  rate  is  a  hundred  (Gen.  xv.  16) — uncertain;  so  Solomon,  "One 
generation  passeth,  another  cometh."  It  is  with  men  as  rasps  :  one  stalk  is  grow- 
ing up,  another  grown,  a  third  withered,  and  all  upon  one  root.  You  see  your 
condition ;  there  is  no  staying  here.  Make  no  other  account,  but  with  David  to 
serve  your  generation,  and  away.  An  untoward  generation  is  one  fro  ward,  per- 
verse, crooked.  Let  us  note — 1.  A  negative  frowardness.  (1)  No  matters  of  behef. 
This  is  what  our  Saviour  rebuked  the  two  disciples  for.  The  stiff  neck,  the  uncir- 
cumcised  ear,  the  fat  heart,  the  blinded  eye,  the  obdurate  soul,  are  expressions  of 
it.  If  these  Jews,  then,  after  the  manifest  proofs  of  Christ's  Messiahship  disbe- 
lieved and  rejected  Him,  most  justly  are  they  a  froward  generation.  And  so  is 
any  nation  that  follows  them  in  their  peevish  increduhty,  shutting  their  eyes  to 
gospel  hght,  like  that  Indian  tree,  which  closes  itself  against  the  beams  of  the 
rising  sun,  and  opens  only  to  the  shades  of  night.  It  is  neither  shame  nor  wonder 
for  those  to  stumble  who  walk  in  darkness,  but  for  a  man  to  stumble  with  the  sun 
in  his  face  is  so  much  more  hateful,  as  the  occasion  is  more  willing.  (2)  In 
action,  i.e.,  when  a  nation  fails  palpably  in  those  duties  of  piety,  justice,  charity, 
which  the  royal  law  of  their  God  requires.  2.  Positive.  In  matter  of  faith 
maintaining  impiety,  heresy,  superstition,  atheism,  and  whatever  other  intellectual 
wickedness ;  in  matter  of  fact  maintaining  idolatry,  violation  of  God's  day  and 
ordinances,  drunkenness,  thefts,  or  any  other  actual  rebellion  against  God. 
Whatever  succession  of  men  abounds  in  these  is  an  untoward  generation.  That 
which  makes  a  man  untoward  makes  a  generation  so,  for  what  is  a  generation  but 
a  resultarian  of  men  ?  But  let  not  our  zeal  make  us  uncharitable.  Never  time 
was  so  bad  but  God  left  some  gracious  remainders.      But  these  few,  if  they  give  a 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

blessing  to  the  times,  cannot  give  a  style.  3.  Let  me  commend  three  emerging 
considerations.  (1)  The  irreparable  wrong  and  reproach  that  lewd  men  bring  upon 
the  times  in  which  they  live.  It  were  happy  if  the  injury  of  a  wicked  man  could 
be  confined  to  his  own  bosom ;  but  his  lewdness  is  like  some  odious  scent  diffused 
through  the  whole  place  where  he  lives.  There  were  worthy  saints  in  St.  Peter's 
time,  yet  the  apostle  brands  them  with  being  "  an  untoward  generation."  It  is  not 
in  the  virtue  of  a  few  to  drown  the  wickedness  of  the  more.  If  we  come  into  a 
field  that  hath  plenty  of  corn,  notwithstanding  the  poppies,  &c.,  we  still  call  it  a 
cornfield  ;  but  if  we  come  upon  a  barn  floor,  where  there  are  a  few  grains  among  a 
heap  of  chaff,  we  do  not  call  it  a  corn  heap.  Thus  it  is  with  times  and  nations,  a 
little  good  is  not  seen  amongst  much  ill ;  a  righteous  Lot  cannot  make  his  city  to  be 
no  Sodom.  A  wicked  man  is  a  perfect  contagion  to  his  age.  Hear  this,  then,  ye 
glorious  sinners,  who  brag  that  your  heads,  purses,  hands,  are  pressed  for  the 
public  good — are  your  hearts  godless,  your  lives  filthy  ?  Your  sins  do  more  dis- 
service to  your  country  than  yourselves  are  worth.  "  Sin  is  a  shame  to  any 
people."  (2)  The  difference  of  terms  in  respect  of  the  degrees  of  evil.  Never 
generation  was  so  straight  as  not  to  be  distorted  with  some  powerful  sins ;  but 
there  are  degrees  in  this  distortion.  In  the  first  world  there  were  giants  (Gen. 
iv.  4)  which,  as  our  mythologists  add,  "bid  battle  unto  heaven."  In  the  next 
there  were  mighty  hunters  and  proud  Babel  builders  ;  after  them  followed  beastly 
Sodomites.  It  were  easy  to  draw  the  pedigree  of  evils  through  all  times ;  yet 
some  generation  is  more  eminently  sinful  than  another ;  as  the  sea  is  in 
perpetual  agitation,  yet  the  spring  tides  rise  higher  than  their  fellows.  Hence 
Peter  notes  his  generation  with  an  emphasis  of  mischief ;  and  what  age  could  com- 
pare with  that  which  crucified  Christ  ?  (3)  The  warrant  of  the  free  censure  of  ill- 
deserving  times.  It  is  a  peevish  humour  that  aggravates  the  evUs  of  the  times, 
which,  were  they  better  than  they  are,  would  still  be  decried.  But  it  is  the 
warrantable  duty  of  Peter  and  his  successors  when  they  meet  with  a  froward 
generation  to  call  it  so,  although  we  may  be  called  querulous  Micaiahs.  Well  might 
Peter  do  so :  his  Master  did  it  before  him,  and  the  Baptist  before  Him,  and  the  prophets 
on  every  page.  And  why  may  we  not  follow  Peter  ?  Who  should  tell  the  times  of 
their  sins  if  we  be  silent  ?  II.  His  obtestation,  "  Save  yourselves."  The  remedy 
is  of  a  short  sound,  but  of  a  long  extent.  The  saving  comprises  in  it  three  great 
duties.  1.  Eepentance  for  our  sin.  Surely  those  sins  are  not  ours  of  which  we 
have  repented.  The  skin  that  is  washed  is  as  clean  as  if  it  had  never  been  foul. 
The  waters  of  our  tears  are  the  streams  of  Jordon  to  cure  our  leprosy,  of  Siloam 
to  cure  our  blindness,  of  Bethesda  to  cure  our  lameness  and  defects  of  obedience. 
2,  Avoidance  of  sinners ;  not  indeed  in  natural  matters,  such  as  breathing  the 
same  air,  &c.,  nor  in  matters  of  business,  nor  in  such  spiritual  matters  as  attending 
the  services  of  God,  but  in  their  evil  deeds  (Eph.  v.  ii.).  If  we  would  save  ourselves 
from  the  sin  of  the  time  we  may  not  command  it,  counsel  it,  consent  to  it,  soothe  it, 
further  it,  share  in  it,  dissuade  it  not,  resist  it  not,  reveal  it  not.  3.  Reluctation 
to  sin  and  sinners.  We  must  set  our  faces  against  it  to  discountenance  it,  our 
tongues  against  it  to  control  it,  our  hands  against  it  to  oppose  it.  III.  Oub  dis- 
suasive    FROM    THE   DANOER   IMPLIED   IN   THE   WORD    "  SAVE,"   for   hoW   are   WC   Saved 

but  from  danger.  The  danger  here  is  that  of — 1.  Corruption.  One  yawning 
mouth  makes  many.  This  pitch  will  defile  us.  St.  Paul  makes  that  verse  of 
the  heathen  poet  canonical.  "EvU  communications  corrupt  good  manners."  2. 
Confusion  (Numb.  xvi.  26).  The  very  station,  the  very  touch  is  mortal.  If  we  share 
in  the  work,  why  not  in  the  wages?  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  {Bp.  Hall.) 
Sai-hig  ourselves  from  a  crooked  generation  : — A  man  ought  not  to  be  carried  to  hell 
by  his  surroundings.  Many  a  man  has  lived  in  a  crooked  generation,  and  adapted 
himself  to  it  most  completely.  And  many  a  man  has  lived  in  a  crooked  genera- 
tion, and  kept  straight  all  the  way  through  it.  If  your  generation  is  crooked,  that 
is  no  reason  why  you  should  be.  But  if  you  would  keep  straight  in  this  genera- 
tion, or  in  any  other,  you  have  got  something  to  do  about  it.  Your  responsibility 
is  for  yourself,  in  spite  of  your  generation.  If  your  generation  is  crooked,  see  that 
you  don't  crook  with  it.     (II.  S.  Trumbull.) 

Ver.  41,  42.  Then  they  that  gladly  received  Ms  word  were  baptized. — Marks 
of  having  received  the  Word  :  1.  A  public  profession  of  faith.  2.  A  desire  to  fulfil 
aU  the  ordinances  laid  upon  them  by  our  Lord.  3.  A  desire  to  unite  in  fellowship 
with  other  believers.  4.  Continuance  in  the  Word.  5.  Prayer  and  study  of  the 
Word  in  order  to  growth  in  grace.     6.  Conclusion :   In  proportion  as  those  who 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  235 

receive  the  Word  are  faithful,  will  godly  fear  fall  upon  others.  (.S'.  S.  Times.) 
Anxious  for  baptism: — Mr.  A.  Wills,  -whose  work  for  Christ  was  much  blessed  at 
Hang-Chan.  He  says  :  "  I  examined  a  poor  sick  man  this  morning,  who  is  anxious 
to  be  baptized.  He  was  first  brought  to  hear  the  gospel  through  coming  for  medi- 
cine, about  a  year  ago,  and  since  then  I  have  baptized  his  wife.  He  was  examined 
some  months  ago,  but  the  Church  thought  it  best  for  him  to  wait  a  little  for  further 
instruction.  His  sickness  has  become  worse,  and  now  all  hope  of  recovery  is  past, 
and  he  again  asks  for  baptism.  He  said,  '  I  expect  to  die  in  a  few  days,'  and  upon 
my  asking  where  he  thought  his  soul  would  go,  he  promptly  replied,  '  To  heaven.' 
'  Why  ?  '  '  Because  Jesus  on  the  Cross  died  to  save  sinners  ;  I  am  a  sinner,  and  I 
trust  Him  to  save  me.'  '  But,'  said  I,  '  if  you  die  before  you  are  baptized,  do  you 
then  expect  to  go  to  heaven  ?  '  '  Oh,  yes,'  he  said,  '  because  it  is  the  blood  of 
Jesus  that  saves  the  soul.'  '  Then  why  do  you  in  your  weak  and  dangerous  state 
wish  to  be  baptized  ?  '  '  Because,'  he  said,  '  it  is  the  duty  of  every  Christian  to 
obey  the  commands  of  Jesus,  and  not  be  ashamed  of  Him.  I  worshipped  idols  for 
forty-two  years,  and  was  not  ashamed  of  the  devil's  works ;  and  now,  before  I  die, 
I  want  to  let  my  sons  and  neighbours  know  that  I  am  not  ashamed  of  Jesus  Christ.' 
I  asked  him  many  other  questions,  one  of  which  was,  '  Are  you  not  afraid  of  the 
cold  water  doing  you  harm  ?  '  He  replied,  '  Oh,  no,  I  don't  fear  that,  be- 
cause I  have  prayed  to  Jesus  to  help  me.'  We  baptized  him,  and  a  week 
later  he  was  called  up  into  the  presence  of  his  Saviour."  Safeguards  of 
religious  life : — We  have  here  a  beautiful  portraiture  of  primitive  Church-life 
in  its  simplicity,  its  purity,  and  its  fidehty.  Now  we  have  brought  before 
us  four  safeguards  of  spiritual  life.  They  are  not  in  themselves  religion, 
but  they  are  protective  of  religion.  We  may  see  the  husbandman  build  a  circle 
of  fencing  around  the  tender  sapling  to  protect  it  in  its  early  growth.  The 
fence  is  not  part  of  the  sapling,  but  it  preserves  it.  Thus  are  these  four  things 
placed  about  religious  life.  Not  as  a  barrier  to  confine  :  their  mission  is  protec- 
tive. You  will  notice  these  are,  Christian  teaching,  Christian  fellowship,  Christian 
sacrament,  communion  with  Jesus  Christ  and  God.  1.  One  great  safeguard  of 
religious  life  is  Christian  instruction.  "  They  continued  steadfastly  in  the  apostles' 
teaching. "  It  is  the  glory  of  Christianity  that  it  is  a  teaching  religion.  It  offers  men 
an  open  Bible,  an  open  Church,  an  open  way  of  redemption  and  an  open  means  of 
access  to  God.  We  have  read  of  men  in  ancient  times  who  had  two  sets  of  doctrines, 
their  esoteric  and  their  exoteric  truth,  truth  that  was  for  the  few  and  truth  that  was 
for  the  many,  truth  to  be  sought  in  secret  to  the  privileged  circle,  and  truth  that  was 
taught  to  the  multitude  of  the  people.  Christianity  has  no  privileged  secrets.  As  far 
as  mysteries  are  revealed  they  are  revealed  alike  to  all.  Its  invitations  are  invitations 
to  all.  The  attitude  of  the  apostles  was  that  of  men  who  had  seen  great  light  and 
found  great  blessing,  and  they  yearned  that  other  men  might  also  see  and  share 
that  which  had  become  so  precious  unto  themselves.  You  will  observe,  moreover, 
these  first  converts  to  Jesus  Christ  not  only  continued  in  Christian  teaching,  but  in 
the  teaching  of  Christ's  apostles.  They  did  not  think  each  was  qualified  to  teach 
the  other.  They  turned  instinctively  to  the  instruction  of  those  who  were  ordained 
for  all  time,  the  accredited  teachers  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  apostles 
were  qualified  to  teach  because  they  themselves  were  taught.  They  were  the  first 
learners.  Their  Christian  education  was  not  confined  to  one  portion  of  their  life, 
it  continued  on.  Truth  was  added  to  truth.  Light  increased  to  greater  light. 
Thus  they  were  enabled  to  speak  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance.  The  quiet 
teaching  of  the  great  truths  of  God  is  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  of  re- 
ligion. If  we  are  to  attain  to  right  views  of  the  Deity,  right  views  of  our- 
selves, right  views  of  the  world,  we  must  be  taught  by  a  higher  Power.  Not 
fancy,  but  food  is  the  first  requirement  of  spiritual  life.  God  has  sent  us  many 
teachers  to  guide  our  feet  in  the  way  of  His  commandments.  Happy  is  the  man 
that  findeth  wisdom,  and  the  man  that  getteth  understanding,  the  merchandise  of 
it  is  better  than  the  merchandise  of  silver,  the  gain  thereof  than  fine  gold.  2.  A 
second  safeguard  of  Christian  life  is  Christian  intercourse.  They  continued  in  the 
apostles'  fellowship.  There  were  doubtless  special  reasons  which  drew  these  early 
disciples  into  close  spiritual  communion.  They  lived  in  an  age  of  hostility.  In 
fellowship  they  found  a  powerful  means  of  sustaining  their  common  spiritual  life. 
There  are  two  forms  of  help  which  minister  to  Christian  life  in  men,  one  which 
comes  from  within,  another  which  comes  from  without.  By  that  which  comes 
from  within  I  mean  meditation,  prayer,  devotion,  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
■within  us.    By  that  which  comes  from  without  I  mean  the  contact  of  mind  with 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

mind,  and  heart  with  heart — the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ministering  through 
agencies  which  are  without  us.  Christian  men  need  both.  There  is  inspiration  in 
true  Christian  fellowship.  Faith  strengthens  faith.  Love  is  quickened  by  love. 
Through  Christian  fellowship  also  they  were  able  to  make  greater  efforts  for  Christ's 
cause.  Achievements  are  possible  to  organised  life  which  are  beyond  the  power  of 
individual  effort.  Unity  is  strength.  Co-operation  is  multiplied  power.  I  know 
no  habit  more  wortb  pleading  for  than  this  habit  of  meeting  together  in  Christian 
fellowship.  It  has  been  the  custom  of  religious  men  in  aU  ages  and  in  all  climes. 
The  patriarchs  in  their  wandering  life  gathered  their  followers  about  them  in 
religious  fellowship.  The  people  of  God  had  their  united  gatherings,  their  feast 
days,  and  their  solemn  assemblies,  when  they  joined  together  in  offering  their 
devotions  to  their  God.  The  ancient  Druids  had  their  sacred  enclosures — rough 
stones  were  the  walls,  the  heavens  the  canopy  above  their  heads,  nature  the  silent 
witness  of  their  devotions.  And  it  has  been  the  custom  of  the  Christian  Church 
in  every  stage  of  its  eventful  history  for  the  saints  of  God  to  continue  in  Christian 
fellowship.  How  often  has  the  first  downward  step  of  a  wasted  life  commenced  in 
the  wandering  away  from  the  communion  of  God's  people  ?  If  we  cannot  meet 
with  God's  people  to  get  good,  we  can,  at  least,  meet  with  them  to  do  good.  It  is 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive.  3.  A  third  safeguard  of  Christian  life  is 
faithful  observance  of  Christian  ordinances.  "  They  continued  in  the  breaking  of 
bread."  The  breaking  of  bread  may  symbolise  three  things  which  should  not  be 
forgotten.  I  see  in  it  a  link  with  the  past.  You  may  trace  this  rite  step  by  step 
backward  through  the  centuries,  till  you  reach  the  little  upper  room  where  Christ 
was  in  the  presence  of  His  disciples.  But  by  it  all  confess  their  devotion  to  Him 
and  His  relationship  to  them  as  Saviour  and  Eedeemer,  and  Friend.  I  see  in  the 
breaking  of  bread  also  the  sign  and  pledge  of  present  grace.  The  broken  body 
and  the  shed  blood  is  for  all  men  who  wiU  receive  His  atoning  work.  "  Take,  eat, 
this  is  My  body  which  is  broken  for  you,"  is  the  language  of  the  Saviour  to  every 
man,  woman,  or  child,  that  lingers  about  His  table.  It  is  a  personal  bond  of  a 
personal  Saviour.  In  it  He  seals  us  as  His  own.  I  see  further  in  the  breaking  of 
bread  a  promise  and  a  prophecy.  This  rite  shall  be  observed  on  and  on  by  genera- 
tions yet  unborn.  4.  A  fourth  safeguard  of  Christian  life  is  found  in  communion 
with  Jesus  Christ  and  God.  They  continued  in  prayer.  They  did  not  theorise 
about  prayer ;  they  prayed.  Men  have  drawn  near  to  God  in  sorrow  that  have  left 
His  presence  with  joy.  Men  have  entered  the  secret  closet  with  weakness  that 
have  left  it  with  courage  and  strength.  The  sorrowful  have  felt  the  comfort  in 
sorrow.  The  perplexed  have  found  light  in  their  darkness.  The  tempted  and 
tried  have  found  deliverance  in  prayer.  Charles  Kingsley  has  said,  "What  an 
awful  weapon  prayer  is  !  It  saved  me  from  madness  in  the  hour  of  my  great 
sorrow.  Pray  day  and  night  very  quietly,  like  a  weary  child,  to  the  loving  and 
great  God  for  everything  you  want  in  body  as  w^U  as  soul,  the  least  as  well  as  the 
greatest.  Nothing  is  too  much  to  ask  God  for.  -  Nothing  is  too  great  for  Him  to 
give.  Thus  we  have  traced  the  four  great  safeguards  of  religious  life.  We  need 
them  as  much  to  day  as  these  first  converts  needed  them  for  their  Christian 
life.  I  do  not  know  one  that  can  wisely  be  neglected  in  the  spiritual  dis- 
cipline of  Christian  souls.  We  trifle  with  them  at  our  peril.  (C  Bramham.) 
The  first  revival : — In  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  we  have  the  cause  in  our  text — 
the  characteristics  of  the  first  revival  of  the  Christian  Church.  Note— I.  Profes- 
sion OF  FAITH — baptism.  Inquire  what  are  those  modes  of  baptism  which  Scripture 
warrants  ;  but  do  not  pelt  others  who  differ,  seeing  the  principle  of  Christianity  is 
not  baptism,  but  communion  with  Christ.  If  you  have  received  Christ,  you  are  not 
to  delay  open  profession.  Young  Christians  may  hear  a  whisper,  "  There  is  a  lion 
in  the  way."  What  lion  ?  A  laugh,  or  an  angry  word  anticipated,  or  like  that  in 
"Pilgrim's  Progress,"  which,  after  all,  was  chained.  Let  every  waverer  look  to 
God,  and  get  strength  to  come  out,  as  these  Christians  of  an  heroic  age  did  1  XL 
Continuance  in  apostolic  teaching.  These  young  converts  were  but  in  the  infant 
school,  and,  like  children,  would  often  say  to  the  apostles,  "  Tell  us  again  about  the 
angels'  song,  the  Infant  in  the  manger,  the  storm  on  the  lake,  the  crucifixion  on 
Calvary  "  ;  and  that  telling  was  the  apostles'  teaching.  I  have  read  an  account  of 
the  conversion  of  a  scoundrel  at  a  gospel  meeting  which  took  place  at  six  o'clock, 
and  at  half -past  six  he  was  preaching ;  but  these  children  in  the  apostles'  infant 
school  knew  they  had  to  learn  before  they  could  teach.  Meanwhile,  with  some 
entreaty,  they  might  say,  Come  father,  come  shipmate,  come  shopmate,  and  hear 
what  these  men  have  to  say.     III.   Generosity.      "  And  all  that  believed  were 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  237 

together,  and  had  all  things  in  common,"  &c.  The  Socialist  says,  "  Ah,  there  you 
see  Communism  is  Christianity,  and  comes  in  along  witli  the  Lord's  Supper  and 
baptism."  But  no.  The  Communist  says,  "  All  your  property  is  mine."  "  AR  my 
property  is  yours,"  says  the  Christian.  The  Communist  says,  "  Stand  and  dehver ! " 
The  Christian  says,  "  Brother,  your  trouble  is  mine,  receive."  There  is  nothing 
that  feU  from  the  lips  of  Christ  to  make  this  act  a  law.  The  circumstances  were 
peculiar,  and  a  special  arrangement  had  to  be  made  to  meet  them.  The  workman 
had  left  his  work,  and  had  nothing  provided  for  a  lengthened  stay,  and  then  had 
come  the  sudden  conversion  and  consequent  waiting  for  more  teaching.  The  spirit 
was  of  Christ,  but  the  action  was  an  economic  mistake.  For  see,  presently,  how 
the  poor  brethren  had  given  away  their  independence,  and  looked  on  this  generosity, 
not  as  an  act  of  love,  but  as  a  right.  They  were  pauperised.  Notice  how  the 
Church  at  Jerusalem  was  so  miserably  poor  as  to  be  dependent  on  the  churches 
abroad  for  support.  Of  a  certain  man  you  say,  "  No  use  helping  him  ;  it  is  like 
throwing  money  into  a  well."  As  to  its  motive,  it  was  Divinely  splendid ;  it  was 
Jesus  Christ  in  action  through  three  thousand  incarnations.  We  are  to  have  the 
same  glorious  capacity  for  making  such  a  mistake.  The  generous  God  will  have  a 
generous  people.  God  will  withdraw  Himself  from  a  synagogue  of  misers,  as  from 
a  synagogue  of  the  dead.  IV.  Joy.  If  we  have  like  precious  faith  in  the  precious 
Saviour,  like  joy  will  follow.  Jesus  Christ  is  mine;  and  mine  is  the  inheritance 
incorruptible,  undefiled.  Eocks  of  diamonds,  mines  of  gold,  are  all  as  nothing  com- 
pared to  what  the  believer  has  in  Christ.  Can  you  say  that,  brother  ?  If  so,  then 
you  may  eat  at  the  same  fir  table,  out  of  the  same  coarse  delf ,  your  poor  fare  ;  but 
it  will  be  " with  gladness,"  &o.  What  a  change!  These  converts  had  been  the 
wolves  howling  round  the  Cross.  Now  Christ  might  say  to  them,  "  Who  is  Master?  " 
The  Spirit  in  the  Word  transfixed  them,  and  they  shuddered  and  twisted  Hke  shot 
things  ;  but  now  the  balm  has  been  apphed  to  their  wounds,  the  oil  of  joy  and  glad- 
ness has  been  poured  into  their  hearts.  V.  Divine  inceease  (ver.  47).  God  adds 
to  the  Church  the  saved.  Does  God  alone  add  to  the  Church  ?  If  you  mean  cer- 
tificated members,  then  verily  others  add  to  the. Church  in  plenty.  Who  added 
Judas,  Ananias,  and  Sapphira  ?  Who  is  that  stealing  on  to  God's  farm  in  the  dark- 
ness, sowing  his  tares  ?  The  devil.  Yea,  the  devil  adds  to  the  Church  diligently, 
to  neutralise  it,  and  make  it  like  the  world.  How  many  were  added  to  the  Church 
last  year  ?  The  proper  question  is  not  How  many,  but  Who  ?  Man  adds  the  dry 
branch,  which  cannot  grow  or  blossom  into  fruit.  God  adds  the  living  branch, 
giving  beauty  and  strength  to  the  Church.  Mr.  Beckford  built  Fonthill,  and  thought 
one  hill  needed  growth  of  wood  to  beautify  the  prospect.  He  found  the  soil  so  thin 
and  the  climate  so  bleak,  that  no  trees  would  grow.  Instead  of  sending  again  to 
the  nursery,  he  sent  to  the  foundry  for  cast-iron  trees,  had  them  painted  green,  and 
stuck  them  by  long  iron  stakes  into  the  ground.  He  could  add  to  these  trees  daily, 
but  they  could  not  grow.  May  we  never  have  such  trees  on  this  hill — iron  hope, 
iron  charity,  iron  love.  Conclusion  :  In  certain  transatlantic  climes,  spring  imme- 
diately succeeds  winter.  By  gentleness  it  makes  winter  go,  bj  kisses  the  sun  un- 
locks the  ice,  and  the  river  is  sent  forth  to  beautify  the  plain.  May  God  give  such 
a  spring  to  all  the  world,  when  its  ice  and  snow  shall  melt  with  the  magic  celerity 
of  enchantment,  and  spiritual  woodlands  burst  into  song  and  rejoice  in  the  new- 
born beauties  of  an  imperishable  spring.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  The  newly  con- 
verted : — The  actions  of  the  converts  proved  that  they  had  passed  into  a  new  spiritual 
state,  and  we  may  regard  them  as  models  for  every  age.  They — I.  Openly  con- 
fessed Chbirt.  Opinions  vary,  and  will  vary,  as  to  tbe  mode  of  baptism  ;  but  all 
are  agreed  as  to  its  symbolic  meaning.  The  words  appointed  to  be  used  in  baptism 
declare  the  relation  of  the  candidate  to  each  person  in  the  Godhead ;  the  water 
symbolises  the  need  of  Divine  purification,  and  the  gracious  provision  which  has 
made  that  purification  possible  ;  while  the  application  of  the  water  represents  the 
process  and  conditions  of  personal  salvation.  In  this  baptism  Christ  was  openly 
confessed.  And  He  must  be  openly  confessed  in  some  way  by  aU  who  are  His.  II. 
Diligently  attended  to  apostolic  teaching.  They  were  careful  to  hear  what 
the  apostles  had  to  say,  that  their  knowledge  of  the  truth  might  increase.  Instruc- 
tion, then,  followed  baptism.  We  have  not  the  apostles,  but  we  have  their  writings, 
by  which  they  still  teach.  Diligent  attention  to  the  New  Testament  is  calculated  to 
save  men  from  infidelity  and  much  mischief  of  other  kinds.  III.  Associated  with 
OTHER  Christians.  How  would  people  who  were  drawn  together  by  a  common 
attachment  to  Christ  act  when  together  ?  All  their  conduct  would  be  affected  by 
their  Christianity.     When  professing  Christians,  of  choice,  associate  with  the  god- 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

less,  their  conduct  belies  their  profession.  And  when  they  meet  without  any 
reference  to  the  Master,  they  neglect  a  means  of  grace,  and  give  ground  for  suspicion 
as  to  their  sincerity  or  zeal.  IV.  Diligently  used  the  means  of  grace.  1. 
"Breaking  of  bread"  reminds  us  of  the  institution  of  the  Eucharist.  2.  "Prayers  " 
show  us  that  they  were  devout  people,  in  which  respect  their  example  is  important. 
"When  professors  are  too  busy  to  pray,  or  indulge  in  conduct  which  makes  prayer 
irksome,  they  are  in  great  danger.  If  the  first  Christians  had  so  lived,  they  would 
never  have  been  charged  with  turning  the  world  upside  down.  And  since  their  day 
great  wonders  have  been  wrought  by  men  and  women  of  much  prayer.  V.  Made 
A  DEEP  and  salutaby  impkession  ON  THEIR  oBSEKVEBS.  "Fear  Came  on  every 
sonl."  Those  who  had  not  become  Christians  were  filled  with  solemn  dread.  They 
felt  that  God  had  sent  among  them  a  wonderful  thing,  which  no  creature  could 
have  produced.  They  seem  also  to  have  been  afraid  lest  they  should  be 
smitten  for  standing  in  an  improper  relation  to  what  was  transpiring.  Recol- 
lection of  the  past  history  of  their  nation  would  tend  to  deepen  the  fear. 
And  ought  not  all  Christians  to  make  on  those  who  watch  them  impressions 
of  the  presence  of  God  ?  A  holy  man  often  makes  the  self-condemning  ob- 
server miserable  by  his  very  silence.  When  will  all  professors  thus  give  counsel 
and  rebuke  by  the  spirit  which  they  manifest  ?  Were  they  to  do  so,  how  soon 
would    Christianity    diffuse    itself    through   all   the    world !      VI.    God  directed 

public  attention  to  the  religious  SYSTEM  WHICH  THESE  CONVERTS  HAD  EM- 
BRACED. "  Many  wonders  and  signs,"  &c.  Attention  was  called  by  miracles  to  the 
doctrine  and  personal  conduct  of  the  first  propagators  of  Christianity.  Eepeatedly 
we  find  in  the  Acts  first  a  miracle,  then  a  sermon.  If  the  time  for  miracles  has 
passed  away,  attention  has  already  been  called  to  Christianity.  What  is  now  wanted 
is  the  fearless  preaching  of  the  gospel,  with  that  best  of  all  commentaries,  Christ- 
like living.  In  using  such  means,  Cdristianity  is  its  own  witness.  (W.  Hudson.) 
A  neto  development  of  social  life: — As  the  result  of  Peter's  sermon,  a  form  of  society 
rises  which  had  never  appeared  before.  New  forces  act  upon  the  social  natures  of 
men,  and  bring  them  together  with  new  feelings  for  new  engagements.  I.  The 
INCOEPOKATING  PRINCIPLE  OF  THIS  NEW  SOCIETY.  The  magnet  that  drew  together 
and  centralised  into  a  loving  unity  these  souls  which  a  few  hours  ago  were  so  dis- 
cordant, were — 1.  The  apostle's  word — i.e.,  Peter's  sermon.  2.  The  apostle's  word 
received.  They  were  convinced  of  its  truth,  and  accepted  it  as  a  Divine  reality. 
3.  The  apostle's  word  received  gladly ;  for  while  it  convinced  them  of  enormous 
wickedness,  it  assured  them  of  salvation.  Christ,  then,  as  He  said,  was  the  rock 
on  which  He  built  His  Church.  II.  The  introductive  ceremony  to  this  new 
SOCIETY.  Baptism  is  a  symbolical  ordinance,  which  expresses  the  twofold  truth  of 
the  moral  pollution  of  humanity,  and  the  necessity  of  an  extraneous  influence  to 
cleanse  its  stains.  These  truths  these  sinners  felt  under  Peter's  sermon  ;  and,  as 
the  most  proper  thing,  they  were  admitted  into  communion  with  the  disciples  by  an 
impressive  declaration  of  them.  As  to  the  mode,  this  is  a  trifle  interesting  only  to 
those  religionists  who  live  on  rites.  When  it  is  remembered  that  Jerusalem  had 
only  the  fountain  of  Siloam  as  its  water  supply,  that  the  three  thousand  were 
baptized  in  one  day  which  bad  commenced  its  noon,  and  that  they  included  both 
sexes,  it  is  impossible  that  they  could  all  have  been  immersed  in  water.  However, 
the  mode  of  the  act  is  nothing,  the  spirit  is  everything.  III.  The  unremitting 
SERVICES  OF  this  NEW  SOCIETY.  They  were  "  persevering  "  in — 1.  The  teaching. 
After  their  conversion  they  had  much  to  learn  ;  so  tbis  new  society  became  a  society 
of  students — they  "  inquired  "  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  They  regularly  attended 
the  teaching  as  distinguished  from  all  other.  2.  The  fellowship.  They  appreciated 
the  communion  of  saints.  They  regarded  themselves  as  members  of  a  brotherhood, 
whose  rules  they  were  bound  to  obey,  and  whose  interests  they  were  bound  to  pro- 
mote. In  this  fellowship,  like  saints  of  old,  they  "  spake  often  one  to  another," 
considered  one  another  "  to  provoke  unto  love  and  good  works,"  exhorted  "  one 
another  daily,"  endeavoured  to  "  edify  one  another,"  and  perhaps  confessed  their 
"faults  one  to  another."  3.  The  breaking  of  bread,  in  accordance  with  their 
Master's  dying  command.  4.  The  prayers,  probably  prayer  meetings.  IV.  The 
distinguishing  spirit  of  this  new  society.  1.  Reverence.  "  Fear  came  upon 
every  soul."  Whilst  they  were  happy,  there  was  no  frivolity.  They  felt  God  was 
near,  because  of  the  "wonders  and  signs."  2.  Generosity.  Selfishness  had  no 
place  here.  Their  benevolence — (1)  Inspired  them  to  make  sacrifices.  The  love  of 
property  gave  way  to  love  of  man.  The  law  of  social  Christianity  enjoins  the  strong 
to  help  the  weak,  and  all  to  bear  each  other's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of 


.CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  23,9 


Christ.  (2)  Adjusted  itself  to  the  occasion.  The  circumstances  justified  this  par- 
ticular effort.  Many  came  from  a  distance,  and  were  unprepared  to  settle  down  ; 
and  many  of  theiu,  too,  were  poor.  The  benevolence  of  those  who  had  property, 
therefore,  was  called  out  to  meet  the  case.  This,  consequently,  cannot  be  regarded 
as  a  precedent  binding  on  future  times,  nor  is  there  a  word  in  the  narrative  to  imply 
this.  3.  Gladness.  The  rich  were  happy,  for  their  benevolence  was  gratified  in 
giving.  The  poor  were  happy,  for  their  hearts  glowed  with  gratitude  in  receiving. 
All  were  happy  in  themselves  and  with  each  other,  because  happy  in  God.  4. 
Simplicity.  There  was  no  pride,  ostentation,  self-seeking,  hypocrisy  among  them ; 
but  all  were  childlike  in  spirit.  5.  Eeligiousness.  "  Praising  God  " — a  summary 
of  the  whole.  V.  The  blessed  condition  of  this  new  society.  1.  Their  influence 
was  great.  They  had  favour,  not  with  a  class — not  with  priests,  Pharisees,  Sad- 
ducees — but  with  all  the  people.  2.  Their  growth  was  constant.  They  were  neither 
declining  nor  stationary;  they  were  daily  increasing.  This  was  "the  Lord's" 
doing.  He  only  can  add  true  men  to  the  Church.  3.  Their  salvation  was  pro- 
mising. "  Such  as  were  in  the  way  of  salvation."  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  And  they 
continued  stedfastly  in  the  apostles'  doctrine. — Church  life: — The  text  tells  us  how 
the  newly-baptized  lived,  in  that  first  bloom  and  freshness  of  the  gospel.  They 
waited  constantly  upon — I.  The  teaching  of  the  apostles.  There  was  much  for 
them  to  learn.  They  knew  nothing  as  yet  in  detail  of  the  doctrine  of  their  new 
Master.  The  particulars  of  His  life,  words,  character,  work  ;  how  must  the  apostles 
have  busied  themselves  in  recounting  these  things  to  a  congregation  all  but  wholly 
ignorant  of  them,  amidst  breathless  silence  or  murmured  satisfaction  ! — the  gospel 
story.  We  are  too  ready  to  imagine  that  we  have  nothing  to  learn  now  from  public 
teaching.  We  sit  in  judgment  upoii  our  teachers,  as  though  we  had  all  truth  and 
knowledge  already  in  possession.  And  most  unwilling  would  your  ministers  be  to 
speak  as  though  they  had  anything  which  you  know  not,  or  might  not  know,  for 
yourselves  from  the  pages  of  the  Holy  Book.  Nevertheless,  preaching  is  one  of 
God's  ordinances,  and  to  it  belongs  the  emphasis  of  that  solemn  caution,  "  Despise 
not  prophesyings."  It  is  still  one  mark  of  the  true  Christian  that  he  waits  stedfastly 
upon  the  teaching  of  appointed  men,  whose  responsible  oihce  it  is  rightly  to  divide 
the  word  of  truth.  II.  In  fellowship — i.e.,  in  the  foriuation  and  fostering  of  that 
brotherly  spirit  of  Christian  love  which  the  Apostles'  Creed  calls  "  the  communion 
of  saints."  The  converts  did  not  separate  after  their  baptism,  each  to  his  home,  to 
live  a  life  of  pious  meditation.  They  set  themselves  resolutely  to  a  life  of  fellow- 
ship. The  Christian  is  one  of  a  community  ;  alone,  he  is  but  a  limb  cut  off  from 
the  trunk  ;  separately,  he  must  draw  his  vital  vigour  from  the  Head,  but  that  vigour 
must  be  used  and  manifested  in  a  self-forgetting  fellowship.  He  must  never  fancy 
himself  the  whole  body,  either  in  being  independent  of  the  Head  or  of  the  organised 
system.  "  Ye  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular."  III.  The' 
BKEAKiNG  OF  THE  BREAD.  How  instantly  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  took 
its  place  among  the  marks  and  tokens  of  the  true  Church  !  From  the  very  first  it 
was  understood  that  a  Christian  is  one  who  observes  all  that  Christ  has  commanded, 
and  not  least,  His  dying  charge,  "  This  do,"  &c.  Doubtless  the  Lord's  Supper  was 
a  daily  celebration.  And  do  you  suppose  that  any  of  the  three  thousand  dared  or 
■wished  to  turn  their  back  upon  it  ?  And  yet  how  many  of  us  are  knowingly,  wilfully, 
and  throughout  life,  acting  as  if  the  charge,  "  This  do,"  had  never  been  uttered,  or 
as  if  the  apostles  only  had  ever  been  addressed  by  it !  And  no  doubt  there  are 
those  who  could  not,  without  presumption  or  profaneness,  attend  on  that  breaking 
of  bread.  But  does  not  that  inability,  of  itself,  startle  them  ?  Does  it  not  sound  in 
their  ears  the  condemning  sentence,  "  Thou  art  none  of  Christ's  ;  thou  art  yet  in 
thy  sins  "?  IV.  In  prayers.  No  doubt  they  prayed  in  secret.  No  doubt  it  was  a 
life  of  prayer.  The  charge  which  we  treat  as  hyperbolical — "  Pray  without  ceasing" 
— was  to  them,  in  its  spirit,  a  literal  precept.  Their  life  was  now  above,  hidden 
with  Christ  in  God,  and  well  might  they  exercise  that  life  in  offices  of  perpetual 
communion.  Christ  was  to  them  not  a  name  nor  a  doctrine,  but  a  real  and  living 
Person,  their  Friend  and  their  Saviour,  their  Lord  and  their  God.  They  could  not 
have  too  much  of  Him  !  Therefore  a  life  of  prayer  was  to  them  a  life  of  happiness. 
But  the  particular  place  occupied  by  the  word  "  prayers  "  in  the  text,  leads  us 
rather  to  think  of  the  worship  of  the  congregation  than  of  the  worship  of  the 
secret  chamber.  It  was  not  then,  as  it  is  now,  that  any  little  fluctuation  of 
feeling,  or  any  passing  accident  of  weather  or  of  company,  can  thin  a  congregation 
almost  to  nothing.  It  was  not  then  the  case,  as  it  is  now,  that  everything  is  more 
attractive  than  worship  ;  an  additional  half-hour's  rest,  a  walk  into  the  country,  a 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ir, 

newspaper  or  a  novel ;  nothing  felt  to  be  so  little  worth  exertion  as  the  opportunity 
of  joining  in  the  Church's  prayers  or  listening  to  the  Church's  teaching.  (Dean 
Vaughan.)  Attachment  to  the  Clnirch: — All  of  us  here  assembled  profess  our- 
selves members  of  this  Christian  community ;  we  profess  ourselves  churchmen,  as 
members  of  the  Church  of  Christ ;  for  every  sincere  and  honest  member  of  the 
Church  of  England  values  his  Church  for  this  reason,  that  it  is  a  portion  of  the 
Church  of  Christ.  The  churchmanship  which  I  am  now  inculcating  is  the  church- 
manship  of  our  text,  and  the  duties  therein  described  are  the  duties  which  I 
earnestly  press  upon  you,  and  which  I  now  proceed  to  illustrate.  "  And  they  con- 
tinued stedfastly  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of  bread, 
and  in  prayers."  1.  This  description  of  the  first  Christians  implies  that  the  good 
churchman  is  stedfastly  attached  to  the  communion  of  his  Church,  cultivates  a 
warm  and  constant  affection  for  her,  and  uses  all  proper  means  for  extending  its 
influence,  and  carrying  its  beneficial  influence  to  all  who  are  ignorant  of,  or  careless 
about,  those  invaluable  blessings  she  contains  within  her  sacred  repository.  This 
profession,  entered  into  at  baptism,  and  ratified  at  confirmation,  leads  the  true 
member  of  Christ's  Church  courageously  to  assert  and  to  maintain  the  doctrines  of 
the  Cross  of  Christ  in  all  their  genuine  simplicity,  and  that  not  only  when  it  can  be 
done  without  incurring  opposition,  but  also  when  their  maintenance  may  be  scorned 
by  the  world  and  assailed  by  the  sceptic  ;  the  good  Churchman  knows  from  Scrip- 
ture that  these  truths  are  the  doctrines  of  the  apostles.  From  these  doctrines  he 
has  derived  peace  and  consolation ;  and  from  them,  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  he  feels  implanted  within  him  a  principle,  a  life-giving  principle,  of  holiness, 
which  suggests  the  motives  and  dictates  the  acts  of  his  daily  conduct.  These  doc- 
trines, when  heartily  embraced,  are  doctrines  for  the  healing  of  the  world  of  its  sina 
and  evils.  The  good  Churchman  remains  immovable  ;  he  loves  his  Church  for  the 
truth's  sake  ;  if  any  of  her  sons  act  unworthily  of  her,  if  any  abuse,  any  deformity 
for  a  time  creep  round  her  sacred  battlements,  the  abuse,  the  deformity  is  lamented, 
and,  if  possible,  removed ;  but  the  Church  herself  is  his  delight ;  he  loves  her  for 
the  blessings  she  conveys.  2.  From  our  text,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Christian 
who  desires  to  act  his  part  well  in  his  duty  and  obligations  to  his  Church,  wiU 
stedfastly  attend  on  its  services  and  observe  its  institutions.  The  first  three  thou- 
sand Churchmen,  than  whom  so  good  a  sample  has  never  since  been  met  with, 
"  continued  stedfastly,  as  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  so  also  in  break- 
ing of  bread  and  in  prayers."  Indeed,  the  services  of  the  Church  form  the  maia 
bond  of  fellowship  with  her.  Most  inconsistent  is  it  for  men,  like  the  Jews  of  old, 
to  exclaim,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we,"  when  the 
temple  is  scarcely  ever  frequented,  and  they  themselves  never  seen  within  its  sacred 
enclosure !  Calling  themselves  members  of  Christ's  Church,  but  altogether  neglect- 
ing its  services,  except  as  necessity  calls  upon  them  to  join  in  them,  and  conse- 
quently as  ignorant  of  their  intent  and  meaning,  as  unmoved  by  any  spiritual 
affection  towards  them  or  sacred  pleasure  from  them,  as  though  they  were  repeated 
in  a  language  they  understood  not ;  boasting  of  their  external  fellowship  by  baptism, 
as  though  baptism  were  the  sum-total  of  Church  membership.  The  remark  of 
Bishop  Beveridge  upon  the  character  and  behaviour  of  these  first  Christians  is  well 
worthy  of  universal  attention  :  "  They  did  not  think  it  sufficient  to  be  baptized 
into  Christ,  but  they  still  continued  in  Him,  doing  all  such  things  as  He  hath 
appointed,  whereby  to  receive  grace  and  power  from  Him  to  walk  as  becometh  Hia 
disciples ;  and  so  must  we  also,  if  we  desire  to  be  saved  by  Him.  It  is  our  great 
happiness  to  have  been  by  baptism  admitted  into  the  Church  and  school  of  Christ, 
and  so  made  His  disciples  and  scholars  ;  but  unless  we  continue  to  do  what  we 
promised  at  our  baptism,  our  condemnation  will  be  the  greater,  in  that  we  do  not 
only  break  the  laws  of  God,  but  likewise  the  promise  we  made  to  Him  when  we 
were  baptized."  Of  this  state  of  things  the  consistent  Churchman  is  fully  aware, 
and  by  the  grace  of  God  he  acts  accordingly ;  hence  his  regular  attendance  on 
Divine  ordinances  is  marked  by  internal  devotion  and  external  propriety.  He  is 
enabled  to  say  of  the  temple  and  worship  of  the  Lord,  "  This  is  none  other  but  the 
house  of  God,  and  this  is  the  gate  of  heaven."  (J.  C.  Abdy,  M.A.)  Steadfast' 
ness : — Kecently,  at  Chicago,  Bishop  Whipple  related  the  following  incident  as  an 
illustration  of  the  moral  courage  of  Christian  Indians  :  "  One  day  an  Indian  came 
to  our  missionary  and  said,  '  I  know  this  religion  is  true.  The  men  who  have 
walked  in  this  new  trail  are  better  and  happier.  But  I  have  always  been  a  warrior, 
and  my  hands  are  fuU  of  blood.  Could  I  be  a  Christian  ? '  The  missionary  repeated 
the  story  of  God's  love.    To  test  the  man,  he  said,  '  May  I  cut  your  hair?  '    The 


CHAP,  II.]  THE  ACTS.  241 

Indian  wears  his  scalp-lock  for  his  enemy.  When  it  is  cut  it  is  a  sign  that  he  willl 
never  go  on  the  war-path  again.  The  man  said,  '  Yes,  you  may  cut  it.  I  shall 
throw  my  old  life  away.'  It  was  cut.  He  started  for  home,  and  met  some  wild 
Indians,  who  shouted  with  laughter,  and  with  taunts  said,  '  Yesterday  you  were  a 
warrior  ;  to-day  you  are  a  squaw.'  It  stung  the  man  to  madness,  and  he  rushed 
to  his  home  and  threw  himself  on  the  floor  and  burst  into  tears.  His  wife  was  a 
Christian,  and  came  and  put  her  arms  about  his  neck  and  said,  '  Yesterday  there 
was  not  a  man  in  this  world  who  dared  call  you  a  coward,  Caa't  you  be  as  brave 
for  Him  who  died  for  you  as  you  were  to  kill  the  Sioux  ?  '  He  sprung  to  his  feet 
and  said,  '  I  can,  and  will.'  I  have  known  many  brave,  fearless  servants  of  Christ, 
but  I  never  knew  one  braver  than  this  chief."  Revivals  favourable  to  doctrhie  : — A. 
languid  church  breeds  unbelief  as  surely  as  a  decaying  oak  fungus.  In  a  condition  of 
depressed  vitality,  the  seeds  of  disease,  which  a  full  vigour  would  shake  off,  are  fatal. 
Eaise  the  temperature,  and  you  kill  the  insect  germs.  Revivals  unfavourable  to  un- 
belief : — A  warmer  tone  of  spiritual  life  would  change  the  atmosphere  which  unbelief 
needs  for  its  growth.  It  belongs  to  the  fauna  of  the  glacial  epoch,  and  when  the  rigours 
of  that  wintry  time  begin  to  melt,  and  warmer  days  to  set  in,  the  creatures  of  the  ice 
have  to  retreat  to  arctic  wildernesses,  and  leave  a  land  no  longer  suited  for  their  life. 
{A.  Maclaren.)  Model  Church : — I.  It  was  made  up  of  converts — that  is,  of  such  as 
had  repented  and  put  an  unquestionable  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  possible,  of  course, 
that  some  slipped  in  who  were  either  wilful  deceivers  or  self-deceived,  but  that  was  not 
likely  to  be  the  case  under  such  circumstances.  None  joined  from  social  considera- 
tions or  because  others  were  doing  so.  II,  The  members  of  this  model  Church 
"  continued  stedfastly  in  the  apostles'  doctrine."  They  received  the  truth  as 
it  came  to  them  from  inspired  lips  and  were  cordially  faithful  to  it.  They  had  a 
creed  and  were  not  ashamed  of  it.  There  were  no  heretics  among  them,  walking 
about  with  feathers  in  their  hats  and  vaunting  their  disloyalty  to  truth.  We  are 
told  that  Christianity  is  not  dogma,  but  life.  It  is  both,  and  to  say  that  it  is  either 
at  the  expense  of  the  other  is  to  antagonise  the  clear  teaching  of  Scripture.  Chris- 
tianity is  neither  dogma  nor  life  ;  it  is  life  founded  on  dogma ;  it  is  ethics  growing 
out  of  truth ;  it  is  creed  flowering  into  conduct.  III.  "  They  continued  stedfastly 
IN  fellowship  and  in  breaking  op  bread  and  in  prayers."  The  rationale  of  the 
Church  finds  its  briefest  expression  in  that  word  "fellowship."  There  is  a  notion 
abroad  that  the  Church  is  an  organisation  of  good  people,  such  as  think  themselves 
a  little  better  than  their  neighbours.  This  is  a  mistake ;  the  very  opposite  is  true. 
The  Church  is  a  mutual  help  association,  made  up  not  of  good  people,  but  of  such 
as  want  to  be  good,  who  feel  their  weakness  and  their  need  of  co-operative  sympathy 
and  prayer.  The  over-righteous,  who  are  strong  enough  to  get  along  by  themselves, 
are  outside  of  the  Church.  IV.  They  surrendered  all  their  earthly  possessions 
to  a  common  treasury  to  be  expended  for  the  common  good.  These  people  hved 
in  the  early  morning,  with  the  dewy  memory  of  Christ  upon  them  and  hearts 
warmed  by  the  baptism  of  fire ;  they  had  recently  seen  their  Master  caught  up  in 
the  clouds  of  heaven  and  received  an  assurance  that  He  would  come  again  in  "like 
manner."  Thus  memory  and  hope  conspired  to  make  their  hearts  unworldly,  and 
in  their  fellowship  we  may  reasonably  expect  to  find  the  nearest  approach  to  the 
Church  of  the  millennium.  In  these  days,  when  property  rights  so  far  eclipse  the 
great  verities,  we  may  be  excused  for  wondering  how  these  people  could  be  so 
foolish  as  to  sell  their  possessions  in  this  way  and  "  hold  all  things  common  "  ;  but 
by-and-by  there  will  come  a  time  when  truth  and  goodness  will  outshine  silver  and 
gold,  and  then,  perhaps,  it  will  appear  that  these  early  Christians  were  not  wrong 
after  all,  but  only  a  little  premature.  The  term  "  communism  "  is  apphed  to  so 
much  of  crack-brained  fanaticism  that  we  are  in  danger  of  overlooking  the  real 
truth  at  the  centre  of  it.  V.  The  members  of  this  primitive  Church  gave  them- 
selves wholly  up  to  the  work  and  worship  of  God  :  "  They  continued  daily  with 
one  accord  in  the  temple  and  breaking  bread  from  house  to  house."  They  were  not 
content  with  mere  Sabbath  worship  and  the  other  perfunctory  duties  of  a  religious 
life.  To  these  enthusiastic  Christians  every  day  was  a  holy  day  and  every  place 
was  a  sanctuary.  {D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  The  faith  and  stedfastness  of  the  earlif 
Christians : — I.  We  have  here,  then,  in  the  first  place,  a  very  full  account  of  the 
primitive  Church.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  kind  of  full-length  portrait,  drawn  by  the  pencil 
of  inspiration,  which  we  must  analyse  and  examine  for  our  own  benefit.  And  here, 
first  of  all,  we  find  it  stated  that  "  they  continued  stedfastly  in  the  apostles'  doc- 
trine." If  you  ask  what  this  doctrine  was,  we  refer  you  back  to  the  clear  outline 
of  it  which  is  presented  to  our  minds  in  the  sermon  of  the  Apostle  Peter.  It  was 
VOL.  I.  16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

the  doctrine  of  a  free  and  full  remission  of  our  sins,  through  the  atoning  sacrifice 
of  our  blessed  Saviour,  who  was  put  to  death  for  our  offences,  and  was  raised  again 
for  our  justification,  II.  The  blessed  effects.  It  is  also  asserted  that  these 
primitive  Christians  maintained  a  constant  attendance  on  the  means  of  grace.  A 
man  cannot  walk  alone  and  by  himself  on  the  path  which  leads  to  glory.  As  soon 
as  his  conscience  has  been  awakened,  his  judgment  convinced,  and  his  heart  sub- 
dued to  the  obedience  of  faith,  he  must  become  a  member  of  that  Church  to  which 
her  Divine  Master  has  entrusted  the  dispensation  of  those  means  of  grace  which 
He  has  provided  for  the  advancement  of  the  spiritual  interests  of  His  people.  But 
we  must  also  notice  another  characteristic  feature  in  this  infant  Church.  They 
manifested  a  noble  and  commendable  attention  to  the  wants  of  their  poorer  brethren; 
.  they  "  continued  stedfastly  in  the  fellowship,"  or,  rather,  as  the  original  word  im- 
plies, in  the  contribution,  or  in  the  generous  and  considerate  extension  of  their 
temporal  resources  for  the  supply  of  the  necessities  of  their  poorer  brethren:  "They 
had  aU  things  common,  and  sold  their  possessions  and  goods,  and  parted  them  to 
all  men,  as  every  man  had  need."  And  we  cannot  fail  to  notice  the  spirit 
of  union  and  of  Christian  love  that  pervaded  all  the  services  and  intercourse 
of  these  first  disciples  of  our  blessed  Redeemer.  There  was  an  unity  of  faith,  and, 
what  was  of  more  consequence,  there  was  an  unity  of  feeling  amongst  them,  binding 
together  into  one  happy  family  the  constituent  members  of  this  infant  Church.  It 
might,  indeed,  be  said  of  them,  "  Behold  how  these  Christians  love  one  another," 
so  zealously  did  they  endeavour  to  "  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bonds  of 
peace."  They  "  were  together  "  ;  they  did  not  frustrate  the  great  purpose  for  which 
Christ  has  incorporated  His  people  into  a  church  by  becoming  hermits,  but,  feeling 
their  mutual  dependence  on  each  other,  they  endeavoured  by  mutual  encouragement 
to  strengthen  and  to  build  each  other  up  in  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  everlasting 
gospel.  (D.  Bagot,  D.D.)  The  first  Christians  a  holy  family  : — I.  The  kind 
FATHER  OF  THE  FAMILY:  recoguiscd  m  fihal  love  and  proved  in  daily  blessings. 
II.  The  loving  members  of  the  family  :  the  old  ones  of  Pentecost  and  the  new 
ones  added  to  it.  III.  The  beautiful  order  of  the  family  :  doctrine  and  prayer, 
breaking  of  bread  and  care  for  the  poor.  IV.  The  holy  peace  of  the  family.  1, 
Within  among  themselves.  2.  Without  in  relation  to  the  world.  (Gerok.)  The 
first  Christian  Church : — 1.  The  faith  which  it  testified.  2.  The  deeds  which  it 
performed.  3.  The  love  which  it  evidenced.  4.  The  means  of  grace  which  it 
employed.  5.  The  blessedness  which  it  enjoyed.  {G.  Florey.)  The  blooming 
garden  of  God  in  the  primitive  Church  : — 1.  The  delightful  sunshine  of  Divine  grace 
which  it  enjoys  after  the  Pentecostal  rain.  2.  The  lovely  spiritual  blossoms  and 
fruits  of  grace  which  increase  under  such  a  Divine  blessing — faith,  love,  hope, 
humility,  meekness,  purity,  alms,  prayer,  &c.  3.  The  strong  wall  by  which  God's 
garden  is  protected  from  the  wasting  of  the  enemy.  {C.  Gerok. )  Christian  doc- 
trine : — The  New  Testament  was  not  yet  written,  yet  there  was  a  coherent  system 
of  Christian  faith  and  truth,  and  by  an  instinct  these  people  knew  it.  The  truth 
had  not  yet  been  formulated  into  a  creed,  but  the  essentials  of  a  creed  existed  in 
the  minds  of  both  preachers  and  hearers  of  the  gospel ;  and  say  what  we  may 
about  creeds  and  the  use  which  has  sometimes  been  made  of  them,  Christian 
doctrine  is  and  ever  has  been  essential  to  the  integrity  and  the  triumphs  of  the 
Christian  Church.  Note — I.  Th\t  the  Christian  life  depends  partly  upon  the 
soul's  convictions  as  to  the  character  of  God.  1.  This  life  is  derived  from  God, 
and  is  developed  in  the  soul.  There  are  inscrutable  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  bringing  about  the  inward  change.  There  are  also  undefinable  influences  of 
godly  friends  or  preachers,  but  none  of  these  can  be  effectual  unless  there  be  a 
truth  or  fact  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit  works.  How  does  a  parent  move  his 
child  towards  a  godly  life  ?  By  force  of  character  ?  Yes ;  but  character  is  the 
product  of  Christian  truth  ;  and  the  parent  was  holy  because,  among  other  things, 
he  read  his  Bible  and  believed  his  Saviour.  2.  You  might  as  well  try  to  account 
for  the  life  of  a  flower  apart  from  the  seed  as  to  account  for  spiritual  life  apart 
from  spiritual  doctrine.  You  can  predict  the  character  of  the  flower  from  the 
nature  of  the  seed ;  so  from  your  knowledge  of  religious  systems  you  can  foretell 
the  forms  of  character  that  will  be  developed  from  them — Mohammedan,  Buddhist, 
Socinian,  &c.  ;  and  our  spiritual  life  will  depend  on  the  tenacity  with  which  we 
cling  to  true  convictions  of  the  character  of  God.  St.  Paul  was  one  of  the  most 
spiritual  and  self-denying  of  men,  and  again  and  again  he  traces  his  inner  life  to 
the  power  which  Christian  truth  had  over  him — over  his  heart,  of  course,  but  over 
his  intellect  as  well.     3.  It  is  a  shallow  and  often  a  hypocritical  cry  that  asks  us 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  213 

for  a  Christianity  -without  doctrine.  You  cannot  have  it.  God  is — that  is  a  doc- 
trine. God  loves  you — that  is  a  doctrine,  and  so  on.  Feed  your  mind  on  these 
and  kindred  facts,  and  yours  shall  be  no  puny  life.     II.  That  a  Christian  commd- 

KITY  MUST  BE  DBAWN  TOGETHER  BY  AFFINITIES  IN  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE.       1.  If    the  Unit 

of  spiritual  life  depends  for  its  existence  and  sustenance  on  truth,  so  does  the 
community ;  if  one  child  needs  food,  so  do  aU  the  children  ;  and  though  differences 
may  be  made  to  suit  various  appetites,  yet  chemical  analysis  shows  that  the  foods 
are  the  same  in  their  primal  elements.     And  all  spiritual  communions  must  find 
a  common  spiritual  basis.     Feeling  is  too  shifting  for  this   basis,  conduct   too 
indefinite,  negation  too  cold  and  unsubstantial,  ceremony  too  formal  and  outward, 
and  those  combinations  which  are  formed  by  the  sinking  of  convictions  are  immoral 
and  hollow.     No ;  the  first  requisite  for  Christian  union  is  that  there  shall  be  a  due 
regard  to  Christian  conviction.     2.  We  sometimes  talk  of  truth  as  though  it  were 
in  the  air,  in  documents,  in  the  mystic  utterance  of  the  whole  body  of  believing 
people.     Yet  ultimately  it  must  be  found  in  the  individual  soul.     This  is  where 
error  is,  and  not  merely  in  magazines  and  lectures.     A  number  of  individuals, 
then,  tenaciously  holding  the  same  beliefs,  constitutes  a  spiritual  community,  and 
no  Church  is  so  destitute  of  the  first  principles  of  common  sense  as  to  seek  fellow- 
ship apart  from  understood  and  common  beliefs.     The  Unitarian  may  say,  "  We 
do  not  lay  down  any  doctrinal  basis  for  our  fellowship,"  yet  a  preacher  who  pro- 
claimed the  atonement  or  Divinity  of  Christ  would  have  but  a  sorry  welcome.     3. 
Churches  exist  for  the  very  purpose  of  proclaiming  Christian  truth.     If  truth  has 
gone,  their  mission  has  gone,  and  thirsty  souls  wiU  go  to  them  and  find  no  living 
water.    III.  That  for  Christian  doctrine  we  are  dependent  on  revelation.     God 
did  not  leave  men  to  find  out  the  truth  concerning  Himself ;  He  revealed  it.    When 
He  revealed  it  He  did  not  leave  it  to  take  care  of  itself.     Both  the  revelation  and 
the  record  are  monuments  of  God's  special  love  to  man.     The  idea  of  the  super- 
natural is  particularly  obnoxious  to  "advanced  thinkers";  they  are  consequently 
ever  on  the  look-out  for  evidence  that  Christianity  was  only  a  product  of  the  human 
mind,  and  so  on  a  level  with  all  other  religions.    But  Christianity  professes  to  be  a 
new  and  supernatural  departure  in  the  history  of  rehgion,  and  the  apostles  are  the 
Divinely  appointed  media  of  the  Divine  revelation.     Their  "  doctrine  "  concerns 
the  life,  death,  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord,  and  who  so  competent  as  they  to 
deliver  it,  and  who  shall  contest  it  as  it  comes  from  their  lips  or  pens  ?     Matthew 
was  a  chosen  companion  of  Christ's;  Mark  was  a  convert  of  Peter's,  and  a  comrade 
of  Paul's  ;  Luke  had  "  a  perfect  understanding  of  all  things  from  the  first "  ;  John 
was  "  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,"  and  "  we  know  that  his  testimony  is  true." 
Peter  was  an  eye-witness  of  His  majesty,  and  did  *'  not  follow  cunningly  devised 
fables."     To  Paul  the  risen  Christ  appeared  as  to  one  born  out  of  due  time,  and 
"he  received  of  the  Lord  that  which  he  also  delivered"  to  his  converts.     If  we 
want  trustworthy  guides,  these  are  the  men  to  help  us.     IV.  That  the  power  of 
Christian  churches  lies,  amongst  other  things,  in  their  adherence  to  Christian 
doctrines.     If  men  want  to  be  strong  and  aggressive,  they  must  not  be  easily 
moved  by  the  threatening  sounds  of  modern  unbelief  ;  they  must  know  their  own 
minds  and  the  mind  of  Christ.     In  moral  conflicts  convictions  are  the  only  forces 
that  will  do  lasting  service.      {S.  Pearson,  31. A.)  The  disciplined  life  of  the 

Church: — "They  continued  steadfastly."  The  word  seems  to  imply  a  double 
action ;  first,  that  of  stretching  out  the  hand  to  grasp  firmly ;  and  having  done 
this,  to  adhere  strongly  to  the  object  in  our  possession.  They  were  persever- 
ingly  devoted  to — 1.  The  apostles'  doctrine;  the  great,  deep,  broad  fundamental 
truths  and  principles  upon  which  the  whole  catholic  faith  is  founded,  and 
according  to  which  tlie  lives  of  the  members  of  the  Church  must  be  regulated 
and  conformed.  Before  we  proceed  to  teach  a  truth,  before  we  even  profess  to 
embody  a  truth  in  life  and  conduct,  we  should  have  a  clear  conception  of  the 
same.  And  before  we  ask  others  to  frame  their  life  and  conduct  according  to  these 
principles,  we  must  see  that  upon  them  and  according  to  them  we  frame  and  fashion 
our  own.  A  profession  without  practice  will  never  tend  to  the  conversion  of  others, 
it  can  only  bring  ridicule  and  contempt  upon  ourselves.  2.  The  apostles'  fellow- 
ship. Besides  the  community  of  principle,  there  was  a  community  of  life.  Nothing 
tends  to  give  principles  so  much  force  as  seeing  and  feeling  them  embodied,  not 
merely  in  the  lives  of  isolated  individuals,  but  in  the  life  of  a  society.  The  power 
of  a  small  united  body  of  men  is  many  times  greater  than  that  of  each  separate  unit 
multiplied  by  the  whole  number.  Let  us  remember  that  the  wisdom  and  teaching 
of  the  Church  is  more  perfect  than  that  of  any  individual  within  it.     Let  us  culti* 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  il. 

vate  a  spirit  of  watchful  obedience ;  and  let  us  be  careful  to  check  in  ourselves  or 
in  others  a  spirit  of  self-wisdom,  which,  could  we  only  regard  it  in  its  true  light, 
■would  be  seen  to  be  little  more  than  the  spirit  of  selfishness.  3.  The  breaking  of 
the  bread.  They  were  careful  to  be  regular  commuuicants.  The  most  familiar 
name  of  that  sacred  service  reminds  us  that  it  is  meant  to  be  a  bond  of  union ; 
those  who  neglect  to  partake  thereof  are,  by  absenting  themselves  from  it,  guilty  of 
encouraging  divisions  in  the  Church.  In  the  Holy  Communion  God  calls  us  to 
rejoice  with  Him  over  the  celebration  of  the  closest  union  between  the  Divine  and 
the  human.  It  is  the  spirit  of  selfishness  which  causes  us  to  disobey  that  call. 
But  the  Holy  Communion  is  more  than  the  chief  bond  of  unity  in  the  Church.  It  is 
in  worthily  partaking  of  the  blessings  offered  there  that  the  Christian  soldier 
receives  his  chief  support ;  there  he  gains  the  strength  he  needs  in  the  day  of  battle  ; 
there  he  re-equips  himself  for  active  service.  4.  The  prayers.  As  they  had  a 
common  creed  and  a  common  life,  as  they  joined  together  in  the  participation  of 
the  Holy  Communion,  so  they  took  part  in  a  form  of  common  prayer.  The 
principal  feature  of  the  prayer-book  upon  which  I  |would  now  dwell  is  this — it 
teaches  regular,  systematic,  common  and  public  prayer.  Nothing  ministers  more 
surely  to  the  unity  of  faith  and  the  unity  of  life  than  the  unity  of  worship.  That 
we  think  the  same  thing,  that  we  aspire  towards  the  same  ideal,  that  we  ask  the 
same  blessing,  the  prayer-book  is  ever  reminding  us.  (IF.  E.  Ghadwick,  31. A.) 
Steadfastness  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship  : — Proofs  of  the  reality  of  alleged  ^ 
conversions  are  always  desirable.  No  man  ought  to  feel  offended  if  both  the  Church' 
and  the  world  demand  such  proof.  If  the  change  is  real,  the  evidence  will  be  forth- 
coming. Profession  will  not  do,  for  without  corresponding  life  it  is  mere  assertion. 
For  a  man  to  say  he  is  a  Christian  does  not  make  him  one.  The  only  satisfactory 
evidence  is  that  given  by  these  Pentecostal  converts  by  stedfastness  in — I.  The 
apostles'  docteine.  1.  Sudden  conversions  are  not  always  lasting.  Many  causes  may 
bring  about  a  change  of  view.  It  is  difiicult  even  for  a  man  of  calm  self-possession  to 
retain  the  mastery  of  his  emotions  and  keep  himself  free  from  the  influence  of  that 
strong  sympathetic  feeling  which,  like  an  electric  current,  runs  through  a  crowd. 
Thus  by  the  able  orator  or  the  artful  demagogue  marvellous  effects  are  often  produced, 
and  many  a  so-called  conversion  has  been  so  effected.  For  the  moment  it  is 
undeniably  sincere,  but  the  impression  is  due  to  passing  sympathy  with  an  earnest 
soul  rather  than  with  the  truth  declared  ;  and  the  sequel  often  is  unstedfastness 
in  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  The  cause  ceases,  and  the  effect  disappears.  The 
sympathy  dies  out  for  want  of  fresh  stimulus.  Like  a  house  without  a  foundation, 
the  assumed  Christian  profession  may  be  swept  into  ruin  by  the  first  tempest.  It 
is  like  a  human  body  whose  spinal  column  has  been  materially  damaged ;  artificial 
props  are  necessary  to  shore  it  up  and  prevent  its  collapse.  2.  One  test,  then,  of 
sincere  adhesion  to  Christ  is  stedfast  adherence  to  His  teaching — a  life  in  accord- 
ance with  His  precepts.  This  proof  of  conversion  these  converts  had.  With  us  it 
is  not  a  difficult  thing  to  make  a  profession.  In  certain  circles  this  is  a  badge  of 
respectability.  But  then  it  was  to  incur  serious  peril.  These  converts  were  true 
converts,  and  therefore  became  assiduous  scholars  in  Christ's  school,  and  when 
the  day  of  cool  reflection  or  hot  persecution  came,  they  were  not  moved  from  their 
stedfastness.  The  more  they  knew  of  the  doctrine,  tiie  more  they  deemed  it  worth 
the  sacrifice.  II.  In  fellowship.  The  disciples  were  no  longer  a  mere  family, 
but  a  community.  They  had  now  ceased  to  be  the  private  followers  of  a  man ; 
they  stood  before  the  world  as  a  church,  a  living  body,  all  whose  members  were  iu 
fellowship.  And  so  we  come  thus  early  to  the  root  idea  of  the  Church.  It  is  a 
brotherhood  conferring  privileges  upon,  yet  demanding  duties  from,  every  one  of 
its  members.  Each  is  a  partner  in  a  firm,  and  as  such  is  bound  to  promote  the 
interests  of  the  concern.  But  it  is  a  concern  that  can  neither  conduct  its  operations 
with  borrowed  capital,  nor  permit  the  presence  of  any  sleeping  partners.  It  is  a 
living  body,  whose  graceful  movement  is  as  much  impeded  by  an  inactive  member 
as  is  the  action  of  the  body  by  a  diseased  limb.  The  rich  are  to  help  the  poor,  and 
the  strong  the  weak ;  the  wise  are  to  be  the  advisers  of  the  ignorant,  <fec.  The 
converts  at  Pentecost  recognised  all  this,  and  thus  proved  the  reality  of  their 
conversion.  "Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ." 
( W.  M.  Arthur,  M.A.)  The  use  of  fellowship : — The  community  of  spirit  suggested 
in  the  word  here  rendered  "  fellowship  "  must  have  grown  out  of  the  instant  recog- 
nition of  the  rule,  "  A  place  for  every  man,  and  every  man  in  his  place."  One  of  the 
most  successful  preachers  in  modern  times,  being  asked  how  he  was  able  to  accom- 
plish  so  much  good  in  the  course  of  a  year,  replied,  "  It  is  not  I  that  do  it,  but  the 


CHAP.  11.]  THE  ACTS.  245 

Church  I  serve ;  I  preach  as  hard  as  I  can  on  Sunday,  and  then  I  have  seven 
hundred  members  who  go  out  and  preach  every  day  of  the  week  afterwards." 
(C  S.  liohinson,  D.D.)  The  primitive  fellowship  at  Jerusalem  was  : — I.  Founded 
ON  A  NEW  DOCTRINE.  1.  This  doctrine  was  in  harmony  with  and  fulfihnent  of  the 
old,  but  yet  it  was  new.  Its  subject  was  the  hfe,  death,  &c.,  of  Christ,  and  the 
salvation  which  His  work  had  brought  to  man.  2.  This  doctrine,  received  by  faith 
and  apphed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  became  spirit  and  life  to  the  hearers.  There  were, 
of  course,  no  church  buildings;  the  meetings,  therefore,  could  only  be  held  in  the 
Temple  courts  or  in  private  houses.  Wonderful  evenings  must  those  have  been 
which  were  spent  in  the  spacious  apartments  of  such  as,  being  wealthier,  kept 
open  house — evenings  not  only  of  hearing  the  doctrine,  but  of  worship,  mutual 
converse,  frugal  feasting,  and  winding  up  with  the  Lord's  Supper.  But  it  was  to  learn 
about  Jesus  that  mainly  brought  them  tog^ther.  II.  Inspired  by  a  new  life.  1. 
This  life  began  in  repentance  and  faith,  and  broke  out  of  cloud  into  sunshine,  and 
from  embryo  into  active  and  joyous  expression  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
It  was  the  soul  of  the  new  fellowship,  the  spring  of  its  development,  the  source 
of  its  tendencies  and  laws.  2.  This  new  life,  like  the  new  doctrine,  was  one  with 
the  old,  but  so  much  fuller,  and  more  intense  and  glorious,  that  it  may  justly  be 
called  new.  Moreover,  it  was  poured  forth  with  so  free  and  wide  a  bounty  that  it  may 
"well  be  called  the  donation  of  a  new  life  to  the  Church,  and  through  it  to  the  world. 
3.  This  new  life  belongs  to  every  penitent  believer,  and  there  is  no  "higher  life" 
than  this,  although  it  has  its  stages  from  the  "  babe  "  to  the  "  father  "  in  Christ. 
It  is  in  fact  that  "  life  eternal,"  which  is  to  "  know  the  only  true  God  and  Jesus 
Christ  whom  He  has  sent."  4.  This  new  life  made  all  things  new.  5.  Its  secret 
and  its  relations  to  Divine  truth  and  holy  duty  are  summed  up  in  1  Pet.  i.  22,  23. 
Faith  is  obedience  to  the  truth  ;  tbe  new  life  develops  itself  in  holy  love.  III.  Ex- 
pressed and  sustained  by  new  means  and  developments.  1.  Fellowship  meetings  from 
house  to  house,  where  speech  and  prayer  were  free  to  each,  were  tbe  ordinary  means 
of  common  edification,  and  appear  for  some  time  to  have  been  the  only  specific  and 
characteristic  means  maintained  in  the  Church  at  Jerusalem.  There  was  neither 
ritual  nor  organisation,  but  the  primary  germ  cell  was  there  in  the  fellowship  meet- 
ings, and  we  are  thus  shown  what  is  the  true  substratum  of  Church  organisation 
and  life.  Without  this  a  so-called  church  is  not  a  living  Christian  community. 
However  complete  its  organisation  may  become,  it  is  bound  to  retain  its  character 
as  a  spiritual  commonwealth,  instinct  with  free  life.  2.  This  new  life  grafted  on  its 
new  means  new  developments  of  mutual  care.  The  converts  did  not  say  that  any- 
thing was  their  own  ;  they  acknowledged  themselves  to  be  not  proprietors,  but 
stewards.  There  was  a  vast  number  of  pauper  Jews,  and  we  may  be  sure  that  the 
fountain  of  Pharisaic  beneficence  would  be  sealed  against  them  when  they  became 
Christians.  It  was  therefore  incumbent  upon  their  believing  brethren  to  make 
provision  for  their  necessities.  And  in  that  hour  of  loving  enthusiasm  their  generosity 
knew  no  bounds.  This  was  no  new  principle.  It  lay  at  the  root  of  all  Bible  ethics, 
but  it  had  never  been  fully  acted  on  by  a  whole  community  before.  IV.  Sealed  by 
kew  sacraments — baptism  atd  "the  breaking  of  bread."  The  latter  was  a  natural 
and  beautiful  finish  to  their  social  meals  and  sacred  exercises.  As  multitudes  were 
continually  joining  the  Church,  we  may  believe  that  at  each  gathering,  house  by 
house,  there  were  fresh  converts.  To  these  the  seal  of  the  Holy  Communion  would 
rightfully  be  given  as  consummating  their  union  and  fellowship  with  the  company 
of  believers.  V.  Maintained  in  harmony  with  the  earlier  ordinances  of  public 
worship  as  established  in  the  Temple  services.  "  The  prayers  "  were  the  daily 
prayers  of  the  Temple.  Thus  in  the  providence  of  God  it  was  ordered  that  the 
Christian  Church  should  take  root,  and  partially  unfold  its  form  and  glory  within 
the  ground  of  Judaism.  The  unity  and  continuity  of  the  Divine  dispensations  was 
thus  to  be  set  forth.  {J.  H.  Rigg,  D.D.)  Christian  fellowship: — I.  Its  hin- 
drances. 1.  Exaggerated  individualism.  (1)  It  is  a  grand  truth  that  religion  lies 
between  the  solitary  soul  and  God,  and  that  no  priest  has  any  right  to  intermeddle 
with  it.  Alone  we  were  born  into  the  new  world  ;  alone  we  have  to  wrestle  in  it ; 
alone  we  shall  die.  (2)  But  we  have  exaggerated  this  principle,  and  thrown  the  idea 
of  the  Church  into  the  shade.  The  lonely  pilgrim  travels  to  the  Cross,  but  to  find 
there  "  the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the  first-born."  Yet  there  are  those  in 
our  churches  who  do  not  share,  or  only  feebly,  this  common  life.  To  them  public 
worship  differs  only  from  private  in  being  offered  publicly.  They  eat  their  portion 
.alone,  and  come  and  go,  knowing  only  the  man  who  preaches,  and  the  man  who 
collects  pew  rents.     It  may  be  they  are  constitutionally  shy,  or  self-absorbed,  or 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

unhappy.  But  they  are  spots  in  our  feasts  of  charity,  and  icebergs  which  chill  the 
gulf  stream  of  the  Church's  life.  (3)  We  need  to  be  reminded  that  the  Church  is 
not  a  club,  hotel,  or  a  mere  voluntary  association,  but  a  home,  and  that  they  can 
no  more  denude  themselves  of  their  spiritual  than  they  can  of  their  natural  rela- 
tionships. 2.  Social  distinctions.  (1)  It  is  a  dark  day  for  any  Church  when  it 
declares  its  special  mission  to  be  to  any  one  class,  or  when  a  Church  consists  of  any 
one  class.  This  is  a  danger  which  menaces  modern  Church  life.  The  rich  gravi- 
tate to  the  suburbs,  the  poor  crowd  into  the  towns,  her  great  gulf  yawns  between. 
(2)  The  ideal  relation  is  when  rich  and  poor  meet  together  on  the  same  common 
level — before  the  Lord,  the  Master  and  Eedeemer  of  them  all.  We  need  to  b& 
reminded  that  squire  and  labourer,  master  and  clerk,  mistress  and  maid,  have  com- 
mitted the  same  sins,  felt  the  same  penitence,  been  redeemed  by  the  same  sacrifice. 
If  the  life  of  the  Church  is  not  strong  enough  to  perfect  this  union,  and  enable  men 
to  rise  above  such  things,  seen  and  temporal,  as  distinctions  of  rank,  to  things 
unseen  and  eternal,  it  is  time  we  consider  how  to  recover  the  diviner  spirit  of  earlier 
days.  3.  The  caste  of  culture.  Superior  persons  who  are  acquainted  with  all  the 
scientific  objections  to  Christianity  look  down  upon  the  uninitiated  as  Philistines. 
Then  there  are  those  half-time  Christians  who  contend  that  their  spiritual  culture 
can  be  promoted  quite  as  well  by  private  reading  as  public  worship,  and  attend  once 
a  day  merely  for  example.  Such  forget  that  the  Saviour  was  the  Friend  of 
publicans  and  sinners,  and  thanked  God  for  hiding  things  from  the  wise  and' 
prudent,  and  for  revealing  them  unto  babes.  4.  The  spirit  of  faction.  "  Mark  them 
which  cause  divisions  among  you."  How  many  are  they  1  On  what  slight  grounds 
and  paltry  pretexts  they  disturb  the  peace  of  the  Church !  With  what  arrogance 
do  they  judge  and  condemn  brethren  whose  lives  are  as  pure  as  theirs  1  II. 
Pkactical  remedies.  1.  We  must  train  our  young  members,  and  inculcate  upon 
them  the  duties  as  well  as  the  privileges  of  Church  fellowship.  2.  Our  churches 
must  be  organised  for  work.  There  must  be  no  drones  in  the  hive.  No  member 
ought  to  secure  exemption  by  money  payment  from  personal  service.  It  was  when 
the  people  had  a  mind  to  work  that  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  rose.  Pastor  Oncken, 
of  Hamburg,  gathered  a  church  of  three  thousand,  the  distinctive  feature  of  which 
was  that  each  was  pledged  to  personal  service.  In  our  churches  the  most  beautiful 
and  spiritually  operative  brotherly  love  is  found  among  those  who,  in  Sunday-schools, 
tract  societies,  <fec.,  are  associated  in  effort  ta  advance  the  cause  of  Christ.  3. 
Meetings  of  the  Church  might  be  held  distinct  from  those  for  business,  for  mutual 
conference,  after  the  pattern  of  Methodist  class  meetings,  where  "  whosoever  hath 
a  psalm,  a  doctrine,  a  revelation,  an  interpretation,"  might  feel  at  liberty  to  impart 
it.  The  patient  sufferings  of  the  sick  and  poor,  their  quiet  trust  in  God's  love  might 
rebuke  our  discontent,  and  teach  us  the  meaning  of  Divine  support  and  consolation. 
The  rough  honest  speech  of  a  working  man  telling  the  story  of  his  difiiculties 
might  give  the  well-to-do  an  insight  into  hardships  which  they  are  in  danger  of 
forgettmg,  while  a  business  man  frankly  telling  his  difficulties  might  remind  the 
poor  man  that  the  prosperous  have  temptations  from  which  he  is  spared.  Such 
conferences  would  create  a  mutual  trust  and  affection  fruitful  in  a  thousand  acts  of 
brotherliness.  (A.  Wilson,  B.A.)  In  prayers. — Prayer  meetings  as  affecting  the 
prosperity  of  the  Church: — If  we  regard  prayer  meetings  merely  as  expedients 
appointed  by  men  and  having  no  sanction  from  the  Word  of  God,  we  may,  perhaps, 
be  disposed  to  treat  them  lightly.  And  it  is  very  much  to  be  feared  that  this  is  the 
view  taken  by  many  of  prayer  meetings,  because — 1.  They  are  generally  so  thinly 
attended.  2.  They  are  so  disparaged — "  It  is  only  a  prayer  meeting."  Let  us  show, 
then — I.  That  prayer  meetings  are  Scriptural.  We  find  here  that  when  those 
who  gladly  received  the  Word  had  been  baptized,  they  "  continued  stedfastly,"  not 
once  or  twice  or  occasionally,  "  in  prayers,"  in  fact  as  stedfast  as  in  "  doctrine,"  &c. 
Social  prayer  is  placed  on  a  level  in  point  of  importance  with  apostolic  doctrine  and 
the  Lord's  Supper.  Why,  then,  should  the  one  be  comparatively  lost  sight  of  by  the 
churches,  whilst  the  others  are  regarded  as  essential  to  the  profession  of  Chris- 
tianity ?  Those  who  neglected  "  the  assembling  of  themselves  together "  were 
denounced  by  the  apostle,  and  the  continumce  of  fellowship  is  here  associated  with 
continuance  in  prayer.  Now  if  we  look  at  any  other  part  of  the  Word  of  God,  we 
shall  find  the  same  thing  uniformly  brought  before  us  as  the  practice  of  the  Church. 
In  chap.  i.  14-15  we  find  that  such  was  the  practice  before  the  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit.  We  come  next  to  chap,  iv.,  and  after  Peter  and  John  had  been  dismissed  we 
find,  in  ver.  33,  they  reported  all  that  the  chief  priests  and  elders  had  said  unta 
them.     Then  there  was  a  prayer  meeting,  and  the  prayers  offered  were  honoured 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  247- 

with  a  remarkable  reply  from  heaven  (ver.  31).  In  chap.  xii.  Peter  was  apprehended 
and  kept  in  prison.  The  Church,  however,  had  prayer  meetings  on  his  behalf. 
And  the  prayer  was  granted  before  the  prayer  meeting  was  broken  up.  I  have  not 
quoted  passages  in  the  Epistles  where  supplication  and  prayer  are  enjoined  on  the 
churches,  but,  glancing  generally  at  these  exhortations,  are  you  to  suppose  that  they 
ask  for  the  prayers  merely  of  individuals  as  such  ?  When  they  call  upon  the  Church 
to  do  anything,  do  they  not  call  upon  the  Church  to  do  it  as  a  public  body,  and  in  a 
pubHc  way  ?  Taking  this  view  of  the  matter,  you  will  find  aU  the  apostolic  exhor- 
tations to  supplication  bearing  upon  the  apostolic  practice,  and  then  the  evidence 
that  prayer  meetings,  properly  so  called,  were  a  part  of  the  practice  of  the  apostolic 
churches  will  be  found  to  be  complete.  II.  What  benefit  will  accede  fkom  such 
MEETINGS.  1.  Union  of  feeling  must  arise  in  the  Church.  When  the  same  minds 
are  before  the  same  throne  of  grace ;  when  the  same  acknowledgment  is  made  of 
common  transgressions,  and  the  same  faith  is  exercised  in  a  common  Saviour ;  and 
when  the  whole  mind  of  a  combined  people  is  consecrated  by  the  solemnity  of  their 
common  supplications,  surely  there  must  be  the  elements  of  a  union  far  surpassing 
any  other  that  can  exist.  It  is  this  very  circumstance  that  frequently  leads  people 
to  think  highly  of  unions  by  no  means  scriptural  in  their  character.  2.  As  that 
united  feeling  becomes  sanctified  prayer  meetings  will  also  tend  to  strengthen 
spiritual  devotion  in  the  Church.  Devotion  may  be  regarded  as  an  ardent  feeling 
in  connection  with  religious  matters  ;  with  or  without  scriptural  light  and  authority 
the  latter  may  be  created  in  a  variety  of  ways.  The  solemnities  of  high  mass 
create  that  feeliag  in  the  Church  of  Eome.  The  splendour  of  its  statuary  and  its 
paintings  ;  the  richness  of  its  structures ;  the  grandeur  of  its  rites ;  the  elevating 
influence  of  its  music,  all  will  be  found  having  a  tendency  to  create  an  ardent  feeling 
in  connection  with  religious  matters.  But  this  is  not  religious  feeling  accompanied 
with  scriptural  light  and  scriptural  sobriety.  In  the  midst  of  the  thrilling  influences 
to  which  they  are  subject,  remind  them  that  these  structures  were  raised  by  a 
system  that  destroyed  the  souls  of  men,  and  took  away  liberty  as  regarded  their 
bodies.  Tell  them  to  observe  that  such  places  were  never  intended  for  instruction. 
Let  them  afterwards  look  at  the  plainer  structures  which  were  evidently  intended 
for  instruction.  It  is  very  clear  that  the  feeling  I  have  described  is  not  to  be  found 
there  ;  but  at  the  same  time  the  light  of  scriptural  truth  will  be  found  operating, 
and  the  calm  and  practical  influence  of  genuine  Christianity  will  be  found  to  have 
superseded  the  feeling  of  excitement  and  religious  awe.  Now,  if  we  look  at  devo- 
tional feeling  in  both  these  points  of  view,  where  are  we  to  find  that  which  is  reaUy 
scriptural  so  clearly  exhibited  as  in  prayer  meetings  ?  Go  to  the  humble  prayer 
meeting  ;  let  there  be  no  influence  there  but  the  influence  of  heaven  :  let  there  be 
no  power  but  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  let  the  mind  be  directed  by  scriptural 
light  and  by  scriptural  desires,  expressed  in  scriptural  petitions,  and  you  have  there 
the  exhibition  of  a  plain  and  practical  Christianity,  which,  while  it  has  fellowship 
with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son,  exercises  a  sufficient  command  over  the  physical 
economy  to  prevent  that  extravagance  which  deludes  in  the  manner  that  I  have 
described.  3.  Prayer  meetings  are  calculated  to  promote  the  spread  of  God's  glory 
in  the  Church.  We  know  that  they  bring  the  glory  of  God  before  the  supplicants 
with  a  degree  of  spirituality  and  power  unknown  in  any  other  circumstances,  and 
that  therefore  they  are  best  fitted,  best  armed,  for  the  field  in  which  God  calls  upon 
them  to  act  when  they  have  received  common  refreshment  at  the  footstool  of  the 
Majesty  on  high.  4.  Prayer  meetings  are  calculated  to  raise  the  Church  above  the 
secular  influence  and  spirit  by  which  churches  are  often  divided.  If  individuals 
belonging  to  a  Christian  Church  are  habitually  separated  from  one  another ;  if  they 
know  little  or  nothing  about  one  another ;  when  any  question  arises  in  that 
Church,  how  ill  provided  are  they  to  treat  it  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  devotion.  In 
such  a  state  of  things  every  man  feels  that  he  has  to  seek  his  own  will  in  reference 
to  the  question,  and  there  is  likely  to  be  a  conflagration  of  feeling  in  the  Church. 
But  let  them  come  from  the  throne  where  they  have  often  asked  for  that  help  by 
which  they  may  work  together  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  charity ;  let  them  come 
from  the  place  where  God  has  often  been  felt  to  be  present ;  and  let  something  then 
be  suggested  that  may  for  a  moment  lead  to  debate,  and  you  will  see  the  whole 
Christian  brotherhood  acting  as  those  who  know  what  it  is  to  feel  together  the 
sanctifying  influence  of  devotion.  The  peace  of  the  Church,  therefore,  is  involved 
in  prayer  meetings.  5.  When  prayer  meetings  are  conducted  spiritually,  the  Church 
itself  will  be  found  to  exhibit  to  tlie  world  more  of  the  spirit  by  which  the  Church 
must  be  actuated  before  the  gospel  can  triumph.     If  the  Saviour  prayed  that  His 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

people  might  be  one,  as  He  was  one  with  the  Father,  in  order  "  that  the  world  might 
believe  that  He  had  sent  Him";  i.e.,  made  their  union  evidence  of  the  truth  of 
Christianity ;  and  if  the  Saviour,  at  the  same  time,  held  up  His  people  as  a  praying 
psople,  and  promised  that  whatever  they  should  ask  in  His  name  He  would  bestow  ; 
the  world  finding  all  this  laid  down  in  our  statute  book,  will  look  to  see  how  far  it 
is  carried  out  in  our  practice.  Let  them  see,  then,  that  prayer  meetings  are  duly 
attended;  and  they  wiU  be  ready  to  acknowledge  that  God  is  "among  you  of  a 
truth  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  24).  III.  What  are  the  eeal  objections  ?  The  only  objection 
that  I  know  is  that  people  cannot  give  two  evenings  in  the  week.  You  have,  then, 
to  take  the  prayer  meeting  and  the  meeting  for  public  assembly,  and  to  ask  which 
is  the  more  important  of  the  two  ;  or  you  have  to  compare  the  two  meetings  with 
your  other  employments,  and  to  determine  to  which  you  shall  give  the  preference. 
Is  the  business  to  which  you  have  to  attend  on  the  two  evenings,  or  on  one  of  them, 
more  important  than  the  assembly  or  the  prayer  meeting ;  then  attend  to  that 
business.  The  very  same  remark  will  apply  to  the  Sabbath  day.  {J.  Burnet.) 
And  fear  came  upon  every  soul. — Church  life  : — Note — 1.  The  effect  produced 
UPON  beholders  wri'HOUT.  "  And  fear  came  upon  every  soul."  One  explanation 
of  this  may  be  found  in  the  clause  which  follows.  Proofs  daily  witnessed  of  the 
Divine  presence  could  not  fail  to  strike  fear  into  the  hearts  of  those  who  looked  on 
without  obeying.  But  there  is  more  than  that.  The  effect  upon  the  wicked  Herod 
of  the  charac'ier  of  the  Baptist  was  fear,  little  as  was  the  ground  for  it  in  an  earthly 
sense.  So  it  was  here.  Christians  do  not  always  know  their  own  power.  What 
fears  do  young  Christians  often  experience  in  the  prospect  of  opposition  or 
ridicule !  Let  them  go  forward  in  the  path  of  duty,  and  they  will  find  that 
"  Greater  is  He  that  is  in  them  than  he  that  is  in  the  world."  So  far  from 
having  anything  to  fear,  you  have  all  of  you  the  power  of  striking  a  wholesome  and 
perhaps  a  saving  fear  into  the  enemies  of  Christ  by  a  bright  and  consistent  example. 
That  is  a  testimony  which  men  cannot  gainsay.  All  else  they  may  laugh  at :  your 
persuasions,  warnings,  arguments  ;  but  your  example  wiU  make  its  way  into  their 
consciences.  That  is  the  one  weapon  which  a  woman,  which  a  child  may  wield, 
and  which  no  coat  of  mail  is  close  enough  to  evade  or  strong  enough  to  parry.  II. 
Their  union  and  beneficence  (vers.  44-45).  In  the  first  ardour  of  their  new 
conviction  they  obeyed  literally  the  direction  to  "  lay  up  for  themselves  no  treasures 
on  earth";  to  "sell  that  they  had,  and  give  alms";  to  "forsake  all  and  follow 
Christ."  They  could  not  bear  to  have  while  anotlier  wanted.  Nothing  but  a  real 
community  of  goods  could  satisfy  their  Christian  instincts.  It  was  an  example  for 
aU  times.  1.  Not,  however,  in  form.  There  is  no  inspired  rule,  applicable  to  all 
cases,  for  this.  We  find  St.  Paul,  e.g.,  recommending  a  liberal  contribution, 
according  to  the  circumstances  of  each  man,  to  the  relief  of  the  poor  saints  at 
Jerusalem  ;  and  in  another,  advising  that  on  the  first  day  of  each  week  every  one 
should  "  lay  by  him  in  store  "  for  this  purpose  "  as  God  had  prospered  him."  This 
could  not  have  been  done  if  in  the  Church  of  Corinth  there  had  been  a  community 
of  possessions.  How  different  was  this  example  from  anything  which  the  world 
has  since  witnessed  1  It  has  been  the  dream  of  theorists  to  see  all  distinction  of 
ranks  levelled,  and  a  whole  congregation,  or  nation,  living  in  brotherly  concord 
upon  the  common  property  of  all.  But  every  such  scheme  has  been  based  upon 
assumptions  hasty  in  themselves  and  mischievous  in  their  consequences.  In 
Christian  bodies  the  attempt  to  establish  a  system  of  communion  has  led  more 
often  to  the  exclusion  than  to  the  consideration  of  the  poor.  Among  political 
speculators  the  principle  of  communism  has  been  too  often  absolutely  anti-Christian ; 
and  a  hatred  of  subordination  has  been  the  secret  spring  of  much  professed  zeal  for 
the  rights  of  man,  and  of  much  declamation  tipon  the  interests  of  society.  The 
example  before  us  was  of  a  widely  different  kind  from  either  of  these.  It  was  the 
spontaneous,  natural,  and  temporary  effect  of  a  fresh  faith,  a  lively  hope,  and  a 
genuine  charity.  In  its  form  it  was  not  and  it  could  not  be  permanent.  While  it 
continued  it  was  a  wonderful  testimony  to  the  strength  of  the  new  religion  in  the 
hearts  of  those  who  believed.  "  See  how  these  Christians  love,"  might  well  be  the 
comment  of  those  who  looked  on  upon  a  scene  so  unlike  the  world  of  common  life. 
Judge  ye  what  there  is,  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  which  would  have  made  any  one  of  us 
go  and  do  likewise.  2.  And  though  the  form  of  that  entire  self-sacrifice  may  vary — 
and  we  believe  that  our  Master  designed  that  it  should  vary  with  the  varying 
circumstances  of  the  world  and  of  His  Church — let  us  not  forget  that  the  spirit  of 
t>iis  life  must  be  ours.  If  it  be  the  best  on  the  whole  for  the  true  welfare  of  society 
that  each  man  be  the  possessor  of  the  fruits  of  his  own  toil,  and  the  uncontrolled 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  249 

steward  of  his  own  resources  ;  if  many  high  and  Christian  purposes  are  answered 
by  that  gradation  of  ranks  and  that  variety  of  fortunes  which  is  the  form  of  society 
under  which  God  has  placed  us  ;  yet  let  us  not  forget  that  one  end,  perhaps  the 
chief  end,  to  be  answered  by  this  arrangement,  is,  that  each  man,  "  working  with 
his  hands  the  thing  that  is  good,"  may  thereby  "have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth"; 
that  every  one  may  be  able  to  exercise  his  individual  judgment  upon  various  objects 
of  piety  and  charity  proposed  to  him ;  but  certainly  not  that  any  one  may  be  at 
liberty  to  say,  I  prefer  keeping  to  myself,  and  to  my  own,  all  that  I  possess.  III. 
Their  pkivate  and  domestic  life  (vers.  46-47).  1.  The  life  of  a  true  Christian 
ought  to  be  and  will  be  a  happy  life.  His  very  food  has  a  blessing.  He  praises 
God  over  it.  He  partakes  of  it  in  gladness.  It  is  to  him  the  token  of  a  Father's 
love.  He  receives  it,  as  out  of  God's  hand,  in  his  own.  And  the  heart  which  is 
glad  is  described  as  a  "single"  or  a  •' simple  "  heart.  The  word  denotes  properly 
smooth  or  level ;  it  is  the  epithet  of  a  field  or  a  road  out  of  which  the  stones  have 
been  carefully  gathered,  so  that  it  presents  no  impediment  to  the  plough  of  the 
husbandman  or  the  feet  of  the  traveller.  A  stoneless  heart  is  one  which  has  no 
impediments  or  obstacles  in  it ;  one  out  of  which  the  roughnesses  of  temper  and  the 
stumblingblocks  of  sin  have  been  removed  by  grace,  so  that  it  is  now  level  and  even, 
smooth  in  its  course,  and  gentle  in  its  contact.  2.  And  this  may  explain  how  it 
should  be  that  a  life  which  inspired  fear  was  also  one  of  "  favour  with  all  the 
people."  A  Christian  life  is  a  witness  against  sinfulness  and  carelessness.  It 
awakens  slumbering  consciences,  testifying  of  realities  above  not  to  be  forgotten 
without  danger.  In  this  aspect  it  inspires  awe.  But  in  another  it  is  altogether 
lovely.  It  is  written  of  Jesus  that,  as  He  "  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature,"  He 
increased  also  "  in  favour  with  God  and  man."  So  is  it  with  His  people.  Men 
often  show  their  religion  in  unattractive  or  repulsive  forms,  and  then  regard  their 
own  unpopularity  as  a  proof  of  the  world's  hatred  against  religion.  Let  them 
exhibit  their  religion  in  its  aspect  of  a  world-wide  charity,  and  they  wiU  find  it 
otherwise.  They  will  find  that,  while  it  inspires  awe  as  God's  witness,  their  religion 
wins  love  also  as  the  friend  of  man.  IV.  Theib  increase  (ver.  47).  There  is 
nothing  here  of  a  Divine  selection  fixing  by  an  arbitrary  sentence  who  should  and 
who  should  not  be  heirs  of  salvation.  The  words  themselves  say,  "  those  who  were 
in  the  course  (in  the  process)  of  salvation."  Salvation,  if  in  one  sense  a  single  act, 
is  in  another  a  course  of  acts.  A  man  may  forfeit  salvation  ;  he  may  grieve  and 
quench  the  Holy  Spirit ;  he  may  fall  away  and  never  be  renewed  And  while  these 
things  are  possible,  it  is  as  much  as  we  can  say  of  any  man  that  he  is  in  course  of 
salvation.  And  a  great  thing  it  is  to  be  able  to  say  this.  We  cannot  say  this  of  a 
man  who  is  trifling,  or  is  a  despiser  of  the  means  of  grace,  or  is  cherishing  any 
known  sin.  1.  It  is  "the  Lord"  who  adds.  "Without  Him,  without  His  Holy 
Spirit,  what  would  be  Paul  or  ApoUos  or  Cephas,  much  more  we  poor,  erring, 
uninspired  men?  It  was  He  who  "opened  the  heart"  of  Lydia  "that  she 
attended  to  the  things  that  were  spoken  by  Paul."  And  it  is  He  who  opens 
hearts  now  to  attend  to  the  things  spoken  by  His  ministers.  We  want  new 
converts,  and  who  can  add  these  to  our  number,  save  the  Lord  only  ?  2.  It  is  "  to 
the  Church  "  that  the  Lord  adds.  It  is  not  only  secret  desires,  resolutions,  prayers, 
that  we  need  awakening  in  us  ;  there  must  be  an  adding  to  the  Church.  We  ought 
to  be  not  only  a  pious  people,  fulfilling  life's  duties  and  satisfying  life's  relations  in 
the  fear  of  God ;  but  also  a  people  honouring  God,  and  walking  to  heaven  together, 
together  serving  Christ,  and  working  righteousness.  3.  These  additions  were  "  day 
by  day."  The  course  of  this  world  is  a  transitory,  rapid  thing;  we  are  here  to  day, 
and  to-morrow  there.  In  the  meantime  can  we  say  that  there  is  a  daily  Church 
progress?  "The  Lord's  arm  is  not  shortened,"  &c.  Then  why  this  pause  and 
intermission  in  the  work  of  grace  ?  Why  is  it  that  a  minister  counts  himself 
happy  if  but  one  or  two  souls  are  gathered  into  the  Church  below  ?  What  has 
become  of  the  word  "daily"?  Can  we  afford,  any  better  than  the  primitive 
Christians,  to  lose  time  in  this  work  of  adding?  The  world  stops  not  for  our 
loitering ;  life  and  death  stop  not  while  we  linger ;  God  of  His  infinite  mercy  make 
us  feel  the  value  of  time,  and  count  each  day  lost  that  has  not  added  to  His  Church 
one  that  shall  be  saved  I    (Dean  Vaughan.) 

Vers.  44-47.  All  that  believed  were  together,  and  had  all  things  common. — The 
primitive  Christians,  as  here  depicted — I.  Presented  a  new  social  development, 
marked — 1.  By  community  of  goods.  2.  By  judicious  distribution  to  the  needy. 
Poor  people  had,  of  course,  been  relieved  before,  but  not  in  the  systematic  way 


250  THE   BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

which  is  here  seen  to  mark  the  beneficence  of  the  early  Church.  3.  By  a  new  and 
separate  place  of  worship.  Religious  exercises  were  conducted  "  at  home  "  as  well 
as  in  the  Temple.  Thus  the  disciples  were  both  conformists  and  nonconformists. 
II.  Exhibited  notable  personal  characteeistics.  1.  They  were  strongly  attached 
to  one  another.  2.  They  kept  a  good  conscience,  •'  singleness  of  heart."  3.  They 
lived  in  happiness,  "gladness."  4.  They  mingled  devotion  with  all  their  actions, 
"praising  God."  III.  Commanded  the  esteem  op  observers,  "having  favour 
with  all  the  people."  IV.  Witnessed  the  constant  extension  of  the  work  op 
God  (ver.  47).  {IV.  Hudson.)  The  communism  of  Ghristianity  : — To  those  whose 
eyes  are  opened  wide,  because  their  hearts  are  truly  loving,  there  is  no  time  in  God's 
whole  year  that  is  equal  to  this  (Whitsuntide)  time  of  fullest  bloom.  The  soul  of 
man  is  greatened  by  promises  of  the  future,  and  he  walks  the  earth  in  gladness 
because  of  the  glorious  bloom  around  him.  But  it  is  sad  when  autumn  comes  to 
see  the  pitiful  harvest.  I  have  seen  that  of  a  hundred  blossoms  on  a  given  tree 
only  one  came  to  perfection.  There  is  pathos  and  tragedy  in  that,  for  I  see  in  it 
human  life.  Of  a  thousand  babes  that  are  born — God's  holiest  blossoms — how 
many  come  to  manhood  ?  Why  this  waste  ?  Yet  God  knows  best.  It  is  His  law 
that  the  bloom  shall  be  plentiful,  and  that  some  may  remain  for  fruit.  Some  must 
f aU,  but  the  few  that  remain  are  a  prophecy  of  what  shall  be,  and  man  must  learn 
that  a  little  fruit  of  God  is  worth  a  great  waste  of  bloom.  "  All  that  believed  were 
together,"  &c. :  the  doctrine  was  received  into  gladsome  hearts.  The  spring  heat 
was  come,  the  winter  had  vanished.  But  what  became  of  it  ?  When  a  man  looks 
round  the  world  nowadays,  what  a  strange  blossom  that  seems  to  be  I  Who  would 
try  to  gather  it  ?  When  lovers,  newly  entranced,  are  scarce  able  to  see  common 
daylight,  or  to  comport  themselves  with  common  sense,  what  are  they  to  do  ? 
Bloom,  blossom  I  But  the  blossom  wiU  not  last.  It  is  so  Uke  that  outbreak  of 
communism— and  we  know  that  did  not  last.  But  it  will  come  again  ultimately. 
It  is  the  Word  of  God,  the  end  of  civilisation,  the  aim  of  all  holy  souls,  that  the  holy 
city,  the  New  Jerusalem,  shall  descend  to  earth.  Here,  then,  is  this  first  blossom 
of  Christian  faith,  which  was  the  natural  outbreak  of  loving  hearts.  But  these 
blossoms  could  not  last,  because  the  blossoms  of  love  have  to  blow  out  in  the  cold, 
and  be  tried  by  the  storm,  as  the  blossoms  of  the  tree  must  have  the  wind  to  nip 
them — but  they  prophesied  as  they  died.  Watching  a  little  child's  life,  what 
glorious  blossoms  of  unselfishness  we  see  sometimes  1  But  they  don't  last.  The 
cynic  sneers  at  this,  but  the  wise  man  rejoices,  for  these  blossoms  teU  him  of  what 
man  may  come  to  under  more  perfect  conditions.  And  so  these  men  got  scattered, 
and  by  degrees  the  old  world  resumed  its  sway  over  them.  Nevertheless,  there  yet 
remains  the  ultimate  outcome  of  the  Christian  faith.  We  smile  at  these  men,  but 
only  as  a  loving  father  smiles  upon  his  little  child  who  cries  for  the  moon,  because 
his  ambition  is  so  lofty  and  its  realisation  so  impossible.  Yet  the  Christian  religion 
is  making  progress,  and  having  its  effect  in  working  out  of  us  what  is  evil  and  low,- 
and  what  it  is  working  out  of  us  it  will  ultimately  work  out  of  the  whole  world. 
For  what  else  mean  the  various  efforts  to  put  all  things  at  the  service  of  all  men  ? 
Some  of  you  who  are  much  given  to  admiring  the  pictures  of  saints  can  now  have 
a  library  full  of  the  souls  of  the  ancients  ;  for  far  beyond  all  the  saints  you  can 
paint  on  windows  are  those  shelves  filled  with  the  books  of  the  men  of  olden  time. 
For  in  these  books  are  the  spirits  of  the  fathers — of  John  Milton,  of  William  Shake- 
speare— the  thoughts  of  the  wise,  the  songs  of  the  minstrels,  the  gathered  honey  of 
all  nations.  And  over  all  this  is  written  "Free  Library" — holy  words  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  Himself  might  have  inspired.  By  and  by  education  too  shall  be  like 
the  gospel — free  to  all,  crying,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour,"  and  "  he  that 
hath  no  money,  come  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money  and  without  price."  Since 
I  was  a  boy  what  has  not  been  done  to  restore  Pentecost?  I  have  long  given  up  the 
dream  of  my  youth — that  all  men  could  do  as  these  men  did — live  in  a  community. 
Robert  Owen  tried  it ;  thousands  have  tried  it,  but  they  have  given  it  up.  All 
attempts  at  communism,  in  any  practical  form,  have  died  out,  gone  into  history, 
but  the  fruit  remains.  At  every  point  we  are  winning — hours  of  leisure,  places  of 
recreation,  free  libraries,  free  roads,  free  churches,  free  speech,  cheap  books. 
Therefore  when  I  hear  that  the  National  Gallery  is  opened  free  to  the  public  my 
soul  is  glad.  For  the  beautiful  works  of  art  of  the  nation  are  there  ;  they  are  not 
now  shut  up  in  rich  men's  houses,  but  belong  alike  to  aU.  What  has  God  to  do 
with  the  rich  ?  Did  He  send  His  sun  to  shine  simply  for  the  rich  ?  Nay,  but  for 
the  beggar  also.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  always  toward  the  Pentecostal  blossom ; 
but  that  it  may  become  galden  fruit  there  must  be  large  loving;  all  thought  of  self 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  251 

must  be  consumed  by  the  love  of  God.  God's  gifts  are  many  ;  strive  as  far  as  pos- 
sible to  have  all  things  common,  especially  the  greatest  things.  I  smile  when  I  see 
men  saving  a  little  property  of  their  own,  and  keeping  apart  from  one  another  ;  for 
the  best  and  greatest  things  are  fast  passing  into  the  hands  of  every  one.  Books 
are  cheap,  and  when  books  are  cheap  the  inspiring  things  of  God  belong  to  all. 
High  price  of  books  means  Pentecost  impossible.  Let  every  man  judge  his  own 
heart  to  what  degree  the  love  of  God  has  entered  it,  for  in  that  degree  he  will  be 
willing  that  all  things  should  be  common,  especially  the  highest  and  greatest  things. 
Some  men  smile  at  this  doctrine,  and  think  that  we  mean  the  dividing  of  money  or 
property.  No,  keep  your  money!  Free  libraries,  picture  galleries,  churches,  &c. 
— all  these  we  have  won,  and  we  shall  win  more  yet.  So  you  may  keep  your  old 
purse.  Those  blossoms  that  did  stop  on  the  tree  are  now  bearing  rich  and  golden 
fruit  which  shall  last  for  ever.  Christianity  is  the  death-blow  of  privilege,  the 
scorner  of  pedigree,  the  ridiculer  of  fine  linen.  It  turns  its  back  on  all  these  and 
says,  "  When  thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the  poor,"  &c.  ;  for  the  Christian  religion 
means  the  opening  of  the  gate  of  heaven  to  all  men.  It  is  the  religion  whose  first 
miracle  was  to  turn  water  into  wine  for  humble  people,  and  is  slowly  bringing  back 
the  Pentecostal  spirit ;  not  with  a  mighty  rushing  wind  and  tongues  of  fire,  but 
with  the  sweetness  of  charity.  You  would  do  well  to  get  it  into  your  plans  of  daily 
life,  that  tlie  day  will  come  when  all  the  nations  of  Europe  shall  be  Pentecostal,  for 
they  shall  have  passed  from  feudalism  to  federalism,  and  the  custom-house  shall 
be  abolished,  and  all  nations  shall  be  "together  and  have  all  things  common." 
{Geo.  Daivson,  M.A.)  Communism: — "What  about  this  so-called  communism  in 
the  early  Church ?  What  was  it  in  nature  and  extent?  The  passage  describing 
the  community  of  goods  is  critical.  Social  reformers,  not  always  Christian,  point 
to  this  as  the  ideal  state  from  which  the  Church  has  wandered.  1.  The  arrange- 
ment was  purely  voluntary.  What  any  man  put  in  was  still  his.  The  sin  of 
Ananias  was  not  that  he  had  kept  back  a  portion  of  his  estate  by  fraud,  but  that  he 
lied  about  it.  It  was  still  in  his  power  after  the  sale  as  before.  The  community  of 
property  flowed  out  of  the  new  spiritual  hfe.  (See  chap.  iv.  32-37.)  "  In  point  of 
fact,  their  experiment  was  simply  the  assertion  of  the  right  of  eveiy  man  to  do  as 
he  chooses  with  his  own  ;  and  they  chose  to  live  together  and  help  each  other.  It 
was  a  fraternal  stock  company  for  mutual  aid  and  protection.  No  man  was  bound 
to  come  into  it  unless  he  wished ;  but  if  he  did  come  in,  he  was  bound  to  act 
honestly."  2.  It  was  a  spiritual  result,  and  not  a  social  erperiment.  It  cannot  be 
explained  except  on  the  spiritual  basis.  It  must  be  studied  in  its  true  setting.  The 
Brook  Farm,  "  Utopia,"  and  all  kindred  institutions,  have  been  social  experiments. 
Bellamy's  "  Looking  Backward  "  Society  is  allied  with  them.  They  have  arisen 
for  lack  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  sprung  up  spontaneously  because  of  Pentecost. 
3.  The  community  of  goods  seems  to  have  been  a  community  of  use,  not  owner- 
ship. Nobody  said  that  aught  that  he  possessed  was  his  own.  They  were  of  one 
heart.  The  circumstances  were  peculiar.  Many  of  the  people  were  away  from 
home.  All  had  to  be  cared  for.  No  one  should  suffer.  4.  The  plan  was  local. 
Jerusalem  was  the  only  city  where  it  was  tried.  No  trace  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  any 
other  Church.  It  evidently  did  not  commend  itself  to  other  churches  as  a  wise 
plan.  The  other  churches  took  up  collections  just  as  now  when  a  case  of  need  was 
presented.  (See  1  Cor.  xvi.  2;  2  Cor.  ix.  6,  7.)  5.  It  was  temporary.  It  lasted 
while  the  circumstances  in  which  it  arose  continued.  6.  It  did  not  relieve  poverty. 
It  was  not  devised  for  that  purpose.  Many  writers  insist  upon  seeing  a  close  con- 
nection between  this  incident  and  the  subsequent  poverty  in  Jerusalem.  Thus 
Meyer  :  "  And  this  community  of  goods  at  Jerusalem  helps  to  explain  the  great  and 
general  poverty  of  that  Church.  It  is  probable  that  the  apostles  were  prevented  by 
the  very  experience  acquired  in  Jerusalem  from  advising  or  introducing 'it  else- 
where." Thus  Gulliver  :  "  Under  such  sublime  inspirations  it  is  easy  to  see  that  a 
communism,  impossible  to  ordinary  human  nature,  might  temporarily  flourish. 
But  it  is  as  easy  to  see  that  it  would  gradually  settle  to  the  level  of  ordinary  motive, 
and  would  be  subjected  to  the  disturbances  of  inevitable  inequalities  in  capacity 
and  industry,  as  well  as  in  piety.  The  Plymouth  Pilgrims  were,  perhaps,  the  most 
single-minded  men  of  modern  times.  Yet  it  was  not  till  the  community  of  lands 
and  goods  which  obtained  in  the  early  years  of  their  settlement  gave  place  to  farms 
in  severalty,  and  to  private  property  protected  by  law,  that  the  annually  recurring 
danger  of  absolute  starvation  in  their  colony  disappeared.  The  lesson  of  such  a 
history  is,  therefore,  not  solely  the  lesson  of  Christian  consecration.  It  includes 
the  utility  and  the  sacredness  of  the  personal  control  of  property.     It  places  before 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

us  the  problem  of  combining  the  largest  Christian  benevolence  with  the  strict  main- 
tenance of  proprietary  rights."  7.  It  was  not  modern  communism.  Says  Garok  : 
"  That  holy  community  of  goods  proceeded  from  love  to  the  poor  ;  but  that  which  is 
now  proclaimed  is  the  result  of  a  hatred  to  the  rich."  And  Van  Dyke  :  "  Of  late  years 
the  communistic  doctrine  has  begun  to  present  itself  in  another  shape.  It  has  laid 
aside  the  red  cap  and  put  on  the  white  cravat.  It  invites  serious  and  polite  inquiry. 
It  quotes  Scripture  and  claims  to  be  the  friend,  the  near  relative,  of  Christianity. 
So  altered  is  its  aspect  that  preachers  of  religion  are  discovering  that  it  has  good 
points,  and  patting  it  on  the  back  somewhat  timidly,  as  one  might  pat  a  converted 
wolf  who  had  offered  his  services  as  watch-dog."  There  is  a  fundamental  and  abso- 
lute difference  between  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible  and  the  doctrine  of  the  commu- 
niser.  For  the  Bible  tells  me  that  I  must  deal  my  bread  to  the  hungry ;  while  the 
communiser  tells  the  hungry  that  he  may  take  it  for  himself,  and  if  he  begins  with 
bread  there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  draw  the  line  at  cake.  The  Bible  teaches 
that  envy  is  a  sin ;  the  communiser  declares  that  it  is  the  new  virtue  which  is  to 
regenerate  society.  The  communiser  maintains  that  every  man  who  is  born  has  a 
right  to  live  ;  but  the  Bible  says  that  if  a  man  will  not  work  neither  shall  he  eat; 
and  without  eating  life  is  difficult.  The  communiser  holds  up  equality  of  condition 
as  the  ideal  of  Christianity ;  but  Christ  never  mentions  it.  He  tells  us  that  we 
shall  have  the  poor  always  with  us,  and  charges  us  never  to  forget,  despise,  or  neg- 
lect them.  Christianity  requires  two  things  from  every  man  that  believes  in  it : 
first,  to  acquire  his  property  by  just  and  righteous  means ;  and,  secondly,  to  look 
not  only  on  his  own  things,  but  also  on  the  things  of  others.  (IF.  F.  McDowell.) 
The  equalities  and  inequalities  of  human  lots  : — The  infant  Church,  from  the  nature 
of  the  case,  was  composed  mainly,  though  not  exclusively,  of  the  less  prosperous 
classes.  The  work  it  had  to  do  at  Jerusalem  brought  together  a  number  of  persons 
whose  homes  were  elsewhere,  and  whose  ordinary  occupations  were  suspended,  and 
it  became  necessary  to  face  the  all-important  question  of  their  simplest  food  and 
lodging.  For  this  purpose  a  common  fund  was  instituted,  to  which  those  who  had 
money  or  other  property  might  contribute  for  the  temporary  support  of  those  who 
had  none.  There  is  no  evidence  that  these  were  anything  but  voluntary  offerings. 
There  follow,  for  example,  repeated  references  to  the  existence  of  rich  and  poor  side 
by  side  in  the  same  Church,  and  to  the  need  and  duty  of  almsgiving.  Had  there 
been  any  system  in  force,  tantamount  to  a  "  community  of  goods,"  neither  of  these 
things  could  possibly  have  survived.  It  might  seem,  indeed,  superfluous  to  aigue 
such  a  point  were  it  not  for  two  reasons — one,  that  there  are  always  to  be  found 
well-meaning  persons  who,  believing  that  tbe  earliest  type  of  Church,  before  cor- 
ruption entered  and  human  frailty  overthrew  Divine  institutions,  was  and  must  be 
the  best,  and  the  one  we  ought  to  seek  to  restore,  look  back  with  yearninsj  upon  a 
state  of  things  so  different  from  our  own,  and  resolve  that  oui'  faces  ought  to  be 
firmly  set  towards  reviving  the  primitive  usage.  Imagining  that  true  Christian 
equality  involves  equality  of  conditions  and  advantages,  they  see  in  the  phenomena 
of  our  modern  Church  only  the  most  terrible  of  inconsistencies.  Many  of  these 
objectors  are  genuine  friends  and  adherents  of  Christianity,  and  as  such  demand 
our  warm  sympathy.  But  there  are  others,  I  need  not  say,  hostile  to  our  religion, 
who  in  aU  times  have  made  useful  capital  out  of  these  alleged  discrepancies.  We 
cannot  but  notice  that  one  chief  grievance  against  Christianity  in  our  day  is  that  it 
does  not  tend  to  rectify  human  inequalities  ;  that  while  it  professes  to  hold  all  men 
equal  in  the  sight  of  God,  it  seems  quite  content  that  they  should  remain  unequal 
in  their  own.  But  though  the  objection  is  put  as  one  against  religion,  it  is  obvious 
that  the  grievance  is  really  one  against  Providence,  or  rather  (since  this  form  of 
socialism  is  almost  always  atheistic)  against  fate,  which  has  allowed  one  man  to 
enter  the  world  better  equipped  than  another  for  the  struggle  of  life.  Hence  this 
form  of  socialism,  which  we  see  more  and  more  asserting  itself,  is  not  merely 
atheistic,  it  is  bitterly  antitheistic,  since  it  chiefly  resents  inequalities,  due  not  to 
defective  laws,  but  to  natural,  inborn,  inherited  differences.  Such  socialism  de- 
mands, as  the  first  right  of  humanity,  that  society  should  aim  at  compensating  the 
feeble  for  their  feebleness  at  the  expense  of  the  strong  ;  or  rather,  that  arrange- 
ments should  be  made  that  neither  weak  nor  strong  should  be  at  any  expense  ;  that 
society  should  be  restored  to  one  level,  and  that  of  universal  prosperity  and  com- 
fort. This,  it  asserts,  a  reform  in  the  world's  laws  might  and  would  effect. 
Eeligion,  it  alleges,  is  a  failure ;  civilisation  is  a  failure ;  legislation  is  a  failure, 
seeing  that  all  these  have  so  far  failed  to  bring  about  an  equalisation  of  human  lots. 
Those  who  use  this  language  and  lead  captive  many  willing  listeners  are  at  least 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  253 

thus  far  justified  in  that  Christianity  has  beyond  question  failed  to  bring  about  the 
result  they  desire  ;  and  they  might  even  go  further  and  object  that  CLiristianity 
does  not  start  from  any  such  assumption  as  the  equal  rights  of  human  beings. 
From  first  to  last  the  Bible  nowhere  teaches  this  kind  of  equality  among  men  ;  nor 
their  equal  right,  nor  the  right  of  any  individual  among  them,  to  prosperity  and 
comfort.     It  does  not  even  regard  these  things  as  the  aim  towards  which  human 
effort  should  be  directed.     Its  millennium  is  not  in  any  sense  a  millennium  of  an 
equally  distributed  prosperity.     Every  counsel  and  command  addressed  to  the  rich 
and  strong  is,  on  the  contrary,  framed  on  the  evident  expectation  that  inequalities 
of  condition  would  always  exist.    It  must  be  frankly  admitted  that  Jesus  Cbrist 
accepted  such  inequality  as  a  fact  of  human  existence,  and  addressed  His  teaching 
to  show  how  that  fact  might  be  made  the  best  of — how  it  might  minister  to  the 
discipline  of  man's  nature,  and  its  preparation  for  the  kingdom  of  God.     Christ's 
teaching  abounds  in  denunciations  of  the  rich.     But  it  is  never  for  being  rich,  but 
for  not  recognising  and  accepting  the  responsibility  of  riches.     He  enunciated  no 
fixed  and  rigid  rules  for  the  regulation  of  society.     He  enjoined  no  pouring  of  the 
world's  wealth  into  a  common  stock,  from  which  the  once  rich  and  the  once  poor 
should  be  endowed  anew  on  one  uniform  and  unchangeable  scale.     He  never  offered 
to  put  back  the  clock  of  time,  and  to  start  all  men  on  the  race  of  life  afresh.     He 
took  society  as  it  existed  in  His  day,  and  propounded  the  law  and  the  spirit  by 
which  it  might  be  made  ever  sounder  and  sounder,  even  while  the  weak  and  the 
strong,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  lived  and  worked  side  by  side.     A  vulgar  Socialist, 
aiming  first  at  winning  adherents,  might  have  preached  vaguely  how  all  this  would 
speedily  be  at  an  end  ;  how  no  one  should  suffer  much  longer  from  his  present  dis- 
abilities, but  that  all  should  share  and  share  alike  when  new  laws  should  be  passed 
in  the  Constitution  he  would  frame  and  estabhsh.    But  Jesus  promised  no  such 
thing  ;  He  introduced  no  such  topic.     He  dealt,  indeed,  persistently  with  the  sub- 
ject of  equality.     He  called  all  men,  without  distinction.  His  brethren ;  He  spoke 
of  them  all  as  alike  dear  to  the  heart  of  God,  and  as  equally  invited  to  the  highest 
blessings  that  God  confers.     He  appealed  to  all.  who  were  weary  and  heavy  laden 
to  come  to  Him  (Jesus)  and  He  would  give  them  rest.    And,  before  all  things.  He 
insisted  that  in  that  kingdom  there  is  no  such  thing  as  caste.    The  first  upon  earth 
might  be  the  last  in  that  kingdom,  and  the  lowliest  on  the  earth  the  highest  and 
greatest  there.     Who  can  doubt  that  it  was  this  Christian  doctrine  of  equality — this 
form  of  Christian  Socialism  ("fellowship,"  "membership  in  one  Body,"  He  pre- 
ferred to  call  it)  that  fell  like  music  on  the  wearied  spirits  of  that  motley  crowd  ? 
No  religious  caste — no  intellectual  caste — no  social  caste — each  man's  acceptance 
of  the  responsibilities  of  sonship ;  each  man's  faithful  cultivation  of  the  talent 
entrusted  to  him — this,  the  one  way  of  working  out  his  own  salvation,  and  entering 
upon  eternal  life.     This  was  the  one  only  equality  that  Christ  recognised  and  pro- 
claimed.    As  to  inequalities  of  human  fortune,  so-called,  and  their  methods  of 
equalisation,  it  apparently  did  not  enter  into  His  plan  to  speak.     On  such  subjects 
as  a  man's  right  or  duty  to  "better  himself"  in   his  earthly  position  He  said 
nothing.     He  neither  commanded  nor  forbade  a  man  to  do  his  utmost  in  that  kind. 
There  is  a  common  sneer  against  religion  that  it  looks  with  coldness  upon  the 
ambition  which  natures,  not  apparently  vicious,  are  aware  of,  to  rise  in  the  world, 
and  to  win  fame,  position,  and  wealth  by  the  effective  use  of  the  talents  confided  to 
them.     Whatever  can  be  reasonably  inferred  from  the  Bible's  teaching  is  to  the 
very  opposite  effect.     A  gospel  which  enjoins  its  followers  to  cherish  and  improve 
every  talent  committed  to  them  is  in  itself  a  command  to  excel,  and  therefore  to 
advance,  in  whatever  the  hand,  or  the  intellect,  findeth  to  do.     And  to  excel,  and 
to  advance,  means  and  implies  (let  us  not  be  afraid  of  the  word)  competition.     If, 
of  two  men  to  whom  talents  are  entrusted,  one  cultivates  them  and  the  other  neg- 
lects them,  what  power  that  we  can  even  guess  at  can  prevent  one  of  these  men 
outstripping  the  other  in  the  course  of  pre-eminence  ?     If  one  man  rises  through 
moral  character  and  fidelity  to  the  talents  given  him,  and  another  sinks  through 
moral  weakness  and  indolence,  who  can  deny  that  in  that  contrast  is  witnessed  a 
survival  of  the  fittest?     And  the  gospel  of  Christ  did  not  interpose  to  remove  such 
inequalities.     But  the  primary  purpose  of  the  revelation  of  God  to  men  was  to 
change  their  conceptions  of  success  and  failure  ;  to  alter  the  world's  standpoint  as 
to  happiness.     "Man  shall   not   live   by  bread   alone,  but   by  every  word   that 
proceedeth   out   of  the   mouth   of   God."    And   who   can  fail   to   observe   that 
whichever  be  cause  and  which  effect,  the  decay  of  belief  in  a  God,  and  the  asser- 
tion of  every  man's  right  to  be  prosperous,  always  appear  together  ?    It  cannot  be 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

otherwise ;  for  belief  in  the  God  whom  Christ  revealed  is  not  consistent  with  a 
belief  that  we  have  all,  or  any  of  us,  a  right  to  any  blessing  or  comfort  save  one,  the 
greatest  and  most  blessed  of  all.     We  have  no  rights  as  against  God  :  we  have  only 
obligations.     The  very  things  that  difference  us  from  other  men  are  our  talents. 
We  are  forgetting  to  thank  God  for  what  He  takes  away.     Prosperity — equal  pros- 
perity— and  the  gradual  extinction  of  bodily  pain  and  mental  distress — this  is  the 
earthly  paradise  to  which  thousands  are  now  being  taught  to  look  forward.     Does 
it    harmonise  well  with   the   teaching   of    Him   who   claimed  to    be  the  Elder 
Brother  of   the  race,  whose   appointed   life   was    suffering   and   self-denial,  and 
whose  death  was  the  death  of  the  Cross  ?      The  cure  for   discontent  is  to  turn 
our    thoughts    to    the    noblest,   purest,    best   Friend   of   our    spirits ;    and    then, 
recalling  what  He   has   been   to   us  in  the   past,  and  what  things  He  has  pre- 
pared for  us  in  the   future,  we   may  well   feel   that  with  aU  our   unworthiness, 
all  our  weakness   and   disappointments,  our   profoundest  sorrows  and   anxieties, 
we  are  more  than  conquerors  ;   that  having  received   this  pledge  of   victory,  we 
may    indeed     scorn    to    "  change    our    state    with    kings."         [Canon    Ainger.) 
The  apparent  communism  of  the  infant  Church : — Under  the  shadow  of   a  great 
calamity,  or  the  strain  of  a  great  excitement,  the  lines  that  divide  classes  or  limit 
possessions  vanish  like  snow-wreaths  in  the  noonday  sun.     "  All  ye  are  brethren  " 
is  the  word  of  the  great  occasions  that  stir  and  shake  society  to  its  deptbs.    It  is  an 
easy  step  to  the  conclusion  that  that  which  associates  men  lies  deeper  in  their 
nature  and  in  the  nature  of  society  than  that  which  divides  them.    It  is  a  tempting 
step,  though  a  false  one,  from  this  position  to  the  principle  that  that  which  creates 
and  maintains  the  differences  cometh  of  evil,  and  is  to  be  fought  against  as  evil. 
This  is  the  conviction  out  of  which  the  nobler  idea  and  form  of  communism  spring ; 
that  which  is  rooted  in  love  of  humanity,  in  the  desire  for  human  progress,  and  the 
realisation  of  a  condition  in  which  society  will  not  have  to  weep  tears  over  the 
miseries  of  the  poor.    Whether  the  communistic  conviction  and  plan  of  working 
out  the  regeneration  of  society  have  any  root  in  the  nature  of  things,  or  the  Word 
of  God,  is  one  of  the  most  profoun»»ly  important  social  questions  of  our  times.    Let 
us  consider — I.  The  remarkable  appearance  of  a  communistic  organisation  in  the 
Church.     Nothing  can  look  more  like  communism  on  the  outside.     Make  this 
arrangement  universal,  a  communist  would  say,  and  the  social  millennium  will 
come  in.     It  wiU  help  us  to  estimate  the  countenance  which  Christianity  lends  to 
communistic  ideas  to  consider — 1.  How  far  was  this  universal  in  the  Church  ?     It 
seems  to  have  been  born  and  to  have  died  at  Jerusalem.     There  appears  to  have 
been  no  attempt  even  to  extend  it  in  the  Church.     It  was  a  beautiful  outburst  of 
heavenly  charity  and  zeal ;  but  it  bloomed,  flourished,  and  faded,  so  to  speak,  in 
an  hour.     Churches  were  planted  everywhere,  but  there  is  not  the  faintest  attempt 
to  repeat  the  experiment.  Further,  it  was  not  universal  even  in  Jerusalem.  In  chap. 
V.  1-4  St.  Peter  recognises  that  Ananias  was  free  to  adopt  the  plan  or  to  decline  it ; 
and  it  appears  from  chap.  xii.  12  that  some  members  retained  their  property,  and 
had  their  households,  children  and  servants,  round  them  as  before.     It  would  ap- 
pear that  it  was  but  a  partial  and  temporary  arrangement  even  in  the  Church  which 
adopted  it,  growing  out  of  a  moment  of  pressure,  and  quietly  dying  away.     But — 
2.  How  far  are  we  justified  in  regarding  it  as  an  arrangement  or  organisation  of  the 
infant  society  at  all  ?     Both  terms  are  misapplied.     Organisation  implies  a  definite 
principle  of  action  for  a  definite   purpose,  adopted   by  competent  authority,  and 
binding  upon  all  over  whom  the  authority  extends.     We  find  nothing  of  this  kind 
in  the  action  of  the  apostles  and  of  the  Church.     It  was  a  spontaneous  outburst  of 
feeling — nothing  like  a  plan.     The  man  who  had  the  best  right  to  speak  for  the 
community  expressly  disclaims  any  plan  or  arrangement  binding  on  the  members 
of  the  community ;  he  recognises  their  entire  freedom.     Far  from  making  this  a 
primary  law  of  the  Church  of  Jerusalem,  it  was  in  no  sense  a  law  at  all,  but  simply 
a  voluntary  action  on  the  part  of  individuals  ;  beautiful,  heavenly  in  its  inspiration, 
but  valid  only  while  the  inspiration  lasted,  and  having  no  beauty,  no  virtue  apart 
from  the  spirit  which  gave  it  birth.     3.  The  light  cast  upon  the  institution  by  the 
legislation  of  the  apostolic  age,    Eemember  that  the  Church  had  before  it  the  very 
problems  with  which  communism  professes  to  be  able  to  deal — the  wrongs  of  op- 
pressed classes  and  the  miseries  of  the  poor.    No  literature  of  communism  is  so 
charged  with  passionate  sympathy  for  the  oppressed  and  the  wretched,  such  burn- 
ing indignation  against  strong-handed  wrong,  such  tender,  cherishing  compassion 
for  the  poor  and  helpless,  as  those   Old   Testament  prophecies  to  which  Christ 
appealed  to  explain  His  mission  (Luke  iv.  18-21).     "  The  poor  have  the  gospel 


CHAP,  II.]  THE  ACTS.  255 

preached  unto  tliem  "  was  the  very  crown  of  miracles  in 'the  Saviour's  judgment; 
and  the  words — "  Only  they  would  that  we  should  remember  the  poor  " — tells  us 
how  sacredly  the  mission  was  cherished  in  the  Apostolic  Church.  It  was  through 
no  oversight  of  this  its  great  function,  to  save  the  poor  and  so  to  begin  at  the  right 
end  the  salvation  of  society,  that  the  apostles  suffered  this  institution  to  drop  out 
of  the  habit  of  the  Church.  They  were  as  intensely  eager  to  enfranchise  the  en- 
slaved, to  deliver  the  oppressed,  to  comfort  and  to  elevate  the  poor,  as  the  most 
passionate  of  social  reformers ;  and  yet,  having  to  deal  with  three  great  classes 
whose  woes  and  wrongs  were  rending  society  in  pieces — the  slaves,  the  women  and 
the  poor — instead  of  proclaiming  universal  emancipation  and  community  of  pos- 
sessions, they  deliberately  left  the  slave  to  the  Christian  brotherhood  of  his  master, 
the  woman  to  the  Christian  fellowship  of  her  husband,  and  the  poor  to  the  Chris- 
tian justice  and  charity  of  mankind.  There  was  no  attempt  at  a  rearrangement  of 
society,  save  as  it  might  grow  naturally  and  healthfully  out  of  better  and  holier 
sphitual  relations  between  class  and  class,  and  man  and  man.  Thus  they  addressed 
themselves  to  the  terrible  social  problems  of  their  times  :  on  this  basis  they  sought 
to  work  out  their  solution.  They  showed  themselves,  like  Christ,  studious  to  main- 
tain the  existing  order  against  violent  disturbance  or  readjustment  from  without. 
When  hardy  Galileans  would  take  Christ  by  force,  and  make  Him  a  king,  giving 
Him,  as  they  dreamed,  the  grand  opportunity  to  work  out  His  glorious  plans,  He 
withdrew  Himself  to  a  desert  place  and  prayed.  The  only  power  which  could  re- 
generate the  world  must  come  from  that  fountain.  The  Church  sought  to  redress 
the  wrongs,  to  adjust  the  inequalities,  to  heal  the  maladies  and  the  miseries  of 
society,  by  proclaiming  the  brotherhood  of  man  under  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  re- 
vealed in  Him  who  is  the  Elder  Brother  of  the  poorest,  the  most  crushed  of  the 
human  race.  You  may  say  in  answer,  "Look  round  and  see  what  it  has  wrought ! 
Look  round  in  Lambeth,  in  Bethnal  Green,  on  burning  Paris,  on  luxurious,  disso- 
lute New  York.  Is  this  salvation  ?  "  I  feel  the  full  pressure  of  the  question.  "  How 
long,  0  Lord,  how  long  ?  "  is  the  cry  that  is  ever  rising  from  watching,  breaking 
hearts.  But  I  see  also  this,  that  the  selfish  lust  and  passion  which  make  the  day 
of  the  Lord  so  long,  and  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  so  slow,  would  bury  in  wreck 
or  drown  in  blood  every  poorer  and  weaker  attempt  to  work  out  more  swiftly  and 
vehemently  the  salvation  of  society,  II.  But,  what  thpn  was  this,  "  they  had  all 
THINGS  COMMON  "?  Was  IT  A  MISTAKE  ?  1.  On  the  Contrary  it  was  an  inspiration  ; 
an  outlet  of  love  and  joy  when  man's  heart  was  bursting  with  them  ;  and  a  holy 
and  beautiful  prophecy  of  what  Christianity  will  one  day  accomplish  for  the  salva- 
tion of  the  poor.  There  is  many  a  beautiful,  elevating,  purifying  action  of  the 
spirit  in  its  intercourse  with  spirits,  which  if  it  were  organised  into  an  institution 
would  be  fatal  to  society.  This  action  of  the  Church  belongs  to  the  same  sphere  as 
the  holy  waste  of  Mary.  The  money  might  have  been  saved  and  given  to  the  poor, 
and  the  Master  none  the  worse.  But  tiie  prompting  of  the  f  pirit  which  found  that 
expression  held  r,  ithin  its  glow  more  benediction  to  the  poor  in  the  long  run,  than 
the  pence  that  might  have  been  saved  a  thousand  times  told.  2.  This  action  was 
an  irrepressible  outburst  of  joy  and  thankfulness.  Travelleis  meeting  in  the  heart 
of  a  great  desert  are  ready  to  make  "  all  things  common  "  under  the  human  sym- 
pathy which  the  new  and  glad  experience  kindles  within.  A  shipwrecked  company 
gathered  on  the  shore  of  a  desert  island  is  ready  to  make  "  aU  things  common," 
through  the  joy  of  deliverance,  and  shame  that  any  of  the  saved  should  want. 
There  are  crises  when  all  that  leads  a  man  to  say  that  anything  is  his  own  vanishes ; 
when  the  sense  that  one  great  human  heart  is  beating  everywhere,  and  that  we  are 
but  limbs  of  one  great  body,  whose  private  use  and  pleasure  is  nothing,  whose 
ministry  to  the  whole  is  all,  possesses  us.  These  are  our  moments  of  inspiration, 
of  rapture.  They  come  to  us  laden  with  the  breath  of  a  purer,  brighter  region, 
which,  organised  as  we  are,  it  would  waste  us  to  live  in,  but  the  breath  of  which, 
mingled  with  our  grosser  air,  Jends  a  more  vivid  glow  to  the  vital  flame  in  our 
hearts,  and  in  the  heart  of  society,  3.  And  it  was  beautiful  as  a  prophecy.  The 
miracles  of  Christ  were  prophecies.  And  this  shone  out  as  a  sign,  that  forces  were 
there  at  work,  whose  fountain  is  the  heart  of  Christ,  which  will  one  day,  after  a 
Divine  fashion,  establish — (1)  Liberty,  the  liberty  of  a  soul  and  a  society  under  the 
law  to  Christ.  (2)  Equality,  not  of  lot  or  of  function,  but  of  use  and  of  honour.  (3) 
Fraternity,  not  of  rights  and  of  claims,  but  of  ministries  and  loves.  (J.  B.  Brown, 
B.A.)  Christian  and  anti-Christian  covimunism  : — That  Christian  communism 
said.  What  is  mine  is  thine ;  modern  anti-Christian  communism  says,  What  is  thine 
is  mine.     Among  those  Christians  it  was  said,  Take  what  I  have ;  modern  com- 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

munists  say,  Give  me  wl*at  thou  hast.  That  holy  community  of  goods  was  founded 
on  a  spirit  of  love  to  the  poor  ;  this  now  preached  rests  on  a  spirit  of  hatred  to  the 
rich.  {G.  Gerok,  D.D.)  Christian  communism  distinguished  from  unchristian : — ■ 
I.  Its  suukce.  Not  an  external  law  or  bare  power,  but  the  free  impulse  of  love.  II. 
Its  object.  Not  general  equality,  but  general  welfare.  Ill,  The  way  to  effect 
this  object.  Not  by  a  community  of  goods,  but  by  a  community  of  hearts.  (Ibid.) 
Man's  IV  i  Hi  I  g  less  to  trust  everything  to  Gud  but  money: — Once  in  a  most  lively 
prayer-meeting  the  preacher  who  was  presiding  prayed  :  "  0  Lord,  help  aU  of  us  to 
trust  Thee  witli  our  whole  souls  !  "  And  a  hundred  voices  responded,  "  Amen!  " 
Some  also  shouted,  "  Lord,  grant  it  1  "  and  "  Amen,  amen,"  all  over  the  room. 
Encouraged  by  such  sympathy,  he  went  on  :  "  Help  us  all  to  trust  Thee  whoUy  with 
our  bodies  !  "  And  then  the  people  cried,  "Amen  !  "  as  heartUy  as  before.  Now 
the  exalted  sense  of  consecration  rose  to  its  height,  and  he  prayed  again :  "Oh, 
help  us  to  trust  Thee  wholly  with  our  money !  "  And  it  is  actually  reported  in 
private  circles  since  that  not  a  man  had  a  word  to  say  then.  (E.  S.  Robinson.) 
And  they  continuing  daily  with  one  accord  in  the  temple. — Characteristics  of  the 
primitive  Christians  : — See — I.  Their  constancy — they  continued,  II.  Their  fer- 
vour— daily.  III.  Their  unity — with  one  accord.  IV.  Their  audacity — in  the 
temple.  V.  Their  charity — breaking  bread  from  house  to  house.  VI.  Their 
familiarity — did  eat  their  meat.  VII,  Their  alacrity — with  gladness.  VIII. 
Their  sincerity — with  singleness  of  heart.  {E.  Leigh.)  Public  worship: — I. 
We  ought  to  worship  God  in  public.  1 .  It  is  obvious  to  the  natural  reason  of 
mankind  that  this  is  a  duty.  (1)  Even  those  whose  "  foolish  heart  was  darkened," 
&c.,  were  not  so  blind  as  not  to  see  the  fitness  of  their  honouring  with  public  wor- 
ship those  whom  they  accounted  Deities.  The  heathens  have  their  temples  to  which 
they  resort  for  the  celebration  of  some  rites,  whereby  they  think  their  idols  honoured. 
(2)  God  has  formed  our  nature  for  society,  is  it  not,  then,  a  dictate  of  nature  that 
we  should  associate  ourselves  for  the  most  important  purposes  of  religion  as  well  aa 
for  the  lesser  purposes  of  the  natural  and  civil  life,  (3)  Our  Creator  has  made  us 
capable  of  signifying  to  aU  about  us  the  sense  we  have  of  His  perfections,  and  of 
our  obligations  to  Him.  Should  we  not,  then,  employ  our  best  powers  after  that 
manner  in  His  service,  to  which  they  are  so  wisely  fitted  ?  "  The  heavens  declare 
the  glory  of  the  Lord ;  the  firmament  showeth  His  handiwork.  How  excellent  is 
His  name  in  all  the  earth  !  "  And  is  it  not  fit  that  intelligent  creatures  should  show 
forth  His  glories  by  the  most  open  acknowledgment  of  them?  The  law  of  God 
written  in  the  heart  (Rom.  ii.  15)  obliges  them  to  the  performance  of  social  public 
worship.  2.  God  has  in  His  Word  given  plain  significations  of  His  will  that  men 
should  publicly  worship  Him.  (1)  Public  worship  was  practised  long  before  we 
have  any  account  of  its  being  required.  The  hght  of  nature  directed  men  to 
assemble  themselves  together  for  the  worship  of  God ;  perhaps,  therefore,  He  did 
not  see  it  needful  expressly  to  reveal  His  mind  tiU  their  natural  notions  of  religion 
were  greatly  corrupted  by  idolatry.  Then  it  pleased  God  to  give  a  law  according 
to  which  worship  was  to  be  regulated  (Exod.  xxiii.  17).  But  though  Israel  were  to 
offer  sacrifices  only  at  the  tabernacle  or  temple,  yet  they  did  meet  together  in  other 
places,  where  they  did  engage  in  some  parts  of  Divine  worship.  This  appears  from 
the  account  given  us  in  Scripture  of  synagogues  (chap,  xv,  21).  (2)  Jesus  Christ, 
while  He  was  here  on  earth,  did  not  only  go  to  Jerusalem  at  the  great  feasts,  but 
also  attended  constantly  to  the  service  of  the  synagogue  (Luke  iv.  16).  His  example 
lays  a  strong  obligation  upon  His  followers.  (3)  The  disciples  of  Jesus,  in  the  early 
days  of  Christianity,  discharged  their  duty  in  this  matter  with  great  diligence,  but 
in  process  of  time  the  love  of  some  began  to  cool,  which  appeared  in  their  neglect 
of  the  duties  of  public  worship.  To  prevent  the  spreading  of  this  great  evil  the 
apostle  admonished  them  (Heb.  x.  25).  II.  The  ends  of  public  worship.  1.  The 
glory  of  God,  As  He  made  all  things  for  Himself  it  is  highly  reasonable  we  should 
principally  design  the  glorifying  of  His  name  in  all  that  we  do.  Now  when  God  is 
worshipped  by  His  creatures,  they  own  His  being.  His  all-sufficiency.  His  infinite 
understanding,  that  to  Him  belongeth  power  and  mercy  ;  and  the  more  public  their 
worship  is  the  more  clearly  they  spread  abroad  the  honour  of  His  name.  The  house  of 
God,  where  He  was  publicly  worshipped,  is  called  "  the  place  where  His  honour  dwelt " 
(Psa,  xxvi.  8),  perhaps  because  He  was  there  honoured  in  an  eminent  manner  by  the 
social  worship  of  His  people.  For  this  reason,  as  we  may  justly  suppose,  the  Lord 
is  said  to  love  the  gates  of  Zion  (Psa.  Ixxxvii.  2),  This  chief  end  of  Divine  worship 
cannot  be  so  well  answered  by  private  devotions.  The  honour  of  God's  name  is 
more  propagated  in  the  congregation  than  it  can  be  in  the  family.    Though  our 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  257. 

Saviour  far  exceeded  those  in  knowledge  who  officiated  in  the  Jewish  synagogue, 
yet  was  He  stated  in  His  attendance  there,  for  He  knew  that  by  so  doing  He  "  glori- 
fied His  Father."  2.  Our  spiritual  benefit.  God  has  connected  our  advantage  with 
His  own  glory.  He  dispenses  to  us  blessings  in  that  way  wherein  we  show  forth  the 
honour  of  His  name.  He  promised  His  people  of  old  that  in  all  places  where  He 
should  record  His  name  he  would  come  unto  them  and  bless  them  (Exod.  xx.  24). 
There  is  no  appointment  of  any  particular  place  under  the  gospel,  but  our  Lord  has 
said  that  "  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  His  name,  there  He  is  in 
the  midst  of  them  "  (Matt,  xviii.  20 ;  Eev.  i.  13).  God  delights  to  honour  the 
ordinances  of  His  public  worship  by  making  them  means  of  grace  (Psa.  Ixxxvii.  5). 
Most  commonly  it  is  by  the  means  of  public  worship  that  sinners  are  awakened  and 
converted ;  it  is  hereby  that  the  saints  are  for  the  most  part  edified  and  comforted. 
AU  the  private  instructions  which  the  psalmist  enjoyed  were  not  effectual  to  remove 
a  very  perplexing  temptation.  But  when  "  he  went  into  the  sanctuary  "  so  much 
light  was  imparted  to  him  there  as  cleared  his  difiiculty  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  17).  Upon 
which  he  concludes  (ver.  29)  that  it  was  good  for  him  to  draw  near  to  God,  i.e.,  in 
the  sanctuary.  David  expected  that  the  clearest  and  most  engaging  discoveries  of 
God  would  be  made  to  him  in  His  house,  therefore  he  was  very  desirous  of  having 
his  stated  abode  there  (Psa.  xxvii.  4,  xcii.  12-14).  3.  Communion  with  one  another 
in  the  great  concerns  of  religion.  The  Scripture  represents  believers  as  one  in  God 
and  Christ  (John  xvii.  20,  21).  They  are  spoken  of  as  "members  one  of  another" 
(Eph.  iv.  25).  They  have  one  God  and  Father,  the  same  Mediator  and  Saviour ; 
they  are  animated  by  one  Spirit ;  they  belong  to  the  same  family,  and  they  are 
travelling  towards  the  same  heavenly  habitation.  Now,  when  as  many  of  them  as 
conveniently  can  assemble  together  to  partake  of  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  they 
hereby  denote  the  oneness.  III.  The  several  parts  of  public  worship  as  mentioned 
in  the  context.  1.  Prayer.  The  house  of  God  is  called  "  the  house  of  prayer"  (Matt. 
xxi.  13).  We  have  all  our  common  wants  and  weaknesses.  Is  it  not,  then,  proper 
we  should  present  our  joint  supplications  to  God  for  supplies  and  helps  ?  (Matt, 
xviii.  19).  2.  Praise  (Psa.  xlviii.  1,  xxxiv.  3).  We  are  never  in  such  destitute 
circumstances  as  not  to  be  obliged  to  bless  the  name  of  God,  therefore  are  we  com- 
manded to  add  thanksgivings  to  our  supplications  (Phil.  iv.  6;  1  Thess.  v.  17,  18). 
It  is  proper  here  to  consider  that  particular  method  of  praising  God  by  singing.  It 
is  natural  for  the  joy  of  men's  hearts  to  break  forth  into  songs,  and  it  is  most  fit  they 
should  express  the  delight  they  take  in  the  perfections  and  mercies  of  God  by  sing- 
ing His  praises  (James  v.  13 ;  Eph.  v.  19,  20 ;  Col.  iii.  16 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  14,  15 ; 
Bev.  XV.  3).  8.  Hearing  the  Word  of  God.  Under  the  Mosaic  constitution  the 
priest's  lips  were  to  keep  knowledge,  and  the  people  were  to  seek  the  law  at  his 
mouth  (Mak  ii.  7).  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  appointed  ministers  "who 
are  to  give  themselves  continually  to  prayer  and  the  ministry  of  the  Word  ; 
to  be  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season "  in  preaching  of  it.  Therefore, 
certainly  it  is  the  duty  of  Christians  to  be  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season 
in  hearing  the  gospel  (Eph.  iv.  11-13).  4.  The  Lord's  Supper.  This  is  meant 
by  "breaking  of  bread"  (1  Cor.  x.  16,  17).  Application:  1.  How  thankful 
should  we  be  for  our  liberty  to  worship  God  in  public.  2.  It  is  matter  of 
great  lamentation  that  there  is  so  much  indifference  among  us  to  the  public 
worship  of  God.  3.  Let  us  have  a  care  of  "  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves 
together  as  the  manner  of  some  is."  In  order  to  press  you  hereto,  consider — 
(1)  That  an  indifference  to  the  duties  of  public  worship  is  a  dangerous  step  to- 
wards apostacy.  (2)  Persons  of  the  most  eminent  piety  have  expressed  the  greatest 
value  for  the  public  worship  of  God.  (S.  Price.)  Importance  of  daily  prayer : — 
Great  pianists  carry  the  dumb  piano  with  them,  which  is  simply  a  mechanical  key- 
board for  the  exercising  of  the  fingers.  Eubenstein  uses  it,  and  on  a  recent  occasion 
he  said,  "If  I  neglect  practice  a  single  day,  I  notice  it,  and  if  for  two  days,  my 
friends  notice  it,  and  if  for  three  days  the  people  notice  it."  Some  Christians  leave 
off  practising  their  rehgion.  First  they  notice  it  themselves,  then  their  friends, 
then  the  world.  Every  Christian  has  his  dumb  piano  on  which  to  practise.  True 
it  gives  no  sound  that  the  world  can  hear,  but  it  nevertheless  accomplishes  much ; 
it  is  the  instrument  of  silent  prayer.  McCheyne  once  expressed  the  belief  that  no 
one  who  prayed  daily  to  God  ever  became  a  lost  soul.  It  is  well  to  recall  this  at 
times  whenever  the  habit  of  silent  prayer  is  neglected.  Use  the  dumb  piano. 
Constancy  in  the  performance  of  holy  duties  makes  them  easy  : — It  is  easy  to  keep 
that  armour  bright  which  is  daily  used ;  but  hanging  by  the  walls  till  it  be  rusty, 
it  will  take  some  time  and  pains  to  furbish  it  up  again.  If  an  instrument  be  daily 
VOL.  I.  17 


'258  ■  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

played  upon,  it  is  easily  kept  in  tune ;  but  lef  it  be  but  a  while  neglected,  and  cast 
in  a  corner,  the  strings  and  frets  break,  the  bridge  flies  off,  and  no  small  labour  is 
required  to  bring  it  into  order  again.  And  thus,  also,  it  is  in  things  spiritual,  in 
the  performance  of  holy  duties,  if  we  continue  them  with  a  settled  constancy,  they 
will  be  easy,  familiar,  and  delightful  to  us  ;  but  if  once  broken  off,  and  intermitted, 
it  is  a  new  work  to  begin  again,  and  will  not  be  reduced  to  the  former  estate  but 
with  much  endeavour  and  great  difficulty.  Constancy  in  the  performance  of  holy 
duties : — It  is  observable  that  many  who  have  gone  into  the  field,  have  liked  the 
work  of  a  soldier  for  a  battle  or  two,  but  soon  have  had  enough,  and  come  running 
home  again  from  their  colours,  whereas  few  can  bear  it  as  a  constant  trade.  War 
is  a  thing  that  they  could  willingly  woo  for  their  pleasure,  but  are  loath  to  wed 
upon  what  terms  soever.  Thus  many  are  soon  engaged  in  holy  duties,  easily  per- 
suaded to  take  up  a  profession  of  religion,  and  as  easily  persuaded  to  lay  it  down. 
Like  the  new  moon,  which  shines  a  little  in  the  first  part  of  the  night,  but  is  down 
long  before  half  the  night  be  gone,  are  lightsome  professors  in  their  youth,  but 
whose  old  age  is  wrapt  up  in  thick  darkness  of  sin  and  wickedness.  Oh  !  this  con- 
stancy and  persevering  is  a  hard  word  1  This  taking  up  the  cross  daily,  this  pray- 
ing always,  this  watching  night  and  day,  and  never  laying  aside  our  clothes  and 
armour,  indulging  ourselves  to  remit  and  unbend  in  our  holy  waiting  upon  God, 
and  walking  with  God.  This  sends  many  sorrowful  from  Christ ;  yet  this  is  the 
saint's  duty,  to  make  religion  his  every  day's  work,  without  any  vacation  from  one 
end  of  the  year  to  the  other.  And  breaking  bread  from  house  to  house  did  eat  their 
meat  with  gladness.— T/(e  holy  communion  a  feast  of  love : — Love,  as  it  is  undoubtedly 
one  of  the  most  natural  and  general,  so  is  it  likewise  one  of  the  most  agreeable  and 
delightful  emotions  of  the  human  heart.  Whoever  therefore  promotes  love,  at  the  same 
time  prom,otes  happiness ;  and  the  firmer,  the  purer,  the  nobler  that  love  is,  the  more 
solid  is  this  happiness.  And  where  shall  we  find  a  more  perfect  doctrine  of  happi- 
ness than  in  Christianity  ?  Tend  not  all  its  doctrines,  all  its  precepts,  all  its 
promises,  all  its  rites  to  kindle  and  inflame  the  purest,  noblest  love  towards  God 
and  man  ?  Such  is  its  whole  design  ;  this  is  the  distinctive  character  of  the  noble 
few  by  whom  it  is  actually  attained.  1.  The  holy  communion  is  a  feast  of  the  love 
of  God.  Here  we  see  the  love  of  God,  our  heavenly  Father,  in  all  its  lustre ;  here 
enjoy  it  in  its  full  measure.  Here  we  draw  nigh  to  Him,  not  as  slaves,  not  as 
criminals,  trembling  at  the  sight  of  their  judge,  but  as  children,  favoured,  eminently 
endowed,  meet  together  in  His  house,  at  His  table,  and  rejoice  and  glory  in  His 
being  our  Father.  Here  we  are  truly  blessed  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  benefits 
wherewith  He  has  favoured  us  through  His  Son  Jesus.  2.  In  like  manner  is  the 
holy  communion  a  feast  of  love  to  Jesus  our  Lord.  This  holy  feast  emphatically 
reminds  us  of  that  sublime,  disinterested,  unprecedented  love  to  the  wandering 
wretched  race  of  mortals  that  brought  Him  from  a  throne  to  the  condition  of  a 
servant,  to  the  Cross  and  to  the  sepulchre !  And  here  we  enjoy  the  fruits  and  effects 
of  this  love  of  our  Lord.  The  effulgence  which  He  brought  with  Him  from  heaven 
enlightens  and  shines  round  us ;  the  virtue  and  the  efficacy  that  are  gone  out  from 
Him,  vivify  us ;  the  serenity,  the  hope  which  He  prepared  for  mankind  reanimate 
us ;  the  prospects  into  better  worlds  which  He  opened  to  them  are  our  comfort  and 
joy.  3.  Lastly  the  holy  communion  is  a  feast  of  Christian  brotherly  love.  Far 
hence  away,  all  such  as  harbour  malice,  all  cold  and  selfish  hearts,  all  the  slaves  of 
envy,  hatred,  and  revenge  I  Far  hence,  every  the  slightest  suggestion  of  vanity  and 
pride,  whereby  one  exalts  himself  above  another,  and  one  in  comparison  of  himself 
despises  another  I  Do  we  not  here  rejoice  and  glory  in  our  common  deliverance, 
forgiveness,  elevation,  and  happiness?  Come,  let  us  show  ourselves  glad  in  Jesus 
Christ  by  our  love,  by  our  mutual  endeavours  to  become  ever  more  humane,  ever 
more  bountiful  and  generally  useful.  Let  us  all  rejoice  in  one  another,  as  He 
rejoices  in  us  all.  Let  us  serve  and  assist  one  another,  as  He  has  helped  and  still 
helps  us  all.  (G.  J.  Zollikofer.)  The  soul's  atmosphere  : — This  passage  points  out 
the  characteristic  fact  of  the  cheerful  social  dispositions  of  the  early  disciples.  The 
Jewish  religion  was  the  only  one  which  ever  organised  joy  as  an  integral  and  im- 
portant part  of  its  services.  Christ  and  the  apostles  were  Jews,  and  the  same  joyous 
spirit  came  with  the  new  faith ;  and  although  they  entered  upon  the  organisation 
of  the  new  life  under  circumstances  calculated  to  make  men  bigoted  and  bitter,  yet 
all  the  early  periods  of  Christianity  were  sweet  and  calm.  The  earliest  Christian 
art  has  not  a  single  emblem  of  suffering  or  distress.  All  the  representations  were 
those  of  hope  and  cheerfulness.  Subsequently  philosophy  almost  destroyed  this 
temper,  and  wrought  an  atmosphere  of  stoical  hardness  and  moroseness  which  waa 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  259 

not  characteristic  of  true  Christianity.  Note : — I.  The  nature  of  the  Cheistian 
ATMOSPHERE.  We  all  know  how,  in  the  physical  world,  that  a  dull,  heavy  atmos- 
phere is  unfavourable  to  pleasure  or  labour.  We  bear  with  it,  fight  our  way  through 
it ;  but  it  is  the  clear,  bright,  genial  day  that  affects  our  spirits  favourably,  facili- 
tates our  work,  and  makes  things  grow.  So  the  soul  has  an  atmosphere  of  one  kind 
or  another.  Discouragement,  sadness,  obscurity  of  soul  makes  it  hard  for  a  man  to 
live,  to  be  social.  It  is  especially  mischievous  in  religious  life;  for  all  the  higher 
graces  are  such  as  spring  up  and  bloom  only  in  most  genial  atmospheres,  just  as 
many  of  our  plants  can  only  blossom  in  a  long  warm  summer.  The  characteristics 
of  this  atmosphere  are — 1.  Good-nature — a  grace  not  mentioned  in  Scripture  be- 
cause Paul  did  not  speak  English.  This  is  better  than  genius,  property,  or  honour. 
When  Baxter  spoke  of  marrying  a  woman  who  was  of  a  good  disposition  rather  than 
one  who  was  eminently  pious,  he  said  that  the  grace  of  God  could  dwell  with  many 
persons  that  he  could  not  live  with.  This  good  disposition  is  enjoined  in  "Be  kindly 
affectioned  one  to  another  with  brotherly  love,"  &c.,  and  is  that  charity  which  is 
"  not  easily  provoked,"  &c.  Now  good-natured  people  are  often  not  geniuses ; 
because  to  have  genius  one  must  have  nerves ;  but  men/  whose  nerves  are 
well  covered,  are  relieved  from  many  exasperations  and  exaggerations  which 
annoy  people  ;  but  where  men  have  not  this  protection  and  still  are  good-natured, 
it  is  a  peculiar  grace.  2.  Cheerfulness- -a  hopeful  state  of  life  under  any  con- 
ditions ;  a  shining  state  which  amounts  to  more  than  contentment.  3.  Faith — not 
simply  that  act  which  accepts  Christ,  but  that  which  includes  the  whole  action  of 
the  imagination.  A  practical,  matter-of-fact  man  is  like  a  waggon  without  springs 
— every  single  pebble  on  the  road  jolts  him ;  but  the  man  who  has  imagination  has 
always  the  power  of  glancing  off  from  hard  facts,  and  of  overcoming  the  world. 
4.  Humour.  The  sense  of  the  ludicrous  is  a  distinct  peculiarity  of  man  as  lifted 
above  the  brute  creation.  If  it  calls  to  itself  an  element  of  distinctiveness  it 
becomes  sarcasm.  When  it  holds  up  a  man  as  an  object  of  mirth  it  becomes 
ridicule.  When  it  has  a  certain  element  of  suppression  then  it  developes  humour. 
It  sees  things  in  a  funny  light.  Blessed  are  the  men  who  are  able  to  put  this 
cushion  between  themselves  and  all  the  sharp  edges  of  affairs  —who  know  how  to 
see  something  that  will  convert  sorrow  into  a  sourfce  of  pleasure.  A  man  who  has 
it  is  always  able  to  call  to  his  side  good-nature  and  happiness,  and  troubles  are  not 
so  troublesome,  nor  cares  so  sharp  to  him  as  they  would  be  if  he  had  no  such 
faculty,  II.  Its  advantages.  He  who  is  cheerful,  imaginative,  humorous,  has  a 
summer  of  the  soul,  and  whatever  he  has  to  do  he  will  do  better  in  that  than  in 
any  other  atmosphere.  This  atmosphere  favours — 1.  Earnestness  and  courage. 
It  has  been  thought  to  tend  to  frivolity,  but  that  is  not  the  case.  When  Napoleon 
was  crossing  the  Alps,  and  the  strength  of  the  men  had  almost  given  out,  and 
there  was  hesitation,  he  ordered  the  band  to  strike  up  a  cheerful  air.  The  sound  of  the 
drums  rolled  through  the  mountain  passes,  and  the  men,  catching  exhilaration  from 
the  music,  applied  themselves  with  renewed  earnestness  to  the  task.  Now,  when  we 
are  called  to  disappointments,  if  under  the  influence  of  imagination  we  can  but  feel 
cheer  and  good-nature,  that  temperament  of  the  soul  will  enable  us  to  hold  on  our 
way.  What  kills  men  is  discouragement.  It  is  sitting  down  under  trouble  that 
destroys  men ;  it  is  standing  up  and  mocking  it  that  enables  men  to  go  through  it 
without  harm.  "  I  have  thee,  O  man,"  says  the  Gorgon  of  disaster.  "  Not  yet," 
says  the  man  of  hope,  with  a  smiling  face,  and  eludes  his  grasp.  2.  Charity — that 
which  seeks  the  well-being  of  men.  A  man  who  is  without  good-nature  always 
judges  harshly ;  but  the  man  who  has  cheerfulness  and  humour  is  at  peace  with 
other  men.  The  most  difBcult  people  to  manage  are  those  who  never  see  a  jest  or 
develop  a  smile  ;  they  carry  gashing  angles  to  the  end  of  life.  And  unfortunately 
among  them  there  are  only  too  many  professing  Christians  ;  so  that  men  say  that  if 
they  wanted  sympathy  in  distress  they  would  rather  go  to  their  drinking  com- 
panions than  to  members  of  the  Churcb.  But  a  man  who  is  really  a  Christian  is 
a  "  light  of  the  world  " — a  man  whose  temper  and  disposition  make  him  luminous. 
Sweet  emotions  give  light  to  the  face,  and  bitter  emotions  make  it  dark.  And  a 
man  whose  face  is  lit  with  joy  and  hope  carries  among  his  fellow-men  that  good 
will  which  takes  away  the  friction  of  life  and  gives  joy  to  the  sorrowful  and  hope  to 
the  sinful.  3.  Patience  under  difficulties.  The  world  is  a  great  deal  larger  to  a 
man  of  imagination  than  to  a  "  Gradgrind  " — a  man  of  mere  facts — a  man  of  miles 
who  treats  the  world  as  though  it  were  a  football.  The  former  takes  cognisance  of 
things  invisible  which  help  him  to  see  that  the  troubles  of  to-day  are  the  instru- 
ments of  the  joys  of  to-morrow.  The  man  of  facts  sees  only  the  cloud;  the  hopeful 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

man  sees  the  sun  behind  and  the  fruitful  showers  after  the  cloud.  4.  Eealisation 
of  the  presence  of  God  and  trust  in  Him.  The  trouble  with  men  in  this  world  is 
that  they  have  no  God.  A  present  help  in  time  of  trouble  is  God,  and  if  there  be 
no  help  for  you  it  is  because  you  have  no  God  that  you  know  how  to  use.  A  man 
might  live  to  the  age  of  Methuselah  and  never  know  what  music  was,  if  he  did  not 
know  how  to  handle  the  instrument ;  and  a  man  may  live  with  God  around  him 
and  yet  be  without  God  because  he  does  not  know  how  to  use  Him.  And  the  soul's 
atmosphere  is  the  medium  through  which  a  man  discerns  God  more  easily  than 
through  any  other.  In  conclusion — 1.  You  ask,  "  Does  not  this  tend  to  relax 
conscience  ?  "  Perhaps  it  does,  and  that  is  the  best  thing  about  it  so  far  as  some 
consciences  are  concerned.  A  man  may  be  conscientiously  wrong  and  cruel  as- 
were  Saul  of  Tarsus  and  Loyola.  What  is  needed  of  conscience  is  that  it  should 
act  in  the  sphere  of  love.  Love  being  the  summer  atmosphere  of  the  soul,  let  any 
faculty  act  in  it,  and  it  will  act  right.  2.  But  do  not  many  lack  the  capacity  for 
such  cheerfulness  ?  Yes,  but  cripples  are  not  to  be  held  up  as  models  of  humanity. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  atmosphere  of  a  church  : — There  ought  to  be  such  an 
atmosphere  in  every  Christian  church,  that  a  man  going  there  and  sitting  two 
hours  should  take  the  contagion  of  heaven  and  carry  home  a  fire  to  kindle  the  altar 
whence  he  came.  (Ibid.)  Christian  festivity  : — 1.  When  you  ascend  from  the 
post-apostolic  to  the  apostolic  days,  you  seem  to  emerge  from  a  stifled,  airless  cave, 
where  all  manner  of  fungous  growths  luxuriate,  into  the  open  field,  where  fresh  ^ 
breezes  play  and  sunbeams  glitter  and  dew-besprinkled  flowers  shed  their  varied 
perfume  on  the  air.  In  the  Acts  you  find  not  only  a  purer  religion  but  more  of 
common  sense  and  manliness  than  in  the  history  of  the  fathers.  2.  We  make  a 
great  mistake  if,  whUe  we  seek  in  the  Scriptures  and  by  prayer  for  direction  iu 
matters  of  faith  and  in  the  larger  turning-points  of  life,  we  leave  smaller  affairs, 
such  as  our  feasts,  to  the  arbitrament  of  chance  or  the  example  of  the  world. 
"  In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication,"  &c.  Only  on  the  great  things  may  the 
stranger  approach  the  king,  but  in  everything  is  the  appeal  of  the  child  welcome  to 
the  Father.  The  disciples  did  eat  their  bread— I.  With  gladness.  1.  A  pre- 
liminary to  this  was  a  liberal  contribution  to  their  poorer  brethren — a  necessary 
ingredient  in  all  glad  Christian  festivity.  2.  These  ancient  Christians  were  not 
hermits,  they  enjoyed  their  food  all  the  more  by  enjoying  it  together.  The  sight  of 
a  friend's  face,  and  the  sound  of  his  voice  while  we  eat,  are  as  good  gifts  of  God  as 
food.  A  convivial  meeting  is  an  object  of  dread  to  Christian  parents,  but  it  is  not 
in  itself  evil ;  in  as  far  as  it  retains  its  etymological  meaning — eating  together — it 
is  good.  3.  A  good  reason  for  eating  with  gladness  is  that  we  have  something  to 
eat,  and  a  self-acting  machinery  which  reminds  us  when  nourishment  is  needed, 
and  compels  us  to  take  it  at  the  proper  time.  4.  In  the  case  of  a  Christian  the 
Giver  of  food  is  recognised,  and  therefore  he  has  more  gladness  than  other 
men.  II.  With  singleness  of  heart,  as  well  as  gladness,  and  that  without 
which  gladness  soon  disappears.  "  A  double-minded  man  is  unstable  in  aU  his 
ways."  Simplicity  is  destroyed  and  gladness  lost — 1.  By  burdensome  and  irrational 
luxury.  The  cares  of  the  meal  are  sometimes  as  heavy  as  the  management  of 
the  estate.  Instead  of  singleness,  doubleness  of  a  very  troublesome  type  is  the 
occupant  of  the  heart.  One  half  of  the  mental  vision  squints  aside  to  calculate 
the  estimation  in  which  the  elaborate  festival  is  held  by  the  guests.  Simplicity 
may  be  marred,  too,  by  the  cost  of  the  entertainment ;  and  some  approach  to  it 
might  both  replenish  the  coffers  of  charitable  institutions  and  facilitate  the  settle- 
ment of  tradesmen's  bills.  The  Christian  should  "  add  to  his  faith  courage " 
here.  2.  By  immoderately  late  hours.  To  turn  night  into  day  is  not  simplicity, 
and  cannot  promote  gladness.  It  is  like  the  opinion  within  lunatic  asylums  that 
people  should  lie  in  bed  while  the  sun  shines,  and  be  active  under  gaslight  during 
the  night.  What  would  you  think  of  the  gardener  who  should  cover  your  green- 
house till  noon,  and  make  up  for  the  deficiency  of  light  by  burning  lamps  beside 
the  flowers  till  midnight.  Treat  yourselves  as  you  treat  your  gardens.  Young 
men  and  women  would  be  more  like  the  lilies  in  freshness  and  beauty  if  they  con- 
sidered and  imitated  them.  3.  The  free  use  and  vile  abuse  of  intoxicating  drinks, 
(W.  Arnot,D.D.)  The  bright  side  of  life: — There  are  two  sides  to  every  street 
and  to  every  life — the  bright  and  the  dark.  The  man  who  deliberately  chooses  the 
latter  must  look  to  himself  for  companionship,  but  the  man  who  elects  the  former 
will  not  lack  society.  The  double  attraction  of  liis  circumstances  and  his  example 
will  prove  irresistible.  2.  The  bright  side  exists  not  only  in  spacious  avenues 
fringed  with  lordly  mansions,  but  in  narrow  lanes  flanked  by  lowly  cottages.    The 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  261 

cheerful  Christian  draws  satisfaction  from,  and  shows  it  in,  not  only  life's  great 
occasions,  but  in  life's  commonplace  acts.  You  can  form  no  judgment  of  the 
spirit  of  a  man  when  he  is  being  united  to  his  bride,  when  successful  in  business, 
or  when  on  a  holiday.  Watch  him  at  the  table,  or  in  some  ordinary  duty,  and  you 
will  be  able  most  accurately  to  gauge  his  character.  T.  The  bright  side  of  life 
IS  illumined  by  a  triple  light.  1.  Gladness.  We  like  to  see  a  man — par- 
ticularly if  he  be  a  guest — thoroughly  enjoy  his  meal.  To  see  him  daintily  picking 
over  half  of  it,  and  sending  the  other  half  untasted  away,  grieves  the  generous 
host,  and  excites  commiseration  for  the  man  who  cannot  relish  wholesome  food.  The 
illustration  may  be  expanded  so  as  to  embrace  the  whole  of  life.  The  good  work- 
man is  glad  with  his  work  and  glad  to  do  it.  There  is  no  gladness  for  a  good 
mother  like  that  excited  by  and  indulged  in  home  and  children.  And  for  the  good 
Christian  perfect  gladness  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  blessed  work  that  God  has 
given  him  to  do.  But  insipidity  or  disagreeableness  in  any  of  these  relations  is 
invariably  attended  by  poor  if  not  bad  effects.  2.  Singleness  of  heart — a  word 
only  occurring  here  in  the  New  Testament — means  soil  from  which  aU  stones  are 
cleared  ;  and  hence  even  and  smooth,  presenting  no  obstacle  to  the  object  passing 
over  it.  So  these  good  people  did  not  wait  till  conscience  thundered  that  while  they 
were  feasting  others  were  starving.  Nor  had  they  to  clear  away  a  number  of  pru- 
dential considerations,  and  make  a  number  of  troublesome  calculations  before  their 
beneficence  could  find  free  play.  All  hindrances  were  already  swept  away  by  the 
fresh  vigorous  tide  of  charity  which  resulted  from  the  copious  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Surely  this  singleness  of  mind  is  wanted  everywhere.  What  trouble  is 
caused  by  anxious  thought  about  the  future  at  home  and  in  the  market  place.  What 
energies  are  paralysed  when  the  thought  of  interest  is  allowed  to  mingle  with  the 
single  thought  of  duty.  How  many  Christians  are  kept  back  from  joyous  Christian 
service  by  allowing  the  disturbing  thought  of  what  other  people  will  think  or  feel 
to  upset  the  simple  conviction  that  God's  will  ought  to  be  done.  Get  these  thoughts 
swept  out  of  the  mind  by  the  power  of  the  Sphit,  and  then  let  the  current  of 
activity  flow  straight  forward,  and  hf e  will  be  bright.  Otherwise  it  will  be  gloomy — 
a  mixture  of  light  and  darkness — or  hopelessly  dark.  3.  Thankfulness.  He  was  a 
happy  man  who  wrote  that  103rd  Psalm.  The  unthankful  man  is  never  happy,  and 
cannot  be.  Selfishness  and  discontent  kill  all  joy.  II.  The  bright  side  is  the 
ATTRACTIVE  SIDE.  The  disciples  had  "favour  with  all  the  people,  and  the  Lord 
added  to  the  Church."  Thus  God  blesses  those  who  walk  on  the  bright  side,  and 
gives  them  their  heart's  desire,  which  is  success — the  gathering  to  themselves  of  a 
like-minded  company.  Religious  increase  is  brought  about  in  two  conceivable  ways 
— by  compulsion  and  by  attraction.  The  first  produces  hypocrites,  the  second  only 
true  Christians.  It  is  only  when  Christians  win  favour  that  God  adds.  Apply  this 
to — 1.  Families.  How  many  children  have  simulated  godliness  when  forced  upon 
•them  only  to  cast  it  away  with  disgust  when  the  time  of  independence  comes;  but 
how  many  have  risen  up  to  call  God  blessed  by  the  winsome  piety  they  have  seen  at 
home.  2.  Society.  The  estimate  which  vrorldly  men  and  women  form  of  religion 
is  derived  from  what  they  see  of  professing  Christians.  And,  alas !  much  of  it  is 
wholly  and  naturally  unfavourable.  The  time  has  come  to  re-try  the  Pentecostal 
experiment ;  not  in  form  but  in  spirit,  a  spirit  that  shall  work  through  established 
social  usages — showing  how  a  Christian  can  comport  himself  joyously  everywhere, 
and  socieiy  will  not  long  remain  unchristianised.  3.  The  Church.  So-called  Chris- 
tianity has  tried  force,  indifference,  and  means  calculated  only  to  repel.  Let 
Christians  try  that  which  will  have  favour  with  the  people,  use  means  in  the  best 
sense  popular,  and  watch  the  result.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Gladness  and  singleness 
of  heart. — Gladness  of  heart  springs  from  singleness  of  heart: — They  were  glad 
at  heart  because  they  were  single  in  heart.  Their  hearts  were  not  divided 
between  God,  or  Christ,  and  the  world,  and,  being  wholly  the  Lord's,  they 
rejoiced  in  the  Lord.  I.  Their  gladness  was  the  effect  of  their  singleness  of 
HEART  TOWARDS  GoD,  towards  God  in  Christ,  whom  they  called  Lord  and  God, 
and  into  whose  name  they  had  been  baptized  for  forgiveness  of  sins,  with  the 
promise  of  receiving  from  Him,  if  they  repented,  the  gift  or  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  It  was  the  proper  fruit,  that  is  to  say,  of  that  awful  fear  of  God,  tempered 
and  softened  by  filial  confidence  and  grateful  love,  which  we  see  characterised  in  the 
context  as  the  habitual  frame  of  mind  in  which  these  primitive  disciples  walked 
with  God,  in  the  exercise  of  living  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  In  proportion  as  they 
knew  God,  or  knew  the  gospel  of  Christ,  they  saw  that  He  was  all  in  all,  that  of 
Him,  and  through  Him,  and  to  Him  were  all  things.     They  connected  all  things, 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u, 

little  and  great,  with  God.  All  things  were  thus  to  them  full  of  God,  and  since  they 
rejoiced  in  God,  full  of  the  joy  of  God.  Tiiis  was  the  secret  of  their  happiness,  this  the 
source,  this  the  sum.  And  in  proportion  to  the  singleness  of  their  hearts  towards  God, 
so  that  He  was  all  in  all,  and  of  Him,  through  Him,  and  to  Him,  all  things,  di'l  the 
gladness  of  their  hearts  become  more  full  and  ecstatic,  or  rise  nearer  to  the  blessed- 
ness of  saints  in  heaven.  Their  joy  was,  then,  first  of  all  the  joy  of  godliness  and 
gratitude.  II.  Again,  this  gladness  proceeded  from  the  singleness  of  theik  hearts- 
TOWARDS  THE  WORLD,  from  the  victory  over  the  world,  to  which  they  were  crucified 
by  the  Cross  of  Christ.  A  half-hearted  Christian,  if  such  a  man  there  be,  a  worldly- 
minded  professor  of  Christianity  whose  heart  is  divided  between  God  and  the  world,, 
or  rather  is  not  yet  given  to  God,  is  miserable  when  he  is  called  to  surrender  his 
worldly  possessions,  and  feels  his  happiness  to  consist  in  giving  as  little  as  possible- 
to  the  cause  of  Christ.  But  not  so  the  man  who  with  singleness  of  heart  has  said, 
"I  am  not  mine  own;  I  am  bought  with  a  price,"  therefore  must  I  glorify  my 
Redeemer  with  all  that  is  mine.  The  more  he  can  do  for  God,  the  more  he  can 
contribute  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  the  more  is  his  joy  made  full.  His  heart  being- 
single,  his  final  aim  being  one,  in  the  fulfilment  of  that  aim,  in  the  extent  to  which 
he  can  contribute  by  his  exertions  or  possessions  to  its  fulfilment,  he  is  glad.  III. 
There  was,  however,  another  element  in  the  joy  of  these  Christians,  for  there  was 
another  distinguishing  feature  of  i;heir  character.  Theirs  was  the  joy  of  MOTUAii. 
LOVE — the  sweetest  joy  which  earth  can  boast.  Their  hearts  were  united  in  the  - 
bond  of  perfectness,  charity,  and  therefore  they  were  glad.  That  man  might  well  con- 
sent to  part  with  the  world  who,  with  the  world  as  the  price,  could  purchase  a  friend, 
could  win  to  himself  the  pure  love  of  one  purified  heart.  No  wonder  they  were  glad 
at  heart.  They  loved  one  another  with  a  pure  heart  fervently.  Their  singleness  of 
heart  in  their  attachment  to  one  another  made  them  glad.  Love  is  the  proper  fruit 
of  the  gospel,  for  faith,  which  is  the  reception  of  the  gospel,  worketh  by  love.  Lov& 
is  happiness  ;  pure  love  is  pure  happiness;  Christian  love  is  Christian  happiness, 
or  hfe  eternal  in  present  possession,  the  life  of  heaven  upon  earth.  Theirs  waa 
therefore  the  gladness  of  love  free  from  selfishness,  and  as  free  from  sectarianism. 
IV.  But  there  was  one  other  characteristic  of  this  gladness  of  heart  which  must  not 
be  omitted,  since  it  points  to  its  source,  and  is  the  thing  by  which  it  was  distin- 
guished from  all  other  joy.  This  gladness  was  the  joy  of  faith  in  Jesds  Christ. 
In  all  its  elements  it  was  the  fruit  of  that  faith.  Their  godliness,  their  gratitude, 
was  the  godliness  of  faith  and  the  gratitude  of  faith.  Their  victory  over  the  world 
was  also  the  victory  of  faith  :  "  For  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world, 
even  your  faith."  And  their  love  to  one  another  was  love  in  the  Lord,  love  of  faith's 
producing,  for  "  faith  worketh  by  love,"  which  is  the  believer's  life.  They  were 
glad  at  heart,  because  they  believed  with  all  their  heart.  What,  then,  is  the  glad- 
ness of  faith,  as  it  is  described  here,  compared  with  other  joys  ?  Need  I  show  that 
it  was  a  joy  peculiar  in  its  character,  and  pre-eminently  pure  and  exalted?  Need  I 
show  that  it  was  an  independent,  and  uniform,  and  habitual  joy?  not  arising  from 
circumstances  of  a  variable  kind,  not  Mke  the  joy  of  wealth,  or  of  honour,  or  of 
pleasure,  which  may  come  in  a  night  and  depart  in  a  night,  which  return  only  at 
intervals,  and  soon  pall  and  cease  to  please,  the  sooner  the  oftener  they  return. 
Faith  may  flourish  whatever  fades  ;  and  this  joy  is  as  independent  and  as  unifornv 
as  is  the  exercise  of  faith.  Need  I  show  that  it  is  a  perpetually  increasing  joy,  a 
light  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day  ?  Every  view  of  God 
increases  it,  if  we  see  Him  as  He  is  in  Jesus  Christ.  All  our  intercourse  with  the 
world  calls  it  into  exercise,  and  gives  it,  if  we  overcome  the  world,  renewed  strength. 
And  love  produces  love.  By  loving  we  learn  to  love,  as  by  walking  we  learu  to 
walk.     (R.  Paisley.) 

Ver.  47.  Praising  God,  and  having  favour  with  all  the  people. — At  once  godly  and 
popular : — I.  Piety.  "  Praising  God."  Behold  the  natural  history  of  regeneration. 
Those  who  are  bought  with  a  price  are  constrained  to  glorify  God.  Thanksgiving 
is  a  constituent  element  of  prayer  without  which  it  is  ineffectual.  In  the  case  of 
these  converts  as  in  the  case  of  Israel  redeemed  from  Egypt  it  was  spontaneous, 
and  could  not  be  restrained.  The  gratitude  that  comes  through  prompting  is  not 
gratitude.  II.  Popularity.  "  Having  favour,"  &c.  In  the  first  stage  of  their 
progress  these  converts  were  not  persecuted.  Two  opposite  experiences  alternate 
in  the  history  of  the  Church  :  sometimes  the  world  admires  and  sometimes  reviles. 
This  is  necessary.  If  godliness  were  always  to  obtain  the  favour  of  the  world, 
counterfeits  would  spring  up  ;  if  it  were  always  to  bring  down  the  world's  enmitj* 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  263. 

the  spark  of  Divine  truth  in  humanity  would  be  quenched.  God  holds  the  balance, 
anu  permits  as  much  of  the  wrath  of  man  as  suffices  to  praise  HimseK  and  purge 
the  Church,  and  then  He  restrains  the  remainder.  This  method,  as  exemplified  in 
his  ory,  we  see  to  be  the  best.  When  a  spark  is  imbedded  in  the  flax,  and  it  begins 
to  &  noke,  a  blast  would  blow  it  out,  and  theref  oio  the  blast  is  restrained.  But  after 
the  fire  has  fairly  caught,  the  blast  will  spread  the  flame,  and  therefore  it  is  per- 
mitted to  blow.  III.  Increase.  1.  The  Lord  added  them,  and  yet  they  added 
themselves.  The  Good  Shepherd  carried  the  sheep  home,  but  the  prodigal  walked 
home.  The  two  are  one  showing  the  Divine  and  human  sides  of  the  same  transac- 
tion. At  one  place  the  saved  are  "  Whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  ; 
at  another  they  are  "  As  many  as  the  Lord  shaU  call."  When  I  know  myseK  to  be 
like  a  withered  leaf  that  flows  to  a  sea  of  perdition,  it  is  sweet  to  think  that  help  is 
laid  on  One  that  is  mighty,  and  to  hope  that  the  Lord  adds  me  to  His  Church.  My 
comfort  arises  from  the  fact  not  that  I  hold  Him,  but  that  He  holds  me.  But  woe 
to  the  man  who  with  no  hkiag  for  God's  presence  or  the  company  of  His  people 
dares  to  comfort  himself  that  he  has  no  power  till  God  puts  forth  His  strength. 
The  Lord  is  now  ready  to  do  it,  if  you  are  wilUng  that  it  should  be  done.  2.  Every 
day  some  were  added.  There  is  no  blank  in  the  birth  registers  of  God's  family. 
The  Lamb's  Book  of  Life  has  a  page  for  every  day,  and  names  on  every  page, 
although  some  pages  are  more  crowded  than  others.  3.  He  added  the  saved  to  the 
Church  :  added  them  in  the  act  of  saving,  saved  in  the  act  of  adding.  He  does  not 
add  a  withered  branch  to  the  vine  ;  but  in  the  act  of  inserting  it  makes  the  withered 
branch  live.  When  pure  water  is  drawn  from  the  salt  sea,  it  is  added  to  the  clouds 
in  heaven.  It  is  thus  that  the  Lord  adds  the  saved  to  the  Church,  wkming  them 
from  a  sea  of  wickedness  and  leaving  their  bitterness  behind.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 
And  the  Lord  added  to  the  Churcli  such  as  should  be  saved. — The  relation  of  the 
Church  to  the  individual : — I.  It  seems  almost  inevitable  that  all  believing  men 

WILL   as  a  matter  OF  COURSE   ASSOCIATE    THEMSELVES  WITH    THE    ChURCH.       1.    Thls    iS 

prompted  by  the  very  nature  and  fitness  of  things.  (1)  It  is  the  moral  duty  of  every 
individual  to  give  society  an  account  of  his  convictions.  No  man  is  perfectly  sincere 
to  his  fellows  except  as  his  whole  life — his  thoughts  as  weU  as  his  conduct — is  open 
to  their  inspection.  Eespect  for  his  feUow-men,  himself  and  his  God  alike  demand 
this.  Therefore  not  to  do  this  in  matters  of  reUgious  conviction  is  to  withhold  from 
society  that  to  which  it  has  a  moral  claim,  for  rehgious  behef  lies  at  the  foundation 
of  all  moral  conduct ;  and  therefore  of  aU  social  confidence.  To  profess  to  belong 
to  society,  and  yet  conceal  our  rehgious  principles  is  a  moral  fraud.  (2)  An  evasion 
of  rehgious  profession  does  as  much  wrong  to  the  spiritual  hfe  of  the  beUever  as  it 
does  to  the  community.  He  does  as  much  violence  to  his  spiritual  nature  as  he 
would  to  his  social  nature  were  he  to  become  a  recluse.  Such  separation  renders 
the  development  of  one's  entire  nature  impossible — social  instincts,  sympathies  and 
capabihties.  And  just  as  the  domestic  feehng  finds  development  in  the  family,  the 
mercantile  in  the  company,  the  political  in  the  club,  so  the  religious  feeling  finds  its 
proper  development  in  the  Church.  Standing  aloof,  therefore,  our  personal  piety 
must  suffer,  wanting  that  mutual  encouragement  and  help  that  it  requires.  For  the 
Church  is  "  the  garden  of  the  Lord  " — the  place  of  rapid  and  healthy  growth. 
"  They  that  be  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  (fee.  Standing  aloof  from  our 
fellow  Christians,  moreover,  there  is  a  large  class  of  holy  and  beautiful  feelings  that 
are  never  called  into  exercise.  It  is  as  if  the  members  of  a  family  were  to  hve 
separate — the  tie  of  relationship  would  be  the  same,  and  the  affection  might  be  in 
their  hearts,  but  it  would  find  but  imperfect  expression  in  the  life.  (3)  Church 
association  is,  moreover,  needful  for  the  advantageous  application  of  spiritual 
power.  The  units  are  added  into  one  sum  ;  the  drops  collected  into  one  stream  ; 
the  strands  twisted  into  one  cable;  the  parts  "fitly  framed  together "  into  one 
potent  engine.  What  separated  believers  cannot  do  the  Church  easily  can.  For 
other  purposes,  the  advancement  of  literature,  science,  commerce,  (fee,  men  spon- 
taneously unite,  and  so  should  believers  in  the  work  of  God.  For  each  Christian  to 
do  "  what  is  right  in  his  own  eyes  "  is  as  if  soldiers  were  to  disperse  themselves 
through  a  country  for  the  purpose  of  subduing  it.  (4)  One  prime  part  of  the  prac- 
tical expression  of  reUgious  principle  is  in  public  worship.  God  will  have  His  people 
render  Him  sanctuary  service — the  chief  way  in  which  the  "  profession  of  Christ  " 
is  to  be  made.  We  might  be  pious  without  it,  but  our  piety  would  be  to  ourselves, 
not  to  the  world.  2.  This  natural  necessity  of  the  Church  is  further  insisted  upon 
in  the  New  Testament.  The  injunctions  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  are  not  mere 
arbitrary  directions,  but  recognitions  of  our  spiritual  nature.     We  have  passages — 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.ii. 

(1)  Becognising  the  Church  as  a  legitimate  fact.  "  Tell  it  to  the  Church,"  "They 
assembled  with  the  Church,"  &c.  (2)  Of  injunction,  expostulation  and  promise. 
"Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves,"  "These  be  they  who  separate 
themselves,"  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  in  My  name."  (3)  Where  the 
necessity  of  professing  Christ  (of  which  Church  membership  is  the  chief  way)  is 
insisted  on.  We  are  to  "  come  out  and  be  separate,"  to  "  confess  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus."  So  imperative  was  this  that  the  early  Christians  submitted  to  perse- 
cution for  the  maintenance  of  it.  Half  the  martyrdoms  of  the  Church  might  have 
been  avoided  had  Christians  been  content  with  an  isolated  religion.  And  the  great 
solicitude  of  the  apostle  in  writing  to  persecuted  believers  is  that  they  should  "  hold 
fast  their  profession  without  wavering."  II.  What  does  the  Church  bequiee  op 
THE  ivMviDUAL  AS  A  coNmTioN  OF  ITS  COMMUNION?  Ver.  42  embodies  the  natural 
principles  of  associated  Christian  life,  and  St.  Luke  distinctly  traces  the  passage  of 
the  individual  to  the  social  Christian  life.  Membership  with  Christ  tirst,  then 
membership  with  His  Church.  All  social  life  is  made  up  of  individual  lives — each 
member  enters  as  an  individual  not  to  receive  life  from  it,  but  to  add  life  to  it.  The 
spiritual  life  of  the  Church,  therefore,  is  the  sum  of  individual  lives.  In  none  of 
our  relationships  can  we  lose  our  individuality.  As  individuals  we  are  born,  Uve, 
die,  and  give  account  of  ourselves  to  God.  Of  the  individual,  therefore,  the  Church 
may  require — 1.  Moral  conversion.  A  purely  spiritual  society  can  admit  none  but 
spiritual  members ;  and  can  include  none  that  are  unregenerate.  Of  course  the 
Church  has  not  omniscience,  but  it  is  bound  to  exercise  the  most  vigilant  jealousy. 
And  it  cannot  receive  a  more  deadly  injury  than  an  unsanctified  member.  A 
society  is  worth  no  more  than  it  possesses  of  the  quality  for  which  it  exists.  A 
scienti6c  society,  whatever  other  qualities  its  members  may  have,  is  worth  no  more, 
as  such,  than  it  has  science.  And  so  the  Church  is  worth  no  more  than  the  spiri- 
tual Ufe  that  is  in  it.  Wealth,  intellect,  energy,  are  of  incalculable  value,  if  their 
possessor  bring  spiritual  life  also,  but  they  are  a  curse  if  he  do  not.  Hence  the 
Church  is  invested  with  the  power  of  discipline,  like  all  social  bodies,  and  therefore 
St.  Paul  censured  the  Corinthian  Church  for  not  excommunicating  the  incestuous 
person.  Christian  churches  must  be  churches  of  Christians.  2.  Intellectual  agree- 
ment with  its  distinctive  ecclesiastical  principles.  An  Episcopalian,  e.;).,  cannot  and 
ought  not  to  be  allowed  to  take  part  in  a  Congregational  administration.  His 
membership  would  involve  either  a  tacit  denial  of  principle  on  his  part  or  an  ex- 
posure to  constant  embarrassment  on  the  part  of  the  Church.  While  we  welcome 
him  to  all  our  spiritual  privileges,  we  must  deny  him  participation  in  our  govern- 
ment. 3.  Active  and  cordial  co-operation  in  religious  functions — participation  in 
worship,  communion  and  service.  Every  member,  therefore,  enters  into  a  moral 
contract  with  the  Church,  and  as  far  as  he  holds  aloof  is  as  dishonest  as  a  mercan- 
tile servant  who  absents  himself  from  his  occupation.  Of  course  we  claim  no  legal 
hold,  and  can  use  no  compulsion,  and  would  not  if  we  could.  But  these  are  the 
lowest  constraints,  and  Christianity  refuses  to  employ  them.  But  if  you  will  not 
discharge  its  duties  the  Church  has  a  right  to  ask  you  to  withdraw  from  a  fellow- 
ship to  whose  enjoyment  and  efficacy  you  add  nothing.  III.  The  claim  of  the 
INDIVIDUAL  IN  THE  Church.  He  may  expect  not  the  extinction  on  the  part  pf  its 
members  of  social  rank,  nor  the  sacrifice  of  individual  claims.  Membership  warrants 
no  rude  familiarity,  establishes  no  social  equality.  But  Church  members,  though 
not  one  in  rank  or  wealth,  are  yet  one  in  Christ,  and  each  in  his  spiritual  and 
temporal  need  may  expect  such  help  as  Christian  brotherhood  may  prompt  in  his 
sorrows,  brotherly  interest  and  sympathy ;  in  his  assaults  or  perils,  brotherly  assist- 
ance and  rescue  ;  all  that  is  involved  in  the  great  law,  that  we  "  love  one  another." 
(H.  AUon,  D.D.)  GraduaUty  and  divinity  of  human  salvation: — Dean  Alford's 
version  of  the  words  is,  "  The  Lord  added  to  their  number  day  by  day  them  that 
were  in  the  way  of  salvation."  Dr.  Samuel  Davidson's  version  we  think  better : 
"  The  Lord  was  adding  to  the  Church  daily  those  who  were  being  saved."  The 
authors  of  the  New  Testament  Revised  Version  have  adopted  Dr.  Samuel  Davidson's 
translation,  and  read,  "  the  Lord  added  to  them  day  by  day  those  that  were  being 
saved."  Not  those  that  had  been  saved,  or  those  who  would  be  saved,  but  those 
who  were  being  saved.  The  words  in  their  connection  teach  two  great  facts  in 
relation  to  man's  salvation.  I.  It  is  gradual  in  its  process.  The  popular  impression 
is  that  this  great  event  is  instantaneous.  But  the  nature  of  the  work  and  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Scriptures  give  no  sanction  to  such  an  impression.  Consider — 1.  The 
nature  of  the  work.  Salvation  may  be  said  to  involve  a  twofold  change.  (1)  A 
ch.inge  in  condition.     The  soul  is  represented  as  lost,  it  has  lost  its  normal  condi- 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  265 

tion  and  its  original  character.  We  say  that  a  thing  is  lost  when  it  has  failed  to 
reahse  the  object  for  which  it  was  produced.  Thus  a  chronometer  is  lost  when  it 
becomes  incapable  of  keeping  time  ;  a  vessel  is  lost  when  it  is  unfit  any  more  to 
plough  the  ocean ;  a  family  portrait  is  lost  when  all  the  lineaments  are  so  discoloured 
or  defaced  as  to  be  incapable  of  giving  any  faitiiful  idea  of  the  subject.  In  this 
sense  the  soul  is  lost ;  it  does  not  answer  the  end  of  its  existence.  It  involves — (2) 
A  change  in  character.  We  often  say  of  a  man  when  his  character  is  gone  that  he 
is  lost.  Whether  you  consider  salvation  as  consisting  in  the  restoration  of  a  lost 
condition,  or  a  lost  character,  graduahty  is  implied.  The  chronometer  cannot  be 
restored  at  once,  nor  can  the  unseaworthy  vessel  be  repaired  at  once.  Skilful  and 
persistent  effort  in  aU  cases  of  restoration  is  required.  It  is  so  with  the  soul.  The 
rebellious  does  not  become  obedient  at  once,  the  malign  benevolent  at  once,  the 
selfish  generous  at  once.  The  same  in  relation  to  character.  Character  is  not 
something  formed  at  once.  Character  is  made  up  of  habits,  and  habits  are  made  up 
of  numerously  repeated  actions.  Consider — 2.  The  testimony  of  the  Scriptures. 
"  Now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed.''  "  With  the  mouth  confes- 
sion is  made  unto  salvation."  "  Work  out  your  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling." 
"  Kept  through  faith  unto  salvation."  "  Eeceiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  even  the 
salvation  of  your  souls."  "  He  that  shall  endure  to  the  end  shall  be  saved."  The 
various  figures  employed  to  represent  the  Christian  life  indicate  the  same  graduality. 
It  is  a  building,  a  planting,  a  race,  a  fight,  &c.  II.  It  is  effected  by  God  theough 
THE  INSTRUMENTALITY  OF  PREACHING.  It  is  Said,  "  The  Lord  added."  He  did  it,  but 
how  ?  Everywhere  in  nature  He  works  by  means.  This  is  the  means  by  which 
God  effects  human  salvation.  Christ  is  the  Gospel,  and  the  gospel  preached  is 
Christ  exhibited.  Conclusion  :  1.  Infer  not  from  this  that  salvation  does  not  imply 
a  crisis.  There  is  a  point  when  everything  begins.  There  is  a  point  when  the  dead 
seed  receives  the  first  touch  of  life.  The  heavy  clouds  charged  with  electricity  reach 
a  point  when  they  flash  into  flame  and  break  into  thunder.  There  is  a  point  in 
disease  when  it  either  becomes  incurable  or  yields  to  a  restorative  touch,  and  we  say 
the  disease  has  taken  a  turn.  It  is  so  with  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  Conversion 
is  a  turn.  But  the  mere  turn  is  not  salvation ;  the  starting  point  is  not  the  goal ; 
incipient  germination  is  not  fruitage.  The  mariner  may  turn  his  barque  from  the 
direction  of  a  northern  port  to  a  southern  port,  and  yet  the  southern  port  he  may 
never  reach.  2.  Infer  not  from  this  that  other  elements  apart  from  the  gospel  may 
not  contribute  to  human  salvation.  Wholesome  literature,  pliilosopbic  truths, 
scientific  facts,  and  rational  speculations  we  disparage  not  these,  they  may  render 
important  service,  but  they  cannot  do  the  work  of  the  gospel,  they  cannot  save  souls. 
Put  the  best  seed  into  the  best  soil,  let  the  choicest  showers  come  down  upon  it,  and 
the  most  genial  airs  breathe  about  it.  It  will  never  spring  to  life  without  something 
else,  they  are  useless  without  the  sun.  Add  to  them  the  sun,  and  the  work  is  done. 
Add  to  all  the  elements  of  nature  the  sun,  and  it  will  start  majestic  forests  on  the 
barren  hills.  So  with  the  gospel.  Add  to  all  other  truths,  natural  and  moral,  the 
gospel,  and  they  wiU  render  service,  but  not  otherwise.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Additions  to  the  Church ; — I.  What  about  them  ?  1.  It  was  the  custom  in  the 
earliest  times  for  persons  who  had  been  converted  to  Christ  to  join  themselves  with 
the  Church.  From  that  fact,  I  feel  persuaded  that — (1)  They  did  not  conceal  their 
convictions.  It  is  a  strong  temptation  with  many  to  say,  "  I  have  believed  in  Jesus, 
but  that  is  a  matter  between  God  and  my  own  soul.  Can  I  not  go  quietly  to  heaven 
and  be  a  Nicodemus,  or  a  Joseph  of  Arimathea  ?  "  Yes  ;  but  that  is  a  different  thing 
from  being  cowardly  and  ashamed  of  Christ.  We  shall  not  object  to  your  being  a 
Nicodemus  if  you  will  carry  spices  to  the  grave  of  Jesus,  or  beg  His  body.  Neither 
of  these  two  brethren  were  cowardly  after  the  Cross  had  been  set  up,  nor  ashamed  to 
identify  themselves  with  Christ  crucified.  FoUow  them,  not  in  the  infancy  of  their 
love,  but  in  its  maturer  days.  The  promise  of  the  gospel  is  "  He  that  with  his  heart 
believeth,  and  with  his  mouth  maketh  confession  of  Him,  shall  be  saved."  (2)  They 
did  not  try  to  go  to  heaven  alone.  There  has  been  a  great  deal  said  about  being 
simply  a  Christian  and  not  joining  any  particular  church.  But  these  people  joined 
the  Church  at  once.  I  daresay  that,  had  they  criticised  the  Church,  they  would 
have  found  faults  in  her,  certainly  within  a  few  weeks  great  faults  had  to  be 
remedied  ;  but  these  converts  felt  that  the  society  at  Jerusalem  was  the  Church  of 
Christ,  and,  therefore,  they  joined  it.  If  you  wait  for  a  perfect  Church,  you  must 
wait  until  you  get  to  heaven  ;  and  even  if  you  could  find  one  they  would  not  admit 
you,  for  you  are  not  perfect  yourself.  Find  out  those  people  who  are  nearest  to  the 
Scriptures,  and  then  cast  in  your  lot  with  them.     If  it  would  be  right  for  you  to 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ii. 

remain  out  of  Church  fellowship,  it  must  be  right  for  every  other  believer,  and  then 
there  would  be  no  visible  Church  at  all.  2.  The  persons  who  were  received  at 
Pentecost  were  added  to  the  Church  by  the  Lord,  Does  anybody  else  ever  add  to 
the  Church?  Oh,  yes,  the  devil.  Who  was  it  that  added  Judas,  and  Ananias  and 
Sappbira,  and  Simon  Magus,  and  Demas?  Who  was  it  that  stole  forth  by  night 
and  sowed  tares  among  the  wheat  ?  Moreover,  the  Church  itself  cannot  avoid 
adding  some  who  should  not  be  received.  Mr.  Hill  met  a  man  who  hiccuped  up  to 
him  and  said,  "  How  do  you  do,  Mr.  Hill?  I  am  one  of  your  converts."  "  Yes," 
said  Rowland,  "  I  should  say  you  are,  but  you  are  none  of  God's,  or  else  you  would 
not  be  drunk. "  Converts  of  that  sort  are  far  too  numerous — converts  of  the  preacher, 
of  friends,  or  of  a  certain  fashion  of  making  profession,  but  not  true-born  children 
of  the  Lord.  3,  Additions  to  the  Church  of  a  right  kind  are  described  as  "  those 
who  were  being  saved. "  Those  in  whom  the  work  of  salvation  is  really  begun  are 
the  proper  candidates,  and  these  are  spoken  of  in  ver.  44  as  "believers."  So  let 
the  question  go  round — Am  I  saved  ?  Have  I  believed  in  Jesus  ?  If  I  have,  the 
process  of  salvation  within  me  is  going  on,  I  am  being  delivered  from  the  reigning 
power  of  sin  each  day ;  I  am  being  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto 
salvation,  and  I  shall  be  kept  and  presented  at  last  spotless  before  the  presence 
of  God  with  exceeding  joy.  We  set  the  door  wide  open  to  all  who  are  saved, 
however  httle  their  faith  may  be.  4.  Such  were  really  "  added."  I  am  afraid 
certain  persons'  names  are  added,  but  not  themselves.  They  are  added  like  figures 
on  a  slate,  but  they  do  not  augment  our  strength.  If  you  want  to  add  to  a  tree 
you  cannot  take  a  dead  bough  and  tie  it  on  ;  that  is  not  adding  to  it,  but  incumbering 
it.  To  add  to  a  tree  there  must  be  grafting  done.  A  true  Church  is  a  living  thing, 
and  only  Uving  men  and  women  are  fit  to  be  grafted  into  it,  and  the  grafting 
must  be  made  by  the  Lord.  Some  members  are  only  tied  on  to  the  Church,  and 
they  are  neither  use  nor  ornament.  When  I  see  disunion  and  disaffection  among 
Church  members,  I  can  weU  understand  that  the  Lord  never  added  them ;  but 
it  would  be  a  great  mercy  to  the  Church  if  the  Lord  would  take  them  away.  5. 
There  were  additions  to  the  Church  every  day.  Some  churches,  if  they  have  an 
addition  once  in  twelve  months  make  as  much  noise  over  that  one  as  a  hen  does 
when  she  has  laid  an  egg.  Now,  in  the  early  Church  they  would  not  have  been 
contented  with  that.  II.  Under  what  conditions  mat  we  expect  them  on  a 
LARGE  SCALE?  Tum  to  the  chapter  and  we  shall  have  our  answer.  We  may 
expect  additions  to  every  church  of  God  on  a  large  scale — 1.  When  she  has  a  Holy 
Ghost  ministry.  Peter  was  no  doubt  a  man  of  considerable  natural  abihties,  and 
just  such  a  man  as  would  have  power  over  his  feUow-men ;  but  for  all  this  Peter 
had  never  seen  three  thousand  persons  converted  until  he  had  been  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Ghost.  I  fear  that  many  churches  would  not  be  content  with  a  ministry 
whose  power  would  lie  solely  in  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  judge  a  minister  by  his  style, 
or  culture.  The  jingle  of  rhetoric  has  more  attraction  for  them  than  the  certain 
sound  of  the  trumpets  of  the  sanctuary.  A  Holy  Ghost  ministry,  if  Peter  be  the 
model,  is  one  which  is  bold,  clear,  telling,  persuasive,  and  chooses  Jesus  for  its  main 
theme.  He  did  not  speak  to  them  about  modern  science  and  the  ways  of  twisting 
Scripture  into  agreement  with  it.  He  cared  nothing  for  Rabbis  or  philosophers ; 
but  he  went  right  on  setting  forth  Christ  crucified  and  Christ  risen.  When  he  had 
preached  Christ,  he  made  a  pointed  personal  appeal  to  them  and  said,  "  Repent  and 
be  baptized,  every  one  of  you."  That  was  the  sort  of  sermon  which  God  blesses. 
2.  When  she  is  a  Holy  Ghost  Church — a  church  baptized  into  His  power,  and  this 
will  be  known  by  being — (1)  "Steadfast  in  the  apostles'  doctrine,"  &c.  (ver. 
42).  (2)  United.  The  Sacred  Dove  takes  His  flight  when  strife  comes  in.  (3) 
Generous.  I  do  not  believe  the  Lord  will  ever  bless  a  stingy  church.  There  are 
churches  where  more  is  paid  per  annum  for  cleaning  the  shoes  of  the  worship- 
pers than  for  the  cause  of  Christ ;  and  where  this  is  the  case  no  great  good 
will  be  done.  (4)  Ready  to  make  home  a  holy  place.  The  converts  did  not 
think  that  religion  was  meant  only  for  Sundays,  and  for  what  men  now-a-days 
call  the  House  of  God.  Their  own  houses  were  houses  of  God,  and  their  own  meals 
were  so  mixed  and  mingled  with  the  Lord's  supper  that  to  this  day  the  most  cautious 
student  of  the  Bible  cannot  tell  when  they  left  off  eating  their  common  meals,  and 
•when  they  began  eating  the  supper  of  the  Lord.  No  house  beneath  the  sky  is  more 
holy  than  the  place  where  a  Christian  lives,  and  there  is  no  worship  more  heavenly 
than  that  which  is  presented  by  holy  families.  To  sacrifice  home  worship  to  publio 
worship  is  a  most  evil  course  of  action.  Every  truly  Christian  household  is  a  church, 
and  as  such  it  is  competent  for  the  discharge  of  any  function  of  Divine  worship. 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  267 

Are  we  not  all  priests?  (5)  Devout.  They  did  not  forget  any  part  of  the  Lord's 
will.  (6)  Joyful.  (7)  Grateful.  III.  What  kesponsibilities  do  they  bring  to  us  ? 
It  is  our  duty — 1.  To  welcome  them  heartily.  2.  After  welcoming  them  we  must 
watch  over  them.  Of  course  no  pastor  is  equal  to  this  alone.  Let  the  watch- 
ing be  done  by  the  officers  of  the  church  first,  and  then  by  every  individual.  3. 
Setting  them  a  good  example.  4.  Giving  them  work  to  do.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon. ) 
The  saved  added  to  the  Church  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  Church?  The  English 
is  from  the  Greek  kxiriake  ;  but  the  word  here  is  eccZesf'a  used  in  the  New  Testament 
sometimes  for — 1.  The  place  where  the  disciples  met  to  worship  God  (1  Cor.  xi. 
22).  2.  The  assembly  met  together  to  worship  God.  Any  particular  congregation 
of  saints  (Col.  iv.  15 ;  Kom.  xvi.  3,  5 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  19).  If  the  apostle  had  meant 
their  private  family  he  would  have  expressed  it  so  (Eom.  xvi.  10-15  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  19), 
He  means  therefore  the  congregation  usually  met  in  some  part  of  their  house  con- 
secrated to  the  service  of  God.  3.  The  whole  body  of  saints  in  any  city  or  country 
a  church:  as  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  (chap.  viii.  1);  Antioch  (chap.  xiii.  1); 
Caesarea  (chap,  xviii.  22) ;  Thessalonians  (2  Thess.  i.  1).  4.  The  body  collective 
of  all  Christians  in  the  world  whereof  Christ  is  Head  (Col.  i.  18  ;  Eph.  i.  22,  23, 
V.  23,  25).  Thus  Cbrist  uses  the  word  (Matt.  xvi.  18),  and  thus  it  is  understood  in  the 
Creed  and  in  the  text.  II.  What  are  the  properties  of  this  Church.  It  is — 1.  One — 

(1)  As  haviijg  one  Head  and  built  on  one  Foundation  (1  Cor.  iii.  11  ;  Eph.  ii.  19, 20). 

(2)  As  agreeing  in  one  faith  (Eph.  iv.  5).  (3)  As  led  by  one  Spirit  (Eph.  iv.  3,  4). 
2.  Hdly.  (1)  Negatively,  (a)  Not  as  though  there  were  no  unholy  persons  in  it, 
for  Christ  compares  it  to  a  floor,  wheat  and  chaff  (Matt.  iii.  12) ;  a  field,  good  seed 
and  tares  (Matt.  xiii.  24,  25  ;  a  casting-net,  good  and  bad  fishes  (Matt.  xiii.  47, 48)  ; 
a  house,  vessels  of  honour  and  dishonour  (2  Tim.  ii.  20).  {b)  Not  as  if  any  were 
perfectly  holy  in  this  world  (1  John  i.  8).  (2)  Positively.  The  Church  is  holy 
because — (a)  It  calls  men  to  holiness  (2  Tim.  i.  9).  [h]  It  engages  men  to  holiness 
(2  Tim.  ii.  19).  (c)  In  it  many  are  sincerely  holy  (Tit.  ii.  14).  (d)  It  brings- 
them  to  a  perfect  holiness  hereafter,  when  the  Church  will  be  all  holy  (Eph.  v. 
26,  27).  3.  Universal :  as — (1)  Spread  over  all  places  and  ages  (Matt,  xxviii.  19  ; 
Mark  xvi.  15 ;  Rev.  v.  9).  (2)  Teaching  all  necessary  truths  (John  xvi.  13).  (3) 
Enjoining  universal  obedience,  and  the  exercise  of  all  graces  (1  Pet.  i.  15).  III. 
Such  as  are  saved  are  brought  into  the  Church  by  God.  1.  The  Lord  brings 
or  adds  them  to  the  Church  (John  vi.  44  ;  Acts  xvi.  14).  2.  They  that  are  saved 
are  thus  brought  by  the  Lord  into  the  Church  (chaps,  iv.  12;  xvi.  31).  Use  1. 
Thank  God  for  being  brought  into  the  Church  (Matt.  xi.  25).  2.  Continue  in 
the  Church  and  live  up  to  its  doctrine  and  disciphne  (Matt.  v.  16 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  12). 
Unless  ye  do  this,  it  will  avail  you  nothing.  If  you  do  you  will  get  to  the  Church 
triumphant  (Heb.  xii.  22).  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  A  pure  Church  an  increasing 
Church : — The  principal  alterations  in  the  Revised  Version  are  the  omission  of  "  the 
Church,"  and  the  substitution  of  "  were  being  saved."  The  former  suggests  that 
at  this  period  the  name  of  "  the  Church  "  had  not  yet  been  definitely  attached  to 
the  infant  community,  and  that  the  word  afterwards  crept  into  the  text  at  a  time 
when  ecclesiasticism  had  become  a  great  deal  stronger  than  it  was  at  the  date  of 
the  writing  of  the  Acts.  The  second  suggests  that  salvation  is  a  process  going  on 
all  through  the  course  of  a  Christian  man's  life.  Notice — I.  The  profound  con- 
ception WHICH  THE  WRITER  HAD   OF   THE   PRESENT   ACTION    OF    THE   ASCENDED   ChRIST. 

"  The  Lord  added,"  &c.  1.  Then  the  living,  ascended  Christ  was  present  in,  and 
working  with,  that  little  community  of  believing  souls.  And  the  thought  of  a 
present  Saviour,  the  life-blood  of  the  Church,  aud  the  spring  of  all  its  action,  runs 
through  the  whole  of  this  book.  The  keynote  of  it  is  struck  in  ver.  1,  which 
implies  that  the  Acts  is  the  second  treatise,  which  tells  all  that  Jesus  continued  to 
do  and  teach.  It  is  He,  e.g.,  that  sends  down  the  Spirit ;  whom  the  dying  martyr 
sees  ready  to  help ;  who  appears  to  the  persecutor  on  the  road  to  Damascus ; 
who  sends  Paul  to  preach  in  Europe  ;  who  stands  by  the  apostle  in  a  vision,  and 
bids  him  be  of  good  cheer,  and  go  forth  upon  his  work.  Thus,  at  every  crisis  it  is 
the  Lord  who  is  revealed  as  the  ascended  but  yet  ever-present  Guide,  Protector,  and 
Eewarder  of  them  that  put  their  trust  in  Him.  So  here  it  is  He  that  adds  to  the 
Church.  2.  Modern  Christianity  has  far  too  much  lost  the  vivid  impression  of  this 
present  Christ.  We  cannot  think  too  much  of  that  Cross  by  which  He  has  laid  the 
foundation  for  the  salvation  of  the  world ;  but  we  may  easily  so  fix  our  thoughts 
upon  that  work  which  He  completed  when  he  said,  "  It  is  finished  1  "  as  to  forget 
the  continual  work  which  will  never  be  finished  until  His  Church  is  perfected,  and 
the  world  is  redeemed.    3.  Notice,  the  specific  action  which  is  here  ascribed  to 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

Him.  He  adds  to  tbe  Church,  not  we,  not  our  preaching,  our  fervour,  our  efforts; 
these  may  be  the  weapons  in  His  hands,  but  the  hand  that  wields  the  weapon  gives 
it  all  its  power.  4.  It  is  His  will,  His  ideal  of  a  Christian  Church,  that  con- 
tinuously it  should  be  gathering  into  its  fellowship  those  that  aie  being  saved. 
Does  our  reality  correspond  to  Christ's  ideal  ?  If  it  is  not,  wherefore  ?  II.  Let 
us  see  if  we  can  find  an  answer.     Notice  how  emphatically  there  is  brought  out  here 

THE  ATTRACTIVE  POWER  OF  AN   EAENEST   AND    PURE    ChuECH.       1.    My  tCXt  is  the  end  o£ 

a  sentence.  What  is  the  beginning?  "All  that  believed  were  together,"  &c. 
Suppose  this  Church  bore  stamped  upon  it,  plain  and  deep  as  the  broad  arrow  of 
the  king,  those  characteristics — fraternal  unity,  unselfish  unworldliness,  unbroken 
devotion,  gladness,  and  transparent  simplicity  of  life  and  heart — do  you  not  think 
that  the  Lord  would  add  to  you  daily  such  as  should  be  saved  ?  Wherever  men  are 
held  together  by  a  living  Christ,  and  manifest  in  their  lives  the  features  of  that 
Christ,  there  will  be  drawn  to  them — by  the  gravitation  which  is  natural  in  the 
supernatural  realm — souls  that  have  been  touched  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  and 
souls  to  whom  that  grace  has  been  brought  the  nearer  by  looking  upon  them. 
Wheresoever  there  is  inward  vigour  of  life  there  will  be  outward  growth.  Histori- 
cally, it  has  always  been  the  case  that  in  God's  Church  seasons  of  expansion  have 
followed  upon  seasons  of  deepened  spiritual  life  on  the  part  of  His  people.  2.  And 
just  in  like  manner  as  such  a  community  will  draw  to  it  men  who  are  like-minded, 
so  it  will  repel  from  it  all  formalists.  And  I  come  to  you  with  this  appeal :  Do  you 
see  to  it  that  this  community  be  such  as  that  half-dead  Christians  will  never  think 
of  coming  near  us,  and  those  whose  religion  is  tepid  will  be  repelled  from  us,  but 
they  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  earnest  devotion  shall  recognise  in  us 
men  like-minded,  and  from  whom  they  may  draw  help.  3.  Now,  if  all  this  be  true, 
it  is  possible  for  worldly  and  stagnant  communities  to  thwart  Christ's  purpose.  It 
is  a  solemn  thing  to  feel  that  we  may  clog  Christ's  chariot-wheels,  that  there  maybe 
so  little  spiritual  life  in  us,  that  He  dare  not  entrust  us  with  the  responsibility  of 
guarding  and  keeping  the  young  converts  whom  He  loves  and  tends.  Depend  upon 
it  that,  far  more  than  my  preaching,  your  lives  will  determine  the  expansion  of 
this  Church.  And  if  my  preaching  is  pulling  one  way  and  your  lives  the  other, 
and  I  have  half  an  hour  a  week  for  talk  and  you  have  seven  days  for  contradictory 
life,  which  of  the  two  do  you  think  is  likely  to  win  in  the  tug  ?  And  remember 
that  just  as  a  bit  of  sealing-wax,  if  you  rub  it  on  your  sleeve  and  so  warm  it,  develops 
an  attractive  power,  the  Church  which  is  warmed  will  draw  many  to  itself.  HI. 
The  definition  given  here  of  the  class  of  persons  gathered  into  the  community. 
1.  In  the  New  Testament  salvation  is  represented — (1)  As  past,  in  so  far  as  the  first 
exercise  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  the  whole  subsequent  development  is  involved,  and 
the  process  of  salvation  has  its  beginning  then,  when  a  man  turns  to  God.  (2)  As 
present,  in  so  far  as  the  joy  of  deliverance  from  evil  and  possession  of  good,  which 
is  God,  is  realised  day  by  day.  (3)  As  future,  in  so  far  as  all  the  imperfect  posses- 
sion of  salvation  prophesies  its  perfecting  in  heaven.  But  all  these  three  points  of 
view  may  be  merged  into  this  one  of  my  text,  which  speaks  of  every  saint  on  earth, 
from  the  infantile  to  the  most  mature,  as  standing  in  the  same  row,  though  at 
different  points;  walking  on  the  same  road,  though  advanced  different  distances  ; 
all  participant  of  the  same  process  of  "  being  saved."  2.  The  Christian  salvation, 
then,  is  a  process  begun  at  conversion,  carried  on  progressively  through  the  life, 
and  reaching  its  climax  in  another  state.  Day  by  day,  through  the  spring  and  the 
early  summer,  the  sun  is  longer  in  the  sky,  and  rises  higher  in  the  heavens.  And 
the  path  of  the  Christian  is  as  the  shining  light.  Last  year's  greenwood  is  this 
year's  hardwood;  and  the  Christian,  in  like  manner,  has  to  grow  in  the  grace  and 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour.  So  these  progressively  and,  therefore,  as  yet 
imperfectly  saved  people,  were  gathered  into  the  Church.  3.  Now  if  that  be  the 
description  of  the  kind  of  folk  that  come  into  a  Christian  Church,  the  duties  of  that 
Church  are  very  plainly  marked — (1)  To  see  that  the  community  help  the  growth 
of  its  members.  There  are  Christian  Churches  into  which,  if  a  young  plant  is 
brought,  it  is  pretty  sure  to  be  killed.  The  temperature  is  so  low  that  the  tender 
shoots  are  burned  as  with  frost,  and  die.  I  have  seen  people  coming  all  full  of 
fervour  and  of  faith,  into  Christian  congregations,  and  finding  that  the  average 
round  about  them  was  so  much  lower  than  their  own,  they  have  cooled  down  after 
a  bit  to  the  fashionable  temperature,  and  grown  indifferent  like  their  brethren.  (2) 
And  if  any  hold  aloof  from  Christian  fellowship  for  more  or  less  sufficient  reasons, 
let  me  press  upon  them,  that  if  they  are  conscious  of  however  imperfect  a  posses- 
sion of  that  incipient  salvation,  their  place  is  thereby  determined,  and  they  are 


CHAP.  II.]  THE  ACTS.  269' 

doing  wrong  if  they  do  not  connect  themselves  with  some  Christian  communion, 
and  stand  forth  as  members   of   Christ's  Church.      Conclusion :    Salvation  is  a 
process.      The  opposite  thing  is  a  process  too.      "  The  preaching  of  the  Cross  is  to 
them  who  are  in  the  act  of  perishing,  foolishness  ;    unto  us  who  are  being  saved, 
it  is  the  power  of  God."     These  two  processes  start,  as  it  were,  from  the  same 
point,  one  by  slow  degrees  and  almost  imperceptible  motion,  rising  higher  and 
higher,  the  other  by  slow  degrees  and  almost  unconscious  descent,  sliding  steadily 
and  fatally  downward  ever  further  and  further.     And  in  each  of  us  one  or  other  of 
these  processes  is  going  on.     Either  you  are  slowly  rising  or  you  are  slipping  down. 
No  man  becomes  a  devil  all  at  once,  and  no  man  becomes  an  angel  all  at  once. 
Trust  yourself  to  Christ,  and  He  will  lift  you  to  Himself ;  turn  your  back  upon 
Him,  and  you  will  settle  down,  down,   down,  until  you  are  lost   for   ever.     (A. 
llaclaren,  D.D. )         Church  membership  not  the  measure  of  Christianity  .-—It  is  a  joy 
to  me  to  know  that  the  Christians  within  the  communion  of  this  church  are  not  all 
the  Christians  to  be  found  in  the  congregation.     We  are  richer  than  we  appear  to 
be.      Here    are   growing    pear-trees,   apple-trees,   cherry-trees,    and   shrubs,   and 
blossoming  vines,  and  flowers  of  every  hue  and  odour;  but  I  am  glad  that  some 
seeds  have  blown  over  the  wall,  and  that  fruit-trees  and  flowers  most  pleasant  to 
the  eye  are  springing  up  there  also.     And  though  I  wish  they  were  within  the 
enclosure,  where  the  boar  out  of  the  wood  could  not  waste  them,  and  the  wild  beast 
of  the  field  devour  them,  yet  I  love  them,  and  am  glad  to  see  them  growing  there. 
(if.  W.  Beecher.)         Church  membership  does  not  ensure  final  salvation  : — Many  men 
seem  to  think  that  religion  consists  of  buying  a  ticket  at  the  little  ticket-otfice  of 
conversion.      They  conclude  that   they  will  make  the  voyage  to  heaven.      They 
understand  that  a  man  must  be  convicted  and  converted,  and  join  the  Church ; 
and,  wben  they  have  done  that,  they  think  they  have  a  ticket,  which,  under  ordinary 
circumstances,  will  carry  them  through.     Their  salvation  is  not  altogether  sure.     A 
man  may  be  cast  away  upon  a  voyage.     But  still  they  say,  "I  have  got  my  ticket, 
and,  if  no  accident  occur,  it  will  carry  me  to  my  destination  safely ;  and  all  I  have 
to  do  is  to  have  patience  and  faith."     And  they  are  like  a  man  that  is  riding  in  the 
cars,  who,  every  time  the  conductor  comes  around,  shows  his  ticket.     They  say, 
"I  was  awakened,  I  saw  that  I  was  a  sinner,  and  trusted  my  soul  in  the  hands  of 
Christ."     Yes :  you  have  trusted  it  there,  and  there  you  have  left  it  ever  since  you 
were  converted.     Are  there  not  hundreds  and  thousands  who  are  living  in  just  the 
same  way  ?     (Ibid.)       Success  : — I.  Divine  in  its  source.     "  The  Lord."     1.  It  was 
instrumentally  Divine.  Through  the  labours  of  the  good.  2.  It  was  voluntarily  Divine. 
Omnipotence  did  not  coerce.     3.  It  was  beneficently  Divine.    None  deserved  to  be  in- 
fluenced.    4.  It  was  impartially  Divine.     No  respect  of  persons.     5.  It  was  unosten- 
tatiously Divine.     The  virtual  energy  and  blessing  came  from  the  Lord,  but  He  was 
hidden  in  the  instrument.     6.  It  was  mediatorially  Divine.     "  TlieLord" — Christ, 
operating  not  as  Creator,  but  Eedeemer.  II.   Social  in  its  eokm.   "  To  the  Church." 
This  implies — 1.   Separation  from  the  world.     New  maxims,  motives,  aspirations, 
activities.     2.  Public  profession  of  attachment  to  Christ.     3.  Supreme  sympathy 
with,  and  love  to,  the  associated  friends  of  the  Saviour.     Like  draws  to  like.     4. 
Co  operation  with  advocates  of  orgmised  Christianity.    III.  Constant  in  its  occue- 
bence.     "  Daily."     1.  Eepeateduess.     2.  Gradualness.     3.  Continuity.      4.  Accu- 
mulativeness.    Each  day  added  to  the  advance  of  the  others.     IV.  Eedemptive  in 
its  blessings.     "  Such  as  should  be  saved."     1.  Saved  from  sin  and  its  contamina- 
tions.    2.  Saved  by  the  Spirit  through  the  blood  of  Christ.     3.  Saved  for  a  life  of 
holiness  and  usefulness.    4.  Saved  unto  eternal  gains.    Best,  victory,  purity,  fellow- 
ship, happiness.    (B.  D.  Johns. )      Church  membership  :  its  importance  : — An  old  sea- 
captain  was  riding  in  the  cars  towards  Philadelphia,  and  a  young  man  sat  down  beside 
him.    He  said,  "  Young  man,  where  are  you  going  ?  "    "I  am  going  to  Philadelphia  to 
live,"  replied  the  young  man.     "  Have  you  letters  of  introduction  ?  "  asked  the  old 
captain.     "  Y'es,"  said  the  young  man,  and  he  pulled  some  of  them  out.     "Well," 
said  the  old  sea-captain,  "haven't  you  a  church  certificate?  "     "Oh,  yes,"  replied 
the  young  man,  "  I  didn't  suppose  you  would  want  to  look  at  that."     "  Yes,"  said 
the  sea-captain,  "  I  want  to  see  that.     As  soon  as  you  get  to  Philadelphia,  present 
that  to  some  Christian  Church.     I  am  an  old  sailor,  and  I  have  been  up  and  down 
in  the  world,  and  it's  my  rule,  as  soon  as  I  get  into  port,  to  fasten  my  ship  fore  and 
aft  to  the  wharf,  although  it  may  cost  a  little  wharfage,  rather  than  have  my  ship 
out  in  the  stream,  floating  hither  and  thither  with  the  tide."     (T.  De  Witt  Talmagc, 
D.D.)         Converts  should  join  the  Church: — At  first  Oliver  Cromwell's  Ironsides 
were  dressed  anyhow  and  everyhow ;  but  in  the  melee  with  the  Cavaliers  it  some- 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

times  happened  that  an  Ironside  Was  struck  down  by  mistake  by  the  sword  of  one 
of  his  own  brethren,  and  so  the  general  said,  "  You  wear  red  coats,  all  of  you.  We 
must  know  our  own  men  from  the  enemy."  What  Cromwell  said  he  meant,  and 
they  had  to  come  in  their  red  coats,  for  it  was  found  essential  in  warfare  that  men 
should  be  known  by  some  kind  of  regimental.  Now,  you  that  are  Christ's,  do  not 
go  about  as  if  you  were  ashamed  of  His  Majesty's  service.  Put  on  your  red  coats : 
I  mean  come  out  as  acknowledged  Christians.  Unite  with  a  body  of  Christian 
people,  and  be  distinctly  known    to   be  Christ's.      (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Church 

membership:  its  value  to  the  young: — Griffith  John,  the  celebrated  missionary 
to  China,  was  admitted  to  Church -membership  at  the  exceedingly  early  age  of 
eight.  His  testimony  is,  "Had  I  not  taken  that  step  then,  I  doubt  whether 
I  should  ever  have  been  a  missionary,  if  a  member  of  a  Christian  Church  at 
all."     {J.  Morley   Wright.)  Church  mevihers  :  wrong  and  right  sort  of: — Now, 

many  people  go  to  church  as  a  rich  man  goes  to  an  hotel.  He  has  his  big 
boxes,  his  trunks,  his  wife,  his  children,  and  plenty  of  money,  and  he  wants 
to  find  commodious  apartments.  Many  people  think  that  if  they  have  clothes, 
and  a  good  supply  of  money,  and  are  well-appearing  and  good-paying  boarders 
in  the  hotel  of  the  Church,  they  are  just  the  kind  that  we  want.  We  do  not 
want  any  such  folks.  We  have  too  many  of  them  already !  This,  in  respect 
to  a  man's  qualifications  for  entering  the  Church,  falsifies  the  fundamental  idea  of 
Christianity ;  for  we  look  upon  men,  and  know  that  they  are  fallible,  imperfect, 
and  that  by  the  force  of  evil  passions  from  within,  and  the  pressure  of  temptations 
from  without,  imperfection  has  wrought  itself  into  sins  in  innumerable  instances. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.) 


CHAPTER  III. 

Vers.  1-11.  Now  Peter  and  John. — Peter  and  John : — The  union  of  the  two 
brings  the  narratives  of  the  Gospels  into  an  interesting  connection  with  the  Acts. 
They  were  probably  about  the  same  age  (the  idea  that  Peter  was  some  years  older 
than  John  rests  mainly  on  the  pictures  which  artists  have  drawn  from  their 
imagination,  and  has  no  evidence  in  Scripture),  and  had  been  friends  from  their 
youth  upward.  They  had  been  partners  as  fishermen  on  the  Sea  of  Galilee  (Luke 
V.  10).  They  had  been  sharers  in  looking  for  the  consolation  of  Israel,  and  had 
together  received  the  baptism  of  John  (John  i.  41).  John  and  Andrew  had  striven 
■which  should  be  the  first  to  tell  Peter  that  they  bad  found  the  Christ  (John  i.  41). 
The  two  had  been  sent  together  to  prepare  for  the  Passover  (Luke  xxii.  8).  John 
takes  Peter  into  the  palace  of  the  high  priest  (John  xviii.  16),  and  though  he  must 
have  witnessed  his  denials,  is  not  estranged  from  him.  It  is  to  John  that  Peter 
turns  for  comfort  after  his  fall,  and  with  him  he  comes  to  the  sepulchre  on  the 
morning  of  the  resurrection  (John  xx.  6).  The  eager  affection  which,  now  more 
strongly  than  ever,  bound  the  two  together  is  seen  in  Peter's  question,  "Lord,  and 
what  shall  this  man  do  ?  "  (John  xxi.  21) ;  and  now  they  are  again  sharers  in 
action  and  in  heart,  in  teaching  and  in  worship.  Passing  rivalries  there  may  have 
been,  disputes  which  was  the  greatest,  prayers  for  places  on  the  right  hand  and  the 
left  (Matt.  XX.  20  ;  Mark  x.  35) ;  but  the  idea  maintained  by  Eenan,  that  St.  John 
wrote  his  Gospel  to  exalt  himself  at  the  expense  of  Peter,  must  take  its  place  among 
the  delirantium  somnia,  the  morbid  imaginations,  of  inventive  interpretation.  They 
appear  in  company  again  in  the  mission  to  Samaria  (chap.  viii.  14),  and  in  recog- 
nising the  work  that  had  been  done  by  Paul  and  Barnabas  among  the  Gentiles 
(Gal.  ii.  9).  When  it  was  that  they  parted  never  to  meet  again,  we  have  no  record. 
(Dean  Plumptre.)  Peter  and  John: — In  natural  disposition,  Peter  and  John  did 
not  very  exactly  correspond  with  each  other  ;  but  diamond  polishes  diamond,  and 
these  two  precious  stones  may  have  advantageously  polished  each  other.  {Rieger.) 
Went  up  together  into  the  temple. — Public  worship  : — The  Christian  has  to 
regard  this — I.  Negatively.  1.  Not  as  a  legal  yoke.  2.  Not  as  a  meritorious 
work.  II.  Positively.  1.  As  a  good  and  useful  discipline.  2.  As  a  thankworthy 
opportunity  for  increase  in  goodness.  (Lechler.)  Love  for  worshij) : — "I  have 
in  my  congregation,"  said  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  "  a  worthy  aged  woman,  who 
has  for  many  years  been  so  deaf  as  not  to  distinguish  the  loudest  sot  nd  ;  and  yet 


cnAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  271- 

she  is  always  one  of  the  first  in  the  meeting.  On  asking  the  reason  of  her  constant 
attendance,  as  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  hear  my  voice,  she  answered,  "  Though 
I  cannot  hear  you,  I  come  to  God's  house  because  I  love  it,  and  would  be  found  in 
His  ways  ;  and  He  gives  me  many  a  sweet  thought  upon  the  text  when  it  is  pointed 
out  to  me :  another  reason  is,  because  I  am  in  the  best  company,  in  the  most 
immediate  presence  of  God,  and  among  His  saints,  the  honourable  of  the  earth.  I 
am  not  satisfied  with  serving  God  in  private :  it  is  my  duty  and  privilege  to  honour 
Him  regularly  and  constantly  in  public."  We  should  have  set  places  for  the 
tcorship  of  God : — The  song-birds  in  our  fields  have  a  chosen  branch  on  which  they 
continually  perch  for  their  morning  and  evening  songs.  In  time  of  encampment 
Washington  reserved  to  himself  a  thicket  where  he  could  pray  undisturbed. 
Bishop  Leighton  frequented  a  grove  in  a  public  park  which  was  at  last  left  to  him 
as  his  own  property.  In  the  story  of  "  The  Path  to  the  Bush  "  is  an  account  of  the 
beaten  track  through  the  forest  to  the  praying  huts  of  the  native  converts,  and  the 
faithful  girl  hinting  to  her  sister  that  "  the  grass  grew  on  her  path."  The  house 

of  God: — A  new  student  had  come  to  the  university  and  called  to  see  Professor 
Tholuck.  The  latter  asked  him  where  he  went  to  church.  "  Oh,"  said  he,  "  I  do 
not  attend  preaching.  Instead  of  confining  myself  to  the  four  walls  of  a  building  I 
go  out  into  the  green  fields,  and  under  the  lofty  arches  of  the  forest  trees  I  listen 
to  the  singing  of  the  birds  and  the  countless  melodies  of  God's  creatures,  where 
everything  that  hath  breath  praises  the  Lord."  Then  the  professor  asked  him, 
"  But  what  do  you  do  when  it  rains  ?  "  Conformity  to  God's  plan  is  best.  Why 
do  Christians  go  to  church  « — Is  it  chiefly  in  order  that  they  may  give  or  receive, 
through  the  services  and  their  own  part  in  them  ?  These  questions  would  be 
answered  very  differently  by  different  persons.  Some  go,  out  of  a  glad  and  grateful 
heart,  to  show  and  to  express  their  gratitude  to  God,  and  to  bear  a  part  in  His 
public  worship.  Others  go  in  order  to  gain  some  personal  advantage  through  what 
they  see  and  hear  and  feel  while  there.  The  one  sort  are  pretty  sure  to  accomplish 
what  they  go  for.  They  swell  the  service  of  prayer  and  praise,  and  by  their 
countenance  and  evident  appreciativeness  they  cheer  the  heart  of  the  preacher,  and 
give  added  force  to  his  preaching.  The  other  sort  often  find  their  church-going  a 
failure.  The  singing  is  not  what  they  hoped  for;  the  prayers  fail  to  meet  their 
wants  ;  the  Bible  selections  are  poorly  timed  to  their  requirements  ;  and  as  to  the 
sermon,  "it  does  not  feed  "  their  souls.  It  is  a  great  pity  that  there  are  com- 
paratively so  few  of  the  first  class  of  Christian  worshippers,  and  that  there  are  so 
many  of  the  second  class.  And  it  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  those  who  go  to  church 
to  do  what  they  can  to  make  the  church  service  a  success,  grow  steadily  in 
character  and  in  intellectual  power ;  while  those  who  go  there  v/ith  a  chief  desire 
to  be  the  personal  gainers  by  their  going,  shrink  and  dwindle  in  their  personality. 
The  poorest  specimens  of  church-goers  are  those  who  are  constantly  complaining 
that  the  preaching  "  does  not  feed  "  them.  Hearers  of  that  sort  are  like  Pharaoh's 
lean  kine  ;  the  more  they  swallow  the  leaner  they  look.  In  this  sphere,  as  well  as 
in  every  other,  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  are  true,  that  "  it  is  more  blessed  to 
give  than  to  receive."  (H.  C.  Trumbull,  D.B.)  At  the  hour  of  prayer,  being 
the  ninth  hour. — Hours  of  prayer  : — The  ninth  hour  was  3  p.m.,  the  hour  of  the 
evening  sacrifice  (Jos.  Ant.  xiv.  4,  §  3).  The  traditions  of  later  Judaism  had  fixed 
the  third,  the  sixth,  and  the  ninth  hours  of  each  day  as  times  for  private  prayer. 
Daniel's  practice  of  praying  three  times  a  day  seems  to  imply  a  rude  of  the  same 
kind,  and  Psa.  Iv.  17  ("Evening  and  morning  and  at  noon  will  I  pray")  carries  the 
practice  up  to  the  time  of  David.  "  Seven  times  a  day  "  was,  perhaps,  the  rule  of 
those  who  aimed  at  a  life  of  higher  devotion  (Psa.  cxix.  164).  Both  practices 
passed  into  the  usage  of  the  Christian  Church  certainly  as  early  as  the  second 
century,  and  probably  therefore  in  the  first.  The  three  hours  were  observed  by 
many  at  Alexandria  in  the  time  of  Clement  {Strom,  vii.  p.  722).  The  seven  became 
the  "canonical  hours"  of  Western  Christendom,  the  term  first  appearing  in  the 
rule  of  St.  Benedict  {ob.  a.d.  542)  and  being  used  by  Bede  (a.d.  701).  (Dean 
Plumptre.)  The  proper  hour  of  worship  ;  — Eowland  Hill  well  knew  how  to  seize 
the  best  opportunity  for  reproving  culpable  habits  in  his  hearers.  One  of  them, 
who,  to  his  great  annoyance,  avoided  coming  to  chapel  in  time  for  the  prayers,  and 
arrived  only  just  soon  enough  to  hear  the  sermon,  complained  to  him  of  partiality 
in  a  magistrate.  He  gave  him  one  of  his  most  searching  looks,  and  said  with  an 
emphasis  and  manner  peculiar  to  himself,  "  Then  why  do  you  not  come  to  public 
worship  in  proper  time  to  pray  that  God  would  '  grant  all  magistrates  grace  to 
.execute  justice  and   maintain  truth'?"         The  hour  of  prayer : — 1.   The  com- 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

panions.  This  first  verse  reveals,  as  by  a  flash-light,  the  spirit  of  these  companions. 
Peter  and  John  together.  What  antipodes  I  Peter,  impulsive,  bold,  energetic, 
daring ;  John,  meditative,  timid,  loving,  trustful.  What  ground  in  nature  for 
fellowship  between  them  ?  Yet,  like  Luther  and  Melanchthon  in  the  crisis  of  a 
later  age,  they  were  joined  in  the  strength  and  beauty  of  a  friendship  in  Christ 
that  gave  to  each  supplemental  grace  and  energy.  2.  "  Going  up  into  the  temple," 
though  the  vail  had  been  rent  and  the  lesson  of  the  spirituality  and  universality  of 
worship  had  been  taught  them  1  Peter  and  John  had  reverence  for  sacred  places 
— that  reverence  which  is  a  mark  of  depth  and  spirituality  in  the  religious  life. 
These  early  disciples  did  not  spurn  religious  custom,  though  it  was  a  custom  of  a 
decadent  Jewish  Church.  To  their  devout  souls  history  and  sacred  associations 
meant  something.  Character  that  is  strong  has  roots.  These  grow  deep  and  take 
hold  of  institutions  representing  thought  and  life  and  history.  Luther  was  loth  to 
leave  the  old  Catholic  Church,  Romanised  and  corrupt  as  it  was.  Wesley  always 
clung  to  the  Church  of  England.  Superstition  you  may  call  this  clinging  to  the 
venerable  and  historic.  Well,  if  the  choice  is  between  irreverence  and  superstition, 
give  me  superstition.  Irreverence  weakens  conscience  and  bFtints  the  spiritual  edge 
of  character.  Superstition,  as  the  devout  Neander  has  well  said,  often  paves  the 
way  to  faith.  God's  plan  was  not  to  obliterate  Judaism  at  a  stroke,  but  to  trans- 
form it.  3.  "At  the  hour  of  prayer  "  went  these  devout  men.  But  what  need  had 
they  for  prayer,  just  fresh  from  the  open  revelation  and  spiritual  excitement  of 
Pentecost  ?  By  this  act  they  teach  that  prayer  is  apostolic  ;  that  special  seasons 
of  illumination  and  sanctification  are  a  special  call  to  prayer.  Though  men  may 
not  need  more  fire,  yet  need  they  more  grace.  Religion  means  daily  duty,  not 
occasional  ecstasy.  "Suspect  any  inspiration  that  makes  you  contemptuous  of 
ordinary  religious  duties."  After  your  Pentecost  be  found  "going  up  into  the 
temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer."  (IF.  P.  Thirkkield.)  And  a  certain  man  lame 
&om  his  mother's  womb  was  carried. — Spiritual  lameness :— I  turn  to  the  story 
because  it  brings  before  us  very  vividly  the  whole  problem  that  lies  before  you  and 
me  ;  the  whole  problem  that  lies  before  the  Church  ;  the  whole  problem  that  lies 
before  our  Master.  When  you  see  that  lame  man  carried  daily  and  laid  in  all  his 
helplessness  at  the  gate  of  the  temple,  you  get  a  very  vivid  picture  of  the  whole 
problem.  Do  not  let  us  gather  round  this  impotent  man  in  a  questioning,  philo- 
sophical way,  and  ask,  "How  did  he  become  so  ?  "  Let  us  not  start  vain,  seemingly 
wise,  but  at  bottom  foolish  questions.  The  real  problem  is  not.  How  did  we  come 
here?  Why  are  we  (the  grace  of  God  apart)  such  wretched  creatures?  Why  is 
there  in  London  and  everywhere  else  such  moral  and  spiritual  impotence  ?  Why 
is  there  in  the  East  End,  and  not  less  in  the  West  End — only  it  is  better  dressed 
and  covered  up — that  which  is  so  powerfully  represented  by  this  helpless  man,  that 
squirming  misery,  that  loathsomeness,  that  wretchedness,  that  godlessness  which 
no  power  of  art  or  aesthetics  can  in  the  least  alleviate?  With  all  our  culture,  with 
all  our  philosophy,  with  all  our  fine  speeches,  and  all  our  fine  talking,  to  this  hour 
there  is  the  situation  of  things :  human  nature  weary,  abject,  dejected,  sick  of 
itself,  utterly  loathsome,  useless,  and  helpless ;  and  the  problem  is  not  as  I  have 
said,  "  How  did  he  come  there?  "  but  "  How  is  that  man  to  be  got  up  ?  "  not  "How 
did  you  fall  into  the  sea  ?  "  but  "  How  are  we  going  to  get  you  out  ?  "  Let  us  turn 
to  this  story,  then,  to  see  how  the  great  problem  that  baffles  man's  wisdom  and 
love  even  at  its  best,  how  the  great  problem  is  solved  by  Jesus  Christ  and  by  His 
humble  servants  in  His  name,  working  in  immediate  contact  with  an  absent  and 
uncrowned  Lord .  Man  or  woman  here  who  objects  to  this  description  of  human 
nature,  disprove  what  I  am  saying  ;  rise  in  the  might  of  your  own  goodness,  rise 
in  the  might  of  your  own  morality,  rise  in  the  strength  and  dignity  of  human 
nature,  which  you  think  I  am  talking  against,  and  display  it  in  this  fashion  : 
Walk  in  your  own  strength  into  God's  presence.  Come,  you  cannot.  The  more 
yon  try  it  the  more  you  prove  you  are  an  impotent  man.  This  man  saw  Peter  and^ 
John  about  to  go  into  the  temple,  and  he  asked  help.  "  And  Peter,  fastening  his 
eyes  on  him,  with  John,  said,  Look  on  us."  I  would  we  preachers  could  learn 
more  thoroughly  to  do  after  them,  for  we  do  not  find  that  the  impotent  first  of  all 
looked  at  them,  but  it  certainly  is  strikingly  curious  that  Peter  and  John  fastened 
their  eyes  upon  him.  He  saw  them.  They  might  have  gone  past.  He  looked  at 
them  for  ordinary  help  just  as  he  looked  at  any  others,  but  the  point  is  that  Peter 
and  John  did  not  go  past  that  man.  They  challenged  him.  Let  us  challenge  the 
world's  need.  We  are  blamed — it  is  the  deepest  part  of  the  charge  against  us  in 
newsp  >per  and  magazine  articles,  and  there  is  too  much  truth  in  it,  and  the  sting 


CHAP,  in.]  THE  ACTS.  273 

of  it  lies  in  its  truth— that  we  are  walking  past  the  problem.    Peter  and  John 
might  have  been  so  busily  engaged  in  talking — talking,  it  may  be,  about  Jesus 
Christ  and  the  resurrection — that  they  would  have  swept  past  this  man.     He  was 
not  a  very  attractive  sight  to  look  upon,  and  it  would  have  been  very  convenient, 
would  it  not,  for  them  to  have  gathered  up  their  garments  and  swept  into  the 
temple  past  him  to  engage  in  the  worship  of  God,  and  to  engage  in  high  and  holy 
converse  on  the  mighty  things  which  were,  of  course,  within  their  ken  ?     Is  there 
not  a  good  deal  of  church-going  which  is  just  that  to-day?     Let  me  ask  you  point- 
blank,  face  to  face,  what  is  your  church-going  very  often  but  just  that  walking  past, 
and  turning  your  blind  eye  to  the  squirming  wretchedness  all  around  you  ?     When 
did  you  put  out  your  hand  to  alleviate  it  ?     When  did  you  utter  Christ's  almighty 
name  over  it?     Aye,  this  is  far  too  true,  that  the  worship  of  God  with  many  of  us 
is  a  denial  of  God  ;  it  is  a  useless,  blind,  formalistic,   stupid,  heartless  thing.     It 
has  no  power  towards  God  or  towards  man.     It  is  in  ourselves  and  belonging  to 
our.-elves — a  mere  thing  of  dress,  and  of  Sunday  parading  to  the  temple  and  home 
again.     And  the  misery  of  the  East  End,  and  of  the  fat,  well-fed,  but  still  wretched 
West  End,  is  utterly  untouched  by  our  Christianity.     Not  so  with  Peter  and  John. 
Do  we  believe  after  all  at  bottom  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  is  this  :  sin  is 
here  not  to  defeat  us,  but  to  be  defeated  by  us,  to  be  changed  into  life  and  holiness 
by  the  power  of  Him  who  sits  enthroned  above  the  stars  of  God,  even  Jesus  Christ. 
It  is  time  that  we  did,  whether  we  do  or  not — more  than  time.    Peter  and  John 
fastened  their  eyes  upon  him  and  looked  at  him.     They  did  not  go  past  him. 
What  a  lesson  for  preachers  1     There  are  teachers  abroad,  let  me  tell  j'ou,  who  do 
not  want  to  see  you  ;  you  are  a  hard  nut  for  them  to  crack.     Why,  when  you  were 
better  off  they  could  speak  to  you,  and  you  go  to  them,  but  since  these  hard  days 
have  come  upon  you  you  have  dropped  going  there.     When  comfort  was  needed 
they  were  too  cold.     Now,  you  are  right  for  the  gospel.     Christ  Jesus  is  here  for 
the  sake  of  this  impotent  man,  and  He  has  lifted  up  you  and  me,  if  we  are  lifted 
up,  that  we  may  go  and  fetch  the  others  who  bave  not  been  brought  yet.     This  is 
really  the  whole  scope  and  purpose  of  the  mighty  woi'k  which  God  has  done  upon 
you,  and  I  rather  fear  that  you  are  forgetting  it.     Think  of  Peter  and  John  stepping 
forward  there.     Try  to  catch  the  light  in  their  faces  as  their  eyes  burned  like  twin 
lamps,  when,  not  only  they,  but  Christ,  the  loving  Saviour,  in  them  and  through 
them,  bent  down  and  stretched  out  a  hand  and  looked  into  the  very  despairing 
soul  of   that   helj^less  creature.      And  then  let  me  understand,   and  let  you,  O 
Christian  worker,  understand  how  much  is  needed  to  be,  indeed,  in  this  wretched 
world  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ.     Oh,  if  we  are  able  to  bring  ourselves  and  our 
Christ  into  naked,  palpitating  contact,  let  us  do  so.     Let  us  stand  over  the  perish- 
ing as  though  we  meant  to  take  a  two-handed  grasp  of  them,  and  by  our  own 
power  to  lift  them  right  off  the  sodden  bed   on    which  sin  has  stretched  them. 
Ah,  we  need  an  eye  in  our  head,  and  a  tongue  in  our  mouths,  and  a  hand  at  the 
end  of  our  arm  which  has  in  it  some  tingle  of  everlasting  love,  and  we  need  a  heart 
working  behind  all  three  which  has  been  kindled  from  the  heart  of  Jesus  Christ, 
who  for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation  took  flesh  and  died  upon  the  Cross.     "And 
he  gave  heed  unto  them,  expecting  to  receive  something  of  them."     That  is  some- 
thing.    The  man  gave  heed.     I  do  not  like  a  man  to  hide  behind  his  fingers  and 
peep  at  me.     I  have  not  much  hope  of  that.     When  the  audience  looks  broadly 
and  frankly  up  into  the  preacher's  face  things  are  looking  hopeful.     "  He  gave 
heed  to  them."     What  followed  ?    "  Then  Peter  said.  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none." 
What  an  inconsequential,  disappointing  word  1     What  an  anti-climax  to  all  that 
had  gone  before  I     "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none."     Can  you  imagine  the  poc- 
man's  eyes  ?     All  the  delight  going  out  of  them,  and  his  long  face  getting  still 
longer    and    blacker,  and   perhaps   his    tongue    uttering  indignant  words,  as   he 
might  have  said,  "  Sirs,  if    you  have  neither  silver  nor  gold  do  not  add  insult 
to  my  wretchedness.      You  might   have   passed   on,  and  left  me  unnoticed  and 
unchallenged."     Ay,  there  are  men  who  just  .say  that  to  us.     I  read  a  book  not 
long  ago  with  a  very  fine  title  by  a  very  learned  man.      I  do  not  question  his 
learning.     He  just  broadly  said  this — that  we  preachers  can  do  nothing  for  thi^ 
helplessness  tbat  is  represented  here,  that  we  are  only  talking.     They  level  against 
us  the  objection  that  was  levelled  against  Jesus  Christ,  when  another  helpless  man 
was  laid  at  His  feet,  and  iustead  of  curing  bis  physical  wretchedness  He  went  fir.-t 
to  what  was  first  in  importance — his  spiritual  wretchedness,  and  said,  "  Thy  sins  be 
forgiven  thee."     It  is  virtually  the  pame  thing  still.     It  is  a  great  blessing  for  that 
poor  man  himself  that  he  was  not  impressed  by  it  when  Peter  and  John  said, 
VOL.  I.  18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuat.  m. 

*'  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none."     I  do  not  know  that  we  are  keeping  as  faithful 
to  our  own   wares   as   Peter   and   John   did.     I    am  not   sure  that  we  are  not 
getting  to  be  too  much  impressed  by  the  thought  that  what  the  East  End  needs 
is  coals  and   blankets,  and   boots    and    shoes,  and    stockings    for   itself    and  its 
wife   and  its  bairns.      But  suppose  we  fed  the  wretchedness    of  the  East  End, 
and  suppose  we  clothed  them;  after  all,  what  have  we  done?     At  the  most  and 
best  we  have  only  soothed  their  passage  to  the  grave.     Silver  and  gold  can  do 
much,  and  far   more   of    the    silver  and    gold    that    belongs   to   those    who  call 
themselves  Christians  ought  to  be  speut  in  this    blessed  way.     But  there  is  an 
end  to  the  power  of  silver  and  gold,  and  the  Church  was  never  better  in  posses- 
sion of  her  true  wealth  than  when  she  was  represented  by  a  couple  of  penniless 
fishermen,  from  the  crevices  of  whose  hands  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  the  fish- 
scales  had  yet  been  dried.     You  who  have  got  silver  and  gold,  who  have  come  to 
Jesus  Christ,  come  as  humbly  as  you  can.     Forget  your  silver  and  gold.     "  Silver 
and  gold  have  I  none."     As  I  have  said,  on  the  surface  how  disappointing  that 
was  !     Yet  it  was  well  said,  and  it  was  better  done.     "  Such  as  I  have  give  I  thee. 
In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  rise  up  and  walk."     Now  here  that  poor 
fellow  in  a  moment,  but  very  truly  and  also  very  suddenly,  was  himself  put  to 
solve  a  very  trying  problem.     Those  of  us  who  have  been  at  college  know  the 
weary  days  we  spent  on  what  is  called  sumvium  bonum — "  What  is  the  highest 
good  ?  "     It  is  not  a  mere  vague  question  of  philosophic  schools.     It  is  a  very 
practical  question,  and  that  poor  man  lying  there  that  day  had  to  solve  for  himself 
very  speedily.     Virtually  this  question  was  put  to  him :  "  What  is  the  highest 
good  ?     Is  it  silver  and  gold  ?  "     And  quicker  than  my  tongue  can  tell  it  he  came 
to  the  swift  conclusion  :  "  There  is  something  here  that  can  come  to  me  which  is 
better  than  anything  that  silver  and  gold  can  do."     Have  we  got  that  length  ? 
Young  fellow,  you  are  toiling,  you  are  trying  to  reach  the  summiim  bonum.     Put  it 
philosophically  or  non-philosophically,  that  is  what  we  are  all  trying  to  do.     Now, 
what  is  your  highest  good  ?     Does  it  not  lie  in  the  direction  of  silver  and  gold,  in 
the  direction  of  all  that  is  covered  by  these  gilded,  these  very  comprehensive  terms, 
both  in  their  notation  and  in  their  denotation  ?     Through  the  grace  and  working 
of  God's  Word  and  God's  Spirit — aye,  and  through  the  hardships  of  life — are  not 
some  of  us  beginning  to  get  an  insight  of  what  flashed  upon  that  poor  man : 
"  Here  is  the  greatest  blessing  that  I  could  have,  a  blessing  that  I  feel  I  am 
capable  of  receiving,  a  blessing  that  I  feel  I  greatly  need.     I  have  been  looking  for 
it  in  a  wrong  direction,  the  world  cannot  give  it."     Those  of  you  who  have  plenty 
have  said  to  yourselves,  "  Soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years. 
Thou  hast  got  the  summum  bonum;  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry." 
And  you  cannot.     Silver  and  gold  are  utterly  failing.     They  are  cheating ;  God 
grant  that  you  may  find  out  the  cheat  in  time.     Now  listen.    It  is  for  men  and 
women  when  they  come  to  that  pass  that  the  preacher  of  the  gospel  is  here.     It  is 
not  because  we  are  poor  preachers  ;  it  is  because  you  are  poor  stuff  to  preach  to. 
When  we  get  into  contact  with  those  who  are  ripe  for  spiritual  blessing,  when  they 
are  brought  to  that  condition  by  the  stress  and  disappointment  of  life,  then  the 
gospel  preacher  becomes  wonderfully  eloquent,  simply  because  your  ears  are  getting 
bored  and  your  heart  is  getting  adapted  to  the  message  that  is  spoken.     "  Silver 
and  gold  have  I  none ;  but  such  as  I  have  give  I  thee.     Having  thus  spoken,  he 
took  him  by  the  right  hand."     There  must  be  immediate  contact  between  Christ 
and  you,  and,  more  than  that,  between  the  preacher  and  you.     That  is  one  reason 
why  I  object  to  this  historical  pulpit — just  simply  because  in  here  a  great  deal  of 
that  magnetism  that  was  present  with  Peter  and  John  is  lost.     How  Peter  stooped 
down  and  uttered  that  mighty  name  !     Never  go  without  uttering  that  mighty 
name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.    Peter  stooped  down  to  grasp  that  man  by  the  hand, 
and  I  see  him  yielding  to  the  power  of  omnipotence.     Up  he  came.    Hallelujah  1 
Christ  is  the  power  that  Peter  expected  Him  to  be.    Heaven  has  won,  hell  is 
baffled.    The  tide  has  begun  to  turn.    From  this  One  learn  all.     There  is  One  who 
has  power  over  every  form  of  the  enemy's  malignant  triumph  as  it  extends  in  all 
its  vastness.      Do  you  not  see  that  it  needs  all  that  supernatural  work  to   be 
wrought  upon  your  impotent  soul  before  you  can  enter  into  the  temple  to  appear 
before  God  in  any  profitable  way  to  yourself  or  in  any  way  that  will  bring  praise 
and  glory  to  His  name  ?     Now  what  do  you  know  about  worship  ?     This  is  the 
road  to  the  church,  this  is  the  way  to  the  temple.     This  gospel  cannot  be  preached, 
and  no  signs  following.     Peter  and  John  did  not  stand  over  that  man  for  half  a  day, 
saving,  until  it  became  a  dull,  stale,  flat,  unprofitable,  weary  woid:  "  In  the  name  of 


•CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  275 

Jesus  of  Nazareth,  rise  up  and  walk  !  Rise  up  and  walk!  Rise  up  and  walk  "  whil« 
he  lay  and  lay  as  helpless  and  as  supine  as  ever.  They  risked  everything,  and 
they  were  justified  in  it.  And  the  times  are  ripe  for  us  to  do  the  same  thing  still. 
Sinner,  backslider,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  rise  up  !  (/.  McNeill.)  A 
picture  of  sin  and  salvation : — I.  Find  a  picture  of  the  sinnek.  The  external 
world  is  a  reflex  of  the  spiritual.  That  lame  man  crouchiug  at  the  gate  and 
unable  to  enter  it  is  a  type  of  the  sinner's  condition.  1.  He  was  a  cripple,  not  a 
sound,  complete  man.  So  is  every  sinner.  In  him  there  is  a  miserable  distortion 
of  character.  2.  He  was  a  beggar.  Sin  is  want.  3.  This  man  was  shut  out  of 
the  temple.  From  certain  texts  in  the  Old  Testament  and  certain  passages  in  old 
Jewish  writings  the  inference  has  been  drawn  that  deformed  people  were  not 
allowed  to  enter  the  temple.  Though  it  is  not  certain,  such  was  probably  the 
Jewish  law.  Such  is  every  sinner's  condition.  He  is  not  merely  outside  the 
visible  church,  but  he  has  no  part  in  the  spiritual  fellowship  of  God's  people.  II. 
Find  also  as  a  contrast  to  the  above  a  pictuke  of  the  disciples.  There  are  two 
men  standing  before  the  lame  man.  They  show  us  the  privilege  of  Christ's 
followers.  1.  They  have  fellowship  with  each  other.  Notice  how  close  was  the 
intimacy  between  Peter  and  John,  and  how  often  they  are  named  together.  They 
were  very  different,  yet  they  enjoyed  the  communion  of  saints  with  each  other.  2. 
They  have  a  love  for  God's  house.  They  are  going  up  to  the  temple,  not  as 
formal  worshippers,  but  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  enjoying  an  intimate  com- 
munion with  God.  To  them  all  the  service  has  a  new  meaning,  since  they  have 
known  Christ.  He  is  the  Lamb  laid  on  the  altar  ;  He  is  the  Theme  of  the  psalm  ; 
He  is  shown  in  the  vestments  of  the  high  priest.  They  worship  Christ  while  others 
gaze  at  the  spectacle.  .S.  They  have  sympathy  for  the  needy.  The  love  of  Christ 
awakes  in  the  Chribtian  heart  a  love  for  every  man.  Others  passed  by  the  cripple 
with  a  glance  of  contempt  or  with  a  shudder  of  disgust.  These  men  looked  at  him 
with  love,  for  in  that  distorted  form  was  a  soul  for  whom  Christ  died.  4.  They 
have  power  to  help.  As  Peter  looks  on  the  man  he  feels  a  consciousness  of  Divine 
power  to  heal  him.  It  is  not  in  himself,  but  through  Christ,  that  he  can  lift  him 
up  to  health  and  strength.  We  cannot  bring  healing  to  men's  bodies,  but  we  can 
bring  salvation  to  men's  souls.  HI.  Find  in  this  scene  a  pictdee  of  salvation. 
1.  In  the  salvation  of  every  soul  there  is  a  human  instrumentality.  God  does  not 
save  men  alone  and  directly,  nor  through  the  agency  of  angels.  There  is  always  a 
Peter  through  whom  the  power  of  God  comes  to  a  needy  soul.  2.  There  is  in 
every  lifetime  one  moment  of  special  opportunity.  No  one  knows  how  long  the 
lame  man  had  been  lying  at  the  gate  ;  but  one  day  he  met  his  opportunity.  So  the 
Samaritan  woman  met  hers  at  the  well,  so  Matthew  met  his  at  his  table,  so  the 
Ethiopian  met  his  in  the  desert.  Success  is  to  grasp  at  the  opportunity ;  failure  is 
to  let  it  pass.  3.  In  this  miracle  the  power  lay  not  in  Peter's  hand,  but  in  Jesus's 
name — that  is,  in  Jesus  Himself,  invoked  by  name.  Only  a  Divine  power  could 
heal  the  cripple,  and  only  a  Divine  power  can  make  the  sinner  whole.  4.  There 
was  effort  required  on  the  part  of  the  man  himself.  If  he  had  not  responded  to 
Peter's  strong  clasp  of  the  haud  with  an  effort  of  his  own  he  would  have  remained 
a  cripple  still.  That  effort  was  faith.  IV.  Find  in  this  scene  a  picture  of  the 
SAVED  MAN.  See  how  aptly  he  represents  the  soul  just  after  the  new  birth  in  the 
image  of  Christ  Jesus.  1.  We  behold  the  transformation.  A  moment  ago  he  was 
a  crouching  cripple ;  now  he  stands  and  leaps  upon  the  rtiai  ble  floor.  Look  at  a 
greater  change  in  every  converted  sinner.  2.  We  notice  his  privilege.  His  first 
act  is  to  enter  through  the  Beautiful  gate  into  the  temple.  3.  We  notice  his 
gratitude.  Every  saved  soul  should  make  confession  of  what  God  has  done  for  him. 
4.  We  notice  his  prominence.  At  once  the  remarkable  event  attracted  attention. 
Every  converted  man  becomes  at  once  an  object  of  interest  and  an  evidence  of  Jesus's 
power.  (C.  H.  Simrgeon.)  The  first  apostolic  miracle  : — The  date  of  this  miracle 
is  not  quite  certain.  It  appears  to  be  reported  as  a  specimen  of  those  wonders  and 
signs  referred  to  in  chap.  ii.  43.  Note — I.  That  it  was  wrought  on  a  living  man. 
In  all  our  Lord's  miracles  there  was  an  exhibition  of  benevolence.  This  was  the 
case  here,  for  the  miracle  was  wrought — 1.  On  an  afflicted  man.  He  had  been 
lame  from  his  birth.  Every  man  is  afflicted  from  his  birth  with  an  evil  which 
nothing  but  the  grace  of  God  can  remove.  2.  On  a  poor  man.  How  could  one  so 
circumstanced  find  employment  ?  He  was  then  hopelessly  poor  ;  but  "  man's 
extremity  was  God's  opportunity."  3.  On  a  man  dependent  on  his  friends.  This 
followed  from  his  affliction  and  poverty.  And  it  seems  that  those  friends  could 
only  put  him  in  the  way  of  receiving  help  from  strangers.     Thus  the  necessities  of 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

nature  led  up  to  the  manifestation  of  God's  mercy.  To  how  many  has  affliction 
been  a  means  of  salvation  !  4.  On  a  man  known  to  many  from  the  fact  that  he 
had  been  earned  there  for  years.  This  enhanced  the  significance  of  the  miracle 
and  promoted  its  evidential  purpose.  In  like  manner  does  the  conversion  of 
the  notoriously  sinful  bear  witness  to  Christianity.  II.  That  it  was  an  exhibi- 
tion OF  ACTIVE  Christianity.  It  was  fitting  that  being  the  first,  it  should  have 
this  quality.  It  shows — 1.  A  desire  to  do  good  on  the  part  of  Christian  men. 
If  men  have  no  such  desires,  and  yet  call  themselves  Christians,  their  words 
and  characters  do  not  agree.  2.  The  effort  which  arises  out  of  the  proper 
desire  to  do  good.  Peter  did  not  "consider  the  case,"  "promise  to  do  the 
best  he  could  for  him,"  he  took  him  by  the  hand  and  lifted  him  up.  True 
Christianity  turns  desire  into  deed,  and  makes  a  missionary,  a  preacher,  or 
a  generous  contributor  of  the  man  who  desires  the  conversion  of  the  heathen 
at  home  or  abroad.  3.  The  course  of  the  working  of  the  gospel  in  the 
individual  who  receives  it.  (1)  Special  attention  was  awakened.  "  Look  on 
us."  The  man  had  already  looked  in  an  ordinary  way.  So  the  hearers  of 
the  gospel  have  to  give  it  more  than  their  usual  attention  if  they  would  be 
saved.  (2)  Hope  was  aroused.  He  "expected  to  receive  something" — what 
he  did  not  know.  So  those  in  whom  the  gospel  is  "  mixed  with  faith  "  when  they 
hear  it  are  made  hopeful  before  they  have  very  distinct  views  of  the  joys  of  personal 
salvation,  and  their  faith  is  strengthened  until  ihey  can  apprehend  the  blessings 
offered  them.  (3)  Healing  was  administered.  It  came  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  immediately :  so  does  salvation.  (4)  The  healed  cripple  became  a 
witness.  The  changes  in  the  man's  conduct  told  observers  that  he  had  received  a> 
great  blessing  from  God,  and  was  constrained  to  declare  it.  So  Christians  are  con- 
strained to  bear  witness  by  lip  and  life.  (IF.  Hudson.)  The  miracle  at  the 
Beautiful  gate : — The  spiritual  lessons  we  ought  to  learn  are — I.  It  is  well  for 
Christians  to  become  acquainted  with  what  is  going  on  "  at  the  gate,"  over 
the  borders  of  our  serene  and  comfortable  lives ;  we  must  look  after  those  who 
dwell  on  the  outside.  II.  Oppobtunities  of  doing  good  lie  in  our  way  every 
DAY  and  hour,  if  we  really  desire  to  improve  them.  One  slight  turn  of  the  eye 
across  the  temple-area,  where  we  pass  on  our  way  to  prayers,  will  introduce  us  to 
two  entirely  different  and  totally  distinct  worlds  of  feeling,  thought,  and  history. 
III.  Christians  ought  not  to  lose  time  in  sighing  after  new  spheres  of  con- 
spicuous sacrifice.  Like  Peter  and  John,  we  ourselves,  children  of  the  covenant, 
are  apt  to  be  jostled  against  those  who  are  ignorant,  poor,  feeble,  and  in  pain. 
But  it  does  not  follow  that  all  of  them  are  certainly  vicious  and  unworthy  of  help ; 
Fome  of  them  may  actually  have  "  faith  to  be  healed."  IV.  Working  hands  and 
willing  voices  ought  to  go  with  weeping  eyes  when  we  know  the  wants  of 
THE  Lord's  poor.  Poverty  at  hand,  weakness  close  beside  us,  are  quite  unro- 
mantic  ;  it  is  distance  which  lends  enchantment  to  the  view  in  many  cases  as  we 
converse  about  heathenism.  But  our  home-heathen  must  not  be  absolutely  neg- 
lected because  they  are  so  near.  Many  men,  and  some  women,  will  shed  tears  over 
the  painted  picture  of  a  Neapolitan  boy  begging,  who  would  speak  most  savagely 
to  the  same  lad  if  they  met  him  alive  in  New  York  streets  ;  they  would  quote  with 
vigour  the  first  part  of  Peter's  little  speech,  and  leave  off  the  rest  of  it ;  and  they 
would  not  put  out  their  hands  at  all.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  miracle  at  the 
Bcavtiful  gate —as  a  fact.  If  there  be  history  in  any  writing,  these  verses  in  their 
simplicity  and  minute  details  are  a  history.  There  is  nothing  here  approaching 
the  parabolic  or  the  mythical.  See  here — I.  Poor  men  becoming  the  organs  op 
OMNIPOTENCE.  How  often  has  this  been  the  case.  Moses,  Elijah,  and  the  apostles 
are  examples.  II.  A  wretched  cripple  made  the  occasion  of  great  good. 
Thoughtful  men  have  often  asked,  Why,  under  the  government  of  a  benevolent 
God,  such  cases  should  occur  ?  Why  men  be  sent  into  the  world  without  the  use 
of  their  limbs,  eyes,  or  reason?  But  note^ — 1.  That  those  who  come  into  the  world 
in  this  state,  being  unconscious  of  physical  perfection,  feel  not  their  condition  as 
others.  Men  who  have  never  seen  know  nothing  of  the  blessedness  of  vision. 
Hence  persons  of  constitutional  defect  in  form  or  organ  often  display  a  joy  or  peace 
at  which  others  wonder.  2.  That  such  cases  serve  by  contrast  to  reveal  the 
•wonderful  goodness  of  God.  In  nature  those  parts  that  have  been  shattered  by 
earthquakes,  or  lie  in  black  desolation,  serve  to  set  off  the  beauty  and  order  which 
generally  reign.  And  so  a  cripple  here,  or  a  blind  man  there,  only  set  off  the  good- 
ness of  God  as  displayed  in  the  millions  that  are  perfect.  These  are  a  few  dai'k 
strokes  which  the  Great  Artist  employs  to  set  off  in  the  picture  of  the  world  the 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  277 

more  striking  aspects  of  beauty  ;   a  few  of  the  rougher  notes  which  the  Great 
Musician  uses  to  swell  the  chorus  of   universal   order.     3.  That   they  serve   to 
inspire  the  physically  perfect  with  gratitude  to  heaven.     In  the  poor  idiot,  God 
says  to  us,  "  Be  thaukful  for  reason,"  &c.     4.  That  they  afford  scope  and  stimulus 
for  the  exercise  of  benevolence.     Were  all  men  equal  in  every  respect  there  would 
be  no  object  to  awaken  charity.     III.  Christianity  transcending  H0man  aspira- 
tions.    Tbis  man  wanted  alms,  "  silver  and  gold  "  ;  but  in  the  name  of  Christ  he 
received  physical  power,  a  blessing  he  had  never  ventured  to  expect.     Thus  it  is 
■ever:  Christianity  gives  man  "  more  than  he  can  ask  or  think."     "Eye  hath  not 
seen,"  &c.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         Miraculous  faith : — "  A  miracle  is  the  dearest 
child  of  faith."     I.  Faith  performs  the  miracle — Peter  and  John.      II.  Faith 
EXPERIENCES  the  miracle— the  lame  man,  who,  although  not  before  the  miracle, 
yet  after  it,  appears  as  a  believer.      III.  Faith   comprehends   the   miracle — the 
believing   hearers.     (C.  Gerok.)         The  impotent  man: — I.  The   person   healed. 
1.  He  was  impotent,  carried  by  others ;  and  where  they  left  him  they  were  sure  to 
find  him.     He  was  not  so  by  any  accident,  as  Mephibosheth,  but  from  the  womb  ; 
and  therefore  his  case  was  the  more  deplorable,  and  a  cure  the  more  improbable. 
This  is  a  fit  emblem  of  the  unregenerate,  who  are  not  only  spiritually  blind,  and 
deaf,  and  dumb,  but  lame  too  ;  so  that  they  cannot  tread  the  paths  of  wisdom,  or 
stir  one  foot  in  the  way  to  heaven.     Good  men  may  be  ready  to  halt,  and  their  feet 
"well  nigh  slip  ;  but  these  are  always  halting  and  slipping  ;  for  their  legs,  like  those 
of  the  lame,  are  not  equal.     It  is  not  legs  and  feet  that  they  want,  but  the  right 
use  of  them ;  and  this  has  been  their  case  from  their  birth.     Blessed  be  God  for 
the  promises  made  to  such  !     "  I  will  assemble  her  that  halteth,  and  gather  her 
that  is  driven  out.     The  lame  man  shall  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the 
dumb  shall  sing."    2.  His  poverty  added  to  his  distress.    If  help  was  to  be  obtained 
by  medicine,  he  had  not  wherewithal  to  procure  it,  for  he  had  to  beg  his  bread. 
And  thus  it  is  with  sinners.     The  saints  want  many  things  in  the  present  life  ;  but 
wicked  men  want  everything  that  is  worth  having  ;  and  the  want  of  a  sense  of  this 
is  perhaps  their  greatest  want.     Give  me  leave  to  add,  that  those  to  whom  God 
shows  mercy  are  also  oftentimes  like  the  impotent  man,  poor  in  temporals.     The 
poor,  says  Christ,  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them.     Those  who  are  destitute  of 
outward  ornaments  and  comforts  are  inwardly  beautified  with  Divine  grace,  and 
filled  with  Divine  consolations.     3.  He  had  continued  long  under  his  disorder, 
which  made  his  case  the  more  deplorable.     Let  tbis  afford  encouragement  to  old 
and  accustomed  sinners,  if  they  have  a  sense  of  the  evil  of  their  way,  and  are  in 
^ood  earnest  seeking  relief,  let  them  not  despair  of  obtaining  it.     He  who  cured 
old  diseases  can  save  old  sinners.     4.  He  was  neveitheless  in  the  way  of  a  cure; 
for  he  lay  at  the  Beautiful  gate  of  the  temple,  where  the  charitable  might  relieve 
him,  the  pious  pray  for  him,  and  the  intelligent  afford  him  their  best  advice. 
Thus  the  impotent  sinner  should  watch  daily  at  wisdom's  gates,  remembering  that 
God  commands  deliverance  out  of  Zion,  and  is  there  known  for  a  refuge  to  His 
people.     II.  The  nature  of  the  core.     1.  It  was  unexpected,  and  therefore  the 
more  welcome.     And  thus  it  is  in  the  conversion  of  sinners.     Mercy  comes  as  it 
did  to  Zaccheus,  to  Saul,  and  to  this  man  :  unsought  and  unimplored  !     2.  It  was 
instantaneous.     Peter  does  not  put  him  upon  a  long  course  of  medicine  ;  but  takes 
him  by  the  hand,  and  lifts  him  up.     Thus,  however  gradual  the  work  of  grace  may 
appear  in  some  converts,  yet  the  implantation  of  grace  is  instantaneous.     God  new 
•creates  the  soul,  as  He  created  the  world.     He  says.  Let  there  be  light ;  and  there 
is  light ;  Let  there  be  life  !  and  there  is  life.     3.  As  Omnipotence  took  it  in  hand, 
so  it  was  an  easy  cure.     No  violent  methods  were  used  :  his  distorted  limbs  were 
not  reduced  to  their  proper  place  by  any  painful  operation.     And  so  the  actings  of 
Divine  grace  upon  the  soul  are  as  mild  and  gentle  as  they  are  powerful  and  effectual. 
4.  It  was  a  real  and  per.manent  cure.    Thus  it  is  when  God  heals  the  broken  heart, 
or  cures  the  distempered  soul.     The  one  is  a  miracle  of  power,  the  other  of  grace  : 
and  as  the  former,  so  the  latter  is  no  deception.     III.  The  effects  of  the  core. 
1.  "He  leaped  up."    Thus  it  is  with  the  sinner  recovered  by  Divine  grace.     The 
word  of  the  Lord,  the  way  of  the  Lord,  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  and  especially  the 
Christ  of  God,  is  his  strength  ;  and  this  strength  he  employs  for  the  purposes  for 
which  it  is  bestowed.     "  I  will  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God."     Earnestness 
and  intentness  of  mind  is  also  implied.     He  not  only  exerted  himself,  but  did  it  to 
the  utmost  of  his  power.     Thus  when  a  sinner  is  capable  of  acting,  especially  ia 
the  warmth  of  bis  first  love,  he  will  act  with  all  his  might.     2.  "He  stood." 
Formerly  he  could  not  stand  without  leaning  and  trembling.     He  stood  ready  for 


278  IRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi, 

action,  as  one  that  would  hereafter  get  his  HveHhood  by  working,  and  not  by 
begging.  He  also  stood  to  show  himself  to  the  people.  3.  "He  walked."  This 
was  a  new  exercise  to  him.  Thus,  by  the  power  of  Divine  grace,  those  that  are 
spiritually  lame  are  made  to  walk  with  God,  and  before  Him ;  honestly  and 
uprightly,  in  newness  of  life  ;  in  the  light,  in  the  truth,  and  at  liberty.  The  Spirit 
is  their  guide,  the  Word  their  rule,  the  excellent  of  the  earth  their  companions, 
glory  their  end,  and  Christ  their  way.  4.  "  He  entered  with  the  apostles  into  the 
temple."  At  the  gate  of  it  he  had  got  many  an  alms  from  man  :  now  he  would 
enter  into  it  to  get  an  alms  from  God.  From  this  part  of  his  conduct  we  may 
learn — (1)  What  place  the  saints  make  their  chosen  residence,  the  house  of  God.. 
"  My  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  0  Jerusalem  1  "  Especially  when  recovered 
from  disorder,  and  released  from  confinement.  The  first  place  they  will  visit  is 
the  temple,  there  to  pay  those  vows  which  they  made  in  the  time  of  their  distress^ 
and  present  their  humble  and  thankful  acknowledgments  unto  God.  (2)  What 
persons  they  choose  for  their  companions.  Those  whom  God  has  made  useful  to 
them,  as  hoping  still  to  receive  the  benefit  of  their  prayers  and  instructions.  Thus 
the  jailer  brought  Paul  and  Silas  into  his  house,  and  Lydia  constrained  them  ta 
abide  in  ber  house.  5.  Still  "  he  walked  and  leaped,"  like  one  in  an  ecstasy  and 
transport,  and  "  praised  God."  Whence  we  may  observe,  that  though  he  loved  the- 
instruments,  yet  he  did  not  praise  them.  He  gave  the  praise  where  it  was  due. 
Improvement :  1.  Let  awakened  sinners  take  encouragement  from  this  wonderful 
instance  of  Divine  grace.  2.  Let  the  saints  imitate  the  example  here  set  before- 
them,  in  the  warmest  gratitude  and  most  affectionate  praises.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
The  lame  man  at  the  gate  of  the  temple  (hospital  sermon)  : — I.  The  lame  man.  1. 
Many  become  lame  through  accident  or  sickness ;  but  this  man  was  born  a  cripple. 
Luke,  who  was  a  physician,  gives  us  to  understand  that  his  lameness  was  owing  to- 
a  weakness  in,  and  perhaps  malformation  of,  the  ankle-bones.  But  that  hardly 
suffices  to  describe  his  helpless  condition.  Many  lame  men  are  able  to  move  about 
with  the  help  of  artificial  supports.  But  this  man  was  so  utterly  helpless  that  he 
was  obliged  to  be  carried.  Not  that  there  was  any  weakness  in  his  body,  all  the 
weakness  was  in  his  ankles.  Eaphael  seems  to  have  seized  this  feature.  He  has 
drawn  at  a  little  distance  from  him  another  deformed  man,  who,  however,  is  able 
to  hobble  along  by  the  help  of  a  crutch.  But  I  think  Raphael  was  mistaken  in 
drawing  his  legs  in  a  stiff,  rigid  form;  it  was  not  rigidity  in  the  ankles  he  was 
suffering  from,  but  extreme  weakness.  "  Immedititely  his  feet  and  ankles  became 
firm."  2.  And  not  only  was  he  lame,  he  was  a  cripple  and  a  beggar  too.  It  i& 
difficult  to  conceive  a  more  pitiable  condition.  3.  There  were  several  reasons  why 
the  gate  of  the  temple  had  been  selected  as  a  propitious  place  for  begging.  Crowds 
of  people  were  coming  and  going  through  it  at  least  three  times  a  day.  Besides, 
the  people  who  were  coming  in  and  going  out  were  the  best  men  and  women  in 
Jerusalem.  It  is  the  cream  of  society  that  frequent  places  of  worship.  Moreover, 
men  in  going  to  and  coming  from  church  are  in  a  better  mood  for  considering  the 
poor  and  supplying  their  wants  than  in  the  tumultuous  whirl  of  business.  And  it 
is  a  fact  that  almost  all  the  ahns  of  the  world  are  administered  at  the  gates  of  the 
temple,  that  charitable  institutions  are  dependent  for  their  support  and  success  on 
them  that  go  up  to  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer.  I  never  was  honoured  with 
a  letter  from  the  Lord  Mayor  of  London  till  he  thought  money  was  required  to 
carry  out  his  humane  object.  Maybe  that  every  man  of  science  and  of  business- 
also  received  a  letter  from  him,  which  I  doi\,bt ;  but  I  am  sure  every  minister  did. 
Do  I  find  fault  ?  No  ;  I  look  upon  it  as  a  great  compliment  to  Christianity.  Some 
time  ago  a  daily  paper  warmly  advocated  private  contributions  towards  the  relief  of 
the  famine  in  India.  So  far,  good.  These  papers  which  are  going  to  supersede 
the  pulpit,  and  do  away  with  preaching,  ought  to  do  that.  But  the  money  did  not 
come.  As  a  last  resort,  the  paper  with  its  "  largest  circulation  in  the  world  "  pro- 
posed to  have  a  collection  in  the  churches,  forsooth.  But  where  were  the  readers 
of  the  paper?  Where  the  "largest  circulation  in  the  world"?  Could  not  the 
"almighty  press  "  squeeze  a  little  money  out  of  its  numerous  readers  ?  Do  I  find 
fault?  Oh,  no  ;  it  is  a  high  compliment  to  Christianity  and  to  the  ministers  who 
teach  their  hearers  what  the  papers  fail  to  teach  their  readers.  But  Christianity 
is  dying  fast,  the  world  can  do  without  the  churches  ?  No,  my  friends,  not  as  long 
as  there  are  lame  to  help  and  hungry  to  feed.  The  beggars  sometimes  sit  at  the 
gates  of  Trade,  but  they  are  sternly  told  to  "  move  on  " ;  and  at  the  gates  of  Pleasure 
and  of  Fashion,  but  none  save  the  dogs  deign  to  take  notice  of  them.  The  beggars 
know  that  the  temple  is  the  great  almshouse  of  the  world.    4.  There  were  about 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  279 


ten  gates  to  tlie  temple,  all  of  them  very  costly  and  superb.  The  Jews  did  not  as  a 
rule  grudge  the  most  lavish  expenditure  upon  the  adornments  of  the  temple.  But 
there  was  one  gate  far  surpassing  all  others  in  material  and  design.  God's  house 
should  always  be  the  most  beautiful  house  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  God's  people 
ought  to  contribute  towards  its  adornment.  If  our  congregations  increase  in  wealth, 
God  expects  a  part  of  it  to  flow  to  the  sanctuary.  Trade  must  do  homage  to 
rehgion,  and  "  offer  unto  it  gifts — gold,  frankincense,  and  myrrh."  When  the 
Church  was  in  a  state  of  comparative  poverty,  a  mound  of  earth  served  for  an  altar 
and  was  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God.  But  when  the  Church  increased  in 
numbers  and  refinement,  the  altar  of  earth  was  justly  superseded  by  an  altar  of 
shittim  wood  overlaid  with  brass ;  instead  of  the  rude  mound,  there  was  to  be  a 
little  artistic  work.  Finally,  when  the  Church  had  increased  in  numbers  and  pos- 
sessions, God  required  an  altar  overlaid  with  fine  gold.  Do  Christians  increase  in 
wealth  ?  Let  a  portion  of  it  flow  to  the  sanctuary  of  the  Highest ;  let  there  be 
built  a  gate  called  the  Beautiful.  And  at  the  gate  let  there  stand  a  sister  of  mercy 
to  administer  alms  to  the  helpless  and  forlorn.  However  beautiful  was  the  gate 
of  the  temple,  more  beautiful  in  the  sight  of  God  were  the  hands  which  gave  alms 
to  the  cripple.  Beauty  of  stone  and  of  metal  is  not  to  be  compared  with  beauty  of 
disposition  and  of  character.  II.  The  cuke  of  the  lame  man.  1.  Peter  and  John 
went  up  to  the  temple.  The  apostles  did  not  abruptly  sever  themselves  from  the 
old  dispensation ;  sudden  ruptures  never  take  place  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  First, 
there  is  a  division  in  the  Church,  then  a  division  Jroin  the  Church.  That  was  the 
case  at  the  establishment  of  Christianity ;  first,  a  division  in  Judaism,  next  a 
division  from  Judaism.  That  was  the  case  at  the  time  of  the  Protestant  Eeforma- 
tion.  .  That  was  the  case  in  the  history  of  the  Establishment  in  our  own  country. 
The  heathen  who  adopted  Christianity  were  called  upon  to  break  off  at'  once  their 
connection  with  idols  ;  but  the  Jews  who  adopted  Christianity  were  only  gradually 
weaned  from  Judaism.  One  could  not  be  an  idolater  and  a  Christian  ;  but  one 
could  be  a  Jew  and  a  Christian.  2.  As  they  were  about  to  enter,  their  attention 
was  called  to  the  impotent  man  who  asked  an  alms.  He  had  long  ago  ceased 
hoping  for  anything  else.  Forty  years  of  helplessness  and  beggary  will  kill  ambi- 
tion in  the  most  sanguine  heart.  We  have  known  people  who  bad  been  lying  on  a 
bed  of  suffering  for  years.  If  you  spoke  to  them  at  the  close  of  the  first  year,  you 
would  discover  a  shade  of  discontent — they  had  a  strong  desire  to  get  up  and  walk. 
But  at  the  end  of  ten  years  the  most  fiery  spirit  is  quite  tamed.  3.  They  fastened 
their  eyes  on  him.  A  characteristic  feature  of  Christianity  is  that  it  fastens  its 
eyes  on  the  destitute  and  the  sick.  Science  fastens  its  eyes  on  inanimate  matter; 
art  on  the  "  gate  called  Beautiful";  but  Christianity  on  the  poor  cripple.  Science 
seeks  out  the  secrets  of  the  world ;  art  its  beauties ;  but  Christianity  its  ills.  There 
is  a  great  deal  in  a  look.  The  sympathising  eyes  of  Peter  caught  the  wondering 
eyes  of  the  beggar,  and  the  latter  felt  a  strange  sensation,  like  a  stream  of  elec- 
tricity, thrilling  nis  entire  system.  4.  The  man  sought  alms ;  but  the  apostles 
gave  him  what  was  better — health.  Health  without  money  is  infinitely  better  than 
money  without  health.  Moreover,  by  endowing  him  with  health  they  were  con- 
ferring on  him  the  ability  to  earn  money.  In  this  the  miracle  was  a  "  sign."  The 
gospel  does  not  directly  aim  at  improving  men's  circumstances ;  it  aims  at  im- 
proving men  themselves.  But  no  sooner  does  it  that  than  a  noticeable  improve- 
ment is  seen  in  their  surroundings.  The  gospel  converts  the  man ;  the  man 
converts  the  house.  The  gospel  does  not  directly  aim  at  increasing  the  material 
riches  of  a  nation ;  it  aims  at  increasing  its  funds  of  spiritual  health ;  but  no 
sooner  does  the  nation  feel  new  blood  palpitating  in  every  limb  and  member  than 
it  shakes  off  the  lethargy  of  centuries,  and  marches  fearlessly  forward  in  the 
upward  path  of  discovery  and  enterprise,  and,  as  a  natural  consequence,  riches 
flow  in  plentifully  to  its  exchequer.  The  gospel  came  to  a  crippled  world.  It  said 
unto  it,  "  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  rise  up  and  walk,"  and  forth- 
with it  began  a  career  upward  and  forward,  and  Christianity  has  indirectly  added 
enormously  to  its  material  riches.  Which  are  the  most  flourishing  nations  in  our 
day?  England,  America,  and  Germany,  the  countries  that  have  received  most 
abundantly  of  the  life  and  health  that  are  lodged  in  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 
Utilitarianism  says.  Give  men  better  houses,  higher  wages,  purer  air,  more  whole- 
some water,  and  by  improving  their  circumstances  you  will  improve  their  constitu- 
tions. But  what  says  Christianity  ?  I  will  strive  to  improve  men,  for  I  know  that 
no  sooner  will  men  feel  beating  within  them  new  and  potent  energies  than  they 
■will  set  about  to  improve  their  external  condition.    Men  need  better  houses,  and 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

purer  air,  and  more  ■wholesome  water ;  but  the  great  want  of  men  is  life— more 

life ;  and  I  have  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  have  it  more  abundantly. 

Utilitarianism  does  men  good,  Christianity  makes  them  good.     5.  The  Apostolic 

Church  had  no  silver  and  gold,  it  had  only  health  to  impart.     But  it  is  in  the 

power  of  the  modern  Church  to  give  both  money  and  health.     There  are  in  this 

huge  city  over  eighty  hospitals,  and  you  will  find  on  inquiry  that  every  hospital  is 

v/ell-nigh  full  of  people  who  have  not  the  means  to  pay  for  professional  attendance 

at  home ;  and  it  is  a  duty  incumbent  on  the  churches  to  maintain  these  institutions 

in  a  state  of  high  efficiency.     Hospitals  in  a  special  sense  are  the  earliest  and 

mellowest  fruit  of  our  holy  religion.     Where  was  the  first  hospital  founded  ?     In 

Ephesus,  the  home  of  John,  the  beloved  disciple  who  taught  that  "  God  is  love." 

And  by  what  name  were  hospitals  first  known  ?     Lazarettoes ;  the  very  name  bears 

on  its  forefront  the  stamp  of  the  gospel,  from  the  touching  story  of  Lazarus  sitting 

at  the  rich  man's  gate.     And  who  founded  and  endowed  the  great  hospitals  of  this 

metropolis?     Christians.     <Saint  Bartholomew's,  5'amt  Luke's,  jSai'wt  George's,  with 

a  few  exceptions  the  hospitals  are  all  saints !    They  are  the  precious  legacies  of  the 

Christianity  of  the  past ;   they  have  a  strong  claim  on  the  Christianity  of  the 

present.     6.  But  I  also  trust  that  in  acquiring  money  we  have  not  lost  what  is  of 

incomparably  greater  value,  the  faith  and  the  courage  to  say  to  poor  humanity, 

"  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  rise  up  and  walk."     Hundreds  who  go 

into  hospitals   founded   by  Christian  philanthropy  and   supported   by  Christian 

charity  come  out  "  able  to  stand  and  to  walk."     But  I  trust  that  in  a  still  deeper 

sense  it  is  true.     Have  we  not  witnessed  the  power  of  the  gospel  in  our  own  midst, 

giving  strength  to  the  weak  and  life  to  the  dead?     Men  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins 

have  risen  in  newness  of  life ;  men  crippled  in  the  spiritual  nature  have  received 

strength  ;  men  weak  in  their  feet  and  ankle-bones  have  received  fresh  power — they 

now  enter  the  temple,  they  run  in  the  way  of  the  Divine  commandments,  th^y  leap 

for  joy  like  harts  on  the  mountains  of  spices.     The  Church  is  fast  increasing  in 

riches  ;  let  us  pray  that  it  may  also  increase  in  the  power  to  impart  health  to  men 

"  lame  from  their  mother's  womb."    (J.  Cyvddi/laii  Jones,  D.D.)         The  cripple  and 

his  healers  : — I.  The  companions — "  Peter  and  John."     1.  Their  destination — "  the 

temple."   Those  who  have  been  the  greatest  blessing  to  mankind  through  all  the  ages 

have  loved  God  and  frequented  His  tem^de.     The  tbeory  that  a  man  who  is  able  to 

go  to  church  can  serve  God  at  home,  and  never  go,  is  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  the 

New  Testament.    2.  Their  harmony — "  went  up  together."    Nothing  like  Pentecostal 

power  to  harmonise  opposite  temperaments,  and  hold  in  check  possible  discordances 

and  selfish  tendencies  in  human  nature.     3.  Their  look.     Christianity  is  the  only 

system  in  the  world  that  knows  how  to  "fasten  its  eyes  upon"  tbe  afflicted  and 

destitute,  the  guilty  and  the  lost.     4.  Their  devotion — "  at  the  hour  of  prayer." 

If  any  men  were  justified  in  supposing  that  they  could  dispense  with  the  ordinary 

routine  of  religious  worship,  "Peter  and  John"  were  surt-ly  those  men.     But  no 

men  in  Jerusalem  were  more  consciously  indebted  to  the  means  of  grace,  or  more 

utterly  dependent  upon  God.     The  more  religion  a  man  has,  the  more  he  will  love 

"the  temple"  and  "the  hour  of  prayer."     5.  Their  poverty — "silver  and  gold 

have  I  none."     Then  a  child  of  God  maybe  poor.     Then  God  maybe  specially 

honouring  men,  and  fitting  them  for  extraordinary  careers  of  usefulness,  who  are 

without  worldly  means  or  influence.     In  this  materialistic  age,  when  men  are 

judged  of  by  their  money,  and  not  by  their  character — by  what  they  have,  and  not 

by  what  they  are,  it  is  well  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  manhood  and  money  are  not 

interchangeable  terms.     The  power  that  lifts  and  heals  a  crippled  world  is  not 

carried  about  by  men  in  their  pocket-books,  nor  does  it  grow  out  of  their  bank 

accounts  or  social  standing.     It  comes  through  the  right  relationship  of  the  soul  to 

Jesus  Christ,  and  absolutely  without  regard  to  a  man's  worldly  con<lition.     G.  Their 

power — "  Else  up,  and  walk."     That  is  the  main  power  the  Cburch  lacks  just  now 

to  make  her  ready  for  the  conquest  of  the  world ;  and  that  is  the  power  for  the 

exercise  of  which  a  crippled  world  fastens  its  eyes  upon  us.     Neither  wealth,  nor 

education,  nor  social  influence  can  atone  for  the  want  of  this  Divine  afflatus.     If. 

The  cripple — "A  man  lame  from  his  mother's  womb."     1.  His  location — "At  the 

gate  of  the  temple."    Then  this  cripple  was  no  fool.    He  understood  tbe  philosophy 

of  benevolence.    The  kindest  and  most  sympathetic  people  in  the  world  are  praying 

people.    Persons  who  obey  the  first  table  of  the  law  are  most  likely  to  obey  the 

second.     Nine-tenths  of  all  the  money  raised  for  benevolent  purposes,  and  for  the 

support  of  our  charitable  institutions,  comes  from  tbe  pockets  of  those  who  go  "  up 

lo  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer."     2.  His  attituue— "Lay  at  the  gate."    We 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  281 

have  seen  thousands  of  lame  men  who  could  go  almost  anywhere,  through  the  aid 
of  artificial  supports.  But  this  man  was  obliged  to  be  carried.  3.  His  vocation — 
"  To  ask  alms."  Both  the  place  and  time  selected  by  this  cripple  to  ply  his  voca- 
tion indicate  that  he  was  a  shrewd,  thoughtful  man.  4.  His  cure.  (1)  It  was 
instantaneous.  (2)  It  was  thorough — "Walked  and  leaped."  5.  His  gratitude. 
The  accession  of  strength  was  sudden,  and  his  manifestation  of  it  was  equally 
sudden.  There  was  no  timid  shrinking,  lest  he  should  overtax  bis  new  strength. 
The  man  that  God  blesses  and  saves  need  not  be  afraid  of  overdoing,  and  bringing 
on  a  relapse,  by  anything  his  heart  prompts  him  to  do,  in  the  shape  of  letting 
others  know  what  has  hapjiened.  The  want  of  the  times  is  a  joyful,  happy, 
triumphant  Christianity.  III.  The  crowd — "All  the  people."  1.  Their  evidence 
— "  Saw  him."  2.  Their  recognition  (ver.  10).  He  had  sat  at  the  gate  so  long 
that  everybody  knew  him,  and  that  may  be  the  reason  why  he  was  favoured  with 
this  miraculous  cure.  3.  Their  excitement.  They  wisely  argued  that  the  change 
could  only  be  effected  by  a  Divine  cause.  Extend  this  reasoning,  and  you  have 
one  of  the  most  unanswerable  arguments  in  favour  of  Christianity.  The  trans- 
formations wrought  by  it  in  society  prove  it  to  be  Divine  in  its  origin.  4.  Their 
emotions — "  Wonder  and  amazement."  Strange  that  they  should  be  so  affected 
hy  this  miracle,  after  having  witnessed  so  many  by  the  Master.  Application  :  1, 
Let  us  imitate  Peter  and  John  in  our  appreciation  of  the  means  of  grace.  2.  Let 
us  not  disturb  the  services  by  coming  in  late ;  but,  like  them,  let  us  try  to  be 
punctual;  "at  the  hour."  3.  Pentecostal  blessings  of  yesterday  cannot  supply 
our  need  of  God's  inspiration  and  blessing  to-day.  4.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  uncon- 
verted to  "fasten  their  eyes"  upon  spiritual  matters,  to  yield  to  right  influences, 
to  allow  themselves  to  be  carried  daily  to  the  gate  of  right  feeling  and  conduct.  It 
this  lame  man  had  rebelled  that  morning  against  being  carried  "  to  the  gate  of  the 
temple,"  he  miKht  never  have  been  healed.  5.  Learn  that,  though  the  eyes  of  the 
sinner  may  be  fastened  upon  the  servant,  the  Master  only  can  heal.  (2'.  Kelly.) 
The  lame  man  healed: — You  will  not  see  the  whole  beauty  of  this  paragraph  unless 
you  connect  it  with  the  chapter  preceding.  1.  You  remember  the  infinite  excite- 
ment of  that  chapter.  There  had  never  been  such  a  day  in  the  Church  before. 
Life  was  raised  up  to  a  higher  level  than  it  had  ever  attained,  and  the  people  were 
praising  God  from  morning  till  night.  Surely  the  millennium  had  come !  After 
this  tbere  will  be  no  more  common-place.  Who  would  willingly  come  out  of  the 
blue  heavens  to  walk  again  on  the  pathways  of  ordinary  life  ?  But  read  the  open- 
ing words  of  the  third  chapter.  After  the  excitement  of  Pentecust,  is  not  this  of 
the  nature  of  an  anti-climax?  Two  men,  former  partners  in  the  fishing  trade, 
*'  went  up  together  into  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer."  Then  see  tbat  the 
ecstatic  hours  of  life  ought  to  be  succeeiJed  by  quiet  worship,  for  that  alone  can 
sustain  the  heart  with  true  nourishment.  God  grants  unto  His  Church  hours  of 
enthusiasm,  days  when  the  whole  horizon  opens  like  an  infinite  door  into  the  upper 
places  of  the  uni /erse ;  but  after  such  peculiarly  solemn  manifestations  of  power 
and  grace,  He  expects  us  to  go  up  into  the  temple  to  pray,  as  He  knows  such 
visions  make  all  other  life  ordinary  and  common.  Whatever  luxuries  you  may 
enjoy  occasionally,  you  must  have  bread  permanently.  We  cannot  always  live  in 
the  extraordinary  ;  for  by  the  very  fact  of  its  being  always  extraoidinaiy,  it  would 
cease  to  be  other  than  usual.  2.  But  were  not  the  men  inspired  ?  Yes ;  yet  the 
two  men  "went  up  together  into  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer."  The  clock 
was  not  altered ;  the  great  Pentecostal  storm  had  rushed  across  the  heavens,  and 
had  left  behind  it  showers  of  blessings.  Siill  the  quiet  clock  ticked  and  travelled 
on  to  the  time  of  the  offering  of  the  evening  sacrifice,  and  Peter  and  Jol'n  were  not 
so  transported  by  special  ecstasies  as  to  forget  their  daily  and  ciistomai'y  engage- 
ments with  God.  Suspect  any  inspiration  that  makes  you  contemptuous  of  ordmary 
religious  duty.  Inspiration  never  lessens  duty.  Any  supposed  inspiration  that  has 
withdrawn  men  from  the  temple  and  poisoned  them  with  the  delusion  that  they 
could  sufficiently  read  the  Bible  at  home,  is  an  inspiration  coming  otherwhere  than 
from  heaven.  You  were  not  made  to  live  at  home  always.  There  is  in  you  that 
which  finds  its  completion  in  public  fellowship.  It  does  every  man  good  to  be 
now  and  then  in  a  crowd  ;  public  assembly  has  an  educational  and  social  influence 
upon  the  individual  life.  Standing  alone,  a  man  may  seem  to  be  very  great,  im- 
portant, self-complete ;  it  is  when  he  enters  into  a  crowd  that  he  realises  his 
humanity,  his  littleness,  and  yet  the  very  greatness  that  comes  of  tbat  contraction 
of  individuality.  "Forsake  not  the  assembling  of  yourselves  together."  Peter 
and  John  did  not.     Are  we  not  wrong  in  supposing  that  prayer  can  ever  be  of  the 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi 


nature  of  common-place  ?  What  is  praj'er  ?  Is  it  not  communion  with  God.  The 
apostles  Lad  not  lo-t  their  inspiration,  as  is  evident  by  what  they  did.  Verily, 
these  men  then  had  not  lost  their  inspiration,  or  they  never  would  have  taken 
this  course  with  the  suppliant  at  the  Beautiful  gate  of  the  Temple.  They  could 
work  this  miracle.  Let  that  be  taken  as  a  proof  of  the  continuance  of  their  inspira- 
tion ;  and  yet  we  see  that,  notwithstanding,  they  are  going  up  like  ordinary  humble 
worshippers  to  pray  in  the  temple.  Beware  of  any  inspiration  that  leads  you  away 
from  apostolic  practice.  Your  ambition  may  be  easily  excited,  and  you  may  not 
require  a  very  expert  tempter  of  the  human  mind  to  say  to  you  that  perhaps  you 
may  be  a  genius,  that  you  need  not  submit  to  take  upon  you  the  yoke  of  religious 
custom.  When  such  temptation  seduces  you,  give  it  the  lie.  The  law  would  seem 
to  be  that  every  great  effort  of  human  life  should  be  followed  by  a  religious  exer- 
cise ;  every  outgoing  of  the  soul  should  have  its  compensatory  movement  in  silent 
communion  with  God.  After  you  have  been  striving  arduously  and  valiantly  in 
the  fight,  plunge  into  the  bath,  so  to  say,  of  Divine  meditation  and  heavenly  com- 
munion, and  therein  leave  your  weakness  and  recover  your  strength.  3.  This 
incidental  conversation  with  the  poor  lame  beggar  at  the  Beautiful  gate  of  the 
Temple  gives  us  some  particulars  about  the  apostles  themselves,  and  those  parti- 
culars are  the  more  valuable  because  of  the  way  in  which  they  are  introduced  into 
the  narrative.  I.  It  is  perfectly  evident  that  having  all  things  common  hai> 
NOT  ENEicHED  Peter  AND  JoHN.  ApostoHc  communion  was  no  priest's  trick ;  it 
was  no  attempt  to  enrich  the  apostolate  at  the  expense  of  the  Christian  public. 
"  Silver  and  gold  have  we  none."  So  much  the  better  for  them  1  Woe  unto  the 
apostle  who  spends  one  half  of  his  life  in  getting  silver  and  gold,  and  the  other  half 
in  watching  that  they  do  not  run  away  from  him.  What  had  they  then  ?  Divine 
energy,  spiritual  life,  social  sympathy,  and  hearts  to  bless  those  who  needed  bene- 
diction and  assistance.  The  poverty  of  the  apostles  was  in  material  substance 
only  ;  and  therefore  it  was  no  poverty  at  all.  He  is  the  poor  man  who  has  nothing 
but  money.  He  is  rich  who  has  high  ideals  and  noble  sympathies,  and  who  lives 
in  the  presence  of  God  and  in  the  service  of  truth.  Have  your  riches  in  your 
mind,  in  your  heart,  in  your  thoughts,  in  your  purposes,  in  your  beneficent  plans. 
II.  This  action  shows  how  possible  it  is  to  be  giving  less  than  others,  and 
AT  THE  same  TIME  TO  BE  GIVING  MORE.  "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none."  "Then 
he  could  give  nothing  "  would  be  the  swift  and  shallow  reasoning  of  those  who 
read  the  surface  only.  "But  such  as  I  have  give  I  thee."  That  is  the  giving  that 
does  not  impoverissh  ;  the  more  given  the  more  left.  The  sun  has  been  giving  his 
light  for  thousands  of  years,  and  yet  he  is  as  luminous  as  when  he  first  looked  out 
upon  the  darkness  which  he  dispelled.  Give  mechanically,  and  you  will  weary  of 
the  exercise;  but  give  spiritually,  and  you  will  increase  your  possessions  by  the 
very  giving  of   your  alms.      III.    A  man  may  pray  none  the   less    prayerfully 

BECAUSE    HE    HAS   AIDED   SOME    POOR    CREATURE  BEFORE  HE  ENTERED  THE  SACRED  PLACE. 

We  should  have  enjoyed  the  service  many  a  time  much  more  keenly  if  before 
coming  to  it  we  had  made  some  sorrowful  heart  glad.  That  is  the  preparation  for 
prayer.  If  you  want  to  come  up  at  the  time  of  the  offering  of  the  evening  sacrifice 
with  glowing,  thankful  hearts,  ready  to  receive  any  communication  God  may  make 
to  them,  spend  the  intervening  hours  in  doing  good  to  those  who  sit  in  solitary 
places.  Then  you  will  come,  not  in  a  spirit  of  r riticism,  but  in  a  spirit  of  sympathy, 
and  from  the  first  note  to  the  last  there  shall  be  a  shining  forth  and  revelation  of 
the  Divine  presence.  IV.  Christianity  now,  as  then,  must  prove  its  Divinity 
BY  its  beneficence.  "In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  rise  up  and 
walk."  Peter  did  not  preach  a  sermon  to  the  man.  To  the  excited  multitude  he 
expounded  the  Scriptures  ;  but  when  he  came  face  to  face  with  the  man,  he  preached 
no  sermon,  except  as  the  mention  of  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  is  always 
a  sermon,  but  bade  him  rise  up  and  walk.  Here  is  the  sphere  in  which  Christian 
argument  may  yet  secure  its  highest  triumph.  Words  can  be  answered  by  words, 
phrases  beget  phrases,  and  the  easy  trick  of  recrimination  is  the  favourite  amuse- 
ment of  mere  controversialists ;  but  a  Church  seeking  out  the  lowly,  helping  the 
helpless,  healing  the  sick,  teaching  the  ignorant,  standing  by  the  cause  of  righteous- 
ness, defying  the  oppressor,  and  suffering  and  working  for  the  right,  is  a  Church 
whose  beneficence  is  its  noblest  attribute,  and  whose  character  is  the  only  vindica- 
tion it  requires.  (J.  Parker,  D.I).)  The  healing  of  the  lame  man : — Look  at  the 
miracle  in  the  light  of  what  has  just  taken  place.  There  is  great  enthusiasm  in 
the  Church.  The  Divine  life  is,  so  to  speak,  at  its  highest  point.  We  should  con- 
aider,  confining  ourselves  within  the  limits  of  the  Church,  that  the  age  of  human 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  283 

unity  and  love  had  come  in  all  its  golden  glory.  We  are  now  invited  to  go  beyond 
the  Church  line,  and  at  our  very  first  step  we  find  a  man  who  appeals  to  our  sym- 
pathy in  his  pain  and  helplessness.  See  how  world  lies  within  world,  and  how 
misleading  are  all  the  inferences  drawn  from  a  limited  set  of  facts.  1.  The  man 
who  has  access  to  every  means  of  mental  and  spiritual  culture  may  think  all  the 
■world  as  highly  privileged  as  himself.  2.  The  healthy  and  prosperous  family  may 
forget  that  other  households  are  afflicted  and  depressed.  Look  beyond  your  own 
sphere.  You  have  not  far  to  look ;  there  is  but  a  step  between  thee  and  the  world 
which  is  either  higher  or  lower  than  thine  own.  The  lesson  has  a  double  applica- 
tion ;  the  prosperous  man  is  to  look  down  that  he  may  help ;  the  unsuccessful  man 
is  to  look  up  that  he  may  hope.  I.  The  social  side  of  this  incident.  1.  We  may 
be  able  to  carry  the  cripple  when  we  are  unable  to  heal  him.  Do  what  you  can. 
Human  helplessness  is  a  continual  appeal  to  human  power.  There  are  secondary 
services  in  life.  We  cannot  always  do  the  great  deed  ;  nor  can  we  always  stand  in 
the  full  light,  that  we  may  be  seen  of  men.  Sometimes  we  can  only  carry.  We 
cannot  restore.  2.  The  commonest  minds,  as  well  as  the  highest,  have  always 
associated  the  idea  of  charity  with  that  of  religion.  This  is  right.  This  is  a  high 
compliment  to  any  form  of  religion.  See  how  it  has  been  paid  to  Christianity  above 
all !  The  theology  that  has  no  philanthropy  is  its  own  vain  god.  3.  Look  at  the 
compensations  of  the  poorest  life.  The  man  was  carried  daily  by  friendly  hands, 
and  had  the  temple  as  his  daily  hope.  The  sun  shines  even  on  the  poorest  lot. 
II.  The  apostolic  side.  1.  The  apostles  never  attempted  to  do  without  public 
worship.  Such  worship  has  its  distinct  advantages.  (1)  Provocation  of  thought. 
(2)  Development  of  sympathy.  2.  They  never  neglected  human  want  in  their 
anxiety  to  render  Divine  worship.  Some  people  are  one-sidedly  religious.  3.  They 
never  attended  even  to  physical  necessities  in  their  own  name.  Conclusion  :  The 
incident  suggests  two  questions.  1.  Are  we  too  pious  to  be  philanthropic?  2. 
Has  the  name  of  Jesus  lost  its  power?  (Ibid.)  The  first  miracle: — Viewing 
the  Acts  as  a  type  of  what  all  Church  history  was  to  be,  and  a  Divine  exposi- 
tion of  the  principles  which  should  guide  the  Church  in  times  of  suffering  as 
well  as  of  action,  we  can  see  good  reasons  for  the  insertion  of  this  particular 
narrative.  I.  This  miracle  was  typical  of  the  Church's  work,  for  it  was 
a  beggar  that  was  healed,  and  this  beggar  lay  helpless  and  hopeless  at  the  very 
doors  of  the  temple.  The  beggar  typified  humanity  at  large.  He  was  laid,  indeed, 
in  a  splendid  position — before  him  was  extended  the  magnificent  panorama  of  hills 
which  stood  round  about  Jerusalem ;  above  him  rose  the  splendours  of  the  building 
upon  which  the  Herods  had  lavished  the  riches  and  wonders  of  their  gorgeous  con- 
ceptions— but  he  was  nothing  the  better  for  all  this  material  grandeur  till  touched 
by  the  power  which  lay  in  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  And  the  beggar  of  the 
Beautiful  gate  was  in  all  these  respects  the  fittest  object  for  St.  Peter's  earliest 
miracle,  because  he  was  exactly  typical  of  mankind's  state.  Humanity,  Jew  and 
Gentile  alike,  lay  at  the  very  gate  of  God's  temple  of  the  universe.  Men  could 
discourse  learnedly,  too,  concerning  that  sanctuary,  and  they  could  admire  its 
beauteous  proportions.  Poets,  philosophers,  and  wise  men  had  treated  of  the 
temple  of  the  universe  in  works  which  can  never  be  surpassed,  but  all  the  while 
they  lay  outside  its  sacred  precincts.  They  had  no  power  to  stand  up  and  enter  in, 
leaping,  and  walking,  and  praising  God.  This  miracle  of  healing  the  beggar  was 
typical  of  the  Church's  work  again,  because  it  was  a  beggar  who  thus  received  a 
blessing  when  the  Church  roused  itself  to  the  discharge  of  its  great  mission. 
Christianity  is  essentially  the  religion  of  the  masses.  Its  Founder  was  a  carpenter, 
and  its  earliest  benediction  pronounced  the  blessedness  of  those  that  are  poor  in 
spirit,  and  ever  since  the  greatest  triumphs  of  Christianity  have  been  gained  amongst 
the  poor.  Here,  however,  lies  a  danger.  Its  work  in  this  direction  must  be  done 
in  no  one-sided  spirit.  Christianity  must  never  adopt  the  language  or  the  tone  of 
the  mere  agitator.  A  Christianity  which  triumphs  through  appeals  to  popular 
prejudices,  and  seeks  a  mere  temporary  advantage  by  riding  on  the  crest  of  popular 
ignorance,  is  not  the  religion  taught  by  Christ  and  His  apostles.  But  yet,  again, 
the  conversion  of  this  beggar  was  effected  through  his  healing  ;  and  here  we  see  a 
type  of  the  Church's  future  work.  The  Church,  then,  as  represented  by  the  apostles, 
did  not  despise  the  body,  or  regard  efforts  of  the  bodily  blessing  beneath  its  dignity. 
Schools,  hospitals,  sanitary  and  medical  science,  the  dwellings  and  amusements  of 
the  people,  trade,  commerce,  all  should  be  the  care  of  the  Church,  and  should  be 
based  on  Christ's  law,  and  carried  out  on  Christian  principles.  II.  This  miracle 
WAS  the  occasion  of  St.  Peteb's  testimony  both  to  the  people  and  to  thele  kulehs. 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cn.vp.  in. 

His  discourse  has  two  distinct  divisions.  It  sets  forth,  first,  the  claims,  dignity, 
and  nature  of  Christ,  and  then  makes  a  personal  appeal  to  the  men  of  Jerusalem. 
St.  Peter  begins  his  sermon  with  an  act  of  profound  self-renunciation.  When  he 
saw  the  people  running  together,  he  said  (ver.  12).  The  same  spirit  of  renunciation 
appears  at  an  earlier  stage  of  the  miracle  (ver.  6).  One  point  is  at  once  manifest 
when  St.  Peter's  conduct  is  compared  with  his  Master's  under  similar  circumstances. 
St.  Peter  acts  as  a  delegate  and  a  servant ;  Jesus  Christ  acted  as  a  principal,  a 
master^the  Prince  of  Life.  St.  Peter's  words  teach  another  lesson.  They  are 
typical  of  the  spirit  which  should  ever  animate  the  Christian  preacher  or  teacher. 
They  turn  the  attention  of  his  hearers  wholly  away  from  himself,  and  exalt  Christ 
Jesus  alone.  Earthly  motives  easily  insinuate  themselves  in  every  man's  heart, 
and  when  a  man  feels  urged  on  to  declare  some  unpleasant  truth,  or  to  raise  a 
violent  and  determined  opposition,  he  should  search  diligently,  lest  that  while  he 
imagines  himself  following  a  heavenly  vision  and  obeying  a  Divine  command,  he 
should  be  only  yielding  to  mere  human  suggestions  of  pride,  or  partisanship, 
or   unchaiitableness.     {G.    T.   Stokes,   D.D.)  The   apostles   and   the   beggar   a 

inodel  of  Christian  care  of  the  poor: — I.  The  proper  disposition  from  which 
Christian  care  for  the  poor  should  flow.  1.  Love  to  God.  The  apostles  were 
on  their  way  to  the  temple.  2.  Love  of  our  neighbour.  They  regard  the  poor 
man  with  sympathy— John  feeling,  Peter  helping.  II.  The  pkopee  means  which 
Christian  care  of  the  poor  should  employ.  Silver  and  gold  is  not  the  chief 
concern.  Alms  quickly  thrown  to  the  poor  costs  little,  and  bears  little  fruit. 
But— 1.  Peis  mal  and  living  intercourse  with  the  poor.  "  Peter  looked,"  &c.  2. 
Evangelical  counsel  and  comfort  from  the  Word  of  God.  "  Such  as  I  have,"  &c. 
III.  The  proper  result  in  which  Christian  care  for  the  poor  should  delight.  1. 
Bo  lily  restoration — he  could  rise  up  and  walk.  2.  Spiritual  health — he  praised 
God.  (C  G  rok.)  Spiritual  co-operation  : — It  is  seldom  that  the  co-operation  of 
both  parties — the  doer  and  the  receiver— is  so  clearly  seen  as  here.  I.  In  the 
LOOKS  or  BOTH  PARTIES.  Peter  looking  on  the  lame  man  with  sympathising  love, 
ready  to  help  and  to  heal ;  and  the  lame  man,  at  the  order  of  the  apostle,  regard- 
ing him  and  John  steadfastly  with  a  petitioning  and  hopeful  spirit.  II.  In  their 
BELiEViNa  apprehension  OF  Jestjs.  Peter  speaking  and  commanding  in  the  name 
of  Jesus ;  and  the  lame  man,  also  hopeful  and  susceptible,  with  his  whole  soul 
attaching  himself  to  Jesus.  III.  In  their  spiritual  and  bodily  exertions.  Peter 
stretching  forth  and  taking  the  man  by  the  right  hand ;  and  the  man,  with  mira- 
culous strength  of  will  and  muscle,  lifting  himself  up.  The  name  of  Jesus,  the 
person  of  Jesus,  His  grace  and  Divine  saving  power  is  the  centre  ;  in  Him  the  souls 
meet,  the  men  reach  forth  their  hands,  and  find  spiritual  and  bodily  strength  in 
giving  and  receiving.     (G.  V.  Lechler,  D.D.)  Alleviations  of  the  hardest  lot: — 

It  would  not  be  fair  to  say  even  this  limping  beggar  had  no  alleviations  to  his  lot. 
He  was  not  blind  ;  he  could  see  the  Beautiful  gate,  with  its  wonderful  pillars  of 
brass  overlaid  with  vast  plates  of  gold  and  silver.  He  was  not  deaf ;  he  could  hear 
the  priests'  trumpets  on  the  feast-days ;  he  could  even  listen  to  the  singing  of  the 
daily  psalms  and  the  chanting  of  the  evening  prayers  in  the  courts  of  the  loveliest 
edifice  under  the  sun.  He  was  not  dumb ;  he  could  ask  for  alms  as  a  beggar,  he 
could  cry  for  mercy  as  a  sinner.  He  was  not  forsaken  ;  he  had  a  circle  of  patient 
friends  to  bring  him  to  his  wonted  place  every  afternoon.  Discontented  poor  people 
might  as  well  count  up  their  manifest  mercies  now  and  then.  (C  S.  Robinson, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  "me  gate  of  the  temple  whlcli  la  called  Beautiful. — The  gate  Beautiful : — 
In  our  ignorance  of  the  topography  of  Jerusalem  and  the  temple,  it  is  not  possible  to 
determine  with  absolute  certainty  which  of  the  many  gates  of  the  temple  was  distin- 
guished by  this  name.  According  to  Josephus,  "  There  were  nine  of  the  gates  that 
were  overlaid  with  silver  and  gold.  But  one  without  the  temple,  or  sanctuary,  made 
of  Corinthian  brass,  far  excelled  those  of  gold  or  silver."  This  gate  is  supposed  to 
have  been  the  east  entrance  to  the  women's  court,  and  was  sometimes  called  the 
Corinthian  Gate,  from  the  material  of  which  it  was  made.  It  was  also  known  by 
the  name  of  Nicanor's  gate.  Others,  however,  suppose  the  Beautiful  gate  to  be 
that  called  Shushan  by  the  Rabbins,  probably  from  the  bas-relief  lily  work  in 
brass  around  the  capitals  of  the  columns  (1  Kings  vii.  19).  It  is  derived  from  an 
unused  root  signifying  "white,  "white  and  beautiful  being  convertible  as  in  Shushan 
(Esther  1.  2),  the  white  or  beautiful  city  (as  Beogrady — Belgrade — in  Slavonic). 
This  gate  was  on  the  east  side  of  the  court  of  the  Gentiles,  and  close  to  Solomon's 


CHAP,  iii.l  THE  ACTS.  285 

porch.      (IV.  Denton,  31. A.)  The    gate    Beautiful: — The  temple  of  religion 

has  a  beautiful  gate  in  it ;  but  in  one  important  respect  it  differs  from  the 
Beautiful  gate  of  the  Jewish  temple.  On  the  pillars  on  either  side  of  that 
gate  were  engraved  in  Greek  letters  the  words,  "  Let  no  stranger  pass  beyond 
tbis  on  paiu  of  death."  But  through  the  beautiful  gate  of  the  gospel  every 
one  is  free  to  enter  into  the  holiest  place.  And  that  at  all  times.  In  each 
of  the  great  churches  of  Rome  there  is  what  is  called  the  Porta  Santa,  or  Holy 
Door.  It  is  made  of  a  peculiar  marble,  and  is  sea'ed  up  for  fifty  years,  so  that  no 
one  during  all  that  time  can  obtain  admission  through  it  to  the  liigh  altar.  In  the 
jubilee  year  the  reigning  Pope  knocks  at  this  door  with  a  silver  hammer ;  and  im- 
mediately it  is  pulled  down  and  a  breach  made  through  which  the  Pope,  followed  by 
a  splendid  procession,  can  pass  and  minister  in  the  most  sacred  place.  But  not  like 
this  Porta  Santa  is  the  beautiful  gate  of  the  gospel. .  Not  at  long  intervals  is  it 
opened.  To  every  one  who  knocks,  however  feebly,  and  at  whatever  time,  it  swings 
back  at  once  and  gives  admission.  All  that  is  needful  to  entitle  any  one  to  admis- 
sion is  faith  and  love.  It  is  a  beautiful  gate  by  which  you  enter  into  God's  king- 
dom. The  everlasting  doors  are  lifted  up  that  you  may  pass  through,  and  the  sal- 
vation wrought  for  you  is  a  great  salvation  v/orthy  of  the  greatness  of  your  nature. 
The  ancieut  Eonians  had  a  strange  law  which  required  that  when  a  man  returned 
from  captivity  in  a  foreign  land  he  should  not  enter  his  house  by  the  doorway.  He 
could  not  recover  his  right  of  possession  and  citizenship  unless  he  entered  his  house 
through  the  roof ;  and  then  he  was  supposed  never  to  have  been  out  of  it.  Not 
thus  is  admittance  to  be  obtained  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  There  can  be  no 
make-believe  that  the  redeemed  sinner  has  always  been  in  the  Father's  bouse.  The 
captive,  the  wanderer,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  must  return  by  the  one  living 
Way,  and  enter  in  by  the  one  living  Door  open  to  all — viz. ,  a  simple  faith  in  the 
atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ.  But,  while  the  gate  of  the  temple  of  Christ's  religion  is 
thus  beautiful  to  all,  it  is  especially  beautiful  to  the  young.  You  are  to  enter  the 
temple  of  religion  by  the  gate  of  innocence,  before  you  have  had  any  experience  of  the 
dark  sins  and  trials  of  the  world.  Youth  is  the  most  beautiful  door  by  which  to 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  You  have  the  qualities  of  faith,  hope,  and  love 
required  of  those  who  enter  in.  They  are  easy  and  natural,  as  it  were,  to  you  ;  and 
you  have  only  to  exercise  them,  not  towards  earthly,  but  towards  heavenly  things. 
And  how  beautiful  is  this  gate  of  youthful  piety — beautiful  as  all  first  things  are — ■ 
first  love,  the  first  light  of  the  morning,  the  first  flowers  of  spring,  the  dawn  of 
human  history  in  Eden,  the  golden  age  of  the  world ;  beautiful  as  all  pure  things 
are  that  have  no  alloy  or  base  mixture  of  evil  in  them  !  You  ask  how  are  you  to 
get  this  beautiful  religion  ?  In  a  very  beautiful  way  !  Not  only  is  the  temple  itself 
beautiful,  but  the  gate  by  which  you  enter  it  is  beautiful.  It  is  like  the  beautiful 
fruit  of  the  orange-tree  which  you  get  through  the  beautiful  and  fragrant  orange 
blossom.  Jesus  says,  "I  am  the  Door,"  &c.  How  beautiful  and  costly  is  that 
living  Door!  What  a  wonderful  death  of  self-sacrificing  He  died  !  And  Jesus  be- 
comes a  door  to  you  such  as  your  nature  requires.  He  suits  His  long  step  to  your 
short  step,  and  narrows  His  octave  to  the  stretch  of  your  little  fingers.  {H.  Mac- 
millan,   LL.D.)  The   Beautiful  Gate : — It  is  hardly   a  figure  to   say   that  in 

our  human  life  there  are  gates  we  may  well  call  "beautiful,"  ever  opening  and 
inviting  us  to  enter  on  new  experiences  and  duties.  But  the  special  thought  I  want 
to  empbasise  is  that  at  every  one  of  tliese  gates  we  need  a  helping  hand,  human  or 
Divine,  to  put  us  on  our  feet,  and  prepare  us  for  the  new  phase  of  life  into  which 
the  gate  opens.  1.  To  begin  with  the  first  gate — the  gate  of  infancy  and  child- 
hood. It  is  a  beautiful  gate,  indeed.  What  fond  hopes  wreathe  every  cradle ! 
What  possibilities  are  wrapped  up  in  that  little  bundle  of  helplessness  and  want 
called  the  baby  ?  This  bundle  of  weakness  and  want  laid  at  the  beautiful  gate  of 
life,  asking  alms  of  all,  having  nothing  but  capacity,  needing  everything — care, 
watching,  sympathy,  love,  wisdom — everything  to  feed  and  clothe  the  body,  to 
quicken  and  nourish  the  mind,  and  train  a  young  immortal  for  the  mortal  and 
immortal  life.  And  what  can  do  this  like  mingled  affection  and  faith  akin  in  spirit 
to  that  which  looked  out  through  the  illuminated  eyes  of  Peter  and  John  upon  the 
lame  man  at  the  temple  gate  ?  And  what  this  foundling  at  the  gate  of  life  needs  is 
the  touch  of  a  loving  hand  and  the  faith  of  a  loving  heart.  This  is  sure  to  carry  with 
it  healing  and  strength.  And  it  is  no  less  Divine  on  what  is  called  the  natural  than 
what  is  called  the  supernatural  plane.  Are  not  the  mingled  affection  and  faith 
with  which  a  true  Christian  mother  broods  over  her  child,  nurturing  into  life  body 
and  mind  in  what  we  call  the  natural  order,  just  as  truly  of  God  as  was  the  power 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

that  healed  the  lame  man  at  the  temple  gate  ?  See  how  she  puts  herself  into 
affectional  rapport  with  her  child.  She  looks  into  its  eyes,  finds  its  soul,  talks  with 
it  in  the  soul's  language,  which  mother  and  child  both  know,  smiles  upon  it,  gives 
strength  to  its  ankle-bones  by  holding  them  in  her  warm,  motherly  hands,  and, 
finally,  tempting  the  child  to  rise  up  and  walk  by  the  confidence  that  shines  through 
her  eyes,  and  by  the  outstretched  hand  ready  to  save  from  falling  or  to  lift  up  again 
and  again  and  yet  again,  till  at  last  the  child  walks  and  leaps  and  praises  God,  in 
childish  fashion,  by  its  innocent  gladness.  All  this  aSeclion  may  do,  is  continually 
doing,  in  all  true  homes.  But  there  is  a  higher  work  to  be  done  for  the  child,  a 
deeper  nature  to  be  reached,  a  life  within  a  life  to  be  waked  ;  and  this  calls  not  for 
affection  only,  but  faith — faith  in  the  reality  of  this  interior  life,  faith  in  God  as 
the  Infinite  Good,  and  in  the  reality  of  His  Holy  Spirit's  influence,  faith  in  Him 
as  the  constant  inspiration  and  life  of  the  soul.  This  faith  must  crown  affection, 
or  the  deepest  wants  of  the  child's  soul  can  never  be  met  It  is  this  sweet,  calm, 
holy  influence  filling  the  home,  as  the  balmly  odours  of  pine  groves  fill  the  sur- 
rounding air,  that  gives  to  the  home  atmosphere  a  healing,  a  strengthening,  a  life- 
giving  power.  It  is  better  than  silver  or  gold.  But  by  and  by  the  child  is  grown, 
and  the  home  is  left  for  the  "  wide,  wide  world."  2.  Here  opens  another  gate — the 
gate  of  early  manhood.  This,  too,  is  a  beautiful  gate,  especially  when  the  gate  of 
childhood  has  been  a  fitting  preparation  for  it.  If  it  ever  seems  to  rest  in  shadow, 
it  is  because  the  higher  nature  has  not  been  waked,  but  sleeps,  while  the  lower 
nature  is  alive  and  active.  What  in  all  this  world  is  more  beautiful  than  a  young 
man — and  man  means  woman — well  furnished  mentally,  morally,  spiritually,  pass- 
ing out  through  the  beautiful  gate  for  the  great  work  of  life  I  What  fond  hopes 
centre  in  him  !  But  all  such  hojDes  are  not  realised.  Why  is  it  ?  But  one  reason 
for  the  failure  may  safely  be  ascribed  to  this :  an  undue  sense  of  self-sufficiency. 
In  the  pride  and  strength  of  young  manhood,  one  is  slow  to  perceive  that  he  is 
lame  or  undeveloped,  or  weak  in  any  part  of  his  nature.  He  is  no  cripple  at  the 
gate,  to  ask  help  of  anybody.  Is  there  no  lameness,  no  weakness,  no  need  of  the 
touch  of  a  helping  hand?  Even  if  the  need  be  not  felt,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  is 
not  real.  It  may  not  be  felt,  because  the  greatness  of  life  is  not  felt.  Where  life 
is  regarded  only  as  a  vigorous  scramble  for  the  main  chance,  for  business  success, 
or  pleasure,  without  aspiration  for  anything  above  the  beaten  paths  of  dust  and 
ashes,  then,  indeed,  any  man  with  good  legs  and  arms  and  a  thimbleful  of  brains 
may  feel  quite  equal  to  the  undertaking.  But  for  one  who  looks  on  life  from  the 
standpoint  of  spiritual  possibility — such  a  one,  comparing  his  ideal  with  his  actual, 
the  glorious  possibility  with  his  own  sense  of  inability,  will  need  no  argument  to 
convince  him  that,  however  strong  his  ankle-bones,  his  spirit  is  in  pressing  need  of 
the  healing  and  strengthening  touch  of  a  faith  and  hope  that  makes  the  deepest 
and  truest  things  of  life  the  most  real.  He  who  helps  me  to  faith  in  eternal  realities, 
honour,  right,  integrity,  self-sacrifice,  and  lifts  me  to  a  plane  of  life  where  the  dif- 
ference between  noble  and  ignoble  living  is  most  clearly  seen,  is  my  greatest  bene- 
factor. It  is  this  spirit  which  lifts,  guides,  and  liberates  the  soul  for  noblest  living. 
It  is  inspiration  for  the  life  eternal  here  and  now.  "  Silver  and  gold  "  Jesus  had 
none.  Such  as  He  had  He  gave — Himself,  a  soul  enkindled  with  the  love  of  God 
and  man.  3.  But  manhood  hastens  on  to  old  age.  May  we  call  that,  too,  a  beauti- 
ful gate?  Yes,  if  fiiith  and  hope,  like  Peter  and  John,  stand  at  the  gate  to  look 
into  our  eye  and  take  our  hand  as  we  pass  through.  At  first  the  gate  of  old  age 
seems  anything  but  beautiful.  One  of  the  brightest  and  most  cheerful  of  our 
American  poets  calls  it  an  "  Iron  Gate."  At  first,  they  were  almost  ashamed  to  be 
found  fairly  iuside  the  gate  and  unable  to  get  back.  But  by  and  by,  as  they  get 
adjusted  to  the  new  condition,  and  find  themselves  still  in  good  company,  rather 
select  withal,  the  gate  does  not  seem  so  dreadful.  Approaching  it,  it  did  look  like 
iron ;  but  seen  from  the  inside,  with  faith  and  hope  shining  upon  it,  it  becomes 
beautiful — just  as  beautiful  as  the  gates  of  childhood  and  manhood.  The  gate  of 
childhood  faces  the  sunrise.  The  gate  of  manhood  lies  under  the  mid-day  sun. 
The  gate  of  old  age  "  looks  toward  sunset,"  indeed ;  but  it  is  a  sunset  that  carries 
with  it  the  promise  of  an  immortal  day.  They  are  all  beautiful  gates  of  life. 
Which  is  the  most  beautiful  we  will  not  venture  to  say  till  we  see  them  all  from  the 
higher  standpoint  vve  hope  to  reach  by  and  by.  But,  even  here  and  now,  old  age, 
with  all  its  infirmities,  has  its  blessings,  which  youth  and  manhood  cannot  know 
till  they  pass  through  the  gate — the  blessing  of  rest  after  toil,  the  blessing  of  sweet 
companionship  with  those  with  whom  we  have  passed  through  all  the  beautiful 
gates,  the  living  over  again  with  them  the  scenes  of  the  past,  to  which  "  distance 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.,  287 

lends  enchantment "  :  the  looking  forward  in  glorious  hope  to  higher  fellowship, 
where  youth  is  renewed  as  the  eagle's.  These  and  the  like  lift  the  shadow  from  old 
age,  and  let  God's  sunshine  in  to  brighten  and  warm.  But  this  implies  a  touch  of 
the  healing  band.  And  now,  especially,  as  in  life's  morning,  the  help  is  none  the 
less,  but  all  the  more  Divine,  if  it  comes  through  the  eye,  the  heart,  the  hand  of 
affection  and  faith  mingled,  assisting  us  tenderly  and  lovingly  to  rise  up  above  the 
gathering  mists  and  shadows,  and  pass  trustingly  through  one  more  beautiful 
gate  to  the  other  mansions.  4.  And  is  death,  too,  a  beautiful  gate  ?  One  would 
not  think  so  by  the  hard  names  given  to  it — "  Grim  Tyrant,"  "  Great  Destroyer," 
"  King  of  Terrors,"  and  the  like.  But  God  never  gave  His  white-winged  angel  such 
names.  These,  then,  are  some  of  the  beautiful  gates  of  life.  All  beautiful  gates  ! 
built  not  by  the  wealth  or  workmen  of  Herod,  but  by  the  AU-Beautiful,  who  created 
man  in  His  own  image,  for  the  beauty  of  holiness.  And  at  each  gate  God's  mes- 
sengers, in  some  form,  wait  to  give  us  the  healing  touch  and  put  us  on  our  feet. 
Oh  !  were  we  always  conscious  of  the  brooding  spirit  of  Divine  Love  standing  at 
every  gate,  looking  into  our  eyes,  seeking  to  find  our  souls  and  call  forth  responsive 
love,  should  we  not  all  leave  our  sins,  our  weakness,  our  doubts,  and  stand  on  our 
feet,  walking  and  leaping  and  praising  God  by  a  life  in* harmony  with  the  Divine 
will?  {W.  P.  Tilden.)  The  grace  of  beauty  : — Observe— I.  The  close  relation 
BETWEEN  RELIGION  AND  BEAUTY.  The  gate  Bcautiful  was  a  temple  gate.  The 
Puritans  depreciated  beauty.  In  their  excessive  spirituality  they  ignored  the  true 
and  proper  uses  of  the  visible,  and  disparaged  the  body.  Jesus  Christ  manifested 
in  human  flesh  the  Divine  glory,  and  by  the  resurrection  of  His  body  has  given  a 
type  and  pledge  of  the  exaltation  of  man  and  nature.  All  material  things  may  be 
transformed  by  the  spirit  of  man.  The  beautiful  in  form,  colour,  and  sound  has 
heen  created  by  love,  patriotism,  and  genius.  But  the  higher  inspiration  of  beauty 
is  in  religion,  which  touches  with  firmest  finger  the  faculties  out  of  which  the 
graceful  arises.  Art,  poetry,  architecture,  and  music  owe  their  finest  products  to 
Christianity.  As  religion  has  inspired  aesthetic  creations,  so  the  way  to  religion 
should  be  by  the  paths  of  beauty.  God's  worship  should  be  no  bald  offering  of 
utility,  but  should  be  associated  with  the  most  perfect  in  architecture,  music,  and 
oratory.  The  ways  by  which  the  young  are  drawn  to  Christ  should  be  festooned 
with  loveliness,  and  not  be  a  via  dolorosa.  All  the  qualities  of  the  Christian 
character  may  be  rendered  in  attractive  forms.  When  religion  and  beauty  are 
wedded,  science,  industry,  and  citizenship  wiU  also  be  drawn  into  the  goodly  fellow- 
ship. II.  But  the  highest  beauty,  and  the  largest  gateway  to  heaven,  is  spiritual 
BEAUTY — the  beauty  of  the  Lord  revealed  in  Christ.  The  cripple  was  not  healed  by 
the  beauty  of  the  temple  gate,  but  by  the  beauty  of  Christ— the  glory  of  His  love, 
sympathy,  and  helpfulness.  Visible  beauty  brings  us  to  the  threshold  only ;  we 
must  enter  to  behold  the  uncreated  beauty.  It  is  thi«!  which  transforms  the  man 
and  changes  him  from  glory  to  glory  in  its  image.  When  possessed  it  must  not  be 
hidden,  but  mupt,  in  imitation  of  the  altogether  lovely,  be  manifested  in  beautiful 
words,  acts,  life.  As  Christ  would  have  us  reproduce  His  beauty,  so  we  must  aim  at 
making  spiritually  lame  and  ugly  people  radiant  with  the  same  loveliness.  {J.Matthews.) 
The  beauty  of  religion  : — The  temple  represented  the  Jewish  religion,  and  the  gate 
by  which  you  entered  was  called  Beautiful.  The  way  of  the  beautiful  is  the  way  of 
entrance  into  the  sanctuary,  if  only  we  understand  what  is  meant  by  beauty.  1. 
With  one  or  two  exceptions  the  word  beauty  is  not  mentioned  in  the  whole  New 
Testament.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  mentioned  often  in  the  Old.  The  most  remarkable 
contrast  among  nations  in  antiquity  was  that  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek.  The 
Greeks  are  always  instanced  as  the  nation  that  had  the  genius  of  beauty  and  the 
love  of  it ;  but  among  the  Greeks  it  was  essentially  physical ;  and  although  moral 
qualities  were  sometimes  brought  down  and  represented  in  it,  it  was  in  order  merely 
to  enhance  the  physical  beauty.  On  exactly  the  other  side  stood  the  Hebrew,  who 
was  forbidden  to  have  much  that  was  physical  in  his  worship.  And  so  art  never 
took  root  nor  flourished  in  Palestine.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  arose  in 
the  minds  of  the  old  Hebrew  seers  and  lyrists  a  sense  of  the  beauty  of  conduct, 
character,  and  moral  quality  that  never  represented  itself  in  sensuous  form.  I  think 
that  if  we  were  to  look  into  the  modern  schools  of  beauty  we  should  find  that  they 
follow  the  Greek  and  not  the  Hebrew.  Now,  in  the  New  Testament,  though  it  doea 
not  mention  beauty  as  the  Old  Testament  does,  nevertheless  we  have  a  specification 
of  qualities  of  thought,  and  feeling,  and  exhortations  to  beautiful  conduct.  One  by 
one  Christ  takes  up  the  things  that  are  transcendentally  beautiful  in  their  kind, 
although  they  are  not  so  to  men.     When  a  diamond  is  first  found  it  is  like  a  rough 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuav.  iu. 

stone,  without  form  or  comeliness,  and  only  when  it  has  been  ground  does  it  become 
glittering  ;  and  so  almost  all  the  precious  stones  are  found — in  seams  and  ledges, 
and  under  circumstances  where  their  beauty  does  not  appear  until  they  ha\e  been 
dealt  with.  "  Blessed  be  ye,  when  persecuted."  Blessed  be  the  rapid-running  stone 
that  grinds  the  gems — not,  perhaps,  in  the  process,  but  in  the  result.  2.  In  all  the 
earth  no  spire,  cathedral  front,  nor  temple  is  so  beautiful  as  the  form  of  man  and 
woman  when  brought  out  in  all  the  lines  and  lineaments  of  Christian  culture.  And 
the  New  Testament  says,  "Let  your  light  so  shine."  Some  have  interpreted  it, 
"  Let  your  gloom  so  shine  that  men  think  you  are  very  serious-minded."  No, 
but  let  your  light  shine.  Let  the  things  that  shine  out  be,  as  the  apostle  other- 
where says  in  regard  to  them,  "  Whatsoever  is  pure,  whatsoever  is  true,  whatsoever 
is  of  good  report,  think  on  these  things."  These  are  the  qualities  that  are  to  shine 
with  such  attractiveness,  as  that  religion  shall  not  repel  men,  but  win  them,  draw 
them — "  that  men,  seeing  your  good  work,  shall  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in 
heaven."  3.  Every  single  quality  that  belongs  to  Christian  character  should  be 
carried  up  to  the  condition  of  beautifulness.  That  is  the  aim,  not  by  flash,  rare — 
used  only  as  a  medicine  is — but  beauty  that  rises  like  a  star,  and  continues  to  shine 
with  a  steadfast  ray.  The  light  that  has  in  it  all  the  primary  colours  carries  them 
always  without  any  discontinuity.  And  so  the  great  qualities  which  grace  inspires 
are  to  be  carried  up  toward  the  line  of  beauty  ;  they  are  intrinsically  so.  Now,  when 
a  plant  seed  unknown  is  sown  we  watch  the  unfolding  of  it,  wondering  at  every  step 
what  is  to  be  the  outcome.  The  stem  may  be  coarse,  the  leaf  may  be  hirsute,  and, 
hke  the  cactus,  one  may  never  dream  that  this  great  flat,  fat,  spiny  leaf  could  ever 
be  the  mother  of  beauty  until  the  blossom  comes,  and  then  in  all  the  earth  is  there 
anything  more  exquisite  and  goi'geous  than  the  blossom  of  the  cactus  ?  So  in  regard 
to  unripe  and  undeveloped  qualities  of  moral  feeling  in  the  soul.  Men  may,  during 
the  process  in  which  they  are  unfolding,  see  nothing  very  lovely ;  but  when  they 
have  been  carried  up  to  their  florescence,  or  their  fruit  estate,  they  are  invariably 
beautiful.  Moral  qualities,  like  physical  excellences,  have  a  beginning.  Some 
attain  more  quickly  and  easily  than  others  the  relish  of  the  beautiful ;  some 
are  the  result  only  of  long  striving ;  some  grow  like  autumnal  flowers,  only  when 
they  feel  the  coming  breath  of  frost  itself ;  but  every  quality  that  goes  to  make 
the  true  Christian  as  Christ  longs  to  see  him  is  an  element,  that,  if  carried  up  to  its 
full  extent,  touches  the  line  of  the  beautiful.  So  of  conduct.  Whatever  is  graceful, 
noble,  free,  large,  manly,  lordly  in  courage,  is  beautiful ;  and  because  it  is  beautiful 
it  belongs  to  the  religious  perfection  of  man.  And  all  conduct  that  has  in  it  the 
element  of  heroism — how  beautiful  it  is.  The  fidelity  that  costs !  The  self-denial 
that  finds  its  reward  in  the  fruition  of  that  which  is  served !  The  angels  of  the 
cradle  and  the  crib— those  Protestant  saints,  maiden  women,  that,  having  no  family, 
adopt  the  children  and  the  household  of  those  with  whom  they  dwell,  and  spend 
love,  and  time,  and  all  service,  and  j»ain  even,  and  watchfulness  for  the  sake  of 
others — how  beautiful  is  this  quality  of  conduct  1  If  I  read  over  the  qualities  that 
constitute  religion,  as  described  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  Galatians,  they  will  sound  to 
you  like  the  snap  of  so  many  harpstrings,  and  all  of  them  together  like  the  sweep  of 
an  old  harper's  hand.  The  joy  of  religion ! — not  the  joy  of  reading  hymns,  or  of 
going  to  meeting,  necessarily,  or  hearing  sermons ;  but  the  inward  joy  which  one 
has  from  communion  with  God  through  hope,  and  inspiration,  and  faith  ;  the  tem- 
perament of  joy — peace — the  absolute  concordance  of  every  quality  in  us,  without 
any  oppositions  from  any  direction  ;  the  perfect  harmonisation  of  every  element  in 
the  soul.  "  Long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  self-control  " — these  are  the 
features.  The  portraiture  every  one  must  make  up  in  his  own  imagination.  This 
is  religion.  Whoever,  then,  so  lives  as  not  to  produce  in  some  way  or  other  the 
impression  of  the  beauty  of  religion  falls  short  of  tlie  genius  of  the  New  Testament. 
(H.  W.  Bi'cclier.)  The  beautiful  :—l.  A  beautiful  thing.  "  The  gate  Beautiful." 
1.  It  was  fitting  that  the  approach  to  a  beautiful  place  like  the  temple  shocld  be 
beautiful.  Many  beautiful  things  are  marred  by  the  ungainliness  of  their  surround' 
ings.  A  cathedral  in  a  squalid  neighbourhood,  a  mansion  with  a  tumble-down  entry, 
a  picture  in  a  broken  frame,  an  untidy  woman,  are  offensive  incongruities.  Tho 
most  beautiful  thing  in  the  world  is  the  religion  of  Christ,  but  how  many  are  offended 
by  what  they  see  at  the  front  of  it — conditions  of  entrance  which  Christ  never  laid 
down,  specimens  of  Christianity  that  Christ  never  produced.  Eeproduce  the  beauty 
of  religion  in  yourselves,  and  make  the  path  to  it  attractive,  and  there  will  be  no 
difficulty  in  making  converts.  2.  The  gate  led  to  a  beautiful  place.  This  is  not 
always  the  case.     The  best  things  only  are  placed  in  some  windows.    The  world 


CHAP  III.]  THE  ACTS.  289 

presents  an  attractive  outside,  but  within  is  death.  Once  through  the  gate  of  God's 
house  the  worshipper  should  find  everything  in  harmony  with  the  beautiful  work  he 
has  to  perform  there  ;  the  structure,  the  service  in  all  its  parts  should  be  conducive 
to  the  beauty  of  holiness.  An  ugly,  ill-kept  church,  a  tame,  bald  service — how 
detrimental  to  devotion,  how  dishonouring  to  God.  II.  Beautiful  characters.  1. 
Peter.  There  were  ugly  seams  in  Peter's  character.  He  was  impulsive,  he  denied 
his  Lord,  he  compromised  at  Antioch.  But  we  must  take  that  character  as  a  whole, 
and  like  some  vast  mountainous  region,  although  there  may  be  a  morass  here,  and 
stunted  vegetation  there,  and  yawning  chasms  yonder,  yet  how  grand  the  whole  !  In 
his  deep  penitence,  his  burning  enthusiasm,  his  teaching  by  word  and  pen,  there 
have  been  few  more  admirable  men  than  Peter,  2.  John.  If  Peter  represents  the 
rugged,  John  exhibits  the  more  symmetrical  type  of  Christian  character.  He  must 
have  had  exquisite  qualities  whom  Jesus  so  loved,  and  who  was  specially  selected 
for  so  beautiful  a  task  as  the  care  of  Jesus'  mother.  And  all  these  qualities,  tender- 
ness, love,  loyalty,  come  out  in  his  letters.  3.  Peter  and  John,  a  combination  which 
nearly  makes  perfection  of  beauty,  power  and  gentleness,  zeal  and  affection.  And 
at  the  last  a  good  deal  of  Peter  came  out  in  John,  and  a  good  deal  of  John  in  Peter. 
III.  A  beautiful  act.  1.  It  was  beautifully  done.  "  Fastening  his  eyes  upon  him." 
"  He  took  him  by  the  right  hand."  How  much  may  be  accomplished  by  a  look.  The 
mere  gaze  of  Peter  and  John  inspired  Life  into  a  hope  that  had  been  dead  for  long 
years.  There  is  as  much  in  the  way  a  thing  is  done  as  in  the  thing  itself.  You 
may  bestow  abns  so  as  to  deprive  them  of  half  their  value — grudgingly,  morosely, 
even  vindictively.  You  may  help  a  man  so  as  to  make  every  nerve  quiver,  and  so 
as  to  provoke  a  reluctance  to  be  helped  at  aU.  You  may  wipe  a  tear  and  leave  a 
wound  in  the  process.  The  action  should  be  suited  to  the  act.  And  if  you  can  do 
nothing  you  can  always  look  something,  which  sometimes  will  answer  as 
well,  and  if  you  can  give  nothing  else  you  can  give  your  hand,  which  often  will  be 
more  acceptable.  2.  The  deed  was  beautiful.  It  was  physician's  work,  and  what 
more  beautiful — restoration  to  health — for  which  in  its  literal  sense  we  may  not  be 
qualified  ;  but  there  are  sick  bodies  to  which  we  may  minister  by  kindly  attention — 
"  Sick  and  ye  visited  Me  "  ;  sick  hearts  to  which  we  may  administer  comfort ;  sick 
minds  that  we  may  relieve  by  wise  advice ;  sick  souls  that  we  may  lead  to  the  Great 
Physician.  IV.  A  beautiful  method.  1.  A  frank  recognition  of  the  impossible. 
"  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none."  There  are  few  things  more  unpleasant  than  to 
attempt  what  is  beyond  our  power.  We  excite  expectations  that  are  doomed  to  dis- 
appointment, and  bring  ourselves  into  contempt.  Before  you  piomise  to  do  a  thing 
be  sure  you  have  the  means.  Don't  let  people  think  that  you  are  a  philosopher 
if  you  have  no  wisdom,  a  philanthropist  if  you  have  no  money,  a  doctor  if 
you  have  no  medical  skill,  a  preacher  if  you  cannot  preach.  Moral  deformities 
are  what  a  man  pretends  to  have  but  has  not.  2.  Self-abnegation  in  favour  of  the 
able.  "  In  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  To  put  oneself  between  the  helpless 
and  the  helper,  what  more  ugly.  Who  more  despicable  than  the  quack  who  inter- 
poses between  the  diseased  and  the  doctor  ?  Only  he  who  stands  between  the  sinner 
and  the  Saviour.  If  you  cannot  help  a  man,  do  not  interfere  with  those  who  can. 
This  is  the  least  you  can  do  ;  but  the  beautiful  action  is  to  get  the  two  together  and 
then  stand  aside.  This  is  what  Peter  and  John  did :  and  this  is  what  all  men  do  in 
dealing  with  diseased  souls,  get  them  to  Christ  and  then  get  out  of  the  way,  V.  A 
beautiful  experience.  "  Immediately  his  feet  and  ancle  bones  received  strength." 
1.  Strength  was  given  to  the  weak.  Strength  added  to  strength  is  abnormal,  and 
therefore  not  beautiful.  There  is  no  grace  in  the  opulent  receiving  money,  or  in 
the  competent  receiving  help,  but  frequently  the  reverse.  But  if  a  starving  man  is 
fed,  and  a  helpless  man  assisted  to  do  a  task  otherwise  impossible,  a  beautiful  effect 
is  produced.  "  The  whole  need  not  a  physician,"  and  to  give  medicine  to  the 
healthy  only  results  in  a  disagreeable  experience.  Go.  then,  to  the  sinful,  and  lead 
them  through  the  stages  of  repentance  and  faith  until  the  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins  become  alive  unto  God  through  Christ,  and  the  most  beautiful  of  experiences  is 
tbe  result.  2.  The  weak  was  made  strong.  What  experience  is  comparable  to  the 
consciousness  of  strength — strength  of  body,  of  intellect,  above  all  of  soul — to  resist 
temptation,  to  live  to  and  work  for  God.  VI.  A  beautiful  result.  1.  On  the  part  of 
the  man.  "Walking  and  leaping  and  praising  God."  (1)  Progression.  (2)  Eleva- 
tion. (3)  Worship — the  three  great  characteristics  of  a  personal  Christian  hfe.  2. 
On  the  part  of  the  multitude.  (1)  "  They  saw  and  knew."  (2)  "  They  were  filled 
with  wonder  and  amazement."  (3)  Who  can  doubt  that  many  were  convinced  and 
converted  ?  3.  On  the  part  of  Peter.  It  led  to  two  of  the  most  beautiful  sermons 
VOL.   I.  19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

in  all  Christian  literature.  (J".  W.  Burn.)  Beauty,  designations  of: — Socrates 
called  beauty  a  short-lived  tyranny ;  Plato,  a  privilege  of  nature  ;  Theo- 
phrastus,  a  silent  cheat ;  Theocritus,  a  delightful  prejudice;  Carneades,  a  solitary 
kingdom;  Homer,  a  glorious  gift  of  nature;  Ovid,  a  favour  bestowed  by  the 
gods.  God's   love   of  the   beautiful : — It    is    among  tbe  mosses   of    the   wall 

that  the  richest  harvest  of  beauty  and  interest  may  be  gathered.  Well  do  I 
remember  the  bright  July  afternoon  when  their  wonderful  structure  and  pecu- 
liarities were  first  unveiled  to  me  by  one  long  since  dead,  whose  cultured  eye  saw 
strange  loveliness  in  things  which  others  idly  passed,  and  whose  simple  warm  heart 
■was  ever  alive  to  the  mute  appeals  of  the  humblest  wild  flower  or  tiniest  moss. 
There  was  opened  up  to  me  that  day  a  new  world  of  hitherto  undreamt-of  beauty 
and  intellectual  delight ;  in  the  structural  details  of  tbe  moss  which  illustrated  the 
lesson  I  got  a  glimpse  of  some  deeper  aspect  of  the  Divine  character  than  mere  in- 
telligence. Methought  I  saw  Him,  not  as  the  mere  contriver  or  designer,  but  in  His 
own  loving  nature,  having  His  tender  mercies  over  all  His  works — displaying  care 
for  helplessness  and  minuteness — care  for  beauty  in  the  works  of  nature.  SmaU  as 
the  object  before  me  was,  I  was  impressed — in  the  wonder  of  its  structure,  at  once  a 
means  and  an  end,  beautiful  in  itseK  and  performing  its  beautiful  uses  in  nature — 
not  with  the  limited  ingenuity  of  the  finite,  but  with  the  wisdom  and  love  of  an 
Infinite  Spirit.  To  that  one  unforgotten  lesson,  improved  by  much  study  of  these 
little  objects  alike  in  the  closet  and  in  the  field,  I  owe  many  moments  of  pure  happi- 
ness. {H.  Macmilhin,  LL.D.)  Beauty,  true  and  false: — Hearing  a  young  lady 
highly  praised  for  her  beauty,  Gotthold  asked,  "  What  kind  of  beauty  do  you  mean  ? 
Merely  that  of  the  body,  or  that  also  of  the  mind  ?  I  see  well  that  you  have  been 
looking  no  further  than  the  sign  which  Nature  displays  outside  the  house,  but 
have  never  asked  for  the  host  who  dwells  within.  Beauty  is  an  excellent  gift  of  God, 
nor  has  the  pen  of  the  Holy  Spirit  forgotten  to  speak  its  praise  ;  but  it  is  virtuous 
and  godly  beauty  alone  which  Scripture  honours,  expressly  declaring,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  a  fair  woman  which  is  without  discretion  is  as  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine's 
snout  (Prov.  xi.  22).  Many  a  pretty  girl  is  like  the  flower  called  the  imperial  crown, 
•which  is  admired,  no  doubt,  for  its  showy  appearance,  but  despised  for  its  unpleasant 
odour.  Were  her  mind  as  free  from  pride,  selfishness,  luxury,  and  levity,  as  her 
countenance  from  spots  and  wrinkles,  and  could  she  govern  her  inward  inclinations 
as  she  does  her  external  carriage,  she  would  have  none  to  match  her.  But  who 
loves  the  caterpillar  and  such  insects,  however  showy  their  appearance,  and  bright 
and  variegated  the  colours  that  adorn  them,  seeing  they  injure  and  detile  the  trees 
and  plants  on  which  they  settle  ?  What  the  better  is  an  apple  for  its  rosy  skin,  if 
the  maggot  have  penetrated  and  devoured  its  heart  ?  What  care  I  for  the  beautiful 
brown  of  the  nut,  if  it  be  worm-eaten,  and  fill  the  mouth  with  corruption  ?  Even  so 
external  beauty  of  person  deserves  no  praise,  unless  matched  with  the  inward  beauty 
of  virtue  and  holiness.  It  is,  therefore,  far  better  to  acquire  beauty  than  to  be  born 
■with  it.  The  best  kind  is  that  which  does  not  wither  at  the  touch  of  fever,  like  a 
flower,  but  lasts  and  endures  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  in  old  age,  and  even  unto  death." 
Beauty  and  virtue  : — A  gentleman  had  two  children — one  a  daughter,  who  was  con- 
sidered plain  in  her  person  ;  the  other  a  son,  who  was  reckoned  handsome.  One 
day,  as  they  were  playing  together,  they  saw  their  faces  in  a  looking-glass.  The 
boy  was  charmed  with  his  beauty,  and  spoke  of  it  to  his  sister,  who  considered  his 
remarks  as  so  many  reflections  on  her  want  of  it.  She  told  her  father  of  the  affair, 
complaining  of  her  brother's  rudeness  to  her.  The  father,  instead  of  appearing  angry, 
took  them  both  on  his  knees,  and  with  much  affection  gave  them  the  following 
advice : — "  I  would  have  you  both  look  in  the  glass  every  day :  you,  my  son,  that 
you  may  be  reminded  never  to  dishonour  the  beauty  of  your  face  by  the  deformity 
of  your  actions ;  and  you,  my  daughter,  that  you  may  take  care  to  hide  the  defect  of 
beauty  in  your  person  by  the  superior  lustre  of  yonr  virtuous  and  amiable  conduct." 
Beauty  and  virtue: — Beauty  unaccompanied  by  virtue  is  a  flower  without  perfume. 
Beauty  of  a  living  Christian  : — A  true  man  after  Christ  will  be  the  most  nubie  and 
beautiful  thing  upon  the  earth — the  freest,  the  most  joyous,  the  most  fruitful  in  all 
goodness.  There  is  no  picture  that  was  ever  painted,  there  is  no  statue  that  was 
ever  carved,  there  ■was  no  work  of  art  ever  conceived  of,  that  was  half  so  beautiful 
as  the  living  man,  thoroughly  developed  on  the  pattern  of  Christ  Jesus.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Beauty  of  conscience : — There  is  great  beauty  in  conscience.  When  it 
tempers  the  speech,  and  makes  it  true  and  just;  when  it  tempers  the  actions,  and 
makes  them  noble  and  right ;  when  it  produces  fairness,  and  honour,  and  just  judg- 
ments— hovr  beautiful  are  all  the  direct  and  indirect  influences  of  a  Christian  con- 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  291 

science  in  a  man  !  But  it  sometimes  leads  Christian  men  to  a  sphere  of  uncharitable 
judgment.  It  inspires  a  high  conception  of  -what  is  right,  and  men  take  that  con- 
ception as  a  rule  by  which  to  measure  the  conduct  of  their  fellow-men,  without 
consideration  of  their  organisations,  without  making  allowance  for  their  weaknesses, 
•without  sympathy  with  them.  There  are  many  men  that,  adhering  strictly  to  God's 
ideal  of  rectitude,  fail  to  have  sympathy  with  poor,  crippled,  and  broken-down 
human  nature  ;  and  they  go  aside  and  away  from  God  just  in  proportion  as  they  do 
this.  It  was  this  cruelty  that  brought  down  from  our  Saviour  His  most  vehement 
denunciations ;  for  vice  and  crime  were  not  regarded  by  Christ  as  being  as  guilty  as 
moral  purity  without  any  heart,  without  any  sympathy,  without  any  charitable 
judgment.  (Ibid.)  Beauty  an  educator  : — If  1  am  to  use  things  that  are  beautiful, 
I  must  remember  that  beauty  is  a  moral  instructor ;  I  must  educate  myself  with  it, 
that  I  may  become  a  man  of  more  power,  and  that  I  may  take  that  power  and  employ 
it  in  my  Master's  cause.  If  I  use  beauty  as  a  means  of  education,  I  shall  be 
redeemed  from  the  charge  of  selfishness  in  it.  And  if  men  ask  me,  "  How  can  you 
lay  out  so  much  for  works  of  art  when  there  is  such  a  demand  for  money  to  support 
missionaries  and  mission-schools?  "  I  reply,  that  I  am  preparing  myself  by  these 
things  to  preach  the  gos^pel.  They  help  me.  The  things  that  fill  my  house  with 
beauty  are  not  objects  for  the  gratification  of  my  selfishness,  but  instrumentalities 
by  which  I  am  qualified  to  do  the  work  of  God  in  this  world.     {Ibid.)  Beauty  : 

its  utility  : — People  seem  to  think  that  God  must  be  a  great  utilitarian,  and  that 
He  always  makes  things  for  uses.  Now,  there  is  many  a  man  that,  drawing  a  sword 
whose  blade  is  wreathed  with  all  manner  of  traceries,  which  must  have  required 
days  and  days  of  exquisite  work,  will  say,  "  How  foolish  it  is  for  a  man  to  spend  so 
much  precious  time  to  so  little  practical  purpose  !  Those  things  do  not  make  the 
sword  any  sharper.  Who  cares  in  the  day  of  battle  whether  there  is  a  picture  on 
the  blade  of  his  sword  or  not  ?  "  But  when  God  made  rocks,  He  did  not  let  them 
alone  till  He  had  etched  them  all  over  with  lines  and  figures  of  every  description. 
He  smiled  upon  the  earth,  and  all  sorts  of  grasses  and  flowers  and  vines  began  to 
grow  upon  the  surface.  And  wherever  you  see  that  God  has  walked  in  the  world, 
you  see  that  He  has  had  an  eye  to  beauty.  The  unconscious  effects  of  Divine 
benevolence  are  everywhere  springing  out  of  the  ground,  and  from  every  tree,  from 
eveiy  dead  s-tick,  and  from  every  stone.  There  is  something  on  the  globe  besides 
what  men  can  eat,  drink,  and  wear.  "  What  is  this  flower  good  for  ?  "  saj  s  a  man ; 
"  I  cannot  eat  it."  What  are  you  good  for,  that  nothing  is  good  to  you  except  what 
you  can  eat  ?  Have  you  no  appetite  except  in  your  mouth  ?  I  have  an  appetite  in 
my  ear,  and  the  things  that  give  that  appetite  food — sweet  sounds — are  something 
to  me.  I  have  an  appetite  in  my  eye,  and  the  things  that  give  that  appetite  food- 
form,  symmetry,  and  beauty — are  something  to  me.  These  things  are  a  great  deal 
more  food  to  me  than  bread.  I  pity  a  man  whose  appetites  are  confined  to  physical 
things,  and  I  like  a  man  whose  appetites  rise  up  to  nobler  things.  On  every  side  of 
us  are  witnesses  that  God  did  not  make  the  world  for  iron,  and  gold,  and  stones, 
and  meat,  and  drink,  and  clothes,  alone  ;  but  for  tbe  mind  and  soul  as  well.  {Ibid.) 
Beauty,  danger  of: — Gaze  not  on  beauty  too  much,  lest  it  blast  thee  ;  nor  too  long, 
lest  it  blind  thee  ;  nor  too  near,  lest  it  burn  thee.  If  thou  like  it,  it  deceives  thee  ; 
if  thou  love  it,  it  disturbs  thee  ;  if  thou  hunt  after  it,  it  destroys  thee.  If  virtue 
accompany  it,  it  is  the  heart's  paradise ;  if  vice  associate  it,  it  is  the  soul's  purga- 
tory.   It  is  the  wise  man's  bonfire,  and  the  fool's  furnace.     {F.  Quarles.) 

Ver.  4.  And  Peter,  fastening  Ms  eyes  upon  him  -viritli  John,  said.  Look  on  us. — 

The  reciprocal  gaze : — The  gaze  was  one  which  read  character  in  the  expression  of 
the  man's  face,  and  discerned  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed  (ver.  16).  And  he,  in 
his  turn,  was  to  look  on  them  that  he  might  read  in  their  pitying  looks,  not  only 
the  wish  to  heal,  but  the  consciousness  of  power  to  carry  the  wish  into  effect.  {Dean 
Plumptre.)  The  proper  effects  of  the  sight  of  misery : — When  thou  seest  misery  in 
thy  brother's  face,  let  him  see  mercy  in  thine  eye ;  the  more  the  oil  of  mercy  is 
poured  on  him  by  thy  pity,  the  more  the  oil  in  thy  cruse  shall  be  increased  by  thy 
piety.  {F.  Quarles.)  Magnetic  influence  over  our  fellow-creatures  : — You  may 
take  a  lily  and  draw  it  through  the  sand,  and  it  comes  out  clean.  Nothing  holds 
to  it.  You  may  take  a  magnet  and  draw  it  through,  and  out  come  the  iron  filings 
■with  it.  The  magnet  knows  and  catches  that  which  is  germane  to  it — that  which 
is  susceptible  to  its  attraction.  There  are  some  natures  that  are  like  magnets,  and 
that  touch  lust  in  you.  You  do  not  know  what  it  is  that  affects  you.  You  feel 
unwashed  after  they  are  gone.     There  has  been  nothing  said,  and  there  has  been 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

nothing  exactly  done.  It  is  that  subtle  magnetic  power  which  feeling  has  on  feel- 
ing. If  on  one  instrument  in  the  room  you  sound  a  given  chord,  every  other 
instrument  in  that  room  has  a  tendency  to  sound  its  octave.  If  you  go  among  men 
of  strong  natures  there  is  a  certain  vibration  in  them  of  a  feeling  which  is  strong  in 
you.  When  you  have  been  with  some  persons  you  feel  finer,  you  feel  lifted  up. 
And  yet  they  have  not  exhorted  you.  There  has  been  no  magisterial  instruction 
whatever  given  to  you.  You  have  drunk  the  wine  of  being,  and  by  it  you  are  lifted 
up  and  strengthened.     {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  6.  Then  Peter  said,  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none ;  but  such  as  I  have 
give  I  thee. —  Wealth  in  poverty  : — What  a  remarkable  combination  of  poverty 
which  can  give  nothing,  with  power  which  can  do  almost  anything  !  "  Silver  and 
gold  have  I  none  " — then  we  are  ready  at  once  to  class  him  with  the  men  from  whom 
no  help  is  to  be  expected,  with  those  who  hang  upon  others.  The  speech,  however, 
does  not  end  there.  "Rise  up  and  walk,"  says  the  penniless  man.  Why,  Pilate 
who  was  the  great  man  at  Jerusalem,  or  Caesar  who  was  yet  greater  at  Eome,  would 
never  have  dared  to  utter  anything  so  bold,  Peter,  however,  ventured  in  Christ's 
name,  and  the  result  was  perfect  soundness  given  immediately  by  the  great  Author 
of  life,  who  has  made  our  frames  so  curiously  and  can  repair  them  so  easily.  St. 
Peter  walked  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  on  tbat  memorable  morning  an 
unobserved  and  undistinguished  man.  Many  passed  him  by,  probably,  who  had- 
upon  them  the  trappings  of  worldly  wealth,  or  were  swelling  with  the  pride  of  oifice, 
and  if  they  looked  the  obscure  Galilean  in  the  face,  would  have  taken  him  for  one 
of  the  many  thousand  drudges  who  filled  the  streets  of  Jerusalem.  Yet  was  there 
a  hidden  power  within  which  made  him  really  greater  than  the  world's  rulers. 
And  the  contrast  was  equally  striking  between  the  utterly  defenceless  condition  of 
Peter  and  John  and  the  boldness  with  which  they  bore  their  simple  emphatic 
testimony  as  witnesses  for  Christ.  Precisely  of  the  same  character  was  the 
apostle's  defence  of  the  next  day  before  the  council.  The  history  of  mankind 
shows  nothing  grander  than  these  two  appearances  of  the  first  preacher  of  the 
gospel  before  two  such  audiences.  But  I  wish  you  to  notice  that  in  the  text  we 
have  not  only  a  plain  historical  account  of  something  said  and  done  by  one  eminent 
saint,  but — I.  A  symbolical  account  of  the  Church's  work  in  many  ages.  It  was 
specially  true  of  the  apostles,  considering  the  place  they  filled,  the  work  they 
wrought,  the  testimony  they  bore,  the  blessings  they  dispensed,  that  being  "  poor," 
they  "  made  many  rich  "  ;  but  numbers,  like-minded  with  them,  have  trod  in  their 
steps,  and  have  earned  their  praise.  The  Church  which  they  founded  has  often 
been  poor  as  they  were.  Yet  at  those  very  times,  more  than  in  her  more  prosperous 
days,  she  has  said  to  many  a  crippled  soul,  "  Else  up  and  serve  thy  God."  Just 
when  she  had  nothing  to  bribe  men  with,  when  her  life  would  have  been  destroyed 
if  it  had  not  been  "  hidden  with  Christ  in  God,"  then  she  has  been  strengthened 
with  might  by  Him  whose  servant  and  witness  she  is,  and  her  tones  bave  been 
louder  than  before,  her  port  loftier,  her  message  clearer,  her  triumphs  more 
blessed.  She  has  gone  abroad  from  city  to  city,  or  from  village  to  village,  proclaim- 
ing aloud,  "  '  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none.'  Let  the  men  who  covet  either  go  else- 
where and  seek  them ;  they  are  often  baits  to  snare  men's  souls.  But  I  carry  with 
me  better  treasures.  I  teach  the  man  of  halting  pace  and  crippled  limb  to  run  in 
the  ways  of  righteousness."  Thus  often  has  the  Church  prophesied  in  sackcloth, 
and  while  many  have  called  her  traitress  because  she  would  not  bow  down  to 
images  of  gold,  and  some  have  branded  her  with  heresy,  because  her  message 
squared  not  with  the  creeds  that  were  most  in  favour  at  court,  others  have  come 
thronging  from  their  homes  to  give  her  their  greeting  and  blessing.  Look,  e.g.,  at 
the  sixteenth  century,  and  the  man  who  did  more  than  any  other  to  distinguish  it 
from  the  ages  of  black  darkness  which  went  before  it.  Who  was  it  that  said  to 
prostrate  Europe,  "  Rise  up  and  walk  "  ?  It  was  the  son  of  a  Saxon  miner,  singing 
Christmas  carols  at  fourteen,  that  he  might  earn  a  few  pence  to  supply  the  cravings 
of  hunger,  the  companion  of  the  poor  till  the  fame  of  his  deeds  brought  him  to  the 
company  of  princes.  There  were  mighty  princes  in  that  day,  one  of  them  govern- 
ing a  larger  portion  of  Europe,  and  swaying  its  destinies  more  absolutely  than  any 
single  potentate  of  our  own  time.  On  one  occasion  the  monk  and  the  emperor  met 
face  to  face,  and  who  that  reads  the  scene  must  not  see  that  the  man  of  power 
gi'ew  little  by  the  side  of  the  fearless,  upright  champion  of  truth  ?  It  was  Peter 
and  the  Jewish  council  over  again.  II.  IBut  we  will  come  to  humbler  scenes 
AND  MORE  EVERY-DAY  CHARACTERS.     1.  Look  at  OHc  of  God's  saints.     He  has  lived 


CHAP,  in.]  THE  ACTS.  293 

a  life  of  faith,  and  in  his  humble  way  has  honoured  God,  served  the  Church,  blessed 
his  generation.     And  now  the  day  is  come  that  he  must  depart  hence.     No  inven- 
tory need  be  taken  of  his  goods  ;  no  will  is  wanted.     Such  an  one  might  say  to  his 
weeping  children,  "  Silv6r  and  gold  have  I  none  ;  but  such  as  I  have  give  I  thee." 
And  who  shall  despise  the  legacy  ?     It  is  better  than  the  miser's  gold.     They  are 
not  poor,  but  rich,  who  inherit  his  blessing  and  his  prayers ;  but  how  often  does  the 
portion  of  the  covetous  turn  to  poverty !     It  looks  like  a  spreading  tree  rich  in 
foliage  and  fruit ;  but  a  worm  is  at  the  root,  and  lo  !  one  branch  withers,  and  then 
another,  till  at  last  nothing  but  a  bare  trunk  is  left.     2.  Take  instances  from  among 
the  living.     Look  at  the  lone  woman,  whose  week's  pittance  just  buys  her  week's 
bread,  giving  kind  looks,  pleasant  words,  spare  lialf-hours,  to  some  ailing  or  afflicted 
friend.     Look  at  the  little  child,  who  never  had  a  sixpence  perhaps  of  its  own, 
dutiful  at  home,  gentle  and  patient  abroad,  running  on  errands  for  the  sick,  bright- 
ening with  its  innocent  look  and  cheerful  prattle  some  desolate  fireside  where  infant 
voices  were  once  heard,  but  are  now  heard  no  more.     Look  at  some  aged  man  of 
God,  who  finds  it  hard  to  make  his  weakened  limbs  hold  out  from  Sunday  to  Sun- 
day, ministering  to  the  sick,  offering  a  word  in  season  to  the  reckless,  pointing  the 
dying  sinner  to  the  Lamb  of  God,  comforting  many  a  tried  and  tempted  brother 
with  cordials  from  the  storehouse  of  God's  promises.     Do  not  all  these  say  in  turn, 
*'  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none ;  but  such  as  I  have  give  I  thee  "  ?     Is  it  not  a  blessed 
work,  that  of  ministering  out  of  our  little  to  those  who  have  less  ?     Is  not  your 
scanty  fare  the  sweeter  when  you  come  home  from  making  some  dark  chambers 
more  bright,  and  some  heavy  hearts  more  hopeful  ?     Very  precious  are  alms  like 
these,  worth  a  hundred  times  more  than  the  money  gifts  of  the  wealthy,  ranking 
higher  in  God's  account,  bestowed  at  greater  cost,  more  blessed  proofs  of  the  power 
of  faith.     Oh !  if  the  poor,  one  and  all,  were  a  brotherhood  of  living,  loving  Chris- 
tians, they  might  almost  do  without  help  from  others,  help  from  each  other  to  each 
other  would  be  dispensed  so  wisely  and  so  seasonably,  and  large-hearted  generosity 
would  find  such  a  response  in  warm-hearted  gratitude.    3.  God  forbid,  however,  that 
because  they  might  befriend  their  equals  more,  we  should  befriend  any  of  them  less  ! 
God  forbid  that  the  miserably  stinted  measure  of  all  our  charities  should  descend 
to  a  j'et  lower  standard !     (1)  Many  have  leisure.     How  many  hours  in  a  month 
are  given  by  many  to  any  public  object  ?     What  is  the  world  the  better  for  their 
not  being  compelled  to  toil  at  some  allotted  task?     (2)  We  might  pursue  the  subject 
and  speak  of  knowledge,  worldly  influence,  talents  of  any  special  kind.     Whose  are 
they  ?     Who  gave  them  ?     Whose  are  you  ?     Who  redeemed  you  and  told  you  that 
you  were  not  your  own  ?     (3)  And  if  we  speak  of  what  man  may  do  for  his  brother- 
man,  our  prayers,  surely,  must  not  be  forgotten.     Who  can  say  to  a  neighbour, 
"  What  I  have  give  I  thee,"  if  he  be  not  one  who  remembers  them  all  in  turn,  when 
he  pleads  for  his  own  mercies  before  the  throne  of  grace?     (J.  Hampden  Gurney, 
M.A.)         What  can  be  done  ivithout  silver  and  gold  : — I.  Silvrb  and  gold  can  do 
MANY  THINGS.     To  speak  of  them  as  of  no  value  would  be  folly.     Money — 1.  Can 
save  our  minds  from  anxiety,  supply  our  wants,  educate  our  children,  fill  our  life 
with  comfort.     To  speak  of  such  blessings  as  trivial  were  both  foolish  and  unthank- 
ful.    2.  As  an  instrument  of  commerce  is  an  essential  element  in  the  activity  and 
interest  of  life.     Without  it  our  markets  would  sink  back  into  the  system  of  barter, 
and  we  should  be  in  a  ruder  condition  than  those  who  lived  centuries  ago.     3.  Can 
be  used  to  relieve  distress,  to  cheer  the  desolate,  to  help  the  struggling.     4.  Can  be 
employed  in  the  direct  furtherance  of  religious  ends.     5.  Gives  influence  which 
can  be  used  in  the  promotion  of  its  highest  purposes,  and  when  consecrated  by  the 
Christian  life  of  its  possessor  becomes  one  of  the  noblest  offerings  for  the  honour 
of  God  and  the  blessing  of  the  world.     II.  There  are  some  things  which  silver 
AND  GOLD  CANNOT  DO.     1.  You  may  buy  a  man's  work,  but  you  cannot  buy  his 
affection.     By  paying  him  his  wages  you  do  not  on  that  account  secure  his  respect ; 
while  by  indiscriminate  almsgiving  it  is  not  certain  that  you  will  earn  or  deserve 
any  real  gi'atitude.     2.  The  possession  of  wealth  does  not  improve,  but  sometimes 
spoils  a  man's  character.     It  seldom  makes  him  more  generous.     But  those  who  are 
very  poor  may  be  rich  in  better  things — in  the  respect  and  gratitude  of  others,  the 
sweet  temper,  the  generous  heart.     How  rich  the  poor  are  sometimes,  in  the  kind- 
ness of  disposition  which  gives  happiness  to  themselves  and  those  around  them  I 
3.  Money  cannot  purchase  health,  whether  for  ourselves  or  those  whom  we  love. 
David's  treasury  was  well  filled  when  Nathan  told  him  his  child  must  die.     Heze- 
kiah  had  proud  thoughts  of  wealth  when  Isaiah  commanded  him  to  "  set  his  bouse 
in  order."     4.  Money  cannot  purchase  grace.      Simon  Magus  thought  it  could; 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  uu 

but  Peter  said,  "Thy  money  perisli  with  thee."  (Dean  Hoivson.)  Poverty  and 
power : — I.  God  is  no  eespecteb  of  persons,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  poor  men 
STAND  foremost  IN  THE  GREAT  HUMAN  LINE.  Weigh  what  Dives  has  done  for  the 
world,  and  what  the  penniless.  Because  Peter  and  John,  though  they  had  not  a 
penny  in  their  purses,  had  something  to  give  to  that  poor  man,  and  to  all  poor  men,, 
and  gave  it,  we  are  here  to-day,  and  the  great  world  lives.  He  was  the  poorest  of 
the  poor  who  brought  that  gift  to  us.  "Foxes  have  holes,  "  &c. ;  and  by  hands  as 
poor  the  gift  has  been  distributed.  Perhaps  the  most  heavenly  men  and  women 
living  are  among  the  poorest.  The  men  who  have  drawn  forth  the  great  inven- 
tions, poems,  thoughts  which  have  blessed  mankind  have  seldom  enriched  them- 
selves by  their  toils.  They  have  loved  their  work  too  well  for  that.  The  world  is 
not  bountiful  to  genius  and  to  love.  And  thank  God  it  is  not :  genius  lives  on  a 
nobler  nourishment,  and  love  has  a  nobler  hire.  Socrates,  Paul,  Epictetus,  Dante, 
Luther,  Milton  found  it  so.  And  yet  that  we  may  not  idolise  poverty  the  world'a 
most  glorious  psalms  came  forth  from  one  of  the  most  splendid  and  prosperous 
monarchies  of  the  world.  But  David  knew  want  before  he  came  to  wealth,  and 
perhaps  his  best  work  was  done  in  his  most  struggling  days.  Still  there  are  eminent 
instances  of  the  noblest  service  to  humanity  from  those  in  the  loftiest  station  tO' 
rebuke  the  supposition  that  any  class  has  a  monopoly  of  the  highest  ministries. 
Sokya-Mouni  was  a  prince,  and  few  out  of  Christianity  have  done  such  work  for 
man  as  his  ;  and  our  own  great  Alfred  did,  perhaps,  the  noblest  life-work  that  was 
ever  done  by  one  man  for  his  generation  from  the  height  of  a  throne.  The  poor 
may  be  bigots  as  well  as  the  rich.  St.  Giles  is  as  contemptuous  as  St.  James,  and 
God  rebukes  them  both.      II.    What    are  silver   and  gold  compared  with  the 

RICH    endowment    OF   FACULTY   WITH    WHICH    GoD     HAS     BLESSED    OUR     RACE  ?      Which 

of  you  now,  moaning  over  your  poverty,  would  exchange  for  the  wealth  of  Dives, 
your  sight,  hearing,  or  soundness  of  limb  ?  It  would  do  us  good,  when  we  make  our 
plaint  against  providence,  if  God  compelled  us  to  make  the  exchange  awhile,  and 
try  how  we  liked  a  splendid  paralysis,  a  gilded  bUndness  or  deafness,  a  park  big 
enough  for  a  province  and  a  shrivelled  limb.  What  cries  would  rise  to  heaven  for 
poverty  again  !  Take  this  healed  man,  as  he  clings  to  Peter  and  John,  half  afraid 
of  a  relapse,  and  suggest  that  he  go  back  to  his  cripple's  lair  with  a  mountain  of  gold 
for  his  store.  Faculty  is  the  true  wealth  of  man.  There  is  many  a  poor  workman 
trudging  to  his  work  at  sunrise  who  has  a  joy  in  beholding  the  pomp  and  glow  of 
the  eastern  heavens,  hearing  the  lark's  glad  carol,  and  bathing  his  brow  in  the  clear 
air  such  as  Dives  would  give  any  price  to  enjoy.     III.  If  it  is  a  God-like  gift  to 

BESTOW    HEALTH    ON    A    CRIPPLED     BODY,    WHAT     MUST     IT     BE     TO     GIVE     HEALTH     TO     A 

CRIPPLED  SOUL  ?  The  healing  of  bodily  disease  was  but  the  mere  fringe  of  the  work 
of  Christ  and  His  apostles.  The  real  disease  that  paralyses  man  underlies  aU  that. 
Sin  makes  disease  the  first  form  of  death  in  every  bodily  organ.  You  know  why 
there  are  so  many  bleared  eyes,  bloated  faces,  shaking  hands,  and  limping  feet ;  and 
Christ  knows  too,  and  He  knows  also  that  the  only  way,  in  the  long  run  and  on  a 
large  scale,  to  heal  sick  bodies  is  to  save  sick  souls.  And  He  who  can  do  this  for 
you  gives  you  a  boon  of  which  gold  and  silver  yield  no  measures.  (J.  B.  Broxvn, 
B.A.)  Apostolic  poverty  and  power  contrasted  with  Papal  wealth  and  weakness: 
Once  when  Thomas  Aquinas  visited  mediaeval  Kome  he  was  shown  through  all  the 
sumptuously  furnished  rooms  of  the  Papal  Palace,  he  became  almost  as  much 
fatigued  and  dazed  as  was  the  queen  of  Sheba,  when  she  had  been  dazzled  with  the 
riches  of  Solomon's  kingdom ;  and  then  it  is  related  as  a  fine  pleasantry  of  the 
Pontiff  himself,  that  he  remarked  to  him,  "  The  Church  cannot  say  in  our  times. 
Silver  and  gold  have  I  none  1 "  And  Aquinas  replied  quickly,  "  No,  indeed  1  neither 
can  the  Church  say  now.  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  rise  up  and 
walk ! "  (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Poverty  of  the  rich  : — A  shrewd  old  gentleman  once 
said  to  his  daughter,  "  Be  sure,  my  dear,  you  never  marry  a  poor  man  ;  but  remem- 
ber that  the  poorest  man  in  the  world  is  one  that  has  money  and  nothing  else." 
(Christian  Aye.)  Poverty  a  stimulus  : — A  nobleman  who  painted  remarkably  well 
for  an  amateur,  showing  one  of  his  pictures  to  Poussin,  the  latter  exclaimed, 
"  Your  lordship  only  requires  a  little  poverty  to  make  you  a  complete  artist." 
(Horace  Smith.)  Something  better  than  money: — A  poor  converted  woman  of 
India  said,  "  I  have  no  money  to  give  to  missions,  but  I  am  able  to  speak  of  the 
Saviour  to  my  neighbour."  Could  a  volume  tell  more  of  the  duty  of  the  people  of 
this  country  who  have  found  Christ?     Said  a  young  man  at  a  meeting,  "  I  worked 

for  Mr. ,  a  well-known  Christian,  for  eight  years,  and  he  never  spoke  to  me  of 

religion."     The  woman  in  India  had  learned  what  is  better  than  money — the  powei; 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  295 

of  personal  influence.  Money  is  not  omnipotent : — We  sometimes  think  that 
money  is  omnipotent,  that  it  can  purchase  for  us  every  good  thing.  This  is  a  great 
mistake.  Money  cannot  buy  love.  It  often  wins  its  semblance.  Summer  friends 
swarm  around  him  who  rolls  in  wealth,  but  the  love  of  a  mother,  the  fidelity  of  a 
father,  the  affection  of  a  sister,  the  sympatby  of  a  brother,  the  trust  of  a  friend, 
are  never  bdlight  with  gold.  Money  cannot  bring  conteutment,  and  "  Our  content 
is  our  best  having,"  Money  alone  will  not  secure  for  us  a  good  education.  A  rich 
man,  who  had  neglected  his  early  opportunities,  was  heard  to  say  sadly,  "I  would 
give  all  my  wealth  for  a  thorough  education  and  well-trained  mind."  But  his 
money  and  his  riches  were  alike  unavailing.  Plenty  of  money  will  not  of  itself 
insure  culture  and  gentility,  yet  next  to  Christian  graces  and  robust  health  nothing 
is  so  desirable  as  refiaement  and  pleasing,  self-possessed  manners.  The  wealth  of 
a  Croesus  could  not  give  a  peaceful  conscience.  Sin  scourges  the  soul  of  the  rich 
as  surely  as  of  the  poor.  The  poorest  boy  or  girl  who  has  "  always  a  conscience 
void  of  offence  toward  God,  and  toward  men,"  is  richer  than  the  richest  with  a 
"  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron."  A  good  character  is  more  precious  than  gold. 
Yet  money  is  not  to  be  despised.  If  we  have  it  let  us  accept  it  as  God's  gift,  and 
use  it,  not  so  much  for  our  own  pleasure  as  for  the  benefit  of  others.  If  we  have  it 
not  let  us  believe  that  for  our  good  it  has  been  withheld  from  us.  But  whether  we 
have  it  or  not  let  us  remember  that  it  cannot  purchase  love,  contentment,  educa- 
tion, culture,  refinement,  nor  a  good  conscience,  and  that  it  will  not  secure  for  us 
either  peace,  purity,  holiness,  or  heaven.  [Christian  Age.)  What  is  money  ? — 
"  What  is  money,  father  ?  "  asked  a  sickly,  motherless  child.  "  Why,  gold  and 
silver  and  copper,  my  boy."  "  Yes;  I  don't  mean  that;  I  mean.  What's  money, 
after  all?  What  can  it  do  ?  "  "  Oh,"  replied  the  purse-proud  father,  "  money  can 
do  anything!"  "Anything!  then  why  did  not  money  save  me  my  mother?" 
The  father  felt  puzzled,  and  the  boy  continued,  "  It  can't  make  me  strong  or  well 
either,  father."  And  the  question,  "  What  is  money,  after  all  ?  "  is  left  to  work 
its  impression  for  good  upon  many  minds  and  hearts.  Poverty  no  hindrance 
to  beneficence : — A  year  or  two  ago  a  missionary  in  one  of  the  South  Sea  Islands 
wished  very  much  to  get  a  translation  of  the  Gospels  printed  in  one  of  the 
languages  of  the  island  where  he  was  working.  It  is  not  in  the  South  Seas  as  it  is 
with  us.  We  have  one  language  which  can  be  understood  nearly  everywhere  all 
over  the  United  Kingdom.  In  the  New  Hebrides  and  other  island  groups,  not  only 
has  every  island  a  different  language,  but  often  different  parts  of  the  same  island 
speak  different  languages.  This  missionary  had  translated  the  Gospels.  He  was 
going  over  to  Sydney  with  some  arrowroot  and  sago,  which  his  poor  people  had 
contributed  out  of  their  scanty  stores,  in  order  that  they  might  have  the  Gospels  to 
read  in  their  own  tongues  and  in  their  own  homes.  He  had  saved  a  little  of  his 
own  also  to  add  to  the  offerings.  But  on  board  the  steamer  to  Sydney  he  met  a 
printer,  and  the  printer  jjroved  to  him  that  he  had  not  one  quarter  enough  money 
to  pay  for  the  printing.  So  the  missionary  was  much  cast  down,  and  thought  that 
he  would  have  all  his  trouble  and  long  journey  for  nothing.  When  he  was  landed 
on  the  quay  at  Sydney  a  little  boy,  the  son  of  the  gentleman  with  whom  he  was  to 
stay  in  the  city,  met  him,  and  holding  out  half  a  sovereign  to  the  missionary,  said, 
"  This  is  to  help  to  priirt  your  Bible.  My  father  told  me  that  you  had  come  all 
this  way  to  get  the  Bible  printed  for  the  poor  natives.  I  had  not  any  money,  but 
father  said  I  might  run  messages  and  carry  parcels  at  the  warehouse.  So  I  did, 
and  here  is  my  week's  pay."  Brave  boy  and  happy  missionary  1  The  half-sove- 
reign did  not  of  course  print  the  Bible,  but  it  helped,  and  it  encouraged  the  mis- 
sionary to  trust  God,  who  can  raise  up  help  for  His  servants  among  little  boys  and 
kings  of  great  empires.  So  much  interest  was  aroused  in  Sydney  by  the  story  of 
the  little  boy,  which  the  missionary  told  at  many  a  meeting,  that  not  only  were  the 
Gospels  printed,  but  money  was  gathered  to  print  the  whole  Bible  as  soon  as  the 
missionary  got  time  to  translate  it.  So  the  missionary  went  away  back  to  his  island 
home,  glad  and  thankful.  (S.  E.  Crockett.)  The  true  sympathy  : — The  richness 
of  any  material  lessens  the  necessity  for  adornment.  The  finest  gems  are  the 
simplest  set,  because  no  environment  can  add  either  to  their  beauty  or  value.  The 
story  of  the  Beautiful  gate  is  in  itself  a  gem  of  such  inherent  worth,  that,  like 
Plato's  Republic,  it  needs  no  rhetorical  setting.  We  can  hardly  imagine  the  intro- 
duction to  any  great  truth  told  with  greater  simplicity  than  this  :  "  Now  Peter  and 
John  went  up  together  into  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  being  the  ninth  hour." 
And  yet  these  words  lead  us  to  the  consideration  of  a  truth  comprehensive  of  the 
whole  scope  of  practical  Christianity.     Our  first  lesion  is  this — 1.  The  disciples  of 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

Christ  in  the  regular  performance  of  their  daily  duties  have  ample  opportunities  for 
charity,  and  hence  the  necessity  of  mutual  helpfulness.  Objects  of  charity  natur- 
ally divide  themselves  into  two  classes :  first,  those  who  are  strong  enough  to 
approach  us  for  help  ;  and,  secondly,  those  who  are  so  weak  that  we  must  approach 
them  to  give  help.  Peter  dealt  with  the  latter  class.  While  energj  lies  at  the 
basis  of  benevolent  deeds,  yet  no  extraordinary  exertion  is  required  to  discover  the 
impotent  men  of  this  world.  God  usually  finds  them  for  us  somewhere  along  the 
line  of  our  daily  duty.  God  may  discover  one  man's  object  of  charity  in  the 
heathenism  of  China  ;  another's  on  the  frontiers  of  our  own  civilisation  ;  and  yours 
between  your  own  dwelling  and  the  village  church.  2.  Wherever  there  is  ability 
to  do  good  there  is  always  close  at  hand  some  object  that  needs  it.  The  Christian 
system  is  so  manifold  in  its  organism  that  a  place  is  afforded  for  every  variety  and 
degree  of  talents.  No  Christian  is  wholly  lacking  in  ability.  We  are  all  creatures 
of  want,  and  mutually  dependent  on  one  another.  In  practice,  as  in  theory,  the 
subjective  and  the  objective  are  in  juxtaposition.  We  are  sometimes  misled  by  the 
impression  that  only  great  deeds  count  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  3.  Every  Christian 
can  impart  vastly  more  than  the  impotent  man  anticipates.  Peter's  object  of 
charity  was  a  most  dismal  sight.  Placed  before  a  temple  whose  cost  and  magnifi- 
cence filled  all  the  world  with  its  fame.  It  is  the  old,  old  story  repeated  again  and 
again  to  the  burning  shame  of  the  ages,  that  costly  temples  can  be  built  while  the 
more  valuable  temple  of  humanity  must  beg  beneath  their  sculptured  arches  for 
bread.  We  may  pause  to  inquire  what  Peter  had  to  give  more  valuable  than  silver 
and  gold.  He  had  the  Christ  of  history,  the  Christ  of  his  own  rich  experience,  to 
impart,  which  was  infinitely  more  valuable  than  all  the  world's  material  treasure. 
"Christ,  Christ,"  I  hear  the  impotent  man  repeat,  "  what  need  I  of  Christ?  I 
only  want  the  means  of  driving  away  the  pangs  of  starvation."  Then  says  Peter, 
with  all  the  authority  accorded  to  an  inspired  apostle,  "In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Nazareth  rise  up  and  walk."  You  will  notice  that  the  man  had  merely  asked 
for  the  means  of  buying  bread  ;  he  receives  the  power  to  earn  his  own  bread,  which 
was  far  better.  Do  we  not  all  receive  from  God  more  than  we  ask  for,  and  infinitely 
more  tban  we  deserve?  Two  inferences  from  the  above.  Men  are  everywhere 
about  us  in  spiritual  impotency,  and  they  recognise  it  not.  We,  as  Christ's  dis- 
ciples, have  power  to  help  them  more  than  they  anticipate,  or  we  ourselves  imagine, 
until  it  has  been  put  forth.  If  religion  is  of  supreme  moment  to  the  human  soul, 
how  is  spiritual  impotency  possible?  Simply  because  the  sinner's  free  will 
positively  refuses  the  spiritual  antidote.  We  have  seen  that  want  and  the  ability 
to  relieve  it  go  hand  in  hand.  Is  it  true  in  the  vegetable  world  where  by  the  side  of 
every  poison  grows  its  antidote  ?  Is  it  true  in  the  animal  world  where  the  bitten 
creature  knows  where  to  go  for  remedial  efficacy  ?  Who  tells  the  birds  of  the 
tropics  that  a  certain  leaf  placed  over  the  nest  protects  their  little  ones  from  prey- 
ing reptiles  ?  Is  it  likely  that  "  man,  the  paragon  of  animals,"  when  bitten  by  sin 
should  be  in  ignorance  as  to  the  antidote  ?  Let  the  spiritual  impotent  "  fasten  his 
eyes  "  on  the  Truth,  and  he  will  receive  a  larger  blessing  than  he  anticipates.  4. 
Through  human  means  a  complete  work  is  accomplished  by  bringing  Christ  into 
actual  contact  with  human  wants.  There  is  a  mighty  power  in  human  sympathy. 
But  sympathy  in  the  abstract  is  meaningless.  It  has  content  only  as  it  is  applied 
to  an  object.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  we  may  express  our  sympathy  with 
sinners.  First  by  mingling  with  them  for  mere  companionship,  which  always 
lowers  us  to  their  level ;  and,  secondly,  by  mingling  with  them  for  the  sole  purpose 
of  doing  them  good,  which  tends  to  raise  them  to  our  level.  We  need  never  be 
ashamed  nor  afraid  to  go  wherever  we  can  take  Christ  with  us.  It  is  only  through 
personal,  sympathetic  contact  that  the  impotent  men  of  this  world  are  likely  to 
know  of  God  and  the  power  of  His  salvation.  Suppose  Peter  had  sent  a  written 
message  from  his  home  to  the  impotent  man,  saying,  "  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Nazareth  rise  up  and  walk,"  the  presumption  is  that  the  man  would  have  died 
as  he  had  lived,  impotent.  No,  the  two  must  come  into  vital,  sympathetic  contact. 
The  weakness  of  the  one  must  arouse  the  curative  energies  of  the  other  as  they 
associate.  6.  The  place  where  impotent  men  first  find  their  Lord  is  always  a 
beautiful  gate  to  them.  The  place  of  our  natural  birth  is  dear  to  us.  But  the 
place  of  our  spiritual  new  birth  cannot  be  any  the  less  so.  It  is  a  beiuty  that 
overrides  every  material  consideration.  Thus  through  life  by  doing  and  receiving 
good  are  beautiful  gates  made.  By  doing  good  along  the  quiet  lines  of  our  daily 
duties  not  only  do  we  confirm  our  own  Christian  characters,  but  strengthen  the 
chaiacttirs  and  increase  the  joys  of  our  felluw-men.     (C.  H.  Rickctts.)        Responsi' 


CHAP,  in.]  THE  ACTS.  297 

hility  for  power : — Pentecostal  energy  now  begins  to  find  one  of  its  spheres.  The 
power  of  preaching  Christ,  crucified  and  risen,  had  already  been  proved.  The 
power  of  healing  was  now  put  forth.  The  power  of  testifying  before  rulers  and 
princes  was  soon  to  be  shown.  The  power  of  toiling,  suffering,  and  dying  for 
Christ  would  ere  long  find  its  expression.  Observe — I.  The  consciousness  of 
POWEK.  "  Such  as  I  have  give  I  thee."  It  must  have  been  a  very  high  and 
inspiring  moment  for  Peter  when  he  tlius  felt  the  healing  energy  of  Christ  ready  to 
work  through  him.  We  have  often  been  disposed  to  envy  the  skilful  physician 
who,  when  visiting  a  diseased  sufferer,  is  so  conscious  of  mastery  over  the  disease 
that  he  is  able  to  say,  "  I  can  heal  you."  So  many  of  the  sorrows  of  our  life  mas- 
ter us  that  we  feel  to  grow  big  when  we  are  conscious  of  the  power  to  make  and 
master  any  one  of  them,  A  simple  illustration  taken  from  the  life  of  M'Cheyne 
sets  this  point  clearly  :  "  His  custom  in  preparing  for  the  pulpit  was  to  impress  on 
his  memory  the  substance  of  what  he  had  before  carefuUy  written,  and  then  tc 
speak  as  he  found  liberty.  One  morning,  as  he  rode  rapidly  along  to  Dunipace,  hie 
written  sermons  were  dropped  on  the  roadside.  This  accident  prevented  him  from 
having  the  opportunity  of  preparing  in  his  usual  manner,  but  he  was  enabled  to 
preach  with  more  than  his  usual  freedom.  For  the  first  time  in  his  life  he  dis- 
covered that  he  possessed  the  gift  of  extemporaneous  composition,  and  learned,  to 
his  own  surprise,  that  he  had  more  composedness  of  mind  and  command  of  lan- 
guage than  he  had  believed."  That  is  to  say,  through  this  providential  circum- 
stance he  was  awakened  to  the  consciousness  of  power.  What  we  need  in  these 
our  times  is  a  higher  faith  in  the  varied  and  abundant  gifts  with  which  the  Church 
and  the  individual  Christian  are  endowed,  and  a  keener  power  of  discernment  to 
find  these  gifts  in  ourselves  and  in  others.  But  powers  differ  in  different  persons, 
both  in  kind  and  in  degree.  None  are  without  some  kind  of  faculty  and  ability 
which  they  may  lay  on  the  altar  of  God's  service.  1.  What  is  called  "  wealth  "  is 
power.  All  beyond  needful  expenditure  is  a  man's  wealth.  Wealth  is  what  I  can 
save  and  win  by  self-denial  for  the  service  of  others  and  the  glory  of  God.  In  that 
sense  we  are  all  of  us  more  or  less  wealthy,  and  we  might  be  much  wealthier  than 
we  are.  Such  wealth  is  holy  power.  A  poor  widow  could  glorify  God  with  the 
wealth  of  her  two  mites.  But  some  have  wealth  in  the  commone"r  sense.  And 
your  wealth  is  power — a  dreadful  power  if  it  has  not  been  first  presented  to  God  to 
be  used  for  Him  ;  a  glorious  power  if  it  has.  2.  Intellect  is  power.  Every  man 
who  knows  a  little  more  than  his  neighbour  has  the  trust  of  a  power.  It  is  evident 
that  he  can  teach  and  lead  others.  Surely  these  times  are  making  larger  demands 
every  day  on  Christian  intelligence  in  these  sceptical  days.  The  battle  of  Chris- 
tian truth  is  as  that  great  battle  of  Inkerman — a  soldiers'  battle,  a  people's  battle — 
each  one  of  us  in  our  varied  spheres  making  Christian  knowledge  and  experience 
teU  upon  the  conservation  of  the  Christian  verities.  3.  Art  is  power.  Such  pain- 
ters as  Holman  Hunt  and  Sir  Noel  Paton  are  but  the  high  examples  of  endowments 
that  come  in  measure  to  some  of  us.  In  Sunday-school  spheres  and  among  the 
children  there  is  room  for  the  consecration  of  the  draughtsman's  skill.  And  stUI 
there  is  given  to  men  and  women  the  Divine  gift  of  song,  and  they  may  "  sing  for 
Jesus."  No  door  will  be  shut  against  your  song.  4.  But  every  Christian  has 
spiritual  power.  In  this  he  is  like  Peter.  He  may,  if  he  will,  lay  hold  of  and  use 
the  great  power  of  God.  But  this  lies  dormant  in  so  many  of  us.  We  could  give 
something  to  men,  something  heahng,  vitalising,  the  very  thing  which  the  dying 
world  wants.  And  what  more  do  we  want  ?  Only  what  Peter  had  that  day — the 
consciousness  of  power.  This  would  stir  in  us  holy  impulses,  would  shake  us  out 
of  selfishness  and  apathy.  Eemember  that  the  words  "I  cannot"  have  no  place 
upon  a  Christian's  lips,  if  they  are  applied  to  any  right  and  good  and  holy  work. 
Thou  hast  power  with  God  and  with  men,  and  thou  mightest  prevail.  II.  The 
BESPONSiBiLiTY  OF  CONSCIOUS  POWEB.  All  God's  gifts  to  US  are  for  our  giving  away  to 
others.  Keep  any  of  God's  gifts  to  yourself  and  they  will  speedily  rot.  You  can 
no  more  store  up  God's  present-day  manna  than  the  old  Israelites  could  store  up 
the  bread  that  came  down  from  heaven.  If  He  makes  an  arm  strong,  it  is  for  work. 
If  He  makes  a  leg  strong,  it  is  for  walking  in  search  of  somebody  to  help.  If  He 
makes  a  voice  strong,  it  is  that  we  may  plead  earnestly  with  our  fellow-men  for 
Him,  or  that  we  may  win  men  with  the  gospel-song.  If  He  makes  a  heart  strong, 
it  is  that  we  may  inspire  others  to  a  nobler  life.  Try  to  dam  up  God's  living 
streams  of  blessing,  and  make  a  pond  in  your  own  grounds,  and  they  will  cease  to 
be  living  streams,  they  will  soon  become  disease-breeding,  staannnt  waters,  and 
you  will  have  to  be  content  with  the  pond,  for  God  will  cut  off  the  waters  at  the 


293  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOR.  [chap,  iir, 

fountain-head.  "  He  that  hath  not  (does  not  make  a  worthy  use  of  what  he  has), 
from  him  shall  be  taken  away  that  which  he  seemeth  to  have."  (R.  Tuck,  B.A.) 
In  tlie  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  rise  up  and  walk. — The  power  of  Jesu's 
name: — Consider — I.  Man  morally  crippled,  helpless,  and  wretched.  Bodily 
infirmities  are  the  shadows  of  the  sins  and  weaknesses  of  the  soul.  All  sin  works 
by  privation.  It  shuts  up  senses  and  organs  which  God  meant  to  be  inlets  of  joy 
and  channels  of  life.  But  there  is  something  very  suggestive  in  this  cripple's  case 
— he  never  knew  the  joy  of  movement,  "  Lame  from  his  mother's  womb."  Can 
you  remember  the  time  when  sin  was  not  a  source  of  suffering  and  weakness  ?  How 
long  have  you  been  borne  by  the  storm  of  passion  into  excesses  and  follies  when 
you  have  craved  the  beggar's  dole  ?  You  ought  to  be  taking  your  part  with  the 
angels  in  God's  great  workshop ;  but  where  are  you  ?  In  the  devil's,  where  you 
labour  and  are  sheltered  and  sleep  like  the  brute  through  long  monotonous  years. 
A  change  sometimes  breaks  the  monotony — quari-els,  drinkings,  and  all  the  rest, 
and  I  have  heard  men  talk  of  this  as  life  1  What  stroke  has  crippled  you  to  put 
up  with  such  a  life  as  this — without  God,  joy,  hope,  like  the  beasts  that  perish  ? 
Are  you  in  love  with  such  a  life,  poor  cripple  ?  or  are  you  heartily  sick  of  it,  as  this 
man  was  of  his  ?  II.  There  is  a  Name  which  can  make  tou  whole  again,  sound, 
GLAD,  and  free.  Your  soul  wants  what  that  poor  cripple's  body  wanted — power, 
and  that  power  is  in  Christ  alone.  A  man  whose  system  is  worn  out  can  be  patched 
up  awhile  by  the  physicians,  but  a  new  gush  of  life  into  it  is  what  he  needs.  They 
try  to  do  something  like  it  sometimes,  they  pour  some  fresh  young  life-blood  into 
the  exhausted  veins.  But  this  is  what  Christ  can  truly  do  for  your  soul.  His  life 
will  pass  into  every  crippled  faculty  and  unbind  it,  and  open  to  your  powers  a  field 
of  the  most  glorious  activity.  Lie  no  longer  moaning,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I 
am  1 "  "  The  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life."  III.  This  is  the  time  to  believe  on 
THAT  Name  and  to  rise  up  and  walk.  You  have  been  there  fearfully  too  long. 
How  much  of  your  time  has  been  spent  wearily  in  the  devil's  service  ?  How  much 
faculty,  how  much  life  is  left  for  God  ?  But  will  God  welcome  such  a  wreck  as  I 
am?  Let  that  poor  cripple  and  Christ's  works  of  mercy  answer.  "The  blind 
receive  their  sight,  .  .  .  the  lame  walk."  They  were  mostly  broken  fragments  of 
humanity  that  He  gathered.  Such  as  you  He  needs.  You  have  made  many  an 
effort  at  reformation,  but  the  poor  palsied  limbs  have  doubled  up  again.  Now  rise 
once  more  ;  there  is  a  hand  outstretched  to  you — lay  hold  of  it.  Eefuse  it,  and  to- 
morrow all  power  to  make  the  effort  may  be  gone.  (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  The 
difference  between  the  miracles  of  Christ  and  those  of  the  apostles  : — This  difference 
is  here  observable.  They  performed  them  through  Christ,  by  virtue  of  His  name 
and  authority.  They  were  mere  instruments  ;  He  was  the  efficient  agent.  Christ, 
on  the  other  hand,  performed  His  miracles  in  His  own  name,  and  by  His  own 
authority.  He  wrought  independently.  His  language  was  that  of  omnipotence, 
theirs  was  that  of  faith  in  Him.  He  said,  "  I  say  unto  thee.  Arise  "  ;  they  said, 
♦'  In  the  name  of  Jesus  rise  up  and  walk."  He  was  the  Messiah,  the  Son  ;  they 
were  the  servants  of  the  household.     (P.  J.  Gloag,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  And  he  leaping  up  stood. — The  healed  man^s  activity  and  gratitude : — 
The  evangelist  describes  minutely  the  actions  of  the  lame  man  as  soon  as  he  began 
to  believe  that  he  was  healed.  First  he  leaped  forth,  releasing  himself  from  thfe 
hold  of  Peter,  or  leaped  up,  as  if  trying  the  strength  of  his  muscle  ;  then  he  stood 
on  his  feet  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  and  walked  around,  to  see  whether  the  same 
power  of  walking  belonged  to  him  which  all  that  were  about  had.  But  the  pen  of 
the  writer,  not  content  with  this,  adds  graphically,  "  And  he  entered  with  them,"  un- 
willing to  be  separated  from  the  instruments  of  his  cure,  "  into  the  temple,"  practising 
his  newly  acquired  powers  without  the  ability  to  restrain  himself,  now  walking, 
now  leaping,  and  all  the  while  praising  God.  "  Then  did  the  lame  man  leap  as  an 
hart."  He  was  of  another  kind  from  the  nine  lepers,  who  never  looked  back  to  give 
thanks  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  (Pres.  Woolsey.)  Practical  gratitude: — They  who 
have  witnessed  our  frailties  should  also  attest  our  conversion  and  gratitude.  Our 
gratitude  is  false  and  of  no  avail  unless  accompanied  with  newness  of  life ;  and 
this  cannot  endure  long  if  our  thankful  sense  of  the  grace  to  which  we  owe  our 
deliverance  declines.  (Quesnel.)  The  responsibilities  of  the  saved  : — Sin  has 
reduced  the  soul  to  a  state  of  impotence.  It  has  not  destroyed  the  soul's  powers, 
but  only  disabled  them.  When  a  man  is  saved,  therefore,  his  crippled  powers  are 
straightened  and  strengthened,  and  his  new  vocation  is  to  use  them.  I.  What 
faculties  AiiE  crippled  bx  SIN  AND  RESTORED  BY  Christ  ?     1.  Faith.     This  exists 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  239 

in  every  soul,  but  is  dormant  or  perverted.  Christ  straightens  it  out  and  empowers 
it  as  an  eye  to  see,  a  hand  to  grasp  Him  and  heavenly  things.  2.  Love.  No 
man  is  destitute  of  this :  but  it  is  wrenched  away  from  its  highest  Object,  who  is  its 
true  life,  and  rests  upon  unworthy  objects  often,  on  secondary  objects  at  best  whom  it 
cannot  love  fully,  because  unrecruited  by  the  love  of  God.  "  We  love  (R.V.)  be- 
cause He  first  loved  us."  Salvation  largely  consists  in  the  conversion  of  the  heart, 
the  turning  of  all  the  affections  to  Christ,  by  whom  they  are  invigorated  and  sancti- 
fied, and  made  to  flow  in  worthy  channels.  3.  The  wUl.  Paul  has  given  us  a 
graphic  picture  of  what  that  is  in  the  natural  man  (Eom.  vii.)  and  what  Christ 
makes  it  (Rom.  viii.  and  his  own  hfe).  4.  The  active  powers.  These  again  are 
paralysed  for  all  spiritual  purposes,  but  energp.tic  enough  in  the  cause  of  evil — the 
tongue,  how  silent  for  God,  how  ghb  for  self  or  for  foUy  or  sin  1  the  hands,  how 
idle  for  God,  how  active  in  other  causes  1  Christ  restores  these  to  their  true  uses,  and 
consecrates  them  to  the  service  of  God.  H.  The  bestored  faculties  must  be 
EMPLOYED,  otherwise  they  wUl  faU  into  their  old  decrepitude.  Had  the  lame  man 
returned  to  his  haunt,  and  neglected  to  use  his  limbs,  those  limbs  would  soon  have 
become  helpless  once  more.  To  neglect  faith,  love,  resolution  and  work  for  God  is 
to  forfeit  them.  The  action  of  the  healed  man  may  illustrate  the  manner  in  which 
our  restored  faculties  are  to  be  employed.  1.  With  alacrity,  "  leaping  up."  2. 
Progressively,  "  walked."  3.  In  union  with  the  Church,  "  entered  with  them  into 
the  temple."  4.  Thankfully,  "  praising  God."  (J.  IF.  Burn.)  Praise  hreahing 
forth  : — Wherever  God's  grace  is  discerned,  and  His  love  is  welcomed,  there  praise 
breaks  forth,  as  surely  as  streams  pour  from  the  cave  of  the  glacier  when  the  sun  of 
summer  melts  it,  or  earth  answers  the  touch  of  spring  with  flowers.  (A.  Maclaren.) 
The  gate  Beautiful : — I.  The  close  proximity  of  physical  deformity  to  natural 
BEAUTY.  II.  The  strange  association  of  spiritual  riches  with  temporal 
POVERTY.  III.  The  sodden  transformation  of  popular  indifference  into 
abounding  amazement.  The  gospel  had  been  applied,  put  to  the  test,  and  had  suc- 
ceeded in  a  superhuman  manner.  1.  It  had  come  into  positive  contact  with 
poverty  and  suffering.  2.  It  had  exalted  the  whole  nature  of  the  man.  3.  It  had 
set  the  man  on  a  new  course  of  life.  (F.  W.  Brown.)  Praise  : — A  Christian 
man  ought  to  be  like  a  horse  that  has  bells  on  his  head,  so  that  he  cannot  go  any- 
where without  ringing  them  and  making  a  noise.  His  whole  Ufe  should  be  a  psalm, 
every  step  should  be  in  harmony,  every  thought  should  constitute  a  note,  every 
word  he  utters  should  be  a  component  part  of  the  joyful  psalm.  It  is  a  blessed 
thing  to  see  a  Christian  going  about  his  business  like  the  high-priest  of  old,  who 
wherever  he  went  made  music  with  the  golden  bells.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Thank- 
fulness excejJtional : — It  is  said  of  a  lately  deceased  benefactor  of  a  Western  college 
in  the  United  States  that,  on  a  recent  commencement  day,  a  lady  stepped  up 
to  him  and  said,  "  Governor  Hardin,  I  wish  to  thank  you  for  this  splendid  college, 
and  to  say  that  my  daughters,  who  graduate  to-day,  owe  you  a  debt  of  grati- 
tude they  can  iiever  repay."  The  white-haired  old  man  broke  down,  and,  while 
the  tears  filled  his  eyes,  he  faltered  out,  "  Madam,  you  are  the  first  person  to  ex- 
press such  a  sentiment  to  me."  How  many  men  who  secure  scholarships  and  fellow- 
ships, or  receive  other  benefactions,  ever  think  of  or  thank  the  generous  givers  ? 
Thanksgiving  expressed: — "  When  a  boy,"  said  a  prominent  member  of  a  church, 
"  I  was  much  helped  by  Bishop  HamUne,  who  visited  at  a  house  where  I  was. 
Taking  me  aside,  the  Bishop  said,  '  When  in  trouble,  my  boy,  kneel  down  and  ask 
God's  help  ;  but  never  climb  over  the  fence  into  the  devil's  ground  and  then  kneel 
down  and  ask  help.  Pray  from  God's  side  of  the  fence.'  Of  that,"  said  he,  "  I 
have  thought  every  day  of  my  life  since."  Continuing,  he  remarked,  "  Sanford 
Cobb,  the  missionary  to  Persia,  helped  me  in  another  way.  Said  he,  '  Do  you  ever 
feel  thankful  when  God  blesses  you  ?  '  '  Always.'  '  Did  you  ever  tell  Him  so  ?  ' 
'Well,  I  don't  know  that  I  have.'  'Well,  try  it,  my  young  friend,  try  it,  try  it. 
Tell  Him  so  ;  tell  Him  aloud ;  tell  Him  so  that  you  are  sure  you  will  hear  it  your- 
self.' That  was  a  new  revelation.  I  found  that  I  had  been  only  glad,  not  grateful. 
I  have  been  telling  Him  with  grateful  feehngs  ever  since,  to  my  soul's  help  and 
comfort." 

Vers.  11-26.  All  the  people  ran  together  unto  them  In  the  porch  that  is  called 
Solomon's,  greatly  wondering. — Solo7non's  porch  : — The  porch — or  better,  portico  or 
cloister — was  outside  the  temple,  on  the  eastern  side.  It  consisted  in  the  Herodian 
Temple,  of  a  double  row  of  Corinthian  columns,  about  thirty-seven  feet  high,  and  re- 
ceived its  name  as  having  been  in  part  constructed,  when  the  temple  was  rebuilt  by 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Zerubbabel,  with  the  fragments  of  the  older  edifice.  The  people  tried  to  persuade 
Herod  Agrippa  I.  to  pull  it  down  and  rebuild  it,  but  he  shrank  from  the  risk  and 
cost  of  such  an  undertaking  (Jos.,  "  Ant."  xx.  9,  §  7).  It  was,  like  the  porticoes  in 
all  Greek  cities,  a  favourite  place  of  resort,  especially  as  facing  the  morning  sun  in 
winter.  (See  John  x.  23.)  The  memory  of  what  had  then  been  the  result  of  their 
Master's  teaching  must  have  been  fresh  in  the  minds  of  the  two  disciples.  Then 
the  people  had  complained  of  being  kept  in  suspense  as  to  whether  Jesus  claimed  to 
be  the  Christ,  and,  when  He  spoke  of  being  One  with  the  Father,  had  taken  up 
stones  to  stone  Him  (John  x.  31-33).  Now  they  were  to  hear  His  name  as  Holy 
and  Just,  as  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,"  as  the  very  Christ  (vers.  13,  14,  18). 
{Dean  Plmnjjtre.)  Solomon's  porch — a  halloioed  spot  for  Peter  : — It  must  have  been 
a  spot  filled  with  cherished  memories  for  the  apostle.  Every  Jew  naturally  venerated 
this  cloister,  because  it  was  Solomon's  ;  just  as  men  in  the  grandest  modern  cathedral 
still  love  to  point  out  the  smallest  relic  of  the  original  structure  out  of  which  the 
modern  building  grew.  At  San  Clemente,  in  Eome,  the  priests  delight  to  show  the 
primitive  structure  where  they  say  St.  Clement  ministered  about  a.d.  100.  At  York 
the  vergers  will  indicate  far  down  in  the  crypt  the  fragments  of  the  earliest  Saxon 
church,  which  once  stood  where  that  splendid  cathedral  now  rears  its  lofty  arches. 
So,  too,  the  Jews  naturally  cherished  this  limb  of  continuity  between  the  ancient 
and  the  modern  temples.  But  for  St.  Peter  this  Solomon's  porch  must  have  had 
ppecial  memories  over  and  above  the  patriotic  ideas  that  were  linked  with  it.  He 
could  not  forget  that  the  very  last  feast  of  the  Dedication  which  the  Master  had 
seen  on  earth,  He  walked  in  this  porch,  and  there,  in  His  conversation  with  the 
Jews,  claimed  an  equality  with  the  Father  which  led  them  to  make  an  attempt  on 
His  life.  Here,  then,  it  was  that  within  twelve  months  the  apostle  Peter  makes  a 
similar  claim  on  his  Master's  behalf.  ((?.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.)  MisapjjreJiensions 
removed : — Here  was  a  congregation  worthy  of  an  apostle  ;  and  Peter  was  ready 
for  the  occasion.  The  people  were  excited.  They  "  ran  together."  This 
made  it  possible  to  address  them  all  at  once.  They  were  amazed,  and  were, 
therefore,  in  an  inquiring  mood.  Peter — I.  Called  his  heabeks  to  quiet 
THOUGHTFULNESS.  He  askcd  them  the  cause  of  their  amazement.  Did  he  pause 
after  his  questions  to  let  the  hearer's  mind  balance  itself  ?  The  miracle  had 
aroused  attention  which  must  now  be  steadied,  in  order  that  judgment  might 
be  calmly  exercised.  II.  Cokeected  the  supposition  that  the  miracle  had 
BEEN  done  by  HUMAN  ABILITY.  Some  supposed  the  cause  was  in  their  magical 
power  or  extraordinary  godliness.  But  this  was  a  superficial  and  God-dis- 
honouring hypothesis,  as  is  that  which  attributes  the  results  of  preaching  to 
the  preacher's  eloquence,  logic,  or  "  magnetism.''  Peter  corrected  this,  and  we 
say  that  conviction,  penitence,  conversion,  and  the  power  to  live  holy  is  all  of  God's 
grace.  HI.  Cleared  a  way  foe  the  truth.  If  false  suppositions  had  not  been 
removed  the  true  view  of  the  miracle  would  have  been  prevented  ;  but  by  contra- 
dicting error  Peter  brought  the  minds  of  the  hearers  to  need  a  true  explanation. 
So  long  as  astronomers  believed  the  earth  to  be  the  centre  of  the  solar  system,  many 
false  suppositions  had  to  be  made,  and  many  phenomena  were  misinterpreted. 
Ptolemaic  error  blocked  out  Copernican  truth.  But  when  the  fundamental  error 
had  been  overthrown  the  chariot  of  knowledge  could  proceed.  See  the  magnifi- 
cent results  in  the  precision  and  fulness  of  modern  astronomical  science.  Conclu- 
sion :  Let  us  learn  to  remove  error  in  order  that  the  way  of  truth  may  be  open. 
Let  us  do  this  for  penitents  whom  some  error  may  keep  in  bondage,  for  inquirers 
lest  some  false  notion  blind  them.  {W.  Hudson.)  And  when  Peter  saw  it,  he 
answered. — A  greater  miracle  : — 1.  This  speech  is  a  greater  miracle  than  the  cure. 
The  great  miracles  are  all  wrought  within.  Compare  Peter  before  the  resurrection 
with  the  Peter  of  this  speech,  and  tell  me  what  has  happened.  Surely  a  great  cure 
has  been  wrought  upon  him.  You  cannot  work  miracles,  because  you  yourselves 
are  not  miracles.  We  approach  the  whole  case  from  the  outside,  and  with  many 
a  lame  suggestion  we  attempt  to  mend  the  world's  sad  condition.  We  must  be 
greater  ourselves  than  any  work  which  it  is  possible  for  ourselves  to  do.  2.  In  this 
speech  Peter  vindicated  his  apostolic  primacy.  You  might  have  asked  questions 
concerning  Peter's  superiority  before,  but  after  this  all  men  feel  that  the  first  place 
belongs  to  him.  Any  primacy  that  is  not  based  on  merit  must  go  down.  For  a 
time  you  may  bolster  up  a  man ;  but  a  superiority  of  position  that  is  not  based 
upon  fundamental  and  vital  merit  falls  before  the  testing  touch  of  circumstances 
and  time.  So  let  this  book  of  God  stand  or  fall.  The  priests  cannot  keep  it  up. 
Parliaments  and  thrones  cannot  give  the  Bible  its  lasting  primacy.    If  the  inspira- 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  301 

tion  be  not  in  the  book  itself  you  cannot  communicate  it ;  and  if  the  inspiration 
really  be  in  the  book  itself  you  can  never  talk  it  down.  By  force  you  may  quiet  it 
for  a  time,  but  truth  is  eternal,  it  returns.  3.  The  danger  is  that  we  be  not  just  to 
such  men  as  Peter.  We  may  take  this  speech  as  a  mere  matter  of  course.  We  hear 
an  eloquent  man  drop  sentence  after  sentence  of  singular  beauty,  and  think  that  he 
does  so  simply  as  a  matter  of  course.  In  every  such  sentence  there  is  a  drop  of  sacri- 
ficial blood.  True  eloquence  is  forced  out  of  men.  This  speech  was  not  a  prepared 
oration  which  he  took  out  and  read  ;  it  was  as  extemporaneous  as  was  the  event 
itself.  The  looking  people  make  the  eloquent  preacher,  AH  the  people  fastened 
their  eyes  upon  Peter  and  John  ;  and,  as  the  lame  man  had  drawn  out  of  Peter 
spiritual  power  by  his  magnetic  look,  so  the  people  drew  out  of  Peter  still  higher 
power  by  their  marvelling.  4.  In  reply  to  that  wonder  Peter  declines  any  primacy 
based  on  purely  personal  considerations.  "  This  is  not  our  doing.  It  is  the  Lord's 
doing  ;  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes."  And,  with  inspired  wisdom,  he  magnified 
the  occasion  by  attaching  the  miracle  to  the  omnipotence  of  a  God  about  whose 
existence  the  Jew  had  no  doubt.  "  The  God  of  Abraham,"  &c.  The  apostles  did  not 
snatch  at  praise  for  theanselves.  They  maintained  their  royal  supremacy  by 
operating  in  the  presence  of  the  people  merely  as  the  servants  and  instruments  of 
God.  We  must  return  to  that  allegiance  to  the  Divine  name  and  throne.  5.  Not 
only  does  Peter  decline  the  implied  eulogium,  he  takes  upon  himself  to  cut  the 
people  to  pieces.  No  great  progress  can  be  made  in  moral  reform  until  our  apostles 
slay  us.  Flattery  will  do  nothing  for  us — at  most,  will  but  mislead  or  bewilder  us. 
Hear  his  speech,  "  Whom  ye  delivered  up,"  &c.  That  man  must  succeed  in  his 
ministry,  or  he  must  be  killed  !  Such  a  speaker  of  such  an  address  cannot  occupy 
a  middle  position.  When  did  the  apostles  speak  with  bated  breath  and  whispering 
humbleness  ?  When  did  they  try  to  make  the  best  of  the  case  by  appeasing  the 
spirit  of  the  people,  and  by  an  endeavour  to  placate  sensibilities  which  had  been 
strongly  excited  ?  So  we  come  back  to  a  truth  with  which  this  message  has  made 
us  familiar.  We  are  not  to  put  away  the  Crucifixion  as  an  historical  circumstance, 
nineteen  centuries  old.  The  Crucifixion  takes  place  every  day.  Eealise  this  cir- 
cumstance, and  there  will  go  up  the  old  cry,  and  after  it  will  come  times  of 
refreshing  from  tbe  presence  of  the  Lord.  6.  In  ver.  17  the  tone  changes 
with  wondrous  skill.  The  gospel  is  not  an  impeachment  only — it  is  an  offer, 
and  he  introduces  this  new  phase  of  the  subject  with  a  word  which  united 
himself  with  the  people — "  brethren."  This  verse  repeats  the  very  prayer  of  Christ 
Himself  upon  the  Cross.  So  he  opens  a  great  door  of  hope.  The  Church  ought  to 
be  fertile  in  its  invention  of  opportunities  for  the  worst  men  to  return.  Tell  the 
very  worst  man  that  the  door  of  hope,  if  not  wide  open,  is  yet  ajar,  and  that  the 
very  faintest  touch  of  his  fingers  wiU  cause  it  to  fall  back  to  the  very  wall,  7. 
Then  comes  the  keyword  of  apostolic  preaching,  and  the  secret  of  apostolic  success — 
"  repent  "  (ver.  19).  It  is  like  the  sword  of  which  David  said,  "  Give  me  that ;  there 
is  none  like  it."  This  word  "  repent "  goes  t(^the  root  and  to  the  reality  of  the 
case.  Who  has  repented  ?  I  do  not  ask  who  has  been  alarmed  by  threatened  con- 
sequences, and  who  therefore  has  professed  a  change  of  habit  and  of  purpose. 
My  question  is  a  deeper  one.  Who  has  felt  heart-brokenness  on  account  of  sin,  as 
a  spiritual  offence  against  God  ?  Have  we  not  forgotten  that  old  word  ?  Has  the 
Church  become  too  dainty  to  use  it  ?  8.  There  is  another  word  in  ver.  19  of  as  much 
importance — "  therefore  " — which  refers  to  the  historical  and  logical  argument 
upon  which  Christianity  is  founded.  Peter  having  gone  back  to  "  God  of  Abraham," 
&c.,  and  having  traced  the  history  of  the  Crucifixion,  and  having  explained  the 
secret  by  v/hich  the  lame  man  had  been  healed,  &c.,  gathers  himself  up  in  this  one 
supreme  effort,  and  says,  "  Bepent  ye,  therefore  " — for  no  sentimental  reasons,  but 
on  the  historical  ground  of  the  ancient  dealings  of  God  with  His  people,  and  be- 
cause of  the  culmination  of  those  dealings  in  the  recovery  of  the  man  who  is 
standing  there.  9.  Then  Peter's  speech  proceeds  like  a  deep,  broad  river,  and  ends 
with  "  Unto  you  first  God,  having  raised  up  His  Son  Jesus,  sent  Him  to  bless  you." 
Apostolic  preaching  was  tender,  but  it  kept  itself  to  this  one  theme.  And  because  it 
did  so  it  turned  the  world  upside  down.  Preacher,  come  back  from  all  intellectual 
vagaries,  romances,  and  dreamings,  and  stand  to  your  one  work  of  accusing  men 
of  sins,  and  then  revealing  the  hving  Son  of  God,  who  came  with  the  one  purpose 
only  of  blessing  men.  Blessing  and  iniquity  never  can  co-exist  in  the  same  heart. 
The  iniquity  must  go,  and  the  blessing  will  come.  The  wickedness  must  depart,  and 
then  angels  will  hasten  into  the  soul  from  which  it  has  gone  out.  {J.  Parker  D.D.) 
'Hie  miracle  at  the  Beautiful  gate  as  a  text : — It  is  a  law  of  mind  to  look  through  its 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi. 

dominant  sentiments,  and  to  subordinate  all  outward  things  to  its  dominant  pur- 
poses. The  apostles  were  full  of  thoughts  pertaining  to  Christ,  and  they  looked  at 
all  events  through  this  medium.  I.  Peter  traces  the  miracle  to  its  true  Author. 
1.  Negatively.  He  disclaims  the  authorship — a  remarkable  demonstration  of  his 
honesty.  Had  he  taken  the  credit  his  social  power  would  have  been  regnant  at 
once,  and  would  have  had  an  immense  following.  And  the  people  were  willing  to 
give  it  him.  2.  Positively.  He  shows — (1)  That  their  God  had  wrought  the 
miracle.  "  The  God  of  Abraham."  (2)  That  their  God  had  wrought  it  in  order  to 
glorify  His  Son — not  merely  to  restore  the  invalid — and  to  attest  the  Messiahship  of 
Him  whom  they  had  put  to  death.  II.  He  connects  the  miracle  with  the  name 
OF  Christ.  He  had  unbounded  faith  in  Jesus,  and  had  therefore  power  to  perform 
works  that  should  demonstrate  His  Divine  authority  ;  and  the  effects  produced  on 
the  bodies  of  men  were  02ily  faint  types  of  the  results  which  faith  in  Christ  will 
produce  on  souls.     Jesus  is  here  presented — 1.  In  the  titles  that  belong  to  Him. 

(1)  "  Holy  One  and  Just."  (2)  "  Prince  of  Life."  2.  In  the  history  of  their  con- 
duct. (1)  They  delivered  Him  up.  (2)  They  denied  Him,  their  Messiah,  in  the 
presence  of  a  heathen  scoffer.  (3)  This  was  done  in  opposition  to  the  tyrant's  wi&h. 
(4)  They  preferred  a  mnrderer.  (5)  They  killed  Him.  3.  In  His  relation  to  God. 
God  had — (1)  Glorified  Him,  (2)  Kaised  Him  from  the  dead.  (3)  Overruled  their 
conduct  towards  Him.  Observe— (a)  It  was  the  purpose  of  the  Father  that  Christ 
should  suffer  as  announced  in  prophecy  (Psa.  xxii ;  Isa.  liii.  3-10  ;  Dan.  ix.  26). 
(b)  That  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  was  made  to  subserve  this  purpose.  So  perfect  is 
the  control  which  the  Monarch  of  the  universe  has  over  His  creatures,  thut  He 
makes  the  g-eatest  rebels  work  out  His  grandest  plans,  (c)  The  Jews  were  ignorant 
of  what  they  were  doing.  This  was  said  not  to  extenuate  their  guilt,  but  to  convict 
them  of  their  folly  and  impotence.  III.  He  develops  the  Christian  plan  of 
restitution  (vers.  19-26).  Which — 1.  Aims  at  a  thorough  spiritual  reformation 
as  a  necessary  condition.      This  includes — (1)  A  change  of  heart.     "  Kepent,"  &c. 

(2)  Forgiveness  of  sins.  "  That  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out."  (3)  Invigoration 
of  being.  "  When  the  times  of  refreshing  shall  come."  2.  Is  ever  under  the  direc- 
tion of  God.  "From  the  presence  of  the  Lord"  i.e.,  by  His  providence.  Observe 
— (1)  That  the  invigorating  influence  of  the  scheme  is  from  God.  The  times  of 
refreshing  are  from  His  presence.  (2)  That  the  chief  Agent  of  this  scheme  is  from 
God.  "  He  shall  send  Jesus."  (3)  That  the  revelation  of  this  scheme  is  from  God. 
"  Which  God  hath  spoken,"  &c.  3.  Shall  realise  its  end  before  the  final  advent  of 
Christ.  "  Whom  the  heavens  must  receive,"  &c.  Christ  is  now  in  heaven,  but  His 
work  proceeds  on  earth,  and  when  His  work  is  accompli-hed  He  will  come  again, 
and  not  before.  Pre-millennialism  is  a  delusion.  4.  Is  the  grand  burden  of  pro- 
phetic truth.  Observe — (1)  The  cases  of  prophetic  reference  to  Christ,  (a)  Moses 
(ver.  22  ;  cf.  Deut.  xviii.  15-19,  LXX.).  {b)  Samuel  (ver.  24).  Moses  and  Samuel 
are  the  most  distinguished  names  in  Jewish  history ;  but  they  are  mentioned  as 
samples,  (c)  All  the  prophets.  We  may  not  be  able  to  trace  references  to  Christ 
in  each,  yet  in  the  majority  of  the  prophetic  books  there  are  notes  of  hope  struck 
from  the  harp  of  future  ages,  flashes  of  light  from  that  bright  day  which  Abraham 
saw  afar.  (2)  The  reason  for  these  references  (ver.  25).  5.  Was  first  to  be  pre- 
sented to  the  Jews  (ver.  26).  Chiist  was  sent — (1)  To  bless,  not  to  curse.  Justly 
might  we  have  expected  malediction.  (2)  To  bless  with  the  greatest  blessing. 
Iniquity  is  the  greatest  curse  ;  to  men  from  that  is  the  greatest  boon.  (3)  To  bless 
the  greatest  sinners  firot.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Peter's  sermon  : — How  he  denounces 
(vers.  14,  15) ;  how  he  comforts  and  grows  gentle  (vers.  17,  18) ;  how  he  pleads 
(ver.  19) ;  how  he  promises  (ver.  20) ;  how  he  proves  (ver.  21).  It  makes  one  think 
another  Joseph  has  come  to  the  pulpit  (Gen.  xlv.  4,  5).  (C.  S.  Rohin>on,  D.D.) 
Peter's  address : — I.  Jesus  presented.  II.  Sinners  condemned.  III.  Pardon 
proclaimed.     (J.  T.  McCrory.)        Peterh  address  .-—He— I.  Begins  (vers.  12-16) 

BY  DISCLAIMING  THE  MIRACLE  AS    HIS    OWN  AND  ASCRIBING    IT  TO    ChRIST.      II.    GoCS   On 

(vers.  13-16),  to  set  before  the  people  their  sin.     III.  Continues  (vers.  19,  21) 

BY   HOLDING    OUT  A  HOPE   OF    MERCY.       IV.    CrOWHS    all  (verS.  19,  21)  BY  A  SUMMONS    TO 

bepentance  and  a  CHANGED  LIFE.      {Monday    Club.)  Peter's  address: — I.  The 

exordium  is  stamped  with  humility  (ver.  12).  II.  The  body  is  marked  by 
FIDELITY  (vers,  13-18).  III.  The  application  is  redolent  of  mercy  (vers. 
19-26).  (J.  Bennett,  D.D.)  Peter's  speech : — This  was  in  thorough  consonance 
with  the  miracle.  The  people  were  excited,  the  apostles  were  calm  ;  the  people 
clamoured  in  darkness,  the  apostles  spoke  from  the  serene  elevation  of  cloudless 
height ;  the  people  were  startled  by  a  spectacle,  the  apostles  were  controlled  by  law. 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  303. 

Was  it  not  almost  a  mockery  to  ask  the  people  why  they  marvelled  ?  Are  great 
works  to  he  regarded  without  surprise  ?  Are  men  to  become  familiar  with  the  out- 
stretched arm  of  God  and  to  be  calm  ?  The  power  that  can  restore  is  one  that  can 
destroy  ;  what  if  that  dread  power  be  preparing  itself  to  strike  ?  It  would  strike  but 
once — its  stroke  would  be  death.  Peter's  speech  may  be  regarded  as  showing — I. 
The  false  method  of  looking  at  human  affairs — "  As  though  by  our  own  power," 
<fec.  1.  The  visible  is  not  the  final.  2.  Second  causes  do  not  explain  life.  There 
is  a  false  method  of  looking  at  the  results  of — (1)  Preaching.  (2)  Business.  (3) 
Thinking.  The  man  who  does  not  look  beyond  second  causes  lives  in  distraction — 
in  chaos  !  II.  The  true  method  of  regarding  extraordinary  events — "  God  liatli 
glorified  His  Son  Jesus."  "  Faith  in  His  name  hath  made  this  man  strong."  That 
is  the  sublime  explanation  of  all  recovery,  progress,  abiding  strength  and  comfort. 
Forget  God,  and  society  in  every  phase  and  movement  becomes  a  riddle  without  an 
answer ;  its  happiness  is  but  a  lucky  chance — its  misery  an  unexpected  cloud. 
Eegard  life  as  controlled  and  blessed  by  the  mediation  of  Christ,  then — 1.  There  is 
discipline  in  every  event — design,  meaning,  however  untoward  and  unmanageable 
the  event.  2.  A  purpose  of  restoration  runs  through  all  human  training.  See  how 
new,  how  beautiful,  life  would  be,  if  after  all  its  happy  experiences  we  could  say, 
"  God  hath  glorified  His  Son  Jesus"!  Physical  recovery;  spiritual  forgiveness; 
special  interpositions ;  even  death  itself.  III.  The  only  method  of  setting  man 
EIGHT  with  God.  "Eepent  ye  therefore,"  &c.  The  men  who  worked  miracles 
spoke  plain  words  about  men's  souls.  There  is  no  ambiguity  here.  Are  the  old  words 
"  Eepent,"  "  Be  converted,"  being  allowed  to  slip  out  of  Christian  teaching,  and  are 
we  now  trifling  with  the  character  and  destiny  of  men  ?  1.  Every  man  must  repent, 
because  every  man  has  sinned.  2.  Every  man  must  be  converted,  because  every 
man  is  in  a  false  moral  condition.  IV.  The  sublime  object  of  Christ's  incarna- 
tion— "  To  bless  you,"  &c.  1.  Where  iniquity  is  there  is  no  blessing.  2.  Physical 
restoration  is  the  type  of  spiritual  completeness.  Conclusion  :  1.  Two  practical 
lessons  arise  out  of  the  subject.  (1)  It  is  not  enough  to  wonder  at  the  mighty 
works  of  God.  (2)  God's  glory  is  even  identified  with  the  well  being  of  man. 
"  Eestitution,"  "  Eefreshing,"  "Blessing."  2.  Peter's  appeal  rested  upon  a  solid 
Biblical  basis ;  Moses,  Samuel,  and  all  the  prophets.  God's  message  is  the  sum- 
ming up  of  ail  the  voices  of  holy  history.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  threefold  testi- 
mony of  Feter  concerning  Christ: — He  is — 1.  The  substance  of  all  miracles  (vers. 
12,  17).  2.  The  Eedeemer  of  all  souls  (vers.  18-21).  3.  The  accompUsher  of  all 
prophecies  (vers.  22-26).     (Lisco.)  True  courage  : — If  you  see  a  man  on  the 

railway  track  before  an  approaching  train,  or  if  you  see  a  child  in  the  roadway 
in  danger  of  being  run  over  by  a  horse,  you  have  no  right  to  be  silent  and 
inactive.  It  is  a  sin  not  to  speak  out.  If  you  see  the  first  outbursting  of  flames 
in  a  neighbour's  house  it  would  be  criminal  not  to  cry  "Fire."  Truth  cannot 
be  kept  to  yourself  without  sin.  Silence  on  popular  forms  of  wrong  doing  is 
criminal  silence.  Silence  concerning  the  duty  of  repentance  and  the  possi- 
bilities of  salvation  in  the  presence  of  the  impenitent  and  unsaved  is  not 
to  be  thought  of  by  the  true  disciple  of  Jesus.  {H.  G.  Trumbull,  D.D.) 
Why  look  ye  so  earnestly  upon  us  as  though  by  our  own  power  and  holiness  we  had 
made  this  man  to  walk. — "  Show  me  the  doctor  "  ; — A  man,  blind  from  his  birth,  a 
man  of  much  intellectual  vigour,  and  with  many  engaging  social  qualities,  found  a 
woman  who,  appreciating  his  worth,  was  willing  to  cast  in  her  lot  with  him  and 
become  his  wife.  Several  bright,  beautiful  children  became  theirs,  who  tenderly 
and  equally  loved  both  their  parents.  An  eminent  French  surgeon,  while  in  this 
country,  called  upon  them,  and,  examining  the  blind  man  with  much  interest  and 
care,  said  to  him  : — "  Your  blindness  is  wholly  artificial ;  your  eyes  are  naturally 
good,  and  if  I  could  have  operated  upon  them  twenty  years  ago,  I  think  I  could 
have  given  you  sight.  It  is  barely  possible  that  I  can  do  it  now,  though  it  will 
cause  you  much  pain."  "  I  can  bear  that,"  was  the  reply,  "  so  you  but  enable  me 
to  see."  The  surgeon  operated  upon  him,  and  was  gradually  successful.  First 
there  were  faint  glimmerings  of  light ;  then  more  distinct  vision.  The  blind  father 
was  handed  a  rose ;  he  had  smelled  one  before,  but  had  never  seen  one.  Then  he 
looked  upon  the  face  of  his  wife,  who  had  been  so  true  and  faithful  to  him  ;  and 
then  his  children  were  brought,  whom  he  had  so  often  fondled,  and  whose  charming 
prattle  had  so  frequently  fallen  upon  his  ears.  He  then  exclaimed  :  "  Oh,  why 
have  I  seen  all  of  these  before  inquiring  for  the  man  by  whose  skill  I  have  been 
enabled  to  behold  them  1  Show  me  the  doctor."  And  when  he  was  pointed  out  to 
^  him,  he  embraced  him  with  tears  of  gratitude  and  joy.      So,  when  we  reach 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iiv 

heaven,  and  with  unclouded  eyes  look  upon  its  glories,  we  shall  not  be  content  with 
a  view  of  these.  No  ;  we  shall  say,  "  Where  is  Christ — He  to  whom  I  am  indebted 
for  what  heaven  is  ?  Show  me  Him,  that  with  all  my  soul  I  may  adore  and  praise 
Him  through  endless  ages."  Credit  due  to  Christ : — The  engineer  of  an  express 
train  sees,  just  ahead,  a  switch  wrongly  turned,  and  knows  that  if  he  cannot  stop 
the  train  it  will  go  over  the  bank  and  be  destroyed.  The  stoker  jumps  out,  but  the 
brave  engineer  resolves  to  share  the  fate  of  the  engine.  Speedily  he  reverses  the 
action,  and  with  aU  his  strength  rolls  back  the  wheels,  Just  as  the  fatal  point  is 
reached,  they  cease  to  move,  and  the  train  is  saved  1  What  meanness  would  it  be, 
when  unharmed,  they  reach  the  town,  for  the  stoker  to  say,  "  We  were  in  great 
danger,  but  by  my  presence  of  mind  I  saved  the  train."  Yet  what  greater  mean- 
ness is  it  for  us  to  take  the  credit  to  ourselves  when  it  belongs  to  Christ.  God's 
influences  come  upon  you  in  mighty  tides,  and  you  have  no  right  to  claim  for 
yourself  the  glory  which  belongs  to  Christ.      (H.   W,   Beecher.)  Glory  to  he 

given  to  God : — If  I  were  a  pupil  of  Titian,  and  he  should  design  my  picture  and 
sketch  it  for  me,  and  look  over  my  work  every  day,  and  make  suggestions,  and 
then,  when  I  had  exhausted  my  skill,  he  should  take  the  brush  and  give  the  finish- 
ing touches,  bringing  out  a  part  here  and  there,  and  making  the  whole  glow  with 
beauty,  and  then  I  should  hang  it  upon  the  wall,  and  call  it  mine,  what  meanness 
it  would  be  !  When  life  is  the  picture  and  Christ  is  the  designer  and  master,  what 
greater  meanness  is  it  to  allow  all  the  excellence  to  be  attributed  to  ourselves. 
{Ibid.)  Glory  due  to  Christ: — That  workman  should  do  ill  who  having  built  a 
house  with  another  man's  purse,  should  go  about  to  set  up  his  own  arms  upon  the 
front  thereof.  In  Justinian's  law  it  was  decreed  that  no  workman  should  set 
up  his  name  within  the  body  of  that  building  which  he  made  out  of  another 
man's  cost.  Thus  Christ  sets  us  all  at  work,  it  is  He  that  bids  us  to  fast,  and  pray, 
and  hear,  and  give  alms,  &c.  But  who  is  at  the  cost  of  all  ?  whose  are  all  these 
works  ?  surely  God's.  Man's  poverty  is  so  great  that  he  cannot  reach  a  good 
thought,  much  less  a  good  deed  ;  all  the  nraterials  are  from  God,  the  building  is 
His,  it  is  His  purse  that  paid  for  it ;  give  but  therefore  the  glory  and  the  honour 
thereof  unto  God,  and  take  all  the  profit  to  thyself.  (-/.  Spencer.)  The  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  conversion  of  men : — 1.  The  disposition  of  the  crowd  to 
make  heroes  of  the  apostles  when  they  should  have  recognised  in  the  miracle  the 
power  of  God  is  an  illustration  of  a  common  and  not  altogether  mischievous 
instinct.  When  through  foreign  invasion  or  internal  revolution  the  institutions  of 
society  are  broken  up,  the  blind  submission  which  a  whole  nation  sometimes  yields 
to  a  popular  chief,  or  the  heir  of  an  illustrious  name,  sometimes  renders  it  possible 
to  restore  law  and  order.  The  intellectual  supremacy  of  great  men  has  also  its 
uses ;  it  preserves  something  like  order  in  our  intellectual  life.  It  is  the  same 
with  that  conspicuous  moral  excellence  which  wins  more  reverential  homage.  The 
example  of  great  saints  has  been  a  law  to  successive  generations.  2.  But  there  is 
hero-worship  in  the  Bible.  The  Jews  had  their  fighting  men,  poets,  orators,  states- 
men, saints  ;  but  you  find  no  dispositioa  in  the  Old  Testament  to  surround  them 
with  glory.  The  heroism  of  Wallace  is  commemorated  in  the  national  songs  of 
Scotland,  but  there  is  no  Psalm  to  celebrate  the  heroism  of  David.  Nor  does 
Jewish  history  exalt  Moses  as  the  history  of  Europe  exalts  Charlemagne,  as  the 
history  of  England  exalts  Alfred  or  Elizabeth.  The  genius  of  Isaiah  does  not 
receive  the  same  kind  of  homage  that  we  concede  to  the  genius  of  Dante  or  of 
Shakespeare.  There  is  the  same  absence  of  hero-worship  in  the  New  Testament. 
Luke  never  analyses  the  apostles'  power  nor  dwells  upon  their  personal  qualities. 
That  they  were  in  any  way  remarkable  is  never  intentionally  suggested.  The 
saints  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  saints  of  the  New  are  transparent ;  God 
shines  through  them.  3.  That  is  the  Christian  law.  Are  men  steadfast  in  right- 
eousness, fervent  in  charity,  temperate,  fearless?  Do  not  glorify  them ;  glorify 
God  who  made  them  so  good.  Are  they  wise  ?  Glorify  God  who  is  the  Giver  of 
wisdom.  Have  they  wrought  great  deliverances  for  mankind  ?  Why  look  ye  on 
them  as  though  by  their  own  power  or  holiness  they  had  wrought  these  deliver- 
ances ?  Joshua  fought  well ;  but  when  the  men  of  later  days  look  back  upon  his 
victories,  they  say — "  We  have  heard  with  our  ears,  0  God,"  &c.  And  we  find  the 
greatest  of  the  apostles  saying,  "  I  planted,  Apollos  watered,  and  God  gave  the 
increase."  This  address  of  St.  Peter's  about  the  miracle  is  a  vivid  illustration  of 
the  spirit  of  both  Testaments.  4.  In  recent  times  we  have  failed  to  maintain  the 
traditional  spirit  of  Judaism  and  of  Christianity.  We  dwell  on  the  goodness, 
temperament,  and  intellectual  power  of  Peter,  Paul,  and  John ;  and  treat  them  as 


CHAP,  m.]  THE  ACTS.  305 

ordinary  historians  treat  sovereigns  like  Elizabeth  and  Cromwell,  statesmen  like 
Burghley  and  Walpole  and  Chatham.  We  inquire  what  there  was  in  the  men  that 
accounted  for  the  success  of  their  work.  No  doubt  their  character  and  endow- 
ments had  a  dkect  relation  to  their  work.  But  the  gifts  were  from  God ;  their 
power  was  His.  In  the  spiritual,  as  in  the  natural  life,  when  the  blind  receive 
sight,  Christ  gives  it ;  when  the  lame  walk,  it  is  Christ  who  makes  them  strong. 
"  His  name  through  faith  in  His  name,  hath  made  this  man  strong  "  is  the  ex- 
planation of  all  wonders.  5.  Wycliffe,  Luther,  Calvin,  Baxter,  Wesley,  and 
Whitefield,  what  were  they  aU  but  ministers  of  God  by  whom  England  or  Europe 
came  to  know  and  believe  a  truer  gospel  ?  They  should  be  transparent  to  us  as  the 
Jewish  prophets  and  heroes,  and  as  the  Christian  apostles  were.  Their  noble 
quahties  may  be  honoured  as  God's  gifts  ;  but  stUl  it  was  not  their  power  or  their 
holiness  that  first  loosened  and  then  broke  the  fetters  by  which  the  spiritual  life  of 
nations  was  bound  ;  it  was  God  who  did  it  aU.  This  holds  true  of  aU  effective 
spiritual  work  in  our  own  time.  When  men  are  prevailed  upon  to  submit  to 
Christ's  authority,  their  great  decision  is  not  to  be  attributed  to  the  impassioned 
eloquence,  the  vigorous  argument,  the  pathetic  entreaty  of  the  preacher,  nor  to  his 
personal  sanctity,  nor  to  his  fervent  zeal,  but  to  the  direct  appeal  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  to  the  conscience  and  to  the  heart.     I.  Everything  short  of  the  actual 

CONVERSION    OF  MEN  TO  GoD  WE  CAN  ACCOMPLISH  WITHOUT  God's  HELP  ;    BUT    FOR  THAT 

WE  ARE  ENTIRELY  DEPENDENT  UPON  HiM.  1.  Canvass  the  town  for  children  and 
you  can  fiU  your  Sunday  schools.  Make  the  teaching  interesting,  let  the  rooms  be 
pleasant,  have  cheerful  singing,  let  the  teacher  be  kindly  and  earnest,  and  you  can 
keep  the  children  when  you  have  them,  and  enable  them  to  pass  excellent  ex- 
aminations in  Scripture,  and  you  can  soften  their  manners,  refine  their  tastes  and 
elevate  their  morals.  And  if  you  are  satisfied  with  this  there  is  no  need  to  pray. 
But  if  you  want  the  children  to  love  a,nd  serve  Christ,  the  Spirit  of  God  must' 
be  with  you,  and  must  work  directly  on  the  inner  thought  and  hfe  of  your 
scholars.  2.  Build  an  attractive  church,  get  a  good  organ  and  choir,  let  there  be 
an  educated  and  earnest  and  eloquent  man  in  the  pulpit,  and  you  can  get  a  crowd 
of  people  to  hear  him,  and  he  may  produce  a  profound  impression.  But  if  men 
are  to  be  moved  to  real  penitence,  and  are  to  be  inspired  with  real  faith,  the  hght 
and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  must  reach  individual  hearts.  3.  Many  of  us  know 
what  this  means.  For  years  we  were  familiar  with  truths  which  ought  to  have 
exerted  irresistible  control  over  us  ;  we  beheved  them  ;  sometimes  we  felt  their 
power.  But  we  can  remember  when  these  very  truths  came  to  us  as  though  we 
had  never  known  them  before.  Perhaps  we  were  listening  to  a  sermon  ;  but  we  had 
listened  to  sermons  before,  and  to  sermons  not  less  impressive,  and  had  listened 
unmoved ;  others  heard  the  same  sermon  and  it  did  not  touch  them.  Perhaps  we 
were  reading  a  book  ;  but  we  had  read  the  book  before,  and  it  had  never  taught  us 
what  we  now  learnt,  and  others  have  read  the  same  book  and  learnt  nothing  from 
it.  What  made  the  difference  was  a  silent  voice  to  which  then,  for  the  first  time, 
we  consented  to  listen.  The  Spirit  of  God  came  to  us,  and  we  suffered  Him  to 
lead  us  into  the  truth.  II.  Our  perverse  reluctance  to  believe  that  all  life  and 
LIGHT  COME  FROM  GoD  IS  INEXPLICABLE.  We  havc  to  Icam  the  same  lesson  over 
and  over  again  in  many  forms  ;  and  we  look  back  upon  wasted  years,  and  mourn 
that  we  had  not  learnt  the  open  secret  earlier  which  would  have  made  all  those  years 
bright  and  noble  and  glorious  success.  1.  The  lesson  has  to  be  learnt  at  the 
beginning  of  the  religious  life.  We  want  the  pardon  of  sin  and  that  change  which 
will  render  it  possible  for  us  to  do  the  will  of  God.  And  we  try  for  months, 
perhaps  for  years,  to  make  our  penitence  for  sin  more  agonising  and  our  hunger 
and  thirst  for  righteousness  more  keen,  hoping  that  at  last  we  shall  have  assurance 
and  strength.  It  is  aU  in  vain ;  and  then  we  discover  what  we  knew  from  the  first 
— that  we  can  trust  God  to  forgive  us,  and  to  inspire  us  with  the  life  and  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost :  we  trust  Him  and  we  pass  into  a  new  world.  2.  But  the  lesson 
has  to  be  learnt  over  again.  We  are  now  liberated  from  distress  about  our  past 
guilt,  and  we  know  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God  ;  but  we  find  that  we  are  unequal 
to  many  duties,  and  are  overcome  by  many  temptations.  We  subject  ourselves  to 
discipUne  ;  we  pray ;  we  think  upon  the  transcendent  motives  to  righteousness.  It  is 
all  in  vain.  And  then,  again,  we  discover  what  a  child  might  have  taught  us,  what 
we  always  knew,  that  evil  passions  are  to  be  burnt  down  to  their  very  roots  by  the 
fire  of  God  ;  that  we  are  to  be  strong  for  holy  Uving  in  the  strength  of  God :  we 
trust  in  Him  once  more,  and  as  long  as  we  trust  we  are  kept  in  perfect  peace. 
3.  But  we  have  not  learnt  the  lesson  even  now.  We  engage  in  Christian  work. 
VOL.  I.  20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  in. 

We  do  our  best,  and  hardly  anything  comes  of  it.  Then  once  more  we  discover 
what  we  always  knew ;  God  and  only  God  can  bring  right  home  to  man  the  truth 
which  is  on  our  lips ;  we  trust  in  Him,  and  then  our  work  begins  to  prosper. 
III.  Entire  dependence  in  God  is  the  secret  of  ministerial  power.  1.  For 
the  work  of  the  Christian  ministry  it  is  necessary  to  secure  men  of  intellectual 
power,  and  men  who  have  received  the  most  thorough  intellectual  training. 
There  is  an  Antinomianism  in  relation  to  Christian  work  not  less  fatal  and  far 
more  subtle  than  the  Antinomianism  of  the  Christian  life.  Men  have  argued 
that  since  they  can  do  nothing  for  their  own  salvation  without  God,  they  will 
attempt  nothing.  They  might  as  well  say  that  they  can  get  no  harvest  without 
the  rain  of  heaven  and  the  heat  and  Ught  of  the  sun,  and  that  therefore  they  will 
not  plough  nor  sow.  And  men  have  argued,  that  since  Christian  work  can  never 
achieve  its  highest  results  apart  from  the  direct  appeal  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  the 
souls  of  men,  that  learning  and  eloquence  are  worthless,  and  that  we  should  leave 
everything  to  God.  What  insanity  there  is  in  this  1  2.  But  among  ourselves  there 
are  not  many  who  are  likely  to  be  infected  with  this  heresy.  Our  peril  lies  in  the 
opposite  direction.  1.  We  look  back  upon  the  great  evangelists  of  the  past,  and 
think  that  if  we  could  only  have  them  with  us  again  the  most  glorious  days  of  the 
Church  would  return.  If  St.  Bernard  with  his  fiery  passion,  Luther  with  his 
audacity  and  immense  moral  force,  Whitefield  with  his  affectionate  spirit  and  his 
charming  eloquence,  Wesley  with  his  cahn  and  resolute  strength  and  his  keen 
sagacity  were  here — then  we  might  hope  to  see  a  great  religious  reformation  in^ 
England.  But  what  can  we  do  ?  This  self -distrust  is  only  the  specious  cover  of  a' 
want  of  faith  in  God.  The  illustrious  preachers  of  former  days  are  with  us  no 
longer ;  but  the  great  Preacher  of  all  is  with  us  still — the  only  Preacher  whose 
voice  can  raise  the  dead,  whose  power  achieved  all  the  triumphs  which  we  connect 
with  the  famous  and  sacred  names  in  the  history  of  Christendom.  Could  these 
great  saints  come  back  again,  it  would  not  be  to  take  the  work  from  our  hands 
because  we  are  unequal  to  it,  but  to  tell  us  that  the  same  Spirit  that  was  with  them 
can  still  reach  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  men.  2.  Even  when  we  pray  we 
sometimes  forget  that  our  trust  should  be  in  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  ask  that  for  the 
success  of  our  work  we  may  have  a  larger  knowledge  of  the  thought  of  God,  a  more 
fervent  passion  for  the  honour  of  Christ,  a  profonnder  solicitude  for  the  rescue  of 
men — wise  and  necessary  prayers,  but  incomplete,  fatally  incomplete.  For  the 
prayers  imply  that  if  we  ourselves  had  greater  "  power,"  greater  "  holiness,"  we 
should  be  successful.  This  was  not  what  the  apostles  thought — *'  Paul  planted, 
Apollos  watered,  God  gave  the  increase."  3.  What  is  true  of  men  is  also  true  of 
ecclesiastical  systems.  It  is  not  the  perfection  of  its  organisation  that  enables  a 
Church  to  redeem  men.  There  have  been  preachers  in  the  Church  of  Eome,  spite 
of  its  monstrous  polity,  who  have  done  glorious  work  for  mankind  and  for  God. 
There  is  no  "  power,"  no  "  holiness  "  in  Presbyterianism,  in  Methodism,  in  Con- 
gregationalism, in  Episcopacy,  to  work  spiritual  miracles.  The  chief  merit  of  an 
ecclesiastical  system  lies  in  the  measure  in  which  it  is  transparent  and  lets  the 
glory  of  Christ  shine  through.  4.  The  same  test  is  to  be  applied  to  aU  theologies 
and  all  methods  of  spiritual  discipline.  Do  they  break  down  everything  that  comes 
between  the  soul  and  Him  who  is  the  fountain  of  mercy  and  of  power?  (1)  TeU 
me  that  my  good  works  are  necessary  before  Christ  will  forgive  my  sins,  and  you 
put  months,  and  perhaps  years,  of  painful  moral  struggle  between  me  and  Christ ; 
tell  me  that  He  will  forgive  me  at  once,  as  soon  as  I  come  to  Him,  and  Christ  is 
already  at  my  side  at  the  very  beginning  of  my  new  life.  The  doctrine  of  justifi- 
cation by  works  seems  less  likely  to  be  true  than  the  doctrine  of  justification  by 
faith.  (2)  TeU  me  that  to  make  sure  of  the  Divine  forgiveness  I  must  confess  my 
sins  to  a  priest,  and  there  is  danger  lest  the  priest  should  come  between  me  and  Christ. 
Tell  me  that  I  can  confess  to  Christ,  and  then,  again,  Christ  is  near  to  me  while  I 
am  in  the  agony  of  my  repentance.  The  doctrine  which  affirms  that  the  priest  has 
power  to  absolve  seems  less  likely  to  be  true  than  the  doctrine  which  denies  it. 
(3)  Tell  me  that  the  priest  must  consecrate  the  bread  and  the  wine  before  the 
Church  can  have  the  real  presence  of  Christ  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  then  the 
Church  must  wait  till  the  priest  has  pronounced  the  words  of  mystery  and  power. 
Tell  me  that  wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  at  the  table  of  Christ, 
Christ  is  among  them,  and  then  there  is  no  delay,  either  in  His  access  to  us,  or  our 
access  to  Him.  Those  who  maintain  the  theory  of  sacramentalism  seem  less 
likely  to  be  in  the  right  than  those  who  reject  it.  (4)  But  here,  too,  we  must  re- 
member that  the  truest  and  simplest  doctrine  may  be  made  a  fetich,  and  may  come 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  307 

between  the  soul  and  Christ.  If  you  think  that  any  doctrine  is  so  true  and  so 
simple  that  by  its  own  "power"  or  "holiness"  it  will  regenerate  and  save 
men,  you  will  be  separated  from  Christ  as  completely  by  the  soundest  belief  as 
other  men  are   by  the  most   corrupt.      IV.  The   truths  which   we   have   been 

CONSIDERING    SHOULD    TEACH    US    TO    BE     OP    GOOD     HEART    ABOUT    THE    WORK,    WHICH    IS 

Christ's  rather  than  ours.  We  fU'e  conscious  —  all  of  us — that  we  have 
little  strength  to  do  any  noble  service  for  God  and  for  mankind.  The  con- 
sciousness deepens  as  we  grow  older.  But  neither  our  weakness  nor  our  un- 
worthiness  is  a  reason  for  despondency.  If  we  had  to  measure  our  own  strength 
and  earnestness  against  the  difficulties  of  our  work  we  migbt  despair  ;  but  our  con- 
fidence is  in  the  strength  and  in  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  results 
of  our  labour  will  transcend  all  that  could  be  anticipated  from  the  labour  itself. 
This  kindles  our  enthusiasm,  and  is  a  motive  for  strenuous  exertion.  If  we  are 
only  perfectly  loyal  to  Christ,  even  we  may  do  very  much  for  the  rescue  of  men. 
The  true  minister  of  Christ  does  not  stand  alone ;  he  is  in  alhance  with  Christ 
Himself ;  this  is  the  secret  of  the  minister's  power.  But  very  much  depends  on 
the  sympathy  he  receives  from  his  Church,  lien  remember  the  famous  description 
of  an  orator.  It  was  not  his  voice  alone  that  spoke ;  his  eyes,  his  face,  his  hands, 
his  feet — they  were  all  eloquent.  And  a  Church  is  a  living  body.  The  minister  is 
its  voice;  but,  if  he  is  to  speak  to  any  purpose,  the  voice  must  not  come  from 
a  body  struck  with  death,  with  fixed  features,  glassy  eyes,  and  rigid  limbs ;  there 
would  be  something  ghastly  in  that.  Eyes,  hands,  face,  feet,  must  all  have  life  and 
passion  in  them,  and  must  all  speak  ;  they  must  share  the  sorrow  and  alarm  with 
which  the  minister  tells  men  of  the  infinite  evil  of  sin,  and  the  rapture  with  which 
he  triumphs  in  the  infinite  love  of  God.     (R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  13-16.  The  God  of  Abraham  .  .  .  hath  glorified  His  Son  Jesus ;  whom  ye 
delivered  up. — St.  Peter^s  testimony  : — I.  The  vindication  of  Christianity  from  a 
Jewish  standpoint.  "  The  God  of  Abraham,"  &c.,  not  God  generally  considered, 
but  God  in  relations  acknowledged  by  the  Jews — the  God  of  Abraham,  as  such, 
had  glorified  Jesus.  If  this  were  the  case,  then  Judaism  was  logically  at  an  end. 
The  God  of  Abraham,  in  a  sense,  had  glorified  Moses,  and  had  so  terminated  the 
patriarchal  dispensation,  which  every  good  Jew  would  acknowledge  was  thereby 
legitimately  closed,  and  religion  thus  advanced  a  stage.  Now  the  same  God  had 
glorified  the  great  Teacher  whom  Moses  had  predicted  (ver.  22),  under  whom  the 
legal  dispensation  must  pass  into  the  Christian.  When  that  Teacher  came  He  said, 
as  Moses  might  have  said,  "  I  come  not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil,"  and  when  He  died 
He  exclaimed,  "  It  is  finished."  By  glorifying  Jesus,  therefore,  God  put  His  seal 
upon  the  further  advance  which  religion  had  made  out  of  Judaism  into  Christianity. 
A  true  servant  of  the  God  of  Abraham  was  thus  logically  a  Christian.  II.  The 
GLORIFICATION  OF  THE  HUMILIATED  Christ.  1.  No  depth  of  Christ's  degradation 
is  here  left  unexplored.  (1)  He  who  claimed  to  command  legions  of  angels  was 
"  delivered  up."  (2)  He  who  demanded  the  profoundest  homage  and  the  com- 
plete allegiance  was  "destined."  (3)  This  denial  came  from  "His  own"  for 
whom  He  had  done  so  much,  and  to  whose  loyalty  He  had  every  right.  (4)  It 
took  place  in  the  presence  of  a  heathen  governor,  whose  jurisdiction  was  thereby 
acknowledged,  and  in  spite  of  even  his  protestations.  (5)  And  to  crown  all  the 
release  of  a  murderer  was  demanded,  while  the  Prince  of  Life  was  handed  over  to 
the  Cross.  2.  The  glorification  reversed  all  this.  Deep  as  Christ  descended  it  was 
higher  that  He  rose.  (1)  Jesus  was  released  from  a  more  terrible  than  Roman 
tyranny  after  Jews  and  Eomans  had  been  allowed  to  do  their  worst.  (2)  The 
belief  anii  confession  of  the  apostles  then,  and  of  adoring  Christians  since,  more 
than  compensates  for  the  denial  before  Pilate — the  inveterate  denial  which  has 
since  characterised  the  stubborn  race.  The  grand  testimony  of  Paul  before  Felix, 
Festus  and  Nero  makes  atonement  for  the  shameful  denial  of  Caiaphas  and  his 
rabble  before  the  Boman  judge — not  to  mention  the  innumerable  testimonies  all 
through  Christian  history  which,  "  before  princes  and  governors  "  have  been  borne 
to  Christ.  (3)  That  Cross  to  which  Christ  was  nailed  gave  Him  power  to  give  life 
to  dead  humanity,  and  that  power  He  now  wields  from  the  throne  of  heaven. 
III.  The  inveterate  depravity  of  the  human  heart  —  the  denial  of  the  Holy 
One  and  the  preference  of  a  murderer.  Here  sin  is  seen  in  its  ghastliest  develop- 
ment, but  the  ghastliness  lies  in  the  circumstances.  We  are  horrified  at  the 
Crucifixion,  but  the  Crucifixion  was  only  a  detail,  the  denial  was  the  essence  of  the 
act.     And  this  denial  of  Christ,  and  the  preference  of  one  who  is  "  a  murderer  from 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  hi. 

the  beginning  "  is  normal.  The  sinner  is  doing  to-day  that  the  only  logical  out- 
come of  which  is  crucifixion,  and  letting  loose  the  devil  on  his  life.  This  is  what 
is  being  done  on  a  large  scale,  and  the  same  is  being  done  on  a  smaller.  What  is 
history  but  the  record  of  the  preference  of  murderers  to  deliverers  ?  What  was 
the  reward  of  Socrates,  of  Savonarola,  of  Cromwell,  of  the  early  Christian  martyrs, 
and  later  Protestant  confessors  ?  IV.  The  impotence  of  seeming  might  and  the 
POWER  OF  APPARENT  WEAKNESS.  The  powcr  of  Ronie  was  at  its  greatest,  and 
the  malignancy  and  craft  of  Judaism  most  intense  and  concentrrtted,  and  both 
were  exerted  to  crush  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth.  And  both  said  that  He  was 
crushed — killed  upon  a  cross  and  shut  up  in  a  caiefuUy  guarded  tomb.  And 
then  it  might  seem  was  that  poor,  weak  Prophet  at  His  weakest  and  poorest. 
Who  could  help  Him  now?  Himself.  "The  Prince  of  Life,"  "could  not  be 
holden  of  death  "  ;  and  that  "  stone  cut  without  hands  "  has  crushed  in 
succession  the  mightiest  despotisms  that  have  dominated  the  race.  And 
that  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  the  power  of  man,  let  the  history  of 
all  great  and  beneficent  monuments  bear  witness.  "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs 
is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  The  leader  is  killed  but  the  cause  flourishes. 
Tbe  thinker  starves  ;  but  his  thoughts  become  the  potent  forces  of  the  world. 
The  inventor  dies  of  a  broken  heart  with  the  products  of  his  genius  lying  in  ruins 
around  him ;  but  his  invention  lives,  and  helps  to  make  civilisation  what  it  is.  V. 
The  POTENCY  of  faith — of  all  things  the  weakest  in  the  world's  estimate.  Are 
there  not  circles  in  which  faith  and  folly  are  convertible  terms  ?  And  on  what 
does  this  faith  rest  ?  On  what  the  world  would  call  an  accomplished  failure.  "  Stark 
imbecility  " — then  says  the  world.  But  here,  again,  God  chooses  the  weak  things  to 
confound  the  mighty;  for  in  this  early  instance  of  its  exercise  it  accomplished 
what  all  the  science  of  the  world  before  and  since  has  failed  to  do  ;  it  gave  a  man 
perfect  physical  soundness.  And  here,  and  here  alone,  is  the  cure  for  personal, 
social,  literary,  commercial,  national  unsoundness.  Everything  else  has  failed. 
Let  this  be  tried  on  a  large  scale,  and  faith  in  Christ  will  give  "  perfect  soundness  " 
to  a  crippled  world.  (J.  iV.  Burn.)  Men  denyinri  the  Jtist  One  : — I.  The  Person 
against  whom  the  outrage  was  perpetrated.  Men  thought  Him  a  mere  Jew ;  and 
yet  He  possessed  a  universality  and  fervour  of  love  inconsistent  with  the  Jewish 
character  generally.  Men  regarded  Him  as  only  a  carpenter ;  and  yet  He  evinced  a 
strength  of  mind  and  soul  which  enabled  Him  to  grapple  with  Divine  things 
altogether  beyond  the  grasp  of  the  Jewish  doctors.  Men  thought  Him  a  mere 
man  ;  and  yet  there  were  profound  depths  and  majestic  heights  about  His  nature, 
which  entirely  separated  Him  from  the  common  herd.  1.  He  looked  like  a  man  ; 
but  His  words  proved  Him  more.  2.  He  looked  like  a  man  ;  but  His  works  proved 
Him  more.  3.  He  looked  like  a  man ;  but  His  life  proved  Him  more.  II.  The  nature 
of  the  outrage  that  was  enacted.  1.  It  was  the  culminating  act  of  human  trans- 
gression. 2.  It  was  sin  against  their  highest  good.  III.  The  outcome  of  it  all. 
God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing.  "  He  made  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him." 
1.  From  the  death  of  Christ  came  deliverance  from  tbe  curse.  2.  From  Christ's 
death  came  the  magic  force  which  conquered  man's  rebellion.  Sinai's  terrors  and 
the  Levitical  law  failed  to  evoke  the  deep  affection  and  fervent  devotion  of  men. 
But  the  Cross  of  Christ  succeeded.      (Homilist.)  The  rejection  of  Christ : — How 

terrible  an  evil  this  was  Peter  showed — I.  By  the  testimony  of  a  heathen.  The 
sentiment  of  common  humanity  was  against  this  treatment.  How  often  has  the 
conduct  of  professors  shocked  the  prayerless.  II.  By  the  nature  of  the  thing 
itself.  This  is  set  forth  in  an  awful  gradation.  The  rejected  One  was — 1. 
Spotless.  2.  Righteous.  3.  The  Prince  of  Life,  without  wliose  interposition  no 
man  could  have  had  life.  4.  God's  own  chosen  Servant.  Ttiose  who  in  rejecting 
Him  had  repudiated  purity,  justice,  needful  grace,  and  indispensable  Divine  service, 
might  well  prefer  a  murderer.  What  is  reserved  for  those  who  now  reject  Christ 
with  clearer  light  and  further  knowledge  ?  III.  By  Goi/s  manifest  opposition  to 
it.  1.  Men  put  Jesus  to  death,  but  God  raised  Him  from  the  dead.  2.  Men  cast 
Him  out,  but  God  declared  Him  to  be  His  accepted  servant  by  the  Resurrection. 
Men  thought  the  Crucifixion  would  put  an  end  to  His  influence,  but  God  augmented 
that  influence  by  tbe  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  empowered  the  apostles.  The 
argument  showed  that  they  had  been  fighting  against  God.  and  that  God  had  com- 
pletely overcome  their  evil  course.  IV.  By  the  keen  rebuke  which  the  apostles 
were  directed  to  keep  up.  "  Whereof  we  are  witnesses."  (W.  Hudnon.)  Ye  killed 
tlie  Prince  of  Life. — The  Prince  of  Life  : — The  title  suggests — I.  That  Jesus  is  the 
source  of  life.      1.  Of  natural  life.     "In  Him  we  live  and  move,"  &c.    It  is  only 


CHAP,  in.]  THE  ACTS.  809 

for  Him  to  say  to  dead  Lazarus  "  Come  forth,"  and  He  proves  Himself  to  be  the 
source  of  life.  Let  us  not,  then,  deny  Him  the  use  of  the  faculties  He  has  given. 
2.  Of  spiritual  life.  If  we  admit  that  we  cannot  give  ourselves  physical  life,  how 
absurd  to  think  we  can  give  ourselves  spiritual  life.  And  yet  multitudes  are  under 
this  delusion.  It  is  only  by  Christ's  almighty  fiat  that  the  "  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins  "  can  "  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  and  live."  3.  Of  eternal  Ufe. 
Jesus  is  the  life  of  all  the  joy,  the  glory,  and  the  love  of  heaven.  11.  That  life 
CEXTKES  IN  Him  as  begabds  sensible  enjoyment  of  it.  The  common  comforts  of 
Christ  without  Christ  are  monotonous  and  miserable  ;  but  if  Christ  be  enjoyed  in 
them,  if  He  be  eaten  with  our  bread,  received  with  our  water,  breathed  with  our 
air,  then  life  has  a  blessedness  and  a  dignity  conferred  upon  it  which  the  world 
knows  nothing  of.  III.  That  He  sustains  the  life  He  gives.  "  He  giveth 
power  to  the  faint,"  as  well  as  life  to  the  dead.  Does  the  life  of  faith,  of  hope,  of 
love,  wane  through  trial  and  loss  and  disappointment  ?  Christ  has  inexhaustible 
resources  of  vitality  for  their  invigoration.  Dost  thou  fear  lest  thou  shouldest  lose 
thy  little  life  in  the  fierce  conflict  with  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  ?  Hear 
His  promise,  "  They  shall  never  perish."  IV.  That  He  beings  life  to  fruition. 
"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,"  &c.  V.  That  He  does  ai,l  this  in  a  princely 
manner.  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life  .  .  .  abundantly."  {J.  Irons.) 
We  are  witnesses. — Sworn  testimony  : — In  the  days  of  George  Stephenson  some 
scientists  proved  conclusively  that  a  rail-train  could  never  be  driven  by  steam 
power ;  but  the  rushing  expresses  have  made  all  the  world  witnesses  of  the  splendid 
achievement.  It  was  proved  conclusively  that  a  steamer  could  never  cross  the 
Atlantic ;  but  the  work  was  done,  and  the  passengers  on  the  Cunard  and  the 
Inman  Lines  are  witnesses.  There  went  up  a  guffaw  of  laughter  from  some  of  the 
wise  men  at  Professor  Morse's  proposition  to  make  lightning  his  errand-boy,  and  it 
was  proved  conclusively  that  the  thing  could  never  be  done  ;  but  now  the  news  of  the 
wide  world,  put  in  your  hands  every  morning  and  night,  has  made  all  nations  wit- 
nesses. In  the  time  of  Christ  it  was  proved  conclusively  that  it  was  impossible  for 
a  man  to  rise  from  the  dead.  The  disciples  took  the  witness-stand  to  prove  to  be  true 
what  the  wiseacres  of  the  day  had  proved  to  be  impossible.  Now  let  me  play  the 
sceptic  for  a  moment.  There  is  no  God,  for  I  have  never  seen  Him  with  my 
physical  eyesight.  Your  Bible  is  a  pack  of  contradictions.  There  never  was  a 
miracle.  Your  religion  is  an  imposition  on  the  credulity  of  the  ages.  There  is  a 
suppressed  feeling  which  would  like  to  cry  out  in  behalf  of  the  truth  of  our  glorious 
Christianity.  "  We  are  witnesses!  "  If  this  world  is  ever  brought  to  God,  it  will 
not  be  through  argument,  but  through  testimony.  You  might  cover  the  whole  earth 
■with  learned  treatises  in  defence  of  religion — you  would  not  convert  a  soul.  In 
order  to  have  faith  we  must  have  testimony,  and  if  five  hundred  men  get  up  and 
tell  me  that  they  have  felt  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  a  joy,  an  inspiration,  I  am 
bound  as  a  fair-minded  man  to  accept  their  testimony.  I  want  to  put  before  you 
three  propositions,  the  truth  of  which  I  think  you  will  attest  with  overwhelming 
unanimity.  I.  "  We  are  witnesses "  that  the  religion  of  Christ  is  able  to 
convert  a  soul.  You  say  conversion  is  only  an  imaginary  thing.  We  know 
better.  People  laughed  at  the  missionaries  in  Madagascar  because  they  preached 
ien  years  without  one  convert ;  but  there  are  thirty -three  thousand  converts  in 
Madagascar  to-day.  People  laughed  at  Dr.  Judson  because  he  kept  on  preaching 
five  years  without  a  single  convert ;  but  there  are  twenty  thousand  Baptist  Christians 
in  Burmah  to-day.  People  laughed  at  Dr.  Morrison  for  preaching  seven  years 
without  a  single  conversion ;  but  there  are  fifteen  thousand  Christians  in  China 
to-day.  People  laughed  at  the  missionaries  for  preaching  at  Tahiti  and  in 
Bengal  years  without  a  single  conversion;  yet  in  all  those  lands  there  are 
multitudes  of  Christians  to-day.  But  why  go  so  far  to  find  evidence?  "We 
are  witnesses."  We  were  so  proud  that  no  man  could  have  humbled  us  ;  we  were 
so  hard  that  no  earthly  power  could  have  melted  us.  But  one  day  a  power  seized 
us,  from  which  we  tried  to  wrench  ourselves,  but  could  not.  It  flung  us  on  our 
knees,  and  when  we  arose  we  were  as  much  changed  as  Gourgis  the  heathen.  He 
went  into  prayer-meeting  with  a  dagger  and  a  gun,  but  the  next  day  was  found 
crying  :  "  Oh,  my  great  sins !  Oh,  my  great  Saviour  !  "  For  eleven  years  he  preached 
the  gospel  of  Christ  to  his  feUow-mountaineers,  and  the  last  words  on  bis  dying  lips 
were,  "  Free  grace  1  Oh,  it  was  free  grace  I  "  There  is  a  man  who  was  for  ten  years 
a  hard  drinker.  The  dreadful  appetite  had  sent  down  its  roots  until  they  were  inter- 
linked with  the  vitals  of  body,  mind,  and  soul  ;  but  he  has  not  taken  any  stimulants 
for  two  years.     What  did  that  ?     Not  temperance  societies.     Not  prohibition  laws. 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

Not  moral  suasion.  Conversion  did  it.  "  Why,"  said  one  upon  whom  the  great  change 
had  come,  "  sir,  I  feel  just  as  though  I  were  somebody  else  !  "  There  is  a  sea  captaia 
who  swore  all  the  way  from  New  York  to  Havana,  and  from  Havana  to  San 
Francisco,  and  when  he  was  in  port  he  was  worse  than  when  he  was  on  the  sea. 
What  power  was  it  that  washed  his  tongue  clean  of  profanities,  and  made  him  sing 
to  the  glory  of  God  ?  Conversion.  There  are  thousands  who  are  no  more  what 
they  once  were  than  a  water-lily  is  nightshade,  or  a  morning  lark  a  vulture,  or  day 
night.  II.  "  We  are  witnesses  "  that  the  gospel  has  the  power  to  comfort. 
When  a  man  has  trouble  the  world  says :  "  Now  get  your  mind  off  this  ;  go  out  and 
breathe  the  fresh  air  !  plunge  deeper  into  business."  What  poor  advice.  Get  your 
mind  off  of  it !  when  everything  reminds  you  of  what  you  have  lost.  They  might 
as  well  advise  you  to  stop  thinking.  Take  a  walk  in  the  fresh  air  !  Why,  along  that 
very  road  your  dead  wife  once  accompanied  you.  Go  deeper  into  business  !  Why,  she 
was  associated  with  all  your  ambition,  and  since  she  has  gone  you  have  no  ambition 
left.  And  yet  you  have  been  comforted.  How  was  it  done  ?  Did  Christ  come  to 
you  and  say  :  "  Get  your  mind  ofi  this,"  &c.  No.  There  was  a  minute  when  He 
came  to  you,  and  He  breathed  something  into  your  soul  that  gave  peace,  so  that 
you  could  take  out  the  photograph  of  the  departed  one  and  say  :  "  It  is  all  right ; 
she  is  better  off ;  I  would  not  call  her  back."  There  are  Christian  parents  who  are 
willing  to  testify  to  the  power  of  this  gospel  to  comfort.  Your  son  had  just 
graduated  and  was  going  into  business,  and  the  Lord  took  him.  Or  your  daughter 
had  just  left  the  school,  and  you  thought  she  was  going  to  be  a  useful  woman  and 
of  long  life,  but  the  Lord  took  her.  Or  the  little  child  came  home  with  the  hot 
fever  that  stopped  not  for  the  agonised  prayer,  or  for  the  skilful  physician.  What 
has  enabled  you  to  stand  all  the  trial?  "  Oh,"  you  say,  "  I  threw  myself  at  the 
feet  of  a  sympathising  Saviour,  and  when  I  was  too  weak  to  pray,  or  to  look  up,  He 
breathed  into  me  a  peace  that  I  think  must  be  the  foretaste  of  that  heaven  where 
there  is  neither  tear,  nor  a  farewell,  nor  a  grave."  Is  there  power  in  this  gospel  to 
soothe  the  heart?  There  comes  up  an  answer  from  comforted  widowhood,  and 
orphanage,  and  childlessness,  saying — HI.  "  We  are  witnesses "  that  religion 
HAS  POWER  TO  GIVE  COMPOSURE  IN  THE  LAST  MOMENT.  We  are  Very  apt  when  we 
want  to  bring  illustrations  of  dying  triumph  to  go  back  to  some  distinguished 
personage — to  a  John  Knox,  or  a  Harriett  Newell.  Such  illustrations  are  of  no  use 
to  me  to-night.  I  want  you  for  witnesses.  I  want  to  know  whether  you  have  seen 
or  heard  anything  that  makes  you  believe  that  the  religion  of  Christ  gives  com- 
posure in  the  final  hour?  "Oh  yes,"  you  say;  "  I  saw  my  father  and  mother 
depart."  How  did  they  seem  to  act?  Were  they  very  much  frightened?  Did 
they  take  hold  of  this  world  with  both  hands  as  though  they  did  not  want  to  give  it 
up?  "  Oh,  no,"  you  say ;  "  she  had  a  kind  word  for  us  all,  and  there  were  a  few 
mementos  distributed  among  the  children,  and  then  she  told  us  how  kind  we  must 
be  to  our  father  in  his  loneliness,  and  then  she  kissed  us  good-bye  and  went  asleep 
as  calmly  as  a  child  in  a  cradle."  What  made  her  so  composed  ?  Natural  courage  ? 
"  No,"  you  say,  "  mother  was  very  nervous  ;  it  was  because  she  was  so  good."  Here 
are  people  who  say,  "  I  saw  a  Christian  brother  die,  and  he  triumphed."  And 
some  one  else,  "I  saw  a  Christian  sister  die,  and  she  triumphed."  Conclusion: 
You  see  I  have  not  put  before  you  to-night  anything  like  guess-work,  but 
affidavits  of  the  best  men  and  women,  living  and  dead.  Two  witnesses  in  court 
will  establish  a  fact.  Here  are  not  two  witnesses,  but  millions.  If  ten  men  should 
come  to  you  when  you  are  sick  and  say  they  had  the  same  sickness,  and  took  a. 
certain  medicine  and  it  cured  them,  you  would  probably  take  it.  Now,  suppose  ten 
other  men  should  come  up  and  say,  "  We  don't  believe  there  is  anything  in  that 
medicine."  "  Well,"  I  say,  "have  you  ever  tried  it  ?  "  "  No,  I  never  tried  it,  but 
I  don't  believe  there  is  anything  in  it."  Of  course  you  discredit  their  testimony. 
The  sceptic  may  come  and  say,  "  There  is  no  power  in  your  religion."  "  Have  you 
ever  tried  it  ?  "     "No,  no."     "  Then  avaunt  1  "     {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  And  His  name  through  faith  In  His  name  hath  made  this  man 
strong. — The  power  of  faith : — Faith  in  the  name  of  Jesus  is  faith  in  Himself. 
The  result  of  its  exercise  here  was  a  manifest  continuance  of  what  Jesus  "  began  to 
do  "  in  the  way  of  healing,  and  on  the  same  condition.  I.  Faith  moved  Peter  to 
SEEK  THE  POOR  man's  GOOD.  Faith  had  united  the  apostle  to  the  Saviour,  and 
brought  him  into  sympathy  with  His  benevolent  designs.  The  love  of  "  Christ  still 
constrains  those  who  enjoy  it  by  faith "  with  like  results.  II.  Faith  enabled 
Peter  to  pronounce  the  man's  cure.    Peter  believed  the  promise,  "  The  works  that 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  311 

I  do  shall  ye  do  also  "  ;  that  Jesus,  though  out  of  sight,  was  able  and  willing  to  cure 
the  cripple ;  and,  acting  under  a  gracious  impulse  which  that  faith  secured,  he 
bade  the  man  be  whole.  It  was  faith  that  made  this  conduct  consistent ;  but 
without  faith  it  would  have  been  an  act  of  presumption,  and  even  of  blasphemy. 
When  God  is  taken  at  His  word  and  fully  trusted,  there  is  exercised  a  confidence 
which  enables  its  possessor  to  defy  all  adverse  power.  This  is  the  faith  which 
overcomes.  III.  Faith  fuenished  an  evidence  of  Christianity  which  even  its 
ADVERSARIES  WERE  OBLIGED  TO  ADMIT.  The  Cripple  had  been  seen  and  known,  and 
his  cure  had  taken  place  in  the  presence  of  all.  The  faith  exercised,  being  invisible, 
might  have  been  talked  of  long  without  becoming  the  means  of  any  one's  full 
persuasion  ;  but  here  was  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  the  inward  and  spiritual 
grace.  What  could  be  said  against  such  an  evidence  ?  And  what  can  be  said  at  this 
day  against  the  evidence  presented  in  conversions  and  holy  lives  ?  But  to  some 
even  this  evidence  is  as  nothing.  They  love  not  the  Lord  ;  they  have  no  sympathy 
with  His  gracious  purposes  ;  and  they  lack  that  spiritual  discernment  which  can 
come  only  in  connection  with  the  faith  which  is  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen. 
(TV.  Hudson.)  Influence  of  the  name  of  Christ : — While  infidelity  is  boastful,  it  is 
refreshing  to  note  such  facts  as  these :  Eighty  years  ago,  William  Carey  wrote  from 
Bengal :  "  The  people  here  hate  the  very  name  of  Christ,  and  will  not  hsten  when 
His  name  is  mentioned."  To-day  the  Eev.  W.  E.  James  writes  from  Serampore  : 
"  By  all  means  see  to  it  that  the  name  of  Christ  is  plainly  printed  on  the  title-page 
of  every  book  or  tract  that  we  print.  We  have  now  arrived  at  that  point  of  time  in 
the  history  of  Christian  missions  in  Bengal,  when  the  name  of  Christ  is  more  of  a 
recommendation  to  a  book  than  otherwise.  Very  often  have  I  heard  natives  ask 
for  a  '  Life  of  Jesus  Christ '  in  preference  to  any  other  book. "  The  influence  of 

faith : — Two  men  are  wandering  over  the  mountains  in  Nevada.  They  find  curious 
veins  running  through  the  rocks  One  of  them  studies  these  veins  with  the  interest 
of  a  geologist,  and  cbisels  out  a  few  specimens  for  his  cabinet.  The  other,  who  is 
an  expert  in  ores,  believes  that  he  has  found  a  silver  mine  of  great  richness.  When 
his  companion  has  passed  on  with  his  specimens  in  his  pocket,  he  returns  and 
stakes  out  a  claim.  He  perfects  his  title  to  that  claim.  He  works  it,  and  becomes 
a  millionaire.  Now  was  it  the  mine  that  enriched  this  man  or  his  faith  in  the 
mine  ?  Evidently  his  faith.  And  so  it  is  the  world  over.  It  is  not  enough  to 
know  of  a  good  thing  and  to  be  able  to  grasp  it.  We  must  believe  in  it  and  take 
possession  of  it.  There  is,  of  course,  no  value  in  faith,  if  what  we  believe  is 
worthless.  A  lunatic,  whom  we  knew  years  ago,  imagined  that  he  was  a  millionaire. 
He  would  take  you  into  his  little  chamber,  and  after  carefully  locking  the  door, 
would  open  drawers  full  of  bits  of  paper  on  which  he  had  written  figures  for  various 
amounts.  He  would  say,  '•  Here  are  bills  and  bonds  worth  milhons  of  dollars." 
When  asked  why  he  did  not  use  them  to  buy  what  he  needed,  he  would  reply,  "  No, 
no,  they  are  too  precious."  That  man's  faith  was  great,  but  it  was  baseless.  It 
was  like  the  faith  of  worldly  men  in  material  things.  They  are  heaping  up  riches 
that  are  as  worthless  for  the  soul  as  his  bits  of  paper  were  for  the  wants  of  this 
life.  "  Jesus  "  ; — The   old   Greek  orators,    when   they   saw    their    audiences 

inattentive  and  slumbering,  had  one  word  with  which  they  would  rouse  them  up 
to  the  greatest  enthusiasm.  In  the  midst  of  their  orations  they  would  stop  and  cry 
out,  "  Marathon !  "  and  the  people's  enthusiasm  would  be  unbounded.  My  hearers, 
though  you  may  have  been  borne  down  with  sin,  and  though  trouble,  and  trial,  and 
temptation  may  have  come  upon  you,  and  you  feel  hardly  like  looking  up,  methinks 
there  is  one  grand,  royal,  imperial  word  that  ought  to  rouse  your  soul  to  infinite 
rejoicing,  and  that  word  is  Jesus.  Faith  in  a  name  : — When  John  Howard 
wanted  to  visit  the  prisons  of  Kussia  he  sought  an  interview  with  the  Czar.  He 
explained  his  object,  and  the  Czar  gave  him  permission  to  visit  any  prison  in  his 
empire.  It  was  a  long  and  weary  journey ;  he  knew  how  jealously  the  prisoners 
were  guarded,  and  how  averse  the  gaolers  were  to  permit  any  one  to  visit  them. 
But  he  set  out  in  perfect  confidence.  When  he  arrived  at  a  prison  he  would  make 
his  application,  and  was  prepared  for  the  refusal  which  invariably  came.  Then  he 
produced  the  Czar's  mandate,  and  the  prison  doors  were  immediately  opened  to  him. 
He  had  faith  in  that  name,  and  it  was  justified  by  the  results.  But  now,  brethren,  I 
wot  that  tbrough  ignorance  ye  did  it. — Apostolic  reassurance  for  the  desponding : — 
The  apostle  seems  to  say,  "Ye  h^ve  rejected  Christ,  and  this  is  a  great  evil;  ye 
know  not  the  privilege  of  faith  in  Him,  and  therefore  your  loss  is  great ;  but  still 
do  not  despair."  In  order  to  reassure  his  hearers  he — I.  Eeminded  them  of  the 
Divine  origin  of  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament.     God  had  shown  what 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAP.  m. 

the  prophets  had  set  forth ;  the  prophets  as  with  one  mouth  had  declared  the  mind 
of  God ;  and  of  every  part  of  revealed  truth  it  was  to  be  remembered  that  "  the 
mouth  of  the  Lord  had  spoken  it."  This,  in  the  judgment  of  a  Jew,  was  a  firm 
foundation,  and  this  foundation  remains  to  this  day.  But  what  was  now  to  be 
built  upon  it  ?  II.  Indicated  the  key-note  to  which  all  the  prophetic  harmonies 
HAD  been  tdned.  It  was  "  that  Christ  should  suffer."  Then  it  would  become  evident 
that  salvation  through  the  death  of  Jesus  was  not  a  new  doctrine  invented  by  His 
disciples.  One  who  began  to  apprehend  tbis  would  quickly  discern  new  meaning  in 
the  leading  events  of  the  last  few  months.  III.  Affirmed  that  God  had  accom- 
plished His  own  word  in  eegakd  to  Jesus  by  unconscious  agents.  They  bad 
ignorantly  pursued  Him  to  the  Cross.  This  was  some  mitigation  of  their  guilt, 
though  not  an  excuse  for  their  sin.  But  in  all  their  error  and  evil  conduct  God 
was  bringing  His  own  purpose  to  pass.  The  Captain  of  our  salvation  was  made 
perfect  through  suffering,  and  His  death  and  resurrection  made  and  declared  the 
way  of  life  open  to  all  who  should  repent  and  believe.  Wicked  men  had  not  meant 
to  accomplish  this,  but  God  had  wrought  His  sovereign  will.  Peter's  hearers  must 
now  feel  that  God  had  been  infinitely  better  to  them  than  they  had  been  to  them- 
selves.     IV.  Tenderly   hinted   that    those   who,   while    doing   wickedly,    had 

UNCONSCIOUSLY    FULFILLED    THE    WILL    OF    GoD  WERE     STILL    OBJECTS    OF    BENEVOLENT 

CONCERN.  Being  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  they  were  the  children  of  the  covenant. 
Peter's  endearing  word  "  brethren "  contained  the  suggestion  of  great  blessing. 
There  are  still  those  who  need  encouragement,  and  this  can  best  be  obtained  from 
the  Word  of  God,  which  sets  forth  the  Saviour  of  men  accessible  to  all  penitent 
inquirers.  (TF.  Hudson.)  The  guilt  of  unbelief: — 1.  An  act  of  cruelty  excites 
both  compassion  for  the  sufferer  and  indignation  at  the  actor,  and  perhaps  the 
latter  feeling  is  the  stronger.  Your  sympathy  with  the  martyr  is  almost  lost  in 
your  anger  at  the  persecutor,  because,  perhaps,  you  do  not  make  sufficient  allow- 
ance for  him.  He  may  have  been  acting  under  a  mistaken  sense  of  duty. 
"Whosoever,"  says  our  Lord,  "killeth  you  shall  think  he  doeth  God  service." 
Much,  too,  may  have  to  be  attributed  to  the  temper  of  the  times.  Many  a  man  who 
now  only  argues  against  heresy  would  have  been  for  the  stake  when  the  rights  of 
conscience  were  less  understood.  Men  are  apt  to  condemn  the  Jews — and  very 
justly — for  their  crimes,  but  Jesus  said,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do,"  and  here  St.  Peter  corroborates  this.  He  did  not  hesitate  to  charge 
on  them  the  crime  of  having  "  killed  the  Prince  of  Life,"  but,  as  though  he  feared 
driving  them  to  despair,  he  used  words  which  seem  in  a  measure  to  extenuate  their 
crime.  But  we  shall  find  that  this  plea  of  ignorance  does  not  apply  to  modern 
unbelief.  2.  What  right  had  Peter  to  make  this  allowance  ?  He  must  be  under- 
stood to  mean  that  the  Jews  were  not  acquainted  with  the  character  and  dignity  of 
Christ.  They  did  not  crucify  Him  as  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  but  as  a  blas- 
phemous pretender.  But  were  they  innocent  in  that  their  ignorance  was  involuntary 
and  unavoidable,  arising  from  the  insufficiency  of  the  evidence,  or  from  feebleness 
of  understanding  ?  St.  Peter  did  not  imply  this,  otherwise  he  had  impeached  the 
whole  of  Christ's  ministry,  and  represented  His  miracles  as  defective  credentials. 
Undoubtedly  the  ignorance  was  blameworthy.  They  might  and  ought  to  have  known 
that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  and  ignorance  is  only  excusable  when  we  do  not  wilfully 
neglect  the  means  of  obtaining  information  or  cherish  prejudices  which  bar  out  the 
truth.  Yet  it  is  probable  that  we  use  the  Jews  too  harshly  in  respect  of  the 
crucifixion.  It  was  not  in  that,  but  in  rejecting  the  final  evidence  afforded  by  the 
descent  and  miracles  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  they  committed  the  unpardonable  sin. 
3.  It  may  be  strange  to  us  that,  though  He  did  so  many  mighty  works,  Jesus  was 
rejected  by  His  countrymen.  But  we  do  not  sufficiently  consider  their  powerful 
prejudice  in  favour  of  a  Messiah  attended  with  all  the  pomp  of  earthly  dominion. 
It  is  true  they  were  to  blame  for  cherishing  this  prejudice,  since  due  search  into 
prophecy  would  have  dispersed  it ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  it  was  contracted  not 
through  shutting  their  eyes  altogether  against  prophecy,  but  through  fixing  them 
Fo  intently  on  one  part  that  they  overlooked  all  others.  They  associated  with 
Christ's  first  coming  the  characteristics  of  the  second.  So,  then,  the  Jew  had  not 
sinned  against  all  the  evidence  that  Christ  meant  to  afford — he  had  sinned  against 
a  suffering  Redeemer,  but  not  against  a  triumphant ;  and  so  the  sin  was  something 
that  admitted  of  extenuation — a  sin  against  evidence  as  yet  incomplete.  The 
ignorance  was  not  excusable ;  it  was  only  not  unpardonable.  4.  Here  comes  in  the 
case  of  modern  ignorance  and  unbelief — the  sin  of  those  who,  by  rejecting  Christ, 
"crucify  the  Son   of   God   afresh."      Can  the  plea  of  Peter  be  urged  in  favour 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  813 

oE  modern  infidels  and  of  those  who  nominally  believe  in  Christ  without  the 
consent  of  the  heart?  Kemember  that  the  Jew  had  not  the  whole  of  the 
evidence  before  him;  but  we  have  the  whole  before  us.  The  Jew  crucified  Christ 
vrhilst  His  appearance  was  that  of  an  ordinary  man  ;  we  crucify  Him  afresh  now 
that  He  has  assumed  His  Divine  glory.  Christ  had  not  then  given  the  most 
touching  proof  of  His  love,  nor  was  it  understood  even  by  the  apostles  that  His 
death  was  a  propitiation  ;  but  now  the  whole  plan  of  redemption  is  set  forth,  and 
we  who  reject  Him  crucify  afresh  a  loving  Saviour,  and  one  who  sends  down  His 
Spirit  to  persuade  us  to  be  reconciled.  What  did  the  Jew  in  comparison  with  this? 
And  how  absurd  to  plead  an  extenuating  ignorance  !  How  can  anything  be  known 
if  this  is  not  ?  Or,  if  the  ignorance  be  not  impossible — besotted  as  men  are  by  the 
cares  of  the  world,  or  the  pleasures  of  sin — men  might,  if  they  would,  know  what 
they  do.  Ignorant  they  may  be,  but  unavoidably  and  innocently  ignorant  they 
cannot  be.  Therefore  "he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  (U.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
In  His  name  : — In  the  New  Testament  special  potency  is  attributed  to  the  utterance 
of  a  name,  especially  the  name  of  Jesus.  Some  of  these  I  will  enumerate.  Jesus 
promises  that  He  will  be  with  every  two  or  three  who  assemble  in  His  name  (Matt, 
xviii.  20).  He  promises  to  help  those  who  pray  in  His  name  (John  xiv.  13,  14  ;  xv. 
16;  xvi.  23,  24,  26).  It  appears,  also,  tbat  devils  were  cast  out  by  the  use  of  the 
name  of  Christ.  Tbis,  at  first  sight,  seems  hke  magic.  For  magic  is  essentially 
this,  a  power  obtained  over  the  supernatural  world  by  the  use  of  charms  and  tahs- 
mans.  In  the  story  of  the  "Forty  Thieves,"  the  door  of  the  cave  opened  by  en- 
chantment to  whoever  used  the  right  word,  and  said,  "  Open  Sesame,"  whether  it 
was  said  by  the  robbers  or  by  the  good  man.  If,  therefore,  we  believe  that  by  merely 
putting  the  word  "  Christ  "  at  the  beginning  or  end  of  our  prayer,  we  shall  obtain 
some  blessing  from  God  which  He  would  not  otherwise  bestow,  we  degrade  Christi- 
anity to  the  level  of  a  magical  process  and  demoralise  it.  Now,  I  think  it  quite 
clear  that  the  whole  spirit  of  Christianity  and  teaching  of  Jesus  is  utterly  oppused 
to  any  such  magical  notions.  According  to  Jesus,  men  were  saved,  not  by  the  use 
of  His  name  as  an  outward  formula,  but  by  obeying  His  precepts  and  doing  good 
actions.  In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  He  distinctly  rejects  any  such  merely  out- 
ward use  of  His  name  (Matt.  vii.  22,  23).  Elsewhere  He  says,  "  Many  deceivers 
shall  come  in  My  name."  "  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord!  shall 
«nter,"  &c.  What,  then,  does  He  mean  when  He  says  that  God  will  hear  us  and 
help  us  if  we  pray  "  in  His  name  "  ?  To  answer  this  question  we  must  understand 
the  peculiar  way  in  which  the  Jews  regarded  the  name  of  any  persou.  A  name 
with  us  is  an  arbitrary  appendage,  having  no  relation  to  a  man's  character.  But  to 
the  Jew  a  name  carried  a  mysterious  power,  expressive  of  what  was  deepest  in  the 
parent's  heart,  and  capable  of  influencing  the  child's  destiny.  If  the  man  or  woman 
appeared  to  develop  new  qualities,  the  name  was  changed.  So  Jesus  added  to 
Simon's  name  that  of  Peter — a  rock  :  and  Saul's  name,  which  meant  "  a  destroyer," 
■was  changed  to  Paul,  which  meaus  "  a  worker."  Thus  it  happened  that  to  come  in 
the  name  of  any  one  meant  to  come  in  his  spirit.  So  John  the  Baptist  was  said 
by  Jesus  to  be  the  Ehjah  that  was  to  come,  because  he  came  in  the  spirit  and  power 
of  Elijah.  When  the  Lord  said  to  Moses,  "  Thou  hast  found  grace  in  My  sight,  and 
I  know  thee  by  name,"  it  means  that  the  Lord  knew  his  character,  and  that  it  was 
equal  to  his  work.  Whenever  trust  "  in  God's  name  "  is  spoken  of,  it  means  trust 
ia  His  wisdom,  or  His  love,  or  His  providence.  When  it  is  said  that  "  a  good  name 
is  better  than  riches,"  it  means  a  good  character.  When  Jesus  says  that  "  he  who 
receives  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet  shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward,"  it 
signifies  that  he  who  is  in  sympathy  with  the  spirit  of  the  prophet,  and  helps  the 
prophet  on  that  account,  shall  have  the  reward  of  being  himself  filled  wilh  the 
same  prophetic  spirit.  And  so  when  He  tells  them  to  "  pray  in  His  name,"  He 
means  to  tell  them  to  pray  in  His  Spirit ;  to  "  cast  out  devils  in  His  name  "  is  to 
cast  them  out  by  the  power  of  a  Christian  spirit.  There  are  a  great  many  devils  in 
the  world — devils  of  pride,  of  vanity,  of  lust,  of  dishonesty,  of  falsehood,  of  cruelty. 
Now,  if  we  attack  these  devils  in  the  name  of  the  devil  we  can  do  nothing  If  we 
meet  pride  with  pride,  falsehood  with  cunning,  selfishness  with  self-will — if  we  try 
to  put  down  evil  with  evil,  we  shall  never  succeed.  We  must  cast  out  devils  in  the 
rame  of  Christ — that  is,  "  overcome  evil  with  good."  There  is  a  wonderful  power 
which  belongs  to  him  who  allies  himself  to  truth  and  right.  When  we  "  overcome 
■evil  by  good,"  then  only  do  we  cast  out  devils  in  the  name  of  Christ.  And  so,  to 
pray  "  in  the  name  of  Christ "  does  not  mean  to  put  the  name  of  Christ  at  the  end 
of  our  prayer,  and  say,  "We  ask  this  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord";  but  it 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iil 

means  when  we  pray  to  be  in  Christ's  Spirit ;  to  forget  our  vanity,  selfishness,  ego- 
tism; to  desire  the  good  of  others  ;  the  coming  of  God's  kingdom  of  love.  If  we 
pray  thus,  we  may  ask  what  we  will  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  us,  for  we  shall  ask 
only  what  God  wills.  To  meet  together  "  in  the  name  of  Christ  "  means  to  meet 
for  the  purpose  of  doing  good  and  getting  good.  Where  the  spirit  of  Christianity 
is  there  is  the  coming  of  Christ.  Therefore,  when  Peter  said  to  the  lame  man,  "  In 
the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  rise  and  walk,"  he  did  not  utter  these  words  as  a 
charm.  But  he  thus  openly  avowed  his  faith  in  the  Master  he  had  denied  a  few 
weeks  before,  and  the  man  was  healed,  not  by  the  magic  of  words,  but  by  the 
wonderful  power  which  attends  a  sincere  faith  in  God.  Not  the  word  of  Jesus,  but 
the  faith  in  Jesus  cured  him.  Not  the  word,  but  the  thing,  makes  the  power  of 
Christianity.  When  I  see  a  man  walking  the  road  of  duty,  faithful  to  every  obliga- 
tion ;  true  and  just,  when  those  around  him  are  false ;  when  I  see  him  hold  his 
principles  of  honesty,  though  the  world  grows  dishonest,  standing  by  his  purity,  no 
matter  what  comes ;  then  I  say  that  this  man  is  casting  out  devils  "  in  Christ's 
name."  And  when  I  see  a  youth,  beset  by  temptations  from  without  and  within, 
making  a  brave  strngf^le  to  be  true  to  his  mother's  counsels  and  his  father's  honour, 
and  saying  to  the  Satan  who  tempts  him  to  go  astray,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,"  I  say 
that  this  boy  also  is  fighting  devils  "  in  Christ's  name."  And  when  I  see  a  young 
girl,  in  the  midst  of  a  happy  home,  surrounded  by  love,  called  to  leave  life  and  all 
its  hopes,  and  go  to  meet  the  great  mystery,  and  going  tranquilly,  peacefully,  trust- 
ingly, comforting  all  around  her  with  the  comfort  wherewith  she  herself  has  been 
comforted  by  God,  I  say  that  she  is  going  to  heaven  in  the  strength  "  of  Christ's 
name."  The  name  of  Christ  stands  for  immortality,  for  He  is  the  Resurrection  and 
the  Life.  The  name  of  Jesus  Christ  means  Saviour  and  King.  Jesus  means 
Saviour,  Christ  means  King,  and  the  whole  means  that  He  who  saves  men  is  the 
King  of  men.  It  means  that  love  is  to  conquer  hatred,  that  truth  is  mightier  than 
falsehood,  life  tban  death,  eternity  than  time.     (J.  Freeman  Clarke.) 

Vers.  19-21.  Repent  ye  therefore  and  be  converted. — Apostolic  exhortation: — 
I.  The  apostle  bade  men  kepent  and  be  converted.  1.  Repent  signifies,  in  its 
literal  meaning,  to  change  one's  mind.  It  has  been  translated  "after-wit,"  or 
"  after-wisdom  "  ;  it  is  the  man's  finding  out  that  he  is  wrong,  and  rectifying  his 
judgment.  But  although  that  be  the  meaning  of  the  root,  the  word  has  come  in 
Scriptural  use  to  mean  a  discovery  of  the  evil  of  sin,  a  mourning  that  we  have 
committed  it,  a  resolution  to  forsake  it,  the  love  of  what  once  we  hated,  and  the 
hate  of  what  once  we  loved.  Conversion  means  a  turning  from,  and  a  turning  to, 
from  sin  to  holiness,  from  carelessness  to  thought,  from  the  world  to  heaven,  from 
self  to  Jesus.  The  words  in  Greek  are  "Repent  and  convert,"  or,  rather,  "Repent 
and  turn."  It  is  an  active  verb,  just  as  the  other  was.  When  the  demoniac  had 
the  devils  cast  out  of  him,  that  was  repentance  ;  but  when  he  was  clothed  and  in 
his  right  mind,  that  was  conversion.  When  the  prodigal  was  feeding  his  swine, 
and  on  a  sudden  began  to  consider  and  to  come  to  himself,  that  was  repentance. 
When  he  set  out  and  left  the  far  country  and  went  to  his  father's  house,  that  was 
conversion.  2.  Repentance  and  conversion  are  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And 
yet  Peter  says,  "Repent,  and  be  converted"!  "How  reconcile  you  these 
two  things  ? "  We  tell  men  to  repent  and  believe,  not  because  we  rely 
on  any  power  in  them  to  do  so,  not  because  we  depend  upon  any  power  in 
our  earnestness  or  in  our  speech,  but  because  the  gospel  is  the  mysterious  engine 
by  which  God  converts  the  hearts  of  men,  and  we  find  that,  if  we  speak  in  faith, 
God  the  Holy  Uhost  operates  with  us,  and  while  we  bid  the  dry  bones  live,  the 
Spirit  makes  them  live — while  we  tell  the  lame  man  to  stand  on  his  feet,  tlie 
mysterious  energy  makes  his  ankle-bones  to  receive  strength — while  we  tell  the 
impotent  man  to  stretch  out  his  hand,  a  Divine  power  goes  with  the  command,  and 
the  hand  is  stretched  out  and  the  man  is  restored.  The  power  lies  not  in  the 
sinner,  not  in  the  preacher,  but  in  the  Holy  Spirit.  II.  There  was  good  reason 
FOR  THIS  command.  "  Repent  ye  therefore.''  The  apostle  was  logical.  It  was  not 
mere  declamation.  What,  then,  was  the  argument?  1.  The  Jews  put  Christ  to 
death.  And  this  is  spiritually  true  of  you.  Every  sin  in  the  essence  of  it  is  a 
killing  of  God.  Every  time  you  do  what  God  would  not  have  you  do,  you  do  in 
effect,  so  far  as  you  can,  put  God  out  of  His  throne,  and  disown  the  authority  which 
belongs  to  His  Godhead.  When  Christ  was  nailed  to  the  tree,  sin  only  did  then 
literally  and  openly  what  all  sin  really  does  in  a  spiritual  sense.  Will  you  not 
repent  if  it  be  so  ?    While  you  thought  your  sins  to  be  mere  trifles,  you  would  not 


CHAP.  in.J  THE  ACTS.  315 

repent ;  but  now  I  have  sliown  you  that  every  sin  is  really  an  attempt  to  thrust  God 
out  of  the  world.  What,  then,  if  the  authority  of  God  should  be  no  more  owned  in 
the  universe — where  should  we  all  be  ?  What  a  hell  above  ground  would  this  world 
become  1  Do  you  not  see  what  a  mischievous  thing,  then,  your  iniquity  has  been? 
Then,  truly,  there  is  abundant  reason  why  you  should  repent  and  turn  from  it. 
2.  He  whom  they  had  slain  was  a  most  blessed  person — one  so  blessed  that  God  the 
Father  had  exalted  Him.  Jesus  Christ  came  not  into  this  world  with  any  selfish 
motive,  but  entirely  out  of  philanthropy,  full  of  love  to  men ;  and  yet  men  put  Him 
to  death  I  Now  God  does  not  deserve  that  we  should  rebel  against  Him.  If  He 
were  a  great  tyrant  domineering  over  us,  putting  us  to  misery,  tliere  might  be  some 
excuse,  but,  when  He  acts  like  a  tender  fattier  to  us,  it  is  a  cruel  shame  that  we 
should  live  in  daily  revolt  against  Him.  You  who  have  not  believed  in  Christ  have 
mighty  cause  for  repenting  that  you  have  not  believed  in  Him,  seeing  He  is  so  good 
and  kind.  3.  While  they  had  rejected  the  blessed  Christ  they  had  chosen  a  mur- 
derer. Sinner,  thou  hast  despised  Christ,  and  what  is  it  thou  hast  chosen  ?  Has 
it  been  the  drunkard's  cup  ?  Thy  lust  ?  What  devilish  things  to  set  in  the  place 
of  Christ!  What  have  thy  sins  done  to  thee  that  thou  shouldst  prefer  them  to 
Jesus  ?  What  wages  have  you  had  ?  Oh,  then,  this  is  a  thing  to  be  repented  of. 
4.  Christ  whom  they  had  despised  was  able  to  do  great  things  for  them.  "  His 
name  through  faith  in  His  name,"  &o.  If  you  will  trust  Jesus  to-day,  all  your 
iniquities  shall  be  blotted  out.  Believing  in  Him,  He  can  make  thee  blessed.  And 
is  not  this  cause  for  repentance  ?  With  hands  loaded  with  love  He  stands  outside 
the  door  of  your  heart.  Is  not  this  good  reason  for  opening  the  door  and  letting 
Him  in  ?  5.  "  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it. "  As  if  He  would  say,  "  Now 
that  ye  have  more  light,  repent  of  what  you  did  in  the  dark."  You  had  not  heard 
the  gospel,  you  did  not  know  that  sin  was  so  bad  a  thing,  you  did  not  understand 
that  Jesus  was  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  Now  you  do  understand  it.  The 
times  of  your  ignorance  God  winked  at,  but  now  "  commandeth  all  men  everywhere 
to  repent."  Greater  light  brings  greater  responsibility.  Do  not  go  back  to  your 
sin,  lest  it  become  tenfold  sin  to  you.  "Now  ye  have  no  cloak  for  your  sin." 
Therefore,  because  the  cloak  is  pulled  away,  and  you  sin  against  the  light,  I  say  as 
Peter  did,  "Eepent  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out."  III. 
Without  repentance  and  conversion  sin  cannot  be  pardoned.  Many  Oriental 
merchants  kept  their  accounts  on  little  tablets  of  wax.  On  these  tablets  they 
indented  marks  which  recorded  the  debts,  and  when  these  debts  were  paid,  they 
took  the  blunt  end  of  the  stylus  or  pencil,  and  just  flattened  down  the  wax,  and  the 
account  entirely  disappeared.  Now,  he  that  repents  and  is  pardoned  is,  through 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  so  entirely  forgiven  that  there  is  no  record  of  his  sin 
left.  If  we  blot  out  an  account  from  our  books,  the  record  is  gone,  but  there  is  the 
blot ;  but  on  the  wax  tablet  there  was  no  blot.  But  sin  cannot  be  removed  except 
there  be  repentance  and  conversion.  This  must  be  so,  for — 1.  It  is  most  seemly. 
Would  you  expect  a  great  king  to  forgive  an  erring  courtier  unless  the  offender  first 
confessed  his  fault  ?  2.  It  would  not  be  moral ;  it  would  be  pulling  up  the  very 
sluices  of  immorality  to  tell  men  that  they  could  be  pardoned  while  they  went  on  ia 
their  sins  and  loved  them.  Does  not  conscience  tell  us  this  ?  There  is  not  a  con- 
science here  that  will  say  to  a  man,  "  You  can  hope  to  be  saved  and  yet  live  as  you 
list."  But  whether  your  conscience  shall  say  so  or  not,  God  says  "He  that 
coiifesseth  and  forsaketh  his  sin  shall  find  mercy,"  but  there  is  no  promise  for  the 
unrepenting.  "  He  who  goeth  on  in  his  iniquity  and  hardeneth  his  neck  shall 
suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy."  IV.  Kepentance  and  conversion 
WILL  BE  regarded  AS  PECULIARLY  PRECIOUS  IN  THE  FUTURE,  for  my  tcxt  says,  "  When 
the  times  of  refreshing  shall  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."  J.  He  that 
I'epents  and  is  converted  shall  enjoy  the  blotting  out  of  sin  in  that  season  of  sweet 
peace  which  always  follows  pardon.  When  the  prisoner  first  gets  out  of  prison, 
when  the  fetters  for  the  first  time  clank  music  as  they  fall  broken  to  the  ground ! 
when  the  sick  man  leaves  the  sick  chamber  of  his  convictions  to  breathe  the  air  of 
liberty  and  to  feel  the  health  of  a  pardoned  sinner !  Oh,  if  you  did  but  know  what 
a  bliss  it  is  to  be  forgiven,  you  would  never  stay  away  from  Christ !  But  you  do 
not  know,  and  cannot.  Oh,  "  repent  and  be  converted,"  then,  and  you  will.  2.  Perhaps 
these  "times  of  refreshing  "  may  also  relate  to  times  of  revival  in  the  Christian 
Church.  The  only  way  in  which  you  can  share  in  the  refreshment  of  a  revival  is 
bv  your  own  repenting  and  being  converted.  Of  what  use  is  a  revival  to  an  unpar- 
doned sinner  ?  It  is  like  the  soft  south  wind  blowing  upon  a  corpse.  3.  The  text 
means,  according  to  the  context,  the  second  advent.     Jesus  is  yet  to  come  a  second 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

time,  and  like  a  mighty  shower  flooding  a  desert  shall  His  coming  be.  His 
Church  shall  revive  and  be  refreshed.  But  woe  unto  you,  who  are  not  saved 
when  Christ  cometh,  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  be  darkness  and  not  light 
to  you.      {G.   H.   Spurgeori.)  Repentance,   a  chancje    of  mind  : — -The    original 

"a  change  of  mind"  or  "an  after-thought."  Now  that  is  exactly  what  the 
Holy  Sjjirit  produces  in  the  convicted  soul.  "There  is,"  says  the  wise  man,  "a 
way  that  seemetli  right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death." 
Now  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  dispel  this  false  view  of  our  way,  and  to 
bring  us  to  see  things  as  they  really  are ;  and  when  we  yield  to  His  convicting 
influences,  the  light  of  truth  flashes  into  our  soul,  and  we  come  to  ourselves.  Now 
we  see  things  from  an  entirely  different  point  of  view,  and  cry  out  against  ourselves 
— against  our  folly  and  our  sin.  "  What  a  fool  I  have  been !  "  cries  the  awakened 
and  repentant  soul.  "  So  many  years  I  have  lived  in  this  world,  and  yet  have  I 
never  really  begun  to  live  at  all !  My  whole  past  has  been  a  wasted  existence.  I 
have  been  simply  exercising  my  faculties  in  furthering  my  own  destruction  !  "  The 
first  step  in  a  real  repentance  is  taken  when  we  open  our  eyes  to  see  things  as  in 
the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  when  we  escape  from  the  long  delirium  of  a  life  lived 
under  the  influence  of  the  great  deceiver,  and  thus  undergo  a  change  of  mind  with 
respect  to  God  and  to  sin,  and  the  value  of  things  seen  and  things  eternal.  ( W. 
Hay  Aitken.)  Repentance  not  mere  sorroiv  for  sin: — It  is  a  common  thing  to  find 
people  confusing  between  repentance  and  sorrow  for  sin,  and  this  leads  sometimes 
to  most  distressing  results.  I  remember  once  insisting  very  strongly  upon  the 
importance  of  making  this  distinction.  The  next  day  an  intelligent  Christian  man 
said,  "  Ah,  Mr.  Aitken,  if  I  had  heard  that  sermon  of  yours  last  night  when  I  was 
seeking  salvation,  I  believe  it  might  have  saved  me  long  weary  years  of  misery, 
during  which  I  was  really  and  earnestly  desirous  to  give  myself  to  God,  and  yet 
fancied  I  had  no  right  to  come  to  Christ,  because  I  could  not  feel  the  sorrow  for  sin 
that  I  thought  I  ought  to  feel."  Now  it  is  quite  possible  to  experience  a  good  deal 
of  sorrow  for  sin  without  any  real  repentance,  and  it  is  equally  possible  to  have  a 
sincere  repentance,  and  yet  to  be  ready  to  cry  out  against  ourselves  because  we  don't 
feel  as  much  sorrow  for  sin  as  we  think  we  should.  Indeed  this  impatience  at  our 
own  hardness  of  heart  and  lack  of  true  spiritual  sensibility  is  often  a  feature  of  true 
repentance.  But  observe  that  on  no  less  than  ten  occasions  men  are  directed  to 
repent,  the  word  being  for  the  most  part  employed  in  the  imperative  mood.  Now 
it  is  obviously  absurd  to  suppose  that  we  should  be  thus  commai'ded  to  produce 
within  ourselves  a  certain  state  of  feelings ;  for  obviously  our  feelings  constitute 
just  that  element  in  our  nature  over  which  we  have  least  control.  We  cannot 
command  our  feelings  at  will,  and  therefore  it  is  simply  ridiculous  to  command 
persons  to  do  so.  It  would  be  folly  were  I  to  say  to  you,  "  Feel  very  bappy,"  or 
"Feel  very  sorrowful."  Again,  we  find  repentance  expressly  distinguished  from 
godly  sorrow.  "  Godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  .  .  .  not  to  be  repented  of." 
Now,  if  it  may  be  the  cause  of  repentance,  it  must  be  distinct  from  repentance,  for 
an  effect  must  always  be  distinct  from  its  cause.  It  does  not,  however,  always 
stand  in  this  relation.  Godly  sorrow  may  sometimes  flow  from  a  real  repent- 
ance, just  as  in  another  case  it  may  proceed  and  lead  up  to  it.  Of  this  we  see  an 
instance  in  David,  who  poured  forth  his  soul  in  the  sorrowful  language  of  the 
fifty-first  Psalm  long  after  he  had  both  repented  and  had  been  forgiven.  (Ibid.) 
Repentance  and  its  results  :  —Peter  had  now  proved  that  the  people  were  in  an  evil 
case,  and  pointed  out  that  the  only  way  of  escape  was  by  repentance  and  conversion. 
But  the  apostle  urged  this  duty  on  three  special  grounds.  I.  In  ordeb  that  they 
MIGHT  ATTAIN  PROPER  RELATIONS  TO  GoD.  "  That  your  sius  may  be  blotted  out." 
There  stood  against  them  an  account  by  which  they  were  bound,  and  that  account 
could  not  be  cancelled  except  through  repentance.  Then  God  would  not  treat  them 
as  sinners.  The  reason  for  this  condition  is  obvious  since  God  can  do  nothing  that 
is  morally  unfit.  To  attain  this  right  relation  to  God  is  to  enter  the  way  of  ultimate 
personal  perfection.  II.  In  order  that  they  might  cease  to  stand  in  the  way 
OF  blessing  designed  for  their  fellow-men.  "  That  the  times  of  refreshing,"  &c. 
The  world  was  full  of  sin  and  weariness.  God  knew  all  about  it,  and  had  promised 
seasons  of  refreshment.  They  were  to  be  granted  "  from  His  presence,"  by  His 
decree.  But  He  would  bless  men  through  men.  Bepentance  and  conversion  were 
therefore  required.  So  now.  Domestic  piety  will  be  promoted  by  those  who  penitently 
turn  to  God.  The  purification  and  quickening  of  particular  churches  will  be  aided 
by  such  as  mourn  over  sin  and  forsake  it.  And  the  multiplication  of  purified  and 
quickened  churches  would  soon  work  mighty  changes  in  Christendom.    III.  In  obder 


CHAF.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  317 

THAT    THEY   MIGHT   PEOMOTE    THE    COMING  OF   THE    GREAT   FINAL  MANIFESTATION  OF    THE 

Bedeemer.  "  And  He  shall  send  Jesus."  {W.Hudson.)  What  is  repentance '? — It  is, 
right  about  face  !  I  think  these  soldiers  understand  that  expression.  Some  one  has 
said  that  every  one  is  born  with  his  back  to  God,  and  that  conversion  turns  him  right 
round.  If  you  want  to  be  converted,  and  want  to  repent,  I  will  tell  you  what  you 
should  do.  Just  get  out  of  Satan's  service,  and  get  into  the  Lord's.  Leave  your 
old  friends,  and  unite  yourself  with  God's  people.  I  shall  be  gone  on  a  journey 
shortly.  If,  when  I  am  in  the  train,  a  friend  should  say,  "  Moody,  you  are  going  in 
the  wrong  train."  "  My  friend,"  I  should  say,  "you  have  made  a  great  mistake; 
the  guard  told  me  this  is  the  right  train.  You  are  wrong,  I  am  sure  you  are  wrong. 
The  guard  told  me  this  is  the  right  train."  Then  my  friend  would  say,  "  Moody, 
I  have  lived  here  forty  years,  and  I  know  all  about  the  trains.  That  train  is  the 
wrong  one."  He  at  last  convinces  me,  and  I  get  out  of  that  train  and  get  into  the 
right  one.  Bepentance  is  getting  out  of  one  train  and  getting  into  the  other.  You 
are  on  the  wrong  train  ;  you  are  in  the  broad  path  that  taketh  you  down  to  the  pit 
of  hell.  Get  out  of  it  to-night.  Bight  about  face  !  Who  will  turn  his  feet  towards 
God  ?  "  Turn  ye,  for  why  will  ye  die  ?  "  In  the  Old  Testament  the  word  is  "  turn." 
In  the  New  Testament  the  word  is  "repent."  (D.  L.  Moody.)  True  repentance  is 
practical : — I  heard  one  say,  "  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  be  a  slave  to  the  winecup  ;  I 
wish  that  I  had  never  tasted  it.  The  first  opportunity  I  get  I  will  turn  over  a  new 
leaf."  He  did  not  say  what  the  new  leaf  would  be,  but  he  was  going  to  do  any 
quantity  of  reforming  work.  Alas  !  he  never  did  anything  at  all,  for  he  was  drunk 
again  the  next  day.  A  beautiful  penitent  to  look  upon  ;  but  a  wretched  hypocrite 
in  due  time,  for  he  returned  like  the  dog  to  his  vomit,  and  the  sow  which  was 
washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire.  If  you  repent  of  sin,  down  with  sin  !  In 
God's  name,  down  with  sin  !  When  repentance  is  hearty  it  is  practical.  When  a 
man  tru  y  turns  to  God,  he  turns  away  from  sin.  (C.  H.  Spurgcon.)  We  must 
repent  now  : — Years  ago,  on  a  summer  afternoon,  I  stood  on  a  little  harbour-wall  and 
saw  two  vessels  trying  to  make  the  entrance.  They  were  lying  in  a  narrow  channel, 
and,  since  there  was  not  water  enough  to  keep  them  up,  they  were  lying  on  their 
side.  But  far  out  the  tide  began  to  turn,  and  one  wave  after  another  passed  under 
them,  and  every  wave  in  the  channel  made  the  water  deeper ;  and  I  saw  in  a  little 
while  that  the  water  was  twelve  feet  deep  in  the  harbour,  and  the  green,  foaming 
waves  rushed  in  like  a  millrace.  I  looked  again  towards  the  narrow  passage,  and 
saw  on  one  vessel  that  they  had  taken  advantage  of  the  wind  at  the  right  moment, 
and  on  that  first  vessel  they  floated  in  on  the  full  tide.  Upon  the  other  vessel  they 
were  not  on  the  alert,  though  sailors  do  not  often  make  that  mistake,  and  when  they 
tried  to  make  the  harbour  the  tide  had  turned,  and  they  could  not.  The  water  grew 
shallower  ;  they  gave  up  the  attempt ;  and  gradually  the  vessel  heeled  over,  and  lay 
just  as  before  on  the  bank  of  sand.  At  nightfall  I  went  down  again,  and  in  the 
dark  gloaming  I  saw  the  forsaken  vessel,  and  I  prayed  that  I  might  not  miss  the 
tide  which  Goa  gives  to  our  souls,  nor  quench  His  Spirit  within  my  heart.  (J. 
Watson,  M.A.)  Repentance  inqdies  the  fitter  forsaking  of  sin  : — Every  time  a  man 
takes  a  journey  from  home  about  business,  we  do  not  say  he  hath  forsaken  his 
house  ;  because  he  meant,  when  he  went  out,  to  come  to  it  again.  No  ;  but  when 
we  see  a  man  leave  his  house,  carry  all  his  goods  away  with  him,  lock  up  his  doors, 
and  take  up  his  abode  in  another  place,  never  to  dwell  there  more,  this  man  may 
very  well  be  said  to  have  forsaken  his  house  indeed.  Thus  it  is  that  every  one  of 
us  are  to  forsake  sin  so  as  to  leave  it  without  any  thought  of  returning  to  it  again. 
It  were  strange  to  find  a  drunkard  so  constant  in  the  exercise  of  that  sin,  but  some- 
times you  may  find  him  sober,  and  yet  a  drunkard  he  is,  as  if  he  were  then  drunk. 
Every  one  hath  not  forsaken  his  trade  that  we  see,  now  and  then,  in  their  holiday 
suit ;  then  it  is  that  a  man  is  said  to  forsake  his  sin,  when  he  throws  it  from  him, 
and  bolts  the  door  upon  it,  with  a  purpose  never  to  open  any  more  unto  it.  Ephraim 
shall  say,  "  What  have  we  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  "  (Hos.  xiv.  8).  (J.  Spencer.) 
Be  converted  : — Let  us — I.  Consider  the  state  of  the  soul  before  conversion  1. 
The  Bible  speaks  of  it  as  a  state  of  death.  Death  is  so  offensive  in  physical  nature 
that  we  are  compelled  to  bury  even  our  beloved  friends ;  and  had  we  eyes  and  hearts 
to  see  and  feel  the  realities  of  the  spiritual  world  a  soul  dead  by  sin  would  be  more 
offensive  than  a  decaying  body.  We  bury  the  physical  dead,  but  it  is  impossible  to 
put  away  a  dead  soul  from  society.  The  world  would  have  been  better  without  you, 
for  as  a  corpse  putrifies  the  air  we  breathe,  so  a  dead  sonl  is  a  corruption  which  gives 
forth  evil  and  prevents  good.  A  dead  soul  may — (1)  Have  great  influence.  Your 
influence  might  have  been  exerted  for  the  good  of  society,  but  you  have  lived  only 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOR.  [chap.  in. 

to  enjoy  your  own  self,  and  so  instead  of  being  a  helper  of  the  highest  interests  of 
mankind,  you  are  drawing  sap  from  the  human  tree  and  are  yielding  no  fruit.  (2) 
Be  a  moral  person.  You  have  not  committed  any  crime,  but  you  are  dangerous  to 
society.  Your  goodness  is  an  argument  to  a  bad  man  against  being  "  religious," 
and  the  children  of  your  family  say,  "  Why,  father  never  goes  to  church,  nor  reads 
the  Bible,  nor  prays — why  should  I  ?  "  People  will  follow  a  moral  sceptic  because 
they  wish  to  have  an  excuse  for  sin.  (3)  Be  an  openly  wicked  man.  2.  How  can 
it  be  known  whether  I  am  in  this  state  of  death  or  not  ?  If  you  be  in  this  state 
there  will  be — (1)  No  growth  of  goodness  in  your  character.  Some  persons  appear 
to  grow  more  beautiful  every  year,  but  others  become  more  wicked  as  they  grow 
older.  (2)  No  strength  to  do  holy  things.  You  may  do  as  you  Hke  with  a  dead 
body  ;  it  can  make  no  resistance,  and  likewise  a  dead  soul  is  helpless  in  the  hands 
of  Satan.  (3)  Troubles  and  obstacles  which  will  cause  you  to  despair.  In  such  a 
case  men,  but  mostly  women,  rush  to  intoxicating  liquor,  and  their  last  state  is 
worse  than  the  first.  A  dead  soul  is  one  "  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 
world."  II.  Inquiee,  What  is  convebsion  ?  1.  It  is  a  new  life.  You  may  see  ad- 
vertisements offering  for  sale  an  ingredient  which  improves  the  breath.  Now 
conversion  does  not  improve  the  old  sinful  breath,  but  it  gives  a  new  holy 
breath  within  the  soul.  Just  as  God  by  His  Providence  gives  us  at  birth 
physical  lungs  with  which  to  breathe  the  air  about  us,  so  His  Holy  Spirit  creates 
spiritual  lungs  in  our  soul  by  which  we  breathe  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  kingdom 
of  God.  2.  A  second  incarnation  of  God.  The  first  was  in  Christ,  the  second  in 
the  soul  of  His  disciple.  God  is  not  limited  to  the  body  of  Jesus.  He  sliall  also 
fill  every  believer  with  all  His  fulness.  Socrates,  speaking  of  true  friendship,  de- 
scribes it  as  one  spirit  in  two  bodies.  Now  conversion  is  one  Spirit  in  God  and  also 
in  you.  3.  A  moral  transformation.  It  is  that  change  which  makes  a  man  who 
has  loved  sin  to  shun  it  as  he  would  a  poisonous  serpent.  4.  Abiith  for  humanity. 
It  is  to  realise  that  you  are  born  to  be  the  brother  or  the  sister  of  every  one,  and  to 
prove  it  by  your  active  goodness.  It  is  that  union  with  God  which  unites  us  to  our 
fellow-man.  III.  I  would  tjkge  you  to  be  converted  :  because — 1.  Unless  con- 
verted you  are  at  war  with  God.  How  shameful  to  be  at  war  with  a  loving  Father  ! 
2.  The  gospel  assures  you  of  pardon.  3.  The  Lord  loves  you.  4.  God  can  convert 
you.  (IV.  Birch.)  Conversion  :— I.  What  conversion  is,  and  wherein  it  lies.  The 
conversion  to  be  treated  of  is  not — 1.  An  external  one,  or  what  lies  only  in  an  outward 
reformation  of  life  and  manners,  such  as  that  of  the  Ninevites,  for  this  may  be 
where  internal  conversion  is  not,  as  in  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees.  2.  Nor  is  it  a 
mere  doctrinal  one,  nor  a  conversion  from  false  notions  before  imbibed  to  a  set  of 
doctrines  and  truths  which  are  according  to  the  Scriptures ;  so  men  of  old  were 
converted  from  Judaism  and  heathenism  to  Christianity.  3.  Nor  the  restoration 
of  the  people  of  God  from  backsliding  when  they  are  in  a  very  affecting  and  im- 
portunate manner  called  upon  to  return  to  the  Lord  (Jer.  iii.  12,  14,  22  ;  Hos.  xiv. 
1-4) ;  so  Peter  when  he  fell  through  temptation  and  denied  his  Lord,  and  was  re- 
covered from  it  by  a  look  from  Christ,  it  is  called  his  conversion  (Luke  xxii.  32). 

But 4.  The  conversion  under  consideration  is  a  true,  real,  internal  work  of  God 

upon  the  souls  of  men.  (1)  In  the  turn  of  the  heart  to  God,  of  the  thoughts  of 
the  heart.  (2)  Conversion  lies  in  a  man's  being  turned  from  darkness  to  light ; 
the  apostle  was  sent  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light  (chap.  xxvi.  18),  that  is, 
to  be  the  instrument  or  means  of  their  conversion  by  preaching  the  gospel.  (3) 
From  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God  as  in  the  above  place  (chap.  xxvi.  18).  Satan 
has  great  power  over  men  in  an  unconverted  state.  (4)  Conversion  lies  in  turning 
men  from  idols  to  serve  the  living  God ;  not  merely  from  idols  of  silver  and  gold, 
of  wood  and  stone,  as  formerly,  but  from  the  idols  of  a  man's  own  heart.  (5)  Con- 
version lies  in  turning  men  from  their  own  righteousness  to  the  righteousness  of 
Christ.  (6)  Conversion  lies  in  a  man's  turning  to  the  Lord  actively  under  the 
influence  of  Divine  grace ;  and  by  this  phrase  it  is  often  expressed  in  Scripture 
as  in  Isa.  x.  21 ;  Acts  xi.  21 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  16.  II.  The  causes  of  conversion. 
1.  Not  by  the  power  of  man;  what  is  said  of  the  conversion  or  turning 
of  the  Jews  from  their  captivity  is  true  of  the  conversion  of  a  sinner  that  it 
is  not  by  might  nor  by  power,  that  is,  not  of  man,  but  by  My  Spirit, 
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts  (Zech.  iv.  6).  2.  Nor  is  conversion  owing  to  the  will 
of  man ;  the  will  of  man  before  conversion  is  in  a  bad  state ;  it  chooses  its  own 
ways,  and  delights  in  its  abominations,  it  is  in  high  pursuit  after  the  desires  of  the 
fle-h  and  of  the  mind.  3.  God  only  is  the  author  and  efficient  cause  of  conversion. 
4.  The  moving  or  impulsive  cause  of  conversion  is  the  love,  grace,  mercy,  favour,  and 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  319 

good  will  of  God,  and  not  the  merits  of  men.  5.  The  instrumental  cause  or  means 
of  conversion  is  usually  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  III.  The  subjects  of  conver- 
sion. Lost  sinners  redeemed  by  Clirist  are  the  subjects.  (Theological  Sketch-Book.) 
Conversion  : — 1.  All  through  the  New  Testament  one  great  saving  change,  involving 
entirely  new  relations  with  God  on  the  one  hand,  and  with  sin  on  the  other,  is 
represented  as  indispensably  necessary,  and  one  only,  and  it  is  to  this  great  change 
that  we  give  the  name  of  "conversion."  The  word,  particularly  in  the  original, 
seems  to  be  a  suitable  one  to  indicate  it,  looking  at  it  from  man's  point  of  view, 
because  it  connotes  a  turning  round  and  a  turning  towards,  with  a  view  to  resting 
in.  The  word  too,  in  common  use,  suggests  just  such  a  radical  change.  We  si^eak  of 
"converters"  that  change  iron  into  steel;  of  converting  a  saihng  ship  into  a 
steamer,  or  an  old-fashioned  gun  into  a  breechloader.  2.  This  great  saving  ch  <nf:;e 
is  represented  as  the  true  starting-point  of  the  spiritual  life.  It  is  therefore  n.,.,  a 
life-long  work,  for  if  all  our  days  be  consumed  in  making  the  start,  what  time  is 
there  left  to  that  journey  ?  The  locomotive  requires  to  be  placed  upon  the  turn- 
table, and  to  have  its  position  reversed,  before  it  can  proceed  on  its  return  journey. 
But  if  the  whole  four-and-twenty  hours  are  consumed  in  getting  the  engine  turned, 
what  is  to  become  of  that  journey?  And  where  is  the  station-master  that  would 
be  content  to  go  on  all  day  asking,  *'  Is  that  engine  being  turned  ?  "  or  would  feel 
content  on  hearing  that  the  process  was  going  forward  ?  I.  Conveesion  is  closely 
CONNECTED  WITH,  BUT  DISTINCT  FKOii,  REPENTANCE.  Repentance  represents  the  nega- 
tive, conversion  the  positive,  element.  Eepentance  consists  in  the  honest  repudia- 
tion of  the  old,  with  the  accompanying  feelings  of  regret  and  humiliation  ;  but 
conversion  consists  in  the  acceptance  of  the  new,  with  all  natural,  spiritual  exultation 
in  God.  Eepentance  is  the  discovery  of  the  fatal  disease  and  the  mournful  confession 
of  it.  Conversion  is  the  appropriation  of  the  remedy,  the  believing  touching  of  the 
hem  of  His  garment,  with  the  firm  persuasion,  "  If  I  may  bat  touch  I  shall  be  whole." 
Eepentance  brings  us  down  to  the  dust ;  conversion  sets  us  amongst  the  princes  and 
makes  us  inherit  a  crown  of  glory.  II.  Conversion  implies  an  origixal  attitude  of 
AVERSION,  "  An  evil  heart  of  unbelief  departing  from  the  living  God."  And  it  is  the 
preseuce  of  this  attitude,  more  or  less  fully  developed,  that  makes  conversion 
necessary.  Now  this  attitude  is  inherited  from  our  first  parents.  Hence  our  posi- 
tion differs  from  theirs  in  this,  that  they  had  to  fall  beneath  their  created  nature 
in  order  to  turn  from  God,  whereas  we  have  to  rise  above  our  inherited  nature  to 
turn  to  God.  Then,  again,  as  it  was  by  a  definite  moral  act,  an  act  of  the  will, 
that  man  turned  away  from  God,  so  it  is  only  by  a  definite  moral  act  that  man  can 
be  converted  to  God.  And  hence  it  is  evident  that  no  ordinance  can  render  the 
conversion  to  God  superfluous  or  unnecessary.  This  is  surely  a  sufiBcient  answer 
to  those  who  allege  that  conversion  cannot  be  necessary  in  the  case  of  those  who 
have  been  baptized  as  infants,  unless  they  have  lapsed  into  open  sin.  On  the  other 
hand,  however,  it  must  frankly  be  admitted  that  there  are  many  of  whose  conver- 
sion there  cau  be  no  reasonable  doubt,  who  yet  cannot  remember  in  the  past  any 
aversion,  and  hence  cannot  point  to  any  distinct  conversion.  They  seem  to  have 
loved  and  trusted  their  Saviour  so  long  as  they  could  remember  anything.  Again, 
there  are  others  who,  although  they  can  recall  a  condition  of  aversion,  cannot 
point  to  the  hour  of  conversion.  This  seeming  indefiniteness  with  some,  no  doubt, 
arise  from  temperament,  or  perhaps  to  defective  teaching.  Anxious  souls,  who 
wish  to  come  to  Christ  instead  of  being  directed  at  once  to  the  Cross,  are  told  that 
they  must  wait  for  certain  experiences.  But  whatever  be  the  true  explanation  we 
shall  do  wisely  in  thinking  less  of  the  accidents  and  more  of  the  essence  of  this 
great  change.  The  question  is  not  when  and  how  did  your  conversion  take  place  ? 
but.  Has  it  taken  place  ?  III.  Must  conversions  always  be  sudden  ?  You  hear  not 
a  few  affirm  with  sufficient  dogmatism  that  they  don't  believe  in  sudden  conversions 
except  those  on  a  death-bed.  I  must  say,  for  my  own  part,  that  these  are  the  only 
kind  of  sudden  conversions  that  I  am  sceptical  about.  But  my  answer  is  not  that  all 
conversions  are  in  their  outward  appearances  necessarily  sudden,  but  that  there  is  no 
reason  why  they  should  not  be  so.  If  this  matter  of  turning  back  again  from  sin 
and  self  to  God  can  be  settled  promptly,  none  would  wish  to  see  it  protracted  ;  for 
it  is  only  after  this  point  has  been  passed  that  real  religious  experience  begins.  If 
conversion  can  be  immediate,  there  is  surely  no  sense  in  desiring  that  the  process 
should  be  protracted.  "  Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time,"  &c.  If  conversion 
were  one  and  the  same  thing  as  reformation,  this  might  well  require  time ;  but  if 
it  be  a  mighty  spiritual  revolution  wrought  in  man  by  the  Holy  Giio-t,  then  it  is 
by  no  means  surprising  that  it  should  be  completed  as  rapidly  as  Naaman's  cure. 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

Let  us  turn  to  our  text.  IV.  Conveesion  is  an  impeeative  duty.  The  text  is  a 
direction  couchpcl  in  the  form  of  a  command.  "  Be  converted."  It  may  occur  ta 
you  to  object,  Who  can  convert  himself  ?  If  I  am  to  be  converted,  it  is  God  that 
mu^t  convert  me.  Now  there  is  a  certain  sense  in  which  this  is  quite  true.  The  I'e- 
generating  power  can  only  come  from  God ;  but,  on  tlie  other  hand,  man  as  well  as 
God  has  his  part  in  producing  this  great  change,  and  it  is  to  man's  part  in  it  that 
the  word  conversion  almost  invariably  refers.  Only  once  is  the  word  used  in  the 
Passive  Voice,  "  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,"  &c.  In 
that  passage  the  actual  moral  change  is  referred  to.  And  it  is  well  that  the  word 
should  thus  be  used  once  lest  we  should  lose  sight  altogether  of  the  necessarily  close 
connection  that  must  exist  between  the  turning  on  our  part  and  the  change  wrought 
by  God  on  His  part.  But  in  the  present  passage  the  word  is  active,  "  turn  again. "^ 
Many  awakened  souls  are  kept  back  from  Christ  because  they  cannot  make  them- 
selves feel  the  great  change  that  they  think  they  ought  to  experience.  They  wait 
and  hope  and  pray  that  they  may  be  converted,  instead  of  turning  right  round  so 
as  to  face  the  God  from  whom  they  have  turned  away.  Now  to  all  such  the  voice  of 
God  through  similar  passages  would  seem  to  say,  "  Turn  ye  even  unto  Me,  saith  the 
Lord."  V.  Conveesion  is  the  coeeelative  of  aversion.  Now  in  this  aversion 
three  distinct  steps  may  be  discerned.  The  first  is  taken  in  the  aversion  of  the- 
inner  eye,  the  looking  away  from  God  ;  the  next  in  the  aversion  of  the  will  when 
we  say,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  We  prefer  to  assert  our 
independence ;  and  then  follows  the  aversion  of  the  desires  and  affections.  Now 
there  are  three  corresponding  steps  in  conversion.  We  begin  to  turn  Godwarda 
when  we  allow  ourselves  to  recognise  our  inward  needs,  and  turn  from  the  empty 
cisterns  that  can  hold  no  water,  and  confess,  "  My  soul  is  athirst  for  God,  yea,  even 
for  the  living  God."  That  may  be  called  the  conversion  of  the  desires.  We  take 
our  second  step  in  the  submission  of  our  wills  and  our  decision  to  yield  ourselves  ta 
God,  and  here  usually  the  struggle  is  the  most  severe,  and  when  this  point  is  gained 
the  hardest  part  of  the  battle  is  won.  But  there  is  a  third  step,  the  conversion  of 
our  inner  vision.  For  even  when  our  desires  are  fixed  on  God  and  our  wills  yielded 
to  God,  seeking  souls  are  still  not  unfrequently  kept  in  darkness  just  because  they 
will  turn  their  eyes  to  anything  else  rather  than  God.  They  will  look  at  themselves,, 
at  their  feelings,  at  their  ill  deserts,  at  their  own  faith,  or  rather  at  their  want  of 
it,  at  other  people,  and  their  experiences  rather  than  at  God.  Now  when  St.  Peter 
calls  upon  us  to  turn  right  round  and  face  towards  God,  it  is  in  order  that  we  may 
so  fix  our  gaze  upon  God  as  to  discover  what  there  is  in  God  for  us,  and  rest  at 
peace  in  the  joy  of  that  discovery.  But  it  would  be  of  little  use  to  call  upon  us  to 
turn  unless  such  an  object  were  presented  to  us  as  should  attract  and  retain  our 
gaze  when  once  we  direct  our  vision  towards  it.  The  thought  of  God  and  of  Hia 
holiness  repels  and  even  appals  the  awakened  soul.  But  here  it  is  that  we  learn 
the  value  of  the  gospel.  It  was  not  enough  that  Christ  should  bid  us  return  to  our 
Father  ;  it  was  necessary  that  He  should  constitute  Himself  the  way.  VI.  Thus 
we  see  the  connection  between  the  atoning  work  of  Cheist  and  conveesion.  The 
result  of  that  work  la,  that  the  sinner  finds  in  God  the  very  thing  he  has  despaired 
to  find  in  himself.  Gazing  on  the  Cross,  he  makes  the  astonishing  discovery, 
"  Behold,  God  is  my  salvation  ;  I  will  trust  and  not  be  afraid."  Indeed,  we  may 
8ay  that  in  the  wondrous  vision  we  find  that  which  converts  all  our  thoughts  of 
God.  He  who  pave  His  Son  for  me  must  needs  be  worthy  of  my  confidence  and 
love.  "  Look  unto  Me,"  I  hear  Him  say,  "  and  be  ye  saved,"  and  unto  Him  I  look 
and  find  that  there  is  indeed  "  life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One."  And  this  look  is 
conversion  ;  for  everything  about  that  Cross  seems  of  a  kind  to  produce  a  change  of 
thought  and  feeling  that  might  be  called  a  conversion.  I  love  my  sins,  but  I  look 
at  that  Cross,  and  I  see  in  the  agony  and  death  of  the  Sin-bearer  what  sin  really  is, 
and  what  it  must  bring  me  to  if  I  cling  to  it ;  and  thus  my  view  of  sin  is  changed. 
I  looked  upcm  many  of  my  sins  as  mere  trifles;  now  I  see  how  exceeding  sinful  sin 
must  be  in  the  sight  of  Him  who  is  its  Judge,  and  thus  my  estimate  of  the  gravity 
of  sin  is  changed.  I  once  thought  of  God  as  though  He  were  hard,  austere,  and 
unsympathetic  ;  now  I  see  how  tender,  as  well  as  infinite,  is  His  love.  Thus  my 
judgment  of  God  is  changed.  I  used  to  love  to  think  of  myself  as  my  own  master, 
but  now  I  see  what  man  is  without  God,  and  so  my  views  of  myself  and  of  my 
relations  to  God  are  changed.  Thus  in  turning  myself  to  God  I  turn  my  back  upon 
my  old  self.  The  old  is  passed  away,  left  crucified  on  yonder  Cross,  and  all 
things  are  become  new.  But  more  than  even  this.  Not  only  am  I  changed  in  all 
ray  views  and  feelings,  but  I  am  converted  to  God  ;  that  is  to  say,  I  am  restored  to 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  321 

my  proper  relations  with  God.  Between  Him  and  me  there  is  now  nothing  but 
love,  and  so  I  am  now  in  a  position  to  enjoy  His  fellowship  and  to  be  strong  in  His 
power.  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Conversion  is : — I.  A  change.  A  Scotch  lassie, 
who  heard  Mr.  Whitefield  preach,  was  so  impressed  that  she  underwent  a  change  of 
heart.  When  she  presented  herself  before  the  Church  to  be  admitted  as  a  member, 
the  deacon  said  to  her,  "  My  child,  is  your  heart  changed  ?  "  She  replied,  "  Sir,  I 
do  not  know  whether  it  is  my  heart  that  is  changed  or  the  world,  but  I  feel  that 
something  is  changed  ;  things  are  different  now."  When  a  man  is  "  converted  " 
he  undergoes  a  change.  Instead  of  being  a  servant  of  Satan,  or  living  merely  to 
please  himself,  he  becomes  a  servant  of  God,  and  lives  henceforth  to  try  to  please 
God.  n.  A  SUBSTANTIAL  CHANGE  ;  not  merely  in  name,  but  in  reality.  A  certain  clergy- 
man was  preaching  to  black  people.  One  of  the  men  seemed  much  impressed,  and 
said  he  would  be  a  Christian.  So  the  clergyman  baptized  him,  made  the  mark  of 
the  cross  on  his  forehead,  and  called  him  by  a  new  name — "Adam."  A  week 
or  two  afterwards  the  clergyman  had  reason  to  believe  that  this  man  was  not 
doing  as  he  ought,  and  amongst  other  things  that  he  was  not  fasting  on  Fridays. 
Accordingly,  one  Friday,  he  went  to  the  man's  cabin,  and,  as  he  expected,  smelt 
the  savoury  scent  of  roasting  beef.  The  clergyman  said,  "Adam,  you  are  breaking 
the  law  of  the  Church  ;  you  ought  to  be  fasting  ;  that  is  beef,  not  fish."  The  man 
replied,  "  Well,  massa  preacher,  you  cross  me  and  call  me  a  new  name,  and  say  I 
am  Cbristian.  So,  massa,  I  take  de  beef  and  cross  him,  and  put  him  in  de  water, 
and  call  him  fish."  That  is  about  as  great  a  change  or  conversion  as  one  man  can 
give  another.  No  rite  can  convert  a  living  soul.  Conversion  is  a  personal  act  be- 
tween the  soul  and  God.  HI.  A  change  within  which  tkansfoems  the  outwaed 
LIFE.  IV.  An  endueing  change,  a  man  can  get  a  new  "rig-out"  for  about 
half-a-crown  in  Petticoat  Lane.  You  can  get  a  coat  and  vest  for  a  shilling,  a  pair  of 
"  unmentionables  "  for  sixpence,  a  shirt  for  fourpence  halfpenny,  a  collar  and  tie — 
such  as  they  are,  for  a  penny,  a  hat— what  you  call  a  "  pot,"  for  threepence,  a  pair 
of  stockings  also  for  threepence,  and  you  may  get  a  cane  and  a  ring  for  a  penny  ! 
And  if  you  are  good  at  bargaining,  you  may  have  a  gold-like  breast  pin  with  a  thing 
like  a  diamond  thrown  into  the  lot  for  good  luck.  While  you  are  in  the  dark  shop 
the  whole  thing  looks  moderately  "  respectable."  The  articles  are  not  new  cer- 
tainly; nor  second-hand;  they  are  about  tenth-hand.  But  when  you  walk  out 
with  your  purchases  on  your  back — well,  you  had  better  have  a  good-sized  sheet 
of  brown  paper  to  wrap  yourself  in,  for  I  suspect  a  decent  gust  of  wind  might 
blow  them  away  altogether,  or  a  shower  of  rain  might  dissolve  them.  The  fact  is 
the  things  are  not  substantial ;  they  won't  stand  wear  and  tear.  Man-made  con- 
versions are  like  those  cast-off  clothes — they  are  unsubstantial — they  will  not  wear 
well.  (W.  Birch.)  That  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out. — The  blotting  out  of 
sin: — "This  is  the  only  passage  in  which  the  verb  is  directly  connected  with  sins. 
The  image  that  underlies  the  words  (as  in  Col.  ii.  14)  is  that  of  an  indictment  which 
catalogues  the  s'ns  of  the  penitent,  and  which  the  pardoning  love  of  the  Father 
cancels.  The  word  and  the  thought  are  found  in  Psa.  li.  10 ;  Isa.  xliii.  25.  (Dean 
Plumptre.)  Sin  blotted  out: — A  little  boy  was  once  much  puzzled  about  sins 
being  blotted  out,  and  said,  "  I  cannot  think  what  becomes  of  the  sins  God  forgives, 
mother."  "  Why,  Charlie,  can  you  tell  me  where  are  the  figures  you  wrote  on  your 
slate  yesterday?"  "I  washed  them  all  out,  mother."  "And  where  are  they, 
then?  "  "  Why,  they  are  nowhere  ;  they  are  gone,"  said  Charlie.  "  Just  so  it  is 
with  the  believer's  sins — they  are  gone ;  blotted  out ;  '  remembered  no  more.' "  "  As 
far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  far  hath  He  removed  our  transgressions  from 
us."  Obliteration  more  tha.n  pardon : — I  have  spilled  the  ink  over  a  bill  and  so 
have  blotted  it  till  it  can  hardly  be  read,  but  this  is  quite  another  thing  from  having 
the  debt  blotted  out,  for  that  cannot  be  till  payment  is  made.  So  a  man  may  blot 
his  sins  from  his  memory,  and  quiet  his  mind  with  false  hopes,  but  the  peace  which 
this  will  bring  him  is  widely  different  from  that  which  arises  from  God's  forgiveness 
of  sin  through  the  satisfaction  which  Jesus  made  in  His  atonement.  Our  blotting 
is  one  thing,  God's  blotting  out  is  something  far  higher.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
When  the  times  of  refreshing  shall  come. — Times  of  refreshing : — Such  times — I. 
Aee  needed.  Spiritual  life  is  dependent  on  direct  Divine  agency.  But  as  there 
may  be  life  without  health  or  vigour,  so  in  the  believer  and  the  Church  there  may 
be  real  life  but  great  languor,  and  when  such  is  the  case  times  of  refreshing  are 
needed.  This  Divine  influence  is  often  compared  to  rain,  &c.  (Isa.  xxxv.  1 ; 
xliv.  3;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  26;  Isa.  Ixi.  11),  and  the  result  of  its  exertion  is  fertility  and 
growth.  1.  Personal  piety  will  be  deep  and  personal  activity  energetic.  These 
VOL     I.  21 


822  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

are  here  connected  because  they  should  never  be  separated.     Piety  without  activity 
■will  degenerate  into  spiritual  selfishness  ;  activity  without  piety  will  be  formal  and 
mechanical.     As  spiritual  life  generally  begins  in  the  closet,  it  is  there  that  it  will 
be  invigorated  and  revived.     As  the  healthy  man  requires  more  sustenance  and 
has  a  larger  appetite  than  the  invalid,  so  there  will  be  a  craving  for  spiritual  food. 
As  in  health  we  crave  for  the  fresh  air  of  heaven,  so  we  shall  often  ascend  the 
mountain-top  of  communion  with  God.     And  this  revived  piety,  taking  cognisance 
of  eternal  realities,  will  prompt  to  corresponding  activity  in  the  cause  of  Christ. 
As  such  times  are  the  result  of  spiritual  influence,  by  that  influence  the  love  of 
Christ  will  constrain  to  holy  and  individual  devotedness.     2.  Domestic  piety  will 
be  more  manifest.     If  the  flame  of  closet  devotion  be  dim,  that  of  the  family  altar 
cannot  be  bright ;  but  when  times  of  refreshing  come  the  members  of  the  house- 
hold will  catch  the  spirit  of  devotion,  and  those  for  whom  parents  have  long 
prayed  will  give  evidence  of  spiritual  life.     Here,  perhaps,  more  than  anywhere 
are  such  times  to  be  desired.     Worldly  amusements,  literature,  principles,  con- 
formity, have  in  too  many  instances  sapped  the  foundations  of  family  religion.     3. 
Social  piety  will  be  revived.     What  dulness  and  formality  there  often  is  in  our 
Church   organisations    and    gatherings,  and   what  a   falling  off  in  consequence. 
But  get   a   season   of   refreshing,    and   the    pastor  will    speak    direct   from    the 
mount   of  communion  a  message  from  God,  and  Church  officers  and  members, 
instead  of  availing  themselves  of  any  trifling  excuse,  will  eagerly  throng  to  the 
services   and   zealously  work   all   the   departments.      Equally   great   will  be  the ' 
change  in  the  habitual  converse  of  Christians.    Out  of  the  fulness  of  the  heart  the 
mouth  will  testify  of  spiritual  things.     4.   Sinners  will  be  converted  and  added  to 
the  Church.     This  has  always  been  a  characteristic  of  such  seasons.     Witness 
Pentecost,  e.g.     II.  May  be  expected.     We  are  not  left  in  doubt  as  to  the  ultimate 
triumph  of  the  truth.     Christ  yet  will  draw  all  men  unto  Him.     But  Christ  works 
by  agents,  and  since  the  success  of  the  gospel  is  in  proportion  to  the  vigour  of  the 
agents,  we  are  led  both  by  the  nature  of    things  and  the  Divine  promises  to 
expect  a  renewal  of  spiritual  invigoration  from  time  to  time.     And  as  the  fruitful 
showers  of  one  year  will  not  suffice  for  the  next,  but  each  has  its  own  supply,  so 
we  are  led  to  expect  for  each  generation,  and  for  each  believer  in  his  successive 
phases  of  experience  and  work,  fresh  supplies  of  reviving  grace.     And  the  recur- 
lence  of  such  seasons  may  be  expected  from  the  analogy  of  the  past.     They  have 
alwa^  8  been  sent  when  the  Church's  need  has  been  great.     It  was  so  after  the  Exile 
(Haggai  i.  14),  in  the  days  of  the  Baptist,  at  Pentecost,  in  Italy  under  Savonarola, 
in  Germany  and  Switzerland,  at  the  time  of  the  Eeformation,  in  America  under 
Jonathan  Edwards,  &c.  (Isa.  li.  9).     III.  Must  be  sought.    While  we  refer  their 
recurrence  to  the  sovereignty  of  God,  yet  He  has  indicated  the  course  which  we 
have  to  pursue.     "  I  will  yet  for  this  be  inquired  of  by  the  House  of  Israel  to  do 
it  for  them."     But  if  we  regard  iniquity  in  our  hearts  the  Lord  will  not  hear  us, 
"  Bepent  ye,   therefore,  .  .  .  that  the   times    of    refreshing  may   come."     This 
exhortation  is  needed  by  dead  Christians  as  well  as  dead  sinners,     IV.  Will 
CHANGE  THE  WHOLE  ASPECT  OF   THE  Church.      There  will  be — 1.  Clearer  know- 
ledge of  Divine  truth.      2.  More  manifest  spirituality.     3.  Greater  joy.     {R.    C. 
Pritchett.)         Times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  : — I.  What  thet 
AEE.     The  phrase  might  be  read — 1.  "  Times  of  cooling,"  in  allusion  to  the  custom 
of   labourers,  especially  in  Eastern  countries,  of  retiring  to   the   shade   during 
the   heat   of   the   day   to    recruit    their   exhausted    strength.      And    what    are 
these  hallowed  hours,  whether  on  the  week  days  or  on  the  Sabbath,  but  times  of 
refreshing,  affording  an  agreeable  pause  amid  the  busy  scenes  of  life,  enabling  us 
to  retire  from  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day  to  "  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a 
weary  land?"     Here   grows   the  "tree  of  life,"   of  which   the   grateful   Church 
exclaims,  "  I  sat  down  under  His  shadow  with  delight,  and  His  fruit  was  sweet 
unto  my  taste."     Here  gently  rolls  "the   river  of  the  waters  of   life,"  "whose 
streams  make  glad  the  city  of  God."    Here,  like  Nathanael  under  the  fig-tree,  we 
can  review  all  "the  way  in  which  the  Lord  our  God  hath  led  us,"  and  that  is 
refreshing.     Here  we  can  contemplate  the  unfolded  mysteries  of  redeeming  love, 
and  that  is  refreshing.     We  can  inspect  the  work  of  grace  in  the  heart,  and  that  is 
refjeshing.     We  can  look  into  the  promises  and  examine  the  covenant  which  is 
"ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,"  and  that  is  refreshing.     We  can  think  of  heaven, 
and  that  is  "  refreshing."     2.  Times  of  refection.     The  renewed  soul  has  an  appe- 
tite as  well  as  the  body,  and  the  blessings  of  salvation  are  adapted  to  our  n^^cessi- 
ties.     "  In  this  mountain  shall  the  Lord  of  Hosts  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of 


CHAP.  HI.]  THE  ACTS.  323 

Jat  things,"  &o.  To  these  rich  provisions  we  have  constant  access.  Here  is  food 
for  all,  and  the  whole  in  pleasing  variety.  Here  is  "the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word" 
for  "  babes  in  Christ,"  &c.  3.  Times  of  humidity,  softening,  and  moisture,  when  the 
genial  showers  or  refreshing  dews  saturate  and  revive  the  thirsty  bosom  of  vegeta- 
■tion.  Apt  emblem  of  the  refreshing  influences  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost,  which  "come 
down  like  rain  upon  the  new-mown  grass,  and  as  the  showers  which  water  the 
earth."  And  how  welcome  these  heavenly  showers  !  How  they  refresh  the  soul 
of  the  minister,  who,  having  sown  the  good  seed  of  the  Word,  is  anxious  to  see  "the 
blade,  the  ear,  and  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  !  "  How  they  revive  the  spirit  of  the 
people  whose  graces  open  and  expand  like  "  trees  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water  !  " 
What  a  happy  effect  they  have  upon  our  religious  institutions  !  What  a  sweet 
perfume,  as  a  "  savour  of  life  unto  life,"  do  they  produce,  as  you  find  in  a  garden 
after  a  refreshing  shower !  And  what  a  beautiful  bow  upon  "  the  cloud  of  our 
mercies  as  in  the  day  of  rain,"  do  they  impress,  when  they  descend  in  concert  with 
the  Sun  of  Bighteousness,  like  "  the  bow  of  promise  mid  the  storm."  II.  The 
SOURCE  WHENCE  THEY  SPRING — "  The  presence  of  the  Lord."  This  renders  them 
doubly  valuable.  The  gift  is  enhanced  by  the  love  which  we  bear  to  the  Giver, 
especially  when  we  recollect  His  motive,  the  way  in  which  our  supplies  have  been 
procured,  the  medium  through  which  they  descend,  the  impossibility  of  procuring 
others  of  equal  worth,  our  own  unworthiness  and  "the  fulness  of  joy  and  the  pleasure 
for  evermore  "  of  which  they  are  the  pledge  and  the  earnest.  They  come  "from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord,"  as  the  pool  of  Bethesda  was  rendered  medicinal  by  the 
presence  of  the  angel ;  as  the  bitter  waters  of  Marah  became  sweet  by  the  in- 
liuence  of  the  tree  which  was  cast  into  them  ;  or  as  the  sorrowing  disciples  were 
made  glad  by  the  presence  of  the  Eedeemer.  That  the  blessed  God  is  present  with 
His  people  whenever  and  wherever  they  meet  together  in  His  name,  requires  no 
proof.  He  has  promisd,  "  in  all  places  where  I  record  My  name  will  I  come  unto 
you  and  bless  you."  III.  Their  importance.  What  would  the  earth  be  without 
the  genial  showers  which  water  it  but  a  desert,  whatever  our  skill  or  labour  ? 
Thus  it  would  be  in  our  Churches  without  Divine  influences.  Ministers  might 
"break  up  the  fallow  ground,  and  scatter  the  precious  seed,"  but  it  would  not 
germinate.  "  We  should  labour  in  vain,  and  spend  our  strength  for  nought." 
But  when  the  Spirit  is  poured  out  from  on  high,  "  The  wilderness  shall  bud  and 
blossom  as  the  rose."  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  fruitful  source  of  vital  religion.  With- 
out His  fructifying  graces,  instructions,  invitations,  warnings,  judgments,  mercies, 
miracles — are  all  unproductive.  But  when  He  descends,  "  like  showers  of  heavenly 
rain,"  the  simplest  means  produce  the  noblest  effects.  And  as  the  Holy  Spirit 
produces  vital  religion  where  it  has  never  existed  before,  so  He  revives  it  where  it 
has  withered,  streisgthens  it  where  it  is  weak,  and  beautifies,  expands,  and  causes 
it  to  unfold  where  it  has  been  contracted  and  confined.  IV.  How  they  are  to 
BE  OBTAINED.  1.  Bv  a  conviction  of  their  value.  This  is  requisite  to  give  a  proper 
impulse  to  our  solicitude.  2.  By  fervent  and  persevering  prayer.  We  must  ask  in 
order  that  we  may  receive.  For  the  blessings  which  we  require  the  Lord  will  be 
sought  unto.  And  "if  ye,  being  evil,"  &c.  3.  Prayer  must  be  followed  by  an 
avoidance  of  those  inconsistencies  and  declensions  which  ' '  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  God."  {W.  B.  L'ach.)  lieligious  revivals  times  of  refreshing  (text,  and  Psa. 
Ixxxv.  6): — I  have  selected  these  words — I.  As  the  deep  dtterances  of  our 
LONGINGS  roR  A  REVIVAL  IN  OUR  OWN  LAND.  1.  Do  we  HOt  feel  the  need  of  it  in 
ourselves  individually  ?  Beligion  begins  with  a  man's  self  and  works  out- 
ward. "When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren."  Instead  of 
saying,  "What  lack  I  yet?"  or  "thanking  God  you  are  not  like  other  men," 
rather  cry,  "  My  soul  cleaveth  unto  the  dust.  0  quicken  Thou  me,  according  to 
Thy  Word."  Are  some  secretly  flatteiing  themselves  that  they  have  not  lived  in 
open  ungodliness  ?  "  Ah,  but  where  is  the  blessedness  ye  once  spake  of  ?  "  What 
report  from  thy  closet  ?  thy  scene  of  daily  labour  ?  the  house  of  God,  the  Sunday 
school  ?  the  chamber  of  the  sick  and  dying  ?  "  Wilt  Thou  not  revive  me  again  ?  " 
2.  Is  there  no  need  for  a  revival  in  our  families?  Have  you  set  your  house  in 
order  ?  Do  you  walk  within  your  house  with  a  perfect  heart  ?  Is  there  h'-re  no 
too  indulgent  Eli  ?  Is  there  no  parent  troubled  with  an  Absalom  ?  Like  Jacob, 
are  you  suffering  from  conceahd  idols?  Difficulties  are  felt  in  these  modern  times 
by  many  a  parent ;  but  let  the  "  land  mourn,  every  family  apart,"  and  "  the  voice  of 
rejoicing  and  salvation  shall  be  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  righteous."  Let  the 
family  Bible,  the  family  altar,  and  the  family  pew,  secure  the  family  blessing.  8. 
Is  there  no  need  for  a  revival  in  our  Churches  ?    But  let  us  beware  of  that  cen- 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

Boriousness  which  can  see  rothing  but  faults,  and  even  feel  a  pleasure  in  exposing 
them.  The  ears  of  the  world  are  open  to  these  aspersions,  and  out  of  their  mouths 
they  condemn  us.  Mark  you  the  example  of  Christ  in  the  addresses  to  the  Churches 
in  Asia :  where  possible,  praise  is  blended  with  censure,  and  praise  has  the  prece- 
dence. 4.  Our  eyes  naturally  turn  to  our  nation  at  large,  and  we  inquire  if  no 
revival  be  needed.  What  is  our  national  character,  habits,  and  reputation  abroad? 
Look  at  your  senate,  universities,  markets,  factories,  press,  theatres,  prisons,  the 
sins  and  miseries  of  your  streets,  by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  and  will  you  not 
"  sigh  and  cry  for  all  the  abominations  that  be  done  in  the  midst  thereof  "  ?  The 
deep  conviction  of  national  sins  precedes  a  revival.  II.  The  sotjece  of  a  re- 
LiGioTJS  EEViVAL.  Whence  is  it?  "From  heaven,  or  of  men?"  What  more 
perplexes  the  worldly  philosopher  than  to  see  crowds  of  men,  women,  and  children 
rushing  to  the  prayer-meeting.  On  the  Day  of  Pentecost  "  they  were  all  amazed 
and  were  in  doubt,  saying  one  to  another,  What  meaneth  this  ?  Others  mocking^ 
said.  These  men  are  full  of  new  wine."  But  all  this  leaves  the  phenomenon  of  a 
genuine  religious  revival  unexplained.  That  a  real  revival,  as  tested  by  the  fruits 
of  repentance  and  a  holy  life,  is  the  work  of  tbe  Spirit,  we  boldly  aver.  We  argue 
this  from  the  change  effected.  I  appeal  to  the  history  of  the  Church.  Say, 
whether  you  refer  to  the  conversion  of  the  three  thousand,  or  of  individuals,  as 
the  malefactor,  Zaccheus,  Saul  of  Tarsus,  or  the  jailor,  whether  in  every  case  it  was 
not  as  with  Lydia— "  The  Lord  opened  the  heart."  If  any  fact  were  necessary  to 
confirm  this  view,  it  would  be  not  only  the  notorious  sinners  that  have  been  con-' 
verted,  but  the  humble  and  despised  agents  and  agency  employed.  But  let  us 
appeal  to  the  Scripture  itself.  What  say  apostles  of  their  own  success?  "Not 
that  we  are  sufficient  of  ourselves."  "So  then  neither  is  he  that  planteth  any- 
thing, neither  he  that  watereth,  but  God  that  giveth  the  increase."  "  Not  by 
might,  nor  by  power  ;  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  And  the  same 
Voice  is  heard  saying,  "And  I  will  make  them  and  the  places  round  about  My 
hill  a  blessing,"  &c.  III.  The  jotousness  of  its  character.  1.  This  time  is  one 
of  "  refreshing  "  from  its  effects  on  our  own  minds.  Some  of  you  may  be  awakened 
to  discover  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  to  be  alarmed  for  its  consf^quences. 
See  the  penitent  at  the  footstool  of  mercy  beseeching  the  royal  forgiveness  ;  mark 
the  proclamation  of  the  Sovereign's  favour,  and  watch  the  change  on  the  sup- 
pliant's countenance !  "  I,  even  I,  am  He  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for 
Mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy  sins."  How  different  now  the  heart  of 
tbe  suppliant  to  the  trembling  with  which  he  approached  to  present  the  prayer — 
"  Hide  Thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out  all  mine  iniquities  !  "  Was  it  not  so 
with  the  jailor  when  he  "  rejoiced  with  all  bis  house  "  ?  Was  it  not  so  with  the  men 
"pricked  in  their  heart"?  "They  gladly  received  his  word."  2.  Is  it  not  a 
time  of  refreshing  when  we  witness  large  accessions  to  the  Christian  Church? 
Roused  to  a  feeling  of  compassion  for  the  perishing  world,  the  Church  unites  her 
joy  on  earth  with  tbe  "  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  But  if  the 
rescue  of  one  sinner  be  such  joy,  what  rejoicing  when  at  these  seasons  Satan's 
fmpire  is  shaken  to  its  centre,  and  he  himself  trembles  for  his  kingdom?  3. 
Then  the  Churches  themselves  are  so  purified  and  separated  from  the  world,  that 
they  not  only  believe  in,  but  experience  the  communion  of  saints.  The  charity  of 
every  one  of  them  towards  each  other  aboundeth.  Instead  of  being  idlers,  they 
are  in  "labours  more  abundant";  instead  of  being  troublers  they  are  peace- 
workers  of  Zion.  4.  But  we  have  not  reached  the  height  of  the  joy  until  we 
have  associated  religious  revivals  with  the  manifested  glory  of  God.  {J.  S.  Pearsall.) 
lievirals  : — A  revival  is  the  spring  of  religion,  the  renovation  of  life  and  gladness. 
It  is  the  season  in  which  young  converts  burst  into  existence  and  beautiful  activity. 
The  Church  resumes  her  toil  and  labour  and  care  with  freshness  and  energy.  The 
air  all  around  is  balmy,  and  diffusing  the  sweetest  odours.  The  whole  landscape 
teems  with  living  promises  of  abundant  harvest  of  righteousness  and  peace.  It  is 
the  jubilee  of  holiness.  A  genial  warmth  pervades  and  refreshes  the  whole 
Church.  Showers  of  "vernal  deligbt  and  joy"  descend  gently  and  copiously. 
Delightful  influences  are  wafted  by  every  breeze.  Where  the  dead  leaves  of  winter 
still  linger,  the  primrose  and  tbe  daisy  spiing  up  in  modest  loveliness.  Trees  long 
barren  put  forth  the  buds  of  beauty  and. power.  The  whole  valley  is  crowned  with 
fragrant  and  varied  blossoms.  Forms  of  beauty  bloom  on  every  side,  and  Zion  is 
the  joy  of  the  whole  earth.  If  the  spirit  that  renews  the  face  of  the  earth  is  a 
spirit  of  beauty  in  the  elegance  of  the  germs,  the  tints  of  the  buds,  the  verdure  of 
the  foliage,  the  splendour  of  the  blossoms,  and  the  witching  glories  of  the  matured 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  325 

fruits  of  Nature,  "  how  great  is  His  beauty  "  when  acting  out  His  lovely  and  holy 
perfections  in  revivals  of  religion.  {T.  W.  Jenkyn,  D.D.)  Revivals  :  True  test 
of: — The  divinity  of  revivals  may  be  tested  by  their  effect  on  the  family.  If  they 
turn  the  heart  of  the  parents  towards  their  children,  and  the  heart  of  the  children 
towards  their  parents,  they  are  of  God.  If  they  increase  the  love  of  the  family  ; 
if  they  cause  the  tendrils  of  love  to  draw  the  members  of  the  family  closer  and 
closer  to  each  other ;  if  under  their  influence  blossoms  and  clusters  of  love  hang 
in  abundance  on  the  family-tree,  then  you  may  be  sure  that  it  is  the  true  religion 
that  is  revived.  But  if  the  family  has  no  blessing,  and  the  dew  is  on  the  Church, 
you  may  be  in  doubt  whether  it  is  a  Divine  blessing,  or  any  blessing  at  all.  If 
rehgious  excitements  make  home  dull,  and  parental  and  filial  duties  and  relations 
tame  or  tasteless,  they  may  be  suspected  of  being  spurious,  carnal,  worldly.  And 
■when  there  begins  to  be  a  desire  for  a  revival  of  God's  work,  it  is  not  wrong  to 
■desire  that  the  congregation  should  be  inflamed,  and  that  there  should  be  a  multi- 
plication of  meetings,  in  which  Christians,  coming  together,  may  exchange  their 
thoughts  and  mingle  their  feelings ;  but  it  is  wrong  to  suppose  that  a  revival  should 
begin  in  the  Church.  The  family  is  a  hearth  raked  up,  and  the  fire  must  be 
unraked  there.  And  every  one  must  bring  his  home-brand  and  lay  it  on  the  altar 
of  the  Church.  Then  the  revival  in  the  Church  will  be  genuine.  Sometimes 
revivals  begin  in  Churches  and  thence  go  into  families.  At  any  rate,  either  first  or 
last,  every  true  revival  of  religion  must  reach  the  family.  A  revival  that  does  not 
reach  the  family  is  imperfect,  if  not  spurious.  (H.  W.  Beecher. )  Revivals  :  Use 
of: — One  of  the  blessings  of  revivals  of  religion  is  that  they  surround  men  with 
sympathies  that  work  towards  religious  growth.  Hours  of  conviction  are  benificent 
in  this,  that  they  shut  men  out  from  the  world,  and  give  them  to  themselves  for  the 
time  being,  and  afford  them  the  opportunity  of  dwelling  in  their  thoughts  upon  things 
Divine  and  spiritual.  Anything  is  favourable  to  advancement  in  Christian  manhood 
which  tends  to  countervail  that  flow  of  sympathetic  action  by  which  the  mind  is 
carried  away  from  intercourse  with  Christ  and  God.  (Ibid.)  Revivals:  Effects 
of: — In  the  revival  shadowed  in  the  vision  of  the  valley  of  dry  bones,  there  was 
first  a  noise,  and  then  a  shaking,  throughout  all  the  plain.  Eevivals  always  pro- 
duce vigorous  stirrings  in  a  Church,  and  excitement  in  a  neighbourhood.  The 
smooth  and  chilling  ice  of  the  frigid  latitudes  of  formality  is  disturbed  and  broken 
up  ;  and  all  the  barks  and  ships  that  were  frozen  in  them  are  set  at  liberty.  The 
«nows  of  winter  are  melted  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  all  men  awaken  to 
activity  and  labour.  Eevivals  disturb  the  formalist,  the  indolent,  the  lukewarm, 
and  the  wicked.  They  produce  a  turbulence  in  the  conscience,  an  agitation  in  the 
mind,  tumult  in  the  emotions,  commotion  in  the  sympathies,  and  vigorous  animation 
in  all  the  faculties.  {T.  TV.  Jenkyn,  D.D.)  Revivals,  and  seasons  of  coldness  : — 
I  remember  one  week  New  York  was  like  a  second  Jerusalem  at  Pentecost.  Mer- 
chants ran  from  counting-houses,  and  bankers  from  Wall  Street  and  South  Street, 
hungry  and  thirsty  for  an  hour  of  noon-day  prayer ;  and  the  atmosphere  seemed 
laden  with  the  perfumes  of  the  Spirit,  as  I  saw  the  orchards  of  England  a  short 
time  since  laden  with  the  sweet  apple-blossoms.  Of  the  thousands  that  then  set  out 
toward  Zion,  with  songs  of  joy  and  gladness,  how  many  have  held  out,  and  who 
iave  held  out  ?  Only  those  who  gave  themselves  fully  up  to  Christ,  and  have 
followed  Christ  fully  ever  since ;  the  truly  regenerated  with  the  Spirit,  who  have 
learned  to  know  no  other  but  Christ,  and  follow  no  other  but  Him.  The  Church 
^ets  filled  in  revival  seasons,  but  it  gets  winnowed  in  seasons  of  coldness  and 
indifference.  Only  sound  piety  holds  out  and  keeps  fresh  at  times  when  worldliness 
abounds,  and  popular  and  fashionable  sins  pour  in  like  a  flood.  (T.  L.  Ciiyler.) 
Revival :  Waiting  for : — Far  in  the  woods  of  Maine,  in  these  winter  months,  there 
are  a  hundred  camps,  and  scores  of  axemen  are  busy  cutting  down  the  huge  trees 
and  measuring  the  logs  and  sorting  them,  and  throwing  them  into  deep  gullies, 
where  they  will  lie  dry  and  undisturbed  until  the  snow  melts  and  the  spring 
floods  come  ;  and  then  they  will  be  borne  out  of  the  ravines  into  the  ever  deep- 
flowing  river,  and  from  thence  to  some  Penobscot  or  Kennebec,  and  there  collected 
together  and  bound  in  mighty  rafts,  they  will  float  down  to  the  tide-waters.  So 
men  are  laying  dry  logs  along  empty  channels,  hoping  that  some  revival  freshet 
will  come  and  sweep  them  down  to  the  deep  waters  of  piety.  {//.  W.  Beecher.) 
Times  of  rextitution  and  restoration : — In  the  text  we  have  (1)  the  conditions  of  sal- 
Tation  by  Christ ;  repentance,  and  conversion ;  change  of  mind,  and  change  of 
life  ;  reviewing  the  past  with  true  contrition,  and  turning  to  God  with  full  purpose 
of  amendment :  (2)  the  immediate  result,  forgiveness  ;  the  cancelling  of  sin ;  tha 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

obliteration  of  the  guilty  record  ;  the  "  casting  all  our  sins  into  the  depths  of  the 
sea  "  ;  the  so  passing  by,  the  so  dismissing,  the  sins  of  those  who  truly  repent,  that 
He  remembers  them  no  more :  and  (3)  the  future  result ;  "  that  so  there  may  come 
from  God's  presence  seasons  of  refreshing  "  ;  that  so,  the  number  of  His  elect  being 
at  last  accomplished,  He  may  send  Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour,  who  is  now  in  heaven 
awaiting  the  arrival  of  those  times  of  restitution,  restoration,  reparation  of  all  thinp:s 
which  liave  been  the  great  subject  of  Divine  prediction  from  the  first.  The  arrival 
of  the  times  thus  described  is  made  to  depend  upon  the  repentance  and  conversion 
of  man.  I.  The  period  of  refreshing.  The  word  thus  rendered  is  properly  a 
revival  by  fresh  air ;  the  consequence  of  letting  in  a  breeze  of  cool  and  invigorating 
air  upon  one  who  has  been  long  fainting  under  a  sultry  and  oppressive  atmosphere. 
Do  not  we  want  such  times  ?  Are  We  not  all  conscious  of  the  oppressive  weight  of 
this  world's  atmosphere  ?  Do  we  not  all  feel  ourselves  oftentimes  fainting  with  the 
closeness  and  sultriness  of  the  air  we  are  forced  to  breathe  ?  The  oppression  of 
persecution  is  rather  "  a  stormy  wind  and  tempest  "  which  has  in  it  something  of 
a  wholesome  severity,  rousing  our  whole  being  into  a  more  resolute  and  vigorous 
vitality.  But  the  text  speaks  of  that  stifling  heat  which  at  once  indisposes  and 
incapacitates  for  exertion  ;  of  that  sense  of  breathmg  an  exhausted  air,  or  living  in 
a  crowded  cabin,  which  paralyses  every  energy,  and  at  last  forbids  repose  itself. 
How  seldom  does  the  refreshing  breath  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  revive  Christians  into 
the  buoyancy  of  conscious  life  and  health  !  How  seldom  does  the  sweet  influence 
of  the  Divine  presence  hft  them  into  that  upper  air  where  no  earth-born  cloud ' 
darkens  their  sky,  and  no  noxious  vapour .  damps  or  poisons  their  atmosphere  I 
They  can  tell  the  times  when  this  has  been  their  bright  experience.  But  far  more 
often  they  sigh  for  light  and  air,  hunger  for  food,  thirst  for  water.  In  prosperity 
the  air  of  earth  is  laden  with  a  luscious  perfume,  lulling  us  into  a  stupor  which  is 
no  repose.  In  adversity  we  seem  to  be  confined  within  the  walls  of  a  sick-room,, 
from  which  worldly  pleasure  is  banished,  without  the  admission  of  a  heavenly 
visitant.  II.  The  time  of  restitution.  What  a  tangled,  disordered,  inverted 
thing  is  the  world  as  we  see  it !  What  a  deterioration  from  any  condition  in  which 
God  could  ever  have  pronounced  it  to  be  very  good.  "  The  whole  creation  groaneth 
and  travaileth,"  &c.  Only  see,  for  example,  how  the  relations  of  life  are  disorganised ! 
See  what  misfortunes,  sorrows,  spring  out  of  the  aSections !  See  the  hearts  of  fathers 
turned  from  their  children,  and  the  hearts  of  children  from  their  fathers.  See  the 
weaker  and  the  more  trusting  half  of  mankind  made  the  sport  and  the  victim  of 
the  stronger  and  the  less  sensitive.  See  the  distinction  of  ranks  now  cruelly  aggra- 
vated, and  now  violently  obliterated.  And  under  the  government  of  a  righteous 
and  holy  God  can  it  be  conceived  that  this  state  of  things  should  be  perpetual?  la 
not  the  very  extent  of  the  ruin  a  pi-ophecy  of  the  restoration?  Can  it  be  that  God 
should  thus  have  made  all  things  in  vain,  and  suffered  His  own  beautiful  handiwork 
to  be  thus  marred  and  desolated  finally  ?  It  has  been  the  language  of  all  prophecy 
that  there  shall  be  a  time  of  restitution.  "We,"  the  same  apostle  writes, 
"  according  to  His  promise,  look  for  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness."  And  shall  it  not  be  a  comfort  to  the  true  Christian  to  look  forward 
to  the  arrival  of  that  time  when  the  ways  of  God  shall  be  finally  justified  to  the 
universe  ?  How  does  it  become  us  to  see  that  we  ourselves  be  not  adding  to  the 
confusion.  Although  the  restoration  of  all  things  is  not  yet,  yet  let  us  remember 
that  there  is  a  restitution,  a  reparation,  a  reconstruction,  which  belongs  to  all  time  ; 
a  repentance  and  a  conversion  which,  if  not  realised  here,  can  be  realised  nowhere  ; 
a  renewal  of  soul,  and  an  amendment  of  life  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  which  is  the  condition  of  our  ever  being  admitted  into  the  world  in  which 
dwelleth  only  righteousness.  If  we  would  ever  enter  heaven,  we  must  begin  it  here. 
If  we  would  ever  see  the  restoration  of  all  things,  we  must  struggle  day  by  day  here 
for  our  own.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Times  of  refreshing  and  restitution. — Timen  of  re- 
freshment:— The  thought  is  that  again  expressed  both  by  St.  Peter  (2  Pet.  iii.  12)  and 
by  St.  Paul  (Rom.  xi.  25-27),  that  the  conversion  of  sinners,  especially  the  conversion 
of  Israel,  will  have  a  power  to  accelerate  the  fulfilment  of  God's  purposes,  and, 
therefore,  the  coming  of  His  kingdom  in  its  completeness.  The  word  for 
"  refreshing "  is  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament,  but  the  cognate 
verb  meets  us  in  2  Tim.  i.  16.  In  the  Greek  version  of  Exod.  viii.  15,  it  stands 
where  we  have  "  respite."  The  "  times  of  refreshing"  are  distinguished  from  the 
"  restitution  of  all  things  "  of  verse  21,  and  would  seem  to  be,  as  it  were,  the 
gracious  preludes  of  that  great  consummation.  The  souls  of  the  weary  wonlJ  be 
t^uickened  as  by  the  fresh  breeze  of  morning ;  the  fire  of  persecution  assuaged  a» 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  327 

by  "a  moist  whistling  wind"  ("  Song  of  the  Three  Children,"  verse  24).  Israel, 
as  a  nation,  did  not  repent,  and  therefore  hatred  and  strife  went  on  to  the  bitter 
end  without  refreshment.  For  every  church,  or  nation,  or  family,  those  "  times  of 
refreshing"  come  as  the  sequel  of  a  true  conversion,  and  prepare  the  way  for  a 
more  complete  restoration.     {Dean  Plumptre.) 

Ver.  20.  And  He  shall  send  Jesus. — The  Missionary  Christ : — A  missionary 
is  "  one  sent."  Jesus  was  a  missionary  when  He  came  to  save ;  He  will 
be  a  missionary  when  He  comes  to  judge.  These  missions  have  been 
loosely  termed  the  First  and  Second  Advents  as  though  there  were  no 
others.  But  if  the  Old  Testament  theophanies  were  manifestations  of  Christ, 
then  Christ  came  on  a  pre-incarnate  mission.  Then,  again,  He  had  an 
important  mission  after  the  Resurrection  ;  and  further,  we  see  from  the  text 
in  conjunction  with  ver.  26  and  His  promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you,"  that  He 
has  been  engaged  in  a  mission  ever  since  the  Ascension.  So  there  are  four  advents 
which  characterise  the  successive  phases  of  the  mission  of  the  Son  of  God.  The 
text  refers  to  that  in  which  He  is  now  engaged.  Note — I.  The  missionakt.  1. 
The  name  "  Jesus  "  is  generally  used  of  the  Saviour  in  His  human  capacity  ;  and 
it  is  not  without  the  profoundest  interest  that  the  Great  Ambassador  from  on  high 
is  that  "  same  Jesus  "  who  assumed  our  humanity  to  qualify  Himself  for  a  real 
brotherhood  with  our  race.  We  have  suggested,  therefore,  in  the  name  sympathy, 
helpfulness,  accessibility,  companionship.  While  we  carefully  remember  His 
august  position  on  the  throne  of  the  universe,  let  us  not  forget  that  that  throne  is 
occupied  by  our  Brother,  and  that  therefore  we  may  "  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of 
grace  !  "  2.  Christ  is  the  official  title  which  represents  our  Lord  as  embodying  all 
that  was  meant  by  the  "  anointed  "  personages  of  the  Old  Testament.  He  is  the 
reality  of  which  they  were  the  type — the  Messiah.  (1)  Christ,  then,  still  discharges 
His  teaching  functions,  and  says  many  things  which  He  could  not  say  to  His 
ancient  disciples — not  so  much  revealing  new  truth  as  unfolding  fresh  develop- 
ments, exhibiting  new  aspects,  and  bringing  it  home  in  unlooked-for  ways.  (2) 
Christ  is  the  Priest  of  His  Church.  Atonement  was  only  one  function.  He  ever 
lives  to  apply  the  benefits  of  His  sacrifice,  to  make  intercession,  to  pour  forth  His 
ceaseless  blessings.  (3)  Christ  is  King  to  legislate,  rule,  and  lead  to  victory.  H. 
The  Sender.  God  (ver.  19).  That  Jesus  was  the  Sent  of  God  shows — 1.  The 
harmony  of  the  missions  of  Christ  incarnate  and  Christ  glorified.  No  more  frequent 
thought  was  in  our  Lord's  mind  than  that  He  came  from  God  except  the  cognate 
thought  that  He  was  glad  to  come.  So  our  text  regards  Christ  as  still  being  sent, 
and,  since  the  effects  of  His  mission  are  so  blessed  (ver.  26),  with  the  same  joy. 
What  dignity  and  blessedness  does  this  give  to  those  who  receive  Him  !  We  are 
amazed  at  the  condescension  and  love  which  marked  the  advent  to  Bethlehem  ; 
but  under  the  same  grand  auspices  does  Christ  come  to  our  soul,  home,  church. 
2.  The  relation  of  Christ.  (1)  To  the  Father,  (a)  Subordination.  "Send."  (/;) 
Equality.  God  only  could  do  what  Christ  is  sent  to  do  (ver.  26).  (2)  To  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  "  times  of  refreshing  "  are  regarded  as  emphatically  the  Spirit's,  but 
our  text  shows  that  they  are  also  Christ's.  This  harmony  of  operation  is  seen 
throughout  the  New  Testament.  And  what  God  hath  joined  together  let  no  man 
put  asunder.  IIL  The  time.  "  Times  of  refreshmg.  '  Christ  is  always  here,  but 
He  is  not  always  manifest.  But  He  is  supremely  manifest  during  periods  of 
spiritual  revival.  1.  In  the  revival  of  personal  religion  it  is  the  vivid  realisation  of 
Christ  that  brings  refreshment.  Our  dead,  dry,  barren  times  are  when  Christ  is 
partially  or  altogether  hidden.  But  when  the  clouds  break  the  showers  fall  and  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  shines  forth,  and  all  is  glad  and  fruitful.  2.  In  the  revival  of 
Church  life  it  is  Christ  brought  home  to  the  sinner,  magnified  by  the  saint,  and 
honoured  in  all  effort  that  is  the  prime  cause.  IV.  The  means.  "  Preached  unto 
you."  1.  Christless  preaching  is  never  marked  by  a  time  of  refreshing.  There 
were  learned  rabbis  prophesying  in  a  valley  of  dry  bones  ;  but  it  was  a  rude  fisher- 
man that  was  the  instrument  of  bringing  them  to  life.  This  Peter  did  by  simply 
preaching  Christ.  Scholastic  philosophers  were  scattering  their  ponderous  tomes 
on  an  age  that  was  not  only  dark  but  dead ;  but  it  was  a  rude  miner's  son  that 
awakened  Europe  into  life.  "This  Luther  did  by  simply  preaching  Christ.  Stately 
essays  were  read  by  cultured  thinkers  in  that  barren,  arid  eighteenth  century ; 
but  untutored  evangelists  simply  h'4d  up  Christ  and  times  of  refreshing  came.  2. 
As  a  means  of  revival,  therefore,  preaching  Christ  is  the  chief.  Other  thmgs  are 
important — architecture,  music,  visitation,  schools,  pleasant  evenings,  &e.    But 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

a  Church  may  have  all,  and  yet  lack  the  one  thing  needful.  But  the  Subject  to  be 
preached  is  a  -whole  Christ :  not  His  tender  humanness  apart  from  His  sovereign 
dignity;  not  His  precious  promises  apart  from  His  atoning  sacrifice.  Let  the 
whole  Christ  be  preached  accompanied  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  with 
and  through  whom  He  works,  and  "  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord,"  will  come.     {J.  W.  Burn.) 

Ver.  21.  Whom  the  heavens  must  receive  until  the  times  of  restitution  of  all 
things. — Times  of  restitution  of  all  things: — The  "times"  seem  distinguished 
from  the  "  seasons  "  as  more  permanent.  This  is  the  only  passage  in  which  the 
word  translated  "  restitution  "  is  found  in  the  New  Testament ;  nor  is  it  found  in  the 
LXX.  version  of  the  Old.  Etyinologically,  it  conveys  the  thought  of  restoration  to 
an  earlier  and  better  state,  rather  than  that  of  simple  consummation  or  completion, 
which  the  immediate  context  seems,  in  some  measure,  to  suggest.  It  finds  an 
interesting  parallel  in  the  "  new  heavens  and  new  earth  " — involving,  as  they  do, 
a  restoration  of  all  things  to  their  true  order — of  2  Pet.  iii.  13.  It  does  not  neces- 
sarily imply,  as  some  have  thought,  the  final  salvation  of  all  men,  but  it  does 
express  the  idea  of  a  state  in  which  "  righteousness,"  and  not  "  sin,"  shall  have 
dominion  over  a  redeemed  and  new-created  world.  The  corresponding  verb  is 
found  in  the  words,  "  Elias  truly  shall  come  first,  and  restore  all  things"  (Matt. 
xvii.  11) ;  and  St.  Peter's  words  may  well  be  looked  on  as  an  echo  of  that  teaching, 
and  so  as  an  undesigned  coincidence  testifying  to  the  tru:h  of  St.  Matthew's  record. 
{Dean  Plumptre.)  The  golden  age — the  restitution  of  all  things  : — 1.  Restitution 
means  the  setting  up  again  of  tbat  which  has  been  thrown  down.  When  a  fallen 
pillar  is  restored  to  its  position ;  or  a  plant,  blown  down,  or  crushed,  regains  its  up- 
right attitude ;  when  a  building,  overthrown,  is  rebuilt — there  is  a  restitution.  2. 
In  the  universe  there  has  been  a  great  overturning.  The  course  of  history  seems  to 
be  a  succession  of  failures — God  setting  up,  some  other  power  casting  down.  And, 
apart  from  revelation  we  could  not  tell  what  the  end  of  all  things  would  be.  In 
the  Word  of  God  we  have  the  assurance  of  a  restitution — a  setting  up  again  of  all 
things — a  restoration  out  of  the  old,  but  higher  than  the  old — the  same  and  yet 
different.  "  The  city  shall  be  builded  upon  her  own  heap,  and  the  palace  shall 
remain  after  the  manner  thereof."  I.  The  kestitution  op  nature.  In  the 
beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth — garnitshed  with  wisdom  ;  blessed 
with  love ;  and,  surveying  the  whole.  He  pronounced  it  very  good.  But  through 
the  introduction  of  evil,  a  curse  soon  fell  upon  creation,  and  the  earth  underwent 
some  change,  in  respect  of  its  beauty  and  fertility.  The  world  is  regarded  as  full 
of  beauty,  notwithstanding  its  barren  deserts,  &c. ;  but  had  sin  never  entered,  it 
would  have  been  a  scene  of  order  and  peace  far  surpassing  onr  conception.  The 
Cosmos  we  behold  bears  traces  everywhere  of  great  convulsions ;  and  in  this 
respect  nature  has  been  called  "  a  born  ruin."  There  are  revolutionary  forces 
which,  if  let  loose,  would  rend  creation  asunder.  Meantime  these  forces  check 
each  other  ;  only  occasionally  are  we  reminded  of  their  power  by  a  quaking  of  the 
earth,  or  a  peal  of  thunder.  But  the  day  is  coming  when  these  forces  will  overleap 
their  present  bounds,  and  involve  universal  nature  in  a  catastrophe.  The  two 
agents  appointed  by  God  to  work  great  physical  and  moral  revolutions  are  water 
and  fire.  God  has  already  employed  water  to  change  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  the 
current  of  history.  The  other  agent  to  be  employed  in  the  destruction  of  the  world 
is  fire  (2  Pet.  iii.  10-14).  Part,  then,  of  the  restitution  of  all  things  consists  in  the 
restitution  of  nature.  In  the  beginning  of  revelation  we  see  God's  first  work  set 
up,  but  soon  thrown  down,  or  marred.  In  the  end  we  read  of  its  being  set  up  again 
in  higher  form  :  "I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,"  &e.  The  first  creation 
was  cursed,  but  in  the  second  creation  "there  shall  be  no  more  curse."  The  first 
creation  has  thorns  and  thistles,  but  with  regard  to  the  second,  "  Instead  of  the 
thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir-tree,"  &c.  The  restitution  will  be  not  merely  a  return 
to  primeval  beauty,  but  the  introduction  of  a  far  higher  beauty.  For  then  "  the 
light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  sun,"  &c.  Involved  in  the  restitution 
of  nature  is  the  restitution  of  Paradise,  "  The  Lord  God  planted  a  garden,"  &c.  In 
this  there  was  a  perfect  combination  of  the  useful  and  the  beautiful.  It  had  trees 
•'pleasant  to  the  sight  and  good  for  food."  A  river,  also,  went  out  of  Eden  to 
water  the  garden.  And  so  in  the  midst  of  Paradise  restored  there  is  "  the  tree  of 
life,  with  twelve  manner  of  fruits,"  &c.,  and  "a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,"  <&c. 
II.  The  restitution  of  man.  This  is  intimately  connected  with  the  restitution  of 
nature,  as  Paul  shows  in  Bom.  viii.     1.  Look  at  man  in  his  first  estate.    He  was 


CHAP.  III.]  TEE  ACTS.  329 

made  in  the  image  of  God  in  nature  and  will.  He  possessed  the  glorious  but 
perilous  gift  of  liberty.  And  how  did  he  demonstrate  his  freedom  ?  Not  as  God 
had  done  in  the  production  of  good,  but  as  Satan  had  done  in  the  production  of 
evil.  He  showed  himself  to  be  tree  by  an  act  that  destroyed  his  freeiiom.  He  was 
a  broken  creature,  smitten  with  death.  Being  spiritually  dead,  temporal  and  eternal 
death  was  the  necessary  result.  Besides,  when  man  lost  the  image  of  God,  he  lost 
the  sovereignty  of  nature,  and  having  tliis  dominion,  he  must  have  had  powers 
vastly  greater  than  those  which  remained  with  him  after  the  fall.  But  man,  the 
broken  image  of  God,  is  to  be  restored.  Man,  the  dethroned  and  prostrate  monarch 
of  nature,  is  to  be  reinstated  in  his  sovereignty.  This  restitution  begins  in  time,  as 
a  renewal  of  the  spirit.  At  the  resurrection  the  body  is  set  up  again  in  a  far  higher 
form,  like  the  glorified  body  of  the  Redeemer.  Then,  too,  the  image  of  God  being 
perfectly  restored,  man  will  eater  on  his  true  sovereignty  again.  The  believer  will 
be  made  a  king  and  a  priest  to  God.  2.  All  this  was  seen  to  be  accomplished  in 
Christ,  as  the  representative  man.  He  took  up  the  work  at  the  point  of  ruin  to 
which  man  had  brought  it,  and  from  that  regained  all  that  man  had  lost.  He 
magnified  the  law  which  man  had  despised ;  and  fulfilled  all  righteousness.  He 
encountered  the  tempter,  and  defeated  him.  The  first  temptation  took  place  in  a 
garden,  and  the  result  was  that  man  v.'as  driven  into  the  wilderness.  Jesus  resumes 
the  conflict  in  the  wilderness  in  order  to  restore  the  garden.  He  Himself  is  the 
image  of  God,  and  shows  that  He  is  in  possession  of  the  lost  sovereignty  over 
nature.  When  He  was  in  the  wilderness  it  is  recorded  that  He  was  with  the  wild 
beasts,  who  lost  their  ferocity  and  rebellion  in  His  presence.  In  this  we  have  a 
passing  glimpse  of  man's  returning  dominion  over  the  lower  creation  ;  of  the  time 
when  "the  wolf  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,"  &c. ;  just  as  His  miracles,  mani- 
festing His  power  over  inanimate  nature  and  the  body  of  man,  were  a  pro- 
phetic fulfilment  of  the  great  aspiration  and  effort  of  the  human  mind  to 
regain  the  mastery  of  nature.  III.  The  eestitdtion  of  society.  We  find 
much  reformation  wanted  here.  Next  to  the  great  question — How  shall  man 
be  just  with  God? — is  the  question,  On  what  .  terms  shall  he  live  with  his 
fellow-men  ?  It  is  the  problem  of  goverument.  Next  to  the  salvation  of  the  indi- 
vidual is  the  construction  of  society.  The  disturbing  element  in  humanity  does  not 
lie  primarily  in  forms  of  government,  but  in  the  individual  soul ;  and,  therefore,  all 
attempts  to  regenerate  man  from  without,  by  ameliorating  his  circumstances  merely, 
or  placing  him  under  a  new  political  arrangement,  have  failed  ;  for  the  root  of  all 
rebellion  is  the  unrenewed  heart.  For  a  machine  to  work  perfectly — even  supposing 
the  machine  itself  to  be  perfect— there  are  required  honest  and  competent  men  to 
work  it ;  and,  therefore,  Christianity  begins  with  the  individual,  and  regenerates 
society  from  that  point.  1.  The  first  form  of  society  is  that  of  the  family.  Here 
we  have  the  nursery  of  all  other  forms.  If  families  are  godless  the  Church  cannot 
be  prosperous.  If  they  are  immoral  the  city  cannot  be  safe.  If  they  are  dis- 
organised the  State  cannot  be  strong.  But  what  a  dark  tragedy  broke  up  the  first 
society  of  this  kind  !  As  we  come  down  the  stream  of  sacred  history,  we  see  that 
God  always  sets  up  His  work  again  in  the  midst  of  some  particular  family.  In  the 
family  of  Noah  the  race  makes  a  new  stait.  In  the  families  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob  a  new  covenant  of  grace  is  established.  In  the  family  of  David  the 
kingdom  of  the  Jews  is  confirmed.  In  the  house  at  Nazareth  the  foundation  of 
Christendom  is  laid.  But  existing  families  are  ever  being  broken  up  and  dispersed. 
The  institution  itself,  however,  is  a  Divine  idea  that  cannot  perish,  and  in  the 
restitution  of  all  things  the  family  reappears.  God  is  revealed  as  the  Father  of 
Christ,  "  of  whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named."  2.  Next  to 
the  family  is  the  city.  Cain,  who  destroyed  the  first  family,  was  the  founder  of  the 
first  city  ;  an  acknowledgment  that  man  was  no  longer  at  home  with  nature  ;  a  city 
being  a  fortified  place,  surrounded  by  walls,  to  keep  out  intruders.  Now,  what  man 
founded,  God  has  adopted.  After  His  people  had  wandered  in  the  wilderness  He 
led  them  to  the  promised  land,  and  there  built  that  famous  capital  of  the  old 
theocracy,  Jerusalem.  It  was  called  the  City  of  God,  the  Holy  City.  But  it  was 
ultimately  visited  by  a  terrible  overthrow.  "  But  the  city  shall  be  built  on  her  own 
heap."  In  the  restitution  of  all  things  a  new  Jerusalem  rises  into  view,  "a  city 
which  hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."  Christ  has  gone  to 
the  unseen  world  to  prepare  many  mansions  for  His  people  ;  and  in  the  revelation 
given  to  John  there  are  glimpses  of  "  That  great  city,  the  holy  Jerusalem."  3.  Next 
to  the  city  is  the  empire,  or  union  of  cities  and  states.  Very  early  the  idea  of 
universal  empire  took  possession  of  the  human  mind,  and  in  the  immense  tower 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOH.  [chu.  m. 

erected  on  the  plain  of  Shinar  we  have  the  first  embodiment  of  that  idea.  In  the 
very  attempt  to  make  such  a  huge  confederation  they  were  more  divided  than 
before.  Their  impious  attempt  brought  down  upon  them  a  judgment  that  revealed 
their  real  but  originally-hidden  incongruities.  Thus  the  first  Babel  prophesied  the 
fate  and  gave  its  very  name  to  subsequent  systems,  political  and  religious,  which 
have  attempted  the  impossible  task  of  founding  a  universal  empire,  or  Church  on  a 
false  and  godless  principle.  In  itself,  however,  the  idea  of  a  universal  empire  is  not 
false  but  true.  The  true  tendency  of  the  world  is  to  reach  a  confederation  of  men, 
or  parliament  of  the  world,  notwithstanding  national  differences.  The  discoveries 
of  science  and  the  reciprocities  of  commerce  are  aiming,  consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously, at  this  stupendous  result ;  which,  however,  they  cannot  gain  by  them- 
selves. The  highest  end  of  science  and  commerce  is  to  herald  the  kingdom  of 
Christ,  which  carries  in  its  bosom  the  highest  law — the  law  of  God,  and  the  charter 
of  universal  freedom.  The  idea  of  the  Church  is  that  of  a  universal  brotherhood 
under  the  fatherhood  of  God ;  and  the  reahsation  of  this  is  the  splendid  goal  of 
humanity.  Christ  is  King  of  kings  and  the  Lord  of  lords,  and  everywhere  it  is 
foretold  that  His  kingdom  will  be  universal  and  eternal.  (F.  Fergiison,  D.D.) 
Restoration : — I.  "  The  restitution  of  all  things  "  will  be  a  clearing  away  of  suffer- 
ing. This  is  the  special  point  of  that  mysterious  passage  in  Eom.  viii.  in  which 
Paul  speaks  of  the  "  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature."  We  see  "  the  creature," 
rational  and  irrational,  "  subjected  to  vanity  "  ;  to  a  condition  of  anxiety  and  toil, 
unrest, disease,  death  ;  "not  willingly  " — by  no  act  or  choice  of  its  own — generation 
inheriting  from  generation  its  heirloom  and  entail  of  distress ;  and  this,  St.  Paul 
adds,  by  the  fiat  of  One  who  laid  it  under  this  subjection — we  suppose  him  to  mean, 
as  the  penalty  of  sin  ;  yet  that  sin  is  not  its  own,  that  penalty  not  removable  by 
present  obedience,  but  having  to  be  endured,  to  the  bitter  end,  even  by  the  innocent. 
The  thought  pressed  upon  the  apostle,  as  it  presses  upon  us.  And  he  has  one  and 
but  one  escape  from  "  charging  God  foolishly."  He  adds,  with  an  emphasis  which 
no  power  of  voice  and  no  skill  of  enunciation  can  satisfy,  the  two  brief  words,  "  in 
hope  "  ;  and  goes  on  to  explain  that  even  before  this  distressed  and  disconsolate 
"  creature  "  there  lies  a  future  of  emancipation.  Then  shall  it  "  remember  no  more 
the  anguish,"  in  the  joy  of  a  delivery  and  the  transport  of  a  new  life.  We  would 
detain  the  apostle  and  interrogate  him  concerning  these  dark  sayings.  We  would 
ask.  Is  it  of  earth  as  the  scene  of  a  future,  an  everlasting  inhabitation ;  is  it  of  a 
race  of  nature,  to  be  cleared  of  sterility  and  unfruitfulness ;  is  it  of  irrational 
creatures,  by  man  requited  too  often  with  neglect  or  cruelty,  that  the  words  are 
written,  "  The  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature  waiteth  for  the  unveiling  of  the 
sons  of  God"?  Or  does  "restitution"  mean  that  nations,  ignorant  of  Christ, 
destitute  of  the  gospel,  shall  then,  in  some  wonderful  manner,  "  walk  in  the  light 
of  it "  ?  But  there  is  no  voice  nor  any  to  answer  us  in  these  perhaps  presumptuous 
questionings.  Thou  hast  Moses  and  the  prophets,  Christ  and  the  apostles — hear 
them.  Soon  shalt  thou,  faithful  unto  death,  be  reading  these  mysteries  right  in  the 
very  sunshine  of  the  smile  of  God.  Meanwhile,  "  what  is  that  to  thee?"  Christ 
says,  "  follow  thou  Me."  Earth  shall  be  restored  to  its  original  beauty;  its  face 
shall  be  wiped  from  tears,  its  scarred  and  seamed  countenance  shall  be  radiant 
again  with  a  more  than  Eden  loveliness  ;  for  it  is  one  of  those  "  all  things"  which 
must  receive  "  restitution  "  when  the  heaven  which  has  "  received  "  Him  shall  send 
Jesus  back.  II.  Man,  his  soul  and  body,  his  very  being  and  life,  is  among  these 
"  all  things  "  which  are  awaiting  a  restoration.  Set  before  the  mind's  eye  the 
character  which  you  most  admire,  the  person  whom  you  best  love — can  anything 
but  blind  idolatry  paint  even  him  to  you  as  perfect  ?  But  supposing  that  the  very 
qualities  which  you  love  in  their  imperfection  were  but  intensified  and  glorified  ; 
that  the  only  change  were  in  the  refining  away  of  the  dross  and  alloy  of  the  thing 
loved,  would  not  the  perfecting  be  a  gain  unmingled,  the  "restoration  "  a  joy  un- 
speakable and  full  of  glory  ?  And  if  it  has  happened  to  any  one  to  behold  the 
gradual  overclouding  of  magnificent  faculties — the  growth  of  small  imperfections, 
till  the  result  was  almost  the  unloveliness  of  the  lovely ;  if  it  has  been  yours  to 
stand  finally  by  the  grave,  and  bury  out  of  your  sight,  a  face  and  a  form  once  all 
but  Divine  to  you,  surely  you  have  felt  then  that  the  one  solace  for  the  loving  must 
be  the  thought  of  the  restoration,  in  soul  and  body,  of  the  loved.  But  if  this  be 
true  in  cases  of  exceptional  loveliness,  how  shall  it  be  in  the  average  experiences  of 
human  character  and  attainment?  Where  is  the  man  not  soiled  and  spoilt  by 
imperfections  ?  What  shall  ice  say  of  faults  and  blemishes,  of  follies  and  mean- 
nesses,  of  failures  and  irresolutions  and  broken  vows,  as  we  are  conscious  of  them 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  831 

within  ?  Who  that  has  seriously  tried  the  struggle  to  be  holy  has  not  found  him- 
self vexed  and  irritated,  if  not  reduced  to  despair,  by  perpetual  failure  ?  But  if  it 
be  so,  that  I,  this  faulty  man,  ever  failing,  halting,  vanquished — seeming  to  make 
no  way  in  the  race  of  duty,  and  purity,  and  eternal  life — shall  yet  certainly,  if  I 
continue  to  fight,  be  more  than  conqueror  when  I  die ;  shall  be  clean,  sanctified 
whoUy,  filled  with  peace  and  love,  made  anew  in  more  than  all  the  thoroughness  of 
the  first  perfection,  when  God  looked  upon  all  the  work  of  His  hands  and  beheld  it 
"  very  good  "  ;  then  I  will  arise,  if  need  be,  from  a  thousand  falls  in  one  day,  "  cast 
down  but  not  destroyed,"  to  say,  "Kejoice  not  over  me,  0  mine  enemy,  for  greater 
is  He  that  is  for  me  than  all  that  can  be  against  me."  III.  That  ' '  restitution  of 
all  things  "  which  thus  affects  earth  and  the  man  has  an  aspect  towaeds  God.  It 
there  be  one  thing  clear  in  the  Scripture  narrative,  it  is  the  nearness  of  God  to  the 
as  yet  sinless  Adam.  The  hiding  from  God,  the  expulsion  from  Paradise,  the 
subsequent  approach  through  sacrifice,  the  first  "  calling  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord,"  which  is  mentioned  as  a  feature  of  the  exile — are  all  so  many  hints  of  a 
change  in  the  facility,  the  nearness,  and  the  constancy  of  access  to  God.  The  whole 
history  of  the  race,  the  whole  experience  of  the  life,  has  been  the  commentary  upon 
this  parable.  The  sinner  has  been  in  hiding  from  the  face  of  God.  Calling  upon 
Him  has  been  an  effort.  8in  has  made  it  so.  Now  it  is  one  of  the  express  revela- 
tions of  "the  times  of  refreshing,"  that  then  the  conscious  presence,  the  spiritual 
Shechinah,  the  Divine  companionship,  wiU  be  restored.  "  I  heard  a  great  voice  out 
of  heaven,  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God,"  &c.  The  greatest  of  the  restitu- 
tions will  be  the  restoration  of  God's  presence.  In  the  prospect  of  admission  into 
the  very  presence  of  God,  let  us  be  willing  to  endure  now  the  difficulty  of  the 
pursuit  and  the  delay  of  the  attainment.  Every  moment  now  spent  in  seeking  God 
is  an  earnest  of  the  time  when  we  shall  have  found,     [Dean  Vaughan.) 

Vers.  22-26.  For  Moses  truly  said  unto  your  fathers,  A  prophet  shall  the  Lord 
your  God  raise  up  unto  you  .  .  .  like  unto  me. — The  promised  I'rophet : — Note — 
I.  The  appropriateness  of  God  revealing  Himself  through  a  human  being. 
For  man  is  the  Divine  image,  and  hence  God  reveals  Himself  to  man  through  a 
man,  otherwise  we  could  have  no  knowledge  of  God.  The  office  of  prophet  is  the 
most  appropriate  way  of  revealing  God's  will.  When  we  carry  on  this  line  of 
thought  we  are  landed  in  the  idea  that  an  incarnation  of  God  alone  could  adequately 
convey  to  man  the  mind  and  nature  of  God.  II.  A  single  prophet  after  the 
similitude  of  Moses  is  to  be  the  mediator  for  the  ages.  Now,  only  one  Person 
answers  this  description,  and  that  is  Christ.  He  is  incarnate  God.  God's  Spirit 
He  alone  could  take,  and  through  its  gift  to  men  in  the  different  ages  make  them 
the  channel  of  Divine  revelation  (ver.  24).  As  a  matter  of  fact  "  the  testimony  of 
Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy,"  and  the  prophets  were  His  instruments  in  the 
history  of  the  Church.  God  has  spoken  in  these  last  days  by  His  Son ;  and  the 
prophets  between  Moses  and  Christ  were  really  the  inspired  messengers  of  the  one 
great  Prophet.  This  is  the  idea  of  Peter  (1  Pet.  i.  11).  III.  The  life  and  death 
OF  Jesus,  therefore,  become  the  climax  of  Divine  revelation.  The  previous 
revelations  were  but  shadows  of  this.  A  human  history  became  the  embodiment  of 
Divine  thoughts,  mercies,  and  self-sacrifice.  The  blaze  of  Divinity  that  was 
intolerable  at  Sinai  becomes  not  only  bearable  but  entrancing  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ.  "  We  beheld  His  glory,"  but  it  did  not  scare  men  as  on  the  holy  mount, 
JV.  Disregard  of  the  words  of  Jesus  is  punishable  by  death  (ver.  23).  "  If 
any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  anathema."  If  disobedience  to 
Moses  was  visited  in  many  cases  by  death,  how  much  more  disloyalty  to  Christ 
(Heb.  X.  28-31).  The  gospel  has  penalties  of  the  severest  kind  for  its  rejection,  as 
well  as  bliss  beyond  compare  for  its  reception.  The  alternative  is  thus  clearly  set 
before  us.     (R.   M.  Edgar,  M.A.)  The  Prophet  like  unto  Moses: — Christ  and 

Moses  were  alike — I.  As  founders  of  dispensations.  It  was  the  greatness  of 
Moses  that  he  was  employed  by  God  in  inaugurating  a  new  era  in  the  history  of 
His  kingdom.  In  this  respect  he  stood  at  the  head  of  the  Old  Testament  Une  of 
prophets,  and  in  a  sense  apart  from  them  (John  i.  17).  He  had  the  ordering  and 
settling  of  the  "  house  "  of  God  in  the  form  in  which  it  was  to  last  till  Christ  came, 
who  "  as  Son  over  His  own  house  "  would  revise  its  arrangements  and  reconstitute 
it  on  a  better  basis  (Heb.  iii.  2-7).  Prophets  subsequent  to  Moses  stood  within  the 
lines  of  economy  already  established.  They  could  enforce  and  maintain,  but  while 
predicting  the  advent  of  a  new  age  in  which  great  changes  would  be  wrought,  they 
had  no  authority  to  introduce  such  changes.     It  was  reserved  to  Christ  to  so 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iii. 

remodel  Mosaic  institutions,  or  abolish  and  supersede  them,  as  to  place  the  Church 
upon  a  permanent  basis,  and  adapt  it  for  the  reception  of  the  Gentiles.  II.  In  the 
FREEDOM  AND  iNTERCOCESE  THEY  ENJOTED  WITH  GoD.  Moses  enjoyed,  as  was  neces- 
sary,  the  freest  intercourse  with  heaven.  God  spake  with  him,  not  in  a  vision,  or 
dream,  or  in  dark  speeches,  but  "mouth  to  mouth"  (Numb.  xii.  6-9),  "face  to 
face  "  (Deut.  xxxiv.  10).  This  is  made  a  feature  of  distinction  between  Moses  and 
the  later  prophets.  In  Christ  this  peculiarity  appears  in  a  higher  form.  Inter- 
course with  the  Father  reaches  the  highest  degree  of  closeness  and  intimacy  (John 
xiv.  10).  Christ's  insight  into  the  Father's  will  was  perfect  (John  v.  20,  21),  His 
communion  habitual  and  uninterrupted.  III.  As  mediating  between  the  people 
AND  God.  These  points  involve  others.  There  was  resemblance — 1.  In  the  degree 
of  authority  with  which  they  were  clothed,  and  in  the  mighty  signs  which  authenti- 
cated their  mission.  2.  In  the  fulness  and  grandeur  of  their  revelations.  3.  In 
the  severe  penalties  attaching  to  disobedience  to  their  words  (Deut.  xviii.  19  ;  Heb. 
ii.  1-5,  X.  28,  29).  (</.  Orr,  B.D.)  The  resemblance  between  Christ  and  Moses : — 
As  Moses  was  born  in  a  strange  land,  so  was  Christ  born  in  a  world  and  country 
•which  knew  Him  not,  in  a  city  which  rejected  Him.  To  preserve  His  life  Moses 
■was  laid  in  an  ark  of  bulrushes,  as  Christ's  life  was  preserved  by  the  lowliness  of 
the  manger  in  which  He  lay.  Both  were  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  children,  the 
one  of  a  priestly,  the  other  of  the  royal  race.  The  jealousy  of  Pharoah  put  the  life 
of  Moses  in  jeopardy  as  soon  as  He  was  born,  as  Herod  sought  the  life  of  Christ 
because  of  the  same  jealous  fear,  whilst  both  kings  ordered  the  male  children  to  be 
slain  in  order  to  preserve  the  stability  of  their  respective  thrones.  Both  were 
mediators  between  God  and  a  sinful  people,  and  as  Moses  pleaded  for  the  children 
of  Israel,  so  does  Christ  for  mankind.  Both  Moses  and  Christ  were  legislators  of 
God's  people,  the  former  for  those  under  the  old  covenant,  the  latter  for  those  under 
the  new.  As  Moses  led  the  people  from  slavery  into  the  land  promised  to  their 
fathers,  so  did  Christ  deliver  His  people  out  of  the  power  of  Satan  and  go  before 
them  into  heaven.  Both  Moses  and  Christ  proved  the  truth  of  their  mission  by 
miracles  and  signs.  As  Moses  sent  forth  the  twelve  to  survey  the  land  and  en- 
couraged the  people  to  persevere  and  to  enter  into  Canaan,  so  did  Christ  send  forth 
the  twelve  to  teach  the  people  by  what  means  they  might  take  possession  of  the 
spiritual  Canaan.      (W.  Denton,   M.A.)  Reasons  for  repentance  : — Peter  urged 

the  Jews  to  repent  because — I.  They  believed  the  prophets.  Those  prophets  had 
told  of  the  Messiah  and  His  claims,  and  in  those  prophets  they  professed  to  beheve. 
But  they  had  rejected  Christ,  and  hence  the  necessity  according  to  their  own  beUefs 
of  repentance.  This  appeal  is  a  pertinent  one  to-day.  II.  They  already  claimed 
RELIGIOUS  privileges  (vct.  25).  Hence  their  guilt  in  rejecting  Christ.  Abraham, 
the  patriarchs  and  prophets  had  all  been  believers,  and  the  blessings  of  the  covenant 
could  be  attained  only  by  faith.  But  faith  implied  repentance.  How  many  value 
their  privileges  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  and  yet  live  in  sin  1  But  these 
privileges  call  them  to  repentance.  III.  God  had  crowned  all  their  former  privi- 
leges BY  sending  Jesus.  Yet  they  had  rejected  Him.  So  now — IV.  Without 
repentance  they  must  remain  in  a  state  of  depravity.  They  would  not  be  "turned 
from  their  iniquities."  Those  who  do  not  repent  and  receive  Christ  remain  among 
the  enemies  of  God  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity.     V.  Without  repentance  they 

MUST  BE  EXCLUDED  FROM  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GOD  (ver.  23).  (W.  HudsOU.) 

Vers.  25,  26.  Ye  are  the  children  of  the  prophets  and  of  the  covenant. — The 
children  of  the  covenant,  the  Saviour's  first  care  : — I.  All  who  have  been  dedicated 
TO  God  by  believing  parents,  are  children  op  the  covenant  which  God  has  made 
with  their  parents,  and  especially  with  Abraham,  the  great  father  of  the  faithful. 
1.  The  blessings  of  the  covenant  with  Abraham  were  all  included  in  three  great 
promises.  The  first  was,  "  In  thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed  "  ; 
the  second,  "  To  thee  and  to  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land  "  ;  the  third,  "  I  will  be 
a  God  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee."  Of  these  promises  the  first  was  made  to 
Abraham  as  an  individual,  and  as  the  ancestor  of  the  Messiah,  and  we  have  nothing 
to  do  with  it,  except  to  receive  the  Saviour  whose  coming  it  reveals.  The  second 
was  made  to  Abraham,  considered  as  the  progenitor  of  the  Jewish  nation ;  and  this 
promise  also  has  been  fulfilled,  and  we  have  no  concern  with  it,  only  so  far  as  it  has 
a  typical  reference  to  the  heavenly  Canaan.  The  third  promise  was  made  to 
Abraham,  considered  as  a  believer,  in  covenant  with  God ;  as  the  great  father  of 
the  faithful,  or  of  all  who  should  believe  with  a  faith  similar  to  His  own.  Of  this 
covenant  circumcision  was  the  seal  which  answers  to  our  baptism.     2.  And  now  the 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  333 

question  is,  Are  the  baptized  children  of  professed  believers,  like  the  Jews,  born  in 
covenant,  and  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  God?  Notice — (1)  It  is  frequently  pre- 
dicted that  the  Gentiles  should  be  brought  into  covenant  with  God.  Thus  in  Hosea, 
God  sa\s,  "  I  will  call  them  My  people  which  were  not  My  people."  This  passage  is 
quoted  by  St.  Paul,  to  prove  our  point,  and  in  Isaiah  the  Jewish  Church  is  assured 
that  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  her  light,  that  they  shall  come  bringing  her  children 
in  their  arms,  and  that  these  shall  supply  the  place  of  the  children  whom  she  had 
lost.  (2)  We  learn  from  many  passages  in  the  New  Testament,  that  all  these 
promises  were  fulfilled.  We  are  there  told  that  Abraham  is  tbe  father  of  all  who 
believe,  that  the  blessing  of  Abraham  has  come  upon  the  Gentiles  ;  that  all  who 
belong  to  Christ  are  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise.  Now  one 
of  the  privileges  which  Abraham  enjoyed,  was  the  liberty  of  bringing  his  children  into 
covenant  with  God,  and  one  of  the  promises  which  was  made  to  him  was,  "  I  will 
be  a  God  to  thy  seed  after  thee."  If,  then,  Christians  are  Abraham's  heirs,  they 
also  have  the  same  privilege ;  and  God's  language  to  every  Chiistian  parent  is  the 
same.  It  appears,  then,  that  Christians  stand  in  the  same  place,  which  was  formerly 
occupied  by  the  Jews  ;  we  take  up  what  they  laid  down  ;  we  receive  the  privileges 
and  blessings  which  they  forfeited ;  and  therefore  if  their  children  were  in  covenant 
with  God,  so,  my  Christian  friends,  are  ours.  This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  St. 
Paul  when  he  says,  "  If  the  first-fruit  be  holy,  the  lump  is  also  holy ;  and  if  the 
root  be  holy,  so  are  the  branches,"  i.e.,  relatively,  holy  as  being  dedicated  to  God 
in  the  ordinance  of  baptism.     II.  If  these  truths  have  been  established,  it  follows, 

THAT  WE  AEE  AUTHORISED  TO  ADDRESS  EVERT  BAPTIZED  CHILD  OF  BELIEVING  PARENTS    IN 

THE  LANGUAGE  OF  OUR  TEXT.  To  all  such,  then,  I  Say,  To  you  first  God,  having  raised 
up  His  Son  Jesus,  hath  sent  Him  to  bless  you,  &c.  1.  One  of  the  privileges  which 
the  Jews  enjoyed  in  consequence  of  being  children  of  the  covenant  was,  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  first  offer  of  salvation.  Thus,  when  Christ  commissioned  His  disciples 
to  preach  the  gospel,  he  charged  them  to  begin  at  Jerusalem.  This  command  the 
apostles  strictly  observed.  They  preached  the  gospel  at  first,  we  are  told,  to  none 
but  the  Jews  only;  and  St.  Paul,  addressing  the  Jews  at  Antioch,  says.  It  was  need- 
ful that  the  gospel  of  Christ  should  first  be  preached  to  you.  So  now  God  sends 
the  ofi'er  of  salvation  first  to  the  childi-en  of  believing  parents.  In  this  respect  He 
acts  as  a  wise  earthly  prince  would  do.  Were  such  a  prince  disposed  to  confer  dis- 
tinguishing favours,  he  would  doubtless  offer  them  to  the  children  of  his  obedient 
subjects,  who  had  sworn  allegiance  to  him  before  he  offered  them  to  the  children  of 
rebels  or  strangers.  Now  your  parents  have  sworn  allegiance  to  God,  and  engaged 
to  use  all  their  influence  to  induce  you  to  do  the  same.  In  token  of  their  readiness 
to  do  this,  they  have  solemnly  and  publicly  dedicated  you  to  God  ;  and  He  has  so 
far  accepted  this  dedication,  that  He  now  sends  you  the  first  offer  of  pardon  and 
salvation  through  His  Son.  At  the  same  time  He  can  confer  these  blessings  upon 
you  only  by  turning  you  from  your  iniquities  ;  for  so  long  as  you  cleave  to  them,  it 
is  impossible  that  Christ  should  bless  or  prove  a  blessing  to  you.  At  the  same  time 
you  cannot  be  turned  from  your  iniquities  but  by  your  own  consent.  Christ's 
language  to  you  is,  "  Turn  ye  at  My  reproof,  and  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  you, 
I  will  make  known  My  words  unto  you.  Come  ye  out  from  the  ungodly  world,  and 
be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing,  and  I  will  receive  you,  and  be  a 
Father  to  you,  and  ye  shall  be  My  sons  and  My  daughters,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty." 
2.  And  now  I  ask  every  baptized  person  what  answer  will  you  return  to  these  invi- 
tations ?  While  you  were  infants,  God  permitted  your  parents  to  act  for  you ;  but 
DOW  you  must  act  for  yourselves,  and  stand  or  fall  by  your  own  choice.  And  what 
is  that  choice  ?  Will  you  trtke  your  parents'  God  to  be  your  God  ?  Will  you  take 
upon  yourselves  that  covenant  wliich  they  have  made  in  your  behalf,  and  perform 
its  duties,  that  you  may  enjoy  its  blessings?  Will  you  receive  Christ  as  all  must 
do  who  would  receive  power  from  Him  to  become  the  children  of  God  ?  and  as  a 
proof  of  your  willingness  to  receive  Him,  will  you  turn  from  your  iniquities,  and 
renounce  all  sinful  pleasures  and  pursuits?  3.  Permit  me  to  suggest  some  con- 
siderations which  may  induce  you  to  return  such  an  answer  as  your  duty  and 
hnppiness  require.  (1)  You  are  this  day  to  determine  whether  God  or  the  world  shall 
be  your  portion,  whether  Christ  or  Satan  shall  be  your  king.  One  of  these  masters 
you  must  serve,  but  not  both.  (2)  The  choice  you  make  will  make  a  complete  dis- 
covery of  your  true  characters.  If  you  choose  to  persist  in  pursuing  worldly  objects, 
it  will  pi-ove  that  you  are  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God ;  nay,  that 
you  are  irreconcilably  God's  enemies,  and  that  the  tears,  entreaties,  and  example  of 
your  parents  cannot  induce  you  to  love  Him.     (3)  Your  choice  is  to  be  made  for 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

eternity.  You  are  not  to  choose  -whether  you  will  serve  sin  and  Satan  in  this  world, 
and  God  in  the  next ;  but  whether  you  will  be  the  slaves  of  sin,  and,  of  course,  the 
enemies  of  God  for  ever.  (4)  Your  choice  will  decide,  not  only  your  character,  but 
your  doom.  You  must  receive  the  wages  of  that  master  whom  you  choose  to  serve. 
4.  Will  you,  by  your  conduct,  say  to  all  about  you,  I  am  a  wretch  so  totally  devoid 
of  goodness,  that  I  prefer  the  world  to  God,  hell  to  heaven  ?  (1)  If  so,  surely  yoar 
guilt  will  be  no  common  guilt;  for  jou  can  make  no  excuse.  You  cannot  even 
plead  ignorance ;  for  you  have  lived  in  pious  families,  and  had  a  religious  education. 
You  reject  a  known,  and  not  an  unknown  God.  After  seeing  the  difference  between 
a  life  of  religion  and  a  life  of  sin,  you  deliberately  choose  the  latter.  Nay,  more, 
you  reject  not  only  God,  but  your  parents'  God;  you  violate  not  only  the  obligations 
which  all  His  creatures  are  under  to  love  and  serve  Him,  but  the  peculiar  obligations 
which  result  from  your  baptismal  dedication  to  God.  In  addition  to  this,  you  will 
be  guilty  of  the  most  inexcusable  ingratitude.  In  giving  you  pious  parents,  God 
has  conferred  on  you  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  which  He  could  bestow.  And 
will  you  requite  Him  for  this  favour  by  practically  saying,  I  regret  that  my  parents 
were  pious,  or  that  they  dedicated  me  to  God  ?  (2)  If  so,  remember  that  as  your 
guilt  will  be  no  common  guilt,  so  your  punishment  will  be  no  common  punishment. 
How  awfully  aggravated  it  will  be,  you  may  learn  from  the  terrible  threatenings 
denounced  aeainst  the  unbelieving  Jews  who,  like  you,  were  children  of  the 
covenant.  Christ  declares  that  the  very  heathen  will  rise  up  ai-'ainst  them  in  the 
day  of  judgment  and  condemn  them.  They  who  know  their  Lord's  will  and  do  it 
not  t  ha  1  be  beaten  with  many  stripes.  And  will  you  th^n,  by  refusing  to  turn  from 
your  iniquities,  pull  down  upon  yourselves  this  terrible  fate  ?  Shall  all  the  prayers 
and  exertions  of  your  parents  only  serve  to  increase  your  condemnation  ?  Shall 
the  baptismal  water,  with  which  you  have  been  sprinkled,  be  converted  into  drops 
of  liquid  fire  ?  You  are  like  Capernaum,  raised,  as  it  were,  to  heaven  by  your 
privileges.  Will  you,  by  abusing  or  neglecting  them,  be  yourselves  cast  down  to 
hell — to  the  lowest  hell  ?    And  now  I  wait  for  your  reply.     III.  What  answer  shall 

I    EETUBN    TO    HlM    THAT    SENT    ME,    TO    HiM    WHO    SENDS    HiS    SON    TO    BLESS    YOU    in 

turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  your  iniquities  ?  I  suspect  that  most  of  you 
will  return  no  direct  answer,  but  plead  for  time  to  deliberate,  for  a  little  longer 
delay.  But  this  cannot  be  granted.  You  have  already  delated  too  long.  The 
Jewish  children  were  required  to  partake  of  the  passover,  and  appear  before  God  at 
the  solemn  feasts,  as  soon  as  they  arrived  at  a  proper  age ;  and  this,  as  we  learn 
from  our  Saviour's  example,  was  the  age  of  twelve  years.  If  they  refused  or 
delayed  to  comply,  they  were  doomed  to  be  cut  off  from  the  people  ;  to  lose  for  ever 
the  privileges  which  they  slighted.  Now  a  large  proportion  of  those  whom  I  am 
addressing,  have  not  only  reached,  but  overpast  this  period  of  life.  You  ought 
then  long  since  to  have  embraced  the  Saviour,  and  thus  have  become  prepared  to 
appear  at  the  table  of  Christ,  who,  the  apostle  tells  us,  is  our  passover  that  was 
sacrificed  for  us.  Already  you  are  liable  to  be  cut  off  for  ever  from  His  people,  in 
consequence  of  delaying  to  receive  Him  ;  and  will  you  then  talk  of  a  longer  delay? 
God's  language  to  you  is,  "Now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation." 
"To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  My  voice,"  &c.  I  cannot  but  fear  that  some  are  still 
delaying  a  reply,  and  saying  to  the  preacher  as  Felix  did  to  Paul,  "  Go  thy  way  for 
this  time,  when  I  have  a  convenient  season  I  will  call  for  thee."  But,  ray  friends, 
I  cannot  depart  without  a  direct  and  decided  answer.  Indeed,  if  you  persist  in 
delaying,  I  have  one ;  for,  in  this  case,  to  delay  is  to  refuse.  Beware  lest  there  be 
among  you  any  profane  person,  as  Esau,  who  for  one  morsel  of  meat  sold  his 
birthright;  for  ye  know  how  that  afterwards,  when  he  would  have  inherited  the 
blessing,  he  was  rejected,  and  found  no  place  for  repentance,  though  he  sought 
it  carefully  with  tears.  Conclusion  :  It  was  my  duty  first  to  offer  Christ  to  others. 
This  duty  I  have  discharged,  and  am  now  at  liberty  to  make  the  same  offer  to  you. 
Your  heavenly  Father  is  more  careful  for  your  happiness  than  even  your  earthly 
parents.  They  refused  or  neglected  to  give  you  to  Him  in  your  infancy,  but  He 
has  provided  a  Saviour,  through  whom  you  may  present  yourselves  to  Him  and  be 
accepted.  The  Gentiles  accepted  Christ,  when  the  children  of  the  covenant 
rejected  Him.  Will  you  then  imitate  their  example?  Will  you  give  yourselves  to 
that  God  whom  the  children  of  the  covenant  neglect?  Will  you  accept  the 
privileges  which  they  despise  ?  If  so,  the  blessing  of  Abraham  will  come  upon  you 
and  your  families,  as  it  has  on  thousands  of  the  Gentiles  ;  and  God  will  make  with 
you  an  everlasting  covenant,  as  He  did  with  him,  to  be  a  God  to  you.  (E.  Payson, 
D.D.)        Samuel : — The  life  of  Samuel  manifests — I.  A  holy  childhood.    Four 


CHAP,  in.]  THE  ACTS.  835 

things  conduced  to  this.  1.  A  mother's  prayers.  2.  Dedication  to  God.  3.  A 
Divine  message.  4.  Acceptance  of  the  heavenly  call.  II.  A  noble  manhood. 
1.  He  was  a  champion  for  God.  God's  service  is  ennobling.  2.  He  was  an 
instrument  of  God.  (1)  An  instrument  of  defence  to  the  people.  (2)  An  in- 
strument of  vengeance,  soul,  &c.  (3)  An  instrument  of  instruction.  3.  lie  was  a 
king-maker  and  governor.  III.  A  useful  end.  The  great  man  often  does  as  much 
in  his  death  as  in  his  life.  Samuel,  in  the  solemn  moments  of  his  end — 1. 
Vindicated  his  life.  Not  in  egotism,  but  as  an  example.  2.  Eeasoned  with  and 
admonished  the  people.  He  urged  them  to  serve  the  Lord.  IV.  A  happy  death. 
He  had  served  God  in  life.  God  honoured  him  in  death,  and  he  went  to  his 
reward.  Here  we  see  the  steps  to  happiness.  Mothers,  much  of  your  child's  future 
rests  on  you.  Childhood,  how  important  is  your  training !  A  useful  life  and  a 
happy  death  follow  this.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  26.  Unto  you  first  God,  halving  raised  up  His  Son  Jesus,  sent  Him  to  bless  you. 

Sent  to  bless  you : — I.  God  sent  Jesus  to  bless  us.  We  should  have  thought  that 
after  the  Jews  had  slain  the  prophets,  God  would  have  had  no  more  to  do  with 
them  ;  or  that  if  He  sent  His  own  Son,  it  would  be  to  take  vengeance  upon  them. 
But  when  the  Jews  murdered  Jesus,  what  would  you  expect  God  to  do  ?  A  human 
father  could  scarcely  forgive  such  murderers ;  it  needs  a  God  to  do  that.  What  did 
He  do  ?  This :  He  raised  up  Jesus,  and  not  to  punish  evil-doers,  but  to  bless. 
Many  look  upon  religion  as  a  sad  thing;  but  it  is  the  most  joyous  inspiration  of 
life.  Jesus  is  not  a  taskmaster ;  He  gives  rest  to  the  weary  and  help  to  the  heavy- 
laden.  He  charms  the  dullest  life,  sweetens  the  bitterest  cup,  salves  the  deepest 
wound,  heals  the  most  stricken  heart,  gives  joy  to  the  sorrowful,  peace  to  the 
troubled,  hope  to  the  despairing,  pardon  of  sin  to  the  penitent,  salvation  from  the 
power  of  sin  to  the  believer,  and  eternal  felicity  to  all  who  trust  Him.  II.  God 
SENT  Jesus  to  bless  us  in  turning  away  every  one  of  us  from  our  iniquities.  With- 
out sin  life  would  be  very  joyous  ;  but  when  we  yield  to  anything  which  we  know 
to  be  wicked,  gladness  at  once  departs.  A  man  may  gratify  his  wicked  propensity, 
and  by  so  doing  satisfy,  for  the  time  being,  his  physical  appetite,  but  the  hunger 
of  his  soul  for  peace  is  not  satisfied.  The  greedy  boy,  who  hides  behind  the  door, 
away  from  his  brothers,  to  eat  the  whole  of  his  big  apple  alone,  is  fully  satisfying 
his  appetite,  yet  he  is  unhappy,  and  comes  from  his  feast  vexed,  sullen,  and 
spiritless.  Had  he  divided  the  apple  amongst  his  brothers,  what  a  joyous  lad  he 
would  have  been  1  Greediness,  or  any  other  sin,  brings  sorrow  to  the  soul.  1.  The 
greatest  blessing,  therefore,  that  God  can  give  us  is  to  turn  us  away  from  our  sins. 
We  may  turn  away  from  sin  in  our  ouiward  life,  and,  at  the  same  time,  love  and 
indulge  it  in  our  hearts  ;  but  Jesus  would  turn  us  from  sin  altogether ;  and  in  order 
to  do  so.  He  begins  first  with  the  heart.  Make  the  fountain  pure,  and  the  stream 
shall  be  pure.  The  philosophy  of  the  unbeliever  tries  to  guide  the  human  ship  by 
outside  pressure  ;  but  Jesus  puts  a  rudder  to  it,  and  gives  it  a  magnet  of  love  to 
show  its  pathway  in  the  trackless  deep.  He  is  not  satisfied  with  half-measures. 
We  must  be  turned  away  from  our  sins.  There  has  been,  unfortunately  for  the 
world,  a  church-organisation  which  has  allowed  its  priests  to  sell  indulgences  for 
sin.  But  Jesus  knows  sin  to  be  so  hurtful,  that  He  could  not,  at  any  price,  give  a 
licence  to  permit  it.  He  came  to  take  sin  away.  A  man  says,  "  If  I  do  not  cheat, 
I  shall  have  to  go  to  the  workhouse."  Jesus  teaches  us  to  reply,  "  Under  such 
circumstances  you  would  be  happier  if  you  walked  along  an  honest  path  to  the 
workhouse,  than  on  the  road  of  cheating  to  a  palace."  As  you  would  hastily  pass 
a  house  in  which  you  know  the  small-pox  to  be,  so  would  Jesus  have  us  turn 
away  from  sin.  May  the  Lord,  likewise,  turn  away  every  one  of  us  from  our  sins  1 
2.  The  text  goes  on  to  say,  that  God  sent  Jesus  to  bless  us,  in  turning  away  every 
one  of  us  from  our  iniquities.  Then  the  worst  man  in  the  world  is  capable  of  being 
saved.  Here  is  a  man  who  has  been  guilty  of  many  crimes,  and  is  now  standing  at 
the  bar  to  receive  sentence.  The  judge  may  say  within  himself,  "  No  good  can  be 
done  with  this  man  ;  he  has  been  twice  in  penal  servitude,  and  we  must  now  get  rid 
of  him  altogether."  "  Penal  servitude  for  life !  "  But  God  dooms  no  man  to  life- 
servitude  to  sin.  Jesus  comes  to  open  the  prison  doors  in  the  soul  of  every  one  of 
us ;  and  the  man  who  is  the  chief  sinner  of  this  age  may  be  saved.  Your  life  may 
be  like  a  tangled  string,  which  you  have  tried  to  unravel,  but  failing  to  do  so,  you 
have  thiown  it  among  the  ashes.  That  tangled  string  wearied  your  patience,  and 
you  gave  it  up ;  but  though  yonr  life  just  now  is  like  the  tangled  string,  Jesus  is 
not  weary  of  blessing  you,  and  in  this  world  He  will  never  give  you  up.     As  every 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iit. 

tangled  string  can  be  undone,  so  every  sinful  life  can  be  converted.  God  sent  Jesus 
to  bless  such  as  you ;  and  His  skilful  fingers,  His  loving  heart,  and  His  patient 
Spirit  will  work  in  you  until  you  are  like  Himself.  III.  Jesus  titens  tis  from  our 
INIQUITIES  BY — 1.  The  powerful  inducement  of  pleasing  God.  To  call  upon  a  man 
to  turn  from  iniquity  because  it  will  be  a  good  thing  for  himself  is  to  appeal  to  his 
lowest  motive,  and  is  not  the  most  successful  way  in  winning  souls.  To  brihe  a 
man  by  promising  something  good  if  he  will  serve  the  Lord,  or  to  intimidate  him 
by  the  threat  of  the  torment  of  hell,  is  a  popular  way  of  winning  men,  but  it  is  the 
least  successful.  The  most  powerful  force  in  the  heart  of  a  child  is  the  love  which 
constrains  him  to  obedience,  because  if  he  did  wrong  he  knew  it  would  grieve  his 
mother.  Jesus  draws  us  effectually  from  sin  by  reminding  us  of  the  loving  heart 
of  God ;  our  sin  grieves  Him,  and  it  should  pain  us  to  grieve  His  loving  heart. 
2.  Eevealing  the  goodness  of  God.  His  goodness  in  first  loving  us  should  draw  us 
to  Himself.  After  Jesus  had  risen  from  the  dead,  He  said,  "  Go  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature,  beginning  at  Jerusalem."  He  was  not  angry  because  the 
Jews  rejected  and  crucified  Him  ;  and  there  was  nothing  in  His  heart  but  love  to 
them.     (TV.  Birch.)         The  servant  of  the  Lord  and  his  blessing: — Notice — I.  The 

BOLBNESS  AND  LOFTINESS   OF   THE   CLAIM  WHICH   IS   HERE   MADE   FOR   JeSUS   ChRIST.      1. 

Long  ago  Peter  had  said,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  And 
as  long  as  Jesus  Christ  had  been  with  them  none  of  them  had  wavered  in  that 
belief ;  but  the  Cross  shattered  all  that  for  a  time.  "  We  trusted  that  it  had  been 
He  that  should  have  redeemed  Israel."  There  had  been  plenty  of  pretenders  to  the 
Messiahship  (chap.  v.  36),  and  death  had  disposed  of  all  their  claims.  And  so  it 
would  have  been  with  Christ,  unless  He  had  risen  from  the  dead.  But  the  faith 
and  hope  in  His  Messiahship  which  had  died  with  Him  on  the  Cross,  rose  with  Him 
to  newness  of  life — as  we  see  from  such  words  as  these.  2.  Now  the  characteristic 
of  these  early  addresses  contained  in  chap,  ii.-iv.,  is  the  clear  decisiveness  with  which 
they  put  forward  Christ  as  the  fulfihnent  of  Jewish  prophecy.  The  Cross  and  the 
Kesurrect  o  i  poured  a  flood  of  light  on  the  Old  Testament.  Almost  every  word 
here  has  reference  to  some  great  utterance  of  the  past,  which  now  for  the  first  time 
Peter  is  beginning  to  understand.  (1)  "  God,  having  raised  up  His  Son  Jesus." 
The  reference  is  not  to  the  resurrection,  but  to  the  prediction  in  ver.  22.  Now  that 
prediction,  no  doubt,  refers  to  the  prophetic  order,  and  the  word,  "  a  prophet,"  is  a 
collective,  meaning  a  class.  But  the  order  does  not  come  up  to  the  ideal  of  the 
prophecy.  For  the  appendix  to  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  is  plainly  referring  to  the 
prophecy,  when  it  sadly  says,  "  And  there  arose  not  a  prophet  since  in  Israel  like 
unto  Moses."  The  prophetic  order,  then,  was  a  prophecy  by  reason  of  the  very  in- 
completeness of  the  noble  men  who  composed  it ;  not  only  by  their  words,  but  by 
their  office  and  by  their  limitations,  they  pointed  onwards  to  Him  who  not  only, 
like  the  great  law-giver,  beheld  God  face  to  face,  but  from  the  beginning  dwelt  in 
the  bosom  of  the  Father  and  therefore  declares  Him  perfectly  to  men.  The 
manifold  methods  and  fragmentary  portions  of  the  revelations  to  the  prophetic 
order  are  surpassed  by  the  one  final  and  complete  utterance  in  the  Son,  as  noonday 
outshines  the  twilight  dawn.  (2)  "  His  Son  Jesus"  means,  literally,  a  "  boy"  or  a 
"  child,"  and  like  our  own  English  equivalent,  is  sometimes  used  with  the  meaning 
of  "  a  servant."  For  instance,  we  talk  about  "  a  boy,"  or  "a  maid,"  or  " a  man," 
meaning  thereby  to  express  the  fact  of  service  in  a  graceful  and  gentle  way ;  to 
cover  over  the  harsher  features  of  authority.  So  the  centurion  in  Matthew's 
Gospel,  when  he  asks  Christ  to  heal  his  little  page,  calls  him  "  hia  boy,"  which  our 
Bible  properly  translates  as  "  servant."  The  reasons  for  adopting  "  servant "  here 
rather  than  "  son  "  are  these :  that  the  New  Testament  has  a  distinct  expression 
for  the  "  Son  of  God,"  which  is  not  the  word  employed  here :  and  that  the 
Septuagint  has  the  same  expression  which  is  employed  here  as  the  translation  of 
Isaiah's,  "  the  Servant  of  the  Lord."  (a)  Now  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  this 
expression  as  applied  to  Jesus  Christ  only  occurs  at  this  period.  Altogether  it 
occurs  four  times  in  these  two  chapters,  and  never  again.  Does  not  that  look  like 
the  frequent  repetition  of  a  new  thought  which  had  just  come  to  a  man  and  was 
taking  up  his  whole  mind  for  the  time?  The  Cross  and  the  resurrection  had 
opened  his  eyes  to  see  that  the  dim  majestic  figure  that  looked  out  on  him  from  the 
prophecy  had  had  a  historical  existence  in  the  dear  Master  whom  he  had  lived 
beside  ;  and  we  can  almost  perceive  the  gladness  and  surprise  swelling  his  heart  as 
he  thinks — "Ah !  then  He  is  '  My  servant  whom  I  upheld.'  Of  whom  speaketh  the 
prophet  this  ?  Wonder  of  wonders,  it  is  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  we  are  His 
witnesses."    If  you  turn  to  the  second  half  of  Isaiah's  prophecies,  you  will  find  that 


CHAP,  m.]  THE  ACTS.  337 

they  might  almost  be  called  the  biography  of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord,  And  whilst 
I  admit  that  the  collective  Israel  is  often  intended  by  the  title  "  the  Servant  of  the 
Lord,"  there  remain  other  parts  of  the  prophecy  which  have  distinctly  a  person  for 
their  subject,  and  which  cannot  apply  to  any  but  Him  that  died  and  lived  again. 
For  instance,  is  there  anything  which  can  correspond  to  the  words,  "when  His  soul 
shall  make  an  offering  for  sin  He  shall  see  His  seed  "  ?  Who  is  it  whose  death  is 
the  birth  of  His  children,  whom  after  His  death  He  will  see  ?  Who  is  it  whose 
death  is  His  own  voluntary  act  ?  Who  is  it  whose  death  is  a  sacrifice  for  others' 
sin  ?  Who  is  it  whose  days  are  protracted  after  death,  and  who  carries  out  more 
prosperously  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  after  He  has  died?  (6)  But  that  name  on 
Peter's  lips  is  not  only  a  reference  to  prophecy,  but  it  is  a  very  beautiful  revelation 
of  the  impression  of  absolute  perfection  which  Christ's  character  made.  Here  was  a 
man  who  knew  Christ  through  and  through ;  and  the  impression  made  upon  him  was 
this  :  "  All  the  time  that  I  saw  Him  there  was  never  a  trace  of  anything  but  perfect 
submission  to  the  Divine  will."  Jesus  asserted  the  same  thing  for  Himself.  "  I  do 
always  the  things  that  please  Him  "  :  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of  sin  ?  " 
Strange  claims  from  one  who  is  meek  and  lowly  of  heart  I  Stranger  still,  the  world, 
not  usually  tolerant  of  pretensions  to  sanctity,  has  allowed  and  endorsed  the  claim, 
(c)  So  the  claim  rises  up  into  yet  loftier  regions  ;  for  clearly  enough,  a  peifect  and 
stainless  man  is  either  an  impossible  monster  or  something  more.  And  they  that 
fully  believe  that  God's  will  was  absolutely  and  exclusively  done  by  Jesus  Christ, 
in  all  consistency  must  go  a  step  further  and  say,  "  He  that  perfectly  did  the 
Father's  will  was  more  than  one  of  us,  stained  and  sinful  men."  II.  The 
DAWNING  VISION  OF  A  KiNGBOii  OF  woFLD-wiDE  BLESSINGS.  1.  Peter  and  all  his 
brethren  had  had  their  full  share  of  Jewish  prejudices.  But  I  suppose  that  when 
they  found  the  tongues  of  fire  sitting  on  their  heads  they  began  to  apprehend  that 
they  had  been  intrusted  with  a  world-wide  gospel.  The  words  before  us  mark  very 
clearly  the  growing  of  that  consciousness,  while  yet  the  Jewish  prerogative  of 
precedence  is  firmly  held.  "  Unto  you  first  " — that  was  the  law  of  the  apostolic 
working.  But  they  were  beginning  to  learn  that  if  there  were  a  "  first,"  there  must 
also  be  a  "  second";  and  that  the  very  words  of  promise  to  the  father  of  the  nation 
which  he  had  just  quoted  pointed  to  "  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  "  being  blessed 
in  the  seed  of  Abraham.  If  Israel  was  first  to  receive  the  blessing,  it  was  only 
that  through  Israel  it  might  flow  over  into  the  whole  Gentile  world.  That  is  the 
true  spirit  of  "Judaism,"  which  is  so  often  spoken  of  as  "narrow"  and  "exclusive." 
There  is  nothing  clearer  in  the  Old  Testament  than  that  the  candle  is  lighted  in 
Israel  in  order  that  it  might  shed  light  on  all  the  chambers  of  the  world.  That  was 
the  genius  of  "  Judaism,"  and  that  is  Peter's  faith  here.  2.  Then,  again,  what 
grand  confidence  is  here !  What  a  splendid  audacity  of  faith  it  is  for  the  apostle 
with  his  handful  of  friends  to  stand  up  in  the  face  of  his  nation  to  say :  "  This 
Man,  whom  you  hung  on  a  tree,  is  going  to  be  the  blessing  of  the  whole  world." 
Why,  it  is  likt,  the  old  Eoman  story  of  putting  up  to  auction  in  the  Forum  the  very 
piece  of  land  that  the  enemy's  camp  was  pitched  upon,  whilst  their  tents  were 
visible  over  the  wall.  And  how  did  all  that  come  ?  Was  aU  that  heroism  and 
enthusiasm  born  out  of  the  grave  of  a  dead  man?  The  resurrection  was  the 
foundation  of  it,  and  explains  it,  as  nothing  else  can  do.  III.  The  pueely 
spiKiTUAii  CONCEPTION  OF  WHAT  Christ's  BLESSING  IS.  What  has  bccomc  of  aU  the 
Jewish  notions  of  the  blessings  of  Messiah's  kingdom  ?  That  had  not  been  the 
kind  of  kingdom  of  which  they  had  dreamed  when  they  had  sought  to  be  first  in 
it.  But  now  the  Cross  had  taught  Peter  that  Him  hath  God  raised  up  a  Prince  and 
a  Saviour  to  give — strange  gift  for  a  prince  to  have  in  his  hand — "  to  give  repent- 
ance unto  Israel,  and  remission  of  sins."  1.  The  heart,  then,  of  Christ's  work  for 
the  world  is  deliverance  from  sin.  That  is  what  man  needs  most.  There  are 
plenty  of  other  remedies  offered  for  the  world's  ills — culture,  art,  new  social 
arrangements,  progress  of  science  and  the  like,  but  the  disease  goes  deeper  than 
these  things  can  cure.  You  may  as  well  try  to  put  out  Vesuvius  with  a  tea- 
spoonful  of  cold  water  as  to  cure  the  sickness  of  humanity  with  anything  that  does 
not  grapple  with  the  fundamental  mischief,  and  that  is  a  wicked  heart.  There  is 
only  one  Man  that  ever  pretended  He  could  deal  with  that,  and  it  took  Him  all  His 
power  to  deal  with  it ;  but  He  did  it !  And  there  is  only  one  way  by  which  He 
could  deal  with  it,  and  that  was  by  dying  for  it,  and  He  did  it !  So  He  has  con- 
quered. "  Canst  thou  draw  out  leviathan  with  an  hook  ?  "  When  you  can  lead  a 
crocodile  out  of  the  Nile  with  a  bit  of  silk  thread  round  his  neck,  you  will  be  able 
to  overcome  the  plague  of  the  world,  and  that  of  your  own  heart,  with  anything 
VOL.  I.  22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

Bliort  of  the  great  sacrifice  made  by  Jesus  Christ.     2.  The  secret  of  most  of  the 
mistaken  and  partial  views  of  Christian  truth  lies  here,  that  people  have  not  got 
into  their  hearts  and  consciences  a  sense  of  their  own  sinfulness.     And  so  you  get 
a  tepid,  self-sufficient  and  superficial  Christianity  ;  and  you  get  ceremonials,  and 
high  and  dry  morality,  masquerading  under  the  guise  of  religion :  and  you  get 
Unitarian  and  semi-Unitarian  tendencies  in  churches.     But  if  once  there  came  a 
wholesome,   living   consciousness   of   sin   all   such    mutilated  Christianity  would 
crumble.     3.  So  I  beseech  you  to  put  yourself  in  the  right  place  to  understand 
the  gospel  by  the  recognition  of  that  fact.     But  do  not  stop  there.     It  is  a  matter 
of  Ufe  and  death  for  you  to  put  yourselves  in  the  right  place  to  receive  Christ's 
richest  blessing.     You  can  only  do  that  by  feeling  your  own  personal  sin,  and  so 
coming  to  Him  to  do  for  you  what  you  cannot  do  for  yourselves,  and  no  one  but  He 
can  do  for  you.     4.  And  notice  how  strongly  the  text  puts  the  individuality  of  this 
process.      "Every   one" — or   rather   "each   one."      The   inadequate   notions   of 
Christianity  that  I  have  been  speaking  about  are  all  characterised  by  this  amongst 
other  things  :  that  they  regard  it  as  a  social  system  diffusing  social  blessings  and 
operating  on  communities  by  elevating  the  general  tone  and  quickening  the  public 
conscience  and  so  on.     Christianity  does  do  that.     But  it  begins  with  dealing  with 
men  one  by  one.     Christ  is  like  a  great  King,  who  passing  through  the  streets  of 
His  capital  scatters  His  largesse  over  the  multitude,  but  He  reserves  His  richest 
gifts  for  the   men   that   enter  His  presence   chamber.      Even   those   of   us   who 
have  no  close  personal   union   with   Him   receive   of   His   gifts.      But   for  their' 
deepest    needs   and  their  highest  blessings  they  must  go  to  Christ  by  their  own 
personal  faith — the  flight  of  the  solitary  soul  to  the  only  Christ.   (A.Maclaren,D.D.) 
Christ  and  His  blessing  : — I.   The  parties  concerned.     Why  was  the  first  offer  of 
Christ  made  to  the  Jews?     1.  Because  they  were  the  only  Church  of  God  for  that 
time.     And  God  hath  so  much  respect  for  the  Church,  that  they  shall  have  the 
refusal  and  the  morning-market  of  the  gospel.     2.  They  were  the  children  of  the 
covenant  (ver.  25).     God  follows  a  covenant  people  with  more  offers  of  grace  than 
others.     3.  Christ  came  of  them  after  the  flesh,  and  was  of  their  seed  (Rom.  ix. 
5),  to  teach  us  to  seek  the  salvation  of  our  kindred  first.      4.    That  He  might 
magnify  His  grace  and  faithfulness,  not  only  in  the  matter  of  the  gospel,  but  even 
in  the  first  offer  of  it  (Rom.  xv.  8  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  14,  15).     5.  This  was  necessary  too 
for  the  confirmation  of  the  gospel.     Christ  did  not  steal  into  the  world  privately, 
but  He  would  have  His  law  set  up  where,  if  there  were  any  falsehood  in  it,  it  might 
easily  be  disproved  ;  and  because  the  main  of  the  Jewish  doctrine  was  adopted  into 
the  Christian,  and  was  confirmed  by  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,   they 
were  the  only  competent  judges  to  whose  cognisance  these  things  should  be  first 
offered.    6.  That  the  ruin  of  that  nation  might  be  a  fit  document  and  proof  of  God's 
severity  against  the  contemners  of  the  new  gospel  (chap.  xiii.  45-47).    7.  That  the 
first  ministers  might  be  a  pattern  of  obedience,  to  preach  where  God  would  have 
them,    to   preach   in  the  very   face  and   teeth   of  opposition.     II.  The    benefit 
OFFERED :  wherein  is  set  forth  the  great  love  of  God  unto  the  people  to  whom  the 
gospel  comes.     1.  In  designing  such  a  glorious  person  as  Jesus  Christ :"  having 
raised  up  His  Son  Jesus."     2.  In  that  He  gave  notice,  and  did  especially  direct  and 
send  Him  to  them  :  "  hath  sent  His  Son."     3.  Wliy  He  came  among  them  in  His 
Word :  it  was  "  to  bless  them."     III.  The  blessing  interpreted.     They  expected 
a  pompous  Messiah,  that  should  make  them  an  opulent  and  potent  nation.     But 
Christ  came  to  convert  souls  urrto  God.     IV.  What  it  is  to  be  turned  from  sin. 
Take  these  considerations :  1.  Man  fallen,  lay  under  the  power  and  guilt  of  sin 
(Eph.  ii.  1-3).     So  man  was  both  unholy  aud  guilty.     2.  Christ  came  to  free  us 
from  both  these.     (1)   The  guilt  (Eph.  i.  7)  ;  (2)  and  the  power  (Titus  iii.  5).     3. 
To  be  turned  from  sin  implies  our  whole  conversion.     Though  one  part  only  be 
mentioned,  the  term  "  from  which,"  yet  the  term  "  to  which  "  is  implied  (chap.  xxvi. 
18).    4.  That  remission  of  sins  is  included  in  our  conversion  to  God  (ver.  19,  chap.  v. 
31).    V.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  made  partakers  of  this  benefit.    Blesseduess 
imports  two  things — 1.  An  immunity  from,  or  a  removal  of,  the  great  evil,  and 
that  is  sin.     (1)  The  great  cause  of  offence  between  God  and  us  is  taken  out  of  the 
way  (Isa.  lix.  2).     (2)  We  are  freed  from  the  great  blemish  of  our  natures  (Rom.  iii. 
23).     (3)  We  are  freed  from  the  great  burden  of  sin.     (4)  Being  turned  from  onr 
sins,  we  are  freed  from  the  great  bane  of  our  persons  and  all  our  happiness  (Psa. 
xxxii.  1,  2;  Rom.  viii.  1).    2.  The  enjoyment  of  positive  good.      It  is  a  blessed 
thing  to  be  turned  from  our  sins  because — (1)  This  is  the  matter  of  our  serenity, 
comfort,  and  peace  here  (Isa.  xxxii.  17).     (2)  It  is  the  pledge  of  our  eternal  felicity 


CHAP.  III.]  THE  ACTS.  339 

hereafter ;  for  heaven  is  the  perfection  of  holiness,  or  the  full  fruition  of  God  in 
glory  (Heb.  xii.  14;  Eph.  i.  13,  14).  [T.  Mantoii.)  Christ  and  His  blessing  : — 
I.  God  kaised  up  His  Son  Jesus  to  be  a  prophet  (ver.  22,  Deut.  xviii.  15).  1.  To 
teach  the  will  of  God  (Isa.  Ixi.  1).  2.  To  expound  it  to  us  (John  xiv.  2,  xv.  15). 
<1)  By  His  prophets  (1  Pet.  iii.  19  ;  Neh.  ix.  3U).  (2)  Himself  (Heb.  i.  1,  2,  ii.  2,  3). 
<3)  His  apostles  (2  Cor.  v.  19,  20).  (4)  His  ministers  (Eph.  iv.  11,  12).  II.  God 
SENT  Him.  1.  By  promise  in  the  Old  Testament  (1  Pet.  i.  10,  11,  iii.  19 ;  Gen.  iii. 
15).  2.  In  person  in  the  New  (Gal.  iv.  4,  5).  (1)  First  to  the  Jews  (chap.  ii.  39  ; 
John  iv.  22).  (a)  He  was  first  promised  to  them,  (b)  Born  of  them,  (c)  Manifested 
Himself  first  among  them  (Matt.  iv.  12, 17).  (2)  To  the  Gentiles  also  (chap.  ii.  39, 
xi.  18,  XV.  7-9;  Gal.  iii.  14;  Gen.  xxii.  17,  IB).  III.  He  was  sent  to  bless  us 
(Gon.  xxii.  17, 18).  1.  To  purchase  a  blessing  for  us  (Gal.  iii.  13, 14).  2.  To  apply 
it  to  us.  IV.  His  gheat  blessing  isconveesion  feom  sin  (Psa.  i.  1,  xxxii.  1,  2).  Is  it 
not  a  blessed  thing  to  know — 1.  Our  sins  p"jrdoned  (Matt.  ix.  2).  2.  God  reconciled 
(Kom.  V.  1).  3.  That  we  have  an  interest  in  Christ  (1  John  iii.  24).  4.  To  have  a 
pacified  conscience  (2  Cor.  i.  12).  5.  To  delight  ourselves  in  the  best  things 
(Psa.  i.  2).  6.  To  be  related  to  God  (Gal.  iv.  6).  7.  To  have  all  things  blessed  to  us 
(Rom.  viii.  28).  8.  To  have  an  infallible  evidence  of  our  title  to  heaven  (Eom.  viii.  1 ; 
Matt.  XXV.  46).  V.  Christ  has  purchased  this  blessing  fob  us  (Matt.  i.  21 ;  1  Pet.  i. 
18;  Titus  ii.  14;  1  John  iii.  8).  1.  What?  (1)  Pardon;  therefore  conversion 
(Ezek.  xviii.  30  ;  chap.  ii.  38).  (2)  Peace  with  God ;  therefore  conversion.  (3) 
Eedemption  from  misery  ;  therefore  conversion  (Luke  xiii.  3).  (4)  Heaven ;  there- 
fore conversion  (John  iii.  16  ;  Heb.  xiii.  14).  2.  How?  Note — (1)  All  men  are 
sinners.  (2)  Christ  undertook  to  clpanse  us  from  our  sins.  (3)  This  could  not  be 
but  by  purchasing  the  same  grace  we  lost  by  sin.  (4)  No  way  to  obtain  grace  but 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  27 ;  Numb.  xiv.  24).  (5)  God  would  not  send  His 
Spirit  until  man's  sins  were  satisfied  for,  and  so  God  reconciled.  (6)  Christ  by  His 
death  satisfies  for  sin  (1  John  ii.  2).  (7)  And  so  purchased  the  donation  of  the 
Spirit  (John  xvi.  7).  (8)  The  Spirit  sent  into  our  hearts,  turns  us  from  sin  (2  Thess. 
ii.  13).  (Bp.  Beveridae.)  The  blessed  mission  : — I.  God's  gracious  act,  "  Raised 
up  Jesus."  II.  God's  merciful  purpose,  "  To  bless  you."  HI.  God's  blessed 
WAY,  "  By  turning  every  one  of  you,"  (fee.  IV.  God's  great  encouragement,  "  To 
you  first."  (H.  Allan,  D.D.)  The  gospel  blessing  : — 1.  The  work  is  not  described 
only  as  Christ's,  but  bather  as  God's  work  in  Christ.  We  are  too  ready  to  make 
a  difference ;  to  think  of  God  as  all  justice,  and  of  Christ  as  all  love.  In  past  days 
men  had  used  a  loose  and  unscriptjral  language  about  Christ's  calming  God's 
wrath.  The  language  of  Scripture  is  always  this  :  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  <fec. 
What  things  soever  the  Son  doeth,  these  also  doeth  the  Father  likewise.  There  is 
but  one  will,  one  work.  Never  run  away  from  God,  but  ever  seek  Him  and  see  Him 
in  the  Son.  II.  Christ  has  a  mission  to  us.  There  is  no  thought  more  delightful 
than  that  of  the  mission  of  Christ  as  He  now  is  in  heaven  ;  of  His  having  an 
errand,  and  apostleship  still  towards  us  (Heb.  iii  1).  We  are  all  called  to  from 
heaven:  that  is  the  meaning  of  "  partakers  of  a  heavenly  calling."  We  are  all 
like  Saul  of  Tarsus  when  Jesus  Christ  spoke  to  him  suddenly  from  heaven.  Christ 
is  calling  to  us.  In  His  Word,  by  His  minister,  in  conscience,  by  His  Spirit  also. 
And  then,  as  we  recognise  this  truth,  we  are  told  also  to  fix  our  thoughts  upon  Him 
as  "  the  apostle  of  our  profession  "  (or  confession).  God  has  sent,  is  sending,  Him 
to  us,  with  a  message,  addressed  to  each  one  of  us  separately,  "  every  one  of  you," 
not  a  vague,  general,  promiscuous  mission,  but-  a  direct  and  single  one  to  each. 
You  are  not  lost  in  a  crowd.  If  this  be  so,  "how  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so 
great,"  because  so  minute  and  so  personal,  "  a  salvation  ?  "  III.  A  mission  of  what 
SORT  ?  Is  it  that  of  One  who  comes  from  the  dead  to  appal  and  to  terrify  ?  the 
apparition  of  a  reprover  and  a  prophet  of  evil  ?  Hear  the  text :  "  to  bless  you  " ;  to 
speak  well  of  you ;  to  declare  good  to  you  ;  and  in  the  very  act  of  doing  so,  to 
communicate  the  good  of  which  He  tells.  Is  not  this  the  very  notion  of  a  Gospel  ? 
It  is  not  a  threatening,  a  reproof,  it  is  not  even  a  condition  of  acceptance,  or  a  rule 
of  duty  :  it  does  not  say.  like  the  Law,  "  Do  this,  and  thdu  shalt  live  "  :  its  essential 
character  is  that  of  an  announcement ;  tidings  of  something  already  done ;  the 
good  news  of  some  change  which  God  has  made  in  our  state  and  in  our  prospects. 
And  what  is  that  ?  Surely  that  God  forgives  us,  whatsoever  we  are.  God  sent  Him 
not  to  curse,  but  to  bless  ;  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save.  IV.  How  is  this 
MISSION  OF  blessing  MADE  EFFECTUAL  ?  1.  Is  it  a  flattering  of  human  vanity,  a 
lulling  of  human  indolence,  the  intelligence  that  God  has  forgiven,  and  that  there- 
fore man  may  lie  asleep  in  his  sins,  that,  where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap,  in- 

abound,  and  that  therefore  we  may  continue  in  sin  if  only  to  swell  the  ti-iumphs  of 
Divine  grace  ?  None  of  these  things.  "  Sent  Him  to  bless  you,  in  turning  away 
each  one  of  you  from  his  iniquities."  2.  Does  this  description  of  Christ's  work 
seem  to  militate  against  the  former  ?  Does  any  one  say,  Then,  after  all,  the  gospel 
is  a  law  :  it  is  only  the  old  story  once  again,  You  must  be  holy,  and  then  God  will 
save?  Oh  the  ignorance  and  the  hardness  of  these  hearts  of  ours!  Is  there  no 
difference  between  working  for  forgiveness  and  working  from  forgiveness,  between 
being  holy  because  we  are  loved,  and  being  holy  that  we  may  be  loved,  between  the 
being  commanded  to  turn  ourselves  from  our  sins,  and  the  being  blessed  by  finding 
ourselves  turned  from  them  by  another  ?  Your  hearts  tell  you  that  there  is  all  the 
difference  I  "Which  of  us  knows  not  something  of  the  force  of  gratitude  ?  Which 
of  us  has  not  felt  that  it  is  one  thing  to  please  a  person  as  a  duty,  and  another  to 
please  a  person  out  of  love  ?  Which  of  us  has  not  known  the  strange  effect  of  a 
word  or  an  act  of  affection,  from  one  whom  we  are  conscious  that  we  have  injured  ? 
how  it  sometimes  rolls  away  the  whole  barrier  between  us,  makes  us  ashamed  of  our 
ill-temper,  and  heaps  coals  of  fire  upon  our  head?  Even  thus  is  it  with  the  man 
whom  God  has  forgiven.  How  did  David  begin  to  inquire,  "  What  reward  can  I 
give  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  that  He  hath  done  unto  me?  "  and  answer 
himself,  saying,  "  I  will  receive  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord  "  :  yea,  I  will  love  much,  having  been  much  forgiven  I  3.  But  there  may  be 
some  here  pi-esent  who  cannot  understand  the  connection  of  the  words.  They  may, 
be  saying,  1  know  that  my  sins  are  wrong;  and  I  can  understand  being  required  to 
part  with  them :  but  how  can  it  be  a  blessing  to  give  up  this  pleasant  thing  which 
sin  is  to  me  f  But  does  your  sin  make  you  happy?  Have  you  found  the  pleasure 
of  sinning  as  great  as  its  anticipation  ?  Have  you  found  the  morning  after  sinning 
a  bright  and  pleasant  awakening  ?  Have  you  never  known  what  it  was  to  curse  the 
fetter  which  bound  you,  and  to  long  (even  without  hoping)  to  be  free  ?  Have  you 
not  sometimes  looked  back  upon  a  past  and  now  unattractive  sin  with  bitter  remorse, 
with  astonishment  at  your  own  infatuation?  Then  that  experience  has  shown  you 
what  it  would  be  to  look  back  upon  a  life  of  sin,  from  a  world  where  it  will  be  too 
late  ever  to  repent.  A  thing  which  has  all  these  marks  of  misery  upon  it  cannot  be 
happiness.  If  there  is  any  power  or  any  person,  in  earth  or  in  heaven,  who  can  set 
us  free  from  this  influence,  the  coming  of  that  power  or  that  person  may  indeed  be 
said  to  be  a  blessing.  Cost  us  what  it  may,  it  will  be  a  blessing  if  it  succeeds. 
And  when  that  victory  is  wrought  wholly  through  the  power  of  love ;  through 
an  assurance  of  free  forgiveness;  through  the  agency  of  an  inward  influence 
as  sweet  as  it  is  constraining ;  how  much  more  may  it  be  so  regarded  !  God 
grant  that  each  one  of  us  may  know  it  for  ourselves  1  (Dean  Vaughan.) 
The  blessing  of  Christ  in  the  heart : — Lady  Somerset  at  Chicago  said  that 
in  a  fisherman's  hut  in  the  extreme  north-east  of  Scotland,  she  saw  a  picture 
of  our  Saviour,  and  as  she  stood  looking  at  it  the  fisherman  told  her  its  story  :  "  I 
was  way  down  with  the  drink,"  he  said,  "  when  one  night  I  went  into  a  '  public,' 
and  there  hung  this  picture.  I  was  sober  then,  and  I  said  to  the  bar-tender,  '  Sell 
me  that  picture,  this  is  no  place  for  the  Saviour.'  I  gave  him  all  the  money  I  had 
for  it,  and  took  it  homer.  Then,  as  I  looked  at  it,  the  words  of  my  mother  came 
back  to  me,  I  dropped  on  my  knees,  and  cried,  '  0  Lord  Jesus,  wiU  you  pick  me 
up  again,  and  take  me  out  of  all  my  sin  ?  '  "  No  such  a  prayer  is  ever  unanswered. 
To-day  that  fisherman  is  the  grandest  man  in  that  little  Scotch  village.  "  I  asked 
if  he  had  no  struggle  to  give  up  liquor  ;  such  a  look  of  exultation  came  over  his  face 
as  he  answered,  '  Oh,  madam,  when  such  a  Saviour  comes  into  the  heart  He  takes 
the  love  of  drink  right  out  of  it.'  This  Saviour  is  ready  to  take  every  sin  out  of 
your  heart  if  only  you  will  let  Him."  Christ's  errand  of  mercy  : — After  the  long, 
sharp  winter,  a  bright,  beautiful  day  comes  like  a  benediction.  As  I  looked  up 
toward  the  welcome  sun,  this  thought  came  into  my  mind  :  Yonder  sun  is  ninety- 
six  millions  of  miles  away.  These  rays  of  light  have  travelled  all  that  stupendous 
distance,  and  yet  I  have  only  to  drop  the  curtain  of  my  eyelid  and  I  am  left  in  total 
darkness.  There  might  as  well  be  no  sun  as  to  have  his  rays  shut  out  at  the  last 
instant  from  this  little  doorway  of  my  eye.  Even  so  has  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
come  from  His  infinite,  far-away  throne,  on  His  errand  of  mercy,  to  a  sinner's  soul. 
That  sinner  has  but  to  close  up  his  heart's  door  and  keep  it  bolted,  and  for  him 
there  might  as  well  have  been  no  redemption  and  no  Redeemer.  Eternal  life  is 
refused,  eternal  death  is  chosen  at  that  very  spot,  the  door  of  the  human  heart. 
T.  L.  Ciiyler. )  The  generous  mission  of  Christ : — When  Madame  Son  tag  beg  an  her 
(musiccil  career  she  was  hissed  off  the  stage  at  Vienna  by  the  friends  of  her  rival, 


CHAP,  in.]  THE  ACTS.  341 

Amelia  Steininger,  who  had  already  begun  to  decline  through  her  dissipation. 
Years  passed  on,  and  one  day  Madame  Sontag,  in  her  glory,  was  riding  through  the 
streets  of  Berlin,  when  she  saw  a  child  leading  a  blind  woman,  and  she  said,  "  Come 
here,  my  little  child,  come  here.  "Who  is  that  you  are  leading  by  the  hand  ?  " 
And  the  little  child  replied,  "  That's  my  mother ;  that's  Amelia  Steininger.  She 
used  to  be  a  great  singer,  but  she  lost  her  voice,  and  she  cried  so  much  that  she  lost 
her  eyesight."  "  Give  my  love  to  her,"  said  Madame  Sontag,  "  and  tell  her  an  old 
acquaintance  wiU  call  on  her  this  afternoon."  The  next  week  in  Berlin  a  vast 
assemblage  gathered  at  a  benefit  for  that  poor  blind  woman,  and  it  was  said  that 
Madame  Sontag  sang  that  night  as  she  had  never  sung  before.  And  she  took  a 
skilled  oculist,  who  in  vain  tried  to  give  eyesight  to  the  poor  blind  woman.  Until 
the  day  of  Amelia  Steininger's  death,  Madame  Sontag  took  care  of  her,  and  her 
daughter  after  her.  That  was  what  the  queen  of  song  did  for  her  enemy.  But,  oh, 
hear  a  more  thrilling  story  stiU.  Blind,  immortal,  poor  and  lost,  thou  who,  when 
the  world  and  Christ  were  rivals  for  thy  heart,  didst  hiss  thy  Lord  away — Christ 
comes  now  to  give  thee  sight,  to  give  thee  a  home,  to  give  thee  heaven.  With  more 
than  a  Sontag's  generosity  He  comes  now  to  meet  your  need.  With  more  than  a 
Sontag's  music  He  comes  to  plead  for  thy  deliverance.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
God's  plan  for  making  us  happy  : — We  are  told,  in  a  simple  allegory,  that  when  man 
was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  one  of  the  bright  angels  about  the  throne  was 
appointed  to  wait  upon  him,  and  to  be  his  constant  companion.  After  this  beautiful 
image  had  been  marred  by  sin.  Happiness  could  no  longer  recognise  the  Heavenly 
Father's  likeness  upon  earth,  and  pined  to  go  back  to  her  happy  home  on  high. 
PaUen  and  wretched  man  now  wandered  about  searching  for  a  friend  to  make  good 
his  loss.  He  looked  on  the  fair  face  of  Nature,  and  saw  her  gay  and  cheerful ;  but 
Nature  assured  him  that  she  could  offer  no  alleviation  for  his  misery.  Love 
appeared  so  bright  and  joyous,  that  man,  in  his  disappointment,  turned  next  to 
her  ;  but  she  timidly  shrank  back  at  his  approach,  while  her  tender  eyes  over- 
flowed with  tears  of  sympathy.  He  now  sought  friendship,  and  she  sighed  and 
answered,  "  Caprice,  anxiety,  and  the  fear  of  change  are  ever  before  me."  Dis- 
appointed at  these  repeated  failures,  man  followed  after  Vice,  who  boasted  loudly, 
and  promised  great  things  ;  but  even  while  she  talked  with  him  the  borrowed  roses 
dropped  from  her  withered  brow,  and  disclosed  the  wrinkles  of  sorrow  and  the  deep 
furrows  ploughed  by  pain.  Eetreating  in  haste  from  the  haunts  of  the  vile 
enchantress,  he  now  sought  for  Virtue,  hoping  that  the  secret  of  happiness  might  be 
learned  from  her  ;  but  she  assured  him  that  Penitence  was  her  proper  name,  and 
that  she  was  powerless  to  bestow  the  boon  he  craved.  Brought  down  at  last  to  the 
verge  of  despair,  man  applied  to  grim  Death,  who  relaxed  his  forbidding  aspect, 
while  he  answered  with  a  smile :  "  Happiness  can  no  longer  be  found  upon  the 
earth.  I  am  really  the  friend  of  man,  and  the  guide  to  the  blessedness  which  his 
heart  yearns  after.  Hearken  to  the  voice  of  Him  who  died  on  the  Cross  of  Calvary, 
and  I  wiU,  at  last,  lead  man  through  the  shades  of  the  dark  valley  to  the  delectable 
mountains,  where  Happiness  makes  her  perpetual  abode."  The  allegory  which  I 
have  thus  tried  to  repeat,  is  a  mere  expansion  of  the  text.  God  does  not  secure 
happiness  to  His  people — I.  By  making  axl  of  them  rich.  Instead  of  saying, 
"Blessed  are  ye  rich,"  He  says,  "  Blessed  are  the  poor."  The  only  really  happy  rich 
man  is  the  one  who  acts  as  God's  steward,  paying  his  lawful  tithes  to  the  Church, 
and  dealing  kindly  with  the  suffering  poor.  Dr.  Guthrie  says  :  "  Money  wiU  buy 
plenty,  but  not  peace ;  money  will  furnish  your  table  with  luxuries,  but  not  you 
with  an  appetite  to  enjoy  them  ;  money  will  surround  your  bed  with  physicians, 
but  not  restore  health  to  your  sickly  frame  :  it  will  encompass  you  with  a  crowd  of 
flatterers,  but  never  promise  you  one  true  friend  ;  it  will  bribe  into  silence  the  tongues 
of  accusing  men,  but  not  an  accusing  conscience  ;  it  will  pay  some  debts,  but  not 
one,  the'  least,  of  your  debts  to  the  law  of  God  ;  it  will  relieve  many  fears,  but 
not  those  of  guilt,  the  terrors  that  crown  the  hour  of  death."  II.  By  bestowing 
ON  us  THE  EMPTY  HONOURS  OF  THE  WORLD.  It  is  truc,  multitudes  imagine  that 
happiness  is  to  be  found  in  them ;  but  experience  always  proves  how  grievously  they 
were  mistaken.  The  devil  seems  to  have  persuaded  himself  that  even  the  Son  of 
God  could  be  tempted  by  such  a  bribe.  A  mandarin  puffed  up  with  a  sense  of  his 
high  position  was  fond  of  appearing  in  the  public  streets,  sparkling  with  jewels. 
He  was  annoyed,  one  day,  by  an  uncouth  personage,  who  followed  him  about, 
bowing  often  to  the  ground,  and  thanking  hiih  for  his  jewels.  "  What  does  the 
man  mean  ?  "  cried  the  mandarin ;  "  I  never  gave  you  any  of  my  jewels."  "  No," 
returned  the  other ;  "  but  you  have  let  me  look  at  them,  and  that  is  aU  the  use  you 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

can  make  of  them  yourself.  The  only  difference  between  us  is,  that  you  have  the 
trouble  of  watching  them."  III.  By  affokdino  them  a  large  share  of  worldly 
PLEASURE.  Most  of  the  things  which  are  called  "  worldly  pleasures  "  not  only  fail 
to  make  people  happy,  but  leave  positive  misery  behind  them.  And  then,  the 
terrible  phantom,  which,  in  moments  of  solitude  and  silence,  must  disturb  the 
minds  of  the  most  frivolous — the  end  ;  when  God  shaU  bring  all  these  things  into- 
judgment.  When  the  Chevalier  Gerard  De  Kampis,  a  rich  and  proud  man,  had 
finished  his  magnificent  castle,  he  gave  a  great  entertainment  to  all  his  wealthy 
neighbours.  At  the  close  of  the  sumptuous  banquet,  the  guests  made  speech  after 
speech,  lauding  their  host  to  the  skies,  and  declaring  him  to  be  the  happiest  of  men. 
As  the  chevalier  loved  flattery,  this  fragrant  incense  was  most  acceptable ;  and 
nothing  disturbed  his  equanimity,  until  one  of  the  guests  who  had,  thus  far,  kept 
silence,  gravely  remarked  :  "  Sir  Knight,  in  order  that  your  felicity  should  be  com- 
plete, you  require  but  one  thing,  but  this  is  a  very  important  item."  "  And  what 
thing  is  that?  "  demanded  the  astonished  nobleman.  "  One  of  your  doors  must  be 
waUed  up,"  replied  his  guest.  At  this  strange  rejoinder  several  of  the  guests 
laughed  aloud,  and  while  Gerard  himself  began  to  think  the  man  was  mad,  he 
preserved  self-control  enough  to  ask  :  "  Which  door  do  you  mean ?  "  "I  mean 
that  through  which  you  will  one  day  be  carried  to  your  grave."  The  words  struck 
both  guests  and  host,  and  the  proud  man  saw  the  vanity  of  all  earthly  things,  and 
began  from  that  moment  to  lay  up  treasure  in  heaven.  IV.  But  by  sending  His- 
Son  Jesds,  "  to  turn  away  every  one  of  them  from  His  iniquities."  There  can 
be  no  salvation  for  us,  unless  we  are  delivered  from  our  sins.  God  only  makes  men 
happy  by  making  them  holy  (Matt.  i.  21).  Lycurgus  would  allow  none  of  his 
laws  to  be  written,  insisting  that  the  principles  of  government  must  be  interwoven 
with  the  lives  and  manners  of  the  people,  as  the  only  sure  way  of  promoting  their 
happiness.  He  who  would  abide  by  the  commandments  of  God  must  be  able  to  say 
with  David,  "  Thy  word  have  I  hid  within  my  heart."  He  who  will  be  received 
into  the  presence  of  God  and  enjoy  the  blessedness  of  heaven,  is  "  the  new  man, 
which  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness  "  (Eph.  iv.  24).  We 
are  made  heirs  of  glory  only  by  putting  on  Christ ;  but  we  are  "  made  meet  for  the 
inheritance  of  the  saints  "  through  a  studied  and  careful  conformity  to  the  Divine 
precept :  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy."  Say  of  no  sin,  however  trivial  it  may 
appear,  "  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ?  "  but  following  after  holiness,  let  evil  under  every 
possible  disguise  be  your  abhorrence.  (J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  The  gospel  turns 
men  from  sin : — If  a  physician  were  called  to  see  a  patient  who  had  a  cancer  on  his 
breast,  the  only  thing  to  be  done  would  be  to  cut  it  out  from  the  roots.  The 
physician  might  give  palliatives,  so  that  the  patient  would  have  less  pain — or  he 
might  make  his  patient  believe  it  was  no  cancer — or  forget  that  he  had  a  cancer 
near  his  vitals  ;  but  if  the  physician  were  to  do  this  instead  of  removing  the  evil,  he 
would  be  a  wicked  man  and  the  enemy  of  his  patient.  The  man's  case  was  such 
that  the  only  favour  which  could  be  conferred  upon  him  would  be  to  cut  out  the 
cancer.  Now  aU  agree  that  sin  is  the  great  evil  of  the  soul  of  man.  Nothing  can 
make  man  more  spiritually  happy  here,  or  fit  him  for  happiness  hereafter,  but  the 
removal  of  sin  from  his  nature.  Sin  is  the  plague-spot  on  the  soul  which  destroys 
its  peace,  and  threatens  its  destruction  unless  removed.  It  is  therefore  certain  that 
if  the  love  of  God  were  manifested  towards  man,  it  would  be  in  turning  man  from 
sin  which  produces  misery,  to  hohness  which  produces  happiness.  (/.  B.  Walker.} 
Turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  Ms  iniquities. — Tlie  blessedness  of  conver- 
sion : — I.  That  the  indulgence  of  sin  is  the  grand  source  of  human  misery. 
We  increase  by  our  own  transgressions  the  maladies  to  which  we  are  naturally  ex- 
posed :  our  understandings  become  more  confused ;  our  affections  more  depraved  ; 
our  passions,  appetites  and  tempers  more  unrestrained  and  virulent;  our  disap- 
pointments more  bitter  and  acute;  and  all  this  progressive  advancement  in  evil  and 
misery  is  the  consequence  of  increasing  indulgence  in  sin.  II.  That  CHRisr 
especially  blesses  His  people  in  turning  away  every  one  of  them  from  their 
INIQUITIES.  1.  Iq  that  as  a  prophet  He  enUghtens  their  understanding  to  perceive 
the  evil,  the  misery,  and  the  ruinous  consequences  of  sin,  both  as  it  regards  the 
present  and  the  future  state.  2.  This  turning  from  iniquities  is  progressive ;  at 
first  the  gross  and  outward  acts  of  sin  are  cut  off,  unlawful  and  expedient  pleasures, 
and  indulgences  follow,  many  things  of  a  doubtful  and  indifferent  nature  are  then 
relinquished.  The  tongue,  the  temper,  the  thoughts,  are  gradually  brought  more 
and  more  under  regulation  and  restraint ;  holy  principles  are  cultivated  ;  the  ppirit 
of  fervent  charity  takes  possession  of  the  soul ;  and  pity,  meekness,  forbearance. 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  343 

compassion,  patience,  holy  resignation,  lively  hope,  and  heavenly  joy  increase  and 
abound.  (T.  Webster,  B.D.)  The  return  of  the  affections  to  God: — The  history 
of  man  on  this  side  of  the  grave  is  like  the  history  of  the  natural  world :  the  sea- 
sons change;  if  the  winter  chills,  the  summer  warms;  if  darkness  wraps  in  its 
shade,  light  cheers  with  its  brilliancy.  Thus  joy  and  sorrow,  hope  and  fear,  satisfac- 
tion and  perplexity  are  mingled  together.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  very 
material  to  know  whether  there  be  any  mode  of  defending  ourselves  against  such 
an  increase  of  sorrow,  and  of  insuring  to  ourselves  such  an  increase  of  comfort. 
Here  in  the  text  is  a  chart  to  the  wanderer,  a  light  to  the  benighted,  a  shelter  to  the 
forlorn,  a  certainty  to  the  dubious !  The  misery  of  man  lies  chiefly  in  the  circum- 
stances of  his  moral  condition ;  he  is  wretched  under  the  effects  of  his  iniquities. 
His  remedy  must  be  found  in  the  return  of  his  affections  to  God  ;  God  sent  Christ 
to  bless  you  by  turning  you  away  from  your  iniquities.  The  sorrows  of  man  mainly 
issue  from  the  depravity  of  his  affections.  He  is  guilty  before  God.  Certainly  his 
passions,  earthly  and  selfish,  spurn  every  barrier  when  occasions  exasperate  their 
movements.  To  restrain  them  under  such  excitements  is  as  impracticable,  as,  by 
the  weight  of  the  dews  of  heaven,  to  chain  down  the  fiery  matter  which  a  volcano 
is  about  to  cast  forth.  But  to  come  to  individual  experience.  From  whence  does 
the  largest  portion  of  man's  sufferings  arise  ?  Is  it  not  from  the  disordered  state  of 
his  affections  ?  Is  there  not  a  disease  of  the  heart,  which  is  widely  prevalent,  and 
which  no  skill  can  heal  ?  To  reproduce  happiness  in  a  sinful  being  requires,  there- 
fore, a  remedy  applicable  to  the  inward  disease  in  his  mind  ;  a  remedy  which  not 
only  respects  a  new  and  favourable  relation  on  the  part  of  God,  but  also  a  new  and 
holy  state  of  the  affections  on  the  part  of  man.  In  other  words,  the  happiness  of 
a  sinner  wiU  depend  first  upon  the  conviction  that  God  has  pardoned  him,  and 
secondly,  upon  the  consciousness  that  he  loves  the  Being  who  has  thus  tenderly 
dealt  with  him.  Now  the  remedy  which  Christianity  brings  forward  to  the  view  of 
him  who  believes  it,  is  exactly  of  this  kind.  "  Jesus  Christ  came  to  bless  you  by 
turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  his  iniquities."  He  holds  out  to  us  pardon  and 
peace,  and  He  gives  us  the  disposition  to  love  the  nature  and  the  heart  from  which 
that  pardon  flows  i  In  this  complex  operation  the  means  of  human  happiness  are 
unfolded.  The  pardon  of  sin  is  complete  and  free,  unclogged  with  any  condition  or 
qualification.  "  There  is  no  more  condemnation,"  but  perfect  reconcihation  and 
peace.  Now  the  belief  in  this  truth,  under  the  agency  of  the  Spirit,  conveys  heal- 
ing to  the  heart.  Sin  becomes  loathsome  when  its  consequences  are  thus  made 
visible  in  the  personal  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  obedience  to  the  will  and 
mind  of  God  then  becomes  identical  with  peace  and  happiness.  Thus  Christ 
blesses  by  turning  away  from  iniquity,  by  procuring  at  once  the  pardon  of  sin,  and 
by  healing  the  disease  of  sin  ;  by  restoring  peace  in  the  relations  between  God  and 
man,  and  by  making  God's  character  the  glowing  object  of  attractive  imitation. 
(G.  I.  Noel,  M.A.) 


CHAPTEE   IV. 

Yebs.  1-22.  And  as  they  spake  unto  the  people,  the  priests,  and  the  captain  of 
the  temple,  and  the  Sadducees,  came  upon  them. — The  captain  of  the  temple  was 
an  officer  of  a  sort  which  Iiuke  mentions  in  the  plural  in  his  Gospel  (Luke  xxii.  4), 
and  is  several  times  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  as  in  Jer.  xx.  1.  This  officer, 
with  his  subordinates,  had  charge  of  the  Levites,  especially  of  those  who  kept  the 
night  watch  in  the  temple.  A  hint  at  the  forms  and  ceremonies  which  accompanied 
his  duties  may  be  obtained,  perhaps,  from  Psa.  cxxxiv,  in  which  vers.  1  and  2 
are  supposed  to  be  the  address  of  these  strategoi,  or  captains  or  archons  of  the 
temple,  and  ver.  3  the  response  of  the  Levite  watchers.  The  talmudical  name 
for  this  captain  appears  to  have  been  the  "  man  of  the  mountain  of  the  house  [of 
the  Lord],"  and  he  is  frequently  mentioned  in  ancient  Jewish  writings.  A  little 
quotation  will  show  a  part  of  his  duties :  "  The  man  of  the  mount  of  the  house  [or 
temple]  used  to  make  his  rounds  among  the  several  watches,  with  burning  torches 
before  him.  If  he  found  any  of  the  watch  not  standing  on  his  feet,  he  said  to  him, 
'  Peace  be  to  thee.'  But  if  he  observed  one  asleep,  he  struck  him  with  his  staff, 
and  then  was  at  liberty  to  set  on  fire  bis  garments.  And  when  he  was  asked  by 
others,  '  What  is  the  noise  in  the  court  ?  '  he  answered,  '  the  cry  of  a  lazy  Levite, 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

■whose  clothes  have  been  burned,  because  he  slept  on  guard.'  Eabbi  Eliezer  ben 
Jacob  said,  '  Once  they  found  my  mother's  brother  asleep,  and  burned  his  garment.'" 
It  is  most  probable  that  this  custom  is  alluded  to  in  Eev,  xvi.  15,  "Behold,  I  come 
as  a  thief.  Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  and  keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk 
naked  "  &c.  An  official  of  corresponding  power,  but,  of  course,  different  duties,  has 
charge  of  the  temple  enclosure  in  Jerusalem  to-day.  He  is  the  "Sheikh  of  the 
Sanctuary  "  ;  and  in  addressing  him  the  proper  form  is  "  Ya  Sheikh,"  or  "  0  Elder." 
(Prof.  I.  H.  Hall.)  Peter  and  John  before  the  council: — 1.  The  name  of  Jesus 
was  the  power  that  wrought  the  miracle  ;  or  to  use  the  incomparable  language  of 
the  preacher  himself,  "  by  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  whom  ye  crucified, 
whom  God  raised  from  the  dead,  even  by  Him  doth  this  man  stand  here  before  you 
whole."  By  the  name  we  are  to  understand  all  the  powers  and  prerogatives  that 
centre  in  the  Person.  An  ambassador  borrows  all  his  authority  from  the  name  of 
his  sovereign.  Paul,  in  the  provincial  court  at  Philippi,  saved  himself  by  invoking 
the  name  of  Cassar.  The  inquisitors  before  whom  Peter  stood  on  this  occasion 
supposed  that  Jesus  was  dead.  It  was,  indeed,  true  that  bodily  He  had  vanished 
from  the  sight  of  men  ;  but  He  had  left  behind  Him  a  name  in  which  resided  the 
tremendous  power  of  His  spiritual  presence,  which  was  destined  thereafter  to  be  the 
working  force  in  history  until  the  whole  world  should  be  subjugated  to  God.  For 
want  of  ability  to  discern  this  fact,  Hume  and  Gibbon  and  all  other  undevout 
historians  have  been  at  their  wits'  end.  They  have  marked  the  operations  of  a 
mysterious  force,  working  hke  a  magnet,  and  leading  the  nations  on  toward  a 
brighter,  better  day ;  but  for  the  most  part  they  have  frankly  acknowledged  their 
inabihty  to  locate  or  characterise  it.  The  name  of  Jesus  is  this  unnamed  factor  in 
universal  history.  2.  The  name  of  Jesus,  though  despised  by  these  inquisitors,  has 
taken  precedence  of  all  others  in  heaven  or  on  earth.  Or,  again  to  quote  the 
preacher,  "  This  is  the  stone  which  was  set  at  naught  of  you  builders,  which  is 
become  the  head  of  the  corner."  Christ  dead  ?  Ah,  no  !  Could  these  ecclesiastics 
have  looked  forward  through  the  centuries  they  would  have  seen  His  name  written 
on  all  scrolls  of  honour.  His  Cross  glowing  on  innumerable  spires  that  were  to 
point,  like  index-fingers,  to  His  throne  in  heaven,  and  His  kingdom  spreading  like 
a  vast  tabernacle  to  enfold  the  world.  In  vain  do  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves 
and  rulers  take  counsel  together  against  this  Jesus.  3.  The  name  of  Jesus  alone 
has  power  to  save ;  in  Peter's  words,  "  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other  ;  for 
there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven,  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be 
saved."  Among  those  who  listened  to  the  apostle  that  day  there  was  probably  not 
one  who  did  not  cherish  some  sort  of  hope  of  salvation  ;  but  if  these  words  were 
true  they  were  all  leaning  on  broken  reeds.  (1)  No  doubt  there  were  rabbis  there 
who  congratulated  themselves  on  their  acquaintance  with  current  theology.  They 
knew  the  technics  of  the  argument  between  the  schools  of  Shammai  and  Hillel, 
and  were  thoroughly  adept  in  the  traditions  of  the  elders.  But,  without  desiring  to 
behttle  the  importance  of  dogma,  it  is  right  to  say  that  the  brain  is  a  good  way  from 
the  heart,  and  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  theology  and  religion.  Many  a 
man  has,  intellectually,  a  faultless  creed  who  is  nevertheless  an  utter  stranger  to 
vital  godliness.  But  souls  are  not  saved  that  way.  A  man  may  know  all  about 
the  Nicene  and  the  Ante-Nicene  fathers,  and  all  about  creeds  and  symbols  and 
theological  systems,  but  if  he  has  not  made  the  acquaintance  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a 
personal  Saviour,  he  shall  not  enter  into  life.  (2)  Then,  doubtless,  there  were 
others  ia  Peter's  audience  who  hoped  to  be  saved  for  their  devotion  to  the  Church. 
We  cannot  dispense  with  the  Church ;  nor  dare  we  cast  reproach  upon  it,  for  it  is 
the  bride  of  Jesus  Christ ;  nevertheless,  to  rely  upon  externals  for  salvation  is  to 
face  an  awful  disappointment  at  the  great  day.  This  was  the  trouble  with  the 
Pharisees.  (3)  No  doubt  there  were  moralists  also  in  this  company,  and,  if  so, 
Peter's  word  ruled  them  out  of  heaven.  For  morality,  as  such,  however  admirable, 
has  no  saving  virtue  in  it.  Emerson  objects  to  the  use  of  the  term  "  mere 
morality,"  but  what  else  shall  we  call  that  sort  of  legalism  which  takes  no  cogni- 
sance of  the  Lawgiver?  The  trouble  with  "mere  morality"  is  that  it  leaves 
uncancelled  the  mislived  past ;  it  has  no  power  to  atone  for  a  single  sin,  while  it 
ignores  the  claims  of  Jehovah.  In  saying  that  we  say  nothing  against  morality,  for 
the  law  is  good ;  but  the  atoning  power  must  be  sought  for  elsewhere.  Peter's 
sermon  had  a  remarkable  effect  upon  the  minds  of  his  distinguished  hearers,  (a) 
They  marvelled  that  "  unlearned  and  ignorant  men  "  should  have  such  forensic 
power.  But  they  knew  nothing  of  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  rested  upon 
them,     [b]  They  "  took  knowledge  of  these  men  that  they  had  been  with  Jtsus." 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  345 

The  ground  of  that  conclusion  lay  in  the  fact  that  they  had  manifestly  caught  His 
Spirit.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Peter  and  John  before  the  council: — A  notable 
miracle  had  been  wrought  at  the  gate  of  the  temple,  and  a  notable  sermon  had 
been  preached  to  the  assembled  crowd,  who  were  tilled  with  wonder  and  amazement. 
It  is  the  sequel  of  that  which  had  been  thus  done  and  said  which  furnishes  our 
preseiat  theme.  We  notice — I.  The  offence  of  the  apostles.  It  was  not  that 
they  had  been  the  means  of  bringing  healing  and  health  to  a  disabled  man.  Most 
sympathetic  souls  doubtless  were  glad.  Others,  probably  (are  there  not  always 
such  ?),  after  a  little,  began  to  question  this  way  of  coming  to  his  health.  It  was 
not  according  to  the  regular  practice.  It  was  a  reflection  upon  the  professed 
practitioners  of  the  healing  art.  But  this  was  not  the  grievance  to  those  with  whom 
the  two  disciples  of  Jesus  are  brought  into  speedy  conflict.  These  were  the  ruling 
class,  the  Sadducees,  of  whom  were  also  the  officials,  both  ecclesiastical  and  civil, 
who  arrested  Peter  and  John  and  locked  them  up  for  more  deliberate  examination. 
These  were  the  rulers  of  the  Church  in  that  day;  but  they  were  by  no  means  the 
religious  class.  The  offence  of  the  apostles  was  not  that  they  had  healed  the  lame 
man,  or  even  that  they  had  been  disciples  of  Jesus,  but  that  "  they  taught  the 
people  and  proclaimed  in  Jesus  the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  It  was  an  offence  of 
doctrine  rather  than  of  deed  which  excited  the  opposition  of  these  Sadducean  rulers.  It 
was  the  offence  of  supernaturalism.  But  there  was  something  m  ore  than  this  in  it.  Men 
oppose  teachings  often  because  the  teachings  conflict  with  the  lives  which  they  prefer 
to  live.  Supernaturalism  always  has  its  foes,  for  it  implies  a  present  God — a  God  who 
works,  who  sees  and  will  judge.  Ours  is  a  Sadducean  age.  Natural  science  has 
engrossed  the  attention  of  the  learned  class  to  a  large  degree.  They  will  accept 
mind  cure  or  hypnotism,  but  not  the  healing  touch  of  God.  They  will  allow  the 
inspiration  of  the  poet,  but  not  of  the  prophet.  The  offence  of  the  Cross  is  not  the 
only  one  which  stirs  up  hostility.  The  offence  of  supernaturalism  is  now  equally 
cause  of  anger  and  derision  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Peter  and  John.  II.  The 
defence  of  the  apostles.  Thus  arraigned  and  thus  accused,  the  two  disciples  are 
put  in  ward  until  the  morrow.  This  was  the  very  time  for  which  they  bad  been 
prepared — the  very  time  to  exercise  their  gift  to  be  witnesses  here  in  the  very  court 
of  Israel.  And  that  is  what  they  were :  not  defenders  of  themselves,  but  sturdy, 
truthful,  uncompromising  witnesses  to  Jesus  and  the  resurrection.  So  they 
rehearse  the  facts.  "  You  ask  us  who  has  done  this  good  deed  to  the  helpless  man? 
Jesus  has  done  it ;  Jesus  the  Christ,  the  Messiah  for  whom  Israel  has  looked  and 
longed.  Nay,  you  know  Him  well,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  Man  whom  you  so  lately 
condemned  to  deith,  yes,  'whom  ye  crucified' — He  is  the  Author  of  this  cure. 
For  God  undid  your  murder  and  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  So  they  bore 
testimony  to  the  thing  which  had  been  done.  But  now  they  testify  to  the  greater 
things  which  He  can  do.  "  He  is  the  only  One  by  whom  we  can  be  saved.  We 
disciples  or  your  priests  and  Sadducees  can  be  safe  and  be  saved  alone  by  Him 
whose  name  and  power  has  wrought  this  cure."  The  defence  of  those  who  believe 
in  supernaturalism  is  not  argument.  You  cannot  reason  about  the  particulars  in  a 
sphere  which  men  refuse  to  recognise.  What  can  you  do  ?  You  can  oppose  your 
faith  to  their  unbeUef,  your  confidence  to  their  incredulity.  You  can  give  your 
ringing  testimony  to  what  you  know.  Testimony  wUl  win  the  day  for  Christ  sooner 
and  more  surely  than  reasoning ;  for  it  will  secure  a  hearing  for  the  reasons  of  the 
faith  that  is  in  the  disciples.  Witnesses  are  more  important  than  advocates.  A 
hundred  reasons  why  it  should  be  so  are  not  half  as  strong  as  one  "  It  is  so."  III. 
The  charge  of  the  judges.  After  this  form  of  a  trial,  the  accusation  and  the 
defence,  the  court  retires  to  consult.  They  cannot  deny  the  facts.  Facts  are 
unfortunately  stubborn  things.  What  shall  they  do?  "  Let  us  silence  them,''  they 
say  ;  and  so  they  bring  the  two  unlearned  men  before  them,  and  charge  them,  with 
aU.  the  authority  they  have,  and  with  what  dignity  they  can,  "  not  to  speak  at  all 
nor  teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus."  How  well  they  were  able  to  enforce  their  com- 
mand the  further  record  tells.  It  is  not  the  last  time  in  the  history  of  the  world 
that  men  of  deep  convictions  have  been  met  with  a  similar  command.  Bight  or 
wrong,  it  is  impossible  to  correct  men's  thinking,  or,  for  very  long,  their  speaking, 
by  the  mere  command  or  compulsion  to  be  silent.  The  very  command  is  a  con- 
fession of  weakness.  To  ask  your  foe  not  to  strike  again  is  to  acknowledge  your 
fear  of  him.  You  cannot  silence  witnesses.  The  fire  which  is  in  men's  hearts 
cannot  be  smothered  by  the  authority  of  courts,  civil  or  ecclesiastical.  The  truth  of 
God  will  overcome  all  lies  at  last  in  the  kingdom  of  the  truth.  In  the  hot  fires  of 
experience  the  dross  will  be  run  off  and  the  pure  silver  reflect  the  image  of  ita 


34G  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

Maker.  All  through  this  passage  the  name  of  Jesus  is  set  forth  as  the  source  of 
power,  of  salvation,  and  of  Divine  teaching.  {Geo.  M.  Boynton.)  Bigotry  : — I 
was  once  driven  upon  an  Irish  jaunting-car  with  a  little  child  of  four  years  of  age. 
It  began  to  rain,  and  a  hood  was  placed  over  the  child's  head.  I  heard  her  mutter, 
"  That  is  such  a  pretty  view."  I  said,  "  How  can  that  be  when  your  head  is 
covered?"  "Oh,"  she  replied,  "  I  see  my  knees,  my  shawl,  and  my  pretty  little 
feet."  A  good  illustration  of  people  who  cannot  see  farther  than  the  extremity  of 
their  own  beautiful  selves.  (J.  Alexander, D.D.)  Ecclesiasticism  has  no  exclusive 
rights  : — The  Church  ecclesiastical  is  like  a  vast  water  company  chartered  to  supply 
the  Church  spiritual  from  the  great  river  of  the  water  of  life.  But  how  absurd  it 
would  be  for  a  water  company  to  claim  the  right  to  interdict  rain  from  heaven,  or 
to  say  to  the  inhabitants  of  a  particular  district,  "  You  shall  receive  no  water  except 
it  pass  through  the  hydraulic  machinery  which  I  have  constructed."  (General 
Gordon.)  The  first  persecution  of  the  apostles  : — To  the  tempter  God  said,  "  I  will 
put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  and  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed."  But 
the  hatred  reigns  in  the  breasts  of  the  children  of  the  devil,  "  he  that  is  born  after 
the  flesh  persecutes  him  that  is  born  after  the  Spirit,"  while  those  who  are 
"  counted  to  the  Saviour  as  a  seed  "  are  told  to  love  their  enemies.  The  first-fruit 
of  the  enmity  was  the  murder  of  Abel.  The  first-fruit  of  this  enmity  towards  the 
Apostolic  Church  was  the  imprisonment  of  Peter  and  John.  But  it  belongs  to  the 
disciples  of  a  crucified  Saviour  to  do  good  and  receive  evil.  I.  The  imprisonment 
OF  THE  APOSTLES  (vcrs.  1-4).  Peter  had  said  to  Christ,  "I  will  go  with  Thee  to 
prison  "  &c.,  and  our  Lord  had  said  to  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  "  Ye  shall,  indeed, 
drink  of  the  cup  that  I  drink  of."  And  now  we  see — 1.  The  first  act  of  violence, 
which  was  the  arrest  of  Peter  and  John.  "  While  they  were  speaking  to  the  people  " 
gracious  words  there  was  a  rush  in  the  assembly,  and  an  iron  hand  was  laid  on  the 
preachers,  not  by  "  rude  fellows  of  the  baser  sort,"  but  the  priests,  of  whom  Hosea 
said,  "  As  troops  of  robbers  wait  for  a  man,  so  the  company  of  the  priests  murder 
in  the  way  by  consent."  The  Sadducees  were  then  in  possession  of  authority, 
which  they  employed  to  indulge  in  the  enjoyment  of  this  Ufe,  as  they  believed  in  no 
other,  and  were  cruel  to  all  who  disturbed  their  ease.  They  were,  therefore, 
"  vexed  that  the  apostles  preached,  through  Jesus,  the  resurrection  from  the  dead." 
For  if  He  who  was  known  to  have  been  put  to  death  was  alive  again.  He  was  that 
"  Man  by  whom  came  the  resurrection  of  the  dead."  What  was  there  in  this  to 
grieve  any  one  ?  Is  the  present  life  so  long  that  we  should  not  wish  for  another  ? 
Or  were  these  rulers  so  wicked  that  they  suspected  a  future  life  must  be  to  them  a 
state  of  punishment?  To  wish  to  die  like  a  dog  belongs  to  those  who  wish  to  live 
like  a  dog.  But,  whatever  men  might  think  or  say  of  theKesurrection,  the  question 
with  magistrates  should  have  been.  What  injury  will  this  do  to  society?  Will  men 
be  worse  neighbours,  or  subjects,  for  believing  that,  after  this  life,  they  will  rise, 
and  be  judged  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body  ?  And  yet,  how  many  have  felt  the 
rude  hand  of  violence  for  no  other  crime  than  preaching,  through,  Jesus  the  resur- 
rection from  the  dead  I  2.  The  first  night  which  the  apostles  passed  in  prison  is 
full  of  interest.  See  them  led  along  to  where  criminals  are  lodged,  the  healed  man 
following,  not  leaping  for  joy,  but  asking  in  sorrow,  "  Is  it  a  crime,  then,  that  they 
have  made  me  walk  ?  "  Arrived  at  the  gaol,  the  authorities  demand  entrance  for 
twoprisoners,  who  have  done — what  ?  good  to  body  and  to  soul.  Shall  we  pity  tbem  ? 
No  ;  save  your  pity  for  their  persecutors.  For,  if  you  say,  "  But  what  must  it  be 
for  pious  men  to  pass  a  first  night  in  a  gaol  ?  "  I  answer,  but  they  are  in  a  good 
cause,  with  a  good  conscience,  and  in  good  company ;  and  with  tliese  three 
attendants  a  man  may  lie  easy  on  a  cold,  hard,  stone  tioor ;  and  in  a  dreary  dungeon 
pass  a  pleasant  night.  For  now  Peter  blesses  his  Lord,  that,  instead  of  denying 
Him,  he  can  suffer  for  Him  ;  and  John  feels  that  he  is  indeed  the  disciple  whom 
Jesus  80  loved,  as  to  hand  from  His  own  lips  the  cup  of  suffering,  "  that  His 
beloved  may  drink  also."  Call  them  not  prisoners ;  their  spirits  are  not  imprisoned, 
but  mount  together  to  the  mercy-seat,  in  prayer  for  grace  to  suffer  well.  And  they 
knew  that  "  the  Word  of  G  od  was  not  bound,"  that  the  Church  now  numbered  five 
thousand.  If  the  apostles  were  kept  from  sleep,  it  was  for  joy  of  such  triumphs. 
But  "He  giveth  His  beloved  sleep,"  which  often  refuses  to  shed  its  balm  on  royal 
eyelids,  while  it  rests  sweetly  on  theirs  who,  exhausted  with  labours  and  devotions, 
sink  down,  and,  like  Jacob,  though  with  a  stone  for  a  pillow,  see  visions  of  God, 
heaven  open,  and  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending,  in  attendance  on  the 
heirs  of  salvation.  Thus  Bunyan,  passing  through  the  wildermss,  lighted  on  a  den, 
where  he  slept,  and  saw  what  myriads  have  gladly  kept  awake  to  read.    II.  Tueib 


cnAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  347 

COMING  FORTH  AND  TRIAL  (vcts  5-22).  1.  The  court  IS  particularly  described,  as  of 
importance  to  the  narrative.  The  great  men  lived  in  the  suburbs,  and  now  called 
a  general  meeting  in  the  city.  The  rulers  were  probably  the  president  and  vice- 
president  of  the  Sanhedrim  ;  the  elders  the  body  of  the  council ;  and  the  scribes, 
the  persons  who  acted  as  counsel,  and  clerks  of  the  court.  Annas  was  the  high 
priest,  as  Caiaphas  had  been.  Alexander's  name  intimates  a  heathenish  Jew  ;  but 
he  was  then  a  man  of  note.  John  is  thought  to  have  been  the  Ben  Zacchai, 
celebrated  in  the  Talmud,  who,  forty  years  before  the  destruction  of  the  temple, 
saw  the  gates  open  spontaneously,  and  said,  "  I  know  thine  end  "  ;  for 
Zechariah  prophesied,  "  Open  thy  gates,  0  Lebanon,  that  the  fire  may  devour  thy 
cedars."  "  All  the  kindred  of  the  high  priest,"  who  were  a  species  of  nobles,  were 
now  assembled,  as  if  their  dignities  were  at  stake.  Listen  to  the  examination  : 
"  By  what  power,  or  by  what  name,  have  you  done  this? — you?  "  For  the  last 
word  stands  as  if  it  were  uttered  in  scorn  :  "  You,  fellows,  to  have  done  this !  "  See 
how  "  God  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness,  and  turneth  the  counsel  of  the 
wicked  headlong."  For  they  venture  not  to  deny  the  fact.  The  more  con- 
temptuously they  treat  the  apostles,  as  unequal  to  such  a  work,  the  more  they 
glorify  Christ.  But  who  ever  heard  of  trying  men  for  the  crime  of  healing  in  a 
moment?  Who  would  think  of  accusing  a  physician  for  curing  thoroughly  and 
speedily  ?  They  ask,  what  name  has  done  it ;  as  if  alluding  to  the  Jews'  notion  of 
a  magic  virtue  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  which  modern  Jews  have  affirmed  Jesus 
learned,  and  by  it  wrought  His  miracles.  Had  the  apostles  themselves  dictated  the 
examination,  they  could  scarcely  have  made  it  more  to  their  mind ;  for  it  elicited — ■ 
2.  The  defence  which  they  made  (vers.  8-12).  "  It  was  done  in  the  name  of  Jesus, 
the  Messiah  of  Nazareth,  whose  name  we  pronounced  ere  we  wrought  the  cure. 
You,  indeed,  condemned  Him  to  die  on  the  Cross ;  but  God  raised  Him  from  the 
dead,  of  which  the  proof  is  before  you."  The  rulers  had  asked  after  the  wonder- 
working name,  and  they  now  know  more  than  they  wished  ;  for  what  a  stab  must 
this  have  been  to  their  pride  !  What  a  thunder-bolt  to  their  consciences !  They, 
aware  that  Jesus  promised  to  rise  again,  had  set  a  guard  to  prevent,  and  now  are 
told  that  a  miracle  has  proved  it  true.  But  see  how  Peter  turns  their  attention 
from  healing  bodies  to  salvation  for  the  soul.  Who  sees  not  here  the  fulfilment  of 
Christ's  promise  to  His  apostles,  "  be  not  anxious  what  ye  shall  say,  for  the  Holy 
Spirit  shall  teach  you  in  the  same  hour  what  ye  ought  to  say  "?  3.  The  council's 
embarrassment  arose  from  the  sight  of  the  apostles  and  of  the  man  they  had  cured. 
"  Seeing  the  freedom  of  Peter  and  John,"  who  spoke  hke  men  at  their  ease,  and 
"  conceiving  them  illiterate  and  private  "  men,  the  rulers  could  not  account  for 
their  unembarrassed  air.  They  were  not  among  the  hterati,  nor  in  any  public 
oflfice,  but  in  private  secular  life ;  and  they  were  known  to  have  been  with  Jesus, 
who  was  neither  in  high  station  Himself,  nor  attended  by  those  who  were ;  for  it 
was  asked,  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  Pharisees  believed  on  Him  ?  "  But  the  man 
who  was  healed  was  another  embarrassing  sight,  to  which  the  council  had  nothing 
to  reply.  This  embarrassment  induced  them  to  order  all  others  out  of  the  hall, 
ashamed  to  say  before  them,  "  What  shall  we  do  to  these  men  ?  "  It  is,  indeed, 
difficult  to  know  what  to  do  with  men  who  are  tried  for  their  good  deeds ;  and  still 
more  with  men  who  can  work  miracles.  Often  have  persecutors  seized  their  victims 
and  then  knew  not  what  to  do  with  them.  Hence,  with  a  confounding  coolness,  they 
plot  to  smother  a  miracle,  that  it  may  not  spread  further,  as  if  it  were  an  infectious 
plague.  Thus  commenced  a  long  course  of  threats  and  orders,  not  less  impious 
than  vain.  This  was  overruled,  to  bring  out  to  view  the  great  principle  of  religious 
liberty.  From  this  time  Christ  is  declared  to  be  the  paramount  Ruler  in  religion. 
"It  is  impossible  for  us  not  to  speak  what  we  have  seen  and  heard."  Not  to  speak 
at  all  to  any  man  in  the  name  of  Jesus  1  Bid  us,  neither  breathe  nor  think!  A 
religion  of  ceremony  may  be  put  down  by  brute  force ;  but  to  hide  the  love  of  Jesus 
is  as  impossible  as  to  "  hide  the  ointment  of  your  right  hand."  Having,  therefore, 
threatened  again,  they  let  the  apostles  go  ;  the  people  made  it  dangerous  to  punish 
(ver.  21).  Thus  ended  the  first  act  of  persecution,  and  thus  commenced  the 
triumph  of  religious  freedom.  III.  The  liberty  of  the  apostlks  was  improved 
IN  A  manner  worthy  OF  THE  MEN  AND  OF  THEIR  CAUSE.  Earth  and  hcaveu  exhibit 
scenes  full  of  instruction.  1.  On  earth,  the  two  confessors,  "  being  let  go,  returned 
to  their  own  company  "  (vers.  23-30).  A  night  in  gaol,  and  fierce  threats,  had 
wrought  no  change,  except  to  increase  their  attachment  to  a  cause  that  could  not 
be  gainsaid ;  and  when  restraint  was  taken  off,  as  the  bird  whose  string  is  cut  soars 
away  to  its  nest,  they  returned  to  their  own  company.     Of  the  sufferings  of  a  night. 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

in  gaol,  they  say,  they  think,  nothing.  The  threats,  however,  call  forth  a  united 
prayer  to  God,  expressing  their  submission  to  His  Sovereign  pleasure,  and  their 
confidence  in  Him  as  the  Almighty  Creator.  They  had  astonished  the  enemy  by 
their  very  courage  ;  but  they  knew  themselves  too  well  to  trust  to  this  ;  for  he  that 
was  a  hero  in  the  last  battle  may  turn  coward  in  the  next ;  and  therefore  they  ask 
for  boldness.  "He  giveth  more  grace  ";  and  they  who  ask  it  are  the  men  who 
endure  to  the  end.  The  apostles  ask  that  "  God's  hand  might  still  be  stretched 
forth  to  heal " ;  though  one  such  display  of  power  had  cost  them  one  night  in  gaol. 
Attention  to  an  apostolic  prayer  becomes  us.  Mark  its  Scriptural  character  ;  a  large 
portion  is  the  Word  of  God ;  its  high  rationality ;  for  the  Psahn  quoted  is  not 
misapplied ;  its  deep  humility,  with  its  lofty  bearing  ;  its  superiority  to  self  ;  with 
its  consecration  to  the  Divine  honour ;  and  then  say  whether  these  men  were  either 
deceivers  or  deceived?  If  we  pray  like  apostles,  shall  we  not  wisely  adapt  our 
prayers  to  occasions  as  they  arise  ?  2.  Heaven  responded  to  earth ;  for,  they 
having  thus  prayed,  a  second  Pentecost  followed.  As  in  the  first,  a  mighty  sound, 
like  a  roaring  wind,  roused  attention ;  so  now,  an  earthquake,  which  shook  the 
place  where  they  were  assembled,  spoke  the  descending  God.  They  were  aU  filled 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  new  and  more  abundant  measures.  Eich  recompense  for 
bonds  and  imprisonments.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  their  testimony  sink  into  your 
hearts,  that  "  there  is  salvation  in  no  other  name,  but  that  of  Jesus  the  Crucified." 
2,  When  you  have  believed,  and  found  salvation  in  it,  you  wiU  show  the  attraction 
of  affinity  as  they  did,  who,  "being  let  go,  returned  to  their  own  company."  B. 
Triumph  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus  against  aU  the  terrors  of  persecution  ;  which  is 
a  blunt  weapon,  that  has  ever  failed  of  its  object,  from  the  hour  that  these  apostles 
were  let  go,  to  this  moment.  {J.  Bennett.)  The  first  persecution  of  the  Cliurch  : — 
The  authorities  were  offended  because — I.  The  ajDOstles  taught.  This  is  em- 
phatically true  of  the  priests,  who  looked  upon  themselves  as  the  only  lawfully 
constituted  teachers.  1.  They  considered  that  the  apostles  were  not  personally 
qualified  (ver.  13).  "Unlearned"  means  they  had  not  been  trained  in  Kabbinical 
lore — they  were  not  brought  up  to  letters^they  were  arirammatol.  Men  in  every 
age  lay  undue  stress  upon  "Grammar."  Not  to  have  been  trained  in  the  public 
schools  is  of  itself  almost  fatal  to  any  man  who  aspires  to  the  office  of  a  teacher. 
But  were  not  the  priests  right  ?  It  is  necessary  we  should  distinguish  between 
scholarship  and  learning.  Scholarship  is  proficiency  in  words  and  forms  and 
opinions ;  learning  is  a  large  sympathy  with  life,  and  a  deep  insight  into  the  eternal 
truth  of  things.  In  the  priest  we  see  scholarship ;  in  the  apostles  learning ;  and 
the  learning  of  the  latter  is  infinitely  preferable  to  the  scholarship  of  the  former. 
But  the  men  of  scholarship  looked  down  contemptuously  upon  the  men  of  learning. 
Does  that  surprise  you  ?  It  has  been  repeated  over  and  over  again  in  the  history  of 
our  own  country.  Did  not  the  clergy  sneer  at  the  ministers  of  Dissent — Bunyan 
and  his  contemporaries — whom  they  now  indeed  emulate  each  other  to  honour  ? 
The  best  thing  is  to  honour  the  living  prophets,  the  next  best  thing  is  to  respect 
and  perpetuate  the  memory  of  the  dead.  One  fact  the  history  of  the  Church  has 
indisputably  demonstrated — that  scholarship  alone,  however  valuable  it  may  be  as 
an  accessory,  is  not  a  sufficient  qualification  to  teach  the  people.  But  though 
scholarship  alone  is  not  a  sufficient  qualification,  yet  learning  is ;  and  better  still  to 
have  both  scholarship  and  learning.  The  ministry  of  the  apostles  was  characterised 
by  learning,  the  ministry  of  the  middle  ages  by  scholarship ;  let  us  hope  that  the 
ministry  of  the  future  will  be  distinguished  for  its  happy  combination  of  the  two. 
2.  They  considered  that  the  apostles  had  no  official  right  to  teach.  They  were 
idiotai—TdQn  of  no  profession,  private  individuals,  in  a  word,  laymen.  And  the 
professionals  were  very  indignant  that  parties  outside  the  sacred  pale  of  the  sacer- 
dotal order,  and  not  commissioned,  should  set  themselves  up  as  teachers.  Laymen 
were  considered  very  ignorant  men ;  the  idiotai  suggested  idiots.  The  priests 
claimed  an  exclusive  right  to  teach.  This,  however,  had  not  always  been  the  case 
in  Jewry.  The  ceremonies  of  religion  had  been  entrusted  to  the  priests,  the  teaching 
of  the  people  to  the  prophets.  But  prophecy  had  long  died  out,  and  the  priesthood 
had  stepped  into  its  place ;  and  having  once  possessed  themselves  of  the  power  they 
guarded  it  most  jealously.  Does  this  seem  strange  ?  The  same  thing  has  occurred 
over  and  over  again.  The  now  famous  pedlar  of  Elstow  was  charged  with  insolence, 
irreverence,  and  disloyalty  for  daring  to  stand  up  to  deliver  himself  of  the  truths 
burning  in  his  soul.  The  police  came  suddenly  upon  him  and  immured  him  in 
Bedford  gaol  for  twelve  long  years.  Why  ?  What  evil  had  he  done  ?  This — that 
be,  a  layman,  one  of  the  idiotai,  should  venture  to  trespass  on  the  prohibited 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  349 

preserves  of  the  priests !  This  mischievous  spirit  is  still  smouldering.  II.  The 
apostles  taught  the  people.  1.  Some  felt  vexed  on  personal  considerations,  for 
the  apostles,  labouring  to  enlighten  and  convert  the  people,  were  indirectly  under- 
mining the  power  of  the  priests.  The  heyday  of  priestcraft  is  generally  the  "  times 
of  ignorance,"  and  it  naturally  desires  the  prolongation  of  those  times.  Peter  and 
John  held  out  the  lamp  of  knowledge,  and  the  authorities  rushed  upon  the  lamp- 
bearers  and  endeavoured  to  break  the  lamp.  With  what  result  ?  With  the  simple 
result  of  smashing  the  glass  and  letting  the  flame  burn  more  intensely  than  before, 
and  kindle  five  thousand  other  lamps.  2.  Others  felt  annoyed  on  ecclesiastical 
grounds.  The  priests  knew,  through  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  that  the 
enlightenment  of  the  people  meant  virtually  their  deposition.  The  people  had  to 
receive  implicitly  and  unquestioningly  the  word  of  priests  and  rabbis  as  to  what  the 
will  of  God  was  ;  or  worse  still,  their  interpretation  of  it.  This  monopoly  plunged 
the  people  into  an  elaborate  system  of  lifeless  traditions  and  burdensome  super- 
stitions. And  when  the  apostles  demanded  back  the  key  of  knowledge  and  desired 
to  lead  the  people  into  the  hidden  dwelling  place  of  truth,  with  what  reward  did 
they  meet  ?  They  were  cast  into  prison.  Does  that  surprise  you  ?  No  ;  for  this 
history  has  been  enacted  over  again  in  Christendom.  The  key  of  knowledge  was 
taken  away  from  Europe,  and  the  Scriptures  were  allowed  to  lie  in  an  unknown 
language.  Luther  on  the  Continent  and  Wycliffe  in  England  endeavoured  to  unlock 
the  treasures,  to  translate  the  Scriptures  into  the  popular  language,  and  to  scatter 
broadcast  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  will ;  and  they  were  vilified,  excommunicated, 
and  hunted  about  for  their  pains.  Nevertheless  the  translation  of  the  Bible  caused 
the  Papal  hierarchy  to  topple  to  its  ruin  in  Germany  and  England.  Mark  that 
well.  Priests  still  forbid  laymen  to  peruse  and  expound  the  Scriptures — they  must 
believe  on  authority.  The  essence  of  Eomanism  is  to  believe  on  authority.  The 
essence  of  Protestantism  to  believe  on  proof.  3.  Others  felt  annoyed  on  civil 
grounds.  They  would  say  as  all  despots  have  in  effect  said — "Knowledge  is  power. 
If  you  educate  the  people  you  put  into  their  hands  a  weapon  which  they  have  not 
the  wisdom  to  use.  What  if  they  use  it  for  revolution  ?  To  avert  the  evil,  we  will 
refuse  the  good."  That  has  always  been  the  language  of  despotism  ;  and  forthwith 
it  proceeds  to  fetter,  and  if  need  be,  to  kill  the  champions  of  popular  education. 
No  doubt  knowledge  is  a  tremendous  power — especially  religious  knowledge  ;  and 
often,  alas  !  it  has  been  converted  to  mean,  vulgar  ends.  But  are  we  to  reject  the 
use  of  a  thing  because  of  its  abuse  ?  Do  not  have  fires,  and  you  will  have  no  con- 
flagrations. Light,  no  doubt,  does  multiply  the  shadows  ;  shall  we  on  that  account 
declaim  against  the  sun  ?  III.  They  taugLt  tlie  people,  through,  Jesus  the  restjebec- 
TiON  FROM  THE  DEAD.  1.  The  teaching  reflected  deep  discredit  on  the  tribunals  of 
the  nation.  The  leading  members  of  those  courts  had  crucified  Christ ;  but  yeb 
God  had  raised  Him  up  from  the  dead.  Now  the  Ptesurrection  was  a  complete  vindi- 
cation of  Christ's  character ;  but  to  vindicate  His  character  was  to  brand  the 
character  of  His  judges.  Therefore  those  judges  were  irritated  beyond  measure.  In 
their  furious  madness  the  infant  Church  saw  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  (ver.  25). 
You  have  seen  a  spirited  unmanageable  horse  snorting  wildly  and  plunging 
desperately — his  eyes  flashing  fire,  his  nostrils  breathing  thunders.  That  is  the 
very  figure  used  in  this  chapter  to  describe  the  raging  of  the  Jewish  authorities 
against  the  gospel — they  were  like  wild  beasts,  filled  with  foolish  and  unreasonable 
fury.  2.  The  teaching  was  new.  The  Pharisees  were  very  much  in  love  with  the 
old,  and  were  deemed  wiser  than  their  descendants.  The  Pharisees  were  the 
champions  of  orthodoxy,  and  in  confederacy  with  the  other  sections  of  the  Jewish 
Church  put  the  apostles  on  their  trial  for  healing  the  lame  man.  The  Sanhedrim 
assembled — the  court  had  to  decide  between  orthodoxy  and  heterodoxy.  The 
miracle  they  could  not  deny.  The  question  was,  "  By  what  power  or  by  what  name 
have  ye  done  this  ?  "  The  whole  trial  turned  upon  that  hinge.  Were  the  apostles 
orthodox,  yea  or  no?  You  know  the  conclusion  they  arrived  at — the  apostles  were 
branded  as  heretics,  and  forbidden  to  heal  or  to  preach  any  more  in  the  name  of 
Jesus.  We  should  never  forget  that  the  apostles  and  the  Saviour  Himself,  were 
charged  with  heresy  and  persecuted  to  death  on  account  of  it.  This  teaches  us  two 
lessons.  (1)  That  we  should  be  careful  not  to  reject  any  doctrine  because  of  its 
novelty,  nor  call  the  advocates  of  new  opinions  by  bad,  unpopular  names.  Every 
truth — of  science  as  well  as  theology — was  considered  heresy  on  its  first  promulga- 
tion. The  heterodoxy  of  one  age  is  the  orthodoxy  of  the  next.  Truth  is  first 
crncified,  then  raised  from  the  dead,  then  exalted  to  the  throne  and  adored.  (2) 
Not  to  refute  what  we  deem  heresy  by  imprisonment.     Jesus  Christ  argued  with 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

the  people  of  Jerusalem,  and  they  took  up  stones  to  cast  at  Him.  It  is  a  very  easy 
but  a  very  foolish  way  to  meet  an  argument  with  a  stone.  And  yet  it  has  been  the 
universal  practice  till  recently.  The  Christians  hold  certain  views  concerning  life 
and  death,  and  the  Jews  persecute  them.  Among  Christians  again,  certain  parties 
hold  views  different  from  the  majority  and  they  are  burnt.  Mankind  are  slow  to 
learn  than  it  is  a  cowardly  thing  to  kill  a  man  for  an  opinion.  3.  Their  teaching, 
moreover,  flatly  contradicted  an  influential  section  of  the  hierarchy.  The  Saddu- 
cees  probably  prided  themselves  on  how  little  they  believed.  They  would  no 
doubt  style  themselves  broad  thinkers  ;  but  certainly  they  were  not  broad  believers. 
Breadth  of  thought  is  in  our  time,  too,  preferred  to  breadth  of  faith.  But  there  is 
something  fundamentally  wrong  with  the  man  whose  broad  thinking  leads  to  narrow 
believing.  Broad  thinking  should  always  lead  to  broad  believing,  and  where  the 
faith  is  feeble,  it  is  to  me  a  proof  positive  that  the  thinking  is  not  broad,  but  lax. 
Anyhow,  the  Sadducees  conspired  to  suppress  the  teaching  of  the  apostles.  In  the 
Gospels  the  merciless  hostility  of  the  Pharisees  is  in  the  forefront ;  but  in  the  Acts 
the  fierce  enmity  of  the  Sadducees ;  for  there  the  fact  and  the  doctiine  of  the 
resurrection  find  a  more  prominent  place.  Scepticism  knows  how  to  imprison  and 
behead  its  opponents  as  well  as  superstition.  Unbelief,  not  faith,  is  the  real  source 
of  persecution.  Let  men  believe  in  God,  and  that  He  is  stionger  than  the  devil ; 
in  truth,  and  that  it  is  more  potent  than  error ;  in  right,  and  that  it  will  and  must 
prove  triumphant  over  might,  and  they  can  afford  to  be  patient,  th^y  will  see  the 
futility  of  resorting  to  physical  force.  The  truth  of  liberty  is  based  in  religion. ' 
"What  has  unbelief  done  on  behalf  of  liberty  ?  It  has  written.  What  has  Chris- 
tianity done  ?  It  has  bled.  Infidels  have  pleaded  for  it,  but  Christians  have  died  tor 
it.  Did  their  imprisonment  check  the  mighty  progress  of  the  gosp2l  ?  Nay,  "  many 
of  them  that  heard  the  Word  believed."  Times  of  persecution  are  generally  times  of 
much  spiritual  prosperity.  Some  of  the  early  martyrs  had  for  their  mystic  symbol 
a  candle  surrounded  by  a  crowd  of  angry  men  puffing  as  hard  as  they  could  to  blow 
it  out ;  but  the  harder  they  puffed  the  more  brightly  burnt  the  candle.  The  English 
Reformers  were  sorely  harassed,  but  did  they  abandon  the  cause  of  Protestantism  ? 
No  ;  some  of  them  devised  an  anvil  for  their  coat  of  arms  with  the  striking  motto — 
"  This  anvil  hath  broken  many  hammers."  "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of 
the  Church."  (J.  Cyndd]]lanJones,D.D.)  Typical  religious  perxeciition  : — I.  The 
PEBSECDTOKS  Were  typical — the  "  priests,  and  the  captain  of  the  temple,  and  the 
Sadducees."     Here  we  have — 1.  Men  whose  tenets  were  discredited— the  Sadducees. 

2.  Men  whose  prerogative  was  invaded — the  priests.  3.  The  subordinate,  notoriously 
accessible  to  bribes — "  the  captain  of  the  temple,"  the  servant  of  the  priests  and 
the  Sadducees,  who  would  desire  what  would  please  them.  Is  there  not  here  a 
type  of  the  agency  employed  in  all  religious  persecutions  ?  Outraged  orthodoxy, 
slighted  privilege,  and  vile  sycophancy  have  distinguished  themselves  in  many  ways 
and  in  various  combinations  in  the  attacks  made  on  faithful  reformers  and 
evangelists  from  age  to  age.  II.  The  ground  was  typical.  The  persecutors  were 
"annoyed."  God  was  not  employing  them.  They  were  unable  to  give  any  expla- 
nation. And  their  own  cherished  notions  were  ceasing  to  command  the  respect  of 
the  people.  Has  it  not  been  ever  thus,  when  "  unauthorised  "  teachers  have  been 
more  welcome  and  more  successful  than  the  official  representatives  of  the  Church  ? 
But  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done.  III.  The  treatment  was  typical.  They  were — 
1.  Stopped  in  their  preaching.  But  "  the  Word"  had  been  effectually  spoken. 
Those  who  wished  and  had  determined  to  hinder  were  restrained  until  GoU's  own 
time.  2.  Apprehended.  Their  reasons  were  not  met  with  counter-reasons.  To 
deal  with  truth  by  physical  force  !     What  a  confession  of  ignorance  and  weakness! 

3.  Imprisoned.  That  they  could  do  ;  but  they  could  not  imprison  or  bind  the  truth, 
nor  prevent  it  becoming  the  instrument  of  spiritual  freedom  to  those  who  received  it. 
IV.  The  encouragements  were  typical.  The  preachers — 1.  Had  remained  at  the 
post  of  duty  until  forced  away.  They  had  nothing  to  reproach  themselves  with  oa 
that  account.  2.  Had  the  pleasure  of  knowing  that  the  good  work  had  progressed. 
3.  Had  a  whole  night  for  meditation  and  prayer.  In  like  manner  have  the 
Lord's  persecuted  servants  been  comforted  and  sustained  since.  (W.  Hudson.) 
Apostolic  trials: — Two  men  displaiming  all  original  power  excited  Jewish  society 
by  the  performance  of  a  miraculous  deed.  The  excitement  became  in  the  long  run 
bewilderment.  The  Jewish  leaders  were  completely  battled.  The  facts  of  Christi- 
anity have  been  awkward  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of  unbelief.  Opponents  can 
see  two  sides  to  a  theory,  but  to  a  fact  it  is  vain  to  oppose  a  suggestion  of  fancy  or 
a  jeer  of  ill  w'ill.    L  On  the  side  of  the  Jewish  leaders  there  was — 1.  lUiberality. 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  331 

"  Being  grieved  that  they  taught  the  people."  The  highest  pre-Christian  culture ! 
Christ  alone  has  shown  Himself  the  friend  of  universal  man — slave  or  king. 
Christianity  has  a  universal  appeal.  It  is  not  a  taper,  it  is  the  sun,  2.  Shortsighted- 
ness. They  put  the  apostles  in  prison  !  Fools  !  They  could  not  put  God  in  prison  ! 
Had  the  apostles  been  original  workers  the  imprisonment  might  have  met  the  case. 
The  apostles  were  put  into  prison  because  they  did  good  to  the  diseased  and  in- 
structed the  ignorant.  Christianity  is  still  the  physical  and  moral  regenerator  of 
the  world.  The  only  charge  that  can  be  brought  against  it  is  that  it  continually 
seeks  to  do  good.  3.  Impotence.  "  What  shall  we  do  ?"  &c.  They  "  threatened  " 
the  apostles  :  that  is,  they  shook  their  fists  at  the  sun  in  order  to  darken  the  world ! 
They  stamped  on  the  sea  shore  to  repel  ttie  tide !  They  sent  a  message  to  the 
wind  stating  that  they  would  henceforth  be  independent  of  air  1  We  see  how  small 
men  are  when  they  set  themselves  against  truth.  II.  On  the  side  of  the  apostles 
there  was — 1.  Complete  intelligence  within  the  sphere  of  their  ministry.  Though 
they  were  unlearned  and  ignorant  men,  yet  within  the  compass  of  their  work  they 
were  wise  and  efficient.  This  is  the  secret  of  success.  Know  what  you  do  know. 
Do  not  venture  beyond  the  line  of  your  vocation.  Every  pireacher  is  strong  when 
he  stands  on  fact  and  experience.  Christians  must  not  accept  the  bait  which  would 
draw  them  upon  unknown  or  forbidden  ground.  2.  Unconquerable  courage  in 
narrating  and  applynig  facts.  Look  at — (1)  The  dignity  of  the  address.  (2)  The 
calm  and  emphatic  assertion  of  the  name  of  Christ.  (3)  The  direct  and  special 
impeachment  of  the  hearers.  "  Whom  ye  crucified."  "  Set  at  nought  of  you 
huilders."  Dignity  is  proper  in  the  preachers  of  truth.  Christ  is  the  life  of 
Christianity — beware  of  lauding  the  system  and  foi'getting  the  Man.  Accusation  is 
the  work  of  every  Christian  evangelist.  Prove  the  world's  crime.  3.  Chiistian 
magnanimity  in  preaching  the  gospel  (ver.  12).  (1)  Man  needs  saving.  (2)  All 
men,  even  Christ's  murderers,  may  be  saved.  (3)  There  is  but  one  way  of  saving 
them.  4.  Incorruptible  loyalty  to  God  and  His  truth  (ver.  19).  "  Things  that  we 
have  seen  and  heard."  What  a  field!  Missions  at  home  and  abroad — schools, 
labours,  sacrifices,  death-beds.  {J.  Forker,  D.D.)  Teaching  and  per.feciition : — 
1.  Not  only  did  Peter  and  John  cure  the  lame  man,  they  proceeded  to  "  teach  the 
people."  Herein  was  their  greatest  fault.  Christianity  is  a  teaching  religion.  It 
seeks  out  all  the  people,  and  speaks  the  popular  tongue.  It  is  just  here  that 
preachers  may  learn  their  most  useful  lesson.  Our  danger  is  that  we  speak  to  the 
classes ;  the  apostles  taught  the  masses.  We  can  never  get  back  to  that  universal 
Fpetch  unless  those  of  you  who  are  educated  and  highly  refined  will  support  us. 
You  must  be  content  to  be  partially  neglected  in  so  far  as  intellectual  luxuries  are 
concerned,  and  must  assist  us  in  providing  good  wholesome  bread  for  the  common 
people.  That  is  precisely  the  difference  between  Christianity  and  every  other  re- 
ligion. Others  say,  "Keep  the  people  in  the  dark  "  ;  this,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  Others  draw  a  screen,  as  Pythagoras 
lectured  from  behind  a  curtain  to  his  disciples,  and  from  behind  they  mutter  their 
unintelligible  incantations ;  this  lifts  its  red  banner,  throws  it  out  upon  the  willing 
wind,  and  on  it  is  written,  "  This  thing  was  not  done  in  a  corner."  Other  religions 
are  philosophies  only;  Christianity  is  a  gospel  as  well.  2.  A  very  marvellous  thing 
occurs  here,  in  a  kind  of  parenthesis.  The  rulers  put  them  in  prison.  "  Howbeit "  ! 
— God  has  His  finger  in  this  !  He  comes  through  very  narrow  spaces,  and  seizes 
very  transient  opportunities.  "  Howbeit " — Wait  there  a  while  to  get  the  full  rush 
of  this  glorious  announcement — "  many  of  them  which  heard  the  Word  believed." 
WTiy  should  not  that  be  the  case  now,  so  that  whatever  may  happen  to  the  preacher 
within  the  next  hour  be  may  know,  as  he  goes  to  his  account,  that  he  has  left  behind 
him  a  harvest  before  the  time?  3.  The  morning  came,  and  justice  must  be  done. 
This  question  was  hurled  at  them,  "  By  what  power,  or  by  what  name,  have  ye  done 
this  ?  "  Beware  of  turning  your  religion  into  a  piece  of  metaphysical  inquiry.  It 
is  at  that  point  that  Christianity  is  often  defeated  in  her  most  beneficent  purp  'ses. 
The  learned  men  wanted  to  analyse  what  we  now  call  the  modus  operandi.  Instead 
of  accepting  the  man,  the  concrete,  positive,  indisputable  fact,  they  wanted  to  lure 
the  apostles,  and  those  who  followed  them,  into  metaphysical  quagmires  and  diffi- 
culties. Preachers  do  not  answer  the  "  why  "  and  the  "  how  "  of  merely  inquisitive 
minds.  Have  the  man  himself  with  you,  and  let  him  be  your  argument.  Christi- 
anity rests  on  facts,  not  upon  opinions.  If  the  Church  of  Christ  has  not  the  Man 
with  it,  any  amount  of  mere  philosophical  theorising  and  speculation  will  do  harm 
ratiier  than  good.  Where  is  the  man  you  have  saved  ?  Produce  him.  Where  are 
the  hungry  you  have  fed,  the  ignorant  you  have  instructed,  the  enslaved  you  have 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

emancipated  ?  Produce  them.  This  is  a  fact,  not  a  quibble.  By  whatever  means 
it  is  done  the  effect  is  certain,  and  the  cause  of  such  an  effect  must  itself  be  good. 
4.  Peter  and  John  will  surely  stammer  before  this  glittering  assembly!  The  maid 
that  taunted  the  rouKh-spoken  Galiltean  was  too  much  for  Peter  ;  when  he  sees 
Annas,  A'C,  there  will  be  no  spirit  left  in  him.  How  does  the  narrative  r'^ad? 
"Then  Peter,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  That  is  a  thousand  Peters:  P.ter 
multiplied  by  the  very  Deity.  Peter  ? — a  straw  blown  away  by  the  mocking  wind,  by 
himself.  But  Peter  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost "  was  a  man  of  war  clothed  with 
heavenly  panoply,  eloquent  with  heaven's  thunder,  gracious  with  heaven's  love. 
Have  we  received  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  The  question  is  not,  "  Are  we  well  trained 
intellectually  ?  "  "  Have  we  read  many  books?  "  "Are  we  able  to  conduct  very 
subtle  arguments  ?  "  We  shall  know  whether  we  have  received  the  Spirit  by  the 
fire  that  is  in  us.  We  have  received  the  first  baptism,  we  have  been  "  christened," 
Christ-named,  christianised  in  the  sense  of  having  been  brought  to  the  church, 
and  had  the  initial  water  sprinkled  upon  our  forehead ;  but  have  we  received  the 
Holy  Ghost?  There  is  no  mistaking  Him.  5.  Peter  having  been  challenged  to 
give  an  account  of  the  circumstance,  made  the  eloquent  reply  which  you  find  within 
verses  9  to  12  inclusive.  Whenever  Peter  spake  suddenly,  on  great  subjects,  he 
spake  the  very  heart  of  God.  How  much  he  makes  of  Christ  in  the  10th  verse  !  We 
seem  hardly  to  have  heard  the  whole  style  and  title  of  Jesus  before.  We  have  them 
here.  We  have  called  the  Saviour  "  Jesus,"  sometimes  we  have  called  Him  "  Jesus 
Christ,"  By  some  short  indication  of  this  kind  we  have  made  reference  to  the  Ke- 
deemer.  But  how  seldom  have  we  given  Him  His  full  style  and  title  ! — "  Jesus 
Christ  of  Nazareth,  whom  ye  crucified,  whom  God  raised  from  the  dead,  even  Jay 
Him."  There  is  no  mistaking  that  address.  What  Christ  do  you  preach  ?  We 
have  heard  of  the  Christ  of  the  painter — a  figure  tenderly  coloured,  set  in  wondrous 
hghts  and  shades.  We  have  stood  before  it,  and  sometimes  we  have  thrilled  in  its 
presence,  and  felt  the  waters  stealing  into  our  eyes.  But  that  Christ  never  saved 
the  soul,  it  is  only  a  creation  of  art.  We  have  heard  of  the  Christ  of  the  poet. 
Christ  has  been  spoken  of  in  flowing  rhyme  and  stately  blank  verse  ;  but  that  Christ 
never  came  from  the  intellect  into  the  depths  of  the  heart  in  its  deadliest  remorse 
on  account  of  sin.  We  must  go  back  to  the  apostolic  Christ  if  we  have  to  realise 
apostolic  conceptions  and  to  win  apostolic  successes  in  the  ministry.  Peter  might 
well  have  ended  by  the  statement  contained  in  the  10th  verse,  but  Peter  often 
found  it  difficult  to  conclude  when  Christ  was  the  theme.  How  can  a  river  end 
except  in  the  sea  ?  The  little  pool,  the  purling  rill,  soon  sinks  in  the  sand  ;  but  the 
river — deep,  broad,  fluent — moves  on  through  channelled  rocks  and  shady  woods, 
on,  on  to  the  solemn  sea.  Peter  went  onward.  Said  he,  "  This  is  the  stone  which 
was  set  at  nought  by  you  builders,  which  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner."  The 
place  trembled  under  the  vibration  of  that  living  voice !  He  might  have  ended 
there ;  but  it  was  difficult,  let  us  repeat,  for  Peter  ever  to  end  when  Christ  was 
the  theme.  So  he  continued,  "Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other,"  &c. 
The  original  question  was  not  one  of  salvation,  it  was  merely  a  question 
of  healing  a  lame  man.  But  you  never  find  the  apostles  confining  them- 
selves to  the  mere  incident.  Everji  miracle  is  only  a  text.  Let  an  apostle  heal  a 
man's  ankle-bones,  and  from  those  ankle-bones  he  swings  clear  off  to  Christ's  world- 
saving  Cross.  "  If  we  have  healed  your  ankle-bones,  we  meant  it  to  be  symbolic  of 
the  greater  healing  of  your  soul."  6.  Now,  it  was  the  turn  of  the  Sanhedrim  to  be 
shut  up  and  put  "in  hold  unto  the  next  day,"  and  every  day  after  that.  When 
they  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  John  "  they  marvelled."  Any  man  that  can  be 
accounted  for  will  never  influence  his  age.  He  will  make  a  splash  in  the  pool ;  but 
the  bubbles  will  be  seen  a  moment,  then  will  sink  for  ever.  You  never  can  make 
out  the  secret  of  a  Whitefield.  You  never  can  make  out  the  secret  power  of  any 
man  who  makes  a  whole  world  hear  him.  If  you  could  account  for  him  you  would 
be  as  great  as  he  is.  What  then  did  the  wise  and  influential  Jews  do  ?  "  Threaten 
them."  You  feel  the  difference  of  temperature  between  vers.  11,  12,  and  vers. 
16-18.  The  apostles  must  not  speak  any  more !  There  must  be  an  end  of 
this  nuisance.  Society  is  not  to  be  disturbed  by  such  propagandists.  Peter, 
having  heard  the  threatening,  said  unto  them,  "  Whether  it  be  right.  .  .  ."  That 
is  the  word  that  makes  history,  that  thrills  the  ages.  And  the  apostles  having  re- 
ceived this  threatening,  "  went  to  their  own  company,  and  reported,"  &c.  What  a 
talk  they  had  1  How  they  reminded  one  another  of  the  occasion  of  the  movement ! 
And  when  the  company  had  heard  it  all  "they  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with 
one  accord,  and  said,  .  .  ."    They  too  became  eloquent.    And  when  they  had 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  853 

prayed,  "  tbe  place  was  shaken  where  they  were  assembled  together ;  and  they 
were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  Pentecost  after  Pentecost!  Poor  Church  I 
Thou  hast  fallen  upon  empty  times.  They  are  but  mean  challenges  that  are  ad- 
dressed to  us  now.  If  v/e  could  be  once  more  threatened  with  the  prison  and  the 
stake,  the  rod  of  iron  and  the  keen  double-edged  weapon,  some  of  us  might  be 
heroes.  At  present  we  may  be  but  common  clay.  (Ibid.)  Peter  and  John  ex- 
amined : — I.  When  God  is  carrying  on  any  design  for  the  manifestation  of  His 
<3L0RY  GREAT  OPPOSITION  WILL  BE  MADE  TO  IT.  Satan  will  not  remain  a  quiet  spec- 
tator, and  his  servants  will  be  stirred  up  to  his  assistance.  In  this  combination  it 
ought  not  to  sui  prise  us  to  find,  not  only  persons  of  profane  princiijles  and  wicked 
lives,  but  some  who,  in  consequence  of  their  apparent  attachment  to  religion,  might 
have  been  expected  to  range  themselves  on  the  opposite  side.  When  God  was 
setting  His  Son  on  His  holy  hill  of  Zion,  not  only  did  the  "heathen  "  rage,  who 
■were  ignorant  of  prophecy,  and  had  not  seen  the  miracles  of  Jesus,  but  the 
favoured  "  people,"  to  whom  the  oracles  of  God  were  committed,  and  among  whom 
the  Messiah  had  appeared,  "imagined  a  vain  thing."     II.  God  may  expose  His 

PEOPLE  TO    much    DISCOURAGEMENT    WHEN    THEY   ARE    WALKING   IN  HiS  OWN  WAY.       The 

apostles  preached  Christ  by  express  commission  from  heaven,  and  on  tbeir  succes? 
depended  the  conversion  of  the  world.  Yet  in  the  outset  they  were  opposed  by  the 
supreme  authority  in  the  nation.  In  the  course  of  their  ministry  they  were  sub- 
jected to  danger  and  suffering,  and  most  of  them  lost  their  lives  in  the  cause. 
Superficial  reasoners  may  conclude  that  God  is  at  variance  with  Himself,  retarding 
the  execution  of  His  own* plans,  and  may  complain  that,  instead  of  rewarding,  He 
punishes  men  for  their  zeal  and  fidelity.  "  But  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser 
than  men."  By  such  dispensations  He  exercises  the  faith  of  His  servants,  and 
makes  known  His  power  in  carrying  on  His  designs  in  spite  of  the  utmost  efforts  of 
His  adversaries;  while  in  the  beh  viour  of  His  people,  such  examples  of  courage, 
patience,  and  love  are  exhibited,  as  afford  no  slight  testimony  to  the  truth  oi 
religion.  Converts  are  made  by  the  sufferings  of  the  saints  as  well  as  by  their 
doctrine.  III.  Christ  requires  no  service  for  which  He  does  not  furnish  them 
WITH  necessary  AID.  He  is  no  hard  ta-kmaster.  As  His  commandments  are 
reasonable,  so  His  grace  strengthens  ns  to  obey  them.  When  Peter  and  Jnhn  were 
called  to  plead  His  cause  before  the  Jewish  council,  they  were  "  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost."  Hence  did  cowardly  fishermen  become  undaunted  apostles ;  lience 
have  simple  and  uneducated  men  put  learning  to  silence;  hence  have  feeble  ana 
delicate  women  endured  with  unshaken  firmness,  cruel  tortures,  and  death  in  its 
most  terrible  forms.  "  As  thy  day,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  IV.  Great  is  the 
TRUTH,  AND  IT  WILL  PREVAIL.  It  confouuded  and  silenced  the  Jewish  council ;  it 
made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  vanquishing  its  vain  philosophy  and 
sophistical  eloquence  by  the  plain  doctrine  of  the  Cross ;  it  will,  in  like  manner, 
triumph  over  infidelity,  superstition,  heresy,  and  licentiousness.  From  what  it  has 
already  done  we  may  calculate  the  effects  which  are  yet  to  be  expected  from  it  (Psa. 
ex.  2,  3).  V.  Let  us  be  careful  to  maintain  a  good  conscience  in  our  religious 
PROFESSION.  This  was  the  constant  study  of  the  apostles,  and  hence  they  considered 
not  what  was  honourable  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  what  was  advantageous  or  safe, 
but  solely  what  was  right.  It  was  God  only  whom  they  were  resolved  to  obey,  and 
they  minded  not  the  contrary  commands  and  threatenings  of  men.  You  will  never 
enjoy  peace  of  mind,  you  will  never  act  uprightly  and  consistently  till  you  learn  to 
regulate  your  conduct  by  the  fixed  standard  of  truth  and  rectitude,  and  not  by  the 
shifting  opinions  and  fancies  of  men.  Beware  of  the  vain  attempt  to  serve  two 
masters.  The  result  of  such  an  attempt  will  be  tliat  you  will  serve  neither  of  them 
fully,  and  will  lose  the  reward  promised  by  both.  (-/.  Dick,  A.M.)  liigliteous 
holdnei^s  : — Courage  is  of  various  sorts.  Brazen  courage  is  simply  an  outside  affair, 
born  of  impudence.  Many  a  timid  soul  will  cower  before  it,  but  itself  will  aU  ays 
cower  wlien  rightly  met.  Physical  courage  is  an  affair  of  the  bod*,  born  of  mere 
brute  force.  There  is  a  courage  of  love,  conscience,  conviction,  action,  repose. 
What  is  Christian  courage?  Let  us  to-day  look  buck  to  the  time  when  Christ's 
disciples  were  first  under  the  fire  of  persecution  and  see — I.  Its  occasion.  Peter 
and  John  had  healed  a  lame  man,  and  to  the  wondering  crowd  pieaclied  Jesus  and 
His  resurrection.  Out  of  patience  with  this  contmued  talk  about  Jesus — the  priests, 
because  Jesus  had  denounced  their  hypocrisy  and  formalism;  the  Sad.mcees, 
because  in  Jesus  was  set  fonh  the  resurrection,  which  they  si;oute<i  and  denied — 
had  got  the  apostles  arraigned  before  the  Sanhedrim.  In  the  presence  of  this 
august  body  they  proved  what  stuff  they  were  made  of.  They  had  no  friends  at 
VOL.   I.  23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

this  court.      Wealth,  learning,  fashion,  pride,  numbers,  and  even  piety  and  the 
national  faith,  and   the  very  oracles   of   God,  were   arrayed   against   the?e  poor 
disciples.     Peter  stood  in  view  of  them  all,  calm  and  confident,  a  splendid  illustra 
tion  of  the  truth  that  "  the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion  "  (Prov.  xxviii.  1),  and  made 
his  rep'y.    II.  Irs  skcket.  "  Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  This  made  the  difference 
between  Peter  before  the  ascension  and  Peter  after  it.     It  was  not  natural  courage, 
"  to  the  manner  born."     Peter's  impetuous  ardour  often  got  him  into  trouble,  but 
his  courage  failed  him  when  put  to  the  test.     He  could  use  his  sword  under  sudden 
impulse,  but  Lis  temporary  boldness  is  followed  by  blank  cowardice.   He  could  leap 
from  the  ship  in  impul-ive  obedience,  but  he  scarcely  touches  the  waters  before  he 
cries  out  for  fear.     This  is  Peter  by  nature.     But  after  Pentecost  what  granite-like 
firmness  he  exhibits !  what  courage  of  conviction !  what  unflinching  loyalty  to  truth ! 
what  boldness  in  the  rebuke  of  wrong !     This  is  Peter  by  g;^-ace.     The  bank  of  sand 
is  transformed  into  a  rock  of  firmness.    Impulse  has  given  way  to  principle.     Fear 
of  man  is  exchanged  for  fear  of  God.    III.  Its  chaeacteeistics.    1.  Courtesy.   Peter 
gives  the  men  of  the  court  their  appropriate  titles,  recognises  their  office  and 
authority,  and  addresses  them  with  deference  and  respect.     Bravery  does  not  con- 
sist in  brusqueness  and  bravado  and  bluster.     To  speak  the  truth  boldly  one  need 
not  be  a  boor  or  a  bear.     There  is  a  so-called  maintaining  one'i  self-respect  which 
is  simply  a  manifesting  one's  impudence.     But  the  courtesy  had  no  weakness  in 
it.     Where  grace  salts  courage,  the  courage  is  not  noisy  or  dogged  or  defiant,  but' 
marked  by  a  quiet  courtesy  in  the  very  repose  of  conscious  power.     2.  Prudence. 
The  deed  was  "  good,"  and  Peter  reminds  them  of  it.     It  is  well-doing  they  are  to 
be  examined  about,  not  evil-doing.     Peter  first  turns  attention  from  the  meihod  to 
the  thing.     The  work  itself  could  challenge  only  gratitude  and  joy.     Of  itself  it 
could  provoke  no  opposition.     One  would  think  the  healing  of  a  lifelong  cripple  to 
be  a  matter  about  which  there  could  be  no  two  opinions.     How  can  a  corrupt  tree 
bring  forth  such  good  fruit?     He  made  the  most  of  his  circumstances.     So  will  the 
highest  courage  always.     While  scorning  compromise  of  principle,  it  presses  into 
service  every  alleviating  circumstance.     It  does  not  court  a  tilt  or  invite  a  conflict. 
3.  Frankness.     The  council  demanded  by  what  authority  or  name  they  had  done 
this.     They  got  for  instant  answer,  "By  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth." 
Here  Peter  might  have  stopped.     This  was  the  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth. 
But  this  was  not  the  truth  that  put  Peter  in  bonds.     He  knew  he  was  a  prisoner 
because  of  some  other  word  that  he  had  been  bold  enough  to  speak  in  the  presence 
of  the  people,  and  in  the  frankness  of  righteous  boldness  that  word  must  be  spoken 
now  in  the  presence  of  the  court.     "  Whom  ye  crucified,"  for  this  had  stirred  the 
priests  against  him  ;  and,  "  whom  God  raised  from  the  dead  "  ;  for  this  had  stirred 
the  Sadducees  against  him  (vers.  1,  2).     This  is  simply  another  Daniel  (see  Dan. 
vi.  10).     It  was  not  necessary  to  pray  with  "  his  windows  open  "  ;  but,  having  been 
open  when  he  prayed  in  security,  they  must  not  be  shut  when  the  king's  decree 
threatens  with  a  den  of  lions  any  man  that  prays.     Christian  courage  will  wear  no 
masks.     The  temptation  to  be  compromisingly  politic  at  the  point  of  real  danger  is 
most  plausibly  insidious  and  subtle,  and  a  brave  spirit  gets  here  its  sorest  test.  The 
man  of  real  Christian  courage  will  die  rather  than  be  sheltered  behind  a  truth  with- 
held.    4.  Fidelity.     Peter  had  fully  stated  the  facts.     But  here  was  a  rare  oppor- 
tunity to  bring  out  also  the  meaning  of  the  facts.     Peter  might  never  get  such  a 
hearing  again.   So  he  makes  the  rejected  Christ  the  glorious  and  chief  corner-stone 
in  Zion  (Psa.  cxviii.  22 ;  Eph.  ii.  20).     These  trusters  in  Abraham  and  good  works 
are  thus  told  that  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby 
they  must  be  saved.     This  was  the  top  and  crown  of  Christian  courage.     It  was 
transforming  the  prisoner's  bar  into  a  pulpit.     This  is  another  John  the  Baptist 
ready  to  lose  his  head  rather  than  fail  to  testify  that  his  hearers  are  wrong.     A 
brave  soul  will  preach  the  gospel  as  fearlessly  to  the  Sanhedrim  as  to  a  mais-meet- 
ing.     Opportunity  is  obligation.     IV.  Its  effects.     "  They  marvelled."     The  first 
effect  was  profound  surprise.     Then  they  came  to  recognise  them  as  men  they  had 
seen  before  in  the  company  of  Jesus.     And  beholding  the  cripple,  a  healed  and 
living  witness  to  the  truth,  "they  had  nothing  to  speak  against."     They  were 
silenced  completely,  just  as  Jesus  had  said  they  would  be  (Luke  xxi.  15).     So  now 
— 1.  Men  wonder  first  at  the  boldness.     They  see  nothing  behind  it,  nothing  to 
support  it — no   arms,  government,  material  resource — and  they  are  astounded. 
The  world  knows  not  its  secret.     The  natural  man  has  not  entered  into  its  hiding- 
place.     2.  Then  they  have  nothing  to  speak  against.      Christian  courage  has  a 
wonderful  way  of  disarming  opposition.     Opposition  may  still  rage,  as  it  did  here, 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  355 

but  it  has  no  case,  as  it  had  not  here.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  Spirit  of  God  can  make 
the  weakest  saint  bold.  2.  We  can  afford  to  trust  Christ.  3.  Truth  wiU  some- 
times smite  to  silence  when  it  does  not  smite  to  heal.  {Herrick  Johnson,  D.D.) 
Christ  the  power  of  God : — I.  In  times  of  trouble  and  peksecution  (vers.  1-4) 
adding  all  the  more  to  the  Church.  II.  In  giving  aid  to  His  disciples  (vers. 
5-8).  Fulfilling  the  promise  to  Peter  of  courage  and  right  words.  III.  In  the 
s.UiVATioN  OP  MEN  (veis.  9-12).  The  only  name  by  which  men  can  be  saved  is 
His.  IV.  In  changing  chaeactek  (vers.  13,  14).  Making  His  disciples  like  Him- 
self. (Christian  Age.)  The  miracle  at  the  Beautiful  gate  as  an  epoch : — Peter's 
discourse  delivered  on  this  text  woke  impulses  and  started  efforts  both  amongst 
the  adherents  and  opponents  of  the  true  religion  that  introduced  a  new  order  of 
things.  Notice — I.  A  new  impulse  to  the  wobld's  antagonism  to  Christianity. 
Observe — 1.  The  representatives  of  this  antagonism  —  the  world  against  the 
Church,  the  defenders  of  the  false  in  theory  and  the  corrupt  in  practice. 
Religion,  "the  priests";  politics,  "the  captain  of  the  temple";  scepticism, 
"  the  Sadducees  "  conspired  to  crush  the  young  Church.  The  hostile  sections  of  a 
wicked  world  are  ever  ready  to  merge  their  differences  in  an  attack  on  the  Divinely 
pure  and  good.  Pilate  and  Herod  became  friends  on  a  similar  occasion.  2.  The 
reason  of  this  antagonism.  The  priests  were  "  grieved "  because  the  apostles 
arrogated  their  teaching  office ;  the  captain  because  social  tranquility  was  disturbed  ; 
the  Sadducees  because  the  resurrection  was  proclaimed.  Wicked  men  hate  truth 
for  different  reasons,  and  according  to  their  passions  and  interests.  3.  Its  develop- 
ment. The  persecutors  (1)  Imprisoned  the  apostles.  (2)  Arraigned  them.  (3) 
Threatened  them.  So  the  antagonism  was  strong  in  spirit,  but  futile  in  efforts.  In 
sooth,  all  endeavours  to  crush  truth  are  fruitless  and  self-confounding.  II.  A 
NEW  demonstration  OP  God's  power  in  Christianity.  1.  In  multiplying  its 
adhereuts  (ver.  4).  Though  the  clouds  gather,  the  sun  rises.  The  tides  flow, 
though  the  force  of  the  mightiest  tempest  bears  against  them ;  and  God's  truth 
moves  on  to  universal  empire,  though  earth  and  hell  combine  against  it. 
•'  Howbeit,"  aye,  and  not  only  despite  it,  but  because  of  it.  Persecution  does 
two  things  which  give  an  impulse  to  the  course  of  the  Christian  martyr.  It 
presents  on  the  one  side  such  a  hideous  manifestation  of  evil  as  produces  a  social 
recoil,  and  on  the  other  such  an  exhibition  of  Christian  goodness  as  awakens 
sympathy  and  admiration.  As  the  aromatic  plant  emits  its  sweetest  odours  by 
pressure,  so  Christian  character  gains  charm  by  suffering.  As  the  stars  only  shine 
at  night,  so  the  brightest  virtues  can  only  shine  in  trial.  2.  In  strengthening  its 
advocates.  See  how  they  heroiciilly  expound  their  cause.  (1)  The  miracle  was 
wrought  by  Him  whom  they  had  crucified.  (2)  He  whom  they  had  crucified  had 
become  pre-eminent  in  the  universe.  What  they  had  rejected  God  had  honoured. 
Observe — (a)  That  men  in  their  enterprises  often  reject  the  Divine,  (b)  That 
though  they  reject  the  Divine,  the  Divine  shall  be  honoured  at  last  to  their  con- 
fusion, (c)  That  He  whom  they  had  crucified  was  the  only  One  that  could  save 
them.  3.  In  confounding  its  enemies.  (1)  They  were  astonished,  and  two  things 
would  heighten  the  astonishment,  (a)  The  intellectual  and  social  position  of  the 
men.  Pedants  in  every  age  consider  those  illiterate  who  do  not  know  exactly 
that  branch  of  learning  in  which  they  pride  themselves.  The  Hnguist,  «.<;.,  despises 
the  man  who  does  not  understand  languages,  although  he  may  know  much  better 
the  wonders  of  God's  universe.  So  Peter  and  John  were  not  up  in  Eabbinical 
lore,  but  were  well  acquainted  with  more  important  matters,  (b)  Their  connection 
with  Christ,  the  carpenter's  son,  and  the  crucified  malefactor.  (2)  They  were 
silenced.  Facts  are  stubborn  things.  The  way  to  silence  Christ's  enemies  is  to 
show  them  lame  men  walking.  3.  They  were  perplexed.  They  felt  that  some- 
thing must  be  done,  but  what  they  know  not.  Seventy  of  a  nation's  magnates 
were  confounded  by  two  peasants.  It  is  heaven's  law  that  the  opponents  of  the 
truth  shall  involve  themselves  in  inextricable  bewilderment.  4.  They  were  thwarted 
(vers.  19,  20).  Note  here — (1)  That  the  will  of  God  is  the  imperial  rule  of  life, 
whether  of  monarch  or  slave.  (2)  That  universal  conscience  sanctions  the  supreme 
law.  "  Judge  ye."  (3)  That  gospel  truth,  when  fully  felt,  is  an  irrepressible  force. 
"  We  cannot  but  speak."  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me."  Conclusion.  Mark  the 
difference  in  the  effect  of  Peter's  discourse  and  that  on  Pentecost.  None  seem 
here  to  have  been  pricked  to  the  heart,  although  the  same  truths  were  preached. 
Why  ?  Doubtless  because  of  the  different  character  of  the  audiences.  [D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  The  four  chief  props  of  apologetics  : — Proof  from — 1.  Miracles — 
the  lame  man.  2.  Prophecy  and  Scripture  (ver.  11).  3.  History  (ver.  21).  4^ 
The  heart  and  experience  (ver.  13).     (0.  Smith,  D.D.) 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  it. 

Ver.  2.  They  taught  the  people,  and  preached  throug-h  Jesus  the  resurrection. — 

Apostolic  teaching  : — A  tolerably  full  report  of  two  or  three  of  St.  Peter's  sermons 
is  Riven  us  in  the  Acts,  and  we  may  assume  that  they  are  fair  specimens  of  his 
ordinary  preaching.  A  striking  likeness  runs  through  them.  1.  As  to  stjle  he 
deals  largely  in  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,  and  shows  how  those  quota- 
tions were  fulfilled  in  Christ,  adducing  this  correspondence  as  a  proof  of  Messiah- 
ship.  In  respect  of  matter,  it  may  be  summed  up  in  one  sentence — "  Whom 
ye  have  slain,  but  whom  God  hath  raised  up."  It  was  not  necessary  for  the 
apostles  to  bear  witness  to  His  death,  for  nobody  disputed  the  fact.  But  His 
resurrection  was  not  an  "  open "  triumph.  It  therefore  resolved  itself  into  a 
matter  of  testimony,  which  testimony  formed  the  chief  burden  of  apostolic 
teaching.  Eeading  the  Epistles  we  cannot  help  observing  a  slight  ditfeience  in 
tone.  The  atonement  receives  more  attention,  and  the  doctrinal  significance 
of  the  resurrection  more  than  the  fact.  Addressing  unbelievers  they  dwell  on  the 
simple  facts.  Addressing  believers  they  take  the  bare  facts  for  granted,  and 
expatiate  on  their  doctrinal  significance.  I.  They  taught.  Teaching  consists 
in  (1)  drawing  out  the  mind  and  making  it  work  on  the  object-matter  presented  to 
it ;  (2)  presenting  the  object-matter  to  the  mind,  and  bringing  within  its  ken  the 
proper  materials  of  knowledge.  The  first  is  represented  in  "  education,"  the 
second  in  "instruction."  There  must  be  power  in  the  eye  to  see,  and  there 
must  be  light  outside  the  eye  in  and  on  which  sight  may  exercise  itself.  Eyes 
without  light  are  puiposeless;  light  without  eyes  is  useless;  good  eyes  and  good 
light  are  necessary  to  clear  vision.  1.  Christianity  educates  men  by  teacliing 
them  to  think.  It  leads  out  the  mind,  and  develops  its  dormant  faculties. 
The  masses  of  men  expend  more  thought  upon  religion  than  upon  any  other 
subject.  The  little  thinking  they  do  is  chiefly  in  connection  with  the  religion  of 
Jesus  Christ.  And  it  stimulates  thought  not  only  in  the  vulgar,  but  also  in 
the  learned.  Go  to  the  British  Museum;  four  out  of  every  live  books  there 
discuss  the  problems  of  Christianity.  There  is  a  subtle,  indescribable  quality  in 
Christianity  eminently  calculated  to  provoke  thought.  Just  as  the  rising  of  the 
sun  drives  away  slumber,  the  rays  quietly  but  effectually  tickling  the  drowsy  eye 
into  wakefulness,  so  Christianity  pours  such  a  flood  of  white  radiance  on  the  eyes 
that  it  feels  constrained  to  open  them.  The  presentation  of  Christianity  to  the 
mind  constrains  thought ;  and  in  the  exercise  of  thought  the  world  learns  to 
think.  The  angel  Uriel  came  down  to  Eden  in  search  of  the  devil,  and  noticing  a 
toad  crouching  at  Eve's  ear,  he  touched  it  with  his  mystic  wand  and  up  sprang 
an  angel.  A  fallen  one,  it  is  true,  but  an  angel  still.  Christianity  possesses 
similar  powers  of  transformation.  If  it  only  touch  the  rude,  unlettered  boor,  there 
gradually  will  be  unfolded  a  holy  angel,  glowing  with  enthusiasm  for  all  that  is 
noble  and  divine.  The  foremost  nations  are  those  which  have  come  most  largely 
under  the  influences  of  Christianity.  The  religions  of  the  heathen  are  the  greatest 
obstruction  to  their  progress.  Fhilosophy  taught  the  learned  to  think,  but 
Christianity  aims  at  making  every  man  a  thinker,  and  man,  to  be  a  man,  must 
be  a  thinker.  2.  Christianity  teaches  men  to  know.  That  is  the  meaning  of 
the  word  "instruct" — to  pile  up  in  the  mind  the  proper  materials  of  know- 
ledge. No  amount  of  hard  thinking  answers  its  purpose,  unless  it  leads  to 
knowing.  Now,  Christianity  brings  within  the  sweep  of  our  intellectual  vision 
verities  which  before  lay  inaccessible.  This  confers  a  vast  advantage  on  us  as 
compared  with  the  mighty  minds  which  lay  outside  the  sphere  of  revelation.  The 
philos'iphers  are  renowned  merely  for  their  thinking — indeed,  they  evolved  and 
formulated  the  laws  of  thought  for  all  succeeding  generations.  Nevertheless,  their 
knowledge  was  small  in  quantity  and  poor  in  quality.  They  had  excellent  eyes ; 
still  they  did  not  see  very  far,  and  what  little  they  did  see  was  shrouded  in 
obscurity.  Did  the  fault  lie  with  the  eyes  ?  No  ;  they  lacked  light.  But  this 
much-needed  light  the  gospel  abundantly  supplies.  Our  eyes,  maybe,  are  not 
so  strong  as  theirs ;  but  the  medium  through  which  we  see  is  clearer,  and  the 
objects  have  been  brought  nearer.  3.  Thinking  answers  not  its  paramount  purpose 
except  as  it  leads  to  knowing;  and  Christianity  conjoins  thinking  and  knowing, 
thereby  perfectly  fulfilling  our  idea  of  teaching.  There  is  a  scliool  of  philosophy 
■which  disparages  thinking,  and  runs  down  the  metaphysics  of  the  ancients.  This 
school — sometimes  called  the  Positive,  and  sometimes  the  Utilitarian — judges 
tliought  by  its  material  results.  Christianity  avoids  this  extreme — it  enconrMges 
thinking  more  or  less  for  its  own  sake  ;  the  profoundest  Christian  thinkers  feel 
impelled  by  a  kind  of  natural  instinct  to  grapple  with  the  questions  which  baffled 


cnAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  357 

the  giants  of  ancient  days.    Another  school  swings  to  the  other  extreme,  and 
disparages  knowing.     "  If  God,"  says  Lessing,  "  was  to  hold  Truth  in  one  hand, 
and  Search  after  Truth  in  the  other,  and  offer  me  my  choice,  I  should  with  all 
deference  choose  the    Search   after    Truth    in    preference   to    the   Truth   itself." 
This  is  a  mistake.     To  think  is  well,  but  to  know  is  better.     To  hunt  for  truth  is 
commendable,  but  to  catch  truth  is  more  satisfactory.     The  Greek  philosophers 
hunted   well,   but   it   was   very  little   they   caught.     We   do   not   hunt    so   well, 
nevertheless  we  catch  more.     Our  children  know  more  of  God  and  the  soul  and 
eternity  than  the  most  accomplished  writers  of  classic  times.     Christianity  lays 
more  stress  on  thinking   than  the  Positivists ;    it  lays  more  stress  on   knowing 
than   the  Transcendentalists  ;    and  thus  it  is  the  reconciliation  of  the  opposite 
schools  of  philosophy.     If.  They  taught  the  people.     There  are  two  stages   in 
religion.     1.  The  first  is  that  in  which  is  awakened  within  us  reverence  for  the 
High — worship  of  that  which  is  above  us.     The  first  essential  in  the  education  of 
the  race  as  of  the  individual,  is  to  cultivate  this  sense,  and  this  the  religion  of  the 
Old  Testament  was  eminently  calculated  to  do.     God  is  seldom  mentioned,  but 
some  sublime  epithet  is  appended.     The  religions  of  nature  served  to  engender 
fear ;  but  a  religion  of  revelation  was  necessary  to  engender  reverence.     2.  But 
Christianity  marks  a  second  stage — it  teaches  us  also  to  reverence  that  which  is 
under  us ;  not  only  to  worship  God,  but  to  compassionate  and  succour  the  great 
masses  of  men.     In  Plato's  Kepublic  Ihe  population  is  divided  into  the  philosophers 
who  govern,  the  soldiers  who  tight,  and  the  people  who  serve  ;  and  the  people  are 
immured  in  slavery  the  most  abject  and  helpless.     Plato  never  entertained  the 
idea  that  the  vast  bulk  of  mankind  are  capable  of  being  enlightened,  elevated, 
made  pure  and  wise.     But  Jesus  Christ  cherished  a  larger  hope  of  the  human  race, 
the  "common  people  heard  Him  gladly."     John  the  Baptist  sent  to  ask  Him  the 
evidences  of  His  Messiahship.     "The  blind  receive  their  sight,"  &c.,  replied  He, 
and,  as  the  crowning  proof,  "  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them." 
The  Saviour  adduces  this  as  a  more  convincing  evidence  than  even  His  miracles. 
It  was  easier  to  suspend  the  laws  of  nature  than  reverse  the  usages  of  society. 
3.  But   Christianity  cultivates   reverence    for    the   high    and   reverence    for    the 
low.     Did   it  teach  the  first   only,  it    would  establish  gigantic  despotisms,  and 
authority  would  crush   out   freedom.     Did   it  teach  the   second   only,   it  would 
establish  anarchy,  and  freedom  would   destroy   all   authority.      But   laying   due 
emphasis  on  both,  it  serves  as  the  mainstay  of  authority,  and  the  sure  guarantee 
of  liberty.     To  the  subjects  it  says — Submit  yourselves  to  those  who  are  above 
you.     To  the  rulers  it  says — Respect  the  liberty  of  those  who  are  under  you. 
And  thus  touching  the  two  extremes  of  government  and  filUng  all  the  space  between, 
it  is  the  very  religion  which  covers  all  the  world's  wants.     III.  They  taught  the 
people    and  preached    through  Jesos   the    resurrection    from   the    dead.     1. 
They  preached  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  by  the  example  of  Jesus.     "  This  Jesus 
hath  God  raised  up,  whereof  we  are  all  witnesses."     They  preached  it.     They  did 
not  argue  and  weigh  probabilities.     The  sages  hnd  thought  and  argued  much,  but 
left  the  subject   in   a   state   of   chaotic  uncertainty.     What  professes   to   be   an 
historical  fact  must  be  judged  by  historical  evidence,  and  the  evidence  the  apostles 
brought  forward  was  the  undoubted  witness  of  their  bodily  senses.     We  require  no 
theories  to  confirm  or  confute  that.     But  the  Rationalists  reply,  "  The  evidence 
would  suffice  to  establish  beyond  controversy  any  event  in  the  history  of  Greece  or 
Rome  ;  but  no  amount  of  evidence  can  serve  to  establish  the  miraculous."     That 
indeed  is  theorising  with  a  vengeance  1     But  you  will  notice  that  such  reasoning 
shifts  the  ground  of  the  argument  from  the  realm  of  history  to  the  province  of 
science.     Again  we  must  remind  sceptics  that  the  resurrestion  of  the  Saviour  is 
primarily  an   historical   question.     No   amount   of    evidence    can    establish    the 
miraculous !     Then  did  they  see  miracles  with  their  own  eyes,  still  they  would 
not  believe.     But  any  candid  inquirer  can  see  that  such  reasoning  is  not  reason, 
but   unbelief.     "  The  man  who   denies   that   God  can   perform   miracles,"   says 
Rousseau,  himself  not  on  terms  of  amity  with  the  Chri>tian  religion,  "  is  not  fit 
to  be  reasoned  with — he  should  be  sent  to  the  lock-up."     2.  They  preached  the 
doctrine  of   the  resurrection.     Christianity  is  first  a  religion  of  facts  ;  and  out  of 
the  facts  grow  the  doctrines.     First  the  Gospels,  next  the  Epistles.     First  the 
foundation  in  history,  next  the  development  in  doctrine.     Jesus  Christ  is  risen 
from  the  dead.     What,  then,  is  the  legitimate  conclusion  ?     That  there  is  life  after 
death.      .S.    "  Preaching    through   Jesus   the   resurrection   from   the   dead,"    the 
apostles'  doctrine  was  much  in  advance  of  the  highest  Gentile  teachiijg.     Philo- 


•358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

sophy  unceasingly  returned  to  this  fascinating  problem  ;  but  its  utterances  were 
vague,  wavering,  and  contradictory.  Is  the  soul  of  man  immortal  ?  Ages  passed 
before  the  human  mind  was  sufficiently  educated  to  launch  the  question,  and  then 
philosophy  could  not  return  a  decisive  answer- — it  could  only  hope.  Will  the  body 
survive  death  ?  Ancient  speculation  did  not  concern  itself  about  this.  Christianity 
has  raised  the  masses  of  men  to  a  loftier  altitude  of  knowledge  than  the  sublimest 
philosophers  of  the  old  world  ever  achieved,  notwithstanding  their  strenuous  life-  , 
long  efforts.  4.  Their  teaching  is  also  much  in  advance  of  Judaism.  Is  man 
immortal  ?  Verv  little  is  said  on  the  matter  in  the  books  of  Moses.  No  doubt  it  is 
implied,  for  Christ  perceived  it  and  beautifully  evolved  it  in  His  conversation  with 
the  Sadducees  ;  and  we,  reading  the  Pentateuch  under  the  light  of  the  gospel,  can 
perceive  in  it  certain  other  passages.  As  you  come  on  to  the  Psalms  the  conscious- 
ness of  immortality  becomes  more  definite  ;  Sheol  becomes  an  important  word  in  the 
writings  of  David  and  the  Prophets.  But  still,  when  the  Saviour  appeared,  Jewish 
opinion  was  divided  as  to  the  precise  teaching  of  Judaism.  (J".  Cynddylan 
Jones,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3,4.  And  they  laid  hands  upon  them.  .  .  .  Howbelt  many  of  them  which 
heard  the  Woid  oelieved. — The  impotence  and  benefit  of  persecution: — 1.  Peter 
had  boasted,  "1  am  ready  to  go  with  Thee  to  prison."  He  was  not  ready  then,  Hnd 
hence  the  folly  of  his  boast.  He  was  ready  now,  and  so  did  not  boast,  but  doubtless , 
reflected  on  his  Master's  words,  "  Thou  shalt  follow  Me  afterwards."  2.  The  time- 
honoured  method  of  the  opponents  of  truth  was  here  practised,  "  No  case  ;  abuse 
defendant's  attorney."  You  can't  refute  the  preacher ;  lock  him  up.  The  only 
answer  that  pagan  Eome  had  for  Christians  was  prison  and  death  ;  the  only  answer 
that  papal  Rome  has  is  the  same.  3.  But  the  policy  does  not  answer.  The  preachers 
as  cheerfully  accept  the  prison  as  the  pulpit  when  their  Master  bids  tbem,  and  may 
take  as  theirs  the  crest— an  ox  with  the  plough  on  one  side  and  the  altar  on  the 
other,  with  the  legend,  "  Eeady  for  either."  Eeady  for  work  or  for  sacrifide.  Nor 
does  the  policy  answer  in  another  seui-e.  You  may  silence  the  teacher,  but  you 
cannot  silence  the  truth.  In  the  case  before  us  "  many  believed."  I.  In  spite  of 
the  apostles'  imprisonment.  God's  work  goes  on  wh^ther  His  agents  are  bound  or 
free,  living  or  dead.  It  is  independent  of  its  best  and  worthiest  supporters.  Peter 
and  John  are  in  piison,  but  the  fact  that  many  believed  shows  that  even  the  chief 
among  the  apostles  are  notindispensalJe.  How  foolish,  then,  the  unbeli>3ving  anxiety 
expressed  in  the  question  about  this  or  that  distinguished  minister,  "  Who  can  take 
his  place  ?  "  Plenty,  if  God  wills  ;  if  not  the  Holy  Ghost  will  take  his  place.  1. 
The  preacher  is  imprisoned  or  dead,  but  the  Word  which  does  the  work  is  not. 
Fragments  of  the  Bible  left  behind  by  the  missionaries  in  Madagascar  did  more  for 
Christianity  than  their  vocal  teaching.  2.  The  preacher  is  imprisoned  or  dead,  but 
his  teaching  and  example  are  not.  They  remain  in  the  memory  to  influence  the 
life.  The  stone  sinks  in  the  water,  but  the  ripples  on  the  lake  extend  till  they  reach 
either  shore.  II.  Because  of  the  apostle-.'  imprisonment.  Their  endurance  of 
persecution  for  the  truth  was  a  guarantee  of  their  sincerit.v,  and  an  exhibition  of 
the  power  of  the  gospel  on  themselves.  It  is  an  easy  thing  to  preach  when  Christi- 
anity is  popular,  but  when  unpopular,  and  when  men  notwithstanding  are  prepared 
to  endure  bonds  or  death  rather  than  be  silent  about  it — this  shows  that  they  believe 
in  and  enjoy  the  mighty  power  they  preach.  So  in  the  milder  forms  of  afiQiction. 
How  many  powerful  semions  are  silently  preaohed  from  sick  beds  1  {J.  W.  Burn.) 
Persecution  a  stimulus : — A  certain  amount  of  persecution  rouses  a  man's  defiance, 
Btiis  his  blood  for  magnificent  battle,  and  makes  him  fifty  times  more  a  man  than 
he  would  have  been  without  the  persecution.  So  it  was  with  the  great  reformer 
when  he  said,  "I  will  not  be  put  down;  I  will  be  heard."  And  so  it  was 
with  Millard,  the  preacher,  in  the  time  of  Louis  XI.  When  Louis  XL  sent 
word  to  him  that  unless  he  stopped  preaching  in  that  style  he  would  throw 
him  into  the  river,  he  replied,  "  Tell  the  king  that  I  will  reach  heaven  s-ioner 
by  water  than  he  will  reach  it  by  fast  horses."  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 
Persecution  for  well-doing : — Sad,  th[.t  so  good  news  should  find  so  bad  entertain- 
ment !  but  happy  for  some,  that  as  it  was  raised  for  so  good  a  Word  (Matt.  xiii. 
21),  (0  occasioned  by  so  good  a  deed  done  to  an  impotent  man.  Such  may  ever 
our  sufferings  be,  that  if  a  black  shadow  must  needs  follow  us,  it  may  be  only 
because  we  walk  in  the  light ;  and  that  if  it  prove  our  lot  to  hear  and  fare  ill,  it 
may  be  for  doing  well  (1  Pet.  iii.  17,  iv.  l(j ;  John  x.  82).  (A.  Tuckncy,  D.D.) 
IKtcr  and  John  before  the  council: — I.  The  akuest  was  brought  about — 1.  While 


OHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  359 

iihe  service  was  being  held  (ver.  1).  The  devil  has  a  keen  aversion  to  the  proclaim- 
ing of  the  gospel,  and  will  stop  it  if  he  can.  2.  By  ecclesiastical  officials.  In 
proportion  as  Chrift  is  exalted,  the  Jewish  idea  of  an  official  priesthood  must  lose 
its  hold  upon  the  minds  of  men.  3.  By  men  who  felt  deeply — "  grieved."  The 
preaching  of  the  gospel  causes  heaven  to  rejoice,  and  it  brings  joy  to  those  who 
jreceive  it,  but  these  men  were  grieved  because  of  it.  How  thorougbly  even 
reh'gious  men  may  be  out  of  touch  with  sympathies  that  emanate  from  God  ! 
What  a  pity  there  should  be  so  much  deep  feeling  wrongly  directed  1  There  has 
been  quite  a  Niagara  of  human  emotion,  which,  during  the  Christian  ages,  has 
spent  itself  in  vain  in  dashing  against  the  impregnable  rock  of  Christian  verities. 
II.  The  detention.  The  apostles  had  started  out  to  visit  the  temple  at  the  hour 
■of  the  evening  sacrifice,  but  as  that  evening  closed  they  themselves  offered  a  sacri- 
fice with  which  the  Lord  would  he  well  pleased.  The  bars  and  bolts  of  the  string 
■door  might  keep  them  in,  but  they  could  not  keep  Jesus  out.  Even  on  earth 
suffering  saints  have  often  found  what  Thomas  Cooper  caUs  "  the  paradise  of 
martyrs."  III.  The  tkial.  1.  Christ  was  honoured.  2.  There  was  a  word  for 
the  rulers.  3.  There  was  a  word  for  everybody.  IV.  The  result.  1.  The  rulers 
were  impressed.  2.  The  apostles  were  thieatened.  3.  The  apostlts  were  released. 
4.  God  was  glorified.  To  Peter  and  John  this  would  be  an  all-sullicient  recom- 
pense,    (if.  Thome.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  that  their  rulers  .  .  .  were 
gathered  together. —  The  Sanhedrin  in  the  time  of  the  apostles  : — 1.  Of  all  the  ancient 
Jewish  institutions  there  is  none  which  is  of  greater  interest  than  that  of  the  San- 
hedrin.    Though  the  name  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  Authorised  Version,  yet  it 
occurs  in  the  original  no  less  than  twenty-two  times  in  the  Gospels  and  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  where  it  is  uniformly,  but  inadequately,  represented  by  the  expression 
"  council."     2.  There  were  two  kinds  of  Sanhedrins.     I.  The  Great  or  ISupreme 
.Sanhedrin  consisted  of  seventy  members  and  a  president.     Hence  it  is  sometimes 
spoken  of  as  the  Sanhedrin  of  seventy-one  members,  and  sometimes  as  the  Sanhe- 
drin of  seventy,  exclusive  of  this  patriarch.     To  understand  the  constituencies  from 
which  these  were  chosen,  it  is  necessary  to  remark  that  from  time  immemorial  the 
Jewish  commonwealth  was  divided  into  the  three  following  classes  :  First,  the 
priests.     These,  by  virtue  of  their  being  descendants  of  Aaron,  were  the  ministers 
of  the  sanctuary,  and  enjoyed  certain  privih  ges  arising  from  the  services  they 
reudered  in  the  private  life  of  the  laity.     Second,  the  Israelites — the  people  at  large 
who  were  distinguished  by  their  piinces  or  chiefs  of  the  several  tribes,  and  by  the 
heads  of  the  families  called  "  the  elders  of  the  people,"  or,  simply,  "the  elders,"  or 
"  rulers,"  because  they  managed  the  affairs  of  their  respec*;ive  clans.     The  third 
■class  consisted  of  the  literary  laity,  the  custodians  and  transcribers  of  the  Sacred 
Text,  hence  called  the  "  law^  ers,"  or  the  "  scribes."     The  first  class  was  represented 
in  the  Sanhe-J'rin  by  its  four-and-twenty  chiefs,  "  the  chief  priests."     The  second 
class  were  represented  by  their  four-and-twenty  elders,  whilst  the  scribes  had  two- 
And-twenty  members.      1.  To  belong  to  one  of  these  three  classes  was  simply  a 
preliminary  necessity,  but  it  was  also  necessary  to  be  of  unblemished  moral  reputa- 
tion, and  without  any  physical  blemish.     Blindness  of  one  eye,  or  even  squinting, 
•or  lameness  of  one  foot,  or  even  repulsive  appearance,  was  a  disqualification.     The 
applicant  had  to  be  the  legitimate  offspring  of  Jewish  parents,  in  the  prime  of  hfe, 
and  wealthy.     One  who  played  dice,  lent  mon^y  on  Usury,  or  flew  pigeons  to  entice 
others,  was  disqualified.     He  had  to  be  a  father  of  a  family,  so  as  to  be  able  to 
■sympathise  with  domestic  affairs.     He  had  to  be  learned  m  the  Divine  law  and 
secular  knowledge,  and  foreign  languages,  so  that  the  Sanhedrin  might  not  be 
dependent  upon  an  interpreter.     He  was,  moreover,  required  to  have  been  a  judge 
in  his  native  town,  and  to  have  been  promoted  thence  to  the  Small  Sanhedrin 
which  sat  at  the  entrance  to  the  temple  hall.     2.  The  newly  elected  member  had 
not  to  go  through  any  special  ceremony,  since  the  ordination  which  he  had  received 
from  his  teacher  on  his  appointment  to  a  judgeship  at  his  native  town  was  deemed 
sufficient.     About  thirty  years  before  Christ,  however,  the  power  to  ordain,  which 
had  up  to  that  time  been  vested  in  every  teacher,  was  conferred  upon  Hillel  I.,  the 
president  of  the  Sanhedrin.     With  the  permission  of  this  functionary,  any  member 
■of  this  asi-embly  of  notables,  assisted  hy  two  non-ordained  persons,  pei  formed  this 
ceremony  by  calling  him  Rabbi,  and  by  saying,  "Behold,  thou  art  ordained,  and 
hast  the  authority  to  judge  even  cases  involving  pecuniary  fines."     The  chain  in  the 
succession  of  ordination,  however,  was  broken  during  the  presidency  of  Hillel  II., 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


A.D.  330-365.  3.  In  the  earliest  times  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth  the  seventy-one 
members  elected  the  most  distinguished  of  their  number  as  president,  and  the  next 
in  distinction  as  vice-president.  The  former  was  styled  nasi  (i.e. ,  prince,  patriarch), 
because  he  represented  the  civil  and  religious  interests  of  the  Jewish  nation  before 
the  government  abroad,  and  before  the  different  Jewish  cong^^ gallons  at  home; 
whilst  the  latter  was  called  "the  father  of  the  house  of  judgment,"  because  he  led 
and  controlled  the  discussions  on  disputed  points.  The  only  one  ineligible  for  the 
presidency  was  the  king,  because,  according  to  the  Jewish  law,  subjects  were  not 
allowed  to  contradict  or  differ  from  the  monarch.  Besides  these  two  high  officials, 
there  was  a  referee,  who  examined  the  cases  before  they  were  brought  before  the 
Sanhedrin.  There  were,  moreover,  two  notaries,  and  several  menial  officials  cO' re- 
sponding to  lictnrs,  who  are  alternately  called  in  the  New  Testament  "  servants," 
"officers,"  and  "  ministers  "  (Matt.  v.  25  ;  xxvi.  58  ;  Mark  xiv.  54,  65,  &c.).  4. 
The  Sanhedrin  held  its  sessions  in  the  hall  of  squares  which  was  situated  in  the 
centre  of  the  south  side  of  the  temple  court,  between  the  courts  of  the  priests  and  of 
the  Israelites,  and  had  doors  into  both.  With  the  exception  of  the  Sabbath  and 
festivals,  these  sessions  were  held  every  day,  fmm  the  termination  of  the  daily 
morning  sacrifice  till  the  evening  sacrifice.  On  these  occMsions  the  president  sat 
on  an  elevated  seat ;  on  his  right  sat  the  vice-president,  and  on  his  left  the  referee, 
whilst  the  members  were  seated  on  low  cushions,  with  their  knees  bent  and  crossed 
in  Oriental  fashion  in  a  semicircle,  according  to  their  resj)ective  ages  and  attain- 
ments. They  could  thus  see  each  other,  and  also  be  seen  by  the  president  and ' 
vice-president.  Twenty-three,  or  one-third  of  the  entire  number  of  members, 
formed  a  quorum.  5.  Besides  being  the  depositaries  of  the  legislative  enactments 
which  were  called  forth  by  the  development  of  the  domestic  institutions  and  foreign 
relations  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth,  the  Sanhedrin  had  both  to  interpret  and  to 
administer  the  Divine  law  in  its  ecclesiastical  and  civil  bearings  upon  the  dnily  life 
of  the  community.  All  questions  of  orthodoxy  or  heterodoxy,  morality  and  immor- 
ality, every  pretension  to  prophecy  or  miraculous  gifts,  the  legitimacy  to  perform 
the  duties  of  priesthood,  the  necessity  to  extend  the  precincts  of  the  temple  or  the 
boundaries  of  the  city,  the  desirability  of  going  to  war,  and  even  the  conduct  of  the 
king,  all  these  came  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Sanhedrin.  Though  sitting  at 
Jerusalem,  its  jurisdiction  was  recognised  by  Jews  everywhere,  so  that  their  deci- 
sions secured  unity  of  faith  and  uniformity  of  practice.  6.  In  trials  of  capital 
offences  it  required  a  majority  of  at  least  two  to  condemn,  and  the  verdict  of  guilty 
could  only  be  delivered  the  day  following  the  trial,  to  enable  the  Sanhedrin  carefully 
to  go  over  again  the  whole  evidence.  The  Sanhedrin  who  found  the  verdict  had  to 
fast  all  day,  and  the  criminal  was  executed  the  day  after  the  sentence.  This  leni- 
ency, however,  was  not  extended  to  one  who  gave  himself  out  as  the  Messiah,  or  was 
proved  to  be  a  false  prophet,  or  promulgated  false  doctrines.  The  trial  of  such  an 
offender  was  generally  reserved  for  the  forthcoming  festival,  when  all  the  Israelites 
came  up  to  Jerusalem.  The  accused  was  then  tied  in  the  presence  of  the  pilgrims  ; 
he  was  condemned  and  executed  the  same  day  on  the  festival  (Deut.  xvii.  13).  But 
even  to  such  a  criminal  a  stupefying  beverage  was  mercifully  administered  before 
his  execution,  to  deprive  him  of  consciousness  and  lessen  his  pain.  In  latter  days, 
however,  the  sentence  of  death  passed  by  the  Sanhedrin  had  to  be  confirmed  by  the 
Eoman  procurator.  7.  Whatever  we  may  think  of  Jewish  tradition,  which  affirms 
that  the  Sanhedrin  is  a  Mosaic  institution  based  upon  Exod.  xviii.  24-2(5 ;  Numb, 
xi.  16-24,  still  both  the  several  classes  and  the  number  of  members  which  consti- 
tuted this  assembly  of  notables  are  alluded  to  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptutes  (Jer. 
xxvi.  8,  16  ;  Ezek.  viii.  11,  &c. ;  Ezra  vi.  8;  2  Chion.  xix.  8,  11).  The  chain  of 
presidents,  however,  can  only  be  traced  uninterruptedly  to  circa  170  b.c.  For  about 
a  hundred  and  forty  years  the  members  elected  the  president  from  one  of  their 
midst.  Thirty  years  before  Christ,  however,  the  presidency  of  tlie  Sanhedrin 
became  hereditary  in  the  family  of  Hillel  I.  for  fifteen  generations  ;  that  is,  from 
30  B.C.  to  425  A.D.  8.  To  enable  the  student  to  see  with  which  of  the  Jewish 
patriarchs  the  important  events  in  the  lives  of  Christ,  the  apostles,  and  the  apostolic 
lathers  synchronise,  we  subjoin  a  list  of  these  fifteen  presidents  of  the  Sanhedrin 
with  their  dates  of  office  : 

1.  Hillel  I B.C.  30-A.D.  10 

2.  Simon  I.  b.  Hillel  I a.d.       10-30 

3.  Gamaliel  I.  b.  Simon  I.,  the  teacher  of  St.  Paul     ...  „         30-  50 

4.  Simon  II.  b.  Gamaliel  I.          ...         „         50-  70 


CHAP.  IV.]                                           THE  ACTS.  361 

5.  Gamaliel  II.  b.  Simon  II a.d.       80-116 


6.  Simon  III.  b.  Gamaliel  II. 

7.  Jehudah  I.  the  Holy  b.  Simon  III. 

8.  Gamaliel  III.  b.  Jehudah  I.     ... 

9.  Jehudah  II.  b.  Simon  III. 

10.  Gamaliel  IV.  b.  Jehudah  II.    ... 

11.  Jehudah  III.  b.  Gamaliel  IV. ... 

12.  Hillel  II.  b.  Jehudah  III. 

13.  Gamaliel  V.  b.  HiUel  II. 

14.  Jehndah  IV.  b.  Gamaliel  V.    ... 

15.  Gamahel  VI.  b.  Jehudah  IV.  .„ 


140-168 
163-193 
193-220 
220-270 
270-300 
300-330 
330-365 
365-385 
385-400 
400-425 


From  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  however,  to  the  death  of  the  last  president,  the 
Sanhedrin  held  its  sessions  in  different  cities  of  Palestine.  II.  There  were  also 
Small  Sanhedeins,  consisting  of  twenty-three  members,  who  were  appointed  by  the 
Great  Sanhedrin.  Every  town  or  village  in  Palestine,  which  had  no  less  than  one 
hundred  and  twenty  representative  men,  had  a  smaller  court,  which  held  its  sittings 
on  Mondays  and  Thursdays  in  the  market-place,  or  in  a  room  adjoining  the  syna- 
gogue. There  were  two  such  courts  in  Jerusalem  itself ;  one  sat  at  the  entrance  to 
the  temple  mount,  and  the  other  at  the  entrance  to  the  temple  hall.  With  the 
exception  of  certain  capital  offences  which  belonged  exclusively  to  the  jurisdiction 
of  the  Great  Sanhedrin,  the  Small  Sanhedrin  had  the  power  to  judge  both  civil  and 
criminal  cases,  and  there  was  no  appeal  against  their  decision  to  the  Great  Sanhe- 
drin. It  was  only  when  the  judges  were  divided  in  their  opinion  that  they  them- 
selves consulted  the  Great  Sanhedrin.  In  such  a  case  the  decision  given  by  the 
Bupreme  court  was  absolutely  binding  upon  the  judges  of  the  Small  Sanhedrin.  As 
a  rule,  the  members  of  the  Small  Sanhedrin  were  elected  to  fill  up  the  periodical 
vacancies  in  the  Great  Sanhedrin.     (G.  D.  Ginsburg,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  7-10.  By  what  power,  or  by  what  name,  have  ye  done  this  ? — The  power  in 
apostolic  miracles  : — The  fact  of  the  healing  was  recognised  ;  and  the  logical  conclu- 
sion, that  it  was  a  sign  of  the  presence  and  working  of  some  supernatural  power, 
was  not  shirked  ;  but  the  inquiry  remained,  "  What  is  your  power  and  authority?  " 
The  word  "power"  is  that  used  of  our  Lord's  miracles,  and  translated  "mighty 
works."  The  term  "  name"  here  stands  for  "authority."  This  the  Sanhedrin  a^-ked 
because  they  regarded  themselves  as  the  highest  religious  authority  in  the  land,  and 
they  could  approve  of  nothing  which  had  not  been  submitted  for  their  sanction. 
They  had  to  learn  that  God  never  will  allow  His  grace  to  be  tied  with  official  bonds. 
Moses  gave  the  high  example  of  the  noble  spirit.  "  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's 
people  were  prophets,  and  that  He  would  put  His  Spirit  on  them !  "  We  are  led  to 
consider  the  apostolic  miracles,  and  what  was  thought  of  them.  I.  The  people's 
THOUGHT  OF  THEM.  Miraclcs  excited  the  interest  of  the  "  common  people."  This  is 
true  both  of  our  Lord's  miracles  and  of  those  wrought  by  the  apostles.  The  great 
distinction  between  the  two  series  is  this — our  Lord  permitted  His  miracles  to  witness 
to  Himself ;  but  the  apostles  turned  the  people's  minds  from  themselves.  The 
"  common  people  "  are  more  susceptible  to  the  supernatural  than  the  learned ; 
partly  because  they  are  more  simple,  freer  from  prejudices ;  and  partly  because 
sentiment  and  imagination  are  toned  and  repressed  by  knowledge.  The  simplicity 
of  the  "  common  people  "  has  both  its  good  and  its  bad  side.  They  hardly  knew 
what  to  make  of  St.  Peter's  miracle.  It  was  not  in  their  way  to  think  the  matter 
out.  Enough  for  them  that  it  was  a  sign  of  gracious  power.  They  must  be  good 
men  who  were  the  agents  of  such  good  work ;  and  so  they  were  prepared  to  listen 
with  the  expectation  that  their  word  would  be  as  good  as  their  work.  It  is  a  safe 
principle  that  if  a  man's  works  are  kind  and  good  we  may  expect  kindness  and 
goodness  in  his  words  ;  and  we  may  even  assume  that  there  will  be  truth  in  them. 
Our  Lord  taught  us  that  by  their  works  we  may  judge  our  teachers.  II.  The 
priests'  thought  of  them.  The  priests  stand  for  the  Sadducee  section.  They 
were  not  simple-minded,  and  so  not  prepared  fairly  to  consider  the  apostolic  miracle. 
They  had  taken  up  strong  prejudices  against  our  Lord  which  developed  into  active 
enmity,  and  secured  our  Lord's  death.  Eut  their  gratification  passed  into  intense 
anxiety  when  the  guard  reported,  and  the  disciples  of  the  Crucified  openly  declared 
that  He  was  risen.  If  that  were  true  they  were  convicted  of  the  almost  inconceiv- 
able crime  to  a  Jew,  of  judicially  murdering  the  long-promised  Messiah.  In  their 
straits  they  determined  to  put  a  bold  face  on  the  matter,  and  make  violence  serve 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vf. 

their  end.  Perhaps  they  even  succeeded  in  deluding  themselves  ;  and  when  new3 
came  of  tbis  miracle  of  healing  they  declared  it  must  have  been  wrought  by  some 
malign  power,  some  strange  jugglery;  and  it  was  their  duty  to  deal  with  these  mea 
as  wizards  and  mountebanks.  To  these  prejudiced  priests  the  same  rule  may  be 
applied  as  sufficed  tor  the  people,  and  the  character  and  quality  of  the  apostle's 
woiks  should  be  allowed  to  declare  their  truthfulness,  and  explain  the  source  of 
their  authority.  III.  The  apostles'  thought  of  them  (vers.  9-12).  They  firmly 
declare  that  they  had  wrought  the  miracle  by  Divine  power  entrusted  to  them  ;  and 
that  they  had  exerted  that  power  by  the  authority  of  that  very  Nazaiene  whom  they 
had  crucified,  but  who  was  risen,  and  sending  forth  that  grace  of  which  the  miracle 
of  healing  was  an  outward  sign.  The  apostles  teach  us  to  look  upon  the  miracle — 
and  all  the  cycle  of  apostohc  miracles— as  being  signs  of — 1.  The  Divine  presence : 
the  Lord  was  present  to  heal.  2.  The  Divine  witness,  giving  public  attestation  to 
their  teachings  and  preachings;  and — 3.  The  Divine  work,  which  is  to  recover  men 
from  all  the  ill  and  woes  brought  in  by  sin,  redeeming  them  from  both  sin  and  sin's 
effects.  Conclusion :  Miracles  are  fitting  modes  of  persuasion  only  for  the  unscien- 
tific ages  and  peoples.  They  are  witnesses  to  eye  and  feeling  for  those  who  are 
mainly  influenced  through  the  senses  rather  than  through  the  mind.  Therefore 
the  age  of  miracles  has  ceased  ;  and  the  ever-working  miracle  of  God's  converting 
and  renewing  grace  in  men's  hearts  and  lives  suffices  to  convince  all  open  souls  that 
Jesus  the  Eisen  is  the  One,  only,  all-sufficient  Saviour  still.  {R.  Tuck,  B.  A.)  The 
'pre-eminence  and  power  of  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  : — These  are  mani- 
fest— I.  In  the  necessity  foe  the  gospel,  and  in  its  cokeesponding  nature.  Two 
correlative  words  summarise  the  whole  Bible — sin  and  salvation.  But  our  know- 
ledge of  these  is  not  derived  from  the  same  source.  There  is  a  distinction  between 
what  is  revealed  and  what  is  only  recorded  in  Scripture.  Salvation  is  revealed. 
But  sin  is  only  recorded.  It  was  already  in  the  world,  and  the  consciousness  of  it 
was  inttrwoven  with  human  experience  before  salvation  was  proclaimed  (Rom. 
iii.  20).  The  Scriptures  assume  this  terrible  fact.  All  their  waruings,  invitations, 
and  promises  are  based  upon  it.  All  the  rites  prescribed  in  the  Old  Testament  and 
all  tbe  forms  of  wori^hip  recognised  in  the  New  take  it  for  granted.  It  lies  at  the 
foundation  of  all  prnyer.  The  Scriptures  also  directly  assert  it.  "  All  have  sinned, 
and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  The  most  formal  and  elaborate  argument  of 
the  Bible  (the  Epistle  to  Rome)  sustains  these  assertions.  On  thedaik  background 
of  natural  religion,  by  which  all  men  are  tried  and  found  guilty,  the  glorious  gospel 
shines  resplendent.  Jesus  Christ  is  not  a  light,  but  The  Light  of  the  world,  without 
which  there  is  no  deliverance  from  the  power  of  darkness.  God  has  laid  at  the 
foundation  of  all  revealed  theology,  and  of  all  Christian  effort,  that  Stone  which 
foolish  builders  have  rejected,  and  has  graven  upon  it  this  indelible  inscription, 
"  Ne.ther  is  there  salvation  in  any  other — for  there  is  none  other  name  under 
heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  II.  In  the  Biblical  history 
OF  that  name.  It  is  not  a  mere  collection  of  arbitrary  titles,  but  the  embodiment 
of  the  Divine  nature  and  purpose.  The  Elohim  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ; 
but  Jehovah  Elohim  entered  into  covenant  with  man.  This  new  name  (Exod.  vi.  3) 
runs  through  and  characterises  tbe  Old  Testament  economy,  until  its  last  prophet 
proclaims  the  promise,  "  Jehovah  whom  ye  seek  shall  suddenly  come  to  His  temple  ; 
eveu  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  whom  je  delight  in  "  (Mai.  iii.  1).  The  New 
Testament  revelations  begin  with  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  tbat  closes  the  Old. 
Jesus  ih  the  human  name  of  the  Covenant  Angel.  In  the  synagogue  at  Nazareth 
He  claims  to  be  tbe  Anointed  of  God,  and  from  that  time  His  words  evoke  tbe 
recognition  of  His  nature  and  His  mission.  Andrew  declares,  "We  have  found  the 
Messias,"  and  Philip  confirms  tbe  testimony.  Nathanael  falls  down  before  Him, 
and  says,  "  Rabbi,  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  Thou  art  the  King  of  Israel."  The 
woman  of  Samaria  exclaims,  "  Is  not  this  tbe  Christ  ?  "  Peter  falls  prostrate  at 
His  feet,  crying  out,  "  Depart,  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord  1  "  and  "  No 
man  can  call  Jt  sua  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Now  He  is  not  only  Jesus,  He 
is  Jesus  the  Christ,  and  "Our  Lord  Jesus  Cbrist."  That  name  is  above  every 
name.  It  translates  the  ineffable  name  of  Jehovah  into  human  speech,  and  inter- 
prets it  to  human  hearts.  It  runs  through  and  unifies  all  Scripture.  It  embodies 
tlie  expressed  essence  of  a  thousand  titles,  by  which  all  that  is  glorious  and  amiable 
in  God  and  man,  in  heaven  or  earth,  is  appropriated  to  Him.  III.  In  the  consti- 
tution OF  His  person.  The  Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  is  the  most  stupendous 
fact  in  the  history  of  the  universe.  This  it  is  that  makes  His  name  Wonderful. 
This  is  the  foundation  God  has  laid  in  Zion,  and  calls  upon  men  and  angels  to 


CHAP.  IV.]  TUE  ACTS.  3G3 

behold — the  elect,  tried,  and  precious  stone,  rejected  of  men,  but  made  in  the  Divine 
plan  and  in  human  experience,  the  head  of  the  corner.  And  that  which  demon- 
strates this  stupendous  fact  as  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  is  the  revealed 
purpose  that  Jesus  Christ  should  come  in  the  flesh  to  be  "  the  propitiation  for  our 
sins,  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  Among  the 
human  buUders  there  are  none  whose  speech  is  so  utterly  confounded,  and  whose 
wisdom  is  more  manifestly  taken  in  their  own  craftiness,  than  those  who  undertake 
lo  re-wi'ite  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  to  explain  His  mission,  and  the 
confessed  power  of  His  name,  omitting  the  recognition  of  His  Deity,  and  the  cleans- 
ing power  of  His  atoning  blood.  Eegarded  simply  as  a  man  and  a  teacher.  He  is  a 
bundle  of  conti-adictions.  Tor  while  we  are  not  competent  to  set  limits  to  the 
Almighty,  we  do  know  what  man  can  do ;  and  we  know  that  no  uninspired  and 
deceitful  man  could  have  drawn  this  consistent  portraiture  of  the  incarnate  God. 
It  is  only  when  we  add  to  the  human  name  and  nature  of  Jesus — the  Divine  attri- 
butes and  purposes  of  which  the  angels  sang  when  they  declared  Him  to  be  "  a 
Saviour  who  is  Christ  the  Lord  "  (Luke  ii.  11) — that  we  can  apprehend  the  truth 
and  grace  which  shine  out  in  all  His  recorded  ministry,  or  the  power  with  which 
the  story  of  His  life  comes  home  to  the  universal  heart.     IV.  In  the  offices  thax 

NAME  DESCEIBES,  AND  FOP.  THE  EXECUTION  OF  WHICH  He  IS  QUALIFIED  BY  THE  CONSTITU- 
TION OF  His  wondeeful  person.  1.  He  is  that  Prophet  whose  coming  Moses  pre- 
dicted, and  for  whose  teaching  he  challenged  an  absolute  credence.  His  instruc- 
tions prepare  the  way  for  the  effectual  appUcation  of  His  sacrifice.  2.  This  Prophet 
is  also  the  great  High  Priest,  and  by  the  one  offering  of  Himself  He  has  both  satisfied 
Divine  justice,  and  for  ever  perfected  them  that  are  sanctified.  3.  Moreover,  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  King.  His  royal  power  underhes  and  gives  efficacy  to  His 
prophetic  and  priestly  offices.  4.  These  offices  impart  a  Divine  efficacy  to  the  facts 
of  His  death  and  resurrection.  He  died  as  a  Prophet  and  Martyr,  to  confirm  His 
testimony.  He  died  as  a  King,  to  conquer  death,  and  him  that  hath  the  power  of 
it.  He  died  as  a  Priest,  that  by  His  precious  blood  He  might  redeem  and  purify 
unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people.  V.  In  all  true  preaching  of  the  gosficl.  The 
power  of  God  unto  salvation  resides  in  the  gospel,  i.  e.,  in  the  open  proclamation  of  the 
truthas  it  is  in  Jesus  ;  and  demonstrates  itself  in  them  that  beUeve.  "AH  power,"  says 
the  ascending  Saviour,  "is  given  unto  Me ;  go  ye,  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations."  So 
the  apostles  understood  it,  and  because  they  believed,  therefore  have  they  spoken. 
When  the  Jewish  council  charged  them  to  speak  no  more  to  any  man  in  this  name,  they 
answered,  "  We  cannot  but  speak  the  things  we  have  seen  and  heard."  Wherein  con- 
sisted their  inability  to  keep  silence  ?  Doubtless  they  were  constrained  by  loyalty  to 
Christ.  But  their  loyalty  ran  much  deeper  than  the  external  commandment.  It  was  but 
another  name  for  a  Divine  sympathy  and  oneness  with  Him.  (if.  J.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.) 
If  we  this  day  be  examined  of  the  good  deed. — Giving  the  reason  : — Let  us  see 
that  we  can  give  a  good  reason  for  our  work,  both  to  ourselves  and  also  to  others. 
It  is  well  for  us  again  and  again  to  question  ourselves  as  to  the  real  motives  and, 
as  far  as  we  can  predict  them,  the  probable  results  of  our  actions.  Let  us  see  that 
we  can  give  thoroughly  satisfactory  answers  to  questions  about  whose  real  meaning 
there  can  be  no  possible  doubt.  Questions  such  as  these,  Why  do  I  teach  in  the 
Sunday  school  ?  Why  ought  I  to  teach  ?  What  should  be  the  reason  for  and  the 
object  of  my  instruction  ?  Don't  let  us  be  satisfied  with  merely  general  and  in- 
definite answers,  such  as,  "Because  it  is  right,"  or  "Because  it  i^  known  and 
admitted  to  be  a  good  work."  The  real  answer  should  be  of  this  kind,  "  It  is  most 
important  that  these  children  and  these  young  people  should  have  a  thort  ugh 
knowledge  of  the  life  and  words,  the  example  and  teaching  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  They  should  be  taught  to  seek  for  and  be  guided  by  His  Spirit,  they 
should  be  prepared  for  the  many  temptations  they  will  meet  in  the  world.  The 
conscien'-e  must  be  made  tender  and  able  to  discern  between  good  and  evil.  The 
■will  must  be  strengthened  so  that  they  may  be  able  to  persevere  in  that  course 
of  life  which  they  perceive  and  know  to  be  right.  Moreover,  since  the  conflict 
upon  which  they  will  enter  will  be  of  lifelong  duration,  it  is  most  important  that 
they  should  be  trained  to  live  a  disciplined  life ;  that  they  should  be  taught 
that  the  Church,  besides  being  a  school,  is  also  an  army,  the  members  of  which 
should  lead  disciplined  lives  ;  that  they  should  learn  that  a  means  and  a  method 
and  a  safeguard  is  provided  against  p!1  forms  of  temptation  by  means  of  this 
discipline."  The  district  visitor  should  also  be  able  to  answer  the  same  questions. 
They  must  answer  both  themselves  and  others.  From  the  nature  of  their  work 
they  are  more  likely  lo  be  criticised  than  the  Sunday-school  ttacher;   for   they 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

deal  with  those  of  mature  years,  with  those  who  can  form  an  opinion,  and  who 
are  not  slow  to  detect  and  judge  their  motives.  Let  people  see,  then,  that  our 
object  is  helpfulness.  Teach  them  how  many  are,  by  sad  experience,  proved  to 
be  impotent  to  carry  on  the  struggle  of  life  ;  tell  them  how  we  would  instruct 
them  in  the  laws  of  life,  aud  help  and  strengthen  them  to  live  happier  and 
healthier  lives.  St.  Peter  pointed  to  effects  produced ;  we  must  do  the  same ; 
we  must  show  men  and  women  how  those  who  are  really  obedient  to  the 
teaching  of  Christ  and  the  discipline  of  the  Church  are  more  able  to  fulfil  the 
duty  to  wLich  God  has  called  tbem.  (W.  E.  Chadtvick,  3I.A.)  May  I  never  be 
disposed  to  apologise  for  any  "  good  deed  "  which  I  may  have  wrought  in  the 
name  of  Jesus,  no  mutter  who  may  be  offended  thereby.  May  I  never  be  tempted 
to  give  to  myself  any  glory  for  anything  that  has  been  wrought  through  me  by  the 
Hfily  Gho^t.  May  I  not  be  moved  by  any  regard  for  the  opinions  of  what  is 
called  cultivated  society  or  the  opinions  of  materialistic  scientists  to  attempt  to 
explain  away,  or  explain  on  some  natural  principle,  that  which  has  been  wrought 
by  the  supernatural  grace  of  God,  by  the  power  of  faith  in  Jesus.  May  I  never  be 
ashamed  of  Jesus  because  of  the  opprobrium  thrown  on  Him  by  His  enemies.  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  :  call  Him  so,  bigoted  churchmen ;  call  Hi  ta  so,  powerful  worldlings ;  call 
Him  so,  cultivated  sceptics  ;  but  He  is  Jesus,  and  whether  of  Nazareth,  or  Bethlehem, 
or  Jerusalem,  or  earth,  or  heaven,  faith  in  His  name  has  healed  millions,  and  not  a 
single  soul  has  ever  been  healed  by  faith  in  any  other  name.  (C.  F.  Deems,  LL.D.) 
This  is  the  Stone  which  was  set  at  nought  of  you  builders,  which  is  hecome  the 
Head  of  the  corner. — The  corner  stone  is  the  top  stone  at  an  angle  of  the  building, 
of  great  weight  and  importance  in  their  roofs,  built  of  solid  flat  stones,  to  admit  of 
being  walked  upon.  Christ  as  the  Corner  Stone  united  Jews  and  Gentiles,  as  He 
united  the  two  natures,  the  Godhead  and  the  manhood.  His  own  name  must  have 
helped  to  endear  this  Psalm  to  the  apostle  (1  Pet.  ii.  4-7).  {Bp.  Jacobson.)  Men 
as  moriil  architects: — These  words,  borrowed  from  Psa.  cxviii.  22,  are  also  quoted 
by  all  the  evangelists  except  John,  and  are  applied  to  the  Jewish  leaders  who  pro- 
fessed to  be  the  builders  of  the  temple  of  religion.  All  men  are  builders  in  some 
form  or  another.  Man  is  a  constructive  creature.  Some  are  building  scientific 
systems,  some  mercantile  schemes,  some  social  institutions.  All  are  building  their 
own  character.  The  text  suggests — I.  Man's  great  need  as  a  mokal  builder — a 
foundation  stone.  A  good  foundation  is  essential  to  a  good  building.  1.  Is  it  a 
system  that  man  is  building?  He  must  have  a  foundation  principle  which  will 
give  strength  and  unity  to  all  the  parts.  2.  Is  it  an  institution — social,  political, 
or  ecclesiastical  ?  It  must  be  based  on  some  good  reason.  3.  Is  it  character  ? 
Whatever  a  man's  governiig  disposition,  whether  sensuality,  avarice,  ambition, 
selfishness,  or  benevolence  and  religion,  that  is  the  foundation  of  his  character. 
II.  Man's  great  error  as  a  moral  builder.  Men  reject  the  Divine — 1.  In  their 
system  of  thought.  The  world  teems  with  intellectual  buildings,  some  of  a  grand 
and  imposing  character  ;  but  they  have  no  Divine  truth  for  their  foundation. 
These,  like  houses  on  the  sand,  are  constantly  tumbling  down.  The  ever-swelling 
river  of  history  bears  on  its  bosom  the  wrecks  of  many  such.  2.  In  their  institu- 
tional arrangemeuts.  A  truculent  expediency,  a  false  philanthropy,  a  perverted 
religious  sentiment,  form  the  basis  of  many  political,  social,  and  religious  institu- 
tions. These  cannot  stand  ;  many  have  tumbled  down;  some  are  tumbling  now; 
all  must  go.  3.  In  their  practical  enterprises.  Schemes  of  business  are  launched, 
great  companies  are  built  up,  whose  foundations  are  chicanery  and  fraud,  and 
sooner  or  later  they  fail.  4.  In  their  moral  character.  Man's  character  is  made 
up  of  habits,  habits  aie  made  up  of  acts,  and  acts  start  from  principles  which  lie 
at  the  foundation.  But  the  principles  are  not  Divine.  They  are  selfish,  not 
benevolent;  carnal,  not  spiritual;  atheistic,  not  godly.  All  these  are  "wood, 
hay,  stubble,"  and  cannot  last.  III.  Man's  ultimate  discovery  as  a  moral 
BUILDER.  One  day  he  will  find  the  Divine,  which  he  rejected,  supreme.  1.  This  is 
often  fulfilled  in  the  individual  characters  of  men — in  the  history  of  all  who  have 
been  genuinely  converted.  The  stone  which  they  once  set  at  nought,  through  the 
ren-vating  grace  of  God,  becomes  the  head  of  the  corner.  Christ,  whom  they  once 
despised,  becomes  ther  all  in  all.  2.  This  is  being  gradually  fulfilled  in  the  life 
of  society.  As  the  old  systems,  institutions,  and  enterpri-es  in  society  which  have 
been  founded  on  wrong  principles  totter  and  fall,  society  begins  to  look  out  for  a 
firmer  foundation — for  the  Divine — and  the  rejected  stone  in  many  cases  is  becom- 
ing the  head  of  the  corner.  The  varied  edifices  in  social  life  are  becoming  Diviner 
things.    3.  This  will  be  fully  realised  in  the  final  history  of  the  world.     Christ, 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  3C5 

■whom  the  world  had  rejected,  will  be  the  subject  of  every  thought,  the  spirit  of 
every  system,  the  spring  of  every  activity,  the  sweetness  of  every  pleasure,  the 
glory  of  every  distinction.  He  shall  be  all  in  all.  What  a  terrible  discovery  for 
Christ's  rejecters  !  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  C  hist  the  Head  of  the  Corner: — Christ 
acts  in  a  two-fold  capacity  in  the  building  up  of  human  life.  He  is  the  foundation 
(1  Cor.  iii.  2  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  4-7) ;  and  the  stone  which  crowns  the  edifice  and  gives  it 
completeness,  unity,  and  strength.  He  is  thus  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  first  and 
the  last.  The  text  sets  forth  Christ  in  the  latter  of  these  two  capacities.  Man 
without  Christ  is  incomplete,  disorganised,  and  weak;  in  Him  he  bas  perfection, 
oneness,  and  power.  We  see  this — I.  In  the  histoky  of  the  races.  Before 
Christ  came  humanity  lacked  its  full  development.  Never  before  the  Advent  was 
there  an  exhibition  even  in  the  ideal  of  what  man  could  be.  Just  as  man  was  the 
crown  and  perfection  of  God's  handiwork  in  creation,  so  is  Cbrist  tbe  crown  and 
perfection  of  man.  And  wherever  Christ  is  not  accepted  and  placed  in  His  true 
position,  the  fatal  flaw  of  incompleteness  is  apparent.  Note,  too,  the  disintegration 
of  humanity  before  Christ  came,  and  where  Christ's  supremacy  is  not  recognised. 
"  One  is  your  Master,"  etc.,  is  the  secret  of  the  unity  of  mankind.  WeHkness,  too, 
is  stamped  upon  all  ancient  nationalities,  in  spite  of  high  civilisation  and  bloated 
armaments,  "part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay."  Hence  their  non-survival.  Internal 
weakness,  prophetic  of  sure  decay,  is  the  fate  of  every  nation  that  rejects  tbe  Head 
of  the  Corner.  II.  In  the  experience  of  the  individual.  These  principles  hold 
good  of  man's — 1.  Intellectual  life.  Ancient  and  modern  antichristian  philosophy 
were  and  are  defective,  lacked  coherence,  had  and  have  no  power  to  quicken.  The 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  alone  can  survive,  because  it  has  in  it  all  that  man  needs  to 
know,  appeals  to  all  his  faculties,  reason,  imagination,  &c.,  and  thoroughly  satisfies 
the  mind.  Then  it  is  a  complete  and  well-rounded  unity,  and  by  accepting  it  man's 
intellectual  nature  becomes  at  one  with  itself  and  with  the  o'her  faculties.  And 
finally  the  words  of  Jesus  "  are  spirit  and  are  life."  2.  Moral  life.  "  One  thing 
thou  lackest  "  is  the  allegation  against  all  systems  and  m^n  out  of  Christ,  and  how 
true  Rom.  viii.  is  of  all  the  unregenerate  1  "  Dead  in  trespasi=es  and  sins  "  completes 
the  f^ital  cat'  gory.  3.  Business  life.  The  fatal  lack  here  is  that  of  the  ennoblmg 
motive,  "Do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  Men  are  "distracted"  because  of  the 
want  of  a  cohering  commercial  principle  such  as  "  Ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ  "  would 
supply.  And  all  enterprises  are  impotent  to  do  more  than  supply  man's  physical 
needs  which  are  not  animated  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ.     III.  In  the  government  of 

THE    FAMILY.       (J.    W.  Bum.) 

Ver.  12.  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other. — Salvation  in  none  other. 
This  is  — 1.  The  substance  of  every  apostolic  announcement.  2.  The  experience 
of  every  pardoned  sinner.  3.  The  strength  of  every  courageous  confession.  4. 
The  foundation  of  all  missionary  preaching  of  the  Church.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.) 
Salvation  in  Christ  alone: — I.  Salvation  is  a  subject  of  world-wide  interest,  for  all 
need  it.  1.  The  infant  at  birth  needs  salvation,  and  unless  kindly  hands  "  save  " 
it,  and  minister  to  its  necessities,  it  must  perish.  Through  childhood  the  saving 
interposition  of  others  is  needed.  Even  in  manhood  there  is  constant  exposure  to 
dangers,  salvation  from  which  is  required.  In  age,  sickness,  and  sorrow,  how  great 
is  the  need  of  temporal  succour  and  salvation  1  2.  The  unhappy  fall  of  our  fiist 
parents  has  involved  all  their  descendants  in  ruin.  By  it  the  human  race  has  been 
brought  into  imminent  peril  (Rom.  iii.  10,  23  ;  Ezek.  xviii.  4).  Nor  is  the  danger 
of  sinners  the  less  real  because  they  are  ignorant  of  it,  or  affect  to  make  light  of 
it.  See  to  it  that  you  neglect  not  so  great  salvation.  To  give  prior  consideration 
to  any  farthly  consideration,  however  pressing,  is  a  terrible  mistake.  II.  Salvation 
IN  Christ.  1.  With  the  general  outlines  of  the  plan  of  salvation  in  Christ  we  are 
all  happily  familiar.  We  know  how  the  Divine  pity  was  extended  to  man  in  his 
fallen  estate  (Job  xxxiii.  24).  Christ  undeitook  our  cause,  and  purchased  our 
salvation  by  His  d^ath  (Isa.  liii.  5  ;  Rom.  v.  6,  8  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24,  iii.  18).  Now,  since 
Christ  was  really  God,  His  sufferings  had  an  infinite  value,  and  His  life  might  well 
be  regarded  a^^  more  than  an  equivalent  for  the  life  of  guilty  man ;  and  since  He 
was  perfectly  man,  it  was  both  possible  and  propf^r  for  Him  to  take  man's  plac, 
endure  his  punishment,  and  procure  his  salvation,  so  that  God  can  be,  and  is, 
"  just,  and  the  jnstifier  of  him  which  believeth  in  Jesus"  (Rom.  iii.  26).  2.  The 
conditions  on  which  this  salvation  is  bestowed  are  also  familiar,  viz.,  repentance 
and  faith  (chap.  xx.  21).  Compliance  with  these  conditions  is  necessary.  Nor  can 
you  justly  complain  of  this.     The  seaman,  provided  with  chart  and  compass,  and 


3G6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

instructions  as  to  their  use,  who  refuses  to  follow  his  instructions,  and  perishes, 
has  only  himself  to  blame.  The  man  who  has  taken  poison,  and  refuses  tha 
antidote,  will  have  but  scant  pity.  3.  And  how  much  does  the  expression  "  salva- 
tion in  Christ"  include  ?  (1)  By  it  the  mind  is  brought  in  contact  with  the  entire 
range  of  human  history.  We  are  led  to  think  of  the  fall  of  our  first  parent?,  the 
promise  of  a  Deliverer  in  the  seed  of  the  woman,  the  types  and  shadows  of  the 
patriarchal  and  Mosaic  dispensations,  the  incarnation  of  the  Messiah,  His  atoning 
death.  His  triumphant  resurrection  and  ascension,  the  mission  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  His  representative  and  administrator  until  He  shall  come  again.  His  high-priestly 
intercession  and  mediatorial  reign,  the  coming  judgment  of  quick  and  dead.  (2) 
Nor  are  thoughts  connected  with  the  salvation  of  the  individual  less  full  of  interest. 
Salvation  in  Christ  comprehends  the  first  dawn  of  conviction  of  sin,  the  apprehen- 
sion of  the  plan  of  salvation,  the  exercise  of  repentance  and  faith,  the  joy  of  for- 
giveness, adoption,  and  renewal,  a  life  of  holiness  and  usefulness,  with  its  vicissitudes, 
its  conflicts,  and  its  triumphs,  conquest  of  death,  entrance  into  heaven,  everlasting 
life  in  God's  presence,  where  there  is  fulness  of  joy,  the  light  of  perfect  knowledge, 
the  glow  of  perfect  love,  the  rapture  of  perfect  felicity,  and  all  this  forever.  4.  This 
salvation,  as  it  is  needed  by  all,  is  adapted  to  all.  Of  all  so-called  faiths  the  gospel 
alone  is  equally  suited  to  all  latitudes  and  lives.  Some  religions  can  only  flourish 
in  certain  countries,  just  as  some  kinds  of  food  are  peculiar  to  certain  climates ; 
hut  this  seed  of  the  kingdom  is  like  corn — wherever  man  lives  it  will  grow.  5.  And 
this  greatest  of  all  blessings,  while  adapted  to  all,  is  intenrled  for  all.  It  is  cause 
for  thankfulness  that  the  chief  blessings  even  of  this  world  are  not  the  exclusive 
property  of  the  great  and  wealthy.  And  salvation  may  be  the  portion  of  the  poor 
as  well  as  of  the  rich.  Moreover,  it  may  be  embraced  by  the  illiterate  as  well  as 
by  the  learned.  6.  This  salvation  is  in  the  name  of  Christ.  Amongst  the  Jews  a 
mystic  virtue  was  supposed  to  be  attached  to  certain  names  (chap.xix.  14-lG).  And 
we  rejoice  to  know  that  the  name  of  Jesus  is  still  the  most  potent  of  chavms,  and 
is  invested  with  glorious  mystic  and  saving  properties.  HI.  Salvation  in  Christ 
ALONE.  1.  With  regard  to  the  salvation  of  the  race,  of  no  other  being  except  Christ 
has  it  ever  been  affirmed,  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  " 
(1  John  ii.  2).  Christ,  however,  having  redeemed  all,  claims  the  homage  and  the 
hearts  of  all  (1  Tim.  iv.  10).  2.  As  to  the  salvation  of  the  individual,  this,  too,  is 
to  be  had  in  Christ  alone.  (1)  We  cannot  save  ourselves.  The  poor  pinner  under 
conviction  resolves,  it  may  be,  to  "  turn  over  a  new  leaf,"  but  the  first  thing  he 
does  is  to  make  a  blot  at  the  top  of  the  next  page.  But  even  supposing  he  could 
succeed,  what  would  it  profit  him  while  his  former  sins  still  cried  for  vengeance  ? 
For  a  sinner  to  undertake  to  lead  a  moral  life  henceforward  is  merely  like  a  bank- 
rupt promising  his  creditors  that  for  the  future  he  will  always  pay  cash.  Nor  can 
we  save  ourselves  by  the  merit  of  our  penitence  and  faith.  Impenitence  is  a 
perpetuation  and  aggravation  of  sin  ;  but  penitence  has  in  it  no  atoning  efficacy. 
And  unbelief — the  refusal  to  accept  Christ — is  a  sin  ;  but  faith  is  not  a  meritorious 
act  which  earns  salvation.  (2)  And  as  we  cannot  save  ourselves,  so  also  no  other 
human  being  can  save  us.  We  would  not  undervalue  the  loving  efforts  of  others 
for  our  salvation.  Who  can  tell  how  much  those  of  us  who  are  now  saved  owe  to 
the  examples,  counsels,  prayers,  and  faith  of  pious  parents  and  devoted  friends  ? 
The  conditions  of  salvation  cannot  he  fulfilled  by  proxy.  (3)  Nor  can  any  human 
system  save  us.  (a)  Look  at  the  various  systems  of  heathenism.  How  degrading 
and  demoralising  their  teaching  and  tendency !  (h)  Sometimes  an  impious  priest- 
hood has  professed  to  dispense  salvation  by  external  religious  rites  and  sacramental 
efficacy;  but  such  a  claim  is  mere  blasphemy,  (r)  Philosophy  has  often  made 
proud  pretensions  as  to  the  elevation  and  salvation  of  mankind  ;  but  her  actual 
performances  have  not  been  such  as  to  warrant  boasting.  Education  and  civilisa- 
tion may  do  much  for  man  ;  but  with  regard  to  his  sorest  need  they  are  helpless. 
The  greatest  benefits  which  it  is  in  their  power  to  bestow  may  be  enjoyed,  and 
enjoyed  to  the  full,  by  sinners  whose  end  is  everlasting  destruction.  In  the  great 
work  of  human  redemption  Christ  is  absolutely  alone  (Isa.  Ixiii.  1-3,  xlv.  22  ;  Matt. 
i.  21;  Heb.  vii.  25).  (A.  0.  Smith,  B.A.)  Salvation  by  Christ  alone :— I.  What 
IS  IMPLIED.  That  there  is  salvation  for  us  in  Christ,  we  appeal — 1.  To  the 
typical  representations  of  Christ.  There  were  a  gi'eat  variety  of  sacrifices  under 
the  law  which  typified  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  To  the  positive  declarations  con- 
cerning Him.  Nothing  can  be  conceived  more  clear  and  strong  than  the  Scripture 
declarations  of  Christ's  sufficiency  to  save.  How  forcibly  has  the  prophet  marked 
the  extent  (Isa.  xlv.  22),  the  fulness  (Isa.  i.  18),  and  the  freeness  (Isa.  Iv.  1,  2)  ol 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  367 

His  salvation  !  3.  To  matter  of  fact.  "We  can  draw  aside  the  veil  of  heaven,  and 
point  to  some  before  the  throne  of  God  who  are  such  monuments  of  grace  as  leave 
no  doubt  respecting  the  sufficiency  of  Christ  to  save  any  others  whatsoever.  Let 
us  now  turn  our  attention  to — II.  What  is  expressed.  It  is  of  infinite  importance 
to  every  one  of  us  to  know  that,  as  there  is  salvation  for  us  in  Christ,  so  "  there  is 
no  salvation  in  any  other."  1.  There  is  not.  (1)  In  whom  else  can  we  find  the 
requisites  of  a  Saviour  ?  In  whom  can  we  find  a  sufficiency,  either  of  merit  to 
justify,  or  of  power  to  renew,  a  sinner  ?  If  we  should  apply  to  the  highest  angel 
in  heaven  to  give  us  of  his  merit,  he  would  tell  us  that  "he  himself  is  only  an 
unprofitable  servant ;  for  that  he  does  no  more  than  is  his  duty  to  do  "  (Luke  xvii.  10). 
If  we  should  intreat  him  to  change  our  hearts,  he  would  confess  his  utter  inability 
to  effect  so  great  a  work.  Shall  we  then  look  to  ourselves  ?  We  are  full  of  sin 
(2)  If  there  were  any  other  Saviour,  the  most  eminent  of  God's  servants  would 
have  had  some  intimation  of  it.  Abraham  (Rom.  iv.  3-5) ;  David  would  probably  have 
been  acquainted  with  such  an  important  fact  in  order  to  his  own  salvation  ;  but  he 
sought  refuge  in  none  but  Christ  (Psa.  li.  7).  We  might  hope  at  least  that  some 
information  of  this  kind  would  have  been  given  to  the  Apostle  Paul  (Phil.  iii.  9 ; 
1  Cor.  ii.  2).  2.  There  cannot  be.  We  are  warranted  by  the  Scriptures  to  say 
that,  consistently  with  His  honour,  as  the  Moral  Governor  of  the  universe,  man 
could  not  have  been  saved  without  a  Mediator :  nor  could  any  Mediator  besides 
Jesus  have  been  found  to  execute  aU  that  was  necessary  for  our  salvation.  But 
there  is  yet  another  ground  on  which  we  may  deny  that  any  other  could  save  us, 
namely,  that  if  we  were  indebted  to  any  other,  either  for  righteousness  or  strength, 
we  could  not  join  in  the  songs  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven,  but  must  separate  from 
the  heavenly  choir  (Rev.  vii.  9,  10),  and  ascribe  to  ourselves,  or  to  some  other,  the 
honour  of  our  salvation.  And  how  would  this  comport  with  the  dignity  of  Jehovah, 
who  has  determined  "that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  His  presence  "  ?  Address — 1. 
The  careless.  Wherefore  are  men  so  indifferent  about  their  spiritual  concerns  ? 
Is  it  that  they  are  in  no  danger  of  perishing  ?  Surely  the  very  circumstance  of  / 
Christ  being  sent  down  from  heaven  to  die  for  us  is  enough  to  alarm  all  our  fears,  t 
and  to  convince  us  that,  if  the  salvation  offered  us  could  be  procured  by  none  but  i 
Him,  the  danger  of  those  who  are  not  interested  in  Him  must  be  inexpressibly 
great.  2.  The  self-righteous.  It  is  difficult  to  convince  those  who  are  looking  to 
Christ  in  part  that  they  are  really  renouncing  Christ  altogether.  3.  The  despond-  ' 
ing.  By  nature  and  practice.  Let  none  complain  as  though  they  were  beyond 
the  reach  of  mercy  :  for  there  is  nothing  impossible  with  Jesus  :  "  with  Him  there 
is  mercy  ;  with  Him  is  plenteous  redemption ;  and  He  shall  redeem  Israel  from  all 
his  sins"  (chap.  iii.  16,  iv.  10).  (Theological  Sketch-Book.)  Salvation  only  from 
above : — In  Germany  there  was  a  prison  of  exquisite  beauty ;  its  floors  and  walls 
were  highly  polished ;  it  was  roofless,  and  the  prisoner  could  look  out  upon  the 
beautiful  sky.  A  prisoner  was  placed  therein,  and  for  a  moment  congratulated 
himself  upon  the  polish  and  splendour  of  his  apartments  ;  he  could  freely  breathe 
the  fresh  air  aud  see  the  stars  that  decked  the  brow  of  night,  or  the  sun  that  rose 
in  glory ;  but  after  a  time  he  observed  that  the  walls  were  gradually  approaching 
him,  softly  as  the  fall  of  the  dew  from  the  hand  of  night ;  noiselessly,  as  by  the  force 
of  gravitation,  those  walls  drew  nearer,  inch  by  inch,  and  as  they  came  closer  and 
closer  the  cold  sweat  stood  upon  his  brow,  for  he  saw  that  those  walls  were  soon  to 
embrace  him  in  the  arms  of  death.  There  was  but  one  way  of  escape,  and  that 
was  from  above :  a  friendly  hand  might  possibly  be  put  down,  but  there  was  no 
such  friendly  hand  for  him.  That  represents  the  condition  of  humanity ;  the  walls 
are  approaching,  there  is  but  one  way  of  escape,  and  the  relief  comes  from  above.  . 
The  Son  of  the  Highest  from  His  Father's  throne  is  reaching  down  His  hand  of ' 
power  into  our  dungeon  :  our  hope  is  to  grasp  it,  or  the  walls  of  our  dungeon  will 
crush  us  to  death.  "  There  is  none  other  name  given  under  heaven  whereby  we 
must  be  saved."  {J.  P.  Neieman,  LL.D.)  Salvation  in  Clirist  alone: — "You 
have  been  a  good  child  to  your  parents,"  said  the  venerable  George  III.  to  his 
daughter,  the  Princess  Amelia;  "  we  have  nothing  for  which  to  reproach  you  ;  but 
I  need  not  tell  you  that  it  is  not  of  yourself  alone  that  you  can  be  saved,  and  that 
your  acceptance  with  God  must  depend  on  your  faith  and  trust  in  the  merits  of  the 
Redeemer."  "  I  know  it,"  replied  the  dying  princess,  with  gentle  resignation, 
"  and  I  could  not  wish  for  a  better  trust."  Clirist  the  only  Saviour  : — "  Believe 
a  dying  man,"  said  Dr.  Johnson  in  his  last  days  to  his  physician.  "  There  is  no 
salvation  but  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lamb  of  God."  Christ  the  only  Saviour 
found  out  too  late  : — It  is  not  long  since  that  a  prominent  business  man,  when 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOlt.  [chap.  iv. 

closely  pressed  by  his  pastor,  -who  had  lately  come  to  the  church,  replied  with  a 
calm  force  which  was  meant  to  put  an  end  to  further  pertinacity  :  "  I  am  interested 
in  all  religious  matters  ;  I  am  always  glad  to  see  the  ministers  when  they  call ;  but 
I  have  in  the  years  past  thought  the  subject  over  long  and  carefully,  and  I  have 
come  to  the  decision  deliberately  that  I  have  no  personal  need  of  Jesus  Christ  as  a 
Saviour  in  the  sense  you  preach.''  Only  two  weeks  fronr  this  interview,  the  same 
man  was  suddenly  prostrated  with  disease  ;  the  illness  was  of  such  a  character  as 
to  forbid  his  conversing  with  any  one,  and  the  interdict  from  speaking  was  con- 
tinued until  he  was  within  an  hour  of  death.  A  solemn  moment  was  that  in  which 
a  quection  was  put  to  him,  intimating  he  might  talk  now  if  he  could — nothing 
would  harm  him.  The  last  thing,  and  the  only  thing,  he  said  was  in  a  melancholy 
and  frightened  whisper,  "Who  will  carry  me  over  the  river?"  (C.  S.  Robinson, 
D.D.)  Christ  the  only  Saviour : — A  young  French  nobleman,  a  particular  friend 
of  Napoleon  III.,  becoming  unaccountably  gloomy  in  mind,  and  threatened  with 
insanity,  was  urged  by  the  Emperor  to  apply  for  advice  and  treatment  to  the 
celebrated  Dr.  Forbes  Winslow.  He  came  to  London,  and  the  great  doctor,  after 
careful  questioning,  discovered  the  character  of  his  disease.  He  was  tormented 
with  a  thought — and  the  thought  was  "  Eternity !  where  shall  I  spend  it?"  This 
haunted  him  day  and  night.  Dr.  Winslow  told  him  he  could  not  help  him.  He 
had  sought  in  the  wrong  quarter  for  his  cure.  "  Is  there  no  hope,  then  ! "  exclaimed 
the  nobleman  in  despair.  "  Yes ;  listen  to  me,  and  I  will  tell  you  how  I  whs  helped 
and  healed,"  said  Dr.  Winslow.  "  When  I  was  younger  I  had  your  complaint ;  and 
I  tried  every  resource  but  the  right  one.  At  last  I  carried  my  case  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  in  prayer,  and  He  gave  me  health  and  peace.  Go  thou,  and  do  like- 
wise." The  nobleman  was  astonished,  but  he  stayed  while  the  doctor  read  to 
him  the  portions  of  Scripture  that  had  been  blessed  to  himself,  and  after 
prayer,  light  and  comfort  cume  to  him.  The  new  medicine  had  cured  him. 
Tlie  ivay  of  salvation : — Salvatio"  is  the  total  restoration  of  man  from  his  fallen 
estate;  and  yet  it  is  something  more,  for  God's  salvation  fixes  our  standing  more 
secuie  than  it  was  before  we  fell.  It  first  heals  our  wounds,  removes  our  diseases, 
takes  away  our  cur-e,  puts  our  feet  upon  the  rock  Christ  Jesus,  and  having  thus 
dune,  at  last  it  lifts  our  heads  to  be  crowned  with  the  King  of  heaven.  Some  pe  pie, 
when  they  use  the  word  "salvation,"  understand  nothing  more  by  it  than  deliver- 
ance from  hell  and  admittance  into  heaven.  Now,  that  is  not  salvation  :  th'ise  two 
things  are  the  effects  of  salvation.  We  are  redeemed  from  hell,  and  enter  heaven 
because  we  have  been  saved.  Observe  here — I.  A  negative  fact.  "  Neither  is 
there  salvation  in  any  other."  1.  Did  you  ever  notice  the  intolerance  of  God's 
religion?  In  olden  times  the  heathen  respected  the  gods  of  their  neighbours  :  but 
Jehovah  put  this  as  one  of  His  first  commandments,  "  Thou  shalt  have  none  other 
gods  besides  Me."  The  Christian  religion  is  just  as  intolerant.  The  Brahmin  may 
admit  that  there  is  salvation  in  fifty  religions  besides  his  own  ;  but  we  admit  no  such 
thing.  Tliere  is  no  true  salvation  out  of  Jesus.  2.  Wliat  is  the  reason  of  this  in- 
tolerance ?  (1)  Because  there  is  the  truth  with  the  Jew  and  the  Christian.  A 
thousand  errors  may  live  in  peace  with  one  another,  but  truth  is  the  hammer  that 
breaks  them  in  pieces.  A  hundred  lying  religions  may  sleep  peaceably  in  one  bed, 
but  wherever  the  Christian  religion  goes  as  the  truth,  it  is  like  a  fire-brand.  Truth 
cannot  afford  to  be  yoked  with  error  :  it  gives  to  error  its  due,  declaring  that  it  hath 
no  salvation.  (2)  13ecause  we  have  here  the  sanction  of  God.  It  would  be  im- 
proper in  any  man  who  had  invented  a  creed  of  his  own  to  state  that  all  others 
must  be  damned  who  do  not  believe  it ;  but  since  this  religion  is  revealed  from 
heaven,  God,  who  is  the  author  of  all  truth,  hath  a  right  to  append  to  this  truth 
the  dreadful  condition.  We  are  not  really  intolerant,  for  we  are  but  eclioing  the 
words  of  Him  that  speaketh  from  heaven,  that  there  is  no  salvation  out  of  Him.  3. 
Now  perr-ons  say,  "  Do  you  imagine,  then,  that  none  are  saved  apart  from  Christ  ?  " 
I  reply,  I  don't  imagine  it,  but  I  have  it  here  in  my  text.  "  Well,  but  how  is  it 
concerning  the  death  of  infants?  Are  they  saved?  and  if  so,  how  ?  "  I  answer. 
Saved  they  are  beyond  a  doubt ;  but  m.t  apart  from  the  death  of  Christ.  Another 
eays,  "But  how  «bout  the  heathen?  "  Holy  Scripture  saith  but  very  little  concern- 
ing them  ;  but  there  are  texts  which  lead  us  to  believe  that  there  are  some  who,  led 
by  God's  Spirit,  are  seeking  after  Him  ;  and  it  may  be  that  the  God  of  infinite  mercy 
is  pleased  to  make  to  them  revelations,  so  that  they  may  be  made  partakers  of  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  without  having  such  an  open  vision  as  we  have  received.  But 
this  much  is  certam  :  no  heathen,  however  moral — whether  in  the  days  of  their  old 
philosophy,  or  in  the  present  time  of  their  barbarism — ever  did  or  ever  could  enter 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  3C9 

the  kingdom  of  heaven  apart  from  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  But  it  is  a  great 
deal  better  not  to  talk  upon  speculative  matters,  but  to  come  home  personally  to 
ourselves.  And  let  me  now  ask  you  this  question,  have  you  ever  proved  by  experi- 
ence the  truth  of  this  great  negative  fact  ?  Once  I  thought  there  was  salvation  in 
good  works,  and  I  laboured  hard  to  preserve  a  character  for  integrity  and  upright- 
ness ;  but  when  the  Spirit  of  God  came  into  my  heart,  "  sin  revived  and  I  died  "  ; 
wherein  I  thought  I  had  been  holy  I  found  myself  to  be  unholy.  After  that  I 
thought,  surely  salvation  might  be  obtained,  partly  by  reformation,  and  partly  by 
trusting  in  Christ ;  so  I  laboured  hard  again.  But  after  fagging  on  for  many  a 
weary  day,  like  a  poor  blind  horse  toiling  round  the  mill,  I  found  I  had  got  no 
farther,  for  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  that  are  written 
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  Perhaps  I  have  in  my  presence  some  who  are 
trying  to  gain  salvation  by  ceremonies.  You  have  been  baptized ;  you  take  the 
Lord's  Supper ;  you  attend  church ;  and  if  you  knew  any  other  ceremonies  you 
would  attend  to  them.  As  well  might  you  labour  to  build  your  house  with  water, 
as  to  build  salvation  with  such  poor  things  as  these.  These  are  good  enough  for 
you  when  you  are  saved,  but  if  you  seek  salvation  in  them,  they  shall  be  to  your 
soul  as  wells  without  water,  clouds  without  rain,  and  withered  trees,  twice  dead, 
plucked  up  by  the  roots.  II.  A  positive  fact,  viz.,  that  there  is  salvation  in  Jesus 
Christ.  Thou  hast  long  been  trying  to  find  the  road  to  heaven,  and  thou  hast  missed 
it.  Guilt,  like  a  heavy  burden,  is  on  thy  back,  and  thou  darest  not  yet  cry  for 
pardon.  Satan  whispers,  "  It  is  all  over  with  thee  ;  there  is  no  mercy  for  such  as 
thou  art :  Christ  is  able  to  save  many,  but  not  thee."  Poor  soul  I  Come  to  the 
Cross  of  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  there  see  something  which  shall  remove  thine  un- 
belief. 1.  Come  now  with  thy  defilement,  and  look  at  Christ's  purity  ;  and  as  thou 
lookest  at  that  purity,  like  the  lily,  and  thou  seest  the  crimson  of  His  blood  over- 
flowing it,  let  this  whisper  be  heard  in  thine  ear — He  is  able  to  save  thee,  sinner, 
inasmuch  as  though  He  was  "  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,"  yet  He  was 
"  without  sin  "  ;  therefore  the  merit  of  His  blood  must  be  great.  Oh,  may  God 
help  thee  to  believe  on  Him  I  2.  Bat  tbis  is  not  the  grand  thing  which  should 
recommend  Him  to  thee.  Eemember,  He  who  died  upon  the  Cross  was  no  less 
than  the  everlasting  Son  of  God.  If  He  were  a  mere  man,  a  Socinian's  or  an 
Arian's  Christ,  I  would  not  bid  thee  trust  Him ;  but  since  He  is  none  other  than  God 
Himself  incarnate  in  human  flesh,  I  beseech  thee  cast  thyself  upon  Him:  "He 
is  able.  He  is  willing,  doubt  no  more."  "He  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost 
them  that  come  unto  God  by  Him."  3.  Eecollect  again,  as  a  further  consolation 
for  your  faith,  that  God  the  Father  has  accepted  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  It  is  the 
Father's  anger  that  you  have  the  most  cause  to  dread.  Now,  Jesus  was  punished  in  the 
f-tead  of  every  sinner  who  hath  repented,  and  God  the  Father  hath  accepted  Christ 
in  the  stead  of  sinners.  Ought  not  this  to  lead  you  to  accept  Him  ?  If  the  Judge 
has  accepted  the  sacrifice,  sure  you  may  accept  it  too  ;  and  if  He  be  satisfied,  sure 
you  may  be  content  also.  If  the  creditor  has  written  a  full  and  free  discharge,  you, 
the  poor  debtor,  may  rejoice  and  believe  that  that  discharge  is  satisfactory  to  you, 
because  it  is  satisfactory  to  God.  But  do  you  ask  me  how  I  know  that  God  has  ac- 
cepted Christ's  atonement  ?  I  remind  you  that  Christ  rose  again  from  the  dead.  4. 
Another  argument  is  this — many  have  been  saved  who  were  as  vile  as  thou  art,  and 
therefore  there  is  salvation.  The  chief  of  sinners  was  saved  years  ago  ;  that  was 
the  Apostle  Paul :  but  even  if  thou  should  exceed  him,  still  that  word"  uttermost  " 
goes  a  little  beyond  you.  I  could  turn  to  you  myself,  and  tell  you  that  surely  there 
must  be  salvation  in  Christ  for  you,  since  I  have  found  salvation  in  Christ  for  myself. 
Often  have  I  said,  I  will  never  doubt  the  salvation  of  any  one,  so  long  as  I  can  but 
know  that  Christ  has  accepted  me.  5.  To  quicken  thy  diligence,  however,  I  will 
conclude  by  noting  that  if  you  do  not  find  salvation  in  Christ,  remember  you  will 
never  find  it  elsewhere.  What  a  dreadful  thing  it  wiU  be  for  you  if  you  should  lose 
the  salvation  provided  by  Christ  1  For  "  how  shall  you  escape  if  you  neglect  so 
great  salvation?"     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  One  only  way  of  salvation: — I.  Other 

WAT  OF  SALVATION   THERE    CANNOT   BE,  FOR    THAT    ONE  WAT  IS    God's   WAT  ;    itS    divinity 

necessitates  its  exclusiveness.  It  is  clear,  that  when  man  fell,  he  lay  at  the  mercy 
of  his  Sovereign.  To  Him  alone  it  pertained  to  determine  these  two  points — 
■whether  the  offender  should  have  means  of  salvation  at  all ;  and  then,  what  those 
means  should  be.  If,  in  the  exercise  of  the  mercy  in  which  He  delights,  Jehovah 
determined  on  man's  salvation,  and  appointed  and  revealed  the  way,  how  can  the 
conclusion  be  resisted  that  that  way  is  the  only  way  ?  The  name  by  which  we  are 
to  be  saved  must  be  "  given  "  ;  i.e.,  it  must  have  Divine  appointment.  If  '  Jesus" 
VOL.  I.  24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOIt.  [chap.  iv. 

be  the  name  "  given,"  then  must  it  be  the  only  name  that  can  furnish  any  vahdand 
'  satisfactory  plea  at  the  throne  of  the  eternal  God  ?  If  men  could  have  been  saved 
I  in  ways  of  their  own,  God  would  not  have  devised  one  of  His;  and  the  very  fact  of 
jHis  having  done  so  is  sufficient  to  show  that  men  cannot  be  saved  in  ways  of  their 
own.  It  is  related  of  Alphonsus,  of  Castile,  that  on  having  the  Ptolemaic  system  of 
astronomy  explained  to  him,  he  jeeringly  said,  that  had  he  lived  at  the  time,  to  give 
the  Almighty  counsel,  he  could  have  instructed  Him  to  make  a  universe  better.  We 
now  know  that  the  scoff  of  presumptuous  profanity  was  founded  in  sheer  ignorance. 
And  so  it  is  in  every  one  who  fancies  that  he  can  dictate  to  God  the  way  to  save 
him.  Men  calling  themselves  philosophers  have  speculated  whether  God  could 
have  saved  men  in  any  other  way  than  that  which  Christianity  reveals,  so  as  to 
forget  the  necessity  of  an  interest  in  the  way  which  He  lias  accomplished.  The  ques- 
tion with  us  should  be,  what  God  actually  has  done,  and  if  you  admit  that  God  has 
done  what  was  best,  you  admit  that  He  has  done  what  alone  He  could  do  without 
ceasing  to  be  God.  II.  We  argue  the  same  thing  from  the  Divinity  of  the  Exe- 
cutor of  the  plan  ;  that  is,  from  the  person  of  the  Eedeemer.  He  is  "  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh."  Now  if  this  is  true,  then  that  there  can  be  no  other  Saviour  must  of 
necessity  be  as  true.  Either  such  a  Mediator  and  such  means  of  salvation  were 
necessary,  or  they  were  not.  If  they  were  not,  God  could  never  have  had  recourse 
to  them,  for  He  is  infinitely  wise,  doing  nothing  in  vain,  never  using  great  means 
for  little  ends ;  and  if  they  were,  then  all  others  must  have  been  not  only  inadequate, 
but  infinitely  inadequate.  The  Mediator  between  God  and  man  must  either  have 
been  created  or  Divine.  Then  if  a  creature  were  sufficient,  no  matter  how  exalted,  a 
Divine  Mediator  was  infinitely  above  the  exigency  of  the  case  ;  and  if,  on  the  contrary, 
a  Divine  Mediator  was  requisite,  then  was  a  created  infinitely  beneath  the  exigency  of 
the  case.  We  might  base  our  argument,  with  equal  conclusiveness,  on  the  wisdom  or 
the  goodness  or  the  justice  of  God.  Take,  in  connection  with  the  Divinity  of  the 
Saviour's  Person,  the  sufferings  which  He  endured.  Then,  if  all  this  was  not  neces- 
sary, the  adoption  of  such  a  plan  was  at  variance  with  the  Divine  justice  and  good- 
ness.    III.  We  argue  exclusiveness,  on  the  ground  that  the  plan  revealed  is  the 

ONLY  ONE  THAT    BEARS  TO    BE  TESTED    BY  THE    PRINCIPLE    OF  ADAPTATION    TO    WHAT    THE 

EXISTING  CASE  REQUIRES.  This  principle  of  adaptation  is  largely  appealed  to,  as 
exhibiting  the  evidence  of  Divine  perfection  in  the  works  of  creation.  This  principle 
is  as  applicable  in  the  moral  world.  1.  The  gospel  plan  of  salvation  is  in  the  essen- 
tial and  elementary  principle  of  it,  as  well  as  in  its  provisions,  adapted  to  the 
circumstances  of  man  as  the  party  to  be  saved.  As  guilty  and  condemned,  he 
needed  pardon  and  justification ;  and  these  are  provided  for  by  the  mediatorial  pro- 
pitiatory obedience  unto  death  of  the  divinely  constituted  and  Divine  Saviour.  As 
depraved  and  sinful,  he  needed  renewal  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind,  sanctifi cation  ;  and 
this  is  provided  for  him  by  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  association  with  the  work 
of  Christ.  2.  It  is  the  only  scheme  adapted  to  the  character  of  Him  who  saves. 
There  is  no  salvation  in  any  other,  because  He  is  the  only  Saviour  by  whom,  and 
His  the  only  name  by  which,  in  saving  the  lost,  the  glory  of  God  is  in  every  point 
secured.  IV.  The  last  ground  on  which  we  rest  the  exclusiveness  of  the  gospel 
method  of  salvation  is  the  completeness  of  the  salvation  itself.  It  is  a  salvation 
worthy  in  all  respects  of  God,  and  fully  meeting  the  wants  of  man.  It  is  a  salvation 
from  guilt,  sin,  suffering,  death,  hell,  to  a  state  of  pardon  and  acceptance  and 
favour,  to  the  exercise  of  holy  principles  and  holy  affections,  to  life,  to  happiness,  to 
usefulness,  to  heaven,  and  all  for  eternity.  All  God's  works  are  perfect,  and  this 
not  less  than  others.  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Jesus  the  only  Sat^iour : — This  pas- 
sage is  remarkable  as  forming  part  of  a  sermon  by  Peter — who  thrice  denied  this 
very  Jesus — and  as  having  been  first  delivered  in  the  hearing  of  the  judges  and 
murderers  of  Jesus.  When  Jesus  stood  before  theh-  tribunal.  He  told  them  that 
"  hereafter  they  would  see  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  power," 
and  when  the  sacred  writer  speaks  of  His  second  coming,  he  says,  "  Every  eye  shall 
see  Him,  and  they  also  that  pierced  Him."  Now,  it  must  have  been  a  foretaste  of 
this  fearful  truth  when  His  apostles  stood  in  their  presence.  In  illustrating  this 
subject,  let  us — I.  Remove  an  objection.  A  difficulty  arises  in  the  minds  of  some, 
as  if  the  doctrine  savoured  of  intolerance.  They  rest  satisfied  with  the  general  idea 
that  Christianity  is  true  and  important,  but  do  not  feel  that  it  is  the  only  Divine 
religion.  Now  these  views  are  precisely  those  of  the  ancient  heathens,  who  would 
have  allowed  an  image  for  Jesus  as  one  amongst  many  idols.  What  they  found 
fault  with  was  the  universal  demand  that  every  idol  should  be  destroyed,  and  that 
Jesus  alone  should  be  regarded  as  the  object  of  worship  and  the  author  of  salvation. 


■CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  371 

But  this  is  evidently  the  very  spirit  of  Christianity.  No  blood  can  cleanse  sin  but ; 
that  which  was  shed  on  Calvary ;  no  power  can  open  the  gate  of  heaven  but  that  of  , 
Him  who  "  hath  the  key  of  David,  opening  so  that  no  man  can  shut,  and  shutting  . 
so  that  no  man  can  open"  ;  no  power  can  overcome  the  "  strong  man  armed,"  but  ■ 
the  power  of  Him  who  binds  Satan  in  chains  and  bruiseth  him  under  the  feet  of 
His  people.  If  men  would  only  meditate  on  the  solemn  truth,  that  "  God  spared 
not  His  only-begotten  Son,"  who  "  died  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might 
bring  us  to  God,"  he  would  see  that  it  is  blasphemy  to  imagine  that  the  salvation 
of  man  can  be  secured  in  any  other  way.  For  if  so,  God  would  have  spared  His  only-/| 
begotten  Son.  Nor  is  there  any  ground  for  imagining  that  the  doctrine  of  the  texni 
is  at  all  inconsistent  with  just  views  of  the  benevolence  of  God.  Suppose  a ' 
body  of  men  cast  ashore  on  a  desert  island,  smitten  with  disease,  and  famishing, 
and  that  in  such  circumstances  one  solitary  ship  was  descried  making  towards  the 
island,  loaded  with  bread,  but  carrying  an  infallible  physician,  who  o£fered 
to  supply  and  heal  the  diseases  of  the  ppople  and  to  carry  them  to  a  land  where  they 
should  hunger  no  more,  and  where  there  should  be  no  more  death — what  would  you 
think  of  the  perishing  men  if  they  objected  to  all  this  because  there  was  only  one 
ship  by  which  to  escape,  only  one  i^hysician,  only  one  supply  of  bread — because 
vessels  had  not  been  sent  to  all  sides  of  the  island,  and  bread  of  various  kinds,  and 
physicians  of  various  qualities?  Would  you  not  think  them  insane  and  deeply  un- 
grateful ?  Now  this  is  the  very  case  before  us,  only  not  nearly  so  strong.  And 
what  are  we  to  think  of  such  as  object  solely  on  the  ground  that  God  has  not  sent 
many  deliverers  instead  of  one  ;  and  instead  of  hailing  the  glorious  offer,  stand  by 
callous  and  indifferent,  and  imagine  that  somehow  or  other  they  will  escape, 
although  death  aird  famine  are  raging  around.  II.  Explain  the  truth.  1.  We 
are  said  here  to  be  saved  by  the  "  name  "  of  Christ.  This  is  a  mode  of  expression 
sometimes  used  in  Scripture  ;  as,  e.g.,  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower"  ; 
where  by  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  meant  God  Himself.  We  speak  of  the  "  greatest 
names"  of  antiquity,  and  of  men  filling  the  world  with  the  "  terror  of  their  names," 
when  in  both  cases  we  mean  not  the  names  but  the  persons.  And  so  we  are  saved 
by  Christ  Himself,  although  in  Scripture  we  are  said  to  trust  in  His  name.  "  In 
His  name  shall  the  Gentiles  trust."  2.  The  form  of  expression,  also,  in  the  first 
part  of  the  verse,  is  peculiar.  The  apostle  does  not  represent  Christ  as  giving 
salvation  as  a  thing  disconnected  from  Himself,  but  as  a  thing  existing  in  Him,  as 
a  great  treasure-house  of  spiritual  blessings  in  Christ,  from  whom  all  the  members 
united  to  Him  by  faith  derive  strength,  nourishment,  and  salvation.  The  general 
doctrine  here  is,  that  Chiist  is  the  only  Redeemer  as  He  was  the  only  Creator ;  and 
that  He  only  is  able  to  create  us  again,  as  He  was  to  make  us  at  first.  The  special 
doctrine  is,  that  this  fulness  of  mediatorial  power  is  laid  up  in  Christ  as  the  Head 
of  His  Churcii,  and  that  it  descends  from  Him  upon  all  His  members,  like  the  holy 
anointing  oil  from  the  head  of  Aaron,  which  flowed  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  gar- 
ments. The  general  truth  is,  that  Christ  alone  hath  removed  the  curse  of  the  law 
and  silenced  the  accuser  of  the  brethren.  He  hath  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust, 
that  He  may  bring  us  to  God,  and  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every 
one  that  believeth.  The  special  truth  is  that  it  hath  pleased  the  Father  that  in 
Him  should  all  fulness  dwell,  and  that  we  become  partakers  of  all  the  blessings 
which  He  hath  purchased  only  when  by  faith  we  become  branches  of  the  true  vine, 
living  stones  in  the  spiritual  building  of  which  Christ  is  the  chief  corner-stone. 
And  these  blessings  are  in  no  other.  The  merits  of  saints  only  exist  in  the  imagi- 
nations of  blinded  idolaters  ;  for  every  saint  is  by  nature  a  child  of  wrath,  even  as 
others.  If  we  desire  blessings  we  must  go  to  the  Master  of  the  house  direct,  for 
none  of  the  servants  can  supply  our  wants.  III.  Show  the  concurrence  op 
Scripture  in  this  truth.  The  whole  stream  of  revelation  from  the  beginning 
points  to  Jesus  and  His  finished  work.  The  law  which  was  given  by  Moses  pointed 
to  that  grace  and  truth  which  were  to  come  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  prophets  pro- 
phesied beforehand  His  coming  and  sufferings.  The  angels  of  heaven  filled  the  air 
with  melody  at  His  birth,  and  announced  that  the  great  Deliverer  had  at  length 
arrived.  The  Spirit  of  God  descended  like  a  dove,  and  rested  on  His  head,  and  a 
voice  from  heaven  said,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased,  hear 
ye  Him'."  John,  who  baptized  Him,  said,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  &c.  Old 
Simeon  said,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace,''  &c.  Philip 
said  to  Nathanael,  "  We  have  found,"  &c.  And  what  was  the  uniform  doctrine  of 
the  apostles?  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  which  is  laid,  which 
is  Jesus  Christ. "     And  the  song  of  heaven  is  full  of  Christ's  atonement.     (J.  Begg, 


372  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  rr. 

D.D.)  Salvation  exclusive  hut  cornp7-ehensive  : — I.  The  nattjee  of  this  salvation. 
St.  Peter  might  well  have  meant — 1.  Salvation  from  physical  discomfort  and  pain. 
The  circumstance  was  the  healing  of  the  cripple  which  the  judges  thought  was  effected 
by  magic,  but  which  the  apostles  ascribed  to  the  name  of  Jesus,  who  had  simply 
employed  them.  Pain  and  discomfort,  although  they  may  be  transfigured  by  resig- 
nation, may  yet  crush  out  heart  and  hope,  and  our  business  in  imitating  God  is  to 
cure  it  if  we  can.  Our  Lord  did  by  His  apostles  what  He  still  does  by  generous 
hearts.  The  inspiring  force  of  our  hospital  system  is  the  grace  and  charity  of 
Christ.  2.  National  salvation.  This  was  the  point  of  the  reference  to  Psa.  cxviii. 
Christ's  way  of  delivering  the  nation  was  by  becoming  the  corner-stone  of  its  hope. 
For  Israel  was  the  real  cripi^le.  As  a  political  body  the  Roman  power  had  broken 
it.  Still  more  was  it  crippled  morally.  The  devotion  of  prophets  and  psalmist  had 
died  away,  and  in  its  place  were  Pharisees,  Sadducees,  and  Herodians.  The  old  heart 
had  been  eaten  out.  What  Israel  wanted  was  new  life,  and  its  only  Saviour  was  He 
who  had  healed  the  cripple.  3.  Spiritual  salvation.  This  was  implied  by  the  national, 
and  the  spiritual  salvation  of  the  nation  implied  that  of  the  majority  of  its  members. 
A  nation  is  but  an  aggregate  of  individuals  seen  as  such  by  God.  To  save  men  they 
must  be  taken  one  by  one.  Did  not  the  Eedeemer,  who  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for 
all,  love  me  and  give  Himself  for  me?  Does  not  the  Spirit,  by  whom  the  whole 
Church  is  governed  and  sanctified,  dwell  in  each  separate  soul  ?  Does  not  a  mother 
deal  with  her  children  personally?  So  Christ  dealt  with  Peter,  Thomas,  Mary 
Magdalene,  as  if  there  were  no  other  souls  in  existence.  II.  Salvation  in  this 
SENSE  IS  NO  monopoly  OF  IsRAEL.  What  was  Israel  that  she  should  claim  the  sole 
monopoly  of  the  saving  name  ?  The  final  absolute  religion  could  not  but  be  uni- 
versal. The  question  of  the  Gentiles  had  not  been  raised,  but  there  was  behind  the 
apostles  the  broad  commission.  The  old  infection  of  nature  still  remains  in  the 
world.  Who  will  save  it?  Now,  as  eighteen  centuries  ago,  Jesus  washes  out  the 
stains  of  a  guilty  past,  and  gives  new  desires,  aims,  hopes,  enthusiasms,  and  renews 
by  His  eternal  Spirit  what  His  enemies  have  destroyed.  III.  Salvation  was  exclu- 
sively CONFINED  TO  THE  powEE  OF  THE  LoED  Jesus.  Christ  was  not  one  among 
many  possible  saviours  ;  He  was  the  only  Saviour.  And  the  ground  of  Peter's  con- 
fidence was  that  he  had  not  a  human  speculation  or  theory,  but,  as  he  firmly  believed, 
the  final,  absolute,  one  truth.  Error  may  pay  its  insincere  and  splendid  compli- 
ments to  that  which  contradicts  it.  Truth  can  only  firmly,  tenderly,  unvaryingly 
say,  "  It  is  I  who  save  ;  neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other."  "  No  man  cometh 
to  the  Father  but  by  Me."  The  apostles  speak  as  men  who  had  found  the  secret 
of  life,  hope,  happiness,  salvation,  and  their  highest  ambition  was  that  others  might 
share  their  privilege.  1.  When  we  affirm  that  there  is  salvation  in  none  other  than 
Jesus,  we  do  not  deny  that  other  religions  than  Christianity  have  in  them  certain 
elements  of  truth.  They  would  not  exist  if  they  had  not.  The  element  of  truth  in 
them  enables  them  to  resist  dissolution.  But  they  cannot  save.  2.  When  we  affirm 
that  Christ  alone  can  save  men,  we  do  not  deny  that  other  agencies  can  improve 
mankind.  Education,  &c.  8.  But  such  influences  as  these  are  bounded  by  the 
horizon  of  time ;  they  have  no  effects  in  the  great  hereafter.  They  are  not  opponents 
nor  rivals ;  they  move  in  a  different  sphere.  4.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this 
conviction  was  in  the  first  ages  of  Christianity,  and  has  been  since  a  great  motive 
power  in  urging  devoted  men  to  spread  the  religion  of  their  Master.  (Canon  Liddon.) 
Christ  our  onli/  hope  : — On  a  huge  cross  by  the  side  of  an  Italian  highway  hung  a 
hideous  caricature  of  the  Beloved  of  our  souls,  who  poured  out  His  life  for  our  re- 
demption. Out  of  reverence  to  the  living  Christ  we  turned  aside,  disgusted,  from 
the  revolting  image,  but  not  until  we  had  espied  the  words  Spes  unica,  in  capitals 
over  its  head.  Here  was  truth  emblazoned  on  an  idol.  Yes,  indeed,  Jesus,  our  now 
exalted,  but  once  crucified  Lord,  is  the  sole  and  only  hope  of  man.  Assuredly,  O 
Lord  Jesus,  Thou  art  spes  unica  to  our  soul. 

"  Other  refuge  have  we  none. 
Hangs  our  helpless  soul  on  Thee." 

We  fotind  this  diamond  in  the  mire  of  superstition  :  does  it  sparkle  any  the  less  ? 
(G.  H.  Spurfjeon.)  None  other  name  : — A  few  persons  were  collected  round  a 

blind  man,  who  had  taken  his  station  on  a  bridge  in  the  City  Road,  and  was  reading 
from  an  embossed  Bible.  Receiving  from  the  passers-by  of  their  carnal  things,  he 
was  ministering  to  them  spiritual  things.  A  gentleman  on  his  way  home  from  the 
City  was  led  by  curiosity  to  the  outskiits  of  the  crowd.     Just  then  the  poor  man, 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  373 

■who  was  reading  from  Acts  iv.,  lost  his  place,  and,  while  trying  to  find  it  with  his 
fingers,  kept  repeating  the  last  clause  he  had  read,  "  None  other  name, — None  other 
name, — None.  .  ."  Some  of  the  people  smiled  at  the  blind  man's  embarrassment, 
but  the  gentleman  went  on  his  way  musing.  He  had  lately  become  convinced  that 
he  was  a  sinner,  and  had  been  trying  in  many  ways  to  obtain  peace  of  mind.  But 
religious  exercises,  good  resolutions,  altered  habits,  all  were  ineffectual  to  relieve  his 
conscience  of  its  load,  and  enable  him  to  rejoice  in  God.  The  words  he  had  heard 
from  the  blind  man,  however,  rang  their  solemn  music  to  his  soul — "None  other 
name."  When  he  reached  his  home  and  retired  to  rest,  the  words,  like  evening 
chimes  from  village  towers  nestling  among  the  trees,  were  still  heard — "  None  other 
name — None  other  name."  And  when  he  awoke,  in  more  joyful  measure,  like  matin 
bell  saluting  the  morn,  the  strain  continued,  "  None  other  name — None  other  name." 
The  music  entered  his  soul,  and  he  awoke  to  new  life.  "I  see  it  all;  I  see  it  all!  I  have 
been  trying  to  be  saved  by  my  own  works — my  repentance,  my  prayers,  my  reforma- 
tion. I  see  my  mistake.  It  is  Jesus  who  alone  can  save  me.  To  Him  I  will  look. 
Neitheristhere  salvation  in  any  other  :  for  there  isnone  other  name — none  othername 
— none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved." 
The  power  of  the  name  of  Jesus  .•—A  brave  cavalry  officer  was  dying  of  his  wounds. 
He  thought  himself  on  the  field,  at  the  head  of  his  gallant  men,  and  fancied  that  a 
heavy  gun  was  just  in  front  of  them  ready  to  be  fired.  His  distress  was  great.  At 
length  he  thought  the  gun  had  been  fired,  and  his  men,  badly  cut  up,  were  retreat- 
ing. Here  I  interposed,  saying,  "  There  is  no  gun  there ;  you  are  safe  among 
friends."  "  Let  me  alone,"  he  sternly  replied  ;  "  I  must  recover  my  command  and 
renew  the  attack."  "No,"  said  I,  "let  us  not  think  of  battle  scenes.  You  are 
soon  to  die.  Let  us  talk  of  Jesus."  The  mention  of  that  name  seemed  to  exert 
the  powerful  influence  I  had  often  heard  ascribed  to  it.  His  agitation  ceased  at 
once ;  his  delirium  passed  away  ;  a  smile  lit  up  his  pallid  features.  After  a 
moment's  silence,  he  said  in  a  low  tone,  "  Jesus,  Jesus  !  It  is  He  who  said, 
*  Come  unto  Me,'  &c.  I  want  rest,  I  am  weary."  Soon  after  he  entered  the  glorious 
rest  of  heaven.  iW.  Baxendale.)  The  one  saving  name  : — The  text  declares  that 
Christ's  is  the  only  saving  name  on  earth.  Other  terms  are  used  elsewhere  to  in- 
dicate the  paramount  value  of  His  religion  over  all  other  instrumentalities  for 
man's  well-being  in  this  world  and  in  that  to  come.  But,  either  from  an  inade- 
quate idea  of  moral  evil,  or  from  a  failure  to  see  the  perfect  fitness  of  God's  remedy 
for  it,  this  truth  is  yet  widely  unfelt  or  denied.  Men  resort  elsewhere,  and  apply 
to  this  or  that  pretender,  instead  of  the  only  infallible  Physician.  With  some 
insufBeient  and  temporary  expedient,  they  patch  up  evils  which  the  miraculous 
touch  of  the  Son  of  God  is  requisite  to  cure.  Lanterns  and  lamps  are  of  no  little 
use,  but  he  would  not  be  accounted  wise  who  should  propose  to  substitute  them  for 
the  sun.  Let  us  consider  some  of  the  substitutes  which  have  been  proposed  by  some 
men  for  the  great  instrument  of  man's  highest  good.  I.  Liberty — the  goddess,  as 
Mammon  is  the  god,  of  the  present  civilisiition.  Summoned  upon  the  theatre  of 
Europe  by  the  fearless  voice  of  Luther,  breaking  forth  in  the  tremendous  throes  of 
successive  French  revolutions,  and  winning  her  more  complete  triumph  in  the  New 
World,  liberty  is  one  of  the  strongest  passions  of  modern  history.  And  no  wonder. 
When  you  have  entered  the  house  of  human  bondage,  and  remembered  its  dreadful 
secrets,  no  wonder  your  blood  boils.  The  BMstiles  of  tyranny  have  fallen  before 
this  potent  indignation.  Let  them  fall.  All  honour  is  due  to  those  who  have 
lifted  the  yoke  from  the  neck  of  humanity,  and  said  to  myriads,  "  Ye  are  men, 
go  free."  But  then  we  need  only  glance  at  the  condition  of  the  freest  nations  to 
see  that  Liberty  can  be  no  substitute  for  the  gospel.  Under  her  dominion  men 
may  know  theh  rights,  but  they  need  another  master  to  teach  them  their  duties. 
Liberty  must  take  law  into  her  partnership,  or  she  is  but  another  name  for 
license.  And  when  the  general  relations  of  society  are  e(iuitably  adjusted,  and 
justice  done  between  man  and  man,  what  a  wide  empire  of  character  is  beyond 
her  reach  !  National  liberty,  glorious  boon  as  it  is,  is  external.  But  the  liberty 
wherewith  Christ  makes  His  people  free  is  carried  into  the  inmost  recesses  of 
the  mind.  Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty — liberty  from  anger 
and  malice  and  lust  and  drunkenness,  and  the  whole  legion  of  evil  spirits  where- 
with society  is  possessed.  II.  Modebn  civilisation.  The  crying  demand  for  a 
spiritual  regeneration  is  postponed  for  external  ease  and  luxury.  When  the 
sacred  writer  wished  to  describe  the  growing  degeneracy  of  the  chosen  people, 
he  said,  "  Jeshurun  [a  term  of  endearment  for  Israel]  waxed  fat,  and  kicked." 
That  phrase  describes  the  two  great  eras  in  a  nation's  growth  :  first,  of  prosperity ; 


374  THE   BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

and  secondly,  of  insolent  power,  forgetting  right.  Thus  modern  civilisation  has- 
woven  so  thick  a  veil,  that  many  seem  to  be  incapable  or  indisposed  to  see  un'^er- 
neath  the  living  texture  of  Divine  laws,  and  our  accountableness  to  the  will  of  the 
Supreme.  Strange  and  deplorable  result,  if  home  become  so  attractive  that  it 
should  prove  a  rival  to  heaven !  Sad  mistake,  if  the  charms  of  earthly  friendship 
and  comfortable  life  should  dull  our  sensibilities  to  our  holy  relationship  to  God 
and  Christ !  AVe  need  to  know  that  what  is  best  and  safest  in  this  modern 
civilisation  has  flowed  from  Christianity ;  but  that,  so  far  as  it  is  disconnected 
from  Christ,  as  its  controlling  principle  and  sanctifying  motive,  it  is  base  and 
soulless  and  dangerous;  that  there  is  hazard  of  entombing  our  souls  in  this 
magnificent  earthly  good.     The  splendid  gift  of  life  was  not  bestowed   that  we 

V  might  dress  in  purple  or  fine  linen,  or  fare  sumptuously  every  day,  or  even  that. 

)  we  might  ride  a  mile  a  minute,  cross  the  ocean  in  ten  days,  or  send  a  despatch  round 
the  globe  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  He  who  rides  a  mile  a  minute  ought  to  be 
using  that  grand  conveyance  on  no  fool's  errand.     He  who  can  cross  the  Atlantic  in 

/  ten  days  should  feel  himself  commissioned  to  do  some  great  and  good  work  for 
man,  when  the  Almighty  has  thus  put  in  his  hands  the  sceptre  of  the  winds  and 
waves,  and  they  obey  him.  He  who  can  send  swifter  than  the  sun's  flight  mes- 
sages from  clime  to  clime  ought  to  charter  the  telegraph  with  some  good  tidings 
of  good.  Modern  civilisation  is  all  good  and  safe,  when  kept  down  at  the  proper 
secondary  mark ;  but  if  it  arise,  and  assume  prouder  titles,  and  the  privilege  of 
monopolising  immortal  capacities  for  mortal  uses,  the  watchmen  must  cry  aloud^ 
and  spare  not.  For  none  can  look  abroad,  and  not  see  that  the  world,  so  called, 
has  got  a  fearful  hold  of  men's  minds.  Everything,  even  virtue,  is  to  be  turned 
to  profit.  What  does  not  bring  money  is  not,  in  general,  thought  to  be  worth  any- 
thing. Then  is  there  no  fear  that  we  have  another  God  than  the  Lord  of  heaven 
and  earth,  even  Mammon,  as  the  actual  deity  of  our  worship  !  Tried  by  every 
rule,  and  weighed  in  every  balance,  modern  civilisation,  as  such,  is  found  wanting.. 
Ill  can  it  suflice  for  its  own  temporal  needs,  and  keep  itself  out  of  fire  and  water ; 
how  much  less  meet  the  great  need  of  immortal  man  !  Ill  can  it  stand  in  the  place 
of  Christ  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  Its  god  is  gold,  its  aim  is  self;  too  many 
of  its  governments  are  tyrannies ;  too  many  of  its  cities  Sodoms  ;  its  highest 
honours  are  military  butcheries ;  and  its  only  tolerable  deserts  are  discoloured 
reflections  from  His  glory  who  died  on  the  Cross.  III.  Reformation,  philan- 
thropy, A  NEW  organisation  OF  SOCIETY.  The  plea  is  ingenious,  because  it  haa 
some  truth  to  give  it  countenance,  that,  notwithstanding  Christianity  has  existed 
so  many  centuries,  the  dreadful  evils  of  society  have  gone  unieformed.  True,  but 
it  is  because  it  has  been  corrupted,  both  under  Greek,  Catholic,  and  Protestant 
forms.  But  there  it  is,  in  the  life  of  Christ,  in  the  books  of  the  New  Testament, 
and  it  will  never  suffer  man  to  give  sleep  to  his  eyes  until  it  has  made  all  things 
new.  It  is  said,  also,  by  the  reformer,  ttiat  though  men  make  institutions,  institu- 
tions, in  turn  make  men.  For  example,  that  you  may  preach  heavenly-minded- 
ness,  but  how  can  you  expect  any  considerable  amount  of  spirituality  in  the  brutal 
camp,  or  in  the  damp,  cold  cellars  of  city  pauperism  ?  We  confess  we  cannot. 
It  becomes,  accordingly,  a  matter  of  the  last  consequence  that  the  permanent  in- 
stitutions of  society,  and  the  customs  of  the  time,  should  all  square  with  the 
Christian  standard.  Christ  must  sit  as  sole  and  final  umpire  upon  all  the  great 
questions  that  now  agitate  society.  And  in  this  just  judgment,  whatever  Christ,  by 
His  Word,  rejects,  we,  who  are  His  followers,  must  reject ;  and  whatever  He  com- 
mands we  must  do,  let  whoever  will  say  nay.  So  much  we  yield  to  reformation. 
But  what  we  protest  against  is,  simply,  that  moral  reformation,  or  any  new 
organisation  of  society,  can  take  the  jjlace  of  the  religion  of  Christ.  For,  in  the 
outset,  how  could  these  great  moral  movements  start,  unless  there  were  the 
heaven-derived  and  omnipotent  influences  of  Christian  ideas  acting  behind  ?  This 
is  the  ever-flowing  river  that  sets  in  motion  all  the  wheels  and  complicated 
machinery  of  practical  philanthropy.  This  is  the  exhaustless  reservoir  and  lake 
that  fills  all  the  pipes,  aqueducts,  and  fountains,  and  quenches  a  city's  thirst,  and 
cleanses  a  city's  impurity.  Christ  is  the  reformer's  wisdom  and  guidance  and 
strength,  and  without  Him  he  could  do  nothing.  Then,  again,  grant  that  you 
could  by  a  possibility  get  the  world  all  reformed,  the  timepiece  wound  up  and 
running  well,  property  more  equalised,  education  and  happiness  universal.  How 
long  would  the  millennium  last  without  Christ  ?  Self  is  still  there,  and  passion 
is  busy,  and  the  old  man  will  again  come  to  life  though  he  has  once  been  crucified 
with  the  lusts  thereof ;  and  then  the  world  is  as  bad  as  it  was  before,  and  you  have 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  875 

all  your  work  to  do  over  again.  No  ;  Christ  is  the  only  Sovereign  and  legitimate 
Eeformer,  as  He  is  the  Saviour  of  the  individual  soul,  and  those  only  who  go  forth 
in  His  name  and  spirit  are  mighty  to  the  pulling  down  of  strongholds.  IV. 
Education.  We  grant,  indeed,  tiiat  if  the  world  is  ever  to  be  better  and  happier, 
it  must  be  in  no  slight  measure  by  a  better  family  and  common  school  nurture. 
But  education,  like  all  other  great  movements  of  benevolence,  is  powerless  of  good 
when  disjoined  from  Christ.  The  culture  of  the  mind  exclusively  becomes  a 
doubtful  good,  if  moral  training  keep  not  an  even  pace  with  it.  Jesus,  as  the  per- 
fect representative  of  our  spiritual  nature,  encourages  the  earliest  moral  training. 
He  called  children  to  Him,  and  prouounced  His  blessing  upon  them.  At  one  time 
He  set  a  little  child  in  the  midst,  and  bade  His  disciples  be  converted  and  become 
like  little  children,  or  they  could  not  enter  His  kingdom.  And  He  left  it  in  charge 
to  His  apostles,  "  Feed  My  lambs."  Education,  then,  in  its  higher  forms,  has  the 
explicit  encouragement  of  Him  who  knew  what  was  in  man.  (A.  B.  Livermore.) 
One  saving  name  : — We  can  destroy  ourselves  and  each  other,  but  we  cannot  save 
ourselves  or  each  other.  There  are  some  dangers  and  evils  from  which  we  can 
save  both  ourselves  and  our  fellows,  but  from  the  worst  we  can  neither  save  our- 
selves nor  others.  All  that  in  this  case  we  can  do  for  ourselves  is  to  look  to  a 
Saviour,  and  for  others  to  direct  them  to  a  Redeemer.  We  are  seldom  satisfied  with 
what  we  have.  Eve  desired  the  forbidden  fruit ;  and  the  Jews  desired  a  Saviour 
entirely  different  from  Him  to  whom  the  prophets  had  given  witness,  and  whom 
God  had  sent.  To  this  fact  Peter  calls  attention,  and  then  adds,  "  Neither  is  there 
salvation  in  any  other,"  &c.  Note  here — -I.  Salvation.  1.  Ignorance  with  respect  to 
the  highest  subjects  is  compared  to  darkness  ;  to  be  called  out  of  darkness  into 
marvellous  hght,  is  in  part  salvation.  2.  Foolishness  is  ever  attendant  upon  sin- 
fulness. To  receive  wisdom  from  above,  and  to  be  made,  concerning  the  highest 
ends  and  the  best  means,  truly  wise,  is  in  part  salvation.  3.  The  imagination  is  a 
faculty  ever  busy  for  good  or  evil.  Unless  connected  with  knowledge  and  wisdom, 
its  fabrications  are  vain  and  wicked.  To  have  all  such  imaginations  cast  down,  is 
in  part  salvation.  4.  The  heart  of  man  is  a  tree  bearing  corrupt  fruit,  and  a 
fountain  pouring  forth  bitter  water.  To  have  created  within  us  a  clean  heart  and 
a  right  spirit,  is  in  part  salvation.  5.  The  will  of  man  was  created  to  correspond 
to  the  will  of  God,  as  a  wheel  within  a  wheel,  but  it  has  fallen  from  its  place  and 
revolves  out  of  its  sphere.  Like  the  rudder  of  a  ship,  the  will  was  intended  to  keep 
men  true  to  the  glory  of  God  while  compassing  the  broad  way  of  God's  command- 
ments. But  the  helm  is  in  the  hands  of  pirates,  and  the  vessel's  prow  is  to  the 
rock,  or  the  quicksand,  or  the  iceberg.  To  be  delivered  from  a  rebellious  and 
wayward  wiU,  and  to  be  made  ready  to  do  the  will  of  God  as  an  obedient  child,  is 
in  part  salvation.  6.  Conscience  is  a  faculty  which  many  suppose  can  never  become 
corrupt.  But  a  man  may  do  evil  when  he  acts  conscientiously,  for  there  are  evil 
consciences.  To  have  the  conscience  cleansed  and  healed  by  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ,  and  rectified  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  in  part  salvation.  7.  God  created 
man  in  His  own  image  (Gen.  i.  27).  As  the  painting  or  the  statue  to  its  subject,  as 
the  mirror  to  the  spectator,  so  was  the  first  man,  in  the  beginning,  to  his  God. 
But  the  mirror  is  broken,  and  the  statue  is  defaced,  and  the  painting  is  rent,  and 
the  child  has  fallen  and  is  disfigured  and  maimed.  To  have  the  mirror  replaced, 
the  picture  renovated,  the  child  healed,  and  the  Divine  likeness  restored,  is  in  part 
salvation.  8.  With  a  sinful  nature  we  are  born.  To  have  our  sinfulness  crucified 
and  its  dominion  destroyed,  is  in  part  salvation.  9.  The  position  of  man  was, 
in  his  first  estate,  righteous  and  filial.  But  we  have  fallen  from  our  position  by 
sin,  and  are  accounted  guilty  and  ungodly.  To  be  justified,  is  in  part  salvation. 
10.  Tliere  is  an  evil  spirit  that  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience.  To  be 
delivered  from,  his  presence  and  power,  is  in  part  salvation.  11.  There  is  evil  in 
aU  human  institutions  and  arrangements.  God's  world  is  good,  but  man's  has 
much  evil.  To  be  made  to  overcome  the  world,  is  in  part  salvation.  12.  Death 
has  crept  over  our  human  nature,  spiritual  death.  To  be  morally  and  religiously 
quickened,  is  in  part  salvation.  13.  Punishment  hangs  over  our  guilty  heads  Uke 
a  thunder-cloud  pregnant  with  storm,  and  the  impending  tempest  murmurs  in  our 
present  sorrows.  The  wages  of  sin  is  death,  and  all  the  evils  to  which  flesh  and 
soul  are  heir  are  as  instalments  of  the  wages  of  sin.  To  have  the  firmament 
of  life  clenred  of  these  clouds  by  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  is  in  part  salvation.  14. 
Such  are  the  derangements  of  evil,  that  the  forgiven  and  regenerated  are  exposed 
to  affliction,  and  it  is  appointed  that  they  too  should  die.  To  be  sustained  in  the 
hour  of  tribulation,  to  go  down  into  our  grave  and  to  rise  again,  shouting,  "  0 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

death,  where  is  thy  sting?  0  grave,  ■where  is  thy  victory?  "  is  in  part  salvation. 
15.  Paradise  was  lost  by  Adam,  but  paradise  is  regained  by  Jesus  Christ.  To  enter 
that  garden  as  our  own,  and  enjoy  its  innumerable  delights,  and  to  realise  therein 
everl-i sting  life,  this  is  the  consummation  of  salvation.  This  salvation  God 
promised  at  the  beginning,  this  God  has  provided,  and  this  we  offer  you  in  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel.  II.  Salvation  in  a  peeson.  1.  Deliverances  are  some- 
times wrought  by  things.  The  shipwrecked  one  is  saved  by  clinging  to  a  floating 
spar,  the  tenant  of  a  house  on  fire  by  the  trap-door  in  the  roof.  And  deliverances 
are  effected  by  things  employed  by  persons,  as  by  a  crew  in  a  Hfeboat,  a  fireman 
and  the  fire-escape,  a  physician  and  his  medicines.  There  are,  moreover,  persons 
whose  profession  is  some  work  of  salvation,  as  the  medical  practitioner,  the  fireman, 
and  the  lifeboat  crew.  2.  The  salvation  of  which  we  have  been  speaking  is  not  in 
the  Divine  purpose,  or  in  the  Divine  fiat,  or  in  anything,  but  in  a  living  Saviour. 
3.  To  be  saved  by  a  Saviour.  (1)  This  shows  our  weakness,  and  in  our  weakness 
we  see  our  wretchedness.  We  are  like  one  drowning,  bound  hand  and  foot.  "We 
are  like  one  exposed  to  the  flames,  and  paralysed  in  every  Umb.  We  are  hke  one 
poisoned,  upon  whom  the  sleep  of  death  is  already  creeping.  (2)  This  arrange- 
ment removes  all  cause  of  boasting  from  the  saved.  (3)  It  places  the  redeemed 
under  special  obligations.  They  are  indebted  to  their  Saviour  as  to  none  other. 
Father,  mother,  husband,  wife,  have  done  nothing  for  us  compared  with  Him  who 
saves  us.  (4)  It  renders  the  actual  work  of  salvation  a  service  of  sympathy  and 
love.  Salvation  comes  not  from  a  mere  power  or  force,  but  it  is  connected  with 
intelligence,  affection,  and  volition,  and  is  therefore  not  liable  to  failure.  (5)  It 
creates  a  new  relation  and  connection.  By  our  existence  we  become  the  offspring 
of  God.  By  our  entrance  into  life  we  have  parents  of  the  flesh.  And  these  and 
other  connections  are  natural.  We  have  Creator,  mother,  father,  perhaps  brothers, 
sisters,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  providence.  But  a  Saviour  is  distinct  from  all 
other  relations.  Blessed  is  the  man  who,  looking  toward  one  mighty  to  save,  can 
say  "  My  Saviour."  A  man  may  be  an  orphan  and  friendless,  but  with  a  Saviour 
anything  but  desolate,  while  he  who,  in  the  midst  of  the  largest  and  most  loving 
circle,  has  no  Redeemer  is  not  only  a  forlorn,  but  a  lost  man.  III.  Salvaiion  in  a 
PERSON  WHOSE  NAME  IS  MADE  KNOWN.  1.  Six  thousaud  years  ago  the  Saviour  of 
men  was  simply  called  the  seed  of  the  woman.  Then  He  was  denominated  the 
Shiloh,  the  Prophet,  Wonderful,  Boot  of  Jesse,  Righteous  Branch,  Jehovah  our 
Righteousness.  And  the  angel  who  announced  the  concejjtion  said,  "  Thou  shalt 
call  His  name  Jesus,"  &c.  2.  Jesus  is  the  name  given  among  men  as  the  name 
of  the  Saviour.  To  this  Jesus  give  all  the  prophets  witness  as  the  Christ  of  God. 
This  Jesus  was  proclaimed  Saviour  by  the  angel  Gabriel,  by  another  angel,  and 
by  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host.  This  Jesus  was  introduced  by  one  of  the 
greatest  prophets  the  earth  has  ever  known.  The  works  He  wrought  bare  witness 
of  Him.  The  heavens  were  thrice  rent,  and  from  the  excellent  glory  a  voice  came, 
saying,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Eclipse  and 
earthquake  saluted  Him  as  the  Saviour  when  He  died ;  resurrection  revived  His 
renown,  and  ascension  established  it  for  ever,  "  That  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  shall  bow."  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the  name  Jesus  occurs  nearly 
seven  hundred  times  in  the  four  Gospels,  Christ  alone  some  sixty  times  in  the 
Gospels  and  in  the  Acts,  Jesus  Christ  but  five  times  in  the  Gospels,  and  Christ  Jesus 
not  once  in  those  books.  We  may  regard  Jesus  as  therefore  the  name  given 
among  men.  3.  Joshua,  to  which  name  Jesus  corresponds,  is  composed  of  a 
portion  of  the  name  Jehovah,  and  of  a  word  which  signifies  salvation.  So  that 
the  etymon  would  signify  the  Lord's  salvation,  or  Lord  of  salvation.  This  name 
was  given  to  the  Son  of  Man,  to  a  Bethshemite  in  the  time  of  Samuel,  to  a 
governor  among  the  cities  of  Judah  in  the  days  of  Josiah,  and  to  a  high  priest  in 
the  days  of  Haggai.  The  name,  though  in  use,  was  not  common,  and  it  was  given 
the  Son  of  Mary  with  a  special  signification.  4.  But  who  is  this  Jesus  ?  He  is  God 
manifest  in  flesh.  He  has  all  the  attributes  and  properties  of  God,  but  while  on 
earth  He  "  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,"  &c.  He  has  all  the  attributes  and 
properties  of  humanity,  but  without  sin.  In  Him  is  all  that  is  requisite  for  com- 
plete redemption.  God  has  given  this  name — in  writing  to  be  read,  by  preaching  to 
be  heard  ;  given  it  Himself  that  it  may  never  be  forgotten,  and  that  it  may  be 
above  every  name ;  given  it  among  men,  that  men  may  read  and  hear  it,  learn  and 
repeat  it,  incorporate  it  with  their  prayers  and  their  songs,  and  that  it  may  be- 
come as  familiar  in  their  mouths  as  any  household  word.  IV.  Salvation  limited 
\  TO  this  peeson.     1.  There  have  been  other  names  under  heaven  given  among 


CHAP,  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  377 

men.  The  Pharisees  gave  the  name  of  Abraham,  and  said,  "We  have  Abraham  \ 
for  our  father,"  and  the  name  of  Moses,  saying,  "  We  are  Moses'  disciples."  The 
false  prophet  of  the  sixth  century  gave  his  own  name.  The  Church  of  Rome  gives 
the  name  of  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,  the  names  of  angels,  saints  and  martyrs, 
and  above  aU,  the  name  of  Mary.  But  Abraham  was  the  ancestor  of  the  Saviour, 
not  the  Saviour  ;  Moses  was  a  prophet  of  the  Saviour,  not  the  Saviour ;  Mahomet 
was  self-deceived  and  a  deceiver ;  the  Church  is  composed  of  the  saved,  not  of 
saviours ;  the  angels  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation,  they  cannot  save  them ; 
and  Mary  is  indebted  for  her  own  salvation  to  her  own  son  Jesus.  2.  But  not  only 
have  other  names  been  put  forward,  but  things  have  been  presented  as  saviours. 
Thus,  sacraments  are  given  among  men  as  means  of  salvation,  and  men-made 
creeds,  and  membership  with  particular  churches,  and  good  works.  But  these  are 
given  among  men  by  men,  and  not  by  God.  3.  It  would  be  interesting  to  inquire 
into  the  causes  of  other  names  and  things  being  put  forward.  Perhaps  the  chief 
cause  is  pride.  We  shrink  from  the  practical  acknowledgment  of  entire  and 
absolute  dependence  upon  the  grace  of  God  for  our  redemption ;  we  despise  the 
simplicity  of  faith,  or  we  are  not  prepared  to  follow  after  holiness.  But,  however, 
this  may  be,  "  neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other."  4.  There  is  much  mystery 
surrounding  this  name,  the  mystery  of  the  holy  incarnation,  of  the  union  of  the 
Divine  and  human  natures,  of  oneness  with  the  Father,  co-existing  with  subjection 
to  the  Father,  of  the  temptation  and  agony,  and  of  the  "  Eloi,  Eloi,"  of  the  grave 
and  resurrection  and  ascension  ;  but  we  cannot  afford  to  neglect  the  name  Jesus 
because  of  the  mystery  which  surrounds  it,  because  "  neither  is  there  salvation  in 
any  other."  5.  There  are  differences  of  opinion  concerning  Him  who  bears  this 
name  Jesus.  Some  deny  His  Deity,  others  His  true  humanity.  Some  refuse  to 
recognise  Him  as  victim  and  priest,  and  do  Him  homage  only  as  a  teacher ;  others 
leave  Him  in  the  sepulchre  among  all  the  mighty  dead.  The  unbelieving  Jew  still 
accounts  Him  an  impostor,  the  believing  Gentile  crowns  Him  Lord  of  all.  But 
amidst  this  diversity  of  opinion  we  may  not  say,  "  I  suspend  my  judgment."  We 
must  on  this  subject  make  up  our  minds.  Nor  can  we  hold  error  without  fearful 
pern,  for  "  neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other."  6.  Many  who  say  they  are 
saved  by  Christ  show  no  signs  of  redemption.  As  we  look  at  them  we  say, 
"Saved  from  what?"  If  they  be  saved,  what  must  they  have  been  before? 
There  are  men  who  boast  that  they  are  saved,  who  are  such  children  of  the  devil, 
that  many  have  said,  "  If  this  be  salvation,  may  Heaven  keep  it  far  from  me  ! " 
But  -what  then  ?  Although  many  who  say  they  are  saved  exhibit  no  signs  of 
salvation — yea,  more,  although  but  few  be  saved — yea,  more,  if  as  yet  not  one  soul 
has  been  saved,  my  text  abides  true,  "  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other." 
7.  Many  men  think  their  own  cases  too  singular  to  be  saved  by  Christ  Jesus.  One 
man  is  sceptical,  and  his  doubtings  are,  in  his  judgment,  of  the  most  e>;'  aordinary 
character  There  have  been  sceptics  many,  but  none  like  himself.  A  second  was 
once  an  atheist  or  a  deist,  and  in  the  denial  of  religious  truth  proceeded  farther 
than  he  can  conceive  it  possible  for  an  infidel  to  go.  A  third  has  been  a  blas- 
phemer. A  fourth  has  been  a  licentious  profligate.  A  fifth  has  been  more  cruel 
than  a  beast  of  prey.  A  sixth  once  wore  the  form  of  godliness  while  destitute 
of  the  power.  A  seventh  once  heard  the  Word  with  joy,  but  endured  only  for  a 
while ;  tribulation  arose  and  he  was  offended.  The  eighth  has  been  a  biUer  per- 
secutor. Now,  each  of  these  say,  Jesus  may  save  others,  but  He  cannot  save  me. 
But  whatever  eminence  a  man  may  have  in  thp.t  which  is  sinful,  if  he  be  saved  at 
all,  he  must  be  saved  by  the  Redeemer  of  the  least  of  sinners.  There  is  one  sun 
to  rule  our  day,  one  moon  to  rule  our  night,  one  atmosphere  round  our  globe  in 
which  to  breathe  and  move,  and  not  another.  "  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any 
other."  Conclusion  :  1.  And  are  there  any  persons  here  who  believe  not  on  Jesus  ? 
If  there  be,  who  can  they  be  ?  Surely  not  the  children  of  believing  parents  ?  Not 
those  who  are  now,  or  who  have  been,  in  our  Christian  schools?  Not  the 
possessors  of  a  New  Testament  ?  Not  those  who  regularly  or  even  occasionally 
hear  the  gospel?  Not  such  as  know  this  name  Jesus?  Or  is  it  so,  that  the  un- 
believers here  consist  of  these  very  classes  ?  Not  believe  !  Why  do  you  not  believe  ? 
This  name,  by  faith  in  this  name,  saves.  The  ignorant  by  faith  come  to  this  Jesus 
as  a  teacher ;  the  unwise  by  faith  come  to  this  Jesus  as  wisdom's  fountain  ;  the 
foolish  builders  by  faith  come  to  earth's  Creator ;  the  impure  by  faith  come  to  this 
Jesus,  as  to  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  all  uncleanness  ;  the  conscience-wounded 
creature  comes  by  faith  to  this  physician  of  souls,  that  He  may  make  him  whole  ; 
the  f alien  come  by  faith  to  this  Jesus,  mighty  to  save,  that  He  may  lift  them  up  ; 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

and  if  you  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  you  will  be  saved.  2.  My  brothers, 
believe.  Do  I  hear  you  say,  "  Go  thy  way  for  this  time  "  ?  For  this  time  I  Why 
for  this  time  ?  Ah,  I  know  wby — that  you  may  drink  more  freely  of  this  world's 
pleasures,  3.  Believers  in  this  name,  do  your  utmost  to  make  it  known.  When 
you  see  it,  does  it  not  sparkle  beneath  your  eye  as  the  gem  of  gems  ?  When  you 
hear  it,  does  it  not  sound  as  heaven's  sweetest  music  in  your  ear  ?  and  in  your 
heart  of  hearts,  do  you  not  feel  it  to  be  the  power  of  God  to  your  salvatioo  ?  Then 
do  your  best  to  sustain  the  men  by  whom,  and  to  uphold  the  places  in  which,  this 
name  of  names  is  preached.  (S.  Martin.)  Only  one  way  in : — Standing  opposite 
Fort  William,  a  missionary  heard  the  Mussulmans  and  Chinamen  saying,  "  There 
are  very  many  gates  into  Fort  William — there  is  an  hospital  gate,  a  water  gate,  and 
others.  Now,  Sahib,  it  is  just  the  same  in  regard  to  heaven.  Chinamen  get  in  at 
one  gate,  Mussulmans  in  at  another,  and  Hindoos  in  at  another  !  "  "  Yes,"  the 
missionary  said,  "  that  is  true ;  but  there  is  a  sentinel  at  every  gate,  and  every 
sentinel  has  the  same  watchword,  and  you  cannot  get  into  it  without  that 
watchword.  '  There  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men 
whereby  we  must  be  saved '  but  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified."  Christianity 
the  only  reformatory  force: — 1.  Four  great  facts  confront  us  at  every  turn. 
(1)  There  is  that  in  the  world  which  men  have  consented  to  call  vice.  (2)  There 
is  that  in  the  world  which  men  have  consented  to  call  virtue.  (3)  This  vice 
and  virtue  has  its  residence  not  in  the  human  physique  or  intellect,  but  in  that 
which  you  and  I  have  consented  to  call  character.  (4)  The  power  to  suppress  vice 
and  to  develop  virtue  is  not  in  man  nor  of  man,  but  from  God.  2.  These  are  four 
facts,  confirmed  by  the  whole  race,  that  stand  to-night  unchallenged.  And  we  stand 
here  to  advocate  the  great  thought  in  the  text  that  the  only  power  whereby  vice  can 
be  suppressed  and  virtue  developed  is  the  power  of  Christianity,  manifested  through 
a  personal  Christ,  resident  in  the  human  heart.  I.  The  libeealism  of  to-dat  is 
opposed  to  such  a  thought,  and  points  us  to  other  sodkces  of  kefobmatoey  powee. 
1.  Our  attention  is  directed  to  China,  where  a  name  is  held  as  sacred  as  the  name 
of  Christ  by  us.  Once  a  year  the  Emperor,  surrounded  by  his  court,  enters  a  temple, 
and  exclaims :  "  Confucius,  Confucius,  how  great  is  Confucius ;  before  Confucius 
there  was  no  Confucius,  and  since  Confucius  there  has  been  no  Confucius  ;  Con- 
fucius, Confucius,  how  great  is  Confucius  I  "  Now  what  was  the  radical  conception 
of  humanity  by  Confucius  ?  It  was  that  humanity  is  radically  good,  that  it  is 
capable  of  the  highest  form  of  virtue,  independent  of  any  external  force  ;  hence  he 
gives  to  his  countrymen  the  five  relations.  The  great  reformatory  force  of  Con- 
fucius was  subordination  ;  the  obedience  of  the  wife  to  the  husband  ;  of  the  child  to 
the  parent ;  of  the  youngest  brother  to  the  eldest  brother ;  of  the  youngest  friend  to 
the  oldest  friend  ;  and  of  the  subject  to  the  Emperor.  Let  us  honour  Confucius  for 
the  moral  principles  he  gave  his  countrymen  ;  but  those  principles  have  been  tested 
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  and  what  are  the  results  ?  Go  all  through 
the  Chinese  Empire,  and  what  do  you  find  ?  Lying  and  theft,  and  all  forms  of 
dissipation ;  the  degradation  of  women ;  and  an  expenditure  of  £33,400,000  annually 
in  one  branch  of  idolatry.  2.  Then  in  the  East  there  is  another  rival  name,  the 
name  of  a  man  who  sways  his  sceptre  over  more  than  100,000,000  of  people  in 
China,  Japan,  the  Isles  of  the  Sea.  Sakya-Muni  went  forth  with  the  two  great  ideas 
that  vice  is  the  result  of  the  change  that  is  apparent  all  around  us,  and  that  to 
secure  virtue  the  mind  must  rise  to  that  law  under  which  no  things  change.  Hence 
the  name  Buddha  is  given  to  one  who  ascertains  that  changeless  law,  I  have  no 
interest  in  misrepresenting  this  great  man,  I  would  estimate  him  a  providential 
man,  as  Socrates  and  Plato.  But  when  he  is  brought  as  a  rival  against  my  Master 
I  am  bound  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  his  proposals  to  make  humanity  better.  He 
gave  noble  precepts  to  his  people,  and  that  six  hundred  years  before  Christ  came 
into  the  world.  He  issued  His  commandments,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill,''  "  Thou  shalt 
not  steal,"  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery,"  all  of  whicb,  however,  can  be  traced 
to  Moses.  But  now  go  all  through  where  Sakya-Muni  has  swayed  his  religious 
sceptre.  Here  not  only  are  his  precepts  violated,  but  all  the  precepts  in  our  Ten 
Commandments.  3.  In  India  we  find  another  rival  to  our  Master  in  the  form  of 
Brahma.  The  great  theory  in  Brahminism  for  the  elevation  of  humanity  is  that  as 
sin  abides  in  the  flesh,  and  virtue  in  the  intellect,  we  must  reduce  the  physical  to 
the  minimum,  and  exalt  the  intellect  to  the  maximum,  and  then  we  suppress  vice 
and  develop  virtue.  Well,  let  us  judge  of  Brahminism  by  its  results.  Let  us  go  to 
that  fair  land,  where  all  nature  is  lovely  and  only  man  is  vile.  Look  at  the  idolatry 
— 300,000,000  of  godsl     Woman  is  degraded;  childhood,  especially  female  child- 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  379 

hood,  is  sacrificed  ;  Thuggism  prevails,  and  there  vices  are  dominant.  And  all  this 
is  the  result  of  the  insufficient  reformatory  force  in  Brahminism.  4.  I  do  not 
mention  Mohammedanism,  for  Mohammedanism  is  not  original ;  it  is  plagiarism. 
II.  Now  TUKN  TO  Christianity.  What  is  Christ's  radical  idea  of  the  condition  of 
humanity  ?  It  is  that  human  nature  is  bad,  and  that  this  badness  is  in  the  con- 
dition of  the  will,  conscience,  and  affections,  and  that  out  of  this  moral  condition 
flows  vice,  and  that  out  of  vice  comes  the  misery  of  the  world.  Now,  what  does 
He  propose  to  do  ?  To  transform  by  a  supernatural  power.  1.  We  must  not  look 
upon  Him  as  a  mere  philanthropist ;  Christ's  philanthropy  is  subordinate  to  His 
supernatural  power.  Christ  did  not  come  to  improve  the  physical  condition  of  man. 
Do  you  tell  me  that  He  performed  miracles  ?  True  ;  but  not  as  a  philanthropist.  He 
did  not  raise  all  the  dead,  or  heal  all  the  sick ;  but  only  where  He  could  write  a 
credential  for  His  great  mission  to  renew  the  human  heart.  The  significance  of  the 
miracles  of  Jesus  Christ  is  this,  that  all  through  the  East  there  prevailed  the  idea 
that  sin  was  in  matter,  and  that  there  was  no  power  in  the  universe  by  which  matter 
itself  could  be  controlled.  Hence  He  performed  His  miracles  simply  to  prove  that 
He  was  higher  than  nature,  and  that  matter  was  subject  to  H;m.  He  was  not  a 
philanthropist  in  the  ordinary  sense.  The  orphans  cried  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem, 
but  He  erected  no  orphan  asylum  ;  He  never  founded  a  college.  He  might  have 
given  to  the  world  a  perfect  system  of  science  and  a  Materia  Medica  that  would 
have  alleviated  the  sufferings  of  humanity.  But  He  did  nothing  of  the  kind.  He 
might  have  anticipated  great  inventors  ;  whatever  to-day  seems  to  be  the  glory  of  our 
civilisation  must  have  floated  through  His  Divine  imagination.  But  this  was  not 
the  purpose  of  His  coming.  Nor  did  He  come  as  a  statesman.  Twice  He  was 
invited  to  be  a  judge,  but  He  declined  ;  once  He  was  asked  to  be  a  king,  but  He 
refused.  He  expressed  no  preference  for  this  form  of  government  or  that.  He 
knew  that  government  was  oppressive,  and  slavery  fearful,  but  He  issued  no  pro- 
clamation of  emancipation.  The  social  evil  prevailed,  but  He  organised  no  meet- 
ings for  reclamation.  Intemperance  prevailed,  yet  He  never  offered  the  pledge  of 
total  abstinence  to  any.  War  prevailed,  yet  He  did  not  organise  peace  societies. 
Even  idolatry  cursed  every  hill  and  valley,  yet  He  organised  no  crusade  against 
idolatry.  What  He  did  not  do  is  as  remarkable  as  what  He  did  do.  The  infidels 
of  to-day  arraign  Him  because  He  did  not  do  these  things.  2.  But  listen !  His 
eye  looked  down  the  ages,  and,  passing  over  China,  saw  what  subordination  or 
subjugation  had  failed  to  do ;  over  the  region  swayed  by  Buddha,  and  saw  what  his 
teaching  had  failed  to  do  ;  over  India,  and  saw  that  intellectual  culture  had  proved 
a  failure  ;  over  Rome,  and  saw  that  law  had  failed  to  suppress  vice  or  develop  virtue  ; 
over  Greece,  where  art  was  in  its  glory ;  and  there  He  saw  that  the  esthetics  of 
civilisation  had  failed,  and  that  art  was  not  a  reformatory  force.  Then  He  said, 
"  I  will  now  enter  the  citadel  of  man;  I  will  come  to  each  individual,  and  ask  him 
to  permit  Me  to  incarnate  Myself  in  him  ;  to  enchain  his  conscience  to  My  severe 
morality,  to  harmonise  his  will  with  Mine,  to  enthrone  Myself  in  his  affections ;  I 
will  make  each  man  a  living,  walking,  speaking  Christ."  3.  He  resolved  not  to  do 
what  men  could  do.  He  knew  that  man,  unaided  by  Him,  could  educate  the  mind, 
could  bless  the  orphan  and  comfort  the  widow ;  but  He  resolved  to  touch  the 
fountain  of  life  that  all  the  streams  might  be  pure,  and  just  in  proportion  as  He  is 
received  as  the  regenerator  of  the  human  heart,  in  that  proportion  do  public 
charities  become  facts,  and  benevolence  is  a  sublime  truth  in  the  world.  A  learned 
Chinese  in  Philadelphia  wrote  a  series  of  articles  to  this  effect — that  in  his  country 
there  were  houses  of  charity  for  the  reception  of  the  widow  and  the  aged,  but  he 
should  have  had  the  honesty  to  tell  two  facts — first,  that  in  his  country  there  is  no 
h)use  of  charity  which  antedates  the  introduction  of  Christianity;  and,  secondly, 
that  on  the  banks  of  the  Yang-tse-kiang  there  is  a  house  of  charity  for  animals 
which  antedates  Christianity.  Those  Chinese  are  in  advance  of  Darwin,  for  they 
say  these  animals  are  to  be  men  in  the  next  world.  In  the  same  city  I  attended 
the  semi-centennial  of  the  Bible  Society.  First  came  upon  the  stand  a  mute,  who, 
in  his  graceful  language,  recited  to  us  the  Beatitude,  "Blessed  are  they  that  mourn, 
for  they  shall  be  comforted."  Then  came  a  beautiful  girl  born  deaf,  but  Christian 
science  had  taught  the  mute  lips  to  speak,  and  she  whispered,  "  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  Then  came  a  Chinese  lady  who  was  born 
blind,  brought  to  this  country  and  converted,  and  Christian  science  had  taught  her 
fingers  to  read  deftly  in  the  language  of  the  blind,  "  The  Lord  is  my  sbepberd,  I 
shall  not  want."  Christian  science  is  doing  to-day  what  Christ  did  in  His  person. 
The  genius  of  Christianity  working  through  renewed  hearts  is  writing  its  credentials 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiP.  iv. 

in  favour  of  our  Divine  Lord.  Is  it  true  He  did  not  found  a  college  or  a  university  ? 
He  did  something  better  ;  He  placed  in  the  hands  of  each  man  a  book  that  should 
tell  men  of  the  character  and  the  claims  of  Almighty  God  ;  that  should  inform 
man  of  his  own  origin,  that  he  is  immortal,  and  responsible  to  the  ages  as  he  is  to 
God ;  a  book  that  should  present  to  him  the  noblest  specimen  of  virtue  and  the 
grandest  laws  of  morality,  and  wherever  this  Book  has  spread  its  banner  of  wisdom 
and  love  knowledge  has  been  diffused,  universities  founded,  and  science  advanced. 
Christ  did  not  come  as  a  statesman?  He  declared  the  brotherhood  of  mankind ; 
He  announced  the  eternal  principles  of  truth  and  justice,  and  He  knew  that 
wherever  these  principles  were  accepted,  from  a  heart  that  had  been  renewed  by 
Him,  tliere  government  would  be  modified,  oppression  would  cease,  and  liberty 
would  be  enjoyed.  Is  it  true  He  did  not  organise  missions  to  reclaim  the  poor 
courtesan  ?  He  knew  it  was  necessary  to  create  a  new  affection  in  the  heart  of  men 
and  of  women,  for  Him  to  be  received  into  the  human  heart,  to  restrain  passion  ; 
and  He  knew  that,  having  been  thus  received,  there  would  come  a  refoimation  of 
this  fearful  class  in  society.  Only  in  a  Christian  land,  and  as  Christianity  becomes 
a  living  force  in  society  is  the  social  evil  branded  and  banished.  Is  it  true  He  did 
not  offer  the  pledge  of  total  abstinence  to  any  ?  He  knew  that  antecedent  influences 
would  be  at  work  at  first,  and  that  great  moral  forces  must  operate.  Is  it  true  He 
did  not  organise  peace  societies?  He  whispered  that  Beatitude,  "  Blessed  are  the 
peacemakers,"  and  He  very  well  knew  that  only  as  humanity  is  transformed  by 
His  power  would  war-passions  cease  and  men  live  in  sweet  harmony  together. 
Christian  men  have  organised  the  only  peace  societies  in  the  world.  (/.  P. 
Neivman,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Now  when  they  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  John. — St.  Peter;  or, 
true  courage  : — The  grace  of  God,  which  St.  Peter's  character  and  story  specially 
forces  on  our  notice,  is  the  true  courage  which  comes  by  faith.  There  is  a  courage 
which  does  not  come  by  faith,  but  from  hardness  of  heart,  obstinacy,  anger,  or 
stupidity,  which  does  not  see  danger  or  feel  pain.  That  is  the  courage  of  the 
brute.  One  does  not  blame  it.  It  is  good  in  its  place,  as  all  things  are  which  God 
has  made.  It  is  good  enough  for  the  brute  ;  but  it  is  not  good  enoush  for  man. 
You  cannot  trust  it  in  man.  And  the  more  a  man  is  what  a  man  should  be,  the  less 
he  can  trust  it.  The  more  mind  a  man  has,  so  as  to  be  able  to  foresee  danger  and 
measure  it,  the  more  chance  there  is  of  his  brute  courage  giving  way.  The  more 
feeling  a  man  has  the  more  chance  there  is  of  his  brute  courage  breaking  down, 
just  when  he  wants  it  more  to  keep  him  up,  and  leaving  him  to  play  the  coward 
and  come  to  shame.  Yes  ;  to  go  through  with  a  difficult  or  dangerous  undertaking 
a  man  wants  more  than  brute  courage.  He  needs  to  have  faith  in  what  he  is  doing 
to  be  certam  that  he  is  in  the  right.  Look  at  the  class  of  men  who  in  times  of 
peace  undergo  the  most  fearful  dangers.  Not  a  week  passes  without  one  or  more 
of  them,  in  trying  to  save  life  and  property,  doing  things  which  are  altogether 
heroic.  What  keeps  them  up  to  their  work  ?  High  pay  ?  The  amusement  and 
excitement  of  the  fires  ?  The  vanity  of  being  praised  for  their  courage  ?  Those 
are  motives  which  would  not  keep  a  man's  heart  calm  and  his  head  clear  undt^r 
such  responsibility  and  danger  as  theirs.  No ;  it  is  the  sense  of  duty.  The 
knowledge  that  they  are  doing  a  good  and  noble  work,  that  they  are  in  God's  hands, 
and  that  no  evil  can  happen  to  him  who  is  doing  right.  Yes  ;  it  is  the  courage 
which  comes  by  faith  which  makes  men  like  St.  Peter  and  St.  John.  "  I  will  not 
fear,"  said  David,  "  though  the  earth  be  moved,  and  the  mountains  carried  into  the 
midst  of  the  sea."  The  just  man  who  holds  firm  to  his  duty  will  not,  says  a  wise 
old  writer,  "  be  shaken  from  his  solid  mind  by  the  rage  of  the  mob  bidding  him  do 
base  things,  or  the  frown  of  the  tyrant  who  persecutes  him.  Though  the  world 
were  to  crumble  to  pieces  round  him,  its  ruins  would  strike  him  without  making 
him  tremble."  Such  courage  has  made  men,  shut  up  in  prison  for  long  weary 
years  for  doing  what  was  right,  endure  manfully  for  the  sake  of  some  great  cause, 
and  say — 

"  Stone  walls  do  not  a  prison  make,  nor  iron  bars  a  cage." 

There  is  but  one  thing  you  have  to  fear  in  heaven  or  earth — being  nntrue  to  your 
better  selves,  and  therefore  untrue  to  God.  If  you  will  not  do  the  thing  you  know 
to  be  right,  and  say  the  thing  you  know  to  be  true,  then  indeed  you  are  weak. 
You  are  a  coward,  and  sin  against  God,  And  you  will  suffer  the  penalty  of  your 
cowardice.    You  desert  God,  and  therefore  you  cannot  expect  Him  to  stand  by  you. 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  381 

But  who  will  barm  you  if  you  be  followers  of  that  which  is  right?  (Psa.  xv.  1-5.) 
There  is  a  tabernacle  of  God  in  which,  even  in  this  life,  He  will  hide  us  from  strife. 
Tbere  is  a  hill  of  God  in  which,  even  in  the  midst  of  danger,  and  labour,  and 
anxiety,  we  may  rest  both  day  and  night — even  Jesus  Christ,  the  Eock  of  Ages — He 
who  is  the  righteousness  itself,  the  truth  itself.  And  whosoever  does  righteousness 
and  speaks  truth,  dwells  in  Christ  in  this  life,  as  well  as  in  the  life  to  come.  And 
Christ  will  give  him  courage  to  strengthen  him  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  to  stand  in  the 
evil  day,  the  day  of  dangpr,  and  having  done  all  to  stand.  (C.  Kincjdey,  31. A.) 
Christian  heroism  : — The  Church  was  born  and  nursed  amid  storms.  The  advocates 
of  Christianity  have  frequently  met  with  unexpected  opposition  and  cruel  persecu- 
tion. Men  whose  office  it  was  to  promote  the  progress  of  truth  have  striven  to 
impede  its  course.  Persecution  intimidates  the  weak,  but  ennobles  and  purifies  the 
true.  The  text  teaches  us  three  things  about  the  genuine  disciple.  I.  That 
Christian  men  aee  inspired  with  Divine  courage  in  times  of  persecution. 
"  They  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  John."  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  a 
Christian  and  a  worldly  man  in  times  of  trouble.  The  worldly  man  is  timid, 
irritable,  and  restless  ;  the  Christian  man  is  calm,  courageous,  and  hopeful. 
Nothing  can  calm  and  strengthen  a  man  more  than  a  full  assurance  of  God's 
protection.  Three  things  show  that  the  disciples  were  endowed  with  Divine  forti- 
tude. 1.  Look  at  their  noble  defence.  Peter  speaks  courageously  and  eloquently 
for  Christ.  2.  Look  at  their  bold  attack.  Peter  charged  his  accusers  with  ignor- 
ance, they  had  rejected  Christ ;  he  charged  them  with  sin,  they  had  crucified 
Christ.  3.  Look  at  their  undaunted  spirit.  They  were  commanded  to  cease  from 
preaching  ;  but  they  remained  steadfast  to  the  truth.  God  can  inspire  His  children 
with  courage  to  meet  the  fiercest  conflicts  of  life — to  endure  pain,  to  suffer  poverty, 
to  bear  bereavement,  to  meet  persecution.  II.  That  Christian  men  are  inspired 
WITH  Divine  wisdom  in  times  op  persecution.  "And  perceived  that  they  were 
unlearned  and  ignorant  men."  Christ  had  promised  to  impart  wisdom  to  His 
disciples  in  times  of  danger.  "When  they  deliver  you  up,  take  no  thought  how 
and  what  ye  shall  speak,  for  it  shall  be  given  you  in  that  same  hour  what  ye  shall 
speak."  "  I  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  wisdom  that  all  your  adversaries  shall  not 
be  able  to  gainsay  and  resist."  Three  things  show  that  the  disciples  were  Divinely 
instructed.  1.  They  were  enabled  to  make  a  special  declaratioQ  of  the  power  of 
Christ.  The  examination  was  particular — "  by  what  name  "  they  had  performed  the 
miracle.  The  answer  was  particular — "  by  the  name  of  Jesus."  It  was  a  merciful 
work,  a  successful  work,  a  Divine  work.  2.  They  were  enabled  to  make  a  suitable 
declaration  of  salvation  in  Christ :  "neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other."  3. 
They  were  enabled  to  make  a  public  declaration  of  their  faith  in  Christ :  "  there  is 
no  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  They 
believed  in  the  supremacy  of  Christ.  They  knew  He  was  both  the  Son  and  the 
Sent  of  God.  His -word  was  true.  His  work  was  complete.  "If  any  man  lack 
wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God."  Christian  men  ought  to  speak  boldly  in  defence  of 
the  truth.  Speak  for  Christ  anywhere  and  everywhere,  in  the  shop  and  in  the 
market,  at  fasts  and  at  feasts.  Speak  of  His  hfe,  His  atonement.  His  resurrection, 
His  intercession.  III.  That  Christian  men  are  inspired  with  a  Divine  influ- 
ence IN  TIMES  OP  PERSECUTION.  "And  they  took  knowledge  of  them  that  they 
had  been  with  Jesus."  The  man  who  has  frequent  intercourse  with  Jesus  will 
reflect  his  Master's  spirit.  Communion  with  Christ  makes  a  man  gentle, 
patient,  courageous,  devout,  and  zealous.  When  Moses  came  down  from  Mount 
Sinai  his  face  shone  with  such  a  Divine  lustre  that  the  children  of  Israel  "  were 
afraid  to  come  nigh  him."  The  influence  the  disciples  possessed  is  noticeable  for 
three  things.  1.  It  was  a  visible  influence.  "  They  saw,  perceived,  took  knowledge 
of  them."  There  is  something  in  the  conduct,  disposition,  and  countenance  of  a 
good  man  that  reports  itself ;  his  influence  is  felt  in  the  world,  the  Church,  the 
family  circle.  A  Divine  life  cannot  be  concealed  ;  the  light  must  shine.  2.  It  was 
a  mighty  influence.  They  silenced  their  accusers,  they  convinced  their  hearers, 
they  converted  five  thousand  men.  3.  It  was  a  spiritual  influence.  The  miracle 
only  excited  attention,  the  word  produced  conversion.  {Joseph  Woodhou-e.) 
Christian  heroism  : — We  sometimes  hear  it  stated  that  courage  is  a  quality  that  is 
decreasing ;  that  men  are  wise,  enterprising,  and  refined,  but  not  courageous. 
That  opinion  is  not  true  even  of  physical  bravery.  It  also  ignores  the  altered  con- 
ditions of  life.  If  we  look  into  life  and  see  wh  it  is  necessary  to  realise  any  great 
purpose  in  it,  we  shall  conclude  that  opportunities  are  rot  wanting  for  the  display 
of  high  heroism.     The  old  bravery  is  not  extinct,  it  is  transformed  and  directed  to 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

better  ends.  It  is  the  fortitude  that  comes  from  faith,  love,  and  duty  that  is  needed 
in  these  times.  Christianity  is  the  religion  of  heroism,  as  opposed  to  the  creeds  of 
expediency  and  prudence.  It  begets  in  us  that  temper  of  mind  from  which  high 
achievements  naturally  flow.  It  reveals  a  universal  conflict  between  truth  and 
error  in  which  true  chivalry  must  be  shown.  The  boldness  of  the  mariner  or  the 
adventurer  we  may  not  all  be  caUed  to  rival,  but  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  John 
we  must  all  possess,  if  we  are  to  fight  our  battle  faithfully  and  attain  the  crown  of 
life.  Peter  and  John  are  examples  of  the  new  courage — the  heroism  of  hearts 
inspired  by  love,  and  living  for  the  benefit  of  others.  Christianity  had  to  fight. 
How  did  it  bear  itself  in  the  conflict  ?  Did  it  take  counsel  of  safety,  compromise, 
policy  ?  No !  what  one  is  struck  by  in  the  action  of  the  apostles  is  an  audacity 
that  is  caution,  a  calmness  that  is  power,  and  a  love  that  impressed  friends  and 
foes.  Peter  declares  that  it  is  by  the  power  of  the  risen  Christ  the  healed  man 
stood  before  them.  That  is  the  true  explanation  of  all  progress.  The  confidence, 
the  contempt  of  suffermg,  the  holy  elevation  of  soul  with  which  Peter  uttered  that 
statement  filled  all  with  surprise ;  they  took  knowledge  of  them  that  they  had 
been  with  Jesus.  That  was  the  result  of  Peter's  boldness.  It  turned  judges  into 
criminals,  and  apostles  into  judges.  It  brought  about  their  acquittal,  and  the  still 
greater  progress  of  their  cause.  If  Peter  had  wavered,  all  had  been  lost.  Similar 
devotion  do  we  need  to-day,  not  only  for  the  conflict  of  Christian  truth  with  error, 
but  for  the  destruction  of  evil  in  laws,  institutions,  and  habits,  and  for  the  every-day 
battle  of  life.  I.  Christian  heroism  results  from  fellowship  with  Christ.  , 
The  sense  of  the  heroic  is  in  all  men  ;  the  disposition  to  admire  the  great  and  ex- 
ceptional in  the  lives  and  acts  of  men.  Life  would  be  very  monotonous  if  all  men 
occupied  one  level  of  power.  The  sameness  of  nature  is  broken  up  by  mourjtains, 
torrents,  cataracts,  and  by  crises.  So  the  torpor  of  social  life  is  brolien  up,  and  a 
new  sense  of  power  reached,  by  the  presence  of  heroes,  and  of  the  heroic.  The 
hero  is  one  whose  faculties  are  raised  to  a  higher  plane  of  power  than  ordinary  men 
rea''h.  Before  Christ  came  there  had  been  such  characters.  In  various  countries 
and  at  different  times  they  had  appeared  :  military  heroes  like  Alexander ;  political 
heroes  like  Pericles;  intellectual  heroes  like  Plato  and  Socrates;  artistic  heroes  like 
Phidias;  reforming  heroes  like  Elijah,  Buddha,  Confucius;  patriotic  heroes  like 
Moses  and  David.  But,  wonderful  as  were  the  doings  of  these  men,  they  do  not 
fully  satisfy  the  sense  of  the  heroic.  Their  mastery  over  nature  was  not  complete ; 
their  knowledge  was  limited;  their  sympathies  were  not  univeisal;  their  greatness 
was  measurable.  The  world  needed  the  expression  of  a  higher  enthusiasm.  Jesus 
Christ  realised  and  transcended  aU  these  conditions.  The  special  qualities  of  all 
other  heroes  meet  in  Him.  Consider  His  personality.  His  knowledge,  His  labours. 
His  conflicts,  His  sufferings  and  triumphs.  And  now  that  He  is  exalted  to  the 
throne  of  the  universe,  and  praised  and  adored  as  the  glorified  Son  of  God,  what  is 
His  purpose  towards  His  disciples  ?  To  impart  unto  them  His  own  enthusiasm, 
courage,  power,  and  glory.  How  does  Jesus  Christ  infuse  His  spirit  into  His  dis- 
ciples ?  1.  He  reveals  to  them  the  high  possibilities  of  their  nature.  The  unheroio 
mind  sees  the  actual  as  the  measure  of  the  possible.  The  heroic  mind  says, 
"  All  things  are  possible."  Jesus  Christ  is  the  measure  of  human  possibility.  He 
sees  and  awakens  the  capabilities  of  men.  He  saw  the  possibilities  of  Peter,  of 
Paul,  of  Augustine,  of  Luther,  of  John  Howard,  of  Carey,  and  educated  their  faculties 
to  realise  tliem.  2.  Jesus  Christ  gives  absolute  certainty  about  the  truth  He 
teaches.  If  Peter  had  doubted,  boldness  would  have  fled.  3.  Jesus  gives  courage 
by  demanding  the  surrender  of  self.  All  cowardice  results  from  self-consciousness. 
Let  self  be  devoted  to  a  worthy  end,  fear  dies.  4.  Jesus  Christ  teaches  us  that 
heroism  is  the  universal  law  of  heaven.  The  heroisms  of  earth  are  the  common- 
places of  heaven.  5.  Jesus  Christ  concentrates  our  powers  on  one  great  aim. 
Distraction  destroys  heroism.  The  balloon  must  be  steered.  6.  Jesus  Christ  sus- 
tains His  followers  by  His  presence.  Peter  denied  Jesus  when  he  was  charged. 
The  Master  does  not  disown  the  servant,  but  stands  by  him.  II.  Christian  hero- 
ism SHOULD  BE  manifested  IN  VARIOUS  SPHERES.  1.  In  witnessing  to  Christ  in 
common  life.  2.  In  faithfulness  in  temptation.  3.  In  new  methods  of  Christian 
service.  4.  In  loyalty  to  personal  conviction.  5.  In  responses  to  special  calls  to 
duty.  6.  By  the  boldness  of  our  prayers.  III.  Christian  heroism  produces  great 
RESULTS.  IV.  Christian  heroism  is  possible  to  all.  Peter  the  denier  trans- 
formed into  Peter  the  heroic  witness.  Be  not  discouraged,  cleave  to  Jesus,  and  in 
Him   be    strong.      (J.   Matthews.)  The  boldness   of   apostolic   preaching  : — I. 

The  position  and  character  of  these  men  who  were  grieved  at  the  apostles' 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  383 

TEACHING  OF  THE  RESURRECTION.     Most  of  them  Were  Sadducees,    rich,    courtly, 
influential,  holding  the  Pharisees  in  contempt  as  did  the  Pharisees  the  common 
people.     A  crisis  was  now  impending.     The  impress  of  the  Great  Teacher  was  too 
great  to  be  denied.     Tone,  look,  manner,  put  the  apostles'  training  above  suspicion. 
All  had  admitted  the  originality  of  Jesus  as  a  teacher,  and  had  opposed  Him  on  this 
account.     Lo  !  this  originality  has  reappeared.     The  old  controversy  had  suddenly 
returned.      Jerusalem  was  in  a  moral  upheaval.     In  this  God's  hand  strikingly 
appears.     To  confront  the  Sadducees  was  the  initial  work  of  Christianity.     The 
question  of  "  Jesus  and  the  resurrection  "  must  be  settled  at  once.     Other  questions 
might  be  postponed  till  Sadduceeism  received  its  deathblow.     So  the  risen  Christ 
confronted  them  everywhere  and  "  sore  troubled"  them.     II.  The  consciousness 
OF  THE  Sadducees  as  to  the  power  op  Christianity.     "  We  cannot  deny  it."    If 
the  miracle  is  undeniable,  then  the  source,  in  the  risen  Christ,  is  undeniable.    Only 
one  resource  remains — sdence  the  preachers  !     But  can  they  be  silenced  ?     The 
leader  of  the  hour  was  lately  a  weak  man,  who  quailed  before  a  servant-maid.     Now 
he  stands  with  John  unflinchingly  before  the  most  formidable  tribunal    of  the 
country.      How  is  it  ?      The  secret  escapes  their    own    lips..       "  The    boldness  " 
astonishes  them,  and  they  put  it  down  to  the  fact  that  they  had  been  with  Jesus. 
Was  this  conscience  ?     No.     There  was  no  sense  of  guilt  here.     It  was  fear.     In  the 
boldness  of  Peter  and  John  they  saw  the  answer  to  "  His  blood  be  upon  us  and  our 
children."     III.  No  one  can  have  been  with  Jesus  as  a  disciple  and  not  show 
IT  thereafter  in  his  spirit  and  action.     The  human  heart  was  made  for  Him, 
and  when  renewed  receives  His  fulness.     This  is  the  secret  of  Christian  influence. 
{A.  A.  Lipscomb,  LL.D.)         Courage  comes  from  faith: — Courage  comes  from  faith  ! 
Faith  always  leads  us  out  of  self  and  teaches  us  to  believe  in  the  possibilities  of 
others.     No  nature  can  be  strong  that  is  not  enthusiastic,  and  no  nature  can  be 
enthusiastic  that  has  not  faith.     The  man  who  has  faith  in  other  men  and  other 
things,  and  other  manifestations  of  life  and  character  than  his  own,  will  always 
have  courage.     And  this  faith  of  which  we  hear  so  much  in  the  matter  of  religion 
is  not  only  a  Bible  quality  ;  it  is  a  quality  which  is  found  in  the  busiest  market-places 
of  life  and  among  the  most  successful  of  earthly  heroes.     Columbus  bound  in  his 
prison  was,  after  all,  a  stronger  nature  than  the  crowned  Ferdinand  upon  his  throne, 
for  his  faith  realised  an  undiscovered  continent.     It  was  said  of  William  Pitt,  the 
younger,  the  Prime  Minister  of  England  at  twenty-three  years  of  age,  that  no  one 
ever  entered  his  closet,  if  it  was  for  only  live  minutes,  who  did  not  come  out  of  it  a 
stronger  and  braver  man  than  he  was  when  he  went  in.     Count  Cavour,  when  he 
made  Italy  the  free  kingdom  that  it  is,  was  once  asked  how  he  came  to  be  so  trusted 
by  every  one,  and  said,  in  reply,  that  it  was  simply  because  he  believed  in  men,  and 
trusted  them.     There  can  be  no  courage  without  faith ;  for  it  is  faith  which  bears 
our  trembling  natures  away  from  their  earthly  moorings  to  some  unknown,  unseen 
reality,  which  exists  because  the  soul  believes  in  its  existence.         Serving  God  with 
boldness  : — Mr.  Moody  told  of  a  young  man  who  attended  his  meetings  at  the 
Hippodrome  in  New  York.     He  was  long  before  he  would  confess  to  this  belief  in 
Christ,  and  when  at  length  he  did  so,  Mr.  Moody  asked  him  what  had  kept  him 
back.     He  replied  that  he  knew  he  had  to  make  a  clean  breast  of  his  profession  to 
his  room-mate,  and  he  was  deterred  by  the  fear  of  being  laughed  at.     Eventually 
he  summoned  up  courage.     He  sat  in  his  room  reading  the  Bible,  and  presently  he 
heard  his  mate  coming  up  the  stair.     His  first  impulse  was  to  shut  the  Bible  and 
put  it  away  in  his  trunk.     His  second  thought  restrained  him,  however,  and  he 
continued  his  reading.     His  bed-fellow  came  in  and  saw  him  with  the  Bible  before 
him,  and  going  up  to  him,  said,  "  Are  you  interested  in  such  things  ?  "     "  Yes,  I 
am."     "  How  long  have  you  been  so  ?  "     "  Since  Mr.  Moody  preached  on  such  and 
such  a  text  at  the  Hippodrome."     "  Well  now,  that  is  strange,  I  was  impressed  with 
the  same  address,  and  all  these  nights  I  have  been  trying  to  screw  up  my  courage 
to  read  my  Bible  before  you."     "  And  I  have  only  succeeded  to-night  in  getting  my 
courage  up  to  read  mine  before  you."     Mr.  Moody  remarked,  "  We  want  men  who 
have  got  boldness  and  courage.     If  it  is  right  to  serve  God,  then  let  them  serve 
Him  with  boldness,  without  regard  to  what  man  will  think."        And  perceived  that 
they  were    unlearned   and  ignorant   men,   they   marvelled. — True  religion  the 
wonder  of  men  : — This  astonishment  was  the  natural  effect  of  the  appearance  of  a 
true  Christianity  differing  so  greatly  from  all  its  surroundings,  of  an  effect  dis- 
proportionate to  the  apparent  cause.     Strange  coincidence  that  in  the  moment  of 
their  amazement  the  rulers  should  give  the  true  explanation,  "  They  have  been 
with  Jesus."    This  should  remind  us,  in  the  face  of  those  powers  now  leagued 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

against  us,  that  we  too  possess  a  supernatural  power,  ever-victorious,  be  tlie 
combat  what  it  may.  This  amazement — I.  Was  the  manifestation  of  the  spirit 
OF  THE  WORLD  WHICH  BELIEVES  ONLY  IN  THE  VISIBLE,  whether  as  to  power,  riches, 
or  science.  1.  None  of  these  characteristics  were  found  in  these  men,  therefore 
when  the  power  of  the  invisible  and  Divine  appears  in  them,  it  is  beyond  the  com- 
prehension of  the  world  which  ignores  that  the  visible  is  the  Son  of  the  invisible, 
and  Uves  by  its  inspiration.  2.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  amazement  was  felt  by 
the  representatives  of  a  holy  religion.  One  could  understand  the  Eomans,  men  of 
war,  or  the  Greeks,  lovers  of  art,  or  the  worshippers  of  gods  which  were  only  per- 
sonifications of  natural  or  human  feeling,  feeling  such  amazement.  But  here  we 
are  in  the  land  of  the  prophets,  yes — but  religion  was  in  a  state  of  decay,  impreg- 
nated with  tlie  spirit  of  the  world.  Therefore  its  pride  was  punished  and  its 
wisdom  confounded.  II.  Arose  from  the  illiteracy  of  the  disciples.  1. 
Opposition  does  not  exist  between  religion  'and  science  in  itself,  but  between  false 
knowledge  and  religion.  Two  conditions  of  religious  knowledge  proceed  from  the 
nature  of  its  object,  which  is  God.  (1)  The  moral  intuition  of  the  heart  and  con- 
science. (2)  The  communication  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Learning  destitute  of  these 
conditions  is  ignorance,  but  having  them  the  apostles  could  aiiord  to  be  illiterate. 
See  that  learned  man  with  his  phylacteries.  He  reads  the  Scriptures,  but  under- 
stands nothing;  compare  him  with  the  man  who  was  born  blind.  Yes,  these 
apostles,  opening  their  minds  to  the  teaching  of  the  Master,  have  learned  more 
than  all  the  sages  of  Jerusalem.  2.  Application  to  the  present  time.  (1)  Man  , 
objects  to  illiterate  Christianity  compared  to  antichristianity.  But  the  objection 
must  be  overruled,  for  Christianity  has  knowledge  rich  and  fruitful.  Fear  nothing, 
therefore.  (2)  God  wills,  perhaps,  to  lead  us  back  to  the  intuitions  of  the  heart  and 
conscience.  (3)  Above  all,  we  should  learn  the  lessons  of  the  upper  room,  that  we 
may  cause  our  contemporaries  to  acknowledge  that  we  "  have  been  with  Jesus." 
(jG.  De  Pressense,  D.D.)  Influence  of  unlearned  hut  true  piety  : — Next  came  a 
negro  servant.  He  was  my  next  evangelist.  I  used  to  watch  him  in  the  field,  and 
in  the  house,  and  even  now,  with  my  mature  reflection,  I  cannot  remember  ever  to 
have  seen  him  do  a  wrong  act.  As  I  worked  beside  him  in  the  field,  he  used  to  tell 
me  his  experience,  and  where  he  learned  this  and  that  hymn  ;  and  then  he  would 
sing  as  only  the  African  can  sing,  and  I  used  to  wish  that  I  could  have  such  religion 
as  that  negro  enjoyed.  When  we  went  to  bed^-he  and  I  slept  in  the  same  garret, 
he  in  one  corner  and  I  in  the  other ;  some  people  would  think  it  a  dreadful  thing 
to  have  to  share  a  garret  with  a  negro — when  we  went  to  bed  he  used  to  pile  his  pillows 
up  behind  him  so  that  he  could  lie  sitting  up,  take  his  hymn-book,  and  fasten  his 
candle  up  somewhere  so  that  he  could  see.  He  would  sing  hymn  after  hymn  with 
such  relish  and  enjoyment,  the  big  tears  frequently  rolling  down  his  dark  face,  that 
I  used  to  be  cut  to  the  heart  with  remorse,  that  I,  a  minister's  son,  brought  up  with 
every  advantage,  should  be  so  much  worse  than  a  poor  negro.     I  would  lie  there 

and  pretend  to  be  asleep,  while  all  the  time was  singing  right  at  my  conscience, 

and  I  was  crying  heartily  to  hear  him.  Oh,  how  glad  I  should  have  been  could  I 
have  changed  places  with  that  poor  negro  serving-man,  if  it  hadn't  been  for 
cheating  him  1  I  think  that  lived,  acted  out  religion  does  more  good  to  children 
than  all  the  talking  that  can  be  done,  though  talking  certainly  should  not  be 
omitted.  That  African  did  me  more  good  than  all  the  ministers  that  ever  came  to 
my  father's  house.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Unbelievers  astonished: — There  are  two 
sets  of  problems  which  excite  the  attention  of  the  unbelief  of  every  age — intellectual 
and  practical.  The  first  provokes  antagonism,  the  second,  mostly  wonder.  It  is 
with  the  second  that  we  have  here  to  do.  Note — I.  The  courage  of  the  weak  m 
THE  presence  of  IRRESISTIBLE  MIGHT.  What  that  might  and  that  weakness 
were  had  been  felt  eight  short  weeks  ago.  Nor  had  the  one  grown  weaker  or 
the  other  stronger  by  lapse  of  time.  Yet  in  the  face  of  the  power  which  could 
commit  them  to  prison,  to  scourging  and  to  the  cross,  these  two  helpless  men 
deliberately  brought  themselves  into  collision  with  the  authorities.  The  like  has 
been  witnessed  in  every  age,  when  the  tender  child,  the  gentle  maiden,  the  aged 
have  dared  the  fires  of  martyrdom  for  the  cause  of  Christ.  The  like  is  still 
witnessed  in  the  conflict  with  the  powers  of  darkness,  the  resistance  to  worldly 
solicitation,  the  endurance  of  contempt,  poverty,  and  affliction  even  with  gladness. 
Whence  this  courage  ?  asks  the  infidel.  Ah  1  we  know.  "  We  have  been  with 
Jesus."  II.  The  victory  of  the  ignorant  when  confronted  with  the  wisdom 
OF  THIS  WORLD.  What  chance  had  these  uneducated  fishermen  in  the  presence  o£ 
a  whole  college  of  learned  Eabbis  ?    Yet  the  Rabbis  were  made  to  look  very  foolish, 


CHAP.  IT.]  THE  ACTS.  385 

and  the  fishermen  won  a  triumph  such  as  a  philosopher  might  have  envied.  So 
has  it  ever  been.  It  was  so  with  Jesus  as  a  child,  it  was  so  with  Him  as  a  man. 
" Whence  has  this  man  letters?"  It  has  been  so  with  His  followers  ever  since. 
How  often  has  Christianity  been  slain  in  the  opinion  of  its  opponents !  Scholar- 
ship has  left  no  weapon  unused.  But  the  victory  of  Christianity  is  all  along  the 
line.  And  this  not  because  of  the  labours  of  its  learned  "  apologists." 
The  disciples  of  Celsus  were  not  vanquished  by  the  treatises  of  Origen,  but  by  the 
witness  of  obscure  slaves  and  artisans.  The  tide  of  infidelity  in  the  last  century 
was  not  stemmed  by  Butler's  "  Analogy,"  but  by  the  testimony  of  Kingsvvood 
colliers  and  Lincolnshire  labourers.  The  good  fight  of  faith  to-day  is  not  won  by 
academic  men  in  secluded  cloisters,  but  by  "  unlearned  and  ignorant  "  successors 
of  the  men  who  could  not  but  speak  the  things  they  had  seen  and  heard.  And  scep- 
tics marvel.  They  need  not,  for  it  is  an  open  secret,  "We  have  been  with  Jesus." 
III.  The  persistency  with  which  Chkistians  adhebe  to  a  discredited  cause. 
Here  were  men  calmly  avowing  themselves  disciples  of  a  crucified  malefactor,  and 
prepared  to  be  crucified  themselves  rather  than  abandon  not  simply  His  cause,  but 
His  very  cross.  It  was  this  which  astonished  the  cultured  Greek  and  the  practical 
Roman ;  it  is  this  which  has  astounded  both  persecutors  and  onlookers  ever  since. 
The  offence  of  the  cross  has  not  ceased,  yet  millions  still  glory  in  it.  Wonderful, 
says  the  worldHng,  that  these  fanatics  should  renounce  our  pleasures  and  profits, 
and  deliberately  prefer  a  life  of  self-sacrifice  and  service  of  others.  Wonderful, 
sa.>s  the  modern  thinker,  that  men  in  the  nineteenth  century  should  hold  to  a 
creed  formulated  in  the  first.  Not  at  all  wonderful,  says  the  Christian,  "  I  have 
been  with  Jesus."  IV.  The  reason  of  it  all,  which  is  the  greatest  wonder.  How- 
can  there  be  fellowship  with  Jesus  ?  And  if  that  were  possible,  how  can  that 
fellowship  make  men  bold  in  persecution,  invincible  in  argument,  enlhusiastic  in 
attachment,  and  so  hold  the  field  all  through  the  centuries  ?  Ah,  perhaps  we 
ourselves  cannot  tell.  All  we  can  say  is,  "  We  have  been  with  Jesus,  and  He  has 
baptized  us  with  the  power  from  on  high,  which  has  made  us  bold.  We  have 
been  with  Jesus,  and  have  learned  of  Him,  and  with  His  wisdom  have  been  made 
wise.  We  have  been  with  Jesus,  and  His  love  has  created  a  union  which  death, 
life,  angels,  princip  ilities,  powers,  &c.,  cannot  break."  We  can  say  nothing  further 
to  a  woniiering  world  except  "  Come  and  see  "  ;  then  you  will  know  what  we  know, 
but  cannot  speak.  {J.  W.  Burn.)  They  took  knowledge  of  them,  that  they  had 
been  with  Jesus. — Christians  who  have  been  with  Jesus  : — The  apostles  are  called 
unlearned  and  ignorant,  or  private  men,  i.e.,  men  of  private  education.  They 
were  not  men  who  then  appeared  unlearned  and  ignorant.  The  freedom  with 
which  they  spake,  their  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  force  of  their 
reasoning,  convinced  the  rulers  that  they  were  at  that  time  men  of  superior  abili- 
ties and  acouirements.  But  it  was  matter  of  wonder  how  these  men  who  had  only 
had  a  private  education,  and  never  had  been  instructed  in  the  Jewish  schools, 
should  so  speak  ;  but  the  fact  that  "  they  had  been  with  Jesus  "  was  sufficient  toj 
account  for  it  all.  It  is  here  observable,  that  though  Christ  chose  men  of] 
private  education,  yet  He  sent  them  not  forth  to  preach  until  they  had  been  for' 
some  time  under  His  own  immediate  instruction.  Paul,  whose  early  education  had 
been  superior,  was  previously  instructed  in  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  by  Ananias. 
Even  in  that  day,  when  uncommon  gifts  were  bestowed  by  the  Spirit,  a  prepara- 
tory education  was  ordinarily  required  for  the  gospel  ministry.  Novices  were  not 
to  be  introduced  into  so  great  and  important  an  ofiice.  How  absurd  is  it,  then,  in 
this  day,  when  supernatural  gifts  have  ceased,  for  the  unlearned  and  igno- 
rant to  assume,  without  a  previous  education,  the  work  of  public  instruction ! 
I.  The  expression  "being  with  jesus"  may  be  applied  to — 1.  All  who  I 
enjoy  the  gospel.  Peter  and  John,  and  their  fellow  disciples,  were  admitted  to ' 
familiar  converse  with  their  Lord.  You  have  His  gospel,  which  communicates  the 
instructions  they  heard,  the  works  they  beheld,  the  example  they  followed,  and 
the  devotions  in  which  they  joined.  In  regard  therefore  to  all  the  purposes  of 
faith,  knowledge  and  vu-tue,  you  may  be  with  Him  as  truly  as  they  were.  If  a 
living  voice  will  touch  the  heart  more  sensibly,  yet  the  written  word  is  better 
adapted  to  enrich  your  memory  and  improve  your  knowledge.  2.  The  true 
behever.  He  has  received  the  renewing  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and 
experienced  the  sanctifying  power  of  his  gospel.  This  the  first  disciples  had. 
Barely  to  behold  Christ's  works  and  receive  His  instructions,  was  but  a  small  thing 
compared  with  this.  But  there  are  times  when  true  believers  have  special  inter- 
course with  Christ.  (1)  In  their  private  devotions.  (2)  In  social  worship.  "Where 
VOL.  I.  25 


386  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  My  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them." 
(3)  In  the  Holy  Communion.  II.  Those  who  have  been  with  Jesus.  Should — 1. 
Be  watchful  against  all  sin.  You  have  seen  Him  who  suffered  death  to  redeem 
you  from  iniquity ;  how  can  you  continue  any  longer  therein  ?  2.  As  having 
been  trained  up  under  His  instructions,  excel  in  religious  knowledge.  3. 
Show  themselves  to  be  like  Him.  Learn  of  Him  to  be  meek  and  lowly, 
patient  and  contented,  pious  and  heavenly.  4.  Set  their  affections  on  things 
in  heaven,  for  Jesus  is  there.  5.  Like  the  apostles,  discover  zeal  and 
fortitude  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  6.  Be  loving.  (J.  Latliroj),  D.D.)  Fellow- 
ship with  Jesus: — I.  Life's  tkuest  fellowship.  It  is  with  Jesus.  1.  It  is 
real.  "Enoch  walked  with  God."  2.  It  is  spiritual  (Rom.  viii.).  3.  It  is  hearifelt 
(Luke  xxiv.  32).  4.  It  is  sustaining  (2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10).  5.  It  is  eflficiicious  (Rom. 
viii.  37 ;  Phil.  iv.  13).  6.  It  is  constant  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  II.  The  marks  of 
life's  truest  fellowship.  1.  Simple  faith  (chap.  iv.  7-12).  2.  Manly  courage 
(chap.  iv.  20).  3.  Sanctified  wisdom  (chap.  iv.  19).  4.  Decisive  choice  of  Associa- 
tions (chap.  iv.  23).  5.  Faithful  consistency  of  character  in  all  things  (Luke  i.  6). 
III.  The  influence  of  life's  truest  fellowship.  1.  It  awakens  surprise. 
"  They  marvelled."  2.  It  produces  conviction.  "They  took  knowledge  of  them 
that  had  been  with  Jesus."  3.  It  disarms  the  enemy  (chap.  iv.  21.)  {Homiletic 
Review.)  Beenwith  Jesus : — I.  We  must  be  much  with  Him  by  meditating  on 
His  great  love  for  us  displayed  in    His  sufferings   on    our   behalf.     II,  We 

MUST  BE  MUCH  WITH  JeSUS  IN  STUDYING  THE  EXAMPLE  He  HAS  SET  US.  HI. 
We    MUST    BE    MUCH    WITH   JeSUS    IN     HOLDING     COMMUNION     WITH     HiM.       (HomiUst.) 

Keeping  company   ivith  Jesus  : — I.  It    is  possible  to  keep  company  with  Jesus. 

1.  In  His  Word.  2.  In  the  sanctuary.  3.  In  the  closet.  4.  At  His  table.  5.  In 
every  path  of  service.  II.  Keeping  company  with  Jesus  will  result  in  some 
assimilation  of  character.  1.  In  proportion  to  the  degree  of  intimacy.  2.  The 
constancy  of  the  intercourse.  3.  The  regard  we  have  for  our  Companion.  III. 
The  resemblance  to  Chbist,  in  habit  and  character,  will  be  manifest  to  the 
WORLD.  The  disciple  may  be  unconscious  of  it,  but — 1.  God  will  see  and 
reward  it.  2.  Angels  will  note  it  and  rejoice.  3.  Brethren  will  discern  it  and  be 
encouraged  or  rebuked.  4.  The  ungodly  will  be  forced  to  confess  it,  to  the  honour 
of  religion.  (Homiletic  Review.)  Fellowship  with  Jesus  : — I.  As  a  spiritual 
possibility.  By  many  lightly  esteemed,  by  some  ignored,  and  by  others  denied, 
fellowship  with  Him  in  His  work,  word,  worship,  is  real  (1  John  i.  3).  As  real  now 
as  with  the  disciples  of  Emmaus,  as  with  the  youths  in  the  fire,  as  with  Paul. 
John,  or  Peter.  II.  As  an  essential  experience.  However  ignored  or  denied,  it 
is  a  necessity  of  spiritual  life.  Christ  cannot  be  known  but  by  fellowship.  1,  It 
is  the  initial  act  of  living  faith.  Consciously  or  unconsciously,  each  soul  that 
seeks  has  fellowship.  The  woman  touched  "hem  of  garment,  and  fellowship 
resulted,  though  she  knew  not  its  meaning.  So  in  prayer  of  contrite  as  well  as  in 
sublimest  communion.  2.  It  is  the  constant  solace  of  earnest  spirits.  Mid  life's 
perplexing  problems  and  heavy  sorrows,  this  is  support.  It  is  indispensable. 
The  body  would  as  soon  forget  to  breathe  as  the  heart  to  talk  with  and  lean  upon 
Christ.  "  Lo  I  am  with  you  alway,"  is  Christ's  promise  :  "I  am  continually  with 
Thee,"  is  the  heart's  reply.  III.  As  a  moral  inspiration  The  apostles  possessed 
the  secret  of  true  courage.  They,  of  all  men,  could  be  bold — 1.  Because  they 
believed  and  did  the  right.  They  knew  their  mission  and  their  message  to  be 
Divine  ;  this  made  them  invincible.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  flgain^t  us  ?  " 
"Who  is  he  that  shall  harm  you  if  you   be  followers  of  that  which  is  good?" 

2.  Because  they  believed  and  did  the  right  from  a  right  motive.  They  were  no 
time-servers.  Many  can  do  the  right  when  such  doing  is  popular.  Inquiring  too 
often  what  will  please,  what  will  suit,  not  what  is  right,  what  will  profit.  8. 
Because  they  believed  and  did  the  right  from  a  right  motive  un<)er  the  immediate 
inspiration  of  Christ.  Here  was  the  true  secret  of  courage.  "Fear  not,  for  I  am 
with  thee";  "  Go  in  this  thy  might."  IV.  As  the  secret  of  real  influence. 
"  They  took  knowledge  of  them,"  &c.  Priests  and  scribes  and  rulers  felt 
the  force  with  which  these  men  spoke.  They  exerted  an  influence  which 
— 1.  Transcended  social  distinctions;  they  were  but  fishermen.  2.  Sur- 
passed educational    attainments.     "They  were   unlearned   and   ignorant   men." 

3.  Lies  within  our  reach.  It  was  when  Jacob  had  been  alone  with  God 
that  he  was  enabled  to  meet  and  to  overcome  his  brother.  Be  much 
with  Christ,  and  you  shall  be  a  prince  amongst  men.  {W.  H.  Burton.) 
Fellowship  with  Christ  essential  to  courageous   testimony  for  Him: — I.    In   the 


CHAP,  rv.]  THE  ACTS.  387 

PRESENCE  OF  THE  WORLD.  To  havc  heard  or  read  of  Him  is  not  enough  :  we  must 
be  with  Him  ;  walk  with  Him  in  a  consenting  will,  love  Him  as  having  first  loved 
us,  be  joined  to  Him  in  one  Spirit.  They  who  have  been  with  Jesus  fear  not  the 
pomp,  nor  the  scotfs,  nor  the  threats  of  men.  A  man's  religion  before  the  world  is 
one  of  those  things  by  which  his  genuineness  as  a  Christian  are  most  readily  tested. 
By  testimony  for  Christ  I  do  not  mean  an  obtrusive  introduction  of  His  name 
and  dnctrines  at  all  times;  but  a  prudent  uncompromising  assertion  of  His  rights 
and  defence  of  His  precepts  and  servants  when  occasion  i-equires.  II.  Before  the 
FOE  WITHIN,  a  more  formidable  feat.  Many  a  man  could  bear  testimony  for  Christ 
before  a  world  in  arms,  who  yet  is  ignominiously  silent  in  the  council  chamber  of 
his  own  heart.  There — where  he  hopes,  or  fears,  or  loves — his  Redeemer's  name 
is  not  heard,  his  Saviour's  precepts  are  not  alleged,  his  Master's  example  is  not 
heeded.  Would  you  find  a  remedy  for  this  and  uplift  the  spirit  so  that  it  may 
assert  Christian  motives,  press  Christian  rules  of  action,  put  forward  Christ  as  his 
pattern?  Christ  must  dwell  in  your  heart  by  faith.  III.  In  the  time  of  sorrow. 
Ere  we  have  gone  on  long  in  life,  hopes  betrayed,  fears  realised,  joys  dashed  with 
bitterness,  nre  every  man's  companions.  And  sorrow  is  a  stern  suggester  of  doubts 
and  misbelief.  Would  you  bear  a  consistent  testimony  in  the  presence  of  sorrow  ?  I 
Here,  above  all,  you  require  the  Saviour's  presence.  Hearing  and  reading  of  Him 
may  do  while  the  weather  is  fair,  and  the  sails  are  set,  and  the  sea  is  smooth  ;  but  ' 
when  the  sky  is  overcast,  and  the  winds  are  awake,  and  the  sail  is  torn,  and  the 
bill  >ws  rage,  we  want  Him  in  the  boat  to  steer.  IV.  In  the  period  of  prosperity. 
If  sorrows  are  open  foes,  successes  are  to  us  enemies  in  disguise.  Many  a  man 
has  borne  noble  witness  to  his  Saviour  in  adversity,  but  how  few  have  glorified 
Him  in  the  broad  sunshine  Of  prosperity!  It  was  the  custom  of  persecutors  to  try  ; 
not  merely  tortures  to  shake  the  constancy  of  the  martyrs — these  only  a  few  craven 
dispositions  heeded — but  also  to  tempt  them  by  the  offer  of  advancement,  of  lands 
and  houses,  of  rank  and  honours.  And  the  father  of  persecutors  follows  the  same 
plan.  "  All  these  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me."  How 
shall  the  man  of  wealth,  the  magistrate,  the  statesman,  render  a  fearless  testimony 
to  the  Master  of  his  talents  and  time  ?  Only  in  one  way — only  on  one  condition. 
That  way  is  the  way  of  reality — that  condition,  communion  with  his  Lord  for 
himself.  "  They  took  Tcnowledge  of  them,  that  they  had  been  with  Jesus."  How 
different  is  the  decent  toleration  of  religion,  the  respectable  patronising  of  God,  Hi8 
service  and  His  people,  the  worldly-prudent  care  to  grasp  the  world  in  one  hand 
and  just  touch  the  refuge  with  the  other  ;  from  the  genuine  Christian  character, 
whose  fountains  gush  evermore  within,  which  is  found  always  fearless  on  the  side 
of  God  and  good,  submitting  to  obloquy  if  need  be,  endurii)g  hardness  as  a  good 
soldier  of  Christ.  And  there  is  nothing  short  of  being  with  Jesus  that  will  create 
such  a  character.  You  cannot  put  it  on — it  must  result  from  the  gradual  accretion 
of  many  experiences,  trials,  failures,  prayers,  years  spent  under  the  eye  and  within 
the  sound  of  the  voice  of  the  Saviour.  You  cannot  build  it  up  on  the  shifting 
sands  of  fashion,  or  on  the  soft  and  tempting  soil  of  self-indulgence  :  its  foundations 
must  be  on  the  holy  hills,  or  it  will  never  stand.  V.  In  the  hour  of  death. 
There  will  come  a  day  when  each  one  will  be  called  to  wrestle  with  the  last  foe :  to 
bear,  in  the  presence  of  his  past  life,  and  in  the  presence  of  those  who  are  to  out- 
live him,  his  witness  to  Christ.  Would  we  meet  death  fearless,  and  in  humble 
assurance  that  we  have  a  part  in  One  who  has  robbed  him  of  his  terrors  ?  There 
is  but  one  way,  and  that  way  is,  to  have  been  with  Jesus  during  our  lives.  There 
is  nothing  but  the  reality  of  the  Christian  life,  which  can  ensure  the  peace  of  the 
Christian's  death.  VI.  In  the  day  of  judgment.  Then  who  are  they  that  shall  escape 
the  wrath  of  the  Judge,  whom  the  crash  of  falling  worlds  shall  strike  unmoved  and 
fearless  ?  There  will  be  found  a  multitude  whom  no  man  can  number,  who  have 
washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Ange's  and 
men  shall  take  knowledge  of  them,  that  they  have  been  with  Jesus.  (Dean  Alford.) 
'J  he  Christian's  exemplification  of  religion  : — I.  By  what  marks  men  should  take 

KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  THAT  HE   HAS    BEEN   WITH    JeSUS.       1.    By  th»'  exclu-'ive 

dependence  with  which  he  regards  Him  as  his  Saviour.  2.  By  the  simplicity  with 
which  he  acknowledges  Him  as  a  Teacher.  3.  By  the  fidelity  with  which  he 
follows  Him  as  his  Example.  II.  To  what  end  this  munifestation  i^  demanded 
of  him.  1.  It  were  a  motive  of  irresistible  urgency  (if  no  other  existed),  to  one 
who  knows  his  obligations  to  redeeming  goodness,  that  He  who  bought  him  from 
the  condemnation  of  endless  death,  is  hereby  honoured  in  the  estimation  of  men. 
2.   To  this  powerful  impulse  I  would  add  the  animating  consideration,  that  the 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 

conduct  resulting  from  a  spiritual  and  saving  communion  with  Jesus  Christ  by 
faith,  may  be  advantageous  to  others ;  and  induce  them  to  glorify  God  iu  the  day 
of  their  visitation.  Lessons  :  1.  Kemember,  ye  who  profess  to  seek  Jesus,  that  as 
the  Jews  took  knowledge  of  the  apostles  that  they  had  been  with  Him,  so  the  world 
is  taking  knowledge  of  you.  2.  If  any  here,  like  the  chief  priests  and  Sadducees, 
are  taking  knowledge  of  those  who  have  been  with  Jesus,  to  blame  the  good  part 
they  have  chosen — to  cavil  at  the  principles  they  profess,  the  joys  tbey  feel,  the 
self-denial  they  practice,  or  the  faith  in  which  they  dehght— let  such  ungenerous 
observers  bear  ia  mind  Who  hath  said,  "  Blessed  is  he  whosoever  shall  not  be 
offended  in  Me."  (K.  P.  Buddicom,  31. A.)  Communion  wilh  Clirut  discovered  :— 
I.  When  may  we  be  said  to  have  been  with  Jesus?  1.  When  we  have  been 
engaged  in  piivate  devotion.  2.  When  we  have  been  attending  public  worship.  3. 
When  we  have  been  partaking  of  the  Holy  Communion,  There  "  we  dwell  in 
Christ,  and  He  in  us."  II.  By  what  pkoofs  should  men  take  knowledge  of  us 
that  we  have  been  with  Jesus?  1.  By  our  humility.  2.  By  our  zeal.  3.  By 
our  heaveuly-mindedness.  4.  By  our  holiness — hatred  of  sin,  and  determination 
to  avoid  it.  (R.  Davies,  3I.A.)  The  assimilation  of  character : — It  is  a  law  of  our 
nature  that  we  become  like  those  whom  we  habitually  admire  and  love.  This  is 
the  princijile  according  to  which  religions,  whether  true  or  false,  react  on  men's 
minds  and  hearts  for  good  or  evil.  By  worshipping,  men  are  assimilated  to  the 
moral  character  of  the  objects  which  they  adore.  In  China,  Buddhist  priests 
have  been  heard  to  say,  "  Think  of  Buddha,  and  you  will  be  transformed  into 
Buddha.  If  you  pray  to  Buddha  and  do  not  become  Buddha,  it  is  because  the 
mouth  prays,  and  not  the  mind."  The  same  is  true  in  the  highest  degree  of 
Christianity :  communion  with  God  in  Christ,  in  thfe  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
must  have  an  assimilating  effect,  very  gradual,  indeed,  but  sure.  "  There  are,"  it 
hrts  been  well  said,  "  some  men  and  women  in  whose  company  we  are  always  at 
our  best.  While  with  them,  we  cannot  think  mean  thoughts  or  sppak  ungenerous 
words.  Their  mere  presence  is  elevation,  purification,  sanctity.  AH  the  best  stops 
in  our  nature  are  drawn  out  by  their  intercourse,  and  we  find  a  music  in  our  souls 
that  was  never  there  before.  Suppose  even  that  influence  prolonged  through  a 
month,  a  year,  a  lifetime,  and  what  would  not  life  become?  To  have  lived  with 
Christ  must  have  made  us  like  Christ:  that  is  to  say,  a  Christian."  (W.  Bvrnet, 
M.A.)  The  odour  of  grace: — Men  carry  unconscious  signs  of  their  life  about 
them.  Those  that  come  from  the  forge,  and  those  from  the  lime  and  mortar,  and 
those  from  the  humid  soil,  and  those  from  dusty  travel,  bear  signs  of  being  work- 
men, and  of  their  work.  One  need  not  ask  a  merry  face  or  a  sad  one  whetber  it 
hath  come  forth  from  joy  or  from  grief.  Tears  and  laughter  tell  their  own  story. 
Should  one  come  home  with  fruit,  we  say,  "  Thou  art  come  irom  the  orchard  "  ;  if 
with  hands  full  of  wild  flowers,  "  Thou  art  from  the  fields  ";  if  one's  garments 
Bmell  of  mingled  odours,  we  say,  "Thou  hast  walked  in  a  garden."  But  how  much 
more,  if  one  hath  seen  God,  bath  held  converse  of  hope  and  love,  and  hath  walked 
in  heaven,  should  he  carry  in  his  eye,  his  words,  and  his  perfumed  raiment,  the 
sacred  tokens  of  Divine  intercourse  1  (H.W.  Beecher.)  Fellowship  witli  Christ : 
its  visible  effects : — Often  when  I  am  on  the  beach,  or  even  from  my  window,  I 
look  across  the  bay;  atid  I  can  just  see  a  speck  gleaming  against  the  grey  sands, 
or  the  surf-beaten,  sullen-looking  cliffs  of  Howth  beyond  ;  and  I  kuow  at  once  what 
the  speck  is  by  its  whiteness.  At  other  times  when  the  storm  has  come,  and  the 
waves  are  sweeping  over  the  rocks,  I  see  a  light  speck  upon  the  dark  cloud  curtain  ; 
and  I  know  it  is  a  brave  little  sea-gull  in  its  white  coat.  So  when  we  have  given 
ourselves  to  Jesus,  it  should  be  easy  for  those  round  about  us  to  see  that  we  have. 
When,  like  the  bird  on  the  sands,  we  are  doing  our  lowly  work,  the  white  robe 
sbould  be  visible ;  and  in  sorrow  and  trouble  the  whiteness  should  gleam  as  it  did 
in  the  lives  of  those  men  of  whom  we  are  told  in  the  New  Testament  that  others 
♦'took  knowledge  of  them  that  they  had  been  with  Jesus."  (J.  Bowker.)  Com- 
miiniciition  with  Christ  the  secret  of  power  to  bless  men : — On  Thursday  evening, 
March  29,  1883,  for  above  an  hour  all  who  hard^ccasion  to  use  the  telephone  in 
Chicago  found  it  vibrating  to  musical  tones.  Private  and  public  telephones,  and 
even  the  police  and  fire-alarm  instruments,  were  alike  affected.  The  source  of  the 
music  was  a  mystery  until  the  following  day,  when  it  was  learned  that  a  telegraph 
wire,  which  passes  near  most  of  the  telephone  wires,  was  connected  with  the 
harmonic  system  ;  that  tunes  were  being  played  over  it,  and  that  the  telephone 
wires  took  np  the  sounds  by  induction.  If  one  wire  carrying  sweet  sounds  from 
place  to  place  could  so  affect  another  wire  by  simp'y  being  near  to  it,  how  ought 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  389 

Christians  in  communication  with  Christ  in  heaven  to  affect  all  with  whom  they 
come  in  contact  in  the  world.  The  Divine  music  of  love  and  gentleness  in  their 
lives  should  be  a  blessing  to  society.  [Homiletic  Monthly.)  Communication  with 
<Jhri.st  the  source  of  pulpit  poiver : — It  is  related  that  one  of  his  hearers  once  asked, 
"  How  is  it  that  Mr.  Bramwell  always  has  something  that  is  new  to  tell  us  when 
he  preaches  ?  "  "  Why,"  said  the  person  interrogated,  "  you  see  Brother  Bramwell 
lives  so  near  the  gates  of  heaven  that  he  hears  a  great  many  things  that  we  don't 
get  near  enough  to  hear  anything  about."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ's  people — 
imitators  of  Him: — I.  What  a  believer  should  be — a  striking  likeness  of  Cbrist. 
You  have  read  lives  of  Christ  beautifully  and  eloquently  written,  but  the  best  life 
of  Christ  is  His  livmg  biography,  written  out  in  the  words  and  actions  of  His  people. 
A  Christian  sbould  imitate  Christ  in — 1.  His  boldness.  This  is  a  virtue  nowa- 
days called  impudence,  but  the  grace  is  equally  valuable  by  whatever  name  it 
maybe  called.  Christ  dealt  out  honest  truth;  He  never  knew  the  fear  of  man; 
He  stood  out  God's  chosen,  careless  of  man's  esteem.  Be  like  Christ  in  this. 
Have  none  of  the  time-serving  religion  of  the  present  day,  which  only  flourishes 
in  a  hot-bed  atmosphere,  a  religion  which  is  only  to  be  perceived  in  good 
company.  No ;  if  ye  are  the  servants  of  God,  be  like  Jesus  Christ ;  never  blush 
to  own  your  religion  ;  your  profession  will  never  disgrace  you — take  care  you 
never  disgrace  that.  2.  His  loveliness.  The  one  virtue  of  boldness  will  never  make 
you  like  Christ.  There  have  been  some  who,  by  carrying  their  courage  to  excess, 
have  been  caricatures  of  Christ  and  not  portraits.  Let  courage  be  the  brass  ;  let 
love  be  the  gold.  Let  us  mix  the  two  together,  so  shall  we  produce  a  rich 
Corinthian  metal,  fit  to  be  manufactured  into  the  beautiful  gate  of  the  temple.  The 
man  who  is  bold  may  accomplish  wonders.  John  Knox  did  much,  but  he  might 
Lave  done  more  if  he  had  had  a  little  love.  Luther  was  a  conqueror — still,  if  while 
he  had  the  fortiter  in  re  he  had  been  also  suaviter  in  modo,  he  might  have  done 
even  more  good  than  he  did.  So,  while  we  too  are  bold,  let  us  ever  imitate  the 
loving  Jesus.  .3.  His  humility.  In  England  a  sovereign  will  not  speak  to  a 
shilling,  and  a  shilling  will  not  notice  a  sixpence,  aud  a  sixpence  will  sneer  at  a 
penny.  But  it  should  not  be  so  with  Christians.  We  ought  to  forget  caste, 
•degree,  and  rank,  when  we  come  into  Christ's  church.  EecoUect,  Christian,  who 
your  Master  was — a  man  of  the  poor.  4.  His  holiness.  II.  When  should 
Ghkistians  be  this  ?  For  there  is  an  idea  in  the  world  that  persons  ought  to  be 
very  religious  on  a  Sunday,  but  that  it  does  not  matter  what  tbey  are  on  a  Monday. 
Is  there  a  time  when  the  warrior  may  unbuckle  his  armour,  and  become  like  other 
men  ?  No ;  at  all  times  and  in  every  place  let  the  Christian  be  what  he  professes 
to  be.  I  remember  talking  with  a  person  who  said,  "  I  do  not  like  visitors  who 
come  to  my  house  and  introduce  religion  ;  I  think  we  ought  to  have  religion 
when  we  go  to  the  house  of  God,  but  not  in  the  drawing-room."  I  suggested  that 
there  would  be  a  great  deal  of  work  for  the  upholsterers  in  that  case.  "  How  is 
that?"  was  the  question.  "Why,"  I  replied,  "we  should  need  to  have  beds 
fitted  up  in  all  our  places  of  worship,  for  surely  we  need  religion  to  die  with,  and 
consequently  every  one  would  want  to  die  there."  Ave,  we  all  need  the  consola- 
tions of  God  at  last ;  but  how  can  we  expect  to  enjoy  them  unless  we  obey  the 
precepts  of  religion  during  life  ?  Imitate  Christ — 1.  In  public.  Most  of  us  live 
in  some  sort  of  publicity.  The  eagle-eyed,  argus-eyed  world  observes  everything 
we  do ;  and  sharp  critics  are  upon  us.  Let  us  live  the  life  of  Christ  in  public. 
Let  us  exhibit  our  Master,  and  not  ourselves — so  that  we  can  say,  "  It  is  no  longer 
I  that  live,  but  Christ  that  liveth  in  me."  2.  In  the  Church.  How  many  there 
are  like  Diotrephes,  seeking  pre-eminence,  instead  of  remembering  that  there  all 
men  are  equal — alike  brethren.  Let  your  fellow-members  say  of  you,  "  He  has 
been  with  Jesus."  3.  In  your  houses.  Kowland  Hill  once  said  he  would  not 
believe  a  man  to  be  a  true  Christian,  if  his  wife,  his  children,  the  servants,  and 
even  the  dog  and  cat  were  not  the  better  for  it.  4.  In  secret.  When  no  eye  seeth 
you  except  the  eye  of  God,  then  be  ye  like  Jesus  Christ.  Eemember  His  necret 
devotion — how,  after  laboriously  preaching  the  whole  day,  He  stole  away  in  the 
midnight  shades  to  cry  for  help  from  His  God.  Take  care  of  your  secret  life.  III. 
Why  should  Christians  be  this  ?  1.  For  their  own  sakes.  For  their  honesty's 
sake,  their  credit's  sake,  their  happiness'  sake ;  let  them  imitate  Christ.  2.  For 
religion's  sake.  The  professor  who  has  not  lived  up  to  his  profession ;  the  man 
who  enters  the  fold,  being  nought  but  a  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing — such  men  injure 
the  gospel  more  than  the  laughing  infidel  or  the  sneering  critic.  3.  For  Christ's 
sake.     "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments."    Be  like  Christ,  since  gratitude 


3S0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 


demands  obedience ;  so  shall  the  world  know  that  ye  have  been  with  Jesus.  IV. 
How  HE  CAN  BE  SO.  1.  You  must  know  Christ  as  your  Eedeemer  before  you  can 
follow  Him  as  your  Exemplar.  2.  You  must  study  Christ's  character.  There  is  a> 
wondrous  power  about  that,  for  the  more  you  regard  it  the  more  you  will  be  con- 
formed to  it.  I  view  myself  in  the  glass,  I  go  away,  and  forget  what  I  was.  I 
behold  Christ,  and  I  become  like  Christ.  3.  "  But,"  say  you,  "  we  have  done  that, 
and  we  have  proceeded  but  little  farther."  Then  correct  your  poor  copy  every  day. 
At  night  recount  all  the  actions  of  the  twenty-four  hours,  scrupulously  putting 
them  under  review.  When  I  have  proof  sbeets  sent  to  me  of  any  of  my  writings, 
I  have  to  make  the  corrections  in  the  margin.  I  might  read  them  over  fifty  times, 
and  the  printers  would  still  put  in  the  errors  if  I  did  not  mark  them.  4.  Seek 
more  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Take  the  cold  iron,  and  attempt  to  weld  it  if  you  can 
into  a  certain  shape.  How  fruitless  the  effort !  Lay  it  on  the  anvil,  seize  the 
blacksmith's  hammer  with  all  your  might ;  let  blow  after  blow  fall  upon  it,  and 
you  shall  have  done  nothing.  But  put  it  in  the  fire,  let  it  be  softened  and  made 
malleable,  then  lay  it  on  the  anvil,  and  each  stroke  shall  have  a  mighty  effect,  so 
that  you  may  fashion  it  into  any  form  you  may  desire.  So  take  your  heart,  put 
it  into  the  furnace  ;  there  let  it  be  molten,  and  after  that  it  can  be  turned  like  wax 
to  the  seal,  and  fashioned  into  the  image  of  Jesus  Christ.  Conclusion  :  To  be  like 
Christ  is  to  enter  heaven ;  but  to  be  unlike  Christ  is  to  descend  to  hell.  Likes, 
shall  be  gathered  together  at  last,  tares  with  tares,  wheat  with  wheat.  (Ibid.) 
The  true  joyfulness  of  a  witness  for  God : — I.  On  what  it  is  founded.  1.  The 
experience  of  grace  in  the  heart.  2.  The  pure  Word  of  God  on  the  lip.  3.  The 
exemplary  walk  in  the  life.  II.  How  it  shows  itself.  1.  In  the  pulpit  by  the 
joyful  opening  of  the  mouth.  2.  In  the  world  by  the  fearless  testimony  of  the 
truth.  3.  Under  the  cross  by  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  III.  How  it 
woEKS.  1.  To  the  confusion  of  the  adversaries.  2.  To  the  building  up  of  the 
Church.      3.  To   the    glory   of    God.      (C.    Gei-ok.)  The   means    of  silencing 

blasphemers : — I.  Joyful  peeseverance  in  testimony.  II.  Exhibition  of  fruits. 
OF  work.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  14.  And  beholding  the  man  which  was  healed  .  .  .  they  could  say  nothlngr 
against  it. — Practical  testimony  to  Christianity  : — "Have  you  ever  heard  the  gospel 
before?''  asked  an  Englishman  at  Ningpo  of  a  respectable  Chinaman,  whom  he 
had  not  seen  in  his  mission-room  before.  "No,"  he  rephed,  "  but  I  have  seen  it. 
I  know  a  man  who  used  to  be  the  terror  of  his  neighbourhood.  If  you  gave  him 
a  hard  word  he  would  shout  at  you,  and  curse  you  for  two  days  and  nights, 
without  ceasing.  He  was  as  dangerous  as  a  wild  beast,  and  a  bad  opium  smoker  ; 
but  when  the  religion  of  Jesus  took  hold  of  him  he  became  wholly  changed.  He 
is  gentle,  moral,  not  soon  angry,  and  has  left  off  opium.  Truly,  the  teaching  is 
good  I  "  (Horidletic  Monthly.)  Mouths  closed  and  opened  : — I.  The  mouths  of 
the  rulers  were  closed.  They  could  say  nothing  against  the  miracle — 1.  As  a 
fact.  There  was  the  man  ;  that  he  was  lame,  that  he  now  walked  they  all  knew. 
There  are  equally  incontrovertible  facts  to-day.  Men  are  sober  who  were  once 
drunkards,  honest  who  were  once  thieves,  and  the  enemy  cannot  deny  it.  2.  As  a 
blessed  fact.  Not  a  man  amongst  them  but  would  have  confessed  that  lameness 
was  a  misfortune,  and  the  cure  of  it  a  blessing.  Similarly  when  sceptics  see  lives, 
homes,  circumstances  transformed  by  the  power  of  the  gospel,  they  can  say  nothing 
against  the  blessedness  of  the  transformation.  II.  The  mouths  of  the  rulers 
should  have  been  opened.  If  they  could  say  nothing  against  the  fact  they  ought 
to  have  said  something  for  it.  1.  They  should  have  accounted  for  it.  If  they 
rejected  the  apostles'  hypothesis  of  the  cure  they  should  have  framed  one  more 
satisfactory.  And  so  now.  The  blessed  facts  of  moral  healing  have  to  be  accounted 
for,  and  sceptics  are  bound  logically  to  account  for  them.  The  process  requires 
painstaking  and  honest  research,  and  candour  when  the  conclusion  is  reached. 
But  no  one  has  ever  reached  but  one  conclusion  which  will  satisfy  all  the  con- 
ditions of  the  case— the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  2.  They  should  have  been 
grateful  for  it  and  encouraged  its  repetition.  However  much  it  may  have  gone 
athwart  their  convictions,  at  least  the  sum  of  human  misery  was  by  so  much 
reduced  and  the  sum  of  human  happine-s  augmented — why,  then,  not  more?  The 
Marquis  of  Queensberry  candidly  confessed  his  disbelief  in  Christianity,  but  he 
could  not  ignore  the  blessedness  of  its  results,  and  so  in  logical  consistency  with 
the  knowledge  which  should  have  upset  his  illogical  unbelief  contributed  to  General 
Booth's  scheme.    III.  The  mouth  of  the  rulers  was  opened.     1.  In  secret  con- 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  391. 

fession  of  the  truth  of  the  fact  (ver.  16).  And  there  is  much  of  this  nowadays. 
Not  all  of  it  is  like  that  before  us  hypocritical.  Many  sceptics  are  privately  con- 
vinced of  the  unsoundness  of  their  position,  and  many  heathen  are  secretly  convinced 
of  the  truth  of  Christianity.  Let  us  hope  that  both  may  come  into  the  public 
light.  But  these  rulers,  like  others  to-day,  "  love  darkness  rather  than  light,"  &c. 
2.  In  open  prohibition  of  its  repetition  (ver.  18).  What  a  result  1  Here  were 
men  objecting  to  other  men  being  made  healthy  and  happy.  Why?  Because  it 
was  done  in  an  objectionable  way.  Let  us  not  be  surprised,  for  there  are  doctors 
who  forbid  the  use  of  any  remedies  that  are  not  in  their  pharmacopoeia,  although 
the  use  of  those  remedies  has  been  proved  to  be  beneficial,  and  there  are  also 
Christians  who  forbid  a  certain  style  of  preaching  and  preachers  although  they 
convert  souls.  3.  Ineffectually.  The  mouth  of  the  rulers  was  opened  to  close 
those  of  t'le  apostles,  instead  of  which  mouths  which  were  open  all  along  opened 
wider.  (1)  In  emphatic  and  persistent  testimony  (vers.  19,  20).  (2)  In  powerful 
and  prevailing  prayer  (ver.   24,  &c.).      (J.   W.  Burn.)         The   golden  muzzle: — 

I.  It  is  no  new  thing  for  the  gospel  to  be  opposed.  2.  Nor  a  strange  thing  for  the 
great,  the  official,  the  powerful,  and  the  influential  to  be  foremost  in  such  opposition. 
The  opposition  of  ungodly  men  is — (1)  Natural,  seeing  that  the  heart  of  man  is 
depraved.  (2)  Endurable,  since  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  suffered  it.  (3)  Harm- 
less, if  we  commit  the  case  to  God.  (4)  Overruled  for  good  by  Divine  grace  and 
wise  providence.  3.  The  best  and  perhaps  the  only  way  to  silence  opposition  is  by 
exhibiting  the  blessed  results  which  follow  from  the  gospel.  4.  Those  who  would 
say  anything  if  they  could,  can  say  nothing  of  what  they  would,  when  they  see 
before  their  eyes  the  cures  wrought  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  '*  The  man 
that  was  healed"  is  our  best  apologist.  Better  than  Paley's  "Evidences,"  or 
Butler's  "  Analogy,"  is  the  proof  given  by  results.  I.  The  gospel  is  vindicated  by 
ITS  RESULTS.  1.  On  a  broad  scale  in  nations.  England,  the  islands  of  the  Pacific, 
Jamaica,  Madagascar,  &c.  2.  In  individual  conversions  from  open  sin.  Some  of 
the  worst  of  men  have  become  clear  instances  of  the  purifying  power  of  the  gospel. 
8.  In  restoring  to  hope  the  comfortless  and  despairing.  Very  marvellous  is  its 
efi&cacy  in  the  direction  of  healing  mental  maladies.  4.  In  elevating  saints  above 
selfish  aims  and  designs,  and  inducing  heroic  consecrations.  The  biographies  of 
gracious  men  and  women  are  demonstrations  of  the  Divine  power  of  the  Word. 
5.  In  sustaining  character  under  fierce  temptation.  Wonderful  is  the  preserving  salt 
of  grace  amid  surrounding  putrefaction.  6.  In  holy  and  happy  death-beds.  These 
are  plentiful  throughout  history,  among  all  ranks  ;  and  they  never  fail  to  convince 
the  candid.  Many  another  catalogue  of  results  might  be  made.  Many  a  man  is 
unable  to  be  an  infidel  because  of  what  he  has  seen  in  his  mother,  wife,  or  child. 

II.  GosPEL-woRKS  AND  WORKERS  MUST  LOOK  FOR  LIKE  VINDICATION.  Nowadays  men 
ask  for  results :  the  tree  must  bear  fruit,  or  the  cry  is,  "Cut  it  down."  We  do 
not  shrink  from  this  test.  1.  The  minister  must  find  in  his  converts  a  proof  of 
his  call,  and  a  defence  of  his  doctrines,  methods,  peculiarities,  &c.  2.  A  society, 
college,  or  institution  must  stand  or  fall  by  its  fruits.  3.  The  individual  professor 
must  abide  the  same  test.  4.  The  Church  in  any  place,  and  the  Church  on  the 
largest  soale,  must  be  tried  by  similar  methods.  5.  Even  our  Lord  Himself  loses 
or  gains  honour  among  men  according  as  His  followers  behave  themselves.  IH. 
The  GOSPEL  and  its  woricers  deserve  vindication  AT  OUR  HANDS.  Those  who 
are  healed  should  boldly  stand  with  Peter  and  John  as  witnesses  and  fellow- 
workers.  This  suggests  a  series  of  practical  questions  : — 1.  Has  it  produced  blessed 
results  in  us  ?  2.  Have  we  come  forward  to  stand  with  the  preachers  of  it  in 
evidence  that  it  has  wrought  our  cure  ?  Are  we  continually  witnessing  to  the  truth 
and  value  of  the  gospel  of  Christ?  3.  Does  the  influence  of  the  gospel  upon  us 
so  continue  and  increase  unto  holiness  of  life  as  to  be  a  credit  to  its  influence  ?  4. 
Are  thei-e  not  points  in  our  character  which  harm  the  repute  of  the  gospel  ?  Should 
not  these  be  amended  at  once  ?  5.  CouLi  we  not  henceforth  so  live  as  more 
effectually  to  silence  the  opponents  of  the  Word?  Let  the  Church  plainly 
see  that  her  converts  are  her  best  defence :  they  are,  in  fact,  her  reason  for 
existence.  Let  converts  see  the  reason  why  they  should  come  forward  and  declare 
their  faith,  and  unite  with  the  people  of  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Opponents 
silenced  by  Christian  consistency  : — The  behaviour  of  some  professors  has  often 
given  the  wicked  an  opportunity  to  reproach  religion.  Lactantius  reports,  that 
the  heathen  were  wont  to  say,  "  The  Master  could  not  be  good,  when  His  disciples 
were  so  bad."  The  malice  of  sinners  is  such  that  they  will  reproach  the  rectitude 
of  the  law,  for  the  obliquity  of  their  lives  who  swerve  from  it.      Oh  that  your 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 


pure  life  did  but  hang  a  padlock  upon  their  impure  lips  !  {TFilliam  Seeker.) 
Conversions  the  test  of  a  good  ministry  .-—Certain  gentlemen  waited  upon  Kev. 
Matthew  Wilks  to  coniiplai'n  of  the  eccentricities  of  his  discourses.  Wilks  heard 
them  through,  and  then  produced  a  long  list  of  names.  "  There,"  said  the  quaint 
divine,  "all  those  precious  souls  profess  to  have  found  salvation  through  what 
you  are  pleased  to  call  my  whims  and  oddities.  Can  you  produce  a  similar  list  from 
all  the  sober  brethren  you  have  been  so  much  extolling  ?  "  This  was  conclusive  : 
they  withdrew  in  silence. 

Ver.  16.  What  shall  we  do  to  these  men  ?  for  that  indeed  a  notable  miracle  hath 
been  done  ...  we  cannot  deny. — Healed  men  (1) — The  miracle : — Few  things  are 
more  striking  than  the  continuance  and  growth  of  Christianity  ;  first,  under  the 
circumstances  of  difficulty  and  persecution ;  and  next,  under  the  comiitions  of 
maintenance  to  which  it  is  restricted,  viz.,  moral  persuasion  and  impression.  The 
Church  is  its  own  sufficient  witness.  It  is  of  God,  because  it  has  so  triumphed. 
The  conditions  under  which  its  most  signal  triumphs  have  been  won  have  been  far 
removed  from  any  that  human  sagacity  could  have  devised.  How  often  the  things 
that  threatened  its  destruction  have  proved  the  signal  means  of  its  salvation  !  The 
Jews  prevail  upon  Pilate  to  crucify  Jesus ;  that  very  death  accomplishes  His  re- 
deeming purposes.  The  Sanhedrin  persecute  the  little  Church,  and  break  it  up  ; 
but  it  simply  scattered  coals  of  living  fire,  which  ignited  everything  they  touched. 
So  it  Las  been  a  thousand  times  since.  Tempests  of  persecuting  passion  have  only 
carried  in  every  direction  the  pollen  of  the  Christian  flower,  which  has  fructified 
and  brought  forth  a  hundred-fold.  Precisely  this  result  was  produced  by  this  per- 
secution :  unwittingly  it  furnished  occasion  for  one  of  the  most  signal  triumphs  of 
early  Christianity.  The  whole  issue  turned  upon  the  character  of  the  alleged 
miracle,  and  upon  the  power  whereby  it  was  wrought.  If  it  could  be  established 
that  such  a  miracle  had  been  wrought  in  the  name  and  by  the  power  of  Jesus,  the 
Christian  doctrine  was  indubitably  attested.  The  question  therefore  really  was  the 
relation  of  miracles  to  Christianity,  the  question  that  scepticism  is  discussing  still. 
Only  the  Sanhedrin  never  thought  of  taking  the  ground  of  modern  scepticism, 
which,  not  so  closely  confronted  by  contemporary  fact,  affirms  that  miracle  is  im- 
possible. Their  insinuation  was  the  old  Pharisaic  blasphemy,  "He  casteth  out 
devils  by  Beelzebub,  the  prince  of  the  devils."  It  is  not  always  deficiency  of  evidence 
that  causes  men  to  reject  Christianity.      I.    The  healing  of  this  cripple  is  a 

STBIKINQ    illustration    OF   THE    PECULIAR   BENEVOLENCE   AND    GRACE  OF  CHRISTIANITY. 

Amid  thousands  who  needed  healing  this  beggar  was  the  selected  object. 
Lordly  priests  and  wealthy  nobles  crowded  the  temple,  some  probably  victims  of 
paiijful  disease,  but  to  none  of  them  were  the  apostles  sent.  It  was  surely  in  pur- 
posed and  beautiful  harmony  with  the  character  of  the  goppel  that  neither  our  Lord 
nor  His  apostles  sought  for  illustrious  patients.  They  did  not,  of  course,  exclude 
the  rich.  Our  Lord  gladly  went  to  the  house  of  Jairus,  and  to  that  of  the  centu- 
rion. To  the  poor,  characteristically,  the  gospel  was  preached.  They  especially 
awakened  the  Master's  compassion,  because  of  their  greater  misery.  There  is  a 
sense  in  which  special  solicitudes  of  the  Christian  worker  will  gather  round  the 
rich,  whose  peculiar  spiritual  peril  the  Master  indicated  when  He  said,  "  How 
hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven !  "  It  is  not  easy  to 
make  Dives  conscious  of  his  spiritual  poverty.  Men  who  receive  their  "  good 
things  "  in  this  life  are  in  danger  of  neglecting  the  life  hereafter.  But  it  is  the 
distinctive  grace  of  Christ's  gospel  that  to  the  very  poorest  its  blessings  may  come. 
It  saves  the  respectable  Pharisee,  but  it  has  its  greatest  triumph  and  joy  in  saving 
the  outcast  publican.  It  comes  to  "  seek  and  to  save  the  lost "  ;  to  "  call,  not  the 
righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."  Its  characteristic  agencies  are  reformatories 
and  ragged  schools,  theatre  preachings  and  midnight  meetings,  city  missions  and 
missions  to  the  heathen.  When  do  its  workers  seek  the  palaces  of  noldes,  or  a 
place  among  the  rich  ?  Its  glory  is  to  fill  its  churches  with  "healed  men."  II. 
The  promptings  of  the  healed  man's  gratitude.  1.  Its  p'ety.  (1)  His  first 
movement  was  into  the  temple.  The  first  use  of  his  recovered  limbs  was  in  G^d's 
praise.  The  healing  of  his  body  had  touched  deep  springs  of  religious  feeling. 
Perhaps  his  disabihty  had  long  taught  him  to  pray.  Such  is  often  the  severe  yet 
gracious  lesson  of  affliction.  The  rarer  thing  is  that  his  healing  prompted  him  to 
praise.  Of  the  ten  lepers  cleansed,  only  one  returned  to  give  God  thanks.  (2)  All 
great  experiences  of  life  appeal  to  religious  emotions  :  in  great  sorrows  we  are  pas- 
sionate in  prayer,  in  great  joys  rapturous  in  praise;  only  the  religious  feeling 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  393 

excited  is  often  as  transient  as  it  is  fervent.  Whether  or  not  this  was  so  with  this 
recovered  cripple  we  are  not  told.  But  his  fervour,  and  the  courage  with  which  he 
took  his  stand  by  the  criminated  apostles,  are  strong  presumption  of  a  radical  and 
permanent  piety.  (3)  Whatever  the  instrument  of  our  blessing,  it  is  God  who 
makes  it  efficient.  He  therefore  claims  our  supreme  acknowledgment.  If,  there- 
fore, I  have  received  temporal  healing,  let  me  first  pay  to  Him  the  "  vows  which  I 
made  when  I  was  in  trouble."  If  my  soul  has  been  healed,  let  me  "  enter  His  gates 
with  thanksgiving,  His  courts  with  praise."  What  emntiou  can  be  so  strong,  what 
joy  so  exquisite,  as  those  of  the  man  who  for  the  first  time  after  his  healing  enters 
God's  house  ?  2.  Its  human  fidelity.  (1)  He  "  held  Peter  and  John  "  in  a  grate- 
ful embrace.  Next  to  him  who  saves  us  our  gratitude  is  due  to  him  who  leads  us 
to  the  Saviour.  (2)  Thankful  to  his  .benefactors,  the  healed  man  stood  by  them 
when  they  were  apprehended  by  the  Sanhedrin  ;  glad  to  share  their  reproach  and 
peril.  And  poor  and  unworthy  will  be  our  thankfulness  if,  when  Christ  is  rejected 
or  His  servants  are  scorned,  we  slink  away  in  shame  or  fear.     III.  In  this  peei- 

LOUS    CRISIS    OF   THE    INFANT  ChUECH    IT  WAS    SAVED   BY   THE    PRESENCE  AND  TESTIMONY 

OP  THIS  HEALED  CRIPPLE.  What  could  thcsB  few  peasants  and  fishermen  have  done 
against  the  might  and  hostility  of  the  Sanhedrin  ?  If,  as  is  sometimes  affirmed, 
Christianity  be  only  human,  the  miracle  of  its  establishment  and  propagation  by 
such  apostles,  and  under  such  circumstances,  is  surely  as  great  as  tlie  miracle  of 
the  Incarnation.  Five  thousand  converts  within  a  few  days,  as  the  result  of  simple 
religious  teaching,  are  surely  as  difficult  to  credit  as  the  healing  of  the  lame  man. 
It  was  not  the  first  time  that  Peter  had  stood  before  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  who 
would  exult  in  having  in  their  hands  again  the  leaders  of  the  sect.  What  could  be 
easier  than  to  crush  this  accursed  thing  ?  The  difficulty  lay  in  certain  incorrigible 
facts.  The  vitality  of  this  pestilent  heresy  was  derived  from  these  facts.  First 
there  were  the  notorious  miracles  which  Christ  Himself  had  wrought,  crowned  by 
His  own  indubitable  resurrection.  And  now  His  followers  seem  to  be  working 
similar  marvels.  A  fact  such  as  this  was  v/orth  a  thousand  arguments.  It  utterly 
baffled  the  Sanhedrin.  It  compelled  them  to  admit  the  miracle,  and,  with  it,  its 
undeniable  inferences.  The  healed  man,  not  the  eloquence  of  its  apostles,  saved 
the  infant  Church.  Such  has  often  been  the  vindication  of  the  Church;  not  the 
learning  of  its  doctoi'S,  or  the  arguments  of  its  apologists,  but  the  spiritual  life  of 
some  humble,  simple-hearted  disciple,  who  has  justified  its  work  by  himself  demon- 
strating its  healing  power.  {H.  Allon,  D.D.)  Healed  men  (2) — The  argument: 
— In  religious  systems  the  ultimate  test  of  validity  must  ever  be  practical  efficiency. 
Let  us  then  apply  this  test  to  Christianity.  Putting  the  argument  in  the  broadest 
way,  it  stands  thus  :  The  fact  of  human  sinfulness  is  proved  from  the  universality 
of  the  consciousness  of  moral  imperfection,  and  the  assertion  of  the  Christian 
Scriptures.  Now  philosophers,  theologians,  and  moralists  have  set  themselves  to 
correct  this  evil,  and  to  exert  such  influences  as  may  quicken  within  men  holy 
affections,  and  array  their  will  resolutely  and  effectively  on  the  side  of  purity  and 
piety.  The  world  has  had  a  long  history.  All  kinds  of  experiments  have  been 
made  in  it.  We  know  what  was  the  faith,  and  what  the  kind  of  life  that  it  pro- 
duced in  Assyria,  Egypt,  Greece,  Eome,  India,  China,  and  other  non-Christian 
nations.  We  know  how  various  forms  of  Christianity  have  worked  in  Europe.  We 
know  the  effects  of  infidelity.  And  the  comparative  claims  of  these  various  systems 
are  submitted  to  our  verdict.  Which  of  all  the  theologies,  philosophies,  or  mornli- 
ties  propagated  amongst  men  has  been  the  most  effective  in  making  men  good  ? 
We  might  rest  the  argument  first  upon  a  broad  historical  view  of  nations  and 
peoples ;  we  might  compare  Christian  nations  with  idolatrous  or  Mohammedan 
nations  ;  and  point  out  how  little  non-Christian  faiths  have  done  to  correct  moral 
evil  in  men.  We  gladly  admit  that  they  have  done  something,  and  cannot  question 
the  true  and  noble  elements  of  Buddhism,  &c.,  and  the  very  worst  superstition  is 
better  than  unchecked  godlessness  and  vice.  There  may  be  religious  traditions  of 
a  primitive  knowledge  of  God  which  even  a  Beehuana  has  not  lost.  Yet  who  would 
hesitate  to  recognise  the  moral  superiority  of  Christianitv,  and  the  greater  practical 
power  of  its  truths  ?  A  similar  line  of  argument,  secondly,  might  be  maintained 
respecting  different  forms  of  Christianity.  Just  in  proportion  as  it  has  been 
spiritual,  biblical,  have  the  nations  who  have  received  it  been  virtuous,  noble,  in- 
dustrious, and  powerful.  The  connection  between  Popery  and  the  state  of  nations 
such  as  Spain,  Austria,  Italy,  and  Ireland,  not  to  speak  of  France ;  and  between 
Protestantism  and  the  state  of  nations  such  as  Germany,  England,  and  the  United 
States,  is  too  obvious  to  need  exposition.    And  one  has  only  to  think  of  the  prin- 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

ciples,  religious,  social,  and  political,  of  the  two  systems,  to  see  that  the  result  is 
inevitable.     Sacerdotalism,  in  aU  its  forms,  is  antagonistic  to  the  noblest  life  of 
nations  or  men.     But  these  lines  of  argument  demand  volumes  for  their  adequate 
illustration.     Let  me  take  one  or  two  of  the  fuudamental  elements  of  Christianity, 
and  look  at  their  adaptation  to  make  men  holy.     I.  The  Bible.     It  is  our  authori- 
tative religious  book,  claiming  to  be  a  supernatural  revelation  of  the  thought  and 
heart  of  God.     Is,  then,  the  Bible,  as  tested  by  its  history  and  practical  moral 
power,  the  efficient  instrument  for  recovering  men  ?     On  many  sides  its  claims  are 
disallowed.     It  is  denied  that  it  is  inspired — only  as  Plato,  and  Bacon,  and  Shake- 
speare, and  Milton  are  inspired.     It  is  not,  we  are  told,  even  true  as  a  history.    Its 
chronology,  statistics,  science  are  false,  its  miracles  impossible  violations  of  natural 
law,  its   prophecies  but    remarkable  coincidences  or  sagacious  prognostications. 
There  is  in  the  Book  nothing  that  may  not  be  accounted  for  on  natural  principles. 
How,   then,  are  its  Divine  claims  to  be  vindicated?     Christianity  has  scholars 
abundantly  competent  to  reply  to  the  scholars  of  infidelity.     Nay,  the  chief  learning 
and  science,  criticism  and  pliilosophy  of  the  world,  are  Christian.     Hitherto,  more- 
over, every  assault  of  hostile  criticism  has  only  called  forth  new  champions,  who 
by  fresh  researches  and  lines  of  argument  have  shown  how  impregnable  and  mani- 
fold its  defences  are.     But  the  vindication  of  the  Bible  need  not  be  left  to  learned 
argumentation.     We  may  appeal  to  the  religious  character  and  achievements  of 
the  Bible.     Alone  among  the  religious  books  of  the  world  it  is  a  book  of  history ; 
and  further,  itself  has  a  history.     The  Bible  is  not  like  the  Zendavesta,  a  book  of 
liturgies  ;  nor  like  the  Vedic  Hymns,  a  book  of  impossible  legends  ;  nor  like  the 
writings  of  Confucius  and  Plato,  a  book  of  moral  philosophy  ;  nor  like  the  Koran,  a 
book  of  mere  doctrine  and  precept.     Fundamentally  and  characteristically  it  is 
history.     What,  then,  is  the  moral  character  of  the  Bible  ?  and  what  have  been  its 
moral  effects  ?     Take  as  a  test  of  the  Old  Testament  the  Book  of  Genesis.     Is  it 
history  or  is  it  legend,  from  God  or  of  men  ?     Do  we  need  a  Niebuhr  to  give  us  a 
reply  ?     Nay,  verily.     Make  what  abatement  we  may  for  historic  or  scientific  diffi- 
culties, indisputable  religious  characteristics  remain.     1.  How  are  we  to  account 
for  its  characters,  Abel,  Enoch,  Abraham  ?     Htw  is  it  that  Abraham,  the  "  friend 
of  God,"  is  not,  like  Hercules,  a  demigod  or  a  hero  ?     Always  in  closest  intimacy 
with  Jehovah,  he  is  yet  always  as  human  in  all  his  thoughts  and  actions  as  the  men 
of  to-day.     How  is  it,  again,  that  the  Jehovah  whom  he  worships  is  not  like  Zeus, 
an  incongruous  conception  of  supernatural  attributes,  human  imperfections,  and 
even  vile   passions.     While  the  worshipper  has  no  single  trait  of  divinity,  the 
Jehovah  whom  he  worships  has  no  single  trait  of  humanity.     How  is  it  that  these 
conceptions  of  the  human  and  Divine,  and  of  their  relations,  so  incomparably 
transcend  all  the  mythologies  of  the  world,  that  in  fundamental  ideas  we  have 
neither  surpassed  nor  altered  them  since  ?     2.  How  is  it,  again,  that  the  morality 
taught  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  so  singularly  transcends  even  that  of  Plato ;  nay, 
that  it  is  so  wonderfully  accordant  with  the  moral  conceptions  and  feelings  of  our 
own  day  ?     Abraham,  Jacob,  Joseph,  are  fully  delineated,  and  then-  faults  exposed. 
Wrong  is  never  confounded  with  right.     How  came  it  to  pass  that  when  the  philo- 
sophy of  a  Plato  and  the  morality  of  an  Aristotle  were  so  signally  defective,  this  old 
book   of  three  thousand   years   ago   anticipated  the    fundamental   theology    and 
morality  of  our  nineteenth  Christian  century  ?     Is  not  the  only  possible  answer — 
These  were  men  whom  God  had  healed,  and  this  is  God's  record  concerning  them? 
Difficulties  of  science  or  of  history  have  no  weight  against  these  moral  evidences, 
bas^d  as  the  former  are  upon  ignorance  or  erroneous  interpretation,  which  greater 
information  might  remove.     But  there  can  be  no  mistake  about  these  positive 
features,  and  before  the    claims  of  the  record    can  be   rejecteil  these    must   be 
accounted  for.     II.  Turning  to  the  New  Testament,  still  grander  moral  delinea- 
tions are  presented  to  us.     Peerless  and  Divine  stands  the  moral  portraiture  of 
Jesus  Christ.    Whence  is  it  ?  of  man  or  of  God  ?    Whatever  we  may  think  about 
Christianity,  Christ  Himself  is  the  greatest  moral  miracle  of  human  history.     Had 
Jesus  never  lived,  could  His  character  have  been  imagined?     Has  any  conception 
of  romance  approached  it  since?     Think  of — 1.  His  calm,  majestic  strenj^th.  His 
perfect  self-possession  and  dignity,  and  yet  His  nature  intense  even  to  passion  in 
its  emotions.     He  denounces  the  Pharisees,  but  without  a  vestige  of  unholy  pas- 
sion ;  He  drives  out  the  money-changers,  but  without  a  spark  of  religious  fanaticism. 
2.  The  wisdom  of  His  holiness.    His  is  not  the  innocence  that  is  ignorant  of  human 
life,  it  is  the  strength  that  is  above  it.     3.  His  self-consciousness  and  self-assertion. 
When   He    speaks    concerning  Himself   it  is  to  avow  His  human  faultlessness, 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  395 

to  assert  His  Divine  perfection  and  prerogative.  His  character,  He  claims, 
has  been  subjected  to  unparalleled  tests,  and  without  the  discovery  of  a  single 
flaw.  4.  The  singular  proportion  and  adjustment  of  His  character.  "What  a 
wonderful  harmony  of  greatness  and  gentleness,  holiness  and  pity,  strength  and 
sympathy ;  the  grandeur  of  the  loftiest  manhood,  the  tenderness  of  the 
gentlest  womanhood.  We  reverence  as  much  as  we  love  Him,  we  love  Him 
as  much  as  we  worship  Him.  5.  His  moral  excellences  in  combination  with 
His  intellectual  greatness.  6.  His  conception  of  His  own  kingdom.  He,  a 
peasant  of  the  mountain  village  of  Nazareth,  conceives  a  kingdom  of  pure 
spiritual  life,  alike  adapted  to  the  ancient  Asiatic  and  to  the  modern  European, 
to  the  shivering  Esquimaux  and  to  the  torrid  Hindoo ;  a  kingdom  of  universal 
brotherhood,  in  which  all  men  are  to  be  knit  together  in  holiness  and  love.  May 
we  not,  then,  fairly  appeal  to  the  moral  portraiture  of  the  New  Testament  in  proof 
that  it  is  of  God  ?  Not  merely  to  its  healed  men,  but  also  to  their  Healer.  Scep- 
ticism has  had  its  men  of  genius — why  has  it  never  produced  another  gospel  ? 
Upon  the  moral  integrity  of  its  Christ  Christianity  is  staked.  He  alleged  that  He 
wrought  miracles.  But  if  He  never  did  them,  the  loftiest  truth,  the  pui'est  morality 
of  the  world  is  the  offspring  of  a  lie — a  moral  solecism  so  great  that  our  entire 
consciousness  rejects  it.  III.  Nor  are  the  effects  of  Cueist's  gospel  or  the 
religious  history  of  the  Bible  less  conclusive.  We  know  what  Christianity  did  in 
apostolic  times,  when  it  came  into  contact  with  the  unutterable  depravities  of 
Greece  and  Kome — what  it  found  its  converts,  and  what  it  made  them.  We  know 
what  it  has  done  in  every  land  to  which  it  has  come  since ;  what  just  now  Europe 
is  in  contrast  with  Asia,  America  in  contrast  with  Africa.  We  know  what  fifty 
years  ago  the  South  Sea  Islands  were,  and  what — the  officers  of  our  navy  and  the 
intercourse  of  our  merchant  ships  being  witness — they  are  now.  And  its  latest 
triumphs  have  been  the  most  signal.  A  few  chapters  of  the  Bible,  sometimes  a 
single  page,  has  sustained  and  propagated  the  Christianity  of  Madagascar;  inspiring 
its  converts  with  the  virtue  of  saints  and  with  the  heroism  of  martyrs.  No  other 
book  does  this.  Stand  in  a  pulpit  and  read  to  men  Plato  or  Milton  or  Bacon :  where 
are  their  converts  ?  whose  hearts  do  they  change  ?  whose  lives  do  they  sanctify  ? 
Bead  to  them  the  Bible,  and  henled  men  spring  up  everywhere,  "  walking,  and  leap- 
ing, and  praising  God."  IV.  We  might  take  the  distinctive  doctrines  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  reason  from  them  in  the  same  way.  1.  No  doctrine,  e.g.,  has  been 
more  demurred  to  than  the  doctrine  of  atonement.  It  has  been  represented  as 
unrighteous  and  immoral.  It  is  sufficient  to  reply — (1)  That  this,  for  eighteen 
hundred  years,  has  been  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  Christendom.  The  moral 
conscience  of  Christian  men,  so  far  from  stumbling  at  its  supposed  moral  incon- 
gruities, has  gloried  in  notbing  so  greatly.  (2)  That  if  it  be  a  false  doctrine,  men 
are  misled  the  most  grievously  where  they  think  themselves  guided  the  most  ex- 
plicitly ;  and  instead  of  being  the  most  lucid,  the  New  Testament  is  the  most 
ambiguous  of  books.  (3)  That  in  its  practical  influence  upon  men's  hearts  and 
lives,  this  alleged  error  has  been  more  potent  and  fruitful  than  all  admitted  truth. 
Whenever  this  idea  is  lost,  whatever  else  is  retained,  religious  life  is  chilled  down, 
and  grateful  love  is  abated.  Can  we  then  imagine  that  all  this  is  a  delusion  ?  that 
this  gratitude  has  been  falsely  generated  ?  this  holiness  illegitimately  wrought  ?  It 
cannot  be  ;  man's  error  can  never  be  more  potent  than  God's  truth.  2.  So  with 
the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  objected  to  as  loosening  the  bonds  of  respon- 
sibility, as  enci'uraging  a  perilous  laxity  in  morals;  inasmuch  as  men  who  are 
taught  that  all  their  goodness  is  from  God,  and  that  a  Divine  power  external  to 
themselves  must  "  create  in  them  a  clean  heart,"  and  "  renew  them  day  by  day," 
are  not  likely  to  strive  to  be  good.  Again  we  appeal  to  the  inexorable  logic  of  fact, 
to  healed  men.  Who  in  religious  life  are  the  most  sensitive  to  sin,  the  most  scru- 
pulous in  lioliness,  the  most  consecrated  in  service,  the  most  beneficent  in  help  ? 
Beyond  all  dispute,  they  who  theoretically  believe,  and  who  practically  illustrate 
the  new  birth  of  the  Spirit.  In  a  word,  we  boldly  submit  all  the  fundamental  doc- 
trines of  Christianity  to  this  test  of  results.  Conclusion  :  Every  Christian  minis- 
ter, every  town  missionary,  almost  every  member  of  a  Christian  Church,  could 
adduce  instances,  some  of  them  scores  and  hundreds,  which  would  stand  the  test 
of  any  judicial  investigation.  No  one  rejects  Christianity  because  its  influences  are 
pernicious,  or  Christ,  because  His  teaching  is  immoral.  When  Christian  men  are 
charged  with  inconsistency,  the  very  charge  implies  a  standard  far  higher  than  any 
other  in  our  social  life.  Reason  with  a  sceptical  objector,  you  may  be  ignominiously 
defeated.      But  the   argument  from  moral  result  is   unanswerable.     The   most 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

ignorant  can  say,  "  Whether  this  be  of  God  or  not  I  cannot  tell ;  this  I  know,  that 
wheieas  once  1  was  blind  now  I  see."  If  the  objector  tells  vouwhat  his  philosophy 
is,  you  show  him  what  your  Christianity  has  done.  He  challenges  the  philosophy 
of  your  creed,  you  challenge  the  moral  effects  of  his  infidelity.  Where  are  its 
religious  penitents,  its  rescued  reprobates,  its  Magdalens  and  prodigals  ?  And  if  he 
has  found  no  such  moral  power  to  make  men  holy,  be  will,  if  a  true  man,  tell  you 
with  a  so'rowful  heart,  how  reluctantly  he  rejects  your  Christianity.  He  who  feels 
no  such  anguish,  or  who  chuckles  over  any  discredit  of  a  benign  and  holy  Chris- 
tianity, is  simply  a  fiend  and  not  a  man.  In  this  way,  then,  even  gainsayers  may 
be  made  to  confess,  "  That  a  notable  miracle  hath  been  done  by  these  Chris- 
tian teachers,  is  manifest  to  all  them  that  dwell  in  the  land,  and  we  cannot  deny 
it."     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  18-31.  And  they  called  them,  and  commanded  them  not  to  speak  at  all  nor 
to  teach  in  the  name  ♦of  Jesus. — Christian  coiirarje  :■ — I.  Its  test.  The  apostles 
did  njt  wish  to  separate  themselves  from  the  Jewish  Church,  for  it  was  while 
entering  the  temple  that  Peter  and  John  restored  the  lame  man.  See  these  men, 
then,  confronted  by  a  positive  command  from  the  nation's  highest  tribunal  to  be 
silent,  a  tribunal,  too,  that  had  condemned  their  Master.  National  love,  respect 
for  law,  pride  of  race,  reverence  for  institutions  hoary  with  age,  strength  of  social 
ties,  personal  friendships,  a  shrinking  from  becoming  disturbers  of  the  peace,  fear 
for  personal  safety — all  ihese  conspired  to  intensify  the  command  "net  lo  speak  at 
all  nor  teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus."  What  now  enables  tbem  to  oppose  the  San- 
hedrin's  command  ?  Their  personal  love  for  Jesus.  To  be  silent  is  impossible. 
Bound  to  tbeir  nation  by  enduring  ties,  a  stronger  cord  binds  them  to  Jesus.  "We 
cannot  but  speak."  And  speak  they  did,  with  added  boldness.  There  are  cur- 
rents in  the  sea  which,  despite  opposing  winds  and  tides,  move  on  their  way 
unhindered,  impelled  by  a  mighty  force  hidden  far  in  the  depths.  Such  a  force  in 
the  hearts  of  ttiese  disciples  was  love  for  Christ.  II.  Its  M.vMFESTATiONS.  Men  are 
sometimes  called  courageous  when  they  are  only  reckless.  The  man  of  real  courage 
will  be  bold  enough,  and  calm  enough,  to  act  wisely.  In  the  conduct  of  the 
apostles  every  mark  of  true  courage  is  manifest.  1.  They  show  that  their  course 
is  not  prompted  by  impulse  or  passion.  They  are  moved  by  deep  convictions. 
They  plant  themselves  on  tbe  highest  conceivable  ground,  the  sense  of  right.  They 
have  no  ambitious  ends  to  seek,  no  revenge  to  gratify,  no  popular  applause  to  gain. 
"  Thrice  armed  is  he  who  hath  his  quarrel  just."  When  the  Empress  Eudoxia 
sent  threatening  messages  to  Chiysostom  in  Constantinople  to  desist  from  his  pun- 
gent reproofs,  the  golilen-tongued  preacher  replied  :  "  Tell  the  Empress  that  Chry- 
sostom  fears  nothing  but  sin."  Note,  as  an  evidence  of  wisdom,  how  sagaciously 
the  apostles  appeal  to  this  self-same  principle  of  right  in  the  minds  of  their  accusers. 
"  Judge  ye."  This  sense  that  it  is  right  to  hearken  more  unto  God  than  unto  men, 
whether  adopted  in  practical  life  or  not,  must  and  does  commend  itself  to  every 
man's  conscience.  Those  who  adhere  to  it  gain  the  confidence  of  all.  "  What," 
was  asked  by  a  merchant  of  a  poor  boy  applying  for  a  situation,  "  should  you  s^y 
if  I  were  to  tell  you  to  work  on  Sunday  ?  "  "I  shouldn't  come ;  for  God  has  said, 
'  Eemember  the  Sabbath  day  to  keep  it  holy,'  and  I  shall  do  as  God  has  told  me." 
"  Then,"  said  the  employer,  "  you  are  the  boy  I  am  looking  for."  2.  The  apostles' 
courage  is  seen  in  the  company  they  keep.  "  Being  let  go,  they  went  to  their  own 
company,"  &c.  How  changed  the  aspect !  In  the  Sanhedrin  the  air  was  dense 
with  suspicion  and  malice — here  is  love,  purity,  and  the  peace  of  heaven.  Courage 
is  of  the  right  kind  when  it  seeks  to  sustain  itself  by  breathing  an  atmosphere  like 
this.  III.  Its  source  (ver.  31).  The  breath  of  God's  Spirit  upon  their  spirits. 
Christ  did  not  send  the  apostles  into  trial  without  providing  them  with  a  po^er 
adequate  to  every  want.  Christians  should  learn  to  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  work 
in  them  and  for  them  whatever  their  needs  require.  If  courage  is  the  virtue  needed, 
here,  then  courage  will  be  the  product  of  the  Spirit.  Before  the  Sanhedrin  the 
Spirit  makes  Peter  bold;  but  afterwards  the  same  Spirit  made  him  deeply  humble. 
John,  originally  a  "  son  of  thunder,"  was  by  the  Spirit's  agency  so  transformed  as 
to  become  a  renowned  example  of  Christian  gentleness.  {Mondny  Club  Sermons.) 
The  apostles'  confidence  hi  God : — In  the  breast  of  every  earnest  man  this  conflict 
resolves  itself  into  a  question  of  duty  v.  expediency.  The  easy  thing  is  to  suit  one's 
convenience ;  the  hard  thing  is  to  do  right.  In  the  case  of  Peter  and  John  there 
was  a  disagreement  between  the  higher  and  the  lower  law.  The  powers  that  be 
are  ordained  of  God;    wherefore  it  is  right  to  be  subject  to  principalities  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  397 

powers,  to  obey  magistrates,  and  be  ready  unto  every  good  work  (Titus  iii.  1).  But 
if  there  comes  a  moment  when  the  soul  is  hemmed  in  between  the  mandate  of  an 
earthly  ruler  and  the  word  of  Jehovah,  the  way  is  plain :  God  must  ever  hold  the 
first  place  in  the  soul  of  a  true  man.  We  are  resolved  to  do  our  duty  thout?h  the 
heavens  fall !  In  reaching  this  determination  they  were  moved  by  two  arguments 
— 1.  It  was  right.  All  considerations  of  mere  prudence  must  stand  aside  for 
principle.  Conscience  has  always  the  right  of  way.  The  meanest  man  on  earth 
knows  that  God's  service  is  above  time-service.  It  was  perfectly  safe  for  the  two 
disciples  to  submit  that  proposition  to  their  inquisitors,  as  they  did  when  they  said, 
"  Judge  ye."  2.  It  was  in  line  with  the  ruling  motive  of  their  lives.  They  had 
some  time  ago  made  up  tbeir  minds  deliberately  to  follow  Christ.  In  that  resolve 
there  was  no  reservation ;  they  had  surrendered  all.  Now  the  matter  is  to  be 
brought  to  a  test ;  will  they  be  loyal  to  their  Master  or  not  ?  Tbere  is  no  ground 
for  hesitation.  So  Peter  and  John  stood  by  their  principles.  It  must  have  seemed 
to  them  as  if  they  were  facing  death,  but  no  matter.  Now  mark  the  immediate 
result.  These  disciples  expected  imprisonment,  the  lash,  perhaps  death,  fur  their 
temerity ;  but  God  had  His  own  plans.  1.  Their  judges  "  marvelltd  "  at  their 
courage  and  "let  them  go  "  1  The  angel  of  the  Lord  came  and  shut  those  lions' 
mouths  so  that  they  could  not  hurt  them.  2.  The  peoj^le  "glorified  God  for  that 
which  was  done."  That  term,  "the  people,"  represents  an  inconstant  and  untrust- 
worthy factor ;  but  in  this  instance  the  good  work  done  upon  the  impotent  man  was 
so  manifest,  and  the  subsequent  demeanour  of  Peter  and  John  in  court  so  heroic, 
that  they  were  perforce  convinced  and  moved  to  glorify  God.  3.  The  two  disciples 
were  themselves  emboldened  for  further  service.  They  had  tried  God  and  found 
Him  faithful,  and  they  were  ready  to  try  Him  again.  The  lad  David  was  encour- 
aged to  go  out  against  Goliath  by  the  fact  that  God  had  once  before  delivered  him 
from  a  lion  and  bear  that  had  taken  a  lamb  out  of  his  flock.  A  man's  courage  is 
like  his  biceps  muscle  ;  it  grows  by  use.  4.  The  whole  Church  was  strengthened 
and  enheartened  by  this  event.  Courage  is  catching.  Heroes  make  heroes.  (D. 
J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Obedience  to  God  : — The  Rev.  Mr.  Martini,  from  Spain,  says  : 
*'  I  have  had  the  privilege  of  suffering  a  little — a  very  little — for  the  dear  Lord,  but 
in  a  sense  it  was  my  own  fault,  for  I  broke  the  law  of  my  country.  In  Spain  it 
was  against  the  law  for  a  Protestant  to  preach  to  a  congregation  of  more  than 
twenty  persons,  and  that  law  I  broke  by  addressing  an  audience  of  more  than  two 
hundred  and  fifty  persons  in  the  open  air.  I  was  holding  a  meeting  of  twelve 
persons  in  a  small  room,  when  certain  persons  entered  and  told  me  that  there  was 
a  large  number  of  people  who  wished  me  to  preach  to  them  in  the  open  air.  I 
thought,  '  This  is  a  call  from  God  1  Shall  I  obey  God  or  m.m?  '  I  obeyed  God, 
and  broke  the  law  of  man  ;  the  consequence  was  that  I  was  sent  to  i^rison  for 
forty-six  days.  I  was  well  treated  by  every  one.  The  mayor  and  all  the  notables 
came  to  see  me,  and  I  gave  them  tracts  and  Gospels,  besides  pi-eaching  inside  the 
prison  to  more  than  fifty  persons  at  a  time,  although  the  law  forbade  me  to  preach 

to  more  than  twenty  persons  at  a  time  outside  the  prison."         God  before  man  : 

A  heathen  king  had  a  Christian  bishop  brought  before  him,  and  ordered  him  10 
abjure  his  faith  and  sacrifice  to  the  heathen  idols.  "  My  lord  and  king,"  said  the 
bishop,  "  that  I  will  not  do."  At  this  the  king  was  furious,  and  said,  "  Do  you 
know  that  your  life  is  in  my  hands,  and  that  if  I  liked  I  could  kill  you  ?  I  have 
only  to  sign  to  my  servants,  and  you  are  a  dead  man."  "  I  know  that,"  answered 
the  bishop ;  "  but  before  you  kill  me  let  me  tell  you  a  story.  You  can  decide  my 
fate  when  1  have  finished.     Suppose  one  of  your  most  faithful  servants  falls  into 

the  hands  of  your  enemies,  and  they  seek  to  excite  him  to  rebel  against  you to 

make  him  a  traitor.  He,  however,  remains  faithful,  and  your  enemies  strip  him, 
and  drive  him  back  to  his  country.  Say,  0  king,  when  he  came  to  you  thus, 
insulted  and  outraged  for  your  honour,  would  you  not  provide  him  with  your  best 
gaiments,  and  cover  his  shame  with  honour?  "  "  So  far,  so  good,"  said  the  king, 
"  but  what  has  all  this  to  do  with  the  ca^e  in  hand?  A  pretty  story  enough,  and 
well  told,  but  I  do  not  see  the  connection  it  has  with  yon."  Then  the  pious  bishop 
answered,  "  Listen,  sire.  You  may  strip  me  of  my  earthly  garments,  but  I  have  a 
Master  who  will  clothe  me  with  splendour,  and  fit  me  for  His  presence  in  glory. 
Shall  I  barter  away  my  faith  to  save  my  garments?"  Then  the  heathen  king 
answered,  "  You  have  conquered;  go  in  peace."  Christian  courage:—!.  Mani- 
fested (vers.  18-22).  II.  Sustained  (ver;^  23-28).  III.  Increased  (vers.  29-31). 
(Christian  Age.)  Not  to  cease  because  despised: — What  would  the  nightingale 
care  if  the  toad  despised  her  singing  ?   She  would  still  sing  on  and  leave  the  toad  to 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i v. 


his  dark  shadows.  And  what  care  I  for  the  threats  of  men  who  grovel  upon  the 
earth?  I  will  still  sing  on  in  the  bosom  and  ear  of  my  God.  [H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Christian  courage  : — Courage  is  one  of  the  Bible  virtues.  It  was  one  of  the 
last  words  of  Moses  to  Joshua  :  "  Be  strong  and  of  good  courage."  It  was  almost 
the  first  word  of  the  Lord  on  welcoming  him  to  his  new  office  :  "  Be  strong  and 
of  good  courage."  It  was  the  counsel  given  the  twelve  Hebrew  explorers.  David 
recalled  the  energising  word  in  his  charge  to  Solomon,  and  in  the  Psalms  he  rings 
out  the  same  voice  to  all  the  saints  :  "  Be  of  good  courage,  and  He  shall  strengthen 
your  heart,  all  ye  that  hope  in  the  Lord."  The  correspondent  word  "boldness"  is  as 
often  used  in  the  New  Testament.  It  applied  to  Christ  Himself  in  His  preaching  ; 
it  was  what  Paul  would  have  the  Church  pray  for  as  a  gift  to  him  ;  and,  as  we  see  in 
this  book  of  Acts,  it  was  one  of  the  distinguishing  traits  of  the  other  apostles  and 
the  primitive  Church.  Mark,  then,  this  instance  of  Christian  courage — I.  As 
BELONGING  TO  PRIVATE  AND  NON-PKOFESsiONAL  MEN  Thls  was  the  problem  that 
first  exercised  the  Sanhedrin — confidence  where  they  looked  for  diffidence.  They 
had  not  been  trained  in  the  schools  as  rhetoricians  who  might  be  expected  to  com- 
mand their  speech  and  self-possession  before  the  tribunal  or  a  popular  assembly. 
It  would  have  been  a  severe  ordeal  to  some  men  of  education  and  experience. 
"Whence,  then,  the  calmness  of  these  obscure  disciples?  It  was  derived  from 
Christ  Himself.  And  so  the  Sanhedrin  soon  perceived.  Christ,  though  no  pro- 
fessed rhetorician,  spoke  with  calmness,  with  knowledge  and  with  authority,  and 
these  two  disciples  had  taken  their  style  from  their  Master.  I  have  seen  plain  men, 
who  had  been  brought  up  far  from  schools,  but  brought  so  near  to  Christ  that  they 
could  not  but  speak  of  Him,  and  with  such  knowledge  and  calmness  that  they 
always  gained  a  hearing.  II.  As  maintained  in  the  face  of  worldly  array  and 
AUTHORITY.  "  What  wlIl  the  world  Say  of  us?"  is  a  question  many  persons  ask 
with  great  solicitude.  Some  very  strong  men  (like  Napoleon)  have  been  very  weak 
here.  What  the  world  will  do  to  us  is  still  more  startling,  if  it  has  a  rod  in  its 
hands  and  a  will  to  use  it.  It  seemed  as  if  the  whole  world  was  against  these  two 
Galileans,  and  likely  to  make  quick  work  with  them.  The  Shepherd  had  been 
gmitten  ;  how  could  the  flock  fail  to  be  scattered  ?  The  people  rather  than  the 
rulers  were  the  audience  on  Pentecost.  "  Your  rulers  "  are  spoken  of  as  if  absent. 
But  now  the  great  men  began  to  be  astir.  How  amazed  was  the  Sanhedrin  when 
these  two  plain  men,  instead  of  humbly  begging  pardon,  cahnly  stood  on  their 
defence  !  They  went  over  the  gospel  story  as  unembarrassed  as  if  they  were  telling 
it  to  an  audience  of  friends.  HI.  As  sustained  by  the  sense  of  a  Divine 
PRESENCE.  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God."  There  being  two  here  to 
judge  us,  which  shall  have  the  precedency?  The  rulers  had  not  been  with  Jesus, 
and  had  not  learned  this  lesson.  If  Jesus  were  at  their  side,  what  though  the 
whole  array  of  the  Sanhedrin  confronted  them?  Precisely  this  was  what  the 
Saviour  had  promised  :  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway."  IV.  As  having  the  support 
of  pertinent  and  palpable  facts.  When  the  lame  man  heard  of  the  apostles' 
arrest,  he  went  before  the  tribunal,  ready  to  give  his  testimony  and  share  their 
fate.  Standing  upright  there  on  his  feet,  what  could  the  Sanhedrin  say  ?  How 
else  could  the  apostles  feel  at  that  sight  but  joyful  and  thankful  that  such  a  miracle 
of  mercy  had  been  wrought  by  their  hands  ?  This  has  always  been  a  strong  sup- 
port in  the  work  for  God — the  good  results  that  have  atttended  it.  Paul  felt  this  : 
"  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,"  &c.  V.  As  encouraged  by  tub 
companionship  of  Christian  men.  "  They  went  to  their  own  company."  In  holy 
joy  thev  lifted  up  their  voices  together  in  the  triumphant  words  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment Psalm  :  "  Why  do  the  Gentiles  rage,  and  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing?  " 
Their  prayer  went  up  for  greater  boldness  in  their  Master's  cause,  and  new  wonders 
of  grace  as  the  fruit  of  it.  (W.  E.  Knox,  D.D.)  The  apostles'  confidence  in 
God : — The  suggestions  and  the  truths  which  may  be  gathered  from  this  lesson 
are  many  and  varied,  for  example  —  The  vanity  of  combinations  and  con- 
spiracies against  God  as  affirmed  in  Scripture  and  illustrated  in  history.  The 
beneficent  character  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  necessity  and  value  of 
mutual  sympathy.  The  power  of  united  and  believing  prayer  as  taught  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  care  of  God  over  His  own.  The  disciples  had  in  a  measure 
been  prepared  for  trouble  by  the  pre-announcement  of  Christ :  "  If  they  have  per- 
secuted Me,  they  will  also  persecute  you."  But  now  it  was  in  sight,  and  under 
threat  of  pains  and  penalties  they  were  (^arged  to  keep  silence.  But,  like  the  three 
Hebrew  children  of  Daniel's  day,  they  needed  no  time  for  considering  the  question. 
We  find  no  hint  or  shadow  of  one  that  indicates  on  their  part  any  wavering  of 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  899 

purpose.  We  look  for  the  grounds  of  this  confidence  and  courage,  and  find  them 
incorporated  in  the  lesson  text.  This  confidence  was  based  on  the  omnipotence 
of  God,  which  was — 1.  A  fundamental  element  of  the  irreligious  faith.  The 
Mosaic  economy  had  taxight  them  this.  The  histoiy  of  their  own  people,  which 
they  still  cherished,  and  the  memories  of  which  were  dear  to  them,  was  full  of 
illustrious  evidences  of  the  power  and  glory  of  Jehovah.  They  had  not  changed 
in  becoming  followers  of  Christ  this  fundamental  faith  in  the  God  of  their  child- 
hood and  of  their  earlier  manhood.  This  element  of  their  religious  faith  was 
further  buttressed  by — 2.  The  convincing  events  of  the  life,  death,  resurrection, 
and  ascension  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  facts  were  then,  as  they  siiould  be  now,  the 
unanswerable  factors  in  the  propagation  of  the  gospel.  When  they  beheld  "  the 
man  which  was  healed  standing  with  them,  they  could  say  nothing  against  it." 
3.  In  addition,  the  Holy  Ghost  within  them  enabled  them  to  make  forceful  and 
persuasive  the  truth  they  advocated.  It  is  true  they  were  neither  skilled  in  arms 
nor  trained  in  schools  ;  they  had  neither  wealth  nor  social  position,  but  God  was 
•with  them,  and  they  were  invincible.  Pentecost  had  made  them  all-powerful.  Let 
us  emulate  their  dauntless  courage,  touch  the  sources,  as  they  did,  of  supernal 
power,  make  regnant  in  our  lives  the  principles  they  enunciated,  and  then  the 
world  will  be  at  our  feet  as  it  was  at  theirs,  and  we  shall  go  forth,  as  did  the 
apocalyptic  rider,  on  the  white  horse,  "  conquering  and  to  conquer."  {John  D. 
Ficldes.)  BoldJiess: — I.  Commanded — 1.  Against  God's  enemies  (Deut.  xxxi.  6  ; 
Josh.  i.  6,  9,  18).      2.  To  keep  God's  law  (Josh.  i.  7,  xxiii.  6 ;  1  Cliron.  xxii.  13). 

3.  In  testifying  for  Cbrist  (Matt.  x.  28  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  13 ;  Eph.  vi.  10).  4.  In  re- 
proving sin  (Isa.  Iviii.  1  ;  Mic.  iii.  8).  II.  The  source  of — 1.  Wisdom  (Eccles.  vii. 
19).      2.  Grace   in   Christ  (2  Tim.  ii.   1).      3.  Distrust   of    self  (2  Cor.  xii.   10). 

4.  Righteousness  (Prov.  xxviii.  1).  5.  Faith  in  Christ  (Eph.  iii.  12 ;  Heb.  x.  19). 
6.  Trust  in  God  (Isa.  1.  7).  7.  Fear  of  God  (chap.  v.  29).  8.  Faithfulness  to  God 
(1  Tim.  iii.  13).  9.  Prayer  (ver.  29  ;  Eph.  iii.  12  ;  Heb.  iv.  16).  III.  Reasons 
FOR.  1.  God  only  to  be  feared  (Isa.  viii.  12-14,  li.  12,  13  ;  Matt.  x.  28  ;  Heb.  x. 
31,  xii.  28,  29).  2.  Those  who  trust  in  God  are  safe  (Prov.  xxix.  25).  3.  God  is 
with  His  servants  (Isa.  xii.  10).  4.  God  can  deliver  (Dan.  iii.  17  ;  Jer.  1.  8). 
6.  The  Lord  delivereth  (Psa.  xxxiv.  7).  6.  Eight  requiies  (ver.  19).  7.  God 
will  reward  (Rev.  ii.  10).  (S.  S.  Times.)  Testimony  not  to  he  stifled  : — Suppose 
that  some  savages  have  seen  a  cannon  charged  and  discharged.  Suppose  that 
when  they  saw  it  charged  a  second  time,  dreading  the  consequences,  they  should 
gather  stones  and  clay,  and  therewith  ram  the  cannon  full  to  the  muzzle,  by  way 
of  shutting  in  the  shot,  and  securing  the  safety  of  the  neighbourhood.  They 
know  not  the  power  of  gunpowder  when  it  is  touched  by  a  spark.  This  is  the  sort 
of  blunder  into  which  the  Sanhedrin  fell.  They  tliought  they  could  stifle  the 
testinfiony  of  the  apostles  by  ramming  a  threat  of  punishment  down  their  throats. 
They  "knew  not  the  power  of  faith  when  kindled  by  a  spark  from  heaven.  (W. 
Arnot,  D.D.)  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  to  hearken  unto  you  more 
than  unto  God,  judge  ye. — Apostolic  heroism : — A  great  and  prolonged  conflict  was 
approaching.  How  were  the  Christians  to  meet  it  ?  We  have  the  answer  here. 
The  apostles'  heroism — I.  Was  based  on  righteousness.  "  Whether  it  be  right 
in  the  sight  of  God  "  was  a  rebuke  to  those  who  were  only  consulting  the  interests 
of  Judai-m  or  their  own.  But  that  which  is  based  on  righteousness  does  not  find 
favour  with  unregenerate  human  nature,  and  much  so-called  heroism  has  rested  on 
wrong.  II.  Was  sustained  by  reference  to  God.  All  is  right  which  is  right  in 
His  sight.  The  apostles  then  referred  to  the  only  true  authority,  doubtless  devoutly 
and  in  faith.  No  wonder  they  were  heroic,  for  the  history  of  their  nation  showed 
that  such  reference  to  God  had  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the  violence 
of  fire,  &c.  How  could  they  fail  with  Omnipotence  on  their  side  ?  What  could 
the  Sanhedrin  be  to  such  men  ?  Like  faith  produces  like  heroes  everywhere, 
III.  Was  manifested  in  obedience  to  God.  The  npostles  "  hearkened  unto  God  " 
wLo  had  spoken  by  Jesus,  and  was  now  speaking  by  the  Spirit — hence  the  healing 
of  the  cripple,  and  this  defence.  The  man  who  wns  urged  to  do  his  duty  on  the 
battleiield  because  he  seemed  to  hear  the  voice  of  his  country  was  a  hero  ;  but 
how  much  more  the  apostles.  They  heard  God  Himself,  and  as  long  as  He  was 
obeyed  what  mattered  it  if  men  were  displeased.  IV.  Bore  the  test  of  common 
HUMAN  intelligence.  "  Judgc  ye."  The  principle  was  referred  to  as  an  axiom 
which  might  be  evaded  and  practically  disobeyed,  but  which  could  not  be  intel- 
lectually contested ;  and  any  position  founded  upon  it  is  impregnable.  When  our 
ways  please  God  we  may  safely  submit  them  to  the  arbitrament  of  human  judg- 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.iv. 

ment.  V.  Was  the  constant  expression  of  the  constraint  of  conscience. 
"  For  we  cannot  but  speak,"  <fec.  To  have  acted  otherwise  would  have  been 
to  violate  their  consciences  by  wilful  unfaithfulness  and  neglect  of  duty.  We  have 
seen  the  works  of  Christ  in  the  salvation  of  sinners  :  then  how  dare  we  be  silent  ? 
(W.   Hudson.)  Moral   heroism  : — When   John    Knox  heard   of    the  projected 

marriage  of  Queen  Mary  with  the  Roman  Catholic  prince  of  Spain,  he  rose  in  the 
pulpit  at  St.  Giles,  Edinburgh,  and  told  the  congregation  that  whenever  they,  pro- 
fessing the  Lord  Jesus,  consented  that  a  Papist  should  be  head  of  their  sovereign, 
they  did,  as  far  as  in  them  lay,  banish  Christ  from  the  realm.  Mary  recognised 
her  enemy.  Him  alone  she  had  failed  to  work  upon.  She  sent  for  him,  and  her 
voice  shaking  between  tears  and  passion,  she  said  that  never  prince  had  been 
handled  as  she  :  she  had  borne  his  bitterness,  she  had  admitted  him  to  her 
presence,  she  had  endured  to  be  reprimanded,  and  yet  she  could  not  be  quit  of 
him;  she  "  vowed  to  God  she  would  be  avenged."  The  queen  sobbed  violently. 
Knox  stood  silent  until  she  collected  herself.  He  then  said,  "  Madam,  in  God'a 
presence  I  speak  :  I  never  delighted  in  the  weeping  of  God's  creatures  ;  but  seeing  I 
have  but  spoken  the  truth  as  my  vocation  craves  of  me,  I  must  sustain  your 
Majesty's  tears  rather  than  hurt  my  conscience."  (if.  O.  Mackey.)  Duty  to  God 
first: — The  great  classic  dramas  (the  4n?f  170776  of  Sophocles,  «.(/.)  frequently  deal 
with  the  complications  involved  in  the  conflict  between  duty  to  God  and  duty  to 
earthly  authorities.  I.  Man's  claims  akb  admitted.  Family  life  and  social  01  der 
demand  that  some  should  rule  and  some  should  serve.  Scripture  requires  due 
submission  to  government  authorities  on  the  ground  that  they  are  ordained  of 
God,  and  that  resistance  to  them  is  resistance  of  the  ordinance  of  God.  AU  right 
and  reasonable  demand  of  human  magistracy  are  therefore  to  be  loyally  met  as  in- 
directly the  claims  of  God.  But  no  human  authority  may  interfere  with  a  man's 
spiritual  religion.  Man's  claims  are  limited  to  conduct.  God  alone  may  rule  in 
motive,  thought,  opinion  and  feeling.  Even  apostles  had  no  dominion  over  the 
disciples'  faith.  II.  God's  claims  akb  admitted.  1.  He  may  as  He  pleases  com- 
municate His  will  either  directly  or  indirectly  by — (1)  His  providential  arrange- 
ments. (2)  His  written  Word.  (3j  His  Son.  (4)  His  Spirit.  2.  These  clauns 
must  be  absolutely  supreme.  They,  indeed,  afford  the  test  of  all  other  claims, 
which  must  be  in  harmony  with  these,  if  they  are  to  be  in  any  sense  binding  upon 
men.  The  relation  in  which  man  stands  to  God  is  that  of  the  child  who  recognises 
no  authority  above  that  of  his  father.  III.  Should  the  claims  of  man  and  the 
CLAIMS  of  God  come  in  conflict  there  can  be  no  question  as  to  which  must 
^lELD.  Here  was  such  a  contiict,  and  there  were  many  such  in  the  times  of  the 
prophets.  The  conflict  is  in  regard  to  things — 1.  Absolutely  wrong,  as  when  the 
early  Christians  were  required  to  swear  by  the  genius  of  the  Emperor.  To  cease 
to  witness  for  Christ,  or  to  yield  where  custom,  fashion  and  caste  require  what  is 
inconsistent  comes  under  this  category.  2.  Doubtful.  The  conflict  in  this  case  is 
the  gravest  perplexity  of  life,  and  sends  us  back  on  first  principles.  No  one,  how- 
ever, need  find  much  difficulty  who  accepts  such  counsel  as  this,  "  Be  not  con- 
formed to  this  world,"  &c.  {li.  Tuck,  B.A.)  Duty  to  God  the  supreme  law  : — The 
Word  of  God  is  not  my  word  ;  I,  therefore,  cannot  abandon  it ;  but  in  all  things 
short  of  that,  I  am  ready  to  be  docile  and  obedient.  You  shall  have  my  blood,  my 
life,  rather  than  a  single  word  of  retraction  ;  for  it  is  better  to  obey  God  than  man. 
It  is  no  fault  of  mine  that  this  matter  cretites  confusion  among  you.  I  cannot 
prevent  the  Word  of  Christ  becoming  a  stumbling-block  to  men.  I  know  well  that 
we  must  pay  obedience  to  the  civU  magistrate,  even  though  he  be  not  a  man 
after  God's  own  heart ;  I  am  quite  ready  to  pay  that  obedience  in  any 
matter  that    does    not    shut    out    the  Word    of    God.      {M.    Luther.)  The 

one  question  in  conduct : — We  have  here — I.  A  criterion  op  freedom.  The 
two  men  are  prisoners ;  but  who  will  say  that  they  are  not  free  ?  Great  things 
may  be  expected  of  any  man  when  he  has  gained  the  moral  liberty  to  put 
this  question  first.  The  liberty  of  a  Eoman  citizen  at  that  time  was  costly,  but, 
like  all  mere  political  independence,  stopped  far  short  of  this.  It  secured  mortal 
rights  ;  but  it  could  never  confer  the  conscience  which  inquires,  or  the  powor  to 
perform,  what  is  rif^ht.  That  distinction  between  rights  claimed  and  right  done 
runs  very  deep,  dividing  the  world  into  two  orders  of  souls.  It  may  be  pure 
selfishness  that  insists  on  its  rights.  It  must  be  unselfish  duty  that  chooses  what 
is  right  and  does  it  in  singleness  of  heart.  A  new  commonwealth  had  just  risen 
from  the  grave  of  Christ,  and  here  was  its  watchword.  II.  A  test  of  Christian 
SOCIETY.     1.  We  have  one  outward  witness  to  the  religion  of  Jesus — the  Christian 


OHAP.  IT.]  THE  ACTS.  401 

propriety  of  domestic  habits ;  the  Christian  talk  of  the  railway  and  parlour ;  the 
Christian  tone  of  literature ;  the  Christian  fashion  of  Sunday  and  ceremony.  But 
as  the  eyes  of  God  run  over  the  Christian  world,  does  He  not  seek  some  other  proof  ? 
2.  This  brings  us  to  the  vital  point.  Original  Christianity  is  a  religion  of 
righteousness.  Behold  the  Divine  Man  I  Observe  the  proportions  of  His  doctrine 
— how  much  about  duty,  character,  the  glory  of  right,  the  wretchedness  of  wrong  ; 
how  little  about  anything  else  !  Notice  what  kind  of  people  hated  Him — corrupt 
ofiBce-holders,  hypocritical  devourers  of  widows'  houses,  traders  in  virtue  and 
blood,  (fee.  Notice  what  kind  of  people  loved  Him — men  that  wanted  to  be  honest 
and  true,  women  that  wanted  to  be  strong  in  charity  and  pure  in  heart.  Infer 
from  these  passions  that  He  crossed,  and  from  the  noble  aspirations  that  He  in- 
vigorated, what  it  was,  after  three  years  of  loving  work,  that  drove  the  nails 
through  His  hands  and  feet.  Settle  it  with  yourself  in  this  way,  what  was  the 
vital  core  of  His  ministry  ?  Was  it  not  righteousness  in  man  ?  Was  it  not  to  set 
up  a  kingdom  of  "  right  "  ?  Did  not  Christ  come  and  die  to  beget  by  a  new  faith  a 
race  of  men  right-thinking,  right-feeling,  right-reverencing,  right-working  ?  He 
had  now  but  just  ascended  out  of  sight.  The  power  of  His  Spirit  had  illuminated 
His  messengers.  Two  apostles  there,  knowing  Him  thoroughly,  sure  of  His 
meaning,  are  told  to  shut  their  lips  about  Him.  The  blood  scarcely  yet  dry  at 
Calvary  shows  that  these  magistrates'  threats  are  not  empty.  But  nothing  comes 
into  their  minds  but  one  open  answer,  not  whether  it  be  prudent,  politic,  safe, 
profitable,  or  even  "  necessary,"  but  "  Whether  it  be  right."  I  take  that  to  be  the 
fundamental  ground  in  practical  Christianity.  Many  other  things  have  been 
crowded  into  its  place  ;  things  of  high  pretension  and  considerable  value.  But  we 
had  better  go  back  to  the  beginning.  For  what  is  Catholic,  Evangelical,  Churchly, 
reasonable,  true  as  Christ  is  true,  we  had  best  go  nowhere  else  but  there.  This  is 
what  we  mean  by  the  appeal  to  primitive  antiquity  and  apostolical  authority. 
They  make  the  substance  of  personal  Christianity  to  be  a  character  that  you  can 
trust.  Dogma,  formularies,  symbols,  sermons,  exist  for  character.  It  is  the 
decisive  test,  as  to  every  particular  action,  as  to  its  being  done  or  let  alone — 
"  whether  it  be  " — not  lucrative,  fashionable,  popular,  comfortable,  but  "right." 
Call  Christianity  a  temple — this  is  its  foundation ;  a  kingdom — this  is  its  law  ;  a 
tree — this  is  the  root ;  a  stream — this  is  the  spring  ;  a  creed — this  is  the  conclu- 
sion of  all  its  articles.  3.  Does  the  world  want  this  less  now  than  ever  before? 
Take  two  of  the  great  departments  of  human  conduct  for  a  criterion.  (1)  Business 
life.  It  would  seem  that  the  highest  law  here,  the  ideal  mercantile  condition, 
would  be  that  producers,  sellers,  and  buyers  should  trust  one  another,  and  not  be 
disappointed  in  that  trust ;  that  the  money,  the  interest,  the  good  name  of  each 
one  should  be  safe  in  his  neighbour's  hands.  But  do  not  business  men  watch  one 
another  with  distrustful  anxiety  ?  Are  not  the  processes  of  trade  and  commerce 
methods  of  protecting  one  man  from  another's  rapacity  ?  What  are  all  the 
complicated  functions  of  the  attorney,  the  court,  the  police,  but  a  standing  pre- 
sumption that  men  will  cheat  if  they  can  ?  Every  little  while  comes  a  crash. 
Some  hitherto  unquestioned  reputation  collapses  in  disgrace.  A  merchant,  a 
banker,  a  contractor,  a  trustee  of  orphans'  inheritances,  fails;  so  fails  that 
integrity,  truth  to  his  creditors,  gratitude  to  his  friends,  fail  in  him  and  with  him. 
The  tumbling  down  of  all  the  towers  and  steeples  of  the  town  ought  to  send  less 
shock  and  gloom  through  the  air.  Then,  on  the  other  hand,  there  appears 
amongst  you,  now  and  then,  a  man  of  solid  virtue — so  true,  so  unbribable,  that 
everybody  does  trust  him,  and  is  never  betrayed.  The  very  rarity  and  refreshment 
of  the  sight  tell  to  the  same  conclusion.  There  is  a  widespread  lack  of  simple 
reverence  for  the  right.  There  is  some  defect  in  our  training.  Eight  is  not  first ; 
it  comes  after  profit,  office,  position.  In  the  summing-up  of  Old  Testament 
morality  there  were  three  requirements  of  God  :  "  Do  justly  "  was  the  first  of  the 
three.  In  the  new  gospel  test  there  are  two  conditions  of  acceptance  for  every 
nation  ;  and  working  "  righteousness  "  is  one  of  the  two.  (2)  From  business  turn 
to  social  entertainment.  Christianity  is  in  the  world  of  common  social  hfe  not  to 
prohibit  it  or  to  ask  leave  to  look  on,  but  to  regulate  it  by  its  rule,  helping  to 
sweeten  it  by  its  charity,  and  to  elevate  it  by  its  chaste  nobility.  Yet  as  one  sees 
what  passes,  and  listens  to  what  is  said,  he  wonders  how  often  the  participators 
ask  of  this  or  that  feature  of  the  spectacle  "  Whether  it  be  right."  Are  the  going 
or  staying,,  the  indulgence  or  rejection,  the  expenditure,  style,  talk,  dress,  drink, 
brought  to  this  Christian  criterion  of  right  and  wrong  ?  I  speak  of  no  artificial 
standard  or  rule  ;  but  does  the  question  of  duty,  by  any  rule,  of  sin  by  any 
VOL.  I.  26 


403  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

standard,  get  a  fair  and  clear  hearing  of  all  ?  4.  In  the  gospel  there  are  propor- 
lions.  In  one  sense  the  bark  of  a  fruit-tree  is  as  necessary  as  the  root  or  the  sap, 
the  limbs  of  the  body  as  the  heart.  But  after  all  we  build  badly,  and  we  grow 
badly,  unless  we  set  things  in  their  order,  always  with  a  view  to  the  one  end,  and 
keep  the  essentials  supreme.  In  the  religion  of  Christ  the  one  end  is  character. 
In  the  kingdom  of  God  the  honours  are  for  those  who  are  good  and  true  ;  upright- 
ness is  the  nobility  ;  and  the  business  of  the  citizens  is  not  only  to  take  the  name 
of  their  King,  and  to  bow  in  His  presence,  but  to  be  like  Him.  An  apostolic  faith 
is  not  handed  down,  but  it  fails  on  the  way  unless  it  carries  with  it  an  apostolic 
conscience.  Before  Mammon,  before  the  spirit  of  society,  before  gain  and  fashion, 
before  all  the  world's  rulers  and  elders  and  scribes,  make  your  answer  for  God, 
each  one  alone,  and  then  stand.  In  a  way  that  will  need  no  subtle  imagination  to 
explain,  the  grand  issue  of  that  old  trial  in  Jerusalem  will  be  yours  also  :  "  All  men 
glorified  God  for  that  which  was  done."  {Bp.  Huntington.)  Not  man's,  but  God's 
voice  to  he  heard  : — The  spirit  of  this  reply  is  that  calm  but  immoveable  resolution 
in  pursuing  the  course  of  duty  which  an  enlightened  conscience  shall  mark  out. 
The  reply  of  the  apostles  points  out — I.  The  eule  of  personal  conduct  ;  and  this 

AS    CONSISTING    IN   AN    ACKNOWLEDGMENT    OF     THE    AUTHORITY   OF    THE    LAW    OF    ChRIST, 

AS  REGULATING  ALL  THE  PRINCIPLES  AND  ACTIONS  OF  LIFE.  And  here  a  vcry  wide 
field  opens  itself,  if  we  were  to  follow  out  this  head  at  length.  It  takes  in  the 
whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  Christian  character :  it  contemplates  the  servant 
of  the  Lord  under  all  the  conceivable  circumstances  of  duty  in  which  he  may  be 
placed  in  the  world.  Suffice  it,  therefore,  to  state  generally  that,  in  such  a  man, 
Christ  sits  as  a  King  upon  the  throne  of  the  heart.  The  line  of  duty  being  plainly 
marked  out  in  the  law  of  Christ,  He  follows  it  in  the  face  of  all  the  consequences 
that  may  ensue.  He  will  not  judge  of  the  extent  of  his  duty  by  what  is  acceptable, 
or  otherwise,  to  those  around  him,  but  from  the  plain  command  of  Christ.  What 
will  the  world  think  of  me  ?  is  a  suggestion  which  frightens  away  "  the  fearful  and 
unbelieving  "  man  from  following  that  path  which  the  voice  of  God  within  him 
pronounces  to  be  right.  The  fear  of  being  reckoned  what  is  called  "  righteous 
overmuch,"  or  of  being  deemed  too  rigid  in  his  principles,  reconciles  him  to 
practices  which  his  conscience  condemns.  Like  those  base  flatterers  who  crowd 
the  courts  of  kings,  and  know  no  other  standard  of  good  and  evil  than  their 
prince's  humour,  so,  in  whatever  heart  the  fear  of  man  reigns,  that  heart  will  avow 
neither  doctrine,  nor  sentiment,  nor  practice,  but  such  as  are  in  good  odour  among 
men,  however  strongly  it  may  be  enforced  in  God's  Word  as  truth,  and  however  it 
may  be  inwardly  felt  to  be  such.  But  while  discretion  regulates  the  conduct  of  the 
courageous  Christian,  and  points  out  to  him  the  fit  time  and  manner  of  acting,  yet 
he  will  not  fail  to  discover  his  true  character.  Bemembering  evermore  the  "  con- 
tradiction of  sinners  against  Himself,"  which  his  Lord  underwent,  and  with  a  sense 
of  eternal  things  fastened  on  his  mind ;  recollecting,  too,  the  sting  he  has  felt  in 
his  conscience  when  he  may  have  seemed,  by  his  silence  at  least,  to  applaud  senti- 
ments and  practices  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  law  of  Christ,  he  is  enabled,  by  the 
united  influence  of  all  these  considerations,  to  be  prepared  to  risk  the  loss  of  all 
things,  rather  than  desert  the  cause  of  God.  Such  a  man,  such  a  Christian,  will 
feel  that  the  more  ungodly  are  those  with  whom  he  converses,  the  more  imperative 
the  call  made  upon  him  to  honour  God  in  an  irreproachable  life  :  the  greater  the 
darkness  which  is  around  him,  the  stronger  the  obligation  that  rests  upon  him  to 
shine  forth  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  By  this  were  those  eminent  servants  of  God 
actuated,  who,  in  the  face  of  a  burning  fiery  furnace,  heated  seven  times  more  than 
it  was  wont  to  be  heated,  could  say  to  the  king  in  whose  power  they  were,  "  We 
are  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this  matter."  This  was  the  spirit  of  David, 
who  said,  "  I  will  speak  of  Thy  testimony  even  before  kings,  and  will  not  be 
ashamed."  II.  The  reply  of  the  apostles  expresses,  with  equal  decisiveness, 
THE  leading  principles  OF  PERSONAL  BELIEF.  If  there  be  any  part  of  His  truth 
which  it  is  plain  that  "  God  hath  highly  exalted  " ;  if  there  be  any  one  an- 
nouncement upon  which  a  mighty  emphasis  is  laid  by  the  constant  repetition 
of  it,  and  because  it  meets  the  view  at  all  points,  this  ought  to  find  a  rank 
proportionably  high  in  our  own  minds.  This  truth  a  Christian  must  learn  to 
prize  dearly,  and  for  this  earnestly  contend.  Such  a  truth,  pre-eminently,  is  that 
which  teaches  that  "  we  are  accounted  righteous  before  God  only  for  the  merit 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  faith."  But  it  is  pos'^ible  to  hold  suclj  a  system 
of  doctrine,  as  shall  pass  for  a  Scriptural  acceptance  of  this  truth,  while  it  is  either 
a  corruption  of  that  truth,  or  even  in  its  tendency  subversive  of  it.     He  must  be 


CHAP,  iv.]  THE  ACTS.  403 

little  conversant  with  his  own  heart  who  is  not  aware  how  reluctant  man  naturally 
is  to  be  beholden  to  another  for  his  redemption,  even  tbough  it  were  to  God  Him- 
self ;  and  how  unpalatable  to  the  taste  which  Divine  grace  has  not  refined  is  that 
religion  whose  first  claim  is  that  all  idea  of  personal  merit  be  renounced.  The 
courageous  Christian  finds  here  an  exercise  for  his  firmness.  III.  The  occasion  on 
which  the  two  apostles  announced  this  great  principle  suggests  to  us  yet  another 
application  of  it :  It  was  when  they  had  been  peeaching    the  truth  of  Christ 

THAT     the     prohibition     WHICH     THEY    RESISTED     CAME     FORTH     FROM     THE     COUNCIL. 

Their  answer,  therefore,  naturally  reminds  us  of  the  foundation  on  which  is  to 
be  constructed  the  rule  of  faith.  Here,  too,  as  in  the  former  case,  the  course 
of  a  resolute  follower  of  Christ  is  to  be  founded  on  a  principle.  It  may  not  be 
self-willed,  but  it  must  be  conscientious  :  not  caprice,  which  is  irresponsible, 
but  reason,  which  is  consistent,  must  be  his  guide.  And  the  principle,  on  which 
the  rule  of  his  "  faith  "  is  constructed,  is  obvious  and  distinct.  In  a  matter  so 
peculiar,  and  so  closely  affecting  himself,  as  religion,  he  declines  to  listen  to  any 
voice  except  that  which  sp  aks  to  him  immediately  from  heaven.  Whilst  he 
acknowledges,  in  common  with  one  who  wrote  on  the  evidences  of  Christianity, 
and  against  the  infidel,  tbat,  considering  the  circumstances  in  which  man  is 
placed,  it  is  even  highly  probable  that  a  revelation  should  be  made  to  man ; 
yet,  for  that  very  reason,  because  it  is  a  revelation — something  hitherto  unheard 
of  that  God  should  speak  to  man — he  requires  that  the  voice  which  speaks  shall  be 
one  that  shall  instantly  be  recognised  to  be  the  voice  of  God.  If  a  Eoman  poet, 
familiar  to  us  all,  could  say,  "  'Tis  when  he  thunders  from  the  sky  that  we  believe 
Jove  is  really  king  there,"  the  Christian  may,  with  much  more  reason,  require  that 
the  voice  to  which  he  is  called  upon  to  attend  in  the  things  that  everlastingly 
concern  him  shall  be  attended  by  credentials  alike  Divine.  Those  of  us  who  admit 
this  reason  will,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  take  the  Scriptures  as  our  sole  rule  of 
faith.  Had  the  Holy  Ghost  spoken  unto  us  only  a  few  enigmatical  words,  it  had 
been  necessary  to  spell  and  scan  them  with  the  most  inquisitive  earnestness,  and  to 
eke  out  from  some  other  source  a  supplement  to  a.  communication  so  scanty.  But, 
when  we  have  a  volume  of  such  bulk,  beginning  with  the  foundation  of  the  world, 
and  ending  with  tbe  last  dispensation,  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  upon  what 
principle  we  are  to  look  for  any  other  communication  (as  from  God)  from  any  other 
quarter  whatsoever.  Nor,  in  thus  upholding  the  undivided  claim  of  the  Scriptures 
to  be  the  rule  of  faith,  need  any  simple-miuded  advocate  of  truth  be  perplexed  by 
questions  that  have  startled  some.  If  any  should  inquire  how  the  Church  is  to 
extract  from  a  body  of  truth  lying  scattered  over  so  wide  a  surface  her  own  con- 
fession of  faith,  the  reply  is  that  she  can  only  do  it  by  the  study  of  that  Scripture 
itself.  To  aid  in  ascertaining  its  meaning  she  will  not  disdain  the  writings  of  the 
pious  and  learned  of  all  by-gone  days ;  she  will  take  them,  however,  as  guides  to 
her  judgment,  not  as  superseding  it.  The  Word  of  God  will  thus  be  made  the 
supreme  authority ;  and  if  any  should  propose  to  modify  the  plain  assertion  of 
Scripture  upon  any  point,  the  servant  of  Christ,  tenacious  of  the  principle  he  has 
adopted,  will  reply,  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  to  hearken  unto  you 
more  than  unto  God,  judge  ye."  And  yet  it  is  remarkable  that,  in  thus  asserting 
the  paramount  duty  of  listening  to  no  other  voice  than  God's,  he  need  not  shut 
his  ear  to  that  of  the  Church  ;  and  this  in  two  respects :  first,  because  the  Church 
has  taught  agreeably  to  God's  teachings ;  and,  far  more,  because  such  is  the  course 
acted  upon  by  our  Church  itself.  For  what  was  the  procedure  of  those  men  wbo 
drew  up  our  doctrinal  standards  ?  They  made  the  Scriptures  the  single  court  of 
appeal.  With  them  tradition  is  not  an  assessor  with  Scripture  upon  the  throne  of 
judgment,  but  sits  in  a  lower  place.  It  may  be  no  small  satisfaction  to  an  inquirer 
after  the  right  way,  thus  to  have  it  made  clear  to  him,  that  he  may  be  at  once 
jealous  for  the  honour  of  God,  and  not  conceitedly  negligent  of  the  opinions  of 
men.  But,  that  the  balance  of  truth  in  this  matter  may  be  duly  preserved,  it  is  well 
to  urge  that  the  rule  of  faith  is  not  the  blended  voice  of  God  and  man,  but  that  of 
God  only.  It  was  not  until  "  Eli  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  called  the  child 
Samuel,"  that  he  bade  him  give  to  the  voice  this  reply,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy 
servant  heareth."  IV.  There  is  yet  another  case  which  comes  within  the  range  of 
that  broad  principle  which  the  apostles  Peter  and  Jobn  laid  down.    That  principle 

WILL   FURNISH   A   RULE    FOR    MAINTAINING    THE    PURITY   OF    God's    TRUTH,       Taking  the 

Church  from  its  commencement,  it  will  be  seen  that  error  has  been  found  in  it  of 
a  more  or  less  mischievous  nature.  Every  period  has  witnessed  its  peculiar  cor- 
ruptions.   And  thus  the  men  of  each  age  have  had  a  corresponding  duty  imposecl 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  iv. 

upon  them,  to  be  very  jealous  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  The  Israelites,  -when  the 
■whole  generation  that  rebelled  in  the  wilderness  were  cut  off,  entered  into  Canaan, 
and  soon  fell  into  the  idolatry  of  their  new  neighbours.  Other  Christians,  again, 
were  for  engrafting  on  it  the  pagan  philosophy,  for  rejecting  the  Old  Testament  and 
the  moral  law — a  specious  and  insinuating  heresy.  The  vigilant  sentinel  would 
cry  out  to  those  who  were  in  danger  from  this  subtle  enemy,  "  Beware  lest  any  man 
spoil  you  through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  after  the  traditions  of  men,  and  not 
after  Christ."  But,  when  it  shall  have  been  successfully  maintained  that  it  is 
"  right  to  hearken  unto  God  rather  than  unto  man"  in  all  of  these  respects,  the 
whole  practical  use  of  the  demonstration  may  yet  be  lost.  For  some  may  say, 
"  You  need  a  key  which  is  to  unlock  to  each  individual  the  sense  of  the  Scripture, 
a  curb  to  the  vagrancy  of  each  man's  private  construing  of  that  very  voice  to  which 
you  bid  him  hearken.  Unless  you  will  open  a  door  to  the  entrance  of  as  many 
varieties  of  opinions  as  there  are  men  to  frame  fancies,  another  voice  must  be 
listened  to."  Whoever  will  not  yield  up  the  very  citadel  of  Christian  liberty,  must 
manfully  defend  the  truth  in  this  matter.  It  is  in  religion  as  in  our  daily  conduct. 
There  are  certain  laws  of  morals  which  are  defined ;  and  the  conscience  of  each 
man  is  to  make  his  own  application  of  them  to  his  own  case.  This  is  discipline 
under  which  we  are  all  held,  and  from  which  none  of  us  can  escape.  The  keeping 
of  ourselves  from  hour  to  hour  is  not  by  any  specific  rule  provided  for  every  ease 
that  can  arise,  but  by  the  going  back  to  some  grand  principle  which  we  have  the 
task  of  applying.  If  there  be  any  truth  in  the  foregoing  remarks,  then  every  one 
must  gird  himself  with  the  armour  of  resoluteness  ;  for  a  yet  more  subtle  foe  may 
be  in  the  rear.  When  the  unanswerable  nature  of  our  arguments  shall  have 
silenced  the  adversary,  he  may  employ  another  expedient  to  wrest  out  of  our  hands 
the  weapons  which  they  grasp.  The  voice  of  God  may  have  been  so  clearly  heard 
by  unwilling  ears  that  it  cannot  be  gainsaid ;  but  there  may  be  a  demand  set  up  for 
not  speaking  of  these  things,  and  for  forbearing  to  characterise  the  opposed  errors 
by  such  titles  as  probably  belong  to  them.  Under  the  specious  plea  of  charity,  and 
an  abstinence  from  evil  speaking,  many,  on  whom  the  mantle  of  Peter  and  John 
may  have  fallen,  will  be  "  straightly  charged  to  speak  no  more  "  that  of  which 
they  are  inwardly  convinced.  "  We  cannot  but  speak  the  things  which  we  have 
heard  and  seen."  Truth,  if  it  be  such,  must  find  its  utterance  ;  just  as  love  will 
express  itself,  or  any  other  emotion  :  "  Wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children,''  not  by 
their  suppressing,  but  by  their  declaring  her  claims  :  "  I  tell  you,  if  these  should 
hold  their  peace,  the  very  stones  would  cry  out."  Why  shall  not  this  strong 
language  of  the  Lord  have  a  fitness  always  as  heretofore  ?  The  remarks  that 
have  been  offered,  if  they  are  to  be  practically  applied,  imply  such  a  state  of  things 
in  the  Church  as  it  is  never  joyous  to  contemplate.  Courage  implies  danger — un- 
shaken firmness  is  an  attitude  which  tells  of  encroachment.  It  suggests  itself  as 
another  reflection  from  this  subject,  how  painful  the  sensation  and  the  effects  of  a 
period  of  religious  dissension  1  The  occasion  which  calls  for  firmness  is  not  one  of 
serenity.  {R.  Eden,  HJ.A.)  God  to  he  obeyed  at  all  costs : — Unless  I  be  confuted 
and  convinced  by  the  testimony  of  Scripture,  or  by  open  and  clear  grounds  and 
reasons,  and  also  those  sayings,  adduced  and  brought  forward  by  me,  be  confuted, 
and  my  conscience  be  captivated  by  the  Word  of  God,  I  can  and  will  recall  nothing, 
because  it  is  neither  safe  nor  advisable  to  do  anything  against  conscience.  Here  I 
stand,  I  cannot  do  otherwise.  So  help  me  God.  (M.  Luther.)  Obeying  God 
rather  than  men  : — John  Nelson,  the  Methodist  stonemason,  being  once  desired  by 
his  master's  foreman  to  work  on  the  Lord's  day,  on  the  ground  that  the  King's 
business  required  despatch,  and  that  it  was  common  to  work  on  the  Sabbath  for 
His  Majesty  when  anything  was  wanted  in  a  particular  haste.  Nelson  boldly 
declared,  "  That  be  would  not  work  upon  the  Sabbath  for  any  man  in  the  kingdom, 
except  it  were  to  quench  fire,  or  something  that  required  immediate  help." 
"Religion,"  says  the  foreman,  "has  made  you  a  rebel  against  the  King."  "No, 
sir,"  he  replied,  "  it  has  made  me  a  better  subject  than  ever  I  was.  The  greatest 
enemies  the  King  has  are  Sabbath-breakers,  swearers,  drunkards,  and  whore- 
mongers, for  these  bring  down  God's  judgments  upon  the  King  and  country."  He 
was  told  he  should  lose  his  employment  if  he  would  not  obey  his  orders ;  his 
answer  was,  "  He  would  rather  want  bread  than  wilfully  offend  God."  The  fore- 
man swore  he  would  be  as  mad  as  Whitefield  if  he  went  on.  "  What  hast  thou 
done,"  said  he,  "  that  thou  needest  make  so  much  ado  about  salvation?  I  always 
took  thee  to  be  as  honest  a  man  as  I  have  in  the  works,  and  would  have  trusted 
thee  with  £500."     "  So  you  might,"  answered  Nelson,  "  and  not  have  lost  a  penny 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  405 

fcyme."  "I  have  a  worse  opinion  of  thee  now,"  said  the  foreman.  "Master," 
rejoined  he,  "  I  have  the  odds  of  you,  for  I  have  a  worse  opinion  of  myself  than 
you  can  have."  The  issue,  however,  was  that  the  work  was  not  pursued  on  the 
Sabbatb,  and  Nelson  rose  in  the  good  opinion  of  his  employer  for  having  shown  a 
«ense  of  his  duty  as  a  Christian.  {Southey's  Life  of  Wesley.)  Protestantism  was 
a  refusal  to  live  any  longer  in  a  lie.  It  was  a  falling  back  upon  the  undefined 
untheoretic  rules  of  truth  and  piety  which  lay  upon  the  surface  of  the  Bible,  and  a 
determination  rather  to  die  than  to  mock  with  unreality  any  longer  the  Almighty 
Maker  of  the  world.  {J.  A.  Fronde.)  We  cannot  but  speak  the  things  which 
we  have  seen  and  heard. — Honest  Christian  speech: — I.  That  which  the 
Christian  has  heard  is  worth  repeating.  He  knew  not  God — words  from  heaven 
have  revealed  to  him  God.  He  was  far  from  God — words  from  heaven  have  been 
the  means  of  leading  him  nigh  to  God.  His  heart  was  at  enmity  towards  God 
— words  from  heaven  have  been  the  means  of  reconciling  him  to  God.  He 
knew  not  how  he  could  be  pardoned — words  from  heaven  have  directed  him  to 
the  Lamb  of  God.  So  timid  was  the  Christian  before  he  heard  these  words 
that  he  was  like  a  soldier  who  trembles  at  the  flutter  of  his  own  banner,  and 
starts  at  the  clangour  of  his  own  trumpet — words  from  heaven  have  so  aroused 
his  latent  courage,  that  now,  armour-clad,  and  sword  in  hand,  he  glories  in  the 
battle  of  a  true  life,  and  instead  of  shrinking  cowardly  from  the  conflict,  he  now, 
in  the  thickest,  sharpest  warfare  stands.  Verily,  worthy  of  the  world's  acceptation 
are  words  which  are  God's  power  unto  salvation.  And,  think  you,  will  the  winds 
■waft  these  words  of  God  ?  Will  the  waters  spread  these  Divine  voices  ?  Not  your 
winds,  O  ye  husbandmen,  not  your  waters,  0  ye  merchants  ;  but  the  currents 
which  carried  Peter  onwards  when  he  said,  "I  cannot  but  speak,"  and  the  breath 
which  moved  John  when  He  testified,  "  "We  cannot  but  speak  the  things  which  we 
have  seen  and  heard."  II.  The  spirit  of  faith  inclines  the  Christian  to 
repeat  what  he  has  heard.  1.  Observe  the  order  in  which  religious  belief  and 
speech  are  here  placed.  We  have  heard  ;  and  we  cannot  but  speak.  This  is  like 
Paul's  language,  and  it  is  in  harmony  with  that  of  David,  "  I  believed,  and  there- 
fore have  I  spoken.  We  also  believe,  and  therefore  speak."  This  order  has  been 
reversed,  and  much  mischief  has  been  the  result.  Are  not  children  often  made  to 
sav,  "  We  are  members  of  Christ,  we  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  and  in 
His  Son,"  while  all  evidence  is  wanting  of  such  union,  and  of  such  faith  ?  And 
converts,  before  they  enter  Christian  communion,  are  often  required  to  confess 
their  belief  in  all  the  doctrines  which  that  community  holds.  In  some  cases  men 
puljlicly  teach  and  preach  before  they  believe,  and  the  mischief  of  this  false  speech 
is  most  terrible.  Immediately  a  lad  has  acquired  a  few  religious  ideas,  he  is  often 
ushered  into  a  Sabbath-school  to  speak.  So  soon  as  an  adult  is  religiously  im- 
pressed he  must  confess  himself  a  Christian  publicly,  and  speak.  And  when  he 
has  made  a  profession,  he  must  be  hurried  iuto  some  sphere  of  Christian  instruc- 
tion to  speak.  Now  where  is  the  Nazareth  in  which  Christ's  dis  iples  are  brought 
np  ?  Where  the  wilderness  that  precedes  the  showing  unto  Israel  ?  Where  the 
men  who,  like  Paul,  sojourn  in  Arabia  before  acknowledging  Christ  in  Jerusalem? 
Premature  effort  makes  weak  Christians,  and  if  you  would  have  in  Christ's  Church 
strong  Christians,  men  who  can  work,  you  will  certainly  keep  all  young  converts 
for  a  time  at  Nazareth  ;  and  even  after  that  you  will  sometimes  send  them  into  the 
wilderness.  We  have  no  confidence  in  number  ;  our  confidence  is  in  the  right  men 
to  do  certain  things.  Faith  comes  by  hearing — faith  grows  by  listening — doubts 
are  dispersed  by  waiting  and  by  inquiry.  Moreover,  listening,  while  it  permits 
the  honest,  unwilful  doubter  to  suspend  his  confession,  is  the  best  means  of 
guiding  such  into  that  integrity  of  faith  in  which,  like  Thomas,  they  can  address 
as  living  the  Saviour  whom  they  thought  dead,  and  cry,  "  My  Lord  and  my 
<jrod."  We  cannot  be  always  silent,  that  would  be  concealment;  and  we  dare 
not  be  always  reserved,  that  would  mislead ;  we  speak.  There  is  something  in 
the  very  principle  of  faith  which  moves  to  utterance.  2.  But  while  it  is  of  the 
nature  of  faith  to  incline  to  speech,  that  testimony  which  is  the  object  of 
Christian  faith,  exerts  the  same  influence.  For  what  is  it  that  the  Christian 
"has  heard?  Faithful  sayings,  worthy  of  all  acceptation.  And  if  his  heart  be 
right,  sensitive,  alive,  it  cannot  be  to  him  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  or 
not  men  hear  and  believe  that  which  he  has  heard  and  believed.  The  word 
that  he  has  heard  is  a  Divine  word  ;  and  he  would  have  others  hear,  that  God 
may  be  glorified.  It  is  the  message  of  reconciliation ;  and  he  would  have  others 
hear,  that  they,  too,  may  be  reconciled.    The  origin,  the  worth,  and   the  truth 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

of  the  gospel,  move  the  beh'ever  to  speak.  Its  utility,  its  wonderfulness,  the 
good-will  to  man  that  it  induces,  the  believer's  own  conscience,  obligation  ta 
the  gospel,  all  move  him  to  speak.  If  the  Christian  history  appeared  to  him 
a  fable,  seriousness  might  bid  him  hold  his  peace  ;  if  the  Christian  doctrine 
were  doubtful,  integrity  will  command  silence ;  but  the  tendency  of  the  believer's 
faith  in  the  gospel  is  to  move  him  to  speak.  3.  And  beside  the  inward  impulse, 
there  is  an  external  demand  for  honest,  Christian  speech.  The  disciple  of 
Christ  believes  that  which  multitudes  around  him  have  not  heard ;  and  as  he 
detects,  by  many  symptoms,  their  ignorance,  the  spirit  of  faith  saith,  "  Inform 
them — speak."  He  binds  to  his  heart  that  which  many  reject ;  and  the  spirit 
of  faith  saith,  "  Eepeat  that  which  you  have  heard,  persuade,  warn,  speak." 
He  sees  many  perishing  for  lack  of  that  remedy,  of  that  provision  by  which  h& 
is  saved  ;  and  the  spirit  of  faith  saith,  "  Tell  of  the  antidote  to  sinfulness — 
speaking."  The  Christian  in  the  midst  of  an  ignorant  community  is  like  a. 
fountain  in  the  deseit ;  a  beacon  on  a  dangerous  coast ;  like  his  Master  when 
surrounded  by  a  multitude  of  the  sick  and  needy  in  Palestine.  Lepers  are 
before  him  —  he  knows  what  will  cleanse  the  leper.  The  palsied  and  the 
paralysed  are  around  him — he  knows  what  will  re-animate  the  withered  nerves- 
Divers  diseases  are  exhibited  to  him — he  knows  what  will  remove  them  all. 
For  sin  in  all  its  forms,  for  evil  in  all  its  workings  and  results,  the  Christian 
knows  a  remedy,  and  has  a  remedy.  Then  keep  not  silence  about  it,  but  of  it 
— intelligently,  lovingly,  earnestly,  incessantly,  but  seasonably,  speak."  III. 
Considerations  helpfdl  to  honest  Christian  speech.  1.  Multitudes,  by  voice 
and  pen,  are  sneering  at  religious  faith  and  speech.  Be  not  driven  from  either 
by  the  sneers  of  men ;  but  let  us  learn  from  them.  There  is  some  excuse  for 
them.  The  world  has  heard  the  Church  say  she  believes  what  the  Church 
cannot  prove  that  she  has  ever  heard ;  and  the  world  has  had  reason  to  suspect, 
that  some  Christians  speak  that  which  they  do  not  believe.  Paul  told  Titus, 
*'  There  are  many  unruly  and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers,  whose  mouths  must  be 
stopped."  So  you  see  it  is  not  simply  talking  about  religion  that  the  world  wants 
and  that  the  Church  requires,  but  it  is  sensonable  talking,  talking  about  the  right 
thing.  2.  We  increase  our  faith  by  listening.  The  mere  prayer  for  increase  of 
faith  is  not  enough.  How  many  precious  moments  in  the  day  are  lost,  during 
•which  you  might  be  directing  your  ear  to  Christ !  Do  not  say  that  there  is  any 
incongruity  between  your  listening  to  the  voice  of  Christ,  and  your  standing  before 
a  bench  or  behind  the  counter.  Wherever  it  is  right  for  you  to  be  it  is  right  for 
you  to  speak  to  your  Saviour.  And  if  you  think  that  you  honour  Him  by  fancying 
that  you  must  be  in  the  place  of  worship  to  think  of  Hmi,  or  that  you  must  have 
the  Bible  always  open  before  you,  you  make  a  very  serious  mistake  ;  for  you  want 
Christ  with  you  everywhere.  Thomas  Carlyle  recommends  as  a  remedy  for  the 
false  speech  of  the  age,  that  the  tongues  of  one  generation  should  be  cut  out. 
But  the  cure  for  the  truthless  utterances  of  the  Church  will  be  found  in  placing 
listening  to  Christ  before  believing — in  meditation  upon  the  object  of  faith,  and  in 
placing  speech  after  this  meditation.  Such  bridling  of  the  tongue  will  make  perfect 
men;  while  clipping  of  the  tongue,  as  Carlyle  forgets,  would  only  make  maimed 
men  ;  and  God's  way  of  redeeming  a  man  is  not  to  maim  him,  but  to  make  him 
•whole.  3.  As  it  is  not  mere  faith  that  saves  us,  but  faith  in  Christ,  so  it  is  not 
religious  speech  that  the  world  needs,  but  speech  of  true  religion.  As  our  interpre- 
tations of  the  Bible  are  not  necessarily  the  Bible,  so  no  Christian  system  is  Christy 
and  some  systems  called  by  His  name  have  no  connection  at  all  wi  h  Him.  Do 
not  let  men  hear  so  much  about  my  views  (for  of  what  consequence  are  they?), 
our  principles,  our  Church,  our  denomination,  our  fathers,  our  tradition,  our 
theology ;  for  amid  these  sounds  men  lose  the  only  Name  by  which  a  sinner  can  be 
saved.      (S.  Martin.)  The  connection  between  believing  the  (jonpel  and  making 

it  known : — I.  What  we  conceive  to  be  believing  the  gospel.  1.  Entertaining 
it  in  the  mind,  so  as  for  the  judgment  to  approve,  from  a  conviction  of  its  im- 
portance. 2.  Yielding  to  it,  as  God's  method  of  acceptance.  3.  So  feeling  ita 
influence  as  that  the  character  shall  be  changed.  This  faith,  generally  speaking, 
comes  by  listening  to  Divine  truth.  "Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by 
the  Word  of  God."  II.  What  we  include  in  making  the  gospel  known.  1. 
Imparting  spiritual  knowledge  to  those  with  whom  we  are  acquainted — husbands, 
wives,  Bisters,  brothers,  <fec.  2.  Giving  Christian  education.  We  commend  the 
cultivation  of  the  mind,  but  let  us  not  neglect  the  sanctification  of  the  heart.  3. 
Distribution  of  religious  tracts,  of  books,  such  as  "Baxter's  Call,"  Eomaine's  "  Walk 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  407 

of  Faith,"  &c.,  but  especially  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make  wise  to 
salvation,  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  4.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel.  5. 
Deportment  becoming  the  gospel.  III.  The  connection  between  the  two. 
Where  there  is  a  real  spiritual  reception  of  the  gospel  there  will  be  a  publication  of 
it  arising  from  the  following  considerations.  1.  Sympathy  with  the  distressed.  2. 
Love  to  the  Eedeemer.  3.  Anxiety  for  the  cause  will  induce  this.  4.  The  happi- 
ness to  be  possessed  here  and  hereafter.  6.  The  glory  that  will  be  secured  to  God. 
(W.  Lucy.)  The  gospel  cannot  he  concealed: — I  have  heard  say  that  in  the  old 
Bread  Biots,  when  men  were  actually  starving  for  bread,  no  word  had  such  a 
terribly  threatening  and  alarming  power  about  it  as  the  word  "  Bread !  "  when 
shouted  by  a  starving  crowd.  I  have  read  a  description  by  one  who  once  heard 
this  cry  :  he  said  he  had  been  startled  at  night  by  a  cry  of  "Fire  !  "  but  when  he 
heard  the  cry  of  "  Bread !  bread  !  "  from  those  that  were  hungry,  it  seemed  to  cut 
him  like  a  sword.  Whatever  bread  had  been  in  his  possession  he  must  at  once 
have  handed  it  out.  So  it  is  with  the  gospel  ;  when  men  are  once  aware  of  their 
need  of  it,  there  is  no  monopolising  it.  None  can  make  "  a  ring  "  or  "  a  corner  " 
over  the  precious  commodity  of  heavenly  truth.  Neither  can  any  one  put  this 
candle  under  a  bushel  so  as  quite  to  conceal  its  light.  It  cannot  be  hid,  because 
there  are  so  many  that  want  it.  They  are  pining,  these  myriads  of  London,  these 
myriads  all  over  the  world  ;  and  though  they  hardly  know  it,  yet  there  is  a  cry 
coming  up  for  ever  from  them  for  something  which  they  can  never  find,  except  in 
Christ.  You  may  depend  upon  it  you  cannot  stop  the  gospel  being  preached  while 
there  is  this  awful  hunger  after  it  in  the  souls  of  men.  (C.  H.  Spiirgeon.)  Speak- 
ing God's  Word : — If  you  really  study  God's  Word,  I  believe  you'll  get  so  full  of  it 
that  you  can't  help  but  speak  it  out.  The  reason  so  many  don't  care  to  work  for 
God  is,  that  they  are  so  empty  they  cannot  find  anything  to  say.  You  can't  bring 
water  out  of  a  dry  well.  There  are  two  ways  of  getting  water;  the  one  is  by 
pumping.  Now  many  Christians  are  like  these  pumps,  you  have  to  pump  a  long 
time  before  you  get  anything.  The  other  kind  of  well  is  what  they  call  artesian ; 
they  just  dig  down  until  they  come  to  the  very  fountain  itself,  hundreds  of  feet 
below,  then  up  springs  the  water  into  the  air,  they  don't  need  any  pumping  then. 
I  wish  Christians  would  be  like  artesian  wells  ever  springing  up  to  eternal  life. 
(D.  L.  Moody.)  Making  Christ  known  to  others : — Gideon  Ousely  was  impressed 
with  the  thought  that  he  ought  to  preach  Jesus  Christ  to  the  people ;  he  hesitated 
for  a  time  till  a  voice  came  to  him,  as  if  asking,  "  Gideon,  do  you  know  the  nature 
of  the  evil?  "  He  said,  "  Yes,  I  do.  I  know  the  nature  of  sin."  "  Do  you  know 
the  remedy  ?  "  "  Yes,  I  do."  "  Then  go  and  tell  it."  We  know  the  nature  of  the 
disease,  and  we  know  the  only  remedy  is  God's  remedy  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  we 
must  go  and  make  the  remedy  known  to  those  who  are  in  the  dark  valleys  of  the 
shadow  of  sin.  There  comes  to  my  mind  the  story  of  one  of  our  own  missionaries 
in  Wales,  who,  when  he  was  converted,  was  so  full  of  joy  that  he  ran  out  of  the 
meeting  shouting.  A  boy  went  up  to  him  and  said,  "  What's  to  do  ?  What's  to 
do  ?  "  Then  the  man — Griffith  Griffiths,  well  known  to  many  of  us — took  sixpence 
out  of  his  pocket,  and  said  to  the  lad,  "  Here,  go  and  tell  the  people  that  God  has 
saved  Griffith  Griffiths."  He  gave  the  boy  sixpence  to  do  it.  He  felt  that  as  soon 
as  he  knew  Jesus  Christ  it  was  his  business  to  make  Jesus  Christ  known  to  others. 
(J.  S.  Balmer.)  Christian  testimony  : — A  gentleman,  sitting  in  an  arbour  in  the 
middle  of  a  wood,  saw  an  ant  running  along  the  surface  of  a  rustic  table  which  was 
in  front  of  him.  Knowing  that  ants  are  fond  of  sugar,  and  having  a  small  lump  of 
loaf  sugar  in  his  pocket,  he  placed  it  on  the  table,  and  set  himself  to  watch  the 
movements  of  the  ant.  As  he  expected,  the  ant  soon  discovered  it,  and  began 
sipping.  But  it  had  scarcely  partaken  of  it,  when,  to  his  great  surprise,  it 
scampered  off  and  disappeared.  A  short  time  after,  however,  it  returned,  followed 
by  some  two  or  three  hundred  of  its  friends  ;  from  which  it  appeared  that  the  ant 
had  no  sooner  tasted  the  sweet  morsel,  than  it  went  to  invite  its  friends  to  become 
partakers  of  its  joy.  And  so  it  is  with  all  who  have  tasted  the  joy  of  salvation. 
No  sooner  does  Christ  become  precious  to  their  souls  than,  like  Peter  and  John, 
they  "  cannot  but  speak  "  of  Him  to  others.  Constrained  to  speak  ai)out  Jesus  : — 
An  evangelist  in  an  inquiry  meeting  asked  a  woman,  "Are  you  resting  in  Jesus  ?  " 
Very  indignantly  she  replied,  "  It  is  nothing  to  you  whether  I  am  or  not ;  besides, 
I  would  not  speak  about  such  a  subject  to  any  one  but  God  !  "  In  about  a  fortnight 
the  evangelist  was  in  another  inquiry  meeting,  and  saw  this  same  person  speaking 
very  earnestly  to  another  woman.  Drawing  near  to  tbem,  he  heard  her  telling  the 
Btranger  about  her  own  conversion  to  Christ,  and  pressing  the  woman  tO  follow 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Jesus  at  once.  Much  gratified,  the  evangelist,  thinking  to  test  her,  said,  "  Madam, 
madam,  keep  your  mouth  shut  on  that  subject !  "  "  Keep  my  mouth  shut !  "  she 
rephed,  with  enthusiasm,  "I  cannot  do  it,  sir;  I  must  speak  about  Jesus." 
So  when  they  had  further  threatened  them,  they  let  them  go. — A  reluctant 
release : — I.  It  was  accompanied  with  great  wrong.  "  They  further  threatened 
them."  The  dreadful  language  which  had  hitherto  stood  in  the  place  of  argument 
was  now  made  more  dreadful.  We  see  here  proofs  of  iniquity,  of  a  settled  prejudice 
against  Jesus  and  His  work,  and  of  absolute  unwillingness  to  yield  to  the  evidence 
of  facts.  But  these  threats  were  sure  to  be  answered  as  the  previous  ones.  II.  It 
WAS  A  CONFESSION  THAT  THE  COURT  WAS  BAFFLED.  "  Finding  nothing  how  they  might 
punish  them."  They  had  a  mind  to  punish,  they  had  done  their  best  to  do  so,  but 
severally  and  unitedly  they  had  failed  ;  and  now  prudence  moved  them  to  do  what 
was  no  part  of  their  pleasure.  They  barked  and  snarled,  but  were  afraid  to  bite. 
Often  have  persecutors  been  in  such  a  case.  III.  It  was  in  deference  to  a  preva- 
lent POPULAR  sentiment.  "  Bccausc  of  the  people."  The  people  were  wiser  than 
their  rulers,  and  more  religious.     ( IV.  Hudson. ) 

Vers.  23-37.  And  being  let  go,  they  went  to  their  own  company. — Being  let  go : 
— We  do  not  know  what  we  or  other  people  are  until  the  restraint  is  taken  off.  We 
call  ourselves  free,  but  there  is  not  an  absolutely  free  man  in  the  universe.  We 
have  the  liberty  of  law.  We  have  the  freedom  of  a  theocracy.  "  The  Lord  reign- 
eth,"  and  He  would  reign  to  no  purpose  if  He  did  not  restrain  every  creature,  and 
restrain  with  singular  meaning  and  graciousness  the  creature  who  bears  His  own 
image.  I.  Good  restraints.  1.  Socially,  in  the  lowest  level.  He  is  an  ungahant  and 
wholly  undesirable  man  who  is  not  restrained  by  the  presence  of  ladies.  But  for 
that  you  could  not  tell  what  language  he  would  have  used.  He  could  not  be  in  his 
true  self,  not  because  there  are  ten  great  fiery  commandments  staring  him  in  the 
face,  but  because  of  an  all-pervading  feeling  of  refinement.  But  if  such  men  be  let 
go,  and  join  their  bad  set,  you  see  their  quality.  2.  Or  take  the  limits  of  hospitality. 
A  man  says,  "  I  cannot  avenge  this  insult  now,  because  I  am  bound  to  show  hospi- 
tality ;  but  being  let  go,  I  shall  feel  entitled  to  say  or  do  things  which  at  present  I 
cannot."  3.  Or,  still  keeping  within  the  scope  of  the  question,  the  occasion  makes 
the  man.  Say  it  is  a  solemn  occasion,  a  funeral,  people  weeping  because  of  the 
dead  and  gone.  The  modest  man,  at  all  events,  halts,  he  is  silent  if  not  com- 
plaisant. He  dare  not  say  what  he  would  at  other  times  ;  but  being  let  go  away 
from  the  grave  and  the  cypress  shadow,  you  will  see  what  he  is  really.  4.  Look  at 
the  subject  religiously.  Here  we  have  the  subtlest  restraints.  The  tender  memories, 
the  old,  old  long  ago,  somehow,  to  kill  that  ancient  time  would  be  like  strangling  an 
angel.  The  old  home  feeling,  the  childish  sounds,  the  old  family  usages,  seem  to 
keep  us  back  with  "Beware  !  you  had  better  not  do  it !  Stand  still !  "  Who  can  estimate 
the  value  of  a  religious  education  ?  First  prayers,  first  little  verses  learned  and  sung  by 
bird-Uke  lips — who  can  tell  how  these  things  will  go  with  the  child  when  he  becomes 
a  man,  full  of  care  and  tempted  to  sin  ?  The  little  things  which  now  are  matters 
of  amusement,  may  stand  one  day  up  and  say  to  the  man,  "  You  used  to  be  a  pure- 
lipped  child,  a  loved  and  loving  creature  ;  a  thousand  prayers  were  ofi'ered  for  your 
salvation."  When  you  murder  yourself,  you  murder  a  whole  generation  of  mentors 
and  suppliants.  II.  Bad  restraint.  1.  A  man  is  shut  up  in  bad  society,  in  a 
corrupt  atmosphere.  He  never  hears  a  word  that  touches  his  best  nature  ;  he  longs 
for  the  higher  and  purer  spaces  ;  for  moral  liberty  ;  he  is  a  better  man  than  he  can 
be  under  his  circumstances.  God  will  make  a  difference,  because  He  will  have 
compassion  upon  some.  He  knows  exactly  what  restraints  are  upon  us,  and  what 
we  would  be  if  we  could  break  the  chain  and  fly  upward  into  the  blue  heaven.  2. 
Others  are  crippled  for  want  of  means.  We  regard  them  as  destitute  of  good  deeds 
and  high  feeling,  and  we  speak  about  them  with  our  erring  judgment.  God  will 
discriminate.  He  knows  what  the  poor  soul  will  be.  There  is  a  way  out  at  the 
other  end  !  Great  moral  freedom,  liberty  for  giving  the  soul  spaces  to  fly  in,  and 
temples  to  sing  in  not  made  with  hands.  God  knows  what  munificence  you  would 
show  if  you  had  the  liberty.  3.  Many  a  man  is  misunderstood  for  want  of  liberty. 
He  is  waiting.  I  have  known  often  splendid  talents  wait  a  long  time  for  a  chance. 
I  have  known  men  misjudged,  contemned,  spring  up  into  their  true  selves  when  let 
go.  Their  time  has  come  ;  then  you  hear  the  mu^ic  of  their  voice,  and  you  know 
the  length  of  their  arm,  and  they  were  waiting— great  men  all  the  while.  Conclu- 
sion :  1.  We  each  belong  to  a  company,  and  until  we  have  found  our  company,  we 
are  restless.    We  speak  of  being  "  a  fish  out  of  water,"  as  fully  expressing  the  con- 


CHAP.  IV.]  •  THE  ACTS.  409 

dition  of  men  who  are  not  in  their  own  company.  Some  of  us  are  only  half  in  our 
right  society.  We  were  born  for  the  gutter  and  were  destined  for  low  companion- 
ship, and  by  a  singular  force  of  gravitation  we  turn  to  that  which  is  unworthy. 
Others,  again,  are  the  contrary.  They  are  forced  to  do  the  things  they  hate.  They 
say,  "  It  is  not  our  nature  ;  it  is  not  the  place  I  was  born  into.  These  are  not  the 
surroundings  God  meant  me  to  enjoy."  So  by  this  discontent  of  soul  God  calls  us 
to  our  own  company.  2.  But  we  may  be  converted !  The  lowest  nature  may  be 
converted  !  The  lowest  nature  may  be  made  into  the  highest.  The  man  who  began 
with  low  desires  may  come  to  enjoy  the  desire  for  prayer.  Conversion  is  the  state 
which  we  are  called  upon  personally  to  realise  and  represent.  Mere  restraint  is  not 
conversion.  We  are  restrained  from  starting  up  in  the  midst  of  the  service  and  going 
out.  We  seem  to  rise  to  the  great  spirit  of  the  occasion,  while  we  are  in  reality 
buying  and  selling,  transacting  our  business.  So  we  cannot  tell  what  we  are  until 
the  restraints  are  taken  off,  when  we  shall  be  left  to  our  own  company,  and  being 
let  go,  will  only  go  downward.  There  are  grades  in  devildom,  and  there  is  still  a 
lower  and  lower,  untU  we  reach  the  pit  that  never  ends.  3.  Are  we  under  the  right 
influence  ?  We  cannot  test  it  by  mere  laws,  by  mechanical  arrangements  and  im- 
positions. Only  love  can  keep  us,  and  love  will  keep  us.  And  though  we  shall 
always  have  the  liberty  of  doing  wrong,  we  shall  have  within  us  the  love  which 
makes  the  use  of  that  liberty  an  impossibility.  Now  I  am  about  to  let  you  go. 
Will  you  go  to  your  own  company  ?  But,  remember,  young  man,  wisely  trained  at 
home,  you  have  no  business  with  that  bad  set.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Our  own 
company  : — I.  We  all  suffer  a  kind  of  imprisonment  by  our  circumstances.  There 
is — 1.  The  chain  of  work.  We  and  our  children  must  live.  And  in  order  to  main- 
tain this  life,  we  voluntarily  give  away  every  day  a  part  of  our  personal  freedom. 
This  necessity  is  on  the  whole  a  bensficent  one,  and  it  is  perfectly  consistent  with 
personal  freedom  in  the  truest  sense.  But  stiU  there  is  imprisonment  of  some  of 
the  highest  faculties.  Faith,  hope,  love,  joy,  can  aU  indeed  have  exercise  in  work, 
but  not  their  most  perfect  exercise.  What  a  prison  a  great  city  is,  and  how  many 
are  in  it  with  "  hard  labour  !  "  A  fine  morning  dawns.  You  would  like  to  wander 
away,  to  hear  the  gurgle  of  the  country  stream,  to  see  the  bloom  on  the  trees,  the  bird 
on  the  wing,  the  clouds  floating  so  restf ully  across  the  sky.  But  you  are  a  prisoner. 
You  can  look  through  your  bars  towards  the  large  and  wealthy  place  but  it  is  only 
a  look.  You  must  soon  turn  to  your  work.  2.  The  chain  of  habit.  Not  so  much 
of  a  man's  own  habits  as  those  of  the  society  in  which  he  lives — the  convention- 
alities of  life,  in  which  every  man  is  more  or  less  bound.  These  are  not  at  all 
insincerities,  hypocrisies.  They  are  generally  a  fair  product  of  the  state  of 
society  at  the  time.  If  our  conventionalities  were  all  away,  some  would  be  better, 
and  some  worse.  So  that  all  are  in  prison  by  them.  There  is  a  great  resentment 
sometimes  felt  against  those  who  break  through  ;  and  such  attempts  generally  end 
in  submission.  Take,  for  instance,  our  social  gatherings.  With  aU  their  freedom 
and  geniality,  there  is  considerable  restriction  imposed  by  the  mere  forms  of 
society.  One  makes  an  endeavour  to  be  natural  and  almost  succeeds  ;  but  cannot 
quite.  Another  seeks  to  know  his  neighbour  a  little  better,  but  the  real  man 
escapes  him,  and  goes  home  to  be  known  far  more  perfectly  by  his  little  children. 
Another  endeavours  to  speak  out  his  real  sentiments  ;  but  the  astonishment,  pain, 
or  disapprobation,  make  him  almost  regret  that  he  has  spoken — and  certainly  a 
little  less  likely  to  speak  again.  '6.  The  great  strong  chain  of  law.  That  is  no 
doubt  a  grand  safeguard  of  society.  But  while  it  protects  it  restrains.  It  protects 
partly  by  restraining.  It  makes  some  men  more  virtuous  than  they  would  be,  and 
others  a  little  less.  A  man  could  do  some  great  good,  and  would,  but  the  law  for- 
bids. He  would  only  involve  himself  and  others  in  difiiculties  and  loss  by  making 
the  attempt.  Or  he  could  do  some  evil.  He  has  impure  thoughts  which  might 
become  actions ;  unjust  longings  which  might  become  fraud,  if  the  law  were  not 
there  frowning  defiance  and  suspending  penalty.  II.  In  these  environing  circum- 
stances, there  are,  now  and  again,  clear  providential  openings— by  which  the 
real  man  himself  comes  out,  seen  by  others,  or  seen  only  by  himself  and  God  !  A 
changing  time  is  always  a  critical  time.  1.  When  the  young  man  leaves  home  to 
come  up  to  the  great  city,  how  intense  is  the  parental  and  the  friendly  solicitude  ! 
"  He  was  safe  here  ;  but  will  he  be  safe  yonder  ?  Will  he  not  slide  or  perhaps  fall  ? 
Or  will  the  change  strengthen  his  will  for  goodness,  and  draw  him  more  clearly 
into  the  ranks  of  Christ's  faithful  ones  ?  "  These  are  the  searching  solemn  ques- 
tions, but  why  do  they  arige  ?  Because  it  is  felt  that  even  at  home  that  youth  was 
not  fully  known,  because  there  are  sleeping  possibilities  which  other  circumstances 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

might  draw  out  into  actualities,  and  they  are  not  quite  sure  how  the  scale  might 
turn.  2.  A  change  of  residence  in  later  life  sometimes  operates  in  the  same  way. 
There  is  then  a  complete  break  up  in  one  class  of  associations.  Living  in  the  new 
neighbourhood  seems  to  bring  out  a  new  man.  It  may  be  a  better  man,  or  it  may 
be  a  worse.  The  gates  of  that  social  prison  where  before  he  was  held  in  restriction, 
perhaps  kept  from  ruin,  have  been  opened,  and  he  will  show  himself  more  as  he  is. 
3.  The  continental  journey  is  another  opening  of  the  wall.  Persons  then  go  to 
places  the  like  of  which  they  would  never  think  of  visiting  at  home,  and  altogether 
feel  a  freedom  which  they  would  in  vain  seek  for  with  the  ordinary  circumstances 
of  life  around  them.  The  freedom  may  be  rightly  used  in  putting  aside  the  chains 
of  opinion,  prejudice,  and  custom  ;  or  it  may  be  much  abused.  But  it  is  freedom, 
and  therefore  develops  some  more  of  the  reality  of  the  persons  than  is  usually  seen 
in  the  walks  of  their  home  life.  4.  Then  again  Hfe  as  it  goes  on  brings  many 
opportunities  for  freer  action  and  f uUer  display  of  the  real  inward  man  than  ordi- 
nary circumstances  permit.  They  are  opportunities  for  good  and  for  evil.  To 
some  they  are  "  the  gates  of  righteousness,"  into  which  they  "  enter  and  praise  the 
Lord."  To  others  they  are  but  the  door  leading  to  an  "  inner  prison,"  where  their 
•'  feet  are  made  fast  in  the  stocks."  III.  When  so  eeleased  we  go  to  our  own 
COMPANY.  Every  night  what  multitudes  hasten  through  the  door  of  opportunity  to 
their  own  company  !  The  day  keeps  them  in  prison,  the  night  brings  release.  Let 
us  follow  some,  and  see  what  company  they  keep  1  1.  Take  that  young  man  for 
whom  so  much  anxiety  was  felt  when  he  left  home.  Enter  with  him — there  is  no 
company  there.  There  is  the  little  table  for  refreshment  which  is  soon  over  ;  then 
he  takes  down  the  books  to  the  study  of  which  he  will  devote  these  evening 
hours — and  that  is  the  company  he  keeps.  He  is  smitten  with  the  love  of  know- 
ledge, and  what  is  far  better,  with  the  love  of  Christ.  He  is  sure  that  he  will  have 
to  serve  Him  in  some  sphere,  and  is  resolved  by  study  and  prayer  to  maka  himself 
ready.  2.  Or  let  us  observe  this  young  woman  who  has  been  busy  all  day  with  her 
needle.  Blessings  on  her  industry !  honour  to  her  virtue  !  peace  to  her  home ! 
To-night  she  is  going  to  her  own  company  before  she  reaches  that  home.  There  is 
to  be  a  meeting  for  prayer,  a  great  blessing  is  expected,  and  she  must  be  there  to 
ask  among  the  rest.  3.  Take  another,  a  man.  He  has  bad  what  is  called  a  heavy 
day  ;  but,  oh,  what  a  lightsome  welcome  now  that  he  is  home  !  Little  hands  are 
soon  in  his,  and  little  tongues  are  telling  the  wonderful  things  that  have  happened 
during  the  day  ;  and  smiles  fall  from  another  face,  and  there  is  a  comfortable 
mingling  of  thought,  and  love,  and  sympathy,  and  heart  with  heart.  The  day 
opened  to  him  the  theatre  of  duty,  the  night  thus  brings  him  to  "  his  own  com- 
pany." 4.  Another  ;  where  is  he  going  ?  Westward,  but  not  out  of  the  city.  On 
he  passes  along  the  busy  streets  under  the  gas-lights,  until  he  comes  to  the  flaring 
entrance  of  the  place  where  his  company  will  be.  With  perhaps  just  one  twinge  of 
conscience  he  passes  in,  and  there  among  the  gaudy  and  giddy  throng  he  sits  for 
hours  hsteningto  the  music,  or  watching  the  display.  And  these  he  says  are  the 
happiest  hours  of  his  life.  That  man  has  reduced  his  soul  to  a  pitiable  condition 
when,  having  all  this  world  to  choose  from,  that  soul  "  being  let  go,"  finds  its  own 
selectest  company  in  a  frivolous  throng  like  that.  5.  And  others  go  to  places  still 
worse,  which  we  cannot  describe ;  where  the  fires  of  Tophet  are  already  kindled, 
where  the  guests  are  in  the  depths  of  hell,  and  there  find  "  their  own  company." 
6.  But  enough  !  Where  do  we  find  ours?  We  shall  say  no  more  of  places  now, 
but  speak  only  about  persons.  Who  are  the  persons  in  whose  presence  and  society 
our  souls  find  their  best  company?  What  is  their  character  ?  What  is  their  aim 
in  life?  What  will  be  their  end?  Suppose  we  had  been  imprisoned  with  the 
apostles,  and  with  them  set  free,  should  we  bave  gone  with  them  to  their  own  com- 
pany ?  When  we  are  set  free,  now  and  again  in  the  course  of  our  own  life,  do  we 
long  for  and  seek  fellowship  with  faithful  souls  and  pure  hearts  ?  There  are  but 
two  companies  in  .the  universe.  Even  now  there  are  but  two,  although  in  this 
•world  they  are  to  us  inseparably  mingled.  The  division  and  separation  is  taking 
place  by  degrees.  The  gospel  makes  it.  We  ourselves  make  in  those  selective 
moments  of  our  life  to  which  we  have  referred.  But  it  will  be  made  infallibly  and 
visibly  at  last  by  the  Lord  Himself,  when  the  sheep  shall  be  on  His  right  hand,  and 
the  goats  on  His  left.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Their  oicn  company: — The  crystal- 
lising power  in  nature.  What  we  call  the  force  of  gravitation  is  a  force  most 
mysterious  and  constant.  But  the  force  of  gravitation  is  simple  compared  with 
this  many-sided  ramifying  force  of  crystallisation.  The  reason — ultimate  particles 
of  matter  are  seeking  their  own  company ;  these  ultimate  particles  of  matter  are 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS,  411 

possessed  of  attractive  and  repellent  poles ;  and  as  these  atomic  poles  attract  or 
repel  each  other  the  shape  of  the  crystal  is  determined.  There  is  as  weU  a  certain 
crystallising  power  sovereign  in  society.  Men  and  women  have  attractive  and 
repellent  poles.  By  means  of  this  social  crystallising  power  many  and  various 
social  shapes  are  being  formed — not  always  beautiful  and  noble,  sometimes  evil, 
ugly,  disastrous.  Concerning  this  crystallising  fact  and  force  in  society,  in  the 
light  of  this  narrative,  consider — 1.  Hindrance.  See  whole  narrative  as  to  how 
Peter  and  John  were  hindered  from  going  to  their  own  company.  So,  often,  we  are 
somehow  hindered  from  seeking  the  company  really  most  congenial  to  us.  Work, 
social  requirements,  regard  for  reputation,  lack  of  money,  hinder.  Apply  to  young 
men,  &c.  2.  Permission.  "  And  being  let  go  " — work  ceases,  social  requirements 
allow,  special  danger  to  reputation  passes,  wages  are  paid.  Men  are  free.  3.  Like 
goes  to  like.  Character  asserts  itself.  These  apostles  went  to  the  company  of  the 
pure  because  they  were  pure.  4.  Lessons.  (1)  It  is  a  man's  own  company  which 
nurtures  what  is  predominant  in  him.  (2)  A  man's  own  company  discloses  him  to 
others.  (3)  A  man's  own  company  discloses  him  to  himself.  (4)  A  man's  own 
company  is  the  test  of  the  regenerate  hfe.  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from 
death  unto  life  if  we  love  the  brethren.  (5)  A  man's  own  company  settles  his 
destiny.  {Homiletic  Review.)  Being  let  go: — " Being  let  go,  they  went  to  their 
own  company."  That  means  for  one  thing  that  we  do  not  know  until  straits  come, 
what  a  man's  heart  and  real  disposition  are.  You  have  your  children  with  you  at 
home,  and  think  tbat  your  children  have  a  love  for  this,  and  a  liking  for  that,  and 
a  strong  desire  for  the  other,  but  "  let  them  go,"  and  then  you  will  see  ;  as  long  as 
they  are  under  parental  restraints,  you  really  do  not  know  what  they  are.  They 
must  be  tested  by  being  let  go.  They  go  to  their  own  resort,  and  to  their  own  set. 
Oh,  what  painful  things  happen  in  family  life  when  the  children  are  old  enough, 
and  you  must  let  them  go,  when  home  restraints  are  removed  I  Then  you  thought 
they  loved  whatsoever  things  were  honourable  and  of  good  report,  and  they,  per- 
haps, themselves  thought  it  too.  It  is  not  so  much  hypocrisy  as  an  illustration  of 
the  solemn  truth  that  the  heart  is  deceitful  and  full  of  evil  things.  Being  let  go, 
the  real  heart  in  them  takes  command,  the  real  pilot  takes  the  wheel  and  guides  the 
vessel  according  to  his  liking.  "  Being  let  go  they  went  to  their  own  company." 
See,  for  example,  the  restraints  of  religion.  I  think  I  am  a  religious  man,  you  think 
that  you  are  religious  people,  but  if  in  some  way  I  could  be  let  go  from  the  ministry, 
and  if  you  could  be  let  go  from  fhe  eyes  that  are  upon  you  in  this  place,  from  the 
associations  and  routine  that  brings  you  here,  where  would  you  go?  What  is  iu 
the  heart  determines  the  life.  To-night  you  are  set  free  from  business,  and  in  a 
sense  you  are  let  go  from  the  office,  but  are  you,  is  your  heart  really  let  go?  Are 
you  going  into  the  holy  work  before  us  to-night,  or  is  it  not  the  case  that  even  while 
you  are  sitting  here,  that  being  let  go,  your  heart  is  back  to  the  stocks  and  shares, 
the  buying  and  the  selling,  that  even  here  your  heart  is  seeking  its  true  home,  its 
true  happiness  ?  It  is  not  in  this  thing,  is  it  ?  There  are  reasons  whv  we  come, 
why  in  a  sense  we  like  it,  but  let  us  be  honest  with  ourselves.  It  is  what  we  like 
that  is  the  true  man  or  the  true  woman.  How  does  the  heart  go  when  we  are  let 
go  ?  But  if  I  have  thus  spoken  of  the  dark  side,  bless  God  there  is  a  brighter  side, 
and  I  trust  that  we  can  even,  when  we  meet  here  to-night,  experience  the  happiness 
and  brightness  of  the  better  side.  When  we  come  to  the  House  of  God,  to  the 
prayer-meeting,  from  all  outward  life,  because  we  like  to  do  it,  we  like  to  come,  like 
a  bairnie  with  her  mother,  a  wee  bird  to  her  nest,  we  fly  home  to  God,  to  the  Bible, 
to  God  and  the  Book  of  God,  and  the  House  of  God,  when  we  are  let  go.  We  delight 
when  the  cords  are  snapped,  and  when  we  can  come  into  the  House  of  God.  Only 
during  the  day  there  is  a  kind  of  chafing  restlessness  within  us.  Oh  that  the 
evening  would  come  that  I  might  get  to  my  own  company  1  "Being  If-t  go  they  went 
to  their  own  company."  Just  as  at  school,  I  suppose  we  looked  as  if  we  liked  our 
school,  we  looked  as  if  we  were  diligent,  we  had  to  be  so  outwardly,  but  when  four 
o'clock  came  and  the  doors  were  open,  did  you  ever  see  the  schoolbojs  that  departed 
reluctantly,  as  if  they  could  hardly  cross  the  threshold  and  go  away  from  the 
h\>  ssed  place  ?  We  nearly  tumbled  over  each  other  rushing  away.  Being  let  go, 
out  we  went  home.  And  yet  we  were  not  hypocrites.  It  is  that  our  heart  was  in  it, 
and  we  were  restrained ;  we  were  tied  up,  held  back,  but  being  let  go,  the  full 
momentum  and  swing  of  our  disposition  got  out.  Thank  God,  then,  for  the  bright 
side,  and  I  would  say  you  are  encouraged  to  make  much  of  the  bright  side.  If  you 
know  God,  then  thank  God,  for  that  is  a  fruitful  plant  that  never  grew  up  in  the  dry 
dreary  sand  of  our  worldly  heart.    And  if  I  speak  to  any  to  whom  this  word  is  sad, 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

you  say,  "Well,  brother,  I  wish  I  was  like  it,  I  wish  I  could  rush  to  the  fellowship 
of  God's  people,  as  those  apostles  rushed  to  their  own  company,  and  as  children  rush 
home  from  school,  and  the  tired  business  men  flying  home  by  'bus  and  train  to  the 
sweetness  and  seclusion  of  their  own  homes  in  the  suburbs.  I  wish  I  hud  that 
desire  for  the  House  of  God."  There  is  more  gladness  of  heart  here' than  if  I  were 
in  the  theatre  or  music-hall,  or  giddy  dance  or  banquet,  with  its  so-called  "  feast  of 
reason  and  flow  of  soul."  Here  the  best  and  deepest,  the  truest  thoughts  in  you 
get  out,  and  lay  hold  of  the  deep,  true,  living,  satisfying  God.  "  Being  let  go,  they 
went  to  their  own  company."  It  is  that,  let  me  just  urge,  that  we  should  cultivate 
still  more,  this  company  and  fellowship.  Do  not  let  a  little  keep  us  back.  How 
disappointed  the  apostles  would  have  been  if  they  went  to  their  own  company,  and 
found  a  small  meeting  when  puch  great  interests  were  involved.  My  father  said, 
when  he  was  a  lad  going  to  school,  they  had  to  take  their  own  fire  with  them,  the 
coals  were  not  then  provided  as  they  are  now,  -and  every  lad  carried  his  peat  under 
his  arm.  That  was  his  contribution  of  heat.  Bring  your  peat  under  your  arm,  and 
like  one  that  is  let  go,  like  an  arrow  from  the  string,  come  gladly  and  brightly,  and 
I  will  try  and  come  with  mine,  and  "  every  little  makes  a  mickle,"  and  it  is  won- 
derful what  a  roaring,  open  fire  we  may  have,  even  in  this  dull  neighbourhood  of 
Regent's  Square,  what  light  and  warmth  before  God,  and  to  His  praise.  Let  us 
come  as  the  apostles  did,  when  being  let  go  they  went  to  their  own  company.  I 
like  to  think  of  the  text  in  its  final  application.  There  is  a  day  coming  when  we 
shall  be  let  go.  The  dark  side  and  the  bright  side  of  my  text  will  receive  its  final 
and  truest  illustration  then,  for  every  man  goes  to  his  own  place.  And  when  the 
stroke  of  death  cuts  all  our  cords,  and  we  drop  this  muddy  vesture  of  clay,  and  are, 
at  last,  let  go,  we  will  hardly  need  the  judgment  day  and  verdict  of  God.  Some 
will  rise  as  glorious  ones,  treading  the  way  unto  the  throne  of  God,  and  some  will 
go  into  outer  darkness,  for  they  always  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  and  they 
will  get  it.  Being  let  go,  God  at  last  will  say,  "  I  will  restrain  you  no  more,  I  will 
argue  with  you  no  more,  you  would  be  free,  be  free.  He  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be 
filthy  still,  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  holy  still.  Be  let  go  and  find  your  own  com- 
pany." This  is  the  Lord's  election.  This  is  the  natural  law  that  runs  through  the 
spiritual  world,  even  He  that  worketh  in  all  our  fellowships  and  friendships,  our 
likes  and  dislikes,  our  drawings  and  repentings.  It  is  being  let  go  that  a  man  finds 
his  level,  and  seeks  and  gets  his  own  company.  At  the  great  day  when  some  of  us  go 
past  the  judgment  seat  on  our  way  home,  and  hear  the  word,  "Come  ye  blessed,"  it 
will  just  be  a  re-echo  of  this,  for  you  have  been  always  coming  ever  since  you  were 
converted.  It  was  the  end  and  trend,  a  focus  of  all  your  way  and  work.  Only 
when  some  of  us  hear  the  thundering  curse,  "Depart !  "  we  shall  understand  then  that 
we  were  always  cursed.  "  I  never  knew  you,"  what  a  solemn  word  !  How  bright ! 
How  black !  Thank  God  that  grace  can  make  it  for  you  and  me  all  bright.  The 
Ethiopian  can  change  his  skin,  the  leopard  can  change  his  spots,  the  vilest  can  be 
changed,  and  changed  by  the  abundant  grace  of  Christ,  received  through  simple 
faith  in  Christ.  Another  few  minutes  and  you  are  let  go,  and  you  go  to  your  own 
house,  and  a  rebound  will  take  place.  The  heart  will  slip  round  to  its  true  base. 
Watch  it,  for  God's  sake,  and  your  own.  Being  let  go  when  the  preacher's  voice  is 
still,  the  holy  words  are  no  longer  spoken,  the  holy  place  with  its  associations  no 
longer  present  here,  God  grant  that  it  may  be  all  bright.  (/.  McNeill.)  Com- 
pany : — I.  Every  man  has  his  company.     II.  Sometimes  men  are  restrained  from 

KEEPING  THE  COMPANY  OF  THEIR  FRIENDS.  III.  WhEN  THESE  RESTRICTIONS  ARE  WITH- 
DRAWN, men  RETURN  TO  THE  COMPANY  OF  THEIR  CHOICE.  Life  itsclt  is  a  restraint, 
separating  us  from  the  companions  we  have  cho?en,  but  when  it  ceases,  its  restrain- 
ing power  will  cease  too,  and  we  shall  go  to  "our  own  company  "  in  heaven  or  in 
heU.  (IF.  Jl/.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Every  man  to  his  men  place: — I.  The  disciples 
WENT  TO  THEIR  OWN  COMPANY.  They  naturallv  desired  the  society  of  those  who  had 
sympathy  with  them.  II.  Every  person  belongs  to  some  company.  There  are 
two  classes  :  saints  and  sinners.  Affinities,  proclivities,  &c.,  ai-e  only  subdivisions 
of  these.  III.  Restraints  of  life  may  prevent  odr  openly  joining  our  company. 
1.  Our  work.  2.  Public  opinion.  3.  Policy.  4.  Interest.  5.  Lack  of  courage. 
IV.  When  these  are  removed  each  person  will  go  to  his  own  place.  What  a 
change  would  follow  if  this  world  had  no  social,  civil,  or  moral  law  laid  upon  it 
— every  one  a  law  to  himself  1  The  devil  in  man  would  make  havoc  in  human  his- 
tory. This  has  been  proved  wherever  restraints  have  been  slackened.,  V.  The 
TEST  OF  character  FOUND  HERE.  1,  What  is  OUT  Company  ?  2.  Are  we  restrained 
by  work,  circumstance,  or  policy  from  joining  it  ?     3.  Is  it  a  company  God  oaa 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  413 

approve  of  ?    4.  What  is  our  influence  on  it,  and  its  influence  on  us  ?    5.  We  shall  go 
to  our  own  place  at  last.    {G.  F.  Humplireys.)       Happy  only  in  "  our  own  company  "  : 
— The  following  incident  was  told  in  my  hearing  in  one  of  the  villages  of  Canada  to 
illustrate  the  truth,  which  so  many  ignore  at  the  present  day,  that  there  must  be  a 
change  of  heart  if  we  are  ever  permitted  to  enjoy  "  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the 
people  of  God."     "  Some  years  ago  there  was  to  be  a  prize-fight  at  a  certain  place  in 
England,  and  a  party  of  men  chartered  a  steamboat  to  take  them  to  the  place  at 
the  time  appointed.     Another  steamer  was  engaged  to  take  a  party  of  Christians  to 
a  different  kind  of  fight — a  fight  against  wrong-doing,  that  every  soldier  of  Christ  is 
called  to  engage  in  under  the  '  Captain  of  his  salvation.'     The  place  of  the  last- 
named  conflict  was  a  Methodist  camp-ground.    Just  as  the  last  bell  rang  on  each 
steamer  (both  were  chartered  to  leave  at  the  same  hour — half-past  two  p.m.)  two 
men  were  seen  running  towards  the  steamers  as  they  were  moving  out  from  the 
wharf,  and  both  sprang  into  what  each  one  thought  to  be  his  own  company.     But, 
oh  !  what  a  mistake !  the  Methodist  saw  that  he  was  among  prize-fighters,  and 
the  prize-fighter  found  that  he  was  among  Christians.     Do  you  suppose  those  men 
were  contented  and  happy  in  their  different  company?     Is  a  fish  happy  out  of 
vfater  ?     '  No,  not  happy,  but  miserable,'  you  say.     So  each  of  those  men  were 
miserable  because  they  were  out  of  their  element.     The  Methodist  came  to  the 
captain,  and  said, '  Captain,  I  have  got  into  the  wrong  steamer,  and  I  am  not  going 
to  stay  here  ;  it  is  like  hi-ll  to  be  among  these  men  who  are  cursing  and  swearing  ; 
take  the  steamer  back  and  let  me  get  out.     I  intended  to  go  to  a  camp-meeting ; 
yonder  is  the  steamer  I  ought  to  be  in.'    But  his  trying  to  get  himself  righted  after 
he  saw  he  was  wrong  was  fruitless.     Well,  what  about  the  other  man?     '  Oh,*  you 
say,  '  he  was  all  right  and  happy  among  those  good  Methodist  people.'     But  you  are 
mistaken,  for  he  was  in  a  worse  dilemma  than  the  Christian  man.     He  went  to  the 
captain  and  asked  him  to  take  the  steamer  back,  as  he  said  he  must  go  to  the 
prize-fight.    But  the  captain  said,  '  No :  our  orders  are  to  keep  on  our  course  as 
long  as  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  steamer,  and  we  must  obey.'     Then  the 
man  offered  the  captain  money  if  he  would  turn  back,  but  the  captain  was  as  deter- 
mined to  go  on  his  voyage.     By  this  time  the  Methodists  thought  they  would 
'  show  their   faith   by  their  works,'  by   talking  to    the    prize-fighter    about  his 
soul ;    but  the   prize-fighter   could   not  endure   it,    so  he    went   to    the    captain 
again   and  begged  of  him  to   bring   the   steamer   a   little  nearer  to   the    shore 
and    he    would    jump    into    the    water    and   swim    to    land."       (John    Currie.) 
Every  creature  after  its  kind : — A  mysterious,  reciprocal  attraction  drew  Peter  and 
John  together,  although  they  were  by  no  means  alike.     Perhaps  their  differences 
rendered  them  more  suitable  to  each  other ;  as  a  man's  strength  and  a  woman's 
gentleness  bind  two  into  one  in  married  hfe.     This  noble  pair  were  of  the  three 
chosen  disciples,  were  companions  at  the  sepulchre,  and  were  together  through  all 
the  stages  of  this  incident.     Now  being  free  they  go  to  their  own.     Like  draws  to 
like.     When  evil  was  to  be  done  the  rulers  laid  their  heads  together.     "  Birds  of  a 
feather  flock  together  "  ;  and  if  one  bird  has  been  for  a  time  imprisoned,  when  the 
cage  is  opened  it  will  fly  straight  and  quick  to  the  place  where  it  left  its  mates.     On 
this  principle  proceeds  the  pigeon  telegraph.     The  instincts  of  animals  are  perfect 
in  their  kind.     When  a  captive  lamb  is  set  at  liberty  it  never  halts  until  it  has  re- 
joined the  flock.     With  equal  exactness  does  the  washed  sow  return  to  wallow  with 
her  fellows  in  the  mire.     Thus  suddenly  and  surely  did  a  worldling,  who  had  for  a 
time  been  arrested  by  the  discourses  of  Jesus,  leap  back  into  his  element  of  filthy 
lucre.     As  soon  as  there  was  a  pause  in  the  sermon  he  went  to  his  own  :  "  Master, 
speak  to  my  brother  that  he  divide  the  inheritance  with  me."     An  example  of  the 
opposite  tendency  in  a  renewed  heart  is  seen  in  the  possessed  man  whom  our 
Lord  delivered  at  Gadara.     Being  let  go  of  Satan  he  went  to  his  own — to  his  own 
Saviour  and  fellow  disciples.    How  often  when  professing  Christians  go  abroad,  they 
leave  their  religion  behind  them.     It  was  never  more  than  an  external  thing,  a 
bondage,  and  therefore  when  removed  the  irreligious  soul  goes  to  its  irreligion.     A 
young  man  has  been  accustomed  to  the  order  of  a  Christian  household.     As  the 
lines  of  restraint  were  laid  on  him  while  an  infant,  he  is  not  very  conscious  of 
them.     But  he  leaves  for  the  great  metropolis.   If  his  religion  has  been  only  a  cord 
round  his  neck,  like  the  bit  and  bridle  which  holds  the  horse,  he  i"  now  free  ;  he 
will  go  to  his  own  and  seek  the  company  of  the  careless  or  the  profane.     Cords  of 
this  kind  were  fastened  on  Judas,  but  when  at  last  he  was  let  go  what  a  leap  he 
made  into  his  own  place  !     Demas  was  brought  for  a  time  under  the  mighty  influ- 
ence of  Paul,  which,  however,  gave  way  one  day,  and  to  the  present  world,  his 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

chosen  portion,  gravitated  Demas,  as  a  stone  sinks  when  you  let  it  go.  But  the  new 
creature  acts  after  its  kind  as  well  as  the  old ;  when  the  chains  of  bondage  are 
broken  the  captive  returns  to  his  Father's  house.  A  youth  who  has  got  a  new  heart 
becomes  an  apprentice  in  an  engineering  establishment  where  his  lot  is  cast  among 
the  profane.  In  the  first  hour  they  discover  that  a  saint  is  among  them,  and  do 
everything  that  devilish  ingenuity  can  suggest  to  make  him  one  of  themselves.  If 
his  religion  had  been  a  conventional  gilding  it  would  have  been  rubbed  off  in  the 
first  week  ;  but  as  it  was  all  gold  the  more  it  was  rubbed  the  brighter  it  grew.  The 
first  evening  came,  and  each  went  to  his  own  company — the  apprentice,  articled  by 
an  eternal  covenant  to  the  Saviour,  went  to  the  fields,  the  flowers,  the  birds,  with 
which  he  had  been  wont  to  keep  company  at  home ;  then  to  his  food,  which  he 
enjoyed  with  the  fresh  relish  of  a  labourer,  and  the  fresher  relish  of  a  child  of 
God  constantly  getting  daily  bread  from  a  Father's  hand  ;  then  to  his  Bible,  his  own 
Book ;  then  to  his  own  Saviour,  in  faith's  confiding  prayer.  A  whole  legion  of 
wicked  men  will  not  overcome  this  youth — maybe  he  will  subdue  some  of  them  and 
•  lead  them  captive  to  Christ.  Yet  another  lesson.  The  grave  has  a  greedy  appetite, 
and  all  go  to  it.  A  strange  place  for  Christ's  members  to  be  in  !  But  some  day 
they  must  be  let  go,  and  then  they  will  go  to  their  own  company.  An  atom  of  air 
may  have  been  imprisoned  in  some  strong  vessel  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  for  ages. 
At  last  the  vessel  gives  way,  and  the  atom  of  air,  though  long  an  exile,  has  not  for- 
gotten its  home,  and  will  not  miss  its  way.  It  rises  in  a  sheer  straight  line  through 
the  thick  heavy  waters,  nor  halts  tiU  with  a  joyful  burst  it  reaches  its  own.  Be  of 
good  cheer,  disciples  of  Jesus.  Ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  atoms  of  air. 
(W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Men  will  go  at  last  where  they  are  fit  to  go  : — It  is  related  of 
the  distinguished  Eev.  Dr.  Bellamy  that  he  had  seasons  of  deep  despondency,  when 
he  was  confident  he  was  going  to  hell.  His  brethren  often  laboured  with  him  in 
vain.  One  day,  after  all  reasoning  had  failed,  one  of  the  ministers  said,  "  Well, 
brother,  you  know  more  about  yourself  than  we  do.  To  us  you  appear  very  well : 
but,  after  all,  you  may  be  a  whited  sepulchre — beautiful  outside,  but  inwardly  full 
of  corruption.  If  so,  you  will  go  to  heU.  I  should  like,  however,  to  know  what 
you  wiU  do  when  you  get  there  ?  "  "  Do  ?  "  cried  the  doctor,  with  great  animation 
and  emphasis  :  "  what  wiU  I  do  ?  I  will  vindicate  the  law  of  God,  and  set  up  prayer- 
meetings. "  "  All  right !"  said  the  brother ;  "but  in  that  case  the  devil  will  not 
keep  you  there  ;  he  will  soon  turn  you  out  as  unfitted  for  his  place  and  company." 
The  doctor  wap  happy.  Men  will  go  at  last  where  they  are  fit  to  go ;  and  those  who 
spend  their  hves  in  the  service  of  God  would  be  poor  company  for  the  devU  and  his 
angels,  while  those  who  hate  God  and  despise  Christians  here  must  have  strange 
notions  if  they  expect  to  be  for  ever  happy  with  them  hereafter.  The  disciples, 
"  being  let  go,  went  to  their  own  company."  So  all  wiU  go  at  last.  {J.  L.  Nye.) 
Features  of  the  apostolic  Church : — By  so  simple  a  term  is  the  infant  Church  desig- 
nated— "  a  company."  As  soon  as  Jesus  had  ascended,  we  find  that  there  was  an 
assembly  of  His  followers,  who  continued  with  one  accord  in  prayer,  resorting  to  an 
upper  room  (chap  i.  13,  14).  This  small  assembly  was  speedily  increased  by  fresh 
adherents.  Our  Saviour  never  formally  organised  His  Church  :  He  left  it  to  the 
operation  of  the  human  mind  assisted  by  Divine  influence.  Men  find  it  necessary  to 
associate  together  for  all  important  interests,  and  would  be  sure  to  do  so  for  religious 
purposes.  I.  The  natuee  of  the  Church.  1.  It  is  a  voluntary  company  :  one  to 
which  men  are  not  born,  but  to  which  they  attach  themselves  by  choice  and  from 
conviction.  Such  assemblies  were  at  first  formed  in  various  places,  and  were  each 
called  a  church.  The  term  was  not  then  used,  as  it  has  since  been,  to  mark  the 
whole  body  of  Christians  in  any  district ;  but  always  either  for  the  whole  Church 
or  for  some  particular  society.  In  the  former  sense,  we  read  that  "  Christ  is  head 
over  all  things  to  the  Church."  In  the  latter  we  hear  of  the  Churches  of  Achaia 
and  Macedonia ;  of  the  Church  which  is  at  Corinth,  or  at  Ephesus,  or  even  in  the 
dwelling  of  a  single  famOy.  2.  It  is  a  separated  company ;  a  holy  society ;  its 
members  are  called  to  come  out  from  among  the  people  of  the  world.  3.  It  is  a 
spiritual  society,  as  opposed  to  a  merely  civil  association.  Nothing  secular  properly 
belongs  to  the  Church.  Just  as  we  cannot,  by  artificial  embeUishments,  add  any- 
thing to  the  real  beauty  of  nature  ;  so  all  that  man  has  aimed  to  add,  in  the  way  of 
pomp  and  circumstance  to  the  Church  of  Christ  instead  of  adorning,  rather  dis- 
figures it.  4.  Though  human  instruments  are  employed  in  this  society,  yet  it  is 
■wholly  of  Divine  institution.  All  its  varied  offices  and  administrations  are  of 
Divine  origin  :  "  He  gave  some  apostles  .  .  .  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of 
Christ."    5.  It  is  an  immortal  company.    The  individual  members  die  ;  but  Iresh 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  415 

generations  of  saints  are  continually  rising  up  in  succession.  The  sacred  lamp  may 
be  removed  from  one  place,  but  it  is  only  that  it  may  burn  brighter  in  another.  II. 
The  DESIGN  with  which  the  Church  is  formed.  1.  For  the  benefit  of  every  indi- 
vidual belonging  to  it.  The  Good  Shepherd,  while  He  feeds  the  whole  of  His  flock, 
has  a  particular  respect  to  the  state  and  wants  of  every  member.  As  in  the  first 
age  all  had  all  things  in  common,  so  real  Christians  will  now  be  ready  to  share  their 
joys  and  sorrows  ;  to  help  the  needy  in  temporal  wants ;  and  most  of  all  to  cherish 
a  spiritual  union  and  sympathy.  Christian  intercourse  unites  the  hearts  of  the 
saints,  "  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  together."  2.  For  the  salvation  of 
others.  III.  The  manner  of  its  government.  As  every  society,  to  be  well-ordered, 
requires  rules  ;  so  there  are  rules  of  Church  government.  These  indeed  are  very 
few  and  very  simple  :  real  Christians  need  very  httle  law  ;  the  law  is  for  the  lawless 
and  disobedient :  but  theirs  is  the  law  of  love  ;  love  is  fulfilment  of  the  law.  {R.  Hall, 
M.A.)  The  apostles  at  liberty: — I.  The  whole  Church  is  interested  in  the 
PROCEEDINGS  OF  ITS  INDIVIDUAL  MEMBERS.  Peter  and  Johu  gave  their  report  to  the 
whole  company.  It  was  a  report  of — 1.  Gracious  success.  A  man  had  been 
healed,  and  therein  the  name  of  Jesus  had  been  glorified.  2.  Opposition,  suffer- 
ing, threatening.  This  is  the  kind  of  report  which  the  Church  will  render  until  the 
end  of  its  beneficent  course.  The  two  sides  should  be  looked  at  together — the  one 
will  stimulate,  the  other  will  give  new  aspects  of  sin,  and  call  for  increasing  devo- 
tion. II.  The  RIGHT  method  of  treating  opposition  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
1.  See  what  the  apostles  might  have  done.  (1)  They  might  have  fled  before  dif35culty. 
"  If  we  are  exposed  to  all  this  we  shall  give  up  our  work :  we  are  not  equal  to  it ;  it 
will  be  a  losing  battle,  our  enemies  are  so  many  and  so  strong."  (2)  They  might 
have  formed  themselves  into  a  secret  society  for  their  own  edification  and  comfort. 
Contemplation  would  have  taken  the  place  of  service.  2.  What  they  did  do. 
"  They  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with  one  accord,"  and  committed  themselves  to 
Him  as  unto  a  faithful  Creator.  A  prayer  offered  under  circumstances  as  peculiar 
will  show  the  strength  and  purpose  of  the  Church.  It  did  show — (1)  The  profound 
religiousness  of  the  Church.  Instantly  the  disciples  flee  to  the  Holy  One.  There 
is  no  paltering  with  second  causes  ;  no  drivelling  talk  about  difficulty.  Opposition 
brought  the  Church  face  to  face  with  God.  (2)  The  clear  doctrinal  intelligence  of  the 
Church.  They  fell  back  upon  the  great  histories  and  prophecies  upon  which 
Christ's  kingdom  rests.  Again  and  again  it  is  seen  how  thoroughly  the  early  Church 
knew  the  sacred  writings.  This  is  the  strength  of  the  spiritual  life.  "  Let  the  Word 
of  God  dwell  in  you  richly."  (3)  A  supreme  desire  for  the  glory  of  Christ.  The 
apostles  were  referred  to  as  "  servants."  It  was  for  "  the  Holy  Child  Jesus  "  that 
the  suppliants  were  concerned.  (4)  Preparedness  for  further  service  (ver.  29).  III. 
The  spiritual  and  social  results  which  follow  the  right  acceptance  of  service 
AND  suffering.  1.  A  vast  acccssiou  of  spiritual  grace.  The  disciples  "were  all 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  2.  A  vast  accession  of  spiritual  power.  They  "  spake 
the  Word  of  God  with  boldness."  3.  The  consummation  of  spiritual  union.  They 
were  "  of  one  heart  and  one  soul."  4.  The  ideal  of  social  beneficence.  They  claimed 
nothing  as  their  own.  but  had  aU  things  common.  In  such  a  case  opposition  became 
the  occasion  of  infinite  good.  There  was  no  wordy  controversy,  but  a  renewed  dedi- 
cation to  Christ.  AU  opposition  should  be  met  in  the  same  way.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Christian  socialism : — The  narrative  gives  us  such  a  view  of  this  as  throws  the  secular 
thing  into  contempt,  and  reveals  the  lamentable  imperfection  of  modern  spiritual 
fellowship.  From  it  we  learn  that  early  Christian  socialism  was — I.  Attractive. 
No  sooner  were  the  apostles  free  than  they  returned  as  if  drawn  by  magnetic  force 
to  their  chosen  society.  There  were  two  things  that  rendered  it  attractive.  1. 
Eesponsive  listening.  There  is  a  law  of  mind  which  urges  a  man  to  communicate 
what  he  deems  of  great  importance.  It  is  also  a  law  to  seek  the  most  responsive 
listeners.  To  those  who  wiU  give  a  cordial  hearing  we  go,  rather  than  to  the  hostile 
or  indifferent.  True  Christian  socialism  involves  this.  There  the  speaking  brother 
will  find  an  audience  all  candour  and  love.  This  is  not  the  case  in  the  cavilling, 
captious,  secular  socialism,  and  alas  !  not  always  in  the  Church  where  there  is  too 
often  the  prejudice  that  deafens  the  ear  and  closes  the  heart.  2.  Sympathetic  co- 
operation. For  this  we  instinctively  crave,  and  without  it  the  strongest  are  weak. 
Without  the  breeze  of  social  sympathy  the  sails  of  our  spirits  would  collapse  in  the 
voyage  of  duty.  Peter  and  John  knew  that  they  had  this,  and  so  were  strong  in 
prison  and  before  the  council,  and  when  "let  go"  they  instinctively  found  their 
way  to  their  sympathetic  brethren.  Thus  was  Christian  socialism  attractive. 
Kindred  souls  flowed  to  it  as  rivers  to  the  sea.     What  circle  is  so  attractive  as  tliat 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rv. 

which  has — (1)  A  common  object  of  supreme  affection.  (2)  A  common  class  of 
dominant  thoughts.  (3)  A  common  cause  engrossing  the  chief  activities  of  being. 
This  is  the  ideal  of  Christian  fellowship.  Would  that  it  were  everywhere  realised. 
II.  Beligious.  This  comes  out  in — 1.  Ascription.  Here  we  have  a  recognition 
of  God's — (1)  Authority.  "Lord,  Thou  art  God."  The  word  is  that  from  which 
"  despot "  is  taken.  Deeply  did  the  company  feel  the  absoluteness  of  the  Divine 
control.  (2)  Creatorship.  "Which  hast  made,"  &c.  (3)  Eevelation.  "By  the 
mouth  of  Thy  servant  David."  (4)  Predestination.  They  regarded  aU  the  enemies 
of  Christ  as  unconsciously  working  out  the  eternal  plans  of  heaven.  2.  Suppli- 
cation. Note — (1)  The  substance  of  their  prayer.  They  invoked  {a)  Personal 
protection.  "Behold  their  threatenings,"  i.e.,  those  of  vers.  17  and  21.  The 
meaning  is,  "Guard  us  and  frustrate  the  evil  designs  of  our  enemies."  (h)  The 
power  of  spiritual  usefulness.  "  That  with  all  boldness,"  &c.  Protection  is  desired 
for  service,  not  because  they  dreaded  martyrdom,  (c)  Miraculous  inteiposition. 
"  That  signs  and  wonders,"  &c.  :  i.e.,  "Enable  us  to  work  miracles  that  we  may  be 
more  successful  in  spreading  the  knowledge  of  Christ."  This  power  Christ  had 
promised ;  they  had  an  authority,  therefore,  to  seek  it.  (2)  The  success  of  their 
prayer  (ver.  31).  In  answer  there  was — (a)  A  miraculous  sign,  familiar  to  Old 
Testament  saints  (Exod.  xix.  18 ;  Psa.  Ixviii.  8).  (6)  An  impartation  of  Divine 
power — to  preach  the  gospel.  III.  Amalgamating  (ver.  82).  Note  in  regard  to  this 
amalgamating  force  that — 1.  It  was  most  hearty  and  practical  (ver.  34) .  The  ^ 
thorough  unity  of  soul  expressed  itself  in  the  surrender  of  worldly  goods.  Aristotle 
defines  friendship  as  "one  soul  residing  in  two  bodies."  It  was  so  here.  The 
rising  tide  of  brotherly  affection  bore  away  from  their  hearts  all  love  of  gain.  2.  It 
consisted  with  a  diversity  of  position  and  service  (vers.  35,  36).  The  apostles  were 
both  the  spiritual  and  economical  heads  of  the  community.  Material  bodies  may 
get  so  thoroughly  fused  as  to  lose  all  their  individual  peculiarities ;  but  minds, 
however  closely  welded  together  by  social  love,  will  retain  for  ever  their  individuality 
of  being,  position,  and  mission.  Social  unity  is  not  the  uniformity  of  a  regiment 
moving  with  one  step  and  in  the  Same  garb,  but  rather  hke  the  variety  of  the  land- 
scape, each  object  clad  in  its  own  costume  and  bending  to  the  breeze  according  to 
its  own  structure  and  style.  It  is  not  the  sound  of  one  monotonous  note,  but 
all  the  varying  notes  of  being  brought  into  sweetest  harmony.  3.  It  was  produced 
by  the  gracious  favour  of  heaven.  "Great  grace  was  upon  them  aU."  (1)  The 
love  of  God  was  the  parent  of  their  liberality.  (2)  This  liberality  brought  the 
esteem  of  men.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  They  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with  one 
accord. — Resource  in  trouble  : — I.  God  Almighty  (ver.  24).  It  is  good  sometimes  to 
think  of  the  affluence  of  the  Divine  power.  Take,  e.g.,  the  central  object  in  the 
heavens  which  God  has  made :  the  sun — diameter,  112  times  that  of  our  own  earth ; 
surface,  12,611  times  that  of  our  earth  ;  volume,  1,400,000  times  that  of  our  earth. 
Sun's  light — 800,000  times  greater  than  that  of  the  full  moon,  22,000  million  times 
more  than  that  of  the  most  brilliant  star.  The  sun — the  source  of  ligbt,  heat,  life. 
And  yet,  all  the  manifold  action  on  this  earth  of  ours  is  carried  on  by  the  two 
thousandth  three  hundred  millionth  part  of  the  force  radiation  by  the  sun.  For 
that  is  all  the  earth  can  grasp  of  the  sun's  rays  given  out  in  all  directions.  It  is  by 
this  pitiable  fraction  of  the  sun's  mighty  power  that  all  the  earth's  work  is  done. 
Now,  God  is  a  Sun — ^how  limitless  His  power,  &c.  II.  An  all-wise  God.  David, 
a  thousand  years  before,  sang,  yet  prophesied :  "  Why  do  the  heathen  rage,"  &c. 
(vers.  25-27).  That  is  to  say,  that  which  was  predicted  is  now  taking  place.  Thou 
are  not,  0  God,  taken  by  surprise  and  disappointed.  Disastrous  as  it  seems  to  ua, 
it  is  shining  clear  to  Thee.  III.  An  all-controlling  God.  "  For  to  do  whatsoever," 
(fee.  (ver.  2S).  Mystery  here,  but  comfort.  Here  is  the  great  helpful  truth  that 
God  controls.  IV.  This  almighty,  all-wise,  all-controlhng  God,  laid  hold  of  by 
PRAYER  (ver.  24).  No  thought  unto  them  that  such  a  God  could  not  answer. 
V.  This  almighty,  all-wise,  all-controlling  God,  laid  hold  of  by  prayer,  that  in 
THEM  THE  DiviNE  WILL  MAY  BE  ACCOMPLISHED.  They  do  Dot  ask  to  be  released  from 
persecution,  but  that  in  their  present  circumstances  they  may  be  enabled  to 
accomplish  their  Christian  duty  (ver.  29).  They  ask  for  magnificent  self- 
surrender.  Thus  they  take  sides  with  God.  They  are  as  one  with  the  nature  of 
things.  Defeat  is  impossible.  Theirs  must  be  the  deliverance  of  victory.  Appli- 
cation. Do  not  let  your  trouble  get  between  you  and  God.  Let  your  trouble  shut 
you  up  to  God.  (Wayland  Hoyt,  D.D.)  Prayer  and  the  prominen  are  doubly  dear 
in  extremities : — When  I  first  went  to  sea,  as  the  winds  arose  and  the  waves  became 
rough  I  found  difficulty  to  keep  my  legs  on  the  deck,  for  I  tumbled  and  tossed  about 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  417 

like  a  porpoise  on  the  water.  At  last  I  caught  hold  of  a  rope  that  was  rolling 
about,  and  then  I  could  stand  upright.  So  when  troubles  invade  we  lay  hold  of 
God's  faithfulness  to  His  promises,  and,  holding  fast,  we  can  securely  stand. 
(H.  G.  Salter.)  Friviitive  worship : — No  doubt  there  was  something  in  it 
of  a  special  character.  It  was  held  at  a  moment  of  danger.  There  was  that, 
therefore,  in  the  circumstances  from  which  God's  mercy  has  spared  7is.  Should 
we  be  here  at  all,  were  it  otherwise  ?  Those  of  us  who  even  in  quiet  times, 
when  it  is  respectable  to  be  a  Christian,  cannot  conquer  indolence,  forego  in- 
clination, brave  a  smile  or  a  sneer,  in  behalf  of  Christ ;  what  would  they  do  if  the 
voice  of  the  world  turned  altogether  against  Christ  ?  Certainly,  then,  our  thanks- 
givings should  arise  to  God  for  having  permitted  us  to  live  in  quiet  times.  And  then 
we  ought  to  set  ourselves  to  make  our  worship  as  much  like  theirs  as  by  God's  grace 
we  can.  I.  The  manner  of  this  worship.  "  They  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with 
one  accord."  Not  their  heart  only,  but  their  voice.  1.  Some  have  called  this  the 
first  example  of  a  creed,  one  of  those  joint  utterances  of  a  common  faith  which  our 
Church  has  prescribed  to  us,  e.g.,  in  "  Ibeheve  in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  Maker 
of  heaven  and  earth."  "Lord,  Thou  art  God,  which  hast  made  heaven  and  earth," 
&c.  2.  Others  have  seen  in  this  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  Liturgy.  They 
have  said  that,  in  order  to  lift  up  their  voice  to  God  in  these  words,  they  must  first 
have  known  them.  We  will  not  enter  into  these  arguments :  they  at  least  want 
certainty.  3.  It  will  be  enough  for  us  to  observe,  that,  while  one  spoke,  all 
followed ;  the  well-known  voice  of  St.  John  or  St.  Peter  led,  and  they  who  heard 
found  no  difficulty  in  adding  a  humble  voice,  as  well  as  a  pure  heart,  to  the  words 
of  supplication,  accompanying  the  speaker  to  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace,  and 
saying  the  prayer  after  him.  In  this  elementary  point  let  us  be  earnest  to  resemble 
them.  If  the  heart  is  engaged,  the  voice  will  not  be  withheld.  II.  Its  nature.  It 
was — 1.  Eeverent.  How  profound  is  the  adoration  of  God  as  the  alone  Great  and 
Good  and  Holy  1  How  solemn  is  the  sense  of  that  rightful  sovereignty  over  all 
things !  The  least  that  can  be  looked  for  in  this  House  of  Prayer  is  reverence ;  the 
feeling  of  the  sinful  approaching  the  Sinless,  the  creature  the  Creator.  2.  Scriptural. 
"  Who  by  the  mouth  of  Thy  servant  David  hast  said."  It  is  not  essential  to  prayer 
that  it  be  in  Scripture  words,  but  it  is  essential  that  it  be  founded  on  Scripture 
doctrine ;  that  our  petitions  be  addressed  to  God  as  He  is,  and  not  to  God  as  we 
fancy  Him.  And  we  can  only  know  God  as  He  is  by  becoming  acquainted  with 
Him  in  His  Word.  3.  Believing.  Unbelieving  men  would  have  seen  only  Herod,  (fee, 
'banded  together  against  God  and  against  His  Christ,  and  said,  What  are  we  against 
the  world  ?  But  their  eye  was  not  thus  bounded.  Above  all  human  agency  for 
evil,  they  saw  the  hand  of  God  working  wholly  for  good.  The  murder  of  Jesus, 
what  was  it  ?  In  itself,  a  Satanic,  a  diaboiical  act ;  in  its  consequences,  the  working 
out  of  God's  counsel ;  the  redemption  of  a  world.  4.  Practical.  V.'e  are  too  ready 
to  let  our  prayers  stop  with  themselves  ;  to  be  satisfied  if  a  ray  of  comfort,  if  a 
passing  thought  of  peace  is  left  behind  them.  We  have  our  reward,  even  as  we 
prescribed  it.  But  these  worshippers  looked  to  conduct,  to  duty,  to  future  trials  of 
their  faith  and  constancy,  and  asked  for  grace  sufficient.  To  quicken  this  zeal, 
to  strengthen  this  devotion,  they  pray  that  God's  hand  may  still  be  outstretched  to 
heal ;  that  He  will  never  leave  them  without  witness,  but  will  give  them  daily  proof 
that  His  holy  Servant  Jesus  is  indeed  strong  to  help,  mighty  to  save.  We  ought  in 
prayer  to  bethink  ourselves  of  coming  trial ;  and  while  we  trust  God  implicitly  with 
the  unforeseen,  to  ask  His  help  expressly  for  that  which  we  can  see  before  us.  One 
word  of  definite  request  is  worth  volumes  of  vague  general  aspirations.  (1)  In 
itself  ;  because  it  is  real  and  means  something ;  because  it  is  the  address  of  a  living 
man  to  a  living  God  on  a  topic  which  concerns  life.  (2)  In  its  effects ;  because 
one  thing  actually  granted  is  a  proof  of  being  heard  ;  is  God's  own  witness  to  His 
own  grace  ;  is  a  token  for  good,  shown  and  proved,  encouraging  confidence  in  Him 
who  is  not  only  the  Giver  of  single  blessings,  but  the  Fountain  of  all  goodness,  and 
the  very  source  of  life.  III.  Its  effects.  An  immediate  sign  followed  it.  The 
place  was  shaken.  These  things  are  of  the  past.  Men  then  looked  for  outward 
signs,  and  wanted  them,  while  faith  was  young.  In  this  age  there  is  no  outward 
sign  which  scepticism  could  not  account  for  :  signs  would  not  convince  the  infidel, 
and  the  believing  ask  not  for  them.  But  has  God,  then,  no  sign  for  His  people? 
Has  worship  no  sign  of  its  acceptance  ?  Is  there  nothing  now  corresponding  to  tha 
altar-flame  which  attested  God's  regard  to  man's  offering?  Yes,  there  is  an  inward 
peace  following  upon  Divine  communion  :  a  glow  of  faith,  and  a  comfort  of  love, 
and  a  joy  of  hope,  by  which  "  the  Spirit  Himself  bears  witness  with  our  spirit  that 
VOL.  I.  27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

we  are  sons  of  God."  He  who  seeks  God  with  all  his  heart,  on  any  occasion  of 
worship,  shall  find  Him,  and  know  that  he  finds :  he  shall  feel  it  good  for  him  to 
be  here,  and  he  shall  be  sent  on  his  way  rejoicing.  Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  by 
a  conscious  communication  between  his  soul  and  Gjd,  he  shall  go  forth,  to  bear 
a  more  manful  and  a  more  consistent  testimony  to  the  gospel.  Conclusion  ;  1. 
Expect  great  things  from  worship.  Worship  will  be,  in  great  measure,  what  you 
make  it  in  your  use  and  expectation.  If  you  look  for  much,  you  wiU  also  receive 
much :  if  you  expect  httle,  you  will  also  reap  little.  2.  Carry  your  worshipping 
thoughts  forth  with  you.  Let  them  not  be  dissipated  by  idle  words,  by  foolish  levity, 
just  outside  or  even  within  these  walls.  The  great  enemy  wiU  watch  you  after  this 
service,  that  he  may  catch  away  the  seed  sown.      {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  j>rayer 

of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  under  persecution : — I.  The  pkayer.  1.  It  contains  a 
distinct  acknowledgment  of  God's  ahnighty  power.  "  Lord,  Thou  art  God,"  &c. 
Our  highest  conceptions  of  the  power  of  God  are  derived  from  the  act  of  creation. 
Finite  power  can  shape  and  fashion,  but  it  can  never  create.  (1)  God  created  the 
heaven  of  heavens :  the  place  where  He  has  erected  His  throne,  and  where  He  is 
pleased  especially  to  manifest  Himself  to  the  heavenly  powers.  There  the  humanity 
of  Christ  is  seen.  That  world  our  Saviour  has  described  as  His  "  Father's  house." 
If  the  Queen  of  Sheba  fainted  at  the  sight  of  the  splendour  of  Solomon's  court, 
what  shall  be  thought  of  the  temple  of  the  great  King?  He  created  aU  the 
inhabitants  of  that  world.  Of  these  there  are  various  orders.  "  Thrones, 
dominions,"  &c.  Their  numbers  are  great.  All  derive  their  existence  from  God, 
their  immortality,  their  mighty  intellect,  their  profound  and  comprehensive  know- 
ledge, their  burning  love,  their  rich  and  elevated  enjoyments.  (2)  He  made  the 
visible  heavens.  The  sun,  moon,  stars,  and  planets.  Their  magnitudes ;  the 
regularity  and  rapidity  of  their  motions  ;  the  vast  sweep  of  their  orbits  ;  all  declare 
the  greatness  of  His  power.  (3)  He  made  the  earth.  Its  plains  and  valleys,  its  deserts, 
its  hills,  its  mineral  substances,  its  refreshing  springs,  its  daily  and  annual  motion, 
with  its  changing  seasons,  the  clouds  which  supply  it  with  the  fruitful  rain,  the 
winds  which  sweep  over  its  surface,  the  atmosphere  in  which  it  moves,  all  attest  the 
greatness  of  His  power.  He  made  aU  that  the  earth  contains.  The  varieties  of  the 
vegetable  kingdom ;  the  fowls  of  the  air,  with  the  endless  train  of  sentient 
creatures.  Man,  his  outward  frame,  so  "  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,"  his 
mind,  by  whose  sagacity  the  secrets  of  nature  are  penetrated,  and  the  unruly 
elements  and  animals  made  subservient ;  and  by  which  the  knowledge  of  God  is 
acquired,  and  a  spiritual  worship  is  presented.  The  lesson  is  that  the  mighty  hand 
which  fabricated  all  this  is  pledged  to  defend  the  Christian  from  evil.  Hence  this 
prayer.  The  storm  of  persecution  was  raging  around.  The  danger  is  appalling ; 
but  God  is  near  ;  and  His  people  take  refuge  in  His  almightiness.  What  is  the  power 
of  the  rulers  before  the  great  Lord  of  earth  and  sky?  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is 
a  strong  tower :  the  righteous  runneth  into  it,  and  is  safe !  "  Here,  then,  is  an 
example  worthy  of  imitation.  In  every  perplexity  and  danger,  let  us  call  upon 
God  in  prayer,  and  cover  ourselves  with  His  omnipotence.  "  God  is  our  refuge  and 
strength,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble.  Therefore  will  we  not  fear."  2.  A 
distinct  acknowledgment  of  God's  governing  wisdom  (vers.  25-28 ;  cf .  Psa.  ii,). 
(1)  Because  the  men  who  put  our  Lord  to  death  did  that  which  God  had  "  deter- 
mined before  to  be  done,"  some  have  concluded  that  they  were  compelled.  But  as 
to  the  perpetration  of  it,  this  opinion  is  dishonourable  to  God,  and  injurious  to 
piety.  We  shaU  prove  that  it  is  not  the  doctrine  of  Holy  Scripture,  (a)  It  was 
God's  purpose  that  His  Son  should  die.  This  was  the  appointed  method  of  human 
salvation.  Man  had  sinned,  and  could  not  be  justified  without  an  atonement. 
That  atonement  was  therefore  determined  in  the  counsels  of  the  Divine  Mind  before 
time  began  ;  for  He  "  verily  was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world." 
The  death  of  Christ,  therefore,  was  in  effect  declared  in  the  first  promise :  was 
prefigured  by  the  sacrifices  of  the  old  dispensations,  and  was  attested  by  the 
prophets.  But  now  note  that  so  far  as  the  Jews  were  concerned,  the  crucifixion 
involved  a  criminal  inattention  to  the  predictions  of  their  own  Scriptures.  They 
wilf  uUy  shut  their  eyes  against  the  light  of  the  clearest  evidence,  as  to  His  real 
character,  arising  from  His  miracles  and  teaching.  To  suppose  that  God  should 
solemnly  forbid  all  this  wickedness,  and  reveal  His  wi-ath  against  it,  and  yet  impel 
any  of  His  creatures  to  commit  it,  is  a  foul  aspersion  upon  His  truth  and  holiness, 
as  well  as  upon  His  justice  and  love,  {b)  It  has  been  rashly  concluded,  that  if  the 
authorities  had  believed  in  Jesus,  and  forborne  to  lay  violent  hands  upon  Him,  the 
Divine  plan  of  redemption  must  have  failed ;  but  such  apprehensions  arise  from 


CHAP,  rv.]  THE  ACTS.  419 

very  imperfect  views  of  the  depth   of  God's  counsels.     His  wisdom  could  have 
devised  a  thousand  means  of  securing  the  death  of  His  Son  independently  of  all 
sinful  agency.    If  He  "  does  not  need  man's  work,"  in  order  to  the  accomplishment 
of  His  plans,  He  certainly  does  not  need  man's  wickedness  for  any  such  purpose. 
But  on  such  a  subject  it  is  useless  to  speculate.     The  death  of  Christ  has  been 
accomplished,  and  with  it  the  world's  redemption,     (c)  Some  persons  have  thought 
that  the  prophecies  imposed  upon  the  Jewish  people  a  necessity  to  put  Jesus  to 
death ;  but  of  this  there  is  no  proof.      Prophecy,   in   this   case,  was   simply  an 
expression  of  God's  foreknowledge.     Had  the  conduct  of  the  Jewish  and  Koman 
authorities  towards  our  Lord  been  friendly,  the  Divine  Mind  would  have  seen  it  to 
be  such  ;  and  prophecy  would  have  corresponded  with  it.    Simple  foreknowledge  no 
more  influences  a  fact  than  after-knowledge  ;  and  the  actions  of  a  moral  agent  are 
no  more  determined  by  a  mere  prediction  than  they  are  by  history.     (2)  In  all  the 
circumstances  attending  the  crucifixion  we  have  a  striking  display  of  the  wisdom 
of  God.     The  Jews  unquestionably  intended — (a)  To  cover  His  name  with  indelible 
odium,  but  God  has  made  it  an  occasion  of  the  highest  glory.     (6)  To  subvert  His 
spiritual  kingdom.     Vain  men  !     The  means  which  they  adopted  led  Him  to  the 
possession  of  a  dominion  wide  as  the  universe,  and  lasting  as  eternity,     (c)  By  the 
frightful  and  tormenting  death  to  which  our  Lord  was  subjected,  to  terrify  and 
scatter  His  disciples.     Here  again  we  see  the  short-sightedness  of  man  ;  the  Cross 
was  the  means  of  binding  the  disciples  of  Christ  to  Him  for  ever.     (3)  Here,  then, 
is  another  ground  of  confidence  towards  God.     He  who  thus  brought  good  out  of 
evil  is  always  the  same.     Men  are  olten  taken  by  surprise  ;  but  He  sees  the  end 
from  the  beginning,  and  is  therefore  prepared  for  all  events.    3.  A  direct  application 
to  God  for  His  immediate  interposition.     They  request  that  supernatural  boldness 
may  be  given  to  the  apostles  in  the  exercise  of  their  ministry.     This  is  a  very 
remarkable  petition,  and  places  in  a  striking  light  the  singleness  of  heart  of  the 
first  Christians.     Ease,  honour,  liberty,  friends,  life  itself,  are  all  to  be  sacrificed, 
rather  than  the  word  of  God  should  be  bound.  As  one  means  of  inspiring  the  apostles 
with  the  requisite  "boldness,"  the  Church  pray  that  miracles  may  be  continued  and 
Increased.     It  is  here  assumed  that  miracles  are  the  peculiar  work  of  God  :  for  had 
miraculous  power  been  inherent  the  prayer  would  have  been  absurd.    Miracles  were 
indeed  wrought  by  the  instrumentalityof  the  apostles,  because  they  were  intended  to 
authenticate  the  system  of  truth  which  they  were  appointed  to   teach ;  but  the 
miracles  themselves  were  effects  produced  by  the   immediate  exertion  of   God's 
power  ;  and  in  every  instance  they  depended  upon  His  will.     4.  The  prayer  is 
marked  by  the  absence  of  all  wrathful  feeling.     In  preaching  Christ  the  apostles 
violated  no  law ;  injured  no  man ;  they  conferred  the  greatest  possible  good  upon 
multitudes.     While  thus  discharging  their  consciences,  and  benefiting  mankind, 
they  were  censured,  imprisoned,  brow-beaten,  and  severely  threatened.     Yet  the 
only  allusion  made  to  this  cruel  and  unreasonable  conduct  is,  "  And  now.  Lord, 
behold  their  threatenings."     How  like  their  Lord  who,  when  He  "was  reviled,  He 
reviled  not  again"  ;  and  "  when  He  suffered  unjustly,"  He  forbore  "  to  threaten." 
In  the  same  spirit  Stephen  suffered      There  was  a  time  when  the  disciples  proposed 
to  punish  inhospitable  people  with  fire  from  heaven.     But  now  they  were  actuated 
by  holier  feelings.     The  spirit  of  Christianity  is  a  spirit  of  love.     5.  The  prayer 
presents  a  beautiful  example  of  Christian  unanimity.     The  assembled  multitude 
"lifted  up  their  voices  with  one  accord."     How  different  from  the  congregations  of 
ungodly  men,  brought  together  for  some  worldly  object,  and  actuated  by  selfishness, 
anger,  or  curiosity  (chap.  xix.  32).    Here  is  a  complete  unity  of  purpose  and  desire. 
Not  a  wandering  eye,  no  listlessness,  inattention,  or  formality ;  no  silent  lips ;  for 
here  is  no  cold  and  unfeeling  heart.     The  Holy  Ghost  has  produced  in  them  all  an 
intense  desire  for  the  preservation  and  extension  of  the  cause  of  Christ.     Oh,  when 
will  our  assemblies  resemble  this !      When  shall  we   cease  to  complain   of   late 
attendance  upon  our  religious  ordinances?    of   undevout  worshippers?     II.  The 
ANSWER  WHICH  GoD  GRACIOUSLY  VOUCHSAFED.     1.  They  received  a  sensible  token  of 
the  Divine  presence.     "  The  place  was  shaken."     The  entire  fabric  was  moved  by 
the  power  of  God ;  but  not  a  stone  seems  to  have  been  displaced.     The  effect  must 
have  been  somewhat  similar  to  that  produced  on  Jacob  and  Elijah  (Gen.  xxviii.  16, 17 ; 
1  Kings  xix.  12, 13).   Only  in  this  case  there  was  no  guilt  to  terrify  ;  for  their  sin  was 
purged;  and  the  weakest  among  them  was  greater  in  Divine  knowledge  and  heavenly 
enjoyment  than  the  most  distinguished  prophet.     To  them,  therefore,  the  presence 
of  God  was  the  cause  of  holy  joy.     Miracles  are  no  longer  necessary,  and  are 
therefore  discontinued ;  but  God  is  as  really  present  in  the  assemblies  of  His  people 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

at  this  day  as  He  was  wheii  they  met  in  Jerusalem ;  and  our  whole  spirit  and 
behaviour  in  His  house  should  correspond  with  tliis  conviction.  2.  Thay  were 
favoured  with  a  rich  eiiusion  of  Divine  influence.  "  They  were  aU  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost."  This  beiug  the  case — (1)  They  were,  of  course,  emptied  of  all  that 
was  opposed  to  His  mind  and  nature ;  and  whatever  was  defective  in  the  piety  of 
any  of  them  was  now  suppHed.  Those  that  were  weak  in  ^aith  were  now  inspired 
with  strong  confidence.  Each  of  them  was  entirely  sanctified  to  God,  and  made 
perfect  in  every  Christian  grace.  They  were  not  only  saved  from  all  sin,  but  were 
fiUed  with  the  fulness  of  God.  They  dwelt  in  God,  by  constant  acts  of  faith  and 
love ;  and  He  dwelt  in  them  in  all  the  fulness  of  His  Spirit's  power.  It  may  be 
justly  questioned  whether  the  power  of  Christianity  was  ever  more  strikingly 
manifested  than  upon  this  occasion.  Who  were  these  people?  The  greater  part  of 
them  were  Jews  upon  whom  the  spotless  purity  of  our  Saviour's  example,  and  even 
the  resurrection  of  Lazarus,  had  failed  to  make  any  salutary  impression.  They 
had  actually  been  "His  betrayers  and  murderers."  Yet  they  no  sooner  believe  in 
Jesus,  and  are  brought  under  the  fuU  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  than  they  become 
examples  to  the  Church  in  all  ages  till  the  end  of  time.  Who,  then,  can  despair  of 
the  conversion  of  any  one  ?  Why  should  we  not  in  the  present  day  witness 
displays  of  the  power  and  grace  of  Christ  equally  striking  ?  Even  our  missionaries 
never  meet  with  people  more  deeply  depraved.  (2)  They  "  spake  the  word  of  God  " 
with  renewed  "boldness."  They  had  a  full  assurance  of  the  triumph  of  the 
Christian  cause,  whatever  opposition  they  might  encounter.  Hence  they  preached 
Christ  at  every  opportunity  with  dauntless  ardour ;  for  they  felt  that  God  was  with 
them,  conferring  upon  the  world  the  richest  blessings.  (3)  "  The  multitude  of 
them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart,  and  of  one  soul."  The  "  little  flock"  had 
now  become  a  "  multitude  "  ;  yet  were  they  perfectly  one  in  spirit.  No  angry 
controversies  agitated  them  ;  for  they  had  not  learned  to  attempt  the  settlement 
of  questions  which  no  human  sagacity  can  solve.  Tbe  authority  of  the  Son  of  God 
was  sufficient  to  fix  the  assent  of  their  understandings,  as  it  was  to  sway  their  will, 
and  command  their  obedience.  There  was  in  tbem  such  an  identity  of  feelmg,  and 
tenderness  of  sympathy  and  affection,  as  the  world  had  never  previously  seen.  The 
more  wealthy  shared  the  blessings  of  Divine  Providence  with  the  poor;  and  the 
hearts  of  all  were  so  set  upon  the  heavenly  treasure,  that  none  of  them  called  the 
earthly  tbings  which  belonged  to  him  his  own.  They  lived  not  under  a  low  degree 
of  Divine  influence  ;  nor  was  that  influence  limited  to  a  few  individuals.  "  Great 
grace  was  upon  them  "  ;  and  it  was  upon  them  "  all."  Thus  was  the  dying  request 
of  the  Saviour  answered  (John  xvii.  20  23).  3.  The  cause  of  Christianity  was 
greatly  extended.  Tlie  Church  prayed  that  God  would  "  stretch  forth  His  hand  "  ; 
and  now  the  historian  goes  on  to  state,  that  "  by  the  hands  of  the  apostles  were 
many  signs  and  wonders  wrought  among  the  people."  Conclusion  :  The  subject 
reminds  us — 1.  Of  our  obligations  to  the  merciful  providence  of  God,  for  our 
exemption  from  those  harassing  persecutions  by  which  the  Church  was  formerly 
oppressed.  2.  In  times  of  trouble  to  seek  relief  in  prajer.  Though  we  are 
exempted  from  legal  persecution,  we  are  liable  to  various  other  calamities,  from 
which  we  have  no  means  of  escape.  3.  Of  the  true  secret  of  tbe  Church's  power. 
Weak  as  the  Church  is  in  itself,  it  is  armed  with  God's  truth.  Tbis  is  the  weapon 
which  no  form  of  evil  can  effectually  resist,  when  it  is  rightly  applied.  The  Church 
is  also  favoured  with  the  presence  and  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  where  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  zeal.  Let  us  return,  then,  to  the  first  principles  of  our 
holy  religion.  Let  us  study  Christianity  as  it  is  embodied  in  the  books  of  the  New 
Testament,  and  as  it  was  exemplified  by  the  Church  under  the  Pentecostal  baptism  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  {Thomas  Jackson.)  The  prayer  of  the  primitive  Church : — Prayer  is 
not  the  origin  of  a  movement,  but  the  result  of  one.  You  stand  on  the  margin  of  a 
lake,  and  hear  a  mysterious  sound  coming  from  the  dead  wall  of  a  grey  ruined  castle 
that  stands  on  an  island  near  the  shore.  The  sound,  however,  was  not  generated  in 
that  ruin.  The  words  of  a  living  man,  wafted  over  the  still  water,  struck  the  old  silent 
keep,  and  its  wall  gave  back  the  echo.  Prayer,  man's  cry  to  God,  is  the  second  of  a 
series  of  vibrations,  an  echo  awakened  in  ruined  dumb  humanity,  by  God's  sweet 
promise  coming  down  from  heaven.  We  may  discover  the  specific  promise  to  which 
this  prayer  replies  (Isa.  xl.  26,  27).  What  a  sublime  position  these  suppliants  occupy ! 
They  are  admitted  into  the  Divine  couns'l.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them 
that  fear  Him."  They  were  able  to  mark  in  the  Scriptures  the  precise  spot  they 
had  reached  in  the  scheme  of  providence,  as  a  ship-master  marks  his  latitude  on 
his  chart.     In  the  quiet  confidence  of  faith  they  realise  that  hostile  combinations 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  421 

only  accomplish  the  gracious  purpose  of  God.  In  ver.  29  comes  the  most  important 
of  all  their  requests.  Parliamentary  petitions  are  sometimes  of  gi-eat  length.  There 
may  be  a  narrative  of  facts,  long  and  intricate ;  there  may  be  the  citation  of 
precedents  ;  there  may  be  arguments  and  plans  ;  but  it  is  common  to  pass  over  all 
these  when  the  document  is  presented,  and  to  read  only  what  is  denominated  "  the 
prayer  of  the  petition,"  i.e.,  the  clause  at  the  end  which  declares  what  the  petitioners 
want.  Ver.  29  contains  the  prayer  of  this  petition.  And  what  was  it?  Not 
vengeance,  not  immunity  from  danger,  but  grace  to  be  faithful  under  persecution. 
This  exhibits  a  beautiful  distrust  of  self  and  confidence  in  God.  Their  only  anxiety 
was  lest  natural  shrinking  from  suffering  should  tempt  them  to  conceal  the  pungent 
parts  of  their  testimony.  Our  circumstances  are  diverse  from  theirs ;  yet  the 
pressure  which  tempts  to  timid  unfaithfulness  is  only  removed  from  one  side  to 
another.  "  The  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare,"  but  snares  are  not  all  of  one 
shape  or  material.  A  force  that  is  diffused  and  soft  may  have  a  greater  pressure 
than  one  that  is  sharp  and  hard,  as  the  atmosphere  over  a  man's  body  lies  heavier 
on  him  than  any  other  burden  he  ever  bore.  To  threaten  a  witness  for  Christ  with 
the  prison  or  the  scaffold  is  one  way  of  turning  him  from  his  faithfulness,  to  set 
before  him  the  favour  of  a  polished  but  worldly  circle  is  another.  If  two  ships  are  lost 
at  sea  by  the  false  pointing  of  their  compasses  it  will  make  no  difference  as  to  the 
loss  of  property  or  life  that  the  compass  of  one  ship  was  prevented  from  pointing 
truly  by  a  nail  that  fastened  it  to  the  deck,  and  that  the  compass  of  the  other  was 
secretly  drawn  aside  by  a  mass  of  iron  concealed  in  the  hold.  Thus  an  ancient 
preacher  who  held  back  the  truth  for  fear  of  the  dungeon,  and  a  modern  minister 
who  softens  and  disguises  the  truth,  because  a  gay,  worldly,  and  critical  congregation 
listen,  must  stand  side  by  side.  {W.  Arnnt,  D.D.)  The  burnt  offering  of  a  true 
Church  prayer ; — I.  The  alt.ui  on  which  it  must  be  placed :  the  fellowship  of 
believers.  II.  The  fibe  in  which  it  should  burn  :  tbe  glow  of  brotherly  love.  III.  The 
WIND  which  must  blow  on  it :  the  storm  of  persecution.  IV.  The  wood  with  which 
it  should  be  fed  :  the  Divine  promises  taken  from  the  ever-green  forest  of  Scripture. 
V.  The  God  to  whom  it  ascends  :  the  Almighty  Creator  and  Lord  of  heaven  and 
€arth.  VI.  The  amen  which  falls  to  its  lot ;  renewal  and  strengthening  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.     (A'.  Gerok.) 

Vers.  25-28.  Why  do  the  heathen  rage. — Opposition  to  the  gospel : — I.  Its 
CHAEACTERisTics.  1.  Furiousncss,  "  rage,"  a  word  signifying  the  neighing  or 
snorting  of  highly  excited  horses — like  the  prancing  war-horse  in  the  book  of  Job. 
It  is  metaphorically  used  to  represent  the  noise  and  fury  of  insolent  and  over- 
bearing men,  and  well  represents  the  attitude  of  Christ's  enemies.  2.  Vanity. 
They  "  imagine  vain  things."  Those  who  aspire  to  thwart  the  plans  of  Christ,  to 
crush  Christianity,  live  in  a  region  of  mad  dreams.  They  are  agents  of  con- 
summate folly,  and  must  fall  victims  to  their  own  delusions.  3.  Combination. 
"  Kings  and  rulers  "  were  banded  together.  Ungodly  men  that  differ  widely  in 
other  things,  are  one  in  their  antagonism  to  Christ.  II.  Its  frustration.  All 
that  Herod,  Pontius  Pilate,  &e.,  could  do  was  just  as  much  as  God  determined  they 
should  do.  How  great  is  God !  He  maketh  His  enemies  to  do  His  work. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Whatsoever  Thy  hand  and  Thy  counsel  determined  before 
to  be  done. — The  hand  of  God  : — "For  to  do,"  or  be  the  means  of  doing,  that  by 
which  Christ  became  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  This  was  the  effect,  although  the 
secondary  agents  were  ignorant  of  it.  In  their  blindness  and  sinfulness  they  did 
just  so  much  and  no  more  than  God  had  determined  to  be  done.  God  decreed  the 
salvation  of  the  world  by  the  death  of  Christ,  but  He  did  not  decree  the  means — 
man's  sin  ;  but  overruled  it  to  the  accomplishment  of  His  purpose.  This  is 
ascribed  to  the  "  hand  "  of  God,  which  in  Scripture  implies — I.  Power.  This  was 
displayed  in  the  work  of  our  deliverance  from  the  slavery  of  Satan — the  strong 
man ;  and  this  dehverance  was  effected  by  the  suffering  and  death  of  Christ,  in 
■which  the  great  power  of  God  was  displayed.  II.  Providence  or  direction.  It 
was  not  Jewish  malice  that  procured  our  redemption,  but  malice  overruled  by 
Divine  providence.  III.  Operation.  God  by  the  death  of  Christ  has  wrought  our 
redemption,  and  established  His  Church  as  a  channel  of  salvation.  IV.  Mercy  and 
<jRACE.  The  work  of  our  salvation  was  wrought  through  the  mercy  God  bears 
towards  us.  V.  Wisdom  (Job  xxviii.  11 ;  Ezra  viii.  18 ;  Neh.  ii.  8,  18).  (W. 
Denton,  M.A.) 

Vers.   29,  30.    And  now,  Lord,  bshold  their  threatenlngs. — How  a  Christian 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

ought  to  pray  for  his  enemies  : — I.  Without  anxiety  and  fear  :  for  he  prays  to  the 
King  of  kings.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  II.  Without  hatred 
AND  malice  ;  for  he  prays  against  wickedness,  not  against  the  wicked.  III.  With- 
out PRIDE  AND  SCORN ;  for  he  prays  not  for  himself,  but  for  the  cause  of  God. 
(K.  Gerok.)  Grant  unto  Thy  servants  that  with  all  boldness  they  may  speak 
Thy  Word. — The  prayer  of  GhrisVs  witnesses  : — I.  That  they  may  speak  and  not  re 
DUMB.  1.  Speech  is  a  chief  gift  of  God  and  prerogative  of  man.  Where  there  is 
a  Uving  spring  it  finds  a  channel,  and  where  a  living  soul  an  avenue  of  egress. 
Neither  can  be  imprisoned.  On  the  other  hand,  where  there  is  no  spring,  no 
channel  is  needed,  and  none  is  found.  Among  living  creatures  accordingly,  where 
there  is  not  a  soul  there  is  not  speech ;  but  in  that  one  creature  into  whom  God 
breathed  a  Uving  soul,  there  is  speech.  Eeverence  human  speech.  It  is  the  mark 
of  a  being  who  was  made,  and  may  be  remade,  a  child  of  God ;  it  is  a  Divinely 
formed  capacity  for  a  Divinely  prescribed  use.  Dread  false  speech,  proud,  impure, 
profane  speech,  for  these  are  the  King's  weapons  used  against  Himself.  2.  Why 
should  they  be  silent  who  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious  ?  Let  them  tell  to 
all  what  God  hath  done  for  their  souls.  Let  the  compressed  love  which  glows  in 
renewed  hearts  find  expression  in  spoken  praise.  3.  Silence  is  a  sin,  if  your  cry 
might  save  a  neighbour  from  stumbling  over  a  precipice ;  if  your  neighbours  are 
on  the  broad  path  and  your  word  might  lead  them  into  the  narrow  one ;  if  a 
brother  is  sliding  back  and  your  reproof  might  urge  him  on ;  if  a  believer  is. 
oppressed  with  doubts  and  fears,  while  your  lips  might  pour  the  consolations  of 
God  into  his  weary  heart.  4.  The  prayer  points  mainly  to  a  public  ministry,  and 
yet  nothing  is  said  about  sermons,  or  even  preaching.  "  That  they  may  speak.^^ 
Whether  the  address  be  long  or  short,  whether  the  audience  be  few  or  many, 
whether  the  style  be  eloquent  or  stammering,  the  pith  and  marrow  of  the  whole 
matter  is,  that  one  man  hoping  in  Christ  and  loving  his  neighbour,  speaks  to  that 
neighbour  about  Christ's  redeeming  love.  Out  of  this,  as  the  germ,  all  true 
preaching  springs.  If  its  whole  mass  were  by  some  chemical  process  reduced  to  its 
elements,  this  would  be  the  essential  residuum  remaining  indestructible  after  aU 
ornaments  and  accessories  had  been  melted  away.  II.  That  they  may  speak  Thy 
Word,  This  supphes  alike  the  authority  and  material  of  preaching.  The  seed  ia 
the  Word ;  the  sower  need  not  scatter  any  other  in  his  field.  This  alone  is  vital ; 
this  alone  will  grow.  III.  With  boldness.  Let  none  assume  too  readily  that  he 
has  attained  this  qualification.  Here  aU  is  not  gold  that  glitters.  Beware  of 
counterfeits.  To  rasp  like  a  file  on  other  people's  tender  points,  because  you  have 
none  of  your  own,  is  not  the  boldness  here  prayed  for,  but  that  of  some  of  the 
inferior  creatures.  An  essential  constituent  of  courage  is  tenderness.  In  feudal 
times  battle  courage  was  only  one  half  of  knightly  bearing ;  the  other  half  con- 
sisted of  a  tenderness  almost  feminine.  The  boldness  of  speech  which  costs  the 
speaker  nothing  is  neither  beautiful  nor  successful.  Paul  was  a  bold  man, 
accusing  people  of  being  enemies  of  the  Cross,  but  he  wept  as  he  did  so ;  and  the 
tears  did  more  than  the  reproving  word.  IV.  With  all  boldness.  Even  courage 
may  be  one-sided.  That  is  not  true  courage  which  is  severe  to  the  poor  but  quails 
before  the  rich.  As  the  water  of  a  reservoir  will  be  lost  unless  the  circle  of  its  lip 
be  kept  whole  on  aU  sides,  all  the  dignity  and  power  of  boldness  vanishes  when  it 
fails  on  one  point.  Perhaps  the  weakest  point  of  all  the  circle  for  every  man  i» 
himself.  A  surgeon  needs  a  stout  heart  when  he  has  to  operate  on  others,  he 
needs  a  stouter  to  operate  on  himself.  (IF.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Boldness  in  preaching : 
— Some  preachers  are  traders  from  port  to  port,  following  the  customary  and 
approved  course ;  others  adventure  over  the  whole  ocean  of  human  concerns.  The 
former  are  hailed  by  the  common  voice  of  the  multitude,  whose  cause  they  hold, 
the  latter  blamed  as  idle,  often  suspected  of  hiding  deep  designs,  always  derided  as 
having  lost  all  guess  of  the  proper  course.  Yet,  of  the  latter  class  of  preachers  waa 
Paul  the  apostle.  .  .  .  Such  adventurers,  under  God,  this  age  of  the  world  seems 
to  us  especially  to  want.  There  are  ministers  now  to  hold  the  flock  in  pasture  and 
in  safety,  but  where  are  they  to  make  inroads  upon  the  alien,  to  bring  in  the 
votaries  of  fashion,  of  literature,  of  sentiment,  of  policy,  and  of  rank  ?  .  .  .  Where 
are  they  to  lift  up  their  voice  against  simony,  and  acts  of  policy,  and  servile 
dependence  upon  the  great  ones  of  this  earth,  and  shameful  seeking  of  ease  and 
pleasure,  and  anxious  amassing  of  money,  and  the  whole  cohort  of  evil  customs 
■which  are  overspreading  the  Church  ?  Truly  it  is  not  stagers  who  take  on  the 
customary  form  of  their  office  and  go  the  beaten  round  of  duty,  and  the  i  lie  down 
content ;  but  it  is  daring  adventurers,  who  shall  eye  from  the  grand  eminence  of 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  423 

a  holy  and  heavenly  mind  all  the  grievances  which  religion  underlies,  and  all  the 
obstacles  which  stay  her  course,  and  then  descend  with  the  self-denial  and  faith  of 
an  apostle  to  set  the  battle  in  array  against  them.      (Edward    Irving.)  The 

servant  and  the  slai'ss : — "  Thy  servant  David."  "  Thy  holy  servant  Jesus."  "  Thy 
servants  "  (chap.  iv.  25,  27,  29).  A  word  or  two  of  explanation  may  be  necessary 
as  to  the  language  of  our  texts.  You  will  observe  that,  in  the  second  of  them, 
I  have  followed  the  Eevised  Version,  which,  instead  of  "  Thy  holy  child,"  as  in  the 
Authorised  Version,  reads  "  Thy  holy  servant."  The  alteration  is  clearly  correct. 
The  word,  indeed,  literally  means  "  a  child,"  but,  like  our  own  English  "  boy,"  or 
even  "man,"  or  "maid,"  it  is  used  to  express  the  relation  of  servant,  when  the 
desire  is  to  cover  over  the  harsher  features  of  servitude,  and  to  represent  the  servant 
as  a  part  of  the  family.  Thus  the  kindly  centurion,  who  besought  Jesus  to  come 
and  heal  his  servant,  speaks  of  him  as  his  "  boy."  And  that  the  word  is  here  used 
in  this  secondary  sense  of  "  servant  "  is  unmistakable.  For  there  is  no  discernible 
reason  why,  if  stress  were  meant  to  be  laid  on  Christ  as  being  the  Son  of  God, 
the  recognised  expression  for  that  relationship  should  not  have  been  employed. 
Again,  the  Greek  translation  of  the  Old  Testament,  with  which  the  Apostles  were 
famihar,  employs  the  very  phrase  that  is  here  used  as  its  translation  of  the  well- 
known  Old  Testament  designation  of  the  Messiah,  "  the  servant  of  the  Lord,"  and 
the  words  here  are  really  a  quotation  from  the  great  prophecies  of  the  second  part 
of  the  Book  of  Isaiah.  So,  then,  we  have  here  three  figures,  the  Psalmist-king,  the 
Messiah,  the  disciples.  Christ  in  the  midst,  on  the  one  band  a  servant  with  whom 
He  consents  to  be  classed,  on  the  other  hand  the  slaves  who,  through  Him,  have 
become  sons.  And  I  think  I  shaU  best  bring  out  the  intended  lessons  of  these 
clauses  in  their  connection  if  I  ask  you  to  note  these  two  contrasts,  the  servants 
and  the  Servant;  the  Servant  and  the  slaves.  "David  Thy  servant";  "Thy 
holy  servant  Jesus  "  ;  us  "  Thy  servants."  I.  First,  then,  notice  the  servants  and 
THE  Sebvant.  The  reason  for  the  application  of  the  name  to  the  Psalmist  lies,  not 
so  much  in  his  personal  character,  or  in  his  religious  elevation,  as  in  the  fact  that 
he  is  chosen  of  God  for  a  specific  purpose,  to  carry  on  the  Divine  plans  some  steps 
towards  their  realisation.  Kings,  priests,  prophets,  the  collective  Israel,  as  having 
a  specific  function  in  the  world,  and  being,  in  some  sense,  the  instruments  and 
embodiments  of  the  will  of  God  amongst  men,  have  in  an  eminent  degree  the 
designation  of  His  "  servants."  But  then,  whilst  this  is  true,  and  whilst  Jesus 
Christ  comes  into  this  category,  and  is  one  of  these  special  men  raised  up  for 
special  ser\ice  in  connection  with  the  carrying  out  of  the  Divine  purpose,  mark 
how  emphatically  the  line  is  drawn  here  between  Him  and  the  other  members  of 
the  class  to  which,  in  a  certain  sense,  He  does  belong.  Peter  says  "  Thy  servant 
David,"  but  he  says  "  Thy  holy  servant  Jesus."  There  are  many  imperfect  instru- 
ments of  the  Divine  will ;  thinkers  and  heroes  and  saints  and  statesmen  and 
warriors,  as  well  as  prophets  and  priests  and  kings ;  but  amongst  them  all  there  is 
One  who  stands  in  their  midst  and  yet  apart  from  them,  because  He,  and  He  alone, 
can  say  "  I  have  done  all  Thy  pleasure,"  and  into  My  doing  of  Thy  pleasure  no 
bitter  leaven  of  self-regard  or  by-ends  has  ever,  in  the  faintest  degree,  entered. 
"  Thy  holy  servant  Jesus,"  is  the  unique  designation  of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord. 
And  what  is  the  meaning  of  holy?  The  word  does  not  primarily  refer  to  character 
so  much  as  to  relation  to  God.  The  root  idea  of  holiness  is  not  righteousness  nor 
moral  perfectness,  but  something  that  lies  beyond  that — viz.,  separation  for  the 
service  and  uses  of  God.  The  first  notion  of  the  word  is  consecration,  and  built 
upon  that  and  resulting  from  it,  moral  perfection.  So  then  these  men,  some  of 
whom  had  lived  beside  Jesus  Christ  for  all  those  years,  and  had  seen  everything 
that  He  did,  and  studied  Him  through  and  through,  came  away  from  the  close 
inspection  of  His  character  with  this  thought :  He  is  utterly  and  entirely  devoted 
to  the  service  of  God,  and  in  Him  there  is  neither  Fpot  nor  wrinkle  nor  blemish 
such  as  is  found  in  all  other  men.  I  need  not  remind  you  with  what  strange 
persistence  of  affirmation,  and  yet  with  what  humility  of  self-consciousness,  our 
Lord  Himself  always  claimed  to  be  in  possession  of  this  entire  consecration,  and 
complete  obedience,  and  consequent  perfection.  Think  of  human  lips  Faying,  "  I 
do  always  the  things  that  please  Him "  !  There  followed  in  Jesus  the  moral 
perfectness  that  comes  from  such  uninterrupted  and  complete  consecration  of  self 
to  God.  "  Thy  servant  David."  What  about  Bathsheba,  David  ?  What  about 
a  great  many  other  things  in  your  life  ?  The  poet  king,  with  the  poet  nature  so 
sensitive  to  all  the  delights  of  sense,  and  so  easily  moved  in  the  matter  of  pleasure, 
is  but  the  type  of  all  other  servants  in  the  fact  of  imperfection.     In  every  machine 


4i24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

power  is  lost  through  friction  ;  and  in  every  man,  the  noblest  and  the  purest,  there 
is  resistance  to  be  overcome  ere  motion,  in  conformity  with  the  Divine  impulse, 
can  be  secured.  We  pass  in  review  before  our  minds  saints  and  martyrs  and 
lovely  characters  by  the  hundred,  and  amongst  them  all  there  is  not  a  jewel 
without  a  flaw,  not  a  mirror  without  some  dint  in  it  where  the  rays  are  distorted,  or 
some  dark  place  where  the  reflecting  surface  has  been  rubbed  away  by  the  attrition 
of  sin,  and  there  is  no  reflection  of  the  Divine  light.  And  then  we  turn  to  that 
meek  figure  that  stands  there  with  the  question  that  has  been  awaiting  an  answer 
for  eighteen  centuries  upon  His  lips,  and  is  unanswered  yet :  "  Which  of  you 
convinceth  Me  of  sin?"  "The  holy  Servant,"  whose  consecration  and  character 
mark  Him  off  from  all  the  class  to  which  He  belongs  as  the  only  one  of  them  all 
who,  in  His  fulness,  has  executed  the  Father's  purpose,  and  has  never  attempted 
anything  besides  1  Now  there  is  another  step  to  take,  and  that  is  this.  The 
servant  who  stands  out  in  front  of  all  the  group — though  the  noblest  names  in  the 
World's  history  are  included  there — could  not  be  the  Servant  unless  He  were  the 
Son.  This  designation,  as  applied  to  Jesus  Christ,  is  peculiar  to  these  three  or 
four  earlier  chapters  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  There  is  no  sign  that  the  proper 
Sonship  and  Divinity  of  our  Lord  was  clear  before  them  at  this  period.  They  had 
the  facts,  but  they  had  not  yet  come  to  the  distinct  apprehension  of  how  much  was 
involved  in  these.  But,  if  they  knew  that  Jesus  Christ  had  died  and  had  risen 
again,  and  if  they  were  certain  that  in  His  character  of  Messiah  there  had  been 
faultlessness  and  absolute  perfection,  then  it  would  not  be  long  before  they  took  the 
next  step,  and  said,  as  I  say,  "  He  cannot  be  the  Servant  unless  He  is  more  than 
man."  And  we  may  well  ask  ourselves  the  question — If  we  admit,  as  the  world 
does  admit,  the  moral  perfectness  of  Jesus  Christ,  how  comes  it  that  this  Man 
alone  managed  to  escape  failure,  and  deflections  from  the  right,  and  sins,  and  that 
He  only  carried  through  life  a  stainless  garment,  and  went  down  to  the  grave  never 
having  needed,  and  not  needing  then,  the  exercise  of  Divine  forgiveness  ?  I  venture 
to  say  that  it  is  hopeless  to  account  for  Jesus  Christ  on  naturalistic  principles ;  and 
that  either  you  should  give  up  your  belief  in  His  sinlessness,  or  advance,  as  the 
Christian  Church  as  a  whole  advanced,  to  the  other  belief,  on  which  alone  that 
perfectness  is  explicable  :  "  Thou  art  the  King  of  Glory,  O  Christ.  Thou  art  the 
everlasting  Son  of  the  Father."  II.  And  so,  secondly,  let  us  turn  to  the  other 
contrast  here — the  Servant  and  the  servants.  I  said  that  the  humble  group  of 
praying,  persecuted  believers  seemed  to  have  wished  to  take  a  lower  place  than  their 
Master's,  even  whilst  they  ventured  to  assume  that,  in  some  sense,  they  too,  like 
Him,  were  doing  the  Father's  will.  So  they  chose,  by  a  fine  instinct  of  humility, 
rather  than  from  any  dogmatical  prepossessions,  the  name  that  expresses,  in  its 
most  absolute  and  roughest  form,  the  notion  of  bondage  and  servitude.  He  is  the 
Servant ;  we  standing  here  are  slaves.  The  true  place,  then,  for  a  man  is  to  be 
God's  slave.  The  harsh,  repellent  features  of  that  wicked  institution  assume  an 
altogether  different  character  when  they  become  the  features  of  my  relation  to 
Him.  Absolute  submission,  unconditional  obedience,  on  the  slave's  part ;  and  on 
the  part  of  the  Master  complete  ownership  ;  the  right  of  life  and  death  ;  the  right 
of  disposing  of  all  goods  and  chattels ;  the  right  of  separating  husband  and  wife, 
parents  and  children ;  the  right  of  issuing  commandments  without  a  reason ;  the 
right  to  expect  that  those  commandments  shall  be  swiftly,  unhesitatingly,  punc- 
tiliously, and  completely  performed ;  these  things  inhere  in  our  relation  to  God. 
Blessed  the  man  who  has  learned  that  they  do,  and  has  accepted  them  as  his 
highest  glory  and  the  security  of  his  most  blessed  life  !  Remember,  however,  that 
in  the  New  Testament  these  names  of  slave  and  owner  are  transferred  to  Christians 
and  Jesus  Christ.  "  The  Servant "  has  His  slaves  ;  and  He  who  "  is  God's,"  and 
does  not  His  own  will,  but  the  Father's  will,  has  us  for  His,  imposes  His  will  upon 
us,  and  we  are  bound  to  render  to  Him  the  same  revenue  of  entire  obedience  which 
He  hath  laid  at  His  Father's  feet.  Such  slavery  is  the  only  freedom.  Liberty  does 
not  mean  to  do  as  you  like,  it  means  to  like  as  you  ought,  and  to  do  that.  He 
only  is  free  who  submits  to  God  in  Christ,  and  thereby  overcomes  himself  and 
the  world  and  all  antagonism,  and  is  able  to  do  that  which  it  is  His  life  to  do. 
The  prison  out  of  which  we  do  not  desire  to  go  is  no  restraint,  and  the  will  which 
coincides  with  law  is  the  only  will  that  is  truly  free.  You  talk  about  the  bondage 
of  obedience.  Ah !  "  the  weight  of  too  much  liberty "  is  a  far  sorer  bondage. 
They  are  the  slaves  who  say,  "  Let  us  break  His  bonds  asunder,  and  cast  away 
His  cords  from  us."  In  the  wicked  old  empires,  as  in  s^me  of  their  modern 
survivals  to-day,  viziers  and  prime  ministers  were  mostly  drawn  from  the  servile 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  425 

classes.  It  is  so  in  God's  kingdom.  They  who  make  themselves  God's  slaves  are 
by  Him  made  kings  and  priests,  and  shall  reij^n  with  Him  on  earth.  "  If  a  slave, 
then  a  son  and  an  heir  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ."  Eemember  the  alternative. 
You  cannot  be  your  own  masters  without  being  your  own  slaves.  Better  serve 
God  than  the  devil ;  than  the  world  ;  than  the  flesh.  The  Servant- Son  makes  us 
slaves  and  sons.  It  matters  nothing  to  me  that  Jesus  Christ  perfectly  fulfilled  the 
law  of  God.  So  much  the  better  for  Him,  but  of  no  value  for  me,  unless  He  has 
the  power  of  making  me  like  Himself.  [A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  By  stretching 
forth  Thine  hand  to  heal.  The  Gospel  of  Pentecost : — I.  The  healing  hand  of  God 
IS  EXTENDED.  The  hand  is  an  emblem  of  power,  and  the  gospel  is  the  hand  or 
"  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  The  hand  of  God  is  seen  in  (1)  The  works  of 
creation ;  above,  around,  beneath — ^everywhere.  (2)  The  course  of  Providence  ; 
through  all  time,  among  all  nations :  it  governs,  guides,  supports,  defends. 
(3)  The  work  of  redemption.  To  this  latter  the  apostles  refer — "  The  hand  of  God 
stretched  out  to  heal."  The  gospel — not  a  sword  to  destroy,  not  a  rod  to  rebuke, 
but  a  gracious  hand  to  heal.  We  need  to  be  healed,  for  we  are  all  bruised  with  the 
worries  of  life — its  puzzling  problems,  its  exacting  work,  its  burdens  and  bereave- 
ments, its  sins  and  sorrows,  (a)  The  gentle  ministration  of  the  beauty  and  bounty 
of  the  world,  (b)  The  sympathy  and  condolence  of  social  love.  He  heals  us  by 
assuriog  us  that  He  loves  us ;  by  the  exhibition  of  His  healing  hand  in  the  life  of 
His  dear  Son ;  by  actual  aid  ;  by  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises.  In  the 
gospel  God's  hand  is  stretched  out  to  heal.  II.  The  thoughtful  attention  of 
MAN  13  arrested.  The  apostles  prayed  that  signs  and  wonders  might  be  wrought. 
They  knew  how  prone  men  were  to  be  thoughtless  and  inattentive,  and  that  it 
needed  some  loud  bell  to  be  rung  in  the  ears  of  the  world.  Under  the  Old 
Testament  dispensation  signs  and  wonders  had  been  wrought  to  secure  attention 
to  the  promulgation  of  the  Law  and  the  proclamations  of  the  Prophets.  The 
apostles  were  privileged  to  wield  miraculous  power,  thus  arresting  the  attention  of 
their  auditors.  These  things  were  (1)  credentials  of  apostleship  and  (2)  proofs  of 
the  supernatural  in  Christianity.  III.  The  peerless  name  of  Christ  is  ex.alted. 
The  apostles  fell  into  the  background  and  hid  themselves  under  the  shadow  of  the 
Cross.  In  the  name  of  Jesus  they  found  the  secret  of  unfaltering  faith.  To  the 
glorious  company  of  the  apostles  the  name  of  Jesus  was  above  every  name ;  that 
name,  as  "  Servant,"  as  the  Sent  One,  the  true  Messiah,  excels  all  other  names 
of  ancient  or  modern  times.  Above  the  names  of  Peter  and  Paul,  Augustine  and 
Luther,  Whitfield  and  Wesley,  rises— like  the  sun  in  his  splendour — the  name  of 
the  world's  great  Redeemer,  the  Essence  of  light  and  sweetness,  the  Symbol  of 
purity  and  power,  the  Source  of  life  and  salvation.  (F.  W.  Brown.)  That 
signs  and  wonders  may  be  done  by  the  name  of  Thy  Holy  Child  Jesus.  The 
Eternal  Child : — I.  This  description — ChUd — seems  to  be  an  eternally  appropriate 
characterisation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Is  it  not  appropriate  to  Him  as  we 
dwell  on  the  infinite  past  ?  Great  as  the  mystery  of  His  pre-existent  hfe  is,  we 
cannot  accept  the  authority  of  Seripture  and  deny  that  pre-existence.  He  was 
ever  God's  holy  child,  2.  Is  it  not  appropriate  of  Him  as  we  study  His  in- 
carnate life  on  earth?  There  are  always  in  His  conduct  and  character  the  simple 
beauties  we  admire  in  a  chUd — freshness,  sensitiveness,  wonder,  simplicity,  even 
to  the  point  of  exquisite  artlessness,  which  is  the  child's  glory.  He  wanted  every- 
body else  to  be  a  child  even  as  He  felt  He  was  a  child,  and  so  He  said, 
"'Except  ye  become  as  httle  children  ye  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God." 
3.  Is  it  not  appropriate  of  Him  as  we  contemplate  the  life  He  is  living  now  ?  He 
lives  still,  and  lives  to  care  for,  to  help,  to  bless  us.  "He  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost  them  that  draw  near  unto  God  through  Him,  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  us  ;  for  such  a  High  Priest  became  us,  who  is  holy,  guileless, 
undefiled. "  That  guilelessness  is  the  distinctive  virtue  of  God's  holy  child  Jesus. 
II.  The  history  of  this  child  Christ  illustrates  much  in  the  life  of  many 
an  one  who  is  also  God's  child.  As  we  have  seen,  Jesus  Christ  is  in  some 
senses  unique  as  God's  child — His  only  begotten  Son.  But  in  many  aspects  He  is 
the  Brother,  the  Type  of  every  one  who  is  God's  child.  "He  is  not  ashamed  to  call 
us  brethren."  Remembering  that,  we  notice — 1.  God's  child  may  be  born  in  very 
lowly  circumstances,  2,  God's  child  is  often  brought  up  in  the  midst  of  most 
adverse  circumstances.  We  recall  Nazareth  where  He  was  brought  up  who  was 
"God's  holy  child  Jesus."  3.  God's  child  should  early  be  accustomed  to  the 
means  of  grace.  You  find  it  said  of  God's  holy  child  Jesus,  that  His  custom  was  to 
go  to  the  synagogue  at  Nazareth.     4.  God's  child  will  be  the  subject  of  the  highest 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

spiritual  consciousness.  5.  God's  child  will  show  that  he  is  the  subject  of  this 
highest  consciousness  by  his  daily  life.  6.  God's  child  must  develop  into  a  future  of 
beauty  and  strength.  Growthis  thelawof  life.  {D.  Tliomas,D.D.)  The  Holy  Child 
Jesus  : — I.  The  real  humanity  of  Jesus.  1.  "While  we  always  contend  that  Christ 
is  God,  let  us  never  lose  the  firm  conviction  He  is  truly  man.  His  humanity 
was  real,  for  He  was  born.  The  gate  by  which  we  enter  upon  the  first  life.  He 
passed  through  also.  In  the  circumstances  of  His  birth  He  is  completely  human  ; 
He  is  as  weak  and  feeble  as  any  other  babe.  As  He  grows  up,  the  very  growth 
shows  how  completely  human  He  is.  "  He  grows  in  stature,  and  in  favour  both 
with  God  and  man."  When  He  reaches  man's  estate,  He  gets  the  common  stamp 
of  manhood  upon  His  brow.  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  shalt  thou  eat  bread." 
The  carpenter's  shop  must  witness  to  the  toils  of  a  Saviour,  and  when  He  becomes 
the  preacher  still  we  read  such  significant  words  as  these — "  Jesus,  being  weary, 
sat  thus  on  the  w-ell."  We  find  Him  needing  to  betake  Himself  to  rest  in  sleep, 
and  if  sorrow  be  the  mark  of  real  manhood,  certainly  Jesus  has  the  truest  evidence 
of  being  a  man.  If  to  hunger  and  to  thirst  be  signs  that  His  manhood  is  no 
fiction,  you  have  these.  Since  the  day  when  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air 
obtained  dominion  in  this  world,  men  are  tempted,  and  He,  though  born  pure  and 
holy,  must  not  be  delivered  from  temptation.  If,  since  we  have  fallen  and  must 
endure  temptation,  we  have  need  to  pray,  so  had  He.  Leave  out  sin,  and  Christ  is 
the  perfect  picture  of  humanity.  And  lastly,  as  the  whole  human  race  must  yield 
its  neck  to  the  great  iron-crowned  monarch,  so  must  Christ  give  up  the  ghost. 
2.  Having  thus  insisted  upon  the  humanity  of  Christ,  let  us  gather  a  few  reflec- 
tions from  it.  1.  Let  us  marvel  at  His  condescension.  Cyprian  well  said,  "  I  do 
not  wonder  at  any  miracle,  but  I  do  marvel  at  this,  which  is  a  miracle  among 
miracles,  that  God  should  become  man."  That  God  should  make  a  creature  out 
of  nothing  is  certainly  a  marvellous  manifestation  of  power,  but  that  God  should 
take  that  creature  into  intimate  union  with  His  own  nature — this  is  the  strangest 
of  all  acts  of  condescending  love.  A  prince  who  puts  aside  his  crown,  and  clothes 
himself  with  beggar's  rags  to  investigate  the  miseries  of  his  country,  is  but  a  worm 
condescending  to  his  fellow  worm.  An  angel  that  should  lay  aside  his  beauty,  and 
become  decrepit,  and  walk  the  streets  in  pain  and  poverty  to  bless  the  race  of  man, 
were  but  a  creature  humbling  himself  to  creatures  a  little  lower  than  himself. 
2.  See  the  fitness  of  Christ  for  His  work  1  He  is  a  perfect  man,  and  so  "  can  be 
touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  seeing  He  was  tempted  in  all  points  like 
as  we  are."  Being  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren,  He  can  compassionate  the 
ignorant  and  those  who  are  out  of  the  way.  3.  Behold  His  near  relationship  and 
union  to  His  people.  He  is  no  stranger.  He  is  our  Brother  ;  nay,  our  Head.  Not 
a  head  of  gold,  and  feet  of  clay,  or  limbs  of  baser  metal ;  but  as  we  are,  so  was  He, 
that  as  He  is  so  might  we  be.  4.  See  the  glory  of  manhood  now  restored  1  Man 
was  but  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  had  dominion  over  the  fowl  of  the  air, 
and  over  the  fish  of  the  sea.  That  royalty  he  lost.  But  all  this  is  given  back  to 
us.  We  see  Jesus,  who  was  made  a  little  lower  ^han  the  angels,  for  the  suffering 
of  death,  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  It  is  our  nature,  Jesus  in  our  manhood, 
who  is  now  Lord  of  providence,  which  sits  upon  the  throne  of  God  at  this  very  day. 

5.  Eejoice  that  a  blessed  channel  is  opened  by  which  God's  mercy  can  come  to  us  ! 

6.  See  what  a  door  of  access  is  thus  opened  between  us  and  God  !  7.  See  how 
safe  we  are  1  Our  soul's  estate  was  once  put  in  the  hands  of  Adam ;  he  was 
a  fallible  man  ;  how  unsafe  our  salvation  was  then  1  The  salvation  of  every 
believer  now  is  in  the  hand  of  a  man ;  it  is  the  man  Christ  Jesus  !  But  what 
a  man  1  Can  He  fail  ?  Can  He  sin  ?  Can  He  fall  ?  8.  Here  is  your  adoption  I 
You  become  sons  of  God,  because  Christ  becomes  a  son  of  man.  9.  Here  is  your 
acceptance  I  The  man,  Christ,  is  accepted,  and  you,  since  He  stands  for  you,  are 
accepted  in  Him.  II.  The  humanity  as  it  is  here  described — "Holy  Child." 
1.  Christ's  humanity  was  perfectly  holy.  Upon  this  doctrine  you  are  well 
established ;  but  you  may  well  wonder  that  Jesus  was  always  holy.  He  is  con- 
ceived of  a  woman,  and  yet  no  sort  of  sin  cometh  from  His  birth.  He  is  educated 
in  the  midst  of  sinful  persons.  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  He  goes  into  the  world, 
and  as  a  physician  must  mingle  with  the  sick,  so  He  is  found  in  the  very  woi'st  of 
society.  The  harlot  may  speak  to  Him,  and  from  the  publican  He  turns  not 
away,  yet  from  none  of  these  did  He  receive  any  corrupt  influence.  He  is  tempted, 
but  the  prince  of  this  world  came  and  had  nothing  in  Christ.  Imputation  of  sia 
would  be  the  nearest  approach  to  making  our  Lord  a  sinner ;  but  let  it  ever  be  re- 
membered that  though  Jehovah  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us,  yet  He  knew  no  sin, 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  427 

and  even  in  the  conflict,  when  all  the  powers  of  hell  were  let  loose  against  Him,  and 
when  God  Himself  had  withdrawn — which  would  have  hardened  our  hearts,  but  did 
not  harden  His.  2.  Christ  is  called  a  "  Holy  Child  "  because  His  character  is  more 
aptly  pictured  by  that  of  a  child  than  that  of  a  man.  If  you  conceive  of  a  perfectly 
holy  child,  you  have  then  before  you  a  representation  of  Christ.  There  is  that  in 
holy  childhood  which  you  cannot  find  even  in  holy  manhood.  You  note  in  child- 
hood— (1)  Simplicity,  the  absence  of  aU  cunning.  We  dare  not  in  manhood 
usually  wear  our  heart  upon  our  sleeve  as  children  do.  (2)  Humbleness.  There 
is  a  king's  daughter,  and  here  is  a  gipsy  child.  Leave  them  in  a  room  and  see  if 
they  will  not  be  at  play  together  in  five  minutes.  If  it  had  been  the  queen  and  the 
gipsy  woman  they  would  have  sat  as  far  apart  as  possible.  Christ  is  King  of  kings. 
Yet  He  is  always  with  the  poor  and  needy.  You  do  not  find  little  children  sitting 
down  and  planning  how  they  shall  win  crowns,  popularity,  or  applause.  They  are 
quite  satisfied  to  do  their  father's  will,  and  live  on  his  smile.  It  is  so  with  Christ, 
When  they  would  have  made  Him  a  king.  He  went  and  hid  Himself.  (3)  Obe- 
dience. Was  it  not  so  with  Jesus  His  whole  life  long  ?  (4)  A  forgiving  temper. 
We  know  that  sometimes  the  blood  comes  up  in  the  little  face,  and  a  little  angry 
quarrel  ensues,  but  it  is  soon  over.  Well,  with  Jesus  this  characteristic  of  child- 
hood is  carried  out  to  the  fullest  extent,  for  His  latest  words  are,  "  Father,  forgive 
them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  (5)  There  is  something  very  sweet  in  thig 
picture  of  Christ's  humanity,  because  we  are  none  of  us  afraid  to  approach  a  child. 
Come  then,  and  tell  Jesus  everything.  Whatever  your  trouble  or  difficulty  may  be, 
stand  not  back  through  shame  or  fear.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  holy  Servant 
(see  chap  iii.  26) : — The  term  translated  in  the  Authorised  Version  here,  and  in 
ver.  21,  "child"  is  more  correctly  rendered  in  ver.  25,  in  regard  to  David, 
"  servant."  The  word  is  so  given  in  Matt.  xii.  18,  where  Isa.  xiii.  1 — part  of  the 
grf  at  prophecy  of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord — is  applied  to  Christ.  This  prophecy 
and  its  fulfilment  in  Jesus  was  evidently  running  in  the  minds  of  the  apostles 
throughout  these  discourses.  The  term  "holy"  in  conjunction  with  "servant" 
suggests  that  God  has  servants  who  are — I.  With.out  holiness — creatures  whom 
God  has  not  endowed  with  a  moral  being,  and  can  therefore  render  neither  a  holy 
nor  an  unholy  service.  This  applies  to  the  laws,  forces,  substances  of  nature  to 
sun,  moon,  stars,  tbe  earth,  and  all  its  inhabitants  except  man.  These  perform 
an  unconscious  service.  II.  Unholy — creatures  in  antagonism  to  the  Divine 
will ;  devils  and  evil  men.  These  are  servants  by  right,  for  God  made  them 
for  service,  equipped  them  for  service,  placed  them  in  spheres  for  service,  and 
gave  them  a  work  to  do.  But  their  powers  and  opportunities  are  occupied  in 
endeavouring  to  thwart  the  Divine  purpose.  Do  they  succeed  ?  Nay,  they  are 
servants  in  fact  as  well  as  by  right.  Let  the  conduct  of  the  rulers,  fitting  types 
of  their  class,  show  this,  and  Judas  also  and  his  confederates  in  the  Crucifixion. 
Their  service  is  an  unwilling  service.  III.  Imperfectly  holy.  Such  are  true 
Christians,  whose  Ufelong  experience  is  gradual  separation  from  sin  and  growing 
approximation  to  complete  consecration  to  God.  In  both  sides  of  this  ex- 
perience the  Divine  and  human  co-operate.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  cleansing 
them  from  sin,  and  they  are  cleansing  themselves  "  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and 
spirit,"  thus  "perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God."  The  Holy  Spirit  sanctifies, 
sets  them  apart  for  God.  They  "  present  themselves  living  sacrifices,  holy,  accep- 
table to  God."  Their  service  is  a  conscious  and  glad  service.  IV.  Holy.  Such 
was  Adam ;  such  are  the  angels.  But  the  holiness  was  not  inherent  in  the  first, 
for  he  fell ;  nor  in  the  second,  for  some  of  their  order  fell.  Angelic  purity  is 
Divinely  imparted,  and  for  their  Divine  woi'k  they  are  Divinely  sustained. 
V.  Divinely  holy.  Such  and  such  only  is  Jesus.  1.  He  is  holy  by  nature — 
essentinlly,  eternally.  2.  His  work  is  perfectly  holy  without  a  flaw,  and  such  as 
God  can  accept  without  the  least  reservation.  3.  His  merits  make  the  hohest 
holy.     {J.  W.  Burn.) 

Ver.  31.  And  when  they  had  prayed  the  place  was  shaken  .  .  .  and  they  were 
all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost. — Prayer  effects  miracles  : — I.  Internal.  1.  Hearts 
are  savingly  affected.  2.  Spirits  are  mightily  strengthened.  II.  External.  1. 
Houses  are  moved.  2.  Churches  awakened.  3.  Enemies  frightened.  4.  Moun- 
tains displaced.  5.  The  world  convulsed.  (K.  Gerok.)  The  blessings  of  spiri- 
tual worship: — I.  The  devotional  supplication  offered  to  God.  "They 
prayed."  It  was — 1.  Earnest.  2.  United.  3.  Believing.  4.  Sincere.  5.  Specific. 
IL  The  visible  evidence  of  the  Lord's  presence.     "  The  place  was  shaken  where 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

they  were  assembled  together."  1.  The  unmistakable  proof  of  Divine  power.  2. 
The  reliable  sign  of  Divine  nearness.     3.  The  full  assurance  of  Divine  protection. 

III.  The  invisible  descent  of  the  Spirit.  "  They  were  all  iilled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost."  1.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  bestowed.  2.  The  supply  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  abundant.      3.  Every  worshipper  received  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit. 

IV.  The  Chbistian  coueao:-  of  the  disciples.  "  They  sjake  the  Word  of  God  with 
boldness."  1.  The  subject  of  their  speeches.  2.  The  fearlessness  of  their  conduct. 
3.  The  activity  of  their  labours.  Lessons — 1.  To  plead  with  God  should  be  our  first 
thought  when  surrounded  with  difficulties.  2.  God  will  grant  to  our  request  some 
token  of  His  presence  and  help  of  the  Spirit.  3.  The  prayers  of  true  worshippers 
bring  blessings  if  we  wait  patiently  at  the  throne  of  grace.  4.  May  we  seek  by  holy 
fellowship  to  speak  Divine  truths  without  the  fear  of  the  world.  {Alfred  Buckley.) 
The  gift  of  the  Spirit  dependent  on  prayer : — How  well  I  remember  a  sermon  I 
preached  at  a  great  outdoor  meeting  in  the  upper  part  of  this  State  1  For  several 
days  in  that  place  prayer  had  been  offered  for  the  success  of  the  service,  and  I  had 
myself  been  unusually  prayerful,  and  we  had  a  Pentecostal  blessing  while  I  was 
preaching  it.  That  afternoon  I  took  the  train  for  a  great  outdoor  meeting  in  Ohio. 
I  said  to  myself  :  "  This  sermon  was  blessed  to-day,  and  it  is  fresh  in  my  mind,  and 
I  will  preach  it  to-morrow  in  Ohio."  And  I  did  preach  it,  but  not  in  as  prayerful 
a  spirit,  and  I  think  no  one  else  had  been  praying  about  it,  and  it  turned  into  the 
most  inane  and  profitless  discourse  that  I  ever  delivered.  It  was  practically  the 
same  sermon,  but  on  Wednesday  it  had  on  it  a  power  that  comes  from  the  secret 
place  of  thunder,  and  on  Thursday  it  had  on  it  no  such  power  at  all.  Oh  !  pray 
for  us  1  Poor  sermons  in  the  pulpit  are  the  curse  of  God  on  a  prayerless  parish. 
We  ministers  and  preachers  want  the  power  a  man  gets  when  he  is  alone,  the  door 
locked  ;  on  his  knees  at  midnight ;  with  such  a  burden  of  souls  upon  him  that 
makes  him  cry  out,  first  in  lamentation  and  then  in  raptures.  Let  all  the  Sabbath- 
school  teachers,  and  Bible-class  instructors,  and  all  reformers,  and  all  evangelists, 
and  all  ministers  know  that  diplomas,  and  dictionaries,  and  encyclopiedias,  and 
treatises,  and  libraries  are  not  the  source  of  moral  and  spiritual  achievement,  but 
that  the  room  of  prayer,  where  no  one  but  God  is  present  and  no  one  but  God  hears, 
is  the  secret  place  of  thunder.  Secret  ?  Ah,  yes  !  So  secret  that  comparatively 
few  ever  find  it.  At  Boscobel,  England,  we  visited  a  house  where  a  king  was  once 
hid.  No  one,  unless  it  were  pointed  out  to  him,  could  find  the  door  in  the  floor 
through  which  the  king  entered  his  hiding-place.  When  there  hidden  the  armed 
pursuers  looked  in  vain  for  him,  and  afterward  through  an  underground  passage, 
far  out  in  the  fields,  he  came  out  in  the  open  air.  So  this  imperial  power  of 
spiritual  influence  has  a  hiding-place,  a  secret  place  which  few  know,  and  it  comes 
forth  sometimes  in  strange  and  mysterious  ways,  and  far  off  from  the  place  where 
it  was  hidden.  You  can  find  it  only  by  diligent  searching.  But  you  may  find  it,  and 
some  of  you  will  find  it,  and  I  wish  you  might  all  find  it,  the  secret  place  of  thunder. 
(T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  second  Pentecost :— Notice— 1.  The  praying.  1. 
The  exuberance  of  joy,  the  yearnings  of  sympathy,  the  wailings  of  sorrow  seek — 
very  commonly — loud  vocal  expression.  So  the  disciples  lifted  up  their  voice  (ver. 
24).  2.  They  prayed  together.  The  soul  loves  sympathy  in  joy  as  well  as  sorrow. 
II.  The  shaking.  Praying  and  shaking  have  often  been  found  together.  The 
foundations  of  the  prison  at  Philippi  were  shaken.  The  Lord  of  old  promised  to 
shake  the  heavens,  and  not  the  earth  only.  The  bones  were  shaken  when  Ezekiel 
prophesied  in  the  valley  of  vision.  In  mighty  prayer  the  electric  current  shakes  the 
clouds  of  blessing,  so  that  heavy  showers  descend  upon  us.  Hearts  are  shaken, 
knees  shaken,  sinners  shaken.  III.  The  filling.  Not  half  filled,  not  three  parts, 
but  completely.  Not  filled  with  doubts  and  fears,  as  too  often  people  now  are  when 
they  pray,  but  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  is  the  sort  of  filUng  preachers  or 
people,  teachers  or  scholars,  require  nowadays.  To  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  to  be  filled  with  faith,  with  power,  with  unction,  with  heaven.     IV.  The  speak- 

■  ING.  1.  What  did  they  speak  ?  Not  the  praise  of  man  :  much  less  slander  and 
reproach.  Not  the  mere  shibboleth  of  party,  not  idle  or  mischievous  words,  but  the 
Word  of  God.  How  httle  do  many  professors  speak  of  God's  Word.  But  as  David 
said  of  GoUath's  sword,  "  there  is  none  like  it."  2.  They  spake  it— how  ?  Boldly. 
Of  course,  when  they  were  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  they  would  little  heed  what  men 
thought  of  them,  said  about  them,  or  did  at  them.  Many  a  fit  of  nervousness  has 
been  cured  this  way,  (TF.  Antliff,  D.D.)  Early  Church  life:— Let  us  consider 
— I.  The  prayer.  1.  Its  occasion.  The  persecution  of  the  apostles.  2.  Its  sub- 
stance.    It  was  seasonable,  suitable,  short,  as   all  the  prayers  recorded  in  the 


CHAP.  IT.]  THE  ACTS.  429 

Scriptures  are  ;  and  though  they  had  been  so  evil  entreated  yet  they  beseech  God 
to  stretch  forth  His  hand,  not  to  strike  and  to  punish,  but  to  heal.  3.  Its  success. 
God  never  said  to  the  seed  of  Jacob,  "  Seek  ye  My  face  in  vain."  The  sign  of  the 
acceptance  of  their  prayer  seemed  much  more  likely  to  produce  dread  than  to 
gender  hope  ;  but  so  God  would  teach  us  that  He  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the 
assembly  of  His  saints;  that  He  will  be  sanctified  by  f  U  them  that  come  nigh  to 
Him  ;  that  there  is  something  awful  even  in  the  dispensations  of  His  grace  ;  that 
He  sometimes  answers  His  people  as  the  God  of  their  salvation,  by  terrible  things 
in  righteousness.  4.  Its  effect.  "  They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  They 
were  now  called  to  fresh  duties,  difficulties,  dangers ;  and  therefore  they  required 
fresh  suppUes  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.  Their  strength  was  made  equal  to  their 
day,  and  they  obtained  accessions  of  illumination,  of  confidence,  of  courage,  of 
peace,  and  of  joy,  and  were  prepared  to  stand  complete  in  all  the  will  of  God.  II. 
The  preaching.  "  And  they  spake  the  Word  of  God  with  boldness."  The  very 
thing  for  which  they  had  been  praying.  The  very  thing  Paul  beseeches  of  the 
Ephesians  to  implore  on  his  behalf  :  "  that  utterance  may  be  given  unto  me,  that 
I  may  open  my  mouth  boldly."  You  see  how  little  they  were  governed  by  the 
opinions  of  the  people  around  them  ;  that  they  did  not  walk  in  craftiness,  nor 
handle  the  Word  of  God  deceitfully,  nor  appeal  to  the  fancies  and  wishes  of  the 
individuals  before  them ;  but  by  manifestation  of  the  truth,  they  commended  them- 
selves to  every  man's  conscience  in  Ijhe  sight  of  God.  Suppose  a  number  of  persons 
were  to  call  on  a  minister  on  a  Sabbath-day  morning,  and  one  of  them  should  say, 
"I  hope,  sir,  you  do  not  mean  to-day  to  be  severe  against  avarice,  for  my  heart  goes 
after  my  covetousness  "  ;  and  another,  "  I  trust  you  will  not  be  severe  against  back- 
biting, for  my  tongue  walketh  with  slanderers  "  ;  and  another,  "  Do  not  represent 
implacability  as  being  inconsistent  with  Divine  forgiveness,  for  I  never  did  forgive 
such  an  one,  and  I  never  will."  What  would  this  minister  say  to  these  men  ?  Why, 
if  he  were  in  a  proper  state  of  mind,  he  would  say,  "  Oh,  thou  child  of  the  devil, 
thou  enemy  of  all  righteousness !  when  wilt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the  right 
ways  of  the  Lord  ?  "  Our  people  are  not  likely  to  address  us  in  this  way,  but  this  is 
the  wish  and  meaning  of  many.  "  Three  things  equalise,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  "  the 
grave,  the  judgment-bar,  and  the  pulpit :  the  grave  makes  no  difference,  the  judg- 
ment-bar makes  none,  and  the  pulpit  should  make  none."  Daniel  addressed  Bel- 
shazzar  as  if  he  had  been  a  common  man.  John  the  Baptist  was  to  Herod  as  rough 
as  the  garment  he  wore.  James  the  First  said  of  one  of  his  chaplains,  "  Why,  this 
man  always  preaches  before  me  as  if  death  stood  at  his  elbow."  Why,  death  does 
always  stand  at  the  preacher's  elbow,  and  he  ought  to  be  able  to  say  with  Baxter  : 
"I  preach  as  if  I  ne'er  should  preach  again  ;  and  as  a  dying  man  to  dying  men." 
III.  The  people  (ver.  32).  Verily,  if  this  be  "  the  golden  age  of  Christianity,"  we  may 
well  exclaim,  "  How  is  the  gold  become  dim  !  "  Note — 1.  Their  number,  "  a  multi- 
tude." This  accords  with  our  Saviour's  representation  of  His  kingdom  as  in  the 
beginning — like  a  little  leaven  in  the  meal,  and  like  a  mustard-seed  in  the  ground. 
But  then  this  little  leaven  was  to  leaven  the  whole  lump,  and  this  mustard-seed  was 
to  become  a  tree.  Our  Saviour  first  opened  His  mind  to  twelve,  and  then  to  seventy, 
and  then  we  read  of  five  hundred  brethren  in  Galilee  and  a  hundred  and  twenty  in 
Jerusalem  ;  then  three  thousand  sA  Pentecost.  Then  as  a  result  of  daily  additions 
to  the  Church,  five  thousand.  We  concede  that  success  by  itself  is  not  proof  of  the 
divinity  of  a  cause.  If  we  did,  what  should  we  then  do  with  Mohammedism  and 
Popery  ?  But  here  we  contend  that  the  case  is  unspeakably  peculiar,  and  that  the 
instrumentalities  employed  were  so  perfectly  in  themselves  inadequate  to  the  result, 
that  the  effect  must  induce  us  to  exclaim,  "This  is  the  finger  of  God."  2.  Their 
character.  "  The  multitude  believed."  The  subject  reported  by  the  apostles  had 
been  unknown,  or  held  in  contempt,  before ;  but  now  the  people  received  it,  not  as 
the  word  of  man,  but  as  it  was  in  truth,  the  word  of  God ;  and  the  belief  became 
productive  of  godliness  in  the  soul,  and  the  influence  of  it  worked  effectually  in  them 
that  believed.  Is  this  always  the  case  with  belief  ?  You  believe  !  so  do  the  devils 
— and  tremble,  and  remain  devils  still ;  and  wicked  men  may  hold  the  truth  in  un- 
righteousness. Take  heed,  therefore  ;  he  is  a  vain  man,  says  James,  who  says  he 
has  faith  and  has  not  works.  3.  Their  unity.  They  "  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one 
soul  " — one  object  influenced  them  ;  one  cause  engaged  them  ;  one  principle  swayed 
them.  It  must  be  obvious  that  the  views,  and  tempers,  and  inclinations  of  men  are 
very  various  ;  and  therefore  they  are  only  to  be  brought  into  a  state  of  social  con- 
nection by  an  object  that  is  important  and  interesting  to  all:  and  you  find  such  an 
object  as  this  in  the  gospel.     Therefore,  in  the  language  of  prophecy,  it  is  said,  "  All 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

nations  shall  flow  unto  it,"  as  so  many  streams  flowing  from  different  sources 
towards  the  same  fulness — the  sea.  When  the  brazen  serpent  was  erected  in  the 
midst  of  the  camp,  it  became  the  centre  of  attraction  and  regard.  Our  Saviour,  in 
allusion  to  this,  says,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  If  there 
were  but  one  well  for  the  inhabitants  of  a  village  or  a  town,  why  they  must  all 
repair  to  it  or  perish.  Old  Jacob,  therefore,  said  when  he  was  dying,  "  Unto  Him 
shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be,"  Isaiah  said,  "To  Him  shall  men  come." 
They  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul ;  one  in  their  need  of  the  blessing,  one  in 
their  desire  after  it,  one  in  their  valuation  of  it,  one  in  their  concern  to  diffuse  it, 
and  to  extend  it  to  all  their  fellow-creatures.  They  were  as  one  family,  as  one 
body,  where  if  one  member  suffer,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it,  and  if  one  member 
be  honoured,  all  the  members  rejoice.  You  will  note  -here,  as  they  were  now  so 
numerous  in  Jerusalem,  they  must  have  worshipped  in  various  rooms,  and  have 
been  addressed  by  various  preachers  ;  but  though  they  were  divided  into  so  many 
parts,  there  were  no  parties  among  them.  They  had  not  yet  learned  to  be  carnal, 
and  to  walk  as  men,  saying,  "  I  am  of  Paul,  and  I  of  Apollos."  4.  Their  liberality. 
You  have  heard  often  of  the  communion  of  saints,  and  here  you  have  it  literally. 
Their  property,  by  a  conventual  giving  and  receiving,  being  intermingled,  became  a 
kind  of  joint  stock,  from  which  every  man  drew  according  to  his  need.  (IF.  Jai/.) 
Waiting  for  the  Sjiirit : — When  tidal  rivers  meet  the  sea,  a  sight  may  often  be 
witnessed  very  strange  to  the  uninformed  spectator.  The  day  is  fine,  the  breeze  is 
steady  and  favourable,  the  rippling  waters  dance  in  the  sunlight ;  and  as  the 
anxious  watcher  waits  for  the  long-absent  friend  who  is  expected  from  a  distant 
land,  he  rejoices  in  the  favourable  conditions  which  will  hasten  the  happy  hour  of 
meeting.  Eagerly  he  scans  the  horizon  for  the  expected  ship.  Presently  it  appears, 
rapidly  draws  nearer,  and  the  bounding  heart  shows  its  restless  eagerness  by  a 
hundred  sighs.  But  lol  the  great  vessel  slackens  speed,  and  presently  drops 
anchor.  Then  from  the  horizon  comes  another,  a  stately  ship,  her  snowy  sails 
filled  by  the  breeze.  She,  too,  draws  near,  and  turns  away,  or  furls  her  sails  and 
waits.  And  then  another  and  another  come,  and  are  stopped  on  their  course  by 
some  unseen  barrier.  Perplexed  and  impatient,  the  watcher  appeals  to  a  seaman, 
and  gets  for  answer,  "  Oh,  it's  the  tide ;  they  are  waiting  for  the  tide."  And 
behold,  even  while  they  speak  there  is  a  change  in  the  aspect  of  the  shore.  Tlie 
hurrying  waters,  which  have  been  flowing  so  rapidly  down  to  the  sea,  are  stopped  ; 
they  creep  up  again  over  the  strand.  From  far  away  in  the  southern  ocean  a 
mighty  wave  is  flowing  on  unseen.  It  rises  and  flows  and  fills  the  cliannels,  and 
washes  against  the  sea-wall,  and  reaches  almost  to  the  dock  sills,  and  the  gates  ai'e 
opened,  and  the  waiting  fleet  wakes  up  to  new  life ;  anchors  are  raised ;  sails  are 
spread  ;  steam  is  once  more  at  work ;  and  the  stately  procession  comes  up  the 
stream  and  into  the  harbour — the  ocean  steamer  With  its  living  freight  of  a  thousand 
souls,  the  merchantman  from  the  East  with  precious  cargo  of  silks  and  spices,  and 
lesser  craft  from  their  various  voyages,  and  with  their  various  stores  of  goods. 
(London  Missionary  Society^s  Report.)  Conditions  of  the  haptism  of  the  Spirit : — 
Some  of  the  older  States  in  the  great  Eepublic  across  the  Atlantic  complain  sadly  of 
excessive  drought.  In  bygone  years  the  rain  was  wont  to  descend  in  copious  ferti- 
lising showers  ;  but  now  the  clouds  hover  high  in  the  air  and  float  away  to  other 
regions.  And  why  ?  Because  the  old-established  States  have  been  completely  shorn 
of  their  ancient  forests,  and  as  a  penalty  they  now  fail  to  attract  the  clouds ;  or,  if 
they  attract  them,  they  fail  to  draw  from  them  the  "  water  of  life."  What  then  do 
the  inhabitants  do  under  these  blighting  circumstances  ?  They  plant  cannons  in  the 
high  places  of  the  land,  and  when  they  see  a  cloud  sailing  high  in  mid-air  they  fire 
their  artillery;  the  air  shakes,  and  in  the  shock  the  cloud  rends  and  pours  its 
precious  contents  on  the  thirsty  soil — rain  often  descends  the  day  after  battle. 
That  is  the  modern  way  of  obtaining  rain  ;  but  the  grey-haired  settlers  declare  the 
old  way  was  better,  and  they  are  now  busily  planting  trees  in  the  denuded  regions — 
trees  will  draw  water  from  the  clouds  easier  than  artilleiy.  In  hke  manner  the 
Israel  of  God  is  lamenting  the  excessive  drought  in  the  present  day — some  of  you 
are  longing  for  a  "  season  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,"  you  are 
fervently  praying  for  the  ♦'  day  of  visitation."  We  see  the  clouds  of  the  Divine 
promises  heavy-laden  with  water  ;  but  they  sail  high  in  the  empyrean — no  showers 
descend.  What  do  tbe  Churches  do  ?  They  fetch  the  American  revivalists,  they 
send  here  and  there  for  the  big  guns  of  the  Christian  ministry.  The  guns  shoot, 
the  air  trembles,  the  clouds  burst,  the  torrent  falls.  But  it  is  a  torrent,  and  like  all 
torrents  it  drenches  the  surface  and  soon  passes,  and  the  earth  is  as  parched  as 


CHAP.  IV,]  THE  ACTS.  431 

ever.  I  say  nothing  against  your  resorting  to  extraordinary  means  to  force  on  a 
revival — forcing  is  now  a  complicated  art,  not  only  in  horticulture,  but  in  all 
departments  of  activity,  temporal  and  spiritual.  But  I  show  you  a  more  excellent 
■way — cultivate  more  assiduously  the  "  trees  of  righteousness,"  grow  more  vigor- 
ously in  grace  and  knowledge,  fulfil  more  faithfully  your  duties  to  men,  and  dis- 
charge more  promptly  your  obligations  to  God  and  your  Eedeemer,  and  the  clouds 
of  the  Divine  promises,  big  with  mercy,  shall  break  in  showers  on  your  heads. 
Get  you  up,  gird  your  loins,  live  lives  of  holiness  and  consecration,  and  soon  you 
will  bear  the  "  sound  of  abundance  of  rain."  (./.  Cynddylan  Jones,  D.D.)  The 
necret  of  power: — I.  The  outpouring  of  prayer.  "When  they  heard,  they  lifted 
up  their  voice  to  God."  It  would  seem  that  not  a  word  was  said  to  one  another. 
We  know  it  was  earnest  and  fervent  prayer,  because  of  the  men  by  whom  it  was 
offered,  because  of  the  special  source  that  gave  the  inspiration  from  which  it 
sprang,  and  because  of  the  result  that  followed.  Prayer  is  the  only  preparation  by 
which  we  can  be  meetened  for  the  work,  and  the  only  power  by  which  the  work  can 
be  blessed.  Not  mere  repetition  of  forms,  either  from  printed  page  or  stereotyped 
memory,  but  the  uprising  and  outpouring  of  prayer  like  a  living  power  out  of  a 
living  soul,  in  which  God  the  Spirit  shall  plead  vvith  God  the  Father  the  merits  of 
God  the  Son,  and  then  shall  God's  work  be  sustained  by  His  grace,  and  be  prospered 
by  His  Divine  power  indeed.  Prayer  without  work  is  mockery  ;  work  without 
prayer  is  vanity,  and  must  lead  to  despair,  vexation,  and  grief.  If  Israel  is  to  rally 
her  broken  ranks  to  the  conflict,  bearing  her  glorious  standard,  to  march  in  un- 
daunted power  and  all-conquering  might  against  the  Amalekites  and  all  that  assail 
her,  it  must  be  preceded  by  the  uplifting  of  the  arms  upon  the  mountain  above  the 
plain.  It  must  be  special  prayer,  prayer  with  point,  with  a  purpose,  for  your 
ministers,  for  all  your  instrumentalities.  Gather  them  all  like  a  golden  sheaf  into 
your  arms,  and  bring  them  all  into  the  presence  of  the  God  of  all  grace,  and  the 
Spirit  of  all  power.  Prayer  that  shall  spring  from  a  sense  of  our  own  responsi- 
bility to  God  for  everything,  the  utter  inability  for  anything  of  ourselves  ;  prayer 
that  shall  bring  down  the  Divine  power  to  make  us  say,  "  I  can  do  all  things." 
II.  They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  1.  All  fiUed  with  it,  not  merely 
Peter,  and  John,  and  James.  And  so  must  it  be  with  every  servant  of  God.  It 
shall  be  sought  not  merely  for  the  minister,  or  the  church  officer,  or  the  Siftday- 
school  teacher,  but  for  all,  that  it  may  give  the  tenderness  of  the  still  small  voice  ; 
that  it  may  be  heard  in  the  thunder  of  every  Boanerges  ;  that  it  may  give  Divine 
vitality  and  power  to  the  sweet,  soft  mu'^ic  of  every  Barnabas  ;  that  it  may  be  as  a 
living  two-edged  sword  out  of  the  mouth  of  every  ApoUos  ;  that  it  may  be  as  the 
Divine  fire  that  shall  glow  in  all  the  reasoning  of  aU  Pauls  ;  that  the  Church  may 
become  an  embodiment  of  Divine  life  and  power.  2.  They  were  all  filled — not 
merely  drops  and  rivulets.  It  came  like  a  river  that  proceeded  from  the  throne  of 
God ;  or  rather  the  broad,  deep  tide  from  the  fathomless  ocean  of  the  fulness  of  the 
Divine  grace  and  gl"ry  above.  It  came  and  filled  them,  and  overflowed,  and  poured 
its  living  tide  throughout  the  world  around  them.  And  so  it  must  be.  "  Prove  Me 
now  herewith,  and  see  if  I  will  not  pour  out  the  blessing  till  there  shall  not  be  room 
to  receive  it."  We  want  more  depth,  and  breadth,  and  power  of  religious  emotion, 
and  life,  and  faith,  and  service.  Our  life  too  often  is  so  restricted  in  its  dimensions, 
BO  feeble  in  its  spirit,  so  low-toned  in  its  vitality,  and  so  circumscribed  in  the  mode 
of  its  operation.  We  want  as  men  of  God  to  be  tilled  with  the  fulness  of  God.  3. 
They  were  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost — not  merely  with  excitement,  mental  vigour 
and  determination,  indignation,  compassion,  grief,  despair,  but  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 
There  is  the  power  we  must  have.  III.  What  followed.  They  all  sprang  to  the 
work  in  which  the  two  brethren  had  been  previously  engaged.  "  They  spake  the  Word 
of  God  with  boldness  "  is  spoken  of  all  the  brethren.  There  are  none  who  have  a  voice 
that  cannot  speak  and  sing  of  other  things  ;  and  there  must  be  none  that  do  not  speak 
of  Jesus.  It  must  be  spoken  at  all  becoming  times  and  with  all  becoming  promptitude, 
for  soon  our  voices  will  be  hushed  in  the  silence  of  th"  grave.  {J.  P.  Chown.)  Power 
to  he  witnesses  : — 1.  These  feeble  Christians  moved  the  Hand  that  moves  the  world. 
The  place  was  shaken,  but  not  the  people.  The  ground  trembled,  but  they  had  found 
a  refuge  in  God.  It  is  after  and  in  answer  to  prayer  that  the  Lord  arises  to 
shake  the  earth.  Quick  wnd  strong  vibrations  are  felt  in  the  political  sphere. 
God's  saints  groan.  God  hears  and  answers  in  His  own  good  time,  and  then  the 
most  firmly-rooted  national,  social,  religious  tyrannies  totter  and  fall.  The 
shaking  was  a  sign  that  prayer  was  heard.  They  had  acknowledged  God  as  the 
Maker  of  heaven  and  earth.    In  answer  He  gives  a  token  that  Almightiness  is 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  iv. 

at  hand  for  their  protection.  The  commotions  of  our  day  are  encouraging  to  the 
Christian.  Hollow  hypocrisies  are  shaken  in  order  that  the  things  that  cannot  be 
shaken  may  remain  (Heb.  xii.  27).  2.  But  besides  this  symbol  of  power,  a  more 
specific  answer  was  given.  "  They  were  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  spoke  the 
Word  with  boldness."  They  did  not  fear  their  enemies,  they  distrusted  them- 
selves lest  danger  should  shake  them  from  their  steadfastness.  Now  they  have 
obtained  what  they  asked,  they  are  at  ease,  as  is  the  magnet  on  the  surging  sea,  fixed 
to  its  pole  because  loosed  from  holds.  The  steadiest  thing  in  a  shaking  world  is  a 
disciple  whose  life,  loosed  from  tbe  dust,  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  3.  Thus 
endued  with  power,  all  that  was  required  of  them  was  to  bear  witness  to  a  fact — 
"  The  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Christ  had  promised  them  power  for  this 
purpose,  and  now  the  promise  was  fulfilled.  (1)  The  main  characteristic  of  their 
witnessing  was  not  "great"  eloquence  or  learning,  but  "power."  When  you 
travel  by  night  through  a  mining  district,  you  see  mighty  volumes  of  flame 
issuing  from  the  furnaces.  This  is  the  ordinary  accompaniment  of  the  power, 
but  it  is  not  the  power.  The  heat  in  the  heart  of  the  furnace  is  melting  the 
metal.  Do  not  despise  dazzling  accompaniments  of  preaching,  but  do  not  trust 
in  them,  for  they  may  be  the  pithless  flash  from  blazing  straw.  (2)  This  power 
seems  to  have  been  a  special  gift  bestowed  on  the  apostles,  but  a  suitable  portion 
was  imparted  to  the  whole  company — "great  grace  was  upon  them  all" — a 
specific  example  of  which  was  liberality  and  brotherly  love.  And  thus  the  world 
had  two  things  to  say  about  them — "Behold  how  they  defy  us;  behold  how  they 
love  one  another."  Alas  for  the  Church  in  our  day — for  we  are  weak  where  they 
were  strong ;  viz.,  in  courage  to  bear  witness  for  Christ,  and  fervent  charity  among 
ourselves.  {W.  Ar7wt,  D.D.)  Work  for  those  who  are  filled  with  the  S2)irit : — 
Is  there  nothing  for  men  who  are  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God  to  do  now  ?  Are 
there  no  vile  iniquities  still  going  on  buttressed  up  with  immoral  wealth  and 
political  chicaneries  which  may  coexist  very  well  indeed  with  all  the  pompof-ities 
of  a  fashionable  religiousness ;  but  to-day  if  there  were  but  one  stirring  of  the 
Spirit  in  our  dead  hearts  would  be  spurned  back  to  the  hell  from  which  they  came? 
Look  at  the  streets  of  London,  shameless  with  prostitution ;  look  at  glaring  and 
multiplied  incentives  to  drunkenness  which  roll  into  the  coffers  of  some  one,  a 
stren^  of  wealth,  tainted  with  the  tears  of  women  and  the  blood  of  men  ;  look  at 
the  nefarious  sweaters'  dens,  where  greedy  Jews  and  Christians  make  their  vile 
money  out  of  human  misery.  Look  at  the  universal  worldliness  around  us,  look 
at  the  passionate  mammon  worship,  at  the  reckless  competition,  at  the  desecration 
of  Sundays  in  the  mere  voluptuous  wantonness  of  pleasure.  Look  at  the  dangerous 
increase  of  the  guilty  madness  of  betting  and  gambling  in  every  school,  ofiice, 
street  among  rich  and  poor.  Look  at  the  rapid  degradation  of  our  journalism  by 
the  paltry  flunkeyism  of  gossip  and  the  evil  malice  of  slander  ;  look  at  the  bad  and 
false  spirit  of  our  so-called  religious  newspapers.  O  God,  pive  us  saints  ;  O  God, 
pour  out  the  Spirit  of  Thy  mi^ht.  Were  it  but  in  the  hearts  of  one  or  two  to  slay 
these  dragons  and  not  fear  their  poisonous  breath !  O  Christ,  send  us  but  two  or 
three  heroes  for  this  new  ThermopylaB.  0  Holy  Ghost,  fill  one  or  two  hearts  with 
Thy  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  mitre  one  or  two  brows  with  Thy  Pentecostal  flame! 
Priests  we  have  in  plenty,  and  Churchmen,  but  oh,  send  us  men  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  1     {Archdeacon  Farrar.) 

Ver.  32.  And  the  multitude  of  them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart  and  of 
one  soul. —  U^iity  among  Christians  to  he  desired: — Melancthon  mourned  in  his  day 
the  divisions  among  Protestants,  and  sought  to  bring  Protestants  together  by  the 
parable  of  the  war  between  the  wolves  and  the  dogs.  The  wolves  were  somewhat 
afraid,  for  the  dogs  were  many  and  strong,  and  therefore  they  sent  out  a  spy  to 
observe  them.  On  his  return,  the  scout  said,  "  It  is  true  the  dogs  are  many,  but 
there  are  not  many  mastiffs  among  them.  There  are  dogs  of  so  many  sorts  one 
can  hardly  count  them  ;  and  as  for  the  worst  of  them,"  said  he,  "  they  are  little 
dogs,  which  bark  loudly,  but  cannot  bite."  "  However,  this  did  not  cheer  me  so 
much,"  said  the  wolf,  "  as  this,  that  as  they  came  marching  on,  I  observed  they 
were  all  snapping  right  and  left  at  one  another,  and  I  could  see  clearly  that  though 
they  all  hate  the  wolf,  yet  each  dog  hates  every  other  dog  with  all  his  heart."  I 
fear  it  is  true  still ;  for  there  are  many  professors  who  snap  right  and  left  at  their 
own  brethren,  when  they  had  better  save  their  teeth  for  the  wolves.  If  our  enemies 
are  to  be  put  to  confusion,  it  must  be  by  the  united  efforts  of  all  the  people  of 
God :  unity  is  strength.    (C.  II.  Sturgeon.)         Unity  requires  dissimilarity  ; — Unity 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  438 

subsists  between  things  not  similar  and  alike,  but  things  dissimilar  or  unlike. 
There  is  no  unity  in  the  separate  atoms  of  a  sand-pit  ;  they  are  things  simi- 
lar ;  there  is  an  aggregate  or  collection  of  them.  Even  if  they  be  hardened  in 
a  mass  they  are  not  one,  they  do  not  form  a  unity ;  they  are  simply  a  mass.  There 
is  no  unity  in  a  flock  of  sheep ;  it  is  simply  a  repetition  of  a  number  of  things 
similar  to  each  other.  But  in  Christian  unity  we  find  something  very  different,  for 
the  Christian  Church  is  made  up  of  dissimilar  members,  without  which  dissimilarity 
there  could  be  no  unity.  Each  is  imperfect  in  itself,  but  each  supplying  the  defi- 
ciencies of  other  members  of  the  body  spiritual,  as  do  the  physical  members  of  the 
physical  body.  Now,  if  you  cut  off  from  the  spiritual  body  any  one  member,  as  in 
the  physical  body,  you  destroy  the  unity  of  the  whole  body.  (2'.  H.  Leary,  D.G.L.) 
Unity  assisted  by  fire : — There  was  a  blacksmith  once  who  had  two  pieces  of  iron 
which  he  wished  to  weld  into  one,  and  he  took  them  just  as  they  were,  ail  cold 
and  hard,  and  put  them  on  the  anvil,  and  began  to  hammer  with  all  his  might,  but 
they  were  two  pieces  still,  and  would  not  unite.  At  last  he  remembered  what  he 
ought  never  to  have  forgotten  ;  he  thrust  both  of  them  into  the  fire,  took  them  out 
red-hot,  laid  the  one  upon  the  other,  and  by  one  or  two  blows  of  the  hammer  they 
very  soon  became  one.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  social  instinct : — I.  God's  Voice 

ASSURES   us    THAT    "  IT    IS    NOT    GOOD    THAT    THE    MAN    SHOULD     BE     ALONE  "  :     and    knit 

into  the  very  stuff  of  our  personality  is  the  instinctive  dread  of  loneliness  and  the 
craving  after  intercourse  with  our  fellow-men.  We  know  that  it  is  only  in 
fellowship  with  others  that  the  life  which  belongs  to  us  as  men  can  find  its 
essential  exercise  and  development.  Conscience,  justice,  sympathy,  honour,  pity, 
love  :  these  are  but  a  few  of  the  words  whose  whole  wealth  of  meaning  lies  in  a 
man's  dealiugs  with  his  fellow-men.  Every  principle  of  morality,  every  safeguard 
of  reason,  every  canon  of  taste,  depends  for  its  significance,  if  not  for  its  sanction, 
on  our  position  as  members  of  a  great  community :  and  it  was  by  a  true  and 
deep  insight  that  the  Greek  declared  that  he  who  would  live  in  solitude  must 
be  either  more  or  less  than  man.  The  social  instinct  is  astir  in  the  very  act  of 
self-consciousness :  and  I  would  show  something  of  the  reality  of  the  satisfaction 
which  is  offered  to  it  m  the  Church  of  Christ — God's  answer  to  the  needs  of  man. 
II.  Theke  are  two  ways  in  which  we  mat  measure  the  adequacy  of  any  commu- 
nion AND  fellowship  INTO  WHICH  WE  ARE  INVITED.  Sympathy  lives,  so  to  speak, 
in  two  dimensions :  breadth  and  depth :  and  we  may  call  it  great  either  for  the 
extent  which  it  can  cover,  or  for  the  inner  depths  which  it  can  reach.  So,  too, 
it  may  be  cramped  and  narrow,  either  because  it  moves  within  a  scanty  range, 
or  else  because  its  diffuse  activity  hardly  goes  below  the  surface  of  life.  And  in 
correspondence  with  these  two  measurements  of  sympathy,  there  are  two  distinct 
ways  in  which  the  desire  for  communion  may  seek  and  seem  to  find  its  satisfac- 
tion without  reference  to  Chi'istianity.  1,  On  the  one  hand  we  may  find  an 
almost  infinite  scope  for  sympathy  and  fellowship,  if  we  share  or  understand 
the  wants  and  hopes  and  aims  of  our  generation,  and  so  bear  our  part  in  its 
corporate  action.  Probably  there  never  was  an  age  which  offered  wider  range, 
more  varied  opportunity,  more  hopeful  schemes  for  such  an  exercise  and  develop- 
ment of  the  social  instinct.  Whatever  help  we  have  to  give,  we  can  pass  at 
once  into  commerce  with  hundreds  of  our  fellow-men.  Whether  the  feelings 
with  which  we  go  out  into  the  world  are  mainly  benevolent,  political,  or  scientific, 
we  are  at  once  admitted  to  a  tract  of  interest  and  work  in  which  the  social 
instinct  mores  without  the  fear  of  limitation.  2.  It  is  when  the  other  measure- 
ment is  forced  upon  us  that  we  feel  the  practical  defect  of  a  purely  natural  com- 
munion, however  wide  and  intelligent,  with  our  fellow-citizens  or  with  mankind. 
Every  human  soul  has  energies,  mysterious  and  profound,  which  find  no  exercise 
or  answer  in  that  diffusive  interest  which  is  ever  losing  in  intensity  what  it  gains 
in  width.  For  while  our  inner  life  looks  out  to  no  horizon,  in  our  social  relations 
we  are  hemmed  in  on  every  side :  in  each  wider  range  of  fellowship,  more  of  our 
personal  feehngs  and  convictions  have  to  be  repressed  or  misunderstood :  as  we 
pass  from  love  to  friendship,  from  friendship  to  acquaintance,  from  acquaintance 
to  association,  at  each  stage  we  feel  that  less  of  our  true  self  is  active  and  satisfied, 
that  we  are  exchanging  the  full  and  blessed  sympathy  "  where  hearts  are  of  each 
other  sure,"  for  the  excitement  and  effectiveness  of  living  in  a  crowd.  And  from 
the  partial  and  superficial  communion  which  thus  beckons  on  and  disappoints  in 
ever-widening  fields  of  ever  more  restricted  feeling,  most  men  turn  to  seek  in 
friendship  or  in  home  a  sympathy  which  has  less  to  fear  from  the  second  measure 
ment  of  which  I  spoke.  Probably  we  all  know  the  intense  relief  of  passing  from 
VOL.  I.  28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


the  jar  or  compromise  of  society  at  large  into  some  inner  sphere  of  love  where 
"we  mean  what  we  say,  and  what  we  would  we.  know."  3.  And  having  found 
the  refreshment  and  confidence  of  such  sympathy,  most  men  come  to  live  a  double 
life  :  pasi^ing  across  day  by  day  from  the  diffuse  and  shallow  fellowship  of  the 
wide  world  to  the  quiet  trust  and  swift  intercourse  of  the  chosen  few :  trying  to 
supplement  the  extent  of  one  communion  by  the  depth  of  the  other :  even  as  the 
great  poet  of  our  day  cries — 

•*  God  be  thanked,  the  meanest  of  His  creatures 
Boasts  two  soul-sides,  one  to  face  the  world  with, 
One  to  show  a  woman  when  he  loves  her." 

But  must  we  put  away  for  ever  all  thought  and  hope  of  any  communion  which 
shall  be  at  once  both  wide  and  deep  ?  Is  there  any  power  which  can  bring  the 
souls  of  men  together  in  a  sympathy  without  either  exclusion  or  reserve?     III. 

♦'  I     BELIEVE     IN     THE     CoMMTJNION     OF     SaINTS.  "        ThIS     IS     THE     ANSWER     OF     THE 

Chkistian  Church  :  she,  and  she  alone,  still  clings  to  the  hope  and  promise  of  a 
fellowship  and  sympathy  which  shall  be  at  once  deeper  than  any  depth  which  a 
man  can  fathom  in  his  own  soul,  and  wider  than  the  world  itself :  a  brotherhood 
into  which  the  most  ignorant  and  outcast  and  sinful  may  through  penitence  find 
entrance,  a  brotherhood  in  which  the  most  sensitive  and  thoughtful  and  exacting 
Boul  shall  never  feel  or  fear  the  touch  of  cruelty  or  stupidity,  but  ever  be  led  on 
from  height  to  height,  from    strength  to  strength,  from  glory  to  glory,  by  the 
answer  of  a  love  which  never  is  out  of  sight,  and  yet  never  can  be  outstripped.    By 
what  means  then  does  the  Church  propose  to  make  good  her  promise  of  a  sym- 
pathy both  wide  and  deep  ?     Must  we  look  back  for  the  plainest  answer  to  these 
questions  to  the  days  when  "  the  multitude  of  them  that  believed  were  of  one 
heart  and  of  one  soul"?    It  is,  in  deed  and  truth,  a  humiliating  necessity.      But 
still  we  cannot  doubt  that  the  Divine  spirit  of  that  communion  is  with  us  now : 
we  know  that,  for  all  the  noisy  and  obtrusive  quarrels  which  are  the  shame  and 
plague  of  Christendom,  the  strong  love  which  held  together  the  souls  of  martyrs 
and  evangelists,  the  love  which  was  stronger  than  death,  is  among  us  still :  that 
in  pure  homes,  in  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  work  among  the  poor  and  suffering, 
we  can  still  see,  in  the  perfect  harmony  of  self -forgetful  work,  the  inherited  secrtt 
of  Christian  unity  and  the  earnest  of  its  achievement  in  the  Church  triumphant. 
But  there  is  one  plain  ground  of  fellowship  which  lies  so  near  to  the  experience  of 
our  daily  life,  that  it  is  easy  for  all  to  see  and  measure.     For  at  the  outset,  Chris- 
tianity, and  Christianity  alone,  sets  before  us  all  one  Lord.     Alike  in  earth  and 
heaven  we  are  to  be  brought  into  the  true  fellowship  one  with  another  by  a  service 
and  devotion  which  is  not  mutual  but  common  :  by  seeking  first  the  same  Lord 
and  Saviour.     The  real  secret  of  sympathy  is  to  love  in  the  first  place,  not  one's 
friend,  but  that  which  he  loves  better  than  himself :  and  the  fulfilment  of  the 
social  instinct  is  found  in  the  concentration  of  all  hearts  upon  the  one  true  God. 
We  shall  better  understand  what  the  communion  of  saints  may  be,  in  proportion 
as  we  can  give  our  hearts,  our  strength,  our  lives,  to  Him  who  gave  Himself  for  us 
to  Him  who,  since  He  was  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  alone  can  draw  all  to  Him- 
self, and  link  them  in  the  one  sufficient  sympathy  of  one  unending  Love.     For  "if 
we  walk  in  the  light  as  He  is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another." 
{F.  Paget,  D.D.)         Neither  said  any  of  them  that  ought  of  the  things  which 
lie  possessed  was  his  own;    hut  they  had  all  things  common. — Notlnng  our 
ojpn : — Their  conduct  was  answerable  to  so  great  a  change  as  had  been  brought 
over  their   spirits.      In  several  respects  it  was  singular ;    such  as  befittt-d  their 
special  condition,  but  was  nowise  applicable  to  any  other  community  or  any  after 
generation.     Among  these  was  the  community  of  goods  ; — a  usage  into  which  they 
fell  by  a  natural  consequence  of  the  relation  in  which  they  stood  to  one  another 
and  to  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  even  by  their  own  position  and  expectation  upon 
the  earth.     They  were  few,  and  they  were  brf-thren.    If  they  had  been  numerous, 
or  if  they  had  been  divided,  the  idea  would  have  been  from  the  first  as  imprac- 
ticable as  it  soon  became.     But  at  the  outset  it  almost  forced  itself  upon  tiieir 
observance.    What  was  wealth  to  them  ?     They  were  set  upon  a  profession  of  self- 
denials.    There  was  nothing  that  they  cared  to  purchase  or  inherit  in  the  places 
that  were  so  soon,  as  they  imagined,  to  be  destroyed.     Their  minds  were  attracted 
but  by  incorruptible  treasures  and  enduring  abodes.     For  this  reason  it  was,  that 
none  of  them  said  "  that  aught  of  the  things  which  he  possessed  was  his  own ;  but 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  435 

they  liad  all  things  common."  Let  us  trace  a  few  lines  of  reflection  over  so  great 
a  subject.  What  can  we  consider  our  own  ?  Relatively,  in  certain  connections, 
and  to  a  certain  extent,  everytbing  that  we  can  conceive  of.  All  the  objects  that 
delight  the  senses,  all  the  pursuits  that  interest  the  attention,  all  the  truths  that 
occupy  and  nourish  the  mind,  are  ours.  We  have  no  need  to  become  the  proprietors 
of  anything,  in  a  commercial  sense,  in  order  to  make  it  belong  to  us.  The  poor 
borderer  upon  a  rich  domain  may  use  and  enjoy  it  more  than  its  real  occupant  and 
lord.  He  who  borrows  a  book  from  a  wealthy  library  may  render  it  more  truly  his 
than  it  is  the  collector's,  whose  name  is  written  in  it,  but  whose  understanding  has 
never  grown  familiar  with  its  contents.  Whatever  we  can  avail  ourselves  of  for 
the  purpose  of  our  instruction,  of  our  profit,  of  our  happiness,  is  our  own. 
Whatever  we  can  put  away  at  a  calm  distance  from  us,  doing  without  it  and  feeling 
above  it,  is  more  tban  our  own.  The  fruits  of  our  endeavours  are  ours,  the  days 
of  our  being,  the  circumstances  of  our  condition,  the  pictures  of  our  fancy,  the 
associates  of  our  hearts.  The  universe  offers  itself  to  the  eyes  that  can  love  its 
beauty,  not  only  as  a  spectacle,  but  as  a  gift ;  and  the  very  Lord  of  that  boundless 
whole  is  manifested  as  the  portion  of  obedient  souls.  Since  everything  we  know  is 
imaged  in  the  mind,  and  the  mind  is  ourself,  we  may  call  the  powers  of  nature  and 
the  lessons  of  wisdom  our  tributaries,  wherever  those  powers  are  surveved  or  those 
lessons  embraced.  But  if  we  are  ready  to  be  elated  with  such  a  description  of  the 
extent  of  the  authority  that  has  been  committed  to  men,  we  have  but  to  take  into 
view  that  opposite  truth  which  accori^s  better  with  the  expression  of  the  text,  and 
account  that  none  of  the  things  which  they  po^^sess  are  theirs,  in  any  absolute 
sense.  We  may  say,  with  the  apo'.tle  to  his  Corinthians,  "  All  things  are  yours." 
But  then  we  must  add,  in  the  words  of  the  same  great  testifier,  "  Ye  yourselves  are 
not  your  own  ;  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  Let  us  turn  to  this  side  of 
our  theme,  and  remark  some  of  the  leading  particulars  that  belong  to  it.  None 
of  the  things  which  we  possess  are  absolutely  our  own.  1.  Not  our  worldly 
goods.  Who  created  them  ?  He  who  made  them  to  be  transitory.  Who  bestowed 
them  ?  He  who  has  a  right  to  take  them  back.  For  what  purpose  have  they  beea 
lodged  in  the  hands  of  prosperous  men  T  For  their  special  benefit  and  gratifica- 
tion ?  Yes.  But  for  their  occupation,  their  exercise,  their  trial  also,  and  more. 
In  the  first  place,  the  changes  of  events  prove  to  us  that  we  do  not  hold  by  any 
absolute  tenure  what  we  seem  to  hold ;  for  how  often  it  is  suddenly  snatclied 
from  us,  or  drained  gradually  away !  So  much  for  chances.  And  then  come  in 
the  settled  decrees  of  our  condition  and  the.  demands  of  our  consciences.  Con- 
sider them  both,  and  you  will  see  how  amply  they  vindicate  the  expressions  of 
the  text  as  applicable  to  all  men  and  times  and  places.  You  will  have  no  commu- 
nity of  goods ;  and  indee'd  we  can  scarcejy  conceive  of  any  social  project  so  un- 
natural, 80  unjust,  so  impracticable.  Yet  still  the  goods  of  the  wealthiest  cannot 
choose  but  flow  into  the  community.  He  must  part  with  them,  whether  he  will 
or  not,  and  regularly  part  with  them.  He  can  have  no  enjoyment  from  them 
hut  by  their  use,, and  their  use  is  their  perishing.  They  are  not  his  but  as  they 
pass,  and  when  they  ai'e  gone  whose  are  they?  They  must  be  spent  and  dis- 
tributed, and  return  into  the  common  stock  from  which  they  were  amassed. 
Eeflect  further  on  what  the  v^irious  bbligations  of  life  admonish  us  ought  to  be. 
Are  we  not  stewards  and  debtors,  rather  than  owners  and  lords,  in  the  portion 
that  is  allotted  to  us  ?  Much  is  due  to  the  service  of  our  brethren ;  and  all  is  in 
pledge  to  Him,  to  whom  the  whole  must  be  accounted  for.  Benevolence,  justice, 
and  truth  are  greater  apostles  than  Peter  and  James  and  John  ;  and  honest 
contributions  must  be  brought  and  laid  down  at  their  feet.  2.  Our  friends  and 
the  objects  of  our  affection  are  not  our  own.  You  look  into  the  faces  of  those 
you  love,  and  take  them  by  their  cordial  hands,  and  they  seem  to  be  yours,  because 
their  countenances  have  been  always  bright  towards  you,  and  you  are  well  assured 
that  their  help  is  ready  in  the  time  of  your  need.  But  how  many  such  have 
circumstances  parted,  and  misunderstandings  estranged  1  And  how  often  has 
death  severed  the  tie  which  no  trials  of  life  could  weaken!  Children  are  in  a 
sense  yoar  creatures.  None  can  share  with  you  your  parental  rights.  I  will  not 
say,  that  they  may  so  disappoint  your  hope  as  to  leave  little  disposition  to  rejoice 
in  their  belonging  to  you;  that  they  may  so  grieve  and  burden  your  lives  as  to 
lead  you  to  wish  that  you  had  been  childless.  But  at  least  you  are  well  aware, 
that  what  no  temptations  of  after  days  might  be  able  to  make  unworthy  of  your 
regard,  the  decree  of  heaven  may  remove  from  your  side.  The  infant  and  the  youth 
are  as  liable  to  be  summoned  away  in  their  unsullied  freshness,  as  the  grown  man 


43G  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

in  the  fulness  of  his  strength  and  the  midst  of  his  labours  ;  and  how  can  you 
claim  as  yours  what  is  so  changing  and  so  frail  ?  Eejoice,  rather,  that  they  are 
in  better  hands  and  at  a  wiser  disposal ;  that  their  portion  is  in  the  assignments 
of  an  eternal  Providence  ;  and  that  their  true  Proprietor  is  the  Holy  Father, 
whose  angels  have  a  charge  over  them  here,  and  who  will  never  dismiss  those 
blessed  ministers  from  their  office  of  love.      [N.  L.  Frotliingliam.)  The  unity 

of  the  early  Church : — I.  The  unity.  "  The  multitude  of  them  that  believed 
were  of  one  heart  and  soul."  The  Church  of  that  day  was  a  great  contrast  with 
the  world,  where  there  were  "  wars  and  rumours  of  wars,"  envious  and  jealous 
hatreds.  Unity  ever  set  forth  in  New  Testament  as  a  fundamental  conception  of 
the  Church.  Christ  prayed  for  it.  Apostles  strove  to  preserve  it.  The  ideal  we 
should  ever  keep  before  us.  II.  The  manifestation.  "  Neither  said  any  of  them 
that  aught  of  the  things  that  he  possessed  was  his  own  ;  but  they  had  all  things 
common."  This  a  convincing  evidence  of  their  unity.  Teaches  the  surpassing 
love  of  that  brotherhood  of  Christ.  The  principle  is  just  as  true  to-day.  The 
Church  is  a  partnership  in  preaching  the  gospel  and  in  good  works.  III.  The 
CAUSES.  By  examining  the  context  we  may  discover  some  of  the  causes  or  con- 
ditions. 1.  Fidelity.  They  had  been  entrusted  with  the  gospel.  They  had  faithful 
leaders  (chaps,  ii.  14;  iii.  12  ;  iv.  3-8;  xiii.  19).  They  had  faithful  people  (vers. 
24-30).  2.  Prayer  (vers.  24-30).  3.  Eecognition  of  God's  providence  (ver.  28). 
4.  Holy  Spirit  (ver.  31).  Notice  it  came  in  answer  to  prayer.  To  believers  (c/. 
chap.  ii.  4).  Churches  need  renewals  {cf.  chaps  ii.  4  and  iv.  31)  of  Holy  Spirit. 
IV.  The  results.  1.  Great  spirituality.  Scatter  the  embers  of  a  dying  fire  and 
it  goes  out.  Eake  them  together  and  you  have  warmth  and  glow.  So  with  a 
divided  and  a  united  Church.  2.  Great  power.  "  A  city  set  on  a  hill,"  &c.  Such 
a  Church  can  make  the  powers  of  darkness  tremble.  Keep  this  ideal  before  us  and 
we  shall  be  a  united,  spiritual,  and  aggressive  Church.  (E.  E.  Curry.)  Apostolic 
socialism : — I.  The  reasons  which  led  the  first  Christians  to  form  them- 
selves INTO  A  COMMUNITY  HAVING  ALL  THINGS  COMMON.  1.  From  the  moment  of 
the  founding  of  Christianity  the  duty  of  living  for  others  was  insisted  on.  John 
the  Baptist  said,  "  He  that  hath  two  coats,  let  him  impart  to  him  that  hath  none," 
&c.  Nor  was  Jesus  less  explicit.  "Sell  that  ye  have  and  give  alms."  "It  is 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  and  many  other  passages  which  embody  the 
principle  of  true  socialism.  2.  Doubtless  some  would  urge  that  Jesus  set  the 
example  of  founding  such  a  communistic  society — not  that  He  required  all  to  part 
with  their  possessions,  but  it  would  seem  that  He  did  require  this  of  the  inner 
circle  of  apostles.  *'  Lo,  we  have  left  all  and  followed  Thee."  "Go  sell  that  thou 
hast  .  .  .  and  come  follow  Me."  Of  tlds  community  Judas  was  the  treasurer. 
3.  Remember  again  that  this  took  place  immediately  after  the  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit,  the  natural  effect  of  which  would  be  the  kindling  of  an  enthusiasm  which 
would  make  them  capable  of  a  self-sacrifice  impossible  to  the  natural  man.  It  is 
evident,  too,  that  poverty  was  very  rife,  and  the  newly  invigorated  affections 
rendered  it  impossible  for  a  Christian  to  feast  while  others  starved.  II.  Why  was 
this  SOCIALISTIC  SCHEME  ABANDONED  ?  For  it  is  evident  that  it  did  not  last  long, 
since  we  find  it  nowhere  else,  nor  even  here  a  few  years  later.  The  truth  is  expe- 
rience taught  them  that  in  the  existing  state  of  society  Socialism  would  not  work. 
Why  ?  Just  the  sinfulness  and  selfishness  of  men.  For  society  can  only  prosper 
if  men's  faculties  are  sharpened,  and  their  energy  and  industry  exerted  to  the 
utmost.  And  it  is  found  that  only  competition  can  supply  the  motive  which  will 
induce  men  to  do  their  best.  No  doubt  if  men  were  perfectly  unselfish  it  would  be 
otherwise,  but  they  are  not.  When  a  man's  comfort  no  longer  depended  on  his 
own  efforts,  so  that  even  if  he  worked  harder  than  others  he  would  fare  no  better, 
the  spur  to  exertion  would  be  gone,  and  he  would  do  less,  or  even  nothing,  and 
thousands  would  prey  upon  otliers.  Even  the  sharp  law  under  which  we  live,  "  If 
a  man  will  not  work,  neither  shall  he  eat,"  is  evaded  by  idle  impostors  and  beggars, 
but  how  indefinitely  would  the  number  of  these  social  parasites  be  increased  if  all 
had  a  common  right  to  the  wealth  of  the  community.  And  then  again  Socialism 
would  give  scope  for  fraud  and  dishonesty.  The  basis  of  any  such  scheme  is  that 
rich  and  poor  give  alike  all  they  possess  into  the  common  fund.  Selfish  men,  like 
Ananias,  would  seek  to  evade  this  and  to  live  at  the  public  expense  while  retaining 
what  others  had  relinquished.  It  was  this  that  probably  broke  up  the  scheme.  IH. 
Why  ARE  THESE  FACTS  RECORDED  ?  Not  merely  to  te:ich  that  Socialism  is  a  mis- 
take, but  that  it  is  true  as  an  ideal,  but  false  as  a  practical  system.  Its  essential 
underlying  ideas  are  true.     It  is  a  Divine  instinct  which  makes  us  long  to  give  the 


CHAP.  IV.]  'THE  ACTS.  437 

same  blessings  to  the  poor  which  the  rich  possess.  It  is  right  that  each  should 
labour  not  only  for  himself  but  for  all.  And  while  we  cannot  bring  all  humanity 
into  a  communistic  society,  we  must  nevertheless  keep  the  ideal  of  social  regenera- 
tion on  the  basis  of  brotherly  love  ever  before  us.  (A.  M.  Mackay,  B.A.)  Bap- 
iined  purses : — Miss  Margaret  Winning  Leitch,  one  of  two  sisters  from  Eyegate, 
Vermont,  U.S.A.,  of  Scottish  parentage,  formerly  of  the  United  Presbyterian 
Church,  now  missionaries  of  the  American  Board  in  Ceylofi,  lately  told  her 
scholars  the  following  incident:  "A  man,  being  converted,  was  about  to  join  the 
Baptist  Church.  When  he  was  going  down  inCo  the  water  to  be  baptised,  upon  a 
profession  of  his  faith  in  Christ,  he  handed  his  pocket-handkerchief  to  a  fiiend  to 
hold.  In  doing  so,  his  purse  fell  out.  The  friend  said,  '  I  will  hold  that  too ;  you 
will  not  want  it  to  get  wet.'  But  the  man  replied,  '  No,  when  I  go  down  into  the 
water  I  want  my  purse  to  be  baptised  with  me,  for  that,  as  well  as  myself,  must  be 
consecrated  to  the  service  of  the  Lord.'  "  We  may  well  agree  with  the  missionary 
in  her  wish  that  there  were  more  Christian  workers  with  baptised  purses. 
Remarkable  liberality : — Perhaps  there  never  was  a  more  charitable  man  than 
John  Wesley.  His  liberality  knew  no  bounds  but  an  empty  pocket.  He  gave 
away,  not  merely  a  certain  part  of  his  income,  but  all  that  he  had ;  his  own  wants 
being  provided  for,  he  devoted  all  the  rest  to  the  necessities  of  others.  He  entered 
upon  this  good  work  at  a  very  early  period.  We  are  told  that  when  he  had  thirty 
pounds  a  year,  he  lived  on  twenty-eight,  and  gave  away  forty  shillings.  The  next 
year,  receiving  sixty  pounds,  he  still  lived  on  twenty-eight,  and  gave  two  and 
thirty.  The  third  year  he  received  ninety  pounds,  and  gave  away  sixty-two.  The 
fourth  year  he  received  one  hundred  and  twenty  pounds.  Still  he  lived  on  twenty- 
eight,  and  gave  to  the  poor  ninety-two.  During  the  rest  of  his  life  he  lived 
economically  ;  and  in  the  course  of  fifty  years,  it  has  been  supposed,  he  gave  away 
more    than    thii'ty   thousand  pounds.  Accumulated   riches   rightly    used : — If 

jou  go  to  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  in  London,  I  ask  you  to  find  out  the  monument  to 
John  Howard  the  philanthropist,  and  you  will  read  upon  it  that  the  man  who 
devotes  himself  to  the  good  of  mankind  "  treads  an  open  but  unfrequented  path 
to  immortality."  Thank  God,  that  path  is  not  unfrequented  now,  and  many 
capitalists  realise  their  responsibilities.  I  was  chaplain  in  Switzerland  during 
August.  One  morning  I  was  walking  up  a  lovely  valley  by  the  banks  of  a  river, 
and  through  a  rich  pasture  land,  enamelled  with  flowers,  when  I  was  overtaken  by 
&  young  Swiss  lad.  He  pointed  to  a  mighty  mountain  at  the  head  of  the  valley, 
covered  with  perpetual  snow,  and  said  in  French,  "  Why  should  the  good  God  have 
made  snowfields  and  glaciers?  "  I  pointed  to  the  stream,  and  to  the  rich  grass 
heueath  our  feet,  and  told  him  that  the  streams  which  enriched  the  valleys  all 
around  came  from  this  snow  mountain.  So  there  are  men  who  rise  above  their 
fellows  like  mountains  above  the  valleys  ;  riches  have  accumulated  upon  them  as 
i5now  upon  the  lofty  heights  ;  but  the  sunshine  of  Divine  love  has  melted  the  snow, 
which  has  flown  down  in  fertilising  streams,  spreading  gladness  and  prosperity 
around.     {Canon  Barddey.) 

Ver.  33.  With  great  power  gave  the  apostles  witness  of  the  resurrection  of 
the  Lord  Jesus. -The  poiver  of  the  Apostolic  testimony  to  the  resurrection : — In  what 
did  this  great  power  consist  ?  I.  In  the  great  number  of  witnesses.  Here  were 
more  than  were  necessary  for  the  fabrication  of  a  cheat,  and  too  many  to  keep 
it  long  a  secret  (1  Cor.  xv.  5,  6).  II.  In  the  well-known  character  of  the 
APOSTLES.  They  were  poor,  timid  and  friendless  ;  and,  therefore,  unlikely  to  devise, 
iind  unable  to  execute,  a  scheme  for  imposing  a  falsehood  of  this  nature  upon  the 
world.  Above  all,  they  were  proverbial  for  int3grity  in  principle  and  conduct. 
Such  qualities  would  render  any  evidence  respectable.  Will  it  be  said  that  their 
smiplicity  exposed  them  to  delusion  ?  There  were  among  them  Peter,  sufficiently 
acute,  and  Thomas  sufficiently  scrupulous.  Will  it  be  said  that,  as  followers  of 
Christ,  they  were  interested  in  the  success  of  this  story.  Alas  !  in  what  way  could  the 
stoiy  advance  the  interest  of  any  of  them,  if  Jesus  was  not  risen  ?  It  would  have 
been  much  more  natural,  as  well  as  reasonable,  for  them,  as  indeed  they  did  after  the 
crucifixion,  to  have  shrunk  from  the  public  view.     III.    In  that  there  was  amono 

THEM     consistence,     BOLDNESS,     AND     CORRESPONDENT     BEHAVIOUR.         1.      They     Were 

perfectly  consistent.  Numerous  as  were  the  testifiers,  there  were  no  divisions, 
contradictions,  or  separate  interests  :  and  if  there  were  some  little  variations  in 
their  narratives,  respecting  minute  matters,  these  are  reconcilable,  and  tend 
rather  to  confirm  their  accounts,  by  evidencing  that  there  had  been  no  combina- 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

tion.  2.  They  were  undaunted.  Though  before,  mortified  with  disappointment,, 
and  shaking  with  terror,  they  shunned  even  the  light,  they  now  openly  and  eagerly 
proclaimed  that  He  who  had  been  crucified,  was  risen  from  the  dead.  3.  There 
was  also  correspondent  behaviour.  They  exhibited  that  life  which  the  resurrection 
necessarily  enforced.  They  were  animated  with  that  joy  which  it  was  calculated 
to  inspire.  They  manifested  that  anxiety  and  diligence  to  maintain  and  propagate 
the  religion  of  their  Lord  which  it  could  not  fail  to  produce.     IV.  In  that  they 

BROUGHT     TO     THEIR     SUPPORT     THE     TYPES     AND    PROPHECIES    OF    THE    WoRD    OF    GoD. 

The  argument  was  of  wonderful  power  with  those  Jews  who  had  cherished  the 
revelations  which  the  Most  High  had  vouchsafed  to  them  ;  and  it  is  of  astonishing, 
import,  of  irresistible  force  to  every  man,  who  considers  soberly  the  wonderful,  the 
supernatural,  the  connected,  the  singularly  significant  nature,  of  the  Jewish 
economy.  V.  In  that  it  left  His  adversaries  destitute  of  any  satisfactory 
OR  reasonable  replication.  Much  it  behoved  the  rulers  of  the  Jews  to  prove  to 
the  people,  who  were  many  of  them  struck  with  the  miracles  of  Christ,  that  they 
had  not  "  crucified  the  Lord  of  Glory."  In  their  care  to  secure  the  sepulchre,  they 
betrayed  their  anxiety  to  do  so.  And,  blessed  Lord,  could  they  have  produced  Thy 
sacred  body  after  the  third  day,  with  what  triumph  would  it  have  been  exhibited  ! 
But  there  was  no  such  refutation  of  the  resurrection.  VI.  In  that  it  was- 
accompanied  with  the  confirmation  and  blessing  of  God,  and  produced  great 
and  extensive  conviction.  The  establishment  and  rapid  progress  of  a  religion, 
whose  Author  was  crucified,  and  its  propagators  twelve  of  the  most  despised  men  ; 
of  a  religion  so  opposed  to  the  strongest  propensities  of  nature,  so  different  from 
anything  to  which  man  had  been  accustomed,  and  so  destructive  to  ancient, 
venerated,  and  congenial  systems ;  and  this,  too,  by  means  so  simple,  and 
seemingly  inadequate  to  the  object,  is  of  itself  a  demonstration  of  the  wisdom 
and  power  with  which  its  witnesses  unto  the  people  spake.  {Bp.  Dehon.) 
Preaching  the  resurrection  of  Jesus : — Notice — L  The  great  fact  to  which  they 
GAVE  testimony.  1.  This  fact  was  of  essential  importance  in  the  Christian 
scheme.  All  the  great  events  of  our  Lord's  history  are  of  vast  importance,  both  in 
themselves  or  in  their  relation  to  each  other.  What  would  the  death  of  Christ 
have  availed  if  He  had  not  also  risen?  2.  The  apostles  were  witnesses  of  it. 
Hence  they  were  prepared  everywhere  to  vindicate  the  doctrine  of  the  Besurrec- 
tion.  II.  The  character  of  their  testimony.  "  Power  "  may  refer  to — 1.  The 
miracle  they  wrought.  2.  The  unction,  the  energy,  the  extraordinary  influence 
of  their  ministry.  3.  Their  marvellous  success.  III.  The  abundant  grace  with 
WHICH  they  were  ENDOWED.  "  Great  grace."  Application  :  1.  Let  us  learn  to  give 
great  prominence  to  the  fundamental  doctrines  and  facts  of  ChristiHnity.  2.  Let  us 
remember  that  the  success  of  our  labours  depends  not  only  on  what  is  preached,  but 
very  greatly  on  how  it  is  preached.  3.  Let  us  all,  and  always,  mind  to  have  great  grace 
— the  grace  of  humility,  of  patience,  of  charity,  of  faith — if  we  would  have  great  suc- 
cess. {W.  Antliff,  D.D.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ  historic  : — 1.  The  resurrection  of 
Christ  is  the  most  important  event  in  all  history.  It  expresses  in  itself  the  whole 
gospel  of  God  to  man.  When  a  new  apostle  was  elected  it  was  that  he  might  be  "  a 
witness  "  to  it.  (1)  This  fact  is  the  demonstration  of  all  the  other  vital  things 
in  the  gospel  that  went  before  it.  By  it  Jesus  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God 
with  power.  By  it  God  publicly  owned  Him  in  the  face  of  earth  and  heaven,  and 
testified  to  aU  things  vital  in  His  life  and  mission,  to  the  sinlessness  of  His 
character,  to  the  Divine  truth  of  His  teaching,  and  to  the  sufficiency  of  His 
atonement.  (2)  It  is  also  the  pledge  and  promise  of  all  that  is  yet  to  come.  It 
opens  the  gate  of  a  future  life ;  it  is  the  pattern  and  the  assurance  of  our  own 
resurrection ;  the  Church  arose  again  in  Christ,  and  each  individual  member  of  it  has 
power  and  privilege  to  say,  "  Because  He  lives,  I  shall  live  also  1  "  2.  With  truth 
therefore,  this  fact  is  put  in  the  Scriptures,  and  in  derived  systems  of  theological 
thought,  as  the  key-stone  of  the  arch  of  Christianity.  Take  it  away,  and  the  whole 
system  crumbles  to  pieces.  Our  preaching  is  vain  ;  your  faith  is  vain  ;  we  are  yet 
in  our  sins  ;  we  have  no  more  hope  in  Christ  for  this  Ufe,  or  for  any  other.  3. 
Such  a  fact,  from  its  very  importance,  requires  the  very  strongest  confirmation, 
and,  being  a  fact  of  history,  confirmation  of  a  strictly  historical  kind.  I.  The  fact 
itself.  1.  It  is  a  fact  quite  capable  of  proof.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  imagining 
it  to  have  occurred.  There  are  no  invincible  laws  against  it.  There  are  no 
natural  principles  or  instincts  of  the  human  mind  which  reject  it.  All  that  can 
be  averred  is  that  it  is  not  in  the  line  of  our  experiences.  2.  W'hat  is  sufficient 
evidence  ?     All  human  laws  assume  that  the  testimony  of  two  witnesses,  when 


CHAP.  IT.]  THE  ACTS.  439 

that  testimony  is  unchallenged  and  when  it  is  confirmed  by  collateral  evidence,  is 
enough.  This  is  not  to  say  that  any  two  men  would  be  believed  in  anything  they 
might  choose  to  say.  They  must  be  honest  men  worthy  of  belief,  and  must  be 
able  to  show  that  they  had  adequate  opportunity  for  ascertaining  or  observing 
the  thing  to  which  they  give  testimony,  and  that  they  were  the  dupes  of  no 
illusion,  and  that  they  were  in  full  possession  of  their  faculties.  Then,  the  human 
mind  is  so  constituted  that  it  must  receive  their  testimony.  If  it  were  not  so, 
human  society  would  be  no  longer  possible ;  no  important  case  could  be  decided 
in  any  court  of  law ;  in  fact,  no  law  could  be  administered  at  all.  II.  The 
WITNESSES.  1.  How  many  are  they  ?  The  first  to  se6  the  risen  Lord  was  Mary  ; 
then  her  companions,  the  other  women,  shared  the  privilege  with  her.  Then  John 
and  Peter  saw  Him.  Later  in  the  day  He  met  the  two  disciples  on  the  way  to 
Emmaus.  In  the  evening  He  appeared  to  the  brethren  as  they  sat  at  meat ;  and 
again,  a  week  later,  to  them  in  presence  of  Thomas.  He  came  to  the  apostoUc 
company  by  the  lake  ;  on  the  mountain  more  than  five  hundred  brethren  at  once 
saw  Him.  It  is  probable  that  six  or  seven  hundred  people,  at  least,  saw  Christ 
after  He  was  risen.  True,  we  have  not  a  separate  testimony  in  writing  from  every 
one  who  saw  Him.  Writing  in  those  days  was  not  an  easy  matter.  We  have  the 
testimony  of  the  four  Evangelists  and  of  James,  Peter,  and  Paul — to  what  ?  Not 
only  to  what  they  themselves  saw  and  heard,  but  to  the  fact  that  a  great  many  others 
saw  and  heard  with  them ;  and  there  is  no  denial  from  any  of  these.  Here,  e.g.,  is 
a  letter  which  Paul  writes  to  the  Corinthians,  which  he  must  have  known  would 
not  be  kept  a  spcret ;  and  he  asserts  in  it  that  Christ  was  seen  after  His  resurrec- 
tion by  more  than  five  hundred  men,  most  of  whom,  he  says,  were  then  alive ;  and 
yet  there  is  no  contradiction.  Corinth  was  full  of  objectors,  and  some  of  them 
would  have  been  nothing  loth  to  undermine  his  authority.  The  casual  observa- 
tion, "  Some  have  fallen  asleep,"  indicates  that-  he  knew  many  of  the  persons 
referred  to,  and  that,  had  it  been  necessary,  he  could  have  given  further  details 
respecting  them.  2.  Are  they  honest  men  ?  Let  any  one  read  the  Gospels  and 
see.  True,  and  honest,  and  simple-hearted  are  they,  if  ever  such  men  were  in  the 
world.  3.  As  to  their  soundness  of  mind.  Where  is  there  any  sign  of  weakness  or 
of  hallucination  in  these  Gospels,  or  in  the  Epistles,  from  first  to  last  ?  They  seem 
almost  too  calm.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  evidence  more  perfectly  given.  They 
were  the  subjects  of  profound  emotion  ;  but  they  knew  that  the  world  could  have 
no  interest  in  the  state  of  their  feeUngs,  and  that  what  they  had  to  do  was  to  tell 
faithfully  and  truly  the  great  facts  which  had  excited  such  feehngs.  4.  As  to  their 
opportunities  for  ascertaining  the  truth.  They  saw  their  risen  Lord  many  times 
and  in  many  places.  They  heard  Him  speak  ;  they  talked  with  Him ;  they 
touched  Him  ;  they  saw  Him  eat ;  they  felt  His  breath  ;  they  saw  Him  ascend  to 
heaven.  5.  But  had  they  not  something  to  gain  by  this  history  ?  Yes ;  they 
gained  disrepute,  persecution,  spoiling  of  goods,  as  the  price  of  their  faithfulness. 
They  gained  bonds  and  martyrdom.  If  they  did  not  believe  it,  their  course  of 
action  makes  them  the  greatest  madmen  the  world  has  ever  seen.  6.  Their 
testimony  was  received  undoubtingly  by  men  of  their  own  generation.  It  has 
been  said  that  eighteen  centuries  is  a  long  time  across  which  to  verify  important 
histodc  truth.  But  it  was  grasped  and  held  by  those  to  whom  it  was  near,  who 
could  judge  of  its  truth  as  we  judge  of  the  occurrences  of  our  own  time,  and  who 
could  not  be  deceived.  Eemember  the  wonderful  effects  this  belief  produced  then  ; 
and  now  Christendom,  with  all  the  light  and  love  and  tenderness  it  contains,  is  the 
fruit  of  the  faith  that  there  is  a  risen  Christ.  Conclusion  :  Eighty  years  before 
the  resurrection  Ciesar  landed  on  the  coast  of  Kent.  Who  thinks  of  doubting 
that  ?  I  suppose,  if  eternal  salvation  depended  on  believing  it,  there  is  not  a  sane 
Englishman  alive  who  would  fail  of  heaven  ;  and  yet  the  actual  historic  proof  of 
this  is  far  less  complete,  cogent,  convincing,  than  the  proof  that  Christ  died  and 
rose  and  revived,  that  He  might  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  of  the  living.  Men 
beheve  without  any  doubt  or  difficulty  in  the  Sabine  farm  of  Horace,  where  his 
friends  quaffed  the  Falernian  wine.  .We  believe  that  Virgil  died  on  a  journey,  and 
that  he  lies  buried,  at  his  own  request,  at  the  second  milestone  from  Naples  on 
the  Puteolan  way.  We  believe  in  the  plough  of  Cincinnatus,  and  in  the  poison- 
cnp  of  Socrates  ;  but  all  kinds  of  conscientious  scruples  and  honest  doubts,  which 
must  be  treated  with  great  tenderness  and  delicacy,  arise  in  some  minds  when  they 
are  asked  to  believe  in  the  resurrection  and  ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
We  feel  inclined  to  eayof  such,  everything  in  its  own  plare.  We  would  not  break 
any  bruised  reed,  or  quench  any  smoking  flax ;  but  if  any  one  will  not  take  the 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.iv. 

trouble  to  examine  the  evidence  for  the  resurrection,  and  yet  will  complain  that  he 
is  unable  to  believe  it,  sympathy  with  such  a  person  may  be  unfaithfulness  td  truth, 
and  a  slight  even  upon  rationaUty,  because  he  asks  for  comfort  while  rejecting 
light.  Let  men  be  honest  and  earnest  in  this  great  matter.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
The  pospel  of  the  resurrection : — Let  us  consider  some  of  the  reasons  why  the 
apostles  attached  such  importance  to  the  resurrection.  It  proved :  I.  That  Christ 
WAS  STILL  LIVING  AND  HAD  EETUENED  TO  His  Chdrch.  His  death  had  struck 
them  with  confusion  and  dismay,  and  their  first  feeling  was  one  of  profound  loss. 
The  resurrection  was  the  return  of  their  beloved  Master.  So  we  do  not  worship  a 
dead  Christ.  He  is  not  a  memory  but  a  presence.  II.  That  Christ  had  not 
FAILED  IN  His  WORK.  This  was  once  their  impression  (Luke  xxiv.  21).  But 
after  the  resurrection  all  was  changed.  Here  was — 1.  Triumph  over  death.  2. 
The  proof  that  God  had  accepted  the  great  sacrifice.  3.  The  evidence  that  what 
seemed  a  hindrance  was  the  very  means  by  which  the  Saviour  effected  His  work 
of  redemption.  III.  That  Christ  was  more  than  man.  It  was  a  triumphant 
refutation  of  Jewish  error.  They  had  mocked  at  His  claims  (Luke  xxiii.  35). 
Here  was  the  vindication  of  them.  Accordingly  the  apostles  pressed  this  fact  with 
great  persistency  (cbap.  iii.  15).  He  could  be  no  mere  man  that  could  break  the 
bars  of  the  grave.  IV.  The  supernatural  character  of  Christianity.  If 
this  is  granted  it  is  vain  to  cavil  at  lesser  miracles.  Admit  this,  and  all  anti- 
Christian  objection  crumbles  to  dust.  V.  That  it  is  possible  for  man  to  be 
raised  from  the  dead  (1  Cor.  xv.  20).  (TF.  F.  Adeney,  31. A.)  Great  grace 
was  upon  them  sl\.— Manifestations  of  Divine  grace : — Grace  sometimes  denotes 
the  full  and  undeserved  compassion  which  our  Heavenly  Father  manifests  to  a 
lost  world.  At  other  times,  the  term  is  employed  to  describe  the  subduing  and 
sanctifying  effects  of  this  marvellous  love.  In  the  text  it  is  to  be  understood  as 
referring  to  both.  Great  grace  was  manifest — I.  In  their  earnest  and  united 
PRAYERS.  They  held  frequent  communion  with  the  God  of  all  grace.  This 
practice  was  habitual  (chap.  i.  14).  On  any  unusual  occasion  of  trial,  prayer  was 
their  first  and  last  resort  (chap.  iv.  31 ;  xii.  5 ;  xxi.  5).  If  "  great  grace  "  is  to  rest 
upon  believers  in  our  time,  it  will  be  when  they  realise  the  cheering  promise  of 
their  Lord  (Matt,  xviii.  20).  No  matter  how  small,  or  how  great  the  number,  nor 
from  what  quarter,  nor  the  place  of  assembly,  He — the  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King 
of  His  Church — will  be  present  to  bless.  II.  In  their  steadfast  devotion  to 
Scripture  doctrine.  Indifference  to  Divine  truth  is  always  the  sign  that  the 
spark  of  grace  in  the  heart  is  near  extinction.  The  first-fruits  of  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  instead  of  dividing  themselves  up  into  rival  factions,  to  suit  their 
individual  caprice,  "continued  steadfast  in  the  apostles'  doctrine"  (chap.  ii.  42). 
III.  In  their  love  one  to  another  (ver.  32).  When  a  company  of  Christians 
in  Numidia  had  been  taken  prisoners  by  barbarians,  and  the  churches  to  which 
they  belonged  were  unable  to  pay  their  ransom,  they  sent  to  the  Church  in 
Carthage.  Bishop  Cyprian  no  sooner  heard  of  this  than  he  set  himself  at  work, 
and  never  relaxed  his  efforts  until  he  had  collected  the  necessary  sum.  This 
substantial  token  of  brotherly  kindness  was  not  more  gratifying  than  the  letter 
of  Christian  sympathy  and  tenderness  which  accompanied  it.  "  In  cases  like 
these,"  wrote  the  bishop,  "  who  would  not  feel  sorrow,  and  who  would  not  look 
upon  a  brother's  sufferings  as  his  own  ?  "  As  the  apostle  says,  "  When  one  member 
suffers,  all  the  members  suffer  with  it "  (1  Cor.  xii.  26).  Therefore,  we  must  con- 
sider the  captivity  of  our  brethren  as  our  own  captivity.  We  must  see  Christ 
in  our  captive  brethren,  and  redeem  Him  from  captivity  who  redeemed  us  from 
death.      IV.    In    the    holt    joy    and    peace   in   believing    with    which    they 

TRIUMPHED  IN  EVERY  PLACE.  V.  In  THE  SPIRIT  AND  DEPORTMENT  WITH  WHICH 
THEY   RECOMMENDED     THEIR    RELIGION     TO     THE    WORLD    (chap.    ii.    47).       A    Ch'istian 

young  man  was  asked  what  had  led  him  to  turn  aside  from  his  wild  and  thought- 
less career  to  become  a  follower  of  Jesus.  Was  it  a  sermon  or  a  book  that  had 
improved  him  ?  He  answered  very  emphatically,  No.  Had  any  one  spoken  to 
him  specially  on  the  subject  of  religion?  "No.  It  was  a  Christian  man,  who 
boarded  at  the  same  house  with  me."  "  Did  he  ever  talk  to  you  about  your  soul  ?  " 
"  No,  never,  till  I  sought  an  interview  with  him  ;  but  there  was  a  sweetness  in  his 
disposition,  a  heavenly-mindedness  about  him,  that  made  me  feel  that  he  had  a 
source  of  comfort  and  peace,  to  which  I  was  a  stranger.  His  whole  life  was  a 
sermon.  I  sought  an  interview  with  him.  He  pointed  me  to  Jesus  Christ,  prayed 
■with  me  and  counselled  me."  In  this,  and  in  all  such  cases,  religion  is  pi'eached 
most  eloquently  to  the  world.    About  twenty  years  ago,  a  Christian  woman  ol 


/CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  441 

Lonclon  was  asked  to  take  charge  of  a  Bible-class  of  three  young  women.  Although 
the  work  was  a  very  humble  one,  she  shrank  from  its  responsibilities,  and,  with  many 
misgivings,  consented  to  the  trial.  The  first  month's  experience  was  so  encourag- 
ing that  she  consented  to  go  on  with  the  work,  and  the  class  constantly  increased 
in  numbers.  From  fifty,  it  soon  grew  to  eighty,  and  a  larger  room  was  provided. 
In  the  course  of  a  few  years  the  Bible-class  became  five  hundred  strong ;  and  now, 
at  the  age  of  sixty-nine,  the  faithful  teacher  (Mrs.  Bartlett)  has  fallen  asleep  in 
Jesus.  She  was  not  a  woman  of  marked  ability,  but  simply  one  who  gave  up  her 
whole  self  to  the  service  of  the  Lord.  This  was  the  secret  of  her  success.  She 
knew  the  members  of  her  large  class,  and  called  them  by  their  nanaes.  She  visited 
them  at  their  homes,  and  wrote  letters  to  the  absent  ones.  For  each,  and  for  all 
of  them,  she  prayed  unceasingly.  Her  pupils  are  scattered  over  the  whole  earth,  and 
many  of  them  are  tellingto  others  the  good  tidings  she  brought  to  tbem.  (J.  N.  Norton, 
D.D.)  Happy  state  of  the  primitive  Church  : — We  shall  now  seek  an  illustration  of 
the  text,  by  inquiring  wherein  such  eminent  grace  appeared  in  these  primitive 
believers.  1.  Great  grace  appeared  in  their  earnest  and  united  supplications.  2. 
It  appeared  in  their  steadfast  adherence  to  the  apostles'  doctrine.  3.  In  a  constant 
adherence  to  the  worship  and  service  of  God.  4.  In  their  great  love  to  one  another. 
6.  These  primitive  Christians  were  full  of  holy  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  and  they 
triumphed  in  every  place.  6.  Their  spirit  and  deportment  were  such  as  recom- 
mended their  religion  to  the  word  (chap.  ii.  47).  They  abounded  in  those  Chris- 
tian graces  which  are  lovely  even  in  the  eyes  of  men  in  general.  (Theological 
Sketch-Booh.) 

Vers.  36,  37.  Joses,  who  by  the  apostles  was  surnamed  Barnabas.— Karaatas  .• — 

Surnames  become  necessary  as  soon  as  men  form  themselves  into  societies.  They 
are  then  no  longer  adequately  distinguished  by  the  simple  "  James  "  or  "  John," 
for  others  also  bear  the  same  name.  Some  personal  characteristic,  therefore,  has 
to  be  selected :  the  trade,  stature,  complexion,  or  disposition  of  the  man  wiU  suggest 
a  title  for  him ;  he  becomes  known  as  James  the  Smith,  or  as  John  the  Black,  and 
probably  transmits  the  surname  to  his  posterity.  When  our  Lord  chooses  His 
apostles  they  have  to  be  distinguished  in  this  way.  There  is  Judas  Iscariot,  and 
Judas  the  brother  of  James.  There  is  Simon  Zelotes,  and  Simon  surnamed  Peter, 
&c.  The  apostles  in  their  turn  give  surnames,  and  in  the  present  instance  the 
second  name  thrust  the  first  out  of  recollection.  "  Joses  "  is  from  this  time  known 
as  "  Barnabas  "  alone.  Our  English  translation  interprets  the  name  as  "  the  son 
of  consolation."  Take  "  consolation  "  in  a  strong  sense,  and  that  is  right.  The 
word  is  elsewhere  rendered  "  exhortation."  It  answers  to  the  old  English  use  of 
"  comfort,"  in  the  sense  of  strengthening,  as  well  as  soothing,  as  we  have  it  in  the 
phrase,  "  the  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost."  I.  We  shall  best  understand 
THE  NAnrE  BY  suEVEviNG  THE  HISTORY.  We  kuow  little  of  the  antecedents  of 
Barnabas.  He  was  a  native  of  Cyprus,  the  first  stepping-stone  across  the  great  sea 
to  the  lands  of  the  Gentiles.  Its  population  was  partly  Greek,  partly  Oriental ;  and 
the  kind  of  education  which  such  a  society  would  afford  may  have  helped  to  make 
Barnabas  a  broader  man  than  his  brethren  who  had  been  born  and  bred  in  the 
closer  atmosphere  of  Jerusalem.  Tradition  marks  him  out  as  among  the  seventy 
sent  forth  by  Christ.  Or  he  may  have  been  one  of  the  fruits  of  Pentecost.  Some 
of  those  converts,  we  know,  were  "  men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene."  His  first  appear- 
ance has  more  of  action  in  it  than  of  speech.  It  was  at  the  moment  when,  under 
the  fresh  impulses  of  their  awakening,  the  disciples  who  had  "  houses  or  lands  " 
were  parting  with  them  for  the  relief  of  their  poorer  brethren.  Conspicuous  among 
them  was  Barnabas.  It  was  a  good  beginning  for  a  Christian  ministry.  "  Let  us 
not  love  in  word,  neither  in  tongue,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth."  The  interest 
deepens  as  we  proceed.  Six  or  seven  years  pass,  and  an  unlooked-for  and  almost 
unwelcome  proselyte  presents  himself.  It  is  Saul,  who  finds  himself  an  object  of 
alarm  and  undisguised  mistrust.  The  way  is  opening  for  a  schism  between  them 
and  this  "  last  of  the  apostles,"  who  seeks  their  sympathy,  but  who  can  dispense 
with  it,  strong  in  his  own  independent  authority,  and  in  the  promised  presence  of 
the  Lord.  There  was  needed  at  that  moment  some  well-known  and  trusted  leader, 
large-hearted  enough  to  become  surety  for  the  former  persecutor,  and  to  stand  his 
friend.  This  friend  was  found  in  Barnabas.  It  was  he  who  joined  Peter's  hands 
with  Paul's,  and  who  told  the  tale  of  the  wonderful  conversion  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  dissolve  all  doubt.  The  "  son  of  consolation  "  appears  here  at  his  appropriate 
work,  reconciling  those  opposing  forces  with  the  sweet  reasonableness  of  his  own 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

gentler  spirit.  He  was  selected,  shortly  afterwards,  for  a  mission  in  which  the 
same  spirit  would  find  scope.  Tidings  had  reached  the  apostles  of  strange  successes 
attending  the  gospel  in  Antioch,  and  they  were  not  prepared  for  such  an  event.  The 
baptism  of  Cornelius  was  in  obedience  to  a  direct  revelation  from  heaven,  but  this 
larger  movement  appeared  unauthorised,  and  might  prove  unwarranted.  Barnabas 
was  accordingly  chosen  to  visit  the  spot  and  make  inquiry.  Now  it  is  not  altogether 
easy  for  any  man  to  give  unstinted  commendation  to  a  work  in  which  he  himself 
has  had  no  share.  He  is  apt  to  point  out  what  might  have  been  done  better,  rather 
than  what  has  been  done  well.  Finely  in  contrast  with  that  tendency  stands  out 
the  candid  and  generous  behaviour  of  Barnabas.  He  "  saw  the  grace  of  God," 
"  was  glad,"  and  expressed  himself  in  terms  of  warm  congratulation  and  approval. 
Nay,  he  threw  his  own  energies  into  the  glorious  enterprise,  and  "  exhorted  them 
all  that  with  purpose  of  heart  they  would  cleave  to  the  Lord."  When  he  departed 
he  left  many  further  converts  added  to  the  infant  Church,  and  the  impression  that 
"  he  was  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith."  Next  we  find  that 
by  his  urgency  Paul  was  brought  from  the  seclusion  of  Tarsus,  and  introduced  to 
the  field  of  work  which  lay  ready  for  him  in  Antioch.  It  was  through  his  generous 
co-operation  that  the  ministry  of  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  found  favourable 
opportunities  of  exercise.  But  from  that  hour  the  lustre  of  his  name  begins  to  pale 
beside  the  fervent  and  forward  energy  of  his  incomparable  companion.  We  find 
in  the  history  no  trace  of  any  jealousy ;  but  rather  tokens  of  a  noble  modesty, 
akin  to  that  of  the  Baptist  when  he  drew  back  into  the  shade  before  the  perfect 
hght  of  Christ.  This  man,  who,  when  others  shunned  Paul,  had  become  his  patron 
and  protector,  laying  him  under  no  common  obligation,  is  now  content  to  yield  the 
precedence,  and  to  walk  loyally  and  lovingly  at  his  side.  When  the  missionaries 
differed — if  we  have  to  choose  between  the  two — surely  it  was  Barnabas  who  erred 
upon  the  generous  side  ;  for  what  he  did  was  to  take  a  faint-hearted  brother  whom 
Paul  was  too  impatient  to  endure,  and  to  give  him  that  fresh  chance  of  honourable 
service  which  made  Mark  "  profitable  "  ever  afterwards  to  Christ  and  to  His  Church, 
n.  AU  will  acknowledge  the  peculiar  charm  which  attaches  to  the  true  "  son 
OF  CONSOLATION."  There  are  men  who  everywhere  leave  behind  them  a  sense  of 
irritation,  hke  winds  that  blow  dust  into  face  and  eyes.  They  are  the  opposites  to 
Barnabas.  There  was  sunshine  where  he  came.  At  his  approach  the  feeble 
gathered  strength,  and  trembUng  souls  crept  out  of  their  hiding  toward  the  hght. 
Hard  words  were  hushed  in  his  company ;  the  sternest  grew  gentle,  and  the  very 
churl  tried  to  be  liberal.  Yet  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  suspect  him  of  moral  weak- 
ness and  irresolution.  The  sunshine  has  its  strength,  as  well  as  the  wind,  though 
it  makes  much  less  noise.  Barnabas  was  once,  to  Paul's  great  wonder,  "  carried 
away  by  the  dissimulation  "  of  others  ;  but  his  very  wonder — "  even  Barnabas  !  " 
— shows  how  unusual  the  symptom  was.  For  "  sons  of  consolation  "  are  also 
sons  of  strong  encouragement,  who  can  themselves  burn  against  injustice  or 
hypocrisy,  and  inspire  others  with  a  kindred  zeal.  It  is  significant  that  heathen 
men  "  called  Barnabas  Jupiter,"  the  name  that  embodied  their  poor  conceptions  of 
what  was  greatest  and  best,  most  fatherly,  and  most  benignant.  We  recognise  the 
pref-ence  of  such  men  in  our  own  generation.  The  temper  of  the  moment  may  not 
tend  to  exalt  them,  or  to  press  their  example  on  our  imitation.  The  steruer  gifts 
may  be  mostly  in  request.  We  watch  with  mingled  awe  and  admiration  as  some 
impetuous  missionary  spirit  sweeps  by,  rousing  the  dull  Church  to  a  measure  of 
its  own  activity.  We  appla.ud  the  controversialists,  who  contend  for  separate  sides 
of  truth,  or  for  principles  which  they  reckon  overlooked.  No  doubt  there  is  great 
need  of  them.  Is  there  not  need  also  of  "the  son  of  consolation,"  and  may  he 
not  do  as  good  a  work  as  they?  Surely  it  is  not  below  the  ambition  of  the  strongest 
to  play  the  part  of  Barnabas  among  the  Churches  of  to-day.  As  long  as  so  many 
timid,  undecided  souls  remain,  needing  the  tenderest  touch  and  a  patience  almost 
motherlike  to  bring  them  to  decision ;  as  long  as  there  are  little  children  to  be 
drawn  into  the  Saviour's  arms  ;  as  long  as  the  Church  has  her  backsliders  to 
reclaim,  and  her  doubters  to  direct  and  encourage ;  so  long  there  will  be  ample 
occupation  for  such  a  man,  and  abundant  reward.  Nor  wiU  he  live  in  vain,  but 
rather  to  the  highest  purpose,  if  he  be  made  instrumental,  like  Barnabas,  in  dis- 
sipating suspicions,  and  confirming  friendships,  between  Christian  brethren.  {W. 
Brock.)  A  son  of  consolation : — While  some  good  people  are  overpraised,  there 
are  others  who  hardly  get  their  dues.  One  of  these  too  much  neglected  worthies 
is  Barnabas,  the  "son  of  consolation,"  or  "son  of  exhortation,"  as  some  Bible 
scholars  prefer  to  render  it.    How  seldom  do  we  hear  his  name  mentioned  either 


CHAP.  IV.]  THE  ACTS.  443 


in  the  pulpit  or  the  lecture-hall  or  anywhere  else  1  Yet,  to  my  fancy,  he  is  one  of 
the  very  noblest  of  the  New  Testament  heroes.  As  a  blind  person  may  detect  the 
presence  of  a  rose  by  its  fragrance,  so  this  good  man's  character  exhales  a  peculiarly 
sweet  perfume  of  godliness  to  those  who  will  study  it.  He  was  just  the  sort  of 
Christian  needed  in  aU.  our  Churches  in  these  days.  The  Bible  is  very  chary  of 
eulogies  ;  but  it  does  not  hesitate  to  call  him  "  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the  Holy 
Spirit."  In  some  vital  points  he  is  a  Christian  to  be  copied.  1.  He  was  a  native 
of  tbe  island  of  Cyprus,  which  was  renowned  for  the  worship  of  Venus,  and  the 
very  name  "  Cyprian  "  is  still  a  synonym  of  impurity.  But,  as  the  brightest  hght 
is  kindled  on  a  point  that  comes  out  of  a  bed  of  charcoal,  so  this  light-bearer  of 
the  gospel  came  out  of  a  very  dark  region  of  debauchery  and  idolatry.  His 
original  name  was  Joseph  ;  but  another  name  was  given  him  after  his  conversion 
to  Christ.  They  christened  him  Barnabas,  the  son  of  consolation.  That  is  a  name 
to  be  proud  of,  and  it  comprehends  a  vast  deal ;  it  signifies  a  helper  of  the  weak,  a 
guide  to  the  wanderer,  a  comfofter  of  the  sad,  a  succourer  of  the  perishing,  with 
an  eye  to  discover  misery  and  a  hand  to  relieve  it.  My  old  friend  WiUiam  Arnot 
has  well  said  that  this  name  bespeaks  a  fine  character.  "  To  possess  consolation  is 
to  give  it ;  not  to  give  it  is  not  to  possess  it.  The  more  of  it  you  have,  the  more 
you  may  give  ;  and  the  more  you  give  to  others,  the  more  you  retain  for  your  own 
use.  This  circle,  when  it  is  set  a-going,  moves  perpetually,  like  the  sea  giving  out 
its  waters  to  tbe  sky,  and  the  sky  sending  back  the  boon  by  rain  and  the  rivers  to 
the  sea  again."  The  power  of  this  man  lay  iu  the  same  quality  that  characterised 
nearly  all  those  first  converts  to  Christianity,  and  that  was  their  superabounding 
sympathy.  Barnabas,  if  in  New  York  or  Brooklyn  or  London  now,  would  likely  be 
found  in  a  mission  church  for  the  half  or  the  whole  of  every  Sabbath.  He  would 
show  us  how  to  bridge  the  chasm  between  wealth  and  poverty,  and  between 
Christian  culture  and  city  heathenism.  On  many  an  evening  during  the  week  he 
would  be  found  beside  the  squalid  bed  of  sickness,  or  amid  the  swaiming  outcasts 
of  the  slums.  When  the  members  of  our  Churches  become  "  sons  of  consolation  " 
in  the  broadest  sense  of  the  word,  bestowing  not  merely  their  dollars,  but  their 
time,  their  presence,  and  the  sympathy  of  their  hearts  upon  the  un christianised 
masses,  we  shall  have  a  primitive  and  Pentecostal  revival.  Personal  sympathy  is 
worth  more  to  the  poor,  the  suffering,  and  the  neglected  than  silver  and  gold. 
Pulpits  speak  only  for  an  hour  or  two,  and  then  only  to  those  who  fill  pews  before 
them ;  it  is  by  sermons  in  shoes — and  plenty  of  them — that  the  suffering  and  the 
sinning  only  can  be  reached.  The  curse  of  too  much  of  what  passes  for  Christianity 
is  itself  selfishness.  2.  There  is  another  plume  in  the  coronet  of  Barnabas.  He 
was  the  father  of  systematic  beneficence.  We  are  told  that  having  land  he  sold  it, 
and  brought  the  money  and  laid  it  at  the  apostles'  feet.  Having  given  his  heart 
to  Christ,  he  consecrated  a  goodly  portion  of  his  property  to  his  Master's  service. 
Some  others  of  the  new  converts  may  have  done  this  as  soon  as  he ;  but  he  is  the 
first  one  mentioned.  He  is,  therefore,  to  be  regarded  as  the  pioneer  in  that  long 
procession  of  systematic  givers  which  reaches  on  to  our  times,  and  numbers  in  its 
ranks  the  Nathaniel  Kij^ley  Cobbs  and  James  Lenoxes  and  William  E.  Dodges,  and 
many  other  bountiful  stewards  of  the  Lord ;  and  not  only  they  who  gave  of  their 
abundance,  but  every  conscientious  Christian  who  gives  according  to  his  means — 
however  humble — and  gives  spontaneously.  Barnabas  did  more  than  fling  loose 
money  into  Christ's  treasury.  He  sold  real  estate  and  contributed  the  proceeds. 
That  looks  as  if  there  were  real  self-denial  in  the  transaction,  and  that  the  man 
would  stand  a  pinch  for  Christ's  sake.  When  he  was  converted,  the  work  reached 
not  only  the  bottom  of  his  heart,  but  the  bottom  of  his  pocket.  {T.  L.  Cuyler.)  A 
son  of  consolation : — Who  is  the  man  who,  in  his  bereavement  or  pain,  receiving 
comfort  from  God,  radiates  it,  so  that  the  world  is  richer  by  the  help  the  Lord  has 
given  him?  It  is  the  reverent,  the  unselfish,  and  the  humble  man.  The  sunlight 
falls  upon  a  clod,  and  the  clod  drinks  it  in,  is  warmed  by  it  itself,  but  lies  as  black 
as  ever,  and  sheds  no  light.  But  the  sun  touches  a  diamond,  and  the  diamond 
almost  chills  itself  as  it  sends  out  in  radiance  on  every  side  the  light  that  has 
fallen  on  it.  So  God  helps  one  man  bear  his  pain,  and  nobody  but  that  one  man 
is  a  wliit  the  richer.  God  comes  to  another  sufferer,  reverent,  unselfish,  humble, 
and  the  lame  leap,  and  the  dumb  ppeak,  and  the  wretched  are  comforted  all 
around  by  the  radiated  comfort  of  that  happy  soul.  A  son  of  consolation  : — 

I.  Barnabas  was  a  Levite,  tet  he  possessed  land,  which  was  contrary  to  the  old 
law  of  Israel,  but  probably  on  account  of  great  and  frequent  changes  it  was  found 
impossible  to  maintain  the  ancient  constitution  in  its  integrity.     Barnabas  was  a 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

good  name  ;  but  how  rife  is  its  opposite — the  son  of  complaint,  of  gloom.  To  such 
a  man  everything  appears  iu  its  darkest  colours.  He  sees  no  green  on  the  earth, 
and  in  the  heavens  no  blue— all  is  seen  through  the  medium  of  a  jaundiced  eye. 
Barnabas  had  much  comfort  himself  because  he  had  much  to  bestow  on  others.  If 
we  see  streams  flowing  to  refresh  a  neighbourhood  we  argue  that  the  spring  is  full. 
His  great  contributions  did  not  embitter  his  spirit.  The  flow  of  bounty  from  that 
man's  hand  acted  as  the  flow  of  water  from  the  drain  on  a  ploughed  field — it 
sweetened  and  made  fertile  the  whole  breadth  of  his  life.  It  is  the  gorging  up  of 
water  for  want  of  outlet  that  makes  the  land  sour  and  leaves  it  barren.  Barnabas 
was  a  rich  man,  and  therefore  able  to  bestow  practical  consolation  ;  but  in  thus 
expending  his  wealth  he  acquired  the  better  and  more  enduring  riches.  II. 
Barnabas  was  a  Levite,  yet  he  was  a  son  of  consolation — how  unlike  many  of 
the  class  to  which  he  belonged,  who  "  despised  others."  See,  e.g.,  the  parable  of 
the  Good  Samaritan.  Yet  is  not  this  note  added  to  show  that  an  order  must  not 
be  blamed  for  the  vices  of  individual  members?  "Levi  had  a  remote  descendant 
called  Caiphas  ;  he  had  another  surnamed  Barnabas.  Let  those  who  assail  the 
ministrj'  and  other  professions  remember  this.  III.  Barnabas  was  a  Levite — A 
KELiGioDS  TEACHER.  He  could  administer  comfort  from  his  lips  as  well  as  from 
his  purse.  Many  can  only  give  lip  comfort ;  what  we  have,  then,  let  us  give 
cheerfully.  (IF.  Arnot.)  Of  the  country  of  Cypras. — Cyprus: — An  island  in 
the  Mediterranean,  one  hundred  and  sixty  miles  long  by  fifty  broad.  A  range  of 
mountains  runs  through  its  entire  length,  called  Oympus  by  the  ancients,  but  now 
known  by  sevei'al  names.  Salamis,  afterwards  called  Constantia,  was  one  of  the 
principal  cities,  and  Paphos  another.  The  island  was  colonised  by  Phcenicians  at 
a  remote  period,  and  afterwards  divided  among  petty  tyrants  when  it  became  sub- 
ject to  the  Persian  yoke.  Next  it  fell  under  the  sway  of  Alexander,  upon  whose 
death  it  fell,  with  Egypt,  to  the  share  of  Ptolemy  Lagos.  In  the  course  of  time  it 
passed  over  to  Eome,  in  whose  hands  it  was  during  the  New  Testament  period. 
Paul  and  Barnabas  visited  the  island,  and  preached  at  Salamis  and  Paphos,  where 
they  left  Christian  Churches.  When  the  empire  was  divided,  Cyprus  became  part 
of  the  Eastern  section.  Bichard  I.  took  it  in  1191,  and  sold  it  to  the  Templars, 
whose  oppression  drove  the  people  into  revolt,  liichard  resumf-d  the  sovereignty, 
and  gave  it  to  Guy  of  Lusignan,  the  expelled  king  of  Jerusalem,  in  1192.  The 
Lusignans  retained  it  for  nearly  three  centuries,  which  was  a  flourishing  period  for 
Cyprus.  The  Venetians  were  its  next  masters,  but  in  1470  Selim  II.  seized  it. 
*'  No  grass  grows  where  the  Turk  sets  his  hoof,"  and  ever  since  ruthless  despotism 
has  wasted  the  fnir  island,  so  that  from  1,000,000  in  the  days  of  Barnabas,  the 
population  has  dwindled  to  100,000.  Now  under  British  protection,  and  with 
British  enterprise,  capital,  and  missionary  zeal,  Cyprus  may  become  prosperous 
ouce  more.  (F.  A.  Warrinpton.)  Having  land,  sold  it,  and  brought  the  money 
and  laid  it  at  the  apostles'  feet. — Practicul  Cluistian  beiie/icence :  — The  good 
Duchess  of  Gordon  set  her  heart  upon  the  erection  of  a  school  and  chapel  in  a 
needy  district  of  her  neighbourhood.  The  Gordon  estatts  at  the  time  were  so 
encumbered  that  she  did  not  know  where  to  find  the  necessary  funds.  In  a  letter 
to  her  friend  Miss  Howe,  she  described  some  of  her  efforts  and  the  consequences. 
"  I  took  up  to  London,"  she  says,  "  a  gold  vase  that  cost  about  £1,200  in  hopes  of 
selling  it,  but  could  not  find  a  purchaser  even  at  h'llf  price.  I  have  still  left  it  to 
be  disposed  of.  The  Duchess  of  Beaufort,  hearing  of  my  vase,  thought  of  her 
diamond  earrings,  which  she  got  me  to  dispose  of,  for  a  chapel  in  Wales,  and  her 
diamonds  made  me  think  of  my  jewels ;  and  as  the  Duke  has  always  been  most 
anxious  for  the  chapel,  he  agreed  with  me  that  stones  were  much  prettier  in  a 
chapel  wall  than  round  one's  neck,  and  so  he  allowed  me  to  sell  £^100  worth,  or, 
rather,  what  brought  that,  for  they  cost  me  more  than  double.  The  chapel  is 
going  on  nicely,  and  I  have  still  enough  jewels  left  to  help  to  endow  it,  if  no  other  way 
should  open.  I  do  think  I  may  with  confidence  hope  for  a  blessing  on  this.  It  is 
no  sacrifice  to  me  whatever,  except  as  it  is  one  to  the  Duke,  who  is  very  fond  of 
seeing  me  fine,  and  was  brought  up  to  think  it  right."  The  chapel  cost  rather 
more  than  was  expected,  and  the  Duke,  following  up  his  wife's  example,  offered  of 
his  own  accord  to  sell  some  of  his  own  horses  to  make  up  the  deficiency.  (A. 
Moody  Shiart,  D.D.)  The  profit  and  rule  of  Christian  heneficence  : — "Since  I 
began  to  obey  the  law,"  said  a  thriving  merchant  to  me,  "  I  have  not  only  been 
greatly  prospered,  but  I  have  found  my  ability  to  give  somewhat  largely  the  greatest 
luxury  of  my  life.  The  money  is  laid  by;  the  call  comes,  and  I  am  not  tempted  to 
the  baseness  of  inventing  excuses  ;  I  generally  have  something,  not  always  enough. 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  445 

for  every  deserving  appeal ;  I  make  short  work  of  it,  for  time  I  cannot  spare,  and 
as  soon  as  I  get  the  facts,  and  am  sure  as  to  the  claimant,  I  give  him  cheerfully 
what  I  think  I  owe  to  his  cause."  I  know  another  and  a  wealthier  man,  who  said 
he  and  his  wife  had  an  understanding.  When  his  wife  thought  they  were  rich 
enough  to  set  up  their  carriage,  the  answer  was,  "  Yes,  my  dear ;  it  will  cost 
just  so  much  a  year;  we  can  afford  it,  and  you  deserve  it  if  you  approve  my 
increasing  my  charities  by  an  equal  sum."  Is  not  this  the  law  of  Christian  luxury? 
I  can  buy  such  a  picture,  or  give  such  an  entertainment,  only  when  I  give  an 
equivalent  to  Christ's  poor  and  to  the  glory  of  His  cross  and  crown.  (Bjp.  Cleveland 
Coxe.) 


CHAPTEE  V. 

Vebs.  1-11.  But  a  certain  man  named  Ananias,  with  Sapphira  his  wife,  sold  a 
possession. — Ananias  and  Sapphira : — The  word  Ananias  means  "  grace  of  God  "  ; 
and  the  word  Sapphira  signifies  just  "  a  sapphire,"  the  familiar  jewel  of  brilliance 
and  beauty.  We  should  suppose  these  two  people  had  an  unusually  bright  pros- 
pect in  the  outlet.  Somebody  there  was  who  loved  them  enough  to  give  them 
very  fine  names  when  they  were  little.  Ananias  lied  ;  then  it  was  that  "  the  grace 
of  God  "  went  out  of  him  for  ever.  Sapphira  lied  ;  when  a  woman  loses  the  truth, 
it  is  as  if  the  last  light  went  out  of  a  sapphire.  (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Ananias 
and  Sapjihira : — Hitherto  all  has  been  progress  and  triumph.  Faith  has  become 
enthusiasm.  Earth  caught  the  colouring,  yea,  the  very  life  of  heaven.  Private 
ownership  was  swallowed  up  by  social  beneficence,  and  little  restrictions  and  classi- 
fications were  swept  away  by  a  generosity  akin  to  the  love  of  God.  Now  we  come 
upon  another  aspect  of  affairs.  We  find  a  twist  in  the  golden  thread.  The  whole 
thing  must  come  to  a  stop  until  this  be  rectified.  Think  of  the  Church  standing  still, 
though  glowing  with  the  enthusiasm  of  love,  until  judgment  be  satisfied  I  Why 
not  treat  the  offence  as  a  trifling  one  ?  Why  not  pass  it  over  without  notice  ? 
Because  the  Church  is  called  unto  holiness,  and  sin  must  ever  bring  down  the 
anger  and  judgment  of  God.     From  the  conduct  of  these  people  we  see — I.  The 

VITAL    DIFFERENCE    BETWEEN    THE     SPIRIT    AND    THE    FASHION    OF    CHRISTIANITY.       We 

might  say  between  a  principle  and  a  haere  rule.  Ananias  tried  to  be  a  Christian 
from  the  outside.  He  put  the  hands  of  the  clock  to  the  right  time,  but  left  the 
mainspring  broken  and  the  pendulum  still.  1.  We  may  imitate  Christ,  and  yet 
not  l<now  Him  after  the  spirit.  2.  We  may  mingle  with  Christians,  and  yet  know 
nothing  of  the  spiritual  power  of  Christianity.  The  incident  says,  "  Ye  cannot 
serve  God  and  mammon."  II.  The  fatal  temptation  to  give  the  part  as  the 
WHOLE.  Observe  not  the  part  instead  of  the  whole  :  not  to  give  the  part  distinctly 
and  avowedly  as  the  part ;  but  to  give  it  as  if  it  were  really  all.  This  is  illustrated 
— 1.  In  speaking  half-heartedly  as  if  sincerely.  2.  In  giving  a  small  contribution 
as  if  it  exhausted  our  resources.  "  I  cannot  afford  more,"  is  the  chief  lie  of  the 
Church.  3.  In  concealing  our  convictions  by  using  words  with  various  meanings. 
4.  In  having  outward  associations  which  do  not  express  the  whole  tendency  and 
trust  of  the  heart.  5.  In  modifying  vows  according  to  changes  in  circumstances — 
young  man  dedicating  himself  to  the  ministry  :  young  tradesman  vowing  to  conse- 
crate his  property  :  young  Christian  vowing  to  offer  a  solemn  testimony  for  Christ. 
III.  The  concealed  sin  as  well  as  the  public  iniquity  will  be  followed  by 
THE  judgment  OF  GoD.  "  Thou  hast  not  hed  unto  men,  but  unto  God."  "  How 
is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together  to  tempt  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord?  "  1.  There  is 
yet  to  be  a  reading  of  hearts.  2.  Not  only  what  we  have  done,  but  what  we  have 
left  undone  is  to  be  judged.  3.  Sins  which  apparently  do  no  harm  to  society  are 
to  be  punished.  The  voice  of  the  judgment  is,  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death." 
Application — 1.  The  Church  is  to  be  holy.  2.  Though  hand  join  in  hand  the 
wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished.  3.  DiscipUne  is  of  greater  consequence  than 
numbers.  4.  The  Christian  power  which  heals  one  man  destroys  another.  Con- 
trast the  cripple  with  Ananias.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Ananias  and  Sapphira  : — 
The  apostolic  Church  had  been  welded  into  a  remarkable  unity  of  experience  and 
purpose.  All  hours  and  places  seemed  filled  with  the  presence  of  God.  Men  had 
forgotten  their  selfishness,  and  Uved  for  each  other  and  their  Lord.     Pentecost  and 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t. 

millennium  were  apparently  but  a  little  way  and  a  short  time  apart;  and  then 
suddenly,  like  lightning  from  a  clear  sky,  came  the  crime  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira. 
The  Church  was  the  Church  militant,  and  not  triumphant,  after  all.  The  Judas 
among  the  apostles  had,  and  was  to  continue  to  have,  his  descendants.  The  Church 
in  the  world  was  to  be  crippled  and  compromised  by  the  world  in  the  Church.  The 
transaction  was  typical  and  the  narrative  suggestive.  Notice,  then — I.  The  cha- 
KACTER  OF  THE  SIN.  It  was  uot  simple  falsehood.  Misrepresentation,  deceit,  lying, 
in  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life,  are  evils  of  incalculable  magnitude  ;  but  this  sin  was 
the  attempt  to  deceive  and  defraud  God.  In  the  fervour  of  their  new-born  faith 
and  experience,  men  were  parting  with  their  property,  and  consecrating  the  price 
of  it  to  Christ  and  His  Church.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  had  seen  enough  of  the 
new  religion  to  wish  to  be  numbered  among  its  followers  ;  so  they  plotted  to  buy 
discipleship  at  a  cheaper  rate  than  their  neighbours.  In  this  they  thought  that 
they  were  measuring  their  business  capacity  against  the  business  ignorance  of 
Peter ;  in  fact,  they  were  trying  to  deceive  the  eyes  that  look  through  eternity. 
Many  a  man  since  has  ventured  upon  the  same  experiment.  In  every  community 
there  are  some  who  are  convinced  of  the  worth  of  religion,  and  outwardly  unite 
with  the  Church.  Neither  their  conduct  nor  their  neglect  is  such  as  to  subject 
them  to  discipline  ;  and  yet  they  are  far  from  having  made  a  complete  surrender  of 
themselves  to  God.  Their  religious  life  is  a  compromise.  The  bulk  of  their  time 
and  energy  is  devoted  to  self  and  the  world ;  the  dust  and  sweepings  are  offered  to 
God.  Fingers  that  glisten  with  diamonds  drop  dimes  into  the  contribution-box. 
Luxuries  are  cheerfully  paid  for ;  but  poverty  and  prudence  are  urged  as  excuses 
for  mere  pittances  towards  the  cause  of  God.  Ananias  in  broadcloth  and  Sapphira 
in  silk  sit  in  the  churches  every  sabbath,  trying  to  cheapen  the  bargain  with  God, 
and  cheating  as  well,  by  offering  less  than  complete  surrender.  II.  The  origin  of 
THE  SIN.  In  general  it  was  due  to  an  evil  heart,  but  its  specific  root  was  the  love 
of  monfy.  1.  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  while  they  were  not  averse  to  the  reputation 
of  having  made  great  sacrifices  for  the  gospel,  could  not  give  up  the  pleasure 
of  feeling  that  they  had  property ;  and  so,  as  avaricious  people,  they  "  kept  back 
part  of  the  price."  2.  Perhaps  thej'  desired  to  have  the  means  of  purchasing  more 
^  luxuries  than  were  enjoyed  by  those  who  "  had  all  things  in  common  "  ;  and  so,  as 
selfish  people,  they  "  kept  back  part  of  the  price."  3.  Not  impossibly,  they  were 
uncertain  as  to  the  permanence  of  this  new  faith,  whose  coUapse  would  leave  them 
without  means  of  support ;  and  so,  as  prudent  people,  they  "  kept  back  part  of  the 
price."  In  our  day,  when  men  are  called  to  choose  between  piety  and  property, 
there  are  many  who  prevaricate,  and  end  with  a  compromise.  The  great  aggressive 
enterprises  of  the  Church  are  crippled  for  lack  of  financial  support,  and  yet  a  very 
considerable  portion  of  the  wealth  of  Christian  lands  is  in  the  hands  of  professed 
disciples.  They  are  prodigal  in  their  prayers  and  hymns  and  exhortations,  but 
close-handed  with  their  money.  Like  the  tree  in  the  ancient  legend,  which  uttered 
a  moan  and  bled  whenever  a  twig  was  broken  off,  they  writhe  when  forced  to  give 
for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  men.  The  old  poison  of  avarice  is  still  in 
the  veins  of  the  Church  ;  and  Christ  is  dishonoured,  and  thousands  perish,  because 
so  many,  who  call  themselves  His  followers,  "  keep  back  part  of  the  price."  III. 
The  discovery  of  the  sin.  It  seemed  unlikely  that  the  transaction  would  be 
made  public.  The  land  was  probably  sold  to  some  one  outside  the  company. 
Ananias  and  Sapphira  would  not  circulate  the  story  of  what  they  had  done.  But 
there  was  an  uncalculated  factor  in  the  equation.  It  affected  the  kingdom  of  God, 
as  well  as  the  real  estate  market.  It  was  fair  dealing  as  between  man  and  man ;  as 
between  man  and  God  it  was  fraud,  and  so  it  was  sure  to  be  discovered.  It  is  a 
truth  which  men  are  slow  to  learn,  that  there  is  a  Divine  detective  system  in  the 
universe.  It  is  easy  to  deceive  the  world.  Men  may  consider  us  generous,  when 
in  reality  we  are  pinched  in  our  charities;  they  may  call  us  self-sacrificing,  when 
in  fact  self-pleasing  is  the  sovereign  motive  of  our  lives  ;  they  may  esteem  us 
devout,  when  we  ai'e  cold  and  formal :  but  what  is  our  trickery  worth,  so  long  as 
there  is  One  that  knows  us  altogether  ?  Dionysius  constructed  a  prison,  so  that  he 
could  hear  all  that  was  said  by  the  prisoners,  and  so  made  them  self-accusers  in  the 
dav  of  their  trial.  To  God  this  world  is  one  vast  whispering-gallery,  and  every  sin 
which  men  commit  reports  itself  to  Him.  What  a  wonderful  day  that  will  be  when 
the  secrets  of  all  hearts  are  made  known  I  Men  ought  always  to  live  as  in  the  light 
of  the  Great  White  Throne.  IV.  The  punishment  of  the  sin.  1.  It  was  startling 
and  severe.  One  moment  Ananias  and  Sapphira  stood  before  the  apostle  in  the 
flush  of  life  and  health,  with  the  lie  upon  their  lips  ;  the  next  they  were  iu  eternity, 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  447 

beginning  the  experience  of  its  unchanging  awards.  The  penalty  might  be  judged 
extreme  for  a  single  sin :  but  (1)  At  the  outset  of  the  Christian  Church  it  was 
important  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  the  liberty  of  the  gospel  was  not  license.  (2) 
More  than  that,  the  sin  itself  was  significant.  As  the  single  blossom  is  evidence 
whether  the  stock  is  weed  or  flower,  so  this  action  was  proof  of  a  heart  alienated 
from  God.  Grace  is  ample  in  its  provisions,  but  strict  in  its  conditions.  The 
Bedeemer  will  have  the  whole  of  men,  or  He  will  have  none  of  them.  "  Every 
branch  that  beareth  not  fruit,  He  taketh  away."  2.  It  was  anticipative  and  repre- 
sentative. The  judgment  continues  to  be  executed.  Men  now  who  attempt  to 
defraud  God  are  not  beaten  down  as  with  a  lightning-stroke  ;  but,  all  the  same, 
they  die  spiritually.      (Monday   Club  Sermons.)  Deception   exposed  and  pun- 

ished : — I.    Impious    deception.      1.    The    possession    devoted.      "  Ananias   with 
Sapphira    his    wife    sold    a    possession  "    (chap.   iii.    45  ;    iv.    34  ;    Lev.    xxvii. 
28  ;    Eccles.    v.    4).      2.    The    part    kept    back    (Mai.    iii.    8  ;     Josh.    vii.    11  ; 
John  xii.  6 ;    1  Tim.  vi.  10).     d.    Counterfeit  benevolence.      Lessons  :    (1)   Has 
as  its  motive  the  praise   of  men  rather   than   the   approval   of   God.      (2)  Aims 
chiefly  at  making  a  big  impression  upon  people.     (3)  Aims  to  give  in  such  a  way  as 
shall  most  advertise  the  donor.     (4)  Always  tries  to  get  credit  for  giving  more  than 
it   actually  does.     II.  Immediate  detection.     1.  The  source  of   the   sin  (ver.  3 ; 
John  xiii.  27;  Eph.  iv.  27  ;  Jas.  iv.  7).     2.  The  inexcusableness  of  the  sin  (ver.  4; 
Lev.  i.  3  ;  Exod.  xxv.  2 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  7).     3.  The  nature  of  the  sin.     Thou  hast  not 
lied  unto  men,  but  unto  God  (Psa.  li.  4  ;  Gen.  xxxix.  9  ;  Luke  xv.  21).    Lessons  : 
(1)  Sin  is  suggested  by  Satan.     (2)  No  sin  is  unavoidable — "Why hath  Satan  filled 
thine  heart  to  lie  ?  "     (3)  Sin  is  inexcusable — no  one  can  plead  compulsion.     (4) 
Sin  is  never  concealed  from  the  eyes  of  God.     (5)  Sin  is  not  so  much  a  trespass 
against  men,  as  a  trespass  against  God.     III.  Instant  death.     1.  Ananias.     (1) 
The  judgment.      "  Fell  down  and  gave  up  the  ghost "  (chap.  xiii.  11 ;  Numb.  xvi. 
32  ;  2  Kings  i.  12).     (2)  The  effect.     "  Great  fear  "  (Lev.  x.  3 ;  Numb.  xvi.  34 ; 
Deut.  xiii.  11).     (3)  The  burial  (Lev.  x.  5 ;  2  Sam.  xviii.  17  ;  John  xix.  40).     2. 
Sapphira.     (1)  Her  examination  (Rev.  ii.  21 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9).     (2)  Her  sin  pointed 
out  (Prov.  xi.  21 ;  Exod.  xvii.  7 ;  1  Cor.  x.  9).     (3)  Her  sentence  (Prov.  xix.  9 ;  Psa. 
Iv.  23  ;  Job  xxxi.  3  ;  Prov.  xxix.  1).     3.  The  great  fear  (Psa.  cxi.  10;  Matt.  x.  28  ; 
Phil.  ii.  12).     Lessons  :  (1)  Judgment  may  tarry,  but  it  is  sure  to  come  at  the  last 
as  a  lightning  stroke.     (2)  In  the  day  of  judgment  aU  hypocrites  will  be  exposed. 
(3)  Judgment  is  not  pronounced  until  opportunity  for  repentance  is  given.     (4) 
Judgment  upon  one  or  two  often  is  mercy  to  the  many.     (5)  The  judgments  of 
God  upon  iniquity  should  cause  a  wholesome  fear  of  the  Lord.     (6)  The  judgments 
of  God  are  to  be  feared  by  the  workers  of  iniquity.     There  are  limits  even  to  His 
forbearance.     (Sunday  School  Times.)         Ananias  and  Sapphira : — I.  The  sin.     It 
was  of  no  common  magnitude.     If  we  consider  the  circumstances  we  shall  find — 1. 
That  this  falsehood  was  an  imposition  on  the  society  with  which  Ananias  was  him- 
self connected.     2.  That  it  was  designed  to  defraud  the  ap'>stles  and  the  whole 
Church.     3.  That  he  could  plead  no  appearance  of  external  temptation.    4.  That 
his  purpose  was  veiled  under  the  pretence  of  religious  principles.     5.  That  his  sin 
was  deliberately  and  presumptuously  directed  against  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.     II. 
The  punishment.     1.  It  was  death.     2.  It  was  inflicted  without  warning.    3.  It 
immediately  followed  the  presumptuous  transgression.     4.  It  produced  sreat  fear 
upon  all  the  Church,  and  upon  as  many  as  heard  of  it.     III.  Reflections.     1. 
That  men  may  enjoy  high  advantages,  may  make  a  fair  profession  of  religion,  and 
may  obtain  admission  to  its  most  sacred  external  privileges,  and  yet  may  remain 
slaves  to  vicious  dispositions,  and  strangers  to  the  fear  of  God.    Other  examples  we 
have  in  Cain,  Esau,  and  Judas.     2.  That  men  may  travel  far  in  the  journt-y  of  life 
before  they  meet  with  those  peculiar  circumstances  which  are  fitted  to  discover  and 
display  their  true  characters.    So  it  was  with  Balaam,  Hazael,  and  Judas.     3.  How 
corrupting,  enslaving,  debasing  is  the  spirit  of  avarice  (Prov.  xxi.  26  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  9, 
10).     4.  The  encroaching  nature  of  sinful  principles  and  dispositions.     Covetous- 
ness  led  to  deliberate,  aggravated  falsehood  and  fraud,  and  to  impiety  so  presump- 
tuous as  to  provoke  tlie  immediate  judgment  of  God.     One  transgression  of  the 
Divine  law  renders  others  in  some  degree  necessary,  and  at  the  same  time  renders 
the  mind  blind  to  the  sad  consequences  that  must  result  from  them.     5.  The 
odious  nature  and  pernicious  tendency  of  the  vices  of  lying,  fraud,  and  hypocrisy 
(Prov.  vi.  16,  19 ;  Hab.  ii.  9 ;  Jer.  xxii.  13 ;  Mai.  i.  14).     Conclu-^ion :  The  fear- 
ful punishment  of  these  two  false  disciples  leads  to  the  consideration  of — 1.  The 
omniscience  of  God.     No  human  eye  saw  Cain  murder  his  brother.     Gehazi  flat- 


448  THE  BBILICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

tered  himself  that  he  was  perfectly  secure  from  detection.  Ananias  and  Sapphira 
had  no  doubt  prepared  their  plan  with  all  possible  secrecy ;  but  they  all  forgot  that 
"  all  things  are  naked  and  open  to  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  2. 
How  tremendous  is  the  power  of  God  over  His  creatures !  He  can  bestow  life,  and 
He  can  withdraw  it  at  His  pleasure  (Deut.  xxxii.  39).  (H.  Thomson,  D.D.) 
Ananias  and  Sapphira: — The  sin  and  punishment  of  this  pair  of  hypocrites  present 
the  first  trace  of  a  shade  on  the  bright  form  of  the  young  Church.  As  in  Eden  the 
enemy  could  not  assert  his  evil  sway  in  his  proper  form,  so  in  his  efforts  in  the 
Church  he  assumed  a  guise  suited  to  etfect  his  purpose — the  guise  of  goodness.  A 
foe  within  is  more  to  be  dreaded  than  a  foe  without.  But  no  sooner  did  evil  reveal 
itself  within  the  Christian  circle  than  the  Spirit;  detected  and  judged  it.  The  word 
"but"  put  the  conduct  of  Ananias  and  his  wife  in  sharp  contrast  with  that  of 
Barnabas.  Matthew  Henry  calls  it  the  "  melancholy  itwt."  We  pass  suddenly 
from  the  warm  sunshine  of  the  "  son  of  consolation"  to  the  gloom  of  hypocrisy 
and  fraud.  Evil  is  often  a  close  neighbour  to  good.  "  The  sons  of  God  came  to 
present  themselves  before  the  Lord,  and  Satan  also  came  among  them."  How 
near  to  each  other  are  chaff  and  wheat !  but  the  chaff  is  not  wheat,  and  is  finally 
separated  from  it.  Teaching  by  opposites  is  an  impressive  method  of  instruction. 
I.  The  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  "Lying  unto  the  Holy  Ghost."  In  vers. 
3  and  4  the  personality  and  deity  of  the  Spn-it  are  asserted  in  an  incidental  way. 
Peter  varies  the  charge  of  lying  to  the  Spirit  in  the  third  verse  to  lying  to  God  in 
the  fourth.  It  is  noteworthy  that  a  similar  exchange  of  expression  occurs  in  Psa. 
Ixxviii.  36 — "lied  unto  Him,"  and  ver.  41,  "tempted  God."  Numb.  xi.  and  xiv. 
clearly  show  that  the  righteous  judgment  which  Israel's  "lying"  to  Gad  and 
"  tempting  "  Him  provoked  was  quite  analogous  to  this  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira. 
Their  case  was  aggravated  far  beyond  that  of  Simon  Magus  or  of  Elynias.  It 
resembles  more  closely  that  of  Nadab  and  Abihu,  of  Achan  and  of  Gehazi  (Lev.  x. ; 
Josh.  vii. ;  2  Kings  v.  20-27),  but  was  more  criminal,  because  committed  against 
greater  light  and  intensified  by  a  more  profound  hypocrisy.  Let  us  note  some  of 
its  aggravations.  1.  Their  act  was  gratuitous.  2.  It  was  marked  by  covetousness. 
3.  Unbehef  also  entered  into  their  guilt.  (1)  They  distrusted  God.  "  Suppose  this 
community  of  goods  should  become  exhausted,  what  then  ?  "  (2)  There  was  the 
feeling  that  they  would  not  and  could  not  be  detected  in  their  deed.  4.  The  sin 
was  preconcerted.  They  "  agreed  together  "  to  deceive  the  Church  and  the  Spirit 
in  the  Church.  The  plan  was  concocted  deliberately  and  dispassionately.  5.  The 
devil's  agency  in  the  sin.  The  question  "  why  "  implies  that  resistance  to  Satan's 
influence  had  been  possible.  Ananias  is  addressed,  not  as  a  helpless  creature 
whom  the  enemy  had  made  his  tool,  but  as  one  who  had  made  him  his  partner 
and  abettor.  "  Filled  thine  heart "  means  sompfliini?  more  than  to  suggest  or  to 
encourage;  it  means  affections  engrossed  and  will  do  vnated.  II.  Their  punish- 
ment. It  was  instantaneous.  '  As  their  sin  <  ballenged  uoth  the  omniscience  and 
justice  of  God,  He  at  once  vindicated  the  ho.  ness  an  .  majesty  of  His  character. 
But  why  were  these  persons  so  swiftly  and  sev»-reiy  judged?  Have  not  men  lied 
to  God  since?  Let  these  points  be  noted — 1.  The  sin  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira 
was  peculiarly  heinous  and  odious.  2.  At  their  death  "  great  fear  came  upon  all." 
To  produce  this  was  doubtless  one  of  the  objects  intended.  It  was  important  also 
as  a  permanent  testimony  against  similar  offences  in  every  age  of  the  Church.  3. 
This  judgment  connects  with  God's  dispensational  ways.  At  the  opening  of  an 
economy  a  standard  is  established  designed  to  characterise  the  entire  period.  At 
the  beginning  any  gross  departure  is  immediately  punished.  The  first  sabbath- 
breaker,  the  trespass  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  at  the  first  founding  of  the  priesthood, 
and  that  of  Achan  at  the  first  entrance  into  Canaan,  were  punished  with  death. 
Such  inflictions  are  at  the  start  the  exhibition  of  God's  thoughts  as  to  what  the 
economy  should  be.  Nothing  false,  hypocritiod,  or  presumptuous  is  to  be  tolerated 
in  it.  III.  The  lessons.  1.  The  Divine  abhorrence  of  prevarication.  If  false- 
hood kindle  among  men  the  deepest  resentment,  what  must  be  God's  feelings 
toward  the  hypocrite  ?  2.  The  certainty  of  the  exposure  of  hypocrisy.  All  that  is 
required  is  some  pressure.  "Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  3.  Religious 
enthusiasm  without  grace  is  dangerous.  People  run  fearful  risks  when  they  profess 
more  than  their  spiritual  strength  can  carry.  In  times  of  great  religious  excite- 
ment men  pledge  themselves  to  what  they  cannot  fulfil.  Or  remarkable  experiences 
are  claimed  ;  then  trials  are  encountered,  and  failure  succeeds.  Pride  forbids  the 
acknowledgment  of  failure ;  professions  are  as  loud  as  ever.  And  for  all  this 
there  is  no  basis  in  fact — it  is  a  mere  mask  to  hide  the  true  state  of  the 


CHAP.  T.]  THE  ACTS.  449 

heart.      How  much   safer  and  nobler   is    the   honest    confession    of   a    break- 
down than   such    loud    and    hollow   protestations !      (W,    G.   Moorchead,   I).D.) 
Ananias  and  Sapphira — the  eiiormity  of  religious  pretension : — I.  The  sin  generating 
powEB  OF  AVARICE.     "The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil."     II.  An  undue 
ATTENTION  TO  PUBLIC  SENTIMENT.   Ananias  and  Sapphira,  without  any  heart  sympathy 
with  the  community  of  goods,  professed  to  adopt  it  because  it  was  popular.     They 
wished  to  appear  as  good  as  others,  and  did  outwardly  that  for  which  they  had  no 
real  respect.     III.  A  spiritual  connection  with  the  evil  one.     "  He  is  a  har  and 
the  father  of  it."    IV.  Keligious  contributions  regarded  as  crime  (ver.  4).     There 
was  no  necessity  for  them  to  give  it.     God  does  not  want  our  property  except  as  it 
expresses  our  loving  loyalty.     Better  far  to  hold  money  as  a  miser  than  to  give  it  if 
the  heart  does  not  go  with  it.     Gifts  to  pacify  conscience  or  for  display,  or  to  get  it 
back  with  interest,  is  an  insult  to  Omniscience.     Great  contributions  may  be  great 
sins.     V.  A  deliberate  attempt  to  impose  upon  God  and  His  Church  (ver.  9). 
VI.  A  solemn  display  of  Divine  displeasure.     Conclusion :  1.  Social  benevolence 
is  the  law  of  Christianity.     2.  The  tendency  to  depravity  is  to  counterfeit  goodness. 
3.  Satan's  influence  is  no  palliation  of  man's  crime.     4.  Hypocrisy  must  one  day 
be  unmasked  and  punished.    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)       The  sin  and  the  doom  of  Ananias 
and  Sapphira : — Note — I.  A  particular  state  op  things  occasioned  by  peculiar  and 
temporary  circumstances.     Many  who  were  strangers  in  Jerusalem  would  wish  to 
remain ;   many  would  be  detained  longer  than  they  anticipated ;  there  might  be 
serious  consequences  to  some  of  them  in  relation  to  the  synagogue,  and  they  might 
be  in  danger  of  the  confiscation  of  their  goods ;  and  perhaps  there  was  an  impres- 
sion that  the  time  was  nigh  when  Christ  would  come,  and  when  all  property  would 
cease.     But,  along  with  that,  there  was  the  gush  of  new  feeling  filling  their  hearts 
under  the  influence  of  their  new  faith.    And  so  they  clung  to  one  another  as  really 
"  members  one  of  another  "  ;  and  they  showed  it  in  this  way.   But — 1.  It  was  never 
laid  down  by  the  apostles  as  a  principle  of  the  Church.    This  is  distinctly  stated  by 
Peter.    It  was  necessary,  however,  for  money  to  be  got.     The  most  spiritual  society 
and  plans  cannot  go  on  without  money.     Here  were  many  who  at  this  time,  and  as 
public  men,  could  not  be  doing  anything,  and  many  who  were  likely  to  be  drawn 
into  difliculty  through  their  new  faith ;  and  the  easiest  and  simplest  way,  to  men 
who  were  not  pohtical  economists,  was  just  to  throw  the  money  into  a  common 
fund,  and  to  live  upon  that  as  long  as  they  could.     But  it  is  evident  from  the 
Epistles  that  it  never  was  taught  as  a  part  of  Christianity,  for  they  recognise  differ- 
ences of  rank  and  circumstance,  and  they  do  not  call  upon  the  rich  to  throw 
everything  into  a  common  fund.     They  prescribe  appropriate  duties  to  rich  and 
poor,  but  they  do  not  say  that  these  distinctions  are  to  be  done  away.     Christianity 
is  not  so  absurd  a  thing.    If  it  were  a  matter  of  positive  obligation  upon  a  Christian 
to  part  with  private  property  because  wrong  in  itself,  terrible  consequences  would 
follow.     If  it  is  wrong  in  me  to  have  house  or  land,  it  is  wrong  for  me  to  sell  it  to 
anybody  else.     True,  indeed,  you  may  come  in  with  the  idea  that  it  is  wrong  for  a 
Christian  to  have  these  things,  and  that  a  Christian  (or  a  church)  is  to  sell  house 
and  land.     But  are  you  going  to  doom  a  part  of  the  earth  to  be  eternally  "the 
world" — unbeUevers,  to  whom  you  wiU  sell  these  things  ?    Let  us  remember  that 
the  gospel  is  intended  to  be  universal,  and  that  you  are*not  to  lay  down  as  a  positive 
duty  of  the  Church  anything  which  all  men  cannot  do.     And  all  men  cannot  do 
this.     As  long  as  the  earth  lasts,  there  will  be  the  land  and  fields  and  houses  and 
private  possessions ;  and  if  Christianity  is  to  be  a  thing  filling  the  earth,  depend 
upon  it,  it  never  can  do  that  if  aU  people  are  to  part  with  their  possessions.    Why, 
if  Christianity  is  to  be  universal,  the  time  will  come  when  there  will  be  nobody  to 
buy.    I  do  not  think,  therefore,  that  this  is  laid  down  as  an  obligation,  or  intended 
to  be  permanent,  or  that  it  involves  in  it  a  fixed  principle  that  can  become  universal. 
2.  It  should,  however,  be  remembered  that  a  strong  religious  faith  will  bring  Divine 
and  eternal  things  very  close  to  a  man ;  and  under  its  deep  influence  he  will  learn 
to  hold  cheaply  the  possessions  of  time,  feeling  that  he  knows  not  at  what  hour  the 
Son  of  Man  may  come,  when  he  must  pass  away  from  these  things  it  they  do  not 
pass  away  from  him.     3.  Christians  are  to  feel  that  they  are  members  one  of 
another,  and  that  if  one  member  suffers  others  must  sympathise.    But  then  the 
principle  should  be  carried  out  fully  ;  all  men  should  remember  that  they  are  caUed 
upon  to  do  this.     And  in  this  way  the  operation  and  influence  of  institutions  and 
laws  and  habits  are  to  be  looked  at  and  regarded,  and  everything  which  will  operate 
with  any  crushing  power  upon  a  part  of  society ;  and  the  principle  of  pure  humanity 
and  Christian  feeling  should  lead  men  to  take  out  of  the  way  what  will  injure  a 
VOL.  I.  29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

brother,  and  to  impart  of  their  substance  and  their  sympathy  for  the  promotion  of 
universal  happiness  and  tranquillity  and  comfort.  4.  There  are  extraordinary  times 
and  circumstances  when  very  extraordinary  things  may  be  required.  There  may 
be  times  when  a  peculiar  and  extraordinary  call  shall  be  made  upon  the  libt-rality 
of  the  Church.  And  men  in  the  Church  may  feel  themselves  called  to  a  peculiar 
vocation ;  they  may  feel  that  God  is  urging  them  by  His  providence  to  the  fulfilment 
of  a  mission  for  which  they  must  free  themselves  from  any  entanglement.  Barnabas 
had  land,  and  he  sold  it,  and  he  stood  from  that  time  forth  a  poor  man,  resting 
upon  the  Church ;  but  then  he  was  free  to  go  anywhere — and  he  did  go,  fulfilling  a, 
mission  to  mankind.  But  you  cannot  make  that  universal  with  respect  to  all  men. 
II.  This  state  of  things  became  a  snaee  to  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  and  led  thkm 
INTO  SIN.  I  daresay  a  public  opinion  sprung  up  among  Christians,  and  perhaps 
they  might  look  rather  coldly  upon  those  that  did  not  do  what  others  were  doing. 
I  daresay»there  was  some  kind  of  distinction  thrown  about  those  who  were  con- 
spicuous for  sympathy  of  this  sort.  And  it  made  Ananias  and  his  wife  wish  for  the 
distinction  without  being  willing  to  pay  the  price  for  it.  And  so  they  agreed  to  sell 
their  property,  and  to  lay  down  a  part  of  the  price,  pretending  it  was  the  whole, 
and  then  to  stand  there  as  if  they  had  stripped  themselves,  and  to  be  claimants 
upon  the  common  fund.  This  sin  had  some  tremendous  aggravations.  Note — 1. 
The  hypocrisy  of  the  whole  procedure.  They  were  pretending,  of  course,  to  be 
moved  by  a  Divine  influence ;  to  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  pretending  to  give 
a  sacred  thing,  "  Corban,"  given  up  for  the  service  of  God  and  of  His  people — and 
yet  they  were  not  doing  it.  And  it  was  to  get  an  odour  of  sanctity.  2.  The  delibe- 
rateness  of  it.  It  was  not  a  thing  done  upon  sudden  temptation.  They  had  their 
object ;  they  formed  their  plan ;  they  determined  upon  it,  and  went  about  its  execu- 
tion. When  they  met  again,  could  they  pray  ?  Oh  !  what  an  extinction  there 
must  be  of  everything  like  personal  and  conjugal  piety  when  they  rose  up  to  do 
this  thing  1  Ah !  when  men  agree  together  to  do  a  great  sin,  all  religious  exercises, 
rehgious  intercourse  are  gone.  3.  The  public  lie  to  the  apostles  in  the  presence  of 
such  of  the  Church  as  might  be  standing  round,  to  the  apostles  as  the  ministers  of 
God,  to  God  Himself  in  the  apostles  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  There  was  the  determina- 
tion thus  to  teU  this  lie,  and  there  was  the  performance  of  it  up  to  the  last  point. 
4.  The  dishonesty  that  would  be  involved  in  the  after  conduct  of  this  man,  in  his 
taking  (as  he  would)  his  share  from  the  common  fund,  as  if  he  had  given  up  all, 
and  yet  he  had  secreted  this  something  upon  which  he  could  fall  back.  The  man 
had  no  faith ;  he  could  not  trust  God,  nor  the  Church,  nor  the  apostles  of  God ;  and 
yet  he  pretended  to  do  it.  5.  The  source  of  the  sin,  which  was  his  giving  way  to 
the  suggestions  of  the  devil.  "  Why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  heart?  "  And  there 
was  the  consummation  of  Satanic  suggestion — his  presenting  the  fruit  of  it  to  the 
Church  as  if  it  was  the  result  and  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  for  he  stood  there,  not 
as  doing  a  common  act,  but  as  doing  a  thing  which  was  pre-eminently  tbe  fruit  of 
the  Spirit,  and  yet  it  was  the  fruit  and  the  suggestion  of  the  devil — as  he  might 
have  known.  III.  The  punishment.  1.  It  was  extreme  and  instantaneous.  It  was 
not  a  moderate  act  of  discipline  ;  the  extreme  penalty  was  inflicted  in  a  moment. 
He  was  not  put  away — afforded  time  for  confession  and  prayer,  repentance  and 
return,  but  he  was  struck  d^ad  as  with  lightning  from  heaven.  A  terrible  thing 
this  must  have  been.  Only  think  of  the  members  of  the  Church  gathered  about 
the  apostles,  and  Ananias  coming  in  with  this  money  in  his  hand.  Perhaps  it 
might  have  been  a  considerable  sum.  Think  of  the  feeling  with  which  he  was 
looked  at  by  the  poor  and  afflicted  members  of  the  Church ;  how  they  were  gazing 
upon  him,  and  thinking  what  an  act  of  munificence  it  was,  what  a  trophy  to  Divine 
grace,  what  a  glorious  manifestation  of  the  power  of  faith  and  of  religion  and  of 
God  upon  this  man's  heart ;  and  in  a  moment  Peter  strips  him,  and  God  strikes 
him  dead.  2.  Observe  that  Peter  merely  charges  him  with  the  sin,  accuses  him, 
puts  it  to  his  conscience,  and  the  man  trembles  and  falls.  Peter  did  not  inflict  the 
punishment ;  Peter  had  no  more  power  to  strike  him  dead  than  I  have  to  strike 
any  of  you  dead.  The  apostles  were  not  so  put  in  possession  of  omnipotence.  In 
every  instance  where  omnipotence  was  put  forth,  it  was  not  man  that  wielded  it:  it 
was  God.  The  volition  of  the  Divine  Mind  went  through  the  man,  and  that  did  it. 
It  was  not  the  man  Peter  —aye,  and  it  was  not  the  priest  Peter  (as  some  would  be 
disposed  to  think).  We  will  leave  to  other  priests  the  pretension  to  this  power;  we 
will  leave  to  the  Pope  the  pretension  that  he  makes  to  employ  the  secular  sword 
because  Peter  did  it.  We  say  it  was  not  Peter  that  did  it ;  it  was  God  emploving 
Peter,   Let  us  see  it  so  done  again ;  and  if  the  Pope  with  a  glance  of  his  eye  can  strike 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  451 

a  man  dead,  let  him  do  it  if  he  likes  ;  but  no  priest,  no  pope  is  to  claim  secular 
power  if  all  that  they  can  do  is  to  fulminate  their  curses  or  to  put  us  into  gaol. 
When  Sapphira  comes,  Peter  goes  further,  and  he  tells  her  that  she  shall  die,  which 
he  had  not  told  her  husband.  I  think  the  difference  results  from  this — that  Peter 
himself  had  had  a  revelation  made  to  him.  3.  There  is  every  reason  to  fear  that 
this  outward  visible  punishment  was  but  tlie  prelude  of  utter  separation  from  God 
— the  condemnation  of  both.  We  can  hardly  suppose  that  there  was  an  act  of 
forgiveness  at  the  very  same  moment  with  this  act  of  indignation,  and  that  while 
these  persons  were  sinking  down  dead  under  the  expression  of  the  Divine  anger 
their  souls  were  in  that  state  that  they  could  be  received  to  the  Divine  bosom — 
•*  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  4.  Things 
like  these  should  make  us  very  careful  how  we  push  short,  general  state- 
ments too  far  and  erect  too  much  u^Don  a  jDarticular  statement.  It  is  said,  "  The 
multitude  of  them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul."  Ananias 
and  Sapphira  were  a  part  of  that  multitude.  Was  this  the  "  one  heart  and  one  soul" 
that  was  diffused  through  tht-m  all  ?  God  forbid.  It  is  said,  "  The  Lord  added  to 
the  Church  daily  such  as  should  be  saved."  He  added  these;  is  this  a  specimen? 
They  were  either  converted,  or  they  were  not.  If  they  were  really  converted,  and 
added  to  the  Church,  this  is  the  issue ;  a  dreadful  fall.  Or  they  were  not  converted, 
and  yet  added  by  an  outward  profession  ;  and  tben  they  were  not  in  that  state  in 
which  they  could  be  ultimately  saved.  Let  us  not  build  too  much  upon  a  single 
€X|)ression.  They  might  as  a  whole  be  "  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul,"  but  there 
might  be  many  exceptions;  the  mass  of  those  tbat  were  "added  to  the  Church" 
might  be  truly  converted,  but  there  might  be  exceptions.  5.  The  intention  of  such 
a  punishment  as  this.  (1)  It  was  a  strong  manifestation  of  God's  condemnation  of 
hypocrisy  in  religion — saying  one  thing  and  meaning  another — religious  pretence, 
profession,  without  religion  in  the  heart.  God  can  do  without  your  money,  but  He 
cannot  do  without  your  heart.  If  you  profess  to  be  His,  you  must  be  a  reality. 
(2)  Perhaps  it  might  be  intended  also  as  a  kind  of  guard  and  protection  to  the 
Church,  to  keep  the  Church  from  being  increased  and  enlarged  under  the  influence 
of  motives  that  might  arise  from  the  temporary  state  of  things  in  it — motives  which 
mi<;ht  be  connected  with  the  casting  of  themselves  upon  the  fund  of  the  Church. 
Ood  would  rather  keep  the  Church  small,  if  it  might  be  kept  pure,  than  enlarge  it 
by  those  who  might  come  in  from  questionable  motives  and  with  questionable 
intents.  (3)  Another  thing  would  be  to  produce  a  salutary  awe  upon  the  minds  of 
the  Church.  "Great  fear  came  upon  all  the  Church."  At  the  beginning  of  that 
He  came  forth  with  this  majestic  demonstration  of  His  presence  in  order  to  make 
Ihem  feel  how  holy  He  was,  and  how  purely  and  spiritually  He  was  to  be  worshipped. 
Lessons :  1.  While  extraordinary  proceedings  in  the  ancient  Church  cannot  be  lite- 
rally precedents  to  us,  there  may  be  a  principle  in  them  worth  following.  The 
conduct  of  the  Church  is  not  a  precedent  to  us  with  respect  to  property,  but  yet 
there  is  a  principle  in  it,  showing  how  Christians  ought  to  feel  with  respect  to  being 
members  one  of  another.  So  with  respect  to  the  conduct  of  the  apo-tle  and  the 
manner  in  which  God  interfered  through  him  ;  that  cannot  be  literally  imitated, 
but  that  is  no  reason  why  there  should  not  be  discipline  and  an  anxiety  to  preserve 
the  fellowship  of  the  faithful  such  as  a  Christian  fellowship  ought  to  be.  2.  The 
seriousness  that  there  is  about  a  religious  profession.  I  suppose  none  of  you  would 
like  to  be  denied  the  name  of  Christian.  Now  I  do  not  ask  you  what  you  are  giving 
or  professing  to  give  to  God,  but  I  wish  you  to  ask  yourselves  what  you  are  keeping 
back.  Some  of  you  give  your  bodily  attendance — your  ear,  eye,  attention.  Where 
is  your  heart?  Are  you  keeping  that  baik?  and  will  this  be  acceptable?  Some  of 
you  are  giving  your  intellect ;  are  you  keeping  back  your  affections  ?  Some  of  you 
are  prqfessing  publicly,  like  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  to  give  up  all  by  the  manner  in 
which  you  are  associated  with  the  Christian  Church.  What  are  you  keeping  back? 
Those  of  you  "  that  are  rich  in  this  world  " — what  are  you  keeping  back  of  that 
which  the  Church  needs?  In  a  world  like  this,  in  the  movements  of  the  Church, 
this  great  missionary  institution  (and  that  is  the  proper  idea  of  the  Church,  moving 
onward  until  it  embrace  the  w«rld),  money  must  be  had.  God  must  have  your 
money.  How  much  are  you  keeping  back  ?  What  driblets  are  the  donations 
connected  with  religious  societies  compared  to  what  some  of  them  misht  be  !  And 
God  has  His  eye  upon  that  which  is  kept  back  as  well  ns  that  which  is  given.  Ah  1 
there  are  some  rich  men  in  the  Church  who  might  dread  indeed  if  Jesus  Christ 
\Fere  to  say,  "  I  will  come  unto  you  "  ;  if  He  were  to  come  with  the  purpose  of  going 
dyer  all  their  documents,  and  looking  at  all  their  books,  and  examining  all  their 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v* 

accounts,  and  seeing  the  actual  state  of  their  affairs,  and  marking  and  pointing  out 
how  accumulation  was  going  on  after  accumulation,  and  if  He  were  to  look  tLem  in 
the  face,  and  say,  "Well,  now,  after  aU  this,  what  is  it  you  do  for  Me?  I  give 
you  all  this ;  it  is  all  Mine ;  by  a  waive  of  My  hand  1  could  deprive  you  of  it  to- 
morrow— every  bit  of  it ;  and  I  entrust  it  to  you  ;  you  are  My  steward  ;  do  you  keep 
anything  back?  "  3.  Even  the  honours,  distinctions,  reputation,  that  may  be  to 
be  possessed  or  acquired  in  God's  Church  are  things  that  are  to  be  jealously  watched 
lest  they  become  temptations  to  sin.  4.  The  perfect  confidence  that  Peter  must 
have  had  in  his  own  honesty  when  he  acted  in  this  way.  If  he  did  not  thoroughly 
believe  the  resurrection,  then  he  was  a  "  false  witness  for  God,"  and  the  apostle, 
standing  up  and  accusing  these  perscms  of  lying  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  would  himself 
be  the  great  incarnation  of  a  far  worse  lie.  I  think  that  impossible.  5.  The  devil 
cannot  till  your  heart  and  lead  you  into  sin  unless  you  let  him.  (T.  Binney.)  Tha 
heacon — Ananias  : — 1.  The  case  of  Barnabas  and  that  of  Ananias  sprang  from  the 
same  movement  and  illustrate  the  same  principles,  yet  they  are  reciin-ocally  oppo- 
sites.  It  is  as  necessary  to  moor  a  buoy  over  a  rock  or  sand- bank  as  to  show  a 
light  in  a  line  with  the  safe  entrance  to  the  harbour.  Barnabas  is  a  light  at  the 
pier  head;  Ananias  buoys  a  rock  where  many  have  perished,  and  warns  the  mariner 
from  the  place  of  doom.  Both  examples  are  useful.  We  may  reap  profit  alike  from 
the  truth  of  the  true  and  from  the  lie  of  the  false.  When  our  Lord  taught  His 
disciples  how  to  pray.  He  placed  near  the  humble  suppliant  of  mercy  a  solemn 
hypocrite.  When  He  taught  the  blessedness  of  pressing  in  while  the  door  was  open, 
He  taught  also  how  dreadful  it  is  to  be,  even  by  a  little,  too  late.  This  dual  method 
is  adopted  everywhere  in  Scripture  to  enforce  moral  lessons.  In  morals  as  well  as 
in  physics  you  exert  greater  power  when  you  apply  an  attraction  on  one  side  and  a 
presi-ure  on  the  other.  2.  "  But  a  certain  man."  The  little  word  "  but "  is  the 
hinge  on  which  great  issues  turn,  e.g.,  "  The  righteous  is  cast  away  in  his  iniquity, 
but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death."  The  door  that  swings  on  this  sharp 
pivot  opens  and  shuts  the  way  of  life.  Sometimes,  as  here,  it  turns  from  light  to 
daikness,  and  sometimes  from  darkness  to  light.  3.  The  deep,  sad  cause  of  the 
conduct  before  us  was  the  stirring  of  the  rehgious  emotions  without  a  corresponding 
quickening  of  the  moral  sense.  There  may  be  much  devotion  of  a  certaia  kind 
where  honesty,  truth,  or  purity  is  feebly  rooted  and  liable  to  die  out.  It  is  often 
said  in  certain  quarters  that  a  non-professor  is  more  trustworthy  than  a  professor, 
the  common  fallacy  of  magnifying  a  few  glaring  examples  into  a  general  law.  If 
those  who  count  that  all  piety  is  a  mask  worn  to  (jain  an  end  would  only  think, 
they  would  find  that  their  theory  destroys  itself.  Because  honest  men  seem  to  be 
religious  people  trust  them.  But  if  it  were  the  common  rule  that  religious  men 
were  dishonest,  they  would  cease  to  obtain  credit ;  it  would  not  pay  a  villain  to 
assume  religion,  and  when  it  ceased  to  pay  he  would  cease  to  assume  it.  So  the 
argument  goes  to  prove  that  pious  men,  as  a  rule,  aie  honest ;  and  yet  there  is  truth 
in  the  calumny,  and  because  of  this  it  lives.  Apart  from  conscious  scoundrels  there 
are  those  who,  although  moved  in  a  period  of  religious  fervour,  have  not  acquired 
a  proper  sense  of  the  binding  character  of  the  Ten  Commandments.  The  Anti- 
nomian  is  not  a  dried  fossil  in  tomes  of  polemical  theology ;  he  is  a  living  species. 
But  true  believers  need  not  faint.  Tares  grow  up  with  the  wheat,  but  the  wheat 
prevails  even  here,  and  at  the  end  the  separation  will  be  complete  and  eternal, 
(jr.  Arnot,  D.D.)         Ananias  and  SuppJiira— lessons  of  the  narrative: — I.  It  is 

VAIN    TO    EXPECT    THAT  IN  THIS   WORLD  THE  ChUKCH  WILL  EVER  BE  PERFECTLY  PURE.       I 

mean  not  only  that  imperfections  will  always  adhere  to  the  members  of  the  Church 
because  "  there  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth  that  doth  good  and  sinneth  not," 
but  farther,  that  hypocrites  will  be  found  intermixed  with  the  saints.  The  wheat 
and  the  chaff  lie  together  on  the  barn  floor.  No  precautions,  however  strict,  can 
prevent  their  admission ;  no  discipline,  however  vigorous,  no  doctrine,  hSwever 
faithful,  will  be  able  to  expel  them.  II.  We  ought  to  guard  against  the  pre- 
dominance OF  ANY  SINFUL  PASSION,  whether  it  be  avarice,  ambition,  sensuality,  envy, 
pride,  or  any  other  lust  of  the  flesh  or  of  the  spirit.  As  "  one  sinner  destroys  much 
good,"  so  one  sin  reigning  in  the  heart  counteracts  .the  efficacy  of  the  best  means, 
and  may  carry  us  to  a  very  great  length  in  depravity.  If  the  restraints  of  providence 
be  removed,  and  a  strong  temptation  be  presented  in  favourable  circumstances,  it 
■will  precipitate  us  into  such  excesses  as  shall  dishonour  us  in  the  eyes  of  men,  and 
provoke  God  to  pour  out  upon  us  the  fury  of  His  wrath.  III.  Impenitent  sinners 
are  always  in  danger  of  perishing  by  the  vengeance  of  heaven.  Judgment, 
indeed,  is  God's  "  strange  work,"  but  it  is  a  work  which  a  regard  to  His  glory 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  453 


sometimes  calls  upon  Him  to  perform.  And  when  one  victim  falls,  it  is  impossible 
to  tell  who  shall  be  tbe  next.  A  sentence  of  deatli  is  passed  upon  all  unbelievers, 
the  execution  of  which  is  delayed  only  by  the  long-suii'ering  aud  patience  of  God. 
Let  not  m  ri  presume  upon  His  patience,  for,  although  Divine,  it  has  its  limits, 
beyond  which  it  will  not  extend  (Isa.  xxxiii.  14).  IV.  Let  vs,  above  all  things, 
STUDY  TO  BE  siNCEEE  IN  KELiGioN.  Wbat  will  hypocrisy  avail  ?  Can  our  artifice 
impose  upon  God?  (Heb.  iv.  13).  In  vain  did  Ananias  and  Sapphira  secretly 
concert  their  plan  and  assume  the  confidence  of  conscious  integrity  to  quash  any 
suspicion  of  their  baseness.  A  good  name,  the  esteem  and  friendly  offices  of  Chiis- 
tians,  and  even  worldly  advantages,  may  be  the  recompense  of  dissimulation  in  this 
world,  but  wbat  awaits  it  iu  the  next  ?  (Job  xxvii.  8).  (J.  Dick,  A.M.)  The  first 
sin : — There  is  an  old  saying,  "  The  corruption  of  the  best  is  worst."  The  better  a 
thing  is,  the  worse  is  its  spoiling.  The  greater  the  elevation,  the  greater  the  fall. 
And  this  is  true  both  of  profession  and  of  reality.  When  a  man  who  has  talked 
loudly  is  at  length  unmasked  as  an  impostor,  his  exposure  is  more  terrible  than  if 
he  had  never  affected  great  virtue.  And  wben  a  man  who  has  felt  the  truth  and 
power  of  religion  is  overtaken  by  the  enemy,  it  is  sometimes  found  that  he  gives 
himself  over  more  entirely  to  the  grasp  of  evil  than  one  who  had  never  known  what 
it  was  to  serve  another  master.  We  look  upon  this  scene  almost  as  we  look  upon 
man's  original  fall ;  we  seem  to  be  reading  of  a  paradise  regained,  when  we  are 
suddenly  shocked  and  startled  by  the  narrative  of  a  paradise  for  the  second  time 
forfeited.  Observe  from  the  narrative — I.  That  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
ACTING  A  falsehood.  1.  Auauias  did  not  expressly  say  that  the  sum  was  the  whole 
price.  It  was  his  wife  who  told  an  express  falsehood.  Ananias  only  gave  it  to  be 
understood.  We  have  to  do  witb  a  God  of  truth,  and  where  truth  is  not,  there  in 
His  sight  is  falsehood.  We  often  think  that,  if  we  can  avoid  saying  the  exact 
opposite  of  the  truth,  it  is  enough.  Learn,  tlien,  that  wherever  deception  is,  tbere 
is  falsehood.  And  how  many  of  our  words  are  "  an  attempt  to  steer  dexterously 
between  the  truth  and  a  lie  " !  2.  But,  even  beyond  this,  there  may  be  an  acted  false- 
hood. Ananias,  witnessing  the  honest  self-devotion  of  others.  He,  too,  will  seem  to 
have  counted  all  things  but  loss  for  Christ.  Just  as  Barnabas  brought  the  profits 
of  his  sale  of  land,  so  does  Ananias  bring  his.  Every  one  gives  him  credit,  and  he 
intends  tliat  they  should  do  so,  for  a  devotion  which  thinks  only  of  things  above, 
and  a  self-forgetfulness  which  cannot  enjoy  so  long  as  others  suffer.  No  word,  it 
may  be,  is  spoken,  but  the  act  itself  says  all  this,  and  the  doer  intends  that  all  this 
should  be  understood.  Alas !  how  much  of  the  conduct  of  many  of  us  is  indeed  no 
better  than  an  acted  lie  !  How  much  is  done  to  throw  dust  into  the  eyes  of  others 
as  to  our  real  motive,  our  real  self  1  Even  apart  from  the  positive  purpose  of  de- 
ceiving, how  impossible  it  is  to  give  others  a  true  and  just  idea  of  us  as  we  are  I 
How  does  confession  itself  turn  upon  our  lips  into  self-parade  and  boasting  !  It  is 
so,  perhaps,  in  mercy  to  others.  We  might  draw  others  downwards  if  they  saw 
how  low  are  our  own  attainments ;  we  might  tempt  them  to  acquiesce  in  imperfec- 
tions against  which  God  would  have  them  struggle  on  in  hope.  God  save  us  all 
from  the  falsehood  of  the  tongue,  and  from  the  falsehood  of  the  life,  from  the  lie 
acted  as  well  as  from  the  lie  spoken  !  II.  What  an  illustration  have  we  here  op 
"  The  love  op  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  which  while  some  coveted  after,  they 
have  erred  from  the  faith,  and  pierced  themselves  through  with  many  sorrows." 
What  made  Ananias  and  Sapphira  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Was  the  lust  of  money 
the  wish  to  save  something  out  of  the  surrender  of  their  all  to  Christ?  Thus  it 
was  that  they  lost  both  worlds,  even  by  trying  to  gain  both  1  What  is  it  but  the 
love  of  money  which  creates  some  of  the  most  characteristic  evils  of  society  ?  I 
speak  not  now  of  that  honourable  industry  in  the  business  of  a  lawful  calling,  which 
is  as  much  the  duty  as  it  ever  can  be  the  interest  of  a  Christian.  I  speak  of  those 
precarious,  adventurous,  idle  methods  of  gaining,  upon  which  God's  blessing  cannot 
be  asked,  and  upon  which  God's  curse  almost  visibly  rests.  I  speak  of  wants 
created  by  an  expenditure  habitually  exceeding  income,  and  supplied  by  the  ex- 
orbitant profits  of  a  single  week  in  the  year.  I  speak  of  examples  s-et  to  the  young 
of  unlawful  ventui'es,  by  which  many  a  life  has  been  drawn  astray  from  the 
beginning,  and  many  a  hopeful  career  cut  short  by  crime  and  infwmy.  I  speak  of 
a  love  of  gain,  which  has  made  sons  indifferent  to  a  father's  command  and  a 
mother's  hapj^iness,  reckless  in  destroying  the  inheritance  of  sisters,  and  at  last 
regardless  even  of  a  country's  laws  and  the  terrors  of  a  wrath  to  come.  Earnestly 
and  affectionately  would  I  warn  the  young  of  the  fearful  risks  run  by  the  first  step 
into  the  region  of   chance.     III.  What  a  responsibij.ity  is   involved  in   BEiua 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t^ 

BROUGHT  NEAR  TO  GoD  AS  MEMBERS  OF  His  Church  !  Well  may  this  be  recorded  a<j 
the  consequence  of  the  fate  of  Ananias,  that  great  fear  came  upon  all  the  Cliurch, 
and  upon  as  many  as  heard  these  things.  Yes,  there  is  a  reaHty  in  our  connection 
with  Christ  whicii  must  tell  upon  us  for  good  or  for  evil.  These  means  of  grace, 
these  opportunities  of  worship,  have  a  meaning,  whether  we  will  or  no,  and  we 
ourselves  are  fearfully  and  wonderfully  concerned  in  it.  We  must  spend  our  lives, 
think  our  thoughts,  speak  our  words,  and  do  our  acts,  in  the  sight  and  hearing  of 

God.      IV.    How  TO  CAST  OUT    THE    FEAR  OF    ONE  ANOTHER    BY    THE    STRONGER  AND  MORE 

IMPRESSIVE  FEAR  OF  GoD.  Anauias  and  Sapphira  committed  this  great  sin  in  the 
hope  of  purchasing  to  themselves  the  good  opinion  of  the  Christian  congregation 
to  which  they  belonged.  And  they  would  have  succeeded  in  this  endeavour  but 
for  one  consideration  which  they  left  out  of  sight.  They  would  have  succeeded  ia 
winning  the  esteem  of  man  if  they  could  only  have  kept  God  silent.  And  we  also- 
are  daily  tempted  to  live  for  the  honour  which  comes  to  us  from  one  another,  and 
not  for  that  honour  which  is  of  God  only.  When  shall  we  give  up  this  fatal  habit 
of  asking  at  each  turn,  What  does  the  world  say?  what  does  the  world  do? — my 
world,  I  mean — the  world  of  my  family,  my  friends,  my  neighbourhood,  and 
inquire  rather,  Is  this  right  ?  Does  Christ  approve  ?  Let  me  look  up  to  Christ 
for  direction.  Let  the  whisper  of  His  Spirit  be  my  voice  of  admonition.  And 
let  me  in  all  things  thank  the  Lord  for  giving  me  warning.  {Dean  Vaughaii.\ 
The  first  tare  among  the  wheat: — I.  How  the  wicked  one  sows  it.  II.  How  the 
Lord  of  the  field  plucks  it  out.  {K.  Gerok.)  Hypocrites  amyrar  after 
revivals  : — After  a  refreshing  shower  which  has  made  all  the  flowers  to  smile  till 
the  teardrops  of  joy  stand  in  their  eyes,  you  wiU  see  your  garden-paths  spotted  over 
with  slugs  and  snails.  These  creatures  lay  concealed  till  the  genial  rain  called  them 
forth  to  make  their  slimy  way  towards  whatsoever  they  might  devour.  After  this 
fashion  revivals,  of  necessity,  develop  hypocrites  ;  yet  who  would  deplore  the  shower 
because  of  the  snails,  and  who  would  raU  at  "  times  of  refreshing  "  because  mere 
pretenders  are  excited  to  make  a  base  profession  of  a  grace  to  which  they  are 
strangers?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  T  lie  Divine  judgment  on  duplicitij  : — The  Church 
may  defy  the  maUce  of  her  foes,  but  cannot  afford  to  pass  over  faithlessness  of 
professed  friends.  The  Jews  are  borne  with ;  hypocritical  pretenders  are  visited 
with  Divine  vengeance.  The  sin  here  consisted  in  false  pretence  and  misrepre- 
sentation. I.  The  Church  is  not  a  pure,  unmixed  society  of  perfected  believers. 
Members  of  the  Apostolic  Church  fell  into  gross  sin.  Perfection  is  not  to  be  looked 
for  in  the  nursery  or  school.  The  Church  is  a  training-ground  of  the  immature, 
and  yet  men  unreasonably  expect  perfection.  II.  There  is  no  absolute  safety  in 
THE  Church.  There  is  danger  necessarily  involved  in  the  weakness  of  all  unde- 
veloped life.  The  Church  is  not  shielded  from  temptation.  Wilfulness  may  lead 
to  shipwreck  of  faith.  New  conditions  of  life  involve  new  dangers.  "  Let  him 
that  thinketh  he  standeth,"  &c.  III.  Moral  dangers  may  be  increased  by  those. 
WHO  ARE  nearest  TO  US  IN  THE  RELATIONSHIPS  OF  LIFE.  A  man  and  his  wife 
joined  together  in  this  sin.  The  perversion  of  family  and  social  life  to  the  degra- 
dation of  spirits  is  not  enough  considered.  If  a  husband  induce  his  wife  or  a 
master  his  servant  to  violate  conscience,  neither  need  be  surprised  at  reaping  bitter 
fruit.  IV.  Wilful  sin  persisted  in  by  members  of  the  Church  involves  them  in 
DIRE  AND  AWFUL  CALAMITIES.  "  Whose  fan  is  in  His  hand."  {W.  H.  Davison.) 
Ananias  and  Sapphira: — Eden  hardly  puts  forth  its  flowers  before  sin  enters  tO' 
cast  a  blight  over  everything.  The  Church  is  hardly  founded  before  punishment 
falls  on  two  of  its  members  for  their  crimes.  The  fate  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira 
may  seem  hard.  Their  sin  was  not  so  heinous  as  some  others  that  went  unpunished. 
I.  Some  considerations  which  serve  to  mitigate  the  seeming  severity  of  thk 
punishment.  1.  The  Church  was  in  its  infancy.  Influences  brought  to  bear  upon 
it  at  that  time  were  more  effective  than  later  on,  when  its  character  was  more 
fixed.  A  sin  was  more  consequential  then.  To  have  permitted  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  to  do  wrong  with  impunity  would  have  soon  resulted  in  the  corruption  of 
the  whole  Church.  An  example  must  be  made  to  deter  others  from  repeating  the 
sin.  2.  The  complete  character  of  the  sin  is  undescribed.  Peter  twice  refers  to  it 
as  a  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit  (vers.  3  and  9).  This  would  suggest  that  the  main 
element  of  the  sin  lay  not  in  the  external  act,  but  in  the  condition  of  heart  back  of 
it.  Sins  are  like  icebergs — the  larger  part  of  them  is  unseen.  We  must  not 
estimate  the  sinfulness  of  Ananias'  sin  by  its  extei'nal  impression  upon  ub.  3.  The 
Apostle  Peter,  in  his  relations  with  these  unfortunate  people,  was  under  the  imme- 
diate direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     There  was  nothing  of  spitefulness  or  malice  in 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  45& 

Peter's  conduct.  The  will  he  obeyed  was  the  will  of  another.  The  outcome  was 
therefore  due  wholly  to  the  immediate  interposition  of  God.  4.  All  life  is  God's, 
who  gave  it,  and  who  may  take  it  back  to  HimseK  whenever  and  in  whatever 
manner  He  pleases  without  doing  any  injustice  to  any  rights  of  the  creature.  That 
He  took  the  lives  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  would  have  involved  no  injustice  even  if 
they  had  not  sinned.  5.  The  loss  of  two  hves  was  a  means  of  saving  many  more. 
Others  were  deterred  from  sin.  II.  The  sin  itself.  1.  The  action  which  turned 
out  to  be  so  wrong  originated  in  a  praiseworthy  motive.  To  give  up  one's 
property  in  part  or  in  whole  for  the  helping  of  the  other  Christians  was  a 
noble  sacrifice.  The  act  was  praiseworthy.  2.  We  are  led  to  suspect,  however, 
that  their  whole  hearts  were  not  set  on  this  disinterested  view  of  the  matter. 
They  felt  the  force  of  others'  example.  The  approbation  of  the  Church 
which  followed  such  gifts  was  worth  securing.  There  was  a  considerable  enthu- 
siasm aroused  in  their  hearts.  They  could  anticipate  the  happiness  of  hearing 
others  praise  their  noble  giving.  But  their  hearts  were  not  truly  in  the  gift. 
The  act  conveyed  the  idea  of  a  higher  type  of  feeling  than  they  really  had.  3. 
The  difference  of  extent  between  his  good  feeling  and  the  larger  deed  was  at  once 
filled  up  by  another  feeling,  a  bad  feeUng.  How  often  in  producing  good  actions 
are  two  quantities  of  diverse  kinds  thus  at  work !  4.  In  the  heart  of  Ananias  selfish- 
ness grew  until  it  predominated,  and  correspondingly  unselfishness  diminished 
until  it  was  outweighed.  The  formal  act  of  benevolence  of  Ananias  was  a  good 
act,  but  it  was  made  bad  by  the  preponderance  of  vanity  among  the  feehngs  which 
led  to  it.  He  wanted  to  seem  more  generous  than  he  truly  was.  There  was  more 
of  vanity  than  benevolence  in  his  gift.  He  sinned  really,  therefore,  in  doing  what 
was  formally  good.  5.  For  his  act  was  a  falsehood.  The  two  persons  were  not 
brought  to  death  for  teUing  a  falsehood  so  much  as  for  acting  a  falsehood.  They 
pretended  to  be  giving  a  whole  estate  when  they  were  giving  but  a  part  of  it.  6. 
Their  act  was  purely  voluntary.  True,  Peter  recognises  the  agency  of  Satan  in  the 
matter  (ver.  3),  but  this  is  to  be  recognised  in  every  sin.  He  is  the  tempter.  He 
cannot  compel  us  to  sin ;  he  can  only  suggest.  Sin  is  null  and  void  until  of  our 
own  volition  we  aflix  our  sign-manual  to  it.  7.  Hence  we  are  not  surprised  to  find 
that  Ananias  and  Sapphira  were  perfectly  deliberate  in  their  wrong-doing.  Peter 
said  to  her,  "  How  is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together  to  tempt  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord?  "  (ver.  9).  That  word  "  agreed  "  points  to  a  plan.  This  is  not  an  instance 
of  a  man's  yielding  to  a  furious  onslaught  of  temptation  when  he  has  let  himself 
be  caught  unprepared  by  it.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  show  a  fox-like  shrewdness  in 
their  sinning.  They  planned  it  deliberately,  and  they  carried  out  their  plan.  Their 
sin  was  not  as  light  as  it  seems  before  we  analyse  it.  III.  The  bearings  of  their 
SIN.  1.  It  immediately  affected  men.  Ananias  defrauded  his  fellows.  By  not 
doing  as  he  declared  he  intended  to  do  he  was  defrauding  others  of  that  which,  to 
be  sure,  had  once  been  his,  but  had  now,  by  his  own  voluntary  profession,  passed 
out  of  his  ownership.  He  virtually  acted  the  part  of  a  thief.  2.  His  sin  was  also 
against  God.  He  lied  to  the  Holy  Ghost  (ver.  3) ;  he  tempted  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  (ver.  9).  His  soul  was  in  a  certain  relation  to  God,  and  every  sin  of  whatever 
character  was  a  violation  of  that  relation.  We  owe  obedience  to  God.  Duty  is 
obligation  heavenward.  Sin,  whatever  it  be  in  act,  has  its  determining  element  in 
the  heart.  It  is  the  heart's  rebellion  against  its  obligation  to  do  the  will  of  God. 
It  is  an  offence  against  the  sovereign  Lord.  3.  The  two  are  identified  ;  sin  against 
man  is  sin  against  God.  Ananias  lied  to  the  apostles  ;  they  were  acting  under 
the  immediate  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Whatever  he  did  toward  them 
he  did  toward  the  Spirit  which  was  in  them.  A  man  who  shoots  a  prince 
strikes  at  a  kingdom.  Whoever  sins  against  a  fellow-man  aims  a  blow  at 
God.  Lying,  stealing,  adultery,  murder,  are  sins  against  men,  but  at  the  same 
moment  they  are  sins  against  God.  God  hides  Himself,  as  it  were,  in  humanity, 
so  that  what  we  do  to  men  we  do  tO  God.  4.  Ananias'  sin  affected  the  Church.  The 
importance  of  Ananias'  sin  is  raised  to  a  higher  power  by  the  fact  that  it  concerned 
the  welfare  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  His  punishment  is  interpreted  by  this  special 
bearing  of  his  sin.  Sin  is  thus  reduplicated.  Every  man  has  special  functions  and 
relations,  and  every  sin  committed  against  him  passes  on  and  has  an  unlimited 
reach  in  these  relations.  One  man  shoots  another.  He  sins  against  that  man. 
But  he  does  more.  He  makes  a  wife  a  widow ;  he  makes  children  fatherless  ;  he 
bereaves  parents,  relatives,  and  friends ;  he  removes  a  man  from  the  community 
who  has  a  special  function  in  it ;  he  offends  against  the  whole  commonwealth, 
against  all  humanity  indeed.     Oh,  the  awful  reach  of  sin  !     No  man  hveth  to  him- 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOB.  [chap.  v. 

self,  and  no  man  sinneth  to  himself.  5.  The  sin  returned  upon  Ananias  and  his 
wife,  who  connived  with  him,  in  terrible  retribution.  Its  wages  were  paid  to  the 
last  farthing.  As  these  unfortunate  people  were  carried  out  to  burial  how  impres- 
sive the  reply  to  the  heart's  question,  "  Does  sin  pay?  "  6.  Yet  this  affliction  was 
made  to  bear  good  fruit  under  the  providence  of  God.  The  effect  on  the  Church  was 
salutary.  There  were  no  more  Ananiases.  IV.  The  infeeences  from  this  study. 
1.  Man's  accountability  for  sin.  Satan  suggests  it,  but  man  accepts  his  suggestion 
and  is  responsible  for  the  result.  2.  The  folly  of  sin.  As  we  look  at  Ananias  and 
his  wife,  with  their  silly  vanity,  they  seem  almost  irrational.  To  sin  is  truly, 
according  to  the  plain-spokenness  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  to  be  a  fool.  To  escape 
it  we  must  be  made  wise  by  God.  3.  Sin  reaches  to  God.  "  Against  Thee,  Thee 
only,  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  Thy  sight,"  says  the  most  heart-searching 
confession  of  sin  ever  penned.  4.  The  consequences  of  sin  are  more  than  we  can 
anticipate — more  as  they  develop  after  we  have  planted  them  in  the  field  of  the 
world's  hfe,  more  as  they  come  back  to  us  in  the  harvest  of  retribution.  5.  Lying 
is  an  especially  bad  sin.  So  bad  is  it,  that  among  sins  which  specifically  exclude 
from  heaven  lying  is  particularly  named.  God  is  truth  Himself.  We  are  made  to 
be  like  Him.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Ananias  and  Sapphira  : — The  question  may 
be  asked,  Was  not  this  punishment  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  too  severe  ?  No  time 
was  given  for  repentance ;  no  opportunity  was  offered  for  them  to  consider  their 
transgression,  and  to  cry  unto  God  for  pardon.  We  may  find  answer  to  this 
inquiry,  I  think,  in  the  following  suggestions  : — 1.  Their  sin  was  an  aggravated  one. 
"  Thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  God,"  were  Peter's  words  to  Ananias.  The 
peculiar  enormity  of  their  sin  consisted  in  its  being  committed  against  the  Holy 
Ghost.  They  knew  of  the  Pentecostal  gift ;  and  now  they  come  with  a  definitely 
settled  purpose  to  deceive  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  persons  of  God's  chosen  ones, 
thinking  Him  to  be  such  a  one  as  themselves.  Dr.  Lightfoot  supposes  that  Ananias 
was  not  an  ordinary  believer,  but  a  minister,  and  one  that  had  received  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  with  the  hundred  and  twenty.  Yet  he  dared  thus  by  dissembling 
to  belie  and  shame  that  gift.  2.  It  was  a  deliberate  sin.  It  was  not  committed  as 
the  result  of  a  sudden  temptation  ;  but  these  two  had  consulted  together  about  it, 
and  had  entered  into  a  mutual  agreement  to  work  this  deception  upon  the  apostles 
and  the  Church.  It  was  cold-blooded  in  every  respect.  There  was  appareutly  no 
necessity  laid  upon  them  by  outward  circumstances.  Ananias  shows  himself  to 
have  been  by  deliberate  choice  a  hypocrite.  3.  Sin  must  have  become  the  settled 
purpose  of  their  lives.  God  does  not  pronounce  condemnation  unto  death  for  an 
initial  sin  or  for  a  series  of  sins.  It  is  only  when  the  soul  becomes  saturated  with 
sin,  when  there  is  no  longer  hope  of  the  man's  bearing  fruit  unto  righteousness, 
that  God  casts  him  off.  It  must  have  been  a  crisis  in  their  inner  lives  marking 
the  determination  of  their  souls — a  crisis  not  apparent  to  men,  but  open  and  plain 
to  the  eye  of  God.  4.  The  severity  of  this  punishment  may  have  been  due  in  a 
measure  to  the  conditions  surrounding  the  Church  at  that  early  period.  The 
Church  was  in  its  infancy.  We  may  further  learn  from  this  lesson — (1)  That 
those  who  presume  upon  security  and  impunity  in  any  sinful  course  are  reckoning 
ignorantly  and  foolishly.  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  (2)  It  is  useless  to 
bring  half  of  self  to  God  in  consecration.  (3)  The  wheat  and  the  tares  ever  grow 
together  in  the  earthly  Church.  {G.  C.  Osgood.)  Ananias  and  Sappliira  :  — 
I.  The  sins  or  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  No  sin  stands  alone.  1.  There  was  lf)ve  of 
praise.  2.  There  was  covetousness,  an  inordinate  love  of  money.  They  clung  to 
their  gold.  3.  There  was  lying.  4.  There  was  hypocrisy,  the  pretence  of  godli- 
ness where  none  existed.  II.  The  bevelation  of  God's  charactkr.  Every  Divine 
act  is  a  revelation  of  God.  What  does  this  event  show  ?  1.  God's  omniscience. 
He  saw  the  sin,  though  it  was  secret.  2.  God's  impartiality.  He  deals  with  His 
followers  no  more  leniently  than  with  His  enemies  when  they  do  wrong.  3.  God's 
justice.  4.  God's  power.  IH.  The  teachings  concerning  the  Chdrch.  1.  Its 
high  moral  standard.  The  power  of  the  Church  is  in  its  purity.  The  Church 
must  be  better  than  the  world  if  it  is  to  save  the  world.  2.  Its  human  imperfec- 
tion. Let  us  not  expect  all  the  people  in  the  earthly  Church  to  be  perfect.  3.  Its 
responsibility.  The  Church  is  held  to  a  high  account  for  its  members,  and  must 
put  away  every  branch  which  is  known  to  be  dead.  Ananias  and  Sapphira : — A 
well-matched  pair,  alike  in  ambition  and  in  falsehood,  Ananias  and  Sapphira. 
There  are  thousands  of  ways  of  telling  a  lie.  A  man's  whole  life  may  be  a  false- 
hood, and  yet  never  with  his  lips  may  he  falsify  once.  There  is  a  falsehood  by  look, 
by  manner,  as  well  as  by  lip.    There  are  persons  who  are  guilty  of  dishonesty  of 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  457 

speech,  and  then  afterward  say  "  may  be,"  call  it  a  white  lie,  when  no  lie  is  that 
colour.     The  wLitest  lie  ever  told  was  as  black  as  perdition.     There  are  those  so 
given  to  dishonesty  of  speech  that  they  do  not  know  wlien  they  are  lyin^.     With 
some  it  is  an  acquired  sin,  and  with  others  it  is  a  natural  infirmity.     There  are 
those  whom  you  will  recognise  as  born  liars.     Misrepresentation  and  prevarication 
are  as  natural  to  them  as  the  infantile  diseases,  and  are  a  sort  of  moral  croup  or 
spiritual  scarlatina.     Then  there  are  those  who  in  after-life  have  opportunities  of 
developing  this  evil,  and  they  go  from  deception  to  deception,  and  from  class 
to  class,  until  they  are  regularly  graduated  liars.      I.   First  of  all,  I  speak  of 
AGRICULTURAL  FALSEHOODS.     There  is  something  in  the  presence  of  natural  objects 
that   has   a   tendency  to    make  one   pure.      The   trees   never   issue   false   stock. 
The  wheat-fields  are  always  honest.  Eye  and  oats  never  move  out  in  the  night,  not 
paying  for  the  place  they  occupy.      Corn  shocks  never  make  false  assignments. 
Mountain  brooks  are  always  current.   The  gold  of  tbe  wheat-fields  is  never  counter- 
feit.    But,  while  tbe  tendency  of  agricultural  life  is  to  make  one  honest,  honesty  is 
not  the  characteristic  of  all  who  come  to  the  city  markets  from  the  country  districts. 
You  hear  the  creaking  of  the  dishonest  farm  waggon  in  almost  every  street  of  our 
great  cities,  a  farm  waggon  in  which  there  is  not  one  honest  spoke  or  one  truthful 
rivet  from  tongue  to  tailboard.     Tbe  tendency  in  all  rural  districts  is  to  suppose 
that  sins  and  transgressions  cluster  in  our  great  cities ;  but  citizens  and  merchants 
long  ago  learned  that  it  is  not  safe  to  calculate  from  the  character  of  the  apples  on 
the  top  of  the  farmer's  barrel  what  is  the  character  of  the  apples  all  tbe  way  down 
toward  the  bottom.     Milk-cans  are  not  always  honest.     The  producer  sometimes 
practically  says  to  the  merchant,  "  You  get  your  money  easily,  anyhow."     Does  he 
get  it  easily  ?     Let  those  who  get  their  living  in  the  quiet  farm  and  barn  take  the 
place  of  one  of  our  city  merchants,  and  see  whether  it  is  so  easy.   It  is  hard  enough 
to  have  the  hands   blistered  with  outdoor  work,  but   it   is   harder  with  mental 
anxieties  to  have  the  brain  consumed.     God  help  the  merchants  !     And  do  not  let 
those  who  live  in  country  life  come  to  the  conclusion  that  all  the  dishonesties 
belong  to  city  life.     II.  I  pass  on  to  consider  commercial  lies.     Tliere  are  those 
■who  apologise  for  deviation  from  the  right  and  for  practical  deception  by  saying  it 
is  commercial  custom.     In  other  words,  a  lie  by  multiplication  becomes  a  virtue. 
There  are  large  fortunes  gathered  in  which  there  is  not  one  drop  of  the  sweat  of 
unrequited  toil,  and  not  one  spark  of  bad  temper  flashes  from  the  bronze  bracket, 
and  there  is  not  one  drop  of  needlewoman's  heart's  blood  on  the  crimson  plush  ; 
while  there  are  other  fortunes  about  which  it  may  be  said  that  on  every  door-knob, 
and  on  every  figure  of  the  carpet,  and  on  every  wall,  there  is  the  mark  of  dis- 
honour.    There  are  large  fortunes  upon  which  God's  favour  comes  down,  and  it  is 
just  as  honest  and  just  as  Christian  to  be  affluent  as  it  is  to  be  poor.     In  many  a 
house  there  is  a  blessing  on  every  pictured  wall,  and  on  every  scroll,  and  on  every 
traceried  window,  and  the  joy  that   flashes  in  the  lights,  and  that  showers  in   • 
the  music,  and  that  dances  in  the  quick  feet  of  the  children  pattering  through  the 
haU  has  in  it  the  favour  of  God  and  the  approval  of  man.     But  you  and  I  know 
that  there  are  in  commercial  life  those  who  are  guilty  of  great  dishonesties  of 
speech.     A  merchant  says,  "  I  am  selling  these  goods  at  less  than  cost."     Is  he 
getting  for  these  goods  a  price  inferior  to  that  which  he  paid  for  them  ?     Then  he 
has  spoken  the  truth.     Is  he  getting  more  ?     Then  he  lies.     But  there  are  just  as 
many  falsehoods  before  the  counter  as  there  are  behind  the  counter.     A  customer 
comes  in  and  asks,  "  How  much  is  this  article  ?  "    "  It  is  five  dollars."    "  I  can  get 
that  for  four  somewhere  else."     Can  he  get  it  for  four  somewhere  else,  or  did  he 
say  that  just  for  the  purpose  of  getting  it  cbeap  by  depreciating  the  value  of  the 
goods  ?     If  so,  he  hed.     Who  would  take  the  responsibility  of  saying  how  many 
falsehoods  were  yesterday  told  by  hardware  men,  and  clothiers,  and  lumbermen, 
and  tobacconists,  and  jewellers,  and  importers,  and  shippers,  and  dealers  in  furni- 
ture, and  dealers  in  coal,  and  dealers  in  groceries?    III.  I  pass  on  to  speak  of 
mechanical  falsehoods.     Among  the  artisans  are  those  upon  whom  we  are  depen- 
dent for  the  houses  in  which  we  live,  the  garments  we  wear,  the  cars  in  which  we 
ride.     The  vast  majority  of  them  are,  so  far  as  I  know  them,  men  who  speak  the 
truth.     I  am  speaking  now  of  those  who  promise  to  do  that  which  they  know  they 
will  not  be  able  to  do.     They  say  they  will  come  on  Monday ;  they  do  not  come 
until  Wednesday.     They  say  they  will  have  the  job  done  in  ten  days  ;  they  do  not 
get  it  done  before  thirty.     So  in  all  styles  of  work  there  are  those  who  are  not 
worthy  of  their  work.    IV.  I  pass  on  to  speak  of  social  lies.    How  much  of  society 
is  insincere  !     You  hardly  know  what  to  believe.     They  send  their  regards  ;  you  do 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

not  exactly  know  whether  it  is  an  expression  of  the  heart  or  an  external  civility. 
They  ask  you  to  come  to  their  house  ;  you  hardly  know  whether  they  really  want 
you  to  come.    We  are  all  accustomed  to  take  a  discount  from  what  we  hear.    Social 
life  is  struck  through  with  insincerity.    They  apologise  for  the  fact  that  the  furnace 
is  out ;  they  have  not  had  any  fire  in  it  all  the  winter.     They  apologise  for  the  fare 
on  their  table  ;  they  never  live  any  better.     They  decry  their  most  luxurious  enter- 
tainment to  win  a  shower  of  approval  from  you.     On  small  incomes  we  want  the 
world  to  believe  we  are  affluent,  and  society  to-day  is  struck  through  with  cheat  and 
counterfeit  and  sham.     How  few  peojple  are  natural  !     V.  I  pass  on  to  speak  of 
ECCLESIASTICAL  LIES,  those  which  are  told  for  the  advancement  or  retarding  of  a 
church  or  sect.     It  is  hardly  worth  your  while  to  ask  an  extreme  Calvinist  what  an 
Arminian  believes.     He  wiU  tell  you  an  Arminian  believes  that  a  man  can  save 
himself.     An  Arminian  beUeves  no  such  thing.     It  is  hardly  worth  your  while  to 
ask  an  extreme  Arminian  what  a  Calvinist  believes.      He  will  tell  you  that  a 
Calvinist  believes  that  God  made  some  men  just  to  damn  them.      A  Calvinist 
believes  no  such  thing.     Then  how  often  is  it  that  there  are  misrepresentations  on 
the  part  of  individual  churches  in  regard  to  other  churches,  especially  if  a  church 
comes  to  great  prosperity.     VI.  Let  us  in  all  departments  of  life  stand  back 
FROM  deception.    "  Oh  1  "  says  some  one,  "  the  deception  that  I  practise  is  so  small 
it  don't  amount  to  anything."     Ah  !  my  friends,  it  does  amount  to  a  great  deal. 
"  Oh  !  "  you  say,  "  when  I  deceive,  it  is  only  about  a  case  of  needles,  or  a  box  of 
buttons,  or  a  row  of  pins."   The  article  may  be  so  small  you  can  put  it  in  your  vest 
pocket ;  but  the  sin  is  as  big  as  the  Pyramids,  and  the  echo  of  your  dishonour  will 
reverberate  through  the  mountains  of  eternity.     There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  small 
sin.     They  are  all  vast  and  stupendous,  because  they  will  have  to  come  under 
inspection  in  the  day  of  judgment.     My  friends,  let  us  make  our  life  correspond  to 
what  we  are.     Let  us  banish  all  deception  from  our  behaviour.     Let  us  remember 
that  the  time  comes  when  God  will  demonstrate  before  an  assembled  universe  just 
what  we  are.     The  secret  will  come  out.     We  may  hide  it  while  we  live,  but  we 
cannot  hide  it  when  we  die.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)         Privileged  with  the  gospel, 
hut  not  improved  by  it : — In  a  room  glazed  with  yellow  glass  the  photographer  would 
get  heat  and  light  from  the  sunshine,  but  he  could  not  produce  a  photograph 
becaiise  yellow  glass,  while  it  lets  in  the  light  and  heat  of  the  sun,  keeps  out  the 
chemical  or  actinic  ray  necessary  to  produce  a  portrait.     And  so  it  is  true  of  many 
that,  while  they  live  in  the  free  light  and  warmth  of  the  gospel  day,  while  the  true 
Light  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world  shines  upon  and  all 
round  them,  they  are  not  savingly  changed,  they  are  not  transformed  by  the  light 
into  the  ima<;e  of  God.    So  in  the  case  of  Gehazi,  Judas,  and  Ananias,  covetousness 
prevented  the  shining  of  the  example  of  those  around  from  converting  and  blessing 
the  heart.         Hypocrites  in  the  Church  : — An  ingenious  attempt  to  defraud  was 
detected  at  the  United  States  Mint  recently.     A  package  purporting  to  contain  gold 
grains  was  delivered  there  by  express  from  Little  Rock.     Tlie  general  appearance 
of  the  grains  was  much  like  that  daily  received,  and  they  also  bore  successfully  the 
acid  test.     Subsequently  a  careful  analysis  was  made  to  ascertain  what  the  article 
really  was  and  of  what  it  was  composed.     The  result  was  astonishing,  revealing  an 
ingenious  device  for  the  deception  of  parties  dealing  in  gold  bullion.    The  grains  were 
found  to  be  nothing  more  nor  less  than  steel  filings,  and  to  give  them  the  appearance 
of  grains  of  the  precious  metal  they  were  covered  with  fine  gold,  which  was  made 
to  adhere  by  the  use  of  a  compositi<in  of  turpentine.     The  Church  and  the  world 
are  often  similarly  imposed  upon.     Hypocrites  are  often  able  to  pick  up  a  coating 
of  cant  phrases  and  wear  a  sanctimonious  appearance  who  are  really  base  metal. 
Though  the  deception  may  succeed  here,  and  for  a  time,  ultimate  detection  is 
inevitable.         Fraudulent  benevolence  : — Christians  say  that  they  will  give  a  tenth 
of  their  incomes,  or  more,  to  the  work  of  Christ ;  and  then  comes  a  hard  year  of 
tightening  in  the  market.     They  now  think  to  themselves  with  a  sweet  caution,  "  I 
must  retrench  in  benevolence  this  season."     Sometimes  Christians  make  a  show  of 
contribution,  but  adroitly  manage  to  get  back  a  fair  percentage.  The  hardship 

of  hypocrisy  : — Now,  half  the  trouble  which  many  people  take  to  be  smooth  and 
worthless  impostors  in  religion  would  make  them  genuine  Christians.  A  lie 
is  a  great  deal  harder  to  tell  than  the  truth.  It  is  actually  harder  to  be 
a  successful  hypocrite  than  to  be  a  successful  Christian.  In  the  one  case 
God  is  continually  helping  us.  In  the  other  case  God  is  hindering  us,  and 
all  the  time  is  exposing  us  to  detection  and  disgrace.  It  is  really  easier 
to  possess  a  sincere  heart-piety,  and  to  let  that  inward  light  shine  out  naturally 


CHAP.  T,]  THE  ACTS.  459 

from  the  countenance  and  the  conduct,  than  it  is  to  go  through  life  wearing 
the  mask  of  false  profession.  To  be  a  true  Christian  is  a  constant  joy.  To 
seem  to  be  one  when  we  are  not  is  to  wear  a  hateful  galling  yoke  of  bondage.  In 
order  to  keep  up  appearances  an  insincere  professor  is  incessantly  obliged  to  do 
many  things  which  are  exceedingly  distasteful  and  even  loathsome.  He  must  utter 
many  a  solemn  falsehood  which  sticks  in  his  throat.  He  must  forfeit  all  self- 
respect.  He  must  perform  many  a  penance,  and  call  it  a  pleasure.  He  lives  in 
the  constant  dread  that  his  mask  may  slip  aside  and  reveal  his  real  character.  For 
no  man  ever  went  through  a  whole  false  life  of  professed  piety  without  awakening 
occasional  suspicion  of  his  "  godly  sincerity."  Sometimes  a  sudden  emergency 
jerks  the  mask  aside  and  exposes  the  dissembler.  Oh  !  what  a  wretched 
life  is  led  by  him  who,  in  trying  to  "  keep  afloat  "  before  his  fellow-creatures,  is 
constantly  striving  to  caulk  up  those  fatal  leaks  which  he  knows  are  sending  him 
to  the  bottom  !  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Dangers  within  the  early  Church  : — We  have 
here  the  first  great  danger  that  arose  from  within  the  Christian  Church.  In  the 
foregoing  chapter  a  serious  danger  arose  from  without.  Two  of  the  apostles  were 
cast  into  prison.  This  was  the  first  storm  of  human  rage  that  broke  upon  the  infant 
Church,  and  it  passed  away,  like  many  a  storm  of  wind  upon  the  tender  plants  of 
nature,  without  doing  serious  damage.  But  dangers  from  within  are  more  to  be 
dreaded.  One  traitor  in  the  camp  is  more  terrible  than  a  host  of  enemies.  One 
little  worm  in  the  heart  of  a  plant  is  more  destructive  than  the  wildest  tempest.  Many 
a  noble  youth  and  many  a  young  congrfgation  have  been  sadly  injured  by  worldly- 
mindedness.  Note — I.  Peter  detecting  hypocrisy.  The  sin  of  these  people  was 
the  C'lmmon  crime  of  great  profession  with  little  principle  and  less  practice.  They 
wished  to  be  counted  generous,  while  they  were  really  selfish  ;  and  seeming  to  care 
little  for  the  world,  they  were  intensely  ambitious,  and  anxious  to  get  as  much  as 
possible  of  human  praise  and  worldly  commendation.  This  is  an  evil  against  which 
we  have  need  to  watch.  Liberality  is  now  fashionable  in  the  Church.  A  man  was 
famous  in  ancient  times  as  he  laid  his  axe  upon  the  thick  trees  of  Lebanon,  and 
brought  them  down  to  build  the  Jewish  temple.  A  man  is  famous  at  the  present 
day  when  he  is  able  to  give  ten,  twenty,  fifty,  a  hundred,  a  thousand  pounds,  for 
the  support  of  public  charities  or  the  extension  of  the  gospel.  These  are  noble 
deeds,  which  we  cordially  commend,  but  it  is  not  impossible  that  in  accordance 
with  the  generous  fashions  of  our  period  many  a  large  gift  may  be  laid  upon  the 
altar  of  benevolence  from  no  higher  motive,  and  with  no  better  purpose,  than  to 
stand  well  in  public  estimation.  When  Ananias  and  Sapphira  came  into  the  pre- 
sence of  Peter  with  their  hypocrisy  they  were  detected.  Most  likely  the  good  Spirit 
endowed  him  with  the  power  of  discerning  evil  spirits.  Certain  it  is  that  God  is 
able  to  read  the  heart  and  motive  of  every  man ;  and  though  we  may  succeed  in 
imposing  upon  men,  we  must  remember  that  God  looks,  with  perfect  eye,  into  all 
our  professions,  and  thoroughly  tests  their  sincerity.  "  Be  not  deceived  ;  God  is 
not  mocked."  II.  Peter  exposing  falsehood.  "  Be  sure  thy  sin  will  find  thee 
out,"  is  written  on  one  page  of  God's  Bible  and  on  many  pages  of  God's  provi- 
dence. The  efforts  made  to  conceal  a  fault  enhance  its  crime,  and  make  the 
consequences  more  serious.  Sin  is  often  more  than  doubled  before  it  is  detected  or 
checked  or  punished.  "  He  that  does  one  fault  at  first,  and  lies  to  hide  it,  makes 
it  two."  The  two  or  the  two  thousand  faults  spring  from  one.  There  was  a  first 
fault  with  the  man  who  complained  that  his  iniquitits  were  more  than  the  hairs 
upon  his  head.  1.  The  apostle  calls  the  sin  by  its  proper  name,  and  traces  it  to 
its  evil  source.  "  Why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  heart  to  lie  ?  "  Falsehood  for  the 
sake  of  worldly  gain  is  one  of  the  coolest  and  meanest  crimes  which  a  man  is  able 
to  commit.  The  man  smiles,  and  smiles  again,  to  do  his  villainy.  He  is  not  only 
Satan-taught  when  his  heart  is  filled  to  lie,  but  Satan-like,  for  every  movement  is 
crooked  and  cunning  as  the  motions  of  a  serpent.  We  read  of  Satan,  in  the  days 
of  Job,  presenting  himself,  like  an  angel  of  light,  with  an  air  of  piety,  among  the 
sons  of  God.  He  told  onr  first  parents  (Gen.  iii.  5)  great  lies,  which  have  their 
counterpart  in  those  which  men  utter,  by  speech  or  action,  when  th-y  wish  their 
hta'tlesf;  worship  to  be  taken  for  true  devotion ;  put  on  a  fair  robe  of  friendshiiJ  to 
cover  the  worst  of  enmity  ;  or  condescend  to  the  meanness  of  a  base  transaction,  as 
if  it  were  a  royal  road  to  wealth,  fame,  and  happiness.  2.  Peter  also  exposed  the 
essence  of  the  crime.  It  was  a  daring  offence  against  high  Heaven — "  unto  God." 
These  words  must  have  had  a  startling  effect  upon  the  transgressor.  We  have  seen 
a  child  suffused  with  crimson  shame  and  tears  of  bitter  sorrow  when  caught  and 
checked  in  the  utterance  of  falsehood.  We  have  seen  a  man  grow  pale  as  a  winding- 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

sheet,  struck  silent  as  the  dumb,  and  unable  for  a  time  to  breathe  a  word  of 
apology  or  a  prayer  for  pardon  when  shown  that  he  had  been  uttering  a  list  of 
unt  TiiiHs.  You  can  fancy  what  a  person  must  feel  in  an  open  court,  before  a  crowd 
of  je^ple,  when  a  letter  is  produced  in  his  own  handwriting  to  show  that  he  has 
spoken  and  sworn  deceitfully.  The  man  who  sows  handfuls  of  falsehood  may  be 
expected  to  reap  sheaves  of  shame  and  sorrow  and  suffering.  "  All  liars  shall  have 
their  part  in  the  lake  that  burns  with  fire  and  brimstone,  which  is  the  second 
death."  III.  Peter  condemning  the  guilty.  His  words  embodied  a  severe  re- 
proof— "  Why  hast  thou  conceived  this  thing  in  thine  heart  ?  "  The  question  is 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,  and  must  have  cut  the  guilty  man  most  deeply. 
He  was,  no  doubt,  expecting  great  praise  for  his  liberality.  It  was  a  meeting  of  the 
Church,  where  the  apostles  were  waiting  to  receive  the  Christian  offerings  for  the 
common  treasury.  Ananias  stepped  forward  with  an  air  of  peculiar  importance, 
and  when  he  told  of  selling  the  estate  and  laid  down  the  money  he  would  look  for  a 
hearty  commendation  from  Peter  and  a  round  of  applause  from  the  peoi^le.  But 
what  is  tijis?  Peter  looks  oppressed  with  sorrow  and  displeasure  ;  the  people  are 
silent  and  still.  And  when  the  apostle  proceeded  to  describe  the  sin  and  curse  of 
falsehood,  his  condemnation  would  fall  upon  the  soul  of  Ananias  like  a  thunderbolt. 
It  did  so  fall,  not  from  the  hand  of  Peter,  but  the  hand  of  God,  and  the  deceiver 
was  laid  prostrate  in  the  stillness  of  death.  His  wife,  three  hours  afterwards, 
appeared  at  the  place  of  meeting  with  similar  expectations  to  those  of  her  husband. 
She  anticipated  many  tender  and  hearty  greetings  from  the  assembled  disciples; 
but  when  she  entered  all  was  solemnity  and  sorrow.  The  poor  woman  looked  round 
in  vain  for  a  smile  or  sign  of  approbation.  Her  husband,  too,  was  absent :  none 
had  dared  to  whisper  to  her  that  he  was  away  to  his  grave ;  and  when  Peter  asked 
about  the  land  and  its  price  she  was  ready  to  repeat  and  confirm  her  husband's 
falsehood.  Foolhardy  presumption !  Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall 
not  go  unpunished.  Like  Ananias,  she  must  be  carried  to  a  dishonoured  grave; 
and  in  an  nistant  she  fell  down  and  yielded  up  the  ghost.  Such  was  the  first  great 
danger  within  the  Christian  Church.  The  early  Church  was  delivered  by  a  stroke 
of  judgment  that  must  have  clothed  every  member  in  sackcloth.  We  read  that 
when  Achan  was  taken  from  his  tent  and  stoned  for  stealing  the  spoils  of  Jericho 
the  impression  made  upon  the  Israelites  was  so  profound  that  the  scene  of  execu- 
tion was  named  the  Valley  of  Achor  ;  or,  the  Vale  of  Sorrow.  And  here  we 
have  the  Achor  of  the  Christian  Church  ;  for  assuredly  the  apostles  and  their 
people  would  retire  from  this  awful  meeting  with  bitter  tears  and  bleeding  hearts 
to  mourn  tlje  terrible  doom  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  {J.  Thompson,  A.M.)  A 
hmken  vow  : — I.  The  character  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  1.  Like  ourselves,  they 
belonged  to  a  nation  greatly  blessed  by  God.  2.  Like  us,  the  Ijeirs  of  religious 
memories  and  influences.  3.  Like  all  of  us,  believers  in  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  ; 
not  infidels.  4.  Like  many  of  us,  Church  members — members  of  the  Jerusalem, 
Pentecostal  Church — the  Church  of  James,  Barnabas,  and  Philip,  noted  for  its 
orthodoxy,  faith,  and  good  works  5.  Like  many  of  us,  they  did  not  go  to  the 
prayer  meeting  (compare  chap.  iv.  .31  with  chap.  v.  3).  They  missed  the  blessing 
and  exposed  themselves  to  temptation.  6.  Like  most  of  us,  probably  neither  very 
rich  nor  very  poor  (Agur's  prayer).  7.  A  harmonious  couple  (chap.  v.  9).  (1)  Are 
you  helping  your  husband  or  wife  to  heaven  or  hell?  (2)  Marry  only  in  the  Lord. 
8.  On  the  whole  they  were  very  reputable  and  highly-esteemed  disciples.  II.  Their 
temptation.  1.  Temptation  common  to  all.  Its  uses.  2.  The  particular  tempta- 
tion— a  desire  to  gain  popularity  without  losing  their  property.  III.  Their  sin. 
1.  Lying  without  speaking  ;  giving  a  part  of  the  worship  of  God  for  the  whole.  2. 
Its  essence  a  broken  vow,  aggravated  by — (1)  Lying  ;  (2)  Irreverence.  The  guilt  of 
our  broken  vows  aggravated  by — (3)  Greater  light,  and — (4)  Greater  mercies.  IV. 
Their  punishment.  1.  Sudden  death  a  mercy  to  those  prepared.  2.  A  blessing 
to  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  le  -ause  it  saved  them  from  a  long  life  of  lying  and 
hypocrisy.  8.  Why,  then,  were  they  slain  ?  Not  because  their  guilt  was  greater, 
but — 4.  As  an  example  to  us:  like  Nadab  and  Abihu  (Lev.  x.  1-3),  and  Uzzah 
(2  Sam.  vi.  1-9).  Application.  Our  broken  vows.  1.  Unpaid  subscriptions.  2.  As 
Church  officers.  3.  As  Church  members.  4.  At  baptism.  6.  At  the  Communion 
table.     6.  To  dying  friends,     7.  In  sickness.     (<7.  B.  Converse.) 

Ver.  2.  And  kept  back  part  of  the  price. — The  sin  of  pretence  and  its 
punishment: — They  desired  to  have  all  the  credit  the  Church  would  give  them 
for   acting   as   generously   as  Barnabas    did,  and   yet,  while  getting   credit   for 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  461 


unselfish  and  unstinting  liberality,  to  be  able  to  enjoy  in  private  somewhat 
of  that  which  they  were  believed  to  have  surrendered.  And  their  calculations 
■were  terribly  disappointed.  They  tried  to  play  the  hypocrite's  part  on  most 
dangerous  ground,  just  when  the  Divine  spirit  of  purity,  smcerity,  and  truth  had 
been  abundantly  poured  out,  and  when  the^spirit  of  deceit  and  hypocrisy  was  there- 
fore at  once  recognised.  It  was  with  the  apostles  and  their  spiritual  natures  then 
as  it  is  with  ourselves  and  our  physical  natures  still.  When  we  are  living  in  a 
crowded  city  we  notice  not  strange  scents  and  ill  odours  and  foul  gases  ;  our  senses 
are  dulled,  and  our  perceptive  powers  are  rendered  obtuse  because  the  whole 
atmosphere  is  a  tainted  one.  But  when  we  dwell  in  the  pure  air  of  the  country, 
and  the  glorious  breezes  from  mountain  and  moor  blow  rouud  us  fi'esh  and  free, 
then  we  detect  at  once,  and  at  a  long  distance,  the  slightest  ill  odour  or  the  least 
trace  of  offensive  gas.  The  outpoured  presence  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  abounding 
love  which  was  pruduced  thereby,  quickened  the  perception  of  St.  Peter,  He 
recognised  the  hypocrisy,  characterised  the  sin  of  Ananias  as  a  lie  against  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  and  then  the  Spirit  and  Giver  of  life,  seconding  and  supporting  the  words 
of  St.  Peter,  withdrew  His  support  from  the  human  frame  of  the  sinner,  and 
Ananias  ceased  to  live,  just  as  Sapphira,  his  partner  in  deceit,  ceased  to  live  a  few 
hours  later.  It  may  well  have  been  that  this  incident  was  inserted  in  this  typical 
Church  history  to  correct  a  false  idea  which  would  otherwise  have  grown  up.  The 
apostles  and  their  followers  were  now  realising  their  freedom  in  the  spirit ;  and  some 
were  inclined  to  run  into  licentiousness  as  the  result  of  that  freedom.  They  were 
realising,  too,  their  relationship  to  God  as  one  of  pure  filial  love,  and  they  were  in 
great  danger  of  forgetting  that  God  was  a  God  of  justice  and  judgment  as  well,  till 
this  stern  dispensation  recalled  them  to  a  sense  of  the  fact  that  eternal  love  is  also 
eternal  purity  and  eternal  truth,  and  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty.  (G.  T. 
Stokes,  D.D.)  The  nature  of  the  sin: — That  it  was  simply  the  sin  of  lying,  is 
impossible  to  believe.  He  who  calmly  told  them  of  their  instant  fate  had  himself 
lied  most  foully,  and  been  forgiven.  It  is  more  plausible  to  maintain  that  their 
sin  was  something  far  worse  than  mere  falsehood — that  it  was  hypocrisy  of  the 
lowest  type — that  they  could  not  endure  to  lack  the  praise  of  the  noblest  Christian 
conduct,  or  to  make  the  necessary  sacrifices — that  they  schemed  to  be  considered 
the  best,  whilst  they  were,  and  knew  that  they  were,  very  far  below  the  best.  All 
this  is  true  and  terrible,  but  does  not  satisfy  us  as  an  explanation  of  their  awful 
end.  I  venture  to  suggest  that  Ananias  and  Sapphira  suffered  the  extreme  penalty, 
not  as  sinners,  but  as  criminals ;  not  in  revenge  for  a  flagrant  insult  offered  to  the 
Almighty,  but  as  the  due  reward  for  a  frightful  wrong  inflicted  upon  tljeir  fellow- 
men  ;  not  to  accentuate  the  hideousness  of  a  sin  (for  which  purpose  it  had  been 
unnf  eded  and  ineffective),  but  to  mark  the  enormity  of  a  crime  which  blasted  the 
fairest  prospect  ever  opened  before  the  sons  of  men.  It  seems  to  me  tliat  they 
suffered  death  just  as  the  dynamitards  ought  to  suffer  death,  because  in  the  reck- 
lessness of  political  hatred  they  destroy  the  lives  of  innocent  people.  Their  crime 
was  beyond  all  possible  reach  of  human  justice,  therefore  God  Himself  intervened 
to  mark  for  once  and  ail  how  great  a  crime,  how  vast  a  wrong  they  had  committed 
in  the  sight  of  Heaven.  Of  what,  then,  were  they  guilty  ?  What  did  they  do  ? 
Before  the  deceit  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  communism  was  the  rule  within  the 
Christian  fold,  It  was  practised  freely  as  a  natural,  nay,  a  necessary  part  of  a 
whole-hearted  following  after  Christ.  After  the  deceit  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira 
communism  ceased  to  be  the  rule — apparently  it  ceased  to  exist.  In  the  very  next 
chapter  we  find,  not  communism,  but  "  charity,"  with  all  its  paltry  greeds  and 
grudges.  Why  was  this  ?  What  became  of  the  communism  ?  I  say  that  Ananias 
and  his  wife  killed  it.  Such  a  state  of  things  depends  essentially  upon  mutual 
confidence,  and  they  killed  that  confidence.  The  fatal  blow  had  been  given  :  and 
what  had  been  an  actual  working  system,  perfect  in  its  principle,  and  boundless  in 
its  promise,  faded  at  once  into  a  beautiful  dream.  .  .  .  Co-operation  in  the  labours 
of  life  does  very  well  for  beavers,  for  they  do  not  deceive  one  another,  nor  does  one 
desire  to  grow  fat  at  his  neighbour's  expense,  neither  does  another  wish  to  take 
credit  for  having  done  what  he  has  not  really  done.  Why  cannot  Christian  men 
be  as  true  to  one  another,  and  to  the  society  of  which  they  form  a  part,  as  beavers  ? 
Ask  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  Before  they  began,  there  were  no  suspicions,  no 
grudgings,  no  wealth,  and  no  poverty,  "  neither  was  there  any  among  them  that 
lacked."  When  they  had  ended  there  were  rich  and  poor,  there  was  "  a  murmur- 
ing  "  of  one  class  against  another,  there  was  the  foretaste  of  those  monstrous  evils 
which  we  deplore  to-day.    They  only  "  told  a  lie,"  but  that  lie  gave  a  mortal  blow 


462  THE  BIBLICAL   ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

to  the  mutual  confidence  on  which  any  system  of  communism  has  to  rest.  If  it  is 
only  to-day  that  we  are  beginning  to  face  the  social  problems  of  advanced  civilisa- 
tion in  their  naked  ugliness,  if  it  is  only  to-day  that  we  are  in  a  position  to  estimate 
the  results  of  unlimited  competition,  and  the  reign  of  universal  greed  ;  if  it  is  only 
to-day  that  we  are  bec(iming  thoroughly  frightened  at  the  hideous  contrast  between 
the  professed  principles  and  the  existing  facts  of  Christian  society ;  it  is  for  this 
very  reason  only  to-day  that  we  are  able  to  appreciate  the  true  moral  of  that 
tremendous  and  unexampled  judgment.  The  socialism  of  the  first  believers  was 
the  fairest  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost — it  was  the  truest  following  after  Christ — it  was 
the  loftiest  faith  and  the  broadest  charity  translated  into  that  simple  language  of 
everyday  life,  which  must  be  read  and  loved  of  all  men.  The  "  Magnificat "  is  the 
inspired  hymn  of  gospel  communism,  it  is  the  Marseillaise  of  the  Christian  socialist. 
Striking  at  once  to  the  heart  of  the  matter,  rising  at  once  to  the  principle  of  the 
new  order,  forestalling  (like  all  inspired  strains)  the  end  from  the  beginning,  it 
pronounces  without  mitigation,  it  exults  without  qualification,  that  "  He  hath  put 
down  the  mighty,"  tfec.  {R.  Winterhotham,  M.A.)  Making  gain  out  of  a  pretence  of 
godliness  : — When  Nineveh  was  burned  undtr  Sardanapalus,  great  quantities  of 
treasure  were  known  to  have  fallen  into  the  fiery  ruins.  Belesis,  governor  of 
Babylon,  had  been  one  of  the  conspirators  against  the  dead  king,  and  was  aware 
of  all  the  circumstances  of  the  sack  of  the  city.  He  told  the  other  generals  that 
in  the  midst  of  the  fight  he  had  at  one  time  despaired  of  success,  and  then  he  had 
solemnly  sworn  to  the  immortal  gods  that,  if  victoi-y  were  vouchsafed  him,  he 
would  convey  bodily  all  the  ashes  of  the  conflagration  to  Babylon,  and  deposit  them 
in  a  vast  temple  which  he  would  erect  to  receive  them  in  honour  of  the  propitious 
deities:  he  added  that  his  tender  conscience  would  not  permit  him  to  delay  the 
fulfilment  of  his  vow.  No  one  could  object  to  so  pious  a  proposal  ;  so  Belesis  set 
the  whole  army  at  work  to  gather  up  the  remains  of  the  fire.  When  the  valuable 
mass  reached  Babylon  he  smelted  the  heaps  in  gieat  furnaces,  and  enriched  him- 
self to  a  fabulous  amount  with  the  gold  and  silver  that  came  forth.  'J  his  he  had 
understood  all  along ;  but  he  was  neither  the  first  nor  the  last  man  who  has  put 
forward  his  conscience  to  make  gain  out  of  godliness  with  a  villainous  deceit.  {G.  S. 
Robinson,  D.D.)  Keeping  back  the  price  : — We  read  in  French  history  that  Louis 
XI.  once  profi'ered  the  entire  department  of  Bologne  to  the  "  Blessed  Virgin  Mary." 
He  drew  up  a  deed,  signed,  sealed  ;  he  delivered  it  to  the  proper  ecclesiastics  of  the 
Cburch.  But  with  a  peculiar  perversity  he  kept  all  the  revenues  and  taxes, 
appointing  every  year  new  collectors  who  might  secure  the  income  r  gidly  for  him- 
self without  any  peril  of  being  tampered  with  by  the  priests.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  3.  Why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  heart  to  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost. — Satan  is  a 
Hebrew  word  meaning  adversary  or  opponent,  whether  in  war  (1  Kings  v.  4)  or  litiga- 
tion (Psa.  cix.  6),  often  applied  to  human  enemies,  but  in  one  place  to  rfh  angel 
(Numb.  xxvi.  22),  and  with  the  article  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  1),  was  a  proper  name  without 
it  (1  Chron.  xxi.  1),  to  the  evil  spirit  or  prince  of  the  fallen  angels,  as  the  adversary 
and  accuser  of  mankind  (Job.  i.  7,  ii.  2;  Zech.  iii.  1,  2  ;  cf.  Rev.  xii.  9,  10).  In  this 
sense  and  api'lication  it  is  nearly  equivalent  to  Diabolns  (Kev.  xii.  9  ;  xx.  2),  meaning 
slanderer,  informer,  false  accuser  ;  to  which  the  English  devil  may  be  easily  traced 
back,  through  the  intermediate  forms  of  the  French  iJiahle.  and  Italian  Diavolo.  As 
the  same  being  is  the  tempter  of  our  race  from  the  beginning  (2  Cor.  xi.  3),  the  name 
Satan  sometimes  has  that  special  meaning  (Matt.  iv.  10,  xvi.  23  ;  Mark  viii.  33), 
and  so  it  is  used  here.  (J.  W.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Satan  filling  the  heart: — The 
question  contains  mure  than  one  truth  in  reference  to  Satan.  I.  The  existence 
AND  REALITY  OF  Satan,  that  is  to  Say  of  the  evil  spirit  who  is  the  prince  of  darkness, 
is  throughout  undeniably  to  be  understood.  It  cannot  here  be  considered  as  a  mere 
allegory  ;  the  matter  was  too  serious,  and  the  speech  of  the  apostle  is  much  too 
impressive,  severe  and  direct  for  that.  II.  Evil  does  not  exist  and  grow  isoi.ated 
IN  the  human  breast,  but  is  conneutively  interwoven  with  the  kingdom  of  evil  in 
the  invisible  world.  Ar.d  precisely  the  worst  sins,  the  subtlest  hypocrisy,  where 
evil  clothes  itself  in  the  holiest  garments  of  light,  are  the  operations  of  Satan.  III. 
Thkreare  i>ifferent  df.guees  of  the  working  of  Satan,  from  the  smallest  tempta- 
tion to  the  filling  of  the  heart,  i.e.,  entirely  and  complet-ly  taking  possession  of  it, 
which  is  the  terrible  contrast  to  the  "fulness  of  the  Holy  Spirit."     IV.  Man  la 

RKSPONSTRLE,  AND    HIS  WILL  FREE  EVEN  IN  RELATION  TO  THE  POWERFUL  PROMPTINGS   OP 

THE  DEVIL.     For  Peter  savs  not  only  Satan  has  filled  thy  heart,  but  asks  why. 
And  the  reason  he  seeks  lies  evidently  not  in  Satan,  but  in  Ananias.     "  Why  hast 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  463 

thou  pprmitted  it?"  The  apostle  indirectly  testifies  that  man,  if  he  -will,  may 
resist  the  devil  (1  Pet.  v.  9  ;  James  iv.  7).  There  is  no  irresistible  power  of 
Satan.      (G.    V.    Lechler,    D.D.)  Lying    to    the    Holy    Spirit  : — Falsehood 

is  particularly  a  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  a  sin  against — I.  His  nature. 
One  of  His  titles  is  "the  Spirit  of  Truth."  It  is  essentially  inherent  in  Him. 
He  cannot  Himself  be  false,  and  falsehood  cannot  dwell  in  His  presence.  II. 
His  WORD.  Christ  prayed  "  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth  ;  Thy  Word  is  truth. 
This  is  the  instrument  by  which  He  accomplishes  all  His  purposes;  and  He  will  use 
no  other.  He  tells  all  the  truth  as  it  regards  God,  man,  sin,  and  salvation,  time 
and  eternity.  Of  such  Jesus  says,  "Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall 
make  you  free."  A  lie  is  the  rejection  of  the  truth,  and  a  direct  resistance  to  the 
testimony  and  word  of  the  Spirit.  III.  His  wobk  in  the  heakt.  "  Thuu  desirest 
truth  in  the  inward  parts."  When  God  writes  His  law  upon  the  heart  it  is  as  a 
standard  of  truth  which  He  sets  up  there.  Establishing  it  within  us,  He  entwines 
around  it  all  our  principles,  afTectidns  and  practices.  He  makes  us  "  true  men."  IV. 
The  character  which  He  forms  in  His  people.  They  are  "of  the  truth,"  "do 
the  truth,"  "speak  the  truth  in  their  heart,"  and  are  "girt  about  with  truth." 
{J.  Morgan.  D.D.)  The  resistibility  of  evil  .-—The  Bible  is  a  book  of  personalities 
— it  has  nothing  to  do  with  personifications,  streams  of  tendency,  &c.  Here  the 
personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  clearly  recognised,  and  Satan  is  no  figure  of  speech. 
The  resistibility  of  evil  is  the  greatest  moral  of  the  text.  Satan's  action  is  fully 
assumed,  but  Ananias  is  held  responsible  for  the  result :  "  Why  hast  thou  permitted 
it  ?  "  Now  we  are  all  quite  ready  to  blame  the  tempting  power  for  our  bad  conduct. 
Supernatural  evil  comes  in  like  a  flood,  and  we  think  there  is  much  to  be  said  for 
us  if  we  are  swept  away.  We  are  told  that  in  the  East  robbers  employ  magic  to 
effect  their  nefarious  purpose,  their  victims  lying,  with  their  eyes  open,  helpless 
spectators  of  the  spoliation  of  their  homes.  Some  men  persuade  themselves  that 
they  are  similarly  helpless  in  the  presence  of  the  arch  thief.  Not  so,  says  the  text. 
You  can  resist  the  devil  and  he  will  flee.  There  is  no  enchantment  in  wickedness 
which  may  prevail  against  a  sincere  and  steadfast  soul.     I.  The  very  epithet  we 

USE  TO  EXPRESS  THE  ACTION  OF  EVIL  IMPLIES  THE  RESISTIBILITY  OF  EVIL.       Satan  is  the 

tempter,  the  initial  action  of  evil  is  temptation.  This  is  only  another  word  for 
experiment  or  trial.  It  was  the  design  of  God  (Deut.  viii.  2),  through  certain 
discipline,  to  show  Israel  what  was  in  His  heart.  Satan  also  tempts  men,  makes 
experiments  upon  their  moral  nature.  But  there  is  always  this  great  distinction. 
God  is  ever  aiming  to  realise  the  good  that  is  in  us,  and  to  purge  the  evil ;  Satan  to 
realise  the  evil  and  to  purge  the  good.  But  uncertainty  is  of  the  very  nature  of 
temptation.  When  Satan  makes  an  experiment  upon  us  he  may  possibly  succeed, 
he  may  possibly  fnil,  according  to  the  quality  of  our  nature.  He  cannot  coerce. 
Christ  affirmed,  "  The  p'-ince  of  this  world  cometh  and  hath  nothing  in  Me  " — 
nothing  that  owned  his  sway.  He  was  pure  gold,  and  as  such  He  went  into  the 
crucible,  and  as  such  He  came  out  again.  The  alchemist  sought  to  transmute  base 
metnls  into  gold  ;  the  devil  seeks  to  turn  gold  into  cinders,  which  can  never  be  done 
in  the  physical  world,  much  less  in  the  ethical.  If  you  are  of  baser  metal  in  your 
inmost  self — I  do  not  care  how  much  gilt  you  put  on  the  surface,  nor  whether  you 
have  got  the  hall  mark  of  the  Church — if  you  are  at  the  centre  base  metal  when 
you  are  put  into  the  crucible,  base  metal  you  will  come  out.  But  if  there  is  nothing 
of  the  devil  in  us  he  can  get  nothing  out  of  us.  Loyal  to  the  truth  in  your  deepest 
thought  and  sympathy,  the  black  storm  may  bow  you  down,  but  having  done  all, 
you  stand  ;  rotten  at  the  heart,  when  the  storm  comes  upon  you,  great  is  your  fall. 
Experiment  d^^monstrates  :  it  does  not  necessitate.  II.  The  method  of  its  appro.^ch 
AND  action  indicates  THE  RESISTIBILITY  OF  EVIL.  The  dcvil  uses  deccit.  Temptation 
is  cajolery.  Evil  comes  in  the  wriggle  of  the  serpent.  All  this  is  consolatory  so 
far  as  it  reveal s  the  weakness  which  underlico  aU  wickedness.  Strong  men  do  not 
resort  to  these  equivocal  methods  ;  they  wear  no  masks,  proffer  no  bribes,  tell  no 
lies.  The  devil  comes  as  a  conjurer,  not  as  a  conqueror.  The  fowler  set'ing  his  net 
shows  that  we  are  free ;  the  destroyer  proffering  his  sorcerous  cup  confesses  that 
he  has  no  authority  to  smite  or  bind  ;  and  seeing  the  serpent  wriggling  in  the  grass, 
it  flashes  on  us  in  a  moment  how  easily  we  may  bruise  his  head.  Irresistibility  does 
not  trick  itself  out  in  motley  disguises.  Be  true  in  the  inward  parts  and  you  shall 
be  more  than  conqueror.  Ttie  "  properties  "  of  a  sorceror — mirrors,  vapours,  charms, 
incantations — will  prevail  nothing  against  the  armour  of  lieht ;  the  liar  of  ages 
will  not  deceive  the  simplicity  of  a  httle  chihJ  (2  Thess.  ii.  7-12).  The  root  of  the 
whole  matter  is  here.     Do  you  love  the  truth  in  your  inmost  heart,  and  are  you 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

prepared  to  follow  it  at  all  sacrifices  ?     Then  no  mystery  of  lawlessness  or  lying 
wonders,  etc.,  shall  lead  you  astray,  but  you  shall  hear  a  heavenly  voice  saying, 
"  This  is  the  way,"  and  walking  in  it  you  shall  be  safe  from  the  fear  of  evil.     III. 
If  evil   weee   irkesistible   it   would   possess  a  power   which   God  does  not 
PERMIT  Himself  to  exercise.     God  respects  the  nature  He  has  given,  and  does 
not  compel  us  along  any  line  of  action.     "  Behold  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock." 
The  heart  of  man  seems  but  a  hut  of  clay,  yet  before  its  lowly  door  stands  the 
Majesty  of  the  skies  asking  admittance.     God  respects  the  freedom  He  first  gave, 
and  if  ever  He  enters  we  shall  have  to  turn  the  key.    He  knocks,  but  He  does  no 
mnre.     God  made  the  human  heart  to  be  opened  only  from  within  ;  and  be  suro 
what  God  will  not  do  no  other  power  shall  be  permitted  to  do.     We  have  kept  God 
out,  and  surely  we  can  keep  the  devil  out.     The  deceiver  may  post  himself  before 
the  windows  of  our  soul,  and  we  cannot  drive  him  away;  but  as  sure  as  we  are 
men  he  can  never  put  his  sooty  foot  across  the  red  threshold  of  our  heart  except 
we  agree  to  it  (Luke  xxii.  31).    The  French  proverb  is  right,  "  The  devil  goes  away 
from  a  closed  door."     The  door  of  the  soul  is  sacred :  keep  it  shut,  latch  it  with 
caution,  bolt  it  with  resolution,  lock  it  with  prayer,  and  all  hell  may  gather  about, 
as  the  Sodomites  did  about  the  door  of  Lot,  yet  they  shall  be  baffled.     But  onco 
have  the  door  open,  begin  coquettings  with  evil,  and  the  devil  will  soon  be  your 
guest  and  master.     IV.  Evil  is  being  constantly  vanquished.     Nothing  is  more 
terrible  than  that  we  should  be  convinced  of  the  invulnerability  of  evil.     Cortes 
sought  to  make  the  Mexicans  believe  that  a  Spaniard  could  not  die,  an  illusion 
which  unnerved  them  in  the  day  of  battle.   We  must  entertain  no  such  belief  about 
evil.     The  spirits  of  wickedness  are  being  tramped  under  foot  every  day.     The 
Bible  is  full  of  the  records  of  victory  over  temptation  and  sin.     What  is  the  lesson 
of  the  victory  of  our  Lord  in  the  wilderness  but  the  powerlessness  of  the  devil  in 
the  presence  of  faith  and  purity.    In  His  strength  His  victory  is  being  ever  repeated 
"  What's  done  we  partly  may  compute,  but  we  know  not  what's  resisted."     We  eee 
the  ugly  side  of  life :  if  anybody  goes  to  the  bad  we  all  know  it.     But  all  around 
us  magnificent  moral  victories  are  being  scored  :  if  our  eyes  were  opened  and  we 
could  see  everything  that  is  going  on  many  a  sublime  spectacle  would  inspire  us 
•with  exultation.     Now  a  young  man  has  the  cup  of  guilty  pleasure  pressed  to  his 
lips,  but  in  the   critical  moment,  on  which  hangs  eternity,  he  dashes  it  to  the 
ground ;   now  a  young  maiden,  by  the  grace  of   heaven,  turns  away  from  some 
alluring    cluster,     keeping    her    purity   and    her  paradise  ;    now    a     struggling 
tradesman  prefers  honesty  to   gold ;    now   a  politician  loses   an  election   rather 
than  self  respect.     Poor  human  nature !     We  often   get  the  worst  of  it,  but  not 
always.      You  have  innumerable  brothers  and   sisters    in    tribulation,   who    by 
God's  grace  in  miry  pathways  walk  with  unspotted  robes,  and  the   same  grace 
shall  be  perfected  in   your  weakness.     The  Jewish  tradition   says,    "  The  devil 
cannot  overcome  except   he  first   see  your  face."      Turn  your  face  to  the  light 
and  your  back  to  the  devil,  and  you  shall  never  perish.     Conclusion :  1.  If  you 
do  not  want  Satan  to  fiU  your  heart,  take  care  that  God  fills  it  first.     Satan  fiUed 
Ananias'  heart  because  it  was  empty.     Of  his  brethren  we  read   "  they  were   all 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."     Satan  could  do  nothing  there.     Here  is  our  safety. 
When  the  devil  finds  an  empty  brain  he  fills  it  with  false  ideas,  wicked  plans ;  when 
he  finds  empty  hands  he  fills  them  with  mischiefs  ;  when  he  finds  an  empty  heart 
he  fills  it  with  vanities,  burning  passions,  vicious  sympathies  and  delights.     If  you 
wish  to  be  saved  from  temptation's  power,  keep  your  heart  full  of  the  love  of  God, 
your  hands  fuU  of  noble  work,  your  mind  full  of  high  thought  and  desire.     2.  You 
say,  "  Satan  has  filled  my  heart ;  oh  wretched  man  that  1  am."     There  is  hope. 
The  dispossessing  power  is  sufficient.     It  is  hard  for  a  landlord  to  dispossess  a  bad 
tenant.     He  wiU  not  go  out  for  the  telling,  you  cannot  frighten,  coax,  starve  him 
out,  it  is  only  when  the  king's  officer  comes  that  you  wiU  get  rid  of  the  objection- 
able party.     It  is  terrible  work  indeed  to  get  the  diabolism  out  of  our  heart.     The 
Bationalist  says,  "  I  will  persuade  him  out,"  but  inicjuity  does  not  yield  to  argu- 
ment.    The  Optimist  says,  "  I  will  coax  him  out,"  but  passion  does  not  yield  to 
blandishments.  The  Legalist  says,  "  I  will  frighten  him  out,"  but  lust  will  not  yield 
to  law.     The  Ascetic  says,  "  I  will  starve  him  out,"  but  pride,  selfishness,  and 
sensuality  do  not  yield  to  discipline.     The  Pessimist  says,  "  Death  shall  pull  down 
the  tabernacle,  and  so  give  us  relief  from  the  ghastly  dilemma,"  to  find  relief  only 
in  the  destruction  of  the  house  is  to  confess  ourselves  utterly  vanquished.    Appeal 
from  earth  to  heaven.     The  strong  man  armed  shall  bind  the  strong  man  and  eject 
him.      Seek  the  delivering  Christ,  and  although  your  fetters  have  been  riveted 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  465 

through  years  of  transgression,  you  shall  be  led  into  liberty  and  peace.  Evil  irre- 
sistible !  never.  "Thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,"  (fee.  (IF.  L.  Watkin- 
son.)  Insincere  Christians  an  easy  prey  to  Satan : — A  good  coloured  man  once 
said,  in  a  class-meeting :  "  Brethren,  when  I  was  a  boy,  I  took  a  hatchet  and  went 
into  de  woods.  When  I  found  a  tree  dat  was  straight,  big,  and  sohd,  I  didn't  touch 
dat  tree ;  but  when  I  found  one  leaning  a  little  and  hollow  inside,  I  soon  had  him 
down.  So  when  de  debbil  goes  after  Christians,  he  don't  touch  dem  dat  stand 
straight  and  true  ;  but  dem  dat  lean  a  little  and  are  hoUow  inside. "  The  devil's 
trade  wind: — One  of  W.  Jay's  peculiarities  was  the  manner  in  which  he  would  sur- 
prise his  hearers  by  a  startling  sentence.  Preaching  on  the  repentance  of  Judas  he 
took  occasion  to  attack  the  love  of  money,  and  at  the  close  of  one  of  the  divisions  of 
his  subject,  he  cried  out,  "  Avarice,  avarice  is  the  monsoon,  the  devil's  trade  wind 
from  the  Church  into  hell."  At  another  time,  speaking  of  the  inconsistency  of  many 
professors  of  the  gospel,  after  making  a  powerful  appeal,  he  exclaimed,  "  Some  of 
you,  my  dear  brethren,  are  so  inconsistent  and  undecided  that  if  at  this  moment  I 
saw  the  devil  running  away  with  you,  I  could  not  call  out,  '  Stop  thief  1 ' — he  would 
but  carry  off  his  own  property  !  "  Satan^s  worms  of  avarice : — A  journal  devoted 
to  the  interests  of  horticulture  states  that  a  gardener  in  the  employ  of  a  gentleman 
at  Pittsford,  New  York,  has  recently  solved  a  problem  which  has  long  perplexed 
him.  In  the  garden  under  his  care  is  a  large  lawn,  on  which  he  has  bestowed  much 
labour,  and  which  was  his  especial  pride.  For  some  time  past  a  small  patch  on  this 
lawn  disfigured  it,  for  the  grass  that  grew  there  was  poor  and  withered,  in  marked 
contrast  to  aU  around.  For  a  long  time  the  gardener  vainly  endeavoured  to  discover 
the  cause  of  its  decay.  One  day,  as  he  stood  meditatively  gazing  at  it,  he  saw  several 
birds  settle  upon  it  and  thrust  their  beaks  through  the  sod  with  much  diligence  and 
satisfaction.  The  gardener  had  the  curiosity  to  turn  up  a  portion  of  the  punctured 
turf,  and  discovered,  to  his  amazement,  that  the  earth  beneath  was  alive  with  a 
greedy  multitude  of  large  white  grubs,  which  had  completely  consumed  the  roots  of 
the  grass.  He  continued  the  work,  and  at  every  fresh  removal  of  the  sod  the 
same  phenomenon  presented  itself,  until  quarts  of  the  larvae  were  gathered  and 
destroyed.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  lack  of  vigorous  life  in  some  portions  of 
Christ's  vineyard,  the  Church,  may  have  a  similar  cause.  The  root  of  the  piety  of 
the  members  is  being  destroyed  by  Satan's  worms  of  avarice,  ambition,  and  love  of 
pleasure.     [Christian  Herald.) 

Ver.  4.  Thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  God. — Lying  unto  God: — I.  The 
SIN.  Men  lie  unto  God — 1.  When  they  use  their  profession  as  members  of  the 
Church  for  an  instrument  of  self  interest.  2.  By  making  false  pretences  in  their 
routine  of  worship.  3.  By  breaking  their  covenant  of  consecration.  4.  By  the 
offering  of  insincere  prayers.  5.  By  self  seeking  in  acts  of  Christian  zeal.  II.  The 
EETEiBDTiON— 1.  Was  the  visitation  of  God.  2.  Often  comes  in  the  form  of  a  de- 
moralisation of  soul,  which  renders  recovery  impossible  at  the  last.  (C.  S.  Robin' 
son,  D.D.)  The  permanence  of  a  lie  .-—A  httle  boy  to  sell  his  paper  told  a  lie. 
The  matter  came  up  in  the  Sunday  school.  "  Would  you  tell  a  he  for  three  cents  ?  " 
asked  a  teacher  of  one  of  the  boys.  "  No,  ma'am,"  answered  Dick,  very  decidedly, 
"For  ten  cents?"  "No,  ma'am."  "For  a  dollar?"  "No,  ma'am."  "For  a, 
thousand  dollars  ?  "  Dick  was  staggered.  A  thousand  dollars  looked  big— it  would 
buy  lots  of  things.  While  he  was  thinking  another  boy  cries  out  "  No,  ma'am,  be- 
cause when  the  thousand  dollars  are  gone  and  the  things  you  have  got  with  thpm, 
are  gone  too,  the  he  is  there  all  the  same."  Ah,  yes  !  That  is  so.  A  lie  sticks. 
Everything  else  may  go,  but  that  wiU  stay,  and  you  will  have  to  carry  it  round  with 
you,  whether  you  wUl  or  no — a  hard  and  heavy  load.  {Biblical  3Iuseum.)  Self 
deception : — A  man  never  deceives  himself  so  much  as  when  he  attempts  to  deceive 
God.     (J.  Caryl.)  The  retribution  of  falsehood  .-—George  Eliot,  in  "  Romola," 

powerfully  illustrates  in  that  remarkable  book  the  embarrassments  involved  in  one 
cowardly  departure  from  truth.  In  the  chapter  headed  "Tito's  Dilemma,"  the 
occasion  arises  for  Tito  to  fabricate  an  ingenious  lie.  Many  chapters  on  we  find 
him  experiencing  the  inexorable  law  of  human  souls  that  we  prepare  ourselves  for 
sudden  deeds  by  the  reiterated  choice  of  good  or  evil  that  gradually  determines 
character,  and  it  becomes  a  question  whether  aU  the  resources  of  lying  wiU  save  him 
from  being  crushed.  At  another  time  we  read :  "  Tito  felt  more  and  more  confi- 
dence as  he  went  on ;  the  lie  was  not  so  difficult  when  it  was  once  begun,  and  as 
the  words  feU  easily  from  his  lips,  they  gave  him  a  sense  of  power  such  as  men 
feel  when  they  have  begun  a  muscular  feat  successfully."  The  penalty  is  enforced  a 
VOL.    L  bO 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

few  pages  later.  "But  he  had  borrowed  from  the  terrible  usurer  Falsehood,  and  the 
loan  had  mounted  and  mounted  with  the  years,  till  he  belonged  to  the  usurer,  body 
and  soul." 

Vers.  7-10.  It  was  about  the  space  of  three  hours  after,  when  his  wife,  not 
knowing  what  was  done,  came  in. — Plain  langnaae: — I  think  that  one  of  the 
master  incantations,  one  of  the  most  signal  deceits,  which  we  practise  upon  our- 
selves, comes  from  the  use  of  language.  There  are  words  that  we  learn  in  childhood 
which  we  abandon  when  we  come  to  manhood.  Generally  speaking,  our  fireside 
words  are  old  Saxon  words — short,  knotty,  tough,  and  imbued  with  moral  and 
affectional  meanings  ;  but  as  we  grow  older  these  words  are  too  rude  and  plain  for 
our  use,  and  so  we  get  Latin  terms  and  periphrases  by  which  to  express  many  of 
our  thoughts.  When  we  talk  about  ourselves  we  almost  invariably  use  Latin  words, 
and  when  we  talk  about  our  neighbours  we  use  Saxon  words.  And  one  of  the  best 
things  a  man  can  do,  I  think,  is  to  examine  himself  in  the  Saxon  tongue.  If  a  man 
tells  that  which  is  contrary  to  the  truth  let  him  not  say,  "  I  equivocate  "  ;  let  him 
say,  "  I  lie."  Lie !  why,  it  brings  the  judgment  day  right  home  to  a  man's  thought. 
Men  do  not  like  it,  but  it  is  exactly  the  thing  that  will  most  effectually  touch  the 
moral  sense;  and  the  more  the  moral  sense  is  touched  the  better.  If  a  man  has 
departed  from  rectitude  in  his  dealings  with  another,  let  him  not  say,  "  I  took  ad- 
vantage," which  is  a  roundabout  long  sentence :  let  him  say,  "  I  cheated."  That 
is  a  very  direct  word.  It  springs  straight  to  the  conscience,  as  the  arrow  flies 
whizzing  from  the  bow  to  the  centre  of  the  mark.  Does  it  grate  harshly  on 
your  ear  ?  Nevertheless,  it  is  better  that  you  should  employ  it ;  and  you 
should  come  to  this  determination  :  "I  wiU  call  things  that  I  detect  in  my 
conduct  by  those  clear-faced,  rough-tongued  words  that  my  enemies  would  use 
if  they  wanted  to  sting  me  to  the  quick."  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  sin  in  the  pur- 
pose more  than  in  the  act : — It  is  said  by  sceptics  that  St.  Peter's  question  to 
Sapphira,  "  Tell  me  whether  ye  sold  the  land  for  so  much  ?  "  was  a  temptation  to 
the  sin  of  falsehood ;  but  it  is  plain,  from  the  story  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Acts, 
that  Sapphira  had  committed  berself  to  a  fraudulent  undertaking.  The  sin  had 
been  aheady  committed  when  she  adopted  her  sinful  purpose.  Peter's  question  was 
only  to  make  the  secret  purpose  known.  It  is  an  abuse  of  language  to  speak  of 
tempting  one  to  do  what  he  has  committed  himself  to  do.  We  do  not  tempt  a  shop- 
keeper when  we  propose  to  buy  what  he  wishes  to  sell.  No  more  did  Peter  tempt 
Sapphira  to  become  a  liar.  She  was  a  liar  before  his  question,  quite  as  much  as 
after  her  answer.  The  ethical  principle  is  that  it  is  the  purpose,  not  the  act,  which 
constitutes  the  essential  sin.  The  sin  of  Sapphira  greater  than  that  of  Ananias  : 
— 1,  She  had  longer  time  for  consideration.  2.  Peter,  by  a  yet  more  pointed  ques- 
tion, gave  her  a  much  better  opportunity  for  reflection,  and  for  giving  glory  to  God. 
3.  She  answered  still  more  shamelessly.  4.  And  is,  therefore,  obliged  to  listen  more 
fully  to  her  sentence,  and  to  hear  what  has  happened  to  her  husband.  (Rieger.) 
The  perversion  of  the  marriage  bond : — In  families  where  marriage  is  nothing  more 
than — 1.  A  fellowship  of  goods  and  a  business  transaction  to  become  rich  instead  of 
a  union  of  hearts  in  the  Lord  ;  or,  2.  A  union  to  the  service  of  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil,  instead  of  a  pious  resolution.  "  I  and  my  house  will  serve  the  Lord." 
And,  3.  A  walking  together  to  hell,  it  may  be  to  a  hell  on  earth,  or  to  eternal  perdition, 
instead  of  the  married  pair  being  helpers  of  one  another's  joys  and  blessedness,  and 
striving  how  the  one  might  bring  the  other  to  heaven.  "  How  is  it  that  ye  have 
agreed  together?  " — a  serious  question  to  every  married  pair.  {K.  Gerok.)  Then 
she  fell  down  straightway  at  his  feet  and  gave  up  the  ghost. — Death  hy  the  visi- 
tation of  God : — It  would  not  be  diflicult  to  find  some  instances  of  direct  and  swift 
punishment  even  in  modern  times.  In  the  old  town  of  Devizes  the  tourist  is  led  up 
to  see  an  interesting  inscription  in  the  public  market-place.  It  reads  thus :  "  The 
mayor  and  corporation  of  Devizes  avail  themselves  of  the  stability  of  this  building 
to  transmit  to  future  times  the  record  of  an  awful  event  which  occurred  in  this 
market-place  in  the  year  1753 ;  hoping  that  such  a  record  may  serve  as  a  salutary 
warning  against  the  danger  of  impiously  invoking  the  Divine  vengeance,  or  of  call- 
ing on  the  holy  name  of  God  to  conceal  the  devices  of  falsehood  and  fraud.  On 
Thursday,  the  25th  of  January,  1753,  Ruth  Pierce,  of  Pottera,  in  this  county,  agreed 
with  three  other  women  to  buy  a  sack  of  wheat  in  the  market,  each  paying  her  due 
proportion  towards  the  same.  One  of  these  women,  in  collecting  the  several  quotas 
of  money,  discovered  a  deficiency,  and  demanded  of  Ruth  Pierce  •the  sum  which 
was  wanting  to  make  good  the  amount.    Ruth  Pierce  protested  that  she  had  paid 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  4G7 

her  share,  and  said  she  wished  she  might  drop  down  dead  if  she  had  not.  She 
rashly  repeated  this  awful  wish,  when,  to  the  consternation  of  the  surrounding 
multitude,  she  instantly  fell  down  and  expired,  having  the  money  concealed  in  her 
hand."     (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11-16.  And  great  fear  came  upon  all  the  Church. — After  judgment,  revival : — 
The  case  of  Ananias  served  several  important  ends.  I.  It  bore  a  very  emphatic  testi- 
mony TO  TRUTH.  Falsehood  in  the  world  was  a  great  barrier  in  the  way  of  the  Church. 
It  was  difficult  to  build  even  that  Divine  edifice  without  a  foundation,  without  some- 
thing in  humanity  of  which  it  might  take  hold.  Unless  the  Church  find  or  generate 
truth  it  will  not  overcome  the  world  ;  it  will  sink  as  in  a  mire.  And  so  at  the  outset 
a  miracle  was  employed  to  set  truth  as  on  a  rock  for  ever.  The  death  of  Ananias 
and  Sapphira  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  to  deliver  the  body  of  the  Church  in 
her  youth  from  a  consumption  which,  if  not  so  checked,  might  have  brought  her  down 
to  an  early  grave,  although  no  breath  of  persecution  had  ever  blown  upon  her.  We 
learn  here  the  work  of  God  to  cast  out  of  the  body  the  poison  that  would  undermine 
life  is  as  stupendous  as  His  work  to  shield  the  Church  from  the  power  of  her  foes. 
II.  Great  fear  came  upon  the  Church.  It  is  a  healthful  symptom,  a  needed 
discipline.  " Lord,  is  it  I ?  "  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,"  &c.  It  was 
Christ  who  said,  "  Eemember  Lot's  wife."  Many  centuries  after  the  event.  He 
directed  that  it  should  be  kept  in  memory.  These  dark  monuments  have  obtained 
a  place  in  the  Word  that  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever,  that  their  warning  may  be 
available  in  all  nations  and  times.  Fear  also  came  on  as  many  as  heard.  As  a 
natural  consequence,  "  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  himself  to  them,"  i.e.,  those 
who  were  not  of  them  dared  not  pretend  to  be  of  them.  The  stroke  of  judgment 
scared  the  hypocrites.  III.  Believers  were  the  more  added.  The  judgment  on 
false  professors  hastened  instead  of  hindering  conversions.  The  terror  of  the  Lord 
effectually  persuaded  men  to  take  refuge  in  His  mercy.  1.  Believers  were  added  to 
ihe  Lord;  not  merely  to  the  communicants  roll.  "  Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God."  The  life  of  the  branch  depends  on  being  in  the  vine;  although  its  fairness 
may  depend  on  its  being  interlaced  in  bonds  of  love  with  other  branches.  2.  Multi- 
tudes were  added.  This  is  the  common  experience  still.  A  great  number  came  at 
one  time  with  a  rush  :  and  a  period  of  comparative  barrenness  supervenes.  Again 
there  is  a  revival,  and  again  a  time  of  coldness.  Ask  yourself,  Has  the  tide  risen  in 
my  time  and  carried  in  many  on  its  wave,  and  am  I  left  behind  ?  But  even  when 
the  heaving  of  the  spiritual  tide  in  our  neighbourhood  has  ceased,  the  door  is  not 
shut.  We  are  as  welcome  when  we  come  one  by  one  as  when  we  press  in  with  a 
crowd.  3.  "  Both  men  and  women."  There  was  a  reason  for  specifying  this.  The 
gospel  enfranchises  and  elevates  woman.  She  owes  to  Christ  not  only  her  home  in 
heaven,  but  her  rightful  place  in  the  world.  Nor  women  exclusively ;  for  when  the 
Word  comes  in  power  it  makes  quick  work  with  that  lordly  pride  in  which  men  wrap 
themselves  when  they  select  philosophy  or  politics  as  their  sphere,  and  leave  religion 
to  women.  ( W.  Arnot,  D.D. )  And  by  the  hands  of  the  apostles  were  many  signs 
and  wonders  wrought. — Contrasts  : — The  wrath  of  God  by  the  mouth  of  the 
apostles  had  consumed  two  hypocrites ;  but  relief  by  the  hands  of  the  apostles  hap- 
pened to  a  great  number  of  miserable  people.  The  Lord  proved  thereby  that  judg- 
ment is  His  strange  work,  but  that  He  delights  in  mercy.  And  as  He  shows  His 
zeal  against  the  wicked,  so  He  does  not  turn  His  heart  away  from  the  wretched. 
(Apostolic  Pastor.)  Phases  of  the  young  Church  : — The  text  presents  the  young 
Church  as — I.  An  organ  of  restorative  power.  The  works  were  miraculous  and 
material,  but  they  may  be  regarded  as  specimens  and  symbols  of  those  spiritual 
works  which  the  true  Church  is  constantly  performing  for  the  benefit  of  mankind. 
This  restorative  power  was — 1.  Manifestly  Divine.  So  little  did  the  people  regard 
the  works  as  the  effects  of  the  natural  powers  of  the  apostles,  that  they  considered 
the  very  shadow  of  Peter  sufficient.  The  moral  power  of  the  Church  to  restore  souls 
is  also  incontrovertibly  Divine.  No  man,  however  exalted  his  piety,  extensive  his 
attainments,  or  brilliant  his  talents,  can  restore  one  lost  soul.  2.  Very  extensive. 
Great  were  the  crowds  of  sick  folk,  and  various  their  diseases  ;  but  they  were  healed 
every  one.  So  the  healing  power  in  the  Church  is  equal  to  every  case.  II,  An 
institution  differently  affecting  different  men.  1.  In  some  it  produced  a  revul- 
sion. "  And  of  the  rest,"  the  class  to  which  Ananias  had  belonged, "  durst  no  man 
join  himself  to  them."  A  church  whose  discipline  is  so  severely  pure,  which  will 
not  tolerate  untruthfulness,  dishonesty,  or  selfishness,  is  sure  to  keep  aloof  the 
carnal,  mercenary,  and  false.     2.  In  some  it  awakened  admiration.     "  But  the  people 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

magnified  them."  Incorruptible  sincerity  and  high  spiritual  purity  will  always  com- 
mand the  honour  and  respect  of  the  unsophisticated  multitudes.  The  common 
people  heard  Christ  gladly,  because  He  spoke  the  true  thing  in  the  true  spit  it.  And 
so  the  people  will  always  honour  the  Church  for  what  is  pure  and  noble  in  her 
members.  3.  In  some  it  effected  a  conversion  (ver.  14).  [D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
The  power  of  God  with  the  apostles  : — 1.  As  when  the  earth  opened  and  swallowed 
up  Dathan  and  Abiram  and  their  company,  the  people  fled  at  the  cry  of  them,  and 
said,  "  Lest  the  earth  swallow  us  also "  ;  so  the  fate  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira 
operated  as  a  warning  to  all  who  were  of  a  like  spirit,  and  made  them  afraid  of 
tempting  God  by  a  false  profession,  lest  they  should  be  struck  dead  in  like  manner. 
But  though  the  false  hearted  were  thus  restrained,  those  whose  consciences  bore  them 
witness  that  they  were  upright  before  God  were  not  discouraged,  nay,  they  were  even 
induced  the  more  to  unite  themselves  with  the  company  of  disciples.  2.  The  peculiar 
words,  "  Added  to  the  Lord,"  do  not  stand  in  the  text  without  a  strictly  appropriate 
meaning.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  had  been  added  to  the  Church,  but  not  to  the  Lord. 
The  judgment  executed  upon  them  guarded  the  growing  society  from  being  corrupted 
in  spirit  as  it  increased  in  numbers.  Alas  1  how  often  is  this  the  case.  The  visible 
Church  increases  in  numbers  but  decays  in  piety.  The  real  prosperity  of  the  Church, 
then,  consists  in  two  things — in  its  being  enlarged,  and  in  its  being  edified ;  in  multi- 
tudes being  added  to  the  community,  and  believers  added  to  the  Lord.  And  there 
seem  to  have  been  two  causes  of  this  happy  state  of  things.  The  apostles  had  prayed ' 
that  the  Lord  would  give  them  boldness  to  speak  the  Word  by  stretching  forth  His 
hand  to  heal,  &c.  In  the  text  we  find  that  the  prayer  was  answered.  And  as  the 
support  which  they  asked  was  given,  no  doubt  it  was  given  for  the  end  for  which 
they  asked  it,  namely,  to  embolden  them  in  speaking  the  Word.  We  have  then  three 
things  for  consideration.  I.  The  Wokd  peeached.  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and 
hearing  by  the  Word  of  God."  Men  cannot  call  on  that  only  name  under  heaven 
given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved  unless  they  know  it ;  and  they  cannot 
know  it  unless  it  be  revealed  to  them.  And  though  it  is  in  the  power  of  God  to 
reveal  it  without  the  instrumentality  of  men,  yet  such  is  not  His  ordinary  niethnd. 
"  Of  His  own  will  begat  He  us  by  the  Word  of  truth."  If  we  are  begotten  again,  it 
is  "  not  of  corruptible  sef  d  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God  which  liveth 
and  abideth  for  ever."  Though  he  that  planteth  is  nothing,  and  he  that  watereth 
nothing  ;  though  God  alone  giveth  the  increase ;  yet  there  must  be  the  planter  and 
the  waterer.  To  expect  the  fruit  from  man  without  the  blessing  of  God  would  be 
vain  confidence ;  to  expect  it  from  God  without  the  human  means  whicli  He  has 
appointed  would  be  presumption.  The  true  path  of  wisdom — the  golden  mean — in 
this  case  is,  not  to  neglect  the  means  of  grace,  and  not  to  rest  in  them ;  to  use  them 
diligently,  yet  to  look  beyond  them.  There  is  a  regard  to  instruments  which  is  faulty, 
and  when  men  glory  in  one  above  another,  so  as  to  say,  "  I  am  of  Paul,  and  I  of 
Apollos,"  &c.,  this  is  to  ascribe  to  man  what  is  the  work  of  God ;  nevertheless,  the 
preaching  of  the  Word  is  a  Divine  ordinance,  and  ought  to  be  attend*  d  to.  II.  Thr 
Wokd  accompanied  with  signs  coNriRMiNO  it.  Though  it  has  pleased  God  to 
withdraw  the  miraculous  confirmation,  is  therefore  all  Divine  confirmation  of  the 
Word  withheld?  Though  gifts  of  healing  have  ceased,  is  there  no  way  by 
which  the  Lord  bears  witness  to  His  truth  ?  Yes  :  there  surely  is,  and  that  the  most 
important  of  all.  The  body  might  be  healed,  but  that  healing  would  be  only  for  a 
time ;  it  must  at  length  die,  and  the  soul  might  be  lost.  The  blind  eye  might  be 
opened,  and  the  natural  light  poured  in  upon  its  before  insensible  organs ;  but  in  a 
little  while  it  must  be  closed  again  in  death  :  and  the  soul  might  be  consigned 
to  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.  The  most  important  confirmation,  and  what 
is  equally  above  the  power  of  man,  is  that  which  quickens  the  soul  that  was  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins ;  which  opens  the  bhnd  eyes,  so  that  he  who  was  spiritually 
blind  may  say,  I  see.  He  who  is  brought  out  of  darkness  into  light,  has  the  witness 
in  himself;  and  while  he  lets  his  lij^ht  shine  before  men,  he  may  be  a  witness  to 
others  al>o ;  proving  to  them  that  there  is  a  power  of  Divine  grace  working  mightily 
in  them  that  believe,  and  enabling  them  to  do  what  in  the  strength  of  nature  they 
could  not  perform.  III.  The  benefits  or  healing  conferred  in  answer  to  faith. 
These  "  signs  and  wonders  "  were  an  evideuce  to  all  men  ot  the  power  of  God  with 
them,  a  proof  of  their  commission  from  Him,  who  thus  set  His  seal  to  their  preach- 
ing, and  confirmed  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  which  they  taught.  And  the  doctrine 
thus  deliveied  and  confirmed  was  variously  received.  Some  believed,  and  some 
believed  not.  But  multitudes  believed  :  and  these  showed  their  faith  by  acting  as 
men  always  do  when  they  are  fully  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  any  report.     They 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  469 

hasted  to  make  their  sick  friends  and  relations  partakers  of  the  benefit.  And  we 
should  go  ourselves  to  Christ  for  the  heahng  of  our  own  souls  in  the  first  place ; 
and  then  do  what  we  can  to  carry  our  friends  to  Him.  (J.  Fawcett,  3I.A.)  Of 
tlie  rest  durst  no  man  join  himself  to  them. — The  ungodly  repelled  : — I.  That  a 

LIVING  AND  SPIRITUAL  ChBISTIANITY  REPELS  THE  UNGODLY  FROM  THE  COMMUNION  OF  THE 

Church.  1.  It  does  so  by  awakening  a  feeling  of  hatred — (1)  Of  God  (Rom.  i.  30). 
(2)  Of  Christ  (John  xv.  24).  (3)  Of  Christ's  disciples  (John  xvii.  14).  (4)  The  Church 
is  hated  by  the  world  in  proportion  to  its  purity  (John  xv.  19).  (a)  The  sinfulness 
of  seeking  to  make  religion  pleasing  to  the  world,  (b)  The  condition  of  the  Church, 
or  believer,  loved  by  the  world.  2.  It  does  so  by  producing  feelings  of  fear  and 
reverence.  (1)  When  God  comes  forth  in  the  more  visible  displays  of  His  majesty 
in  nature — in  providence — in  the  judgment,  the  wicked  tremble.  (2)  When  tbe 
image  of  God  is  visibly  on  the  character  of  man,  reverence  is  thereby  extorted 
from  the  «icked.  (3)  In  like  manner,  when  God  is  in  the  visible  Church — when  He 
mak-s  it  His  pavilion,  the  world  regards  it  with  a  constrained  reverence  (Psa.  xiv. 
5).  (4)  This  feeling  is  not  inconsistent  with  persecution,  (5)  Such  a  feeling  will 
keep  the  world  out  of  the  Church.  3.  It  does  so  by  acting  upon  tbe  conscience. 
(1)  CImri'h  membership,  comltined  with  practical  irreligion,  shows  a  conscience 
asleep.  (2)  This  is  encouraged  by  a  low  general  standard  among  believers.  (3)  A 
living  Christianity  would  be  a  check.  II.  That  a  living  and  spiritual  Christianity 
IS  not  easily  imitated.  1.  It  is  by  feigning  Christianity  that  ungodly  men  enter  the 
communion  of  the  Church.  2.  Human  nature  has  a  wonderful  power  in  counter- 
feiting religion — assisted  by  the  devil.  3.  But  the  more  spiritual  that  religion  is, 
the  less  easily  is  it  cnunterfeited — detection  is  more  likely.  4.  And  the  self-denial 
being  generally  greater,  is  not  likely  to  be  practised.  5.  Hence,  a  spiritual  Church 
will  not  be  joined  by  worldly  men.  III.  That,  being  in  a  spiritual  state,  the 
Church  possessed  much  of  the  spirit  of  judgment  1.  The  Spirit  is  promised  to 
the  Church  as  "a  spirit  of  judgment"  (Isa.  xxviii.  6).  2.  The  statement  of  the 
text  is  connected  with  its  exercise  (vers.  1-11).  3.  This  spirit  is  still  needed — should 
be  asked.  4.  The  ground  of  admission  into  the  Church  is  a  credible  profession; 
when  it  is  declared  credible,  there  is  a  judgment.  5.  When  the  Church  is  spiritual, 
the  possessidn  of  this  Spirit  of  judgment  will  be  more  apparent.  (1)  The  grounds 
of  each  jur'gment  will  be  more  ample  (Matt,  xviii.  15-18).  (2)  The  rule  of  judg- 
ment will  be  more  Scriptural.  (3)  The  application  more  enlightened.  (4)  The 
decision  given,  more  free  from  the  influence  of  worldly  consideration.  6.  This 
matter  rests  with  the  members  of  tbe  Church.  A  languid  body  will  not  cast  off 
disease.  IV.  That  persecution  was  a  test  of  discipleship.  1.  The  world  applies 
a  test  as  well  as  the  Church — sometimes  a  severer  and  more  searcbing  one.  2.  But 
only  when  the  Church  is  living.  3.  The  Church  is  not  diminished  (ver.  14). 
(Jas.  Stewart. )  Authority  and  faith : — This  beautiful  picture  of  the  apostles  ruling 
the  infant  Christian  community  and  bearing  a  never-ceasing  testimony  to  their 
Eisen  Lord,  displays  to  us  the  great  principles  on  which  the  Christian  Church  is 
founded.  We  find  here  the  principle  of  authority  and  the  existence  of  office  in 
the  Church — office  and  authority  cheerfully  recognised  and  submitted  to.  Of  the 
rest  of  the  Christian  body  none  durst  join  himself  to  the  apostles.  Their  office 
■was  of  Divine  appointment.  There  was  nothing  in  this  exceeding  reverence  with 
which  tbe  apostolic  office  was  viewed  inconsistent  wiih  the  personal  belief  of  every 
Cbristian  in  the  Saviour  as  his  Saviour,  and  in  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  given 
directly  to  him.  How  different  would  the  Church  of  the  present  day  be  from  that 
of  those  primitive  times  if  there  were  now,  as  some  suppose,  an  inconsistency 
between  authority  and  faith,  and  a  man  must  needs  believe  the  less  in  Christ  his 
Saviour  the  more  he  believes  in  the  Church  of  Christ  as  a  Divinely  ordered  system 
of  authority  and  government !  Eightly  regarded  by  those  who  use  it,  and  by  those 
for  whose  benefit  it  is  used,  there  is  no  earthly  means  which  ought  to  help  men  so 
much  to  faith  in  the  Lord  as  the  Christian  Church,  set  before  men's  eyes,  witnessing 
to  His  story  by  its  very  existence,  which  began  with  the  apostles,  whom  He  chose  and 
educated  through  all  their  weakness  to  carry  on  His  work  on  earth  when  He  had 
entered  heaven,  to  help  them  from  thence  by  His  unfailing  grace,  and  to  fit  them 
for  an  office  and  a  work  which,  without  Him,  they  could  never  have  fulfilled.  (Dean 
Travers  Smith.) 

Ver.  15.  Inasmuch  that  they  brought  forth  the  sick  .  .  .  that  at  least  the 
shadow  of  Peter  passing  by  might  overshadow  them. — The  shadotv  of  Peter  : — The 
-miracles  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  were  mainly  miracles  of  healing — a  fact  to  be 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

well  noted.  The  power  to  work  these  has  been  withdrawn  ;  but  the  same  object  is 
still  accomplished  by  the  prayerful  use  of  natural  means.  Still  the  heart  of  the 
believer  is  alive  to  the  tender  offices  of  compassion ;  still,  in  the  shadow  of  the 
Christian,  the  sorrows  of  the  unfortunate  obtam  relief.  Charity  may  be  not  unaptly 
denominated  the  Christian's  shadow.  A  shadow  is  the  reflection  of  a  substance  : 
charity  is  a  habit  of  couduct,  reflected  from  a  Christian  disposition.  A  shadow 
represents,  in  some  degree,  the  form  and  aspect  of  the  substance  ;  charity  pourtrays, 
in  outline,  the  figure  of  the  child  of  God.  A  shadow  moves  with  the  substance  it 
represents,  attends  and  imitates  it  in  every  step  and  posture :  charity  accommodatt'S 
itself,  in  equal  vigour,  to  every  change  of  capacity  and  circumstance ; — in  pros- 
perity, is  liberal ;  in  adversity,  considerate ;  humble  in  joy,  cheerful  in  affliction. 
But  a  shadow  can  only  be  reflected  by  a  stronger  light  than  that  in  which  the  sub- 
stance stands  or  moves.  And  what  is  that  light  ?  I.  Shall  we  find  that  ray  within  ? 
In  the  tenderness  and  fervency  of  our  own  affections  ?  Many  are  the  deeds  of  kind- 
ness prompted  by  instinctive  feeling  :  but  are  not  deeds  of  very  different  hue  a» 
often  prompted  by  the  same  emotions?  Are  not  "  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,"  Ac, 
things  which  "  defile  a  man,"  the  offspring  also  of  the  heart  ?  And  shall  we  think 
to  derive  our  light  from  such  a  source  ?  Shall  we  follow,  in  security,  a  guide  so 
blind  and  treacherous?  Nay,  we  are  assured  that  "  the  heart,"  with  all  its  flexibility 
of  control,  "  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked."  So  far  from 
directing  our  judgment,  it  must  itself  be  brought  perpetually  to  justice  ;  instead  of 
holding  "a  light  unto  our  path,"  it  ever  needs  "  a  lantern  to  its  own."  II.  Shall 
we  look  AROUND  us  for  that  ray  ?  And  shall  we  find  it  in  the  selfishness  and  ambi- 
tion of  the  world,  the  blandishments  of  man's  admiration  ?  It  has  become  a 
practice  somewhat  too  prevalent  to  urge  the  contributions  of  the  wealthy,  without 
regard  to  rectitude  of  principle  or  motive,  on  the  pretext  that,  so  long  as  charitable 
institutions  are  upheld,  no  matter  with  what  design  of  their  supporters,  the  object 
of  such  application  is  substantially  realised.  But  there  is  a  case  of  the  giver  to  be 
taken  into  consideration  ;  and  the  effect  on  his  mind  is  decidedly  injurious.  He  is 
taught  to  repose  a  merit  upon  actions  which,  under  existing  circumstances,  assume 
a  character  entirely  the  reverse  of  meritorious.  /^He  is  taught  to  attach  an  undue 
value  to  wealth,  as  a  vital  source,  and  not  an  accidental  garb,  of  beneficence :  to 
allow  to  charity  its  plenary  importance  in  the  rank  of  virtues,  but  to  limit  the  scope 
of  charity  to  the  bare  performance  of  alms-giving.  And  lastly,  he  is  taught  to  look 
to  man,  and  not  to  God,  for  his  reward.  "Why  else  are  we  reminded  of  the  generosity 
of  those  who  have  thought  to  make  their  peace  with  heaven  for  the  defects  of  an 
unprofitable  life  by  bequeathing  their  possessions  to  the  poor,  when  the  near 
approach  of  death  withdraws  the  further  prospect  of  gratifications  which  have  con- 
stituted the  chief  endearment  of  their  lives  ?  The  poor  enjoy  their  pittance,  it  is 
true  ;  but  at  whose  and  at  what  expense  ?  to  those  who  give,  the  probaliility  of  that 
mortifying  reproof  hereafter,  "Who  hath  required  this  at  thy  hand?  "  To  those 
who  urged  the  gift,  the  sure  and  certain  recompense  of  the  ceremonious  Pharisee, 
who  preached  sacrifice  and  not  mercy,  and  put  other  burdens  on  the  souls  of  men 
than  the  covenant  of  their  Lord  and  Master.  III.  If  we  find  it  neither  within  us, 
nor  around  us,  it  remains  only  that  we  lift  our  eyes  above  us,  even  to  that  "  Sun  of 
Kighteousness,"  who  rose,  the  offering  for  our  redemj^tion,  and  the  example  of  our 
duty,  with  "  healing  in  His  wings."  "  From  Him  have  we  this  commandment,  that 
he  who  loveth  God,  should  love  his  brother  also."  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth 
us."  It  is  only  under  the  influence  of  this  prevailing  motive  that  our  principles 
and  habits  can  be  warmed  into  a  generous  concern  for  the  whole  household  of 
Christ ;  it  is  only  under  the  brightness  of  His  presence  that  the  Christian's  shadow 
can  be  reflected.  The  frame  of  mind  required  for  such  an  exercise  of  benevolence 
is  the  repose  inspired  by  a  firm  and  humble  trust  in  the  providence  of  the  Almighty, 
and  the  efficacy  of  His  Son's  atonement ;  a  calm  and  holy  peace,  which  leaves  the 
mind  at  liberty  to  toil,  for  righteousness'  sake,  amid  the  sneers  and  censures  of  the 
ungodly,  and,  like  the  pattern  of  its  daily  practice,  to  "  go  about  doing  good."  And 
what  other  influence  can  be  named,  capable  of  producing  this  blessedness  of  tone 
and  spirit,  but  the  constraint  of  the  love  of  God?  Will  you  say  that  inducements, 
at  least  of  equal  weight,  are  given  us,  in  the  dread  of  future  punishment.  But  fear 
is,  after  all,  but  a  flickering  and  inconstant  meteor,  totally  incapable  of  reflecting 
that  steady  shadow  we  are  now  employed  in  contemplating.  Think  not  I  would 
deny  the  efficacy  of  an  arrangement  which  converts  even  the  fears  and  apprehen- 
sions of  the  sinner  into  occasions  and  instruments  of  good,  and  thus  not  seldom 
penetrates  his  soul  through  the  only  avenue  unchoked  by  the  brambles  of  worldly- 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  ill 

windedness.  I  merely  argne  that  the  sensations  of  fear  and  terror  are  incompetent 
of  themselves  to  generate  that  steadiness  of  principle  and  habit,  that  abandonment 
of  selfish  and-carnal  interests,  that  devotion  of  the  heart  and  life  to  the  will  and 
purposes  of  the  Creator,  which  manifests  itseK  in  a  regard  and  concern  for  all  the 
creatures  of  His  hands.  I  say  that  an  intermediate  process  must  take  place  ;  that 
the  inner  man  must  be  purified  as  well  as  roused ;  must  first  learn  to  love  God,  and 
then,  and  not  till  then,  will  love  his  brother  also.  There  is  not  a  star  that  twinkles 
in  the  firmament  on  high  but  has  its  appointed  sphere  of  service  and  occupation  : 
but  from  the  sun  alone  we  behold  our  fair  proportions  represented.  There  is  not  a 
motive,  a  feeling,  in  the  constitution  of  a  human  being  but  maybe  made  conducive, 
by  God's  blessing,  towards  the  great  end  of  his  probation  ;  but  it  is  only  beneath 
the  love  of  God  that  the  Christian's  shadow  lies  unfolded.  (P.  Hall,  31. A.) 
'  Casting  shadows  : — We  all  cast  shadows,  i.e.,  exert  unconscious  influences.  Some 
men  are  always,  without  seeming  effort  or  thought,  making  other  people  happy. 
But  there  are  others  whose  presence  depresses  and  saddens  us.  This  is  so  in  the 
secular  sphere  ;  but  our  unconscious  influence  spreads  into  wider  areas.  God  works 
out  His  grandest  purposes  by  undemonstrative  agents.  The  earthquake  and  light- 
ning are  as  nothing  compared  with  attraction  and  heat.  And  so  with  human 
influences.  1.  Because  our  voluntary  efforts  are  only  occasional  and  interrupted, 
while  our  unconscious  energy  is  everywhere  operative  and  constant.  2.  Our  con- 
stant and  silent  energy  is  most  expressive  of  our  real  character.  Consider  a  few 
practical  applications.     I.  It  should  impress  us  with  a  sense  of  the  importance 

OF   HUMAN    LIFE.        II.    We    ARE    RESPONSIBLE   FOR    OUR    UNCONSCIOUS   INFLUENCE.       We 

may  think  to  evade  this  on  the  ground  that  the  evil  vve  do  is  unintentional.  But 
apply  this  to  physical  evil ;  to  the  case  of  Solomon's  lunatic  who  said,  "  I  am  in 
sport "  ;  or  to  the  man  who,  exerting  no  positive  influence,  lets  a  blintt  man  fall  over 
a  precipice.  Just  to  do  nothing  is  to  do  terrible  evil ;  but  in  such  a  world  no  man 
can  do  nothing.  Our  whole  mortal  life  is  embodied  force.  III.  Death  does  not 
DESTROY  this  UNCONSCIOUS  INFLUENCE.  The  Greeks  used  to  term  the  disembodied 
spirit  a  shadow,  an  invisible  presence,  haunting  the  scenes  of  its  former  life,  and 
though  not  in  this  sense  yet,  as  abiding  influences,  the  dead  are  still  with  us.  On  the 
one  hand.  Lord  Byron,  Bonaparte,  Voltaire,  <fec.,  yet  stalk  the  earth  and  gibber  their 
influence  ;  on  the  other,  Calvin,  Luther,  Wesley,  Chalmers,  still  live.  This  truth  is  a 
warning  to  all  workers  of  iniquity,  but  an  encouragement  to  every  true  child  of  God. 
{C.Wadsivorth,  D.D.)  Casting  shadows  in  life : — Our  text  shows— I.  The  power 
there  may  be  in  compap.ative  TRIFLES.  As  a  metaphor  few  figures  are  more  frequently 
used  in  the  Scriptures  than  that  of  the  "  shadow."  Sometimes  it  is  suggestive  of 
blessing,  as  "  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land,"  or  "  the  shadow  of  the 
Almighty  "  ;  sometimes  the  opposite,  as  "  the  shadow  of  death."  A  shadow  ! 
What  is  more  insignificant  ?  Intangible  and  unsubstantial,  is  it  not  the  veriest 
trifle  ?  Yet  how  solemnly  impressive  it  is.  1.  The  most  irresistible  forces  of  the 
world  in  nature  are  those  that  we  can  neither  see  nor  hear.  The  earthquake's  tread 
makes  us  tremble,  and  so  does  the  roar  of  the  hurricane.  How  appalling  the 
thunder  and  lightning  ;  but  how  far  inferior  are  they  in  either  benign  or  blasting 
influence  to  the  quieter,  subtler  'force  of  electricity,  gravitation,  heat,  or  light.  2. 
In  science  and  civilisation  the  quieter  forces  have  counted  most.  The  grandest 
discoveries  have  usually  emerged  from  some  by-way  of  accident.  The  most  thrilling 
pagps  of  history  are  but  chronicles  of  events  that  have  nearly  all  turned  on  the  pivot 
of  some  trivial  circumstance.  Mohammedanism  was  the  product  of  a  spider's  web 
woven  behind  the  fleeing  prophet  and  deceiving  his  pursuers.  The  battle  of  Waterloo 
was  suspended  upon  the  co-operation  of  Blucher,  whose  life  escaped  the  enemy's 
sword  by  the  simple  circumstance  of  wearing  the  cap  of  a  common  soldier,  and  for 
the  reason  that  the  clasp  of  his  own  helmet  had  broken.  3.  Just  so  it  is  in  religion. 
Are  we  not  astonished  often  to  find  that  the  little  tilings  we  say  and  do  tell  m^re 
radically  and  widely  than  some  of  our  most  demonstrative  actions  ?  Then,  too,  the 
very  constancy  of  those  trifles  tells.  Repeated  blows  of  a  little  hammer  may  be 
more  effective  than  the  single  downfall  of  the  ponderous  sledge.  The  clock  strikes 
at  intervals,  the  ticking  is  momentary  ;  we  hear  the  one,  we  do  not  notice  the  other ; 
yet  the  hour  stroke  comes  not  if  the  ticking  fails.     II.  As  no  shadow  can  be  cast 

WITHOUT   light,  OUR   TEXT  ILLUSTRATES    THE   ESSENTIAL    PLACE    ChRIST    HOLDS   IN    ALL 

tSttk  religion,  in  the  world  and  in  THE  SOUL.  If  the  sun  be  clouded,  or  the  atmo- 
sphere hazy,  no  distinct  shadows  can  be  cast.  The  sun  must  shine  out  to  make 
sliadows.  So  the  distinctness  of  shadows  of  grace  indicate  the  strong  or  feeble 
shining  of  the  "  Sun  of  Righteousness."     1.  Nationalities  like  Italy  and  Russia  and 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

South  America  tell  us  of  "  the  cloudy  and  dark  day."  England  and  America,  on 
the  other  hand,  bourgeoned  with  beauty,  tell  of  the  sun  shining  warmly  and  clearly 
from  a  gospel  sky.  2.  As  in  the  world,  so  in  the  soul.  Saul  of  Tarsus,  "  breathing 
out  threatenings  and  slaughter,"  stands  in  striking  contrast  with  Paul,  the  singing 
pilgrim  in  the  dungeon  of  Philippi,  and  the  same  man  near  martyrdom  exclaiming, 
"  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered  up,"  &c.  Whence  came  the  difference  ?  Ah  !  Christ 
commenced  shining  upon  him  near  that  Damascene  gate,  and  the  light  grew  brighter 
and  sweeter  and  cleiirer  every  day,  so  that  he  shouted,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me."  Peter  and  James  and  John  exclaimed  on  a  glory-lit  summit,  "It  is 
good  to  be  here!"  because  "Jesus  in  the  midst"  was  the  centre  of  the  glory. 
Shadows  of  noble  action  and  happy  feeling  can  come  from  those  only  who  are 
wont  to  bask  in  the  light  of  "  One  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun."     III.  Eveky 

ONE  EXEETS  AN  INFLUENCE,  QUIET  BUT  EEAL,  UNCONSCIOUS  BUT  A  FACT.    Every  One  CastS 

a  shadow.  The  ghost  of  Banquo  no  more  persistently  refuses  to  "  down  at  the  bid- 
ding" of  Macbeth  than  the  ghostly  shadow  of  the  person  or  thing  on  which  the  sun 
is  falling  refuses  to  disappear.  A  man  may  simply  stand  still  in  a  thoroughfare, 
he  will  soon  find  all  eyes  upon  him,  and  all  excitement  about  him.  Every  act, 
word,  look,  attitude,  is  a  moral  dynamic  upon  those  around  us.  They  are  forces 
with  which  we  are  building  or  destroying.  A  whisper  has  often  been  clothed  with 
the  attribute  of  thunder.  Unconsciousness  of  it  is  no  argument  against  the  fact. 
Peter  was  not  thinking  of  the  shadow  he  threw  ;  much  less  how  eagerly  the  sick 
sought  it.  So  lasting  is  the  influence  that  it  lingers  behind  when  the  living  have 
passed  away.  "He  being  dead  yet  speaketh."  "No  man  liveth  to  himself,  and  no 
man  dieth  to  himself."  How  startling  the  warning  to  the  worker  of  wickedness, 
while  the  good  may  take  its  lessons  of  perpetual  encouragement.  "  The  evil  that 
men  do,"  and  the  good,  too,  "lives  after  them."  This  is  true  of  great  lives;  it  is 
equally  true  of  the  humblest.  The  intoning  of  Niagara  can  be  heard  farther  away, 
but  the  rippling  of  the  rill  is  just  as  real  and  sweeter.  Mont  Blanc  witnesses  to 
Divine  power,  but  not  more  effectually  than  the  violet  tells  us  of  the  Divine  skill 
and  goodness  by  its  beauty  and  fragrance.  The  eagle  may  soar  higher,  but  the  little 
canary  has  a  sweeter  song.  As  I  mark  the  trivial  act  of  the  poor  widow  dropping 
her  two  mites,  unconscious  that  any  eye  was  watching,  and  then  remember  what  a 
sermon  that  lowly  act  has  been  preaching  to  the  world  from  that  day  to  this  ;  then 
am  I  ready  to  express  the  deep  conviction  that  a  shadow  of  influence  beyond  con- 
ception clings  to  the  most  obscure  person  ;  and  often  the  humblest  act.  How  this 
fact  shows  the  dignity  and  importance  of  human  life,  and  with  what  tremendous 
responsibility  it  invests  it  1  IV.  The  sombre  and  empty  character  of  some  kinds 
OF  religion  ;  only  a  shadow.  TJje  shadow  is  dark  and  intangible ;  alas  if  our 
rehgion  be  "  only  that  and  nothing  more  "  I  Pity  that  any  should  get  but  a  gloomy, 
and  so  a  false,  impression  of  religion  from  the  representation  we  give  them.  It  has 
been  said  that  "  every  one  lives  for  a  funeral  "  ;  but  can  we  not  wait  for  the  funeral 
till  life  is  over?  Must  we  see  it  every  day?  "  Wemeet  such  people,"  saysawriter, 
"every  day,  and  they  have  always  some  new  distress  for  us.  Their  sweetest  smile 
is  suggestive  of  the  neuralgia,  and  their  most  cordial  greeting  depresses  like  an  east 
wind.  They  go  home  at  night  like  an  undertaker  to  a  funeral,  and  children  cease 
singing,  and  wives  refrain  from  smiles.  They  go  abroad  in  the  morning  like  a 
Scotch  mist  from  the  Highlands,  to  drizzle  discontent  in  the  street  and  market-place. 
They  enter  the  house  of  God  to  render  its  songs  of  praise  requiems,  and  its  oil  of 
.  joy  ice  water;  and  their  religious  light  shines  before  men  as  heaven's  sunshine 
'through  stained  glass,  and  the  priest  at  the  shrine  looks  like  a  variegated  ghost,  and 
the  reverend  worshippers  like  brindled  hobgoblins.  A  croaking  raven  is  the  device 
on  their  shields — a  coffin  with  cross-bones  tlie  blazon  on  their  banner."  Surely  such 
a  religious  spirit  and  demeanour  argue  a  wrong  idea  altogether  of  God  and  of  truth. 
Peevish,  morose,  severe,  fault-finding  and  censorious  Christians  are  guilty,  though 
they  may  not  mean  it,  of  dishonouring  their  Lord  and  defaming  the  Church  by  the 
cheat  of  a  shadow.  True  religion  is  sweet  as  the  light,  joyous  as  childhood,  and 
benevolent  as  love.  So  the  Scriptures  represent  it,  and  true  hearts  have  ever  felt  it. 
V.  The  real  benevolence  and  cheer  there  is,  or  ought  to  be,  in^  genuine  religion. 
Peter's  shadow  was  eagerly  sought  by  the  sick  ones  or  their  friends,  not  because  it 
was  a  shadow,  but  because  to  them  it  was  the  symbol  of  healing  and  cheer.  So  on 
■whatever  threshold  the  shadow  of  a  Christian  falls,  in  whatever  company  he  moves, 
his  coming  should  start  a  smile  of  pleasure ;  a  manifest  benison  should  beam  in  his 
face.  "  Good-will  to  men  "  was  the  cradle  song  over  the  Saviour,  and  it  should  be 
perpetuated  as  an  echo  in  the  life  of  every  child  of  God.    Heaven,  as  represented 


OHAP.v.]  THE  ACTS.  473 

to  us,  is  all  joy,  and  earth  should  resemble  heaven  as  far  as  sin  and  suffering 
will  allow,  by  the  prevalence  of  an  atmosphere  of  cheerfulness  over  it.  There 
are  those  whose  presence  is  like  the  ripple  of  water  by  the  wayside,  or 
the  shadow  of  groves  on  a  hot  day  like  an  oasis  in  a  vast  sandy  desert, 
or  the  singing  of  the  nightingale  ia  the  darkness.  (J.  M.  McNalti/,  D.D.) 
The  healing  shadow  : — Who  ever  heard  of  the  shadow  of  a  person  acting  the  part  of 
a  physician  ?  They  had  no  right  to  suppose  that  any  good  would  come  of  such  an 
extraordinary  plan.  And  they  had  certainly  no  right  to  make  Peter  cure  their  friends 
in  their  own  way,  by  a  device  of  their  own,  without  consulting  him  fir.-<t  as  to  whether 
it  would  be  agreeable  or  not.  Now  the  remarkable  thing  is,  though  these  people 
•were  thus  ignorant  and  superstitious,  neither  God  nor  Peter  found  fault  with  thnm. 
They  used  Peter's  shadow  as  a  charm,  and  God  made  it  to  them  what  they  wished 
it  to  be.  Now,  why  was  this  ?  Because  of  the  simplicity  of  their  belief.  And  does 
not  God  often  throw  His  power  into  the  means  which  we.ourselves  devise,  if  we  have 
only  childlike  faith?  Little  children  come  to  church  with  their  parents,  and  they 
are  not  always  able  to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  service.  But  their  attendance 
is  not  useless  on  that  account.  If  they  place  themselves  in  their  simple  faith  under 
the  shadow  of  God's  house,  the  blessing  will  assuredly  not  be  wanting.  It  is  not  an 
intellectual  knowledge  of  deep  mysteries  that  God  values,  but  a  simple  faith  in 
Himself.  The  shadow  of  a  tree  or  rock  is  a  very  delightful  and  refreshing  thing  on 
a  burning  summer  day.  It  cools  the  heated  frame,  and  imparts  vigour  and  strength 
to  the  languid  body.  And  if  an  inanimate  thing  can  do  so  much  good  by  its 
shadow,  you  would  expect  that  the  shadow  of  a  human  being  would  be  more 
effectual  still.  I  do  not  know  that  the  shadow  of  our  bodies  would  help  much  to 
keep  off  the  too  hot  sun  from  a  friend,  but  most  certainly  the  shadow  or  influence 
of  a  good  character  can  help  othei's  a  great  deal.  We  read  in  the  fairy  tale  of  a 
Peter  Schlemihl,  the  man  without  a  shadow,  who  frightened  everybody  else,  and 
was  miserable  himself.  But  in  real  life  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  person  without 
a_shadow.  We  have  all  a  shadow  to  our  natures  as  we  have  a  shadow  to  our  bodies. 
They  say  that  it  was  from  the  shadow  thrown  by  the  figure  of  a  girl  on  a  wall,  on  a 
sunny  day,  that  the  art  of  drawing  a  picture  was  first  found  out.  And  so  from  the 
shadows  which  people  cast  as  they  pass  by  on  the  way  of  life,  we  can  draw  their 
portraits  in  our  own  mind  ;  and  these  portraits  are  wonderfully  like — much  more 
true  to  life  than  the  old  silhouettes  that  used  to  be  cut  out  of  black  paper.  "  If 
people's  tempers,  should  cast  shadows,  what  would  they  be  ?  "  said  a  little  boy  once, 
as  he  walked  beside  a  companion,  and  saw  his  shadow  on  the  road.  "  John's 
shadow  would  be  a  fist  doubled  up,  for  he  is  always  quarrelling ;  and  Andrew's 
would  be  that  of  a  dove,  for  he  is  always  amiable  and  pleasant ;  and  Jane's  would 
be  that  of  a  letter  X,  for  she  is  as  cross  as  two  sticks  ;  and  my  own  shadow,  what 
would  it  be  ?  "  He  stopped  short.  He  was  afraid  of  what  kind  of  shadow  his  own 
temper  would  cast.  Now  supposing  you  follow  out  the  little  boy's  idea,  and  believe 
what  is  actually  true,  that  you  are  throwing  off  impressions  of  what  you  really  are 
all  around  you,  and  in  fact  can  no  more  help  doing  so  than  you  can  prevent  your 
bodies  from  casting  real  shadows  on  the  road  as  you  walk  along ;  and  each  of  you 
should  ask  himself  or  herself,  What  kind  of  shadow  is  my  temper  casting  ?  It 
might  perhaps  surprise  you  to  see  yourselves  as  others  see  you.  (H.Macinillan,  LL.D.) 
Healing  and  hurting  shadows  : — "This  record  is  the  indication  of  a  belief  that  stirred 
some  human  souls  in  old  times,  and  ought  to  stir  them  still — a  belief  that  there  is 
something  in  a  shadow  cast  from  one  over  another,  of  a  deep  and  potent  power ;  a 
deed  done  sometimes  the  hand  has  no  part  in  ;  a  word  said  the  tongue  never  utters  ; 
a  virtue  going  out  of  me,  or  a  vice,  apart  from  my  determination  ;  a  shadow  of  my 
spirit  and  life  cast  for  good  or  evil,  as  certain  and  inseparable  as  my  shadow  on  the 
wall.  For  instance,  there  is  some  mysterious  force  by  which  men,  the  first  time  we 
meet  them,  cast  a  shadow  of  light  or  darkness  we  cannot  account  for,  and  cannot 
overcome.     What  these  subtle  influences  are  no  man  has  ever  told  us. 

"  I  do  not  like  thee,  Dr.  Fell ; 
The  reason  why  I  cannot  tell ; 
But— I  do  not  like  thee,  Dr.  Fell," 

is  the  inner  and  instinctive  verdict  we  pass  on  some  men ;  probably,  also,  that  some 
men  pass  on  us.  Their  shadows  hurt  us :  our  shadows  hurt  them.  Foremost  of  all 
shadows  is  the  shadow  of  the  home ;  where,  four  times  in  a  century,  God  makes 
a  new  earth,  and  out  of  which  he  peoples  a  new  heaven.    I  have  sat  bareheaded  ia 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

the  noblest  Gothic  cathedral  on  the  earth.  And  for  years  I  sat,  in  my  youth, 
in  a  simple  country  church,  joining  in  the  old  liturgies  that,  in  one  form  or  another, 
had  been  said  or  sung  ever  since  the  Saxon  embraced  the  Christian  faith.  And 
once,  I  remember,  I  rose  in  the  grey  light,  and  stood  alone  by  Niagara,  while  the 
sound  of  its  mighty  thunder  rose  up  fresh  and  pure,  unbroken  as  yet  and  undefiled 
by  the  clamour  of  those  many  changers  who  deserve  a  whip  of  not  very  small  cords 
for  profaning  that  place  in  which,  of  all  places,  the  soul  longs  to  be  alone  with  her 
God.  These  were  sacred  places.  But  the  holiest  of  all,  the  place  whose  shadow 
stretches  over  forty-five  hundred  miles  of  earth  and  sea,  and  forty  years  of  time, 
and  is  still  a  shadow  of  healing,  is  a  little  place  built  of  gray  stone.  There,  bending 
over  the  picture  in  the  great  Bible,  or  listening  to  psalm  or  song  or  story,  the  child 
lived  in  the  shadow  of  that  home  ;  and  it  became  to  him  as  the  very  gate  of  heaven, 
so  dear  and  good,  that  no  great  cathedral,  no  grand  scene  in  nature,  no  place  for 
worship  anywhere,  can  be  what  that  grey-stone  cottage  was.  I  wonder  whether  we 
have  any  deep  consciousness  of  the  shadows  we  are  weaving  about  our  children  in 
the  home  ;  whether  we  ever  ask  ourselves  if,  in  the  far  future,  when  we  are  dead 
and  gone,  the  shadow  our  home  casts  now  will  stretch  over  them  for  bane  or 
blessing.  It  is  possible  we  are  full  of  anxiety  to  do  our  best,  and  to  make  our 
homes  sacred  to  the  children.  We  want  them  to  come  up  right,  to  turn  out  good 
men  and  women,  to  be  an  honour  and  praise  to  the  home  out  of  which  they  sprang. 
But  this  is  the  pity  and  the  danger,  that  while  we  may  not  come  short  in  any  real 
duty  of  father  and  mother,  we  may  yet  cast  no  healing  and  sacramental  shadow 
over  the  child.  I  look  back  with  wonder  on  that  old  time,  and  ask  myself  how  it 
is  that  most  of  the  things  I  suppose  my  father  and  mother  built  on  especially  to 
mould  me  to  a  right  manhood  are  forgotten  and  lost  out  of  my  life.  But  the  tender, 
unspoken  love ;  the  sacrifices  made,  and  never  thought  of,  it  was  so  natural  to 
make  them  ;  ten  thousand  little  things,  so  simple  as  to  attract  no  notice,  and  yet 
so  sublime  as  I  look  back  at  them — they  fill  my  heart  still  and  always  with  tender- 
ness when  I  remember  them,  and  my  eyes  with  tears.  All  these  things,  and  all 
that  belong  to  them,  still  come  over  me,  and  cast  the  shadow  that  forty  years,  many 
of  them  lived  in  a  new  world,  cannot  destroy.  To  make  this  question  clear,  if  we 
can,  let  me  open  to  you  a  glimpse  of  some  shadows  tbat  are  being  cast  in  some 
homes  every  day,  not  over  children  alone,  but  over  men  and  women  also.  1.  Here 
is  a  man  who  has  been  down  town  all  day,  in  the  full  tide  of  care,  that  from  morning 
till  night  floods  the  markets,  offices,  and  streets  of  all  our  great  cities.  Tired, 
nervous,  irritable,  possibly  a  little  disheartened,  he  starts  for  his  home.  If  it  is 
winter,  when  he  enters  there  is  a  bit  of  bright  fire,  that  makes  a  bad  temper  seem 
like  a  sin  in  the  contrast ;  a  noise  of  children  that  is  not  dissonant ;  and  an  evident 
care  for  his  comfort,  telling,  plainer  than  any  words,  how  constantly  he  has  been 
in  the  mind  of  the  house-mother,  while  breasting  the  stress  and  strife  of  the  day  ; 
while  a  low,  sweet  voice,  that  excellent  thing  in  woman,  greets  him  with  words 
that  ripple  over  the  fevered  spirit  like  cool  water.  And  the  man  who  can  nurse  a 
bad  temper  after  that  deserves  to  smart  for  it.  There  is  no  place  on  the  earth, 
into  which  a  man  can  go  with  such  perfect  assurance  that  he  will  feel  the  shadow 
of  healing,  as  into  such  a  home  as  that.  It  is  the  very  gate  of  heaven.  2.  But 
I  will  open  another  door.  Here  is  a  home  into  which  the  man  goes  with  the  same 
burden  on  him.  When  he  enters  querulous  questions  meet  him  as  to  whether  he 
has  forgotten  what  he  ought  never  to  have  been  required  to  remember.  Plaintive 
bewailings  are  made  to  him  of  the  sad  seventy-seventh  disobedience  of  the  children, 
or  the  radical  depravity  of  the  servants ;  and  a  whole  platoon-fire  of  little  things  is 
shot  at  him,  so  sharp  and  ill-timed,  that  they  touch  the  nerve  like  so  many  small 
needles.  It  is  in  such  things  as  these  that  the  shadows  are  cast,  that  hurt,  but 
never  heal :  that  drive  thousands  of  men  out  of  their  homes  into  any  place  that  will 
offer  a  prospect  of  comfort  and  peace,  even  for  an  hour.  3.  But  let  me  not  be 
unfair.  The  evil  shadow  may  just  as  certainly  come  from  the  man.  Here  is  another 
man  in  the  mood  I  have  tried  to  touch.  All  day  long  he  has  fretted  at  the  bit;  but 
society  has  held  him  in.  He  goes  home  too,  but  it  is  to  spume  out  his  temper. 
The  very  sound  of  his  foot  casts  a  shadow  that  can  hurt,  but  can  never  heal.  If 
his  wife  is  silent,  he  calls  her  sulky  :  if  she  speaks,  he  snaps  her.  If  his  children 
come  to  him  with  innocent  teasings  he  would  give  a  year  of  his  life  some  day  to 
bring  back  again,  they  are  pushed  aside,  or  sent  out  of  the  room,  or  even — God 
forgive  him — are  smitten.  He  eats  a  moody  dinner  :  takes  a  cigar ;  bitter,  I  hope, 
and  serves  him  right;  takes  a  book,  too— not  Charles  Lamb  or  Charles  Dickens, 
I  warrant  you — and,  in  one  evening,  that  man  has  cast  a  shadow  he  may  pray, 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  475 

some  day,  in  a  great  agony,  may  be  removed,  and  not  be  heard.  4.  Then  again, 
what  shadows  of  heahng  fall,  in  their  turn,  from  the  children  !  No  affliction  that 
can  ever  come  through  children  ever  equals  that  which  comes  with  their  utter 
absence  ;  while  the  heaviest  affliction  to  most,  the  death  of  the  little  one,  often 
casts  a  shadow  of  heahng  that  could  come  in  no  other  way.  I  went  one  day  to 
see  a  poor  German  woman,  whose  children  had  all  been  down  with  scarlet  fever. 
Four  were  getting  well  again ;  one  was  dead.  And  it  was  very  touching  to  see  how 
the  shadow  of  that  dead  child  had  come  over  the  mother,  and  sent  its  blessing  of 
healing  through  all  the  springs  of  her  life.  "  These  are  beautiful  children,"  I  said. 
— "  Ob,  yes !  but  I  should  have  seen  the  one  that  died."  While  he  was  with  her, 
he  was  like  the  rest.  Eut  now,  when  he  was  gone,  he  cast  the  shadow.  The  little 
shroud  was  turned  into  a  white  robe,  that  glistened  and  shone  in  the  sun  of  Paradise, 
so  that  she  was  blinded  ;  the  broken  prattle  had  filled  out  into  an  angel-song  ;  the 
face  shone  as  the  face  of  an  angel;  and,  all  unknown  to  herself,  God  had  laid  her 
where  the  shadow  of  the  little  one  up  in  heaven  could  touch  her  with  its  healing. 
And  no  shadow  is  so  full  of  healing  as  that  shadow  of  the  child  that  is  always  a 
child  in  heaven.  The  most  gentle  and  patient  will  sometimes  feel  a  touch  of 
irritation  at  the  waywardness  of  the  one  that  is  with  us  ;  but  no  father  or  mother 
in  tbis  world   ever   did  bring  back  any  sense  of  such  a  feeling  toward  the  one 

that  is  gone.     The  shadow  of  healing  destroys  it  for  ever.     {R.   Collyer,  D.D.'l 

Unconxcious  influence  : — All  things  are  engaged  in  writing  their  history.  The  plant,  ! 
the  pebble,  goes  attended  by  its  shadow.  The  rolling  rock  leaves  its  scratches  on 
the  mountain  ;  the  river,  its  channel  in  the  soil ;  the  animal,  its  bones  in  the 
stratum  ;  the  fern  and  leaf,  their  model  epitaph  in  the  coaL  The  falling  drop 
makes  its  sculpture  in  the  sand  or  stone.  Not  a  foot  steps  into  the  snow  or 
along  tbe  ground  but  prints,  in  characters  more  or  less  lasting,  a  map  of  its 
march.  Every  act  of  man  inscribes  itself  on  tbe  memory  of  his  fellows,  and  in  his 
own  manners  and  face.  The  air  is  full  of  sounds,  the  sky  of  tokens ;  the  ground 
is  all  memoranda  and  signatures,  and  every  object  covered  with  hints  which  speak 
to  the  intelligent.  Unconscious  influence  : — Here  was  the  apostle  who  had  gone 
forth  purpo-ed  to  heal  men;  and  one  by  one  as  they  were  brought  up  he  commanded 
tbem  to  stand;  and  they  stood  whole.  Thus  he  exerted  a  conscious  and  voluntary 
power.  But  as  he  passed  along  the  streets,  his  shadow  fell  upon  many,  and  they 
sprang  up  behind  him,  he  knowing  little  or  nothing  of  it ;  so  that  his  shadow  or 
unconscious  influence,  also,  was  working  at  the  same  time.  Now,  all  of  us  have 
both  kinds  of  influence  or  power — that  which  we  understand  and  mean,  and  that 
wbich  falls  like  a  shadow,  the  existence  of  which  we  do  not  understand  or  recognise. 
I.  Unconscious  influence  in  a  bad  sphere.  Men  may  act  unconsciously  in  the 
production  of  trouble,  far  more  than  they  themselves  suspect  ;  for  their  unconscious 
influ-^nce  v/orks  according  to  the  quality  of  that  which  is  in  them.  When  men 
pursue  voluntary  courses,  they  often  hide  tbe  reality,  and  put  forth  that  which  is 
not  real  but  simulated.  Thus,  perhaps,  one  makes  himself  friendly  to  a  person 
whom  he  does  not  like,  for  purposes  of  business.  Sometimes  men  suppress  anger 
because  good-nature  will  carry  their  purposes  better.  So  that  a  man's  overt  and 
open  conduct  may  not  be  in  the  line  of  nature.  But  there  is  an  influence  derived 
from  that  which  you  actually  are.  1.  A  proud  man  may  carry  himself  intentionally 
in  such  a  way  that  every  one  he  meets  is  made  to  feel  his  inferiority.  But  a  man  may 
carry  himself  iu  such  a  way  that  without  the  slightest  intention  he  shall  insult  his 
fell  iw-men,  and  make  a  perpetual  aggression  upon  them.  Your  pride  does  not  always 
exert  iiself  according  to  your  will.  It  has  a  magnetism  of  its  own.  A  man  may 
carry  in  his  hand,  if  he  please,  a  mignonette,  and  he  may  carry  it  because  it  is 
sweet.  He  may  also  put  fetid  odours  in  his  clothes.  He  may  hide  them,  not 
wishing  that  others  shall  know  that  they  are  there.  But  they  will  make  themselves 
known,  whether  he  .wants  them  to  or  not.  So  a  man  may  cairy  himself  in  the 
stiong  qualiiies  of  bis  nature,  wishing  well ;  but  if  those  qualities  are  harmful  in 
their  tendency  he  will  produce  mischief  in  spite  of  his  good  intentions.  2.  A  man's 
selfishness  may  act  as  good  conductors  of  heat  do.  If  you  put  your  hand  upon 
wood  it  seems  relatively  warm  ;  and  if  you  put  it  on  iron  it  seems  excessively  cold. 
They  are  of  the  same  temperature,  as  measured  by  the  thermometer,  only  the  iron, 
being  a  good  conductor,  has  the  power  of  drawing  heat  rapidly  from  your  hand, 
while  the  wood,  being  a  poor  conductor,  draws  it  but  sparingly.  So  it  is  with  men. 
Some  men  exhaust  you,  they  suck  you  dry,  and  you  know  not  what  is  the  matter. 
A  man  may  have  a  nature  such  that  when  you  are  in  his  presence  you  are 
perpetually  conscious  that  your  sympathy  is  drawn  upon  and  exhausted.     He  ia 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

a  good  conductor.  His  effect  upon  you  is  to  chill  you.  And  he  does  not  intend 
any  harm.  Unconscious  selfishness  always  works  in  that  way.  A  man  may  be 
consciously  selfish  and  not  half  so  offensive  as  a  man  whose  selfishness  is  never 
positively  aggressive,  but  who  carries  an  inward  nature  that  all  the  while  and 
everywhere  draws  upon  men,  making  the  whole  room  and  house  uncomfortable. 
3.  So  combativeness  may  take  on  forms  which  will  detract  from  the  happiness  of 
every  one.  The  more  obvious  forms,  bad  as  they  are,  probably,  if  measured  by  the 
mischief  which  they  work,  would  not  be  found  to  produce  one-half  the  discomfort 
of  society  which  arises  from  the  latent  forms — what  we  call  ill-nature.  It  hovers 
in  the  air.  It  is  in  silence  as  much  as  in  the  short,  sharp  reply.  So  men  often- 
times till  the  circles  in  which  they  live  with  mahgn  influences.  They  poison  the 
air  with  suspicion,  with  envy,  with  jealousy.  A  look,  a  hint,  a  shrug,  may  convey 
the  wretched  insinuation  ;  or  the  unconscious  atmosphere  of  jealousy  make  itself 
felt.  4.  I  may  mention,  also,  the  unconscious  wrong  which  sorrow  commits  upon 
those  who  are  about  it.  Sorrow  is  not  a  thing  to  be  controlled  altogether ;  and  yet 
we  must  exhort  meu  to  beware  of  the  extremely  selfish  tendencies  and  qualities  of 
sorrow.  You  have  a  right,  as  far  as  you  can,  to  lean  on  sympathising  friends,  and 
so  relieve  your  sorrow  :  and  men  should  help  the  sorrowful;  but,  after  ail,  one  has 
no  right  to  distribute  his  sorrow.  This  is  true,  too,  in  the  matter  of  ill-health. 
Invalids  are  privileged  persons ;  but  they  should  not  privilege  themselves.  Because 
one  is  sick  he  has  no  right  to  set  aside  all  laws  of  love,  and  disinterestedness,  and 
honour.  5.  Men's  good  qualities  even  may  act  unfavourably  upon  other  men. 
For  example,  a  man  may  be  perfectly  upright,  and  yet  carry  his  conscience  in  such 
a  way  that  it  is  perpetually  condemning  men.  There  is  a  kind  of  arrogance  of 
goodness.  Deliver  me  from  a  person  who  never  does  wrong — and  knows  it ;  from 
one  whose  tongue  never  makes  any  mistakes — and  keeps  account  of  that  fact.  If 
there  be  anything  that  is  provoking  to  a  poor  sinner — and  most  of  us  are  poor-sinners 
— it  is  one  of  these  perfect  people  who  move  about  without  much  temptation — a  per- 
petual rebuke  to  us  all  the  time — a  kind  of  stinging  censure  to  our  infelicities  and 
inferiorities.  II.  Unconscious  influence  in  a  good  sphere.  If  the  predominant 
faculties  are  sweet  and  gracious,  then  you  will  carry  with  you  a  sweet  and  gracious 
atmosphere,  so  that  while  you  are  doing  good  on  purpose,  you  will  be  doing  more 
good  without  purpose.  There  be  men  whom  we  might  almost  wish  to  have  walk 
up  and  down  in  the  street,  in  order  to  shed  abroad  their  disposition— unconscious 
to  themselves.  There  is  goodness  that  means  to  be  good  ;  and  there  is  a  great  deal 
of  goodness  which  is  better,  that  comes  out  from  the  eye,  from  the  lips,  or  from  the 
pores — I  had  almost  said  from  the  skin — and  that  is  not  conscious  of  being  good. 
And  when  one  dwells  in  such  a  royal  bounty  of  kindness  and  goodness  in  himself, 
that  his  very  sliadow,  falling  on  men,  makes  them  happy,  that  unconscious 
kindness  and  goodness  is  wealth  indeed.  When  the  train  is  stopped,  the  engineer 
springs  from  the  locomotive  and  oils  the  machinery  at  every  point,  so  that  the  oil 
runs  in  at  all  the  joints.  We  look  at  him  and  at  the  engine,  and  admire  them. 
But  we  never  say  a  word  to  the  oil,  or  about  it.  And  yet  the  engine,  and  what  it 
does,  are  largely  dependant  upon  the  lubrication  which  the  oil  brings.  Now  there 
are  lubricators  among  men  who  keep  the  machinery  of  society  oiled,  so  as  to  prevent 
its  joints  from  wearing,  and  its  journals  from  heating.  1.  Such  a  man  is  one  who 
is  thoroughly  good-natured.  Men  are  as  much  perceived  that  carry  good-nature  in 
society  as  spicewood  is  that  carries  sweet  odours.  There  is  no  danger  of  there 
being  too  many  men  who  are  not  easily  irritated,  who  look  on  the  bright  side  of 
things,  and  who  tend  to  solace — men  that  you  can  cushion  on,  and  not  touch  the 
hard  angles  of  an  exacting,  conscientious  spirit.  It  is  a  great  comfort  just  to  look 
at  a  man  who  is  good-natured.  I  remember  once  riding  on  a  cold  night.  I  was  so 
cold  that  I  almost  feared  that  I  should  freeze.  After  awhile  I  came  across  a  black- 
smith's shop.  I  saw  a  bright  light  on  the  forge.  I  wanted  to  get  off  and  warm 
myself,  but  I  was  afraid  that  I  should  be  so  numb  that  I  could  not  get  on  again. 
So  I  sat  and  looked  at  the  fire  a  moment;  and  then  I  said:  "  Well,  I  feel  better 
just  for  looking  at  you,"  and  rode  on.  I  have  seen  persons  whose  very  presence, 
when  the  night  was  dark,  and  the  way  was  difficult,  and  all  things  were  freezing, 
filled  you  with  comfort.  There  are  thousands  of  times  when  men  want  to  be 
thawed  out.  Men  have  power  enough,  but  it  is  frozen  ;  they  need  sympathy.  And 
there  are  men  who  are  supplying  this  element  without  knowing  what  they  are 
doing.  Many  men  are  shot  along  the  way  of  encouragement,  and  made  to  triumph, 
by  some  man  who  never  dreams  that  he  is  doing  anything  for  them.  It  is  a  good 
investment  to  have  good-nature,  and  so  much  of  it  that  you  exhale  it,  as  flowers  do 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  477 

their  odours ;  for  you  do  not  know  who  will  take  the  comfort  of  it.  2.  So,  too, 
there  is  great  inspiration  in  humour  and  in  wit.  Among  the  gifts  which  have  been 
made  to  humanit}',  none  in  the  lower  sphere  of  virtues  should  call  forth  our  thank- 
fulness more  than  these.  They  civilise  life.  They  carry  with  them  a  perpetual 
blessing.  3.  Still  more  are  trust,  devotion,  humility.  We  think  more  of  what 
Christ  was,  than  of  what  He  said  or  did.  He  always  seems  as  one  with  a  shining 
face.  None  go  near  Him  without  feeling  the  sanctity  of  His  presence.  None  go 
near  Him  without  feeling  inspired  toward  good.  4.  And  so  while  we  do  and  teach, 
our  best  work  is  that  which  we  perform  without  knowing  it.  Silence  under 
provocation  is  better  than  doctrine  to  many  and  many  a  man.  Fortitude  under 
trouble  is  a  testimony  to  religion  w^Lich  is  far  better  than  a  thousand  proof-texts. 
In  your  boyhood,  as  you  will  very  well  remember,  you  used  to  wTite  with  invisible 
ink;  and  there  was  nothing  for  the  recipient  to  do  but  to  take  ihe  paper  and  hold 
it  to  the  fire,  and  straightway  out  came  the  message.  You  are  writing  with  invisible 
letters  on  thousands  of  children's  hearts;  on  the  hearts  of  passers-by;  on  the 
hearts  of  those  whom  you  meet  in  every  circle  where  you  move.  (H.  TV.  Beecher.) 
Personal  inftnence  : — I.  We  ail  exert  some  kind  of  influence.  The  law  of  influence 
every  atom  has  to  obey.  A  bird  can  neither  scatter  its  songful  notes  in  the  air,  nor 
soar  in  the  heavens,  without  setting  in  motion  pulsations  which  vibrate  through  all 
space.  So  man  is  so  closely  united  to  his  fellows  by  various  ties  that  he  cannot 
live  unto  himself.  In  our  social  gatherings  we  meet  with  some  persons  around 
whom  there  is  a  kind  of  atmosphere  charged  with  enkindling  and  attractive 
elements ;  and  we  meet  with  others  who  have  a  something  about  them  which  is 
dampening  and  rapelling.  As  leaven  influences  the  meal,  so  we  in  some  way  affect 
those  with  whom  we  come  into  contact.  Now  this  influence  is — 1.  Voluntary. 
Our  Loi'd  declared  that  the  apostles  should  heal  all  manner  of  diseases.  In  this 
chapter  we  have  a  fulfilment  of  this  prediction.  The  apostles  voluntarily  touched 
the  sick  and  healed  them.  So,  whenever  we  do  anything  with  an  aim,  we  exert 
voluntary  and  conscious  influence.  2.  Involuntary.  The  shadow  which  Peter 
cast  upon  the  diseased  restored  them.  Unintentionally  and  unconsciously  a 
curative  virtue  went  out  from  him.  It  is  this  influence  which  we  all  possess,  an  in- 
fluence which  flows  from  us,  and  floats  about  us  insensibly  (1)  Like  our  shadow,  this 
involuntary  influence  is  noiseless  in  its  working  as  the  darkness"  of  night,  or  as  the 
moonbeams  which  transfigure  the  sea.  But  we  do  not  imagine  that  its  power  is  less 
because  it  operates  so  quietly.  The  shadow  of  Peter  was  heard  not,  yet  it  cured  the 
suffering  ones  by  the  wayside.  Time  and  sunshine  are  ever  soundless,  but  are 
there  any  forces  more  omnipotent?  (2)  As  our  shadow  is  the  similitude  of  our 
form,  so  our  involuntary  influence  is  the  type  of  our  actual  self.  Good  words  and 
deeds  do  not  always  spring  from  a  good  disposition.  Young,  in  his  "Night 
Thoughts,"  writes  suorifuUy  of  worldly  glory,  and  yet  no  man  sought  for  it  more 
eagerly  than  he  did.  Voluntary  influence  does  not  always  indicate  what  a  man 
really  is,  but  involuntary  influence  does.  How  many  there  are  who  try  to  pass  for 
what  they  are  not.  But  in  spite  of  their  mask  we  feel  when  in  contact  with  them 
that  they  are  playing  a  false  part.  Our  involuntary  influence  is  as  much  the  outcome 
of  our  real  nature  as  the  scent  is  the  outcome  of  the  plant's  life.  It  is  a  something 
which  we  cannot  imprison — a  something  that  will  out.  Our  unintended  influence, 
then,  is  the  key  to  the  quality  of  our  being.  (3)  Our  involuntary  influence,  like 
our  shadow,  is  ever  with  us.  It  is  not  a  mere  appendage — a  robe  of  which  we  can 
divest  i/urselves.  Voluntary  influence  is  necessarily  intermittent,  but  involuntaty 
influence  is  incessant.  It  is  co-extensive  with  our  existence.  As  a  pebble  when 
flung  into  a  lake  causes  ripples  to  extend  over  its  surface,  so  as  soon  as  we  enter 
the  world  we  influence  it  in  some  degree.  II.  The  secret  of  beneficial  influence. 
Christian  character.  A  man  may  have  but  little  of  this  world's  goods,  and  may 
occupy  a  lowly  sphere ;  but  if  he  has  the  _Chriat-like  disposition,  his  influence,  as 
was  the  shadow  of  Peter,  will  be  rife  with  benediction.  On  the  other  hand,  a  man 
may  possess  extensive  knowledge,  immense  wealth,  and  may  move  in  the  highest 
circles  ;  but  unless  he  has  the  Christ-like  spirit,  bis  treasures  and  status  may  fill  him 
with  pride ;  he  may  use  them  as  instruments  in  the  service  of  the  god  of  this  world, 
and  render  his  influence  as  deadly  as  a  pestilence.  Or,  prompted  by  some  selflsh 
motives,  he  may  devote  them  very  largely  to  benevolent  purposes ;  but,  lacking  the 
true  spirit,  he  p.oduces  in  our  minds  a  feeling  of  his  hollowuess  and  insincerity. 
If  such  an  one  would  really  benefit  his  fellows  his  heart  must  be  renewed.  Spiritu- 
ality of  character  alone  will  give  weight  and  value  to  riches,  learning  and  position, 
when  used  in  the  service  of  Christ.     If  our  voluntary  influence  is  to  be  good. 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

our  involuntary  influence  must  be  good,  and  if  our  involuntary  influence  is  to  be 
good  we  must  be  right  at  the  core.  We  must  be  quickened  ere  we  can  quicken. 
We  must  be  recipients  of  tlie  Divine  ere  we  can  be  its  distributors.  Lord  Peter- 
borough said  of  Fenelon :  "  He  is  a  delicious  creature  ;  I  was  forced  to  get  away 
from  him  as  fast  as  I  could,  else  he  would  have  made  me  pious."  Thus  our 
influence  will  be  a  wondrous  force  for  good  in  proportion  to  the  holiness  of  our  life. 

III.     A    FEW   REASONS    WHICH    SHOULD     tlRGE     US     TO     EXERT   A    BENEFICIAL   INFLUENCE. 

1.  Because  of  our  responsibility.  We  are  as  responsible  for  the  influence  which 
our  character  pours  out  apart  from  our  own  will,  as  we  are  for  the  influence  of  the 
words  we  intentionally  utter,  and  the  deeds  we  intentionally  peiform.  Surely,  then, 
it  should  be  our  supreme  effort  to  model  our  character  according  to  the  Divine 
plans.  We  should  see  to  it  that  our  foundation  and  materials  are  such  as  shall 
endure  the  fire-tests  of  the  Judgment.  2.  Because  we  owe  so  much  to  such 
influence.  The  good  that  men  do  is  not  interred  with  their  bones.  What  would 
have  been  the  character  of  our  laws,  literature,  art,  commerce,  and  morals,  apart 
from  the  influence  of  those  whose  footfalls  are  no  longer  heard  on  earth !  Do  not 
sceptics  and  infidels  owe  their  best  privileges  to  the  influence  of  those  who  were 
animated  by  the  faith  which  they  reject !  3.  Because  it  will  be  a  source  of 
infinite  joy.  It  will  cause  joy  to  well  up  in  the  heart  now — a  joy  which  springs 
from  the  sense  of  duty  done,  from  a  quiet  conscience,  from  making  others  haj'py 
and  noble.  But  who  can  depict  the  joy  to  which  it  will  give  rise  in  the  future? 
4.  Because  it  is  the  will  of  Christ.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine,"  &c.  {K.  H.  Palmer.) 
The  mysterious  power  of  a  man  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost : — 1.  He  repels  tlie  wicked 
(ver.  13),  and  attracts  the  good.  2.  He  is  the  torment  of  unclean  spirits  (ver.  16), 
but  gives  rest  to  the  weary  and  heavy-laden  (ver.  18).  3.  To  the  enemies  of  truth 
He  is  as  the  savour  of  death  unto  death — Ananias  and  Snpphira;  the  priests  and 
elders — and  to  souls  desiring  salvation,  a  savour  of  life  unto  life — the  sick,  and 
those  who  were  added  to  the  Church.     (K.  Gerok.) 

Vers.  17-26.  Then  the  high  priest  rose  up. — Vain  efforts  to  oppose  the  (jospel : — 

1.  The  effort  in  this  case  ;  by  the  imprisonment  of  the  leaders  of  the  gospel 
(vers.  17,  18).  The  whole  Jewish  authority  was  in  opposition.  II.  Its  vanity.  1. 
Because  God  was  on  the  side  of  the  gospel  (vers.  19-24).  (1)  Sending  His  angel 
to  release.     (2)  Infusing  courage.     "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  " 

2.  Because  the  people  wanted  and  needed  the  gospel  (vers.  20,  21,  25-28).  The 
rulers  were  fighting  against  the  deepest  requirements  of  the  human  soul.  The 
gospel  is  for  the  people.  3.  Because  Christ  is  a  Prince  as  well  as  a  Saviour  (vers. 
29-32).  (Christian  Aye.)  The  priests  and  the  preachers  : — I.  The  devil  some- 
times   MAKES  USE  OF  THE  BEST  INSTRUMENTS   FOR  THE    BASEST  OF   HIS    PURPOSES.       The 

Sadducees  the  best  sect :  the  high  priest  the  pick  of  his  nation.  II.  Persecution 
MUST  be  reckoned  AS  THE  COST  OF  CHRISTIAN  COURAGE.  The  age  of  martyrdom  not  yet 
closed.     HI.  God's  DELivERANcrfS  of  His  chosen  often  appear  like  miraculous 

INTERVENTIONS  OF  HiS  OWN  HAND  (Psa.  XCi.  11,  12).  IV.  ThE  TRUE  PURPOSE  OF  EVERY 

Christian  career  is  to  "  go  stand  and  speak  to  the  people  all  the  words  of  this  life : 
by  testimony  or  works."  V.  The  devil's  minions  are  usually  the  earliest  to 
become  frightened  when  the  fight  really  begins.  VI.  What  Satan  fears  most 
IS  good  doctrinal  teaching  (ver.  28).  VII.  The  grand  principle  of  the  gospel  is 
unqualified  obedience  to  God.  VIII.  The  entire  gospel  is  contained  in  the 
STORY  of  Christ's  humiliation  and  exaltation.  IX.  The  limit  ofhum.\n  responsi- 
bility IS  FOUND  IN  STATING  THE  TRUTH  AND  LIVING  UP  TO  IT.      (C.  S.  RobinSon,  D.D.) 

The  Sanhedrin  and  the  apostles  : — In  considering  the  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  this 
history  we  see — I.  How  God  overrules  opposition  for  the  good  of  His  Church. 
It  seemed  indeed  a  dark  hour  for  the  cause  of  Christ  when  the  apostles  were  shut 
up  in  the  common  prison,  and  left,  apparently,  in  the  power  of  their  bitterest 
enemies.  They  were  now  beginning  to  realise  the  truth  of  their  Lord's  words : 
"  They  shall  lay  their  hands  on  you,  and  persecute  you,"  &c.  But  they  had  no 
reason  for  despondency,  for  in  that  same  prediction  was  also  the  promise  of  help : 
"  And  it  shall  turn  to  you  for  a  testimony."  In  the  faith  of  this  they  waited  on  the 
Lord.  Nor  did  they  wait  in  vain.  It  was  a  triumphant  answer  to  the  teaching  of 
the  Sadducees,  who  denied  the  existence  of  angels,  and  it  was  also  calculated  to 
instruct  and  elevate  the  faith  of  the  Church.  Nor  was  the  lesson  lost.  As  mercies 
granted  make  us  bold  to  ask  for  more,  so,  we  may  believe,  this  deliverance  was 
remembered  on  a  subsequent  occasion,  when  the  disciples  met  together  to  pray  for 
the  release  of  Peter.    But  more  especially  was  this  event  blessed  to  the  apostles 


CHAP.  V.)  THE  A  CTS.  479 

themselves.  The  angel  who  delivered  them  said,  "  Go,  stand  and  speak  in  the 
temple  to  the  people  all  the  words  of  this  life."  Their  trial  and  deliverance,  after 
all,  increased  their  qualifications  to  preach.  Satan  defeated  himself.  So  it  has 
ever  been  in  the  experience  of  God's  faithful  ministers.  Many  a  sore  trial  or  dark 
night  of  sorrow  has  fitted  them  to  proclaim  more  clearly  and  positively  the  words  of 
life.  The  apostles  in  prison,  Paul  in  Nero's  dungeon,  and  John  Bunyan  in  Bedford 
jail,  are  events  which  show  how  God  can  make  the  trials  and  persecutions  of  His 
servants  advance  His  glory  and  turn  to  them  "  for  a  testimony."  We  cannot  but 
admire  the  prompt  and  faithful  obedience  of  the  apostles.  To  stand  in  that  public 
place  and  teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus  was  to  expose  themselves  again  to  danger  and 
death.  Carnal  prudence  might  say,  "  You  ai'e  now  delivered  ;  hide  yourselves  until 
this  storm  of  indignation  has  swept  by."  But  no;  these  were  men  who  thought 
more  of  Christ  than  of  their  personal  safety.  II.  Rationalism  confounded.  The 
high  priest  and  his  council  slept  undisturbed  by  the  visits  of  angels.  On  the 
mori'ow  they  were  to  pass  sentence.  But  instead  of  their  anticipated  triumph  came 
their  discomfiture.  Evil  is  never  so  near  its  defeat  as  when  it  seems  to  be  in  the 
hour  of  its  triumph.  The  morrow  came ;  the  high  priest,  his  council  and  the  San- 
hedrin  were  assembled,  and  officers  were  sent  to  bring  in  the  prisoners.  The  officers 
return,  with  their  faces  proclaiming  their  amazement,  saying,  ' '  The  prison  truly 
found  we  shut  with  all  safety,"  &c.  (ver.  23).  Here  was  something  that  confounded 
aU  their  plans  and  put  a  new  phase  on  the  matter  before  them.  Just  when  ration- 
alism thought  to  put  down  the  supernatural,  lo  1  it  appears  in  a  new  manifestation 
before  them.  The  perplexity  of  the  council  is  further  increased  when  one  came 
saying,  "Behold,  the  men  whom  ye  put  into  prison  are  standing  in  the  temple,  and 
teaching  the  people."  When  men  escape  from  prison  it  is  to  hide  themselves,  but 
these  prisoners  go  at  once  to  repeat  their  offence.  It  was  this  conduct,  as  much  as 
the  strangeness  of  their  deUverance,  that  impressed  the  senate.  Then,  as  often 
since,  men  were  made  to  see  that  there  is  a  hidden  spiritual  force  about  the  gospel 
which  cannot  be  accounted  for,  save  on  the  ground  that  the  life  of  Christ  is  in  it. 
III.  The  enemies  of  the  gospel  made  to  feab  and  eespect  those  who  are  fearless 
IN  proclaiming  it.  The  high  priest  and  his  council  have  now  heard  where  their 
former  prisoners  are,  but  how  were  they  to  arrest  them  ?  A  short  hour  before  they 
deemed  it  enough  to  send  the  ordinary  officers  to  drag  them  to  their  tribunal.  But 
now  (ver.  26)  they  were  compelled  to  show  special  consideration  to  the  apostles,  and 
the  latter  are  set  before  the  Sanhedrin  with  something  of  honour  and  deference. 
The  meeting  is  most  significant :  it  presents  one  of  those  striking  contrasts  between 
the  old  and  the  new  which  history  now  and  then  furnishes.  On  one  side  are  men 
of  this  world,  who  have  no  aims  or  hopes  beyond  the  grave — men  of  policy  and  self- 
interest,  controlled  in  their  actions  by  "  fear  of  the  people  " ;  on  the  other  side, 
men  who  are  living  for  eternity,  and  who  through  the  risen  Christ  have  seen  the 
glorified  life  beyond  the  grave — men  whose  conduct  is  shaped  only  by  the  fear  of 
God.  The  issue  between  them  is  the  struggle  of  the  ages  ;  they  represent  the  parties 
of  to-day.  Which  side  are  you  on  ?  {S.  J.  Niccolls,  D.D.)  Persecution  renewed: 
— 1.  The  apostles  in  prison.  The  high  priest  and  the  Sadducees  "  were  filled  with 
jealousy."  1.  Because  of  the  popularity  and  success  of  the  apostles  (ver.  12-16). 
The  rapid  growth  of  the  Church  was  a  threat  to  them.  It  presented  to  them  the 
uneasy  suggestion  of  some  day  being  called  to  account  for  having  crucified  the  Head 
of  the  Church  (ver.  28),  2.  Because  the  apostles  were  still  giving,  with  great  power, 
their  testimony  to  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (chap.  iv.  33).  They  were 
tolling  the  knell  of  the  Sadducees  as  a  sect.  3.  The  apostles  represented  the  vital 
energy  of  this  new  sect.  If  they  only  could  be  silenced,  the  propagating  power  of 
the  new  faith  would  be  gone.  II.  The  apostles  released.  Observe — 1.  Its  manner. 
By  an  angel  in  such  a  way  that  the  prison  guards  were  unaware  of  their  going 
(ver.  23).  2.  Its  suggestions.  (1)  As  to  the  power  of  God.  Men  had  incarcerated 
His  followers,  but  He  took  them  out  of  their  prison  as  easily  as  we  take  a  fly  out  of 
the  meshes  of  a  cobweb.  (2)  As  to  the  vigilant  care  of  God.  Not  a  sparrow  falls  to 
the  ground  without  His  knowL  dge.  It  was  not  in  His  design  to  leave  the  apostles 
at  the  mercy  of  the  Sanhedrin  in  this  time  of  the  genesis  of  His  Church.  By  mira- 
culously delivering  ihem  first,  He  would  warn  the  rulers  not  to  proceed  too  far.  (3) 
As  to  the  ministry  of  angels.  For  illustrative  instances,  take  the  succouring  of 
Elisha  under  the  juniper  tree  (1  Kings  xix.  5-7) ;  the  invisible  celestial  host  round 
about  Elisha  at  Dotham  (2  Kings  vi.  16,  17) ;  the  delivery  of  Peter  from  prison 
(chap.  xii.  1-11),  &c.  For  the  scriptural  teachings  relative  to  the  mission  of  angels 
with  regard  to  God's  servants  refer  them  to  Psahn  xiv.  7;  Hebrews  i.  14.     But  just 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  v;. 

here  a  caution  is  needed.  Generally  speating,  it  is  true  that  the  Lord  delivers  those 
■who  fear  and  trust  in  Him,  but  it  is  not  always  so.  He  brought  the  apostles  out  of 
prison,  but  he  suffered  Stephen  to  be  stoned.  He  delivered  Peter,  but  He  permitted 
James  to  be  slain  with  the  sword.  There  are  circumstances  where  death  is  worth 
more  than  life.  Whether  He  delivers  or  permits  one  to  suffer,  God  acts  towards 
His  servants  in  the  best,  the  wisest,  and  the  tenderest  way.  III.  The  apostles  in 
THE  TEMCLE.  Note — 1.  That  the  apostles  were  not  allowed  to  flee,  they  were  released 
that  they  might  return  to  the  thick  of  the  fray.  2.  That  with  the  release  of  the 
prisoners  the  mission  of  the  angel  ceased.  They  were  to  speak  the  words  of  eternal 
life.  It  is  not  by  the  eloquence  of  angels,  but  by  the  often  faltering  testimony  of 
men,  that  the  world  is  to  be  won  to  Christ.  3.  That  the  apostles  were  to  speak 
"  all  the  words,"  not  a  part  merely — to  speak  without  fear  and  favour — to  speak  just 
as  freely  as  though  no  Sanhedrin  or  prisons  or  crosses  were  in  existence.  4.  That 
they  must  have  spoken  that  morning  with  peculiar  power.  The  circumstances 
suggest  that  they  could  not  have  done  otherwise.  IV.  The  apostles  on  tbial. 
Before  they  were  brought  to  trial,  the  Sanhedrin  "  were  much  perplexed,"  and 
were  particularly  concerned  as  to  "  whereimto  this  would  grow."  They  were  in 
dread  of  miracles  and  of  the  influence  of  miracles.  In  the  midst  of  their  perplexity, 
the  astounding  information  was  brought  that  their  late  prisoners  were  doing  openly 
what  the  Sanhedrin  had  forbidden  them  to  do.  But  on  account  of  the  manifest 
favour  of  the  people  toward  the  apostles,  the  officers  brought  them  without  violence, 
fearing  to  be  stoned  if,  in  any  way,  they  roughly  treated  them.  When  brought 
before  the  council  the  apostles — 1.  Were  reminded  of  the  prohibition  which  they 
had  just  been  disregarding — a  prohibition  which  the  apostles,  at  the  time,  intimated 
that  they  must  disregard.  2.  Were  accused  now  of  trying  to  bring  "  this  man's  blood  " 
upon  them.  This  man's  blood,  however,  they  had  invoked  upon  themselves  (Matt, 
xxvii.  25).  V.  The  apostles'  answer.  1.  It  was  bold.  It  laid  down  the  principle, 
*'  We  must  obey  God  rather  than  men."  That  was  like  the  reply  of  that  heroic 
trio  (Dan.  iii.  16,  17).  So  Socrates  at  Athens,  "  I  honour  and  love  you,  but  I  shall 
obey  God  rather  than  you."  2.  It  was  faithful.  In  reciting  the  facts  that  impelled 
them  to  speak  in  spite  of  the  prohibition  of  the  Sanhedrin,  Peter  again  pressed 
home  the  guilt  of  the  rulers  before  whom  he  stood.  God  had  raised  up  Jesus,  whom 
they  slew,  and  exalted  Him  with  His  right  hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour.  3. 
It  was  suggestive  of  mercy.  Peter  pointed  out  that  God  had  exalted  Jesus  "  to  give 
repentance  to  Israel,  and  remission  of  sins."  In  this  was  an  answer  to  the  charge 
that  the  apostles  were  endeavouring  to  bring  the  blood  of  "  this  man  "  upon  them. 
They  were—  but  for  their  redemption  1  Peter's  address  is  short,  but  it  contains  the 
substance  of  the  gospel.  To  the  rulers  as  well  as  to  the  people  in  the  temple,  the 
apostles  were  enabled  to  speak  "  all  the  words  of  this  life."  4.  It  gave  the  reason 
why  they  must  speak.  They  were  "  witnesses  of  these  things."  They  were  chosen 
of  Christ  to  speak.  They  were  not  alone  in  their  witness.  The  Holy  Spirit 
witnessed  with  them,  and  through  them,  and  through  others — thus  Divinely  con- 
firming their  testimony.  And  here  was  a  hint  to  the  rulers.  If  they  would  not 
accept  the  witness  of  the  apostles,  they  should  accept  the  higher  witness  of  the 
Spirit.  (M.G.  Hazard.)  Persecution  renetced : — I.  The  apostles  imprisoned  and 
EELEASED.  1.  Put  in  prlson  (chaps,  iv.  1,  xiii.  45,  xvii.  5  ;  Luke  xxi.  12).  2.  Led 
out  of  prison  (chaps,  xii.  7,  xvi.  26  ;  Heb.  i.  14).  3.  Teaching  in  the  temple.  (1) 
The  command  given  (Matt.  x.  27;  John  vi.  68;  Acts  xx.  20).  (2)  The  command 
obeyed  (Prov.  xxviii.  1 ;  Isa.  viii.  13  ;  Mutt.  x.  28).  4.  Sent  by  the  council.  (1) 
The  sending.  (2)  The  report  (Psa.  cxxiv.  7,  xci.  3  ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  22).  (3)  The 
perplexity  (Isa.  ix.  7  ;  Dan.  ii.  44 ;  Mark  iv.  32).  5.  Lessons  :  Faithful  witnesses' 
for  Christ — (1)  May  count  upon  exciting  the  jealousy  of  those  who  are  the  enemies 
of  Christ.  (2)  May  count  upon  some  kind  of  hostile  interference  by  the  enemies  of 
Christ.  (3)  May  count  upon  the  ministries  of  angels  in  their  behalf.  (4)  May 
count  upon  God's  being  alive  to  any  dangers  they  may  incur  by  witnessing  for 
Christ.  (5)  May  count  upon  God's  delivering  them  when  it  is  beat  for  His  cause 
that  they  i-hould  be  deliveied.  (6)  Are  called  upon  to  speak  to  the  people  all  the 
words  of  this  life.  (7)  Still  cause  the  enemies  of  Christ  to  be  perplexed  with  the 
question  as  to  whereunto  this  gospel  is  to  grow.  II.  The  apostles  on  trial,  l.^ 
The  apostles  brought  (Matt.  xiv.  5  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  13).  2.  The  apostles  examined.  (1) 
The  reminder  (chap.  iv.  18  ;  Dan.  vi.  12,  iii.  10).  (2)  The  accusation,  (a)  Ye  have 
filled  Jerusalem  with  your  teaching.  "  Ye  shall  be  My  witnesses  ...  in  Jerusa- 
lem" (chap.  i.  8).  "  Shall  go  forth  .  .  .  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem  " 
(Isa.  ii.  3).     "  The  earth  shall  be  filled  with  knowledge  ...  of  the  Lord  "  (Hab. 


CHAP.  ▼.]  THE  ACTS.  481 

ii.  14).     (b)  "And  intend  to  bring  this  Man's  blood  upon  us"  (Matt,  xxvii,  25; 
Acts  ii.  36,  iii.  14).     3.  Lessons  :  If  the  disciples  of  Christ  are  faithful — (1)  They 
will  secure  the  respect  and  favour  of  the  people.     (2)  They  will  find  that  deliver- 
ance from  one  trouble  will  not  secure  them  from  further  trial.     (3)  They  may  some- 
times be  compelled  to  disobey  the  mandates  of  the  authorities.     (4)  They  will  yet 
fill  the  world  with  their  teaching.     (5)  They  will  bring  the  blood  of  Christ  upon  all 
men,  either  for  their  redemption  or  for  their  condemnation.     III.  The  apostles' 
ANSWER.   1.  The  declaration.  "  We  must  obey  God  rather  than  men  "  (chap.  iv.  19  ; 
Dan.  iii.  18,  vi.  10).     2.  The  reason  for  the  declaration.     (1)  The  facts,     (a)  "  The 
God  of  our  fathers  raised  up  Jesus,  whom  ye  slew  "  (chaps,  ii.  24,  iii.  26 ;  1  Cor. 
XV.  13).     (b)  "  Him  did  God  exalt  ...  to  give  repentance  to  Israel  "  (chap.  ii.  33  ; 
Phil.  ii.  9;  Matt.  i.  21).     (2)  Their  relation  to  the  facts.     "We  are  witnesses  of 
these  things  ;  and  so  is  tbe  Holy  Ghost "  (Luke  xxiv.  48 ;  Acts  i.  8 ;  Heb.  ii.  4), 
3.  Lessons  :    (1)  The  fundamental  rule  for  Christians,  "  We  must  obey  God  rather 
than  men."     (2)  Christians  should  obey  God  rather  than  men.     {a)  Because  of  that 
which  Jesus  has  done  to  purchase  their  perfect  obedience.     (&)  Because  of  the 
exaltation  of  the  One  whom  they  serve,     (c)  Because  they  are  witnesses  for  Christ, 
their  witness  being  effective  in  proportion  to  their  fidelity  to  God.     (S.  S.  Times.) 
The  activity  and  bafflement  of  the  persecutors : — I.  The  apostles'  arrest  and  im- 
prisonment.    The  new  attack  was  occasioned  by  the  things  described  in  vers.  12-16. 
Note — 1.  The  feeling  of  the  persecutors — "Indignation."   2.  Their  conduct.    They 
laid  hands  upon  the  apostles  and  put  them  into  tbe  common  prison,  of  all  places 
the  most  revolting  and  disreputable.     Thus,  as  ever,  bigotry  shows  the  weakness  of 
its  opinion  and  tbe  malignity  of  its  aims,  by  substituting  force  for  argument,  might 
for  right.    II.  Their  deliverance  and  commission.     1.  Their  deliverance.     On  the 
former  occasion  they  were  released  by  the  timid  and  apprehensive  policy  of  their 
oppressors ;  here  by  a  direct  messenger  from  heaven.     Prison  walls,  iron  gates, 
massive  chains  are  nothing  to  an  angel.     2.  Their  commission.     (1)  Its  subject. 
"The  words  of  this  life."     The  gospel  is  a  record  of  "words"  that   generate, 
nurture,  develop,  and  perfect  the  true  life  of  humanity.     (2)  Its   sphere — "  the 
temple,"  the  most  public  place,  when  the  greatest  numbers  could  be  reached,     (3) 
Its  expedition.     They  set  themselves  to  work  at  once  "  early  in  the  morning."     3. 
This  deliverance  and  commission  had  a  twofold  effect  upon  their  enemies.     (1)  It 
confounded  them  with  disappointment.      The  wicked  work    in  the    dark,    and 
Providence  makes  them  the  victims  of  their  own  plots.     (2)  It  filled  them  with 
apprehension.     "  They  doubted  whereunto  this  would  grow."     Well  might  they 
fear.     III.  Their  arraignment  and  defence.    1.  Their  arraignment  (ver.  28).    The 
language  expresses — (1)  Their  mortification  at  the  disregard  of  their  authority.     (2) 
An  assuraed  contempt  for  Christ.     (3)  Their  reluctant  testimony  to  the  progress  of 
Christianity.     (4)  The  foreboding  of  a  terrible  retribution.     To  "  bring  blood  on 
the  head  "  is  a  EEebrew  idiom  for  having  to  answer  for  the  death  of  another.     They 
had  cried,  "  His  blood  be  upon  us,"  now  they  deprecated  that  as  the  direst  of 
judgments.   2.  Their  defence  (vers.  29-32).  We  have  here — (1)  One  of  the  grandest 
of  principles  (ver.  29).     (2)  One  of  the  most  wonderful  of  facts.     "  The  God  of  our 
fathers  raised  up  Jesus."    (3)  One  of  the  most  appalling  of  crimes.  "Whom  ye  slew," 
&c.     (4)  One  of  the  most  glorious  of  communications  (ver.  31).     Here  observe — (a) 
That  Christ  is  exalted  to  the  highest  dignity — "  the  right  hand  of  God."     {b)  That 
He  is  so  exalted  for  the  sublimest  functions — "  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour."     (c) 
That  in  these  functions  He  has  to  communicate  to  the  world  the  greatest  of  bless- 
ings— repentance  and  forgiveness.     (5)  The  most  exalted  of  missions  (ver.  32). 
They  were  fellow-workers  with  the  great  Spirit  Himself.     (6)  The  most  intense 
exasperation  (ver.  33).     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         The  imprisonment  and  deliverance 
of  the  apostles  : — I.  The  conflict  of  force.     1.  On  the  side  of  the  persecutors 
(vers.  17, 18).     2.  On  the  side  of  the  persecuted  (vers.  19,  21).     II.  The  conflict  of 
argument.     1.  The  Sanhedrin  (ver.  21).     2.  The  apostles  (vers.  29,  32).     III.  The 
conflict  of  policy.     1.  The  violent  party  (ver.  33).     2.  The  moderate  party  (vers. 
34-42).      Lessons  :    1.  Man'.s   extremity   is    God's    opportunity.      2.  The    moral 
cowardice  of  bravado.     The  Sanhedrin  put  the  apostles  in  prison,  but  dared  not 
ask  how  they  got  out.     3.  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men."     4.  The 
inefficacy  of  force  to  crush  the  truth.     (J.  Bennett,  D.D.)     The  apostles  persecuted : 
— 1.  (vers.  17,  18).    There  all  evil  power  ends.     The  policy  may  admit  of  great 
variety  in  detail,  but  it  is  all  summed  up  in  that  poor  sentence.     How  differently  it 
might  have  read  remembering  the  dignity  and  culture  of  the  Sanhedrim — "  Let  us 
instantly  dare  them  to  controversy,  and  in  the  hearing  of  all  the  people  put  silence 
VOL.   I.  31 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v, 

to  their  doctrine."  No ;  their  only  resource  was  physical  force.  It  is  the  same 
thing  in  all  ages.  No  man  can  answer  the  truth  ;  he  can  only  lay  hands  on  the 
truth-teller.  2.  But  having  looked  at  the  darkness,  let  us  see  if  it  be  all  dark- 
ness (vers.  18,  19).  So  the  affairs  of  men  are  not  bounded  by  what  we  can 
see,  and  measure,  and  add  up.  There  are  invisible  agencies  over  which  we 
have  no  control.  All  the  stars  fight  for  God,  all  the  angels  of  heaven  assist 
the  good  man.  They  have  always  identified  themselves  with  Christian  effort. 
They  were  with  Christ  in  all  the  crises  of  His  life ;  and  now  they  were 
with  Christ's  servants  in  theirs.  Men  can  shut  us  up ;  angels  can  deUver 
us.  Men  can  do  the  destructive  work  upon  our  persons  and  ministry,  whether  in 
the  pulpit,  in  the  home,  or  in  business ;  but  God  can  do  the  constructive  work,  and 
set  up  again  what  has  been  shattered  by  violence.  To  know  this  is  power,  eman- 
cipation. The  great  difiSculty  is  to  realise  the  invisible.  Lord,  increase  our  faith  ! 
Give  us  those  inward,  all-piercing  eyes  that  see  angels  everywhere,  as  the  prophet 
saw  them  when  the  hosts  of  Samaria  encamped  round  about  him.  3.  "  And  when 
they  heard  that  they  entered  into  the  temple  early  and  taught."  The  apostles 
were  always  prepared,  never  better  at  one  time  than  at  another.  They  could  preach 
early  in  the  morning  ;  they  could  study  in  prison  ;  they  could  face  the  highest  men 
in  the  nation  ;  they  could  answer  questions  extemporaneously  and  completely  ;  they 
could  heal  the  sick  and  teach  inquirers  at  once.  Are  we  in  the  apostolic  succession  ? 
Have  we  not  to  go  to  books  of  reference  ?  But  the  Christian  professor  ought  never 
to  have  to  go  away  in  order  to  find  a  word  for  his  Master.  The  Church  is  losing' 
power  by  not  hving  in  the  atmosphere  of  Christian  thought,  service,  love.  The 
apostles  received  their  commissions  from  the  angels ;  but  had  a  little  child  said, 
"  There  are  some  poor  people  in  the  temple  who  want  to  hear  about  Jesus,"  the 
apostles  would  have  accepted  the  call  instantly.  How  can  we  teach  Jesus  if  we  do 
not  know  Him  ?  But  if  He  be  our  heart's  delight  and  supreme  love,  then  we  shall 
always  be  prepared  in  the  best  sense  to  speak  for  Him,  not  artistically  and  in  a 
literary  sense,  but  with  that  aU-piercing  power  that  touches  every  man  to  the  core. 
4.  No  angel  had  called  upon  the  Sanhedrin  during  the  night.  So  they  came  in 
the  morning  to  go  about  their  day's  work.  But  the  prisoners  were  not  forthcoming. 
Think  of  a  whole  court  being  put  hors  de  combat.  God  is  always  making  fools  of 
those  who  oppose  Him.  The  officers  return.  Hear  their  statement  (ver.  23).  This 
is  an  aspect  of  the  terrible  power  of  God.  He  lets  things  remain  just  as  they  are, 
to  aU  human  appearance,  but  sucks  the  Ufe  out  of  them.  He  leaves  prisons  great 
shells.  God  can  work  so  secretly,  so  completely.  Circumstances  have  been  your 
prison,  and  bewilderment,  and  prejudice,  but  an  angel  has  come  in  the  night-time 
and  deUvered  you.  5.  What  a  message  was  that  of  verse  25 !  Your  expostu- 
lation has  come  to  nothing.  God  has  not  touched  a  key  in  the  girdle  of  the  prison 
keeper,  but  He  has  used  His  own.  The  men  were  brought  before  the  senate,  and 
they  said,  "  We  ought  to  obey  God."  This  was  their  strength.  Not  "  We  had  a 
vision,  and  were  compelled  to  this  act,  otherwise  we  would  have  remained  in  prison 
and  come."  Be  gentle  with  some  men.  Peter  denied  his  Master,  and  some  of  us 
would  have  expelled  him  for  ever  from  the  Church.  But  Jesus  recovered  him,  and 
here  he  is,  a  hero.  Have  any  of  us  slipped  ?  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should 
slip  for  ever.  Give  a  man  an  opportunity  of  getting  up  again.  Those  who  heard 
Peter  were  cut  to  the  heart,  and  took  counsel  to  slay  him.  I  would  we  had  more 
such  preaching.  Whether  it  is  the  knife  is  too  short  or  blunt,  or  the  hand  too 
cowardly,  we  never  get  down  into  the  heart.  6.  There  was  one  wise  man  in  the 
council — Gamaliel.  He  called  them  to  common  sense.  He  told  them  of  two  men 
of  marvellous  pretensions  who  subsided  into  oblivion,  and  his  argument  was, 
"Give  the  men  time."  Time  is  the  enemy  of  the  bad — the  friend  of  the  good.  If 
this  be  a  nine-days'  wonder,  do  not  let  us  be  angry  on  the  fourth  day  :  five  days 
more  will  show  us  what  it  is  made  of.  He  prevailed,  and  the  council  compounded 
with  the  occasion  by  simply  beating  the  men  they  intended  to  slay.  7.  When  the 
apostles  were  dismissed,  what  think  you  they  said  ?  "No  more  of  this ;  we  cannot 
endure  being  trampled  on.  We  have  done  enough,  now  we  wiU  resume  our  ordinary 
tasks."  Nay,  read  verse  41.  Their  wounds  were  medals.  You  could  never  have 
had  a  sentence  like  this  from  a  mere  artist.  No  literary  man  could  have  hit  upon 
this  expression.  Have  you  ever  suffered  shame ?  Did  they  obey  the  prohibition? 
No :  daily  in  the  temple  and  in  every  house  they  ceased  not  to  preach,  teaching 
Jesus  Christ.  There  was  a  new  tone  in  their  voices.  Peter's  suffering  developed 
that  womanly  element  without  which  a  man  can  never  be  complete  in  any  great 
ministry.     What  examples  we  have  to  follow  1    We  see  from  their  history  the  worst 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  4P3 

that  can  be  done  to  us.  "  Fear  not  them  that  kill  the  body."  8.  This  history 
shows  us  whence  true  power  comes.  The  power  that  bears  affliction  comes  not  out 
of  our  own  hearts,  but  from  heaven.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  But  the  angel  of  the  Lord  by  night  opened  the  prison  doors. 

— Miraculous  interposition  : — Observe — I.  That  human  authoeity  is  powerless  to 
OPPOSE  THE  WILL  OP  GoD.  The  king  on  his  throne,  the  judge  on  the  bench,  the 
soldier  in  his  rank,  &c.,  can  only  claim  Divine  protection  when  they  discharge  the 
functions  of  their  office  on  the  ground  of  truth,  honour,  and  justice.  Nowhere  is 
obedience  to  true  authority  more  emphatically  enforced  than  in  the  Word  of  God ; 
but  nowhere  is  human  authority,  exercised  contrary  to  righteousness,  condemned 
with  greater  severity.  Be  assured  that  every  sentence  against  the  truth  will  be 
reversed.  Every  attempt  to  hinder  the  progress  of  the  gospel  will  be  punished. 
II.  That  God  has  instruments  of  the  highest  order  to  carry  out  His 
BEHESTS.  There  are  many  records  in  the  Bible  of  the  glorious  services  which 
angels  have  done  to  the  Church.  Are  they  not  aU  ministering  spirits  ?  &c.  When 
ordinary  means  are  unavailable  God  can  command  extraordinary  help  for  His 
people.  Let  us  strengthen  our  faith  by  this  truth.  It  is  not  wise  to  indulge  in  any 
speculation  as  to  the  manner  or  mystery  of  such  interposition.  Neither  is  it 
expedient  to  indulge  in  the  sentimentalism  which  hands  everything  over  to  the  Lord 
to  be  done  by  Him  to  save  human  energy.  True  faith  never  pries  into  God's 
mysteries  ;  if  it  did,  it  would  no  longer  be  faith.  True  faith  inspires  all  our  energy 
in  fulfilment  of  our  duty.  But,  beyond  this,  faith  trusts  in  a  higher  power  when 
other  means  are  exhausted.  IH.  That  no  prison  can  detain  the  men  whom  God 
kequires  for  the  work.  The  greatest  of  all  teachers  had  devoted  aU  His  time 
to  instruct  these  men  in  the  principles  of  the  kingdom.  They  witnessed  His 
mighty  deeds,  and  were  made  participators  of  His  power.  The  evidences  of  Chris- 
tianity were  inscribed  on  their  consciousness,  and  that  was  the  book  which  the  ages 
would  read.  Furthermore,  the  Holy  Ghost  had  descended  upon  them,  and 
had  endowed  them  with  additional  qualifications  for  their  work.  Many  souls 
had  been  saved,  and  the  Church  duly  formed.  If  the  world  might  be 
redeemed,  evidently  God  intended  it  to  be  done  by  their  instrumentality.  Cin 
you  conceive  of  any  prison,  or  authority,  that  could  silence  the  voice  of  trath, 
the  voice  of  the  Cross,  the  voice  of  God  ?  A  necessity  was  laid  upon  th^m 
to  preach  the  gospel  which  not  only  they  felt,  but  all  the  world  must  feel.  The 
angel  came,  and  said,  "  Go,  stand  in  the  temple  and  preach  the  words  of  this 
life."  When  the  Lord  says  go,  it  is  of  no  use  for  man  to  stand  in  the  way  with 
his  feeble  no.  If  we  have  a  mission  from  Jesus  to  the  world,  however  cir- 
cumscribed our  sphere  to-day,  God  will  send  His  angel  to  open  the  prison.  If  we 
a*re  straightened,  it  is  in  ourselves  and  not  in  Him.  {Weekly  Pulpit.)  Divine 
interposition  : — A  tide  was  kept  back  strangely  for  twelve  hours  once,  and 
so  a  host  of  Christians  in  Holland  were  saved  from  slaughter  by  the  Duke 
of  Alva.  A  tremendous  wind  once  scattered  the  Armada  of  Spain  over 
the  wide  wastes  of  the  North  Sea,  and  so  Protestant  England  was  spared  to  the 
world.  John  Knox  moved  his  usual  seat  away  from  before  the  window  one  night, 
pressed  by  a  feeling  he  could  neither  understand  nor  resist ;  an  hour  later  there 
came  a  musket-ball  crashing  through  the  glass  and  burying  itself  harmlessly  in  the 
opposite  wall.  Such  things  occur  almost  every  day  in  some  conspicuous  and 
exposed  lives.  One  man  has  a  conviction  that  he  must  not  take  a  certain  train  ; 
another  feels  that  danger  lies  in  his  embarking  upon  a  certain  ship :  the  train  is 
afterwards  wrecked,  or  the  vessel  is  lost :  now  the  man  knows  that  God  interposed 
and  protected  him ;  and  he  offers  a  new  consecration  of  his  life  thus  spared 
as  the  only  return  he  can  make.  {C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Anrjplic  interference 
and  apostolic  work  : — The  apostles  might  well  say,  as  Eli'ha  did,  "  They  that 
be  with  us,"  &c.  It  is  only  to  carnal  eyes  that  the  world  ever  seems  to  get 
the  better  of  believers.  Very  formidable  machinery  is  set  in  motion  to  silence 
the  apostles ;  but  the  touch  of  an  angel's  hand  makes  it  all  vain.  This,  the 
opening  of  the  prison  doors,  the  angel  could  do ;  but  there  was  a  p<irt  of  the 
work  to  be  done  which  no  angel  could  fulfil.  And  the  mighty  one  who  set  the 
apostles  free,  bore  the  message  which  bade  tiiem,  "  go  and  preach  all  tlie  words  of 
this  life."  Let  us  accept  these  two  lessons  for  use  to-day  and  every  day.  By  His 
angel  host'',  as  well  as  by  all  other  means,  the  Lord  works  out  our  well-being.  And 
if  we  rightfully  boast  that  the  agency  is  none  the  less  mighty  because  unseen,  so 
the  blessings  and  deliverances  administered  to  us  are  often  unseen  also,  but  no  less 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

real.  Along  the  channel  and  amidst  the  circumstances  of  ordinary  things,  our 
welfare  is  being  as  certainly  wrought  out,  as  if  we  saw  prisons  broken,  or  sickness 
healed,  or  the  bitterness  of  death  pass  us  by.  It  were  but  a  poor  faith  that  would 
limit  our  Lord's  help  only  to  extraordinary  inteiferences  of  His  power.  The  next 
lesson  is  two  in  one.  The  Master  sends  us  help,  and  works  mightily  on  our  behalf 
to  this  end,  that  we  may  go  and  witness  for  Him.  Next,  we  must  never  so  trust  in 
the  forces  of  Divine  aid  put  at  our  service  as  to  look  to  them  either  to  do  our  work 
or  to  make  it  needless.  The  weakest  and  most  helpless  of  us,  being  helped  of  God, 
has  some  mission  entrusted  to  him  to  make  known  "  the  words  of  this  life."  If  we 
make  it  our  rule  to  "  obey  God  rather  than  men,"  we  shall  be  maintained  by  God's 
resources  instead  of  man's  help.  {G.  S.  Rowe.)  Go,  stand  and  speak  in  tlie 
temple  to  the  people  all  the  words  of  this  life. — The  proclamation  and  the  power 
of  the  gospel: — Observe — I.  The  manifestation  or  a  power  which  provides  for 
THE  CONTINUED  PUBLICATION  OP  THE  GOSPEL.  An  attempt  was  made  to  suppress 
truth  by  the  imprisonment  of  its  heralds.  Evidently  men  are  not  to  be  judged  by 
the  positions  they  may  be  compelled  to  occupy.  The  best,  as  well  as  the  worst, 
of  mankind  have  occupied  dungeons.  God  seemed  to  take  no  notice  of  the 
monstrous  iniquity.  But  oftentimes  there  is  a  great  calm  before  the  storm.  How 
breathlessly  calm  the  army  is  just  before  making  the  terrible  charge  1  And  when 
God  appears  blind  and  deaf  to  the  wrongs  done  under  the  sun,  then  it  is  that 
avenging  angels  grasp  their  swords  and  await  in  dread  silence  the  word  of  command. , 
For  Jerusalem  there  was  in  store  an  all-consuming  penalty ;  but  the  hour  for  its 
infliction  had  not  yet  come.  Nevertheless,  it  was  necessary  for  the  enemies  of  the 
Church  to  be  taught  the  absurdity,  as  well  as  the  wickedness,  of  their  opposition. 
First,  they  are  allowed  every  advantage.  They  lodge  and  carefully  guard  their 
captive  ;  then,  as  easily  as  light  passes  through  the  air,  the  prisoners  pass  through 
to  liberty.  You  might  as  well  attempt  to  chain  down  a  ghost  as  any  man,  or  cause, 
or  truth,  when  God  has  said,  "  Go  forth."  II.  The  attractive  description  of 
THE  gospel  couched  in  the  phrase,  "The  words  of  this  life."  How  often  God 
comes  to  win  our  poor  confidence,  love,  and  service !  It  was  when  Jesus  had 
scarcely  done  reproving  the  cities  of  Galilee  that  He  said,  "Come  unto  Me  all  ye 
that  labour,"  &c.  Marvellous  in  themselves,  these  words  are  more  marvellous  as 
coming  from  Christ  at  that  particular  moment,  as  if,  though  He  seemed  to  have 
no  fruit  of  His  labour.  He  would  plead  with  men  again.  And,  similarly,  the  apostles 
had  not  only  to  preach,  but  to  illustrate,  in  their  own  graciousness,  the  grace  of 
God.  They  escaped  from  bondage,  not  to  flee  nor  to  be  avenged,  but  to  proclaim 
again  the  truth  for  which  they  had  suffered.  1.  Such  a  proclamation  involved  of' 
necessity  a  profound  view  of  sin.  We  are  dead,  physically,  when  the  air  is  no 
longer  inhaled  ;  mentally,  when  the  truth  produces  no  impression  upon  the  mind ; 
and  spiritually,  when  God  is  unloved  by  our  hearts.  We  may  be  the  cleverest  ot 
the  clever,  and  yet  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  in  sin.''  2.  But  Christ  brings  to 
believers  a  new  life.  He  confers  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  creates  the  blessed  life^ 
Christ  in  you,  in  your  thoughts  and  aims,  your  consciences  and  affections.  And  if 
Christ  be  in  you  ye  shall  not  be  barren  and  unfruitful;  sinful  habits  will  fall  off 
the  soul,  just  as  dead  foliage  drops  to  the  earth  in  this  spring-time,  when  the  rising 
life  within  the  tree  puts  forth  tender  shoots  to  dis'odge  the  withered  leaves  which 
all  the  winter  may  have  defied  the  angiiest  wind  to  tear  them  from  their  boughs. 
3.  Christ  nourislies  that  life.  All  ministers,  &c.,  are  commanded  to  speak  to  the 
people  all  the  words  of  this  life.  But  can  life  benourisbed  by  words  ?  It  depends. 
Golden  plates,  being  empty,  are  of  no  avail  for  those  perishing  with  hunger. 
Perfect  wires,  unconnected  with  a  source  of  electricity,  convey  no  message.  Words 
also  may  be  empty  planters  or  mere  wires  ;  but  may  they  not  be  infinitely  more? 
"  God  said.  Let  there  be  light ;  and  there  was  light."  Some  one  announced  to  you, 
"  She  is  dead  " — merely  three  words ;  but  their  meaning  froze  your  blood.  We  have 
heard  these  words  :  "  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  Are  they  mere 
words  ?  They  may  be  ;  and  yet  tbey  may  be  so  filled  with  life  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
that  they  shall  quicken  in  men's  hearts  a  vitality  that  shall  never  fade  away. 
III.  The  PUBLICITY  of  Chuisti.vnity.  1.  No  doubt  the  temple  was  a  very 
convenient  place  because  of  the  multitudes  that  resorted  there.  But  who 
can  fail  to  see  another  kind  of  appropriateness  ?  It  was  there  that  men  had  seen 
types  and  s»iadows  age  after  age.  The  gospel  was  to  be  preached  as  an  inter- 
pretation of  the  old  revelation  ;  a  key  was  supplied  which  made  plain  the  cypher 
which  had  been  obscure.  2.  Further,  it  is  evident  that  Christianity  courts  pub- 
licity.   Christ  is  uplifted  for  all  to  see.     So  His  missionaries  are  bound  to  be  as  plain 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  485 

and  clear  as  possible.  Who  ever  heard  that  the  apostles  arranged  a  dark  sednee,  or 
preferred  to  speak  their  words  in  corners  ?  The  gospel  is  addressed  not  to  a  clique,  but 
broadly  to  humanity.  There  is  no  man  or  woman  or  child  anywhere  whodnesnot  need 
Christ ;  and  there  is  no  one  upon  whom  Christ  would  not  shine.  (W.  J.  Henderson, 
B.A.)  Divine  idea  of  Christianity  : — There  is  a  strong  tendnncy  to  place  the  religion 
of  Christ  by  the  side  of  other  kindred  systems,  and  the  Word  of  God  on  tbe  same 
level  with  the  Koran,  Shasters,  and  writings  of  ancient  philosophers  and  poets. 
This  arises  from  a  forgetfulness  of  — I.  This  Divine  definition  of  Christianity. 
"This  life."  As  a  life  Curistiai)ity  is  distinguished  from  all  other  systems.  It  is 
the  one  only  life  — God  given  and  God  sustained.  This  life  is  confined  to  no  sect. 
It  is  co-extensive  with  faith  in  Christ.  It  is  a  life  which  breathes,  feels,  loves, 
and  hates.  It  has  its  own  sphere,  literature,  food,  work.  II.  This  Divine  desig- 
nation OF  the  gospel.  As  "  all  the  words  of  this  life,"  the  gospel  stands  alone. 
When  the  Bible  speaks  all  other  books  are  silent.  Men  who  try  to  discover  the 
truth  by  the  aid  of  ancient  philosophers  and  religions  are  as  those  who  light  a 
candle  in  the  middle  of  a  cloudless  day  in  order  to  discover  the  sun.  The 
gospel  is  "  all  the  words  of  this  life,"  because  it  is  the  Word  by  which  this  life  is 
— 1.  Discovered.  Here  the  gospel  stands  alone.  What  amongst  the  vanities  of 
the  heathen  ever  discovered  to  a  soul  "  this  life  "  spoken  of  in  the  text  ?  These 
leave  men  still  in  darkness  and  uncertainty,  while  "  life  and  immortality  are 
brought  to  light  by  the  gospel."  2.  Imparted.  Here  again  the  gospel  stands 
alone.  Men  try  to  draw  unfavourable  comparisons  betvve^^n  the  writings  of  Scrip- 
ture and  those  of  uninspired  men,  but  assuming  that  such  comparisons  are  just, 
they  give  no  advantage.  The  man  who  wants  to  reap  a  harvest  does  not  scatter 
glittering  pearls  in  his  field  because  they  look  much  better  than  his  "  bare  grain," 
but  knowing  that  his  corn  possesses  an  inherent  vitality,  which  will  reproduce 
itself  manifold,  he  commits  it  to  the  soil.  The  gospel  was  never  intended  to  satisfy 
the  cravings  of  critics,  but  to  impart  "  this  life."  3.  Sustained.  This  life  has 
wants  and  cares,  emotions  and  hopes,  peculiar  to  itself.  In  the  gospel  we  have 
that  which  exactly  meets  its  necessities.  You  have  soul  needs,  which  all  the  words 
■of  Plato,  Socrates,  Aristotle,  and  Shakespeare  together  would  not  satisfy,  but  which 
&re  more  than  satisfied  by  the  gospel.  In  "  the  words  of  this  life,"  you  have  that 
which  strengthens  and  consolidates  life's  trust ;  inspires  and  sustains  life's  hope, 
and  rekindles  and  inflames  life's  love.  Christ  is  in  them  I  That  is  the  secret. 
He  in  the  Word  sustains  the  soul.  4.  Governed.  Here  again  the  gospel  is  without 
a  rival.  The  daily  prayer  of  a  true  heart  is,  "  Order  my  steps  in  Thy  Word,"  and 
its  daily  testimony  is,  "  Thy  Word  is  a  lamp  to  my  feet  and  a  light  to  my  path." 
III.  This  Divine  delegation  of  the  Chdkch.  "  Go,  stand  and  speak  in  the 
temple  to  the  people,"  &c.  There  is  uo  ambiguity  here.  The  Divine  commission 
"was  clear  and  simple.  In  this  we  see  the  Church's  work  to-day.  1.  "  The  words 
■of  this  life  "  are  to  be  preached.  Not  by  ministers  only.  "  Let  him  that  heareth 
say,  come."  2.  They  only  are  to  be  preached.  "  Speak,"  &c.  The  apostles  were 
not  to  go  and  draw  comparisons  between  these  words  and  others,  they  were  to 
preach  the  gospel.  They  knew  nothing  amongst  men  but  "  Jesus  Christ  and  Him 
crucified."  3,  They  are  to  be  preached  earnesily.  "  Stand  and  speak."  Let  con- 
ventional forms  and  usages  be  forgotten.  The  theme  demanded  zeal.  Tha  old 
masters  might  sit  and  teach  their  philosophies,  but  as  "  Jesus  stood  and  cried.  If 
any  man  thirst  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink,"  so  we  must  consecrate  our  whole 
manhood  to  this  surpassing  work.  4.  They  are  to  be  preached  exhaustively.  "AH 
the  words."  The  pleasant  with  the  painful ;  the  doctrine  with  the  promise  ;  the 
warning  with  the  invite.  It  was  Paul's  boast  that  he  had  not  "shunned  to 
•declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God."  5.  They  are  to  be  preached  universally  "  to 
the  people."  They  were  to  classify  men.  Every  creature  is  God's  limit,  and  who 
is  he  that  shall  dare  to  circumscribe  ?  To  the  converted  and  to  the  unconverted ; 
to  the  "elect"  and  to  the  "reprobate";  "to  the  people,"  indiscriminately  and 
Tiniversally,  we  are  to  "  stand  and  speak  all  the  words  of  this  life."  {W.  H.  Burton.) 
The  religion  of  the  people  : — Before  Christ  came,  truth  was  considered  to  be  the 
"benediction  of  the  few  rather  thnn  the  birthright  of  the  many,  the  property  of  certain 
■classes  rather  than  the  possession  of  the  masses.  But  when  Christ  appeared  He  broke 
•down  the  caste  of  light  and  learning,  and  brought  the  glorious  truths  of  the  gospel 
into  the  open  market  of  the  world.  I.  The  command  of  the  angel.  It  was  in 
direct  opposition  to  the  command  of  the  Jewish  hierarchy.  There  occurs  a 
period  in  all  lives  when  there  is  a  conflict  between  the  higher  and  the 
lower,    between    the    external    voice    of    authority    and    the    inward    voice   of 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t» 

conscience,  a  period  when  the  soul  must  dare  to  assert  the  majesty  of  eternal 
right  in  the  face  of  the  whole  world.  When  the  Lord  speaks  to  us,  either  in  the 
written  Word  or  through  the  voice  of  conscience,  or  it  may  be  in  the  events  of 
providence,  we  must  disregard  custom  and  creed  and  yield  to  the  dictates  of  the 
still  small  voice  within.  II.  The  place  of  the  apostles'  ministry.  The  temple  of 
nature  is  one  vast  symbol  of  God.  In  the  circle  of  sky  above  our  heads,  in  the 
round  ocean  beneath  our  feet,  we  see  the  image  of  His  eternity,  in  the  light  we  see 
His  perfection,  in  the  lily  His  purity.  Every  common  bush  is  aflame  with  the 
glory  of  God.  And  so  it  was  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  It  contained  the  symhola 
and  the  shadows  of  redemption.  We  have  in  the  action  of  the  apostles  the 
recognition  of  the  great  principle  of  the  right  and  privilege  of  every  man  who  is- 
filled  with  the  Spirit  to  teach  and  to  preach  in  the  temple  of  the  living  God.  III. 
The  persons  to  whom  the  apostles  spoke.  It  is  the  crowning  glory  of  the  gospel, 
that  it  appeals  to  the  people  and  admits  the  masses  into  the  inner  shrine  and 
sanctuary  of  truth.  It  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  transcendent  blessing  which  a 
cheap  Bible  has  conferred  upon  mankind,  and  the  liberty  to  read  the  sacrt-d 
oracles  in  one's  native  tongue.  IV.  The  purport  of  the  apostles'  message.  The 
life  of  Christ  challenges  the  attention  of  the  world.  "  This  life"  is  the  life  of  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh,  the  life  of  the  Divine  and  the  human  in  one  person,  the  life  of 
the  Eternal  looking  through  the  windows  of  time.  In  Christ  is  the  fountain  of 
life.  He  came  to  give  lite,  and  to  give  it  more  abundantly.  (J.  C.  Shanks.} 
Christianity,  a  voice  to  the  people  r — The  record  is  instructive.  Why  not  send 
the  angel  straight  to  "the  people"?  An  angel  could  not  be  imprisoned.  The 
Divine  system  of  operation  is  not  to  get  certain  things  done,  but  done  in  a  certain 
way.  He  does  not  go  out  of  the  common  course  of  things,  unless  it  is  absolutely 
necessary.  He  honours  His  laws  and  arrangements.  In  using  men  in  the  pro- 
motion of  Christianity,  He  best  advances  its  pi-ocess  of  education,  discipline,  and 
development.  Human  thought,  sympathy,  and  affection  are  awakened  and 
matured  both  in  the  dispensers  and  recipients  of  the  gospel,  and  thus  this  ordinance 
"  blesses  him  who  gives  and  him  who  receives."  If  angels  are  not  employed  to 
preach  the  gospel,  then,  it  is  because  they  would  not  be  the  best  preachers.  To- 
angels  they  might  be,  but  not  to  men.  Note  here — I.  The  proclamation.  "The  words 
of  this  life."  1.  The  reference  is  to  Sadducean  unbelief.  A  truth  is  most  needed 
when  it  is  least  liked,  and  the  age  that  rejects  it  should  have  it  kept,  with  martyr 
constancy,  before  its  eye.  2.  "Life"  is  the  burden  of  the  message.  This,  in  its 
lowest  state,  is  prized  above  all  temporal  blessings.  Under  a  law  of  death, 
Christianity  assures  us  of  the  perpetuity  of  our  existence.  It  thus  gives  an  infinite 
multiplication  of  the  present  life  of  man.  What  was  a  probability  in  the  minds  of 
wisest  philosophers,  became  a  proclamation  in  the  mouths  of  Jewish  rustics.  3. 
The  existencfl  of  man  hereafter  is  not,  however,  the  onlv,  nor  the  chief,  prospect 
of  blessing  aii'orded  by  the  gospel.  Existence  may  be  the  bier  of  souls.  Life,  in 
its  full  ess,  consists  in  the  healthful  and  unfettered  activity  of  the  whole  man.  It 
includes,  therefore,  a  perfect  nature  and  a  perfect  state.  Hence  it  is  so  frequently 
put  for  the  whole  of  gospel  goodness.  "He  shall  have  everlasting  liie,"  is  the 
entire  promise  made  to  faith.  Hun  is  a  moral  being.  This  supposes  that  he  has 
moral  powers  and  moral  responsibilities.  Sin  is  a  violation  of  his  nature,  and  it 
subjects  him  to  punishment.  As  sinful,  he  is  evil  within,  and  he  is  exposed  to 
evil  as  an  infliction.  Both  these  are  called  "  death."  Carnality  is  "  death." 
Pdnishment  is  "  death."  The  design  of  the  gospel  is  to  remove  and  prevent  this 
death;  to  renew  our  nature,  and  then  put  us  into  a  scene  and  sphere  in  which  all 
its  dispositions  and  principles  may  have  free  course  and  be  glorified ;  to  make  us 
right,  and  surround  us  with  a  right  lot.  The  whole  work  of  Christ,  and  the  opera- 
tions of  His  Holy  Spirit  are  designed  to  quicken  the  soul,  to  bring  out,  unite,  and 
purify  its  powers,  and  prepare  it  for  a  state  in  which  there  shall  be,  no  hindrance 
to,  but  every  facility  for  its  love  and  joy  and  work :  in  one  word,  that  it  may 
"  have  life,  and  have  it  more  abundantly."  Through  Christ  we  are  restored  to 
God,  His  law.  His  likeness.  His  love.  His  service ;  and  no  otherwise  can  we  find 
our  true  place  and  rule  and  end.  4.  And  what  a  beautiful  light  is  the  gospel 
thus  presented  in  !  How  accordant  is  it  with  the  deepest  and  most  advanced 
thoupht  I  How  natural  is  its  mercy  !  How  agreeable  its  provision  !  And  how  in- 
dispensable its  blessing !  How  every  other  method  and  object  would  miserably 
fail  I  All  ornaments,  instruments,  advantages — what  are  they  apart  from  life  ? 
II.  The  place.  "  The  temple."  Do  we  not  see  in  this  publicity — i.  The  truthful- 
ness of  the  gospel  ?    The  first  preachers  of  the  gospel  did  not  secrete  themselves, 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  487 

choose  select  audiences,  go  to  strange  people,  nor  wait  until  the  matters  of  which 
they  spake  had  been  forgotten,  or  could  not  so  well  be  sifted.  Their  message,  in- 
tended for  the  people's  benefit,  was  committed  to  the  people's  scrutiny.  Based  on 
history,  they  proclaimed  it  to  those  who  had  the  fullest  opportunities  and  means 
of  trying  its  historical  integrity.  They  knew  tbat  they  spoke  the  truth,  and  knew 
that  others  knew  it  too.  And  what  could  convince  them  but  Christ's  resurrection 
and  ascension  ?  The  gospel  is  the  same  to-day.  It  is  open  to  the  inspection  of  all. 
It  comes  before  the  people  in  its  fuU  utterances  and  evidences.  It  especially 
challenges  investigation.  It  allows  of  no  means  of  bringing  men  to  its  adoption 
but  their  conviction  of  its  truth.  And  it  promotes,  as  all  reason  and  history  go  to 
show,  a  spirit  of  intelligence,  dangerous  to  any  system  that  cannot  stand  the  test. 
2.  The  indifference  of  Christianity.  The  whole  state  of  the  Jewish  Church  was 
corrupt.  And  the  time  had  come  wben  the  gorgeous  ceremonial  ceased  to  be  obli- 
gatory, and  realism  took  the  place  of  ritualism.  I  can  imagine  some  who  would 
not  have  used  the  temple  at  all.  There  have  been  reformers  who  would  have 
shunned  the  place,  or  only  have  frequented  it  to  warn  men  of  the  sin  and  foUy  of 
making  use  of  it.  So  did  not  they.  And  this  is  but  one  instance  of  the  modera- 
tion of  the  first  preachers  of  Christianity.  Jesus  did  not  shrink  from  contact  even 
with  doubtful  things  around  Him.  And  His  servants  addressed  the  people  through 
their  familiar  ideas,  and  conciliated  them  by  conformity  to  their  habits.  We  find 
one  now  prudently  circumcising  a  disciple,  and  now  as  prudently  joining  some  who 
had  a  vow.  These  things  bear  marks  of  the  healthy  character  of  apostolical 
religion,  not  to  say  proofs  of  apostolical  inspiration.  Men  always  work  fresh 
theories  to  death.  And  when  I  find  the  first  preachers  of  the  gospel  as  calm  as 
they  were  earnest,  making  no  account  of  secondary  matters,  but  every  account  of 
matters  of  first  importance,  I  cannot  but  admire  the  reasonableness  of  their  faith, 
and  am  disposed  to  admit  tbat,  in  this,  they  were  "  taught  of  God."  3.  There  is 
still  a  higher  suggestion.  The  temple  was  tbe  great  symbol  of  the  Jewish  religion 
which  had  virtually  passed  away.  In  declaring  the  gospel  in  its  porch,  the  apostles 
declared  the  fulfilment  of  all  it  was  designed  to  signify.  When  the  temple  became 
a  church,  it  was  in  the  natural  order  of  Divine  Providence.  What  more  meet  than 
that  the  spot  which  had  witnessed  the  premonitions  of  the  gospel,  should  be  the 
scene  of  its  complete  announcements  ?  Nor  must  we  stop  at  Judaism.  There  have 
been  other  great  religions  among  men.  In  Christianity  you  have  aU  these  met  and 
satisfied,  and  in  it  alone.  It  stands  in  the  porch  of  humanity,  and  "  speiks  all  the 
words  of  this  life."  HI.  The  people.  "  Speak  to  the  people."  1.  We  have  here 
a  specimen  of  the  genius  and  design  of  the  gospel.  (1)  It  knows  nothing  of  the 
artificial  distinctions  of  men  ;  it  regards  man  as  man.  "  There  is  neither  Greek 
nor  Jew,"  &c.  "  The  common  salvation  "  differs  widely  in  the  universality  of  its 
aspects  from  many  false  religions  and  philosophic  systems.  Christ  addressed  Him- 
self not  to  a  class  exalted  above  the  rest,  but  to  the  people  generally.  So  did  the 
apostles.  No  anxiety  to  reach  and  win  the  learned  and  mighty  class  prompted 
them.  They  preached  to  the  Sanbedrin  when  brought  before  them,  but  their 
mission  was  not  to  classes,  but  to  the  "  people."  (2)  And  in  speaking  to  the  "  people," 
they  not  only  recognised  their  right  to  the  gospel,  but  their  power  to  understand 
and  to  profit  by  it.  Their  gospel  was  not  a  problem  to  be  solved  only  by  faculties 
specially  trained,  but  a  truth  to  be  apprehended  by  undisciplined  understandings, 
to  be  tested  by  common  sense  and  common  honesty,  to  be  felt  and  appreciated  by 
hearts  untutored  save  by  the  Spirit  of  Divine  love.  While  skill  has  often  served 
only  to  perplex,  and  learning  to  encumber,  and  worldly  pomp  to  corrupt,  the  gospel, 
the  simple  and  the  unlettered  have  "  received  the  kingdom  of  God  as  little 
children,"  and  felt  it  to  be  "  in  power,  and  not  in  word."  While  "these  things 
have  been  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  they  have  been  revealed  unto  babes." 
While  the  first  have  been  making  elaborate  comments  on  the  architecture  of  the 
temple,  the  last  have  been  humbly  worshipping  before  the  glory ;  while  the  first 
have  been  cleverly  criticising  the  wording  of  the  invitation,  the  last  have  been 
feasting  joyously  at  the  table  of  the  Lord.  As  men  have  sometimes  altered  it,  it 
has  been  adapted  only  for  the  few  ;  as  God  has  given  it,  it  is  designed  and  fitted  for 
all.  (3)  We  say,  "for  all."  For  it  is  possible  to  err  in  two  directions.  We  may 
leave  out  the  great  and  wealthy  as  well  as  the  poor  and  mean.  We  may  depreciate 
humanity  in  high  plac»-s  as  well  as  in  low  places.  There  is  an  aristocracy  of 
poverty  as  well  as  of  rank  and  riches.  Pride  may  look  up  as  easily  as  look  down. 
The  haughtiness  of  supposed  unrequited  mcit  maybe  a  severer,  bitterer  thing 
than  that  of  satiated  self-esteem.     The  people  may  be  fiattered  as  well  as  nobles. 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

And  I  am  not  sure  that  this  danger  has  no  existence  now.   There  were  two  disciples 
in  the  Sanhedrin,  as  large  a  proportion  probably  as  there  were  among  the  people. 
There  were  "  saints  in  Ctesar's  household."     If  "  not  many  mighty  and  noble  and 
wise  are  called,"  it  must  be  remembered  that  there  are  not  many,  speaking  com- 
paratively, to  be  called.     But  if  the  gospel  do  not  exclude  them,  it  includes  others. 
For  its  design  is  to  bless  with  "  life,"  and  the  need  and  power  of  life  is  in  the  man, 
in  every  man.     Might  does  not  create  it,  weakness  does  not  destroy  it ;  riches  do 
not  buy  it,  poverty  does  not  losa  it.     The  blessed  child  of  God  may  be  clothed  in 
rags  ;  the  heir  of  heaven  may  lie  at  the  rich  man's  gate,  covered  with  sores  ;  "  the 
woman  that  was  a  sinner  "  may  be  the  loved  and  commended  of  Cbrist.     The  poor 
widow  may  be  the  most  honoured  contributor  to  God's  cause ;  and  the  crucified 
robber  the  first  of  His  converts  to  be  with  Christ  in  paradise.     2.  Let  us  obey  the 
angel's  charge.     There  are  temptations  to  restriction.     This  mission  may  be  harder 
and,  in  some  respects,  less  profitable  than  that  of  others.     But  remember  also,  that, 
in  others,  it  will  be  most  fruitful.     And  "  the  people  " — the  great  body  of  the  people 
— are  in  special  need  of  these  "  words  of  life."     Christianity,  by  the  influence  of  its 
truths  and  principles,  has  raised  the  people,  and  will  yet  raise  them  to  a  higher 
social  position.     The  views  it  gives  of  man's  nature  and  relations  must  excite  a 
desire  for  a  position  which  the  masses  have  not  yet  attained.     It  is  impossible  to 
mark  the  tendencies  of  our  own  day,  without  seeing  that  power  is  being  wonderfully 
diffused.     Whatever  our  views,  whatever  our  apprehensions,  be  it  desired  or  be  it  ' 
dreaded,  persons  and  classes  wiU  be  of  less  importance  than  they  have  been,  and 
men  in  general  will  be  of  more.    We  may  forbid  the  tide,  but  it  will  come  in.    With 
this  destiny  before  the  people,  our  duty  is — (1)  To  prepare  them  for  their  inherit- 
ance.   Believing  that  the  gospel  alone  can  guide  and  develop  and  sanctify  all  our 
powers,  give  "  hfe"  to  nations  as  well  as  individuals,  let  us  endeavour  to  diffuse 
Christianity,  that  the  people  may  be  faithful  stewards  in  their  solemn  trust.     I  do 
not  mean,  however,  do  this  from  policy,  but  from  principle.     There  is  something 
mean  and   almost  dishonest  in  using  the  gospel  simply  as  a  means  of  keeping 
people  in  order.     It  is  as  a  "  word  of  life  "  in  all  its  channels— social,  political, 
moral,  religious  life — that  you  sbould  proclaim  it.     Proclaim  it  not  from  fear,  but 
love.     (2)  To  represent  the  gospel  as  intemiing  to  bless  man  by  and  through  His 
soul.     The  gospel  looks  benignly  on  all  attempts  at  reform  and  advancement.     It 
never  forgets,  though  its  professors  have   forgotten,  that  men  have  bodies,  and 
through  their  bodies  are  to  be  reached.     But  let  us  not  forget  that  the  condition  of 
men  may  be  elevated  without  their  hearts  being  sanctified  ;  that  ungodliness  may 
dwell  in  circumstances  of  plenty,  cleanliness,  and  health  ;  that  good  wages  may  be 
associated  with  bad  conduct,  and  healthy  neighbourhoods  with  diseased  souls.     To 
hear  some  people  talk,  you  might  suppose  that  "the  kingdom   of   heaven"   is 
nothing  to  sanitary  reform,  that  there  are  no  sanctuaries  like  improved  dwelling- 
houses,  no  baptism  like  that  of  baths  and  wash-houses,  no  Lord's  Supper  to  be 
compared  to  soup-kitchens,  no  method  of  quickening  men  in  towns  like  that  of 
having  cemeteries  out  of  town.     We  say  not  a  word  against  these  things.     We 
wish  them  God-speed.    But  let  us  not  estimate  too  higbly  the  religious  influence 
of  these  things,  and  while  ye  attend  to  them  attend  also,  and  supremely,  tq  the 
greater  things  of   spiritual  salvation.      (3)  To  exactly  understand,   and  be  well 
assured  of,  the  nature  and  necessity  of  our  own  spiritual   agency.     We  should 
guard  against  the  precipitance  of  mere  zeal  and  fear.    It  is  s  lid  of  a  modern  states- 
man (Lord  Melbourue)  that  he  was  never  alarmed  except  when  he  heard  people 
say,  "  Something  must  be  done."    We  must  avoid  the  idea  that  there  is  mvsteryor 
miracle  in  the  question.     There  is  no  great  discovery  to  be  made.     We  must  not  be 
impatient,  supposing  any  sudden  and  surprising  change  is  probable.     We  must 
beware  of  attaching  too  much  value  to  institutional  and  instrumental  changes,  as 
if  the  great  cause  of  popular  alienation  from  the  gospel  lay  in  ecclesiastical  build- 
ings, offices,  or  economies.    Above  all  must  we  not  substitute  the  conversion  of  the 
Church  to  the  world  for  the  conversion  of  the  world  to  the  Church  ;  not  fall  into 
the  terrific  blunder  of  trying  to  remove  unbelief  and  sin  by  denuding  Christianity 
of  its  peculiar  truths  and  peculiar  sanctities.     The  work  of  the  gospel  is  not  to 
change  the  wine  into  water,  but  the  water  into  wine.     The  "  earth  "  suffers  dread- 
ful loss  when  the   "salt"   no  longer    retains    its   "savour."      {A.  J.    Morris.) 
Christianity  a  life : — 1.  There  are  two  ideas  of  life — necessary  existence   and 
voluntary  action.     Thousands  of  men  live,  pass  away,  and  are  nameless  for  ever. 
Others  live  in  a  higher  sense — live  an  idea — and  hence  leave  behind  them  a  heri- 
tage of  good  deeds  and  life-inspuing  words.    2.  The  unit   of  life  is  the  most 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  489 

strongly  marked  fact  in  the  universe  of  God.  It  begins  with  an  eternal  thought  in 
the  existence  of  a  supreme  personality,  and  is  traceable  through  every  order  of 
beings.  We  speak  of  a  nation's  history.  What  is  it  ?  The  history  of  men  and 
women  in  the  aggregate  ends  of  their  actions.  The  Magna  Charta  and  the 
Declaration  of  Independence,  while  expressions  of  national  sentiment,  are  yet 
histories,  to  that  extent,  of  every  man  whose  voice  and  hands  were  raised  in  their 
defence  or  promotion.  Every  great  working  principle,  every  theory  of  reformation 
and  progress  must  have  a  life-foi'ce  behind  it.  Its  recommendation,  its  truth,  and 
its  power  are  one  with  this  vital  force.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  has  behind  it 
this  vital  force  in  a  transcendently  striking  fulness.  It  is  pre-eminently  a  life. 
It  is  not  a  theory,  but  an  experience ;  not  a  speculation,  but  a  certainty ;  not  an 
abstract  idea,  but  a  vital  truth.  I.  It  was  spoken.  Men  live  by  what  they  speak. 
All  that  is  left  of  human  life  in  the  past  are  the  few  scattered  words  of  poets, 
seers,  and  philosophers,  gathered  up  after  the  banquet  of  time.  The  words  of  the 
gospel  were  spoken  by  a  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  It  came  welling  up  from  the 
life-fountains,  as  His  holy  eyes  looked  on  sin  and  sorrow.  "  Language  was  given 
man  to  conceal  his  thoughts."  But  the  language  of  Christ  brought  them  forth  in 
a  revelation  of  beauty  and  power.  So  Divine  were  these  words  in  their  meaning 
that,  when  rough  men  were  sent  to  bind  the  people's  Teacher,  they  were  disarmed 
and  went  back  to  those  who  sent  them,  saying,  "  Never  man  spake  like  tbis 
man."  But  His  words  were  also  linked  with  the  power  of  life.  Each  was  a  life- 
principle.  "  The  words  which  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life." 
Yea,  He  was  Himself  the  living  Word — the  eternal  Logos — spoken  from  the  begin- 
ning. Peter  read  this  truth  in  the  Master's  early  utterances,  and  boldly  asked,  "  Lord, 
to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life."  II.  It  was  acted.  Its 
precepts  and  promises  were  not  spoken,  like  the  philosophy  of  Greece,  in  the  re- 
tirement of  the  academy,  to  a  few  disciples,  but  they  were  given  to  the  thirsting 
multitudes  in  the  midst  of  arduous  toils.  Christ  worked  while  He  preached.  In 
the  highest  sense  the  gospel  is  a  drama,  enacted  upon  the  stage  of  the  universe. 
It  represents  itself,  and  its  effect  is  its  own  eternal  life-necessity  and  life-efficiency. 
The  sympathy  provoked  in  the  hearts  of  its  spectators  also  deepens  the  life-idea. 
It  is  not  an  aesthetic  sentiment  awakened  by  its  delicate  finish  of  language  and 
character,  or  of  profound  emotion  stirred  by  its  tragic  colouring,  but  of  deep  self- 
felt  interest  in  the  letter  of  its  purpose  and  the  efficacy  of  its  sacrifice.  Every 
scene  in  the  grand  drama  is  real.  The  real  feet  of  the  "  Man  of  Sorrows  "  pressed 
the  sands  of  Galilee  ;  a  hand  of  flesh  touched  the  blind  eyes ;  a  human  heart  wept 
tears  through  human  eyes  over  the  grave  of  Lazarus.  Human  blood  was  found 
on  the  cross,  and  stained  the  grass  in  "  the  place  of  a  skull."  A  real  body  was  laid 
in  the  new  tomb  of  Joseph,  and  a  glorified  human  body  rose  through  ethereal 
depths,  and  on  a  cloud-chariot  ascended  to  the  kingdom  above.  III.  It  was  lived. 
Christ  practised  what  He  preached.  The  great  truths  and  heavenly  virtues  which 
He  held  up  to  others  found  illustration  and  shone  with  Divinest  radiance  in  His 
own  hfe.  In  an  absolute  sense,  then,  this  gospel  may  be  styled  a  life — a  perfect 
life.  None  other  is.  It  stands  out  in  chiselled  beauty  and  symmetry.  The  Child 
of  children ;  the  Brother  of  brothers ;  the  Friend  of  friends ;  the  Man  of  men ; 
His  life  was  confined  to  the  proper  channels  of  duty,  while  the  perfect  balance  of 
His  whole  nature  made  Him  ever  the  Just,  the  True,  the  Good.  IV.  It  was  felt. 
It  felt  not  only  for  humanity,  but  felt  with  it ;  and  came  not  only  with  a  relief  for 
human  woe,  but  came  to  share  that  woe.  1.  There  is  a  time  in  every  life  when 
sorrow  and  care  are  a  strange  and  pathetic  poetry.  But  after  a  while  they  become 
strangely  real.  Experience  makes  them  part  of  life,  and  thus  the  chords  of  sympathy 
are  struck  through  all  the  race.  It  was  thus  that  Christ  leajsned  to  sympathise 
with  man.  With  man  He  quaffed  the  bitter  chalice  ;  with  man,  trod  the  path  of 
thorns ;  with  man,  tasted  death,  and  with  him,  slumbered  in  the  grave.  But  He 
rose  as  the  earnest  of  immortality  to  man's  slumbering  dust.  2.  But  this  sympathy 
is  not  only  with  human  sorrow,  but  also  with  human  joy.  It  is  a  lyre  strung  with 
chords  of  grief  and  chords  of  joy.  Sometimes  they  are  struck  in  unison,  some- 
times singly,  but  always  to  throbs  of  human  hope.  The  gospel  is  a  religion  of 
light.  Gloom  was  never  on  His  face.  {H.  31.  Duhose.)  Distinguishing  properties 
of  spiritual  life : — I.  The  nature  of  the  gospel,  as  here  intimated.  "  All  the 
words  of  this  life."  It  is  the  design  of  the  gospel  to  restore  man  to  a  certain  life. 
With  regard  to  its  matter,  the  gospel  is  styled  the  word  of  truth  ;  with  regard  to  ita 
end,  the  word  of  life.  The  apostles  embraced  Jesus  Christ  as  "  having  the  words 
of  eternal  life."     There  is  a  life,  lost  by  the  fall  to  man,  restored  by  the  gospel. 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

Christians  experience  a  great  transition,  no  less  than  from  death  to  life. 
Jesus  Christ  came  to  give  life,  and  to  give  it  more  abundantly ;  the  gospel  being  a 
fuller  ministration  of  the  blessings  related  to  spiritual  and  eternal  life  than  the  Old 
Testament.  This  life  consists  in  the  effects  of  the  gospel  on  the  spirits  of  men. 
Their  state  is  essentially  changed  by  the  introduction  of  this  life  :  "all  things  be- 
come new."  God,  who  was  the  object  of  aversion,  becomes  the  object  of  love;  God, 
who  was  disregarded,  becomes  the  chief  source  of  happiness ;  His  favour,  which 
was  left  out  of  sight,  becomes  the  great  prize  and  end  of  our  being  ;  we  press  after 
this  beyond  all  beside.  II.  Some  distinguishing  pkoperties  of  this  life.  None 
can  form  an  adequate  conception  of  it  but  those  who  experience  it.  This  is  the 
case  with  every  kind  of  life ;  you  could  not  judge  of  the  life  you  live,  unless  you 
had  experienced  its  functions,  its  pleasures  and  its  pains.  Similarly,  the  natural 
man  cannot  know  the  things  of  the  spiritual ;  they  must  be  spiritually  discerned. 
This  is — 1.  A  supernatural  and  spiritual  life.  It  is  not  produced  by  any  natural 
causes  or  means ;  none  can  impart  it  to  another,  none  can  produce  it  in  himself. 
God  must  give  it ;  it  is  called  a  "  new  creation,"  "born of  the  Spirit — born  of  God." 
It  is  a  life  quite  distinct  from  every  other  kind  of  life  ;  there  is  vegetable  life,  dis- 
tinct from  sentient  or  animal  life  ;  and,  above  this,  there  is  the  life  of  reason, 
which  reaches  to  the  past  and  the  future  by  reflection  and  anticipation,  and  diffuses 
existence  over  interminable  space  ;  but  as  far  superior  to  this,  as  this  is  to  the  life  of 
mere  sensation,  is  the  life  of  spirituality.  2.  A  most  elevated  life.  It  brings  us 
into  an  alliance  with  the  Father  and  the  Spirit  by  Jesus  Christ.  He  who  has 
this  life  places  his  interest  in  heaven.  He  would  not  exchange  the  sufferings  of 
this  life  lor  all  that  riches  could  purchase,  all  that  pleasure  could  offer,  all  the  glory 
of  time ;  for  he  feels  himself  called  to  the  station  of  those  who  are  "  kings  and 
priests  to  God  "  ;  he  is  enabled  to  reign  over  his  fleshly  appetites  and  desires,  and 
to  sit  down  with  Jesus  Christ  in  heavenly  places.  Never  shall  we  know  what  real 
dignity  is  till  we  experience  this  life.  This  is  the  life  that  Jesus  Christ  lived.  3. 
A  holy  life.  It  partakes  the  nature  of  its  Author,  the  Holy  Spirit ;  it  is  given  for  the 
very  purpose  of  recovering  man  from  sin  to  holiness  ;  the  necessity  that  existed  for 
Christ's  mterposition  springs  entirely  out  of  this  design.  It  is  a  life  which  creates 
pure  desires  ;  wars  against  everything  base  and  evil ;  makes  men  strive  against  sin 
even  unto  death.  4.  A  progressive  life.  All  life  is  such,  vegetable,  human,  and 
Divine.  The  views  of  a  Christian  become  clearer,  his  faith  strengthens,  his  con- 
solations improve,  and,  if  he  has  not  so  much  fervour  as  at  first,  his  increasing 
stability  amply  compensstes  for  the  decrease.  The  saints  are  described  as  rich  and 
flourishing  in  old  age.  Grace  is  represented  as  at  first  a  blade,  then  an  ear,  then 
the  full  corn  ;  as  a  little  leaven  leavening  the  lump.  The  Christian  pilgrim,  for- 
getful of  things  behind,  presses  on  to  things  before  ;  he  is  never  satisfied  until  he 
is  with  God  ;  his  path  is  like  the  light  shining  more  and  more  to  the  perfect  day. 
5.  An  eternal  life.  "I  give  My  sheep  eternal  life."  As  this  life  commences  with 
the  eternal  purpose  and  Spirit  of  God,  so  it  is  destined  to  flourish  with  God  for 
ever  and  ever.  The  life  of  believers  is  the  same,  in  its  essential  spirituality,  with 
the  life  of  those  who  live  in  heaven  ;  they  have  the  same  pleasures,  the  same  devo- 
tion ;  they  feed  on  the  same  bread,  taste  the  same  salvation,  sing  the  same  new 
song.  Conclusion  :  1.  He  that  has  experienced  this  life  has  a  knowledge  of  its 
value  that  surpasses  all  that  description,  even  the  description  given  in  the  Word 
of  God  itself,  can  impart  to  others.  He  has  had  realising  foretastes  of  un- 
utterable, unchangeable,  interminable  glory  and  felicity ;  he  seems  almost  to 
have  entered  within  the  veil.  2.  But  without  this  life,  heaven  itself,  as  it 
is  the  exhibition  of  God,  must  "prove  a  most  unsuitable  element.  There 
must  be  a  new  heart,  new  tastes,  a  new  life  in  the  soul.  They  that  have 
not  this  grand  specific,  must  die  in  their  sins.  {Robert  Hall.)  The  gospel 
message: — I.  The  sobstance  of  our  message.  It  consists  of  "words."  Too 
great  a  distinction  is  sometimes  made  between  words  and  things.  Brought 
together,  ranged  in  the  order  of  living  thought,  they  are  among  the  mightiest 
things  on  earth.  But  above  all  words  of  law  and  literature,  statesmanship  and 
science,  military  despatch  and  moral  disquisition,  pictorial  and  philosophical 
history,  poetical  and  pathetic  sentiment — are  the  words  of  this  life.  1.  It  is  life 
from  death.  Not  life  following  death,  as  in  the  order  of  vegetation,  where  the  sap 
that  has  fallen  down  into  the  root  comes  up  again  to  vitalise  the  dry  and  barren 
branches.  Men  do  not  carry  in  their  souls  the  seeds  of  this  new  life ;  its  appear- 
ance is  not  through  a  development,  but  throu;^h  a  regeneration.  2.  It  is  life 
through  death.     You  get  this  life  through  the  sacrifice  of  the  Great  High  Priest. 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  491 

God  breathed  into  "  man's  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  became  a  living 
soul."  That  was  all  which  was  necessary  for  the  first  life.  That  you  and  I  might 
have  the  second  the  Eternal  Word  becomes  a  man,  that  through  death  He  might 
destroy  and  "deliver,"  becoming"  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
Cross."  3.  It  is  life  for  death  instead  of  it.  Death  in  trespasses  and  sins  is  but 
the  forerunner  of  another  death,  a  death  to  deepen,  grow,  intensify  itself,  and  not 
to  end  with  the  destruction  of  the  body,  but  to  go  on  consuming  the  soul  without 
annihilating  it.  Our  message  includes  words  of  death  ;  we  would  solemnly  repeat 
them,  but  they  are  in  service  to  the  words  of  life,  they  illustrate  them  by  contrast. 
If  the  gospel  proclaims  life  in  exchange  for  death,  then  the  terrors  of  the  death 
enhance  our  conceptions  of  the  life  that  delivers  us  from  it.  II.  The  illusi ra- 
tions OF  OUR  MESSAGE.  Whether  the  apostles  were  sent  to  the  temple  because 
there  so  many  types  of  the  words  of  life  were  before  them  and  the  heareis,  or  not, 
certainly  the  temple  was  like  an  open  picture-book,  from  which  they  could  illumi- 
nate what  they  had  to  say.  Judaism  was  "a  sbadow  of  good  things  to  come." 
.  The  apostles  as  they  declared  the  words  of  this  life  stood  in  the  midst  of  the 
shadow.  1.  Entering  the  temple,  the  apostles  passed  tbe  brazen  sea  (Exod.  xxx. 
17-21).  Through  purification  the  Jews  were  to  be  saved  from  death.  Through 
the  washing  of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  live.  The 
defilement  of  sin  is  the  power  of  death^cleansed  from  that  defilement  we  escape 
that  death.  Through  the  deep  evil  of  our  hearts  we  are  shut  out  of  God's  pre- 
sence, bathed  in  the  water  of  the  Spirit,  made  clean  through  the  new  birth,  we  can 
cross  the  threshold  of  God's  palace,  and  bow  before  His  throne,  and  minister  in 
His  service.  2.  Beyond  the  brazen  sea  stood  the  altar.  It  proclaimed  that 
"  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  Death  for  life  ;  no  life  for  the 
sinner  but  through  the  death  of  another.  3.  Beyond  and  at  the  end  of  the  temple 
was  the  veil  (Lev.  xvi.  2).  There  was  not  access  within  the  veil  at  all  times  even 
for  Aaron,  for  the  people  at  large  there  was  no  access  at  all.  Most  emphatically 
did  this  declare  the  holiness  of  Jehovah  and  the  sinfulness  of  man.  The  drawn 
curtain  before  the  Holy  of  Holies  means  that  the  gospel  undraws  it ;  rather,  the 
death  of  Christ  rends  it  in  twain  (Heb.  x.  3  ;  x.  16-22).  Such  are  the  words  of 
this  life,  they  show  the  way  open;  they  oiJer  the  privilege  of  the  High  Priest  to  all ; 
they  offer  it  continually.  HI.  The  ends  of  our  message.  1.  The  inspiration  of 
this  life.  "How  shall  they  call  on  Him  on  whom  they  have  not  beheved? 
.  .  .  Faith  Cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God."  Thus 
we  sppak  that  men  may  live,  believing  that  God  will  put  life  into  His  own 
words  when  we  utter  tham.  We  do  not  try  to  play  the  philosopher,  but  we  would 
walk  in  the  steps  of  the  Hebrew  prophet.  We  would  study  Ezekiel's  vision, 
believing  there  is  a  lesson  in  it  for  us.  2.  For  the  nourishment  of  this  life.  Peter 
describes  the  believer  "  as  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible, 
by  the  word  of  God,"  and  that  which  he  recognises  as  the  germ  of  life,  he  presents 
as  the  food  of  life.  "  As  new-born  babes  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word  that 
ye  may  grow  thereby."  The  new  life,  God  connects  with  means  in  its  nurture  as 
in  its  inspiration.  The  minister  is  not  simply  a  herald,  he  is  to  be  a  pastor  feeding 
his  flock,  a  father  taking  care  of  his  family.  Christians  want  what  will  feed  their 
spiritual  life,  and  strengthen  it,  and  refresh  it,  recover  it  when  faint,  revive  it 
when  feeble.  3.  The  diffusion  of  this  life.  It  is  communicative.  He  who  con- 
veys it  to  another  has  no  less  of  it  himself,  but  more.  The  heavens  drop  down 
rain  ;  through  a  million  channels  does  it  flow  to  fertilise  the  land.  Spiritual  life 
comes  from  God,  who  makes  you  and  me  bearers  of  it  to  others.  Conscious  of 
having  it  and  enjoying  it,  how  can  we  help  striving  to  give  it  to  others  who  perish 
through  the  want  of  its  blessing?  (J.  Stoughton,  D.D.)  The  burden  of  t lie 
preacher — itpeaking  in  the  temple  : — The  religion  of  the  Pharisee  was  one  of  bodily 
forms,  that  of  the  Sadducee  one  of  intellectual  negations,  and  thus  both  were 
opposed  to  a  religion  the  crowning  characteristic  of  which  was  life.  The  ever-new 
life  of  the  gospel  comes  to  burst  every  lifeless  ceremony,  and  so  confound  the 
Pharisee  ;  it  comes  to  open  the  graves  and  confute  the  Sadducee.  The  apostles 
were  the  representatives  of  this  new  life.  Their  touch  brought  health  wh^re  there 
was  sickness.  Their  words  enlivened  souls.  What  were  the  arguments  of  iufidels 
and  the  authority  of  priests  before  this  all-prevailing  power?  One  of  the  last 
shifts  of  despotism  was  resorted  to — they  laid  hands  upon  the  men  and  dragged 
them  out  of  sight.  But  as  the  Prince  of  Life  Himself  burst  the  common  prison  of 
death,  so  He  led  these  His  servants  forth  from  the  common  prison  of  Jerusalem, 
Baying,  "  Go,  stand  and  speak  in  the  temple,"  &c.      I.  The  character  of  the 


492  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

preacher's  commission.  1.  He  is  sent  by  Christ.  "  No  man  taketh  this  honour  to 
himself."  Even  Christ  was  the  Sent  of  God.  And  of  His  disciples  He  said,  "  As 
Thou  has  sent  Me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  also  sent  them  into  the  world." 
The  twelve  were  called  apostles  because  they  were  sent  by  Him.  When  He  left  the 
earth  He  said,  "  Go  ye  therefore.  ,  .  .  And  lo  !  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto 
the  end  of  the  world."  How  was  He  to  be  with  them  but  by  working  and  ruling 
spiritually  in  thfl  midst  of  His  Church,  "  giving  some  apostles,  and  some  prophets," 
&c.  They  are  the  true  successors  to  the  apostles  who,  called  from  the  world  into 
the  Church,  are  still  further  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  devote  themselves  to  the 
work  of  the  ministry.  2.  Is  furnished  and  supported  by  Christ.  The  question  is, 
How  is  one  man  to  minister  to  the  wants  of  a  congregation  of  men,  and  sym- 
pathise with  all  its  multiform  life — rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  and  weep  with 
them  that  weep  ;  guide  the  erring,  cheer  the  disconsolate,  convince  the  doubting  ; 
have  a  word  for  the  young,  for  the  middle-aged,  and  for  the  old.  Who  is  sufficient 
for  all  this  ?  Looked  at  from  the  human  side  alone,  no  one  is  sufficient.  He  may 
have  the  strength  of  Samson,  the  brain  of  Shakspeare,  the  courage  of  Luther,  the 
tenderness  of  Howard,  the  eloquence  of  Chrysostom  ;  but  if  he  has  notbing  more 
than  what  is  human,  he  is  unfit  for  his  work.  Whatever  his  natural  advantages 
may  be,  he  requires  an  unction  from  on  high — he  must  be  upheld  and  nourished, 
and  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  And  he  is  so  upheld.  3.  Is  responsible  to  Christ. 
To  have  Christ  for  one's  Master  is  the  chief  of  blessings.  Meu  may  misunder- 
stand us,  deal  out  scant  justice,  fail  in  sympathy,  and  forsake  us,  but  Christ  will 
not.  No  faithful  act  of  any  servant  of  Christ  can  pass  unnoticed  or  unappreciated 
by  Him,  but  we  have  this  consideration  also  for  our  warning.  If  our  faithfulness 
is  noticed,  so  is  our  unfaithfulness.  If  Christ  has  done  so  much  for  the  world.  He 
will  look  after  those  whose  business  it  is  to  watch  for  souls.  II.  The  subject- 
matter  OF  THE  preacher's  MESSAGE.  The  subjcct  is — 1.  A  definite  one.  (1)  It 
is  all  contained  in  one  book ;  and  it  is  embodied  in  one  Person  who  is  called  "  The 
Word."  It  is  necessary  that  Divine  truth  should  be  put  into  human  words,  for 
they  give  stability  and  perpetuity  to  the  Divine  message.  We  can  lay  hold  of  them 
and  keep  them  before  the  mind,  and  study  them  until  they  bud  out  with  meanings 
thi.  k  as  the  buds  and  blossoms  on  Aaron's  rod.  They  are  the  flowers  from  which 
we  may  sip  the  nectar  of  truth  that  is  sweeter  than  the  droppings  of  the  honey- 
comb. If  God's  message  had  been  delivered  to  men  merely  as  a  spoken  word,  and 
had  come  down  through  time  as  an  unwritten  tradition,  it  would  have  wanted 
clearness,  certainty,  and  authority.  (2)  The  preacher's  message,  then,  has  been 
written  down  in  definite  words,  and  he  must  keep  to  these.  He  is  not  at  liberty  to 
speak  on  any  subject  he  pleases.  There  is  truth  in  the  stars,  and  it  is  the  business 
of  the  astronomer  to  unfold  that.  There  are  sermons  in  stones,  and  it  is  the  work 
of  the  geologist  to  make  the  stones  preach  their  sermons.  There  is  much  wisdom 
in  the  conditions  of  human  society,  and  it  is  the  business  of  the  statesman  and 
the  lawyer  to  teach  us  what  it  is.  But  the  preacher  has  to  expound  the  Word  of 
God.  Science  and  politics  may  illustrate  his  subject,  but  they  do  not  form  it. 
Passing  events  may  present  us  with  striking  lessons,  but  we  have  to  preach  from 
the  Bible,  and  not  from  the  newspapers.  But  it  may  be  said.  Did  not  Jesus  Cbrist 
preach  fr^m  nature?  Did  He  not  find  texts  in  the  lilies,  birds,  waving  corn,  and 
little  children  ?  Not  texts  exactly,  but  illustrations.  He  Himself  was  the  text, 
for  He  was  the  living  incarnate  Word  of  God,  and  He  is  our  subject.  The  preacher 
makes  no  pretence  to  absolute  originality.  He  is  not  the  discoverer  of  a  new 
country,  but  the  guide  to  a  country  that  has  been  discovered.  As  from  the  original 
languages  the  Bible  has  been  translated  into  the  living  languages,  so  from  the 
primitive  life  it  must  be  translated  into  the  modern  life.  The  experience  of  the 
nineteenth  century  before  Christ  requires  to  be  translated  into  the  experience  of 
the  nineteenth  century  after  Christ.  (3)  But  although  the  Bible  is  the  preacher's 
text-book,  it  does  not  follow  that  every  one  who  takes  a  text  from  the  Bible  is  a 
gospel  preacher.  The  Bible  has  been  used  to  arrest  the  march  of  science ;  to  rivet 
the  chains  of  the  slave;  to  justify  every  form  of  despotism.  From  the  words  of 
Christ  men  have  preached  against  Cbrist.  They  have  taken  His  own  words  to 
disprove  His  divinity.  Yea,  Satan  himself  has  often  preached  from  a  Bible  text. 
The  mere  fact,  then,  that  the  text  is  taken  from  the  Bible  is  no  guarantee  tbat  the 
sermon  is  really  a  gospel-sermon.  (4)  Neither  does  it  follow,  although  we  select  no 
particular  text,  that  we  do  not  preach  Scriptural  truth ;  for  a  discourse  might  be  at- 
tached to  no  particular  verse  of  Scripture,  and  yet  be  full  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  2. 
A  profound  one.    Life  is  a  great  deep.     Who  can  fathom  the  soul  amid  the  dark* 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  493 

ness  that  is  within  ?  disclose  its  origin  in  the  darkness  that  is  behind  ?  tell  its 
issues  in  the  darkness  that  is  before  ?  If  the  gospel,  then,  has  any  reality  and 
power  it  must  say  something  satisfactory  as  to  what  we  are,  whence  we  have  come, 
whither  we  are  going,  and  what  we  ought  to  do.  The  gospel  does  this.  The 
Bible  is  emphatically  a  Book  of  Life.  Everywhere  it  is  full  of  life.  In  the  Old 
Testament  there  is  the  life  of  God ;  in  the  Gospels  there  is  the  life  of  Christ ;  in  the 
Epistles  there  is  the  life  of  the  Spirit — everywhere  the  life  of  regenerated  man.  It 
is  not  a  book  of  skeletons,  but  of  beings  clothed  with  flesh  and  blood.  Like 
nature,  it  has  an  appearance  of  abruptness  and  disorder,  which  rests,  however,  on 
the  eternal  order.  3.  A  broad  one.  "  All  the  words."  "  The  commandment  is 
exceeding  broad."  The  gospel-kingdom  is  •'  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and  streams." 
"What  richness  and  variety  there  is  in  the  Word  of  God.  As  the  book  stretches 
over  a  great  bread-th  of  time,  so  it  stretches  over  a  corresponding  breadth  of  spiri- 
tual lite.  It  has  its  high  mountains  on  which  the  clouds  of  heaven  are  resting,  in 
the  doctrines  of  the  Divine  fore-knowledge,  predestination,  and  sovereignty.  It 
has  its  fruitful  plains  in  the  moral  activities  and  good  works  of  men.  It  has  its 
city  life  in  its  civil  and  ecclesiastical  arrangements.  It  has  its  quiet  valleys  in 
which  lie  the  beauties  of  domestic  life.  And  it  has  its  great  rivers  in  the  prin- 
ciples that  run  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  book.  The  preacher,  then, 
should  not  dwell  exclusively  on  the  mountain  tops  of  high  doctrine,  nor  should  he 
stand  always  on  the  plain,  preaching  what  is  called  mere  morality.  If  men  will 
insist  on  opening  tbeir  eyes  to  one  set  of  facts,  and  shutting  them  to  another 
equally  true  set  of  facts,  it  is  not  probable  that  they  will  preach  "  all  the  words  of 
this  life."  And  whence  come  the  narrowness  of  sectarianism  and  the  bitterness  of 
bigotry,  but  from  a  disregard  of  this  truth — that  the  Word  of  God  has  many  sides? 
III.  The  suitability  of  this  meksage  to  the  circumstances  and  wants  op  all 
MEN.  The  Word  was  to  be  spoken  to  the  people  in  the  temple,  where  they  were 
wont  to  congregate,  in  a  language  they  could  understand.  The  types  in  the 
temple  had  now  served  their  purpose  as  forms  of  worship,  and  preaching  had  now 
become  the  chief  work  of  the  Church.  1.  Speech  is  a  noble  faculty,  whereby  man 
resembles  God,  in  that  He  reveals  Himself  by  a  word,  and  so  comes  into  closer 
contact  with  his  fellow-man.  As  an  institution  in  society,  public  speech  can  never 
become  obsolete ;  and  as  a  part  of  the  service  of  the  Church  it  is  coeval  with  the 
Church.  Preaching  is  more  essential  to  the  Church  than  any  other  form  of 
worship.  Forms  of  worship  belong  to  particular  dispensations,  but  the  preacher 
belongs  to  every  dispensation.  Whatever  the  form  of  worship  in  the  antediluvian 
and  patriarchal  ages,  there  were  always  preachers.  In  the  Jewish  Church 
all  the  prophets  were  preachers.  The  reason  is  that  the  preacher's  func- 
tion, being  simple  and  direct,  is  suited  to  every  age.  2.  It  is  sometimes 
said  tliat  the  press  is  invading  the  domain  of  the  pulpit.  Not  so  ;  the 
press  is  a  handmaid  of  the  pulpit,  and  instead  of  silencing  the  preacher  it  gives 
him  a  voice  that  extends  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  so  that  every  week  we  may  hear 
one  divine  preaching  in  New  York  and  another  in  London.  As  a  propagator  of 
religious  literature  the  press  ministers  to  the  pulpit;  and  with  regard  to  other 
matters,  the  publication  of  things  secular  and  ephemeral,  the  press  is  here  alto- 
gether out  of  tbe  province  of  the  pulpit,  which  has  to  do  with  the  spiritual  and 
eternal.  The  question  is,  How  is  a  man  to  be  most  deeply  impressed  with  Divine 
truth  ?  We  cannot  answer  by  saying  that  he  ought  to  stay  at  home,  reading  the 
Bible  or  a  sermon,  for  in  private  he  wants  three  influences  which  he  has  at  Church. 
(1)  The  person  of  the  preacher.  There  is  a  mysterious  power  proceeding  from 
personality.  The  tones  of  the  human  voice  and  the  look  of  a  living  man  have 
great  power  to  impress  truth  upon  the  soul.  (2)  Now  this  is  wanting  in  books. 
There  is  the  sympathy  of  numbers.  The  rapt  attention  of  one  may  convict  us  of 
inattention,  and  the  careless  look  of  another  may  call  forth  a  prayer,  while  the 
feeling  that  each  is  but  the  fragment  of  a  great  whole  is  fitted  to  solemnise  tbe 
mind,  as  if  there  fell  upon  it  the  shadow  of  the  myriads  who  worship  God  in 
heaven,  and  that  that  multitude  shall  stand  before  the  throne  of  God.  Such  influences 
are  wanting  in  solitude.  (3)  There  is  the  influence  of  the  other  parts  of  the  ser- 
vice, prayer  and  praise,  in  rendering  the  mind  more  susceptible  of  true  and  saving 
impressions,  and  this  does  not  exist  to  the  same  degree  in  private.  But  some  one 
may  say,  "I  get  better  ideas,  and  a  greater  number  of  them,  from  reading  a  book 
in  private."  Well,  it  is  a  good  thing  to  read  and  get  ideas;  but  we  all  know  a 
great  deal  more  than  we  put  in  practice,  and  what  we  want,  therefore,  is  gracious 
impulses  to  the  performance  of  duty.    And  how  are  we  to  get  these  if  we  do  not 


iU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

seek  them  in  the  way  of  God's  appointment?  In  short,  if  books  merely  could 
convert  the  world,  why  did  not  God  allow  books  to  do  it  ?  Along  with  the  written 
Word  there  has  always  been  the  spoken  Word.  3.  The  words  of  the  Bible  suit  all 
phases  of  life.  It  has  pleasant  pictures  for  the  simple-minded,  grammatical  diffi- 
culties for  the  scholar,  deep  problems  for  the  philosopher,  guiding  precepts  for  the 
practical,  visions  of  beauty  for  the  poet,  hoary  wisdom  for  the  experienced,  and 
songs  for  the  dying  in  the  dark  valley.  It  has  words  for  the  father  in  his  family, 
for  the  master  among  his  servants,  for  the  teacher  among  his  scholars,  for  the 
judge  on  the  bench,  for  the  king  on  the  throne.  It  has  words  for  different  states 
of  mind  :  words  of  enhghtenment  for  the  ignorant,  of  conviction  for  the  sceptical, 
of  consolation  for  the  bereaved,  of  warning  for  the  thoughtless,  of  condemnation 
for  the  impenitent,  and  of  forgiveness  for  the  contrite  in  heart.  4.  All  earnest 
persons  who  come  to  the  temple  to  worship  God  in  simplicity  of  heart  will  hear 
words  that  wiU  suit  their  case.  And  how  varied  are  the  wants  represented  in  a 
congregation  of  worshippers!  No  two  hearers  altogether  alike,  but  all  alike  in  this, 
that  they  are  by  nature  under  one  common  condemnation,  and  must  become  par- 
takers of  a  common  salvation.  The  young  are  here  with  the  world  before  them 
untried  and  unknown  ;  they  need  a  Saviour  to  keep  them  from  the  bitterness, 
unbelief,  and  vanity  of  the  world.  The  middle-aged  are  here,  with  the  world's 
work  resting  on  their  shoulders,  and  they  need  strength,  wisdom,  and  the  sweet 
charity  of  the  Christian  Ufe  to  enable  them  to  do  that  which  is  true,  faithful,  and 
kind.  The  old  are  here,  with  their  histories  in  time  about  to  be  closed  for  ever ; 
and  they  require  to  have  their  anchor  cast  within  the  veil,  and  to  be  at  peace  with 
God,  and  there  are  words  of  life  for  all.  (F.  Ferguson,  D.D.)  Preachers  must 
reach  the  people  : — A  minister  whose  congregation  numbers  about  forty  all  told 
I'ejoiced  in  the  smallness  of  it,  because  he  professed  that  a  greater  work  could  be 
done  with  a  few  than  with  a  large  number.  In  answer,  a  friend  suggested  that  he 
should  infer  from  that  statement  that  a  greater  work  could  be  done  with  no  people 
at  all.  This  reduced  the  hypothesis  to  an  absurdity.  "  I  am  sure,"  said  one, 
"that  the  better  a  man  preaches  the  smaller  his  congregation  will  become."  This 
shows  what  a  large  number  of  very  excellent  preachers  we  have  in  London.  But 
our  business  is  to  reach  the  people  somehow.  (C.  H.  Spttrgeon.)  Christianity 
and  the  people  :  We  read  of  Jesus,  that  "  all  the  people  were  very  attentive  to  hear 
Him."  Moreover,  the  paople  retain  the  truth  when  they  receive  it.  Note  this  fact 
in  history  :  the  Reformation  in  Spain  was  among  the  nobility,  and  it  was  the  same 
in  Italy,  and  the  work  soon  subsided.  In  England  the  common  people  received 
the  truth  from  WyclLHe,  and  it  never  died  out.  If  you  wanted  to  burn  a  haystack, 
you  would  set  it  alight  at  the  bottom  ;  and  if  you  want  a  whole  nation  to  feel  the 
power  of  the  gosp3l,  it  must  first  be  received  by  labourers  and  artisans.  The 
martyrs  of  England  were  largely  taken  from  weavers,  and  such  like.  The  people 
love  the  man  "  chosen  out  of  the  people."  The  Bible  is  their  charter,  the  gospel 
is  their  estate,  and  when  they  know  it  they  will  retain  it  with  heroic  constancy. 
What  is  more,  thoy  will  spread  it.  Christ's  first  preachers  were  of  the  paople,  and 
in  the  streets  of  London  to-day,  and  in  the  Sunday-schools  of  England  to-day, 
you  will  find  that  the  people  are  to  the  front  in  holy  work.  We  are  glad  to  see  the 
noble,  the  great,  the  rich,  the  cultured  dedicated  to  our  Lord,  but,  after  all,  our  chief 
hope  lies  among  the  people.  (Ibid.)  Ministers  must  preach  the  ivhole  gospel: — 
Dear  brethren,  it  is  forbidden  us  to  omit  any  part  of  the  gospel.  I  am  very  glad 
it  is,  for  if  we  were  permitted  we  should  sometimes  shirk  the  unpopular  parts  of  it. 
Yet  surely  it  would  be  very  dangerous  to  omit  any  part  of  the  gospel,  would  it  not  ? 
It  would  be  like  a  physician  giving  a  prescription  to  a  dispenser,  and  the  dispenser 
omitting  one  of  the  ingredients.  He  might  kill  the  patient  by  the  omission.  The 
worst  results  follow  the  kejpirg  back  of  any  doctrine;  we  may  not  see  those 
results,  but  they  will  follow.  Possibly  only  the  next  generation  wiU  fully  display 
the  mischief  done  by  a  truth  concealed  or  denied.  It  would  be  a  dangerous 
experiment  for  any  one  of  us  to  make.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  21-26.  And  when  they  heard  that  they  entered  Into  the  temple.  .  .  .  But 
the  high  priest  .  .  .  called  the  council  together. — The  characteristics  of  opposition 
to  the  truth: — The  contrast  is  very  graphic.  The  apostles  in  public  disseminating 
the  truth :  the  Jewish  authorities  at  the  same  moment  plotting  in  private  for  its 
suppression.  The  conference  suggests  at  once  the  characteristics  which  mark 
oppDsition  to  the  truth,  and  the  motives  by  which  the  opponents  are  actuated. 
Sometimes,  in  a  given  conflict,  the  characteristics  are  displayed  in  the  same  natural 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  495 

order  of  development  as  here.  At  other  times  each  mark  distinguishes  some 
individual  or  movement.  I.  Confidence  (ver.  21).  The  apostles  were  locked  up 
and  therefore  safe.  It  only  remained  to  summon  and  sentence  them.  Then  all 
■would  be  over  :  the  position  of  the  authorities  secured,  and  Christianity  a  thing  of 
the  past.  So,  in  effect,  have  persecutors  argued  all  through  time.  Christ  was  a 
babe  at  Bethlehem.  All  the  babes  at  Bethlehem  were  murdered ;  therefore  Herod 
was  safe.  Diocletian  inscribed  on  pillars  that  the  name  of  Christian  was  every- 
where destroyed.  Intellectual  opponents  have  argued  in  the  same  way.  How 
many  times  has  Christianity  been  killed  and  buried  from  the  time  of  Celsas  and 
Porphyry  to  those  of  Voltaire  and  Tom  Paine.  II.  Disappointment.  The  prison 
doors  were  locked,  and  the  sentries  were  at  their  posts,  but  the  prisoners  were  gone. 
So,  in  effect,  has  it  ever  been  found.  Doors  do  not  always  open  and  close  at  an 
angel's  bidding  to  set  the  prisoner  free ;  but  his  influence  and  his  message  finds  its 
way  somehow  through  the  thickest  walls.  Paul  was  not  less  effective  in  a  dungeon, 
nor  was  Bunyan.  And  though  opponents  may  be  permitted  to  wreak  their  full 
vengeance  on  their  prisoner,  martyrdom  only  enhances  power.  John  the  Baptist's 
influence  is  all  the  greater  for  his  tragic  death,  and  Christ  lifted  up  on  the  Cross  is 
drawing  all  men  unto  Him.  Bishop  Tunstall  may  burn  Tyndale's  Bibles,  but  that 
only  provides  Tyndale  with  the  means  of  publishing  more.  III.  Bafflement  (vers. 
23,  24).  The  authorities  felt  themselves  fairly  brought  to  bay,  and  began  to  cherish 
the  secret  suspicion  that  these  Galilean  peasants  would  in  the  long  run  be  too  strong 
for  them.  And  no  wonder.  The  possibilities  of  the  men  for  whom  prison  doors 
would  open  were  boundless,  and  so  they  doubted  whereunto  these  things  would 
grow.  And  now  the  information  comes  that  they  were  not  only  at  liberty,  but  were 
doing  in  the  most  public  place  the  very  thing  for  which  they  had  been  imprisoned. 
This  would  only  increase  the  bafflement.  It  was  the  same  in  the  great  persecutions 
of  the  early  Church.  The  doubt  whereunto  these  things  would  grow  made  even  the 
philosophic  Hadrian  a  persecutor,  but  eventually  made  the  politic  Constantine  a 
Christian.  The  same  doubt  agitates  the  heathen  as  he  sees  his  cherished  convic- 
tions and  constitutions  crumbling  and  Christianity  slowly  but  surely  rising  on  their 
ruins.  The  same  doubt  agitates  the  sceptic  as  he  sees  his  books  dwindling  in 
ci-rculation  and  Bibles  multiplying.  IV.  Feae.  1.  Seen  in  the  method  of  arrest 
(ver.  26).  2.  But  more  powerfully  in  the  dread  lest  their  own  imprecation,  "  His 
blood  be  upon  us,"  should  be  fulfilled  (ver.  28).  "Conscience  makes  cowards  of  us 
all."  Nor  can  it  be  denied  that  a  large  share  of  the  anti- Christian  attack  all  through 
the  centuries  is  due  to  the  fear  of  consequences.  This  will  explain  a  good  deal  of  its 
virulence.  Conclusion :  1.  Christians  must  expect  the  truth  to  be  opposed. 
"  What  concord  hath  Christ  with  Belial."  2.  In  spite  of  opposition  Christiana 
must  maintain  the  truth.  It  is  a  sacred  deposit  to  be  defended  at  all  costs.  3.  Let 
Christians  be  animated  by  the  thought  that  truth  is  mighty  and  wiU  prevail. 
(J.  W.  Burn.) 

Vers.  27-29.  And  when  they  had  brought  them,  they  set  them  before  the 
council. — The  accusation  this  time  is  simply  that  the  apostles  had  not  complied 
with  the  former  judgment — they  were  guilty  of  contempt  of  court.  They  had  not, 
however,  broken  their  parole,  for  they  had  given  none,  having  declared  that  they  would 
continue  to  preach  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  And  now  the  judges  are  thinking  not  of 
truth  and  justice,  but  simply  of  their  own  safety  (ver.  28).  They  believed  that  the 
apostles  were  working  up  the  multitude  to  revenge  the  murder  of  the  Saviour.  It  is 
interesting  to  observe  how  shy  they  were  of  introducing  the  name  of  Jesus ;  but  in 
proportion  as  the  rulers  avoided  it,  the  apostles  proclaimed  it.  It  was  a  stone  of 
stumbling  to  the  former  which  might  grind  them  to  powder :  it  was  a  strong  tower 
to  the  latter,  into  which  they  ran  and  were  safe.  Peter's  reply  to  the  question  was, 
"  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men."  Whence  had  this  man  this  wisdom  and 
this  courage  ?  How  much  the  world  owes  to  Peter's  reply  I  It  is  the  foundation  of 
all  true  liberty.  Peter's  defence  is  one  of  the  finest  specimens  of  pleading  on 
record.  It  is  clear  and  cogent ;  it  is  very  short,  but  long  enough.  The  speaker  says 
all  that  is  needful,  and  then  stops.  In  this  short  space  he  defends  himself,  con- 
founds his  adversaries,  and  commends  Christ.  The  address  assumes  the  form  of  a 
syllogism  which  would  not  have  been  so  remarkable  on  the  lips  of  Paul,  but  which 
we  are  surprised  to  find  in  the  unpremeditated  defence  of  a  simple  and  impetuous 
fisherman.  After  announcing  the  general  principle  that  wherever  God  claims 
obedie>  ce  man's  claim  must  stand  in  abeyance,  he  shows  that  this  case  comes 
tinder  the  rule.     "  The  God  of  our  fathers  "  he  takes  care  to  trace  all  up  to  the  God 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

of  Israel  whom  the  Sanhedrin  .acknowledged — "  raised  up  Jesus  whom  ye  slew." 
The  point  of  the  arrow  is  at  their  breast  again.     In  one  sense  he  is  in  their  power; 
in  another  they  are  in  his.     "Him  God  hath  exalted."     He  pillories  the  priests 
as  enemies  of  God  and  crucifiers  of  the  Messiah.     But  this  is  not  the  dictate  of 
revenge.     He  is  feeling  for  an  opening  into  the  consciences  of  the  judges,  that  he 
may  introduce  the  gospel ;  and  therefore  now  offers  through  the  exalted  Prince  and 
Saviour  remission  of  sins.      Ehe  preachers  have  an  eye  to  the   magistrates,  the 
bystanders,  the  officers,  the  young  advocates,  such  as  Saul  of  Tarsus,  who  might  be 
hanging  about  the  court.     And  who  shall  tell  whether  Saul,  through  Peter's  word, 
received  an  arrow  into  his  heart  which  would  not  out  for  all  his  intemperate  zeal 
until  he  surrendered  at  Damascus.     The  witnesses  were  careful  to  sow  beside  all 
waters,   not  knowing  which  might   bear  fruit.     (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)         The  apostles 
persecuted : — I.  The  aerest  by  the  council.     The  arrest  of  Peter  and  his  brother 
apostles  took  place  at  the  instigation  of  the  council  before  whom  they  were  brought. 
It  was   the   intent   of  the  rulers  to  make  the  new  doctrine  odious  by  making  its 
teachers  criminals.     Thus  reasoned  the  rulers.     Moreover,  they  believed  that  truth 
confined  behind  bars  and  stone  walls  could  not  be  very  dangerous.     But  how  little 
they  understood  the  nature  of  the  truth !    There  is  a  vitality  in  ideas  utterly  beyond 
the  power  of  man  to  conceive.     When  once  they  are  fully  grasped  by  and  instilled 
into  the  mind  they  become  living,  permanent  influences.     The  teachings  were  safely 
lodged  in  men's  hearts  outside  the  prison,  and  not  confined  within  the  prison.    The 
rulers  also  made  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  they  could  prevent  the  growth  of  the 
gospel  by  the  power  of  authority.      "Did  not  we  straitly  command  you  that  ye 
should  not  teach  in  this  Name '? "     They  had  no  doubt  as  to  their  power  to  suppress 
it.     But  human  authority  takes  no  account  of  the  intense  enthusiasm  which  truth 
inspires  in  men  who  believe  it,  and  the  degree  of  self-sacrifice  which  it  can  evoke. 
You  can  never  be  sure  that  your  authority  has  stopped  up  all  loopholes  of  escape. 
You  can  never  be  sure  that  your  authority  can  inspire  fear  enough  to  terrify  tbe 
advocate  of  it  into  silence.     II.  Peter's  reply  to  the  council.     Here  was  another 
instance  in  which  Christ's  words  were  to  come  true,  for  He  had  said  some  time 
previously,  "But  when  they  shall  deliver  you  up,  be  not  anxious  how  or  what  ye 
shall  speak :  for  it  shall  be  given  you  in  that  hour  what  ye  shall  speak  "  (Matt.  x.  19). 
Peter,  in  his  reply,  admitted  the  truth  of  the  charges.     The  apostles  had  indeed 
refused  to  recognise  the  authority  of  the  council,  because  they  recognised  a  higher 
authority.     "We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men."     Peter,  however,  goes  still 
farther.     Not   satisfied  with   merely   answering   their   charges,   he    assumes    the 
aggressive  by  re-affiiming  the  doctrines  he  had  been  teaching  the  people,  and  boldly 
sets  forth  the  claims  of  Christ.     There  is  no  shadow  of  a  spirit  of  compromise  iu 
his  words.     Peter  makes  the  startling   announcement  that   Christ  was  a  Prince. 
"Him  liath  God  exalted  .  .  .  to  be  a  Prince."     Peter,  nevertheless,  unflinchingly 
declared  the  new  truth,  that  salvation  was  not  in  a  system,  but  in  a  man.     There 
was  one  more  step  necessary  to  complete  Peters  argument,  which  was  tbat  he  and 
his  fellow  apostles  had  irrevocably  committed  themselves  to  these  truths.    "  We  are 
His  witnesses  of  these  things."     Thus  the  reply  of  Peter's  threw  the  necessity  of 
action  upon  the  council.     III.  The  release  by  the  council.    They  began  in  bluster 
and  ended  in  ignominious  defeat.     Gamaliel,  the  master  mind  among  them,  rises  to 
state   his  position,   having   first,   however,   secured   a   temporary  removal  of  the 
apostles.      In  private  session  he  pleads  for  caution,  his  fundamental  ground  being 
that  they  cannot  decide  upon  the  merits  of  the  case.     Tbey  cannot  tell  yet  whether 
this  new  movement  is  of  God  or  of  man.     If  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow  it ; 
if   it   be   of  man,   it  will   come   to   an   end  of   itself.     They  bad  had  two  marked 
instances  in  their  own  history  of  the  schemes  of  men  coming  to  an  untimely  end- 
namely,  those  of  Theudas  and  Judas.     This  incident  in  the  history  of  the  early 
Church  clearly  shows  two  or  three  things  which  it  is  well  to  note.     And  one  is  that 
ideas  cannot  be  suppressed  by  persecuting  their  advocates ;  and  yet  the  world  is 
very  slow  in  learning  this  lesson.    To  shut  Peter  in  jail  is  no  answer  to  the  doctrine 
he  taught,  that  salvation  is  of  Christ.     Fanatic,  dreamer,  bigot,  heretic,  are  names 
freely  hurled  against  individuals  who  are  doing  what  they  can  for  their  fellow-men. 
But  these  titles  have  no  more  power  to  prevent  thought  or  action  than  a  thistledown 
can  keep  back  the  tides.  The  personal  equation  in  persecution  makes  it  the  infernal 
thing  it  is.    Another  thing  to  be  remarked  is  that  persecution  serves  the  hated  truth 
a  good  turn  by  causing  it  to  be  clearly  stated  before  the  public.     If  you  will  con- 
sider the   causes   that   called  forth  four  of  Peter's  sermons,  you  will  find  that 
it  was  the  opposition  or  doubt  of  unbelievers.      (E.  S.    Tead.)  Did  we  notl 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  49T 

straitly  command  you  .  .  .  and  behold  ye  have  filled  Jerusalem  with  your 
doctrine. — Fidelity  under  intimidation : — Basil  being  offered  the  alternative  of  con- 
forming to  the  Arian  creed  or  of  resigning  his  bishopric,  he  answered  the  prefect, 
•who  was  interrogating  him,  with  calm  dignity,  that  he  could  not  obey  the  emperor's 
will,  "  because  it  was  inconsistent  with  that  of  his  Sovereign  Lord,  and  he  could  not 
worship  any  human  creature,  being  himself  a  subject  of  that  Lord,  and  commanded 
to  be  like  Him."  "Do  you  know  his  dignity  to  whom  you  speak?"  asked 
Modestus.  "  I  do,"  was  the  reply,  "  and  I  respect  it,  but  that  of  God  is  greater. 
We  are  both  His  servants,  and  among  Christians  greatness  depends  not  upon  rank, 
but  upon  faith."  The  prefect  threatened  him  with  pains  and  penalties.  The 
bishop  smiled  as  he  answered,  "What  are  such  threats  to  me?  He  who  has 
nothiug  to  lose  can  scarce  fear  confiscation,  and  I  have  no  possession  save  these 
mean  garments  and  some  few  books.  Neither  does  he  fear  exile  who  counts  no 
spot  on  earth  his  home,  being  here  but  a  pilgrim  and  sojourner,  seeking  safer  place 
of  rest ;  heaven  is  my  home.  Nor  do  I  fear  torture  ;  my  frail  body  would  endure 
but  little — you  could  strike  but  one  blow,  and  my  pain  is  past ;  I  should  but  depart 
the  sooner  to  Him,  for  whose  service  alone  I  am  willing  to  live,  and  after  whom  my 
soul  yearns."  Modestus  could  not  forbear  expressing  his  surprise  at  the  boldness 
of  the  bishop's  speech.  "Perhaps,"  was  the  answer,  "you  have  not  before  met  with 
a  Christian  bishop,  or  under  such  circumstances  you  would  have  found  the  same 
conduct."  The  emperor  yielded,  and,  his  child  being  dangerously  ill,  the  Empress 
Dominica  even  sought  Basil's  prayers  on  the  young  Galatus'  behalf. 

Ver.  29.  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  man. — Ought : — The  word  "  ought " 
is  but  an  old  past  form  of  the  verb  "  owe  "  ;  it  is,  in  fact,  but  another  spelling  of 
"  owed."  What,  therefore,  we  ought  to  do,  we  owed  to  do  ;  what  we  ought  to  be, 
we  oioed  to  be.  To  God  we  owe  our  lives  ;  we  ought  to  pay  Him  with  our  lives. 
What  we  owe  to  our  fellow-man,  is  that  which  we  owe  it  to  God  to  do  for  an 
honoured  creature  of  God.  We  ought  to  do  it  because  we  owe  to  do  it.  And  yet  we 
go  on  saying  we  ought  to  do  and  we  ought  to  be,  never  thinking  that  what  we  ought 
we  owe,  and  that  what  we  owe  we  do  not  pay  1  (H:  G.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  Oughtis 
the  word  which  sets  forth  the  sense  of  duty.  It  differs  from  all  the  other  words  of 
the  language  save  those  of  cognate  meaning  —  a  word  without  moods,  tenses, 
conjugation,  above  time,  space,  and  circumstance,  a  word  like  eternity,  perfect  and 
complete  in  itself.  Ought !  Wbence  came  it  ?  Not  from  time,  for  it  is  not  sub- 
ject to  the  laws  of  time  as  other  words ;  it  is  a  stray  word  from  eternity.  In  virtue 
of  this  word,  the  central  word  of  conscience,  man  is  in  eternity,  and  eternity  is  in 
man.  This  word  "  ought,"  or,  if  you  like,  the  truth  which  this  word  symbolises, 
the  momentous  truth  of  duty  and  obligation,  is  a  "great  light"  hung  up  in  the 
sky  of  the  soul  for  ever  ;  and  however  bright  the  lustre  of  the  sun  in  the  material 
firmament  of  the  senses,  it  pales  by  the  side  of  the  exceeding  brightness  of  the 
"  great  light  which  rules  the  day  "  in  the  inner  heavens  of  the  spirit.  {J.  Cynd- 
dylan  Jones,  D.D.)  Obedience  to  God : — I.  Its  necessity.    1.  Commanded  (Deut. 

xiii.  4  ;  X.  12).  2.  The  condition  of  acceptance  with  God  (Exod.  xix.  5  ;  Jer.  vii. 
23).  3.  The  condition  of  securing  God's  help  (Exod.  xxiii.  22 ;  Dent.  vii.  9).  4. 
Expected  of  God's  people  (Deut.  xxvii.  9, 10).  5.  More  than  burnt-offerings  (1  Sam. 
XV.  22).  6.  A  fit  return  for  God's  mercies  (1  Sam.  xv.  24).  7.  Must  obey  God 
rather  than  man  (chaps,  iv.  19,  20;  v.  29).  8.  Exhorted  (Jer.  xxvi.  13;  xxxviii.  20). 
9.  A  proof  of  friendship  to  Christ  (John  XV.  14).  II.  What  it  includes.  1.  Obey- 
ing God's  voice  (Exod.  xix.  5  ;  Jer.  vii.  23).  2.  Obeying  God's  law  (Josh.  i.  7;  Isa. 
xlii.  24).  8.  Bringing  every  thought  into  obedience  to  Christ  (2  Cor.  x.  5).  4. 
Obeying  the  gospel  (Rom.  i.  5  ;  vi.  17 ;  x.  16).  5.  Keeping  God's  commandments 
(Eccles.  xii.  13).  III.  How  to  be  rendeked.  Should  be  —  1.  From  the  heart 
(Deut  xi.  13  ;  Eom.  vi.  1).  2.  WiUingly  (Psa.  xviii.  44  ;  Isa.  i.  19).  3.  Faithfully 
(Josh.  xxii.  2,  3).  4.  Undeviating  (Deut.  xxviii.  14).  5.  Constantly  (Phil.  ii.  12). 
IV.  Motives  to.  1.  Promises  to  (Exod.  xxiii.  22  ;  1  Sam.  xii.  14,  15 ;  Isa.  i.  19). 
2.  Blessedness  of  (Deut.  xi.  27,  xxviii.  1-14  ;  Luke  xi.  28;  Jas.  i.  5).  3.  Disobedience 
punished  (Deut.  xi.  28,  xxviii.  15-68;  Josh.  v.  6;  Isa.  i.  20).  {S.  S.  Times.) 
Obedience  to  God : — The  proposition  is  one  which  receives  an  unanimous  assent. 
It  is  a  truth  seen  by  intuition.  If  there  be  a  God,  and  He  has  any  will  respecting 
our  conduct,  we  ought  to  obey  Him.  We  owe  Him  obedience  on  every  account. 
He  is  our  Maker,  Proprietor,  Benefactor,  and  a  Being  infinitely  perfect,  incapable 
of  willing  anything  inconsistent  with  the  strictest  rectitude.  We  ought  to  obey 
Him.  Ought  we  I  Then  why  have  we  disobeyed  Him  ?  Out  of  thy  own  moutb 
VOL.  I.  32 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  7. 

■will  He  judge  and  condemn  us.  But  since  there  are  mistakes  as  to  what  obedience 
is  and  is  not,  let  us — I.  Draw  some  distinctions.  1.  The  mere  doing  of  what  God 
commands  does  not  constitute  obedience,  unless  we  also  abstain  from  what  He 
forbids.  Negative  precepts  are  as  obligatory  as  positive  precepts.  2.  Obedience 
must  be  universal.  It  must  not  only  have  respect  to  all  that  is  forbidden  and 
required.  The  same  reasons  exist  why  we  should  be  conformed  to  the  whole  will 
as  to  any  part  of  the  will  of  God.  If,  therefore,  any  one  disobeys  God  in  any 
respect,  he  forfeits  the  character  of  obedience ;  and  hence  it  is  written,  "  cursed  is 
every  one  who  continueth  not  in  all  things  written  in  the  buok  of  the  law  to  do  them." 
3.  To  obey  God  is  not  simply  to  act  according  to  His  will,  but  because  it  is  His  will. 
An  accidental  conformity  of  the  will  of  man  to  the  will  of  God  is  not  obeiiience.  It 
must  be  intentional.  An  atheist  may  do  what  God  requires,  but  you  would  not  there- 
fore say  that  he  obeys  God.  A  man  may  do  some  things  which  God  requires  from 
some  inferior  consideration.  Thus  some  are  scrupulously  honest,  because  dis- 
honesty is  disgraceful,  or  an  inherent  principle  of  integrity,  and  not  out  of  regard 
to  the  Supreme  Lawgiver.  The  very  same  elements  go  into  the  constitution  of 
filial  obedience.  A  dutiful  son  is  one  who  does  what  his  parent  instructs,  not 
because  it  falls  in  with  his  own  inclination,  or  because  he  is  to  gain  anything  by  it, 
but  out  of  regard  to  the  will  of  his  parent.  It  is  apparent,  then,  that  there  may  be 
a  great  deal  of  morality  and  right  acting  among  men  where  there  is  no  obedience  to 
God.  4.  A  doing  according  to  God's  will,  out  of  a  regard  to  God,  does  not  alone 
constitute  obedience.  It  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  regard.  The  regard  may 
be  servile — dread  of  the  effects  of  God's  displeasure  at  disobedience.  It  may  be 
mercenary — expectation  of  reward  for  obedience.  But  the  regard  that  is  had  to 
God  in  all  acceptable  obedience  is  the  union  of  respect  and  love.  5.  Obedience,  to 
be  acceptable,  must  be  internal  as  well  as  external.  External  actions  are  really 
but  the  expression  of  obedience.  In  what  is  the  law  of  God  summarily  compre- 
hended but  in  a  twofold  exercise  of  the  heart?  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy 
God  with  all  thv  heart,  and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  All  pious  and  charitable 
acts  must,  in  His  account,  pass  for  nothing,  unless  they  are  the  expressions  of  love, 
the  obedience  of  the  heart.  II.  Chaeaoteristics  of  obedience.  It  must  be — 1. 
Constant ;  not  occasional  and  interrupted.  There  exist  the  same  imperative 
reasons  why  God  should  be  obeyed  at  all  times,  as  at  any  time.  And  the  love  of 
God,  the  principle  of  obedience,  is  noc  a  fitful  and  feverish  excitement,  but  a 
regular  and  healthful  pulsation.  2.  Unconditional.  We  ought  to  obey  God,  what- 
ever the  difficulty,  the  circumstances,  or  the  consequences.  There  is  no  power  of 
dispensation.  And  yet  how  many  exceptions  are  taken  on  the  mere  score  of  incon- 
venience— e.g.,  as  regards  the  Sabbath  law.  And  must  the  laws  of  the  great  and 
dreadful  God,  whose  majesty  is  such  that  all  nations  are  before  Him  as  nothing, 
bend  to  human  convenience?  What !  is  it  our  duty  to  obey  God  only  when  it  is 
convenient  and  agreeable,  or  when  it  does  not  seem  to  interfere  with  any  of  our 
secular  interests  ?  3.  Supreme  and  primary,  and  not  subordinate  and  secondary. 
This  obligation  takes  the  precedence  of  every  other.  They  must  bend  to  it.  It 
will  bend  to  none.  Whoever  is  disobeyed,  God  must  be  obeyed.  4.  Immediately, 
without  hesitation.  Delay  is  disobedience,  even  though  it  should  be  accompanied 
with  the  determination  to  obey  hereafter.  Is  God's  law  fulfilled  by  good  resolu- 
tions and  dutiful  purposes  ?  5.  Unquestioning.  We  have  no  right  to  ask  the 
reason  of  His  commands,  or  their  utility.  It  is  enough  that  He  commands.  Some 
little  Sunday-school  girls  were  questioned  in  reference  to  the  petition,  "Thy  will  be 
done,"  &c.  "How  do  angels  in  heaven  do  it?"  "Immediately,"  said  one;  "actively," 
said  another  ;  "  unitedly,"  replied  a  third  ;  and  then  there  was  a  pause,  when  one 
little  girl  said  "  without  asking  any  questions."  6.  Submission.  The  reasons  for 
obedience  to  God's  perceptive  will  are  the  same  as  those  for  submission  to  His  pro- 
vidential will.  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  means  "  be  Thy  purposes  accomplished,  as 
well  as  be  Thy  commands  obeyed."  7.  Sinlessness  is  necessary  to  the  perfection 
of  obedience,  but  not  to  its  reality.  Yet  the  desire  and  prayer,  and  aim  and  effort, 
and  struggle  to  be  free  from  it  is.  (IF.  Nevins,  D.D.)  Three  clasxcs  of  people : — 
I.  The  spirit  of  the  believer.  This  is  shown  in  the  conduct  of  the  disciples 
under  persecution.  1.  A  working  spirit.  As  soon  as  set  free,  they  are  found  in 
the  temple  at  work  for  Christ.  2.  A  conscientious  spirit.  "We  ought  "is  the 
principle  controlling  their  conduct.  3.  A  witnessing  spirit.  Notice  how  strong  and 
how  clear  is  their  testimony  (vers.  80-32).  4.  A  rejoicing  spirit  (ver.  41).  They 
were  glad  at  the  privilege  of  suffering  for  their  Master's  cause.  II.  The  spirit  of 
THE  TjNBELiEVEB.    Noticc  how  this  stauds  in  marked  contrast  with  the  believer's 


CHAP.  T.]  THE  ACTS.  499 

«pirit.  1.  There  is  the  fear  of  men  (ver.  26).  While  the  apostles  are  fearless  of 
popular  opinion,  their  persecutors  are  fearful,  and  stand  in  awe  of  the  people's 
wrath.  2.  There  is  hatred  against  the  truth  (vers.  28,  33).  These  men  were  not 
sincere  seekers  after  the  truth.  The  truth  was  the  particular  object  of  their 
■enmity.  3.  There  is  the  spirit  of  persecution  (ver.  40).  Either  the  disciples  were 
right  or  they  were  wrong.  If  they  were  wrong,  the  priests'  party  need  Lave  no 
fear — -their  cause  would  come  to  naught.  If  they  were  right,  it  was  a  crime  to  beat 
them.  But  to  repress  truth  by  violence  has  been  the  aim  of  persecution  in  all 
as;es.  III.  The  spirit  of  indecision.  This  we  observe  in  the  counsel  of  Gamaliel. 
His  plea  may  be  interpreted  as  the  utterance  of  a  noble  toleration  or  of  an  unprin- 
■cipled  expediency ;  perhaps  both  elements  entered  into  it.  Obedience  to  God 

rather  than  man  : — A  stern  father  one  day,  when  he  came  home  from  his  business, 
heard  a  noise  as  if  some  one  were  talking  in  his  little  boy's  room.  He  asked  hia 
•wife  what  it  was.  She  told  him  it  was  Johnnie  praying.  This  made  him  angry. 
He  told  his  little  son,  in  a  decided  tone,  that  if  he  dared  to  do  it  again  he  must 
leave  the  Louse  and  fiud  another  home.  Like  Daniel,  dear  Johnnie  knew  all  he 
must  suffer  ;  but  he  determined  to  keep  on  praying.  The  next  day  his  father  came 
home  and  found  him  praying  again.  He  went  at  once  to  his  little  room,  and  in  a 
•gruff  voice  said,  "  Pack  up  your  things  and  be  off.  I'll  not  have  any  of  your  pray- 
ing in  ray  house.  You  shall  not  live  with  me.''  And  so  the  poor  fellow  packed  up 
the  little  that  was  his,  and  took  his  bundle  and  walked  downstairs  to  say  "  good- 
bye." He  went  first  to  his  mother  and  sister,  and  gave  th^m  the  "good-hye"  kiss; 
and  then,  with  a  full  heart,  he  leaned  over  the  cradle  and  pressed  his  quivering 
lips  to  those  of  the  little  one  he  loved  so  much.  His  mother  stond  by  weeping. 
How  could  he  part  with  her?  At  last,  throwing  his  arms  around  her  neck, 
and  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  he  sobbed,  "  Good-bye,  mother !  "  And  then  the  little 
hero  turned  kindly  to  his  stern  father,  and,  holding  out  his  hand,  said,  "Good-bve, 
father."  But  the  father  could  not  bear  it  any  longer.  He  could  not  keep  (he  hot 
tears  from  his  eyes.  No,  he  could  not,  after  all,  drive  away  his  noble  boy. 
■"  Johnnie,  you  need  not  go  now.  Pray  for  me.  I  have  been  a  wicked  man  to  try 
to  keep  you  from  praying.  I  was  wrong  ;  you  were  right  in  praying.  Oh,  pray  for 
me !"  was  all  he  could  say.  And  Johnnie  did  pray.  Yes,  and  the  father  prayed 
too.  He  became  a  converted  man,  and  loved,  with  his  family,  to  bow  before  the 
mercy-seat.  (E.  P.  Hammond.)  \  Obedience  to  God  in  spite  of  danger : — One 
Saturday  there  was  a  little  boy  named  Jamie  Brown  pushing  along  the  road  on  his 
way  home.  He  had  only  travelled  about  a  mile,  when,  at  a  turn  of  the  road,  three 
or  four  very  wicked  boys,  who  disliked  him  for  going  to  church,  and  refusing 
to  join  them  in  mischief,  came  rushing  out  from  a  clump  of  trees  with  a  fierce 
bull-dog,  and  said,  "Brown,  you  must  say  the  bad  words  we  tell  you  before  you 
go  another  step,  or  we'll  s?nd  the  dog  at  you.''  And  then  they  began  to  swear,  and 
speak  the  worst  of  words.  Now  there  was  one  thing  Jamie  had  learned  at  his 
mother's  fireside,  and  that  was,  that  it  was  wrong  to  take  God's  name  in  vain,  and 
wrong  to  foul  the  tongue  with  bad  words.  But  he  simply  said,  "  Let  me  go  ;  I 
want  to  get  home. "  "Not  one  step  farther,"  said  the  biggest  fellow,  "until  you 
say  these  words  after  me.  Swear  this  oath,  and  we'll  let  you  go,"  and  he  repeated 
wild  and  wicked  words.  "  I  dare  not  say  that,"  replied  the  boy  ;  "  and  you  have 
no  right  to  ask  me."  "  Swear  the  oath  this  moment,  or  we  will  let  slip  the  dog." 
"I  will  not  swear  that  oath  ;  and  you  have  no  right  to  let  slip  the  dog  on  me." 
They  gave  him  one  more  chance,  and  then  let  loose  the  dog.  That  night,  as  his  mother 
and  the  other  children  sat  round  the  fire,  the  brave  boy  told  the  rest  of  the  adven- 
ture. It  came  into  his  head,  as  his  savage  persecutors  were  unloosing  the  dog, 
that  God,  who  shut  the  mouths  of  the  lions  in  the  den  where  Daniel  was,  could 
shut  the  mouth  of  the  fierce  dog  on  that  lonely  road.  And  God  did  shut  the  mouth 
of  the  dog.  The  big,  hulking  scoundrels,  more  brutal  than  their  dog,  yelled  it  at 
the  harmless  boy.  The  dog  barked  furiously  for  a  second  or  two,  and  went  rush- 
ing up  to  him.  But  it  neither  bit  nor  offered  to  bite.  And  Jamie  was  delivered 
out  of  their  hands.     (.Y.  T.  Anecdotes.) 

Ver.  31.  Him  hath  God  exalted  with  His  right  hand  to  he  a  Prince  and  a 
Saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins. — The  end  of 
the  Saviour's  exaWition  : — Elevation  is  necessary  to  influence.  Of  what  advan- 
tage is  a  candle  under  a  bushel  ?  While  the  sun  is  below  our  eatth,  all  is  dark  and 
cold ;  but  when  he  rises,  he  scatters  his  enlightening  and  enlivening  beams.  When 
the  shrub  rises  up  out  of  the  ground,  it  requires  support ;  but  when  it  becomes  a 


500  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v.. 

tree,  the  birds  lodge  in  its  brancVies.  A  man  in  the  obscurity  and  contractedness 
of  private  hfe  can  only  pour  forth  benevolent  wishes  and  shed  ineffectual  tears. 
But  give  him  pre-eminence,  and  thousands  are  protected  by  his  power  and  enriched 
by  his  bounty.  Take  the  case  of  Joseph,  e.g.  But  a  greater  than  Joseph  is  here. 
Jesus  suffered  from  the  hands  of  sinners;  but  His  sufferings  led  to  His  exaltation. 
Some  are  exalted  as  princes  who  are  by  no  means  saviours.  They  sacritice  the 
lives  of  their  subjects  to  save  their  own  ;  but  He  sacrificed  Himself  for  the  welfare 
of  His  subjects.  They  are  princes  of  war  ;  but  He  is  "  the  Prince  of  peace."  They 
are  princes  of  death  ;  but  He  is  "the  Prince  of  life."  They  are  princes  and  des- 
troyers ;  but  He  is  "  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour."  Let  us  take  three  views  of  the 
blessings  which  the  exalted  Saviour  gives.  I.  Their  meaning.  1.  What  is  repent- 
ance? The  inquiry  is  necessary  because  of  the  counterfeits  of  repentance.  Pha- 
raoh, Ahab,  and  Judas  repented,  and  yet  died  in  their  sins.  An  old  divine  tells  us 
that  "  Genuine  repentance  consists  in  having  the  heart  broken  for  sin,  and  from 
it."  (1)  The  subject  of  repentance,  then,  is  convinced  of  sin.  He  sees  that  it  is 
the  greatest  evil  in  the  universe.  Hence  he  feels  shame,  grief,  ancl  contrition — 
especially  when  he  apprehends  the  goodness  of  God.  This  dissolves  the  heart,  and 
makes  him  "sorrowful  after  a  godly  sort."  For  the  tear  of  evangelical  penitence 
drops  from  the  eye  of  faith ;  and  faith  while  it  weeps  stands  under  the  Cross.  The 
pressure  of  these  various  feelings  constitutes  what  we  mean  by  having  the  heart 
broken  for  sin.  (2)  But  the  man  has  now  new  dispositions  and  resolutions  ;  and 
hence  a  new  course  of  life.  He  is  delivered  from  the  love  of  all  sin,  however  dear 
before.  He  is  freed  from  its  dominion,  and  avoids  its  occasions.  And  this  is  what 
we  mean  by  having  the  heart  broken  from  sin,  2.  And  what  is  forgiveness  ?  It 
does  not  render  a  man  innocent.  Sin  contracts  guilt,  and  guilt  binds  over  to 
punishment ;  forgiveness  cancels  this  obligation,  and  restores  the  offender  to  safety. 
And  frequently  among  men  forgiveness  extends  no  further.  But  God  takes  pleasure 
in  those  whom  He  pardons,  and  indulges  them  with  the  most  intimate  friendship. 
When  two  individuals  have  been  at  variance,  the  hardest  to  believe  in  reconcilia- 
tion is  the  offender.  A  man  once  offended  Augustus,  and  the  emperor,  to  show  his 
greatness  of  mind,  declared  that  he  pardoned  him.  But  the  poor  creature,  fearing 
the  declaration  was  too  good  to  be  true,  desired  bis  majesty  to  give  him  some  pre- 
sent as  a  proof  that  he  had  really  forgiven  him.  Thus  anxious  is  the  awakened 
mind.  Such  a  free  and  full  forgiveness  after  all  his  heinous  provocations  seems 
incredible  :  he  therefore  desires  a  token  for  good  :  and  many  pledges  of  the  most 
perfect  reconciliation  the  God  of  all  grace  affords.  II.  Their  connection.  This  is 
not  a  meritorious  connection,  as  if  repentance  deserved  forgiveness,  for  they  are 
both  given  ;  and  how  can  one  gift  merit  another  ?  But  there  is  between  them  a 
connection  of — 1.  Propriety.  It  would  not  accord  with  the  wisdom  of  G.od  to  for- 
give one  incapable  of  enjoying  or  serving  Him — yea,  one  who  abhors  Him.  If  a 
servant  or  a  child  were  to  behave  improperly,  though  goodness  may  incline  you  to 
pardon,  j'ou  would  naturally  require  a  proper  state  of  mind,  and  signs  of  sorrow, 
confession,  and  reformation ;  otherwise  your  forgiveness  would  look  like  con- 
nivance or  indifference,  and  encourage  a  repetition  of  disobedience.  2.  Certainty. 
No  one  ever  really  enjoyed  forgiveness  without  repentance  ;  and  no  one  ever  truly 
exercised  repentance  without  forgiveness.  On  the  other  hand,  "  He  that  con- 
fesseth,  and  forsaketh  his  sins,  shall  have  mercy."  III.  Their  source.  Some 
think  repentance  a  very  legal  subject ;  but  there  never  was  a  greater  mistake.  For, 
not  to  mention  that  our  Lord  "  came  to  call  sinners  to  repentance,"  and  that  the 
apostles  "  went  forth  preaching  eveiywhere  that  men  should  repent,"  repentance 
is  peculiarly  evangelical.  The  law  has  nothing  to  do  with  it ;  it  does  not  even 
command  it ;  all  it  has  to  do  with  the  transgressor  is  to  condemn.  It  allows  him 
neither  liberty  nor  ability  to  repent ;  but  the  gospel  gives  him  both,  and  Christ  was 
exalted  to  effect  the  purpose  of  the  gospel.  And  if  repentance  be  a  gift,  can  the  forgive- 
ness be  a  purchase  ?  Hence  two  things  follow.  1.  If  we  possess  these  blessings,  we 
learn  to  whom  we  are  to  address  our  praise.  "  In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness  and 
strength."  2.  If  we  want  them,  we  see  to  whom  we  are  to  address  our  prayers.  (W.Jay.) 
Exalted  to  give  : — 1.  The  murderer  is  haunted  by  the  ghost  of  his  victim.  This 
is  a  part  of  the  sublime  machinery  of  providence  for  the  punishment,  and  so  for 
the  prevention  of  crime.  All  history  teems  with  examples  of  this.  Witness  Herod 
— "John  the  Baptist,  whom  I  beheaded,  is  ris^en  from  the  dead."  These  high 
priests  were  com])elled  to  undergo  this  inevitable  sentence,  "Whom  ye  slew,  God 
has  exalted."  Their  victim  lias  risen,  and  the  murderers  tremble.  'I  hey  showed 
Him  no  mercy,  and  expect  none  from  Him.     But  now  that  He  is  exalted,  and  Hia 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  501 

enemies  in  His  power,  instead  of  taking  vengeance  He  offers  remission.  2.  The 
water  is  exalted  into  the  heavens  that  it  may  give  rain.  In  the  same  way  He  who 
comes  as  rain  on  tbe  mown  grass  was  exalted  that  He  might  give  Himself  as  the 
Living  Water.  The  exalted  Giver  bestows  every  kind  of  good.  "  Every  good  and 
perfect  gift  is  from  above."  But  the  fundamt-ntal  benefit,  without  which  all  others 
would  be  of  no  avail,  is  the  twin  gift  promised  in  our  text.  3.  Eepentance  and  for- 
giveness constitute  one  entire  redemption.  These  two  God  has  joined  as  He  has 
joined  the  right  and  left  sides  of  a  body  to  make  one  organised  life.  To  separate 
them  is  to  destroy  them.  Forgiveness  is  an  act  of  the  Supreme  God,  repentance 
the  act  of  sinful  man,  and  yet  both  are  the  gift  of  the  risen  Redeemer.  It  is  not 
like  two  portions  of  an  extended  straight  line,  but  like  two  halves  of  a  great  revol- 
ving ring — as  it  goes  rapidly  round  it  sepms  as  if  this  balf  were  impelling  that,  and 
sometimes  as  if  that  were  impelling  this.  From  one  point  of  view  repentance 
seems  to  draw  forgiveness,  from  another  forgiveness  seems  to  work  repentance.  It 
is  true  Christ  says,  "  If  any  man  open  I  will  come  in  "  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  no 
one  would  open  unless  moved  by  the  plaintive  voice,  "  Behold  I  stand  at  the  door 
and  knock."  It  is  opening  from  within  that  lets  the  Saviour  enter,  but  it  is  the 
pressure  of  the  Saviour  that  causes  the  fastenings  of  the  heart  to  give  way,  4.  We 
cannot  determine  tbe  precise  point  at  which  the  process  begins.  I  do  not  know  the 
'point  in  the  circle  which  the  Spirit  touches  to  communicate  motion.  All  I  know  is 
that  He  tjives  it  motion,  and  that  when  one  point  moves  all  move.  And  this 
•wheel  is  like  Ezekiel's,  so  high  that  it  is  dreadful.  The  upper  part  is  irf  heaven, 
while  its  lower  edge  rolls  upon  the  earth.  Forgiveness  is  an  act  done  by  God  ;  the 
official  act  of  the  Judge  on  the  great  white  throne.  Repentance  is  a  rending  and  a 
melting  of  the  heart  here  upon  earth.  The  lower  part  of  the  circle  is  in  the  cham- 
bers of  the  sinner's  soul,  and  yet  every  movement  of  a  hair's  breadth  is  accompanied 
by  a  corresponding  movement  on  high.  So  "  there  is  joy  in  heaven  overone  sinner 
that  repenteth."  These  two  were  joined  in  Peter's  own  experience.  When  he  had 
denied  his  Lord,  "  the  Lord  looked  on  Peter  "  ;  that  look  conveyed  pardon,  and  the 
repenting  disciple  went  out  and  wept  bitterly.  .  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Christ  an 

■exulted  Prince  and  a  glorified  Saviour: — I.  The  exaltation  of  Christ,  properly 
ppeaking,  consists  of  four  parts — His  resurrection,  ascension,  sitting  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  and  His  coming  to  judge  the  world.  It  is  to  His  sitting  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  however,  that  our  attention  is  here  called.  And,  regarding  it,  three 
circumstances  are  noticed  in  the  text.  1.  The  dignity  to  which  Christ  is  raised. 
(1)  The  expression,  "  with  His  right  hand,"  does  not  denote  the  agency  bj'  which, 
but  the  glory  to  which  He  is  exalted.  It  intimates  that  our  Mediator  enjoys  Divine 
honour  at  the  Father's  right  hand,  exercises  Divine  authority,  and  dispenses  Divine 
government.  This  is  a  situation  which  no  mere  creature  can  occupy.  I  admit  that 
the  divinity  of  Christ  being  necessarily  unchangeable,  could  not,  strictly  speaking, 
be  humbled  or  exalted.  But  inasmuch  as  He  took  our  nature  into  personal  union 
with  Him,  He  was  humbled.  And  when  His  work  was  finished  He  dropped  His 
lowly  character,  but  not  His  human  nature.  Clothed  in  it  He  gloriously  appeared 
before  God  on  our  behalf,  and,  as  the  reward  of  His  undertaking,  received,  at  His 
Father's  hands,  universal  authority.  (2)  And  let  none  suppose  that  the  right  hand 
of  God  in  heaven  denotes  any  visible  proximity  to  the  infinite  Spirit,  like  nearness 
of  place  in  the  case  of  a  prince  at  the  right  hand  of  an  earthly  sovereign.  The 
human  nature  of  Jesus,  indeed,  requires  a  local  residence.  But  who  can  describe 
His  dignity  and  glory  in  heaven  ?  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive 
power,"  &c.  2.  The  character  in  which  He  is  raised,  "  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour." 
(1)  As  a  Divine  person,  Jesus  was  never  deprived  of  His  royal  supremacy,  and 
therefore  could  never  be  exalted  to  a  dignity  from  which  He  had  never  descended. 
But  there  was  a  dignity  to  which,  as  God  and  man  in  one  person.  He  had  never 
hitherto  been  formally  raised,  although  from  the  beginning  He  had  acted  as  King 
of  the  Church  and  Lord  of  the  Universe.  But  this  princely  office  arose  entirely 
from  the  covenant  made  between  the  Father  and  the  Sou,  which  required  from  the 
latter  obedience  unto  death,  as  absolutely  necessary  to  His  being  formally  installed 
into  His  regal  authority  as  King  in  Zion.  (2)  And  as  the  nature  of  Christ's  kingly 
office  is  peculiar,  so  also  is  its  exercise.  His  law,  indeed,  is  still  the  immutable  rule 
of  righteousness.  But  there  is  exercised  to  obstinate  sinners  the  most  marvellous 
long-suffering ;  and  to  believers  the  freest  and  most  astonishingly  gracious  forgive- 
ness, joined  with  the  choicest  spiritunl  blessings.  Such  a  mode  of  administration 
can  only  be  accounted  for  on  the  principle  that  a  system  of  mediatorial  authority 
exists,  in  consequence  of  which  "  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  speedily  exe- 


502  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t- 

cuted "  on   unbelievers ;    and  pardon,  purity,  spiritual  protection,  comfort,  anJ 
eternal  glory,  secured  to  all  the  faithful.     (3)  But  Christ  is  not  only  an  exalted 
Prince,  but  also  a  glorified  Saviour.     We  have  seen  that  as  a  Prince  He  completely 
secures  the  happiness  and  dignity  of  His  people.     But  deliverance  from  sin  could 
never  have  been  realised  unless,  lilce  the  high  priests  of  old,  He  had  entered  intO' 
the  holy  place,  and  presented  the  blood  of  His  atonement  as  the  ground  of  His  in- 
tercession.    He  saves  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  to  God  by  Him,  because  He 
ever  lives  to  make  intercession  for  them.     3.  The  agency  of  the  Father  in  the 
exaltation  of  His  Son — "  Him  hath  God  exalted."     We  are  here  carried  back  to  the 
council  of  peace,  the  agreement  of  the  Divine  persons  in  reference  to  the  salvation 
of  men.     The  Father  was  bound  to  exalt  the  Mediator  when  His  work  of  humilia- 
tion  was  accomplished.     II.  Its  blessed  consequences.     Amongst  these  are  the 
glory  of  God,  the  establishment  of  order  and  harmony  in  the  universe,  the  increased 
light  thrown  upon  God's  character  and  designs ;  but  what  chiefly  concerns  us  is- 
that  the  exalted  Saviour  bestows — 1.  Eepentance.     2.  Forgiveness.     Conclusion  ;■ 
This  subject  ought  to  be  improved,  especially  by — (1)  Those  who  have  good  reason 
to  conclude  that  they  are  already  in  possession  of  these  blessing's.    Such  are  under 
infinite  obligations  to  the  God  of  all  grace,  and  forget  not  that  it  flows  through  the 
channel  of  Christ's  mediation  ;  and  while  you  admire  this  salvation  in  its  rise  and  , 
progress  and  ai^plication,  forget  not  to  pray  for  the  continued  communication  of 
grace  to  your  soul.     Remember  that  faith  needs  to  be  strengthened,  and  repentance 
deepened.     (2)  Those  who  doubt  their  interest  in  Christ  are  here  encouraged.    Your 
very  sorrow  is  a  hopeful  symptom.     It  is  well  that  you  feel  your  unworthiness  ;  and 
instead  of  making  it  an  argument  against  coming  to  Christ,  use  it  as  a  strong' 
argument  to  lay  vigorous  hold  of  Him.     (3)  To  those  who  are  as  yet  destitute  of 
Divine  grace.     These  are  of  two  classes,     (a)  The  hypocrite  knows  that  he  is  not 
what  he  pretends  to  be.      Yet,  notwithstanding  your  aggravated  guilt,  you  are 
invited  to  the  Saviour,     {b)  Let  the  self-deceiver  open  his  eyes  to  his  true  state- 
and  character.     You  say  you  repent ;  but  yours  is  a  legal  repentance,  which  con- 
sists in  a  dread  of  the  Divine  wrath.     Such  a  sorrow  works  death.     Repentance 
unto  life,  on  the  other  hand,  is  that  sorrow  which  flows  from  a  believing  view  of 
the  atonement  of  Christ  and  of  the  evil  of  sin,  as  manifested  in  the  Cross,  and  is 
recognised  to  be  genuine  only  by  the  fruits  of  holiness  which  result  from  it.     (TF» 
Orr.)      A  Prince  and  a  Saviour : — I.  Note  Christ's  titles  and  learn  their  meaning. 
1.  A  Prince.     This  tells  of — (1)  Honour  as  the  reward  of  His  sufferings  on  earth. 
While  He  was  here  He  was  treated  as  a  felon.     What  presents  tbe  Prince  of  Wales- 
brought  home  from  his  travels  I    But  the  Prince  of  Glory  took  home  with  Him  His- 
wounds  only.     But  the  shame  and  the  rejection  are  now  ended,  and  in  glory  Jesus 
is  manifestly  a  Prince,  reverenced,  obeyed,  and  honoured.     (2)  Power.     His  is  no- 
nominal  princedom — He  has  both  glory  and  strength.     Unto  Him  is  given  the 
mediatorial  kingdom,  which  includes  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  so  that  He- 
is  well  styled  "  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate."     There  is  no  bound  to  this  power. 
(3)  Dominion.     If  Christ  is  to  be  yours  you  must  let  Him  rule  over  you.     "He 
must  reign."     He  claims  to  be  Master  and  Lord  to  those  who  ask  salvation  at  His 
hands  ;  and  is  not  the  claim  a  just  one?     Whom  should  we  serve  but  the  Lord  who 
became  a  servant  for  our  sakes  ?     It  must  be  so,  or  salvation  is  impossible.     You 
must  accept  Jesus  to  be  a  leader  and  a  commander  to  yon,  or  you  cannot  win  the 
battle  of  life.     You  must  yield  Him  loving  obedience,  or  He  will  not  be  married  to- 
your  souls.     His  dominion  is  sweetly  tempered  by  love ;  so  that,  as  the  prophet 
writes,  "  Thou  shalt  call  Me  no  more  Baali,"  that  is,  "  My  Lord,"  with  a  hardness  of 
rulership,  but  I^hi,  "My  Lord,"  because  Thou  art  my  Husband.     2.  A  Saviour. 
Observe  here — (1)  The  perseverance  of  the  Lord's  love.     He  was  a  Saviour  here;. 
He  is  a  Saviour  now  that  He  has  reached  His  throne.     "  The  Son  of  Man  came  to- 
seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost,"  and  now  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the 
uttermost,"  &c.     (2)  The  prevalence  of  the  work  He  achieved  here.     Here  He  was- 
able  to  save,  but  His  salvation  was  not  complete,  for  He  had  not  yet  said,  •'  It  is- 
finished."   Now  His  redeeming  work  is  done,  and  saving  is  a  simple  matter  to  Him. 
(3)  His  approachableness.     You  might  be  abashed  at  coming  to  a  prince,  but  you 
may  be  encouraged  in  coming   to  a  Saviour.      3.  Put  the  words  together — (1)> 
Prince-Saviour  :    one   who   is   kingly    in    the    salvation    which    He    brings,   and 
deals  out  no  stinted  grace,  but  makes  us  to  receive  of  His  fulness  grace  for  grace. 
(2)  Saviour-Prince   whose   glory   it   is   to   save,   whose  kingdom   and  power  and 
dominion  are    all   turned   in    full    force   to    achieve    the    work  of   rescuing    His 
peojile.      II.    ArpROACu    Him,    then,    undek   these   two   characters.      1.   As   st 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  503 

Prince.  And  how  shall  we  do  that?  (1)  With  the  sorrowful  confession  of 
past  rebellion.  "Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry."  (2)  Accept  His  great 
purpose  and  submit  to  His  rule.  He  is  a  Prince,  therefore  yield  yourself  to 
be  His  subject.  The  object  of  His  rule  is  to  make  you  love  God,  and  to  be  like 
God.  (3)  Surrender  everything  to  Him.  If  He  has  redeemed  you  then  you  belong 
to  Him  ;  henceforth  you  are  not  your  own,  you  are  bought  with  a  price.  (4)  Pay 
your  loving,  loyal  homage  to  your  Prince.  Behold  Him  in  His  glory,  where  all  the 
angels  cast  their  crowns  before  Him,  while  tbe  elders  adore  Him  with  vials  full  of 
sweet  odours.  2.  As  Saviour.  (1)  Confessing  that  you  need  a  Saviour.  (2)  Be- 
lieving that  He  is  able  to  save  you.  (3)  Submitting  entirely  to  His  processes  of 
salvation.  He  will  not  save  thee  in  thy  way,  but  in  His  way ;  and  His  way  of 
saving  thee  is  to  make  thee  feel  the  smart  and  bitterness  of  sin,  to  make  thee  hate 
that  sin,  and  so  to  turn  thee  from  it  for  ever.  (4)  Trusting  Him  as  Saviour.  III. 
Mark  His  gifts.  1.  Eepentance.  This  does  not  mean  to  give  space  tor  repent- 
ance, nor  to  make  repentance  acceptable,  but  to  give  repentance  itself.  What  is 
repentance?  (1)  It  is  a  change  of  mind,  (a)  He  can  give  thee  to  change  thy 
mind  about  all  the  past,  so  that  the  things  which  pleased  thee  shall  grieve  thee, 
that  which  charmed  thee  shall  disgust  thee,  (b)  He  can  also  change  thy  mind  as 
to  the  present  and  the  future,  so  that  instead  of  looking  for  present  pleasure  thou 
wilt  find  thy  delight  m  future  glory  realised  by  faith.  (2)  It  includes  a  most  need- 
ful sense  of  sin,  and  the  Saviour  can  give  thee  this  by  His  Spirit.  (3)  He  can  work 
in  thee  desires  after  holiness  and  hatred  of  every  false  way;  He  can  take  the  guile 
out  of  thy  soul  as  well  as  the  guilt  out  of  thy  life.  2.  Forgiveness.  (1)  He  can 
pass  an  act  of  amnesty  and  oblivion  for  all  thy  sin.  "I  have  blotted  out  thy  sins 
like  a  cloud,  and  as  a  thick  cloud  thy  transgressions."  (2)  When  full  forgiveness 
comes  it  brings  with  it  the  eternal  removal  of  the  penalty.  Tbe  forgiven  man  can- 
not be  punished.  (3)  With  pardon  there  shall  come  a  restoration  of  every  privilege. 
IV.  Ask  Him  for  these  gifts.  1.  Humbly.  You  do  not  deserve  them.  You 
have  no  claim  to  His  love,  and  must  not  set  up  any.  2.  Importunately.  Do  not 
come  with  a  cold  heart  and  a  trifling  spirit.  Come  with  this  resolve,  "  I  will  not 
leave  the  Cross  till  my  sins  have  left  me."  3.  Believingly — believing  that  Christ  can 
give,  and  that  He  is  as  willing  as  He  is  able.  4.  Now.  The  Romans  when  they 
meant  to  bring  things  to  an  issue  with  an  Oriental  tyrant,  sent  their  ambassador 
to  bring  his  answer  back — yes  or  no,  war  or  peace.  The  messenger  when  he  saw 
the  king  stooped  down,  and  drew  a  ring  upon  the  ground  round  the  monarch ;  and 
then  said,  "  Step  outside  that  ring,  and  it  means  war ;  before  you  leave  that  circle 
you  must  accept  our  terms  of  peace,  or  know  that  Rome  will  use  her 
utmost  force  to  fight  with  you."  I  draw  a  ring  round  you,  and  I  de- 
mand an  answer.  Sinner,  wilt  thou  now  be  saved  or  not?  To-day  is  tbe 
accepted  time,  to-day  is  the  day  of  salvation.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Jesus 
Christ  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  : — I.  A  Prince.  According  to — 1.  His  heavenly 
origin.  2.  His  Divine  credentials,  even  when  in  the  form  of  a  servant.  3.  His 
glorious  exaltation  to  the  right  liaud  of  God.  II.  A  Saviour.  1.  Already 
in  the  manger  by  His  self  renunciation.  2.  On  the  Cross  by  His  sacrifice.  8.  On 
the  throne  by  His  intercession.  III.  A  prince  and  a  Saviour.  1.  If  He  were  not 
a  Saviour  He  could  not  be  a  Prince — His  fairest  princely  ornament  is  His  crown  of 
thorns.  2.  If  He  were  not  a  Prince  He  could  not  be  a  Saviour — the  efficacy  of  His 
sacrifice  depends  on  His  Divine  dignity.  3.  As  a  Prince  we  must  honour  and  obey 
Him,  and  as  a  Saviour  love  and  confide  m  Him,  in  order  to  become  partakers  of 
His  salvation.      (K.  Gerok.)  Repentance  the  gift  of  Christ: — The  doctrine  of 

the  gospel  appears  to  be  not  only  that  Christ  taught  the  efficacy  of  repentance,  but 
rendered  it  of  the  efficacy  which  it  is,  by  what  He  did  and  suffered  for  us  ;  that 
He  obtained  for  us  the  benefit  of  having  our  repentance  accepted  unto  eternal  life ; 
not  only  that  He  revealed  to  sinners  that  they  were  in  a  capacity  of  salvation  by 
what  He  did  and  suffered  for  them.  And  it  is  our  wisdom  thankfully  to  accept 
the  benefit  by  performing  the  conditions  on  which  it  is  offered,  on  our  part  without 
disputing  how  it  is  procured  on  His.  {Bp.  Butler.)  Repentance  and  remission 
of  sin  : — I.  The  offices  of  Christ  the  Lord  in  His  heavenly  state,  or 
what  He  is  exalted  to  be,  viz.,  "a  Prince  and  a  Saviour."  II.  The  gifts  at 
His  disposal,  or  what  He  is  able  to  bestow,  viz.,  "repentance  and  forgive- 
ness of  sins.''  Application:  1.  Give  to  Him  whom  God  hath  exalted  an  exalted 
place  in  your  thoughts  and  affections.  2.  Give  to  Him,  at  all  times,  the  daily 
homage  of  your  faith  and  love  and  obedience.  (1)  Go  to  Him  as  the  only 
Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  sole  appointed  medium  of  all  your  communica- 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

tions  with  the  most  High  God.  (2)  Go  to  Him,  and  give  heed  to  Him,  as 
presenting  you  at  once  with  the  noblest  model,  and  strongest  motives,  iu  every 
duty.  (3)  Go  to  Him  farther  as  the  authorised  source  and  dispenser  of  spiritual 
blessings  to  your  souls.  3.  See  that  you  value  these  blessings  which  He  is  exalted 
to  bestow,  and  that  you  faithfully  seek  them  according  to  His  Word.  4.  Take, 
then,  the  full  consolation  and  encouragement  of  having  such  an  exalted 
Redeemer.  (Jas.  Brewster.)  Repentance  and  forgiveness  : — There  are  some 
who  would  object  to  this  phraseology  as  unsound,  if  it  were  not  the  phraseology 
of  Holy  Writ.  It  appears  to  savour  too  much  of  legalism,  both  because  it  is 
repentance  —  not  faith  —  with  which  the  forgiveness  of  sins  stands  connected, 
and  because  in  the  statement  of  the  two  things,  repentance  is  placed  first  in 
order.  But  it  will  be  seen  upon  examination  that  here,  as  everywhere  else,  the 
grace  of  the  gospel  and  the  authority  of  the  law  are  equally  recognised,  and  that 
there  is  not  the  slightest  sacrifice  of  the  one  of  these  Divine  dispensations  to  the 
other.      I.  Repentance  and  forgiveness  oe  sins  are  here  employed  to  denote 

THE    WHOLE    EXTENT    OF    THAT    SALVATION  WHICH  ChRIST  HAS  EFFECTED  IN  OUR  BEHALF. 

1.  Forgiveness  of  sins  denotes  it  as  applied  to  our  condition.  We  are  in  a  state  of 
guilt — liable  to  God's  displeasure,  and  under  a  sentence  of  condemnation.  But 
Christ  by  "  suffering,  the  just  for  the  unjust,"  procures  for  us  "  redemption,  even 
the  forgiveness  of  sins."  And  thus,  the  only  thing  which  separated  between  God 
and  us  being  effectually  removed,  we  are  restored  to  His  favour,  and  regain  a  title 
to  every  blessing.  2.  Repentance  denotes  it  in  reference  to  our  character,  A 
change  of  character  is  as  essential  for  us  as  a  change  of  condition.  Though 
pardon  and  eternal  life  had  been  procured  for  us,  yet  these  we  could  not  enjoy  so 
long  as  we  were  alienated  from  God,  by  whom  that  pardon  was  to  be  granted  and 
with  whom  that  eternal  life  was  to  be  spent.  And  accordingly  provision  is  made 
in  the  gospel  scheme  for  producing  the  revolution  in  our  moral  nature  which  is 
thus  found  to  be  indispensable.  Of  this  revolution  Christ  is  the  author,  as  He  is  of 
every  other  benefit.  In  this  way  our  salvation  is  complete.  3.  The  circumstance 
that  faith  is  not  specified  does  not  amount  to  an  underrating  of  its  value,  or  a 
depriving  it  of  its  just  province.  Repentance  includes  faith,  not  only  as  one  of  its 
component  parts,  but  as  its  essential  feature.  Faith,  whether  considered  simply 
as  a  belief  in  the  Divine  testimony  respecting  Christ,  or  as  an  actual  embracing  of 
Him,  and  trusting  in  Him,  enters  into  the  very  substance  of  repentance.  Note 
that  it  is  the  "repentance  of  Israel"  that  is  especially  spoken  of.  They  had  crucified 
Christ.  Their  repentance  must  necessarily  have  mainly  consisted  in  a  transition 
from  their  obstinate  infidelity  to  faith  in  Jesus  as  a  suffering  Saviour.  In  like 
manner  the  predominant  sin  of  all  who  have  not  repented,  is  that  Christ  has  been 
offered  to  them,  and  that  they  have  refused  the  offer.  So  that  when  they  repent, 
the  great  thing  they  have  to  do  is  to  open  their  ears  and  hearts  to  the  message 
which  the  gospel  brings  them  concerning  the  Saviour,  and  to  flee  for  refuge  in  His 
Divine  person  and  finished  work.     II.  Though  repentance  is  first  in  order,  it 

DOES  not  bear  to  FORGIVENESS  OF  SINS  THE  RELATION  OF  CAUSE  TO  EFFECT,  AND  IS 

NOT  THE  CONDITION  OF  FORGIVENESS.  Were  there  nothing  in  the  passage  itself  to 
indicate  this  we  should  be  entitled  to  explain  it  by  what  the  Bible  says  as  to  the 
nature  of  repentance — viz.,  that  it  cannot  meritoriously  contribute  to  the  attain- 
ment of  any  blessing  from  God  ;  and  by  tbe  general  analogy  of  Scripture,  one  of 
whose  great  objects  is  to  strip  all  human  moralities  of  every  thing  like  good 
desert,  or  in  cancelling  the  guilt  of  man.  But  we  liave  no  occasion  to  wander  from 
the  text.  Forgiveness  comes  to  us  from  Divine  mercy.  Christ  is  exalted  to  give 
it.  And,  represented  as  His  gift,  it  is  not  traced  to  repentance  as  its  source.  Nay, 
the  very  juxtaposition  of  the  two  benefits  serves  to  put  them  on  the  same  footing. 
Repentance  is  just  as  much  a  gift  as  forgiveness.  And  if  this  be  so,  does  it  not 
exclude  altogether  the  idea  of  forgiveness  being  earned  or  deserved  by  repentance, 
and  virtually  prohibit  us  from  attaching  any  merit  to  the  change  that  is  effected  iu 
our  character,  more  than  to  the  change  that  is  effected  in  our  condition  ?  And  by 
teaching  us  to  assign  the  whole  of  our  salvation  to  the  achievement  of  Christ 
alone,  does  it  not  discountenance  every  feeling  of  confidence  in  our  own  perform- 
ances, and  bid  us  cherish  as  profound  humility,  in  respect  to  our  need  of  repentance, 
as  in  respect  to  our  need  of  forgiveness  ?  We  must  therefore  simply  regard  ourselves 
as  the  mere  undeserving  recipients  of  both.  We  may  recognise  the  distinction,  that 
while  the  one  is  bestowed  upon  us,  the  other  is  wrought  in  us  ;  but  still  for  neither 
of  them  must  we  feel  indebted  to  any  virtue  or  efficiency  of  our  own.     III.  Re- 

PENTANCB    IS    INDISSOLUBLT    LINKED    WITH    FORGIVENESS,    AND    UNLESS    THE    FIRST    IS 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  605 

WKOTJGHT    IN   US,    MOST    CEETAINLT   THE    SECOND    IS    NOT    CONVEYED    TO    US.  Men     are 

very  apt  to  overlook  this.  The  fear  of  hell  is  felt  to  be  so  awful  that  they  are 
desirous  to  escape  from  it,  and  the  hope  of  heaven  so  delightful  that  they  willingly 
entertain  it.  And  as  the  gospel  proposes  a  plan,  whose  tendency  is  to  deliver  from 
the  one  and  to  encourage  the  other,  they  cherish  the  expectation  that,  tbrough  Divine 
mercy,  all  will  be  well  with  them  at  last.  But  all  this  while  they  have  overlooked 
that  moral  change  without  which  punishment  cannot  be  shunned,  nor  felicity 
reached.  Now  it  requires  no  elaborate  train  of  argument  to  demonstrate  the  uiter 
groundlessness  and  danger  of  such  views.  1.  "  God  commandeth  all  men  every- 
where to  repent " — Christ  has  said,  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  perish  " — 
and,  with  all  the  rich  mercy  which  it  unfolds,  the  gospel  gives  no  one  the  slightest 
ground  to  hope  for  salvation,  if  the  exhortation  to  repent  is  neglected.  And  do  not 
you  perceive  that  this  position  is  a  proof  more  ample  and  conclusive  than  any- 
thing else,  that  repentance  is  essential  ?  Men  are  so  much  in  love  with  sin  that 
they  not  only  cherish  the  prospect  of  going  into  heaven,  though  unprepared  for  it, 
but  resolutely  shut  out  from  their  view  all  that  the  God  of  heaven  has  told  them 
of  the  necessity  of  a  moral  renovation,  and  deliberately  rest  upon  the  grace  He  has 
manifested,  while  they  as  deliberately  maintain  the  character  with  which  that  grace 
is  declared  by  Him  to  be  completely  irreconcilable.  Wherefore,  I  would  say  to  all 
such,  look  to  this  declaration  of  the  Apostle  Peter,  in  which  repentance  is  as 
emphatically  announced  as  forgiveness.  It  is  honoured  by  having  conferred  upon 
it  the  precedence  to  forgiveness.  At  any  rate,  so  closely  are  the  two  conjoined  that 
you  cannot  look  upon  either  without  seeing  both.  2.  And  besides  this,  consider 
repentance  and  forgiveness  as  proceeding  alike  from  Christ.  He  died  to  purchase 
them — He  is  exalted  to  communicate  them.  And  could  this  have  been  the  case, 
unless  both  of  them  had  been  necessary  for  you?  If  both  of  them  are  thus 
demonstrated  to  be  necessary  for  you,  upon  what  principle  consistent  with  duty  or 
with  safety  can  you  be  contented  with  only  one  of  them  ?  Are  not  you,  in  reject- 
ing the  other,  doing  what  you  can  at  once  to  frustrate  the  Saviour's  sufferings  on 
the  Cross,  and  to  dishonour  the  power  which  He  exercises,  the  mercy  which  He 
manifests,  on  His  throne?  (A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  salvation  in  Christ: — 
I.  Offered  by  Him — as  the  Prince  and  the  Saviour.  II.  To  be  appeopriated  by 
ua — in  repentance  and  forgiveness  of  sins.     {K.  Gcrok.) 

Ver.  32.  And  we  are  witnesses  of  these  things ;    and  so  also  is   the  Holy 

Ghost. — The  ivitness  of  the  Word  and  of  the  SjJii'it : — The  book  of  Acts  is  one  con- 
tinuous testimony  to  the  Ascension.  As  the  Gospels  contain  the  record  of  what 
Jesus  began,  so  the  Acts  contain  the  record  of  what  He  continued  "  to  do  and 
teach  "  (chap.  i.  1).  Our  Lord  prolongs  His  days,  and  some  of  the  earliest  of 
the  ne»v  "days  of  the  Sou  of  Man  "  are  recorded  here.  This  word  of  St.  Peter  sums 
up  the  witness  to  the  Ascension  in  a  more  compendious  form  than  any  other.  It 
unites  the  two  testimonies- — of  God  and  man —as  they  are  not  elsewhere — united. 
Let  us  consider  these  as — I.  The  sum  of  the  historical  testimony  to  the  facts 
OF  THE  GOSPEL.  That  which  the  evangelists  afterwards  wrote  the  apostles  now 
preach  under  the  inspiration  of  the  same  Spirit,  viz. — 1.  The  Divine  mission  of 
Christ.  "  The  God  of  our  fathers  raised  up  His  Son  Jesus."  Peter  is  here,  and 
as  long  as  we  follow  him  in  this  book,  a  minister  of  the  circumcision.  Jesus  in 
His  preaching  is  the  promise  given  to  the  fathers  of  the  Jewish  covenant. 
"Beginning  at  Jerusalem"  He  testifies  to  the  council,  who,  however,  could  only 
receive  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  the  dignity  of  Christ.  Hence  the 
reserve  with  which  the  holy  name  is  always  introduced.  It  is  not  God's  "  only 
begotten  Son,"  but  His  "Servant"  Son,  whom  He  raised  up  of  the  seed  of  David,  a 
prophet  approved  of  God  as  the  other  prophets  were.  But  St.  Peter  did  not  preach 
only  for  Jews.  His  words  are  so  ordered  as  to  bear  the  higher  and  broader 
meaning.  The  "  Servant  "  was  not  only  a  descendant  of  Abraham  and  a  prophet 
like  unto  Moses ;  God  "  raised  Him  up  "  in  a  sense  that  has  no  parallel.  As  Divine, 
Christ's  goings  forth  were  from  everlasting  ;  as  human.  He  was  raised  up  by  a 
peculiar  and  heavenly  generation.  St.  Paul  at  Antioch  takes  up  Peter's  words,  and 
gives  them  the  wider  application.  2.  The  death  of  Christ.  Here  also  we  mark  the 
specific  application  to  Jewish  hearers.  St.  Peter  proclaimed  Christ's  death  as  it 
could  only  have  been  proclaimed  to  the  actual  crucifiers.  The  same  message  that 
offered  tliera  pardon  painted  their  crime  in  its  most  awful  colours.  The  death  of 
Christ  is  the  central  theme  of  New  Testament  testimony  as  declared  by  human 
witnesses  under  the  direction  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     As  a  fact,  it  has  the  largest  place 


506  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

in  the  record.  Here  only  all  the  evangelists  unite,  and  wherever  we  turn  in  the 
later  scriptures  the  Crucifixion  is  always  near  at  hand.  This,  however,  is  a  light 
thing  compared  with  the  meaning  of  the  event.  The  "  tree "  becomes  the 
"  Cross,"  and  it  is  placed  in  the  centre  of  New  Testament  theology.  While  the 
work  of  Christ's  mission  is  the  whole  sum  of  truth,  the  Cross  is  the  whole  sum  of 
Christ's  work,  and  it  is  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross  that  the  apostles  survey 
the  whole  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  3.  The  exaltation  of  Christ.  Once  more  we 
mark  the  influence  of  Peter's  hearers.  Every  word  is  chosen  to  mark  the  contrast 
between  the  act  of  men  and  the  act  of  God.  They  raised  Him  up  to  the  tree  ; 
God  raised  Him  up  to  a  glory  that  was  the  measure  of  His  humiliation.  This  is 
the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  all  mankind,  and  in  a  special  sense.  The 
apostles  could  only  witness  to  Christ's  life,  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension,  but 
the  Spirit  throughout  the  entire  New  Testament  proclaims  through  the  apostles 
that  Jesus  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.     II.  The  saving 

SOPBEMACY    OF     ChKIST     AS     OUR     PeINCE    AND     SaVIOUB   AT   THE    EIGHT    HAND    OF   THE 

Father.  It  was  declared  by  our  Lord  that  the  Spirit  should  glorify  Him  after  His 
departure,  and  one  part  of  that  ofBce  He  discharged  by  giving  Him  the  new  names 
acquired  by  His  death.  1.  Christ  became,  by  His  ascension,  the  Prince  of  His 
people.  He  was  not  that  in  the  deepest  and  widest  sense  until  He  was  received 
into  the  heavens.     Then  God  highly  exalted  Him  because  of  the  suffering  of  death. 

2.  So  also  He  became  our  Saviour,  in  the  most  comprehensive  sense  only,  when,  all 
His  offices  complete.  He  began  His  mediatorial  reign.  "  His  name  shall  be  called 
Jesus,"  said  the  angel ;  and  by  that  name  He  was  always  known.  "  Unto  you  is 
born  a  Saviour,"  said  the  angels  ;  but  we  never  hear  that  name  given  Him  till  now. 

3.  But  the  full  significance  of  the  new  name  is  found  only  in  the  combination. 
(1)  He  is  the  Saviour  of  the  subjects  of  His  kingdom,  and  none  are  His  true 
subjects  who  are  not  delivered  by  His  power  from  their  guilt,  their  subjection  to 
sin  and  the  empire  of  Satan.  The  whole  tenor  of  His  instructions  is  faithful  to 
the  one  idea  of  the  gathering  out  of  the  world  a  people  who  are  saved  from  their 
sins.  As  He  began,  so  He  ended  with  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven."  Tbis  also  was 
the  burden  of  apostolic  testimony.  St.  Peter  (chap,  ii.)  proclaims  a  saving  grace 
that  rescues  souls  from  an  untoward  generation  and  adds  them  to  the  Church  as 
saved.  And  the  Holy  Ghost  everywhere  bears  the  same  testimony.  The  kingdom 
is  stiU  not  of  this  world.  (2)  And  He  is  the  Kuler  over  those  whom  He  saves. 
Absolute  submission  to  His  authority  is  the  law  of  His  Church — a  law  to  which 
the  Spirit  everywhere  bears  testimony.  Our  salvation  is  made  perfect  by  holy 
obedience.  This  testimony,  added  to  the  former,  completes  the  witness  to  the 
Bedeemer's  lordship  in  heaven.  Those  who  would  make  Him  a  king  over  all  men 
alike  are  rebuked  by  the  declaration  that  He  is  a  prince  only  as  He  is  a  Saviour. 
Those  who  would  make  Him  only  a  Saviour  are  rebuked  by  the  declaration  that 
He  is  a  Saviour  only  as  He  is  a  prince.  III.  The  salvation  which  our  Prince  in 
HEAVEN  bestows  ON  MAN  UPON  EARTH.  And  here  St.  Peter  preaches,  as  the  organ 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  "  common  salvation,"  to  use  his  own  phrase,  in  a  manner 
that  is  by  no  means  common.  1.  Jesus  in  heaven  is  the  Giver  of  repentance  and 
pardon.  These  two  words  express  the  whole  sum  of  salvation  provide<l  in  Christ 
and  proclaimed  in  His  gospel.  The  former  comprises  all  that  is  to  be  wrought  in 
man  as  preparation  ;  the  latter  comprises  all  that  man,  thus  prepared,  receives 
from  Christ's  mercy.  The  two  together  comprise  "  all  the  words  of  this  life."  2. 
To  these  things  bear  the  apostles  witness,  and  so  does  also  the  Holy  Ghost — (1) 
As  the  vindicator  of  Christ's  claims  to  all  who  hear  the  gospel,  but  more  specifically 
to  those  who  obey.  (2)  As  the  revealer  of  Christ's  mercy.  (IF.  B.  Pope,  D.D.) 
Christian  witnesses : — I.  The  keppective  w^TNEssES — the  apostles  in  the  first  case, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  second.  With  regard  to  the  apostles  :  we  may  remark, 
that  their  evidence,  as  it  will  bear  the  strictest  scrutiny,  so  it  is  worthy  of  universal 
credit.  1.  These  witnesses  must  have  had  the  strongest  reasons  for  what  they 
affirmed,  concerning  the  Saviour's  resurrection — or  they  would  not  have  espoused 
a  cause  so  extremely  unpopular  and  hazardous.  2.  Next  to  their  peculiar  situation — 
the  nature  of  the  evidence  which  these  persons  gave  affords  the  strongest  grounds  of 
confidence.  They  were  eye-witnesses  of  the  fact.  3.  And  this  is  further  strengthened 
by  the  number  of  witnesses  herein  concerned.  4.  The  place  where  they  declared 
the  fact  strongly  confirms  it.  They  chose  the  spot  where  the  event  happened — the 
city  where  dwelt  the  very  murderers  of  the  Son  of  God — as  the  first  place  in 
which  to  spread  their  report.  5.  The  time  which  they  chose  also  is  another 
evidence  of  their  integrity.    While  the  transactions  of  Calvary  were  yeL  fresh  in 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  507 

the  memory  of  all,  and  while  the  enemies  of  the  Saviour  were  still  in  transports 
of  joy  on  account  of  their  supposed  victory,  His  disciples  boldly  declared  that  He 
was  raised  from  the  dead,  and  ascended  into  heaven.  II.  But  there  is  a  higher 
kind  of  evidence  :  The  Holy  Ghost  also  (Mark  xvi.  20  ;  Acts  iv.  33).  1.  This  He 
did  by  enabling  them  to  work  miracles  in  confirmation  of  the  truth.  2.  The 
transforming  effects  of  the  gospel  on  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men  afford  us 
another  proof.  3.  Consolation  and  peace  afforded  to  the  mourner  are  also  in 
proof.  His  smile  makes  the  poor,  the  needy,  the  trembling  rejoice.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  The  evidence  of  an  ascended  Saviour  gives  us  encouragement  for 
faith  and  prayer,  and  love,  and  praise.  2.  How  dangerous  for  sinners  to  disobey 
and  dishonour  Him  I  {American  National  Preacher.)  God's  chosen  tvitnesses 
(text,  and  Isa.  xliii.  10)  : — Men  bear  for  God  two  kinds  of  testimony— in- 
voluntary and  voluntary.  I.  The  Jews  were  involuntary  witnesses.  They 
had  "  the  law  and  the  prophets."  They  glorified  in  this.  But  their  formahsm 
and  worldliness  prevented  them  from  seeing  the  meaning  of  these  oracles  of 
God.  They  were  called  into  court,  as  it  were,  by  God.  "Bring  forth  the 
blind  that  have  eyes,  and  the  deaf  that  have  ears " ;  "  Let  all  nations  be 
gathered"  and  confronted  with  these  Hebrews.  Who  among  the  heathen  can 
announce  coming  and  far-distant  events,  or  even  show  former  things  ?  But  the 
Jews  can.  The  law  and  prophets  in  their  hands — books  seven  centuries  old — ■ 
declare  the  history  of  man  from  the  Creation  and  announce  the  coming  One—"  My 
servant  whom  I  have  chosen  " — seven  centuries  in  advance.  You  Hebrews,  God 
said  by  Isaiah  (xliii.  8),  "  with  eyes  but  seeing  not,"  hold  these  books  in  your  hands. 
"  Ye  are  My  "  unconscious,  involuntary  "  witnesses."  So  He  may  say  still.  These 
Hebrews  have,  most  tenaciously,  and  often  at  the  hazard  of  their  lives,  held  fast 
these  sacred  volumes  through  all  these  centuries.  Peeled  and  scattered  over  the 
earth,  they  have  guarded  these  documents  while  they  have  misread  them;  "a 
blind  people  that  have  eves " — shrewd,  far-seeing,  and  intelligent  in  all  other 
matters,  but  perverse  and  ignorant  in  this,  they  have  remained  involuntary  wit- 
ness-bearers to  the  veracity  and  supremacy  of  God.  II.  Christians  are  voluntary 
WITNESSES  in  a  twofold  capacity — as  a  Church  and  as  individuals.  1.  Against 
atheism  asserting  there  is  no  God,  the  Church  proclaims:  "There  is,  and  we 
know,  worship  and  obey  Him."  2.  Against  paganism,  with  its  many  gods,  the 
Church  testifies :  "  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord."  3.  Against  many-faced 
infidelity  denying  that  there  is  any  revelation  from  God,  if  there  is  a  God  at  all, 
the  Church  avers  :  "  We  have.  God  spake  at  sundry  times  and  in  various  ways  to 
the  fathers  by  the  prophets.  In  these  last  days  He  has  spoken  unto  us  by  His 
Son."  4.  Against  those  who  deny  the  manifestation  of  God  in  three  persons,  the 
Church  keeps  uttering  its  benediction  :  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all."  5. 
Those  who  deny  the  necessity  for  any  atonement  may  hear  the  Church  declare : 
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  death,  but  we  have  redemption  through  the  blood  of  Christ, 
even  the  forgiveness  of  sins,"  and  see  her  "  showing  forth  His  death  till  He  come  " 
in  her  holy  communion.  6.  To  sceptics  who  scornfully  ask :  "  Where  is  the 
promise  of  His  coming  ? "  the  Church  testifies  :  "  We  wait  for  the  Son  of 
God  from  heaven.  He  will  appear,  and  then  all  mysteries  will  be  solved." 
7.  To  Eomanists  who  assert  that  there  are  other  mediators  than  Jesus,  the 
Church  proclaims  "  one  God  and  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the 
Man  Christ  Jesus."  8.  False  liberalism  may  say  to  the  sinner:  "  Be  sincere  and 
you  need  no  more  "  ;  the  Church  echoes  her  Founder's  words :  "  Except  a  man 
be  born  from  above  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  and  those  of  His 
beloved  disciple  :  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  (J.  Hall,  D.D.) 
The  evidence  from  experience : — Does  the  religion  of  Christ  stand  the  test  of  the 
Baconian  philosophy  ?  I.  We  shall  probably  find  Christianity  a  religion 
that  will  submit  to  the  test  of  experience,  because — 1.  It  is  a  religion  for  all 
men.  There  is  nothing  in  Christianity  narrow,  exclusive,  sectarian.  Now  how 
can  this  be  unless  it  be  put  to  the  test  of  fact  ?  The  masses  cannot  reason  closely. 
2.  Only  by  commending  itself  to  his  experience  will  this  rehgion  do  for  any  man 
aU  the  time.  There  are  times  when  philosophy  and  theology  cannot  sustain  a  man. 
In  trouble  and  death  mere  reason  will  not  sustain  him.  He  must  then  know  his 
support.  3.  The  method  of  experience  has  been  found  to  be  better  fitted  to  give 
an  understanding  of  things.  The  world  knew  little  of  the  sciences  till  Bacon's 
time.  One  pound  of  fact  is  worth  a  ton  of  argument.  It  is  probable,  therefore, 
that  God  designing  a  religion  for  all  men  would  so  arrange  that  it  could  be  sub- 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

jected  to  the  most  convincing  test.  II.  Does  Christianity  submit  itself  to  tests 
THAT  MAN  CAN  TRY?  Yes ;  let  US  obssrve  them — 1.  A  verification  of  the  promises 
of  the  Bible  as  touching  (1)  charity.  Ask  any  man  who  has  tried  charity  for  twenty 
or  thirty  years  if  it  pays.  (2)  Prayer.  2.  Let  us  come  to  the  heart  of  Scripture. 
We  are  told  that  he  who  believes  will  be  saved.  Can  we  kitow  we  are  saved  ?  If 
there  is  a  fact  in  the  universe  of  which  we  may  be  certain,  it  is  that  Christ  reveals 
Himself  to  the  believer  as  his  Saviour.  III.  A  few  questions  to  those  who 
still  object.  1.  Is  mystery  confined  to  Christianity  ?  I  will  undertake  to 
explain  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity  to  any  man  who  will  unfold  the  mystery  of  a 
single  seed.  2.  On  the  testimony  of  a  few  competent  witnesses  we  believe  in  the 
wonderful  revelation  of  the  spectroscope.  Millions  of  competent  witnesses  declare 
that  tbey  know  by  experience  Christianity  to  be  true.  3.  Owen  finds  a  fossil  five 
hundred  feet  down.  He  says  that  animal  lived  on  the  surface  because  there  are 
sockets  for  eyes.  Nature  makes  nothing  in  vain.  It  must  have  lived  where  light 
was.  Now  in  man  we  find  yearnings,  hopes  that  nothing  but  immortality  can 
satisfy.  Can  you  believe  that  God  made  light  for  the  eyes,  but  nothing  for  the  soul  ? 
Conclusion  :  Many  doubt  the  possibility  of  knowing  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  I 
say  to  a  man,  "  Saturn  has  three  rings  and  eigiit  satellites."  Says  he,  "  That 
cannot  be,  for  I  have  conversed  with  many  men  who  have  looked  at  Saturn,  but 
they  never  saw  any  rings  or  moons."  I  apply  the  telescope  to  his  eye  ;  he  looks, 
but  sees  nothing.  Why?  He  is  blind.  (C  D.  Fosx,  I).D.)  Tlie  test  of  ex- 
perience : — There  are  two  methods  by  which  conclusions  are  reached — the  method 
of  argument  and  that  of  experience.  These  iiave  their  representatives  in  Aristotle 
and  Bacon.  By  the  first  we  are  led  by  reason  ;  by  the  second  fact.  Which  is  the 
better  method  ?  A  farmer  ploughing  his  field  turns  to  the  light  a  bit  of  yellow 
substance.  He  examines  it.  It  seems  to  be  gold.  He  reasons  ;  gold  has  been 
found  in  the  neighbourhood ;  the  geological  conditions  are  all  favourable,  and  it 
has  the  appearance  and  gravity  of  gold.  This  is  the  first  method.  But  suppose 
he  takes  that  substance  to  the  metallurgist,  and  an  acid  is  applied  that  will  take 
hold  of  nothing  else  but  gold.  He  now  knows  through  experience  that  it  is  gold. 
Take  the  case  of  character  :  you  wish  to  know  if  a  man  is  honest.  You  say  he 
looks  honest,  has  honest  associates,  comes  of  an  honpst  stock.  Now  that  is  all 
argument.  But  suppose  his  partner  says,  "  I  knoio  he  is  honest ;  he  has  been 
with  me  for  twenty  years."  That  is  the  method  of  Bacon — experience.  Is  it  not 
the  most  conclusive  ?    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  33-42.  When  they  heard  that  they  were  cut  to  the  heart. — Cut   to  the 

heart : — The  strict  meaning  of  the  verb  describes  the  action  of  a  saw,  as  in  Heb. 
xi.  37.  Used  figuratively,  it  seems  to  imply  a  more  lacerating  pain  than  the 
"  pricked  to  the  heart "  of  chap.  ii.  37,  leading  not  to  repentance  but  to  hatred. 
The  persons  spoken  of  are  principally  the  high  priest  and  his  Sadducean  followers 
(ver.  17).  (Dean  Plumptre.)  Preaching  to  the  heart : — What  would  be  thought 
of  a  doctor  who,  when  called  in  to  a  suffering  patient,  should  not  at  once  prescribe 
the  best  and  swiftest  remedy  without  note  or  comment;  but  should  pi'oceed  to  dis- 
cuss the  comparative  merits  of  homoeopathy  and  allopathy,  with  sly  sarcastic 
glances  at  massage,  hydropathy  and  faith-healing,  then  go  on  to  describe,  negatively, 
all  the  medicines  which  have  been,  or  might  be  given  ;  then  positively  to  describe 
a  remedy  recently  discovered  by  a  young  German  doctor,  saying  he  was  not  quite 
certain  whether  it  would  be  effectual,  but  it  was  worth  trying ;  that,  in  any  case, 
with  or  without  medicine,  the  patient  would  probably  be  cured,  in  this  world  or  the 
next,  and  that  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  such  is  the  march  of  intellect  in  this 
enlightened  age,  a  better  remedy  would,  no  doubt,  be  discovered?  Equally  foolish 
and  wrong  it  is  for  a  Christian  minister,  standing  before  a  congregation,  all  suffer- 
ing more  or  less  from  mental  and  moral  disorders,  doubts  and  fears,  sins  and 
sorrows,  ignorance  and  self-deceit — all  hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness,  or 
,  if  not,  the  more  needing  a  warm-hearted  gospel  of  truth  and  love  to  awaken  in  them 
a  sense  of  unrighteousness — to  make  the  staple  of  his  discourse  a  series  of  clever 
hair  splitting  of  words  with  all  the  opinions  of  commentators  (A  B  C  to  Z)  wlio 
had  tried  to  find  out  (say)  what  St.  Paul  meant,  perhaps  winding  up  with  the  con- 
solatory remark,  that  after  all,  it  was  not  so  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  true  key 
to  his  meaning  had  been  lost,  as  probably,  if  Paul  had  lived  now,  he  would  not  only 
have  used  different  words  but  held  different  opinions  1  Let  us  learn  all  that 
grammar  and  theology  can  put  into  our  heads,  but  when  we  go  into  the  pulpit  we 
go  not  as  grammarians,  theologians,  scientists,  or  philosophers,  but  as  preachers 


CHAP.  V.J  THE  ACTS.  609 

to  speak  from  the  heart  to  the  heart.  Our  people  ask  for  bread,  not  flour  and 
water;  for  water,  not  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  [R.  Bruce,  D.D.)  The  victory  of 
the  truth  : — Whoever  will  not  receive  truth  into  his  heart,  will  perhaps  be  pierced 
to  the  heart  by  the  truth.  Even  this  is  a  victory.  {Starke.)  Four  characters  : 
— I.  The  character  of  the  chief  pkiests  and  eldeks  ;  persecuting  the  servant  as 
they  had  persecuted  the  Lord.  1.  One  pew  feature  there  is  in  this  persecution. 
Among  the  impugners  of  our  Lord's  own  doctrine  the  Pharisee  is  the  more  con- 
spicuous :  it  is  he  whose  hypocrisy  made  him  dread  Christ's  discernment  and 
holiness,  and  whose  very  orthodoxy  gave  a  self-sufficiency  to  his  judgment  peculiarly 
unfavourable  to  the  reception  of  the  truth.  But  no  sooner  has  Christ  left  the  earth 
than  the  opposite  party  becomes  the  assailant.  And  most  natural  it  was  that  a 
gospel  built  upon  a  resurrection  should  irritate  most  strongly  the  sect  which  denied 
that  great  hope  of  man.  While  it  was  a  mere  tenet  they  bore  it  with  composure  ; 
when  it  became  a  statement  of  fact,  it  was  at  once  a  struggle  for  life  and  death. 
Great  as  were  the  faults  of  the  Pharisee,  he  had  a  shorter  path  to  traverse  if  once 
his  steps  should  be  turned  in  the  direction  of  Christ's  kingdom.  The  Sadducee 
was  a  cold,  scoffing,  irreligious  materialist.  2.  And  if  there  be  a  body  of  professed 
Christians  who  seek  to  divest  the  gospel  of  its  supernatural  character;  who  resolve 
its  whole  system  of  duty  into  respectability  rather  than  holiness  and  good  nature 
rather  than  charity  ;  who  practically  make  their  nest  here,  and  leave  out  of  sight 
the  world  to  come  ;  then  that  body  is  the  type  of  the  Sadducee  of  other  days ;  and 
those  who  have  seen  anything  of  the  working  of  that  spirit  will  be  at  no  loss  to 
understand  how  the  Sadducee  should  outrun  the  Pharisee  in  the  bitterness  of  his 
hostility  to  all  that  is  distinctive  and  characteristic  in  the  gosi^el.  The  spirit 
of  the  Sadducee  is  in  all  of  us  by  nature,  struggling  in  us  for  the  mastery  with 
that  of  the  Pharisee  and  the  Herodian.  Each  of  these  is  but  the  development  of 
one  attribute  of  fallen  nature.  What  is  the  Sadducee  but  the  man  who  avows  his 
disbelief  in  mysteries  of  which  we  all  have  too  feeble  a  grasp  ?  And  what  shall  we 
say  of  those  who  have  accustomed  themselves  to  treat  everything  lightly  till  nothing 
is  serious,  who  have  a  jest  ready  for  every  revelation,  and  a  scoff  for  every  demand 
of  duty,  till  at  length  they  can  neither  tremble  at  God's  terrors  nor  believe  in  God's 
love?  The  Sadducees  of  our  day  do  not  gather  themselves  together  in  council  to 
judge  the  disciples  of  the  Lord :  they  themselves  use  the  same  name,  and  would  be 
indignant  at  the  denial  of  the  title.  But  they  hate,  none  the  less,  and  they  persecute 
too,  those  who  truly  believe ;  point  at  them  as  ignorant,  as  old-fashioned,  as 
righteous  overmuch,  as  slaves  of  the  letter,  as  exclusive  and  positive  and  self- 
sufficient.  May  such  persons  ask  themselves  seriously  this  one  question,  Am  I 
certain  that  I  shall  never  want  Christ  in  loneliness  and  sorrow,  in  age  and  sickness, 
in  the  hour  of  death,  and  in  the  day  of  judgment  ?  II.  And  when  we  turn  from 
this  hostility  are  we  not  struck  with  the  existence  in  these  days  of  many  a 
Gamaliel  ;  of  many  a  -man  who  is  at  once  observant  and  candid,  anxious  to  do 
nothing  rashly,  waiting,  rather  to  examine  credentials,  or  even  to  see  the  end, 
before  he  pronounces  himself  decisively  either  for  or  against  the  gospel  ?  1.  These 
men  have  much  in  them  that  is  attractive,  and  at  first  sight  all  that  is  reasonable. 
What  but  good  can  come,  we  might  inquire,  of  that  prudent  and  sensible  reminder, 
in  a  time  of  religious  excitement  and  enthusiasm  (ver.  38)  ?  And  no  doubt  such  a 
voice  is  useful.  Happy  the  nation  which  has  such  men  amongst  its  counsellors, 
when  an  act  of  hasty  tyranny  is  in  danger  of  treading  out  the  spark  of  grace  and 
truth !  This  was  the  part  of  Nicodemus,  when  the  case  of  One  greater  than  the 
apostles  was  at  issue.  Not  long  afterwards  this  timid  and  doubting  ally  is  found 
testifying  a  love  and  a  devotion  refused  by  men  who  owe  to  Christ  their  all.  2. 
But  yet  we  must  not  overrate  a  quality  which  has  so  much  in  it  of  good.  Candour, 
moderation,  an  open  mind  and  a  calm  judgment  are  useful  qualities,  and  at  certain 
times  may  rise  even  into  great  virtues.  But  not  all  of  them  together  will  suffice 
to  save  a  soul.  There  are  just  a  few  great  questions  on  which  minds  ought  to  be 
made  up  ;  on  which  if  the  evidence  we  possess  be  not  sufficient  for  conviction,  it  is 
our  first  and  most  bounden  duty  to  seek  and  to  obtain  more.  Such  a  question, 
above  all  others,  is  that  of  the  truth  and  power,  of  the  person  and  work,  of  the 
Messiahship  and  Divinity  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  To  be  candid  on 
this  subject  is  better  indeed  than  to  be  prejudiced,  scoffing,  or  hostile  ;  but  he  who 
is  nerely  candid  concerning  Christ  is  in  danger  of  a  life-long  suspense,  of  an  ultimate 
indifference.  Men  of  mere  candour,  are  commonly  men  who  in  great  emergencies 
disappoint,  and  in  critical  decisions  are  even  worse  than  foes.  Their  presence  is 
fatal  to  generous  impulses,  to  noble  enthusiasms.    Erasmus  was  the  Gamaliel  of 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  V. 

the  Beformation  ;  calm,  critical,  deliberative,  discerning :  but  where  would  the 
Eeformation  liave  been  if  beside  Erasmus  there  had  not  been  a  Luther?  If  all 
had  waited  to  see  wiiether  this  counsel  or  this  work  was  of  men  or  of  God,  by 
watching  for  its  issue,  the  blow  for  truth  had  never  been  struck,  and  a  reformed 
faith  had  never  emerged  from  the  mists  of  Papal  darkness.  In  details,  or  on 
subjects  of  minor  moment,  it  is  harmless,  .it  is  ri^ht,  to  be  Gamaliels;  but  on  the 
one  great  question,  of  having,  or  not  havmg  a  Saviour,  that  man  is  a  fool  who  post- 
pones IjIs  decision,  a  lost  man  who  dies  without  making  it.  III.  The  common 
PEOPLE  wlio  magnified  the  believers  though  they  durst  not  join  them,  and  who 
gladly  used  their  beneficent  and  healing  power.  These  too  have  tbeir  counterpart 
amongst  us.  There  are  men  and  women  who  reverence  religion,  who  count  the 
Christian  alone  happy,  wlio  delight  to  profit  by  Christian  converse  and  to  record 
the  triumphs  of  the  gospel,  but  who  yet  shrink  from  membership.  Such  persons 
are  not  against  Clirist,  nor  are  they  yet  quite  with  Him.  They  are  something 
more  than  candid  inquirers;  something  far  beyond  men  waiting,  like  Gamaliel,  to 
see  the  end.  Would  that  they  could  be  induced  to  take  just  tljat  one  step  which 
divides  them  fr^^m  every  hope  and  every  comfort  of  a  Christian  !  Would  that  they 
could  be  led  to  become  not  spectators  only,  but  inmates  of  the  sacred  porch  of 
Solomon  !  Believe  only,  not  that  Christ  died  for  some,  but  that  He  died  for  thee  ; 
no  longer  an  admirer  but  a  partaker  of  the  promises,  vea,  a  fellow  citizen  with  the 
saints,  and  of  the  very  household  of  God  1  IV.  The  altogethee  Christian. 
Hear  his  creed  as  it  is  rehearsed  in  this  record.  I  believe  that  I  ought  to  obey  God 
rather  than  men  ;  that  God  has  exalte<l  Christ  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour ;  that 
the  very  purpose  of  that  exaltation  is  that  He  may  bestow  repentance  and  bestow 
forgiveness  ;  that  God  for  His  sake  gives  His  Holy  Spirit  to  all  who  set  themselves 
in  His  strength  to  obey.  This  was  the  faith  which  enabled  apostles  to  brave 
persecution,  nay,  to  rejoice  to  be  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame,  or  even  death 
itself,  for  the  one  sufficient  name  in  which  alone  is  salvation.  Conclusion  :  Who 
can  doubt  which  of  those  four  characters  is  the  one  which  it  would  be  happiest  to 
Jive  with,  safest  and  most  glorious  to  possess  in  death?  Believe  only,  and  it  shall 
be  yours  !  (Dean  Vaufjhan.)  Gamaliel,  a  doctor  of  the  law,  had  in  reputation 
of  all  the  people. — Gamaliel: — I.  It  is  strange  how  a  single  name  heke  and 
there  secures  remembrance.  1.  It  is  almost  as  when  one  looks  out  across  the 
sea,  and  upon  the  surface,  all  grey  and  monotonous,  there  comes  one  flash  of  silver. 
Why  should  that  especial  wave  have  such  peculiar  piivile'.'e  ?  It  is  not  any  larger 
thin  tbe  rest,  and  is  made  of  no  different  water  ;  it  is  simply  that  it  happened  to 
leap  just  where  the  sun  was  smiting,  and  so  it  becomes  illustrious.  So  the  sun  of 
history  shines  on  this  great  sea  of  human  life ;  and  the  special  career  which 
happens  to  leap  just  where  the  sun  is  striking  catches  his  glory  and  seizes  men's 
notice  and  remembrance.  If  the  man's  life  is  larger  than  other  lives,  so  much  the 
better, — it  catches  so  much  more  of  sunshine.  If  it  is  of  special  fineness,  made  of 
more  lustrous  stuff  than  other  men's,  so  much  the  better  still — it  turns  the  sunshine 
into  a  peculiar  rtidiance.  But  still  the  essential  thing  is  that  it  should  leap  at  the 
right  moment  and  should  be  turned  the  right  way.  With  these  conditions  even  a 
very  common  life  becomes  illustrious ;  and  without  them  the  largest  and  the  finest 
character  melts  back  into  the  bosom  of  the  humanity  out  of  which  it  sprung, 
unnoticed,  unremembered.  2.  These  illustrious  men  when  they  appear  are  of 
more  than  merely  phenomenal  value.  In  their  illumination  the  whole  mass  of 
humanity  finds  its  illustration  and  understands  itself.  Each  of  them  becomes  the 
representative  of  some  smaller  group,  to  which  he  almost  gives  his  name.  Often, 
indeed,  it  is  only  a  degenerate  caricature  of  the  higher  nature  which  they  present. 
The  dogmatist  names  himself  by  the  great  name  of  St.  Paul.  The  feeble  senti- 
mentalist counts  himself  the  twin-brother  of  St.  John.  The  dainty  sceptic,  d-tb- 
bling  in  unbelief,  takes  the  name  of  earnest,  puzzled,  simple-souled  St.  Thomas 
to  himself.  But,  after  all,  there  is  a  constant  tendency  in  their  association  with 
the  highest  types  of  their  several  natures  and  tendencies  to  draw  them  upward  and 
to  make  each  of  them  a  more  worthy  expression  of  his  characteristic  qualities  than 
he  could  be  if  he  knew  it  only  in  himself.  In  this  truth  lies  one  of  the  greatest 
advantages  of  the  study  of  the  representative  men  of  human  history.  3.  I  ask  you 
to  turn  to  the  story  of  a  man  whose  name  flashes  for  a  moment  as  the  light  of  the 
New  Testament  history  falls  upon  the  life  of  Jerusalem  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Christian  Church.  The  flash  is  only  for  a  moment,  and  yet  the  impression  which 
it  leaves  is  very  clear.  He  is  peculiarly  a  representative  man,  and  the  nature  which 
he  represents  is  one  which  appeals  peculiarly  to  our  modern  life.    II.   Let  us 


CHAP. -v.]  THE  ACTS.  611 

EECALL  THE  HISTORY  OF  GAMALIEL.  He  was  One  of  the  most  famous  teachers  of  the 
Jewish  law.  1.  All  Jewish  history  declares  that  he  was  one  of  the  ablest  of  the  learned 
men  of  the  nation.  There  were  two  schools  among  the  Jews — that  of  Shammai, 
which  was  strict  and  narrow  ;  and  that  of  Hillel,  which  was  liberal  and  free.  Gamaliel 
■was  the  grandson  of  Hillel,  and  belonged  to  his  schnol.  He  was  one  of  the  few 
rabbis  who  allowed  their  students  the  study  of  Greek  literature.  He  taught  that  aU 
persons  engaged  in  works  of  mercy,  duty,  or  necessity,  should  be  exempt  from  the 
more  stringent  Sabbatical  traditions  ;  he  bade  his  disciples  greet  even  the  pagans  on 
their  feast-days  with  the  "  Peace  be  with  you."  In  ways  like  these  he  showed  the 
larginess  of  his  spirit,  and  the  people  loved  him.  He  was  one  of  the  seven  among 
the  Jewish  doctors  who  alone  have  been  honoured  with  the  supreme  title  of  Rabban. 
He  lived  to  a  good  old  age,  and  died  about  60  a.d.  2.  In  the  New  Testament 
Gamaliel  appears  twice,  and  both  times  in  the  most  interesting  way.  (1)  As  a  great 
preacher  of  toleration.  Every  great  teacher  and  scholar  ought  to  be  aware  of  the 
mystery  and  of  the  mightiness  of  Truth,  and  therefore  be  prejDared  to  see  Truth 
linger  and  hesitate,  and  even  seem  to  be  turned  back,  and  yet  to  keep  a  clear  assur- 
ance that  Truth  must  come  right  in  the  end,  and  that  the  only  way  to  help  her  is  to 
keep  her  free,  so  that  she  shall  be  at  liberty  to  help  herself.  There  is  something  in 
Gamaliel  which  reminds  one  of  Milton.  Tlie  one,  like  tire  other,  seems  to  feel  that 
any  attempt  to  help  truth  save  by  securing  her  liberty  is  impertinent  ;  that  all 
attempts  to  make  truth  sti'ong  either  by  disarming  her  enemies  or  by  choosing  for 
her  what  weapons  she  shall  fight  her  battles  with,  is  not  a  homage  to  her  strength, 
but  ail  insulting  insinuation  of  her  weakness.  The  scholar  of  Truth  must  trust 
Truth ;  that  is  Gamaliel's  ground.  (2)  And  this  character  has  close  connection 
with  the  fact  that  he  was  the  teacher  of  St.  Paul.  Such  a  teacher  as  that  has  a 
Bpeuial  interest.  He  is  one  of  tbose  men  who  give  other  men  the  chance  to  make 
history  rather  than  make  it  themselves.  They  themselves  are  almost  of  necessity 
relegated  ti>  obscurity.  The  very  splendour  of  the  career  of  their  pupils  makes  it 
impossible  for  the  world  to  see  them  ;  as  the  flash  of  fire  from  the  gun's  mouth, 
and  the  rush  of  the  burning  shell  on  its  tremendous  way,  makes  it  impossible  to 
see  the  gun  itself  in  whose  deep  heart  the  power  of  the  explosion  was  conceived  and 
born,  (a)  We  can  picture  to  ourselves  Gamaliel  watching  Paul,  and  we  can  think 
of  the  calm  large-minded  teacher  following  the  career  of  his  fiery-hearted  scholar, 
and,  however  he  disagreed  with  what  he  thought  his  delusions,  rejoicing  in  his 
faithfulness  and  force.  (6)  And  if  we  look  the  oth^-r  way,  there  are  few  things 
finer  thxn  to  see  the  reverence  and  gratitude  with  which  the  best  men  of  active  life 
look  back  to  the  quiet  teachers  who  furnished  them  with  the  materials  of  living. 
Even  from  the  midst  of  his  missionary  journeys,  and  his  prison  iu  Rome,  we  are 
able  to  believe  that  St.  Paul  looked  back  to  the  lessons  of  faithfulness  and  generosity 
which  he  had  learned  of  the  great  teacher  of  his  youth,  (c)  There  are  some  of 
us  whose  wi  rk  in  life  seems  to  assume  mainly  this  character.  Parents,  teachers, 
quiet  helpers  of  other  lives,  it  seems  as  if  we  were  rather  providing  other  souls  with 
the  conditions  of  living  than  living  ourselves.  In  the  apparent  stationariness  of 
much  of  our  experience,  seeing  life  flow  by  us,  as  the  river  flows  by  the  tree,  it  is 
good  to  live  thus  by  the  life  to  which  we  try  to  minister,  as  the  tree  lives  by  the 
river  whose  waters  it  at  the  same  time  does  something  to  colour  and  to  direct.  (3) 
But  there  is  a  larger  view  of  Gamaliel  than  this.  He  has  his  relation  not  merely  to 
St.  Paul,  but  to  the  whole  opening  history  of  Christianity.  There  are  some  men 
whose  whole  influence  is  to  keep  history  open,  so  thai  whatever  good  thing  is 
trying  to  get  done  in  the  world  can  get  done.  The  counsel  of  Gamaliel  seems  to 
point  him  out  as  being  such  a  man.  There  are  men  who  seem  to  shut  up  a  com- 
munity, so  that,  as  far  as  their  influence  extends,  if  a  new  thought  were  waiting  to 
be  spoken  or  a  new  deed  all  ready  to  be  done,  it  would  be  thrown  back  and  made 
hopeless.  Was  not  this  exactly  what  Jesus  charged  upon  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees :  "  Ye  shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  men.  Ye  neither  go  in 
yourselves  ;  neither  suffer  ye  them  that  are  entering  to  go  in  "?  They  made  great 
deeds,  fresh  thoughts,  enthusiastic  conseci'ation  to  first  principles  appear  impos- 
sible. There  is  a  still  stronger  instance  of  the  same  blighting  power  in  the  record 
that  Jesus  "  could  there  do  no  mighty  work,  because  of  the  people's  unbelief."  It 
was  possible  for  men  so  to  shut  up  a  whole  district  of  the  land  that  even  Christ's 
marvellous  power  could  not  do  its  work  there.  And  in  our  little  circles  are  there 
not  men  so  distrustful  of  the  higher  impulses,  men  so  unbelieving  and  so  scornful, 
that  we  see  the  young  people,  the  earnest  people,  shut  up  their  lives  before  them 
as  the  flowers  shut  up  at  night ;  and  there  is  no  hope  for  any  great  thing  to  be 


512  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

done  or  thought  while  they  are  there.  I  do  not  mean  the  sober,  thoughtful,  accu- 
rate, critical  men  who  act  like  the  healthy  frost,  which  kills  the  gnats  and  mosqui- 
toes, but  makes  every  higher  being  live  with  a  fuller  life  ;  but  the  men  who  are  set 
upon  making  all  the  world  live  in  their  way,  and  who  have  no  real  faith  in  God, 
nor  therefore  in  man.  But  there  are  other  men  who,  not  doing  themselves  perhaps 
great  deeds,  seem  to  make  great  deeds,  or  a  least  to  make  great  life,  possible.  Such 
men,  in  oar  community,  in  our  family  circles,  in  our  own  little  groups,  whatever 
they  are,  any  of  us  may  be.  We  cannot  make  the  wind  to  blow, — it  bloweth  where 
it  listeth ;  but  we  can  keep  the  windows  open,  so  that  when  it  blows  the  cham- 
bered life  about  us  shall  not  fail  to  receive  its  freshness.  III.  GAJiALrEL  believed 
IN  God.  1.  To  him,  surrounding  all  that  man  does  and  working  through  it,  there 
is  God.  And  with  God  are  the  final  issues  and  destinies  of  things.  Work  as  man 
will,  he  cannot  make  a  plan  succeed  which  God  disowns;  work  as  man  will,  he 
cannot  make  a  plan  fail  which  God  approves.  That  is  a  noble  and  distinct  faith. 
These  words  of  Gamaliel  are  the  words  of  all  progressive  spirits.  They  were  the 
words  of  Luther,  who  opened  Europe  and  made  the  best  of  modern  history  a  pos- 
sibility. Fitly  do  they  stand  to-day  carved  upon  the  pedestal  of  his  great  statue  at 
Wittenberg.  2.  Nobody  can  doubt  that  Gamaliel  went  back  from  the  Sanhedrin 
to  teach  with  all  his  might  that  Christianity  was  wrrong.  He  had  his  thoughts,  and 
he  upheld  them.  He  said,  "  This  is  the  truth  "  ;  only,  as  he  said  that,  he  must 
have  said  also  to  his  scholars — young  Saul  of  Tarsus  sitting  there  among  them — • 
"There  are  men  here  in  Jerusalem — earnest,  brave,  enthusiastic,  wofully  deluded, 
as  I  think  — who  are  asserting  that  the  Christ  has  come,  and  that  His  reign  has 
begun.  I  think  these  men  are  wrong.  I  give  you  my  reasons.  By  and  by  you 
will  see  their  fanaticism  wither  and  dry  up  because  no  life  of  God  is  in  it.  But 
now  let  them  alone.  Believe  your  truth,  assert  it,  prove  it,  live  it:  so  will  you  do 
your  best  to  kill  this  folly."  That  was  Gamaliel.  That  is  the  true  spirit  always. 
Men  do  not  flee  out  of  the  furnace  of  bigotry  only  to  freeze  on  the  open  and  deso- 
late plains  of  indifference.  You  believe,  and  yet  you  have  no  wish  to  persecute; 
and  any  reader  of  the  history  of  faith — nay,  any  student  of  his  own  soul — knows 
how  rarely  these  two  conditions  have  met  in  perfect  harmony.  3.  Persecution 
sounds  like  a  bygone  word,  and  yet  all  persecution  has  not  passed  away.  Social 
ostracism  comes  in  to  take  the  place  of  the  more  crude  and  violent  punishments  of 
other  days,  and  persecution  lingers  still  in  a  form  yet  more  subtle — in  the  disposition 
to  attach  disastrous  consequences  in  this  world  or  the  next  to  honest  opinions  which 
we  hold  to  be  mistaken ;  the  desire  to  fasten  upon  intellectual  convictions  those 
stigmas  of  wickedness  which  can  belong  only  to  personal  character.  When  that 
last  form  of  terrorism  shall  have  passed  away,  then  persecution  will  have  finally 
perished.  Man  will  cease  persecuting  his  brother  man,  partly  because  he  will  out- 
grow the  wish  to  persecute,  but  partly  also  because  he  will  see  how  useless  it  is  to 
persecute.  We  shall  come  in  the  end  to  welcome  all  the  honest  and  earnest 
thought  of  men,  partly  because  we  see  the  good  of  it,  however  it  differs  from  our 
own,  and  partlv  because  we  cannot  help  ourselves.  It  is  by  the  combined  forces  of 
these  two  causes  that  every  great  progress  of  human  thought  has  taken  place.  4. 
And  when  all  persecution  goes,  there  will  come  a  chance  and  a  demand  for  the  two 
forms  of  human  influence  which  will  then  have  all  the  work  to  do.  When  you 
have  thoroughly  believed  that  it  is  both  wrong  and  useless  to  try  to  frighten  your 
fellow-man  out  of  his  faith  into  yours,  then  what  remains  ?  First,  you  may  argue 
with  him,  tell  him  why  you  believe,  show  him  how  unreasonable  his  unbelief  or  his 
fanaticism  is.  And  if  you  cannot  argue,  or  if  your  frieni  is  one  to  whose  mind 
arguments  bring  no  conviction,  then  you  must  live  your  faith.  And  then  just 
trying  to  live  out  its  own  life,  to  turn  its  own  assured  beUef  into  obedient  action, 
gradually  other  people  become  aware  that  the  true  soul  is  bearing  a  witness  to 
truth  which  must  have  power.  In  a  live  State  the  soldiers  have  their  useful  duty, 
but  it  is  not  the  soldiers  who  make  the  State's  true  strength.  Its  faithful  citizens, 
living  their  industrious  lives  within  its  institutions,  which  their  lives  are  always 
filling  with  life,  they  are  the  true  defenders  of  the  State,  making  it  strong,  and 
making  its  strength  impressively  manifest  to  all  the  world.  So  the  great  faith 
neeils  learned  reasoners ;  but  it  needs  obedient  servants  and  disciples  more.  6. 
And  that  brings  us  back  to  Gamaliel.  Was  he,  then,  right  ?  Could  he  then,  can  a 
man  to-day,  leave  all  to  God  and  be  quietly  sure  that  He  will  vindicate  the  truth  ? 
A  thousand  fluctuations  in  the  varying  battle  make  us  doubt.  Many  and  many  a 
time  it  seems  as  if  between  the  error  and  the  truth  it  were  merely  a  question  of 
which  had  the  cleverest  men  upon  its  side.     And  yet  you  know  that,  if  there  be  a 


CHAP.  T.]  THE  ACTS.  513 

God  at  all,  Gamaliel  was  right.  There  must  be  time,  there  must  be  patience  ;  but 
the  real  final  question  of  two  trees  is  the  question  of  their  roots.  That  which  is 
rooted  in  God  must  live.  The  final  glory  of  Gamaliel  lies  there.  He  believed  that 
God  was  the  only  life  of  this  world,  that  all  which  did  not  live  in  Him  must  die. 
We  do  not  know  whether  Gamaliel  ever  became  a  Christian.  The  legends  say  that 
he  did.  History  seems  to  say  that  he  did  not.  But  at  least  we  know  that  if  we 
have  rightly  read  his  character  and  story,  he  made  the  Christian  faith  more  possible 
for  other  men,  and  he  must  somewhere,  if  not  here,  then  beyond,  have  come  to  the 
truth  and  to  the  Christ  Himself,  (Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.)  The  speech  of  Gamaliel  at 
the  Sanhedrin : — Note  here — I.  Good  oratory  neutralised  by  a  corrupt  audi- 
ence. 1.  The  speaker.  (1)  His  ability  and  position.  Some  suppose  him  to  be  the 
son  of  Simeon,  who  took  the  infant  Jesus  in  his  arms,  and  the  grandson  of  Hillel, 
both  famous  Jewis^h  doctors.  The  exalted  title  of  Hahban  was  given  him  for  his 
great  wisdom.  He  had  been  president  of  the  Sanhedrin,  and  was  the  tutor  of  St, 
Paul.  He  was  popular  too — "  had  in  reputation  among  all  the  people."  All  this  would 
give  weight  to  his  oratory,  which  would  be  wanting  in  a  less  distinguished  man. 
(2)  The  course  he  recommended.  Had  he  urged  some  abstract  proposition,  or  a 
difficult  or  dangerous  course  of  action,  one  need  not  have  wondered  at  the  ineffec- 
tiveness of  his  address  ;  but  the  course  he  recommended  was  most  reasonable  and 
easy,  "  Eefrain  from  these  men,"  &c.  (.3)  The  argument  he  employed,  (a)  If  the 
movement  was  undivine,  opposition  was  unnecessary — it  would  come  to  nought  of 
itself.  In  support  of  this,  first,  he  gives  facts  referring  to  Theudas  and  Judas. 
Secondly,  he  states  a  principle — viz.,  that  the  human  would  perish  and  the  Divine 
flourish.  The  argument  is  ad  hominem,  his  hearers  on  their  own  principles  were 
bound  to  take  his  advice.  They  professed  to  regard  the  new  religion  as  an  undivine 
thing  and  therefore  need  not  take  the  trouble  of  opposing  it.  (b)  If  the  movement 
was  of  God,  opposition  would  be  futile  and  impious.  Attempts  to  crush  the  cause 
of  God  are  as  futile  as  attempts  to  roll  back  the  tides  of  the  ocean,  or  reverse  the 
course  of  the  planets — worse  than  futile,  it  is  fighting  against  God.  (4)  The  im- 
pression he  produced — "  To  him  they  agreed."  They  could  not  but  feel  the  force  of 
his  arguments.  2.  So  far,  Gamaliel's  speech  seehis  powerful,  and  one  might  have 
thought  that  he  would  have  gained  his  end.  But  no ;  they  pursued  their  course  of 
persecution  (ver.  40).  What  rendered  this  oratory  so  ineffective?  The  churacter 
of  the  audience.  Prejudice  warped  their  judgment  and  malice  inspired  their  hearts. 
The  eloquence  of  a  discourse  depends  upon  the  mind  of  the  auditory.  Hence  what 
is  felt  to  be  eloquence  in  one  audience  would  not  be  in  another.  He  is  the  most 
eloquent  man  in  his  sphere  who  advocates  the  wishes  of  his  hearers :  otherwise, 
though  he  reasons  with  the  logic  of  Aristotle,  and  declaims  with  the  power  of 
Demosthenes,  his  eloquence  will  not  be  felt.  Paul  was  a  babbler  at  Athens.  Let, 
then,  hearers  who  would  benefit  free  their  minds  from  prejudife  and  listen  with 
candour ;  and  let  speakers  be  above  pandering  to  low  tastes  and  sectarian  sympa- 
thies. II.  Culpable  indifference  justifying  itself  by  plausible  logic.  The 
non-intervention  here  recommended  may  in  some  aspects  admit  of  justification. 
Statesmen,  e.g.,  have  no  right  to  interfeie  with  the  religi)us  opinions  and  move- 
ments of  the  people,  so  long  as  there  is  no  infringement  of  the  rights  of  others. 
The  conscience  is  sacred  to  God.  Men  may  argue,  but  not  coerce.  Again,  the 
advice  may  be  justified  on  the  ground  of  social  philosophy,  supposing  Gamaliel 
beheved  Christianity  to  be  an  imposture.  The  way  to  give  social  power  to  error  is 
to  persecute  it.  But  looking  at  it  in  a  broad  light  the  councillor  displayed  a  repre- 
hensible moral  indifference.  Because — 1.  As  a  man,  he  was  bound  to  satisfy  him- 
self whether  the  apostles'  cause  was  of  man  or  of  God  by  honest  investigation.  2. 
He  had  abundant  evidence  to  satisfy  himself  on  the  question.  3.  If  it  was  the 
work  of  God  he  was  bound  to  go  heart  and  soul  into  it.  We  cannot  therefore  but 
regard  his  argument  as  formularised  to  apologise  for  his  indifference.  In  this 
respect  he  is  a  t.ype  of  a  large  class  whose  policy  is  to  allow  things  to  take  their 
course  and  settle  themselves  whether  true  or  false.  III.  A  test  by  which  the 
Divinity  of  Christianity  is  established.  "  If  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow 
it."  Christianity  has  not  been  overthrown,  but  has  gone  on  conquering  and  to 
conquer.  IV.  An  example  of  the  all-conquering  spikit  of  genuine  religion 
(vers.  40-42).  Observe — 1.  Their  exultation  in  ignominious  suffering  which  can  only 
be  accounted  for  by — (1)  A  consciousness  of  rectitude.  (2)  Asupi-eme  affection  for 
Christ.  Love  rejoices  to  suffer  for  its  object.  (3)  A  recollection  that  their  Master 
suffered  in  the  same  way.  (4)  A  fresh  assurnnce  of  their  genuine  interest  in 
Christ.  He  had  told  them  that  they  should  suffer  (Matt.  v.  11,  12  ;  x.  17-22).  2.. 
VOL.  I.  33 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cmp.  r. 

Their  invincibility  in  prohibited  labour.  No  power  could  break  down  their  boly 
purpose.  (jD.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Gamaliel's  counsel: — I.  A  sood  counsel.  1.  As 
a  rule  of  judgment  when  we  see  the  end  of  God's  ways.  Then  at  last  it  shall 
certainly  hold  good.  "  Every  plant  which  My  Heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted 
shall  be  rooted  up."  2.  As  a  rule  of  conduct  when  carnal  zeal  will  resort  to  carnal 
weapons  in  spiritual  matters;  and  when  no  light  Ims  arisen  as  to  whethf-r  a  work 
be  of  God  or  man.  In  this  sense  Luther  applied  this  counsel  to  the  Elector  of 
Treves  as  one  undecided.  II.  A  bad  counsel.  1.  As  a  rule  of  juiigment  when,  in 
the  midst  of  the  imperfect  course  of  the  world,  good  and  evil  are  judged  according 
to  their  external  and  temporary  success.  2.  As  a  rule  of  conduct,  when  it  is  trans- 
formed into  a  pillow  of  laziness,  to  get  rid  of  an  inward  and  earnest  decision,  when 
God's  Word  speaks  distinctly  enough,  and  God's  Spirit  points  clearly  enough  ;  and 
to  avoid  courageous  acting  and  energetic  witness-bearing,  when  we  are  really 
decided.  (K.  Gerok.)  Gamaliel's  counsel: — I.  A  good  counsel.  1.  Of  humility 
before  God,  the  Supreme  Judge.  2.  Of  charitableness  toward  our  neighbour  who 
thinks  differently,  and  perhaps  erroneously.  3.  Of  watchfulness  over  our  passions. 
II.  A  BAD  COUNSEL.  1.  Of  a  policy  judging  only  according  to  outward  success.  2. 
Of  a  toleration  toward  that  which  is  evil.  3.  Of  an  indifferentism  undecided  in 
itself.  Conclusion  :  Better  the  deed  of  the  apostles  than  the  counsel  of  Gamaliel. 
(Ibid.) 

Vers.  36,  37.  Before  these  days  rose  up  Theudas. — Theudas  :  an  ancient  person- 
afje  ivith  modern  lessons  : — Who  Theudas  was  I  do  not  know,  and  have  carefully 
refrained  from  inquiring.  Biographical  details  are  of  small  importance  when  we 
are  in  search  of  substantial  principles.  The  point  of  this  passage  lies  in  the  fact 
that  Theudas  was  a  wholly  insignificant  person,  just  like  a  thousand  other  men  who 
have  made  a  noise  in  their  day,  drawn  the  gaze  of  the  world  for  a  few  hours  and 
then  passed  into  silence  and  oblivion.  The  apostles  are  summoned  before  the 
council  which  has  already  resolved  on  their  death.  Then  stands  up  Gamaliel — the 
teacher  of  Paul,  a  man  "  had  in  reputation  among  all  the  people  " — and  reads  the 
excited  Sanhedrin  a  lesson  out  of  their  own  national  history.  He  says  in  substance : 
"  This  alarm,  this  hurrying  to  and  fro,  this  calling  for  the  scourge  and  tbe  dungeon, 
this  breathless  haste,  is  all  the  result  of  narrow  vision  and  small  outlook.  Our  own 
time  is  not  the  first  to  witness  startling  movements.  '  Before  these  days  rose  up 
Theudas,'  and  drew  four  hundred  men  after  him.  Yet  that  uprising  which  seemed 
so  terrible  has  been  almost  forgotten.  Wider  horizon  would  make  us  calm.  Learn 
the  lesson  of  your  past.  God's  great  plan  moves  through  the  ages  to  its  sure  ac- 
complishment. If  this  new  teaching  be  not  of  Him,  it  will  be  like  all  the  rest — a 
mere  nois^e  followed  by  a  great  silence.  But  if  God  is  behind  tbis  teaching— beware 
lest  haply  ye  be  found  to  fight  against  God."  These  words  may  imply  that  Gamaliel 
was  almost  ready  to  embrace  Christianity,  or  they  may  indicate  only  that  he  was  a 
broad  and  tolerant  Jew.  In  either  case  the  application  to  our  restless,  eager,  dis- 
putatious age  is  very  clear.  Old  formulae  are  recast,  until  many  souls  more  timid 
than  wise,  loving  quiet  more  than  trnth,  cry,  "  Alas  !  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  The  true 
answer  cannot  be  given  either  by  intense  partisanship  or  by  cynical  indifference. 
The  true  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the  unfaltering  faith  whicb  sees  God  behind  the 
shifting  panorama  of  human  thought  and  action,  and  knows  that  whatever  lights 
may  cross  our  firmament — whether  glowing  planet,  shooting  meteor,  or  s-teady  star 
— He  calleth  them  all  by  name  in  the  greatness  of  His  power.  I.  God's  kingdom 
on  eabth  is  not  a  novelty.  The  first  thing  for  us  to  remember  is  that  the  kingdom 
of  God  on  earth  is  not  a  novelty,  Christianity  is  not  an  experiment,  and  that 
"before  these  days  "  ten  tbousand  similar  dangers  have  been  triumphantly  sur- 
mounted. The  man  who  is  not  in  league  with  the  past  cannot  face  the  future.  We 
need  to  see  things  in  large  perspective,  to  stand  off  from  our  little  immediate  task, 
as  the  painter  stands  away  from  his  canvas,  that  he  may  return  to  it  wiih  surer 
touch.  Even  in  the  common  responsibilities  of  daily  life  some  knowledge  of  his- 
tory is  quite  as  important  as  acquaintance  with  the  multiplication  table.  Let  the 
man  who  despairs  of  our  political  leaders  to-day  read  the  story  of  the  attacks  male 
on  Washington  in  the  darkest  days  of  the  Revolution.  Let  the  man  who  is  be- 
wildered by  the  sudden  influx  of  new  knowledge,  and  cannot /idjust  himself  at  once 
to  the  fresh  truth  poured  into  his  mind,  remember  the  great  shock  given  to 
humanity — a  shock  which  seemed  to  dislocate  all  systems  of  science  and  all  hymns 
of  the  faith — when  Copernicus  proclaiinel  that  this  earth,  instead  of  being  the 
centre  of  the  universe,  for  the  sake  of  which  sun  and  stars  were  created,  around 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  515 

which  the  ordered  sky  revolved,  was  but  a  mote  floating  in  the  boundless  void,  an 
insignificant  star  sending  its  tiny  ray  into  the  infinite  darkness.  The  present  gene- 
ration is  specially  deficient  in  historical  perspective.  Our  life  has  been  so  swift,  so 
wholly  modern,  that  we  are  intensely  individual,  delighting  often  in  segregation 
from  the  past.  Thus,  having  small  background  for  present  endeavour,  we  grow 
restless  and  are  easily  tossed  by  conflicting  winds.  History  says,  too,  as  Nature  to 
Emerson:  "  Why  so  hot,  my  little  man?"  The  history  of  the  Christian  Church 
is  a  splendid  armoury  for  faith.  The  future  of  Christianity  does  not  depend  on 
what  is  won  or  lost  this  morning.  The  success  of  God's  kingdom  in  the  earth  is 
not  staked  on  the  success  of  my  little  scheme  any  more  than  the  coming  of  spring 
depends  on  the  success  of  the  pansy  bed  in  my  garden.  That  kingdom  was  before 
we  came  into  being,  it  will  endure  when  we  are  gone — it  is  the  work  of  Him  who 
was,  and  is,  and  is  to  be,  the  Almighty.  Behind  all  the  men  that  come  and  go,  the 
theories  that  rise  and  fall,  stands  "  God  within  the  shadow,  keeping  watch  above 
His  own."  II.  A  background  of  triumphant  history.  We  are  writing  now,  but 
never  before,  "  1892  "  on  all  our  letters,  notes,  deeds.  These  figures  are  vastly  more 
than  a  conventional  argument.  They  are  eloquent  with  strong  assurance.  They 
are  like  a  flag  brought  home  from  battle,  smoke-begrimed,  blood-stained,  bullet- 
torn,  but  bright  with  its  original  splendid  colour,  and  vocal  with  great  inspiring 
speech.  We  have  no  right  to  live  as  did  the  Church  of  the  first  century,  when  mnch 
was  tentative  and  experimental.  We  have  a  background  of  triumphant  history. 
Steadily  is  the  kingdom  of  Christ  spreading  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  Witty  and  keen  have  been  the  attacks  on  the  faith — sometimes  they  have 
purged  it  from  excrescences,  oftener  they  have  glanced  off  and  rebounded.  The 
opponents  of  Christianity  are  remembered  because  of  the  grandeur  of  wh  it  they 
attacked.  In  this  Christian  land  we  do  not  accept  Christian  faith  to  see  whether  it 
is  true  ;  we  accept  it  as  we  accept  the  earth  beneath  our  hurrying  feet  and  the  un- 
troubled sky  that  overarches  all.  Hence  we  see  the  place  and  purpose  of  the  Old 
Testament,  whose  peculiar  function  is  to  show  us  that  God  is  behind  and  within 
human  history,  and  that  all  history  culminates  in  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ. 
God's  primary  revelation  is  not  through  the  s-peech,  but  through  events.  The  Old 
Testament  precedes  the  New  to  show  us  God  liehind  and  within  the  nation's  life, 
and  when  we  once  see  and  believe  that,  a  historical  Saviour  becomes  not  only 
credible  but  inevitable.  III.  Use  of  the  historical  in  Scripture.  A  noble  Chris- 
tian man  recently  t"ld  me  that  in  his  piivate  reading  of  the  Psalms  he  always  used 
an  expurgated  edition,  from  which  all  imprecatory  and  otherwise  oltjectiona'de 
passages  had  been  expunged.  Surely  this  is  the  acme  of  religious  prudf^ry,  and  the 
fastidiousness  of  one  who  is  totally  devoid  of  the  historical  sense.  If  we  expurgate 
the  Songs  of  David,  why  not  expurgate  his  life  also  ?  Surely  his  deeds  of  vengeance 
are  worse  than  his  revengeful  pra.\ers.  Then  having  struck  out  from  his  life  all 
that  offends  our  purism,  and  having  made  him  the  man  he  ought  to  have  been  but 
was  not,  we  shall  be  ready  to  remodel  the  entire  history  of  Israel — very  much  as 
Cibber  proposed  to  remodel  Shakespeare,  making  King  Lear  to  be  at  last  rewarded 
for  his  suffering,  and  making  the  tragedy  of  Hamlet  to  end  with  the  death  of  the 
king  and  queen  and  the  happiness  of  0[>helia.  When  we  have  been  through  the 
Bible  and  struck  out  the  great  blHck  record  of  human  sin,  we  shall  have  banished 
the  shining  story  of  redemption  also.  The  imprecatory  Psalms  are  as  truly  the 
expression  of  a  certain  stage  in  Israel's  life,  and  so  part  of  the  story  of  redemption, 
as  the  paintings  of  the  early  Byzantine  school  are  part  of  the  history  of  Christian 
art.  What  if  the  faces  limned  by  those  first  Christian  painters  are  hard  and  wooden  ? 
They  are  to  us  the  priceless  expression  of  a  great  endeavour  which  has  made 
Baphael  and  Da  Vinci  possible.  To  lift  the  P>alter  to  the  level  of  the  Se  mon  on 
the  Mount  is  to  spoil  them  both.  But  the  most  practical  thing  is  still  unsaid. 
When  a  man  has  attained  the  historical  point  of  vifW,  when  his  Bible  is  no  longer 
a  flat  surface  like  a  Chinese  picture,  but  a  long  vista  of  historical  persons  and 
events,  and  the  great  story  of  God's  love  for  man  is  seen  slowly  unfcldii  g  through 
the  millenniums,  when  a  man  keeps  hin]self  familiar  with  God's  working  "  before 
these  days,"  he  will  possess  a  spiritual  poise  and  cential  peace  which  nothing  can 
disturb.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  believe  in  a  God  who  watches  over  my  life  and  cares 
for  me.  It  is  a  grander  thing  to  rest  in  a  God  whose  purposes  are  bnger  and  lorger 
than  any  concerns  of  mine  possibly  can  be.  I  could  not  admiie  the  Hudson  Eiver 
if  I  thought  its  only  purpose  was  to  fill  my  drinking  cup.  I  could  not  wonder 
greatly  at  the  sun  if  I  thought  its  only  purp<  se  was  to  shine  in  at  my  window.  I 
need  a  God  greater  than  my  need.     I  want  a  Saviour  far  beyond  my  private  per- 


516  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

Bonal  lack.  If  I  do  not  believe  in  a  God  who  has  some  grander  work  to  do  than  to 
make  me  happy,  I  shall  soon  cease  to  believe  at  all.  I  shall  soon  find  tbat  God 
does  not  always  make  me  happy,  and  then  I  shall  lose  faith.  Through  all  ages  runs 
His  purpose.  From  everlasting  to  everlasting  His  great  thoughts  realise  themselves 
in  the  ci-aseless  unfolding  of  creation,  and  our  highest  glory  is  not  to  bend  His 
purjDOse  but  to  bend  our  lives  into  harmony  with  it.  Has  any  man  come  here 
in  a  state  of  tumult  and  alarm,  perplexed  by  the  problems  of  the  time,  and 
confronted  by  movements  he  cannot  fathom  ?  I  bid  you  think  of  the  God  who 
before  these  days  has  guided  His  Church  and  ever  will  guide.  Is  any  man  here 
saying  :  "  God  has  forgotten  me  ;  my  plan  does  not  prosper  "  ?  Is  your  plan,  then, 
the  first  thing  in  your  desire,  or  God's  plan  ?  Is  it  the  building  of  your  nest  or  the 
achievement  of  the  world's  redemption  ?  He  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega — we  are  to 
fit  in  somewhere  in  His  Divine  alphabet  and  spell  out  His  eternal  thought.  (IF. 
H.  P.  Faiince,  D.D.)  The  false  prophet  and  the  true: — I.  The  fai.se.  1.  Rises 
up  of  his  own  accord  as  Theudas  and  Judas.  2.  Boasts  himself  to  be  somebody. 
3.  Draws  away  the  people  after  him.  4.  Falls  from  heaven  as  a  wandering  star. 
Theudas  and  Judas  perished,  and  their  followers  were  dispersed.  II.  The  true. 
1.  Is  raised  up  by  God.  2.  Does  not  boast  of  himself,  but  gives  glory  to  God.  3. 
Leads  souls  to  the  Lord.    4.  Will  shine  as  stars  for  ever  and  ever.     [K.  Gerok.) 

Vers.  38,  39.  And  now  I  say  unto  you,  Refrain  from  these  men,  and  let  them 
alone. — T)ie  witness  of  history  to  Cltiistianity  : — 1.  Christianity  was  on  trial  before 
the  Jewish  Sanliediin.  It  had  then  no  history.  Now  it  has  an  history  of  more 
than  eighteen  hundred  years.  Wisely  spake  that  wisest  of  Jewish  Rabbis ;  Let  us 
wait  awhile  and  see.  If  it  be  of  men,  no  blow  is  needed.  If  it  be  of  God,  no  smiting 
will  do  it  any  hami.  Leave  it  to  history.  Such  was  the  appoal.  We  are  ready  now 
for  the  verdict.  If  Gamaliel  were  here  I  would  be  willing  to  leave  it  all  to  his 
candid  judgment.  Is  Christianity  a  success  or  a  failure  ?  2.  This  argument  from 
history  requires  discrimination.  Mere  age  makes  out  nothing  decisive  for  a  religion. 
Religions  in  general  are  apt  to  be  long-lived ;  longer-lived  than  civil  politics.  (1) 
Those  of  Egypt,  of  Mesopotrimia,  of  Phoenicia,  of  Greece  and  Rome,  all  lasted  many 
centuries  ;  and,  while  they  lasted,  might  have  made  an  argument  of  their  longevity. 
But  they  are  all  dead  now,  and  nobody  names  either  of  them  as  a  rival  of  Christi- 
anity. (2)  Brahnianism  and  Buddbi^m  vary  the  problem  for  us.  Here  are  very 
old  religions.  What  is  to  be  said  of  them  ?  This  ;  that  they  are  like  the  old  dead 
religions  in  having  a  limited  domain.  Not  one  of  them  has  had  much  strength  or 
currency  outside  of  its  own  native  land.  They  might  as  well  be  dead.  They  tight 
no  battles,  win  no  victories.  (3)  Mohammedanism  makes  the  problem  a  still  nicer 
one.  Here  is  a  religion,  not  merely  of  great  age,  but  of  great  expansiveness  and 
versatility.  There  is  truth  in  it,  these  two  great  truths :  that  God  is,  and  rules. 
In  less  than  a  hundred  years  from  its  origiu  men  were  praying  towards  Mecca  over 
a  wider  territory  than  the  Roman  eagles  had  shadowed  in  nearly  a  thousand  years. 
Why  was  it?  Partly  because  they  had  been  persuaded  to  do  so.  The  argument 
for  one  God  was  better  than  the  argument  for  many  gods.  And  so  idolaters  were 
vanquished.  Then  the  worship  was  simple,  and  the  degenerate,  sacerdotal,  tawdry, 
idolatrous  Christianity  of  the  Orient  went  to  the  wall.  But  had  no  sword  been 
drawn,  Islamisra  must  have  stayed  in  Arabia,  or  have  gone  but  little  beyond  it. 
For  idolaters  the  alternative  was  Islam  or  the  swoid.  For  Jews  and  Christians 
Islam  or  tribute.  And  so  the  crescent  shot  along  the  sky.  Christianity  has  had 
no  such  history.  Its  symbol  has  always  been  a  wooden  cross.  Now  and  then  it 
has  drawn  the  sword,  as  Peter  drew  it  in  the  garden  ;  but  only  to  be  rebuked,  as 
Peter  was.  Its  beginning  dates  significantly  from  tlie  gift  of  tongues.  Not  sword, 
but  sermon  was  to  hew  its  way  for  it.  It  must  spill  no  blood  but  its  own.  Nor 
might  cunning  serve  it.  Wolves  are  fierce  and  cunning  both.  The  disciples  of 
the  Man  of  Nazareth  were  sent  forth  like  sh»ep  and  doves.  Such  was  Christianity  ; 
the  Christianity  of  Gamaliel's  time.  Let  us  see  now  wbat  came  of  it.  I.  Its  first 
conflict  was  with  Judaism,  with  which  it  should  have  had  no  conflict  at  all.  Judaism, 
then  fifteen  centuries  old,  was  not  human,  but  Divine.  And  Christianity  had  come 
out  of  it,  as  an  apple  comes  out  of  its  bud  and  blossom.  But  madness  ruled  the  hour. 
They  hanged  their  Prophet  on  a  tree,  hissing  that  awful  prayer  which  God  has  been 
answering  ever  since  :  "His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  children."  Many  Jews,  as 
•we  know,  passed  over  into  the  Christian  Church,  in  all,  perhaps  some  ten  or  twelve 
thousand  within  the  first  six  years.  Then  their  most  learned  and  ablest  Rabbi,  Saul 
of  Tarsus,  went  over  to  the  new  religion.    And  his  voice  rang  all  along  the  northern 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  517 

shore  of  the  Mediterranean,  from  Damascus  to  Spain,  in  countless  synagogues, 
entreating  his  countrymen  to  follow  him.  It  was  tLeir  golden  opportunity.  And 
they  lost  it.  Judaism,  they  shouted,  is  final.  Not  Judaism,  answered  the  pupil  of 
Gamaliel,  but  Christianity.  This  was  the  point  at  issue.  In  their  madness  the 
people  thought  they  could  tear  the  Eoman  eagles  from  their  battlements  and  re- 
establisli  the  fallen  throne  of  David.  They  tried,  and  failed.  Judaism  was  shattered 
when,  as  foretold  by  Daniel,  the  oblation  censed.  Since  then  no  smoke  of  sacrifice 
has  ascended  from  Mount  Moriah.  Since  then  the  story  of  our  Christian  sacrifice 
has  gone  round  the  globe.  And  almost  everywhere  it  finds  the  forsaken  and 
scattered  remnants  of  that  ancient  people,  over  whose  city  the  Eedeemer  wept.  II. 
The  second  conflict  of  Christianity  was  with  the  Gr^co-Koman  civilisation.  The 
whole  theatre  of  ancient  history,  the  whole  garden  of  ancient  letters,  art,  and  social 
refinement,  now  acknowledged  the  supremacy  of  Rome.  Christianity  i-he  greeted 
with  contempt  and  scorn.  1.  In  this  lay  the  safety  of  the  new  religion.  It  thus 
had  chance  to  grow.  All  over  the  Roman  Empire  its  roots  went  down  into  the 
soil  unnoticed.  After  a  hundred  years  its  branches  were  in  all  the  air.  There 
were  at  least  two  or  three  millions  of  Christians.  Tliey  were  a  people  by  themselves, 
sifted  out  of  society,  organised,  drilled,  and  handled  by  their  leaders,  as  no  other 
religious  body  ever  had  been.  They  could  no  longer  be  ignored.  And  then  the 
leaven  had  been  working  upwards,  as  well  as  downwards,  among  the  people.  The 
commercial  middle  class  furnished  many  converts.  By  and  by  philosophers  and 
scholars  began  to  come  over,  who  boldly  jDroclaimed  the  new  faith  as  the  final 
philosophy.  Christianity  could  no  longer  be  despised.  Books  had  been  written  in 
its  defence,  and  these  books  must  be  replied  to.  Then  there  came  out  on  the 
heathen  side  such  champions  as  Pronto,  Lucian,  and  Celsus,  learned  and  witty  men, 
attacking  Christianity  with  every  known  weapon  of  argument,  abuse,  and  raillery. 
By  and  by,  persecution  began  in  terrible  earnest.  It  was,  however,  chiefly  the  work 
of  mobs,  stirred  up  and  hounded  on  by  men  whose  interests  were  imperilled.  Of 
the  emperors,  only  Nero  and  Domitian,  and  they  for  reasons  of  their  own,  had 
dipped  their  hands  willingly  in  Christian  blood.  Now,  soon  after  the  middle  of  the 
second  century,  persecution  began  to  be  a  part  of  the  imperial  policy.  It  was 
assumed  that  the  old  Roman  religion  was  essential  to  the  welfare  of  the  Roman 
State.  It  was  seen  that  Christianity  was  getting  the  better  of  that  old  Roman 
religion.  Bad  emperors,  like  Commodus  and  Heliogabalus,  who  cared  nothing  for 
the  welfare  of  the  State,  let  the  new  religion  alone.  Able,  patriotic,  high-toned 
emperors,  like  Marcus  Aurelius,  Decius,  and  Diocletian,  could  not  let  it  alone. 
Those  were  times  of  awful  agony  when  the  powerful  Roman  Empire,  shutting  the 
gates  of  the  ampitheatre,  leaped  into  the  arena  face  to  face  with  the  Christian 
Church.  When  those  gates  were  opened,  the  victorious  Church  went  forth,  with 
the  baptism  of  blood  on  her  saintly  brow,  bearing  a  new  Christian  Empire  in  her 
fair,  white  arms.  It  only  remained  for  heathen  frenzy  to  contest  this  verdict  of  Pro- 
evidence,  as  Jewish  frenzy  had  contested  the  verdict  of  Providence  in  Palestine. 
Philosophers  had  been  for  some  time  at  work,  elaborating  what  we  call  the  New 
Platonism,  a  strange  conglomerate,  which  taught  one  God  in  the  lecture-room  and 
many  gods  in  the  market-place  ;  which  discoursed  loftily  of  union  with  God  ;  and 
stooped  to  magical  arts.  This  was  the  informing  spirit  of  that  notable  reaction  and 
revival  of  heathenism  which  found  a  fit  champion  in  Julian,  who,  burning  with  zeal 
for  the  old  religion,  resolved  to  put  the  new  religion  down.  Did  he  do  it  ?  In  less 
"than  two  years  after  mounting  the  throne  of  the  Caesars,  he,  pierced  by  a  Persian 
arrow,  confessed  "  Thou  hast  conquered,  0  Galilean."  But  Christianity,  you  tell 
me,  did  not  save  the  life  of  the  Roman  Empire.  No,  it  came  too  late  for  that.  But 
Christianity  prolonged  that  life  ;  by  a  century  or  two  in  the  Occident,  by  six  or  eight 
centuries  in  the  Orient.  III.  The  third  conflict  was  with  the  Tedthnic  baebakians. 
In  German  forests  Christian  captives  were  the  first  evangelists.  They  had  to  learn 
a  new  language  which  had  then  no  alphabet.  The  men  that  spoke  it  had  no  culture. 
In  a  hundred  years  those  rude  barbarians  were  reading  their  Gothic  Bibles.  From 
tribe  to  tribe  the  sacred  message  ran  till,  in  another  hundred  years,  the  barbarian 
conquest  of  Rome  was  essentially  a  Christian  conquest.  From  generation  to  gene- 
ration the  missionary  work  went  on,  till  at  last  the  whole  Teutonic  race  in  Europe, 
DOW  numbering  well-nigh  eighty  millions,  took  on  a  Christian  civilisation,  higher, 
stronger,  more  radiant  than  that  of  Greece  and  Rome.  The  Kelts,  now  numbering 
about  nine  milUons,  were  also  evangelised ;  the  Slaves,  now  numbering  nearly 
eighty  millions,  came  later  ;  then  the  Scandinavians,  one  of  the  finest  races  in  his- 
tory, now  numbering  some  eight  millions,  whose  old  mythology  is  richer  and  grander 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

than  that  of  ancient  Greece,  and  whom  it  took  two  centuries  to  conquer.  And  not 
one  of  the  nobler  historic  peoples,  once  evangelised,  has  ever  let  go  its  hold  of  the- 
gospel.  The  decayed  churches  of  the  Orient  are  only  decayed,  not  dead,  wliile  the 
tide  that  went  over  them  is  evidently  going  out.     IV.  The  fourth  great  conflict  is 

witll    A   LOWER    TVPE    OF    HEATHENISM   AT    HOME    AND   AEEOAD,  and    is    HOW  in  progress. 

There  is,  indeed,  a  conflict  with  science  which  is  sharp  enough  just  now,  and  mauy 
good  people  are  needlessly  alarmed  about  it.  There  are  tidal  waves  in  all  human 
affairs,  and  scepticism,  like  everything  else,  comes  and  goes  on  its  endless  round. 
But  every  time  Christianity  sails  through  it  all  like  an  ironclad.  The  great  mass 
of  Christians  have  never  troubled  themselves  about  it.  Augustine  made  an  end  of 
Manicheism.  The  great  schoolmen  of  the  thirteenth  century  silenced  the  sceptics 
of  the  twelfth.  And  out  of  the  scepticism  of  the  fifteenth  century  came  the  reaction 
that  culminated  in  the  Protestant  Reformation.  Christianity,  the  mother  of  uni- 
versities, the  nurse  and  patron  of  all  high  study,  has  no  fear  of  science.  No.  The 
real  strain  and  conflict  of  our  day  are  more  practical.  Christianity  has  conquered 
all  the  best  races  in  history  thus  far.  Now,  can  it  conquer  to  the  bottom  as  it  has 
already  conquered  to  the  top  ?  Can  it  bring  the  whole  human  family,  its  lowest 
peoples  with  its  highest,  into  one  common  fold?  Can  it  evangelise  the  Chinese, 
.Tapanese,  Polynesians,  Africans,  North  American  Indians  ?  Can  it  evangelise  its 
own  cities,  going  down  into  the  cellars,  up  into  the  garrets  of  its  own  heathens  here 
at  home  ?  Hard  as  the  task  may  be,  Christianity  stands  squarely  committed  to  it. 
If  Christianity  fails  in  this  its  supreme  endeavour,  it  is  not  of  God.  But  it  will  not 
fail.  What  it  can  do  may  be  known  from  what  it  has  done.  We  have  carried  the 
gospel  into  the  huts  of  the  bushmen,  we  shall  yet  carry  it  into  every  cellar  and 
every  garret  of  every  Christian  city.  Let  us  be  of  good  courage.  It  is  not  long  we 
shall  have  to  wait.  (R.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.)  Gamaliel  and  his  advice;  or  the 
policy  of  caution  and  neutrality : — Broadly  speaking,  men  divide  themselves  into 
three  classes  in  relation  to  Christianity.  First,  there  are  the  open  enemies,  who 
never  miss  an  opportunity  of  offering  unto  it  the  most  energetic  and  violent 
opposition.  Secondly,  there  are  the  earnest  advocates  and  the  zealous  pro- 
pagators of  Christianity.  Thirdly,  but  coming  midway  between  these  two  classes, 
there  is  another,  which  we  might  term  the  cautious,  timid,  and  perhaps  temporising,, 
neutral  class.  Speech  after  speech  was  delivered  in  favour  of  physical  violence. 
At  length  Gamaliel  arose.  His  speech  was  what  we  might  call  a  moderate  speech^ 
It  counselled  caution,  "  refrain,"  "take  heed."  "Do  not  lay  rash  and  violent 
hands  on  these  men."  "  Do  not  endeavour  to  stamp  out  this  new  religion  or  irre- 
ligion  by  rash  and  violent  methods."  I.  The  favoukable  aspect  of  this  policy.  Let 
us  point  out  what  there  is  that  is  commendable  in  this  policy  of  awaiting  the  test 
of  time.  1.  Time  ceitainly  is  a  most  searching  and  accurate  test.  It  is  very  diffi- 
cult to  judge  a  movement  that  is  in  its  infancy.  By  their  fruits  movements  too  are 
known.  But  then  you  must  allow  time  for  the  fruit  to  appear  and  to  mature.  2. 
Ceitainly  this  policy  is  opposed  to  that  objectionable  method  of  procedure  which  is- 
characteris^d  by  "zeal  without  knowledge."  There  are  those  whose  zeal  in  itself 
is  really  commendable  ;  and  they  rush  on  rashly,  never  taking  time  to  consider  the 
bearing  of  present  action  on  future  events  ;  they  will  run  and  risk  their  life  to  rescue 
a  child  in  danger,  but,  perhaps,  they  will  knock  down  half-a-dozen  children  on 
their  way  and  do  them  serious  harm.  They  will  spend  their  best  energies  to  advance 
a  principle  which  they  hold  dear,  but,  perhaps,  they  will  trample  on  many  other 
principles  which  are  equally  true  and  Divine.  "  Zeal  without  knowledge."  Their 
warm  hearts  are  not  under  the  direction  of  wise  heads.  Their  action,  while  en- 
thusiastic, is  ill-directed.  Well,  Gamaliel  and  his  friends  are  not  guilty  of  this  fault. 
They  are  never  led  into  anything  rash.  If  they  err,  they  err  on  the  safe  side.  They 
do  not  do  much  harm  if  they  do  no  good.  They  will  not  hinder  a  good  movement, 
though  they  may  not  help  it.  They  will  not  further  a  bad  cause,  though  they  may  do 
nothing  to  hinder  it.  Their  policy  is  to  refrain,  to  take  heed,  to  take  no  action  until 
time  makes  it  quite  clear  whether  the  cause  be  human  or  Divine.  3.  There  is  some 
amount  of  wise,  cautious  humility  and  devoutness  also  about  this  policy  of  Gamaliel 
and  his  friends.  They  greatly  fear  lest  they  should  be  found  fighting  against  God, 
opposing  His  wiU  and  purpose.  They  knew  that  that  would  not  only  be  fruitless, 
but  sinful  and  blasphemous.  It  is  a  sad  thing  to  find  even  a  portion  of  one's  life 
fruitless.  Moral  fruitlessness  is  a  terrible  calamity.  To  fight  against  God  then  is 
fruitless,  for  He  must  conquer  in  the  end  and  our  work  come  to  nought.  But  it  is 
also  sinful,  and  even  blasphemous.  Blasphemy,  properly  so  called,  is  speaking 
against  God,  but  there  is  also  a  blasphemy  which  consists  in  acting  against  Him, 


CHAP,  v.l  THE  ACTS.  519 

in  using  those  faculties  with  which  He  Himself  has  endowed  us,  to  frustrate  His 
will  and  purpose,  and  to  further  the  ends  and  intents  of  the  devil.     Well,  Gamaliel 
and  his  friends  strove  to  steer  clear  of  this  evil.     They  are  cautiously  humble  and 
devout.     They  would  not  for  the  world  be  found  fighticg  against  God.    Hence  their 
policy  is  to  "  take  heed,"  to  "  refrain,"  to  wait  until  time  proves  whether  God  be  in 
the  movement  or  not.     II.  The  unfavodkablb  aspects  of  this  policy.     1.  It  makes 
this  mistake,  it  regards  the  external  results  of  a  movement  as  the  unfailing  test  of 
its   character.     Or  to  put  it  in  this  way :  It   says,   "  this  movement   succeeds — 
it  is  Divine;  this  movement  fails — it  is  human."      Success  or  failure  is  taken 
as  the  test.      But  is  it  a  true  test?      Some  of  the  most  successful  movements 
have  had  the  least  of   God  in   them,  and    some  of  the  least  successful  have 
had  the  most  of  God  in  them.     The  followers  of  Buddha  are  more  numerous 
than  aU  olher  religionists.      Is  Buddhism  more  Divine  because  of  that?      It   is 
evident  then  that  external  success  is  not  an  absolute  test  of  the  spirituality  and 
Divinity  of  a  religion,  or  of  the  character  of  a  movement.     Eesults  !  results  !    That 
is  the  great  cry  of  the  day.     And  it  is  almost  thought  that  spiritual  results  can  be 
got  to  order  just  Uke  material  results.     You  send  your  boy  to  the  tailor  for  a  suit  of 
clothes ;  he  gets  it,  you  are  satisfied.     Do  you  send  him  in  the  same  spirit  to  the 
master  of  the  grammar  school,  saying,  "I  want  a  good  education  for  my  boy,  so 
much  time,  so  much  money?  "     The  master  would  reply,  "  Education  is  not  to  be 
had  to  order  ;  there  are  other  matters  to  be  taken  into  consideration :  has  your  son 
the  ability,  the  application  to  learn  ?   Without  that  I  can  do  nothing  with  him."  If 
it  is  so  with  intellectual  results,  how  much  more  so  with  moral  and  spiritual  results. " 
We  cannot  get  true  conversions  to  order ;  we  may  get  spurious  ones.     Nor  is  it 
possible  to  count  true  converts.     Men  can  count  heads  ;  bat  it  takes  God  Himself 
to  count  hearts.  Therefore  the  test  of  external  results  is  not  an  absolutely  safe  test. 
Are  we,  therefore,  not  to  aim  for  success  ?     By  all  means.     All  the  success  that  we 
can  get;  as  many  hearers,  as  many  converts,  as  many  Christian  workers  as  possible. 
Only  do  not  rely  on  external  results  as  furnishing  an  unfailing  test  of  the  character 
of  any  work.     This  the  policy  of  Gamaliel  is  guilty  of.     2.  Moreover  this  policy  is 
productive  of  culpable  inactivity  and  moral  cowardice.  Now  the  most  critical  period 
of  any  movement,  or  of  any  new  religion,  is  its  infancy.     Then  does  it  bear  the 
severest  brunt  of  prejudice  and  hostility.     The  severest  period  in  the  history  of 
Christianity  was  the  apostolic  age  and  the  ages  immediately  following.     We  ought 
to  thank  God  that  there  were  men  brave  enough  and  strong  enough  to  overcome 
the  first  opposition.     After  a  while  it  makes  itself  felt  in  the  world ;  it  proves  itself 
to  be  a  power  for  good.     Now  Gamaliel  and  his  friends  will  join  it.     "  We  are  glad 
to  see  you  even  now,  you  Gamalielites  ;  but  you  did  not  lend  us  a  helijing  hand 
when  the  waves  of  ojDposition  nearly  swamped  our  ship  ;  we  and  our  cause  would 
have  perished  for  you ;  you  looked  out  on  us  with  timid,  cautious,  neutral  eyes. 
But  uow  that  we  have  gut  to  shore,  and  established  our  character  and  power,  you 
seek  to  join  our  ranks.     Come  in  ;  even  at  this  hour  we  are  glad  to  see  you  ;  only 
we  must  tell  you  that  you  have  been  guilty  of  culpable  inactivity  and  of  moral 
cowardice."     Gamaliel  and  his  friends  will  only  join  a  successful  cause,  but  a  flag- 
ging interest  they  will  refrain  from  touching.     On  the  other  hand,  take  a  movement 
directly  the  reverse  of  that  to  which  we  have  alluded,  not  only  not  Divine,  but  sin- 
ful and  calculated  to  do  a  terrible  amount  of  mischief.     In  its  earlier  years  its 
destructive  features  are  not  written  in  large  letters,  still  they  are  written  in  such 
letters  as  the  keen  observer  can  read.  What  do  Gamaliel  and  his  friends  do  ?  Tbey 
refrain  from  taking  any  action.     They  allow  the  evil,  the  mischievous  movement 
to  grow,  to  establif^h  itself.  They  might  nip  it  in  the  bud,  were  they  to  take  prompt, 
decisive  action.    "  You  cautiously  timid,  inactive  Gamalielites,  ynu  are  anxious  not 
to  be  found  fighting  against  God  ;  wherefore  are  ye  not  equally  desirous  to  fight  for 
Him?    You  do  ncjt  further  His  will  when  you  allow  evil  to  grow  unchallenged  and 
unopposed."     There  are  many  of  whom  it  may  be  said,  "  Tbey  have  done  no  evil." 
But  what  evil  have  they  opposed,  what  good  have  they  done?     Nothing!     Then  is 
their  poor,  Laimless  inactivity  culpable  in  the  sight  of  Gcd.     3.  Then  there  is  that 
further  error  in  this  policy  of  neuirality  and  delay,  viz.,  that  it  presumes  too  much 
on  Divine  power  and  relies  too  little  on  human  instrumentality.     It,  says,  "  If  that 
work  or  counsel  be  of  God,  He  will  make  it  successful ;  if  it  be  sinful,  then  He  will 
bring  it  to  nouyht."     Now,  how  does  God  promote  His  purposes  ?     Through  good 
men.     How  does  He  baffie  and  bring  to  nought  evil  doings  ?     Through  good  men. 
The  old  excuse  for  inactivity  is,  "  God  will  see  to  it."    No  !  He  will  not,  unless  you 
place  yourself  humbly  in  His  hand  and  say,  "  Send  me,  send  me !  "     What  was  the 


520  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

excuse  of  onr  ancestors  who  were  opposed  to  modern  missions  :  "  If  God  means 
to  convert  the  world  He  will  see  to  that."  But  He  would  never  convert  the 
world  unless  the  men  came  forward  and  severally  said,  "  Send  me,  send 
me ! "  We  can  never  rely  too  much  on  Divine  power ;  we  can  never  rely  too 
much  on  human  co-operation.  Are  we  allowing  Him  to  use  us  for  that  grand 
purpose?  Or  are  we  endeavouring  to  cover  our  culpable  inactivity  by  the  old 
excuse  :  *'  The  work  is  His,  and  He  will  see  to  it."  What  is  the  conclusion  of  the 
whole  matter  ?  Every  movement,  social,  political,  religiou-^,  let  us  try  to  under- 
stand. Let  us  bring  to  bear  upon  it  the  faculties  which  God  has  given  us,  without 
prejudice  and  with  prayer.  Should  it  remain  a  mystery,  let  us  wait,  not  listlessly, 
but  with  faces  wistfully  upturned  towards  heaven,  solicitous  to  know  the  will  of 
God.  When  light  is  given  from  heaven  let  us  act  accordingly,  whether  in  favour 
or  in  opposition,  act  sincerely,  with  heart  and  soul.  By  doing  the  will  of  God,  as 
far  as  it  is  revealed,  we  shall  know  more  of  the  doctrine.  {Henry  Harries,  M.A.) 
Gamaliel : — Gamaliel's  feeling  was  this — "  God  is  the  supreme  ruler,  truth  comes 
from  Him,  and  He  will  take  care  of  it.  What  is  not  true  has  in  it  the  seeds  of  its 
own  destruction,  and  will  sooner  or  later  come  to  nothing.  Men  are  very  poor 
judges  of  what  in  true  or  false.  God  is  tbe  judge,  time  the  test."  1.  This  convic- 
tion is  the  foundation  of  all  true  tolerance,  liberality  of  mind,  and  of  charity  and 
candour  in  judging.  For  want  of  it  we  are  often  falsely  liberal,  or  foolishly  bigoted. 
2.  I  need  hardly  say  how  this  principle  and  conviction  bears  upon  our  daily  life,  or 
point  out  how  much  calmness,  wi.-dom,  and  peace  it  would,  if  recognised,  pour 
upon  the  distractions  which  surround  us.  We  live  in  the  midst  of  new  things.  In 
our  religious,  social  and  political  life  new  and  startling  opinions  meet  us.  Like 
Gamaliel  we  see  old  faiths  and  old  institutions  in  Church  and  State,  and  old  habits, 
relations,  and  customs  in  society  crumbling  away  or  threatened.  (1)  In  religion, 
men  have  arisen  who  call  upon  us  to  go  back  to  the  beliefs  and  practices  of  bygone 
centuries.  We  may  safely  leave  them  in  God's  hands,  who  will  make  them  work 
out  His  purposes,  and  establish  whatever  is  in  accordance  with  His  will,  and  wither 
up  what  is  false  and  foolish  in  their  teaching.  (2)  The  same  thing  may  be  said 
with  respect  to  another  department  of  human  thought  in  which  great  activity 
prevails.  Men  of  inquiring  mind  will  examine,  speculate,  and  try  to  solve  the 
riddle  of  human  life.  And  what  is  called  science  in  our  day  claims  to  have  made 
very  startling  discoveries,  which  have  shaken,  and  will  enevitably  destroy,  many  an 
old  belief.  And  why  not?  God  makes  men  of  inquiring  minds,  and  He  gives 
them  light  to  discover  new  facts  and  truths.  Tlje  agitation  of  the  so-called 
Christian  world,  its  hostility  to  our  men  of  science,  and  its  senseless  alarm  at  their 
discoveries,  when  viewed  in  the  light  of  Gamaliel's  calmness  and  candour,  are 
simply  a  proof  how  little  Christianity  exists  amongst  us,  and  what  low  and 
miserable  ideas  we  have  of  God  and  His  truth.  (3)  So  again  in  those  sad  disputes 
betweea  class  and  class  which  distract  and  disturb  us.  It  must  needs  be  that  these 
things  come  in  the  course  of  this  world's  progress,  and  much  s  )rrow,  sin,  aud 
suffering  will  follow  in  their  wake ;  and  to  the  eye  of  the  faithless,  the  future  may, 
for  a  time,  look  dark.  But  how  much  comfort,  too,  the  thought  affords,  that  in 
this  respect  also  God  rules — is  working  out  here,  too.  His  purpose  and  plan — and 
how  much  calmness  and  wisdom  is  the  example  of  Gamaliel  capable  of  imparting, 
whilst  it  warns  us  to  refrain  from  anything  like  the  spirit  of  violence  or  hasty  judg- 
ment, and  to  wait  patiently  to  see  how  much  of  the  counsel  and  work  we  deplore  is 
of  God  and  cannot  be  overthrown,  and  how  much  is  merely  of  men  and  therefore 
destined  to  perish ;  and  to  rest  assured  that  God  has  not  forsaken  us,  or  Igt  the 
reins  of  government  fall  from  His  hands.  (4)  When  tried  by  misfortune  or  sorrow, 
when  harassed  by  the  tempers  or  injustice  of  others,  when  suffering  in  paiu  or 
sickness,  amid  the  sundry  and  manifold  cares  and  perplexities  which  entangle  us 
all,  what  an  untold  gain  it  would  be  to  us  if  we  would  refrain  from  a  hasty  or  sinful 
judgment,  and  keep  in  our  feelings,  tongue,  and  temper  from  the  conviction  that 
God  was  overruling  even  in  the  midst  of  these  seemingly  evil  things  ;  that  a  truth 
and  a  purpose  underlie  them  all,  and  would  wait  aud  watch  how  much  in  them 
there  is  which  is  from  God,  how  much  from  our  own  perversity,  and  how  much  from 
that  source  of  evil  from  which  all  comes  that  opposes  and  seeks  to  thwart  His 
Divine  intention,  and  abide  in  the  faith  that  nothing  but  what  is  true  and  good  for 
us  will  endure,  while  all  that  is  false  and  foolish  will  soon  be  swept  away.  3.  And 
if  it  should  seem  that  an  example  such  as  that  of  Gamaliel  is  too  much  insisted  on, 
that  the  preacher  who  again  and  again  enforces  largeness  of  mind,  charity  in 
judging,  patience  and  gentleness  in  thought  and  action,  together  with  the  rest 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  521 

of  the  Christian  graces  and  tempers,  shows  himself  unmindful  of  his  sppcial 
work,  and  of  his  duty  to  teach  the  way  of  salvation  for  the  souls  of  men ;  then 
I  would  submit  that,  in  enforcing  these  things,  we  are.  setting  forth  man's  salvation; 
for  the  soul  which  lives  in  the  feeling  and  conviction  that  God  our  Father  is  constantly 
present,  and  overrules  all  things ;  that  He  will  take  care  of  the  truth  and  of  us  when 
we  stand  upon  it;  the  soul  that  tries  to  catch  the  S|.drit  of  Christ,  and  to  let  it 
penetrate  thought,  temper,  and  action  ;  the  soul  that  waits  to  see  what  God 
will  establish  and  what  He  will  overthrow,  that  soul  lives  in  the  light  of  the 
truth  ;  and  he  who  lives  in  the  truth,  lives  in  the  love  of  God  ;  and  where  God's 
truth  and  love  are,  there  is  salvation,  strength,  and  peace.  (Jolin  Congreve,  M.A.) 
The  success  of  Christianity  an  argument  for  its  Divine  origin: — I.  The  argument 
FROM  TH8  SUCCESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL  OF  Christ.  It  may  be  regarded,  like  all  other 
evidences,  as  an  argument  from  miracles.  Here  are  certain  undoubted  tacts.  They 
cannot  be  accounted  for  without  the  immediate  hand  of  God.  Note,  then,  tbat  this 
success  has  been — 1.  Wide  and  extensive.  In  the  early  ages  this  excited  universal 
attention  both  among  friends  and  foes.  About  thirty  years  after  our  Lord's  death, 
Tacitus  tells  us  tbat  an  "  immense  multitude  "  of  Christians  were  either  crucified 
or  burned  alive  in  Eome  daring  the  Neronian  persecution,  whence  we  may  have 
some  idea  of  the  number  of  Christians  in  that  capital.  Forty  years  later,  Pliny,  in 
his  letter  to  Trajan,  states  that  in  Bithynia  the  heathen  temples  had  been  deserted, 
and  the  victims  used  in  sacrifice  had  ceased  to  be  purchased.  By  the  end  of  the 
second  century  TertuUian  exclaimed,  "  We  are  but  of  yesterday,  and  we  have  filled 
up  every  place  :  towns,  islands,  castles,  boroughs,  councils,  camps,  tribes,  wards, 
palace,  senate,  forum  ;  we  have  left  you  nothing  but  your  temples."  In  little  more 
than  three  centuries  the  Roman  empire  became  professedly  Christian  under  Con- 
stantine  ;  and  all  the  efforts  of  bis  successor  Julian  could  not  avert  the  total  down- 
fall of  Paganism.  The  wide  diffusion  of  the  gospel,  though  in  a  corrupt  form,  did 
not  cease.  It  was  extended  from  Britain  to  China,  and  the  foundation  was  laid  ot 
the  present  Christian  nations  of  Europe,  which  have  never  since  abjured  the  religion 
of  the  Cross.  It  has  become  the  religion  of  the  New  World,  and  the  efforts  of  mis- 
sions have,  in  recent  times,  given  it  a  footing  in  parts  of  the  earth  the  most  remote 
from  one  another,  and  renewed  its  early  triumphs.  The  spread  and  hold  of  the 
gospel  is  thus  a  truly  wonderful  fact,  when  we  consider  its  scanty  beginnings  and 
forlorn  prospects.  Even  an  unbeliever  who  looks  calmly  at  this  astonishiug  fact 
may  well  feel  something  of  the  misgiving  of  Gamaliel.  2.  Inward  and  radical.  All 
experience  shows  how  hard  a  thing  it  is  to  make  men  converts  even  to  the  mere 
outward  forms  of  a  new  religion ;  and  the  attempt  to  convert  men  from  one 
sanctuary  to  another — from  the  synagogue,  for  example,  to  the  Church,  or  from 
Popish  to  Protestant  temples— is  still  more  arduous.  We  can  judge  of  this  matter 
from  the  widest  experience  ;  for  we  see  what  frightful  sufferings  have  been  in  all 
ages  endured,  what  wars  have  been  waged,  what  mutinies  have  been  stirred  up, 
trom  men's  reluctance  to  change  their  religion.  Had  the  gospel  only  brought 
heathen  nations  into  the  same  state  that  Christian  nations  are  in  at  this  day, 
though  not  a  siugle  person  had  been  regenerated,  it  would  have  been  something  not 
easy  to  explain  without  calling  in  the  power  of  God.  But  the  true  miracle  begins 
with  making  man  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  when  we  see  this  done  every- 
■where  among  the  polished  Greeks  and  the  wandering  Scythians,  among  masters 
and  slaves,  among  Jews,  Samaritans,  and  Gentiles — ^we  are  constrained  to  ex'jlaira, 
"  This  is  the  fiiuger  of  God !  "  In  this  sense  the  age  of  miracles  is  not  past,  and 
never  will  be.  What  is  the  turning  of  water  into  wine  to  the  turning  of  a  sinner 
into  a  saint  ?  Compare  heathenism,  even  in  its  brightest  scenes  and  noblest  pas- 
sages, with  Christiauity,  the  martyrdom  of  Socrates  with  that  of  Stephen,  the  life 
of  Plato  with  that  of  Paul  or  John,  the  return  of  Kegulus  to  die  at  Carthage  in  his 
country's  cause  with  the  advance  of  Luther  to  Worms  to  testify  for  Christ's 
truth.  Where  was  there  a  Howard  among  the  heathen  ?  Where  a  Wilberfoi'ce  ? 
Where  a  Francis  Xavier  ?  Where  anything  corresponding  to  the  honourable  women 
■who  have  laboured  much  in  the  Lord,  and  who,  from  the  beginning,  have  been  last 
at  the  Cross  and  first  at  the  sepulchre  ?  These  are  all  facts  to  be  accounted  for, 
and  with  them  the  whole  moral  and  spiritual  influence  of  the  gospel  in  life  and  in 
death ;  and  so  long  as  Christianity  can  produce  them  we  feel  that  it  is  in  a  great 
measure  independent  of  other  signs  and  wonders.  It  bears  upon  its  front  the  very 
seal  of  heaven.  3.  Prolonged  and  renewed.  When  Gamaliel  compared  the  gospel 
to  the  movements  in  the  days  of  Theudas,  or  of  Judas  of  Galilee,  he  was  quite  in 
order.     Had  the  cause  of  Christ  been  no  more  Divine  than  theirs,  it  would,  after 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

Bome  noise  and  commotion,  have  as  speedily  died  away.  There  is  something  very 
impressive  in  tbe  vitality  of  genuine  Christianity.  Persecution  drove  it  from. 
Jerusalem  ;  but  it  returned  and  dwelt  there  when  its  Jewish  persecutors  were  scat- 
tered and  overthiown.  The  Eoman  Ctesars  arrayed  against  it  the  brute  force  of 
forty  legions,  but  tbe  empire  with  all  its  forces  became  subject  to  the  Cross.  There 
is  a  plant  culled  the  rose  of  Jericho,  one  of  a  class  which,  when  withered  by  the 
scorching  heats,  rolls  up  its  leaves  into  the  form  of  a  ball,  and  suffers  itself  to  be 
drawn  from  the  ground,  and  borne  on  the  wings  of  the  wind  to  a  great  distance, 
till,  meeting  with  moisture,  its  roots  again  strike  down,  its  leaves  spread,  and  its 
rose-like  colour  returns  in  all  its  beauty.  Thus  did  Christianity  roll  over  the  arid 
wastes  of  the  Middle  Ages,  till,  in  the  Eeformation  period,  it  reasserted  its  living 
power,  and  all  but  equalled  its  ancient  glory  :  and  since  then  the  same  sign  has 
been  repeated ;  for  as  it  rolled  harmlessly  over  the  great  desert  of  Popery,  so  has  it, 
not  less  uninjured,  crossed  the  dreary  s  nds  of  infidelity  which  have  spread  out  to 
intercept  it,  and  expi^nded  in  our  own  days  at  home  and  abroad  with  all  its  primitive 
lovehness.  Everywhere  it  puts  forth  the  same  flowers — zeal  for  God,  love  to  Christ, 
pity  for  men.  The  self-renewing  power  of  the  gospel  exceeds  all  fable.  The  con- 
verts of  Polynesia,  Ceylon,  Burmah,  Madagascar,  speak  all  one  tongue,  and  exalt 
one  name  which  is  above  every  name.  Cliristianity  has  returned  to  the  old  seats 
of  revelation,  to  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  to  Shechem,  to  Nazareth,  to  Bethlehem.  It 
converts  the  house  of  Voltaire  into  a  Bible  depository,  and  the  palace  of  Frederick 
the  Great  iuto  a  meeting-place  of  Christian  union.  II.  Some  objections  to  its.  , 
FORCE,  which,  however,  one  and  all,  turn  out  in  its  favour,  and  strengthen  its. 
validity.  It  is  objected — 1.  That  false  religious  have  had  great  success  in  the  world.. 
Not  to  mention  the  various  systems  of  idolatry,  there  is  the  delusiifrof  the  Arabian 
prophet  which  spread  over  a  very  wide  circle  with  great  rapidity,  and  even  expalled 
Christianity  from  its  ancient  territories.  But  we  may  use  here  the  tests  already 
employed.  (1)  The  spread  of  Mohammedanism,  though  extensive,  has  been  far 
more  limited  than  that  of  Christianity.  With  the  instinct  of  some  oriental  beast 
or  plant,  it  keeps  to  its  own  habitat,  without  iioing  into  all  the  world.  (2)  It  has 
had  no  inward  or  radical  success.  Let  it  be  granted  that  it  set  up  the  unity  of  God, 
and  maintained  some  excellent  moral  lessons,  it  had  in  its  bosom  no  doctrine  of 
regeneration,  no  strict  and  unworldly  discipline,  no  heaven  of  purity  and  spiritual 
blessedness  ;  and,  therefore,  its  success  is  as  little  parallel  to  that  of  Christianity  as 
the  success  of  a  man  who  could  mould  pieces  of  tough  clay  into  different  humaji 
shapes  would  be  parallel  to  that  of  a  man  who  could  endow  these  shapes  with  true 
life.  (3)  Its  success  has  not  been  prolonged  and  renewed.  It  did  not  take  long  to 
reach  its  limit ;  and  since  then  it  has  never  been  revived.  It  lies  at  this  day  effete 
and  helpless,  not  only  unable  to  heal  the  "  sickness  "  of  the  nations  that  embrace 
it,  but  itself  their  true  disease,  which  they  must  shake  off  before  they  can  have  any 
promise  either  for  the  life  that  now  is,  or  for  that  which  is  to  come.  (4)  All  this 
would  have  been  true,  and,  I  think,  unanswerable,  even  had  this  false  system,  like 
the  gospel  of  Christ,  been  introduced  on  its  own  merits,  and  supported  by  per- 
suasion and  argument.  But,  as  we  all  know,  it  was  propagated  at  the  point  of  the 
sword.  2.  That  it  has  not  been  universal.  Many  are  staggered  by  the  slow  pro- 
gress of  the  gospel,  and  by  the  fact  that  it  is  not  yet  the  religion  of  the  majority  of 
the  human  race.  This  difhculty  admits  of  a  complete  answer.  Consider  how  it 
limits  the  power  of  God.  Upon  tliis  supposition  He  cannot  reveal  Himself  to  one 
or  many  without  revealing  Himself  to  all.  Even  one  true  conversion  is  a  super- 
human result,  and  much  more  a  multitude  of  such  conversions ;  and  all  that  we 
are  warranted  to  infer  from  the  partial  nature  of  the  result  is,  that  the  Divine 
Author  of  the  gospel  has,  for  reasons  known  to  Himself,  not  chosen  everywhere  to 
exert  the  same  power.  To  hold  that  God  must  work  at  the  full  stretch  of  Omni- 
potence before  we  can  know  that  it  is  God,  is  the  same  absurdity  as  to  hold  that  a 
man  must  speak  at  the  full  pitch  of  his  voice  before  he  can  be  recognised.  We  must 
plainly  know  what  God's  intentions  were  before  we  find  fault  with  the  paitial  suc- 
cess of  the  gospel.  (1)  If  He  meant  to  punish  the  wilful  rejection  of  His  own  gift 
this  will  sufficiently  explain  the  non-conversion  of  the  Jews.  (2)  If  He  meant  to 
leave  room  for  human  co-operation,  this  will  explain  the  slow  progress  of  the  gospel 
in  professedly  Christian  nations.  (3)  If  He  judged  it  better  to  pi'oceed  by  degrees^ 
than  at  one  sweeping  stroke,  this  will  obviate  a  host  of  difficulties  connected  with 
the  gradual  and  interrupted  march  of  Chi  istianity.  When  are  we  to  be  satisfied  ? 
Suppose  that  the  whole  world  was  converted  but  one  man,  this  objection  would  still 
hold  good ;  nay,  that  solitary  unbeliever  could  stand  up  and  make  the  whole  truth. 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  523 

of  God  of  none  effect !  It  is  enough  that  we  see  a  power  at  work  which  has  con- 
verted many,  and  which  is  able  to  convert  all.  3.  That  this  success  has  been  less 
with  those  who  profess  to  be  influenced  by  the  gospel,  than  might  have  been  ex- 
pected from  a  Divine  religion.  What  evils  have  been  associated  with  the  Christian 
name,  what  scandals,  what  inconsistencies  !  But  we  must  first  of  all  separate  be- 
tween nominal  and  genuine  Christians.  The  distinction  exists  among  Christians 
alone ;  for  no  other  religion  is  spiritual  enough  to  allow  of  this  division.  Is  the 
true  Church,  then,  to  blame  for  its  nominal  adherents  and  their  evils  ?  Nay,  is  not 
the  tribute  to  its  own  light  and  truth  and  goodness  all  the  greater  that  men  seek  to 
cloak  even  their  vices  under  its  venerable  sanction  ?  It  is  among  true  Christians 
that  the  true  effects  of  Christianity  are  to  be  seen,  and  here  we  fearlessly  join  issue 
with  objectors.  And  is  there  not  in  Christian  lands  a  general  purpose,  somewhere 
deep  down  in  the  heart  of  the  worldling,  to  become  himself  a  Christian?  "  Let  me 
die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  aud  let  my  last  end  be  like  his."  III.  Some  infer- 
ences WHICH  FOLLOW.  The  success  of  Christianity  is — 1.  A  tribute  to  the  glory  of 
the  Saviour.  Every  onward  movement  is  like  a  step  in  some  solemn  piece  of 
martial  music  which  sounds  His  praise.  Every  conversion  is  a  trophy  to  His 
invincibility.  Every  land  added  to  His  sway  is  another  crown  placed  upon  His 
head.  And  the  final  conquest  of  the  world  will  awake  the  final  peal  of  the  anthem 
to  His  glory.  It  is  delightful  to  a  Christian  heart  to  identify  the  success  of  the 
gospel  with  the  personal  efforts  and  sympathies  of  the  Eedeemer.  2.  A  source  of 
confidence  to  the  Church.  Christianity  can  never  be  in  such  danger  again,  as  it 
has  already  triumphed  over.  Had  it  been  of  man,  it  had  long  ago  come  to  nought. 
Its  enemies  have  assailed  it  with  every  possible  weapon,  and  .searched  every  rivet 
of  its  armour.  And  therefore  it  moves  a  smile  of  pity  when  this  hero  or  the  other 
comes  forth  against  the  gospel,  forgetful  of  the  hosts  that  have  sunk  already  in  the 
attempt,  like  insects  rushing  against  the  flame,  or  birds  of  night  glaring  defiance  at 
the  sun.  3.  A  motive  of  conversion  to  the  unbeliever.  There  is  nothing  so  mourn- 
ful as  to  be  at  once  on  the  wrong,  and  on  the  losing  side.  To  perish  in  a  good 
cause  surrounds  the  name  with  glory  ;  but  where  is  the  wisdom,  the  magnanimity, 
the  honour  of  dying  a  martjT  to  error,  to  folly,  to  sin  and  wickedness?  This  is  not 
to  be  a  hero,  but  a  traitor  ;  not  to  be  a  sacritice,  but  a  suicide  1  (/.  Cairns,  D.D.) 
Moral  truths  inextinguishable : — M'Kenzie,  in  his  North  American  tour,  speaking 
of  the  country  bordering  on  the  Slave  Lake,  says  :  "  It  is  covered  with  large  trees  of 
spruce  pine  and  white  birch  ;  when  these  are  destroyed  poplars  succeed,  though  none 
were  before  to  be  seen."  Evelyn  notices  a  fact  very  similar  to  this,  which  is  observed 
in  England,  in  Nova  Scotia,  and  in  the  United  States  of  America,  that  where  fires 
have  destroyed  the  original  wood  the  new  saplings  which  spring  up  are  generally 
different  species  of  trees.  All  these  phenomena  indi^'^ate  the  inexiiaguishableness 
of  vegetable  vitality  ;  and  on  this  pomt  they  may  be  employed  to  typify  the  inex- 
tinguishableness  of  moral  truths  in  our  world.  No  fires  of  insurrection,  no  deluges 
of  persecution,  no  changes  in  the  forms  of  human  society  by  kings,  or  priests,  or 
mobs  have  ever  had  the  effect  of  obliterating  moral  ideas.  They  are  inextinguish- 
able, aud  spring  up  unaccountably  in  perennial  beauty  despite  all  social  conflagra- 
tions and  convulsions.  {Scientific  Illustrations.)  The  fate  of  antagonists  to 
Christianity : — "Gibbon,  Voltaire,  Chesterfield,  Hume,  and  Paine,"  said  an  un- 
believer, "  are  the  champions  of  infidelity.  Their  works  completely  overthrow  Chris- 
tianity." "Whit!"  said  a  Christian  ;  "  overthrow  Christianity  !  Are  you  aware 
of  the  way  in  which  the  Most  High  God  has  thwarted  their  designs  and  overruled 
their  evil  purposes  ?  Lei  me  tell  you  that  in  Gibbon's  hotel  at  Lake  Leman  is  a 
room  where  Bibles  are  sold.  The  printing-press  from  which  Voltaire's  infidel 
works  were  issued  has  been  used  to  print  the  Word  of  God.  Chesterfield's  parlour, 
once  an  infidel  club-room,  is  now  a  vestry,  where  Christians  meet  for  prayer  and 
praise.  Hume  predicted  the  death  of  Christianity  in  twenty  years,  but  be  has  gone 
to  his  grave,  and  the  first  meeting  of  the  Bible  Society  in  Edinburgh  was  held  in 
the  room  where  the  prince  of  sceptics  died.  Paine,  on  landing  at  New  York,  was 
foolish  enough  to  prophesy  that  in  five  years  not  a  Bible  would  be  found  in  the 
United  States.  But  it  is  a  fact  that  there  are  more  Bible  Societies  to-day  in 
America  than  in  any  other  country  in  the  world."  The  unbeUever  was  silenced. 
{J.  L.  Nye.) 

Ver.  41.  They  departed  from  the  presence  of  the  council,  rejoicing  that  they  were 
counted  worthy  to  suffer. — Heroic  for  the  truth  : — I.  The  bitter  antagonism  of 

WICKED  MEN  TO  THE  TROTH,  AS  SEEN  IN  THEIR  DESPERATE  ATTEMPTS  TO  ARREST  ITS  PRO- 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

GBESS  IN  THE  WORLD.  The  history  of  truth  has  ever  been  one  of  trial  and  conflict.  He 
who  was  "  The  Truth  "  had  to  contend  with  the  antagonism  of  men  ;  and  the  noble 
army  of  martyrs  sliows  how  desperate  and  determined  have  been  the  attempts  of 
cruel,  wicked  men  to  arrest  the  course  of  truth.    Arrayed  against  the  apf^stles  was — • 

I.  Social  status.  The  Founder  of  Christianity  was  of  humble  origin,  the  apostles 
were  of  the  common  people;  and  of  course  the  high  priest  and  the  )ulers  could 
not  consent  to  be  taught  by  them.  So  for  ages  persons  of  social  rank  and  great 
worldly  wealth  have  not  favoured  Christianity,  but  rather  hindered  it.  2.  Le«al 
mijjht.  The  judg»  s  and  the  lawyers,  who  ought  to  have  defended  tbem,  sided 
against  them  ;  and  for  centuries  history  repeatt-d  itself  in  this  particular,  and  the 
strong  arm  of  the  law,  mstead  of  being  extended  to  defend  the  truth,  has  drawn  the 
sword  to  persecute  and  destroy.  3.  Mental  p  wer.  At  the  council  there  was  the 
elite  of  the  intelligence  of  the  Jewish  nation.  And  from  that  time  until  miw  tbere 
have  been  men  of  biilliant  powers  arrayed  against  the  truth— powers  worthy  of  a 
not  ler  employment  and  end.  Polished  and  poii-oned  have  been  the  arrows  that 
have  been  shot  at  the  army  of  the  Cross.  4.  Sympathy  of  numbers.  Many 
believed,  but  many  did  not  believe.  Truth  has  always  been  in  the  minority,  so  far 
as  numbers  are  concerned.  Error  has  usually  gained  the  show  of  hands.  Men 
with  high  and  holy  purposes  must  expect  comparative  loneliness.  It  was  so  with 
the  Master,  largely  so  with  the  apostles,  and  has  bten  so  more  or  less  with  all 
intellectual  giants  and  true  moral  refoimers.  5.  Antiquity.  They  were  Noncon- 
formists, and  the  Jews  would  feel  the  utmost  disdain  for  those  who  dared  to  dissent 
from  their  national  establishment.  Those  who  opposed  the  apostles  venerated 
Abraham  snd  Moses ;  but  Christ  they  regarded  as  an  innovator  and  a  sower  of 
sedition.  Error  has  still  pretext  for  pleading  that  antiquity  is  on  its  side  ;  for  sin 
is  as  old  as  Eden.  All  these  things  were  arrayed  agninst  the  truth,  and  yet  it  won 
its  way.  And  if  these  things  could  not  impede  it  when  it  was  a  streamlet,  shall 
they  succeed  now  that  it  is  a  mighty  river  ?  If  alien  and  hardy  hands  could  not 
uproot  the  truth  when  it  was  a  newly-planted  sapling,  sh  11  any  hands  be  able  to 
lift  it  now  it  is  a  deep-rooted  mighty  tree?  God  is  on  the  side  of  truth,  and  its 
early  victories  are  a  pattern  and  pledge  of  its  coistant  and  complete  triumph  over 
all  antagonistic  forces.     II.  The  sublime  heeoism  of  holy  men  fob  the  truth,  as 

SEEN    IN    THEIR    DETERMINED    LABOURS    TO    ACCELERATE    ITS    PROGRESS    IN    THK    WORLD. 

Notice — 1.  Its  nature.  (1)  They  could  endure  pain.  They  were  not  Stoics,  but 
sensitive,  generous  men ;  and  yet  they  endured  torture  even  joyfully.  (2)  They 
could  endure  shame.  Christ  had  endured  the  Cross  and  shame  for  tlicm.  and  for 
Him  they  could  endure.  (3)  They  could  brave  dangers.  It  was  no  use  for  the 
council  to  threaten  them.  They  were  prepared  to  lose  their  libert.^ ,  and  even  life, 
rather  than  deny  the  name  which  to  them  was  above  eveiy  name.  2.  Its  secret. 
They  were  not  fanatics,  hut  calm,  cool,  and  common-sense  men.  (1)  They  were 
witnesses  of  the  facts  they  attested  to.  They  knew  they  liad  "  not  followed 
cunningly  devised  fahles,"  the\  had  "seen,"  and  "heard"  and  "felt"  the  things 
they  proclaimed  ;  and  the  council  might  as  well  have  tried  to  argue  them  out  of 
their  own  existence  as  out  of  their  belief  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  (2)  'I'hey  were  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Natural  courage,  physical  pluck,  would  not  have  bnen 
enough  to  lead  them  to  endure  and  hold  out  as  they  did  ;  they  required  super- 
natural com  age,  and  they  had  it.  They  were  strong  in  the  Lord  and  iu  the  power 
of  His  might.  (3)  They  were  inspired  by  a  mighty  name.  Oh  the  power  of  a 
name!  Poets,  patriots,  warriors,  &c.,  have  been  stimulated  and  inspired  by  great 
and  illustrious  nnmes;  but  here  is  "a  name  that  is  above  every  name,"  that  has 
been  more  uiilifiing  among  men  than  any  other  lever  name  in  the  world.  {b\  W. 
Brown.)  Four  classes  in  the  school  of  siiffering : — I.  Those   obliged  to  suffer. 

II.  Those  WILLING  to  suffer.  HI.  Those  able  to  suffer.  IV.  Those  permitted  to 
suffer.  (Hartman.)  Rejoicimj  in  tribulation : — I.  What  the  apostles  felt. 
1.  Not  mere  resignation.  It  is  reckoned  a  high  Christian  grace  not  to  murmur  at 
afflictive  providences,  but  to  submit — not  trying  to  pierce  the  inscrutable,  but 
saying,  "  Thy  will,  not  mine  be  done."  2.  Not  mere  acquiescenre.  This  is  a  grace 
higher  still,  involving  as  it  does  the  confession  that  God's  will  is  good  will,  and 
God's  way,  however  painful,  the  best  way.  Its  language  is,  '♦  All  things  work  together 
for  good,"  &c.  3.  But  joyfulness — perhaps  the  highest  grace  possible,  being  exulta- 
tion that  at  whatever  personal  cost  God's  will  is  done.  Certainly  the  most  difficult 
gi'ace  to  exercise,  and  one  which  goes  clean  contrary  to  all  the  tendencies  of  our 
nature.  We  naturally  love  ease,  prosperity,  honour  ;  but  when  we  are  enabled  to 
rejoice  as  the  apostles  did  in  pain,  adversity,  and  ignominy  we  are  more  than  con- 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  525 

querors.  II.  How  to  account  for  it.  1.  Not  on  the  ground  of  the  expectation  of 
ulterior  benefit.  Many  a  man  bas  rejoiced  in  the  trouble  and  suffering  which  would 
certainly  issue  in  wealth  or  honour.  Witness  the  conduct  of  warriors  and  explorers. 
The  apostles  could  gain  nothing  except  further  suffering.  2.  Not  on  the  ground  of 
a  hope  of  heaven.  This  has  been  the  support  of  many  a  Christian  martyr  and 
sufferer,  is  quite  legitimate,  and  was  a  source  of  comfort  often  to  the  apostles  them- 
selves, but  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been  taken  into  account  here.  3.  But  on  the 
ground  that  Christ  counted  them  worthy  to  suffer  for  His  name.  It  was  suffering — (1) 
For  Christ's  sake.  (2)  By  Christ's  nppointmeut.  (3)  With  Christ's  support.  (J.  W. 
Burn.)  Apostolic  joy  : — The  history  of  the  Church,  as  given  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  shows  the  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind  towards  God.  But  the  persecution  to 
which  the  apostles  were  subject  has  its  bright,  no  less  than  its  dark  siiie.  It  shows  us 
the  integrity — the  courage  of  these  men  of  God.  Many  have  liMzarded  life  from 
love  of  worldly  honour  and  glory ;  self,  in  some  form  or  other,  has  been  the 
prompting  motive ;  and  they  have  won  the  applause  of  man.  But  a  higher  and 
nobler  feeling  has  induced  the  followers  of  Chiist  to  go  to  the  prison  and  siake.  I. 
The  situation  of  these  men  of  God.  The  circumstances  in  which  they  were 
placed  were  harassing  and  painful.  The  whole  weight  of  the  civil  power  was 
brought  to  bear  upon  them.  They  were  also  put  to  shame.  They  were  men  of 
high  moral  sensibility,  and  keenly  felt  the  degradation  attached  to  a  jnublic  whip- 
ping, as  if  they  had  been  robbers,  yet  they  rejoiced.  But  what  fault  had  they 
committed  ?  They  were  punished  because  they  pre-.ched  pardon  to  the  guilty,  and 
salvation  through  Christ  to  them  that  believe.  II.  The  judgment  they  formed 
OF  the  treatment  they  received.  They  rejoiced  that  they  were  counted  worthy 
to  suffer  shame  for  the  name  of  their  Lord  and  Master.  1.  M:iy  this  not  have 
arisen  from  the  conviction  that  opposition  would  redound  to  the  Saviour's  glory  ? 
They  knew  that  His  cause  would  in  the  end  prevail,  however  it  might  for  a  season 
be  hindered.  2.  Moreover,  they  might  have  formed  their  judgment  on  a  principle 
that  regarded  themselves.  They  knew  that  their  ascended  Lord  had  foretold  the 
certainty  of  persecution,  and  now  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction,  they  saw  an 
evidence  of  the  truthfulness  of  their  Great  Master,  and  of  their  n-latiou  to  Him. 
They  therefore  rejoiced  in  the  grace  of  God.     III.  On  what  grounds  and  by  what 

MEANS  MAY  WE  REJOICE  IF  WE  SHOGLD  BE  CADLED  TO  SUFFER  FOR  THE  NAME  OF  ChRIST  ? 

It  is  still  true,  that  through  mu(^h  tribulation  we  are  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Children  have  been  persecuted  by  their  parents  for  the  sake  of  their  piety  and 
religious  zeal.  Servants  have  been  mocked  and  dismissed  from  their  situations  on 
account  of  their  faith.  Tenants  have  been  turned  out  of  their  houses  and  farms 
because  they  have  obeyed  the  voice  of  conscience.  And  not  a  few  have  suffered  in 
their  trade,  because  they  have  followed  their  convictions  in  the  worshipping  of 
God.  1.  If  we  would  be  associated  with  the  apostles  in  this  case,  we  must  reckon 
by  faith  —  not  by  sight.  A  man  may  resign  himself  to  the  observance  of  the 
established  usages  of  society,  he  may  conform  to  the  standaid  of  the  world's 
morality  ;  but  he  will  never  submit  to  reproach  for  the  name  of  Christ,  unless  he 
sees  His  Divine  excellency,  and  loves  Him  in  sincerity.  2.  Again,  if  we  would 
account  it  joy  to  be  persecuted  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  our  eye  must  be  single  in  His 
cause.  3.  In  a  word,  finally,  you  must  seek  for  a  constant  supply  of  the  spirit  of 
grace.  These  men  of  God  were  filled  with  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  {Aiiierican 
National  Preacher.)  Joy  in  Cliristian  ivork,  and  peace  amid  tribnlation  : — I. 
Many  people  can  imagine  Church  workers  feeling  pleasure  under  certain  conditions 
and  experiences  of  their  work — in  its  hours  of  success,  and  scenes  of  glad  accep- 
tance and  sympathetic  reception  ;  but  hardly  any,  without  careful  thought,  could 
understand  men  professing  themselves  as  happy  after  enduring  such  an  ordeal  as 
the  apostles  had  just  passed  through.  Yet  let  me  point  you  to  analogies.  First 
take  the  case  of  the  scholar,  the  man  who  loves  and  pursues  knowledge  for  its  own 
sake.  Have  we  not  heard  of  men  who  are  content,  nay,  supremely  happy  in 
toiling  on  steadily  and  silently  for  years,  wrapped  up  in  and  devoted  to  enlarging 
their  ever-increasing  stores  of  information  ?  Such  there  have  been  and  are,  who 
deny  themselves  all  other  pleasures,  even  health,  not  to  speak  of  woildly  advan- 
tage or  social  advancement,  who  work  on  in  silence  and  solitude,  finding  their  one 
joy  ill  their  enthusiastic  devotion  to  this  their  only  object  in  life.  Or  take  the  case 
of  the  man  of  science.  Not  the  man  who  studies  literature  or  law  or  history,  but 
the  man  who  is  ensiaged  in  wresting  fresh  secrets  from  nature  ;  not  in  order  to 
patent  an  invention  and  make  a  large  fortune,  but  who  loves  nature  and  science  for 
their  own  sake,  whose  one  object  seems  to  be  making  constant  additions  to  the 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

number  of  known  facts  or  verified  laws  and  operations.  Again,  have  we  not  read 
of  travellers  and  explorers  perfectly  possessed  by  their  life  of  adventure  ;  ever 
seeking  to  scale  heights  which  no  one  else  has  reached,  to  penetrate  further  into 
unknown  regions,  aud  who  for  this  purpose  have  endured  ahuost  incredible  hard- 
ship and  toil ;  to  whom  labours  well-nigh  superhuman  seemed  as  nothiug,  who 
would  face  with  readiness  situations  where  they  verily  went  with  their  lives  in 
their  hands  ?  I  miyht  go  on  to  speak  of  the  love  of  the  soldier,  the  engineer,  the 
artist,  the  musician,  for  their  callings.  For  we  shall  find  that  the  greatest  men  in 
every  sphere  of  life  have  had,  as  it  were,  a  perfect  passion  for  their  profession,  and 
have  followed  it  not  for  any  outside  reward  or  emolument  it  might  bring,  but  for 
its  own  sake.  Now,  may  I  take  Christianity  as  a  profession,  and  give  the  widest 
interpretation  to  the  true  Christian  work  ?  Is  it  quite  impossible  for  the  Christian 
worker  to  find  such  an  interest  in  the  work  itself,  apart  from  any  bope  of  reward, 
as  a  scholar,  an  artist,  a  soldier  finds  in  his  profession  ?  The  true  artist  has  a 
pure  and  enthusiastic  love  for  art ;  the  scholar's  one  object  in  life  is  knowledge  ; 
what,  then,  is  the  Christinn  worker's  means  and  oliject  of  rejoicing  ?  Must  it  not 
be  in  the  increase  of  goodn»ss  ?  Christ  and  Christianity  have  but  one  object — the 
righteousness  of  man,  the  placing  of  good  in  the  stead  of  evil.  Notice  how  different 
the  conduct  of  the  apostles  now  from  what  it  was  previous  to  the  resurrection. 
Then,  at  the  advent  of  a  few  armed  men,  they  had  fled  in  terror  and  deserted  their 
Master.  Now,  they  were  joyfu'ly  prepared  to  suffer  persecution  Hud  death  on  His 
behalf.  What  had  produced  the  change  ?  What  but  a  revelation  of  the  true 
nature  of  their  Master?  II.  With  joy  is  closely  allied  pence.  Pence  is  the 
inward  state  of  feeling  of  which  holy  joy  is  the  manifestation.  The  Christian  lives 
in  two  spheres — in  the  world  and  also  in  Christ.  In  the  first  sphere  he  must  be  in 
a  state  of  conflict  with  much  he  finds  around  him.  But  he  lives  also  in  close  com- 
nmnion  with  his  Master ;  and  so  far  as  he  tries  to  do  his  Master's  service,  to  obt-y 
His  will,  to  be  led  by  His  Spirit,  he  is  at  peace.  We  are  all,  in  one  way  or  another, 
seeking  for  happiness.  Physical  life  depends  on  conformation  to  the  laws  of 
nature.  Spir  tual  life  depends  on  conformation  to  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  object 
of  the  will  of  God  is  righteousness,  goodness,  truth  This,  if  we  would.have  peace, 
must  be  the  object  of  our  wills  also.  Hence,  in  the  pursuit  of  goodness,  even  in 
the  midst  of  tribulation,  shall  we  find  joy.      (IF.  E.   Cliaduuck,  M.A.)  The 

effects  of  persecution : — Unless  a  grain  of  mustard-^eed  be  bruised,  the  extent 
of  its  virtue  is  never  acknowledged.  For  without  bruising  it  is  insipid,  but 
if  it  be  bruised  it  becomes  hot,  and  it  gives  out  all  those  pungent  properties 
that  were  concealed  in  it.  Thus  every  good  man,  so  l"ng  as  he  is  not  smitten, 
is  regardi  d  as  insipid,  and  of  slight  nccount.  But  if  the  grinding  of  perse- 
cution crush  him,  instantly  he  gives  forth  all  the  warmth  of  his  savour,  and  all 
that  before  appeared  to  be  weak  and  contemptible  is  turned  into  godly  fervour,  and 
that  which  in  peiiceful  times  he  had  been  glad  to  keep  from  view  within  his  own 
bosom,  he  is  driven  by  the  force  of  tribulHtion  to  ninke  known.  (St.  Gregory.) 
The  joy  of  siiff)  riiiy  for  Christ : — Guy  de  Brez,  a  Frem-h  minister,  was  prisoner  in 
the  Castle  of  Tournay,  in  Belgium.  A  lady  who  visited  him  said  she  wondered 
how  he  could  eat,  or  drink,  or  sleep  in  quiet.  "Madam,"  said  he,  "  my  chains 
neither  terrify  me  nor  break  my  sleep  ;  c»n  the  contrary,  I  glory  and  take  delight 
therein,  esteeming  them  at  a  higher  rate  than  chains  and  rings  of  gold,  or  jewels 
of  any  price  wliatever.  The  rattling  of  my  chains  is  like  the  effect  of  an  instrument 
of  music  in  my  ears — not  that  such  an  effect  comes  merely  from  my  chains,  but  it 
is  because  I  am  bound  therewith  for  maintaining  the  truth  of  the  gospel." 

Ver.  42.  And  daily  in  the  temple,  and  in  every  house,  they  ceased  not  to  teach 
and  preach  Jesus  Christ. — Daih/  apostolic  labours  : — This  is  a  suggestive  picture  of 
the  life  and  work  of  the  early  Church.  We  like  to  trace  enterprises  to  their 
beginnings,  rivers  to  their  sjaings.  These  were  times  of  holy  zeal  and  fervour 
which  u.ay  be  accounted  for  by  four  considerations.  1.  The  apostles  felt  the 
impulse  of  a  new  undertaking.  2.  They  held  fresh  in  memory  thnir  inter- 
course with  their  Lord.  3.  They  had  the  inward  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  4. 
Tiiey  were  inspired  by  the  truths  they  preached.  The  text  is  one  of  the  best 
exhibitions-  of  this  energy,  and  suggests  to  us — I.  Our  wokk.  "  Teaching  and 
preachii  g  J^'sus  Christ."  That  may  seem  to  be  the  specific  work  of  apostles  and 
ministers,  but  in  tiuth  it  is  the  work  of  every  Christian.  Mosf^s  wished  that  "  all 
the  Lord's  people  were  prophets  "  ;  Jesus  said,  "  Go  home  to  thy  friends  and  tell 
them  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee."     1.  The  subject.    (1)  Jesus, 


CHAP.  T.]  THE  ACTS.  527 

regarded  as  the  object  of  love — in  the  infinite  grace  of  His  character,  and  in  the 
persuasions  of  His  self-sacriflcing  love.  (2)  Christ,  as  the  object  of  faitb — in  His 
mission,  death,  resurrection.  (3)  Jesus  Christ — sent  of  God  to  save  from  sin. 
2.  The  motle.  (1)  Preaching,  announcing,  heralding,  witnessing,  proclaiming  the 
Saviour  present  and  almighty  to  save.  (2)  Teaching — careful  and  minute  instruc- 
tion in  Christian  facts,  truths,  duties.  II.  Odr  spheres.  "In  the  temple  and  in 
every  hou>-e."  Not  only  in  appointed  sanctuaries,  but  also  in — 1.  Society,  which  we 
are  to  leaven  and  purify  for  Christ  with  wise  teachings  and  preachings.  2.  Our 
houses — homes  where  family  bonds  and  sympathies  make  for  it  a  preparatory  atmo- 
sphere. Our  first  circle  to  win  for  Christ  is  the  home  circle.  But  these  two  circles 
cannot  be  properly  occupied  in  any  one  way  or  by  any  one  agency.  We  want — (1) 
A  life  voice,  the  testimony  of  a  daily  pure  and  helpful  conduct.  (2)  A  lip  voice, 
the  witness  of  wise,  earnest,  and  loving  words.  (3)  A  works, voice,  the  hallowing 
influence  of  good  and  gracious  deeds.  III.  Our  times.  "  Daily,"  i.e.,  always. 
Not  a  day  should  pass  without  some  witness  for  Christ.  Christ  wants  service  from 
lis  on  week-days  as  well  as  Sundays.  We  may  preach — 1.  Christ's  spirit,  which 
is  charity.  2.  Christ's  will,  which  is  holiness.  3.  Christ's  salvation.  {R.  Tuck,  B.A.) 
Ministerial  fidelity  and  devotedness  : — In  this  brief  but  emphatic  record  of  the  labours 
of  the  first  apostles  we  may  find  a  pattern  after  which  to  model  ours,  in  the  prose- 
cution of  that  great  work  to  which  we  have  been  set  apart.    I.  Examine  the 

COMPREHENSIVE    CHARACTER    OF     THE    MINISTERIAL    OFFICE    DELINEATED markmg    itS 

adaptation  to  the  end  for  which  it  was  originally  instituted.  The  recovery  of  the 
sinner— his  restoration  to  the  Divine  image  and  favour,  is  the  revealed  purpose  of 
God,  We  must  not  shun  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  Herein  we  perceive 
"what  should  constitute  the  staple  of  our  preaching.  It  is  Christ,  in  the  glory  of 
His  person,  in  the  all-sufficiency  of  His  offices,  in  the  riches  of  His  grace.  1.  To 
preach  Jesus  is  to  announce  Him  as  a  Peacemaker,  who  brought  in,  by  His  one 
oblation  of  Himself  once  oiiered,  an  atonement.  It  is  to  herald  Him  as  the 
Saviour,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  humanly-devised  methods,  wherein  salvation 
is  sought;  a  Saviour,  suitable  and  sufficient — suitable  as  man,  sufficient  as  God — 
His  deity  being  the  altar  upon  which  His  humanity  was  immolated;  "the  altar 
sanctifying  the  gift."  2.  To  preach  Jesus  is  "  to  declare  His  righteousness  for  the 
remission  of  sins  "  ;  a  righteousness  resulting  from  His  obedience,  at  once  active 
and  passive,  exacted  and  rendered  as  the  sinner's  substitute,  and  imparted  unto  all 
who  exercise  faith  in  Him.  3.  Further,  the  title  of  Christ  is  applied  to  the  Saviour. 
Christ,  the  anointed  Prophet,  Priest,  Advocate,  and  King.  4.  It  is  further  recorded 
of  the  apostles  that  they  did  not  restrict  their  labours  to  the  service  of  the  temple, 
but  that  they  instructed  "  from  house  to  house."  "We  watch  for  souls,"  and 
should  therefore  have  our  people  under  constant  inspection,  and  ever-wakeful 
snp^rvision.  By  such  a  course  we  shall  best  prove  that  we  are  indeed  alive  to 
their  highest  interests  ;  by  this  will  the  cause  of  religion  and  morality  aud  public 
tranquiUily  be  bnst  advanced  ;  by  this,  too,  shall  we  be  best  prepared  for  meeting 
that  sol  mn  inquiry,  "  Where  is  the  flock  that  was  given  thee,  thy  beautiful  flock  ?  " 
5.  Another  remark  upon  this  part  of  our  subject  is  suggested  by  the  expression, 
*'  they  taught  Jesus  Christ."  It  is  in  the  power  of  conduct,  as  well  as  of  words,  to 
convey  instruction.  "Ye,"  said  our  Lord,  "  are  the  light  of  the  world."  Like  a 
moral  Pharos,  enkindled  from  above,  we  are  placed  in  a  direct  line  with  the  haven 
of  eternity,  in  ord^-r  that,  by  the  concentrated  beams  of  purity  of  doctrine  and  of 
conduct,  we  may  guide  the  endangered  sinner  across  these  perilous  waters,  wherein 
many  are  engulphed  and  for  ever  lost.  We  are  to  be  "  ensamples  unto  our  flock," 
giviuii  strength  and  power  to  our  public  admonitions  by  the  consistency  of  our 
private  deportment.  'J'hat  which  we  have  "  heard  and  seen,"  tasted,  and  are  en- 
joying, we  declare  unto  our  perishing  fellow  sinners ;  and  this  invests  our  addresses 
■with  a  charm  and  power  which  nothing  short  of  it  could  possibly  impart.  Ours 
it  is  to  utter  testimony  confirmed  by  experience ;  and  who  can  fail  to  admit  its 
force,  in  its  peculiar  fitness  for  the  end  designed?  II.  The  constancy  and  folness 
OF  dedic.\tion  to  their  work  exhibited  by  the  apostles,  furnishing  for  our 
imitiition  a  just  and  impressive  pattern.  It  was  a  noble  declaration  of  the  twelve, 
"  We  wiU  give  ourselves  continually  t<'>  prayer  and  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word." 
They  appear  to  have  been  influenced  by  an  "  inconceivable  severity  of  conviction, 
that  they  had  one  thing  to  do."  Upon  this  one  object  the  whole  force  of  their 
mind  was  expended.  For  its  furtherance  they  were  content  to  suffer  the  loss  of  all 
things,  deeming  reproach  an  honour,  suffering  a  privilege,  a  martyr's  death  a  gain. 
The  necessity  for  this  self-sacrificiug  devotedness  still  exists,  in  order  to  our  reach- 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

ing  the  highest  style  of  ministerial  excellence.  1.  The  ministry  of  the  gospel,  in 
its  widest  acceptation,  is  emphatically  the  work  we  have  to  do.  Well  may  we,. 
engaged  in  such  an  undertaking,  affirm  in  th<j  language  of  Nehemiah,  "  I  am  doing 
a  great  work."  The  magnitude  of  that  work  will  be  further  seen  in  the  diversity 
of  the  employment  connected  with  its  due  discharge.  To  the  Christian  pastor 
belongs  the  study  of  human  character  in  its  every  different  aspect.  He  will  have  to 
adapt  his  resources  to  the  peculiarities  of  every  rank  and  age  in  the  Church  and 
in  the  world.  2.  The  disproportion  between  our  powers  and  the  undertaking  upon 
which  they  are  to  be  expended  is  another  consideration  calculated  to  prove  the 
nece^sity  for  the  accumulated  force  of  all  our  powers  in  its  performance.  3.  More- 
over, we  may  observe  that  the  amount  of  our  success  will  bear  some  proportion  to 
our  efforts.  The  seed  will  reproduce  itself,  and  the  greater  the  quantity  sown  in 
prayer  and  watered  by  that  gracious  influence  which  faithful  sustained  suppli- 
cation calls  d'  vvn,  the  more  abundant  will  be  the  crop.  The  manifestation  of 
this  success  n-.  -y  be  for  a  while  denied ;  we  may  be  permitted  to  toil  on,  witness- 
ing but  little  fruit  of  our  labour ;  nevertheless,  the  result  is  certain.  {Henry  Abney, 
B.A.)  A  model  Christian  ministry  : — I.  Its  subject.     Not  things  about  Jesus 

Christ,  but  Himself.  Creeds  may  satisfy  the  reason,  but  the  heart  craves  a  Person; 
The  heart  grows,  but  creeds  are  stationary.  Christ  and  His  fulness  ever  transcend 
our  utmost  need.  A  ministry  of  which  Christ  is  not  the  grand  theme  is  a  misnomer 
— worthless  and  injurious.  H.  I^ps  method.  "  PreacLiing,"  i.e.,  evangelising; 
"  teaching,"  i.e.,  instructing  those  who  have  received  the  evangel.  Notice — 1.  The 
great  importance  of  these  two  things.  2.  The  difficulty  of  doing  both  well.  3. 
The  difficulty  of  obtaining  appreciation  for  both  in  one  congregation.  Yet  the 
Church  must  have  and  exercise  both.  III.  Its  spheees.  1.  Public.  2.  Domestic 
(chap.  ii.  4G).  IV.  Its  feequency.  "  Daily."  Here  is  a  message  for  those  who 
never  enter  the  sanctuary  except  on  the  Lord's  day.  (W.  Jones.)  Apostolic 
ministration: — I.  Its  subject.  "Jesus  Christ."  This  was  not  one  subject  of 
many;  it  was  the  only  one.  Note  that  this  is  a  subject  of — 1.  Infinite  importance. 
"  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other."  You  may  be  interested  in  many  sub- 
jects ;  you  may  love  music,  history,  &c. ;  but  you  may  die  to-morrow;  and  without 
an  interest  in  Christ  you  are  lost :  and  therefore  to  know  how  you  are  to  be  saved 
must  be  matter  of  infinite  impoitance.  2.  Unequalled  suitableness.  It  is  adapted 
to  the  moral  necessities  of  all  mankind.  3.  Endless  variety.  The  mind  of  man  is 
so  constituted  that  it  never  can  be  happy  without  variety  ;  and  that  variety  is 
furnished  us  in  the  heavens  and  on  the  earth.  But  in  Christ  all  God's  various 
wonders  meet ;  He  is  the  great  Centre  of  both  worlds,  in  whom  the  glories  of  both 
are  concentrated.  I  can  hardly  look  at  an  object  in  creation  without  being  reminded 
of  Him  ;  and  the  Bible  is  intended  that  whichever  way  I  look  it  should  preach  to 
me  about  Jesus  Christ.  4.  Peculiar  sweetness.  What  is  so  sweet  to  a  starving  man 
as  food,  to  a  weary  traveller  as  rest,  to  the  criminal  as  pardon  ?  5.  Singular  efficacy. 
It  is  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  And  what  subject  has  the  efficacy 
which  this  possesses?  Mahometanism  has  converted  its  millions  ;  but  how  ?  By 
the  sword  and  by  the  allowance  of  sensual  indulgence.  Idolatry  has  its  millions ; 
but  they  curse  their  senseless  and  blood-thirsty  deities  for  the  slavery  which  they 
impose  upon  them.  But  without  any  carnal  weapons,  or  human  authority, 
the  simple  preaching  of  Christ,  which  first  conquered  the  Roman  world,  brought 
England  into  the  state  into  which  it  now  is,  and  will,  by  its  blessed  conquests, 
finally  convert  and  subdue  the  whole  world.  If  you  are  alarmed  at  the  vice 
and  misery  of  London,  see  the  trophies  of  the  simple  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Saul,  the  persecuting  bigot ;  Mary  Magdalene,  the  habitation  of  foul  demons ;  the 
thief  on  the  cross,  &c.  G.  Eternal  duration.  Many  subjects  which  are  excellent 
in  their  nature,  and  adapted  to  the  present  wants  of  man,  involve  only  the  interests 
of  time.  But  this  one  subject  promises  present  peace  and  eternal  felicity.  I  would 
be  a  Christian  if  its  influence  extended  no  further  than  the  waters  of  Jordan.  But 
although  there  is  great  blessedness  now,  it  is  but  a  taste  of  what  is  to  come.  II. 
Its  method.  1.  Public  preaching.  This  was  according  to  the  charge  of  our  Saviour, 
*'  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,"  and  according 
to  the  plan  of  Divine  wisdom.  By  the  foolishness  of  preaching  "  it  pleased  God  to 
save  them  that  believe."  And  this  is  a  mode  adapted  to  the  wants,  habits,  and  the 
constitution  of  the  human  mind.  People  are  fond  of  a  crowd,  and  God  has  so 
ordained  it,  that  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  multitudes  should  be  gathered  to 
listen  to  it.  They  could  not  spare  the  time  nor  the  money  that  books  would  require, 
to  derive  the  same  instruction  ;  therefore  they  are  congregated  to  save  both.     The 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  529 

same  attention  employed  in  reading  would  not  produce  the  same  effects  that  are 
produced  by  preaching  ;  there  is  a  certain  charm,  enthusiasm  in  the  human  voice, 
the  piercing  look,  the  animated  manner  of  the  speaker,  which  no  books  in  the 
•world  can  supply.  There  is  also  something  in  the  place ;  there  is  something 
charming  to  the  mind  in  a  place  consecrated  to  the  service  of  God.  If  ever  the 
world  is  converted,  preachers  must  be  multiplied,  and  multiplied  to  an  extent  of 
which,  at  present,  we  have  very  little  knowledge  :  we  must  not  wait  till  new  churches 
are  built.  We  must  convert  school-rooms  into  preaching-places,  and  barns  into 
chapels,  and  every  house  we  can  enter  for  a  spot  in  which  multitudes  can  be 
assembled  to  hearken  to  the  words  of  life.  This  was  the  apostolical  plan.  John 
Mark's  was  the  house  where  the  people  met  together  to  pray  for  Peter's  deliverance. 
The  Church  assembled  in  the  house  of  Aquila  and  Priscilla.  The  Church,  assembled 
in  the  house  of  Onesiphorus.  And  if  these  cannot  be  obtained,  then  we  must  have 
open-air  preaching,  with  the  sky  for  a  sounding-board  and  the  m''  "^tudes  around 
for  a  congregation.  Every  spot  is  consecrated.  If  you  go  on  board  a  ship,  Christ 
was  there  before,  and  preached  there.  If  you  go  to  the  hills,  the  apostles  preached 
there  before  you.  If  you  go  to  the  prisons,  the  apostles  preached  there  before 
you.  2.  Private  teaching.  They  were  not  satisfied  with  public  preaching, 
but  they  went  to  every  house.  This  is  the  communication  of  the  truth  to  indi- 
viduals, as  the  other  was  the  communication  of  the  truth  to  multitudes.  David  had 
often  heard  Nathan  speak  in  public ;  but  he  heard  him  in  private  to  purpose  when 
he  came  and  related  his  parable,  and  then  said,  "  Thou  art  the  man."  I  doubt  not 
that  a  part  of  this  private  tuition  consisted  in  the  application  of  the  consolation  of 
the  gospel  to  individuals  who  have  been  pricked  in  their  hearts,  and  their  minds 
somewhat  illuminated  by  the  truth  :  they  had  to  strengthen  them  that  were  weak, 
and  to  bring  back  those  who  had  fallen  away.  But  the  chief  end  of  this  private 
tuition  was,  to  seek  out  that  which  was  lost.  Now  ministers  are  not  only  to  teach 
and  preach  to  them  who  will  come,  but  they  are  to  go  to  those  who  will  not  come. 
Tbey  are  not  only  to  invite  people  to  come  to  the  temple,  but  they  are  to  go  to  their 
houses.  III.  Its  constancy.  "Daily  .  .  .  they  ceased  not."  The  influence  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  produced  three  blessed  states  of  mind.  1.  Burning  zeal  for 
their  Master's  glory.  They  went  into  "every  house";  not  only  those  into 
which  they  were  invited  ;  of  the  rich  as  well  as  of  the  poor ;  of  the  learned 
as  well  as  the  illiterate.  And  what  though  it  was  said,  "  You  have  no  business 
here ;  keep  your  religion  to  yourself ! "  Their  Master's  honour  was  what 
they  attempted  to  sustain :  and  if  men  dishonoured  them  they  bound  the 
scorn  to  their  brow,  and  gloried  in  their  shame.  2.  Ardent  love  for  the 
souls  of  men.  3.  Indefatigable  perseverance  in  their  work.  [J.  Sherman.) 
Teaching  and  'preaching : — As  preachers,  the  apostles  proclaimed  the  gospel 
to  men  ;  and  as  teachers  they  expounded  its  doctrines  and  enforced  its  duties. 
In  this  they  obeyed  the  command  of  their  Lord,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  Go  and  discip'e  all  nations,  .  .  .  teaching 
them."  During  His  own  personal  ministry  He  exemplified  what  He  thus  en- 
joined. "  He  went  about  all  Galilee,  teaching  in  their  synagogues  and  preaching  the 
gospel  of  the  kingdom."     I.  This  command  was  laid  not  upon  the  apostles  alone, 

BUT  UPON  THE  MINISTKY  WHICH  THEY  HAD  SO  VIGOROUSLY  INAUGURATED.       1.    In  the   age 

which  succeeded  that  of  the  apostles  preaching  and  teaching  were  sedulously  main- 
tained by  the  Christians.  From  every  congregation  men  seem  to  have  gone  forth  as 
evangelists  to  make  known  the  message  of  salvation  ;  and  in  the  assemblies  of  the 
believers,  besides  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  a  discourse  delivered  in  the  audience 
of  the  people  formed  a  regular  part  of  the  service.  Justin  Martyr,  in  the  former 
half  of  the  second  century,  gives  an  account  of  how  service  was  conducted  in  the 
assembly  of  the  Christians  on  the  Lord's  day  ;  and  he  says  that  after  the  reading 
of  the  Scriptures  the  president  delivered  a  discourse  of  a  hortatory  character  in 
which  he  admonished  his  hearers  to  reduce  to  practice  what  they  had  he'ard  read. 
These  discourses  were  homely,  unartificial  addresses,  partaking  rather  of  the  nature 
of  conversational  utterances  than  regularly  constructed  orations  or  discourses.  In 
the  Eastern  churches,  where  they  chiefly  were  in  use  in  the  earliest  age,  the  name 
homily  was  given  to  them,  a  word  which  signifies  intercourse,  converse,  and  second- 
arily, instruction.  For  a  long  time  these  homilies  continued  to  be  mere  expositions 
of  Scripture  with  practical  applications  and  exhortations,  often  of  the  simplest 
character,  but  sometimes  containing  the  results  of  careful  investigation  and  pro- 
found thought,  as  in  the  case  of  Origen,  whose  homilies  are  still  valued  by  scholars 
for  their  suggestiveness  and  the  light  they  sometimes  throw  on  the  meaning  of 
VOL.   I.  3i 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

Scripture.  2.  As  Christianity  advanced,  and  the  Christian  assemblies  became  more 
numerous  and  cultured,  the  addresses  of  the  pastors  came  to  be  of  a  more  ambitious 
character,  and  to  be  formed  more  on  the  model  of  the  oratory  of  the  senate  or  the 
forum.  The  shghtly  elevated  platform  which  at  first  was  common  to  the  reader  and 
to  the  preacher,  was  by  the  latter  exchanged  for,  first,  a  loftier  pulpit,  and  after- 
wards for  a  throne,  from  which  the  bishop  delivered  his  oration.  Gradually  the 
ancient  wholesome  usage  of  expounding  the  prophetic  and  evangelic  writings  was 
relinquished,  and  discourses  in  praise  of. martyrs,  or  funeral  orations,  highly  ornate 
harangues,  and  pieces  of  artificial  rhetoric  were  in  their  stead  offered  to  the  people, 
who,  captivated  by  the  gaudy  show,  followed  the  usage  of  the  theatre,  and  at  the 
close  of  each  eloquent  burst,  expressed  their  approbation  by  acclamation  and  clap- 
ping of  hands.  '6.  During  the  Sliddle  Ages,  and  on  to  the  time  of  the  Eeformation, 
preacliing  and  teaching  had  well-nigh  ceased.  It  is  true,  sermons  continued  to  be 
written,  and  were  probably  delivered,  but  as  they  were  in  a  tongue  which  only  the 
learned  understood,  they  were  confined  in  their  use  to  the  clergy  ;  and  it  is  true  also 
that  enlightened  rulers  like  Charlemagne  and  Alfred  the  Great  saw  the  importance 
of  the  people  being  instructed  in  religion,  and  took  measures  to  enforce  on  the 
clergy  the  duty  of  preaching  to  the  people  in  the  vulgar  tongue ;  but  how  little  pre- 
pared were  the  clergy  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  that  the  Emperor  found  it 
necessary  to  enjoin  that  "  bishops  and  presbyters  are  themselves  to  understand  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  and  preach  it  to  all  that  each  may  know  what  he  asks  of  God."  Now 
and  then  a  man  fired  by  holy  zeal — a  Tauler,  a  Wiclitfe,  a  Huss,  a  Gerson,  a  Savo- 
narola— preached  the  gospel  to  the  people  and  taught  them  the  truths  and  duties  of 
Christianity,  and  doubtless  there  were  faithful  but  unknown  men  labouring  in  re- 
tired districts.  But  for  the  most  part,  all  through  these  dreary  centuries,  the  pulpit 
was  virtually  a  nonentity  in  Christendom,  and  the  people  perished  for  lack  of  know- 
ledge. Things  were  at  the  worst  when  the  dawn  of  a  better  day  arrived,  and,  as 
Milton  expresses  it,  "  then  was  the  Sacred  Bible  sought  out  of  the  dusty  corners 
where  profane  falsehood  and  neglect  had  thrown  it,  the  schools  opened.  Divine  and 
human  learning  raked  out  of  the  embers  of  forgotten  tongues,  the  princes  and  cities 
trooping  apace  to  the  new-erected  banner  of  salvation."  4.  All  the  leading  reformers 
were  assiduous  and  eminent  preachers,  and  by  this  more  than  any  other  means 
they  made  good  their  position  and  effected  a  real  and  lasting  revival  of  religious 
life  among  the  nations.  Since  then,  in  all  the  Protestant  Churches,  preaching  and 
teaching  have  been  recognised  as  a  chief  duty  of  the  Christian  pastor;  and  even  in 
the  Eomish  and  Greek  churches  the  value  of  these  is  to  a  greater  or  less  extent 
practically  acknowledged.    II.  A  tendency  has  shown  itself  of  late  to  depreciate 

PBEACHINO  AS  COMPARED  WITH  THE  DEVOTIONAL  PARTS    OF  OUR  PUBLIC  SERVICES.      A    Crv 

has  been  heard  for  less  preaching  and  more  of  prayer  and  praise.  But  after  much 
consideration  and  observation  I  am  brought  to  the  conclusion,  that  not  for  instruc- 
tion alone,  but  for  devotion  and  spiritual  quickening  as  well,  it  is  needful  that  the 
preaching  of  God's  Word  should  keep  that  place  in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary 
which  the  wisdom  and  the  piety  of  our  ancestors  led  them  to  assign  to  it.  Cdusider 
weU  the  following  things.  1.  The  testimony  of  experience  is  strongly  in  favour  of 
the  value  of  preaching  as  a  means  of  sustaining  spiritual  life  in  the  Church.  Turn 
over  the  volumes  of  Church  history  and  it  will  be  found  that  the  free  and  earnest 
preaching  of  God's  Word  has  ever  gone  hand  in  hand  with  a  lively  state  of  religious 
feehng  and  an  earnest  and  elevated  devotion  among  the  people ;  whilst,  on  the 
other  hand,  when  the  Church  has  relied  principally  on  praver  and  praise  for  the 
sustenance  of  her  spiritual  vigour,  coldness,  indiffei-ence,  and  formality  have  become 
characteristic  of  her  members,  and  the  pure  fire  of  devotion  on  her  altar  has  given 
place  to  a  lurid  and  unwholesome  flame.  2.  Devotion  being  the  utterance  of  feel- 
ing has  no  self-sustaining  power.  No  emotion,  high  or  low,  holy  or  common,  sus- 
tains itself ;  unless  it  be  fed  from  without  it  becomes  feeble  and  dies.  But  how  is 
devotional  emotion  to  be  fed  except  by  the  Word  of  God  ?  But  it  is  by  preaching  and 
teaching  in  the  sanctuary  that  the  Word  of  God  is  chiefly  and  most  effectually  to 
be  ministered  to  the  people.  3.  Whatever  help  devotional  exercises  may  lend  to 
the  sanctification  of  the  soul,  they  can  never  minister  so  directly  to  this  as  does 
the  preaching  of  God's  Word.  If  devotion  fans  the  flame,  it  is  preacliing  that  must 
supply  the  fuel,  and  it  is  by  it  that  the  fire  is  to  be  kindled.  Pure  affections  spring 
from  holy  thoughts,  and  holy  thoughts  are  the  offspring  of  Divine  knowledge.  4. 
The  proper  hearing  of  God's  Word  is  in  itself  an  act  of  worship  and  devotion.  If 
indeed  it  is  merely  to  be  pleased  by  an  interesting  preacher  that  people  come  to 
church;  or  if  they  come  merely  to  sit  in  judgment  on  him  or  to  enjoy  an  intellec- 


CHAP,  v.]  THE  ACTS.  631 

tual  pastime  or  a  sensational  display — then  truly  they  are  as  far  from  -worship  as  if 
tbey  were  engaged  in  any  secular  pursuit  or  worldly  amusement.  But  if  they  come 
to  hear  God's  Word,  bowing  their  minds  and  hearts  to  the  utterance  of  the  Divine 
mind  and  seeking  the  blessing  which  lies  in  the  reception  of  the  truth,  then  do  they 
in  that  very  act  rise  to  a  true  devotion,  and  offer  a  worship  which  is  acceptable  to 
God.  {W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Prcaclting  Christ: — I.  The  subject.  To  preach 
Jesus  Christ  aright  we  must  preach  Him  in — 1.  His  infinite  and  indisputable  God- 
head. Take  away  the  Divinity  of  Christ  from  the  gospel,  and  you  have  nothing 
whatever  left  upon  which  the  anxious  soul  can  rest.  If  Christ  were  not  God 
He  was  the  basest  of  impostors.  2.  His  true  humanity.  We  must  never  make 
Him  to  be  less  manlike  because  He  was  perfectly  Divine.  We  must  have  a  human 
Christ,  not  of  shadows  or  fancies,  one  to  whom  we  can  talk,  with  whom  we  can 
walk,  "who  in  His  measure  feels  afresh  what  every  member  bears."  3.  His  per- 
sonality. A  doctrinal  Christ,  a  practical  Christ,  or  an  experimental  Christ.  I  do 
not  feel  to  be  sufficient  for  the  people  of  God.  We  want  a  personal  Christ.  This 
has  been  a  power  to  the  Eomish  Church — a  power  which  they  have  used  for  ill,  but 
always  a  power.  Whatever  we  fail  to  preach  we  must  preach  Him.  If  we  are 
wrong  in  many  points,  if  we  be  but  right  here,  this  will  save  our  ministry  from  the 
flames ;  but  if  we  be  wrong  here,  however  orthodox  we  may  pretend  to  be,  we  cannot 
be  rigbt  in  the  rest.  4.  His  solitary  mediatorship.  Admitting  the  efficacy  of  the 
intercession  of  living  saints  for  sinners,  yet  must  we  have  it  that  the  only  Mediator 
in  the  heavens,  and  the  only  direct  Intercessc  r  with  God,  is  the  Man  Christ  Jesus. 
Nay,  we  must  not  be  content  with  making  Him  the  only  Mediator ;  we  must  set 
aside  all  approach  to  God  in  any  way  whatever,  except  by  Him.  We  must  not  only 
have  Him  for  the  Priest,  but  we  must  have  Him  for  the  Altar,  the  Victim,  and  the 
Offerer  too.  We  must  not  permit  for  a  moment  the  fair  white  linen  of  His  righteous- 
ness to  be  stained  by  the  patch-work  of  our  filthy  rags.  5.  His  authority  as  the 
only  Lawgiver  and  Rabbi  of  the  Church.  When  you  put  it  down  as  a  canon  of 
your  faith  that  the  Church  has  right  and  power  to  decree  rites  and  ceremonies,  you 
have  robbed  Christ  of  His  proper  position.  Or  when  you  claim  the  office  of  con- 
trolling other  men's  consciences  by  the  decree  of  the  Church,  or  the  vote  of  a 
synod  apart  from  the  authority  of  Christ,  you  have  taken  away  from  Christ  that 
chair  which  He  occupies  in  the  Christian  Church.  G.  His  dignity  as  the  sole 
King  of  the  Church.  The  Church  is  queen  above  all  queens,  and  Christ  her  only 
King.  If  any  of  our  acts  violate  the  civil  laws  we  are  citizens,  and  we  acknowledge 
the  right  of  a  state  to  govern  us  as  individuals.  But  we  maintain  that  the  excom- 
munication of  a  Christian  Church  can  never  be  reversed  by  the  civil  power,  nor  are 
its  censures  to  be  examined,  much  less  to  be  removed,  mitigated,  or  even  judged.  7. 
His  supremacy  as  the  King  of  kings.  He  has  an  absolute  right  to  the  entire 
dominion  of  this  world.  II.  The  suepassing  excellencies  of  the  subject.  1. 
Blessed  variety.  There  are  many  strings  to  the  harp  of  the  gospel.  There  are 
some  brethren  who  are  so  charmed  with  five  of  the  strings,  which  certainly  have 
very  rich  music  in  them,  that  they  never  meddle  with  any  of  the  others;  the  cob- 
webs hang  on  the  rest  while  these  five  are  pretty  well  worn  out.  Any  man  who 
preaches  Christ  will  ensure  variety  in  his  preaching.  He  is  all  manner  of  precious 
perfume,  myrrh,  and  aloes,  and  cassia.  He  is  all  sorts  of  music.  He  is  everything 
that  is  sweet  to  the  ear  ;  He  is  all  manner  of  fruits  ;  there  is  not  one  dainty  in  Him, 
but  many.  He  is  all  manner  of  raiment ;  He  is  golden  raiment  for  beauty.  He  is 
the  warm  raiment  for  comfort,  He  is  the  stout  raiment  for  harness  in  the  day  of 
battle.  There  are  all  things  in  Christ,  and  he  that  hath  Christ  will  have  as  great  a 
variety  as  there  is  to  be  found  in  the  scenery  of  the  world  where  are  no  two  rocks 
alike,  and  no  two  rivers  wind  in  precisely  the  same  manner,  and  no  two  trees  grow 
in  preciselj'  the  same  form.  2,  It  suits  all  sorts  of  people.  Are  there  rebels? 
Preach  Christ ;  it  will  suit  them.  Are  there  pardoned  sinners  ?  What  is  better  to 
melt  their  hearts  than  the  blood  of  the  Lcu'd  Jesus  ?  Are  there  doubting  Christians  ? 
'What  can  cheer  them  better  than  the  name  of  Christ  ?  Are  there  strong  believers  ? 
What  is  stronger  meat  than  Jesus  crucified  ?  Are  there  learned,  polite,  int  llectual 
hearers?  If  they  are  not  satisfied  with  Christ  they  ought  to  be.  Are  there  poor, 
ignorant,  unlettered  men  ?  Jesus  Christ  is  just  the  thing  to  preach  to  them — a 
naked  Christ  to  their  simple  ears.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  topic  that  will  keep  in  all 
climates.  Stand  in  New  Zealand  in  the  midst  of  uncivilised  men,  stand  in  the  midst 
of  poetical  Persia  or  fickle  France,  the  Cross  is  adapted  to  all.  HI.  The  power  op 
THIS  snBJECT.  1.  To  promote  the  union  of  the  people  of  God.  There  is  a  mau 
there,  he  is  almost  a  Puseyite.     "  I  do  not  like  him,"  says  one.     There  is  another 


532  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v. 


man,  a  Presbyterian;  he  cannot  bear  Independency.  "Well,  I  like  him  a  little 
better;  but  I  do  not  suppose  we  shall  get  on  very  well."  There  is  anothf^r  man, 
a  very  strong  Calvinist.  "  I  shall  not  admire  him."  Stop,  stop  !  That  man 
yonder,  whom  I  called  almost  a  Puseyite,  was  George  Herbert ;  but  what  a  Chris- 
tian !  What  a  lover  of  Jesus  !  You  know  that  hymn  of  his,  "  How  sweetly  doth 
my  Master's  sound  !  "  TLat  second  man,  the  Presliyterian,  who  would  not  have 
liked  George  Herbert,  was  Samuel  Eutheiford.  Wliat  a  seraphic  spirit  1  Well, 
now,  I  think,  we  will  introduce  Mr.  Eutherford  and  Mr.  Herbert  together,  and  I  am 
persuaded  when  they  begin  to  speak  about  their  Master  they  will  find  fach  other 
next  of  kin ;  and  I  feel  sure  that,  by  this  time,  Samuel  Eutherford  and  George 
Herbert  h=ive  found  each  other  out  in  heaven,  and  are  sitting  side  by  side.  That 
high  Calvinist  was  Dr.  Hawker.  Now,  I  am  sure,  George  Herbert  would  not  have 
liked  Dr.  Hawker,  and  I  am  certain  that  Dr.  Hawker  would  not  have  liked  George 
Herb'^rt,  and  I  do  not  suppose  thit  Samuel  Eutlierford  would  have  had  anything  to 
do  with  either  of  them.  But  what  a  sweet  spirit !  He  cannot  take  up  his  pen,  but 
dips  it  in  Christ  and  hegins  to  write  about  his  Lord  at  once.  "  Precious  Immannel 
— precious  Jesus."  Tbose  words  in  his  morning  and  evening  portions  are  repeated 
again  and  again.  Let  a  man  stand  up  and  exalt  Christ,  and  we  are  all  agreed.  2. 
Upon  the  heart  of  sinners.  There  is  a  person,  now  a  member  of  my  church,  whose 
conversion  was  owing  to  the  reading  of  that  hymn — "Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul." 
"  Ah,"  says  he,  "  does  Jesus  love  my  soul?  Then  how  vile  I  have  been  to  neglect 
Him  I  "  There  are  scores  whose  conversion  is  distinct  and  directly  traceable,  not  to 
doctrine— though  that  is  often  useful — nor  experience,  nor  practice,  though  these  are 
fruitful,  but  to  the  preaching  of  Christ.  This  is  a  seed  which  se'dom  rots  und^r  the 
clod.  One  may  fall  upon  the  stony  ground,  but  itoftener  happens  that  the  seed  breaks 
the  stone  when  it  falls.  We  ought  to  thunder  out  the  threatenings  of  God,  but  they 
must  never  be  the  main  topic.  Judge  not  any  mans  ministry.  The  woild  has  too 
often  condemned  the  man  whom  God  intended  to  honour.  Say  not  of  such  an  one 
"  He  can  do  no  good,  for  his  language  is  rough  and  rude."  Say  not  of  another 
that  his  style  is  too  often  marred  with  flippancy.  Say  not  of  a  third  that  he  is  too 
erudite  or  soars  too  high.  Every  man  in  his  own  order.  If  that  man  preach  Christ, 
whether  he  be  Paul,  or  ApoUos,  or  Cephas,  God  will  bless  the  Christ  he  preaches, 
and  forgive  the  error  which  mingled  with  his  ministry.  (C.  II.  Spurgeoti.) 
Preaching  Chrht : — Little  beginnings  have  large  endings.  A  man  drops  a  small 
seed  upon  the  earth,  and  it  starts  up  and  expands  into  a  tree  of  a  thousand  arms. 
The  slender  rill  that  leaps  from  a  rock  presently  increases  to  a  stream,  and  the 
stream  swells  into  a  river,  and  the  river,  gathering  as  it  rolls,  becomes  the  arm  of 
tlie  t-ea ;  and  then  there  is  a  mingling,  a  sweeping,  and  a  spreading  of  the  waters 
through  the  circuit  of  the  broad  ocean.  And  so  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the 
religion  of  Jesus.  At  first  there  was  the  utterance  of  a  single  voice  in  the  solitudes 
of  the  wilderness,  and  next  was  the  testimony  of  the  Son  of  God  to  Himself  in  the 
village  and  in  the  city  ;  forthwith  was  the  gathering  of  the  twelve,  and  a  declaration 
from  these  of  the  gospel  to  the  surrounding  nations.  Then  arose  from  the  apostles 
the  great  company  of  preachers  multiplying  and  widening  their  circles  of  influence 
abroad  the  earth  unto  this  present,  and  looking  forward  we  anticipate  tlie  time  when 
the  whole  world,  now  lying  in  darkness,  shall  be  tilled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
as  the  waters  cover  the  channels  of  the  sea.  Yes,  whatever  is  or  shall  be,  the  aspect 
of  the  globe  in  the  light  and  beauty  of  holiness  cometh  under  God  of  preaching. 
This  is  the  great  lever,  which  by  little  and  little  is  lifting  tiie  wide  universe  out  of  the 
bondage  of  ignorance  and  superstition.  It  was  this  which  overturned  the  Mosaical 
economy,  which  struck  to  their  centre  and  shivered  the  idols  of  the  heathen,  which 
enkindled  a  light,  that  the  power  of  the  most  numerous  and  miK'hty  of  adversaries 
could  not  put  out,  which  snatched  from  the  grasp  of  Satan,  which  drew  as  brands 
from  the  burning,  thousands  of  souls  now  ministering  before  the  throne  of  the  Lamb. 
I.  Ouu  OBLIGATIONS  TO  PREACH  Jicsus  Christ.  It  is  tlic  solcnin  object  of  our  ordina- 
tion, and  we  should  be  recreants  from  our  vows,  npostate  from  the  articles  of  our  faith, 
and  traitors  to  the  cause  we  professedly  espouse,  were  we  to  gainsay  the  appeal  that 
presses.  To  teach  and  preacii  Jesus  is  the  great  business  of  onr  days  ;  whatever  be 
the  varieties  of  our  talents,  if  the  lines  converge  not  to  this  centre  our  talents  are 
abused  ;  whatever  be  the  plenitude  of  our  strength,  if  it  be  not  consecrated  to  this, 
our  strensth  is  worse  than  unprofitable.  Our  lamp  must  burn  at  the  altar,  our 
sinews  must  bear  the  cross.  Our  obligations  to  preach  Jesus  Christ  rest  upon  the 
conviction — 1.  That  sinners  have  need  of  Him.  In  their  natural  estate  they  are— 
(1)  Blind,    (a)  In  their  ignorance  of  the  true  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  He  hath 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  633 

sent,  (b)  To  the  interests  of  their  souls,  preferring  the  evil  and  rejecting  the  good, 
and  turning  tbeir  back  to  the  only  light  which  shines  from  to  lead  their  steps  to 
heaven.  (2)  Poor,  (a)  As  despoiled  of  the  privileges  and  honours  at  a  happier 
estate,  (b)  As  defrauded  by  an  enemy  of  the  birthright  of  tlie  sons  of  God.  (c)  As  cast 
from  the  affluence  of  the  garden  into  the  necessities  of  the  wilderness,  [d)  As  the 
lieirsof  bodily  sorrows,  and  as  the  victims  of  an  inwardly  consuming  anguish  because 
of  guilt  and  the  judgment,  (e)  As  the  slaves  of  sin  and  the  subjects  to  death,  tempo- 
rally and  eternally.  (3)  Naked,  (a)  As  possessing  no  garment  in  their  own  righteous- 
ness, nor  in  that  of  otliers,  wherewith  they  migbt  staud  clothed  in  the  sight  of  God. 
(b)  As  wanting  that  white  raiment  which  alone  Christ  can  put  on.  2.  That  in 
all  the  multifarious  wan's  of  man,  Chri.-t  is  the  One,  the  near,  the  all-sufficient,  the 
ever-living,  the  inexhaustible  supjily.  The  poor  wandering  and  faintinsj  flock  lacks 
a  shepherd  to  guide  and  cheiish — Christ  is  the  true  Shepherd.  The  plague- 
stricken  lack  the  hand  of  the  physician  to  bind  up  and  heal — Christ  is  the  wise 
Physician.  The  deceived,  the  forsaken,  and  the  abandoned  lack  the  faithful  ad- 
viser, the  able  defender,  the  coun-^ellor  for  good — Christ  is  the  unchangeable 
Friend,  and  ihe  mighty  Advocate,  and  the  Prince  of  Peace.  3.  That  without  Him 
everything  is  nothing,  whil>t  with  Him  and  in  Him  there  is  abundantly  more  than 
■we  can  either  ask  or  think  to  satisfy  and  enrich  here,  and  to  bless  everlastingly.  II. 
What  it  is  to  preach  Jesus  Cheist.  1.  In  substance.  Let  us  analyse  the  title — 
(1)  Jesus — a  name  synon.\mous  with  Joshua,  and  meaning  a  deliverer— a  deliverer 
from  the  bondage  of  sin  ;  from  the  tyranny  of  Satan ;  from  sin  as  a  ruling  prin- 
ciple and  as  a  destroying  violence ;  from  the  fears  of  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death  and  from  the  terrors  of  the  deeper  darkness  beyond !  A  deliverer  from  these 
evils,  and  by  what  means  ?  At  wh  it  cost  ?  By  the  offering  up  of  Himself,  the  just 
for  the  unjust,  by  the  shedding  of  His  blood  as  tlie  Lamb  of  atonerrient  for  the  sins 
of  the  world.  (2)  Christ,  i.e.,  the  anointed.  The  anointed,  the  consecrated,  through 
the  Spirit.  Do  you  acknowledge  Christ  in  the  separate  glories  of  His  offices  as 
having  in  each  the  seal  and  testimony  of  the  Spirit  ?  2.  The  manner  should  be 
characterised  with  a  spirit  of  simpHcity,  decision,  faithfulness,  affection,  and  the 
devotion  of  a  holy  ze»l.  The  man  should  be  forgotten  in  his  message,  the  wise, 
after  the  rudiments  of  this  world,  should  be  hidden  to  himself  and  others  in  the 
office  of  the  minister  of  Christ.  III.  The  posture  in  which  you  should  hear 
Christ  preached.  1.  As  fully  sensible  of  the  value  of  the  piivilege  of  hearing.  What 
gem  had  not  David  plucked  from  his  royal  crown  for  one  of  the  opportunities  with 
which  you  are  blessed?  How  lavish  had  priests  been  of  their  distinctions  and 
prophets  of  their  gifts  in  exchange  for  one  hour  of  your  sabbaths.  And  oh,  the 
treasures  expended  and  the  blood  shed  for  your  present  liberty.  2.  As  men  per- 
sonally concerned  and  addressed  in  every  appeal  and  invitation  and  reproof,  in 
every  promise  and  curse.  You  should  bring  the  application  home,  not  fancying 
how  well  the  preacher's  word  affixes  to  i-ome  one  else.  3.  With  humility,  keeping  self 
in'subjection,  schooling  down  your  natural  arrogancy  into  the  dependence  and  simple 
credence  of  the  little  child.  4.  With  watchfulness  against  the  sins  and  temptations 
that  are  most  prevailing  ;  and  with  prayer  to  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  that  He  may 
impress,  and  sanctify,  and  guide  you  into  all  truth.  5.  With  faith  receiving  the 
masteries  of  Christ  as  mysteries — as  those  deeper  things  of  God,  whose  reception  is 
for  an  exercise  of  faith  here,  and  whose  solutioQ  and  discovery  shall  be  amongst 
the  felicities  of  eternity.  (T.  J.  Judkin.)  The  right  kind  of  preaching  : — A  ser- 
mon devoted  to  metaphysics  is  a  stack  of  dry  corn-stalks,  after  the  corn  has  been 
ripped  out  with  the  husking-peg.  A  sermon  given  up  to  sentimental  and  flowery 
speech  is  as  a  nosegay  flung  to  a  drowning  sailor.  A  sermon  devoted  to  moral 
essay  is  a  basket  of  chips  to  help  on  the  grt-at  burning.  What  the  world  wants  now 
is  to  be  told  in  the  most  flat-footed  way  of  Jeaus  Christ  who  comes  to  save  men 
from  eternal  damnation. 


CHAPTER   VL 

Vers.  1-7.  And  In  those  days  .  .  .  there  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  Grecians 
against  the  Hebrews. — Trouble  the  lot  of  the  Church: — The  Church  on  earth  has 
always  trouble ;  if  it  is  not  persecuted  from  without,  disorders  arise  from  within 
which  is  still  more  dangeioas.     {Starke.)       The  poor  the  treasures  of  the  Church :— 


531  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

1.  They  stir  up  its  spiritual  gifts.  2.  They  exercise  its  brotherly  love.  3.  They 
are  its  ornament  before  the  world.  4.  They  bear  interest  to  it  in  eternity.  When 
Laurentius  the  martyr  was  commanded  by  the  Roman  governor  to  bring  out  the 
treasures  of  the  Church,  he  led  forth  the  poor  of  the  congregation.  (K.  Gerok.) 
The  ancient,  bond  between  poverty  and  Christianity  a  blessing  to  loth : — I.  To 
POVERTY.  Only  in  Christianity,  in  the  kingdom  of  Him  who  became  poor  that  we 
mii^ht  become  rich — 1.  Is  the  Divine  right  of  the  poor  recoRnised.  2.  Has  the 
Holy  Ghost  awakened  a  genuine  care  of  the  poor.  II.  To  Christianity.  In  the 
care  of  the  poor.  1.  It  has  from  the  beginning  developed  its  most  Divine  powers — 
love,  compassion,  patience,  self-denial,  contempt  of  death,  and  trust  in  God.  2.  It 
has  proved  before  the  world  its  right  of  existence  in  the  world.  (Ibid.)  Dissatis- 
faction in  the  primitive  Church: — There  never  has  been  a  perfect  Church,  and  never 
will  be  this  side  the  Lord's  coming.  There  is  much  here  which  has  been  reproduced  in 
modern  times.  Consider — I.  The  occasion  and  character  of  this  dissension.  The 
local  association  of  believers  was  composed  of  men  separated  by  various  nationalities 
and  degrees  of  culture.  There  was  much  freedom  and  simplicity,  for  under  the  influ- 
ence of  a  first  creative  enthusiasm  the  need  of  order  and  discipline  had  hardly  become 
apparent.  Whenever  that  declined,  dissension  was  inevitable.  Christianised 
human  nature  is  long  before  it  shakes  itself  free  fiom  petty  ambitions  and  other 
ignoble  sentiments.  That  the  outbreak  came  soon  need  awaken  no  surprise.  Men 
need  to  be  trained  for  a  life  of  free  self-government.  The  causes  were  here  ready 
to  manifest  themselves  whenever  the  occasion  presented  itself.  There  were  two 
chief  parties — Jews,  born  in  Palestine^  of  narrow  views  and  restricted  sympathies  ; 
and  Jews  or  proselytes  born  in  other  lands,  who  had  been  affected  by  the  re6ne- 
ment,  art,  poetry,  and  beauty  of  Greek  culture,  and  who  spoke  the  Greek  language. 
These  differences  were  sure  to  provoke  collision.  But  the  predominating  influence 
■was  Jewish,  and  the  Jewish  ofQcers  were  blamed  by  the  Grecian  portion  of  the 
community  for  neglecting  Grecian  widows  in  the  daily  administration.  A  small 
thing  suffices  for  a  great  disturbance  when  latent  differences  already  exist.  Sec- 
tarianisms and  divisions  of  Churches  have  often  arisen  from  matters  of  the  smallest 
importance.  Watch  the  beginnings.  Church  dissensions  are  created  by  wrong 
feelings  much  more  than  by  the  maintenance  of  great  principles  and  sacred  interests. 
But  few  will  bear  looking  at  from^  the  Saviour's  Cross  or  in  the  light  of  the  Saviour's 
throne.  II.  The  expedient  resorted  to.  1.  This  was  a  new  stage  in  the  develop- 
ment of  a  complete  Church  life.  What  was  demonstrably  lacking  was  supplied. 
The  Lord  did  not  furnish  His  Church  with  an  apparatus  of  government  already  com- 
plete. But  He  gave  His  Holy  Spirit  by  whom  it  was  to  be  guided  according  to  the 
emergencies  and  needs  of  the  times.  2.  Here  is  a  plain  manifestation  of  apostolic 
initiation  and  of  Church  co-operation.  The  apostles  proposed  a  plan  v^ich  the 
members  freely  accepted,  a  procedure  natural,  seemly,  orderly,  and  most  efficient. 
This  may  be  regarded  as  the  charter  of  Church  rights.  The  apostles  consulted  the 
laity  to  ascertain  their  opinions  and  desires.  At  the  same  time  thereTs  nothing  of 
lawlessness  here.  Power  was  not  wholly  in  their  hands.  The  jostles  a,ctually 
appointed  and  ordained  the  seven  Hellenists  whom  the  people  selectecl'/j,  The 
principle  is  of  the  first  importance,  for  it  is  exactly  what  we,^»w  as  ccnstitiitional 
government.  3.  Here  is  the  principle  of  division  of  labojjA  ^  essential  to  CHurch 
efficiency.  As  those  already  engaged  in  the  daily  administration  were  not  equal  to 
all  the  work,  others  were  associated  with  them.  It  was  enough  for  apostles  to  do 
their  proper  work  in  founding  churches,  preaching  the  Word,  praying,  seeking  the 
supply  of  the  Spirit,  exercising  spiritual  and  miraculous  gifts,  leading  the  Church 
in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  Other  men  could  and  must  do  what  was  merely  secondary 
and  secular.  In  free  Christian  society  the  specialty  of  each  is  needed  and  is  to  be 
employed.  There  is  room  for  all  who  have  a  mind  to  work ;  but  none  for  idlers. 
Division  of  labour  in  this  case  prevented  schism.  A  Church  active  and  consecrated 
will  keep  the  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace.  4.  What  a  solemnity  was 
attached  to  even  the  meanest  work  for  the  Lord  in  His  Church  !  The  deacons  are 
presented  to  the  apostles,  who  pray  for  them,  and  lay  their  hands  on  their  heads. 
Betting  them  apart  to  such  duties.  Prayer  sanctifies  all  Christian  endeavour.  Work 
for  Christ  is  never  to  be  thought  of  in  a  mean  spirit.  It  should  be  associated  with 
•what  is  best  and  highest  in  Christian  life,  and  be  done  ever  "  as  under  the  great 
Taskmaster's  eye."  (IV.  H.  Davison.)  Hellenist  a^xd  Hebrew  : — From  the  first 
the  Church  bad  held  within  its  bosom  two  opposed  tendencies.  So  long  as  its 
numbers  were  not  too  large,  and  its  enthusiasm  had  not  spent  itself,  this  underlying 
division  created  no  difficulty.    A  moment,  however,  was  reached  when  the  jealousy 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  535 

of  Hellenist  and  Hebrew  began  to  give  promise  of  that  deep  schism  -which  ended 
only  by  the  extinction  of  one  of  the  divisions  (the  Hebrew)  altogether.  I.  The  dis- 
tinction BETWEEN  Hellenist  and  Hebrew.  Its  origin  goes  back  to  the  captivity. 
Previously  to  this  the  Jews  had  dwelt  as  far  as  possible  alone,  but  through  that 
catastrophe  they  were  scattered  through  all  the  huge  empire  which  stretched  from 
India  to  the  ^gean.  The  numbers  that  returned  under  Zerubbabel,  and  again 
under  Ezra,  fell  far  short  of  the  number  of  the  dispersed  ;  and  it  was  impossible 
but  that  prolonged  contact  with  pagan  nations  should  greatly  modify  their  customs 
and  modes  of  thought.  Especially  was  this  the  case  during  and  after  the  wars  of 
Alexander.  A  new  spirit  of  commercial  enterprise  awoke  within  them  as  a  new 
world  opened  to  their  wandering  feet,  and  the  ancestral  faculty  for  acquiring  wealth 
which  their  Palestine  life  had  crushed,  developed  itself.  While  the'home  Jews 
recoiling  from  defiling  contact  with  foreigners  grew  prouder  and  more  narrow,  their 
foreign  brethren  took  on  a  strong  tinge  of  Greek  culture,  and  the  spirit  of  secular 
gain  broke  down  the  feeling  of  separatism  which  had  been  the  very  kernel  of  ancient 
Judaism.  All  this  tended  to  modify  their  religion,  and  for  the  better.  Cut  off 
from  the  temple  ritual,  they  carried  with  them  neither  priest  nor  sacrifice  ;  they 
carried  only  the  Septuagint  and  the  synagogue.  What  they  retained  was  just  what 
was  portable,  and  what  was  most  portable  was  most  spiritual.  When  at  last  Chris- 
tianity arose  it  fouud  everywhere  in  the  synagogues  its  first  base  of  operations.  It 
was  from  Hellenised  Jews  that  Christianity  obtained  its  first  and  best  missionaries, 
and  it  is  to  them  we  owe  it  that  the  Church  grew  out  of  all  risk  of  continuing  a 
Judean  sect  and  became  the  religion  of  civilised  mankind.  II.  The  murmoeing  op 
THE  Hellrnists  AGAINST  THE  HEBREWS.  Being  men  of  higher  average  intelligence 
and  energy  than  the  villagers  of  Judea  or  the  small  traders  of  the  capital,  the  former 
were  not  likely  to  acquiesce  silently  in  any  neglect  on  the  part  of  the  other.  There 
was  always  a  tendency  amongst  the  Palestine  Jews  to  pride  themselves  on  retaining 
the  purest  tvpe  of  orthodoxy,  and  to  suspect  as  well  as  dislike  their  countrymen 
who  had  tak-n  on  Greek  manners.  On  the  other  hand,  it  came  very  naturally  to 
the  foreign  Jew  to  look  down  on  stay-at-home  and  old-fashioned  Hebrews  as  bigoted 
and  ignorant.  A  grave  danger  threatened  the  young  Church  if  her  members  im- 
ported into  h'^r  communion  such  mutual  jealousies  as  these  ;  and  the  slight 
*'  murmuring "  about  the  widows'  rations  meant  nothing  less.  III.  How  the 
MURMURING  WAS  ALLAYED.  The  apostlcs  took  alarm,  for  the  murmurs  reflected  on 
them.  The  work  had  evidently  grown  beyond  their  power  of  personal  supervision, 
and  now  that  one  side  of  the  Church  grumbled  about  an  unfairness  some  new 
arrangement  was  clearly  called  for.  Even  the  apostles  were  no  autocrats ;  the 
Church  was  an  oligarchy  which  rested  on  a  democratic  basis.  The  supreme  legisla- 
tive power  was  felt  to  reside  in  the  "  crowd  of  disciples."  What  the  apostles  did 
at  first  was  to  initiate  measures,  and  at  the  last  to  confirm  appointments.  But 
the  adoption  of  the  measure  and  the  election  of  the  ofiicers  were  the  work  of  "  the 
whole  multitude."  This  act — 1.  Established  certain  principles — the  right  of  the 
Church  to  transact  under  Christ  its  own  business ;  the  ministerial,  not  lordly 
character  of  even  its  highest  offices  ;  the  subordination  of  all  material  interests  to 
its  spiritual  work  ;  and  the  ultimate  seat  of  Church  authority  in  the  whole  body  of 
believers.  Any  Church  system  whose  arrangements  flatly  contravene  these  prin- 
ciples must  be  held  to  have  departed  from  primitive  order.  2.  Began  the  severance 
between  the  spiritual  and  temporal  work  of  the  Church.  It  became  impossible  to 
combine  the  serving  of  tables  with  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  A  division  of  labour 
was  called  for,  and  the  apostles  could  not  hesitate  which  side  of  their  double  office 
they  should  abandon.  To  bear  witness  to  the  saving  work  of  Christ  is  not  a 
secondary  function  of  the  Church,  but  its  one  task  for  which  all  other  things  must 
minister.  The  Church,  however,  declined  to  treat  even  its  secular  work  as  wholly 
unspiritual,  and  hfted  it  out  of  the  atmosphere  of  mere  business  into  that  of  worship. 
The  candidates  are  to  be  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as  wisdom,  and  are  set  apart 
with  solemn  services.  The  only  two  among  them  of  whom  we  know  anything  are 
known  for  the  zeal  and  success  with  which  they  preached  Christ.  Stephen  and 
Philip  were  a  good  deal  more  than  almoners.  IV.  With  the  ordination  of  these 
SEVEN  men  a  new  PAGE  OF  Church  HISTORY  OPENED.  1.  It  marked  a  stage  in  the 
Church's  progress  towards  separate  existence.  2.  It  was  the  first  step  towards 
permanence.  The  apostles  cannot  live  for  ever ;  but  if  the  new  society  has  the 
power,  under  Christ,  of  founding  new  orders  of  office  bearers,  then  it  carries  within 
itself  the  conditions  of  self-preservation  and  self-adaptation  to  changed  times  and 
perpetual  progress.     3.  It  brought  a  new  element  to  the  front.     The  seven  bear 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

Greek  names,  which  affords  a  presumption  that  they  belonged  to  that  section  of  the 
Church  whose  complaiot^  had  led  to  the  election.  The  result,  therefore,  was  this, 
that,  through  the  murmurs  of  a  few  widows,  those  members  of  the  Church  were 
lifted  into  office  who  represented  its  most  free,  spiritual,  un-Hebrew,  and  catholic 
elements.  Oae  man  especially  was  thrust  forward  who  was  destined  to  rouse  the 
narrow  and  ultra-national  party  of  the  Pharisees  to  persecution,  as  Peter  had  already 
roused  the  Sadducees,  and  whose  death  was  to  be  a  signal  for  the  scattering  of  the 
Church.  It  was  even  to  lead  to  the  conversion  of  another  man  who  should  one  day 
become  an  apostle  himself  and  vindicate  as  an  inheritance  for  Christendom  that 
larger  and  more  spiritual  view  of  Christianity  of  which  Stephen  was  the  first  ex- 
ponent. V.  The  stout  rebukes  our  short-sighted  alarms  at  the  small  dissen- 
sions AND  APPARENT  DISASTERS  OF  THE  HOUR.  We  See  the  divided  congregation  ;  we 
hear  its  murmuring  voices,  but  we  forget  to  see  the  hand  which  guides  the  Church's 
destinies,  and  causes  aU  things  to  worli  together  for  its  good.  [J.  O-^wald  DyUex,  D.D.) 
The  first  disunion  in  tlie  Church: — I.  Its  occasion.  II.  Its  adjustment.  III.  Its 
BLESSING.  (Lnmihein.)  A  picture  of  early  Church  life  : — I.  The  murmuring  in  the 
Church.  1.  When  it  arose.  With  multiplying  numbers,  new  dangers  arose.  It 
was  more  difficult  to  keep  the  unity  for  which  the  believers  had  been  distinguished. 
Many  a  Charch  that  has  withstood  adversity  has  been  wrecked  by  prosperity.  2. 
How  it  arose.  By  the  jealousy  of  the  Grecians.  If  that  was  not  stopped,  there  was 
a  great  disaster  iDefore  the  Church.  How  it  came  about  that  the  Grecian  widows 
were  neglected,  the  record  does  not  say.  It  may  have  been  unintentional  oversight, 
or  the  result  of  a  feeling  against  the  Greeks  as  being  foreigners.  It  is  worthy  of 
note  that  the  first  two  dangers  to  the  early  Church,  hypocrisy  and  schism,  arose 
from  the  distribution  of  its  charities.  II.  The  harmc^jy  of  the  Church.  How  was 
it  restored  ?  By  the  prompt,  wise,  and  magnanimous  action  of  the  apostles.  They 
did  not  wait  for  the  "  murmuring  "  to  become  a  pronounced  disaffection.  They  did 
not  rebuke  the  murmurers,  nor  try  to  justify  themselves.  They  simply  asked  that 
the  work  might  be  put  in  the  hands  of  others  who  could  properly  attend  to  it.  1. 
They  made  a  protest  against  doing  the  work  at  all.  They  were  chosen  of  Christ  to 
be  His  witnesses— not  to  dole  out  alms.  The  lower  work  was  encroaching  upon  the 
higher.  They  were  liable  to  be  so  much  engaged  in  caring  for  the  bodies  that  they 
could  do  nothing  for  the  souls  of  men.  2.  They  showed  to  whom  the  work  should 
be  committed.  They  directed  the  disciples  to  look  out  seven  men  among  them.  (1) 
"  Of  good  report" — so  that,  to  begin  with,  they  would  receive  the  approval  of  every 
one.  The  apostles  went  upon  the  principle  of  never  putting  a  doubtful  man  into  an 
important  oilice.  (2)  "  Full  of  the  Spirit " — so  that  their  godliness  might  be 
apparent.  Men  full  of  the  Spirit  would  not  be  likely  to  do  injustice  through  parti- 
ality— or  become  defaulters.  (3)  "  And  of  wisdom  " — so  that  the  funds  would  be 
wisely  disbursed.  The  Church  that  has  a  charity  fund  has  to  look  out  that  pauper- 
ism is  not  encouraged,  that  dead-beats  are  not  supported,  and  that  the  really  needy 
are  generously  cared  for.  3.  They  declared  what  their  own  work  should  be.  The 
■world  was  famishing  for  the  gospel  more  than  the  disciples  for  bread.  Others  could 
give  the  bread,  but  the  apostles  were  chosen  especially  to  give  the  gospel.  First 
they  would  get  from  God,  and  then  they  would  give  to  men.  There  is  no  giving 
without  first  getting.  No  water  can  be  poured  from  an  unfilled  pitcher.  HI.  The 
growth  of  the  Church.  1.  The  choice  of  the  seven.  The  seven  were  chosen  in 
accordance  with  the  recommendation  of  the  apostles.  Their  Greek  names  show 
how  generously  the  Church  acted  in  giving  "  the  daily  ministration  "  largely  into 
the  hands  of  the  element  from  which  the  murmurs  had  arisen.  That  made  it 
impossible  for  Grecian  Jews  any  longer  to  complain.  The  suggestion  of  the  apostles 
"  pleased  the  whole  multitude  "  ;  for  they  saw  that  it  not  only  would  do  away  with 
dissensions,  but  would  result  in  the  greater  efficiency  of  the  apostles.  The  seven 
finally  were  inducted  into  office  with  as  much  solemnity  as  though  they  were  to 
preach  the  Word  instead  of  to  serve  tables  !  In  those  days  no  work  for  Christ,  it 
would  seem,  was  unworthy  of  a  consecration.  2.  The  increase  of  the  disciples. 
That,  naturally,  was  the  result  of  the  increase  of  power  resulting  from  the  new  state 
of  things.  The  Church  was  a  greater  power,  because  in  it  there  no  longer  was  any 
division.  The  apostles  were  a  greater  power ;  for  now  there  was  no  obstacle  to 
giving  their  whole  strength  to  prayer  and  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  Notaljle  among 
the  accessions  was  the  great  company  of  priests  that  became  "  obedient  to  the  faith." 
The  new  faith  demanded  of  them  so  much  that  in  their  case  obedience  meant  a 
great  deal  more  than  with  others.  IV.  The  witnrss  for  the  Church.  Among  the 
chosen  seven  there  was  one  especially  prominent  from  the  first,  Stephen.     Observe 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  537 

that  lie  was  a  witness  for  the  Church — 1.  In  his  endo^vments.  He  was  ' '  full  of 
faith  and  the  Holy  Spirit  " — "  full  of  grace  and  power."  The  mere  fact  that  a  man 
is  so  endowed  is  a  great  testimony  for  the  Church.  2.  In  the  exhibitions  of  his 
power.  He  "  wrought  great  wonders  and  signs  among  the  people."  He  showed 
apostolic  power,  though  he  was  not  an  apostle.  The  Liyman  may  be  as  full  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  of  the  power  of  the  Spirit  as  the  minister.  3.  In  his  encounters 
with  adversaries.  "  They  were  not  able  to  resist  the  wisdom  and  the  Spirit  by 
which  he  spake."  They  were  cunning,  but  he  was  wise.  They  were  learned,  but 
he  was  inspired.  4.  In  his  appearance  before  the  council.  {M.  C.  Hazard.) 
On  deacons  : — I.  The  origin  of  the  offics.  1.  We  are  introduced  to  a  class  of 
people  here  called  Grecians,  who  were  proselytes  to  the  Jewish  worship,  and  Jews 
born  and  bred  in  foreign  countries,  whose  language  was  Greek.  In  Acts  ii.  a  long 
catalogue  is  given  us  of  the  countries  from  which  they  came.  The  home  Jews,  or 
Hebrews,  looked  down  upon  their  foreign  brethren  as  having  contracted  contamina- 
tion by  their  long  contact  with  the  heathen.  As  a  natural  result,  considerable 
jealousy  sprang  up  between  them.  The  Church  did  not  create  the  division  ;  on  the 
contrary,  its  direct  influence  was  to  merge  the  two  factions  into  one^they  were  all 
of  "  one  accord."  But  in  process  of  time  the  old  spirit  of  rivalry  manifested 
itself.  The  world  often  taunts  the  Church  with  having  within  its  fold  contentious 
and  hypocritical  people.  But  where  have  they  come  from  ?  The  Church  has  black 
sheep ;  but  they  were  black  when  they  first  came  in  from  the  world,  and  remain 
black  in  spite  of  the  cleansing  influences  around  them.  2.  The  Grecians  mur- 
mured. There  was  no  open  hostility,  or  any  unseemly  ebullition  of  temper.  You 
place  a  shell  by  your  ear,  and  hear  the  subdued  murmur  of  the  air  as  it  winds  its 
way  through  the  intricate  convolutions.  That  is  the  comparison  of  St.  Luke — 
there  was  a  low,  half-articulate  mutter.  This  disposition  to  grumble  formed  the 
gravest  danger  the  Church  had  yet  had  to  encounter.  The  earth  is  exposed  to  two 
perils — from  storms  without,  and  volcanic  fires  within.  Of  the  two,  the  last  is  the 
most  dangerous.  Let  the  winds  beat- as  they  wiU,  the  earth  continues  firm.  But  when 
the  internal  fires  burst  forth,  the  earth  quakes  to  its  foundations.  In  like  manner 
the  Church  is  exposed  to  persecution  in  the  world.  This  has  attacked  the  Church 
repeatedly;  but  it  did  not  fall,  because  it  was  founded  upon  a  rock.  But  the 
gravest  danger  arises  from  within — the  spirit  of  discontent  in  the  members.  3. 
The  Grecians  "  murmured  because  their  widows  were  neglected."  It  appears  that 
only  the  "  widows  "  received  charitable  relief,  and  of  course  those  who  were  dis- 
abled by  age  or  decrepitude.  Men  able  to  earn  a  living  doubtless  had  to  go  and 
work.  Who  were  the  almoners  ?  The  text  seems  to  hint  that  the  apostles  had 
partly  delegated  their  power  to  certain  members  of  the  Hebrew  party.  The 
"  widows  "  were  overlooked  probably  by  accident,  arising  from  defective  organisa- 
tion. But  the  Grecians  insisted  that  there  was  a  set  purpose  in  it,  and  inquired 
for  sinister  motives,  and,  as  is  always  the  case,  found  them  !  Jealousy  always  dis- 
torts facts  to  suit  its  own  morbid  fancies.  4.  The  murmurings  of  the  Grecians  induced 
the  apostles  to  "  call  the  multitude  of  the  disciples  unto  them,"  in  order  to  confer 
together.  The  Jewish  Church  was  constituted  on  mechanical  principles.  God 
Himself  elected  His  own  ofticers,  and  the  nation  was  expected  loyally  to  submit. 
But  the  Christian  Church  is  a  living  organism ;  its  functionaries  are  therefore 
dependent  on  the  vote  of  the  members.  Governments  are  of  two  kinds — the 
parental  and  representative.  The  government  of  the  Jewish  Church  was  on  the 
parental  principle,  the  members  being,  in  the  language  of  the  apostle,  under  age. 
But  the  government  of  the  Christian  Church  is  representative  ;  it  is  self-govern- 
ment— its  members  having  attained  their  majority.  And  in  calling  "  the  multitude 
of  the  disciples  unto  them,"  the  apostles  acknowledged  the  principle  of  manhood 
suffrage.  But  we  must  not  forget  the  promise  that  the  "  Spirit  of  Truth  "  should 
guide  the  Church  into  all  the  truth  of  government  not  less  than  the  truth  of  doc- 
trine. This  promise  holds  good  for  us  as  for  the  age  of  the  apostles.  No  doubt 
precedent  has  its  value,  and  no  conscientious  Christian  will  speak  lightly  of  the 
past  history  of  the  Church.  But  if  webs  be  woven  of  it  to  tie  tlae  hands  and  bind 
the  feet  of  the  Church  now  living,  we  make  of  it  a  bad  and  unjustifiable  use.  The 
Church  of  to-day  is  as  free  as  the  Church  of  the  first  century,  and  is  in  as  close 
communion  with  its  Head  as  ever  it  was.  But  there  is  a  distinction  between 
the  scripturalness  of  a  doctrine  or  usage  and  the  ecclesiasticalness  thereof. 
What  is  taught  by  the  apostles  is  not  subject  to  alteration  or  capable  of  improve- 
ment. What  St.  Paul  taught  the  Corinthian  Church  I  accept  without  cavil  or 
objection ;  but  what  the  Corinthian  Church  practised  I  feel  at  liberty  to  adopt  or 


533  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vu 

reject.  5.  Having  summoned  the  "  multitude  of  the  disciples  together,"  the 
apostles  proposed  "  they  should  choose  from  among  themselves  seven  men  of 
honest  report "  to  supervise  the  distribution,  which  instantly  quelled  the  discon- 
tent. In  ver.  1  they  murmur ;  in  ver.  5  they  are  pleased.  Were  many  in  the 
place  of  the  apostles  they  would  have  stood  upon  their  dignity,  and  ignored  the 
complaint ;  and  the  low  "  murmuring"  of  ver.  1  would  have  grown  into  loud  and 
fierce  denunciation  in  ver.  5.  But  kindness,  straightforwardness,  and  discretion 
at  once  surmounted  the  difficulty.  Evil  had  always  better  be  grappled  with  in  its 
incipient  stage.  A  small  injustice  is  more  easily  remedied  than  a  great  one,  and 
the  facility  makes  the  duty  more  imperative.  Thus  we  are  taught  that  the  Church 
is  a  growth.  It  was  not  launched  upon  society  with  all  its  organisation  perfected. 
Herein  again  it  contrasts  strikingly  with  Judaism.  Moses  was  commanded  "to  do 
everything  according  to  the  pattern  shown  him  in  the  mount  " — by  Di\'ine  revela- 
tion. The  people  had  to  originate  nothing — they  had  to  receive  everything.  But 
the  Christian  Church  is  a  living  organism — it  gradually  unfolds  from  within.  It 
began  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  without  any  regulations  or  offices  except  the  apostolate. 
It  was  simply  a  germ,  but  a  germ  which  had  within  it  the  "  power  of  endless  life.'* 
By  degrees  the  germ  grew  and  threw  out  new  offices,  just  as  the  tree  shoots  out 
new  branches.  Its  functions  are  the  healthy  outgrowth  of  its  life.  The  diaconate  is 
instituted  when  the  temporal  requirements  of  the  Church  urgently  demand  it,  and 
not  a  day  before.  It  is,  therefore,  idle  to  endeavour  to  give  the  Church  a  rigid, 
cast-iron  shape  for  aU  countries  and  ages.  The  exigencies  of  time  and  place  are  to 
determine  its  outward  form.  II.  The  duties  of  the  office.  1.  The  "  seven 
men  "  were  elected  to  "  serve."  The  noun  "  deacon  "  is  not  used,  but  the  corre- 
sponding verb  is — "  they  diaconised."  Is  there  not  a  quiet  hint  to  their  successors 
to  be  more  covetous  of  discharging  the  duties  than  of  wearing  the  name  ?  In  the 
Acts  we  find  only  the  verb  ;  in  the  Epistles  we  find  the  noun.  Here  we  perceive 
the  fundamental  law  of  language  and  of  life ;  for  language  and  life  are  at  bottom 
one — first  get  the  thing,  next  get  the  name.  The  probability  is  that  these  men 
were  not  officially  styled  "  deacons  " — they  were  simply  known  as  the  "  seven." 
Gradually,  however,  the  Church  felt  a  need  for  an  official  title,  and  from  the  verb 
it  developed  the  noun.  Living  in  an  age  noted  for  its  appearances,  we  go  about  in 
the  first  place  to  invent  names,  and  care  but  little  about  things.  All  our  goods  are 
electro -plate.  But  the  primitive  Church  was  living  face  to  face  with  stern  realities. 
If  it  could  procure  the  thing,  it  let  the  name  take  care  of  itself.  A  deacon  is  one 
who  ministers  or  serves.  The  same  words  are  used  to  describe  the  work  of  deacons 
as  that  of  apostles,  the  object  only  being  different.  In  each  case  it  was  "  serving," 
"  ministering."  A  deacon  etymologically  means  one  who  waits  at  table,  who  runs 
to  do  service.  The  very  word  signifies  that  dinconal  work  should  be  chai-acterised 
by  docility  and  alacrity.  People  of  imperious  temperament  are  scarcely  fit  to  act 
as  servers  of  the  Church  ;  instead  of  running  themselves,  their  disposition  is  to  bid 
others  run.  2.  They  were  elected  to  "  serve  tables,"  to  attend  to  the  temporalities 
of  the  Church.  It  was  not,  however,  absolutely  necessary  that  they  should  confine 
themselves  to  this ;  hard  and  fast  lines  are  not  known  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Their  chief  duty  is  to  manaae  the  finances  of  the  kingdom  ;  but,  that  done,  they 
may  extend  the  sphere  of  their  usefulness.  The  public  mind  is  confused  upon  this 
subject.  Preachers  are  supposed  to  have  no  right  to  meddle  with  the  service  of 
tables  ;  the  right  they  indisputably  have,  but  the  expediency  may  be  questioned, 
except  in  very  rare  cases.  On  the  other  hand,  deacons  are  supposed  to  be  guilty  of 
presumption  when  they  preach.  But  they  are  guilty  of  nothing  of  the  kind;  for  Stephen 
and  Philip  "  preach  the  Word  "with  irresistible  power  and  success.  Everywhere 
in  the  Apostolic  Church  are  traceable  the  liberty  and  elasticity  of  life.  "  The  tools 
to  him  who  can  use  them."  3.  The  deacons  are  to  "  serve  the  tables "  of  the 
ministers.  We  may  rest  assured  that,  whilst  waiting  on  the  tables  of  others,  they 
did  not  leave  the  apostles'  table  empty.  One  important  object  was  to  relieve  the 
preachers  of  anxiety  and  distraction  in  their  own  peculiar  work.  4.  They  are  to 
'  •'  serve  the  tables  "  of  the  poor.  This  was  about  the  most  impoverished  period  in 
Jewish  history.  Mendicants  everywhere  flocked  the  highways.  "  The  poor  ye 
have  always  with  you."  Many  of  them  joined  the  Church,  and  the  exceptional 
poverty  called  forth  exceptional  liberality.  Many,  "having  land,  sold  it,  and 
brought  the  money  and  laid  it  at  the  apostles'  feet."  At  their  feet.  Money  should 
always  be  kept  at  people's  feet.  Many  keep  it  in  their  safes,  and,  alas  I  many  in 
their  hearts.  In  this  institution  we  discover  the  first  germ  of  the  philanthropio 
efforts  of  modern   civilisation.      Judaism   doubtless  stood    alone  among   ancient 


CHAP.  VI.]  TBE  ACTS.  539 

religions  for  the  humane  feeling  pervading  it.  Nevertheless,  its  highest  result  was 
negative — not  to  oppress  or  defraud.  Being  the  first  stage  of  religious  culture, 
Judaism  consisted  in  not  doing  evil  rather  than  in  doing  good.  The  Old  Testament 
dealt  in  prohibitions  rather  than  in  positive  injunctions.  But  the  gospel  bids  you 
do  something.  Christ  went  about  doing  good.  In  the  text  a  committee  of  seven 
is  organised  to  supervise  the  distribution  of  the  doles.  Occasional  outbursts  of 
benevolent  impulses  were  witnessed  in  previous  ages  and  other  countries  ;  now  for 
the  first  time  was  a  deliberate  effort  made  to  reduce  impulse  into  system,  and  bene- 
volence into  an  organisation.  The  "  seven  men  of  honest  report  "  constituted,  I 
believe,  the  first  "  board  of  guardians"  in  the  world.  Modern  civilisation  is  rej^lete 
with  "  boards  " — Poor  Law  Boards,  School  Boards,  Boards  of  Guardians,  and 
Boards  of  Health.  But  they  are  all  natural  developments  of  the  board  or  "  table  " 
of  which  the  text  speaks,  to  "  serve  tables"  being  precisely  the  same  as  to  serve 
boards.  In  the  Gospels  we  witness  the  conception,  in  the  Acts  the  birth  of  philan- 
thropy. III.  The  qualifications  for  the  office.  1.  Integrity.  "  Honest  report  " 
• — men  of  uprightness  and  straightforwardness.  The  funds  being  entrusted  to  their 
care,  it  is  of  prime  importance  that  they  be  men  above  suspicion.  Judas  once 
♦'  kept  the  bag  "  ;  but  he  was  a  thief.  It  is  therefore  of  great  consequence  that  men 
of  strict  integrity  be  put  into  this  office.  2.  Piety.  "  FuU  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
The  judicious  management  of  money  requires  the  special  aid  of  God's  Spirit. 
Pecuniary  interests  occupy  the  middle  ground,  and  are  peculiarly  liable  to  corrup- 
tion. It  is  popularly  imagined  that,  if  a  man  is  "  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  he 
cannot  attend  to  temporal  duties  ;  that  he  is  only  fit  to  sing  and  pray.  But  it 
strikes  me  you  do  not  want  a  very  great  deal  of  the  Spirit  to  do  that ;  but  you 
want  a  great  deal  of  Him  to  give  and  collect  money.  Show  me  a  Church's  collec- 
tion books,  and  I  can  estimate  pretty  nearly  how  much  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that 
Church  has.  A  Church  of  one  hundred  members  giving  fifty  pounds  a  year  towards 
the  support  of  the  gospel  at  home  and  its  propagation  in  foreign  parts,  has  not 
much  of  the  Spirit.  Wolff  elaborated  a  system  to  reduce  all  truths  of  philosophy 
into  truths  of  mathematics  ;  and,  if  I  had  the  leisure,  I  could  invent  a  system  to 
reduce  the  truths  of  theology  into  truths  of  arithmetic.  A  man  says,  "I  have 
faith."  "  Show  me  thy  works,"  urges  James;  the  works  are  the  measure  of  the 
faith.  You  say,  "We  have  had  a  powerful  revival."  I  answer,  "Show  me  your 
collection-books."  A  small  collection  means  baptism  by  sprinkling ;  a  large  coUec- 
lection — well,  baptism  by  immersion.  3.  Wisdom.  That  a  man  is  honest  and 
pious  is  not  enough.  Without  wisdom  his  administration  will  do  incalculably  more 
harm  than  good.  Wisdom  is  a  right  application  of  knowledge  (gnosis).  But  this 
implies  two  things.  First,  that  he  possess  the  knowledge  to  be  applied.  A  deacon 
should  be  "  mighty  in  the  Scriptures."  Ignorance  should  never  hold  office  in  the 
Church.  God  does  not  need  our  knowledge  to  carry  on  His  kingiiom  ;  but  He  can 
do  without  our  ignorance.  Second,  that  he  possess  tact  to  apply  his  knowledge  in 
the  pursuit  of  his  official  duties.  Men  require  to  be  managed  with  great  delicacy 
and  discernment.  They  are  very  sensitive  instruments  to  play  upon  ;  a  rude  touch 
may  snap  the  strings,  and  in  vain  you  afterwards  endeavour  to  get  them  to  "  dis- 
course sweet  melody."  You  have  heard  of  Phseton,  the  son  of  Sol;  he  was  desirous 
of  driving  the  chariot  of  the  sky.  Many  persuaded  him  against  the  attempt,  as  he 
had  not  the  necessary  practice  to  guide  with  a  steady  hand  its  fiery  steeds.  But 
he  insisted  on  driving  ;  and  he  broke  his  own  neck  and  sent  horses  and  chariot 
spinning  through  infinite  space.  His  intentions  were  good,  but  his  skill  was  defec- 
tive. And  we  have  known  men  taking  into  their  hands  the  reins  of  Church  govern- 
ment— upright,  pious  men  enough,  no  doubt ;  but  for  lack  of  tact  they  drew  upon 
themselves  no  end  of  personal  discomfort,  drove  the  Church  over  the  precipice,  and 
plunged  it  into  inextricable  confusion.  (J.  Cynddylan  Jones,  D.  D. )  The  election 
of  deaconx : — There  is  nothing  concealed  in  the  action  of  the  New  Testament 
Church.  The  case  of  Judas  is  not  covered  up  nor  made  the  least  of.  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  are  not  names  withdrawn  because  of  the  lies  th^'y  told.  And  the  mur- 
muring of  the  Grecians  against  the  Hebrews  is  not  passed  over  without  reference. 
The  Church  is  not  a  secret  institution,  and  was  never  meant  to  be  a  concealed  force 
in  society.  Christianity  abhors  all  official  secrecy.  It  is  a  religion  which  lives  in 
the  daylight.  Its  registers  are  not  hidden  away  in  iron  safes;  its  writing  is  written 
as  with  a  pencil  of  the  sun.  Who  would  publish  an  expurgated  edition  of  the 
Bible  !  We  undertake  to  adapt  our  poets  to  modern  tastes  and  readers.  It  is 
refreshing  to  belong  to  a  Church  that  is  so  open  and  fearless.  I.  How  was  this 
DIFFICULTY  OF  THE  EARLY  Church  ADJUSTED  ?     1.  To-day  it  would  surcly  terminate 


540  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

in  many  instances  with  a  secession  ;  bnt  the  spirit  that  guided  the  Church  aright 
was  the  spirit  of  love.      There  can  be  no  permanent  difficulties  where  this  is 
supreme.     If  a  Church  is  only  a  religious  debating  society,  then  we  shall  determine 
many  issues  merely  by  numbers.     2.  The  apostles  argue  the  question  out,  from  the 
standpoint  of  a  clear  conception  of  apostohc  work.     Your  first  conception  will 
generally  deteimine  the  whole  course  of  your  argument.     Starting  with  a  noble 
conception,  a  man  will  naturally  fall  into  a  noble  course,  and  reach  a  useful  con- 
clusion.    The  apostles  magnified  their  office.     "  We  will  give  ourselves  continually 
to  prayer,  and  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word."     And  the  apostles  could  pray  I     Just 
lately,  in  this  very  story,  we  heard  them  pray,  and  the  place  where  they  were 
assembled  was  shaken !     And  the  apostles  could  also  preach.     They  divided  their 
hearers  into  two  classes — friends  and  enemies.     The  mere  critic  could  not  play  his 
little  game  at  pedantry  under  the  apostohc  sermon.     It  was  one  of  two  things — 
repentance,   surrender,  crying  to  Heaven  for  pardon,  or  gnashing  of  teeth,  and 
malignant  hatred,  the  very  fire  of  hell!     3.  The  apostles,  conceiving  their  work  to 
be  iif  this  high  and  supreme  kind,  were  rather  anxious  than  otherwise  to  escape 
the  daily  ministration  of  the  tables,  and  gladly  seized  the  opportunity  of  leaving 
this  necessary  routine  to  others  who  were  ready  to  undertake  it.     This  supreme 
conception  of  apostolic  service  was  itself  ennobled  by  the  trust  which  the  apostles 
reposed  in  the  people.     Christianity  is  the  people's  religion  pre-eminently.     There 
are  those  in  the  ministry  of  Christ  who  can  testify  that  they  owe  all  their  comfort, 
prosperity,  and  influence  to  their  trust  in  the  people.     The  apostles  did  not  select  ^ 
certain  notables ;  but  having  to  deal  with  a  people's  question,  they  consulted  the 
people's  instinct,  and  therein  they  have  set  an  example  to  all  Christian  associations. 
4.  Whilst  this  was  the  case  at  the  outset,  it  was  impossible  that  the  \Yhole  Church 
could  constitute  a  committee  of  action,  therefore  the  apostles  said,  "  Look  ye  out 
seven  men,"  who  shaU  really  be  >  ourselves  condensed.     Such  men  as  shall  them- 
selves be  equal  to  the  whole  multitude.     Large-minded,  generous  men,  who  can 
sec  every  aspect  of  a  case,  and  deal  with  noble  wisdom  with  the  practical  difficulties 
of  life.     The  qualifications  of  the  seven  are  plainly  stated.     They  were  to  be  "  men 
of  honest  report,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  wisdom,"     There  are  no  merely  secular 
duties  in  the  Church.     Church  matters  are  not  merely  matters  of  political  system. 
There  is  nothing  done  in  Christ's  Church — whether  the  opening  of  a  door,  the 
lighting  of  a  lamp,  or  the  preaching  of  the  everlasting  gospel — that  is  not  to  be 
done  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     A  duor  may  be  so  opened  as  to 
affront  the  Spirit  of  God;  a  visitor  may  be  so  shown  to  a  seat  as  to  manifest  a 
truly  Christian  spirit  on  the  part  of  the  indicator.     There  is  no  part  of  our  work 
in  any  section  that  is  not  holy  unto  the  Lord.     The  ministry  is  one.     I  have  no 
doubt  that  the  men  chosen  in  this  text  were  better  able  to  serve  tables  than  the 
apostles.     We  have  not  all  the  same  gifts.     We  must  rid  ourselves  of  the  mis- 
chievous sophism  which  teaches  us  that  some  kinds  of  service  are  menial.     There 
is  no  menial  service  in  the  Church,  unless  you  make  it  menial  by  an  unworthy 
spirit.     5.  Looked  at  as  a  piece  of  Chiu-ch  statesmanship,  can  you  suggest  a  single 
amendment  to  this  policy?     Do  not  the  apostles  vindicate  their  apostleship  by 
their  noble  wisdom  and  practical  sagacity  ?     It  is  not  every  man  in  the  apostleship 
who  could  have  settled  a  case  so.     The  ancient  proverb  tells  us  that  "  every  fool 
will  be  meddling."     The  reason  why  some  ministers  are  uncomfortable  and  un- 
settled is  that  they  will  meddle  with  things  that  they  really  cannot  arrange.     Impose 
a  duty  upon  a  friend,  and  show  by  your  manner  of  doing  it  that  you  mean  him  to 
reveal  his  best  quality.     When  this  spuit  seizes  us,  all  distribution  of  labour  will 
not  be  a  division  of  front,  but  will  ratber  show  that  the  front  is  more  united  because 
the  labour  is  wisely  divided.     Jealousy  kills  us  all  to-day.     II.    What  was  the 
EFFECT  ?     1.  The  Word  of  God  increased  (ver.  7).    A  united  Church  means  a  world 
impressed  by  the  noble  scene.     The  Church  of  Christ  is  not  united  to-day.     The 
noble  purpose  of  Christ  is  marred  by  certain  geographical  distinctions  and  eccle- 
siastical arrangements,  in  the  making  of  which  Providence  had  neither  part  nor 
lot.     The  Church  must  be  united  before  the  world  will  be  redeemed.     Hence  Christ's 
great  prayer,  "  May  they  all  be  one,  that  the  world  may  believe."     We  want  the 
apostle  now  who  can  bring  men  together,  who  can  magnify  points  of  union,  who 
can  show  that  the  Church,  though  divided  on  many  minor  points,  ought  to  realise 
its  vital  union,  magnify  and  display  it,  and  thus  Christ's  soul  would  be  satisfied. 
2.  Stephen  was  brought  out  (ver.  8).     They  made  him  a  minister  of  tables,  and  he 
became  the  first  martyr.      Stephen  was  developed  by  circumstances.    Being  put 
into  tins  office,  he  developed  his  true  quality  of  mind  and  heart.     There  are  those 


CHAP.  Yi.]  THE  ACTS.  541 

who  cannot  be  kept  in  obscurity,  and  who  cannot  be  limited  to  merely  technical 
publicity.  What  if  this  man  had  been  unintentionally  neglected  ?  [J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  first  election  of  deacons: — I.  This  reasox  of  their  election.     1. 

The  temporal  necessities  of  the  poor  members  of  the  Church.     "Widows"  are 
especially  mentioned,  in  all  communities  the  most  deserving  of  aid.     The  Bible, 
therefore,  particularly  commends  tbein  to  the  compassion  of  the  benevolent.     "  Pure 
religion  and  undefiled,"  &c.     It  is  the  duty  of  the  Church  to  attend  to  the  temporal 
as  well  as  the  spiritual  necessities  of  its  members.     In  this  Christ  has  left  us  an 
example.     The  gospel  is  more  a  record  of  His  beneficent  acts  than  of  His  doctrinal 
ideas.     2.  The  absorbing  work  of  the  gospel  ministry.     This  the  twelve  referred  to 
as  a  reason.     The  deacons  were  elected  not  to  rule,  as  some  arrogant  modern 
deacons  fancy,  but  to  relieve  the  preachers  ;  so  that,  undistracted,  they  might  give 
themselves  wholly  to  their  proper  work.     II.  The  method  of  their  election.     1. 
The  Church  had  its  part — to  look  out  the  seven  most  suitable  men,  a  work  requir- 
ing inquiry,  good  judgment,  and  responsibility.     2.  The  apostles  had  their  part. 
(1)  They  originated  the  election.     The  suggestion  for  new  officers  came  from  them, 
not  from  the  members ;  and  they,  not  the  members,  called  the  Church  together 
for  the  purpose.     (2)  They  directed  the  election,  describing  the  charHcter  of  the 
men  to  be  elected.     (3)  They  confirmed  the  election.     The  men  the  Church  elected 
were  set  before  the  apostles  for  ordination.     Had  they  not,  however,  been  up  to  the 
standard,  the  apostles  had  assuredly  the  right  of  rejection.     III.  The  qualifica- 
tion FOR  their  ELEcrioN.      1.    Unblemished  reputation.      2.   Eminent  godliness. 
3.  Practical  sagacity.     IV.  The  result  of  the  election  (ver.   7).     The  election 
operated — 1.  By  quelling  the  spirit  of  contention,  which  would  obstruct  the  ad- 
vancement of  the  Church.    2.  By  the  augmented  agency  of  the  Church.     Seven 
noble  men  set  to  work.     3.  By  enabling  the  apostles  to  give  themselves  entirely  to 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel.     {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         The  first  deacons  chosen : — In 
the  beginnini;  of  the  preceding  chapter,  we  had  a  sad  account  of  an  act  of  fraud 
and  falsehood  on  the  part  of  some  that  contributed  to  this  common  fund  among 
the  disciples  in  Jerusalem  ;  and  now  we  have  an  account  of  the  murmuring  of  some 
of  those  who  received  it.     The  first  was  the  offspring  of  great  depravity  ;  this  is 
the  result  of  human  imperfections.     The  one  was  met  by  a  very  strong  measure  ; 
this  is  met  by  conference,  by  advice,  by  calling  into  exercise  the  principles  of 
common  sense  and  the  feelings  of  their  common  Christianity.     I.  The  narrative. 
Notice — 1.  The  increase  of  the  disciples.     In  spite  of  the  persecution  which  the 
Church  was  continually  meeting  with,  we  have  continual  statements  of  its  pros- 
perity and  increase.     I  have  no  doubt  that  by  this  time  the  number  of  Christians 
in  Jerusalem  was  ten  thousand.     2.  When  you  think  about  these  ten  thousand 
people,  you  see  at  once  that  this  common  fund  cannot  mean  that  all  these  people 
had  given  up  all  their  property,  and  that  there  was  a  distribution  made  to  every 
one  of  this  whole  multitude.     What !  had  they  given  up  their  trades  ?  had  they 
left  their  workshops,  their  farms,  and  merchandise?     No;  they  were  going  on,  I 
suppose,  fulfilling  their  daily  duties.     Then  did  they  bring  all  their  wases  and 
profits,  throwing  all  this  into  a  common  fund,  and  taking  back  every  day  what  was 
required,  more  or  less  according  to  their  circumstances  ?     You  cannot  suppose  any 
such  thing.      Why,  if  they  were  to  call  the  whole  ten  thousand  togetiier  every 
morning,  and  gi^'e  them  only  a  shilling  each,  there  would  be  five  hundred  pounds 
wanted  every  day.     We  must  look  at  this  fund  as  just  a  provision  for  those  who 
were  in  necessitous  circumstances.     3.  Now  things  went  on  for  some  time,  till  at 
last  "  there  arose  a  murmuring,"  a  dissatisfaction.     Some  began  to  feel  that  thei'e 
was  not  proper  attention  paid  them,  and  it  reached  the  ears  of  the  apostles,  who 
proceed  to  make  the  arrangement  here  mentioned.     You  will  see  at  a  glance  that 
previous  to  this  somebody  must  have  done  this  work.     The  thing  had  been  done 
before.      In   chap.  ii.  44,  45,  it  is  said,  "All  that  believed    were   together,   and 
had  all  things  common,  and  sold  their  possessions  and  goods,  and  parted  them  to 
all  men,  as  every  man  had  need  " — i.e.,  each  one  at  first  distributed  his  own  bene- 
volence.    The  advance  upon  that  you  have  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  chapter.     The 
first  rude  idea  was  for  every  man  to  act  for  himself,  and  come  with  his  hands  full 
and  his  heart  full,  and  just  dispense  according  to  the  impulse  of  his  feeling  ;  and 
the  first  modification  of  that  was,  for  all  to  bring  what  they  had  to  give,  and  lay 
it  down  at  the  apostles'  feet,  and  so  there  would  be  something  like  regularity  in  the 
distribution,  and  investigation,  and  examination  of  the  particular  case  and  circum- 
stances ;  whereas  in  the  other  way  it  could  not  be  done,  and  one  might  be  receiving 
from  many.    And  that  goes  on,  the  apostles  (I  suppose)  trying  to  do  it.     But  not. 

j^^^ .  a   ir     111      Vf 


542  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

I  apprehend,  without  assistance  from  the  hundred  and  twenty,  who  would  probably 
all  be  Hebrews.     But  here  were  the  Grecians  ;  and  there  might  be  a  feeling  rising 
up,  with  no  ioundation,  that  there  was  a  neglect  of  their  widows  in  the  daily  minis- 
tration.    So  difficult  it  is,  you  see,  even  under  the  guidance  of  the  Divine  Spirit, 
and  with  the  first  love  and  strong  affection  of  the  early  Christiiins,  to  get  rid  of  all 
those  party  prejudices  and  suspicions  whicb  rise  up  in  society  and  array  class  against 
class.     Bat  the  murmurinu;  comes  to  the  ears  of  the  apostles,  and  something  must 
be  done  to  meet  it.     4.  "  Tlien  the  twelve  called  the  multitude  of  the  disciples  unto 
them."     Does  that  mean  the  whole  ten  thousand?     Supposing  there  were  not  ten 
thousand?     Could  five  thousand  men  transact  business?     Any  of  you  that  know 
anything  about  business,  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  get  anything  done  even  in  a 
large  committee.     In  order  to  get  through  business,  you  must  liave  a  few  heads, 
with  strong  hearts  and  hands  connected  with  them,  that  will  really  do  something. 
I  cannot,  therefore,  feel  myself  warranted  in  stating  that  this  is  really  to  be  taken 
positively  and  literally.     I  do  not  know  where  they  would  meet  in  Jerusalem — so 
many  of  them.     I  know  that,  afterwards,  when  Peter  was  in  prison,  "prayer  was 
made  without  ceasing  of  the  Church,"  meeting  in  a  private  house — in  the  house  of 
the  mother  of  John  Mark ;  and  I  dare  say  there  were  little  knots  of  such  all  over 
the  city.     I  think,  in  this  case,  the  principal  part  of  those  they  would  call  together 
would  be  Grecians — the  principal  persons  of  that  party — and  it  would  be  a  full 
meeting,  and  open  for  any  to  attend  who  felt  interested  in  the  matter ;  but  we 
cannot  suppose  that  there  was  the  whole,  or  anything  like  the  whole,  of  the  mass' 
of  Christians  in  Jerusalem.     When  they  were  come  together,  the  apostles  said,  "  It 
is  not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the  Word  of  God  and  serve  tables,"  which  may 
mean,  "  The  thing  does  not  work  well,  does  not  give  universal  satisfaction  ;  we  are 
doing  the  best  we  can,  but  it  is  not  reasonable  that  we  should  be  exclusively  devoted 
to  this  thing ;  we  have  had  our  heads  and  our  hearts  full  of  anxiety  about  this 
matter,  and  we  find  it  is  not  reasonable  that  we  should  'serve  tables,'  for  we  feel 
that  in  doing  so  we  must  '  leave  the  Word  of  God,'  and  we  must  not  do  that ;  and 
therefore,  as  we  have  already  made  one  departure  from  tbe  first  rude  idea  to  a 
better,  we  must  try  now  to  get  a  best,  and  we  propose  now  that  seven  men  be  looked 
out  for  this  duty."     5.   "  And  the  saying  pleased  the  whole  multitude ;  and  they 
chose  Stephen,"  &c.     It  is  remarkable  that  all  these  names  are  Greek ;  and  this 
was  probably  done  to  satisfy  the  Grecians.     Or  if,  in  "  the  multitude  of  the  disciples," 
there  were  included  some  of  the  principal  persons  among  the  Hebrews,  then  this 
marks  also  the  kindly  and  liberal  feeling  among  them,  arranging  that  from  that 
party  and  that  class  that  complains,  every  individual  of  the  seven  was  chosen. 
"  ^Vhom  they  set  before  the  apostles."     We  do  not  know  how  they  chose  them. 
There  was  some  meeting  of  the  brethren — the  more  distinguished  and  influential,  I 
think ;  and  these  individuals  were  fixed  upon,  and  they  were  presented  to  the 
apostles.     6.  "  And  when  they  had  prayed,  they  laid  their  hands  on  them."     I 
think  this  was  just  the  solemn  and  public  representation  before  the  eyes  of  the 
people  that  they  parted  with  so  much  of  that  power  which  they  had  hitherto  exer- 
cised in  relation  to  this  bu-iness,  and  that  henceforth  these  men  were  to  be  held 
responsible  for  the  exercise  of  it.     7.  There  was  peace  restored  to  the  Church  ;  no 
longer  divisions,  or  heart-burnings,  or  jealousies ;    and  then,  as  the  result,  one 
might  think,  we  immediately  read  again  that  "  the  number  of  the  disciples  multi- 
plied greatly."     Just  as  you  find  in  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  chapter,  that  when 
purity  was  restored,  then  as  the  result  there  was  a  great  increase  of  the  Church,  so 
now  peace  and  purity  are  favourable  to  all  those  affections  and  feelings  and  activities 
by  which  an  increase  of  the  body  may  be  expected.     The  Word  of  God  increased 
and  prevailed  in  two  ways.     (1)  With  respect  to  the  number  of  the  disciples.     (2) 
With  respect  to  a  particular  class  of  persons  ;  so  that  some  of  the  most  unlikely 
men,  "  a  great  company  of  the  priests,  were  obedient  to  the  faith."     Some  people 
can  hardly  believe  this;  but  "why  should  it  be  thought  a  thing  incredible  with  us," 
that  in  those  days  of  miracle  and  the  pouring  down  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  there 
should  be  manifested  the  power  of  the  faith  and  grace  of  Christ  upon  these  men  ? 
II.  The  LESS'iNs.     Now  see — 1.  How  difficult  it  is,  even  when  men's  hearts  are  ir 
the  right  place  and  in  a  good  state,  to  prevent  jealousies  and  misunderstandings 
among  a  large  body  of  people.      2.    How  a  liberal,  open,  manly,  common-sense 
policy,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  may  meet  and  allay  this  sort  of  thing ;  when  men 
will  calmly  look  at  it,  and  observe  that  something  must  be  done,  and  endeavour  in 
an  open  and  honest  spirit  to  do  it.     3.  What  an  admirable  opportunity  this  would 
have  been  to  mention  something  about  priesthood  1     There  are  some  men  that  are 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  643 

very  fond  of  getting  priests  into  the  Christian  Church ;  but  here  was  a  gi-eat  num- 
ber of  real  priests  actually  brought  into  the  Church,  and  we  hear  nothing  about 
them.  They  stand  as  simple  disciples.  Standing  there  upon  the  common  floor  of 
the  Christian  temple,  they  had  a  greater,  purer,  more  elevated  priesthood  than  that 
which  they  had  sustained  as  the  offspring  of  Aaron.  4.  Have  we  the  origin  of  the 
office  of  deacons  here  ?  They  are  not  called  deacons.  The  word,  indeed,  from 
which  "  deacons  "  comes,  is  used  in  the  account  two  or  three  times.  It  is  used 
•with  respect  to  the  apostles'  "  giving  themselves  to  the  deaconship  of  the  Word  "  ; 
and  then  these  men  to  "the  deaconship  of  tables."  The  word  "  deacon  "  is  a  very 
general  term,  signifying  ministry  or  service,  occurring  a  great  many  times  in  the 
New  Testament.  It  is  applied  to  the  apostles,  to  Timothy,  to  Jesus  Chiist.  But 
yet  it  did  come  to  a  technical  and  an  official  sense,  and  to  signify  a  particular 
officer  in  the  Christian  Church,  as  the  Church  began  to  grow.  And  I  think  that 
this  was  the  origin  of  the  office  of  the  deacon  ;  though,  perhaps,  that  office,  in  the 
course  of  time,  took  some  degree  of  modification,  as  distinct  from  the  one  thing  for 
which  these  men  were  appointed;  for  they  were  chosen  with  a  very  limited  duty 
with  respect  to  this  particular  thing.  (T.  Binncy.)  Dissensions  and  precau- 
tions : — I.  The  inner  life  of  the  pbimitive  chdech.  1.  The  election  sprang 
out  of  the  multiplying,  and  the  multiplying  begat  a  murmuring.  Increase 
of  numbers  does  not  always  mean  increase  of  happiness  and  true  spiritual 
life.  God  has  made  all  things  double  one  against  another  ;  and  when  He  bestows 
such  notable  increase,  He  adds  some  counterbalancing  disadvantage  to  keep  His 
people  humble.  2.  The  distribution  of  alms  is  always  attended  by  jealousies  and 
disputes,  rendering  the  work  one  of  the  most  unpleasant  tasks  which  can  be  under- 
taken. Fretting  and  worry,  weary  days  and  sleepless  nights,  are  often  the  only 
reward  a  Christian  philanthropist  receives.  But  here  comes  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  to  cheer.  The  aplastics  themselves  did  not  escape  the  accusation  of 
favouritism,  and  we  may  well  content  to  suffer  what  they  were  compelled  to  endure. 
3.  The  primitive  Church  was  no  ideal  communion,  but  a  society  with  failings  and 
weaknesses  and  discontentent,  exactly  like  those  which  exist  in  the  Church  of  our 
own  times.  The  apostolic  Church  did  not  disdain  a  mere  economic  question.  II. 
"What  lay  at  the  basis  of  this  murmuring,  and  of  the  jealousies  thereby 
INDICATED?  If  we  wish  to  understand  the  course  of  events  in  the  Acts,  we  must 
refer  to  the  books  of  Maccabees,  where  is  told  the  romantic  story  of  the  struggle  of 
the  Jews  against  the  Greek  kings  of  Syria,  who  tried  to  force  them  into  conformity 
with  the  religion  of  Greece,  which  then  was  counted  the  religion  of  civilisation  and 
culture.  The  result  was  that  the  intensely  national  party  became  bitterly  hostile 
to  everything  pertaining  to  Greece  and  its  civilisation.  "  Cursed  be  he  who  teacbeth 
Jiis  son  the  learning  of  the  Greeks,"  was  a  saying  among  the  Hebrews ;  while  again, 
we  hear  of  Kabban  Simeon,  the  son  of  Gamaliel,  who  used  to  embody  his  hatred  of 
the  Grecians  in  the  following  story:  "  There  were  a  thousand  bovs  in  my  father's 
school,  of  whom  five  hundred  learned  the  law,  and  five  hundred  the  wisdom  of  the 
<jre<  ks  ;  and  there  is  not  one  of  the  latter  now  alive,  excepting  myself  here  and  my 
uncle's  son  in  Asia."  Heaven  itself  was  supposed  by  the  Hebrews  to  have  plainly 
declared  its  hostility  against  their  Grecian  opponents.  Hence,  naturally,  arose  the 
same  divisions  at  Jerusalem.  The  bitter  dissensions  which  racial  and  linguistic 
differences  have  made  in  the  Church  of  every  age  are  here  depicted  in  miniature. 
The  quarrels  between  East  and  West,  Greeks  and  Latins,  whites  and  negioes, 
European  Christians  and  Hindoo  converts,  all  turn  upon  the  same  points  and  embody 
the  same  principles,  and  may  best  find  solution  upon  the  lines  laid  down  by  the 
apostles.  There  are  diveisities  of  function  and  of  work  in  the  Church — a  ministry 
of  the  Word,  and  a  serving  of  tables.  One  class  should  not  absorb  every  function. 
III.  The  people  nominated,  while  the  apostles  appointed.  They  took  the  most 
effective  plan  to  quiet  the  trouble  which  had  arisen  when  they  took  the  people  into 
their  confidence.  The  Church  has  been  often  described  as  the  mother  of  modern 
freedom.  The  councils  of  old  time  were  the  models  and  forerunners  of  modern 
parliaments.  How  many  a  quarrel  in  life  would  be  avoided,  how  many  a  rough 
place  would  be  made  smooth,  were  the  apostolic  example  always  followed.  Men 
naturally  resist  a  law  impo^^ed  from  without,  without  any  app^-arance  of  consulta- 
tion with  th^m  or  of  sanction  on  their  part ;  but  men  willingly  yield  obedience  to 
laws,  even  though  they  may  dislike  them,  which  have  been  passed  with  their  assent 
and  appeal  to  their  reason.  (G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.)  The  division  of  work  : — Some 
kinds  of  work  are  easier  to  learn  than  otheis.  Some  callings  and  professions 
require  a  long  and  special  training,  others  are  more  easily  acquired.     All  cannot 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIt.  [chap.  vi. 

teaoh,  all  are  not  called  to  the  higher  offices  of  the  Church.  The  work  of  the  Church 
may  be  compared  to  that  of  some  extensive  manufactory.  Do  not  we  seek  from  the 
raw,  or  at  any  rate  from  the  unrefined  material,  to  produce  the  perfect  fabric  ?  The 
material  upon  which  we  work  is  in  every  stage  of  refinement ;  it  is  of  every  class  of 
texture.  All  have  not  to  pass  through  the  same  process ;  what  may  refine  some 
would  surely  damage  otbei  s.  We  do  not  place  the  message  in  the  same  words  before 
the  uneducated  and  tbe  highly  cultured.  And  just  as  there  are  degrees  of  know- 
ledge in  the  learners,  so  there  may  be  in  the  teachers.  Because  we  are  not  fitted  to 
explain  Christian  truth  to  those  who  have  learnt  much,  we  have  no  right  to  con- 
clude that  there  is  no  sphere  in  which  we  may  teach.  In  a  manufactory  there  are 
workers  of  every  degree  of  .skill  and  capacity,  from  the  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers 
of  water,  to  those  by  whose  brain  power,  knowledge,  thought,  and  foresight  the 
working  of  the  great  concern  is  directed.  The  opportunities  of  the  Church  worker 
to-day  are  manifold  indeed ;  and  they  vary  according  to  the  local  conditions.  Think 
how  musical  gifts  and  abilities  may  be  devoted  to  the  service  of  God,  by  making 
more  beautiful,  more  devotional,  the  services  of  the  Church,  the  mission  room,  the 
Sunday  school,  the  cottage  lecture  I  Think  how  financial  and  business  capabilities 
may  be  employed  ia  the  careful  management  of  various  philanthropic  agencies ! 
How  a  knowledge  of  elementary  science  and  the  laws  of  life  may  be  directed  towards 
improving  the  conditions  under  which  the  ignorant  and  careless  live  1  I  might  go 
on  to  speak  of  the  work  on  behalf  of  temperance,  purity,  thrift.  Then,  again,  a 
band  of  earnest  district  visitors  is  among  the  clergyman's  very  greatest  helps.  The 
abilities  necessary  for  the  successful  performance  of  this  work  are  within  the  reach 
of  many.  The  first  requisite  is  sympathy,  the  next  a  knowledge  of  human  character. 
{W.  E.  Chadwick,  M.A.) 

Vers.  3-6.  Wherefore,  brethren,  look  ye  out  among  you  seven  men. — The  work 
of  the  Spirit  in  the  deaconship  of  the  Cliristian  Church: — I.  The  reasons  assigned. 
1.  That  the  apostles  might  be  relieved  of  secular  duties.  This  did  not  arise  out  of 
any  idea  of  superiority.  They  were  the  servants  of  all,  ready  to  be,  do,  or  suffer 
anything  that  might  be  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men.  Nor  did  it  arise 
from  any  low  estimate  of  the  temporal  interests  of  the  Church.  They  were  no 
ascetics.  Temporalities  were  important  in  themselves,  and  in  their  influence  on 
spiritual  concerns.  It  arose  out  of  their  higher  office  and  its  absorbing  cliims. 
With  tbese  nothing  must  be  allowed  to  interfere.  However  valuable  the  buuies  of 
men,  their  souls  were  more  so.  What  reproof  is  here  administered  to  modern 
ministers  and  laymen  !  How  many  ministers  are  serving  tables!  And  the  offence  is 
aggravated  when  this  is  the  result  of  lay  neglect.  Both  are  sufferers — the  minister 
whose  mind  is  secularised,  and  the  people  who  are  less  effectually  instructed.  2. 
That  the  apostles  might  give  themselves  wholly  to  their  proper  duties.  This  is 
"  reason."  The  duty  of  a  minister  is  to  aim  at  the  conversion  of  sinners,  and  to 
employ  all  means  to  secure  that.  And  the  danger  is  lest  his  mind  should  be 
brought  under  any  influence  that  would  disincline  or  disqualify  it.  These  ends  are 
only  to  be  gained  by  an  entire  devotion  to  the  sacred  calling.  Paul  says  to  Timothy, 
"  Give  thysi  If  wholly  to  them."  The  philosophy  is  as  sound  as  the  sentiment  is 
heavenly.  The  physician  who  would  be  successful  in  his  profession  must  be  devoted 
to  it.  So  must  the  merchant  and  the  labourer.  The  apostles  were  to  give  them- 
selves to  pniyer  in  secret,  and  the  Word  in  public.  Without  prayer  there  will  be 
no  heart  for  the  Word — no  success  in  it.  Without  the  Word  prayer  will  be  a 
pretence  and  a  mockery.  Together  they  are  omnipotent  through  grace.  Let  all 
the  arrangements  of  the  Church  be  such  as  to  cherinh  and  encourage  their  union. 
Let  its  temporalities  be  so  managed  by  the  members  that  the  ministry  may  be 
relieved.  II.  Thk  manner.  Church  officers  in  the  apostolic  age  were  chosen  by 
Church  members.  Matthias  was  so  chosen.  The  voice  of  the  Church  is  essential 
to  the  validity  of  the  ministry.  Members  have  an  interest  in  the  minister  they 
have  chosen  which  they  can  never  have  in  one  placed  over  them  without  their 
approval.  At  the  same  time  guards  are  necessary.  1.  The  purity  of  the  Church. 
Its  membership  must  not  be  a  promiscuous  community.  Men  of  the  world  are 
incompetent  to  elect  a  Christian  minister.  2.  The  sanction  of  the  existing 
ministry.  As  these  deacons  were  elected  by  the  people,  they  were  appointed  by 
the  apostles.  Both  had  their  rights  and  their  duties.  Either  might  refuse  consent. 
And  thus  the  one  was  a  wholesome  restraint  on  the  other.  What  a  consummate 
knowledge  of  human  nature  was  manifested  in  the  organisation  of  the  Church  I 
Its  Author  truly  "  knew  what  was  in  man."     III.  The  qualifications  (vers.  3,  8). 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  645 

Note  that  these  are  the  qualifications  required  for  the  management  of  temporal 
concerns.  It  must  not  be  supposed,  then,  that  mere  business  men  can  manage  such. 
They  have  a  sacred  bearing;  they  must  be  conducted  on  holy  principles,  and  ba 
directed  to  holy  ends.  The  meanest  duties  may  be  elevated  by  high  motives.  Tha 
deacons  were  to  be — 1.  Men  of  honest  report.  Their  conduct  must  be  such  as  to 
command  respect.  The  public  seldom  err  in  their  judgment  of  men.  They  may 
dislike  their  piety  and  persecute  them,  but  secretly  they  will  honour  them, 
especially  if  they  are,  as  they  ought  to  be,  useful  and  amiable  as  well.  2.  Full  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Not  only  should  they  be  men  of  piety,  but  eminently  so.  3.  Men 
of  wisdom.  Piety,  although  the  first  requisite,  is  not  the  only  one.  There  are  men 
of  whose  godliness  we  may  be  persuaded,  but  in  whose  ability  for  the  direction  of 
affairs  we  have  not  confidence.  4.  Full  of  faith.  5.  As  a  result  of  all  this  there 
will  be  power — mighty  influence  for  good.  IV.  The  appointment.  1.  The  disciples 
set  the  elected  deacons  before  the  apostles.  2.  The  apostles  prayed  over  them. 
"Without  God  it  was  felt  that  the  whole  procedure  was  vain.  We  must  do  nothing 
in  tlie  Church  on  which  we  may  not  ask  His  blessing.  3.  Then  they  laid  their 
hands  upon  them.  The  Spirit  was  sought  for  men  who  already  had  the  Spirit,  and 
this  was  to  bo  a  token  of  the  increase  of  His  gifts  and  graces  for  their  new  duties. 
V.  The  effects.     1.  Many  evils  were  prevented  of  which  no  mention  is  made. 

(1)  The  discontent  was  silenced,  for  the  cause  was  removed.  (2)  The  apostles  were 
not  hindered  or  distracted  by  misunderstandings  in  the  Church.  2.  Better  than 
this,  much  good  was  done.  (1)  The  Word  of  God  increased.  It  was  preached 
more  generally  and  powerfully,  and  a  greater  blessing  rested  on  the  preachers. 

(2)  The  most  prejudiced,  "  the  priests,"  were  persuaded.  The  bitterest  enemies 
were  won  to  friendship,  and  so  far  the  greatest  barrier  to  the  gospel  was  thrown 
down.  "  ^Vhen  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  He  maketh  his  enemies  to  be  at 
peace  with  him."  Conclusion  :  Note  the  connection  between  a  right  ecclesiastical 
poUty  and  a  successful  ministration  of  the  Word.  Of  course  God  can  bless  Hia 
Word  under  any  polity  ;  but  there  is  a  polity  that  hinders  and  a  polity  that  promotes 
the  truth.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  Suitable  men  to  he  sought  out  by  the  Cliurch : — 
A  radical  mistake  has  been  committed  in  supposing  it  is  necessary  in  all  cases  for 
the  deshe  after  the  sacred  office  to  rise  up  first  of  all  and  spontaneously  in  the 
breast  of  the  aspirant.  In  consequence  of  this,  many  have  thrust  themselves 
forward  who  were  altogether  unfit  for  the  work ;  while  many,  as  eminently  qualified 
for  it,  have  been  kept  back  by  modesty.  Does  it  not  seem  to  be  the  work  of  the 
pastors  and  the  churches  to  call  out  from  among  themselves  the  most  gifted  and 
pious  of  their  members  for  this  object  ?  Should  this  matter  be  left  to  the  inflations 
of  self-conceit,  the  promptings  of  vanity,  or  the  impulses,  it  may  be  of  a  sincere, 
but  at  the  same  time  of  an  unenlightened  zeal?  Nothing  can  be  more  erroneous  than 
that  this  call  of  the  Church  would  be  an  officious  intermeddling  with  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  in  calling  the  ministry — for  it  may  surely  be  conceived  to  be  quite  as  rational 
a  notion  to  suppose  that  the  Spirit  calls  a  person  through  the  medium  of  the 
Church  and  its  pastor,  as  to  imagine  that  the  commission  from  above  comes  direct 
to  the  heart  of  an  individual — especially  as  the  Church  and  the  pastor,  or  at  any 
rate  the  latter,  is  usually  applied  to,  as  a  judge  of  the  candidate's  fitness  for  the 
■work  ;  and  thus,  after  all,  the  power  and  the  right  of  pronouncing  a  judgment  upon 
the  alleged  call  of  this  Divine  agent  are  vested  with  the  pastor  and  the  Church. 
To  affirm  that  an  individual  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  a  very  great  fitness  for  the 
office,  unless  his  love  of  souls  has  been  strong  enough  to  prompt  him  to  desire  the 
work  of  the  ministry,  and  that  he  is  not  likely  to  be  very  earnest  in  it,  if  he  be  thus 
sent,  instead  of  his  going  of  his  own  accord,  is  assuming  too  much  ;  for  on  the  plan 
here  recommended,  it  is  supposed  that  the  individual  who  attracts  the  attention  of 
the  pastor  is  one  who,  in  addition  to  true  piety  and  competent  abilities,  has 
manifested  an  active  zeal  in  the  way  of  doing  good.  It  is  only  on  such  an  one  that 
his  eye  would  light,  or  to  whom  he  would  venture  to  make  the  suggestion.  In  all 
the  official  appointments  recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  from  an  apostle  down  to 
a  deacon,  the  people  were  requested  to  look  out  for  suitable  men,  and  not  to  wait  till 
they  presented  themselves.  {J.  A.  James.)  Why  seven  deacons? — Some  have 
asserted  that  it  was  so  determined  because  seven  was  a  sacied  number,  others 
because  there  were  now  seven  congregations  in  Jerusalem,  or  seven  thousand 
converts.  Perhaps,  however,  the  true  reason  was  simply  that  seven  is  a  very 
convenient  practical  number.  In  case  of  a  difference  of  opinion  a  majority 
can  always  be  secured  on  one  side  or  other,  and  all  blocks  avoided.  The 
number  seven  was  long  maintained  in  connection  with  the  order  of  deacons,  in 

VOL.  I.  35 


546  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

imitation  of  the  apostolic  institution.  A  council  at  Neo-Cffisarea,  a.d.  314,  ordained 
that  the  number  of  seven  deacons  should  never  be  exceeded  in  any  city,  while  in 
the  Church  of  Rome  the  same  limitation  prevailed  from  the  second  to  the  twelfth 
century,  so  that  the  Roman  cardinals,  who  were  the  parochial  clergy  of  Rome, 
numbered  among  them  merely  seven  deacons  down  to  that  late  period.  The  seven 
chosen  by  the  primitive  Church  were  to  be  ncen  of  good  report  because  they  were  to 
be  public  functionaries,  whose  decisions  were  to  alhiy  commotions  and  murmurings  ; 
and  therefore  they  must  be  men  of  weight,  in  whom  the  public  had  confidence. 
But,  further,  they  must  be  men  "  full  of  the  Spirit  and  of  wisdom."  Piety  was  not 
the  only  qualification ;  they  must  be  wise,  prudent,  sound  in  judgment  as  well. 
(G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.)  We  will  give  oiirselves  continually  to  prayer,  and  to  the 
ministry  of  the  Word. — Prayer  and  preachiini,  alternate  or  simuhaneous,  are  the 
right  and  left  side  of  a  hving  ministry.  The  preaching  work  may  be  laboriously 
and  conscientiously  performed  without  comfort  or  success  if  the  other  side  be 
from  any  cause  paralysed.  I  watched  once  the  operations  of  a  brick-maker  in  a 
field  of  clay.  There  was  great  agility  in  his  movements.  He  wrought  by  piece,  and 
the  more  he  turned  out  the  higher  was  his  pay.  His  body  moved  like  a  machine.  His 
task  for  a  time  was  simply  to  raise  a  quantity  of  clay  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  level 
by  means  of  a  spade.  He  threw  up  one  spadeful,  and  then  he  dijiped  his  tool  in  a 
pail  of  water  that  stood  by.  After  every  spadeful  of  clay  there  was  a  dip  in  the 
water.  The  operation  of  dipping  occupied  as  much  time  as  raising.  My  first, 
thought  was,  if  he  should  dispense  with  these  apparently  useless  baptisms,  he 
might  perform  almost  double  the  amount  of  work.  My  second  thought  was  wiser  : 
on  reflection,  I  saw  that  if  he  should  continue  to  work  without  these  alternate 
washings,  the  clay  would  have  stuck  to  the  spade,  and  progress  would  have  been 
altogether  arrested.  I  said  to  myself.  Go  thou  and  do  likewise.  Piayer  is  the 
baptism  which  makes  progress  quick.     {W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Ministers  sliould  give 

themselves  to  prayer : — "  I  was  lately  in  company  of  one  of  our  older  ministers," 
said  a  young  minister  the  other  day;  "  one  who  has  laboured  long  and  with  much 
success  in  some  of  the  most  difficult  fields  of  the  Church.  The  object  of  my  inter- 
view was  to  learn  from  him  the  secret  of  success  with  which  it  had  pleased  God  to 
crown  his  ministry  in  positions  and  places  where  others  had  failed.  Instead, 
however,  of  directly  giving  me  the  information  I  desired,  he  told  me  with  great 
sorrow  the  reason  why  he  had  accomplished  so  little,  and  said  with  unaffected 
sadness,  '  My  young  friend,  the  mistake  of  my  life  has  been  that  I  have  not  prayed 
more.  I  fell  into  the  error  of  most  ministers — I  studied  and  preached.  I  worked 
and  worried  too  much,  and  I  prayed  too  little.  Could  I  live  my  life  over  again, 
I  would  be  more  with  God  and  less  with  men.  I  see  it  all  now — what  wasted  years 
of  unrest  I  have  passed,  how  much  of  my  life  was  my  own  doing,  and  how  little  of 
God  has  been  in  my  active  ministry!  I  can  now,  in  the  evening  of  my  days,  only 
ask  God  to  forgive  my  shortcomings,  and  to  aid  me  in  spending  my  few  remaining 
years  differently  from  the  imperfect  way  in  which  I  have  served  my  Master." 
Prayer  and  piower : — A  friend  who  knew  Mr.  Spurgeon  many  years  ago,  and  who 
heard  him  preach  on  many  occasions,  says  that  he  once  heard  him  preach  in  one 
of  our  large  towns  in  the  afternoon  and  evening  on  a  certain  day  ;  and  that  at  the 
close  of  the  afternoon  service  Mr.  Spurgenn  spoke  of  the  consciousness  that  the 
service  had  not  been  what  it  should  have  been.  His  friend  (then  a  student) 
admitted  that  he  thought  the  preacher  had  not  been  himself  in  the  preaching. 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  with  a  remark  to  the  effect  that  it  would  never  do  to  repeat  the 
failure  in  the  evening,  went  out  into  the  woods  to  pray.  Indeed,  he  spent  the 
whole  interval  between  the  afternoon  and  evening  services  in  prayer.  The  latter 
meeting  was  one  of  great  power,  and  different  in  all  respects  from  that  of  the 
afternoon.  Many  preachers  of  to-day  might  imitate  Mr.  Spurgeon's  example  with 
great  advantage  to  themselves  and  their  congregations.  Prayer  and  iniiiisterial 
success  : — A  minister  observing  a  poor  man  by  the  roadside  breaking  stones  with  a 
hammer,  and  kneeling  to  get  at  his  work  the  better,  said  to  him,  "  Ah,  John,  I  wish 
I  could  break  the  stony  hearts  of  my  hearers  as  easily  as  you  are  breaking  these 
stones!"  The  man  replied,  "  Perhaps,  master,  you  don't  work  on  your  knees?" 
They  laid  their  hands  on  them. — huposit  ion  of  hands : — This  action  was  of  frequent 
use  among  the  ancient  Jews.  The  apostles  must  have  remembered  that  it  was 
employed  in  the  designation  of  Joshua  as  leader  of  Israel  in  place  of  Moses  (Num. 
xxvii.  18-23 ;  cf.  Deut.  xxxiv.  9),  that  it  was  used  even  in  the  synagogue  in  the 
appointment  of  Jewish  rabbis,  and  had  been  sanctioned  by  our  Lord's  practice. 
The^  naturally,  theiefore^  used  this  symbol  upon  the  solemn  appointment  of  the 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  647 

first  deacons,  and  the  same  ceremonial  was  repeated  upon  similar  occasions  (see 
chap.  xiii.  3  ;  2  Tim.  i.  6  ;  Heb.  vi.  2).  This  ceremony  was  also  employed  by  the 
apostles  as  the  rite  which  filled  up  and  perfected  the  baptism  which  had  been 
administered  by  others  (chap.  viii.  17).  The  ceremony  of  imposition  of  hands  was 
eo  essential  and  distinguishing  a  point,  that  Simon  Magus  selects  it  as  the  one  he 
desires  above  all  others  effectually  to  purchase,  so  that  the  outward  symbol  might 
be  followed  by  the  inward  grace  (chap.  viii.  19).  Again  in  ch^p.  xix.  we  find  St.  Paul 
using  the  same  visible  ceremony  in  the  case  of  St.  John's  disciples,  who  were  first 
baptized  with  Christian  baptism,  and  then  endued  by  St.  Paul  with  the  gift  of 
the  Spirit.  Imposition  of  hands  in  the  case  of  ordination  is  a  natural  symbol; 
indicative  of  the  transmission  of  function  and  authority.  It  fitly  indicates  and 
notifies  to  the  whole  Church  the  persons  who  have  been  ordained,  and  therefore  has 
ever  been  regarded  as  a  necessary  part  of  ordination.  (G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.) 
A  man  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. — Stcphen^s  faith  and  its  source : — I. 
Stephen's  faith.  From  the  speech  he  made  in  defence  we  may  gather  some  of  the 
leading  features  of  his  faith.  1.  Stephen  believed  that  God's  hand  was  discernible  in 
history.  He  gives  a  rapid  survey  of  tlie  Scripture  story  from  the  call  of  Abraham  to  the 
death  of  Jesus,  and  shows  how  all  had  been  overruled  by  God.  The  common  notion  is 
that  kings  and  statesmen  make  history.  Stephen  believed  that  God  made  it.  To  him 
the  value  of  history  was  not  merely  that  it  told  succeeding  generations  the  things  that 
had  happened  to  their  fathers,  and  the  deeds  their  fathers  had  done,  but  that  it  revealed 
God,  made  known  His  character,  principles,  and  relationship  to  man.  The  lite  and 
soul  of  history  is  God.  It  is  noticeable  that  Stephen's  speech  is  far  from  exact  in 
its  statements.  Dean  Stanley  points  out  no  less  than  twelve  differences  from  the 
Mosaic  history.  But  mere  precision  of  record  was  not  his  aim.  He  desired  to  show 
the  purposes  of  God.  There  may  be  the  most  minute  exactitude  of  delineation,  and 
yet  no  life.  The  true  artist  will  sacrifice  the  rectitude  of  a  line  that  he  may  express 
the  soul  of  his  subject.  2.  Stephen  believed  that  the  most  noticeable  way-mark  of  the 
universal  march  had  just  been  passed.  It  was  the  Cross  of  Jesus.  So  far  the  race 
had  been  journeying  on  and  on  to  Calvarj'.  3.  Stephen  believed  that  Jesus,  after 
His  Cross  and  passion,  had  risen  from  the  dead,  and  ascended  to  the  right  hand  of 
the  Father.  4.  Stephen  believed  tliat  the  exalted  Jesus  still  cared  for,  and  could 
help  His  servants  in  all  their  labour  and  suffering  upon  earth.  He  beheld  Jesus 
"  stauding  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  as  if  ready  to  assist  him,  and  he  prayed  to 
Jesus.  II.  Stephen's  possession  of  the  Holt  S spirit.  1.  It  was  this  that  gave 
life  to  his  faith.  It  is  not  the  correctness  of  the  creed  that  makes  a  man  a  Christian, 
in  the  highest  sense,  but  the  quickening  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  If  we  would 
be  useful  as  servants  of  God  among  men  we  must  be  boptized  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 
3.  Nay,  we  cannot  hve  aright  without  this.  4.  The  most  important  question  we 
can  be  asked  is,  "Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost?"  (J.  Kirk  Pike.)  The 
character  of  Stephen : — I.  The  spiritual  endowments  by  which  he  was  dis- 
tinguished. "Full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  1.  The  high  and  honour- 
able office  to  which  he  was  elected  would  demand  the  continual  exercise  of  a  simple 
affiance  in  the  power,  the  faithfulness,  the  love  of  Jesus  Clirist — in  the  stability  of 
that  religion  to  which  he  was  self-devoted — in  the  fulfilment  of  that  promise  (Matt. 
xxviii.  20).  2.  Stephen  was  also  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  As  the  Shekinah,  the 
bright  emblem  of  the  Divine  presence,  descended  fi'om  heaven  and  filled  the  holy 
of  holies,  so  did  a  sacred  influence  from  above  fill  the  heart  of  Stephen,  and  make 
his  body  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  II.  The  earnestness  of  his  labour  in 
the  cause  of  Christ.  He  who  is  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  proves  the 
power  of  religion  as  a  practical  principle  by  abounding  in  every  good  word  and 
work.  His  obligations  to  the  Fountain  of  Mercy  are  so  great,  his  deliverance  so 
gracious,  his  hope  so  animating,  his  responsibilities  so  awful,  that  one  master- 
feeling  will  occupy  his  mind — a  desire  to  walk  worthy  of  Go'i,  who  hath  called  him 
to  His  kingdom  and  glory.  III.  To  these  qualifications  of  St.  Stephen  must  be 
added  his  boldness  in  confessing  Christ.  A  Christian  should  indeed  charge  it 
upon  his  conscience  to  abstam,  as  much  as  in  him  lieth,  from  religious  controversy. 
Unnecessary  disputes,  and  oppositions  of  theological  science,  are  mo«t  unfriendly 
to  the  love  and  power  of  Divine  truth  in  his  heart.  But  when  his  faith  is  assailed; 
when  the  foundation  of  every  hope  on  which  the  soul  rests  is  attncked  by  the 
daring  impiety  of  the  blasphemer,  or  the  more  covert  insinuation  of  the  secret 
infid  1,  let  him  remember  that  silence  and  indifference  are  treason  against  the 
Saviour  who  bought  him  with  His  bloo*!.  IV.  Considering  the  closing  events  of 
St.  Stephen's  Ufe  in  the  order  of  the  sacred  narrative,  we  next  remark  his  support 


643  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

IN  THE  HOUR  OF  TEiAL.  He  had  such  a  view  of  his  risen  Bedeemer's  power  and 
glory  as  strengthened  him  to  abide  unshrinkingly  the  fate  before  him  ;  and  such  a 
foretaste  of  the  bliss  which  awaited  him  as  made  him  desirous  to  depart,  and  to  be 
with  Christ.  V.  The  charity  with  which  St.  Stephen  prayed  tor  his  mdr- 
DERERS  :  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  In  this  s2Dirit  of  charity  we 
must  live  and  die  if  we  hope  for  heaven.  Never  let  us  address  God  with  a  prayer 
for  our  own  pardon,  if  we  cannot  unfeignedly  pai  don  others  their  wrongs  against 
us.  VI.  The  confidence  with  which  St.  Stephen  resigned  his  soul  into  the 
hand  of  Christ.  (R.  P.  Buddicom,  31. A.)  The  Christian  full  of  faith  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghont  : — Here  is  an  example.  How  simply  is  the  character 
sketched  1  and  how  distinctly  is  it  stated  whence  it  was  that  this  man  was 
what  he  was !  Happy  is  that  Church  which  has  many  such  among  its  laity, 
"  men  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  wisdom."  How  shall  we  know  such  ? 
"VNTiat  is  it  that  we  are  to  seek  when  we  wish  to  be  such  ?  I.  Who  and  what  is  that 
MAN  who  is  full  OF  FAITH  AKD  OF  THE  HoLT  Ghost  ?  Faith  wliich  belicves  the 
promise  respecti-ig  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  wliich  relies  upon  His  presence  and 
help,  which  looks  to  Him  continually,  leans  on  His  assistance  confidently,  i3 
necessary  to  an  individual's  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  "  full  of  faith"  and 
"  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  are  inseparably  united :  they  twine  together,  they  grow 
up  each  into  their  fulness  together.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  author  of  faith  :  it  is 
by  His  gift  and  operation  that  the  faith  of  believers  "  groweth  exceedingly."  He 
reveals  the  truth  "  from  faith  to  faith."  And  faith  opens  wider  and  wider  the  door 
of  the  heart  for  His  reception ;  and  faith,  acting  upon  the  promises,  draws  a  larger 
and  a  larger  indwelling  of  thnt  blessed  visitant.  It  is  almost  needless  to  say  that 
the  expression  "  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  "  must  mean  being  under  the  influence 
of  the  Holy  Ghost — His  influence  exerted  over  the  whole  man,  in  all  his  powers, 
under  all  circumstances,  at  all  times.  It  is  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  he  is  guided. 
He  is  continually  under  the  Spirit's  teaching.  That  blessed  Spirit  is  acting,  with 
all  his  trials,  by  them  to  sanctify  him.  The  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  upon 
the  man  in  all  that  he  thinks  or  does  :  this  is  the  "  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Hence  Christians  are  said  to  walk  in  the  Spirit,  to  pray  in  the  Spirit,  to  live  in  the 
Spirit.  We  go  on  now  to  the  effects  proouced — tijose  which  others  see  visible  in 
our  disposition  and  conduct.  The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  must  be  manifest  to 
ourselves.  In  true  Christians — for  it  is  of  them  that  we  are  now  e-^pecially  speaking 
— one  of  the  chief  and  most  evident  of  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  where 
His  influence  is  richlj'  imparted,  is  the  shedding  abroad  a  love  to  God  and  a  love  to 
all  real  Christians.  In  close  connection  with  love  is  hope,  a  confiding  trust  in  God. 
"And,  because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  your 
Learts,  crying,  Abba,  Father  "  (Gal.  iv.  6).  With  these,  and  perhaps  springing  out 
of  these  in  a  measure,  love  and  hope,  ate  conjoined  joy  and  peace,  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace"  (Gal.  v.  22),  says  the 
apostle:  "joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  (2  Thess.  i.  6),  he  says  again.  There  are  also 
exhibitions  of  Christian  excellence— these  come  from  the  Spirit:  there  are  works 
done  by  Christians — these  are  originat(  d  by  the  Spirit,  Scripture  is  very  clear 
and  detinite  in  its  language.  We  must  observe  it  where  it  is  so  marked  and  positive 
in  its  expression :  it  does  not  speak  of  goodness,  charity,  temperance,  &c.,  as  our 
own  virtues,  which  we  are  to  follow;  but  it  calls  them  "fruits  of  the  Spirit." 
"But  the  fruit  of  the  Spiiit,"  says  St.  Paul,  "is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering, 
gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance."  These,  if  really  Christian 
graces,  come  from  the  Si^irit's  operation.  He  commences  them ;  He  nurtures 
them  ;  He  gives  them  their  growth  ;  He  will  bring  them  out  to  their  full  completion 
in  another  world.  I  would  observe,  too,  that  all  these  fruits  of  the  Spirit  must  be 
sought  by  the  Christian.  Our  Saviour  denounces  tlie  breaking  one  of  His  least 
commandments.  These  graces  of  the  Holy  Ghost  differ,  in  many  respects,  from 
those  excellencies  which  the  unchanged  heart  of  man  can  exhibit.  We  may  notice 
one  of  these  graces  in  St.  Stephen,  that  man  "  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Christian  graces  have  their  oppo-ites,  but  both  appear.  Where  the  Spiiit  of  God 
works  it  will  be  so.  See  in  St.  Stephen  the  lion  and  the  lamb  united:  he  is  the 
lion  in  courage,  as  he  meets  his  persecutors,  as  he  stands  up  valiant  for  the  truth  : 
he  is  the  lamb  iu  meekness,  as  he  kneels  down  and  prays  for  his  murderers,  "Lord, 
lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charce."     II.  Our  sinfulness  in  cojiing  short  of  this, 

OR   IT    MAY    BE    EVEN,    SOLEMN    AND   PAINFUL   AS    IS    THE     THOUGHT,    IN    SOME    INSTANCES, 

THE  NOT  POSSESSING  IT  AT  ALL.  Think  how  ofteu  His  good  influences  have  been 
quenched,  His  work  upon  the  soul  interfered  with,  and  more  or  less  marred  1    Be 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  549 

humbled  on  account  of  these  things.  Endeavour  to  see  them  rightly.  Confess 
them.  This  is  the  only  way  to  obtain  blessing  from  God.  III.  The  encourage- 
ments TO  OUR  SEEKING  THIS  CHARACTER,  AND,  IN  DEPENDENCE  UPON  GoD,  MAKING 
IT  OUR  OB.TECT  TO  BE    MEN    EULL    OF    FAITH   AND    OF    THE    HoLY    GhOST.       (J.  E,   DaltOTl, 

B.D.) 

Ver.  7.  And  the  Word  of  God  increased.— Goo(Z  earnest^  of  great  success  : — I.  The 
MEANS  BY  WHICH  THIS  PKOSPEBITT  MAY  BE  PROCURED.  Nothing  Can  avail  without — 1. 
The  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  smile  from  heaven.  Paul  planteth, 
Apollos  watereth,  and  God  giveth  the  increase.  2.  The  plain  preaching  of  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  have  been  struck  with  the  downrightness  of  the  testimony 
of  the  Eeformers.  It  was  so  with  Farren,  Luther,  Calvin,  &c.  They  did  not  aim 
at  lofty  periods  and  flowing  eloquence ;  but  they  just  dashed  right  on  with  this  one 
truth,  "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  And  if  we  are 
to  see  the  Church  of  God  really  restored  to  her  pristine  glory,  we  must  have  back 
this  plain,  simple,  gospel-preaching.  Sunday-school  teachers,  you  must  teach  this 
same  gospel.  3.  Much  holy  living  to  back  it  all  up.  After  we  have  done  the 
sermon,  people  say,  "How  about  the  peojile  that  attend  there?  Are  they  such 
people  as  you  can  trust?  What  about  their  homes?  Do  they  make  good  husbands, 
good  servants,  kind  masters?  "  And  if  the  report  of  our  character  be  bad  it  is  all 
over  with  our  testimony.  The  doctor  may  advertise,  but  if  the  patients  are  not 
cured,  he  is  not  likely  to  estabUsh  himself  as  being  well  skilled  in  his  art ;  and  the 
preaclier  may  preach,  but  if  his  people  do  not  live  the  gospel,  they  kick  down  with 
their  feet  what  he  builds  up  with  his  hands.  The  early  Reformers  were  distinguished 
by  the  sanctity  of  their  lives.  When  they  were  about  to  hunt  out  the  Waldenses, 
the  French  king  sent  a  priest  to  see  what  they  were  like,  and  he,  honest  man  as  he 
was,  came  back  and  said,  "  They  seem  to  be  much  better  Christians  than  we  are.  I 
am  afraid  they  are  heretics,  but  I  would  that  all  Catholics  were  as  good  as  they  are." 
This  was  what  made  the  gospel  victorious  in  tliose  days.  4.  Individual,  personal 
exertion.  No  Church  can  have  prosperity  if  only  a  part  of  the  members  are  active. 
It  was  thought  among  Christians  that  we  ministers  were  to  do  all  the  work,  and  that 
you  were  to  sit  still  and  enjoy  the  sermon,  and  perhaps  pull  it  to  pieces.  Let  me 
give  you  a  parable.  A  certain  band  had  been  victorious  in  all  their  conflicts.  But 
on  a  sudden  they  said  in  the  council-chamber,  "  We  have  at  our  head  a  most  valiant 
warrior,  one  whose  arm  is  stout  enough  to  smite  down  fifty  of  his  adversaries  ; 
would  it  not  be  better  if,  with  a  few  such  as  he  to  go  out  to  the  fight,  the  mere  men- 
at-arms,  who  make  up  the  ordinary  ranks,  were  to  stop  at  home  ?  "  Now,  the  fore- 
most champions,  witli  fear  and  trembling,  undertook  the  task  and  went  to  the 
conflict,  and  they  fought  well,  and  did  great  exploits.  But  still  no  city  was  taken, 
no  province  was  conquered,  and  they  met  together  and  said,  "  How  is  this  ?  Our 
former  prestige  is  forgotten  ;  our  ranks  are  broken  ;  our  pennons  are  trailed  in  the 
dust;  what  is  the  cause  of  it?"  When  out  spoke  the  champion,  and  said,  "  Of 
course  it  is  so  !  How  diiJ  you  think  that  some  twelve  or  fifteen  of  us  could  do  the 
work  of  all  the  thousands?  Whf^n  every  man  took  his  share,  we  dashed  upon  the 
foe  like  an  avalanche  ;  but  now  that  you  stay  at  home  and  put  us,  but  a  handful,  to 
do  all  the  work,  how  can  you  expect  that  great  things  should  be  done  ?  "  So  each 
man  resolved  to  put  on  his  helmet  and  his  armour  once  again,  and  go  to  the  battle, 
and  so  victory  returned.  And  if  we  are  to  have  the  victory  you  must  be  every  one 
of  you  in  the  fight.  5.  Much  earnest  prayer.  Nothing  is  impossible  to  the  man 
who  knows  how  to  overcome  heaven  by  wrestling  intercession.  According  to  your 
faith  shall  it  be  done  unto  you.  6.  More  intense  glowing  spiritual  life.  II.  The 
riosults  WHICH  FLOW  FROM  THIS  PROSPERITY.  1.  Souls  are  saved.  John  Owen  said 
that  if  you  had  to  preach  to  a  whole  nation  for  a  twelvemonth,  in  order  to  win  one  soul, 
it  would  be  good  wages.  Richard  KniU  once  saiil,  that  if  there  were  only  one  uncon- 
verted person  in  the  wilds  of  Siberia,  and  that  God  had  ordained  that  eveiy  Christian  in 
the  world  must  eo  and  talk  to  that  one  person  before  he  would  be  converted,  it  would 
be  an  exceedingly  little  thing  for  us  all  to  do.  2.  The  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
glorified.  3.  The  Church  is  edified.  As  those  who  promote  sanitary  measures  for  the 
benefit  of  the  neighbourhood  are  thereby  favouring  the  conditions  of  their  own 
health,  so  the  promulgation  of  saving  knowledge  throughout  the  world  is  augment- 
ing the  peace  and  the  welfare  of  our  own  hearts,  and  of  all  who  are  already  saved. 
III.  The  alternative.  Either  we  must  get  a  high  state  of  prosperity,  or  else  we 
shall  lack  what  is  to  be  dreaded  to  the  very  uttermost.  I  have  seen  congregations 
broken  to  pieces,  and  churches  split  up,  and  the  bottom  of  it  all  has  been  because 


550  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

vital  godliness  has  been  drained  out  of  the  system.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Missionary 
hindrances  and  encouragements  .-—I.  Thk  hindrances.  1.  The  apostles  had  to 
preach  to  them  as  sinners,  who,  because  of  their  ungodliness  and  pride,  necessarily 
hated  the  gospel,  which  oppo.^es  itself  to  these  evils.  2.  Besides  these  elements  of 
opposition,  which  they  possessed  in  common  with  their  fellow- creatures  throughout 
the  world,  there  were  national  hindrances,  formalism,  self-righteousness,  and  exclu- 
siveness.  3.  The  class  that  was  most  especially  opposed  to  the  gospel  from  their 
position  in  society  were  the  priests.  These  were  first  pledged  to  their  own  system, 
as  its  teachers.  Their  pride  as  teachers  would  rise  up  against  the  idea  of  renouncing 
this  system,  to  which  they  had  been  so  long  and  so  warmly  attached.  And  then 
their  interests,  as  priests,  were  likely  to  be  altogether  subverted  by  the  substitution 
of  the  gospel  for  Judaism.  Their  power  and  their  wealth  were  both  at  stake.  II. 
Encouragements.  The  apostles  were  aided — 1.  By  having  to  address  to  those  whom 
they  endeavoured  to  convert,  the  testimony  respecting  undeniable  and  signal  facts. 
The  Jews  might  oppose  their  various  theoretical  objections  to  the  gospel,  and  doubt- 
less did  ;  but  to  all  these  the  apostles  could  adduce  in  answer,  plain  great  facts, 
which  they  d'd  not  adduce  from  hearsay,  but  of  which  they  were  themselves  the 
witnesses.  2.  By  the  moral  force  of  the  doctrine  which  they  had  to  convey.  3.  By 
their  personal  character.  4.  By  the  Divine  assistance  which  was  guaranteed.  Con- 
clusion :  Our  hindrances  are  just  those  which  prevailed  at  the  first  preaching  of 
the  gospel,  which  were  overborne  and  mastered  by  the  first  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  therefore  may  be  by  His  disciples  now,  for  the  very  means  which  they  possessed 
for  wrestling  with  these  difficulties  are  possessed  by  ourselves.  (Baptit  Noel.) 
Frosperous  times  : — I.  The  Word  or  God  increased.  1.  The  number  of  its  preachers 
increased.  Stephen  and  Philip  certainly,  and  the  other  deacons  probably,  were 
added  to  the  company  of  preachers.  Times  of  revival  are  always  times  for  recruiting 
the  ranks  of  the  ministTy.  2.  The  preachers  declared  it  with  augmented  industry 
and  power,  encouraged  by  signs  of  Divine  approval,  and  by  the  favour  of  the  people. 
3.  The  people  received  it  in  constantly  increasing  numbers,  and  passed  it  on.  II. 
The  disciples  multiplied.  1.  Converts  were  made.  There  is  no  surer  sign  of 
spiritual  adversity  than  few  or  no  conversions.  For  this  architecture,  music,  wealth, 
tfcc,  are  no  compensation.  But  a  Church  worshipping  in  some  upper  room  where 
money  is  scarce,  and  ecclesiastical  assthetics  non-existent,  but  where  disciples  are 
multiplied,  is  in  a  prosperous  state.  2.  They  were  made  in  the  least  likely  place. 
In  Jerusalem,  the  stronghold  of  Jewish  bigotry,  where  that  spirit  was  in  the  ascen- 
dant which  had  crucified  ttje  Master.  Had  this  been  in  Galilee,  where  the  prejudice 
was  not  so  intense,  it  would  not  have  called  for  so  much  remark.  So  it  is  a  blessed 
thing  when  those  predisposed  in  favour  of  the  gospel — the  children  of  pious  parents, 
&c.,  are  brought  to  Christ ;  but  it  is  still  more  glorious  when  the  Word  of  God  is 
received  by  heathen,  either  abroad  or  at  home.  3.  They  were  made  in  great  num- 
bers. Not  in  ones  and  twos,  but  in  multitudes.  It  is  sad  when  a  Church  has  to 
congratulate  itself  that  it  holds  its  own,  and  that  the  additions  fill  the  gaps  made  by 
removals  or  deaths.  No  Church  is  prosperous  which  does  not  keep  pace  with  the 
growth  of  the  population.  The  same  power  which  converted  multitudes  in  Jeru- 
salem can  do  the  same  in  London.  III.  A  great  company  of  priests  were  obedient 
TO  THE  faith.  1.  They  had  everything  to  lose  and  nothing  to  gain,  and  so  their 
conversion  and  adhesion  to  the  Churih  was  a  great  argument  in  favour  of  the 
truth  of  the  gospel.  And  so  it  is  in  any  age  when  notorious  opponents  are  converted. 
2.  All  their  learning  and  prestige  were  now  consecrated  to  the  cause  of  Christ. 
Frequently  the  conversion  of  one  man  or  woman  in  an  influential  position  or  of 
great  ability  is  of  more  value  than  the  conversion  of  scores  of  others,  because  of  the 
higher  vantage  gi'ound  they  occupy.  3.  These,  too,  were  converted  in  great  numbers. 
There  is  nothing  unreasonable  in  this.  The  power  that  can  convert  one  can 
convert  multitudes.  4.  Iheir  conversion  was  thorough,  "  obedient  unto  the 
faith."  (./.  W.  Burn.)  A  great  company  of  the  priests  were  obedient  to  tha 
faith. — The  conversion  of  the  priests  an  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  Christian 
religion: — The  Jewish  priesthood  was  of  great  dignity  and  influence.  The  office  was 
hereditary,  and  its  members  constituted  a  national  aristocracy.  Every  priest  could 
trace  back  his  pedigree  to  Aaron,  and  no  matter  to  what  straits  of  poverty  he  might  be 
brought,  his  social  position  was  unchanged.  He  was  exempt  from  taxation  and  military 
service.  The  number  of  priests  during  the  period  of  our  Lord's  life,  Josephus  esti- 
mated at  twenty  thousand.  For  reasons  plainly  to  be  seen,  the  Jewish  authorities 
arrayed  themselves  in  bitter  hostility  against  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth,  and  the  most 
blood-thirsty  of  His  enemies  were  God's  anointed  priests.     The  political  condition 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  551 

of  Palestine  was  then  strange  and  anomalous.  David's  throne  was  occupied  by  a 
creature  of  the  Emperor  of  Rome,  and  foreign  soldiers  kept  the  Jewish  people  in 
subjection.  The  Church  outrivalled  the  state  in  degeneracy.  Her  priesthood, 
greedy,  dissolute,  and  infidel,  demanded  unlawful  fees  for  every  temple  service,  dis- 
graced the  religion  they  professed,  by  the  inhumanity  and  profligacy  of  their  lives. 
With  such  a  condition  of  tbings,  no  wonder  that  tbe  Son  of  God  met  with  the 
cruelty  that  He  did  :  no  wonder  that  even  the  chief  priests  were  losdest  in  their 
clamours  that  He  should  die.  When  the  Saviour  rose  from  the  dead.  His  scattered 
followers  forthwith  flocked  about  His  standard,  and  began  their  great  work  of  the 
conversion  of  the  world.  The  first  martyr,  Stephen,  laid  down  his  life  for  the  truth. 
On  the  very  eve  of  his  ordination  to  the  office  of  deacon  we  are  told  that  "  the 
Word  of  God  increased,  and  a  great  company  of  the  priests  were  obedient  to  the 
faith."  It  is  no  longer  merely  a  company  of  ignorant  fishermen  and  soft-hearted 
women  who  are  found  to  take  sides  with  the  crucified  Jesus,  but  the  very  class  of 
men  who  could  have  been  least  expected  to  make  such  a  sacrifice.  Surely,  among 
all  the  evidences  afforded  of  the  truth  of  the  Christian  religion,  this  is  one  of 
wonderful  force  and  significance.  Had  one  or  two  priests  yielded  to  the  over- 
whelming proofs  vouchsafed,  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiab,  it  would  have  been  a 
testimony  of  no  little  value  ;  but  how  the  weight  of  testimony  is  increased  when  we 
read  that  a  great  company  of  those  who  occupied  this  high  social  position  aban- 
doned everything,  and  exposed  themselves  to  opposition,  ridicule,  contempt, 
persecution,  and  death,  that  they  might  carry  out  their  convictions  of  duty,  and 
prove,  as  no  men  have  ever  done  more  clearly,  that  the  religion  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  worthy  of  all  acceptation.  Once,  the  contemptuous  question  had  been 
asked  :  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the  I?harisees  beheved  on  Him?  "  (John  vii. 
48).  And  yet,  even  then,  many  "  among  the  chief  rulers  "  already  beUeved  in  Jesus, 
"  but  because  of  the  Hharisees  they  did  not  confess  Him,  lest  they  should  be  put 
out  of  the  synagogue  "  (John  xii.  42,  and  xix.  38).  The  day  was  at  hand  when  "  a 
great  company  of  the  priests  "  would  acknowledge  Jesus  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 
Faith  is  here  put  for  the  Christian  religion,  and  we  are  assured  in  this  brief  state- 
ment that  they  not  only  embraced  the  truths  of  the  gospel  as  an  act  of  the  under- 
standing, but  that  they  pledged  themselves  to  obey  its  requirements.  Surely,  then, 
they  who,  in  our  own  day,  claim  to  be  unbelievers,  ought  to  have  very  substantial 
ground  to  go  upon  before  they  rush  to  the  conclusion  that  the  multitudes  who  have 
embraced  the  Christian  faith,  and  who  have  passed  into  another  world,  cheered  and 
comforted  by  its  promises,  have  all  believed  a  lie  !     {J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8-X5.  And  Stephen,  full  of  faith  and  power,  did  great  wonders  and 
miracles  among  the  people. — The  last  first : — I.  The  points  in  which  Stephen 
WAS  LAST.  1.  His  position  was  entirely  subordinate.  The  deacons  were  appointed 
to  help  the  apostles  in  tbe  lower  part  of  their  functions,  and  even  tbis  they  did  not 
presume  to  do  without  delegation  from  the  apostles.  We  may  imagine,  then,  the 
apostles  retiring  after  the  ordination  to  give  themselves  without  distraction  to  their 
spiritual  exercises.  But  it  was  with  them  as  with  Moses  of  old.  God  took  of  the 
Spirit  which  was  upon  them  and  put  it  on  those  who  were  to  bear  the  burden  of  the 
people  with  tbem.  Stephen,  &c.,  b.  came  the  Eldad  and  Medad  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment. Nay,  Stephen  was  an  Elisha,  upon  whom  a  double  portion  of  their  spirit 
rested.  2.  Stephen  had  probably  never  seen  our  Lord,  but  was  in  all  likelihood  a 
Pentecostal  convert.  Otht^rwise  how  could  sucb  a  man  have  missed  nomination  to 
the  vacant  apostleship  ?  But  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  illustrate  in  him  that  the  know- 
letige  of  Curist  after  the  Spirit  is  the  one  requirement  for  sanctity.  "  Whom 
having  not  seen,  ye  love."  3.  The  apostles  had  forsaken  all  to  follow  Christ,  but 
it  nowhere  appears  that  Stephen  had  gone  through  similar  hardships.  His  fiery 
trials  I'lazed  out  upon  him  all  at  once,  and  the  language  of  our  Lord  concerning  the 
late-caUed  labourers  adapts  itself  with  nicety  in  his  case.  He  could  not  be  said  to 
have  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day.  So  we  learn  that  God  has  varieties 
of  trial,  and  applies  them  to  the  different  characters  of  His  servants.  For  Peter 
there  is  a  loug,  wearing  warfare;  for  John  a  wearisome,  desolate  waiting;  for 
Stephen  the  letting  loose  upon  him  at  the  opening  of  his  career  all  the  hounds  of 
hell  in  one  fell  pack.  Us,  perhaps.  He  subjects  only  to  those  little  crosses  which 
form  the  burden  of  daily  life.  But  we  must  consider  that  in  crosses,  as  well  as 
comforts,  God  chooses  what  is  best  for  us.  It  is  possible  to  reach  a  great  height  of 
sanctity  by  submitting  quietly  and  lovingly  to  ordinary  trials.  II.  The  points  m 
WHICH  he  became  FIRST.     1.  He  seems  to  have  outstripped  the  apostles  in  spiritual 


552  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiP.  vi. 

intelligence,  in  appreciation  of  the  breadth,  comprehensiveness,  and  spirituality  of 
the  Diviue  plans.  He  was  the  niorniug  star  who  ushered  in  the  dawn  of  St.  Paul's 
ministry.  It  is  evident  that  the  theology  of  the  one  was  that  of  the  other.  St. 
Peter  clung  long  to  Jewish  prejudices,  and  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the 
other  apostles  were  further  advanced.  2.  In  ze.il  for  his  Master's  honour,  and 
devotion  to  his  Master's  cause,  Stephen  appears  to  have  outstripped  his  contem- 
poraries. Peter  had  denied  his  Lord,  and  long  after,  at  Antioch,  showed  that  he 
was  not  entirely  emancipated  from  moral  cowardice.  But  Stephen  from  first  to 
last  was  as  bold  as  a  lion.  3.  According  to  the  omen  conveyed  in  his  name  (a 
crown),  he  was  the  first  to  wear  the  crown  of  martyrdom.  For  most  of  the  apostles 
it  was  also  in  reserve,  but  when  they  reached  paradise  they  found  Stephen  already 
crowned.  The  labourer  called  at  the  eleventh  hour  had  received  his  wages  before 
those  called  in  the  morning.  4.  In  the  brilliancy  and  number  of  his  miracles 
Stephen  rivalled  if  he  did  not  outstrip  the  apostles  (ver.  8).  Lessons  :  1.  We  should 
see  contentedly  and  thankfully  many  alterations  made  in  the  old  platform  of 
religious  thought.  These  are  days  of  progress,  and  old-fashioned  and  high- 
principled  people  are  made  very  sore  by  novelties.  In  this  adherence  to  old  ways 
and  thoughts  there  is  danger,  while  at  the  same  time  there  is  a  safeguard.  Still  it 
is  very  necessary  that  sound  conservatism  does  not  degenerate  into  bigotry.  Not 
every  new  idea  and  practice  turned  up  by  the  spade  of  modern  inquiry  is  bad.  And 
as  for  keeping  the  platform  of  popular  theology  what  it  was  half  a  century  ago,  it 
is  impossible.  So  we  can  imagine  our  early  Christians  jealous  for  Christ's  apostles, 
saying,  "I  do  not  like  this  Stephen  :  he  carries  matters  too  far;  his  teaching  about 
the  temple  is  audacious."  Yet  to  Stephen's  view  the  apostles  came  round  in  time. 
2.  It  may  be  a  stimulus  to  our  will  in  the  pursuit  of  holiness  to  remember  that 
our  last  shall  be  first.  Hitherto,  maybe,  we  have  made  little,  if  any,  proficiency 
in  religion.  But  if  now  we  are  willing  to  redeem  the  time,  we  may  advance.  The 
blood  and  grace  of  Christ  are  forces  as  fresh  as  ever.  {Dean  Goulburn.)  Stephen's 
miracles  and  controversies : — It  is  observable  that  no  express  mention  is  made  of  his 
performance  of  deacon's  functions.  He  shot  ahead  of  his  position,  and  is  only 
known  as  the  brave  champion  and  first  martyr  of  the  cause  of  Christ.  Not  that  we 
must  infer  that  he  was  neglectful  of  the  duties  of  his  calling.  His  routine  of  daily 
duty  needed  not  recording.  I.  His  mikacles.  Observe  how  carefully  we  are 
guarded  against  the  supposition  that  he  was  a  mere  wonder  worker.  The  liistorian 
does  not  merely  record  the  miracles,  but  tells  us  of  the  secret  of  them,  "  Stephen, 
full  of  faith,"  (fee.  The  man  who  acts  in  faith,  whether  he  works  a  miracle  or  only 
achieves  some  great  enterprise  for  Christ,  simply  lays  hold  of  the  power  of  God. 
So  in  the  triumphs  of  grace.  If  I  win  a  victory  over  a  besetting  sin,  or  am  brought 
out  unharmed  from  temptation,  it  is  not  in  my  own  strength.  The  Bible  knows 
nothing  of  inherent  strength.  The  first  element  of  all  power  is  self-distrust.  The 
vine  branch  has  no  sap,  and  consequently  no  power  of  fructification  of  its  own  ;  the 
sap  must  be  sent  up  fiom  the  stem.  A  little  child  is  quite  incompetent  to  a  long 
walk ;  but  if  in  confessed  impotence  it  throws  itself  into  his  father's  arms,  he  will 
carry  it  through.  Sanciification,  in  its  source  and  efficient  cause,  is  no  more  inherent 
than  justification.  "In  the  Lord  have  I rigliteousness  and  strength."  II.  His  con- 
TKOVEESiES.  It  was  Said  that  in  Jerusalem  there  were  480  synagogues.  Among 
these  several  would  be  appropriated  to  Hellenistic  Jews  of  whom  Stephen  was 
probably  one,  and  thus  his  early  associations  as  well  as  his  office  would  bring  him 
in  contact  with  the  members  of  these  synagogues.  It  is  worth  noting  that  among 
his  opponents  were  representatives  of  each  of  the  three  continents  then  known. 
First  that  of  the  Libertines  or  freedmen,  i.e.,  Jews  whose  ancestors  had  been 
carried  captive  to  Kome  by  Pompey  and  others,  and  had  there,  in  process  of  time, 
been  emancipated.  Many  of  them  would  migrate  to  Jerusalem,  and  found  this 
synagogue  representing  the  Italian  Jews.  Cyrene  and  Alexandria  were  cities  of 
North  Africa.  In  the  former  the  Jews  were  a  fourth  of  the  population.  It  was  a 
Cyrenian  Jew  who  bore  our  Lord's  cross,  and  another  joined  in  laying  hands  on 
Paul.  In  Alexandria  two  out  of  its  five  districts  were  inhabited  by  Jews.  These 
African  Hebrews  would  have  their  representatives  in  the  holy  city,  who  would  build 
their  own  church  and  have  their  own  congregation.  The  Asiatic  opponents  of 
Stephen  would  be  furnished  by  the  representatives  of  the  Jews  in  Cilicia  and  Asia. 
The  mention  of  the  former  is  significant.  For  St.  Paul  was  a  native  of  Tarsus  in 
Cilicia,  and  according  to  tradition  he  appeared  as  a  disputant  against  Stephen.  But 
the  result  of  the  controversy  was  humiliating  to  Stephen's  antagonists.  ' '  They  were 
not  able  to  resist,"  &c.  (ver.  10).     No  wonder  Christ  had  stricken  controversialists 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  553 

dumb  by  "  the  mouth  and  wisdom  "  He  promised  to  His  disciples.  As  soon  as 
Stephen's  opponents  felt  his  irresistibility  his  impeachment  was  arranged.  Lessons: 
1.  The  conditions  of  successful  controversy.  The  controversy  which  carries  the 
inner  convictions  does  not  necessarily  extort  open  confession.  This  may  be  with- 
held from  pride  or  prejudice  as  here.  How  very  few  controversies  are  more  than  a 
skirmish  of  words  in  which  both  parties  are  exasperateil  !  Yet  truth  ought  to  be 
able  to  win  its  way  by  its  own  force.  The  three  qualifications  for  controversy  are, 
"  a  mouth,"  or  power  of  expression,  "  wisdom,"  or  power  of  argument,  and  lying 
deeper  and  giving  effect  to  both,  "  a  spirit — the  Spirit  of  your  Father."  In  some 
modern  controversies,  nothing  but  "  the  mouth  "  is  exliibited,  occasionally  "  wis- 
dom," but  it  was  "the  Spirit  "  as  well  as  "  the  wisdom  "  by  which  Stephen  spoke 
which  his  adversaries  were  unable  to  resist.  The  naked  logic  of  the  intellect  wiU 
not  by  itself  convince,  but  the  logic  that  is  seconded  by  unction  carries  with  it 
■wonderful  weight.  2.  We  may  learn  from  the  fact  that  Stephen's  miracles  formed 
but  an  introduction  to  his  controversies,  breaking  open  a  passage  for  his  arguments 
to  reach  the  minds  and  consciences  of  men.  Tell  me  not  of  an  ecclesiastical 
authority  whose  dictates  are  to  be  received  on  its  own  ijjse  dixit.  Stephen  did  not 
say  after  cleansing  a  few  lepers,  &c.,  "  These  miracles  prove  that  we  are  seut  from 
God:  now  listen  to  us  at  the  peril  of  your  souls."  He  and  his  colleagues  came 
down  into  the  lowly  valley  of  disputation  ;  they  made  a  public  appeal  to  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  and  showed  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ  from  documents  admitted  by  their 
opponents.  When  men  who  could  produce  miracles  in  favour  of  their  teaching 
entered  the  arena  of  controversy,  how  can  any  modern  communion  which  has  not 
the  attestation  of  miracles  make  a  claim  to  be  believed  on  its  own  unsupported 
testimony?  (Ibid.)  The  first  Christian  martyr : — The  Book  of  Acts  is  composed 
upon  a  definite  principle,  to  wit,  what  Jesus  continued  to  do  and  teach  after  Hia 
ascension  through  the  instrumentality  of  His  followers.  In  the  first  five  chapters 
this  principle  is  illustrated  in  the  doings  and  sayings  of  Peter.  But  when  another 
steps  on  the  arena  in  whom  this  truth  is  shown  in  a  stronger  light  Peter  is  at  once 
dropped;  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  chapters  Stephen  it  is  that  occupies  the  forefront, 
then  Philip,  then  Paul.  The  avowed  object  of  the  writer  is  not  to  show  us  Peter, 
but  the  "  hand  of  the  Lord  "  ;  and  His  hand  is  here  more  distinctly  seen  in  Stephen 
than  in  Peter.  Let  us  look  at  Stephen  as — I.  A  man  (ver.  3).  1.  He  was  an  honest 
man,  and  had  a  reputation  for  honesty.  Some  people  are  honest,  but  they  push 
bargains  so  hard  that  their  honesty  is  suspected.  "  Provide  things  honest  in  the 
sight  of  all  men."  Not  only  be  upright,  but  convince  others  of  your  uprightness. 
"  So  shalt  thou  find  favour  and  good  understanding  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man." 
"  Good  understanding  "  :  on  the  margin,  "  good  success."  An  unsullied  reputation 
for  integrity  helps  a  man  forward  even  in  business — it  wins  the  confidence  of  the 
public.  2.  Underlying  hi?  honesty  was  his  goodness — he  was  spoken  well  of  by  all 
•who  knew  him.  Paul  afterwards  said  that  a  deacon  "must  have  a  good  report  of 
them  which  are  without,"  i.e.,  he  should  not  only  stand  well  in  the  family  and  in 
the  Church,  but  in  the  world.  We  should  first  be  light ;  we  should  then  "  shine  as 
lights  in  the  world."  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men  that  they  may  see  your 
good  works,  and  glorify  " — yourselves  ?  No  ;  but  "  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 
I  can  look  at  the  wall,  but  not  through  the  wall ;  but  I  can  look  at  and  through  the 
■window.  And  a  good  character  should  be  clear  as  glass,  transparent  as  light — a 
character  men  can  not  only  look  at,  but  look  through  and  see  God  beyond.  II.  A 
Chkistian  (ver.  5).  1.  He  was  "  full  of  faith  " — a  strong,  healthy  believer.  Some 
of  his  fellow  members  were  exceedingly  weak  in  the  faith,  shy,  timid,  vacillating ; 
but  Stephen's  spiritual  life  was  deep  and  vigorous.  He  put  unbounded  confidence 
in  the  new  religion  ;  he  "  held  fast  his  profession."  "  By  faith  the  elders  obtained 
a  good  report."  Not  a  great  report,  perhaps,  but  a  good  one.  Otber  factors,  such 
as  learning  and  riches,  are  necessary  to  obtain  a  great  report.  But  faith  alone,  if 
strong,  will  secure  you  a  good  report,  which  is  better  than  a  great  one.  By  this 
Stephen  "  still  speaketh,"  and  is  still  spoken  of.  2.  He  was  "  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost "  ;  and  to  be  "  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  "  is  better  than  to  be  "  full  of  faith." 
Faith  at  best  is  only  the  human  aspiring  after  the  Divine  ;  but  to  be  "full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost "  is  for  the  human  to  possess  the  Divine.  To  trust  God  is  good,  to 
have  God  is  better.  One  maybe  "full  of  faith"  and  yet  not  "full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost."  Many  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  were  "full  of  faith,"  but  none  of  them 
were  "full  of  the  HolyGbost" — this  is  the  sole  prerogative  of  saints  under  the 
New  Testament.  The  faith  of  Abraham  has  never  bi  en  excelled,  but  he  fell  into 
sins  which  could  not  be  tolerated  in  the  Christian  Chuich.     The  apost'es  before  the 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.vi. 

Pentecost  were  "  full  of  faith,"  but  on  the  Pentecost  were  they  "  filled  with  the 
Spirit " ;  and  as  a  natural  consequence  a  process  of  refinement  was  then  commenced 
unknown  to  the  religious  experience  of  the  Jewish  Church.  Under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment the  Holy  Ghost  was  "  upon  "  men,  but  under  the  New  He  is  "  in  "  men — a 
sweeteaing,  hallowing  influence,  refining  the  very  fibre  of  our  being.  The  iron 
cold  has  the  same  properties  as  the  iron  heated,  but  the  one  is  black  and  dull ;  the 
other  is  white  and  vivid — the  fire  imparts  to  it  its  own  qualities.  Thus  Stephen 
was  pervaded  by  the  refining  fire  of  God.  His  whole  being  was  transfused  with 
celestial  brightuess,  and  therefore  his  character  grew  in  fineness  of  texture.  III. 
A  DEACON  (ver.  8).  1.  Tbe  fifth  verse  says  he  was  "full  of  faith,"  the  eighth 
(according  to  the  best  MSS.)  that  he  was  "  full  of  grace."  "  Grace  "  means  favour. 
In  its  theological  sense  it  signifies  the  Divine  favour  shown  to  sinners.  Eut  as  used 
in  the  context  it  signifies  the  favour  shown  by  Stephen  to  those  with  whom  he 
came  in  contact.  "  Grace  "  some  suppose  to  have  the  same  etymology  as  "  grease." 
Be  that  as  it  may ;  but  the  body  when  well  "  greased  "  is  lithe  and  nimble,  easy  in 
its  carriage,  graceful  in  its  movements.  Now,  what  grease  does  to  the  body,  srace 
does  to  the  soul.  Stephen  was  elected  to  distribute  the  charity  of  the  Church. 
How  did  he  do  it  ?  Did  he  haughtily  impress  the  humble  recipients  of  his  bounty 
with  their  iuferiority  ?  Certainly  not.  He  did  it  with  grace — beautiful  ease  and 
comfortable  homeliness.  Modern  Christians  may  here  learn  a  valuable  lesson — not 
to  insult  the  objects  of  their  beneficence  in  the  very  act  of  succouring  them. 
"  Draw  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungry."  Thy  money?  Not  only  that,  but  thy  soul. 
Give  alms  by  all  means,  but  give  it  with  grace.  "  Let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what 
thy  right  hand  doeth."  2.  Being  thus  "  full  of  grace,"  be  was  of  necessity  "  full  of 
power."  The  man  devoid  of  grace  cannot  in  the  nature  of  things  wield  much 
influence.  But  the  man  habitually  kind,  polite,  and  obliging  acquires  an  influence 
subtle  but  irresistible  in  the  sphere  in  which  he  moves.  Judging  by  the  outward 
show,  men  are  apt  to  mistake  vehemence  for  power.  Lightning  is  the  strong  thing 
in  the  popular  imagination  because  of  the  flash  and  thunder  accompanying  it.  But 
gravitation,  whose  voice  is  never  heard,  is  the  central  force  holding  countless  worlds 
in  its  grip.  In  like  manner  the  man  of  wealth,  learning,  eloquence — the  man  who 
can  flash  and  roar — is  usually  considered  the  powerful  factor.  But  scan  society 
more  narrowly,  and  you  will  perceive  that  none  of  those  things  wield  so  much  true 
power  as  grace.  3.  *' He  did  great  wonders  and  miracles  among  the  people."  The 
same  laws  govern  society  now  as  then — get  the  grace  and  you  will  infallibly  obtain 
the  power.  The  great  need  of  the  present  age  is  not  physical  but  moral  wonders. 
Think  of  our  trains,  steam  packets,  electric  telegraphs,  and  telephones:  what 
physical  miracles  can  outshine  these  ?  It  is  within  the  reach  of  all  to  do  wonders 
and  to  be  wonders  in  goodness.  IV.  A  disputant  (ver.  10).  1.  They  were  "not 
able  to  resist  the  wisdom  with  which  he  spake."  He  proved  victorious  in  the  debate, 
for  two  reasons.  First,  he  was  evidently  a  practised  logician.  His  Greek  culture 
and  Hebrew  studies  made  him  a  man  of  great  resource  in  argument.  His  speecli 
shows  him  to  be  a  man  of  keen  philosophic  insight.  The  second  and  chief  reason 
was  that  he  had  truth  on  his  side.  The  synagogue  of  the  Cilician  Jews  is  men- 
tioned— the  very  synagogue  of  which  young  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  a  member.  This 
fact,  coupled  with  the  profound  interest  he  took  in  the  trial  of  Stephen,  demon- 
strates conclusively  that  he  was  present.  Young  Saul  would  unquestionably  be 
quite  a  match  to  Stephen  in  a  bare  trial  of  dialectic  skill.  But  Stephen,  backed  by 
the  truth,  was  too  strong  even  for  Saul.  A  weak  mind,  supported  by  a  great  truth, 
can  bring  about  the  total  discomfiture  of  the  stoutest  adversary.  The  paramount 
duty  of  every  public  teacher  is  to  seek  "  to  be  filled  with  wisdom,"  that  is,  with 
good,  sound,  solid  information.  No  amount  of  eloquence  will  make  up  for  lack  of 
matter.  God  can  "  create  out  of  nothing  "  ;  and  doubtless  He  has  blessed  sermons 
with  little  or  nothing  in  them.  In  Genesis  we  read  but  once  that  He  "  created  out  of 
nothing  "  ;  but  we  read  repeatedly  that  He  "  created  out  of  something  " — the 
author  being  very  shy  of  using  the  stronger  word.  That  is  the  usual  method  of  the 
Divine  operation  still.  "  The  preacher  sought  to  find  out  acceptable  words,"  but 
"  the  preacher  "  also  "  was  wise  and  taught  the  people  knowledge."  The  late  Eev. 
Henry  llees,  the  great  Welsh  preacher,  being  a«'."d  which  kind  of  sermon  he 
thought  most  likely  the  Holy  Ghost  would  bless  ;4'  the  salvation  of  the  hearers, 
answered,  "  The  sermon  most  likely  to  effect  their  salvation  without  Him."  2.  His 
"  spirit  "  was  as  noteworthy  as  his  wisdom.  In  a  written  sermon  style  is  of  great 
consequence.  Now,  what  style  is  to  a  written,  the  spirit  is  to  a  spoken  sermon. 
Stephen  spoke  with  a  marvellous  sj)irit — he  imparted  warmth,  beauty,  life,  force  to 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  555 

his  arguments.  3,  "  They  were  not  able  to  resist  the  wisdom  and  the  spirit."  The 
■wisdom  alone  the.v  could.  Dry  argument  skims  only  the  surface  of  our  nature,  it 
does  not  stir  the  depths.  "  Intellectual  preaching  "  seldom  moves  people.  More- 
over, they  could  resist  the  "  spirit  "  alone  ;  and  in  this  day  of  sensationalism  it  is 
of  some  moment  that  we  remember  it.  Mere  "hwyl,"  however  delightful  at  the 
time,  leaves  our  hearers  securely  immured  in  sin.  But  the  wisdom  and  the  spirit 
joined  will  prove  irresistible.  Alas !  to  the  cavilling  Jews  it  was  the  savour  of 
death.  If  they  could  not  resist  his  preaching,  they  could  and  did  resist  his  person. 
"  They  suborned  men — they  stirred  up  the  people—  they  caught  him  and  brought 
him  to  the  council."  V,  A  peisoner  (ver.  11,  &c.).  1.  The  speech  he  made  serves 
to  show — (1)  That  he  was  profoundly  versed  in  the  Hebrew  literature.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  it  was  delivered  at  the  spur  of  the  moment  under  circumstances 
the  most  embarrassing.  I  am  told  that  there  are  twelve  discrepancies  in  it.  How 
to  account  for  them  ?  Simply  that  Stephen  was  obliged  to  address  his  judges  from 
memory  without  the  chance  of  correcting  himself  by  reference  to  the  sacred  Scrip- 
tures. Is  it  a  cause  of  wonder  that,  in  a  review  so  minute  and  so  searching,  the 
valiant  deacon  should  commit  a  few  trivial  mistakes  ?  (2)  His  Greek  culture  and 
sympathy.  It  would  be  almost  a  matter  of  sheer  impossibility  for  a  man  born  and 
bred  in  Palestine  to  deliver  it.  Native  Jews  like  Peter  and  John  dogmatise;  Hel- 
lenistic Jews  like  Stephen  and  Paul  philosophise,  (a)  Stephen  presents  the  council 
with  a  lucid  and  succinct  philosophy  of  the  national  history.  The  same  principle 
he  proves  to  be  running  through  Jewish  history  from  the  call  of  Abraham  to  the 
building  of  the  temple.  What  is  that  principle?  That  true  religion  is  independent 
of  any  tixed  rite  or  particular  locality,  and  that  religious  progress  has  always  meant 
religious  change,  eveiy  change,  however,  involving  progress  on  the  part  of  God,  but 
stern  resistance  on  the  part  of  man.  What  if  God  hath  purposed  to  make  another 
great  change  in  the  establishment  of  Christianity,  and  wiiat  if  the  Jews  like  their 
forefathers  were  making  a  resolute  stand  against  it  1  (h)  The  critics  are  much 
exercised  to  know  how  his  speech  can  be  viewed  as  a  refutation  of  the  charge  of 
blasphemy.  But  they  overlook  the  fact  that  he  does  not  defend  hiaiself  except 
incidentally.  His  supreme  desire  is  to  vindicate  not  himself,  but  the  truth.  Herein 
Stephen,  the  martyr  of  Christianity,  contrasts  favourably  with  Socrates,  the  martyr 
of  philosophy — both  alike  indicted  for  blasphemy.  Socrates,  to  his  honour  be  it 
said,  scorned  to  stoop  to  any  base  or  unworthy  artifice  to  save  his  life ;  his  thoughts 
nevertheless  continually  reverted  to  himself.  The  first  personal  pronoun  bristles 
through  his  famous  apology.  But  Stephen  has  neither  "  I "  nor  "  me  "  on  his  lips 
so  much  as  once — he  wholly  forgets  himself  in  his  intense  eagerness  to  expound  to 
the  council  the  formative  principles  and  historical  career  of  the  kingdom  of  God. 
2.  But  if  his  speech  was  remarkable,  his  bodily  appearance  was  more  remarkable 
still  (ver.  15).  (1)  Solomon  says,  "  A  man's  wisdom  maketh  his  face  to  shine,  and 
the  boldness  of  his  face  shall  be  changed."  Notice  the  young  man  before  his 
admission  to  college— his  countenance  is  marked  by  a  certain  degree  of  heaviness 
and  opacity,  is  devoid  of  expression  for  the  simple  reason  that  there  is  behind  but 
little  to  be  expressed.  Observe  him  again  at  the  termination  of  his  course — his 
features  are  illuminated,  his  eyes  flash  pure  intelligence.  Put  light  within  a  marble 
vase  and  it  grows  translucent.  And  "  the  spirit  of  man  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord  " 
— light  the  candle  within  and  the  face  without  will  shine.  (2)  Now  if  wisdom  is 
thus  able  to  radiate  through  the  veil  of  flesh,  how  much  more  goodness,  and 
especially  goodness  and  wisdom  together  ?  You  can  tell  a  good  man  by  his  very 
face.  "They  took  knowledge  of  them  that  they  had  been  with  Jesns."  That 
wickedness  stamps  itself  on  the  features  is  an  universally  acknowledged  fact.  On 
the  other  hand,  goodness  restores  grace  to  the  faded  features.  Many  men  and 
women,  though  plain  enough  from  an  artistic  standpoint,  possess  indescribable 
charm.  Believe  me,  young  people,  nothing  will  so  improve  your  looks  as  deep 
piety.  It  is  significant  that  the  word  translated  "  good"  in  the  New  Testament  may 
be  also  rendered  "  beautiful."  Stephen  was  "  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost," 
and  therefore  "they  beheld  his  face  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  angel."  (3)  But 
is  this  all  ?  I  believe  not.  When  Moses  returned  from  Sinai,  "  the  skin  of  his  face 
shone  so  that  the  children  of  Israel  could  not  stedfastly  behold  it."  And  the 
angelic  lustre  on  Stephen's  face  was  doubtless  miraculous.  But  here  as  in  other 
instances,  the  miraculous,  so  far  from  obscuring  the  natural,  serves  to  illustrate  it. 
It  brings  out  into  clearer  prominence  a  law  which,  were  it  not  for  the  transfiguration 
of  Stephen,  of  Moses,  and  of  Christ,  would  escape  our  attention — that  genuine 
goodness  is  a  Divine  light  within,  whose  inevitable  tendency  it  is  to  make  luminous 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

both  soul  and  body.  In  regeneration  this  Divine  spark  is  struck,  and  sanctification 
is  only  the  theological  name  for  transfigaration.  "Be  ye  transformed  in  the  spirit 
of  your  mind  "  :  literally,  transfigured — the  very  same  word  that  is  used  to  describe 
the  transfiguration  of  Christ.  The  Divine  brightness  first  makes  luminous  the  dark, 
dull,  obtuse  soul,  and  then  the  dark,  dull,  obtuse  body.  But  more  especially  is  this 
spiritual  Inminousuess  to  be  witnessed  upon  deathbeds.  Friends  beautiful  in  life 
are  still  more  beautiful  in  death.  Their  faces  seem  to  catch  the  pure  beams  of 
eternity  like  mountain  tops  the  first  light  of  day.  VI.  A  jlvktyb.  1.  Look  at  the 
mad  fury  of  his  hearers.  "  They  were  cut  to  the  heart,"  "  sawn  asunder."  The 
prophets  of  old  had  been  "sawn  asunder"  by  their  stif'fnecked  forefathers;  now 
they  are  "  sawn  asunder  "  by  the  powerful  ministry  of  Stephen.  They  further 
"gnashed  on  him  with  their  teeth."  Only  in  one  other  connection  is  this  strong 
phrase  used — "there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  It  seems  as  though 
the  uncontrollable  fury  of  the  damned  seized  the  motley  crowd.  Hell  seemed 
broken  loose  on  the  streets  of  Jerusalem.  2.  But  if  the  rabble  were  wild  with  rage, 
Stephen  himself  whs  calm  and  collected.  (1)  He  first  offered  a  prayer  on  his  own 
behalf.  He  next  prayed  on  behalf  of  his  murderers.  So  deeply  had  he  drunk  of 
the  spirit  of  the  Saviour,  that  he  unconsciously  quotes  His  very  words.  Nowhere 
outside  the  religion  of  the  New  Testament  do  we  behold  such  majesty  and  meekness 
in  the  grim  presence  of  death.  Pagans  may  die  heroically — Christians  only  die 
forgivingly.  (2)  No  wonder  that  such  a  man  should  see  "  into  heaven."  His  body 
was  in  a  state  of  incipient  transfiguration ;  his  eye,  therefore,  supernaturally 
strengthened,  pierced  beyond  the  azure,  and  swejDt  the  vast  places  of  eternity.  Men 
in  the  present  day  will  receive  only  the  testimony  of  the  senses,  and  because  they 
see  not  heaven  and  hell  they  will  not  believe.  But  are  they  sure  th«  supposed 
weakness  of  the  proof  lies  not  in  the  weakness  of  their  vision?  Step'aen  looking 
stedfastly  into  heaven,  "  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing  on  the  right  hand 
of  God."  And  if  credit  is  to  be  given— and  why  not  ? — to  the  dying  t^stimony  of 
saints,  his  is  not  a  solitary  case.  (3)  But  not  only  he  saw  into  heaven,  but  heaven 
itself  was  "  opened."  There  was  an  elevation  of  the  human — there  was  also  a 
condescension  of  the  Divine.  Under  the  Old  Dispensation  "  the  way  into  the 
Holiest  of  All  was  not  made  manifest";  but  now  heaven  is  "opened."  "After 
this  I  looked,  and  behold,  a  door  was  opened  in  heaven  " — standing  open.  Since 
Christ  entered,  the  doors  have  been  standing  open — to  offer  shelter  and  home  to 
the  wearv  and  persecuted  pilgrims.  "  I  see  .  .  .  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the 
right  hand  of  God."  This  is  the  only  instance  except  twice  in  the  Apocalypse  that 
Jesus  after  His  ascension  is  called  Son  of  Man.  Why  called  so  here  ?  Because  He 
was  an  object  clearly  discerned  by  the  bodily  eyes  of  Stephen.  To  the  eyes  of  faith 
He  is  Jesus  or  Christ  or  Lord  ;  to  the  eyes  of  the  body  He  will  for  ever  be  the  Son 
of  Man.  When  St.  John  thinks  or  writes  of  Him,  He  is  always  the  Son  of  God  ; 
but  when  St.  John  is  rapt  up  in  vision  He  is  the  Son  of  Man.  When  He  fit  st  ascended 
He  "  sat "  to  show  His  indisputable  right  to  be  there  ;  but  having  established 
His  right,  He  sits  or  stands  as  occasion  requires.  Stephen  sees  Him  standing — 
eagerly  watching  this  momentous  crisis  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  And  with  this 
magnificent  panorama  floating  before  his  view,  the  intrepid  mart.vr  "fell  asleep  " — 
"  to  sleep,  aye,  perchance  to  dream."  This  sleep  of  Stephen  has  given  to  our 
burial  grounds  the  Christian  name  of  "  cemeteries " — they  are  places  where  our 
friends  sleep;  and  "if  they  sleep,  they  will  do  well."  (-/.  Cynddiilan  Jones,  D.D.) 
•'  Grace  and pincer  "  (K.V.) : — These  two  words,  "grace  and  power,"  are  closely  con- 
nected. Their  union  here  is  significant.  It  was  not  the  intellect,  or  the  eloquence, 
or  the  activity  of  St.  Stephen  which  made  him  powerful  among  the  people,  and 
crowned  his  labours  with  such  success.  It  was  his  abundant  grace.  Eloquence, 
and  learning,  active  days  and  laborious  nights,  are  good  and  necessary  things.  God 
uses  them  and  demands  them  from  His  people.  He  chooses  to  use  human  agencies, 
and  therefore  demands  that  the  human  agents  shall  give  Him  of  their  best,  and  not 
offer  to  Him  the  blind  and  lame  of  their  flock.  But  these  things  will  be  utterly  useless 
and  ineffective  apart  from  Christ  and  the  power  of  His  grace.  (G.  T.  Stol;es,  D.D.) 
Then  there  arose  certain  of  the  synag'ogue  ...  of  the  Libertines,  and  Cyrenians, 
and  AleKandrians,  and  of  them  of  Cilicia  and  of  Asia,  disputing  with  Stephen. — 
Stephen  disputing  in  the  synofiogues  : — I.  The  sphere.  Amongst  the  four  hundred 
and  eighty  synagogues  which  existed  in  Jerusalem  at  this  time  some  were  fre- 
quented exclusively  by  the  Jews  of  the  Dispersion.  Families  which  had  removed 
from  the  same  region  of  heathenism  to  settle  for  devotion  or  trade  in  the  holy  city 
clustered  together  for  daily  prajer  in  the  same  congregation;  exactly  as  to  this 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  557 

day  in  Jeru9alem  Spanish  Jews  (called  Sepharclim),  who  have  dwelt  there  since 
1497,  are  only  to  be  fouml  in  their  four  synagogues,  and  German  and  Polish  Jews 
(called  Ashkenazini)  in  others.  Here  they  fall  naturally  into  three  divisions.  1. 
The  Libertines  (Libertini),  or  Freed-men  from  Eome.  Some  ninety  years  had  now 
passed  since  Pompey  carried  off  a  multitude  of  Jewish  captives;  and  their  descend- 
ants, most  of  them  manumitted  by  their  masters,  htd  either  settled  in  the 
Trastavere,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tiber,  or  been  banished  from  Italy.  It  is 
possitde  that  many  of  the  four  thousand  whom  Tiberius  deporttd  to  Jardinia  (ad. 
19)  had  found  their  way  to  their  own  land.  2.  The  Jews  from  North  Africa,  from 
Alexandria,  and  Cyrene,  the  capital  of  Libya,  and  where  Tripoli  now  stands,  both 
of  which  swarmed  with  Hebrews.  3.  Asiatic  Jews,  from  the  province  known  in 
official  language  as  "Asia,"  and  alwajs  called  so  in  the  New  Testament,  from 
CiUcia,  whose  capital  gave  birth  to  Saul.  II.  With  these  various  representatives 
OF  Hellenxsed  Judaism  the  Church  now  came  tor  the  first  time  in  contact. 
The  elevation  of  Stephen  had  this  for  its  result,  that  his  spiritual  and  intellectual 
gifts  found  a  wider  and  more  public  sphere.  His  duties  brought  him  in  contact 
with  the  poor  brethren  of  his  own  section  of  the  Church,  and  through  them  with 
their  unbelieving  neighbours.  These  opportunities  he  used  for  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel.  Stephen  was  much  more  than  an  almoner.  He  was  a  deep  student  of 
tbe  Old  Testament,  a  theologian  of  unusual  insight,  a  powerful  reasoner,  and  an 
advanced  Christian.  In  him  we  first  find  those  gifts  of  healing  which  Jesus  had 
given  the  apostles  exercised  by  a  man  who  was  no  apostle.  In  him,  too,  we  find 
the  promise  fulfilled  which  had  hitherto  been  fulfilled  to  Peter  (Luke  xxi.  15).  His 
manner  of  speech,  however,  was  unlike  that  of  Peter.  Peter  was  a  witness,  and 
preached  by  witness-bearing.  Stephen  was  a  student;,  and  preached  by  exposition 
and  controversy.  These  synagogues,  to  which  no  doubt  he  belonged,  were  homes 
of  leari)ing  and  bigotry.  Intense  enough  and  terribly  sincere  were  the  disputants 
whom  Stephen  encountered,  but  proud,  narrow,  self-righteous,  and  bitter ;  just  the 
men  to  argue  themselves  into  a  bad  temper,  and,  when  beaten  in  logic,  to  fall  to 
abuse.  III.  We  are  left  to  gather  the  subject  of  dispute  from  the  result. 
From  the  charge  brought  against  Stephen,  from  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses,  and 
from  his  own  defence,  we  gather  that  that  great  question  was  the  bearing  of  the 
new  faith  on  the  old  system.  1.  In  his  earliest  sermons  Peter  had  hinted  that  the 
advent  of  Jesus,  His  passion  and  resurrection,  formed  the  consummation  towards 
■which  Mosaism  pointed,  the  accomplishment  of  the  great  hope  which  all  the  pro- 
pbets  had  foretold,  and  for  which  Isra^^l  waited.  This  constructive  teaching  was  not 
unpopular,  and  orthodox  Jews  did  not  cease  to  be  so  upon  baptism.  Up  to  this  time 
the  question  had  not  been  raised,  What  if  the  Jewisti  hierarchy  and  commonwealth 
reject  it?  Now,  however,  it  was  getting  to  be  not  unlikely  that  the  Sanhedrin 
might  excommunicate  the  Church.  Suppose  it  did,  was  that  to  be  conclusive  against 
the  Church?  Must  the  new  economy  be  fettered  by  the  limitations  of  the  old? 
Nay,  did  not  the  very  coming  of  Him  to  whom  the  whole  symbolic  ritual  pointed 
require  its  abolition,  and  initiate  of  necessity  a  new  wor>hip  ?  2.  How  far  Stephen 
went  in  this  directi^m  it  is  impossible  to  tell,  but  on  it  his  face  was  set.  He  was  the 
first  man  who  dared  to  think  that  the  gospel  was  a  Divine  step  forward,  which 
existing  institutions  might  refuse  to  accept,  and  in  that  case  have  to  be  dispensed 
with.  He  probably  went  a  good  way  in  depreciation  of  the  Mosaic  system.  To  be 
sure  the  false  witnesses  misrepresented  him  as  his  Master  was  misrepresented. 
Still  Stephen  must  have  said  somt  thing  like  it,  nor  is  it  hard  to  guess  in  what  sense 
he  said  it.  The  whole  of  Mosaic  worship  on  its  external  national  side  was  anchored 
on  the  rock  on  which  the  temple  stood.  There  was  nowhere  else  any  altar,  priest- 
hood, lie.  Moreover,  the  current  faith  of  the  people  believed  in  all  thi^  external 
system,  and  in  little  else.  So  long  as  that  stood,  God  was  propitious  and  Israel 
blest;  no  matter  how  full  the  temple  was  of  cheating  or  Jeru;al  m  of  uncleanness. 
This  was  the  svstem  which  threatened  to  reject  the  gospel.  As  it  had  slain  Christ, 
it  seemed  about  to  cut  off  from  its  fellowship  Cbrist's  Church.  What  did  I'ecent 
events  prognosticate?  The  downfall  of  Christ's  cause  over  the  temple  system? 
Stephen  had  read  the  history  of  his  nation  with  other  eyes  than  those  of  the  rabbis. 
Underneath  all  the  changes  of  Hebrew  story  he  had  learned  to  trace  a  Divine  pro- 
gress towards  some  spiritual  end.  He  had  not  found  in  this  latest  phase  of  national 
reigious  life  such  a  finality  as  his  countrymen  dreamed  of.  The  most  material, 
local,  and  unspiritual  of  all  forms  of  Hebrew  worship  did  not  seem  the  form  likely 
to  be  everlasting.  But  one  thing  he  had  found  to  mark  the  whole  of  his  ancestral 
history.     As  olien  as  God  had  led  Israel  forward  through  a  moment  of  change  into 


558  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  VL 

a  fresh  ppiritual  epoch  of  blessing,  so  often  had  His  purpose  been  rejected  by  the 
bulk  of  Israel.     This  they  were  doing  now,  by  idolising  a  material  temple   and 
rejecting  a  spiritual  Christ.     Here  is  the  key  to  Stephen's  long  defence,  which 
maintained — 1.  That  a  mode  of  worship  limited  to  a  single  spot  and  a  fixed  ritual 
was  by  no  means  essential  to  God's  service,  but  had  been  late  in  its  origin  and 
temporary  in  its  purpose — being  only  one  most  recent  stage  in   a  very  long  and 
gradual   process   of   Divine  manifestation.      2.  That  at   every   critical  turning  in 
Israel's  history  Israel  had  mistaken  the  leadings  of  God,  and  resisted  those  who 
were  sent  to  save  it.     {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)        And  they  were  not  able  to  resist 
the  wisdom  and  the  spirit  by  which  he  spake. — Tlie  source  oj  ministerial  jmioer :  — 
It  is  impossible  to  listen  to  the  ministrations  of  others  or  to  watch  carefully  our  own 
without  perceiving  great  inequalities  in  respect  of  power.     You  will  observe  many 
devoted  men  who  are  amiable  in  their  characters,  zealDUS  in  their  ministry,  whose 
sermons  are  carefully  prepared,  who  preach  the  truth  faithfully,  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  there  is  but  little  in  their  ministry  of  "  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and 
power."     On  the  other  hand,  you  often  see  men  of  less  intellectual  calibre  who  pro- 
duce  an  impression  which  even  the  unconverted  cannot  fail  to  feel.     And  this 
inequality  is  scarcely  less  observable  in  regard  to  one  individual.     You  may  fre- 
quently hear  a  sermon  full  of  power  in  the  morning,  and  one  decidedly  feeble,  from 
the  same  minister,  in  the  evening ;  and  if  you  could  ascertain  the  preacher's  own 
opinion,  you  would  find,  in  all  prohability,  that  he  was  best  satisfied  with  the  one 
which  the  people  found  the  feeblest.     Now,  it  is  clear  that  this  gift  of  power  is 
pre-eminently  the  want  of  the  Church  of  God,  both  at  home  and  abroad.     Note — I. 
Stephen's  power.     It  was — 1.  The   power   of   persuasion  (ver.    7).      2.  It  was   a 
power  in  controversial  defence  of  truth  (ver.  9).     3.  It  was  the  power  of  searching 
and  probing  the  heart  to  the  very  quick  (chap.  vii.  54).     4.  But  tnere  is  one  thing  to 
remark,  and  it  is  this — when  we  look  for  power,  we  must  not  look  for  an  easy, 
smooth,  pleasant,  ttiumphant  victory.     Stephen  had  all  the  power  of  which  we 
speak,  but  it  called  forth  the  angry  passions  of  the  wicked,  so  that  they  rose  up 
against  him,  and  he  fell  the  first  martyr  to  the  truth.     Stephen's  power,  however, 
is  just  the  very  thing  we  want.     We  want  persuasive  power  to  bring  in  men,  we  want 
controversial  power  to  maintxin  the  truth,  and  we  want  heart-searching  power  to 
awaken  sinners,  even  if  it  provoke  them.    This  is  the  power  to  be  sought  and  prayed 
for  by  the  whole  Church  of  God.     II.  Its  sources.     1.  Wi^^dom.     There  was  the 
same  connection  between  wisdom  and  power  in  Micah,  "  Now  then,  I  am   full  of 
power,  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  of  wisdom,  and  of  might."     There  is  the  same 
connection  in  the  prophecies  of  our  blessed  Saviour  (Isa.  xi.) — "  the  Spirit  of  wisdom 
and  understandiny;,  the  Spirit  of  counsel  and  might,"  was  given  to  him.     Light 
words,  conceits,  affectations,  and  outward  display  overthrow  all  thoughts  of  power. 
The  man  of  God  wants  wisdom.     He  has  to  unfold  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  he 
must  not  go  lightly  to  the  work.     He  is  a  steward  in  the  Lord's  household ;   Le  has 
to  deal  with  a  multitude  of  different  dispositions,  under  different  circumstances. 
Stephen's  wisdom  was  pre-eminently  Si-riptural.  There  is  only  one  of  his  discourses 
preserved,  and  that  one  is  full  of  Scripture.     He  was  not  one  of  those  who  thought 
his  own  rea-on  was  anything  when  compared  with  the  wisdom  of  God.   He  was  not 
ashamed  to  draw  all  his  conclusions  from  the  Bible,  and  to  base  the  whole  fabric 
of  his  reasonings  simply  upon  Scripture.     The  clearest  evidence  of  the  most  con- 
summate folly  is  the  venturing  forth  in  the  strength  of  your  own  understandings. 
There  may  be  wisdom  in  the  simplest  cottager,  or  the  youngest  child,  far  exceeding 
the  loftiest  flights  of  merely  intellectual  philosoi)hy.     Nor  dues  it  require  anything 
extraordinary  either  in  intellect  or  eloquence  to  produce  such  wisdom,  for  the 
Psalmist  says,  "  I  have  more  understanding  than  all  my  teachers  ;  for  Thy  testi- 
monies are  my  meditation.     I  know  more  than  the  ancients,  because  I  keep  Thy 
precepts."     2.  Faith.    The  connection  between  faith  and  power  is  a  union  frequently 
recurring.     "  This  is   the  victory  that   overcometh   the  world,  even   our  faith." 
Abraham  "  was  strong  in  faith,"  but  that  may  refer  to  one  simple  single  act ;  "  full 
of  faith  "  implies  that  the  whole  mind  and  character  were  completely  imbued  with 
it.     It  was  like  St.  Paul,  when  he  said,  "  The  life  that  I  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by 
the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."    But  how  is  this  faith  displayed  ?    (1)  In  dependence. 
It  is  the  office  of  faith  to  lean.    Self-satisfied  men  are  confident  in  their  own  powers 
and  do  not  care  to  lean.   Tiitiid,  doubting  souls  are  so  perplexed  by  their  misgivings 
that  they  are  almost  afraid  to  lean,  but  the  sinner  who  knows  his  nothingnt  ss  leans 
his  whole  weight  on  Christ.     So  it  is  in  our  own  personal  experience.     Men  are 
very  apt  to  lean  with  one  hand  on  Christ,  and  one  hand  on  resolutions,  or  on  the 


CHAP.  VI.]  TEE  ACTS.  659 

Church,  or  on  the  sacraments;  "but  we  must  learn  to  lean  with  both  hands  on 
Christ,"  and  to  lean  the  whole  weight ;  and  when  you  so  begin  to  lean  you  will  first 
taste  the  joy  of  peace  and  power.  Men  may  go  forth  to  preach  leaning  upon  the 
excellences  of  a  previous  education,  or  on  the  advantages  of  his  early  youtb.  But 
what  are  these  for  the  great  work  we  have  to  do?  (2)  In  expectation,  for  "  faith  is 
the  sulistance  of  things  as-ked  for."  If  we  pray  for  pardon  without  expectation  of 
receiving  it,  or  for  the  Holy  Spirit  without  opening  the  heart  in  the  full  hope  of  his 
sacred  entrance,  or  if  we  send  men  in  the  Lord's  name,  or  go  forth  ourselves,  to 
preach  the  gospel  without  expectations,  where  can  be  our  faith  ?  And  is  not  this 
one  reason  why  there  is  no  more  power  in  the  Church  of  God  ?  Do  we  not  meet 
Sunday  after  Sunday  with  very  little  practical  belief  that  souls  will  be  born  again 
through  the  preached  Word  ?  Periiaps  a  man  begins  with  sanguine  expnctation, 
but  after  some  months  or  years  of  hard  toil  he  is  ready  to  say  with  Peter,  "  We 
have  toiled  all  night  and  taken  nothing."  Stephen  was  full  of  power ;  but  he  was 
first  full  of  faith.  He  could  grasp  a  fast  hold  of  the  Saviour,  and  so  they  were  "  not 
able  to  resist  the  wisdom  and  the  spirit  by  which  he  spake."  3.  All  his  wisdom, 
faith,  and  power  were  to  be  traced  to  a  yet  higher  source — he  was  first  full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  This  has  always  been  so.  Micah  was  full  of  power,  and  he  says, 
"  Truly  I  am  full  of  power  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  The  great  mountain  shall 
melt  before  Zerubbabel ;  but  "  Not  by  might  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts."  Paul  went  to  Corinth,  not  "with  excellency  of  speech,  or 
man's  wisdom,  but  in  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  power."  In  Thessalonica 
his  "  ministry  came  not  in  word  only,  but  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Gliost,  and  with 
muoh  assurance."  Even  Stephen  and  Peter  and  all  the  rest  were  powerless  until 
the  Spirit  of  God  came,  and  then  they  were  full  of  power,  and  soon  thousands  were 
added  to  the  Church.  It  is  clear,  thsrefore,  that  if  we  desire  power  in  our  ministry, 
■we  must  seek  first  for  the  gift  promised  by  our  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour  iu  John 
xiv.  17.  In  Stephen's  case  the  two  promises  were  fulfilled.  The  Spirit  was  with 
him,  so  that  opposing  powers  were  overcome  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit.  He 
was  in  him,  so  that  when  the  stones  were  dashed  at  him  there  was  a  calm  spirit  of 
well-supported  prayer.  Conclusion  :  There  is  a  mighty  conflict  raging — every  day 
the  conflict  thickens.  Depend  upon  it  that  these  are  not  days  for  an  easy,  tranquil, 
indulgent  Christianity.  I  might  ask  for  money;  I  might  ask  for  men — and  we 
want  them  even  more  than  money— but  the  great  want  is  power  to  strengthen  the 
whole  Church  of  God.  What  is  the  use  of  men  if  God  does  not  make  them  men  of 
power?  We  do  not  want  mere  ecclesiastical  machines,  because  we  do  not  believe 
in  mere  ecclesiastical  machinery.  We  want  men  filled  with  wisdom,  faith,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost.     (K.  Hoare,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11-15.  Then  they  suborned  men. — The  accusation  of  S^phen: — I.  Its 
AUTHORS  (ver.  9).  Observe  here — 1.  That  moral  perversity  is  common  to  men  of 
every  race.  All  these  men,  "  Libertines,"  dc,  differing  widely  in  many  respects, 
agreed  in  their  antagonism  to  the  true  and  Divine.  2.  That  theological  controversy 
often  irritates  rather  than  convinces.  II.  Its  spirit  (ver.  10) — hostility  to  a  truth 
which  they  felt  an  utter  incapacity  to  deny.  An  unpalatable  truth  was  forced  upon 
them,  despite  of  all  their  learning  and  logic,  by  the  overwhelming  arguments  of  one 
man.  1.  This  mortified  their  pride.  Nothing  makes  the  soul  so  furious  as  to 
■wound  its  priile.  2.  This  struck  at  their  most  cherished  prejudices.  HI.  Its  sub- 
ject (vers.  11,  13,  14).  The  charge  here  preferred  would  be  considered  by  the 
Sanhedrin  as  the  most  heinous  of  crimes,  sufficient  to  wake  the  vengeance  of  the 
nation.  Blasphemous  words  against  Moses,  God,  the  holy  place,  and  the  law,  a 
threat  to  destroy  Jerusalem  and  change  the  customs  of  the  Jewish  nation  !  IV.  Its 
WEAKNESS.  1.  The  mode  of  procuring  witnesses  (ver.  11).  Also  that  there  should 
be  men  who  prefer  pelf  to  principle.  Facts  require  no  such  support.  2.  The 
appearance  of  the  accused  (ver.  15).  (1)  The  face  is  the  mirror  of  the  soul.  (2) 
Christianity  makes  the  soul  angelic.     (D.  Thomns,  D.D.)  The  arraipnmeji'  and 

transfiguration  of  St.  Stephen : — It  is  necessary  that  the  Bible  should  be  brief.  A  book 
Eo  important  must  be  made  portable  by  the  hand  and  the  memory.  Accordingly,  out 
of  a  vast  mass  of  materials  the  sacred  writers  have  been  directed  to  the  doice  of  a 
very  few.  The  thirty-three  miracles  of  our  Lord  are  specimens  ;  why  should  others 
yielding  no  fresh  lessons  be  detailed  ?  Tautology  only  weakens  effect.  St.  Stephen 
Bnpplied  the  inspired  specimen  of  martyrdom,  although  there  were  many  others. 
Conformity  to  Christ's  sufferings  according  to  that  Word,  "  Ye  shall  indeed  drink  of 
the  cup,"  &c.    You  have  it  here.    Brave  protest  for  Christ  in  the  face  of  those  who 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

have  power  to  kill  the  body — it  is  here.  Joy  in  the  hope  set  before  the  martyr — it 
radiates  from  Stephen's  face.  Love  to  persecutors  mingled  with  stern  faithfulness 
— it  exhales  like  a  precious  perfume  from  Stephen's  prayer.  Studied  imitation  of 
Cliiist  in  the  act  of  dying — nowhere  is  this  more  remarkably  exliibited  than  in  the 
death  of  Stephen.  This  providential  conformity  to  the  image  of  Christ,  however  (as 
distinct  from  the  studied  imitation  of  Him),  is  the  first  thing  which  strikes  us. 
What  befell  the  disciple  is  what  befell  the  Master  over  again.  I.  The  conduct  op 
Stephen's  opponents.  Infuriated  by  defeat  in  ai'gument,  they  resorted  to  calumny 
and  violence.  Agents  were  employed  to  set  about  a  story  of  blasphemy.  With 
precipitate  violence — the  word  used  is  the  one  applied  to  the  seizure  of  the  demoniac 
by  the  legion  of  devils,  and  to  the  seizure  of  St.  Paul's  vessel  by  the  fury  of  the 
wind — they  laid  hands  on  him  and  hurried  him  away  to  the  Sanhedrin.  The  paid 
agents  of  the  Hellenist  synagogues  pronounced  the  formal  accusation,  "  This  man 
ceases  not  to  speak,"  &c.  Now  the  actual  deposition  is  to  be  made,  and  the  wit- 
nesses feel  that  their  words  may  be  called  in  question,  we  hear  no  more  of  the 
big  terms  of  ver.  11.  God  is  exchanged  for  "  the  holy  place,"  and  Moses  for  "  the 
law."  Full  well  they  knew  that  Stephen  had  said  nothing  derogatory  of  Moses, 
much  less  of  God.  No  doubt  he  had  said  much  to  this  effect.  Clirist  had  predicted 
that  not  one  stone  of  the  temple  should  be  left  upon  another,  and  Stephen  echoed 
the  prediction.  Stephen  too  had  probably  seen  further  into  the  mystery  of  the 
admission  of  the  Gentiles,  and  very  possibly  may  have  preached  that  Jewish  rites 
were  non-essential  to  salvation.  But  if  Stephen  had  foretuld  all  this,  why  are  the 
witnesses  stigmatised  as  false?  Because  they  took  his  words  out  of  the  context 
which  interpreted  them,  and  gave  them  a  totally  different  colour.  Doubtless,  like 
his  Master,  Stephen  had  the  profoundest  veneration  for  the  temple  and  the  law. 
But  he  had  an  intelligent  apprehension  of  the  place  which  each  held  in  the  system 
of  true  religion.  He  saw  that  both  were  elements  of  a  preparatory  discipline,  and 
that  now  "  faitb  is  come  "  the  "  schoolmaster  "  was  unnecessary.  A  man  who  says 
that  a  school  book  may  be  parted  with  when  education  is  finished,  by  no  means 
implies  that  school  books  are  unnecessary  while  education  is  in  progress.  And  if  the 
words  "  School  books  are  valueless"  were  separated  from  his  explanation  of  the 
circumstances,  the  witness  would  be  false.  By  telling  half  the  truth  we  may  convey 
quite  as  wrong  an  impression  as  by  a  contradiction  of  the  truth.  Nothing  is  easier 
and  commoner  than  to  make  sweeping  charges  against  those  who  maintain  suspected 
propositions,  while  wilfully  ignoring  their  explanation  of  what  they  hold.  I  have  no 
right  to  say  that  a  man  denies  inspiration  because  he  denies  verbal  inspiration ; 
nor  that  he  impugns  the  atonement  because  he  dissents  from  certain  popular 
views  of  it.  II.  Stephen's  demeanour.  1.  He  heard  the  calumnious  charge. 
It  is  not  hard  to  see  what  course  natural  feeling  would  take.  In  the  first 
place  there  woftld  be  indignation ;  and  then  would  come  perplexity  as  soon  as  it 
became  apparent  that  the  charge  was  so  worded  that  it  could  not  be  met  with  simple 
flat  denial.  With  these  feelings  fear  would  mingle,  and  altogether  painful  discom- 
posure and  hesitation  of  mind  would  be  pioduced  which  would  communicate  itsell 
to  the  feelings  of  the  accused.  But  in  that  exciting  momeut  Stephen  retained  the 
most  perfect  serenity  of  spirit.  When  the  accusation  was  advanced,  every  member 
of  the  court  turned  to  see  how  the  servant  of  Christ  thus  brought  to  bay  would  look. 
Greatly  were  they  surprised,  and  for  the  moment  disconcerted.  This  was  no  wan 
and  haggard  culprit ;  those  features  spoke  of  nothing  but  communion  with  the 
invisible  God,  of  the  love,  joy,  and  peace  which  are  the  result  of  such  communion 
(ver.  15)— a  lower  grade  of  transfiguration.  The  Sanhedrin  are  momentarily  cowed, 
as  the  devil's  agents  are  so  often  by  the  majesty  of  holy  innocence.  Po.-^sit)ly  the 
radiance  of  Stephen's  countenance  reminded  them  of  the  similar  radiance  on  Moses' 
face,  the  result  of  similar  communion  with  God.  2.  Could  there  have  been  any 
neaier  approach  than  this  to  our  Lord's  circumstances  ?  He,  too,  had  been  appre- 
hended with  sudden  violence  ;  in  His  case  false  witnesses  were  suborned ;  His 
words,  too,  were  twisted  from  their  meaning,  and  finally  His  demeanour  made  His 
enemies  quail.  It  may  have  been  that  this  conformity  to  his  Master's  image 
was  the  secret  of  the  supernatural  joy  that  radiated  from  Stephen's  countenance. 
Application :  1.  "  Think  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try 
you  "  :  do  not  consider  it  foreign  to  Christian  experience.  If  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation  was  made  perfect  through  suffering,  let  not  His  soldiers  claim  exemption. 
Therefore,  when  the  cross  is  placed  upon  us,  let  us  rejoice  in  the  resemblance 
between  us  and  our  Master,  and  in  the  prospect  of  perfect  conformity  which  that 
resemblance  guarantees.    2.  Let  the  supernatural  radiance  of  Stephen's  features, 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  561 

caught  from  the  contemplation  ot  his  Master,  remind  us  of  the  spiritual  transfigura- 
tion which  should  he  daily  proceeding  in  ourselves.  "  Be  not  conformed  to  thia 
world,  but  be  ye  transformed,"  &c.,  and  the  secret  of  this  is  disclosed  in  "  We  all, 
■with  open  face,  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed,"  &c. 
(Dean  Goidburn.)  Stephen  before  his  accusers : — I.  The  chakactek  of  Stephen 
(ver.  8).  1.  He  was  "  full  of  grace  and  power."  That  was  his  spiritual  condition. 
Not  all  power,  so  as  to  be  stern,  tyrannous,  overwhelming,  but  power  characterised 
by  love,  geniality,  sympathy,  gentleness.  Not  all  grace,  lest  he  should  be  mistaken  as 
a  mere  sentimentalist,  who  contented  himself  with  exquisite  expressions,  without 
seeking  their  realisation  in  the  sterner  qualities  of  character.  Stephen  was  by  so 
much  a  complete  man.  2.  He  "  did  great  wonders  and  miracles  among  the  people." 
That  was  his  outer  life.  Mark  the  beautiful  correspondence  between  tlie  spiritual 
and  the  active.  The  one  accounts  for  the  other.  With  less  of  a  spiritual  quality 
there  would  have  been  less  of  social  demonstration  and  influence.  The  "  wonder  " 
was  not  a  trick  of  the  hand  ;  it  was  an  expression  of  the  deep  spiritual  history  of 
the  soul's  life.  The  "  miracle  "  was  not  painted  on  a  board ;  it  flamed  forth  from 
an  inner  and  sacied  fire.  This  description  of  Stephen  sLould  be  the  description  of 
the  Christian  man  and  the  Christian  Church.  Not  a  line  can  be  added  to  this 
picture.  We  do  no  wonders  and  miracles.  Why  ?  Because  we  have  so  little  grace 
and  power.  We  have  looked  at  the  wrong  end  of  this  business.  We  have  been 
wanting  more  "wonders"  and  more  "miracles  "instead  of  looking  into  the  inner 
condition  of  the  heart.  Make  the  tree  good,  and  the  fruit  will  be  good.  II.  His 
ACCUSERS.  1.  They  were  controversial,  they  "  disputed  "  with  Stephen.  Controversy 
is  not  Christianity.  It  is  most  difficult  for  any  man  to  be  both  a  debater  and  a 
Christian.  So  long  as  the  Chuich  was  in  the  era  of  suffering,  she  had  no  time  for 
debate.  Her  controversies  were  then  fights  for  life.  The  Christian  life  is  always  a 
controversy  ;  but  "  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  principalities," 
<fec.  Let  us  all  beware  of  the  spirit  of  controversy,  which  delights  in  the  rearrange- 
ment of  words  and  forgets  that  Christianity  is  a  sacrifice,  a  life  of  obedience.  2. 
Being  controversial,  they  were  as  necessarily  unjust.  They  "  suborned "  men  to 
tell  lies.  The  aim  of  debate  is  not  to  secure  truth,  but  to  secure  some  petty 
triumph,  or  to  carry  out  to  its  melancholy  end  some  rooted  prejudice,  or  some  dis- 
creditable antipathy.  This  is  my  fear  of  some  collateral  institutions  which  are 
formed  in  Christian  churches.  There  are  limits  within  which  debate  may  be  con- 
ducted to  high  intellectual  advantage  ;  but  whoever  enters  upon  a  course  of  debate 
merely  as  such,  without  having  as  a  supreme  view  to  knowing,  loving,  accepting,  and 
obeying  the  truth,  puts  his  spiritual  life  to  a  severe  strain.  You  wiU  always  find 
behind  intellectual  hostility  to  Christianity  an  explanatory  moral  condition.  A  man 
who  does  not  love  the  light  will  use  any  excuse  for  getting  out  of  it.  Learn  from 
this  nariative — 1.  The  danger  which  often  accrues  to  truth  from  its  supposed 
friends.  "  We  have  heard  Stephen  speak  blasphemous  words  against  Moses  and 
against  God."  This  is  one  of  the  earliest  instances  of  heresy-hunting.  Once  for  all, 
let  us  lay  it  down  as  an  impossibility  that  bad  men  are  judges  of  truth  and  false- 
hood. Men  who  had  accepted  a  bribe  came  up  to  defend  orthodoxy !  No  blind  man 
is  appointed  as  a  judge  of  pictures,  and  no  deaf  man  of  music.  But  a  bad  man  goes  to 
church,  and  ventures  upon  an  opinion  as  to  the  orthodoxy  or  heterodoxy  of  the 
preacher,  and  says,  with  intolerable  impertinence,  that  he  himself  may  not  be  what 
he  out^ht  to  be,  but  he  knows  the  truth  when  he  hears  it  1  What  is  your  life?  What 
is  your  spirit  ?  What  are  your  wonders  and  miracles  ?  And  what  is  the  interior 
condition  of  heart  which  explains  tbem  ?  These  are  the  questions  that  ought  to  be 
answered.  Search  into  narrow,  envenomed,  and  ignoble  criticism  in  every  age,  and 
you  will  find  that  the  men  who  speak  most  against  blasphemy  in  doctrine  are  often 
the  men  who  could  not  live  otherwise  than  by  telling  lies.  2.  The  manner  in  which 
slander  should  be  met.  What  was  Stephen's  comUtion  at  the  time?  Hearing  these 
lies,  he  will  surely  spring  from  his  seat  and  indignantly  deny  the  impeachment ! 
Some  men  say  they  "  cannot  sit  still  and  hear  false  statements  about  themselves.'" 
If  they  were  greater  men  they  would  learn  the  art  of  patience.  Great  bodies  are  calm. 
Stephen  sat  still,  but  his  faceglenmed  like  an  angel.  Could  you  have  seen  the  other 
faces — with  the  significant  leer,  the  harsh  mouths — you  would  have  known,  without 
hearing  the  defence,  who  was  right  and  who  was  wrong.  Would  that  we  could  look 
more  and  say  less !  3.  The  transfiguring  power  of  Christianity.  The  face  of 
Ste23hen  shone  like  the  face  of  an  aupel.  This  is  typical  of  character.  Whenever 
Ciiaracter  is  under  the  influence  of  Christian  inspiration  it  shines.  "  Ye  are  the 
light  of  the  world."  It  is  typical  ako  of  the  resurrection,  the  last  grand  miraclo 
VOL.   I.  36 


662  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ti. 

that  shall  be  performed  upon  these  common  bodies.  The  face  once  dull  shall  be 
lighted  up  with  an  inward  light  that  shall  transfigure  it  into  nobility  and  gracious 
expressiveness.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be.'  '  Chiistianicy  never 
takes  hold  of  any  man  without  making  him  a  new  creature,  and  without  investing 
him  with  new  beauty,  nobility,  and  occasionally  even  splendour  of  expression.  But 
whether  this  can  take  place  in  the  body  or  not,  it  always  takes  place  in  the  character, 
and  the  character  determines  the  man.  4.  We  can  all  be  lull  of  faith  or  grace, 
and  we  can  all  do  miracles  and  wonders.  We  have  been  too  content  to  sit  down 
under  the  impression  that  miracles  have  ceased.  But  what  a  wonder  it  would  be, 
for  example,  if  some  of  us  ever  helped  a  fellow-creature  under  any  circumstances 
whatsoever  !  That  wonder  is  possible  to  you.  What  a  wonder  it  would  be  for  some 
of  us  could  we  ever  be  met  in  a  good  humour  !  Wonders,  miracles,  signs  !  Why, 
the  diificulty  is  to  escape  them  !  What  a  wonder  it  would  be  if  some  of  us  could  be 
patient  under  suffering !  You  thought  the  age  of  "  wonders  "  was  passed,  because 
the  merely  introductory  signs  have  disappeared  !  The  blossom  is  gone  that  the 
fruit  may  come.  And  we  of  these  latter  times  are  called  to  exhibit  the  wonder  of 
a  disciplined  character,  the  marvel  of  a  sanctified  temper,  the  glittering  phenomenon 
of  a  truly  obedient  sonship.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  We  have  heard  Mm  speak 

blasphemous  words. — A  false  accusation  with  a  semblance  of  truth: — We  get  in 
these  words,  in  this  false  accusation,  even  through  its  falsehood,  a  glimpse  into 
the  chnracter  of  St.  Stephen's  preaching.  A  false  accusation  need  not  be 
necessarily  altogether  false.  In  order  to  be  effective  for  mischief,  a  twisted, 
distorted  charge,  with  some  basis  of  truth,  is  the  best  for  the  accuser's  purpose, 
and  the  most  difficult  for  the  defendant  to  answer.  St.  Stephen  was  ripening  for 
heaven  more  rapidly  than  the  apostles  themselves.  He  was  learning  more  rapidly 
than  St.  Peter  himself  the  true  spiritual  meaning  of  the  Christian  S'heme.  He 
had  taught,  in  no  ambiguous  language,  the  universal  character  of  the  gospel  and 
the  Catholic  mission  of  the  Church.  And  the  narrow-minded  Grecian  Jews,  anxious 
to  vindicate  their  orthodoxy,  which  was  doubted  by  their  Hebrew  brethren,  distorted 
Stephen's  wider  and  grander  conception  into  a  charge  of  blasphemy  against  the 
holy  man.  What  a  picture  of  the  future  of  Christ's  best  and  truest  witnesses, 
especially  when  insisting  on  some  nobler  and  wider  or  forgotten  aspect  of  truth. 
Their  teaching  has  been  ever  suspected,  distorted,  accused  as  blasphemous ;  and  so 
it  must  ever  be.  And  yet  God's  servants,  when  they  find  themselves  thus  mis- 
represented, can  realise  to  themselves  tbat  they  are  but  following  the  course  which 
the  saints  of  every  age  have  run,  that  they  are  being  made  like  unto  the  image  of 
Stephen,  the  first  martyr,  and  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  the  King  of  Saints,  who 
suffered  under  a  similar  accusation.  St.  Paul's  teaching  was  accused  of  tending  to 
licentiousness ;  the  earliest  Christians  were  accused  of  vilest  practices ;  St. 
Athanasius,  in  his  struggles  for  truth,  was  accused  of  rebellion  and  murder ;  the 
Eeformers  were  accused  of  lawlessness  ;  John  Wesley  of  Eomanism  and  disloyalty; 
William  Wilberforce  of  being  an  enemy  to  British  trade ;  John  Howard  of  being 
an  encourager  of  crime  and  immorality.  Let  us  be  content,  then,  if  our  lot  be 
■with  the  saints,  and  our  portion  be  that  of  the  servants  of  the  Most  High.  Again, 
we  learn  from  this  i^lace  how  religious  zeal  can  overthrow  religion  and  work  out 
the  purposes  of  evil.  Men  cannot,  indeed,  now  suborn  men  and  bring  fatal  charges 
against  them  in  matters  of  religion,  and  yet  they  can  fall  into  exactly  the  same 
crime.  Party  religion  and  party  zeal  lead  men  into  preci.<ely  the  same  causes  as 
they  did  in  the  days  of  St.  Stephen.  Partisanship  causes  them  to  violate  all  the 
laws  of  honour,  of  honesty,  of  Christian  charity,  imagining  that  they  are  thereby 
advancing  the  cause  of  Christ,  forgetting  that  they  are  acting  on  the  rule  which  the 
Scriptures  repudiate,  doing  evil  that  good  may  come,  and  striving  to  further  Christ's 
kingdom  by  a  violation  of  His  fundaoienial  precepts.  Oh,  for  more  of  the  spirit 
of  true  charity,  which  will  lead  men  to  support  their  own  views  in  a  spirit  of 
Christian  love !  Oh,  for  more  of  that  true  grasp  of  Christianity  which  will  teach 
that  a  breach  of  Christian  charity  is  far  worse  than  any  amount  of  speculative 
error  1     (G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  And  all  that  sat  in  the  council,  looking  stedfastly  upon  him,  saw  his  face 
as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  angel. —  Tlie  martyr  of  Jesus  : — 1.  Stephen's  circum- 
stances AND  TRANSFIGURATION.  1.  It  was  A.D.  37  that  he  died.  The  circumst  <nceg 
of  that  year  in  the  government  of  the  Jewish  people  were  altogether  exceptional. 
Pilate  had  left  the  country,  and  Judreawas,  for  the  time,  without  any  representation 
of  the  Imperial  Government,  and  thus  the  power  over  life  and  property  remained 


€HAP.  vi.J  THE  ACTS.  563 

absolutely  in  the  hands  of  the  Jewish  council.  2.  Stephen,  young,  full  of  vigour,  and 
as  buld  as  he  was  intellectually  strong,  had  stung  iuto  activity  the  furious  hatred  of 
the  fiercest  fanaticism.  Foiled  in  argument,  exposed  to  the  jeers  or  contempt  of  those 
■who  watched  the  contest,  they  determined  to  have  their  revenge.  3.  There  were 
probablv  three  component  elements  in  the  gathering  of  that  fatal  day.  (1)  The  mob 
of  spectators  no  way  uninterested  in  the  trial.  The  question  at  issue  was  one 
which  seemeil  to  touch  the  quick  of  national  exclusiveness — the  tenderest  point  in 
a  Jewish  mind.  (2)  The  bench  of  judges,  which  included  the  rank  and  learning  of 
the  Jewish  hierarchy.  Some  had  grown  old  in  the  lore  of  Judaism ;  some  w^re 
young  in  years  but  versed  in  the  study  of  the  law ;  all  wt  re  the  possessors  of  the 
sacred  Scriptures,  whose  meaning  was  shrouded  from  them  in  the  dismal  fog  of 
■darkened  minds  ;  all  were  the  slaves  of  an  iron  tradition  and  the  victims  of  a  dis- 
torting prejudice.  (3)  Last  in  that  strange  assembly  was  one  young  man,  with  the 
hopes  of  life  still  fiesh  before  him.  With  the  joy,  felt  by  all  men  who  in  any  sense 
■deserve  it,  of  conscious  strength  and  rectitude,  he  had  committed  an  unpardonahle 
crime  ;  he  had  Joved  truth  better  than  custom,  faithfulness  to  conviction  better  than 
popularity ;  he  had  hated  the  stagnation  of  an  unworthy  tradition,  and  risen  above 
the  temper  of  the  habitual  respectability  of  his  time.  4.  The  trial  began.  The 
witnesses  were  examined  and  performed  their  expected  duty  of  falsehood.  Then  as 
the  president's  interrogation  came,  the  eyes  of  the  assembly  were  turned  on  Stephen. 
Certainly  Jesus  was  with  him,  and  His  promise,  that  the  true  words  would  be  ' '  given  " 
in  the  hour  of  need,  supported  his  spirit.  Certainly  heavenly  powers  were  upon 
him,  and  the  liglit  of  God's  glory  was  stre  imiug  through  his  soul.  Every  eye  was 
riveted  on  the  face  of  St<'phen,  and  the  vision  of  that  inner  splendour  flashed  upon 
them  with  an  unearthly  loveliness.  "  His  face  was  like  the  face  of  an  angel."  A 
face  is  the  dial-plate  of  the  soul.  It  takes  the  lights  and  shadows  of  varying  feel- 
ings, hopes,  and  fears,  and  by  expression  records  for  others  the  inner  variation  of 
the  movements  of  the  soul.  Hence  the  effect  upon  us  frequently  of  a  face  in  a 
crowd.  Our  eyes,  resting  for  the  moment  upon  the  features  of  one  happening  then 
to  be  in  rapturous  joy  or  overwhelming  sorrow,  have  rested — and  we  feel  it — on  the 
revelation  of  a  human  life.  So  some  faces  come  to  us,  remembered  indistinctly, 
and  yet  haunting  our  very  dreams,  moving  us— by  their  slight  and  djlicate  tracery 
of  pathos  and  suffering — moving  us  to  the  deepest,  keenest  sympathy.  Now,  what 
was  the  power  of  this  face  on  which  was  riveted  the  gaze  of  the  council  ?  What? 
why,  the  angels  are  God's  messengers  ;  they  see  the  face  of  the  Father  ;  they  catch 
some  expression  of  the  uncreated  beauty.  Once  on  earth  that  had  been  seen  in  its 
real  loveliness.  Once  it  had  awed  the  multitudes,  subdued  the  intrusive  band  in 
the  garden,  flashed  on  Peter  and  melted  him  to  penitence,  gazed  on  the  Magdalene 
and  wakened  her  to  heavenly  love  ;  now  the  likeness  of  its  loveliness  was  seen  on 
the  face  of  the  martyr,  because  in  his  soul  was  Jesus  the  crucified.  II.  His  defence. 
The  vision  of  the  martyr  was  a  mighty  message ;  but  his  lips  threw  that  message 
into  words.  There,  at  least,  is  outlined  his  message ;  there  for  us  is  traced  his 
character.  Note — 1.  That  earnest  desire  for  truth  which  is  the  first  real  requisite 
to  its  attainment.  To  kindle  curio-ity,  to  keep  alive  an  honourahle  ambition  in 
the  young,  not  merely  for  reward,  but  for  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  is  the  duty 
of  every  good  teacher.  To  know  and  apply  the  best  that  has  been  done  and  thought 
by  those  before  us  is  the  duty  of  all  of  us.  And  this  desire  for  knowledge,  when 
sanctified  and  ennobled  by  a  reverent  spirit  and  eager  thoughts  of  God — how 
beautiful,  how  good  it  is  !  Alas  !  the  fashionable  spirit  of  do.ibt  and  unbelief, 
so  often  a  mei'e  cover  for  the  laziness  of  an  utterly  worldly  temper,  is  turning  the 
noble- hearted  young  men  of  England  into  mere  childish  triflers.  St.  Stephen  had 
evidently  desired  truth,  and  searched  and  studied  the  Scriptures,  and  that  eager 
and  loving  spirit  had  had  its  reward.  One  reward  was  the  vigorous  intellectual 
grasp  of  the  subject  which  he  had  to  handle  with  readiness  and  under  the  appalling 
pressure  of  a  trial  for  life.  2.  Turn  to  the  speech  itself.  (1)  It  indicates  the 
noble  t  eloquence.  True  eloquence  is  one  of  God's  choicest  gifts.  To  abuse  it  is 
always  terrible  ;  because  the  possession  of  no  we  ipon  can  involve  a  greater  respon- 
sibihty  than  of  that  one  bv  which  a  single  mind  can  sway  a  multitude.  But  elo- 
quence has  its  d3grees ;  the  truest  is  primarily  and  intrinsically  the  eloquence  of 
thought.  If  dear  and  powerful  thouf^ht — alive  with  the  vis  vivida  of  genuine 
pathos  or  fiery  feeling,  and  expressed  in  shapely  words — beprese'ited  to  the  ear  and 
mind  of  man,  he  has  the  rarest  and  the  best.  And  in  such  cases  even  all  we 
possess  is  the  written  record  ;  even  then  the  words  have  something  of  a  po«er  of 
life  to  p^'uetrate  through  thj  thickest  wrappings  of  the  human  soul.     This  has  been 


564  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi«! 

felt  in  Demosthenes,  Cicero,  Chrysostom,  Bossuet,  Massillon,  and  Lacordaire. 
From  the  few  recorded  words  of  St.  Stephen  we  feel  the  same.  (2)  "Before  the 
mind  of  the  martyr  was  the  vision  of  a  world-wide  religion,  and  this  was  in  sharp 
contrast  with  the  narrow  and  passin;?  character  of  Judaism.  Before  his  mind,  also, 
was  the  true,  the  necessary,  issue  of  the  Mosaic  teaching — viz.,  Christ  and  the  wide 
reach  and  sacred  sovereignty  of  the  Catholic  Church.  The  dignity  of  the  speech 
was,  of  course,  enlianced  by  the  danger  of  the  speaker;  but  in  it,  on  the  points  of 
the  argument,  every  syllable  told.  The  subjects  he  handled  needed  all  his  vigour, 
as  centuries  have  conclusively  proved.  They  are  just  those  subjects  of  the  deepest 
importance  which  concern  and  interest  us  still — the  character,  office,  and  claim  of 
the  Church  of  our  Master.  (3)  Stephen's  elucidation  of  the  meaning  of  Jewish 
history  and  worship  was  the  fullilling  in  word  of  the  duty  performed  so  nobly  m  his 
life,  and  so  heroically  in  his  death.  In  this  he  is  to  the  humblest  of  us  a  splendid 
and  real  example.  The  bf-ginning,  middle,  and  end  of  that  duty  now  as  then,  is — 
Jesus  Christ.  To  be  faithful  to  Him,  in  each  of  us,  is  to  make  sense  of  fact  and  of 
his'ory.  He  gave  a  reasonable  explanation  to  accepted  facts.  An  everlasting 
Judaism,  with  all  the  rest  of  men  excluded,  would  have  been  a  senseless  solution  of 
the  history  of  the  Jewish  Church.  That  Church  was  like  a  broken  clue  unless  it 
eventuated  in  Catholic  Christianity ;  Moses  and  his  teaching  would  have  been  an 
insoluble  problem  unless  worked  out  in  Jesus  Christ.  The  power  of  this  first  argu- 
mentative statement  of  these  important  truths  was  in  the  fact  that  it  made  Jewish 
history  hang  together ;  its  astonishing  dignity  lay  in  this,  that  it  was  the  first.  HI. 
The  force  behind  him  and  its  effect.  1.  No  mental  vigour  on  such  a  desperate 
crisis  would  have  availed  to  any  purpose  unless  it  had  been  seconded  by  intrepidity 
of  spirit.  And  this  courage  of  St.  Stephen  was  no  physical  excitement  nor  vulgar 
audacity.  He  was  essaying  the  rugged  and  difficult  track  of  Christian  martyrdom 
on  which  many  indeed  have  travelled  after  him,  but  none  had  passed  before.  And 
here  be  it  not  forgotten  that  we  are  scarcely  conscious  how  strongly  we  are  swayed 
by  the  voiceless  testimony  of  those  who  have  gone  before.  If  public  opinion  is  a 
mighty  power  in  life,  stronger  at  times  is  the  public  opinion  of  the  dead.  To  feel 
behind  him  a  long  array  of  public  witnesses,  of  the  achievements  of  brave  generals 
and  successful  politicians,  is  for  a  soldier  or  a  statesman  to  be  confident  in  the  in- 
spiring genius  of  a  great  people.  Noble  ancestors  help  to  noble  deeds.  And  even 
in  daily  life,  for  some  one  else  to  have  first  succeeded,  is  to  ourselves  at  least  half  the 
powerful  element  in  our  own  success.  Stephen,  however,  knew  no  merely  human 
example  ;  struggling  for  a  cause,  new,  untried,  and  deemed  altogether  contemptible, 
he  "  possessed  his  soul  "  with  a  heroic  patience,  and  bore  his  part  with  literally  unex- 
ampled courage.  Christian,  do  you  flinch  from  the  duty  pUced  upon  you  ?  Think — • 
around  you  is  a  "  cloud  of  witnesses  "  ;  behind  you  the  long  array  of  the  greatness  and 
the  suffering  of  the  Christian  Chuich.  I  pause  in  passing  to  remind  you  that  as  it  is 
easy  to  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil,  so  it  is  not  altogether  difficult  to  go  on  the  side  of 
goodness  if  it  chance  to  acquire  the  patronage  of  tlie  majority.  But  the  real  test  of 
principle,  the  real  exhibition  of  Curistian  courage  is,  when  standing  alone,  perhaps 
the  object  of  scoffs  and  taunts,  you  sternly  take  the  path  of  duty  and  witness  to  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  "  Sternly,"  did  I  say  ?— that  brings  me  to  another  feature  in  the  martyr's 
character :  its  extraordinary  wealth  of  tenderness.  Tenderness  in  a  Christian  comes 
first — we  cannot  doubt  it — from  his  sense  of  human  weakness  and  human  need. 
The  scene  at  the  death  of  St.  Stephen  reminds  us  of  that  at  the  death  of  Christ. 
And  both  are  the  outcome  of  the  deepest  tenderness;  no  mere  softness  of  a  natural 
kind  iness,  or  a  natural  shrinking  from  others'  pain,  but  the  true  tenderness  of  a 
Boul  awakened  to  the  depth  of  man's  sorrows,  and  the  t!reatness  of  his  destiny.  3, 
Do  you  ask  the  secret  of  such  a  coinbi nation  of  tenderness  and  courage  in  any 
tempted  man?  There  is  one  answer  :  An  unshaken,  a  deep,  a  supernatural  union 
with  Jesus  Christ.  He  first,  in  the  fullest  sense,  obeyed  the  precept,  or  idealised  tho 
prediction — "  Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Ale."  4.  Tuns  came  the  end.  There  are 
times  when,  from  the  spiritual  blindness  or  the  profound  pr.  judice  of  an  audience, 
the  possibility  of  persuasion  is  gone.  In  such  cases  one  duty  remains  to  an  hnnest 
man,  the  duty  at  all  hazards  of  a  faithful  testimony.  Such  was  the  case  with 
StejAen.  All  else  tried  in  vain,  this  at  last  was  left.  It  was  the  inspiration  of  such 
a  duty  that  prompted  his  daring  peroration.  Obstinate  resistance  to  Divine  remon- 
strances had  been  their  nauonal,  their  historic  danger  ;  if  persisted  in,  it  was  sure 
to  be  their  ruin.  At  least  they  should  be  warned.  "  Ye  stitf-necked  and  uncircum- 
cised  in  heart  and  ears,"  &c.  Hi-ll  was  opened  upon  the  souls  of  the  judges,  but 
Iiea\  en  was,  not  merely  on  the  face,  but  in  the  heart  aud  on  the  lips  of  the  criminal. 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  565 

Not  to  bow  before  Divine  revelation  is  to  join  the  ranks  of  the  rebel  angels.  The 
judges  had  chosen  sides  ;  so  had  the  martyr  !  IV.  The  issues  of  his  martyrdom. 
A  great  life,  even  though  it  seems  to  end  in  failure,  must  have  great  consequences. 
Stephen  was  a  pioneer  in  suffering  and  in  the  spread  of  truth.  The  immediate 
■consequence  was  "  an  open  door  "  to  a  wider  world  than  the  Church  could  act  upon 
in  Jerusalem,  because  there  the  door  seemed  closed.  Stephen  was  the  first  to  clear 
men's  minds,  in  some  measure,  of  the  mistaken  dream  that  Christianity  must  pass 
through  Judaism.  And  further,  the  impression  made  by  his  courage  and  his  con- 
stancy ciuld  not  have  failed  to  be  deep  and  lasting  m  many  minds.  On  one  we 
know  it  was.  Saul  had  heard  words  that  lo  Iged  in  his  mind  and  rankled  in  his 
memory ;  had  seen  a  vision  that  he  could  not  forget,  a  first  faint  outline,  surely,  of 
that  face  which  afterwards  he  saw  in  completed  diynity  amid  the  noonday  glory  of 
the  Damascus  road.  We  know  that,  to  the  end  of  his  days,  in  deep  penitence,  in 
touching  humility,  in  most  loving  sorrow,  the  intense  and  tender  nature  of  the 
great  apostle  was  penetrated  by  the  sad  memory  of  the  death  of  Stephen.  The 
revelation  of  the  richer  details  of  results  is  reserved  for  "  that  day  when  the  secrets 
•of  all  hearts  shall  be  revealed."  V.  Lessons.  1.  The  soul  must  be  true  to  itself. 
There  may  be  a  disloyalty  to  self,  which  is  rather  a  spiritual  suicide  than  a  spiritual 
treason.  Every  soul  seeking  God  faithfully  is  led  by  Him  who  is  the  Guide  to 
truth.  To  be  faithless  to  the  voice  that  warns  and  teaches  is  so  far  forth  to  mar  in 
«s  the  image  of  the  Eternal,  and  to  paralyse  spiritual  power.  2.  In  the  world  of 
revealed  faith  all  power  of  witness  depends  upon  conviction.  To  act  upon  convic- 
tion is  to  work  your  lever  from  a  fulcrum  which  affords  scope  to  move  a  world. 
■Conviction  is  the  fruit  of  a  temperate,  a  true,  a  pi'ayerful  life.  Doubt  is  no  basis  of 
action.  Do  not  trifle  with  your  faith  ;  hold  prayerfully  what  you  know ;  and  pray, 
when  there  is  any  dimness,  for  the  clearer  light  which  is  never  withheld  from  those 
who  earnestly  seek  it.  3.  Act  with  courage  upon  conviction,  and  act  with  charity. 
The  Christian  needs  unflinching  firmness,  with  unflagging  love.  Whence  come 
such  powers  so  needed  and  so  majestic?  The  answer  is,  from  Christ.  4.  Begin  at 
once;  begin  now.  iSione  are  too  young  to  witness. to  Jesus.  The  young  creature 
■whose  soul  was  battered  out  of  the  shattered  body  on  that  morning  of  martyr- 
dom, might  have  pleaded  youth  as  a  reason  for  reserve.  He  did  not.  How  noble, 
iow  beautiful,  is  a  young  life  given  to  Christ  1  5.  When  all  possible  struggle  is 
over  we  may  witness  to  Jesus  by  the  calmness  of  a  loving  resignation.  (Canon 
Knox-Little.)  Moses  and  Stephen :  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  (text,  and 
Exod.  xxxiv.  30)  .• — In  reading  this  account  one  is  led  to  think  of  a  similar  scene  in 
the  life  of  Moses.  1.  To  be  servants  of  the  same  God,  they  could  scarcely  be  more 
Tinlike  in  their  history,  and  they  show  in  what  divers  ways  the  Divine  woikman 
may  use  his  spiritual  instruments.  The  life  of  Moses  is  probably  the  most  com- 
plete of  any  man's.  But  not  a  single  ray  of  light  falls  upon  his  death.  Of  the  life 
of  Stephen  we  know  almost  as  little  as  of  the  death  of  Moses.  But  his  last  hours 
stand  before  us  distinct  and  bright.  2.  So  unlike  in  other  things,  they  have  this  in 
common,  that  each  of  them,  on  a  great  occasion,  bad  a  transfiguration — the  reflec- 
tion of  the  vision  of  God  when  He  comes  very  near.  3.  In  setting  these  transfigu- 
rations over  against  one  another,  we  have  no  thought  of  comparing  the  two  men. 
Stephen  fills  a  small  range  in  the  Book  of  God  beside  Moses.  We  shall  compare 
them,  then,  in  the  periods  to  which  they  belong  in  God's  revelation.  We  may  com- 
pare— I.  That  view  of  God  which  is  reflected  from  the  face  op  each  of  them. 
1.  In  the  case  of  Moses  it  was  "  God's  glory"  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18,  22) — an  appear- 
ance like  that  which  was  seen  by  him  in  the  bush,  and  which  hovered  over  the 
mercy-seat  without  any  definite  form,  for  one  fixed  aim  of  that  dispensation  was  to 
check  the  tendency  to  shut  up  God  in  figures  made  with  hands.  It  was  a  great  and 
significant  vision,  raising  the  Mosaic  system  above  all  religions,  and  proclaiming 
that  there  is  one  God,  who  is  light,  and  who  yet  can  visit  man  in  love.  For  cor- 
responding to  this  vision  came  the  voice  with  it  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7).  There  was  much 
that  was  reassuring,  but  much  also  that  was  doubtful.  It  revealed  the  purity  of 
•God,  but  the  image  had  no  distinct  features  ;  and  it  promisfd  mercy,  but  the  way  of 
pardon  was  not  made  plain.  2.  Stephen  "  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing 
on  the  right  hand  of  God."  The  glory  which  Moses  beheld  has  now  opened  its 
bosom,  and,  issuing  from  it,  there  is  seen  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory  and 
the  express  image  of  His  person."  The  purity  which  in  the  day  of  Moses  had  no 
distinct  features  has  formed  itself  into  the  countenance  of  the  Son  of  God,  and 
the  mysterious  mercy  descends  from  God's  throne  by  a  new  and  living  way  in  the 
person  of  the  God-man  Mediator,  a  Saviour  risen  from  the  Cross   and  grave. 


5G6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi; 

3.  These,  then,  were  the  views  of  God  presented  to  Moses  and  Stephen, 
That  the  first  was  in  the  same  Hne  with  the  second  cannot  be  doubted  if  we 
believe  in  the  unity  of  the  Bible  and  in  the  plan  of  God  running  through 
all  the  ages.  It  would  be  impossible  to  invert  these  views,  for  there  was  a 
fitness  in  their  order.  II.  The  effect  of  the  view  on  the  immediate  witnesses. 
1.  In  the  case  of  Mo-es  the  effect  was  mainly,  if  not  entirely,  an  external  bright- 
ness— "  the  skin  of  his  face  shone."  Its  beauty  had  something  of  terror  with  it. 
Those  who  were  near  could  not  bear  its  open  look,  and  required  to  have  it  veiled. 
Mo-es  was  the  representative  of  a  system  which  was  not  characterised  by  profound 
spirituality,  as  is  proved  by  the  sad  stains  and  inconsistencies  which  mark  the  history 
of  some  of  its  best  members,  and  the  readiness  of  the  great  mass  of  its  adherents- 
to  cast  aside  its  profession  in  the  hour  of  trial.  In  some  few  it  was  a  strong  reality, 
but  in  the  majority  thfir  religion  was  an  illumination  cast  on  them  from  without — 
a  separable  and  perishable  surface  thing.  2.  The  illumination  on  the  face  of 
Stephen  cnme  from  the  action  of  the  soul  itself.  It  is  said,  "  the  children  of  Israel 
were  afraid  to  come  nigh  Moses,"  but  "  all  that  sat  in  the  council  looked  steadfastly 
at  Stephen."  It  did  not  turn  them  from  their  purpose,  their  passion  was  too  fierce, 
but  it  brought  them  to  a  pause,  imprinted  itself  upon  them,  and,  may  we  not  sup- 
pose, came  back  in  waking  thoughts  and  nightly  dreams,  and  deserted  some  of 
them  never  till  they  saw  it  again  before  the  throne  of  God  ?  For  there  is  this 
difference  further  between  mere  brightness  of  face  and  the  beauty  of  the  soul 
which  beams  through  it,  that  the  one  is  seen  entire  at  fii'st  and  grows  no  more. 
It  tends  constantly  to  fade,  and  must  fade.  But  the  soul's  expression  grows 
evermore  as  we  gaze  into  it,  and  it  is  in  reminiscence  above  all  that  it  rises  to 
its  perfect  ideal.  It  was  this  angelic  beauty  which  shone  in  the  face  of  Stephen, 
and  it  was  tbere  because  of  the  object  he  looked  upon.  "His  eyes  were 
beautiful,"  because  you  saw  that  they  saw  Christ.  3.  Now  these  two  forms 
of  transfiguration  belong  each  to  its  own  period.  The  one  is  bright  but  form- 
less, the  shadow  of  the  Shechinah  on  him  who  sees  it,  and  inspiring  even  its 
friends  with  awe  till  they  can  look  no  longer.  The  other  is  the  beauty  of  the  soul 
that  has  beheld  Christ,  distinct  and  expressive,  reflecting  His  Divine  purity  and 
tenderness,  so  mild  that  even  those  who  hate  it  cannot  choose  but  look  and  wonder, 
and,  when  they  would  thrust  it  from  the  world,  must  stop  their  ears  upon  the  voice 
of  Stephen,  and  summon  blind  passion  to  do  i's  work.  III.  The  crisis  of  life  in. 
WHICH  EACH  of  THESE  TRANSFIGURATIONS  occcRRED.  1.  In  the  liistory  of  Moses  it 
was  in  the  fulness  of  his  power  and  success  as  a  Divine  messenger.  Great  through 
his  whole  history,  he  had  never  been  so  great  to  the  eye  of  man  as  at  this  moment. 
He  had  scattered,  as  God's  vicegerent,  disaster  upon  all  opposition,  and  had  led 
through  the  Ked  Sea  an  oppressed  and  terror-stricken  nation  to  breathe  into  them  a 
new  life.  He  had  been  admitted  amid  scenes  that,  for  outward  grandeur,  still 
stand  unparalleled,  into  the  closest  intercourse  with  God,  and  the  glory  is  there  like 
God's  mark  on  his  forehead  to  tell  where  he  has  been  and  with  whom.  This  hour 
is  also  in  the  very  height  of  his  natuial  and  intellectual  life.  Many  men  gain  their 
heart's  desire  as  God's  servants,  only  to  die.  Before  Moses  there  lay  stretched  out 
years  of  usefulness  and  honour,  which  took  their  character  and  bore  their  results 
from  this  crowning  period.  2.  Stephen,  on  the  contrary,  is  placed  as  a  criminal 
before  tliose  who  sat  in  Moses'  seat,  and  is  charged  with  breaking  in  pieces  the  law 
which  Mo  es  gave.  He  has  done  nothing  to  shake  the  earth  with  wonder.  He  pro- 
fesses only  to  be  a  humble  follower  of  One  who  died  on  a  Cross.  A  cruel  and 
ignominious  death  looks  him  full  in  the  face.  But  the  transfiguiation  of  Stephen  is- 
far  grander  than  that  of  Mo.ses.  The  one  is  impressed  with  the  temporal  and  ex- 
ternal magnificence  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  other  full  of  the  spiritual  glory  of 
the  New,  which  begins  with  a  death  as  the  salvation  of  the  world,  and  shows  us  the 
shame  of  the  Cross  on  its  way  to  become  the  brightest  crown  in  the  univeise.  It  is 
more  honouring  to  the  power  of  God  to  see  it  not  merely  sustaining  a  man  in  such 
terrible  extremity  but  glorifying  him.  It  is,  indeed,  most  significant,  that  while,  in  the 
Old  Testament,  the  approving  light  of  God  falls  upon  His  servant  in  the  midst  of 
life,  in  the  New  it  descends  in  the  presence  of  death.  It  crowns  hmi  conqueror 
after  a  course  of  labour  very  ardent  but  very  brief.  Among  God's  servants,  tbose 
•who  fail  in  the  outward  life  may  rise  to  the  highest  rank  in  the  spiritual,  and  the 
fore-glancing  tokens  of  it  can  be  granted  here.  IV.  The  effects  on  the  surround- 
ing SPECTATORS.  1.  The  impression  made  on  the  Israelites  by  the  view  of  Moses 
■was  at  fiist  very  great.  A  growth  of  obedient  homage  took  place  thit  was  rarely 
equalled  in  their  history.    But  it  had  not  much  depth,  and  soon  withered  away. 


CHAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  5G7 

They  had  seen  many  more  wonders  in  Egypt,  and  had  equally  forgotten  them. 
They  went  on  to  murmur  against  God  and  against  Moses.  2.  In  the  case  of  Stephen 
it  may  seem  as  if  the  impression  were  still  less.  Those  who  saw  his  face  as  it  had 
been  that  of  an  angel,  did  not  spare  his  life.  But  we  know  how  a  look  lives  years 
after  the  face  is  hidden  in  the  grave.  We  can  scarcely  doubt  it  was  so  here.  Can 
we  question  that  the  look  of  Stephen  burned  its  impression  into  the  heart  of  Paul, 
and  that  from  the  martyr's  death  the  living  preacher  rose  with  an  angel's  power  and 
zeal  ?  3.  Here  again  these  results  are  entirely  characteristic  of  the  two  systems. 
The  Old  Testament  began  with  outward  demonstrations  of  the  most  striking  kind,  and 
they  were  needful  in  their  time  and  place.  But  their  effects  were  transitory.  They 
served  a  purpose  only  as  they  helloed  the  introduction  of  spiritual  principles,  in 
some  such  way  as  thunder  accompanies  spiing  showers,  where  the  power  lies  not  in 
the  peal  or  the  tremor,  but  in  influences  more  gentle  and  less  marked.  Even  in  that 
ancient  dispensation  a  practised  ear  can  hear  the  words  all  through — "  Not  by 
might  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  And,  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, this  mode  of  working  becomes  fully  apparent.  It  begins  with  the  death  of 
Christ  as  the  grand  means  by  which  men  are  to  be  drawn  to  God.  It  manifests  its 
real  strength  in  the  meekness  and  patience  of  its  humblest  followers — in  their 
calmness  in  trial,  their  fortitude  in  danger,  their  forgiving  spirit  to  their  enemies, 
their  unquenched  hope  in  the  presence  of  death.  Outward  demonstrations  have 
their  use,  but  they  are  only  the  band  of  clay  round  the  young  graft  to  keep  it  safe 
till  the  current  of  inner  life  has  established  itself.  V.  The  permanence  of  the 
TRANSFIGURATIONS  IN  THE  SUBJECTS  OF  THEM.  1.  The  brightness  in  the  face  of  Moses 
faded  away  into  the  light  of  ordinary  life  as  he  receded  from  the  great  vision.  It 
partook  in  this  of  the  transitory  character  of  the  dispensation  to  which  he  belonged, 
and  had  its  brightest  light  turned  to  our  world.  2.  In  Stephen  it  was  no  passing 
glimmer  of  a  setting  sun,  but  that  lustre  in  the  morning  clouds  which  shows  him 
before  he  is  above  the  horizon,  and  which  is  lost  only  in  perfect  day.  In  the  death 
of  Stephen  it  is  intended  we  should  see  how  thin  the  veil  is  between  the  two 
worlds — how  the  Lord  stands  on  the  very  confine,  sending  across  His  look  and 
arm  and  voice,  so  that  ere  His  servant  left  the  earth  he  saw  his  heavenly 
Master,    heard   His   words,    and   returned    His    smile.      (J.    Ker,    D.D.)  The 

angelic  glory  on  Stephen^s  countenance : — I.  A  resplendence  of  the  glory  of 
Christ,  who  says  to  His  own  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation ;  but  be  of 
good  cheer."  &c.  II.  A  radiation  of  the  inner  confidence  of  faith,  which  knows 
that  "if  God  be  for  us  who  can  be  against  us?"  III.  A  reflection  of  the 
future  glory,  with  which  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be 
compared.      {K.    Gerok.)  Man   or   angel? — I.  What  was  ix   men  saw  on  the 

FACE  OF  Stephen?  1.  Not  a  supernatural  aureola  such  as  the  painters  love  to 
depict.  But — 2.  The  transformation  of  the  human  by  the  Divine,  according  to  the 
natural  law  which  connects  spiritual  states  with  corresponding  bodily  manifesta- 
tions. The  most  transient  emotions  and  impulses  will  betray  their  presence  thus ; 
how  much  more,  therefore,  the  more  constaut  elements  of  character  and  disposition  ? 
The  changes  of  expression  upon  the  face  are,  next  to  speech,  the  surest  index  to 
that  inward  world  of  thought  and  feeling  and  will  which  affects  so  powerfully  our 
entire  outward  life.  3.  The  transmission  of  the  Divine  through  the  human.  (1) 
In  that  upward  gaze  Pharisee  and  Sadducee  were  confronted  with  the  reality  of  a 
spiritual  world.  (2)  It  served  to  hold  them  spellbound  until  the  grand  remon- 
strance had  been  uttered — as  whenBi>hop  Stanley,  of  Norwich,  faced  the  tumultuous 
mob  at  his  cathedral  door,  or  Marshman  was  borne  from  his  sick  bed  to  quell  the 
Birmingham  rioters  by  his  gentle  presence.  II.  That  of  which  this  transfigured 
FACE  was  the  prophecy  AND  TOKEN.  What  if  it  were  intended  to  present  the  chief 
end  of  man  to  be  a  minister  and  interpreter  of  the  Divine  ?  Who  more  adapted 
than  he,  standing  as  be  does  between  two  worlds,  and  enjoying  if  he  wills  the 
suffrages  of  both.  [A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.)  The  angel-face  on  man: — 1.  The  Jews 
were  famili  ir  with  angels,  and  knew  that  some  of  the  greatest  things  in  their 
national  history  had  been  accomplished  by  their  agency.  It  was  easy,  thei'efore, 
for  them  to  pee  any  resemblance  between  a  human  creature  and  an  angel  of  God. 
2.  Hnre  is  a  man  who  had  the  look  of  an  angol,  and  yet  was  still  a  man.  Nay,  in 
this  trying  yet  favoured  moment,  he  towered  as  it  were  to  the  height  of  his  man- 
hood, and  put  on  all  its  bloom.  It  was  Stephen's  beauty  that  shone  in  the  face. 
It  was  the  real  qualities  of  Stephen's  character  that  made  that  beauty.  It  would 
seem,  then,  that  a  perfect  man  and  an  angel  are  brothers.  Or  say  an  imperfect 
man,  in  a  mood  of  perfectness,  or  when  he  is  wholly  Christian,  a  child  of  God 


568  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi, 

■when  he  is  looking  homewards.  And  if  this  be  the  way  of  it,  then  surely  there  ia 
many  an  angel-face  ou  earth,  and  much  beholding  of  the  same  from  the  higher 
spheres.  3.  Of  course  we  do  not  associate  the  angel-look  with  any  particular  style 
of  fac3.  We  know  nothing  about  the  personal  appearance  of  Stephen  :  only  this 
seems  plain,  that  such  as  he  was  in  type  and  by  Divine  intention,  that  he  now 
became  with  great  clearness,  and  in  becoming  that,  of  necessity  put  on  the  likeness 
of  the  angel.  Yet,  I  thiok  we  may  say  that  there  are  certain  things  common  to 
the  angel-face  on  man  amid  all  the  endless  variety  of  type  and  form.  I.  Bright- 
ness. We  cannot  be  wrong  in  supposing  that  there  was  something  luminous  on 
the  face  of  Stephen.  We  always  associate  brightness  with  the  angels.  If  they 
come  like  common  men  (as  they  did  to  Abraham  oa  the  plain),  the  veiled  bright- 
ness soon  begins  to  shine  through.  If  they  come  in  their  own  nature,  and  proper 
state,  then  "the  countenance  is  like  lightning;,  and  the  raiment  white  as  snow." 
If  Stephen's  countenance  had  been  dull  or  sad  on  that  day,  this  in- the  text  bad 
never  been  recorded  of  him.  Why  should  any  man  wear  darkness  or  heaviness  on 
his  face  ?  There  is  something  in  the  world  which  we  may  learn,  there  is  some- 
thing from  God  which  we  may  have,  that  will  change  all  to  brightness.  The  true 
philosophy  of  life  is  to  get  the  light  within  ourselves ;  and  then  to  get  the  habit 
of  looking  for  and  seeing  the  light  everywhere,  according  to  that  profound  and 
beautiful  Scripture,  "  In  Thy  light  shall  we  see  light."  II.  Calmness.  Stephen  was 
preternaturally  calm  in  a  scene  of  the  utmost  excitement.  The  test  of  a  man's 
soul-state  is  often  thus  made  very  practical.  He  is  tried  by  the  pressure  of  the 
hour,  by  the  hurry  of  the  happening  events.  And  it  is  not  enough  to  have  a 
general  cheerfulness  as  the  result  of  a  survey  of  life  and  the  world  on  the  whole. 
■There  must  be  superiority  to  particular  disquietudes,  and  a  keeping  of  the  heart  in 
the  stillness  of  grace,  in  the  great  and  deep  peace  of  God.  It  need  not  be  disguised 
that  this  is  sometimes  a  matter  of  supreme  difficulty.  But  no  one  can  h  'pe  to  get 
the  angel-face  who  furrows  and  flushes  his  own  with  daily  excitements.  The  peace 
of  God  is  to  keep  the  heart  and  mind  as  a  garrison  is  kept.  Surely  "  the  helmet  of 
salvation  "  should  keep  the  head  cool  and  quiet.  The  very  feet  should  be  "  shod 
with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace."  III.  Benignity.  This  is  the  family 
likeness.  For  "  God  is  love,"  and  told  us  so  in  the  visible  form  of  His  Son.  And 
he  that  loveth  not  is  not  of  God,  and  cannot  wear  an  angel-face.  The  devil  wears 
a  kind  of  shattered  splendour  on  his  face.  He  is  intellectual,  he  is  calm ;  but 
there  is  no  flush  of  benignity  on  his  face  ;  and  by  a  long  course  of  rebellion  he  has 
forgotten  how  to  love.  But  those  who,  like  Stephen,  learn  the  lesson  at  the  feet  of 
Christ,  and  practise  it  among  those  who  return  good  for  evil,  and  seek  the  salvation 
of  souls,  they  put  on  the  image  of  the  heavenly,  and  look  like  what  thev  are — the 
children  of  the  King  !  IV.  Fearlessness.  In  Stephen's  case  consequences  were 
what  we  call  "fatal.''  But  in  the  nomenclature  of  heaven  fatal  sometimes  means 
vital.  Courage  in  the  highest  sense  always  means  safety.  If  an  angel  were  here, 
to  live  for  a  while  the  life  of  a  man,  you  would  see  what  it  is  to  be  brave.  You 
would  see  him  pas-i  through  sorrows  smiling,  his  heurt  borne  up  already  with  fore- 
taste of  the  after-joy.  Conclusion :  1.  He  who  would  have  the  angel-face  must 
look  high  and  far.  He  must  learn  to  look  not  so  much  at  things,  as  through  them, 
to  see  what  is  in  them,  and  what  is  beyond.  In  a  little  while  Stephen  "  looked 
steadfastly  up  into  heaven."  There  is  a  look  for  a  mortal  man  to  give !  A  look 
which  in  his  case  was  well  rewarded,  for  "  He  saw  the  glory  of  God,"  &c.  And 
that  look  gave  him  final  victory.  Men  were  gnashing  their  teeth,  Ac,  beside  him  ; 
they  did  not  know  that  to  him  the  pains  of  death  were  over.  He  had  "  looked  " 
himself  into  heaven.  He  had  trodden  the  streets  of  gold.  But  this  was  not  the 
first  time  he  had  looked  into  heaven.  Ever  since  he  became  a  believer  he  had  been 
looking  that  way.  "  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are 
above,  where  Christ  sitteth."  You  find  them  everywhere — in  daily  duties,  in 
commonest  things — but  it  needs  the  angel-eye  to  see  them.  Be  an  angel,  or  be  a 
child  in  this ;  for  the  little  child  is  not  unlike  the  angel  in  its  lookmg.  Did  you 
never  see  it  on  the  little  face — that  calm,  dreamy,  distant  look,  that  pierces  i|uite 
through  your  world,  and  transcends  all  your  ideas  of  prurience,  and  care,  and  duty, 
with  a  sublime  indifference  which  is  none  the  less  grand  that  it  is  so  simple  ?  2. 
Of  course  it  is  quite  vain  to  attempt  to  put  it  on — the  angel-face— directly,  and  by 
mental  intention,  as  a  soldier  puts  on  his  armour,  or  a  king  his  royal  rohe.  Could 
anything  more  absurd  be  conceived  than  this,  that  a  man  should  say,  "  Now  I  am 
going  to  look  like  an  angel  1  "  If  you  try  to  put  any  particular  emotion  into  the 
features,  it  will  not  be  suprising  if  the  very  opposite  emotion  should  come  instead. 


«HAP.  VI.]  THE  ACTS.  569 

Try  to  look  grand,  and  you  may  make  yourself  little.  Try  to  look  innocent,  and 
(althongh  you  may  not  remember  a  single  sin)  the  general  consciousness  of  guilt 
may  seize  you  and  put  its  colour  into  your  face.  Have  the  angel  within,  and  leave 
all  else  to  come,  as  it  will.  Or,  as  in  the  case  of  Stephen,  be  "  full  of  faith,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,"  i.e.,  be  a  Christian  man,  througli  and  through,  and  the  Lord 
your  Gud  will  put  His  "  beauty"  on  you,  in  one  or  other  of  its  many  forms,  and 
in  some  supreme  moments  of  life,  in  suffering,  in  trial,  in  death,  may  give  your 
friends  beholding  you  the  privilege  and  joy  of  looking  as  it  were  upon  the  face  of 
an  angel.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Character  seen  in  the  face  : — There  is  a  natural 
effect  of  the  states  of  the  spirit  upon  the  countenance,  which  gradually  progresses, 
and  which  amounts  in  a  lifetime  to  a  transfiguration.  The  infant  has  no  expression 
in  its  face  of  good  or  evil,  because  it  feels  no  good  or  evil.  As  it  grows  into  child- 
hood, there  is  little  to  be  read  there,  save  sometimes  an  inherited  grossness  of 
feature  moulded  by  ancestral  brutishness,  or  some  lines  of  spiritual  or  intellf-ctual 
expression  that  come  down  from  the  father  and  the  father's  father.  Otherwise  all 
is  blank — the  unspotted  sheet  on  which  many  characters  of  exquisite  beauty  or 
unseemly  blots  may  be  thereafter  marked.  But  as  life  progresses  every  deed 
seems  to  be  written  on  the  face.  See  how  it  is — I.  In  a  life  of  vick.  1.  Evil  passions 
and  deeds  trace  the  handwriting  of  sin  ;  and  every  crime  deepens  the  Hues,  and 
every  bad  thought  extends  them  further.  Beastliness  of  habit  makes  a  beastly 
lace.  Hatred  and  revenge  ossify  the  features  to  their  own  hardness.  Drunkeunesa 
puffs  up  the  drunkard's  bloated  face.  The  young  have  not  written  these  characters 
on  themselves  so  plainly  as  yet — they  are  hardly  legible ; — but  age  has  imprinted 
them  as  indelibly  as  if  they  were  carved  in  the  rock.  And  this  is  the  transfigura- 
tion of  vice.  2.  It  is  so  perfect  that  there  need  be  no  other  bo  ik  of  record  for  men 
than  that  which  they  write  themselves  upon  themselves.  Did  Cain  bear  a  mark  on 
his  forehead?  It  was  the  type  or  prediction  of  the  thousands  of  marked  brows 
which  at  the  judgment  shall  require  no  testimony,  and  no  sentence  of  the  Judge, 
tut  shall,  to  all  beholders,  proclaim  the  sinfulness  and  the  punishment.  3.  Do  we 
often  enough  think  of  this,  that  it  requires  not  great  crimes  to  debase  the  features 
of  the  form  Divine,  but  that  wbat  we  call  little  sins  are  just  as  surely  day  by  day 
leaving  their  imprint  ?  We  suffer  anger  to  p  >ssess  us,  and  think  that  when  it  has 
passed  we  shall  be  the  same.  We  cherish  impure  thoughts,  supposing  that  they 
•will  in  no  way  permanently  affect  us.  We  deceive  our  fellows  without  a  thought 
that  "  hypocrite  "  will  be  written  in  our  faces.  How  often  are  these  said  to  be 
little  things  which  will  be  like  stains  upon  the  hands,  easily  washed  away  1  But 
there  is  truth  in  the  thought  that  blood  of  murder  will  not  wash  from  the  palm, 
and  an  equal  truth  that  our  so-called  little  faults,  too,  do  daily  stain  or  mould  our 
countenances.  Take  care,  then,  of  the  inward  impurity,  that  it  may  not  come  to 
it ;  that  not  only  God,  who  reads  the  heart,  but  men  also  who  read  the  face,  may 
see  the  wrong  of  a  wrong  life  by  its  marks.  II.  In  the  life  of  virtue.  1.  This 
also  is  a  change  which  may  progress  from  the  earliest  age  at  which  moral 
character  can  exist.  And  we  have  often  seen  the  good  man's  goodness  written 
upon  his  outward  appearance,  and  bis  purity  of  heart,  like  a  subtle  ether,  penetra- 
ting through  until  it  has  surrounded  him  with  a  kind  of  atmosphere,  and  sat  upon 
his  head  like  a  halo.  Have  you  not  seen  it? — gentleness  on  the  brow;  calmness 
and  purpose  in  the  eye ;  purity  of  heart  on  the  lips  ;  temperance  stamped  on  the 
features  ;  the  love  of  man  in  every  gesture  ;  and  love  and  faith  toward  God  in  the 
air  and  expression.  It  is  seen  more  in  the  aged,  for  it  is  a  change  which  grows 
through  long  years.  It  grows  sooner  in  such  as  have  borne  pain  and  sorrow,  since 
they  ai-e  the  native  soil  of  virtue.  But  it  is,  more  or  less,  in  all  who  live  good  lives. 
It  is  the  mark  by  which  God  marks  His  beloved.  It  is  the  transfiguration  of 
virtue.  2.  This,  too,  is  an  evident  preparation  for  the  judgment  or  life  to  come. 
For  it  is  written  by  ourselves— our  own  handwriting  on  the  white  page  in 
which  we  come  to  this  world  clothed ;  our  own  signature  which  we  shall  carry 
when  we  go  hence.  And  shall  we  fail  to  write  this  lovely  record  as  we  live  here? 
— by  faith  marking  on  ourselves  the  graceful  letters  of  faith ;  by  brotherly  kind- 
ness writing  it  on  our  face;  by  excellent  and  passionless  emotions  smoothing 
our  brows  ;  by  holy  love  illuminating  the  beauteous  margin  of  the  whole  manu- 
script ;  by  patience  and  pain  providing  the  border  of  glory  which  shall  appear 
in  the  white  hairs  which  are,  in  the  good,  a  crown  of  glory.  Ah  !  it  is  ours  to 
rise  at  the  last  day  with  God's  seal  of  baptism  made  a  visible  stamp  on  every 
feature  by  our  daily  fulfilment  of  baptismal  vows.  Conclusion :  How  does  all 
this  impress  on  us  the  folly  of  the  thought  that  we  can  safely  put  off  a  holy  life 


570  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

until  near  the  end  of  life.  Surely,  if  vice  and  virtue  do  thus  stamp  themselves 
upon  the  features,  a  man  cannot  for  long  years  let  avarice  pinch  his  features  and 
passions  deform  them,  and  then  in  a  short  time  expect  God's  Spirit  to  paint  upon 
them  the  beauty  of  goodness.  The  evil  spirits  against  which  we  strive  are  slowly 
to  be  killed  and  drawn  foith  ;  and  the  good  that  shall  be  unto  life  will  be  slowly 
planted  and  nourished.  Begin  early.  For  it  were  better  for  the  saint  even  to  die 
young  and  have  the  glow  of  heaven  on  his  face,  and  see  his  Lord  on  the  right  hand 
of  God,  and  say  in  rapture,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit,"  than  a  long  hfe  would 
have  been,  even  crowned  with  all  worldly  prosperity.  {Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.)  The 
(/lory  on  the  cotintenauces  of  dying  Christians: — 1.  As  the  glorious  setting  of  an 
earthly  life,  ended  in  the  peace  of  God.  2.  As  the  glorious  rising  of  an  approach- 
ing eternity  with  its  heavenly  light.  (K.  Gerok.)  The  outward  expression  of  the 
inward : — It  is  said  that  Eaphael,  the  great  master  of  the  beautiful,  in  sketching  any 
figure  or  group  of  figures,  gave  his  first  attention  to  the  drawing  and  modelling  of 
the  limbs,  adiing  the  draperies  only  after  he  had  satisfied  himself  as  to  these.  By 
this  method  he  succeeded  in  imparting  to  them  an  air  of  inimitable  ease  and  truth- 
fulness. In  like  manner,  grace,  the  character-creating  principle,  begins  from 
within,  gradually  but  surely  harmonising  the  outward  man  with  the  laws  of  the  new 
nature,  and  so  producing  that  "  beauty  of  holiness  "  which  is  so  indescribable  yet 
so  familiar  to  us  all.  (A.  F.  Muir,  3I.A.)  Heaven  in  the  face: — A  little  boy 
going  home  one  day,  exulting  in  the  fact  that  he  had  met  Mr.  Pennefather,  was ' 
asked  by  his  mother,  "  What  did  he  say  to  you  ?  "  "  He  said  nothing,"  was  the 
child's  reply,  "  but  he  beamed  upon  me."  His  singularly  attractive  power,  how- 
ever, was  not  confined  to  children.  An  importunate  beggar,  who  was  one  day  tell- 
ing his  tale  of  waut  to  a  party  of  travellers,  suddenly  caught  sight  of  Mr.  Penne- 
father, and  prefaced  his  appeal  with  the  exclamation,  "  You,  sir,  with  heaven  in 
your  face  1  "  A  face  shining  for  the  Lord : — I  cannot  tell  you  the  privilege  it  is 
to  go  forth  as  Christ's  messenger.  I  have  lately  returned  from  a  visit  to  China, 
and  it  has  been,  not  an  occasional  thing,  but  quite  the  usual  thing,  to  find  the 
missionaries  full  of  blessing  and  boiling  over.  One  who  reached  China  about  a 
year  ago  was  not  there  very  long  before  the  natives  gave  him  a  name — "  Mr.  Glory- 
face  " — because  his  face  was  always  shining  for  the  Lord.  He  left  a  large  business 
in  which  over  two  thousand  hands  were  employed.  He  left  a  very  precious  work 
for  God,  in  which  he  had  been  happy  and  much  blessed.  But  what  was  his 
testimony'  "  Tlie  Lord  promised  me,"  he  said,  "  a  hundredfold  more  than  aU  I 
left  for  Him.  He  has  givfn  me  a  very  large  hundredfold.  It  has  been  the  best 
investment  I  have  ever  made."  (Z*.  Hudson  Taylor.)  Judged  by  the  grace  : — 
An  American  minister  quaintly  said,  "  Many  Christians  are  like  chestnuts :  very 
pleasant  nuts,  but  enclosed  in  very  prickly  burs,  which  require  various  denlings  of 
nature  and  her  grip  of  frost  before  the  kernel  is  disclosed."  This  reminds  me  of 
an  incident  in  my  experience.  Some  years  ago,  when  walking  with  a  dear  friend  in 
the  West-end  of  London,  we  happened  to  meet  a  lady  truly  eminent  for  her  good 
works,  but,  alas  !  possessing  a  stern,  sombre  expression  of  countenance.  I  remarked 
to  my  friend,  "  That  lady  is  a  very  earnest  Christian."  She  replied,  "  I  would  not 
like  to  make  her  acquaintance,  judging  from  her  face."  Here  was  one  of  Christ's 
servants  repelling  instead  of  attracting  to  Himself.  Truly  it  has  been  said, 
"  Gloominess,  irritabihty,  discontent,  and  touchiness  are  four  things  more  catching 
than  cholera." 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Vers.  1-53.  Then  said  the  liig'h  priest,  Are  these  things  so  7 — The  high  priest 
and  his  question : — This  functionary  was  j^robably  Theophilus,  son-in-law  of 
Caiaphas.  The  ex-oOicio  president  of  the  council  called  for  the  defence  auninst  the 
charge  of  blasphemy  (chap.  vi.  13, 14).  The  question,  equivalent  to  guilty  or  not 
guilty,  appears  to  have  been  put  with  great  mildness,  possibly  under  the  influence 
of  the  angel-like  aspect,  (lip.  Jacobson.)  And  he  said,  Men,  brethren,  and 
fathers,  hearken. — Stephen's  defence  : — In  order  to  understand  this  wonderful  and 
somewhat  difficult  speech,  it  will  be  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  a  threefold  element 
runs  through  it.     I.   He    shows  apologetically  that  so  far  from  dishonom'ing 


CHAP.  Yii.]  THE  ACTS.  57 J 

Moses  or  God,  he  believes  and  holds  in  mind  God's  dealings  with  Abraham  and 
Moses,  and  grounds  upon  tbem  his  preaching ;  that  so  far  from  dishonouring  tlie 
temple,  he  bears  in  mind  its  history  and  the  sayings  of  the  prophets  respecting  it; 
and  he  is  proceeding,  when  interrupted  by  their  murmurs  or  inattention,  he  bursts 
forth  into  a  holy  vehemence  of  invective  against  their  rejection  of  God.  II.  But 
simultaneously  and  parallel  with  this  he  also  proceeds  didactically,  showing  them 
that  a  future  prophet  was  pointed  out  by  Moses  as  the  final  lawgiver  of  God's 
people — that  tbe  Most  High  had  revealed  His  spiritual  and  heavenly  nature  by  the 
prophets,  and  did  not  dwell  in  temples  made  with  hands.  HI.  Even  more  remark- 
ably does  the  polemic  element  run  through  the  speech.  "  It  is  not  I,  but  you,  who 
from  the  first  times  till  now  have  rejected  and  spoken  against  God."  And  this 
element  just  appearing  (ver.  9),  and  again  more  plainly  (vers.  25-28),  and  again 
more  pointedly  still  in  ver.  35,  becomes  dominant  in  vers.  39-44,  and  finally  pre- 
vails to  the  exclusion  of  the  others  in  vers.  51-53.  {Dean  Alford.)  Stephen'' s 
defence  : — I.  The  source  of  his  argument.  The  sacred  history  of  the  Jews  which 
accusers  and  accused  alike  revered.  In  doing  this  he  secured  their  attention  by 
giving  them  to  understand — 1.  That  his  faith  in  that  history  was  as  strong  as  theirs. 
2.  That  he  was  thoroughly  conversant  with  that  history.  II.  Its  point — that  all 
God's  dealings  with  His  people  pointed  to  those  very  changes  which  he  was  accused 
of  advocating.  This  position  he  makes  good  by  showing— 1.  That  the  external  con- 
dition of  tbe  Church  had  undergone  repeated  clianges.  There  was  a  change  under 
(1)  Abraham  (vers.  2-8).  (2)  Joseph  (vers.  9-16).  (3)  Moses  (vers.  17-44).  (4) 
Da^id  (vers.  45,  46).  2.  That  the  present  external  state  of  the  Church  had  no 
existence  before  Solomon  ;  and  that  even  this  was  intended  from  the  beginning  to 
be  temporary  (vers.  47-50).  III.  Its  application  (vers.  51-53).  Mark — 1.  The 
vile  character  he  gives  them.  (1)  "  Stiffnecked  " — contumacious,  rebellious.  (2) 
"Uncircumcised"^unsacred,  impure.  2.  The  crimes  he  charges  upon  them — (1) 
Resistance  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  An  hereditary  persecuting  spirit.  (3)  The 
betrayal  and  murder  of  the  Son  of  God.  (D.  Thomas,  D  D.)  'The  defence  of 
Stephen  : — 1.  How  does  this  speech  happen  to  be  h'^re  ?  It  would  be  easy  for  the 
memory  to  carry  a  sentence  or  two  ;  but  who  could  record  so  long  and  highly- 
informed  a  speech  ?  There  was  a  young  man  listening  with  no  friendly  ear.  His 
name  was  Saul.  It  is  supposed  that  he  related  it  to  Luke.  It  is  not  a  correct 
report.  No  man  can  report  chain  lightning.  You  may  catch  a  little  here  and  there, 
but  the  elements  that  lifted  it  up  into  historic  importance,  it  was  not  in  the  power 
of  memory  to  carry.  You  must  not  therefore  hold  Stephen  responsible  for  this 
speech  ;  they  did  not  give  him  an  opportunity  of  revising  it.  There  is  no  state- 
ment here  made  that  is  not  spiritually  true,  and  yet  there  are  a  few  sentences  that 
may  be  chnllenged  on  some  technical  ground.  Some  persons  imagine  that  they 
are  inspired  when  they  are  only  technical.  They  forget  that  you  may  not  have  a 
single  text  in  support  of  what  you  are  stating,  and  yet  may  have  the  whole  Bible  in 
defence  uf  it.  The  Bible  is  not  a  text,  it  is  a  tone  ;  it  is  not  a  piece  of  technical 
evidence,  it  is  an  inspiration.  2.  The  man  who  reported  this  speech  to  Luke  made 
it  the  basis  and  the  model  of  his  own  immortal  apologies.  Truly  we  sometimes 
borrow  from  unacknowledged  sources,  and  are  sometimes  indebted  to  unknown 
influences  for  some  of  our  best  inspirations.  That  a  man  appointed  with  six  others 
to  serve  tables  should  have  become  the  first  Christian  martyr  apologist,  and  should 
have  given  the  model  for  the  greatest  speeches  ever  delivered  by  man,  is  surely  a 
veiy  miracle  of  Providence  !  How  little  Stephen  knew  what  he  was  doing.  Who 
really  knows  the  issue  and  full  effect  of  any  action  or  speech  ?  Life  is  not  marked 
off  in  so  many  inches  and  done  with  ;  it  may  be  the  beginning  of  endless  other 
acts  nobler  than  itself.  I.  It  is  fair  criticism  to  infer  the  man  from  the 
speech.  What  kind  of  man  was  Stephen,  judged  by  his  speech?  He  was — 1.  A 
man  well  versed  in  the  Scriptures.  From  beginning  to  end  his  speech  is  scriptural ; 
quotation  follows  quotation  like  shocks  of  thunder.  Stephen  was  a  man  wlio  had 
read  his  Bible  ;  therein  he  separates  himself  from  the  most  of  modem  people.  I 
cannot  call  to  mind  one  who  ever  read  the  Bible  and  disbelieved  it.  We  all  know 
many  who  abuse  the  Bible  who  have  never  read  it.  Not  that  such  persons  have 
not  read  parts  of  the  Bible,  which  being  perused  without  understanding  are  mis- 
quoted. Wlio  really  knows  the  Bible  by  heart?  Some  of  us  boast  that  we  can 
recite  five  plays  of  Shakespeare.  Who  can  recite  the  Book  of  Psalms  ?  You  call 
upon  your  little  children  to  recite  nonsense  verses,  which  is  well  enough  now  and 
then;  but  which  of  your  children  can  recite  a  chapter  of  St.  John  ?  Suppose  some 
of  us  were  called  upon  at  a  moment's  notice  to  recite  six  verses  of  Eomans  ?     Only 


572  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [cniP.  vii. 

the  men  who  know  the  Bible  should  quote  it.  Only  those  who  are  steeped  in  the 
Scriptures  should  undertake  to  express  any  opininn  about  it.  This  is  the  law  in  all 
other  criticism,  and  in  common  justice  it  ought  to  be  the  law  in  relation  to  the 
inspired  revelation  of  God.  2.  A  man  who  took  a  broad  and  practical  view  of  history. 
It  is  as  difficult  to  find  a  man  who  has  read  history  as  to  find  a  man  who  has  read 
the  Bible.  A  man  does  not  know  history  because  he  can  repeat  all  the  kings  of 
England  from  the  Conquest.  You  do  not  learn  history  from  the  books.  From  the 
books  you  harn  the  facts  ;  but  having  ascertained  the  facts,  you  must  make  history. 
The  novelist  is  a  better  historian  than  the  me'e  annalist,  because  history  is  an 
atmosphere.  It  is  not  only  a  panorama  of  passing  incidents ;  it  is  a  spirit  in  which 
such  men  as  Stephen  lived.  He  was  a  member  of  a  great  and  noble  household,  a 
link  in  a  far-stretching  chain,  an  element  in  a  great  composition.  Why  should 
we  live  the  shallow  life  of  men  who  have  no  history  behind  them?  We  are  en- 
compassed by  a  great  cloud  of  witnesses.  We  have  no  right  todisennoble  ourselves 
and  commit  an  HCt  of  dismembership  which  separates  us  from  the  agony,  the 
repponsibi'ity,  and  the  destiny  of  the  race.  In  Christ  we  have  all  to  be  one.  3.  A 
man  who  was  forced  into  action  by  his  deep  convictions.  That  is  a  word  which 
has  somehow  slipped  out  of  our  vocabulary,  because  it  has  slipped  out  of  our  life. 
Who  now  hns  any  convictions  ?  Life  is  now  a  game,  a  series  of  expedients,  a  suc- 
cession of  experiments.  It  is  not  an  embodied  and  sacrificial  conviction.  In  those 
days  men  spoke  because  they  believed.  They  had  no  necessity  to  get  up  a  speech, 
to  arrange  it  in  words  that  would  offend  and  he  recollected  by  nobody.  Without 
faith  we  cannot  have  eloquence.  It  is  not  enough  to  have  information.  If  you 
believe  Christianity,  you  will  not  need  an  exhortation  to  speak  it.  Speech  about 
Christianity,  where  it  is  known  and  loved,  is  the  best  necessity  of  this  life.  The 
fire  burns,  the  heart  muses,  and  the  tongue  speaks  ;  hence  in  the  fifty-first  verse  you 
find  that  Stephen  was  a  man  whose  information  burned  into  religious  earnestness. 
Having  made  his  quotation  he  turned  round  as  preachers  dare  not  turn  round  now. 
It  was  an  offensive  speech,  and  it  would  be  unpardonable  now.  Why?  Because 
it  was  truth  made  pointed,  and  that  no  man  will  ever  endure.  The  man  who  would 
listen  all  day  with  delight  to  an  eloquent  malediction  upon  the  depravity  of  the 
whole  world  would  leave  the  church  if  you  told  him  he  was  a  drunkard  or  a  thief. 
We  live  in  generalities.  So  preaching  is  now  dying,  or  it  is  becoming  a  trick  in 
eloquence,  or  it  is  offering  a  grand  opportunity  for  sayins;  nothing  about  nothing. 
It  used  to  turn  the  world  upside  down.  II.  Let  us  turn  from  the  man  to  the 
SPEECH.  1.  Its  literary  form.  W^e  need  no  book  of  rnetoric  beyond  this  great 
apology.  Called  upon,  he  addresses  his  auditors  with  courtesy  as  "  Men,  brethren, 
and  fathers."  He  begins  calmly,  with  the  serenity  of  conscious  power.  He  quotes 
from  undisputed  authority.  Every  step  he  takes  is  a  step  in  advance.  There  is 
not  in  all  his  narration  one  circular  movement.  Having  accumulated  his  facts  and 
put  them  in  the  most  vivid  manner,  he  suddenly,  like  the  out-bursting  of  a  volcano, 
applies  the  subject,  saying,  "  Ye  stiff-necked,"  &c.  This  is  the  law  of  argumenta- 
tive progress.  Begin  courteously,  and  beg  the  confidence  and  respectful  attention 
of  your  hearers;  but  your  speech  will  be  their  responsibility.  They  will  not  be  the 
Fame  at  the  end  of  the  speech  a  they  were  at  the  beginning.  A  preacher  may 
begin  as  courteously  as  he  pleases,  but  having  shown  what  God  is  and  has  done, 
and  wants  to  be  done,  his  conclusion  should  be  a  judgment  as  well  as  a  gospel.  2. 
Its  probable  source.  How  did  Stephen  know  all  about  the  case  ?  Suppose  that 
Stephen  was  the  second  disciple  who,  on  the  road  to  Emniaus,  heard  Christ 
expound  in  all  Scripture  the  things  concerning  himself.  What  if  Saul  reported 
Stephen,  and  Stephen  reported  Christ,  and  so  the  great  gospel  goes  on  from  man  to 
man,  from  tongue  to  tongue,  till  the  last  man  hears  it,  and  his  heart  burns  within 
him  1  3.  Its  main  purpose — to  disclose  the  method  of  Divine  revelation  and 
providence.  Let  us  see  whether  what  is  related  here  agrees  with  our  own  observa- 
tion and  experience.  (1)  God  has  from  the  beginning  made  Himself  known  to 
individuals.  Stephen  relates  the  great  names  of  history.  Some  names  are  as 
mountains  on  the  landscape.  We  start  our  journeys  from  tliem,  we  reckon  our 
distances  by  them,  we  measure  our  progress  according  to  their  height.  God  does 
not  reveal  Himself  to  crowds.  It  is  not  only  in  theology,  but  in  science,  politics, 
commerce,  literature,  family  life,  that  God  speaks  to  the  individual  and  entrusts 
him  with  some  great  gospel  or  spiritual  mystery.  Why  talk  about  election  as  if  it 
were  exclusively  a  religious  word  ?  How  is  it  that  one  man  iu  the  family  has  all  the 
sense  ?  How  is  it  that  one  man  is  a  poet  and  another  a  mathematician  ?  How  is 
it  that  one  boy  can  never  be  got  to  stay  at  home  and  his  own  brother  can  never  be 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  673 

got  to  leave  home  ?  How  is  it  that  one  man  speaks  out  the  word  that  exnressea 
the  inarticulate  thought  cf  a  generation,  though  all  other  men  wouid  uave  been 
wise  enough  to  discover  it  ?  (2)  God  has  constantly  come  along  the  line  ol  surprise. 
Eevelation  has  never  been  a  commonplace.  Wherever  God  has  revealed  Himself 
He  has  surprised  the  person  on  whom  the  light  has  fallen.  The  power  of  surprise 
is  one  of  the  greatest  powers  at  the  disposal  of  any  teacher.  How  to  put  the  old  as 
if  it  were  the  new  1  How  to  set  fire  to  common  sense  so  that  it  shall  burn  up  into 
genius !  How  to  reveal  to  a  man  his  bigger  and  better  self  !  How  has  God  pro- 
ceeded according  to  the  historical  narration  of  Stephen?  To  Abram  he  said,  "  Get 
thee  out  from  thy  country  and  from  thy  kindred."  We  cannot  conceive  the  shock 
of  surprise  with  which  these  words  would  be  received.  Travelling  then  was  not 
what  tiavelling  is  now.  No  man  could  receive  a  call  of  that  kind  as  a  mere  com- 
monplace !  Called  to  give  up  a  reality  in  the  hope  of  realising  a  dream  1  Joseph's 
1  f e  was  a  surprise — a  greater  surprise  to  himself  than  to  anybody.  How  was  it 
that  he  always  had  the  key  of  the  gate?  Why  did  men  turn  to  him ?  How  was  it 
that  he  only  could  tell  the  meaning  of  the  king's  dream?  Then  pass  on  to  Moses. 
A  bush  flamed  at  the  mountain  base,  and  a  voice  said  to  the  wanderer.  Stop  I 
Nothing  but  fire  can  stop  some  men  !  There  are  those  to  whom  the  dew  is  a  gospel, 
there  are  others  who  require  the  very  fire  that  lights  the  eternal  throne  to  stop  them 
and  rouse  their  full  attention.  God  knows  what  kind  of  ministry  you  need,  so  He 
has  set  in  His  Church  a  thousand  ministries.  It  is  not  for  us  to  compare  the  one 
with  the  other,  but  to  see  in  such  a  distribution  of  power  God's  purpose  to  touch 
every  creature  in  the  whole  world.  (3)  God  has  all  the  time  been  over-ruling 
improbabilities  and  disasters.  We  should  say  that  when  God  has  called  a  man  to 
service  the  road  would  be  wide,  clear  of  all  obstructions,  filled  with  sunshine,  lined 
with  flowers,  that  the  man  leaning  on  God's  arm  will  be  accompanied  by  the  sing- 
ing of  birds  and  of  angels.  Nothing  of  the  kind  is  true  to  fact.  Stephen  recognises 
this  in  very  distinct  terms.  God  said  that  Abram's  seed  should  sojourn  in  a  strange 
land,  and  that  they  should  bring  them  into  bondage,  and  evil  entreat  them  four 
hundred  years  !  In  the  face  of  such  an  arrangement  can  there  be  an  A  mighty 
providence  ?  Yes.  And  Joseph  was  sold  into  Egypt.  "  God-forsaken  "  we  should 
say,  looking  at  the  outside  only.  And  there  were  those  who  evilly  entreated  our 
fathers,  so  that  they  cast  out  their  young  children  to  the  end  they  might  not  live. 
Moses  himself  was  "cast  out."  Stephen  does  not  cover  these  things  up  or  make 
less  of  them.  Nay,  he  masses  them  into  great  black  groups,  and  says — Still  the 
great  thought  went  on  and  on  !  There  is  the  majesty  of  the  Divine  Providence. 
Its  movement  is  not  lost  in  pits,  and  caves,  and  wildernesses,  and  rivers,  and  seas. 
The  disasters  are  many,  the  sufferings  are  severe,  the  disappointments  are  innumer- 
able and  unendurable  ;  still  the  thought  goes  on.  Judge  nothing  before  the  time. 
So  it  is  with  our  own  life.  Conclusion :  Mark  how  exactly  this  whole  history  of 
Stejjhen's  corresponds  with  Christ's  method  of  revelation  and  providence.  1.  Did 
not  Christ  reveal  Himself  to  individuals  ?  Did  He  not  say  to  the  Abram  of  His  time, 
"  Follow  Me  "  ?  2.  Did  He  not  also  use  the  power  of  surprise  ?  When  was  He  ever 
received  into  any  town  as  an  ordinary  visitor  ?  Who  did  not  wait  for  Him  to  speak 
and  look,  and  act  ?  Who  was  not  impatient  with  all  the  multitude  lest  they  should 
intfrrupt  any  sentence  of  this  marvellous  eloquence?  '6.  Did  He  not  al<o  take  His 
Church  through  improbabilities,  disasters,  and  dark  places  ?  Has  not  His  Church 
been  evil  entreated  ?  Have  not  our  Christian  fathers  been  cast  out  ?  Have  we  not 
also  our  heroes,  and  sufferers,  and  martyrs,  and  crowned  ones  ?  Was  not  Christ 
always  master  of  the  occasion?  Without  a  place  whereon  to  lay  His  head,  He 
was  still  the  Lord.  We  remember  our  disasters;  but  the  Church  is  the  Lamb's 
Bride,  and  He  will  marry  her  at  the  altar  of  the  universe!  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
St.  Stephen's  defence  : — How  was  Stephen's  speech  preserved  ?  The  notaries, 
phoithand  writers,  and  clerks  attendant  upon  a  Koman  court  were  accessible  to 
the  gifts  of  the  richer  Christians  when  they  wished  to  obtain  a  correct  narrative  of 
a  martyr's  last  trial.  Secret  Christians  among  the  officials  also  effected  something, 
and  there  were  numerous  other  methods  by  which  the  Eoman  judicial  records 
became  the  property  of  the  Church.  Probably  St.  Paul  gave  his  disciple,  St.  Luke, 
a  report  of  what  Stephen  said  on  this  occasion.    I.  The  defence  of  St.  Stephen 

WAS    A     speech    delivered     BY     A     JeW,     AND     ADDRESSED     TO    A     JewiSH     AUDIENCE. 

Orientals  argued  then,  and  argue  still,  not  according  to  the  rules  of  logic  taught  by 
Aristotle,  nor  by  the  methods  of  eloquence  derived  from  the  traditions  of  Cicero 
and  Quinctilian,  but  by  methods  and  rules  essentially  different.  What  would 
satisfy  Westerns  would  seem  to  them  utterly  worthless,  just  as  an  argument  which 


574  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vir. 

no>v  R9pms  pointlpss  appeared  to  them  absolutely  conclusive.  Parallels,  analogies, 
parables,  mystical  interpretations  were  then  favourite  methods  of  argument.  St. 
Stephen  was  accused  of  irreverence  towards  Moses,  and  hostility  towards  the  temple, 
and  towards  all  the  Jewish  institutions.  He  begins  his  address  to  the  Sanhedrin 
at  the  earliest  period  of  their  national  history,  and  shows  how  the  chosen  people 
had  passed  through  many  changes  and  developments  without  interfering  with  their 
essential  identity.  There  was  a  chosen  people  before  the  customs  introduced  by 
Moses.  There  may  therefore  be  a  chosen  people  still  when  these  customs  cease, 
having  fulfilled  their  purpose.  He  was  accused  also  of  speaking  blasphemous 
words  a';,'ainst  the  national  sanctuary.  His  argument  now  takes  a  different  turn, 
and  runs  thus :  This  building  is  now  the  centre  of  Jewish  thoughts  and  affections. 
But  it  is  a  mere  modern  thing  as  compared  with  the  original  choice  and  promise  of 
God.  Even  when  it  was  built,  and  in  all  its  original  glory,  its  temporal  character 
was  clearly  recognised  by  Isaiah  (Ixvi.  i.  2).  The  same  truth  had  been  anticipated 
by  Solomon  (1  Kings  viii.  27).  Then  there  occurs  a  break  in  St.  Stephen's  address. 
Possibly  the  Sadiiucean  portion  of  his  audience  had  got  quite  enough^  Their 
countenances  and  gestures  bespoke  their  horror  of  his  doctrines.  Isaiah's  opinion 
carried  no  weight  with  them  as  contrasted  with  the  institutions  of  Moses  ;  and  so, 
boruK  along  by  the  force  of  his  oratory,  Stephen  finished  with  that  vigorous  denun- 
ci<tion  which  led  to  his  de.ith  (vers.  51-53).  II.  What  a  lesson  Stephen's  spiiECH 
HAS  FOR  THE  Church  OF  EVERY  AGE !  His  f.irccast  swcpt  away  at  once  all  the  ^ 
privileges  and  profits  connected  with  the  religious  jjosition  of  Jerusalem,  and  thus 
destroyed  the  political  prospects  of  the  Jewish  people.  Men  never  listen  patiently 
when  their  pockets  are  being  touched,  their  dearest  hopes  annihilated.  Take  the 
political  world  alone.  We  now  look  back  and  view  with  horror  the  deeds  wrought 
m  the  name  of  authority,  and  in  opposition  to  the  principles  of  change  and  innova- 
tion. We  read  the  stories  of  Alva,  and  the  massacres  in  the  Netherlands,  the 
bloody  deeds  of  the  seventeenth  centtiry  in  England  and  all  over  Europe,  the 
miseries  and  bloodshed  of  the  American  War  of  Independence,  the  fierce  opposition 
with  which  the  spirit  of  liberty  has  been  resisted  throughout  this  century ;  and  our 
sympathies  are  altogether  ranged  on  the  side  of  the  sufferers— the  losers  and 
defeated,  it  may  have  been,  for  the  time,  but  the  triumphant  in  the  long  run.  The 
tiue  student,  however,  of  history,  or  of  human  nature,  will  not  content  himself  with 
any  one-sided  view,  and  he  will  have  some  sympathy  to  spare  for  those  wlio  adopted 
the  stern  measures.  He  will  not  judge  them  too  harshly.  They  reverenced  the 
past  as  the  Jews  of  Jerusalem  did,  and  reverence  is  a  feeling  tijat  is  right  and 
blessed.  The  opponents  of  political  change  are  sometimes  denounced  in  the  fiercest 
language,  as  if  they  were  morally  wicked.  The  late  Dr.  Arnold  se^ms  a  grievous 
offender  in  this  respect.  No  one  can  read  his  charming  biography  by  Uean  Stanley 
without  recognising  how  intolerant  he  was  towards  his  political  opponents ;  how  blind 
he  was  to  those  good  motives  which  inspire  the  timorous,  the  ignorant,  and  the  aged, 
when  brought  face  to  face  with  changes  which  appear  to  them  thickly  charged  with 
the  most  dangerous  results.  Charity  towards  opponents  is  sadly  needed  in  the 
political  as  well  as  in  the  religious  world.  And  as  it  has  bet^n  in  politics,  so  has  it 
been  in  religion.  Men  reverence  the  past,  and  that  reverence  easily  glides  into  an 
idolatry,  blind  to  its  defects  and  hostile  to  any  improvement.  It  is  in  religion  too 
as  in  politics ;  a  thousand  other  interests — money,  oilice,  expectations,  memorit'S  of 
the  loved  and  lost — are  bound  up  with  religious  forms,  and  then  when  the  prophet 
arises  with  his  Divine  message,  as  Stephen  ai'ose  before  the  Sanhedrin,  the  ancient 
proverb  is  fulfilled,  the  corruption  of  the  best  becomes  the  worst,  the  good  motives 
mingle  with  the  evil,  and  are  used  by  the  poor  human  heart  to  justify  the  harde-t, 
most  unchristian,  deeds  <<one  in  defence  of  what  men  believe  to  be  the  cause  of  truth 
and  righteousness.  III.  The  mistakes  and  variations  which  occur  in  Stephen's 
SPEECH.  They  are  mistakes  such  as  a  speaker,  filled  with  his  subject  and  speaking 
to  an  excited  and  hostile  audience,  might  naturally  make;  mistakes  such  as  truthful 
speakers  every  day  make  in  their  oidinary  efforts.  (G.  T.  Sokes,  D.D.)  Stcj)hen'» 
testimonij : — 1.  "  Mark  the  perfect  man."  Tliat  object  is  worthy  of  regard  any- 
where; but  here  it  is  in  a  position  peculiarly  fitted  to  display  its  grandeur.  Every- 
thing about  the  faith  of  Christians  is  interesting;  but  "  the  trial  of  their  faith  is 
found  unto  praise,"  &c.  (1  Pet.  i.  7).  The  flame  may  live  through  the  day,  but  it  is 
by  night  that  it  is  seen.  "  Mark  the  perfect  man,"  but  choose  the  time  for  marking 
him — towards  tiie  close :  "  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace."  2.  Stephen  stands 
before  the  Sanhedrin,  not  to  be  tried  but  to  be  c  mdemned.  Whsn  he  distributed 
alms  his  fac^  was  pleasant ;  but  when  he  stands  before  his  murderers  it  is  hke  the 


CHAP.  YU.]  THE  ACTS.  575 

face  of  an  angel.  The  sun  is  most  beautiful  at  its  setting,  and  if  dark  clouds  cluster 
3'ound  they  serve  to  receive  anil  reflect  his  light,  and  so  to  increase  the  loveliness  of 
the  departing  moment.  2.  The  specific  cha'ge  against  Stephen  was  that  he  spoke 
blasphemous  words,  &c  ;  but  the  first  portion  of  his  speech  must  have  gone  far  to 
refute  it,  for  in  the  spirit  of  a  devout  believer  he  traces  the  course  of  Hebrew  his- 
tory. This  is  no  reviler  of  the  temple  and  the  law,  a  renegade  Jew  who  abjures 
Moses.  His  ele^'ant  apologetic  essay  by  itself  would  have  pleased  his  judges,  as 
the  story  of  the  ewe  lamb  did  the  guilty  king,  and  perhaps  they  fliay  have  begun  to 
thinko."this  man  doeth  nothiug  worthy  of  death  or  of  bonds."  4.  Stephen,  I  sup- 
pose, had  a  wtll-defined  plan.  He  wished  to  win  their  attention  and  soften  their 
hearts.  When  at  last  he  saw  the  gates  open  he  made  a  sudden  rush,  in  the  hope 
of  taking  the  city  by  assault,  and  leading  its  defenders  captive  to  Christ.  And  the 
plan  v\as  in  the  first  instance  successful.  The  Word  proved  quick  and  powerful. 
The  sword  ran  into  their  joints  and  marrow.  The  immediate  object  isgained:  there 
is  conviction — "  they  were  cut  to  the  heart."  But  for  tbose  who  try  to  win  souls, 
as  for  those  who  try  to  win  fortunes,  there  is  many  a  slip  betwixt  the  cup  and  the 
lip.  Conversion  does  not  always  follow  conviction.  Wlien  such  a  home  thrust 
takes  effect  a  great  fire  of  anger  is  kindled  which  will  eitiier  turn  inward  and  con- 
sume sin,  or  outward  to  persecute  the  preacher.  In  this  ease  anger  went  the  wrong 
way.  5.  As  the  fury  of  tne  persecutors  increased,  so  did  the  ecstasy  of  the  martyr. 
The  blast  of  their  wrath  against  him,  like  the  wind  against  a  kite,  carried  him 
higher  toward  heaven.  He  saw  "the  glory  of  God  and  Jesus."  The  two  lie  close 
together,  to  Stephen  they  blended  in  one.  If  the  glo>y  of  God  were  to  appear  with- 
out Jesus  the  spirit  would  fail.  "  The  Lamb  is  the  light  "  of  heaven.  An  uproar 
ensued.  The  peace  and  triumph  of  the  maityrs  has  always  had  an  effect  upon  the 
persecutors,  'ihe  drums  were  beaten  to  drown  the  last  words  of  the  Scottish 
covenanters.  "  Argyle's  sleep  "  on  the  night  before  his  execution  made  his  enemies' 
blood  run  cold.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  God  of  Glory. — Stephen's  ansicers  to  the 
charge  of  blaspheviy  aqain»t  God  : — There  was  good  i-eason  for  commencing  his 
speech  in  the  name  of  God.  He  thus  in  opposition  to  the  current  slander  that  he 
blasphemed  God  not  only  testifies  his  deep  respect  for  God,  and  gives  to  Him  the 
honour  which  is  His  due;  but  he  has  a  positive  reason  for  asserting  the  glory  of 
God.  Here,  as  in  the  subsequent  pait  of  his  speech,  he  keeps  in  view  the  unlimited 
greatness,  authority  and  sovereignty  of  God,  according  to  which  God  is  bound  to 
n  ithing  an  I  no  one,  and  can  manifest  Himself  to  whom,  and  how,  and  when  He 
pleases.  The  expression  in  connection  with  "  appeared  "  brings  to  their  remem- 
brance the  sublime  and  elevating  glory  in  which  the  self-manifestations  of  God  were 
■wont  to  take  place.  (G.  V.  Lecliler,  D.D.)  Appeared  unto  our  father  Abraham 
■when  be 'was  in  Mesopotamia. — The  earliest  appearance  of  God  to  Abraham: — Of 
this  particular  appearance  there  is  no  account  in  Gen.  xi.  31.  But  a  Divine  com- 
mand, which  had  already  been  given  at  that  time,  is  implied  in  Gen.  xv.  7,  and 
reference  is  made  to  this  in  Josh.  xxiv.  2,  3  ;  Neh.  ix.  7  ;  Judith,  v.  7-9.  Philoand 
Josephus  agree  in  representing  the  Patriarch  as  having  been  called  twice,  first  from 
his  kindred  and  country  in  Ur,  secondly  from  his  father's  house  in  Haran,  Terah 
having  accompanied  him  in  the  former  migration,  and  being  dead  before  the  second. 
This  is  one  of  several  instances  in  which  New  Testament  supplies  facts  supplemen- 
tary to  Old  Testament— «.(/.,  the  prophecy  of  Enoch  (Jude  14) ;  the  names  of  the 
Egyptian  magicians  (2  Tim.  iii.  8) ;  the  hope  that  sustained  Abraham  in  offering 
Isaac  (Heb.  xi.  19) ;  the  acknowledgment  of  Moses  (Heb.  xii.  21) ;  the  motive  which 
strengthened  him  to  leave  the  court  of  Pharaoh  (Heb.  xi.  24),  and  Egypt  (Heb.  xi. 
27) ;  and  the  prayer  of  Elijah  (James  v.  17).     {Bp.  Jacobson.) 

Vers.  4-8.  When  his  father  was  dead  He  removed  him  into  this  land. — The 

dijjicnity  as  to  the  date  of  Abraham'' s  migration: — Terah  died  at  Harau  at  the  age  of 
two  hundred  and  five  (Gen.  xi.  32),  From  Gen.  xi.  26  it  has  been  inferred  that 
Terah  was  not  more  than  seventy  at  the  birth  of  Abraham  ;  and  as  Abraham  left 
Haran  at  seventy-five  (Gen.  xii.  4)  it  would  follow  that  Terah  outlived  his  departure 
sixty  ye■^rs.  But  it  is  nowhere  stated  that  Abraham  was  Terah's  eldest  son,  and 
the  Eatibins  reckoned  him  the  youngest.  Abraham's  prominence  in  history  as  the 
father  of  tbe  faithful  and  the  friend  of  God  accounts  for  his  name  being  placed 
before  ihat  of  Haran  in  Gen.  xi.  26.  In  like  manner  the  name  of  Shem,  the 
youngest,  stau'ls  first  among  the  sons  of  Noah  (Gen.  ix.  18 ;  x.  21) ;  Isaac's  name 
takes  precedence  of  Ishraael's  (1  Chron.  i.  28) ;  Judah  is  placed  at  the  head  of  the 
list  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  (1  Chron,  iv.  1 ;  v.  1-2),  and  Moses  is  mentioned  before  his 


576  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

elder  brother  Aaron.  {Ibid. )  And  He  gave  Mm  none  inheritance  in  it  .  .  .  yet. 
He  promised  that  He  would  give  it  to  Mm  for  a  possession. — The  faithfulness  of 
God : — Of  this  we  have  three  ilhistrations  in  the  verses  before  us,  which  are  all  the 
more  impressive  because  of  their  unlikelihood.  We  have  God's  fidelity — I.  To  His 
PKOMiSES  (ver.  5).  Abraham,  without  a  foot  of  land,  and,  being  childless  and 
nomadic,  not  Lkely  to  trouble  himself  about  any,  was  promised  that  his  seed  should 
possess  the  entire  country.  We  know  that  this  came  to  pass,  and  through  what  a. 
wonderful  series  of  unlikely  events  it  catae  to  pass.  This,  therefore,  is  a  good 
sample  of  all  God's  promises — e.g.,  1.  Of  temporal  good.  Who  that  has  trusted 
God's  word  in  this  particular  ever  knew  it  to  fail?  There  is  no  promise  of  afflu- 
ence, but  there  are  abundant  promises  of  sufhciency.  Some  of  the  richest  pages  in 
Christian  biogrnphy  are  records  of  the  extraordinary  way  in  which  God  works  the 
deliverance  of  His  people  in  poverty,  affliction,  danger,  &c.  2.  Of  salvation  — 
"Believe on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Who  ever  knew  that 
to  fail  ?  It  has  been  proved  over  and  over  again  in  the  most  hopeless  cases.  The 
infidel,  men  and  women  to  whom  abnormal  vice  has  become  a  second  nature^ 
criminals  on  the  verge  of  execution,  have  found  it  true,  and  in  a  manner  in  which 
the  most  sanguine  could  never  have  expected.  3.  Of  grace.  The  Christian  is 
sometimes  placed  in  circumstances  of  extraordinary  trial.  Extreme  adversity  and 
extreme  prosperity,  circumstances  which  have  been  gradually  accumulating  until 
they  reach  a  climax,  and  circumstances  which  seem  to  gather  like  a  thunderous 
cloud  in  a  moment,  expo«e  the  Christian  to  extreme  peril.  Satan  seems  to  occupy' 
an  unshakeable  vantage  ground,  and  the  good  man  seems  to  be  helplessly  entangled 
in  his  toils.  Not  so.  Strangely  is  there  opened  "  a  way  of  escape,"  which  would 
all  along  have  been  seen  to  be  open  but  for  temporary  blindness  of  faith.  4.  Of 
glory — the  best  illustration  perhaps  of  the  iDromise  before  us.  Then  there  will  be 
given  to  us  what  we  most  seem  to  want  here,  but  which  we  have  least  ground  to. 
expect.  The  poor  will  have  riches,  the  weary  rest,  the  afflicted  blessedness,  and, 
most  wonderful  of  all,  the  humble  Christian  worker  the  glad  "  well  done  "  and  the 
crown  of  life.  II.  To  His  prophecies  (ver.  6).  That  this  prophecy  would  be  ful- 
filled was  most  improbable,  a  general  characteristic  of  most  of  the  Divine  predic- 
tions. Men  make  shrewd  guesses  based  upon  wide  experience  and  a  careful  induc- 
tion of  facts,  and  men  marvel  when  what,  to  the  clear  sighted,  seemed  almost 
inevitable  takes  place.  Much  more  should  they  marvel  when  God's  Word — based 
upon  what  to  the  most  sagacious  human  reason  would  pronounce  to  be  no  ground 
at  all — coaies  true  ;  only  the  wonder  should  be  mixed  with  adoration.  Hure,  e.g., 
is  the  prediction  that  a  childless  old  man  without  a  foot  of  territory  should  have  a 
seed  large  enough  to  occupy  the  land ;  that  a  rare  that  did  not  exist  should  pass 
through  vicissitudes  which  are  sufficiently  specified  for  a  given  number  of  years. 
Of  a  like  character  are  the  prophecies  conc>-rning  Christ  and  His  Church.  This 
being  the  case  with  regard  to  fulfilled  prophecies,  surely  there  is  good  room  for  faith 
in  those  which  have  not  yet  come  to  pass.  Having  regmd  to  the  past  who  can 
cease  to  have  hope  for  the  Church  or  for  the  world.  The  Church  has  not  yet  come 
fully  into  its  inheritance — but  it  is  better  off  than  Abraham,  who  had  not  a  foot  of 
his.  III.  To  His  THREATENiNGS  (vcr.  7).  The  power  here  threatened  was  now,  and 
at  the  time  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  threatening,  the  mightiest  in  the  world.  Yet 
Egypt  was  judged.  The  great  world  powers  afterwards  threatened — Babylon^ 
Persia,  Greece,  Home,  were  in  their  turn  colossal  in  their  strength,  yet  where  are 
they  to-day  ?  And  why  ?  Let  modern  potentates  heed  the  lesson — because  they 
opposed  the  cause  of  God  ;  a  course  as  likely  to  succeed  as  the  effort  to  keep  back 
the  sea  with  a  broom.  Conclusion  :  1.  A  sacramental  guarantee  was  given  for  all 
this.  God  entered  into  solemn  covenant  with  Abraham  that  promise,  prediction, 
threatening — for  all  hung  together — should  be  fulfilled,  and  sealed  the  covenant  by 
the  ordinance  of  circumcision.  And  what  is  a  Christian's  baptism  but  a  seal  of  a 
covenant  of  promise  involving  everything  else  for  this  life  and  the  life  to  come  ;  and 
what  is  the  Lord's  sujiper  but  a  memorial  to  all  generations  of  the  present  support 
and  ultimate  triumph  of  the  Church  of  Christ?  2.  Lessons  :  (1)  God  takes  time 
for  the  evolution  of  His  purposes.  Four  hundred  years  was  not  too  long  tor  the 
working  out  of  His  purposes  concerning  Israel ;  four  thousand  years  are  not  too 
long  for  Him  to  whom  one  thousand  years  is  as  one  day.  (2)  Man  must  therefore 
wait.  Patience  is  the  grace  supremely  needed  in  this  relation.  Let  us  not,  1»* 
faithless  Israel,  forget  or  despair.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  And  God  spoke  in  tM  wisa. 
that  his  seed  should  sojourn  in  a  strange  land. — Sojourners  in  a  strange  Mud: — 1. 
The  sojouitNEiis — Abraham's  seed  the  spiritual  projenitcrd  of  believers.    "  Tb9 


CHAP,  vii.]  THE  ACTS.  ."577 

that  are  of  faith  are  the  seed  of  Abraham."  The  Jews  were — 1.  A  chosen  people  ; 
so  Christians  are  a  chosen  generation.  2.  A  separated  people.  In  whatever  circum- 
stances we  find  them  they  will  not  mix.  They  would  not  in  Egypt ;  they  will  not 
to-day.  So  a  distinguishing  mark  of  Christians  is  separation  from  the  world — 
"  What  concord  hath  Christ  with  Belial."  3.  A  people  owned  of  God — "  I 
will  be  their  God ;  they  shall  be  My  people."  His  own  inheritance,  portion, 
"  special  treasure."  Observe  also,  that  this  people  owned  their  God.  In  their 
feasts,  sacrifices,  offerings,  first-born.  God  was  to  be  owned  as  their  God  in  all. 
They  were  not  to  take  a  journey  nor  engage  in  battle  without  first  asking  God. 
Another  and  a  double  mark  of  Christian  character.  4.  A  blessed  people — "  Blessed 
art  thoa  in  Israel,"  &c.,  and  all  who  are  of  the  faith  are  recipients  of  "the  blessing 
of  Abraham."  The  covenant  treasures  laid  up  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  righteousness 
which  is  by  faith.  II.  The  sojourning.  We  should  never  consider  the  world 
through  which  we  are  passing  as  any  other  than  a  strange  land.  Do  not  think  of 
building  your  nests  as  if  you  were  to  be  always  at  home  here.  Leave  the  worldling 
to  his  toys,  and  let  us  contemplate  the  fact  that  we  are  only  strangers  and  sojourners 
as  all  our  fathers  were.  1.  Abraham's  seed  are  considered  strange  beings  in  this 
world — so  strange,  that  they  are  held  "an  abomination,"  and  positively  offensive 
(Gen.  xliii.  32).  The  case  is  not  altered  in  the  present  day.  "  The  world  knoweth 
us  not,  because  it  knows  Him  not."  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,"  &c.  He  who  is  "  born  after  the  flesh  "  is  still  as  bent  upon 
persecuting  him  who  is  "  born  after  the  Spirit  "  as  in  Paul's  days.  Nor  can  the 
servants  of  Satan,  ihe  soldiers  of  Sihon  and  Og,  allow  the  Israel  of  God  to  pass 
through  their  territories  unmolested.  And  yet  I  am  anxious  that  all  the  seed  of 
Abraham  should  be  able  so  to  live,  that  their  very  enemies  may  come  to  the  same 
conclusion  that  the  enemies  of  Daniel  did  (Dan.  vi.  5).  2.  They  are  annoyed  with 
strange  things  as  they  pass  through  this  strange  land  with  its — (1)  Principles.  (2) 
Practices.  (3)  Persons.  3.  Though  grievously  annoyed,  yet  they  advance  con- 
tinually in  the  face  of  every  obstacle  and  foe.  Nothing  stops  them ;  on  they  must 
go.  But  how  was  it  that  no  powers  could  arrest,  no  floods  or  plains  intimidate,  or 
armies  vanquish  Abraham's  seed?  Just  because  God  went  before  them  as  their 
guide,  a  pillar  of  cloud  by  day,  and  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night.  And  is  it  not  the  same 
now  ?  The  Lord  is  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  them  that  fear  Him.  The  real 
advancement  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  will  always  include  these  two  things ;  an 
advancement  in  the  knowledge  of  ourselves  that  shall  lay  us  low  ;  and  in  the  know- 
ledge of  Jesus  that  shall  elevate  and  cheer  us.  III.  The  kingdom  beyond.  It  was 
Jehovah's  good  pleasure  to  give  His  people  Canaan,  and  they  got  it  not  with  sword 
or  bow.  They  did  not  deserve  it,  for  they  were  a  stiff-necked  and  perverse  genera- 
tion, but  it  was  Jehovah's  good  pleasure  to  giveitto  them,  just  as  "  it  is  our  Father's 
good  pleasure  to  give  us  the  kingdom."  Many  things  might  be  said  about  this 
kingdom ;  but  note  these :  We  shall  then  be  so  situated  as  to  be  above  all  annoy- 
ances, in  a  kingdom  where  there  is  not  an  unwholesome  law ;  where  there  is  not  a 
dissenting  voice  from  the  will  of  the  Monarch  ;  where  there  is  no  infirmity,  and 
nothing  but  joy,  and  peace,  and  righteousness.  (J.  Irons.)  And  that  they  should 
bring  them  into  bondage,  and  entreat  them  evil  four  hundred  years. — The  dura- 
turn  of  the  sojourning  : — Vers.  6  and  7  are  quoted,  not  with  verbal  exactness,  from 
Gen.  XV.  13,  14  according  to  the  LXX.  A  parenthesis  marked  after  "  land  "  and 
"  evil  "  would  make  it  clear  that  the  four  hundred  years  are  the  length  of  the  entire 
time  during  which  Abraham  and  his  descendants  were  to  be  sojourners,  i.e.,  to  have 
no  country  of  their  own.  The  Egyptian  servitude  did  not  begin  till  after  the  death 
of  Joseph,  and  did  not  exceed  two  hundred  and  fifteen  years.  If  the  calculation  is 
made  from  the  weaning  of  Isaac,  the  interval  is  exactly  four  hundred  years.  In 
speaking,  the  round  number  was  used  instead  of  the  precise  total  of  four  hundred 
and  thiity  years  ;  which  is  given  in  the  historical  statement  (Exod.  xii.  40),  quoted 
Gal.  iii.  17,  which  the  received  chronology  makes  to  be  the  interval  between  Abra- 
ham's going  down  into  Egypt  and  the  Exodus.  The  same  variation  is  found  in 
Josephus,  who  states  in  his  history  that  the  Israelites  quitted  Egypt  in  ths  four 
hundred  and  thirtieth  year  ;  but  in  a  report  of  a  speech  of  his  own  in  the  "  Wars  " 
he  gives  the  duration  four  hundred  years.     {Bp.  Jacobson.) 

Vers.  9-15.  And  the  patriarchs,  moved  with  envy,  sold  Joseph  into  Egypt ;  hut 
God  was  with  him. — The  patriarchs  and  their  younger  brother: — This  picture  of 
patriarchal  life  is  not  a  flattering  one,  and  was  "  written  for  our  learning."  Jacob, 
by  no  means  a  model  son,  was  not  a  model  parent,  and  was  blind  to  the  evils  of 

VOL.  I.  37 


.678.  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cdap.  vk- 

parental  favouritism  so  signally  illustrated  in  his  early  history.     There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  his  conspicuous  preference  for  Joseph  was  the  root,  if  not  the  immediate 
occasion,  of  the  "  envy"  of  the  text.     Joseph's  brethren,  however,  stand  in  a  worse 
light.     No  one,  much  less  a  brother,  should  suffer  for  the  faults  of  others.     Even 
supposing  that  parental  affection  was  having  an  ill  effect  on  their  young  relative, 
fraternal  influence  ought  have  done  much  to  check  it ;    and  brotherly  chivalry 
should  have  suggested  a  less  drastic  course  than  that  which  they  pursued.     Note — 
I.  Their  MOTIVE — "envy."  1.  Its  ultimate  cause.  Occasioned  by  Jacob's  partiality, 
it  grew  to  portentous  proportions  by  Joseph's  dreams.     No  douiit  Joseph  was  very 
foolish  to  tell  them  his  dreams,  knowing,  as  he  must  have  done,  their  attitude 
towards  him,  and,  as  he  mis^'ht  have  guessed,  the  motive  which  they  would  impute 
to  him.     Even  Jacob  protested  against  the  dream  which  indicated  that  "  sun  and 
moon"  as  well  as  "  the  eleven  stars  "  would  have  to  bow  down  to  the  young  dreamer. 
Hence  Joseph  has  been  credited  with  egregious  vanity  ;  but  there  is  nothing  in  the 
narrative  which  is  inconsistent  with  childish  simplicity.     2.  Its  evil.     Apart  from 
its  consequences,  envy  is  the  greatest  curse  with  which  a  man  can  be  afflicted.     It 
is  not  hard  to  read  between  the  lines  and  see  the  misery  of  the  eleven  patriarchs  as 
they  brooded  over  their  brother's  offence  and  plotted  his  ruin.     We  see  the  evil  of  it 
nowadays  in  the  wretchedness  of  the  men  who  nurse  revenge,  or  who  are  covetous 
of  their  neighbours'  talents,  position,  or  wealth.     II.  Their  act.     There  are  no 
lengths  to  which  envy  will  not  go.    1.  They  plotted  Joseph's  murder,  and  how  many 
men's  reputation,  fortune,  or  even  life,  have  been  murdered  through  envy  !     And' 
they  were  guilty  of  it  inasmuch  as  it  was  in  their  heart.     2.  Eeuben's  timely  inter- 
position gave  their  rage  time  to  cool,  and  Judah's  cool  calculation  saw  ultimately  a 
personal  advantage  in  sparing  their  brother's  life.     Envy  at  white  heat  studies  only 
revenge  regardless  of  consequences  ;  envy  with  a  dash  of  reason  in  it  plots  for  one's 
own  advantage  at  another's  expense.  Hence  they  argued,  "  What  is  the  use  of  killing 
him  when  sparing  him  means  money."     So  they  sold  him  into  Egypt.     Not  that 
their  hard  hearts  were  in  the  least  softened,  for  they  knew  that  in  all  human  pro- 
bability he  was  going  into  a  life  that  was  worse  than  death.     III.  Their  frustra- 
tion. "  But  " — what  a  turn  this  little  word  gives  for  better  or  for  worse  !  If  we  read 
something  good  about  a  man  the  conjunction  prepares  us  for  the  inevitable  detrac- 
tion which  follows.     Naaman  was  a  great  man,  "  but  he  was  a  leper."     The  word, 
however,  gives  a  bright  turn  sometimes  to  history,  as  in  the  text.     1.  Joseph  was 
delivered  out  of  all  his  afHictions.     2.  He  was  made  governor  over  all  Egypt.     The 
opposite  of  all  they  intended  came  to  pass.     How  often  are  the  designs  of  envy  thus 
frustrated,  and  the  evil  passion  smot,hfred  by  what  it  hoped  to  consume  !     IV. 
Their  humiliation.     1.  They  became  dependents  on  their  evil-intreated  brother. 
Imagine  the  situa.*;ion.     They  were  now  begging  bread  of  the  lad  whom  they  thought 
to  murder ;  the  eleven  stars  were  prostrate  before  the  star  they  thought  to  eclipse. 
Many  other  envious  men  have  been  brought  into  the  same  situation.     2.  Joseph 
overwhelmed  them  with  his  forgiveness  and  generosity;  showing  the  other  side  of 
revenge,  and  the  proper  attribute  of  the  Christian  towards  those  who  envy  him. 
"If  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him,"  <fec.     Leirn — 1.  How  uncalcula'ed  forces  in 
human  life  may  operate  to  the  dismay  of  the  wicked  and  to  the  frustration  of  evil 
plans.     The  patriarchs,  like  all  persecutois,  left  God  out  of  their  calculations.     2. 
How  the  very  means  employed  to  afflict  the  righteous  may  be  the  very  instruments 
of  their  prosperity.     Had  Joseph  not  been  sold  to  the  Ishmaelites  he  had  never  been 
governor  of  Egypt.     3.  How  what  is  intended  for  the  destruction  of  one  may  be  the 
salvation  of  many  1     Had  Joseph  not  been  sold  into  Eyypt,  Egypt  might  not  Lave 
had  its  bounteous  harvest,  and  Joseph  and  his  whole  family  might  have  perished. 
(/.  W.  Burn.)         Examples  of  envy  : — We  shall  find  it  in  Cain,  the  proto-murderer, 
who  slew  his  brother  at  the  instigation  of  envy.     We  shnll  find  it  in  the  dark  and 
gloomy  and  revengeful  spirit  of  Saul,  who,  under  the  influence  of  envy,  plotted  for 
years  the  slaughter  of  David.     We  shall  find  it  in  the  king  of  Israel,  when  he  pined 
for  the  vineyard  of  Naboth,  and  shed  his  blood  to  gain  it.     Yea,  it  was  envy  that 
perpetrated  that  most  atrocious  crime  ever  planned  in  hell  or  executed  on  earth,  on 
which  the  sun  refused  to  look,  and  at  which  Nature  gave  pigns  of  abhorrence 
by  the  rending  of  the  rocks  :  I  mean  the  crucifixion  of  Christ ;  for  the  Evange- 
list   tells    us  that   for    envy   the   Jews    delivered   our   Lord.         {J.    A.    James.) 
Envy  :  its  grounds  : — As  a  shadow  accompanies  those  that  walk  in  the  sun,  so  envy 
is  a  constant  companion  of  those  that  excel  others.    As  there  is  no  shadow  where 
there  is  no  sun,  so  there  is  no  envy  where  there  is  no  prosperity.     The  infatuated 
Caligula  slew  his  brother  because  he  was  a  beautiful  young  man.    Mutius,  a  citizen 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  579 

of  Eome,  was  noted  to  be  of  sucli  an  envious  and  malevolent  disposition,  that 
Publius,  one  day,  observing  him  to  be  very  sad,  said,  "  Either  some  great  evil  has 
happened  to  Mutiiis,  or  some  great  good  to  another."  "  Dionysius  the  tyrant," 
says  Plutarch,  "  out  of  envy,  punished  Philoxenius  the  musician  because  he  could 
sing,  and  Plato  the  philosopher  because  he  could  dispute  better  than  himself." 
Cambyses  killed  his  brother  Smerdis  because  he  could  draw  a  stronger  bow  than 
himself  or   any  of   his   party.  Envy  :  its  evils  : — As  the  joys  of  the   happy 

increase,  the  sorrows  of  the  envious  multiply.  As  a  ship  tossed  with  continual 
waves,  so  the  envious  is  always  in  trouble  of  mind,  repining  at  the  sucess  of 
otbers.      (Caicdray.)  Envy  personally  hurtful : — The  adder  and  the  toad  have 

deadly  poison  in  them,  which  hurt  others,  but  not  themselves;  but  envy  is  so 
deadly,  that  it  killeth  him  that  hath  it,  and  others  also.  The  envious  man  frets 
and  pines  away  when  others  do  well.  He  cannot  eat  or  sleep  quietly,  unless  some 
mischief  falls   on  the    person   he    envies.      (Ibid.)  Envy  self-destructive  : — I 

remember  reading  somewhere  in  a  Grecian  story  of  a  man  who  killed  himself 
through  envy.  His  fellow  citizens  had  reared  a  statue  to  one  of  their  number  who 
was  a  celebrated  victor  in  the  public  games.  So  strong  was  the  feeling  of  envy 
which  this  incited  in  the  breast  of  one  of  the  hero's  rivals,  that  he  went  forth  every 
night,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  destroy  that  monument.  After  repeated  efforts  he 
moved  it  from  its  pedestal,  and  it  fell,  and  in  its  fall  it  crushed  him.  An  uninten- 
tional symbolic  act  was  this,  showing  the  suicidal  action  of  envy  on  the  soul.  It  is 
ever  an  element  of  misery,  a  burning  coal  which  "  comes  hissing  hot  from  hell." 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Envy  :  its  good  : — Envy,  like  the  worm,  never  runs  but  to 

the  fairest  fruit :  like  a  cunning  bloodhound,  it  singles  out  the  fattest  deer  in  the 
flock.  Abraham's  riches  were  the  Philistines'  envy  ;  and  Jacob's  blessing  bred 
Esau's  hatred.      (J.  Beaumont.)  Envy  :  its  universality  : — Envy  is  a  weed  that 

grows  in  all  soils  and  climates,  and  is  no  less  luxuriant  in  the  country  than  in  the 
court ;  is  not  confined  to  any  rank  of  men  or  extent  of  fortune,  but  rages  in  the 
breasts  of  all  degrees.  Alexander  was  not  prouder  than  Diogenes;  and  it  may  be, 
if  we  would  endeavour  to  surprise  it  in  its  most  gaudy  dress  and  attire,  and  in  the 
exercise  of  its  full  empire  and  tyranny,  we  should  find  it  in  schoolmasters  and 
scholars,  or  in  some  country  lady,  or  the  knight  her  husband  ;  all  which  ranks  of 
people  more  despise  their  neighbours  than  all  the  degrees  of  honour  in  wh'ch 
courts  abound  ;  and  it  rages  as  much  in  a  sordid,  affected  dress  as  in  all  the  silks 
and  embroideries  which  the  excess  of  the  age  and  the  folly  of  youth  delight  to  be 
adorned  with.     (Lord  Clarendon.)  Envy  :  advantage  of  benevolence  over : — The 

benevolent  have  the  advantage  of  the  envious,  even  in  this  present  life ;  for  the 
envious  is  tormented  not  only  by  all  the  ill  that  befalls  himself,  but  by  all  the  good 
that  happens  to  another :  whereas  the  benevolent  man  is  the  better  prepared  to 
bear  his  own  calamities  unruffled,  from  the  complacency  and  serenity  he  has 
secured  from  contemplating  the  prosperity  of  all  around  him.  (Colton.)  Josfph's 
afflictions  and  advancem.ent : — I.  His  afflictions.  1.  Their  causes.  (1)  The  envy 
of  the  patriarchs.  (2)  The  desires  of  Potiphar's  wife.  (3)  The  forgetfulness  of 
the  cupbearer.  2.  In  what  they  consisted.  (1)  Incivilities  of  his  brethren. 
(2)  Loss  of  liberty.  (3)  Exile  from  home.  (4)  False  accusation  and  imprison- 
ment. II.  His  advancement.  1.  God  was  with  him.  2.  God  delivered  him  out 
of  all  his  afflictions.  3.  God  gave  him  favour  and  wisdom  in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh. 
4.   Pharaoh  made  him  governor,   &c.     (Biblical  Museum.)  Joseph  a  type  of 

Christ: — I.  In  the  afflictions  he  suffered.  1.  He  was  hated  by  his  brethren. 
2.  He  was  sold  as  a  slave.  II.  In  the  beauty  of  his  character.  This  is  seen 
clearly  in  every  recorded  incident  of  his  life,  but  especially — 1.  In  the  manner  in 
which  he  resisted  temptation.  2.  In  the  spirit  of  forgiveness  he  manifested.  III. 
In  the  counsel  he  imparted.  1.  His  counsel  was  wise  (Gen.  xli.  33-40  ;  xlv.  24). 
2.  Wise  because  God  directed.  Joseph,  like  Daniel,  taught  of  God.  So  of  Jesus 
we  read,  "  Never  man  spake,"  &c.  (John  vii.  46).  "  In  Him  are  hid  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom"  (Col.  ii.  3).  "I  counsel  thee  buy  of  Me,"  &c.  (Eev. 
iii.  18).  IV.  In  the  deliverance  he  accomplished.  1.  From  famine  and 
death.  2.  For  Jew  and  Gentile,  for  his  brethren,  also  for  Egyptians  and  all 
countries  round  Egypt  (Gen.  xli.  56,  57).  V.  In  the  ex\ltatio>j  he  obtained. 
1.  It  was  obtained  through  humility  and  fidelity.  2.  It  was  acknowledged  even  by  • 
his  foes.     So  Christ  is  exalted  (Phil.  ii.  5-11).      (F.  Joseph.)  Joseph  a  type  of 

CJiriit: — I.  In  his  humiliation.  1.  His  father's  beloved  son,  but  his  breihren's 
derifSion  and  offence.  2.  Conscious  from  childhood  of  future  greatness,  only 
attained   by  suffering.     3.  He  was  hated  by  his  own ;  sold  into  the  hands   of 


580  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vil 

sinners ;  falsely  accused,  and  unjustly  condemned.  II.  In  his  exaltation.  1. 
Crowned  with  honour  after  trial,  shame,  and  suffering  2.  Placed  for  a  blessing 
over  a  famishing  people.  3.  Recognised  with  trembling  by  those  who  once  denied 
and  persecuted  him.  4.  Rewarding  with  favour  and  kindness  those  who  did  him 
evil.      (Preacher's  Monthly.)  Pharaoh   .   .   .   made    him  governor. — Joseph's 

exaltation  :— He  exchanges  a  captive's  chain  for  ornaments  of  gold;  the  prison 
garb  for  courtly  vesture  ;  the  narrow  walls  of  a  jail  for  crowded  streets,  through 
which,  amid  acclaims  that  rend  the  skips,  he  is  borne  in  a  royal  chariot.  He  was 
Potiphar's  slave  ;  he  has  become  Potiphar's  lord.  He  begqed  favours  of  a  butler ; 
the  proudest  princes  of  Egypt  row  live  in  his  smiles,  and  tremble  at  his  frown. 
(T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  And  at  the  second  time  Joseph  was  made  known  to  Ms 
brethren.  —  Tlie  second  time  : — There  is  a  plain  parallel  between  Joseph  and  Jesus, 
his  brethren  and  ourselves.  Certain  classes  of  real  seekers  do  not  at  once  find 
peace:  they  go  to  Jesus  after  a  fashion,  and  return  from  Him  as  they  went.  Our 
fear  is  that  they  may  grow  indifferent  or  despairing.  Our  hope  is  tliat  they  will 
go  again,  and  before  long  discover  the  great  secret,  and  find  food  for  their  souls. 
To  this  end  we  would  follow  the  track  of  Joseph's  story,  and  use  it  as  an  allegory 
for  the  benefit  of  the  seeker.  I.  There  is  a  something  which  you  do  not  know. 
The  sons  of  Israel  did  not  know  Joseph.  Like  them — 1.  You  have  no  idea  of  who 
and  what  Jesus  is.     Power  and  pity  blend  in  Him.     He  is  far  more  than  He  seems. 

2.  You  view  Him  only  as  great,  lordly,  unapproachable  ;  a  great  and  stern  governor  ^ 
and  tax-master.  3.  You  do  not  know  that  He  is  your  brother,  one  with  you  in  ' 
nature,  relntionsbip,  and  love.  4.  You  cannot  conceive  how  He  loves  ;  He  yearns 
to  make  Himself  known;  His  heart  is  swollen  big  with  compassion,  5.  You 
cannot  gue«s  what  He  will  do  for  you :  all  that  He  is  and  has  shall  be  at  your 
disposal.  Picture  the  Israelitish  shepherds  in  the  presence  of  the  exalted  Egyptian 
prince,  as  he  stands  veiled  in  mystery,  girded  with  power,  and  surrounded  with 
honour.     Little  could  they  imagine  that  this  was  Joseph  their  brother.     II,  There 

IS   A   REASON    WHY  AT    TOUR   FIRST    GOING    TOU    HAVE    NOT   LEARNED    THIS.      Joseph    WaS 

not  made  known  to  his  brethren  on  their  first  journey,  nor  have  you  yet  found  out 
Jesus  so  as  to  know  His  love.  1.  You  have  not  looked  for  Him.  The  sons  of 
Jacob  went  to  Egypt  for  corn,  not  for  a  brother.  You  are  looking  for  comfort,  &c., 
not  for  the  Saviour,  2.  You  have  not  yet  felt  your  sin  against  Jesus,  and  He  would 
bring  you  to  repentence,  even  as  Joseph  brought  his  brethren  to  confess  their  great 
wrong.  3.  You  have  not  gone  with  your  whole  force.  As  the  brothers  left 
Benjamin  at  home,  so  have  you  left  some  faculty  or  capacity  dormant,  or  chill,  in 
your  seeking  for  grace.  4.  You  have  a  larger  blessing  through  the  delay;  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  will  in  the  most  seasonable  hour  reveal  Plimself,  as  Joseph  did.  Till 
tben  He  ref'ains.  III.  There  is  great  hope  in  tour  going  again  to  Him. 
Joseph's  brelhren  made  a  great  discovery  the  second  time;  you  are  in  similar 
circumstances  to  them.  Go  a  second  time  ;  for — 1.  You  must  go  or  perish.  There 
was  corn  only  in  Egypt ;  and  there  is  salvation  only  in  Christ.  2.  Others  have 
gone  and  speeded.  All  nations  went  to  Egypt,  and  none  were  refused.  Has  Jesus 
cast  out  one  ?  3.  You  have  lingered  too  long  already,  even  as  did  Israel's  sons. 
4.  A  welcome  awaits  you.  Joseph  longed  to  see  his  brethren,  and  Jesus  longs  to 
see  you.  IV.  There  are  fobecasts  of  what  will  happen  if  tou  go.  The  story 
lends  itself  to  prophecy.  As  the  sons  of  Israel  fared  with  Joseph,  so  shall  you  fare 
with  Jesus.     1.  You  will  tremble  in  His  presence.     2.  He  will  bid  you  draw  near. 

3.  He  will  comfort  you  by  revealing  Himself  to  you.  4.  He  will  bless  and  enrich 
you  and  send  you  home  rejoicing,  to  fetch  all  your  family  to  Him.  5.  He  will  rule 
all  the  world  for  your  sake,  and  you  shall  be  with  Him,  and  be  nourished  by  Him. 
Conclusion  :  1.  Let  us  hasten  to  go  to  our  Saviour  the  second  time.  2.  Surely  this 
is  the  season,  for  tbe  Holy  Ghost  saith  "  to-day."  [G.  H.  Rpurgcon.)  All  his 
kindred,  threescore  and  fifteen  souls. — Seventy  is  given  as  the  number,  in- 
cluding Jacob,  Joseph,  and  his  two  sons,  in  Gen.  xlvi.  27  ;  Exod.  i.  5 ;  Deut. 
X.  22.  Here,  however,  Stephen  had  the  authority  of  the  LXX.  of  Gen.  xlvi. 
27,  which  gives  the  number  at  seventy-five  and  makes  it  up  by  inserting  the  son 
and  grandson  of  Manasseh,  two  sons  and  a  grandson  of  Ephraim.  With  them 
it  was  probably  an  editorial  correction  based  upon  Numb.  xxvi.  27-27.  Stephen,  as 
an  Hellenistic  Jew,  naturally  accepted,  without  caring  to  investigate,  the  number 
which  he  found  in  the  Greek  version. .  [Dean  riumptre.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  But  when  the  time  of  the  promise  drew  nigh. — The  fidelity  of  God 
to  His  promises : — What  a  faithful  God !     He  does  not  forget  His  promise,  but 


.■CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  581 

fulfils  it  even  long  after  the  death  of  the  man.  Mark  this,  thou  disheartened  teacher : 
thou  mayest  not  see  the  use  of  this  thy  work,  and  thou  mayest  in  the  meantime 
■with  Abraliam  fall  asleep  ;  Yet  God  will  fulfil  His  promise  after  tliy  death.  {Apos- 
tolic Pastor.) 

Vers.  20-43.  In  which  time  Moses  was  born. — Moses,  a  man  of  God  and  a  man  of 
the  people  : — I.  Fkom  the  people,  accordmg  to  flesh  and  blood.  II.  Above  the 
PEOPLE,  according  to  spirit  and  character.  III.  For  the  people,  in  word  and  in 
•deed.  IV.  Against  the  people,  where  the  law  of  God  was  concerned.  {K.  Gerok.) 
Moses,  a  pattern  of  God's  chosen  instruments  : — 1.  Tlie  metal  from  which  He  takes 
them.  2.  The  fire  in  which  He  forges  them.  3.  The  tests  by  which  He  proves 
them.      4.    The  deeds  which  He  performs  by  them.      (Ibid.)  Moses,  a  true 

reformer: — Every  reformer  needs— 1.  Profound  knowledge  and  living  expeiience  of 
the  heart.  2.  Clear  insight  into  the  times.  3.  Warm  heart  for  the  people.  4. 
Heroic  courage  in  tbe  face  of  the  world.  5.  Childlike  humility  before  God  and  His 
Word.  (Ibid.)  The  training  of  Moses,  an  example  how  God  prepares  His  chosen 
instruments: — 1.  By  great  dangers  and  mighty  deliverances  (ver.  21).  2.  By 
liuman  instruction  (ver.  22),  and  Divine  illumination  (ver.  30).  3.  By  the 
experience  of  the  world  (vers.  22-24),  and  quiet  intercourse  with  our  own  heart 
(ver.  29).  4.  By  deep  humiliations  (vers.  27,  28),  and  high  proofs  of  favours  (vers. 
52-34).  Observe  similar  experiences  in  Joseph,  David,  Elijah,  Paul,  Luther,  &c. 
{Ibid.)  Moses  and  Christ: — I.  Wherein  Moses  resembles  Christ.      1.  Both 

accredited  by  God — (1)  By  a  wonderful  deliverance  in  infancy  (Pharaoh  and 
Herod).  (2)  By  their  silent  ripening  for  their  great  mission  (Moses  at  court 
and  in  the  wilderness;  Christ  in  the  cottage  and  the  wilderness).  (3)  By  their 
solemn  call  to  office  (Moses  at  Horeb,  Christ  at  Jordan).  (4)  By  the  rich  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Spirit  and  of  power  (Moses  "  mighty  in  words  and  deeds,"  Jesus 
"  mighty  in  deeds  and  words  ").  (5)  By  the  deliverances  wrought  out  by  them. 
(6)  By  the  judgments  inflicted  on  an  ungrateful  and  disobedient  people.  2.  Both 
rejected  by  their  nation.  (1)  Their  Divine  mission  was  apprehended  (ver.  27). 
(2)  Their  pure  intention  calumniated  (ver.  28).  (i)  The  freedom  offered  to  the 
despised  (ver.  39).  (4)  Their  memory  blotted  out  by  an  ungrateful  generation  (ver. 
40).  11.  Wherein  Christ  is  superior  to  Moses.  1.  Moses  redeems  from  bodily, 
Christ  from  spiritual  bondage.  2.  Moses  redeems  Israel,  Christ  mankind.  3. 
Moses  effects  a  temporal,  Christ  an  eternal  salvation.  4.  Moses  acts  as  servant, 
Christ  as  Lord.  (Ibid.)  And  was  exceeding' fair.  —  Moses'  beauty: — God  gave 
him  that  tallness  when  he  was  three  years  old,  as  was  wonderful ;  and  as  for  his 
beauty,  there  was  nobody  so  unpolite,  as  when  they  saw  Moses,  they  were  not 
greatly  surprised.  Nay,  it  happened  frequently,  that  those  who  met  him  as  he  was 
carried  along  the  road,  were  obliged  to  turn  again  on  seeing  the  child ;  that  they 
left  what  they  were  about,  and  stood  still  a  great  while  to  look  on  him.  (Josephus.) 
Beauty  a  Divine  talent : — Beauty,  if  given  to  God,  is  indeed  a  talent  not  to  be 
•despised.  It  adds  grace  to  our  actions,  a  lustre  to  our  virtues,  and  eloquence  to 
our  words.  But  if  it  be  not  dedicated  to  the  service  of  God,  it  becomes  a  deadly 
poison,  both  to  ourselves  and  others.     (Dr.  Wogan.)  Beauti/,  its  criterion  : — If 

true,  it  increases  ou  examination  ;  if  false,  it  lessens.     (Lord  Greville.)  Virtue 

necessary  to  beauty  : — Beauty  unaccompanied  by  virtue  is  a  flower  without  perfume. 
And  when  he  was  cast  out  Pliaraoh's  daughter  took  him  up. — Providence  : — 
What  God  wills  to  live  no  tyrant  can  destroy.  Pharaoh,  who  had  given  a  cruel 
■order  for  Moses'  death,  must  bring  him  up  in  his  own  court.  The  Lord  knows  how 
to  protect  His  chosen,  and  makes  their  enemies  their  servants.  (K.  Gerok.)  And 
Moses  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians. — ilIose.s'  education: — I. 
The  education  or  Moses.  1.  He  was  instructed  by  strangers.  Pharaoh's  daughter 
liad  him  taught  Egyptian  learning  at  her  own  expense,  as  children  have  to  be 
taught  in  schools  by  strangers.  Instruction  by  parents  not  always  possible,  because 
of  tueir  ignorance,  labour,  &c.  (1)  God  appointed  a  princess,  as  if  to  honour  the 
teacher's  office.  People  say  any  one  will  do  ;  but  if  your  watch-spring  is  broken, 
do  you  take  it  to  a  blacksmith?  Can  a  common  mind  guide  that  delicate,  ethereal 
thing,  a  child's  soul?  We  want  first-rate  men.  Miserable  economy  in  parents! 
Esau  sold  his  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  You  weigh  your  child's  mind 
against  copper.  (2)  Consider  the  influence  of  teachers.  Three  thousand  five 
hundred  years  an  Egyptian  princess  took  a  poor  man's  child  and  taught  him.  The 
result  of  that  education  is  not  over  yet.  Compare  her  influence  with  Pharaoh's. 
To  rule  in  a  single  heart  is  greater  than  the  proudest  sway.     The  teacher  is  greater 


582  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOE.  [chap.  vn. 

than  the  king.  Here  is  a  man  perched  on  high,  dressed  in  a  little  brief  authority, 
with  fingers  pointing :  That  is  he  !  And  here  is  Christ  with  Httle  children  round 
Him.  2.  He  was  under  home  influences.  By  a  merciful  arrangement  Moses'  early 
years  were  entirely  superintended  by  Pharaoh's  daughter.  His  mother  nin  s  d  him. 
The  princess  gave  him  instruction,  his  mother  education.  People  think  education 
readiug,  writing,  &c. ;  loading  the  memory  with  information  and  making  preparation 
for  a  profession ;  but  that  is  only  the  wisdom  of  Egypt.  We  must  distinguish 
between  education  and  instruction.  The  former  is  to  unfold  nature  ;  to  strengthen 
good  and  conquer  evil ;  to  give  self-help ;  to  make  a  man.  The  teacher  cannot 
give  this.  You  want  influence  bearing  on  the  heart.  Now  influence  is  given  at 
home.  God  gives  the  father  to  impart  strength  of  will,  and  the  mother  teuderne.'ss 
of  affection.  Moses  owed  his  lawgiving,  politics,  &c.,  to  the  princess  ;  his  religion 
to  Jochebed.  Jochebed  that  woman  of  poverty  and  toil,  her  hands  black  with 
hrick-making  ;  Jochebed  that  woman  of  faith,  ennobled  to  defy  the  might  of  Egypt. 
Mothers,  know  your  work  !  God  has  given  you  the  destinies  of  the  world.  Our 
schools  fail  for  the  want  of  mothers  and  homa  influences.  3.  He  was  disciplined 
by  circumstances.  Pharaoh's  daugliter  had  done  something,  and  Moses'  mother 
something,  but  there  were  other  things  needed  beyond  man's  control.  (1)  He 
belonged  to  an  oppressed  nation  :  hence  his  patriotism— that  deep,  long  devotion  to 
one  vast  cause  which  only  can  be  felt  in  such  circumstances.  (2)  He  was  a 
banished  man  :  hence  his  sympathy  with  the  crushed.  (3)  He  was  a  solitary  man : 
hence  his  depth  and  solemnity  of  character.  (4)  He  was  a  traveller :  hence  hi§ 
knowledge  of  the  world  and  man,  and  his  enlarged  views.  4.  But  he  needed  some 
sudden  impulse.  It  came  in  the  burning  bush,  and  from  thence  the  man  of  learning 
became  the  man  of  public  action.  Observe  from  all  this — (1)  That  education 
goes  on  through  life.  After  he  left  Egypt  and  home  his  development  continued. 
The  lot  of  many  is  poverty :  hence  their  fondness  of  character.  It  is  often 
the  lot  of  the  orphan :  hence  may  spring  self-help ;  or,  if  the  disposition  be 
weak,  bad  habits.  Riches  may  obstruct  the  child's  moral  growth,  and  produce, 
in  spite  of  expensive  education,  only  indolence  of  character.  Again,  we  are  dis- 
ciplined by  pubUc  circumstances.  We  live  in  time  of  war  or  peace,  during  a  revolu- 
tion, or  in  an  age  of  trade,  science,  and  philosophy — all  this  disciplines  character. 
We  talk  of  "  finished  education."  Education  only  ends  when  a  man  is  in  his 
winding-sheet.  Observe — education  is  useful  to  call  forth  power  to  grapple  with 
and  modify  circumstances.  Trees  on  the  sea-coast  or  in  stony  soil  are  thwarted, 
yet  they  may  be  pushed  by  agriculture.  The  best  agriculture  is  in  Scotland,  which 
has  but  a  poor  soil.  (2)  Education  is  God's  work,  for  circumstances  come  from 
God.  Teaching  cannot  do  all ;  we  must  look  for  fruit  from  God.  We  must  wait 
lor  our  best  impulses,  which  come  like  a  flash,  unexpectedly.  "  The  wind  bloweth 
where  it  listeth,"  &c.  Look  back  on  our  lives  :  what  governed  our  most  remark- 
able moments  and  alteration  in  character?  Not  systematic  education;  but  some 
impression  like  that  of  Moses  in  the  wilderness,  that  looked  like  chance — an  im- 
pression from  some  great  soul,  or  an  old  truth  forcibly  put.  II.  Its  results.  1. 
On  his  own  character.  (1)  Mentally,  it  gave  him  the  habit  of  inquiry.  He  turns 
aside  "  to  see  wliy  the  bush  is  not  burnt."  Other  men  would  have  simply  seen  the 
bush  on  fire.  The  first  thing  in  education  is  to  encourage  this  habit.  When  your 
child  asks,  "  What  is  the  use  of  this  ?  "  <fec. ,  do  not  call  it  troublesome.  But  not  in 
duty.  •'  Why  "  in  phenomena  is  the  acknowledgment  of  ignorance,  but  in  practical 
duties  it  is  the  boast  of  presumption.  (2)  Morally,  it  gave  him  boldness  and  tender- 
ness. Many  men  are  bold,  yet  tyrannical ;  many  tender,  yet  weak.  The  perfect 
character  joins  both.  Moses  was  ever  the  champion  of  the  oppressed — his  brethren, 
Jethro's  daughters.  (3)  Eeligiously,  it  gave  him — (a)  Reverence.  He  takes  off  his 
shoes,  (b)  Obedience.  God  says,  "  Go  before  Pharaoh,"  and  Moses  braves  the 
angry  king,  (c)  Meekness.  He  was  humble  as  a  child.  This  is  what  is  meant  by 
education — mental  power,  moral  worth,  religious  cbaracter.  2.  On  his  nation  the 
chief  result  was  the  elevation  of  the  labouring  classes.  The  Egyptian  i^olicy  was 
to  keep  Israel  dowu,  to  refuse  them  educational  and  political  advantages,  to  prevent 
their  increase.  The  task  of  Moses  was  their  emancipation.  So  is  that  of  every 
Christian.  To  elevate  the  labouring  classes,  however,  is  not  to  exempt  them  from 
toil.  Labour  is  a  blessing  ;  it  brings  out  strength  of  character.  Nor  is  it  to  break 
down  classes,  but  by  Christianity  and  education  to  level  up.  Thank  God  the  time 
has  passed  when  the  English  policy  was  the  policy  of  Egypt.  The  insane  cry  once 
was,  "  The  people  must  not  be  educated,  because  it  will  unfit  them  for  tlieir 
station."     Now  the  mighty  chasm  between  rich  and  poor  is  filling  up.     {/''.  IJ'. 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  583 

Eobertson,  31.  A.)  Human  learning  recommended  from  the  example  of  Moses  : — I. 

Inquire  into  the  education  and  attainments  of  Moses,  who  is  here  said  to 
have  been  learned  in   all   the   wisdom   of   the   egyptians.     ii.    deduce  the 

LAWFULNESS   AND    EXPLAIN    THE   ADVANTAGES     OF     HUMAN    LEARNING,    IH     OppOsitioH     tO 

those  weak  sophisms  which  some  conceited  noveHsls  have  imagined  to  the 
contrary.  But  there  is  little  need  of  authority  to  recommend  that  which  does 
so  amply  recommend  itself.  Such  is  the  excellency  of  human  learning,  that 
it  is  impossible  to  conceive  hov/  anything  so  entertaining  in  the  theory,  so 
useful  in  the  application,  and  withal  so  ornamental  in  the  figure  it  makes, 
should  be  unlawful  to  be  acquired,  or  should  not,  indeed,  rather  be  highly 
worthy  of  the  most  laborious  pursuits.  The  mind  of  man  is  capable  of  great  im- 
provements, not  to  be  attained  but  by  much  pains  and  study  ;  from  whence  we  see 
every  day  the  mighty  diiierence  between  a  liberal  and  sordid  education.  In  the 
one,  human  nature  seems  only  to  resemble  the  rude  lines  of  an  unfinished  piece, 
which  may,  indeed,  discover  the  bulk  that  is  designed,  but  without  that  beauty, 
order,  and  proportion  which  should  recommend  it.  In  the  other  it  is,  as  it  were, 
finished  by  the  artist's  hand,  and  seems  to  want  nothing  that  should  make  it  lovely 
and  agreeable.  I  forbear  to  expatiate  farther  on  the  transporting  pleasures  which 
arise  from  learning ;  in  regard  its  excellency  is  such  that  it  serves  not  only  to 
please,  but  profit,  to  improve  the  mind  with  useful  lessons  and  instructions,  as 
well  as  entertain  it  with  delightful  specalations.  The  necessity  of  virtue  is  more 
clearly  discerned,  and  the  measures  of  our  duty  are  more  easily  prescribed,  when 
men  are  able  to  perceive  the  consequences  of  their  actions,  and  infer  fit  rules  of 
life  from  their  observation  of  the  nature  of  things.  They  are  likewise  better 
able  to  gain  advantage  to  themselves,  and  go  the  readiest  way  to  work  in  any  enter- 
prise, when  they  know  the  connection  between  causes  and  effects,  and  have  all  tho 
experience  of  former  ages  which  learning  can  afford.  Nor  is  its  influence  confined 
at  home,  but,  diffusive  of  itself,  extends  to  all  that  stand  in  any  way  related  to  us, 
The  philosopher  studies  not  only  for  himself,  but  for  the  common  benefit  of  human 
kind;  and,  by  his  useful  discoveries,  unfolds  those  secrets  for  the  public  good, 
which  had  been  otherwise  locked  up  in  the  profoundest  silence.  The  power  of  medi- 
cine to  heal  diseases  might  have  remained  a  secret,  and  mankind  have  been  for  ever 
destitute  of  wholesome  remedies,  were  it  not  for  such  cultivation  and  improvement 
of  the  mind  as  human  learning  ^ives.  I  need  not  observe  to  you  how  the  several 
arts  of  arithmetic,  geometry,  navigation,  and  the  rest,  conduce  to  the  good  order 
and  government  of  the  world,  to  the  adjusting  men's  various  rights  and  interests, 
to  the  symmetry,  and  thereby  to  the  duration,  of  buildings,  to  the  conjunction  of 
countries  far  distant  in  situation,  and  thereby  to  the  better  carrying  on  of  trade 
and  commerce.  Nor  can  you  want  to  be  reminded  that  an  inquiry  into  the  nature 
of  moral  good  and  evil  must  likewise  be  of  general  use,  beneficial  to  the  public  as 
well  as  to  the  student,  qualifying  some  for  the  information  and  tuition  of  others, 
to  furnish  them  that  have  less  leisure  and  abilities  with  true  principles,  and  instruct 
them  fully  in  the  nature  of  their  duty.  And  from  the  whole  it  will  be  obvious  to 
collect  what  ought  not  to  be  omitted  upon  this  occasion,  that  those  first  rudiments 
of  literature  we  learn  at  school  must  needs  be  highly  beneficial  as  laying  the 
foundation  for  all  the  rest,  and  being,  indeed,  the  proper  groundwork  upon  which 
any  part  of  human  learning  should  be  built.  The  enthusiast,  in  the  first  place, 
objects  against  it  as  deceitful  or  vexatious,  or  at  best  but  useless.  The  deceitful- 
nfTiS  of  human  learning  he  would  build  upon  St.  Paul's  authority,  who  calls  it 
philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  and  warns  his  Colossians  beware  lest  any  man  should 
spoil  them  by  it.  But  they  who  make  this  objection  would  do  well  to  distinguish 
between  the  different  ends  and  uses  to  which  learning  is  applied.  The  right  end  of 
it  is  to  serve  for  the  better  illustration  and  discovery  of  truth  ;  and  when  it  is  sub- 
servient to  this  purpose,  the  Holy  Scripture  is  so  far  from  condemning  it,  that  it 
recommends  it  rather  as  highly  beneficial.  It  is  not  then,  you  see,  the  thiirg  itself, 
but  the  abuse  or  vain  pretence  of  it  the  apostle  blames.  Nor  are  they  less  deceived 
in  the  argument  they  draw  from  the  vexatiousness  and  uncertainty  of  human 
learning,  which  the  wisest  of  men  reckoned  to  be  but  "vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit," 
because  that  "  in  much  wisdom  is  mnch  griet,  and  he  that  increaseth  knowledge 
increaseth  sorrow."  For  here  again  there  is  a  pertinent  distinction  to  be  made 
between  the  study  of  human  learning,  looked  upon  as  being  itself  our  supreme  good 
and  happiness,  and  as  a  means  only  which  may  be  subservitnt  and  conducive  to  it. 
It  was  Solomon's  business,  in  his  book  of  Ecclesiastes,  to  show  that  nothing  but 
religion  or  the  fear  of  God  can  make  us  truly  happy.     To  that  end,  he  observes  the 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vo. 

vanity  of  all  other  schemes  of  happiness,  and  among  them,  how  even  learning 
itself,  though  it  bids  fairer  than  the  rest,  is  yet  very  defective,  and  will  leave  the 
man  far  short  of  happiness  who  has  no  higher  aims,  especially  if  he  be  (as  without 
religion  men  are  too  apt  to  be)  over-curious  to  search  deeper  than  human  reason 
can  fathom,  and  unwilling  to  resolve  everything  at  last  into  unsearchable  wisdom 
and  omnipotence.  But  this  is  no  real  disparagement  to  that  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge which,  being  kept  subordinate  and  made  subservient  to  religious  purposes, 
does  humbly  admire  what  it  cannot  comprehend,  and  therefore  can  be  no  just 
objection  against  tliat  right  use  of  human  learning  which  I  am  at  present  desirous 
to  recommend.  I  have  but  one  objection  more  to  examine,  and  that  is  the  free- 
thinker's, who  reckons  every  man  ought  to  judge  in  all  matters  for  himself,  and  not 
suffer  himself  to  be  influenced  by  the  skill  and  learning  of  another ;  but  especially  that 
it  is  most  unreasonable,  by  arts  of  rhetoric  and  moving  eloquence,  to  work  on 
the  affections  of  vulgar  minds,  and  so  prevail  with  them  to  do  that  to  which 
they  would  otherwise  be  most  averse.  Let  it  be  returned  that  no  man's  liberty 
of  judging  is  taken  from  him  by  having  reasons  offered  to  direct  his  judgment; 
hut  he  ever  judges  with  the  greatest  freedom  who  judges  most  consistently 
with  the  appearance  of  reason  and  truth.  If  the  matter  be  such  as  he  is  capable 
of  examining  himself,  he  ought  seriously  to  weigh  whatever  is  thus  offered,  and 
either  to  reject  or  admit  it,  as  shall  appear  most  reasonable  upon  mature  delibera- 
tion. But  if  the  matter  be  above  his  reach,  it  will  be  but  equitable  to  believe  the 
learned  in  their  own  profession,  since  he  can  have  no  other  way  of  discovering  the 
truth.  He  is  not  to  follow  them  where  he  finds  they  are  in  error,  any  more  than 
he  would  wittingly  take  a  cup  of  poison  if  it  were  recommended  to  him  by  a  skilful 
physician.  But  then  neither  may  he  neglect  their  direction,  where  his  own  judg- 
ment fails  or  wavers,  any  more  than  he  would  refuse  the  medicine  prescribed  by 
his  physician,  for  no  other  reason  but  because  he  is  not  thorout^hly  acquainted 
with  the  quality  and  power  of  those  ingredients  of  which  it  is  compounded — always 
remembering  to  apply  himself  to  God  for  His  special  blessing  and  favourable  assist- 
ance. And  then,  as  to  the  other  part  of  the  objection,  although  I  shall  allow  the 
moving  of  men's  passions,  where  there  are  no  reasons,  either  directly  offered,  or  at 
least  presupposed,  for  tbe  conviction  of  their  judgment,  to  be  an  absurd  and  unjust 
way  of  proceeding,  yet  so  many  are  the  instances  where  people  act  against  their 
judgment,  and  are  backward  to  do  that  which  they  cannot  but  confess  fittest  to  be 
done,  that  it  deserves  to  be  esteemed,  not  a  lawful  only,  but  a  necessary  art,  to  stir 
up  the  affections,  even  where  the  understanding  is  sufficiently  informed  before. 
III.  Inferences  from  all  that  has  been  said.  1.  Such  being  the  manifold  and 
great  advantayes  of  human  learning,  let  us  be  thankful  to  Almighty  God,  who  has 
made  our  nature  capable  of  such  improvements.  It  is  sure  a  very  easy  return  for 
the  blessings  we  receive,  to  acknowledge  the  bounty  of  Him  who  gave  them ;  and 
he  must  be  most  unworthy  of  the  benefit  bestowed  who  will  not  own  it  to  be  one. 
2.  Let  those  who  are  set  apart  to  such  studies  be  careful  to  improve  the  talents 
committed  to  their  trust.  3.  Let  those  who  reap  benefit  from  tbeir  labours  of  this 
kind  value  in  return  and  esteem  them  for  their  works'  sake.  The  advantages,  we 
see,  are  great  which  redound  to  the  public  from  the  studies  of  the  learned ;  and 
therefore  gratitude  requires  that  the  public  should  make  suitable  acknowledgments 
to  those  persons  by  whose  means  such  advantages  are  derived  to  them.  4.  Let  us 
all,  therefore,  in  our  several  stations  and  capacities  encourage  the  study  and  in- 
crease of  useful  learning,  by  our  exhortation,  our  contribution,  or  our  own  industry. 
{}V.  Berriman,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23-30.  And  when  lie  was  full  forty  years  old,  It  came  into  his  heart  to 
visit  his  brethren. — 'The  patriotism  of  Moses: — I.  Long  nursed — "forty  years." 

I.  Inspired  by  his  mother.  The  precious  time  during  which  he  was  entrusted  by 
the  princess  to  the  care  of  his  nurse,  Jochebed,  would,  we  may  be  sure,  be  well  em- 
ployed, and  subsequent  opportunities  would  be  utilised  for  reminding  him  of  who 
he  was,  and  of  his  possible  destiny  as  the  leader  of  his  race.  No  throne  in  the 
universe  is  so  potent,  as  the  mother's  knee  for  good  or  evil.  2.  Cherished  among 
Bmotherlng  influences.  (1)  Gratit^jde  to  his  deliverer.  (2)  Egyptian  learning  and 
court  training.  (3)  Prospects  of  advancement,  even  to  tbe  throne  of  Egypt.  It 
must  have  required  a  very  deep-seated  patriotic  instinct  to  have  resisted  all  this. 

II.  Prejliturelt  KXHiniTED.  1.  Without  a  Divine  call.  Moses  acted  on  the 
spasmodic  impulse  of  the  moment.  Here  was  a  palpable  opportunity — tbe  first 
which  presented  itself — of  showing  his  long  nursed  patriotism,  and  the  ill-usage  of 


CHAP,  vn.]  THE  ACTS.  585 

his  brethren  acted  like  a  spark  on  a  train  of  gunpowder.  Many  men  call  themselves 
to  rectify  certain  evils,  and  mistake  a  seeming  opportunity  for  the  voice  of  God, 
Passion,  however  noble,  is  not  inspiration.  This  is  seen  in  its  effects.  That  which 
leads  to  murder,  however  great  the  provocation,  as  in  the  case  of  Moses  and  the 
Prench  Revolution,  is  manifestly  not  from  heaven.  When  the  hour  comes  the 
man  will  be  inspired ;  let  the  man,  then,  wait  for  the  hour.  2.  Without  the  least 
chance  of  success.  W^hat  was  one  man,  even  suppose  that  he  was  sure  of  the 
loyalty  of  the  unorganised  slaves,  against  the  disciplined  might  of  Egypt  ?  This 
has  been  the  mistake  of  well-meaning  but  impulsive  patriots  all  through  history, 
and  the  results  have  ever  been  fatal  to  the  interests  of  those  whom  tbey  would  have 
served.  III.  Eventually  eectified.  Moses  soon  saw  that  force  wns  no  remedy, 
and  that  his  people  were  hardly  fit  for  immediate  emancipation.  What  chance  of 
liberation  for  a  people  divided  amongst  themselves  ?  Union  is  strength  ;  and 
Moses  bpgan  to  educate  the  people  in  the  two  great  unifying  principles — 1.  Fra- 
ternity. "  Sirs,  ye  are  brethren."  Moses  saw  that  the  only  hope  for  Israel  was 
the  cultivation  of  brotherly  feeling.  Other  ties  without  this  are  ropes  of  sand. 
2.  Justice.  "  Why  do  ye  wrong?"  The  fetters  of  internal  wrong-doing  are  far 
etronger  than  those  imposed  from  without.  Tyrants  are  safe  when  their  subjects 
are  depraved.  If  a  community  would  successfully  resist  the  iniquities  of  the  powers 
that  be,  they  must  be  law-abiding  themselves.  Agitators  are  at  length  recognising 
this  principle,  and  passionately  appeal  to  their  followers  not  to  break  the  law.  IV. 
Ungratefully  repudiated.  When  Moses  smote  the  Egyptian  no  protest  was 
raised ;  but  on  attempting  to  sow  the  seeds  of  self-deliverance  he  met  with  tbe  fate 
of  many  reformers.  Most  people  are  willing  to  be  helped  ;  but  when  urged  to  help 
themselves,  the  whole  situation  is  often  changed.  They  had  no  objection  to  Moses 
being  a  ruler  and  a  judge  when  he  assailed  the  oppressor  ;  but  when  he  advised  the 
oppressed  to  follow  a  more  successful  but  prosaic  and  unromantic  course,  the  worst 
feelings  of  jealousy  were  aroused.  The  public  sentiment  towards  Cromwell  was 
very  different  when  he  was  driving  out  the  Stuarts  from  that  which  was  expressed 
when  reducing  the  chaotic  national  elements  to  order.  V.  Suddenly  abandoned, 
"  Then  fled  Moses."  1.  Not,  we  may  well  believe,  through  sheer  cowardice.  Fear 
of  Pharaoh  had  something  to  do  with  it,  no  doubt ;  but  this  was  the  fear  of  a  man 
who  felt  that  he  would  have  to  encounter  the  monarch  alone.  The  cause  was  hope- 
less ;  he  would  have  no  following  ;  it  was  U'^eless  to  throw  his  life  away.  2.  Dis- 
gust, we  may  believe,  had  something  to  do  with  it.  Why  should  he  sacrifice  him- 
self for  a  people  who  would  not  even  treat  him  with  common  gratitude.  "  Those 
who  would  be  free  must  themselves  strike  the  blow."  Moses  adopted  the  right 
course.  He  accepted  the  inevitable.  The  time  was  not  ripe,  nor  was  he — a  lesson 
for  all  would-be  patriots  and  reformers.  VI.  Divinely  revived.  That  his  patriotism 
died  out  in  Midian  is  obvious  from  his  reluctance  to  embark  on  the  mission  when 
the  time  had  come.  By  minding  other  people's  business  he  had  lost  everything  ; 
henceforth  he  would  mind  his  own.  And  he  did  so  for  forty  years.  But  all  this 
time  he  was  being  Divinely  qualified.  His  character  matured,  his  old  impulsive- 
ness was  gone.  Cool  reason  took  the  place  of  spasmodic  passion.  He  became 
familiar  with  habits  and  scenes  which  stood  him  in  good  stead  for  the  next  forty 
years.  The  time  came,  and  when  it  came  the  fire  of  the  bush  laid  hold  of  his  soul, 
and  the  Divinely-inspired  leader  went  to  beard  Pharaoh  and  to  lead  his  brethren 
out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  {J.  W.  Burn.)  A  true  leader  of  the  people : — These 
words  were  spoken  by  the  Christian  martyr,  Stephen,  when  he  was  standing  before 
the  Jewish  council.  He  was  accused  of  seeking  to  overthrow  the  institutions  of 
Moses,  and  his  mind  not  unnaturally  reverted  to  tbe  time  when  Moses  himself  was 
an  innovator,  and  repelled  by  the  ancestors  of  the  very  men  who  now  taxed  Stephen 
with  seeking  to  change  the  customs  which  he  had  delivered  to  them.  The  passage 
in  the  hfe  of  Moses  which  Stephen  relates  gives  us  an  example  of — I.  The  true 
leader's  instinct.  He  went  to  see  his  brethren,  and  to  look  on  their  burdens. 
This  is  the  instinct  of  a  true  leader.  He  does  it  from  policy ;  for  how  can  the 
general  regulate  the  marches  unless  he  knows  how  much  the  soldier  has  to  carry  ? 
Or  how  can  he  prescribe  methods  of  lightening  burdens  unless  he  knows  of  "what 
they  consist  ?  But  not  only  from  policy ;  from  piety  and  humanity.  The  true 
leader's  nature  comprises  the  true  shepherd's  nature — not  the  robber's  or  the  mere 
hireling's,  II.  The  true  leader's  mistake.  He  supposed  the  people  would  under- 
stand, A  superiorly-gifted  mind  often  finds  a  peculiar  difficulty  in  judging  of 
average  human  nature,  and  its  calculations  may  prove  to  be  ill-founded.  III.  The 
TBUK  leader's  AIM.    It  is  to  causB  unity  to  be  recognised ;  for  what  but  unity  can 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIl.  [cnkT.  vn. 

give  the  power  which  it  is  his  nature  and  his  function  to  wield?  Here  there  was  no 
absence  of  natural  grounds  of  union.  They  had  two  of  the  strongest — oneness  of 
race  and  a  common  oppressor.  IV.  The  true  leader's  disappointment.  That 
his  efforts  to  promote  union  were  in  vain.  But  in  the  case  of  the  Israelites,  blind- 
ness was  combined  with  jealousy.  They  saw  in  Moses  only  a  man  of  their  owa 
order.  "  His  own  received  him  not."  Stephen  might  weU  recall  these  circum- 
stances when  he  was  standing  before  that  tribunal  of  his  countrymen,  which  was 
perpetrating  a  still  greater  refusal.  The  repulse  was  a  personal  one  ;  but  the  dis- 
appointment was  far  from  being  merely  personal.     (Homilist.) 

Vers.  30-34.  And  when  the  forty  years  were  expired  there  appeared  to  him 
an  angel  of  the  Lord  in  a  flame  of  fire  in  a  bush. — The  burning  bush:— A  sign 
and  a  type — I.  Of  Israel.  As  in  Egypt,  it  resembled  a  degenerate  and  wild  thorn 
hedge,  burning,  but  not  consumed,  in  the  glow  of  the  brick-kiln,  and  in  the  heat  of 
trial.  II.  Of  the  Messiah.  According  to  His  human  lowhness — a  thorn  bush, 
and  Divine  glory — the  flame  in  the  bush,  inseparable  in  one  person — the  bush 
not  cousumed.  III.  Op  the  Christian  Church,  in  its  insignificant  cross  form, 
constant  trial,  and  indistructible  powers  of  life.  This  bush  has  now  burned  for 
nearly  two  thousand  years,  and  yet  we  have  never  seen  its  ashes.  {K.  Gi-rok.) 
Moses  trembled. — The  fear  of  Moses : — I.  Its  nature.  1.  It  was  not  slavish  fear.  2. 
But  pious  humility.  ■  How  good  is  it  for  a  teacher,  who  must  so  often  stand  upon  holy 
ground,  to  experience  this  trembling,  not  only  at  the  commencement,  but  during 
the  continuance  of  his  ministry.  II.  Its  effects.  This  filial  fear  and  reverence ' 
will  be — 1.  A  barrier  by  which  useless  words,  vain  gestures,  and  other  sinful  things 
will  be  prevented.  2.  An  incentive  to  speak  and  act  as  laefore  God,  in  God,  and 
from  God.  {Apostolic  Pastor.)  Put  off  thy  shoes. — An  exhortation  to  put  off  earthly 
stains  and  conceited  pride  in  the  presence  of  God.  1.  For  ministers,  in  the  study 
and  in  the  pulpit.  2.  For  hearers  in  their  church-going  and  at  worship,  (/i .  Gerok.) 
I  have  seen,  I  have  seen  the  aMction  of  My  people. — Tie  greater  our  need  th-  nearer 
God : — 1.  He  sees  the  sufferings  of  His  people.  2.  He  hears  the  sighs  >  f  believers. 
3.  He  comes  down  at  the  proper  time.  4.  He  sends  out  His  servants.  (Ibid.) 
The  people  of  God: — I.  God  has  a  people.  "My  people."  1.  Chosen  by  Him. 
2.  In  covenant  with  Him.  II.  Where  they  live.  "  In  Egypt."  1.  A  house  of 
bondage.  2.  A  transient  residence.  3.  Among  a  strange  pei>ple.  III.  What 
THEY  SUFFER.  "  AtflictioH."  In  somc  shape  or  form  this  is  the  Christian's  earthly 
lot.  1.  Inflicted  by  man.  2.  Permitted  by  God.  3.  Working  out  spiritual  ends. 
IV.  The  Divine  notice  of  their  case.  1.  God  sees  their  affliction.  2.  God 
hears  their  groaning.  3.  God  works  out  their  deliverance.  (J.  W.  Burn.) 
This  Moses  .  .  .  broughtthemout  after  that  he  had  showed  wonders  and  signs. — The 
miracles  of  Moses  and  Christ : — The  Divine  authority  of  the  Jewish  lawgiver  was 
chiefly  seen  and  heard  in  thunderings  and  lightnings,  great  plagues  and  fearful 
judgments — in  the  darkened  air,  the  flashing  firmament,  the  corrupted  waters,  the 
divided  sea,  the  rending  earth,  lamenting  families,  armies  overwhelmed  and  terror- 
stricken  nations:  so  that  most  emphatically  does  the  sacred  historian,  iu  summing 
up  the  character  of  Moses  as  a  worker  of  miracles,  declare  that  none  ever  equalled 
him  "in  all  that  mighty  hand,  and  in  all  that  great  terror  which  he  showed  in  the 
land  of  Egypt."  The  gloiy  of  our  Saviour's  miracles  is  of  a  different  kind,  and 
better  suited  to  the  genius  of  His  dispensation.  He  gave  indeed  abundant  testimony 
that  it  was  not  for  want  of  power  He  did  not  signalise  His  mission  like  Moses — 
when,  e.g.,  over  His  Cross  the  sky  was  shrouded  with  a  pall  of  funereal  darkness, 
while  fierce  earthquakes  tore  the  flinty  rocks,  and  the  temple  vail  was  rent  asunder 
by  an  unseen  hand,  and  the  buried  dead  arose.  But  the  charncteristic  tone  of 
the  Eedeemer's  marvellous  works  was  of  another  and  a  benignant  kind.  The 
Mighty  Man  of  Wonders,  by  whom  come  grace  and  truth  "  went  about  doin^jgood." 
Consolation  and  joy  and  bright-eyed  health  attended  all  His  step-!.  Mercy  wi-nt 
before  His  face;  and  at  His  heavenly  smile  diseases  vanislied,  pain  expired,  fear 
ceased  to  quiver,  sorrow  dried  her  tearful  countenance,  the  broken  heart  was  made 
whole.     {A.  S.  Falterson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  37.  This  is  that  Moses  which  said  ...  a  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God 
raise  up  unto  you  of  your  brethren,  like  unto  lae.—Most's,  a  type  of  ChriM. : — How 
emphatic  is  the  expression!  " 'i'his  is  that  Moses!"  You  have  a  sniilar  ex- 
pression where  the  object  was  to  set  a  special  mirk  on  a  gnity  individual.  "  This 
id  that  king  Ahaz."     In  our  text  the  object  ib  to  fix  attention  on  the  faut  that  the 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  587 

Moses  who  had  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  was  the  very  same  who  had  predicted 
the  coming  of  a  greater  prophet.  Even  this  Moses  for  whom,  in  their  blind 
attachment,  they  were  about  to  reject  the  Messiah,  had  told  them  of  the  Christ. 
In  the  whole  line  of  prophets  there  was  not  one  who  could  be  regarded  as  closely 
resembling  Moses.  In  tracing  the  correspondence  here  alleged  let  us  consider 
Moses^I.  As  A  LEADER  AND  LAWGIVER.  1.  The  Condition  of  the  Jews  in  Egypt 
depicted  that  of  the  whole  human  race  given  up  for  their  sins  to  be  the  captives  of 
Satan.  And  it  could  hardly  fail  to  follow  that,  if  our  natural  condition  were  thus 
imaged,  some  resemblance  might  be  traced  between  the  deliverers.  Both  Moses 
and  Christ  proved  their  commission  by  miracles.  They  both  came  to  an  enslaved 
race,  and  claimed  authority  to  set  free  prisoners ;  and,  when  proof  of  their  authority 
was  demanded,  they  both  wrought  wonders  which  were  beyond  human  power. 
There  was  much  the  same  kind  of  opposition  ranged  against  the  one  and  the 
other — the  magicians  contending  with  Moses,  and  evil  spirits  with  Christ.  And  the 
deliverance  effected  by  the  two  was  singularly  alike.  Moses  broke  off  the  yoke 
from  the  neck  of  a  captive  people,  and  Christ  from  the  neck  of  the  whole  human 
race.  But  when  Moses  had  made  a  passage  for  Israel  out  of  Egypt  the  former 
tyrant  pursued  the  freed  tribes  and  sought  to  regain  the  ascendancy  he  had  lost. 
And  though  Christ  has  redeemed  us  from  the  power  of  Satan,  who  knows  not  that 
evil  spirits,  eager  to  regain  their  former  dominion,  pursue  those  that  follow  the 
Captain  of  salvation  ?  When  Moses  led  Israel  out  of  Egypt  he  did  indeed  tell  them 
of  a  goodly  land,  but  be  did  not  at  once  put  them  into  possession  ;  but  conducted 
them  into  a  dreary  wilderness,  where  they  were  exposed  to  continued  trials.  And 
we  also  hear  of  a  beautiful  Canaan,  reserved  for  the  followers  of  the  Eedeemer,  but 
there  is  no  immediate  entrance  ;  a  wild  desert  has  to  be  traversed,  set  thick  with 
snares  and  peopled  with  enemies,  and  it  is  only  through  much  tribulation  that  we 
can  take  possession  of  our  heritage.  2.  As  a  lawgiver  Moses  bore  striking  re- 
semblance to  Christ.  It  was  a  main  part  of  his  office  to  restore  amongst  the  Jews 
the  decayed  knowledge  of  Jehovah,  to  re-institute  a  pure  worship,  and  to  establish 
laws  which  might  mark  them  off  as  a  peculiar  people.  But  was  not  the  condition 
of  our  race  similar  to  that  of  Israel  ?  There  scarce  remained  any  trace  of  truth  in 
the  popular  theology  ;  the  whole  Grentile  race  was  given  up  to  idolatry,  and  Christ 
had  to  instruct  this  world  in  the  very  first  elements  of  spiritual  truth.  Moses  led 
the  children  of  Israel  through  the  waters  of  the  Ked  Sea,  and  then  formed  them 
into  a  church,  with  means  and  ordinances  for  producing  and  preserving  ac- 
quaintance with  God,  obedience  to  His  will,  and  hope  in  His  promises.  And 
Christ  now  conducts  men  through  the  waters  of  baptism  into  fellowship  with  His 
mystical  body,  that  they  may  be  taught  in  duty  and  trained  for  immortality. 
Moses  restores  the  altars  of  God,  delivers  laws,  institutes  sacrifices;  and  Christ 
erects  a  visible  Church,  with  ordinances  and  sacraments,  that  those  who  are  in 
error  may  be  taught,  and  those  who  know  the  truth  may  be  confirmed.  II.  Moses 
AS  A  MEDiATOB.  The  Israelites  were  assembled  round  Sinai  to  receive  the  command- 
ments and  the  law  of  their  God.  There  was  nothing  of  the  sublime  and  the 
terrible  which  did  not  attend  the  publication  of  the  law.  Appalled  by  what  they 
saw  and  heard,  the  rulers  of  Israel  said  to  Moses,  "  Go  thou  near,  and  hear  all 
that  tbe  Lord  our  God  shall  say,  and  speak  thou  unto  us  all  that  the  Lord  our 
God  shall  speak  unto  thee  "  ;  and  as  soon  as  this  petition  was  offered,  God  said  to 
Moses,  "  They  have  well  said  all  that  they  have  spoken  " ;  thus  signifying  His 
approval  of  the  consciousness  that  fallen  creatures  cannot  approach  Him  except 
through  an  intercessor,  and  in  Deut.  xviii.  the  prediction  of  the  text  is  there  made 
to  follow  immediately  on  these  words  of  approval.  As  much  as  to  say,  "  They  have 
asked  a  mediator,  and  a  Mediator  will  I  give  them,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  who  shall 
resemble  thee  in  standing,  as  thou  now  dost,  between  God  and  man."  And  is  it 
not  a  resemblance  most  accurate  ? — for  is  it  not  the  law  by  whose  terrors  we,  as 
weU  as  the  Israelites,  are  affrighted  ?  and  v^as  it  not  to  shield  us  from  the  law — 
condemning  every  human  being  to  everlasting  death — that  Christ  Jesus  arose,  a 
Mediator  between  God  and  ourselves?  In  ca^es  of  conversion,  there  is  ordinarily 
enacted  much  of  that  scene  which  is  described  as  occurring  when  the  Israelites 
stood  around  Sinai.  The  Spirit  when  He  handles  the  moral  law  makes  a  man 
perceive  that  there  has  been  no  moment  of  his  hfe  in  which  he  has  not  infringed 
its  comtuands,  and  that  there  is  no  infraction  so  slight  but  it  entails  punishment. 
Then,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  a  man  knows  rightly  the  awfulness  of  God  ;  and 
th<-n  will  he  exclaim,  with  the  Israelites  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  "This  great  fire  will 
consume  me  :  if  I  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord  my  God  any  more,  then  shall  I  die." 


588  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vij. 

Such  a  man  will  at  once  feel  that  he  cannot  stand  in  his  own  strength  and  his  own 
merit  face  to  face  v\ith  his  Maker.  Therefore  he  has  no  alternative  but  that  of 
leaving  himself  to  be  crushed  beneath  the  weight  of  indignation,  unless,  indeed,  he 
can  find  some  being  mighty  enoui^h  and  puie  enough  to  rise  up  as  an  intercessor, 
and  plead  his  cause  with  the  Eternal  One.  Who  will  deny,  then,  that  in  respect  of 
the  mediatorial  office,  the  prophecy  quoted  by  Stephen  had  its  fulfilment  in  Christ? 
III.  In  the  pakticulars  of  his  life.  Moses  was  wonderfully  preserved  when  the 
male  children  of  the  Hebrews  were  destroyed  ;  and  thus  also  was  Christ  preserved 
when  Herod  slew  all  the  children  in  Bethlehem.  Moses  fled  from  his  country,  and 
then  there  came  a  mes^^sage,  "  Go,  return  into  Egypt:  for  all  the  men  are  dead 
which  sought  thy  life  "  ;  Christ  fled,  in  like  manner,  and  then  there  came  a  message 
in  almost  the  same  words.  Moses  contended  with  the  magicians,  and  forced  them 
to  acknowledge  his  power — Christ  contended  with  evil  spirits,  and  obtained  from 
them  a  similar  confession.  Immediately  before  emancipating  Israel,  Moses 
instituted  the  passover — immediately  before  redeeming  mankind,  Christ  instituted 
the  Lord's  Supper.  When  Moses  had  to  appoint  elders,  he  appointed  seventy — 
when  Christ  chose  disciples,  He  chuse  seventy.  Into  the  land  that  was  to  be 
conquered  Moses  sent  twelve  men  as  spies — when  the  world  was  to  be  subdued, 
Christ  sent  twelve  men  as  apostles.  How  did  Moses  overcome  Amalek '?  By  extend- 
ing both  arms,  and  keeping  them  stretched  out.  How  did  Christ  subdus  all  our 
enemies  ?  By  suffering  t'lat  His  hands  should  be  nailed  to  the  cross.  As  a  prophet, 
it  was  specially  of  the  desolations  which  should  overtake  the  disobedient  Jews  that 
Moses  m  ide  mention ;  and,  as  a  prcphet,  it  was  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem' 
th.tt  Christ  chiefly  spoke.  Mos^s  had  to  deal  with  a  perverse  generation,  who 
wei"e  not  to  be  won  over  to  the  obeying  God,  and  who,  consequently,  with  the 
exception  of  two,  all  parished  in  the  wilderness.  And  was  not  Christ  sent  to  an 
obdurate  people,  and  who,  therefore,  within  abiut  the  same  space  of  forty  years, 
were  almost  all  consumed  by  the  anger  of  the  Lord  ?  Moses  had  to  endure 
injurious  treament  from  his  own  family — his  brother  Aaron  and  his  sister  Miriam 
rebelled  against  him  ;  and  we  are  told  of  Cnrist,  "  Neither  did  His  brethren 
believe  on  Him."  Moses  fed  the  people  miraculously  in  the  wilderness  ;  Christ  fed 
thousands  miraculously  in  the  desert.  And  in  lilting  up  the  brazen  s^^rpeut,  did 
not  Moses  typify  Christ?  In  making  a  covenant  by  bloud  between  God  and  his 
people,  did  he  not  again  represent  the  Saviour,  who,  by  His  own  blood  hath 
"brought  nigh  those  who  were  sometime  afar  off"?  It  was  not  until  Moses 
was  dead  that  the  people  could  enter  the  Promised  Land ;  it  was  only  by  the  death 
of  Christ  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  opened  to  all  believers.  It  was,  in  one 
sense,  for  the  iniquities  of  the  people,  that  Moses  died.  "  The  Lord  was  angry 
with  me  for  your  sakes."  In  the  fulness  of  his  strength,  when  "  his  eye  was  not 
dim  nor  his  natural  force  abated,"  did  Moses  go  up  to  die;  and  when  Christ  was 
yet  in  the  flower  of  His  age  did  not  He  go  up  to  the  summit  of  Calvary  ?  Before  he 
went  up  to  die  Moses  comforted  the  disconsolate  tribes  with  an  assuran  -e  that 
God  would  raise  them  up  another  Prophet ;  before  Christ  went  up  to  die  He  said 
to  His  desponding  disciples,  "  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless  ;  I  will  piay  tlie 
Father,  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter."  Moses  was  buried,  but  no  one 
knew  where  his  body  Jay ;  Christ  was  buried,  and  yet  was  His  body  in  vain  sought 
for  by  the  Jews.  Surely,  if  ever  there  was  a  wonderful  resemblance,  it  is  that 
which  we  thus  trace  in  minute  particulars,  between  Moses  and  Christ,  (if. 
Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  38.  This  is  he  .  .  .  who  received  the  lively  oracles  to  give  unto  us.- 

Living  oracles : — Whatever  sense  "lively"  (A.V.)  may  once  have  had,  it  can 
only  now  mislead  :  it  is  limited  to  certain  special  characteristics  of  life  ;  "  living  " 
(R.  V.)  implies  life  in  itself,  life  as  a  principle,  life  with  all  its  minifold 
issues.  The  one  is  particular,  the  other  is  comprehensive.  What  more  striking 
illustration  could  we  have  of  this  lite,  this  vitality,  than  the  great  Bible  Society, 
comprising  members  of  many  countries  and  churches,  dispensing  an  income  of  more 
than  £200,000  a  year,  dependent  on  gratuitous  support,  and  brinying  no  gain  to 
its  members,  concentrating  all  its  energies  and  absorbing  all  its  resources  on  the 
reproduction  and  the  dissemination  of  one  single  Book — a  Book,  too,  of  whii-h 
the  latest  page  is  some  eighteen  centuries  old ;  claiming  to  have  distributed 
already  between  ninety  and  a  hundred  million  copies,  and  at  this  moment  distribu- 
ting year  by  year  close  upon  three  million  of  its  volumes,  whole  or  in  part,  in  well- 
nigh  every  spoken  language  of  the  globe  ;  however  you  may  look  at  it  this  is  a  fact. 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  589 

to  which  the  long  roll  of  history  presents  not  the  faintest  paralW.  And  yet  this 
society  does  not  stand  alone.  It  is  tbe  handmaid  of  almost  all  the  missionary 
associations  throughout  the  world,  to  whatever  church  or  whatever  country  they 
belong.  I.  Life  involves  growth;  growth  is  at  once  a  characteristic  and  an 
evidence  of  life.  We  speak  of  life  in  a  plant  or  tree,  because  it  puts  forth  leaves 
and  flowers  and  throws  out  fresh  branches.  We  do  not  speak  of  a  crystal  as  living, 
A  crystal  may  be  a  very  beautilul  thing,  but  one  thing  it  wants — life.  This  figure 
fitly  describes  the  Bible  as  contrasted  with  otber  sacred  books.  It  did  not  come 
into  being  all  at  once  ;  it  was  not  the  product  of  one  mind  or  age ;  it  is  not  a  book, 
but  a  library;  it  is  legislation,  chronicles,  poetry,  philosophy,  epistolography, 
allegory,  romance,  apocalyptic.  It  spreads  over  some  thousands  of  years  ;  it 
traverses  the  history  of  the  race  from  the  earliest  dawn  to  the  full  no^n-d-iy  of 
an  elaborate  civilisation.  It  was  not  written  iu  any  one  place ;  Egypt,  Assyria, 
Babylon,  Persia,  Greece,  Eome,  all  contribute.  Now  we  find  ourselves  wandering 
with  nomadic  tribes  over  lonely  pastures  beneath  the  starry  sky ;  now  we  are  dazzled 
by  all  the  splendid  surrounding s  of  an  Oriental  despot's  court ;  now  we  are  lodged 
in  some  humble  peasant  household,  and  now  we  stand  face  to  face  with  the  majesty 
and  the  insignia  of  the  imperial  law.  Sea  and  land,  mountain,  field  and  forest, 
crowded  city  and  trackless  desert,  each  in  its  turn  furnisbes  a  theme  for  this  ever- 
shifting  drama.  All  the  vicissitudes  of  human  life,  poverty,  and  wealth,  m(  urning 
and  joy,  the  marriage  and  the  funeral,  the  secret  communings  of  the  individual 
soul,  and  the  tumultuous  activity  of  public  life — all  contribute  their  quota  to  its 
incidents.  II.  Life  involves  unity — a  unity  underlying  the  various  development. 
There  must  be  some  principle  of  life  from  which  all  the  growth  is  evolved,  which 
stamps  its  character  on  all  the  parts,  wbich  secures  the  harmony  and  coherence 
of  the  whole.  W^e  speak  of  the  germ  in  the  plant,  of  the  soul  in  the  man.  So  it 
is  with  the  Bible.  Amidst  all  these  marvellous  diversities  of  time,  place,  condition, 
form,  subject-matter,  there  is  a  principle  of  unity  which  is  also  the  principle  of  life. 
This  unity  is  quite  as  real  in  the  different  parts  of  the  Bible  as  m  the  different 
parts  of  a  plant,  or  in  the  different  ages  of  man.  The  first  chapter  of  Genesis 
finds  its  natural  and  appropriate  climax  in  the  last  chapter  of  Eevelation,  while  all 
the  intermediate  parts  have  their  proper  place  in  the  sequence  written  though  they 
were  long  centuries  apart  and  gathered  together  we  hardly  know  when  and  we 
cannot  say  how ;  the  New  Testament  latent  in  the  Old,  the  Old  Testament  patent 
in  the  New.  Its  fame  can  never  giowold  or  out  of  date.  And  this  principle  of 
life,  this  animated  soul — what  is  it  but  the  Eternal  Word  speaking  through  lawgiver 
and  captain  and  priest  and  prophet  and  king,  speaking  in  the  continuous  history 
of  a  nation  and  in  the  chequered  but  unliroken  light  of  the  Church  until  at  length 
He  became  incarnate  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  The  many  modes  and  the  many 
parts  of  the  Divine  revelation  were  harmonised,  explained,  completed  when  in  the 
last  days  God  spoke  through  His  Son.  Contrast  this  infinite  variety,  these  world- 
wide interests  and  associations  with  the  monotony  of  other  great  books.  The 
Koran  is  Arabian,  the  Vedas  are  Indian,  the  Zendavesta  is  Persian,  the  Bible 
alone  is  cosmopolitan.  Other  books  for  the  most  part  have  a  oneness  of  treat- 
ment, of  subject-matter,  even  of  style.  They  are  like  the  statue  fused  in  a  mould ; 
it  may  have  a  beauty  of  its  own,  but  it  is  rigid ;  it  has  no  movement  and  no  life, 
and  the  purpose  served  by  all  this  is  that  life  speaks  to  life.  As  a  living  thing 
tbe  Bible  appeals  to  the  mind,  affections,  historical  instincts,  domestic  sympathies, 
political  aspirations.  It  arrests  first  ttiat  it  may  instruct  afterwards.  And  here 
in  this  intimate  union  of  intensely  human  sympathies  and  interests  with  intensely 
Divine  teaching,  this  close  alliance  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  Bible  ever  is  a  type, 
a  reflection,  a  counterpart  of  the  Incarnation  itself.  In  the  BilJe  God  stoops  to 
man,  in  the  Incarnation  God  becomes  man.  Thus  the  Incarnation  is  the  ultimate 
satisfaction  of  all  religious  craving  and  the  final  yoal  of  all  rehgious  history,  beyond 
which  no  other  step  is  possible  or  conceivable.  III.  Life  involves  struggle. 
The  Scriptures  have  proved  themselvts  as  living  oracles  by  the  controversies 
which  they  excite  and  the  antipathies  which  they  provoke.  Is  it  not  an  eloquent 
fact  that  in  the  early  persecutions,  pre-eminently  in  tlie  last  and  fiercest  of  all, 
the  main  object  of  attack  was  the  sacred  writings;  that  the  foes  of  the  gospel 
were  ready  enough  to  spare  the  lives  of  men  if  only  they  might  take  the  life  of  the 
Book ;  that  those  were  branded  by  their  fellow-Christians  with  the  name  of  traitor, 
not  who  had  surrendered  a  human  being,  whether  leader  or  confederate  or  friend, 
but  who  had  betrayed  the  Book  into  the  bands  of  the  destroyer?  Aye,  these 
heathen  persecutors  were  wise   in  their  generation;  they  felt  ibstinctively  that 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap,  vu.. 

these  Scriptures  were  living  things  ;  that  they  were  active  and  aggressive ;  that,  as 
Luther  said  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  "  They  have  hands  and  feet — hands  to  grasp  and 
feet  t '  march  ;  therefore  they  must  be  killed  ;  they  must  be  hurried  out  of  sight." 
Was  Milton  so  far  wrcng  after  all  when  he  said  that  one  who  killed  a  good  book  is 
worse  than  a  homicide  ;  for,  striking  at  the  very  breath  of  reason,  he  slays  an 
immortality  rather  than  a  life?  And  as  it  was  with  the  Greek  Bible  in  the  days 
of  Diocletian,  so  was  it  also  with  the  English  Bible  in  the  days  of  Henry.  What  a 
testimony  to  its  living  power  is  the  record  of  its  early  days  when  that  great  man, 
who  has  won  for  himself  an  un-^lying  name,  not  only  in  Englitili  Christianity,  but 
in  English  literature  also,  an  outlaw  and  a  wanderer  in  a  foregin  land,  fled  from 
city  to  city,  carrying  with  him  the  half-translated  texts,  the  half-printtd  sheets  of 
his  new  version,  the  parent  of  our  English  Bible  of  to-day  !  Can  we  reflect  without 
the  deepest  thanksgiving  on  this  ma'jnificent  irony  of  the  Divine  goodness  that 
within  a  stone's-throw  of  the  place  where  the  gentle,  tender-hearted,  reasonable 
Tunstall  committed  to  the  flames  the  first  i^sue  of  Tyndale's  New  Testament  as  a 
thing  to  be  abhorred  and  detested  by  all  faithful  Christian  people,  his  latest 
successor  in  the  see  of  Durljam  is  able  this  day  to  congratulate  a  large,  powerful, 
and  wealthy  socisty  on  its  distributing  within  a  single  year  no  less  than  oue 
million  and  a  half  copies  of  the  English  Bible,  whole  or  in  parts?  (Bp.  Lightfoot.) 
The  law  of  God,  a  living  icord  : — I.  In  itself  it  is  living — an  etflux  of  the  living 
God  ;  and  was  thus  for  man,  in  a  state  of  innocence,  a  lawgiving  lite,  not  killing  and 
oppres-ing,  but  regulating  and  forming.  II.  In  a  state  of  sin  it  indeed  at  first 
proves  itself  as  killing  ;  it  reveals  spiritual  death  and  threatens  eternal;  but  even 
then  it  is  not  dead,  but  living,  otherwise  it  could  not  as  a  fire  burn  in  the  hearts 
of  sinners,  and  as  a  sword  pierce  them ;  and  also  it  there  operates  to  life,  awMken- 
ing  the  conscience  and  pointing  to  Him  whose  Word  gives  life.  III.  In  a  state 
OF  geace  it  is  not  dead  and  abolished,  but  objectively  in  Christ,  the  Revealer  and 
FulfiUer  of  the  law,  it  has  become  living  and  embodied ;  and  subjectively  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  it  is  employed  as  a  motive  of  life,  and  as  a  power  of  sanctification  in 
the  heart  and  life  of  the  believer.  (K.  Gerok.)  The  Bible — its  liiung  freshnens  : 
— I  heard  a  gentleman  say  yesterday  that  he  could  walk  any  number  of  miles  when 
the  scenery  was  good  ;  but,  he  added,  "  When  it  is  flat  and  uninteresting,  ho^v  one 
tires  !  "  What  scenery  it  is  through  which  the  Christian  man  walks — the  towering 
mountains  of  predestination,  the  great  sea  of  providence,  the  mightv  cliffs  of 
Divine  promise,  the  green  fields  of  Divine  grace,  the  river  that  makes  glad  the  city 
of  God — oh,  what  scenery  surrounds  the  Christian,  and  what  fresh  discoveries  he 
makes  at  every  step  !  The  Bible  is  always  a  new  book.  If  you  want  a  novel,  read 
your  Bible  ;  it  is  always  new  ;  there  is  not  a  stale  page  in  the  Word  of  Go! ;  it  is 
just  as  fresh  as  thou'.'h  the  ink  were  not  yet  dry,  but  had  flowed  to-day  from  the 
pen  of  inspiration.  There  have  been  poets  whose  sayings  startled  all  England 
when  first  their  verses  were  thrown  broadcast  over  the  land,  but  nobody  reads 
their  writings  now  ;  yet  the  pages  that  were  written  by  David  and  by  Paul  are  glow- 
ing with  the  radiant  glory  which  was  upon  them  when  long  ago  the  Holy  Spirit  spake 
by  tbem.  (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.)  The  Bible — its  life  organic  : — If  the  Bible  were 
like  a  collection  of  stoues,  we  might  select  some  and  put  aside  others,  as  less 
valuable  and  beautiful ;  and  although  in  such  selection  we  might  make  great 
mistakes,  we  should  still  be  in  possession  of  sometLing  more  or  less  complete.  But 
the  Bible  is  like  a  plant,  and  all  its  parts  are  not  mechanically  or  accidentally 
connected,  but  organically  united,  and  hence  a  law  of  life  rules  here  ;  and  he  who 
reveres  life  will  neither  add  nor  take  away  from  the  beautiful  plant  which  the 
Father  hath  planted  in  and  through  Christ  by  the  Spirit.  .  .  .  Nobody  asserts 
that  a  man  would  be  killed  if  you  cut  o£f  his  hair  and  his  nails.  But  there  is  a 
vital  union  of  all  his  members.  If  you  cut  off  my  little  finger  I  shall  survive  it ; 
but  it  is  my  little  fing^-r  you  cut  off,  and  it  is  a  loss,  a  disfigurement.  So  with 
the  Bible.  It  is  not  like  a  piece  of  cloth  that  you  can  clip  and  cut.  It  is  a 
body,    animated   by   one    Spirit.      (A.    Saphir,    1).D.)  The   excellence   of  the 

Scriptures : — I.  The  excellence  of  the  Scriptures.  1.  They  are  lively  oracles 
so  called — (1)  In  contradistinction  to  heathen  oracles  which  proceeded  from  the 
pretended  responses  of  senseless  idols  or  departed  spirits  under  the  artful  manage- 
ment of  impostors.  The  Bible  is  the  voice  of  the  living  and  true  God.  (2) 
Because  they  instruct  men  in  the  way  of  life.  (3)  The  Scriptures  of  both  Testa- 
ments are  called  by  this  name  because  they  are  the  means  by  which  God  com- 
municates the  knowledge  of  His  will  and  of  the  way  of  salvation.  2.  If  we  consider 
the  sacred  volume  merely  as  history  it  is  the  most  complete,  entertaining,  and 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  691 

instructive  ever  written.  We  have  a  view  of  the  world  from  its  creation  to  its  final 
dissolution.  3.  How  grand,  solemn,  and  interesting  are  its  doctrines.  4.  It  exhibits 
the  most  correct  view  of  human  nature.  5.  It  prescribes  the  most  excellent 
precepts  and  rules  of  life.  (1)  It  proposes  the  purest  motives  to  virtue.  (2)  It 
teaches  the  noblest  virtues  in  the  subliraest  exercises.  (3)  It  furnishes  the  best 
defence  agaii)st  temptation,  and  the  sweetest  consolation  in  affliction.  (4)  It  has 
instituted  the  most  excellent  means  of  moral  improvement  in  the  order  and 
discipline  of  the  Church.  6.  It  gives  us  affecting  illustrations  of  God's  attributes 
and  piovidence  in  His  various  dealings  toward  tbe  children  of  men.  II.  We  are 
BOUND  TO  CONVEY  THE  ScBiPTUEES  TO  snccEEDiNG  generations  (Deut.  iv.  5,  vi.  7 ; 
Psa.  Ixxviii.  1).  1.  If  the  Scriptures  are  of  such  importance  to  ourselves  they  are 
equally  so  to  our  children.  2.  Their  excellence  demonstrates  our  obligation  to 
transmit  them.  3.  If  we  regard  the  temporal  much  more  ought  we  to  regard  the 
eternal  happiness  of  posterity.  The  former  is  promoted,  the  latter  essential 
depends  on  the  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures.  4.  That  we  may  transmit  them — 
(1).  We  must  make  a  pious  use  of  them  ourselves  :  family  worship.  (2)  Have 
them  rea  I  in  our  schools.  (3)  Take  care  never  to  treat  them  with  disre«pect.  (4) 
Never  allow  our  children  to  read  books  which  treat  them  with  ridicule.  (5) 
Maintain  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  (6)  Show  our  belief  in  and  reverence  for 
the  Bible  by  that  holy  and  blameless  hfe  it  requires.     (/.  Lathrop,  D.D.) 

Vers.  39-45.  To  whom  our  fathers  would  not  obey. — The  sin  of  Israel : — I.  Its 
MANIFOLD  NATURE.  1.  Disobedienco  (ver.  39).  There  is  hardly  a  phase  of  Jewish 
history  in  which  this  sin  does  not  appear.  It  was  manifested  in  the  murmurings 
against  Moses,  iu  tlie  wholesale  transgression  of  the  law,  and  in  the  rejection  of  the 
prophets.  This  is  a  crime  which  provokes  universal  reprobation  as  against  parents  ; 
how  sad  that  it  should  be  so  universally  prevalent,  and  so  loudly  extenuated  as 
against  God.  2.  Ingratitude.  They  were  free,  yet  they  hankered  after  the  poor 
emoluments  of  their  servitude.  They  preferred  the  succulent  products  of  Egypt 
with  Rlavery  to  the  hard  fare  of  the  wilierness  and  liberty.  Nay,  even  after  their 
instalment  in  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  the  fascinations  of  Egypt 
proved  well  nigh-irresistible.  This  was  a  poor  return  to  God  who,  in  response  to 
their  groanings  (ver.  34),  granted  them  the  deliverance  for  which  they  cried.  And 
are  there  no  similar  hankerings  after,  and  even  conformity  to,  the  present  evil 
world  from  which  Christians  have  been  redeemed?  3.  Idolatry.  This  was  the 
crowning  sin  and  had  its  marked  stag^s.  They  worshipped  (1)  "  The  works  of  their 
own  hands  "  (ver.  41),  an  imitation  of  Apis,  perhaps,  a  god  of  the  land  from  which 
they  came.  (2)  The  works  of  God's  hands  (ver.  42),  the  gods  of  the  surrounding 
nations,  honouring  the  creature  instead  of  the  Creator.  (3)  Devils  (ver.  43). 
When  men  renounce  the  living  and  true  God  there  is  no  knowing  whom  they  may 
be  pre;iared  to  honour.  There  are  the  same  stagps  in  the  idolatry  of  modern 
Christian  lands.  Men  worship  (a)  Their  own  fahrications^wealth,  social  position, 
fashion,  pleasure,  &c.  (b)  God's  creatures — natural  beauty,  others,  themselves, 
(c)  Devils.  There  is  not  a  vice  before  which  some  men  are  not  prostrate.  II.  Its 
AGGRAVATIONS.  Israel  sinned  in  spite  of — 1.  The  presence  and  imperial  influence 
of  Moses,  their  mighty  leader  and  God's  appointed  vicegerent.  And  so  men  sin 
to-day  notwithstanding  the  presence  and  authority  of  Christ  whom  Moses  typified 
(ver.  37),  and  the  influence,  strivings,  and  convictions  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  The 
theoeracy,  "  the  church  in  the  wilderness  "  (ver.  38),  and  its  visible  centre  and 
symbol  "  the  tabernacle  of  witne^^s  "  (ver.  44).  They  were,  however  faithless,  the 
people  with  whom  God  had  entered  into  solemn  covenant,  and  their  periodical 
services  in  the  tent  of  meeting  were  a  virtual  acknowledgment  of  the  fact  that  the 
covenant  was  still  binding.  So  men  sin  to-day,  notwithstanding  the  existence, 
great  services,  and  wide-reaching  influence  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  whose  oritjin, 
nature,  history,  and  destiny  are  a  standing  witness  for  God  and  against  sin,  and  in 
spite  of  churches,  visible  symbols  of  the  invisible  Church.  3.  The  "  lively 
oracles"  which  protested  against  iniquity  in  all  its  forms,  and  were  meant  to  create, 
encourage,  and  guide  in  the  life  of  rigliteonsnef^s.  These  oracles  have'since  been 
mult'plied  and  are  now  completed.  They  contain  all  that  is  needful  to  give  and 
sustain  life,  and  have  the  promise  of  both  the  life  that  now  is  and  that  which  is  to 
come.  Yet  men  sin  and  doom  themselves  to  death.  4.  The  most  palpable  mani- 
festations of  God's  severity  and  goodness.  Surely  one  would  liave  thought  that  the 
plagues  and  the  overthrow  of  Pharaoh  were  sufiicient  to  deter  from  crime,  and  that 
their  own  precious  deliverance  and  support  would  have   encouraged  obedience. 


592  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

Those  who  so  argue  forget  that  all  history  teems  with  the  same  manifestations,  and 
yet  men  sin.  III.  Its  punishment,  1.  Their  sins.  Their  idolatry  was  at  once 
their  crime  and  their  punishment  (ver.  42),  and  as  their  crimes  increased  so  they 
held  them  in  the  iron  chain  of  sinful  habit  which  grew  in  strength  and  intolerable- 
ness  as  the  years  passed  by.  "Be  sure  your  sin  will  iind  you  out,"  in  the  misery 
of  a  God-forsaken  and  degraded  manhood.  2.  The  wilderness  wandering.  Those 
who  murmur  against  God's  dealings  with  them,  and  despise  the  grace  which  miti- 
gates and  blesses  the  rigour  of  those  dealings,  shall  be  condemned  to  endure  them 
without  alleviation.  The  Christian's  way  may  be  hard — but  so  is  "  the  way  of 
transj^ressors,"  The  difference  consists  in  God's  presence  with  the  one  and  His 
absence  from  the  other.  •  Surely  this  is  enough  to  make  the  former  a  way  of 
pleasantness  and  a  path  of  peace.  3.  The  Babylonish  Captivity  (ver.  43).  When 
the  nation  cast  God  oS,  God  cast  it  off.  Eventually  Israel  showed  its  preference 
for  the  great  world  powers  to  Himself,  and  He  handed  them  over  to  one  of  them. 
A  respite  came  which  was  unimproved,  and  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  sealed  the 
fate  of  Judaism.  Of  what  sinner  is  that  the  type  as  indicated  by  our  Lord?  (Matt, 
xxiv.-xxv.).  {J.  TV.  Burn.)  And  in  their  hearts  turned  back  again  into  Egypt. — • 
The  fascination  of  Egypt : — Throughout  bis  speech  Stephen  treats  the  early  history 
of  Israel,  as  the  French  say,  "  allusively," — he  talks  about  the  past  while  he  is 
thinking  of  the  present.  Here  he  implies  that  the  Jews  who  rejected  our  Saviour 
were  turning  away  from  the  true  meaning  of  God's  revelation  to  Moses  into  a  time 
of  comparative  darkness — a  mental  and  a  moral  Egypt  from  which  they  had  been 
in  a  fair  way  altogether  to  escape.  Let  us  consider — I.  The  fascination  of  Egypt. 
1.  This  appears  even  before  the  Israelites  had  crossed  the  Bed  Sea.  It  was  the 
fascination  at  once  of  terror  and  of  admiration.  As  they  passed  out  from  the 
fertile  lands  into  the  desert,  their  thoughts  reverted  to  the  vast  burial-ground  above 
Memphis,  along  the  ridge  of  the  desert.  "  Is  it,"  they  cried,  "  because  there  were 
no  graves  in  Egypt  that  thou  hast  taken  us  away  to  die  in  the  wilderness  ?  ...  It 
had  been  better  for  us  to  serve  the  Egyptians."  "  It  was  well  with  us,"  they  cried 
at  Taberah,  "  in  Egypt. "  "Would  to  God,"  they  exclaimed  at  the  report  of  the 
spies,  "  that  we  had  died  in  the  land  of  Egypt,"  &o.  This  fascination  appears  later 
on.  It  is  seen  in  Solomon's  marriage ;  in  the  welcome  which  Jeroboam  seeks  of 
the  Egyptian  court :  in  the  tendency,  rebuked  by  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  and  Ezekiel,  to 
"  trust  in  the  shadow  of  Egypt."  Egypt  became  the  home  of  a  large  colony  of 
Greek-speaking  Hebrews,  and  the  descendants  of  the  patriarchs  counted  for  more 
in  Alexandria  of  the  Ptolemys  than  in  Eameses  of  the  Pharaohs.  2.  This  fasci- 
nation is  the  more  remarkable  because  the  treatment  which  Israel  experienced  was 
frequently  cruel,  always  unscrupulous.  The  patriarchs,  indeed,  had  been  welcomed 
by  the  usurping  "  Shepherd  Kings,"  who  welcomed  all  Asiatics  as  strengthening 
their  position  in  a  country  which  they  ruled  with  difficulty.  Of  these,  the  Pharaoh 
Apf  pi,  the  f  liend  of  Joseph,  was  the  last.  He  had  scarcely  passed  away  when  the 
subject-rulers  of  Thebes,  after  a  great  struggle,  expelled  the  Shepherd  Kings.  In 
the  eyes  of  these  new  rulers  the  Israelites  were  not  guests  who  had  been  invited  to 
become  subjects  :  they  were  the  foreign  dependents  of  a  detested  and  expelled 
dynasty.  Not  one,  but  a  long  line  of  kings,  "  knew  not  Joseph."  The  eighteenth 
dynasty,  including  that  greatest  of  Egyptian  conquerors,  Tbothmes  III.,  whose 
obelisk  now  stands  on  the  Thames  Embankment,  reigned  for  two  hundred  years, 
and  passed  away,  before  the  great  heat  of  the  oppression  began  with  the  third  king 
of  the  nineteenth  dynasty,  llameses  II.  And  as  Egypt  endeavoured  to  crush  the 
children  of  the  patriarchs,  so  in  a  later  day  Egypt  shattered  the  work  of  David  and- 
Solomon.  It  was  at  the  Egyptian  court  tliat  Jeroboam  matured  his  schemes.  It 
was  the  Egyptian  Shishak  who  plundered  Jerusalem  and  then  engraved  the  story 
of  his  triumph  on  the  walls  of  Karnak,  where,  in  confirmation  of  the  Bible 
narrative,  it  may  be  seen  and  read  at  this  very  day.  Not  to  mention  the  invasion 
of  Judah  by  Zerah,  who  was  defeated  by  Asa,  it  may  here  suffice  to  recall  the  defeat 
and  death  of  Josiah  at  the  hands  of  Pharaoh  Necho.  Certainly,  for  reasons  of  her 
own,  which  were  apparent  enough  two  generations  later,  Egypt  was  prepared  to 
assist  Hezekiah  against  Sennacherib ;  but,  on  the  whole,  her  treatment  of  the 
chosen  people  was  anything  but  friendly.  Yet.  for  aU  that,  again  and  again 
during  the  long  course  of  their  history,  Israel's  heart  "  turned  back  again  into 
Egypt."  II.  The  causes  of  this  fascination.  1.  The  productiveness  of  Egypt 
due  to  the  Nile,  which  washes  down  a  rich  soil  from  the  highlands  of  Abyssinia. 
And  this  may  illustrate  the  cry  of  the  Israelites  at  Taberah  (Numb.  xi.  5,  6).  True 
they  were  on  their  way  to  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  ;  a  land  where  every 


CHAP,  vn.]  THE  ACTS.  593 

man  should  sit  "under  his  vine  and  fig  tree,"  &c. ;  hut  for  all  that,  the  land  of 
the  Nile  had,  in  their  eyes,  no  rival.  The  flesh-pots  of  Egypt  were,  beyond  all 
doubt,  one  cause  of  its  attractiveness  for  the  Hebrews.  2.  The  character  of 
Egyptian  civihsation.  In  Egypt  human  Ufe  was  embellished  with  beauty  and 
comfort  such  as  would  naturally  impress  a  comparatively  rude  people  hke  the 
Hebrews.  When  they  became  settled,  and  built  cities  and  the  Temple,  everything 
was  on  a  smaller  and  less  splendid  scale  than  they  had  left  behind.  Our  grandest 
cathedrals  are  dwarfed  by  the  Hall  of  Columns  in  the  temple  at  Karnak,  and  we 
have  never  even  attempted  to  rival  such  structures  as  the  pyramids.  Many 
centuries  before  the  exodus,  kings,  like  Amenemha  III.,  of  the  twelfth  dynasty, 
established  a  complete  system  of  dykes,  canals,  lakes,  and  reservoirs  by  which 
the  inundations  of  the  Nile  were  regulated ;  or  excavated  vast  artificial  lakes 
like  Mceiis  in  Fayuni  to  receive  the  overflowing  waters,  and  so  to  secure  a 
supply  during  the  dry  season  for  a  vast  extent  of  ad/acent  country.  Egypt,  too, 
long  before  Israel's  sojourn  there,  had  its  literature  and  seats  of  learning ;  and 
On,  or  Heliopolis,  the  great  temple  of  the  setting  sun,  before  which,  originally, 
our  obelisk  on  the  Embankment  stood,  and  where  the  patriarch  Joseph  married  his 
wife  Asenath,  was  also  an  university  where  Moses  learned,  as  in  a  later  age  Plato 
and  Euddxus  learned,  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians.  It  is  impossible  to  do 
more  than  touch  the  fringe  of  this  vast  subject.  When  an  Indian  chief  was  asked 
why  he  did  not  join  in  the  mutiny,  he  said,  "I  have  stood  on  London  Bridge." 
And  if  an  ancient  Israelite  could  say,  "  I  have  stood  on  the  ridge  of  the  Libyan 
Desert,  and  have  looked  down  on  Memphis  or  on  Thebes,"  it  might  explain  the 
feeling  with  which  the  member  of  the  less  civilised  race  would  have  regarded  that 
vast  and  elaborate  civilisation.  3.  Its  antiquity.  A  veneration  for  antiquity  is  a 
natural  and  legitimate  sentiment,  and  not  to  feel  it  is  to  lack  some  of  the  finer 
elements  of  a  well-balanced  mind.  This  veneration  is  felt  not  only  by  scholars, 
or  poets,  or  historians,  but  by  men  of  a  very  utilitarian  turn  of  mind.  Look  at 
the  Americans  who  come  to  visit  us  in  increasing  numbers  every  summer.  What 
is  it  in  England,  or  in  Europe,  that  interests  them  most  ?  Not  our  manufac- 
tures, shipping,  or  public  works.  In  these  they  are  always  our  rivals,  and 
sometimes  our  superiors.  That  which  attracts  them  is  a  possession  which  a 
people  cannot  buy  with  money,  or  compass  by  industry,  since  it  is  the  gift  of 
time.  In  their  eyes,  our  older  Hterature,  our  ancient  towns,  our  castles,  our 
parish  churches,  our  cathedrals,  have  a  charm  which  they  sometimes  lack  in  the 
eyes  of  Englishmen.  It  might  almost  seem  that  to  know  the  value  of  an  ancient 
past  it  were  necessary  to  have  no  share  in  it.  Israel,  we  may  think,  was  suffi- 
ciently ancient,  but  as  compared  with  Egypt,  Israel  was  but  of  yesterday. 
Homer  knew  of  no  city  in  the  world  so  great  as  the  Egyptian  Thebes  with  its 
hundred  gates.  Yet,  when  Homer  wrote,  Thebes  had  been  declining  for  at  least 
three  centuries.  And  Thebes  was  modern  when  compared  with  Memphis,  whose 
pyramids  were  ancient  structures  in  the  time  of  Abraham,  and  inasmuch  as 
such  work  implies  a  long  course  of  preceding  labour  and  training,  there  arises  a 
vista  of  a  yet  higher  antiquity,  the  limits  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  conjecture. 
4.  Its  religion.  This  had  in  it,  like  all  pagan  systems,  some  element  of  truth, 
and  a  large  element  of  falsehood.  The  worship  to  which  St.  Paul  refers  when 
writing  to  the  Bomans,  of  "  birds,  and  four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things," 
and  which  we  still  see  in  our  museums,  and  on  the  walls  of  ruined  temples,  to 
us  unintelligible  and  hideous,  were  but  developments  of  a  religious  idea,  which 
at  first  recognised  the  Deity  everywhere  in  nature,  and  then  identified  Him  with' 
nature.  In  ancient  Egypt  a  process  went  forward  which  maybe  observed  in  certain 
regions  of  modern  thought :  Theism  sank  to  Pantheism,  and  Pantheism  sank 
more  and  more  nearly  to  the  level  of  Fetichism.  The  Egyptians  were  always  a 
naturally  rehgious  people.  No  people  of  the  ancient  world  were  so  possessed  with 
the  idea  of  man's  immortaUty.  Their  splendid  tombs  and  pyramids  were  a  per- 
petual profession  of  faith  in  a  future  after  death.  Israel  felt  the  influence  of 
this  religion.  We  cannot  mistake  the  influence  of  Egyptian  models  on  the  form 
of  the  temple,  or  the  ark,  or  other  details  of  the  Levitical  system.  Here  inspira- 
tion has  selected  what  was  good  in  heathendom,  just  as  the  first  chapter  of  St. 
John's  Gospel  consecrates  certain  fragments  of  the  language  of  the  Platonic 
philosophy.  Taken  as  a  whole,  the  religion  of  Egypt  was,  with  its  many,  and 
some  of  them  debasing,  errors,  the  religion  of  a  great,  serious  people  without  a 
revelation  ;  and  as  such  it  contributed  one  powerful  element  to  the  fascination 
which  Egypt  exerted  over  the  mind  of  Israel.  On  two  great  occasions  that 
VOL.  I.  38 


594  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cSap.  vn. 

power  was  apparent  with  fatal  effect.  The  first  was  when  Aaron,  in  the  absence 
of  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai,  made  a  golden  calf  out  of  the  earrings  of  the  people. 
The  second  was  when  Jeroboam  erected  the  two  calves  at  Bethel  and  Dan,  both 
doubtless  suggested  by  the  Egyptian  worship  of  the  sacred  bulls,  Apis  and 
Mnevis.  The  influence  of  Egypt  upon  Israel  might  be  traced  in  later  ages, 
especially  in  Alexandria.  Conclusion  :  Egypt  as  presented  in  Scripture  is  not 
mainly  an  historical  study.  When  St.  Stephen  spoke,  the  Egypt  of  the  Pharaohs 
had  long  forfeited  independent  existence.  The  Csesars  who  ruled  it  had  but  sub- 
jected its  earlier  conquerors.  But  the  Egypt  of  spiritual  experience  which  attracts 
souls  by  its  manifold  seductions  to  return  to  some  mental  or  moral  bondage — this 
Egypt  always  remains.  The  Psalmist  couples  Kahab  with  Babylon,  and  John  with 
Sodom,  as  the  mystic  name  of  the  great  city  of  the  ungodly  world-power,  "where 
also,"  he  adds,  "  our  Lord  was  crucified."  Egypt  is  a  standing  type  of  this  world- 
power,  ever  hostile  to  God ;  and  from  which,  in  all  ages,  elect  souls  must  make 
their  escape  towards  a  land  of  promise,  only,  it  may  be,  to  reach  that  land  after 
long  wanderings  in  some  intellectual  or  moral  desert.  Often  to  such  will  the  past 
which  they  have  renounced  seem  to  them  to  be  ti-ansfigured  and  idealised  by 
memory.  Often  will  tbey  have  misgivings  whether  the  "better  part"  of  Mary 
was  not,  for  them  at  least,  a  Quixotic  enterprise.  Often  will  they  be  tempted,  like 
Israel  of  old,  in  their  hearts  if  not  more  decidedly  stiU,  "  to  turn  back  into  Egypt"; 
for  the  Egypt  from  which  the  Israel  of  God  escapes  is,  like  its  prototype, 
undeniably  attractive.  Perhaps  it  satisfies  man's  lower  appetites ;  perhaps  it 
addresses  itself  to  his  sense  of  beauty  and  refinement ;  and  it  has  been  in  pos- 
session, more  or  less,  ever  since  human  society  has  existed  at  all.  It  even  has  a 
religion  of  its  own,  cleverly  lowered  down  and  adapted  to  the  varied  instincts  of 
human  nature.  Eeferring  to  some  who,  under  his  own  eyes,  yielded  to  its  seductive 
power,  St.  Peter  speaks  with  peculiar  plainness  (2  Pet.  ii.  20-22).  How  are  we  to 
escape  its  subtle  power  save  by  loyal  devotion  to  Him  who  spoke  to  Israel  by  Moses, 
and  who  died  for  us  upon  the  Cross  ?  Surely  no  baits  to  the  senses  can  compete 
with  the  things  which  God  has  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him.  Surely  the 
richest  embellishments  of  man's  outward  life  must  pale  before  Him  who  is  the 
uncreated  Beauty.  The  most  remote  antiquity  is  but  a  second  of  time  when  it  is 
measured  against  the  High  and  the  Eternal.  The  most  reassuring  religion  will  fail 
us  if  it  will  not  stand  the  judgment  of  that  day,  when  "  the  idols  of  Egypt  shall  be 
moved  at  His  presence."  Let  us  learn  to  guard  the  issues  of  our  hearts,  convinced 
that  He  only  has  a  right  to  our  affections  who  has  said  not  less  solemnly  of  the 
redeemed  in  our  age  than  of  the  Eedeemer  in  another,  "  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called 
My  Son."  (Canon  Liddon.)  And  they  made  a  calf  in  those  days.— Ma kinrf  an 
idol : — And  who  would  ever  have  supposed  it !  when  we  remember  how  God  had 
poured  contempt  on  idols  and  idolaters ;  how  they  had  been  delivered,  and  how  the 
visible  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  was  with  them.  I.  The  peculiarities  of 
THIS  SIN.  Men  abuse  everything,  even  the  divinest  things.  Idolatry  is  the  corrup- 
tion of  religion — the  substitution  of  the  materinl  for  the  spiritual,  of  the  lie  for  the 
truth.  It  had  irresistible  attractions  for  the  multitude  ;  it  appealed  to  their  senses 
and  was  a  system  of  solemn  and  splendid  licentiousness.  The  Hebrews  had 
become  tainted  with  it  in  Egypt,  and  manifested  a  proneness  to  it  on  many  occa- 
sions. This  golden  calf  was  the  Apis  of  the  mythology  of  Egypt,  who  was  a 
representative  god,  not  worshipped  on  its  own  account,  but  as  a  symbol  of  the  cbief 
and  supreme  divinity.  This  throws  light  on  the  conduct  of  the  Israelites.  Moses 
was  the  mediator  of  that  economy.  He  had  gone  up  to  commune  with  God  ;  but 
forty  days  and  nights  had  passed  away.  The  people  were  becoming  unensy  and 
unbelieving ;  tbey  felt  that  they  were  alone  in  the  wilderness.  They  wanted  some 
symbol  of  God;  they  would  not  have  wanted  tbis  if  they  had  had  Moses;  but 
having  lost  him,  they  made  a  calf.  They  did  not  renounce  God — they  introduced 
the  unhallowed  ideas  and  practices  of  Egyptian  idolatry  into  the  worship  of 
Jehovah.  Thus  "  they  changed  their  glory" — that  is,  the  invisible  God — "into 
the  similitude  of  an  ox  that  eateth  grass."  The  result  was  most  debasing — " They 
sat  down  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  rose  up  to  play."  They  practised  their  lascivious 
rites  at  the  very  base  of  Sinai.  The  idolater  will  be  like  his  god,  be  can  never  rise 
beyond  his  standard  of  perfection,  and  when  men  become  worshippers  of  an  animal, 
they  become  animal  themselves.  Idolatry  is  the  substitution  of  the  human  for  the 
Divine — the  symbol  for  the  reality.  There  may  be  no  image,  and  yet  idolatry.  In 
after  times  men  trusted  in  the  temple,  and  not  in  God.  Men  now  may  trust  in 
churches  ;  in  the  forms  of  religion,  and  not  in  God  or  the  gospel.     Men  may  put 


CHAP,  vii,]  THE  ACTS.  593 

baptism  in  the  place  of  regeneration,  and  the  Lord's  Supper  in  the  place  of  salva- 
tion by  Christ,  and  thus  overlook  all  the  great  verities  and  realities  of  a  spiritual 
I'eligion.  II.  The  palliatives  of  sin.  Aaron  professed  simply  to  have  cast  the 
gold  into  the  fire,  and  the  unexpected  result  was  this  calf.  Men  have  always 
excuses  or  subterfuges.  They  charge  their  sins  on  the  devil,  or  hereditary  tHint,  or 
constitutional  pecuharity,  or  the  force  of  circumstances.  We  admit  all  this  ;  but 
you  can  defy  all  in  God's  name  and  strength.  There  had  been  preparation  and 
devxign,  and  great  care  in  fashioning  the  mould  for  the  idol.  So  it  is,  by  a  long, 
painful  procf  ss,  we  form  habits  ;  but  these  determine  character.  Your  character 
has  been  fashioned  and  graven  by  a  sharp  instrument,  and  all  your  feelings, 
thoughts,  and  deeds,  like  fused  metal,  are  poured  into  this  mould,  and  come  out 
bearing  its  form.  Many  a  worldly  man  has  said,  "  I  never  thought  I  should  be 
what  I  am."  III.  The  paetneeship  in  sin.  It  was  Aaron's  making,  but  their 
instigation.  They  made  the  calf  that  Aaron  made.  When  legislators,  to  gratify 
the  people,  enact  laws  that  are  opposed  to  the  will  of  God — when  a  teacher  of  truth 
comes  down  from  his  high  position  and  panders  to  the  tastes  and  prejudices  of 
his  hearers — when  fathers  and  mothers  listen  to  the  caprice  and  self-will  of  their 
children — in  all  these  instances  there  is  partnership.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  this. 
You  may  have  moulded  some  character.  Other  men's  sins  may  be  yours.  You 
originated  them — helped  them  to  the  birth.  When  they  were  born,  they  grew  into 
fearful  forms  without  you.  They  are  yours,  however,  you  are  partakers  of  other 
men's  sins.  IV.  The  eeproductiveness  of  sin.  Ages  have  rolled  by.  The  people 
have  entered  the  goodly  land.  There  has  been  the  reign  of  David,  the  golden  age 
of  Solomon.  Once  more  the  cry  of  the  wilderness  is  heard,  the  echoes  of  which 
have  slept  for  centuries — "  These  be  thy  gods,  0  Israel,  which  brought  thee  up  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt."  There  had  been  the  division  of  the  kingdom,  and  it  was  a 
master-stroke  of  policy  on  the  part  of  Jeroboam  to  prevent  the  ten  tribes  going  up 
to  .Jerusalem  to  worship.  He  felt  that  unity  of  worship  would  lead  to  unity  of 
feeling.  The  people,  however,  must  have  a  religion,  and  so  he  falls  back  on  the 
calf  worship.  The  people  are  taught  that  that  worship  cannot  be  wrong  which  had 
been  devised  and  framed  by  the  high  priest  in  the  wilderness.  And  so  the  sin  lives 
again,  and  is  rf^produced.  Sin  is  like  some  fearful  taint  which  has  been  latent  for 
generations,  but  suddenly  manifests  itself  with  new  power.  Conclusion  :  We  are 
leaving  far  behind  the  forms  of  an  old  idolatry ;  getting  beyond  the  worship  of  the 
laws  and  powers  of  nature,  but  the  creature  worship  lives,  and  comes  between 
Christianity  and  the  world.  1.  Men  may  make  an  idol  of  self.  There  is  no  form 
of  idolatry  more  debasing  and  deadly.  2.  Men  may  make  an  idol  of  their  physical 
nature.  How  much  time  do  many  of  you  spend  in  dressing  up  life  as  if  it  were  a 
god.  And  there  are  others  who  say,  "What  shall  we  eat,  and  what  shall  we  drink," 
as  well  as  "  where  with  h,1  shall  we  be  clothed."  All  their  attention  is  concentrated 
on  the  physical.  I  have  lead  of  vines  in  Italy  that  cling  to  some  strong  tree 
and  clasp  it  for  support,  but  they  suppress  all  its  manifestations  of  life  by  the 
growth  of  their  own.  So  the  very  strength  and  wondrous  energy  of  our  spiritual 
natures  may  give  intense  power  to  physical  sins.  3.  What  is  the  idol  men 
worship  in  this  country  ?  Is  it  not  a  golden  one  ?  "  Keep  yourselves  from 
idols."     {H.  J.  Bevis.)  The  folly  of  idolatry  : — "  My  father,"  said  a  convert  to 

a  missionary  in  India,  "  was  an  officiating  priest  of  a  heathen  temple,  and  was 
considered  in  those  days  a  superior  English  scholar,  and,  by  teaching  the  English 
language  to  wealthy  natives,  realised  a  large  fortune.  At  a  very  early  period,  when 
a  mere  boy,  I  was  employed  by  my  father  to  lieht  the  lamps  in  the  pagoda,  and 
attend  to  the  various  things  connected  with  the  idols.  I  hardly  remember  the 
time  when  my  mind  was  not  exercised  on  the  folly  of  idolatry.  These  things,  I 
thought,  were  made  by  the  hand  of  man,  can  move  only  by  man,  and,  whether  treated 
well  or  ill,  are  unconscious  of  either.  Why  all  this  cleHning.  anointing,  illuminating, 
&c.  ?  One  evening  these  considerations  so  powerfully  wrought  on  my  youthful 
mind  that,  instead  of  placing  the  idols  according  to  custom,  I  threw  them  from  their 
pedestals  and  left  them  with  their  faces  in  thedu.-t.  My  father,  on  witnessing  what 
I  had  done,  chastised  me  so  severely  as  to  leave  me  almost  dead.  I  reasoned  with 
him  that,  if  they  could  not  get  up  out  of  the  dust,  they  were  not  able  to  do  what  I 
could,  and  that,  instead  of  being  worshipped  as  gods,  they  deserved  to  lie  in  the 
dust  where  I  had  thrown  them.  He  was  implicable,  and  vowed  to  disinherit 
me,  and,  as  the  first  step  to  it,  sent  me  away  from  his  house.  He  repented 
on    his    death-bed,    and    left    me    all    his    wealth."  Yea,   ye    took   up  the 

tabernacle  of  Mcloch. — Muloch,  the  king  of  gods,  from  Malek,  king,   or   from 


596  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

"  Melkarth  "  at  Tyre,  "the  god  of  the  city,"  and  Saturn,  or  the  Sun,  are  the  same 
as  Baal,  or  Baal  Samen,  "the  Lord  of  heaven,"  in  Phoenicia.     In  Kings  xi.  5-7, 
the  name  occurs  under  the  forms  of  Moloch  and  Milcom,  and  is  there  spoken  of  as 
the  abomination  of  the  Ammorites.     The  worship  of  the  deity  was,  as  the  names 
by  which  tlje  idol  was  known  in  various  countries  will  show,  widely  diffused.     It 
was,  in  its  origin  at  least,  a  kind  of  Sabtean  worship,  and  hence  the  seven  cavities 
in  the  image,  and   the  seven  chapels   of   its   temple,  in  reference  to  the   seven 
planets  of  the  ancient  cosmogony.      That  Baal  aud  Moloch  are  one   is  evident 
not    only    from   the    characteristics    of   the    god    and    his   worship,    but    from 
Jer.  xix.  5;  xxxii.  35.     He  was  a  god  of  terror  and  destruction:  the  god  of  con- 
suming  fire,   the   burning  sun,   the  god  who   smites  the   land   with    upfruitful- 
ness  and   pestilenre,    dries   up   the   springs,   and   begets   poisonous   winds.      See 
with  reference  to  these  characteristics  1  Kings  xviii. ;    where  even   his   prophets 
are  representing   as  in  vain  invoking  him   when  the  land   was  suffering   from 
drought,  and  note  the  answer  of  Jehovah  to  Elijah  in  vers.  44,  45.     The  most 
acceptable  sacrifice  to  this  god  was  little  children.     The  idol  had  a  bull's  head,  and 
his  arms  were  outstretched.     On  these  arms  when  glowing  hot  the  victims  were 
laid  by  their  parents,  and  when,  writhing  from  the  heat  of  the  mftal,  they  rolled 
off,  they  fell  into  the  flames  below.     Drums  drown  the  cries  of  the  children,  and 
hence  the  place  of  sacrifice  was  called  Zophet — a  drum.     Be>ides  children  animals 
were  offered,  sheep,  lambs,   bulls,  and  even  horses.     (TV.  Denton,  31. A.)         Our 
fathers  had  the  tabernacle  of  witness. — The  tabernacle  of  ivitness : — It  was  so, 
called — 1.  Because  of  the  ark  which  contained  the  tables  of  the  law  which  were  a 
perpetual  witness  between  God  and  the  people,     A  witness  against  them  if  they 
disobeyed,  a  witness  for  them  if  they  obeyed — a  standing  evidence  that  they  were 
entitled  to  its  promises.     2.  Because  when  Moses,  or  the  high  priest  afterwards, 
would  know  the  will  of  God,  and  went  into  the  tabernacle,  they  there  obtained  an 
answer  in  their  perplexity,  and  thus  received  perpetual  witness  of  His  truth  who 
revealed  Himself  in  the  tabernacle  :  a  witness  that  all  who  desired  an  answer  to  prayer 
should  seek  God  in  His  house,  and  a  pledge  that  there  they  should  receive  His  guid- 
ance. 3.  The  tabernacle  was  in  itself,  as  it  stood  before  the  eyes  of  the  people,  a  witness 
to  all  His  mercies  whose  tabernacle  it  was,  a  witness  that  He  had  delivered  His  people, 
aud  commanded  them  to  serve  Him.    (Ibid.)      The  ivitnessinthe  wilderness  : — I.  Our 
FATHEES  HAD  THE  TABEKNACLE,     They  had  it  moviug  as  well  as  resting.     I  know  not 
what  ancient  story  or  wondrous  myth  can  approach  in  majesty  the  record  of  that 
long,  tedious,  and  sacred  march,  imagination  quite  fails  in  the  attempt  adequately 
to  realise  either  the  moving  or  the  resting.     There  are  those  who  believe  that  those 
mystic  inscriptions  on  the  red  rocks  of  Sinai  date  from  that  very  time.     Who  will 
dare  to  say  that  it  is  not  so— the  whole  story  heaves  with  miracle.     There  was  the 
mysterious  shrine  ;  it  was,  as  the  word  literally  translated  means,  a  house  of  skins ; 
but  within  were  the  palpitations  of  ineffable  splendour,  heraldries  which  accumulated 
in  wealth  as  the   pilgrims   advanced   on  their  journey.     The  tabernacle  rested, 
surrounded  by  the  tents  of  the  tribes,  and  the  pillar  of  cloud  rested  over  the  shrine. 
Probably  many  of  the  journeyings  were  accomplished  during  the  night.     Then,  in 
the  advance  of  the  tabernacle,  moved  first  the  tents  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh, 
with  the  sacred  sarcophagus,  enshrining  the  bones  of  the  great  Patriarch  Joseph, 
strange  and  weird   monument  of  his  faith  in  the   ultimate  destiny  of  the  exiled 
nation  ;  and  then  as  the  strange  caravan  began  to  move,  would  rise  the  cry,  "  Thou 
that  dwellest  between  the  cherubim  shine  forth,"  and  the  pillar  of  the  white  cloud 
became  a  fixed  red  flame,  a  fire  shooting  forth  a  guiding  light.     So  onward  they 
passed  until  the  Jordan  was  passed,  then  the  tabernacle  of  testimony  rested  on  the 
heights  of  Shiloh.     II,  Box  it  was  all  a  pabable — a  Divine  shadow  of  that  great 
invisible  and  spiritual  society,  the  yet  more  mysterious  Ecclesia,    "  the  Church 
throughout  all  ages,"  on  its  mighty  march  through  Time,  with  all  its  attendant 
omens  and  prodigies — for  such  is  the  Church  everywhere  a  witness  in  the  wilderness ; 
such  are  all  its  varieties  of  ordinance,     "  Ye  are  My  witnesses,  saith  God,  that  I 
am  the  Lord."      It  is   the    perpetual  remonstrance   against  the    sufficiency    of 
the   seen   and  temporal  ;    it   is   a  perpetual   witness    for    the    unseen    and    the 
eternal;    it  is  a  perpetual   testimony   for  the   existence  of  a  spiritual  perpetuity 
and  continuity ;  it  is  a  mysterious  procession  ;  infinite  aspirations  are  infused  into 
the  soul  of  man.     A  transcendent  idea  ;  it  is  embodied  and  takes  its  shape  in  what 
is  called  the  Church.     The  tabernacle  of  testimony  is  the  story  of  the  Church  and 
the  soul — a  witness  for  failh.     The  invincible  assurance  that  all  contradictions 
have  interpretations,  and  th?.t  in  all  disa^^poiutmeats  there  lies  latent  a  Divine 


CHAP,  vii.]  THE  ACTS.  odl 

satisfaction  waiting  to  be  born.  Thus  it  is  that  we  do  not  make  our  faith — our 
faith  makes  us,  not  we  it.  "  By  their  fruits  you  know  them."  A  world  with  no 
tabernacle  of  Divine  testimony  has  a  philosophy  which  only  sees  the  worst,  which 
goes  on  declaring  its  dreary  monologue  that  this  is  the  worst  of  all  possible  worlds, 
that  sleep  is  better  than  waking ;  and  death  is  better  than  sleep  ;  a  creed  full  of 
negatives,  whose  disciples  carry  a  perpetual  note  of  interrogation  on  their  features, 
and  who  write  and  read  books  to  propose  the  question,  "  Is  life  worth  living?  " — in 
the  presence  of  such  thoughts,  the  sky  shuts  down  upon  us,  there  is  no  motive  in 
life — as  Emerson  well  says,  "this  low  and  hopeless  spirit  puts  out  the  eyes,  and 
such  scepticism  is  slow  suicide."     (£.  Faxton  Hood.) 

Vers,  47-50.  But  Solomon  built  Him  an  house. — The  temples  of  God  : — Scripture 
divides  the  Divine  dispensations  into  the  Patriarchal,  the  Jewish,  and  the  Christian. 
We  read  of  three  creations,  or  three  classes  of  heaven  and  earth.  The  first  is 
physical  creation  :  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth." 
The  second  is  Judaism.  "  Yet  once  more  I  shake  not  the  earth  only,  but  also 
heaven."  Evidently  the  heaven  and  earth  there  alluded  to  are  the  ecclesiastical 
and  civil  politj'  of  the  Jews.  The  third  creation  is  Christianity:  "Behold  I 
create  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  ;  and  the  former  one  will  not  be  remembei'ed 
nor  come  into  mind."  I  shall  examine  these  three  creations,  with  a  view  principally 
of  pointing  out  the  successive  dwelling-places  of  God.  I.  The  first  cueation  ob 
NATURE.  "  Heaven  is  My  throne  ;  and  earth  is  My  footstool.  Hath  not  My  hand 
made  these  things  ?  "  Abraham  reared  altars  and  offered  sacrifices  in  the  open 
fields.  He  had  the  earth  for  a  floor  and  the  sky  for  a  canopy.  The  universe  is  a 
temple.  Many  people,  I  am  aware,  convert  it  into  a  warehouse,  or  a  den  of  thieves. 
Alas  I  where  are  the  worshippers  ?  Nature  is  exceedingly  beautiful ;  but  go  where 
jou  will,  the  buyers  and  sellers  and  the  exchangers  of  money  are  there  before  you. 
God  is  present  in  Nature.  The  ancients  saw  Him  in  everything  and  law  in  nothing. 
We  moderns  have  swung  to  the  other  extreme.  But  the  true  Christian  view  is  to 
perceive  God  in  law  and  through  law  and  above  law.  God  still  works  in  Nature,  not 
■capriciously  but  methodically.  The  roses  of  this  year  are  the  embodiment  of  His 
freshest  ideas.  The  rose  is  not  a  part  of  God,  but  God  is  in  it  as  the  source  of  its 
vitality  and  the  principle  of  its  beauty  ;  and  as  long  as  it  is  a  living  rose,  God  will 
be  its  God,  "  for  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead  but  of  the  living."  "For  God  so 
clothes  the  grass  of  the  field."  The  great  heart  of  eternity  may  also  be  felt 
throbbing  in  the  wild  flowers  along  the  hedgerows.  This  spring  God  is  creating  a  new 
heaven  and  a  new  earth.  The  earth  looks  as  new  to-day  as  if  she  were  born  only 
yesterday.  The  curtain  of  heaven  looks  as  blue  and  clean  to  day  as  if  it  came 
from  the  factory  only  this  week.  But  however  magnificent  the  ancient  temj^le  of 
nature,  God  expresses  His  dissatisfaction  with  it.  "  Where  is  the  place  of  My  rest  ? 
Hath  not  My  hand  made  these  things  ?  "  The  first  creation  does  not  afford  rest  to 
the  Almighty — it  is  only  a  preparation  for  a  better  creation  to  follow.  Nature  hides 
more  glory  than  it  reveals,  and  God's  noblest  glory  it  cannot  reveal  at  all.  A 
second  creation  was  needful.  II.  The  second  creation  or  judaism.  1.  The  first 
creation  divides  itself  into  two  parts — matter  and  laws,  substance  and  truths.  But 
in  the  second  creation  God  created  only  laws.  He  did  not  add  to  the  matter,  but 
He  did  add  to  the  laws  of  the  universe.  The  laws  of  Judaism  again  divide  them- 
selves into  laws  which  are  necessary  and  therefore  eternal,  and  laws  which  are 
contingent  and  therefore  temporary.  The  Lord  delivered  the  Ten  Commandments, 
those  commandments  are  in  a  certain  sense  necessary  and  eternal.  God  did  not 
make  them — He  only  spoke  them.  But  as  for  laws  touching  civil  and  ecclesiastical 
government,  God  made  them.  The  splendid  fabric  of  ritual  with  its  tabernacle  and 
sacrifice  and  priesthood  was  the  creation  of  God — not  of  His  arm  like  matter, 
but  of  His  mind.  2.  The  second  creation  is  therefore  of  an  order  superior 
to  the  first.  Inasmuch  as  spirit  is  nobler  than  matter.  It  is  more  difficult 
to  preserve  a  spirit  than  a  planet  in  its  right  orbit.  It  is  harder  to  keep  the 
peace  in  the  commonwealth  of  men  than  in  the  commonwealth  of  stars.  In 
the  first  creation  God  was  legislating  for  dead,  inert  matter ;  in  Judaism 
He  was  legislating  for  free,  living  spirits.  In  every  soul  there  is  a  heaven 
and  an  earth;  aye,  and  if  we  do  not  mind  there  will  be  a  hell  there  too.  But 
originally  there  is  a  heaven — formed  of  love,  imagination,  and  pure  reason.  There 
is  an  earth  there  also---the  propensities  which  qualify  man  for  social  intercourse 
and  worldly  avocations.  And  to  make  laws  for  the  heaven  and  earth  of  the  spirit 
8uch  as  you  find  in  the  religious  and  in  the  civil  code  demanded  more  care  and 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

wisdom  than  to  establish  the  earth  and  garnish  the  heavens.  3.  As  Judaism  is 
thus  an  advance  upon  the  system  of  nature,  so  God  became  more  visibly  and 
palpably  present  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter.  He  was  pleased  to  concentrate 
the  symbol  of  His  presence  in  one  special  locality.  Stephen  speaks  of  God  as  the 
"  God  of  glory,"  referring  probably  to  the  Shekinah.  God  under  the  Old  Testament 
was  manifesting  His  presence  in  a  cloud  of  dazzling  light.  The  name  therefore  by 
which  He  was  known  was  the  Brilliant  or  Shining  One.  It  was  long  supposed  that 
God  etymologically  meant  good.  But  further  investigation  seems  to  point  out  that 
the  English  God,  the  Latin  Deus,  the  Greek  Theos,  the  Welsh  Dmc — all  come  from 
an  old  Aryan  root  signifying  to  shine.  Men  thought  of  God,  and  to  what  could  they 
compare  Him?  To  nothing  else  than  the  shining  splendour  of  the  light.  "God  is 
light."  A  kind  of  natural  correspondence,  therefore,  subsisted  between  the 
Shekinah  and  God — the  shining  cloud  and  the  shining  One.  During  the  Patri- 
archal dispensation  the  glory-cloud  wandered  up  and  down  without  a  fixed 
habitation.  But  on  the  establishment  of  Judaism  it  found  a  convenient  abode  in 
"  Tabernacle  of  witness."  But  this  tabernacle  was  small  in  size  and  mean  in 
appearance;  therefore  David  desired  to  build  a  temple,  and  what  David  conceived, 
Solomon  was  privileged  to  execute.  So  far  progress  marks  the  history  of  religion 
among  the  Jews.  The  Shekinah  thenceforth  dwelt  in  the  Holy  of  Holies — a  visible 
symbol  of  the  invisible  God.  4.  In  what  then  did  the  fault  of  the  Jews  consist '? 
In  supposing  that  the  Divine  presence  was  restricted  to  the  temple,  and  that  there- 
could  be  no  Divine  worship  unless  connected  with  the  Jewish  ritual.  The  local  and^ 
temporary  character  of  Judaism  they  entirely  overlooked,  which  character  Stephen 
in  his  oration  forcibly  urges  on  their  attention.  As  God  was  worshipped  acceptably 
before  the  building  of  the  temple,  so  will  He  be  worshipped  acceptably  after  its 
demolition.  The  temple,  however  spacious  and  costly,  could  not  afford  God  a 
permanent  and  congenial  rest.  "The  hour  cometh  when  ye  shall  worship  the 
Father  neither  in  this  mountain  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem."  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  what 
satisfaction  can  He  find  in  mountains  of  dust,  and  what  rest  can  He  find  in 
bricks  and  mortar  however  skilfully  put  together?  Not  that  we  would  disparage  a 
material  temple — the  House  of  God  demands  our  profoundest  reverence.  "  Keep 
thy  foot  when  thou  goes  to  the  House  of  God."  So  long  as  God  is  pleased  to  dwell 
in  it,  it  deserves  our  reverence  ;  we  drift,  however,  into  error  the  moment  we  exalt 
the  temple  and  its  ritual  above  God  Himself.  Stephen  therefore  was  not  guilty  of 
blasphemy.  The  temple  on  Moriah  was  only  a  stage  in  the  onward  march  of  the 
Divine  economies.  III.  The  thikd  ckeation  or  Christianity.  Evidently  Stephen's 
argument  does  not  properly  conclude  with  ver.  49 — he  is  only  paving  bis  way  to- 
make  a  transition  to  Chris! ianity.  Neither  do  the  prophet's  words  end  there — he 
points  to  a  temple  nobler  and  more  spiritual  and  more  pleasing  unto  God.  "  To 
this  man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and 
trembleth  at  My  word."  In  these  creations  a  certain  gradation  is  observable,  and 
corresponding  with  them,  we  read  of  three  creative  words.  The  first  is  the  word 
"Be  "  in  Genesis,  corresponding  with  the  material  creation.  The  second  is  "I  am" 
in  Exodus,  corresponding  with  the  Jewish  creation.  The  third  is  "  Immanuel," 
corresponding  with  the  Christian  creation.  In  the  physical  universe  is  seen  the 
Word  of  His  might ;  in  the  Jewish  the  Word  of  His  oath  ;  in  the  Christian  the 
Word  of  His  essence.  "Therefore,  even  that  which  was  made  glorious  had  no  glory 
in  this  respect,  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  excelleth."  Truths  are  of  two  kinds  as 
we  have  seen  necessary  and  eternal,  contingent  and  temporary.  That  one  is  the 
first  figure  in  numeration  is  necessary — God  could  not  create  a  figure  less  than  one. 
But  that  the  earth  revolves  round  the  sun  in  twelve  months  is  not  necessary,  it 
might  lie  fourteen  months  quite  as  well.  Christianity  is  a  system  of  new  truths, 
of  truths  which  have  been  made.  The  Incarnation  was  not  a  truth  always ;  it  was 
not  a  truth  in  the  days  of  Adam,  of  Abraham,  or  of  Moses,  But  it  is  a  truth 
to-day,  a  truth  however  which  has  been  made.  And  the  truths  God  has  made  are 
in  a  sense  more  wonderful  than  the  truths  He  has  not  made.  But  what  is  it  that 
principally  differentiates  the  new  creation  of  Christianity  from  the  two  preceding  ? 
The  words  of  the  text  answer — "  God  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands ; 
hath  not  My  hands  made  these  things  ?  "  We  have  here  come  upon  a  very 
important  phrase — " made  with  hands,"  which  suggests  to  us  its  opposite — "not 
made  with  hands."  They  are  the  Scripture  synonyms  for  the  terms,  "  natural  " 
and  "supernatural"  in  modern  theology.  The  first  heaven  and  earth,  and 
Solomon's  temple  were  made  with  hands ;  and  therefore  God  declined  to  acknow- 
ledge them  as  the  place  of  His  rest.     Christianity  is  described  as  a  "  stone  cut  out 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  599 

of  the  mountain  without  hands,"  and  is  thereby  elevated  to  the  realm  of  the  super- 
natural. 1.  The  body  or  rather  the  human  nature  of  Jesus  Christ  was  not 
made  with  hands  (Heb.  ix.  11).  The  human  nature  of  Adam  was,  and  so  was  the 
human  nature  of  his  posterity.  But  the  human  nature  of  the  Saviour  was  radically 
different.  It  was  not  as  the  apostle  explains — "of  this  building,"  "of  this 
creation."  Christ  is  in  it,  but  not  of  it.  He  was  not  produced  by  the  intervention 
of  the  established  laws  of  the  world  ;  He  was  the  supernatural  effect  of  the  super- 
natural operation  of  God.  "The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,"  &c.  That 
is,  therefore,  the  reason  why  He  is  in  a  pre-eminent  sense  the  temple  of  God.  "  All 
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwelleth  in  Him  bodily."  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that 
in  Hira  shall  all  fulness  dwell."  In  Jesus  Christ  He  finds  a  temple  "  not  made  with 
hands,"  a  temple  therefore  more  akin  to  His  own  eternal  nature,  and  in  Him  He 
deigns  to  dwell  for  ever.  "This  is  My  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 
2.  The  regenerate  heart  is  not  made  with  hands  (Col.  ii.  11).  That  to  regenerate 
a  man  does  not  belong  to  the  old  system  of  things.  No  forces  in  the  first  universe, 
whether  of  mind  or  matter,  can  effect  the  spiritual  renewal  of  our  nature.  And 
therefore  is  the  second  birth  designated  "  a  new  creation."  The  spiritual  cir- 
cumcision of  the  heart  belongs  emphatically  to  the  realm  of  the  supernatural.  No 
amount  of  intellectual  hght  or  moral  influence  can  effect  it.  The  natural  man  is 
said  not  to  understand  the  spiritual;  and  no  wonder— they  do  not  belong  to  the 
same  universe.  They  may  be  living  in  the  same  house,  attending  the  same 
church ;  but,  after  all,  they  are  separated  by  the  width  of  a  whole  creation. 
"  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temples  of  God,"  &c.  "  Will  God  of  a  truth  dwell 
with  man  on  the  earth  ?  "  Yea,  answers  St.  Paul,  He  will  not  only  dwell  with 
man,  He  will  also  dwell  in  man  on  the  earth.  It  has  now  been  made  clear  to  us 
that  God's  proper  temple  is  holy  humanity,  and  under  the  Christian  dispensation 
He  has  found  the  temple  He  so  earnestly  coveted.  In  the  first  creation  we  see  the 
works  of  Nature ;  but  God  declares  He  cannot  rest  therein.  In  the  temple  of 
Solomon  we  see  the  works  of  art ;  but  God  again  declares  He  cannot  find  in  it  the 
place  of  His  rest.  However  magnificent,  therefore,  is  the  temple  of  Nature,  God  is 
not  satisfied  with  it,  for  it  is  the  work  of  His  own  hands.  However  splendid  the 
temple  of  art,  God  is  not  satisfied  with  it,  for  it  is  the  work  of  man's  hands.  But  in 
Christianity — in  Christ  first,  and  in  the  Christian  afterwards.  He  has  a  temple 
reared  by  His  grace,  a  temple  not  made  with  hands,  a  temple  in  which  He  vouch- 
safes to  dwell  for  ever.  The  temple  of  nature,  the  temple  of  art,  the  temple  of 
grace,  these  three ;  but  the  greatest  of  these  is  the  temple  of  grace.  (J.  Cynddylan 
Jones,  DD.)  The  true  temple  of  God : — 1.  The  visible  not  to  be  despised  (vers. 
46,  47).  2.  The  invisible  not  to  be  forgotten  (vers.  48-50).  {K.  Gerok.)  Com- 
position of  the  Church: — God's  Church  is  not  built  of — I.  Gold  and  silver,  i.e., 
worldly  might  and  splendour.  II.  Wood  and  stone,  i.e.,  external  customs  and  dead 
works.  III.  Parchment  or  paper,  i.e.,  confessions  of  faith  and  forms  of  govern- 
ment. IV.  But  of  LIVING  HEARTS.  1.  Fouudcd  ou  Christ  by  faith.  2.  United  to 
one  another  in  love.  3.  Growing  up  to  heavenly  perfection  in  hope.  (Ibid.)  Heaven 
is  My  throne,  and  earth  is  My  footstool.  What  house  will  ye  build  Me  ? — 
The  universal  nature  of  Christian  worship  : — These  words  of  Stephen  have  some- 
times been  quoted  as  if  they  sounded  the  death-knell  of  special  places  dedicated  to 
the  honour  and  glory  of  God,  such  as  churches  are.  It  is  evident,  however,  that 
they  have  no  such  application.  They  sounded  the  death-knell  of  the  exclusive 
privilege  of  one  place,  the  temple,  but  they  proclaimed  the  freedom  which  the  Church 
has  ever  since  claimed ;  and  the  Jewish  Church  of  the  dispersion,  by  the  institution 
of  synagogues,  had  led  the  way  in  claiming — teaching  that  whatever  true  hearts 
and  true  worshippers  are  found,  there  God  reveals  Himself.  But  we  must  bear  in 
mind  a  distiiietion.  Stephen  and  the  apostles  rejected  the  exclusive  right  of  the 
temple  as  the  one  place  of  worship  for  the  world.  They  asserted  the  right  to 
estai'lish  special  p'aces  of  worship  throughout  the  world.  They  rejected  the 
exclusive  claims  of  Jerusalem.  But  they  did  not  reject  the  right,  and  tbe  duty  of 
God's  people,  to  assemble  themselves  as  a  collective  body  for  public  worsliip,  and  to 
realise  Chiist's  covenanted  presence.  This  is  an  important  limitation  of  St. 
Stephen's  statement.  The  great  end  of  public  worship  is  worship,  not  hearing,  not 
edification  even,  though  edification  follows  as  a  necessary  result  of  such  public 
worship  when  sincerely  offered.  The  teaching  of  St.  Stephen  did  not  then  apply 
to  the  erection  of  churches  and  buildings  set  apart  for  God's  service,  or  to  the  claim 
made  for  public  worship  as  an  exercise  with  a  peouliar  Divine  promise  annexed. 
It  simply  piotests  agaiust  any  attempt  to  localise  the  Divine  presence  to  one  special 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vu. 

spot  on  earth,  making  it,  and  it  alone,  the  centre  of  all  religious  interest.     [G.  T. 
Stokes,    D.D.)  A    transcendent    existence  :  —  I.   An    omnipresent    existence. 

One  whose  throne  is  heaven,  whose  footstool  is  earth,  and  to  whom 
all  places  are  alike.  One  who  fills  heaven  and  earth  not  merely  with 
His  influence,  nor  indeed,  as  the  Pantheists  teach,  with  His  substance  ; 
but  One  who  is  everywhere  as  a  Personality,  free,  conscious,  active.  All 
created  existences  are  limited  by  the  laws  of  space,  and  those  that  occupy  the 
largest  space  are  mere  specks  in  immensity.  Concerning  the  stupendous  fact  of 
God's  Omnipresence  observe  that  it  is — 1.  Agreeable  to  reason,  although  incompre- 
hensible. The  denial  of  it  would  be  a  contradiction.  A  limited  God  would  be  no 
God.  2.  Essential  to  worship.  (1)  To  its  spirit.  Worship  implies  mystery. 
Take  away  God's  incomprehensibility  and  you  take  away  the  power  to  evoke  in  the 
soul  all  the  awe  and  wonder  which  enter  into  the  very  essence  of  worship.  (2)  To 
its  constancy.  True  worship  is  not  an  occasional  service  confined  to  times  and 
places,  but  an  abiding  attitude  of  the  soul.  "  God  is  a  Spirit,"  &c,  3.  Promotive 
of  holiness.  Let  men  realise  the  constant  presence  of  God,  and  how  strongly  will 
tbey  feel  restraint  from  sin  and  stimulus  to  virtue.  4.  Assurative  of  retiibution. 
Who  can  hide  himself  from  the  Lord  ?  No  sin  escapes  His  notice.  There  is  no 
escaping  therefore  from  punishment.  "  Whither  shall  I  flee  from  Thy  presence  ?  " 
5.  Illustrative  of  heaven.  There  is  nothing  local  or  formal  in  heaven's  worship. 
••I  saw  no  temple  therein."  Then  He  is  felt  to  be  everywhere,  and  is  worshipped 
everywhere.  II.  A  creative  existence.  "  Hath  not  My  hand  made,"  &c.  Because 
He  made  all.  He  owns  all.  Creatorship  implies  sovereignty,  almightiness,  and 
proprietorship.  (D.  Thomas, D.D.)  What  is  the  place  of  My  rest. — The  place  of 
God's  rest : — I.  God  kevealinq  Himself.  By  the  aid  of  figures  God  discloses  His 
spiritual  character.  Everywhere  we  see  pictures,  suggestions  of  the  Divine.  The 
boundary  sky,  with  its  serene  height  of  blue ;  the  midnight  sky  with  its  myriad 
worlds;  mountains  piercing  the  clouds  or  hanging  in  frowning  precipice;  great 
floods  of  water  rolling  in  their  ceaseless  tides;  all  com^Del  us  to  say,  "How 
marvellous  are  Thy  works,"  &c.  1.  Heaven  is  God's  throne.  A  star  in  the  far 
depths  attracted  the  attention  of  an  observer.  It  seemed  to  be  but  a  single  star, 
but  a  powerful  telescope  resolved  into  two  which  were  really  distant  from  each 
other  five  hundred  times  the  distant  between  our  earth  and  the  sun.  Who  can 
conceive  of  such  sublime  spaces.  What  must  He  be  whose  throne  rises  higher 
than  these  stars,  whose  canopy  is  gemmed  by  myriad  suns.  2.  Earth  is  God's 
footstool.  Here  the  microscope  comes  to  our  assistance.  This  great  earth,  with 
its  millionfold  objects  seen  and  unseen,  is  but  a  resting-place  for  God's  foot.  II.  God 
APPEALING  TO  MAN  TO  FIND  HiM  BEST.  We  should  ucver  havc  dared  to  represent  God 
as  seeking  rest.  The  marvel  of  His  condescension  is  that  He  is  independent  of  His 
creatures,  and  yet  seeks  rest  in  them.  If  God  were  only  wisdom  or  pnwer  then  His 
rest  might  be  found  in  the  works  of  His  hands.  But  every  being  seeks  rest  accord- 
ing to  his  character.  The  infinitely  pure  One  can  only  find  rest  in  holiness ;  the 
infinitely  loving  in  love ;  the  eternal  Father  in  His  children.  III.  Man  vainly 
OFFEBiNQ  God  best  in  THINGS.  The  first  shrine  for  human  worship  was  the  open 
firmament  of  heaven.  It  was  the  only  worthy  one.  The  only  befitting  walls  were 
the  distant  horizon  and  the  everlasting  hills ;  the  only  suitable  roof  was  the 
illimitable  sky.  Yet  from  the  first,  through  sin,  this  temple  proved  too  vast  and 
glorious  for  man  to  use.  So  he  planted  groves  to  circle  God  to  a  space  ;  and  conse- 
crated mountain  peaks  to  fix  God  to  a  point ;  and  built  temples  and  churches  to 
narrow  the  infinite  to  human  grasp.  Too  often  man  has  offered  his  temples  as  a 
sacrifice  in  the  vain  hope  that,  satisfied  with  them,  God  would  cease  to  ask  for 
holier  things.  And  even  now  men  thmk  to  offer  God  rest  in  the  beauty  of  our 
churches  and  the  charm  of  our  services,  and  give  Him  things  instead  of  persons. 
And  yet  even  we  men  cannot  be  satisfied  with  things;  how,  then,  can  we  expect 
God  to  be.  Our  hearts  cannot  rest  in  the  artistic  fittings  of  our  dwellings,  the 
creations  of  genius,  or  the  associations  of  culture.  We  want  love ;  we  must  have 
persons.  We  are  "  the  figures  of  the  true."  He,  too,  puts  aside  the  thi7igs  we  offer 
Him,  be  they  temple,  or  gold,  or  work,  and  pleads  with  us,  "  My  son  give  Me  thy 
heart."  If  we  respond  then  He  will  accept  our  things,  and  things  alive  with  holy 
love  may  find  for  Him  the  rest  He  seeks.     {R.  Tuck, B. A.) 

Vers.  51-53.  Ye  stlfitaecked  and  uncircumclsed  in  heart  and  ears. — Stephen't 
change  of  tone : — I.  Justified.    1.  This  was  not  the  first  Christian  sermon  that  thd 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  60l 

Jews  or  the  Sanhedrin  had  heard.  Otherwise,  poissibly,  such  veViement  and  un- 
sparing denunciations  had  been  out  of  place.  Tlaey  had  aU'eady  heard  of  Christ 
twice  from  His  inspired  messengers,  and  he  did  not  speak  till  the  ecclesiastical 
rulers  had  shown  a  determined  animus  to  put  their  foot  on  the  gospel.  It  was  to 
a  council  who  had,  and  still  were,  resisting  grace  that  Stephen  spoke.  2.  Stephen 
was  addressing  the  authorities,  and  the  tone  of  Peter  towards  them  had  been  very 
different  from  his  tone  with  the  people  (chap.  iii.  17 ;  cf.  iv.  H ;  vi.  30).  There 
was  deep  reason  and  equity  in  this  difierence.  It  was  the  Sanhedrin  which  hid 
all  along  fomented  the  hostility  of  the  people  to  Cbrist.  The  common  people  heard 
Christ  gladly,  and  shouted  Hosannah  ;  and  in  the  closing  scene  it  was  only  at  the 
persuasion  of  the  chief  priests  and  elders  that  they  were  induced  to  "  ask  Barabbas 
and  destroy  Jesus."  They  had,  no  doubt,  their  full  share  of  guilt,  and  Peter  charges 
them  with  being  accomplices;  but,  as  at  the  Fall,  God  recognises  a  difference  in 
degree  of  guilt  between  man  and  the  serpent,  so  those  who  are  of  the  same  mind 
with  God  draw  a  distinction  between  those  who  sin  through  weakness,  and  those 
who  sin  of  malice  prepense.  It  is  against  the  latter  that  Stephen  hurls  his  indignant 
invective.  II.  Accounted  for.  1.  There  was  the  natural  friction  which  his  own 
argument  produced  in  his  mind.  As  he  traced  the  history  of  his  nation,  view  after 
view  opened  upon  him  of  the  perversity,  bigotry,  and  wilful  opposition  to  truth 
which  had  characterised  them  at  every  period.  They  had  only  been  too  consistent 
in  rejecting  Divine  messengers,  and  now  by  their  rejection  of  the  love  and  Spirit  of 
God  they  had  put  the  finishing  stroke  upon  their  sin.  This  repeated  defiance  of 
God  galls  Him,  and  kindles  His  holy  indignation.  2.  In  all  probability  his  quota- 
tion from  Isaiah,  so  palpably  adverse  to  their  view  of  the  temple,  and  so  impossible 
to  be  answered  stung  them  to  the  quick.  This  is  indicated  in  the  narrative, "  They 
while  in  the  act  of  listening  were  cut  to  the  heart  and  kept  gnashing  upon  him 
with  their  teeth."  It  is  not  difficult  to  picture  the  scene.  Audible  murmurs  are 
heard  as  Stephen  says,  "  The  Most  High  dwelleth  not  in  temples,"  (fee.  They  make 
menacing  gestures  as  wild  beasts  would  spring  upon  their  prey.  There  two  scribes, 
reaching  across  to  one  another,  have  got  a  scroll  between  them,  in  which  they  are 
pointing  to  passages  which  they  think  confute  him.  One  finger  is  on  the  words, 
"  I  have  hallowed  this  house,"  &c. ;  the  fist  of  the  other  contracts  and  is  raised 
towards  the  prisoner.  The  young  man  from  the  Cicilian  synagogue  glances  to  and 
fro  from  the  accused  to  Gamaliel.  The  great  doctor  had  in  a  previous  council  made 
a  diversion  in  favour  of  the  apostles.  But  on  that  occasion  it  appears  that  the 
high  priest  had  been  under  the  influence  of  the  Sadducees.  Stephen's  speech 
brought  out  into  full  prominence  the  anti- Pharisaic  element  of  the  gospel.  And 
as  he  did  so  the  eyes  of  Saul  are  turned  wistfully  to  his  great  authority  mutely  ask- 
ing, "  Will  you  plead  for  these  Galileans  now?  "  And  Gamaliel's  conti acted  brow 
answers  "  No."  Then  catching  the  symptoms  of  the  storm  long  brewing,  with  that 
quick  ppprehension  which  always  characterises  an  earnest  speaker,  and  seeing  in  a 
moment  "  the  wicked  husbandmen  "  before  him,  he  bursts  forth  in  the  words  of 
the  text.  In  the  early  part  of  his  speech  he  is  cautious,  and  avoids  giving  offence  ; 
"  He  keeps  his  mouth,  as  it  were,  with  a  bridle,  while  the  ungodly  is  in  sight." 
But  at  last  his  heart  grows  hot  within  him,  and  while  he  is  musing  upon  the 
circumstances  he  has  recited,  the  fire  kindles  ;  and  at  the  last  he  throws  away  his 
caution  and  speaks  in  accents  of  burning  indignation.  Conclusion  :  What  has  been 
said  may  read  us  a  needful  lesson  on  the  subject  of  spurious  charity.  Charity  is 
not  uniform  suavity  under  all  circumstances ;  it  has  in  it  a  stern  element  of  moral 
indignation  which  is  the  salt  that  keeps  it  from  corruption.  Charity  never  flatters 
a  man  in  wilful  sin,  but  tells  him  plainly  that  continuance  means  death  ;  just  as 
a  surgeon,  who  desires  nothing  but  the  health  of  his  patient,  does  not  hesitate  to 
perform  a  painful  operation.  And  because  heresy  is  mischievous  to  souls  charity 
pays  it  no  compliments.  If  some  safeguards  are  requii-ed  with  perfect  righteous-, 
ness  of  indignation — 1.  Kid  the  mind  of  personal  resentment.  2.  Be  sure  that, 
it  is  vital  error,  and  do  not  confound  it  with  your  view  of  it.  (Dean  Goulhurn.) 
Ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost. — Resisting  the  Holy  Ghost : — I.  The  cha- 
racter HFRE  GIVEN  OF  IMPENITENT  AND  UNGODLY  MEN.  1.  Their  leading  feature  is 
obduracy,  which  the  Scriptures  call  hardness  of  heart.  There  may  be  a  variety  of 
dispositions,  yet  all  merging  in  this  spirit.  (1)  Stiff-necked  means  nearly  the  same 
as  stout-hearted  ;  one  who  is  unyielding  and  obstinate  ;  who  sets  at  nought  the 
councils  of  God  and  follows  his  own.  (2)  Uncircumcised  in  heart  and  ears.. 
Circumcision  was  a  rite  intended  to  point  out  the  nature  and  necessity  of  spiritual 
renovation   (Deut.    x.   16-18).      2.  The  obduracy  of  an  ungodly    man    may   be 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vu. 

resolved  into — (1)  Sensuality  (Deut.  xxi.  18-20).  (2)  Pride  and  prejudice 
(Jer.  vi.  10-13).  (3)  Habitual  negligence  and  the  spirit  of  slumber  (Isa.  Ixvi.  3, 
4;  xxix,  9-13).  II.  How  ungodly  men  eesist  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  a  crea- 
ture should  rise  in  rebellion  against  the  great  Creator  might  seem  incredible,  had 
we  not  demonstration  of  the  fact.  Gamaliel  said,  "If  this  council,  or  this  work, 
be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow  it,  lest  ye  haply  be  found  even  to  fight  against 
God."  There  are  many  ways  in  which  men  do  fight  against  God  ;  but  the  most 
awful  is  in  resisting  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Sovereign  of  the  universe  maintains  a 
communication  with  our  fallen  world  by  the  agency  of  His  Spirit.  Now  this 
Divine  Spirit  is  called — 1.  The  Spirit  of  Truth.  He  revealed  the  will  of  God  to  us. 
When  any  one  opposes  Divine  truth,  he  resists  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  grand 
doctrines  of  the  gospel  are  confessedly  clear  and  plain  in  the  Word.  How  then 
is  it  that  they  are  not  received  ?  (Isa.  xxx.  8-13 ;  John  iii.  19. )  To  those  who 
prefer  agreeable  things,  which  flatter  the  roving  imagination,  and  the  unrenewed 
heart,  a  full  exhibition  of  Divine  truth,  will  ever  be  unwelcome.  Herein  consists 
the  guilt  of  obstinate  unbelief  and  impenitence.  Hence,  too,  arises  the  sophistry 
which  contrives  a  thousand  subtle  devices  to  nullify  the  Word  of  God.  2.  The 
spirit  of  purity.  He  is  the  sole  source  and  efiicient  author  of  sanctity.  He  has 
given  a  hallowed  and  peculiar  stamp  to  the  various  precepts,  ordinances,  and  in- 
stitutions of  true  religion.  Now,  the  man  who  labours  to  stain  this  stamp  of 
purity  resists  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  The  Spirit  of  Grace.  Godengaged  topour  ouiithe 
spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplication.  The  favour  of  Jehovah  is  eminently  manifested 
through  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Yet,  alas  !  great  numbers  resist  this  Divine 
Agent  of  mercy,  stifling  those  convictions  which  are  produced  by  His  power.  The 
truth  is  heard,  but  not  heeded  and  applied.  III.  The  trkmendods  coNSEQUENCEa 
OF  RESISTING  THE  HoLY  Ghost.  1.  Those  pcrsons  who  have  long  and  obstinately 
opposed  truth,  are  usually  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind.  The  light  which  they 
liave  laboured  so  hard  to  exclude  is  withdrawn,  and  they  are  enveloped  in  the 
thick  darkness  they  love.  Compunction  of  conscience  gradually  abates  till  they 
are  past  feeling.  "  My  Spirit  shaU  not  always  strive  with  man,"  &c.  "Ephraim 
is  joined  to  idols,  let  him  alone."  "  For  it  is  impossible  for  those  who  were 
once  enlighted,"  &c.  2.  The  future  punishment  of  those  who  have  resisted  the 
Holy  Ghost  will  be  beyond  expression  dreadful.  Though  for  a  time  they  may  be 
hardened,  so  as  to  have  little  or  no  fear,  the  justice  of  God  is  preparing  their 
doom.  He  that  despised  Moses'  law,  died  without  mercy,  under  two  or  three  wit- 
nesses ;  of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  &c.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his 
Maker!"  (Essex  Congregatiomd  Remembrancer.)  Resisting  the  Holy  Ghost:  — 
I.  The  office  of  the  Holy  Spieit,  1.  Convincing.  2.  Entreating.  3.  Admo- 
nishing. 4.  Threatening.  II.  The  means  He  uses.  1.  The  Word.  2.  Examples. 
3.  Conscience.  4.  Providential  dealings.  III.  The  modes  of  kesisting  Him. 
1.  Inattention.     2.  Procrastination.     3.   Contradiction.      (W.   IV.    Wythe.)  On 

resisting  the  Holy  Spirit : — To  resist  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  sin  of  the  deepest 
guilt.  It  is  the  basest  ingratitude  against  God  ;  for  it  is  resisting  the  very  means 
which  God  of  His  infinite  mercy  freely  offers  for  recovering  our  souls  from  sin,  and 
bringing  us  to  Christ,  our  only  Saviour.  Does  it  not  seem  strange  that  against 
one  so  good,  so  merciful,  so  willing  to  help,  and  comfort  us,  we  should  ever  be  led 
to  commit  wilful  sin  ?  1.  Christians  of  the  present  day  approach  towards  this 
"  sin  "  several  ways;  and  first  whenever  they  despise  or  ridicule  things  belonging 
unto  God.  Should  they  persevere  in  these  sinful  habits,  they  may  in  the  end  lose 
all  reverence  for  holy  things;  and  then,  if,  with  a  soul  indifferent  to  things 
spiritual,  tbey  die,  have  they  a  hope  that  their  sin  can  be  forgiven  ?  Like  the 
Pharisees  of  old,  they  seemed  to  have  refused  the  very  means  by  which  they  might 
have  been  brought  to  Chiist.  2.  There  is  another  way  by  which  Christians 
"resist  the  Holy  Ghost  ";  and  this,  in  the  language  of  Scripture, is  called  grieving, 
or  quenching,  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  one  sense  every  sin  wilfully  committed  against 
God,  every  known  Christian  duty  wilfully  omitted,  is  grieving  the  Holy  Spirit.  But 
in  a  more  especial  manner  Christians  grieve  the  Holy  Ghost  when  they  refuse  to 
receive  those  doctrines  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  which  He  hath  Himself 
revealed ;  when  the  plain  teachings  of  the  Scriptures  seem  unto  them  "  foolish- 
ness." 3.  God's  Holy  Spirit  is  resisted  also  by  every  one  who,  in  direct  opposition 
to  conscience,  refusing  the  holy  aid  which  alone  could  have  preserved  him, 
wilfully  commits  sin,  knowingly  violates  the  moral  law  of  God.  Such  are  some 
of  the  very  awful  considerations  arising  from  the  subject  before  us.  Warned  of 
the  danger,  let  us  watch  and  pray  against  it.     Let  us  not  resist  the  Holy  Ghost 


CHAP,  vn.]  THE  ACTS.  608 

in  this  our  accepted  time,  and  He  will  fit  us  for  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  salvation 
purchased  by  the  blood  and  secured  by  the  intercession  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus    Christ.       {H.    Marriott,    3I.A.)  WMch    of   the    prophets    have    not 

your  fathers  persecuted.  —  Devotion  to  the  conventional: — I.  The  rejection 
OF  Christ  was  the  national  sin  of  the  Jewish  people.  It  was  the  act 
of  the  whole  nation,  the  result  of  the  full  development  of  the  then  Jewish 
mode  of  looking  at  the  world — the  ppirit  of  the  age.  1.  The  term,  a  national  sin, 
wants  a  clear  definition.  It  is  used  at  present  recklessly.  Every  party  declares 
its  opponents  guilty  of  a  national  sin.  But  a  national  sin  is  not  an  evil  done  by  any 
one  party  to  the  nation,  but  an  evil  done  by  the  nation  itself.  I  might  mention 
courses  of  political  action  in  which  England  has  persisted  for  years,  through  all 
changes  of  p  nty,  whiuhareof  the  character  of  national  sins,  but  I  will  content  myself 
with  saying  that  one  of  the  worst  of  national  sins  is  the  rejection  or  neglect  of  the 
great  men  whom  God  has  sent  to  save  or  to  teach  the  nation.  It  is  a  proof  of 
the  perfect  culture  of  a  people,  when  it  recognises  its  great  men,  puts  them  forward 
at  once  and  obeys  them.  2.  The  man  of  noble  genius,  the  prophet,  or  whatever 
else  you  call  him,  is  the  test  of  the  nation.  Those  are  lost  who  reject  him— the 
•  whole  nation  is  lost  if  the  whole  nation  rejects  him — for  it  is  not  he  so  much  whom 
it  rejects  as  the  eaving  ideas  of  which  he  is  the  vehicle.  The  question  whether 
Christ  shall  be  accepted  or  rejected  has  again  and  again  been  placed  before  the 
nations.  It  was  placerl  most  completely  before  the  Jews  at  the  appearance  of  the 
perfect  M-m — is  placed  before  each  of  us — since  He  was  the  representation  of  that 
which  is  noblest  in  humanity.  This  passive  work  was  recognised  by  Simeon 
when  he  said,  "  This  child  is  set  for  the  fall  and  the  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel. " 
It  was  recognised  by  Christ  Himself  when  He  said,  "  For  judgment,"  i.e.  for 
division,  for  sifting  of  the  chafl  from  the  wheat,  "  am  I  come  into  the  world."  And 
so  it  was,  wherever  He  went  He  was  the  touchstone  of  men.  Those  who  were 
pure  and  true-hearted  saw  Him.  and  loved  Him  ;  those  who  were  cons-cious  of  their 
need  and  sin  believed  in  Him,  drank  deep  of  His  Spirit,  and  found  redemption  and 
repose.  Those  who  were  base  or  false  of  heart  naturally  recoiled  from  Him,  and,  to 
get  rid  of  Him,  hanged  Him  on  a  tree.  In  doing  so — and  this  was  the  deed  of  the 
mass  of  the  people — they  destroyed  their  nationality  which  was  hidden  in  their 
reception  of  Christ.  In  a  coincidence  with  this,  the  priesthood  rejected  Christ  in 
words  which  repudiated  their  di.-'tinct  existence  as  a  nation — "  We  have  no  king 
but  Caesar."  He  did  nothing  overt  to  produce  this.  He  simply  lived  His  life, 
and  it  acted  on  the  Jewish  world  as  an  electric  current  upon  the  water  ;  it  separated 
its  elements.  II.  The  cause  of  this  rejection  was  primarily  devotion  to  the 
CONVENTIONAL,  which  is  practically  identical  with  want  of  individuality,  one  of  the 
moNt  painful  deficiencies  in  our  present  society.  1.  Now  the  rectification  of  that 
evil  lies  at  the  root  of  Christianity.  Christ  came  to  ensure  the  distinct  life,  the 
originality  of  each  man,  to  rescue  men  from  being  mingled  up,  indistinguishable 
atoms,  with  the  mass  of  man,  2.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is  in  exact  opposition  to 
this.  Its  tendency  is  to  reduce  all  men  and  women  to  one  pattern.  There  must 
be  nothing  original  in  the  world's  language,  eccentric,  erratic.  Custom  is  to  be 
despot.  We  must  all  dress  in  the  same  way,  read  the  same  books,  talk  of  the 
same  things.  We  do  not  object  to  progress,  but  everybody  must  be  levelled,  and 
then  collectively  advance ;  no  one  must  leave  the  ranks  or  step  to  the  front.  3. 
This  is  tbe  spirit  which  either  cannot  see,  or,  seeing,  hates  men  of  genius.  They 
are  in  conflict  with  tbe  known  and  the  accredited  modes  of  action.  So  it  comes  to 
pass  that  they  are  depreciated  and  neglected  ;  or,  if  they  are  too  great  and  persist, 
persecuted  and  killed.  And,  indeed,  it  is  not  difficult  to  get  rid  of  them,  for  men 
of  genius  cannot  breathe  in  this  atmosphere,  it  kills  them.  The  pitiable  thing  in 
English  society  now  is,  that  it  is  in  danger  of  becoming  of  so  dreadful  a  uniformity 
that  no  original  man  can  be  developed  in  it  at  all.  This,  if  anything,  will  become 
the  ruin  of  England's  greatness.  4.  There  is,  it  is  true,  a  kind  of  re-action  going 
on  at  present  against  this  tyranny.  Young  men  and  women,  weary  of  monotonous 
pleasures,  are  in  rebellion,  but  the  whole  social  condition  has  been  so  degraded 
that  they  rush  into  still  more  artificial  and  unnatural  pleasures  and  excitements ;  in 
endeavouring  to  become  free,  they  enslave  themselves  the  more.  5.  Those  who 
might  do  much,  do  little.  It  is  one  of  the  advantages  of  wealth  and  high  position 
that  those  who  possess  them  may  initiate  the  uncustomary  without  a  cry  being 
raised  against  them.  But  even  with  every  opportunity,  how  little  imagination  do 
they  ever  display,  how  little  invention,  how  little  they  do  to  relieve  the  melancholy 
uniformity  of  our  pleasures,  or  the  intense  joylessness  of  our  work !     6.  Now  this 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

was  precisely  the  spirit  of  the  Jewish  religious  world  at  the  time  of  Christ. 
Men  were  bound  down  to  a  multitude  of  fixed  rules  and  maxims ;  they  were 
hedged  in  on  all  sides.  It  was  the  most  finished  conventionalism  of  religion,  in 
spite  of  tlie  different  sects,  which  the  world  has  ever  seen.  Then  came  Christ, 
entirely  original,  proclaiming  new  ideas,  or,  old  truths  in  a  new  form,  overthrowing 
worn-out  ceremonies,  denouncing  things  gray  with  tlie  dust  of  ages,  letting  in  the 
lit-ht  of  truth  into  the  chambers  where  the  priests  and  lawyers  spun  tlieir  webs  of 
theology  to  ensnare  the  free  souls  of  men,  trampling  down  relentlessly  the  darling 
customs  of  the  old  conservatism,  shocking  and  bewildering  the  religious  society. 
He  did  not  keep,  they  said,  the  Sabbath  day.  He  ate  and  drank — abominable 
iniquity  ! — witli  publicans  and  sinners.  He  allowed  a  fallen  woman  to  touch  Him. 
Worse  still,  He  did  not  wash  His  hands  before  He  ate  bread.  He  did  not  teach  as 
the  scribes  did.  He  did  not  live  the  time-honoured  and  ascetic  life  of  a  prophet. 
He  dared  to  speak  against  the  priesthcjod  and  the  aristocracy.  He  came  from 
Nazareth,  that  was  enough  ;  no  good  could  come  from  Nazareth.  He  was  a 
carpenter's  son,  and  illiterate,  and  no  prophet  was  made,  or  could  be  made,  out  of 
such  materials.  And  this  man  I  He  dares  to  disturb  us,  to  contest  our  maxims, 
to  set  at  nought  our  customs,  to  array  Himself  against  our  despotism.  "  Come,  let 
us  kill  Him  ;  "  and  so  they  crucified  Him.  They  did  not  see,  the  wretched  men, 
that  in  murdering  Him  they  murdered  their  nation  also.     III.  Take  the  question 

NOW   OUT    OF   THE    REALM    OF    THOUGHT   AND    HISTORY,  AND  APPLY    IT  PRACTICALLY.       Ask 

yourselves  two   questions  :  —  l.  What    would   be    the   fate   of   Christ  if   He   were 
suddenly  to  appear  as  a  teacher  in   the  middle   of  London?     How   would  our 
orthodox  religious    society   and    our    conventional   socinl    world    receive    Him? 
Desiring  to  speak  with  all  reverence,  He  would  horrify  the  one  by  His  heterodox 
opinions,  the  other  by  His  absolute  scorn  of  many  of  the  very  palladia  of  society. 
Supposing  He  were  to  denounce — as  He  would  in  no  measured  terms — our  system 
of  caste  ;  attack  our  most  cherished  maxims  about  property  and  rights ;  live  in 
opposition  to  certain  social  rules,  contemn  with  scorn  our  accredited  hypocrisies ; 
live  among  us  His  free,  bold,  unconventional,   outspoken  life;    how  should  we 
receive  Him  ?     It  is  a  question  which  it  is  worth  while  that  society  should  ask 
itself.     I  trust  more  womd  hail  His  advent  than  we  think.     I  believe  the  time  is 
come  when  men  are  sick  of  the  tyranny  of  custom  of  living  in  unreality  ;  that  they 
are  longing  for  a  new  life  and  a  new  order  of  things,  for  some  fresh  ideas  to  come 
and  stir,  like  the  angel,  the  stagnant  pool.     I  believe  there  are   thousands  who 
would  join  themselves  to  Him,  thousands  of  true  men  from  all  religious  bodies, 
and  from  those  who  are  now  plentifully  sprinkled  with  the  epithets  of  rationalists, 
infidels,  heretics,  and  atheists ;  but  there  are  thousands  who  call  themselves  by 
His  name  who  would  neglect  or  persecute  Him,  for  He  would  come  among  our  old 
conservatisms  of  religion,  our  doctrinal  systems,  superstitions,  piiesthoods,  and 
ritualisms,  as  He  came  of  old.     If  we  could  accept  the  revolution  He  would  make, 
our  nation  and  religion  would  be  saved,  if  not  it  would  be  enervated  by  the  blow 
and  die.     Eealising  these  things,  realisii'g  Christ  speaking  to  us  as  He  wou'd  speak 
now,  we  ounht  to  feel  our  falseness.     We  may  save  our  nation  if  we  resolve,  each 
one  here  for  himself,  to  free  ourselves  from  cant,  and  formalism,  and  snpeistition, 
to  step  into  the  clear  air  of  freedom,  individuality,  truth,  and  holiness.     2.'  How 
far  is  the  spirit  of  the  world  preventing  you  personally  from  receiving  Christ?     (1) 
Is  your  sole  aim  the  endeavour  to  please  your  party,  forfeiting  your  individuality  ? 
Then  you  cannot  receive  Christ,  for  He  demands  that  you  should  be  true  to  your 
own  soul.     (2)  Are  you  permitting  yourself  to  chime  in  with  the  low  morality  of 
the  day,  to  accept  the  common  standard,  repudiating  the  desire  to  be  better  than 
your  neighbours,  and  so  coming  at  last  to  join  in  the  light  la'igh  with  which  the 
world  treats  immoralities  of  society  or  trade,  or  the  more  flagrant  shame,  dis- 
honesty,   and  folly  which   adorn   the  turf — letting  evils   take  their   course,   till 
gradually  the  evils  appear  to  you  at  first  endurable,  and  then  even  beautiful,  being 
protected  by  the  deities  of  custom  and  fashion,  which  we  enthrone  instead  of  God? 
Are  you  drifting  into  such  a  state  of  heart  ?     If  so,  you  cannot  expect  to  be  able  to 
receive  Christ,  for  He  demands  that  life  should  be  Godlike  ;  not  the  prudence  of 
silence  about  evil,  but  the  imprudence  of  bold  separation  from  evil.    3.  And  to 
come  home  to  the  inner  spiritual  life,  is  your  religion  only  the  creature  of  custom, 
not  of  conviction?    Have  you  received  and  adopted  current  opinions  because  tKey 
are  current,  orthodox  because  it  is  the  fashion  to  be  orthodox,  or  heterodox  because 
it  is  the  fashion  to  be  heterodox?     How  can  you  receive  Christ? — for  where  He 
comes  He  claims  reality.    Ye  must  be  born  again  ;  born  out  of  a  dead,  Pharisaic, 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  605 

conventional  form  of  religion  into  a  living  individual  union  with  the  life  of  God. 
Two  tilings,  then,  are  laid  before  you  this  day — conventional  religion,  a  whited 
sepulchre  ;  personal  religion,  a  fair  temple,  whose  sure  foundations  are  bound  to- 
gether by  the  twisted  strength  of  the  innermost  fibres  of  the  Sijul.  {^^Stopford 
A.  Brooke,  M.A.) 

Ver.    54.  When    they    heard    these  things    they    were  cut  to  the  heart. — 

The  procedure  against  Steplten : — I.  The  narrative.  Full  of  faith  and  power, 
he  did  great  wonders  and  miracles  among  the  people.  He  is,  therefore,  singled 
out  for  special  attack,  not  in  relation  to  the  reality  of  his  miraculous  pre- 
tensions, but  on  what,  no  doubt,  his  assailants  felt  with  such  a  man  would  be 
their  higher  vantage  ground,  the  open  field  of  theological  controversy.  And 
hei'ein  they  were  foiled.  Chosen  as  the  disputants  were  most  probably  for 
their  superior  learning  and  abilities,  they  would  doubtless  look  upon  Stephen  with 
much  the  same  scorn  as  the  armed  warrior  of  Gath  regarded  the  stripling  of 
Bethlehem.  But  on  coming  to  close  hand  strife,  they  found  that  human  learning 
was  a  poor  match  against  Divine  gifts,  and  they  were  not  able  to  resist  the  wisdom 
and  the  spirit  by  which  he  spoke.  This  signal  defeat  compelled  a  change  in  their 
mode  of  attack.  Satan  has  more  than  one  arrow  in  his  quiver,  and  whenever  he 
has  set  upon  a  man  to  destroy  him,  will  never  be  wanting.  If  reasoning  fail,  the 
adversary  will  try  invective  ;  invective  silenced,  he  has  recourse  to  falsehood ;  false- 
hood confuted,  there  are  well  laid  engines  of  subtlety  and  fraud  and  brute  force. 
All  these  means  were  successively  emploved  against  Stephen.  The  refuted  argu- 
ment was  followed  by  the  charge  of  blasphemy.  The  groundless  charge  of 
blasphemy  had  to  be  propped  up  by  bribed  witnesses,  as  these  could  only  obtain  a 
judicial  hearing  by  the  violent  dragging  of  the  case  before  the  council ;  and  in  the 
very  act  of  making  his  defence  before  this  body,  Stephen  is  seized,  cast  out  of  the 
city,  and  put  to  death.  II.  Its  lesson.  In  reading  narratives  like  this,  we  are 
prompted  to  look  for  some  principles  on  which  to  account  for  the  bitterness  and 
violence  which  usually  characterises  religious  persecution.  Men,  we  know,  will 
get  angry  sometimes  if  people  differ  from  them  in  politics,  and  will  even  forget  their 
charities  when  contending  on  the  most  ordinary  topics  of  dispute;  but  the  fury, 
the  gnashing  with  the  teeth,  and  the  showers  of  stones,  are  only  met  with  when  that 
which  is  to  be  put  down  is  the  pure  truth  of  God ;  when  the  object  of  popular 
hatred  can  have  no  end  of  his  own  to  compass.  The  fact  is  a  standing,  undeniable 
testimony  to  the  doctrine,  that  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God.  If  the  feel- 
ing of  the  natural  heart,  which  supervened  upon  the  fall,  bad  been  only  the  nega- 
tion of  a  former  love  towards  God,  leaving  man  to  settle  down  into  a  Gallio 
unconcernedness,  we  should  never  have  heard  anything  of  the  blood  of  martyrs. 
Men  would  no  more  have  risen  up  against  an  apostle  than  against  a  philosopher. 
But  the  case  we  know  to  be  far  otherwise.  Press  upon  the  consciences  of  men  in 
any  age  the  obligations  of  spiritual  religion  ;  carry  the  lamp  of  God's  condemning 
truth  into  the  heart's  chambers  of  imagery ;  disturb  that  untempered  mortar  with 
which  men  daub  over  the  walls  of  theirrefuge  of  lies,  and  in  an  instant  you  wake  up 
the  old  feud  of  our  nature  ;  the  embers  begin  to  glow  again  of  an  ancient  but  long- 
slumbering  fire ;  you  have  touched  the  man  in  the  very  quick  of  his  cherished 
delusion,  and  at  once  he  stands  up  in  stout  and  rebellious  front  against  God. 
Neither  has  advancing  civilisation  done  more  than  restrain  the  outward  expression 
of  this  feeling.  It  may  have  taught  men,  when  convinced  of  the  utter  futility  of 
their  own  religious  principles,  that  they  cannot  now  have  recourse  to  the  rude 
retributions  of  a  rude  age — but  it  has  not  dispossessed  them  of  their  malignity,  or 
altered  the  original  antagonism  of  the  natural  mind  to  the  reception  of  Bible  truth, 
or  the  practice  of  Bible  requirements.  If  I  tell  a  Socinian,  that  in  the  sight  of  God 
his  moralities  are  no  more  than  so  many  disguised  and  garnished  sins  ;  if  I  tell  a 
man  of  right  creed  and  pious  activities,  that  if  he  has  not  something  besides  this, 
the  publicans  and  harlots  shall  go  into  heaven  before  him  ;  if  I  say  to  the  proud, 
the  worldly,  the  over-reaching,  the  slander-d«aler,  the  uncharitable,  the  blasphemer, 
and  the  Sabbath-breaker,  "  Ye  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  therefore  can  be 
none  of  His  " — yea,  if  I  can  so  bring  home  these  evidences  of  an  unchanged  heart 
to  the  individual  conscience  as  that  a  man  shall  feel  as  if  I  were  saying  to  him, 
Thou  art  the  man  whom,  in  your  present  state,  the  blood  of  Christ  cannot  reach  ; 
for  whom  the  mansions  of  heaven  can  make  no  room  ;  whose  peace  is  a  delusion, 
and  whose  hope  is  but  a  spider's  web— spared  thouf^h  I  may  be  from  the  gnashing 
teeth  of  unbridled  rage,  yet,  while  determined  to  stand  out  against  conviction,  the 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vil. 

spirit  of  the  persecutor  is  in  that  sinner's  heart,  and  only  to  the  age,  and  other 
accidents  of  social  life,  is  it  owing  that  men  are  not  found  to  rush  upon  a  faithful 
mes-enger  with  one  accord,  and  to  cast  him  out  of  the  city,  and  to  stone  him.  By 
nature  men  hate  truth  as  the  midnight  robber  hates  the  light.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.) 
The  first  Christian  martyr : — I.  The  man.  The  form  of  his  name  would  indicate 
that  he  was  a  Hellenist ;  that  is,  a  Jew  born  among  the  Gentiles,  speaking  the 
Greek  language.  His  name  also  signifies  a  crown.  1.  He  was  versed  in  the  Scrip- 
tures. "  When  they  heard  these  things,  they  were  cut  to  the  heart."  Cranmer  and 
Ridley  learned  the  New  Testament  by  heart.  They  also  saw  its  truths  in  relation 
to  prt'sent  duties  of  life.  This  was  the  case  of  the  first  Christian  martyr.  He 
exposed  the  false  view  of  the  Jews  toward  the  temple  and  the  law.  "  They  were 
cut  to  the  heart,"  or,  literally,  they  were  sawn  asunder  in  their  hearts.  It  was  not 
one  staggering  blow  which  did  the  work.  The  truth,  laden  with  rebukes,  was 
gradually  making  its  way  through  their  hearts.  TBe  personal  application  com- 
pleted the  work.  2.  Stephen  wa-?  spiritually  enlightened.  "But  he,  being  full  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  looked  up  steadfastly  into  heaven."  We  may  not  all  have  the 
privilege  of  Stephen  to  look  into  heaven  in  this  life,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  furnishes 
enlightening  power.  Spiritual  breadth  of  vision  follows.  That  creates  confidence. 
Moses  endured,  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible  ;  and  the  angel  of  God  revealed  himself 
unto  Paul,  saying,  "Fear  not."  Here  was  the  basis  of  Stephen's  confidence. 
Facts  of  the  visible  world  were  newly  impressed  upon  him.  We  see  things  here 
from  a  short  range.  Hence  mystery  and  perplexity  arise.  He  is  sustained  by  a 
h'gher  power,  and  looks  with  joy  to  the  end.  3.  He  possessed  a  forgiving  spirit. 
"  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  This  prayer  is  without  a  parallel  outside 
of  Biblical  history  and  its  influence.  Confucius,  Isocrates,  Seneca,  and  other 
Gentile  writers  hinted  at  the  golden  rule  in  a  partial  or  negative  form.  But  praying 
for  one's  enemies  has  thus  far  been  discovered  only  in  the  Bible  and  in  the  line  of 
its  influence.  The  Cro?s  first  brings  it  to  view.  II.  Stephen  witnessing  to  the 
TRUTH.  1.  He  witnessed  that  God's  presence  and  favour  were  not  limited  to  any 
set  place.  Stephen  taught  that  God's  presence  was  not  limited  to  a  favoured  few. 
This  was  one  link  in  the  chain  which  drew  away  Ctiristians  from  Jewish  rites. 
The  disciples  loved  the  temple.  Who  could  blame  them?  Here  Jesus  gave  some 
of  His  choicest  revelations.  But  lingering  amid  the  incense  and  smoking  sacrifices 
too  long  they  may  bind  these  practices,  only  belonging  to  the  past,  on  the  new 
so'-iety,  and  fetter  its  future  course.  They  were  providentially  thrust  out  into  new 
fields,  as  we  may  be,  by  apparent  disasters,  to  secure  in  the  end  the  best  results. 
2.  Stephen  bore  witness  that  Christ  had  been  elevated  to  glory  and  power.  "  I 
see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the  riglit  hand  of  God." 
Stephen  was  the  first  to  bear  witness  to  the  fact  of  seeing  Christ  after  His  ascen- 
sion. Paul  and  John  were  granted  such  visions  later  (chap.  ix.  3,  4 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  1 ; 
Rev.  i.  12-17).  Perhaps  such  witnessing  was  needed  to  enc  )urage  the  early  Church. 
It  made  visible  things  appear  as  a  positive  reality.  It  also  confirmed  Stephen's 
teaching.  Christ  had  taught  that  spiritual  worship  anywhere  was  pleasing  to  the 
Father.  It  would  follow  that  a  peculiar  privilege  had  been  granted  to  Stephen. 
Any  rabbi  might  have  coveted  it.  The  glory  of  God  had  appeared  to  him  as  well  as 
to  Abraham  and  to  Moses.  If  his  face  had  shone  like  that  of  an  angel,  his  words 
now  hau  a  heavenly  support.  3.  Stephen  bore  witness  that  Jesus  receives  His 
people  after  death.  He  did  not  formally  affirm  this  fact,  but  prayed  to  Jesus  to 
receive  his  spirit ;  or,  in  bold  literalness,  "  Take  my  spirit  by  the  hand."  (•/.  H, 
Allen.)  The  first  Christian  martyr: — We  have  foregleams  of  the  next  life. 
Witnesses  have  had  glimpses  to  which  they  have  given  testimony.  I.  Stephen  was 
A  man  op  affairs.  He  was  no  dreaming  enthusiast,  however  intense  his  spiritual  life. 
He  was  equal  to  the  demands  of  new  enterprises  where  originality  in  planning  and 
fertility  of  resource  were  requisite.     II.  He,  only  a  deacon,  a  layman,  was  full  op 

FAITH  AND  POWER.       III.    ThIS  TESTIMONY  HE  GIVES  WHEN  HE  MUST  SEAL  HIS  SINCERITY 

wriH  HIS  LIFE.    He  knew  what  extremes  Jewish  hate  could  reach.     IV.  He   had 

GIVEN  ABUNDANT  PROOF  OF  MENTAL  SOUNDNESS  AND  GRASP  IN  HIS  RESUME  OF  JeWISH 
HISTORY  AND  God'S  DEALINGS.  V.  HiS  SPIRITUAL  ELEVATION  AND  FELT.OWSHIP 
APPEAR,  BEAUTIFULLY  AND  GLORIOUSLY,  IN  HIS  AGREEMENT  IN  WORDS  AND  DISPOSI- 
TION WITH  HIS  DYING  MASTER.  Such  a  witucss  we  can  trust,  however  momentous 
the  questions  upon  which  he  speaks.  Points  of  Stephen's  testimony — 1.  Heaven's 
glory  gladly  and  easily  appreciable  by  redeemed  souls.  Infinite  the  necessary 
remove  of  heaven's  life  from  earth's,  but  God's  redeemed  ones  can  enter  it  with 
delight.     However  stupendous  the  transition,  it  is  easy  and  quick ;  no  narrowed 


CHAP,  vii.]  THE  ACTS,  607 

and  doubtful  reception  ;  the  finite  easily  joins  the  infinite  ;  the  imperfect  is  neither 
shamed  nor  crippled  by  the  perfect ;  the  lowliest  estate  does  not  shrink  or  tremble 
as  the  highest  glory  suddenly  bursts  upon  it.  Stephen  looked  steadfastly.  2, 
Heaven  is  heaven  because  filled  with  God's  personal  presence.  God's  glory  apart 
from  His  presence  is  inconceivable.  The  soul  is  made  for  God,  and  reposes  only  in 
Him.  There  its  satisfactions  are  supreme  and  complete.  Is  God's  conscious 
presence  welcome  here  now  ?  If  not,  how  can  we  meet  Him  face  to  face  when  this 
life  shall  open  upon  the  next  and  His  flooding  glory  appear  on  every  side?  3. 
Jesus,  in  His  glorified  humanity,  has  the  highest  place  in  heaven's  honour,  and 
■welcomes  His  disciples  as  they  follow  Him.  We  are  strongly  impressed  with  Jesus' 
manifold  offices  for  His  disciple  band  when  with  the  m  in  visible  leadership.  The 
story  is  dramatic  in  vividness  and  suggestive  in  teaching.  But  His  personal  relations 
now.  His  invisible  leadership,  mean  much  more  every  way.  The  glorified  Jesus  is 
the  fii  stfruits  of  our  redeemed  humanity — in  the  fulness  of  time  He  will  gather  to 
Himself,  to  a  full  i-haring  of  His  glory,  all  who  are  washed  in  His  blood  and  trained 
by  His  grace.  4.  Dying  saints  are  strengthened  by  foregleams,  sometimes  brilliant 
sight  of  heaven's  inhabitants'  bliss.  5.  The  spirit  suivives  the  body,  its  powers  ex- 
panded and  quickened.  We  reason  about  continued  life,  the  body  laid  aside ;  but 
hear  the  proof  in  the  experience  of  one  qualified  to  speak.  Stephen  saw  Jesus,  and 
to  Him  committed  his  soul.  We  shudder  at  the  thought  of  going  into  utter 
oblivion,  life  annihilated.  From  this  fear  the  crying  Stephen  brings  sure  release. 
6.  The  saved  soul,  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ  and  quickened  by  Divine  grace, 
call  thoroughly  forgive.  No  test  of  Christian  character  is  more  trustworthy  than 
this.  No  pet  sonal  resentments  embittered  His  dying  hour.  Will  our  pillow  be  free 
from  such  thorns  ?  They  are  sharp  and  fatal  to  dying  peace  or  eternal  safety.  7. 
Divine  Providence  utilises  all  events  to  the  forwarding  of  its  world-embracing  plans. 
A  great  apostle  was  needed  for  the  Gentile  world.  Here  that  coming  apostle  had 
his  first  special  training.  As  Augustine  has  said,  "  But  for  Stephen's  prayers  the 
Church  would  not  have  had  its  apostle  Paul."  8.  A  significant  fact  that  this 
detailed  account  of  Stephen's  martyrdom  stands  alone.  We  needed  it,  that  we 
might  have  this  one  vivid  illustration  of  dying  grace  in  a  crisis  so  remarkable.  9. 
A  typical  instance  of  an  apparent  triumph  of  hostility  to  Jesus  in  His  followers 
turning  into  overwhelming  tie 'eat.  We  tremble  before  assaults  upon  the  Word  of 
God,  the  organised  Church  and  all  related  institutions  ;  but  such  assaults,  however 
successful  in  appearance,  are  but  for  the  moment.  Converts  to  Christ  are,  in 
most  cases,  born  through  the  travail  of  some  one.  10.  Lighter  trials  may  avail 
themselves  of  the  same  supports  as  came  to  the  dying  martyr.  (S.  Lewis  B. 
Spear  e.) 

Vers.  55,  56.  He  1)eing  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost. — The  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
proto-martijr : — Note  how  explicitly  the  character,  attainments,  and  triumph  of 
Stephen  are  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  the  first  notice  of  him  he  is  called  *'  a 
man  full  of  faith  and  the  Holy  Ghost."  So  here  in  his  death.  Bearing  this  in  mind, 
observe— I.  He  looked  up  steadfastly  into  hfaven,  where  his  heart  and  treasure 
had  long  been.  Where  else  could  he  look  ?  Everything  urged  him  to  look  away 
from  earth  and  invited  him  to  look  up  to  heaven.  He  had  no  sympathy  below, 
but  th<-re  was  all  sympathy  above.  There  were  the  redeemed  who  had  gone  before 
him,  the  angels,  Jesus,  his  heavenly  Father,  all  waiting  to  welcome  him.  So  trood 
is  brought  out  of  evil,  and  man's  violence  made  to  hasten  the  saint's  blessedness. 
"  As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  When  earth  casts  us  out,  heaven  waits 
to  receive  us.  II.  As  he  looked  he  saw  the  glory  of  God.  1.  In  Isaiah  vi.  we 
may  see  the  meaning  of  this  glory,  especially  as  interpreted  by  John.  "  These 
things,  said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  Christ's  glory."  The  seraphim  saw  in  Christ 
the  glory  of  God — His  mercy  and  His  holiness,  how  He  could  be  just  and  yet  for- 
giving. So  Stephen  saw  the  Divine  honour  secured  by  that  redemption  for  which 
he  was  call,  d  upon  to  die.  2.  He  saw  Jesus  standing,  and  the  glory  of  God 
softened  in  the  Person  of  his  Saviour.  He  saw  Jesus — (1)  Glorious  after  His 
humiliation.  (2)  Accepted  by  the  Father,  and  in  that  the  proof  that  His  work 
was  Bccomplisbed.  (3)  "  Standing,"  to  import  that  He  was  intercedi'  g,  giving 
the  Spirit,  and  that  human  nature  was  indeed  exalted  in  His  Person.  III.  In  full 
harmony  with  these  views  he  said,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  siy  spirit."  1.  He  had 
a  clear  apprehension  of  the  soul's  independence  of  the  body.  2.  He  knew  that  as 
soon  as  his  enemies  had  despatched  him  his  soul  would  be  admitted  into  glory.  3. 
He  realised  the  sulllciency  of  Christ  for  his  salvation.     IV.  How  was  he  exercised 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn.. 

towards  his  enemies  ?  He  prayed,  Loed,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge.  1. 
"What  just  views  of  Christ  these  prayers  discover.  2.  What  a  view  does  his  conduct 
give  of  tbe  power  of  Christianity.  V.  It  was  while  he  expressed  such  a  spirit  that 
HE  FELL  ASLEEP.     Learn  from  the  example  of  Stephen — 1.  How  to  die  in  peace. 

2.  That  the  Spirit  has  brought  great  glory  to  Christ  from  tbe  death  of  His  people. 

3.  What  shall  be  the  glory  of  the  martyr  in  heaven?  {J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The 
true  conception  of  worship : — I.  Its  nature.  1.  Negatively.  It  does  not  consist 
in — (1)  Mere  external  ceremony.  (2)  The  mere  utterance  of  any  jDrescribed  forms 
of  prayer.  (3)  Any  special  attitudes  of  devotion.  (4)  Mere  devotional  feehng.  2. 
Positively.  The  true  conception  of  worship  is  realised  only  in  the  vision  of  Jesus. 
This  view — 1.  Eespects  His  Divine-human  character.  2.  Is  centred  in  Jesus  as 
Mediator.  3.  Is  directed  to  Christ  in  His  position  of  ofiQcial  dignity.  III.  Its 
characteristics.  Stephen — 1.  "Looked."  This  was — (1)  Personal.  (2)  Present. 
(3)  Anxious.  (4)  Intelligent.  (5)  Glorious.  2.  "  Steadfastly."  Tbe  soul  was  in 
the  act.  It  was  no  mere  "vacant  stare";  no  idle,  curious  glance.  3.  "Into 
heaven."  He  entered  within  the  veil  and  worshipped  with  the  spirits  before  the 
throne.  He  was  not  content  to  look  merely  at  its  burnished  gates.  4.  "  Saw  the 
glory  of  God."  The  instrument  of  vision  was  the  eye  of  the  soul.  He  saw  by  faith 
not  the  outer,  but  the  inner,  glory,  of  the  temple  of  God.  IV.  Its  moral  condition. 
He  was  "  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  It  is  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  purifies 
the  heart,  spiritualises  the  conceptions,  and  develops  the  true  worshipping  faculty 
in  man.  Worship  is  a  dead  letter  without  such  power.  {John  Tesseyman.)  , 
Looked  up  steadfastly  into  heaven  and  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing. 
The  rapture  of  Stephen : — Let  us  regard  this  as — I.  A  ravishing  glimpse  into 
HEAVENLY  REALiTiis.  Divine  manifestations  usually  fasten  on  something  in  the 
fortunes  or  thoughts  of  those  ^^ho  receive  them.  To  Joshua,  about  to  besiege 
Jericho,  the  angel  of  tbe  Lord  appears  as  a  captain ;  to  the  wise  men,  whose  study 
■was  astronomy,  the  revelation  of  Christ's  birth  was  made  by  a  star ;  to  St.  Peter 
and  his  fellow-fishermen,  a  sign  of  Christ's  power  is  given  in  a  miraculous  draught 
of  fishes.  Stephen  was  now  in  the  temple,  and  was  familiar  with  the  history  of 
the  shekiuah  of  its  holy  place.  He  was  before  the  high  priest,  with  whose  function 
on  the  day  of  atonement  he  was  also  familiar.  With,  then,  this  imagery  in  his 
mind  he  sees  the  shekinah  of  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  and  the  great  High  Priest 
standing  before  God  to  intercede  for  the  human  race.  II.  A  confession  of  Christ 
BEFORE  those  WHO  HAD  CRUCIFIED  HiM.  Stephen's  mind  was  full  of  his  Master's 
words  when  placed  in  similar  circumstances,  "  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of 
Man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power,"  and  his  declaration  is  tantamount  to  "  Lo, 
His  words  are  fulfilled.  I  see  your  late  Victim  crowned  with  glory  at  the  right 
hand  of  God."  III.  A  consolation  and  support  to  himself.  Our  Lord  had 
warned  the  Jews  that  they  would  see  Him  "  sitting"  ;  Stephen  sees  Him  "  stand- 
ing." The  difference  is  significant.  To  the  Jews  He  will  sit  as  Judge ;  to  Stephen 
He  stands — 1.  As  ready  to  assist  him.  A  person  who  sits  while  contemplating  the 
sufferings  of  another  gives  an  impression  of  indifference.  One  who  rises  and 
advances  towards  us  shows  that  he  hears  our  cry  and  is  willing  to  help.  2.  As 
ready  to  pltad  for  him.  The  earthly  high  priest  sat  before  him  as  judge,  fury  on 
his  countenance,  and  condemned  him.  The  heavenly  High  Priest  stands  as  his 
Advocate  with  the  Father.  3.  As  ready  to  receive  him  in  fulfilment  of  His  own 
gracious  words  (John  xiv.  2,  3).  IV.  Conforming  the  martyr  to  the  image  op 
HIS  Lord.  At  Christ's  baj^tism  "  the  heavens  were  opened,"  and  in  Gethsemane 
"there  appeared  an  angel  from  heaven,  strengthening  Him."  Thus  was  He  pre- 
pared for  the  two  great  conflicts  of  the  temptation  and  the  passion.  Now  that  the 
disciples  might  be  made  like  Him  it  pleased  God,  in  the  fir>t  martyrdom,  to  vouch- 
safe the  support  of  a  heavenly  vision.  It  was  otheiwise  with  James.  He  had  no 
vision,  but  what  had  passed  in  Stephen's  case  must  have  given  him  support.  "He 
who  welcomed  Stephen  will  welcome  me."  These  different  circumstances  of  the  two 
martyrdoms  open  up  the  general  plan  of  God's  administration  of  His  Church. 
"  We  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight."  If  every  believer  had  such  a  vision  there  would 
be  no  longer  any  trial  of  character  in  faith,  and  the  great  object  of  our  probation 
•would  be  seriously  interfered  with.  God's  plan,  therefore,  is  to  give  glimpses  into 
the  heavenly  world  only  at  the  outset  of  a  dispensation.  But  if  our  privileges  are 
less  high  in  this  respect,  we  have  the  opportunity  of  exercising  a  nobler  faith. 
"  Blessed  are  they  who  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed."  V.  Throwing  into 
belif.f  the  obtuseness  of  the  Jews.  Blinded  by  their  malicious  fury,  they  can 
no  more  see  Christ  than  Balaam  could  the  angel.     In  this  there  is  something 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  tiO» 

very  awful.  A  transaction  was  going  on  in  the  spiritual  world,  which  intimately 
concerned  them,  of  which  they  were  totally  unconscious.  So  it  may  be  with  us  ; 
and  there  is  but  one  thing  which  can  make  the  spiritual  world  a  reality  to  us,  and 
that  is  the  faculty  which  penetrates  into  the  unseen — faith.  (Dean  Goulhurn.) 
Stephen's  outlook  and  vision: — The  eye  of  man  is  "the  window  of  his  soul." 
Through  it,  he  himself  looks  out ;  and  if  any  one  stands  high  enough  in  his  conH- 
dence,  through  it  he  may  likewise  look  in.  The  direction  of  just  one  glance 
sometimes  exhibits  a  whole  character  in  a  single  flash  of  revelation :  and  this  may 
be  drawn  forth  by  the  same  object.  Lot  looked  down  towards  Sodom  ;  thus  lie 
displayed  his  avarice.  Lot's  wife  looked  back  towards  Sodom  ;  thus  she  disclosed 
her  disobedience.  Abraham  looked  forth  on  Sodom  ;  thus  he  showed  his  faith  after 
prayer.  Note — I.  Stephen's  outlook.  1.  Ita  expectancy.  "  He  looked."  He 
was  now  in  search  of  help  in  his  extremity ;  it  was  nowbere  to  be  found  in  that 
neighbourhood.  He  looked  off  from  everything  earthly,  sent  his  mind  backward 
after  some  old  promise,  forward  for  some  fresh  revealing  of  hope,  and  upward 
beyond  ail  pain  and  worry  for  himself  or  the  young  Church  he  loved.  Our  lessou 
is  this  :  Give  up  all  responsibility  for  the  world's  history  into  the  hands  of  a  faith- 
ful God.  How  some  people  distress  themselves  about  the  future  of  their  children ; 
forgetting  that  they  lived  somehow  after  their  parents  died.  God  lives  always.  2. 
Its  intelligence.  "He  looked  up."  He  might  have,  in  some  way,  sought  help 
from  the  Eoman  government,  or  sympathy  from  his  fellow-believers,  but  "  up  '* 
was  the  only  way  in  which  to  look,  tor  one  who  had  read  the  Old  Testament  as  he 
had  (Isa.  xxxi.  1).  So  we  must  rest  for  living  help,  and  for  dying  grace,  upon  Jesus 
Christ  (Heb.  xii.  2).  3.  Its  tranquillity.  "  He  looked  up  steadfastly."  There  ia 
here  no  quailing  of  the  coward,  no  cringing  of  the  captive,  no  weak  sympathy  for 
those  who  would  mourn  his  death.  Is  it  not  strange  that  the  one  person  in  all  the 
world  who  would  fitly  express  his  exact  feelings  was  at  the  time  standing?  (chap.  xx. 
24).  And  any  sincere  beiiever  may  depend  upon  his  covenant-keeping  God  to  give 
him  perfect  peace  in  dying,  even  under  the  most  dreadful  circumstances.  4.  Its 
TEiUMPH.  "Into  heaven."  True  faith,  eminent  and  dauntless,  has  an  eyesight  of 
its  own,  which  will  prove  gloriously  serviceable  at  the  final  moment  of  life.  II. 
The  vision.  When  Stephen  looked  up,  what  did  he  see?  Two  years  afterwards, 
the  "young  man"  Saul  saw  the  same  grand  spectacle  (chap.  ix.  3-5).  It  made  him 
an  apostle  ( I  Cor.  ix.  1).  1.  "  The  glory  of  God."  Moses  and  Elijah  appeared  in 
glory  with  Christ  (Luke  ix.  31).  When  Moses  and  Aaron  saw  it,  it  was  like  a 
pavement  of  sapphires  (Exod.  xxiv.  10).  The  dying  martyr  saw  an  unutterable 
splendour.  He  sprang  towards  it  with  an  impulsive  gesticulation  of  discovery. 
He  forgot  where  he  was,  and  even  ceased  to  think  how  unsympathetic  an  audience 
he  had  2.  "  The  Son  of  Man."  Our  Lord  called  Himself  by  that  name  often,  but 
no  one  else  tiU  this  martyr  died.  The  Son  of  God  is  still  the  Son  of  Man.  Con- 
clusion :  Heaven  is — 1.  The  only  real  thing  in  the  universe.  2.  The  only  hope 
worth  cherishing.  3.  The  only  end  worth  striving  for.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
Stephen  : — We  get  the  keynote  of  Stephen's  life  and  character  in  the  text — "  He, 
being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  looked  up  steadfastly  unto  heaven."  That  was  not 
a  mere  outward  gesture,  a  solitary  act,  but  expressed  the  constant  habit,  the 
normal  attitude  of  his  soul.  Habitually  he  looked  through  the  things  that  are 
seen  to  the  things  that  are  not  peen,  and  saw  life  in  the  light  of  God.  He  saw  the 
glory  of  God — the  one  perfect  revelation  of  the  character  of  God — in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ.  He  looked  through  all  the  changes  and  through  all  the  apparent 
moral  confusion  of  this  world  to  the  Divine  reality  behind.  I.  First  of  all,  it  is 
said,  he  was  "full  of  grace  and  power."  In  the  same  chapter  it  is  said  he  was 
"  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Practically  it  is  the  same  thing.  "Full  of 
faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  "  full  of  grace  and  power " :  the  one  is  the 
condition  of  the  other.  The  one  points  to  the  inward  fact,  the  thing  which  made 
him  what  he  was  ;  the  other  to  the  manifestation  of  that,  the  impression  which  he 
left  upon  those  who  came  into  contact  with  him.  1.  He  was  "  full  of  grace."  The 
expression  suggests  a  type  of  character  with  qualities  of  its  own,  which  not  only 
calls  forth  our  admiration,  but  which  leads  our  thoughts  upwards  to  God.  There 
are  persons  who,  in  a  special  way,  make  us  think  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We- 
irecognise  the  character  I  am  pointing  at  when  we  meet  with  it,  although  we  may 
feel  that  we  can  only  very  inadequately  describe  it.  It  is  a  character  partly  like 
that  of  Christ  Himself,  but  also  in  some  essential  particulars  unlike  it ;  like  it  in 
the  presence  of  simple  trust  in  God,  and  purity  of  heart,  and  prompt  faithfulness 
of  loving  obedience ;  like  it  in  the  pain  and  indignation  caused  by  falsehood  and 
VOL.  I.  39 


filO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  vri. 

cruelty  and  meanness ;  like  it  in  the  love  that  seeketh  not  her  own,  that  is  not 
easily  provoked,  that  beareth  all  things  and  bopeth  all  things  ;  but  also  unlike  it, 
not  only  in  the  imperfection  that  belongs  to  human  goodness  at  its  best,  but  in  the 
profound  humility  which  accompanies  deep  consciousness  of  sin,  and  the  grateful 
love  which  springs  from  sin  forgiven.  Yes,  we  know  very  well  that  there  is  a 
character  which  has  in  it  something  distinctive,  something  peculiarly  its  own,  even 
when  it  is  very  imperfectly  developed,  something  that  we  rfcogiiise,  and  we  know 
whence  it  is  and  how  it  cometh.  We  know  whence  it  is,  for  it  is  grace  ;  and  we 
know  how  it  cometh,  for  it  cometh  by  that  faith  which  realises  the  unseen  and 
lives  as  in  the  presence  of  Him  who  is  unseen,  which  hsibitually  looks  up  into 
heaven,  which  has  learned  to  see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  and 
which,  as  the  result  of  beholding  the  gloiy  of  the  Lord,  reflects  it,  and  is  changed 
into  the  same  image.  2.  And  being  "  lull  of  grace,"  he  was  "  full  of  power."  The 
power  here  indicated  was  not  simply  that  of  working  miracles,  nor  was  it  even 
intellectual  force — the  wisdom  with  which  he  selected  from  a  memory  well-stored 
with  Old  Testament  Scripture,  and  the  cogency  with  which  he  drove  home  his 
arguments,  though  that  was  part  of  it ;  but  it  was  above  all  moral  force  of 
character,  the  power  which  always  goes  along  with  grace,  and  suffers  no  life  where 
that  is  to  be  resultless.  For  grace  in  itself  is  power.  We  can  understand  that 
Stephen  was  "  full  of  power  "  when  he  was  pressing  his  antagonists  in  debate  with 
arguments  which  they  were  unable  to  answer,  and  they  retreated  step  by  step, 
batBed  and  silenced,  and  at  last  slunk  away  abashed.  We  can  understand  it  when, 
we  perceive  how,  while  professedly  dealing  with  the  past,  he  was  really  holding 
up  history  before  them  as  a  mirror,  in  which  they  could  see  themselves,  and  observe 
that  in  one  respect  at  least  they  were  proving  themselves  to  be  the  children  of  the 
fathers,  by  doing  after  their  deeds  ;  and  we  can  understand  it  again,  when  his  pent 
up  feeling  at  last  finds  vent  in  a  burst  of  indignant  denunciation,  which  must  have 
made  those  men  who  held  his  life  in  their  hands  quail  in  his  presence.  We 
recognise  that  there  was  a  power  there ;  and  pei  haps  it  is  not  that  in  us  which  is 
most  akin  to  the  spirit  of  Christ,  which  is  most  quick  to  appreeinte  that  kind  of 
power ;  but  how  slow  we  are  to  realise  that  there  was  perhaps  greater,  wider,  and 
more  lasting  power  in  the  daily  round  of  common  duty,  in  the  unnoticed  ministries 
of  charity,  as  he  daily  wended  his  way  through  the  lanes  and  closes  of  the  city 
among  the  poor  committed  to  his  charge,  in  his  example  of  patience  and  self- 
mastery,  in  the  help  he  gave  by  friendly  counsel,  in  the  silent  influence  of  his 
ordinary  life.  It  is  good  to  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts  ;  but  it  is  well  to  remember 
that  there  is  something  more  excellent,  for  greater — greater  in  power — than  all 
these  is  love,  the  love  which  is  quickened  and  sustained  by  looking  up  steadfastly 
into  heaven  and  beholding  Jesus.  II.  It  is  in  harmony  with  what  we  are  told  of 
Stephen — "  that  he  was  full  of  grace  " — that  we  read  of  that  glory  upon  his  face 
in  the  great  crisis  of  his  life.  For  grace  is  the  inner  beauty  of  the  soul ;  this  was 
the  shining  through  of  that  inner  beauty.  Who  cares  to  stop  to  discuss  the 
question  whether  this  was,  in  the  commonly  accepted  sense  of  the  word,  miraculous  ? 
Does  not  that  which  is  inward  ever  tend  to  find  for  itself  outward  expression  ?  Do 
not  the  habitual  emotions  and  cherished  thoughts  of  the  soul  record  themselves 
upon  the  countenance  ?  And  if  the  evil  dispositions  write  themselves  upon  the 
face,  do  not  the  best  feelings  of  the  heart — does  not  grace — tend  to  do  the  same  ? 
Is  there  not  something  unmistakably  its  own  in  the  eye  of  guilelessness  and 
transparent  openness  ?  Does  not  the  habitual  trustfulness  which  rests  on  God 
come  at  last  to  reflect  itself  in  serene  placidity  of  expression  ?  Does  not  love  in 
its  purest,  intensest,  self-sacrificing  forms — the  love  of  a  mother,  for  instance — 
almost  glorify?  III.  The  inward  likeness  to  Christ,  which  comes  by  steadfastly 
looking  to  Him,  which  was  manifest  in  the  life  of  Stephen,  making  it  full  of  grace 
and  power,  was  also  conspicuous  in  his  death.  He  is  like  his  Lord  in  faith  and  in 
love.  1.  He  is  like  Him  in  faith.  There  is  similar  confidence,  yet  with  a 
significant  difference.  Our  Lord  in  dying  had  said,  "  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I 
commend  My  spirit."  Stephen,  in  his  last  agony,  commits  his  spirit  not  directly 
to  the  Father,  but  to  Jesus,  who  has  bought  it  with  His  blood,  knowing  in  whom 
he  has  believed,  and  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  is  committed  to  Him 
against  that  day.  2.  And,  once  more,  in  his  dying  hour,  in  showing  himself 
strong  in  love,  Stephen  reveals  how  full  his  mind  and  heart  are  of  the  thought  of 
his  Saviour,  and  how  deeply  he  has  drunk  of  His  Spirit.  While  the  blinding 
volleys  of  stones  are  flying  round  him,  crashing  upon  body  and  brain,  the  last 
effort  of  his  yet  clear  consciousness  is  an  act  of  prayer  ;  and  the  prayer  of  Jesus 


CRAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  611 

for  those  who  were  nailing  Him  to  the  Cross  is  echoed  in  his  expiring  appeal — 
•"  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  We  can  scarcely  help  thinking  of  a 
wonderful  contrast.  In  the  days  of  King  Joash,  Zechariah  the  son  of  Jehoiada, 
the  faithful  friend  and  counsellor  of  the  king,  stood  furth  to  rebuke  the  corruption 
of  the  popular  worship.  Like  Stephen's,  his  w^arning  provoked  an  outburst  of 
popular  fury  ;  and  like  him,  he  received  the  earthly  recompense  of  his  faithfulness 
in  being  stoned  to  death,  the  king,  with  shameful  ingratitude,  being  a  party  to  it : 
"  and  when  he  died,  he  said,  "  the  Lord  look  upon  it  and  require  it."  In  what  a 
different  strain  does  the  first  Christian  martyr  plead.  Since  the  old  prophet's 
time  a  new  revelation  of  Divine  love  had  been  given  to  men ;  a  new  example  of 
human  love  had  been  set  before  them  ;  a  new  motive  of  love  had  begun  to  work 
■within  them  ;  a  new  spirit  of  love,  the  Spirit  of  Christ  Himself,  had  been  imparted 
to  them  ;  and  of  that  Spirit  Stephen  was  full — "  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  IV. 
This  is  the  only  narrative  with  any  fulness  of  detail  of  any  death  in  the  New 
Testament,  save  One.  Is  it  wrong  to  infer  from  this  that  in  the. New  Testament 
greater  importance  is  attached  to  the  manner  of  a  man's  life  than  to  the  manner 
of  a  man's  death ;  that  in  his  conquering  temptation  in  living,  even  more  than  in  his 
triumphing  over  fear  in  dying,  is  the  power  of  the  grnce  of  Christ  displayed?  At 
any  rate,  for  once  we  are  a^ked  to  contemplate  a  Christian  in  the  hour  of  his 
departure.  His  was  a  stormy  passage  to  the  heavenly  rest ;  but  this  is  what  we 
have  to  remember — what  was  true  in  his  case  is  true  as  to  the  main  things  in  all 
who  have  obtained  like  precious  faith.  There  may  be  no  brightness  like  the 
reflection  of  the  heavenly  glory  lighting  up  the  face  ;  there  may  be  no  telling  of  a 
vision  of  the  opened  heavens  ;  there  may  be  only  pain  and  weakness,  dull 
unconscious  stupor,  or  a  clouded  mind;  but  none  the  less  it  is  true  that  as  here, 
so  over  every  dying  believer  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  stands  to  succour  and  to 
receive  the  spirit  he  commits  to  Him  then,  or  has  committed  long  before. 
Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  all  His  saints.  Like 
Stephen  they  fall  asleep,  and  awake  to  behold  His  face  in  righteousness, 
and  shall  be  satisfied  with  His  likeness.  (A.  0.  Johnston,  31. A.)  Stephen's 
vision  : — Notice — I.  The  glokious  scene  that  exists  in  the  world  above — 
"  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  This  Stepben 
saw  ;  but  it  did  not  come  into  existence  then  ;  it  was  in  existence  before  ;  it  is  in 
existence  now.  We  find  it  difficult  to  give  reality  in  our  minds  to  distant  and 
unseen  things.  My  friend  in  some  remote  land  is  a  really  existing  being,  though 
I  cannot 'realise  his  presence.  None  of  us  doubts  the  existence  of  countries  on  the 
other  side  of  the  globe.  They  are  as  real  as  though  we  beheld  them.  So  of 
heavenly  things.  II.  Those  disteessing  scenes  that  often  occur  in  our  world 
BELOW.  Scenes  like  that  are  often  acted  in  our  world.  They  seem  to  be  a  part  of 
our  fallen  world's  sad  inheritance.  To  some  of  us  the  injustice,  cruelty,  and  evil 
tempers  of  those  we  live  with,  have  embittered  our  lives.  We  must  not  murmur 
at  this.  It  is  to  be  endured  patiently,  just  as  sickness  or  any  other  calamity.  Let 
us,  as  one  fruit  of  it,  long  more  for  a  world  where  we  and  all  admitted  shull  be 
creatures  of  another  mind — all  happy  one  in  another,  as  well  as  happy  in  our  God. 
III.  The  conduct  op  the  faithful  Christian  amid  the  distressing  scenes  op 
LIFE.  "  They  gnashed  on  him  with  their  teeth."  They  were  becoming  wild  in 
their  rage  against  him  ;  yet  what  does  he  ?  Strive  to  mollify  their  raae  ?  Appeal 
for  protection  to  the  judges  ?  Look  round  to  find  some  one  less  violent  than  the 
rest,  to  interpose  in  his  behalf?  No  ;  great  as  his  danger  appears,  he  looks  above 
his  danger.  "  Full  of  the  Holy  Ghr  st,  he  looks  up  steadfastly  into  heaven."  The 
expression  implies  that  he  felt  sure  that  there  was  help  for  him  there.  Here  is  the 
secret  of  bearing  trouble  well — it  is  not  to  keep  our  eyes  on  our  trouble,  anxious  for 
any  and  ready  to  catch  at  tbe  first  alleviation  of  it ;  it  is  to  look  above  our  troubles, 
to  get  our  whole  soul  riveted  on  Christ  in  the  heavens.  IV.  The  manifestation 
WHICH  the  Lord  sometimes  makes  of  Himself  to  His  expecting  servants.  Our 
Lord  had  promised  His  disciples  that  if  they  loved  Him  and  kept  His  command- 
ments, He  will  still  manifest  Himself  to  them.  Now  to  draw  our  attention  to  this 
promise,  and  to  assure  us  of  the  fulfilment  of  it,  we  may  conceive  to  be  the  design 
of  this  wonderful  vision.  At  this  time  most  certainly  he  was  loving  bis  Lord,  and 
proving  bis  affection  to  Him  by  the  danger  in  which  he  had  placed  himself  for  His 
Sake.  Here,  then,  was  an  opportunity  for  the  Lord  to  show  how  precious  to  Him 
are  the  people  that  love  Htm,  and  how  mindful  He  is  of  His  own  word.  {C.  Bradley, 
M.A.)  Seeing  the  glory  of  Christ : — Dr.  Owen,  just  previous  to  his  deiith,  said, 
"  I  am  going  to  Him  whom  my  soul  has  loved — or,  rather,  who  has  loved  me  with 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

an  everlasting  love — which  is  the  sole  ground  of  all  my  consolation."     On  Mr. 
PaAne  saying  to  him,  "  Doctor,  I  have  just  been  putting  your  book  on  '  The  Glory 
of  Chri.-t'  to  the  press,"  he  answeied,  "I  am  glad  to  hear  it.     But  oh,  brother 
Payne,  the  long-looked-for  day  is  come  at  last,  in  which  I  shall  see  that  glory  in 
another  manner  than  I  have  ever  done  yet,  or  was  capable  of  doing  in  this  world." 
llie  jnesence  of  Christ  in  the  dying  hour : — Eobert  Glover,  mentioned  by  Mr.  Foxe 
in  the  "  Book  of  Mnrtyrs,"  though  he  was  a  man  very  gracious  and  holy,  faithfully 
bearing  witness  to  the  truth,  yet  it  pleased  God  to  withdraw  Himself  and  presence 
from  hiiu,  insomuch  that  he  was  greatly  distressed  while  he  was  in  prison,  and, 
opening  himself  to  his  friend,  told  him  how  God  had  left  and  deserted  him.     His 
friend  exhoited  him  still  to  wait  on  God,  which  he  laboured  to  do,  and  the  night 
before  his  execution  spent  much  of  that  time  in  prajer ;  yet  no  comfort  came,  no 
manifestations  of  the  presence  of  Christ.     The  next  day  he  was  drawn  out  to  the 
stake  to  die  for  the  truth,  and  as  he  went  he  mourned  much  for  the  presence  of 
Chiist ;  but  when  he  came  in  sight  of  the  stake  it  pleased  God  so  to  fill  his  heart 
and  soul  with  comfort,  and  the  incomes  of  His  love,  that  he  cried  out  unto  his 
friend,  "  Oh,  Austin,  He  is  come  1  He  is  come  1  He  is  come  !  "     The  good  man  was 
in  the  dark  a  great  while,  but  when  in  the  darkest  time  then  Christ  came.     (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)         The  martyfs  gaze  on  his  ascended  Lord: — But  twice,  so  far  as  we 
know,  since  Christ's  ascension  has  the  cloud  which  received  Him  out  of  the  sight  of 
those  first  loving  gazers  opened  its  blinding  folds — once  lor  the  conversion  of  the  , 
pert-ecuting  Saul,  once  for  the  support  of  the  suffering  Stephen.     It  was  a  great 
ciisis  in  the  history  of  the  new   faith.      How  much   depended  on   the   faithful 
endurance  of   that  young  champion  I     To  him  tortured  men  and  women  would 
look   back   from   many   a   scene  of   agony,  and  take   courage.      But   he   had  no 
example.     To  him,  therefore,  most  fitly  was  this  support  vouchsafed.     And  mark 
the  mi>de  of  its  bestowal:  "Stephen,  being  full  of   tLe  Holy  Ghost,  looked   up 
steadfastly  into   heaven."     \Yhat  a  gaze   was   that !      What   faith,    desire,  love, 
need,  supplication  was  gathered  into  it  1     And  as  he  gazes,  lo,   the  cloud  melts 
away;  being  "full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  the  power  of  intuition,   so  weakened  in 
us    fallen    men,   is    supernaturally    strengthened,   and   he    sees    Jesus    standing, 
because  it  is  the  priestly  attitude  of  the  great  lutercessor,  and  because  the  atti- 
tude of  His  intercession  is  the  attitude  of  His  help.     And  so  He  showed  Himself 
as  reaching  out  from  the  eternal  shore  into  the  billows  of  this  bitter  stopm  the 
pierced  hand  to  be  the  stay  of  His  martyr.     And  that  sight  changed  all  things 
to  him.     The  lights  of  earth  paled  beneath  its  lustre;  the  sounds  of  eai-th  were 
hushed  by  its  ineffnble  harmony  ;  the  mighty  throb  which  shot  through  his  spirit 
deadened  the  power  of  marking  any  lower  sensation,  as  he  saw  that  sight  of  glory, 
and  knew  that  countenance  of  love  which  was  bent  lull  upon  him.     He  saw  God'a 
kingdom  in  its  strength,  its  vastness,  and  its  repose,  and  he  was  safe.     How  can 
the  ripple  around  their  darkened  base  stir  those  adamantine  foundations  ?     How 
can  the  hate  of  man  pluck  him  out  of  that  hand  pierced  by  love  and  full  of  omnipo- 
tence ?     "  The  Son  of  Man — the  sharer  of  my  nature."     And  as  the  shadow  of  the 
great  Intercessor  falls  upon  him,  transforming  him  into  its  own  likeness,  the  dying 
martyr  pleads  for  his  murderers.     And  then,  not  as  one  shrinking  back  from  pain, 
but  as  a  soul  in  rapture,  thirsting  for  its  full  fruition,  he  calls  upon  his  manifested 
Lord  to  receive  his  spirit ;  until  amidst  that  storm  of  murdering  violence,  calm  as 
the  hushed  infant  upon  its  mother's  breast,  he  sinks  into  a  rest  sweeter  than  that 
of  peaceful  infancy,  and  falls  indeed  asleep  in  Jesus.     For  the  sake  of  its  great 
praciical  lessons — I.  We  have  heie  a  notable  instance  of  the  way  in  which  thk 
WHOLE  OF  OUR  HOLY  KELiGioN  RESi s  ON  FACTS.     We  See  what  it  was  amongst  its  first 
confessors  in  a  time  of  crucial  experiment.     It  was  not  a  set  of  beneficent  maxims 
which  leavened,  and  raised  the  tone  of,  society ;  not  a  set  of  lofty  ideas  which,  gradually, 
with  the  help  of  time  and  distance,  formed  a  highly-coloured  medium  through  which 
reverence  and  affection  could  look  back  to  the  form  of  their  first  promulger,  and 
gaze  upon  it  with  a  wonder  which  at  last  invested  him  with  the  fancied  attribute  of 
a  Rod.     No  I  from  the  very  first  it  was  faith  in  a  Person,  Divine  and  human,  beside 
His  follower,  and  able  and  willing  to  hold  him  up  in  every  struggle.     Stephen's 
spirit  did  not  cast  itself  upon  sublime  abstractions.     No  I  lie  looks  up  steadfastly 
into  heaven  with  the  earnest,  longing,  searching  glance  of  undoubting  expectation, 
following  the  ascended  form  to  where  the  cloud  had  received  Him  out  of  their 
eight;  and  before  such  a  gaze  the  cloud  melted,  and  he  "  saw  the  heavens  opened, 
and  Jesus  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God."    II.  If  thus  the  Word  of  God  was 

A  SET  OF  FACTS,  ANY  ATTEMPT  TO  RESOLVE    IT    INTO   A   SET    OF   IDEAS   SUBVERTS   ITS  VEBT 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  613 

FOUNDATIONS,  AND  DESTKOYS  THE  WHOLE  EDIFICE.  For — 1.  This  is  to  take  a  popitioii 
altogether  at  vax'iance  with  that  occupied  by  the  first  behevers,  and  thus  to  shake 
utterly  their  credit,  inasmuch  as,  in  this  view,  either  they  were  so  ignorant  as  to  be 
misled,  or  so  false  as  to  mislead.  Nor  is  this  all ;  the  great  Teacher  Himself 
appealed  to  these  facts  as  the  proofs  of  His  commission  (1  John  x.  38 ;  xv.  24). 
Either,  therefore,  the  facts  were  real,  or  the  Teacher  was  a  deceiver.  2.  It  is  not 
possible,  consistently  with  any  rules  of  reasoning,  to  make  a  selection  from  the  facts, 
and  yet  seek  to  retain  the  ideas.  A  i^hilosophy,  being  a  speculation,  may  contain  a 
multitude  of  great  and  true  ideas,  mixed  with  phantasies  and  fictions  ;  and  it  is  the 
office  of  higher  intelligences  to  separate  the  precious  from  the  vile.  But  in  a  system 
of  alleged  facts  resting  upon  evidence,  the  presence  of  one  falsehood  shakes  the  truth 
of  the  whole  fabric.  This  is  the  very  issue  to  which  St.  Paul  brings  the  whole 
question,  "  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also 
vain."  III.  The  light  thrown  hereby  upon  difficulties  as  to  gospel  miracles. 
1.  These  difficulties  rest  mainly  on  the  supposed  existence  of  a  contradiction  between 
the  universally  observed  law  of  causes  and  effects,  and  the  interposition  of  any 
intervening  power  to  suspend  or  to  invert  those  laws.  Such  pretended  interruptions, 
we  are  told,  no  evidence  could  establish,  and  that  a  miracle  therefore  is  impossible. 
The  same  conclusion  is  more  gently  insinuated  by  those  who  would  have  us  think 
that  miraculous  power  was  nothing  more  than  a  deeper  acquaintance  with  nature, 
enabling  the  operator  to  work  a  trick  and  to  call  it  a  miracle ;  to  do,  as  some  have 
done  by  savages,  when  they  called  to  their  aid  the  seci'ets  of  science  to  astonish  by 
pretended  portents  the  ignorance  of  the  uncivilised.  2.  But  cast  upon  all  these 
difficulties  the  brightness  of  St.  Stephen's  vision,  and  they  are  scattered  in  a 
moment;  for  it  lifts  us  at  once  out  of  the  dull  level  of  naturalism  into  the  new 
lights  and  shadows  of  the  mountain  of  God.  If  one  of  these  recorded  fact^  be  true 
and  r^al,  it  is  of  itself  enough  to  prove  that  the  Lord  of  nature  has  for  His  wise 
purposes  resolved  to  manifest  to  us,  through  our  sensible  faculties.  His  peculiar 
presence  and  His  direct  working ;  and  this  once  admitted,  the  probability  is  in 
favour  of  the  truth  of  any  other  well-attested  miracles.  For  just  as  one  flash  of 
lightning  evinces  the  existence  of  such  conditions  of  the  atmosphere  as  may  be 
expected  to  produce  a  second,  and  so  makes  the  coming  of  that  second  as  probable 
then  as  at  another  time  it  would  be  improbable  ;  so  does  one  such  direct  proof  of 
the  manifested  working  of  the  Master's  hand  make  it  even  probable  that  according 
to  His  wise  purpose  it  may  be  followed  by  anothf^r.  One  such  fact,  therefore, 
proves  that  we  are  not  under  a  dispensation  of  nature  but  of  grace ;  that  we  are 
introduced  into  a  new  atmosphere,  to  which  we  cannot  apply  the  laws  which 
governed  that  from  which  we  have  been  transported;  that  we  can  no  more  argue 
as  to  what  can  and  cannot  be  from  the  data  of  mere  naturalism,  than  we  could 
measure  the  laws  of  light  by  knowledge  gathered  from  the  darkness.  3.  Here,  then, 
we  are  led  to  the  real  cause  of  such  difficulties.  It  is  to  be  found  in  a  want  of 
hearty  belief  of  the  spiritual  world.  To  any  one  of  such  a  habit  of  mind  all 
difficulties  multiply  spontaneously  after  their  kind.  It  is  with  such  spirits  as  with 
the  bodies  of  men  who  live  beside  open  drains,  or  are  encompassed  in  the  malaria 
of  a  marsh  ;  they  imbibe  unconsciously  at  every  pore  the  lurking  poison  :  you  must 
lift  them  up  to  higher  grounds  and  purer  airs  if  you  would  give  health  to  their 
fever-stricken  limbs.  To  heal  these  troubled  spirits  you  must  place  them  with  St. 
Stephen  on  the  mountain  of  God.  If  that  eye,  so  diseasedly  minute  in  its  small 
criticisms ;  if  that  apprehension,  so  ready  but  so  shallow  in  its  power  ;  if  that 
reason,  so  feverishly  captious  in  its  questions  ;  if  that  bent,  narrow,  trembling  soul 
could  but  be  lifted  to  those  heights — could  but  be  led  to  look  up  steadfastly  into 
heaven — its  difficulties  would  pass  even  unconsciously  from  it,  and  its  cure  be 
certain.  4.  Here,  then,  is  the  true  mode  of  meeting  these  difficulties :  not  by  shut- 
ting our  eyes  feebly  to  them,  not  by  turning  away  from  them  as  though  we  were 
afraid  of  them  ;  but  by  looking  at  them,  not  in  the  purblind  darkness  oif  a  carping 
petulance,  but  in  the  light  of  these  spiritual  verities.  To  live  in  this  light  is  our 
Christian  birthright.  We  need  not  be  with  St.  Stephen  in  the  agony  of  martyrdom 
to  attain  to  it.  God  has  so  made  us  that  common  life  gives  us  daily  opportunities, 
if  we  will  but  use  them,  of  gaining  this  insight.  To  every  soul  so  seeking  Him  He 
reveals  Himself ;  the  cloud  opens ;  the  form  of  the  Son  of  Man  is  seen ;  and  then 
belief  is  comparatively  easy,  and  the  difficulties  which  must  remain,  whilst  thpy 
keep  our  faith  humble  and  watchful,  cease  to  be  perplexing  to  the  soul.  5.  If  this 
be  so,  then  what  becomes  of  the  supposed  morality  of  encouraged  doubts  in  any 
Christian  man  ?     Surely  we  can  see  the  utter  falsehood  of  representing  them  as  the 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vnl 

patient  Teachings  forth  of  an  inquiring  spirit  for  the  light  for  which  he  longs 
Bather,  assuredly,  are  they  the  wilful  turning,  through  some  fault  of  the  flesh  or  of 
the  spirit,  away  from  the  light ;  and  instead  of  bearing  the  noble  titles  of  reasimable 
and  faithful  inquiry,  they  should  by  every  true  heart  be  degraded  to  the  discreditable 
category  of  suspicions  nourished  in  cankered  hearts  against  a  father's  truthfulness 
or  a  mother's  honour.  Dark  and  sad  is  the  history  of  such  a  course.  Its  steps 
lead  surely  down  from  the  mountain  of  light.  The  one  only  Sun  which  ligliteth 
every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world,  sinks  for  him  who  treads  it  in  the  mists 
which  gather  ever  thicker  and  thicker  lound  his  blackening  horizon.  Worship  in 
its  fervour,  prayer  in  its  reality,  and  then  trust,  and  love,  and  peace  one  by  one 
are  all  extinguished — peak  after  peak  loses  the  last  liugering  ray  of  the  daylight — 
until  all  is  dark  (Isa.  lix.  9-11).  6.  It  is  not  on  the  difficulties  of  belief  alone,  but 
upon  all  the  struggles  through  which  the  life  of  God  is  maintained  within  our  souls, 
that  this  vision  of  St.  Stephen  casts  its  light.  Never  can  the  impetuous  tyranny  of 
appetite  be  subdued,  and  the  soul  and  body  kept  in  purity,  save  by  these  powers  of 
the  world  to  come.  When  the  flesh  is  strong  within,  what  shall  aid  us  in  the  strife 
like  looking  up  steadfastly  ioto  heaven  and  seeing  the  Son  of  Man  as  our  helper  ? 
Or,  again,  as  years  go  on,  and  these  impetuous  temptations  of  earlier  life  being 
somewhat  past,  new  ones  of  a  soberer,  heavier,  and  more  stupefying  worldliness 
have  taken  their  place,  what  else  can  so  guard  us  against  sinking  into  the  dull, 
respectable,  commonplace  conformity  with  evil  which,  like  the  white  ashes  after  the 
conflagration,  succeeds  so  naturally  to  the  burst  of  youthful  indulgence,  as  the  ever-- 
living  sense  of  our  nearness  to  the  Lord  and  of  His  perpetual  presence  with  us  ? 
What  can  arouse  watchfulness,  keep  prayer  alive,  kindle  love,  deepen  humility^ 
renew  contrition,  quicken  zeal,  minister  support  in  sorrow,  or  awaken  praises  in 
the  soul  which  God  is  graciously  keeping,  like  the  perpetual  realisation  by 
the  eye  of  faith  of  what  is  now  going  on  within  the  veil?  {Bp.  S.  iVilberforce.) 
The  exaltation  of  Christ : — I.  To  understand  the  nature  and  extent  of  that  honour  and 
glory  to  which  the  Redeemer  is  now  exalted,  first  direct  your  thoughts  to  that  state  of 
HUMILIATION  to  which  He  was  once  subjected  upon  earth.  II.  As  the  sufferings  of 
the  Redeemer  had  been  severe  beyond  example,  so  is  His  teiumph  over  every  enemy 
complete  beyond  the  power  of  description.  It  commenced  at  that  moment  when 
He  broke  asunder  the  chains  of  death,  and  ro!=e  triumphant  from  the  tomb;  and  it 
was  still  more  conspicuously  displayed  at  the  hour  of  His  ascension  to  heaven.  III. 
Consider  the  improvement  to  be  made  of  this  subject.  Tlie  doctrines  of  the  gospel 
either  excite  us  to  avoid  the  paths  of  sin  by  showing  us  the  dangers  with  which 
they  are  beset,  or  they  stimulate  us  to  lives  of  faith  on  the  Son  of  Man  by  display- 
ing the  rich  rewards  that  await  the  righteous.  1.  Of  the  latter  description  is  the- 
doctrine  of  our  Lord's  exaltation ;  and  the  first  obvious  inference  that  flows  from 
it  is,  that  it  furnishes  a  theme  of  joy  and  exultation  to  the  true  Christian.  2. 
Another  lesson  to  be  learnt  from  this  doctrine  is  a  firm  reliance  on  the  promises  of 
the  gospel.  Of  the  truth  of  these  promises,  the  history  of  our  Saviour's  sufferings 
and  triumph  affords  the  most  ample  evidence.  3.  This  doctrine  affords  a  noble  and 
most  powerful  encouragement  to  a  life  of  faith  on  the  Son  of  Man.  Our  blessed 
Redeemer  ascended  to  the  bosom  of  His  heavenly  Father,  not  less  to  prepare  a 
place  for  His  faithful  followers  than  to  enter  Himself  into  His  glory.  4.  Consider 
the  exaltation  of  Christ  as  tearhing  us  to  set  a  just  and  proper  value  on  the  things 
that  belong  to  our  eternal  salvation,  and  as  conveying  to  us  the  important  lesson  of 
placing  our  affection  on  things  above,  and  not  on  things  below.  For  what  are 
the  honours,  the  riches,  and  the  pleasures  of  this  world,  in  comparison  of  that 
glory  which   is  at  the    right    hand   of   God  ?      {Jas.    Bnjce.)  Christ   appeara 

for  His  people  in  time  of  danger  : — A  little  child  in  white  was  playing  in  the 
park.  As  long  as  she  ran  about  on  the  grass,  the  nurse  took  little  notice  of  her — 
she  was  safe.  Presently  the  little  feet  chose  a  path  leading  down  to  the  water,  and 
the  good  nurse  was  after  the  little  one  in  a  moment — she  was  in  danger.  While  we 
lie  down  in  the  green  pasture  of  the  23rd  Psalm,  the  Good  Shepherd  may  not  seem 
to  notice  us — we  are  safe ;  but  when  the  sheep  are  among  the  wolves  of  Matt.  x.  16, 
the  Good  Shepherd  will  run  to  their  help — they  are  in  danger. 

Vera.  57-60.  Then  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  stopped  their  ears,  and  ran 
upon  him. — The  first  gospel  martyr  : — I.  The  matter  for  which  he  died.  II.  The 
Divine  assistance  which  he  experienced.  III.  The  composure  with  which  he 
PASSED   AWAY.      (J.   A.   Krummacher,   D.D.)  The  first    Christian   martyr: — I. 

The  calij  of   Stephen  was  to  mabtirdom.      Neither  he   nor  the  Church   knew 


cnAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  615 

the  honour  which  awaited  him.  Note — 1.  That  the  humblest  service  leads 
to  the  highest.  2.  How  a  man  may  enlarge  a  narrow  sphere.  We  do  not 
want  so  much  men  for  large  places  as  men  to  enlarge  small  places.  3,  "What 
God  wanted  of  Stephen  did  not  fully  appear  at  the  first.  All  that  the  Church 
could  see  was,  that  he  had  qualifications  for  a  difficult  trust.  God  had  a 
larger  purpose.  He  wanted  him,  not  to  live,  but  to  die.  4.  That  a  man's  greatest 
services  may  only  begin  when  he  is  buried.  5.  That  no  Divine  cause  hinges  on  a 
man.  God  always  has  another.  II.  Stephen  was  called  because  he  was  full  op 
THE  Holy  Ghost.  Through  the  Spirit  be — 1.  Had  a  message.  2.  The  power  of  a 
holy  face.  The  baptism  of  the  Spirit  is  an  illumination.  We  have  seen  faces  of 
men  and  women  weak  and  expressionless,  dark  and  evil,  through  conversion  glorified. 
The  change  at  first  is  in  softening,  idealising.  As  it  progresses,  the  peace  of  God 
is  reflected  in  the  features.  In  its  completeness  there  is  the  manifestation  of  un- 
earthly power.  3.  He  displayed  the  Divine  union  of  severity  and  gentleness.  4. 
Had  a  vision.  5.  Was  sustained.  He  triumphed  over  pain.  III.  The  effects  of 
the  MAETyRDOM.  1.  On  the  world.  He  showed  how  a  Christian  could  die.  Tbere 
had  been  deaths  of  disciples  already,  but  they  were  shameful,  dreadful :  first  Judas, 
then  Ananias  and  his  wife.  But  God  now  gave  His  people  a  grave  to  glory  in. 
2.  On  the  Church  (viii.  1).  A  general  persecution  was  let  loose.  The  Christians 
met  the  storm  as  they  had  been  instructed  by  Jesus ;  they  fled  from  the  city  and 
were  scattered,  but  wherever  they  went  they  preached.  Thus  a  part  of  the  Divine 
plan  appeared.  In  all  ages  persecution  has  been  one  of  the  greatest  providential 
agencies  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  3.  On  the  apostles.  It  was  a  discipline 
only  paralleled  by  that  which  followed  the  crucifixion  ;  but  through  it  they  were  to 
become  better  leaders,  and  God  would  take  care  of  His  Church.  They  met  the  trial 
nobly.  They  stayed  at  their  posts.  The  influence  of  their  constancy  upon  the 
Christians,  and  also  upon  their  enemies,  must  have  been  very  great.  4.  Upon  the 
devout  Jews.  The  persecution  tested  them.  At  the  peril  of  their  lives  they  paid 
the  murdered  man  the  reverence  of  burial.  So  the  death  of  Jesus  brought  out 
Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of  Arimathea.  5.  On  Saul.  Upon  him  the  impression  was 
deep.  His  reference  to  the  part  he  had  had  in  the  murder,  when  he  was  in  his 
trance  at  Damascus,  shows  it.  One  of  the  goads  against  which,  from  that  time,  he 
kicked  in  vain,  was  then  buried  in  his  heart.  The  immediate  result  was  to  infuriate 
him.  But  he  had  received  his  death-wound.  The  cord  of  love  held  him.  {Sermons 
hy  the  Monday  Club.)  The  first  martyrdom  : — Note — I.  Stephen's  faith.  He 
did  not  say,  "  All  these  things  are  against  me  "  ;  if  Christ  had  designed  to  own  my 
work,  He  would  not  thus  have  cut  it  short ;  if  this  be  the  manner  in  which  Christ's 
cause  prospers  below,  how  can  I  believe  that  He  Himself  lives  and  reigns  above? 
Never  was  his  faith  so  strong,  or  his  vision  so  unclouded.  While  his  enemies  are 
rushing  upon  him  he  is  rapt  above  earth  and  earthly  things,  and  privileged  to 
behold  his  beloved  Muster  Himself  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  II.  His 
HOPE.  In  the  midst  of  the  uproar  of  angry  voices,  and  of  the  flight  of  stupefying, 
crushing  stones,  he  is  calling  upon  his  Master,  not  as  a  mere  expression  of  pain  or 
disquietude  or  weakness  ;  or  as  the  ignorant  ejaculations  sometimes  heard  from.a 
sinner's  deathbed,  when  for  the  first  time  the  grasp  of  a  mightier  power  is  felt, 
which  must  be  propitiated  by  abject  invocation  :  not  thus,  but  in  the  tone  of  one 
who  "knows  whom  he  has  believed."  III.  His  charity.  As  the  mangled  frame 
begins  to  totter  to  its  dissolution,  the  dying  martyr  kneels.  That  posture  with 
which  we  allow  any  little  excuse  to  interfere,  which  many  of  us  never  practise  even 
in  God's  house,  which  few  of  us  would  practise  in  a  season  of  pain  or  sickness,  be 
deemed  the  fittest  attitude  even  for  a  dying  man  :  he  would  honour  God  with  his 
body  as  well  as  with  the  spirit :  and  then  he  cries  aloud,  in  the  hearing  of  his 
enemies  still  thirsting  for  his  blood,  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge  1 "  He 
prays  not,  as  some  have  done,  that  the  murderers  may  find  out  their  sin  one  daj- 
in  punisliment — not  even  that  his  blood  may  produce  a  speedy  and  an  abundant 
harvest,  but  that  that  cruel  deed  may  never  be  weighed  in  God's  balances  against 
its  perpetrators.  Thus  he  prayed,  and  in  one  case  at  least  we  know  that  his  prayer 
was  heard  and  answered.  IV.  His  composure.  He  was  laid  to  rest.  He  was 
lulled  to  slumber.  The  word  itself  is  enough  to  take  the  sting  from  death.  The 
case  of  St.  Stephen  himself  may  assure  us  that  no  circumstances  of  death  can 
prevent  its  being  this  to  a  Christian.  It  matters  not  whether  the  cause  of  death  be 
disease  or  accident,  the  weapon  of  war  or  the  stroke  of  the  executioner.  It  matters 
not  whether  the  scene  of  death  be  the  house  or  the  roadside,  the  field  of  battle  or 
the  desolate  prison-house.     There  are  three  conditions  of  such  a  death.     It  must 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  vn. 

be — 1.  A  rest  from  labour.  "Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord,"  &c 
(l)  An  idle,  desultory,  self-indulgent  life  has  earned  no  rest.  Night  may  come  t» 
such  a  life,  but  not  the  sweet  sleep  of  the  healthily  wearied  labourer.  (2)  Again,  a 
rest  from  what  labour?  Not  from  common  worldly  occupations,  such  as  have  their 
reward  (if  anywhere)  here,  and  have  nothing  stored  up  for  them  in  the  world 
unseen.  He  who  would  rest  in  Christ  must  first  have  wrought  in  Christ.  It 
is  Christ's  labourer,  not  the  world's,  who,  when  he  dies,  falls  asleep.  2.  A 
rest  with  Christ.  "  I  have  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is 
far  better."  "  While  we  are  at  home  in  the  body,  we  are  absent  from  the 
Lord."  3.  A  rest  unto  rising.  A  sleep  not  to  be  again  broken  is  death,  not  sleep. 
A  sleep  only  to  be  broken  by  terrific  suffering  is  no  sleep :  it  is  a  frightful 
dream,  a  horrible  nightmare.  Such  is  the  death  of  the  wicked.  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
Stephi'ii's  martyrdom : — True  Christian  zeal  will  seek  to  do  the  highest  work  of 
which  sanctified  humanity  is  capable.  Stephen  is  first  heard  of  as  a  distributor  of 
the  alms  of  the  Church  to  needy  widows.  Doubtless  he  used  the  office  of  a  deacon 
well,  and  so  purchased  to  himself  a  good  degree.  Although  the  onerous  duty  of 
serving  tables  might  well  have  excused  him  from  other  service,  we  soon  find  him 
doing  gieat  wonders  among  the  people;  and  not  even  content  with  that,  we  see 
him  defending  the  faith  against  a  synagogue  of  subtle  philosophical  deniers  of  the 
truth.  He  had  a  higher  promotion  yet — he  gained  the  peerless  dignity  of  martyr- 
dom. Put  a  man  without  zeal  into  the  front  place,  and  he  will  gradually  recede 
into  his  native  insignificance,  or  only  linger  to  be  a  nuisance  ;  but  put  a  man  into 
the  rear,  if  his  soul  be  full  of  holy  fire,  you  will  soon  hear  of  him.  Observe — I. 
The  power  of  the  Holt  Spirit  as  developed  in  Stephen's  death,  in  order 
THAT  WE  MAY  LEARN  TO  RELY  UPON  THAT  POWER.  Tliis  power  is  Seen  in— 1.  The 
fact  that  although  surrounded  by  bitter  enemies,  and  having  no  time  for  prepara- 
tion, Stephen's  defence  is  wonderfully  logical,  clear,  and  forcible.  This  chapter 
does  not  read  like  an  address  delivered  to  a  furious  mob.  He  could  not  have 
delivered  it  with  greater  fearlessness  had  he  been  assured  that  they  would  thank 
him  for  the  operation.  To  wbat  do  we  trace  this  mouth  and  wisdom  but  to  the 
Holy  Spirit?  The  Holy  Ghost  exerts  such  a  piwer  over  the  human  mind,  that 
when  it  is  His  will.  He  can  enable  His  servants  to  collect  their  scattered  thoughts, 
and  to  speak  with  unwonted  power.  Moreover,  the  Lord  can  also  touch  the 
stammering  tongue,  and  make  it  as  eloquent  as  tbe  tongue  of  Esaias.  When  we  can 
study  the  Word,  it  is  mere  presumption  to  trust  to  the  immediate  inspiration  of 
the  moment ;  but  if  any  one  of  you  be  called  to  speak  for  your  Master  when  you 
can  have  had  no  preparation,  you  may  confidently  depend  upon  the  Spirit  of  God 
to  help.  It  is  better  to  be  taught  of  the  Holy  Spirit  than  to  learn  eloquence  at  the 
feet  of  n)asters  of  rhetoric.  The  Spirit  of  God  needs  to  be  honoured  in  the  Church 
in  this  respect.  2.  The  manner  and  bearing  of  the  martyr.  He  gazes  steadfastly 
up  into  heaven.  They  may  gnash  their  teeth,  but  they  cannot  disturb  that  settled 
gaze.  What  he  beholds  above  makes  him  careless  of  the  bloodthirsty  fons  below. 
The  bearing  of  many  of  the  martyrs  has  been  singularly  heroic.  When  the  King 
of  France  told  Bernard  Palissy  that,  if  be  did  not  change  his  sentiments,  he  should 
be  compelled  to  surrender  him  to  the  Inquisition,  the  brave  potter  said  to  the  king, 
♦'You  say  I  shall  be  compelled,  and  yet  you  are  a  king;  but  I,  thoui-'h  only  a  poor 
potter,  cannot  be  compelled  to  do  other  than  I  think  to  be  right."  The  p  tter  was 
more  royal  than  the  king.  Now  if  you  and  I  desire  to  walk  among  tbe  sons  of  men 
without  pride,  but  yet  with  a  bearing  that  is  worthy  of  our  calling  and  adoption, 
we  must  be  trained  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Thvse  men  who  go  cap-in-hand  to  the 
world,  asking  leave  to  live,  know  nothing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  His  calm  ami 
happy  spirit.  It  is  a  great  thing  for  a  Christian  to  keep  himself  quiet  within  when 
turmoil  rules  without.  To  be  calm  amid  the  bewildering  cry,  confident  of  victory — 
this  is  so  hard  that  only  the  Divine  Dove,  the  Comforter,  cau  bring  us  from  above 
the  power  to  be  so ;  but  when  once  the  art  of  being  still  is  fully  learned,  what 
strength  and  bliss  is  in  it !  4.  His  holy  and  forgiving  temper.  He  knelt  down,  as 
if  to  make  them  see  how  he  prayed,  and  then  he  prayed  with  a  loud  voice,  that 
they  might  hear.  Surely  this  is  a  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  indeed  1  We  find  it  not 
altogether  easy  to  live  at  peace  with  all  men,  but  to  die  at  peace  with  our  murderers, 
what  shall  I  say  of  it  ?  The  prayer  we  have  just  mentioned  did  not  die  in  the  air  ; 
it  passed  through  the  gate  of  pearl,  and  it  obtained  an  answer  in  the  conversion  of 
Saul.  II.  The  source  of  richest  comfort,  with  the  hope  that  we  may  learn 
TO  look  there.  It  was  the  end  and  aim  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  mak«  Stephen 
happy.     How  could  this  be  done  ?    By  revealing  to  him  the  living  and  reigning 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  G17 

Saviour  at  the  right  l)and  of  God.  If  we  have  like  precious  faith  with  Stephen, 
since  it  is  a  great  fact  that  Christ  is  there,  there  is  no  reason  why  our  faith  should 
not  see  \vhat  Stephen's  faith  saw.  He  saw — 1.  That  Jesus  was  alive.  He  was  not 
serving  a  dead  Christ ;  he  was  speaking  for  a  Friend  who  still  existed  to  hear  his 
pleadings,  and  to  accept  his  testimony.  Stephen  argued  within  himself,  "  If 
Christ  lives  after  crucitixion,  why  should  not  Stephen  live,  through  Christ,  after 
stoning  ?  "  2.  That  Jesus  saw  him  and  sympathised  with  him.  Is  not  that  the 
meaning  of  the  attitude  which  the  Lord  assumed  ?  The  Man  of  Sorrows  is  alive, 
and  sympathises  with  His  people  still.  "  In  all  your  affliction  He  is  afflicted."  3. 
Jesus  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  That  was  the  point  in  dispute.  The 
Jews  said  the  Nazarene  was  an  impostor.  "  No,"  said  Stephen,  "  there  He  is." 
The  people  rage,  the  rulers  take  counsel  together,  hut  yonder  is  the  King  upon  the 
holy  hill  of  God  ;  and  to  Stephen's  heart  this  was  all  he  wished.  I  have  known 
what  it  is  to  be  brought  so  low  in  heart,  that  no  promise  of  God's  Word  gave  me  a 
ray  of  light,  nor  a  gleam  of  comfort,  and  yet,  so  often  as  I  have  come  across  this 
text,  "  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  Him,"  &c.,  I  have  always  found  a 
flood  of  joy  bursting  into  my  soul,  for  I  have  said,  "  Well,  it  is  of  no  consequence 
what  may  become  of  me  so  long  as  my  Lord  Jesus  is  exalted."  Like  the  dying 
soldier  in  the  hour  of  battle,  who  is  cheered  with  the  thought,  "  The  general  is 
safe  ;  the  victory  is  on  our  side."  I  would  like  to  put  this  telescope,  then,  to  the 
eye  of  every  sorrowing  Christian.  Your  Saviour  is  exalted — (1)  To  intercede  for 
you.  (2)  To  prepare  a  place  for  you.  (3)  As  your  representative.  Because  He 
lives,  we  shall  live  also.  III.  The  comfort  itself.  We  do  not  find  that  the 
appearance  of  Jesus  stopped  the  stones.  That  is  the  plan  of  the  present  dispensa- 
tion. The  Lord  Jesus  does  not  come  to  us  to  forbid  our  suffering,  nor  to  remove 
our  griefs,  but  He  sustains  us  under  them.  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee." 
How  sweetly  is  Stephen's  triumph  pictured  in  those  last  words,  "  He  fell  asleep." 
This  is  the  life  of  a  Christian.  When  the  world  has  been  most  in  arms  against  a 
believer,  it  is  wonderful  how  he  has  rested  with  perfect  composure  in  the  sight  of 
his  enemies.  This  shall  be  the  death  of  the  Christian.  He  shall  shut  his  eyes  to 
earth  and  open  them  to  heaven.  His  body  shall  but  sleep,  to  be  awakened  by  the 
heavenly  trumpeter.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Stejihen's  martyrdom : — On  reviewing 
the  whole  narrative  we  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  three  things — 1.  The  professed 
patrons  of  religion  engaged  in  banishing  it  from  the  world.  The  peculiar  enormity 
of  the  crime  is  that  it  was  done  in  the  name  of  religion.  2.  The  most  eminent 
future  apostle  accessory  to  the  death  of  the  most  eminent  disciple.  This  teaches 
us — (1)  How  the  conscience  may  be  perverted.  An  action  is  not  necessarily  right 
because  the  author  believes  it  to  be  so.  (2)  How  concealed  the  spirituality  of  the 
law  may  be  from  its  most  diligent  student.  Some  knew  its  letter,  but  had  not 
learned  the  alphabet  of  its  spirit.  "  The  letter  killeth."  (3)  How  sovereign  and 
almighty  is  the  grace  of  God.  Christ  selected  Saul  to  become  His  apostle,  and  the 
martyrdom  of  Stephen  was  one  of  the  causes  of  His  conversion.  "  He  is  able  of 
stones  to  raise  up  children  to  Abraham."  3.  The  most  useful  man  of  his  time 
allowed  to  be  stoned  out  of  the  world  as  a  blasphemer.  Stephen  appears  in  two 
opposite  lights — as  a  victim  and  as  a  victor.  Though  crushed  he  yet  conquered — 
illustrating  the  dark  and  bright  sides  of  piety.  I.  The  dark  side.  Stephen  dying 
under  a  shower  of  stones.  The  world  has  ever  hated  vital  Christianity.  Two 
causes  led  to  this  result — 1.  He  held  convictions  which  clashed  with  the  prejudices 
and  worldly  interests  of  his  contemporaries.  2.  He  faithfully  declared  those  con- 
victions. Had  he  kept  them  to  himself,  compromised  them,  or  toned  them  down 
to  the  corrupt  spirit  of  his  age,  he  would  have  avoided  such  an  end  as  this.  H, 
The  bright  side.  Piety  looked  upon  from  the  world's  side  is  rather  a  miserable 
object — but  not  so  when  viewed  from  the  spiritual  side.  1.  Stephen  was  in  vital 
connection  with  God.  He  was  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  2.  He  had  a  glorious 
vision  of  heaven.  Having  God  within  him,  everything  was  full  of  divinity.  3.  His 
spirit  was  inspired  with  the  sublimest  magnanimity.  4.  He  had  a  delightful  depar- 
ture from  the  world.  (1)  He  commended  his  spirit  to  Christ.  This  prayer  implies 
— (a)  Consciousness  that  he  had  a  spirit,  (b)  Belief  that  that  spirit  would  survive 
his  expiring  body,  (c)  Unbounded  faith  in  Christ  to  take  care  of  his  spirit.  (2) 
He  fell  asleep.  Implying — (a)  A  welcome  rest,  (ft)  An  anticipated  rising.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  The  martyrdom  of  Stephen: — I.  What  was  the  secret  op  his 
meekness  and  his  bravery?  There  must  have  been  some  Divine  bestowment. 
Was  it,  then,  some  miraculous  gift  reserved  for  some  specially  chosen  man  ?  The 
secret  lies  in  the  fact  that  he  was  "full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."    lie  did 


618  THE   BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vii, 

not  leap  into  this  character.  There  was  no  special  charm  by  which  these  graces 
clustered  round  him :  they  were  the  gift  of  God  to  him  as  they  are  to  us.  The  only 
difference  between  us  and  him  is  that  he  grasped  the  blessing  with  a  holier  boldness, 
and  lived  in  a  closer  communion  with  God.  It  was  not  physical  hardiness  then. 
There  are  men  whose  bravery  no  one  dare  question,  who  have  yet  been  the  veriest 
cowards  in  the  face  of  moral  duty,  and  vice  versa.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  once 
despatched  two  officprs  on  a  service  of  great  hazard,  and  as  they  were  riding  the 
one  turning  to  the  other  saw  his  lips  quivering  and  his  cheek  blanched.  Eeining 
in  his  horse  he  said,  "  Why,  you  are  afraid."  •'  I  am,"  was  the  answer  ;  "  and  if 
you  were  half  as  much  afraid  as  I  am,  you  would  relinquish  the  duty  altogether." 
Without  wasting  a  word  the  officer  galloped  back  and  complained  bitterly  that  he 
had  been  sent  in  the  company  of  a  coward.  "  Olf,  sir,  to  your  duty,"  was  the 
duke's  reply,  "  or  the  coward  will  have  done  the  business  before  you  get  there." 
And  tlie  great  man  was  right.  There  was  physical  timidity,  perhaps  the  result  of  a 
highly-wrought  nervous  organisation,  but  there  was  an  imperial  regard  for  duty 
■which  bore  him  above  his  fears  to  triumph.  Yes ;  and  Church  history  can  tell  us 
many  a  story  of  suiJerings  endured  for  Christ  by  delicate  and  high-born  woman- 
hood. Martyrs  are  what  they  are  from  tbe  "  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and 
power."  II.  The  lot  of  the  Christian  is  ordinarily  an  inheritance  of  perse- 
cution. There  was  nothing  in  Stephen's  character  to  arouse  hostility.  But  he 
was  faithful,  and  his  reproofs  stung  his  adversaries  to  the  quick ;  he  was  consistent, 
and  his  life  was  a  perpetual  rebuke  to  those  who  lived  otherwise ;  he  was  un- 
answerable, and  that  was  a  crime  too  great  to  be  forgiven.  1.  Persecution  has  been 
the  lot  of  the  Church  in  all  ages.  The  prophets  were  scoffed,  and  some  of  them 
were  slain.  Nearly  aU  the  apostles  wove  the  martyr's  amaranth  into  their  crown 
of  thorns.  Home  pagan  persecuted,  so  has  Eome  papal,  and  even  churches  of  a 
purer  faith.  2.  But  apart  from  ecclesiasticism  altogether  "  they  that  will  live 
godly  must  suffer  persecution."  The  developments  of  the  persecuting  spirit  are 
restrained  by  the  advance  of  enlightenment,  the  decorums  of  society,  the  inter- 
lacings  of  interest,  the  silent  unrecognised  leaven  of  Christian  faith  ;  but  depend 
upon  it,  if  you  are  a  Christian  the  world  hates  you  and  your  practice  still.  The 
father  may  interpose  to  prevent  his  child's  devotion,  the  husband  withdraw  his 
wife's  privileges,  or  the  custom  may  be  withdrawn,  the  preferment  withheld,  the 
suspicion  insinuated.  There  are  a  thousand  ways  by  which  the  latent  hate  may 
be  shown — in  the  shrug  of  the  shoulder,  the  curl  of  the  lip,  the  glance  of  the  eye, 
the  wave  of  the  hand.  3.  If  you  are  persecuted  take  it  as  a  proof  of  your  legitimacy. 
I  wonder  almost  whether  the  reason  that  there  is  so  little  persecution  now  is  that 
there  is  so  little  faithfulness.  Unfaithfulness  to  the  Christian  is  like  the  Deluge  to 
the  world — a  flood  to  drown  it :  persecution  to  the  Christian  spirit  is  like  the  Deluge 
to  the  ark — a  flood  to  lift  it  nearer  to  heaven.      III.  Strength  and  grace  are 

ALWAYS    GIVEN    MOST    LIBERALLY   WHERE    THEY   ARE    MOST    NEEDED.       In    the    Carlv  part 

of  Stephen's  life,  when  acting  as  deacon  and  evangelist,  he  had  grace  according  to 
his  day.  When  before  the  council  the  Spirit  inspired  his  unpremeditated  speech 
and  gave  him  a  vision  of  glory.  And  now  amid  the  shower  of  stones  he  lay  his 
head  upon  his  Saviour's  bosom  and  went  triumphant  home.  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall 
thy  strength  be."  Have  you  not  heard  from  the  lips  of  the  now  glorified  that 
the  time  of  their  fiercest  trial  was  the  time  of  their  most  glorious  deliverance? 
Have  you  not  listened  sometimes  in  the  death-chamber,  and  wondered  at  the 
disclosures  of  the  realities  of  heaven  ?  IV.  Death  is  not  death  to  a  believer. 
"He  fell  asleep."  When  men  sleep  tliey  usually  surround  themselves  with 
the  most  favourable  circumstances.  They  demand  quiet,  they  exclude  light  and 
sound.  Stephen  fell  in  circumstances  very  different,  but  when  God  wills  a  man  to 
sleep  it  does  not  matter  how  much  noise  there  is  around  him.  In  sleep  there  is — 1. 
Eepose.  2.  Security.  Men  do  not  usually  commit  themselves  to  sluoiber  without 
some  prospect  of  safety ;  so  there  was  security  for  Stephen's  body  in  the  grave 
and  his  soul  in  paradise.  3.  Eestoration  ;  for  after  tbe  night  comes  the  morning. 
{W.  M.  Punshot),  LL.D.)  The  death  of  Stephen:— Observe — I.  The  ivlm.ignant 
EXCITEMENT  OF  THE  Jevvish  COUNCIL.  We  are  shocked  at  the  wickedness  of  which 
the  heart  of  man  is  capable.  It  has  many  manifestations  ;  but  in  no  case  is  it  so 
strongly  marked  as  in  the  contrasts  presented  in  instances  of  religious  persecution. 
On  the  one  hand,  there  is  everything  to  conciliate  regard  ;  and  on  the  other,  there 
are  the  worst  of  passions.  But  bow  is  tbis  to  be  accounted  for?  Enmity  to  the 
truth  of  God ;  and  hatred  to  them  who  hold  it.  Yet,  think  not  that  this  spirit  la 
confined  to  ages  of  persecution.    It  exists  in  ages  of  professed  liberality.     Be  faith- 


CHAP,  VII.]  THE  ACTS,  619 

ful  witnesses  of  the  truth  ;  and  you  will  see  the  enmity,  and  often  hear  the  growl  of 
the  savage  within,  though  chained.  Be  faithful  to  yourselves ;  and  you  will  often 
find  when  truth  and  its  preachers  press  hard  upon  your  errors,  the  inquiry  rising, 
"  Hast  thou  found  me,  O  mine  enemy?"  II.  The  attitude  of  the  maktyr.  1. 
The  fact  that  he  was  "full  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  intimates  that  he  had  in  that 
moment  a  special  visitation  of  Divine  strength  and  comfort.  How  often  does  this 
appear  in  the  Bible !  Hence  St.  Paul  remarks,  "  We  glory  in  tribulations  also." 
"When  the  three  Hebrew  children  were  cast  alive  into  the  burning  fiery  furnace, 
"  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  God  "  appeared  amongst  them,  so  that  not  a  hair  of  their 
heads  whs  singed.  When  St.  John  was  banished  to  the  Isle  of  Patmos  he  was 
favoured  with  the  presence  of  his  glorified  Lord  and  of  the  holy  angels.  AU  these 
facts  are  designed  to  teach  us  that  the  Lord  is  "  a  very  present  help  in  the  time  of 
trouble."  2.  The  immediate  effect  of  this  visitation  was,  that  "  he  looked  up 
stedfastly  into  heaven,"  a  devout  committal  of  his  cause  into  a  supreme  hand.  A 
man  whose  eye  is  fixed  on  heaven  tramples  equally  underfoot  the  smiles  and  the 
frowns  of  earth.  Here  is  no  defiance,  no  retreating  of  man  into  himself  in  search 
of  natural  courage  or  other  principles  to  sustain  him.  In  Christian  heroism  man 
goes  out  of  himself  to  a  higher  power,  and  becomes  mighty  through  God.  III. 
The  vision  vouchsafed  to  him.  How  appropriate  it  was  to  the  two  great  purposes 
which  to  him  were  so  important  in  that  hour  !  1.  To  confirm  his  faith.  Whether 
he  had  seen  onr  Lord  before  does  not  appear  ;  but  he  now  saw  Him  in  His  glory. 
Here  was  faith  rewarded  and  confirmed  by  the  evidence  of  vision;  just  as  all  true 
faith  shall  finally  be  rewarded.  For  true  faith  fixes  upon  the  reality  of  things. 
They  exist,  though  the  distance  which  separates  time  from  eternity  intervenes  ; 
and  God  does  not  work  a  miracle,  as  in  the  case  of  Stephen,  to  enable  us  to  see. 
Still  they  are  tiiere,  and  the  faith  which  the  world  despises  shall  be  crowned  with 
the  glorious  sight.  Ah  !  how  soon  may  God  lift  the  veil  and  let  the  saint  into  the 
anticipated  glories,  and  plunge  the  sinner  into  the  forgotten  horrors  of  eternity ! 
2.  To  inspire  courage  and  comfort.  It  was  a  vision  of  Jesus— (1)  At  the  place  of 
power  and  authority  ;  everything  below,  therefore,  was  under  His  management  and 
control.  If  the  sovereign  Lord  permitted  his  enemies  to  destroy  him,  it  was  the 
part  of  the  servant  to  bow.  Still  He  is  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  to  control  the 
rage  of  man,  to  choose  the  moment  when  His  servant  should  thus  glorify  Him,  to 
affoid  him  almighty  succour,  to  turn  his  death  into  a  means  of  furthering  His  own 
eternal  truth,  and  by  opening  His  glory  to  receive  his  spirit.  (2)  Standing  and 
looking  down  upon  him.  How  could  he  then  faint?  There  was  Christ  tacitly 
exhorting  him  by  His  look,  "Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,"  (fee.  He  looks  upon 
us  ;  let  us  take  care  that  we  sin  not.  He  requires  of  us  patiently  to  bear  the  cross, 
and  to  suffer  with  ivsiguation.  He  will  give  us  the  help  we  need.  Let  us  look  to 
Him  in  habitual  reverence  and  stedfast  trust.  IV.  His  death.  It  was  a  death 
of — 1.  Prayer.  He  died  calling  upon  God.  No  former  grace  was  then  sufficient, 
although  important ;  for  he  knew  how  to  call  upon  God.  Let  us  now  learn  the 
habit  of  prayer.  We  shall  need  it  to  our  last  strugijle.  2.  Faith.  Christ  was 
recognised  by  the  dyintr  martyr,  and  into  His  hands  the  soul  was  commended.  3. 
Certainty.  In  the  mind  of  Stephen  there  was  no  gloom  as  to  the  future.  "  And 
now,  O  ye  judges,"  said  Socrates,  "  j'e  are  going  to  live,  and  I  am  going  to  die. 
Which  of  these  is  best,  God  knows ;  but  I  suppose  no  mun  does."  "  I  am  going  to 
take  a  leap  in  the  dark  !  "  exclaimed  an  infidel  in  the  prospect  of  dissolution.  The 
despairing  sinner  trembles  at  the  sight  of  the  great  gulf.  It  is  your  privilege  to 
die  like  Stephen.  4.  Charity.  A  soul  ripe  for  heaven  can  have  no  resentments. 
6.  Peace.      "  He  fell  asleep."      {R.   Watson.)  The  death  of  Stephen: — It  is  a 

glorious  thing  t »  be  the  first  to  achieve  some  great  work — the  first  mariner  to  sail 
into  an  unknown  sea,  or  the  first  soldier  to  mount  the  breach,  and  enter  the  be- 
leaguered city — but  nobler  still  to  be  the  first  to  bear  witness  to  a  great  truth,  and 
to  seal  the  testimony  with  one's  blood.  This  honour  was  enjoyed  by  Stephen.  In 
the  story  of  his  martyrdom  we  see — I.  A  victim  conquering.  Stephen's  murderers 
seemed  to  get  the  victory,  yet  in  reality  they  were  vanquished.  No  wonder  that 
their  victim  triumphed,  for  persecution  is  always  a  sign  of  weakness.  Persecution 
is  always  an  attempt  to  accomplish  the  impossible.  It  is  an  endeavour  to  effect 
spiritual  ends  by  physical  means.  Not  all  the  Acts  of  Parliament,  decrees  of 
raai-'ist rates,  rage  of  princes  in  the  world  can  crush  the  soul  that  is  strengthened 
by  the  grnce  of  God.  The  martyr  triumphs  over  his  foes.  II.  A  witness  testify- 
ing. Stephen's  martyrdom  was  an  argument  for  Christianity.  1.  He  bore  testi- 
mony to  the  facts  of  the  gospel  story.    What  a  convincing  proof  of  the  reality  of 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

these  events  !  2,  He  bore  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  living  Saviour.  Nothing 
can  inspire  such  enthusiasm  and  devotion  as  a  person  can  excite.  III.  A  hero 
CROWDED.  1.  A  radiant  vision.  "  I  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man," 
<fec.  The  spirit-world  is  nearer  than  weofteu  think.  If  our  powers  were  developed, 
what  spiritual  glories  would  flash  upon  usl  2.  A  celestial  spirit.  "Lord,  lay  not 
this  sin  to  their  charge" — the  martyr's  prayer  for  his  murderers.  How  unlike 
the  world's  spirit  of  revenge !  3.  A  profound  peace.  "  And  when  he  had 
said  this,  he  fell  asleep."  How  striking  the  contrast  between  Stephen's 
calmness  and  the  fierce  excitement  of  his  persecutors!  (2'.  W.  Maijs,  M.A.) 
The  death  of  Stephen : — Let  us  regard  this  as  refuting  some  practical  mistakes.  I. 
That  character  will  save  a  man  from  harm.  That  would  be  so  in  certain  conditions 
of  society,  but  those  conditious  are  not  present  in  our  life.  Stephen  was  a  man  of 
blameless  character,  yet  when  he  was  called  upon  to  make  bis  defence,  and  had 
made  it,  his  character  went  for  nothing.  The  meanest  criminal  could  not  have 
received  more  malignant  treatment.  A  bad  world  cannot  tolerate  good  men.  If  we 
were  Itetter  we  should  be  the  sooner  got  rid  of.  It  is  our  gift  of  compromise  that 
keeps  us  going.  II.  That  trtith  needs  only  to  be  heard  in  order  to  be  recog- 
nised ASD  accepted.  But  show  where  truth  has  ever  been  crowned  readily.  Truth 
spoken  to  the  true  will  always  be  so  received,  but  truth  spoken  to  the  false 
challenges  a  contest  of  streniith.  III.  That  regularly  constituted  authorities 
MUST  BE  right.  You  smilc  at  the  suggestion  that  one  odd  man  can  have  the  truth, 
and  seventy  regularly  trained  and  constitutionally  appointed  men  do  not  know  the 
reality  of  the  case  in  dispute.  The  Church  must  be  right;  we  cannot  allow  our- 
selves to  be  bewildered  and  befooled  by  eccentric  reformers  and  by  individual 
assailnnts.  All  history  reverses  such  opinions.  The  truth,  it  would  seem,  has 
always  been  with  the  one  man.  The  moment  another  man  joins  him  lie  is  less 
than  he  was  before.  The  sense  of  individual  responsibility  is  almost  lost.  The 
Almighty  seems  to  have  elected  the  individual  man,  and  through  him  to  have 
spoken  to  the  crowd  or  the  race.  But  he  has  not  God's  message  simply  because  he 
happens  to  be  one.  You  are  not  great  be<'ause  you  are  eccentric.  You  are  not 
wise  because  you  are  solitary.  But  being  called  and  inspired,  having  the  assurance 
of  the  truth,  and  b-^ing  prepared  to  establish  that  assurance  by  daily  sacrifice,  go 
forward,  and  at  the  last  the  vindication  will  come.  IV.  That  personal  deliver- 
ance IN  trial  is  the  only  POSSIBLE  PROVIDENCE.  That  is  the  very  idea  that  would 
occur  to  the  simplest  mind  that  could  look  at  the  case.  It  is  tho  first  rush  at  a 
popular  riddle ;  but  there  is  nothing  in  that  answer.  If  that  were  God's  method 
there  would  never  be  any  need  of  deliverance  at  all.  There  must  be  something 
grander  than  this.  The  miracle  was  wrought  within.  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to 
their  charge."  Any  miracle  of  merely  personal  deliverance  set  side  by  side  with 
that  miracle  of  grace  would  he  an  anti-climax  and  a  pitiful  commonp'a(!e.  Any 
religion  that  will  evoke  such  a  spirit  in  its  believers,  and  lead  them  under  such 
circumstances  to  offer  such  prayers,  needs  no  vindication  of  its  divinity.     V.  That 

LIFE    IS   LIMITED    BY   THAT    WHICH    IS    OPEN    TO    THE    EYES     OF     THE     BODY.         It     WOuld 

have  been  a  poor  case  for  Stephen  but  for  the  invisible.  "  If  in  this  life  only  we 
have  hope,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  Moses  endured  as  seeing  the 
invisible.  Stephen  said,  "I  see  heaven  opened,"  &c.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in 
heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  In  great  dangers  God  shows  us  great  sights.  What 
did  Elisha  ask  the  Lord  to  do  in  the  case  of  the  young  man  who  saw  the  gathering 
hosts  surrounding  his  prophet  master  ?  "  Lord,  open  his  eyes  that  he  may  see." 
That  is  all  we  want.  The  enemy  is  near :  but  the  friend  is  nearer.  Stephen's 
spiritual  faith  made  him  forget  that  he  had  a  body.  Think  of  trusting  his  spirit  to 
a  God  that  had  allowed  his  body  to  be  killed !  This  is  the  sublimity  of  faith. 
When  the  spirit  is  inspired,  when  heaven  is  opened,  when  Christ  rises  to  receive 
the  guest,  there  is  no  flesh,  there  is  no  pain,  there  is  no  consciousness  but  in  the 
presence  of  God,  the  absorption  of  the  heart  in  the  infinite  love.  When  the  heart 
seizes  God  as  an  inheritance  it  fears  not  them  that  kill  the  body.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Stephen's  death  : — I.  Its  general  character.  1.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  his  service. 
He  had  been  appointed  an  officer  of  the  Church  to  see  that  the  aLiis  were  distributed 
properly,  and  thereby  he  did  most  useful  service,  for  it  gave  the  apostles  opportunity 
to  give  themselves  wholly  to  their  true  work,  and  it  is  no  small  matter  to  be  able  to 
bear  a  burden  for  another  if  he  is  thereby  set  free  for  more  eminent  service  than  we 
could  ourselves  perform.  The  care  which  Stephen  exercised  over  the  poor  tended 
also  to  prevent  heartburning  and  division.  Bat,  not  content  with  being  a  deacon, 
Stej)hen  began  to  minister  in  holy  things  as  a  speaker  of  the  Word  with  great 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  621 

power.  He  stands  forth  as  quite  a  leading  spirit;  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  the 
enemies  of  the  gospel  made  him  the  object  of  their  fiercest  opposition.  Stephen 
stood  in  the  front  rank  of  the  Lord's  host,  and  yet  he  was  taken  away  1  "  A 
mystery,"  say  some  ;  "  A  great  privilege,"  say  I.  Is  it  not  well  to  die  in  harness  ? 
Who  wants  to  linger  till  he  becomes  a  burden  rather  than  a  help  ?  2.  In  the  prime 
of  his  usefulness.  And  is  not  this  well?  Well,  first,  that  God  sliould  tewch  His 
people  how  much  He  can  do  by  a  man  whom  He  chooses ;  well,  next,  that  He 
should  show  them  that  He  is  not  dependent  upon  any  man.  If  our  life  can  teach 
one  lesson,  and  when  that  is  taught,  if  our  death  can  teach  another,  it  is  well  to 
live  and  well  to  die.  If  God  be  glorified  by  our  removal,  is  it  not  well  ?  3.  It  was 
painful,  and  attended  with  much  that  flesh  and  blood  would  dread.  He  died  not 
suiTOunded  by  weeping  friends,  but  by  enemies  who  gnashed  their  teeth  ;  no  holy 
hymn  made  glad  his  death  chamber,  but  the  shouts  and  outcries  of  a  maddened 
throng  rang  in  his  ears.  For  him  no  downy  pillow,  but  the  hard  and  cruel  stones. 
Now  this  is  all  the  more  for  our  comfort,  because  if  he  died  in  joy  and  triumph, 
how  much  more  may  we  hope  to  depart  in  peace  1  4.  It  was  calm,  i^eaceful,  con- 
fident, joyous.  He  never  flinched  while  addressing  that  infuriated  audience.  He 
■was  as  calm  as  the  opened  heaven  above  him,  and  continued  so  tbough  they  hurried 
him  out  of  the  city.  He  stood  up  and  committed  his  soul  to  Gnd  with  culmness, 
and  when  the  first  murderous  stones  felled  him  to  the  earth  he  rose  to  his 
knees,  still  not  to  ask  for  pity,  but  to  plead  with  his  Lord  for  mercy  upon  his 
assailants;  then,  closing  his  eyes,  "he  fell  asleep."  Believe,  then,  O  Christian, 
that  if  you  abide  in  Christ,  the  like  will  be  the  case  with  you.  We  wept  when 
"we  were  born  though  all  around  us  smiled ;  so  shall  we  smile  when  we  die  while 
all  around  us  weep.  Why  should  we  expect  it  to  be  otherwise?  Stephen's  God 
is  our  God;  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  us  even  as  He  did  in  him.  5.  His  mind 
was  in  a  very  elevated  condition.  Eemark — (1)  His  intense  sympathy  with  God.  All 
through  that  long  speech  of  his  you  see  that  his  soul  is  taken  up  with  his  God,  and 
the  treatment  which  he  had  received  from  Israel.  (2)  His  exclusive  attachment  to 
the  spiritual.  All  ritualism  was  clean  gone  from  him.  I  dare  say  at  one  time 
Stephen  felt  a  great  reverence  for  the  temple ;  but  Stephen  says,  ' '  Howbeit  the 
Most  High  dweileth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  It  is  noteworthy  how  the 
saints,  when  they  are  near  to  die,  make  very  little  of  what  others  make  a  great  deal 
of.  The  peculiar  form  of  worship  and  the  little  specialities  of  doctrines  which  he 
made  much  of,  will  seem  little  in  comparison  with  the  great  spiritual  essentials 
when  the  soul  is  appi'oaching  the  presence  chamber  of  the  Eternal.  (3)  His 
superiority  to  the  fear  of  men.  He  looks  like  an  immortal  angel  rather  than  a 
man  condemned  to  die.  The  fitter  we  are  for  heaven  the  more  we  scorn  all  com- 
promise, and  feel  that  for  truth,  for  God,  for  Christ,  we  must  speak  out,  even  if  we 
die.  (4)  His  freedom  from  all  cares.  He  was  a  deacon,  but  he  does  not  say, 
"What  will  those  poor  people  do?  What  will  the  apostles  do  ?  "  He  trusts  the 
Church  militant  with  her  Captain  ;  he  is  called  to  the  Church  triumphant.  Why 
should  it  not  be  thus  with  us?  Our  Lord  managed  His  Church  well  enough  before 
we  wei'e  born  ;  He  will  not  be  at  a  loss  because  He  has  called  us  home.  (5)  His 
triumphant  death.  His  name  was  Stephanos,  or  crown,  and  truly  that  day  he  not 
only  received  a  crown,  but  he  became  the  crown  of  the  Church  as  her  first  martyr. 
II.  Its  most  notable  pecultaeity.  It  was  full  of  Jesus.  Jesus  was — 1.  Seen — (1) 
As  the  Son  of  Man.  This  is  the  only  place  in  Scripture  where  Jesus  is  called  the 
Son  of  Man  by  any  one  but  Himself.  At  all  times  it  is  a  gladsome  sight  to  see  the 
representative  Man  exalted  to  the  throne  of  God,  but  it  was  peculiarly  suitable  for 
this  occasion,  for  the  Lord  Himself  had  warned  the  jDresent  audience  about  "  the 
Son  of  Man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power."  (2)  Standing — eager  both  to 
sustain  and  to  receive  him  when  the  couflict  was  over.  (3)  At  the  right  hand  of 
God,  the  place  of  love,  power,  and  honour.  Now,  when  we  come  to  die,  we  may 
not,  perhaps,  expect  with  those  eyes  to  see  what  Stephen  saw,  but  faith  has  a 
grand  realising  power.  So  long  as  we  are  sure  that  Christ  is  at  the  right  hund  of 
God,  it  little  matters.  2.  Invoked.  Dying  Christians  are  not  troubled  with 
questions  as  to  the  Deity  of  Christ.  Unitarianism  may  do  to  live  with,  but  it  will 
not  do  to  die  with.  At  such  a  time  we  need  an  Almighty  Saviour.  (1)  Stephen 
mnkes  no  mention  of  any  other  intercessor.  The  abomination  of  saint  and  angel 
worship  had  not  been  invented  in  his  day.  (2)  Neither  do  we  find  him  sa^ing  a 
word  as  to  his  good  works,  and  almsdeeds,  and  sermons,  and  miracles.  3.  Trusted. 
"  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  4.  Imitated,  for  the  death  of  Stephen  is  a  repro- 
duction of  the  death  of  Jesus.    Jesus  died  without  the  gate,  praying,  so  did  Stephen ; 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  vu. 

Jesus  died  paying,  "  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commit  My  spirit  "  ;  Stephen  says, 
"  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  Curist  dies  pleading  for  His  murderers,  so  does 
Stephen.  Now,  if  our  death  shall  be  a  reproduction  of  the  death  of  Jesus,  why 
need  we  fear  ?  III.  Its  suggestion  as  to  the  kind  of  death  which  we  may  wisely 
DESiKE.  First,  it  is  very  desirable  that  our  death  should  be — 1.  Of  a  piece  with  our 
life.  Stephen  was  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  life,  and  so  was  be  full  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  death ;  Stephen  was  bold,  brave,  calm,  and  composed  in  life,  he 
is  the  same  amid  the  falling  stones.  It  is  very  sad  when  the  reported  account  of  a 
man's  death  does  not  fit  in  with  his  life.  It  is  ill  to  die  with  a  jerk,  getting  as  it 
were  upon  another  line  of  rails  all  on  a  sudden.  It  is  better  to  glide  from  one 
degree  of  grace  to  another,  and  so  to  glory.  Death  may  be  the  fringe  or  border  of 
life,  but  it  should  be  maile  out  of  the  same  piece.  A  life  of  clay  is  not  to  be  joined 
to  a  death  of  gold.  2.  The  perfecting  of  our  whole  career,  the  putting  of  the  corner- 
stone upon  the  edifice,  so  that  when  nothing  else  is  wanted  to  complete  the  man's 
labours  he  falls  asleep.  3.  Useful.  Augustine  says,  "  If  Stephen  had  never  prayed, 
Saul  had  never  preached."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Steplien's  death  a  ivitness  to  vital 
Christian  truth  : — I.  The  character  of  Stephen  ;  or  what  manner  of  man  he  was  : 
"  full  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost."  Now  this  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  the  heart  of  all  '•  the 
Israel  of  God  "  (John  xiv.  25,  26).  What  can  be  plainer,  than  that  here  is  a  Person 
distinct  fiom  either  the  Father  and  the  Son,  but  intimately  connected  with  both? 
And  that  He  is  not  a  principle,  but  a  person.  In  this  view,  "the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit  "  are  to  be  always  distinguished  from  the  Spirit  itself;  the  gifts  are  not  to  be 
confounded  with  the  Giver  ;  the  Spirit  of  faith  will  make  a  man  die  contentedly  ; 
the  Spirit  of  purity  will  make  him  die  composedly ;  the  Spirit  of  truth  will  make 
him  die  consistently  ;  the  Spirit  of  comfort  will  make  him  die  happily  ;  the  Spirit 
of  might  will  make  him  die  triumphantly.  II.  His  confidence  ;  or  what  he  did  : 
"He  looked  up  stedfastly  into  heaven."  Not  only  looked  towards,  but  into,  as 
one  who  had  "cast  his  anchor  of  hope  within  the  veil,"  and  knew,  therefore, 
where  again  to  find  it.  1.  "  He  looked  up,"  we  cannot  doubt,  with  longing  desire 
to  be  there.  2.  With  great  indifference  to  all  things  here  below.  We  would  not 
tolerate  neglect  of  your  proper  concerns  ;  hut  the  hour  cometh  when  the  possession 
of  the  whole  world  will  be  of  no  avail ;  when  its  opinions  can  no  longer  influence, 
when  its  interests  can  no  hiUger  bind,  when  its  friendships  can  no  longer  profit,  and 
when  its  pleasures  can  no  longer  charm.  If,  then,  you  cannot  "  look  up  stedfastly 
into  heaven  "  for  comfort,  ah !  you  have  nowhere  else  to  look  1  3.  In  prayer. 
Stephen  knew  that  a  martyr's  grace  was  needful  to  a  martyr's  constancy.  "  He 
prayed,"  therefore,  for  himself ;  but  also  for  his  murderers — "  Holy  hands  must  be 
lifted  up  without  wrath  or  doubting."  III.  His  vision  and  encotikagement  ;  or 
what  he  saw — 1.  "  The  glory  of  God,  aud  Jesus."  As  "  the  glory  of  God  "  is  seen  most 
resplendent  in  "the  face  (or  person)  of  Jesus  Christ,"  this  was  most  probably  the 
view  with  which  his  fouI  was  blest.  Somewhat  of  this,  too,  Esaias  saw  when  at 
the  surpa-^sing  brightness  even  the  seraphim  did  "  veil  thfir  faces  with  their  wings." 
2.  Jesus  "  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God,"  amidst  His  shining  hosts,  sovereign 
and  supreme,  arising  in  order  to  be  the  first  to  receive  the  dying  martyr's  spirit ; 
standing,  as  a  priest  "who  standeth  daily  ministering,"  to  offer  up  this  "  sacrifice 
of  a  sweet-smelling  savour  "  ;  standing,  as  a  judge  of  masteries  at  the  end  of  the  goal 
or  conflict,  to  hail  the  triumph  of  the  candidate,  and  Him-elf  confer  the  victor's 
crown!  IV.  His  avowal;  or,  "what  he  said."  "Behold,  I  see  the  heavens 
opened,"  &c.  Here,  then,  St.  Stephen  gives  a  testimony  to — 1.  The  Trinity; 
for  he  himself  was  "full  of  the  Holy  Ghost":  he  saw  the  "  plory  of  God" 
the  Father,  and  this  manifested  in  Jesus  standing  at  His  right  hand.  He  declared 
also — 2.  Christ's  humanity — "  Son  of  Man.''  His  faith  and  hope  of  admiss-ion  into 
heaven  :  "  I  see  heaven  opsned."  Can  there  be  a  doubt  but  that  there  is  "an  open 
door,  which  no  man  can  shut,"  proposed  to  us  ?  "  When  Thou  bads-t  overcome  the 
sharpness  of  death,  Thou  didst  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers."  V. 
His  adoration  ;  or  whom  it  was  he  worshipped.  "  They  stoned  Stephen,  invocating 
and  saying,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit ! "  Jesus,  therefore,  was  the  object  of 
his  adoration  ;  He  was  the  only  God  he  invocated,  and  at  his  last  extremity  of 
suffering  and  distress — a  period  when,  if  ever,  men  pray  with  the  utmost  seriousness, 
aud  always  to  Him  whom  they  conceive  to  be  the  mightiest  to  help.  Nor  is  it  an 
immaterial  circumstance  that  this  invocation  was  made  at  the  very  time  when 
Stejihen  "  saw  the  glory  of  the  Father,"  and  was  himself  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  "  ; 
so  that  neither  ignorance  nor  inadvertency  nor  imperfection  could  occasion  it. 
And  as  if  conscious,  too,  that  He  who  could  succour  could  equally  forgive,  he  prayed 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  623 

again  to  Christ — "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  (W.  B.  Williams,  M.A.) 
The  massacre  : — Stephen  had  been  preaching  a  rousing  sermon,  and  the  people 
could  not  stand  it.  They  resolved  to  do  as  men  sometimes  would  like  to  do  in  this 
day,  if  they  dared,  with  some  plain  preacher  of  righteousness — kill  him.  I  want  to 
show  you  to-day  five  pictures.  Stephen — I.  Gazing  into  heaven.  Before  you  climb 
a  ladder  you  want  to  know  to  what  point  the  ladder  reaches.  And  it  was  right  that 
Stephen,  witbin  a  few  moments  of  heaven,  should  be  gazing  into  it.  We  would  all 
do  well  to  be  found  in  the  same  posture.  There  is  enough  in  heaven  to  keep  us 
gazing.  The  whole  universe  is  God's  palace,  but  heaven  is  the  gallery  in  which  the 
chief  glories  are  gathered.  We  have  a  great  many  friends  there.  As  a  man  gets 
older,  the  number  of  his  celestial  acquaintances  very  rapidly  multiplies.  We  have 
not  had  one  glimpse  of  them  since  the  night  we  kissed  them  good-bye  and  they 
went  away  ;  but  still  we  stand  gazing  at  heaven.  II.  Looking  dpon  Christ.  How 
Christ  looked  in  this  world,  how  He  looks  in  heaven,  we  cannot  say.  Painters  have 
tried  to  imagine  His  features,  and  put  them  upon  canvas  ;  but  we  will  have  to  wait 
until  with  our  own  eyes  we  see  Him.  And  yet  there  is  a  way  of  seeing  Him  now, 
and  unless  you  see  Christ  on  earth,  you  will  never  see  Him  in  heaven.  Look  ! 
There  He  is.  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God.  Can  you  not  see  Him  ?  Then  pray  to 
God  to  take  the  scales  off  your  eye§>  His  voice  comes  down  to  you,  saying, 
'*  Look  unto  Me,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,  and  be  ye  saved."  Proclamation  of 
nniveisal  emancipation  for  all  slaves,  of  universal  amnesty  for  all  rebels.  Behold 
Him,  little  children,  for  if  you  live  to  threescore  years  and  ten,  you  will  see  none 
60  fa'r.  Behold  Him,  ye  aged  ones,  for  He  only  can  shine  through  the  dimness  of 
your  failing  eyesight.  Behold  Him,  earth.  Behold  Him,  heaven.  What  a  moment 
when  all  the  nations  of  the  saved  shall  see  Him !  III.  Stoned.  The  world  has 
always  wanted  to  get  rid  of  good  men.  Their  very  life  is  an  assault  upon  wickedness. 
Out  with  Stephen  through  the  gates  of  the  city.  Down  with  him  over  the  precipices. 
Let  every  man  come  and  drop  a  stone  upon  his  head.  But  these  men  did  not  so 
much  kill  Stephen  as  they  killed  themselves.  While  these  murderers  are  transfixed 
by  the  scorn  of  all  good  men,  Stephen  lives  in  the  admiration  of  all  Christendom. 
Show  me  any  one  wbo  is  doing  all  his  duty  to  State  or  Cburch,  and  I  will  show  you 
scores  of  men  who  utterly  abhor  him.  If  a  steamer  makes  rapid  progress  through 
the  waves,  the  water  will  boil  and  foam  all  round  it.  You  may  assault  a  good  man, 
but  you  cannot  kill  him.  On  the  day  of  his  death,  Stephen  spoke  before  a  few 
people  of  the  Sanhedrin  ;  this  Sabbath  morning  he  addresses  all  Christendom  !  IV. 
Peaying.  His  first  thought  was  not  how  the  stones  hurt  his  head,  nor  what  would 
become  of  his  body.  His  first  thought  was  about  his  spirit.  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive 
my  spirit."  There  is  within  you  a  soul.  What  direction  will  it  take?  What  guide 
will  escort  it  ?  What  gate  will  open  to  receive  it  ?  Oh,  this  mysterious  spirit !  It 
has  two  wings,  but  it  is  in  a  cage  now,  but  let  the  door  of  this  cage  open  the  least,  and 
that  soul  is  off.  The  lightnings  are  not  swift  enough  to  take  up  with  it.  And  have 
you  no  anxiety  about  it  ?  Thank  God  for  the  intimation  of  my  text,  that  when  we 
die  Jesus  takes  us.  In  that  hour  it  may  be  we  shall  be  too  feeble  to  say  a  long 
prayer,  not  even  the  "  Lord's  Prayer,"  for  it  has  seven  petitions.  Perhaps  we  may 
be  too  feeble  to  say  the  infant  prayer  our  mothers  taught  us,  but  this  prayer  of 
Stephen  is  so  short,  f^oncise,  earnest,  comprehensive,  we  surely  will  be  able  to  say 
that.  V.  Asleep.  What  a  place  to  sleep  in  !  Stephen  had  lived  a  very  laborious 
life.  But  that  is  all  over  now.  I  have  seen  the  sea  driven  with  the  hurricane  until 
the  tangled  foam  caught  in  the  rigging,  and  wave  rising  above  wave  seemed  as  if 
about  to  storm  the  heavens,  and  then  I  have  seen  the  tempest  drop,  and  the  waves 
crouch,  and  everything  become  smooth  and  burnished  as  though  a  camping  place 
for  the  glories  of  heaven.  So  I  have  seen  a  man,  whose  life  has  been  tossed  and 
driven,  coming  down  at  last  to  an  infinite  calm,  in  which  there  was  the  hush  of 
heaven's  lullaby.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.) 

Ver.  58.  And  the  witnesses  laid  down  their  clothes  at  a  young  man's  feet,  whose 
name  was  Saul. — Stej^hen  and  Saul: — I.  Stephen.  The  picture  of  a  dying  saint. 
1.  He  enjoys  the  Divine  presence  and  power  (ver.  55),  "Full  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
The  power  of  God  was  present  when  His  faithful  servant  was  passing  through  the 
flood.  2.  He  is  lifted  above  the  consciousness  of  earthly  surroundings,  enemies, 
and  gnashing  teeth.  3.  He  enjoys  a  full  view  of  heavenly  glory  (ver.  55).  He  saw 
in  that  hour  what  many  would  have  given  their  all  to  see,  the  vision  of  his  glorified 
Bedeemer.  4.  He  shows  the  spirit  of  his  Master  (ver.  60).  5.  He  has  a  peaceful 
death,  though  dying  by  violence.     "He  fell  asleep,"  though  the  storm  oif  stones 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vil. 

was  crashing  upon  him.  6.  He  leaves  a  blessed  memory  (ver.  2).  Though  dead 
he  was  not  forgotten.  Godly  men  mourned  him,  and  many  years  afterward  his 
name  was  remembered  (Acts  xxii.).  Greater  still,  his  influence  endured ;  for  the 
whole  hfe  of  Paul  was  the  larger  echo  of  Stephen's  dying  address.  II.  Saul.  We 
notice  in  him  the  picture  of  an  honest  persecutor.  1.  His  spirit  of  leadership  (ver. 
58).  The  young  man  Saul  ah-eady  shows  himself  as  a  master  of  men.  2.  His 
sinceritj'.  Saul  was  faithful  to  his  conviction,  even  while  in  the  wrong  (Gal.  i.  13, 
14 ;  Phil.  iii.  4-6).  3.  His  thoroughness.  He  must  carry  out  his  conviction, 
even  to  the  bitter  end.  4.  His  failure  to  check  the  gospel  (ver.  4).  The  storm 
which  was  intended  to  destroy  the  gospel  only  served  to  scatter  it  over  new 
soil   and  to  cause  new  churches   to    spring   up.  Stephen    and    Saul : — The 

meeting  here  described  was  a  memorable  event  in  the  Church's  history,  and 
suggests  to  us  some  important  lessons.  I.  Do  not  think  there  are  any 
CHANCE  meetings  IN  THIS  STRiNGE  WORLD  OF  OURS.  1.  It  was  no  accldcnt 
that  Saul  was  by.  This  perhaps  may  be  admitted ;  but  never  let  us  think 
that  saints  and  martyrs  live  under  a  different  form  of  Providential  government 
from  that  of  common  men.  Impiety  will  sometimes  wear  the  cloak  of  humility, 
and  talk  of  worms  like  ourselves  being  too  insiguificant  to  be  watched  at  every  step 
by  the  Eye  that  never  sleeps.  In  such  reasoning  there  is  a  twofold  fallacy.  (1) 
What  is  little,  and  what  is  great?  Take  into  account  the  wide  domain  which 
stretches  from  God's  central  throne  to  the  farthest  limits  of  creation,  and  what  is 
our  world,  and  what  are  the  grandest  men  who  move  upon  its  surface  ?  But  take 
into  account,  on  the  other  hand,  responsibility  and  an  immortal  nature,  and  the 
relation  of  dependence  on  an  heavenly  parent,  with  all  that  is  involved  in  the 
rewards  of  loyalty  and  the  perils  of  disobedience ;  take  into  account  the  great 
redemption,  and  the  univeral  promise  and  the  inspiriting  thought  that  here  God's 
purposes  are  being  worked  out,  and  then  what  about  us  is  mean  ?  which  of  us  all, 
if  bought  with  precious  blood,  can  be  overlooked  and  forgotten  ?  (2)  Even  if  some 
pass  for  great,  and  some  are  reckoned  mean,  in  this  strangely  varied  scene,  still  the 
two  worlds  intermingle  at  a  thousand  points.  Something  that  looks  little  becomes 
the  parent  of  an  evil  of  portentous  magnitude  ;  or  a  deed,  small  at  first  as  the 
mustard-seed,  dropped  into  the  ground  at  a  venture,  grows  into  a  harvest  of 
blessing  by  which  a  nation  is  enriched.  The  first  link  in  a  chain  of  events  shall 
be  a  Word  spoken  at  hazard,  a  journey  taken  without  a  motive,  a  child's  whim,  a 
fool's  false  reckoning,  but  the  last  shall  be  a  city  consumed  by  conflagration,  a 
kingdom  convulsed  by  civil  strife,  a  generation  wasted  and  half  devoured  by  the 
aggressions  of  war ;  yet  the  first  link  and  the  last  were  as  certainly  bound  together 
as  if  an  hour's  interval  only  had  elapsed  between  the  original  movement  and  its 
final  consequences.  2.  Saul  and  Stephen  came  together  that  day  for  good.  And 
as  God  guided  their  steps,  so  God  guides  ours.  You  can  tell  of  meetings,  some  of 
you,  which  have  coloured  your  whole  life,  meetings  which  you  never  planned, 
meetings,  it  may  be,  with  one  unknown  to  you  before,  as  the  apostle  was  to  the 
martyr,  yet  never  forgotten,  because  step  by  step  you  can  trace  the  occurrences 
which  have  grown  out  of  that  single  interview,  and  which  have  done  more,  perhaps, 
to  influence  your  condition  or  your  character  than  all  that  you  have  deliberately 
planned  for  your  ovm  good  through  half  a  life.  These  thoughts  are  good  for  us, 
because  the  more  we  own  God  everywhere,  and  look  on  the  common  working  world 
as  His  world,  sliaped  by  His  wisdom,  and  brightened  by  His  presence,  the  more 
diligently  and  cheerfully  sIihII  we  do  His  will.     II.  We  most  not  think  that  good 

TEACHING    or   EXAMPLE    IS    LIKE    WASTED    SEED,    BECAUSE     THE     FRUIT     IS     NOT    AT    ONCE 

APPARENT.  Stephen  died,  and  little  thought  who  saw  him  die.  His  dying  scene 
was  like  the  conqueror's  march  ;  but  even  then  room  would  have  been  found  for 
one  emphatic  burst  of  thankfulness — to  Him  who  can  make  the  wrath  of  man  to 
praise  Him — if  it  had  been  revealed  to  him  that  one,  who  stood  within  his  view, 
would  soon  rank  as  the  champion  of  the  Cross,  and  a  master-builder  of  Christ's 
Church.  He  did  not  reap  the  harvest,  nor  see  it  reaped  ;  yet  was  he  sowing  for  it 
when  he  lived  and  died  so  well.  So  we  may  do  good  in  the  world  that  we  never 
live  to  see.  What  is  well  done  for  God  is  never  wholly  lost ;  and  half  of  what  we 
fancy  to  be  wasted  may  ripen  and  bear  fruit  when  our  course  is  ended.  "  In  the 
morning,"  then,  "  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thy  hand."  "  The 
husbandman  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,  and  hath  long  patience  for 
it."    III.  Watchful  eyes  are  upon  us  at  all  times,  and  we  mat  be  doing  good, 

OR  doing   harm,  unconsciously,    to    some   whom  we    know  not  now,  and  never  SHALIi 

KNOW.      St.  Stephen  thought,  perhaps,  that  the  men  before  him  were  all  ahke. 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  625 

He  did  not  know  that  one  in  that  crowd  looked  on  with  more  eager  interest  and 
with  deeper  feeling  than  the  rest.  Nothing  was  aimed  at  Saul ;  for  to  St.  Stephen 
he  was  but  one  of  a  hundred  spectators,  probably  all  strange  to  him  alike ;  but 
every  word  was  heard  and  remembered ;  and  to  a  thoughtful,  inquiring  mind,  an 
end  that  looked  so  holy  must  have  seemed  a  wonder,  if  the  dying  man  were  indeed  a 
profane  blasphemer.  Surely  a  lesson  like  that  ought  not  to  be  tost  upon  us.  If 
(iod  has  taught  us  by  His  Spirit,  without  going  out  of  our  way,  or  setting 
ourselves  up  to  be  preachers,  we  may  wonderfully  help  the  ignorant  and  ungodly 
to  understand  what  living  Christianity  is.  We  may  expound  to  them  what  can 
hardly  be  learnt  from  books,  by  the  persuasive  eloquence  of  a  holy,  consistent 
example.  In  the  occupations  and  engagements  of  common  life  we  may  be 
testifying  for  God  and  preaching  Christ,  as  St.  Stephen  was  when  he  died.  It  is 
a  blessed  service  rendered  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness  if  we  stand  the 
test,  and  because  God  helped  us  to  act  faithfully,  and  speak  wisely,  the  man  shall 
trust  us  more  henceforth,  and  receive  our  message  more  willingly.  On  the  other 
hand,  fearful  mischief  will  ensue  if  the  life  contradict  the  lips.  Parents,  masters, 
remember  this,  and  all  of  you  who  become  teachers  of  others  in  any  sense. 
Numbers,  who  are  dull-sighted  in  other  things,  are  sharp-sighted  to  detect  the  flaw 
when  there  is  manifest  inconsistency  between  words  and  deeds.  {J.  Hampden 
Gurney,    31. A.)  Stephen   and    Saul: — The  Holy    Spirit    records    Stephen's 

martyi-dom,  but  does  not  enter  into  details  of  his  sufferings  and  death,  as 
uninspired  recorders  would  have  been  so  apt  to  do.  The  object  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  not  to  indulge  curiosity  nor  to  harrow  the  feelings,  but  to  instruct 
and  move  to  imitation.  Note  here — I.  A  suggested  contrast.  Stephen  and 
Saul.  1.  These  were  both  highly  earnest,  fearless  men,  yet  at  this  time  they  were 
wide  as  the  poles  asunder.  (1)  Stephen  spiritual ;  giving  in  his  address  great 
prominence  to  the  spiritual  nature  of  religion,  and  the  comparative  insignificance 
of  its  externals  (vers.  48-50).  Saul  superstitious,  worshipping  form  and  ritual,  full 
of  reverence  for  the  temple  and  the  priests,  and  so  forth.  (2)  Stephen,  a  humble 
believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  saved  by  faith  alone.  Saul,  a  self-righteous  Pharisee, 
as  proud  as  he  could  live.  (3)  Stpphen,  defending  and  vindicating  the  gospel  of 
Jesus.  Saul,  giving  his  countenance,  his  vote,  his  assistance  in  the  persecution  of 
the  servant  of  the  Lord  Christ.  2.  Inquire  if  a  Saul  is  now  present.  Call  him 
forth  by  name.  (1)  Have  you  been  a  consenting  party  to  the  persecution  of  good 
men  ?  You  do  not  object  to  making  Christian  men  the  theme  of  ridicule.  You 
smile  when  you  hear  such  ridicule.  (2)  By  your  indecision  in  religion  you  aid  and 
abet  the  adversary.  In  these  ways  the  witnesses  lay  down  their  clothes  at  your 
feet,  and  you  are  their  accomplice.  II.  A  singular  introduction  to  true 
RELIGION.  Many  have  been  brought  to  God  by  means  somewhat  similar.  The 
young  man,  whose  name  was  Saul,  met  with  the  religion  of  Jesus  in  the  person  of 
Stephen,  and  thus  he  saw  it  with  the  following  surroundings — 1.  The  vision  of  a 
shining  fa^^e.  2.  The  hearing  of  a  noble  discourse.  3.  Toe  sight  of  a  triumphant 
death.  These  did  not  convert  Saul,  but  they  made  it  harder  for  him  to  be  uncon- 
verted, and  were,  no  doubt,  in  after  days  thought  of  by  him.  Let  us  so  introduce 
religion  to  men,  that  the  memory  of  its  introduction  may  be  worth  their  retaining. 

Ill,    A  REMARKABLE  INSTANCE  OF  THE  LoRD'S  CARE  FOR  HiS  ChURCH,      The  apOStoUcal 

succession  was  preserved  in  the  Church,  1.  Stephen's  death  was  a  terrible  Idow 
to  the  Ciuse  ;  but  at  that  moment  his  successor  was  close  at  hand.  2.  That 
successor  was  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy.  3.  That  successor  was  far  greater  than 
the  martyr,  Stephen,  himself.  There  is  no  fear  for  the  Church :  her  greatest 
champions,  though  as  yet  concealed  among  her  enemies,  will  be  called  in  due  tLrae. 
The  death  of  her  best  advocates  may  assist  in  the  conversion  of  others.  IV.  A 
GRACIOUS  MEMORIAL  OF  REPENTED  SIN.  Did  not  Paul  givo  Luko  this  information 
concerning  himself,  and  cause  it  to  be  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  ?  It 
was  well  for  Paul  to  remember  his  sin  before  conversion.  It  will  be  well  for  us  to 
remember  ours.  1.  To  create  and  renew  feelings  of  humility,  2.  To  inflame  love 
and  zeal.  3.  To  deepen  our  love  to  the  doctrines  of  sovereign  grace.  4.  To  make 
US  hopeful  and  zealous  for  others.  Let  dying  Stephen  be  cheered  by  the  hope  of 
young  Saul's  salvation.  Let  wicked  young  Saul  repent  of  his  wrong  to  Stephen. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  59.  And  they  stoned  Stephen. — The  clearing  shower  of  life  : — When  mists 
have  hung  low  over  the  hills,  and  the  day  has  been  dark  with  intermittent  showers, 
great  clouds  hurry  across  the  sky,  and  the  rain  comes  pouring  down,  then  we  look 
VOL.  I.  40 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vit. 

out  and  say,  "  This  is  the  clearing-np  shower."    And  as  the  clouds  part  to  let  th** 
blue  sky  reappear,  we  know  that  just  behind  them  are  singing-birds  and  glittering 
dew-drops.     So  the  Gbristian,  on  whom  chilling  rains  of  sorrow  have  long  fallen, 
when  the  last  sudden  stonn  breaks  knows  it  is  but  the  clearing-up  shower.     Just 
behind  it  he  hears  the  songs  of  angels  and  sees  the  glories  of  heaven.     {H.  IT. 
Beccher.)         Tran!<fignred  stones  : — The  stones  whifh  the  world  lifts  against  the 
witnesses  of  Christ  are  changed  into — I.  Monuments  of  shame  for  the  enemies  of 
truth.     II.  Jewels  in  the  ckowns  of  the  glorified  martyrs.     III.  The  seed  of  a  new 
LIFE  for  the  Church  of  Christ.     (K.  Gerok.)        Calling  upon  God,  and  saying,  Lord 
Jesus,  receive  my  spirit. — Stephen's  dying  frayer  : — Tins  seems  to  teach  us — I.  That 
Stephen  regarded  Jesus  Christ  as  very  God.     There  are   sundry  places  where 
this  prime  doctrine  is  not  so  much  dogmatically  asserted  as  clearly  implied.    These 
are,  in  one   aspect,   even  more   satisfactory  thwn   foimal   assertions,   because    so 
obviously  sincere  expressions  of  the  heart,  and  show  how  this  cardinal  truth  is 
interwoven  with  the  believer's  whole  experience.     Our  text  in  the  Greek  reads, 
"  They  stoned  Stephen,  invoking,  and  faying,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."     The 
intention  of  the  evangelist  was  to  state  tliat  Christ  was  the  object  of  his  prnyer. 
In  every  office  of  the  Redeemer  the  enlightened  Christian  feels  that  he  could  not 
properly  rely  on  Him  for  salvation  unless  He  were  very  God.     "  It  is  because  He  is 
God,  and  there  is  none  else,"  that  Isaiah  invites  "  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  to  look 
unto  Him  and  be  saved."     But  in  the  hour  of  death  especially  the  Cbristinn  needs 
a  Saviour  who  is  no  less  than  God.     An  angel  could  not  sympathise  with  our  trial, 
for  he  cannot  feel  the  j^anps  of  dissolution.     A  human  friend  cannot  travel  with  us' 
the  path  through  the  dark  valley.     The  God-man  alone  can  sustain  us ;  He  has 
survived  it  and  returns  triumphing  to  succour  us,  for  He  is  God.     Unless  this 
Divine  Guide  be  with  us,  we  must  fight  the  battle  with  the  last  enemy  alone  and 
unaided.     II.  To  expect  an  immediate  entrance  in'to  the  presence  of  Christ. 
Stephen  evidently  did  not  expect  that  the  grave  would  absorb  his  spirit  into  a  state 
of  unconscious  sleep  until  the  final  consummation;  or  that  any  limhus,  or  purgatory, 
was  to  swallow  him  for  a  time  in  its  fiery  bosom.     His  faith  aspired  directly  to  tl  e 
arms  of  Christ,  and  to  that  blessed  world  where  His  glorified  humanity  now  dwells. 
He  manifestly  regarded  his  spirit  as  separate  from  the  bo.ly,  and  therefore,  as  true, 
independent  substance.     The  latter  he  relinquishes  to  the  insults  of  his  enemies, 
the  former  he  commits  to  Christ.     If  only  we  are  in  Christ  by  true  faith,  the  grave 
will  have  naught  to  do  with  that  which   is   the   true,  conscious    lieing,  and  no 
purgatorial  fives  after  death  can  be  inflicted  upon  believers  ;  for  "  Lazarus  died  and 
was  carried  by  angels  to  Abraham's  bosom."     To  the  thief  it  was  said,  "  This  dav 
thou  shalt  be  with  iSIe  in  paradise."     "  To  be  absent  from  the  boHy  is  to  be  present 
■with  the  Lord."      III.    To  what  guidance    the  Christian  may  commit  his  soul 
during  the  journey  into  the  world  of  spirits.     Heaven  is  as  truly  a  place  as 
was  paradise.     When  we  fir.-t  arrive  there  we  shall  be  disembodied  spirits.     But 
spirits  have  their  locality.     The  clearer  evidence,  however,  that  heaven  is  a  literal 
place  is  that  it  contains  the  glorified  bodies  of  Enoch,  of  Elijah,  of  Christ,  and  of 
the  saints  who  rose  with   their  Redeemer.     But  where  is  this  place?     In  what 
quarter  of  this  vast  universe  ?     When  death  batters  down  the  walls  of  the  earthly 
tabernacle,  whither  shall  the  dispossessed  soul  set  out?     It  knows  not;  it  needs  a 
skilful,   powerful  guide.     But  more:  it  is  a  journey  into  a  spiritual  world;  and 
tliis  thous!;ht  makes  it  awful  to  the  apprehension  of  man.     The  presence  of  one 
disembodied  spirit  in  the  solitude  of  night  would  shake  us  with  a  thrill  of  dread. 
How,  then,  could  we  endure  to  be  launched  out  into  theuntriedoceanof  space,  peopled 
by  we  know  not   what   mysterious   beings?     How   could  we  be  certain  thai;  we 
might  not  lose  our  way  in  the  pathless  vacancy,  and  wander  for  ever,  a  bewildered, 
solitary  rover  amidst  the  wilderness  of  worlds?     This  journey  into  the  unknown 
must  issue  in  our  introduction  to  a  scene  whose  awful  novelties  will  overpower  our 
faculties ;  for  even  the  very  thought  of  them  when  we  dwell  upon  it  tills  us  with 
dreadful  suspense.     Truly  will  the  trembling  soul  need  some  one  on  wlioui  to  lean, 
some  mighty,  tender  guardian,  who  will  point  the  way  to  the  prepared  mansions, 
and  cheer  and  sustain  its  fainting  courage.     That  Guide  is  Christ;  therefore  let 
us  say  in  dying,  "Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."     It  is  a  delightlul  belief  to  which 
the  gosijel  gives  most  solid  support,  that  our  Redeemer  is  arcnstomed  to  employ  in 
this  mission  His  holy  angels.     "Are  they  not  ministering  spiiits?"  &c.     When 
Lazarus  died  he  was   carried   by  angels  to  Abraham's   bosom.      IV.    The  arms 
OP  Christ  mat  be  looked  to  as  t)0R  final  home.      We   are  authorised   to   say, 
"Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit";  not  only  that  Thou  mayest  sustain  it  in  the  paugs 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  627 

of  dying,  and  guide  it  to  its  heavenly  home,  but  that  it  may  dwell  with  Thee 
world  without  end.  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  Thou  liast  giveu  Me, 
be  with  Me  where  I  am,"  &c.  Oh,  blessed  resting-place !  In  Thy  presence  is 
fulness  of  joy :  at  Thy  right  hand  are  pleasures  for  evermore.  Let  us  live  and 
die  like  believing  Stephen,  and  our  spirits  will  be  received  where  the  God -man 
holds  His  regal  court,  to  go  out  thence  no  more  for  ever.  (R.  L.  Dabney,  D.D.) 
The  close  of  the  Christian  life  : — I.  There  is  a  spieit  in  man  distinct  feom  the 
BODY.  The  body  is  the  habitation  of  the  soul,  and  only  the  instrument  by  which 
it  acts.  This  is  the  frame  of  human  nature,  and  agreeable  to  the  original  account 
of  its  formation.  We  find  it  represented  as  a  principle  of  life  (Gen.  ii.  7).  The 
dust  of  the  earth  was  animated  by  a  living  soul.  The  dissolution  of  our  constitu- 
tion is  described  by  the  wise  man,  agreeably  to  this  account  (Eccles.  xii.  7).  It  is  a 
principle  of  thought  and  reason,  of  understanding  and  choice  (Job  xx.  2,  3;  xxxii.  8).  It 
is  represented  as  a  principle  both  of  natural  and  religious  action  :  we  not  only  live 
and  move,  but  worship  God  in  the  spirit  (John  iv.  2i).  It  is  represented  as  a 
distinct  thing  from  the  body,  and  of  another  kind  (Matt.  x.  28,  xxiv.  39  ;  2  Cor.  iv. 
16).  And  although  we  do  not  know  the  precise  nature  of  a  spirit,  or  the  manner  of 
its  union  with  the  body,  which  is  a  great  mystery  in  nature  ;  as  neither  do  we  the 
substratum  or  abstract  essence  of  matter ;  yet  we  do  know  the  essential  and  dis- 
tinguishing properties  of  them.  The  soul  is  a  thinking  conscious  principle,  an 
intelligent  agent,  a  principle  of  life  and  action,  which  bears  a  near  resemblance  of 
God  the  Infinite  Sjjirit,  and  of  angels,  who  are  pure  unbodied  spirits.     II.  At  death 

THE    SPIEIT    WILL   BE    SEPAEATED    TEOM   THE  BODY,  AND  EXIST  APAET  FEOM  IT.       ThoUgh 

they  are  closely  united  to  one  another  in  the  present  state,  yet  the  bonds  of  union 
are  not  indissoluble.  But  then  as  it  is  a  vital  principle,  and  all  life  and  action 
proceeds  from  the  union  of  soul  and  body;  so  the  separation  of  the  soill  from  the 
body  is  the  death  and  dissolution  of  it.  It  is  destroying  our  present  being  and  way 
of  existing  :  the  body  dies  and  returns  to  the  dust  when  deserted  of  the  living  soul. 
This  is  plainly  implied  here,  when  Stephen  prays,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit  "  ; 
not  only  that  he  had  a  spirit  distinct  from  the  body,  but  tbat  the  spirit  was  now 
dislodging,  and  ready  to  depart  from  the  body.  It  was  to  be  then  out  of  the  body. 
So  the  apostle  says  (2  Cor.  v.  1,  4  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  6).  To  the  same  purpose  St.  Peter 
«ays  (2  Pet.  i.  14,  15).  The  separation  of  soul  and  body  is  properly  the  di  ath  of 
our  present  nature.  This  came  into  the  world  by  sin,  and  is  the  proper  fruit  of  it. 
It  is  the  sentence  of  the  law  executed  upon  the  breach  of  it  (Gen.  ii.  17  ;  iii.  19). 
Our  death  is  appointed  by  the  Divine  will,  though  we  know  not  the  day  of  our 
death.  Nature  tends  to  a  dissolution,  and  gradually  wears  out,  though  no  evil 
befall  it  ;  and  it  is  liable  to  many  distempers,  and  many  accidents,  which  often 
prove  fatal,  and  hasten  a  separation.  III.  The  Loed  Jesus  will  eeceive  the 
DEPAETiNG  SPIRITS  OF  GOOD  MEN.  This  was  the  matter  cf  Stephen's  prtyer.  And 
we  cannot  suppose  that  he  would  have  prayed  in  this  manner,  who  was  full  of  faith 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  if  the  case  had  been  otherwise ;  if  it  did  not  belong  to  Him 
to  receive  it,  or  He  was  not  disposed  to  do  it.  'J  his  is  a  more  distinct  and  parti- 
cular account  of  the  matter,  and  proper  to  the  Christian  revelation.  In  the  Old 
Testament  we  are  only  told  tbat  the  spirit  returns  to  God  who  guve  it,  and  who  is 
the  Father  of  spirits  ;  but  here  we  are  told  that  the  Lord  Jesus  receives  our  depart- 
ing spirits.  It  is  through  the  Mediator,  and  by  His  immediate  agency,  tbat  ihe 
whole  kingdom  of  proviiience  and  grace  is  now  administered  in  all  the  disposals  of 
life,  and  tne  issues  of  death.  But  what  is  the  import  of  His  receiving  the  dej  arted 
spirits  of  good  men  ?  1.  The  taking  them  under  His  protection  and  care.  He  i^^ 
their  Eefuge  and  Guide,  to  whom  tbey  fly,  and  whom  tliey  follow,  when  they  no  into  a 
new  and  unknown  state.  HepreservestLie  naked  trembling  spirit  by  a  guard  of  boly 
angels  from  affrightment  and  amazement,  from  the  ttrror  and  power  of  enviou-*  spirits, 
who  would  gladly  seize  it  as  a  prey,  and  distress  and  terrify  it,  as  the  df-vil  now 
goes  up  and  down  seeking  whom  hw  may  devour.  2.  He  con\eys  them  to  God,  and 
to  a  state  of  blessedness.  What  this  state  will  be  we  can  have  no  mote  clear  ci in- 
ceptions than  Scripture  gives  us,  and  what  aiises  from  the  natural  notions  of  a 
spirit,  and  the  essential  difference  between  good  and  evil.  That  they  are  in  a  state 
of  activity,  and  in  a  state  of  rest  and  happiness,  and  vastly  dill'  rent  from  t'  at  of 
wicked  spirits.  IV.  Cheistians  should  commend  theiedepaktingspieitsioChuist 
•BY  l-BAYER.  This  was  directly  the  case  here,  and  is  the  form  of  the  expression, 
"  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  This  prayer  was  directed  to  Christ  in  His  exalt'  d 
state,  standing  at  the  right;  hiind  of  God,  and  in  the  quality  of  a  Mediator,  whoever 
lives  to  make  intercession  for  us.     But  upon  what  grounds  may  a  dying  Cliristiaa 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

offer  up  such  a  prayer  to  Christ?  With  wliat  warrant  and  hope  of  success?  I 
answer,  upon  good  grounds  and  sufficient  security.  1.  His  great  love  to  the  spirits 
of  men.  Will  He  deny  us  anything  when  He  freely  gave  His  life  for  us  ?  Will 
He  forsake  them  at  last,  aud  leave  them  exposed  in  an  unknown  state,  whom  He 
has  preserved  all  their  lives,  and  wherever  they  have  been  in  this  ?  2.  His  relation 
to  them.  He  is  their  Lord  and  Saviour,  their  Head;  they  are  His  subjects  and 
servants,  His  members  and  friends,  to  whom  He  stands  in  a  special  relation,  and 
who  is  endeared  to  them  by  special  marks  of  favour.  And  He  is  concerned  in  the 
protection  and  care  of  His  faithful  servants,  as  a  prince  is  concerned  to  secure  his 
subjects.  3.  His  ability  and  power  to  take  care  of  them  (Heb.  vii.  27).  4.  His  en- 
gagements and  undertaking.  He  who  by  the  grace  of  God  tasted  death  for  every 
man,  was  to  bring  the  many  sons  unto  glory  (Heb.  ii.  9,  10).  And  He  would  fail  ia 
His  trust  if  any  of  them  miscarried,  and  came  short  of  the  glory  of  God.  Besides, 
He  is  engaged  by  His  promise  and  faithfulness  to  preserve  and  secure  them  (John 
X.  28).  Inferences  :  1.  That  the  soul  does  not  die  with  the  body,  or  sleep  in  the 
grave.  2.  We  should  be  often  tbinking  and  preparing  for  a  time  and  state  of 
separation.  3.  The  peculiar  happiness  of  good  men,  and  the  great  difference 
between  them  and  others.  4.  We  learn  what  is  the  proper  close  of  a  Christian's 
life.  When  we  have  finished  our  course  of  service,  and  done  the  work  of  life,  what 
remains  but  the  lifting  up  of  our  souls  to  God,  and  commending  them  into  His 
hands?       {W.    Harris,    D.D.)  Prayer    in    death:  —  Passing    inside,    they 

looked  toward  the  bed  ;  Dr.  Livingstone  was  not  lying  on  it,  but  ajipe^red 
to  be  engaged  in  prayer,  and  they  instinctively  drew  backward  for  the  iustant. 
Pointing  to  him,  Majwara  said,  "  When  I  lay  down  he  was  just  as  he  is  now, 
and  it  is  because  I  find  that  he  does  not  move  that  I  fear  he  is  dead-."  They 
asked  the^ad  how  long  he  had  slept.  Majwara  said  he  could  not  tell,  but  he  was 
sure  that  it  was  some  considerable  time.  The  men  drew  nearer.  A  candle  stuck 
by  its  own  wax  to  the  top  of  the  box  slied  a  light  sufiicient  for  them  to  see  his  form. 
Dr.  Livingstone  was  kneeling  by  the  side  of  his  bed,  his  body  stretched  forward,  his 
head  buried  in  his  hands  upon  the  pillow.  For  a  minute  they  watched  bim  ;  he  did 
not  stir,  there  was  no  sign  of  breathing;  then  one  of  them — Matthew — advanced 
softly  to  him,  and  placed  his  hands  to  his  cheeks.  It  was  sufficient ;  life  had  been 
extinct  for  some  time,  and  the  body  was  almost  cold :  Livingstone  was  dead.  {Life 
of  Dr.  Livingstone.)  The  martyrdom  of  Wishart : — Speaking  of  the  martyrdom 
of  Wishart,  in  1546,  Mr.  Froude  writes:  "In  anticipation  of  an  attempt  at 
rescue,  the  castle  guns  were  loaded,  and  the  port-fires  lighted.  After  this, 
Mr.  Wishart  was  led  to  the  fire,  with  a  rope  about  his  neck  and  a  chain 
of  iron  about  his  middle  and  when  he. came  to  the  fire,  he  sat  down  upon 
his  knees  and  rose  up  again,  and  thrice  he  said  these  words :  '  0  Thou  Saviour 
of  the  world,  have  mercy  on  me.  Father  of  heaven,  I  commend  my  spirit 
into  Thy  holy  hands.'  He  next  spoke  a  few  words  to  the  people;  and  then, 
last  of  all,  the  hangman  that  was  his  tormentor  fell  upon  his  knees  and  said, 
'  Sir,  I  pray  you  forgive  me,  for  I  am  not  guilty  of  your  death';  to  whom  he 
answered,  '  Come  hither  to  me,'  and  he  ki-sed  his  cheek  and  said,  '  Lo,  here 
is  a  token  that  I  forgive  thee.  Do  thy  office,'  And  then  he  was  put  upon  a 
gibbet  and  hanged,  and  then  burned  to  p' .wder."  Felloa-ship  in  death : — "  Father, 
into  Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit"  (Luke  xxiii.  4G).  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my 
spirit "  (chap.  vii.  59).  I.  Fellowship  of  suffering*  II.  Fellowship  of  vision. 
III.  Fellowship  of  pity.  "Father,  foi'give  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they 
do."  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  IV.  Fellowship  of  attitude. 
With  bounding  might  and  "loud"  voices  the  last  enemv  was  confronted  and 
destroyed.  V.  Fellowship  of  burial.  Devout;  duty  to  the  dead.  This  is  the 
work  of  the  living.  Let  us  bury  our  friends  reverently.  They  have  an  undying 
history.  Let  us  bury  our  friends  sympathetically.  They  ask  a  brother's  interest. 
Let  us  bury  our  friends  hopefully.  They  have  a  lasting  destiny.  Lessons :  1. 
This  precious  coinciiience  is  surely  not  accidental.  2.  Here  is  a  proof  of  the  true 
humanity  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  wonder  less  that  Stephen  was  like  the  Saviour  than 
that  the  Saviour  was  so  like  Stephen.  3.  How  completely  one  are  the  Lord  and 
His  people!  "  Thou  shalt  be  with  Me."  With  Him  heaven  is  not  only  near,  but 
accessible.  4.  Fellowstip  with  Jesus  Christ  in  life  is  the  surest  guarantee  of  His 
presence  in  death.     (H.  T.  Miller.)  The  last  request : — Human  history  is  a 

record  of  the  thoughts  and  exploits  of  human  spirits.  Wherever  we  touch  the  his- 
tory of  spirit,  we  find  it  invested  with  the  gravest  responsibilities.  Wherever  we 
look,  we  behold  memorials  of  spirit-power.    I  am  anxious  to  impress  you  with  the 


CHAP,  vii.]  THE  ACTS.  629 

fact  that  you  are  spirits,  and  that  your  history  here  will  determine  all  your  con- 
ditions and  relationships  in  the  endless  ages  !  I.  Man's  sdpreme  conceen  should 
BE  THE  WELL-BEING  OF  HIS  SPIRIT.  Because  your  spirit — 1.  Is  immortal.  Only 
eternity  can  satisfy  it.  It  claims  the  theatre  of  infinitude  !  Yet  many  occupy  more 
time  in  the  adornment  of  the  flesh,  which  is  to  turn  to  corruption,  than  in  the  cul- 
ture of  the  spirit  which  no  tomb  can  confine !  You  pity  the  imbecility  of  the  man 
who  estimates  the  casket  more  highly  than  the  gem,  but  your  madness  is  infinitely 
more  to  be  deplored  if  you  bestow  more  care  on  the  body  than  on  the  soul.  2.  Can 
undergo  no  posthumous  change,  whereas  the  body  mav.  There  is  no  repentance  in 
the  gtave.  "  He  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  anjust  still,"  &c.  Moral  change  after 
death  is  an  eternal  impossibility.  Not  so  with  the  body ;  Christ  will  change  our 
vile  body,  and  make  it  like  unto  His  own  glorious  body.  3.  Has  been  Divinely 
purchased.  ''  Ye  are  not  redeemed  with  coriuptible  things,"  &c.  4.  Is  capable  of 
«ndless  progress.  There  is  no  point  at  which  the  spirit  must  pause  and  say,  "  It 
is  enough  !  "  II.  Man  is  approaching  a  crisis  in  which  he  will  realise  the 
IMPORTANCE  OP  HIS  SPIRIT.  Stephen  was  in  that  crisis  when  uttering  this  entreaty. 
Amid  the  commotion  of  the  world — the  strife  for  bread  and  the  battle  for  position 
— men  are  apt  to  overlook  the  moral  claims  of  tlieir  nature.  But  remember  that 
there  hastens  a  time  in  which  you  must  give  audience  to  the  imperious  demands  of 
jour  spiritual  nature !  I  have  visited  the  prodigal  in  the  chamber  of  death  ;  and 
he  who  was  wont  to  scorn  the  appeals  of  Christianity — who  had  drunk  at  the 
broken  cisterns  of  crime — even  he  has  turned  upon  me  his  glazed  eye,  and  stam- 
mered out  with  dying  breath,  "  My  soul !  "  I  have  stood  at  the  bedside  of  the 
departing  rich  ;  and  he  whose  aim  it  was  to  build  around  himself  a  golden  wall — 
who  considered  no  music  so  entrancing  as  that  produced  by  the  friction  of  coin — 
•even  he  has  turned  his  anxious  gaze  to  me,  and,  with  stifled  utterance,  has  said, 
"  My  soul,  my  soul !  "  I  have  watched  the  votary  of  fashion — whose  ambition  it 
was  to  bedeck  his  mortal  frame,  whose  god  was  elegance,  and  whose  altar  the 
mirror — and  even  he  has  wept  and  cried,  "  My  naked  soul,  my  naked  soul  1 "  I 
have  stood  in  the  chamber  where  the  good  man  has  met  his  fate:  has  he  displayed 
anxiety  or  given  way  to  despair?  Nay,  he  exclaims,  "Into  Thy  hands  I  com- 
mend my  spirit !  "  Now,  seeing  that  the  approach  of  this  momentous  hour  is  an 
infallible  certainty,  two  duties  devolve  upon  us.  1.  To  employ  the  best  means  for 
meeting  its  requirements.  What  are  those  means  ?  Those  who  know  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  riches  and  the  cares  of  this  world,  emphatically  testify  that  they  cannot 
meet  the  requirements  of  the  spiritual  constitution.  Faith  in  Christ  and  obedience 
to  His  will  constitute  the  true  preparation  for  all  the  exigencies  of  life,  and  the  true 
antidote  for  the  bitterness  of  death !  2.  To  conduct  the  business  of  life  with  a 
view  to  its  solemnities.  "  How  will  this  affect  my  dying  hour?  "  is  an  inquiry  too 
seldom  propounded,  but,  when  conscientiously  answered,  must  produce  a  power- 
fully restraining  influence  on  man's  thoughts  and  habitudes.  Few  men  connect 
the  present  with  the  future,  or  reflect  that  out  of  the  present  the  future  gathers  its 
materials  and  moulds  its  character.  III.  Man  knows  of  one  Being  only  to  whom 
HE  CAN  safely  ENTRUST  HIS  SPIRIT — the  "  Lord  Jcsus."  This  prayer  implies — 1. 
Christ's  sovereignty  of  the  spiritual  empire.  Whom  does  Stephen  see?  There  are 
ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  glorified  intelligences  in  the  heaven  to  which  he 
■directs  his  eyes  :  but  the  triumphant  martyr  sees  "  no  man  but  Jesus  only."  All 
fiouls  are  Christ's.  All  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect  are  loyal  to  His  crown. 
2.  Christ's  profound  interest  in  the  well-being  of  faithful  spirits.  He  said  that  He 
went  to  "  prepare  a  place  "  for  His  people,  and  that  where  He  was,  there  they 
should  be  also.  Now  one  of  His  people  proves  this.  3.  Christ's  personal  contact 
with  departed  Christian  spirits.  Stephen  acknowledges  no  intermediate  state ; 
looking  from  earth,  his  eye  beholds  no  object  until  it  alights  on  the  Son  of  Man. 
Stephen's  creed  was — "  absent  from  tte  body,  present  with  the  Lord."  4.  Christ's 
unchanging  relationship  to  human  spirits.  Lord  Jesus  was  the  name  by  which 
Christ  was  known  on  earth.  How  He  was  designated  in  the  distant  ages  of  et^-rnity 
none  can  tell !  But  when  He  uncrowned  Himself  He  assumed  the  name  of  Jesus, 
for  He  came  to  save  His  people  from  their  sins !  And  now  that  He  has  returned 
to  His  celestial  glory  He  ha^  not  abandoned  the  name.  IV.  Man  alone  is  respon- 
sible FOR  THE  eternal  CONDITION  OF  HIS  SOUL.  You  make  your  own  heaven  or 
hell,  not  by  the  final  act  of  life,  but  by  life  itself.  Your  spirit  is  now  undergoing 
education.  Two  results  ought  to  be  produced  by  your  trials.  1.  Thev  should  dis- 
cipline your  spirit ;  bring  it  into  harmony  with  the  Divine  will,  by  curbing  passion, 
checkin^l  error,  rebuking  pride.     2.  They  should  develop  the  capabilities  of  your 


G30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

spirit.  Trials  may  do  this,  by  throwing  you  back  on  great  principles.  But  for 
trial,  we  should  never  know  our  powers  of  endurance.  Trial  briugs  out  the  majesty 
of  moral  character.     (•/.  Parker,  D.D.)  Prayer  in  death  : — A  Christian  should 

die  praying.  Other  men  die  in  a  way  fitting  their  lives.  The  ruling  passion  of 
life  is  strong  in  death.  JuUus  Cassar  died  adjusting  his  robes,  that  he  might  fall 
gracefully;  Augustus  died  in  a  compliment  to  Livia,  his  wife;  Tibeiius  in  dis- 
simulations ;  Vespasian  in  jest.  The  infidel,  Hume,  died  with  pitiful  jokes  about 
Charon  and  his  boat ;  Rousseau  with  boasting ;  Voltaire  wilh  mingled  imprecations 
and  supplications  ;  Paine  with  shrieks  of  agonising  remorse ;  multitudes  die  with 
sullenness,  others  wilh  blasphemies  faltering  on  their  tongues.  But  the  Chrtslian 
should  die  praying;  for  "Prayer  is  the  Christian's  vital  breath,"  &c.  "Lord 
Jesus,  receive  my  spirit !  "  This  is  the  prayer  of  faith,  commending  the  immortal 
spirit  to  the  covenant  care  of  Jesus.  (Homiletic  Revieiv.)  The  soul : — From  this 
prayer  we  infer — I.  That  man's  soul  suevives  coRroREAt  death.  This  was  now 
a  matter  of  consciousness  with  Stephen.  He  had  no  doubt  about  it,  and  hence  he 
prays  Jesus  to  take  it.  This  is  with  all  men  rather  a  matter  of  feeling  than  argii- 
meiit.  The  Bible  not  only  addresses  this  feeling,  but  ministers  to  its  growth.  11. 
That  in  death  the  importance  op  man's  soul  is  especially  felt.  The  "  spirit " 
was  now  everything  to  Stephen.  And  so  it  is  to  all  dying  men.  D.ath  ends  all 
material  interests  and  relations,  and  the  soul  grows  more  and  more  conscious  of 
itself  as  it  feels  its  approach  to  the  world  of  spirits.  III.  That  the  well-being 
OF  the  soul  consists  in  its  dedication  to  Jesus.  "  R  ceive  my  spirit."  What 
does  this  mean  ?  1.  Not  the  giving  up  of  our  personality.  Such  pantheism  is 
absurd.  2.  Not  the  surrender  of  our  free  agency.  3.  But  tbe  placing  of  its  powers- 
entirely  at  Christ's  service,  and  its  destiny  entirely  at  His  disposal.  This  implies, 
of  course,  strong  faith  in  the  kindness  and  power  of  Jesus.  IV.  That  this  dedica- 
tion    OF     THE    SOUL     TO     JeSUS   IS    THE    ONE    GREAT    THOUGHT    OF    THE    EARNEST    SAINT. 

It  is  the  beginning  and  end  of  religion,  or  rather  the  very  essence  of  it.  The  first 
breath,  and  every  subsequent  respiration,  of  piety  is,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my 
spirit."       [D.     Thomas,    D.D.)  St.    Stephen    a    worshipper    and    witness    of 

Jesus,  more  than  conqueror  of  death  and  of  the  world  :  —  Stephen  is  not 
a  prodigj'.  He  is  an  example  ;  he  is  a  Christian  ;  he  is  a  believer, 
nothing  more  ;  nothing  more  than  all  of  us  would  become  and  be  this 
day  if  we  were  followers  of  his  faith.     I.  He  died  in  charity.     II.  He  died  as  a 

TRUE  MARTYR,  CONDEMNING  THE  WORLD,  BEARING    THE  CrOSS  OF    ChRIST,       His  defence 

is  no  apology,  as  if  he  were  pleading  for  life,  or  deprecating  either  death  or  their 
displeasure.  Thus  in  Christ's  spirit  did  he  go  forth,  taking  up  his  cross,  and  con- 
fronting all  that  was  not  of  God  in  the  world  and  in  the  Church.     III.  He  died 

CONTENDING    AS   A   TRUE    MARTYR   FOR    THE  COMMON,  OR  CATHOLIC,  FAITH.       His    WaS  DO 

sectarian  stand,  or  fight.  What  was  the  Christianity  for  which  he  pleaded,  and  for 
which  he  was  ready  to  sacrifice  his  life  against  their  dead  form  of  godliness,  and 
conventional  faith,  and  mere  Judaism  ?  It  was  a  Christianity  that  revealed  the 
way  of  access  to  this  living  God,  and  admission  to  this  commimion  in  Jesus  Christ; 
a  Christianity  that  revealed  that  new  anc!  better  covenant  in  which  these  unspeakable 
gifts  of  grace  were  now  published  as  man's  birthright,  in  the  faith  of  which  he  became 
alive  unto  God,  the  faith  of  which  was  eternal  life.  IV.  He  died,  as  he  had  lived, 
BY  faith.  That  opened  his  eyes  to  "  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  Jesus  standing  at 
the  riglit  hand  of  God."  That  made  his  face  to  the  spectators  in  the  council  "  as. 
the  face  of  an  angel."  The  Holy  Ghost  wrought  in  him  visibly.  God  thus  sealed 
His  martyr's  ministry  by  a  token  which  even  his  murderers  could  not  deny,  and 
said,  as  audibly  as  by  a  voice  from  heaven,  "  Weil  done,  good  and  faithful  servant, 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  Stephen-like,  men  in  general.  Christians  and 
others,  die  as  they  live.  1.  There  are,  it  is  evident,  few  deathbeds  like  Stephen's. 
Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  history  of  the  Church  in  ancient  times  could  cite 
many  a  parallel  to  Stephen  among  the  glorious  company  of  its  martyrs  and  con- 
fessors. Nor  are  modern  biographies  without  instances  corresponding  or  similar. 
But  what  are  these,  or  the  greater  number  still  of  unrecorded  triumphs  over  death 
and  suffering,  to  the  multitudes  that  are  different,  to  the  myriads  that  furnish  a 
contrast  rather  than  a  counterpart  ?  To  how  few  is  death  without  a  sting,  a  con- 
quered enemy  I  2.  There  are,  perhap'^,  as  few  lives  like  Stephen's  as  there  are 
deatbbeds  like  his.  What  is  the  value  of  a  deathbed  testimony,  even  of  triumph 
like  Stephen's,  if  what  has  gone  before  has  either  ill  corresponded,  or  has  contra- 
dicted ?  Look  at  family  life,  and  social  life,  and  Church  communion  among  us,  as 
compared  with  the  fellowship  of  Stephen's  day  (Acts  ii.  46,  47).     We  shall  then 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  G31 

cease  to  wonder  that  there  are  few  deathbeds  like  Stephen's.     Stephen's  was  but 
the  appropriate  close  of  a  consistent  life.     3.  The  spirit,  the  faith  of  the  Church 
certainly  now  is  not  Stephen's,  nor  like  those  of  the  Church  of  Stephen's  day.     How 
many  fail  to  claim  the  fulness  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  walk  worthily  of  their  vocation 
by  living  in  the  faith  of  this  vocation  ?     4.  Hence  the  Church's  weakness — want 
of  faith  like  Stephen's ;  want  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Not  a  withholding  on  God's 
part  of  grace,  or  of  the  Spirit,  but  a  want  of  response,  or  reciprocal  action  on  ours. 
We  are  not  straitened  in  Him,  but  in  ourselves.  {R.  Paisley.)       A  tvatcliword  for  life 
and  death  : — (Text  and  Psa.  xxxi.  5  ;  Luke  xxiii.  46.)     1.  David  said  in  his  lijfetime, 
"  Into  Thy  hand  I  commit  my  spirit. "    In  the  hour  of  torture  and  dissolution  Christ 
and  His  servant  used  almost  the  same  expression.     It  is  not,  then,  necessarily  a 
dying  speech.     It  is  as  appropriate  to  youth  as  to  old  age,  to  the  brightness  of  life 
as  to  the  shadow  of  death.      2.    The  greatest  concern  of  man  should  be  about 
his  spirit.      His   clothes  wear   out ;    Lis    house  crumbles    away ;  his  body  must 
I  etnrn  to    dust :   it    is    in    his    spirit   alone   that   man   finds  the  supreme  possi- 
bilities of  his  being.     Care  for  the  spirit  involves  every  other  care.     Regard  the 
words  as  supplying— 1.  The  true  watchwokd  for  life.     Life  needs  a  watchword. 
Our  energies,  purposes,  hopes,  should  be  gathered  round  some  living  and  coutrolling 
centre.     We  stray  far  from  the  right  line  when  we  take  ourselves  into  our  own 
keeping.     When  we  commit  our  spirit  into  the  hand  of  God,  three  results  accrue — 
1.  We  approach  the  duties  of  life  through  a  series  of  the  most  elevating  considera- 
tions.    (1)  We  are  not  our  own.     (2)  We  are  parts  of  a  great  system.     (3)  We  are 
servants,  not  masters.     (4)  The  things  round  about  us  are  beneath   our  serious 
notice,  except  for  momentary  convenience  or  instruction.     2.  We  accept  the  trials 
of  life  with  the  most  hopeful  patience.     They  are — (1)  Disciplinary.     (2)  Under 
control.     (3)  Needful.     3.  We  recognise  the  mercies  of  life  with  joyful  gratitude. 
The  name  of  God  is  on  the  smallest  of  them  (Psa.  xxxi.  7,  8,  19).     To  the  atheist 
the  morning  is  but  a  lamp  to  be  turned  to  convenience ;  to  the  Christian  it  is  the 
shining  of  the  face  of  God.     All  things  are  ours  if  the  spirit  be  Christ's.     What  is 
your  life's  watchword  ?     Have  you  one  ?     What  is  it  ?     Self-enrichment  ?     Plea- 
sure ?     The  one  true  watchword  is,  "  Into  Thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit,"  my  case, 
my  controversies,  disappointments,  whole  discipline  and  destiny.     II.  The  true 
WATCHWORD  FOR  DEATH.     If  R  living  man  requires  a  watchword,  how  much  more 
the  man  who  is  dying  !     How  strange  is  the  country  to  which  be  is  moving;  how 
dark  the  path  along  which  he  is  tiavelling ;  how  short  a  way  can  his  friends  accom- 
pany him !     All  this,  so  well  understood  by  us  all,  makes  death  very  solemn. 
This  watchv^ord,  spoken  by  Jesus  and  Stephen,  shows — 1.  Their  belief  in  a  state 
of  being  at  present  invisible.     Was  Christ  likely  to  be  deceived  ?     Eead  His  hfe  ; 
study  the  character  of  His  thinking ;  acquaint  yourselves  with  the  usual  tone  of 
His  teaching ;  and  thsn  say  whether  He  was  likely  to  die  with  a  lie  in  His  mouth. 
And  Stephen — what  had  he  to  gain  if  no  world  lay  beyond  the  horizon  of  the  pre- 
sent and  invisible?     Jesus  and  Stephen,  then,  must  at  least  be  credited  with  speak- 
ing their  deepest  personal  convictions.     It  is  something  to  us  to  show  who  have 
believed  this  doctrine.     2.  Their  assurance  of  the  limitations  of  human  malice. 
The  spirit  was  quite  free.     Evil  ones  cannot  touch  the  Divine  side  of  human  nature. 
Conclusion  :  1.  When  the  spirit  is  fit  for  the  presence  of  God,  there  is  no  fear  of 
death.     2.  All  who  die  in  the  faith  are  pre.-ent  with  the  Lord.     3.  Jesus  Himself 
knows  what  it  is  to  pass  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.     4.  The  prayer 
for  entrance  among  the  blest  may  come  too  late.     We  have  no  authority  for  the 
encouragement  of  a  death-bed  repentance.     It  is  but  poor  prayer  that  is  forced 
from  a  coward's  lips.     (J.   Parker,  D.D.)         The  dying  testimony  of  Stephen: — 
I.   The    praver    of    Stephen.       1.    Stephen    expected    an    immediate    transfer 
of    his    soul,    in    the    full    possession    of    its    powers    and   consciousness,   from 
a    state    of    earthly  to    a    stale   of    heaven'v   being.     He   understood    its    high 
relation  to  the  Father  of  spirits  ;  and  expected  from  Him  protection  and  provision 
for  its  unembodi  d  existence.     2.  The  piayer  of  Stephen  contained  a  plain,  positive 
acknowledgment  of  the  Saviour's  proper  Deity,  as  one  with  the  Father,  over  all, 
God  blessed  for  ever.     II.  The  circumstances  in  which  the  prayer  of  Stephen  was 
OFFERED.     1.  Swint  Stcphfn  was,  beyond  all  controversy,  a  man  of  uprightness  and 
integrity.   2.  Will  it  be  answered,  "  The  integrity  of  Stephen  remains  unimpeached; 
he  must,  however,  be  ranked  among  those  every-day  characters,  whose  intellectual' 
weakness  is  in  some  degree  retrieved  by  the  uprightness  of  their  principles?" 
Such  an  apology  will   hardly  serve  the  turn  of  those  who  impugn  or  deny  the. 
Divinity  of  our  blessed  Lord.     For  Stephen  was  a  wise  man,  no  less  than  a  man  of 


t532  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

moral  honesty  and  integrity.  The  knowledge  and  intellect  of  Jerusalem  doubtless 
sat  upon  tbe  seats  of  the  Sanhedrin  :  yet  they  were  cut  to  the  heart  with  what  they 
heard  him  declare,  and  could  only  answer  "  by  gnashing  upon  bim  with  their  teeth." 
Now,  it  is  not  the  part  of  wisdom  to  brave  scorn,  mockery,  and  death  for  an 
opinion  unfounded  in  truth.  Even  Erasmus,  one  of  the  most  amiable  and  learned 
men  of  modern  times,  who  lived  when  the  torch  of  the  Reformation  first  shed  its 
glorious  light  upon  the  benighted  Church  of  Christ,  confessed  that,  though  he 
should  know  tbe  truth  to  be  on  his  side,  be  had  not  courage  to  become  a  martyr  in 
its  behalf.  Was  it,  then,  for  one  of  Stephen's  wisdom  falsely  to  ascribe  Godhead 
to  Jesus  Christ,  when  his  life  was  endangered  by  the  assertion,  "  Behold,  I  see  the 
heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God  "?  3.  I 
add,  however,  that  Stephen  was  a  partaker  of  knowledge  more  than  human :  he 
was  a  man  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  "He  had  an  unction  from  the 
Holy  One,  and  he  knew  all  things."  No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  but 
by  tbe  Holy  Ghost.  4.  Once  more  :  Stephen  was  a  dying  man.  Whatever  our 
previous  sentiments  may  have  been,  yet  when  the  things  of  this  world  are  passing 
fast  away,  and  the  realities  of  eternal  existence  are  opening  upon  our  view,  the 
mists  of  delusion  are  dissipated,  and  the  true  light  of  conviction  usually  fla-^hes 
upon  the  soul.  III.  The  death  by  which  the  pbayer  was  followed.  Lessons : 
1.  It  is  a  deduction,  f  asily  and  naturally  made  from  our  review  of  the  passage,  that 
doctrinal  religion  is  not  a  matter  so  unimportant  as  rational  divines  would  persuade 
us  to  beheve.  2.  I  add  that  faith  in  doctrines,  unattended  and  unevidenced  by 
practical  religion,  will  serve  rather  to  condemn  than  to  save.  (R.  P.  Buddicom, 
M.A.) 

Ver.  60.  And  he  kneeled  down,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice. — The  best  testament 
of  a  Christian: — To  commend — 1.  His  soul  to  heaven.  2.  His  body  to  the  earth. 
3.  His  friends  to  the  Divine  protection.  4.  His  enemies  to  the  Divine  compassion. 
(Starke.)  The  power  of  Christ  in  believers : — I.  He  strengthens  them  to  bold- 
ness IN  coNFKSSiNG,  the  powcr  of  which  their  enemies  cannot  resist.  II.  He 
adorns  them  with  purity  of  conduct,  which  the  tongues  of  blasphemers  cannot 
stain.  III.  He  fills  them  with  a  tenderness  of  love,  which  prays  for  their 
bitterest  enemies.  IV.  He  sweetens  their  dying  with  a  blessed  insight  into  His 
eternal  glory.      (Leonhard.)  Stc2}hen''s  three  crowns  : — I.    The  fair  crown  op 

GRACE,  with  which  the  Lord  adorned  him  in  life  and  death.  II.  The  bloody  crown 
ov  THORNS,  which  he  wore  after  his  Saviour  in  suffering  and  deatli.  III.  The 
HEAVENLY  CROWN  OF  GLORY,  which  was  lescrvcd  in  eternity  for  the  faithful  martyr. 
{K.  Gerok.)  The  victory  of  dying  Stephen  : — I.  He  triumphs  over  the  murderous 
CRT  OF  A  HOSTILE  WORLD  by  a  look  of  faith  to  heaven.  II.  He  overcomes  the 
SHARPNESS  OF  DEATH  by  a  child-like  surrender  of  his  spirit  into  the  arms  of  Jesus. 
III.  He  triumphs  over  flesh  and  blood  by  a  priestly  petition  for  his  murderers. 
(Ibid.)  The  Cross  of   Christ  reflected  in  Stephen,  living   and  dying  : — I.    The 

BHAME  OF  the  Cross.     1.  Before  the  same  council.     2.  The  like  false  accusations. 

3.  A  similar  thrusting  out  of  the  city.  4.  The  like  unrighteous  doom.  II.  The 
GLORY  OF  THE  Cboss,  displayed — 1.  In  courageous  defence.  2.  In  patient  meek- 
ness.    3.  In  love,  blessing  its  enemies — Jesus'  first  and  Stephen's  last  dying  words. 

4.  In  a  blessed  hope  of  heaven.  (Ibid.)  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge. 
—The  reqiiest  of  Stephen  : — Tbe  request — 1.  Of  one  dying.  2.  Of  a  soul  that 
entirely  forgets  itself.  3.  Of  a  man  who  is  striving  after  nothing  but  the  kingdom 
of  God.  (Schleiennachi'T.)  llie  magnaniviity  of  the  Christian  .^j^irit: — This  is 
shown  by — 1.  The  victories  it  achieves  over  the  corrupt  affections  of  tbe  human 
heart.  2.  Its  superiority  to  the  principles,  spirit,  and  practices  of  the  world.  3. 
Its  fortitude  under  tbe  infliction  of  unprovoked  injuries.  4.  The  suppoit  and  con- 
solation which  it  gives  in  seasons  of  pain  and  sorrow,  and  the  victory  it  achieves 
over  the  king  of  terrors.  5.  The  benevolence  and  grandeur  of  its  purposes,  and 
Idle  labours  and  sufferings  which  it  prompts  in  the  execution  of  them.  (C  N. 
Jiidd,  D.D.)  Forgiveness  :  its  nature : — A  forgiving  spirit  is  a  nobln,  generous 
Christian  virtue.  It  takes  its  rise  in  that  love  of  God  and  man  which  is  the  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  and  the  fuKilling  of  the  law  ;  it  is  made  up  of  love  and  forb<-arance, 
united  with  tbe  tenderness  of  compassion  towards  those  who  have  injured  us,  and 
fortified  by  some  just  sense  of  our  own  sinfulness  and  need  of  forgiveness  from 
God.  In  the  full  sense  of  the  thing  itself,  it  consists  of  tbe  inward  spirit  of  for- 
giveness and  the  outward  act  of  reconciliation.  It  belongs  to  the  heart,  just  as 
every  other  grace  has  its  seat  in  the  inner  man.    In  this  view  of  it,  it  is  the  opposite 


CHAP,  vii.]  THE  ACTS.  633 

• 
of  revenge,  which  angrily  seeks  redress  for  injuries  by  inflicting  injuries  in  return. 
It  is  the  inward  exercise  of  kindness  and  good- will  toward  our  enemies.  (G.  Tliring, 
I>.D.)  Forgiveness  :  its  rarity  in  heathendom: — -Of  forgiveness,  we  cannot  cer- 
tainly say  that  it  was  unknown  to  the  ancients ;  under  certain  conditions,  no 
doubt,  it  was  very  common  among  them.  In  family  life,  in  which  all  the  germs  of 
Christian  virtue  are  to  be  found,  it  was  undoubtedly  common.  Undoubtedly  friends 
fell  out  and  were  reconciled  in  antiquity,  as  amongst  ourselves.  But  where  the 
only  relation  between  the  two  parties  was  that  of  injurer  and  injured,  and  the  only 
claim  of  the  offender  to  forgiveness  was  that  he  was  a  human  being,  then  forgive- 
ness seems  not  only  not  to  have  been  practised ,.  but  not  to  have  been  approved.  People 
not  only  did  not  forgive  their  enemies,  but  did  not  wish  to  do  so,  nor  think  better 
of  themselves  for  having  done  so.  That  man  considered  himself  fortunate  who  on 
his  death-bed  could  say  that  no  one  had  done  more  good  to  his  friends  or  more 
mischief  to  his  enemies.  The  Koman  Triumph,  with  its  naked  ostentation  of 
revenge,  fairly  represents  the  common  feeling  of  the  ancients.  Nevertheless,  for- 
giveness of  enemies  was  not  unknown.  They  could  conceive  it,  and  feel  that  there 
was  a  Divine  beauty  in  it ;  but  it  seemed  to  them  more  than  could  be  expected  of 
human  nature — almost  superhuman.  [Ecce  Homo.)  Forgiveness :  its  nobility  : — 
Generous  and  magnanimous  minds  are  readiest  to  forgive  ;  and  it  is  a  weakness  and 
impotency  of  mind  to  be  unable  to  forgive.  {Lord  Bacon.)  Forgiveness  :  a  sign  of  a 
noble  nature : — The  brave  only  know  bow  to  forgive ;  it  is  the  most  refined  and  generous 
pitch  of  virtue  human  nature  can  arrive  at.  Cowards  have  done  good  and  kind 
actions  ;  cowards  have  fought  and  even  conquered  ;  but  a  coward  never  forgave  :  it 
is  not  in  hia  nature  ;  the  power  of  doing  it  flows  only  from  a  strength  and  greatness 
of  soul,  conscious  of  its  own  force  and  security,  and  above  the  little  temptat  ons  of 
resenting  every  fruitless  atte'upt  to  interrupt  its  happiness.  (Laurence  Sterne.) 
Forgiveness  :  the  mark  of  a  Christian : — As  a  seal  leaves  a  mark  of  itself  in  the 
wax,  whereby  it  is  known  ;  so  it  is  with  every  one  who  has  a  readiness  to  forgive 
others  :  for  by  it  the  Christian  may  kuow  that  God  hath  sealed  the  forgiveness  of 
his  sins  upon  his  heart.  {Cawdray.)  Forgiveness :  the  poiunr  of  Christ  necessary 
to: — "What  can  Jesus  Christ  do  for  you  now?"  said  an  inhuman  slave-master, 
when  in  the  act  of  applying  the  lacerating  wliip  to  an  already  half-murdered  slave. 
"Him  teach    me   to   foi'give    you,    massa,"  was  his    reply.      {Phillips.)  And 

when  he  had  said  this,  he  fell  SkSlB^Tp.— Stephen's  sleep: — I.  Eveby  man  is 
BOUND  TO  DO  SOMETHING  BEFORE  HE  DIE.  1.  Every  man  is  bound  to  be  some- 
thing, to  take  some  calling  upon  him.  We  begin  with  our  beginning,  our  birth. 
"Man  is  boru  to  labour"  (Job  v.  7;  Heb.).  Howsoever  honourable  his  station 
is,  he  is  bound  to  do  his  day's  work  in  the  day,  the  duties  of  the  place  in  the 
place.  How  far  is  he  from  doing  so  who  never  so  much  as  considers  why  he 
was  sent  into  this  world,  and  in  spite  of  all  that  God  has  done  for  him,  and 
taught  him  in  creation  and  redemption!  Such  a  man  passes  through  life  as  an 
ignis  fatitus,  which  gives  no  light,  and  signifies  nothing.  He  passes  out  of  the 
world  as  a  body  out  of  a  bath,  when  the  water  may  be  the  fouler,  but  otherwise 
retains  no  impression  ;  so  the  world  may  be  the  worse  for  his  having  livod  in  it,  or 
else  retains  no  mark  of  his  having  been  here.  When  God  placed  Adam  in  the 
world  He  enjoined  him  to  fill,  subdue,  and  rule  it ;  when  God  placed  His  children 
in  the  land  of  promise  He  enjoined  them  to  fight  against  idolatry — to  everybody 
some  task  for  His  glory.  God  made  every  man  something,  but  many  make  the 
best  of  things,  man,  nothing.  He  that  qualifies  himself  for  nothing  does  so;  he 
whom  we  can  call  notbing  is  nothing.  God's  own  name  is  "  I  am  " — Being,  and 
nothing  is  so  contrary  to  God  as  to  be  nothing.  Be  something  or  else  thou  canst 
do  nothing,  and  till  thou  hast  done  something  thou  canst  not  sleep  Stephen's  s^leep. 
2.  Every  man  is  bound  to  do  seriously,  sedulously,  and  sincei'ely  the  duties  of  his 
calling.  He  that  stands  in  a  place  and  does  not  the  duties  of  that  place  is  a  statue, 
and  a  statue  without  an  inscription.  The  duty  in  the  text  is  speaking,  "  When  he 
had  said,"  a  duty  devolving  upon  ministers  and  magistrates,  and  unless  they  speak, 
and  speak  to  purpose,  they  cannot  sleep  Stephen's  sleep.  But  as  in  creation  God 
does  as  well  as  says,  so  we  must  not  only  speak,  but  act.  Therefore  do  not  com- 
plain that  God  exacts  tbe  duties  of  thy  place,  and  say  not  of  it  that  it  is  good  for 
nothing,  for  it  is  good  for  this  that  when  thou  hast  discharged  its  duties  thou 
mayest  sleep  Stephen's  sleep.  3.  The  better  to  perform  those  duties  every  one  sball 
do  well  to  propose  to  himself  some  example  to  imitate  in  that  calling.  It  was  the 
counsel  of  that  great  little  philosopher,  Epictetus,  whensoever  thou  undertakest  any 
action  to  consider  what  a  Socrates  or  a  Plato  would  do  in  that  case,  and  to  do 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

conformably  to  that.  Here  is  an  example  which  suits  everybody.  (1)  Note  this 
name,  Stephen,  a  crown — the  reward  of  faithfulness.  Our  names  are  debts ;  every 
man  owes  the  world  the  signification  of  his  name,  and  every  additional  name  of 
honour  or  office  lays  a  new  obligation  on  him;  and  Lis  first  name,  his  Christian 
name  above  all.  The  duties  of  a  Christianity  must  weigh  down  the  duties  of  all 
other  plans.  (2)  He  became  a  disciple  early,  and  therefore  takes  rank  even  before 
Paul.  (3)  He  made  his  ambition  only  to  serve  Christ,  and  not  in  a  high  place,  but 
as  a  deac'in.  (4)  But  Stephen's  exemplariness  consists  not  so  much  in  what  he  did 
as  iu  whrtt  he  suffered.  He  cheerfully  laid  down  his  life  for  Christ's  sake.  To 
suffer  for  God  is  the  greatest  thing  in  the  world,  except  God's  sulJerings  for  man. 
The  latter  was  the  nadir  of  God's  humiliation,  the  formi^r  is  the  zenith  of  man's 
exaltation.  Nor  is  it  needful  to  suffer  death  to  imitate  Stephen.  Every  man  who 
suffers  injuries  without  resentment,  who  resists  temptations  from  power  or  pleasure, 
who  cheerfully  bears  God's  crosses,  is  a  true  copy  of  Stephen.  (5)  Christ  was  his 
and  our  supreme  pattern,  as  we  see  conspicuously  here.     II.  To  that  man  who 

HATH    DONE    THOSE    THINGS    WHICH    THE    DUTIES    OF    HIS     CALLING    BIND    HIM    TO,    DEATH 

is  BUT  A  SLEEP.  There  are  two  classes  of  men,  those  who  die  in  the  bath  of  a 
peaceable,  and  those  who  die  upon  the  wreck  of  a  distracted  conscience— and  the 
lives  of  each  are  correspondent  to,  and  lead  up  to  their  death.  1.  The  death  of  the 
wicked  is  not  a  sleep.  (1)  It  is  bloody  conflict  and  no  victory.  (2)  It  is  a  tempes- 
tuous sea  and  no  harbour.  (3)  A  slippery  height  and  no  footing.  (4)  A  desperate 
fall  and  no  bottom.  2.  The  death  of  the  righteous  is  a  sle  -p.  They  do  not  only 
go  to  heaven  by  death,  but  heaven  comes  to  them  in  death ;  their  very  manner  of' 
dying  is  an  inchoative  act  of  their  glorified  state :  therefore  it  is  not  called  a  dying, 
but  a  sleeping,  which  intimates  two  blessings — (1)  Piesent  rest.  Now  men  sleep 
not  well  fasting;  nor  does  a  fasting  conscience,  a  conscience  that  is  not  nourished 
with  a  testimony  of  having  done  well,  come  to  this  sleep.  "  The  sleep  of  a  labouring 
man  is  sweet,"  and  to  him  that  laboureth  in  his  calling  this  deep  of  death  is 
welcome  (Prov.  iii.  24  ;  Psa.  iv.  8).  (2)  Future  waking  is  the  resurrtction 
(1  Thess.  iv.  14).  They  shall  awake  as  Jacob  did,  and  say  as  he  said, 
"  Surely  the  Lord  is  in  this  place,  and  this  is  none  other  than  the  house 
of    God    and    the    gate    of    Leaven."      (J.    Donne,    D.D.)  The    death    of 

Stephen  : — I.  In  Siephen  we  have  a  pattern  of  faith.  He  knew  and  was 
persuaded  tljat  his  gracious  Eedeemer  reigned  on  high,  that  He  was  not  un- 
mindful of  His  followers  on  earth,  and  would  keep  that  which  was  committed  to  Him 
till  the  day  of  His  appearance.  Depeuding  on  this  hope,  he  died  with  a  composure 
and  magnanimity  which  religion  alone  can  produce.  II.  In  Stephen  we  have  an 
EXAMPLE  OF  UNSHAKEN  CONSTANCY  IN  OBEDIENCE  10  GoD.  When  he  was  chosen  a 
deacon  to  a'^sist  the  apostles  in  managing  the  concei  ns  of  the  Church,  lie  had  a  high 
character  for  piety,  integrity,  and  wisdom.  Nor  did  he  ever  afterwards  do  anything 
to  forfeit  that  character.  On  the  contrary,  the  more  he  was  tried,  the  more  his 
virtues  shone  forth.  Let  his  unshaken  constancy  be  a  pattern  to  us.  Religion 
does  not  ccmsist  of  fits  and  starts  of  devotion,  of  resolutions  that  are  quickly  made 
and  as  quickly  abandoned,  of  that  wavering  and  inconsistent  conduct  which  always 
indicates  unsoundness  in  the  faith.  It  is  a  steady  principle  abiding  in  the  heart 
and  influencing  tfie  conduct.  HI.  In  Stephen  we  have  a  pattern  of  piou-'  resigna- 
tion. No  complaining  words  proceeded  from  his  lips.  He  discovered  no  distrust  of 
the  power,  or  the  love  of  his  Saviour.  We  may  not  have  trials  to  endure,  like 
Stephen,  but  we  are  placed  in  a  situation  which  will  afford  ample  scope  for  the 
exercise  of  resignation.  We  are  subject  to  sickness,  lo-ses.  and  disappointments, 
together  with  innumerable  vexatious  circumstances,  which  we  cannot  prevent.  We 
should  ever  remember  that  God  is  the  sovereign  disposer  of  all  events  ;  that  He 
has  a  right  to  place  us  in  what  station,  and  expose  us  to  what  sufferings  He  plea^^es. 
But  though  the  sovereignity  of  God  over  His  creatures  be  absolute,  yet  we  kuow 
that  He  doth  not  afflict  willinyly,  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men.  These  very 
sufferings  may  be  the  means  of  our  salvHtion.  Such  considerations  will  prevent 
murmuring,  and  dispose  us  to  a  calm  acquiescence  in  the  appointments  of  Provi- 
dence. This  pious  ininciple  will  diffuse  its  benign  influence  over  the  v.hole  soul. 
It  will  soothe  our  sorrows,  overcome  our  angry  passions,  and  sweeten  the  bitter  cup 
of  life.  The  God  whom  we  serve  will  grunt  us  support  and  consolation  here,  and 
bestow  upon  us  unspeakable  happiness  hereafter.  V.  In  Stephen  we  have  a  pattern 
of  foroivkness.  If  we  examine  the  history  of  the  world,  we  shall  find  that  m  iny  of 
the  e\ils  which  from  age  to  age  have  afflicted  mankind,  have  arisen  from  h  re^  enge- 
ful  and  unforgiving  spirit.     In    ancient  times  Ihis  spirit,  exerting  itself  without 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  $35 

control,  diffused  over  every  land  its  baneful  influence,  producing  contention  and 
strife  and  every  evil  work.  This  spirit,  so  adverse  to  human  im^Jrovement,  our 
Saviour  set  Himself  upon  all  occasions  to  correct  and  to  subdue.  He  inculcated 
brotherly  love  to  an  extent  till  then  altogether  unknown.  "  Love  your  enemies,"  cfec, 
"If  we  forgive  not  our  brethren  their  offences,  neither  will  God  forgive  us  our 
offences."  This  considera  ion  should  lead  us  earnestly  to  cultivate  a  meek  and 
forgiving  spirit.  In  this  (-plrit  there  is  a  dignity,  a  magnanimity,  an  excellence, 
which  the  sons  of  dissipation  and  the  votaries  of  pleasure  may  envy  and  ridicule, 
but  which  the  Chiistian,  who  aspires  to  the  inheritance  of  the  blessed,  will  cherish 
as  one  of  the  highest  attainments  that  can  adorn  his  character.  And  while 
he  does  so,  every"  revengeful  principle  will  die  in  his  breast.  He  will 
be  at  peace  with  all  mankind,  "  and  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all 
understanding  will  keep  his  heart  and  mind  through  Christ  Jesus."  (Joint 
Rammy,    M.A.)  Death   to  the  hi-liever :    what? — I.  What  death  is   to   the 

BELIEVER.  1.  A  sleep.  The  expression  conveys  a  sweet  idea  of  placidity  and 
calmness.  The  day  of  life  declines;  the  shadows  of  its  evening  fall  around; 
wearied  and  exhausted  nature  needs  repose  ;  its  strength  is  weakness,  yea,  it  may 
be  labour  and  sorrow,  and  in  the  appointed  moment  the  believer  falls  "asleep." 
2.  Nor  is  it  a  troublous  rest :  it  is  a  peaceful  sleep.  "  Mark  the  perfect  man  .  .  , 
for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace."  The  stroke  of  death— the  pain  of  dissolution,  is, 
as  it  were,  but  the  kind  alarm  which  leads  a  child  of  God  to  shelter  himself  more 
closely  in  the  bosom  of  God's  paternal  love.  Since  the  Kedeemer  died,  death  has 
been  abolished  in  it^  penal  terror.  By  descending,  too,  into  the  grave,  He  has 
dispelled  the  ^lave's  dark  horrors,  and  sanctified  the  resting-place  of  His  dear  and 
believing  people.  The  grave,  therefore,  is  now  no  more  than  the  bed  where  the 
mortal  remains  of  the  believer  rest  in  peaceful  hope.  3.  A  sleep  fi-om  which  he 
shall  awake.  "  Them  that  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him  "  to  reward 
thetn.  The  night  of  the  grave  will  pass  away  ;  the  morning  of  the  resurrection-day 
will  dawn,  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first.  Nothing  shall  resist  the  voice 
which  will  say,  "  Come  forth."  4.  A  sleep  into  which,  when  once  awakened,  he 
will  fall  again  no  n.ore.  "Death  hath  no  more  dominion  over"  Christ:  death 
shall  have  no  more  dominion  over  one  that  believes  and  loves  and  serves  Him,  and 
is  "  risen  together  with  Him."  As  surely  as  "He  that  was  dead,  is  alive  again  and 
liveth  for  evermore,"  so  surely  shall  the  believer  rise  to  live  for  ever.  In  the  new 
heavens  and  the  new  earth  •' theie  shall  be  no  more  death."  The  purified  and 
ennohled  powers  of  a  glorified  saint,  will  be  too  vigorous  ever  to  need  repose  again. 
No  "  second  death  "  awaits  the  believer.  The  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  ;  "  whoso 
liveth  and  believeth  in  Him  shall  never  die."  Thus  "  the  righteous  hath  hope  in 
his  death."  II.  Whence  it  is  he  dies  so  calmly.  Simplv  because  he  is  a  believer. 
By  faith  he  becomes  interested  in  all  the  benefits  which  result  from  "  the  meri- 
torious cross  and  passion"  of  Jesus  Christ.  Like  the  nmrtyr  Stephen,  the 
believer — 1.  Partakes  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  Sees  Jesus  standing  on  God's  right 
hind — not  indeed  as  Stephen  visibly,  but  by  faith.  And  "where  He  is  those  who 
believe  on  Him  may  be  also."  In  a  persuasion  of  this  sweet  truth,  the  believer 
may  smi'e  in  death.  3.  Has  a  Friend,  to  whose  care  he  may  commit  his  departing 
spiiit.  Unspeakably  precious  is  this  privilege.  Our  earthly  friends  may  go  with 
us,  in  their  kind  solicitude,  to  the  verge  of  death  ;  but  there  the  dearest  ties  must 
be  severed,  and  a  last  adieu  be  bidden.  One  there  is,  however,  that  can  be  with  us 
in  the  shadowy  vale,  supjiort  and  cheer  us  through  it,  and  while  our  mortal  eyes  are 
closing  on  all  teri'estrial  objects.  He  can  give  to  our  faith  such  brightening  views  of 
celestial  glory  as  will  enrapture  our  departing  spirits,  and  fill  them  with  desire  to 
wing  their  upward  flight.  As  amidst  the  ocean's  billows  the  shipwrecked  mariner 
will  cling  with  increasing  tenacity  to  the  floating  plank,  so  amidst  the  agonies  of 
deaih  the  believer  lays  a  firmer  and  still  stronger  hold  upon  the  hope  of  life  in 
Christ.  He  sees  his  Lord  above  hitn :  and  whilst  he  hears  the  gracious  words, 
"Fear  not,  for  I  am  with  thee,"  "Receive  my  spirit,"  may  he  cry;  and  very 
grHcious  will  the  Lord  be  to  him  at  the  voice  of  his  prayer.  "  So  the  Lord  giveth 
His  beloved  sleep  "  ;  and  hence  it  is  the  believer  dies  so  calmly.  In  conclusion  let 
me  exhort  you — 1.  To  awake  from  the  slumbers  of  sin.  How  many,  alas  1  are 
there  "dead  in  trespisses  and  sins"!  While  they  continue  so,  they  cannot 
possibly  "  sleep  in  Jesus  "  or  "  die  in  the  Lord."  Do  not  be  saying  in  your  heart, 
"  A  little  more  sleep,  a  little  more  slumber,  a  little  more  folding  of  the  hands  to 
sleep."  Take  care  lest  your  sleep  in  the  death  of  sin  be  perpetuated  till  you  sleep 
in  tue  death  of  nature.     Take  care  lest  when  "  many  of  them  who  sleep  in  the  dust 


C36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

of  the  earth  shall  awake,"  you  rise — not  to  shine  as  the  firmament  and  as  the  stars 
for  ever  and  ever,  but  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt.  2.  To  believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Without  Him,  to  die  peacefully,  in  the  Scripture  senss  of  the 
word,  would  be  impossible.  3.  To  do  immediately  what  you  purpose  doing.  "Now 
is  the  day  of  salvation."     (TF.  Mudije,  B.A.)  heath  a  sleep: — Sleep  is  not 

imfrequently  used  by  ancient  heathen  writers  for  the  same  general  purpose  of 
denoting  the  termination  of  human  life.  The  ctill,  quiescent  stute  into  which 
man  passes  when  he  sinks  into  repose  is  no  unapt  image  of  what  takes  place  in 
appearance  when  man  expires,  more  especially  if  under  circumstances  of  gentle 
dissolution.  It  was  only  in  such  circumstances  that  the  metaphor  would  have  been 
deemed  appropriate  by  a  heathen,  and  would  not  probably  have  been  use^l  in  a  case 
like  the  present.  To  one,  however,  who,  like  the  author  of  this  history,  regarded 
the  pres^-nt  life  as  introductory  to  a  better  world,  and  who  held  the  doctiine  of  the 
resurrection,  death  under  whatever  circumstances  was  regarded  as  being  merely  a. 
sleep.  This  language  suggests  two  ideas.  I.  The  state  of  the  grave  is  not 
PERMANENT  :  it  is  E  slccp.  1.  Sleep  is  not  the  extinction,  but  a  suspension,  of  the 
facultie«,  and  extends  only  to  the  body.  The  mind  continues  its  activity,  and  when 
we  awake  the  two  continue  as  before  to  act  together.  Death  is  not  the  final  end  of 
man.  Tue  stroke  which  consigns  the  body  to  the  grave  does  not  destroy  the  Hctive 
functions  of  the  fouI.  It  still  subsists  in  a  state  of  consciousness,  and  at  the  resur- 
rection it  will  be  again  united  to  its  corporeal  companion.  He  whom  Stephen  saw 
standing  on  God's  right  hand  had  formerly  suffered  the  pangs  of  dissolution.  2. 
On  the  subject  of  the  resurrection  many  dillicnlties  have  been  proposed  and 
questions  started,  and  some  have  taxed  ingenuity  in  framing  answers.  But 
perhaps  the  best  answer  is  a  short  and  simple  one — the  resurrection  is  an  act  of 
Omnipotence.  If  this  is  admitted,  to  speculate  on  the  supf)osed  obstacles  to  its 
accomplishment  is  useless.  Is  anything  impossible  with  God  ?  But  independently 
of  Divine  revelation,  there  are  many  presumptions  of  the  resurrection.  Inanimate 
nature  undergoes  an  annual  death  and  resurrection.  But  however  striking  vegetable 
analogies  are,  they  afford  a  far  less  satisfactory  presumption  of  immortality  than 
that  which  is  derived  from  contemplating  the  sufferings  of  good  men,  and  to  which 
even  their  virtues  in  some  cases  contribute.  Can  it  be  that  the  man,  like  Stephen, 
shall  have  no  other  recompense  for  his  virtues  but  pain  and  torture  ;  while  ease, 
affluence,  and  secular  honours  shall  be  the  lot  of  those  who  have  been  his 
tormentors?  II.  The  state  of  the  grave  will,  to  the  Christian,  be  in  its  con- 
sequences IMPROVING.  It  is  a  sleep.  1.  All  have  experienced  the  f(  eliug  induced 
after  a  day  of  severe  exertion.  Both  body  and  mind  are  jaded.  You  know  likewise 
what  in  health  are  the  feelings  after  a  night  of  sound  repose  ;  you  rise  invigorated, 
and  are  iii  some  respects  new  men.  In  this  the  resemblance  holds  between  sleep 
and  death.  In  advanced  age  the  mind  and  the  body  equally  exhibit  symptoms  of 
decay  ;  and  disease,  at  any  period  of  life,  will  soon  produce  in  both  mind  and  body 
the  effects  which  are  produced  by  age.  When  they  are  leuniied,  after  the  body  has 
been  raised  from  the  grave,  we  shall  be  free  from  former  imperfections,  and  those 
numerous  sufferings  which  are  connected  with  the  body  will  be  no  more  known.  It 
must  be  obvious,  however,  from  this  statement,  that  the  analogy  in  this  case  is  in 
some  respects  far  less  perfect  than  in  the  former.  In  awaking  after  the  slumbers 
of  the  night,  though  invigorated  in  comparison  of  what  we  were  at  the  time  when, 
through  the  exhaustion  of  nature,  sleep  became  necessary,  there  is  no  alteration  ia 
our  general  condition.  It  is  otherwise  after  the  repose  of  the  grave.  On  the 
morning  of  the  resurrection  we  will  not  only  be  different  from  what  we  were  at  the 
time  when  natural  decay  or  disease  brought  on  dissolution,  but  different  from  what 
we  ever  have  been.  2.  To  render  a  future  life  an  object  of  desire,  it  is  necessary 
thrtt  it  phould  be  an  improvement  on  the  present.  Take  away  from  the  enjoyments 
of  this  life  the  pleasure  connected  with  the  hopes  of  another,  and  a  good  man  would 
have  little  inducement  to  resume  it.  If  the  feelings  of  the  worldly  man  were 
analysed,  it  would  perhaps  be  found  that  even  in  his  case,  at  every  period  of  life, 
it  is  the  hope  of  something  better  that  is  bis  chief  support.  Much  more  is  hope 
the  principle  of  a  Christian — a  hope  which  is  not  restricted  to  the  expectation 
merely  of  another  life,  but  includes  in  that  other  the  expectation  of  a  better.  In 
the  Chiistian  this  hope  will  not  be  disappointed.  Of  this  highly  consolatory 
doctrine  Stephen  had  an  ocular  demonstration.  In  what  Jesus  now  is,  Stephen 
saw  what  His  followers  shall  be.  {R.  Brodie,  A.M.)  Death  a  sleep: — When  a 
person  is  asleep  what  is  it  that  rests  ?  It  is  simply  the  muscles  and  the  nerves  and 
the  weary  limbs.     The  heart  goes  on  beating,  the  lungs  respiring  aud  expiring  ;  and 


CHAP.  VII.]  THE  ACTS.  637 

what  is  remarkable  in  sleep,  the  soul  never  sleeps  at  all.  It  seems  that  when  one 
is  asleep  the  soul  often  travels  to  far  distant  lands,  or  sails  upon  the  bosom  of  the 
deep,  amid  the  blue  hills  and  green  glens  of  other  parts  of  the  land ;  exploring, 
thinking,  searching,  studying.  The  soul  is  never  literally  dead  (though  it  may 
forget)  to  every  thoufjht  and  object,  to  all  that  enters  by  the  avenues  of  the  senses. 
If  sleep  be  the  metajihor  oE  deaih,  it  does  not  prove  that  the  soul  is  insensible,  but 
only  that  the  body,  the  outward  garment  only,  having  been  worn  and  wasted  in  the 
Vear  and  toil  of  this  present  life,  is  folded  up  and  laid  aside  in  tliat  wardrobe — the 
grave — a  grave  as  truly  in  the  keeping  of  the  Son  of  God  as  are  the  angels  in  glory. 
(J.  Ciimndng,  D.D.)  Death  a  sleep  : — You  cannot  find  in  the  New  Testament  any 
of  those  hateful  representations  of  dying  which  men  have  invented,  by  which  death 
is  portrayed  as  a  ghastly  skelt ton  with  a  scythe,  or  somelbing  equally  revolting. 
The  figures  by  which  death  is  represented  in  the  New  Testament  are  very  different. 
One  is  that  of  falling  asleep  in  Jesus.  When  a  little  child  has  played  all  day  long, 
and  become  tired  out,  and  the  twilight  has  sent  it  in  weariness  to  its  mother's  knee, 
wbere  it  thinks  it  has  come  for  more  excitement,  then,  almost  in  the  midst  of  its 
frolicking,  and  not  knowing  what  influence  is  creeping  over  it,  it  falls  back  in  the 
mother's  arms,  ami  nestles  close  to  the  sweetest  and  softest  couch  that  ever  cheek 
pressed,  and,  with  lengthening  breath,  sleeps ;  and  she  smiles  and  is  glad,  and  sits 
humming  unheard  joy  over  its  head.  So  we  fall  asleep  in  Jesus.  We  have  played 
long  enough  at  the  games  of  life,  and  at  last  we  feel  the  approach  of  death.  We 
are  tirei  out,  ari^  we  lay  our  head  back  on  the  bosom  of  Chiist  and  quietly  fall 
asleep.      (H.    w.    Beccher.)  The    sleep    of   death ; ^A.slte'p    amid    a    storm! 

"  He  fell  asleep  " — not,  he  died,  or  he  breathed  his  last,  but  "  he  fell 
asleep."  Death  is  but  a  sleej)  ;  we  need  no  more  shrink  from  dying  than 
from  our  nightly  beds  ;  we  may  lie  down  to  die  with  just  as  sure  a  hope 
of  rising ;  we  may  look  forward  to  it  as  the  release  from  all  the  cares, 
aU  the  work  of  life.  Moses  of  old  had  been  warned  of  the  time  when  he  should 
•'  sleep  with  his  fathers  "  (Deut.  xxxi.  16).  The  wise  man  talks  of  Samuel's  "  long 
sleep  "  (Eccles.  xlvi.  19).  David,  we  read,  "  fell  on  sleep  "  (chap  xii.  3G).  Monarcli 
after  monarch  is  laid  in  his  tomb,  by  the  sacred  writer,  with  the  short  epitaph,  that 
he  "  slept  with  his  fathers."  Daniel  prophesies  of  the  time,  when  "  those  who 
sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake  "  (Dan.  xii.  2).  Amid  the  convulsions  by 
which  Nature  testified  her  horror  at  the  dread  hour  of  the  Passion,  "  the  graves 
.were  opaned,  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept  arose"  (Matt,  xxvii.  52). 
So  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  xv.  18,  20 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13,  14).  Such  a  faith  speaks  still  upon 
the  walls  of  the  ancient  cenifteries  iu  the  catacombs  of  Rome,  whereto  this  day  thi 
simple  inscriptions  are  preserved,  by  which  faith  and  affection  marked  the  remains 
of  their  lost,  in  the  first  and  second  centuries  after  Christ.  .  On  one  we  read  two 
words,  "Victoria  sleeps" — or,  "  Saturninus  sleeps  in  paace." — "  Zoticus  is  laid 
here  to  sleep." — "Domitian,  artless  soul,  sleeps  in  peace." — "  Antonia,  sweet  soul, 
in  peace.  May  God  refresh  her." — "Arethusa  sleeps  in  God." — "He  sleeps,  but 
lives." — Laurinia,  sweeter  than  honey,  rests  in  psace." — "  On  the  5th  of  November 
was  placed  here  to  sleep,  Gregory,  friend  of  all,  the  enemy  of  none." — Or,  with  a 
studied  conciseness,  "dementia,  tortiired,  dead,  sleeps;  will  rise  again."  Faith 
loved  to  dwell  upan  an  image  which  represented  so  sweetly  her  hope  in  dying.  But 
Reason  here  comes  in  aid  of  Faith  ;  and  the  more  closely  we  look  into  the  nature 
of  sleep  and  of  death,  the  more  exact  is  the  r.  semblance  we  shall  discern.  1. 
Sleep,  first  of  all,  is  a  mystery  to  us.  What  wonder  death  should  be  ?  Sleep  is 
one  of  the  greatest  mysteries  of  our  existence  here,  so  mysterious  that  were  it  not 
so  familiar  to  us,  we  should  every  day  be  wondeiing  about  it,  that  out  of  the  short 
life  G»d  has  given  us  for  our  probation,  full  one-third  should  be  spsnt  in  a  state  of 
inaction,  when  we  can  do  neither  good  nor  bad.  Even  so  shall  we  lie  inactive  in 
our  graves.  Is  it  a  mystery,  again,  h  )w  we  die  ?  And  who  can  understand  how 
we  fail  asleep  ?  It  comss  upon  us,  we  know  not  how.  We  cannot  recollect  it  after- 
wards. Our  consciousness  dissolves,  and  we  are  asleep.  And  so  it  may  be  at 
death.  We  lie  uneasily  on  our  bed  ;  we  try  to  die  :  on  a  moment  the  last  tie  is 
loosed ;  and,  \ve  know  riot  how,  we  are  away.  Sleep  soothes  every  pain,  forgets 
every  care  ;  angry  tempers,  disappointments,  want,  unkindness,  all  the  miseries  of 
life  are  left  behind  in  a  moment.  And  so  it  will  be  at  death.  A  parting  struggle 
or  two,  one  last  breath,  and  "  there  is  neither  sorrow  nor  sighing,  neither  any  more 
pain,  for  the  former  things  are  passed  away."  2.  The  hours  of  sleep  level  all  the 
inequalities  of  life,  and  make  the  poor  man  as  happy  as  the  king  (Job  iii.  17-19). 
a.  Sleep  unlooses  all  the  ties  of  life,  and  death  breaks  them.     In  sleep  the  soul 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  via. 

is  disengaged  from  the  trammels  of  the  body;  and  thus  we  mav  form  a  conjecture 
how  it  will  exist  separately  from  it  hereafter.  We  lie  asleep,  the  eyes  are  closed, 
the  ears  are  deaf,  the  hands  lie  uselessly  by  our  side ;  but  the  mind  is  busily  at 
work,  and  revolves  within  itself  all  those  images  which  have  been  conveyed  into  it 
in  our  waking  hours.  We  can  so,  I  say,  guess  how,  amid  the  darkness  and  silence 
of  the  grave,  the  soul  will  be  able  to  rehearse  to  itself  all  the  experience  of  life ;  and 
with  the  avenue  of  the  senses  tlien  cut  off,  will  have  material  enough  within  itself 
for  incessant  activity  and  thought.  4.  Sleep,  instead  of  contractinti  the  powers  of 
the  mind,  gives  keenness  to  tiie  memory,  and  wings  to  the  imagination.  And  will 
not  this  again  help  us  to  understand  how,  when  we  have  left  this  material  world 
behind  us,  and  the  sheath  of  the  bo  ly  no  longer  encases  the  soul  and  dulls  her  edge, 
that  the  emancipated  spirit  then  will  be  able  at  a  glance  to  recall  with  the  exactest 
truth  the  entire  history  of  life'  And  when  we  read  of  the  books  being  opened,  and 
the  judgment  set,  and  the  dead,  both  small  and  great,  being  judged  out  of  the  things 
that  were  written  in  the  l)Ooks  ;  what  else  may  be  intended  here,  than  this  book  of 
memory  and  conscience,  with  every  old  impiession  revived  afresh,  so  that  the  sinner 
sees  all  his  sins  before  his  face,  and  goes  away  to  his  own  place,  speechless  and 
without  appeal,  self-condemned?  In  sleep  the  mind  is  emancipated  from  the 
restrictions  of  bodily  lii'e,  and  the  limitation  of  time  and  space.  A  success  on  of 
images  crowd  into  the  mind,  and  we  live  a  life  long  in  a  night.  This  is  a  sort  of 
foretaste  of  the  freed- m  from  material  ties,  which  the  disembodied  spirit  sliall 
enjoy.  5.  It  is  in  the  time  of  sleep,  again,  that  the  soul,  half-loost^ed  from  the  body, 
is  most  open  to  communications  from  the  unseen  world  (Job  xxxiii.  15,  16).  It  was 
in  the  hour  of  sleep,  in  a  vision  by  night,  that  the  angel  appeared  to  Mary,  and  to 
Joseph  and  to  Daniel.  The  spirits  of  another  world  may  have  peculiar  access  to 
our  souls  when  we  are  disengaged  from  this  ;  and  those  that  sleep  in  Jesus  may  so 
enjoy  unrestrained  comnmuioii  with  the  innumerable  company  of  angels.  And  the 
Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  Hesh  may  thus  be  instructii  g  and  preparing  ttiem  for  His 
glorious  kingd.  m.  This  long  sLep  of  peace  may  thus  be  as  needful  for  the  expm- 
sion  and  perfection  of  our  nature,  as  o  ir  nightly  slumber  is  for  the  growth  of  our 
present  frame,  and  for  the  refreshment  of  soul  and  body.  Morning  after  morning 
now  we  each  may  thank  our  Maker,  "I  beheld  and  awaked,  my  sleep  was  sweet 
unto  me  "  ;  and  every  su(h  arising  we  may  hail  as  an  omen  of  the  day,  when 
our  eyes  shall  be  opened  to  behold  God's  presence  in  righteousness,  when 
we  shall  wake  up  after  Christ's  likeness,  and  be  satisfied  with  it.  Such  a 
waking,  who  will  not  look  up  and  hope  after  ?  Such  a  sleep,  who  need 
mistrust  or  fear  ?  And  would  we  know  how  we  may  so  sleep  with  God  ?  A 
quiet  conscience  gives  the  sweetest  sleep.  Night  after  nitht,  let  us  t'ike  a  closer 
and  closer  view  of  death,  and  then  we  shall  not  start  from  it  when  it  comes. 
We  shall  lie  down  at  last  and  be  glad  of  it,  just  as  we  are  glad  to  fall  asleep. 
(C.  F.  Secretiin,  M.A.)  The  blond  of  the  marti/r.f  the  seed  of  the  Church  .-  —  Stephen 
was  dead,  and  it  might  well  have  seemed  that  ail  the  truth  which  was  to  be  tlie  glory 
and  the  thought  of  Christianity  had  died  with  him.  But  the  deliverance  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  their  free  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  were  truths  too  glorious 
to  be  quenched.  The  truth  may  be  suppressed  for  a  time,  but  it  alwuys  starts  up 
from  its  apparent  grave.  Fra  Dolcino  was  torn  to  pieces,  and  Savonarola  and  Huss 
were  burnt,  but  the  Eeformation  was  not  prevented.  Stephen  sank  in  blood,  but 
his  place  was  taken  by  the  young  man  who  stood  by  to  incite  the  murderers.  Four 
years  after  Jesus  hid  died  on  the  Cross  Stephen  was  stoned  for  being  His  disciple ; 
thirty  years  after  the  death  of  Stephen  his  deadliest  opponent  died  also  for  the 
same  holy  faith.     [Archdeacon  Farrar.) 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


Vers.  1-8.  And  Saul  was  consenting  to  his  death. — Three  great  figtirea  in  the 
Church : — I.  The  persecuting  Saul.  In  this  part  of  the  narrative  the  name  of 
Saul  occuis  three  times  (chaps,  vii.  58  ;  viii.  1,  3).  How  quick  the  development  and 
how  sure  !  First  of  all,  he  watched  the  clothes  of  the  men  who  stoned  Stejihen  ; 
then  he  expressed  in  every  feature  of  his  face  satisfaction  at  the  martyr's  death  ; 
and  then  he  took  up  the  matter  earnestly  himself  with  both  hands.  He  struck  the 
Church  as  it  had  never  been  struck  before.     The  taste  for  blood  is  an  acquired  taste. 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  639 

but  "  it  crows  by  what  it  feeds  on."  This  man  Saul  began  as  he  ended.  There 
was  noihing  amniguous  a.bout  him.  A  tremenilous  foe,  a  glorious  friend  !  We  see 
from  this  part  of  the  narrative — 1.  The  power  of  the  Christian  religion  to  excite  the 
worst  passions  of  men.  It  is  a  "  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  deatb." 
Christianity  either  kills  or  saves.  We  have  become  so  familiar  with  it  externally  as 
to  cast  a  doubt  upon  this.  It  has  become  possible  for  nominal  Christian  believers 
to  care  nothing  about  their  faith.  The  age  has  been  seized  with  what  is  known  as 
a  horror  of  dogmatism.  But  Christianity  has  no  reason  for  its  existence  if  it  be  not 
positive.  Poetry  may  hold  parley  with  prose  fiction,  because  they  belong  to  the 
same  category.  But  arithmetic  does  not  say,  "  If  yo'i  will  allow  me,  I  may  venture 
to  suggest  that  the  multiplication  of  such  and  such  n5Tn  ^rs  may  possibly  result  in 
such  an)  such  a  total."  Now,  in  proportion  as  any  religion  is  true,  can  it  not  stoop 
to  the  holding  of  conversation  with  anybody.  It  i.->  not  a  suggestion— it  is  a  revela- 
tion. It  is  not  a  puzzle,  to  which  a  hundred  answers  may  be  given  by  wits  keen  at 
guessing  ;  it  is  an  oracle.  Can  you  wonder,  then,  that  a  religion  which  claimed  to 
be  the  very  voice  and  glory  of  God,  should  have  encountered  unpitying  and  most 
malignnnt  hostility  ?  If  it  could  have  come  croachingly,  or  apologetically,  and  have 
said,  "  I  think,  I  suggest,  I  hope,"  it  might  have  been  heard  at  the  world's  con- 
venience. But  being  witii  angels'  songs  true,  it  raised  the  world  into  antagonism 
aiid  deadly  conflict.  So  will  every  true  life.  We  have  no  enemies  because  we  have 
no  gospel.  We  pass  along  pretty  easily,  because  we  annoy  no  man's  prejudices  or 
naughtinesses.  We  dash  no  man's  gods  to  the  ground ;  we  stamp  on  no  man's 
idolatries;  and  so  we  have  no  martyrs.  In  olden  times  Christianity  attacked  the 
most  formidable  citadels  of  thoui'ht,  p'ejudice,  and  error,  and  broujiht  upon  itself 
the  fist  of  angry  retaliation.  2.  That  the  success  of  the  enemy  was  turned  into  his 
deadliest  failure.  "  They  that  were  scattered  "  (ver.  4),  did  not  go  everywhere  with 
shame  burning  on  their  cheek,  nor  whining  and  moaning  that  they  were  doomed  to 
a  useless  life.  They  were  made  evangelists  by  suffering.  That  is  the  true  way  of 
treating  every  kind  of  assault.  Wbeu  the  pulpit  is  assailed  as  being  behind  the  age, 
let  the  pulpit  preach  better  than  ever  and  more  than  ever,  and  let  that  be  its  trium- 
phant reply.  Wlien  Cbristianity  is  as-ailed,  publish  it  the  more.  Evangelisation 
is  the  best  reply  to  every  form  of  assault.  3.  Christianit.v  followed  by  its  proper 
result.  "  And  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city."  Joy  was  a  word  that  was  early 
associated  with  Christianity.  Said  the  angel,  "  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great 
joy."  Where  now  is  that  singing,  holy  joy  ?  We  have  lost  the  music,  we  have 
retained  the  tears.  The  revelling  is  now  in  the  other  house.  II.  The  dead 
Stephen.  Already  there  are  two  graves  in  the  early  Church.  In  the  one  lie 
Ananias  and  Sipphira,  in  the  grave  opened  to-day  there  lies  Stephen.  In  one  or 
other  of  these  graves  we  must  be  buried !  Over  the  first  there  was  no  lamentation. 
Sad  ^'rave !  The  liars'  retreat,  the  hypocrites'  nameless  hiding-place  1  Will  you  be 
buried  there  ?  Then  there  is  the  good  man's  grave,  which  is  not  a  grave  at  all,  it 
is  so  full  of  peace  and  promise,  will  you  be  buried  there  ?  The  road  to  it  is  rough, 
but  th--  rest  is  deep  and  sweet,  and  the  waking  immortality !  Will  you  so  live  that 
you  will  be  mu(!h  missed  for  good-doing?  III.  The  evangelistic  Philip  (ver.  5). 
Stephen  dead,  Philip  taking  his  place — that  is  the  military  rule  !  The  next  man, 
Forward!  "  Who  will  be  ba|>tized  for  the  dead  ?  "  When  Stephen  was  killed  the 
remainder  of  the  seven  did  not  take  fright  and  run  away  in  cowardly  terror,  but 
Philip,  the  next  man.  took  up  the  vacant  place,  and  pre>ichcd  Christ  in  Samaria. 
Who  will  take  up  the  places  of  the  great  men  and  the  good  men  ?  Is  the  Church  to 
be  a  broken  line,  or  a  solid  and  invincible  square?  These  three  great  figures  are 
still  in  the  Church.  Our  Stephens  are  not  dend.  We  see  them  no  more  in  the  flesh, 
but  ihev  are  mightier  than  ever  since  they  have  ascended  to  heaven,  having  left 
behind  them  the  inspiration  of  a  noble  example.  John  Bunynn  is  more  alive  to-day 
than  he  was  when  he  wrote  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progres•^."  John  Wesley  is  more  alive 
to-d;iy  than  he  was  when  he  began  to  prea  h  the  Word  in  England.  Your  child  is 
Hot  dead  when  its  memory  leads  you  to  do  some  kindness  to  some  other  child. 
Our  fa'hers,  heroic  and  noble,  are  not  dead,  when  we  are  able  at  their  graves  to 
reli^'ht  torches  and  go  on  with  our  sacred  woik.  We  cannot  peruse  a  narrative  of 
this  kind  without  feeling  that  we  are  in  a  great  succession,  and  that  we  ought  to  be 
in  proportion  great  siic:!essors.  (J.  Parker,  D. I). )  Stephen  and  Said: — Oup  of 
the  greatest  demands  that  the  Church  makes  on  us  is  when  she  summ  >ns  us  to  pass 
abruptly  from  Christmas  Day  to  the  fea^t  of  St.  Stephen  ;  from  the  peaceful  joy  of 
the  h  ly  family  and  angel  songs  to  the  violence  of  the  mob ;  from  the  King  of  ange's 
to  the  first  who  bore  witness  to  his  faith  and  patience.    At  a  scene  like  that  of  St. 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

Stephen's  martyrdom  it  is  a  relief  to  place  ourselves  in  the  position  of  a  bystander. 
Tliere  stands  Saul,  the  very  antithesis  of  Stephen,  young  and  enthusiastic  as  he,  but 
passionately  attached  to  Pharisaism  as  Stephen  was  to  the  gospel.  As  we  know 
Paul  in  his  Epistles,  his  great  characteristic  gift  was  sympathy.  How  then  could  he 
have  consented  to  this  tragedy?  I.  The  reasons  for  his  consent.  1.  He  was  follow- 
ing the  stream  of  opinion.  AH  Jerusalem  agreed  that  Stephen  deserved  his  fate; 
and  Paul  had  as  yet  no  reason  for  resisting  the  will  of  the  majority.  2.  He  was 
following  the  instincts  of  religious  lo^  alty  as  he  understood  them.  To  him  Stephen 
was  a  rebel  against  authority.  3.  He  was  following  the  instincts  of  piety.  The 
charge  against  him  was  that  he  calumniated  God,  Moses,  the  temple,  and  the  law.  The 
first  was  clearly  an  inference  from  the  rest,  and  about  the  rest  there  was  this  much 
truth,  that  he  no  doubt  preached  to  the  Christians  against  attending  temple  worship. 
This  he  thought  was  at  variance  with  the  world-wide  mii^sion  of  Christ.  Accord- 
ingly he  proved  before  the  Sanhedrin  that  there  was  nothing  to  show  that  God'3 
presence  was  confined  to  the  Promised  Land,  much  less  to  a  particular  spot  in  it.  All 
this  to  Paul  was  a  blasphemous  novelty.  II.  His  reflections  on  the  tragedy. 
When  all  was  over  the  memories  of  what  had  p  issed  came  back,  and  as  he  saw 
Stephen's  death  in  retrospect  he  felt  the  force  of  three  forms  of  power — suffering, 
sanctity,  truth.  1.  Suffering  is  power — (1)  When  it  is  voluntary.  This  stirs  in  us  a 
fellow  feeling  even  when  undergone  for  an  object  we  condemn.  (2)  This  power  is 
great  in  proportion  to  the  sacrifice  it  involves.  The  deaths  of  the  very  old  or  young 
touch  us  less  than  that  of  a  young  man  just  reaching  and  conscious  of  the  maturity 
of  his  faculties.  He  gives  the  best  human  nature  has  to  give.  So  it  was  with 
Stephen,  and  Saul  as  he  remembered  this  young  manly  life  crushed  out  felt  the 
power  of  suffering.  2.  Sanctity  is  power,  greatest  when  associated  with  suffering. 
Stephen  was  not  merely  good,  keeping  clear  of  what  is  evil ;  he  was  holy.  He  had 
a  spirit  that  reflects  a  higher  world — "  full  of  faiih  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  This 
sanctity  illuminated  his  bodily  frame,  and  was  made  perfectly  plain  in  his  dying 
prayer.  This  was  not  lost  on  Saul.  3.  Truth  is  power.  When  Saul  heard  of 
Stephen's  declaration  his  whole  soul  rose  against  it ;  yet  the  ideas  of  Stephen's 
speech  haunted  the  young  Pharisee,  and  became  the  great  characteristic  positions 
of  his  after  ministry.  4.  These  three  characteristics  of  the  martyr  find  their  perfect 
embodiment  only  in  Christ.  III.  Closing  considerations.  1.  The  view  a  Chris- 
tian should  take  of  an  opponent  of  Christian  truth — that  of  a  possible  convert  and 
ally.  2.  What  persecutors  can  and  cannot  do.  They  can  put  down  a  given  belief 
by  extermination  as  Christianity  was  crushed  out  in  Northern  Africa  and  Protes- 
tantism in  Spain.  But  if  persecution  does  not  exterminate  it  only  fans  the  flame, 
as  did  the  persecuting  emperors  and  Queen  Mary.  The  persecution  begun  by  the 
death  of  Stephen  only  contributed  to  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  3.  The  criminal 
folly  of  persecution  by  Christians  since  it  is  an  attempt  to  achieve  by  outward  and 
mechanical  violence  results  which  to  be  worth  anything  before  God  must  be  the 
product  of  His  converting  grace.  4.  The  signal  service  which  martyrs  have  rendered 
to  the  world — enriching  his  country,  church,  age,  with  new  and  invigorating  ideas  of 
truth,  and  therefore  while  other  sufferers  die  and  are  forgotten,  the  martyr  rightly 
has  his  place  in  the  calendar  of  the  Church  and  in  the  hearts  of  her  faithful  children. 
(Ca7ion  Liddon.)  After  Stephen,  Paul: — It  is  said  of  John  Huss  that,  on  a 
countryman  throwing  a  faggot  at  his  head,  he  exclaimed,  "Oh,  holy  simplicity  I 
God  send  thee  better  light  I  You  roast  the  goose  now,  but  a  swan  shall  come  after 
me,  and  he  shall  escape  your  fire."  Oddly  enough,  "  Huss  "  is  the  Bohemian  for 
"  goose,"  while  the  meaning  of  "Luther  "is  "a  swan."  Strong  contrasts  of 
vioral  character  (texts,  and  chap.  ix.  5,  11) : — Here  is  moral  character — I.  Quies- 
cently consenting  to  the  wrong  (ver.  1).  From  Stephen's  death  Saul  would  no 
doubt  catch  the  inspiration  of  his  future  life.  His  Jewish  education  has  fitted  him 
for  this  crisis.  He  was  quite  prepared  to  guard  the  clothes  of  those  who  would  slay 
a  Christian.  Here,  then,  he  stands  at  his  post  calmly  and  unmoved,  the  subject  of 
two  extreme  influences,  the  surging,  pass^ionate  mob,  and  the  earnest  prayer  of  the 
martyr.  This  event  was  educational  to  Saul.  The  manly  conduct,  earnest  speech, 
and  saintly  death  of  Stephen,  would  appeal  to  his  diviner  sentiments  ;  while  the 
tumult  and  murderous  intentions  of  the  crowd  would  influence  his  baser  side.  To 
which  will  he  yield?  All  the  force  of  his  past  life  inclines  to  the  latter.  But 
cannot  that  pale  face  and  devout  appeal  to  heaven  overcome  his  prejudice  ?  No  1 
he  leaves  the  scene  with  a  cold  determination  to  make  it  typical  of  his  future.  But, 
as  a  thought  may  lurk  in  the  mind,  concealed  and  unrecognised,  so  the  impulses 
awakened  in  the  heart  of  Saul  by  this  event  only  awaited  the  further  touch  of  the 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  641 

Divine  Spirit  to  make  them  the  master  powers  of  his  soul.  Who  can  tell  the  forma- 
tive power  which  one  event  may  exercise  upon  our  lives  ?  But  let  us  not  think  that 
"we  can  stand  to  look  at  sin  without  sharing  its  guilt.  II.  In  detebmined  hostility 
TO  THE  EIGHT  (ver.  3).  This  hostility  was — 1.  Daring,  "  The  Church."  He  might 
strive  to  pluck  the  stars  from  the  Divine  grasp,  but  to  touch  the  object  of  God's 
peculiar  care  was  beyond  description  bold.  We  wonder  that  men  dare  to  attack  the 
Church,  or  to  plot  injury  against  it.  Such  conduct  is  a  proof  of  their  hardihood,  or 
they  would  be  awed  by  her  holy  presence  and  Divine  Protector.  2.  Extensive. 
*'  Made  havoc."  It  often  appears  strange  that  God  should  permit  men  to  pursue, 
sometimes  unchecked,  a  course  of  determined  harm  to  His  Church.  This  fact 
almost  staggers  reason,  and  only  faith  can  repose  in  its  rectitude  and  wisdom.  But 
men  need  not  take  the  sword ;  the  tale  of  the  tattler,  the  formality  of  the  hypocrite 
is  8uf3Sicient.  3.  Impudent.  "  Entering  into  every  house."  What  right  had  Saul 
in  another  man's  house,  and  especially  for  such  a  purpose  ?  A  man's  house  is 
sacred,  consecrated  to  family  union  and  love.  No  stranger  unbidden,  no  foe  should 
enter.  But  religious  bigotry  thinks  not  of  social  usage,  much  less  of  Christian 
courtesy.  4.  Inhuman.  "  Haling  men  and  women."  When  bigotry  once  gets 
possession  of  a  man,  it  yields  to  no  argument,  not  even  to  that  of  tender  woman- 
hood. See  what  quiescent  sin  comes  to.  Men  that  commence  by  keeping  the 
clothes  of  persecutors,  soon  become  persecutors  themselves.  The  path  of  sin  is 
ever  downward.  III.  Aeoused  and  inquiring  (cbap.  ix.  5).  The  transitions  of 
moral  character  are  often — 1.  Sudden.  Saul  little  expected  in  a  few  months  to  be 
praying  to  the  very  Being  whose  followers  he  was  murdering ;  he  was  on  an  errand 
of  rage,  and  he  never  thought  that  it  would  turn  out  a  mission  of  mercy  to  himself. 

2.  Overwhelming.  Saul  is  almost  stunned.  His  moral  being  is  altogether  confused. 
The  change  now  working  within  his  soul  is  too  great  to  be  made  calmly.  The  only 
relief  of  his  half-unconscious  soul  is  the  cry,  "  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?  " 

3.  Astonishing  to  others.  What  would  the  Jewish  council  say  to  the  change  that 
had  come  over  Saul?  The  disciples  of  Christ  received  him  half  with  suspicion. 
What  an  impression  would  his  conversion  make  upon  the  general  public  !  4.  Pro- 
ductive of  great  results  to  mankind.  How  many  have  received  truth  and  benefit 
through  the  toils  of  the  Apostle  Paul  during  his  life  ;  and  how  many  minds  has  he 
instructed,  how  many  souls  has  he  aided  in  life's  struggles  by  his  writings !  Thus 
we  see  that  the  sudden  changes  that  come  over  moral  character  are  often  productive 
of  great  results  to  the  individual  himself,  and  to  mankind  at  large.  IV.  In  com- 
MDNiON  WITH  GoD  (chap.  ix.  11).  1.  Prayer  is  an  index  to  character.  The  praying 
man  is  not  Saul  the  persecutor,  but  Saul  the  penitent  sinner.  Persecutors  do  not 
pray  to  Jesus  Christ.  Whenever  you  see  a  man  in  earnest  prayer  to  Christ,  you 
may  have  some  idea  of  his  moral  character.  2.  Prayer  is  a  reason  for  help.  Ana- 
nias was  to  go  to  Saul  and  instruct  him,  "  for  behold  he  prayeth."  No  matter 
what  our  circumstances,  if  we  will  but  pray,  God  will  send  His  aid  and  comfort.  It 
is  not  the  rule  of  heaven  to  help  a  prayerless  soul.  Do  you  know  of  a  penitent  soul, 
it  is  your  duty  to  take  to  it  a  message  of  peace  and  hope.  3.  A  life  commenced  by 
prayer  is  likely  to  be  useful.  Has  not  Paul  been  useful  to  the  Church  and  the 
world?  And  why?  Was  it  not  because  God  could  say  of  him,  "Behold,  he 
prayeth."  4.  God  notices  the  first  prayer  of  contrition  and  calls  attention  to  it. 
"Behold."  It  is  an  interesting  sight  even  to  heaven.  5.  God  sends  succour  to 
contrite  souls.  Has  He  not  frequently  sent  an  Ananias  to  you,  fellow  sinner? 
What  have  been  the  moral  contrasts  of  your  life  ?  Is  there  a  Damascus  journey 
amongst  them  ?  Conclusion  :  Learn  not  to  entirely  estimate  the  character  of  men 
from  a  past  remembrance  of  them.  Suppose  an  associate  of  Saul's  who  had  known 
him  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  life,  but  who  had  not  seen  him  for  some  time,  had 
spoken  of  him  as  a  persecutor  and  Jewish  bigot,  how  mistaken  would  have  been  his 
opinion,  and  how  unjust  to  the  converted  apostle  I  We  should  not  be  hasty  to  pass 
an  opinion  on  our  friends  from  a  past  remeaibrance  of  them.  They  may  have  since 
undergone  a  moral  change  for  the  better.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  toonderftil 
ways  of  the  Lord  in  the  propagation  of  His  kingdom : — 1.  The  martyr  Stephen 
waters  the  Church  with  his  blood.  2.  The  raging  Saul  serves,  even  as  a  persecutor, 
unconsciously  to  the  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  8.  The  fugitive  Chris- 
tions  are  the  first  messengers  of  the  gospel  to  a  distance.  (K.  Gerok.)  And  at 
that  town  there  was  a  great  persecution. — The  persecution  after  Stephen: — Here 
we  have — I.  A  man  who  became  the  greatest  apostle  op  Cheistianity  acting  as 
ITS  MOST  malignant  TOE.  1.  Saul  was  an  accomplice  in  the  martyrdom  of  Stephen, 
and  rejoiced  in  it  (chap.  vii.  58 ;  xxii.  20).     2.  He  was  an  infuriated  leader  in  the 

VOL.    I.  41 


642  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

general  persecution.  The  word  "  made  havoc  "  is  commonly  applied  to  wild  beasts 
(chap.  xxi.  10  ;  Gal.  i.  6).  Now  the  fact  that  this  man  became  the  greatest  apostle 
demonstrates — (1)  The  greatness  of  his  conversion.  (2)  The  power  of  the  gospel. 
(3)  The  infinitude  of  Divine  mercy.  II.  Men  eising  above  the  most  powekfully 
HOSTILE  ciECUMSTANCES.  1.  The  apostlcs  stood  cahnly  in  ihe  scene  where  their  lives 
were  in  the  most  imminent  danger,  and  when  most  of  their  fellow  disciples  had  fled. 
2.  Devout  men  discharged  a  duty  most  exciting  to  the  rage  of  their  enemies.  Away, 
then,  with  the  dogma  that  man  is  the  creature  of  circumstances.  He  is  imly  so  as 
he  loses  his  manhood.  III.  The  most  intolerant  persecction  ruKTiiERiNO  the 
CAUSE  OF  TRUTH.  Persecution — 1.  Throws  the  persecuted  more  and  more  on  their 
God.  2.  It  enables  them  to  furnish  in  their  lives  a  nobler  manife-tation  of  Chris- 
tianity to  the  world  ;  more  earnest,  united,  devout.  3.  It  awakens  general  sympathy 
among  men  on  their  behalf,  and  thus  disposes  them  to  attend  to  their  teachings. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  effect  of  -persecution : — The  sacred  fire,  wLich  might  have 
burnt  low  on  the  hearth  of  the  upper  chamber  of  Jerusalem,  was  kindled  into  fresh 
heat  and  splendour  when  its  brands  were  scattered  over  all  Judaea  and  Samaria,  and 
uncircumcised  Gentiles  were  admitted  by  baptism  into  the  fold  of  Christ.  {Arch- 
deacon Farrar.)  They  were  all  scattered  abroad. — The  dispersion : — Jerusalem  was 
naturally  the  chief  scene  of  the  persecution,  and  the  neighbouring  towns,  Hebron, 
and  Gaza,  and  Lydda,  and  Joppa,  became  places  of  refuge.  It  was  probably  to  this 
influx  of  believers  in  Christ  that  we  may  trace  the  existence  of  Christian  communi- 
ties in  the  two  latter  cities.  The  choice  of  Samaria  was,  perhaps,  suggested  by  the- 
hatred  of  that  people  to  the  Jews.  Those  who  were  fleeing  from  a  persecution  set 
on  foot  by  the  priests  and  rulers  of  Jerusalem  were  almost  ipso  facto  sure  of  a 
welcome  in  Neapolis  and  other  cities.  But  the  choice  of  this  as  a  place  of  refuge 
indicated  that  the  barriers  of  the  old  antipathy  were  already  in  part  broken  down. 
What  seemed  the  pressure  of  circumstances  was  leading  directly  to  the  fulfilment 
of  our  Lord's  commands,  that  the  disciples  should  be  witnesses  in  Samaria  as  well 
as  in  Jutisea  (chap,  i.  8).     {Dean  Flumptre.)       The  extension  of  the  Church: — I.  God 

INTENDED    THAT    HiS    ChUKCH    SHOULD  BE  SCATTERED   ALL  OVER  THE  WORLD.       1.    TllCrS 

was  a  tendency  in  our  humanity  at  first  to  remain  together;  hence  the  first  grey 
fathers  endeavoured  to  build  a  central  tower  around  which  the  race  should  rally. 
But  God  confounded  their  language,  and  scattered  them  that  they  might  people  the 
world.  Jerusalem  was  first  the  central  point  of  Christianity,  and  the  tendency 
doubtless  was  to  keep  the  centre  strong.  I  have  often  heard  the  argument,  "  Do 
not  have  too  many  out-stations,  keep  up  a  strong  central  force."  But  God's  plan 
was  that  the  holy  force  should  be  distributed  ;  the  holy  seed  must  be  sown — to  do 
this  the  Lord  used  the  rough  hand  of  persecution.  One  went  this  way,  and  one  the 
other;  and  the  faithful  were  scattered.  2.  Every  Church  endowed  with  the  Spirit 
will  be  spread  abroad.  God  never  means  the  Church  to  be  shut  up  in  a  shell  or,  like 
ointmeut,  enclosed  in  a  box.  The  precious  perfume  of  the  gospel  must  be  poured 
forth  to  sweeten  the  air.  Now  that  persecution  has  ceased  godly  men  are  scattered 
through  the  necessity  of  earning  a  livelihood.  Sometimfs  we  regret  that  young 
men  should  have  to  go  to  a  distance,  that  families  should  have  to  migrate.  But 
does  not  the  Lord  by  this  means  sow  the  good  seed  widely  ?  It  is  very  pleasant  to 
be  comfortably  settled  under  an  edifying  ministry,  but  the  Lord  has  need  of  some 
of  His  servants  in  places  where  there  is  no  light ;  and  they  ought  of  themselves  to 
scatter  voluntarily.  Every  Christian  should  say,  "  Where  can  I  do  most  good  ?  " 
And  if  we  will  not  go  afield  willingly,  God  may  use  providential  necessity  as  the 
forcible  means  of  our  dispersion.  II.  God's  design  is  not  the  scattering  in  iiself, 
BUT  scattering  OF  A  PURPOSE — to  prcach  the  Word.  The  word  "  proclaim  "  is  not 
quite  so  subject  to  the  modern  sense  which  has  spoiled  the  word  "  preach."  The 
latter  has  come  to  be  a  sort  of  official  term  for  delivering  a  set  discourse ;  whereas 
gospel  preaching  is  telling  the  gospel  out  in  anyway.  Note — 1.  The  universality  of 
the  work  of  evangelising.  All  the  scattered  went  everywhere  ;  there  does  not  seem 
to  have  been  any  exception.  You  thought  it  would  read  "  the  apostles,"  but  they 
were  just  the  people  who  did  not  go  at  ail.  Generals  mav  have  to  stand  still  in  the 
centre  of  the  battle  to  dn-ect  the  forces;  but  this  was  soldiers'  battles,  and  of  this 
sort  all  the  battles  of  the  Cross  ought  to  be.  2.  There  were  no  personal  distinctions. 
It  is  not  said  that  ministers  preached  tha  Word,  scarcely  anything  has  been  more 
injurious  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ  than  the  distinction  between  clergy  and  laity. 
No  such  distinction  appears  in  the  Bible.  "  Ye  are  God's  Kleros  "  :  all  God's  saints 
are  God's  inheritance.  "Ye  are  a  royal  priesthood,"  Though  God  gives  to  His 
Church  apostles,  teachers,  pastors,  &c.,  yet  not  by  way  of  setting  up  a  professional 


CHAP,  viri,]  THK  ACTS.  643 

<!aste  who  are  to  do  all  the  work  while  others  sit  still.  Every  converted  man  is  to 
teach  what  he  knows.  (C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  The  scattered  Church;  or  good  out  of 
evil: — History  is  God  teaching  by  example.  The  worst  things  in  history  are  not 
necessarily  without  some  elements  which  may  be  Divinely  used  for  good.  The  reins 
never  fall  out  of  the  guiding  hand.  The  heathen  rage.  But  the  Lord  sits  as  King 
in  Zion.  The  contrasted  lights  and  shadows  of  this  narrative  deserve,  aud  will 
repay,  closest  attention.  I.  Hdjian  stmpathy  and  kindness  manifest  themselves 
AMID  EXULTANT  CRUELTY.  The  phrase  in  relation  to  Saul  means  to  approve,  take 
pleasure  and  delight  in  what  others  have  done.  He  was  "  exceedingly  mad  "  against 
the  believers  in  Jesus.  Amid  such  manifestations  of  cruel  depravity  there  were 
■devout  men  who  carried  the  mangled  remains  of  the  martyred  deacon  to  a  reverent 
burial.  The  phrase  refers  to  the  better  elements  of  Jewish  society — the  modeiate 
men  who  hated  persecution.  Violence  always  overreaches  itseif.  Sympathy  is 
awakened  when  wrong  is  boasting  its  victories.  Stephen  dies  ;  but  those  who  fear 
God,  although  they  have  not  adopted  his  faith,  are  emboldened  to  breast  the 
•currents  of  unjust  opinion  and  to  go  in  the  face  of  the  mob  who  applaud  an  infamous 
deed.  It  was  the  same  in  the  case  of  Jesus,  who  was  buried  by  Joseph  and  Nico- 
demus  in  Joseph's  garden.  History  is  full  of  such  contrasts.  Humanity  has  its 
recoil  from  injustice  and  violence.  Successful  villainy  is  always  ruinous.  Passions, 
ecclesiastical  or  political,  satiated  with  blood,  involve  blunder  as  well  as  crime. 
Religious  animosities  are  met  by  this  immense  force  in  human  nature,  and  there  is 
no  withstanding  the  influence  of  that  pity  which  unjust  violence  evokes.  The  tears 
shed  over  a  mai  tyred  corpse  are  more  potent  than  the  mightiest  engines  of  persecu- 
tion. II.  Adversity  and  persecution  are  overruled  by  the  ascended  Lord  for 
THE  extension  OP  THE  Church.  Tlic  signal,  by  Stephen's  death,  was  given  for  a 
general  outbreak  to  exterminate  the  Christians.  When  wild  beasts  taste  blood  their 
fury  becomes  madness.  "As  for  Saul."  The  word  u-sed  means  violent  outrage 
and  physical  maltreatment.  He  made  a  ruin  of  the  Church  by  brutal  and  bloody 
assaults  on  the  persons  of  its  members.  Oriental  religious  fanaticism  has  always 
been  tigerish  in  its  cruelty.  Beneath  the  Crescent  have  been  wrought  deed.s  of  blood 
which  have  cursed  and  doomed  Mahomedan  fanaticism.  The  Lord  reigneth. 
Christians  are  fugitives:  but  they  carry  Christianity  wherever  they  go.  New 
centres  of  Christian  life  and  organisation  spring  up  everywhere.  When  Rome  drove 
out  our  own  reformers  they  found  leisure  on  the  Continent  to  perfect  translations 
of  Holy  Scripture  in  the  mother  tongue.  God's  hand  was  in  it  when  the  power  of 
Rome  was  established  in  our  land.  Caesar  "  meant  not  so,  neither  did  his  heart 
think  so."  Beneath  his  eagles  was  borne  the  cross.  Britain  was  conquered  by  the 
Romans  that  it  might  be  conquered  by  Christ.  III.  A  principle  and  an  encourage- 
ment respecting  Church  extension.  Fugitive  believers  are  the  first  messengers  of 
the  gospel  to  distant  regions.  Philip  was  not  an  apostle,  nor  a  pastor.  His  was  a 
secular  office.  But  when  those  duties  ceased  through  the  scattering,  he  was  still 
ready  for  service.  Changing  his  place,  he  did  not  change  his  di-position.  He 
found  new  work  for  himself.  While  within  the  Church,  for  teaching  and  ruling, 
men  receive  a  special  call  and  ordination  of  the  Lord,  there  is  a  service  of  Christ 
for  which  official  appointment  is  not  indispensable.  Men  who  are  Christians  can 
and  ought  to  make  Christ  known  to  those  who  are  not.  Order  is  seemly ;  but  it  is 
not  to  disp'ace  energy  and  zeal.  {W.  H.  Darison.)  Except  the  apostles. — 
The  apostles  stayed  bravely  in  Jerusalem.  They  might  be  cast  into  prison, 
or  even  put  to  death,  but  they  would  not  go.  They  must  be  there  to  help 
and  comfort  the  poor  people  in  their  danger.  I  have  often  read  of  shipwrecks, 
and  have  generally  found  that  when  the  terrible  waves  were  dar^hing  over 
the  ship,  and  the  sailors  were  letting  down  the  boats  that  tbe  passengers  might 
escape,  the  captain  and  the  officers  remained  on  deck  to  the  very  last.  The 
apostles  were  like  those  brave  officers.  Will  the  ship  sink  ?  No  ;  but  if  it  should 
they  will  sink  with  her.  But  many  others  left  the  city.  It  was  as  ri^ht  for  them 
to  go  as  for  the  apostles  to  stay.  Several  of  them  may  have  had  lit  le  children 
dependent  on  them,  for  whose  sake  they  must  try  to  live  and  work.  Then  while 
they  lived  they  could  speak  for  Christ,  and  so  do  good  to  others.   {S.  G.  Green,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  And  devout  men  carried  Stephen  to  his  burial. — The  bitrinl  of  Stephen  :^ 
I.  The  devout  men  exemplifieJ — 1.  The  constancy  of  Christinn  friendship.  They  did 
not  need  the  sound  of  his  voice  and  the  echo  of  his  ste|is  to  remind  th'  m  of  the  duties 
they  owed  to  him.  The  friendships  induced  by  Christianity  are  the  rirmest  and  most 
enduring.  Our  friend  may  be  no  longer  on  earth,  but  he  lives  with  Christ  and  so  is  still 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

ours.  2.  The  heroism  of  Christian  friendship.  These  men  were  in  danger  of  sharing 
their  friend's  fate.  They  might  have  said,  "  What  is  the  use  of  risking  that  now 
Stephen  is  dead  ?  "  But  the  instinct  of  friendship  was  stronger  than  tho  fear  of 
danger,  and  they  went  forth  confessing  that  they  were  followers  of  Him  in  whoso 
name  Stephen  had  died.  Christian  friendship  is  not  influenced  by  selfish  considera- 
tions. 3.  The  practical  kindness  of  Christian  friendship,  A  saint  who  dies  in  the 
midst  of  saints  is  sure  to  have  a  loving  burial.  He  may  be  poor,  but  his  claims 
will  not  be  unheeded.  II.  The  causks  op  their  lamentation.  1.  Their  own  per- 
sonal loss.  One  dear  to  them  had  been  taken  away.  Our  religion  does  not  chide 
the  tears  of  the  bereaved.  "Jesus  wept,"  and  manifested  a  tender  feehng  for  the 
hearts  of  others  when  He  said,  "Woman,  why  weepest  thou?  "  2.  The  Church's 
loss.  Stephen  seemed  to  be  needed  more  than  ever.  Saul  was  becoming  a  terrible 
opponent,  and  there  was  no  Stephen  to  answer  him.  A  piUar  strongwith  truth,  and 
beautiful  with  love,  was  overturned  when  it  was  wanted  to  sustain  the  temple  of 
God.  A  standard  bearer  had  fallen  when  foes  were  gathering  thickly  about  the 
camp.  A  shepherd  was  taken  away  when  the  flock  was  likely  to  be  scattered.  3., 
The  world's  loss.  The  world  could  not  understand  this.  It  was  nothing  to  the 
soldier,  the  merchant,  the  priest ;  but  it  was  a  far  greater  calamity  than  if 
Cassar  had  fallen  from  his  throne.  III.  The  alleviating  circumstances.  There 
was  no  need  for  the  lamentation  as  far  as  Stephen  was  concerned.  1.  A  little 
before  he  died  he  had  a  vision  of  Christ.  2.  He  died  in  the  calm  assurance 
of  a  life  to  come.  3.  He  died  in  love  and  charity  with  all  men.  (J.  Marratt.y 
The  burial  of  Stephen: — The  action  of  these  devout  men — I.  Expresses  affec- 
tionate SORROW  FOR  their  DEPARTED  FRIEND.  The  religion  of  Christ  does  not 
destroy  our  feelings  as  men.  It  makes  the  already  gentle  and  loving  heart 
more  loving  and  gentle  still,  and  fills  the  stern,  the  frozen  breast,  with  warm  and 
generous  feeling.  What  a  change  it  wrought  in  that  young  man,  at  whose  feet 
Stephen's  murderers  laid  their  clothes  !  The  devout  men  were  not  yielding  to 
unmanly  or  unchristian  emotions.  The  religion  of  Jesus  would  moderate  their 
grief,  but  it  would  not  restrain  their  tears.  Jesus  Himself  wept  at  the  grave  of  a 
friend.  And  Stephen  had  been  their  friend.  II.  Implies  that  their  sorrow 
WOULD  BE  chastened  BY  SUBMISSION  TO  THE  WILL  OF  GoD.  They  kncw  who  had 
said,  "  The  hour  cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth  you,  will  think  that  he  doetb  God 
service."  They  also  knew  who  had  said,  whilst  Himself  drinking  a  cup  far  more 
bitter  than  Stephen's,  "  0  My  Father,  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  from  Me,  except  I 
drink  it.  Thy  wiU  be  done."  And  did  they  not  know  that  that  sufferer  had  left  His 
disciples  an  example  that  they  should  tread  in  His  steps  ?  and  that  now  He  was 
Lord  of  all,  and  could  dash  His  enemies  in  places,  like  a  potter's  vessel?  And  there- 
fore these  devout  men  would  in  submission  say,  amid  all  their  tears,  "  It  is  the 
Lord,  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him  good.  The  Lord  gave — the  Lord  hath  taken  away : 
blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  III.  Infers  that  they  would  be  influenced 
BY  kindest  sympathy  TOWARDS  Stephen's  SURVIVING  RELATIONS.  What  was  their  loss 
compared  with  the  loss  sustaiued  by  such  ?  The  loss  of  a  friend  is  not  so  great 
as  the  loss  of  a  son — -the  loss  of  a  father— the  loss  of  a  husband.  To  such  the  loss 
would  be  irreparable,  or  could  only  be  made  up  by  Him  who  is  better  than  ten 
thousand  sons,  and  who  has  said,  "  Leave  thy  fatherless  children  unto  Me,  I  will 
provide,  and  let  thy  widows  trust  in  Me."  And  would  not  these  devout  men 
sympathise  with  the  widow  and  the  orphan  and  the  mother  who  had  lost  such 
a  relative  as  Stephen  ?  "  Pure  religion  and  undedled  before  God  and  the 
Father  is  this,  to  visit  the  fatheiless  and  widows  in  their  affliction."  IV. 
Leads  us  to  suppose  that  they  could   not  allow  such  an  occasion  to  pass 

away  without  earnest  PRAYER  THAT  THIS  BEREAVEMENT  WHICH  THE  ChURCH 
had   SUSTAINED   jnGHT   BE    SANCTIFIED    TO    THE    ChURCH'S   INTERESTS.       The    burden    o£ 

their  prayer  would  probably  be,  "Help,  Lord,  for  the  godly  man  ceaseth,"  &c.  Who 
can  tell  what  influence  they  had  in  the  calling  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  ?  Would  they  not 
al'iO  pray,  "  Lord,  teach  us  to  cease  from  man  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils,  and 
trust  alone  in  Thee  "  ?  And  would  not  these  prayers  be  blended  with  thanksgivings 
for  the  grace  given  to  their  departed  brother  ?    V.  Suggests  the  hope  of  a  blessed 

EE-UNION  WITH  THEIR  DEPARTED  FRIEND   AT    THE    RESURRECTION    OF    THE    JUST.        They 

sorrowed  not  as  men  without  hope.  They  knew  their  brother  had  fallen  asleep  in 
Jesus ;  and  surely  they  believed  that  them  who  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with 
Him.  VI.  Would  there  not  be  renewed  consecration  to  the  service  of  God  ? 
The  storm  of  persecution  raged,  and  they  were  scattered  by  its  violence — but  not  as 
a  flock  that  has  lost  or  left  the  shepherd.    No ;  rather  scattered  as  rays  of  light,  to 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  G45 

become  the  lights  of  the  world,  to  be  as  flames  of  fire  in  the  service  of  the  Saviour 
{ver.  4).  And  He  that  gave  the  word  went  with  them,  giving  effect  to  the  Word  of 
His  grace,  so  that  the  Word  o  ithe  Lord  had  free  course,  and  was  glorified.  So  it 
ought  ever  to  be.  The  work  of  the  Lord  must  be  done.  It  will  be  done,  whether 
by  us  or  not;  but  if  not,  we  gain  no  reward.  "Work  while  it  is  called  to-day 
— the  night  cometh  in  which  no  man  can  work."  (P.  C.  Horton.)  Stepheii's 
Juneral  : — I.  A  very  select  funeral.  1.  Pre-eminently  select.  "  Devout 
men  " — not  rich,  learned,  or  titled,  but  good  men  ;  those  who  discharged 
thoroughly,  from  the  purest  motives,  all  the  duties  of  life.  (1)  Virtuous,  or  true 
to  themselves.  (2)  Philanthropic,  or  true  to  their  fellow-men.  (3)  Godly,  or  true 
to  the  Most  High.  Christians — men  of  the  highe^^t  type.  2.  Suitably  select.  The 
good  burying  the  good.  The  pious  should  care  for  each  other  to  the  last.  3. 
Wholly  select.  Occasionally  funerals  are  very  mixed.  Some  attend  because  the 
dead  man  had  been  a  good  customer ;  some  because  they  were  neighbours  ;  some 
because  of  a  necessary  family  connection  ;  some  as  an  expression  of  readiness  to  put 
the  deceased  out  of  the  way ;  some  from  a  denominational  bias.  Stephen's  funeral 
was  unmixed — composed  of  sincere  and  practical  lovers  of  God  and  man.  Perhaps 
beaven's  inhabitants  streamed  to  the  balconies  of  the  celestial  city  and  gazed  with 
wonder  at  the  novel  sight.  II.  A  very  sad  funeral.  1.  There  have  been  many 
oon-attendant  burials,  not  an  individual  present  to  grieve.  2.  There  have  been 
largely  attended  funerals,  but  the  signs  of  regret  were  correspondingly  small ; 
more  talk  than  tears.  3.  Stephen's  funeral  was  attended  by  men  of  sense  and 
sanctity,  who  rent  the  air  with  the  cries  of  their  broken  hearts.  (1)  Their 
sadness  was  an  expression  of  homage  to  the  excellencies  of  the  departed,  (a) 
To  great  religious  intelligence,  (b)  To  moral  and  religious  character.  The 
gospel  lived  in  him,  and  he  in  it.  (c)  To  usefulness.  (2)  An  expression 
of  sympathy  with  the  sufferings  of  the  departed.  It  was  the  loss  of — (1) 
A  leading  man.  (2)  In  a  sudden  manner.  (3)  By  cruel  treatment.  (4) 
When   he   was   most   needed.      {B.   D.  Johns.)  The  lamentation  at  Stepheii's 

funeral : — This  was  something  more  than  a  conventional  funeral.  The  people 
among  whom  it  occurred  were  given  to  burial  rites  of  elaborate  and  studied 
ceremonial.  Like  all  orientalists,  their  mourning  was  chiefly  marked  by  a  pains- 
taking and  inteutional  publicity.  With  them  grief  for  the  dead  meant  baring  and 
beating  the  breast,  sprinkling  or  sitting  in  ashes,  songs  of  lamentation,  and  the 
employment  of  mourning  women.  And  so,  when  the  martyred  Stephen  is  buried, 
the  customs  are  not  changed.  True,  he  was  not  merely  a  Jew,  but  a  Christian  ; 
yet  the  infant  Church  still  clung  to  the  cherished  ceremonies  of  the  elder,  and 
what  was  usual  was  followed  here.  It  was  indeed  the  hatred  and  vindictiveness 
of  Judaism  which  had  slain  this  godly  man,  yet,  when  he  is  dead,  the  manner  of 
his  burial  is  the  usage  of  Judaism  itself.  To  have  changed  it  would  have  been  to 
have  surrendered  his  claim  as  a  veritable  and  loyal  Israelite ;  and  doubtless,  also, 
to  have  grieved  and  wounded  his  surviving  relatives.  All  the  more  because  his 
death  had  been  so  cruel  and  distressing,  would  they  have  his  burial  decent  and 
reverent  and  painstaking ;  even  as  when  the  nation  buries  some  honoured  soldier 
she  surrounds  his  funeral  cortege  with  every  element  of  pomp  and  state  and 
ceremony,  as  though  she  would  atone  for  the  hardships  of  his  bitter  and  lonely  end 
upon  the  field  of  battle  by  utmost  tenderness  and  reverence  in  dealing  with  his 
lifeless  body.  And  thus  it  was  with  the  bruised  and  mangled  form  of  Stephen. 
The  funeral  order  of  his  race  was  carefully  observed.  But  there  was  this  difference 
— and  it  comes  out  with  a  singular  and  touching  significance  in  two  Greek  words, 
used  here  only  in  all  the  New  Testament :  the  mourning  at  Stephen's  funeral  was 
the  mourning  of  unaffected  feeling,  and  the  attendants  who  followed  him  to  his 
grave  were  not  hired  mutes  nor  paid  mourners,  but  grief-stricken  and  godly  men. 
This  scene  suggests  the  thought  of  the  difference  that  there  is  in  funerals.  The 
Church  has  one  common  ritual  for  all  her  baptized  dead.  She  does  not  attempt 
to  discriminate  either  in  her  customs  or  her  utterances.  She  is  not  a  judge  with 
such  infallible  insight  that  she  can  weigh  character  and  prophesy  of  destiny.  Most 
wisely,  therefore,  does  she  use  one  common  office  for  all  her  dead,  leaving  scarce 
any  discretion  to  her  ministry,  and  uttering  one  uniform  voice  to  her  people.  Her 
language  is  general,  not  specific.  She  writes  as  Inspiration  has  written  before 
her,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord,"  but  she  utters  no  verdict  of 
application  in  connection  with  their  use.  She  speaks  words  of  Christian  hope  ;  but 
they  are  coupled  with  the  Scriptural  conditions  of  all  Christian  hope.  In  a  word,  her 
language  is  that  of  Christian  faith  and  trust ;  and  while  i+  is  utterly  devoid  of  any 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vinv 

specific  application  of  its  very  general  terms,  we  feel  that  its  tone  is  only  what  the 
tone  of  anything  save  a  heathen  burial  ought  to  be.  And  yet,  when  we  come  to 
use  it,  we  recognise  what  a  really  tremendous  diiierence  there  may  be  in  even  the 
Church's  funerals.  As  with  Stephen's  burial  by  the  elder  Church,  there  are  the 
same  preliminaries,  the  same  customs,  the  same  words,  and  yet,  as  there,  there 
may  be  the  widest  and  most  radical  difference  in  what  those  words  and  customs 
express.  Have  we  not  all  witnessed  funerals  where  even  the  sublime  ritual  of  the 
Church  seemed  powerless  to  touch  the  heart  or  lift  the  thoughts  ?  With  utmost 
charity,  with  every  willingness  to  leave  the  vanished  life  in  the  hands  of  a  Love 
at  once  deeper  and  wiser  than  ours,  we  cannot  bind  that  life  and  the  Church's  tones 
together.  Somehow,  they  do  not  fit  into,  and  form  a  part  of,  each  other.  Verily, 
"  Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord ;  for  they  rest  from  their  labours." 
But  if  they  have  not  lived  in  the  Lord,  nor  laboured  for  Him — we  may  say  these 
questions  are  useless  ;  but  we  cannot  help  asking  them.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  are  other  funerals  where  we  use  precisely  the  same  ritual ;  where  there  is 
no  diversity  in  usage  or  custom  from  what  is  wonted,  unless  in  the  direction  of 
greater  simplicity ;  where  merely  the  Church's  appointed  words  are  said,  and  no 
others,  and  yet  where  the  emotions  of  our  own  hearts  and  the  very  atmosphere 
of  the  whole  occasion  are  utterly  and  wholly  different.  There  is  a  deep  and  wide- 
spread sorrow,  but  it  is  a  grief  gilded  with  light.  We  listen  to  the  words  of  inspired 
hope  and  promise,  and,  as  we  lift  our  eyes  from  the  bier  before  us,  lo  !  the  clouds 
are  parted,  and  we  see  how,  to  a  Christian,  the  grave  is  only  a  low-browed' 
portal,  through  which,  bending  as  he  passes,  he  emerges  into  larger  life  and  freer. 
{Bp.  H.  C.  Potter.) 

Ver.  3.  As  for  Saul,  he  made  havoc  of  the  Church. — The  umiter  smitten: — Read 
and  compare  the  following  passages,  the  text  and  chap.  xiv.  19  ;  chap.  ix.  1  and 
xxiii.  12  ;  Gal.  i.  13  and  2  Cor.  xi.  23 ;  chap.  xxvi.  10  and  xvi.  23  ;  Ezek.  xviii.  25 
and  Gal.  vi.  7.  All  these  experiences  were  undergone  by  the  same  man — the  perse- 
cutor was  persecuted  ;  he  who  breathed  out  threatenings  and  slaughter  against  the 
saints  was  himself  pursued  by  the  vengeance  of  furious  men.  Note,  then — 1.  That 
A  man's  life  comes  back  upon  him  (Gal.  vi.  7).  One  feels  in  reading  such  experience 
that  the  sense  of  justice  is  satisfied.  Had  Saul  after  his  conversion  settled  down 
into  a  state  of  Christian  enjoyment  there  would  have  been  a  want  of  moral  com- 
pleteness. Paul  himself  would  have  been  injured.  He  must  reap  what  he  had 
sown.  Such  is  the  severe  but  beneficent  law  which  keeps  all  things  equal.  If  any 
man  could  mingle  bitter  cups  for  others  and  never  be  compelled  to  drink  them  him- 
self, he  would  soon  become  a  devil.  God  shows  him  that  his  turn  is  coming.  All 
history  has  shown  this — e.g.,  Adonibezek,  Agag,  &c.  The  testimony  of  Holy  Writ  is 
consistent  and  emphatic.  "  He  shall  have  judgment  without  mercy  that  showeth 
no  mercy."  See  how  literally  and  terribly  this  was  fulfilled  in  the  case  of  Paul. 
God  forgot  not  one  of  his  misdemeanours,  and  the  most  terrible  of  persecutors 
rect^ived  the  measure  of  his  own  fury.      II.  That  a  man's  Christian  experience 

MUST  BE    AFFECTED  BY  THE  UNCHRISTIAN  LIFE  HE  HAS  LIVED.       Onewould  SUppOSG  that 

after  conversion  all  the  former  life  would  be  done  away.  But  physically  it  is  not  so, 
and  why  should  it  be  so  spiritually?  Look  at  the  reasonableness  of  the  doctrine. 
A  man  has  lived  a  self-indulgent  life,  been  careless  of  the  rights  of  others,  &c. 
After  all  this  he  is  converted  ;  is  he  then  to  complain  of  the  trials  of  the  Christian 
way  as  if  some  sti'ange  thing  had  happened  to  him  ?  Is  there  not  a  cause  ?  Old 
neglects  have  to  be  made  up  ;  old  wrongs  have  to  be  avenped.  Is  not  the  way  of 
the  Lord  equal  ?  We  complain  of  the  arduousness  of  the  Christian  way,  but  was 
the  devil's  way  easy  ?  What  about  the  cost  and  consequences  of  vicious  luxuries? 
We  were  selfish,  tyrannical,  inconsiderate,  and  is  it  likely  that  all  this  can  have  passed 
away  without  leaving  deep  effects  on  our  life?  Across  our  very  prayers  there  will 
be  blown  the  bitter  wind  of  the  land  we  have  lived  in  so  long;  and  through  our 
tenderest  charities  there  may  be  breathed  somewhat  of  the  old  selfisbness  which 
once  enclosed  us  in  its  prison.  Let  us,  in  honesty,  trace  many  of  our  trials  to  the 
life  we  have  lived  in  tbe  flesh  rather  than  to  any  arbitrariness  of  Divine  grace. 
Conclusion  :  In  reviewing  these  statements  in  the  light  of  history  and  revelation  we 
Bee — 1.  That  the  distribution  of  penalties  is  God's  work  and  not  man's.  "  Ven- 
geance is  Mine,"  &c.  2.  That  under  all  the  apparent  confusion  of  life  there  is  a 
principle  of  justice.  8.  Tliat  the  greatest  sufferings  may  be  borne  with  patience  and 
hopefulness.  When  did  Paul  complain  of  his  lot  ?  When  did  he  say  that  he  had 
Buffered  more  than  his  share  ?     From  him  let  us  learn  how  good  a  thing  it  is  to 


CHAP. VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  C47 

6uf3fer  and  be  strong.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Different  kinds  of  martyrdom : — They  say 
that  martyrdoms  are  ended.  It  is  true  that  the  stake  is  abandoned  ;  Bloody  Mary 
is  dead ;  Smithfield  is  a  commonplace  sheep-market,  with  only  an  inscription  on  one 
side  of  it  to  record  ths  fidelity  of  John  Eogers.  And  perhaps  it  is  not  necessary  to 
force  the  rhet"ric  which  calls  Abraham  Liucoln  the  "  martyr  president,"  or  to  assert 
beyond  strict  accuracy  that  an  assassin  could  make  President  Garfield  a  martyr  by 
shooting  him.  We  need  not  plant  ourselves  upon  a  plane  so  high  or  so  tragic  as 
this.  There  are  small  martyrdoms  for  Christ's  sake  which  in  ordinary  life  are  quite 
within  the  reach  of  our  attainment.  It  is  a  very  plain  truth  that  we  find  in  the  line 
of  the  German  poet,  Heinrich  Heine  :  "  Wheresoever  a  great  thought  is  born,  there 
always  has  been  a  Golt;otha."  When  any  genuine  man  is  called  into  conspicuous- 
ness,  and  forced  to  take  a  stand  for  an  unpopular  or  advanced  principle  against 
obloquy  and  opposition,  there  will  be  persecution  as  common  as  "  the  common 
prison  "  into  which  the  apostles  were  hurried  after  they  preached  the  resurrection. 
(C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Thoughts  under  ■persecution  : — When  I  am  driven  from  the 
city,  I  care  nothing  for  it ;  but  I  say  to  myself.  If  the  empress  wishes  to  banish  me, 
the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof.  If  she  would  saw  me  in  sunder,  let 
her  do  it ;  I  have  Isaiah  for  a  pattern.  If  she  would  plunge  me  into  the  sea,  I 
remember  Jonah.  If  she  would  thrust  me  into  the  fiery  furnace,  I  see  the  three 
Hebrew  children  enduring  that.  If  she  would  cast  me  to  the  wild  beasts,  I  call  to 
mind  Daniel  in  the  den  of  lions.  If  she  would  take  my  head  from  me,  I  think  of 
John  the  Baptist.  If  she  would  deprive  me  of  worldly  goods,  let  her  do  it ;  naked 
came  I  into  the  world,  and  naked  I  shall  go  out  of  it.     {Ghryyostom.) 

Ver.  4.  Therefore  they  that  were  scattered  ahroad  went  ever3rwliere  preaching 
the  Word. — The  aggressive  power  of  Christianity : — That  it  is  pre-eminently  by 
aggressive  movements  that  the  Church  is  to  prosper.  By  this  means  she  is  to 
maintain  spiritual  life  in  her  own  soul — cause  religion  to  flourish  at  home,  and 
extend  its  triumphs  abroad.  1.  The  truth  of  this  doctrine  is  suggested  by  the  first 
impulses  of  the  religious  principle — the  spirit  of  love  in  every  Christian's  bosom. 
False  religionists,  both  among  Pagans  and  nominal  Christians,  have,  I  know, 
taught  that  piety  was  a  kind  of  dormant,  contemplative  spirit ;  that  its  power  was 
to  be  manifested  in  patient  endurance  rather  than  holy  action ;  in  a  voluntary 
withdrawment  frcm  the  world  to  avoid  its  contaminations,  rather  than  in  resolute 
efforts  to  make  the  world  better.  The  unsophisticated  promptings  of  the  new-born 
soul  are  always  to  active  effort  for  God.  This  is  strikingly  exhibited  in  young 
converts.  It  is  illustrated  with  great  beauty  in  the  conduct  of  Christ's  earliest 
disciples.  It  conceives  plans,  it  demands  efforts,  for  the  world's  conversion. 
Every  real  Christian  that  lives  in  the  spirit  of  religion  may  consult  his  own 
consciousness  on  this  subject.  See  the  lives  also  of  eminently  holy  men  in  later 
times — Baxter,  Biainerd,  Martyn,  Payson,  &c.  2.  The  doctrine  I  have  stated 
further  appears  from  the  fact  that  truth  is  the  grand  instrument  which  God 
employs  to  overthrow  the  kingdom  of  Satan,  and  advance  and  establish  the  king- 
dom of  His  Son.  The  Word  of  God  must  not  only  be  translated  into  all  the 
languages  of  the  earth,  but  it  must  be  carried  to  every  man's  door;  nay,  its  great 
truths  must  be  pressed  home  upon  every  man's  conscience.  What  a  mighty  work 
here  opens  for  Christians  of  every  name !  It  is,  moreover,  eminently  an  aggressive 
work,  a  missionary  movement.  How  are  they  to  accomplish  it  by  shutting  them- 
selves up  in  cloisters?  3.  Both  the  necessity  and  the  vital  importance  of  the 
aggressive  movements  of  the  Church  appf^ars  from  the  very  attitude  of  a  fallen 
world  towards  God.  It  is  one  of  hostility  to  His  character  and  opposition  to  His 
truth.  The  world  will  not  come  to  the  Chuich  and  crave  instruction  at  her  lips. 
As  her  Saviour  sought  her,  so  He  requires  her  to  seek  sinners.  In  otber  words, 
she  must  make  external  and  aggressive  movements.  She  must  not  study  so  much 
her  own  comfort  as  her  enlargement.  4.  The  whole  current  of  Scripture  precept 
and  representation  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  this  view  of  the  subject.  The 
Bible  never  instructs  the  Church  that  she  is  to  conquer  the  world  by  her  passive 
virtues—"  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature." 
5.  The  entire  history  of  the  gospel  confirms  this  view  of  the  subject.  When  has 
any  signal  advance  been  made  in  the  work  of  human  salvation,  except  by  a  move- 
ment similar  to  tliat  described  in  the  text?  The  Mosaic  institution  was  peculiar. 
It  was  conservative  rather  than  aggressive.  Turn  to  a  still  later  page  in  the 
history  of  the  Church.  How  was  it  at  the  Reformation  ?  How  was  it  at  the  period 
when  Whitefield  and  Wesley  appeared?    And  just  in  proportion  as  any  branch  of 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

the  Christian  Church,  in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  attempts  spiritual  aggression,  in  the 
same  proportion  its  interests  are  prospered.  It  is  seen  fulfilling  its  high  destiny. 
Remarks  :  1.  "We  see  why  the  Church  is  organised.  2.  This  subject  also  indicates 
the  grand  object  of  all  preaching  to  the  Church.  3.  This  discussion  throws  light 
upon  the  providences  of  God  towards  the  Church,  Now,  as  in  former  days.  He 
allows  heresies,  persecutions,  schisms,  and  various  forms  of  affliction,  from  time  to 
time,  to  invade  the  Church.  Missionary  efforts  formed  no  part  of  their  original 
plan  ;  they  were  the  plan  of  Providence.  4.  This  subject  throws  light  upon  the 
melancholy  fact,  "  known  and  read  of  all  men,"  that  many  Churches  which  have 
numbers,  and  wealth,  and  much  secular  influence,  have  no  corresponding  moral 
power.  Woe  to  Churches  and  to  ministers  who  are  thus  "  at  ease  in  Zion," 
(J.  H.  Thisley,  D.D.)  The  gospel — its  propagation  and  effects: — I.  It  is  the 
WILL  OF  God  to  pkopagate  His  Son's  gospel  ;  and  in  all  ways,  through  circum- 
stances adverse  or  prosperous.  He  gives  it  free  course.  Sometimes  it  is  by  opening 
the  commerce  of  nations,  so  that  the  messengers  may  occupy  new  fields ;  some- 
times by  some  spark  from  a  martyr's  pile  kindling  a  fire  in  a  land  or  in  a  heart. 
Great  as  has  been  the  effect  of  the  patronage  of  kings,  it  has  been  as  nothing  in 
comparison  with  that  constancy  of  faith  even  unto  death,  of  which  Stephen  was  its 
first  instance,  followed  by  those  of  whom  our  text  speaks.  This  was  all  that 
remained  of  the  effects  of  the  first  Christian  persecution ;  an  added  testimony,  a 
■wider  circulation,  and  a  more  decided  devotion,  II.  "What  is  this  gospel?  1.  It 
is  called  "  the  "Word."  A  word  is  the  utterance  of  a  mind,  reason  communicating' 
itself.  Do  we  believe  that  the  gospel  is  the  expression  of  God's  miud,  the  com- 
munication of  His  will?  It  is  a  glorious  view  which  is  thus  opened.  God  has 
spoken  concerning  us,  and  to  us.  That  mystery  which  for  ages  and  generations 
had  enveloped  the  ulterior  designs  of  the  Almighty  Creator  touching  His  rebellious 
creatures  is  at  last  revealed.  God  has  announced  to  us  the  forgiveness  of  sins 
through  a  Mediator  and  a  Sacrifice  ;  the  sanctification  of  sinners,  their  recreation 
in  His  own  lost  image,  by  means  of  an  indwelling  Holy  Spirit ;  that  prayer  is  the 
one  connecting  link  between  us  and  these  two  unspeakable  gifts ;  that  it  is  His 
intention  to  raise  the  dead  to  an  immortal  existence,  the  character  of  which,  for 
happiness  or  misery,  will  depend  upon  the  life  here  led  by  us.  These  things  are 
amongst  the  disclosures  embodied  in  that  "Word  which  these  dispersed  disciples 
preached,  and  which  we,  if  we  be  faithful  to  our  commission,  are  preaching  still 
and  stiU  hearing.  2,  But,  as  they  pteached  the  "Word,  so  Philip  preached  Christ 
(ver.  5).  There  was  no  difference  between  the  two,  Christ  is  "  the  "Word,"  and  is 
so  designated  because  He  is  the  Eevealer  of  God :  "  The  only  begotten  Son,  which 
is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him."  To  preach  Christ,  in  His 
person,  in  His  character,  in  His  work,  is  to  proclaim  Go^'s  Word,  in  its  simplicity, 
fulness,  and  strength.  III.  The  credentials  op  this  gospel.  When  we  preach 
the  Word,  or  Christ,  how  do  we  establish  it  ?  No  doubt  we  go  back  to  the  evidences : 
we  speak  of  God's  triple  seal,  of  goodness,  wisdom,  and  power,  as  set  to  the  words 
and  works  of  Christ.  These  arguments  are  never  worn  out;  nor  can  it  ever  be  safe 
to  disuse  them.  But  when  our  Lord  said,  "  These  signs  shall  follow  them  that 
believe,"  He  taught  us  to  look  for  more  than  a  mere  historical  proof.  When  Philip 
preached,  certain  results  followed  (ver.  7).  Thus  he  could  appeal  to  effects,  and 
say,  Judge  ye  whether  a  doctrine  which  brings  with  it  these  infallible  signs  be  of 
man  or  of  God.  These  visible  tokens  do  not  now  attend  our  preaching,  and  we 
ought  not  to  want  them;  and  "  if  we  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,"  if  we 
refuse  the  doctrine  of  Christ  and  the  apostles,  neither  should  we  be  influenced  by 
any  outward  sign.  But  a  changed  life,  an  altered  spirit,  the  formation  of  Christian 
habits,  and  the  diligent  use  of  Christ's  ordinances — these  are  the  true  proofs  of  the 
gospel  Word  in  our  days  ;  by  these  things  other  men  take  knowledge  of  its  power 
and  of  its  virtue.  I"V.  The  effect  of  the  proclamation  of  the  Word  (ver.  8).  It  is 
long,  we  may  fear,  since  in  any  whole  place  there  was  joy  on  account  of  the  gospel. 
Let  me  ask  then  as  to  the  individual  soul.  Which  of  you  knows  what  joy  is  in 
things  spiritual  ?  Who,  in  days  of  health  and  prosperity,  finds  his  happiness 
simply  in  Christ  ?  Who,  in  days  of  sickness  and  disappointment,  does  not  find  to 
his  consternation  that  the  light  of  heaven  is  gone  out  too  ?  Joy  is  the  overflowing 
of  happiness,  the  exuberance  of  a  comfort  and  a  tranquillity  habitually  felt  within. 
Oh  where  is  such  joy  as  that  of  which  our  Lord  spoke,  "  These  things  have  I  spoken 
unto  you,  that  My  joy  might  remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  might  be  full "  ? 
Levity  there  may  be,  and  too  much  of  it ;  cheerful  spirits  in  some,  domestio 
happiness  in  some,  contentment  and  even  thankfulness  in  a  few;   but  where 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  649 

amongst  ns  is  that  grace  of  Christian  joy  which  seemed  to  flow  so  naturally,  in 
other  days,  out  of  the  very  first  reception  of  the  tidings  of  a  Saviour?  And  yet 
such  joy  lies  nearer  than  we  imagine  :  sin  forgiven,  the  atonement  believed  in,  the 
Holy  Spirit  cherished — it  is  the  natural  effect  of  these  things  to  inspire  joy.  Ask 
of  God  the  power  to  grasp  them  as  realities,  and  joy  will  enter  with  them  ;  a  joy 
not  of  this  world,  a  joy  the  very  foretaste  of  heaven.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The 
liberty  of  prophesying : — The  great  majority  of  the  dispersed  Christians  held  no 
ecclesiastical  ofifice  whatever.  Yet  they  preached  wherever  they  came,  without 
being  called  to  do  so  by  ofBcial  duty  or  express  commission,  but  entirely  from  the 
internal  pressure  of  faith,  which  cannot  but  speak  of  that  which  aiiects  the  heart, 
from  the  impulse  of  the  Spirit  by  whom  they  were  appointed,  and  from  love  to  the 
Saviour  to  whom  they  were  indebted  for  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins  and  for  their 
blessed  hopes.  According  to  human  ideas  of  Church  government  and  office,  it 
ought  not  to  have  been  so.  But  the  Lord  of  the  Church  does  not  so  confine 
Himself  even  to  the  office  of  the  apostolate  established  by  Himself,  as  that  every- 
thing must  take  place  entirely  through  it  in  order  to  be  lawful,  pleasing  to  God, 
blessed,  and  full  of  promise,  Christ  thus  shows  that  no  man  and  no  finite  office 
is  indispensable  and  absolutely  necessary ;  only  He  Himself  is  ever  and  everywhere 
indispensable.  [G.  V.  Lechler,  D.D.)  The  aggressive  character  of  Christianity : — 
A  Christian  is  one  who  knows  and  receives  as  true  what  Christ  has  revealed  in  His 
Word,  whose  inward  state  (religious  consciousness)  is  determined  by  that  know- 
ledge, and  whose  life  is  devoted  to  the  obedience  and  service  of  Christ.  Christianity 
is  therefore  a  system  of  doctrine,  an  inward  life,  a  rule  of  action.  When,  therefore, 
we  speak  of  the  aggressive  character  of  Christianity,  we  may  mean  the  antagonism 
of  truth  to  error,  the  expansive  power  of  the  principles  of  spiritual  life,  or  the 
opposition  of  good  to  evil  in  the  outward  life  ;  or,  as  the  Scriptures  call  it,  the 
kingdom  of  God.  We  may  mean  by  the  aggressive  character  of  Christianity,  its 
inherent  force,  by  which  it  tends  to  gain  more  and  more  the  complete  control  of 
the  individual  man  and  of  human  society ;  by  controlling  all  the  forms  of  human 
thought,  the  inward  character  of  men,  and  their  outward  conduct.  I.  Christianity 
IS  THUS  aggressive.  It  does  tend  and  strive  to  subdue.  1.  This  is  variously 
taught  in  the  Scriptures.  It  is  compared  to  a  stone,  cut  out  of  a  mountain,  which 
gradually  fills  the  whole  earth  ;  to  a  tree  whose  branches  extend  over  all  lands ;  to 
leaven  ;  to  a  temple  in  the  process  of  erection  ;  to  the  sun  in  its  course  through 
the  heavens.  2.  It  is  deducible  from  its  nature.  Truth  is  necessarily  antagonistic 
to  error,  and  holiness  to  sin.  The  one  must  strive  to  overcome  the  other,  both  in 
the  individual  and  the  world.  Besides  being  a  religion  suited  to  the  necessities  of 
all  men,  and  absolutely  essential  to  their  well-being  here  and  hereafter,  it  cannot 
be  embraced  by  the  individual  without  the  consciousness  on  his  part  of  the  obliga- 
tion to  uphold  and  extend  it.  A  Christian,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  is  fired 
with  zeal  for  the  glory  of  Christ  and  with  love  for  his  fellow-men.  3.  It  is  illus- 
trated in  the  history  of  the  Church.  The  original  promise  that  the  seed  of  the 
woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head  has  expanded  into  the  whole  system  of 
Christian  doctrine.  The  hundred  and  twenty  disciples  in  Jerusalem  occupied 
Syria,  Egypt,  Greece,  Italy ;  and  since  then  Christianity  has  gained  the  civilised 
world.  It  has  banished  idolatry,  elevated  man,  and  mouLied  human  society. 
4.  It  is  proved  in  the  experience  of  every  Christian.  His  inward  life  is  a  progress. 
He  passes  from  infancy  to  maturity.  The  truth  becomes  better  known  and  more 
firmly  believed.  Indwelling  sin  becomes  weaker,  and  grace  stronger.  Where  this 
is  not  true,  there  is  no  true  life.  II.  To  what  is  this  aggressive  power  due  ? 
1.  Not  to  anything  in  itself  as  a  system  of  truth.  If  revealed  to  the  lost  in  the 
other  world  it  would  be  powerless.  If  revealed  to  fallen  men,  sent  in  books  or  by 
living  teachers  to  the  heathen,  it  would,  if  left  to  itself,  be  universally  rejected. 
The  opposition  of  Satan  and  the  evil  heart  would  be  too  much  for  it.  2.  Not  to 
the  subjective  effect  on  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  led  to  embrace  it.  If  nothing 
were  done  ah  extra  to  induce  the  reception  of  the  gospel,  the  inward  effect  and 
the  outward  agency  would  fade  away.  3.  But  to  the  purpose  of  God  and  the 
co-operation  of  the  Spirit.  When  a  woman  puts  leaven  into  a  measure  of  meal, 
she  is  sure  that  the  whole  will  be  leavened,  because  the  effect  is  due  to  the 
operation  of  invariable  physical  laws.  But  when  the  gospel  is  introduced  into  a 
community,  whether  it  will  take  root  and  extend,  or  not,  depends  on  an  ab  extra 
sovereign  working  of  Divine  power.  Hence  a  sense  of  dependence  is  to  be  acknow- 
ledged and  cultivated.  It  is  because  Christianity  is  the  life  of  God  (i.e.,  of  a 
present  Christ)  that  it  must  prevail.    4.  Although  the  gospel  is  thus  dependent  oo 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOIt.  [chap.  viir. 

Bupernatural  agency  for  its  preservation  and  extension,  yet  human  co-operation  is 
ordained  as  the  means.  Faith  and  love  are  the  powers  which  we  are  to  wield, 
depending  on  the  Spirit  of  God.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  service  of  persecution  to 
the  Church : — The  dispersed  preached  the  gospel.  Thus  by  the  storm  the  seeds 
hitherto  collected  in  one  place  are  scattered  hither  and  thither,  and  carried  to 
a  distance,  where  they  germinate  and  bear  fruit.  Thus  the  Eedeemer  knows  how 
to  convert  that  into  good  which  was  intended  only  for  evil ;  i.e.,  not  only  to  hinder 
the  contemplated  wicked  designs,  but  by  means  of  them  to  obtain  an  unexpected 
furtherance  of  His  kingdom.  (G.  V.  Lechler,  D.D.)  Sparks  carried  by  the 
tciiid  : — The  storms  of  persecution  are  only  winds  which  fan  the  fire  of  faith  in  the 
Church,  and  carry  the  sparks  of  truth  to  a  distance.  (A'.  Gerok.)  Wider  growth 
of  the  Church  : — We  spring  up  the  thicker  the  of  tener  we  are  mowed  down.  The 
blood  of  the  martyrs  is  their  harvest-seed.  (Tertullian.)  The  zeal  of  the  apostles : — 
As  a  tree  on  fire  kindles  a  whole  forest  into  a  flame,  so  the  apostles,  burning  with 
the  fire  of  heaven,  have  set  in  a  blaze  the  whole  world,  and  have  filled  it  with  the 
light  of  truth  and  the  warmth  of  charity.  {St.  Augustine.)  Useful  incendiaries : — 
The  apostles  were  as  burning  coals,  scattered  throughout  the  nations,  blest  incen- 
diaries of  the  world!  (Archbishop  Leiphton.)  What  true  preaching  is: — I  do 
not  suppose  that  these  good  men  stood  up  in  pulpits  and  gave  sermons.  This 
also  is  good ;  but  for  this  there  would  often  be  no  time ;  the  men  must  make 
haste  —  their  enemies  were  close  upon  them  —  they  must  flee  into  the  next 
village !  But,  before  they  went,  "  Just  listen,"  they  would  say.  "  You  ask 
why  we  are  here,  why  we  are  in  trouble  and  danger,  what  is  the  matter  ?  We 
will  tell  you."  Then  would  come  the  sad  tale  of  Stephen.  And  the  Name  that 
Stephen  had  loved  would  again  be  spoken  ;  with  the  glad  tidings  that  Jesus  who 
had  died  was  risen  again,  and  was  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  to  save  from  their 
sins  those  who  repented  and  believed  in  Him.  "  And  He  has  saved  us  !  "  those 
preachers  would  say  ;  "  and  He  is  ready  to  save  you  !  "  They  might  not  be,  all  of 
them,  very  wise,  but  they  could  tell  as  much  as  this.  And  to  tell  this  truly  and 
earnestly  is  to  "  preach  the  gospel."  May  not  even  a  child,  then,  sometimes 
preach  ?     (S.  G.  Green,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5-8.  Then  Philip  went  down  to  the  city  of  Samaria  and  preached  Christ 
unto  them. — Fhilip  at  Samaria: — I.  The  preacher — "Philip."  1.  His  native 
place — "  Csesarea,"  most  likely.  2.  His  official  status — "Evangelist,"  and  one  of 
the  first  deacons.  3.  His  new  charge — "  Samaria."  4.  His  specific  work — 
"Preached."  5.  His  theme — "Christ."  6.  His  directness — "Unto  them."  He 
took  aim  at  his  audience.  He  did  not  take  long  range  at  antediluvian  iniquity,  but 
poured  hot  shot  and  shell  into  the  living  iniquities  of  Samaria.  H.  The  preacher's 
BUCCESS.  1.  He  made  a  fine  impression — "  The  people  with  one  accord  gave  heed," 
were  impressed  with  his  (1)  Teachings,  (2)  Character,  and  (3)  Spirit.  2.  He  im- 
pressed them  with  his  power — ^"  Seeing  the  miracles."  3.  He  surprised  them  by 
his  authority — "Unclean  spirits  crying  came  out."  4.  He  blessed  them  by  his 
presence  — "  Many  with  palsies."  5.  He  gladdened  them  by  his  ministry — "  There 
was  great  joy  in  that  city."  (2'.  Kelly.)  Pldlip  preacliing  at  Samaria: — The 
early  Christians  were  not  disposed  to  leave  Jerusalem.  They  had  been  couns»^lled 
to  abide  in  Jerusalem  until  they  were  endued  with  power  from  on  high  ;  but  Pente- 
cost had  come  and  gone,  and  still  they  tarried.  Perhaps  they  were  in  a  m*'asure 
constrained  by  their  lingering  prejudice  against  the  gathering  in  of  the  Gentiles. 
The  martyrdom  of  Stephen  was  the  stirring  up  of  the  nest.  The  infatuated  Jews 
who  wrought  that  murderous  deed  may  have  fondly  hoped  that  it  would  prove  the 
death-blow  of  the  little  Christian  Church.  But  God  maketh  the  wrath  of  men  to 
praise  Him.  Thus  it  is  written,  "  The  disciples  that  were  scattered  abroad  went 
everywhere  preaching  the  Word."  The  Church  perforce  begins  her  aggressive 
march.  Providence  made  them  all  missionaries.  The  apostles  alone  remained  in 
Jerusalem,  which  became  henceforth  "  a  centre  not  of  concentration,  but  of  radia- 
tion." I.  Philip,  the  evangelist,  co^rEs  to  Samaria.  Among  those  who  tied  from 
Jerusalem  at  this  juncture  was  Philip,  one  of  Ihe  seven  deacons.  He  was  a  man 
full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  power,  and  with  a  special  fitness  for  evangelistic  work. 
On  reaching  the  city  of  Samaria  he  began  at  once  to  "  preach  Christ  unto  them." 
In  all  the  world  there  was  probably,  at  that  moment,  no  city  whose  conditions  were 
more  unfavourable  to  Christian  effort.  The  people  were  half  heathen  at  the  best. 
Eejecting  all  of  the  Scriptures  except  the  five  books  of  Moses,  they  were  addicted  to 
all  manner  of  superstitious  observances.    Just  now  they  were  under  the  spell  of  a 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  61 

certain  necromancer,  known  to  us  as  Simon  Magus,  who  called  himself  "  The  Great 
Power  of  God."  Under  these  circumstances  a  prudent  evangelist  migiit  have 
thought  best  to  pass  on  to  more  congenial  soil.  But  Philip  was  not  prudent  in 
that  wise.  He  followed  the  lead  of  Providence,  the  only  safe  plan.  For  "  he  tbat 
observeth  the  wind  shall  not  sow ;  and  he  that  regardeth  the  clouds  shall  not 
reap  "  (Eccles.  xi.  4).  II,  His  coming  is  followed  by  a  revival.  Some  men  are 
a  curse  to  the  cities  they  live  in  ;  others  are  a  blessing.  At  once  he  set  about  two 
things: — 1.  ''He  preached  Christ."  It  is  noteworthy  how  of  tea  we  come  upon 
this  and  similar  expressions  in  the  Scriptures — "  preaching  the  Word,"  "  preaching 
the  gospel,"  "preaching  the  Lord  Jesus,"  "preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ." 
Nothing  is  said  about  fiue  essay  work  in  the  pulpit  or  about  profound  scientific 
and  philosophical  disquisitions.  No  truth  was  presented  which  did  not  emanate 
from  Christ  as  a  sunbeam  from  the  sun.  The  mis-ion  of  a  minister  is  to  preach 
the  gospel ;  and  the  gospel  is  the  good  tidings  that  Jesus  saves.  A  hundred 
philosophers,  bending  all  their  efforts  for  a  hundred  years  upon  a  single  sinner 
would  fail  to  save  him,  but  one  faithful  herald  of  the  old-fashioned  gospel  of  the 
Cross  can  stir  a  whole  city  to  its  depth.  Philip  was  only  a  deacon,  an  evangelist ; 
there  were  many  wiser  men  in  Samaria  ;  but,  alas  !  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  had 
not  set  their  hearts  on  fire.  So  he  had  the  alvautage  of  thena  all.  "  And  the 
people  with  one  accord  gave  heed  unto  those  "things  which  he  spake."  2.  And  they 
were  all  the  readier  to  listen  to  him  by  reason  of  the  miracles  which  he  wrought  in 
the  name  of  Jesus.  "  For  unclean  spirits  came  out  of  many  that  were  posses^ed ; 
and  many  taken  with  palsies  and  that  were  lame  were  healed  ;  and  there  was  great 
joy  in  that  city."  The  very  best  evidence  of  the  truth  of  Christ's  gospel  is  in  its 
influence  upon  the  community.  Take  a  map  of  the  world  and  mark  off  the 
countries  where  happiness  and  prosperity  prevail  in  lai'gest  measure,  and  in  every 
instance  they  are  the  countries  that  acknowledge  Jesus  as  the  Christ.  The  gospel, 
"wherever  it  goes,  proves  its  Divineness  by  working  miracles  of  beneficence.  And 
the  Christian  proves  the  truth  of  his  message  by  showing  what  it  has  done  for  his 
own  heart  and  conscience,  and  by  dispensing  of  its  virtues  to  all  around  him.  So 
one  man  turned  Samaria  up.side  down.  Before  the  people  knew,  probably  before 
he  himself  realised  it,  they  were  in  the  mid^t  of  a  great  revival.  HI.  Peter  and 
JOHN  COME  TO  HIS  RELIEF.  No  better  could  have  been  selected  than  the<e  two  whom 
we  so  often  find  in  each  other's  company — Peter  the  Man  of  Kock,  and  John  the 
Son  of  Thunder.  We  may  imagine  the  delight  with  which  the  faithful,  overworked 
evangelist  welcomed  them.  These  ap  )stles  came,  moreover,  not  only  to  preach 
Christ  to  the  Samaritans,  but  to  confer  upon  the  Christian  workers  the  charismata, 
or  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  On  the  arrival  of  these  apostles  the  work  went  for- 
war.i  with  renewed  energy,  but  Philip  was  less  conspicuous.  No  doubt  he  recog- 
nised their  superior  fitness,  and  was  content  to  take  a  subordinate  place.  Where 
the  mind  of  Jesus  prevails  there  is  neither  clash  nor  jealousy.  There  are  diversities 
of  gifts,  but  the  same  Spirit.  {D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  I'hiUp's  ministry  in 
Samaria  : — Consider  the  sugiiestions  arising  from — I.  The  scene  of  his  ministry. 
In  selecting  the  "city  of  Samaria"  we  discover — 1.  His  practical  sagacity.  Christ 
had  been  there  and  had  prepared  the  way.  2.  His  obedience  to  Christ.  Chri-t 
had  commanded  it  (chap  i.  8).  3.  His  largeness  of  soul.  Tuey  were  a  pople 
hostile  to  his  own,  by  politif'al  and  religious  prejudices.  4.  His  intrepidity  of  con- 
duct. He  was  doing  that  which  would  put  him  directly  against  the  Jews.  II.  The 
SUBJECT.  "Christ,"  not  Moses;  Christ,  not  creed — the  living  Christ,  the  anointed 
of  God,  the  Saviour  of  the  world— probably  : — 1.  As  the  burden  of  past  promises, 
as  "  IIi.a  o*  whom  Moses  and  the  prophets  did  write."  This  is  what  we  have  to 
do.  2.  As  the  foundation  of  all  future  hopes.  His  the  "  only  name  given,"  &c. 
No  one  else  to  look  forward  to.  HI.  The  reception  (ver.  6).  They  gave  proper 
attention  to  what  he  said.  Wh  it  would  be  proper  attention  to  a  theme  like  this  ? 
1.  Profoundly  reverential.  It  is  a  Divine  communication.  2.  Devoutly  grateful. 
Infinite  love  is  displayed  in  the  message.  3.  Earnestly  practical.  Demanding 
most  strenuous  personal  application.  IV.  The  attestation.  His  miracles  which 
were — 1.  Illustrations  of  the  benign  glories  of  his  ministry.  2.  Powers  to  impress 
the  Divinity  of  his  ministry.  V.  The  influence  (ver.  8).  They  had  been  partly 
prepared  for  this  by  Christ's  conversation  with  the  woman.  The  gospel  brings  joy 
to  a  people  because  it  is  "  good  tidings,"  &c.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Philip 
preaching  in  a  Samaritan  city  : — Philip — I.  Wknt  down  to  a  city  of  S.a.maria.  1. 
Went  down,  i.e.,  from  Jerusalem.  The  place  physically  was  high  ;  it  was  also  the 
centre  of  government  and  worship — hence  the  expressions  "  going  up  "  and  "  going 


C52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  viifc 

down."  If  there  is  one  super-eminent  mountain  in  a  country  the  clouds  of  heaven 
congregate  round  it,  and  from  it  the  water  flows  in  every  direction  to  refresh  the 
land.  Such,  spiritually,  was  Jerusalem.  The  clouds  gathered  lound  it  at  Pente- 
cost, and  under  the  influence  of  the  mighty  rushing  wind  they  were  precipitated, 
and  bore  the  gospel  of  grace  to  all  nations.  Christ's  name  and  work  is  that  central 
mountain  now.  The  Spirit  without  measure  is  poured  out  upon  Him.  The 
Jerusalem  that  now  is  is  His  Church,  around  which  all  heavenly  influences  con- 
gregate, and  fiom  which  they  flow  forth.  Hence  missions.  Christians  engage  in 
mission  work  as  mountnins  discharge  rivers ;  they  cannot  help  it,  it  is  a  law  of 
their  being.  Love  in  redeemed  hearts  swells,  and  would  rend  them  unless  they 
opened.  2.  To  a  city.  The  efforts  of  the  tirst  Christians  were  directed  chiefly  to 
the  great  cities.  When  the  strongholds  are  won,  the  surrounding  country  is  more 
easily  occupied.  Cities  seem  destined  to  play  a  greater  part  in  modern  than  they 
did  in  ancient  times.  As  yet  no  symptom  appears  of  any  natural  law  that  shall 
check  their  increase.  The  thouaht  of  London  makes  the  hejirt  falter.  But  "  this 
is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,"  &,c.  Lord  increase  our  faith.  3.  A  city 
of  Samaria.  It  was  near ;  it  was  needy.  Its  inhabitants  were  a  mixed  people  with 
a  patchwork  religion.  Samaria  is  near  us  to-day,  and  if  we  are  willing  to  go,  we 
need  not  lack  a  mission-tield.  II.  He  pkeacued  Christ  unto  them.  1.  He 
preached — the  first  and  chief  work  of  a  missionary,  as  a  herald  of  pence  from  the 
king  to  a  i<ebel  country.  Teaching  and  printing  are  useful  auxiliaries,  hut  they 
must  not  usurp  the  first  place.  2.  He  preached  Christ.  To  this  the  teaching  of 
the  Bible  constantly  comes  round.  Not  law,  morality,  philosophy,  or  even  the 
Scriptures  or  true  doctrine,  but  Christ.  3.  Unto  them — to  each  heart.  Not  a 
general  scheme  of  redemption,  but  a  personal  Saviour  to  a  personal  soul.  Let  the 
sunbeams  passing  through  ordinary  glass  be  sprend  over  your  naked  hand  and  the 
effect  is  imperceptible;  but  let  the  rays  pass  through  a  convex  gla'^s  and  be  con- 
centrated on  one  point,  and  they  will  shine  brilliantly  and  go  to  the  quick.  The 
gospel  may  be  preached  or  heard  in  both  these  ways  ;  hence  its  diverse  effects. 
{W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  advent  of  the  gospel  to  Samaria: — With  the  history  of 
Philip  commences  a  new  stage  in  the  development  of  the  Church.  In  the  first 
commission  to  the  twelve  the  glad  tidings  were  restricted  to  the  Jews,  to  the 
express  exclusion  of  the  Samaritans.  This,  however,  was  cancelled  in  the  final 
commission,  and  Samaria  first  and  then  the  whole  world  were  thrown  open  to  the 
gospel.  But  the  honour  of  executiug  this  commission,  in  both  its  narrowest  and 
widest  extent,  fell  not  to  an  apostle,  but  to  a  deacon.  Samaria  din  ctly,  and  Africa 
indirectly,  were  evangelised  by  Philip,  the  forerunner  of  Paul  in  his  work  as  Stephen 
was  in  his  preaching.  "  Coming  events  cast  their  sh^idows  before."  The  forms  of 
Stephen  and  Philip,  projected  on  the  canvas  of  sacred  history,  give  us  some  idea  of 
the  gigantic  figure  in  reserve.  What  moved  Philip  is  not  recorded.  Perhaps  the 
persecution  was  specially  directed  against  him,  as  his  name  occurs  next  to  Siephen's, 
and  because  he  was  as  a  Grecized  Jew  more  liberal  than  his  brethren  in  Palestine. 
He  went  down  to  a  (not  the)  city  of  Samaria,  probably  Sebaste  or  Syihar.  The 
orderliness  of  the  spread  of  the  gospel  should  be  noted.  It  was  to  begin  from 
Jerusalem  as  its  centre,  and  first  to  permeate  Judjea,  the  province  of  which 
Jerusalem  was  the  metropolis,  and  thence  to  Samaria,  the  contiguous  province, 
and  thence  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth.  Now  this  collocation  of  Samaria 
(between  Judsea  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth)  is  not  so  much  to  be  under- 
stood geographically  as  morally.  The  Samaritans  were  Judaised  Gentiles,  just  as 
the  Hellenists  were  Gentilised  Jews.  And  it  is  obvious  that  Judaised  Gentiles 
might  play  the  same  part  which  Hellenists  played — act  as  a  bridge  between  Juda- 
ism and  heathenism.  The  Samaritans  were  probably  purely  heathen  by  extraction, 
descendants  of  those  with  whom  Shalmanezer  repeopled  the  desolatfd  country  (2 
Kings  xvii.),  whose  corrupt  religion  soon  found  for  itself  a  local  habitation  and  a 
name.  Manasseh,  the  son  of  a  Jewish  high  priest,  being  threatened  with  expulsion 
from  the  priesthood  for  contracting  marriage  with  a  Samaritan  lady,  permanently 
sided  with  them,  built  a  rival  temple  on  Gerizim,  and  founded  a  rival  priesthood. 
The  Samaritan  Bible  was  a  copy  of  the  law  of  Moses,  and  that  only,  sh  aving,  how- 
ever, many  alterations  of  the  text.  Thus  where  Moses  commands  the  people  to 
build  an  altar  on  Mount  Ebal,  Gerizim  is  substituted  for  Ebal.  Thus  the  Samaritan 
religion  was  a  spurious  and  mutilated  Judaism.  And  hence  the  antipathy  of  the 
Jews  to  them  exceeded  their  antipathy  to  mere  Gentiles.  Nothing  Uo  men  hate 
more  than  a  caricature  of  themselves.  Accordingly  Samaritans  were  cursed  in 
every  synagogue,  excluded  as  witnesses  from  Jewish  courts  of  justice,  and  coultl 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  653 

never  become  proselytes.  These  rancorous  prejudices  were  foreign  to  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  and  He  took  every  opportunity  of  countera<  t  ng  them.  But  while  He  for- 
bids all  animosity  against  them,  He  gave  no  sanct  on  to  their  religious  claims.  It 
will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  a  strict  Jew  of  the  high  orthoilox  school  would  have 
had  a  vast  deal  of  prejudice  to  surmount  im  carrying  the  gospel  to  Samaria.  But 
Philip  did  not  belong  to  this  school.  His  circumstances  and  office  would  give  him 
wider  sympathies  than  were  to  be  found  anjong  Hebrews  of  the  Hebrews.  Tbe 
original  diaconate  was  now  broken  up,  and  Philip,  the  distributor  of  alms,  appears 
in  the  new  character  of  evangelist— a  striking  proof  that  the  wisest  plans  for 
Cburch  government  must  be  subject  to  modifications  by  the  Providence  of  God. 
Yet  while  the  form  of  the  early  diaconate  passed  away,  its  principles  remained,  and 
we  liear  of  deacons  at  Philippi,  and  of  a  gift  of  "  helps  "  at  Corinth.  A  concluding 
word  on  the  slow  development  of  the  ideas  which  were  to  form  Christendom.  The 
Church  had  much  to  learn  after  Pentecost,  which  experience  and  struggle  only 
could  teach.  The  outpouring  was  not  a  magical  enlightenment  on  all  points  of 
truth,  but  rather  the  implantation  of  a  principle  of  light  and  love,  which  was  to 
work  out  its  results  accoiding  to  the  laws  of  the  human  mind.  Placed  under  the 
guidance  of  the  Spirit  the  views  of  the  apostles  became  gradually  clearer  and  wider. 
Pentecost  did  for  society  what  conversion  does  for  the  individual.  Conversion 
is  a  period  of  warm  and  lively  emotions,  but  the  work  of  sanctifi cation,  so  far  from 
being  finished,  has  only  begun.  Our  young  streniith  has  to  be  approved  by  trial, 
and  our  little  knowledge  to  be  enlarged  by  experience.  So  it  was  with  the  early 
Church.       (Dean    Goulburn.)  Samaria    made  joyful : — I.  Thr   preaching  of 

Christ.  Christ  is  to  be  preached  as — 1.  All  almighty;  2.  All  sufficient;  3.  Only; 
4.  Gracious  and  compassionate,  Saviour.  II.  Its  happy  effects.  1.  The  blessings 
it  brings.  2.  The  prospects  it  unfolds.  Conclusion :  1.  What  reasons  we  have  to 
be  thankful  for  the  gospel!  2.  What  use  are  we  making  of  it?  (IF.  Dransfield.) 
Preaching  Christ : — I.  Christ  is  the  pboper  subject  of  preaching.     This  means — 

1.  That  the  subject  of  preaching  was  not  the  wisdom  of  the  world.  2.  That  it  was 
the  revelation  concerning  Christ.  (1)  The  nature  of  His  person.  (2)  The  character 
of  His  work  in  all  His  offices.  (3)  The  method  of  salvation  through  Him  :  what 
■we  must  do  to  obtain  an  interest  in  His  salvation.  (4)  Tbe  duties  we  owe  Him. 
II.  Christ  as  the  object  of  preaching.  The  objects  which  men  have  are  various, 
and  some  selfish  and  degrading.  Some  preach  Christ  of  strife  and  envy.  Others 
have  objects  which  are  legitimate,  but  subordinate,  as  the  temporal  or  eternal  well- 
being  of  men.  The  true  specific  and  appropriate  object  is  the  exaltation  and  glory 
of  Christ ;  that  He  may  be  known,  worshipped,  and  obeyed.  HI.  Eeasons  why  we 
should  preach  Christ.  Because — 1.  He  is  our  God  and  Saviour.  2.  This  is 
requisite  to  men  becoming  Christians.  8.  To  make  men  Christians  is  the  best 
means  of  glorifying  God,  and  the  only  means  of  promoting  the  happiness,  holi- 
ness, and  salvation  of  men.  IV.  To  preach  Christ  is  a  grace.  The  reasons  why 
it  is  so  great  a  favour  are  because — 1.  It  is  the  highest  service  of  God  and  Christ. 

2.  To  serve  Him  is  the  highe-t  honour,  and  the  greatest  source  of  happiness.  {C. 
Hodge,  D.D.)  Hov)  Christ  should  be  preached: — I.  As  the  Messiah  of  ancient 
prophecy.  II.  As  incarnate.  1.  Very  man.  2.  Very  God.  III.  As  crucified 
AND  RISEN.  1.  Atoning  for  sin.  2.  Triumphing  over  death.  IV.  As  glorified. 
1.  For  Himself.  2.  For  His  people.  V.  As  Judge.  Living  to  make  Christ 
known : — I  wonder  how  many  Christian  people  here  could  have  their  biographies 
condensed  into  this  line,  "  He  lived  to  make  Christ  known."  Might  it  not  be  said 
of  one,  he  lived  to  open  a  shop,  and  then  to  open  a  second  ?  or  of  another,  he  lived 
to  save  a  good  deal  of  money,  and  take  shares  in  limited  liability  companies  ?  or 
of  a  third,  he  lived  to  paint  a  great  picture  ?  or  of  a  fourth,  he  was  best  known  for 
his  genial  hospitality  ?  Of  many  a  minister  it  might  be  said — he  lived  to  preach 
splf^ndid  sermons,  and  to  giin  credit  for  fine  oratory.  What  of  all  these?  If  it 
can  be  said  of  a  man,  "  He  lived  to  glorify  Christ,"  then  his  life  is  a  life.  Every 
Christian  man  ought  so  to  live.  Ch  that  my  memorial  might  be  :  "  He  preached 
Christ  crucified"!      (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  not  in  the  sermon: — The  late 

B>hop  F ,  of  Salisbury,  having   procured  a   young  clergyman  of  promising 

abilities  to  preach  before  the  king ;  and  the  young  man  having,  in  his  lordship's 
opinion,  acquitted  himself  well,  the  bishop,  in  conversation  with  the  king  after- 
wards, wishing  to  get  his  sovereign's  opinion,  took  the  liberty  to  say,  "  Does  not 
your  majestv  think  that  the  young  man,  who  had  the  honour  to  preach  before  your 
majestv,  is  likely  to  make  a  good  clergyman,  and  has  this  morning  delivered  a  very 
good  sermon?"     To  which  the  king  in  his  blunt  manner,  hastily  replied,  "It 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vnr. 

might  have  bpen  a  good  sermon,  my  lord;  but  I  consider  no  sermon  good  that  has 
nothing  of  Christ  in  it."  Christ  in  every  sermon  : — A  lady  named  Euth  Mont- 
gomery, -wriiing  in  an  American  journal,  tells  us  of  bearing  a  young  man  just 
entering  the  ministry,  who  visited  her  grandfather  -when  she  was  a  little  girl, 
deliver  an  address  on  some  public  secular  occasion.  Years  afterwards,  when  gro{vn 
to  womanhood,  she  heard  the  same  speaker  deliver  a  lecture  of  deep  interest,  in  a 
town  in  the  interior  of  New  York.  Standing  at  the  entrance  of  the  pew,  as  he 
passed  down  the  aisle  to  the  door,  she  shook  hands  with  him,  and  said:  "lam 
little  Euth."  A  smile  lighted  up  his  countenance,  and  he  replied,  "  Do  ycu  know 
that  vou  said  something  to  me  when  I  was  at  your  grandfather's  that  1  have  never 
forgotten?"  "Oh,  no,"  I  said;  "it  cannot  be  possible!"  "Yes,  you  did,"  he 
replied  ;  "  when  I  returned  from  the  lecture,  you  said,  '  Dr.  D.,  you  didn't  forget  to 
bring  in  the  Saviour  into  your  lecture.'  And  I  determim-d  then  I  never  would  forget 
it.  I  have  remeujbared  it  from  that  day  to  this,  and  tried  to  keep  my  resolution." 
The  duty  of  Christians  to  speak  about  Christ : — Many  years  ago,  when  S.  D.  Rickards 
was  walking  home  with  a  young  lady,  talking  to  her  of  the  good  Lord  and  His 
willingness  to  help  us  (in  accordance  with  a  resolution  made  still  farther  back  that 
he  would  never  be  alone  with  any  young  person  without  speaking  concerning  "  the 
better  things  "),  he  found  that  she  had  been  longing  to  be  a  Christian  for  a  con- 
siderable time  ;  she  wanted  to  love  and  trust  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  she  did  not  know 
how.  In  the  simplest  way  he  told  her  bow — that  trusting  Christ  was  no  more 
diificult  than  trusting  bim.  Did  she  believe  that  he  would  save  her  if  he  could,  if 
she  asked  him?  And  when  the  rep'y  came,  "  Yea,"  the  question  was  put  whether 
He,  tht^  Infinitely  Good,  was  not  much  more  to  be  trusted  than  a  poor  weak  being  like 
himself.  Would  He  not  be  sure  to  save  her  if  she  asked  Him,  and  could  she  not 
trust  Him  to  say  yes  ?  A  few  days  after,  a  little  note  came,  thanking  him  for  the 
convert^ation,  relating  how  now  she  could  say  she  trusted  the  Lord  Jesus  and  was 
glad  in  Him,  and  adding  these  few  words:  "If  any  one  during  the  last  three 
years  had  spoken  to  me  as  you  did  the  other  night,  I  should  have  been  a  Christian. 
It  was  just  what  I  was  wanting.  I  often  wonder  Christians  talk  so  little  about 
Christ."  (J.  L.  Ny.)  And  the  people  with  one  accord  gave  heed  unto  those 
things  which  Philip  spake,  hearing  and  seeing  the  miracles  which  he  did. — 
Fruit — joy : — I.  The  people  listened  to  the  messenger.  There  was  great 
earnestnt^ss  and  unanimity.  They  did  not  oppose  him  or  remain  unmoved.  It  is 
a  great  advantage  when  an  awaking  becomes  general.  Solitary  Christians  are  like 
solitary  trees  near  the  sea  coast ;  the  cold  winds  keep  down  their  growth  or  kill 
them.  But  in  a  thick  wood  all  contribute  to  shelter  each.  So  quickly  and  generally 
did  this  harvest  grow  up  to  Philip's  hand  that  we  are  compelled  to  believe  that  a 
sower  iiad  been  previously  at  work.  This  was  so.  The  Master  had  sown,  the 
servant  now  reape  1.  II.  The  people  both  heaed  his  doctrines,  and  saw  his 
MIGHTY  WORKS.  We  have  the  same  doctrines  and  the  same  results  in  conversion, 
but  not  tbe  mira'-les?  Why?  They  were  the  credentials  of  the  first  preachers; 
why,  then,  cannot  we  have  them  to  authenticate  ours?  For  the  same  reason,  per- 
haps, that  the  mirac'e  of  Creation  has  not  been  repeated.  To  set  the  world  going 
powers  were  necessary  that  are  not  neces->ary  now.  The  present  O'ganic  Jaws  are 
sufficient  for  the  continuance  of  the  species,  but  not  to  account  for  the  commence- 
ment. Why,  then,  should  it  be  thou-ht  impossible  that  G.)d  should  exert  a  power 
to  establish  the  gospel  which  was  not  needed  afterwards  ?  Existing  spiritual  forces 
are  sufficient  for  all  gospel  purposes,  aud  are  mightier  even  than  the  miracles 
employed  to  establish  it.  III.  There  was  great  joy  in  the  city.  Hear  this, 
ye  butterfly  flutterers,  that  flit  from  flower  to  flower,  satiate  with  each  sweet  as 
soon  as  }oa  alight  upon  it,  and  hastening  unhappy  to  another,  trying  every  flower 
all  day,  and  at  night  bringing  no  honey  home  !  Hear  this,  all  ye  who  study  hard 
to  keep  religion  at  arm's  length,  lest  it  should  cast  a  gloom  over  your  heart  or 
homel  When  Hn  earnest  missiona-y  who  had  risked  his  life  for  Christ's  name 
preached  in  a  city,  the  people,  instead  of  growing  gloomy,  became  glad.  This  is 
a  phenomenon  worthy  of  study.  But  do  not  mistake  its  meaning.  The  instinct 
which  prompts  the  vain  and  worldly  to  keep  religion  away,  lest  it  should  destroy 
their  pleasure,  is  a  true  instinct.  Every  creature's  instinct  is  for  its  own  pr.  serva- 
tion.  To  embrace  Christ  is  to  crucify  the  old  man,  who  does  not  die  without 
struggle  and  pain.  But  when  he  is  put  off  a  new  nature  is  put  on,  and  the  new 
nature  has  new  joys.  What  the  Samaritans  felt  is  the  ultimate  result,  not  the  first 
effect,  of  preaching  Christ  offered  to  a  city  or  a  soul,  and  kept  out  seems  a  terror, 
but  received  becomes  a  joy  wijich  life  cannot  give  or  death  destroy.     {IV.  Arnot, 


CHAP,  vin.]  THE  ACTS.  655 

D.D.)  Genuine  and  spurious  miracles: — Undesigned  coincidences  are  a  most 
satisfactory  evidence  of  tlie  truth  of  Scripture.  We  have  one  here.  From  the 
account  of  our  Lord's  sojourn  in  Sychar,  given  by  John — a  very  different  writer 
from  Luke — we  gather  that  the  Samaritans  were  a  pimple-minded  people,  with  a 
childlike  taste  for  the  marvellous,  and  an  equally  childlike  credulity,  keeuly  antici- 
pating the  coming  of  a  great  Prophet  and  Dehverer,  but  having  the  moral  faculties 
undeveloped.  Now  it  is  exactly  among  such  a  people  that  magic  is  likely  to  make 
way,  as  the  narrative  tells  us  it  did.  Thus  the  Samaritans  of  the  Acts  are  true  to 
the  character  incidentally  ascribed  to  them  in  St.  John.  But  among  nations  of 
a  much  higher  civilisation  there  was  at  the  time  a  susceptibility  to  magical  arts. 
Eeligious  ideas  were  in  a  state  of  fermentation,  and  religious  minds  in  a  state  of 
high  excitement.  There  was  a  general  pxi^ectation  of  the  advent  of  a  great 
Rnler,  due  partly  to  the  dissemination  of  Jewish  ideas  and  associations  through 
Israel's  dispersion,  and  to  the  growing  disbelief  in  mythology.  Men  must  have 
some  religion,  and  so  intelligeut  heathens  held  on  to  the  old  forms,  with  an 
occasional  sneer,  for  the  want  of  a  better,  but  they  yearned  for  sometbing  truer  and 
more  satisfying.  Now  this  state  is  connected  with  ciedulity  and  an  appetite  for 
signs  and  wonders  ;  and  wherever  there  is  a  demand  (here  is  sure  to  be  a  supply. 
And,  to  go  beyond  the  phenomena  to  the  causes,  by  the  manifestation  of  God  in 
the  flesh,  the  powers  of  evil  were  stirred  up  to  a  desperate  effort  for  the  maintenance 
of  their  supremacy.  Demoniacal  possession  was  one  result  of  this  effort ;  a  great 
swarm  of  impostors  was  another.  ApoUonius  of  Tyaua  is  said  to  have  performed 
miracles  which  are  parodies  of  those  in  the  Gospels.  By  the  side  of  the  genuine 
coin  which  God  miuted  was  issued  from  the  devil's  mint  a  whole  school  of  counter- 
feit coins.  The  gospel  was  to  fare  as  the  law  had  done  ;  when  the  sorcerers  were 
able  to  do  the  same  wonders  as  Moses  up  to  a  certain  point,  after  which  they  are 
constrained  to  see  "  the  finger  of  God."  So  here  the  magician  is  forced  to  acknow- 
ledge that  God  is  in  the  gospel,  and  is  baptized,  though  without  change  of  heart. 
His  p'.licy  was,  without  relinquishing  the  purpose  of  his  life,  to  ascertain  the  secret 
of  this  new  power  :  and  he  seems  to  have  regarded  baptism  as  a  magical  rite  on 
a  level  with  his  own  spells.  And  Luke,  in  describing  his  state  of  mind  while 
beholding  the  miracles  of  the  gospel,  used  the  same  Greek  word  which  he  employed 
to  describe  the  effect  of  Simon's  own  powers.  "  He  bewitched  the  people  of 
Samaria,  .  .  .  and  beholding  the  miracles  and  signs  which  were  done,  he  was 
bewitched."  Note  some  of  the  characteristics  of  Philip's  miracles  which  distin- 
guished tbem  from  those  of  the  sorcerer.  The  former  had  upon  them — I.  The 
SEAL  ov  God's  glory.  The  sorcerer  preached  himself — "  Gave  out  that  he  was 
some  great  one  "  ;  whereas  Philip  "  preached  Christ"  and  "the  things  concerning 
the  kingdom  of  God."  He  announced  that  the  devil's  empire  was  broken,  and  that 
whosoever  would  come  to  God  might  have  priceless  blessings.  Miracles  of  a  corres- 
ponding character  att'  sted  the  message.  Unclean  spirits  were  expelled  in  token 
of  Satan's  shaft'  red  kingdom,  and  in  evidence  that  a  new  power  had  come  into 
humanity  many  were  healed.  At  the  sight  of  these  miracles  the  people  rejoiced. 
But  mere  wonders  have  no  aptitude  to  produce  joy.  Simon's  sorceries  produced 
only  amazement  and  dread.  What  produced  the  joy  was  the  glad  tidings  which 
Philip  preached.  Where  miracles  redound,  by  many  thanksgivings  unto  tne  praise 
of  God,  we  may  believe  th  tt  they  had  their  origin  from  God ;  but  when  they 
redo'ind  to  the  glorification  of  men,  we  may  suspect  them.  II.  The  seal  op  lovb 
TO  MAN.  They  brought  relief  to  suffeiing  humanity.  But  not  a  word  is  said  of  the 
beneficence  of  Simon's  miracles — they  were  simply  wonders  that  bewitched  folk. 
Conclusion  :  1.  True  miracles  are  never  shown  for  their  own  sake,  but  for  some 
doctrine  which  has  to  be  attested  by  them.  They  are  never  advanced  to  make 
peofde  wonder,  but  as  signs  to  make  them  believe.  Hence,  as  soon  as  the  doctrine 
has  gained  a  firm  footing,  the  miracles  cease.  When  marvels  are  professed  to  be 
wrought  by  some  occult  power,  do  not  credit  them  unless  they  are  in  confirmation 
of  some  Divine  message.  2.  There  is  a  correspondence  between  the  character  of 
a  true  miracle  and  the  doctrine  which  it  is  wrought  to  establish.  Thus,  e.g.,  the 
plagues  of  Egypt  were  all  directed  to  establish  the  superiority  of  Jehovah  to  the 
idols  of  Egypt,  and  those  of  Philip  to  prove  that  the  gospel  was  good  tidings  of 
great  joy.  And  the  people  saw  the  correspondence  between  the  two  (ver.  8).  [Dean 
Goulhnrii.)  The   spiritual  viiracl  -s  of   the  gospel : — I.  Impurity  is  expelled. 

II.  Weakness  is  strengthened.  HI.  Sorrow  is  converted  into  joy.  Joy — 1. 
At  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  2.  In  the  enjoyment  of  God.  3.  In  the  hope  of  eternal 
salvation.     {K.  Gerok.)        The  only  cure  for  soul  disorders: — Some  years  ago  I. 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

was  at  Birmingham  when  the  onion  fair  was  being  held,  and  thousands  of  people 
came  from  the  Black  Country  to  attend  it,  and  to  witness  the  sights  that  seem  to 
be  a  part  of  all  such  gatherings.  The  London  Bible  Society  sent  an  agent  to  sell 
copies  of  the  Bible.  There  was  also  a  woman  selling  a  patent  medicine,  and  some 
young  fellows  from  the  Black  Country  went  up  to  her,  and  one  of  them  said, 
"  Missis,  can  you  cure  us  ?  "  "  What's  the  matter?  "  inquired  the  woman.  "  Oh, 
we've  got  the  devil  in  us,"  was  the  reply.  "  No,  young  man,"  said  the  woman, 
with  a  reverence  for  the  truth  that  deserved  something  better  than  to  be  selling 
patent  medicine,  "  I  cannot  cure  you.  Your  disorder  is  of  the  soul ;  my  physic 
is  only  for  the  body.  If  you  want  to  be  cured,  you  must  go  to  the  man  that's 
Belling  Bibles  yonder."  (J.  S.  Pawlyn.)  And  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city. 
— The  grounds  of  Christian  joy  : — There  was  Joy  on  account  of — I.  TemporaIi 
MERCIES.  The  circumstances  attending  the  benefits,  as  well  as  the  benefits  them- 
selves, would  render  this  joy  peculiarly  great.  For  many  hopeless  maladies  were 
cured  instantaneously  and  completely,  neither  subjecting  the  patient  to  anv  painful 
operation,  nor  leaving  any  portion  of  the  distemper  unremoved.  And  their  joy 
would  be  still  more  enhanced  by  perceiving  the  hand  of  God  in  all  this,  and  that  it 
was  illustrative  of  the  mercy  and  power  on  which  they  might  rest  their  confidence 
in  Him  for  future  and  higher  blessings.  For  they  welcomed  the  redeeming  message 
thus  recommended  and  attested,  and  embraced  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  gospel. 
Now,  when  any  blessing  is  put  into  your  lot,  your  hearts  will  doubtless  be  affected 
with  joy.  And  the  joy  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  native  sensibility  of  your  minds 
and  to  the  blessing  received.  But  the  great  subject  of  anxiety  should  be  that  your 
joy  shall  be  worthy  of  the  faculties  with  which  God  has  endowed  you,  and  of  those 
sentiments  and  anticipations  which  He  has  taught  you  to  entertain.  "What  is  the 
nature  of  your  joy  after  temporal  bent  fit  ?  Is  it  a  mere  animal  excitement,  like 
the  gratification  of  the  brutes  when  they  are  getting  their  hunger  and  thirst 
appeased,  or  when  they  are  liberated  from  pain  or  confinement  ?  Or  is  it  the 
feeling  of  those  worldlings  who  are  happy  only  when  their  lower  app-tites  are 
ministered  to?  In  order  for  the  joy  to  be  Christian,  those  blessings  by  which  the 
emotion  has  been  excited  must  be  considered  as  to  their  origin  and  as  to  the  higher 
purposes  which  they  are  designed  to  subserve,  both  in  your  present  and  vour  future  | 
condition.  1.  You  are  joyful  for  temporal  benefits,  but  remember  that  thv-se  are  I 
not  the  fruits  of  your  own  exertion,  or  of  the  benevolence  of  your  fellow-men,  or  of 
fate  or  accident.  They  are  the  gifts  of  God.  The  kind  interpositions  here  recorded 
were  miraculous  ;  but  if  you  have  taken  your  principles  and  impressions  from  the 
Holy  Scriptuies,  you  will  not  need  a  miracle  to  lift  your  contemplation  to  Him  by 
whom  a  mercy  has  been  manifested.  Every  comfort  you  will  regard  as  descending 
from  heaven.  And  how  sweet  and  satisfying  is  that  joy  which  you  draw  from  this 
reference  of  every  blessing  to  God !  Were  you  to  be  informed  that  any  happy 
event  which  had  befallen  you  originated  in  the  contrivance  of  an  individual,  who 
combined  with  general  worth  a  strong  and  disinterested  attachment  to  you,  would 
not  this  discovery  add  much  to  your  pleasure  by  giving  birth  to  sympathies  which 
could  not  otherwise  have  existed  ?  And  if  this  individual  should  turn  out  to  be  the 
father  whom  you  had  done  much  to  displease,  would  not  this  increase  the  enjoy- 
ment to  a  still  higher  degree  ?  And  must  not  this  be  realised  in  a  style  which  no 
reciprocity  of  kindness  between  man  and  man  can  ever  exemplify,  and  in  a  degree 
which  no  display  of  mere  human  generosity  can  ever  create,  when  you  are  able  to 
receive  all  the  good  things  of  life  as  proceeding  from  the  hand  of  your  Futlier  in 
heaven?  And  in  proportion  as  you  see  the  finger  of  God  in  whatever  contributes 
to  your  preservation  and  your  comfort  will  your  joy  be  regulated,  not  by  the  great- 
ness of  the  prosperity  which  gives  occasion  for  it,  but  by  the  Divine  bounty  which 
it  indicates  whether  it  be  great  or  small.  2.  But  besides  this,  you  should  be  joyful 
in  the  experience  of  temporal  good,  because  it  restores  or  increases  your  means  of 
personal  improvement  and  of  social  usefulness.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that 
many  of  the  rejoicing  Samaritans  felt  in  this  way.  From  their  having  been  subject 
to  various  infirmities,  they  must  liave  been  not  only  debarred  from  useful  exertion, 
but  have  even  been  a  burden  both  to  themselves  and  to  their  friends.  But  wh^-n 
freed  from  such  bodily  calamities,  the  faith  they  embraced  in  consequence  of  this 
Divine  interposition  would  lead  them  to  employ  their  recovered  powers  in  advanc- 
ing their  own  good  and  the  good  of  their  neighbours,  and  to  rejoice  that  the  ability 
was  restored,  while  the  inclination  was  also  given,  to  glorify  God  in  practical 
acknowledgments  of  His  healing  mercy.  And,  as  under  the  impulse  of  this  holy 
ambition  everything  which  retards  your  progress  will  be  a  subject  of  regret,  so^ 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  657 

whatever  tends  to  promote  it  will  make  you  glad  in  proportion  to  its  power  of 
adding  to  the  warmth  of  your  piety  and  the  extent  of  your  virtue.  Nor  can  you 
fail  to  be  conscious  of  the  same  emotions  in  reference  to  the  welfare  of  others.  (1) 
You  were  long  confined,  perhaps,  to  a  bed  of  sickness,  which  has  interrupted  youjs' 
course  of  aciive  duty.  Now  that,  through  Divine  mercy,  you  are  permitted  to 
exchange  the  chamber  of  disease  for  the  scene  of  wonted  industry,  you  indulge  in 
the  gladness  of  soul  which  such  a  transition  is  fitted  to  inspire.  But  are  you  glad 
merely  that  you  are  again  permitted  to  partake  of  the  amusements,  or  mingle  in  the 
business,  of  the  world?  No;  your  gladness,  if  it  be  Christian,  will  rather  arise 
from  this — that  you  can  now  follow  out  the  important  purposes  for  which  your 
Lord  has  qunlified  you.  (2)  Perhaps  you  had  a  dear  friend  in  whom  you  trusted 
for  advice  and  encouragement ;  and  as  it  had  pleased  God  to  afflict  him,  so  it  has 
pleased  God  to  give  him  back  to  your  prayers  and  your  affections.  But  you  must 
have  poorly  appreciated  his  value  if  you  did  not  hail  his  return,  not  merely  on  the 
ground  of  frieudship,  but  because  you  were  to  be  again  blessed  with  his  counsels 
and  admonitions  and  example.  (3)  Or  perhaps  you  have  been  rescued  from  worldly 
embarrassments  which  had  checked  yuu  in  the  cultivation  of  your  talents,  and 
almost  destroyed  your  power  of  promoting  the  good  of  your  fellow-men.  And  in 
the  relief  from  these  embarrassments  this  will  hold  an  influential  and  distinguished 
place,  that  you  have  recovered  that  by  which  you  can  make  greater  progress  in  the 
things  that  are  excellent,  and  be  instrumental  in  furthering  the  grand  interests  of 
humanity  and  religion  in  the  world.  II.  Spiritual  meecies.  Philip  preached 
Christ  to  the  Samaritans,  and  they  embraced  Him  as  an  all-sufficient  Bedeemer, 
and  by  baptism  vowed  to  undertake  all  the  duties  of  their  Christian  profession. 
Now,  if  we  have  welcomed  the  gospel  as  they  did,  we  must  be  similarly  affected 
wiih  joy.  The  gospel  is  of  such  an  interesting  description,  and  is  so  calculated  to 
work  upon  the  principles  and  susceptibilities  of  our  nature,  that  whenever  it  meets 
with  belief  and  obedience  it  cannot  fail  to  produce  joy.  So  much  is  this  the  case 
that  Christianity  is  distinctively  "good  tidings  of  great  joy."  1.  Let  us  only 
think  of  the  information  which  Christianity  conveys,  that  we  may  see  how  neces- 
sarily it  excites  gladness.  (1)  Do  we  rejoice  to  learn  that  some  temporary  evil  that 
we  greatly  fenred  has  been  averted?  Well,  then,  we  learn  from  the  gospel  that  the 
greatest  of  all  calamities  is  provided  against  so  effectually  that  there  is  "  no  con- 
demnation to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  (2)  Do  we  rejoice  to  be  assured 
that  some  earthly  friend  to  whom  we  had  given  just  offence  is  willing  to  reinstate 
us  in  his  favour  ?  Well,  then,  the  gospel  assures  us  that  God  Himself,  whose  favour 
is  life,  whose  displeasure  is  death,  but  against  whom  we  had  sinned,  has  made 
such  arrangements  that  our  iniquities  may  be  blotted  out,  and  our  peace  with  Him 
regained  and  secured.  (3)  Do  we  rejoice  to  be  told  that  a  distemper  which 
threatened  to  be  mortal  may  be  arrested?  Well,  then,  the  gospel  tells  us  that 
death,  which  we  so  much  dreaded,  is  deprived  of  its  sting — stripped  of  its  terrors — 
and  that  it  need  not  be  feared  any  more.  (4)  Do  we  rejoice  when,  through  the 
unmerited  kindness  of  some  relative,  we  have  the  reversion  of  a  fortune  or  an 
estate  which  we  must  soon  leave  to  others  ?  Well,  then,  the  gospel  informs  us 
that  God  has  reserved  for  us  "  an  inheritance  incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that 
fadeth  not  away."  2.  But  it  behoves  us  to  have  this  feeling  of  interest  in  the 
blessings  of  the  gospel  created  and  established  according  to  the  Scriptural  method. 
Some  people  are  comforted  and  gladdened  by  the  discoveries  of  the  gospel  without 
any  pood  warrant.  They  imagine  that  merely  because  a  Saviour  is  provided,  and 
a  woik  of  redemption  accomplished,  they  may  banish  all  their  fears  and  be  "  joyful 
in  the  Lord."  Whereas,  according  to  the  gospel  scheme,  this  fact  is  of  no  avail 
to  any  sinner  till  it  is  received  by  him,  and  submitted  to  by  him,  "  as  a  faithful 
saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation."  Now,  this  attainment  is  made  by  faith  in 
Christ,  and  the  moment  that  Christ  becomes  our  Saviour  joy  exists  there,  and  ought 
to  be  cherished  there,  as  sanctioned  by  Him  from  whom  the  pardon  and  salvation 
which  produce  it  have  been  derived — as  itself  a  privilege  which  He  confers,  equally 
valuable  and  divine.  We  are  not  to  rejoice  because  we  believe,  as  if  our  joy  were 
to  arise  fi'om  anything  within  ourselves,  but  because  the  Saviour,  in  whom  we 
trust,  is  all-sufficient  for  us.  Thus  it  was  with  the  Samaritan  converts.  They  had 
great  joy.  But  it  was  an  immediate  sequence  of  their  "  believing  the  things  that 
Philip  preached  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ." 
There  may  be  a  strong  faith,  and  there  may  be  a  weak  faith.  The  clearer  and 
more  multiplied  our  evidence  is  of  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  and  of  the  sufficiency 
of  Jesus  Christ  in  whatsoever  that  evidence  may  consist,  the  more  vivid  and 
VOL.  I.  42 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

vigorous  will  be  our  faith ;  and  the  more  vivid  and  vigorous  our  faith,  the  more 
lively,  substantial,  unmingled  will  be  that  joy  which  faith,  in  its  every  degree,  is 
fitted  to  produce.  And,  therefore,  that  we  may  abound  in  joy,  let  it  be  our  care 
and  our  study  to  abound  in  faith.  3.  But  remeuiber  that  the  same  authority  which 
commands  you  to  believe  and  to  rejoice,  also  presents  to  you  dehneations  and 
enforcements  of  a  character  which  you  must  possess,  otherwise  all  your  "religion 
is  vain."  The  faith  which  you  repose  in  Christ,  and  which  gives  joy  to  your  heart, 
is  a  faith  which  receives  Him,  that  He  may  redeem  you  from  the  power  and  pollu- 
tion of  sin,  and  consecrate  you  to  the  service  of  God  ;  and  were  it  possible  for  you 
to  believe  in  Him  to  the  exclusion  of  that  pr.rt  of  His  saving  character,  your  joy 
would  be  presumptuous  and  delusive.  So  that  spiritual  joy  and  spiritual  renova- 
tion are  inseparably  united.  And  as  you  believe  and  rejoice,  so  you  must  give  all 
diligence  to  abound  in  godliness.  The  Samaritans  acted  in  this  manner.  We  do 
not  read  of  their  after  conduct ;  but  so  far  as  the  narrative  goes  they  did  all  of 
which  their  time  and  opportunities  admitted.  They  were  baptized — and  this 
implied  incalculably  more  than  it  does  among  us.  By  undergoing  the  rite,  they 
braved  all  the  terrors  of  persecution,  and  pledged  themselves  to  maintain  that 
purity  of  demeanour  which  the  washing  with  water  signified.  A  holy  life,  in 
reference  to  our  spiritual  joy,  is  of  vast  importance  in  two  ways.  (1)  It  is  tbe 
test  by  which  we  are  to  ascertain  that  our  joy  is  not  false  and  delusive.  There  is 
a  joy  which  proceeds  from  frames,  and  feelings,  and  fancies.  To  guard  against  a 
deception  so  fatal,  it  is  necessary  that  we  "  examine  ourselves  whether  we  be  in 
the  faith,"  wanting  which  the  gospel  speaks  nothing  that  is  good  to  us,  and  whether 
we  are  entitled  to  be  glad  in  the  Lord  as  our  Lord,  our  Saviour,  and  our  portion. 
(2)  While  practical  godliness  thus  satisfies  us  that  we  are  not  rejoicing  without 
warrant,  the  more  we  possess  of  that  character,  the  stronger  evidence  do  we  obtain 
of  our  interest  in  the  blessings  of  redemption,  and  the  stronger  reason  have 
we  for  encouraging  ourselves  in  that  joy  with  which  the  blessings  of 
redemption  are  so  well  fitted  to  fill  the  spirit.      (A.  Thomson,  D.D.)  Joyful 

import  of  the  gospel : — I.  It  is  deserving  of  remark,  that  the  seat  of  this 
HOLY  triumph  WAS  "  THE  CITY  OF  Samaria."  Well  may  it  be  said,  "  The  wilderness 
and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them,  aud  the  desert  shall  rejoice,  and 
blossom  like  the  rose  ; "  for  such  indeed  was  the  city  of  Samaria.  Thus  the 
Lord  builds  up  Jerusalem,  and  gathers  together  the  outcasts  of  Israel  (Psa. 
cxlvii.  2 ;  Isa.  Ivi.  6-8).  II.  The  joy  which  now  prevailed  in  the  city  of 
Samaria  is  fully  accounted  for  by  the  cause  which  produced  it.  Joy  is 
never  incited  but  on  some  great  occasion,  and  the  seasons  of  religious  joy  are 
distinguished  by  some  interesting  or  extraordinary  occurrence.  Such  was  the  joy 
and  gladness  at  the  preparation  for  building  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  (1  Cbron. 
xxiv.  9),  at  Hezekiah's  passover  (2  Chron.  xxx.  25,  26),  at  the  rebuilding  and 
dedication  of  the  city  wall  (Neh.  xii.  43),  at  the  birth  of  Christ  (Luke  ii.  10-14),  at 
the  appearance  of  the  star  to  the  eastern  magi  (Matt.  ii.  13),  and  at  the  ascension 
of  our  blessed  Saviour  (Luke  xxiv.  52).  All  these  were  great  events,  and  furnished 
an  abundant  source  of  joy  and  rejoicing.  We  may  therefore  expect  something 
great  and  interesting  in  the  present  instance,  to  fill  a  whole  city  with  joy — and 
what  was  it  ?  1.  Is  it  not  ground  for  joy  that  the  Lord  is  come  into  the  world  to 
save  sinners  ?  2.  Is  it  not  ground  for  joy  that  Christ  has  Inid  down  His  life  for 
us,  and  redeemed  us  unto  God  by  His  blood?  3.  Is  it  not  a  matter  of  great  joy 
that  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead?  This  proves  that  He  was  the  true  Messiah, 
that  His  sacrifice  is  accepted,  and  that  justice  is  fully  satisfied.  4.  Is  it  not  matter 
of  joy,  too,  that  Christ  has  ascended  into  glory,  and  that  He  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  us  ?  5.  That  through  faith  in  His  name  there  is  forgiveness  of 
sin,  and  acceptance  with  God  ?  6.  Is  it  not  a  source  of  joy  that  this  go-pel  is  now 
sent  to  all  nations?  7.  Was  it  not  a  special  matter  of  joy  to  the  Samaritans,  that 
they  themselves  had  believed  the  gospel?  Eeflections  :  1.  If,  then,  the  gospel  bring 
tidings  of  great  joy,  why  is  it  reproached  as  tending  to  gloom  and  melancholy? 
Can  anything  be  more  unreasonable  and  unjust?  2.  Why  do  individuals  despond 
while  there  is  such  an  exhibition  of  mer(;y  ?  Because  th^y  do  not  hearken  to  the 
gospel,  nor  receive  the  record  which  God  hath  given  of  His  Son.  3.  Why  do  not 
Christians  possess  more  joy  and  peace  in  believing?  Beciuse  we  have  not  more 
religion,  do  not  live  more  under  the  influence  of  the  gospel.  Lord,  increase  our 
faith.  (J.  Benson.)  The  joy  of  salvation  : — John  Bowen,  afterw>irds  Bishop  of 
Sierra  Leone,  being,  while  a  young  farmer  in  Canada,  converted  by  a  sermon, 
•wrote  in  his  diary,  "  I  experienced  such  an  ecstasy  last  evening  in  prayer  that  I 


CHAP.  Via. J  THE  ACTS.  659 


doubted  if  I  were  in  my  right  senses.  Christ  was  slain  for  me.  I  could  give 
mj'self  up  to  Him  unreserveilly.  I  cannot  describe  my  sensations  of  joy.  I  could 
not  praise  God  sufficiently  for  the  great  scheme  of  salvation.  I  remaim  d  a  long 
time  giving  thanks  and  praying  that  such  a  heavenly  joy  might  not  be  taken  away 
from  me."  Joyousnes»of  Christianity  : — Eeligion  is  good  both  for  a  man's  body 
and  soul,  both  for  time  and  eternity.  It  has  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is, 
.and  also  of  that  which  is  to  come.  It  not  only  teaches  men  to  govern  their  spirits, 
but  also  to  take  care  of  their  bodies ;  not  only  to  watch  over  tbeir  tempers  and 
dispositions,  but  also  to  manage,  in  a  prudent  manner,  their  worldly  business.  If 
men  were  truly  religious,  they  would  not  only  have  brighter  prospects  for  heaven, 
but  they  would  also  have  far  more  cheerful  and  happy  homes  on  eaith.  Keligion 
brightens  everything  it  toucbes.  It  strengthens  the  weak,  comforts  thediscr  nsol  ite, 
encourages  the  despondent,  lifts  up  those  that  are  bowed  down,  and  fills  the  mind, 
«ven  amid  worldly  anxieties  and  cares,  with  peace  and  joy  and  hope,  T)ie  unique 
effects  of  the  gosju'l : — There  was  never  found  in  any  age  of  the  world,  either 
philosophy  or  sect,  or  law  or  discipline,  which  could  so  rightly  exalt  the  public 
good  as  the  Christian  faith.  {Lord  Bacon.)  The  Christiancity  : — 1.  All  around 
Philip  was  the  misery  and  sin  of  a  great  city.  He  told  them  of  Him  who  had 
«ome  to  relieve  misery  and  forgive  sin.  As  a  symbol  of  the  new  life  which  he  told 
them  of,  he  touched  some  of  their  sick  and  their  health  came  back  to  them.  Not 
merely  a  few  seatterei  souls  caught  the  new  inspiration  ;  it  seemed  to  fill  the  air 
and  flow  through  all  the  life  of  the  whole  town.  2.  There  is  something  clear  and 
peculiar  in  this  joy  of  a  whole  city  over  a  new  faith.  We  can  all  feel  it  when  a 
thought  or  an  emotion  which  has  lingered  in  a  few  minds  staits  up  and  takes 
possession  of  a  whole  community.  It  is  as  when  a  quiver  of  flame  which  has 
lurked  about  one  bit  of  wood  at  last  gets  real  possession  of  the  heap  of  fuel,  and  the 
whole  fireplace  is  in  a  blaze.  There  came  a  time  when  Christianity,  which  had 
lived  in  scattered  congregaiions,  at  last  seized  on  the  prepared  mind  of  the  Komnn 
Empire,  and  all  Europe  was  full  of  Christianity.  So  it  is  a  phenomenon  possessing 
its  own  interest  and  demanding  its  own  study,  when  beyond  Christian  souls  you 
have  a  whole  community  inspired  with  the  feelings  and  acting  under  the  motives  of 
Christianity.  A  city  as  well  as  an  individual  is  capable  of  a  Christian  expeiience 
and  character.  It  is  more  than  an  aggregate  of  the  experience  of  the  souls  within 
it,  as  a  chemical  compound  has  qualities  which  did  not  appear  in  either  of  its 
constituents;  it  is  a  real  new  bemg  with  qualities  and  poweis  of  its  own.  3. 
Christianity  is  primarily  a  personal  force,  and  only  secondarily  does  it  deal  with 
communities.  1  he  souls  of  men  must  be  converted  ;  and  out  of  those  the  Christian 
Church  or  the  Christian  State  must  grow.  To  begin  by  making  the  structure  of  a 
Church  or  a  State,  and  expect  so  to  create  personal  character,  is  as  if  you  began  to 
build  a  forest  from  the  top.  This  is  the  error  of  all  merely  ecclesiastical  and 
political  Christianity.  But  none  the  less  is  it  true  that  when  a  great  multitude  of 
personal  believers,  who  have  been  fuseii  together  by  the  tire  of  their  common  faith, 
present  before  the  world  tbe  unity  of  a  Christian  Church  or  nation,  that  new  unity 
is  a  real  unit,  a  genuine  being  with  its  own  character  and  pov\er.  4.  We  see  the 
Church  possessed  as  a  whole  of  qualities  which  she  must  gather,  of  course,  from 
her  parts,  but  which  we  can  find  in  no  one  of  her  parts.  She  is  more  permanent, 
more  wise,  more  trustworthy  than  the  wisest  ai^d  most  trustworthy  of  the  men  who 
compose  her  membership.  The  city  is  a  being  dearer  to  us  than  any  of  the 
citizens  who  compose  it.  Many  a  man  goes  out  to  war  and  gives  his  life  gladly  for 
his  country  who  would  not  have  dreamed  of  giving  it  for  any  countr>man.  The 
Bible  is  full  of  this  thought.  Israel  is  more  than  any  Israelite  ;  Jerusalem  isrealer 
and  dearer  than  any  Jew.  The  New  Testament  reverts  to  the  individual,  hut  it 
too  advances  towards  its  larger  personality,  and  leaves  tiie  strong  figure  of  the 
Christian  Church  aud  the  brilliant  architecture  of  the  New  Jerusalem  burning 
upou  its  latest  pages.  5.  But  let  us  come  to  our  subject.  Is  anything  more  to  be 
exp  cied  than  that  here  and  there  throughout  a  city  men  and  women  should  be 
Christians  ?  Can  we  conceive  of  Christianity  so  pervading  the  life  of  a  community 
that  the  city  shall  be  distinctly  different  in  its  cori'orate  life  and  action  from  a 
heathen  city?  Christianity,  or  the  change  of  man's  life  by  Christ,  has  three  w^ys 
in  wiiich  it  makes  its  power  known.  It  appears  eiiher  as  truth,  as  righteousness, 
or  as  love.  Every  soul  which  is  really  redeemed  by  Christ  will  enter  into  new 
beliefs,  higher  ways  of  action,  and  deeper  aOections  towards  fellow-men.  Now 
take  these  one  by  one,  and  ask  if  a  city  is  not  capable  of  them  as  wel  as  an 
individual.     I.  Look  first  at  faith.     1.  Perhaps  this  seems  the  haidest  to  establish. 


GGO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vhu 

There  was  a  time,  we  say,  when  cities  had  their  beliefs,  when  no  man  could  live 
comfort  ibly  in  Kome  without  believing  like  the  Pope,  or  in  Geneva  without 
believing  like  Calvin.  Then  every  proclamation  was  based  upon  a  creed.  But  see 
how  that  is  altered  now.  A  thousand  different  beliefs  fight  freely  in  our  streets, 
and  it  is  almost  true  that  no  man  is  the  less  a  citizen  for  anything  that  he  believes 
or  disbelieves.  But  this  implies  that  the  only  exhibition  of  a  faith  must  be  in 
formal  statement.  It  ignores  for  the  city  what  we  accept  for  the  individual,  that 
the  be>t  sign  that  a  man  believes  anything  is  not  his  repetition  of  its  formulas,  but 
his  impregnation  with  its  spirit.  It  may  have  grown  impossible,  at  least  for  the 
present,  that  cities  should  write  confessions  of  faith  in  their  charters  ;  but  if  it  is 
possible — nay,  if  it  is  necessary — that  the  prevalence  through  all  a  city's  life  of  a 
belief  in  God  and  Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit  should  testify  of  itself  by  the  creation 
of  certain  spiritual  qualities  in  that  city,  then  have  we  not  the  possibility  of  a 
believing  city  even  without  a  written  creeii  or  a  formal  proclamation.  Just  look  at 
London.  This  is  a  believing  city.  And  why  ?  Not  because  an  occasional  document 
is  solemnised  with  the  name  of  God,  nor  because  a  few  verses  of  the  Bible  are  read 
each  morning  in  your  public  schools,  but  because  that  spirit  which  has  never  been 
in  the  world  save  as  the  fruit  of  Christian  faith  prevails  in  and  pervades  your 
government  and  social  life,  the  spirit  of  responsibility,  of  trust  in  man,  and  of 
hopefulness.  This  is  the  Christian  faith  of  your  community,  showing  in  all  your 
public  actions.  It  has  not  come  by  accident.  It  has  entered  into  you  through  the  long 
belief  of  your  fathers  which  you  yourselves  still  keep  in  spite  of  all  your  scepticisms 
and  disputes.  2.  If  we  doubt  this,  we  have  only  to  forecast  the  consequence  if  a 
heathen  belief  were  prevalent.  We  have  some  men  who  disbelieve  intensely  and 
bitterly  in  every  Christian  doctrine.  The  spirit  of  these  men  we  know :  it  is 
hopeless,  cynical,  de-pairing.  If  they  are  naturally  sensual,  they  plunge  into 
debauchery  ;  if  they  are  naturally  refined  they  stand  aside  and  sneer  at  or  super- 
ciliously pity  the  eager  work  and  exuberant  feeling  of  other  men.  Now  fancy  such 
men's  faith  made  common.  What  would  be  the  result  ?  Would  any  generous 
work  be  done?  Could  either  popular  government  or  an  extended  system  of 
business  credit  still  survive,  since  both  are  based  on  that  trust  of  man  in  man 
which  is  at  the  bottom  a  Christian  sentiment  ?  Would  you  not  have  killed  enter- 
prise when  you  had  taken  hopefulness  away,  and  given  the  deathblow  to  public 
purity  when  you  had  destroy i-d  responsibility  ?  3.  No,  the  city  has  its  Christian 
faith.  Its  belief  is  far  from  perfect :  it  is  all  stained  and  broken  with  scepticism, 
but  it  is  vastly  more  strong  than  many  of  you  believe.  Every  now  and  then  comes 
a  revival.  "  What  does  it  mean  ?  "  we  say ;  "  when  men  seem  settling  placidly 
down  into  unbelief  atid  indifference,  all  of  a  sudden  this  great  outbreak  ?  People 
crowding  by  tens  of  thousands  to  hear  some  homely  preacher,  the  city  shaken  with 
the  storm  of  hymns,  thousands  confessing  their  sins  and  crying  out  for  pardon  ?  " 
Is  it  not  clear  enough  what  it  means  ?  Here  many  of  the  men  to  whom  the  people 
most  looked  up  have  beep  sending  down  to  the  uplooking  people  the  barren  gospel 
of  their  scepticism.  But  by  and  by  they  have  pressed  too  terribly  upon  the 
spiritual  consciousness  ;  the  sense  of  God,  the  certainty  of  immortality,  has  risen 
in  rebellion  ;  the  great  reaction  comes  ;  the  wronged  affections  re.isseit  themselves. 
One  must  rejoice  in  such  a  healthy  outburst.  To  complain  of  its  extravagances  or 
faults  of  taste  is  as  if  you  complained  of  the  tempest  which  cleared  your  city  of  the 
cholera  because  it  shook  your  windows  and  stripp-d  the  leaves  off  your  trees.  4. 
The  methods  by  which  this  faith  may  be  perpetuated  nnd  kept  pure  are  open  to 
endless  discussion.  No  doubt  the  city  in  which  it  is  liveliest  stands  the  most  in 
danger  of  ecclesiasticism  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  dogmatic  quarrelsomeness  on  the 
other  ;  but  about  this  one  fact  we  are  most  clear,  that  a  city  may  believe,  and  as  a 
city  may  be  blessed  by  its  belief.  It  seems  to  open  an  appeal  to  any  generous  and 
public-spirited  young  man,  to  which  he  surely  ought  to  listen.  Not  only  for  your 
own  soul  and  its  interests  you  ought  to  seek  the  truth,  but  for  the  community, 
because  these  streams  of  public  and  social  life  which  run  so  shallow  need  to  be 
deepened  with  eternnl  interests,  because  your  faith  in  God  will  help  to  make  God  a 
true  inspiration  to  the  citv's  life.  Remember  the  simple  old  paralde  in  Eccles,  ix, 
14-16.  Wisdom  in  the  Old  Testament  means  what  faith  means  in  the  New.  II. 
EiOHTEOcsNESs.  1.  A  man  who  is  a  Christian  holds  certain  truth,  and  then  he 
does  certain  goodness.  And  every  city  has  a  moral  character  distinguishable  from, 
however  it  may  be  made  up  of,  the  individual  character  of  its  inhabitants.  This 
is  seen  in  two  ways.  (1)  In  the  official  acts  which  it  must  do,  the  acts  of  justice  or 
injustice,  by  which  it  appears  as  a  person  acting  in  its  official  unity  among  its  sister 


CHAP,  viii.]  THE  ACTS.  661 

cities.  (2)  In  the  moral  atmosphere  which  pervades  it,  and  which  exercises  power 
on  all  wlio  come  within  it.  You  send  a  child  to  live  in  some  heathen  brutal  com- 
munity where  vice  is  in  the  veiy  atmosphere,  and  he  is  certainly  contaminated. 
Wliat  is  it  that  contaminates  him?  Not  this  man's  or  that  man's  example,  but 
the  whole  character  of  the  city  where  he  lives.  The  brutality  is  everywhere,  in  all 
its  laws,  its  customs,  its  standards,  its  traditions.  You  send  him  back  to  live  in 
old  Pompeii,  where  the  abominations  which  modern  times  have  uncovered  and 
made  the  subject  of  cool  archieological  study  were  live  things,  the  true  expression 
of  the  heathen  city's  spiiit.  As  he  enters  in  you  see  his  soul  wither  and  grow 
spotted  with  corruption.  Then  bring  your  boy  and  put  him  here  in  Christian 
London.  It  is  not  only  this  or  that  Christian  whom  he  meets.  It  is  a  Christian 
goodness  everywhere:  in  the  just  dealing  of  the  streets,  in  the  serene  peace  of  the 
homes,  in  the  accepted  responsibilities  and  obligations  of  friends  and  neighbours, 
in  the  universal  liberty,  in  the  absence  of  cruelty,  in  the  purity  and  decency,  in  the 
solemn  laws  and  courteous  ceremonies — everywhere  there  is  the  testimony  of  a 
city  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  And  when  we  think  how  imperfectly  Christ 
has  been  welcomed  and  adopted  here — how  only  to  the  outside  of  our  life  He  has 
penetrated,  then  there  opens  before  us  a  glorious  vision  of  what  the  city  might  be 
where  He  should  be  wholly  King.  2.  We  dwell  on  the  iniquity  of  city  life  in 
modern  times.  But  it  is  not  the  riotous  and  boastful  wickedness  of  heathen  times. 
Men  have  at  least  seen  clearly  enough  the  Christian  standard  to  be  ashamed  of 
what  they  are  not  willing  to  renounce,  and  hide  in  secret  chambers  the  villainies 
•which  use  to  flaunt  upon  the  public  walls.  It  is  one  stage  in  every  conversion  of 
the  converted  city  as  of  the  converted  man.  The  next  stage  is  to  cast  away  the 
•wickedness  of  which  one  has  become  ashamed.  Of  cities  in  the  first  stage  there  are 
instances  every  where  through  Christendom.  Of  the  second  stage — of  the  city  totally 
possessed  by  Christ  and  so  casting  all  wickedness  away,  there  is  as  j'et  no  specimen 
upon  the  e^rth,  only  the  glowing  jjicture  of  the  apocalyptic  city,  the  New  Jerusalem. 
That  sounds  very  visionary  and  far  away;  but  consider  that  to  bring  about  that 
city  so  different  from  your  London  you  need  only  vastly  more  of  the  same  power 
that  has  made  your  London  so  different  from  Pompeii.  3.  Again  we  come  to  a 
lofty  ground  of  a^ipeal.  If  you  are  pure  and  true  remember  that  your  righteousness 
is  not  for  yourself  alone,  nor  for  the  few  whom  you  immediately  touch  ;  it  is  for 
your  city.  I  am  speaking  to  business  men  who  may  help  to  put  a  more  Christian 
character  into  business  life ;  to  women  of  society  who  may  make  the  social 
character  of  the  town  more  Christ-like  ;  to  young  men  on  whom  it  rests  to  develop 
or  to  destroy  for  their  city  the  character  that  their  fathers  gave  her.  If  you  fail, 
lyou  Christian  men  and  women,  what  chance  is  there  for  the  city?  III.  Charity. 
When  a  man  becomes  a  Christian,  he  believes  right,  and  then  he  does  right ;  and 
then  he  tries  to  help  his  fellow-men.  And  now  again  the  question  comes,  can  a 
city  too  do  good  as  the  issue  and  utterance  of  its  Christian  character  ?  The 
Christian  character  cf  charity  is  very  apt  to  elude  us,  and  the  connection  of  a 
charitable  act  with  Christian  faith  is  lost.  You  s-ay  it  is  all  impulse  when  you  give 
your  money  to  the  poor ;  but  what  is  the  impulse  ?  Is  it  the  saiue  as  the  savage's? 
Has  Christianity  done  nothing  to  keep  down  the  other  imiDulse  to  harm,  and  to 
strengthen  this  ?  And  so  you  say  the  city's  charity  is  all  economy  ;  her  hospitals 
are  merely  expedients  for  saving  so  much  available  human  life.  But  who  taught 
her  this  economy,  and  that  a  human  life  was  worth  the  saving,  and  how  is  it  that 
the  most  highly  organised  among  un-Christian  n^itions  have  had  but  the  merest 
rudiments  of  hospitals  ?  No  !  'The  charity  of  a  city  is  a  distinct  testimony  to  one 
thing  which  )jas  been  wrought  into  the  convictions  of  that  city — the  value  of  a  man ; 
•and  that  conviction  has  come  out  of  Christian  faith.  A  poor  neglected  creature 
drops  in  the  crowded  street ;  a  horse  strikes  him,  and  the  heavy  waggon  crushes 
him  as  he  lies  ;  or  in  the  blazing  summer  sun  he  is  smitten  to  the  ground 
insensible.  Instantly  the  city — not  this  pitying  man  or  that,  but  the  pitvingcity — 
stoi>ps  and  gathers  him  up  tenderly,  and  carries  him  to  the  hospital,  which  it  has 
built.  Is  there  no  Christ  there?  Once  there  was  a  city  which,  when  Christ  came 
to  it,  hated  and  scorned  Him,  and  would  not  be  satisfied  till  it  hud  seen  Him  die  in 
agony.  To-day  here  is  a  city  which,  if  Christ  came  to  it  in  person,  would  go  out 
•and  welcome  Him,  would  call  Him  Lord  and  Master,  and  hang  upon  His  words  and 
glory  in  the  privilege  of  giving  Him  its  best.  In  that  first  city  there  was  no 
hospital;  in  this  new  city  the  hospitals  stand  thick  for  every  kind  of  misery.  Has 
not  the  Christian  city  a  right  to  hear  the  Saviour's  words  as  if  He  spoke  to  her  : 
•"  Inasmuch  as  thou  hast- done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  thou 


662  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap. via, 

hast  done  it  unto  Me  "  ?  Who  doubts  that  if  the  city  were  tenfold  more  Christian 
than  she  is  the  hospitals  would  be  multiplied  and  enriched  till  it  should  be  an 
impos>ibility  for  any  sick  man  to  be  left  unhelped.  Deepen  the  city's  Christianity 
and  the  ciiy's  charity  must  deepen  and  widen  too.     (Bp.  Fhillips  Brooks.) 

Vers.  9-24.  But  there  was  a  certain  man  called  Simon. — Simon  the  Mafjian  unmasked 
and  fut  to  shame  : — This  Simon  was  the  first  heretic  in  the  Christian  Church,  the 
first  10  claim  its  fellowship  while  out  of  sympathy  with  its  fundamental  truths. 
His  mistakes  were  many  and  grievous.  1.  He  began  with  an  unscrupulous 
ambition.  No  sooner  had  Peter  and  John  begun  to  confer  the  gifts  of  spiritual 
jjower  by  the  lajing  on  of  hands  than  Simon  saw  that  his  own  juggleries  were  cast 
into  the  shade.  All  that  he  perceived  were  the  outward  phenomena  ;  the  inward 
grace  did  not  occur  to  him.  2.  He  was  guilty,  thus,  of  utter  insincerity.  His 
pious  aiis  and  phrases,  while  he  worshipped  with  the  Christians,  were  all  make- 
believe.  His  heart  was  wholly  unchanged  ;  he  was  still  an  unregenerate  smner,  ia 
the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bonds  of  iniquity.  3.  He  was  grievously  mistaken  as 
to  the  purchasing  power  of  money.  He  thought  that  mouey  could  do  anything. 
His  mind  was  so  utterly  sordid  that  he  was  as  honest  as  he  could  be  in  proffering 
coin  for  the  sovereign  gifts  of  God.  There  are  men  in  our  times  who  seem  to  have 
a  like  confidence  in  filthy  lucre.  Their  very  souls  grow  yellow  as  they  bow  before' 
their  wretched  golden  god.  They  subordinate  all  things  to  personal  gain.  Friendship,, 
beneficence,  patriotism,  and  piety  are  of  value  only,  as  they  can  be  made  to  serve 
their  selfish  ends.  4.  He  was  a  blasphemer.  He  should  have  been  appalled  at  the 
mere  thought  of  tampering  with  the  influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit;  but  "fools 
rush  in  where  angels  fear  to  tread."  God  was  nothing  to  him,  and  sacred  things 
were  of  value  only  to  grind  at  his  mill.  It  is  well  that  Peter  and  John  had  the 
courage  to  unmask  this  miserable  impostor.  There  is  no  telling  what  harm  he 
might  have  done  otherwise  in  the  eq,rly  Church.  As  it  is,  be  vanishes  from  our 
Bight  cringing  under  a  terrific  warning  and  whining  for  an  intercession  which,  had  it 
been  offered,  would  have  seemed  to  him  only  another  of  the  apostles'  masterly 
conjurations.  Farewell  to  him  !  And  may  no  disciple  of  his  ever  again  pollute  the 
pure  atmosphere  of  the  Church  of  God  I  {D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Christianity 
true  and  false : — I.  The  traits  of  a  true  Christianity.  1.  It  has  growth.  A 
true  gospel  has  germinative  power ;  it  propagates  itself  ;  it  is  a  seed  which  springs 
up  wherever  it  is  dropped,  whether  in  Judea,  Samaria,  or  Antioch.  2.  It  has 
breadth.  It  overcomes  the  prejudices  of  race  and  nation,  bre:iks  the  bounds  of 
Feet,  and  brings  Jews  and  Samaritans  into  one  fellowship.  3.  It  has  power  (ver. 
7).  The  physical  miracles  of  the  apostolic  age  were  pictures  of  spiritual  power  ir^ 
all  ages.  Even  now  the  gospel  drives  out  unclean  spirits  and  gives  power  to  the 
impotent.  Men  can  see  the  results  of  its  power  though  they  may  not  understand 
its  source.  4.  It  brings  joy  (ver.  8).  Every  soul  truly  converted  tastes  the  joy  of 
salvation,  and  is  glad  with  an  indwelling  happiness.  5.  It  has  discipline  (vers. 
14-16).  The  Church  recognises  a  central  authority,  to  which  all  its  workers  are 
loyal.  6.  It  has  high  moral  standards,  which  are  not  framed  to  suit  base  natures 
nor  influenced  by  worldly  considerations  (vers.  20-23).  II.  The  traits  of  a  false 
Christianity.  Even  in  the  true  Church,  and  in  its  purest  days,  there  was  to  be 
found  a  Simon  the  sorcerer.  1,  The  false  Christianity  is  often  concealed  under  the 
formal  rites  of  the  Church  service.  Outwardly  Simon  was  a  bajjtised  member, 
inwardly  he  was  a  hypocrite.  2.  It  is  revealed  in  the  spiritual  manifestations  of 
the  Church.  When  the  Holy  Ghost  descends,  Simon  is  at  once  detected.  3.  Its 
spirit  is  that  of  selfish  ambition,  seeking  for  power  over  men  rather  than  power  with 
God.  4.  It  should  be  dealt  with  promptly,  rebuked  unsparingly,  and  should  find 
no  countenance  in  the  Church.  5.  It  may  find  mercy  and  forgiveness  if  the  false 
disciple  will  seek  the  Lord.  Simon  Magus,  or  wrong -heartediiess  : — This  short 
sketch  reminds  us — 1.  That  men  in  every  age  have  been  prone  to  deify  great 
wickedness.  2.  That  great  wickedness,  to  answer  its  end,  has  often  identified 
itself  with  religion.  3.  That  true  religion  exposes  all  such  imposture.  We  take 
Simon  as  the  representative  of  wrong-heartedness.  Note — I.  Its  essence — 
covetousness.  "He  offered  them  money."  In  relation  to  this  observe  that — 1. 
It  is  opposed  to  mental  improvement.  It  necessarily  blinds  the  eye  and  limits  the 
intellectual  horizon  :  whereas  benevolence  elevates  the  mind,  gives  vastness  to  the 
view,  and  places  every  object  in  the  full  light  of  heaven.  2.  It  is  condemned  by 
moral  consciousness.  There  is  a  principle  within  which  is  an  infallible  indicator 
of  the  soul's  health,  and  this  ever  condemns  covetousness.    The  selfish  man  weaia 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  663 

oat  his  self-respect,  and  stands  before  God  and  himself  a  wretched  man.  3.  It  is 
condemned  by  the  verdict  of  society.  Society  may  flatter  but  it  cannot  respect  a 
covetous  man.  Hence  men  assume  the  features  and  speak  the  language  of 
benevolence.  4.  It  is  incompatible  with  moral  order.  This  requires  one-ness, 
mutual  attraction.  But  selfishness  repels  from  one  another  and  from  God.  5. 
It  is  denounced  by  Scripture.  Covetousness  is  declared  to  be  idolatry,  against 
which  as  the  most  revolting  form  of  depravity  the  heaviest  judgments  are 
denounced.  II.  Its  tendency — ruin.  This  is  no  constitutional  infirmity  claiming 
palliation,  but  a  disease  of  the  heart.  As  in  physics,  so  in  morals,  if  the  heart  be 
wrong  the  most  serious  consequences  are  imminent.  The  text  reminds  us  of  three 
evils.  1.  It  involves  the  greatest  sacrifice,  "  Thy  money  perish  with  thee."  Peter 
took  it  for  granted  that  he  would  perish.  A  good  man's  money  lives  in  its 
consequences.  2.  It  precludes  an  interest  in  religion,  "  Thou  has  neither  part  nor 
lot,"  &c.,  i.e.,  in  Christianity  with  its  glorious  doctrines,  promises,  and  provisions. 
3.  It  necessitates  great  personal  wretchedness.  Covetousness  is  at  once— (1)  A 
bitter  "  gall,"  and  (2)  A  slavish  life,  "  bonds."  III.  Its  cdke.  1.  Prescribed.  (1) 
Eepentance — a  change  in  the  controlling  disposition.  (2)  Prayer — conscious 
dependence  upon  God.  (3)  Forgiveness.  Covetousness  is  a  sin  against  God,  and  for 
it  a  sinner  must  be  either  forgiven  or  damned.  Eepentance  and  prayer  are 
essential  to  pardon.  2.  Ignored.  Simon  did  not  attend  to  the  heavenly 
presi-riplion.  He  did  not  repent  of  his  sin  although  he  deplored  its  consequences. 
He  did  not  pray  for  himself,  but  he  asked  Peter  to  pray  for  him,  and  not  that  his 
heart  might  be  changed,  but  that  the  consequence  of  his  sin  might  be  averted. 
Observe  the  two  evils  ever  prevalent  in  false  religion?.  (1)  Selfishness.  To 
avoid  misery  is  the  leading  idea  in  the  religion  of  millions.  (2)  Proxyism.  The 
tendency  to  trust  others  in  religious  matters  is  the  foundation  of  all  ecclesiastical 
imposture  and  the  great  curse  of  the  world.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Simon  the 

sorcerer  : — Look  at — I.  The  condition  in  which  Philip  found  the  city  of  Samaria. 
You  find  there  the  condition  of  the  whole  world  represented.  Samaria  was 
diseased,  possessed,  and  deluded.  These  are  the  conditions  in  which  Christianity 
has  always  to  fight  its  great  battle.  Christia'iity  never  finds  any  town  prepared  to 
co-operate  with  it.  We  are  none  of  us  by  nature  prepared  to  give  the  Christian 
teacher  a  candid  hearing.  We  "  hate  the  fellow,  for  he  never  prophesies  good  of 
us."  The  literary  lecturer  pays  homage  to  his  audience,  but  the  preacher  rebukes 
it,  humbles  it.  The  early  preachers  did  not  tiim,  and  balance,  and  smooth  things. 
It  was  because  they  did  fundamental  work  that  they  made  progress  so  slow,  b'ut  so 
sure.  The  world  is — 1.  Diseased — there  is  not  a  man  who  is  thoroughly  and 
completely  well.  If  he  suppose  himself  to  be  so,  he  is  so  only  for  the  moment ;  he 
was  ill  yesterday,  or  will  be  to-morrow.  You  stand  up  in  the  mere  mockery  of 
strength  ;  it  is  when  we  lie  down  that  we  assume  the  proper  and  final  attitude  of 
the  body.  How  ill  we  are,  what  aches  and  pains  !  2.  Possessed.  Possessed  with 
demons,  unclean  spirits,  false  ideas.  Why  make  a  marvel  about  demoniacal 
possession,  or  push  it  back  some  twenty  centuries  ?  We  are  all  devil-ridden.  Out 
of  Christ  we  are  mad !  3.  Deluded.  Samaria  was  bewitched.  Understand  that 
somebody  has  to  lead  the  world.  In  republicanism  there  is  a  sovereignty.  In  a 
mob  there  is  a  captaincy.  There  is  only  one  question  worth  discussing  so  far  as 
the  future  is  concerned,  and  that  is  who  is  to  rule.  To-day  you  find  men  making 
churches  for  the  future.  You  miyht  as  well  make  clothes  for  the  future.  My 
question  is,  who  is  to  be  the  man,  the  life,  the  sovereign  of  the  future  ?  Christ,  or 
Simon?  As  Christians  we  have  no  difficulty  about  the  result.  II.  Philip's  course 
IN  Samaria.  1.  He  took  no  notice  of  Simon.  There  are  some  persons  who  think 
we  ought  to  send  missionaries  to  argue  down  the  infidels.  Let  us  do  nothing  so 
foolish.  There  is  nothing  to  be  argued  down.  Argument  is  the  weakest  of  all 
weapons.  If  occasion  should  naturally  arise  for  the  answering  of  some  sophistical 
argument,  avail  yourselves  of  it,  but  do  not  imagine  that  Christianity  has  to  go 
down  to  Samaria  to  fight  a  pitched  battle,  face  to  face  with  Simon  Magus.  2.  He 
preached  Christ.  Simon  had  been  preaching  himself.  Philip  never  mentioned 
himself.  Thus  Philip  did  not  argue  down  Simon,  he  superseded  him.  The 
daylight  does  not  ar^ue  with  the  artificial  light.  The  sun  does  not  say,  "  Let  us 
talk  this  mntter  over,  thou  little,  beautiful,  artificial  jet.  Let  us  be  candid 
with  one  another,  and  polite  to  one  another,  and  let  us  treat  one  another 
as  gentlemen  talking  on  equal  terms.  Let  us  thus  see  which  of  us  ought  to  rule 
the  earth."  The  sun  does  nothing  but  shine!  What  then!  Men  put  the  gas 
out  !       "  Let    your    light    so    shine    before    men,"    &c.       {J.    Farker-,    D.D.) 


6G4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

Simon  the  sorcerer: — The  phases  of  human  conduct  do  little  more  than  repeat 
tliemselves  along  the  ages.  "  There  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun."  Dugald  Stewart 
remarks,  "  In  reflecting  on  the  repeated  reproduction  of  ancient  paradoxes  by 
modern  authors,  one  is  almost  tempted  to  suppose  that  human  invention  is  limited, 
like  a  barrel-organ,  to  a  specific  number  of  tunes."  A  period  of  deep  religious  and 
emotional  feeliug  is  always  apt  to  be  accompanied  by  a  superstitious  and  mystical 
craving.  Stephen's  martyrdom  brings  to  light  two  typical  characters  at  once ;  Saul 
with  harassing  persecutions,  and  Simon  with  delusions  calculated  to  deceive  even 
the  elect,  and  the  spurious  professor  was  more  dangerous  than  the  violent  foe. 
Note  from  the  st  )ry  that — I.  Mere  working  op  wonders  does  not  prove  that  a 
MAN  cojiES  FROH  GoD.  For  the  marvellous  performances  may  not  be  miracles  at  all. 
In  every  age  founders  of  religious  systems  have  attempted  what  silly  people  have 
accepted  as  veritable  interpositions  of  God.  Human  credulity  is  swift  to  assert  that 
what  is  mysterious  is  divine.  So  fortune-tellers,  spiritualists,  necromancers,  and 
quacks  have  swayed  men  and  led  women  captive.  II.  Miracles  are  at  the  best 
ONLY  evidences  OF  CHRISTIANITY.  Of  themselvcs,  they  never  converted  a  soul.  The 
genuine  wonders  wrought  by  Philip  mocked  this  magician  ;  as  in  Moses'  time,  there 
was  one  supreme  limit  beyond  which  no  human  sleight  of  hand  could  go.  Simon 
astouished,  but  Philip  healed.  So  they  left  the  impostor  and  went  over  to  the 
Christian  deacon  in  a  body  (ver.  12).  Not  that  Philip  was  more  eloquent  or  per- 
suasive than  Simon  ;  not  that  his  miracles  stirred  them  more  ;  but  Philip  preacbed 
Christ.  Marvels  arrest  the  mind,  and  that  is  in  demand  when  audiences  are  dull ; 
but  it  is  the  Spirit  of  grace  only  who  touches  the  heart.  How  curious  it  must  have 
appeared  to  those  spiritnally-minded  converts  that  Simon  Magus  at  last  came  over 
into  the  Church.  III.  The  best  method  in  dealing  with  freob  is  to  proclaim  the 
TRUTH,  AND  LEAVE  RESULTS  TO  GoD.  We  ETC  to  advauce  the  banner  of  Jesus  Christ 
right  out  into  the  field  brightly  as  if  we  trusted  it,  and  most  opponents  will  melt  away 
before  the  mere  marching  of  God's  host,  without  even  a  skirmish  {ver.  13).    IV.  It 

is  GENERALLY   PRUDENT    TO    WAIT    FOR   A    LITTLE    BEFORE  ADMITTING  UNTESTED  PERSONS 

INTO  Church  membership.  It  is  a  most  interesting  question,  to  be  decided  accord- 
ing to  individual  and  local  circumstances,  how  long  one  is  to  be  delayed  in  ascer- 
taining his  own  mind  before  he  becomes  publicly  committed.  These  incidents  are 
worth  study  in  our  modern  times  ;  for  if  the  apostles  could  be  deceived,  it  is  possible 
for   Church    officers   now.      V.  Growth  in   spiritual  graces   renders   one  more 

GENTLE    IN  FEELING  AND    MORE    CHARITABLE    TO    OTHERS  (verS.    14,    15).       The    apOStolic 

company  at  Jerusalem  were  glad  to  hear  what  the  Lord  was  doing,  and  Peter  and 
John  went  over  to  the  scene  of  action,  and  began  to  pray  that  God  would  bestow  the 
gift  of  His  Spirit.  We  cannot  forget  that  the  last  wish  of  John's  concerning  the 
Samaritans  was  that  fire  might  fall  on  them  (Luke  ix.  5'2-5G).  He  was  older  now, 
and  kinder,  and  gentler.  VI.  Order  ought  to  be  observed  in  the  official  organisa- 
tion OF  THE  Church  (ver.  17).  These  little  significant  forms  are  ni>t  to  be  lightly 
esteemed.  The  people  had  received  that  gift  of  the  Hol.y  Ghost  by  which  their  hearts 
had  been  renewed ;  but  not  the  extraordinary  gift  by  which  they  could  work 
miracles.  There  was  no  physical  transmission  of  anything  in  this  laving  on  of 
hands;  it  was  a  mere  sign.  And  it  is  not  likely  that  all  converted  persons  in 
Samaria  were  endowed  with  this  superior  gift ;  some  discrimin«tion  must  liave  lieen 
made  according  to  fitnesses  of  character  or  grades  of  office  (1  Cor.  xii.  8-11).  VII. 
Every  sin  has  its  measure  of  deserved  retribution,  and  meets  its  appropriate 
monument  (vers.  18-20).  This  hypocrite's  fate  it  has  been  to  add  a  new  word  to 
our  language  ;  so,  everywhere  the  Bible  goes,  that  wicked  thing  which  he  did  is  held 
in  everlasting  remembrance.  VIII.  The  essence  of  a  sin  resides  in  the  iniention 
(ver.  22).  Solemn  admonition  is  given  in  the  intimation  that  a  wicked  man  is  held 
responsible  for  his  "  thought  "  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  Peter's  expression  would  look  like  a  curse, 
if  it  were  not  for  the  suggestion  that  repentance  and  prayer  might  yet  find  the  door 
open  for  pardon.  IX.  Profession  of  religion  is  not  real  piety.  (American  Sund'iif 
School  Times.)  Simon  the  sorcerer,  an  admonitory  example  of  a  false  tearhcr : — I.  Hk 
gave  himself  out  to  be  some  great  one.  False  teachers  do  not  seek  the  glory  of 
God,  but  their  own.  II.  He  bewitched  the  people.  False  teachers  seek  to  dazzle 
by  popular  arts,  instead  of  enlightening  and  converting.  III.  He  believed,  was 
b.vptized,  and  continued  with  Philip.  Thus  the  unbelieving  often  speak  the 
language  of  Canaan,  because  they  observe  that  it  is  effective  ;  and  contract  a  liypo- 
criticdl  bond  of  fellowship  with  the  servants  of  God,  in  order  to  cover  their  foul 
Btains  with  the  cloak  of  pretended  sanctity.  (K.  Gf.rok.)  Simon  Dlagtts  and 
Simon  Peter : — I.  Simon  the  upright.     1.  As  a  zealous  servant  of  his  Lord  whom 


CHAP,  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  665 

he  serves  everywhere  with  joy,  in  Samaria  as  in  Jerusalem.  2.  As  an  earnest 
admonisher  of  sins,  which  he  reproves  with  holy  zeal.  3.  As  a  faithful  guide  to 
the  way  of  salvation  by  repentance  and  prayer,  which  he  knew  from  his  own  ex- 
perience. II.  Simon  THE  iMPUBE.  1.  In  the  lying  nature  of  his  heathen  magic.  2. 
In  the  hypocrisy  of  his  deceitful  Christianity.  3.  In  the  defective  nature  of  his 
superficial   repentance.     (Ibid.)  Saul,   Simon,   and   Philip : — I.  The   upright 

ENEMY.  II.  The  false  friend.  III.  The  faithful  servant  of  the  Lord.  Each 
indicated  according  to  the  disposition  of  his  heart,  his  manner  of  acting  and  his 
fate.  (Ibid. )  The  sin  of  Simon : — On  a  general  view  of  this  passage,  notice — I. 
The  difference  between  the  gospel  miracles  and  those  of  a  mere  magician 
iiiKE  THIS  Simon.  1.  Power  by  itself  is  an  ambiguous  sign.  There  are  other 
powers  in  the  world  besides  God's.  Powers  which  have  broken  loose  from  Him, 
which  oppose  Him,  and  which  He  permits,  for  a  time,  for  the  trial  of  His  people, 
and  for  the  overthrow  of  His  foes.  Such  a  power  was  that  exercised  by  this 
sorcerer.  It  came  for  the  exaltation  of  a  creature;  to  make  beholders  say,  "  This 
man  is  the  great  power  of  God."  It  did  not  come  to  attest  anything — to  say,  I  have 
a,  message  for  you  from  God  ;  and  if  you  ask  how  you  are  to  know  that  it  is  from 
Ood,  this  is  the  sign.  That  is  the  true  use  of  power,  in  connection  with  Divine 
truth.  It  ought  to  come  as  the  third  part  of  God's  triple  seal :  first  goodness,  then 
wisdom,  then  power.  That  was  the  use  which  Jesus  Christ  made  of  power.  This 
has  never  been  the  order  of  an  impostor.  He  may  astound  and  bewitch  men  with 
sorceries :  but  he  will  never  succeed  in  counterfeiting  those  other  parts  of  God's  seal, 
which  the  truly  wise  will  wait  for  before  they  call  either  him  or  his  the  great  power 
of  God.  2.  We  are  all  in  danger  of  too  much  worshipping  power.  Money  is  power, 
and  talent,  and  rank,  and  office,  and  knowledge.  But  all  these  are  of  the  earth,  and 
will  perish  with  it.  Power-worship  is  too  often  devil-wor^hip.  Let  the  power  you 
worship  be  all  God's  power.  You  will  know  it  by  its  signs ;  by  its  pointing  upwards  ; 
by  its  drawing  you  towards  God  ;  by  its  making  the  unseen  world  real  to  you,  and 
the  world  of  show  and  semblance  less  attractive.  II.  The  existence  of  a  visible 
AS  WELL  as  an  INVISIBLE  Church.  We  SCO  how  men  fight  against  this  truth.  Men 
have  been  weary  of  the  formality  and  hypocrisy  and  heartlessness  which  had  taken 
possession  of  the  visilde  fold,  and  have  sought  to  go  apart  with  a  few,  of  whose  con- 
sistency and  devotion  they  could  be  assured.  But  there  was  a  Simon  Magus 
baptized  by  Philip  the  Evangelist,  and  recognised  as  a  member  of  the  Christian 
community  by  two  of  the  apostles  themselves.  "  Let  both  grow  together  until  the 
harvest,"  is  the  rule  of  Divine  wisdom  as  much  as  of  Divine  forbearance.  If  you 
attempt  to  judge,  you  will  err  both  ways  :  you  will  often  be  taken  in  by  loud  pro- 
fession, you  will  oftener  be  driven  into  uncharitableness,  into  injury  of  souls.  While 
the  day  of  grace  lasts,  we  must  shut  out  from  hope  and  from  privilege  no  one  who 
desires  and  claims  either.  And  if  others  were  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  us,  where 
should  we  be  ?  We  need  patience,  but  we  need  severity  too ;  patience  from  others, 
severity  from  ourselves,  and  a  union  of  bot*i  from  God.  III.  This  particular  sin 
which  REQUIRED  IN  THE  CASE  BEFORE  US  SO  STERN  A  REPROOF.  Simon  offered  money 
to  the  apostles  to  share  their  gift  with  him.  He  would  purchase  the  Holy  Ghost 
with  money.  The  very  idea  is  blasphemy.  The  law  of  this  land  calls  a  particular 
offence,  that  of  buying  and  selling  sacred  offices  in  the  ministry,  by  a  name  derived 
from  that  of  this  man,  Simony.  But  this  is  not  the  only  nor  the  chief  sense  in 
which  we  can  be  guilty  of  the  sin  of  Simon.  Simnn  had  that  mercenary  mind 
which  St.  Paul  calls  the  root  of  all  evil.  He  thought  that  money  could  do  every- 
thing. He  deified  money.  Knowing  what  it  was  to  him  ;  how  he  taught,  practised 
sorcery,  and  aimed  at  popularity,  and  set  himself  up  as  some  great  one  for  money; 
he  took  it  for  granted  that  every  one  else  regarded  money  in  the  same  way.  Alas  ! 
*'  let  him  that  is  without  sin  among  you  "  in  this  matter  "  cast  the  first  stone  "  at 
him !  If  there  are  none  now  wlio  seek  to  buy  God's  gifts  with  money,  at  least  are 
there  not  some  who  consent  to  sell  their  own  souls  for  money  ?  Oh  these  dishonesties 
in  trade,  in  speculation,  in  trusts,  yes,  even  in  charity  I  If  we  really  cured  for  God's 
gifts,  I  can  even  fancy  that  some  of  us  might  offer  money  for  them.  If  we  do  not 
offer  money  for  God's  gifts,  is  it  not  because  we  care  ten  thousand  times  more  for 
things  which  money  can  purchase  ?  But  I  will  tell  you  what  no  money  can  buy  : 
it  cannot  buy  any  one  of  Goi's  highest  gifts  ;  it  cannot  even  buy  health,  eyesight, 
comeliness,  affection,  repose  of  conscience,  hope  in  death,  or  a  single  ray  of  the  love 
of  God.  And  therefore  a  man  who  learns  by  long  habit  to  think  that  money  is 
everything,  is  as  much  what  the  Scripture  calls  a  fool,  as  he  is  what  the  Suripture 
counts  a  sinner.      The  sin  of  Simon  is  the  being  altogether  of   the  earth,  and  yet 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

expecting  to  have  heaven  too.  It  is  the  bringing  all  that  is  base  and  mean  and 
corruptible,  and  expecting  to  receive — not  in  exchange  for  it,  but  along  with  it — all 
that  is  spiritual  and  eternal  and  Divine.  To  such  a  spirit  it  may  well  Le  said, 
"  Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter,"  &c.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  sin 
of  Si7tion;  or  trading  in  holy  things  : — The  way  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  is  intro- 
duced here  throws  light  upon  apostolic  usages  and  upon  problems  of  Christian  life 
in  all  ages.  Compare  chap.  xix.  1-7,  in  which,  however,  there  is  a  ditlerence,  inas- 
much as  the  disciples  had  not  advanced  beyond  the  teaching  of  John.  They  h4d 
not  so  much  as  heard  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Samaritans  were  favoured  with  dis- 
tinctive Christian  teaching  and  baptism,  but  lacked  that  experience  which  we 
identify  with  conversion,  viz.,  the  receiving  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This,  alas,  is  not 
peculiar  to  that  age.  Multitudes  now  are  Christians,  and  yet  not  Christians. 
Strange  paradox !  Many  become  Christians  by  persuasion,  conform  to  rites,  live 
moral  lives,  without  attaining  consciousness  of  Divine  sonship.  We  are  not  justified 
in  excluding  such  from  our  assemblies  ;  but  their  condition  is  full  of  danger,  and 
renders  them  liable  to  fall  into  the  gravest  sins.  To  all  such  let  Simon  be  a  warning. 
As  to  his  offence,  notice — I.  What  it  was.  1.  An  insult  to  God.  It  could  not  have 
been  tbe  unpardonable  sin,  however,  since  the  apostle  holds  out  hope  of  forgiveness  ; 
but  it  may  have  been  one  of  tbose  sins  which  prepare  for  and  predispose  to  it.  (1) 
It  betrays  a  low  estimate  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  One  who  could  speak  as  Simon  did 
must  have  regarded  Him  very  cheap  !  No  more  than  a  piece  of  sordid  merchandise ! 
Of  a  like  ciiaracter  are  all  conceptions  of  monopolising  spiritual  privileges,  of  selling 
or  buying  such,  or  of  bribing  God  by  money,  good  works,  &c.  (2)  It  was  a  contra- 
diction of  the  principle  on  which  the  gospel  is  based — grace  not  works — that  no 
man  might  boast  or  presume.  Grace  is  the  ground  not  of  pardon  only,  but 
of  every  Divine  gift.  2.  A  desire  through  Christianity  to  aggrandise  self. 
Spiritual  life  springs  from,  and  consists  in,  the  crucifixion  of  self.  In  Simon  self 
was  alive  and  rampant.  With  him  as  with  so  many  professors  it  was  self  first  and 
God  and  righteousness  afterwards.  Every  Christian  worker  should  examine  his 
heart  and  see  whether  he  is  serving  self  or  the  Master.  II.  How  he  fell  into  it. 
This  can  never  be  fully  answered;  it  is  a  part  of  the  "  mystery  of  iniquity."  But 
note — 1.  His  previous  life  tended  to  lead  him  into  such  an  error.  He  was  a 
magician.  One  who  blended  the  mystical  doctrines  of  Eastern  wisdom  with  the 
practice  of  sorcery,  and  prepared  the  way  for  the  subsequent  monstrous  growths  of 
heresy,  called  by  the  general  name  of  Gnosticism.  2.  He  had  not  yet  fully  under- 
stood the  gospel.  Probably  he  had  learnt  only  a  few  of  its  doctrines,  and  those 
only  imperfectly.  3.  He  was  inwardly  a  stranger  to  Divine  grace.  He  had  not  j  et 
been  converted.  This  defect  is  at  the  root  of  most  heresies.  III.  Its  punishment 
— destruction.  1.  Imminent  and  impending.  The  sentence  was  not  only  uttered 
by  the  apostle,  it  was  inherent  in  the  sin  itself.  2.  Graciously  postponed.  His 
might  have  I  :!en  the  fate  of  Korah  and  Ananias,  &c.  God  gave  him  space  for 
repentance.  [St.  J.  A.  Frere,  31. A.)  Simony  : — The  traffic  in  Church  matters  and 
spiritual  gifts.  I.  Fkom  what  it  proceeds — a  covetous  and  ambitious  heart.  As 
Simon  was  for  so  long  held  in  estimation  and  had  bewitched  the  people,  but  was 
now  displaced  by  the  Christian  evangelists,  so  he  now  resolved  to  regain  his  old 
status  by  money.  Thus  have  all,  who  by  impure  means  attempt  to  force  them- 
selves into  the  ministry,  no  other  designs  than  to  serve  the  idols  of  honour, 
sensuality,  or  mammon.  On  this  account  the  Church  has  regarded  Simon  as  the 
father  of  heresies  and  the  type  of  sectarianism  ;  for  the  mainspring  of  almost  all 
founders  of  sects  is  love  of  power,  which,  united  with  arrogance,  by  its  audacity  and 
hypocrisy,  bewitches  the  people  cleaving  to  externals.  II.  What  it  sopposes.  A 
bitter  and  unrighteous  heart.  His  heart  was  full  of  gall,  i.e.,  envy  towards  the 
apostles,  and  the  preference  given  to  their  preaching  above  his  arts  ;  of  un- 
righteousness, for  notwithstanding  his  Christian  profession  he  would  be  no  follower 
of  the  Cross,  but  a  proud  miracle  worker.  He  apparently  attached  himself  to  the 
apostles,  but  in  heart  was  offended  at  them.  Hence  hypocrisy.  He  thought 
to  bawitch  these  servants  of  Jesus  with  money  as  he  bad  bewitched  the  people 
•with  magic,  and  himself  with  honour  and  mammon.  Consequently  unrighteous- 
ness tov.  ards  the  apostles,  and  a  low  estimation  of  tbeir  office  and  persons. 
Envy  and  jealousy,  an  earthly  dii^position  and  a  low  estimation  of  the 
ministry  and  its  office  bearers,  maik  even  still  the  followers  of  Simon. 
III.  At  what  it  aims.  Not  grace,  but  power.  He  did  not  wish  to  save  souls  by 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  but  only  to  acquire  for  himself  a  name  by  deeds  of 
supernatural  might.  In  this  are  all  like  him  who  desire  the  office  but  ntt  ihe  grace: 


cnAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  607 

who  have  in  view  not  the  service  of  Christ,  but  personal  dignity  and  prerogative ; 
and  those,  too,  who  are  covetous  of  gifts  for  the  office — learning,  eloquence,  &c.— 
but  dispense  with  the  qualification  of  holiness  (Luke  x.  20).  IV.  How  it  acts. 
Simon  otfered  money.  Few  offer  actual  money,  now,  for  the  ministerial  office,  but 
many  employ  means  no  less  base.  How  often  must  this  or  that  patron  be  gained 
over  by  crooked  ways  1  How  often  is  the  office  converted  into  a  marriage  portion  ! 
V.  WuAT  it  entails.  Simon  along  with  his  wicked  designs  retained  a  slavish  fear 
of  Divine  punishmeut.  He  dreads  damnation  but  will  not  have  salvation.  So  all 
Simonists  are  slaves.  They  carry  about  them  an  evil  conscience,  and  can  have  no 
true  freedom  in  their  ministry.  {G.  V.  Lechler,  D.D.)  The  fortune  hunter:  — 
We  see  here — 1.  The  power  of  ignorance.  Simon  used  sorcery  and  the  people  were 
bewitched.  Society  in  all  ages  is  troubled  by  these  artful  characters,  and  strange 
to  say  people  are  ever  ready  to  submit  to  them.  2.  The  power  of  rehgion.  The 
sorcerer  and  his  dupes  believed  the  g  ispel.  At  dawn  the  unclean  animals  of  the 
night  flee  to  their  dens ;  so  gospel  light  cha-es  away  the  morally  unclean.  "We 
notice— I.  The  doty  op  the  Church  towards  the  ungodly  (ver.  14).  Wherever 
the  primitive  Church  found  a  tendency  toward  the  truth,  they  were  ready  to  help. 
The  true  spirit  of  the  gospel  removes  all  party  walls.  Jew  and  Samaritan,  black  and 
white,  &c.,  are  all  brethren  according  to  tbe  New  Testament.  Let  us  follow  His 
example  Who  came  to  seek  and  to  save  the  lost.  II,  The  existence  of  good 
AND  evil  in  the  Church.  Judas  was  among  the  twelve,  false  teacliers  were 
at  Corinth,  &c.,  heretics  abounded  in  the  early  churches,  superstition  was 
rampant  in  the  Middle  Ages,  strange  errors  abounded  in  refoimed  communities. 
Why?  Because  of  the  limbed  knowledge  of  men.  Christ  likened  His  kingdom 
to  a  net  full  of  tishes — good  and  bad.  The  Church  may  suspect  many,  but  to 
pelect  is  dangerous,  because  of  the  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  selectors. 
The  Church  is  often  censured  because  of  its  imperfeutions,  but,  its  enemies 
being  witnesses,  it  is  the  best  of  moral  schools.  III.  In  the  life  of  men  there 
ARE  events  which  EXHIBIT  THE  MASTER  PRINCIPLE  (ver.  18).  Simon  saw  here  an 
opportunity  of  making  his  fortune.  A  bad  man  may  go  through  the  routine  of 
Christian  duties,  deceiving  and  deceived,  but  soine  event  will  happen  whicb  will 
discover  the  inner  man.  This  will  not  be  usually  in  great  public  matters,  but  in 
small  thinys  connected  with  the  home  or  shop.  Simon  was  one  of  those  fortune 
hunters  which  are  so  numerous  to-day,  whose  God  is  Mammon,  whose  Bible  the 
Ledger,  and  whose  creed  Gain.  A  quite  incidental  circumstance,  of  whose  issue  in 
an  opposite  direction  he  was  quite  sure,  found  him  out.  Thus  the  devil  makes  fools 
of  the  wisest.  IV.  When  the  evil  is  found  out  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Church  to 
BEFORM  IT.  Peter's  conduct  is  an  example  to  the  Church  in  all  ages,  and  teaches 
us  that  cliurch  discipline  should  be  adaiinistered — 1.  Impartially.  God  is  no  re- 
specter of  persons.  Simon's  policy  had  paid  him  well;  he  was  rich  and  powerful. 
But  Peter  cared  nothing  for  his  position.  Woe  to  the  Church  which  palliates  evil 
because  of  the  social  status  of  the  offi-nder.  Achan  in  the  camp  means  disaster  in 
the  field.  2.  Compassionately.  Though  Peter  spoke  the  truth  frankly,  he  opened 
up  the  path  to  mercy  (Gal.  vi.  1).  V.  Bad  men  when  disciplined  will  often  have 
their  own  way.  Peter  told  Simon  to  repent  and  pray,  but  Simon  only  wanted 
immunity  from  punishment  in  his  own  wicked  course.  So  now  God  offers  pardon 
on  certain  conditions,  but  men  refuse  the  coaditions,  and  go  on  pleasure  seeking, 
mammon  woishippiug,  hoping  that  at  last  some  got)d  man's  praver  will  secure 
mercy.  [W.  A.  G.)  Sudden  conversions  not  ulivays  genuine  : — Fish  sometimes 
leap  out  of  the  water  with  great  energy,  but  it  would  be  foolish  to  conclude  that 
they  have  left  the  liquid  element  for  ever ;  in  a  moment  they  are  swimming  again 
as  if  they  had  never  forsaken  the  stream  ;  indeed  it  was  but  a  fly  that  tempted  them 
aloft,  or  a  sud'ien  freak  :  the  water  is  still  their  home,  sweet  home.  When  we  see 
long  accustomed  sinnnrs  makinsj  a  sudden  leap  at  religion,  we  may  not  make  too 
sure  that  they  are  converts ;  perhaps  some  gain  allures  them,  or  sudden  excitement 
stirs  them,  and  if  so  they  will  be  back  again  at  their  old  sins.  Let  us  hope  well, 
but  let  us  not  commend  too  soon.     {€.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  14-25.  Now  when  the  apostles  which  were  at  Jerusalem  heard  that 
Samr-rla  had  received  the  Word  of  God,  they  sent  unto  them  Peter  and  John. — 
The  first  Church  visitation : — I.  The  occasion.  There  is — 1.  Christian  life  to  be 
fo.-tered  (ver.  14).  2.  A  want  in  the  Church  to  be  supplied  (ver.  16).  II.  The 
visitors.  1.  Peter — apostolic  zeal.  2.  Evangelical  tenderness.  III.  The  functions. 
1.  Prayer  in  the  name  of  the  Church  (ver.  15).     2.  Imposition  of  hands  in  the 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

name  of  God  (ver.  17).  IV.  The  effects.  1.  The  strengthening  of  the  Church 
(ver.  17).  2.  The  sifting  (ver.  18).  (/v.  Gerok.)  The  deputation  to  Samaria:  — 
This  must  have  been  a  most  instructive  experience  to  John.  The  apostle  who 
would  have  prayed  for  destructive  fire  is  himself  sent  down  to  Samaria  to  invoke 
the  falling  of  another  flame  that  burns  but  does  not  consume  1  We  cannot  tell  what 
we  may  yet  do  in  life.  Amongst  our  old  enmities  we  may  yft  find  our  sweetest 
friend-hips.  Do  not  seek  to  destroy  any  man,  however  much  he  may  reject  you  or 
misunderstand  you.  A  time  may  come  when  you  can  render  him  the  service  of 
prayer.  I.  Thr  apostles  receive  a  eepokt  from  Samaria  (ver.  14).  The  text  is 
now  easy  reading,  but  there  was  a  day  when  it  was  a  gnmd  st^ry.  It  is  the  dawn- 
ing of  a  new  day,  the  winning  of  a  great  battle;  that  day  the  Genti'es  were  admitted 
into  the  kin.dom  of  Christ.  We  lose  so  much  by  forgetiing  the  circumstances  of 
the  case.  This  is  a  verse  now  read  as  if  it  had  no  atmosphere.  What  is  it  that  we 
lose  in  history?  The  atmosphere;  that  which  tiives  the  novelist  or  the  dramatist 
suprmiricy  over  thy  dry,  technical,  and  most  learned  annalist !  The  dreariest  part 
of  every  missionary  meeting  to  many  persons  is  the  reading  of  the  report — a  read- 
ing which  should  bring  all  the  Church  togettier  in  its  noblest  enthusiasm,  shouting 
as  a  conquering  husT. — "Praise  God,  from  whom  all  blessings  flow."     I[.  When 

THIS  REPORT  WAS  MADE  THE  APOSTLES  SENT  DOWN    PeTER   AND   JOHN.      WaS  Peter  then 

really  "  sent  down  "  ?  We  thought  that  Peter  would  have  sent  down  other  men  ! 
Yet  how  delicate  the  tribute  to  his  undoubted  primacy  of  love  and  enthusiasm  !  He 
it  was  who  was  selected  ti»  go  down.  There  is  nothing  papal  here.  The  Pope  is  ' 
not  "  sent  down,"  he  sends  down.  Our  greatest  men  should  always  be  sent  down 
to  the  villages  under  circumstances  such  as  these.  Our  very  granilest  preachers 
ought  to  be  our  missionaries.  III.  When  Peter  and  John  were  come  down  wbat 
DID  THEY  DO?  This  wiU  reveal  the  right  aspect  of  apostolic  influence  and  offii-e. 
Let  us  read  ih^^.  text  in  a  way  of  our  own,  "Peter  and  John  sat  upon  a  great  and 
high  throne,  and  waved  over  the  astounded  Gentiles  a  staff  that  was  sup|)Osod  to 
have  singular  power  in  it,  and  the  amazed  and  wonder-struck  villHgers  fell  back 
before  such  dazzling  dignity  and  bewailed  their  own  unworthiness."  That  would 
be  poor  Scripture  1  How  does  the  text  really  read  ?  1.  When  they  were  come  down, 
they  prayed  for  the  villagers.  Pray  for  inquirers  ;  do  not  overpower  them.  Pray 
in  great  religious  crises,  and  thus  magnify  the  event,  and  do  not  lessen  it.  Do  we 
pray  now  ?  Do  we  ask  as  if  we  meant  to  have  what  we  ask  ?  2.  They  prayed  that 
Samaria  might  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.  Then  what  had  Samaria  already  received  ? 
Only  the  fir.-t  baptism.  Water  will  do  you  no  good.  It  was  meant  to  be  a  beginning, 
not  an  end.  We  have  believed,  but  have  we  received  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  People 
imagine  that  when  they  have  believed,  the  work  is  done.  As  well  tell  mn  that  when 
you  have  put  the  fuel  into  the  grate  the  fire  is  lighted.  We  know  the  truth,  what 
we  want  is  the  burning  spark  I  Theie  is  no  mistaking  that.  No  man  can  mistake 
fire.  You  may  paint  it,  tint  you  cannot  waim  your  hands  at  the  flame  on  the  can- 
vas. Fire  is  like  nothing  but  itself.  It  separates  man  from  man,  yet  unites  man 
to  man.  It  hums  up  selfishness;  purifi'  s,  glorifies.  It  gives  a  man  indivi^luality. 
It  detaches  him  from  the  common  crowd  and  gives  him  a  singularity  of  his  own. 
When  the  Church  has  received  the  Holy  Ghost  she  will  be  unlike  every  other  com- 
munity. When  the  pulpit  has  been  baptized  by  the  Holy  Ghost  it  will  stand  alone 
in  the  supremacy  of  its  power.  At  present  it  is  the  retreat  of  the  mumbler,  the 
living  of  the  essayist.  Our  religion  is  at  present  an  argument,  our  desire  is  that  it 
may  become  a  passion  !  IV.  Simon,  hearing  that  through  laying  on  of  thb 
apostles'  hands  the  Holy  Ghost  was  received,  offered  them  money.  1.  It  is 
easy  to  abuse  this  man,  but  he  acted  a  most  natural  and  rational  part,  considering 
his  training,  avocation,  and  the  influence  he  had  acquired.  He  had  lived  all  his 
life  in  the  market-place;  he  had  never  breathed  a  purer  air;  he  knew  but  one 
world,  and  one  langUMge.  He  saw  only  the  outside — which  of  us  sees  any  further  ? 
We  think  because  we  have  been  to  church  we  are  Christians.  That  is  precisely 
the  reasoning  of  Simon.  There  has  grown  up  a  custom  which  is  known  as  Simony,  » 
He  who  would  hold  his  place  in  the  Church  by  virtue  of  having  bought  it  is  guilty 
of  it.  But  simony  is  not  in  the  pulpit  alone.  We  may  buy  intluence,  status,  and 
authority  in  the  Church  by  the  use  of  money.  Who  is  there  that  does  not  imagine 
that  everything  can  be  bought  ?  Yet  how  little  in  reality  can  we  buy  with  money  ! 
Can  you  bny  sound  judgment?  Poetic  fire?  Prophetic  insight?  Any  form  of 
spiritual  and  enduring  power?  Know  ye  that  money  has  but  a  liitle  world  to  ^ 
live  in,  and  that  the  highest  gifts  ai-e  not  to  be  purchased  with  gold.  God  hath 
chosen  the  poor  of  this  world  rich  in  faith,  and  strong  in  power.     To  the  poorest 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  669 

man  He  says,  "  Take  this  gospel  and  preach  it."  A  manger  will  do  for  a  cradle 
■when  there  is  in  it  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Do  you  suppose  that  because  you 
have  little  money  you  have  little  power,  life,  responsibility  ?  What  have  you  ?  You 
may  have  the  power  of  prayer  I  You  may  be  able  to  "  speak  a  word  in  season  to 
him  that  is  weary."  Yon  may  hive  the  gift  of  hope  and  the  faculty  of  music,  and 
you  may  be  able  to  lift  the  load  from  many  a  burdened  heart.  Poorest  man,  do 
not  despair  I  You  may  be  rich  in  ideas,  in  sympathies,  in  suggestion,  and  in  all 
the  noblest  treasures  that  can  make  men  wealthy  with  indestructible  posse^siou.  2. 
There  was  probably  no  fixed  sum  in  the  mind  of  Simon.  If  such  a  bestowal  as  that 
of  the  Spirit  could  be  effected  upon  him,  money  should  not  stand  in  the  way.  This 
was  the  hour  of  apostolic  temptation.  Silver  and  gold  they  had  none.  Money 
is  always  a  powerful  temptation  to  the  empty  pocket.  It  is  very  easy  when  there  is 
no  temptation  to  say  what  we  should  do ;  but  when  the  money  is  in  the  hand  of 
the  tempter,  and  wben  in  one  moment  more  it  may  be  in  our  own,  and  when  the 
thing  asked  for  in  exchange  is  itself  a  good  thing,  where  is  the  man  who  can  return 
a  denial  with  the  emphasis  of  thunder,  and  the  accent  of  lightning  ?  The  Church 
is  always  tempted  in  this  same  way.  We  must  always  reject  the  unholy  patronage. 
Do  I  address  a  minister  who  preaches  to  a  moneyed  pew  ?  Your  ministry  will  be 
blighted  with  well-merited  condemnation.  Do  I  minister  to  a  Church  that  could 
accept  secular  patronage  in  order  to  preach  a  settled  and  determined  theology? 
Such  a  Church  would  have  sold  its  birthright  for  a  contemptible  price.  Faith  must 
spread  its  own  daily  board.  Love  must  pay  its  own  way.  Do  I  speak  to  some 
who  represent  very  feeble  communities  ?  Do  not  ask  any  man  to  help  you,  unless 
his  help  be  the  inspiration  of  love.  Never  be  bribed  iuto  silence.  Never  keep  back 
the  truth  of  God,  lest  you  should  forfeit  status  or  income.  It  is  not  necessary  for 
any  man  to  live,  but  it  is  necessary  for  every  man  to  be  loyal  to  Chiist's  truth. 
When  the  king  came  to  meet  Abram,  and  offered  him  great  hospitality  and  patron- 
age, Abram  said,  "  No,  lest  thou  say,  I  have  made  Abram  rich."  The  chief  power 
is  spiritual,  not  financial.  But  the  Church  has  wonderfully  fallen  under  the  fallacy 
•which  teaches  that  the  Church  ought  to  be  socially  respectable.     V.  How  was  it 

THAT  THE  APOSTLES  WERE  ENABLED  TO  ESCAPE  IHIS  POTENT  TEMPTATION  ?       The  aUSWCr 

is  that  they  had  a  true  conception  of  the  spiritual  election  and  function  of  the 
Church  (ver.  20).  The  Church  had  not  then  become  a  machine.  Ordination  was 
not  then  a  thing  to  be  arranged.  It  was  inspiration.  Men  are  now  "  prepared  " 
for  the  ministry.  Now  we  "  educate  "  men  for  the  pulpit.  Educate  men  for  the 
ministry!  "  Thy  education  perish  with  thee,  because  thou  hast  thought  that  the 
gift  of  God  "  could  be  purchased  by  schooling.  Get  all  the  education  you  can  ;  be 
the  best  informed  man  of  your  circln ;  but  inspiration  makes  a  minister  and  makes 
the  Church.  "  Not  by  might,  and  not  by  power,"  &c.  Are  you,  young  man,  consider- 
ing whether  you  will  enter  C'jrist's  ministry  or  not  ?  Th^n  pray  God  you  may  never 
enter  it ;  for  it  is  not  a  question  for  consiileration.  There  are  those,  shame  on 
their  grey  hairs,  who  are  telling  us  that  if  the  Church  would  offer  more  money  to 
the  young  men  of  our  "  better  families,"  they  might  possibly  give  themselves  to  the 
ministry  1  A  malediction  from  h>^aven  be  upon  such  thoughts  !  Does  Christ  want 
the  members  of  our  "  better  families  "  to  be  kind  enough  to  accept  position  as  His 
ambassadors,  and  expositors,  and  friends?  He  will  choose  His  own  ministers.  He 
will  see  to  it  that  the  pulpit  is  never  silent.  VI.  Peter  spoke  in  his  own  chaeac- 
TEEi-Tic  TONE  (vers.  21-2;-5).  His  speech  was  not  a  mere  denunciation.  His  moral 
dignity  is  fo-itively  sublime,  and  yet,  having  uttered  the  word  of  malediction,  he 
shows  that  the  truo  object  of  the  denunciation  of  wiong  is  to  save  the  wrong-doer. 
Here  is  the  gospel  in  an  unexpected  place.  After  such  a  thunderstorm  who  could 
have  expected  this  voice  of  lute  and  harp  ?  Eepent !  Forgive  !  Give  up  no  man. 
Do  not  spare  his  sin  ;  hold  the  fiercest  light  over  it,  but  point  the  wrong-doer  him- 
self to  the  possibility  of  forgiveness  through  repentnnce  and  supplication.  VII. 
Simon  did  not — nor  could  he  be  expected  to — seize  the  spiritual  idea  which 
KOLED  the  apostle's  THINKING.  His  reply  is  most  natural,  though  often  condemned 
(ver.  24).  He  asked  for  prayer,  so  far  he  was  not  wrong.  He  suggested  the  prayer 
•' that  none  of  tiiese  things  which  ye  have  spoken  come  upon  me."  There  he 
filled  to  see  the  right  meaning  of  prayer.  We  must  not  go  to  God  in  supplication 
merely  to  escape  penalty,  but  to  escape  sin.  Yet  let  a  man  come  through  any  gate 
that  first  opens,  only  let  him  come  !  If  one  man  should  come  through  hatred  of  sin,  if 
another  man  of  lower  mould  should  say,  "I  fearh^ll;  God  have  mercy  upon  me."  Let 
him  al'!0  come.  Every  man  must  pray  as  he  can.  You  cannot  send  the  heart  to  school 
to  teach  it  how  to  pray.  Where  the  pain  is,  the  prayer  should  be.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOIt.  [chap.  vui. 

The  apostle's  visit  to  Samaria  : — I.  The  effacfment  of  Philip.  Like  the  Baptist 
before  our  Lord,  Philip  retires  when  Peter  and  John  come  on  the  scene.  Th -re  is 
something  touching  in  tbis  willingness  to  be  eclipseii.  Philip  might  naturally  have 
felt  that  he  had  borne  the  buiden  and  heat  of  the  day,  and  tliat  the  apostles'  suc- 
cess was  due  to  his  efforts.  "He  had  laboured"  (words  spoken  about  Samaria), 
"  and  they  had  entered  into  his  labours."  He  had  dug  the  soil,  sown  the  setd, 
watered  it,  until  the  field  was  white;  and  now  it  only  remained  for  the  apostles  to 
reap.  Nor  is  he  in  the  least  jealous.  His  aim  was  the  reverse  of  Simon's,  and 
accordingly  any  increase  and  confirmation  of  frtith  was  a  matter  of  joy.  Only 
those  who  after  h  nest  labour  have  been  supnrseded  by  men  of  more  brilliant  gifts 
can  appreciate  the  trial  and  the  grace  to  bear  it.  H.  The  apostolic  deputation. 
1.  The  men  chosen.  (1)  Peter's  presence  was  required  by  his  position  in  prophecy 
and  providence.  Our  Lord  had  entrusted  him  with  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  indicating  that  he  was  to  throw  open  the  gates  of  the  gospel  dispensation. 
(2)  John  is  so  constantly  associated  with  Peter,  that  we  are  not  surprised  to  find 
them  companions  here.  But  it  is  a  striking  coincidence  that  he  who,  givinjj;  vent 
to  the  prevailing  hostility  against  the  Samaritans,  called  for  tire  from  heaven  to 
consume  them,  should,  now  that  a  more  loving  spiiit  actuated  him.  be  selected  to 
call  down  the  tire  of  God's  illuminating  and  quickening  grace.  2.  Their  official  act. 
(1)  This  forms  the  scriptural  ground  for  the  rite  of  coi  firmation.  Bapti-m  is  in 
the  nature  of  a  coutiact  into  which  Christ  enteis  with  the  soul,  and  the  practice  of 
infant  baptism  makes  it  almost  a  necessity  to  bave  some  period  at  which  a  baptized 
child  may  consciously,  and  of  his  own  accord,  enter  into  tLis  contract.  How  suit- 
able, then,  that  they  should  receive  the  completion  of  their  baptism  by  prayer  and 
the  imposition  of  hands.  This  conseora'es,  as  it  weie,  the  baptized  person  to  the 
royal  priesthood,  and  sets  him  apart  solemnly  for  the  service  of  Christ.  Yet,  while 
we  discover  in  holy  Scdpture  the  germ  of  this  rite,  we  do  not  regard  confirmation 
as  havmg  the  universal  necessity  or  virtue  of  a  sacrament.  For  the  gilt  of  the 
Spirit  was  vouchsafed  independently  of  the  imposition  of  hands,  as  in  the  cases  of 
Ctrneliu:*,  Saul,  and  the  Ethiopian  eunuch.  3.  Their  treatment  of  Simon.  Once 
before  had  money  been  offered  to  Peter,  in  order  to  gain  a  fair  reputation.  Ananias 
had  laid  money  down  at  his  feet,  wishing  it  to  be  understood  as  the  who'e.  Simon 
now  does  the  same  thing  to  win  power  and  iufiueuce.  The  secret  of  the  apostles' 
power  WdS  just  what  he  wanted  to  regain  his  lost  influence  and  eclipse  Fhilip. 
What  he  coveted  was  not  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  the  power  of  communicating  the 
Spirit  to  others.  And  what  he  cared  to  cmmunicate  was  not  the  grace  of  the 
Spirit,  but  His  gifts.  And  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  what  he  offered  money 
for,  he  intended  to  win  money  by.  Peter's  reproof,  and  his  insinuation  of  the 
difficulty  of  saving  a  character  so  far  gone  in  evil  ("perhaps")  was  not  too  strong 
for  the  occasion.  Had  there  been  a  single  stirring  of  conscience,  a  single  aspiration 
after  goodness,  the  rejoinder  would  have  been  far  more  lenient.  4.  Ttie  contrasts 
of  character  in  the  Church.  Here  is  Simon  the  apostle,  a  man  of  the  most  intense 
disinterestedness,  who  had  forsaken  all  to  follow  his  Master,  confronted  with  Simoo 
the  sorcerer,  who  had  nominally  embraced  Christianity  as  a  possible  means  of 
wealth  and  power,  ^^hat  a  natural  repulsion  must  there  be  between  the  maids  of 
the  two  when  each  gets  an  isikling  of  the  other.  (D<an  Goulburn.)  Tlie  Church 
and  the  world: — Between  no  two  things  is  there  a  greater  contrast.  The  contrast 
is  a  double  one — between  the  natural  and  supernatural,  and  between  the  holy  and 
the  sinful.  With  respect  to  the  first,  they  are  for  each  other;  and  therein  lies  the 
task  of  the  Church.  With  respect  to  the  second,  they  are  against  each  other;  and 
therein  lies  the  danger  of  the  Church.  Both  the  task  and  the  danger  are  exem- 
plified here.  I.  The  Church  in  the  world.  1.  The  extension  of  the  Church  in 
the  world.  (1)  The  words  of  our  departing  Lord  (chap.  i.  8)  are  the  theme  of  all 
Church  history,  as  well  as  that  of  the  first  days.  The  evangelical  histoiyof  the 
first  thirty-four  years  of  our  dispensation  conducts  us  from  Nazareth  to  Jerusalem. 
The  apostolic  history  of  the  same  number  of  years  leads  us  from  Jerusalem  to 
Kome.  The  bridge  between  Jerusalem  and  the  heathnn  world  was  Samaria,  a  field 
planted  by  our  Lord,  whose  prophecy  of  the  harvtst  there  (John  iv.  35-38)  was  now 
fulfilled  in  Philip,  driven  thither  by  persecution.  The  storm  destroys  fio^vers,  but 
scatters  seeds — a  consolation  for  the  Church  in  every  age.  (2)  Philip  was  a 
gU'iidian  of  the  poor,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  made  hira  an  evangelist.  The  lioerty  of 
the  Spirit  is  not  boun^l  by  human  order.  He  founded  the  Mother  Church  of  Mis- 
sions at  Antioch  by  means  of  private  Christians,  and  the  Church  of  Rome  by  men 
unknown  ;  prisoners  brought  the  gospel  to  the  Goths  in  Europe.     He  "  blowetli 


CHAP,  viir.]  THE  ACTS.  671 


■where  He  listeth."  (3)  In  the  daj'S  of  Jesus,  Samaria  had  been  greatly  moved ; 
then  there  arose  a  sorcerer  who  won  the  people.  Hunger  grasps  at  any  food,  for 
which  reason  also  they  accepted  the  word  of  salvation.  Thn  conversion  of  the 
Samaritans  was  a  sign  for  the  Jews  (Matt.  xxi.  43),  and  the  apostles  understood  it 
well.  The  spread  of  the  gospel  is  always  a  sign  of  warning.  In  our  days  the  ape 
of  missions  has  begun  anew.  May  not  this  be  a  sign  that  the  word  of  grace  will 
depart  if  we  esteem  it  slightly.  "Buy,"  says  Luther,  "while  the  market  is  at  your 
door.  Gather  in  while  the  weather  is  bright  and  fair.  Use  the  word  of  God's 
grace  while  you  have  it.  The  Jews  had  it  once ;  but  they  lost  it,  and  now  they 
have  notliing.  Paul  brought  it  to  Greece  ;  but  they  lost  it,  and  now  they  have  the 
Turk.  Eome  and  Italy  had  it ;  but  they  lost  it,  and  now  they  have  the  Pope.  And 
you  Germans  must  not  think  that  you  will  have  it  for  ever  ;  for  ingratitude  and 
contempt  will  not  suffer  it  to  remain."  2.  The  Church  preserving  its  unity  in  the 
world.  The  apostles  send  Peter  and  John  to  sanction  the  work  of  Philip,  and  to 
incorporate  the  Christians  into  the  Apostolic  Church.  The  rending  of  the  body  of 
Christ  into  such  a  multitude  of  sects  is  to  be  deeply  lamented.  Unceasingly  should 
we  think  of  the  words  of  Jesus  (John  xvii.  12).  But  a  self-conceived,  self-made 
unity,  only  leads  to  schism.  Unity  gives  strength,  but  only  true  unity — unity  in 
the  truth.  3.  The  testimony  of  the  Church  in  the  world  (ver.  15-17).  It  must 
not  be  understood  that  the  baptism  of  Philip  was  ineffective,  and  that  laying  on  of 
apostolic  hands  made  it  so.  The  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  twofold.  He  is  a 
Spirit  of  life  and  a  Spirit  of  work.  He  makes  us  children  of  God  and  servants  of 
God.  The  first  work  of  the  Spirit  was  accomplished  through  Philip,  the  second 
through  the  apostles.  The  first  is  alike  in  all,  the  second  manifold.  God  gives 
various  gifts  of  service,  and  these  are  not  nc  c  'ssarily  and  obviously  miraculous. 
The  gifts  of  koowledge,  doctrine,  guidance,  &c..  Lave  nothing  striking  in  themselves, 
and  yet  they  are  as  much  gifts  of  the  Spirit  as  others.  Without  the  power  and 
blessing  of  God's  Spirit,  all  our  toil  and  skill  are  vain  ;  but  with  that,  our  woik 
gives  evidence  to  the  world  that  the  Church  is  the  possessor  of  heavenly  powers. 
II.  The  world  in  the  Chtjrch.  1.  The  gathering  of  the  world  into  the  Church. 
The  net  cast  into  the  sea  collects  all  manner  of  fish.  The  condition  of  the  Church 
is  necessarily  mixed ;  the  wheat  and  tares  must  grow  together  here.  When  the 
reapers  come  at  the  Judgment,  then  will  the  Church  be  pure.  Let  us  judge  not, 
lest  we  be  judged ;  but  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are  the  children  of  God.  2.  The 
spirit  of  the  world  in  the  Church.  What  is  the  spirit  of  the  world  and  the  spirit 
befitting  the  kingdom  of  G"d  (Matt.  xx.  25-28).  The  world  strives  to  rule,  the 
Christian  rejoices  to  serve  ;  the  one  wants  to  be  great,  the  other  is  willing  to  be 
nothing.  It  wa-<  not  enough  for  Simon  to  be  a  Christian ;  he  wanted  to  play  the 
same  great  pnrt  as  before  his  baptism  ;  and  to  use  the  powers  of  the  Spirit  for  the 
gratification  of  his  self-seeking  mind.  And  yet  his  sin  grew  from  the  corrupt  soil 
of  the  heart,  which  is  the  same  in  all.  Scarcely  is  the  pride  of  the  natural  man 
driven  out,  when  there  comes  the  pride  of  the  spiritual  man.  And,  as  Luti  er  says, 
"  the  white  devil  is  worse  than  the  b'ack."  How  hard  it  is  to  seek  nothing  but  the 
favour  of  God,  whatever  man's  opinion  may  be.  3.  The  Church's  judgment  on 
thit  spirit.  "Thy  money  nerish  with  thee" — i.e.,  all  thy  arts  by  which  thou 
thinkest  the  powers  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  to  be  obtained.  How  marvellous  will  it 
appear  when,  Ht  the  Judgment,  those  now  esteemed  "  great  "  will  be  cast  out,  and 
the  little  ones  esteemed  tjreat  (Matt.  vii.  22,  &c.).  This  judgment  we  can  only 
escape  by  a  penitent  judgment  of  ourselves.     (Prof.  Litthardt.) 

Ver.  17.  Then  they  laid  their  hands  on  them,  and  they  received  the  Holy  Ghost. 

— Confirmation: — Acco'ding  to— I.  Its  origin.  No  sacramental  institution  of  our 
Lord,  but  a  time-honoured  ordinance  of  the  Church.  II.  Its  import.  No  substi- 
tution fur,  or  repetition  of  baptism,  but  a  ratification  of  baptismal  confession  and 
grace.  HI.  Its  effect.  N  >  infallible  communication  of  the  Spirit,  as  here  by 
the  apostles,  but  an' incalculable  spiritual  blessing  for  susceptible  hearts.  (A'. 
Gerok.) 

Vers.   20-24.  But  Peter   said   unto  him.  Thy  money  perish  with  thee. — The 

impotence  of  money: — I  do  nit  know  that  the  age  in  which  Simon  lived  was 
especially  a  commer  -i  il  age  ;  but  whatever  may  have  been  its  distinctive  peculiarity, 
there  ca mot  be  tnueli  doubt  about  ours.  There  h-ive  been  successive  ages,  each  of 
a  chiracteristie  type,  as,  e./;.,  the  age  of  the  shepherds,  illustrated  in  tbo  long 
centuries  of  pastoral  life  in  the  East ;  the  age  of  conquest,  as  depicted  in  the  story 


672  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

of  the  Persian  kings  ;  the  age  of  the  arts  and  of  letters,  as  seen  in  Greece ;  the  age 
of  civic  rule  and  military  despotism,  as  revealed  in  the  history  of  Eome ;  the  age  of 
religious  enthusiasm,  as  traceable  in  the  history  of  the  middle  ages  and  the 
crusades;  the  age  of  luxury,  as  found  in  the  France  of  the  Louises,  and  of  revolu- 
tion, as  found  in  the  France  of  the  Buonapartes.  But,  though  in  all  of  them  mea 
recognised  the  uses  of  wealth,  and  sought  it,  in  no  one  of  them  was  the  conception 
of  its  capabilities  so  fevered  and  exaggerated  as  in  our  own.  We  are  living  in 
times  when  men  not  merely  believe  that  wealth  is  of  all  things  the  most  desirable 
(men  have  believed  that  from  the  time  of  the  rich  young  man),  but  when  they 
believe  also  that  there  is  nothing  that  cannot  be  purchased  with  money.  And 
therefore  it  is  that  this  answer  of  Peter  is  so  timely.  "  This  power  you  covet 
is  communicable,  but  you  cannot  buy  it !  You  have  seen  these  common  people 
quickened  into  a  disclosure  of  powers  such  as  your  poor  arts  have  never  dreamed 
of  ;  but  the  wealth  of  an  empire  couki  not  purchase  the  least  or  lowliest  of  them.'*^ 
'*  Well,  what  of  it  ?  "  one  might  answer.  They  are  not  the  gifts  and  powers  that 
I  crave.  But  the  things  I  do  crave  can  be  purchased  with  money.  I  look  about 
me  and  see  that  there  is  nothing  so  potent  as  wealth.  I  find  that  in  society 
nothing  covers  so  many  faults  as  money ;  that  neither  birth  nor  death  are  separate 
from  the  questions,  "What  will  he  inherit?"  or  "What  did  he  leave?"  That 
while  we  scorn  the  French  marriage  of  convenience  in  name,  we  observe  in  fact ; 
that  poverty,  if  not  a  disgrace,  is  an  impertinence ;  that  every  taste  that  I  cultivate 
makes  wealth  more  desirable  and  poverty  more  irksome  ;  that  while  I  can  acquire 
the  habits  of  luxurious  living  with  facility,  I  can  surrender  them  only  with  pain ; 
and  finally  that,  no  matter  how  selfish  or  unscrupulous  has  been  my  career,  it  ia 
only  necessary  that  it  shall  have  been  exceptionally  successful  to  secure  for  me» 
when  dying,  the  applause  of  mankind.  Wherein,  then,  consists  the  folly  or  even 
the  error  in  my  owning  also  that  everything  that  I  do  care  for  can  be  purchased 
with  money  ?  That  error  and  that  folly  consist  in  this :  that  these  gifts  of  the 
Spirit  which  Simon  would  fain  have  bought  with  money  are  but  the  type  of  every 
other  best  gift  in  all  the  world,  and  that  of  these  as  of  those,  it  is  everlastingly 
true  that  they  are  not  for  sale.  Eecall  some  of  them  for  a  moment,  and  see  if 
it  is  not  so.  I.  He^vlth.  Some  of  us  have  drifted  into  one  of  those  European 
refuges  of  the  invalid  like  Ems  or  Karlsbad  ;  places  where  people  whose  lungs  or 
limbs  or  livers  are  diseased  have  come  together  to  drink  the  waters  and  submit  to 
the  regimen,  or  be  washed  whole  again  in  the  baths.  Oh,  tbose  melancholy  pro- 
cessions of  gloomy- visaged  and  despondent  men  and  women  !  I  have  heard  of  one 
of  them  bursting  into  a  storm  of  passionate  denunciation  because  a  healthy-look- 
ing servant  had  entered  his  apartment.  How  dared  such  an  one  insult  him  with 
the  offensive  ccntrast  of  her  unwelcome  presence!  And  yet  the  one  was  only  a. 
peasant  girl,  and  the  other  a  prince  and  a  millionaire.  Would  he  not  have  been 
willing  to  have  shared  his  millions  if  he  could  have  bought  with  them  the  other's 
single  gift  of  health  ?  Unfortunately,  however,  it  is  not  for  sale.  II.  Next  in  rank 
is  that  higher  boon  of  mental  culture.  There  are  hundreds  of  thousands  of  men 
and  women  who  rarely  know  a  day  without  an  experience  of  pain,  who  yet  are 
possessors  of  a  secret  which  makes  them  habitually  insensible  to  it.  There  are 
accomplishments  in  which  they  can  so  lose  themselves  that,  for  the  time,  nothing 
unwelcome  really  touches  them ;  and  above  all,  in  the  pages  of  a  book,  they  can  so 
pass  out  of  the  consciousness  of  their  outer  world  into  the  consciousncs  of  that 
inner  world  to  which  the  poet,  or  the  historian  has  introduced  them,  that  penury 
and  loneliness  and  pain  will  be  for  the  time  being  forgotten.  But  such  a  pleasure 
as  this  is  not  purchasable.  Indeed,  just  because  high  living  is  usually  so  fatal  to 
high  thinking,  the  pleasures  of  culture  are  almost  prohibited  to  the  merely  rich. 
Now  it  does  not  matter  that  such  persons  have  never  known  (because  incapable  of 
knowing)  the  joys  of  high  intellectual  activity  and  so  cannot  greatly  miss  what 
they  have  never  tasted.  What  they  do  know  is  that  weariness  of  ennui,  that 
pronencFS  to  idle  gossip,  to  coarser  indulgence  which  is  the  everlasting  tendency  of 
an  habitually  luxurious  life.  So  thoroughly  is  this  understood  where  wealth  is 
hereditary  that  occupations  have  to  be  created  as  a  defence  against  the  dangers 
of  their  peculiar  circumstances.  But  when  such  occupations  are  wanting,  the 
intellectual  apathy  is  at  times  a  hideous  and  appalling  nightmare.  HI.  More 
tragically  is  this  true  in  the  domain  of  the  AFFEcrioNS.  Love  is  not  for  sale;  and 
that  mysterious  sentiment  which  must  be  won  and  deserved — not  purchased, 
never  goes  along  with  a  jointure  nor  can  be  made  over  with  transfers  of  real 
estate.    There  have  been  plenty  of  people  with  no  capacity  for  such  an  affection 


CHAP,  vin.]  THE  ACTS.  673 

who  have  bartered  themselves  for  some  one  else's  possessions,  but  in  selling  theii 
persons  or  their  accomplishments  they  have  usually  sold  all  that  they  had  to  sell. 
The  power  of  greatly  and  unselfishly  loving  another  was  not  in  them,  and  what 
they  had  not  to  deliver  they  could  not  sell.  But,  where  in  any  man  or  woman 
there  has  been  such  a  capacity,  the  heart  has  steadily  and  invariably  refused  to 
follow  the  beckoning  of  mere  worldly  possessions.  If  any  one  else  loves  us,  we 
may  be  sure  that  it  is  not  for  what  we  have,  but  for  what  we  are.  IV.  And  that 
reminds  me  of  one  other  unpurchasable  possession — a  good  conscience,  or  peace  of 
mind.  The  world  has  always  had  in  it  people  who,  having  lived  selfish  lives,  have 
striven,  before  they  were  done  with  life,  to  square  accounts  by  the  lavish  distribu- 
tion of  their  means.  All  along  they  have  been  uncomfortably  conscious  of  the 
compassion  of  thoughtful  men  and  quiet  women.  And  when  they  have  encountered 
such  they  have  been  dimly  sensible  that  these  people  had  a  secret  of  peace,  of  hope- 
ful and  certain  anticipation,  of  which  they  themselves  knew  nothing.  Oh,  what 
would  they  not  give  if  they  could  buy  that  1  Nay,  more,  as  they  look  backward 
what  else  would  they  not  give  if  they  but  had  it  to  give,  if  somehow  they  could 
transform  those  cruel  and  accusing  memories.  But  that  peace  of  God  which 
passeth  all  understanding,  passeth  all  price  as  well  1  Conclusion  :  I  want  to  say 
one  word  to  the  young.  You  are  living  in  an  atmosphere  where  the  loudest  bid 
that  is  made  is  the  bid  for  money.  Be  afraid  of  an  idolatry  so  poor  and  mean  ! 
Money,  in  itself  considered,  is  neither  good  nor  bad.  It  is  an  instrument.  You 
may  have  it  without  being  bad  and  you  may  be  without  it  without  being  good.  But 
to  live  for  it,  to  fret  because  you  are  without  it,  is  the  death  of  all  nobleness  and  the 
doom  of  aspiration.  There  must  have  been  some  hours  in  your  life  when  your 
heart  has  thrilled  with  a  genuine  aspiration,  and  when,  sitting  alone,  you  have 
pored  over  the  page  that  has  told  you  of  the  great  names  that  have  made  humanity 
immortal,  and  who,  as  they  moved  onward  and  upward  have  left  behind  them  the 
lustre  of  a  nobility  that  can  never  pale.  And  at  such  moments,  surely  you  have 
longed  to  be  like  those  nobler  beings  and  to  follow  their  radiant  footsteps.  Cling 
to  that  longing  and  follow  it,  for,  sooner  or  later,  this  love  of  goodness  will  bring 
you  into  the  presence  of  One  who  is  the  divinest  of  all.  And  yet,  how  poor  He 
was !  How  utterly  and  absolutely  Christ  triumphed  without  the  aid  of  money. 
Nowadays  there  is  no  entei prise,  however  unworldly  its  aims,  that  must  not  rest 
upon  a  pecuniary  basis.  And  yet  there  has  lived  in  the  world  One,  who  from  first 
to  last  was  penniless.  Since  He  came  and  went  awav,  what  colossal  fortunes  have 
been  h  aped  up,  what  mighty  combinations  of  capital  have  ruled  the  credit  of  the 
civilised  world  and  made  even  princes  and  sovereigns  to  fawn  obsequiously  upon 
their  possessors.  Wh  it  has  become  of  them  ?  Who  remembers  them  ?  But  all 
the  while  the  sway  of  that  Galilean  peasant  who  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head, 
broadens  and  def^pens  and  advances.  Would  you  possess  the  secret  of  His  resist- 
less spell  ?  Verily,  if  like  Simon  you  come  to  buy  it  with  mere  money,  you  and 
your  money  shall  most  surely  perish  together.  But  if  you  come  discerning  that 
the  gifts  of  God  are  gifts  which  money  cannot  purchase,  then  indeed  you  may  hope 
to  learn  that  secret,  which  shall  mal:e  you  rich  for  ever  1  {Bj^-  H.  C.  Potter,  D.D.) 
Gift  and  purchase  : — As  we  read  Peter's  words,  their  very  sound  brings  out  the 
nature  of  the  sin,  for  their  terms  express  the  contradiction  that  is  involved  in  the 
misuse  of  money.  To  purchase  a  gift  is  evidently  impossible.  One  of  the  two 
words  must  be  wrong.  Either  the  thing  is  not  a  gift,  or  else  we  have  not  purchased 
it.  Is  the  world,  is  our  life,  a  gift  or  a  purchase  ?  Between  those  two  ideas  we  are 
for  ever  vacillating.  Our  belief  in  God  says  it  is  a  gift ;  our  lives  of  activity  and 
energy  say  it  is  a  purchase.  We  talk  of  Providence,  and  then  are  discouraged  at 
our  misfortunes  or  our  failures,  as  if  we  had  never  heard  of  such  a  thing  as  God's 
providence.  We  pray  for  all  blessings,  temporal  and  spiritual,  and  then  congratu- 
late ourselves  when  we  have  put  ourselves  in  a  position  to  obtain  them.  Now,  into 
these  lives,  for  ever  tossed  between  these  two  ideas,  enters  the  element  of  money. 
Its  one  reason  of  existence  is  purchase.  We  cannot  eat  it  or  wear  it ;  the  man  who 
hoards  it  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  looking  at  it  is  acknowledged  to  be  a  pitiable  fool. 
Can  we  not  see  how  at  once  this  universal  thing,  so  necessary  and  so  much  desired, 
throws  all  its  weight  on  the  side  of  purchase  in  our  view  of  life  ?  It  makes  one 
continual  barter.  Purchase  is  a  necessary  element  of  life,  and  money  represents  it. 
It  is  needed  for  our  independence  ;  without  it  we  sink  dowu  into  gift-receivers 
from  our  fellow-men.  The  strong,  self-reliant  character  that  belongs  to  men  of 
business  comes  entirely  from  their  holding  so  natural  a  relation  to  their  fellow-men ; 
they  receive  what  they  pay  for,  they  expect  to  be  paid  for  what  they  give.  That  is 
VOL.  I.  43 


.674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

the  simple  law  of  honest  trade  and  of  honest  manhood,  and  woe  to  the  man  who 
attempts  to  avoid  it,  whether  by  begging  or  gambling.  The  very  money  wbich  he 
receives  is  a  rebuke  to  him,  as  it  tells  him  of  the  universal  existence  of  that  law  of 
purchase  between  man  and  man  which,  like  all  other  laws,  will  punish  the  man  who 
violates  it.  But  when  money,  with  the  principle  which  it  represents,  begins  to  enter 
into  our  relation  to  God,  then  the  contradiction  comes,  and  the  sin  with  it.  Just  as 
living  on  men's  gifts  spoils  our  true  relation  to  them,  so  trying  to  purchase  of  God 
spoils  entirely  the  true  sense  of  our  relation  to  Him.  God  must  give  :  that  fact  is 
written  in  our  belief  of  Him  as  our  Creator,  our  great  Superior,  infinitely  above  us. 
It  is  the  fact  that  is  repeated  in  the  tone  of  authority  that  fills  every  revelation  of 
Him  ;  it  is  the  thought  of  every  heart  that  cares  to  look  for  Him  in  the  earth 
around  us.  There  is  no  God  if  we  can  purchase  things  of  Him.  Money  is  utterly 
atheistic  in  its  very  central  principle  when  taken  out  of  its  proper  place ;  and,  as 
men  heap  it  up,  we  have  only  the  repetition  of  the  old-storied  struggle  of  the  giants 
who  heaped  mountain  upon  mountain,  all  of  which  were  so  good  in  their  places 
on  earth,  that  they  might  reach  to  heaven,  and  unseat  God  from  His  throne.  As 
money  grows  in  power  and  influence,  this  will  be  its  destructive  power  upon  men's 
lives.  Beware  of  this  danger  ;  it  meets  all,  as  they  pass  out  of  childhood's  state  of 
gift-receiving  into  manhood's  time  of  purchase.  There  is  nothing  with  which  to 
meet  it  but  the  simple  knowledge  of  God  cultivated  by  every  me;ins  which  is  thrown 
about  us,  and  by  every  spiritual  influence  which  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  us. 
The  relation  to  God  must  be  learned  more  and  more  closely  in  all  its  special  features. 
The  thought  and  the  effort  must  be  fixed  directly  on  Him  by  morals,  by  religion-, 
by  worship,  by  study,  by  prayer.  Never  more  than  in  these  times,  when  money  is 
the  world's  great  power,  did  mankind  more  need  the  simplest,  purest,  most  childlike 
belief  in  God,  that  life  may  bo  truly  complete  on  both  sides,  toward  man  and  toward 
God.  The  two  sides  will  not  remain  without  effect  upon  each  other.  The  depen- 
dence of  the  one  will  soften  and  save  from  cruelty  and  haughtiness  the  independence 
of  the  other.  He  who  knows  that  he  is  constantly  receiving  from  One  above  him 
cannot  be  cruel  and  exacting  toward  one  below  him  ;  nay,  he  cannot  keep  from 
being  like  his  great,  bountiful  God  in  sweet  acts  of  charity.  The  independence  of 
the  one  will  add  a  sense  of  responsibility  and  power  to  the  other ;  he  who  appreciates 
the  power  that  God  has  given  him  among  his  fellow-men  will  more  gladly  euter  the 
service  of  that  God  to  whom  he  owes  so  much,  thankful  for  the  opportunity  to  do 
something.  And  see  how,  once  more,  the  relation  between  rich  and  poor  is  touched 
by  this  higher  view  of  God  as  a  constant  and  manifold  Giver.  Must  the  poor  man 
stand  aside,  and  see  his  neighbour,  who  has  money,  go  before  him  in  opportunities 
of  doing  good,  in  acquisition  of  high  and  refined  motives  and  character  in  life  ? 
From  how  much  does  the  want  of  money  shut  him  out?  Of  how  many  of  God's 
gifts  does  it  deprive  him  ?  Of  but  one — ease  of  bodily  relation  toward  his  fellow- 
men,  one  of  the  most  dangerous  gifts  that  can  be  bestowed.  Shall  he  stand  mourning 
for  that  one,  while  all  the  time  God  waits  to  bestow  character  here,  salvation  here- 
after, while  moral  possessions  and  eternal  life  are  open  to  him,  and  means  of  doing 
good  by  personal  growth  and  work  which  wealth  can  never  buy  are  at  his  hand  ? 
"Thy  money  perish  with  thee."  Money  is  perishable — in  substance,  form,  posses- 
sion. Our  souls  are  immortal.  Which  shall  affect  the  other?  Shall  we  and  our 
money  p^-rish  together  ?  or  shall  our  lives,  knowing  our  God,  lift  up  the  money  by 
the  devotion  of  us  to  whom  it  belongs  ?  Shall  it  dazzle  us  with  its  glitter,  and 
prevent  our  seeing  God  ?  or  shall  we  save  it  by  our  power  of  serving  God  ?  We  are 
the  greater,  surely,  and  to  us  God  has  opened  a  path  out  of  this  bondage  in  which 
earthly  things  are  forever  holding  us.  Walk  in  it ;  break  the  chain,  golden  though 
it  be,  that  binds  our  immortal  souls  to  this  earth  ;  and  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  His  righteousness,  and  with  that  gift  all  other  gifts  shall  be  a  blessing, 
and  not  a  destruction.  (Arthur  Brookx.)  Simony  asunmes  various  forms  : — Simon 
desired  to  obtain  spiritual  power  and  office,  not  in  the  Divine  method,  but  in  low, 
earthly  ways.  Money  was  his  way  because  it  was  the  one  thing  he  valued  and  had 
to  offer  ;  but  surely  there  are  many  other  ways  in  which  men  may  unlawfully  seek 
for  spiritual  office  and  influence  in  the  Church.  Many  a  man  who  would  never 
dream  of  offering  money  in  order  to  obtain  a  high  place  in  the  Church,  or  would 
have  been  horrified  at  the  very  suggestion,  has  yet  resorted  to  other  methods  just  as 
effective  and  just  as  wrong.  Men  have  sought  high  position  by  political  methods. 
They  have  given  their  support  to  a  political  party,  and  have  sold  their  talents  to 
uphold  a  cause,  hoping  thereby  to  gain  their  ends.  They  may  not  have  given  gold 
which  comes  from  the  mint  to  gain  spiritual  position,  but  they  have  all  the  same 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  675 

given  a  mere  human  consideration,  and  sought  by  its  help  to  obtain  spiritual  power  ; 
or  they  preach  and  speak  and  vote  in  Church  synods  and  assemblies  with  an  e\  e  to 
elections  to  high  place  and  dignity.  An  established  Church,  with  its  legally  secured 
properties  and  prizes,  may  open  a  way  for  the  exercise  of  simony  in  its  grosser  forms. 
But  a  free  Church,  with  its  popular  assemblies,  opens  the  way  for  a  subtler  tempta- 
tion, leading  men  to  shape  their  actions,  to  suppress  their  convictions,  to  order  their 
votes  and  speeches,  not  as  their  secret  conscience  would  direct  them,  but  as  human 
nature  and  earthly  considerations  would  tell  them  was  best  for  their  future  prospects. 
{G.  T.  Stokes,  D.D.)  Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter  :  for  thy  heart 
is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God. — The  natural  heart  .-—In  meditating  upon  the  stoiy 
of  the  Samaritan  impostor,  and  studying  our  own  depraved  nature  in  it,  we  may  remark 
— I.  That  the  natdkal  heart  has  no  knowledge  of  Divine  things.  1.  According  to 
fiome  modern  teachings,  all  men  have  a  religious  instinct,  and  worship  God  in  some 
honest  way,  which,  as  He  is  a  kind  God,  must  be  acceptable  to  Him.  On  analysis, 
we  shall  find  that  this  is  only  either  the  action  of  a  guilty  conscience  or  of  a  poetic 
fancy.  In  the  one  case  the  man  has  a  vague  idea  of  retribution  for  his  sins,  and 
strives  in  some  crude  way  to  appease  the  offended  divinity.  In  the  other,  the 
same  disposition  of  mind  which  makes  the  painter  and  the  poet  makes  the  dieamy 
weaver  of  cobweb  thoughts  about  the  unseen.  There  is  a  desire  to  avert  evil,  aud 
a  blind  ceremonial  in  consequence,  or  there  is  a  constructive  imagii  ation  iudulg- 
ing  in  its  exei'cise.  2.  But  is  this  religion?  Is  this  knowing  and  serving  God? 
Can  this  satisfy  the  heart  and  purify  the  life?  The  religion  of  pagan  nations  is 
largely  the  product  of  this  instiuct.  Does  a  comparison  of  these  with  Christian 
nations  lead  us  to  covet  their  condition?  The  religious  instinct  is  of  no  higher 
character  than  the  eating  and  drinking  instinct,  as  far  as  true  religion  is  conceined. 
They  are  both  of  the  earth,  earthy.  Men  are  cut  off  from  God  by  sin,  and  they 
can  return  only  by  the  use  of  Divine  means.  3.  That  which  Simon  brought  out 
into  full  relief  was  simply  the  common  character  of  the  natural  man.  Divine 
things  are  treated  with  low,  earthly  affections,  and,  of  course,  as  low,  earthly 
things.  Simon  in  trying  to  buy  God's  power  was  no  wor^e  than  the  many  who 
try  to  buy  God's  pardon.  4.  The  prominent  sinners  of  Scripture  are  only  prominent 
by  reason  of  their  circumstances,  not  tht-ir  sin.  That  is  common  to  all.  Pharaoh, 
Balaam,  Doeg,  Ananias  and  Simon  are  only  types  raised  up  high  enough  for  all 
to  see.  II.  That  man's  wickedness  before  God  is  in  the  condition  of  his 
HEART.  Men  posit  sin  in  overt  acts,  and  fail  to  explore  the  pollution  of  their 
hearts.  Our  Lord  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  endeavours  to  correct  this  fatal 
error,  and  shows  that  the  seat  of  murder,  &c.,  is  in  the  heart,  and  that  the  sins 
may  there  reside  when  these  outward  exhibitions  are  avoided.  Simon's  desire, 
not  bis  request,  was  his  sin.  God  saw  the  wickedness  in  his  heart.  He  cannot 
allow  wickedness  concealed  any  more  than  wickedness  in  display,  and  can  receive 
none  except  as  the  unholy  heart  is  renewed.  This  fundamental  truth  is  what 
the  poets  and  philosophers  ignore.  They  would  reform  man  on  the  basis  of  the 
old  evil  heart.  They  would  make  the  outer  circles  of  life  pare,  and  leave  the  core 
rotten.  If,  however,  they  say  that  the  heart  of  man  is  pure,  how  then  did  it  ever 
produce  such  universal  impurity  in  life ?  But  some  will  siy,  " We  believe  the 
heart  must  be  renewed,  but  why  cannot  man  renew  it  himself  ?  "  In  reply,  we  say 
— III.  That  only  God's  power  can  renew  the  heart.  When  the  affec  ions  are 
in  the  wrong,  how  can  their  own  influence  t;.ke  them  out?  Where  is  the  first 
impetus  to  come  from  when  that  which  forms  the  force  of  the  life  is  fixed  upon 
evil  ?  Do  you  take  refuge  in  the  thought  that  there  is  some  element  of  good  in 
the  heart,  and  that  this  at  last  accomplishes  the  renewal?  Then  why  does  it  not 
always  accomplish  it  ?  Any  exceptional  case  destroys  your  theory,  for  Nature 
always  works  in  the  same  way.  But,  besides  that,  how  could  the  good  element  in 
the  heart  overcome  the  bad  unless  it  had  a  majority?  And  if  it  had  a  majority, 
how  came  the  heart  ever  to  go  wrong?  No.  Th«  evil  heart  cannot  renew  itself. 
God  alone  can  do  that.  Its  condition  wiihout  God  is  described  as  being  in  the 
gall  of  bitterness  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity,  wretched  and  helpless.  The  bound 
prisoner  cannot  loosen  himself ;  another  mu-t  do  it.  The  conspicuous  examp'es 
of  this  truth,  such  as  the  drunkard  and  the  gambler  vainly  striving  (in  order  to 
save  their  bodies  or  their  propeity  or  their  reputation)  to  stop  their  excesses,  are 
only  specimens  of  a  universal  rule.  IV.  That  the  hope  of  man  is  in  prayer. 
"Pray  the  L^rd."  The  "if"  was  not  a  doubt  whether  God  would  pardon  if 
Simon  prayed,  but  whether  Simon  would  ever  pray.  Prayer  must  have  penitence 
as  its  spirit.    "  Repent."     It  must  have  a  deep  conviction  of  personal  sin.     Simoa 


676  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  viil. 

seems  to  have  been  too  far  gone  to  have  any  such  conviction.  Hence  we  find 
him  only  afraid.  Though  Simon  apparently  did  not  take  the  road  to  pardon  and 
to  God,  we  see  in  Peter's  injunction  what  the  road  is.  It  is  prayer  to  God.  The 
heart  neeils  His  foi'giving  grace.  That  grace,  through  Christ's  sacrificial  death  for 
sin,  fills  the  Divine  reservoir,  and  is  ready  to  be  outpoured  on  every  seeking  soul. 
Prayer  is  that  act  of  faith  which  makes  the  connection  with  this  reservoir ;  the 
acceptance  of  the  Divine  power,  which  is  waiting  to  be  gracious  to  every  sinner. 
(H.  Croabii,  D.D.)        A  right  state  of  the  heart : — I.  By  a  man's  heart  we  are  to 

UNDERSTAND    HIS    PREVAILING    VIEWS,    DISPOSITIONS,    AND    DESIRES.      When     thcSC     are 

such,  as  his  situation  requires,  then  his  heart  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  Now 
man  by  sin  has  lost  God's  favour  and  ruined  his  soul.  But  by  grace  he  is  placed 
in  such  a  situation  that  he  may  recover  God's  favour  and  save  his  soul.  The  oilers 
of  salvation  are  made  to  him.  When  therefore  he  accepts  tbis  offer,  when  his 
prevailing  views,  dispositions,  and  desires  are  such  as,  in  this  situation,  they  ought 
to  be,  then  his  heait  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  II.  What  are  the  particulars 
IN  WHICH  THIS  state  OF  HEART  CONSISTS.  When  the  heart  is  in  a  right  state — 1.  It  is 
deeply  humbled  before  God  on  account  of  its  sinfulness.  God  sees  that  all  men 
are  great  sinners,  that  sin  is  a  dreadful  evil.  When  a  man,  then,  esteems  himself 
to  be  a  little  sinner,  or  perhaps  hardly  a  sinner  at  all ;  when  he  endeavours  to 
excuse,  or  even  to  justify  whatever  he  has  done  amiss,  it  must  be  clear  that  his 
heart  cannot  be  riglit  before  God.  In  order  to  be  right  he  must  think  of  sin  as 
God  thinks  of  it,  and  feel  his  own  depravity.  2.  It  thankfully  believes  in  Christ 
for  the  pardon  of  his  sins.  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  is  not  willing  that  sinners 
should  die  eternally.  He  hath,  therefore,  provided  for  them  a  way  of  salvation. 
So  long,  then,  as  a  man  rejects  God's  offers  of  pardon  and  continues  at  enmity  with 
his  Maker,  how  is  it  possible  that  his  heart  can  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  It 
never  can  be  right  till  he  obey  the  gospel,  and  comply  with  the  terms  of  it.  And 
these  terms  are  "Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  3. 
It  longs  after  holiness.  God  is  holy  and  would  have  all  men  to  be  holy.  How 
is  it  po>sible,  then,  far  the  heart  to  be  right  in  His  sight,  if  it  does  not  love  what 
He  loves,  and  desire  to  be  what  He  is  ?  III.  The  necessity  of  its  being  so. 
Till  a  man's  heart  be  thus  right  in  the  sight  of  God — 1.  He  can  have  no  interest 
in  the  promises  of  the  gospel.  Call  to  mind  what  these  promises  are,  as  well  as 
the  persons  to  whom  they  are  given.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,"  &c.  "  He 
that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  "  Whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh  his 
sins,  shall  find  mercy."  "This  is  the  promise  which  God  hath  given  us,  even 
eternal  life,"  A'c.  "He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life."  "Sin 
shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,"  &c.  "  Blessed  are  they  who  hunger  and  thirst 
after  right^  ousness,"  &c.  Now,  how  is  it  possible  for  a  man  to  have  any  share  or 
lot  in  the  matter,  whose  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  2.  He  cannot  perform 
the  duties  of  religion.  This  is  not  merely  to  go  through  the  forms  of  religious 
worship.  This  a  man  may  do  irrespective  of  the  state  of  his  heart.  To  perform 
the  duties  of  religion  is  to  peiform  them  in  a  spiritual  manner,  with  a  penitent,  a 
believing,  and  an  holy  frame  of  mind.  But  how  can  this  be  done  by  those  who 
are  unhumbled  in  heart,  who  have  no  living  faith  in  Christ,  nor  any  real  desire 
after  holiness?  3.  He  cannot  taste  the  pleasures  of  rehgion.  Consider  what  they 
are.  They  spring  from  a  sense  of  pardon  ;  from  God's  love  shed  abroad  in  the 
heart ;  from  communion  with  Him.  Now  what  can  the  man  unhumbled,  un- 
believing, and  unholy,  know  of  these  ?  4.  He  can  have  no  meetness  for  the  enjoy- 
ment of  heavenly  happiness  in  the  life  to  come.  The  things  which  constitute  the 
happiness  of  the  saints  in  light  are  that  they  see  and  serve  God.  They  are  with 
Christ,  they  behold  His  glory,  and  sing  His  praises.  But  to  the  unhumbled,  the 
unbelieving,  and  the  unholy,  heaven  then  would  not  be  heaven.  They  have  no 
taste  nor  meetness  for  it,  and  consequently  they  have  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter. 
(E.  Cooper.)  Ruiht  hearts: — As  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  laid  his  head  on  the  block, 
the  fxecutioner,  before  lifting  the  dreadlul  axe,  said, "  Does  your  head  lie  right. 
Sir  Walter?  "  Sir  Walter  turned  his  face  to  the  headsman,  saying,  "  You  know, 
good  friend,  it  matters  not  how  tlie  head  hes  if  the  heart  be  right."  Then  he 
laid  his  head  on  the  block,  and  in  another  moment  the  head  of  the  brave  man 
rolled  on  the  straw  of  the  scaffold  floor.  Sir  Walter's  last  speech  is  an  everlasting 
truth.  Nothing  comes  amiss  when  the  heart  is  right ;  but  a  man  may  hayo  all 
the  riclies  of  England,  yet  if  his  heart  be  not  right  he  will  have  fits  of  misery, 
which  would  make  his  friends  avoid  him  if  he  were  not  rich.  But  you  may  find 
another  man  who  lives  at  the  top  of  a  house  in  a  back  room,  and  chiefly  on  bread 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  677 

and  weak  tea ;  yet  if  that  man's  heart  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  he  rejoices  ever- 
more and  in  everything  gives  thanks.  Have  you  a  right  heart  ?  If  you  have  not, 
it  is  the  cause  of  all  your  trouble;  it  is  making  your  life  one  lung  toilsome  weari- 
ness. The  language  of  a  wrong  heart  is,  "  Oh,  dear,  is  it  always  going  to  be  like 
this?  "  Many  and  many  a  time  you  may  hear  a  wrong  heart  sigh,  "  Oh,  I  am  so 
tired  of  my  life!  "  Men  can  do  great  things.  We  can  draw  down  electricity  and 
send  our  message  on  its  wings  across  the  ocean  in  a  moment.  We  dig  down  into 
the  bowels  of  the  earth  for  our  light  and  heat;  we  sail  on  the  wings  of  the  wind; 
we  dive  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea  for  our  pearls  ;  we  make  spindles  to  pull  out  and 
twist  a  thread  so  fine  as  to  excel  that  of  a  spider  ;  we  put  together  looms  to  weave 
the  most  beautiful  and  intricate  patterns  :  and  have  made  a  hammer  which  can 
either  crack  an  egg,  or  dash  a  piece  of  steel  into  powder.  But  tbere  is  one  thing 
we  cannot  do ;  we  cannot  make  a  human  heart  right.  If  your  watch  should  get 
out  of  order,  you  know  that  it  can  be  set  ri^jht ;  but  some  of  us  have  tried  many 
yeais  to  patch  up  our  heart ;  but  it  is  the  one  thing  which  humanity  cannot  do  ; 
it  is  the  act  of  an  Almighty  Being  to  fix  aright  the  human  heart.  What  a  blessed 
position  if  we  could  say,  "  My  heart  is  fixed,  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed ! "  The 
French  have  a  proverb,  that  if  a  man  would  enjoy  a  happy  life,  he  must  have 
good  digestion  and  a  hard  heart.  That  may  be  a  wise  worldly  proverb  ;  but  I  will 
tell  you  a  better,  that  if  your  heart  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  you  may  have  a 
bad  digestion,  and  yet  enjoy  a  happy  life.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  visit  the  hospital 
and  see  those  still,  pale,  painful  faces,  and  hear  some  of  them  say,  "  It's  all 
right!"  What!  with  broken  limbs,  with  crushed  body,  with  cancer  within  and 
sores  without,  "  all  right "  ?  Yes ;  when  the  heart  is  right  with  God,  your  life 
shall  also  be  right  at  all  times.  Your  heart  cannot  be  right  nor  your  life  happy 
— I.  Unless  you  feel  the  tresence  of  a  loving,  forgiving,  and  helpful  God 
AT  ALL  tImes.  During  a  drought  I  noticed  a  mountain  torrent  pouring  its  stream 
of  water  from  rock  to  rock.  Whence  this  flow  of  water  ?  It  comes  from  the  Creator's 
reservoirs  inside  the  mountains.  Kneel  down,  put  your  ear  on  the  heather,  and 
in  the  stillness  of  the  mountain  solitude  you  will  hear  the  water  trickling  beneath 
from  God's  hidden  reservoir  to  the  torrent  yonder.  When  the  rain  teems  on  the 
hills,  the  surface  water  flows  into  the  streams,  but  a  much  larger  quantity  of  water 
quietly  sinks  through  the  earth  into  great  cisterns  which  God  has  provided  there  ; 
and  these  cisterns  pour  themselves  out  through  crevices  in  the  rock  by  a  natural 
syphon  arrangement.  Whenever  I  place  my  ear  to  the  ground  to  listen  to  the 
quiet  .trickling  of  the  underground  water-supply,  it  reminds  me  of  God  1  He  is 
invisible,  but  near  j  and  there  is  never  a  time  when  the  flowing  of  His  love  is 
suspended.  There  are  times  of  drought  when  the  underground  cisterns  are 
emptied,  and  then,  of  course,  if  you  put  your  ear  to  the  mountain,  you  will  hear 
no  trickling  of  water  ;  but  there  never  is  a  time  when  a  man  can  find  a  place  in 
the  woild  without  God.  Some  people  have  an  idea  of  the  presence  of  God  which 
they  do  not  put  into  daily  use.  You  have  certain  garments  which  you  put  away 
in  summer  and  bting  forth  in  winter.  So,  some  peop'e  keep  in  their  minds  an  idea 
of  an  ever-present  God ;  but  they  do  not  make  a  daily  practical  use  of  this  idea. 
When  there  is  a  fever,  or  a  railway  accident,  or  something  terrible,  they  rush  to 
their  memory-box  for  the  idea  which  has  been  kept  wrapped  up  there,  and  cry,  "  0 
God,  help  me !  "  Such  a  life  is  miserable.  The  idea  of  a  present  God  should  be 
like  a  garment  which  is  always  suitable  and  comfortable  at  all  periods.  III. 
Unless  we  know  that  God  is  nigh  at  hand  and  not  afar  off.  Here  is  a  gentle 
girl  earning  her  living  amongst  strangers.  She  is  much  tempted  in  her  position, 
and  longs  for  help ;  and  feeling  that  if  she  does  not  get  it,  she  may  fall,  she  goes 
to  the  telegraph  office  to  send  a  message  to  her  father  far  away.  While  she  waits 
there,  it  comforts  her  to  know  that  the  click  of  the  instrument  is  a  message  coming 
from  her  father,  saying,  "  My  child,  keep  up  your  heart  and  do  your  duty  !  "  The 
message  cheers  her,  but  she  goes  away  to  her  lonely  lodging  saying,  "  Ah,  if  father 
were  only  nearer."  Likewise,  the  soul  which  is  wearied  with  its  trials  and  sins, 
needs  a  loving  and  forgiving  God  nigh  at  hand.  A  distant  God  cannot  comfort 
us  ;  we  need  a  God  to  abide  with  us  ;  such  as  we  have  in  the  heavenly  Father  who 
manifests  himself  to  us  in  .Jesus.  See  in  that  room,  at  midnight,  lies  a  timid  child, 
who  in  the  darkness  is  afraid.  But  while  she  is  trembling,  she  bears  her  father 
«ough  in  the  other  room ;  and,  in  a  moment,  the  child  is  comforted.  Likewise, 
when  we  are  in  the  darkness  of  sorrow,  or  bereavement,  or  affliction  unto  death,  we 
are  always  afraid  unless  we  can  feel  that  God  is  near.  Some  years  Ago,  one  of 
jny  children  one  night  when  I  went  to  kiss  her  while  she  lay  in  bed,  said,  "Paj)a, 


678  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viir. 

are  you  going  out  to-night  ?  "  I  replied,  "No,  dear  I  "  She  said,  "  What  are  you- 
going  to  do?"  I  answered,  "Going  to  write  in  the  study."  She  said,  "Then, 
will  yoa  put  your  hat  on  the  chair,  and  when  I  am  afraid,  I  shall  see  by  your  hat. 
that  you  are  at  home,  with  me  !  "  So  the  promises  of  Jesus  are  tokens  to  us  of  out 
heavenly  Father's  love  and  care.  But  we  need  something  nearer  than  the  telegraph, 
closer  than  a  cough  in  the  other  room,  more  tangible  than  a  hat  on  a  chair.  It  is 
comforting  ti>  have  an  idea  of  a  God  somewhere  ;  but  oh,  how  much  more  consoling 
to  feel  that  He  dwells  in  our  heart !  When  we  walk  in  a  garden  at  night  we  can 
feel  the  swe>-t  perfume  of  the  silent  flowers,  and  even  in  the  darkness  of  night 
the  flowers  though  silent  speak  to  us.  And  he  will  probably  exclaim  : — "  Oh,  what 
lovely  flowers ;  how  delighted  I  am  with  this  sweet  garden  I  "  The  blind  maU' 
cannot  see  the  flowers,  but  they  speak  to  him  with  the  sweet  odour  of  thtir 
fragrance  and  comfort.  Most  of  us  grope  through  life  in  the  dark ;  but  as  we  grope, 
we  feel  at  times  that  God  is  touching  our  spirit,  and  we  say, "  Oh,  blessed  fact,  God 
is  speaking  to  me."  III.  Unless  it  is  inspired  with  love  to  Jesus  for  laying. 
DOWN  His  life  on  the  Cross.  A  young  English  nobleman,  an  officer  in  tbe  Lite 
Guards,  was  charged  with  the  serious  offence  of  forgery ;  but  he  was  not  guilty. 
A  younger  brother  had  done  the  deed ;  and  the  brave  soldier  took  the  blame  oa 
himsi-lf,  and  bore  the  burden  of  a  guilt  that  was  not  his  own.  He  enlisted  as  a 
private  soldier  under  the  French,  who  were  then  at  war  in  Algeria.  While  there, 
he  won  the  admiration  of  the  French  and  the  respectful  fear  of  the  Arabs.  But 
there  was  one  French  colonel  who  hated  him.  Why?  A  beautiful  Arab  princess, 
was  taken  prisoner  whom  the  colonel  seized  as  his  victim  ;  and  the  English  noble- 
man revealing  his  name  and  rank,  threatened  that  if  the  Frenchman  did  not 
act  righteously  towards  the  lady,  he  would  expose  him.  The  colonel  yielded,  and 
sent  the  princess  back  to  her  father,  but,  after  that,  he  hated  the  English  noble- 
man, and  sought  an  opportunitv  of  disgracing  him.  One  day,  the  colonel  taunted 
the  noble  private,  and  stung  him  so  keenly  that  he  pulled  the  coward  from  his 
horse  and  dashed  him  to  the  ground.  According  to  French  military  law,  there 
was  only  one  verdict  for  such  an  offence — death.  Now  it  happened  that  this  noble- 
man, unknown  to  himself,  had  won  the  heart  of  a  pretty  French  girl,  a  vivandiere 
— a  woman  who  sells  to  the  soldiers  provisions  and  liquors — whom  he  had  treated 
with  polite  kindness.  When  she  heard  that  he  was  condemned,  she  galloped  off 
to  headquarters  and  obtained  a  reprieve.  Away  she  sped  with  the  precious  pardon,, 
and  when  she  came  near  the  camp,  she  saw  the  signal  that  the  last  moment  had 
arrived.  A  shrill  cry  was  heai'd  :  "  Wait  1  in  the  name  of  France."  But  the.stern 
word  of  command  sounded  out  upon  the  silence,  "  Fire  !  "  and  the  girl's  cry  came- 
too  late.  But  while  the  volley  was  being  fired,  more  fleet  than  the  bullets,  she 
had  flung  her  arms  about  him,  and  then  turned  her  head  backward  with  her 
brave  smile  as  the  balls  pierced  her  own  bosom.  She  dropped  on  the  ground,, 
and  he  caught  her  up,  sayine;,  "  My  child  !  they  have  killed  you !  "  What  am  I 
worth  that  you  should  perish  for  me  !  "  Looking  up  quickly  at  the  sorrowing 
soldiers,  he  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  that  you  had  fired  one  moment  sooner  1 "  She 
heard  him,  and  in  an  unspHakable  look  which  revealed  her  secret,  she  said,  "  I 
cannot  speak  as  I  would.  But  I  have  loved  you.  All  is  said  1 "  Then  she  gave- 
a  tired  sigh  and  the  brave,  loving  creature  lay  dead  in  his  arms  with  her  head 
on  his  breast.  He  obtained  his  release,  and  his  younger  brother  having  confessed 
his  crime,  he  was  reinstated  in  his  old  position.  Years  passed  away,  but  whenever 
the  name  was  mentioned  of  the  young  creature  who  had  lain  down  her  life  for 
him,  he  would  bow  his  head  as  before  some  sacred  thing.  I  have  told  you  thia 
touching  tale  in  order  that  you  may  be  reminded  of  Jesus  who  laid  down  His  life 
for  you  and  me.  Does  not  your  heart  bow  in  tenderness  at  the  sound  of  His  name? 
Then  consecrate  your  life  in  return  for  that  wondrous  love  which  bled  and  died, 
to  save  a  wretch  like  you.  Oh,  that  you  would  believe  that  Jesus  died  for  you  1 
See,  here  is  a  boy  who  in  the  darkness  of  night  is  playing  by  swinging  on  the  teagle 
chain  of  a  lofty  warehouse.  He  is  swinging  in  and  out  of  the  top  room,  whea 
suddenly  the  break  gives  way,  and  the  chain  rattles  over  the  wheel  carrying  the 
boy  quickly  down.  It  is  quite  dark,  and  the  poor  boy  hangs  there  holding  on 
■with  both  hands  ;  but  he  is  getting  tired,  and  he  fears  he  will  be  dashed  to  pieces 
in  the  yard  below.  Now  one  arm  drops  helpless,  and  finding  his  strength  giving 
way,  he  shrieks  in  terror,  and  falls ;  but  instead  of  being  dashed  to  pieces,  he  finds 
thai  he  has  dropped  only  two  or  three  inches  from  the  ground  1  In  his  fright  in 
the  darkness,  he  feared  he  might  fall  a  hundred  feet,  when  he  was  really  close  to 
the  ground.     Likewise,  some  of  you  are  in  dreadful  misery  on  account  of  your 


CHAP,  viii.]  THE  ACTS.  679 

Bins;  but  if  you  would  trust  Jesus,  you  would  find  yourself  at  liberty.  Drop  into 
His  arms  1  He  is  so  near  1  Believe  that  He  died  instead  of  you.  Venture  to 
think  that  He  really  loves  you.  The  proverb  is  applicable  in  great  things  as  well 
as  small.  "Nothing  venture,  nothing  have."  (IV.  Birch.)  Repent  therefore  of 
this  thy  wickedness,  and  pray  God,  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  thine  heart  be 
forgiven  thee. — Peter's  admonition  to  Simon  the  sorcerer  : — I.  The  wicked  inten- 
tions OF  MEN  REQUIRE  PARDON.  "  The  thought  of  thine  heart."  Simon  did  not 
obtain  his  wish ;  but  it  was  in  his  heart.  The  essence  of  the  sin  was  there.  He 
laid  the  plan,  and  began  its  execution,  but  was  foiled.  Hence  Peter  lays  stress 
upon  what  was  in  the  man's  heart.  He  had  been  received  into  the  fellowship  of 
the  saints  ;  but  this  availed  nothiag  so  long  as  he  was  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and 
in  the  bond  of  iniquity.  Something  was  out  of  order  in  the  man,  and  that  the 
main  thing :  "  Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter ;  for,"  &c.  The 
apostle  would  not  allow  him  to  console  his  conscience  with  the  mere  circumstance 
that  he  had  failed  in  Lis  atteaipt.  In  the  new  creation  the  Holy  Ghost,  therefore, 
makes  the  heart  His  first  cai'e.  This  is  the  citadel,  which  having  been  captured 
by  grace,  the  whole  man  is  gained  for  Christ.  To  be  clean,  we  must  be  cleansed 
from  secret  faults  ;  and  not  until  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts  are  forgiven  shall  we 
stand  justified  before  the  Lord.  H.  The  means  by  which  the  wicked  are  to 
SEEK  PEACE  WITH  GoD.  "  Ecpeut  .  .  .  and  pray."  The  foundation  of  duty  and 
privilege  in  the  spiritual  kingdom  is  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  but  there  is  another 
vital  fact  involved  in  our  rescue  from  sin.  It  is  a  moral  being  who  has  sinneil,' 
and  who  requires  the  sovereign  remedy  of  grace.  The  activity  of  his  moral  nature 
must  assert  itself.  Though  only  willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power,  he  must  not 
expect  to  be  dragged  like  a  stone  to  the  fountain  of  cleansing,  or  like  a  brute  to 
the  altar  of  mercy.  God's  Spirit  meets  him  in  the  path  of  sin,  and  this  is  His 
charge:  "  Eepent  therefore  of  this  thy  wickedness."  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  has 
made  an  open  door  for  penitence.  "  Him  hath  God  exalted,"  &c.  If  the  sinner 
repents  in  an  evangelical  manner,   he  will  be  found  in  Christ.     III.  The  bare 

POSSIBILITY  OF  SUCCESS  SHOULD  ENCOURAGE  THE  SINNER   TO  USE    THIS    MEANS    OF  GRACE. 

"  Pray  God  if  perhaps,"  &c.  In  what  are  called  worldly  adventures,  men  are  not 
only  willing,  but  eager,  to  take  their  chances,  and  though  a  thousand  chances  are 
against  it,  they  bend  every  energy  toward  its  attainment.  Can  it  be  that  the  soul 
is  not  worth  a  venture?  "What  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul?" 
Peter  did  not  intend  to  deny  the  validity  of  the  promises,  or  to  cast  doubt  over 
the  effectiveness  of  repentance  or  prayer.  His  misgiving  arose  from  Simon's  own 
state.  He  may  have  thought  it  highly  improbable  that  Simon  would  ever  become 
at  heart  a  better  man.  In  accordance  with  the  text  we  sing,  "  Venture  on  Him  " ; 
but  we  imply  no  venture  of  risk,  but  one  of  courage.  The  uncertainty  of  your 
salvation  is,  indeed,  alarming,  but  it  lies  in  your  neglect  of  the  means  of  {^race.  If 
there  were  but  the  slightest  possibility  of  Christ's  being  able  to  save  you,  it  would  ■ 
be  amazing  stupidity  in  you  to  slight  Him.  It  is  not  a  possibility,  but  a  certainty. 
"  He  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost,"  &c.  (H.  R.  Raymond,  D.D.) 
For  I  perceive  that  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  toond  of  iniquity. — 
The  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bond  of  iniquity  : — I.  This  man's  state.  In  a  state 
of  nature  as  evidenced  by  his  covetousnes«,  ambition,  and  hypocrisy.  This  state 
is  called — 1.  The  gall  of  bitterness  because  it  is  bitter  (1)  To  God  ;  which  appears 
by  tbe  bitter  sufferings  of  Christ  (Isa.  liii.  6  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  38).  (2)  To  every  good 
man  as  felt  in  their  first  awakenings,  bitter  remorse  (Matt.  xxvi.  75),  bitter  reflec- 
tions. (2)  To  the  impenitently  wicked  (Mark  ix.  44).  2.  The  bond  of  iniquity 
(Prov.  V.  22).  This  bond  is— (1)  Strong.  (2)  Eeproachful  (Prov.  xiv.  34).  (3)  Un- 
profitable. II.  How  IT  WAS  perceived.  By  its  fruit  (Matt.  xii.  33,  35).  A  man's 
state  may  be  discerned  —1.  By  his  ignorance  of  Divine  things.  2.  By  the  company 
he  keeps.  3.  By  the  books  he  reads.  4.  By  his  places  of  resort.  (S.  Barnard.) 
Sin  and  salvation  : — How  true  and  comprehensive  this  description  of  the  sinner's 
state  1  Our  first  parents  thought  the  forbidden  fruit  of  the  sweetest,  they  found 
it  of  the  bitterest,  and  this  transgression  involved  in  their  miserable  gratification 
involved  bondage  to  evil.  True  parable  and  prophecy  of  the  history  of  their  sinful 
diseendants.  How  sweet  the  intoxicating  draught  to  the  drunkard,  but  how  bitter 
the  consequences,  especially  the  enslaved  habit.  So  with  all  evil.  Note  here  that — 
I.  Sin  is — 1.  The  gall  of  bitterness.  The  term  bitter  is  applied  by  us  to — (1)  Dis- 
appointment. When  a  man  makes  a  speculation  which  turns  out  badly,  or  transacts 
business  that  does  not  j>ay,  centres  his  hopes  on  objects  which  elude  him,  he 
Buffers  a  "  bitter  disapiJointment."    Does  sin  turn  out  well?    Does  it  pay?    Has 


6S0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  via. 

it  evfr  fulfilled  man's  aspiration  ?  (2)  Hard  circumstances.  When  a  man  ia 
deplorably  poor,  or  overtaxed,  or  afflicted,  we  say  what  a  "  bitter  lot."  He  then 
surely  must  suffer  the  quintessence  of  bitterness  who  is  destitute  of  God's  riches, 
who  groans  under  the  devil's  burdens,  and  who  suffers  from  the  mortal  malady  of 
sin.  "  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard."  (3)  Euin.  When  a  man  has  made 
his  last  throw  and  lost,  when  he  is  hopelessly  bankrupt,  or  when  he  suffers  the 
fate  of  a  felon,  we  exclaim,  "  How  bitter  !  "  What,  then,  must  be  the  feelicgs  of  a 
man  who  has  gambled  away  his  life,  who  has  become  bankrupt  in  morals,  who 
has  soon  to  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  2.  The  bond  of  iniquitj'. 
Sin  is  the  servitude  of — (1)  The  mind  which  it  imprisons  in  the  sphere  of 
matter.  (2)  The  affections  which  it  sets  upon  earthly  things.  (3)  The  will 
which  it  paralyses  for  good.  H.  Salvation.  1.  Sweetens  every  bitter  lot.  It 
brings — (1)  Pardon  to  the  sinful.  (2)  Comfort  to  the  wretohed.  (3)  Eest  to  the 
burdened.  (4)  Heaven.  2.  Liberates  the  most  enslaved.  It  gives  freedom  of 
thought,  heart,  and  will.     {J.  W.  Burn.) 

Vers.  26-39.  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  unto  Philip,  saying,  Arise,  and  go. 

— Man  versus  angel : — Why  didu't  the  angel  go  himself  ?  Because  tuis  was  a  mission 
where  a  man  was  worth  more  than  an  angel.  In  the  Lord's  plan  of  salvation  there 
is  a  place  for  redeemed  sinners  as  witnesses  for  Christ,  to  do  a  work  that  no  angel 
could  accomplish.  It  is  not  for  us  to  say  that  God  could  have  had  any  better  plan 
than  this.  As  the  plan  stands,  the  man  is  needed  for  its  prosecution.  The  best 
that  an  angel  can  do  is  to  come  as  a  messenger  from  God,  and  tell  the  man  to  arise 
and  go.  (H.  G.  Trimibull,  D.D.)  Toward  the  south  .  .  ,  unto  Gaza,  which  is 
desert. — Gaza: — The  history  of  the  city  so  named  (appearing  at  times  in  the 
English  verson — Lent.  ii.  23;  1  Kings  iv.  24;  Jer.  xxv.  20 — as  Azzah)  goes  even  as 
far  back  as  that  of  Damascus,  in  the  early  records  of  Israel.  It  was  the  southern- 
most or  border-city  of  the  early  Cananites  (Gen.  x.  19),  and  was  occupied  first  by  the 
Avim,  and  then  by  the  Caphtorim  (Dent.  ii.  23).  Joshua  was  unable  to  conquer  it 
(Josh.  X.  41,  xi.  22).  The  tribe  of  Judah  held  it  for  a  short  time  (Judg.  i.  18),  but 
it  soon  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines  (Judg.  iii.  3,  xiii.  1),  and  though 
attacked  by  Samson,  was  held  by  them  during  the  times  of  Samuel,  Saul,  and 
David  (1  Sam.  vi.  17,  xiv.  .52;  2  Sam.  xxi.  15).  Solomon  (1  Kings  iv.  24),  and  later 
on  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xviii.  8)  attacked  it.  It  resisted  Alexander  the  Great  during 
a  siege  of  five  months,  and  was  an  important  military  position,  the  very  key  of  the 
country,  during  the  struggles  between  the  Ptolemies  and  the  Seleucidae,  and  in  the 
wars  of  the  Maccabees  (1  Mace.  xi.  61).  Its  name,  it  may  be  noted,  meant  the 
"strong."  (Dean  Pluniptre.)  Unto  Gaza,  which  is  desert: — 1.  When  Philip  is 
introduced  to  us,  we  find  him  engaged  in  promising  work,  and  there  was  much  still 
to  do.  Philip  might  justly  have  supposed  that  he  would  be  alloweil  to  remain  in 
such  a  rich  and  suitable  field  until  he  had  exhausted  all  its  possibilities.  And  yei 
he  was  Divinely  summoned  to  abandon  it  and  go  away  to  the  desert.  This  place 
was  at  the  extreme  south,  farthest  removed  from  all  the  scenes  and  associations  of 
Philip's  life,  and  if  he  had  reasoned  he  would  naturally  have  wondered  much  why 
he  should  be  sent  to  such  an  out-of-the-way  pla^e.  What  good  could  he  do  there ? 
And  yet  he  immediately  obeyed  the  Divine  command.  And  as  he  did  so  the  will  of 
God  was  made  known  to  him.  He  found  there  a  more  fruitful  field  of  usefulness 
than  even  Samaria.  Scientific  men  have  sbown  us  the  wonderful  arrangements  by 
which  insects  and  flowers  are  brought  together  in  order  to  carry  out  the  ends  of  the 
vegetable  world.  The  blossom  is  furnished  with  a  honey-cell,  is  painted  with 
brilliant  hues,  enriched  with  fragrance,  and  shaped  in  a  pai'ticular  way,  in  order  to 
attract  and  guide  insects,  by  whose  agency  the  plant  may  be  fertilised  and  enabled 
to  produce  seed.  More  wonderful  still  are  the  providential  arrangements  by  which 
God  brings  together  the  soul  and  the  Saviour.  2.  Some  may  say  that  it  was  not 
worth  while  to  take  Philip  away  from  the  great  task  of  converting  multitudes  for 
the  purpose  of  saving  a  single  stranger.  But  such  persona  have  not  so  learned  of 
Christ,  who  said,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose 
his  own  soul  ?  "  and  who  told  the  parable  of  the  lost  sheep.  But  it  was  not  the 
salvation  of  a  single  soul  only  that  was  involved.  The  Ethiopian  eunuch  was  a 
great  dignitary,  next  in  rank  to  the  Queen  of  Ethiopia;  and  the  influence  which 
the  conversion  of  such  a  man  might  be  expected  to  exercise  would,  in  the  nature  of 
things,  be  immense  and  far-reaching,  and  tra  iition  ascribes  to  him  the  con- 
version to  his  new  faith  of  Candace  and  of  many  of  her  subjects,  and  he  may  have 
prepared  the  way  for  the  wonderful  work  which  took  place  among  the  Ethiopians  all 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  681 

a  later  period,  when  the  whole  nation  became  Christian,  and  the  ancient  prophecies 
of  Scripture,  that  Ethiopia  would  yet  lift  her  hands  to  God,  were  fulfilled.  The 
superiority  in  religious  faith  and  in  all  the  arts  of  life  which  the  Abyssinians  enjoy 
over  all  the  benighted  children  of  the  sun  may  be  attributed  in  the  first  instance 
to  the  work  of  the  Ethiopian  eunuch.  We  have  a  similar  instance  of  the  wise 
methods  of  Providence  in  Paul  being  obliged  to  abandon  his  large  and  iuiportaut 
field  of  labour  in  Asia,  and  to  go  over  into  Europe,  which  seemed  to  him,  in  com- 
parison, a  desert  place.  3.  The  scene  of  the  eunuch's  conversion  was  admirably 
adapted  for  the  purpose.  When  Jesus  was  about  to  cure  the  deaf  and  dumb  man, 
He  took  him  aside  from  the  multitude ;  and  when  He  was  about  to  ojien  the  eyes 
of  the  man  born  blind.  He  took  him  by  the  hand  and  led  him  out  of  the  town. 
Jesus  isolated  the  men  that,  apart  from  the  interruptions  of  the  crowd,  they  might 
be  made  more  receptive  of  deep  and  lasting  impressions.  And  so  was  it  with  the 
Ethiopian  eunuch.  He  had  taken  part  in  all  the  solemn  services  of  the  grandest 
of  Jewish  festivals.  A  proselyte  of  rank  and  influence  hke  him,  moreover,  would 
receive  much  attention.  But  the  atmosphere  of  the  Holy  City  was  unfavourable  to 
the  quiet  meditation  which  clears  the  inner  eye,  develops  the  spiritual  life,  and  opens 
the  heart  to  receive  the  truth  of  God.  And  so  what  he  could  not  obtain  in  the 
crowded  city  he  found  in  the  lonely  desert.  A  spirit  of  inquiry  had  been  stirred  up 
within  him  ;  and  here  nothing  would  distract  his  thoughts.  When  Philip  joined 
himself  to  him  bis  mind  was  made  plastic  and  his  heart  sensitive  to  spiritual  im- 
pressions. Shut  out  from  the  world,  alone  with  God  and  the  works  of  His  hands, 
reduced  to  their  primitive  simplicity,  both  the  eunuch  and  the  evangelist  felt  how 
dreadful  was  this  desert-place.  It  was  none  other  than  the  house  of  God  and  the 
gate  of  heaven.  There  the  ladder  was  set  up  by  which  the  benighted  African 
climbed  to  the  light  and  the  joy  of  heaven.  He  found  there  not  only  water  by  which 
he  was  baptized  as  a  Christian,  but  in  his  own  soul  a  well  of  water  springing  up  i 
into  everlasting  life.  4.  This  incident  is  a  type  of  what  often  happens  in  the  ex- 
perience of  God's  people.  Our  Lord  Himself  on  one  occasion  left  the  busy,  crowded 
cities  where  He  was  carrying  on  a  most  beneficent  ministry,  for  the  lonely  desert,  in 
order  that  there  He  might  cure  the  solitary  demoniac,  who,  in  his  turn,  was  the 
means  of  a  wonderful  spiritual  awakening  among  the  people  of  Decapolis.  Peter 
was  sent  from  the  large  maritime  city  of  Joppa,  where  he  could  preach  to  persons 
from  all  parts  of  the  world,  in  order  to  instruct  a  single  Gentile  family  in  the  small 
town  of  Cipsarea.  And  so  God  bids  His  servants  still  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  and 
go  after  the  one  lost  sheep.  We  fancy  that  we  need  to  get  together  large  meetings 
in  order  to  produce  a  deep  and  widespread  impression.  But  crowds  have  not  always 
been  helpful  in  the  matter  of  progress.  Not  unfrequently,  by  their  distractions, 
they  have  placed  hindrances  in  the  way.  A  man  has  in  a  crowd  no  calmness  of 
mind  to  think,  but  is  swayed  exclusively  by  the  feelings  of  the  moment.  Our  Lord's 
own  best  work,  so  to  speak,  was  not  done  in  crowds  ;  and  the  sayings  of  His  that  sink 
deepest  into  our  hearts  were  uttered  when  conversing  with  a  solitary  woman  beside  a 
•well  or  near  a  tomb.  The  fickle  crowds  fell  away  from  Him  in  His  hour  of  need  ;  but 
the  solitary  souls  whom  He  called  to  Him  one  by  one  from  the  sea-shore  and  the 
receipt  of  custom,  and  the  desolated  home,  clung  faithfully  to  Him  to  the  last.  5. 
But  we  may  give  a  wider  application  to  the  lesson.  Whatever  outward  circumstance 
or  inward  motive  induces  us  to  leave  the  crowd  and  go  down  unto  "  Gaza,  which  is 
desert,"  for  rest  and  meditation,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  is  the  prompting  of  the 
angel  of  the  Lord,  We  need  to  obey  the  Divine  injunction  more  frequently,  for 
our  religious  life  is  too  social;  it  depends  too  much  upon  the  excitement  of  meet- 
ings and  associations,  and  is  too  often  incapable  of  standing  alone.  It  is  urgently 
required,  therefore,  that  not  only  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  means  of  grace,  but  much 
more  in  their  absence,  we  should  work  out  our  own  salvation.  We  need  more  of  the 
blessed  solitude  of  prayer.  It  was  at  the  back  side  of  the  mountain  on  which  he 
fed  his  flock  that  the  vision  of  the  burning  bush  appeared  to  Moses.  In  the  front 
he  saw  no  door  opened  in  Leaven.  And  so,  too,  if  we  are  to  behold  something  of 
the  sight  which  Moses  beheld,  and  to  be  changed  in  some  measure  as  he  was 
changed,  we  must  often  retire  to  the  background  of  the  mountain  on  which  we  live 
and  labour.  If  we  refuse  to  go  voluntarily  unto  "  Gaza,  which  is  desert,"  God  will 
providentially  compel  us.  He  will  make  a  desert  around  us,  so  that  under  its 
bitter  juniper-tree  we  may  learn  the  true  lessons  of  life.  The  gain  to  individuals 
themselves  and  to  society  by  the  training  of  enforced  loneliness  cannot  be  over- 
estimated ;  and  wanting  in  the  best  and  highest  qualities  is  that  man  or  woman  to 
whom  Christ  does  not  say,  at  one  period  or  other  of  life,  "  Come  ye  yourselves  apart 


682  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

into  a  desert-place  and  rest  awhile."  {H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.)  Philip  on  his  way 
to  Gaza,  a  type  of  a  true  711  blister : — 1.  The  pious  obedience  with  which  he 
follows  the  impulse  of  the  Spirit.  2.  The  apostolic  courage  with  which  he  lays 
hold  of  a  soul  strange  to  him.  3.  The  evangelical  wisdom  with  whicli  he  fans 
the  spark  into  a  flame.  4.  The  priestly  unction  with  which  he  seals,  at  the  proper 
moment,  the  saved  soul  to  the  Lord.  5.  The  Christian  humility  with  which,  after 
the  work  of  salvation  is  completed,  he  steps  behind  the  Lord.  {K.  Gerok.) 
Philip  and  the  Ethiopian: — I.  God's  providential  direction  in  iNDivionAii 
LIFE.  "  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  unto  Philip."  This  meeting  of  Philip 
and  the  Ethiopian  was  not  the  result  of  mere  accident  or  chance.  A  species  of 
pre-established  harmony  existed  between  these  two  souls  before  they  were  conscious 
of  each  other's  existence  in  this  world.  An  angel  messenger  gives  the  directions 
by  which  they  were  to  be  brought  together.  Frequently  we  speak  of  accidents 
determining  a  man's  destiny,  forgetting  that  in  the  vocabulary  of  God  there  is  no 
such  word  as  chance.  It  seemed  a  mere  chance  that  Moses  was  di^covered  by 
Pharaoh's  daughter.  "  But  Eternal  choice  that  chance  did  guide."  A  dusty  pil- 
grim overtaken  on  the  desert  road  by  the  chamberlain  of  a  Pagan  queen,  that  is  all 
the  world's  wise  ones  see  in  this  incident  of  our  lesson  ;  but  in  this  ch-ince  meeting 
there  is  the  hidden  fire  of  a  Divine  pui-pose.  Behind  all  life^varying  scenes — its 
joys,  its  sorrows,  its  social  positions  and  its  political  ambitions,  its  individual  cares, 
its  national  crises — there  is  the  guiding  hand_afJGrod.  What  comfort  to  short- 
sighted, burden-bearing  pilgrims,  to  think  thatGod's  angels  are  ministering  spirits 
marshalled  under  King  Jesus  to  guard  and  defend  us  against  the  assaults  of  our 
great  adversary,  the  devil,  who  is  continually  striving  for  our  destruction.  II.  The 
WILLING  AND  OBEDIENT  SERVANT.  Notice  the  nature  of  the  directions  given  by  the 
angel,  and  what  was  involved  in  obedience  thereto.  Verse  26  gives  us  the  text  of 
the  angel's  commission  to  Philip.  In  a  sense  Philip  is  to  proceed  under  sealed 
orders.  The  directions  are  simple  in  terms  as  far  as  they  go.  Go  to  a  certain 
road.  Yet  in  a  sense  they  are  vague  and  indefinite.  Sixty  luiles  of  desert  high- 
way, with  the  haughty,  wicked  city  of  Gaza  at  the  southern  terminus,  was  a  com- 
mand seriously  requiring  some  more  definite  statements  as  to  what  duty  was  to  be 
met,  and  where  the  field  of  future  work  was  to  be  found.  The  angel  had  revealed 
to  Philip  just  enough  to  indicate  some  of  the  difficulties  in  the  way.  To  ordinary 
human  nature  such  directions  would  make  room  for  two  or  three  questions  of  a  very 
practical  character  just  here.  Natural,  indeed,  would  have  been  the  questions, 
Why  limit  the  sphere  of  my  ministry  by  takmg  this  unfrequented  way  ?  Here  I  am 
in  the  populous  city,  multitudes  are  being  stirred  with  the  gospel  message,  converts 
coming  every  day.  Because  of  this  there  is  great  joy  in  the  city.  Why,  then, 
must  I  be  side-tracked  ?  why  leave  the  city  appointment  to  take  the  country  charge? 
That  was  the  voice  of  expediency,  and  we  will  always  find  crouching  somewhere  in 
the  near  neighbourhood  of  that  voice  the  cowardly  tempter.  And  thus  the  tempter 
speaks:  A  long  desert  journey  on  foot,  a  lone  pilgrim,  prowling  wild  beasts,  ni^^ht 
coming  on,  and  no  shelter !  Philip,  there  is  danger  ahead,  "lions  are  in  the  way." 
Besides,  if  vou  reach  Gaza,  and  it  is  revealed  to  you  that  there  is  your  new  field  of 
work,  consider  what  difficulties  and  dangers  await  you.  Gaza  is  hardened  in 
crime,  bitter  in  its  rebellion  against  God.  It  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  cities  of 
the  world.  Joshua  could  not  subdue  it.  It  was  assigned  to  Judah,  but  even  that 
warlike  tribe  could  not  retain  its  possession,  let  to  have  yielded  to  his  fears,  to 
have  doubted  the  Divine  wisdom,  would  have  been  to  have  lost  tlie  opportunity  of 
meeting  the  man  for  whose  conversion  Philip  was  the  Divinely  appointed  instru- 
ment :  "  Only  the  willing  and  obedient  shall  eat  of  the  good  of  the  land."  We 
have  heard  inspiring  sermons  on  that  word  "  Gome  "  of  the  gospel,  and  truly  it  is 
a  blessed  word,  in  viting  weary  hearts  to  the  sweet  asylum  of  rest  found  in  Jesus  Christ. 
But,  as  believers  in  the  Cross  of  Christ,  have  we  realised  the  bies-^ed  privili'ge  of 
that  other  great  word  of  the  gospel,  that  small  yet  mighty  word  "  Go  "  ?  •'  Go  out 
into  the  highways  and  hedges,  aud  compel  them  to  come  in."  "  Go,  work  today 
in  My  vineyard."  It  was  the  inspiration  of  that  great  word  that  moved  t-hilip  to 
obedience.  We  dare  not  leave  this  thought  of  loving  obedience  to  the  commaniis  of 
God  without  emphasising  another  fact  in  this  connection,  namely,  that  in  propor- 
tion as  we  obey  present  revelations  of  God's  will,  future  and  f idler  revelations  ^vill 
appear.  Philip  had  plainly  revealed  to  him  the  dir-  ction  he  was  to  take,  "  Arise, 
and  go  toward  the  south,  unto  the  way  that  ...  is  desert."  This  command  was 
sufficient  for  prompt  action  at  that  hour.  Philip  had  capital  enough  at  that 
moment  to  go  right  to  work  for  God  in  the  new  field.     When  the  hour  of  oppor- 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  683 

tunity  came  for  other  work  than  walking  a  desert  highway,  verse  29  informs  us 
that  another  revelation  was  given.  Phihp  is  on  the  journey,  he  is  overtaken  by  the 
chariot  of  tbe  Etliiopian  ;  "  Then  the  Spirit  said  unto  Philip,  Go  near,  and  join 
tliyself  to  this  chariot."  This  higher  revektion  was  given  to  Philip  through 
obedience  to  the  former  revelation.  God  always  furnishes  revelations  of  duty  in 
instalments  according  to  the  necessities  of  the  hour  and  the  measure  of  our  faith. 
The  way  at  first  may  seem  dark.  The  commands  of  God  may  seem  foolish  to  the 
demands  of  expeiiiency.  Human  reason  may  stagger  and  fall  and  refuse  to  go 
farther.  But  to  the  eye  of  faith  the  "  inventory  of  the  universe  is  in  heaven."  He 
will  reveal  place  and  method  when  the  hour  of  oppo' tunity  strikes.  III.  A  Bible- 
KifADiNG  TEAVELLEB.  How  Seldom  do  wc  See  the  Word  of  God  in  the  hands  of 
travellers  to-day  !  If  you  want  to  be  conspicuous  and  regarded  as  a  little  "  cranky," 
take  your  Bible  and  read  it  on  the  railroad  train.  This  Bible-reading  traveller 
offered  Philip  a  better  chance  to  preach  the  gospel  to  him  than  the  average  hearer 
furnishes  the  preachers  of  to-day.  He  was  prepared  for  the  message.  It  is  a  sig- 
nificant statement  in  the  lesson  that  Philip  "  opened  his  mouth,  and  began  at  the 
same  Scripture,  and  pi  cached  unto  him  Jesus."  The  eunuch  had  come  from  a 
period  of  profound  meditation  on  the  Word  of  God  to  hear  the  gospel  sermon. 
Many  times  have  we  heard  the  casual  remarks  dropped  from  the  lips  of  the  careless 
heaier  as  he  retired  from  church  :  "  The  preacher  did  not  strike  me  to-day."  "  He 
did  not  reach  mv  need."  "I  don't  think  he  prepared  that  sermon  with  his  usual 
care."  Dear  friend,  what  about  your  preparation  as  a  hearer  by  an  hour's  thought 
on  the  Word  of  God,  or  a  few  moments'  earnest  meditation  on  the  interests  of  your 
soul  before  }0U  heard  that  sermon?  You  couiefrom  the  wild  clamour  of  the  Stock 
Exchange  ;  yoa  come  from  the  cankering  cares  of  the  business  week,  and  expect  the 
man  in  the  pulpit  to  banish  all  this  influence  in  the  short  hour  of  service,  and  feed 
you  wiih  the  "  bread  of  life,"  without  one  moment's  preparation  by  earnest  prayer 
or  devout  reading.  Again,  this  Bible-reading  traveller  had  some  difficulties  in  the 
way  of  his  receiving  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  He  had  his  doubts,  as  we  all  have. 
But  he  did  not  make  an  idol  of  his  doubts  and  set  it  up  as  an  object  of  worship. 
Almost  in  the  same  breath  whereby  the  Ethi"pian  expressed  his  doubt  he  uttered 
the  words  of  his  confession  of  faith,  "  I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ "  is  the  Son 
of  God,  and  that  moment  the  recording  angel  wrote  his  name  in  the  Book  of 
Life.  IV.  The  kejoicing  Christian.  Our  Bible  story  ends  well.  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  caught  away  Philip,  and  the  eunuch  went  on  his  way  rejoicing.  Pliilip  had 
been  the  instrument  of  c  inverting  the  eunuch  to  Christ,  not  to  the  preacher.  The 
soul  that  truly  finds  Christ  does  not  backslide  when  the  evangelist  goes  away,  or 
when  the  minister  changes  his  appointment.  He  is  in  possession  of  the  Divine 
Comforter  as  Companion.  The  man  has  entered  a  life  of  trust  whose  elements  are 
joy  and  peace  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  [E.  M.  Taylor.)  Worker  and  seeki-r : — I.  The 
EARNEST  wofiKEE.  1.  He  is  in  full  fellowship  with  the  Spirit,  quick  to  receive 
Diviue  influences,  and  living  in  the  atmosphere  of  Divine  companionship  (vers.  26- 
29).  2.  He  is  obedient  and  self-denving,  prompt  to  go  wherever  sent,  ready  to  ex- 
change a  large  field  for  a  small  one,  Samaria  for  the  desert  (vers.  26,  27).  3.  He  is 
aggressive,  eager  to  get  at  his  work,  running  to  meet  the  one  with  whom  he  is  to 
labour,  and  at  once  beginning  the  conversation  without  waiting  for  an  invitation 
(ver.  30).  4.  He  is  skilful.  He  speaks  kindly  and  cheerfully  to  the  Ethiopian. 
"  Philip's  only  recorded  words  contain  a  pleasantry  "  (ver.  30).  5.  He  is  scriptural, 
taking  the  Word  of  God  as  his  text,  and  showing  how  every  page  points  to  Christ 
(vers.  30-35).  6.  He  is  practical,  leading  to  peisonal  faith  in  Christ  ami  to  union 
with  the  Church  (vers.  35-37).  7.  He  is  broad  in  his  views,  recognising  the  privi- 
lege of  Gentile  as  well  as  Jew  to  be  saved  and  baptized  (vers.  37,  38).  II.  The 
SINCERE  SEEKER.  It  is  hard  to  say  whether  the  worker  or  the  seeker  in  this  lesson 
shines  in  the  brighter  light.  1.  He  is  a  noble  seeker,  a  man  of  high  rauk  and  many 
public  cares,  yet  a  humble  follower  of  God  (ver.  27).  Christian  politicians  are  not 
so  numerous  as  they  should  be  (ver.  27).  2.  He  is  a  diligent  seeker,  living  twelve 
hundred  miles  away,  yet  journeying  to  the  temple  and  reading  the  Scriptures  on 
the  road  (vers.  28,  29).  3.  He  is  a  teachable  seeker,  eager  to  learn  the  truth,  willing 
to  be  instructed  by  a  layman  far  below  him  in  social  position,  and  ready  to  embrace 
any  opportunity  to  learn  the  way  of  salvation  (vers.  30-34).  4.  He  is  a  believing 
seeker,  exerting  personal  faith  inChdst,  and  receiving  Him  as  his  Saviour  (ver,  37). 
5.  He  is  a  confessing  seeker,  not  ashamed  to  profess  Christ  in  the  presence  of  his 
company  (ver.  38).  6.  He  is  a  rejoicing  seeker,  going  on  his  way  happy  in  his  new 
experience.        A  upecial  mission  : — Note  here — I.  The  pe.\ctical  care  of  God  fob 


/ 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

THE  INDIVIDUAL  SOULS  OF  MFN.  1.  Tlie  object  of  all  this  whole  transaction  was  one 
single  conversion.  Not  only  will  God  have  all  men  to  be  saVed,  but  He  will  have 
each  man  separately  to  be  saved — showing  the  universality  and  the  minute- 
ness of  His  love  and  care.  2.  Through  such  single  agencies  God's  chief  and  most 
abiding  work  is  ever  wrought  in  our  world.  Each  soul  that  is  really  brought  thus 
to  God  becomes  in  its  turn  a  little  centre  of  light  and  life.  We  must  never  count 
any  time  wasted  that  is  spent  upon  one  human  being.  And  let  no  man  count  his  own 
soul's  culture  a  thing  of  trifling  moment.  He,  too,  may  be  the  evangelist,  if  ni>t  of 
a  nation,  yet  of  a  family  or  of  s  me  one  precious  soul.  II.  The  importance  of  being 
ALWAYS  READY  Fou  DUTY.  1.  Philip  had  to  take  a  long  journey  in  quest  of  one  con- 
vert, and  without  knowing  that  he  was  to  m^ke  one  convert.  Oh,  what  excuses 
should  we  have  made  !  How  should  we  have  urged  the  disproportion  between  the 
means  and  the  end;  the  distance,  the  difficulty,  the  improbability,  the  Wfiste  of 
strength  and  time  ;  till  we  should  have  persuaded  ourselves  that  we  never  were 
called  to  it.  2.  God  does  not  now  speak  to  us  by  an  ange),  yet  there  is  often  some- 
thing within  whi'h  says.  There  is  such  Qi_sttch  a  person  whom  yo_u_ijiight  benefit. 
And  these  inward  promptings  are  easily  resisted  ;  but  they  are  the  tests  of  our 
Christianity.  They  say  to  us,  Here  is  something  which  you  might  do  for  your 
Saviour,  Perhaps  it  may  fail ;  but  there  is  a  chance  also  of  its  succeeding.  If  you 
feel  your  debt  to  Him  as  you  ought  you  will  go  and  do  it.  If  a  man  always  find  an 
excuse  fur  putting  it  aside  and  is  glad  when  something  makes  it  impossible,  he  has 
upou  him  the  mark  of  the  unprofitable  servant,  who  was  satisfied  to  dig  in  the  earth 
and  hi'le  his  Lord's  money.  3.  On  the  other  hand,  how  frequently  is  an  eliort  of 
this  kind  consciously  rewarded !  You  have  roused  yourself  to  leave  your  warm 
fireside ;  you  have  walked  through  rain  or  snow  to  the  poor  man's  cottage,  and 
you  regarded  it  all  as  a  penance  ;  how  often  have  you  found  that  the  visit 
was  singularly  sea:  oaable ;  and  it  was  your  happiness  to  be  an  evident 
instrument  in  God's  hand  for  the  refreshment  or  restoration  of  a  sonl.  III. 
The  impoetance  of  being  always  in  pursuit  of  good.  1.  The  Ethiopian  was 
studying  God's  Word  :  eager  to  hail  a  new  teacher.  To  him  that  hath  shall 
be  given.  This  man  had  an  Old  Testament.  Many  of  us  would  have  said — 
for  we  say  it  now — I  can  make  nothing  of  it ;  it  on'y  puzzles  me  ;  but  the 
Ethiopian,  like  Simeon,  like  Nathanael,  like  older  saints  still,  desired  to  look  into 
the  mysteries  of  the  ancient  Scriptures.  And  therefore  they  saw  wliJtt  to  others 
was  mere  confusion.  There  is  a  growth  in  knowledge  proportionate  to  a  growth  in 
prace.  2.  Many  of  us  err  grievously  in  this  respect.  We  have  no  patience  in  the 
things  of  God.  We  take  it  for  granted  that  in  God's  truth  a  thing  must  either  be 
self-evident  or  unimportant.  In  this  one,  this  greatest  science  of  hU,  we  consider 
study  superfluous.  IV.  The  impobtance,  both  for  strength  and  for  comfobt,  op 
holding  a  simple  gospel.  Many  of  us  pass  through  life  without  one  single  ex- 
perience of  the  effect  of  the  gospel  upon  this  stranger.  We  are  so  mistaught,  or 
else  so  slow  to  learn  ;  we  a'C  so  afraid  of  presumption,  and  so  fond  of  aiding  some- 
thing to  the  woik  and  word  of  God,  that  we  never  reach  anything  that  can 
call  itself  the  glad  tidings  of  Jesus,  or  send  us  forth  on  our  way  rejoicing. 
What  Philip  preached,  what  the  Ethiopian  received,  was  something  which 
needed  but  one  conversation  for  its  statement,  and  but  one  hour  for  its 
reception.  Out  of  this  gospel  flows  all  peace  and  all  stiength.  (Dean  Vau<ihan.) 
Changing  spheres  :  a  icordfor  ivoikers  : — I.  Arise,  and  go  !  And  if  the  Church  at 
Samaria  was  as  unblieving  as  the  Churches  often  are  to-day,  they  said,  "  ^^Tiat  a 
mistake !  To  take  Philip  away  just  as  he  is  getting  to  know  us  so  well.  And 
to  Philip  it  must  have  seemed  harsh.  In  the  very  midst  of  his  successful  work, 
there  came  Peter  and  John  to  take  it  out  of  his  hands,  and  he  is  sent  away  to  the 
desert — above  all  places  !  And  so  many  towns  and  villages  were  pressing  him  to 
come  and  tell  them  of  Jesus.  Really,  it  seems  a  ^va§te  to  send  a  man  like  that  to 
such  a  place.  That  is  certainly  not  what  Philip  would  have  chosen.  So,  then, 
the  appointment  of  the  worker  needs  be  in  wiser  hands  than  his  own.  It  is  not 
what  the  Church  would  have  chosen  for  him.  So  the  worker  must  look  to  a  higher 
authority  than  the  Church.  No  ;  there  is  but  one  way  of  safety  for  us.  We  don't 
know  what  we  need  for  our  own  discipline  or  usefulness.  This  sphere  may  be 
attractive  ;  but  who  can  tell  what  condition  of  affairs  will  come  about  there  ?  what 
particular  gifts  will  be  needed?  what  temptation  the  worker  may  find  there  ?  The 
Lord  knows  it  all.  And  the  only  safety  is  to  let  Him  have  His  own  way  with  us. 
But  our  very  practical  age  smiles  at  this  religious  weakness.  "  That  sounds  all 
very  well,  my  dear  sir,  and  was,  no  doubt,  the  right  sort  of  thing  in  an  age  of 


CHAP.  VIII.]  IHE  ACTS,  685 

miracles.  But,  depend  upon  it,  nowadays — The  Lord  helps  those  that  help  them- 
selves." But  the  teaching  of  the  Book  of  God  is,  "  Trust  in  the  Lord  with  all  thine 
heart ;  and  lean  not  unto  thine  own  understanding."  II.  And  he  .irose  and  went. 
There  see  the  secret  of  the  man's  power.  There  are  no  "  huts,"  no  "  Nay,  Lord," 
no  loitering,  no  turning  aside,  like  Jonah.  God  would  not  have  used  him  in 
Samaria  if  there  had  not  been  this  putting  down  of  self  that  made  him  ready  at  a 
moment's  notice  to  be  off  to  the  desert.  I  watched  an  old  man  trout-tishing, 
pulling  them  out  one  after  another  briskly.  "  You  manage  it  cleverly,  old  friend," 
I  said.  "  I  have  passed  a  good  many  who  are  doing  nothing."  The  old  man  lifted 
himself  up,  and  stuck  his  rod  in  the  ground.  "  Well,  you  see,  sir,  there  be  three 
rules  for  ti  out-fishing  ;  and  'tis  no  good  trying  if  you  don't  mind  them.  The  first 
is.  Keep  yourself  out  of  sight.  And  the  second  is,  Keep  yourself  further  out  of 
sight.  And  the  third  is,  Keep  yourself  further  out  of  sight  still.  Then  you'U  do 
it."  "  Good  for  catching  men,  too,"  I  thought,  as  I  went  on  my  way.  There  was 
the  secret  of  Philip's  usefulness.  He  kept  himself  out  of  sight.  He  dared  not  go 
picking  and  choosing  for  himself.  The  Master  said,  "  Go  the  way  that  is  desert." 
That  settled  it.  To  Saul  there  comes  the  word  of  the  Lord,  Go,  smite  the 
Amalekites,  and  all  tiiat  is  theirs.  But  Saul  spared  of  the  best  to  sacrifice  unto 
the  Lord  their  God  in  Gilgal.  A  very  thoughtful  and  pious  arrangement,  surely. 
No.  Forth  came  Samuel  with  that  dreadful  inquiry  and  menace.  Obedience  is 
the  secret  of  service.  If  we  could  go  into  the  storehouse  of  our  great  Lord,  whence 
His  migl:ity  men  have  fetched  their  gifts,  what  should  we  choose  ?  Here  are 
splendid  gifts  of  intellect,  eloquence  with  which  to  thrill  men,  deep  knowleilge  of 
the  human  heart,  courage  that  will  not  give  in,  faith  that  never  wavers,  hope 
never  dimmed,  and  charity  carrying  her  kind  heart  in  every  look  and  tone  and 
manner.  No,  there  is  something  higher  and  better  than  aU  these.  "  I  am 
crucified  with  Christ."  III.  The  desert  becomes  a  fkditful  field.  Philip  sets 
out.  He  reaches  the  dreary  desert.  What  a  place  for  this  earnest  worker  1  It  is 
aU  right.  The  Lord  has  s^nt  him  here.  Now  afar  off  the  dust  rises,  and  a  prince 
comes  this  way  in  his  chariot.  And  here  are  some  things  which  we  shall  do  well 
to  imitate.  1.  Catching  sight  of  the  traveller,  Philip  did  not  rush  off  at  once  "  to 
talk  to  him  about  his  soul."  Not  they  that  be  zealous  merely  to  win  souls  shall 
shine  as  the  stars,  but  they  that  be  wise.  Philip  waits  for  orders ;  he  does  not  stir 
until  he  gets  them  :  "  Go  near,  and  join  thyself  to  this  chariot."  Of  course,  idle 
folks  will  use  this  doctrine  as  an  excuse.  But  never  mind  ;  they  would  do  nothing 
if  they  had  not  the  excuse,  so  there  is  nothing  lost.  The  Master  will  not  waste  His 
special  orders  upon  them  that  are  not  ready  to  obey.  Only  let  a  man  live  waiting 
for  thp  Lord's  word,  and  near  enough  to  hear  Him,  and  that  man  shall  not  lack  a 
plain  direction.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him."  Uzzah 
dies  because  unbidden  he  stretches  out  his  band  to  steady  the  ark  of  God.  How 
often  thoughtless  hands  are  reached  out  in  the  service  of  the  Church,  meaning  well 
but  really  harmful,  because  not  bidden  of  the  Lord.  2.  When  the  Lord  bids  him 
go,  he  does  not  hang  back  because  it  is  a  rich  man  in  a  cariiage.  He  had  been  a 
plain  man  working  amongst  simple  p  ople.  And  as  he  caught  sight  of  the 
trappings  of  this  Ethiopian  prince  he  mi^^ht  well  have  thought  twice  before  he 
moved  towards  him.  The  intelligent  foreigner  watching  our  ways  of  working 
might  come  to  the  conclusion  that  rich  people  have  no  souls  ;  or  else  that  they  are 
sure  of  getting  to  heaven.  Tracts,  City  missionaries,  out-door  services,  &c.,  are  all  for 
the  poor.  And  yet  the  rich  are  just  as  far  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  have 
more  difficulty  in  getting  there.  To  Philip  it  was  nothing  who  this  man  was,  or 
what;  the  Lord  had  sent  him  ;  that  was  enough.  3.  And  Philip  ran — the  arrow 
is  loosed  from  the  string.  And  well  he  might  run.  The  opportunity  would  soon 
be  lost.  The  chariot  was  speeding  on  its  way,  and  a  dignified  loiterer  would  have 
missed  it.  "  The  King's  business  requireth  haste."  And  that  the  King  has  sent 
him  is  enough;  he  need  not  wait  until  he  can  get  an  introduction,  or  is  fit  to  be 
presented.  So  the  simp'e  evangelist  bursts  upon  the  nobleman  and  asks,  "  Under- 
Btandest  thou  what  thou  readest  ?  "  It  was  all  right.  How  could  it  possibly  be 
-otherwise  ?  God  had  sent  him  ;  and  He  always  makes  things  fit  in  perfectly  when 
we  do  but  perfectly  obey.  IV.  When  God  sends  us  on  His  errands  He  makes 
a  way  for  us.  Philip  found  the  nobleman  in  the  middle  of  a  p-issage  that  gave 
the  opportunity  of  preaching  Jesus.  Perplexed  and  wondering,  he  was  at  the  very 
point  where  PhUip  could  step  in  to  help  him.  "And  he  desired  Philip  that  he 
would  come  up  and  sit  with  him."  Think,  if  we  had  been  sent  on  this  errand 
Low  we  should  have  come  along  nervous  and  afraid  as  to  what  our  reception 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tiii. 

would  be.  And  when  it  all  opened  up  so,  how  we  should  wonder  at  it !  Yet  is  it 
really  so  very  wonderful  that  our  great  Father,  who  sets  the  stars  their  courses, 
and  orders  the  coming  of  the  seasons,  should  be  able  to  time  our  affairs  so  as  to 
make  them  fit  ?  If  the  regulator  of  our  going  were  not  so  often  pointing  to  "  fast  " 
or  to  "  slow,"  instead  of  keeping  Goil's  time  exactly,  we  should  wonder  when  things 
fell  out  otherwise.  But  turn  aside  for  a  moment  to  see  a  sight  worth  looking  at. 
Philip  has  gone  into  the  lonely  desert  at  the  Lord's  bidding — and  he  finds  a 
"chariot"  to  ride  in,  and  a  prince,  "of  great  authority,"  for  his  travelling 
companion.  He  never  had  so  much  honour  paid  him  in  Jerusalem,  or  even  in 
Samaria.  And  is  it  not  always  so  ?  The  moment  we  set  foot  in  the  wilderness  we 
are  the  Lord's  guests,  and  He  ever  keeps  His  table  right  royally  furnished.  He 
has  brought  Israel  into  the  wilderness — but  it  was  a  blessed  change  1  No  more  the 
muddy  water  of  the  Nile,  but  the  sparkling  brook ;  no  more  the  rank  vegetables, 
but  manna,  fresh  every  morning.  Elijah  has  got  away  into  the  wilderness,  and 
the  ravens  brought  him  bread  and  flesh  morning  and  evening.  The  tliousands 
that  followed  Jesus  into  "  a  desert  place,  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled."  John  goes 
forth  to  the  desert  i-le  of  Patraos,  found  his  glorified  Master,  and  the  visions  of 
the  et  rnal  <  ity,  and  the  fulness  of  joy  at  the  Lord's  right  hand.  The  Master 
Himself  goes  into  the  wilderness,  but,  "  behold,  angels  came  and  ministered  unto 
Him."  It  is  true  still.  That  country  toward  the  south  hath  a  goodly  aspect — 
it  faceth  heavenward.  When  the  Lord  bids  us  go  the  way  to  Gaza,  it  is  no 
more  desert ;  it  is  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  As  they  rode  on  together,  Philip 
preached  Jesus  to  the  nobleman.  And  he  believed  and  was  baptized,  and  "  went 
on  his  way  rejoicing  " — went,  most  likely,  to  open  a  whole  country  to  Christianity. 
So  Philip  never  did  a  better  day's  work  than  when  he  went  forth  at  the  Lord's 
bidding  unto  the  way — which  is  desert.  {Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  Comparisons  and 
contrasts  : — The  conversion  of  the  eunuch  suggests  a  cumparison  of  his  case  with 
that  of  present-day  hearers  of  the  gospel.  I.  Compare  the  privileges  enjoyed. 
Wliat  had  he  ?  1.  The  Scriptures.  But  only  the  Old  Testament.  We  have  more, 
the  New  as  well  as  Old.  2.  He  had  a  preacher,  but,  so  far  as  we  know,  only 
one,  and  only  heard  one  sermon.  We  have  the  constant  ministration  of  the 
Word,  line  upon  line  and  precept  upon  precept.  3.  He  had  the  Holy  Spirit, 
awakening  and  influencing  his  mind  and  heart.  We  have  more,  for  He  has 
striven  often  in  our  hearts.  II.  Compare  the  kespovsibility  sustained.  Ours 
greater  by  ai  much  as  our  privileges  are  greater.  To  whom  much  is  given  of 
him  much  shall  be  required.  III.  Compake  conduct  which  resulted.  1.  He 
prized  and  read  his  Bible.  To-day  sadly  neglected,  even  by  those  who  profess 
to  value  it.  2.  He  was  posspsed  of  a  sincere  desire  to  know  the  way  of  life.  How 
few  to-day  seem  to  concern  tuemselves  about  the  great  question  of  salvation.  3. 
He  paid  earnest  attention  to  the  preacher's  words.  How  many  careless,  thought- 
less hearers  to-day,  all  eyes  and  ears  for  the  sights  and  sounds  of  earth,  but  blind 
and  deaf  to  all  that  pertains  to  heaven.  4.  He  applied  to  himself  the  truths  he 
heard.  Philip  "  preached  unto  him  Jesus."  Many  to-day  hear  for  other  people, 
or  hear  as  though  what  they  heard  in  no  wny  concerned  them.  Surely,  here  the 
contrast  is  in  favour  of  the  eunuch.  IV.  Compare  experience  which  resulted. 
He  went  on  his  way  rejoicing.  Have  we  found  any  joy  in  the  gospel  ?  Some 
have,  but  many  have  not.  Are  we  not  bound  to  confess  that  with  fewer  privileges 
his  conduct  is  such  as  to  put  to  shame  the  indifferent  and  unbelieving  hearers  of 
the  gospel  to-day  ?  {Honiilist.)  A  typical  evangelist:  A  striking  conversion: — 
The  first  Christixn  labourer  has  fHllen,  but  a  great  stride  is  now  to  be  taken. 
Stephen  is  dead,  but  Philip  tnkes  his  place.  That  js  the  military  rule.  There 
was  no  panic  or  running  away  in  cowardly  terror,  but  Philip,  the  next  man,  took 
up  the  vacant  place,  and  "  went  down  to  the  city  of  Samaria  and  proclaimed  unto 
them  the  Christ."  "  And  there  was  much  joy  in  that  city."  An  electric  shock 
went  through  it.  And  no  wonder,  for  multitudes  were  blessed  and  led  to  faith  in 
Christ.  Our  problem  of  to-day  is  the  city— the  city  crowd,  the  city  poor,  the  city 
criminals,  the  city  multituda  out  of  work — and  that  problem  is  to  be  solved  on  the 
lin«s  of  Phihp.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  are  content  with  nothing  less.  It  was- 
whiln  Philip  was  in  the  midst  of  this  great  enterprise — changing  the  very  fnce  of 
the  city,  pulling  down  the  strongholds  of  darkness — that  the  incident  occurred 
which  is  narrat'-d  in  this  paragraph,  I.  A  typical  evangeltt.  1.  Notice  that 
the  Lord  directs  His  servants  in  the  path  of  duty.  "  An  angel  of  the  Lord  spake 
unto  Philip."  But  why  an  angel?  Why  this  extraordinary  method  of  guidance 
in  this  particular  case?    Why  this  unusual  honour  placed  upon  Philip?      Dr. 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  687 

Goulburn  suggests  that  this  external  message  of  the  angel  directing  Philip  where 
to  go  was  here  voyichsafed  as  God's  answer  to  the  thoughts  and  doubts  which  were 
then  springing  up  in  His  servant's  mind.     For  though  Piiilip  was  doing  a  great 
work,  yet  he  had  received  an  unpleasant  check  which  must  have  caused  him  some 
annoyance.     Simon  Magus'  wicl-edness  had  come  to  light,  and  it  had  met  with  an 
apostle's  censure.     In  the  simplicity  of  his  heart  Philip  had  admitted  tliis  bad  man 
into  the  fold  of  Christ,  and  it  might  easily  have  occurred  to  him  that  he  ought  to 
be  more  cautious,  that  his  evangelistic  zeal  was  too  great.     Then,  had  he  been 
right  in  preaching  to  these  Samaritans  at  all,  and  admitting  to  baptism  a  race 
hitherto  held  accursed  ?     He  had  dared  to  brave  the  opinion  of  many  good  men, 
and  one  result  had  been  that  such  a  bad  character  as  Simon  Magus  had  crept  into 
the  Church.     The  Lord,  who  watches  over  His  people  and  sees  all  their  difficulties, 
comes  therefore  to  his  rescue,  and,  by  one  of  His  ministering  spirits,  conveys  a 
message  which  assures  His  fainting  servant  of  His  approval  and  of  His  guidance. 
"An   angel   spake."     How  often   this   is  so!     God's   servants   are  filled  with  a 
glorious  discouleut  with  the  rate  of  progress  they  are  making,  and  enter  upon  new 
and  bold  enterprises  for  Him  ;  they  try  expciments  in  His  service,  they  do  and 
dare  much,  and  for  a    time  perhaps  see  nothing  but  disaster  and   failure   and 
opposition  where  it  might  be  least  expected.     Then,  when  their  hearts  are  cast 
down  and  perplexed,  He  sends  His  angel  with  a  message  of  encouragement.     Was 
it  not  so  with  Elijah  ?     "  As  he  lay  and  slept  under  the  juniper  tree,  behold  an 
angel  touched  him."     "An  angel."     Was  there  a  visible  representation?      We 
cannot  tell.     The  text  gives  no  liinc  as  to  the  character  of  the  messenger.     Philip 
went  on  his  journey  under  Divine  direction — this  is  the  gre«t  thing  for  us  to 
remember — and  that  direction  is  within  our  reach  ;  though  the  form  may  vary  the 
fact  remains.     He  is  in  full  fellowship  with  the  Spirit,  quick  to  receive  heavenly 
influences,  and  living  in  the  atmosphere  of  Divine  companionship.     Such  a  man 
as  this  does  not  often  miss  his  way.     And  when  the  way  is  made  clear  he  proceeds 
with  great  confidence.     2.  Notice  His  prompt  obedience.     "  He  arose  and  went." 
"He  went,"  not  knowing  the  purpose  for  which  he  was  sent.     He  went  forth  with 
eealed  orders.     ''He  walked  by  faith,  not  bv  sight."     "  He  was  not  disobedient  to 
the   heavenly  vision."     Yet  what   a   work  he   was   doing  in  tliis  great  town  of 
Samaria  !     What  a  wide  door  for  usefulness  !     It  was  a  great  trial  to  his  faith.     It 
required  a  mighty  effort  of  will  to  fall  in  with  this  Divine  plan.     That  he  knew  it 
to  be  Divine  did  not  make  it  more  easy  to  flesh  and  blood.     Duty  is  Divine,  and 
we  all  know  it ;  but  kuowledge  of  its  Divineness  does  not  remove  our  difficulties  in 
the  performance  of  it.     Mrs.  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe  tells  us  that  the  first  and  last 
word  uttered  in  the  meeting-houses  where  she  worshipped  as  a  child  was  "  sub- 
mission."    And  in  this  department  of  our  Christian  lives,  Ihat  of  service,  this  is 
the  first  and  last  word.     Philip  had  learnt  that  all  true  spiritual  power  lies  in 
submiss    n 'o  the  Divine  will.     "  If  I  do  this,  what  will  So-and  so  say  ?    And  shall 
I  not  be    ut  Uig  myself  in  a  disagreeable  position  ?  "     When  God  meets  with  such 
an  one  wuu  just  says,  "  Lord,  just  glorify  Thyself  in  me,"  He  can  use  him,  and  • 
does  use  him.      3.    He  is  aggressive  and  eager  for  woik.      "Behold  a  man    of 
Etliiopia."      "And  Philip  rnii  to  him."     Ethiopia    was  an  influential  kingdom 
south  of  Egypt,  corresponding  to  what  we  know  as  Nubia  and  Abyssinia.     And 
this  traveller  was  making  his  way  home  after  worshipping  at  Jerusalem.     There 
were  two  great  roa  *s  opf-n  to  him  leading  to  Gaza,  and  he  had  chosen  the  desert 
one,  passing  through  distrii-ts  inhabited  then,  as  now,  by  only  wandering  Arabs. 
"  And  Pi  ilip  ran  thither  to  him."     There  is  no  waiting,  no  hesitation,  the  work  is 
there  and  it  must  be  done.     When  God  gives  us  a  call,  how  many  of  us  creep  and 
limp  instead  of  running  to  obey  it.     4.  Philip  falls  in  with  the  Divine  order  in  this 
respect,  that  much  of   our  work  lies  in  the  personal  dealing  with  individuals. 
"Behold,  a  man  of  Ethiopia."     In  our  aggressive  zeal  we  are  all  liable  to  overlook 
the  individual.     Hitherto  Philip's  labours  had  been  among  masS'  s  of  peopl*',  but 
now,  by  Divine  command,  h"  is  withdrawn  from  this  large  sphere  of  usefu  ness, 
and  sent  to  deal  with  a  f  n  le  man,  attended,  probably,  only  by  two  or  three  re- 
tainers.    It  hiis  been  oberved  that  this  is  the  first  instance  on  record  of  a  private 
ministra'im  of  the  gospel.     The  les-<on  is  to  be  continually  kept  in  mind.     Even 
the  aposlles,  who  had  a  commission  to  "go  and  leach  all  nations,"  and  in  virtue  of 
that  commission  might  have  challi  nged  the  whole  universe  of  immortal  souls  as 
their  audience,  did  not  think  themselves  exempt  from  the  labours  of  private  ad- 
ministration.    Are  we  not  all,  as  Christian  workers,  no  matter  what  position  wo 
take  in  the  campaign,  too  desirous  of  crowds  and  too  little  occupied  with  tue  units 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

of  which  they  are  composed  ?  Dr.  Stalker,  in  his  latest  work  to  preachers,  says  : 
"  Gentlemen,  I  believe  that  almost  any  preacher  on  reviewing  a  ministry  of  any 
considerable  duration  would  confess  that  his  great  mistake  had  been  the  neglect  of 
individuals.  If  I  may  be  permitted  a  personal  reference.  When  not  long  ago  I 
had  the  opportunity,  as  I  was  passing  from  one  charge  to  another,  of  reviewing  a 
ministry  of  twelve  years,  the  chief  impression  made  on  me,  as  I  looked  back,  was 
that  this  was  the  point  at  which  I  had  failed  ;  and  I  said  to  myself  that  henceforth 
I  would  write  "  Individuals "  on  my  heart  as  the  watchword  of  my  ministry." 
Philip  was  now  wisely  engaged  in  individual  work.  5.  Philip,  under  Divine 
direction,  went  outside  and  beyond  the  ordinary  methods.  "  And  the  Spirit  said, 
'Go  near  and  join  thyself  to  this  chariot.'"  "And  Philip  ran  to  him."  What 
spiritual  freedom  characterises  the  whole  incident — its  scene  not  the  temple,  not  a 
Christian  congregation,  but  the  wilderness ;  its  time  not  a  Sabbath  but  a  work- 
day, when  men  may  harness  horses  to  chariots  and  go  a  journey ;  the  minister 
not  an  apostle,  but  one  who  had  been  designated  to  a  more  or  less  secular  ministra- 
tion. 1  heard  a  preacher  say  the  other  day:  "We  shut  up  our  religion  in 
churches ;  we  limit  it  to  days  ;  we  restrict  it  to  services.  And  by  shutting  it  in, 
we  shut  it  out,  and  we  shut  others  out  too."  How  true  this  is  !  II.  A  steikinq 
CONVERSION.  Let  us  briefly  turn  our  attention  specially  to  the  Ethiopian  and  his 
striking  conversion.  1.  He  is  "  a  man  of  great  authority  "  seeking  after  truth. 
He  was  Chamberlain  of  the  Queen,  and  held  the  post  of  First  Lord  of  her 
Treasury.  The  Samaritans  among  whom  Philip  had  just  been  labouring,  and 
where  he  had  great  success,  were  a  simple  people,  and  the  converts,  as  far  as  we 
can  judge,  were  chiefly  of  the  lower  class,  not  persons  of  station  and  influence. 
But  here  is  a  man  seeking  light  of  large  wcMlth  and  high  position  and  of  some 
education— the  first  minister  at  a  Queen's  Court.  "How  hardly  shall  they  that 
have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  hardly  because  their  possession 
entices  the  heart  to  trust  in  them  for  a  contentment  and  a  satisfaction  which  they 
never  can  bestow.  But  the  man  before  us  is  also  a  courtier  and  a  politician.  To 
judge  from  what  we  often  hear  of  the  political  world,  we  might,  for  some  countries 
at  any  rate,  inveut  a  new  text,  "How  hardly  shall  they  that  are  politicians  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God."  2.  He  is  an  earnest  seeker  after  truth.  Philip 
"heard  him  reading."  He  was  reading  aloud  after  the  manner  of  Pastern 
nations.  It  is  more  easy  for  some  minds  to  learn  by  the  ear  than  by  the  eye. 
His  attention  may  have  been  called  to  this  portion  of  Holy  Scripture  during 
his  visit  to  the  temple,  or  he  may  have  met  the  apostles.  At  any  rate,  he  was 
making  a  diligent  use  of  the  means  of  grace.  He  used  the  light  he  had,  and 
eagerly  sought  for  more.  What  a  contrast  this  man  in  high  position  presents 
to  many  in  the  upper  ranks  of  society  of  to-day  !  "  Agnostics  "  many  label 
themselves,  and  when  they  have  spoken  this  word  they  appear  to  think  that 
they  have  done  everything  that  can  be  rightly  expected  of  a  human  being.  3. 
He  is  a  perplexed  seeker  after  the  truth.  "  Understandest  thou  .  .  .  ?  "  "  How 
can  I  except  some  man  should  guide  me?"  The  passage  in  Isaiah  was  a 
difficult  one,  as  taught  by  Jewish  instructors,  to  understand.  It  seemed  almost 
impossible  to  put  together  the  idea  of  Christ  as  a  sufferer,  as  despised  and 
slain,  and  the  promise  that  He  should  be  a  glorious  King,  triumphing  over  the 
world.  Only  the  facts  could  solve  the  problem.  I  would  say  to  you.  Do  not 
be  distressed  if  you  meet  with  obscurities  and  are  bewildered  by  religious 
mystery.  Again  and  again  every  thoughtful  man  meets  with  "  things  hard  to 
be  understood."  Difficulties  we  shall  always  have  which  our  finite  minds 
cannot  solve.  4.  He  is  a  teachable  seeker  of  the  truth.  "  And  he  besought 
Philip  to  come  up  and  sit  with  him."  He  made  no  idol  of  bis  perplexities. 
He  welcomed  help  directly  it  was  within  his  reach.  5.  The  truth  being  an- 
nounced to  him,  he  accepts  it,  confesses  it,  and  rejoices  over  it.  "  And  he 
baptized  him."  "He  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  (A.  Wood,  B.A.)  And, 
behold,  a  man  of  Ethiopia,  an  eunuch  of  great  authority,  under  Candace. — The 
Ethiojnan : — 1.  The  visit  of  the  eunuch  could  not  have  been  at  a  more  op- 
portune moment.  Jerusalem  was  still  thrilling  with  the  tremendous  sacrifice 
that  had  just  been  consummated.  During  his  stay  the  apostles  had  stirred  all 
Jerusalem  with  their  doctrine,  and  Stephen  had  died  for  the  faith.  Never  was 
a  soul  thirsting  for  peace  and  truth  so  near  to  their  source ;  and  yet  this 
Ethiopian  passes  whole  days  in  Jerusalem  witbout  hearing  the  name  of  Christ  I 
How  was  this  ?  Follow  his  steps  and  you  will  understand.  He  betook  himself  to 
the  temple,  for  he  came  to  worship,  and  of  course  met  there  priests  and  Pharisees, 


CHAP,  vm.]  THE  ACTS.  689 

■whose  most  strenuous  desire  was  to  conceal  Christ  and  to  silence  His  followers. 
Fools !     They  know  not  that  at  a  little  distance  are  assembled  in  an  upper  chamber 
some  of  those  despised  Galileans  who  hold  the  destinies  of  the  world  in  their 
hands,  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  law  and  the  prophets.     Poor  Ethiopian  !  why  do 
you  not  know  the  way  to  that  upper  chamber?     Blind  leaders  have  misled  him. 
One  would  say  he  is  the  plaything  of  an  inexplicable  fatality.     But  no  !     God  is 
watching  over  this  soul  that  seeks  Him.     2.  On  leaving  Jerusalem  he  takes  with 
him  the  Holy  Scriptures.     That  which  Pharisees  have  so  sedulously  hidden  from 
him,  Isaiah  will  set  before  him.     Fifteen  centuries  later,  a  German  monk  stirred, 
as  was  this  Ethiopian,  by  profound  aspirations,  after  having  vainly  sought  peace 
in  lacerations  and  penances,  went  to  another  holy  city  in  order  to  adore  the  God 
of  his  fathers.     Day  after  day  he  wandered   through  it,  halting  at  every  place  of 
pilgrimage,  meekly  believing  their  legends.     Kome  was  then  governed  by  Julius 
II.,  the  warrior  pontiff ;  it  was  at  the  time  when  Machiavelli  said  that  atheism 
went  on  increasing  in  measure  as  one  neared  Kome.      Everywhere  reigned   the 
scandalous  traffic  in  holy  things.     Luther  went  back  terrified.     '*  Rome,"  said  he, 
"  is  built  upon  a  hell."     What  was  it  which  saved  him?     The  Scriptures,  which 
he  found  again  in  his  monastery  at  Wittenberg.     And  so  it  has  been  with  many 
since.    3.  Queen  Candace's  steward  then  went  on  his  way  reading  the  Scriptures. 
He  read  without  understanding  them,  yet  he  persevered.     Where,  amongst  us,  are 
they  who  are  willing  to  study  the  Scriptures  in  the  spirit  of  this  heathen  ?     People 
often  say,  "  We  have  sought  truth,  have  read  our  gospel,  but  no  light  has  come  to 
us  ;  our  hearts  have  remained  cold."     True  !     Study  the  gospel  as  a  mere  critic, 
and  it  will  remain  an  object  of  study  to  you  and  nothing  more.     God  does  not 
reveal  Himself  to  mere  intellectual  inquirers  ;  those  whom  He  promises  to  satisfy 
are  they  who,  like  the  Ethiopian,  are  hungering  and  thirsting  for  righteousness 
and  truth.     4.  Philip  was  on  the  road  taken  by  the  stranger.     Here  we  have  one 
of  those  coincidences  called  fortuitous,  but  which,  from  our  text,  we  see  to  be  an 
intervention  of  God.     There  is  no  such  thing  as  chance.     5.  What  strikes  us  in 
the  first  words  of  the  Ethiopian  is  his  good  faith.     He  avows  his  ignorance.     Is  it 
such  a  difficult  thing  to  avow  ignorance?     One  would  hardly  think  it,  for  nothing 
is  more  common  than  to  hear,  "I  do  not  know,"  in  matters  of  religion.      But 
there  are  two  ways  of  saying  those  words.     In  the  mouth  of  many  they  mean, 
"  What  does  it  matter  to  me  ?     I  do  not  want  to  know. "     And  why  not  ?     Because, 
to  know  God  is  to  know  His  claims  upon  us.  "  To  know  ourselves — 0  my  brethren  ! 
who  does  not  shrink  from  this  painful  knowledge?     But  that  day  when,  anxious 
for  truth,  with  heart  dismayed  before  those  dark  mysteries  of  sorrow,  sin,  and 
death,  \ou  cry,  "  I  do  not  know,"  it  will  be  in  a  verj'  different  spirit;  those  words 
will  then  be  a  prayer  rising  up  to  God.     When  a  man,  animated  by  the  spirit  of 
humility,  says,  "  I  do  not  know,"  he  is  already  very  near  the  truth.     6.  A  singular 
abuse  has  been  made  of  the  next  words.     "  How  can  I  understand  except  some 
man  should  guide  me  ?  "     "  You  see,"  has  been  said,  "  it  is  evident  that  by  them- 
selves the  Scriptures  are  unintelligible.     It  is  therefore  necessary  that  an  authority- 
established  of  God  have  the  sole  mission  to  explain  them."     Let  us  examine  this;' 
without  doubt  the  Scriptures  contain  many  mysteries.     But  a  revelation  without 
mystery  were  unheard  of.     In  borrowing  the  language  of  men,  Divine  truth  cannot 
find  in  it  expressions  cnpable  of  presenting  it  with  sufficient  lucidity.     How  can 
beings  trammelled  by  time  and  space,  e.g.,  and  with  no  other  means  of  reasoning 
save  by  recourse  to  these  two  mediums — comprehend  a  Being  for  whom  time  and 
space  are  not  ?     But  without  taking  such  high  ground,  there  are  in  Scripture 
difficulties  of  date,    place,  origin,   grammar,    translation,   history,    and    science. 
Needless  to  say  that  here  piety  cannot    take  the  place  of   learning ;    and  that 
nothing  would  be  more  absurd  tnan  to  see  ignorance  usurping  doctoral  authority. 
This  reservation  made,  there  is,  however,  one  thing  which  has  ever  struck  men  of 
good  faith,  and  that  is  the  marvellous  lucidity  of  the  gosp^-l  upon  everything  that 
touches  essential  questions — those  of  grace,  pardon,  and  salvation.      I  take  it, 
therefore,  that  it  is  a  positive  act  of  treason  to  prohibit  the  free  circulation  of  the 
Bible  among  the  people,  under  pretext  of  its  obscurities  and  the  possible  errors 
that  may  ensue  from  wrong  interpretation.     Look  at  those  nations  which  have 
been  nourished  upon  the  generous  milk  of  Holy  Scripture.     Is  it  not  a  certain  fact 
that  they  are  the  only  ones  that  are  making  steady  progress  towards  light  and 
hberty?     This  said,  let  us  see  what  is  the  true  idea  contained  in  my  text.     "  How 
can  I  understand,"  cries  the  Ethiopian,  "except  some  man  should  guide  me?" 
Herein  I  see  the  confirmation  of  the  Divine  law  which  created  the  Church.     We 
VOL.  I.  44 


690  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 


are  not  made  to  stand  alone.  "  No  man  liveth  to  himself."  From  our  first  steps 
we  have  been  led  by  others ;  and  the  Church's  work  in  forming  of  our  ideas  and 
most  personal  convictions  is  immense.  Like  the  Ethiopian,  not  one  of  us  would 
have  understood  tbe  greater  part  of  those  truths  to  which  we  are  most  attached  if 
he  had  not  had  some  guide  to  say  to  him,  as  did  Philip  to  Nathanael,  "  Cotne  and 
see."  The  Church  is  the  witness  to,  not  the  lord  of,  truth.  7.  Here,  then,  we 
have  PhiUp  sitting  beside  the  Ethiopian,  explaining  the  Scriptures  to  him.  His 
task  was  easy  ;  for,  by  one  of  those  coincidences  in  wLich  theie  is  an  intervention 
of  God,  the  eunuch's  eyes  had  lighted  upon  a  passage  of  Isaiah  which  ha<l  defply 
moved  him.  Hearken  to  the  mysterious  words  uttered  by  the  prophet  so  mauy 
ages  before  Christ,  and  say  if  they  do  not  impress  you  by  their  startling,  pregnant 
nature  (Isa.  liii.).  Gather  together  all  the  features  qi  this  mysterious  picture,  and 
you  will  understand  the  exclamation  of  the  Ethiopian's  (ver,  34).  Endeavour  to 
explain  this  prophecy  by  the  sole  inspiration  of  nature.  Suppose  an  Israelite, 
dreaming  of  the  future  greatness  of  his  nation,  had  essayed  to  describe  ihe  hero 
who  was  to  bring  it  about ;  is  it  not  evident  that  he  must  have  depicted  him  as  a 
triumphant  avenger  ?  By  what  strange  reversal  of  ideas  is  it  that  a  totally  different 
ideal  is  here  presented  to  us?  Weigh  well  the  value  of  the  expressions  here 
employed;  judge  if  one  can  conscientiously  see  in  them  merely  the  desciiption  of 
an  Israelite  who  immolates  himself  in  order  to  save  his  nation  ;  see  if  this  be  not 
a  spiritual  work  which  is  here  predicted  ;  if,  above  all,  it  be  not  sin  which  is  here 
to  be  expiated.  8.  We  can  understand  the  light  cast  upon  this  obscure  text  by 
Philip's  burning  words,  and  his  words,  penetrating  to  the  innermost  depths  of  the 
man,  stirs  his  soul  and  begins  the  work  of  conversion.  One  of  those  dramas  takns 
place  unknown  of  the  world,  but  which  the  angels  of  God  look  upon.  Looking 
only  on  the  surface,  who  would  ever  have  suspected  its  importance  ?  The  smallest 
public  event,  the  most  insignificant  battle  would  have  attracted  far  more  attention. 
But  the  gospel,  which  does  not  even  make  mention  of  the  successive  CsBsurs  who 
governed  Eome,  concentrates  upon  the  destinies  of  a  few  people  unknown  to  the 
world  in  whose  hearts  God  has  established  His  kingdom.  There  fire  hours  that 
are  as  ye+rs  ;  such  are  those  moments  when  some  great  decision  is  being  made. 
9.  The'  Ethiopian  is  now  wholly  gained  for  Christ,  and  he  cries,  "  See,  here  is 
water  ;  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized  ?  "  What  hinders  you,  rash  man,  are 
all  your  future  earthly  prospects.  Are  you  aware  to  what  you  are  expo-ing  yourself 
in  becoming  a  follower  of  this  new  faith  ?  Are  you  not  taking  for  conviction  what 
is  but  a  passing  sentiment  ?  Do  you  know  anything  of  this  Philip  ?  Can  you, 
upon  the  faith  of  his  words,  take  a  step  the  consequences  of  which  will  affect  your 
whole  after-life  ?  Seethe  path  you  are  to  follow,  already  watered  with  the  blood 
of  martyrs.  No  matter ;  he  will  be  baptized.  Like  a  soldier  who  binds  himself  by 
a  solemn  oath,  if  need  be,  to  die  for  his  colours,  so  he  desires,  by  this  open  act,  to 
irrevocably  bind  himself  to  the  service  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  receives  baptism,  and  goes 
on  his  way  rejoicing.  Conversions  of  such  nature  are  now  so  rare  that  they  are  nowise 
believed  in.  People  believe  in  a  gradual  change  of  heart ;  they  are  unwilling  to  give 
credence  to  the  sudden  manifestations  of  mercy  which  attest  in  too  signal  a  manner 
the  intervention  of  God.  This  mistrust  is  iu  part  due  to  the  spirit  of  the  age,  which 
is  more  given  to  calculation  than  to  enthusiasm  or  to  heroism.  (E.  Bersier,  D.D.) 
The  Ethiopian  convert  :  a  typical  man:— The  Ethiopian  still  lives  amongst  us. 
Let  us  look  at  this  man  as — I.  An  inquirer.  1.  He  was  in  a  bewildered  state  of 
mind.  I  do  not  rebuke  the  bewilderment  of  honest  inquiry.  In  the  realm  of 
spiritual  revelation  things  are  not  superficial,  easy  of  arrangement,  and  trifling  in 
issue.  Do  not  be  distressed  because  you  are  puzzled  by  religious  mystery.  The 
most  advanced  minds  have  had  to  pass  through  ttiat  experience.  But  the  path  of 
the  just  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  Do  not  make  idols  of  your 
perplexities.  You  know  that  there  is  a  subtle  temptation  to  talk  about  your  doubts 
as  those  of  a  man  whose  mind  is  not  to  be  put  oft"  with  solutions  that  have  satisfied 
inferior  intellects.  Be  honest  in  your  bewilderment.  2.  He  was  teacha'de.  He 
said,  "  I  wonder  what  this  means ;  would  that  God  would  send  some  director  to 
lead  me  into  the  light."  Teachableness  is  one  of  the  first  characteristics  of  honesty. 
If  you  are  self-trustful  and  dogmatic  you  are  not  a  scholar  in  the  school  of  Christ, 
and  deprive  yourself  of  all  the  gifts  of  Providence.  Yet  how  few  h re  teachable! 
So  many  of  us  go  to  the  Bible  and  find  proofs  of  what  we  already  believe,  but  the 
true  believer  goes  unprejudiced,  humble,  honestly  desirous  of  knowing  what  is  true. 
3.  He  was  obedient.  A  revelation  cannot  afford  to  be  argume^'tative.  Any  gospel 
that  comes  with  hesitancy  or  reserve  vitiates  its  own  credentials,  and  steps  down 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  691 

from  the  pedestal  of  commanding  authority.  The  ennueh,  having  heard  Philip, 
obeyed.  "Here  is  water,  what  hindereth  me  to  be  baptized?"  He  would  have 
the  whole  thing  completed  at  once.  So  many  persons  are  afraid  that  they  are  not 
fit,  prepared.  They  have  heard  the  gospel  a  quarter  of  a  century  or  more,  but  still 
th^y  are  wondering  about  themselves.  Such  people  are  triiling.  What  hindereth 
him?  No  qian  should  hinder  you  from  coming  to  Christ.  I  fear  sometimes  that 
the  Church  makes  fences,  over  which  men  have  to  climb,  but  in  the  gospel  I  find 
only  one  word  for  all  honest,  teachable  men — welcome.  Hindrances  are  man's 
inventions.  As  to  the  form  of  baptism,  please  yourself.  I  believe  in  life-baptism. 
The  spirit  of  baptism  is  greater  than  any  form.  II.  A  hearer.  He  was — 1. 
Prepared  ;  he  was  already  seriously  perusing  the  mysterious  volume.  He  bad  not 
to  be  called  from  afar.  Where  are  those  who  now  come  to  church  from  the  Bible 
itself?  What  is  the  work  of  Philip  nowadays?  It  is  to  persuade,  to  p'ead,  to 
break  through  iron-bound  attention  and  fix  it  upon  spiritual  realities.  Philip  has 
now  to  deal  with  men  who  are  reading  the  journals,  the  fiction,  the  exciting 
discussions  of  the  passing  time,  and  from  any  one  of  these  engagements  to  Ihe 
Scriptures  of  God  there  may  lie  unnumbered  miles  !  A  prepared  pulpit  fights 
against  infinite  odds  when  it  has  to  deal  with  an  unprepared  pew.  2.  Responsive. 
He  answered  Philip.  His  head,  heart,  will,  all  listened.  Who  can  now  listen  ? 
To  hear  is  a  Divine  accomplishment.  Who  hears  well  ?  To  have  a  responsive 
hearer  is  to  make  a  good  preacher.  The  pew  makes  the  pulpit.  It  is  possilile  to 
waste  supreme  thought  and  utterance  upon  an  indifferent  hearer.  But  let  the 
hearer  answer,  and  how  noble  the  exchange  of  thought,  how  grand  the  issues  1 
Do  not  suppose  that  a  man  is  n  )t  answering  because  he  is  not  speaking.  There  is 
a  responsive  attitude,  an  answering  silence,  a  look,  which  is  better  than  thunders 
of  applause !  III.  A  convert.  As  such  he  was— 1.  Enlightened.  He  had  p  issed 
from  the  prophetic  to  the  evangelic.  "  I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of 
God."  Then  Philip  must  have  been  preaching  this  doctrine.  You  know  the 
sermon  by  the  hearer.  Say  ye,  "  It  was  a  beautiful  sermon"  ?  Show  the  solidity, 
the  Scriptuialness,  and  the  power  of  the  discourse  by  living  it !  2.  Deeply 
convinced.  There  are  hereditary,  nominal,  halting,  merely-assenting,  and  non- 
inquiring  Christians.  "  And  they  because  they  have  not  much  deepness  of  earth 
soon  wither  away."  There  are  also  convinced  Christians— men  who  have  fought 
battles  in  darkness,  who  have  undergone  all  the  happy  pain  of  seeking  for  truth, 
and,  proving  it,  have  embraced  it  at  the  altar  as  if  they  had  wedded  the  bride  of 
their  souls.  These  will  make  martyrs  if  need  be.  These  are  the  pillars  of  the 
Church.  3.  Exultant.  "He  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  You  have  not  seen 
Christ  if  you  are  not  filled  with  joy.  See  the  eunuch,  oblivious  even  of  Philip's 
presence.  He  saw  Divine  things,  new  heavens,  a  new  earth,  bluer  skies,  greener 
lands,  than  he  had  ever  seen  before,  and  in  that  transfiguration  he  saw  Jesus  only. 
Philip,  miraculously  sent,  was  miraculously  withdrawn,  but  there  sat  in  the  chariot 
now  "  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man."  And  so  preacher  after  preacher  says,  as  he 
sees  the  radiant  vision  coming — "He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease."  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  The  converted  nohlnnan: — Here  we  have — 1.  A  model  minister. 
1.  He  was  under  Divine  guidance  (ver.  29).  The  success  of  the  gospel  ministry 
will  be  always  in  proportion  to  our  nearness  to  God,  and  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  on  our  hearl;s.  Learning,  eloquence,  and  organisation  are  useful  handmaids 
of  the  truth,  but,  like  the  wire  of  a  telegraph,  they  are  only  a  medium  over  which 
the  Divine  fluid  may  pass.  2.  He  was  personal  in  his  appeal  (ver.  30).  We  speak 
too  much  about  doctrines,  doubts,  and  evidences,  and  too  little  to  individual 
consciousness.  3.  He  was  orthodox  in  his  doctrine  (ver.  35).  Chiist  is  the  centre 
and  circumference  of  the  gospel  ministry.  II.  A  genuinb  truth-seek kr.  Men 
study  for  display,  for  discovery,  to  baffle  an  antagonist.  The  eunuch  was  in  real 
mental  distress  whilst  searching  for  the  truth.  1.  He  was  devout  and  earnest.  He 
respected  the  outward  rites  of  the  old  religion,  and  travelled  scores  of  miles  to  be 
present  at  the  passover.  There  he  procured  for  himself  a  manuscript  of  the 
"Evangelical  Prophet,"  and  peiused  it  eagerly  on  his  way  home.  It  is  a  great 
thing  for  us  to  be  on  the  path  of  duty.  A  parallel  case  may  be  found  in  the  history 
of  Luther  discovering  the  Latin  Bible  at  Erfurt.  The  earn-  st  and  devout  inquirer 
never  seeks  in  vain,  as  is  proved  in  the  historv  of  Nicodemiis,  Cornelius,  and 
Lydia.  2.  He  was  frank  and  honest.  He  confessed  his  ignorance  (ver.  31). 
Seldiim  will  human  nature  acknowledge  its  defects.  Self-love  prompts  man  to  hide 
his  fnults  from  his  dearest  friends,  yea,  from  Omniscience.  That  which  isquite  pLiin 
to  us  was  to  him  an  inscrutable  enigma,  because  there  was  such  discrepancy  betweea 


692  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

public  expectation  and  the  description  of  the  Prophet.  The  Jews  expected  a  Prince, 
and  the  eunuch  could  not  reconcile  His  humiliation  with  royal  pomp  and  victory. 
3.  He  possessed  an  unprejudiced  mind.  Men  too  often  study  the  Word  of  God  with 
pre-formed  creeds — hence  they  warp  the  truth  to  support  falsehood.  The  crew  of  a, 
ship  in  distress  are  not  over-scrupulous  respecting  the  medium  by  which  they  are 
rescued — a  raft,  plank,  rope,  anything  is  welcomed  that  can  bring  them  safe  to 
land.  Even  so  the  man  who  traverses  the  boisterous  sea  of  scepticism,  if  afraid  of 
being  engulfed  in  the  yawning  waves,  he  lays  hold  of  tlie  most  insignificant 
medium,  so  as  to  reach  the  shore  of  truth  safe.  4.  Once  convinced  he  did  not 
procrastinate  (ver.  36).  Thus  he  received  one  of  the  outward  signs  of  discipleship. 
Thousands  are  satisfied  that  Jesus  is  the  only  Saviour  of  the  world,  still  they 
proci'astinate.  These  are  like  a  somnambulist  walking  upon  the  verge  of  a 
precipice  ;  or,  like  a  man  sleeping  upon  the  rails,  that  shall  soon  be  swept  over 
by  the  ponderous  wheels  of  the  express  train.  III.  A  true  conversion.  His 
conviction  was  instantaneous  and  enlightened.  1.  He  possessed  faith.  "  I  believe." 
Faiih  is  indispensable  to  salvation.  The  faith  of  the  eunuch  was  in  the  right 
object — "Jesus  Christ" — not  in  circumcision,  nor  in  the  Virgin  Mary,  nor  in 
priestcraft,  but  in  the  God-man.  The  Jews  stung  by  the  fiery  serpents  could  not 
be  healed  without  looking  upon  the  brazen  serpent;  even  so,  without  looking  up  to 
a  crucified  Eedeemer  with  the  eye  of  faith,  the  wounds  and  bruises  of  sin  caunot 
be  healed.  2.  He  possessed  a  peaceful  mind  (ver.  39).  Well  might  he  rejoice,  for 
he  was  now  delivered  from  guilt  and  condemnation  ;  he  had  peace  with  God  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.      {W.A.Griffiths.)  Philqj^s  audience  of  one:— I.  Tuose 

WHO    WATCH     FOR     PROVIDENTIAL     OPPORTUNITIES     WILL      FIND      THAT      PROVIDENCE     IS 

WATCHING  FOR  THEM.  There  was  a  chance  of  saving  a  fellow-man  down  in  the 
desert ;  God  offered  it  to  this  Christian  preacher  (chap.  viii.  26).  If  a  man's  heart 
is  alert,  and  his  temper  willing,  some  sort  of  an  "  angel "  will  be  discovered  looking 
for  him  for  a  good  work.  II.  No  self-sacrifice  is  to  be  considered  too  great 
WHEN  A  soul  is  TO  BE  SAVED.  Here  we  find  Philip  startin?  out  cheerfully  to  go 
sixty  or   seventy  miles  for  a   foreign  convert  (ver.  27).     III.    God's  kingdom  of 

PROVIDENCE    IS    SUBORDINATE    TO    GoD  S    KINGDOM    OF    GRACE.      Philip    COUld     HOt    haVO 

known  where  he  was  going,  except  in  a  general  way.  Two  persons  might  pass  each 
other  a  hundied  times  in  the  trackless  journey,  and  never  know  it.  It  was  like 
starting  out  on  the  ocean  to  meet  a  ship,  when  nobody  could  tell  the  exact  line  of 
sailing.  But  Divine  foreknowledge  understood  where  the  eunuch  would  be,  and 
Divine  sovereignty  ordered  that  Pliilip  should  meet  the  traveller  out  in  the  sands, 
for  the  Divine  purpose  was  to  Fave  that  soul.  IV.  Good  men  are  to  be  found 
SOMETIMES  IN  THE  UNLiKELiEST  PLACES.  It  is  a  great  Surprise  to  us  to  discover 
in  this  oflicer  of  an  Egyptian  queen  a  proselyte  to  the  ancient  religion.  So  we 
are  told  that  Christ,  even  in  "  Caesar's  household,"  had  saints  (Phil.  iv.  22).  And 
we  have  a  record  of  one  Christian  in  Herod's  family  (Luke  viii.  3).     V.  It  is  worth 

WHILE    TO    PUT    forth   A    CREDITABLE    MEASUftE     OF     EFFORT     TO     ATTEND    CHURCH.        In 

the  kingilom  of  God,  "  not  many  noble  are  called  "  (1  Cor.  i.  26-29),  and  whenever 
one  out  of  those  high  ranks  is  visited  by  Divine  grace,  it  is  best  to  look  up  the 
man's  record  somewhat.  It  offers  a  most  suggestive  comment  on  the  laggaidness 
of  some  Christian  people,  when  we  find  this  African  stranger  putting  forth  such 
supreme  endeavours  in  order  to  render  his  spiiitual  obe<lienco  uuto  God  as  best 
he  knew   how.     VI.  One  may  go  through  a  most  exthaordinary  season  of  the 

LOFTIEST   religious    PRIVILEGE    AND    YET    REMAIN    CNENLIGIITF.NED.       When    we    recall 

the  unusual  history  which  had  been  transpiring,  we  cannot  help  thinking  how  much 
had  happened  calculated  to  arrest  both  the  mind  and  the  heart  of  such  a 
foreigner  in  Jernsulem.  But  even  silent  sorrow  under  the  shadows  of  Calvary  will 
not  !-ave  a  soul  from  death,  just  by  itself.  It  is  possible  for  one  to  pass  through  a 
■whole  revival  of  religion  serious  and  sympathetic,  and  still  remain  unregenerate. 
VII.  Religious  convictions  are  simply  inestimable.  The  eunuch  journeyed 
across  the  known  world  in  fatiguing  travel  in  order  to  find  peace  in  the  worship  of 
the  true  God.  He  is  going  home,  his  soul  not  at  rest.  Still,  though  disappointed, 
he  clings  to  his  purpose;  he  shouts  aloud,  like  the  little  schoolb  'ys  in  Ethioj)ian 
schools,  the  verses  of  that  pathetic  old  chapter  in  Isaiah,  till  Philip  hears  him  and 
comes  to  his  h^lp  (ver.  29,  30).  There  is  nothing  like  that  impressive  moment  in 
•which  an  aroused  soul  begins  to  ask,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  If,  in  that 
crisis,  those  gracious  feelings  are  stifled,  or  suffered  to  pass  away,  they  may  never 
arise  again.  VIII.  How  unrighteous  are  the  modern  sneers  about  creeds  ani> 
commentaries  I    We  wonder  what  the  eunuch  could  have  done  without  that  good 


CHAr.  viir.]  THE  ACTS.  693 

deacon  coming  up.    IX.  It  is  always  best  to  be  bold,  but  also  to  be  polite, 
IN  OFFERING  TiiDTH  TO  iN'QuiREES.     Philip   was   Unabashed,  but  you   will  look  in 
vain  for  any  discourtesy  in  his  action.     When  "  the  Spirit"  says,  "  Go  near,"  it  is 
safe  to  approach  any  one  in  the  name  of  Christ  (ver.  29).     The  Lord  will  never  set 
a  timid  Christian  at  the  task  of  speaking  to  a  nabob  or  a  politician  like  this,  without 
going  beforehand  and,  as  it  were,  clearing  tlie  way  of  access.     X.  So  we  see  what 
•CAN  be  done  WITH  AN  AUDIENCE  OF  ONLY  ONE.     Dean  Swif t  is  Said  to  have  made  a 
joke  of  it:  "Dearly  beloved  Roger  [his  clerk],  the  Scripture  moveth  us."     Lyman 
Beeeher  is  said  to  have  preached  his  sermon  right  along,  and  his  one  hearer  was 
converted.   Jesus   Christ   gave   almost   all  His   supreme  revelations  to  audiences 
of  one,  like  Nicodemus,  and  the  woman  at  the  well.         (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
Philip  the  evangelist : — The  little  that  is  known   about  Philip,  the  deacon  and 
evangelist,  may  very  soon  be  told.     His   name   suggests,  though  by  no   means 
conclusively,  that  he  was  probably  one  of  the  so-called  Hellenists,  or  foreign-born 
and  Greek-speaking  Jews.     This  is  made  the  more  probable  because  he  was  oue  of 
the  seven  selected  by  the  Chu'ch,  and  after  selection  appointed  by  the  apostles  to 
dispense  relief  to  the  poor.     The  purpose  of  the  appointment  being  to  conciliate 
the  grumblers  in  the  Hellenist  section  of  the  Church,  the  persons  chosen  would 
probably  belong  to  it.     He  left  Jerusalem  during  the  persecution  "  that  arose  after 
the  death  of  Stephen."     As  we  know,  he  was  the  first  preacher  of  the  gospel  in 
Samaria ;   he  was  next  the  instrument  honoured  to  carry  the  Word  to  the  first 
heathen  ever  gathered  into  the  Church  ;  and  then,  after  a  journey  along  the  sea- 
coast  to  Caesarea,  the  then  seat  of  government,  he  remained  in  that  place  in  obscure 
toil  for  twenty  years ;  dropped  out  of  tbe  story ;  and  we  hear  no  more  about  him 
but  for  one  glimpse  of  his  home  in  Cajsarea.     I.  We  may  gather  a  thougbt  as 
to  Christ's  sovereignty  in  choosing  His  instruments.     Did  you  ever  notice  that 
events  exactly  contradicted  the  notion  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  apostles,  in  the 
selection  of  Philip  and  his  six  brethren?      The  apostles  said,  "It  is  not  reason 
that  we  should  leave  the  Word  of  God  and  serve  tables.     Pick  out  seven  relieving- 
ofiicers — men  who  shall  do  the  secular  work  of  the  Church."     So  said  man.     And 
what  did  fact-s  say  ?     That  out  of  these  twelve;  who  were  to  give  themselves  to 
prayer  and  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  we  never  hear  that  by  far  the  larger  propor- 
tion of  them  were  honoured  to  do  anything  worth  mentioning  for  the  spread  of  the 
gospel.     But,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  men  that  were  supposed  to  be  fitted  for 
secular  work,  two  at  all  events  had  more  to  do  in  the  expansion  of  the  Church,  and 
in  the  development  of  the  universal  aspects  of  Christ's  gospel,  than  the  whole  of 
the  original  group  of  apostles.     So  Christ  picks  His  instruments.     Christ  chooses 
His  instruments  where  He  will ;    and  it  is  not  the   apostle's   business,  nor  the 
business  of  an  ecclesiastic  of  any  sort,  to  settle  his  own  work  or  anybody  else's. 
The  Commander-in-Chief  keeps  the  choosing  of  the  men  for  special  service  in  His 
own  hand.     Christ  says,  "  Go  and  join  thyself  to  that  chariot,"  and  speak  there 
the  speech  that  I  shall  bid  thee.     Brethren,  do  you  listen  for  that  voice  calling  you 
to  your  tasks,  and  never  mind  what  men  may  be  saying.     II.  The  next  lesson  that 
I  would  take  from  this  story  is  the  spontaneous  speech  of  a  believing  heart. 
There  came  a  persecution  that  scattered  the  Church.     Men  tried  to  fling  down  the 
lamp,  and  all  they  did  was  to  spill  the  oil,  and  it  ran  flaming  wherever  it  went. 
And  so  we  read  that,  not  by  appointment,  nor  of  set  purpose,  nor  in  consequence 
of   any   official   sanction,  nor  in   consequence   of  any  supernatural   and  distinct 
commandment  from  heaven,  but  just  because  it  was  the  natural  thing  to  do,  and 
they  could  not  help  it,  they  went  everywhere,  these  scattered  men  of  Cyprus  and 
Cyrene,  preaching  the  Word.     And  when   this  Philip,  whom   the   officials   had 
relegated  to  the  secular  work  of  distributing  charity,  found  himself  in  Samaria,  he 
did  the  like.     So  it  always  will  be ;  we  can  all  talk  about  what  we  are  interested  in. 
The  full  heart  cannot  be  condemned  to  silence.      Do   you   carry  with  you  the 
impulse  for  utterance  of  Christ's  name  wherever  you  go  ?     And  is  it  so  sweet  in 
your  hearts  that  you  cannot  but  let  its  sweetness  have  expression  by  your  lips  ? 
III.  Another  lesson  that  seems  to  me  strikingly  illustrated  by  the  story  with  which 
we  are  concerned,  is  the  guidance  of  a  Divine  hand  in  common  life,  and  when 
there  are  no  visible  nor   supernatural  signs.      Philip  goes  down  to  Samaria 
because  he  must,  and  speaks  because  he  cannot  help  it.     He  is  next  bidden  to  take 
a  long  journey,  from  the  centre  of  the  land,  away  down  to  the  southern  desert ; 
and  at  a  certain  point  there  the  Spirit  says  to  him,  "Go!  join  thyself  to  this 
ch>4riot."     And  when  his  work  with  the  Ethiopian  statesman  is  done,  then  he  is 
swept  away  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  Ezekiel  had  been  long  before  by 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vnr. 

the  banks  of  the  river  Chebor,  and  is  set  down,  no  doubt  all  bewildered  and  breath- 
less, at  Azotus — the  ancient  Ashdod — the  Philistine  city,  down  on  the  low-lying 
coast.  Was  Philip  less  under  Christ's  guidance  when  miracle  ceased  and  he  was 
left  to  ordinary  powers  ?  Did  it  seem  to  him  as  if  his  task  in  preaching  the  gospel 
in  these  villages  thi'ough  which  he  passed  on  his  way  to  Ctesarea  was  less  distinctly 
obedience  to  the  Divine  command  than  when  he  heard  the  utterance  of  the  Spirit, 
"  Go  down  to  the  road  which  leads  to  Gaza,  which  is  desert "  ?  Ey  no  means.  To- 
this  man,  as  to  every  faithful  soul,  the  guidance  that  came  through  his  own  judg- 
ment and  common  sense,  through  the  instincts  and  impulses  of  his  sanctified 
nature,  by  th^^  circumstances  which  he  devoutly  believed  to  be  God's  providence, 
was  as  truly  direct  Divine  guidance  as  if  all  the  angels  of  heaven  had  blown  the 
commandment  with  their  trumpets  into  Lis  waiting  and  stunned  ears.  And  so  j'ou 
and  I  have  to  go  upon  our  paths  without  angel  voices,  or  chariots  of  storm,  and  to- 
be  contented  with  Divine  commandments  less  audible  or  perceptible  to  our  senses 
than  this  man  had  at  one  point  in  his  career.  There  is  no  gulf  for  the  devout 
heart  between  what  is  called  miraculous  and  what  is  called  ordinary  and  common. 
Equally  in  both  did  God  manifest  His  will  to  His  servants,  and  equally  in  both  is 
His  presence  capable  of  realisation.  We  do  not  need  to  envy  Philip's  biilliant 
beginning.  Let  us  see  that  we  imitate  his  quiet  close  of  life.  IV.  The  last  lesson; 
that  I  would  draw  is  this — The  nobilitj  of  peksistence  in  unnoticed  work. 
What  a  contrast  to  the  triumphs  in  Samaria,  and  the  other  great  expansion  of  the 
field  for  the  gospel  effected  by  the  God-commanded  preaching  to  the  eunuch,  i» 
presented  by  the  succeeding  twenty  years  of  altogether  unrecorded  but  faithful  toil ! 
Persistence  in  such  unnoticed  work  is  made  all  the  more  difficult,  and  to  any  but  a 
very  true  man  would  have  been  all  but  impossible,  by  reason  of  the  contrast  which 
such  work  offered  to  the  glories  of  the  earlier  days.  Philip,  who  began  so  con- 
spicuously, and  so  suddenly  ceased  to  be  the  special  instrument  in  the  hands  of  the 
Spiiit,  kept  plod,  plod,  plodding  on  with  no  bitterness  of  heart.  For  twenty  years 
he  had  no  share  in  the  development  of  Gentile  Christianity,  of  which  he  had  sowed 
the  first  seed,  but  had  to  do  much  less  conspicuous  work.  He  toiled  away  there  iu 
Cffisarea  patient,  persevering,  and  contented,  because  he  loved  the  work.  He 
seemed  to  be  passed  over  by  his  Lord  in  His  choice  of  instruments.  It  was  he  who- 
was  selected  to  be  the  first  mo,n  that  should  preach  to  the  heathen.  But  did  you 
ever  notice  tliat,  although  he  was  probably  iu  Caesarea  at  the  time,  Cornelius  was 
not  bid  to  apply  to  Philip,  who  was  at  his  elbow,  but  to  send  to  Jopj^a  for  the 
Apostle  Peter  ?  Philip  might  have  sulked,  and  said,  "  Why  was  I  not  chosen  to  do 
this  work  ?  I  will  speak  no  more  in  this  Name."  It  did  not  fall  to  his  lot  to  be 
the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles.  One  who  came  after  him  was  preferred  before  him, 
and  the  Hellenist  Saul  was  set  to  the  task  which  might  have  seemed  natin-ally  to- 
belong  to  the  Hellenist  Philip.  He  cordially  welcomed  Paul  to  his  house  in 
CsBsarea  twenty  vears  afterwards,  and  rejoiced  that  one  sows  and  another  reaps ; 
and  so  the  division  of  labour  is  the  multiplication  of  gladness.  A  beautiful 
superiority  to  all  the  low  thoughts  that  are  apt  to  mar  our  persistency  in  unobtru- 
sive aud  unrecognised  work  is  set  before  us  in  this  story.  Boys  iu  the  street  will 
refuse  to  join  in  games,  saying,  "  I  shall  not  play  uuless  I  am  captain,  or  have 
the  big  drum."  And  there  are  not  wanting  Christian  men  who  lay  down  like 
conditions.  "  Play  well  thy  part,"  wherever  it  is.  Never  mind  the  honour. 
{A.  Miiclaren,  D.D.)  Philip  and  the  eunuch: — I.  Philip  meeting  the  eunuch. 
1.  An  "  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  unto  Philip."  Whether  there  was  a  visible 
representation  or  not  we  cannot  tell — very  likely  there  was.  But  certain  it  is  that 
he  ppake.  The  partition  between  men  and  angels  is  very  thin — they  can  hear  us 
talk,  we  can  almost  hear  them.  The  two  spheres  of  rational  existence  adjoin  and 
seem  sometimes  to  overlap  each  other.  Angels,  in  the  first  century  of  our  era, 
busily  interested  themselves  in  the  affairs  of  the  Church.  Have  they  been  with- 
drawn ?  No.  "  Are  they  not  ail  ministering  spirits,"  &c.  We  believe  that  evil 
spirits  insinuate  wicked  thoughts.  Why,  then,  deny  the  same  power  to  good 
spirits  ?  We  sit  leisurely  in  the  house,  when  suddenly  a  thought  shoots  through 
the  mind  that  we  must  "go  towards  the  south" — visit  a  certain  street.  It  ia  not 
impulse,  nor  feeling,  for  both  bid  us  remain  where  we  are  ;  but  we  have  no  rest — 
the  thought  continually  recurs.  At  last  we  go ;  and  lo  1  we  discover  that  our 
presence  and  assistance  were  sorely  needed.  Alas !  we  are  not  equally  obedient 
•with  Philip.  2.  The  angel  said,  "  Go  toward  the  south,"  &c.  One  cannot  help 
wondering  at  the  angel's  knowledge ;  but  Palestine  is  not  the  only  country  with 
whose  geography  ange's  are  acquainted.    3.  That  the  message  would  prove  a  trial 


CH.VP.  vm.]  THE  ACTS. 


to  Philip's  faith  is  unquestionable.  It  required  that  he  should  deny  his  most 
cherished  predilections.  Succeeding  so  remarkably  in  a  city  of  Samaria,  no  doubt 
he  was  much  tempted  to  prolong  his  slay.  He  might,  with  a  great  show  of  reason, 
raise  formidable  objections,  but  did  not.  The  unbeliever  always  raises  objections, 
but  the  believer  always  puts  them  down.  "  He  arose  and  went."  4.  As  soon  as 
he  arrived  in  the  unpromising  neighbourhood,  he  saw  a  chariot  occupied  by  a 
"man  of  Ethiopia" — probably  the  region  now  known  as  Nubia  and  Abyssinia. 
The  eunuch,  therefore,  was  one  of  the  sable  descendants  of  Ham.  Human  reason 
is  much  embarrassed  that  God  should  order  His  servant  to  forsake  the  populous 
city  to  preach  to  a  foreign  traveller  in  a  desolate  path.  But  God  pays  as  much 
heed  to  the  one  as  to  the  many.  His  government  is  special,  attending  to  the 
minutest  wants  of  individuals,  as  well  as  general,  attending  to  the  collective  wants 
of  the  multitude.  "  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one 
sinner,"  &c.  The  "man  of  Ethiopia"  was  also  an  "eunuch."  Eunuchs  were 
numerous  in  the  East,  but  were  forbidden  in  Israel.  Divine  religion  never  en- 
courages the  mutilation  ot  the  body.  False  religions  do.  Their  only  method  of 
overcoming  sin  is  to  disable  the  body  to  commit  it.  But  true  religion  inculcates 
sul)jugation.  Wherefore  the  Ethiopian  eunuch  could  only  be  an  outsider — devout, 
pious  may  be,  but  still  an  outsider.  He  was  employed  under  Candace,  and  was 
set  over  all  her  treasures,  i.e.,  her  Minister  of  Finance,  the  most  important  office  of 
all  under  a  despotism.  But  the  Grand  Vizier  of  Ethiopia  discovered  to  the  bitter- 
ness of  his  soul  that  earthly  possessions,  however  vast,  cannot  satisfy  the  profound 
yearning  of  our  humanity.  That  is  why  "  he  went  to  Jerusalem  to  worship."  5. 
The  best  spirits  of  the  nations  turned  at  this  period  with  loathing  from  heathen 
religions  and  superstitions.  Some  betook  themselves  to  atheism  ;  others  to  witch- 
craft. But  the  better  disposed  passed  over  to  Judaism.  They  found  in  it  what  the 
other  systems  of  religion  failed  to  give — pure  morality  and  strict  monotheism.  So 
the  eunuch  travelled  to  Jerusalem  "  to  worship  God."  II.  Philip  pkeachino  to 
THE  EUNUCH.  1.  The  eunuch  was  now  returning,  and  humbly  studied  the  Word  of 
God  on  his  way  from  the  temple  of  God.  We  often  erase  all  good  impression 
received  in  the  house  of  God  by  frivolous  dissipating  talk  on  our  way  home.  But 
the  eunuch,  "  sitting  in  his  chariot,  read  Esaias  the  prophet."  People  nowadays, 
going  on  a  tedious  journey,  take  with  them  frivolous  and  exciting  books  with  a 
view  to  "kill"  the  time.  Better  I  should  imagine  did  they  learn  a  lesson  from 
the  religious  African  and  read  the  Bible  not  to  "  kill"  the  time  but  to  improve  it. 
2.  He  was  "  reading  aloud,"  as  was  customary  among  Orientals.  But  the  word 
also  signifies  to  read  to  another.  He  was  endeavouring  to  benefit  his  charioteer  as 
well  as  himself.  A  truly  generous  man  !  The  section  of  Scripture  he  was  reading 
was  singularly  appropriate.  It  was  the  very  section  which  treats  of  the  ck)sa 
relation  eunuchs  were  to  sustain  to  the  Church  of  God  under  the  New  Dispensation. 
Not  by  chance  was  he  reading  this  portion  of  Holy  Writ.  No ;  he  was  studying  it 
rather  than  any  other  that  he  might  come  to  some  definite  conclusion  respecting 
his  own  chances  of  ultimate  salvation.  3.  The  chariot  was  driving  leisurely  along 
when  Philip,  wearied  and  dust-stained,  arrived  in  sight.  The  paths  of  the  two  men 
were  now  to  intersect.  At  the  beginning  an  angel  spake  ;  now  that  he  has  obeyed 
and  his  work  is  at  hand,  the  "  Spirit  of  God  said  unto  him."  As  a  reward  for 
cheerful  and  implicit  obedience,  the  presence  of  the  angel  of  God  is  superseded  by 
the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  anuel  was  adequate  to  bid  "  Philip  arise 
and  go"  ;  but  not  to  bring  about  the  conversion  of  the  traveller.  Angels  minister 
unto  the  heirs  of  salvation  but  cannot  sanctify  them.  "  The  Spirit  said  unto 
Philip."  He  did  not  speak,  converse  in  audil/le  tones,  as  the  angel  did,  but  ex- 
pressed Himself  distinctly  in  the  inward  voice  of  the  soul.  Angels  can  never  speak 
in  the  soul,  at  best  they  can  only  speak  to  it.  We  cannot  help  wondering  at  the 
marvellous  combination  of  distinct  agencies:  the  Word,  the  Servant,  the  Angel  and 
the  Spirit  of  God  all  work  together  to  effect  the  salvation  of  one  soul !  4.  Philip 
then  "  ran  "  and  said  unto  the  eunuch,  "  Understandest  thou  what  thou  readest?  " 
"  The  eunueh  answered."  &c.  (ver.  31).  If  he  did  not  understand,  he  had  the  first 
qualification  to  do  so,  he  knew  he  did  not  understand,  and  was  candid  enough  to 
avow  it.  Many  now  are  like  him  in  their  ignorance  of  the  Scriptures,  but  very 
unlike  him  in  their  unconsciousness  of  that  ignorance.  They  occupy  exalted 
positions  in  science  and  literature,  but  they  claim  to  understand  theology  likewise 
better  than  it»  professed  students.  Talk  of  the  dogmatism  of  theology  !  Why,  it 
has  never  been  half  so  dogmatic  as  so-called  philosophy.  But  tbe  eunuch,  humble 
as  a  littie  child,  expressed  his  willingness  to  learn  of  the  footsore  pedestrian. 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

Then  he  read  over  the  passage  again,  and  said,  "  Of  whom  speaketh  the  prophet 
this?  of  himself  or  of  some  other  man?  "  Forgetting  his  social  superiority  in  his 
inteni-e  eagerness  to  solve  the  great  problems  of  religion,  he  beseeches  Philip  to 
explain  the  prophetic  riddle.  The  prophet  speaks  of  the  "  Servant  of  the  Lord." 
But  who  is  this  Servant?  "  himself  or  some  other  man?"  A  right  honest  and 
thoughtful  question — one  still  hotly  debated  between  the  rationalistic  and  the 
evangelistic  schools.  But  of  Philip's  answer  there  can  be  no  doubt — he  pointed 
him  in  plain  unambiguous  language  to  that  "  Other  Man."  "  Philip  opened  his 
mouth,"  and  delivered  himself  of  his  momentous  message.  Some  people  when 
they  open  their  mouths  shut  the  Scriptures.  They  darken  counsel  with  words 
without  knowledge.  But  Pbilip  "  opened  his  mouth,"  and  thereby  opened  the 
Scriptures.  "  He  began  at  the  same  Scripture,"  but  he  did  not  finish  there.  That 
Scripture  is  the  climax  of  the  Old  Dispensation,  which  never  reached  a  higher 
strain.  But  the  climax  of  the  Old  is  the  starting-point  of  the  New.  Where  Esaias 
left  off,  there  Philip  began.  The  only  way  to  expound  the  Bible  is  to  preach  Jesus. 
Omit  Him,  and  it  is  a  dark  riddle  which  no  human  ingenuity  can  unravel.  He  is 
the  key  to  unlock  the  prophecies.  5.  In  a  city  of  Samaria,  Philip  "  preached 
Christ  "  ;  but  to  the  eunuch  "  he  preached  Jesus."  The  Samaritans  expected  the 
Christ;  and  were  full  of  theories  respecting  Him.  Among  them,  therefore,  PhiUp 
had  to  dwell  principally  on  the  Christhood  of  the  Saviour.  But  the  eunuch  was 
not  hampeied  with  any  preconceived  notions.  What  he  supremely  desired  was  a 
personal  Saviour.  To  him,  therefore,  Philip  preached  Jesus.  But  Philip  was  not 
content  with  a  mere  exposition  of  the  prophecy.  He  pressed  the  Saviour  on  his 
acceptance.  There  is  reason  to  fear  that  much  of  modern  preaching  is  not  personal 
enough.  You  pick  up  a  volume  of  sermons  "  preacbed  before  the  University  of 
Oxfoid."  Before,  forsooth !  Let  the  beams  of  the  sun  fall  broadly  on  your  hand, 
and  you  hardly  notice  it ;  concentrate  them  on  one  spot  and  they  burn.  And  the 
gospel  light  shines  fully  and  broadly  on  our  congregations,  but  how  few  the  con- 
versions !  We  diffuse  the  light  instead  of  focussing  it.  UI.  Philip  baptizing  the 
EUNUCH.  1.  Modern  Churches  require  candidates  to  submit  to  a  tedious  process  of 
probation.  Prudence  now  counsels  delay,  but  the  eunuch  was  baptized  immediately. 
2.  But  he  was  baptized  on  making  a  confession  of  his  faith.  Whether  ver.  27  is 
genuine  or  not,  the  truth  it  contains  will  still  remain  intact.  Only  on  a  candid 
confession  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God  can  a  man  be  legitimHtely 
received  into  the  Christian  Church.  Correct  views  on  other  doctrines  are  of  great 
importance  to  a  robust,  vigorous,  spiritual  life ;  but  they  do  not  necessarily  en- 
danger our  ultimate  salvation.  But  a  correct  belief  respecting  the  Pei>on  of  the 
Saviour  is  an  element  absolutely  essential  to  salvation  — without  it  no  man  can  be 
saved.  3.  The  eunuch,  being  baptized,  "went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  Prior  to  his 
interview  with  Philip  he  was  restless  and  unhappy.  He  carried  a  sorrow  he  could 
not  explain.  His  profound  grief  found  vent  in  the  tearful  strains  of  Isa.  liii.  But 
Philip's  teaching  dissipated  the  gloom.  The  strings  of  the  burden  snapped  in 
sight  of  the  Cross,  and  the  eunuch  was  delivered  from  that  which  he  feared.  Many 
foolishly  imagine  that  religion  is  a  melancholy  thing.  A  sad  mistake !  {J. 
Cynddi/lan  Jones,  D.D.)  Philip  and  the  eunuch  :  a  remarkable  meetinp  : — It  v.'as 
a  meeting — I.  Of  remarkable  men.  Each  stood  out  amongst  his  contemporaries 
— the  one  distinguished  by  his  political  position,  the  other  by  his  advocacy  of  a 
new  faith.  In  appearance  and  worldly  position  they  greatly  differed,  for  Philip 
was  poor  and  without  status,  whereas  the  eunuch  was  affluent  and  high  in  his 
country's  esteem.  Philip  was  a  footsore  traveller,  the  eunuch  wended  his  way 
home  provided  with  all  that  the  civilisation  of  the  age  could  supplv  to  make  the 
journey  pleasant.  II.  Brought  about  by  extraordinarv  circumstances.  1.  The 
direction  of  Philip  to  Gaza  by  an  angel  of  the  Lord.  2.  The  occupation  of  the 
eunuch — reading  Ir^aiah  ;  if  to  relieve  the  tedium  of  the  journey,  how  much  bet'er 
than  our  practice  of  devouring  the  trash  sold  at  railway  bookstalls  !  Or  was  it  for 
the  purpose  of  intellectual  culture  ?  Or  to  see  if  the  character  claims  of  the 
recently  crucified  Jesus  corresponded  with  those  of  prophecy  ?  It  matters  not.  It 
was  Bible  reading  that  brought  him  in  contact  with  Philip.  3.  The  Spirit's  im- 
pulse that  prompted  Philip  to  join  the  chariot.  There  was  something  more  (han 
human  in  this  boldness.  III.  Turned  to  rare  spiritual  account.  Coming 
together,  what  did  they  do  ?  Converse  on  politics  ?  No,  on  the  Scripture.  1. 
The  eunuch  was  enlighted  by  Philip— for  which  work  two  things  are  necessary. 
(1)  On  the  part  of  the  one  a  disposition  to  receive  knowledge  (ver.  31).  (2)  On  the 
part  of  the  other,  a  power  to  impart  it.     This  Philip  had.     2.  The  eunuch  was 


CHAP,  viil]  the  acts.  697 

baptized  by  Philip.  IV.  Terminating  blessedly.  1.  For  Philip.  He  was  trans- 
ferred to  another  sphere  of  usefulness.  2.  For  the  eunuch.  He  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Pliilip  and  the  Ethiopian: — Simon  the  sorcerer 
and  the  Ethiopian  officer  are  at  contrast.  In  his  seeking,  Simon's  heart  was 
not  right  in  the  sight  of  God,  while  the  heurt  of  the  Ethiopian  commended 
itself  to  Divine  favour.  Simon  was  after  power — the  Ethiopian  was  aftt-r  truth. 
The  thought  of  the  one  was  only  of  self — the  other  had  no  thought  of  self  at 
all.  Smion  was  rebuked,  but  the  Ethiopian  was  helped.  Simon  was  tilled  with 
fear  —  the  Ethiopian  went  on  his  way  rejoicing.  Note,  then,  the  danger  of 
approaching  God  with  wrong  motives,  and  the  encouragement  to  every  one  who 
sincerely  desires  to  know  and  do  the  will  of  God ;  how  severely  a  selfish  seeker 
may  be  rebuked,  and  how  ready  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  help  an  earnest  inquirer 
after  truth.  Let  us  see  what  the  Holy  Spirit  did  to  help  such  an  one.  I.  He 
SENT  TO  HiJi  A  HELPER.  Notice  the  Instrumentalities  employed— angelic  and 
human — teaching  us  the  value  that  in  heaven  is  placed  upon  a  single  soul. 
There  is  here,  too,  a  suggestion  of  the  way  that  angels  are  made  ministering 
spirits.  The  angel  "spake"  unto  Philip,  but  he  could  not  be  the  guide  into 
the  way  of  life.  It  needed  a  redeemed  soul  to  speak  of  a  Eedeemer.  The 
world  is  to  be  won  to  Christ,  not  by  the  testimony  of  angels,  but  by  the  witness 
of  saved  men.  II.  He  sent  to  him  a  successful  helper.  Philip  has  a  good 
record  as  a  Christian  worker.  He  was  the  sort  of  instrument  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  could  use.  Though  in  the  midst  of  a  great  work,  he  gives  it  up  without 
even  a  query  to.  go  down  to  a  desert.  His  faith  accounts  both  for  his  obedience 
and  his  success.  It  takes  great  faith  to  pive  up  a  work  for  one  that  seemingly  is 
small.  But  teaching  one  man  in  a  desert  may  be  of  more  importance  than 
teaching  a  thousand  in  a  city.  III.  He  directed  the  helper  in  his  work. 
Phihp  not  only  was  sent  down,  but  was  told  what  to  do.  The  juncture 
was  admirably  timed.  The  Holy  Spirit  never  inspires  to  unseasonnble 
labours.  IV.  He  sent  the  helper  to  one  who  needed  help.  The  Ethiopian 
was  a  man  of  station,  and  had  made  some  progress  in  the  right  way.  But  that 
which  brought  him  help  was  the  cry  of  his  soul  for  truth.  That  cry  had  been  heard 
in  heaven  even  before  Jie  had  consciously  called,  and  the  answer  was  at  hand  !  V. 
He  sent  a  helper  of  tact.  The  fact  that  one  is  sent  by  the  Spirit  should  not 
cause  him  to  be  careless  of  methods,  but  should  make  him  call  to  his  aid  all  the 
skill  and  ability  of  which  he  is  the  master.  VI.  He  sent  a  helper  conversant 
with  the  Scriptures.  Philip  could  fit  the  prophecy  to  the  facts.  And  not  merely 
that,  he  showed  his  familiarity  with  other  prophecies.  "  Beginning  from  this 
scripture,"  Philip  preached  .lesus.  If  one  desiies  to  be  a  power  for  Christ,  he  should 
become  familiarly  acquainted  with  the  Word  that  bears  witness  to  Him.  VII.  He 
sent  just  the  help  that  was  needed.  Having  heard  the  Word  explained,  the 
Ethiopian  joyfully  accepted  the  truth,  and  desired  immediately  to  have  that  rite 
performed  that  would  seal  him  to  Christ  as  a  believer.  VIII.  He  caught  away  the 
helper  when  he  was  no  longer  needed.  Naturally,  both  instructor  and  scholar 
would  have  liked  to  have  kept  company  together  indefinitely.  But  the  purpose  of 
Philip's  sending  had  been  accomplished.  Th^re  whs  work  for  the  evangelist  to  do 
elsewhere,  and  work,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  for  the  Ethiopian  to  do  at  home.  (M. 
C.  Hazard.)  How  the  Ethiopian  treasurer  found  the  true  treasure  : — I.  The  place 
where  he  found  it.  a  solitary  road  through  a  waste.  II.  The  chest  wherein  it 
WAS  hid.  The  Scripture  with  its  dark  saying  and  seals.  III.  The  key  which  he 
obtained  by  the  sermon  eagerly  received.  IV.  The  jewel  which  sparkled  to  him. 
Christ  who  died  for  our  sins  and  rose  for  our  justification.  V.  The  bight  of  pos- 
session which  was  acknowledged  to  him  in  baptism.  VI.  The  joy  with  which  he 
carried  the  treasure  home.  {K.  Gerok.)  Courtiers  and  conversion  : — Courtonne, 
a  celebrated  pastor  of  Amsterdam,  notorious  for  the  freedom  of  his  preaching,  was 
urged  to  preach  at  court.  He  consented  on  condition  that  the  household  of  the 
Prince  of  Orange  should  be  present,  and  that  no  one  should  be  offended  at  his  free- 
dom of  speech.  When  the  time  came,  a  great  and  distingnis-hed  audience  assembled, 
and  the  preacher  took  for  his  text  the  present  subject,  which  he  said  contained  four 
subjects  of  astonishment,  which  increase  one  upon  the  other.  I.  A  courtier  who 
BEADS  the  Holy  Scripture,  which  is  sufficiently  surprising.  II.  A  courtier  who 
OWNS  his  ignorance,  which  is  more  surprising  still.  III.  A  courtier  who  asks  his 
inferior  to  instruct  him,  which  should  cause  a  redoubling  of  the  sui'prise.  IV.  A 
courtier  who  is  converted,  which  bring.s  the  surprise  to  a  climax.  (A.  Coquerel.) 
How  all  things  co-operate  to  promote  the  salvation  of  a  soul  desiring  to  be  saved : — I. 


B98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAP.  vin. 

God,  by  His  angel  and  Spirit.  II.  Man.  Philip,  by  his  meeting  and  discourse.  III. 
Scripture.  The  prophecy  of  Isaiah.  IV.  Nature.  The  water  by  the  way.  (K. 
Gerok.)  The  Christian  teacher's  work  and  its  reioards  : — The  Book  of  Acts  contains 
a  gallery  of  missionary  portraits.  One  is  inspired  by  studying  them,  but  none  leave 
an  impression  more  distinct  and  abiding  than  Philip's.  He  appears  suddenly;  the 
sketches  given  of  his  labours  are  very  short ;  he  quickly  disappears.  Like  Elijah, 
when  he  is  seen  he  moves  with  the  Spirit,  and  is  moved  by  the  Spirit.  He  awakens 
joy  wherever  he  goes  ;  and  his  four  daughters  inherit  his  spirit  and  become  pro- 
phetesses. Consider — I.  Cebtain  characteristics  op  the  Christian  teacher's 
WORK.  1.  His  implicit  obedience  to  the  Spirit.  The  angel  said,  "  Arise  and  go." 
He  arose  and  went.  IMvine  guidance  to  particular  service  is  often  accompanied 
by  special  evidence  of  its  sourceTTt  is  always  m  perTecl  accord  with  the  Scriptures  ; 
there  are  providential  circumstances  pointing  towards  it ;  and  often  the  call  is 
emphasised  by  the  counsel  of  God's  most  devoted  servants,  though  no  unseen  angel 
now  brings  His  command.  2.  His  eagerness  to  impart  the  gospel.  He  see  a  dis- 
tinguished foreigner  on  the  road.  Many  a  teacher  would  have  said,  "  He  is  no 
scholar  for  me."  'Only  a  heart  full  of  love  to  men  could  have  made  him  quick  to 
obey  the  Spirit's  direction.  Whatever  openings  we  see,  we  must  press  into.  No 
one  lives  where  souls  are  still  unsaved,  where  God  does  not  open  a  way  for  him  to 
carry  the  gospel.  Take  the  first  step,  and  God  will  point  out  the  next.  3.  His 
usable  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures.  Strangers  interested  in  the  Scriptures  meet  on 
commou  ground.  A  Frenchman  thrown  into  the  company  of  a  German,  tried  many 
ways  to  communicate  with  him  ;  but  neither  could  speak  the  language  of  the  other. 
At  last  he  took  from  his  pocket  a  little  Testament,  and  pointed  to  John  iii.  16.  The 
German  could  not  read  the  language,  but  the  Word  was  the  m^ssage  dear  to  bis 
heart.  They  each  looked  at  the  verse,  then  into  each  other's  eyes,  then  clasped 
hands  across  the  book.  Philip  had  made  no  immediate  preparation,  but  he  had 
prepared  himself  for  such  emergencies,  both  by  experience  and  study.  He  could 
begin  right  there  and  preach  Jesus.  II.  Some  of  his  rewards.  1.  He  finds  a  heart 
prepared  to  receive  the  truth.  One  who  is  filled  with  the  love  of  Jesus  finds  int^nse 
delight  in  kindling  that  love  in  others.  Philip  expected  immediate  results.  It  was 
not  his  purpose  to  sow  the  seed  and  be  content  to  leave  it.  .He  led  the  eunuch  on 
from  willingness  to  learn  to  eagerness  to  lie  a  recognised  disciple  of  Jesus.  Such  a 
reward  is  Divine.  We  never  forget  the  triumphs  of  such  moments.  2.  He  found 
new  evidence  of  being  a  co-worker  with  God.  What  a  reward  is  the  evidence  that 
God  makes  the  efforts  of  His  faithful  servant  effective  I  3.  Philip  secured  a  witness  for 
the  gospel.  That  which  he  was  so  eager  to  make  known  would  now  be  proclaimed 
by  another  also.  4.  Philip  filled  a  life  with  joy.  The  eunuch,  like  Za<cheus,  like 
the  Philippian  jailor,  like  countless  thousands  more,  rejoiced  because  he  had  found 
Christ  as  his  Saviour.  Wherever  Philip  goes,  he  leaves  a  trail  of  joy  behind  him. 
Samaria  rejoices  in  his  presence  :  so  did  also  the  desert.  {Mondaij  Club  Sermons.) 
Four  noble  guides  to  the  way  of  salvation: — I.  The  voice  in  one's  he*rt,  which 
longs  after  God.  II.  The  intimation  of  Scripture,  which  points  to  Christ.  III. 
The  guidance  of  the  ministry,  which  explains  both  the  presentiments  of  the 
heart  and  the  counsels  of  Scripture.  IV.  The  efficacy  of  the  sacrament,  which 
seals  to  us  the  Divine  rrace,  and  nourishes  and  strengthens  within  us  the  Divine 
life.     {K.  Gerok.) 

Ver.  28.  Was  returning,  and  sitting  in  his  chariot  read  Esaias  the  prophet. — Orien- 
tal reading : — If  the  eunuch  followed  the  general  custom  of  the  East,  he  was  not  only 
reading  to  himself  aloud,  but  so  as  to  be  heard  easily  and  distinctly  by  any  one  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood.  The  prayer,  or  praying,  of  the  Orienta  s  is  not 
usually  very  noisy,  but  their  reading  is  a  continual  sound.  They  study  aloud,  re-id 
their  sacred  books  aloud,  and  rehearse  their  lessons  aloud,  to  an  extent  that  is  not 
seen  among  the  Occidentals,  nor  enjoyed  by  an  Occidental  listener.  When  there 
are  many  together,  the  babel  is  astonishing.  The  idea  that  it  might  disturb  nny 
one  never  enters  their  heads.  But  the  Oiientals  do  many  things  with  noise  which 
we  of  the  West  prefer  to  do  with  quietness.  Our  talking  spems  painfully  low  and 
still  to  them,  as  theirs  seems  painfully  loud  and  noisy  to  us.  Yet  the  Orientalu  are  not 
very  much  beycmd  the  ordinary  Italians  in  that  respect.  {Prof.  I.  II.  Hall.)  The 
Word  of  God,  the  best  reading  for  a  journey,  not  only  on  the  way  from  Jerusalem  to 
Gaza,  but  on  the  way  through  time  to  eternity.  1.  We  forget  thereby  th-  hard- 
ships of  the  way.  2.  We  look  not  aside  to  forbidden  paths.  3.  We  make  thereby 
blessed  travelling  acquaintances.   4.  We  go  forward  on  the  right  path  to  the  blessed 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS,  699 

goal.  (K.  Gerok.)  Reading  the  Scriptures  : — I.  Some  eemarks  on  this  subject.  It  is  a 
duty — 1.  Incumbent  upon  all.  2.  In  accordance  witli  the  dictates  of  reason.  3.  To  be 
performed  irrespective  of  rank  and  condition.  II.  Instbuction  bespectino  it.  1. 
Before  you  read  consider  whose  book  it  is.  2.  Eead  with  a  teachable  spirit.  3.  Practise 
whitt  you  learn.  4.  Never  read  without  prayer.  {J.  Clayton,  31.  A.)  Beading  the 
ScrijJtitres  :  its  advantage  : — The  Word  of  God  isthe  water  of  life;  the  more  you  lave  it 
fortJi,  the  fresher  it  runneth  :  it  is  the  fire  of  God's  glory;  the  more  ye  blow  it,  the 
clearer  it  burneth :  it  is  the  corn  of  the  Lord's  fii-ld  ;  the  better  ye  grind  it,  the  more  it 
yieldeth  :  it  is  the  bread  of  heaven ;  the  more  it  is  broken  and  given  forth,  the  more 
it  remaineth:  it  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit ;  the  more  it  is  scoured,  the  biigiiter  it 
shineth.  (Bp.  Jewel.)  Method  of  Bible  reading  deterridned  by  need  and  purpose  : — 
Ah  1  the  way  a  man  reads  the  Bible — how  much  that  depends  upon  his  necessity. 
I  have  unrolled  the  chart  of  the  coast  many  and  many  a  time,  particularly  in  these 
later  days,  since  there  has  been  so  much  interest  attached  to  it.  I  have  gone  along 
down  witb  my  finger,  and  followed  the  shoals  and  dt^pthsin  and  out  of  this  harbour 
and  that,  and  imaj^ined  a  lighthouse  here  and  a  lighthouse  tbere  that  were  marked 
on  the  chart,  and  have  looked  at  the  inland  country  lining  the  shore,  and  it  has 
been  a  matter  of  interest  to  me,  to  be  sure.  But  suppose  I  had  been  in  thnt  equi- 
noctial gale  that  blew  with  such  violence,  and  had  had  the  command  of  a  sbip  off 
the  coast  of  Cape  Hatteras,  and  the  lighthouse  had  not  been  in  sight,  and  my  spars 
had  been  split,  and  my  rigging  had  been  disarranged,  and  my  sails  had  l^een  blown 
away,  and  I  had  had  all  I  could  do  to  keep  the  ship  out  of  a  trough  of  the  sea,  and 
I  had  been  trying  to  make  some  harbour,  how  would  I  have  unrolled  the  chart,  and 
with  two  men  to  help  me  to  hold  it,  on  account  of  the  reeling  and  staggering  of  the 
vessel,  looked  at  all  the  s^gns,  and  endeavoured  to  find  out  where  I  was !  Now, 
when  I  sit  in  my  house,  where  there  is  no  gale,  and  with  no  ship,  and  read  my  chart 
out  of  curiosity,  I  read  it  as  you  sometimes  read  your  Bible.  You  say,  "  Here  is 
the  headland  of  depravity  ;  and  there  is  a  lighthouse — born  again  ;  and  here  is  the 
channel  of  duty."  And  yet  every  one  of  you  has  charge  of  a  ship — the  human  soul. 
Evil  passions  are  fierce  winds  that  are  driving  it.  This  Bible  is  God's  chart  for  you 
to  steer  by,  to  keep  you  from  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  to  show  you  where  the 
harbour  is,  and  how  to  reach  it  without  running  on  rocks  or  bars.  If  yon  have  been 
reading  this  book  to  gratify  curiosity ;  if  you  have  been  reading  it  to  see  if  you  could 
not  catch  a  Universalist ;  if  you  have  been  reading  it  to  find  a  knife  with  which  to 
cut  up  a  Unitarian  ;  if  you  have  been  readiig  it  for  the  purpose  of  setting  up  or 
taking  down  a  bishop  ;  if  you  have  been  reading  it  to  establish  or  overthrow  any 
sect;  if  you  have  been  rtading  it  so,  then  stop.  It  is  God's  medicine-book.  You 
are  sick.  You  are  mortally  struck  through  with  disease.  There  is  no  human 
remedy  for  your  trouble.  But  here  is  God's  medicine-book.  If  you  read  it  for  life, 
for  health,  lor  growth  in  righteousness,  then  blessed  is  your  reading  ;  but  if  you 
read  it  lor  disputation  and  dialectical  ingenuities,  it  is  no  more  to  you  than  Bacon's 
"  Novum  Organum  "  would  be.  It  is  the  book  of  life — it  is  the  book  of  everlasting  life 
— so  t  ike  heed  how  you  read  it.  In  reading  it,  see  that  you  have  the  truth,  and  not 
the  mere  semblance  of  it.  You  cannot  live  without  it.  You  die  for  ever  unless  you 
have  it  to  teach  you  what  are  your  relations  to  God  and  eternity.  May  God  guide 
you  away  from  all  cunning  appearances  of  truth  set  to  deceive  men,  and  make 
you  love  the  real  truth  1  Above  all  other  things,  may  God  make  you  honest 
in  inteipreling  it,  and  applying  it  to  jour  daily  life  and  disposition!  (if.  W. 
Beecher.)  Reading    the   Scripturet  :    unprofitable   method   of : — To    some    the 

Bible  is  uninteresting  and  unprofitable,  because  they  read  too  fast.  Among 
the  insects  which  subsist  on  the  sweet  sap  of  flowers,  there  are  two  very 
diiiereiit  classes.  One  is  remarkable  for  its  imposing  plumafe,  which  shows  in 
the  sunbeams  like  the  dust  of  gems  ;  and  as  you  watch  its  jaunty  gvia  ions  over  the 
fields  and  its  minuet  dance  from  flower  to  flower,  you  cannot  Le  p  admiring  its 
graceful  activity,  for  it  is  plainly  getting  over  a  great  deal  of  ground.  But  in  the  same 
field  there  is  another  worker,  whose  brown  vest  and  business-like,  straightforward 
flight  may  not  have  arrested  your  eye.  His  fluttering  neighbour  darts  down  here 
and  there,  and  sips  elegantly  wherever  he  can  find  a  drop  of  ready  nectar ;  but  this 
dingy  plodder  makes  a  point  of  alighting  everywhere,  and  wherever  he  alights  he 
either  finds  honey  or  make  sit.  If  the  flower-cup  be  deep,  he  goes  down  to  the 
bottom  ;  if  its  dragon-mouth  be  shut,  he  thrusts  its  lips  asunder  ;  and  if  the  nectar 
be  peculiar  or  recondite,  he  explores  all  about  till  he  discovers  it,  and  then  having 
ascertained  the  knack  of  it,  joyful  as  one  who  has  found  great  spoil,  he  sings  his 
■way  down  into  its  luscious  recesses.    His  rival  of  the  painted  velvet  wing  has  no 


700  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

patience  for  such  dull  and  long-winded  details.  But  what  is  the  end  ?  Why,  the 
one  died  last  October  along  with  the  flowers  ;  the  other  is  warm  in  his  hive  to-nig'it, 
ami  1st  the  fragiant  stores  which  he  gathered  beneath  the  bright  beams  of  summer. 
To  which  do  you  belong? — the  butterflies  or  bees  ?  Do  you  search  the  Scriptures, 
or  do  you  only  skim  ttiem  1  (./.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Reailiiif)  the  Scriptures:  motive 
for  : — Other  books  can  nourish  our  minds,  but  only  God's  Word  can  feed  our  souls. 
The  great  ijrophecy  : — A  few  years  ago  a  Brahmin  of  the  highest  caste,  profound  in 
all  the  history  and  language  and  religion  of  Brahma,  came  to  England.  By  chance, 
or  rather  by  special  providence,  a  copy  of  the  Scriptures  fell  into  his  hands.  He 
devoured  it  with  avidity  ;  he  did  not  consult  any  one  to  interpret  for  him  a  single 
passage,  but  the  light  broke  upon  him,  and  what  produced  the  greatest  eSt  et  upon 
his  mmd  was  that  which  converted  Lord  Kochester  on  his  death-bed.  He  read 
Isaiah  liii.,  and  compared  it  with  the  account  of  the  crucifixion,  and  became  a  pro- 
found Christian.  That  man  is  now  in  high  favour  with  the  Nizam  of  Hyderabad, 
and  has  founded  a  church  which  has  several  hundred  Christian  worshippers.  {R. 
Bruce.)  Reading  the  Scriptures :  fruits  of: — A  Roman  Catholic  priest  in  Belgium 
rebuked  a  young  woman  and  her  brother  for  reading  that  "  bad  book,"  pointing  to 
the  Bible.  "  Sir,"  she  replied,  "  a  liltle  while  ago  my  brother  was  an  idler,  a 
gambler,  and  a  drunkard.  Since  he  began  to  study  the  Bible  he  works  with 
industry,  goes  no  longer  to  the  tavern,  no  longer  tou'-hes  cards,  brings  home 
money  to  his  poor  old  mother,  and  our  life  at  home  is  quiet  and  delightful.  How 
comes  it,  sir,  that  a  bad  book  produces  such  good  fruits?  "  Reading  :  kinds  of: — 
The  first  class  of  readers  may  be  compared  to  an  hour-glass ;  their  reading  being  as 
the  sand  :  it  runs  in  and  runs  out,  and  leaves  not  a  ves  ige  behind.  A  second  class 
resembles  a  sponge,  which  imbibes  everything,  and  returns  it  in  nearly  the  same 
state,  only  a  little  dirtier.  A  third  class  is  like  a  jelly-hag,  which  allows  all  that  is 
pure  to  pass  away,  and  retains  only  the  refuse  and  dregs.  The  fourth  class  mi.y 
be  compared  to  the  slave  of  Golconda,  who,  casting  aside  all  that  is  worthless,  pre- 
serves only  the  pure  gems.  (S.T.Coleridge.)  Reading:  results  of  good  and  had  : — 
Do  not  buy,  do  not  borrow,  do  not  touch  bad  books.  One  book  may  decide  thy 
destiny.  The  assassin  of  L  ird  William  Russell  said  he  committed  that  crime  as  the 
result  of  reading  the  romance,  then  popular,  entitled  "Jack  Sheppird."  George 
Law  was  luade  a  millionaire  by  reading  a  biography  in  cliildhood.  Benjamiii 
Franklin  became  the  good  man  and  philosopher  that  he  was  by  reading  in  early  life 
Cotton  Mather's  "  Essays  to  do  Good."  John  Angell  James,  as  consecrated  a  man 
as  ever  lived  in  England,  stood  in  his  pulpit  and  said:  "Twenty-five  years  ago  a 
lad  loaned  me  a  bad  book  for  a  quarter  of  an  liour.  I  have  never  recovered  from  it. 
The  spectres  of  that  book  have  haunted  me  to  this  day.  I  shall  not,  to  my  dying 
day,  get  over  the  reading  of  that  book  for  fifteen  minutes."  A  clergyman,  travelling 
towards  the  West,  many  years  ago,  had  in  his  trunk  Doddridge's  "  Rise  and  Pro- 
gress." In  the  hotel  be  saw  a  woman  copying  from  a  book.  He  found  that  she 
had  borrowed  Do  Idri'lge's  "  Rise  and  Progres.s  "  from  a  neighbour,  and  was  copving 
some  portions  out  of  it,  so  he  mrde  her  a  present  of  his  copy  of  the  "  Rise  and  Pro- 
gress." Thirty-one  years  after,  he  was  passing  along  that  way  and  he  inquired  for 
that  woman.  He  was  pointed  to  a  beautiful  home.  He  went  there.  He  asked  her 
if  she  remembered  him.  She  said,  "  No."  Then,  he  says,  "  Do  you  not  remember 
thirty  years  ago  a  man  gave  you  a  copy  of  Doddridge's  '  Rise  and  Progress  '  ?  "  She 
said,  "  Yes  ;  I  read  it,  and  it  was  the  means  of  my  c  )nversion.  I  passed  it  rouml, 
and  all  the  neighbours  read  it,  and  there  came  a  reviv.J,  and  we  called  a  minister 
and  we  built  a  church.  The  church  of  Wyoming  is  the  result  of  that  one  book 
which  you  gave  me."  The  reading  of  Homer's  "  Iliad  "  made  Alexander  a  warrior, 
and  the  reading  of  the  "  Life  of  Alexander  "  made  Ctesar  and  Charles  XII.  men  of 
blood.  It  is  well  kno<vn  that  Rochester  was,  for  many  years  of  his  life,  an  avowed 
infidel,  and  that  a  large  portion  of  his  time  was  spe  it  in  ridiculing  the  Bible.  Oae 
of  his  biographers  h  is  described  him  as  "  a  great  wit,  a  great  sinner,  and  a  great 
penitent."  Even  this  man  was  converted  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  use  of  His 
Word.  Reading  the  fifty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah,  he  was  convinced  of  the  tru'h  and 
inspiration  of  the  Scriptures,  the  Deity  of  the  Messiah,  and  the  value  of  His  aton3- 
ment  as  a  rock  on  which  sinners  may  build  their  hopes  of  salvation.  On  that 
atonement  he  rested,  and  died  in  the  humble  expdctation  of  pardoning  mercy  and 
heavenly  happiness. 

Ver.   20.    Then   said  the   Spirit  to  Philip,  Go  near. — Lessonit  from   the  desert 
ways: — These  two  men  were  alike  in  a  few  respects,  but  in  all  others  different. 


CHAP,  viii.]  THE  ACTS.  70i 

Both  were  travellers,  both  "were  stewards,  and  each  had  authority.  But  one 
was  rich,  the  other  poor.  One  was  the  steward  of  a  great  queen,  and  return- 
ing to  her  court  and  to  the  charge  of  all  ber  treasure;  but  the  other  was  going 
down  to  Gaza  which  is  desert,  in  trust  with  the  gospel  ministry  and  the  com- 
mission of  the  Mo'st  High.  Here  is  an  instance  to  the  point ;  men  were 
feeling  after  Christ,  in  the  unsatisfied  hunger  of  the  soul.  Whatever  impression 
that  equipage  may  have  made  on  Pliiiip,  as  he  looked,  he  was  greatly  in  error  if  he 
thought,  "  Here  ia  probably  a  haughty  man  of  the  wor-d  !  "  Appearances  deceive. 
Tue  tiumble  and  meek  may  be  in  kings'  courts ;  under  the  robe  of  wealth  and  state 
may  beat  a  he^rt  uncorrupt  before  God.  This  person,  for  example,  had  the  charge 
of  vast  earthly  treasure,  and  yet  his  thoughts  are  far  away ;  he  is  meekly  reading 
the  Word  of  life,  and  seeking  the  pearl  of  g-  eat  price.  { Morgan  Dix,  D.D.)  Guidance 
ill  doing  fiood : — There  was  an  unseen  chance  of  serving  a  fellow-man  down  in  a  distant 
desert.  Christ  offered  that  chance  to  this  Christian  preacher.  If  a  t(  ue  believer's  heart 
is  alert,  and  his  temper  willing,  the  Lord  will  surely  put  him  and  keep  him  in  the 
way  of  doing  good.  Only  he  must  watch  for  heavenly  providences  to  sunimou  him, 
and  instantly  obey.  I.  No  exertion  should  be  considered  too  difficult,  no 
PROSPECT  too  discouraging,  IF  DOING  GOOD  IS  OUR  PURPOSE.  Philip  checifully 
started  to  go  sixty  or  seventy  miles  just  to  save  a  single  soul.  "  He  arose  and 
went."  Sprang  to  meet  the  command.  On  the  other  hand  the  eunuch  traversed 
more  than  half  a  continent  to  render  God  worship  and  find  peace.  II.  Some- 
times THE  Holy  Spirit  chooses  the  best  people  in  the  unlikeliest  places. 
Christ  had  saints  in  Caesar's  househo'd  and  Herod's  family ;  so  there  was  a 
seeker  after  truth  in  the  court  of  Ethiopia.  III.  Eeligious  convictions  are 
OF  inestijiable  value,  and  ought  to  be  cherished  as  we  would  cherish  life 
ITSKLF.  The  eunuih  had  been  all  the  way  to  Jerusalem  without  any  helpful 
illumination  of  grace.  But  he  will  not  give  up  without  the  blessing ;  so  he 
searches  the  Scriptures  on  his  way  back,  in  spite  of  the  tediousness  of  the  journey. 
IV.  It  is  wrong  to  be  fastidious  about  opiobtunities.  Wherever  souls  are,  in 
the  desert  or  not,  there  let  us  try  to  save  them.  V.  We  are  never  to  despise  the 
DAY  OF  small  THINGS.  Philip,  like  our  Lord  at  Sychar,  had  an  audience  of  one— 
but  he  preached  notwithstanding.  VI.  The  measureless  worth  of  a  single 
chance  OF  telling  a  fellow-being  about  Jesus  Christ.  Philip  had  not  met 
this  man  before  :  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  he  met  him  again.  A  moment  lost 
might  have  been  the  loss  of  a  soul.  VII.  Courtesy  is  never  lost  on  any-^ody  in 
THIS  uneasy  and  somewhat  ROUGH  WORLD.  A  churl  would  have  told  this  stranger 
to  move  on  and  attend  to  his  own  concerns.  VIII.  Notice  the  Ethiopian's 
HUMILITY.  He  was  ignorant  and  acknowledged  it.  To  be  conscious  of  ignorance  is 
the  fiist  step  to  knowledge.  IX.  Whoever  desires  to  do  good  must  find  out 
WHERE  the  Spirit  is  leading  hui,  and  simply  and  humbly  follow  on.  X.  Watch' 
even  chariots  passing  by.  (C  -S.  Ixobinson,  D.D.)  The  meting  : — Marriages, 
they  say,  are  made  in  heaven  ;  i.e.,  the  steps  of  two,  both  being  God's  dear  children, 
are  t-o  directed  that  after  each  has  passed  over  many  windings,  the  two  paths  con- 
verge, and  the  two  lives  meet  and  melt  into  one  like  two  rivers,  flowing  thenceforth 
one  broader,  deeper,  stronger  stream.  Meetings  that  are  of  shorter  duration,  and 
partnerships  that  are  less  intimate,  come  under  the  same  rule.  "  It  is  not  in  man 
that  walkeih  to  direct  his  steps."  If  God's  purposes  in  creati^'U  require  the 
meeting  uf  two  circling  worlds.  He  will  so  arrange  that  the  two  shall  touch  at  the 
very  point  of  spice  and  time  which  He  has  designed.  The  same  ni'ght  and  wisdom 
have  been  at  work  to  arrange  a  meeting  wherever  one  earthen  vessel  charged  bears 
Christ,  Hnd  another  emp  y  receives  Christ  at  a  brother's  hand.  This  case  is 
recorded  as  a  specimen  of  the  Lord's  way.  Such  meetings  occur  now,  and  ye  know 
not  the  day  nor  the  hour  when  the  messenger  sent  by  God  to  meet  you  m»j  heave 
in  sight — in  church,  street,  lonely  path,  or  home.  Those  who  desire  to  meet  him 
will  not  miss  him.  Though  the  place  was  desert  and  the  path  dimly  traced,  and 
the  time  not  told  at  all,  Philip  and  the  E'hiopian  met  with  all  the  exactitude  of 
tides  and  seasons.  These  meetings,  long  prepared  and  wisely  arranged,  are  some- 
times loxtthiough  obstinate  unbelief.  What  a  meeting  was  that  between  Paul  and 
Felix  !  How  far  up  the  lines  of  preparation  for  it  ran  ;  and  how  skilfully  they  were 
held  by  God  until  the  missionary  and  the  ruler  met !  Now,  Felix,  or  never.  "  Go 
thy  way, "&c.  Fool!  You  will  never  get  another.  He  thought  he  was  only  politely 
puttins.'  off  the  Christian :  in  reality  he  was  rudely  rejecting  Christ.  To  lose  such 
a  meeting  may  be  to  lose  your  soul.  Philip  ran  to  meet  the  eunuch.  Hitherto  he 
had  walked,  perhaps  sluwly.     So  when  two  objects  attract  each  other  by  hidden 


702  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  vin. 

magtifits,  their  mutual  motion  towards  a  meeting  is  scarcely  perceptible  at  first; 
but  when  they  have  approached  near  the  movement  quickens,  and  they  traverse 
the  rest  of  the  space  at  a  rush.  (IF.  Arnot,  D.I).)  A  proridential  meeting: — 
At  one  of  Mr.  Moody's  meetings  in  Belfast,  the  Rev.  Wesley  Guard  mentioned  an 
incident  of  whiih  he  snid  the  facts  had  just  been  related  to  him.  It  was  to  the 
effect  that  a  farmer,  living  three  miles  out  in  the  country,  wanted  to  cotne  into  the 
meeting  one  day,  but  was  unexpectedly  det  lined,  and  did  not  know  how  he  would 
get  there  iu  time.  He  started,  and  presently  he  heard  a  car  coming  behind  him. 
"When  it  came  np  the  vehicle  was  stopppd,  and  the  man  said  to  the  driver,  "  Thank 
you,  sir,  for  giving  me  a  lift."  "  I  did  not  offer  you  a  lift ;  but  as  the  horse  stopped 
you  had  better  get  up."  The  farmer  got  up,  and  they  drove  on.  After  a  little  con- 
versation ihe  driver  confessed  that  he  was  in  great  distress  about  his  soul,  and  the 
tears  began  to  fall.  The  good  man  told  him  the  way  of  life,  and  there  and  then  as 
they  journeyed  on  the  car  the  gentleman  found  salvation.  Said  he,  "  I  can  see  now 
why  the  horse  stopped;  it  was  that  I  might  get  into  the  light."  Little  events 
leading  to  great : — In  walking  across  Alpine  glaciers,  travellers  often  come  upon 
narrow  and  apparently  insignificant  fissures,  that  seem  to  be  merely  superficial 
cracks  ;  while  the  guide-  know  that,  it  one  but  t^ounds  them,  they  shall  be  found 
sinking  down,  fathom  aftf^r  frtthom,  to  the  very  bottom,  and  sometimes,  though 
small  to  the  eye  externally,  they  are  cavernous,  and  at  the  bottom  torrents  rusli 
and  roar  in  silence,  for  so  far  down  are  they,  and  so  in  covered,  that  their  angriest 
noises  are  smothered.  It  is  just  so  in  human  life.  The  most  insignifi  -ant  inci- 
dents oft"n  lead  to  great  events.  Often,  if  we  liear  God's  voice  in  the  small 
matters  of  life,  and  obey  His  commands,  we  shall  find  that  we  are  led  on  to  great 
things.  Pliilip  was  told  in  what  direction  to  go,  and  by  fioing  in  that  particular 
direction  he  met  the  Ethiopian,  and  was  able  to  lead  him  to  Christ.  A  timely 
vi.4t : — It  is  recorded  of  Mr.  Dod,  one  of  the  Puritan  ministers,  that  being  one 
night  late  in  his  study,  his  mind  wis  strongly  inclined,  though  he  could  assign  no 
reason  for  it,  to  visit  a  gent^man  of  his  acquaintance  at  a  very  unseasonable  hour. 
Not  knowing  the  design  of  Providence,  he  obeyed  and  went.  When  he  reached  the 
house,  after  knocking  a  few  times  at  the  door,  the  gentleman  himself  came,  and 
inquired  if  he  wanted  him  upon  any  particular  business.  Mr.  Dod,  having  ans^vered 
in  the  negative,  and  signified  tbat  he  could  not  rest  till  he  had  seen  him,  the  gentle- 
man replied,  "Oh,  sir,  vou  are  sent  of  God  at  this  ver\  hour,  for  I  was  just  now 
going  t>  destroy  myself,"  and  immediately  pulled  the  halter  out  of  his  pocket  by 
which  he  had  intended  to  commit  the  horrid  deed,  which  was  thus  prevented. 

Vers.  30-39.  And  Pliilip  ran  .  .  .  and  said,  Understandest  thou  what  thou 
readest? — Understanding  the  Word: — 1.  Notice  the  preliminary  fact  that  ttie 
Sciiptaies  clia  lenge  investitration.  "Let  us  reason  together,"  says  Isaiah.  The 
Bible  is  a  definite  and  positive  force.  You  can  no  more  eliminate  it  from  the 
world's  life  than  you  can  tal<e  oxygen  from  its  atmosphere,  or  Columbus  and 
Constantino  from  history.  The  lite  and  words  of  Jesus  invite,  demand  intel- 
ligent study.  2.  These  Scriptures  are  a  growth.  The  Word  of  Gud  is  not  "droppsd 
ready-made  from  heaven."  3.  Our  understanding  of  the  Word  is  a  growth.  We 
must  get  more  and  more  th"  true  perspective.  I.  What  rules  of  interpretatiom 
ARK  WE  to  adopt?  1.  At  the  ou' set  we  assume  the  fact  that  the  Word  is  not  a 
sealed  volume,  but  a  plain  book,  in  the  study  of  which  reason,  common  sense  is 
needed.  Rationalism  enthrones  reason  above  the  Bible,  we  need  not  go  to  the 
other  extreme  and  ignore  it.  We  find  necessary  facts  in  the  Scriptures.  Things, 
indeed,  there  are  which  are  hard  to  be  understood,  but  we  need  not  magni'y 
ditiiculti  s  into  doubts.  To  recognise  difficulties  is  not  sinful,  but  doubt,  at  least,  is 
not  holy.  We  are  to  remember  that  God  is  not  limited  to  our  comprehension  of 
Him.  We  cannot  rule  out  all  difficulties.  Faith  has  its  place  as  well  as  reason. 
2.  The  Scriptures,  in  the  next  place,  appeal  to  our  moral  nature,  the  conscience, 
affections,  to  hope  and  fear.  Christ  says,  "  I  will  tell  yon  whom  ye  shall  fear." 
The  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  Love,  too,  lifts  the  veil  from  many 
a  mystery.  This  is  true  in  even  human  friendship,  but  in  a  grander  sense  love  is 
an  interpreter  of  God.  We  quarrel  with  the  facts  of  His  character  and  govern- 
ment until  we  learn  to  love  Him.  Then  all  grows  pl.iin.  The  Word  of  God  meets 
the  soul's  yearning  for  pardon.  The  conscience  of  Felix  was  app'nled  to,  and  he 
trem'ded.  Christians  need  to  make  their  consciences  more  discriminating  and 
sensitive.  3.  Again,  we  are  to  interpret  the  Word  of  God  in  its  unity  and  rest 
upon  it  as  God's  truth,  not  content  with  fragmentary  facts.     Our  spiritual  universe 


CHAP,  vin.]  THE  ACTS.  703 

is  more  than  one  story  high.  We  cannot  leave  our  belief  in  a  future  existence. 
Deep  and  reverent  scholarship  shown  in  the  study  of  Divine  truth  has  always  been 
honoui  ed  of  God.  We  ought  to  be  content  only  in  a  large  outlook.  II.  Perils  in 
METHODS  OF  iNTERPEETATioN.  1.  Somc  come  to  the  Scriptures  for  a  purpose  and 
bend  it  to  a  theory-.  2.  Others  come  to  the  Scriptures  with  a  captious  spirit  to 
pick  out  faults  and  errors.  3.  Some  cultivate  a  merely  intellectual,  speculative 
knowledge,  and  know  nothing  of  the  gospel  as  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation. 
4.  Others  are  literalists.  They  make  a  great  deal  about  the  horses  in  Eevelation 
and  their  colour.  5.  Others,  still,  go  to  the  opposite  extreme,  and  spiritualise 
everything.  6.  The  Bible  advances  as  a  positive  revelation,  definite  and  fixed, 
•while  science  every  year  abandons  one  theory  after  another.  (BI.  Burnham,  D.D.) 
Askiiifj  questions : — A.  Persian  philosopher  being  asl^ed  by  what  method  he  had 
acquired  so  much  knowledge,  answered,  "  By  not  allowing  shame  to  prevent  me 
from  asking  questions  when  I  was  ignorant."  The  Bible  : — Philip  had  been  sum- 
moned by  the  Spirit  of  God  into  the  desert  of  Gaza.  It  may  have  been  to  save  him 
from  the  intoxication  of  success.  We  all  know  how  prone  we  are — ^when  God  gives 
to  us  success — to  take  the  credit  to  oiu'selves.  It  may  have  besn  therefore  on  this 
account,  to  save  Philip  from  being  puffed  np  by  pride  by  his  popularity  and  power, 
that  he  was  summoned  thus  into  the  wilderness  by  G  jd.  We  do  not  say  that  he 
■was  so  puffed  up  ;  if  he  were,  Simon  Magus  would  have  a  thorn  to  prick  the  bladder 
of  pride  on  this  account.  But  we  do  say  that  ofttimes  in  our  own  case,  God  sees  fit 
to  call  us  aside  for  awhile  with  Him.  In  Philip's  case  it  may  rather  have  been  to 
save  him  from  the  paralysis  of  desjiair.  For  now  no  sooner  was  his  work  tested, 
than  the  very  best  of  his  converts  failed.  Doubtless  there  would  be  heart-searching 
in  the  mind  of  Philip  himself.  "  Was  I  too  anxious  to  get  that  man  ?  "  "Did  I 
soften  the  terms  of  the  message  so  as  to  win  him  on  my  side  ?  "  "  Was  I  suffici- 
ently satisfied  with  the  deepness  of  the  work  which  he  professed  had  taken  place  ?  " 
But  God  is  a  good  Master,  though  this  Simon  Magus  had  so  egregiously  failed.  God 
was  about  to  give  Philip  another  soul,  one  in  whom  he  might  indeed  rejoice,  and  of 
whom — though  perhaps  he  would  never  see  him  agiin— he  might  hear  how 
gloriously  he  was  carrying  on  the  work  of  God  in  a  distant  land.  Now  there  are 
four  questions  I  think  suggested  here.  In  the  tirst  place,  "  What  are  you  reading?  " 
In  the  second  place,  "  Understandest  thou  what  thou  readest  ?  "  And  then  the 
third  question  asked  by  the  Ethiopian  eunuch  himself,  "  How  can  I  understand  ?  " 
And  lastly,  "What  doth  hinder  me  from  obeying  these  precepts?"  I.  What 
readest  thou?  'Jhi^  is  distinctly  a  reading  age.  Take  heed  whit  you  read. 
Beware  of  any  impure  books  which  may  vitiate  the  imagination.  Beware  of  any 
flippant  and  frivolous  books  which  may  nuike  you  tired  of  the  monotony  of  daily 
life.  Beware  of  any  sceptical  books,  which  blasphemously  and  irreverently  dncry 
God  and  His  Holy  Word.  I  know  that  there  are  men  who  say  that  you  must  read 
both  nides  of  a  qupsli"n.  I  don't  see  why,  if  a  man  chooses  to  publish  a  libel  upon 
my  wife,  I  am  obliged  to  wade  through  it  on  the  plea  of  rending  both  sides  of  the 
question.  How  much  is  lead  which  will  scarcely  bear  inspection.  Here  this 
eunuch  is  travelling  back  to  his  own  country.  He  had  no  need  to  be  af>aid  of 
Philip  asking  him  the  qu-  stion,  "  What  readest  thou?  "  There  wa*  no  need  for 
Lim  to  hide  the  book  under  his  carriage  cushion,  and  say,  "  Nothing  " ;  no  r  ason 
for  a  blush  to  cime  across  his  face.  We  know  if  he  liad  lived  in  the  nineteenth 
century,  the  Word  of  God  would  have  been  about  the  la'^t  thing  that  he,  as  a  seeker 
after  truth,  would  have  consid-red  it  right  to  read.  But  not  so  in  that  century.  It 
is  as  an  earnest,  honest  seeker  after  truth  he  studied  God's  own  Word,  and  asked, 
♦'Whit  saith  the  Scripture?"  Ah,  some  of  the  heathen  will  rise  up  in  ju  Igment 
again-;t  us.  We  read  of  a  wild  Paihan  givin.'  one-third  of  his  month's  pay  in  order 
to  ob  ain  a  copy  of  the  Word  <  i  God.  II.  But  Philip's  question  is  directed,  not  merely 
to  what  it  was  he  was  reading,  but  he  asked  him,  "  Understandest  thod  what 
THOU  KEAKEST ?  "  This  is  very  importint.  God  deals  with  us,  not  as  horse  or 
mule  that  bas  no  understanding,  but  He  put's  before  us  a  Word  that  requires  all  the 
b  'st  efforts  of  ourJntelligenf;e  and  reason.  The  first  great  requisite  of  good  ground 
t  >  rec  i  e  the  seed  is  this— that  a  man  understand  the  Word.  III.  Now  comes  the 
question,  "  How  can  I  understand  ?  "  "  How  can  I,"  i-aid  the  eunuch — "  how  can 
I  und  rsta  id  ?  "  The  fir^-t  thing  you  can  do  is  to  ask  the  Author  to  explain  it.  If 
you  were  reading  any  book  you  could  not  quite  understand,  and  the  author  is  in  the 
next  room,  it  is  verv  ea-y  to  go  to  the  author  of  that  bo>k.  The  author  of  this 
b'>ok  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  und  \ou  can  ask  Him  to  explain  it  far  better  than  any 
commentator.      IV.  Then   lasty  comes  the  question,  "  What  doth  hinder  you 


704  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

FROM  BEING  BAPTIZED  ?  "  The  eunuch  knew  this :  If  it  is  true,  I  must  come  out 
and  confess.  (E.  A.  Stuart,  M.A.)  Alacrittj  in  God's  service: — "  Philip  ran  to 
him."  That  is  the  way  a  man  goes  at  the  Lord's  work  when  he  is  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  aud  wisdom.  He  does  not  shutHe  along  in  a  half-hearted  way,  as  if  iie  were 
not  sure  whether  to  go  or  to  hold  back  ;  or  as  if  he  thought  that  to-morrow  or  an 
hour  hence  would  be  as  well  as  now  for  duty  doing.  He  just  runs  as  if  everything 
depended  on  Ins  not  losing  a  minute.  And  if  the  man  whom  he  is  sent  to  is  in  a 
chariot,  and  has  a  fair  start  of  him,  he  has  need  to  run.  A  great  many  opportunities 
of  doing  the  Lord's  work  are  lost  because  of  delay.  There  are  times  when  resting 
and  waiting  are  in  order ;  but  when  we  know  of  a  soul  in  need,  and  when  we  have 
had  a  prompting  from  the  Holy  Spirit  to  go  to  that  soul,  the  one  thing  for  us  to  do 
is — to  run.  {H.  C.  Trumbull,  D.D.)  A  weighty  question: — I.  Ix  supposes  that 
we  read  the  Bible.  Is  this  correct,  or  does  this  half  heathen  put  us  to  shame  ? 
II.  It  discloses  our  natural  blindness.  Is  not  our  Bible  reading  often  an  un- 
intelligent reading,  our  Bible  a  book  not  understood  ?  III.  It  excites  us  to  seek 
the  true  Interpreter  and  Guide.  He  it  is  who  spake  by  Phihp — the  Spirit  of  God, 
who  always  lives  and  operates  in  the  Church.  Lessons :  1.  Eeadest  thou  what 
thou  hast?  2.  Understandest  thou  what  thou  readest?  3.  Obeyest  thou  what 
thou  understandest?     (K.  Gerok.)  Understandest  thou  tvhat  thou  rendest? — 1. 

How  this  chamberlain  came  to  be  a  proselyte  we  do  not  know.     The  book  which  he 
was  so  fond  of  reading  may  have  been  the  means ;  certainly  it  has  answered  that 
purpose  thousands  of  times.    At  any  rate,  he  followed  the  light  he  had.    Be  true  to 
truth  as  it  comes  to  you.     If  God  gives  you  only  common  candle-light,  make  good 
use  of  it.     Those  who  are  willing  to  see  God  by  the  moon  of  nature  shall  soon  be 
illuminated  by  the  sun  of  revelation.     2.  Having  become  a  proselyte,  the  eunuch 
made  a  long  and  perilous  journey  to  Jerusalem.     After  he  had  enjoyed  the  solemn 
feast  he  returned ;  and  while  he  travelled  along  he  read  the  very  best  text  that 
Phihp  could  have  selected.      The  like  conjunction  of  Providence  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  constantly  occurs  in  conversions.     How  often  have  the  talks  of  young  men 
by  the  wayside  been  reproduced  by  the  preacher  I     3.  Tbis  nobleman  is  reading — a 
hopeful  sign.     In  these  days  we  need  haidly  exhort  young  men  to  read.     But  then 
Philip  asked,  "  What  readest  thou  ?  "  and  that  suggests  a  necessary  inquiry.     Much 
that  is  read  nowadays  had  far  better  be  left  unread.     Souls  have  been  ruined  by 
reading  a  vile  book.     Young  men,  you  will  read^but  take  heed  what  you  read! 
The  best  of  reading  is  the  reading  of  the  best  of  books.     I  do  not  like  to  see  in  a 
lending-library  all  the  works  of   fiction  needing  to  be  bound  two  or  three  times 
over,  while  the  books  of  sober  fact  and  solid  teaching  have  never  been  read,  since 
they  have  not  even  been  cut.     4.  It  was  a  very  sharp-pointed  question  that  Philip 
put  to  this  gentleman.     We  find  it  tolerably  easy  to  put  questions  to  a  man  who  is 
poor,  but  how  shall  we  approach  the  rich  ?     We  have  sermons  for  the  working 
classes,  why  not  for  the  Houses  of  Parliament.     Are  there  any  bigger  sinners  any- 
where than  you  might  find  in  those  two  chambers  ?     5.  The  Bible  was  meant  to  be 
understood,  and  it  benefits  us  in  proportion  as  we  get  at  the  meaning  of  it.     The 
mere  words  of  Scripture  passing  over  the  ear  or  before  the  eye  can  do  us  little  good. 
"I  read  a  chapter  every  morning,"  says  one.     Quite  right;  keep  that  up;  but 
" Understandest  thou  what  thou  readest?  "     "  Well,  I  learn  the  daily  text."     Yes, 
but  "  Understandest  thou  what  thou  readest  ?  "     That  is  the  main  point.     The 
butterflies  flit  over  the  garden,  and  nothing  comes  of  their  flitting ;  but  look  at  the 
bees,  how  they  dive  into  the  bells  of  the  flowers,  and  come  forth  with  their  thighs 
laden  with  the  pollen,  and  their  stomachs  filled  with  the  sweetest  honey  for  their 
hives.     This  is  the  way  to  read  the  Bible.     A  thoughtful  book  needs  and  deserves 
thoughtful  reading.     If  it  has  taken  its  author  a  long  time  to  write  it,  it  is  due  to 
him  that  you  give  his  work  a  careful  perusal.     If  the  thoughts  of  men  deserve  tbis, 
what  shall  I  say  of  the  supreme  thoughts  of  God  ?     I.  What  is  the  most  im- 
portant thing  to  be  understood  in  this  Book?    I  believe  that  it  is  contained  in 
the  passage  which  the  eunuch  was  reading.    Already  he  had  noted  the  words,  "  All 
we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray,"  &c.    What  is  wanted  is  that  we  understand — 1. 
That  we  have  all  gone  astray.    He  who  does  not  know  that  will  not  care  for  the 
Shepherd  who  comes  to  fetch  him  back  again.     2.  That  salvation  is  the  gift  of 
Divine  mercy  to  the  guilty,  and  is  never  the  reward  of  human  merit.     Christ  did 
not  come  to  save  you  because  you  are  good,  for  you  are  not  good.    I  hear  the 
doctor's  brougham  rattling  down  the  street  at  a  great  pace  ;  but  it  never  occurs  to 
me  that  he  is  rushinj;  to  call  upon  a  hale  and  hearty  man.     So  Christ  came  not  "  to 
call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."    3.  That  "  the  Lord  hath  laid  on 


CHAP,  nil.]  THE  ACTS.  705 

Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all "  !     Now  every  man  who  believes  in  Jesus  may  know  that 
his  sin  was  laid  upon,  borne  by,  and  put  away  by  Christ.     A  thing  cannot  be  in 
two  places  at  one  time.     You  cannot  bear  it,  but  Christ  bore  it ;  you  are  to  accept 
Christ  as  your  Sin-bearer,  and  then  you  may  know  that  your  sins  have  gone. 
II.  What  is   the   test  of  a  man's  understanding  his  Bible?      1.  That  Jesus 
Christ  is  everything  to  him  :  for  Philip,  who  did  understand  it,  when  he  explained 
it,  preached  unto  the  eunuch  Jesus  and  nothing  else.     I  try  to  preach  Jesus,  and  I 
love  to  meet  with  people  who  delight  in  this  theme.     Every  young  man,  when  he 
believes  in  Jesus,  should  give  himself  to  Jesus,  heart  and  soul,  for  ever.     "That's 
the  kind  of  young  man  for  my  money,  for  he  is  0  and  0,"  said  a  certain  person, 
meaning,  "  Out  and  out  for  Christ."     Jesus  was  out  and  out  for  us;  there  should 
be  no  half-heartedness  in  our  dealings  with  Him.    If  we  have  read  Scripture  aright, 
we  have  not  received  the  kind  of  Christianity  which  sanctifies  us  on  Sunday,  but 
enables  us  to  be  dishonest  throughout  the  week.     I  like  this  eunuch  for  proposing 
that  he  should  be  baptized.     He  was  not  advised  to  do  so,  but  he  gave  himself  up 
to  do  the  Lord's  bidding  at  once.     Whichever  way  the  Scripture  bids  you  dedicate 
yourself  to  God,  set  to  work  about  it,  and  let  it  be  done  at  once.     2.  That  they 
made  him  glad,  for  this  eunuch  "  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."     The  man  who  from 
reading  his  Uible  goes  forth  with  a  pious  resolution  that  he  will  make  everybody  as 
miserable  as  he  can,  wants  converting  again.     3.  That  they  make  him  care  about 
the  salvation  of  others  ;  for  this  Ethiopian  nobleman,  when  he  got  home,  I  have  no 
doubt,  spread  the  gospel  throughout  his  native  land,  and  was  probably  the  founder 
of  the  Abyssinian  Church.     One  of  the  holiest  instincts  born  in  a  renewed  man  is 
that  of  longing  to  save   others.      Being  saved,  we  wish    to  co-operate  with  the 
Saviour  in  His  gracious  work.     4.  That  his  message  to  others  is  what  the  message 
was  to  him — Christ,  Christ.     You  have  nothing  else  to  employ  as  the  means  of 
good,  except  the  salvation  of  Jesus,  and  there  is  nothing  else  wortli  telling.     III. 
What  can  be  done  to  obt.un  such  a  desirable  understanding  of  the  Scrip  iures? 
1.  When  you  read  a  passage  which  you  do  not  understand,  read  it  until  you  do. 
Here  is  a  little  boy  whose  father  is  an  artizan,  and  uses  a  great  many  technical 
terms.     The  boy  is  apprenticed,  and  wants  to  know  all  about  it,  and  therefore  he 
listens  to  his  father,  and  when  the  day  is  over  he  says  to  himself,  "I  heard  my 
father  say  a  great  deal,  but  I  do  not  understand  much  of  it."     "  But  you  did  under-' 
stand  a  little  o-f  it  ?  "     "  Oh,  yes."     To  that  Jittle  he  is  faithful,  and  day  by  day  he 
adds  to  his  store  of  information,  learning  more  by  the  help  of  that  which  he  already 
knows,  and  at  length  he  can  talk  like  his  father,  using  the  same  words  with  under- 
standing.    So  when  I  do  not  comprehend  a  chajiter,  I  say,  I  will  hear  my  great 
Father  speak,  even  if  I  do  not  understand  at  first  what  He  may  say  to  me,  and  I 
will  keep  on  hearing  Him  until  at  last  I  grasp  His  meaning.     Do  as  the  photo- 
grapher does,  when  he  allows  an  object  to  be  long  before  the  camer;*  until  he  obtains 
a  well-defined  iDicture.     Let  your  mind  dwell  on  a  passage  till  at  last  it  has  photo- 
graphed itself  upon  your  soul  by  the  light  of  God.     2.  Always  read  with  a  desire  to 
understand.     Have  the  crackers  with  you  to  crack  the  nuts,  that  you  may  feed 
upon  their  kernels.     3.  Pray  for  the  enlightenment  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     When  I' 
cannot  understand  a  book  I  write  and  ask  the  author  what  he  means.     Can  we  do 
that  with  the  Bible  ?     You  may  consult  learned  commentators,  but  that  is  not  half 
so  satisfactory  as  to  go  to  the  Author  of  the  Book.     Eemember  that  you  can  also  go 
to  the  Maker  of  your  mind,  and  He  can  open  it  to  receive  the  truth.     (C.  H. 
Spurfjeon.)        A  personal  question: — At  our  meeting  for  prnyer  and  fasting  last 
Tuesday,  a  brother,  who  was,  I  think,  the  best  man  amongst-us,  made  a  confession 
of  cowrtrdice,  and  we  all  looked  at  hmi  and  could  not  uudeistand  how  he  could  be  a 
coward,  for  a  bolder  man  I  do  not  know.     He  told  us  that  there  was  a  man  in  his 
congregation  who  was  a  wealthy  man.     If  he  had  been  a  poor  man,  he  would  have 
spoken  to  him  about  his  soul ;  but,  being  a  wealthy  man,  he  thought  it  would  be 
taking  too  much  liberty.     At  last  one  of  the  members  happened  to  say  to  him, 
•'  Mr.  So-and-So,  have  you  found  a  Saviour  ?  "  and  bursting  into  tears,  the  man 
said,  "Thank  you  for  speaking  to  me;  I  have  been  in  distress  for  months,  and 
thought  the  minister  might  have  spoken  to  me.     Oh,  I  wish  he  had  ;  I  mij-ht  have 
found  peace."     (Ibid.)         Humility  in  an  inquirer: — "  Understandest  thou  what 
thou  readest  ?  "  a^ked  Philip  of  the  eunuch.     And  the  great  man  candidly  acknow- 
ledged that  he  understood  it  not  at  all.     And  therein  he  showed  his  real  greatness, 
for  an  intellectual  liliputian  would  have  made  believe  that  he  understood  it  all. 
The  most  insufferable  ignoramuses  are  the  men  that  are  omniscient.     The  writer 
well  remembers  that  upon  one  occasion,  in  his  early  ministry,  during  a  protracted 
VOL.  I.  45 


706  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

meeting  he  approached  an  old  sinner,  who  seemed  to  be  thoughtful,  and,  sitting 
down  beside  him,  undertook  to  open  up  to  him  the  way  of  life,  but  the  aged  repro- 
bate scornfully  said,  "  Young  man,  you  cannot  tell  me  anything."  And  after  that 
we  did  not  try,  nor  would  it  have  been  worth  while.  He  was  wiser  in  his  own  con- 
ceit than  seven  men  that  can  render  a  reason.  Tlif-re  is  more  hope  of  a  fool  than 
of  such  a  man.  A  genuine  inquirer  is  always  humlJe,  and  ready  to  welcome  truth 
from  whatever  quarter  it  may  come.  A  lord  trea-urer,  seated  in  his  chariot,  did 
not  tbink  it  beneath  him  to  be  instructed  by  a  travel-stained  evangelistic  tramp 
whom  he  picks  up  on  the  road.  "How can  I, except  some  mtin  should  guide  me  ?  " 
was  a  form  of  speech  that  did  the  distinguislied  Ethiopian  infinite  honour.  A  man 
possessed  of  such  spirit  has  commonly  not  very  far  to  seek.  "  To  this  man  will  I 
look,"  saith  the  Lord,  "who  is  of  an  humble  and  a  contrite  heart,  and  that 
trembleth  at  My  word."  "  The  meek  will  He  guide  in  judgment,  and  the  meek  will 
He  teach  His  way."  While  such  a  spirit  is  essential  to  eveiy  seeker  after  Christ, 
it  should  characterise  followers  of  Chiist  at  every  stage  of  experience.  Those  who 
have  taken  the  deepest  sea  soundings  and  have  climbed  the  loftiest  mountain  heights 
realise  most  profoundly  the  limitations  of  their  knowledge,  and  are  evermore  the  most; 
willing  to  learn.  And  he  who  thus  acknowledges  his  ignorance  is  in  a  fair  way  to  mend 
it,  for  like  the  Ethiopian  eunuch  he  is  ready  to  reach  out  for  the  guidance  of  a  friendly 
hand,  and  commonly  he  has  not  far  to  seek.  {Baptist  Teacher.)  Bible  reading  : — 
The  Bible  should  I  e  read — I.  Intelligently.  Very  often  the  time  spent  in  I3ible 
readii  g  is  time  wasted.  There  is  a  certain  sect  in  the  East  whose  priests  use  a  pray- 
ing machine,  and  tbere  are  people  who  read  the  Bible  every  day,  hut  they  read  like 
machines.  Eeading  the  Bible  does  us  no  good  unless  we  understand  what  we  read. 
I  have  met  with  people  who  have  gone  abroad  to  a  beautiful  country,  just  to  be  able 
to  say  that  they  had  been  there.  They  never  noticed  the  beauties  of  tlie  scenery, 
their  one  object  was  to  get  to  a  certain  place  and  then  gf  t  back  again.  So  it  is  with 
many  Bible  readers.  Their  one  object  is  to  get  through  so  many  chapters  or  verses. 
Some  of  the  first  discoveries  of  gold  in  Australia  were  made  by  accident.  A  man 
saw  a  mas^s  of  rock,  and  struck  it  carelessly  with  a  pickaxe  and  broke  it,  and  found 
that  it  contained  f.'old.  Now  some  parts  of  the  Bible  may  appear  like  the  rock, 
hard  and  uninteresting,  till  we  can  work  into  them,  then  we  find  gold.  II.  Prayer- 
FDiiLY.  We  may  make  mistakes  about  the  Bible  as  well  as  any  other  bo  k.  If 
you  were  to  read  some  medical  works,  and  had  not  rereived  the  education 
of  a  doctor,  you  would  soon  fancy  that  yon  had  several  different  diseases ; 
and  if  you  were  to  try  to  treat  yourself  for  them  you  would  probably  become 
really  ill,  or  perhaps  die.  In  the  same  way  people  may  make  mistakes  abnut 
the  Bible.  A  lady  once  came  to  me  during  a  mission  utterly  miserable  because 
fihe  thought  she  had  committed  "  the  unpardonable  sin,"  without  knowing  what 
it  was.  John  Bunyan  neatly  went  mad  at  one  time  from  the  same  mistake. 
We  must  have  light  to  read  the  Bible  by  ;  light  given  directly  by  God  in  answer  to 
prayer ;  and  from  the  teaching  and  explanation  of  God's  Church,  Men  of  science 
have  just  taught  us  how  to  store  electricity,  so  that  we  can  lay  in  a  stock  of  it  just 
as  we  lay  in  coals,  sufficient  to  light  our  lamps  for  a  given  time.  Well,  we  can  store 
light  to  understand  the  Bible  by  ;  the  more  we  pray  over  our  Bible  the  more  light  we 
store  in  ourselves.  III.  Meditatively.  Food  not  digested  is  almost  as  bad  as  poison  ; 
and  so  many  people  get  positive  harm  from  their  Bible  reading  because  they  do  not 
digest  what  they  read.  As  properly  digested  food  makes  our  bodies  what  they  are, 
flesh,  and  bone,  and  blood,  and  muscle,  so  God's  Word  properly  digested  makes  a 
member  of  the  Church  9.  Bible  Christian,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  term.  IV.  To  find 
Jesds  there.  You  know  how  they  collect  gold  dust?  They  take  the  soil  which  has 
been  dug  out, and  wash  it  in  rnniiingwater,  carefully  watching  for  tlie  spaikling  grains. 
Well,  we  should  take  what  we  have  dug  out  of  the  Bible  by  study,  and  examine  it 
carefully,  and  look  into  it  again  and  again  till  we  find  gold,  signs  of  Jesus  Christ. 
When  we  approach  one  of  our  English  towns  or  villages,  the  most  conspicuous 
object  is  the  tower  or  spire  of  the  church  or  minster  rising  above  all  other  buildings 
and  casting  its  shadow  over  all.  So  when  we  approach  our  Bible  reading  we  should 
see  Jesus  first,  and  His  Cross  rising  above  all  other  topics,  and  casting  its  shadow 
on  every  page.  V.  With  the  aid  of  the  Spirit.  There  is  an  instrument  called  an 
.S'iolian  harp,  which  is  silent  till  placed  where  the  wind  can  blow  upon  it,  then  its 
strings  give  forth  sweet  music.  Your  Bible  will  be  silent  to  you  till  the  breath  of 
God  blows  upon  it,  then  it  will  be  the  music  of  the  gospel  to  you.  Old  legends  say 
that  when  the  rising  sun  shone  upon  the  statue  of  Memnon,  in  Ef/ypt,  the  figure 
uttered  tuneful  sounds.     So  when  the  sun  of  the  Holy  Spirit  shines  upon  the  pages 


CHAP.  VIII. J  THE  ACTS.  707 

of  your  Bible,  God  will  send  forth  thence  His  voice,  yea,  and  tbat  a  mighty  voice. 
"  Who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."     VI.  Personall?.     Do  not  try  to  fit  the 
warnings  and  teachings  and  threats  of  the  Bible  on  other.s,  but  on  ,\  ourselves. 
People  too  often  study  God's  Word  to  find  out  their  neighbour's  sins,  instead  of  their 
own.     They  need  the  sharp  message — "Thou  art  the  man!"     In  the  old  da\s  of 
Greece,  they  tell  us  of  a  philosopher  who  went  about  from  place  to  place  witb  a 
lantern,  and  when  asked  what  he  was  seeking,  he  answered  that  he  was  looking  for 
an  honest  man.     We  are  too  fond  of  taking  the  lantern  of  God's  Word,  and  examin- 
ing our  neighbours  with  it.     Let  us  try  to  turn  the  light  more  strongly  on  ourselves. 
VII.  To  REALISE  WHAT  YOU  READ.     I  heard  of  a  poor  woman  who  heard  the  account 
of  the  Saviour's  sufferings  read ;  she  was  very  ignorant,  and  being  told  that  these 
«vents  happened  long  ago,  and  in  a  foreign  land,  expressed  a  hope  thit  afier  all  the 
account  might  not  be  true.  I  believe  that  many  people  read  the  Bible,  or  hear  it  read, 
and  never  feel  it,  never  realise  its  truth.     It  is  a  custom  in  Greenland  for  a  stranger, 
W'htn  knocking  at  the  door,  to  ask,  "  Is  God  in  this  house  ?  "    If  the  answer,  "  Yes," 
is  given,  he  enters.     Let  the  Bible  ask  you  this  question.     When  you  read  God's 
Word,  listen  for  God's  voice  asking  you  the  question — "  Is  God  in  this  house  ?  "    Is 
it  well  with  thee,  is  it  well  with  the  husband,  is  it  well  with  the  child?     Let  your 
Bible  spe  ik  to  your  innermost  heart,  and  let  your  answer  be,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy 
servant  heareth."     (H.  J.  IF.  Buxton.)       Fruitful  Bible  reading  : — A  hint  as  to — 
I.  Casual  PERUSAL  OF  THE  Bible.     When  a  man  employs  his  occasi 'nnl  leisure  in 
endeavouring  to  master  a  subject  we  have  no  need  to  question  his  interest  in  it. 
The  study  of  the  Bible  in  a  railway  carriage  is  a  course  which  any  Christian  would 
be  glad  to  pursue  if  he  could  do  it  unostentatiously.     Travellers  like  the  eunuch  are 
not  numerous.     Men  prefer  the  novel.     But  the  grand  lesson  is  the  use  of  passing 
opportunities  for  following  up  what  we  have  learned  of  the  Lord,  and  fitting  us  to 
hear  more  of  Him.     II.  The  exercise  of  thought  which  the  Bible  demands.     It 
cannot  be  "  understood  "  without  fixing  the  mind  on  its  statements,  and  trying  to 
perceive  what  they  mean.      Many  truths  are  perfectly  clear,  but  others  are  so 
recorded  as  if  God  were  aiming  to  make  us  search,  pray,  watch,  and  be  humble. 
And  so  with  the  study  of  nature.     We  cannot  understand  it  by  mere  gazing.     III. 
The  instroctors  the  Spirit  will  provide  for  the  thoughtful  Bible  student. 
'i"he  Spirit  moved  Philip.     To  warrant  the  expectation  of  spiritual  help  two  condi- 
tions here  illustrated  must  be  fulfilled.     1.  The  eunuch  was  reading  the  Scriptures 
lor  himself.     He  was  not  taking  the  account  from  others,  but  was  perusing  the  very 
v.ords  which  "  holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Giiost."     2. 
He  was  conscious  that  help  was  needed.     So  help  came  in  this  unexpected  way.     It 
is  not  that  teachers  are  few,  but  that  our  eyes  are  dull.     The  best  helps,  teachers, 
commentaries,  &c.,  are  useless  without  the  Spirit  of  God.     IV.  The  great  purpose 
OF  THE  Spirit  that  of  leading  readers  of  the  Bible  to  Christ.     The  written 
Word  is  to  tell  of  the  living  Word,  and  would  never  have  been  written  Viut  for  that. 
(D.  G.   Watt,  3I.A.)         Intelliofnt  reading  of  Holy  Scripture :— I.  Many  do  not 
understand  what  they  read.     Through — 1.  Ignorance.     2.  Lack  of  teachers.     3. 
Want  of  spiritual  insight.     4.  Prejudice.     This  is  a  great  moral  loss.     II.  How  we 
MAY  understand  WHAT  WE   BEAD.     By — 1.  Attention.      2.   Meditation.     3.  Prayer. 
4.  Aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     5.  Help  of  friends  and  ministers.     III.  Why  should 
WE  understand  WHAT  WE  READ  ?     The  Bible  is — 1.  The  Word  of  God.     2.  The  way 
of  salvation.     3.  The  joy  of  the  sanctified  heart.     Is  the  Bible  an  open  book  to  us? 
(Family  Churchman.)         The  relations  between  Holy  Scripture  and  the  Church: — 
1.  This  interview  is  a  specimen  of  the  private  ministration  of  the  gospel,  and  teaches 
us  how  such  ministration  should  be  opened  and  conducted.     Philip  fell  in,  not  only 
with  the  eunuch,  but  with  the  train  of  thought  his  mind  was  pursuing.     It  is  sur- 
prising how  many  good  and  even  Scriptural  words  utterly  fail  to  take  hold  of  the 
mind,  because  not  in  a  state  which  requires  that  particular  counsel.     Now  as  there 
is  in  nature  a  specific  for  every  physical  disorder,  so  there  is  in  God's  Word  a  specific 
for  every  spiritual  malady.     If  the  right  specific  is  offered  to  an  individual,  he 
appropriates  it ;  it  is  what  his  conscience  requires ;  but  if  the  wrong,  no  effect  or  a 
btid  one  is  produced,  not  because  it  has  lost  its  virtue,  or  is  essentiallv  deleterious, 
but  because  there  is  no  correspondence  bet  wee  ti  it  and  the  patient's  state.     Now  ia 
order  to  offer  men  remedies  to  meet  their  c-tse  we  must  study  the  direction  of  their 
thoughts.      And  when  we  come  upon   them  off   their   guard,  and   observe   how 
they  are   occupied,  we   can   obtain  a  clue   to   their   thoughts.      The    Ethiopian 
was  reading  the   Scriptures    as   if    he  took   pleasure    in    tliem,    which   showed 
him  to  be  a  religiously  minded  man.     What  followed  brought  out  his  docility 


708  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOE.  [chap.  vm. 

and  willingness  to  be  enlightened.  So  Philip,  guided  by  Providence  and  by 
tie  turn  of  his  hearer's  mind,  spake  a  word  in  season.  2.  Our  Lord  had  instructed 
H  s  disciples  to  "  salute  no  man  by  the  way."  In  common  intercourse  men  begin 
with  trifles  before  they  pass  on  to  topics  of  importance.  But  trifles  do  not  befit  the 
character  of  God's  messenger.  So  Philip  does  not  open  the  conversation  by  talk 
about  the  weather  or  the  crops,  but  begins  at  once  with  the  business  of  his  mission. 
He  was  abrupt,  judged  by  the  standard  of  the  world's  manners,  but  not  as  regards 
the  Ethiopiau's  state  of  mind,  who  therefore  invites  him  up  into  his  cliariot.  Alas 
that  our  thoughts,  unlike  his,  should  be  exercised  so  much  on  secular  things  that 
spiritual  remarks  seem  to  us  an  intrusion  and  a  want  of  tact !  3.  The  eunuch's 
response,  "How  can  I  understand,"  &c.,  intending  to  express  nothing  more  ihan 
the  sentiment  of  the  moment,  contains  an  important  principle.  The  Scriptures  are 
the  Church's  law,  they  contain  all  j^rinciples  of  faith  and  duty,  and  are  given  by 
inspiration  of  God.  Moreover  the  Church  stands  on  them  ;  for  if  the  acts  and  the 
commission  of  Christ  to  His  disciples  did  not  exist  the  Church  would  have  the 
ground  cut  from  under  her.  In  this  point  of  view  Scripture  is  paramount  to  the 
Church  and  prior  in  order  of  thought.  Yet  the  Church  is  prior  to  Scripture  in  order 
of  time.  No  book  of  the  Old  Testament  was  written  before  Moses,  and  yet  from  the 
time  of  Abel  there  were  believers.  No  book  of  the  New  Testament  had  been  com- 
posed at  this  time,  yet  there  was  a  flourishing  Church  in  Jerusalem.  And  each  one 
of  us,  as  we  come  into  the  world,  is  approached  by  the  Church,  e.g.,  in  baptism, 
before  he  can  be  approached  by  the  Scriptures.  That  is  the  principle  on  which 
godparents,  who  represent  the  Church,  and  on  which  religious  teachers  act.  The 
child  is  taught  by  catechisms  compiled  by  the  Church,  but  gathered  out  of  Scrip- 
ture. Now,  suppose  a  mim  competently  educated,  but  whose  mind  has  been  left  a 
blank  on  religion,  were  to  sit  down  to  compile  a  creed  for  himself  out  of  the  Bible,  how 
many  years  would  he  take?  The  mincl  must  proceed  in  the  first  instance  upon 
human  authority  ;  but  in  after  days,  having  been  imbued  with  the  faith,  he  can 
recognise  it  in  Scripture,  and  see  how  it  can  be  proved  thereby.  The  Bible  can  be 
with  none  of  us  the  original  teacher  of  truth,  but  we  must  not  shrink  from  the  duty 
of  testing  by  this  infallible  criterion  what  we  first  receive  on  human  authority.  We 
have  no  fear  that  the  Catholic  faith  will  be  shaken  by  this  examination  if  made  in 
the  spirit  of  prayer.  Yet  as  regai'ds  lesser  points  of  belief  about  which  there  are 
two  opinions  a  word  of  caution  is  needed.  Correct  conclusions  are  scarcely  likely 
to  be  arrived  at  if  we  discard  the  commentary  drawn  from  the  sentiments  of  the 
primitive  Church.  Take,  e.g.,  infant  baptism.  There  are  passages  from  which  it 
may  be  inferred  that  it  is  conformable  to  the  mind  of  Christ.  Yet  it  would  be 
too  much  to  say  that  it  is  proved  from  the  Bible.  But  if  you  allow  the  usages  of 
the  early  Church  to  be  any  evidence  of  what  apostolic  practice  was,  then  the 
evidence  is  overwhelming.  The  relations  between  the  Church  and  Scripture  are 
illu-trated  by  those  between  the  judicial  and  the  legislative  jjower  in  the  State.  A 
judge  has  no  authority  to  make  the  law :  that  is  made  by  Parliament ;  he  is  only  the 
interpreter  and  the  administrator.  On  the  one  hand  the  judge  is  as  much  under 
the  law  as  those  whom  he  tries,  and  on  the  other,  juries  would  often  go  wrong  unless 
the  judge  directed  them.  Well,  Scripture  is  the  law  ;  the  Church  is  the  judge;  the 
individual  soul  is  the  jury.  In  interpreting  the  Scripture  the  individual  soul  needs 
the  guidance  of  the  Church,  which  if  he  rejects,  he  rejects  the  aid  God  has  given 
him  for  arriving  at  a  right  conclusion,  aud  kicks  down  the  ladder  by  which  he 
has  risen  to  what  he  knows  of  Divine  truth.  And  yet  should  the  Church,  as  Rome  has 
done,  impose  new  articles  of  faith,  he  must  break  with  such  a  s^ociety.  Whenever  the 
judge  imposes  new  laws,  it  is  time  to  side  w<th  the  law  against  the  judge.  {Dean  Goiil- 
hum.)  Direction.i  fur  profitable  study  of  the  Word  of  God  : — I.  Dos  r  xnon  read  the 
Scriptures  at  at.i,  ?  Is  such  an  inquiry  necessary  in  a  community  professedly 
Christian?  Yes,  there  are  multitudes  whom  God  continually  solicits  by  the  Bible 
in  vain.  Books  that  corrupt,  or  dissipate,  or  at  best  amuse,  are  read,  to  its  exclu- 
sion. "I  have  wiitten  unto  them  the  great  things  of  My  law,  but  they  were 
counted  as  a  strange  thing."  The  humble  inquirer  who  asks,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be 
eaved  ?  "  needs  the  voice  of  the  book  of  God  to  say,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  The  Christian  pilt;ritn  needs  its  guidance  to  direct  him  to  rest;  and  he 
who  has  grown  in  grace  equally  requires  its  help.  It  is  like  the  line  of  the  architect, 
as  needful  to  lay  the  top  stone  as  to  lay  the  foundation.  Aud  yet  how  many  pro- 
fessing Christians  suffer  the  truth  to  solicit  them  in  vain!  Your  own  reason  and 
human  advisers  can  no  more  renew  a  lost  soul  than  they  can  create  a  living  liian. 
And  yet  the  voice  of  God  in  the  Bible  is  too  often  unheard.    Neither  the  terrors  of 


CHAP.  Till.]  THE  ACTS.  700 

the  law  compel,  nor  the  love  of  the  gospel  allui'es.  The  unwise  mariner  may  not 
feel  the  want  of  his  chart  or  his  compass  while  the  sea  is  calm  and  his  way 
app  ircntly  clear  ;  but  as  he  would  feel  his  deadly  error  in  leaving  them  behind  him 
when  the  win. is  lash  the  waves  into  fury,  and  he  knew  not  whither  to  turn  for  help, 
so  the  time  of  sorrow,  darkness,  sickness,  death  will  come  ;  and  then  what  will  ye 
do,  when  the  redeeming  God  of  the  Bible  is  to  you  an  unknown  God?  II.  "  Under- 
STANDEST  THOU  WHAT  THOU  KEADEST?  "  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,"  &c.  He  wants  the  sight,  the  hearing,  tbe  touch  of  faith. 
Many  understand  not  because — I.  They  read  it  with  cold  indifference.  They  may 
take  it  up  occasionally,  but  it  discloses  nothing  that  meets  their  case,  because  they 
are  ignorant  of  their  want.  Is  it  wonderful  that  they  should  see  no  beauty  in 
Christ,  and  no  merit  in  His  atonement,  who  have  never  realised  their  sin  ?  2. 
It  aims  a  death-blow  at  the  pride  of  self-righteousness.  The  Abana  and 
Pharpar  of  our  own  Damascus  seem  more  efficient,  as  they  are  always  more  grateful 
to  the  natural  man.  The  gospel  will  be  understood  as  a  remedial  revelation,  only 
■when  Divine  grace  shall  make  us  willing  to  come,  naked  and  empty  handed,  to  Him 
■who  justifieth  the  ungodly.  3.  It  opposes  the  prejudices  of  unrenewed  men.  We 
approach  it,  too  frequently,  rather  that  we  may  find  materials  there  on  which  to 
build  up  our  own  system  than  to  find  Christ  and  salvation.  But  God's  immutable 
truth  will  never  adapt  itself  to  the  miseralde  shibboleth  of  our  device.  4.  It  utterly 
condemns  sin,  and  men  love  sin.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."  III. 
In  what  manner  the  Scriptures  mat  be  savingly  read.  The  conduct  of  the 
Ethiopian  will  furnish  us  with  a  directory,  by  teaching  us  to  study  them — ^1.  With 
constancy  and  diligence.  He  beguiled  his  journey  by  reading  tbe  prophet  Isaiah, 
who  testified  so  wondrously  of  Christ.  And  Christ  says,  "  Search  the  Scriptures," 
&G.  Be  not  contented  with  cold,  formal,  occasional  reading  ;  but  look  into  them,  as 
he  who  is  in  search  of  a  mine  dij^s  deeply,  follows  each  vein,  and  minutely  examines 
every  appearance  of  the  gold  which  his  heart  covets.  2.  Com^jaring  spiritual  things 
■with  sjpiritual.  Thus  Philip  began  with  the  passage  in  Isaiah,  and  preached  unto 
the  eunuch  Jesus.  Read  your  Bibles  with  their  references ;  see  how  the  law 
shadows  forth  the  gospel,  how  the  mind  of  God  in  one  place  corresponds  to  the 
same  mind  in  another.  Such  an  examination  will  assist  you  more  surely  than  all 
the  commentators ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  will  always  be  found  the  best  Expounder  of 
His  own  Word.  3.  With  prayer.  As  the  dial  bears  all  the  hours  of  the  day  marked 
upon  its  surface,  but  will  not  show  the  time  unless  the  sun  shine  upon  it,  so  doth 
the  Word  of  God  disclose  all  His  mind,  but  not  to  saving  apprehension,  unless  by 
the  light  of  the  Eternal  Spirit.  To  the  worldly  wise,  the  Bible  is  a  letter  written 
in  cypher.  The  Holy  Ghost  interprets  the  writing  by  bringing  His  people  to  the 
secret  of  a  sanctified  experience,  as  a  clue  to  those  high  and  dear  mysteries  of  grace 
which  before  were  hid  from  their  eyes.  4.  Seeking  the  help  of  others,  who  have 
been  taught  of  God.  '•  And  he  desired  Philip,"  &c.  Thus  Apollos  availed  himself 
of  the  help  of  Aquila  and  Priscilla.  5.  With  humility.  Imitate  the  teachableness 
of  the  Ethiopian.  "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to  the  humble." 
"  Learn  of  Christ,  for  He  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto 
your  souls."      {R.  P.  Buddiconi.)  The  seed  smvn  and  the  harvest  reaped: — 1. 

Sometimes  a  sermon  is  rep  )rted  word  for  word,  at  others  the  substance  only. 
The  report  of  Philip's  sermon  is  the  briefest,  yet  most  complete.  "  He  preached  to 
him  Jesus  " — not  only  Jesus,  but  Jesus  unto  him,  then  and  th3re.  Here  often  our 
preaching  fails.  The  gospel  is  fully  declared  ;  but  Jesus  is  not  pressed  on  the  con- 
science of  every  man.  The  outspread  rays  make  all  the  ground  bright ;  but  the 
concentration  of  the  rays  on  a  spot  makes  it  burn.  The  Ethiopian  understood  the 
message,  believed,  and  was  baptized.  2.  He  went  on  his  way.  He  is  not  instantly 
carried  home.  He  pursues  his  journey  under  the  hot  sun,  and  on  the  hot  sand. 
Christ  prayed  not  that  His  disciples  should  be  taken  out  of  the  world.  The  winter 
is  as  cold  and  the  summer  as  waim  to  them  as  to  others.  The  Ethiopian  began 
that  journey  before  he  had  accepted  Christ ;  and  now  that  he  is  a  Christian  he  does 
not  turn  aside  ;  and  when  he  reaches  his  home  he  will  attend  to  the  duties  of  his 
oilice.  So,  Christian,  if  your  business  was  lawful  before,  you  need  not  desert  it 
after  you  become  a  Christian.  And,  besides,  the  eunuch  would  do  more  good  ia 
Ethiopia  than  in  following  Philip  northward.  Everywhere  the  earth  is  corrupt, 
and  needs  salt.  3.  He  went  on  his  way  rejoicing.  Surely  it  is  not  a  sorrowful 
thing,  whatever  people  may  say,  even  in  this  world  to  know  that  the  next  is  all 
your  own.  4.  Observe  what  i^ower  a  thirsting  soul  exerts,  not  over  earth,  but  over 
heaven.     An  empty  human  heart,  longing  for  living  water,  can  command  all  the 


710  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viu. 


fulness  of  the  Godhead  for  its  supply.  The  longing  soul  of  this  Ethiopian  noi 
only  drew  Philip  from  Lis  successful  ministry,  but  forgiving  love  from  its  fountain 
in  God.  In  certain  sandy  tracks  travellers  sometimes  fall  in  with  a  living  plant, 
whose  leaves  when  cut  give  off  refreshing  water.  How  comes  this  ?  Because  that 
lowly  herb  has  all  the  waters  of  the  Atlantic  at  its  disposal.  A  multitude  of 
microscopic  mouths  open  in  every  leaf.  These  suck  from  the  air  what  moisture  it 
contains,  and  the  air,  thus  divested  of  a  portion  of  its  moisture,  draws  from  the 
distant  ocean  to  fill  the  void.  Blessed  are  they  that  thirst,  for  tbey  shall  be 
satisfied.      (IF.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  conversion  and  baptism  of  the   eunuch  : — 1. 

Note  the  circuitousness  of  the  method  by  which  they  were  brought  about.  This 
man  had  just  visited  Jerusalem  on  an  errand  of  devotion.  The  apostles  still  re- 
raained  in  the  city,  and  frequented  the  temple.  Why  was  it  not  arranged,  there- 
fore, that  he  should  fall  in  with  one  of  them?  Instead  of  this,  an  angel  is  sent  to 
an  evMUgelist,  bidding  him  travel  in  a  distant  region,  where  he  falls  in  with  the 
eunuch.  Perhaps  the  answer  is  that  this  arrangement  was  most  signific«nt  of  the 
designs  for  His  Church  which  God  was  then  unfolding.  The  ministry  of  tbe  deacons- 
was  the  dawn  of  that  of  Paul — freer,  wider  than  that  of  the  apostles.  It  was  far 
more  conformable,  therefore,  with  the  then  state  of  the  Christian  dispensation  that, 
instead  of  receiving  the  gospel  in  the  confined  atmosphere  of  the  holy  city,  the 
Ethiopian  phould  hear  "  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness,"  the  freer  breezes  of 
which  were  a  symbol  of  the  liberty  with  which  God's  Word  went  forth  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth.  2.  Whatever  the  reason,  the  practical  teaching  is  obvious.  Men 
often  find  God  where  they  least  expect  to  meet  Him.  We  may  find  Him  in  the 
desert,  and  miss  Him  in  Jerusalem.  There  is  a  difference  in  this  respect  betweea 
the  laws  of  nature  and  those  of  grace.  In  the  one,  the  effect  is  tied  to  the  means ; 
in  the  other,  good  impressions  are  not  limited  to  ordinances.  The  Spirit  is  oftea 
pleased  to  act  independently  of  His  ordained  channels.  A  casual  interview  with  a 
stranger,  a  book  read  on  a  journey,  some  striking  incident  or  scene,  has  often  proved 
a  means  of  grace  when  sermons  and  sacraments  have  failed.  The  avenues  by 
which  God  reaches  the  hearts  of  men  are  almost  as  various  as  their  characters.  3. 
The  reason  for  the  eunuch  pitching  upon  Isaiah  liii.  may  have  been  because  it  was 
part  of  a  section  which  also  embraces  chap.  Ivi.,  where  such  encourHgement  is  given 
to  eunuchs.  But  whatever  his  motives,  the  text,  applying  as  it  does  only  to  the 
Christ  he  knew  not,  perplexed  him,  and  gave  Philip  the  opportunity  of  preaching 
Him  in  whom  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled — "  Jesus,"  not  Christ  the  Messiah  of  the 
Jews,  through  whom  he  could  (  ffer  an  universal  salvation.  4.  The  Ethiopian  drank 
in  the  good  news,  and  requested  enrolment  among  the  disciples  of  the  new  faith, 
and  Philip  could  make  no  objection.  Had  not  God  brought  him  to  the  spot  for 
this  very  purpose  ?  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  practical  reflections  to  which  the  pas- 
sage gives  rise.  Note — (1)  The  spiritual  freedom  which  characterises  the  whole 
incident — its  scene,  not  the  temple,  but  the  wilderness ;  its  time,  not  the  Sabbath, 
but  a  work-day;  the  minister,  not  an  apostle,  but  an  officer  more  or  less  secular. 
And  yet  the  great  features  of  this  procedure  of  Divine  grace  are  the  same  as  those 
we  find  everywhere.  Our  Lord  commissioned  His  Church  to  make  disciples  of  all 
nations,  baptizing  them,  &c.,  and  had  said  to  Nicodemus,  "  Except  a  man  be  born 
of  water,"  &c. ;  and  St.  Paul  speaks  of  Christ  as  "sanctifying  and  clearing  the 
Church  by  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word."  Two  elements,  according  to  these 
passages,  enter  into  the  idea  of  admission  into  the  Church — the  action  of  the  Word 
of  God  on  the  conscience,  the  outward  sign  of  washing  with  water.  Both  these 
are  found  here.  Philip,  it  is  true,  preached  not  in  a  church,  but  in  a  chariot ;  not  to 
many  souls,  but  to  one ;  still,  it  was  preaching,  and  then  there  was  baptism.  So  that 
there  was  here  a  Church  according  to  the  definition,  "  a  congregation  of  faithful 
men,  in  which  the  pure  Word  of  God  is  preached,  and  the  sacraments  administered." 
"A  congregation  !  "  you  will  say.  Yes.  "  Where  tico  or  three  are  met  together  in 
My  name,"  &c.  What  a  consolation  to  ministers  whose  congregations  are  thin  1 
One  good  listener  is  better  than  one  hundred  indifferent  ones.  (2)  The  immediate 
administration  of  baptism  to  one  whose  knowledge  must  have  been  immature.  It 
was  the  same  in  the  case  of  the  Philippian  jailer.  No  doubt  the  circumstances 
warranted  the  act,  whereas  now  ordinarily  a  probation  would  be  wise.  Yet  it  must 
be  remembered  that  baptism  is  only  matriculation,  not  graduation,  in  the  school  of 
Christ;  and  in  the  great  commission,  the  teaching  which  qualifies  for  baptism  ia 
distinguished  from  that  which  succeeds  it.  It  is  not  the  amount  of  a  catechumen'* 
knowledge  which  is  to  be  looked  to,  but  his  spiritual  receptivity.  3.  The  passage 
■jvhich  proved  the  means  of  the  eunuch's  conversion  is  one  which  describes  the  meek 


CHAP,  viii.j  THE  ACTS.  .     Til 

and  resigned  passion  of  the  Saviour,  and  was  the  means  also  of  the  conversion  of  the 
celebrated  Lord  Eochester.  The  subject  with  which  it  deals  was  the  means  of  a 
mighty  awakening  in  Greenland,  after  long  and  fruitless  efforts,  to  get  at  the  hearts 
of  the  people.  Our  Lord  predicted  that  His  Cross  should  prove  the  supreme  attrac- 
tion, and  Paul  determined  to  know  nothing  but  it.     {Dean  Goulburn.) 

Vers.  32-38.  The  place  of  the  Scripture  which  he  read  was  this,  He  was  led  as 
a  sheep  to  the  slaughter.  .  .  .  Then  Philip  .  .  .  toegan  at  the  same  Scripture  and 
preached  unto  him  Jesus. — Philij^s  seimon: — I.  The  text.  "He  was  led  as  a 
sheep  to  the  slaughter,"  &c.  Here  is  no  difficulty,  but  there  are  two  difficulties 
following  which  require  explanation.  1.  "  In  His  humiliation  His  judgment  was 
tiiken  away."  He  appeared  in  such  a  condition  that  Pilate,  though  convinced  of 
His  innocence,  did  not  consider  Him  of  importance  enough  to  risk  anything  for  His 
deliverance.  "  Taking  away  His  judgment "  means  the  denial  of  the  rights  of  legal 
justice.  2.  "  And  who  shall  declare  His  generation?"  Some  have  referred  this 
to  His  eternal  generation  from  the  Father ;  some  to  His  being  conceived  by  the 
Holy  Ghost;  others  to  His  resurrection ;  others  again  to  His  spiritual  seed.  But 
there  are  only  two  probable  meanings :  (1)  Who  shall  declare  the  manner  of  His 
life?  Before  the  execution  of  criminals,  proclamation  was  made,  "  Will  any  one 
testify  anything  in  favour  of  the  condemned  ?  "  Sometimes  they  saw  one  hasten- 
ing with  a  long  white  flag,  and  exclaiming,  "  A  witness  is  come."  But  there  was 
no  white  flag  on  Calvary  !  "  They  all  forsook  Him  and  fled."  (2)  Who  shall  de- 
clare the  generation  of  men  in  which  He  lived  ?  Thus  Luke  says,  "  He  shall  suffer 
many  things,  and  be  rejected  of  this  generation."  Therefore  there  was  no  one  in 
this  sense  to  declare  His  generation,  the  wickedness  of  the  men  in  whose  day  He 
lived,  suffered,  and  was  slain.  II.  The  sermon.  1.  It  was  unpremeilitated.  The 
apostles  were  admonished  not  to  meditate  beforeliand,  for  "it  should  be  given 
them  in  that  same  hour,"  &c.  And  ministers  should  never  be  at  a  loss  to  say  some- 
thing about  Christ.  Our  Saviour  says,  "  Every  scribe  which  is  instructed  unto  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  is  like  unto  an  householder,"  &c.  Ye  would  not  deem  him  a 
good  housekeeper  who,  if  a  friend  calls  suddenly,  could  not  bring  something  to  feed 
him.  Sometimes  a  minister's  best  thoughts  will  be  those  produced  by  present  cir- 
cumstances and  present  feelings.  Baxter  was  once  preaching,  when  there  occurred 
a  tremendous  storm  which  threw  his  audience  into  great  consternation.  He  paused 
and  exclaimed,  "  My  brethren,  we  are  assembled  this  morning  to  prepare  against 
that  day  when  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  melt 
with  fervent  heat ;  the  earth  and  all  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burut  up." 
This  hushed  and  calmed  the  audience.  When  Peter  was  preaching,  a  multitude  ex- 
claimed, "  What  shiiU  we  do  ?  "  but  Peter  was  not  disconcerted.  2.  Its  subject  was 
Jesus,  as  it  was  in  Samaria.  This  was  his  constant  practice,  nor  was  it  peculiar  to 
him.  Paul  said  to  the  Corinthians,  "  I  determined  to  know  nothing  among  you  save 
Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified."  The  Saviour,  when  He  commissioned  the  apostles, 
instructed  them  to  preach  in  His  name.  This  is  the  subject  which,  though  so  old, 
is  always  so  new  ;  and  not  only  a  faithful  saying,  but  "  worthy  of  all  acceptation.'" 
In  order  to  be  useful  to  otheis  we  must  preach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus;  "for 
"  there  is  salvation  in  no  other."  3.  This  sermon  was  very  Scriptural:  "  He  began 
at  the  same  Scripture,"  and  this  was  a  good  beginning ;  but  we  must  extend  the 
thing.  According  to  Christ's  own  testimony  there  are  tbings  concerning  Him  in 
all  the  Sciiptures.  "  Search  the  Scriptures,  for  they  are  they  that  testify  of  Me." 
Divide  them,  arrange  them  as  you  please,  and  you  will  find  that  He  is  "  all  in  all." 
Wherever,  therefore,  you  step  on  this  holy  ground,  immediately  a  star  is  in  motion, 
going  before  you  till  it  stands  over  where  the  young  child  is  ;  wherever  you  listen, 
you  hear  a  voice  saying,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sins 
of  the  world  " ;  wherever  you  open  the  leaves  in  this  sacred  book,  "  His  name  is  as 
ointment  poured  forth."  (IF.  Jai/.)  Fhili2)'s  sermon  : — I.  The  subject  of  Philip's 
PREACHING.  1.  The  "  Scripture  "  here  referred  to  was  one  of  the  most  striking 
prophecies  concerning  Christ.  It  is  very  minute,  and  seems  to  unite  the  most 
opposite  extremes  ;  so  that  this  Jewish  proselyte  might  well  inquire,  "  Of  whom 
speaketli  the  prophet  this?"  (1)  The  mysterious  person  mentioned  by  the  pro- 
phet was  to  be  treated  with  hatred  and  scorn  (Isa.  liii.  2,  3).  (2)  He  was  to  suffer 
from  God  as  well  as  from  His  countrymen  (ver.  10).  (3)  He  was  to  be  free  from  sin 
(ver.  9).  (4)  He  was  to  be  an  example  of  perfect  meekness  and  submission  under 
all  His  sufferings  (ver. 7).  (5)  He  was  to  be  subjected  to  a  violent  death,  with  which 
some  peculiar  circumstances  were  connected  (vers.  8,  9)     (6)  He  was  to  rise  from 


712  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

the  dead  (ver.  10).     (7)  He  was  to  have  a  progeny,  be  invested  with  great  power, 
and  to  carry  on  a  prosperous  work  in  the  earth,  under  the  Divine  approval,  and  to 
His  own  galisfactioa  (vers.  10,  12),     Here,  then,  we  have  a  prophecy  most  compre- 
hensive in  its  range,  most  minute  and  singular  in  its  details,  which  alone,  in  all 
its  particulars,  is  fulfilled  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.     To  what  conclusion  are  we  then 
brought  by  a  comparison  of  the  prophecy  with  the  events  of  our  Lord's  history  ? 
First,  that  the  prophet  was  inspired  ;  for  no  human  sagacity  could  foresee,  at  a  dis- 
tance of  more  than  seven  hundred  years,  the  facts  which  he  has  described  :  and, 
secondly,  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  and  the  Christ  of  God.     None  but  a  Divine  person 
could  endure  the  sufferings  He  underwent,  could  redeem,  and  govern,  and  save 
mai'kind ;  and  Jesus  was  anointed  of  God  to  accomplish  these  momentous  objects. 
Philip  therefore  preached  Jesus  to  the  Ethiopian,  and  when  this  subject  was  pre- 
sented to  his  candid  mind  conviction  immediately  flashed  upon  his  understanding 
and  conscience ;  and  being  inspired  with  a  love  of  the  truth,  he  "  received  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord."     2.  In  this  prophecy  several  of  the  leading  truths  of  Christianity 
are  explicitly  asserted.     (1)  The  universal  sinfulness  of  mankind.     "All  we  like 
sheep  have  gone  astray,"  &c.,  and  it  is  assumed  not  only  that  we  have  "  infirmities" 
and  "sorrows,"  but  also  "  sins,"  "  transgressions,"  "iniquities."     (2)  The  fact  of 
Christ's  substitution  in  the  place  of  sinners.     His  "soul"  was  made  "an  offering 
for  sin  "  ;  our  "  iniquities  were  laid  upon  Him  "  ;  "  He  bare  the  sin  of  many,"  &c. 
(3)  The  universality  of  Christ's  atonement.     The  remedy  is  as  extensive  as  the 
evil.     "  The  Lord  hath  laid  upon  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."     (4)  The  use  which 
Christ  makes  of  His  atonement  with  regard  to  God.    He  "  made  intercession  for 
the  transgressors."     (5)  The  fruit  of  Christ's  atonement  with  regard  to  fallen  man. 
The  sufferings  which  He  endured  were  "  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  "  (Eom.  iii. 
24,  25).     II.  The  manner  in  which  the  Ethiopian  eeceived  the  evangelical  mes- 
SAOE.      1.  With  deep  seriousness  and  attention.      The  man  who  had  renounced 
idolatry,  who  had  become  a  worshipper  of  God,  who  had  taken  a  long  and  danger- 
ous journey  that  he  might  render  to  Jehovah  the  homage  He  required,  was  not  a 
man  to  treat  any  question  of  religion  with  indifference.     His  heart  was  evidently 
deeply  impressed  with  the  things  of  God.     The  relations  in  which  men  stand  to 
their  Maker,  the  obligations  which  He  has  laid  upon  them,  the  provision  which  He 
has  made  for  their  salvation,  the  final  happiness  of  the  just,  and  the  perdition  of 
ungodly  men— these  are  subjects  which  none  but  either  the  grossly  ignorant  or 
wicked  will  ever  treat  with  levity.  Every  wise  man  will  perceive  that,  if  Christianity 
is  true,  it  is  worse  than  maflness  to  neglect  it,  and  will  make  it  his  first  and  most 
anxious  concern  to  inquire  into  its  nature  and  claims;  that  he  may  not  run  the 
terrible  risk  of  neglecting  that  mercy  which,  when  it  is  once  passed  away,  will  never 
return.    2.  With  exemplary  meekness  and  humility.    He  did  not  resent  the  inquiry 
of  Philip,  abrupt  as  it  might  seem.     No  feeling  of  self-importance,  as  a  man  of 
office  and  rank,  induced  him  to  turn  away.     With  the  utmost  frankness  he  at  once 
confessed  his  ignorance,  invited  Philip  into  the  chariot,  solicited  instruction,  and 
assumed  the  character  and  attitude  of  a  It^arner.     This  is  precisely  the  spirit  in 
which  Divine  light  is  received.     The  wrangling  disputant  has  a  thousand  objections 
to  offer  before  he  can  admit  one  siugle  principle  of  evangelical  truth,  and  when  all 
those  objections  have  been  met  his  dark  and  vain  mind  is  as  far  from  true  wisdom 
as  it  was  when  he  began  his  idle  toil.  The  philosopher,  full  of  his  own  speculations, 
has  almost  everything  to  uulearn  before  he  can  receive  the  truth  as  the  instrument 
of  his  salvation.     3.  In  faith.     That  he  trusted  in  Christ  as  his  Redeemer  and 
■Saviour  we  have  ample  proof  in  the  subsequent  part  of  the  narrative.    4.  In  the 
spirit  of  submission  and  obedience.    As  the  Ethiopian  was  "  swift  to  hear  "  and  to 
understand,  so  was  he  prompt  to  obey.     When  his  understanding  was  enlightened, 
the  asse.it  of  his  will  was  gained.     Being  instructed  in  "  the  doctrine  of  baptit-m," 
he  waited  not  to  be  earnestly  and  repeatedly  urged  to  a  compliance  with  the  Lord's 
command.      He  was  the  first  to  propose  the  immediate  administration  of  the 
ordinance  ;  that  he  might  at  once  practically  declare  his  subjection  to  Christ,  and 
receive  the  salvation  which  the  gospel  reveals  as  the  fruit  of  His  passion.  III.  The 
HAPPY  REStjLT  OF  HIS  CONVERSION — "  He  wcut  on  his  Way  rejoicing."      He  was 
miraculously  deprived  of  his  teacher,  but  he  was  left  in  possession  of  a  treasure 
which  filled  him  with  sacred  joy.     1.  He  doubtless  rejoiced  that  he  had  found  the 
truth.    To  be  ignorant  of  God,  and  of  the  things  belonging  to  our  peace,  is  one  of 
•the  greatest  calamities.     2.  As  a  believer  in  Jesus  Christ  he  rejoiced  in  the  favour 
of  God.     The  favour  of  God  is  better  than  life,  as  His  wrath  is  more  tenible  than 
death.     3.  The  approbation  of  hia  own  conscience  would  be  another  ground  of  r*- 


CHAP,  viii.]  THE  ACTS.  713 

joicing.  Conscience  is  a  powerful  instrument  both  of  happiness  and  of  misery.  4. 
He  rtjoiced  to  be  the  bearer  of  good  tidings  to  others.  A  regenerated  heart  yearns 
over  men  who  are  dying  in  their  sins,  and  at  the  same  time  it  burns  with  desire  to 
promote  the  honour  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  the  extension  of  His  kingdom.  Under 
the  impulse  of  these  feelings  a  believer  cannot  be  silent  on  the  subject  of  his  religion. 
He  who  had  so  unexpectedly  found  mercy  could  not  be  indifferent  to  the  spiritual 
wants  and  claims  of  bis  own  countrymen.  5.  In  common  with  all  true  believers  he 
rejoiced  in  hope  of  eternal  life.  Conclusion  :  The  subject  forcibly  reminds  us — 1. 
Of  the  great  benefit  connected  with  the  public  worship  of  God.  Had  not  this  noble 
Ethiopian  attended  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  the  probability  is  that  he  would  have 
remained  a  stranger  to  the  Christian  salvation.  2.  That  the  great  object  at  which 
we  should  aim  in  the  use  of  God's  ordinances  is  the  knowledge  of  Christ  as  our 
Saviour.  The  Ethiopian,  with  all  his  sincerity,  failed  in  this  grand  point,  and  an 
angel  was  employed  in  providing  for  him  the  requisite  instruction  so  that  he  might 
believe  to  the  saving  of  his  soul.  3.  Of  the  necessity  of  missions  to  the  heatben. 
(r.  Jackson.)  Jesus  and  the  Scriptures  : — I.  The  tjnitt  of  Sckiptuee.  And  that 
"  same  Scripture,"  while  so  eminently  illustrious,  is  only  one  of  many  innumerable 
scriptures  at  which  Philip  might  have  begun  and  by  which  he  might  have  sustained 
his  proclamation  of  the  Jesus.  Gather  into  your  hands,  as  so  many  threads,  aU  "  the 
same  scriptures  "  from  which  Philip  might  have  pursued  his  theme,  and  delightedly 
gaze  on  the  Pattern  into  which  the  New  Testament  fashions  them.  Can  the  charm 
of  their  unity  be  surpassed  ?  II.  The  end  of  Scbiptube.  To  set  forth  Christ,  to 
attract  human  thought  and  fix  it  on  Him,  is  the  steadfast  aim  to  which  everything 
is  subordinated.  Many  are  the  "  voices  of  the  prophets,"  but  they  swell  into  only 
one  chorus  of  which  He  is  the  song.  III.  In  the  intensity  of  the  converse  of  Philip 
and  the  eunuch  we  see  thb  interest  of  Scripture  commended.  No  fact  grows 
more  patent  than  the  world's  need  of  all  that  the  Scriptures  assure  us  of  Je»us. 
There  is  no  light  from  heaven  if  it  does  not  shine  in  Him,  no  bread  from  heaven 
if  He  does  not  supply  it.  IV.  In  the  issue  of  this  converse  we  see  the  power  of 
Scripture  manifested,  "  He  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  The  fulness,  variety, 
and  harmony  of  Scripture  ;  the  compassion,  wisdom,  steadfastness  of  God  through 
all  the  preparatory  measures  which  led  up  to  the  advent  of  Jesus :  the  power, 
grace,  aud  life  brought  by  Him ;  rest  of  mind  in  this  truth,  and  of  heart  in  this 
mercy  ;  the  new  creation  into  which  the  receiver  of  Jesus  passes  and  rises — these 
were  some  of  the  glorious  elements  of  this  man's  joy;  and  meditation,  prayer, 
experience,  would  but  deepen  that  joy,  as  he  passed  further  and  further  away  from 
the  "  old  things,"  aud  further  and  further  into  the  "  new  things  "  prepared  and 
ensured  for  ever  to  them  that  love  Him.  (G.  JB.  Johnson.)  Preacldng  Jesus, 
not  self : — St.  Bernard,  preaching  one  day  very  scholastically,  the  learned 
thanked  him,  but  not  the  godly  ;  but  another  day  he  preached  plainly,  and 
the  good  people  came  blessing  God  for  him,  and  gave  him  many  thanks, 
which  some  scholars  wondered  at.  "  Ah,"  said  he,  "  yesterday  I  preached 
Bernard,  but  to-day  I  preached  Christ."  'Tis  not  learning,  but  teaching;  not 
the  wisdom  of  words,  but  the  evidence  and  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  that  is 
welcome  to  saints.  {R.  Venning.)  Preaching  to  one : — I  remember,  years  ago,  one 
Sunday  that  I  had  to  preach  at  the  Chapel  Eoyal ;  and  in  those  days  the  old  duke 
used  to  attend  service  there,  and  when  he  was  in  town  the  congregation  may  have 
numbered  generally  some  seven  or  eight  persons,  but  when  he  was  out  of  town  per- 
haps two  or  three.  And  on  this  occasion  he  was  out  of  town.  Well,  the  morning 
prayer  was  over,  and  the  clergyman  who  had  said  it  had  to  leave  for  duty  elsewhere; 
and  by  the  time  I  had  mounted  the  pulpit  the  clerk  had  gone  into  the  vestry  to  stir 
the  fire.  I  was  left  alone  with  the  congi  egation  1  Under  the  circumstances  it  would 
have  been  ridiculous  to  have  preached  the  sermon,  and  I  went  down  to  the  con- 
gregation and  told  him  so.  He  said — it  was  a  young  man  I  knew — '•Oh!  I  have 
come  a  long  way  on  purpose  to  hear  you  preach.  I  beg  you  will  proceed."  "No! " 
I  said,  "  I  really  can't.  Besides,  how  personal  you  would  find  the  sermon.  But  I 
will  walk  across  the  park  with  you,  and  give  you  the  heads  of  my  sermon  as  we 
walk  along."  Then  I  and  Samuel  Wilberforce,  Enquire,  walked  across  tbe  park 
together,  (Dean  Hook.)  Preaching  to  one  person : — One  very  stormy  Sunday 
Dr.  Payson  went  to  church  more  from  habit  than  because  he  expected  to  find  any- 
body there.  Just  after  he  had  stepped  inside  the  door  an  old  negro  came  in,  and 
asked  if  Dr.  Payson  was  to  preach  there  that  day,  explaining  that  he  was  a  stranger 
in  the  town,  and  had  been  advised  to  go  to  his  church.  "  Upon  that,"  said  Dr. 
Payson,  "  I  made  up  my  mind  to  preach  my  sermon  if  nobody  else  came."  Nobody 


714  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

else  did  come,  so  the  doctor  preached  to  the  choir  and  the  negro.  Some  months 
afterward  he  happened  to  meet  the  negro,  and  stopping  him,  asked  how  he  enjoyed 
the  s-ermon  that  stormy  Sunday.  "  Enjoy  dat  sermon,"  repHed  the  old  man,  "  I 
'clare,  doctor,  I  nebber  heerd  a  better  one.  Yo'  see  I  had  a  seat  pretty  well  up 
front,  an'  whenebber  you'd  say  somethin's  pretty  hard  like  'gin  de  sius  ob  men  I'd 
jess  look  all  roun'  ter  see  who  you's  a  hittm',  and  I  wouldn't  see  nobody  on'y  jess 
me.  An'  I  s;iys  to  m'self,  he  must  mean  you,  Pompey,  you's  sech  a  dretlul  sinner. 
Well,  doctor,  dat  ar  sermon  set  me  a  thinking  what  a  big  sinner  I  war,  an'  I  went 
an'  jined  the  Church  down  home.     I'se  a  deacon  now." 

Yers.  36-39.  The  eunuch  said,  See,  here  is  water ;  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be 
baptized  ?     The  baptizing  of  the  eunuch : — Note — I.  That    to   an    obedient   and 

CHEEKFUL   HEABEB   THE    WOED    OF    GoD   IS   NEVEK    PREACHED  WITHOUT    SUCCESS.      This 

one  discourse  prevailed  through  God's  mercy  to  the  enlightening  of  the  eunuch's 
mind;  it  wrought  also  upon  his  affections  in  such  a  measure  that  nothing  was  more 
desired  of  him  than  to  show  himself  a  Christian,  and  to  have  some  pledge  of  the 
favour  of  God.  The  Word  never  is  unprofitable  where  it  meets  with  such  an 
auditor.  Learn,  then,  the  true  cause  why  there  is  no  such  profiting  of  the  Word 
preached  as  there  should  be  and  was  in  purer  times.  Then  one  sermon  won 
many  ;  now,  many  sermons  scarce  prevail  with  one.  Surely  the  cause  is  men 
want  that  ready,  cheerful  disposition,  which  the  good  people  in  those  times 
had ;  thtn  they  sued  to  be  taught,  as  the  eunuch  here,  those  at  Pentecost,  the 
Antiochians,  and  the  jailer.     11.  That  where  the  heart  is  truly  touched,  and 

THE    soul   indeed    TURNED    UNTO     GoD,    THERE    IS   A   DESIRE    TO  BE    PARTAKER   OF   THE 

SACRAMENTS.  The  apostlcs  urged  the  use  of  the  sacrament  upon  the  people 
yielding  to  the  doctiine  as  a  tiial  of  them.  If  they  had  refused  it,  tbeir  hypocrisy 
had  been  soon  discovered ;  if  thev  embraced  it,  it  was  an  evidence  that  their  hearts 
were  s^asoned  as  was  meet.  Thus  John  Baptist  bound  his  hearers  to  the 
sacrament  (Matt,  iii.),  and  Peter,  "  Amend  your  lives  and  be  baptized  "  ;  and  after 
that  order  did  the  rest  pioceed.  There  be  just  causes  of  desiring  the  sacrament  in 
him  that  is  enlightened.  1.  He  knows  the  use  of  the  sacraments  to  be  God's 
ordinance,  and  therefore,  in  obedience  to  His  will,  he  will  make  conscience  thereof. 
2.  He  conceives  them  to  be  "seals  of  the  i ighteousnes-*  which  is  by  faith,"  assurances 
of  society  with  Christ ;  for  which  cause  they  must  needs  be  sweet  unto  his  soul.  3. 
He  apprehends  them  to  be  badges  of  his  profession,  and  of  his  service  unto  Christ, 
and  therefore  he  cannot  but  desire  them.  4.  He  believeth  them  to  be  bands  <>f  the 
communion  of  saints,  and  in  that  respect  he  must  needs  affect  them.  In  these 
days  there  is  not  that  respect  to  the  sacraments  that  there  should  be.  Baptism 
•we  have  received  in  our  childhood,  but  what  man  of  many  laboureth  to  make  the 
right  use  of  it?  And  as  for  the  Lord's  Supper,  generally  it  is  made  no  more 
reckoning  of  than  some  three-half-penny  ordinary,  save  only  at  some  season  of  the 
year.  Certninly  this  is  an  argument  of  scantness  of  grace  amongst  men.  There 
cannot  but  be  a  stomach  to  the  sacrament,  where  there  is  felt  sweetness  in  the 
Word.  IIL  That  in  whom  thkre  is  any  truth  of  Christianity,  in  him  there 
IS  also  a  desire  to  make  it  known  to  the  world  that  he  is  a  Christian.  It 
was  an  evidence  of  great  resolution  in  this  convert  to  return  into  his  own  country 
as  one  of  that  sect  which  was  everywhere  spoken  against.  This  is  the  nature 
of  true  conversion,  albnit,  it  may  stir  but  weakly  at  the  first,  and  seem  almost  not 
to  dare  to  show  itself,  yet,  when  it  is  come  to  a  fuller  growth,  then  there  will  be  a 
desire  to  show  the  colours  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  So  Nicodemus,  when  be  was  but  a 
beginner,  came  to  Jesus  liy  night.  Yet  in  time  he  joined  with  Joseph  in  the 
interring  of  our  Saviour.  This  deserves  to  be  commended  to  tlie  care  of  all  that 
fear  God,  that  howsoever  the  vain  applause  of  men  he  not  to  be  hunted  after,  and  it 
be  hypocritical  and  pharisaical  to  practise  the  duties  of  godliness  to  be  seefi,  .vet 
it  is  necessary  to  make  it  appear  what  we  a'e,  and  that  we  be  not  ashamed  of  it. 
Will  some  say,  This  is  a  needless  exhortation,  for  we  have  done  as  much  for 
the  slmwing  of  ourselves  to  be  Christians  as  this  eunuch  did?  I  answer,  that  albeit 
baptism  might  be  a  witness  unto  this  man's  Christianity,  among  a  people  not 
esteeming  it,  yet  some  furl  her  thing  is  necessary  to  the  end  our  sincerity  may 
appear.  There  he  some  things  as  hateful  among  the  men  of  this  generation  as  the 
name  of  a  Christian  could  be  among  the  Ethiopians,  hs,  namely,  for  a  man  to  make 
conscience  of  his  waj's  to  show  himself  fearful  to  offend  God,  to  follow  after  holiness. 
IV.  That  he  that  administereth  the  sacrament  ought  to  be  careful  to  instruct 
the  people  in  things  necessary  to  the  comfortable  partaking  of  it.    Every  ona 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  715 

that  is  entrusted  with  the  dispensing  of  the  sacrament  is  bound  to  acquaint  the 
penple  cai'efully  upon  what  conditions  only  they  may  receive  it  to  their  comfort.  The 
doctrine  appertaiaing  tcf  the  right  use  of  the  sacrament  is  part  of  the  counsel  of 
God,  and  tuerefore  not  to  be  secreted  by  him  that  desireth  to  be  pure  from  the 
people's   blood.      V.  That  since  the  coming  of  Christ  there  is  no  precedence 

OF   ONE    PLACE    above    ANOTHER    FOR   '1  HE    ADMINISTRATION    OF    HOLY   THINGS.        Here    is 

baptism  administered  by  the  wayside,  and  that  in  an  ordinary  river :  the  sacrament 
had  been  no  whit  better  to  the  eunuch  if  he  had  received  it  in  some  hallowed  place, 
or  in  some  cousecrated  vessel.  Formerly  the  worship  of  God  was  limited  to  a 
certain  place,  but  Christ  being  manifested,  who  was  the  Body  of  all  former  shadows, 
the  disiiuction  of  places  is  abolished,  and  neither  is  God's  worship  tied  to 
Jerusalem,  nor  to  Gerizim.  Therefore  Christ's  forerunner  exercised  his  ministry 
openly  in  the  wilderness,  and  baptized  iu  the  river  Jordan  ;  and  our  Saviour 
preached  in  mountains,  by  the  seaside,  and  out  of  boats,  anywliere  where  the 
audience  was.  So  the  apostles  after,  preached  in  houses,  in  fields,  aud  baptized  in 
any  river  which  came  next  to  hand.  "  Wheresoever  two  or  three  are  gathered 
togetLer  in  My  n2,me,"  &c.;  there  is  no  exception  of  place,  so  that  in  other  things 
the  due  form  be  observed.  Conclusion:  This  mny  put  us  all  in  mind  what  use  to 
make  of  our  baptism.  1.  So  often  as  we  think  upon  our  baptism,  it  ought  to  be  a 
spur  to  holiness.  A  servant  to  a  great  man,  when  he  looketh  upon  his  livery, 
cannot  for  shame  be  an  enemy  to  h'm  of  whom  he  had  received  it ;  the  sight  of  it 
is  rather  a  common  caller  upon  him  to  be  faithful  to  him  into  whose  service  he  is 
entered.  So  baptism  is  the  cognizance  of  a  Christian,  and  by  it  we  have  taken  on 
us  to  wear  the  colours  of  our  Captain;  the  very  thought  thereof  should  restrain  us  from 
doing  the  business  of  Satan,  and  work  us  by  all  means  to  the  williug  obeying  of  the 
Lord,  to  the  studying,  learning,  and  practising  of  His  will.  How  excellent  were  it, 
if  in  doing  of  anything,  which  we  rush  ujDon  without  any  scruple,  we  would  say  to 
ourselves.  Is  this  according  to  promise,  is  this  a'.'reeing  to  the  vow  of  baptism? 
2.  To  those  that  thus  make  use  of  baptism  as  a  motive  to  obedience,  it  is  a  storehouse 
of  much  comfort.  When  men's  titles  to  land  be  in  question,  they  fall  to  perusing 
their  sealed  evidences;  and  so  a  Christian  must  often  look  to  the  will  and  deed  of  his 
heavenly  Father  sealed  up  in  baptism,  and  by  it  he  shall  have  comfort.  (S.  Hieron.) 
The  open  itnor  of  the  Church  : — As  you  read  this  story  you  get  the  impi-ession  that 
the  way  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  in  the  days  of  our  Lord  and  His  apostles,  was 
a  very  obvious  and  straightforward  way  to  any  willing  to  enter  it.  It  might  cost 
one  an  inward  struggle  to  consent,  but  to  one  consenting,  the  way  of  entrance  was 
plain,  even  if  it  was  not  easy.  Such  an  one  might  find  itifficulties  in  himself  ;  but 
he  would  have  no  hindrances  p'lt  upon  him  in  the  name  of  the  Lord — -nothing  but 
helps  and  encouragements.  How  wide  open  "the  happy  gates  of  gospel  grace  "  did 
seem  to  stand  in  tuose  days  !  And  what  a  simple  business  they  seemed  to  make  of 
it!  Not  a  word  about  a  judicious  deliberation  and  delay  in  the  case  of  new  converts. 
Not  a  word  about  preparing  them  by  catechism,  or  taking  them  awhile  on  probation, 
or  about  examining  them  on  their  religious  experience.  "  Here  is  water ;  what 
hinders  me  from  being  baptized  ?  "  says  this  eunuch  ;  as  if  to  one  who  had  learned 
about  Jesus  Christ  and  wished  to  be  His  disciple  and  follower,  it  was  the  most 
natural  thing  in  the  world.  And  at  once  the  evangelist  seems  to  answer,  "  Of 
course ;  wuy  not  ?  "  And  right  then  and  there  he  baptized  him.  I.  Rites. 
Our  Lord,  providing  for  the  need  which  His  believing  followers  would  have  of  some 
way  of  declaring  their  discipleship  in  visible  form,  named  two  ordinances.  The 
commonest  acts  of  daily  life — the  daily  bath  and  the  daily  meal.  The  bath,  by 
which  one  coming  to  Him  signified  his  putting  away,  from  that  time  forth,  of  tbe 
sinful,  defiling  service  of  the  world,  and  his  new,  clean  Ufe  of  consecration  to  the 
Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  the  supper,  in  which  he  remembers 
his  Master  and  Friend,  declares  his  dependence  and  allegiance,  and  shows  his 
Lord's  death  until  He  comes.  II.  Experiences.  Needless,  it  should  seem,  to 
declare  that  the  experience  of  other  disciples  was  meant  to  be  a  help  and  encourage- 
ment to  each  one  of  us  in  one  way  into  the  heavenly  kingdom.  Looked  at  in  any 
lar^e  and  reasonable  way,  the  lesson  from  the  vast  diversity  in  the  spiritual  history 
of  true  and  holy  Christians  is  a  lesson  of  unbounded  encouragement.  He  who  is 
the  Way,  and  the  Door  to  the  way,  does  not  care  by  what  path  we  come  up  to  Him, 
if?)nlysvedo  come.  III.  Doctrines.  God's  truth  is  very  plain;  very  easy;  and 
oh,  how  helpful!  What  confidence  it  gives  you  toward  Him  1  As  He  declares  to 
U8  the  great  fact  of  the  reconcihation  of  the  world  to  Himself  in  Christ,  how  it 
wins  us  to  trust  in  His  plain,  faithful  promise,  and  to  rest  in  the  perfect  peace  of 


716  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

Him  -who^e  mind  is  stayed  on  God !  (L.  W.  Bacon.)  Baptism,  Water  in : — 
Some  (me  sent  to  know  whether  it  was  permissible  to  use  warm  water  in 
baptism?  The  doctor  replied,  "Tell  the  blockhead,  that  water,  warm  or  cold, 
is  water."  [Luther^s  Table  Talk.)  Baptism  and  the  visible  Clmrch: — One 
of  the  parish  ministers  preaching  at  Whitewell  Chapel,  Mr.  Philip  Henry  and 
his  family  and  many  of  his  friends  being  present,  was  earnestly  cautioning 
people  not  to  go  to  conventicles,  and  used  this  as  an  argument  against  it,  "  that  they 
were  baptized  into  the  Church  of  England."  Mr.  Henry's  catholic  charity  could  not 
well  digest  this  monopolising  of  the  great  ordinance  of  baptism,  and  thought  it  time  to 
bear  his  testimoiiy  against  such  narrow  principles,  of  which  he  ever  expressed  his  dis- 
like in  all  parties  and  persuasions.  Accordingly  he  took  tbe  next  opportunity  that 
offered  itself  publicly  to  baptize  a  cbild,  and  desired  the  congregation  to  bear 
■witnet-s  "  that  he  did  not  baptize  that  child  into  the  Church  of  England,  nor  into 
the  Church  of  Scotland,  nor  into  the  Church  of  the  Dissenters,  nor  into  th^  Church 
at  Broad  Oak,  but  into  the  Visible  Catholic  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  [Wliitecross.) 
The  Word  and  the  Sacrament : — There  are  two  m^ans  of  grace  which  mutually 
complete  each  other,  and  the  one  must  not  be  valued  over  the  other,  or  despised  in 
conjparison  with  the  other.  When  the  sacrament  is  despised,  the  body  of  the 
Churcli  falls  to  pieces:  when  the  Word  is  set  aside  its  spirit  dies.  (A'.  Gerok.) 
The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  Philip,  that  the  eunuch  saw  him  no  more. — 
'I'he  rapture  of  Philip  and  tlie  eunuch: — The  eunuch  was  the  earliest  first-fruits  of 
the  Gentile  Church,  his  baptism  was  therefore  authenticated  by  a  remarkable 
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  both  on  the  part  of  its  subject  and  its  adminis- 
trator. 1.  The  subject  went  on  his  way  rejoicing,  and  in  order  to  connect  his  joy 
with  the  Spirit  we  have  but  to  remember  that  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  "  love, 
joy,  peace."  2.  The  missionary  was  "caught  away"  by  the  Spirit — the  same  word 
as  that  of  Paul,  "caught  up  into  the  third  heaven,"  only  tbere  the  region  was 
invisible  and  heavenly,  and  the  apostle  knew  not  whether  he  was  in  or  out  of  the 
body;  here  the  transportation  is  merelv  to  another  spot  of  earth,  and  was  clearly 
"  in  the  body."  The  same  word  is  used  of  those  v\ho  are  alive  at  Christ's  coming, 
who  shall  be  "  caught  up  together  "  with  the  dead  in  Christ  "  in  the  clouds."  Here 
the  transport  will  be  of  the  glorified  body,  not  to  another  spot  of  earth,  but 
into  the  air.  The  more  complete  parallel,  however,  is  the  case  of  Ezekiel,  of  whom 
we  read  on  several  occasions  that "  the  Spirit  took  him  up,"  &c.  And  that  the 
■prophets  underwent  this  kind  of  transport  frequenlly  may  be  gathered  from  the 
apprehensive  words  of  Obaiiiah  to  Elijah  (Kings  xviii.  1'2),  and  fr.^m  the  petition 
respecting  Elijah  (2  Kings  ii.  16).  3.  There  is  something  striking  in  this  instan- 
taneous confirmation  of  baptism  which  reminds  us  of  the  d<-sceut  of  the  Spirit  on 
our  Lord  at  His  own,  and  we  may  parallel  with  it  Ihe  old  legend  that  at  St. 
Augustine's  baptism,  he  and  Ambrose,  the  administrator  of  it,  were  so  tilled  with 
the  Spirit  that  they  burst  forth  alternately  into  the  "  Te  Deum."  Note — I.  The 
BODiiiY  TEANSPORT  OF  THE  EVAVGELisT.  1.  This  was  miraculous,  but  we  may  learn 
from  it  —(1)  That  there  maybe  an  operation  of  the  Spirit  on  the  b  idy  of  man. 
"  I  pray  God  that  your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and  bodi/  be  preserved  blameless." 
"He  that  raised  up  Christ  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  body."  We  commonly 
regard  the  body  as  an  encumbrance,  and  look  to  our  disenthralment  from  it  by 
death.  But  St.  Paul,  who  felt  painfully  enough  the  infirmities  of  his  body — "  We 
that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan,  being  burdened  " — yet  cautions  us  against 
supposing  that  he  wished  to  lay  down  his  body  at  death,  "  not  for  that  we  would  be 
unclothed,"  Ac.  Nor  while  he  felt  the  burden  of  the  flesh  did  he  ignore  the 
possibility  of  the  body's  consecration,  and  tlie  noble  uses  it  may  serve  (Rom.  xii.  1). 
Let  us,  then,  conform  our  view  to  Paul's.  Let  us  consecrate  our  eyes  to  God  by 
mortifying  their  lusts,  and  by  studying  His  words  and  works ;  our  ears  by  turning 
them  from  flatteries  and  sinful  enticements,  and  by  opening  them  to  His  Word ; 
our  hands,  by  labouring  in  our  vocation,  and  by  giving  alms ;  our  feet,  by  making 
them  carry  us  on  errands  of  mercy,  &o.  (2)  That  the  minister's  ambition  should  be 
to  lead  men  to  Christ  and  leave  them  there.  The  Baptist  pointed  his  disciples  away 
from  himself  to  the  Lamb  of  God,  and,  without  a  single  pang  of  envy,  saw  them 
following  the  Lamb,  and  thus  fulfilled  his  osvn  joy.  So  with  Paul,  "  We  preach  not 
ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  But  while  the  minister  may  not  personally 
obtrude  himself,  it  is  quite  possible  to  thrust  his  office  into  undue  prominence. 
Christ  did  not  send  us  to  preach  His  ministry,  but  Himself.  2.  Philip  was  fouud 
visiting  the  district  afterwards  traversed  by  Peter,  thus  again  preparing  the  way  for 
apostles.     He  had  hid  a  most  interesting  and  refreshing  conversation  with  the 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  717 

eunuch,  and  it  must  have  occurred  to  him  that  thus  it  might  please  God  to  open  a 
door  for  the  evangelisation  of  Ethiopia.  But  now  lie  was  snatched  away  and 
planted  down  in  a  town  full  of  heathen  associations.  The  lesson  is,  that  spiritual 
lefresliment  must  be  succeeded  by  work.  The  Christian  must  not  expect  to  spend 
his  life  in  delicious  feeling.  II.  The  mental  transport  of  the  convert.  The 
evangelist  was  carried  away  in  one  direction,  the  Ethiopian  in  another ;  which  may 
be  thn  force  of  "  for"  (A.V.  "and"),  or  "for  "  may  mean  the  convert's  ecstasy  was  so 
great  thut  he  did  not  notice  Philip's  departure.  This  seems  strange,  and  hardly 
the  conduct  due  to  so  great  a  benefactor.  But  we  must  remember  that  the  ordinary 
ministerial  tie  could  scarcely  exist  between  these  two  strangers  who  had  only 
known  each  other  for  an  hour.  And  then,  again,  a  glorious  field  had  been  opened 
to  the  eunuch  in  the  new  light  thrown  upon  ttie  Scriptures.  But  like  all  such  strong 
emotions,  t'^e  joy  would  presently  subside,  when  Philip's  absence  would  be  noted  ; 
and  this,  with  his  advent,  so  miraculous,  would  confirm  the  convert's  faith,  as 
assuring  him  of  a  personal  interposition  of  God.  This  joy,  however,  is  the  great 
evidence  of  having  received  Glirist.  It  was  so  with  the  Samaritans  (ver.  8),  and 
with  the  jaihr.  Have  we  this  evidence  ?  Do  not  let  us  deceive  ourselves.  In  the 
sunshine  of  life  it  is  possible  to  mistake  happiness  for  joy.  But  happiness  arises 
from  circumstances,  joy  from  an  internal  spring  in  God.     {Dean  Goulburn.)  He 

went  on  his  way  rejoicing. — The  rejoicinrj  life  : — I.  In  what  it  consists.  I  have 
read  of  a  man  who,  though  possessing  all  the  good  things  of  this  hfe,  declared  that 
he  had  never  known  one  liappy  day.  And  here  is  one  who  "  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing."  What  makes  the  difference?  The  one  knew  and  loved  his  Saviour  and 
Friend,  the  other  had  not  so  learned  Christ.  Of  all  secrets  the  best  is  the  secret  of 
a  happy  life.  Some  people  imagine  that  it  consists  in  having  plenty  of  money,  but 
money  cannot  cure  a  sick  man  or  sweeten  a  bad  temper ;  some  that  it  lies  in 
having  good  health,  but  a  healthy  man  is  not  happy  if  he  is  discontented  ;  others 
that  it  lies  in  great  positions,  but  we  know  that  m>inyof  the  greatest  statesmen  and 
rulers  have  been  haunted  by  fears  and  anxieties ;  others  again  that  it  may  be  found 
in  scenes  of  continuil  amusement,  but  they  are  mistaken.  There  was  once  a 
famous  comic  actor  whose  appearance  always  created  laughter.  Once  he  went  to 
consult  a  doctor  who  did  not  know  him,  and  told  him  of  his  low  spirits  and 
bad  health.  The  doctor  advised  him  to  go  aud  see  the  famous  clown,  and  his 
patient  answered,  "  Alas  !  I  am  that  unhappy  man."  No,  the  secret  of  a 
happy  life  is  to  be  found  only  in  God,  David,  St.  Paul,  Mary,  and  others 
found  it  so.  11.  Why  is  it  that  we  have  so  many  gloomy  Christians?  It  is 
because  they  have  not  learned  to  know  and  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  their 
Saviour  and  Fiiend.  They  believe  in  Him  as  some  one  else's  Saviour  perhaps,  but 
have  not  realised  Him  as  their  own.  This  is  not  because  they  have  too  much 
religion,  as  the  scoffers  say,  but  because  they  have  not  enough.  Be  sure  of  this, 
that  if  your  religion  does  not  make  you  go  on  your  way  rejoicing,  you  have  not 
learned  it  aright.  But  why  are  we  who  come  to  church  not  equally  happy?  The 
same  seed  is  sown  in  all  our  hearts,  but  our  hearts  are  not  all  the  same.  I  have  got 
a  stony  plot  in  my  garden,  and  however  much  good  seed  I  sow  there,  it  won't  grow. 
So  it  is  with  some  of  our  hearts — they  are  not  prepared,  and  the  good  seed  falls  as 
on  a  stone.  Our  first  care,  in  learning  the  secret  of  happiness,  should  be  to  pray  to 
God,  the  heavenly  Hu-^bandman,  to  prepare  our  hearts  that  we  may  receive  the 
Word,  and  find  the  joy  of  that  good  part  which  no  man  taketh  away  from  us. 
Sometimes  people  tell  us  that  their  food  does  them  no  gO"d — they  eaL  and  diink, 
yet  they  waste  away.  Why  ?  Because  there  is  something  wrong  with  their 
digestion.  The  food  is  good  enough,  but  the  mischief  is  in  themselves.  If  religion 
does  people  no  good,  the  fault  is  not  in  the  religion,  there  is  something  wrong 
inside  them,  they 'cannot  digest  their  spiritual  food.  They  have  lost  a  healthy 
taste  for  what  is  good ;  some  sin  is  spoiling  their  taste  for  religion ;  they  are  like 
children  whose  appetite  is  clogged  with  unwholesome  sweetmeats,  so  that  they 
cannot  enjoy  honest  food.  You  know  that  if  you  sow  good  seed  in  your  field  or 
garden,  but  suffer  the  thorns  and  thistles  to  grow,  the  good  seed  will  have  no 
chance.  So  it  is  with  our  lives — the  good  seed  of  God's  Word  cannot  grow  if  we 
allow  the  thorns  to  choke  it.  And  how  abundant  those  thorns  are  1  There  is  the 
thorn  of  pride.  A  young  girl  or  lad  is  reproved  for  doing  wrong.  Instead  of 
expressing  sorrow,  the  one  who  is  in  fault  stiffens  their  neck.  Religion  cannot 
benefit  such  an  one.  Then  there  is  the  thorn  of  bad  temper.  Some  people  hear 
the  message  of  Divine  love,  and  go  home  and  straightway  fly  into  a  pas-^ion,  and  so 
the  good  is  lost.    III.  How  to  lead  the  rejoicing  life.    1.  Let  us  be  sure  that  we  are 


718  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

on  the  right  way;  if  our  way  be  not  a  rejoicing  way,  it  is  not  the  right  way;  we  must 
quit  it,  and  start  again.  Have  you  ever  seen  a  child  which  has  lost  its  way,  wandering 
along  crying?  Well,  when  you  have  put  that  child  into  the  right  road,  all  is  changed. 
We  who  are  not  happy  in  our  relif-ion  are  the  children  who  have  lost  their  way. 
"  HoldThouupmygoiugsinThy  palh'^,  that  my  footsteps  slip  not."  2.  If  we  are  once 
on  the  right  way  we  cannot  help  rejoicinir,  because  we  have  so  much  to  be  thanlsful 
for.  The  man  who  takes  all  the  good  things  which  God  sends  him,  and  never  feels 
thankful,  cannot  expect  to  be  happy.  I  have  read  of  a  man  who  was  once  telling 
his  religious  experiences  at  a  public  meeting  ;  he  dwelt  upon  his  trial,  his  tioubles, 
and  the  hardness  of  the  road  on  whi.  h  he  had  to  travel.  Presently  niiother  man 
spoke,  and  said,  "I  see  oui-  friend  is  living  in  Grumbling  Street.  I  lived  there 
myself  once  upon  a  time,  and  nothing  prospered  with  me.  I  never  had  good  health, 
the  air  was  bad,  the  house  was  lad,  ihe  sun  never  seemed  to  shine  there,  and  no 
birds  ever  sang  in  that  street.  I  changed  my  residence.  I  moved  into  Thanks- 
givintj  Stre.  t,  and  now  I  have  good  heaith.  The  days  are  bright,  the  sun  shines, 
the  air  is  pore,  and  the  birds  sing  oftener  than  anywhere  else.  V  advise  our  friend 
to  cbaiige  his  quarters,  there  is  plenty  of  room  in  Thanksgiving  Street."  One  great 
secret  <f  happiness  is  to  be  thankful — "  in  everything  sive  thanks."  k.  woman  who 
was  too  poor  to  C"ver  her  little  boy  with  extra  bC'lclothes  to  shelter  him  from  the 
snow,  which  drifted  through  the  broken  wall,  used  to  shelter  him  with  boards. 
One  night  the  little  fellow  asked,  "  Mother,  what  do  the  poor  folks  do  who  hsive  no 
boards  to  cover  their  children  with  these  cold  nights?"  That  little  child  was 
thrtn^ful,  even  for  a  idt  of  i)oard  !  But  to  be  thankful  we  must  be  contented;  that 
is  another  great  secret  of  happiness.  The  poorest  Christian  has  all  that  he  needs, 
"as  having  nothing,  nnd  yet  possessing  all  thing*."  He  has  God  for  his  Father, 
Jesns  Chri  t  for  his  Saviour,  the  Holy  Spirit  for  his  Guide,  and  heaven  for  his  home. 
3.  You  must  love  your  brethren,  and  strive  to  help  them  along  the  road.  If  you 
would  be  happy  yourselves,  try  to  make  others  so,  "  learn  the  luxury  of  doing 
good."  There  is  a  beautiful  story  of  a  woiuan  who  had  met  with  many  trials 
and  sorrows,  yet  was  always  cheerful,  as  though  she  were  always  in  the 
sunshine.  When  she  was  dying,  a  stream  of  gjlden  sunlight  streamed  across 
her  bed,  and  a  butt  rfly  lighted  on  her  breast.  As  she  breathed  her  last  the 
beaut  if  u'  insect  flew  upward  into  the  sunshine.  So  pass«  s  away  a  Christian  soul  into 
the  light  of  perfect  day,  and  goes  on  its  way  rejoicing.  (H.  J.  W.  Buxton,  M.A.) 
Divine  icorkiiifi  in  the  unions  and  separdtionii  of  man: — I.  IHvinity  bkinging  men 

TOGETHKR.       II.    DiVINITY    SEPARATING    MEN    FROM    ONE    ANOTHER.       They   had    to  part, 

but  who  parted  them  ?  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  Philip  that  the 
eunuch  saw  him  no  more."  Two  thoughts  are  suggested.  1.  Their  attachment 
was  already  strong.  Christ  brings  souls  together,  and  centralises  them  in  Himself. 
2.  The  separation  was  only  bodily.  Souls  thus  united  cannot  be  separated — no 
distance,  no  time,  no  force  can  do  it.  Indeed,  bodily  separation  often  deepens  and 
intensifies  soul  attachments.  III.  Divinity  uniting  anji  separating  men  for  the 
HIGHEST  ENDS.  1.  The  eunuch  departs  with  a  new  joy.  "He  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing."  2.  Philip  departs  to  prosecute  his  evangelic  mission.  "  But  Philip  was 
found  at  Azotus,  and  passing  through  he  preached  in  all  the  cities  till  he  came  to 
Csesarea."  Thus  the  Divine  Spirit  that  united  and  separ.itcd  these  men  did  it  not 
only  to  bless  them,  but  through  them  to  bless  undoubtedly  countless  thrDUgs.  Thus 
Divinity  ever  works  for  beneficent  ends.  {Homilist.)  Spiritual  joy  : — I.  The 
CAUSES  OF  THIS  ETHIOPIAN'S  JOY.  1.  He  hiid  heard  the  best  of  all  news.  2.  He  had 
seen  the  most  glorious  of  all  sights  (Isa.  xxxv.  1,  2,  5,  6).  He  saw  the  glory  of  the 
wisdom  of  God,  of  the  power  of  God,  of  the  holiness  of  God,  of  the  justice  of  God, 
of  the  faithfulness  of  God,  of  the  grace  and  mercy  of  God,  manifested  in  the  salva- 
tion of  men;  therefore  "he  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  3.  He  hHd  found  the 
richest  of  all  treasures.  He  could  say,  with  an  air  of  spiritual  pleasure,  as  the  two 
disciples  did  (John  i.  41) :  I  have  found  Him  of  whom  Moses  and  the  prophets 
wrote ;  I  have  found  riches  of  goodr  ess,  riches  of  grace,  riches  of  glory,  unsearch- 
able riches,  a  kingdom  that  cannot  be  moved,  a  crown  of  life,  a  crown  of  righteous- 
ness, and  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away.  4.  He  had  nttained  to  the 
greatest  of  all  honours.  He  was  made  a  servant  of  the  King  of  heaven ;  and  some 
suppose  that  from  this  time  henceforth  he  became  a  preacher  of  the  gosp  1  of  His 
kingdom.  Nay,  "not  only  a  servant,  but  a  son;  a  son  of  God,  by  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ.  If  a  son,  then  an  heir  ;  an  heir  of  God,  and  a  joint-heir  with  Christ."  5. 
He  had  got  his  title-deeds  to  heaven  and  eternal  glory  ratified  and  sealed.  6.  He 
was  blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings,  and  had  obtained  the  most  glorious  pros- 


OTAP.  viii.]  THE  ACTS.  719 

pects  for  time   and  for  eternity.      II.  The    nature  of  this  jot.      1.    The    Holy 
iSpirit  is  the  author  of  this  joy.     It  is  planted  in  the  heart  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit,  it  is  drawn  forth  into  exercise  by  His  Divine  agency.     2.  The  knowledge  of 
our  interest  in  Christ  and  God  as  our  reconciled  God  in  Him  is  the  source  and 
spring  of  this  joy.     3.  All  the  tribulations  to  which  the  people  of  the  Lord  are 
subjected  in  this  present  state  cannot  extinguish  this   joy.     4.  The    Word  and 
ordinances  of  God  are  the  means  of  communicating  joy  to  the  souls  of  the  people 
of  the  Lord,  and  they  are  the  means  of  feeding  this  joy.     5.  The  Christian  himself, 
when  in  the  highest  raptures  of  spiritual  pleasures,  cannot  fully  describe  the  excel- 
lence of  this  joy.     6.  This  joy  is  perfected  at  death,  and  prolonged  to  all  the  endless 
ages  of  eternity.     III.  Inferences.     1.  Learn  that  pure  and  undefiled  religion  is 
not  a  melancholy  thing.     2.  That  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His.     3.  From 
this  subject  at  large  see  the  danger  of  returning  home  from  the  ordinances  of  God 
without  your  proper  errand.     4.  From  this  subject  learn  that  men  may  wait  long 
on  God  in  the  ordinances  of  His  grace  before  they  meet  with  Jesus.     The  man  who 
gets  a  saving  sight  of  Christ,  though  not  till  the  last  day  of  the  feast,  though  not 
till  the  time  of  the  preaching  of  the  last  sermon,  the  presenting  of  the  last  prayer, 
the  singing  of  the  last  praise,  the  pronouncing  of  the  blessing — nay,  though  not  till 
he  be  on  the  road  to  his  habitation,  he  will  nevertheless  go  on  his  way  rejoicing. 
5.  Is  there  a  broken-hearted  believer,  under  painful  apprehension,  that  though  he 
has  been  seeking  Jesus,  he  has  not  found  Him,  and  now  saying,  in  the  bitterness  of 
his  soul,  I  must  go  on  my  way  sorrowing  ?     Godly  sorrow  is  not  only  consistent, 
but  is  inseparably  connected  with  this  joy  in  the  Lord  (Isa.  xxix.  19).      (John 
Jardinf.)        Address  after  covi.munion : — Your   condition    is    in    several    respects 
similar  to  that  of  this  man.     He  had  solemnly  avouched  the  Lord  to  be  his  God  : 
you,  with  equal  solemnity,  have  this  day  done  the  same.     He  had  just  received 
one  seal  of  the  covenant  of  grace  :  you,  this  day,  ha^e  received  the  other.     He  had 
a  long  journey  before  him  :  ye  also  are  travellers  through  th^s  wilderness,  toward 
the  promised  land  of  rest.     In  these  circumstances  I  take  ootoasion  to  address  you 
with  a  twofold  exhortation.     I.  Arise  and  go  forward.     Many  who  mistake  the 
nature  of  this  ordinance  are  very  anxious  and  busy  for  a  few  days  in  making  a 
sort  of  formal  preparation  for  it.     Then  their  countenances  are  demure,  and  their 
conversation  is  precise,  and  their  attendance  upon  the  most  protracted  services  of 
devotion  indefatigable;  and  this  they  call  religion,  and  trust  in  its  merit  to  absolve 
them  from  all  the  dishonest,  worldly,  uncharitable,  and  ungodly  practices  of  which 
they  are  guilty  in  the  other  periods  of  their  time.     But  I  trust  that  ye  have  not  so 
learned  Christ.     Let  your  present  attainments,  instead  of  satisfying  \ou,  only  incite 
your  zeal  and  ambition  to  rise  still  higher  in  the  excellencies  of  the  Divine  life.    Do 
not    flatter  yourselves  with  the  prospect   of  uninterrupted    ease    and    unclouded 
enjoyment ;  but  consider  Him  who  endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against 
Himself  when  at  any  time  ye  are  weary  or  faint  in  your  minds,  and  study  to  know 
Him  in  the  pjwer  of  His  resurrection,  and  in  the  fellowship  "of  His  sufferings,  being 
made  confoimable  to  His  death.     Exercise  yourselves  daily  in  mortifyina  the  deeds 
of  the  boHy  ;  in  crucifying  the  flesh,  with  its  affections  and  lusts  ;  and  in  opposing 
your  inclinations  as  o  ten  as  they  oppose  your  duty.     Thus  labouring  to  be  examples 
of  patience,  meekness,  C')ntentment,  and  to  come  behind  in  no  good  thing  to  which 
you  are  called  ;  go  on  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord.     II.  Kejoice  as  you  go  on.     1. 
If  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Loni  is  gracious,  then  rejoice  that  ye  have  passed 
from  death  to  life,  and  that  there  is  now  no  condemnation  for  them  who  are  in 
Christ  Jesus.     2.  Rejoice  that  you  are  advanced  to  the  dearpst  and  mo-^t  intimate 
relation  to  all  the  persons  of  the  ever-blnssed  Godhead.     By  your  new  birth  ye  are 
become  tlie  sons  of  God,  members  of  Christ,  and  temple'^  for  tbe  Holy  Ghost.     3. 
Rejoice  that  God  has  made  with  you  an  everlasting  covenant,  well  ordered  in  all 
-thinjis  and  sure.     4.  Rejoice  that  the  life  which  is  begun  in  you  is  an  immortal 
principle  that  can  never  be  extinguished.     5.  Rejoice  in  the  h  pe  of  the  glory  of 
God.     Even  ami  1st  our  most  sublime  delights  we  are  conscious  of  a  certain  blank 
in  our  feelings  which  remin^ls  us  that  this  is  not  our  rest ;  but  in  the  presence  of  God 
there  is  fulness  of  joy,  and  at  His  right  hand  are  pleasures  for  evermore.    (H.  Walker.) 
ChristiiDi  joy :— How  is  it  tha,t  so  few  are  like  thi-!  eunuih  is  a  veiy  solemn  and 
practical  question.     Some  easily  dispose  of  it.     1.  They  tell  us,  «e  are  not  now  in 
days  of  perstcution,ani  tliatwhenGoJ  tries  His  saints.  He  stands  by  His  saints  with 
peculiar  consolHtions.  No  doul)t  He  does  so ;  hut  the  Word  of  God  that  is  writt'  n,  not 
fur  that  day,  but  for  all  d;iys,  sets  before  us  this  truth — that  gladness  of  he>rtisthe 
very  element  of  our  dispensation.  2.  Neither  do  they  dispose  of  this  matter  who  account 


720  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

for  it  by  the  sovereignty  of  God — alleging  that  God  has  so  appointed  it,  and  that 
therefore  we  must  be  contented  without  it.  What  God's  secret  purposes  are  we  know 
not ;  but  what  His  Word  is,  we  know — "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway  ;  and  again  I  say, 
Rejoice."  Note,  then — I.  How  the  Sceiptuee  desceibes  the  joy  that  is  here  spoken 
OF.  It  is  especially  marked  out  as  a  "  fruit  of  the  Spirit."  If  you  turn  to  Phil.  i. 
it  is  described  as  the  fruit  of  faith.  "Your  furtherance  and  joy  of  faith."  In 
Heb.  iii.  rejoicing  is  said  to  be  the  fruit  of  hope.  "  The  rejoicing  of  the  hope  " — that 
rejoicing  that  hope  giveth.  It  is  needful  to  lay  some  stress  upon  this  description 
because  some  imagine  of  joy  as  if  it  were  always  some  ecstatic  state  of  mind.  It 
is  rather  the  highest  exhibition  of  peace.  High  peace  and  low  joy  come  so  near 
to  one  another  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  draw  the  line  of  distinction.  But  joy 
may  still  stop  short  of  that  which  is  ecstatic.  A  man  may  be  "joyful  in  the  Lord," 
peacefully  and  quietly.  And  numbers  imagine,  too,  that  one  who  "rejoices  in  the 
Lord  "  is  one  who  always  rejoices  in  Him  ;  as  if  there  were  no  ebb  and  flow.  But 
if  this  is  a  holy  joy,  it  must  be  affected  by  sin  ;  and  you  may  be  assured  that  that 
man's  joy  that  is  not  affected  by  sin  never  came  from  God.  It  is  the  joy  of  a 
Bailor  that  Las  faith  for  his  cable  and  hope  for  his  anchor,  but  he  is  in  the  midst 
of  the  stormy  ocean,  and  continually  does  he  stand  exposed  to  all  the  changes  of 
the  storm,  tempest,  and  the  treacherous  calm.  It  is  the  joy  of  a  traveller  through 
a  wilderness,  which  he  finds  to  be  a  wilderness,  for  it  would  show  a  want  of 
sensibility  (and  a  want  of  holy  sense  too)  not  to  feel  it  so  ;  but  a  man  may  have 
the  keenest  sense  of  the  desolation  of  the  wilderness,  and  yet  realise  this  joy  in  his 
soul.  It  is  the  joy  of  a  penitent ;  one  who  knows  what  is  the  element  of  a  broken 
heart  and  contrite  spirit ;  for  where  faith  is  repentance  is,  and  they  that  have  "  joy 
in  believing  "  know  it  to  be  the  joy  of  a  penitent  spirit.  It  is  the  joy  of  a  returning 
prodigal,  and  they  who  know  the  most  of  what  this  holy  joy  is  qan  understand  the 
most  of  what  that  state  of  mind  is — "Sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  There 
are  many  things  said  concerning  this  joy  which  I  cannot  touch  on.  I  would  only 
say,  "the  stranger  intermeddles  not  with  it";  it  is  a  joy  that  is  "  unspeakable, 
and  full  of  glory."  It  is  a  union  of  opposites.  The  more  a  man  rejoices  after  this 
sort,  the  lower  he  walks  before  God;  tlie  lower  he  walks  before  God,  the  more  he 
ascends  in  holy  desires  after  Him.  II.  The  inducements  which  aee  given  us  to 
GO  ON  OCR  WAY  EEjoiciNG.  1.  God's  Command.  I  do  not  object  to  its  being 
called  a  high  privilege  ;  but  the  highest  point  of  all  is  God's  command, 
"  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway."  Do  not  trifle  with  this  Word  of  God.  It  may  be 
one  of  the  holiest  precepts  if  the  Holy  Ghost  should  lay  this  upon  your  soul. 
And  if  it  leads  us  into  a  serious  inquiry  wherefore  it  is  not  so,  it  shall  be  one 
of  the  most  sanctifying  inquiries  boih  as  it  regards  the  causes  that  lead  to  it  and 
the  effects  that  follow  from  it.  2.  The  example  of  the  family  of  God  (1  Thess. 
i.  6  ;  Phil.  iii.  2).  3.  The  privileges  of  a  believer.  Does  he  look  at  God  in  the 
greatness  of  His  perfections  ?  All  His  perfections  are  the  favour  of  God,  the  light 
of  God's  countenance,  the  strength  of  God's  arm,  the  love  of  God's  heart,  the 
hearing  of  God's  ear,  and  the  omniscience  of  God's  mind  (to  say  nothing  of  His 
justice,  His  holiness.  His  faithfulness),  all  surround  His  child  day  by  day,  night  by 
night,  from  the  beginning  of  the  year  to  the  end  of  the  year.  Do  we  look  at  the 
covenant?  All  that  I  can  want  is  there  ;  the  pardon  of  my  sin,  the  accejitance  of 
my  person,  the  sanctification  of  my  soul,  the  help  to  strengthen  me  in  my  hours  of 
need.  III.  Some  of  those  hindrances  that  prevent  the  child  of  God  feom  "  going 
ON  HIS  WAY  REJOICING."  I  do  uot  Speak  now  of  those  who  have  no  right  to  joy.  Ah  I 
there  are  some  whose  joy  I  should  be  glad  to  see  turned  into  heaviness.  And  there 
are  numbers  of  God's  children  that  cannot  rejoice.  They  are  living  at  an 
uncertainty  with  regard  to  their  "  election  to  God."  But  with  regard  to  those  who 
do  know  something  of  what  joy  is,  let  me  give  you  a  word  of  caution  that  you  lose 
it  not.  Beware  of — 1.  Unbelief.  It  is  the  great  hindrance  (Psa.  Ixxvii.).  It  led 
Asaph  to  write  hard  things,  not  only  against  himself,  but  against  God.  2.  Low 
views  of  Christ.  In  proportion  as  Christ  sinks,  everything  sinks  in  you.  3.  A 
hasty  spirit  in  dark  dispensations  (Psa.  cxvi.).  4.  Worldly  entanglements.  5.  An 
uneven  walk.  Indulged  sin,  indulged  neglect,  the  tampering  with  sin  upon  the 
conscience  will  quite  prevent  the  joy  of  a  man's  soul.  6.  All  selfishness  in  religion. 
(J.H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Christian  joy  : — I.  The  source.      "  He  went  on  his  way 

rejoicing,"  because  of — 1.  The  great  discovery  he  had  now  made.  He  had  found  a 
Eedeemer — Him  of  whom  Moses  in  the  Jaw  and  the  prophets  did  write.  (1)  As  a 
man  awakened  to  a  sense  of  spiritual  danger,  he  must  have  felt  the  need  of  a 
Saviour  prior  to  this.    (2)  As  a  proselyte  to  the  Jewish  faith,  he  must  have  been 


CHAP.  VIII.]  THE  ACTS.  721 

expecting  the  "  consolation  of  Israel";  all  the  faithful  longed  for  the  "coming 
one  "  at  this  time.     And  now  he  discovers  the  deliverer  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.     2. 
The  great  change  which  he  bad  now  experienced.     His  mind  was  enlightened  and 
his  heart  was  changed.     No  thoughtful  man  could  have  reflected  on  what  had  now 
taken  place  within  him  without  feeling  grateful  and  happy.    The  joy  of  tbe  bondman 
is  great  when  delivered  from  the  slavery  of  earth  ;  but  the  joy  of  the  emancipated 
is  greater.    We  read  of  an  ancient  race  who  had  been  slaves  for  many  years,  and 
who  were  at  last  released ;  and  when  the  great  blessing  of  liberty  was  tasted  by 
them  they  cried  for  several  hours,  "Liberty!  liberty  1  liberty!"     Some  years  ago 
we  redeemed  800,000  of  West  Indian  slaves,  and  we  are  told  that  when  the  night  of 
their  emancipation  arrived  the  excitement  among  tbe  poor  slaves  became  most 
painful,  and  when  the  midnif.ht  hour  came  the  shouts  of  gratitude  and  joy  were 
utterly  beyond  description.     The  deliverance  of  the  slave  of  sin  is  a  greater  source 
of   joy  still.     3.  The  clearer  views  he  must  have  had  of  God's  nature,  and  the 
character  of  His  dispensations.     Ho  was  a  worshipper  of  the  living  God  before, 
but  bis  views  must  have  been  very  contracted  in  regard  to  the  object  and  nature  of 
worship.     He  confined  his  ideas  of  worship  to  one  place  far  distant  from  his  own 
home.   He  must  have  thought,  too,  that  it  was  by  becoming  a  proselyte  to  Judaism 
only  he  could  be  saved,  "  salvation  being  of  the  Jews."    But  now  his  mind  was 
ex| landed  by  Divine  truth,  and  he  has  broader  views  of  the  Father  of  Spirits,  and 
of  the  spirituality  of  his  religion.     The  wilds  of  Gaza  were  now  converted  into  a 
house  of  God,  and  the  very  gate  of  heaven.    4.  The  prospects  of  usefulness  ;  the 
hope  of  doing  good  in  his  own  country.    Every  good  man  is  happy  at  this.    Having 
tasted  that  the  "Lord  is  gracious,"  he  is  ever  anxious  to  tell  others  of  "  what  God 
has  done  to  his  soul."    When  a  true-hearted  man  has  any  good  news  to  publish, 
he  feels  a  burden  resting  on  bis  soul  and  finds  relief  only  wben  he  accomplishes 
his   mission.     This   is   especially  the   feeling   of  a  true  Christian.      Eeligiou   is 
expansive  in  its  very  nature.      "She   seeketh  not   her  own."     5.  The   glorious 
scenes   opening  before  him  in   eternity.     His  views  of  futurity  must  have  been 
unsatisfactory  before  he  became  a  hearer  of  Philip.     The  heathen  had  but  faint 
notions  of  a  future  life,  and  even  among  the  Jews  the  idea  of  immortality  was  not 
clearly  understood.     Many  of  the  saints  of  tbe  Old  Testament  were  "  all  their  life 
hubject  to  bomlage  through  fear  of  death."     But  now  "life  and  immortality  were 
brought   to   light   through    the  gospel,"  and  the  Ethiopian   was  filled  with   the 
"  hope   of  the  glory  of  God."      II.  The  lessons.      We   find   here — 1.    A  noble 
example  of  regular  attendance  on  the  means  of  grace,  and  the  study  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures.     5.  That  true  happiness  is  connected  only  with  true  piety.     Happiness 
IS  not  found  in  wealth,   honour,    or  worldly  pleasure.     This  distinguished  man 
possessed  all  these  before  his  conversion;  but  till  now  he  was  not  happy.     Nor 
does  true  happiness  consist  in  mere  outward  forms  of  worship,  or  mere  profession 
of  religion.     The  eunuch  was  a  convert  to  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  tiie  Jew  sh 
religion  ;  yet  never  before  this  do  we  find  him  "  going  on  his  way  rejoicing  "  fr  >m 
the  great  feasts.     His  soul  was  not  satisfied  with  shadows.     Now  he  finds  the 
reality,  and  he  finds  "joy  and  peace  in  beheving."     The  path  of  duly  is  the  path 
of  safety,  it  is  also  tbe  path  of  pleasure.    3.  That  the  grand  theme  of  the  gospel 
ministry  in  all  ages  is  Jesus  and  His  Cross.     {H.  P.  Bowcn.)        Happiness  and 
joy  : — Happiness,  according  to  the  original  use  of  the  term,  is  that  which  happens, 
or  comes  t"  one  by  a  hap ;  i.e.,  by  an  outward  befalling,  or  favourable  condition. 
Some  good  is  conceived,  out  of  the  soul,  which  comes  to  it  as  a  liwppy  visitation, 
stirring  in  the  receiver  a  pleasant  excitement.     It  is  what  money  yields  or  will  buy 
— dress,   equipage,  fashion,    luxuries  of  tbe   table  ;  or  it  is  settlement  in   life  — 
independence,  love,  applause,  admiration,  honour,  glory,  or  the  more  conventional 
and  public  benefits  of  rank,  political  standing,  victory,  power.     All  these  stir  a 
delight  in  the  soul  which  is  not  of  the  soul,  or  its  qualities,  but  from  without. 
Hence  they  are  looked  upon  as  happening  to  the  soul,  and  in  that  sense  create 
happi7iess.     But  joy  differs  from  this  as  being  of  the  soul  itself,  originating  in  its 
quality.     And  this  appears  in  the  original  form   of  the  word,   which  instead  of 
suggesting  a  hap,  literally  denotes  a  leap  or  spring.     The  Latin  has  exult,  which 
literally  means  a  leaping  forth.     The  radical  idea,  then,  of  joy  is  this — that  the 
sonl  is  in  such  order  and  beautiful  harmony,  has  such  springs  of  life  opened  in 
its  own  blessed  virtues,  that  it  pours  forth  a  sovereignty  from  within.     The  motion 
is  outward  not  toward,  as  we  conceive  it  to  be  in  happiness.     It  is  not  the  bliss  of 
condition,  but  of  cbaraeter.     The  soul  has  a  hght  in  its  own  luminous  centre, 
where   God  is,  which  gilds  the   darkest  nights  of  external  adversity — a  music 
VOL.  I.  46 


722  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

charming  all  the  stormy  discords  of  outward  injury  and  pain  into  beats  of  rhythm 
and  melodies  of  peace.  (H.  Buslinell,  D.D.)  The  joy  of  the  first  Christian 
experiences : — What  delight  there  is  to  us  in  first  things !  The  first  primrose 
pushing  through  the  clods  telling  of  winter  gone,  and  summer  on  the  way ;  the 
nist  view  of  the  sea  in  its  wondrous  expanse  of  power;  the  first  sense  of  peace 
ihat  came  through  faith  in  Christ  as  a  Saviour.  A  certain  authoress  who  became 
very  famous,  speaks  of  the  exquisite  sense  of  delight  she  felt  when  she  began  her 
first  literary  work  in  the  reviewing  of  books :  the  opeuing  of  the  first  parcel  was 
as  the  "  bursting  of  a  new  world  "  on  her  eyes.  Dickens  describes  how  he  dropped 
his  first  published  paper  stealthily  one  evening  at  twilight,  with  fear  and  trembling, 
into  a  dark  letter-box  up  a  dark  court  in  Fleet  Street,  and  his  agitation  when  it 
appeared  in  all  the  glory  of  print — "  on  which  occasion  I  walked  down  to  West- 
minster Hall,  and  turned  into  it  for  half  an  hour,  because  my  eyes  were  so  dimmed 
with  joy  and  pride  that  they  could  not  bear  the  street,  and  were  not  fit  to  be  seen 
there."     (H.  0.  ilackey.) 


Date  Due 


'\-:t-^^. 


.s^- 


-■r^'i'iSjk 

-^^ 

t'  '. ^ 

iS'l 

»gi  J 

.-..'- *r^Tli 

,^  -.-  i  *  ..Jl 

/.;    '  ti.'^ 

^iffi 

I&i>^ 

»-^,  >  '-^-^"'l*ci^ 

'  ••..■■:^'_!!2J 

■"y'A^^ 

'3 

-:^ 

*  -'  "yM£?*^^{W| 

■■&^ 

„..-:^rx-^JaJ 

