giv ec etr he, 
rl strap byte 
FREES EE 
FaeET ete) 


i ha¢hi if 
Par fie ‘ 
hele UH aft 


i Pet 
Chee Pe hel ‘Y 
AEE, ERE EE uf 
heaters rads Ps phe 


i 
MAE. trier. 
tet 

Hur aatee 


f 


af 
' 
i 


tat 
Ey tytp he 
HOHE 


eee 
ee 


fF 
1 
Sy 

ft 


Library of The Theological Seminary 


PRINCETON - NEW JERSEY 


TK 


PRESENTED BY 
Yale Divinity School Library 


ae 


8) 


vee ee te Pw 


o 


PME et 
¥ aN ees 


4 ‘Saal “2 
+s 


Hel 


The Book of Daniel 


THE BOOK OF 


y 
PY C 
LOLogi Al 
Nees xd . 


REV. CLARENCE LARKIN 


Author of the Great Book on 


“DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH” 
And Other Biblical Works 


Published by the 
REV. CLARENCE LARKIN EST. 
2802 N. Park Ave., Philadelphia 32, Pa. 
U.S. A. 


Copyricut 1929 
By CLARENCE VARKINSEST: 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Charts, Maps, and Diagrams in this book 
must not be used in any way without the written 


permission of the Author 


ERWIN W. MOYER CO., PRINTERS 


PHILADELPHIA, PA. 


Printed in U.S.A, 


THIS BOOK IS 


DEDICATED 
TO THE 


LORD JESUS CHRIST 
WHO BY HIS SPIRIT 
ENABLED THE AUTHOR TO WRITE IT 
FOR THE INFORMATION AND 
EDIFICATION OF THE 
REDEEMED 


| | 0. yuo4 GR = 
“ i): 
ae aE ) ef 
Teh 7 Ut heir a4 Teas 7 
ogee ree ce OE Wy ; 

oo . te AON Te eee 
Pa MOrra cageey 7 ot ON * 
ex fir 26> FrasTi 
i ; Te ae 


v 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 
INUCOCUCTHON MEMENI re oat ns incre ce ee eri hae oe ae 1 
DNR LOPNEliCMVV OL arty ts feet hi cer ee fo hos Sitio 5 
mhes booksotmaniclap we wena Cy en eee ae are tole ee 10 

EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK 
First Division—Historical. Chapters 1 to 6. 
Chapter 1. The Beginning of Gentile Dominion.......... 19 
GhaptereZseN cbuchacnezzais. Dreame... see ee 28 
Ghaptereo- mee nesGolden, lmiagce #7 ee eee eee 56 
Ghapters4 mr Ne worees bream... Mere ia. les seis cote cetone eo 69 
Ghaptersowe hetiallvotebabylon mawee ss eee 78 
Ghaoters0.7 he pions Dente eee ee. ee 106 
Second Division—Prophetical. Chapters 7 to 12. 

Chapters /-me hes HourmWaldebeasts were er...) eee 117 
Ghapteras seelneskamsaucgethemitc-Goat ose te 155 
Ghapters0ss Lhe Séventy mv ceks,..2 0) ee 169 


Chapter 10. The Scripture of Truth— 


Part I—The Relation of Supernatural Beings to 
thes Eartha Chap... 1021s8tosl12153 3 219 


Part JII—-The Pre-written History of the Kings of 
them NOorthealca@oouthem Chapwmbic2-jomee 228 


Part III—The “Time of the End.” 


Ghap mliesOmtom!2c413tene aerccee aoe 246 

CHARTS 
RGOKEOtaL anil evame tie, cr ate nt oes canine Facing Page 5 
PeOpieticu ay SEOINOClIDtULG i ee. rei: era eee 98 
Daniel and Revelation Compared............ Facing Page 117 
Daniel’s Seventieth Week................... Facing Page 169 


MINSESCVENLVIVVCEKSIOLOCrIDtUlG oe... she ee ee 203 


’ of at qth 


eid sackh pias 


as 
an ae 


A 2D 


r 


- 7 


30) 3 Saat 


ry ae 
ws ff tll se 
- cn Pe 


C_- 


F a ‘Ys rt ae 


a id a ah mi 
; 2% ing: 


al jos tee 
qe 


Introduction 


This exposition of the book of Daniel is the 
closing and crowning work by Rev. Clarence Lar- 
kin, a servant of God, whose life was wholly devoted 
to the study, teaching, and preaching of God’s pre- 
cious word. During the more than forty years of 
his quiet, but blessed ministry as a pastor and 
teacher, he made a very faithful use of his time and 
opportunity to thoroughly study the whole counsel 
of God as embodied in the Scriptures, not only for 
his own heart, but in order to help others as fully 
as possible to know their Lord and Saviour. 


Calling to his aid the best books on the exposition 
of the Bible bv the ablest scholars and teachers of 
this and other days, and depending upon the Holy 
Spirit for needed illumination, the author obeyed 
the conviction that it was the will of God to pass on 
to the Church of Christ the results of the years of 
his enrichment in the knowledge of God and of His 
word. At the sacrifice of time, pleasure, strength, 
and financial profit, he gave himself to prepare, not 
only this book on “Daniel,” but also a book on 
“Revelation,” “Second Coming of Christ,” “Rightly 
Dividing the Word,” and “Dispensational Truth,” 
without doubt the best book of Bible charts that is 
printed. 

Suffering in body, yet strong in the power of the 
Holy Spirit. Rev. Larkin pressed on till this hook 
of Daniel was completed, then His loving Saviour 
and Lord said “Come home and rest with Me.” 

Through this consecrated servant, the Lord has 
given to His Church a wealth of wisdom concerning 


THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


His redemptive counsels, in such form that every 
believer may be greatly aided in the study to show 
themselves approved unto God, workmen who need 
not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. 


The writer of this note thanks God for the great 
blessing to his own life and ministry through his 
intimate acquaintance with Rev. Larkin, and with 
his teaching, and heartily commends this volume 
now dedicated to the Lord and to all of His blood- 
bought ones. 


Our prayer is that every reader may be greatly 
blessed, like Daniel, in being given “understanding” 
of the counsels of God concerning the present and 
future evil times, and the glories of Christ which 
are yet to be manifest. 


Yours in His Service, 
W. W. RUGH, 


Founder of the Bible Institute 
of Pennsylvania 


The Book of Daniel 


1; a 


\ 
2 
» 


¢ 
: te 
2 
r 
" 
4 
| 
3 
7 
= 
= 
Co Ee hay gts 
_ 


wait: 


- Ate J ; 
o » j ; ‘ 
_ a 3‘ ft 4 : 
» % oD . 4 
& ) A a r uJ ¥ : ’ 
| 7 3 2 , | 1 : 
Y Pg > = vi ror . 4 » 
er a . pi 
Pant co a he ] : . 
ay ee a ue i 
elt hy fp % e ; ‘ , . a 
na fa 1 % ; . 
Z . v : 
d- . 1 Ve. 
. , 3 i. i 
os 2 “2 
Pi » - P 4 a 
bi A , A ' ; 
§ ] ‘ ba —— 
hp Hae UE 7 rt x A - 
. - a -4 
s ~ i, 7 x 
- en vind 
= « ag a : 
4 m a é 7 
~~ : , 
. a oP 
; a ee t 
4 a 
: 
2 ‘ # 
a | 4 os ; 
Sues a ce b 2 
ioeg + ’ a eS _ 
i Kd ls¢ 
it or ’ aie 
i a u é 
PaO. 
: hate a ; 
z ‘ 2 . 
i 4] ‘ 
5 7 * : 


a 
ind 
~ 
a 
1 
ry — 
7S 
Fen, Wie: . 
= 
SA regan 4c ie 
A 
, 
7 


> i Lo. n ; } rT Lav, 
- mf - 2 “hi 
a. - 
aa ~1 5 p ess ; io I 
ie 1 i o% iF wt af at on 
ies A ; : hi 
5, ve 
a 7 S 4 . i. 
ame. are ru. yo 0S ~~ “e 7 S oe oa <> ch m 
a Peo urursre " i A © hd, < wad ot ep) 
2 ran A of 4 ) & 
wel W Oe 4109 PS ot ; a * 
ae mee ~ a ~ te Sy 
ee ae > (ae ee ate 0 al - nt re es s — ‘pi hay M oY 
* i] 


ge 


iy 
her ne vi 


“THe Time 


BookOr DANIEL act 


‘Tue PERSONAL History OF DANIEL 


CHAPTER 
I 


CHAPTER 
I 


NEBUCHADNESSAR'S DREAM er ve Great WorRLD 
GoLossus" 


“ty Tyeiries THe DETERIOATION OF GENTILE POWER 
Frest In QUALITY, FROM GOLD To IRox Axo Ctay, Seconniy¥ 
Iu STRENGTH, BY SUBDIVISION FROM IRON (INTHE Form OF 
Steet), To Common IRON AND CLAY. 


CTE 


> 
"BELSHAZZAR'S yy pp dpa yon-Zel 
FEAST” “Tue HANOWRITING ON THe WALL” 


DANIEL'S VISION OF ssi = 
"THe BEASTS" 


DANIEL’S VISION OF 
“THe RAM 40 HE-GOoAT™ 


a | 

SA! 

> BC.445 Dantet's “Sixty | 
2|CHapreR|<| | DANtEL's Vision OF canemrrn ase 
o| MK |-| THe SEVENTY Weeks” ar 
BS} 5 To"MESsIAH_ 
He a Men. 3-6 Matt. 
= CHAPTERS ___Daniev’s ' ANGELIC MINISTRY 

x o VISION OF CHRIST WoRLD-RULERS Of THis DARKNESS 
e — Vs. 5-8 DAN. 10:10-2.- EPH. G:12-17 
o. ~ DANIEL’S VISION OF THE 
CH ee - “WILFUL KING” 


"THE ANTICHRIST” 


DANIEL'S VISION OF THe 
“END TIME 


Or THe GENTILES. Luxe 21:24 


dts 


: THE. CHuRcH 
Twe Crurcn’ Was Nor Reveateo To Daniel: 


Tue Jews Scattereo Among 


Reru, 
THE NATIONS . 


THE y/, 9, 
NE Se ,0e 
¢ 


EASTERN DIVISION 0 wesc i Lf 


(GREEK CuuRcH) oA 


= DIVISION OF THE ~ = 
Roman EMPIRE 


a= ADS 64 2 gs 


OF CHRIST 
DAN. 2:34-35,44 


THe 
Four 
Divisions 


“THE ANTICHRIST” 


THe Description OF THe "litte HORN” 
Or THe FourtH Beast’ THe Litre Horn” 
Or THe FourtH Horn” OF THE He-GoAT, AxO 
OF THE WitFUL KING” OF CHAPTER 11-36-45, 
REVEALS THE FACT THAT THEY Are One ANO 
Tue Same, Ano Discioses THe Fact THaT 
THe “ANTICHRIST” SHALL Come Our OF Syria 
(WHicH TKCLUDES Assyria), Ano WHICH WAS 
APart OF THe OLo Roman Empire Wack 
Io To Be Reviveo Ano Cover Aqain Its 
FormMER TERRITORY 


TYPICAL TEACHING 
OFTHE BOOK 
MAN Sees In THe COLOSSUS” A Reere- 
SENTATION OF THE WORLO Kingpows In 
THER WEALTH, MAJESTY ANO Power, 
Goo Sees THEM ASA Set OF Rapa- 
Crovs’ Wico Beasts" DEVOURING ONE 
ANOTHER. 
THe GOLOEN Image Set UP By Nee- 
UCHAONEZZAR, 1S A Tyee OF THe IMAGE 
Of THE Beast” OF Rev. '3:14-17, ANOTHE 
“FIERY FURNACE OF THE PRESERVATION 


OF THE FAITHFUL REMNANT OF Rev.7:3-8. 


DEESee My Cuart ON - 
Oaniet’s StVENTIETH WEEK 
For A Descrierion OF THIS 
“TRIBULATION PERIOD” 
, Ae UNFoLoeD IN THe 
Stven SEALED Book” 
OF THe Book OF REVELATION” 
Rev. 4: 1-t0:21. 


NEBUCHAONEZZARS INSANITY Is Aree 


+ “ * 
ie . My « Or THE MAoNeSS OF THE NATIONS JN The 
"WeeKs AD.30 | Waar SE GREAT INTERVAL | Oanirt’s'Sevenrierd'Weex) — |*Ewo Tide 
tt YTS 4 . 
2 > BETWEEN THE “Sixty NinTH” ANO SE a] "Mivdve OF] THe WEEK” BECSUATZANS LAST Feast ls Tyeicat Or 
5 WEEK WAS Not REVEALED To Da & Time Ties A Maur Tee Imprety ANG Doom OF GENTILE 
PRINCE” Z bis Fouts Two Mowe POWER. | : 
: = 1260 Dare THe “Lions Ogn" Is A Tyre OF THE 
CALVARY Es PRESERVATION OF ISRAEL IN THE Liows 
2 DEN OF THe Nations” 
v 
ry 
= 
> 
S 
UG Ry i 
cs! leh 
OF AEN B.C.168 = Z 
ar” y fin) CHRisT 
1. 1 \ BEE Tbs 2. Thess. 2:6 
3 J ! ~ 4a Rev. 13:1-J0 


Oesiqgned Ano DRawn By 
CLARENCE LARKIN 
Fox Crase, Pui, A 
Ffi9/ia16 


THE SEALED Boox 
Tre Boox Tat Danie WAS Tosa To. 

SEAL UP Is The Seven Seateo” Book 

Of THE’Boon OF LATION” Twat Descrioes 


Tue" Tripytation Penion. Rev. 5:s-19: 24. Corrriqutea 


t 


ee ae ea 5 ins % = == = 
‘ 


myihetany ante Pacha itaeca ae eee en 
a - 


Arak atom 


anne cere Ane a 


= 


<a, 


Om ete 


I 


The Prophetic Word 


The Bible is unlike all other religious books in 
that it bases its “Authenticity,” “Authority,” and “In- 
spiration” on PROPHECY. All other religious hooks 
contain no predictions as to the future. If its authors 
had attempted to foretell future events, their unfulfil- 
ment would long ago have discredited their writings. 
Prophecy is— 


HISTORY WRITTEN IN ADVANCE, 


and proves the foreknowledge of God. This the 
Prophet Daniel opened to the heathen king, Nebuchad- 
nezzar, in his interpretation of the king’s “Dream’”— 


“The Great God hath made known to the king 
what shall come to pass HEREAFTER: and the 


‘Dream’ is certain, and the interpretation thereof 
SURE.” Dan. 2:45. 


Prophecy is twofold, “descriptive” and “predictive.” 
The prophets were both “forth-tellers” and “fore-tell- 
ers.” They had both “insight” and “foresight.” Their 
prophetic utterances were not the deductions of rea- 
son, but were imparted to them by the Holy Spirit 


“For the ‘Prophecy’ came not in old time by the 
‘will of man’: but Holy Men of God spake as they 
were MOVED BY THE HOLY GHOST.” 2 Pet. 
eed: 


The importance of the study of the “Prophetic 
Scriptures” is seen when we recall that two-thirds of 
the Scriptures are prophetic, either in type, symbol, 
or direct statement, and that more than one-half of 
them are as yet unfulfilled; and as those that have 
been fulfilled were literally fulfilled, as the promises 
in reference to the “First Coming” of Christ, so those 
as yet unfulfilled, will be as literally fulfilled. If then 
we would know the “MIND OF GOD” as to the future 


5 


6 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


we must study the “Prophetic Scriptures,” or remain 
in that class that the Apostle Peter speaks of as 
being—“WILLINGLY IGNORANT,” so as to claim 
“ignorance” as an excuse for conduct. 2 Pet. 3: 3-8. 
We are living in a “Dark World,” and we need the 
“SURE WORD OF PROPHECY” to LIGHT us 
over the stormy “Sea of Time.” 2 Pet. 1:19. When 
men see that God has a “Plan and Purpose in the 
Ages” they will take heart and not be discouraged by 
the things that are taking place on the earth in these 
days. 

But we must not forget that—‘‘No prophecy of the 
Scriptures is of any private interpretation.” 2 Pet. 
1:20. That is, no prophecy is to be interpreted by 
itself, but in harmony with the whole body of predic- 
tion on any given subject. It is not to be interpreted 
to suit the theory of any “cult.” The “Grasshopper 
Method” of interpretation or exegesis must be avoided. 
There is no form of evil doctrine or practice that may 
not claim apparent Scriptural sanction and support 
from isolated passages taken out of their context, but 
no erroneous doctrine can ever find support in the 
Word of God when the whole united testimony of the 
Scriptures is weighed against it. 

The prophecies are not to be “allegorized” or “spirit- 
ualized.”” God expounds prophecy by literally fulfilling 
it in every detail. For illustration, when God said to 
Abraham— 


“Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a 
stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve 
them: and they shall afflict them FOUR HUN- 
DRED YEARS: and also that nation, whom they 
shall serve will I JUDGE (by Plagues): and 
afterward shall they come out with great sub- 
stance,” (see Ex. 12: 35-36) Gen. 15: 13-14, 


did He mean that Abraham’s seed should enter into 
some spiritual experience which would cause great 
mental disquietude and heart searching, out of which 
they would emerge richer in experience and spiritual- 


THE PROPHETIC WORD 7 


ity, or did He mean exactly what the words literally 
imply? Let the history of their experience in Egypt, 
as recorded in the first twelve chapters of Exodus, 
answer. There was nothing allegorical in the whips 
of the Egyptian Taskmasters, nor spiritual in the 
double tale of bricks. The Divine law of prophetical 
interpretation is, that the prophecy will be literally 
and in exact detail fulfilled. 

The requirements of a genuine prediction are five 
in number. 


1. It must have been made known PRIOR to 
its fulfilment. 


2. It must be beyond all HUMAN FORE- 
SIGHT. 


3. It must give DETAILS. 


4. A SUFFICIENT TIME MUST ELAPSE 
BETWEEN ITS PUBLICATION AND FUL- 
FILMENT TO EXCLUDE THE PROPHET, 
OR ANY INTERESTED PARTY, FROM FUL- 
FILLING IT. 


5. There must bea CLEAR AND DETAILED 
FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY IN 
EVERY PARTICULAR. 


For illustration, there were 16 detailed prophecies 
in reference to Christ’s First Coming that were lit- 
erally fulfilled during the last week of His life, as 
follows— 


. Sola iere A) preees Wi slkise,” “Ages, ile Ye 
. Betrayed by a friend. Psa. 41:9. 
Forsaken by His Disciples. Zech. 13:7. 

. Accused by false witnesses. Psa. 35:11. 
Dumb before His accusers. Isa. 53:7. 
SPiteupolsandescourved melsamoac. 

rd aAnCorancscetmpier cede isan 40. 

His garments divided by lot. Psa. 22: 18. 
. Mocked by His enemies. Psa. 22: 7-8. 


DOONAN RWNE 


8 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


10. Given gall and vinegar. Fsa. 69: 21. 
Tl Prayed4orsHis murderersi@ isa, 535 V2: 
12. Not a bone broken. Psa. 34: 20. 
133Crucifiedswith= thieves,” fsa. 853 12: 
l4eHis*forsaken*cryee Psance: 1: 

15. His side pierced. Zech 12: 10. 

low Buried*astarrich mans lsay 100 oo. 


Now according to the law of “Compound Probabili- 
ties” there was one chance in 65,536 that all-these 
prophecies would head up, or be fulfilled, in the same 
individual. And when we consider that these prophe- 
cies were made by different prophets during a period 
of 600 years, and half of them about 1000 years before 
Jesus was born, and notice how they dovetail together 
with such marveilous accuracy to describe the be- 
trayal, trial, and crucifixion of Jesus, we cannot but 
admit that the men who foretold those incidents must 
have been indwelt by the “Spirit of God.” 

The student of Prophecy must learn to “Rightly 
Divide the Word.” While all Scripture is profitable 
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction 
(2 Tim. 3: 16-17), and was written for our learning, 
it is not all addressed to us. Part of it is addressed to 
the “JEWS,” part to the “GENTILES,” and part to 
the “CHURCH.” These three constitute the “Three 
Classes” into which humanity is divided. 1 Cor. 10: 32. 
The. “Jews” vand “Gentiles? aremdistinca trom each 
other, while the “Church” is composed of both, but as 
ae NEW BOD YeawE phy 122225 Cole elo aaa 
3327-28; Col) 3 10-ll The Churchtissnot ascupyect 
of prophecy but of Revelation. The burden of prophecy 
is the Jews, Palestine, Jerusalem, and the Messiah. 
Therefore it is very important in studying the Scrip- 
tures not to give to the “Church” what belongs to the 
“Jews? or “Gentiles,” and yice versa», Uhe “Church? 
is not seen in the Old Testament. It treats only of the 
“Jews” and “Gentiles.” The Old Testament chapter 
headings are misleading. They do not belong to the 
text but were put there by the publisher. For illus- 


THE PROPHETIC WORD 2 


tration, take the chapter headings of Isaiah 43 and 44, 
which read—‘“The Lord comforteth the ‘Church’ with 
His promises.” The very first verse of those chapters 
refutes the heading, distinctly saying that the chapter 
ispaddtessedsto mm PO RAEHL,’ snot the’sChurch,” [ftwe 
want to know about the “Church” we must confine 
ourselves to the New Testament, and there to the 
Acts and the Epistles. The entire history of God’s 
chosen people “Israel” is given in the Scriptures. They 
are an earthly people. From their call in Abraham to 
the present time is history. Their regathering, re- 
_pentance, and restoration to their own land, and their 
future earthly glory is the subject of prophecy. The 
prophetic history of the “Gentile Nations” is outlined 
in the Book of Daniel, the book we are about to study. 
This “Present Evil Age” and the manner of its ending 
is also the subject of prophecy. It behooves us there- 
fore if we would know about the future events that 
are to come to pass on the earth that we should be 
students of prophecy. Men and women resort to for- 
tune tellers, clairvoyants, and mediums to get informa- 
tion as to the future, when-they have the “more sure 
WOLMEOr propiecy. ==because Ciethe meclect™ ot the 
study of Prophecy the Scriptures have fallen into dis- 
repute, and scepticism and infidelity have become 
widespread, and an unscriptural optimism as to the 
Wounleetowine better is ieard on every’ side. “he 
neglect of the “Prophetic Word” leaves man ignorant 
Ome Godse) latmeond shurposesas=to tie Aes, and 
makes him the easy prey of all the lying inventions 
and delusive “Cults” of the day. The only cure for 
the rationalism of the day is the study of Prophecy. 
The book we are about to study is a “Prophetic Fore- 
view” of the “Gentile Nations’ and their last great 
ruler—THE ANTICHRIST. 


———— 


II 
The Book of Daniel 


No other book in the Bible has been attacked like 
the Book of Daniel. For 1600 years, beginning with 
Porphyry,-a Syrianjin’ the wmihirds@entury, thesbook 
has been in the “Critic’s Den” and fiercely assailed 
by sceptical writers. Porphyry claimed that instead 
of being written by Daniel about B. C. 533, it was a 
forgery written in the time of the Maccabees about 
B. C. 168, and after Antiochus Epiphanes, so clearly 
foretold in the book, had appeared, and was written to 
comfort and encourage the Jews in those trying times. 
Some modern critics claim that Daniel, if such a per- 
son ever lived, had nothing to do with the book at all, 
that a holy, pious, and gifted Jew, who lived after 
the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, (B. C. 165), wrote 
it, and that it is pure fiction. But how could a man 
who would write such a book and try to palm it off 
as real history be a holy and pious Jew? This shows 
to what an extremity those who do not want to accept 
the book, because it foretells the future, are driven. 

There is no question but that the Book of Daniel 


existed long before the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, — 


| B.C. 175-165. How did it get into the Septuagint, the 


Greek translation of the Scriptures, that was completed 


in B. C. 285, or over 100 years before it is claimed that 
a pious Jew wrote it? Josephus, the Jewish Historian, 
gives us a history of the Jewish people from Abraham 
down to the destruction of Jerusalem, A. D. 70. Nar- 
rating incidents of the struggle with Antiochus Epiph- 
anes, he says that these things came to pass “accord- 
ing to the prophecy of Daniel which was given 408 
years before.” Which means, according to Josephus, 
that the Book of Daniel was written about B. C. 573. 
Josephus also tells us that when Alexander the Great, 
who is foretold in Daniel’s prophecies (Dan. 8: 5-8) 
came in the course of his conquests to Jerusalem, B. C. 
332, that Jaddua, the High Priest, showed him the ref- 


10 


THE BOOK OF DANIEL 11 


erence to himself in the Book of Daniel, which so 
pleased him that he spared the city. According to 
this the Book of Daniel must have been written prior 
to B. C. 332. Again, Ezekiel was a contemporary of 
Daniel, and wrote in Babylon the book which bears 
his name. He was held in high esteem by his fellow 
exiles and was much consulted by them. If Daniel 
was in Babylon in high official position Ezekiel must 
have known it. But he need not necessarily have men- 
tioned Daniel in his book. But he does. Three times 
his name is mentioned— 


“Though these three men, Noah, DANIEL, and 
Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own 
souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord God.” 
Ezek. 14: 14, 20; Ezek. 28: 3. 


Thus Ezekiel bears witness to the fact that such a 
man as Daniel existed, and that he was so noted for 
his righteousness as to be classed with Noah, and for 
his wisdom as to be classed with Job. 

But the highest authority for the authenticity of the 
Book of Daniel is our Lord, who said in His Olivet 
Discourse— 


“When ye therefore shall see the ‘Abomination 
of Desolation,’ spoken of by DANIEL THE 
PROPHET, stand in the Holy Place, whoso 
readeth, let him understand.” Matt. 24:15. 


Whosoever therefore denies the Authenticity of the 
Book of Daniel impeaches the integrity and wisdom 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, for He, in the above quota- 
tion, affirms that there was such a Prophet as Daniel, 
and that He foretold that there was such a thing as 
the “Abomination of Desolation” to stand in the Holy 
Place of the Temple. 


THE ARGUMENT OF SILENCE 


| It is claimed that no such person of influence and 
authority as Daniel ever lived at Babylon, because 
the name Daniel does not appear upon the monuments 


12 THE EOOK OF DANIEL 
| or among the historical records of Babylonia. The 
'claim is premature because comparatively few such 
_ records have been unearthed or deciphered, and the _ 

absence of Daniel’s name is no proof, for his Jewish 

“name Daniel was changed to the heathen name Belte- 

shazzar. Neither is it any proof because the name 

Belteshazzar does not appear, for the name might have 

been abbreviated and spelled differently, as was often 

the custom with lengthy names. The fact then of 
silence is no argument. For illustration, we read in 


‘Luke 2:41-50 that when Jesus was 12 years of age 


He went up to Jerusalem at the “Feast of the Pass- 
over.” Did He not go up to any other Feast between 
that time and when He entered on His Public Min- 
istry? We do not know. The Scriptures are silent. 
We know from John’s Gospel that He went up to the 
Feasts regularly after His Baptism, is it not reason- 
ables@to ssuppose sthatenl em didm beroressineme awe 
required every male to regularly attend the Feasts, and 
as Jesus scrupulously kept the Law, the inference is 
that He from His twelfth year went regularly to the 
Feasts, at least to the Passover Feast, which was a 
type of Himself. The silence then as to Daniel’s name 


among the Babylonian records: is no proof. that _he 
sneyer “existed. r 

It is a fact that we must not forget, that heathen 
monarchs, like Nebuchadnezzar, recorded on the 
monuments only the things that glorified themselves, 
and the great men of their Empires are not men- 
tioned. What about the governors, judges, generals, 
priests, wise men, and the sculptors, architects, engi- 
neers, etc., who planned, and supervised the building 
of the magnificent walls, towers, bridges, tubes, tem- 
ples and palaces of “Great Babylon?” Their names 
do not appear upon the records, why then Daniel’s? 

The Book of Daniel is discounted because it does 
not give a list of kings between Nebuchadnezzar and 
Belshazzar. But why should it? It would seem from 
the record that Daniel was deposed from his high 
office at the death of Nebuchadnezzar, and does not 


THE BOOK OF DANIEL V3 


publicly appear until he is called on to pronounce the 
doom of Belshazzar. Why then should he record 
events, etc., not connected with the purpose of his 
book? \ 


_the presence—of_fifteen Persian and three Greek , 


ne oe 


_ words in the Book of Daniel has led some to o claim ( 


~ that" the book could not have been written as early \ 
_as B. C. 533. But the presence of these words is an | 
argument for the early date.| If the book had been | 
written in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, the author 
would not only have nected acto Greckewords bat” 
he would have incorporated in it many Greek expres-_ 
Shid EHAULES Wee Cae AE eS TG ECS 
musical instruments, probably imported by Nebuchad- 
nezzar from Greece, or played by Greek musicians 
captured in war. The use of foreign words is con- _ 


ss of Daniel’s presence _at the court of a coun-_ 
try that was constantly being visited by. emissaries — 


from o thE lands. 


Proofs of the Authenticity of the Book 


Mention is made in chapter 1:3 of Ashpenaz, Mas- 
ter of the Eunuchs. The word in the original is Rab- 
saris. But until about twenty-five years ago the word 
was not found upon the monuments of Babylon, and 
its absence was used by the critics as proof that there 
was no such official at the court of Nebuchadnezzar, 
and therefore the Book of Daniel was not authentic. 
But the name has been discovered upon a conical brick 
preserved in the British Museum, thus proving that 
Daniel is right.* 

We are told in chapter 1:2 that Nebuchadnezzar 
carried the vessels of the House of God (the Temple 
at Jerusalem) “into the land of Shinar, to the house of 
his god.” From an inscription left by Nebuchadnezzar 
we find that it was his custom to thus place the choic- 


*“Inspiration and Accuracy of the Holy Scriptures.” John 
Urauhart.= Ps 358-359 


14 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


est of his spoils in the house of his god. Could a 
writer, writing 400 years later, who knew nothing 
whatever of Nebuchadnezzar’s custom, ascribe such 
conduct to him? 


Again, the fact that at the Babylonian court there 
were a class of men called “seers,” who were classified 
as magicians, astrologers, and sorcerers, and over 
which Daniel was made head, is another proof of the 
historical character of the book, for a later fictional 
writer, picturing a vanished state of society after his 
imagination, would not be likely to give the proper 
classification. 


THE GENTILE NATIONS 


While the Book of Daniel treats of the “Times of 
the Gentiles,’ it does not give an outline of all the 
Gentile nations, but only of those which were suc- 
cessively to have sway over the territory of the 
“Prophetic Earth,” or that part of the earth covered by 
the Old Roman Empire. Bible prophecy has nothing 
to say about the nations as such in their relation to one 
another, but only in their relation to Israel and the 
Holy Land. 


“When the Most High divided to the nations 
their inheritance, when He separated the sons of 
Adam (at Babel), He set the bounds of the people 
ACCORDING TO THE NUMBER OF THE 
CHILDREN OF ISRAEL.” Deut. 32:8. 


The key to all prophecy is the Jew. If the Jewish 
nation had not forsaken God and neglected His sab- 
saths, there would have been no “Times of the Gen- 
tiles.’ The “Times of the Gentiles” began when God 
transferred earthly rule from the Kings of Israel to 
the Gentile king Nebuchadnezzar, and they will con- 
tinue until Israel again becomes the “Head of the 
Nations.” Daniel is distinctly the Prophet of the 
“Times of the Gentiles.” His vision sweeps the whole 


THE BOOK OF DANIEL 15 


course of Gentile World Rule until the setting up of 
the Messianic or Millennial Kingdom of Christ. Dan- 
iel was not a Prophet in the same sense that Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the Minor Prophets were 
prophets. Their mission was to go to the people and 
proclaim the Word of the Lord, while Daniel’s mission 
was to record what was revealed to him through 
visions. While he did not have the “Prophetic Office,” 
he had the “Prophetic Gift.” The Book of Daniel is 
the Apocalypse of the Old Testament, as the Book 
of Revelation is the Apocalypse of the New Testa- 
ment, and one cannot be understood without the other, 
and it is worthy of note that as Daniel is thrice called 
the man “greatly beloved,” the Apostle John is called 
the “beloved disciple.’ To these two men was ac- 
corded the privilege of seeing in vision the whole 
“course of time” from B. C. 606, on down to the Sec- 
ond Coming of Christ. 


THE DIVISIONS OF THE BOOK 


The Book naturally divides itself into_two grand _ 
divisions. FOtmecix chapters each. The first division is 


mainly “Historical,” and the second is “Prophetical.” 
ee Chart of the Book of Daniel. The Book is written 
in two languages. The first chapter, and the first three 


verses of the second are written in Hebrew, and so are 
chapters & to 12, but from the fourth verse of the sec- | 4 


_ond chapter to the end of the seventh the language is 1 
Aramaic, the ancient language of Syria, and substan- ] 
tially identical with Chaldaic, the language of ancient 
Babylonia, and the language at that time of trade and 
international intercourse. The use of the two lan- 
guages is apparent. What. concerns the Gentile Em- } 
pires is written in their lan uage, Aramaic, and what 
concerns the Jews is wri : 
ence that the Book was written d_ 
written by a Jew. As further evidence the Hebrew is 
the same in style as the Hebrew of Ezekiel, who was_ 


a captive at Babylon at the same time as Daniel, = 


16 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


DANIEL 


Of Daniel himself we know more than of any of the 
other prophets. He was of the Tribe of Judah, and of 
noble, if not royal, blood. He was carried captive from 
Jerusalem in the third year of Jehoiakim, B. C. 606, 
in the first invasion of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar. He 
was probably twenty years of age when he was taken 
to Babylon, and in a short time he rose to a very high 
position in the Empire, which he held during the reign 
of Nebuchadnezzar. At his death Daniel went into 
retirement and is not heard of again until he was sum- 
moned to pronounce the doom of Belshazzar. He lived 
through the whole period of the “Seventy Years Cap- 
tivity,” and became the “Chief President” over the 
120 Princes of the Kingdom, under Darius the Median, 
when he was at least ninety years old. He is the only 
spotless character in the Bible outside of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. There is not one flaw to be found in his 
character. He was a man “greatly beloved” of God. 
He associated with kings and politicians. He led a 
public life. He held office, yet his character was never 
impeached. He talked with angels. The Lord Himself 
appeared unto him, and he had visions of God. He 
was a great man of faith, and though his name is not 
mentioned in the great “Faith Chapter” of the New 
Testament, he is referred to in it as one who “stopped 
the mouths of lions.” Heb. 11:33. He was the— 


PROPHETIC STATESMAN 


of his day. It was given to him to study the “SIGNS 
OF THE TIMES,” to know the outcome of all the 
world’s boasted civilization, and to see that the nations 
of the earth should degenerate in political power until 
the clay of democracy, socialism, and anarchy should 
so weaken the nations that there would be no cohesion 
among them, and that the only salvation for a chaotic 
world would be the return of Christ, and the setting 
up of His Millennial Kingdom, 


Exposition of the Book 


First Division 


Historical 


Chapters 1-6 


sect sot ¥e ering 


= oii wath. ae ar 


yerres? a ae 


CHAPTER ONE 


The Beginning of Gentile Dominion 


THE CONQUEST OF JERUSALEM 


“In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim 
king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. And the 
Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, 
with part of the vessels of the House of the Lord: 
which he carried into the land of Shinar to the 
house of his god; and he brought the vessels into 
the treasure house of his god.” Daniel 1: 1-2. 


Jeremiah (25:8-11) places this captivity in the 
fourth year of Jehoiakim, Daniel in the third. This 
seeming discrepancy is explained by the fact that 
Nebuchadnezzar set out on his expedition near the 
close of the third year of Jehoiakim, from which point 
Daniel reckons, but did not accomplish the subjuga- 
tion of Jerusalem till about the ninth month of the 
following year, and from this Jeremiah reckons. 

After the “Confusion of Tongues,” and the scatter- 
ing of the descendants of Noah at Babel, the nations 
of the earth were held in an unseen leash by God, and 
no one was permitted to conquer and subdue all the 
rest. It was God’s purpose to make the descendants 
of Abraham, the Hebrew Nation, the leading nation of 
the world, but their disobedience and idolatry pre- 
vented this. In B. C. 721, the “Ten Tribes” were car- 
ried into captivity to Assyria by King Sargon, and in 
B.C. 606, 115 years later, began the “Seventy Years’ 
Captivity” in Babylon, as foretold by the Prophet 
Jeremiah (Jer. 25:11), of the remaining two Tribes, 
known as Judah. 

While God had not, up to this time, permitted any 
one nation to be a world conqueror, yet there were 
certain great powers that were ambitious for that 


19 


20 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


honor and were warring for supremacy. Among these 
nations was Babylon, that had already swallowed up 
Assyria. In B. C. 605, Pharaoh-necho, king of Egypt, 
marched against Babylon, and was overwhelmingly 
defeated by Nebuchadnezzar at the Battle of Car- 
chemish on the west bank of the river Euphrates, as 
had been foretold by the Prophet Jeremiah. Jer. 
46: 1-26. The defeat of Pharaoh-necho by Nebuchad- 
nezzar made Babylon the mistress of the world. 

Nebuchadnezzar pursued Pharaoh-necho to Egypt, 
and having completely conquered Egypt, he marched 
against Jerusalem, and in the third year of the reign 
of Jehoiakim (B. C. 605) he besieged it. All resistance 
was speedily overcome, the city was taken, King 
Jehoiakim was loaded with fetters and ready to be 
carried a prisoner to Babylon (2 Chron. 36: 5-8), when 
Nebuchadnezzar, hearing of the death of his father, 
released King Jehoiakim and restored him to his 
throne, and hastened home to Babylon to claim his 
father’s throne. But he did not return empty handed. 
He plundered the Temple, and took away some of its 
golden vessels, and ordered Ashpenaz, the master of 
his eunuchs, to select from among the princes of royal 
and noble blood the most comely and intellectual of 
the Hebrew youths, and convey them to Babylon, 
that they might be instructed in the language and 
tongue of the Chaldeans. 

Three years later Jehoiakim rebelled against Ne- 
buchadnezzar, and the Lord sent neighboring bands of 
Chaldees, Syrians, Moabites and Ammonites to de- 
stroy Judah. 2 Kings 24: 1-4. This continued for five 
years, when Jehoiakim died a disgraceful death (Jer. 
22: 17-19) and his son Jehoiachin reigned in his stead. 
But he only reigned three months, during which he 
did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, when 
Nebuchadnezzar in B. C. 598 came the second time 
and besieged the city of Jerusalem and took it, and 
carried away Jehoiachin, and the princes, and all the 
mighty men of valor, even 10,000 captives. and 1000 
craftsmen and smiths, leaving only the poorest sort of 


GENTILE DOMINION 21 


people behind. 2 Kings 24:8-16. This is commonly 
called—“The Captivity,” because of the number and 
characte~ of those carried away, but the “Seventy 
Years Captivity” began in B. C. 606, because it ran 
out at the “Fall of Babylon,” and the commencement 
of the reign of Cyrus, who issued the edict for the 
Jews to return to Jerusalem in B. C. 536. 


Before departing with his captives, Nebuchadnezzar 
made the uncle of Jehoiachin king, and changed his 
name to Zedekiah. But he did that which was evil in 
the sight of the Lord, and rebelled against the king 
of Babylon, and in the ninth year of his reign, Ne- 
buchadnezzar again besieged Jerusalem, and after two 
years took it (B. C. 587) and destroyed the Temple and 
the city, and from that time the Jewish Nation ceased 
to exist. 2 Kings 24:17-20; 25:1-21. This is called 
“The Desolations,” because of the desolate condition 
in which it left the city and the land for seventy years, 
as foretold by Jeremiah. Jer. 25:11. When Nebuchad- 
nezzarepecame King witb. ©, O06, the = limes otithe 
Gentiles” began. His Kingdom was the first “World- 
wide Empire” the world had ever seen. 


THE HEBREW CAPTIVES 


“And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the raster 
of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the 
children of Israel, and of the king’s seed, and of 
the princes; children in whom was no blemish, 
but well favored, and skilful in all wisdom, and 
cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, 
and such as had ability in them to stand in the 
king’s palace, and whom they might teach the 
leaniitivgantm lem conetice Olmtiem@laldedic uu. e. 
Now among these were of the Children of Judah, 
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: unto 
whom the ‘Prince of the Eunuchs’ gave names: 
for he gave unto Daniel the name of ‘Belteshaz- 
Zan eeoudal tO) sb ananians Olesobadrach jandsto 


“ie THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Mishael, of ‘Meshach;’ and to Azariah, of ‘Abed- 
nego.’” Dan. 1: 3-4, 6-7. 


The Prophet Isaiah said to King Hezekiah— 


“Hear the word of the Lord of Hosts: behold, 
the days come, that all that is in thine house, and 
that which thy fathers have laid up in store until 
this day, shall be carried to Babylon: nothing 
shall be left, saith the Lord. And of thy sons that 
shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall 
they take away: and they shall be LUNUCHS in 
the palace of the King of Babylon.” Isa. 39: 5-7. 


We see from this Scripture that the four Hebrew 
captives, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, as 
they were of royal blood, were descendants of the 
good king Hezekiah, and that they were made 
EUNUCHS. This is confirmed by the fact that they 
were turned over to the “Prince of the Eunuchs,” who 
changed their names, and who had supervision over 
them for three years. The name of Daniel (God is my 
Judge) was changed to “Belteshazzar” (Whom Bel 
favors); Hananiah (Beloved of the Lord) to “Shad- 
rach” (Illumined by the Sun-God); Mishael (Who is 
as God) to “Meshach” (Who is like Venus); and 
Azariah (the Lord is my help) to “Abed-nego” (The 
servant of Nego). The purpose in changing their 
names was to wean them away from their land and 
religion, and get them to adopt the religion and habits 
of the heathen nation where their future was to be 
Spent. 


But changing a man’s name does not change his 
character, and these young men had been too deeply 
rooted in the religion and faith of their own nation 
to adopt the practices of a heathen nation. There is 
a striking similarity between the experience of Joseph 
in Egypt and of Daniel in Babylon. Both were He- 
brews. Both were prisoners in a strange and heathen 
land. Both were dreamers, and revealers of dreams. 
The moral character of each was severely tested. That 
of Joseph in the house of Potiphar (Gen. 39: 1-23), 


GENTILE DOMINION 23 


and that of Daniel in the king’s palace. These tests 
were especially severe on account of their age at the 
time. They were both about twenty. But both stood 
firm. Both were a great blessing to the homes where 
they dwelt, and both were raised to positions of great 
honor. The secret was their loyalty to their God. 

The testing for Daniel and his companions was 
alone the line of their religion. They were com- 
manded to he fed with royal dainties and wine from 
the King’s table. 


“And the king appointed them a daily provision 
of the king’s meat, and of the wine which he 
drank: so nourishing them three years, that at the 
end thereof they might stand before the king.” 
Wis @ 


Now such fare, and from such a source, would be 
very attractive and appetizing for youths of a carnal 
nature, and they could have congratulated themselves 
that they had been selected for such an honor, and 
that they were to spend their lives in the midst of the 
comforts, luxuries, and pleasures of Babylon. There 
were many excuses they might have made to each 
other, such as that they were captives and must obey, 
or that they must comply with the customs of the 
country, for to disobey would cost them the favor of 
the king, and interfere with their advancement, and 
might even cost them their lives, which danger three 
of them actually did face when they were cast into the 
“Burning Fiery Furnace.” They knew to refuse the 
food would make them appear singular, and expose 
them to criticism and ridicule, but they felt that for 
them there could be no compromise. For they knew 
that the meat from the King’s table would at times 
be of a kind forbidden by the Law of their God, as 
swine’s flesh (see Lev. 11: 1-47); or it might be meat 
from which the blood had not been drawn (Lev. 
17: 10-14); or it might be meat that had first been 
offered to an idol, and to eat of which might be looked 
upon as approving the religious customs of Babylon 


24 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


(1 Cor. 8:1-13), and cause them to be ceremonially 
defiled. There was therefore but one course to pur- 
sue, and in it Daniel was supported by his three com- 
panions, and so we read— 


“But Daniel purposed in his HEART that he 
would not defile himself with the portion of the 
king’s meat, nor with the wine which he drank: 
therefore he requested of the ‘Prince of the 
Eunuchs’ that he might not defile himself.” Vs. 8. 


Daniel knew that he could only be defiled by his 
own act. Therefore he purposed in his heart not to 
defile himself. It was the crisis in his life, which was 
safely passed, otherwise we probably would never 
have heard of him again. We next read that God hon- 
ored his loyalty by preparing in advance a way of 
deliverance. 


“Now God had brought Daniel into favor and 
tender love with the Prince of the Eunuchs. And 
the Prince of the Eunuchs said unto Daniel, I 
fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your 
meat and your drink: for why should he see your 
faces worse liking than the children which are of 


your sort? then shall ye make me endanger my 
head to the king.” Vs. 9-10. 


To this Daniel had a courteous reply. He did not 
assume a sanctimonious air, nor make a blatant.dis- 
play of his religious views. He made no assault on 
the Chaldean religion and the worship of idols, but in 
a frank and courteous manner made his request— 


“Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the Prince 
of the Eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, 
Mishael, and Azariah, Prove thy servants, I be- 
seech thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse 
to eat, and water to drink. Then let our counte- 
nances be looked upon before thee, and the coun- 
tenances of the children that eat of the portion of 


GENTILE DOMINION Zo 


the king’s meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy 
Servants: @a\ Ss. 01-13, 


This was a fair test. Daniel did not want to get the 
“Prince of the Eunuchs” into trouble and cause him to 
lose his head, and so he arranged the matter in this 
way Satisfactorily with Melzar the Steward. Ten days 
was sufficient time to prove whether “pulse and water” 
would keep them in good condition. 


“So he (Melzar the Steward) consented to them 
in this matter, and proved them ten days. And at 
the end of ten days their countenances appeared 
fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children which 
did eat the portion of the king’s meat. Thus 
Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and 
the wine that they should drink; and gave them 
pulse.” Vs. 14-16. 


What was the outcome of the test? 


“As for these four children, GOD gave them 
knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom: 
and Daniel had understanding in all visions and 
dreams.” Vs. 17. 


Like Joseph and Moses, Daniel and his companions 
received their training in the palace of a king. They 
were chosen from among others to learn the language 
and literature of the Chaldeans, so as to act as wise 
men and councillors at court. There was nothing 
wrong in that. There is nothing in the Christian relig- 
ion that forbids the acquisition of knowledge, or the 
study of the sciences, although it is a pathway beset 
with temptations that may lead to a loss of faith in 
God and His Word, but in Daniel’s case there were no 
bad results. The fact that Daniel and his compan- 
ions underwent a three-year course of instruction 
implies that there was a “Palace School” or “National 
University” for the instruction and training of youth 
of noble descent, and that such were fed from the 


26 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


King’s table, and therefore the school could not have 
been far away from the Palace, and that the special 
subject of study was the literature and language of a 
certain people called Chaldeans. Now we know from 
the clay libraries of Nineveh and Babylon that the 
Chaldeans were a learned people. They had made 
ereat advances in grammar, mathematics, astronomy, 
and the sciences. We must not forget that Babylon 
was located on the site of Babel, and that the people 
of Babel inherited all the skill and wisdom of the Ante- 
diluvians, who were the inventors of musical instru- 
ments, and skilled workers in iron. (Gen. 4:20-22.) 


“Now at the end of the days (three years) that 
the king had said he should bring them in, then 
the Prince of the Eunuchs brought them in before 
Nebuchadnezzar. And the king communed with 
them; and among them all was found none like 
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: there- 
fore stood they before the king. And in all mat- 
ters of wisdom and understanding, that the king 
inquired of them, he found them TEN TIMES 
better than all the magicians and astrologers that 
were in all his realm.” Vs. 18-20. 


There is a beautiful lesson for us in all this. Daniel 
and his companions had no hope of returning to their 
native land, at least not for seventy years, and they 
had every reason for falling in with the customs of 
the land. They did not act as they did because they 
foresaw that the end would be prosperity, they had 
evetysréeasonyto.expectathesrevercemyciustiios olcome 
was that Daniel was made the “Chief of the Gov- 
ernors” over all the wise men of Babylon (Dan. 2:48), 
and the counsellor of Belshazzar, and ‘‘Prime Min- 
ister” under Darius. Let us like Daniel live 


THE SEPARATED LIFE. 


As Christians we find ourselves captives in the 
Babylonian life of wordliness and pleasure that sur- 


GENTILE DOMINION 27 


rounds us, and many of us instead of being trans- 
formed are conformed to this world. We have fallen 
in with the spirit of this “Present Evil Age,” and are 
living a life of “Compromise,” the outcome of which 
is a life of powerlessness and spiritual barrenness, the 
result of which is we have no “dreams” or “visions” 
of the things that God is waiting to reveal to us out 
of His Holy Word. Let us dare to be a Daniel in these 
days of Babylonian worldliness. 


CHAPTER TWO 
Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream 


A TROUBLED KING 


“And in the second year of the reign of Neb- 
uchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, 
wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleep 
braketiromphineeme Dainese 


As Nebuchadnezzar did not become king until after 
the death of his father, Nabopolassar, in B. C. 605, 
the second year of his reign would be B. C. 603, and as 
Daniel and his companions were carried captive in 
B. C. 606, and were in training for three years, the 
dream of Nebuchadnezzar did not occur until some- 
time aitenethey, hadmoraduateds itommtiess balace 
School,” or “National University.” This accounts for 
why they were included among those who were to be 
slain (verses 13, 18), though for some reason they do 
not appear to have been informed as to the demand 
of the King. Verses 14-15. 

But before we consider the “Dream” and its inter- 
pretation, it would be well to inquire as to why Neb- 
uchadnezzar was chosen to receive the “Revelation” 
that it conveyed. The “Revelation” could have been 
made to Daniel or some other prophet. We often 
read of the “Divine Right” of kings. If there ever was 
a king who had a “Divine Right” to rule it was 
Nebuchadnezzar. He did not assume it, but was di- 
rectly given it by God. 


“Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of 
Israel: thus shall ye say unto your masters: I 
have made the earth, the man and the beast that 
are upon the ground, by my great power and by 
my outstretched arm, and have given it unto 
whom it seemed meet unto me. And now have I 


28 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM 29 


given all these lands into the hand of NEBU- 
CHADNEZZAR the King of Babylon, my servant ; 
and the beasts of the field have I given him also 
to serve him. And ALL NATIONS shall serve 
him, and HIS SON, and HIS SON’S SON, until 
the very time of his land come: and then many 
nations and great kings shall serve themselves of 
him And it shall come to pass, that the nation 
and kingdom which will not serve the same Neb- 
uchadnezzar the King of Babylon, and that will 
not put their neck under the yoke of the King of 
Babylon, that nation will I punish, saith the Lord, 
with the sword, and with the famine, and with the 
pestilence, until I have consumed them by his 


hand.” Jer. 27: 4-8. 


From this Scripture we see that Nebuchadnezzar 
was Divinely chosen for his work. Whether he knew 
it or not, we are not told. We do know, however, that 
he was greatly puffed up by his greatness. For we 
read that as he walked in his palace one day, he ex- 
claimed—“Is not this great Babylon, that I have built 
for the house of the kingdom by the might of my 
power, and for the honor of my majesty?” Dan. 
4:29-30. It seemed meet and proper therefore that 
he should have the “Dream,” which, with its inter- 
pretation, would disclose to him that his greatness 
was not the result of his own ability apart from God, 
and that the glories of his Empire would soon pass 
away. 


Thus it came to pass that early in his reign, as he 
lay one day on a sumptuous couch in his palace, 
thinking about the greatness of his kingdom and won- 
dering what its future would be, he fell into a slumber. 
The impressions of his waking thoughts had not left 
him, and in his sleeping consciousness they began to 
visualize themselves until he saw in his dream a great 
Image, “whose brightness was excellent,’ and the 
“form thereof was terrible.” The form: was “terrible” 
doubtless because of the colossal size of the “Image.” 


30 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


and its “brightness” was caused by a supernatural 
light that fell from the heavens and was reflected from 
the burnished metals that composed it. While the 
king, transfixed, looked in awe and astonishment upon 
the “Image,” he saw a stone detach itself from a 
neighboring mountain and smite the “Image” upon its 
feet, and the “Image” collapsed, turned to powder, and 
was blown away, and to his amazement the “stone” 
erew larger and larger until it covered the whole 
plain on which the “Image” had stood. 

We must distinguish between dreams and visions. 
Dreams occur in the transition stage between loss of 
“waking consciousness” and “sound sleep.” Between 
the two there is what is called a state of “sleeping 
consciousness,” during which we may dream but 
never know it. The dreams that we have and remem- 
ber occur when we are waking, and if not of a vivid 
character they fade as we try to recall them. Visions 
occur in our wakeful moments when our mind is ab- 
sorbed on some thought, so that we are unconscious 
as to what is going on about us. Visions are an ocular 
phenomenon and are seen when the eyelids are closed. 
The vision appears on the inside of the eyelid and is 
sufficiently luminous to be seen by the eye, and if the 
eyelid is not moved the vision will remain indefinitely 
and can be studied in detail. The writer speaks from 
his own experience as to this. For several days dur- 
ing a severe illness visions would appear in his waking 
moments whenever he closed his eyes. 


Dreamers naturally dream of things with which they 
are familiar. A dreamer of fifty years ago would not 
dream of automobiles or airships, and a dreamer of 
today would not be likely to dream of the class of 
vehicles used one hundred years ago. In the time of 
Nebuchadnezzar gigantic statues were common. We 
find them today among the ruins of Egypt. Now 
Nebuchadnezzar had just returned from Egypt, hav- 
ing conquered it. What more natural then than hav- 
ing seen the gigantic statues of Egypt, erected by the 
Kings of Egypt to commemorate their memory, Neb- 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM ol 


uchadnezzar before he fell asleep had been thinking 
of such a method of preserving his own memory. But 
the difference was that the “Image” that Nebuchad- 
nezzar saw was of metal, while the images of Egypt 
were of stone. The metallic character of the “Image,” 
and its being composed of more than one kind of 
metal, was to the King significant, and as all Orientals 
lay much stress on dreams, and as it was God’s method 
in Old Testament times of conveying to heathen kings, 
such as Pharaoh, what He purposed to do, naturally 
Nebuchadnezzar wished to know what his dream 
meant. But so awesome and frightful was it, that the 
King awoke in terror, troubled and perplexed, and 
before he could collect himself the dream had faded 
from his memory. 


“Then the king commanded to call the ‘Magi- 
cians,’ and the ‘Astrologers,’ and the ‘Sorcerers,’ 
and the ‘Chaldeans,’ for to shew the king his 
dreams. So they came and stood before the king. 
And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a 
dream, and my spirit was troubled to know the 
dream.” Verses 2-3. 


The “Magicians” were such as practiced magic. 
That is, they practiced all the superstitious rites and 
ceremonies of fortune tellers, etc. “Astrologers” were 
men who pretended to foretell future events by the 
study of the stars. It was much in vogue among the 
Eastern nations of antiquity. “Sorcerers” were such 
as pretended to hold communication with the dead. 
They used potions, and claimed to possess super- 
natural power or knowledge gained in any manner, 
but especially through the aid of evil spirits, of which 
modern spiritualism is an example. The “Chaldeans” 
here mentioned were a sect of philosophers who made 
the sciences their special study. It was to this class 
that Daniel and his companions belonged. 


“Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in 
Syriac, O king, live forever: tell thy servants the 


32 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


dream, and we will show the interpretation. The 
king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The 
thing is gone from me: if ye will not make known 
unto me the dream, with the interpretation 
thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses 
shall be made a dunghill. But if ye shew the 
dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall re- 
ceive of me gifts and rewards and great honor: 
therefore shew me the dream, and the interpreta- 
tion thereof. They answered again and said, Let 
the king tell his servants the dream, and we will 
shew the interpretation of it. The king answered 
and said, I know of certainty that ye would gain 
the time, because ye see the thing is gone from 
me. But if ye will not make known unto me the 
dream, theresisubuteonemcecteemiOumyOUu miolmye 
have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak 
before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell 
me the dream, and I shall know that ye can shew 
me the interpretation thereof.” Verses 4-9. 


The ancient fortune tellers and interpreters of 
dreams were adepts in the art of drawing out sufficient 
information to form a basis for some shrewd prog- 
nostication, and the framing of their answer in such 
an ambiguous manner that it would appear correct 
whichever way the event would go. The Chaldeans 
therefore figured that if the king would tell them the 
dream, they could agree on some interpretation that 
would seem plausible, and thus save their reputation. 
But this was inconsistent with their claim that they 
possessed occult powers and could get superhuman 
information. From this standpoint the king’s demand 
that they reproduce his dream was not unreasonable. 
When the king saw that they could not reproduce his 
dream ‘he’ lost all confidence in’ their claims; and 
naturally and justly charged them as being impostors, 
and with “sparring for time’? until the “time be 
changed,” that is, until the matter had passed from 
his memory and he was no longer solicitous about it. 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM So 


That the claim of the Chaldeans that they could 
communicate with the “gods” was false is evident 
from their own confession. 


“The Chaldeans answered before the king, and 
said, There is not a man upon the earth that can 
shew the king’s matter: therefore there is no king, 
lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any 
Magician, or Astrologer, or Chaldean. And it is a 
rare thing that the king requireth, and there is 
none other that can shew it before the king, 
EXCEPT THE GODS, whose dwelling is not 

. with flesh.” Verses 10-11. 


When the Chaldeans confessed that no one—“except 
the gods,” could reproduce the Dream, they acknowl- 
edged, because they could not reproduce it, that they 
had no power with the gods, thus justifying the king’s 
charge that they were impostors. 


“For this cause the king was angry and very 
furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise 
men of Babylon. And the decree went forth that 
the wise men should be slain; and they sought 
Daniel and his fellows to be slain.” Verses 12-13. 


Whether the severity of the sentence pronounced 
upon them was justifiable we may question. The 
Magicians, Astrologers, Sorcerers, and Chaldeans were 
numerous, wealthy, and influential bodies. They were 
composed of the learned and cultivated classes of 
Babylon, and to cause their destruction was to weaken 
the Empire. What the execution of the sentence would 
have resulted in we can only imagine, but happily it 
was averted. When the magicians and wise men of 
Egypt could not interpret Pharaoh’s dreams, God had 
a Hebrew captive, named Joseph, prepared for the 
task. So when the wise men of Babylon could not 
recall or interpret the King’s dream, God had a He- 
brew captive, Daniel, on the scene. Why Daniel was 
not among those first consulted we are not told. He 
does not seem to have known anything about the mat- 


34 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


ter until Arioch, the king’s captain, came to arrest 
him. But God’s hand doubtless was in all this. He 
first wanted to show up the false claims of those 
heathen systems represented by the wise men of Baby- 
lon, and have them confess their incompetency. If 
Daniel had been called first the wise men would have 
escaped the test. When Daniel learned the mission of 
Arioch, he protested. 


“Then Daniel answered with counsel and wis- 
dom to Arioch the captain of the king’s guard, 
which was gone forth to slay the wise men of 
Babylon. He answered and said to Arioch the 
king’s captain, Why is the decree so hasty from 
the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to 
Daniel. Then Daniel went in, and desired of the 
king that he would give him time, and that he 
would shew the king the interpretation.” Verses 
14-16. 


Notice the faith of Daniel. He did not ask the 
king to describe his dream, he simply asked for time, 
and with sublime confidence promised the king that 
he would not only reproduce the dream, but give its 
meaning. His request was granted. 


THE ALL-NIGHT PRAYER MEETING 


“Then Daniel went to his house, and made the 
thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, 
his companions: that they would desire mercies 
of the God of Heaven concerning this ‘secret;’ 
that Daniel and his fellows should not perish with 
the rest of the wise men of Babylon.” Verses 


17-18. 


That was an epoch marking “Prayer Meeting.” 
Doubtless Daniel would have been heard if he had 
gone off by himself and prayed, but he believed in 
united prayer, and then his three companions were as 
much interested in the matter as he, for their lives 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM 35 


were suspended in the same balance as his. If Daniel 
could not keep his promise to the king all four would 
perish. But something more than their lives was at 
stake. If Daniel had failed God, the world would have 
missed that great “REVELATION” that was locked 
up in that Dream and its interpretation, the prophetic 
and historical outline of the 


“TIMES OF THE GENTILES.” 


We are not told when the “Prayer Meeting” began, 
but we know that it lasted far into the night, and did 
not close until they had the assurance of a favorable 
answer. Then they retired. Whether Daniel fell asleep 
and the Dream of Nebuchadnezzar was repeated to 
him with the interpretation, or as he lay on his couch 
he saw in vision the Image, and the angel Gabriel 
appeared, as in later visions, and revealed its mean- 
ing, we are not told. We simply read—“Then was the 
‘secret’ revealed unto Daniel in a ‘NIGHT VISION.’” 
Wises: 112) 


Daniel was not elated because the dream was re- 
vealed to him. He did not rush off in haste to the 
king to inquire if it corresponded with what the king 
had seen. But his soul unburdened itself in one of 
the most wonderful and beautiful outbursts of praise 
recorded in the Bible. Daniel believed in giving thanks 
for answered prayer. It contains a sevenfold paean of 
praise. 

“Then Daniel blessed the God of Heaven. Dan- 
iel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God 
forever and ever: for— 


1—Wisdom and Might are His: 

2—And He changeth the ‘Times and the Sea- 
sons:’ 

3—He removeth kings, and setteth up kings: 

4._Fle giveth Wisdom unto the Wise, 


5—-And Knowledge to them that know under- 
standing: 


36 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


6—He revealeth the deep and ‘Secret Things?’ 


7—He knoweth what is in the darkness, and 
the light dwelleth with Him. 


“T thank Thee, and praise Thee, O Thou God of 
my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, 
and hast made known unto ME now what WE 


desired of Thee: for Thou hast now made known 
unto US the KING’S MATTER.” Verses 19-23. 


While to Daniel alone the revelation was made, he 
did not take all the credit to himself, but associated 
his companions with himself in his thanksgiving. 

With no unseemly haste, yet doubtless as soon as it 
was day, Daniel hunted up Arioch. 


“Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom 
the king had ordained to destroy the wise men of 
Babylon: he went and said thus unto him: De- 
stroy not the wise men of Babylon: bring me in 
before the King, and I will shew unto the King 
the interpretation.” Verse 24. 


Daniel’s first request of Arioch was that he—“De- 
stroy not the wise men of Babylon.” Thus they were 
saved because there was a “Man of God” among them, 
just as the prisoners and sailors on that “corn ship” 
were saved for Paul’s sake. Acts 27: 23-24. 

The teaching of the Scriptures is that “The Wicked 
are blest for the Righteous’ sake.” The house of 
Potiphar was blessed for Joseph’s sake. Gen. 39:5. 
The Lord would have spared Sodom if there had been 
ten righteous people in it. The world has thus far 
been spared from judgment because of the righteous 
people in it. When the Church is “caught out” the 
world will be ripe for judgment. And as the wise men 
of Babylon were spared for Daniel’s sake, so we are 
saved for JESUS’ SAKE. 


“Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the 
king in haste, and said thus unto him, I have 
found a man of the captives of Judah, that will 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM oF 


make known unto the King the interpretation.” 
Verse 25. 


It is characteristic of officials that they desire to 
ingratiate themselves with their sovereign. So here 
Arioch claims that he had discovered Daniel, saying, 
“I have found a man,” forgetting, if he knew, that 
Daniel had personally appeared before the King be- 
fore and promised, if given time, that he would make 
known the interpretation. 


“The King answered and said to Daniel, whose 
name was Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make 
known unto me the dream which I have seen, and 
the interpretation thereof? Daniel answered in 
the presence of the King, and said, The ‘secret’ 
which the King hath demanded cannot the wise 
men, the Astrologers, the Magicians, the Sooth- 
sayers, shew unto the King; but there is a GOD 
IN HEAVEN THAT REVEALETH SECRETS, 
and maketh known to the King Nebuchadnezzar 
what shall be in the 


LATTER DAYS. 


Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy 
bed, are these: as for thee, U King, thy thoughts 
came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should 
come to pass HEREAFTER: and he that reveal- 
eth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come 
to pass. But as for me, this secret is not revealed 
to me for any wisdom that I have more than any 
living, but for their sakes that shall make known 
the interpretation to the King, and that thou 
mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.” Verses 
26-30. 


The King’s question to Daniel, “Art thou able to 
make known unto me the ‘Dream’ which I have seen, 
and the interpretation thereof?’—-for the King classed 
Daniel among the “wise men” and doubtless was 
somewhat suspicious that he was any abler than they 


38 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


to make known the “Dream” and interpret it—gave 
Daniel the opportunity to explain why the “wise men” 
could not make known the dream. It was beyond their 
province. It was something that only God, the “RE- 
VEALER OF SECRETS,” could do, because it had 
reference to things that were to come to pass in the 
“LATTER DAYS.” And lest the King should give 
him the credit Daniel declared that the “Secret” was 
not revealed to him for any wisdom of his own, but 
that the King might not only know what the future 
of his Kingdom was to be, but that he might know 
what was to come to pass in the far distant future. 


THE DREAM 


“Thou, O King, sawest, and behold a great 
Image. This great Image, whose brightness was 
excellent, stood before thee: and the form thereof 
was terrible. This Image’s head was of fine gold, 
his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his 
thighs of brass, his legs of iron, his feet part of 
iron and part of clay. Thou sawest till that a stone 
was cut out without hands, which smote the 
Image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, 
and brake them to pieces. Then was the iron, the 
clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to 
pieces together, and became like the chaff of the 
summer threshing floors: and the wind carried 
them away, that no place was found for them: 
and the stone that smote the Image became a 
great Mountain, and filled the whole earth.” 
Verses 31-35. 


We can imagine the King’s feelings when he had 
his “Dream” repeated to him. The “Image” stood out 
in every detail just as he had seen it in his sleep. 
And what must he have thought of Daniel. He must 
have been amazed at his spiritual insight and wisdom, 
which would give him confidence in the interpretation 
of the “Dream” when it was unfolded unto him, 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM oe) 


THE INTERPRETATION 


iiicsice ties ream. and 
we will tell the interpretation 


I. thereof before the King. Thou, 

THE HEAD. O King, art a king of kings: 
THE for the God of heaven hath 
BABYLONIAN _ given thee a kingdom, power, 
EMPIRE. and strength, and glory. And 


wheresoever the children of 
men dwell, the beasts of the 
field and the fowls of the 
heaven hath He given into 
thine hand, and hath made 
thee ruler over them all. 
THOU ART THIS HEAD 
OF GOLD. 
AN hs “And after thee shall arise 
THE ARMS another kingdom inferior to 
AND BREAST. | thee, 
Per 
MEDO-PERSIAN 
EMPIRE. 


ITI. and another third king- 
THE ABDOMEN. dom of brass, which shall bear 
THE GRECIAN rule over all the earth. 


EMPIRE. 
IV. “And the fourth kingdom 
THE LEGS. shall be strong as iron: foras- 
THE ROMAN Miiichmeas uirOtlmabreaKkern™ ain 
EMPIRE. pieces and subdueth all things: 


and as iron that breaketh all 
these, shall it break in pieces 
and bruise. 


THE FEET “And whereas thou sawest 

AND TOES. the feet and toes, part of pot- 
ter’s clay, and part of iron, the 
kingdom shall be divided; but 
there shall be in it of the 


THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


V. 

THE STONE. 
THE 
MILLENNIAL 
KINGDOM 
OF CHRIST. 


THE 
PURPOSE 
OF THE 
DREAM. 


strength of the iron, foras- 
much as thou sawest the iron 
mixed with miry clay. And 
as the toes of the feet were 
part of iron, and part of clay, 
so the kingdom shall be partly 
strong, and partly broken. 
And whereas thou sawest iron 
mixed with miry clay, they 
shall mingle themselves with 
themseced™® of amen: butethey 
shall not cleave one to an- 
other, even as iron is not 
mixed with clay. 


“And in the days of these 
kings (the kings represented 
DY etocm chee oes mca! lm tire 
God of Heaven set up a King- 
dom, which shall never be de- 
stroyed: and the Kingdom 
shall” not. bes leitesto mother 
people, but it shall break in 
pieces and consume all these 
kingdoms, and it shall stand 
FOREVER. 


“Forasmuch as thou sawest 
that the stone was cut out of 
the mountain without hands, 
and that it brake in pieces the 
iron, the brass, the clay, the 
silver, and the gold: the great 
God hath made known to the 
King what shall come to pass 
HEREAFTER: and the 
dream is certain, and the in- 
terpretation thereof sure.” 
Verses 36-45. 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM 4] 


If Nebuchadnezzar was astonished when he heard 
Daniel repeat his “Dream,” he must have been thun- 
der-struck when he heard the interpretation, and 
learned how his own Kingdom would fall and be suc- 
ceeded by inferior ones, until all world kingdoms 
should be destroyed. The interpretation of the 
“Dream” is certainly one that human ingenuity could 
not have hit upon. The wise men and flatterers of the 
Chaldean court would never have dared to announce 
the downfall of Nebuchadnezzar’s Kingdom, and the 
final termination of Gentile supremacy. 


In the Golden Headed Image of Nebuchadnezzar’s 
“Dream” we have a “Visualized Portraiture” of the 
“Times of the Gentiles.” The phrase “The Times of 
the Gentiles” is not found in the Book of Daniel, but 
is a New Testament phrase used by the Lord. It was 
used by Him in His “Olivet Discourse” in reference to 
the destruction of Jerusalem in A. D. 70, where He 
said—“And Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the 
Gentiles, until the ‘TIMES OF THE GENTILES’ 
be fulfilled.” Luke 21:24. In the phrase, “The Times 
of the Gentiles,” Jesus had reference to a “PERIOD 
OF TIME” of certain chronological limits, that cor- 
responds to the time that the Jewish Nation shall be 
without a king. It is foretold by Hosea. 


“The Children of Israel shall abide MANY 
DAYS without a king, and without a prince, and 
without a sacrifice, and without an image, and 
without an ephod, and without teraphim: 
AFTERWARD shall the Children of Israel re- 
turn, and see the Lord their God, and David their 
King; and shall fear the Lord and His goodness 
IN THE LATTER DAYS.” Hosea 3: 4-5. 


The “Times of the Gentiles” did not begin at the 
“Destruction of Jerusalem” in A. D. 70, but at the 
time when Daniel was carried captive to Babylon in 
B. C. 606, and will continue until Christ comes back 
and sets up His Millennial or “Stone Kingdom,” repre- 
sented by the “Stone” cut out of the mountain in 


42 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream. We must not confound the 
phrase “The Times of the Gentiles” with the phrase 
the “Fulness of the Gentiles,” used by the Apostle 
Baulsine kom.) 1.255 dihes.bulness:otsthesGentiless 
has no reference to the “Times of the Gentiles,” but 
to the Gentiles who are being “called out’ in this 
Dispensation by the Holy Spirit as members of 
Christ’s Body—““The Church.” When their number is 
complete, or FULL, then Christ will take out His 
Church, and the “Fulness of the Gentiles” will be 
, complete. This “Divine Program” is outlined in Acts 


15: 13-17. 
MAN’S DAY 


While this present Dispensation is spoken of dis- 
tinctively in the Scriptures as “MAN’S DAY” (see 
1 Cor. 4:3, margin), the term applies to the whole 
period; of the “Times of the Gentiles.” (his isethe 
day of the “DEIFICATION OF MAN.” From the 
day when Nebuchadnezzar set up in the Plain of 
Dura that “Golden Image,” typical of himself, and 
commanded all the people of his realm to worship it 
(Dan. 3:1-7), until the False Prophet shall command 
that the people shall make an “Image to the Beast” 
(The Antichrist) and worship. the same (Rev. 
13: 13-17), the only suitable symbol to describe the 
character of the “Times of the Gentiles” is the “Image 
of a Man.” How suitable then was the “Golden 
Headed Image” of Nebuchadnezzar’s “Dream” to de- 
scribe the character of the “Times of the Gentiles.” 
The deterioration of the “Times of the Gentiles” is 
seen in the DIMINISHING VALUE OF THE 
METALS from gold, to silver, to brass, to iron, to iron 
and clay. Whereas if the world is growing better the 
metals should have been in reverse order. The weight 
of the Image also declines. The specific gravity of gold 
is 19.5, of silver 10.47, of brass 8, of cast-iron 5, of clay 
1.93. The “Image” is TOP-HEAVY. From this we 
see that Gentile dominion is represented by a huge 
“METALLIC MAN” that degenerates in character 
from head to foot. 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM 43 


THE HISTORICAL FULFILMENT 


The “Image” symbolizes the four great World Em- 
pires in their UNITY and HISTORICAL SUCCES- 
SION. There are to be four, and only four, great 
World Empires on the earth from the accession of 
Nebuchadnezzar to the throne of Babylon, to the Sec- 
ond Coming of Christ. They are represented by the 
four metals of the Image. Men like Napoleon have 
hoped, plotted and warred to establish a “Fifth” 
World Empire, and have failed. These Empires are 
not only made known as to number, but their NAMES, 
in. the ORDER OF THEIR SUCCESSION, are 
given. 


1, THE BABYLONIAN EMPIRE 


The First Empire is pointed out by Daniel, in his 
interpretation of the Image, as BABYLON, in his 
words to Nebuchadnezzar—“THOU art the HEAD 
OF GOLD.” It will be noticed in studying the “Inter- 
pretation” that Daniel uses the words “King” and 
“Kingdom” interchangeably. The writer uses the 
word “Empire” instead of “Kingdom” because there 
was a succession of kings in each Empire while it 
lasted, and in profane history those kings were called 
Emperors. The title of Emperor today is rare, be- 
cause the Empires of the world have been broken up 
into small Kingdoms. This is a fulfilment of the teach- 
ing of the “Image,” whose feet are divided into “Ten 
Toes” called Kingdoms. Nebuchadnezzar, after reign- 
ing forty-four years, died in B. C. 561. He was suc- 
ceeded by his son Evil-Merodach, who after an ignoble 
reign of two years was assassinated by his brother-in- 
law, Neriglissar, who seized the throne, and after 
reigning for about four years was killed in battle in 
B. C. 556. He was succeeded by his son Laboroso- 
arched, an imbecile child, who after nine months’ reign 
was beaten to death, and Nabonidus, another son-in- 
law of Nebuchadnezzar, who had married the widow 
of Neriglissar, seized the throne and reigned for sev- 


44 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


enteen years, during the whole of which period Baby- 
lon was threatened with invasion by the Persians, and 
it was while Nabonidus was on a military expedition 
that Babylon was taken, he having made his son Bel- 
shazzar the “second ruler” and left him in charge of the 
city. That was why Belshazzar had to make Daniel 
the “third ruler,” because he himself was the second. 
Thus we see that Nebuchadnezzar was properly called 
the “HEAD OF GOLD,” because all his successors 
were inferior men. With the death of Belshazzar the 
Babylonian Empire ceased to exist. 


2. THE MEDO-PERSIAN EMPIRE 


The Second Empire, the MEDO-PERSIAN, is 
pointed out by Daniel in his account of the “Fall of 
Babylon” in the words—“In that night was Belshaz- 
zar the king of the Chaldeans slain, and Darius the 
MEDIAN took the Kingdom.” Dan. 5: 30-31. 

It is also pointed out in the “Vision of the Ram and 
He-Goat” (Dan. 8:20), where the two horns of the 
Ram, that correspond to the two arms of the Image 
(see chart), are called the kings of Media and Persia. 
Thus we see that while the Babylonian Empire was 
single-headed, the Medo-Persian was a dual Empire, 
represented by the “two arms” of the Image and the 
“two horns” of the Ram. The left arm of the Image 
representing Media the weaker, and the right arm 
Persia the stronger Kingdom. The fact that the Medo- 
Persian Empire is represented by the “Silver” of the 
Image indicates that, as silver is inferior to gold, so 
the Medo-Persian Empire was inferior to the Babylon- 
ian. This we know was true, not in extent, for Cyrus 
conquered more territory, but in wealth, luxury, and 
magnificence. 

Cyrus has the honor of being named in the Scrip- 
tures 175 years before he took Babylon. In Isa. 44:28 
and 45: 1-4, we read— 


“That saith of CYRUS, He is my shepherd, and 
shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM 45 


JERUSALEM—tThou shalt be built; and to the 
TEMPLE—tThy foundation shall be laid. Thus 
saith the Lord to His anointed, to CYRUS, whose 
right hand I have holden, to subdue nations be- 
fore him; and I will loose the loins of kings (as 
those of Belshazzar) to open before him (Cyrus) 
the TWO LEAVED GATES (of Babylon) ; and 
the gates shall not be shut (which was true of the 
inner gates of Babylon, in the river walls, on the 
night of the siege); ... For Jacob my servant’s 
sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called 
thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though 
‘thou hast NOT KNOWN ME.” 


From this Scripture we see that Cyrus was fore- 
ordained, over a hundred years before he was born, 
to do two things. First to besiege and take Babylon, 
and secondly to issue an Edict, at the close of the 
“Babylonian Captivity,” in B. C. 536, for the return 
of the Jews and the rebuilding of the Temple. 

At the taking of Babylon, B. C. 538, Cyrus, as an 
act of courtesy, because Media was the older of the 
two Kingdoms Media and Persia, and because he had 
some other military campaigns to finish, assigned the 
governorship of Babylon to his umcle Darius, the king 
of Media, who ruled for two years. The same year 
(B. C. 536) Cambyses, king of Persia, Cyrus’ father, 
also died, thus making Cyrus the sole monarch of the 
Dual Kingdom. After a reign of seven years, Cyrus 
left the Empire to his son Cambyses, who reigned 
seven years and five months, to B. C. 522. Eight mon- 
archs, whose reigns varied from seven months to forty- 
six years each, followed in succession until B. C. 335, 
when Darius Codomanus became the last of the long 
line of Persian kings. He was a noble person, and a 
long and splendid career would undoubtedly have been 
his, but it was his misfortune to have ascended the 
throne when the time had come for the “Silver” of the 
Image to give place to the “Brass,” and nothing could 
prevent the change, and in B. C. 330 Alexander the 
Grecian conquered the Persian Empire. 


46 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


3. THE GRECIAN EMPIRE 


The Third Empire, the GRECIAN, is identified in 
Dan. 8: 21, by the angel Gabriel as the “He-Goat,” that 
destroyed the “Ram,” which represented the Medo- 
Persian Empire. 


“The ‘Ram’ which thou sawest having two 
horns are the kings of MEDIA and PERSIA. 
And the ‘Rough Goat’ (the He-Goat) is the king 
of GRECIA (Greece): and the ‘Great Horn’ that 
is between his eyes is the first king.” (Alexander 
the Great). Dan. 8: 20-21. 


Again we see inferiority, for “Brass” is an inferior 
metal to “Silver.” The Grecian Empire, as a World- 
Wide Empire, with Alexander as its head, was of 
short duration. After eight short years he died of 
intemperancesand eimnarsh) leversin bie. 6325,1neis 
thirty-third year, and his Empire was divided among 
four of his generals. See the exposition of chapter 
eight. 

Right here we must not forget that the prophecy 
does not say that the Four World Empires are to suc- 
ceed each other without a break. From the death of 
Alexander the Great, B. ©. 323, to BAC. 30, when the 
Roman Empire succeeded the Grecian, the Grecian 
Empire was not a single Empire, but a fourfold Em- 
pire, composed of the Kingdoms of Thrace, Mace- 
donia, Syria, and Egypt. These fell one by one until 
the Romans conquered Egypt in B. C. 30, which made 
them the conquerors of the world. This division of the 
Grecian Empire into four parts is not shown on the 
Image, as there is no break in the “Brass,” between 
the “Silver” and the “Iron” of the Image, but the fact 
is revealed in the story of the “He-Goat” in chapter 
8: 21-25. 

Another explanation is necessary at this point. The 
words—“his belly and thighs of brass,” are a mis- 
translation. The word translated “thighs” is singular, 
and should be translated the “Thigh-part.” A little 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM 47 


explanation will make this clear. As we have already 
seen, the Grecian Empire was divided into four parts, 
that disappeared one by one, until the last, Egypt, was 
conquered in B. C. 30, and the fourth or Roman Em- 
pire came into existence. Now as the Roman Empire 
was not divided into its Eastern and Western Divi- 
sions, which represent the two legs of the Image, until 
A. D. 364, all that went before of the Roman Empire 
belongs to the BODY of the Image, and not the legs, 
dsp slows Oigethes Chart. shes octipturesswouldiibe 
clearer, and better express what we now know from 
history it was intended to express, if we read the pas- 
sage as iollows—‘His belly (abdomen) of brass, and 
his Thigh-parts (buttocks) and legs of iron, his feet 
part of iron and part of clay.” Verses 32-33. 


4, THE ROMAN EMPIRE 


The Fourth Empire, the ROMAN, is not named in 
the Book of Daniel, but it is pointed out. In Daniel’s 
Vision of the “Seventy Weeks,” chapter 9, verse 26, 
we read, that after the “cutting off” (Crucifixion) of 
the “Messiah the Prince’ (Christ), Jerusalem and the 
Temple were to be destroyed by a PEOPLE, from 
whom later should come a “Prince,” whom we shall 
see will be the ANTICHRIST. Now we know that 
Jerusalem and the Temple were destroyed by the 
Romans in A. D. 70, and that Antichrist is to be the 
last Emperor of the Roman Empire, and as Antichrist 
is the “LITTLE HORN” of the “Fourth Wild Beast,” 
that corresponds to the “Iron” of the Image, then the 
“Fourth Empire” is the “Roman.” Thus we see that 
all four of the Empires symbolized by the metals of the 
Image were pointed out in their historical succession 
to Daniel, three of them before they ever came into 
existence. If this does not prove the Divine Inspira- 
tion of the Book of Daniel, what could? 


There are three things that we are to note about 
the “Fourth Empire.” First, as represented by the 


48 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


legs, it takes up in length at least half of the Image, 
and therefore in proportion the Roman Empire was 
to last longer than the other Empires. This we know 
from history to! bey trie. se econd, sthesslinages4s 
divided into “two legs,” this would imply that the 
Roman Empire would be divided into TWO PARTS. 
This we also know to be true, for the Roman Empire 
was divided into its “Eastern Division” with Constan- 
tinople as the Capital, and its “Western Division” 
with) Rome as the’ Capital, insA. DM3047" Thirds the 
two feet of the “Image” are divided into “five toes” 
each. These “TEN TOES” have not as yet mani- 
fested themselves, so the historical fulfilment of the 
Image is not yet complete. From what has been said 
we see that the First Empire was a UNIT, the Second 
DUAL, the Third became QUADRUPLE, and the 
Fourth, in its final form, will be TEN-TOED. While 
the Roman Empire, as a visible Empire, does not exist 
today, yet its laws, etc., are a controlling power among 
the nations, and the Empire in a visible form is to be 
revived, and in its revived and last form it will consist 
of “Ten Federated Kingdoms,” represented by the 
“Yen Toes” of the Image, at the head of which shall 
be the last Roman Emperor and Gentile Ruler, the 
ANTICHRIST. 


THE FEET AND TOES 


While the legs of the Image are of iron, the feet and 
toes are of iron and potter’s clay. There is a mingling, 
but not a commingling. That is, there is no union of 
the iron and the clay, and this condition is to con- 
tinue until the feet of the Image are smitten by the 
“Stone” cut out of the Mountain. 


The character of the Government of the different 
Empires reveals the fact that the Image will become 
increasingly unstable. The Babylonian Empire was 
an ABSOLUTE AUTOCRACY. It was said of Neb- 
uchadnezzar, “Whom he would he slew; and whom 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM 49 


he would he kept alive: and whom he would he set up: 
and whom he would he put down.” Dan. 5:19. The 
Medo-Persian Empire was not an autocracy. The 
Emperor was bound by certain laws, called the “Laws 
of the Medes and Persians.” Having once issued an 
Edict he could not recall it. As illustrations we have 
the case of Darius, who earnestly sought to deliver 
Daniel from the “lion’s den,” and of Ahasuerus, who 
could not rescind his order for the slaughter of the 
Jews, but could only issue a counter-decree permitting 
them to stand for their lives and slay those who would 
attempt=to kill thems Esther 8:1-17)) The Grecian 
Empire was a Monarchy supported by a “Military 
Aristocracy,” that was as weak as the ambitions of its 
leaders. The Roman Emperors were nominally elected 
by the people, but the people were neither allowed to 
legislate for them, nor to interfere with them, and so 
their despotic sway is well symbolized by “Iron,” 
which in the form of STEEL will cut through every 
other metal. Rome was noted for her IRON-RULE. 
But the form of Government grows weaker when we 
exo cunt WCmmrcctl maTlC Gh cmlOes, MaCOMmpO-seds OL 
Iron and Clay. Here we see “Imperialism” mixed with 
“Democracy.” The Iron representing “Imperialism,” 
and the Clay “Democracy.” In short the character of 
government passes from an “ABSOLUTE AUTOC- 
RACY” to a “DEMOCRATIC MONARCHY,” to the 
rule or they, -Eleade by the spiteet,” ito a, form, ot) Gov- 
ernment in which the masses, swayed by politicians 
and demagogues, who think only of their own selfish 
interests, control the Government. Such a form of 
government is the weakest that can be devised and 
opens the way for the growth and development of 
Socialism, Sovietism, Bolshevism, and Anarchy. The 
fact that such phases of government are becoming 
more prominent seems to indicate that, historically, 
we are now living in the time indicated by the “Feet”’ 
of the “Image,” and that it will not be long before the 
“Toes” will appear in the form of “Ten Federated 
Nations,’ over which a Roman Emperor will rule. 


50 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


5. THE STONE KINGDOM 


“Thou sawest till that a STONE was cut out 
without hands, which smote the Image upon his 
FEET that were of iron and clay, and brake them 
to pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, 
the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces TO- 
GETHER, and became like the chaff of the sum- 
mer threshing floors; and the wind carried them 
away, that no place was found for them: and the 
STONE that smote the Image became a GREAT 
MOUNTAIN, AND FILLED THE WHOLE 
EARTH.” Dan. 2: 34-35. 


The interpretation of this is given in verse 44, 


“In the days of these kings shall the God of 
Heaven set up a KINGDOM, which shall never 
be destroyed: and the Kingdom shall not be left 
to other people (that is, it shall not be succeeded 
by other kingdoms), but it shall break in pieces 
and consume all these Kingdoms (the Kingdoms 
represented by the Metals of the Image), and it 
shall STAND FOREVER.” 


The climax of the Dream is the smiting of the 
Image by a “STONE?” cut out of a mountain without 
hands, thus showing the “Stone’s” supernatural origin. 
The “Stone” does not “fill the earth” by degrees and 
thus “crowd out” the Image, it at one blow DEMOL- 
ISHES IT, and its remains are blown away. The 
action of the “Stone” is JUDGMENT, not Grace. Not 
the spread of a “Spiritual Kingdom” by the preaching 
of the Gospel, but the immediate setting up of an out- 
ward and visible earthly Kingdom. The “Stone” there- 
fore cannot mean Christianity, for it is a PROCESS, 
whereas the action of the “Stone” is SUDDEN AND 
CALAMITOUS. Again the TIME of the destruction 
is not until AFTER THE FORMATION OF THE 
TOES OF THE IMAGE. We know that the “Legs” 
of the Image did not appear until A. D. 364, when the 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM a1 


Roman Empire was divided into its Eastern and West- 
ern Divisions, and the “Ten Toes” have not yet de- 
veloped. The time when the “Stone” falls on the feet 
of the Colossus is distinctly given in the interpreta- 
tion as—“IN THE DAYS OF THESE KINGS.” 
What kings? Not the kings of the Four World Em- 
pires, represented by the four metals of the Image, 
that would only bring us down to the “First Advent,” 
and would make Christianity the smiting Stone, but by 
“these kings” we are to understand the kings of the 
“Ten Federated Kingdoms,” represented by the “Toes” 
of the Image. So we see that the TIME of the smit- 
ing was not when Christ came the First time, but 
when He comes the Second time. 


The “Stone” is not Christianity but CHRIST. He 
is everywhere in Scripture spoken of as “THE 
STONE.” To the Jews He was “A Stone of stum- 
bling, and rock of offence.” He was the Stone that the 
builders rejected, that was to become the head of the 
corner. Christ must have had in mind the “Falling 
Stone” of Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream when he prophet- 
ically uttered the words—‘And whosoever shall fall on 
this Stone (Christ) shall be broken (melted into re- 
pentance), but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will 
GRIND HIM TO POWDER.” Matt. 21:44. The 
“Stone” smites the Image, the Image does not smite 
the Stone. Did Christ when He came the First time 
smite and destroy the Roman Empire? No. The 
Roman Empire smote Him and was the cause of His 
death. So we see that the First Coming of Christ 
was not the “Falling of the Stone,” for it is still future 
and cannot be until His Second Coming. 

Some object that because it says—“Then was the 
iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, 
broken to pieces TOGETHER,” that that cannot be, 
because the Empires represented by the “Gold,” the 
Soilverentiem: Brass,y tands the “lron? Chave passed 
away. As outward visible Empires this is true. But 
we must not forget that those Empires were incor- 


a2 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


porated into their successors, and that all of them will 
be found in the last phase of the revived Roman Em- 
pire. As proof of this we have the description of the 
“Beast” that comes up out of the sea (and the sea 
is a symbol of the nations) in Rev. 13: 1-2, where we 
read— 


“And the Beast which I saw was like a LEOP- 
ARD, and his feet were as the feet of a BEAR, and 
his mouth as the mouth of a LION: and the 
Dragon (Satan) gave him his power, and his seat, 
and great authority.” 


Now we shall see in our study of Daniel’s Vision 

, of the “Four Wild Beasts,” chapter seven, that the 
Vv “Wild Beasts” correspond to the metals of the Image. 
That is, the “Gold” corresponds to the “Lion,’ the 
/oilver tothe Deat,, thes biacs stostnes Ccoparas 
and the “Iron” to the Fourth Beast. In John’s descrip- 
tion of the “Beast” out of the sea, given above, which 
is a description of the last phase of the revived Roman 
Pimpires wersee that ics eDeast mise deme Composite 
beast,” composed of a body like that of a “Leopard,” 
with the feet of a “Bear,” and the mouth of a “Lion,” 
the “Fourth Wild Beast” being represented by the 
whole of the Beast. Now we see from this that the 
revived Roman Empire will be a composite Empire, 
composed of the “Lion” (Babylon), the “Bear” (Medo- 
Persia), the “Leopard” (Greece), and the Beast itself 
(Rome). As the body, which is the largest part of a 
beast, in John’s Beast is that of a Leopard, the infer- 
ence is that the last phase of the Roman Empire will 
be mainly Grecian. 


The Mountain out of which the “Stone” is cut by 
invisible hands represents Israel, for of Israel Christ 
came. This is confirmed by the words of Jacob in 
blessing his sons, where he speaks of—‘“The Shep- 
herd, the STONE OF ISRAEL” (Gen. 49: 24), which 
can refer to no other than Christ. The Mountain into 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM 53 


which the “Stone” grows and fills the whole earth is 
the “Stone” or “Millennial Kingdom” of Christ. The 
four Empires or Kingdoms symbolized by the Image 
were LITERAL Kingdoms. It follows then that the 
“Stone Kingdom,” which is to take their place, must 
also be a LITERAL Kingdom, for it is to conquer and 
control the whole earth. It is for this Kingdom, and 
not a spiritual Kingdom, that Christ taught His Dis- 
ciples to pray in the words—“Thy Kingdom Come.” 
If a Spiritual Kingdom was meant, and such a King- 
dom is now present, then we should no longer pray— 
“Thy Kingdom COME,” for it is already here. 


THE EFFECT UPON THE KING 


“Then the King, Nebuchadnezzar, fell upon his 
face, and worshipped Daniel, and commanded that 
they should offer an oblation and sweet odors unto 
him. The King answered unto Daniel, and said, 
Of a truth it 1s, that YOUR GOD is a ‘GOD OF 
GODS,’ and a ‘LORD OF KINGS,’ and a ‘RE- 
VEALER OF SECRETS,’ seeing thou couldst 
reveal this SECRET. (of the Dream). Then the 
King made Daniel a great man, and gave him 
many great gifts, and made him Ruler over the 
whole province of Babylon, and ‘Chief of the Gov- 
ernors’ over all the Wise Men of Babylon. Then 
Daniel requested of the King, and he set Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, over the affairs 
of the province of Babylon: but Daniel sat in the 
gate of the King.” Verses 46-49. 


It took courage for Daniel to stand before a proud 
monarch like Nebuchadnezzar and announce to him 
that his Empire would not long survive his death. 
But Daniel was too loyal to his God to keep back the 
truth. The effect upon the King was the reverse of 
that which naturally was to be expected. Instead of 
professing to not believe a word of the interpretation, 


54 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


he falls upon his face and worships Daniel, thus testi- 
fying to Daniel’s superhuman wisdom. Only God 
could have wrought such a change in the King. He 
also commanded that they should offer an oblation 
and sweet odors unto Daniel. That Daniel protested 
seems clear from the words—“The King answered 
unto Daniel.” The King then gave testimony to the 
character of Daniel’s God. The language is striking, 
in that it bears witness to the Trinity. Your God is a 
“God of Gods” (the Father), and a “Lord of Kings” 
(the Son), and a “Revealer of Secrets” (the Holy 
Spirit). What effect the reproduction of the Dream 
and its Interpretation had upon the Magicians, Astrol- 
ogers, Sorcerers, and Chaldeans, we are not told, but 
they must have realized that they were not in Daniel’s 
class, that what they professed he possessed. 


DANIEL’S REWARD 


Daniel’s reward was twofold. He was made a “Great 
Man.” There are two things in this world that are 
supposedseto silakemay mane areat-emel Nessirst 1s 
. “RICHES,” the second is “POWER.” Daniel received 
both. He was loaded with gifts, and made a Ruler 
over the Province of Babylon, and “Chief of the Gov- 
ernors” over the “Wise Men.” But Daniel did not 
forget his companions, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego, in his exaltation. They had helped him by their 
prayers to secure the needed information as to the 
King’s Dream, and he was determined that they should 
share in his honors, so he besought the King in their 
behalf, and they were given prominent offices, while 
Daniel sat in the “Gate of the King,” the place where 
Councils were held, and matters of chief moment 
decided. 


This chapter is one of the most remarkable in the 
Bible. It gives us a prophetical outline of the history 
of the Gentile nations, in their relation to the nation 
of Israel, from the time of Nebuchadnezzar on down 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S DREAM OD 


to the Second Coming of Christ. If the statesmen 
and kings of the earth knew about it, and would heed 
its teaching, they would not be so ambitious to be- 
come world rulers, and would see in the rise of law- 
less organizations that we are nearing the end of the 
“Times of the Gentiles,” and that the Second Coming 
of the Lord is not so far away. 


CHAPTER THREE 


The Golden Image 


THE IMAGE 


“Nebuchadnezzar the King made an ‘Image of 
Gold,’ whose height was three-score cubits, and 
the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in the 
plain of Dura, in the Province of Babylon.” Dan. 
Sel 


The events recorded in this chapter happened about 
twenty-three years after Nebuchadnezzar had his 
Dream) of thes Goldens ieadeds imave: = lttsshardly 
likely therefore that that Dream suggested “The 
Golden Image.” If it did, Nebuchadnezzar in his pride 
resolved to go one better, and, instead of erecting an 
image the head only of which was of gold and the 
remainder of the image of baser metals, resolved to 
make the whole of his image of “Gold.” Nebuchad- 
nezzar had reached a point in his career when he 
wished to emulate the kings of Egypt, who, while 
still alive, sought to perpetuate their memory, and the 
glory of their reign, by having carved out of the solid 
rock a statue or image of themselves. But as Babylon 
was located in a level country where there was no 
rocky formation, Nebuchadnezzar had to resort to a 
different kind of image or statue, and so he resolved, 
in harmony with the magnificent buildings of Baby- 
lon, as the “Tower of Bel,” and the “Hanging Gar- 
dens; to make it, of?) Gold.7 ) theriactethbat it.was 
erected on the “Plain of Dura,” and not in the city of 
Babylon, reveals the fact that Nebuchadnezzar had a 
twofold purpose in its erection there. First, he did not 
want it to be overshadowed by the great buildings of 
Babylon, and in the second place, he had reached the 
conclusion that, if he was to keep his Great Empire 
intact, composed as it was of peoples from many na- 
tions, with various religious beliefs, he must cement 


56 


~ 


THE GOLDEN IMAGE ay 


them together by some form of “State Religion,” and 
as he proposed to invite all the great men of the many 
provinces of his Empire, there would not be any 
place sufficiently large in the city of Babylon, so he 
chose the “Plain of Dura.” 

The critics of the Book of Daniel claim that every- 
thing in it bears the stamp of “Reckless Exaggera- 
tion,’ and that an image ninety feet high, and nine 
feet wide (counting a cubit as eighteen inches) is not 
only enormous in size, but is out of proportion, and 
that there was not enough gold in that country to 
make such an image of solid gold. But they forget that 
the riches and splendor of those days, and of Egypt 
and Babylon, put our time in the shade, and that 
Nebuchadnezzar had conquered Egypt, and taken back 
with him vast quantities of gold. 

But it does not say that the Image was of solid gold. 
It doubtless was a wooden image plated with gold, 
which would have the same appearance as an image of 
solid gold, and answer the same purpose. Again, the 
height of the _ Image in proportion to its width seems 
to indicate that the Image stood on a pedestal, high 
in the air, so it could be seen above the heads of the 
multitude all over the “Plain of Dura,” and that the 
heighnteoryines Iimare Pincitidedytiespedestal sandgas 
there would be no need of making the pedestal of gold, 
this would reduce the golden part of the Image. 
Whatever Nebuchadnezzar did was “Colossal.” The 
stupendous walls of Babylon have never been equalled, 
neither have its public buildings. See the chapter on 
“The Fall of Babylon.” 

The dimensions of the Image are not without sig- 
nificance. Its height was sixty cubits, and its breadth 
six cubits. Now six is the “NUMBER OF MAN.” 
Six stops short of seven, which is the “Perfect Num- 
ber,” or the number of Completeness. Six then is the 
number of human incompleteness. Man was made on 
the sixth day. His appointed days of labor are six, 
the seventh day is God’s day. The number six re- 
minds us of the number of the “Beast” in Rev. 13: 18, 


58 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


which is 666. Little did Nebuchadnezzar know that 
the erection of that “Golden Image” on the Plain of 
Dura was a “Prophetic Fore-Shadowing” of that 
Image that the “False Prophet” shall command the 
people to make to the “Beast,” or “Antichrist.” An 
Image that shall be given life, and the power to speak. 
And all who will not worship the Beast shall be killed, 
not by being thrown into a “Fiery Furnace,” but by 
the “Guillotine.” They will be beheaded. Rev. 20:4. 
In that day no one shall be able to buy or sell unless 
he has the “Mark of the Beast,’ which is his “Num- 
ber,” which is 666, the “NUMBER OF MAN.” Rev. 
13: 13-18. The worship of the “Image of the Beast’ 
will be the culmination of the “Deification of Man,” 
and the outcome of all such idolatry will be the bring- 
ing to an end of “MAN’S DAY,” or the “Times of the 
Gentiles,” and the setting up of the “Stone Kingdom.” 


DEDICATION OF THE IMAGE 


“Then Nebuchadnezzar the King sent to gather 
together the princes, the governors, and the cap- 
tains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, 
the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to 
come to the ‘Dedication of the Image’ which Neb- 
uchadnezzar the King had set up. Then the 
princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, 
the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and 
all the rulers of the provinces, were gathered to- 
gether unto the ‘Dedication of the Image’ that 
Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up.” Verses 


2-3. 


The arrangements for the Dedication of the Image 
were very elaborate. All the nations of the earth that 
had become subject to Babylon were called upon to 
send representatives to the great ceremony. Babylon 
was crowded with the great men and rulers of the 
nations and their retainers. Everything was on a 
scale of great magnificence. It was probably the great- 
est day in all Babylon’s history. 


THE GOLDEN IMAGE 39 


“Then a herald cried aloud, To you it is com- 
manded, O people, nations, and languages, that at 
-what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, 
harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds 
of music, ye fall down and WORSHIP the ‘Golden 
Image’ that Nebuchadnezzar tne King hath set 
up: and whoso falleth not down and WORSHIP- 
PETH shall the same hour be cast into the midst 
of a burning ‘Fiery Furnace.’ Therefore at that 
time, when all the people heard the sound of the 
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds 
of music, all the people, the nations, and the lan- 
guages, fell down and WORSHIPPED the 
‘Golden Image’ that Nebuchadnezzar the King 
had set up.” Verses 4-7. 


It is not clear from the text that those who were in- 
vited to the “Dedication of the Image’ understood 
that the “Dedication” would be of a religious character 
and take the form of WORSHIP. They probably ex- 
pected the ceremonies to be of the usual character of 
such celebrations. The presence therefore of bands 
and orchestras did not make them suspicious. They 
probably had been informed that the Image was in 
honor of the King, and to memorialize the Golden 
character of his reign. But King Nebuchadnezzar had 
something else in mind. He was at the head of a vast 
Empire, composed of many kingdoms, speaking dif- 
ferent languages, and of various religions. He knew 
for a nation to have but one religion would have a 
unifying effect. Such unification had probably be- 
come a political necessity. So he decided to set up a 
“State Religion,” of a Babylonish type, to be known 
as the 


“RELIGION OF BABYLON,” 


and of an idolatrous character, as were the religions 
of the surrounding nations. But in doing this he was 
guilty of “Religious Intolerance,” in that the penalty 
of refusal was death in a “Fiery Furnace,” a type of 
the “Inquisition.” 


60 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


All men are religious by nature, and are easily car- 
ried away by anything that stirs their religious feel- 
ings. Knowing this, Nebuchadnezzar took advantage 
of it. Everything was done to excite and stir the 
religious emotions of that vast multitude on the 
“Plain of Dura.” Large orchestras, with their various 
musical instruments, were stationed at convenient 
places, and all the paraphernalia and ritualistic cere- 
mony of idolatrous worship, with the most gorgeous 
display of religious trappings, such as were used by 
the “Babylonian Cults,’ were doubtless used to im- 
press the bystanders, and get them to worship the 
Image. The same method has its advocates today. 
And for argument they point to the Roman Catholic 
Church, and claim that its unity and success is largely 
due to the spectacular character of its religious serv- 
ices, which are of Babylonian origin. See the writer’s 
work on the Book of Revelation, pages 149 to 153, for 
confirmation. 


There are movements on foot today for a union of 
all religious denominations and sects in one vast 
organization. The purpose is to establish one “Uni- 
versal Religion” that will appeal to the “Artistic” and 
“Esthetic” in man. A religion that is “Cainite” in 
character because there is no BLOOD in it, and that 
exalts man and his works, which the Scriptures de- 
clare will be the character of the closing days of the 
“Times of the Gentiles,” when men shall have “the 
form of Godliness” without the “POWER.” 2 Tim. 
3:1-7. When the true Church is “caught out,” those 
who are left behind will drift into the Papacy, that 
will then be the “Universal Church,” the last phase 
of which is Babylonish, and is seen in the “Purple 
Clad Woman,” that. in Rev.-17: 1-5, rides the “Scarlet 
Colored’ Beast’-— “MYSTERY, BABYCON VT THE 
GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND 
ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.” 


To insure the success of his plan Nebuchadnezzar 
took one precaution. He was determined that there 


THE GOLDEN IMAGE 6] 


should be no lack of unity. The worship must be un1- 
versal or there would be discord. An ounce of pre- 
vention was worth a pound of cure. It was best to 
forestall any rebellion, and so he had constructed near 
the Image a large “Furnace,” like a blast furnace, in 
which a fire was kindled, into which he threatened to 
throw any person who would not bow down and wor- 
ship his “Golden Image.’ He counted on the love of 
life, and the fear of suffering, to prevent any opposi- 
tion. Doubtless those who were not in his confidence 
wondered why the “Furnace” was there and already 
dichtedButthey didinotione remain imidoubt;for’a 
herald announced that whosoever would not fall down 
and worship the “Golden Image” would be cast alive 
into the “Fiery Furnace.” The result was, that, at the 
sound of the musical instruments, the vast multitude 
fellSiipomatieitetacesmploiitenoteal teal heretweresthree 
men, all prominent officials, who refused to bow the 
knee. They were JEWS, and their names were Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Where Daniel was 
we do not know. He may have been ill, or away on 
State business. But this we. do know, that if he had 
been there he would have refused to worship the 
Image. 

The failure to worship of the “Three Hebrew Chil- 
dren” was noticed by certain Chaldeans, who had 
either been appointed as spies, or who were officials 
or politicians whose schemes had been blocked by 
these faithful public servants, and being jealous of the 
influence and power of the Jews in the affairs of the 
Empire, were glad of an excuse for bringing a charge 
against them, that they might get them out of the 
way. 


“Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came 
near, and accused the Jews. They spake and said 
to the King Nebuchadnezzar, O King, live forever. 
Thou, O King, hast made a decree, that every 
man that shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, 
harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds 


62 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


of music, shall fall down and worship the “Golden 
Image:’ and whoso falleth not down and wor- 
shippeth, that he should be cast into the midst of 
a burning ‘Fiery Furnace.’ There are certain Jews 
whom thou hast set over the affairs of the Prov- 
ince of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego; these men, O King, HAVE NOT RE- 
GARDED THEE, they SERVE NOT THY 
GODS, nor WORSHIP THE GOLDEN IMAGE 
WHICH THOU HAST SET UP.” Verses 8-12. 


When the King heard these three clearly-put 
charges he was furious. Furious that anyone had the 
temerity to show disrespect for him, and his gods, and 
disobey his command to worship the Golden Image. 
Surely there was some mistake. These men must 
either not have heard the command, or misunderstood 
it. So he immediately summoned them into his pres- 
ence, and addressing them said— 


“Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego, do ye not serve MY GODS, nor WORSHIP 
THE GOLDEN IMAGE THAT I HAVE SET 
UP? Now if ye be ready that at what time ye 
hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, 
psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of music, ye 
fall down and worship the Image which I have 
made: well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be 
cast the same hour into the midst of a burning 
ehiery slsurnace grande WwW HOMO aL Ale GOD 
THAT SHALL DELIVER YOU OUT OF MY 
HANDS?” Verses 14-15. 


This defiant challenge of the Kinge—“WHO is that 
God that shall deliver you out of MY hands?” is so 
contrary to his confession made to Daniel at the time 
of the Interpretation of the King’s Dream—“YOUR 
God is a GOD of gods, and a LORD of kings, and a 
REVEALER OF SECRETS,” that we are led to in- 
quire what has caused this radical change against the 
God of the Jews. Was Nebuchadnezzar not sincere 


THE GOLDEN IMAGE 63 


when he made his confession to Daniel, or had subse- 
quent events caused him to change his mind? We 
must not forget that the Dream of Nebuchadnezzar 
had occurred twenty years before, and that in the 
meantime, he had taken Jerusalem the second time 
(B. C. 598) and carried captive the majority of its 
inhabitants, including many of the sacred vessels of 
the Temple, and furthermore, he had besieged the city 
the third time (B. C. 587), took and destroyed it, and 
burned the Temple, and left the Holy Land in desola- 
tion. As Oriental Monarchs believed that their vic- 
tories were a triumph of their “gods” over the “gods” 
of their vanquished foes, it would be conclusive evi- 
dence to Nebuchadnezzar that his victories over the 
earthly Capital of Jehovah, and the destruction of the 
Temple, meant that Jehovah was not the supreme 
Deity, but that his own God “Merodach” was. Hence 
his challenge—“WHO is that God that shall deliver 
you out of MY hands?” 


THE CHALLENGE ACCEPTED 


“Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego answered 
and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are 
not careful to answer thee in the matter. If it be 
so, OUR GOD whom we serve is ABLE TO DE- 
LIVER US FROM THE BURNING FIERY 
FURNACEH, and He WILL DELIVER US OUT 
OF THINE HAND, O King. BUT IF NOT, be 
it known unto thee, O king, that we WILL NOT 
SERVE THY GODS, NOR WORSHIP THE 
GOLDEN IMAGE WHICH THOU HAST SET 
UP.” Verses 16-18. 


What a noble answer. What men of faith they were. 
It was not a presumptuous reply, for they knew their 
God. They,spoke with a decision that is magnificent. 
They said—“We are not CAREFUL.” That is, we 
have no concern as to the matter. Phil. 4:6-7. Our 
God is ABLE to deliver us, and He WILL deliver. 


64 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


BUT IF NOT, that is if He does not see fit to deliver 
us, it will make no difference as to our decision, we 
WILL NOT serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden 
Image which thou hast set up. They had the spirit of 
the Martyrs. They “loved not their lives” and were 
resolved to be faithful UNTO death.” Not until the 
end of their natural lives, but unto the death of the 
“Fiery Furnace.” They would not yield or compro- 
mise. There was no mistaking the meaning of their 
answer, and it made the King more furious than ever. 


THE HARMLESS FURNACE 


“Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and 
the form of his visage was changed against Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego: therefore he 
spake, and commanded that they should heat the 
Furnace one SEVEN TIMES MORE than it was 
wont to be heated. And he commanded the most 
mighty men that were in his army to bind Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, and to cast them 
into the burning ‘Fiery Furnace.’ Then these men 
were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their 
hats, and their other garments, and were cast into 
the midst of the burning ‘Fiery Furnace.’ There- 
fore because the king’s commandment was urgent, 
and the furnace exceedingly hot, the flame of the 
fire slew those men that took up Shadrach, Mesh- 
ach, and Abed-nego. And these three men Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, fell down bound 
into the midst of the burning ‘Fiery Furnace.’ 
Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonished, 
and rose up in haste, and spake, and said unto his 
counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound into 
the midst of the fire? They answered and said 
unto the king, True, king. He answered and 
said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the 
midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the 
form of the fourth is like the SON OF GOD.” 
Verses 19-25. 


THE GOLDEN IMAGE 65 


That the deliverance of the “Three Hebrew Chil- 
dren” from the burning “Fiery Furnace” was a MIR- 
ACLE no one can question. That men could survive 
and remain uninjured in fierce flames that would have 
melted iron, and walk to and fro and breathe as if 
only surrounded by the genial warmth of the sun, 
seems incredible. But that such a miracle was neces- 
sary to counteract the worship of the “Golden Image,” 
and stop the persecution of the Jewish captives in 
Babylon, who were loyal to their religion, is clear. 

The king, in his rage, over-reached himself when he 
commanded the “Furnace” to be heated “seven times 
hotter.” That would only shorten the sufferings of his 
victims and hasten their destruction, and it was the 
cause of the death of the mighty men who threw them 
ing Butathe handsote Goduwasinvitee Uhesfactsthat the 
heat of the “Furnace” was increased sevenfold made 
the “Miracle” that much greater, and revealed the 
hand of God in their deliverance. It is evident that 
some supernatural intelligence controlled the flames, 
for while they consumed the cords with which they 
were bound, they did not touch their clothing or singe 
their hair, and when they emerged from the “Furnace” 
there was no smell of fire upon them. When the flames 
burned off their bonds they made no attempt to 
escape from the “Furnace.” The king put them in, 
and it was up to him to call them out. Then they had 
no desire to leave the “Furnace,” for they had therein 
the companionship of the “Son of God,” and they 
would rather be in the “Furnace” with the “Son of 
God” than in the Palace with the king. To them was 
fulfilled the promise— 


“When thou passest through the waters (like 
tieeh ede>5ea) alan llebeawith thee sandetaroush 
the rivers (like the Jordan), they shall not over- 
flow thee: when thou WALKEST THROUGH 
THE FIRE THOU SHALT NOT BE BURNED; 
NEITHER SHALL THE FLAME KINDLE 
UPON THEE.” Isa. 43: 2, 


66 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


It was to the three Hebrew Children that the writer 
of the Hebrews referred when he said, they “Quenched 
the violence of FIRE.” Heb. 11: 34. 

What a scathing rebuke to the king’s arrogant asser- 
tion, “WHO is that God that shall deliver you out of 
my hands?” was the deliverance of these men from the 
power of the flames. Their deliverance was a vindica- 
tion of the course they had taken. None of the gods 
of the heathen had ever wrought such a deliverance 
as that, nor were they able to do so. The “Miracle” 
converted the king. He recognized that the God of 
the Jews was more powerful than his own gods. 


A CONVINCED KING 


“Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth 
of the burning ‘Fiery Furnace,’ and spake, and 
said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye serv- 
ants of the ‘Most High God, COME FORTH, 
AND COME HITHER. Then Shadrach, Mesh- 
ach, and Abed-nego, came forth of the midst of the 
fire. And the princes, governors, and captains, and 
the king’s counsellors, being gathered together, 
saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no 
power, nor was an hair of their head singed, 
neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of 
fire had passed on them.” Verses 26-27, 


When bidden, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego 
walked out of the burning “Furnace,” and the princes, 
governors, and captains, and the king’s counsellors, 
were gathered together that they might look upon, 
and have optical and tangible proof that a miracle had 
been wrought. The preservation of the men put a stop 
to the worship of the “Golden Image.” 


THE ROYAL DECREE 


“Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed 
be the GOD of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 


THE GOLDEN IMAGE 67 


nego, who hath sent His ANGEL, and delivered 
His servants that trusted in Him, and have 
changed the king’s word, and yielded their bodies, 
that they might not serve nor worship any god, 
except their own God. Therefore I make a decree, 
That every people, nation, and language, which 
speak anything amiss against the God of Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, shall be cut in 
pieces, and their houses shall be made a dung- 
hill: because there is no other God that can de- 
liver after this sort. Then the king promoted 

_ Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, in the Prov- 
ince of Babylon.” Verses 28-30. 


Had these three Jews been “time servers,” the name 
of the true God would not have been exalted in Baby- 
lon, they would not have been promoted, and the 
“Decree of Toleration” by the king would not have 
been issued. The purpose then of the Miracle was not 
merely the deliverance of those three men, but the 
conviction of the king and the issuing of his “Royal 
Decree.” That “Decree of Toleration,’ which God 
brought about by the Miracle, was not intended by 
God as a temporary attitude by the Gentile nations 
of Nebuchadnezzar’s day, but is the attitude that God 
requires of all Gentile nations toward the Jews during 
the whole “Times of the Gentiles,” and for which He 
will judge them at the “Judgment of Nations,” when 
the nations shall be judged for their treatment of 
Christ’s brethren—THE JEWS. Matt. 25: 31-46. 


TYPICAL TEACHING OF THE MIRACLE 


As we have seen that Nebuchadnezzar’s “Golden 
Image” was a type of the “IMAGH OF THE 
BEAST” (Rev. 13:13-15), that is to be set up in 
Jerusalem in the closing days of this Dispensation, so 
the “Three Hebrew Children,” who would not worship 
the “Golden Image” of Nebuchadnezzar, are a type of 
the “JEWISH REMNANT,” the 144,000 “Sealed 


68 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Ones” of Rev. 7: 3-8, who will pass unscathed through 
“The Great Tribulation.” They are seen later in the 
Book of Revelation (Rev. 15: 1-3) standing on a “Sea 
of Glass,’ MINGLED WITH FIRE, typical of the 
“FIERY TRIALS” (1 Pet. 1:7) through which they 
had passed. They had come out of “The Great Tribu- 
lation,” for they had gotten the victory over the 
“Beast,” and over his “Image,” and over his “Mark,” 
and they are “Israelites,” for they sing the “New 
Song” of “MOSES and of the LAMB,” which only 
redeemed Israelites can sing. And as Shadrach, Mesh- 
ach, and Abed-nego were not only delivered but pro- 
moted, so the “Jewish Remnant” of the “End Time” 
will be promoted and given positions of power and 
influence in the Millennial Kingdom of Christ. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


The Tree Dream 


THE PROCLAMATION 


“Nebuchadnezzar the king unto all people, na- 
tions, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; 


PEACE BE MULTIPLIED UNTO YOU. 


“T thought it good to shew the signs and won- 
ders that the HIGH GOD hath WROUGHT 
TOWARD ME. How great are His signs! And 
how mighty are His wonders! His Kingdom is an 
Everlasting Kingdom, and His Dominion is from 
generation to generation.” Verses 1-3. 


This chapter is a “Babylonian State Document.” It 
is a “Proclamation” of King Nebuchadnezzar to the 
whole world. It was issued in B. C. 562, the year he 
recovered from his insanity, and a year before his 
death. It was intended as a confession of his sin of 
Pride, and an explanation of the cause of his insanity, 
and of his conversion to the service of the Most High. 
The tone of it is in marked contrast with his previous 
utterances. And the salutation, “Peace be multiplied 
unto you,” are the words of a Christian, and sound 
strange coming from the lips of a heathen king whose 
life had been spent in warfare for the purpose of build- 
ing up a world-wide Empire. But his Dreams and ex- 
perience had taught him that his Kingdom was not to 
last forever, and that the “Stone Kingdom” of the 
“Most High God” was to be an “EVERLASTING 
KINGDOM,” whose dominion would last from gen- 
eration to generation. 

The main part of the Proclamation is taken up with 
an account of a “Dream” which the King had, and its 
interpretation and fulfilment in his own experience. 


69 


70 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


A TROUBLED KING 


“IT Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, 
and flourishing in my palace: I saw a ‘Dream’ 
which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my 
bed and the visions of my head troubled me. 
Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the 
“Wise Men’ of Babylon before me, that they might 
make known unto me the interpretation of the 
‘Dream.’ Then came in the Magicians, the Astrol- 
ogers, the Chaldeans, and the Soothsayers: and I 
told the ‘Dream’ before them; but they did not 
make known unto me the Interpretation thereof.” 


Verses 4-7, 


The Proclamation begins with the significant 
words—“I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, 
and flourishing in my palace.” Like the rich man in 
the Parable, he was clothed in purple and fine linen 
and fared sumptuously every day, and cared little for 
the misery of others, for his thoughts were self-cen- 
tered, and taken up with his own greatness. He was 
at “rest” because he had conquered all his enemies. 
He was familiar with all the perils of the battlefield, 
and had faced them without fear. And now in the 
quiet and rest of his Palace, with no enemy to fear, he 
is troubled by a “Dream.” If the “Dream” had to do 
with his Empire, he probably would not have cared 
so much, but he realized that it in some way had to do 
with himself. He was anxious therefore to have it 
interpreted. So he sent for the “Wise Men” of Baby- 
lon, and while he this time had not forgotten his 
“Dream,” and repeated it to them, they failed him as 
before. Then Daniel appeared upon the scene. Where 
he had been, or why he had not been called in the first 
place, we are not told. 


“But at the last Daniel came in before me, 
whose name was Belteshazzar. according to the 
name of my god, and in whom is the Spirit of the 
Holy Gods: and before him I told the ‘Dream,’ 


THE TREE DREAM 7a) 


saying, O Belteshazzar, ‘Master of the Magicians,’ 
because I know that the Spirit of the Holy Gods 
is in thee, and no ‘secret’ troubleth thee, tell me 
the visions of my ‘Dream’ that I have seen, and 
the Interpretation thereof.” Verses 8-9. 


THE DREAM 


“Thus were the ‘Visions’ of mine head in my 
bed: I saw, and behold a TREE in the midst of 
the earth, and the height thereof was great. The 

_ TREE grew, and was strong, and the height 
thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof 
to the end of all the earth: the leaves thereof were 
fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was 
meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow 
under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the 
boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it.” Verses 
10-12. 


While Nebuchadnezzar was wondering what the 
“Vision of the Tree” meant, he saw descend from 
Heaven a “WATCHER,” or “HOLY ONE.” From 
verse 17 we learn that there is in Heaven a “Court,” 
known as the 


“COURT OF THE WATCHERS” 
or 


“HOLY ONES,” 


andetiateit swasaby saeeDECREEMZsoithat.Court eto 
which the case of Nebuchadnezzar had been referred, 
that he was condemned to live as a “Beast” for a 
period of seven years. The purpose of the “Decree” 
was that the inhabitants of the earth might know that 
the “Most High” ruleth in the kingdoms of men, and 
giveth them to whomsoever He will. The Book of 
Daniel reveals the close connection between the earth 
and the “Spirit World.” In chapter 9:10 we read of 
the visit of the angel Gabriel to Daniel, and in chap- 
ter 10: 4-12 of other heavenly beings. In Eph. 6: 11-12 


Ves THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


we are told to put on the whole “Armor of God,” for, 
“we wrestle not against flesh and blood (earthly be- 
ings), but against ‘Principalities, against ‘Powers,’ 
against the ‘Rulers of the Darkness of this World,’ 
against ‘Spiritual Wickedness’ in high (heavenly) 
places.” Theré are three heavens spoken of in the 
Scriptures. The first is the atmosphere of our earth, 
the third is the Heaven where God dwells, and the 
second is an intermediate heaven where the “Princi- 
palities and Powers of Evil,’ comprising the “King- 
dom oi Satan,“/dwelly Satanus the’ PRINCE’? ofthe 
“Powers of the Air,’ and he has many subordinate 
Princes who are delegated to do his obstructive work. 
Two of them are mentioned by Daniel, the “PRINCE 
OF PERSIA” and the “PRINCE OF GRECIA.” Dan. 
LO13820) (Hromthismt wouldsiookvasmissatanthadea 
delegated Prince for every nation to superintend his 
work there. So great and powerful are these Princes 
that it takes the power and strength of “MICHAEL” 
the Archangel, the Commander-in-Chief of the 
“Armies of Heaven,” to overcome them. Dan. 10:13; 
Jude 9; Rev. 12:7-9. That the “Powers of Evil” in 
the Heavenlies, as well as the conduct of earthly 
powers, may be properly controlled, and officially 
passed upon, there is a “Judicial Court” in Heaven 
before which their cases are tried, that the Book of 
Daniel calls the “COURT OF THE WATCHERS,” 
and whose decrees, as in the case of Nebuchadnezzar, 
are executed on the earth. 

What troubled Nebuchadnezzar was not the “Vision 
of the Tree,” but the PERSONIFICATION of it by 
the “Watcher” or “Holy One,’ who changed the 
word “it” to the personal pronoun “HIS.” 


‘I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, 
and, behold, a ‘WATCHER’ and a ‘HOLY ONE’ 
came down from Heaven; he cried aloud, and said 
thus. Hew down the TREE, and cut off HIS 
branches, shake off HIS leaves, and scatter HIS 
fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and 


THE TREE DREAM 73 


the fowls from HIS branches: nevertheless, leave 
the stump of HIS roots in the earth, even with a 
band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the 
field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, 
and let HIS portion be with the BEASTS in the 
grass of the earth: let HIS HEART be changed 
from MAN’S, and let a BEAST’S HEART be 
given unto HIM: and let ‘SEVEN TIMES’ pass 
over HIM. This matter is by the Decree of the 
‘WATCHERS,’ and the demand by the word of 
the ‘HOLY ONES: to the intent that the living 
_ may know that the ‘MOST HIGH?’ ruleth in the 
‘Kingdom of Men,’ and giveth it to whomsoever 
He will, and setteth up over it the basest of men. 
This ‘Dream’ I King Nebuchadnezzar have seen. 
Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the Interpreta- 
tion thereof, forasmuch as all the ‘Wise Men’ of 
my Kingdom are not able to make known unto 
me the Interpretation: but thou art able: for the 
Spirit of the Holy Gods is in thee.” Verses 13-18. 


When Daniel heard the Dream he was greatly trou- 
bled, and for one hour was too astonished to speak. 
Not that he did not know the meaning of the Dream, 
but he dreaded to tell the King the unpleasant news. 
When however the King, who seemed to realize the 
personal character of the Dream, assured him that he 
need not fear to tell him, then Daniel, to prepare the 
King for the judgment that was to come upon him, 
said—“My lord, the Dream be to them that hate thee, 
and the Interpretation thereof to thine enemies.” That 
is, I wish that the calamity that is to fall on you 
might fall on your enemies. It was a wise answer, and 
paved the way for 


THE INTERPRETATION. 


“The TREE that thou sawest, which grew, and 
was strong, whose height reached unto the 
heaven, and the sight thereof to all the earth; 


74 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, 
and in it was meat for all; under which the beasts 
of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches the 
fowls of the heaven had their habitation: it is 
THOU, O King, that art grown and become 
strong: for thy greatness is grown, and reacheth 
unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of 
ther earths > And awhereasmithes (Kineaisawvra 
‘WATCHER’ and a ‘HOLY ONE’ coming down 
from Heaven, and saying, Hew the TREE down, 
and destroy it; yet leave the stump of the roots 
thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron 
and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let 
it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let HIS 
portion be with the beasts of the field, till ‘SSEVEN 
TIMES’ pass over him; this is the Interpretation, 
O King, and this is the DECREE of the Most 
High, which is come upon my Lord the King: that 
THEY SHALL DRIVE THEE FROM MEN, 
AND THY DWELLING SHALL BE WITH 
THE BEASTS OF THE FIELD, AND THEY 
SHALL MAKE THEE TO EAT GRASS AS 
OXEN, AND THEY SHALL WET THEE 
WITH THE DEW OF HEAVEN, AND 
SSEVEN TIMES’ SHALL PASS OVER THEE, 
TILL THOU KNOW THAT THE MOST 
HIGH RULETH IN THE KINGDOM OF 
MEN, AND GIVETH IT TO WHCMSCEVER 
HE WILL. And whereas they commanded to 
leave the stump of the tree roots: thy Kingdom 
shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt know 
THAT THE HEAVENS DO RULE.” Verses 
20-26. 


From the Interpretation the King could not mis- 
take the meaning of his Dream. Then Daniel, like the 
faithful prophet that he was, took advantage of the 
opportunity and counselled the King to forsake his 
sinful ways. 


THE TREE DREAM 72) 


“Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be accept- 
able unto thee, and break off thy sins by right- 
ecusness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy 
to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy 
tranquility. MeVierse 2/7: 


THE DREAM FULFILLED 


But the King did not take Daniel’s advice, and later 
had to make the humiliating confession that all that 
had been foretold about him had come to pass. But 
it did not come at once God gave him a year’s grace. 
Because the sentence was not executed at once Nebu- 
chadnezzar may have thought that Daniel was mis- 
taken, or that God had forgotten. But at the end of 
twelve months, as the King was walking in his palace, 
and beheld the great city of Babylon as it spread out 
before him from his Palace window, he exclaimed in 
his pride— 


“Is not this GREAT BABYLON, that I have 
built for the ‘House of the Kingdom’ by the might 
of MY POWER, and for the honor of MY MAJ- 
TS UsyY Pea erse 30! 


That was the fatal moment. The time of probation 
was up. 


“While the word was in the King’s mouth, there 
fell a voice from Heaven, saying, O King Nebu- 
chadnezzar, to thee it is spoken: The Kingdom is 
departed from thee. And they shall drive thee 
from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the 
beasts of the field: they shall make thee to eat 
grass as oxen, and ‘SEVEN TIMES’ shall pass 
over thee, until thou know that the Most High 
ruleth in the ‘Kingdom of Men,’ and giveth it 
(probably the Babylonian Kingdom) to whomso- 
ewerahe swill.s) Verses 31-32; 


The sentence was immediately executed. Not an- 
other moment of grace was given the King. 


76 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


“The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon 
Nebuchadnezzar: and he was driven from men, 
and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet 
with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown 
like eagle’s feathers, and his nails like bird’s 
claws» WVerse33, 


The type of insanity that befell Nebuchadnezzar is 
a disease called “lycanthropy,” in which the patient 
imagines that he is some sort of a beast. Nebuchad- 
nezzar imagined he was an ox. He was not confined 
but was allowed to roam in the fields, probably the 
grounds of the Palace, for we are told that he did eat 
grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of 
heaven, and to complete the delusion he probably 
went about on all fours. 

Nebuchadnezzar’s insanity lasted for seven years, 
for that is what the “Seven Times” mean. The period 
is not without its prophetical significance. It does 
not signify the length of the “Times of the Gentiles,” 
for a “Time” is not a period of 360 years, but only of 
onevyear. See chapter nine. The “Seven Times” fore- 
shadow the “SEVEN YEARS” of the rule of Anti- 
christ, or the “Seventieth Week” of Daniel’s “Seventy 
Weeks,” when the “One” that hindereth— THE 
HOLY SPIRIT, shall have left the earth, having gone 
back with the Church, and when men in their mad- 
ness and bestiality will act like beasts, and give their 
service and worship to Antichrist, that John in the 
Apocalypse calls—“THE BEAST.” At the end of the 
“Seven Times” (years), Nebuchadnezzar’s reason was 
restored to him. 


THE KING’S RECOVERY 


“And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar 
lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine under- 
standing returned unto me, and I blessed the Most 
High, and I praised and honored Him that liveth 
forever, whose dominion is an everlasting domin- 
ion, and His Kingdom is from generation to gen- 
eration: and all the inhabitants of the earth are 


THE TREE DREAM HE 


reputed as nothing: and He doeth according to 

His will in the Army of Heaven, and among the 

inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay His 

hand, or say unto Him, What doest Thou?” 

Verses 34-35. 

At the endgot thes, Seven Years” Nebuchadnezzar 
lifted up his eyes to Heaven. A beast does not do 
that. It, particularly an ox, looks downward. What 
Nebuchadnezzar meant was that he looked upward 
in prayer to God, and acknowledged His supremacy. 
In the doing of that his reason was restored, and he 
was fit to resume his kingly duties. 


“At the same time my reason returned to me; 
and for the glory of my Kingdom, mine honor 
and brightness (glory) returned unto me; and my 
counsellors and my lords sought unto me; and I 
was established in my Kingdom, and excellent 
majesty was added unto me. Now I Nebuchad- 
nezzar praise and extol and honor the King of 
Heaven, all whose works are truth, and His ways 
judgment: and those that walk in pride He is able 
to abase.” Verses 36-37. 


Nebuchadnezzar’s restoration to his kingly rights 
was in fulfilment of the promise that his insanity 
should only last seven years, and that his Kingdom 
should then be made “sure,” or restored to him. Verse 
26. During his insanity, his son, Evil-Merodach, is 
said to have reigned as Regent in his stead. The fact 
that he was graciously received back by his coun- 
sellors and lords is an indication that they looked upon 
his insanity as only temporary, and yet, if that be true, 
it seems strange that they did not confine him to the 
palace, instead of “driving” (vs. 25) him out into the 
fields away from the haunts of men. This is the last 
we read in the Scriptures of Nebuchadnezzar. He 
lived only about a year after his restoration to his 
throne, but it was a year during which great honors 
were heaped upon him, and in which he glorified God. 
He died after a brief illness in B. C. 561, and was suc- 
ceeded by his son Evil-Merodach. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


The Fall of Babylon 


THE CITY OF BABYLON 


The founder of Babylon was Nimrod, the great- 
grandson of Noah, over 2000 years before Christ. 


“And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a 
mighty one in the earth. He was a mighty hunter 
before the Lord: wherefore it is said, Even as 
Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord. And 
the beginning of his kingdom was BABEL (mar- 
gin Babylon), and Erech and Accad, and Calneh, 
in the land of Shinar.” Gen. 10: 8-10. 


Nimrod was a Hamite. Nineveh was founded by 
Asshur, a son of Shem. Gen. 10:11, 22. Nineveh be- 
came the capital jot) Assyria.~AboutyB. Cal2/0 athe 
Assyrian kings became masters of Chaldea, or Baby- 
lonia, of which Babylon was the capital. For several 
centuries the history of Babylon was overshadowed 
by that of Nineveh. In the time of Tiglath-pileser of 
Assyria, Nabonassar ascended the throne of Babylon 
in B. C. 747. About B. C. 720 Berodach-baladan be- 
came king of Babylon, and sent ambassadors to Heze- 
kiah, king of Judah. 2 Kings 20:12-18. Isa. 39: 1-7. 
A few years later Sargon, king of Assyria, defeated 
and dethroned Berodach-baladan. Sennacherib com- 
pleted the subjection of Babylon, which he annexed 
to the Assyrian Empire about B. C. 690. The conquest 
of Nineveh and the overthrow of the Assyrian Em- 
pire, which was effected about B. C. 625, by Cyaxeres 
the Mede, and his ally Nabopolassar, the rebellious 
governor of Babylon, enabled the latter to found the 
Babylonian Empire. He reigned from B. C. 625 to 
B. C. 605. He was succeeded by his more famous son 


78 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 19 


Nebuchadnezzar, the greatest king of ancient times, 
who rebuilt and beautified the city of Babylon until 
it was the most magnificent city the world has ever 
seen. 

The city of Babylon was built in an exact square of 
15 miles on a side, or 60 miles around. It was sur- 
rounded by a brick wall 87 feet thick, which, according 
to Herodotus, was 350 feet high. On the walls were 
250 towers, and the top of the wall was wide enough 
to permit six chariots to drive abreast. Outside this 
wall was a vast ditch or moat surrounding the city, 
kept filled with water from the river Euphrates, and 
crossed by draw-bridges in front of the gates. Inside 
the wall, and not far from it, was another wall, not 
much inferior, but narrower, extending around the 
city. Twenty-five magnificent avenues, 150 feet wide, 
ran across the city from north to south, and the same 
number crossed them at right angles from east to west, 
making 676 great squares, each nearly three-fifths of 
a mile on a side. A wide avenue also ran around the 
city inside the walls, and close to them, into which 
the cross avenues emptied. At the ends of these cross 
avenues magnificently burnished two-leafed gates of 
brass were built in the city walls, that shone, as they 
were opened or closed, in the rising or setting sun, 
like leaves of flame. 

The city was divided into two equal parts by the 
river Euphrates, that flowed diagonally across it, and 
its banks were walled and pierced with brazen gates 
at the main avenues. Outside these river walls, and 
between them and the river, splendid wharves lined 
the river on each side within the city. Ferry boats 
crossed the river at each of the main avenues, and at 
the central avenue a magnificent bridge spanned the 
tivereat eachvend of which was a beautiiul Palace. 
These Palaces were connected by a subterranean pas- 
sageway, or “tube,” underneath the bed of the river. 
in which, at different points. were located sumptuous 
banqueting rooms constructed entirely of brass. Near 
one of these Palaces stood the 


80 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


TOWER OF BEL, 


consisting of eight towers, each 75 feet high, rising 
one upon the other, with an outside winding stairway 
to its summit, which towers, with the Chapel on the 
top, made a height of 660 feet. This Chapel contained 
the most expensive furniture of any place of worship 
in the world. One “Golden Image” alone, 45 feet high, 
was valued at $17,500,000, and the whole of the sacred 
utensils used in worship were reckoned to be worth 
$200,000,000. Babylon also contained one of the 
“Seven Wonders” of the world, the famous “HANG- 
ING GARDENS.” These “Gardens” were 400 feet 
square, and were raised in terraces one above the 
other, to the height of 350 feet, and were reached by 
stairways ten feet wide. The top of each terrace was 
covered with large stone slabs on which were laid a 
bed of rushes, then a thick layer of asphalt, next two 
courses of brick, cemented together, and finally plates 
of lead to prevent leakage; the whole was then cov- 
ered with earth and planted with shrubbery and large 
trees. The whole had the appearance from a distance 
of a forest-covered mountain, which would be a re- 
markable sight in the level plain of the Euphrates. 
These “Gardens” were built by Nebuchadnezzar sim- 
ply to please his wife, who was Amyitis, daughter of 
Cyaxares, king of the mountainous country of Media, 
and who was thus made more contented with her sur- 
roundings. The rest of the city was, in its glory and 
magnificence, in keeping with these palaces, towers, 
and “Hanging Gardens.” It contained many beautiful 
parks, and there was much unoccupied land that could 
be tilled, and help support the over 1,000,000 popula- 
tion. The character of its inhabitants, and of its official 
life at the zenith of its history, is seen in the descrip- 
tion of “Belshazzar’s Feast.” Never before or since 
has this earth seen its equal. The Prophet Isaiah 
speaks of it as—Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, 
the beauty of the Chaldees’ Excellency.” Isa. 13:19. 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 81 


BELSHAZZAR’S FEAST 


“Belshazzar the king made a great Feast to a 
thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the 
thousand. Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, 
commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels 
which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out 
of the Temple which was in Jerusalem; that the 
king, and his princes, his wives and his concu- 
bines, might drink therein. Then they brought 
the golden vessels that were taken out of the 
Temple of the House of God which was at Jerusa- 

’ lem; and the king, and his princes, his wives, and 
his concubines, drank in them. They drank wine, 
and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of 
brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.” Verses 1-4. 


Nebuchadnezzar was succeeded at his death, B. C. 
561, by his son Evil-Merodach, who at once liberated 
Jehoiachin, king of Judah, from prison and fed him 
from his own table. 2 Kings 25: 27-30. Jer. 52: 31-34. 
After a reign of two years Evil-Merodach was put to 
death by conspirators, headed by Neriglissar, his 
brother-in-law, who ascended the throne and reigned 
for about four years, being killed in battle in the year 
B. C. 556. His son, and successor, Laborosoarchod, an 
imbecile child, was king for less than a year, when he 
was beaten to death, and the throne was seized by a 
usurper, Nabonidus (or Nabonnaid), another son-in- 
law of Nebuchadnezzar, who had married the widow 
of Neriglissar, and who reigned from B. C. 555 to the 
Fall of Babylon in B. C. 538. According to Daniel, 
Belshazzar, and not Nabonidus, was King of Babylon 
when it fell. But Berosus, a heathen historian, who 
lived about 250 years after Daniel, in his list of the 
kings of Babylon, omits the name of Belshazzar, and 
gives the name of Nabonnaid (Nabonidus) as the last 
king of Babylon. On account of this the critics attack 
the truthfulness of the Book of Daniel. But its truth- 
fulness has been vindicated by the deciphering of a 
number of clay tablets taken from the ruins of Baby- 


82 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


lonia, on which the name of Belsharuzzar frequently 
appears as the son of Nabonnaid, and as sharing the 
government with him. Thus we see that the Belshar- 
uzzar of the tablets is the Belshazzar of the Bible, and 
that Daniel is historically correct. 

As the Prophet Jeremiah had foretold—‘“All nations 
shall serve HIM (Nebuchadnezzar), and his SON, and 
his SON’S SON, until the very time of his land come” 
(Jer. 27:7), it is clear that Belshazzar must have been 
a GRANDSON, and a son, not of a daughter, but of 
a son of Nebuchadnezzar. But as we have seen that 
his reputed father, Nabonidus, was not a son of Nebu- 
chadnezzar, the only solution seems to be that Belshaz- 
zar was a son of a son of Nebuchadnezzar, and was 
adopted by Nabonidus to conciliate the royal family, 
and because of his adoption could be legally called the 
son of Nabonidus. 

Belshazzar, at the time the incidents in this chapter 
took place, was reigning in conjunction with his father 
Nabonidus, who was away on some military expedi- 
tion and had left Belshazzar in charge of the city of 
Babylon. Feasts were not uncommon in Babylon, but 
the “Feast of Belshazzar’ was no common Feast. 
There is no feast like it recorded in all history. The 
only feast that approaches it is the Feast given by 
Ahasuerus, King of Persia, to the Princes of the 120 
Provinces of his Kingdom, given in Shushan the Pal- 
ace in B. C. 521, and recorded in the first chapter ct 
Esther. Belshazzar’s Feast was the turning point in 
the history of Babylon. It marked the transition from 
the “Head of Gold” to the “Arms and Breast of Sil- 
ver, of) the. Image; Jand) from’ the §ilzion/tothe 
“Bear w:phasesofeGentileyrulex Dany?: 15a Wtetook 
place in B. C. 538, twenty-three years after the death 
of Nebuchadnezzar. As these years were taken up 
with events that had no relation to the Jews they are 
passed over in silence. Even Daniel drops out of 
sight. But he is not forgotten by Ged, who gives him 
“Visions” of coming events. 

The Feast of Belshazzar was given in a spirit of 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 83 


contempt and defiance. The city of Babylon was in a 
state of siege. The armies of the Medes and Persians 
were encamped outside its walls. But Belshazzar felt 
secure, for the drawbridges had been drawn up, the 
brazen gates barred, and Belshazzar knew that the 
walls of the city were impregnable; and he was con- 
fident that his soldiers from their position on the lofty 
walls would be able to destroy any who should attempt 
to batter down the gates. The city also was provi- 
sioned for several years’ siege, and with the tillable 
ground within the city walls its capture could be post- 
-poned indefinitely. So Belshazzar to show his con- 
tempt of the besieging army gave his great Feast. The 
character of the Feast is seen in the conduct of the 
guests. “They drank wine, and praised the gods of 
gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron (reminding us of 
Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream), of wood, and of stone.” It 
was a Feast of licentiousness, drunkenness, and idola- 
trous worship. 


In the midst of the Feast, the King, Belshazzar, his 
brain befuddled with wine, and desirous of doing 
something unique and sensational, surpassed all his 
previous blasphemous and sacrilegious acts by order- 
ing to be brought into the Banqueting Hall the sacred 
vessels of gold and silver that his grandfather Nebu- 
chadnezzar had taken from the Temple at Jerusalem, 
sixty-eight years before. When these vessels were 
brought in they were distributed among the drunken 
guests, and they drank wine from them to the gods of 
gold, silver, brass, iron, wood, and stone, and thus 
desecrated those sacred vessels of the Lord. That was 
the fatal moment, the turning point of the Feast. It 
filled Babylon’s “CUP OF INIQUITY” to the brim. 
Her doom was sealed. 


THE FINGER OF GOD 


“Tn the SAME HOUR came forth the fingers of 
a man’s hand, and wrote over against the Candle- 
stick upon the plaster of the wall of the King’s 


84 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Palace: and the King saw the part of the hand 
that wrote. Then the King’s countenance was 
changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that 
the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees 
smote one against another.” Verses 5-6. 


No flash of supernatural light, nor deafening peal 
of thunder, startled the drunken revelers, thus an- 
nouncing the interference of God in their impious 
CarTOuSd ERD UimOUtsOleLGm cleevenOlstlcmniION tamLiic 
Hand of God appeared, and with its finger silently 
wrote, in mystic characters, on the wall over against 
the lighted Candlestick, where it could readily be seen 
by all the assembled guests, the doom of Babylon. 
The fact that the writing remained indelibly fixed on 
the wall showed that it was no hallucination of an 
intoxicated man’s fancy. It sobered the King, and 
filled him with fear, and he at once called for the 
“Wise Men” of Babylon to interpret its meaning. 


AN INTERPRETER SOUGHT 


“The King cried aloud to bring in the Astrol- 
ogers, the Chaldeans, and the Soothsayers. And 
the King spake, and said to the ‘Wise Men’ of 
Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and 
shew me the interpretation thereof, shall be 
clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold 
about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the 
Kingdom. Then came in all the King’s ‘Wise 
Men: but they could not read the writing, nor 
make known to the King the interpretation 
thereof. Then was King Belshazzar greatly trou- 
bled, and his countenance was changed in him, 
and his lords were astonished.” Verses 7-9. 


Again the “Wise Men” of Babylon fail in their 
office, as they failed in the days of Nebuchadnezzar. 
Dan. 2:1-13. They could not interpret the writing. 
Whether it was in a language with which they were 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 85 


not familiar we are not told. The true reason was 
that it was a message from GOD, and it takes a “MAN 
OF GOD” to interpret the WORDS OF GOD. The 
failure of the “Wise Men” to interpret the handwrit- 
ing greatly troubled the King, and his countenance 
was changed. All the mirth and hilarity left it, and 
it presented the aspect of fear and terror. So marked 
was the change that the assembled lords were aston- 
ished, for they saw that the “handwriting on the 
wall” was not a part of the program, arranged by the 
King to entertain them, but was something super- 
natural and unexpected, and that the King was not 
needlessly alarmed. At once the boisterousness of 
the Feast was changed to cries of terror, and so great 
was the uproar and commotion the Queen came in to 
find out what it was all about. It is hardly hkely that 
the Queen mentioned was the wife of Belshazzar. If 
he was married his wife’s place was with him at the 
Feast. Neither is it likely that the Queen was the 
widow of Nebuchadnezzar. She probably was dead. 
Otherwise she would be very old, and indifferent to 
such an occasion. It would appear therefore that the 
Queen mentioned was the wife and Queen of King 
Nabonidus, who was still the “First Ruler’ of the 
land, though away at the time, and who had a perfect 
right to be living in the Palace at that time, and who 
as a daughter of Nebuchadnezzar would still have a 
fresh and vivid memory of the wonderful part Daniel 
had taken in the affairs of the Empire during her 
father’s reign. This view is confirmed by the use the 
Queen made of the word . father.’ The use of the 
word “father,” instead of “grandfather.” in the Queen 
calling Nebuchadnezzar the “father” of Belshazzar, 
is in accord with the usage of Old Testament times, 
and was made necessary because in the Semitic lan- 
guage there are no words for “grandfather,” or 
“grandson.” 


“Now the Queen by reason of the words of the 
King and his lords came into the Banquet House: 


86 


THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


and the Queen spake and said, O King, live for- 
ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let 
thy countenance be changed: there is a man in 
thy Kingdom, in whom is the Spirit of the Holy 
Gods; and in the days of thy father light and 
understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the 
Gods, was found in him: whom the King Nebu- 
chadnezzar thy father, the King, I say, thy father, 
made Master of the Magicians, Astrologers, Chal- 
deans, and Soothsayers; forasmuch as an excel- 
lent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, in- 
terpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sen- 
tences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in 
the same Daniel, whom the King named Bel- 
teshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will 
shew the interpretation.” Verses 10-12. 


While others had forgotten Daniel, not so the 


“Queen Mother.” At once Daniel was sent for. He 


CO 


uld not have been far away, or he could not have 


appeared so quickly. He was doubtless aroused from 
his slumbers, for it was far in the night. This would 
be no light matter, for he was now an old gray-haired 


man. 
interpreted Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream, and if he was 


Sixty-five years had passed by since he had 


twenty years old when taken to Babylon, counting the 


th 


reewsy cars) sinetheme Palaces School whe mwas now 


eighty-eight years of age. 


“Then was Daniel brought in before the King. 
And the King spake and said unto Daniel, Art 
thou that Daniel, which art of the Children of the 
Captivity of Judah, whom the King my father 
brought out of Jewry? I have even heard of 
thee, that the Spirit of the Gods is in thee, and 
that light and understanding and excellent wis- 
dom is found in thee. And now the ‘Wise Men,’ 
the Astrologers, have been brought in before me, 
that they should read this writing, and make 
known unto me the interpretation thereof: but 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 87 


they could not shew the interpretation of the 
thing: and I have heard of thee, that thou canst 
make interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now 
if thou canst read the writing, and make known 
to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be 
clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold 
about thy neck, and shalt be the ‘THIRD 
RULER’ in the Kingdom.” Verses 13-16. 


Daniel knew how empty were all these promises, 
for he saw by the “Handwriting on the Wall” that 
_the Empire of Babylon was doomed, and that King 
Belshazzar was powerless to fulfil them. So he 
replied— 


“Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy re- 
wards to another; yet I will read the writing unto 
the King, and make known to him the Interpre- 
tation. O thou King, the Most High God gave 
Nebuchadnezzar thy father a Kingdom, and maj- 
esty, and glory, and honor: and for the majesty 
that He gave him, all people, nations, and lan- 
guages trembled and feared before him: whom 
he would he slew; and whom he would he kept 
alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom 
he would he put down. But when his heart was 
lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was 
deposed from his kingly throne, and they took 
his glory from him: and he was driven from the 
sons of men; and his heart was made like the 
beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses: 
they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body 
was wet with the dew of heaven; till he knew 
that the MOST HIGH GOD ruled in the ‘King- 
dom of Men,’ and that He appointeth over it 
whomsoever He will.” Verses 17-21. 


Then Daniel, faithful prophet as he was, took ad- 
vantage of the situation to reprove the King. Hear 
his fearless and sublime words— 


88 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


A PROPHET’S REBUKE 


“And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not 
humbled thine heart, though thou KNEWEST 
ALL THIS; but hast lifted up thyself against 
the Lord of Heaven; and they have brought the 
vessels of His House (the Temple at Jerusalem) 
before thee, and thou and thy lords, thy wives 
and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; 
and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, 
of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, 
nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand 
thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast 
thou not glorified: then was the part of the hand 
sent from Him; and this writing was written.” 


Verses 22-24. 


In this scathing rebuke Daniel charges Belshazzar 
with knowing all that had happened to his grand- 
father Nebuchadnezzar as a punishment for his pride. 
Belshazzar was probably fifteen years old when Nebu- 
chadnezzar recovered from his insanity. Anyway he 
knew all about it from his mother’s lips, and as heir 
apparent to the throne had been warned to avoid his 
erandfather’s sin. But he failed to profit by the les- 
~son, and added to his guilt what his grandfather never 
dared to do, the sin of the profanation of the “Sacred 
Vessels” of the Temple, thus mocking and defying 
God. It is a peculiar coincidence that when Daniel 
was called, Belshazzar took particular pains to find 
out if he was a Jew (verse 13), as if his presence had 
something to do with the King’s desecration of the 
“Sacred Vessels” of the Temple. It seemed fitting 
therefore that DBelshazzar’s doom should be _ pro- 
nounced by Daniel the Jew. For it was because of 
the, -desecration foiethe Mi secredaaViessels® thatthe 
“Handwriting” appeared on the wall, and the doom of 
Belshazzar pronounced, for if he continued on the 
throne there was little hope of the return of the Jews 
and the sacred vessels to Jerusalem two years later, 
as the prophets had foretold. 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 89 


THE DOOM OF BABYLON 


“And this is the writing that was written, 
‘MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.’ 


Mel icmeicmeticmeilterpretaloi Ole thes thing. 
MENE; God hath numbered thy Kingdom, and 
finished it. TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the 
balances, and art found wanting. PERES; Thy 
Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and 
Persians.” Verses 25-28. 


_ In the interpretation Daniel changes the word 

“UPHARSIN” to PERES, which is the singular of 
“Upharsin.” The change helps the interpretation, be- 
cause the consonants written P-R-S on the wall 
were the same as those used for “Persians,” showing 
where Daniel got the words, the “Medes” and “Per- 
sians,’ the Medes and Persians at that time being a 
dual Kingdom. The words “MENE, MENE, TEKEL, 
UPHARSIN,” translated into English, mean—“*Num- 
bered,” “Numbered,” “Weighed,” “Divisions.” Dan- 
iel interpreted them thus— 


MENE—“God hath numbered thy Kingdom, and 
finished it.” 


TEKEL—“Thou (Belshazzar) art weighed in the 
balances and art found wanting.” 


PERES—“Thy Kingdom is divided, and given to 
the Medes and Persians.” 


The writing was in Aramaic, and the letters may 
have been arranged in Acrostic style, and so mystified 
the “Wise Men.” The illustration below, taken from 
the Talmud, will show how this could have been 
done. 

R 4b M M 
ise dss N N 
= IL A A 


The Chaldeans (Wise Men), reading the letters 
from right to left, as in Hebrew and Aramaic, or from 


90 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


left to right, as in other languages, could make no 
sense of the words: but Daniel read from top to bot- 
tom, beginning at the right. That Belshazzar did not 
believe the Prophet, or that while he believed him, he 
did not expect the prophecy to come true in his day, 
is probable from the fact that— 


“Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed 
Daniel with scarlet, and put a chain of gold about 
his neck, and made a proclamation concerning 
him, that he should be the ‘THIRD RULER’ in 
the Kingdom.” Verse 29. 


Belshazzar had to make Daniel the “Third Ruler,” 
because he himself was the “Second,” for his father 
Nabonidus was the “First.” But the honor for Daniel 
was an empty one, for if God’s word was true Belshaz- 
zar had no Kingdom to share with when he clothed 
him in scarlet, and put a chain of gold about his neck, 
for that Kingdom had already been given to the Medes 
and Persians, for we read— 


“In that night was Belshazzar the king of the 
Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took 
(received) the Kingdom, being about threescore 
and two years old.” Verses 30-31. 


Darius the Mede did not take Babylon. It was cap- 
tured by Cyrus. But as an act of courtesy, and be- 
cause Media was the older of the two Kingdoms 
Media and Persia, and because he had some other 
military campaigns to finish, Cyrus committed the 
governorship of Babylon to his uncle Darius, the king 
of Media, who ruled for two years. 


THE TAKING OF BABYLON 


Two years after the death of Nebuchadnezzar a war 
broke out between the Babylonians and the Medes 
that continued off and on for over twenty years. At 
last Cyaxares, king of the Medes, who is called 
“Darius” in verse 31, summoned to his aid his nephew, 


THE FALL OF BABYLON Ot 


Cyrus, of the Persian line. And in the seventeenth 
year of Nabonidus, and the third year of Belshazzar, 
Cyrus laid siege to the city of Babylon. The Baby- 
lonians entrenched behind the impregnable walls of 
the city, with provisions to last them for years, and 
sufficient tillable soil to supplement the supply, scoffed 
at Cyrus, and made light ‘of’ the siege. Hence’ they 
breathed as freely and-slept as soundly as though no 
foe was waiting and watching for their destruction. 
But it was a false security, for God had decreed over 
175 years before that the city should be taken by a 
-man not then born, Cyrus (Isa. 44: 28—45: 1-4), who 
was then knocking at its gates, and when God sets the 
time for the fulfilment of His word, the most impreg- 
nable fortress must fall. 

Realizing the futility of taking the city by siege, 
Cyrus decided to use strategy. He decided to drain 
the river Euphrates, that flowed through the city, 
and march his soldiers in on its bed. To this end some 
say he constructed a large artificial lake, miles above 
the city, into which he drained the river. Others say, 
and it seems the most likely, that he constructed a 
new channel for the river, far away and invisible from 
the tops of the Towers on top of the walls, and into 
this new channel he diverted the water of the river 
above the city, so that the water that flowed through 
the city flowed away and left the river bed through 
the city dry. Having made all arrangements to carry 
out his plan, Cyrus waited a suitable occasion. Hear- 
ing of the Feast that Belshazzar was going to give 
to a thousand of his lords, and knowing the character 
of such Feasts, and that Belshazzar’s soldiers would 
be off their guard, Cyrus divided his army into three 
Divisions. One Division was to divert the water of the 
river Euphrates, at the proper time, into the new 
channel. The second Division was stationed where 
the river entered the city on the north. And the third 
Division was stationed where the river left the city on 
the south. The second and third Divisions were in- 
structed to enter the channel of the river as soon as 


a2 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


the water was low enough, and march toward each 
othersuntill theyemetuinetlescentre oipth cycityewiiere 
the Palace was located. The plan worked to perfec- 
tion. But it would have been a failure if the city had 
not been given over to debauchery. Through the care- 
lessness of the guards, the brazen gates in the walls 
that lined the banks of the river inside the city were 
left unbolted, thus giving easy entrance to the soldiers 
of Cyrus, who quickly took the city. If it had been 
otherwise Cyrus’ soldiers would have been trapped. or 
had to march out again. But the Hand of God was 
in it. God had said that Cyrus should take the city, 
and as its time was come, the plan of Cyrus was doubt- 
less inspired of God, and He saw to it that the gates on 
the river’s banks were not closed. If the guards of 
the river gates had been on duty, and had noticed the 
subsidence of the water of the river, they could have 
given the alarm, and probably saved the city. But 
God had ordered otherwise. The soldiers of Cyrus 
immediately took possession of the city, stormed the 
Palace, and slew the King. That night’s revelry cost 
Belshazzar his life, and the Fall of Babylon. 


As proof of the inspiration of the Scriptures it is 
worthy of note that the “Fall of Babylon” was fore- 
told, and the manner of its capture described, and the 
name of its captor given, 175 years before the event 
took place. The Prophecy is found in Isa. 44: 28— 
45: 1-4. 


“That saith of CYRUS, He is my shepherd, and 
shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to 
JERUSALEM—tThou shalt be built; and to the 
TEMPLE—Thy foundation shall be laid. Thus 
saith the Lord to His anointed, to CYRUS, whose 
right hand I have holden, to subdue nations be- 
fore him; and I will loose the loins of kings (as 
those of Belshazzar) to open before him (Cyrus) 
the TWO LEAVED GATES (of Babylon); and 
the gates shall not be shut (which was true of the 
inner gates of Babylon, in the river walls on the 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 93 


night of the siege) ; I will go before thee (Cyrus), 
and make the crooked places straight: I will 
break in pieces the GATES OF BRASS (of Baby- 
lon), and cut in sunder the bars of iron. And I 
will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hid- 
den riches of secret places, that thou (Cyrus) 
mayest know that I, the LORD, which call thee 
by thy NAME (over a hundred years before he 
was born), am the GOD OF ISRAEL. For Jacob 
my servant’s sake, and Israel mine elect, I have 
even called thee (Cyrus) by thy name: I have 
SURNAMED THEE (given him his name), 
THOUGH THOU HAST NOT KNOWN ME.” 


The last sentence may mean that Cyrus was not a 
believer in God when he besieged the city of Babylon, 
and was not aware that he was chosen of God as His 
agent in the downfall of the city. From this Scripture 
we see that Cyrus was foreordained, over one hundred 
years before he was born, to do two things. First, to 
besiege and take Babylon, and secondly, to issue an 
Edict, two years later, when the term (70 years) of 
the Babylonian Captivity had expired (B. C. 536), for 
the return of the Jews to Jerusalem. 


THE REBUILDING OF BABYLON 


That the ancient city of Babylon restored is to play 
an important part in the startling events of the last 
days of this Dispensation is very clear. This is seen 
from what is said of it in the seventeenth and eight- 
eenth chapters of the Book of Revelation. At first 
sight the two chapters, which contain some things in 
common, are difficult to reconcile, but when we get the 
“Key” the reconciliation is easy. The seventeenth 
chapter speak of a “WOMAN,” called “MYSTERY, 
Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abom- 
inations of the Earth.” The eighteenth chapter speaks 
of a CITY, a literal city, called “Babylon the Great.” 
That the “WOMAN” and the “CITY” do not symbolize 
the same thing is clear, for what is said of the “Woman” 


94 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


does not apply to a city, and what is said of the 
“City” does not apply to a woman. The “WOMAN” 
is destroyed by the TEN KINGS, while the “Kings of 
the Earth” in the next chapter, “bewail and lament” 
the destruction of the “CITY,” which is not destroyed 
by them, but by a MIGHTY EARTHQUAKE AND 
FIRE. Again, the “WOMAN?” is destroyed THREE 
AND A HALF YEARS BEFORE THE CITY; and 
the fact that the first verse of chapter eighteen says— 
“After these things,” that is after the destruction of 
the “WOMAN” what happens to the “CITY” occurs, 
shows that the “WOMAN” and the “CITY” are not 
one and the same.* That the two chapters refer to 
different things is further verified by the fact that 
they are announced by different angels. The events 
of chapter seventeen are announced by one of the 
“Vial” Angels, while those of the eighteenth are an- 
nounced by “another” angel; probably the “Second 
Angel Messenger,” who by way of Anticipation, an- 
nounced in Rev. 14:8, the “Fall of Babylon,” that is 
there called—“That Great City.” 


If “Mystical Babylon” was destroyed in chapter sev- 
enteen, she cannot appear in chapter eighteen, there- 
fore the “CITY” described in chapter eighteen must be 
a literal city called BABYLON. As there is no city of 
that name on the earth today, nor has been since the 
ancient city of Babylon was destroyed, the reference 
must be to some future city of Babylon. The city of 
Babylon is so intimately connected with the history of 
the God’s People, the Jews, that the Scriptures have 
much to say about it. A large part of the book of 
Daniel has to do with it; and it is mentioned in twelve 
other books of the Old Testament, and in four of the 
New Testament. And that the Book of Revelation is 
a continuation of the Book of Daniel is proven by the 
fact that the city of Babylon is again spoken of in it, 
and its prominence in the affairs of the world at the 


*For a description of “Ecclesiastical Babylon” of chapter seven- 
teen, see the author’s book on Revelation, pages 149-153, 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 95 


“End Time” disclosed, and its final and complete de- 
struction foretold. 

That the ancient city of Babylon was destroyed 
there can be no question, but when we affirm that it is 
to be rebuilt and again destroyed we are met with two 
objections. 


1. That all the Old Testament prophecies in refer- 
ence to its destruction have been literally fulfilled, and 
that it cannot be rebuilt. 

2. As there is no city of Babylon now in existence, 
the references in the Book of Revelation to the de- 
struction of such a city must be symbolical and not 
refer to a literal city. 


Let us take up the first objection that all the prophe- 
cies in reference to its destruction have been literally 
fulfilled. For a description of Babylon and her destruc- 
tion we must turn to Isaiah, chapters 13 and 14, and 
Jeremiah 50 and 51. In these two prophecies we find 
much that has not AS YET been fulfilled in regard to 
the city of Babylon. This will appear as we proceed. 
But first we will review the history of Babylon from 
its capture by Cyrus, B. C. 538, until the present time. 
So quietly and quickly was the city captured by Cyrus 
that some of the inhabitants did not know until the 
third day that the King had been slain and the city 
taken. There was no destruction of the city at that 
time. Some years after it revolted against Darius 
Hystaspis, and after a fruitless siege of nearly twenty 
months was taken by strategy. This was in B. C. 516. 
About B. C. 478 Xerxes, on his return from Greece, 
plundered and injured, if he did not destroy, the great 
mBeniplesote Bele 


In B. C. 331 Alexander the Great approached the 
city, which was then so powerful and flourishing that 
he made preparation for bringing all his forces into 
action in case it should offer resistance, but the citi- 
zens threw open the gates and received him with accla- 
mations. After sacrificing to “Bel,” he gave out that 
he would rebuild the vast Temple of that god, and for 


96 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


weeks he kept 10,000 men employed in clearing away 
the ruins from the foundations, doubtless intending 
to revive the glory of Babylon and make it his Capital, 
when his purpose was defeated by his sudden death 
of marsh fever and intemperance in his thirty-third 
year. During the subsequent wars of his generals 
Babylon suffered much, and finally came under the 
power of Seleucus, who, prompted by ambition to 
build a Capital for himself, founded Seleucia in its 
neighborhood about B. C. 293. This rival city grad- 
ually drew off the inhabitants of Babylon, so that 
Strabo, who died in A. D. 25, speaks of the latter as 
being to a great extent deserted. Nevertheless the 
Jews left from the Captivity still resided there in large 
numbers, and in A. D. 60 we find the Apostle Peter 
working among them, for it was from Babylon that 
Peter wrote his First Epistle (1 Pet. 5:13), addressed 
to “The strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Gala- 
tia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bethynia.” 

About the middle of the fifth century Theodoret 
speaks of Babylon as being inhabited only by Jews, 
who had still three Jewish Universities, and in the last 
year of the same century the “Babylonian Talmud” 
was issued, and recognized as authoritative by the 
Jews of the whole world. 

In A. D. 917 Ibu Hankel mentions Babylon as an 
insignificant village, but still in existence. About A. D. 
1100 it seems to have again grown into a town of 
some importance, for it was then known as the “Two 
Mosques.” Shortly afterwards it was enlarged and 
fortified and received the name of Hillah. In A. D. 
1898 Hillah contained about 10,000 inhabitants, and 
was surrounded by fertile lands, and abundant date 
groves stretched along the banks of the Euphrates. 
Certainly it has never AS YET been true that— 
“neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there, neither 
shall the shepherds make their fold there.” Isa. 13: 20. 
Nor can it be said of Babylon—“‘Her cities are a deso- 
lation, a dry land, and a wilderness, a land wherein 
no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass 


THE FALL OF BABYLON OF 


thereby.” Jer. 51:43. Nor can it be said—“And they 
shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone 
for foundations, but thou shalt be desolate forever, 
Saithe thes Lorde jer. 0126), forsmany, towns and 
cities have been built from the ruins of Babylon, 
among them four Capital Cities: Seleucia, built by the 
Greeks; Ctesiphon, by the Parthians; Al Maiden, by 
the Persians; and Kufa, by the Caliphs. Hillah was 
entirely constructed from the debris, and even in the 
houses of Bagdad, Babylonian stamped bricks may be 
frequently noticed. 


_ But Isaiah is still more specific, for he locates the 
TIME when his prophecy will be fulfilled. He calls 
it the “DAY OF THE LORD.” Isa. 13:9. The “Day 
oi the Lord “takes in-the ~“Tribulation™ Period @and 
theme flenninmaes cer the chart eotmthe Prophetic 
Days of Scriptures. Isaiah says when Babylon shall 
be destroyed— 


“The stars of heaven and the constellations 
thereof shall not give their light; the sun shall be 
darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall 
not cause her light to shine.” Isa. 13: 10. 


None of these things happened when Babylon was 
taken by Cyrus in B. C. 538. Nor have they happened 
since. This darkening of the “Heavenly Bodies” 
locates the TIME of the destruction of Babylon as at 
the close of “The Great Tribulation,” as foretold by 
Christ in His “Olivet Discourse” (Matt. 24: 29-30), 
and at the pouring out of the “Seventh Vial” of the 
Book of Revelation. Rev. 16: 17-19. 

In the description of the destruction of the city of 
Babylon given in Rev. 18, we read that her judgment 
will come in ONE HOUR (verse 10), and that in ONE 
HOUR she shall be made desolate (verse 19), and as 
an illustration of the suddenness and completeness of 
her destruction, a mighty angel took up a stone like a 
“Great Millstone,” and cast it into the sea, saying— 
“Thus with VIOLENCE shall that great city Babylon 
be thrown down and shall be found no more at all.” 


. OF1NDIYADOD 
Vol 'V, 1H "ASVHOXOS 


HINYY] ZONIYVTID AG 
NMVUE ONY OaNdISSg 


ib) HO3SZ 
LaAINIO 


H1yvy 3H1ID NOMIVAONSY {4 
EE Nees 


9-1:02 ‘A3Y 
(Suv3i 0001 3HL) 


WINNS TIA SHY 


/ AHOUAHQ ; 


al ‘> 4. 


f 92-¥e:S1' 80) | 


War 


Ty N{ ORY VY 009 o NOMLVINGIL SHE : | 
s5y.6s31ONIHL o}\ ssaNsnoaLHd!y 40 AVG cn cs} | NOLWAIVS 30 AVE | | 
xitNea 14 2 eta cof 1 
; A Horny 30° / (ee 
m7 ALD 
wn s ais 
Zz Cc m0 
z s (A%) #12 SS3H1|2 an 
Fl i 02-61 .2 SLOW OF-62'7Z} 12:97 LIV Zp> 
a 4 9-S' WW 12-)eelPHO3Z afa| (nouv) ros] 
to) h-is2 7307 N 2h €:b YOO | mi | 
Zz Q ~| a y 2 ba 
8 Yo7 3n1 410 * WiiGgo WS ay at 
i = z\\2 
mH x4 2 
< = Li-si.4 SS3HLI © . 
= A wea Bly AHL NI eile 
z m BH HOUNHO AHL = 
is < ; DNILZIW & 
2 sl 1SIGHD x 
m as Bh onn styis x | 
oe S| Sue ODL OS yOd 2 a 
5 >| ING SYSAII IAG, 804 v 
FUNLdIHIS : 
+ 
40 4 


ara ee ee 


SAVQ OILSHAOUd = Kaas 
aHL 455 F 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 99 


Rev. 18:21. We are also told in the same chapter that 
she is to be destroyed by FIRE. Rev. 18:8, 9, 18. This 
is in exact harmony with the words of Isa. 13: 19-22. 


“And Babylon, the glory of Kingdoms, the 
beauty of the Chaldees excelleéncy, shall be as 
when God overthrew SODOM AND GOMOR- 
RAH.” 


The Prophet Jeremiah makes the same statement. 
Jer. 50:40. The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah 
did not extend through many centuries, their glory 
disappeared in a few hours (Gen. 19: 24-28); and as 
ancient Babylon was not thus destroyed, the prophe- 
cies of Isaiah and Jeremiah cannot be fulfilled unless 
there is to be a future Babylon that shall be thus 
destroyed. 

In Rev. 16: 17-19, we are told that Babylon shall be 
destroyed by an EARTHQUAKE, attended with most 
vivid and incessant lightning and awful thunder. It 
would appear then, that as Sodom and Gomorrah were 
first set on fire and then swallowed up by an earth- 
quake, that the rebuilt city of Babylon will be set on 
fire, and as the site of ancient Babylon is underlaid 
with Bitumen (Asphalt), that an earthquake will 
break up the crust of the earth, and precipitate the 
burning city into a “Lake of Fire,” and the city, like a 
MILLSTONE (Rev. 18:21) sink below the surface 
of the earth as into the sea, and be swallowed up so 
that it will be impossible to ever take of her stones for 
building purposes, and the land shall become a Wilder- 
ness where no man shall ever dwell. 

The Vision of the “Ephah,” seen by the Prophet 
Zechariah (Zech. 5: 5-11) is further confirmatory evi- 
dence that the ancient city of Babylon is to be rebuilt 
and become the COMMERCIAL CENTRE OF THE 
WORLD. The “Ephah” is the largest of Hebrew dry 
measures, and is often used as a symbol of Commerce. 
In the vision the “Ephah” is seen being carried by two 
women who had the wings of a stork, and flew with 
the swiftness of the wind, and the Prophet was told 


100 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


that they were transporting it to the “LAND OF 
SHINAR,” where a “House” would be built for it. 
Now the “Land of Shinar” is the place where the 
“Tower of Babel” was built (Gen. 11:1-9), and the 
site of Babylon. The inference is that the “HOUSE” 
that is to be built for the “Ephah” in the “Land of 
Shinar” will be the rebuilt city of Babylon, and that 
Babylon is to become the great “Commercial Centre” 
of the world. The fact that the occupant of the 
“Ephah” was a “Woman” called WICKEDNESS 
implies that the “Commercialism” of those days will 
be characterized by all manner of dishonest schemes 
and methods, which surely will be the business meth- 
ods of those who only can buy or sell who have the 
“MARK OF THE BEAST.” Rev. 13: 16-17. 

As to the probability of the ancient city of Babylon 
being rebuilt, we have only to consider the events 
that in recent years have been happening in that part 
of the world looking to just such a thing. China, 
Japan, and India have risen from their sleep and iso- 
lation and become world commercial nations. There 
must therefore be some transcontinental means of 
transportation between the East and the West of the 
Eastern Hemisphere, and the logical route is through 
Mesopotamia, with rebuilt Babylon as the “Commer- 
cial Centre.” In the “Department of War” of France, 
at Paris, there are to be seen the records of valuable 
surveys and maps made, by order of Napoleon I, in 
Babylonia, and among them is a plan for a New City 
of Babylon, thus showing that the vast schemes of 
Napoleon contemplated the Rebuilding of the Ancient 
City of Babylon, and the making it his Capital, as his 
ambition was to conquer the whole of Europe and 
Asia, and he recognized to that end the strategical 
position of ancient Babylon as a governmental and 
commercial centre. The same was the dream of the 
late Emperor William of Germany. It was that desire 
that made him and Abdul Hamid, of Turkey, the clos- 
est of political friends, and he secured from Abdul 
Hamid a concession to build a railroad from the 


‘ 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 101 


Asiatic side of the Bosphorus, by way of Aleppo, to 
the Tigris River, and from there to Bagdad, and from 
Bagdad via Babylon (via Babylon, mark that) to 
Koweit on the Persian Gulf, and most of the road has 
been built to Bagdad. And if the truth was known 
the Kaiser’s precipitation of the “World’s Great War” 
was largely due to his desire to carry out his plans 
for a “Trans-European-Asiatic-Indian Air Line” that 
would connect Europe with India, China, and Japan, 
and would have necessitated the building of a city on 
the site of ancient Babylon. But his and Napoleon’s 
plans were premature, and were brought to naught by 
God, until His time arrives for the rebuilding of 
Babylon. 

The whole country of Mesopotamia, including 
Assyria and Babylonia, only needs a system of irriga- 
tion, such as it once had, as revealed by the unearth- 
ing of numerous irrigation canals, to make it again 
the most fertile country in the world. As early as 
1850 the British Government sent out a military of- 
ficer, with his command, to survey and explore the 
river Euphrates at a cost of $150,000, and when the 
European war broke out the great English Engineer 
who built the “Assouan Dam” in Egypt was engaged 
in making surveys in the Euphratean valley for the 
purpose of constructing a series of irrigation canals 
that would restore the country and make it again the 
great grain-producing country it once was. With 
these facts in mind, it can readily be seen that it is 
the desire of European capitalists to revive the coun- 
try of Babylonia and rebuild its cities, and when the 
time comes in the purpose of God the city of Babylon 
will be rebuilt almost in a night, and on a scale of 
magnificence such as the world has never seen. 


But I hear a protest. How you say, can we be ex- 
pecting Jesus to come at “any moment,” if the city of 
Babylon must be rebuilt before He can come? We 
reply that Jesus’ “Second Coming” will be in “Two 
Stages.” At the “First Stage’ He will not come all 
the way to the earth but will stop in the “Air,” and 


102 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


all believers who have been “Born Again” will be 
caught up to Him. 1 Thess. 4: 13-18. They will then 
be judged for their “Works,” that they may receive a 
proper reward, at the “Judgment Seat of Christ.” 
Z2eCor..orelLU glu Corm sel iol 5. adiinisewiligtakessome 
time. Then the Church will be married to Christ, 
after which He will come WITH the saints (the 
Church) to “Judge the Nations” (Matt. 25: 31-46) and 
set up His Millennial Kingdom. This will be the 
“Second Stage” of His Coming, and will be visible. 
Between these “Two Stages” there will be a “Time 
Space” of at least SEVEN YEARS, the last “Week” 
of Daniel’s “Seventy Weeks.” (See chapter 9.) But 
there is not a word in Scripture that says He cannot 
come before the beginning of those “Seven Years.” 
He may come five, ten, or even twenty-five years be- 
fore, which would give ample time for the rebuilding 
of Babylon before the rise of the last Gentile Ruler, 
the ANTICHRIST. Some claim that Babylon will be 
rebuilt during the first three and a half years of the 
“Seven,” and Antichrist will make it his Capital dur- 
ing the last three and a half years. And when we 
consider how rapidly cities spring up in these days, 
or are rebuilt, as were Chicago and San Francisco, 
from the catastrophes that overtook them, it would 
take but a very few years to rebuild the city of Baby- 
(on when once the capitalists of the world decide to 
do it. 


BABYLON THE GREAT 


Let us take the description of “Babylon the 
GREAT” as given to us in Rev. 18: 1-24, and try to 
visualize it. It will be an immense city, the greatest 
in every respect the world has ever seen. It will bea 
typical city, the London, the Paris, the Berlin, the 
Petrograd, the New York, the Chicago of its day. It 
will be the greatest “Commercial City” of the world. 
Its merchandise will be of gold and silver, and pre- 
cious stones and pearls, of purple, and silk, and scarlet 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 103 


and costly wools. Its fashionable society will be 
clothed in the most costly raiment and decked with 
the most costly jewels. Their homes will be filled 
with the most costly furniture of precious woods, 
brass, iron and marble, with the richest of draperies, 
mats and rugs. They will use the most costly of per- 
fumes, cinnamon, fragrant odors, ointments and frank- 
incense. Their banquets will be supplied with the 
sweetest of wines, the richest of pastries, and the most 
delicious of meats. They will have horses, and chari- 
ots, and the swiftest of fast-moving vehicles on earth 
and in the air. They will have their slaves, and they 
will traffic in the “souls of men.” That is women will 
sell their bodies, and men their souls, to gratify their 
lusts. 

The markets will be crowded with cattle, sheep, 
and horses. The wharves will be piled with goods 
from all climes. The manufactories will turn out the 
richest of fabrics, and all that genius can invent for 
the comfort and convenience of men will be found on 
the market. It will be a city given over to pleasure 
and business. Business men and promoters will give 
their days and nights to scheming how to make money 
fast, and the pleasure-loving will be constantly plan- 
ning new pleasures. There will be riotous joy and 
ceaseless feasting. As it was in the days of Noah and 
of Lot, they will be marrying and giving in marriage, 
buying and selling, building and planting. The blood 
will run hot in their veins. Money will be their god, 
pleasure their high-priest, and unbridled passion the 
ritual of their worship. 

It will be a city of music. Amid the noise and 
bustle of its commercial life will be heard the music 
of its pleasure resorts and theatres. There will be the 
sound of “harpers and musicians, of pipers and trum- 
peters” (verse 22). The world’s best singers and play- 
ers will be there. Its theatres and places of music will 
be going day and night. In fact there will be no night, 
for the electric illumination of the city by night will 
make the night as bright and shadowless as the day. 


104 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


and its stores and places of business will never close, 
night or day, or Sunday, for the mad whirl of pleas- 
ure, and the absorbing desire for riches will keep the 
wheels of business constantly moving. And all this 
will be easy because the “God of this World” (Age)— 
SATAN, will possess the minds and bodies of men, 
for we read in verse 2, that Babylon at that time will 
be the “Habitation of Devils,” and the “Hold of Every 
Foul Spirit,’ and the “Cage of Every Unclean and 
Hateful Bird.” The city will be the seat of the most 
imposing “OCCULTISM,” and mediums, and those 
desiring to communicate with the other world, will 
then go to Babylon, as men and women now go to 
Paris for fashions and sensuous pleasures. In that day 
“demons,” and “unclean spirits” will find at Babylon 
the opportunity of their lives to materialize themselves 
in human bodies, and from the atmospheric heavens 
above, and from the Abyss below, they will come in 
countless legions until Babylon shall be full of demon- 
possessed men and women. And at the height of its 
glory, and just before its fall, Babylon will be ruled by 
SATAN HIMSELF, incarnate in the ‘“Beast”— 
ANTICHRIST. 


But before its destruction God will mercifully de- 
liver His own people, for a voice from Heaven will 
cry— 

“Come out of her, MY PEOPLE, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of 

her plagues.” Rev. 18:4. 


As Sodom and Gomorrah could not be destroyed 
until righteous Lot had escaped, so Babylon cannot 
be destroyed until all the righteous people in it have 
fled. 

The destruction of the city will be sudden and with- 
out warning. A fearful storm will sweep over the city. 
The lightning and thunder will be incessant. The 
city will be set on fire and a great earthquake will 
shake it from centre to circumference. The tall office 
buildings and apartment houses, the “Hanging Gar- 


ee 
—$<———— 


THE FALL OF BABYLON 105 


dens” and the great towers will totter and fall, the 
crust of the earth will crack and open, and the whole 
city with its inhabitants will sink like a MILLSTONE 
(verse 21) into a lake of burning bitumen, and the 
smoke will ascend as of a “burning fiery furnace,” 
and the horror of the scene will be intensified by vast 
clouds of steam, generated by the waters of the river 
Euphrates pouring into that lake of fiery asphalt, and 
when night comes on those clouds of steam will reflect 
the light of the burning city so it can be seen for miles 
in all directions in that level country. And the kings 
of tne vearth, and the merchants, and the shipmasters, 
and sailors, and all who have profited by her mer- 
chandise, will stand afar off and cry, and wail because 
of her destruction, but the heavens will rejoice, for 
God will have rewarded her “Double” according to her 
works, and Babylon will be NO MORE. 


CHAPTER SIX 
The Lions’ Den 


THE PRIMACY OF DANIEL 


“It pleased Darius to set over the Kingdom a 
hundred and twenty princes, which should be over 
the whole Kingdom: and over these three presi- 
dents of whom Daniel was first: that the princes 
might give accounts unto them, and the King 
should have no damage. Then this Daniel was 
preferred above the Presidents and Princes, be- 
cause an excellent spirit was in him; and the King 
thought to set him over the whole realm.” Verses 
1-3. 


This chapter introduces us to the “Second World 
Empire” of the “Times of the Gentiles,’ the “Medo- 
Persian Empire.” The “Head of Gold” had lasted for 
sixty-seven years, and now the “Arms and Breast of 
Silver” of the “Image” appear. As the Fall of Baby- 
lon occurred in B. C. 538, and Darius immediately took 
the throne, and died in B. C. 536, the event narrated 
in this chapter must have taken place inside those 
two years. Daniel was at this time nearly ninety 
years old. It is remarkable that for his age he was 
equal to such a task as Darius placed upon him. He 
made him not only one of the three Presidents, but 
their chief. What prompted Darius to do this we are 
not told. But he must in some way have become 
acquainted with Daniel’s integrity and superior states- 
manship. The Medo-Persian Empire was not an 
“Absolute Monarchy” such as had been the Babylon- 
ian. The Presidents and Princes composed a sort of 
congress or parliament that had a voice in the making 
of laws, which had to be ratified by the King, and once 
ratified the law was unalterable. 

It was not long before Darius found out the worth 
of Daniel, and preferred him above the Presidents and 


106 


THE LIONS’ DEN 107 


Princes, because of his “excellent spirit,” and the King 
thought to set him over the WHOLE REALM. When 
this became known, the other Presidents and Princes 
were filled with envy and fear. For they well knew 
that Daniel would not stand for any graft or dishon- 
esty in the administration of the affairs of the Empire, 
and they did not want to lose either their positions or 
their opportunity for gain, so they sought for some 
charge of malfeasance in office that they might make 
against the old Jew, but they found no occasion or 
fault. Then they hatched a hellish and 


A DIABOLICAL PLOT. 


“Then the Presidents and Princes sought to 
find occasion against Daniel concerning the King- 
dom; but they could find none occasion nor fault; 
forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there 
any error or fault found in him. Then said these 
men, We shall not find any occasion against this 
Daniel, except we find it against him concerning 
the LAW OF HIS GOD. Then these Presidents 
and Princes assembled together to the King, and 
said thus unto him, King Darius, live forever. All 
the Presidents of the Kingdom, the Governors, 
and the Princes, the Counsellors, and the Captains, 
have consulted together to establish a “Royal Stat- 
ute, and to make a firm Decree, that whosoever 
shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty 
days, SAVE OF THEE, O KING, he shall be 
cast into the ‘DEN OF LIONS.’ Now, O King, 
establish the Decree, and sign the Writing, that 
it be not changed, according to the Law of the 
Medes and Persians, which ALTERETH NOT. 
Wherefore King Darius signed the Writing and 
the Decree.” Verses 4-9. 


The plot reveals the cunning of the “Serpent.” They 
knew that Daniel was a deeply religious man, and 
that nothing would cause him to be disloyal to his 
God. They also knew that it would never do to let 


108 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Darius know that they were after Daniel, because of 
his fondness for the “Old Jew,” whom they considered 
as “superannuated” and in his “dotage.” If they had 
made sthe {Decrees reads that nowpetition sshouldmbe 
asked of the “God of the Hebrews,” the King would 
have divined that it was aimed at Daniel, and would 
have refused to sign it. So they made it general, and 
thus heaped insult on their own gods, for the sake of 
getting rid of the object of their hatred. They also 
knew that the King was not an absolute Monarch as 
was Nebuchadnezzar, that he was subject to the will 
of his Counsellors, and any unanimous suggestions or 
recommendations they should make he dare not ignore. 
They also knew that if their plan succeeded, and the 
King once signed and sealed such a “Decree” it could 
not be repealed by him, for under the Law of the 
Medes and Persians, the “Decree” would be irrev- 
ocable. 

Having decided on their course of action, with lying 
tongues they went into the presence of the King and 
told him that ALL the Presidents, the Governors, the 
Princes, the Counsellors, and the Captains had CON- 
SULTED TOGETHER to establish such a “Royal 
Decree.” But as Daniel, the “Chief” of the Presidents, 
had not been consulted, they lied. King Darius was 
doubtless flattered by their proposal, for in those days 
it was not uncommon to look upon their kings as gods, 
and for no one to pray to any other one than the King 
for thirty days was to exalt him to that position. So 
the King, not knowing that Daniel, whom he loved, 
had not been consulted, fell into the trap, and the 
“Decree” was prepared, signed by the King, stamped 
with the “Royal Seal,’ and publicly proclaimed ac- 
cording to the Law of the Medes and Persians, and 
therefore unalterable. 


A FEARLESS OFFICIAL 


Soon what had been done came to Daniel’s ears. 
What was he to do? He knew that the “Royal Decree” 
was aimed at him. To pray to his God was to break it. 


THE LIONS’ DEN 109 


He must choose between loyalty to his God or loy- 
alty to his King. Should he be faithless to his God, 
and thus save his life? That would be to deny all his 
past faithfulness. But was there no way to pray to his 
God in secret? Could he not enter into some secret 
chamber in his own home and lock the door, and stuff 
the keyhole, and close the shutters, and pray in- 
audibly, so his enemies would have no evidence against 
him? Most of us would be tempted to do that. But 
Daniel was not made of that kind of stuff. He was no 
coward. He did not value his life when it came to a 
question of loyalty to his God. What did he do? 


“Now when Daniel knew that the Writing was 
signed, he went to his own house; and, his win- 
dows being open in his chamber toward Jerusa- 
lem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, 
and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he 
did AFORETIME.” Verse 10. 


This was just what those conspirators expected Dan- 
iel to do. They knew that no “Decree,” even one that 
would endanger his life, would prevent him from pray- 
ing daily to his God. All they had to do then was to 
assemble on the Jerusalem side of his home at the 
hour of prayer, not only to see him in the attitude of 
prayer, but to hear his supplication. 


“Then these men assembled, and found Daniel 
praying and making supplication before his God.” 
Verse 11. 


Daniel’s enemies had not misjudged him, and they 
were delighted at the success of their scheme, and at 
once they brought the matter to the notice of the 
King. 


A HELPLESS KING 


“Then they came near, and spake before the 
King concerning the King’s ‘Decree;’ Hast thou 
not signed a ‘Decree,’ that every man that shall 
ask a petition of any God or man within thirty 


110 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


days, save of thee, O King, shall be cast into the 
‘Den of Lions?’ The King answered and said, 
The thing is true, according to the Law of the 
Medes and Persians, which altereth not. Then 
answered they and said before the King, That 
DANIEL, which is of the ‘Children of the Cap- 
tivity of Judah, REGARDETH NOT THEE, O 
King, nor the ‘Decree’ that thou hast signed, but 
maketh his petition three times a day. Then the 
King, when he heard these words, was sore dis- 
pleased with HIMSELF, and set his heart on 
Daniel to deliver him: and he labored till the go- 
ing down of the sun to deliver him. Then these 
men assembled unto the King, and said unto the 
King, Know, O King, that the Law of the Medes 
and Persians is, That no ‘Decree’ nor ‘Statute’ 
which the King establisheth may be changed.” 
Verses 12-15. 


Notice the contempt with which the conspirators 
speak of Daniel—“THAT DANIEL, which is of the 
‘Children of the Captivity of Judah.’” As much as to 
say, “That old Jew who is but a captive, and is de- 
pendent on you for his position, is so far from being 
grateful and appreciative of your favors, that he has 
disregarded your ‘Decree’ and thus shown his disre- 
spect of thee.” Instead of making the King angry 
with Daniel their charge had the opposite effect. 
When the King learned how he had been tricked, he 
was sore displeased with HIMSELF. He felt morti- 
fied that he had been trapped. He saw how his pride 
had overcome his insight and judgment, and he now 
knew that he ought to have been suspicious when they 
told him that ALL the Presidents had agreed in the 
matter, for a moment’s thought would have made it 
clear to him that Daniel would never have given his 
consent to such an idolatrous “Decree,” and the King 
well knew that anything that Daniel did not favor 
was questionable. The King soon discovered that he 
was in a helpless position. He loved Daniel, and de- 


THE LIONS’ DEN 111 


sired to save him, and though he “labored until the 
going down of the sun” he could devise no way of 
getting around the Law. At sundown the enemies of 
Daniel again assembled and demanded that Daniel 
pay the penalty of the Law. The King was powerless. 


THE LIONS’ DEN 


“Then the King commanded, and they brought 
Daniel, and cast him into the ‘Den of Lions.’ Now 
the King spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God 
whom thou servest continually, HE WILL DE- 
LIVER THEE. And a stone was brought, and 
laid upon the mouth of the “Den; and the King 
sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet 
of his Lords; that the purpose might not be 
changed concerning Daniel.” Verses 16-17. 


Thus Daniel, the aged and faithful servant, was 
cast, as if he had been one of the vilest malefactors, 
into the “Den of Lions” to be devoured of them. The 
God who had permitted the three faithful “Hebrew 
Children” to be cast into the “Burning Fiery Furnace” 
that He might work a Miracle for their deliverance, 
permitted His aged servant Daniel to be cast into the 
"Den of; Lions itoristhe same reason. The King had 
done his best to deliver Daniel and failed. Will Dan- 
iel’s God, who now appears on the scene, fail? 


A GREAT DELIVERANCE 


“Then the King went to his Palace, and passed 
the night fasting: neither were instruments of 
music brought before him: and his sleep went 
from him. Then the King arose very early in the 
morning, and went in haste unto the ‘Den of 
Lions. And when he came to the ‘Den,’ he cried 
with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: and the 
King spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant 
of the ‘Living God,’ is THY GOD, whom thou 
servest continually, ABLE to deliver thee from 


ile? THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


the lions? Then said Daniel unto the King, O 
King, live forever. MY GOD hath sent His Angel, 
and hath SHUT THE LIONS’ MOUTHS, that 
they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before Him 
innocency was found in me; and also before thee, 
O King, have I done no hurt. Then was the King 
exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they 
should take Daniel up out of the ‘Den.’ So Daniel 
was taken up out of the ‘Den,’ and no manner of 
hurt was found upon him, because he BELIEVED 
IN HIS GOD.” Verses 18-23. 


We see from the above that the King’s interest in 
Daniel, and his condemnation of himself, were genuine, 
otherwise he would not have spent a “sleepless night.” 
He was so impressed by Daniel’s faithfulness to his 
God in refusing to obey the “Decree” that he felt that 
somehow Daniel’s God would deliver him. With such 
a hope he hastened to the Lions’ Den” early in-the 
morning to find his hope justified. Then was the King 
“exceeding glad,’ and commanded that Daniel be 
taken up from the “Den,” and when he was examined 
no manner of hurt was found upon him. It was a 
repetition of the Miracle of the “Burning Fiery Fur- 
nace,” from which the three “Hebrew Children” were 
delivered without a hair singed. The writer to the 
Hebrews refers to it in the words— “stopped the 
mouths of lions.” Heb. 11:33. Thus was Daniel’s faith 
vindicated. 


There is a beautiful spiritual lesson in Daniel’s de- 
liverance. The “Den of Lions” prefigures the “Tomb 
of Joseph of Arimathea” in which our Lord was laid, 
and before which a stone was rolled, and sealed, and 
marked with the King’s signet. But as the lions could 
not harm Daniel, so Jesus, who went into the “jaws of 
Death,” could not be “holden of Death,” and was de- 
livered, like Daniel, by resurrection from his prison 
house. When Daniel was liberated from the “Lions’ 
Den,” he could not be thrown in again, he was free 
from that “Law,” for he had paid its penalty. So 


THE LIONS’ DEN 113 


when we accept Jesus as our personal Saviour we 
are free from the Law of “Sin and Death,” because 
Jesus our Saviour paid its penalty on the Cross, and 
His deliverance from the “Tomb” by resurrection 
shows that He had fulfilled His sentence of three days, 
and the “Tomb” could no longer hold Him, any more 
than the criminal who has served his term can any 
longer be kept behind prison bars. 


A JUST PUNISHMENT 


But Daniel’s deliverance did not satisfy the King. 
He felt that the conspirators who had thus selfishly 
and inhumanly imperiled Daniel’s life should have a 
dose of their own medicine, and see if their gods 
would deliver them from the Lions’ mouths. So— 


“The King commanded, and they brought those 
men which had accused Daniel, and they cast them 
into the ‘Den of Lions,’ them, their children, and 
their wives; and the lions had the mastery of 
them, and brake all their bones in pieces or ever 
they came at the bottom of the Den.” Verse 24. 


Here we see how the wicked involve their families 
in their wickedness and bring upon them sorrow and 
death. The argument that the “Lions” were not hun- 
gry, and therefore there was no miracle in the preser- 
vation of Daniel’s life, is disproved by the ravenous 
manner in which they seized and devoured those 
wicked men and their families. The King was con- 
verted by the interposition of Daniel’s God in his 
behalf, and issued a “Decree.” 


THE KING’S DECREE 


“Then King Darius wrote unto all people, na- 
tions, and languages, that dwell in all the earth: 
Peace be multiplied unto you. I make a ‘Decree,’ 
That in every dominion of my Kingdom men 
tremble and fear before the ‘God of Daniel: for 
He is the ‘Living God,’ and steadfast forever, and 
His Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, 


114 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


and his dominion shall be even unto the end. He 
delivereth and rescueth, and He worketh signs and 
wonders in Heaven and in earth. WHO hath de- 
livered Daniel from the POWER OF THE 
LIONS.” Verses 25-27. 


This “Decree” amounted almost, if not quite, to in- 
corporating the worship of Jehovah into the religion 
of the Empire. It°at least ~did™ one thing; it™ pro- 
claimed “Religious Toleration,” and permitted the 
Jewish captives to henceforth worship their God with- 
out molestation. Again, Daniel’s faithfulness to his 
God is rewarded by his promotion, and his life was 
spared not only through the reign of Darius, but into 
the reign of Cyrus the Persian. 


“So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, 
and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.” Verse 28. 


Thus Daniel was delivered from the Lions’ Den that 
he might be the “chief adviser” of the first two mon- 
archs, one representing the Median (Darius), and the 
other the Persian (Cyrus), of the “Dual Kingdom,” 
Medo-Persian, represented by the “Arms and Breast 
of Silver” of the “Image.” 


DEIFICATION OF MAN 


In the erection of the “Golden Image” on the “Plain 
of Dura” we saw that the characteristic feature of the 
First, or “Babylonian” Empire, was the “Deification 
of Man.” And here in this chapter, in the “Decree” 
that no one for thirty days should offer a petition to 
any God or man except King Darius, we see that the 
same characteristic feature, the “Deification of Man,” 
was present in the Second, or “Medo-Persian” Empire. 
So it was in the “Grecian” and “Roman” Empires, and 
so it will be until the end of the “Times of the Gen- 
tiles,’ the last great example of it being the last great 
Gentile Ruler, the “Beast,” or ANTICHRIST. Rev. 
13:4, 14-15. Daniel, like the three Hebrew Children, 
is a type of the Jewish Remnant. that. during the 
“Great Tribulation,” will be miraculously delivered. 


Second Division 


Prophetical 
Chapters 7 to 12 


= 


es 


§ 
_ 


—— 
“ae 


ry oe 


= 


a - 
aad 


THE 


RAPTURE 
VTHOSS 4:16:17 


2.THE THINGS WHICH ARE 
THE SEVEN CHURCHES 


CHAPS 2axod 


|LLHAST SEEN 


THE VISION 
CHAP) 9-20 


DANIEL avo REVELATION 
COMPARED 


Vere o |< s 
Fal = 
oO < Q 
ec |= ° 
ua =x < 
oe 4 


MYSTERY FORM OF THE KINDOM 
MATT.13:1-52 


ae 
JEW!SH DISPENSATION 


THe CHURCH 


MACCABEES 


Sows -JA0.70 


a 
° 
a 
° 
+ 
° 


EMBLEM 
| (Te BURNING Buss) 
: i THE HID TREASURE” 
MATT. 13:44 


tha, <THE NATIONS 
iqvHHE NATIONS 


VO ERIBES||THE 70 YEARS}: 
he ALD : 
cf Tt 


BASYLON 


6.1, 3921-10 F 


ALEXANDERS 


ME DO-PERSIAN 
EMPIRE 
GRECIAN 
FOUR DIVISIONS 
OF 


B.C[4¢5DANIEUS SIXTY NINE WELKS 


REAT nTERVAC 
WHaT ae HAPPEN BETWEE 
Cine GuuRck a Desrexen 
os” “i > Fe oat 


BABYLONIAN 
EMPIRE 
AM 


323 BC}30 ROMAN 
4 Divisions > 


P} 
ALEXANDERS F af 
OURTH Coe” | x 
KINGDOM | Witn Beast ¢ fey 
DAN 11:36-45 
2IWESS.2:9-12 : 
®J 


“THE KING OF, 
THE NORTH” 


HE THE THE . ue . 
REAT WHITE THRONE 

‘D CHURCH HARE SE REVELATION JUOGMENT 

THE LoRD Of THE LAMB 2.THESS 17-10 —— 

Tee REY. 19:7-9 ee ara Wich 


Book OF REVELATION 


3.THE THINGS WHICH SHALL BE HEREAFTER 


THE SEVEN TRUMPETS | SEVEN PERSONAGES |trcead THE SEVEN VIALS 
GHAP 8:7- 11:19) CHAP 1251-13218 [14-294 
‘ 


CHAP. 1551-16: 21 


5 
HY SEVEN DOOMS SEVEN NEW THINGS 
Bi cate iri-tons craps. 2-22 


NEW HEAVEN 
NEW EARTH 
New City 


THE 
THOUSAND 


YEARS 


a 
& 
wy 
Ea 
= 
u 
a 
o 
w 
= 
= 
o 
s 
iz 
< 
be) 


MARRIAGE er TeLAMB. 


HARVEST «ve VINTAGE 
MYSTERY- BABYLON 
BAGYLON tt GREAT 


x 
ns 
t 

< 
ry 
e 
t=) 
a 
> 
iS 
es 
uw 
re 
G3) 


GEAST OUT OF SEA 
* SATAN LOOSED 


RENOVATION OF EARTH 


GH) SILENCE 


NeW HEAVEN 


7 SATANIC 
"THe DRAGON", TRINITY, oe og 
Antigo" ¢ “THE\GREAT TRI 


~ ISRAEL 


Ye UNCLE EAN : 
SPIRITS. 


EUPHRATES ORC OMS 
: 2 


Qe, 
o.- 
73: 
o. 


BUILATION” 


HAIL-FIRE Blog! 
BURNING MOUNT. 
it] 


WoRMWOOO 
HORSEMIN 


"1SUN SMITTEN 
Locusts 
VOICES HAIL 


\SRAEL 


DNCTHES: 


RENOVATION 
OF THe EARTH 
BY FIRE 
2 Pct 310-13 


FOF THE WEE oS: 


= EP 3 eines 2a - = = BoTTOMLess Pit 


TOES OF THE IMAGE (REPRESENTING THE TEN FEDERATED KINGOOMS) EXTEND OVER THE TRIBULATION 


BOOK OF DANIEL hal 


OF CHRIST 


DANIELS SEALED BOOK 


g 


VISION DAN i2:4 

ee THE Book THAT DANIEL WAS TOLD To"SEAL Ue WAS DESCRIPTIVE = 

ME Or THE TIME OF TROVBLE, OR TRIBULATION PERIOD, ANO THUS RUNS PAR- DESIGNED AND DRAWN 
ALLEL WITH THE SEV EALED BOOK HE BOOK OF REVELATION. BY CLARENCE LARKIN 


FOXCHASE PHILA, PA 


Viale 
CopyRIGHTED [ii 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


The Four Wild Beasts 


THE TIME OF THE VISIONS 


“In the first year of Belshazzar King of Baby- 
lon, Daniel had a ‘Dream’ and ‘Visions’ of his head 
upon his bed: then he wrote the ‘Dream,’ and told 
the sum of the matters.” Verse l. 


This chapter, chronologically, should precede chap- 
ters five and six, but chronological order has been dis- 
regarded so as to keep the “Historical” part of the 
Book separate from the “Prophetical.’”’ We now en- 
ter upon the second, or “Prophetical,” part of the 
pol aires poner, ¢ ecm sen an eer take us back 
to the first year of Belshazzar’s reign, the date of 


‘which is uncertain.| In all probability he was not 
associated with his father as King of Babylon over 
three years, and as he was slain in Bee 538, the first 
year of his reign would have been the year B. C. 541, 
at which time Daniel would have been about eighty- 
five years old. The date then of the Visions of this 
chapter must have been sixty-two years after Nebu- 
chadnezzar had his “Dream” of the “Golden Headed 
Image.’ During the “Years of Silence,” from the death_ 
of Nebuchadnezzar (B. C. 561), to the “Fall of Baby- 
log ROC Pa a Wemanra era aiiras jeene, IDEAS 
iel appears to have lived a retired life. How blessed 
must have been those years of rest and communion 
with God. They were largely spent in the study of 
the writings of Moses, and such of the Psalms and 
Prophets as were then in existence. This is clear from 
his reference to the “books” in Dan. 9:2. It was dur- 
ing those quiet years, while Daniel was seeking more 
light from the Scriptures as to the “Times of the 
Gentiles,” and their relation to his own people, the 
Jews, that he had this “Vision” of the “Four Wild 
Beasts.” It is a noteworthy fact that the Apocalyptic 


by 


118 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


writers of the Old and New Testaments, Daniel and 
John, were old men when they received their “Revela- 
tions” from God. They were also both “greatly be- 
loved” of the Lord, and it was because of their faith- 
fulness that they received these “Revelations.” 

This chapter records “Three Visions” that Daniel 
had. 


1. The Vision of the “Four Wild Beasts.” 
2. Phe Visionsora a) udeinent scene. 


3. The Vision of the “Son of Man Receiving the 
Kingdom.” 


The fact that these “Visions” are interwoven implies 
that they were all three seen on the same occasion. 


THE FIRST VISION 
THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 


“Daniel spake and said, I saw in my ‘Vision’ by 
night, and, behold, the ‘Four Winds’ of the heaven 
strove upon the ‘Great Sea.” And FOUR GREAT 
BEASTS came up from the sea, diverse one from 
anotienemsV erses i2-o! 


The scene of this “Vision’’ was on the shore of the 
“Great Sea.” This is an important statement. For in 
the Old Testament the term “Great Sea” stands for 
the Mediterranean Sea. and this locates the geographi- 


~cal position of the Nations symbolized by the “Four 


Wild Beasts.” For while the “Babylonian” and ““Medo- | 


Persian” Empires were not Tocated on the Mediterra-_ 


the “Grecian” 


‘nean Sea, as wer 


quered.. And as more and more of this coast land was 
absorbed as the “Grecian” and “Roman” Empires came 
into existence, the “Prophetic Earth,” including “Pal- 
estine” as a centre, became the boundary of the Medi- 
terranean Sea. and the “Great Sea” became little more 
than a “Roman Lake” within the Roman Empire. 


and “Roman” Empires, | 
they were greatly indebted for their wealth and power 
to their Mec fediterranean coast land which they had con- 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 119 


In the “raging waves” we have a symbol of the 
unrest and tumult of the nations, for the “sea” in the 
Scriptures is a type of the nations. “The waters which 
thou sawest ... are peoples, and multitudes, and na- 
tions, and tongues.” Rev. 17:15. “Woe to the multi- 
tude of many people, which make a noise like the 
NOISE OF THE SEAS, and to the rushing of na- 
tions, that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty 
WATERS.” Isa. 17:12-13. But the sea is never 
thrown into a commotion of itself. Its disturbance is 
caused by some outside force, as a hurricane or an 
earthquake. So the nations are never thrown into dis- 
cord only from without. These outside influences are 
spoken of in the “Vision” as the “Four Winds of 
Heaven,” The number four points out the direction of 
the winds as coming from the four points of the Com-. 


—_--— —————" 


pass, and denotes their_ur universality. These “Winds” 
represent the “POWERS OF THE AIR,” the forces 
of the “Evil One,” of whom the Apostle says— 


“We wrestle not against flesh and blood (that 
is, human beings), but against ‘PRINCIPALI- 
TIKES,’ against ‘POWERS, against the ‘RULERS 
OF THE DARKNESS OF THIS WORLD,’ 
against ‘SPIRITUAL WICKEDNESS’ in HIGH 
(the heavenly) PLACES.” Eph. 6: 12. 


We are to understand then by the “Four Winds of 
Heaven,” the “Evil Powers” of the air that Satan uses 
to cause unrest among the nations of the earth. And 
as the closing days of this Dispensation draw near, 
and Palestine is repeopled by the Jews, the nations 
that centre around it will be more and more thrown 
into commotion, as Satan in his last great effort to 
checkmate the plans of God will bring into play all 
the “Evil Forces” of the air. 

We_are now ready to study the meaning of the 

“Four Beasts” that Daniel saw in his “Vision.” As 
“we proceed we shall find that they correspond with _ 
the “Four Metals” of the “Image” that Nebuchadnez- 
zar saw in his “Dream.” Why, you ask, should there | 


120 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


be a repetition of the same revelation? The answer 
is, that men and God see the nations from a different 
standpoint. Man sees in them the concentration of 
wealth, majesty, and power, as seen in the “Golden 
Headed Image.” God sees them as a set of RAPA- 
CIOUS WILD BEASTS DEVOURING ONE AN- 
OTHER. He sees them as bestial in character, and 
as maintaining their supremacy by brute force. The 
Lion devours, the Bear crushes, the Leopard springs 
upon its victim and sucks its blood, and the character 
of the “Fourth Wild Beast” is such that there is no 
beast in nature to which it can be compared. Uncon- 
sciously the nations affirm their beastly character by 
their national emblems, as the British Lion, the Rus- 
sian Bear, the American Eagle, the Chinese Dragon, 
the Persian Ram, the Macedonian Goat, etc. 

Then this Vision of the “Wild Beasts” was given to 
Daniel that he might have additional hight on the 
“Times of the Gentiles.” Light that God was not 
willing to give to a heathen king like Nebuchadnezzar, 
nor even ready at that time to give to his servant 
Daniel. 


THE FIRST BEAST 


“The first was like a LION, and had eagle’s 
‘wings: I beheld till the wings thereof were 
plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth, and 
made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man’s 
heart was given to it.” Verse 4. 


The “First Beast” that Daniel saw emerge from the 
seething foam of the “Great Sea” was like a LION, 
with this difference, it had wings like those of an 
Eagle. Its appearance would recall to Daniel the co- 
lossal figures of lions, with the wings of an eagle, and 
the face of a man, that adorned the palaces of Nineveh 
and Babylon, and would suggest to him that the “First 
Beast” was a symbol of the Babylonian Empire, and 
its first king, Nebuchadnezzar, and that it corre- 
sponded to the “Head of Gold” of the “Image.” In 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 121 


this “Eagle Winged Lion” we see a combination of 
the “King of Beasts” and the “King of Birds,” typical 
of the “Absolute Monarchy” of Nebuchadnezzar, and 
his conquering flight over the nations. But as Daniel 
gazed upon the “Beast” its wings were plucked. That 
is, Nebuchadnezzar satisfied with his conquests gave 
himself up to building palaces, and to the pursuits of 
peace; and from that time the glory of the Empire 
began to wane. Then Daniel saw it lifted up and 
caused to walk on two feet, instead of four, like a 
man, and a man’s heart was given it, but otherwise it 
was still a beast. That is, it no longer resorted to the 
- use of its teeth and claws to overcome its enemies, but 
to its intellect. The plucking of the wings may also 
refer to the insanity of Nebuchadnezzar, and the 
standing on two feet like a man, and the receiving of a 
man’s heart, to his recovery from his beastly state, and 
his humane conduct thereafter. 


THE SECOND BEAST 


“And behold another beast, a second, like a 
BEAR, and it raised up itself on one side, and it 
had three ribs in the mouth of it between the teeth 
of it; and they (the heavenly Watchers, verse 16) 
said thus unto it—ARISE, DEVOUR MUCH 
FLESH.” Verse 5. 


The “Second Beast” was like a BEAR. The Bear is 
the strongest beast after the Lion, and is distinguished 
for its voracity, but it has none of the agility and ‘maj- 
esty of the Lion, is awkward in its movements, and 
effects its purpose with comparative slowness, and by 
brute force and sheer strength. These were character- 
istics of the Medo-Persian Empire. It was ponderous 
in its movements, and gained its victories by hurling 
vast masses of troops upon its enemies. Xerxes’ expe- 
dition against Greece was undertaken with 2,500,000 
fighting men. It is easy to be seen that the movements 
of such enormous bodies of men would “devour much 
flesh.” Not merely in the shape of food, but by death 


122 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


by exposure and disease, and in battle. The side of the 
‘Bear’ which raised up, preparatory to attack, repre- 
sented Persia, which of the Dual Empire was the 
stronger and the most aggressive. It corresponded to 
the “right shoulder and arm” of the “Image.” The 
“Three Ribs” stood for the three Kingdoms of Lydia, 
Babylon, and Egypt, that formed a “Triple Alliance” 
to check the Medo-Persian power, but were destroyed 
by it. As the ~“Bear’” is*an\ inferior ‘animal itosthe 
“Lion,” we see that the Medo-Persian Empire was 
inferior to the Babylonian. Not however in power, but 
in wealth and magnificence, and in its form of govern- 
ment. Thus the “Four Wild Beasts” correspond with 
the “Metals” of the “Image,” in that each succeeding 
“Beast” is inferior to the one that preceded it. 


THE THIRD BEAST 


“After this I beheld, and lo another (Beast), 
like a LEOPARD, which had upon the back of it 
four wings of a FOWL; the breast had also four 
heads; and dominion was given to it.” Verse 6. 


The “Third Beast” was like a LEOPARD, with this 
difference] thatsit) bade — our sLleads» and') Four 
Wings.” The Leopard is the most agile and graceful 
of wild beasts. Slight in its frame, but strong, swift, 
and fierce, its characteristics render it a fitting symbol 
of the rapid conquests of the Greeks under Alexander 
the Great, who, followed by small but well-equipped 
and splendidly brave armies, moved with great celer- 
ity and in about ten years overthrew the unwieldy 
forces of Persia, and subdued the whoie civilized 
world. While the “Four Wings of a Fowl” would add 
to the rapidity of its progress, they were only the 
wings of a “fowl,” and not those of an “Eagle,” indi- 
cating that its progress, though swift, would not be as 
royally victorious as the armies of Nebuchadnezzar. 
Why only four wings, when “Four Heads” call for 
eight wings, we do not know, unless the “Four Wings” 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 123 


were intended to devote the “four quarters” of the 
earth into which Alexander sought to extend his Em- 
pire. The “Four Heads” represent the “Four King- 
doms” into which the Empire of Alexander was 
divided, namely, Thrace, Macedonia, Syria, and Egypt. 
While Daniel, following out the correspondence be- 
tween the “Beasts” and the “Image,” would see that 
the “Leopard” corresponded to the Abdomen and 
Thigh Parts” (Hips) of the “Image,” he must have 
been confused by the “Four Heads” of the Leopard, 
for there was no “Fourfold Division” of the lower 
part of the “Brass” of the Image, indicating that the 
“Grecian Empire” was to be divided into four parts. 
Thus we read that the “Visions of his Head” troubled 
him (verse 15), and his countenance was changed by 
his “cogitations.” Verse 28. Daniel had to wait two 
years longer, until his Vision of the “Ram and the He- 
Goat,” for a solution of his difficulty. See the exposi- 
tion of chapter eight. 


THE FOURTH BEAST 


“After this I saw in the ‘Night Visions,’ and be- 
hold a FOURTH BEAST, dreadful and terrible, 
and strong exceedingly; and it had great IRON 
TEETH; it devoured and brake in pieces, and 
stamped the residue (the three previous Beasts) 
with the feet of it: and it was DIVERSE from 
all the Beasts that were before it; and it had TEN 
HORNS. I considered the ‘Horns,’ and, behold, 
thetemcaticoui Dmalonuominem sanotiers Lb b 
HORN,’ before whom there were three of the 
‘First Horns’ plucked up by the roots: and, be- 
hold, in this ‘HORN’ (the Little Horn, Anti- 
christ) were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a 
mouth speaking great things.” Verses 7-8. 


The words, “After this,” do not imply that the Vision 
of the “Fourth Wild Beast” was separate as to time 
from the Vision of the three preceding Beasts, for the 


124 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Vision of the “Third Beast” begins with the same 
words. The fact is, as stated in verse 4, that Daniel 
saw the “Four Beasts” emerge from the “Sea,” not_all 
at_once, but one after the other, and that their sepa-_ 
rate appearances constituted but one Vision. This 
“view seems correct. Otherwise the correspondence 
between the “Four Wild Beasts,” and the “Four 
Metals” of the “Image” would not harmonize, for 
Nebuchadnezzar did not have two separate Visions of 
these lmages i seeingvonly thalt ofit, thes Golds ssi 
ver,’ and “Brass” in one Vision, and the other half, 
the “Iron,” in another, and later Vision. 

The “Fourth Beast” was like no other beast that 
had ever been seen on the earth. It was hideous to 
behold, and had, what no natural beast has, teeth of 
iron, and nails of brass. Verse 19. The fact that the 
“Fourth Beast’ had IRON TEETH and TEN 
HORNS would cause Daniel to see that the “Iron 
Teeth” corresponded to the “Iron Legs” of the 
“Image,” and the “Ten Horns” to the “Ten Toes,” and 
therefore the “Fourth Beast” represented the ROMAN 
EMPIRE. But what mystified Daniel was the “LIT- 
TLE HORN” that sprang up amid the “Ten Horns,” 


for he had not seen a “LITTLE TOE” spring up 

_among the “Ten Toes” of the “Image.” Daniel at once 
saw that the “LITTLE HORN,” with its “eyes of a 
man” and its “mouth speaking great things,’ meant 
some new and additional revelation that God did not 
see fit to reveal on the “Image” to Nebuchadnezzar, 
and that was reserved for Daniel and his people, for 
we must not forget that Daniel’s own “Visions” in the 
last six chapters of the Book have to do with God’s 
dealings with the “Jewish People” in the “LATTER 
DAYS.” It is well then to remember that Daniel’s 
“Fourth Wild Beast” is descriptive of the Roman Em- 
pire in both its “First” and “Last”? Stages. Before 
Daniel could ask for an explanation of the “Little 
Horn” he had another Vision. 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 125 


THE SECOND VISION 


A JUDGMENT SCENE 


“T beheld till the ‘Thrones’ were cast down, 
and the ‘ANCIENT OF DAYS’ did sit, whose 
garment was white as snow, and the hair of His 
head like the pure wool: His Throne was like the 
fiery flame, and His wheels as burning fire. A 
fiery stream issued and came forth from before 
Him: thousand thousands ministered unto Him, 
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before 
Him: the Judgment was set, and the books were 
opened. I beheld then, because of the voice of the 
great words which the ‘HORN’ (Little Horn) 
spake: I beheld even till the ‘BEAST?’ (the Fourth 
Wild Beast) was slain, and his body destroyed, 
and given to the burning flame. As concerning 
the rest of the ‘Beasts,’ they had their dominion 
taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for a 
season and time.” Verses 9-12. 


The introduction here of a “Judgment Scene,” and 
a Vision of Christ “Receiving the Kingdom,” was for 
the purpose of revealing to Daniel the Judgment that 
shall fall on the “Gentile Nations,” and the manner in 
which Christ shall receive the Kingdom. This was 
information not imparted in Nebuchadnezzar’s “Dream 
Vision” of the “Golden Headed Image,” and helped 
Daniel to fill out God’s Program as to the Gentile 
Nations. Thus step by step Daniel was receiving 
light as to the things that should come to pass in the 
“Latter Times,” or the “TIME OF THE END.” Not 
the “end of time,” but the end of this present Dis- 
pensation. 

This “Judgment Scene” is not the “Great White 
Throne Judgment” of Rev. 20: 11-15, that takes place 
at the close of the Millennium. Neither is it the “Judg- 
ment Seat of Christ” that is pictured. 2 Cor. 5:10, 
1 Cor, 3: 11-15. That Judgment takes place before the 
Millennium, and soon after the Church has been 


126 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


“caught out.” This “Judgment Scene” is that of the 
“Gentile Nations” as represented by the “Four Wild 
Beasts,” for as the outcome of the “Judgment” Daniel 
saw the “BEAST,” the “Fourth Wild Beast,” the Ro- 
man Empire (not the “Little Horn,” it is not called a 
“Beast” in Daniel), slain and its body destroyed and 
given to the burning flame. This is figurative lan- 
guage describing the destruction of the Roman Em- 
pire. The “Little Horn,” called by John “THE 
BEAST” (Rev. 13: 1-8), is not slain, as is the “Beast” 
of Daniel, but is cast ALIVE into the “Lake of Fire.” 
Rev. 19:20. While the “Fourth Wild Beast,” the 
Roman Empire, will be destroyed as the result of this 
Judgment, the other “Beasts,” the “Lion,” the “Bear,” 
and the “Leopard,” representing respectively the 
Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, and the Grecian Em- 
pires, simply have their dominion taken away, but 
their lives are prolonged for a season and a time. It is 
worthy of note right here, that the Persian and Gre- 
cian Kingdoms have been revived. Why not the Baby- 
lonian when Babylon is rebuilt? 

It is well to recall that there is a “Dispensation of 
Judgment” between the Present Dispensation, and the 
Millennium, during which there shall be three Judg- 
ments. (1) The “Judgment of Believers for their 
Works” at the “Judgment Seat‘ot C@hrist™ °2°Cor: 
5:10. (2) The “Judgment of the Jews” during “The 
Great Tribulation.” The Jews are an earthly people, 
and as all promises to them are earthly, it follows 
that their Judgment must be of an earthly char- 
acter, and it is called by Jeremiah and Daniel as the 
time of “JACOB’S TROUBLE.” Jer. 30:4-7. Dan. 
12:1. Christ calls it “THE GREAT TRIBULA- 
TION.” Matt. 24: 21-31. The result of this Judgment 
will be the conversion of the Jews. (3) The “Judg- 
ment of Nations.” Matt. 25:31-46. This is a Judg- 
ment of the Nations after Christ’s return to the earth. 
It will take place in the “Valley of Jehoshaphat” (Joel 
3: 1-2), and its purpose will be to senarate the “Sheep” 
and “Goat” Nations, so that the “Sheep” Nations may 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS VZ7, 


enter into the “Kingdom prepared for them from the 
Foundation of the World,” which is the Millennium, 
or “Stone Kingdom” of Christ. The “Goat” Nations, 
as nations, will be destroyed.* From this we see that 
the “Judgment Scene” that Daniel saw in his “Second 
Vision” is a general description covering the whole 
“Dispensation of Judgment” period. 

The statement—‘“I beheld till the THRONES 
WERE CAST DOWN?” (verse 9) may refer to the 
“Thrones” of the “Ten Kings” that shall be reigning 
with the “Little Horn” at the time of this Judgment. 
Or they may refer, as the writer thinks more probable, 
to the “Thrones” of the “EVIL POWERS OF THE 
AIR.” For we know that at the time of this Judg- 
ment, the “DRAGON” (Satan), with all the “Princi- 
palities” of the Air, will be cast out of the Heavenlies, 
and thus their “Thrones” will be cast down. Eph. 
6:12. Rev. 12:7-9. The writer is aware that the 
words “cast down” are changed in the Revised Ver- 
sion to the word “placed,” but the marginal, or alter- 
nate reading, is “cast down.” 

-Who_is_it_that_sits_upon_this “Throne of Judg-_ 
ment?” He is called the “ANCIENT OF DAYS.” 
Who is the “ANCIENT OF DAYS?” He -can-be_no 
other than the “SON OF MAN,” “For the FATHER 
judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment 
unto the SON.” John 5:22. Then the description of 
Him corresponds to that of the “Son of Man” in Rev. 
1: 12-15, “whose Head and Hairs were white like wool, 
as white as snow: and His Eyes were as a flame of 
fire; and His Feet like unto fine brass, as if they 
burned in a furnace; and His Voice as the sound of 
many waters.” The picture of the “Son of Man” in 
Revelation, chapter one, is that of Christ as JUDGE, 
not as High Priest. At that time Christ will have com- 
pleted His High Priestly Office, and assumed the 
Office of “JUDGE,” preparatory to His entering upon 
His “Kingly” duties when the Millennial Kingdom is 


~ *See the Chart of the Judgments in the Author’s book on 
“Rightly Dividing the Word.” 


128 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


set up. This is seen in that He is not girdled around 
the waist like a Priest, but wears a sash over His 
shoulder and breast like a Judge, and His hair of 
“White Wool” corresponds to the “Snow White Wig” 
worn by English Judges. 


THIRD VISION 


THE SON OF MAN RECEIVING 
THE KINGDOM 


“T saw in the night visions, behold, one like the 
‘SON OF MAN’ came with the clouds of heaven, 
and came to the ‘ANCIENT OF DAYS,’ and they 
brought him near before Him. And there was 
given him dominion, and glory, and a KINGDOM, 
that all peoples, nations, and languages should 
serve him: his Dominion is an EVERLASTING 
DOMINION, which shall not pass away, and his 
KINGDOM that which shall not be destroyed.” 
Verses 13-14. 


We are met here with an apparent contradiction in 
titles. We learned in the preceding “Vision” that the 
“Son of Man” was the “ANCIENT OF DAYS,” here 
we are told that the FATHER is. How can we recon- 
cile these statements? There is but one way, and that 
is that the “Title” is used interchangeably. Jesus 
said—“I and my Father are ONE.” John 10:30. And 
Paul says—“And without controversy great is the 
‘Mystery of Godliness:?’ God was MANIFEST IN 
THE FLESH.” 1 Tim. 3:16. And John tells us— 
“In the beginning was the WORD (Christ), and the 
WORD was with God, and the WORD WAS GOD.” 
John 1:1. Thus we see, that. without trying to ex- 
plain the Mystery of the Trinity, God and the Son of 
Man are one and the same, and therefore their “Titles” 
can be used interchangeably. Now we know from 
other Scripture that Christ is to receive the Kingdom 
from the FATHER. Hence in this “Vision,” the 
“Ancient of Days” must represent GOD THE 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 129 


FATHER. When Pilate asked Jesus—‘Art Thou the 
KING of the Jews?” He evaded the question by say- 
inge—“My Kingdom is not of this world.” That is, it 
would be given to Him by God the Father, and there- 
fore would be from Heaven. John 18: 33-37. In Luke 
19: 11-12 we read— 


“Because He was nigh to Jerusalem, and be- 
cause they thought that the ‘Kingdom of God’ 
should IMMEDIATELY appear; He spake this 
Parable. A certain nobleman went into a far 
country to receive for himself a KINGDOM, and 
to return.” 


From this we see that Jesus is the “Certain Noble- 
man” who has gone into a “Far Country” (Heaven) 
to receive THE KINGDOM, and that, when He has 
received it, He will return. That He has not as yet 
received it is evidenced by the fact that He has not 
as yet returned. The time for receiving the Kingdom, 
as shown by this Vision, is still future, and is given 
by John in Rev. 11:15. 


“And the Seventh Angel sounded; and there 
were great voices in Heaven, saying, The King- 
doms of THIS WORLD are become the KING- 
DOMS OF OUR LORD, AND OF HIS 
CHRIST; and He shall reign FOREVER AND 
EVER.” 


This passage locates the time when Christ shall re- 
ceive the Kingdom as being when the “Seventh Trum- 
pet” shall sound, which locates it as near the Middle 
Oi Wdnicl se oeventictimevVcek, su lhtss Daniel and 
Revelation are in agreement. 


THE PERPLEXITY OF DANIEL 
The effect of these “Three Visions” on Daniel was a 
troubled spirit. 


“T Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst 
of my body, and the ‘Visions’ of my head troubled 
me.” Verse 15. 


130 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Daniel knew from the “Dream Vision” of Nebu- 
chadnezzar of the “Golden Headed Image” that there 
were to be “Four Great World-wide Empires” to suc- 
ceed each other before the “Times of the Gentiles” 
would end. He also knew that the first one, the Baby- 
lonian, was still in existence, with no signs at that 
time of a speedy ending, and if the three Empires to 
follow should each last as long, the end of the “Times 
of the Gentiles” was a long way off; which meant 
that the setting up of the “Stone” or “Messianic King- 
dom” was that far away. But what troubled him the 
most was the character of the “Four Wild Beasts,” 
and the meaning of the “Little Horn.” So he says— 


“T came near unto one of them that stood by, 
and asked him the truth of all this. So he told me, 
and made me know the interpretation of the 
things.” Verse 16. 


The “Bystander” that Daniel approached was no 
human being, for Daniel was still in the “Vision 
State,’ and no human being could have revealed to 
him the meaning of the Visions. It was some celestial 
messenger, like those sent to him later, who was wait- 
ing to interpret the Visions. 


THE INTERPRETATION OF THE VISIONS 


“These great Beasts, which are four, are four 
Kings (or Kingdoms), which shall arise out of the 
earth. But the ‘Saints of the Most High’ shall take 
the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom forever, 
even forever and ever.” Verses 17-18. 


The “Heavenly Bystander” informed Daniel that the 
“Hour Wald#@:Beastsy wepresentcdmePograikings: = or 
Kingdoms, which should rise in the earth, thus identi- 
fying them with the Four Kingdoms represented by 
the Metals of the “Image,” and that their power would 
be wrested from them by the “Saints of the Most 
High,” whose Kingdom should last forever. Who are 
these “Saints of the Most High?” They are not the 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 131 


“Saints of the Church,” for the “Saints of the Church” 
are “caught out” before the “Little Horn” makes 
“War with the Saints.” Verse 21. And as the loca- 
tion of that “War” is on the earth, and the time is 
during the reign of the “Little Horn,” and is distinctly 
given as three and one-half years (verse 25), the 
“Saints of the Most High” must be Daniel’s people 
the Jews. For the “Most High” is the “Son of Man,” 
the Messiah of the Jews, and they therefore are His 
Saints of the “End Time,” who shall with Him take 
the Kingdom. Verse 22. This is further confirmed in 
verse 27, where it says— 


“And the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the 
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven, 
shall be given to the People of the ‘Saints of the 
Most High,’ Whose (the Most High) Kingdom is 
an ‘Everlasting Kingdom,’ and all ‘Dominions’ 
shall serve and obey Him.” 


Now the “People” of the “Saints of the Most High” 
are the Jews, for they are to be the “Head” of the Na- 
tions during the Millennium (Deu. 28:13), and the 
“Saints of the Most High” are the “God-fearing Jews” 
that shall escape destruction by the “Little Horn” 
during the “Great Tribulation.” 

The reply of the “Heavenly Bystander” was not full 
enough for Daniel. It did not explain the meaning 
of the “Fourth Wild Beast,” and of the “Little Horn” 
who was to make war on the “Saints of the Most 
High,” Daniel’s people. It was the conduct of the 
“Little Horn” that perplexed and troubled him. 


“Then I would know the truth of the ‘Fourth 
Beast,’ which was diverse from all the others, ex- 
ceeding dreadful, whose teeth were of IRON, ana 
his nails of BRASS; which devoured, brake in 
pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet; 
and of the TEN HORNS that were in his head, 
and of the other (Horn) which came up, and be- 
fore whom three fell; even of that ‘HORN’ that 
had EYES, and a MOUTH that spake very great 


132 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


things, and whose LOOK was more stout than 
his fellows.” Verses 19-20. 


Here Daniel records what he did not mention in his 
first description of the “Fourth Wild Beast:” 


“T beheld, and the same HORN (the Little 
Horn) made war with the Saints, and prevailed 
against them; until the ‘Ancient of Days’ came, 
and judgment was given to the ‘Saints of the Most 
High;’ and the time came that the Saints pos- 
sessed the Kingdom.” Verses 21-22. 


This additional description of his Vision of the 
“Fourth Wild Beast” helps the explanation of the 
“Heavenly Bystander.” 


“The ‘Fourth Beast’ shall be the ‘Fourth King- 
dom’ upon earth, which shall be diverse from all 
Kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and 
shall tread it down, and break it in pieces. And 
the ‘Ten Horns’ out of this Kingdom are ‘Ten 
Kings’ that shall arise: and another (King) shall 
rise after them: and HE shall be diverse from the 
first (Kings), and HE shall subdue Three Kings. 
And HE shall speak great words against the 
‘MOST HIGH,’ and shall wear out the ‘Saints of 
the Most High,’ and think to change “Times’ and 
‘Laws:’ and they shall be given into his hand 
until a “Time and Times and the Dividing of 
Time’ (three and one-half years). But the Judg- 
ment (verses 9-12) shall sit, and they shall take 
away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it 
unto the end. And the Kingdom and Dominion, 
and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole 
heaven, shall be given to the PEOPLE of the 
‘Saints of the Most High,’ whose (the Most High) 
Kingdom is an ‘Everlasting Kingdom,’ and all 
Dominions shall serve and obey HIM.” Verses 
23-27, 


There are two “Figures” in this Interpretation that 
demand our attention. The first is the “Beast,” and 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 133 


the second is the “Little Horn.” We must distinguish 
between them. 


TIMES AND LAWS 


Ania = shall “think to charge 
Times _and Laws: and they shall be given into 
“hand until a ‘Time’ and ‘Times’ and the ‘Dividing of 
Times (or three.and one-half years). Dan. 7: 25. Lhe 
Rabbis understood by “Times” and “Laws,” the He- 
brew Sabbaths and Festivals, and the Law (Levitical) 
which regulated them. Now as these “Times” and 
“Laws” will be re-established when the Jews return to 
their own land and rebuild the Temple, they will be in 
force when the Antichrist (the Little Horn) shall 
make a Covenant with them for “One Week,” or 
“Seven Years.” But in the “Middle of the Week” the 
Antichrist will break the Covenant (Dan. 9:27), and 
substitute the worship of himself for the worship of 
Jehovah, thus causing the Jewish “sacrifices and obla- 
tions to cease,” and in his desire to annihilate all Jew- 
ish institutions he will think to change all Jewish 
“Times” and “Laws,” and this he will do for the re- 
mainder of the “Week,” or for three and one-half 
years. 


THE BEAST 


The “iron teeth” of this “Fourth Beast” identifies it 
with the “Iron Legs” of the “Image,” or as we have 
seen, with the Roman Empire in its past stage. The 
“Ten Horns” correspond to the “Ten Toes” of the 
“Tmage,” or the last stage of the Roman Empire. So 
we see that this “NONDESCRIPT BEAST” repre- 
sents the Roman Empire in its first and last stages, 
but does not reveal what happens between the two 
stages. Now as the Book of Revelation gives us, in 
chapters 6 to 19 inclusive, the details of what is to 
happen during Daniel’s “Seventieth Week,” the period 
covered by the “Toes” of the “Image,” and that is rep- 
resented on Daniel’s ‘Fourth Wild Beast” by the 


134 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


“Ten Horns,” we must turn to the Book of Revela- 
tion to get further light as to the “Beast,” and the 
“Little Horn.” Let us compare “Daniel’s Beast,” and 
Se onnisebeactes 


DANIEL’S BEAST 


y aN 
AS 


iS 
’ 
a, 
_ 
ee 
ut 


isl 
SHSSS 
27 
A ae) 
see 
sot" 


“After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a 
FOURTH BEAST, dreadful and terrible, and strong 
exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth; it devoured 
and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue (the 3 
preceding Beasts) with the feet of it; and it was di- 
verse from all the Beasts that were before it; and it 
had TEN HORNS. I considered the HORNS, and, 
behold, there came up among them another LITTLE 
HORN, before whom there were THREE of the 
FIRST HORNS plucked up by the roots; and, behold, 
in THIS HORN were eyes like the eyes of a MAN, 
and a mouth speaking great things.” Dan. 7: 7-8. 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 135 


“Thus he said, the FOURTH BEAST shall be the 
FOURTH KINGDOM upon earth, which shall be 
diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole 
earth, and shall tread it down and break it in pieces. 
And the TEN HORNS out of this Kingdom are TEN 
KINGS that shall arise; and another (King) shall rise 
after them; and he shall be diverse from the first, and 
he shall subdue THREE KINGS. And he shall speak 
great words against the Most High, and shall wear 
out the saints of the Most High, and think to change 
times and laws; and they shall be given into his hand 
until a TIME and TIMES and the DIVIDING OF 
PEM 4 Dante/ii23-75) 


JOHN’S BEAST 


“I saw a BEAST rise up out of the SEA, having 
SEVEN HEADS and TEN HORNS, and upon his 
horns TEN CROWNS, and upon his heads the 
NAMES OF BLASPHEMY. And the BEAST which 
I saw was like unto a LEOPARD, and his feet were as 
the feet of a BEAR, and his mouth as the mouth of a 
LION; and the Dragon gave him his power, and his 
seat, and great authority. And I saw one of his 


136 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


HEADS as it were wounded to death; and his deadly 
wound was healed; and all the world wondered after 
the BEAST. . . . And there was given unto him 
a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and 
power was given unto him to continue FORTY AND 
TWO MONTHS. And he opened his mouth in blas- 
phemy against God, to blaspheme His Name, and His 
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. And it 
was given unto him to make war with the saints, and 
to overcome them; and power was given him over all 
kindreds, and tongues, and nations.” Rev. 13: 1-7. 


In comparing these two “BEASTS” we find that 
they both come up out of the “Sea.” As “Daniel’s 
Beast” came up out of the “Great Sea’ (the Medi- 
terranean) (Dan. 7:2), and John was a prisoner on 
the Isle of Patmos when he had his Vision, an island 
of the same sea, both “Beasts” came from the same 
locality. Both of these “Beasts” were utterly unlike 
any beasts we have ever heard of. “Daniel’s Beast” 
was dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and 
it had great IRON teeth, and nails of BRASS; while 
“John’s Beast” was ike a LEOPARD, with the feet of 
a BEAR, and the mouth of a LION. As “Daniel’s 
Beast” represented the “Fourth Kingdom,” the Roman 
Empire, it is evident that its characteristics, as given 
above, describe the Old Roman Empire, while the 
characteristics of “John’s Beast” describe the Future 
Roman Empire. We know that the Old Roman Em- 
pire was “strong exceedingly” and its grip and power 
were like a beast with “great iron teeth” and “claws of 
brass;” and from the description of “John’s Beast” we 
learn that the Future Roman Empire shall embody all 
the characteristics of the “Four World Empires,” as 
seen in its LEOPARD-like body, its feet of a BEAR, 
and its mouth of a LION. And as the body of an ani- 
mal is the largest part of it, the “Leopard,” or Grecian 
character of the “Beast,” will probably preponderate. 
That both “Beasts” have “TEN HORNS” reveals the 
fact that they will both be in existence at the time 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 137 


indicated by the “TEN TOES” of the “Image,” which 
will be just before the setting up of the “Stone,” or 
“Millennial Kingdom of Christ.” We are told that the 
ben liorns or. Daniel’ss Beast = stands tor) LEN 
KINGS,” and the “Ten Horns” of “John’s Beast” stand 
for the same. Rev. 17:12. From this we see that both 
Daniel and John foresaw that the Roman Empire was 
to be eventually divided into “Ten Federated King- 
doms.” 

While both “Beasts” have “Ten Horns,” they differ 
in that John’s has “SEVEN HEADS,” while Daniel’s 
had but “ONE,” and among the “Ten Horns” on 
“Daniel’s Beast” there came up a “LITTLE HORN,” 
which is not seen amid the “Ten Horns” of “John’s 
Beast.” These, as we shall see, are features that refer 
to the “Last Stage” of the “Beast,” and show that we 
cannot understand the “Last Stage” of the Beast with- 
out carefully comparing Daniel’s and John’s “Beasts,” 
for the “LITTLE HORN” of “Daniel’s Beast’ plucks 
up three of the “Ten Horns” and destroys them, or 
takes their Kingdom away, a thing that John omits to 
tell us. Again the “Antichristian” character of “Dan- 
iel’s Beast” is seen in its “LITTLE HORN,” whose 
conduct corresponds with not a part, but the whole 
of “John’s Beast,” and that for the same length of 
time, for Daniel’s “TIME and TIMES and the 
DIVIDING OF TIME” (Dan. 7:25) is equal to 
John’s “FORTY AND TWO MONTHS” (Rev. 
13:5), or three and one-half years. And both Beasts 
make “War” on the “Saints of the Most High,” and 
blaspheme His Name. From this comparison we see 
the similarity of the two Beasts, and that they must be 
studied together to fill out the picture. 


THE LITTLE HORN 


In our study of Prophecy we lay much stress on 
the “Second Coming of Christ,” forgetting that there 
are two other comings of “Persons” that are just as 
momentous as Christ’s Coming. The first is that of 


138 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


“ANTICHRIST,” and the other is that of “SATAN.” 
In both the Old and New Testaments we are told of 
a—“MYSTERIOUS AND TERRIBLE PERSON- 
AGE” who shall be revealed in the “LAST TIMES,” 
or the closing days of this Dispensation. He is called 
by various names. 


In the Old Testament 


“The Assyrian.” Isa. 10: 5-6; 14: 24-25; 30: 27-33. 
“The Wicked.” Isa. 11:4. 

“King of Babylon.” Isa. 14:4. 

se Luciter.s lsa. 14 2. 

“King of Tyrus.” Ezek. 28: 11-19. 

“<The bittlesiiorn sae Dat torao oe. 

“A King of Fierce Countenance.” Dan. 8:23, 
“The Prince That Shall Come.” Dan. 9: 26, 

“The Wilful King.” Dan. 11: 36. 


In the New Testament 


“The Man of Sin.” 2 Thess. 2: 3-8. 
“Son of Perdition.” 2 Thess. 2: 3-8. 
“That Wicked.” 2 Thess. 2: 3-8. 
MATILICHTISt: nla ObDNeZreELo: 

“The Beast.” Rev. 13: 1-8. 


The Prophet Isaiah sees the “Antichrist” as the 
“SASSY RUAN H% @163 7710 295-6 30e82/7-S olin elsas | le Aa 
chapter which is evidently Messianic, we read that, 
among other things which the Messiah will do, “He 
small smite the earth with the ‘rod of His mouth,’ 
and with the ‘breath of His lips’ shall He slay 
‘THE WICKED.’” The word translated “THE 
WICKED?” is in the singular number, and cannot re- 
fer to wicked persons in general, but to some one per- 
son who is conspicuously wicked. The expression is 
strikingly like that of Paul in 2 Thess. 2:8. “Then 
shall that ‘WICKED’ be revealed, whom the Lord 
shall consume with the ‘Spirit of His Mouth,’ and shall 
destroy with the ‘Brightness of His Coming.’” It is 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 139 


evident that Isaiah and Paul refer to the same individ- 
ual, who can be no other than the “ANTICHRIST.” 
In Isa. 14:4-17 there is a description of a “King of 
Babylon” who shall smite the people in his wrath, and 
rule the nations in anger. He is called “LUCIFER, 
Son of the Morning,” and his fall is described. There 
has never as yet been such a King of Babylon. It 
must therefore refer to some future King of Babylon, 
when Babylon shall be rebuilt, as we have seen it is to 
be. Verses 12 to 14 evidently refer to “Satan,” here 
called “LUCIFER,” and are descriptive of him before 
his fall, but as he is to incarnate himself in the “Anti- 
christ” (Rev. 13: 1-2), who will be a future King of 
Babylon, they explain the source of the pride and pre- 
sumption of Antichrist which will lead to his down- 
fall, as it did to Satan’s. The Prophet Ezekiel has a 
similar view of the “Antichrist,” under the name of 
the “King of Tyrus.” Ezek. 28:11-19. And as the 
Future Roman Empire will include both Tyrus (Tyre) 
and Babylon, the “Antichrist” will be both King of 
Babylon and King of Tyrus. 

We now come to the “LITTLE HORN” of Daniel, 
and as Daniel had three Visions of him, we will have 
to anticipate in part the description given of him in 
chapters eight and eleven. We have already consid- 
ered him in this chapter. In Dan. 8: 3-12, 20-25, in the 
Vision of the “Ram and He-Goat,” Daniel saw a 
“Great Horn” between the eyes of the “He-Goat” 
broken off, and four “Notable Horns” came up in its 
place, and upon one of these there appeared a “LIT- 
TLE HORN.” 


“And out of one of them came forth a ‘LITTLE 
HORN,’ which waxed exceeding great, toward the 
South (Egypt), and toward the East (Babylonia), 
and toward the ‘Pleasant Land’ (Palestine). And 
it waxed great, even to the ‘Host of Heaven;’ and 
it cast down some of the ‘Host’ and of ‘Stars’ 
(angels) to the ground, and stamped upon them. 
Yea, HE magnified himself even to the ‘Prince 


140 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


of the Host,’ and by HIM (the Little Horn) the 
daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of 


His (the Prince of the Host) Sanctuary was cast 
down.” Dan. 8:9-11. 


In his interpretation of the “LITTLE HORN,” the 
Angel Gabriel said— 


“In the ‘LATTER TIME’ of their Kingdom, 
when the transgressors are come to the full, a 
King of ‘Fierce Countenance,’ and understanding 
‘Dark Sentences,’ shall stand up. And his power 
shall be mighty, but not by his own power (it 
shall be Satanic): and he shall destroy wonder- 
fully, and shall prosper, and practice, and shall 
destroy the mighty, and the ‘Holy People’ (the 
Jews). And through his policy also he shall cause 
craft to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify 
himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy 
many: he shall also stand up against the ‘Prince 
of princes;’? but he shall be BROKEN WITH- 
OUT HAND.” Dan. 8: 23-25. 


Quite a few Bible scholars claim that this “LITTLE 
HORN” is not the same as the “LITTLE HORN” 
that arose amid the “Ten Horns” of the “Fourth Wild 
Beast,” but that it represents Antiochus Epiphanes, 
whowiteb a@ 166s desecrated stheml enplerAltamat 
Jerusalem by erecting an “idol altar” upon it, and of- 
fering “swine flesh” thereon. But the description of 
this “LITTLE HORN” and his conduct does not ac- 
cord with that of Antiochus Epiphanes, but does with 
the “LITTLE HORN” of the “Fourth Wild Beast.” 
Antiochus Epiphanes never cast down any of the 
“Host of Heaven,” or magnified himself against the 
“Prince of the Host.” Neither did he stand up against 
the “Prince of Princes” (Christ), nor was he “broken 
without hand,” for he died a natural death at Tabae in 
B. C. 165. The Angel Gabriel distinctly states that 
the Vision belongs not to the time of Antiochus 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 141 


Epiphanes, but to the “TIME OF THE END.” Dan. 
8:17. That is, to the end of the “Times of the Gen- 
tiles’ which is still future. And Gabriel also added 
that his mission was to make known to Daniel what 
shall come to pass in the “Last End of the Indigna- 
tion” (Dan. 8:19), or the “GREAT TRIBULA- 
TION.” So we see that as the “Little Horn” of Dan. 
8: 9-12, 23-25, synchronizes as to TIME (the “Time 
of the End”) with the “Little Horn” of the “Fourth 
Wild Beast” of Dan. 7: 7-8, that they both refer to 
the same person—THE ANTICHRIST. 


Daniel also had another “Foreview” of the “Little 
Horn” in his Vision of the “Wilful King,” but we will 
not stop here to consider it, as it will be explained in 
the Exposition of chapter eleven. We now turn to— 


PAUL’S FOREVIEW OF THE “LITTLE HORN.” 


“Let no man deceive you by any means; for 
‘THAT DAY’ (the ‘Day of the Lord’) shall not 
come except there come a falling away first, and 
that ‘MAN OF SIN’ be revealed, the ‘SON OF 
PERDITION,’ who opposeth and exalteth him- 
self above all that is called God, or that is wor- 
shipped; so that he AS GOD sitteth in the Temple 
of God (the rebuilt Temple of Jerusalem), show- 
ing himself that he IS GOD.... For the ‘MYS- 
TERY OF INIQUITY’ doth already work (in 
Paul’s day); only He (the Holy Spirit) who now 
letteth (restraineth, R: V.) will let (restrain), 
until He be taken out of the way. And then shall 
‘THAT WICKED’ be revealed, whom the Lord 
shall consume with the spirit (breath) of His 
Mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness 
(manifestation, R. V.) of His Coming. Even him, 
whose coming is after the working of Satan with 
all power and signs and lying wonders, and with 
all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that 
perish; because they received not the love of the 
Truth (Christ) that they might be saved. And 


142 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


for this cause God shall send them strong delu- 
sion that they should believe a lie (THE LIE. 
American Standard 1911 Bible), that they all 
might be damned who believed not the truth, but 
had pleasure in unrighteousness.” 2 Thess. 2: 3-12. 


Here Paul calls the “Little Horn” of Daniel by three 
different names, 


“THE MAN OF SIN.” 
“THE SON OF PERDITION.” 
“THAT WICKED.” 


The name “SON OF PERDITION” is not without 
significance. It may help us to locate the origin of the 
“Little Horn” or “Antichrist.” The name is used but 
twice in Scripture. It is first used by Christ of “Judas” 
(John 17:12), and here of “Antichrist.” In Gen. 3: 15; 
God said to the “Serpent” (Satan), “I will put enmity 
between thee and the woman, and between ‘THY 
SEED’ and ‘HER SEED.’” Now the Woman’s SEED 
was CHRIST, then the Serpent’s SEED must be 
ANTICHRIST. And as Christ was born of a “virgin” 
by the Holy Spirit, so Antichrist will be born of a 
“woman” (not necessarily a virgin) by Satan. This is 
no new view, for it has been held by many of God’s 
spiritually minded children since the days of the 
Apostle John, who have been looking for a man to be 
born among men who should be a “Demon Man,” upon 
whose mother Satan would descend, and fill her to- 
tally, and surround her totally, and possess her totally 
within and without, so that the creature born of her 
would be totally depraved. If the “Sons of God” 
(Angels) could take on them the form of men, and 
cohabit with the “Daughters of Men” in the days just 
before the Flood, and the offspring of that union were 
“mighty men,” men of Satanic character, whose wick- 
edness brought on the Flood (Gen. 6: 1-8), then why 
cannot Satan assume the form of a man and be the 
father, by some woman, of the Antichrist? And could 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 143 


not such a person be properly called the “SON OF 
PERDITION,” or of Satan? For while “Perdition” is 
a PLACE (Rev. 17:8, 11), Judas and Antichrist are 
the “SONS OF PERDITION?” in a special sense, for 
they are the SONS of the author of “Perdition”’— 
SATAN. 


In John 6: 70-71, we read that Jesus said—“Have 
not I chosen you Twelve, and one of you isa DEVIL? 
He spake of ‘Judas Iscariot’ the son of Simon: for he it 
was that should betray Him, being one of the Twelve.” 
In no other passage than this is the word “Devil” ap- 
plied to anyone but to Satan himself. Here the word 
is “diabolus.” The definite article is employed, and it 
should read—“and one of you is THE DEVIL.” This 
would make Judas the Devil incarnate, and explains 
why Jesus called him the “SON OF PERDITION.” 
It will not do to say that in the text he is called “the 
son of Simon,” for the words “the son” are in italics, 
showing that they are not in the original, and the name 
“Simon” is given because he was the reputed father 
of Judas, while Judas might have been the son of 
someone else. 


The next question that arises is, “If Judas and the 
Antichrist are both called the ‘SON OF PERDI- 
TION,’ are they one and the same, or are there two 
‘Sons of Perdition?’”” Here we must anticipate. Turn- 
ing to Rev. 11:7, we read that the “Beast” that slays 
the “Two Witnesses” ascends out of the “Bottomless 
Pit” (ABYSS), and that “Beast” is the ANTI- 
CHRIST. Now how did he get into the “ABYSS?” 
Well, if there is only one “SON OF PERDITION,” 
and Judas and Antichrist are one and the same, then 
he got in the ABYSS when Judas went to his “Own 
Place” (the ABYSS). Acts 1:25. Of no other person 
is it said anywhere in the Scriptures that he went “to 
his own place.” Again in Rev. 17:8 it is said—“The 
‘Beast’ that thou sawest was, and is not: and shall 
ascend out of the ‘Bottomless Pit’ (Abvss), and go 
into PERDITION.” As this “Beast” is the same that 


144 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


slays the “Two Witnesses” he is the ANTICHRIST. 
Now there are four things said of him. First, he 
“WAS.” Second, he “IS NOT.” Third, he shall 
“ASCEND OUT OF THE BOTTOMLESS PIT.” 
Fourth, he shall “GO INTO PERDITION.” From 
this we learn that in John’s day the “Beast” “Was 
Not,” but that he had been before on the earth, and 
was to come again, that he was to ASCEND FROM 
THE BOTTOMLESS PIT. This is positive proof 
that the ANTICHRIST has been on the earth before, 
and that when he comes in the future he will come 
from the “ABYSS.” 


The question then arises, when was “Antichrist” on 
the earth before? If Judas and Antichrist are one and 
the same the enigma is solved. When Judas was on 
the earth, he WAS; when Judas went to his “Own 
Place” he “WAS NOT;” when Judas comes back from 
the “Abyss” he will be—-THE ANTICHRIST. The 
Author does not insist on this view of Judas and Anti- 
christ being correct, but with open mind he accepts it, 
because it seems to be the only logical solution of both 
Judas and Antichrist being called the “SON OF PER- 
DITION.” 


The Apostle Paul also calls the Antichrist the “MAN 
OF SIN.” That is, all “SIN” will head up in him. The 
“Apostasy” will be not merely a corruption of Chris- 
tianity, but a renunciation of it. It will be a denial of 
the Father and the Son. It will be the embodiment of 
all “Lawlessness.” The “Mystery of Iniquity” (Law- 
lessness) was secretly working in Paul’s day. The 
Antichrist will not be the “cause” of ‘‘Lawlessness,”’ 
he will be the “fruit” of it. He will arise out of the 
seething cauldron of “Lawlessness” that is now be- 
coming so pronounced and manifest in the world, and 
in him will be the consummation of all ‘“Lawlessness.” 

It now remains in tracing the “LITTLE HORN,” 


or Antichrist, to compare the “Two Visions” that John 
had of the “BEAST.” 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 145 


JOHNS TWO VISICNS 
OF THE BEAST 


a Fa 


BEAST Out 0 THE SEA 


Revemloen=7, 


“IT saw a BEAST rise up out of the SEA, 


having SEVEN HEADS and TEN HORNS, 
and upon his horns TEN CROWNS, and 
upon his heads the NAMES OF BLAS- 
PHEMY. And the BEAST which I saw was 
like unto a LEOPARD, and his feet were as 
the feet of a BEAR, and his mouth as the 
mouth of a LION; and the Dragon gave him 
his power, and his seat, and great authority. 
And I saw one of his READS as it were 
wounded to death; and his deadly wound was 
healed; and all the world wondered after the 
BEAST. And there was given unto 
him a mouth speaking great things and blas- 
phemies; and power was given unto him to 
continue FORTY AND TWO MONTHS. 
And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against 
God, to blaspheme His Name, and His Taber- 
nacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. And it 
was given unto him to make war with the 
saints, and to overcome them; and power was 
given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and 
nations,” 


SCAR 
Rev. 17:3, 7-17 

“I saw a Woman sit upen a scarlet colored 
BEAST, full of names of blasphemy, having 
SEVEN HEADS and TEN HORNS. .. . 
I will tell thee the mystery of the Woman, and 
of the BEAST that carried her, which hath the 
SEVEN HEADS and TEN HORNS. The 
BEAST that thou sawest WAS, and IS NOT; 
and shall ascend out of the BOTTOMLESS 
PIT, and go into perdition. . . The 
SEVEN HEADS are SEVEN MOUNTAINS, 
on which the Woman sitteth. And they (the 
Seven Heads, R. V.) are SEVEN KINGS; 
FIVE are fallen, and ONE is, and the OTHER 
is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must 
continue a short space, And the BEAST that 
WAS, and IS NOT, even he is the EIGHTH, 
and is of the SEVEN, and goeth into perdition. 
And the TEN HORNS which thou sawest are 
TEN KINGS, which have received no king- 
dom as yet; but receive power as kings one 
hour with the BEAST. These have one mind, 
and shall give their power and strength unto 
the BEAST. And the TEN HORNS 
which thou sawest upon the BEAST, these 
shall hate the WHORE, and shall make her 
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and 
burn her with fire. For God hath put in their 
hearts to fulfil His will, and to agree, and give 
their kingdom unto the BEAST, until the 
words of God shall be fulfilled.” 


In the two descriptions given above it is very impor- 
tant to see that the “Beast” has a “Dual” meaning. It 


146 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


represents both the Revived Roman Empire, and its 
“Imperial |Head;ae the eA ntichristawaAsmtie eRevived 
Roman Empire it is seen coming up out of the “sea of 
the nations” (Rev. 13:1), as the Antichrist it comes 
up out of the “ABYSS.” Rev. 1127; 17:8. For in- 
stance, it cannot be said of the Roman Empire of 
John’s day, that it “WAS,” and “IS NOT,” for it was 
at the height of its power in John’s day. Neither can 
it be said of it that it shall “ascend out of the pit 
(ABYSS) and go into PERDITION,” that could only 
be said of a person. Again we must distinguish be- 
tween the “Body” of the Beast and its “Heads” and 
“Horns.” The “Body” being that of a LEOPARD, 
with the feet of a BEAR, and the mouth of a LION 
is to show that the Revived Roman Empire in its 
“Last Stage” will include the characteristics of the 
first ““Three Wild Beasts” of Daniel. That is, of the 
LION (Babylon), the BEAR (Medo-Persia), and the 
LEOPARD (Greece), and as the largest part of the 
Beast, the body, is represented by the LEOPARD, 
the prevailing characteristic of the Revived Roman 
Empire will be GRECIAN. 

The Beast that comes up out of the Sea (Rev. 
13) has SEVEN HEADS and TEN HORNS, and the 
“Horns” are CROWNED. This represents the Beast, 
or Empire, at the height of its power, when it will 
have all its “Heads,” and when the TEN KINGS, the 
heads of the TEN KINGDOMS into which the Em- 
pire shall be divided, will have been crowned. The 
Beast that comes up out of the “ABYSS” also has 
SEVEN HEADS and TEN HORNS, but they are 
not crowned, for the Ten Kings represented by the 
“Ten Horns” have not as yet received their kingdom 
(Rev. 17:12). This implies that the Beast of Rev. 17 
represents the Empire at the beginning of the “Week.” 
As confirmation of this view the “WOMAN?” is seen 
at this stage RIDING THE BEAST. For while the 
“Scarlet Clothed Woman” is not seen until chapter 17, 
it is clear that she rides the Beast from the beginning 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 147 


of the “Week,” for she represents the “PAPAL 
CHURCH” that comes into power after the “Church” 
has been caught out. During the wars preceding the 
rise of Antichrist the nations that will then be found 
in the geographical limits of the Old Roman Empire 
will form an “Alliance” for mutual protection. Those 
nations will be ten in number, represented by the “Ten 
Horns” of the Beast. No doubt the “Papal Church” 
will play a prominent part in those proceedings. She 
will be rewarded by restoration to Political Power, 
and this union of Church and State, in which the 
Church will have control, is shown by the WOMAN 
RIDING THE BEAST, thus dominating it. But when 
the “Ten Kings” shall receive their Kingdoms and be 
Crowned, which shall be in the “Middle of the Week,” 
they “shall HATE THE WHORE, and shall make 
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesn (con- 
fiscate her wealth), and burn her with fire.” That is, 
burn her churches and cathedrals. Rev. 17: 16. 


While we are told in Rev. 17:9 that the “Seven 
Heads” of the Beast represent “SEVEN MOUN- 
TAINS” (this is to identify it with the Roman Em- 
pire), we are told in the next verse (R. V) that they 
(the “Seven Heads”) also represent “SEVEN 
KINGS” of whom “FIVE are fallen, and ONE is, and 
the OTHER is not yet come; and when he cometh he 
must continue a short space.” That is, in John’s day 
“Five” of these Kings had fallen, “One” was the then 
ruling Emperor, and the “Seventh” was yet to come. 
Who are meant by the first “Five Kings” that had 
fallen we do not know. They were doubtless Kings 
of the Nero type. The King that was on the throne in 
John’s day was Domitian, who had banished John to 
the Isle of Patmos. The last, or “SEVENTH KING,” 
who is yet to come is undoubtedly the ANTICHRIST. 
We are told in Rev. 13:3, that one of the “Seven 
Heads,” or “Kings,” received a deadly wound. Which 
one is not stated. The inference is that it is the last, 
for the Beast has ALL of his “Heads” before one of 
them is wounded. In Rev. 17:11 he is called “the 


148 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Beast that WAS, and IS NOT, even he is the 
‘EIGHTH’ (Head), and is of the ‘SEVENTH’ 
(Head), and goeth into PERDITION.” The only 
clear explanation is that the “Seventh Head”—THE 
ANTICHRIST, is the one who receives the “deadly 
wound,” probably at the hand of an assassin, and who 
actually dies or simulates death, and as his body 1s 
lying in state, he rises from the dead, and thus be- 
comes the “EIGHTH” (Head), though he is of the 
“SEVENTH” (Head) revived. By this apparent 
resurrection from the dead, the Antichrist imitates the 
Resurrection of Christ and makes the world “WON- 
DER AFTER THE BEAST” (Rev. 13:3), and this 
will add to his prestige and power. If this happens at 
the “Middle of the Week,” at the time the Dragon is 
cast out of Heaven (Rev. 12: 7-9), it will account for 
the great change that takes place in the Antichrist, 
for before receiving his “deadly wound” he was sweet 
and lovable, but after his resurrection, or recovery, he 
becomes “Satanic,” the result of the “Dragon” (Satan) 
incarnating himself in him. It is at this time that he 
breaks the “Covenant” with the Jews (Dan. 9:27), 
and desecrates the rebuilt Temple at Jerusalem by 
setting up the “Abomination of Desolation” (Matt. 
24:15), which is an “Idol Image” of himself—THE 
DESOLATOR. Rev. 13: 13-15. As the “Little Horn” 
of Daniel’s “Fourth Wild Beast” he will destroy three 
of the “Ten Kings” and firmly establish himself in the 
place of power, and as he as the “LITTLE HORN” 
does not appear until after the “TEN HORNS,” or 
“Ten Federated Kingdoms,” come into existence, it is 
clear that the Antichrist does not form the “Federa- 
tion,’ but is the outgrowth of it. 


When we compare these “Foreviews,” and note the 
similarity of conduct of Daniel's “LITTLE HORN,” 
Paul’s “MAN OF SIN,” and John’s “BEAST,” and 
that Daniel’s “LITTLE HORN” and John’s “BEAST” 
are to continue for the same length of time—“Forty 
and Two Months,” or three and one-hzir years, and 
that Daniel’s:“LITTLE HORN; Panlsi’@MANZOFR 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 149 


SIN,” and John’s “BEAST,” are all to be destroyed in 
the same manner at Christ’s “Second Coming,” we see 
that they all prefigure the same “Evil Power” which is 
after the “Working of Satan,” and which John in 
latfohng2-sicecallismiHbh VAN LICH RIST ainsother 
words, when we find in prophecy “Three Symbolic 
Personages” that come upon the stage of action at the 
same time, occupy the same territory, exhibit the same 
character, do the same work, exist the same length of 


time, andl meet the same fate, they must symbolize the 
SAME THING. 


THE ANTICHRIST 


The Antichrist, or last “Gentile Ruler,” will be a 
“COMPOSITE MAN,” as seen from the description 
of the “Leopard Like Beast” with its feet like a 
Bear, aealndilitcmeliOn ainOUutnwmRevialolic- aulteawill 
have the combined abilities and powers, augmented by 
the power that the Dragon will confer upon him (Rev. 
ISei 2p eon Nebuchadnezzar Xerxes, “Alexander sthe 
Great, and Caesar Augustus. He will have the mar- 
vellous gift of attracting unregenerate men, and the ir- 
resistible fascination of his personality, his versatile 
attainments, superhuman wisdom, great administrative 
and executive ability, along with his powers as a con- 
summate flatterer, a brilliant diplomatist, a superb 
strategist, will make him the most conspicuous and 
prominent of men. All these gifts will be conferred 
on him by Satan, whose “Masterpiece” and TOOL he 
will be, thus making him 


THE SUPERMAN. 


He will intoxicate men with a strong delusion and 
his never-varying success. And when he shall be slain 
and rise again he will have lost none of these powers, 
but will be in addition the embodiment oi ai! kinds of 
wickedness and blasphemy. There has never as yet 
appeared on this earth a person who answers the de- 
scription of the “Little Horn.” Such a character is 


150 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


almost inconceivable. No writer would have invented 
such a character. Yet the Scriptures clearly foretell 
the coming of such a “Person.” The world that today 
is rejecting Christ for “Eternal Salvation” will readily - 
accept the Antichrist unto “ETERNAL DAMNA- 
TION.” Refusing the “Lamb,” they will receive the 
“BEAST.” 


THE FALSE PROPHET | 


While Daniel did not see the “Little Horn’s” com- 
panion—THE FALSE PROPHET, that being an ad- 
ditional revelation given to John, and therefore does 
not belong to the Book of Daniel, yet because many 
confuse the “Two Beasts” of Rev. 13, calling the “First 
Beast” that comes up out of the sea the “Political 
Head” of the Revived Roman Empire, and the “Sec- 
ond Beast” that comes up out of the earth the “Eccle- 
siastical Head” or THE ANTICHRIST, it seems nec- 
essary that we should at this point distinguish be- 
tween the two. John thus describes the “Second 
Beast :” 


“And I beheld another Beast coming up out of 
the EARTH; and he had “Two Horns’ like a 
LAMB, and he spake asa DRAGON. And he ex- 
erciseth all the power of the First Beast before 
him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell 
therein to worship the First Beast, whose deadly 
wound was healed. And he doeth great wonders, 
so that he maketh fire come down from heaven 
on the earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth 
them that dwell on the earth by the means of 
those miracles which he had power to do in the 
sight of the Beast; saying to them that dwell on 
the earth, that they should make an IMAGE TO 
THE BEAST, which had the wound by a sword, 
and did live. And he had power to give LIFE 
unto the ‘Image of the Beast,’ that the ‘Image of 
the Beast’ should both SPEAK, and cause that as 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 151 


many as would not worship the “Image of the 
Beast’ should be KILLED. And he causeth all, 
beth small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, 
to receive a ‘MARK’ in their right hand, or in 
their foreheads; and that no man might BUY or 
SELL, save he that had the ‘MARK,’ or the 
‘NAME OF THE BEAST,’ or the ‘NUMBER OF 
HIS NAME.’ Here is wisdom. Let him that hath 
understanding count the ‘NUMBER OF THE 
BEAST? for it is the ‘NUMBER OF MAN?’ and 
his number is SIX HUNDRED THREESCORE 
AND SIX.” Rev. 13: 11-18. 


This “Second Beast,” while John does not say it 
was a Lamb, had “Two Horns” like a lamb, that is, 
it was LAMB-LIKE, but it spake asa DRAGON. It 
had a name. It is called the “FALSE PROPHET” 
threes timestatvev sLOwlo st) 1920 20 a One iwice® iteis 
associated with the “First Beast’ (Antichrist), and 
once with the “Dragon” (Satan) arid the “First Beast,” 
and as they are PERSONS so must it be. The fact 
that the “Second Beast” is called the “False Prophet” 
is proof that he is not the Antichrist. Jesus had a 
foreview of him when He said—“There shall arise 
‘FALSE CHRISTS’ and ‘FALSE PROPHETS,’ and 
shall show GREAT SIGNS AND WONDERS: inso- 
much that, if it were possible they shall deceive the 
very elect.” Matt. 24:24. Here Jesus differentiates be- 
tween “False Christs” and “False Prophets,” therefore 
ANTICHRIST and the FALSE PROPHET cannot 
be the same. 


That the “Second Beast’ comes up out of the 
EARTH may signify that he will be a resurrected 
person. If, as we have hinted, Antichrist was Judas 
resurrected, why should not the “False Prophet” also 
be a resurrected person? There will be two persons 
who shall come back from Heaven in those days, the 
“Two Witnesses,” Moses and Elijah. Rev. 11: 3-7. 
Why not two persons come up from “The Under- 
world,” brought up by Satan to counteract the work 


52 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


of the “Two Witnesses?” The fact that both Beasts 
are cast ALIVE into the “Lake of Fire” (Rev. 19: 20) 
is further proof that they are more than ordinary 
mortals, and that the “First Beast’? is more than 
the last Emperor of the Revived Roman Empire, 
he is the ANTICHRIST. Again, the Antichrist is 
to be a KING, and rule over a KINGDOM. He 
will accept the “Kingdoms of this World” that Satan 
offered Christ, and that Christ refused. Luke 4: 5-8. 
He will also EXALT himself, and claim to be God. 
2 Thess. 2:45 (But theme alsech rophet sisinotvaniing, 
He does not exalt himself, he exalts the “First 
Beast” (Antichrist). Huis relation to the “First Beast” 
is the same as the Holy Spirit’s relation to Chiist, 
which is to glorify Christ and not himself. John 
16: 13-15. He causeth the earth and them which dwell 
therein etomworships theme itor mb cict mmc venice: 
And as the followers of Christ are “sealed” by the 
Holy Spirit until the “Day of Redemption” (Eph. 
4:30), so the followers of the “First Beast’ shall be 
sealed by the “Second Beast” (the “False Prophet’) 
untilthe “Day of Perdition” Revs 1316-172) Pet: 
ouye 

The “False Prophet” will be a “Miracle Worker.” 
While Jesus was a “Miracle Worker,” He did all His 
“Mighty Works” in the power of the Holy Spirit. 
Actss 10736. Onemotmetnemmifaclcsmtitateiices Lalse 
Prophet” will perform will be to bring down FIRE 
FROM HEAVEN. Rev. 13:13. As Moses and Elijah 
will be back on the earth at that time (Rev. 11: 3-12), 
there will probably be a “FIRE-TEST” between Eli- 
jah and the “False Prophet,” and-the test of Mt. Car- 
mel as to who is God, Jehovah or Baal, will be 
repeated. But the test this time will be as to whether 
Jehovah or Antichrist is God, and as both Elijah and 
the “False Prophet” shall bring down fire, the test 
will not be conclusive. The “False Prophet’ will be 
able to do this because he will be energized by Satan. 
For Satan can bring down fire from heaven, as we 
know from the Book of Job. Job 1:16. As further 


THE FOUR WILD BEASTS 153 


proof that the “First Beast” is the Antichrist, the 
“False Prophet” commands the people to make an 
“IMAGE OF THE BEAST,” and worship it, which 
he would not do if the “First Beast’ were not the 
Antichrist. The “False Prophet” will also cause all 
who buy or sell to receive a “Mark,” the “BRAND OF 
HELL.” This “BRAND” will be either upon the 
“Right Hand,” or the “Forehead,” and will be of three 
kinds, the “Mark” (some peculiar mark), or the 
“NAME OF THE BEAST,” or the “NUMBER OF 
HIS NAME,” which is 666, the “NUMBER OF 
MAN.” Rev. 13: 16-18. Now these several distinctions 
between the “First” and “Second Beast,” and that they 
both come up from “The Underworld” (Rev. 17:8; 
13:11), hence cannot be slain as mortals, but must be 
Caste A UV Heintomthem Laken ois ire: IGkev e195), 
differentiates them, and clearly shows that the “False 
Prophetaus snot ines Antichuste but thatthe.) first 
Beast” is. In other words the “False Prophet” is intro- 
duced, without any preliminary explanation, as an 
ecclesiastical companion and subordinate of the “First 
Beast,” having no power of his own, but only that 
which is delegated to him (Rev. 13:12), and he claims 
no worship for himself, but causeth all to worship the 
“First Beast,” and those who will not he punishes as 
heretics, emphasizing his authority by miracles and 
“lying wonders’ so as to get the people to accept 
peli egal ness e2 foal 2. 


THE SATANIC TRINITY 


In, the “Dragon,” =the’ “Beast,” and’ the “False 
Prophet,” we have the “SATANIC TRINITY,” Sa- 
tan’s imitation of the “Divine Trinity.” In the unseen 
and invisible “Dragon” we have the FATHER (the 
ANTI-GOD). In the “Beast” we have the “SON OF 
PERDITION” (the ANTI-CHRIST), begotten of the 
Dragon, who appears on the earth, dies, and is resur- 
rected; "and to whom is given a “Throne” by his 
Ratner thems racon. Rew, 133275 In ether «Valse 


154 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Prophet” we have the “ANTI-SPIRIT,” who pro- 
ceeds from the “Dragon Father” and the “Dragon 
Son,” and whose speech is like the DRAGON’S. The 
“Dragon” then will be the “ANTI-GOD,” the “Beast” 
the “ANTI-CHRIST,” and the “False Prophet’ the 
“ANTI-SPIRIT,” and the fact that all three are cast 
ALIVE into the “Lake of FireseGkev. 20: 10) issprooi 
that they together form a “Triumvirate” which we 
may weil call—“THE SATANIC TRINITY.” 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


The Ram and the He-Goat 


THE TIME AND PLACE OF THE VISION 


“Tn the third year of the reign of King Belshaz- 
zar a ‘Vision’ appeared unto me, even unto me 
Daniel, after that which appeared unto me at the 
first. And I saw in a ‘Vision;’ and it came to pass, 
when I saw, that I was at Shushan in the Palace, 
which is in the province of Elam; and I saw ina 
sVision, and l°was byi the river of Ulai.”” Verses 


1-2. 


It. is worthy of note that, beginning with this 
eighth chapter, the remainder of the Book of Daniel 
is written in Hebrew. The first chapter. and the first 
four verses of the second, are also in Hebrew, because 
this sectionwsives tie account: om the allvorferusa- 
lem and the Captivity of Israel. But from chapter 2:4 
to the end of chapter seven, the language is Aramaic, 
because that part of the Book relates to the Gentile 
World Powers. From chapter 8:1 to the end of the 
Book is in Hebrew because it has direct reference to 
the Jews, Jerusalem, and the Sanctuary (Temple), and 
the terrible Roman Emperor (Antichrist) who will 
desecrate the Sanctuary and persecute the Jews. The 
purpose was to show Daniel what shall befall his 
People (the Jews) in the “Latter Days.” 

This Vision of the “RAM” and “HE-GOAT” oc- 
curred in the “Third Year” of the reign of Belshaz- 
zar, B. C. 538, or two years after the previous Vision 
of the Four Wild Beasts. It occurred in the same 
year as the “Fall of Babylon,” and probably before its 
“Fall,” and its purpose was to inform Daniel what 
Empires were to succeed the Babylonian, and to fur- 
ther trace the Little Horn, for it is worthy of note 
that while the prophecies of Isaiah relate mainly to 
the “Christ,” the Visions of Daniel are for the purpose 

155 


156 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


of unveiling the ANTICHRIST. The Prophet was in 
Babylon when he received the Vision, but was trans- 
ported in spirit to Shushan, the Capital of Persia, in 
the Province of Elam, where as he stood by the side 
of the river Ulai, he saw a wonderful sight. 


THE VISION 
THE RAM 


“Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, be- 
hold, there stood before the river a RAM which 
had ‘TWO HORNS? and the “Iwo Horns’ were 
high, but one was higher than the other, and the 
higher came up last. I saw the RAM pushing 
Westward, and Northward, and Southward; so 
that no beasts might stand before him, neither 
was there any that could deliver out of his hand; 
but he did according to his will, and became 
great.” 


THE HE-GOAT 


“And as I was considering, behold, a HE-GOAT 
came from the West on the face of the whole 
earth, and touched not the ground: and the GOAT 
had a ‘Notable Horn’ between his eyes. And he 
came to the RAM that had ‘Two Horns,’ which I 
had seen standing before the river, and ran unto 
him in the fury of his power. And I saw him 
come close unto the RAM, and he was moved 
with choler (rage) against him, and smote the 
RAM, and brake his ‘T!'wo Horns: and there was 
no power in the RAM to stand before him, but 
he cast him down to the ground, and stamped on 


him: and there was none that could deliver the 
RAM out of his hand.” 


THE FOUR HORNS 


“Therefore the HE-GOAT waxed very great: 
and when he was strong, the ‘GREAT HORN’ 
(the ‘Notable Horn,’ verse 5) was broken; and for 


THE RAM AND THE HE-GOAT 157 


it came up FOUR NOTABLE ONES (Horns) 
toward the ‘Four Winds of Heaven.’ ” 


THE LITTLE HORN 


“And out of one of them came forth a LITTLE 
HORN, which waxed exceeding great, toward the 
South (Egypt), and toward the East (Babylonia), 
and toward the Pleasant Land (Palestine). And 
it waxed great, even to the ‘Host of Heaven;’ and 
it cast down some of the ‘Host,’ and of the ‘Stars’ 
to the ground, and stamped upon them. Yea, he 
magnified himself even to the ‘PRINCE OF THE 
HOST? (Christ). and by him (the Little Horn) 
the ‘Daily Sacrifice’ was taken away, and the 
Place of His (Christ’s) Sanctuary was cast down. 
And a Host was given him against the ‘Daily Sac- 
rifice’ by reason of transgression, and it (the Little 
Horn) cast down the truth to the ground; and it 
practiced and prospered.” Verses 3-12. 


AN ANGELIC CONVERSATION 


While Daniel was pondering over the meaning of 
the “Vision” of the “Ram and He-Goat,” he overheard 
a conversation between two “Saints” or “Holy 
Ones’ — 

“Then I heard one Saint speaking, and another 
Saint said unto that certain Saint which spake, 
How long shall be the Vision concerning the 
‘DAILY SACRIFICE,’ and the ‘TRANSGRES- 
SION OF DESOLATION,’ to give both the 
‘Sanctuary’ and the ‘Host’ to be trodden under 
foot? And he (the first Saint) said unto me (Dan- 
iel), unto TWO THOUSAND AND THREE 
HUNDRED DAYS; then shall the Sanctuary be 
cleansed.” Verses 13-14. 

Before we proceed any further let us try to clear 
up the meaning of the “I'wo Thousand and Three 
Hundred Days.” The Hebrew expression is not 
“days,” but “evening-mornings,” that is 2300 evening- 


158 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


morning sacrifices, which proves that actual days of 
twenty-four hours are intended. The question the 
second saint asked of the first was, “How long shall 
be the Vision concerning the ‘Daily Sacrifice,’ and the 
‘Transgression of Desolation,’ to give both the Sanctu- 
ary  and®the Hlost=to@be trod den under foot?” This 
question was prompted by the previous statement, 
thatthe telitvlesllormeewouldrtakec ae pic “Daily 
Sacrifice,” and that the “Place of His Sanctuary” (the 
Temple) would be cast down, or desolated. The 
answer to the question was—Unto two thousand and 
three hundred days.” Now as these days are literal 
days, and date from the time when the “Daily Sacri- 
ficetsshallabestdkentiwayey ule. dente mt Otnes( te 
Antichrist), which is in the “Middle” of Daniel’s “Sev- 
entreth Wreel an On 27 inven diese: 000 dae be- 
gin in the “Middle of the Week,” and as the “Week” 
is seven years long, half the “Week” would be three 
and one-half years, or forty-two months of thirty 
days each, or 1260 davs. This would make the 2300 
days overrun the last half of the Week 1040 days, or 
two years, ten months, and twenty days. And as the 
“Sanctuary” is not to be cleansed, or the “Daily Sacri- 
fice’ renewed until then, it would’ appear as if the 
Temple services are not to be re-established until Eze- 
kiel’s Temple has been built. Exek. 41: 1—43: 27. 

While Dantel was pondering on the meaning of his 
Vision, he was startled by an apparition that had the 
appearance of a man. 


THE INTERPRETER 


“And it came to pass when I, even I Daniel, had 
seen the ‘Vision,’ and sought for the meaning, 
then, behold, there stood before me as the appear- 
ance of a man. And I heard a man’s voice be- 
tween the banks of the Ulai (probably from a 
cloud over the river), which called and_ said, 
GABRIEL, make this man to UNDERSTAND 
THE ‘VISION,’” Verses 15-16, 


THE RAM AND THE HE-GOAT 159 


Everything was done to make Daniel UNDER- 
STAND the Vision. The “Interpreter” was no earthly 
being but the Angel Gabriel. What he told Daniel 
must have been perfectly clear to him, and will be 
to us if we put ourselves in Daniel’s place. What had 
troubled Daniel in his Vision of the “Four Wild 
Beasts” was the “Little Horn,” and now in this Vision 
of the “Ram and He-Goat” is another “Little Horn.” 
Are they one and the same or are they different? Or 
was this Vision given to throw additional light upon 
the “Little Horn” as-to the place of his origin? We 
must not forget that God led Daniel step by step. 
Each succeeding Vision was to throw additional light 
upon the Visions that went before. 


“So he (Gabriel) came near where I stood: and 
when he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my face 
(@s,ever sintal aman willsinwiies presence ofva 
Holy being): but he said unto me, UNDER- 
STAND, O son of man: for at the ‘TIME OF 
THE END’ shali be the Vision. Now as he was 
speaking with me, I was in a deep sleep on my 
face toward the ground (Daniel swooned): but he 
touched me, and set me upright. And he said, 
Behold, I will make thee know what shall be ‘IN 
THE LAST END OF THE INDIGNATION’ 
(ThemGreat Vribulation ): Siore at,-ther tintewap- 
pointed “THE END’ shall be.” Verses 17-19. 


Now notice, and this is the “KEY” to the Vision, 
that the Vision has to do with the “TIME OF THE 
END.” The “TIME OF THE END?” is a definite 
statement of Scripture, and has reference to the 
“END” of the “Times of the Gentiles.” The Vision 
then had no bearing upon the times in which Daniel 
lived, and so, after it had been explained to him, he 
was told to “shut it up,” for it would not be fulfilled 
for “many days” (verse 26), that is, until the “TIME 
OF THE END.” So the “END TIME?” of this Vision 
is the same as the “END TIME” of all the “Dreams” 
and “Visions” in the Book. 


160 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


THE INTERPRETATION 


“The RAM which thou sawest having “Two 
Horns’ are the Kings (Kingdoms) of Media and 
Persia. And the ROUGH GOAT is the King 
(Kingdom) of Grecia: and the ‘Great Horn’ that 
is between his eyes is the First King. Now that 
(the Great Horn) being broken, whereas FOUR 
(Horns) stood up for it (in the place of it), FOUR 
KINGDOMS shall stand up out of the nation, but 
not in his (the Great Horn) power. And in the 
LATTER TIME of their Kingdom (the Four 
Kingdoms into which the Grecian Empire was 
divided at Alexander the Great's death), when the 
transgressors are come to the full, a King of 
‘FIERCE COUNTENANCE,’ and understanding 
‘dark sentences,’ shall stand up. And his power 
shall be mighty, but not by his own power (by 
Satanic power): and he shall destroy wonderfully, 
and shall prosper, and practice, and shall destroy 
the mighty and Holy People (the Jews). And 
through his policy also he shall cause craft to 
prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify himself 
in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he 
shall also stand up against the ‘Prince of Princes’ 
(Christ); but he shall bb BROKEN WITHOUT 
HAND.” Verses 20-25. 


While Daniel knew from the “Dream Image” of 
Nebuchadnezzar (B. C. 603) that there were to be 
“Four World-wide Empires” that were to succeed 
each other, symbolized by the Gold, Silver, Brass, and 
Iron, of the Image (Dan. 2: 36-40), he was not told 
their names, except the first, Babyion. Neither in his 
“Vision” of the “Four Wild Beasts’ (chapter 7), 
given sixty-two years later (B. C. 541), were the 
names of the Kingdoms that were to succeed the 
Babylon given. But in this Vision of the “Ram and 
He-Goat” there were revealed the names of the King- 
doms represented by the “Silver” and “Brass” of the 


THE RAM AND THE HE-GOAT 161 


“Image,” and their corresponding Beasts, the “Bear” 
and “Leopard.” This information had been withheld 
until the time had come for the “Fall of the Baby- 
lonian Empire,” and was given to Daniel at this time 
that he might know that the Medes and Persians, 
that were then besieging the city, represented the 
“Arms and Breast” of the Image, and therefore that 
the Fall of Babylon was at hand. This knowledge 
doubtless helped Daniel to interpret the ‘““Handwrit- 
ing on the Wali.” 

In Daniel’s Vision of the “Four Wild Beasts,” 
Medo-Persia and Greece are represented by a “Bear” 
and a “Leopard;” in this Vision they are also repre- 
Selitecmym beacuc mama il eatlddeet teo(Oat.« aie 
change in the Beasts is to further identify the Empires 
Dyetiein. taeraldicuenicecw: ne Lind emo! Persia 
was a “RAM.” Coins have been discovered which dis- 
play a “Ram’s Head” on one side, and a Ram recum- 
bent on the other. We also read of a Persian king 
riding in front of his army wearing “a Golden Figure 
of a ‘Ram’s Head’ set with gems, instead of a diadem.” 
In the Zendavesta, Ized Behram, the guardian spirit 
of Persia, appears like a Ram, with cloven feet, and 
sharp-pointed horns. The national Emblem of Mace- 
donia (Greece) was a “GOAT,” and is found on the 
coins of that country, the ancient capital of which was 
called Aegae, or the “GOAT CITY,” while the adja- 
cent waters were called the Aegean, or “GOAT-SEA.” 
Hence the son of Alexander the Great by Roxana was 
called Aegus, the “Son of a goat.” 

To Daniel the “Ram” and the “He-Goat” corre- 
sponded to the “Bear” and the “Leopard” of the “Four 
Wild, Beasts’ Vision, and the “Arms and Breast of 
Silver,” and the “Abdomen of Brass” of the “Image,” 
he saw that the Empires that these represented were 
Medo-Persia and Greece. This correspondence was 
further confirmed as Daniel more closely compared 
the Beasts of his two Visions. The higher “Shoulder” 
of the “Bear” corresponded to the higher “Horn” of 
the “Ram” (Persia). And the “Three Ribs” in the 


162 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


mouth of the “Bear,” which stood, as we have seen, 
for the three Kingdoms of Lydia, Babylon, and Egypt, 
that formed a “Triple Alliance” to check the Medo- 
Persian power, but were destroyed by it, corresponded 
to the action of the “Ram” that pushed “Westward” 
toward Lydia; “Northward” toward Babylon; and 
“Southward” toward Egypt. 


When Daniel compared the “Leopard” and the “He- 
Goat” he saw that the “Four Heads” of the “Leopard” 
corresponded to the “Four Horns” that came up in the 
placeofi them Greats horn son tiesiead sor (hemelic; 
Goat.” So far all was clear to Daniel. But what was 
meant by the “LITTLE, HORN” -that came up on 
one of the “Four Horns” of the “He-Goat’ was to 
him a mystery. He had seen nothing to correspond 
to it on the “Leopard,” and there was no Beast in this 
Vision to compare with the “Fourth Wild Beast” of 
the previous Vision, on whose head were “Ten Horns,” 
amid which a LITTLE HORN sprang up. What re- 
lation did these “Little Horns” have to each other, if 
any? Now as to this “Little Horn’ we can do no 
guessing. We must take the interpretation of the 
Angel Gabriel. 


We are told by Gabriel that the “Great Horn” that 
was between the eyes of the “He-Goat” represented 
the “First Kine” (of Greece). Now this King, as all 
historians know, was ALEXANDER THE GREAT 
(B. C. 356-323, the son of Philip of Macedon), who 
became King of Greece when but twenty years of age, 
BuiGy 336." Two*yedrs later (CBC, 364) sin feoat-hke 
fashion, he leaped the Hellespont, and with an army of 
30,000 infantry and 5000 cavalry he defeated a Persian 
force on the banks of the Granicus. By a swift advance 
eastward he, in the following year, B. C. 333, defeated 
at Issus a Persian army of 600,000 men, commanded 
by the Persian King, Darius. After minor conquests 
in Phoenicia and Egypt he returned to Syria, where 
on the banks of the Tigris River he defeated an enor- 
mous army led by Darius. This is known as the Battle 


THE RAM AND THE HE-GOAT 163 


Oreirpela, be Oe 30l froin. Ca OU tO o2/,7 1 exan- 
der was engaged in subjugating the outlying prov- 
inces of the Persian Empire. Later he returned to 
Babylon, where, at the climax of his glory, he died of 
Wigton reverand anineciaperancerine | Uile, 4. .Ol0s 1 
his thirty-third year. 

After the death of Alexander there was dissension 
as to who should be his successor, which ended, as 
the prophecy foretold, in four of his Generals divid- 
ing the territory of the Empire among themselves. 


GASSANDER took Macedonia and the Western 
part. 


LYSIMACHUS took Thrace and the Northern part. 
SELEUCUS took Syria and the Eastern part. 
PTOLEMY took Egypt and the Southern part. 


The “Four Horns” may therefore be named “Mace- 
donia,” “Thrace,” “Syria,” and “Egypt.” These “Four 
Kingdoms” were in time absorbed by the “Fourth 
World Wide Empire,” the Roman. The last to lose 
its identity was Egypt in B. C. 30. Thus we see that 
while there were to be but FOUR “World Wide Em- 
pires,” the “Babylonian,” “Medo-Persian,” “Grecian,” 
ande=homan. dirinesthes® Dimes orthetGentilés, iy ect 
they were not to succeed each other without a break. 
This was not shown on the “Image,” nor in the Vision 
of the “Four Wild Beasts,” but is first revealed in the 
Vision of the “He-Goat.” The “break” or “GAP” be- 
tween the “Grecian” and “Roman” Empires is covered 
by the “Four Minor Kingdoms” of “Macedonia,” 
“Thrace,” “Syria,” and “Egypt.” Here is history prov- 
ing prophecy. 

Having explained the meaning of the “Ram” and the 
“He-Goat,” and of the “Four Horns” that came up in 
the place of the “Great Horn,” the Angel Gabriel pro- 
ceeds to an explanation of the “LITTLE HORN” 
that came up out of one of the “Four Horns,” If the 
Vision had been given to us without an interpretation, 


164 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


we naturally would have supposed that the “Little 
Horn” indicated some “Monarch” that arose out of 
one of the “Four Kingdoms” soon after their estab- 
lishment, such as Antiochus Epiphanes, who in some 
respects answers the description in verses 9-12. But 
Gabriel tells us in verse 23, that he is not to rise 
“until the LATTER TIME of their Kingdom, when 
the transgressors are come to the full.” Here is a dis- 
tinction between the “FORMER” and “LATTER” 
time of the “Four Kingdoms” into which Alexander’s 
Impire was divided, which prophetically declares that 
those “Four Kingdoms” are to be resuscitated and be- 
come “Four” of the “Ten Kingdoms” into which the 
Revived Roman Empire shall be divided, for God is 
able to revive dead nations as well as dead men. As 
proof of this Greece is a sovereign State today, and 
Egypt is again coming into power, and in the up- 
heaval of nations no one can foretell how soon Thrace 
and Syria shall again appear as independent King- 
doms. 


It will not do to say that by the “Latter Time of 
their Kingdom” is meant the “Latter Time” of the 
“Four Kingdoms” before they were swallowed up by 
the Roman Empire, for they were not all swallowed up 
at the same time. Egypt was the last in B. C. 30. 
Neither will it do to say that by the “Little Horn” 
Antiochus Epiphanes is meant. Antiochus did not live 
in the “Latter Time’ of those Kingdoms. He was the 
eighth out of twenty-six kings that ruled over Syria, 
and he died in B. C. 164, or 134 years before the last 
of the “Four Kingdoms” disappeared. As Antiochus 
was one of the twenty-six kings who constituted the 
“Syrian Horn,” he could not be that “Horn” and also 
the “LITTLE HORN” that sprang out of it. The 
“Little Horn” waxed exceedingly great, but Antiochus 
never did. It is true that he desecrated the Temple 
at Jerusalem, but the Maccabees rebelled, and in B. C. 
165 restored its worship. When Jesus spoke of the 
“Abomination of Desolation” spoken of by Daniel the 
Prophet (Matt, 24:15), He did not refer to it as a 


THE RAM AND THE HE-GOAT 165 


thing of the past, but as something still future, there- 
fore it was not something connected with the career of 
Antiochus, for he had been dead nearly 200 years. 
Antiochus never stood up against the “Prince of 
Princes” (Christ), for he died 160 years before Christ 
was born. Neither was he “broken without hand,” for 
he died a natural death at Tabae (Persia) in B. C. 164. 
It will not do to say that verses 9-12 refer to Anti- 
ochus, and verses 23-25 to the Antichrist, for verses 
23-25 are the interpretation of verses 9-12, and there- 
fore the same person must be meant. Therefore if 
verses 23-25 refer to some future person, verses 9-12 
cannot refer to Antiochus. From this we see that 
there is a “GAP” that takes in the space between the 
“Former” and “Latter Time” of the “Four Kingdoms” 
into which Alexander’s Empire was divided. and which 
corresponds with the “GAP” between Daniel’s Sixty- 
ninth and Seventieth Week as revealed to Daniel in 
the next chapter. 


THE LITTLE HORN 


In comparing the descriptions of the “Little Horn” 
the mistake is made of supposing that they should 
agree as to details, etc., whereas they are progressive, 
each successive description adding new details to the 
preceding one. Thus the picture is filled out until the 
“Portrait” of the “Little Horn” (Antichrist) 1s com- 
plete. In chapter seven Daniel describes the “Little 
Horn’? as pluckine up three of the Ten Horns,” and 
having eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speak- 
ing great things. The “Bystander” (a Holy One) who 
interprets the Vision repeats that the “Little Horn’”’ 
will subdue “Three Kings,” and adds—“He shall speak 
great words against the Most High, and shall wear 
out the Saints of the Most High, and think to change 
Times and Laws: and they shall be given into his hand 
until a Time and Times and the Dividing of Time.” 


166 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Daniel describes the “Little Horn” of chapter eight 
as, “Waxing exceedingly great, toward the South, and 
toward the Hast, and toward the Pleasant Land (Pal- 
estine): sind’ fl waxed Great, "even tothe 10st o1 
Heaven; and it cast down some of the Host and of the 
Stars to the ground, and stamped upon them. Yea, 
he magnified himself even to the ‘Prince of the Host,’ 
and by him the Daily Sacrifice was taken away, ana 
the place of His (Christ’s) Sanctuary was cast down. 
And an host was given him against the Daily Saeri- 
fice by reason of transgression, and it (the Little 
Horn) cast down the truth to the ground; and it 
practiced, and prospered.” Verses 9-12. The Angel 
Gabriel in interpreting this “Little Horn’ says—“A 
King of ‘Fierce Countenance,’ and understanding ‘dark 
sentences, shall stand up. And his power shall be 
mighty, but not by his own power (it shall be super- 
human): and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall 
prosper, and practice, and shall destroy the mighty and 
the Holy People (the Jews). And through his policy 
also he shall cause craft (all kinds of business) to 
prosper in his hand: and he shali magnify himself in 
his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall 
also stand up against the ‘PRINCE OF PRINCES’ 
(Christ): but he shall be BROKEN WITHOUT 
HAND.” Verses 23-25. 


But these two descriptions from chapters seven and 
eight do not complete the picture of the “Little Horn.” 
So we will anticipate and turn to the description of 


THE WILFUL KING 


in chapter 11: 36-39, which fills out the picture—“‘And 
the KING (of the North) shall do according to his 
will; and he shall exalt himself and magnify himself 
above every god, and shall speak marvelous things 
against the ‘God of Gods,’ and shall prosper till the 
‘INDIGNATION’ (The Great Tribulation) be accom- 
plished, for that that is determined, shall be done, 
Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the 


THE RAM AND THE HE-GOAT 167 


desire of women, nor regard any god; for he shall 
magnify himself above all. But in his estate shall he 
honor the ‘God of Forces;’ and a god whom his fathers 
knew not shall he honor with gold and silver, and 
with precicus stones, and pleasant things. Thus shall 
he do in the most strong holds with a strange god, 
whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory; 
and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall 
divide the land for gain.” This completes the picture 
of the “Little Horn” as far as it was revealed to 
Daniel. 

From what has thus far been revealed it is clear 
that the “Little Horn” is to rise amid the “Ten Horns” 
of the “Fourth Wild Beast” or in the Roman Empire, 
andmthateotmthoses Len whlorns, or Kinedoms: four 
shall be the “Four Kingdoms” into which Alexander’s 
Empire was divided, or Macedonia (Greece), Thrace 
(Asia Minor), Syria (Assyria), and Egypt, and that 
out of one of these four the “Little Horn” (Antichrist) 
shall rise. Which one will be revealed to us later as 
Syria. See “The Wilful King,” chapter 11: 36-45. We 
are told that this King of “Fierce Countenance” shall 
understand “dark sentciices,” that is, he will be a Re- 
vealer of Secret Things, which will add to the mystery 
of his power. He will also stand up against the 
“PRINCE OF PRINCES” (Christ). That will bring 
his transgression to the full, and he shall be BROKEN 
WITHOUT HAND. The meaning of this is disclosed 
in 2 Thess. 2:8, where we are told that the Antichrist 
(that Wicked) shall be consumed with the Spirit of 
the Lord’s mouth, and shall be destroyed by the 
brightness of His Second Coming. See the Battle of 
Armageddon eh evan lO kl-20; 

Having received the Vision, Daniel was told to 
“shut it up,” for its fulfilment would not be for many 
days Not untilitnesdeatter lime: of the. Pourskine- 
doms,” which is still future. Then Daniel fainted and 
was sick certain days. The revelation of what was to 
befall his people in the “Latter Days” was too much 
for him, and made his heart sick, He says, “I was aston- 


168 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


ished at the Vision, but none understood (it).” The 
word “it” is not in the original. What Daniel meant 
was, that no one understood why he was sick, for he 
had “shut up the Vision,” that is, he had told no one 
about it, and therefore they did not know the cause 
of his illness. But Daniel’s disturbed state of mind 
did not prevent his attending to the affairs of State. 
for he says—“I rose up, and did the King’s business.” 
Verse 27. 


we. atazs a 
‘t ee ae 
e724 treet 


a ONG RU TAR ipa, 


ma & 


ae zs iahas 


THe GLoriFieo CHure! ene sete 


Rev. 7:9-17 


tau ALTA 
Witt THE LorD Visineeapeine 


Rtv. 4 a¥e5, Sevie Usorn Tne AUTAR 


BLioop Washed Murti tube 


Foy 
“TH 
THE 
THe SEVEN SEALED BOOK 7 
CHAP 8:71-9:21 [CHAP lori | CHAP Nie [UsI519] 


INTERVAL 


re) 
5 HORSE ao 7] 

WS (ree) (OEATHD <= lz BETWEEN THE SOUNDING| Tauympet 
a) Vg |e WARNING * eC 
kK % a2 15 woes | OF THE SIXTH »#o SEVENTH = 
at b Psy a a TRUMPETS “7 

4 LE = = Py HIRD Woe™ 
<li he Tue Littte|“THeTwo | — 
a Fl 6 Book" |WiTNESSES , 
r " 
: \ 


U- FIRe-BLoop: 


BEFORE THE TRIBULATION PERIOD 


“ ae i 


=e = 
SJHE-RiSE-OF-ANTICHRIS 


Tue CHurcH Prosasiy Caucut Out SOMETIME 


"THER 


"FIRST HALF OF THE: WEEK =3i°7-EARS: “DANIEL'S 


ee ee Nee T Locusts FROM THE Pit 
WE GRAVE @ HE TRIBULATION PERIOD 
newton DANIELS SEVENTIETH WEEK 
e THE 


CLARENCE LARKIN 


FOXCHASE PHILA, PA. REIGN OF ANTICHRIST 


COPYRIGHTED 


REV.15:2-4 


CHAP.15:1- 16:21 


THE , VIALS 


THE BEAST 
_ Our OF 
THE EARTH 


THE BEAST 
' Out OF 
THe SEA 


THe HARVEST: 
THe VINTAGE 


MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB: 
THe Armies OF HEAVEN <—— 


THE REVELATION 


T DESCENDING WITH 


“THE: Beast”. 
(ANTICCHRIST)- 


ATAN TO THE PIT 


MARRIA 
Or Tue LAMB 
REv.19:8-9 


GE 


2. THEess.2:8-9 


SATAN BOUND 
Rev. 20:1-3 


THE MILLENNIUM 


; 
wT 
7 5 a 
; 
! 
n dus 
4 
‘) ? tie a 
a! = 
1a 
7 as 
eee 0.0% 


fi wens 


=p. 


ES 


td 


es 


a 


‘ 


b 


- 


= 


Tides 


Fieak ot! 


oe -aare 


rwrGss Fe 


? 


r 


' = - iq: 
7 = «es . 
payers: ck 


ih’ajr 28 


SP eareai 


Wlraset 


awe: 


¢ a = 
aasise 4 


e 


” Del 


CHAPTER NINE 
The Seventy Weeks 


THE TIME OF THE VISION 


“In the FIRST YEAR of Darius the son of 
Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, which was 
made king over the realm of the Chaldeans; in 
the FIRST YEAR of his reign I Daniel under- 
stood by books the number of the years, whereof 
the, words.oi the, Jeord scamesstojs|eremiah (the 
Prophet, that he would accomplish SEVENTY 
YEARS in the desolations of Jerusalem.” Verses 
1-2. 


The date of the chapter is important. The Prophet 
tells us that it was in the FIRST YEAR of the reign 
of Darius the Median over Babylon, which was B. C. 
538. The time was critical, and Daniel’s mind was ina 
state of perplexity and confusion. He had understood 
the Visions of the “Four Wild Beasts,” and the “Ram 
and He-Goat,” which foretold of a prolonged period of 
“Dispersion” for his people, but while he believed 
what had been revealed to him, he found it hard to 
reconcile with what he understood “THE BOOKS,” 
the writings of Moses and the Prophets, to teach as 
to the Captivity of his people, the Jews. From the 
Book of Jeremiah, Daniel understood that the Baby- 
lonian Captivity was to last but seventy years. 


“And this whole land shall be a desolation, and 
an astonishment; and these nations (Judah and 
the surrounding nations) shall serve the King of 
Babylon SEVENTY YEARS.” Jer. 25: 11. 


The “False Prophets’ contradicted this, and en- 
couraged the people to believe that the Captivity 
would be of short duration. To counteract this the 
Prophet Jeremiah wrote to the Captives at Babylon to 
settle down for a long stay, saying, 


169 


170 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


“Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of 
Israel. . . . Build ye houses, and dwell in them; 
and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them; take 
ye wives, and beget sons and daughters; and take 
wives for your sons, and give your daughters to 
husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; 
that ye may be increased there and not diminished. 
And seek the peace of the city whither I have 
caused you to be carried away captives, and pray 
unto the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof shall 
ye Nave peace...) Or thls saitn the Word Unat 
after SEVENTY YEARS be accomplished at 
Babylon I will visit you, and perform my good 
word toward you, in causing you to return to this 
place (Jerusalem).” Jer. 29: 4-10. 


From this we see that Jeremiah was recognized as 
a Divinely inspired Prophet, and that Daniel, while 
himself a Prophet, was a STUDENT OF PROPH- 
ECY, and that he not only read the Word of God, but 
also BELIEVED it. Like Daniel, we should “Search 
the Scriptures” and find out what they have to say as 
to the times in which we live, and then believe what 
they say. 

Now Daniel knew that as the Captivity began when 
he was carried a captive to Babylon in B. C. 606, that 
sixty-eight years of the seventy had already expired. 
He also knew that the man whom the Prophet Isaiah 
foretold would issue the edict for the return of the 
Jews, Cyrus, had taken Babylon as prophesied. Isa. 
44:28. To him therefore the Captivity should end in 
a couple of years. How was he to reconcile this with 
his Visions that FOUR “World Wide Empires” were 
to come and go before the Children of Israel were to 
be restored to their “National Existence.” Only one 
had come and gone, the Babylonian, leaving only two 
years for the passing of the other three. This was the 
cause of his perplexity. He had to learn that Israel’s 
seventy years’ sojourn in Babylon was a TYPE ofa 
longer Dispersion, that was to last seven times as 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS LA 


long. The Vision of the “SEVENTY WEEKS?” that 
we are about to study was given to Daniel for this 
purpose. In the meantime Daniel gave himself to 
prayer, because he had read in the writings of Moses 
(Lev. 26:40-45; Deu. 30:1-10) that if Israel as a 
nation repented and turned to God, He would hear 
their cry and restore them to their own land. 


DANIEL’S PRAYER 


Daniel’s prayer is one of the most sublime in the 
Bible, and is a model of confession, supplication, and 
intercession, in which Daniel, the most spotless char- 
acter outside of Christ, associates himself as a sinner 
with his people. It was in this year that Daniel was 
cast into the “Lions’ Den” for praying to his God, 
and it may have been that during that testing period, 
as he knelt at the time of the “Evening Oblation” 
(3 P. M.), verse 21, that Daniel made this prayer, and 
saw this Vision of the “Seventy Weeks.” If so, we 
can understand how it strengthened him to face the 
“Lions’ Den.” Asa preparation for the prayer Daniel 
fasted, and clothed himself in sackcloth and ashes, a 
token of humility. Verse 3. 


THE CONFESSION 


“And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made 
MY CONFESSION, and said, O Lord, the great 
and dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy 
to them that love Him, and to them that keep His 
commandments; WE have sinned, and have com- 
mitted iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have 
rebelled, even by departing from Thy precepts 
and from Thy judgments: neither have we heark- 
ened unto Thy servants the Prophets, which spake 
in Thy name to our kings, our princes, and our 
fathers, and to all the people of the land. O Lord, 
righteousness belongeth unto Thee, but unto us 
confusion of faces, as at this day; to the men of 
Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and 


Wed THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


unto all Israel, that are near, and that are far off, 
through all the countries whither Thou hast 
driven them, because of their trespass that they 
have trespassed against Thee. O Lord, to us be- 
longeth confusion of face, to our kings, to our 
princes, and to our fathers, because we have 
sinned against Thee. To the Lord our God be- 
long mercies and forgiveness, though we have re- 
belled against Him; neither have we obeyed the 
Voice of the Lord our God, to walk in His Laws, 
which He set before us by His servants the 
Prophets. Yea, all Israel have transgressed Thy 
Law, even by departing, that they might not obey 
Thy voice; therefore the curse is poured upon us, 
and the oath that is written in the Law of Moses 
the servant of God, because we have sinned 
against Him. And He hath confirmed His words, 
which He spake against us, and against our Judges 
that judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil: 
for under the whole heaven hath not been done as 
hath been done upon Jerusalem. As it is written 
in the Law of Moses, all this evil is come upon us: 
yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our 
God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and 
understand Thy truth. Therefore hath the Lord 
watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us: for 
the Lord our God is righteous in all His works 
which He doeth: for we obeyed not His voice. 
And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought Thy 
People forth out of the Land of Egypt with a 
mighty hand, and hast gotten Thee renown, as at 
this day: WE have sinned, WE have done wick- 
edly.” Verses 4-15. 


THE SUPPLICATION 


“O Lord, according to all Thy Righteousness, I 
beseech Thee, let Thine anger and Thy fury be 
turned away from Thy city Jerusalem, Thy Holy 
Mountain: because for OUR sins, and for the ini- 
quities of our fathers, Jerusalem and Thy People 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 173 


(the Jews) are become a reproach to all that are 
about us. Now therefore, O our God, hear the 
prayer of Thy servant, and his supplications, and 
cause Thy face to shine upon Thy Sanctuary that 
is desolate, for the LORD’S SAKE. O my God, 
incline Thine ear, and hear; open Thine eyes, and 
behold our desolations, and the City which is 
called by THY NAME: for we do not present 
OUR supplications before Thee for OUR right- 
eousnesses, but for THY GREAT MERCIES. O 
Lord; HEAR; © Lord, FORGIVE; O Lord, 
HEARKEN AND DO; defer not, for Thine own 
sake, O my God: for Thy City and Thy People are 
called by THY NAME.” Verses 16-19. 


In his Prayer Daniel associates himself with sinning 
Israel. He does not say—“Behold, the people have 
sinned,” but “WE” have sinned, and committed ini- 
quity, and done wickedly, and have rebelled, and de- 
parted from Thy precepts and judgments. There is no 
covering up of the shameful facts. To “US” belongs 
confusion of face. And he confesses that all the evil 
that had befallen them was because they had broken 
the “Law of Moses.” He does not base his supplica- 
tion upon any righteousness that he or Israel had 
done, but upon God’s deliverance of Israel from 
Egyptian bondage, and that the renown of that would 
be lost if God should now permit them to perish. He 
also pleaded that the Lord would deliver them for the 
sake of Jerusalem, His Holy Mountain, that the Sanc- 
tuary, then desolate, might be rebuilt. It was the 
“Glory of the Lord” he had in view, and not their 
worthiness. 


THE INTERRUPTED PRAYER 


“And whiles I was speaking, and praying, and 
confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, 
and presenting my supplication before the Lord 
my God for the Holy Mountain of God; yea, 
whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man 


174 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Gabriel, whom I had seen in the Vision at the be- 
ginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me 
about the time of the ‘Evening Oblation’ (3 P. M.). 
And he informed me, and talked with me, and 
said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee 
skill and understanding. At the beginning of thy 
supplications the commandment came forth, and 
I am come to shew thee; for thou art GREATLY 
BELOVED: therefore understand the matter, and 
consider the Vision.” Verses 20-23. 


It is not often that God breaks in upon our pray- 
ers, but He did in this instance. This is the INTER- 
RUPTED PRAY ERvot the Bible) “The timesof the 
“Interruption” was that of the “Evening Oblation” in 
the Temple, which was 3 P. M. There was no Temple 
in Babylon, and the one at Jerusalem had been de- 
stroyed, but Daniel, as he had been taught in his 
youth, observed the set times of the Temple services. 
This throws a “side-light” upon his religious habits. 
Special note is made of the swiftness of the man 
Gabriel. That between the commencement of Dan- 
iel’s prayer, and its conclusion Gabriel had flown from 
Heaven to Babylon. The margin translates “swift,” 
with “weariness,” as if the flight was of such a great 
distance as to produce weariness. While Gabriel is 
an angel, Daniel speaks of him as a man, because 
angels when they appear to human beings always 
assume the form of a man. Gen. 18:1-2. The reason 
Gabriel gave for coming to Daniel was, that he was 
GREATLY BELOVED IN HEAVEN. Think of 
celestial beings, the highest in the Universe—the 
Father, the Son, the Holy Spirit, and the angels— 
having such high regard and esteem for a mortal 
man here upon the earth, as to deputize an angel of 
the rank of Gabriel to tell him so. 

It would appear from the words—“Gabriel, whom I 
had seen in the Vision at the beginning” (verse 21), 
as if Daniel had a Vision at the beginning of his 
prayer that is not recorded. For there does not appear 
in the preceding Vision anything that was not ex- 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS We 


plained to Daniel. If there was a Vision that is not 
recorded, we may surmise what it was from the char- 
acter of the revelation of the “Seventy Weeks.” It 
must have been a Vision connected in some way with 
the “Seventy Years” of the Babylonian Captivity, that 
led Daniel to pray as he did. And Gabriel was sent 
to show him that the “Seventy Years’ were only a 
“type” of a longer period that would be seven times as 
long. The time therefore of the chronological dis- 
closure of the “Seventy Weeks” was very appropriate. 
It was as definite a forecast of the 490 years of “Dis- 
persion” that still remained for Israel, as was the sev- 
enty years of Captivity then closing. Daniel adds— 
“He (Gabriel) informed me, and talked with me, and 
said, O Daniel, | am now-come forth to give thee 
skill and understanding.” How biessed to have an 
angel, or the Holy Spirit, to instruct us in God’s Plan 
and Purpose as to this world’s affairs. 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 
Dan. 9: 24-27 


Verse 24. “SEVENTY WEEKS are deter- 
mined (marked off) upon THY (Daniel’s) 
PEOPLE (the Jews) and upon THY (Daniel’s) 
HOLY CITY (Jerusalem), to finish the trans- 
gression, and to make an end of sins, and to make 
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in ever- 
lasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision 
and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy. 

Verse 25. “Know therefore and understand, 
that from the going forth of the commandment to 
‘restore and to build Jerusalem’ unto the ‘MES- 
SIAH THE PRINCBE’ shall be SEVEN WEEKS, 
and THREESCORE AND TWO WEEKS: the 
‘street shall be built again, and the wall, even in 
troublous times. 

Verse 26. “And AFTER ‘Threescore and Two 
Weeks’ shall MESSIAH (Christ, the Anointed 
One) be ‘CUT OFF,’ but not for Himself: and 


176 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


the people (Romans) of the ‘PRINCE THAT 
SHALL COME’ shall destroy the City (Jerusa- 
lem) and the Sanctuary (the Temple); and the 
end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the 
end of the war desolations are determined. 

Verse 27. “And he (the ‘Prince that shall 
come’—Antichrist) shall confirm the Covenant 
with many for ONE WEEK (the last or Seven- 
tieth Week): and in the MIDST of the Week he 
(Antichrist) shall cause the sacrifice and the obla- 
tion to cease, and for the overspreading of abom- 
inations he (Antichrist) shall make it (the 
Temple) desolate, even until the consummation, 
and that determined shall be poured upon the 
desolate (Desolator).” 


This Vision*of the seventy” Weeks” “1s=the most 
important revelation, in many ways, made in the 
Scriptures. It is not only an interpretation of “Pro- 
phetic Chronology,” but it is the “Key” that unlocks 
the “Scriptures of Pruth,’ “lt alsowdiscloses another 
important fact that the “Seventy Weeks” only cover 
the period when the Jews are DWELLING IN 
THEIR OWN LAND, and does not cover the present 
period of their “Dispersion,” but takes up their history 
again when they return to their own land, thus cover- 
ing the time from. the going forth of the decree to 
“restore and rebuild Jerusalem” until the “Second 
Coming of Christ.” 


THE PURPOSE OF THE SEVENTY WEEKS 
We are told in verse 24 that the purpose of the “Sev- 
enty Weeks” is “six-fold”— 
I. TO FINISH THE TRANSGRESSION. 
II. TO MAKE AN END OF SIN. 
III. TO MAKE RECONCILIATION FOR 
INIQUITY. 
IV. TO BRING IN EVERLASTING 
RIGHTEOUSNESS. 


f 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 177 


V. TO SEAL UP THE VISION AND 
PROPHECY. 


VI. TO ANOINT THE MOST HOLY. 


I. TO FINISH THE TRANSGRESSION 


We are told that these “Six Things” concern only 
Daniel’s PEOPLE (the Jews), and the HOLY CITY 
(Jerusalem). This is very important. It discloses the 
fact that the “Seventy Weeks” have nothing to do 
with the “Gentiles” or the “Church,” but only with 
the JEWS and JERUSALEM. While the “Messiah 
the Prince’ (Christ) when He was “CUT OFF” (Cru- 
Ciiied) mea omcescti Ded sine verceecO,miInadcr ain. 11d = Of 
Sin” (Heb. 10:12), and “Reconciliation for Iniquity” 
(Rom. 5: 6-10), that was for the whole world. But the 
Atonement of Christ for the whole world is not in view 
Hheress lthismctlem=eputtingsawaysw ore: inisnhinoe sor the 
“Transgression” of one class of persons—THE JEWS. 
That their “Transgression” is not yet finished is evi- 
dent from the fact that they are still in disfavor with 
God. It will not be finished until they as a Nation re- 
pent and turn to God. 


Il. TO MAKE AN END OF SIN 


Here again it is the “Sin” of Israel that is meant. 
The margin reads “Seal up Sin.” That is, restrain it, 
as when a criminal is “locked up’ and the door 
sealed. We read that the time will come when God 
“shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, and take 
away from Israel all their sins.” But this will not be 
until the “DELIVERER?” (Christ at His Second Com- 
ing) comes. Rom. 11: 26-27. 


Ill. TO MAKE RECONCILIATION 
FOR INIQUITY 


Here again it is the “Iniquity” of Israel that is meant. 
The word “iniquity” means wickedness, unrighteous- 


178 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


ness, etc. It is written in Isa. 53:6—“The Lord hath 
laid on HIM (Christ) the iniquity of us all.” This is 
blessedly true. But it has no application to the Jews 
as a people in this Dispensation. If a Jew desires to 
be saved by the Blood of Christ he must renounce his 
nationality and become a member of the “Body of 
Christ” (the Church), in which there is neither Jew 
nor sGentile: sial.73 320-26. Cole 3 ml0=lie Bb utewhen 
the “Body of Christ” is complete, and “caught out,” 
then the Jews, not as individuals but as a Nation, shall 
look upon Him Whom they pierced (Rev. 1:7) at His 
Second Coming, and a “nation,” the JEWISH NA- 
TION, shall be born (converted) IN A DAY. Isa. 
66:8. “in ‘That Day’ (the Day of the Lord) there 
shall be a ‘Fountain’ opened to the ‘HOUSE OF 
DAVID’ (Israel) and to the inhabitants of JERUSA- 
LEM for sin and uncleanness.” Zech. 13:1. 


IV. TO BRING IN EVERLASTING 
RIGHTEOUSNESS 


There can be no “Everlasting Righteousness” until 
the “Millennial Kingdom” of Christ is set up, and it 
cannot be set up until the “Transgressions of Israel”’ 
have come to an end, and their “sins” sealed up. Then 
shall the Lord make a “New Covenant” with the 
“House of Israel.” 


“But this shall be the COVENANT that I will 
make with the ‘House of Israel; AFTER THOSE 
DAYS (the days of their present Dispersion), 
saith the Lord, I will put ‘My Law’ in their in- 
ward parts, and write it in their hearts; and I 
will be their God, and they shall be ‘My People.’ 
And they shall teach no more every man his neigh- 
bor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the 
Lord: for they shall ALL KNOW ME, from the 
least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the 
Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will 
remember their sin no more.” Jer. 31: 33-34. 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 179 


V. TO SEAL UP THE VISION AND 
PROPHECY 


While “Vision” and “Prophecy” appear to be sealed 
up at present to the Jews, it is only temporary. 


“For I would not, brethren, that ye should be 
ignorant of this Mystery, lest ye should be wise 
in your own conceits; that “blindness in part’ is 
happened to Israel, UNTIL THE FULNESS OF 
THE GENTILES BE COME IN.” Rom. 11:25. 


When the “Transgression” of Israel has ceased, and 
they have uninterrupted communion with God, there 
will no longer be any need for “Vision” or “Prophet.” 


“Love never faileth: but whether there be Pro- 
phecies, they shall fail (cease) ... For we know in 
part, and we prophesy in part. But when that 
which is PERFECT IS COME, then that which 
is in part shall be done away.” 1 Cor. 13:8-10. 


It is a noteworthy fact that “Vision” and “Prophecy” 
have been confined to the Jewish race, and when all 
the “Visions” and “Prophecies” have been fulfilled, 
and there is no further use for them, they will be 
“sealed up” for preservation. 


VI. TO ANOINT THE MOST HOLY 


Some claim that by the “Most Holy” Christ is 
meant, and that this anointing of the “Most Holy” was 
fulfilled when He was anointed with the Holy Spirit 
at His Baptism. But the “Most Holy” is a PLACE, 
not a person. The reference is doubtless to the “Most 
Holy Place” of the new “Millennial Temple” as de- 
scribed in Ezek. 41: 1—42: 20, whose erection is still 
future. The first appearance of the “Shekinah Glory” 
of God was at the Exodus, when the Lord went before 
the Children of Israel in a “Pillar of Cloud” by day, 
andl age eillarsomiireiwiby; nicht vii xsl 5 721222 elvater 
when the “Tabernacle” was erected the “Shekinah 
Glory” took possession of the “Most Holy Place,” and 


180 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


dwelt between the Cherubim on the “Ark of the Cove- 
nant.” Ex. 40: 34-35. Ex. 25: 10-22. Num. 7:89. When 
the Temple of Solomon was dedicated the “Shekinah 
Cloud” filled the “Holy Place’ so that the Priests 
could not stand to minister. 1 Kings 8:10-11. The 
Prophet Ezekiel tells us that he saw the “Shekinah 
Glory” of God reluctantly leave “The House” (The 
Temple), Ezek. 9:3, and later the City (Jerusalem), 
Ezek. 11:23, to return to Heaven. And in his Vision 
of the “Millennial Temple” Ezekiel sees the “Shekinah 
Glory” return from the East. Ezek. 43:1-6. From 
this we see that when the “Millennial Temple” is built 
the “Shekinah Glory” of the Lord will return and 
anoint the “Most Holy Place.” Thus the “Time Space” 
betweentthe®) Departure and ™ Return sofethe: She- 
kinah Glory” marks the duration of the “Times of the 
Gentiles.” 

Now as the “Six-fold” purpose of the “Seventy 
Weeks” is all still future, the “Seventy Weeks” did 
not end with the “First’’ Coming of Christ, as some 
claim, but reach on down to His “Second” Coming. 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 


Literally these words should read “SEVENTY 
SEVENS.” The word “WEEK” is retained because 
we have no exact equivalent for the Hebrew original, 
which signifies a period of “Seven.” Whether those 
“sevens” are days, weeks, or years, is to be deter- 
mined by the context. It is a noteworthy fact that 
both the “Natural World” and the “Spirit World” are 
built on the “Law of Sevens,” thus proving that they 
have a common origin. In the Natural World we 
read that God rested on the “Seventh Day.” And all 
through the Scriptures the number “Seven” is a basic 
number. There is the “Week of DAYS,” the “Week 
of WEEKS,” the “Week of MONTHS,” the “Week 
of YEARS,” the “Week of WEEKS OF YEARS,” 
the “Week of MILLENNIUMS,” and the “Week of 
AGES,” seven in all. The last book of the Bible, the 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 181 


book of Revelation, which is the book of ““Consumma- 
tion,” has seven divisions, 


The Seven Churches. 
The Seven Seals. 

The Seven Trumpets. 
.. The Seven Personages. 
The Seven Vials. 

The Seven Dooms. 

The Seven New Things. 


The number “Seven” is the PERFECT number. It 
is composed of the “Divine Number’ — THREE, 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and the “World Num- 
ber’—FOUR, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. 


AE ated att yl boat ed 


PROPHETICAL CHRONOLOGY 


Now if nature and the Scriptures are based on the 
“Law of Sevens,” does it not seem reasonable that 
there is a “Time “lement” that enters into all God’s 
plans, and that He has a system of “Prophetical Chro- 
nology” by which He makes known His “Plans and 
Purposes” as to the Ages and Dispensations? That 
this is so is clear from Christ’s reply to His Disciples 
when they asked Him—‘Lord, wilt Thou at this time 
restore again the Kingdom of Israel?’ and He said— 
“It is not for you to know the ‘TIMES’ or the ‘SEA- 
SONS,’ which the Father hath put in His own power.” 
Acts 1:6-7. From this we see that there are “Times” 
and “Seasons” in God’s plans for the Ages. And we 
know that—“When the ‘FULNESS OF THE TIME’ 
was come, God sent forth His Son.” Gal. 4:4. In 
other words everything moves on “Schedule Time” in 
the Universe. And as we have seen from fulfilled 
prophecy that nothing has failed to be fulfilled on 
time, so we can confidently believe that all that the 
Scriptures foretell of the future will likewise come to 
pass to the very minute. 

In “Prophetical Chronology” we come across such 
divisionsip Of itime? ase. hours); 9; days,i-)1) weeks 


182 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


99 66 


“months,” “years,” “time, times, and an half.” It is 
evident that these divisions of time, in order to be 
intelligible, must all be interpreted on the same scale. 
What scale is it? God has given us the Key” in His 
Word. In Num. 14:34 we read— 


“After the number of the DAYS in which ye 
searched the land, even FORTY DAYS, 


EACH DAY FOR A YEAR, 


shallAwe Wearesyour siniqiuities sseven sO hapy: 
YEARS.” 


Now we know that this judgment was literally ful- 
filled, for the Children of Israel wandered in the Wil- 
derness forty years, a YEAR for every day that the 
spies searched out the land of Canaan. See also Ezek. 
4:6. From ‘this: wevsee: that’ the “Divine Scale “of 
“Prophetical Chronology” is, A DAY STANDS FOR 
A YEAR. 


Apply now this “Scale” to the “Seventy Weeks,” 
and we find that in 70 weeks we have 490 days, or 
on the “Year Day Scale” 490 years. We are told’in 
verse 25—“That from the going forth of the com- 
mandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the 
Messiah the Prince shall be ‘seven weeks,’ and ‘three- 
score and two weeks,” that is 7 + 62 = 69 weeks, or 
on the “Year Day Scale” 483 YEARS. If we take as 
the beginning, "of this’ period thevedretsor Gyruss bec. 
530, anc its-end: the birth’or Christ..b. .@e4 swe. nave 
the length of the period as 532 years, which is 49 
years too much. Right here it will be well to note that 
we are not sure as to the chronology of the above 
period. The Old Testament stops with Malachi. 400 
years before Christ, and we have to depend upon pro- 
fane writers such as Ptolemy for the chronology of 
those times, and some think that he makes the time 
too long, having given too much time to the kings of 
Persia. It is not generally known that if it were not 
for the Bible we would not know how long the human 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 183 


race has been on t!s. earth. The genealogical tables 
giving the length of life of the patriarchs up to the 
Exodus, and then of the Judges and Kings of Israel 
and Judah on down to the Babylonian Captivity, bring 
us down to B. C. 606, and from there we have to de- 
pend on profane history. When we study profane 
history and try to find the origin of such nations as 
Egypt. Assvria. Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and 
Rome, we find them enveloped in the mists of Mythol- 
ogy. They seemed not, until a late date, to have seen 
the importance of keeping any chronological records, 
and the method some adopted of keeping the record 
by dynasties, or from some event in their history, is 
confusing. The fact is they all date from Babel, or the 
“Confusion of Tongues” (Gen. 11:1-9), and the tra- 
ditions they have of Creation and the Flood are proof 
of this rather than the reverse. 

The reliability of Biblical Chronology as recorded 
in the Old Testament is seen when we understand 
God’s purpose in it was to trace the “Line of Descent” 
from Adam to Christ.. While the records are incom- 
plete in some cases, as not giving the birth date, or 
where the reign of father and son overlap, the number 
of years involved are trifling in comparison with the 
sum total. This is seen when we compare the total 
number of years from Adam to Christ as given by the 
following leading Bible Chronologists: 


Archbishop Ussher B.C. 4004 
Henry F. Clinton BaCHal3s 
Martin Anstey B.C. 4124 


Here there is only a difference of 134 years in 4000 
The length of time then that man has existed on the 
earth is B. C. 4004+ A. D. 1924.* or 5928 vears. With 
this understanding of the difficulty of securing, with 
absolute certainty, chronological data, let us return to 
the “Seventy Weeks.” 


*The vear the author was called Home. 


184 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


THE STARTING POINT OF THE 
SEVENTY WEEKS 


The first thing to do in studying the Period of the 
“Seventy Weeks” is to find the date of its commence- 
ment. Here there is a conflict of opinion. There are 
four “Decrees” as to the restoration of Jerusalem and 
the Temple, after the Babylonian Captivity. 


FIRST DECREE 


The “First Decree” was given by Cyrus in B. C. 
930. 


“Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, 
that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jere- 
miah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the 
spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a 
Proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put 
it also in writing, saying, Thus saith Cyrus king 
of Persia, The Lord God of Heaven hath given 
me all the Kingdoms of the earth; and He hath 
charged me to BUILD HIM AN HOUSE at 
Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among 
you of all His people? His God be with him, and 
let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and 
BUILD THE HOUSE OF THE LORD GOD 
OF ISRAEL (He is the God), which is in Jerusa- 
lem. And whosoever remaineth in any place where 
he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him 
with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and 
with beasts, beside the freewill offering for the 
HOUSE OF GOD that is in Jerusalem.” Ezra 
1: 1-4. 


This proclamation of Cyrus is confirmed in 2 Chron. 
36: 22-23. But a careful reading of it reveals the fact 
that nothing is said in it about “restoring and rebuild- 
ing Jerusalem,” all that is mentioned is the “House of 
the Lord,” or the TEMPLE. But some claim that it 
must be interpreted by the passage in Isa. 44: 28, 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 185 


where the Lord says of Cyrus, 176 years before he 
came to the throne— 


“He is My Shepherd, and shall perform all my 
pleasure: even saying to JERUSALEM, Thou 
shalt be built; and to the TEMPLE, Thy founda- 
tion shall be laid.” Isa. 44: 28. 


It would be interesting to know what prompted the 
heathen King, Cyrus, to utter his decree. Did Daniel 
call his attention tocthe prophecy of Jeremiah (Jer. 
25: 11-14), that the Jews were to be captives in Baby- 
lon for seventy years, and that the time was up, and 
did he ask for their freedom, or did he call the King’s 
attention to Isa. 44:28, which the Holy Spirit used to 
move Cyrus to free the Jews from their Captivity and 
send them back to rebuild the Temple, even restoring 
the gold and silver vessels that Nebuchadnezzar had 
taken from the Temple? Whatever prompted Cyrus 
to issue his “Decree,” we are told that as the result of 
it 50,000 captives returned to Jerusalem (Ezra 
2: 64-65), that they set up an altar and renewed their 
sacrificial offerings and feasts, and proceeded to re- 
build the Temple, but the work dragged because of 
adversaries. Is this a fulfilment of Gabriel’s words to 
Daniel? As Cyrus limited himself in his command- 
ment to the rebuilding of the Temple, and said nothing 
about the restoration and rebuilding of Jerusalem, are 
we to infer that he included that, or in the 176 years 
between Isaiah’s prophecy and the issuance of Cyrus’ 
decree, had the Lord changed His mind and limited 
the work of Cyrus to the mere rebuilding of the 
Temple? It would seem as if we should limit our- 
selves to the words of Cyrus himself, that the Lord 
charged him to simply build Him an “HOUSE” in 
Jerusalem. | 


SECOND DECREE 


The “Second Decree” was :that of Darius, B. C. 
F19Ntlt sisiecordeds ini-bzra. 6: 1312., In Ezray'5 1-17 
we read how those who were trying to rebuild the 
Temple were interfered with in their work on the 


186 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


score that they had no authority for it, so they made 
an appeal to Darius to make a search in the king’s 
treasure house in Babylon, which he did. The search 
revealed the Decree of Cyrus; and Darius’ Decree is 
simply a reaffirmation of the Decree of Cyrus with 
penalties attached. It is worthy of note that Darius’ 
Decree has reference to the Temple only, nothing 1s 
said about restoring and rebuilding the City, thus con- 
firming the limitation of Cyrus’ decree to the Temple. 


THIRD DECREE 


The “Third Decree” was that of Artaxerxes, king 
of Persia, in B. C. 458. It was simply a letter giving 
to Ezra permission to go up to Jerusalem and take 
with him some of the Priests and Levites, with author- 
ity to collect gold and silver to purchase bullocks, 
rams, and lambs for offerings in the Temple, and if 
necessary to draw on the King’s Treasurers to the 
extent of “an hundred talents of silver, and to an 
hundred measures of wheat, and to an hundred baths 
of wine, and to an hundred baths of oil, and salt with- 
out prescribing how much.” Ezra 7:11-22. There is 
nothing in this “Decree” that had anything to do with 
restoring or rebuilding of Jerusalem. It was simply a 
“letter” given to a Scribe who had prepared his heart 
to seek the Law of the Lord, and who wished to see 
that Law carried out in the service of the House of the 


Jord: 
FOURTH DECREE 


This was the Decree of Artaxerxes Longimanus, 
given in B. C. 445, in the twentieth year of his reign, 
and is recorded in Neh. 2:1-8. It was given to Nehe- 
iniah, the King’s “Cupbearer,” a very high official of 
the Persian Court, and one of the King’s trusted 
servants; and was permission to return to Jerusalem 
and “BUILD” it. It was a political and not a religious 
mission, as is evident from the opposition of outsiders, 
such as Sanballat and Tobiah, who felt that the re- 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 187 


building of the walls and the fortifying of the City 
was a rebellious act. While the walls were repaired in 
fifty-two days, it took Nehemiah twelve years to re- 
build and restore the City, and re-establish the Law, 
thus fulfilling the prophecy — “The street shall be 
built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.” 
Verse 25.- The purpose of Nehemiah’s mission was the 
restoration of Jerusalem as a political capital, and the 
re-establishment of the Jewish Nation. While the 
words of the Decree are not given, the character of 
Nehemiah’s work, that of restoration, is proof of its 
nature. That the “letters” given Nehemiah by the 
ing were in the form of a Decree is evident, other- 
wise Nehemiah would have had no authority to do 
what he did. As there ts no other Decree authorizing 
such restoration, therefore this one of Artaxerxes 
Longimanus must be the one meant by Gabriel. 


Let us look at it in another way. If we take the 
“First Decree,” that of Cyrus, B. C. 536, as the start- 
ing point of the “Seventy Weeks,” then the 7 + 62 
- Weeks, or 483 years on. the “Year Day, Scale” to 
“Messiah the Prince,” ran out in B. C. 53, or 49 years 
before the “Birth of Christ,” B. C. 4. If we take the 
“Second Decree,” that of Darius, B. C. 519. the 483 
years ran out in B. C. 36, or 32 years before the “Birth 
of Christ.” Now if our present chronology is correct 
we cannot take either of the first two “Decrees” as a 
Starting point, unless we admit that there is a “time- 
space” of 49 or 32 years between the “7 Weeks’ and 
the “62 Weeks,” which the prophecy will permit, in 
fact implies, by the division of the “69 Weeks” into 
“7 Weeks” and “62 Weeks.” 


Decree Birth 
of 7 Weeks 49 ) 62 Weeks of 
Lk P 49 Years \ Years/ 434 Years Ske 


If we take the “Third Decree,” that of Artaxerxes, 
B, C. 458, the 483 years carry us over to A. D. 25, or 


188 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


29 years after the “Birth of Christ.” Christ being born 
B. C. 4. If we take the “Fourth Decree,” that of Arta- 
xerxes Longimanus, B. C. 445, the 483 years carry 
us over to A. D. 38, or 8 years after the “Crucifixion 
of Christ’ in A. D. 30.\ From this we see that we 
must either allow a “Time-Space” between the “7 
Weeks” and the “62 Weeks,’ or we must use some 
other method of calculation. 


THE TERMINUS OF THE “SIXTY-NINE 
WEEKS” 


But there is another factor that enters into the 
problem. We have considered the four possible “start- 
ing points” of the “Seventy Weeks,’ how about their 
“ending?” What does the statement—“Unto Messiah 
the Prince’ mean? We know that “Messiah the 
Prince” means Christ, but to what particular period or 
event in His life does the prophecy point? To His 
Birth, His Baptism, or His “Triumphal Entry?” These 
cover a period of 33 years and affect our reckoning. 
Let us look at them. Was the “BIRTH” of Christ the 
“Terminus” of the Sixty-nine Weeks?” Naturally we 
would suppose it was. If Gabriel was sent to Daniel 
to announce the “Seventy Weeks,” what more suit- 
able person could there be than he to announce the 
expiration of the “69 Weeks,” and the Birth of “Mes- 
siah the Prince.’ So we find that when the “Fulness 
of Time” (Gal. 4:4) of the “Seventy Weeks” had 
come for the appearance of “Messiah the Prince,” 
Gabriel appeared to Mary and said— 


“Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favor with 
God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy 
womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call His 
name JESUS. He shall be great, and shall be 
called the ‘Son of the Highest :’ and the Lord God 
shall give unto Him the Throne of His father 
David: and He shall reign over the House of 
Jacob forever: and of His Kingdom there shall be 
no end.” Luke 1: 30-33. 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 189 


While Gabriel did not announce to Mary, or the 
angels, that Jesus was the “Messiah the Prince,’ he 
did announce that He was to have the Throne of His 
father David, and therefore he was born as a “Prince” 
of the “House of David.” While the “Wise Men” 
(Matt. 2: 1-2) and Pilate (John 18: 33-39) called him 
a King, and He was so crucified, He is still a “Prince,” 
for a Prince is a King in the making, and Jesus has not 
as yet been crowned and received His Kingdom, for 
He is now a “High Priest,’ and will not be a King 
until He receives the Kingdom from the Father. Dan. 
7:13-14. There was a wonderful suitableness there- 
fore in Jesus being called “Messiah the PRINCE” 
when He came the first time, for if Gabriel had said, 
“Unto Messiah the KING,” the “69 Weeks” would 
have reached to His “Second Coming” as KING. But 
as Jesus did not become publicly known at His birth 
it becomes a question whether that event fulfils the 
prophecy. 

The first public event in Jesus’ life was His Bap- 
tism, when, at the age of thirty, He had the twofold 
witness of the Father and the Holy Spirit to His Deity. 
Matt. 3:13-17. The Father saying—“This is My be- 
loved Son in whom I am well pleased,” and the Holy 
Spirit inetner orm Ol-a cove, anomtine’ Fim, leuke 
4:16-19. Now the word “Messiah” means the 
“Anointed One,” and so the date of Christ’s Baptism 
might have been the time of the expiration of the 
“Sixty-nine Weeks,” for at that time He entered upon 
His Public Ministry and proclaimed that the “King- 
dom of Heaven” was “at hand,” but the offer of the 
Kingdom was rejected, and from that time Jesus’ min- 
try tookvonea differentyiorm-= sso =the “Baptism** ot 
Jesus could not have been the “Terminus” of the ‘69 
Weeks” because Jesus avoided all public recognition 
of His claim as Messiah, even charging His Disciples 
again and again that they should not make Him 
known. 

The third event in Christ’s life that might be con- 
sidered as the “Terminus” of the “Sixty-nine Weeks” 


190 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


was the “Triumphal Entry” of Christ into Jerusalem 
on “Palm Sunday,” April 2, A. D. 30, a few days betore 
His Crucifixion, and recorded in all four Gospels. 
Knowing that He was soon to be “cut-off” (Crucified), 
Dan. 9:26, and that His MESSIAHSHIP must be 
publicly recognized before that event. Jesus Himself 
took steps toward the fulfilment of Zech 9:9. 


“Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O 
daughter of Jerusalem: because thy KING com- 
eth unto thee: He is just, and having salvation; 
lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the 
foal of an ass.” 


We are told in John 12:13, that the people who 
went out to meet Him as He descended the Mount 
of Olives, cried—“‘Hosanna: Blessed is the ‘KING OF 
ISRAEL’ that cometh in the name of the Lord.” Why 
was this public proclamation of the “Kingship” of 
Jesus? The fact that Jesus at that time not only con- 
sented, but took steps to bring about His “Triumphal 
Entry” by commanding His Disciples to bring a “cer- 
tain ass,” whose location He pointed out to them 
(Matt. 21: 1-3), and declared, when He was asked to 
rebuke His Disciples (luke 19: 39-40), that if they 
should hold their peace the stones would immediately 
cry out; the fact, I say, that Jesus not only consented 
to be called “KING,” but aided in bringing it about, 
is proof that the “Triumphal Entry” had some pro- 
phetical significance, and what greater significance 
could it have had than that of proclaiming the end of 
the “Sixty-nine Weeks,” and the coming of “MES- 
SIAH THE PRINCE?” There was no reason why 
the prophecies of Dan. 9:25 and Zech. 9:9 should not 
be fulfilled in the same event, the “TRIUMPHAL 
ENTRY,” for those who thus accepted Jesus as 
“King,” in that act accepted Him as “MESSIAH THE 
PRINCE.” When Jesus came the first time He rode. 
meek and lowly, into Jerusalem on an “ass;” when 
He comes to Jerusalem the second time it will be on a 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS LO 19 


“WHILE HORSE” accompanied by the armies of 
Heaven. Rev. 19:11-16. It seems logical therefore 
that we should accept His “Triumphal Entry” as the 
date of the “Terminus” of the “Sixty-nine Weeks,” 
rather than either that of His “Birth” or “Baptism.” 

Having reached the conclusion that the “START- 
ING POINT” of the “69 Weeks” was the “Decree” of 
Artaxerxes Longimanus, given March 14th, B. C. 445, 
and the “TERMINUS” the “Triumphal Entry” of 
Jesus into Jerusalem on “Palm Sunday,” April 2, A. D. 
30, it remains to be seen if the “69 Weeks” cover the 
“Time-Space” between these dates. But before we 
proceed it would be well to note that there is a dif- 
ference of opinion as to the date of Christ’s birth and 
death. He was not born A. D: 1, for He was born 
before the death of Herod (Matt. 2: 1-23), and Herod 
diedmthes latter ipartwowmil o G44) hen wesread:that 
when Christ was Baptized He was “about thirty years 
of age” (Luke 3:23), which would make the date of 
His Baptism the latter part of A. D. 26. And as His 
Public Ministry lasted three and one-half years, that 
would carry Him over until the spring of A. D. 30, 
when He was Crucified at the time of “The Pass- 
over,” which that year fell on Friday, April 7, making 
the “Triumphal Entry” fall on the preceding Sunday, 
EA DpileseN\ 1) 3O), 

Thus far we have figured on the Julian, or Astro- 
nomical year of 365% days, but there are other years. 
There is the Solar year of 365 days, the Calendar year 
of 360 days, and the Lunar year of 354 days. Which 
of these years does God use in the Scriptures? We 
find the answer in the account of the Flood in Gen. 
7: 11-24: 8: 3-4. There we are told that the 5 months, 
from the 17th day of the second month until the 17th 
day of the seventh month, are reckoned as 150 days, 
or 30 days to a month, or 360 davs to a year. So we 
see that in “Prophetical Chronology” we are to use a 
“Calendar” year of 360 davs. Having discovered that 
God's measures of “Prophetic Time” are “A DAY 

LORMAGI EAR and aD HIRDY SDAYS@T.O 7A 


192 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


MONTH,” let us now apply them to the “Seventy 
Weeks” of Daniel. 

According to ordinary chronology the 475 years 
from B. C. 445 to A. D. 30 inclusive are “Solar” years 
of 3605 days each. Now counting the years between 
these two dates (444 + 29 = 473 years), and count- 
incebmG@ el andeAwy wlgasiZay ears: 


B.C. Baer aie eae A.D. 
1 Stee eee eee Tippin) woe 


we have 473 “Solar” years. Multiply these by 365 
(the number of days in a “Solar” year) and we have 
172,645 days, to which add the number of days in- 
clusive from March 14 to December 31; B.C. 445 = 
293 days, and the number of days from each 1 to 
April 2, A. D. 30 = 92 days, we have 172,645 + 293 + 
oa 173, 030 days. To which add 116 days for “leap 
years,’ and we have 173,146 days. Divide these by 
360, the numberof days inva “Prophetic Y ear,” and 
we have 481 years, less 14 days, or within 2 years and 
14 days of 483 years, the number of “Year Days” in 
wOUENVeeks. 

This reckoning does not agree with that of Sir Rob- 
ert Anderson in his book, “Daniel in the Critic’s Den,” 
page 134. Sir Robert claims that Jesus’ “Triumphal 
Entry. swassinadeson. Sunday.en prilg6. eA, SZaatle 
fixes the date on the statement of Luke (Luke 3: 1-3), 
that John the Baptist began his ministry in the fif- 
teenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, which was 
A. D. 29, if profane history is correct. Now as Jesus 
was baptized during the first year of John’s ministry, 
then He must have been baptized in A. D. 29. And 
Sir Robert by limiting Jesus’ ministry to three years. 
makes the date of the “Triumphal Entry” to be Sun- 
day, April 6, A. D. 32. This conflicts with the previous 
statement of the writer that Jesus was born in B. C. 4, 
because He was born before the death of Herod 
(Matt. 2: 1-23), and Herod died the latter part of that 
year. Now Luke tells us that Jesus was “about thirty 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 193 


years of age” when He was Baptized (Luke 3:23), 
and if He was born in B. C. 4, and John the Baptist 
began his ministry in A. D. 29, Jesus was 33 years old 
when He was Baptized, and if His Ministry lasted 
for 314 years, He was 36% years old when He was 
crucified. The whole thing hinges on whether Herod 
died in B. C. 4, or Tiberius Caesar began his reign in 
A. D. 14. 


We quote below the figures of Sir Robert: 


“From B. C. 455 to A. D. 32 is 476 years (he counts 
PrpCurland i. Danimas onepyearje —) l/3740 edays 
(476 & 365) + 116 days for leap years. And from 
14th March to 6th April (reckoned inclusively accord- 
ing to Jewish practice) is 24 days. But 173,740 + 
Teh Oye ae Geel 3 880A ndi 69s <7 360371173, 8802" 
Thus he claims that the “69 Weeks” were exactly 
fulfilled to the day. But Sir Robert counts the years 
B. C. 445 and A. D. 32 as full years, when he ought 
only to count from March 14 to December 31 of B. C. 
445, and from January 1 to April 6 of A. D. 32. That 
would leave only 474 full years in between B. C. 445 
andere oc e COUntiic mi es Ome leandeAsml) 4 lvasvone 
year. Figuring this out, we have 474 «& 365 = 173,010 
+ 293 days from March 14 to December 31, B. C. 
445, + 96 days from January 1 to April 6, A. D. 30, + 
116 days for leap years (173,010 + 293 + 96 + 116) 
equals 173,515. Divide this by 360 and we have 482 
years less 5 days, or 1 year and 5 days short of the 
483 years. 

The first of these calculations (that of the writer) 
is 2 years and 14 days short of 483 years, while that 
of the second (Sir Robert Anderson’s) is 1 year and 
5 days short. How are we to explain this shortage? 
The only way we can explain it is that there is an 
error in profane chronology, of a year or two, between 
B. C. 445 and A. D. 30 or 32. If such an error is dis- 
covered, and it amounts to more than a year or two, 
that would not invalidate the calculation, but could 
readily be explained on the supposition that there is a 


194 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


“Time-Space” between the “7 Weeks” and the “62 
Weeks.” The fact is, that the difference in time, in 
either of the above calculations, is so small as to 
amount to a demonstration that the “69 Weeks” cover 
the time between the Edict of Artaxerxes Longimanus, 
B. C. 445, and the “Triumphal Entry” of Jesus into 
Jerusalem. 

We see from this that if the “Students of Prophecy” 
of Christ’s day had been on the alert, and had under- 
stood Daniels Prophecy of the Seventy Weeks)’ 
they would have been looking for Him, and woud 
have known to a certainty whether He was the Mes- 
siah or not. What a rebuke is all this to those teachers 
and preachers of today who make light of the pro- 
phetical statements of the “Word of God.” The “Sec- 
ond Coming” of Christ will find them just as much 
unprepared to receive: Him as the Jews were to re- 
ceive Him at His First Coming. It was just as the 
man “clothed in linen.” who stood on the river bank, 
said to Daniel—‘‘None of the wicked shall under- 
stand; but the Wise Shall Understand.” Dan. 12:10. 
That is, the scripturally and spiritually wise. 


THE GREAT PARENTHESIS 


Having shown that 69 of the “70 Weeks” ran their 
course with the “Triumphal Entry” of Christ into 
Jerusalem, the next question is, does the “70th Week” 
immediately follow the “69th” or is there a “Time- 
Space” between them? A “Time-Space” that takes in 
the whole of the present Dispensation. There are 
some who claim that there is no “Time-Space.” Some 
of these elaim: thatethes “69th iw ecky tendedmatithe 
Birth of Christ, and the Middle of the “/Oth” at His 
Crucifixion, when He was “cut off,” and that the re- 
mainder of the “70th Week” is now in the process of 
fulfilment. The fallacy of this is seen in that it divides 
the “70th Week” into two unequal parts, one of 33% 
years, from the Birth of Christ until His Crucifixion, 
the other of 1900 or more years, when the “70th 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 195 


Week” can be no longer than each of the “69 Weeks,” 
which we have seen were 7 years. 

some of those who claim that there is no “Time- 
Space’ “between the 69th’ and “70th Week” affirm 
that it would be contrary to other Scripture to put a 
“Gap” -between them, and they quote the “Seventy 
Years” of the Babylonian Captivity, which lasted for 
exactly 70 years without a break. They also mention 
the 430 years’ sojourning of Abraham’s descendants 
ite Ua oei oe on el 40 Gale oly) ee which 
was tulfiled to a day (Ex. 12:41-42), and the 40 
years’ wandering in the Wilderness of the Children of 
Israel (Num. 14: 34), which was literally fulfilled with- 
out a break. But they forget that there were no “Time 
Divisions” in those prophecies, while in this prophecy 
of the “Seventy Weeks” there are three (7 + 62 + 1), 
and each period has its own particular work to do. 
The fact that each period is mentioned separately is 
an intimation, if not direct proof, that in the mind of 
God there was to be a “break,” if not a “GAP,” be- 
tween them. 

“Tf this be true,” you ask, “what filled in the ‘Gap’ 
between the ‘7 Weeks’ and the ‘62 Weeks?’”* While 
there is no statement as to what happened between 
the “7 Weeks” and the “62 Weeks,” as there is as to 
what happened between the “69th” and “70th” Week 
(which was the Crucifixion of Christ and the Destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem), it is clear from the fact that they 
are mentioned separately, that the “7 Weeks” lead up 
to some event that marks a “Time Space,” which 
might have been only a day or a year. Now we know 
that the “7 Weeks,” or 49 years, give the time it took 
to rebuild the Temple. and re-establish the Temple 
form of worship, and that they cover the time exactly 
between the Decree of Artaxerxes, B. C.-445, and the 
close of Hebrew prophecy and of the Old Testament 
Scriptures, B. C. 396. This leaves the “62 Weeks” to 
cover the “Time of Silence” from the close of the Old 
Testament, B. C. 396, to Christ’s “Triumphal Entry” 
into Jerusalem, A. D. 30. 


196 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Verse 26 tells us what is going to happen between 
the “69th” and “70th Week.” First, that ‘““Messiah the 
Prince” (Christ) should be “cut-off” (Crucified). Sec- 
ond, that Jerusalem and the Temple were to be de- 
stroyed by the Romans. Third, that after their de- 
struction there would be a long period covered by 
wars, etc. It was of this last period that Jesus said— 
“Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, 
until the “Times of the Gentiles’ be fulfilled” (Luke 
21:24), and as the “Times ‘of the Gentiles’ are still 
running, we see that verse 26 cannot be a description 
of the “70th Week” immediately following the “69th,” 
for it covers a period now nearly 1900 years long, 
while the “7Oth Week” is to cover only SEVEN 
YEARS. 

Those who claim that the “69th Week” ended and 
the “70th” began when Jesus appeared at the Jordan 
to be Baptized, and that the 3% years of His Public 
Ministry were the “First Half” of the “/Oth Week,” 
and that His Crucifixion was the “Middle of the 
Week,” when by His death on the Cross He caused 
“the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease,” meaning that 
He then caused all “bloody sacrifices” to cease, forget 
that the “bloody sacrifices’ of the Temple did not 
cease at the Crucifixion, nor were they put away by 
Christ. They did not cease until the destruction of 
the Temple by the Romans 40 years later. 


THE OLIVET DISCOURSE 
Matt. 24231-3575) Mark 1321-31 4mlvuke rt 5233) 


When Jesus uttered His “Olivet Discourse” the ‘69 
Weeks” were already BEHIND Him, and He stood 
within two days of the “AFTER” when He was to be 
“CUT-OFF” (Crucified). Dan. 9:26. And as in that 
“Discourse” He foretold the destruction of Jerusalem, 
and how it was to be trodden under foot of the Gen- 
tiles until the “Times of the Gentiles” be fulfilled (and 
they are still running), After Which He would return, 
we see that the “70th Week” could not appear until 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 197 


the END of this Dispensation, and therefore there is a 
“GAP” of 1900 or more years between the “69th” and 
“70th Week.” The “Olivet Discourse” then is the 
“Key” to the interpretation of Dan. 9: 26-27. 

But we have still further confirmatory evidence in 
the Book of Revelation, written A. D. 96, twenty-six 
years after the destruction of Jerusalem. We must not 
forget that the Book of Revelation, while written by 
the Apostle John, is the “Revelation of JESUS 
CHRIST” (Rev. 1:1), and therefore is a “Revelation” 
made by Him AFTER HIS ASCENSION, and is not 
only confirmatory of His “Olivet Discourse,” but gives 
in detail what is to happen during “Daniel’s Seven- 
tieth Week.” The Book of Revelation is written in 
chronological order.* In chapters 2 and 3, in the “Mes- 
sages to the Churches” there is a “Prophetic Outline” 
of the Christian Church during the present Dispensa- 
tion. In chapter 4 the Church is “caught out,” and 
passes through the “OPEN DOOR?” (verse 1) into 
Heaven. This is the “Rapture” of the Church as de- 
scribed in 1 Thess. 4: 13-18. And from the 5th chapter 
to the 19th inclusive, we have a description of the 
whole of “Daniel’s Seventieth Week,” which covers 
the “End Time” of this Dispensation. 

From this we see that “Daniel’s Seventieth Week” 
(Dan. 9:24-27), Jesus’ “Olivet Discourse” (Matt. 
24:1-35), and John’s “Seals, Trumpets and Vials” 
(Rev. 6:1 to 18:24), cover the SAME period, and are 
Jewish and have no reference to the Christian Church. 
Daniel draws the outline in his “Seventieth Week,” 
Jesus roughs in the picture in His “Olivet Discourse,” 
and John fills in the details in the “Book of Revela- 
tion.” What Daniel condenses in one verse, John en- 
larges to thirteen chapters. 


“See the writer’s book on Revelation. 


198 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


DANIEL’S SEVENTIETH WEEK, CHRIST'S 
OLIVET DISCOURSE, AND THE BOOK 
OF REVELATION COMPARED 


DANIEL’S SEVENTIETH WEEK 


———EEE 


Damme 27, 
FIRST HALF MIDDLE LAST HALF 
(3% Years) ithe (3% Years 
The “Prince that | Covenant A Period 
+ Broken 
shall come of 
(Antichrist) Desolations 
makes a /-year 
“Covenant” Sacrifices 
with the Jews and 
Oblations 
Cease 


THE SECOND ADVENT 


CHRIST’S OLIVET DISCOURSE 


FIRST HALF 


Matt. 24: 1-31 
MIDDLE 


LAST HALF 
Wars The : 
Famines Appearance A Period 
Pestilences of the of 
Earthquakes “Abomination Tribulation 
False Christs of such as 
These are the fe cae there has never 
Beginning of Bee a been before 
Sorrows by Daniel 


Matt. 24: 4-14 


Matt. 24: 15-19 Matt. 24: 20-22 


THE SECOND ADVENT 


Matt. 24: 29-31 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 199 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 
Reve oe 1922 


FIRST HALF MIDDLE LAST HALF 
(31%4 Years) The Dragon (3% Years) 
Cast Out onto The Vial 
The Seals the Earth and Noah eee 
and Incarnates 
Himself in The Great 
svt Antichrist Tribulation 


Rev. 5: 1-11-19 Revyvelcal-l7, Revelo Loe 


THE SECOND ADVENT 
Reve, LO 1-21 


We must not forget that the Book of Daniel treats 
of the “TIMES OF THE GENTILES,” and that 
therefore its “Visions” should cover the whole sweep 
Ofte Gentilemeutmes mas lakemtncea reales) Isioneno! 
Nebuchadnezzar. It covers the whole “Time of the 
Gentiles,” and the “Golden Headed Image’ he saw 
was not to be destroyed until Christ ‘sets up| His 
“Stone Kingdom” at His Second Coming. The “Beast 
Visions” of Daniel also carry us down until the 
“END,” when the “Little Horn” (Antichrist) is de- 
strovedmatetienr .écond Coming ot @hristiy isathe 
bev isiOuemOlmithe: Seventy eeksmraniexceptiongt0 
these? Does it only extend to the “First Coming” ol 
Christ, and end with the destruction of Jerusalem? 
Does it not follow that it must cover the whole period 
of the “Times of the Gentiles,” like the others, to be 
in harmony with the purpose of the “Vision,” which 
was to inform Daniel what was to happen to his people 
(the Jews), and the Holy City (Jerusalem), until the 
transgressions of the Jews are finished, and their 
transgressions are not yet finished, else why are they 


200 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


scattered all over the world, and Jerusalem still trod- 
den down of the Gentiles? 

From this we see that the “Seventy Weeks” are dis- 
tinctively “JEWISH,” and are “cut out” from the 
whole course of the “Times of the Gentiles.”’ Neither 
have they any reference or application to the “Chris- 
tian Church.” We must not forget that the “Christian 
Church” was not revealed in the Old Testament. This 
is why Daniel jumps from the “cutting off’ (Cruci- 
fixion) of Christ, and the destruction of Jerusalem 
(verse 26), to the confirming of a Covenant by Anti- 
christ (verse 27), which is still future. The fact then 
that the “Christian Church,” which comes in between 
them Ciuuiciixionm andmthesteyved iio Omet lem rattlICe 
that shall come” (Antichrist), had no place in a proph- 
ecy concerning Daniel’s People and City, makes it 
imperative that there should be a “GAP” or “PAREN- 
THESIS” between the “69th” and “70th Week,” a 
“Gap” as wide as this “Church Dispensation” shall 
last. 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS OF SCRIPTURE 


It is most interesting, and not generally known to 
Bible students, that there is not only one “Seventy 
Week” period in the Scriptures but four, and that 
these four begin with the birth of Abraham, and follow 
each other, without a break, until the Second Coming 
of Christ, and are connected with the Jews only, and 
give us the “Prophetic Chronology” of that nation, and 
prove that God in the Scriptures only reckons time 
when the Jews are in His favor, for there is no reve- 
lation of the length of the “Times of the Gentiles,” or 
of the Church Period, in the Scriptures, for if there 
were we might be able to find out the time of the 
Lord’s return. 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 201 


THE FIRST SEVENTY WEEKS 


In Gen. 12: 1-4 we read: that Abraham was seventy- 
five years old when he received the “Promise.” And in 
Gal3217 = Pauletellomusethatethe: « Covenantu@ror 
“Promise,” was not annulled by the “Law” (the Law 
given on Mt. Sinai), which was given 430 years later. 
This would make the length of time from the birth of 
Abraham to the Exodus, 75 + 430 = 505 years. But 
during that time, from the conception of Ishmael, 
Gen: 16:16, to the*birthyol Isaac, Gen..2] : 5,74 period 
of about 15 years, Ishmael was a usurper, and the 
time should not be reckoned. So when we subtract 
those 15 years from the 505 years we have remaining 
490 years, or our first “Seventy Weeks’ of years, 
WiHicherinetrom thei birth ot Abratam, Ba Ce 211 to 
the Exodus, B. C. 1606. While these dates are not 
those of Archbishop Ussher given in our Bibles, which 
dates are only approximately true, we find that count- 
ing back from Christ, on the basis of these four “Sev- 
enties,” that the above dates are established. 


THE SECOND SEVENTY WEEKS 


In 1 Kings 6:1 we are told that it was 480 years 
from the Exodus to the fourth year of Solomon’s reign, 
when he began to build the Temple. But in Acts 
Pople Pe ear tellorasnin histsermon.ateanuocnstnat 
God for 40 years suffered the manners of Israel in the 
Wilderness; then, after the dividing of the land, for 
about 450 years (say 448 years), He gave them Judges 
(which it would appear included Joshua and the Elders 
that outlived him) until Samuel the Prophet, who 
acted as Judge about 20 years. Then follows the reign 
of King Saul, 40 years; the reign of King David, 40 
years; and up to the fourth year of Solomon’s reign, 
which makes from the Exodus to the building of the 
Temple 591 years. Here there is a difference between’ 
the statement in Acts, and the one in 1 Kings, of 111 
years. How are we to account for it? It is accounted 


202 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


for by not reckoning the time during that period that 
the Children of Israel were out of favor with God. 
From the Exodus to the building of the Temple the 
Children of Israel were in SERVITUDE six times, as 
follows— 


Years 

1. To MESOPOTAMIA. Judges 3:8....... 8 
2. To the MOABITES. Judges 3:12-14.... 18 
3. To the CANAANITES. Judges 4:2-3.... 20 
4. To the MIDIANITES. Judges 6:1...... 7 
5. To the PHILISTINES AND 

AMMONITES. Judges 10:7-8... 18 
GO Totthes-PHILISPTINES: Judges! 132 te 140 


—— 
— 
— 
— 


pote 


Subtract these 111 years of “Servitude” from Paul’s 
statement in Acts of the 591 years, and you have 480 
years the time mentioned in Kings, which clearly 
shows that the writer in Kings deducted the “Years 
of Servitude” from the time from the Exodus to the 
building of the Temple, thus recognizing the fact that 
God does not count time for the Children of Israel 
when they are in servitude to other nations. 

Now we know that the Temple was not finished 
until 7 years later (1 Kings 6: 38), and as it probably 
took Hiram 3 years longer to cast the brazen pillars 
and make the brazen vessels for the service of the 
Temple (1 Kings 7: 13-51), we have 10 years, which 
added to the 480 years makes 490 years from the 
Exodus to the “Dedication of the Temple” (1 Kings 
8: 1-66), according to the Jewish way of reckoning 
time, but the actual time was 480 years plus the 111 
of “Servitude,” or 591 years, making the date of the 
“Dedication of the Temple” B. C. 1005.* 


*See Chart of “The Seventy Weeks of Scriptures.” 


SAVO 0921 
F SHINGY)-2- 
teyynaaz! SVN VeSSsal| Say 


é AIBA BHLI so F20014 


7 
q 
\) 


q 
3 


Ma3 MM WISAN3AIS ST3INVO 


‘aye[osep 943 uodn pamod 

Lisjep BY} pur ‘acy 

Wh dea ‘azzoOsap 

? yey sdoneuLMogr Jo 
Bcipvaidsisad ay} 493 pue ‘estar 03 
WonVigO eg) pur soyluoes ey) oanno 
Urys ay Se SUT JO FSplad ey) ay 
pav sha oO 40; Aueul UVM JuEM 
“PaO 94} Wipuss YeYS oy puy 1Z 


Vij ~ 


3M SHE 


v2:i2 NAT 
wood WLN3 aHL 40 SAMY 


RO 
© (W2EGHD Jeg) 
NOISIAIQ NYF1S3 


434M,.0L 569 AHL N33M139g dvb 


“pestulise}ep are saciyzosap 
234 6Y} JO pus ey, aun PAL ‘pooy 
B YP 99 YOYS jJoaro ae ey} pas 
$ daenjoaes ayy paz 9 843 fans 
-@p Teys owes [wys jeq) oouud ony 
~ Jo ojdoed ey} puv 
OLY 
W3IVSNYSP 40 


bee 
NO!LINY1S30 


V3IINYG Ol Q3IIVSA3Y LON S¥VM 
»HOUNHD 3H1,30 
NOILYSN3dSIQ IN3S3¥d 3H 


W-iIS Livw 6:6 °HI3Z'92-52:6 NWO 
wi ONTEG FHL HVISSZp] OF 
SUVE\-pe+ 


S433M-29 


TEE ee Leer erro: 


SN23M ININ ALXI 


i }resumry sey 100 


709 (HO 3d _9q_CwReo}] RYS Sysona 
OM} pu siossusiy} Jeye pry 9g 


“SJOH 3SOW 04} yUIOUE 97 pus ‘ace 


QalndisAdoy 
Vg "VAIS 'SSVHQKOJ 
NINYV] ADNAYVID AG 
NMWEQ ONY OINDISIg 


Fault} snomqnes3 
UL Made “Te oy. put ‘ureFu ying 
*Q LEYS tesags 047 
“9-C HAN 
WAIVENEaP 46 
SNtaATINe2yY 


° 


-ydoid pue uorsta ey} dn jvas 0} put 
‘ssausno0a4y3is Soysepiaaa ut 3a oq 
0} pae ‘Aqmbrar soy worjeronosas 
OFEW OCF PUe ‘EUTS JO pua Ue ayUT 04 
pue ‘corssai%suey ey) ystuy 03 ‘4419 
4joy 443 uodn pave ajdoad 24) codn 
Poultuiazap ere syjoem Ajuaaeg 1 


OI-L:V'SS3HL 
2A 


G1-A3Y" 
NOILY 


L2-72:6' NVQ 


SAddM ALNAASS SASZINVE 


}) 


a 


\% 


204 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


LENGTH OF THE “TIMES OF 
THE GENTILES” 


Right here it might be well to correct the erroneous 
method of calculating the length of the “Times of the 
Gentiles.” It has already been stated that there is no 
revelation of the length of the “Times of the Gentiles,” 
On ol the. Church bertodymineties schipturessm out 
some claim that there is, and base their claim on Lev. 
26: 18-21, 24-28, where Moses foretold, and four times 
repeated it, that if the Children of Israel disobeyed 
God, He would punish them “Seven Times” for their 
sins, and that Jesus referred to these “Seven Times” 
when He spoke of the “TIMES of the Gentiles,’ and 
that He meant by a “TIME,” a “Prophetical Time,” 
which they claim is a year of 360 days, each day 
standing for a year, thus making a “Time” equal to 
360 years, and “Seven Times” equal to 2520 years. If 
this be true, and “Seven Times” is the length of the 
“Times of the Gentiles,” then the length of the “Times 
of the Gentiles” is 2520 years, and as they began in 
B. C. 606, they ran out in A. D. 1914, which we know 
is not true, for the “Times of the Gentiles” are still 
running, with no end in sight. We have already seen 
that a “Time” is not 360 years but only one year, and 
“Seven Times” would be but seven years. And if we 
should admit that the “Times of the Gentiles” are 
2520 years long, they would not be years of 365% 
days but “Prophetic Years” of 360 days, and Se would 
have to reduce the 2520 years from 36514 days per 
year to 360 days as follows: 2520 K 365% = 920,430 
= 360 = 255634 years, which is 3634 years over 2520. 
So if the 2520 years of 365%4 years ran out in A. D. 
1914, the 2520 years of 360 days ran out 3634 years 
before, or in A. D. 1878. As the “Times of the Gen- 
tiles” are still running, this proves that they are more 
than 2520 years long, and that their length is not 
given. The fact is the “Seven Times” of Lev. 26: 18-28 
have no reference to the “Times of the Gentiles” at 
ally but refer tosthesioixioervitudes! *durine the time 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 205 


’ 


of the Judges, and to the “Babylonian Captivity,’ 
which makes the seventh. The present “Dispersion” 
of the Jews does not count, for it is neither a “Servi- 
tude” nor a “Captivity.” So we see that the “Children 
of Israel” have been already punished “Seven Times,” 
and that Lev. 26: 18-28 has been fulfilled. 


THE THIRD SEVENTY WEEKS 


By counting the years from the “Dedication of the 
Demplefebs Car O05 ;to sthep Edict of sAttaxerxessto 
restore and rebuild Jerusalem, B. C. 445, we find they 
are 560, but when we deduct the 70 years of the “Baby- 
lonian Captivity” we have left 490 years, making our 
“Third Seventy Years,” and proving our contention 
that God does not count time prophetically when the 
Jews are out of favor. This is also further proof that 
Theme Ciena ecksmebeclnmavitheime a Wecrecs | Of 
Artaxerxes Longimanus, B. C. 445. 


THE FOURTH SEVENTY YEARS 


We have now reached the period covered by Dan- 
iel’s “Seventy Weeks.” We have seen that “69 Weeks,” 
or 483 years on the “Year Day Scale,” of those “Sev- 
enty Weeks” elapsed with the “Triumphal Entry” of 
Jesus into Jerusalem in A. D. 30. While Jerusalem 
was not destroyed and the Jews scattered until A. D. 
70, their doom was sealed when Christ was crucified. 
The remaining 40 years were merely years of proba- 
tion, like the 40 years in the Wilderness, and cannot 
be counted as years of favor. So far then 483 years 
of the 490 of Daniel’s “Seventy Weeks” have expired. 
There is “One Week,” or seven years, yet to be ful- 
filled. For nearly 1900 years the Jews have been scat- 
tered over the earth. They have never been assimi- 
lated by the nations. They have never lost their 
identity or national peculiarities. And we have the 
unique spectacle of a people without a king, govern- 
ment, or land, retaining their national existence, and 
a land, Palestine, that seems to be under a curse, 


206 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


awaiting the return of its legal owners. Why is this? 
Is it not a fulfilment of the prophecy of Hosea 3:4? 


“The Children of Israel shall abide MANY 
DAYS without a King, and without a Prince, and 
without a Sacrifice, and without an Image (they 
are no longer idolators), and without an Ephod, 
and without Teraphim.”’ 


And the prophet adds in the next verse— 

“AFTERWARD shall the Children of Israel 
RETURN, and seek their God, and David their 
king; and shall fear the Lord and His goodness in 
the LATTER DAYS.” 


Flereis the secretiof their preservation, eiheysare 
being kept that they may RETURN IN THE LAT- 
TER DAYS. We see from this that “God has NOT 
CAST AWAY HIS PEOPLE” (the Jews—Rom. 
11: 1-2), that “blindness IN PART is happened to 
Israel, UNTIL the ‘Fulness of the Gentiles’ (the 
Church) be come in” (Rom. 11:25), and that the 
Jews are to be nationally restored to their own land. 
Jer. 30: 10-11; 16: 14-15; 24:6. Isa. 11: 11-12; 43: 5-7. 
Amos 9: 14-15. 

For the time being the Jews are out of favor with 
God, and God’s “Time-piece,” as far as the Jews are 
concerned, stopped at the end of the “69th Week” of 
Daniel’s “Seventy Weeks,” when they crucified the 
Lord. Acts 2: 22-23. We are living in the “Gap” be- 
tween the “69th” and: “70th Week,” and: the» “70th 
Week” cannot begin until God begins to deal again 
with Israel. From this study of the four “Seventy 
Week” periods, from the birth of Abraham, B. C. 
2111, to the present time, A. D. 1924,* we find that 
4035 years have elapsed; but when we deduct the 
number of years that Abraham and his descendants 
have been out of favor with God, which amounts to 
2090 years (15 + 111 + 70 + 1894 = 2090), we find 
that God’s people, the Children of Israel, have been 
under discipline over half the time. 

*The year the author was called Home. 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 207 


THE GAP 


In the “Gap” between the “69th” and “70th Week,” 
we are told ir ~erse 26 that four things would occur. 


I. That Messiah should be “cut-off,” but not for 
Himself. 


II. That the City (Jerusalem) and the Sanctuary 
(the Temple) would be destroyed. 


III. That a “Prince” would come of the same na- 
tionality as the People who should destroy the 
City and the Sanctuary. 


IV. That Palestine would be desolated until the 
Consummation, that is, until the “Seventy 
Weeks” have ended in the Second Coming of 
Christ, who shall destroy the “Desolator’— 
the Antichrist. 


Let us look at these four things more in detail. 


i. THAT MESSIAH SHOULD BE “CUT-OFF,” 
BUT NOT FOR HIMSELP. 


Jesus did not die tor Himself, He died for others. 
He died that He might bear our sins on the “Tree.” 
| Pet. 2:24. The margin reads—“and shall have 
nothing.” It was announced to Mary by the Angel 
Gabriel, that her son Jesus should have the “Throne” 
of his father David. Luke 1: 30-33. But instead of 
receiving the Kingdom, which John the Baptist, Jesus, 
and His Disciples proclaimed as “at hand,” Jesus was 
rejected as the Messiah and “cut-off” without any- 
thing. Instead of sitting on the Throne of His father 
David, and reigning in peace over the whole earth, 
He was Crucified between two thieves, and had none 
of the earthly dignities and glories to which, as Israel’s 
promised Messiah, He was entitled. He received no 
Crown, except the “Crown of Thorns,” no Throne, no 
Kingdom. Thus was foretold by Daniel the Cruci- 
fixion of Christ, and the postponement of the King- 
dom. 


208 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Il. THAT THE CITY (JERUSALEM) AND THE 
SANCTUARY (THE TEMPLE) WOULD BE 
DESTROYED. 


It is clear that as soon as the Jews rejected Jesus as 
their King, that He refused to any longer recognize 
them as a nation. The day after His “Triumphal 
Entry” Jesus visited the Temple and drove out the 
“Money Changers,’ declaring “MY House shall be 
called the ‘House of Prayer,’ but ye have made it a 
“Den of Thieves.’” Matt. 21:13. From that time Jesus 
no longer recognized the Temple as “God’s House,” 
but said of it—“YOUR House is left unto you deso- 
late,” that is, God-forsaken. Matt. 23:38. On the eve- 
ning of the following day, as Jesus sat on the Mount 
of Olives, overlooking the City over which He had 
wept, He foretold its destruction, saying of it and its 
inhabitants— 


“And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, 
and shall be led away captive into all nations: and 
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, 
UNTIL the ‘Times of the Gentiles’ be fulfilled.” 
Luke 21: 24. 


Now we know that this came to pass in A. D. 70, 
just as Jesus foretold. Jerusalem has never since been 
a Jewish city. It has been besieged and rebuilt over 
twenty times, and been under the control of a number 
of foreign Governments, but the Jews for the most 
part have not been permitted to set their foot in it. 
There is a movement on foot, called “Zionism,” to re- 
cover the possession of Palestine, but it will be of little 
avail, for it must remain desolate until the “Times of 
the Gentiles” are fulfilled, when God will restore it, 
without a penny of expense, to its original owners, 
the Children of Israel, and thus fulfil His Covenant 
with Abraham. Gen. 13:14-18. How do those who 
claim that the Book of Daniel was written by some 
pious Jew after the time of Antiochus Epiphanes 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 209 


(B. C. 175-164), because they do not believe that it is 
possible to predict future events, account for the fact 
that the verse we are considering foretells two out- 
standing historical events as the “Crucifixion of 
Christ,” and the “Destruction of Jerusalem,” neither 
of which took place until over 190 years after the time 
they claim the Book of Daniel was written? 


Ill. THAT A “PRINCE” WOULD COME OF THE 
SAME NATIONALITY AS THE PEOPLE 
WHO SHOULD DESTROY THE CITY AND 
THE SANCTUARY. 


This “Prince” was not the “Messiah the Prince” of 
verse 25, for the “Prince to come” is to be a “Roman,” 
that is of the “People” who destroyed the City of Jeru- 
salem, who were the Romans, but ‘Messiah the 
Prince” (Jesus) was not a Roman. Those who claim 
that by the “Prince that shall come,” Titus, the leader 
of the Roman forces, was meant, and not some still 
future “Prince,” declare, that as the “Prince” is to be 
a Roman, and there is no Roman nation today, there- 
fore some past Roman Prince, such as Titus, must 
have been meant. But such claimants forget that the 
Roman Empire is to be revived, and a “Prince,” the 
Antichrist, is to arise in it. The use of the words 
“People” and “Prince That Shall Come” show clearly 
that Titus was not that “Prince,” for the words “shall 
come” are future in their application, and imply that 
the “Prince that shall come” was to come at a time 
far removed from the time of Titus and the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem. The same argument applies to 
Herod. 


We must not forget that it was not necessary for 
the Angel Gabriel to specify to Daniel more in detail 
who the “Prince that was to come” was, or to give 
his name, for Daniel already knew. He knew that he 
would be the “Little Horn” that would rise among the 
“Ten Horns” on the head of the “Fourth Wild Beast.” 


210 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Dan. 7: 7-8, 23-27. While Daniel knew what Empires 
the first three “Wild Beasts’ stood for (Babylon, 
Medo-Persia and Greece), we are not sure that he 
knew that the “Fourth Wild Beast” stood for Rome. 
If he did, then he knew that the “People” that should 
destroy the City and the Sanctuary would be the 
Romans. We must not forget in the study of the 
Book of Daniel, that it has to do with the “Times of 
the Gentiles,’ and its purpose is to disclose in the 
“Little Horn” the last great “Gentile Ruler”’—THE 
ANTICHRIST. Naturally, the Prophecy of the “Sev- 
enty Weeks” should include him, for the purpose of 
the Prophecy is to inform us as to the “END TIME,” 
and what shall come to pass in the “LATTER DAYS.” 


IV. THAT PALESTINE WOULD BE DESO- 
LATED UNTIL THE CONSUMMATION, 
THAT IS, UNTIL THE “SEVENTY WEEKS” 
HAVE ENDED IN THE SECOND COMING 
OF CHRIST, WHO SHALL DESTROY THE 
“DESOLATOR’”—THE ANTICHRIST. 


The Land of Palestine when it was first occupied by 
the Children of Israel under Joshua was a land of 
“milk” and “honey,” and of “all manner of fruits” 
(Deu. 8: 7-9), and its soil brought forth “abundantly,” 
and this continued as long as the Children of Israel 
kept its Sabbaths. But God had warned them that if 
they did not obey Him and turned aside to worship 
other gods He would shut up the heavens and the 
harvests would fail. Deu. 11:13-17. Palestine today 
has the same fertile soil it had in Joshua’s time, but it 
lacks rain and irrigation. It is under the curse. God 
has withheld the “early” (October and November) and 
the “latter” rains (April and May), though they are 
now becoming more frequent, a sign that the lifting 
of the curse is near. This desolation of Palestine is 
what was foretold by Daniel in verse 26, and it is to 
continue until the Millennium, when 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS yale 


“The wilderness and the solitary place shall be 
glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and 
blossom as the rose.” Isa. 35:1. “Instead of the 
thorn shall come up the fir-tree, and instead of the 
briar shall come up the myrtle tree.” Isa. 55:13. 
“THEN shali the earth yield her increase.” Psa. 
67:6. “And the floors (threshing floors) shall be 
full of wheat, and the vats shall overflow with 
wine and oil. And I will RESTORE to you the 
years that the locust hath eaten, the cankerworm 
and the caterpillar, and the palmerworm, my great 
army which I sent among you. And ye shall eat 
in plenty and be satisfied, and praise the name of 
the Lord your God that hath dealt wondrously 
with you; and MY PEOPLE (the Jews) SHALL 
NEVER BE ASHAMED.” Joel 2: 24-26. 


Thus we see from these four things that were pro- 
phesied in verse 26 to occur AFTER the “69th Week,” 
two of which have been fulfilled, one now in the 
process of fulfilment, and the third, the coming of the 
“Prince,” still future, that there is a “Gap,” covering 
the whole of this “Church Dispensation,” between the 
[O9theande-/Othimv cele 


THE SEVENTIETH WEEK 


We now come to the last verse of the Prophecy, 
the 27th. . 


“And ‘HE’ shall confirm the Covenant with 
many, for ‘ONE WEEK: and in the ‘MIDST OF 
THE WEEK’ he shall cause the Sacrifice and the 
Oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of 
abominations he shall make it desolate, even until 
the consummation, and that determined shall be 
poured upon the desolate.” 


The first question is, who is meant by the pronoun 
“HE?” Some claim that the pronoun “He” refers to 
“Messiah the Prince,” or Christ, and that the “Cove- 
nant” is the “New Covenant” that Christ proclaimed 


GNZ THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


when He instituted the Lord’s Supper, saying as He 
handed to His Disciples the cup—“This is my blood 
of the ‘New Testament’ (Covenant), which is shed for 
many for the remission of sins.” Matt. 26:28. But 
they forget that Christ’s Covenant is an “Everlasting 
Covenant” (Heb. 13:20), while this “Covenant” is 
broken in the “Midst of the Week,” or at the end of 
three and one-half years. The pronoun “He” then 
cannot refer to Christ, but must refer to the last per- 
son mentioned in the preceding verse, who is the 
“Prince that shall come,” or the Antichrist. 

We know from other Scriptures that the Jews are 
to be gathered back to their own land and become 4 
“Nation” again. Jer. 30:10-11. Amos 9:14-15. Jer. 
16: 14-15. Isa. 43:5-7. When the time comes for this 
there will have gathered back to Palestine a great 
number of Jews, whose desire will be to repossess the 
land, build a Temple in which they can revive their 
sacrificial form of worship, and re-establish the Jew- 
ish State. They will not be able to do this without 
outside assistance, and at the “Psychological Moment” 
the Antichrist will appear on the scene and enter into 
a Covenant with them, that the Prophet Isaiah calls— 


“A COVENANT WITH DEATH 
AND AN 
AGREEMENT WITH HELL.” 


TsaeZsl 518: 


Notice that this “Covenant” will be made with 
“many,” not with all, for God will have His “Re- 
serves,” like the 7000 of Israel (1 Kings 19:18) and 
the 144,000 of Rev. 7:2-10, who will not bow the 
knee to Antichrist. Christ refers to this time in His 
Parable of 


THE UNCLEAN SPIRIT. 


“When the ‘Unclean Spirit’ is gone out of a 
man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS 213 


and findeth none. Then he saith, I will return into 
my house from whence I came out; and when he 
is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. 
Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven 
other spirits more wicked than himself, and they 
enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that 
man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be 
also unto THIS WICKED GENERATION.” 
Matt. 12: 43-45. 


It is clear from the words—“This Wicked Genera- 
tion,” that Christ applied the parable to the Jews; 
and not merely the Jews of His own time, but to all 
time, for the word “generation” means “race,” and not 
merely a period of time. 


It is a matter of history that the Jews were deliv- 
ered of the “Unclean Spirit of Idolatry” by their 
“Babylonian Captivity,” and they are free from it 
today, their house being “empty,” “swept,” and “gar- 
nished,” but the “Unclean Spirit” can still say of 
them—‘“MY HOUSE.” The “Unclean Spirit of Idola- 
try” is yet to return to the Jews, and he will take with 
him seven more spirits more wicked than himself. 
This will happen when, in the “Midst of the Week,” 
the Antichrist will break the Covenant, treat it as a 
“scrap of paper,” and cause the “Sacrifice and Obla- 
tion” to cease, and the “Abomination of Desolation” 
to stand in the Holy Place of the rebuilt Temple 
(Matt. 24:15), which “Abomination of Desolation” 
will be an “Image of the BEAST,” that che “False 
Prophet” will cause the followers of Antichrist to 
erect and worship under penalty of death. Rev. 
13: 14-15. This “Image” will be the Antitype of the 
“Golden Image” that Nebuchadnezzar commanded to 
be made and set™up in the Plain of Dura” in’ the 
Province of Babylon (Dan. 3: 1-30), before which, at 
the sounding of musical instruments, the people were 
commanded to bow down and worship under penalty, 
for those who disobeyed, of being cast into a “BURN- 
ING FIERY FURNACE.” Doubtless there will be 


214 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


many in the “Day of Antichrist” who will refuse to 
bow down and worship the “Image of the Beast,” and 
who will not escape as did the “Three Hebrew Chil- 
dren,” unless miraculously delivered by God, but will 
die by the “Guillotine.” Rev. 20: 4. 

The word “Abomination” was a common term 
among the Hebrews for a “false god,” and in the Old 
Testament means an “idol,’ and in one passage 
(1 Kings 11:5-7) we read how King Solomon, to 
please his heathen wives, built a “high place’ for 
Chemosh, the “Abomination of Moab,” in the hill that 
is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the “Abomina- 
tion of the Children of Ammon.” The word rendered 
“overspreading,” literally means “wings,” which in 
the Scriptures suggests the idea of protection, as 
“Under His wings shalt thou trust.” The meaning is 
that the Jews in that day shall seek protection under 
the “Wing of the Abomination of Desolation,” or the 
“Idol Image” of the ANTICHRIST. This will mean 
a “SEVENFOLD?” return of the “Evil Spirit of Idola- 
try,” so that their last state shall be worse than their 
first. And this shall continue until the “Consumma- 
tion,’ that is until the “End of the Week,” when 
Christ will return, and they shall look upon Him whom 
they pierced (Rev. 1:7) and turn from their idolatry, 
and the “Desolator’” (Antichrist) shall be destroyed 
by the “brightness of His Coming. 2 Thess, -2: 8. 
Rev. 19:20. From this we see that in those Anti- 
christian days there will be set up in the rebuilt 
Temple the “Wings of Abomination” instead of the 
“Wings of the Cherubim.” 

It is at this time, after their “national repentance,” 
and they have received Christ as their “Messiah the 
KING,” that He will make a “NEW COVENANT” 
with them that shall never be broken. 


“Behold, the days come (they are still future), 
saith the Lord, that I will make a ‘NEW COVE- 
NANT?’ with the ‘House of Israel,’ and with the 
“House of Judah:’ (the whole twelve Tribes) not 


THE SEVENTY WEEKS Ze 


according to the Covenant that I made with their 
fathers in the day that I took them by the hand 
to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which 
‘My Covenant’ they brake, although I was a hus- 
band unto them, saith the Lord: but this shall be 
the ‘Covenant’ that I will make with the ‘House of 
Israel; AFTER THOSE DAYS (the days of 
their present scattering), saith the Lord, I will put 
my law in their inward parts, and write it in their 
hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be 
MY PEOPLE. And they shall teach no more 
every man his neighbor, and every man his 
brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord: for they shall 
all know me, from the least of them unto the 
greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will for- 
give their iniquity, and will remember their sin 
NO MORE.” Jer. 31: 31-34. 


The writer of Hebrews quotes the above passage 
(Heb. 8: 7-13) and declares the promise of the “New 
Covenant” is for the Jews, and not for the Church, 
though the Church has a share in it; and that the time 
when this New Covenant shall be made with the 
Jews will be when their sins and iniquities have been 
put away. Which corresponds to Dan. 9: 24, or at the 
end of the “Seventy Weeks,” which is further proof 
that the “Seventy Weeks” have not as yet reached 
their end. 


er ‘inans maa a 
ile sige Jaret: Cup, Hue, 


ae As fal pay 


* 


a a sation perce’ beak 


t & . sé ty > ade ps ips au Ce 


* 


bie. . tee rey ven? (it. Ma f 
Not by a ier’ ate a teaeey 


i 


The Scripture of Truth 


CHAPTERS TEN, ELEVEN, TWELVE 


The last three chapters of the Book of Daniel be- 
long together, and there should be no chapter divi- 
sions. The three chapters for clearness may be divided 
into three parts. 


PART ONE 


The Relation of Supernatural Beings to the Earth 
Chap. 10: 1—11:1 


PART TWO 


The Pre-written History of the Kings of the North 
and the South 


Chap. 11: 2-35 


PART THREE 


The “Time of the End” 
Chap. 11: 36—12: 13 


isa Sot te eqin at se he, wromil 


TV IZWT may Tid Mat S4aTtTqAHo 


ie . > Apes ‘Se S12) ta (eye sarntg sant . at 
ry (TE 4 4yt ad hicons ast. Sere. orl) Hae ! Seer 
*, sd vam epoaiaels te? B1eIqAns. Adee ONG are 


. Ayabt 


tT 
= 


thinT 34'4ungqind off” 


i 
» 


i i= 


i ; 7 aa ahi tt apt 


EVO TSAS | 
uty of Qeale@ laritemequd jo nehasish wht 


1: (4—] sO] gat? op’ | ~ 
ow? Teas °° ae, | 


free. ockp Grae 
" Pe sit att i is 


oy einer rapes 
. benny rig 


PART ONE 


The Relation of Supernatural 
Beings to the Earth 
Chap. 10: 1—11:1 


THE TIME OF THE VISION 


“In the THIRD YEAR of Cyrus King of Persia 
a thing was revealed unto Daniel, whose name 
was Belteshazzar; and the thing was true, but the 
time appointed was long: and he understood the 
thing, and had understanding of the Vision.” 
Chap. 10: 1. 


This, Daniel’s last Vision, came to him in the “Third 
Year” of the reign of King Cyrus, which was B. C. 
533. Daniel at this time was over ninety years of age, 
and probably was no longer active in public affairs, as 
we are told in chapter 1:21, that he continued only 
unto the first year of King Cyrus. Why Daniel did 
not return three years before with those who 
took advantage of King Cyrus’ Decree, we are not 
told. Ezra 1:1-11. It may have been his age, but 
more likely because God had some further revelations 
to give him, and restrained the Prophet from going. 

Relieved from the burden of public affairs, Daniel 
doubtless spent his time in inquiring as to the success 
of those who had returned to Jerusalem in building 
up the walls and restoring the Temple. He doubtless 
was disappointed in the number that returned, only 
42,360. Ezra 2:64. The great majority of the priests 
and chief of the people preferred the houses which 
they had built, and the gardens which they had 
planted, in Babylonia, to the desolation of their home- 
land. How numerous were those who remained we 
may learn from the Book of Esther. Possibly, too, he 
had been informed that the Samaritans, irritated bv 
the refusal of the Jews to accept their help and alli- 
ance, were hindering the work by every means in 


yah 


220 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


their power, and were about to seek an injunction 
from the Persian Court. Ezra 4: 1-6. Thus disheart- 
ened by the fact that so many of his people were not 
interested in the restoration of Jerusalem and the 
Temple, and that those who returned were a “feeble 
folk,” dispirited, and harassed on every side by their 
enemies, is it any wonder that the Prophet fasted and 
mourned. 


“In those days I Daniel was mourning THREE 
FULL WEEKS. | ate no pleasant bread, neither 
came flesh or wine in my mouth, neither did I 
anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks were 
fulfilled.” Chap. 10: 2-3. 


This does not mean that he did not eat or drink any- 
thing, but that he refrained from all dainties, and re- 
stricted his fare to the simplest articles of diet. And 
this he did for twenty-one days, and doubtless would 
have continued to do, if an angelic being had not come 
to his relief. 


THE VISION OF THE SON OF MAN 


“And in the four and twentieth day of the First 
Month, as I was by the side of the great river, 
which is Hiddekel (Tigris) ; then I lifted up mine 
eyes, and looked, and behold a CERTAIN MAN 
clothed in linen, whose LOINS were girded with 
fine gold of Uphaz: His BODY also was like the 
beryl, and His FACE as the appearance of light- 
ning, and His EYES as lamps of fire, and His 
ARMS and His FEET like in color to polished 
brass, and the VOICE of His words like the voice 
of a multitude.” Chap. 10: 4-6. 


Who was this “CERTAIN MAN?” He was no other 
than the “LORD OF GLORY.” If the Lord appeared 
to Abraham (Gen. 18: 1-8), and to Moses at the Burn- 
ing Bush (Ex. 3: 1-6, 13-14), why not to Daniel? To 
find out who is meant, all we have to do is to turn 
over to the Book of Revelation, and compare the de- 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 221 


scription there of the “SON OF MAN” as He ap- 
peared to John on the Isle of Patmos, to see that 
the descriptions are of the same person. 


“And I turned to see the voice that spake with 
me. And being turned, I saw seven Golden 
Candlesticks (Lamp-stands) ; and in the midst of 
the seven Candlesticks one like unto the SON OF 
MAN, clothed with a garment down to the foot, 
and girt about the paps (breast) with aGOLDEN 
GIRDLE. His HEAD and His HAIRS were 
white like wool, as white as snow; and His EYES 
were as a flame of fire; and His FEET like unto 
fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and His 
Meee as the sound of many waters.” Rev. 

> 12-15. 


Daniel had been told, in the Vision of the “Seventy 
Weeks;” that the “Messiah” when He came would be 
“CUT-OFF” (Crucified). What more reasonable then 
than that the “Messiah” should appear to him at this 
time, when he was filled with perplexity and anxiety. 
Daniel saw the Lord before His “Incarnation” and 
John beheld Him after His “Ascension,” but in both 
instances His appearance was the same. The effect of 
the “Visions” of Daniel and John upon themselves 
was the same. Daniel says—“There remained no 
strength in me: for my comeliness was turned in me 
into corruption, ... then was I in a deep sleep on my 
face, and my face toward the ground.” Verses 8-9. 
That is, Daniel fainted. John savys—‘‘When I saw 
Him, I fell at His feet as dead.” Rev. 1:17. John also 
fainted. Thus the similarity of the effect of the “Vi- 
sions” of Daniel and John upon them is proof that the 
“Certain Man” that Daniel saw was no other than the 
LORD OF GLORY. 


And I Daniel alone saw the Vision: for the men 
that were with me saw not the Vision; but a great 
quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide 
themselves. Therefore I was left alone, and saw 


222 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


this ‘Great Vision,’ and there remained no strength 
in me: for my comeliness was turned in me into 
corruption, and I retained no strength. Yet heard 
I the ‘VOICE OF HIS WORDS?” and when I 
heard the ‘Voice of His Words,’ then was I in a 
deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the 
ground.” Chap. 10: 7-9. 


That the “Certain Man” Daniel saw was the “Lord 
of Glory,’ and not Michael the Archangel, as some 
claim, is clear from a comparison of Daniel’s experi- 
ence as given above, and the experience of Saul of 
Tarsus when the Lord appeared to him on the way to 
Damascus.” Acts 9% 129; 


THE HEAVENLY MESSENGER 


“And, behold, a hand touched me, which set me 
upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands. 
And he (the Heavenly Messenger) said unto me, 
O Daniel, a man GREATLY BELOVED, under- 
stand the words that I speak unto thee, and stand 
upright: for unto thee am I now sent. And when 
he had spoken this word unto me, I stood trem- 
bling.” Chap. 10: 10-11. 


From this we see that the Lord of Glory was not 
alone in this Vision. He was accompanied by a “Heav- 
enly Messenger,” who was no other than the Angel 
Gabriel. This we know from the words and conduct 
of the Angel. All we have to do is to compare this 
“Vision” with that of the “Ram and He-Goat” seen 
by Daniel six years before. Dan. 8:15-19. In it we 
were told that as Daniel was standing by the river 
Ulai there stood between the banks of the river, sup- 
ported possibly by a cloud, the “appearance of a man.” 
While Daniel did not at that time describe him, he 
doubtless was the same person as the “Certain Man” 
of this Vision, the Lord of Glory. Daniel heard this 
“man” call the Angel Gabriel and command him to 
interpret Daniel’s Vision. And Daniel, who had fallen 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 23 


into a faint, as in this instance, was aroused by Gabriel 
and instructed. Then in the “Vision of the Seventy 
Weeks,” while Daniel was speaking, and praying, and 
confessing the sins of his people, Gabriel was sent to 
him again. This time he saluted Daniel as the one 
“GREATLY BELOVED.” And in this “Vision” we 
are now considering the “Heavenly Messenger” twice 
uses the same salutation. Verses 11 and 19. Surely 
he could have been no other than Gabriel. As further 
proof that it was Gabriel and not the “Certain Man” 
that touched Daniel is the fact that the one who 
touched Daniel had to call on Michael, one of the 
Chief Princes, to free him from the grip of the “Prince 
of Persia,” a thing the Lord of Glory would not have 
had to do, for He would have smitten him with the 
“Two-edged Sword of His Mouth.” Rev. 1:16; 19:15. 
It is clear from the language of the one who touched 
and assisted Daniel to his feet, that he was a servant, a 
subordinate, and not the Lord of Glory. 


THE PRINCE OF PERSIA 


“Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for 
from the first day that thou didst set thine heart 
to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy 
God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy 
words (sake R. V.). But the ‘Prince of the King- 
dom of Persia’ withstood me one and twenty days: 
but, lo, MICHAEL, one of the Chief Princes, 
came to help me; and I remained there with the 
Kings of Persia.” Chap. 10: 12-13. 


The words—“I remained” are translated in the mar- 
gin of the Revised Versions—“I was not needed.” 
Later Gabriel said he would return to fight with the 
Prince ob bersiang 

The first words that Gabriel spoke to Daniel were 
an explanation of his delay in answering Daniel’s 
prayer. He said that he had been detained for twenty- 
one days, the same length of time Daniel had been 
praying, by the “Prince of Persia,” and if Michael, the 


224 | THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Archangel (Jude 9) had not come to his rescue he 
would have been there still. Here the veil is lifted, 
and we are shown something of the workings of the 
“UNSEEN WORLD,” and of the connection between 
the “Spirit World” and the affairs of men and nations 
on the earth. This “Prince of Persia” was not Cyrus 
the King of Persia. No one for a moment would think 
that a mere human being like Cyrus could withstand 
a supernatural being like Gabriel, with a message from 
God, for twenty-one days. The Scriptures clearly 
teach that there is a 


“KINGDOM OF DARKNESS” 


over which Satan reigns as KING (Matt. 12: 24-30), 
and that his Kingdom is composed of “PRINCIPALI- 
TIES,” “POWERS,” “AGE RULERS OF DARK- 
NESS,” and “WICKED SPIRITS.” All this is re- 
vealed in Eph. 6:12, where Paul says—“We wrestle 
not against FLESH and BLOOD (human beings), 
but against PRINCIPALITIES, against POWERS, 
against the RULERS OF THE DARKNESS OF 
THIS WORLD (Age), against SPIRITUAL WICK- 
EDNESS in High Places (the Heavenlies).” Satan is 
the “PRINCE OF THE POWERS OF THE AIR” 
(Epi? <2) sandathe GODS ORB DHIS EW ORD, 
(Age). Eph. 2:2. It was no false claim he made when 
he offered to give to Jesus the “Kingdoms of this 
World, and the Glory of them.” Matt. 4: 8-9. 

From this we see that Satan has his Kingdom organ- 
ized in a wonderful manner. It is divided into King- 
doms and Principalities. These divisions correspond 
with the Kingdom divisions of our earth. If Satan has 
a'sPrince Of Persia’ and a’ Prince of Grecia,o why 
not a Prince for every nation? Satan has his limita- 
tions. He is not omnipresent, neither is he omnipotent 
or omniscient. He has to depend upon his agents. And 
so great and powerful are his “Princes” that it takes 
a supernatural being, like Michael the Archangel, to 
overcome them. That Michael is a match for even 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 223 


Satan himself is seen in two recorded instances in the 
Scriptures. In Jude 9 we are told that Michael con- 
tended with Satan as to the body of Moses, and while 
victorious, he had to treat him respectfully, for Satan 
is a great and “Mighty Potentate.” And in Rev. 
12: 1-9 we are told that there is to be “War in Heaven” 
and that Michael and his angels shall prevail over 
Satan and his angels, and they shall be cast out of the 
Heavenlies on to the earth.* We know from Chap. 
12:1, that Michael is the “Guardian Angel” that 
standeth for the “Children of Israel.” The purpose of 
the “Prince of Persia” in detaining Gabriel was be- 
cause his Master—Satan, was hostile to the Jews, and 
did not want his plans revealed to Daniel. This is 
seen in the purpose of Gabriel’s visit as outlined in the 
NEXtev Crise: 


THE PURPOSE OF GABRIEL’S VISIT 


“Now I am come to make thee understand what 
shall befall Thy People (the Jews) in the ‘LAT- 
TER DAYS: for yet the Vision is for MANY 
DAYS ay Chap a0 al+ 


This is a very important statement, and gives us 
the “Key” to the interpretation of the remainder of the 
book. But before Gabriel reveals what is to befall 
Daniel’s People in the “Latter Days,” there is a 
“Prelude” which describes in detail the wars of the 
“Ptolemies” and “Seleucidae,” two of the “Four King- 
doms” into which Alexander the Great’s Empire was 
divided, and which are spoken of as the wars of the 
“King of the North” and the “King of the South,” and 
carry us down to the end of the reign of Antiochus 
Epiphanes, B. C. 164. This “Prelude” ends with Chap. 
11:31, and verses 32-35 cover the whole period from 
the time of the Maccabees, B. C. 166, down to the 
“TIME OF THE END,” and verse 36 introduces us 


*See the writer's book on “The Spirit World.” 


226 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


to the “Wilful King”—ANTICHRIST, and from there 
to the end of the Book we have an account of what 
shall befall Daniel’s People in the “LATTER DAYS.” 


THE PROPHET STRENGTHENED 


“And when he (Gabriel) had spoken such words 
unto me, I set my face toward the ground, and I 
became dumb. And, behold, one like the simili- 
tude of the sons of men touched my lips: then I 
opened my mouth, and spake, and said unto him 
that stood before me, O my lord, by the Vision 
my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have re- 
tained no strength. For how can the servant of 
this my lord talk with this my lord? for as for 
me, straightway there remained no strength in 


me, neither is there breath left in me.’ Chap. 
10: 15-17. 


When Daniel realized the import of Gabriel’s words 
he was dumb, until one like the “similitude of the 
sons of men” touched his lips. Then he opened his 
mouth and spake. This reminds us of the Seraphim 
that touched Isaiah’s lips with a coal of fire from off 
the altar. Isa. 6:6-7. While Daniel addresses this 
angelic being as “lord,” the word does not begin with 
a capital “L,” which shows that he was not the Lord 
of Glory. After the Seraphim had restored Daniel’s 
speech, Gabriel again approached him and strength- 
ened him. 

“Then there came again and touched me one 
like the appearance of a man (all angels appeared 
as men), and he strengthened me, and said, O 
man GREATLY BELOVED, fear not: peace be 
unto thee; be strong, yea, be strong. And when 
he had spoken unto me, I was strengthened, and 
said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast strength- 
ened me. Then said he, Knowest thou where- 
fore I come unto thee? and now will I return to 
fight with the ‘Prince of Persia:’ and when I am 
gone forth, lo, the ‘Prince of Grecia’ shall come. 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 227 


But I will shew thee that which is noted in the 
‘SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH? and there is none 
that holdeth with me in these things but MICH- 
AEL your Prince. Also I in the first year ot 
Darius the Mede, even I, stood to confirm and to 
strengthen him.” Chap. 10: 18—11:1. 


The angelic being that here again touched Daniel 
was the same angelic being that touched him in verse 
10. For he uses the same salutation, “Greatly Be- 
loved,” and declares that he is about to return to fight 
the “Prince of Persia,” and that he and Michael are 
co-workers against the Satanic powers, for it was 
through the co-operation of Michael that the Fall of 
Babylon was brought about in the first year of Darius 
the Mede. 


PART TWO 


The Pre-written History of the Kings 
of the North and the South 


Chap.il2-35 
THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 


In this chapter we have what Gabriel calls the 
“Scripture of Truth.” It is a PRE-WRITTEN HIS- 
TORY of the wars of the Ptolemies of Egypt, “the 
Kings of the South;” and the Seleucidae of Syria, “the 
Kings of the North.” Here we have history so accu- 
rately foretold and “written in advance,” that the Crit- 
ics claim that the Book of Daniel could not have been 
written as early as is claimed (B. C. 533), but that it 
must have been written after the wars of the Ptolemies 
and Seleucidae were over, or about [3. C. 160, for it 
would have been impossible for Daniel, or any other 
person, to have so accurately described these wars 
before they occurred. But it is right here that the 
Scriptures and the Critics part. The Scriptures claim 
that they have been inspired by the Holy Spirit (2 
Tim. 3: 15-17), and that “Holy Men of God spake as 
they were moved by the HOLY SPIRIT.” 2Z Pet. 
1: 19-21. Prophecy then is HISTORY WRITTEN IN 
ADVANCE. And the “Spirit of God” can write His- 
tory beforehand as well as afterward. The catching 
phrase “History Unveiling Prophecy” should be re- 
versed to read “Prophecy Foretelling History.” His- 
torical interpretation of Prophecy always works mis- 
chief, for it leads to “forced interpretation” of his- 
torical events. The relation of History to Prophecy 
is not that of interpretation, but of verification. This 
makes Prophecy a “LIGHT IN A DARK PLACE.” 
2 Pet. 1:19. That is, Prophecy illuminates the future 
by forecasting it. 

The detailed accuracy of the Prophecy is most mar- 
vellous. The Prophecy is not clothed in figures and 


228 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 229 


symbols, as in the previous Visions. In fact it is not a 
Vision, but a description in literal language of his- 
torical events concerning Daniel’s people and the Holy 
Land, from Daniel’s time down to the Second Coming 
of Christ. For the sake of clearness we will take the 
Prophecy up verse by verse, or where necessary sev- 
eral verses together. The Prophecy begins with the 
second verse of chapter eleven. 


VERSE 2—“And now I will shew thee the 
Truth) (s¢ripture, ot Truth: Chap. 10721). Be- 
hold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; 
and the fourth shall be far richer than they all: 
and by his strength through his riches he shall 
stir up all against the realm of Grecia.” 


Since the Prophecy was given in the third year of 
Cyruse( Chaps lO “nla a @20535), the three; kinos that 
WiClL@mtOmuStondatl pany el aatiateiSmcalter nim, were 
Ahasuerus, Artaxerxes, and Darius (Ezra 4: 1-24), 
known in history as Cambyses (B. C. 529-522), 
Pseudo-Smerdis (B. C. 522-521), and Darius Hystaspes 
(B. C. 521-485). The “fourth” king was Xerxes (B. C. 
485-465), the son of Darius Hystaspes, whose mar- 
vellous riches enabled him to put vast armies in the 
field. He stirred up Persia against Greece, which he 
invaded in B. C. 480, but failed to conquer it. Since 
prophecy touches only upon important events and 
characters, the remaining kings of Persia are omitted, 
and the prophecy jumps over nearly 150 years to the 
time ot Alexander the Great, BY C. 336-323. 


VERSES 3-4—“And a Mighty King shall stand 
up, that shall rule with great dominion, and do 
according to his will. And when he shall stand 
up, his Kingdom shall be broken, and shall be 
divided toward the ‘Four Winds’ of heaven; and 
not to his posterity, nor according to his domin- 
ion which he ruled: for his Kingdom shall be 
plucked up, even for others beside those.” 


These verses take us back to the Vision of the 


230 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


“Ram and He-Goat” (Dan. 8: 3-8, 20-22), and we rec- 
ognize in the “Mighty King,” the “Notable Horn” of 
the ‘“He-Goat” that was broken off, and in the “Four 
Horns” that came up in its place, the division of this 
“Mighty King’s” Kingdom toward the “Four Winds.” 
This “Mighty King’’ then was Alexander the Great, 
and the division of his Kingdom toward the “Four 
Winds” of heaven was the division of his Kingdom at 
his death among four of his Generals. Cassander took 
Macedonia and the Western part; Lysimachus took 
Thrace and the Northern part; Seleucus took Syria 
and the Eastern part; and Ptolemy took Egypt and the 
Southern part. None of Alexander the Great’s pos- 
terity succeeded him, and within fifteen years his fam- 
ily was extinct. 


VERSE 5—*“And the ‘King of the South’ shall 
be strong, and one of his Princes; and he shall be 
strong above him, and have dominion; his domin- 
ion shall be a great dominion.” 


The Prophecy now narrows down to two of the 
four Kingdoms into which Alexander the Great’s Em- 
pire was divided. And the reason is clear. Gabriel 
told Daniel that the Prophecy belonged to Daniel’s 
PEOPLE. And as the “Glorious Land” (Palestine— 
verses 16, 41, 45) lay between Syria on the North and 
Egypt on the South, so the Prophecy narrows down to 
a description of the wars between the “Kings of the 
North” and the “Kings of the South,’ whose march- 
ing ground and battlefield would be the “Glorious 
Land,” where for centuries.(B. GC. 320) to. A. Dae?) 
Daniel’s People would be ground between the Upper 
and Lower Millstones. Because of the suffering that 
these wars would bring to Daniel’s People, and the 
desolation they would cause the country, God revealed 
these wars to Daniel that he might see that it would 
be “many days” (chap. 10: 14) before his People would 
ever become a nation again, 

Of the Four Kingdoms into which Alexander’s Em- 
pire was divided, the Kingdom of Egypt was the first 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH Zot 


to appear. It was founded by Ptolemy Soter, one of 
Alexander’s generals. Another of Alexander’s gen- 
erals, Seleucus Nicator, was appointed vicegerent of 
Babylonia, but was driven out by Antigonus and fled 
to Egypt, where he was favorably received by Ptolemy 
and made one of his Princes. With Ptolemy’s assist- 
ance he recovered his province and enlarged it, until 
it extended to the Indus and included Syria, as well as 
Assyria, and so he became stronger than Ptolemy, and 
his dominion became a great dominion. 


VERSE 6—“And in the end of years they shall 
join themselves together; for the King’s daughter 
of the South shall come to the King of the North 
to make an agreement: but she shall not retain the 
power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his 
arm: but she shall be given up, and they that 
brought her (her attendants), and he that begat 
her (Margin—whom she brought forth), and he 
that strengthened her in these times.” 


There was peace between Egypt and Syria during 
the reigns of Ptolemy Soter and Seleucus Nicator. 
But, at length, Ptolemy Soter abdicated in favor of 
his son Ptolemy Philadelphus, whose half brother 
Magas had married a daughter of Antiochus Soter, 
who had succeeded Seleucus Nicator as King of Syria. 
This marriage led to war between Egypt and Syria. 
For Magas induced his father-in-law, Antiochus Soter, 
to declare war against Egypt. Antiochus Soter was 
succeeded by Antiochus Theus, who continued to war 
with Ptolemy. At length, “at the end of years,” 
Ptolemy offered Antiochus Theus, as a bribe for peace, 
his daughter Berenice with a large dower, on condi- 
tion that the Syrian King should declare his former 
marriage to Laodice void, and her two sons illegiti- 
mate. This iniquitous compact was carried out. But 
when Ptolemy Philadelphus died, his daughter Ber- 
enice could no longer “retain the power of her arm,” 
for Antiochus Theus put her away, and took back his 
former wife Laodice. But neither did he himself 


Menye THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


“stand,” for Laodice, distrusting his motives, and eager 
to secure the crown for her own son, poisoned her 
husband, and so opened the succession to Seleucus 
Callinicus. Then Laodice persuaded Seleucus to have 
Berenice assassinated, and her child, who by the 
articles of her marriage had been made heir to the 
throne, was also killed, as well as all those who 
“strentghened her in those times.” 


VERSES 7-8—“But out of a branch of her 
(Berenice) roots (her parents) shall one stand up 
in his estate, which shall come with an army, and 
shall enter into the fortress of the King of the 
North, and shall deal against them, and shall pre- 
vail. And shall also carry captives into Egypt 
their gods, with their princes, and with their pre- 
cious vessels of silver and gold; and he shall con- 
tinue more years than the King of the North.” 


Out of a “branch of her roots” means an offspring 
of Berenice’s parents, and refers to her brother, Pto- 
lemy Euergetus, who succeeded his father Ptolemy 
Philadelphus. And who, indignant at the treatment 
of his sister, hastily marched into Syria with a large 
army, and, although he arrived too late to save Ber- 
enice and her son, took revenge by putting Laodice 
to death, captured Seleucia, the fortress of the King 
of the North, and would have possessed himself of the 
whole of the Kingdom had he not been recalled by an 
insurrection in Egypt. But he did not return empty 
handed. Not only did he carry back many princes, 
but spoil to the value of 40,000 talents of silver, and 
2500 precious vessels and “idol-images” of the gods. 
Among these “images” were many that Cambyses had 
formerly taken from Egypt and carried into Persia. 
These were replaced in the Temples of Egypt with 
great ceremony, and it was in gratitude for their resto- 
ration that the Egyptian priests bestowed upon Pto- 
lemy his surname of Euergetes, or Benefactor. 


VERSES 9-10—“So the King of the South shall 
come into his Kingdom, and shall return into his 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH Zoo 


own land. But his sons shall be stirred up, and 
shall assembJe a multitude of great forces: and 
one shall certainly come, and overflow, and pass 
through: then shall he return, and be stirred up, 
even to his fortress.” 


The Revised Version translates these two verses 
differently. But their meaning is clear if read thus— 
“So the King of the South shall come into his (the 
King of the North) Kingdom and shall return into his 
own land (Egypt).” Which we have seen he did. “But 
his sons,” not the sons of the King of the South, but 
the sons of the King of the North, “shall be stirred up” 
by the invasion of the King of the South, “and shall 
assemble a multitude of great forces, etc.” Now we 
know that this is what actually occurred. The sons 
of Seleucus Callinicus, Seleucus Ceraunus, and Anti- 
ochus, afterwards surnamed Magnus (the Great), as- 
sembled large armies. Seleucus Ceraunus succeeded 
his father. He assembled a large army to recover his 
father’s dominions, but being a weak and pusillani- 
mous Prince, and unable to discipline his army, he was 
poisoned by two of his generals after an inglorious 
reign of two or three years. He was succeeded by his 
brother Antiochus, who assembled a large army and 
took the field in person. He is the “one” in the text 
who should “overflow” and “pass through.” He di- 
rected his energies against the “King of the South,” 
Ptolemy Philopater, who had succeeded his father, 
Ptolemy Euergetes. He seized Tyre and Ptolemais, 
overflowed and passed through Palestine, and marched 
against Gaza, the fortress of the King of the South, 
the limit set by the Prophecy. This was in B. C. 218. 


VERSES 11-12—“‘And the King of the South 
shall be moved with choler (rage), and shall come 
forth and fight with him, even with the King of 
the North: and he (the King of the North) shall 
set forth a great multitude (army): but the multi- 
tude shall be given into his (the King of the 
south) hand. And when he hath taken away the 


234 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and he 
shall cast down many ten thousands: but he shall 
not be strengthened by it.” 


The voluptuous and dissolute King of the South, 
Ptolemy Philopater, was thoroughly aroused by the 
invasion of his realm by the King of the North, Anti- 
ochus. He assembled a great army, and defeated the 
large and well-appointed army of Antiochus, at 
Raphia, not far from Gaza, B.C. 217. Ptolemy s\ heart 
was lifted up” by his success, and he might have fol- 
lowed up his victory and seized the Kingdom of Anti- 
ochus, but he was too anxious to return to his sensual 
pleasures, and so lost his opportunity of gaining su- 
premacy, and thus he was “not strengthened” by his 
great victory. 


VERSE 13—‘“For the King of the North shall 
return, and shall set forth a multitude greater than 
the former, and shall certainly come AFTER 
CERTAIN YEARS with a great army and with 
much riches.” 


The peace concluded between Ptolemy Philopater 
and Antiochus lasted thirteen years. In the meantime 
Antiochus strengthened himself in his Kingdom. And 
when his armies were numerous and well equipped, 
and flushed with many victories, and his treasury filled 
with spoils, having learned of the death of Ptolemy 
Philopater, and that he had been succeeded by his in- 
fant son Ptolemy Epiphanes, Antiochus, feeling the 
time was ripe, marched against Egypt with a “great 
army and much riches,” expecting an easy victory. 
How he succeeded we shall presently see, for new 
complications entered into the affairs of the two King- 
doms, and new actors were introduced upon the stage 
of history. In studying the history of these two King- 
doms and their Kings, we must not forget that while 
the Kingdoms remain the same, the “King of the 
North” and the “King of the South” change, though 
their official title does not. 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH oo 


VERSE 14—“And in those times there shall 
many stand up against the King of the South: also 
the robbers of thy people (the Jews) shall exalt 
themselves to establish the Vision; but they shall 
fall.” 


Among the “many” that stood up against the infant 
King of the South was Philip, King of Macedon, who 
entered into a league with Antiochus to divide the 
Kingdom of Ptolemy Epiphanes between them. Egypt 
itself was also a “seething pot” of sedition. And there 
were “wicked Jews” in Palestine who hoped to gain 
the favor of Antiochus. They were called “robbers” 
because by their conduct they made it hard for their 
brethren, and thus “established the Vision,” or proph- 
ecy of suffering for Daniel’s people during those times. 
Antiochus turned against these “robber Jews” and 
thus caused them “to fall.” This verse was fulfilled in 
the wars of Antiochus that followed. | 


VERSES 15-19—“So the King of the North 
shall come, and cast up a mount (breastwork) and 
take the most fenced cities: and the arms (army) 
of the South shall not withstand, neither his (the 
King of the South) chosen people, neither shall 
there be any strength to withstand. But he (the 
King of the North) that cometh against him shall 
do according to his own will, and none shall stand 
before him: and he shail stand in the Glorious 
Land (Palestine), which by his hand shall be con- 
sumed. He shall also set his face to enter with the 
strength of his whole Kingdom, and upright ones 
with him; thus shall he do: and he shall give him 
(the King of the South) the ‘daughter of women,’ 
corrupting her: but she shall not stand on his 
(the King of the North) side, neither be for him. 
After this shall he turn his face unto the isles, and 
shall take many: but a Prince for his own behalf 
shall cause the reproach offered by him to cease; 
without his own reproach he shall cause it to turn 


236 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


upon him. Then he shall turn his face toward the 
fort of his own land: but he shall stumble and 
fall, and not be found.” 


These verses are taken together because they cover 
the remainder of the wars of Antiochus the Great, the 
King of the North. In considering them we must not 
forget that the “Glorious Land” was under the domin- 
ion of the King of the South, at this time Ptolemy 
Epiphanes. Therefore to reach Egypt it was necessary 
for Antiochus to first conquer the “Glorious Land.” 
Upon his entrance into the land he encountered 
Scopas, the General of Ptolemy’s army, and compelled 
him to seek refuge in the strongly fortified city of 
Sidon, which he besieged. Desperate attempts were 
made by the Egyptians to relieve the city, but all 
failed, and Sidon was compelled to surrender. Then 
Antiochus was able to do “according to his own will, 
and none were able to stand before him.” So he took 
possession of the “Glorious Land.” 


Then he “set his face” to enter Egypt with the 
whole strength of his Kingdom. But he was com- 
pelled to change his plans. The Egyptian regency had 
sought the help of the Romans, then rising in power, 
and their assistance had been promised. So Antiochus 
decided to resort to diplomacy. He proposed that his 
daughter Cleopatra be espoused to the infant king 
Ptolemy Epiphanes, then seven years old. Cleopatra 
herself was very young, and it was because she was 
of tender years, and still under the care of her mother 
and a nurse, that she was called the “daughter of 
women.” The marriage was consummated some five 
years later. The words “corrupting her” refer to Anti- 
ochus’ scheme to get her to play into his hands, 
rather than into the hands of her husband. But the 
plan failed. Cleopatra not only took sides with her 
husband, but even joined him in sending congratula- 
tions to the Romans on their victories over her father. 

To avenge himself against the Romans, Antiochus 
fitted out a fleet of 300 vessels and assailed the coasts 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 23/7 


and isles of Asia Minor. He was defeated at Mag- 
nesia, B. C. 190, by Scipio Asiaticus, the Prince men- 
tioned in the prophecy. He then turned his face home- 
ward. At Antioch he sent ambassadors to sue for 
peace. The terms were hard. He was not only to 
relinquish Europe, but Asia on the European side of 
the Taurus, and pay 2550 talents down, and 1000 
talents annually for the next twelve years. A few 
months later, while traversing his Eastern Provinces 
to raise this tribute money, he attempted to plunder 
the Temple of Bel in Elymais, but the people rose and 
slew him. So he “stumbled and fell and was found no 
more.” 


VERSE 20—“Then shall stand up in his estate 
a raiser of taxes in the Glory of the Kingdom: 
but within a few days he shall be destroyed, 
neither in anger, nor in battle.” 


Antiochus the Great was succeeded by his eldest 
son, Seleucus Philopater. He was compelled to be a 
“raiser of taxes” to pay the heavy tribute imposed on 
his father. He seems to have reigned about twelve 
years. Toward the end of that time, being hard pressed 
for money, he sent his Treasurer, Heliodorus, to Jeru- 
salem, called in the above Scripture the “Glory of the 
Kingdom,” to confiscate the treasures of the Temple. 
Shortly afterward, “within few days,” he was myste- 
riously poisoned. So he died “neither in anger, nor in 
battle.” 


ANTIOCHUS EPIPHANES 
B. C. 175-164 


VERSES 21-31—“And in his estate (place) 
shall stand up a VILE PERSON, to whom they 
shall not give the honor of the Kingdom: but he 
shall come in peaceably, and obtain the Kingdom 
by flatteries. And with the arms of a flood shall they 
be overflown from before him, and shall be broken; 


238 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


yea, also the ‘Prince of the Covenant.’ And after 
the League made with him he shall work deceit- 
fully: for he shall come up, and shall become 
strong with a small people. He shall enter peace- 
ably even upon the fattest places of the Province; 
and he shall do that which his fathers have not 
done, nor his father’s fathers; he shall scatter 
among them the prey, and spoil, and riches: yea, 
and he shall forecast his devices against the 
strongholds, even for a time. 

“And he shall stir up his power and his cour- 
age against the King of the South with a great 
army; and the King of the South shall be stirred 
up to battle with a very great and mighty army; 
but he shall not stand; for they shall forecast de- 
vices against him. Yea, they that feed of the por- 
tion of his meat shall destroy him, and his army 
shall overflow: and many shall fall down slain. And 
both these Kings’ hearts shall be to do mischief, 
and they shall speak LIES at one table; but it 
shall not prosper: for yet the end shall be at the 
time appointed. Then shall he return into his 
land with great riches; and his heart shall be 
against the HOLY COVENANT; and he shall do 
exploits, and return to his own land. 

“At the time appointed he shall return, and come 
toward the South; but it shall not be as the for- 
mer, or as the latter. For the ships of Chittim 
(the Romans) shall come against him: therefore 
he shall be grieved, and return, and have indigna- 
tion against the HOLY COVENANT: so shall 
he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence 
with them that forsake the HOLY COVENANT. 
And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall 
pollute the SANCTUARY OF STRENGTH, and 
shall take away the DAILY SACRIFICE, and 
they shall place the ABOMINATION THAT 
MAKETH DESOLATE.” 

The next King of the North was Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, spoken of in the text as a “VILE PERSON.” 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH Zoo 


He was the younger son of Antiochus the Great. He 
was given up to the most degraded and unnatural 
passions, was unscrupulous, cruel, and of a savage 
nature, but did not lack courage and ability. The 
“honor of the Kingdom” was not given to him, be- 
cause his nephew, Demetrius, was the rightful heir. 
He was aided by Eumenes, King of Pergamum, and 
his brother Attalus. With their help his enemies, as 
the “arms of a flood,” were swept away, and the 
“Prince of the Covenant,” the Jewish High Priest 
Onias III, was deposed. He broke the “League” he 
made with King Eumenes and his brother, Attalus, 
when he persuaded the Romans to recognize him, and 
meanwhile he was working “deceitfully,” letting on 
that he had but a small following. But he soon be- 
came “strong with a small people,” and entered 
“peaceably into the fattest places of the Province.” 
Unlike his predecessors, he was profuse and extrava- 
gant in his gifts, and “scattered the spoil” of his con- 
quests among his friends, all the time “forecasting his 
devices against the strongholds” of Egypt, three of 
which, Pelusium, Naucratis, and Memphis, he later 
occupied, but failed to take Alexandria. This he did, 
“even for a time,” but was finally checked by the 
Romans. 


When he was ready to invade Egypt, he marched 
against it with a very great army, and was met by an 
equally great army, which, after great losses, dis- 
solved, and Ptolemy Philometer fell into the hands of 
Antiochus, probably betrayed by those that “fed of 
the portion of his meat.” His brother Physcon was 
proclaimed King in his stead. Antiochus received 
Ptolemy Philometer with much consideration, con- 
cluded a peace with him on favorable terms, and then, 
on pretense of taking his part against his brother 
Physcon, laid siege to Alexandria, but without suc- 
cess. In the meantime, Philometer suspicious of Anti- 
ochus, and scheming for himself, made overtures to 
Physcon, on the basis of a joint sovereignty, and was 
received into Alexandria. Both brothers then declared 


240 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


against Antiochus. So the prophecy was fulfilled— 
“these kings’ (Antiochus and Philometer) hearts shall 
be to do mischief (against each other), and they shall 
speak LIES (to each other) at one table.” 

Antiochus then returned toward Syria, loaded with 
the rich spoils of Egypt. On the march he heard, that, 
owing to a false report of his death, Jason, who had 
been deprived of his High Priestly Office, had made 
an attack upon Jerusalem, and had endeavored to re- 
cover his Office by force. Choosing to regard this as 
a revolt of the Jews, especially when he found that the 
news of his supposed death caused great joy among 
them, he assailed Jerusalem, slew 40,000 of the inhabi- 
tants, sold as many more as slaves, and plundered the 
Temple, carrying off treasure to the value of 1800 
Talents. And, after thus venting his anger against 
the “Holy Covenant” (the Temple), he continued his 
march tofAntiochs 2’ Maceouli-2l 

In the spring of B. C. 168, Antiochus again led his 
troops to Egypt in order to subjugate the two broth- 
ers, Ptolemy Philometer and Ptolemy Physcon. But 
the same success no longer awaited him, for the Pto- 
lemies had appealed to Rome. Along the well-known 
route the Syrian King passed, no one daring to arrest 
his progress, until he was within four miles of Alex- 
andria. A Roman fleet lay at anchor in the bay, and 
presently Antiochus was met by Popilius Laenas, who 
put into his hand a missive from the Roman Senate 
commanding him to leave the friends of the Roman 
people unmolested, and to be content with his own 
Kingdom. Having read it, Antiochus remarked that 
he would call his advisers and consult with them as 
to what was to be done. Whereupon Popilius drew 
a circle around him in the sand with his staff, and 
said—“Before you step out of that circle give such an 
answer as I may report to the Senate.” The King was 
cowed, and replied—“If it so please the Senate, we 
will depart.” 


Antiochus then withdrew his army from Egypt and 
vented his fury upon the Jews of the “Glorious Land,” 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 241 


in the fearful massacres, persecutions, and pollutions 
of the Temple, described in the first chapter of the 
first Book of Maccabees. In doing this he repaired 
the massive walls and towers of the Citadel of David, 
and garrisoned them with Syrian soldiers. He com- 
manded that all his subjects should be one people, 
with one religion, and with the same laws. And, in 
order to enforce this upon the Jews, their Sanctuary 
was profaned, the offerings and sacrifices prohibited, 
and an “Idol-Altar” built over the “Altar of Jehovah,” 
upon which swine’s flesh was sacrificed, presumably 
to an Image placed over it. This was the “Abomina- 
tion that maketh desolate,” spoken of in the text, but 
not the “Abomination of Desolation” spoken of by 
Christ in Matt. 24:15. That is still future. It is men- 
tioned in Dan. 12:11, and wili be the fulfilment of the 
“Overspreading of Desolations” of Dan. 9:27. Anti- 
ochus’ stringent measures for the Hellenization of 
Judea caused the Maccabean revolt. In the meantime 
he had gone with an army into Persia, gaining many 
victories everywhere. Later he was forced to retire to 
Babylon. Heartbroken at the news of the Maccabean 
revolt in Palestine, he died a natural death at Tabae 
(nee en Los. 


It is very important right here to note that all that 
has been recorded from verse 21 to 31, inclusive, has 
reference to Antiochus Epiphanes, and not to the Anti- 
christ, or any other person, and was literally and com- 
pletely fulfilled by him as foretold. So there is abso- 
lutely nothing in these verses left for the future. 
There is no intimation that Antiochus Epiphanes is 
even to be regarded as a type of Antichrist. They are 
distinct historical personages, each dealt with in his 
own place, and though they resemble each other in 
some respects, on account of their conduct, and their 
treatment of the Jewish race, yet they must not be 


confounded wi other. 


This Prophetic and Pre-Written historical account, 
recorded in verses 2-31, of the wars of the Persian 


242 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


and Grecian Empires, and more in detail of the Syrian 
and Egyptian Divisions of the Grecian Empire, ex- 
tending from B. C. 536 to B. C. 164, a period of 372 
years, is the most marvellous “Prophetic Foreview” 
in the whole Bible, because it goes into details that 
only the Omniscience of God could reveal. It is there- 
fore one of the strongest confirmatory evidences to the 
Inspiration of the Word of God found within its 
pages. 


THE PERIOD BETWEEN ANTIOCHUS 
EPIPHANES AND “MESSIAH 
THE PRINCE” 


B. C. 164-A. D. 30 


VERSES 32-33, “And such as do wickedly 
against the Covenant shall he corrupt by flat- 
teries: but the people that do know their God shall 
be strong, and do EXPLOITS. And they that 
understand among the people shall instruct 
many.” 


The behavior of the Jews under the oppression of 
Antiochus Epiphanes is shown in verse 32. Some of 
them did “wickedly,” and forsook the “Covenant,” and 
the religion of their fathers, and worshipped idols, and 
were led into this by “flatteries.” But there were some 
who “knew their God,” that He was able to deliver, 
and so they were made “strong,” and did “EX- 
PLOITS.” This refers to Mattathias, an aged Priest, 
and his sons, known as the MACCABEES, who, from 
B. C. 166 to B. C. 47, fought to restore the national 
life of Israel. Mattathias, driven to desperation by the 
outrages of Antiochus, raised a revolt against him, and 
fled to the mountains with a number of followers, 
zealous for the faith of Israel. Two years later he 
died and was succeeded by his third son, Judas, known 
as “The Hammer,” who by avoiding pitched battles, 
and by guerilla warfare, defeated and routed every 
Syrian army sent against him, and in B. C. 165 retook 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 243 


Jerusalem, purified the Temple, and restored the daily 
sacrifice. He fell in battle in B. C. 160, and was suc- 
ceeded by his younger brother Jonathan, a High 
Priest. During the leadership of Jonathan the Syrians 
were engaged in civil war, so Judea was left in peace, 
and Jonathan strengthened his position by making a 
treaty with the Romans and the Spartans. He was 
treacherously slain by a Syrian general in B. C. 143, 
and was succeeded by his brother Simon, the last re- 
maining son of Mattathias. Simon and two of his sons 
were treacherously slain by his son-in-law in B. C. 
135. His son John, known as John Hyrcanus, who 
escaped, succeeded him and had a long and prosperous 
reign. Others in the same line followed, with varying 
success, until the Maccabeans, falling into disfavor, 
were succeeded by the Idumaen, Antipater, in B. C. 
47. After the murder of Antipater, B. C. 43, Marc 
Anthony visited Syria, and appointed two of Anti- 
pater’s sons, Phasaelus and Herod, afterward known 
a5). tlerod the Greatem( BW Gr.3/to "Bh Ox4\ratoalook 
after the Jews. Herod the. Great was King when 
Ghristhwas born inuBeGu4.) Matt, 221-15. Brom this 
we see that the Maccabees bridged the greater part of 
the period from Antiochus Epiphanes to the Birth of 
Christ. 


During the latter part of this period a new class of 
spiritual leaders arose who “understood” the Pro- 
phetic Scriptures, and knew how to “instruct” the 
people. They were persons like Simeon and Anna, 
who waited for the “Consolation of Israel.” 


THE GAP BETWEEN “MESSIAH THE PRINCE” 
AND THE “TIME OF THE END” 
ASD Tc0 tog Ae D.? 
VERSES 33-35. “They shall fall by the sword, 
and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, MANY 


DAYS. Now when they shall fall they shall be 
holpen (helped) with a little help: but many shall 


244 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


cleave to them with flatteries. And some of them 
of understanding shall fall, to try them, and to 
purge, and to make them white, even to the TIME 
OF THE END: because it is yet for a TIME 
APPOINTED.” 


In the “fulness of time” Christ was born, and offered 
unto the Jews as their Messiah. But His claim was 
rejected, and [leswas Crucitied 4  cut-oft=). andsiorcy 
years later (A. D. 70) Jerusalem was destroyed by the 
Romans, and then began the fulfilment of the last half 
of verse 33, “they shall fall by the sword, and by 
flame, by captivity, and by spoil MANY DAYS.” 
The “Many Days” are the days of this Dispensation 
Christ referred to them when He said— 


“They (the Jews) shall fall by the edge of the 
sword, and shall be led away captive into all na- 
tions, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the 
Gentiles, until the “TIMES OF THE GEN- 
TILES’ bejtulfilled:y” Luke 21: 24. 


All this is in process of fulfilment before our eyes. 
The Jews have been “spoiled,” that is, repeatedly 
robbed of their material possessions, for “MANY 
DAYS.” Although they have “fallen,” they have not 
been exterminated, and from time to time they have 
been “holpen (helped) with a little help.” They have 
been “flattered” and promised many things, but these 
promises have seldom, if ever, been fulfilled. Even 
now they are putting their trust in ZIONISM, and 
other schemes of men, for the rehabilitation of their 
own land, and their restoration to it. Some of their 
“understanding ones,” even in the time of Antichrist, 
will be deceived and “fall.” But it will be for the pur- 
pose of “purging” (Ezek. 20: 34-38), that is “refining” 
(Ezek. 22: 19-227 Malachi 03: 123¥eZeck? 133:9)and 
purifying them and others by their example, even unto 
the “TIME OF THE END.” Here we have the mean- 
ing and purpose of all the afflictions and persecutions 
of the Jews down the centuries, and even unto THE 
END, outlined in one verse. 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 245 


The verses we have just considered cover the 
“GAP” between “Messiah the Prince” (A. D. 30) and 
the “Time of the End” (A. D. ?), and correspond with 
the “Gap” between Daniel’s “69th” and “70th Week.” 
Thus showing the consistency of all the “Visions” of 
Daniel, and proving that they relate only to Daniel’s 
People (the Jews), and not to the Church, for in every 
instance the present Church Dispensation is con- 
spicuous by its omission. 


PART THREE 


“The Time of the End” 


Chaps. 11: 36-12: 13 
“THE WILFUL KING” 


VERSES 36-45—“And the KING shall do ac- 
cording to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and 
magnify himself above every god, and shall speak 
marvellous things against the GOD of gods, and 
shall prosper till the INDIGNATION be accom- 
plished: for that that is determined shall be done. 
Neither shall he regard the GOD oi his fathers, 
nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for 
he shall magnify himself above all. But in His 
estate (in God’s place) shall he honor the ‘God 
of Forces:’ and a god whom his fathers knew not 
shall he honor with gold, and silver, and with 
precious stones and pleasant things. Thus shall 
he do in the most strongholds with a strange god, 
whom he shall acknowledge and increase with 
glory: and he shall cause them to rule over many, 
and shall divide the land for gain. 

“And at the “TIME OF THE END)’ shall the 
King of the South push at him: and the King of 
the North (the Wilful King described above) shall 
come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, 
and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he 
shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow 
and pass over. He shall enter also into the ‘Glo- 
rious Land’ (Palestine), and many countries shall 
be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his 
hand, even EDOM, and MOAB, and the chief of 
the children of AMMON. He shall stretch forth 
his hand also upon the countries: and the land of 
Egypt shall not escape. But he shall have power 
over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over 
all the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans 
and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps. 


246 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 247 


“But tidings out of the East and out of the 
North shall trouble him: therefore he shall go 
forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to 
make away many. And he shall plant the ‘taber- 
nacles of his palace’ between the Seas (the Medi- 
terranean and Dead Seas) in the ‘Glorious Holy 
Mountain;’ yet he shall COME TO HIS END, 
AND NONE SHALL HELP HIM.” 


The sudden and abrupt appearance of “THE KING” 
in verse 36 implies that he is one of whom we have 
heard before, and is not a new character, and there- 
fore does not need to be again introduced. Notice 
that it does not say “a” King, but “THE” King. There 
are some who claim that there are THREE Kings in- 
troduced to us in the Book of Daniel. First, the “LIT- 
TURPHORN ofthe “Fourth Wilds Beast? (Dan. 
7:8), or the last Roman Emperor. Second, the “LIT- 
TLE HORN” that came up on one of the “Four 
Horns’ of the He-Goat (Dan: 8:9-12), that repre- 
sented Antiochus Epiphanes. And third, the “WIL- 
FUL KING” of the chapter we are now considering, 
who represents the “Antichrist.” If this be true, then 
there is no “progressive revelation” of the Antichrist 
in the Book of Daniel, as we have tried to show. That 
these three Personages, the two “Little Horns,” and 
the “Wilful King,” appear and reign at the same time, 
the “TIME OF THE END;” that they display the 
same “Wilful disposition,’ and shall be destroyed in 


the same manner, implies that they are one and the 
SAME PERSON. 


The fact that this “Wilful King” appears on the 
scene at the close of “THE GAP” between “Messiah 
the Prince” and the “Time of the End” (verses 33-35), 
and which corresponds, as we have seen, with the 
“interval” between the “69th” and “7Oth Week” of 
Daniel's “Seventy Weeks,” identifies him with the 
“PRINCE THAT SHALL COME?” of Dan. 9: 26-27. 
And as the “Prince that shall come” shall be the last 
Roman Emperor, it identifies the “Wilful King” as 


248 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


the last Roman Emperor, and therefore the “Little 
Horn” of Daniel’s “Fourth Wild Beast.” Again in 
verse 40 this “Wilful King” is called the “King of the 
North.” Some dispute this, claiming that the state- 
ment—‘And at the ‘Time of the End’ shall the King 
of the South push at him: and the King of the North 
shall come against him,” that the pronoun “him” 
stands for the “Wilful King,’ and that the Kings of 
the “North” and “South” are “colleagues” banded to- 
gether against him. But this is disproved by verses 
42-43, where it says that the “King of the North” 
shall treat the “King of the South” as an enemy and 
shall spoil Egypt. What verse 40 means is, that at 
the “Time of the End,” the “King of the South” shall 
push at him (the Wilful King): and the King of the 
North (the Wilful King) shall come against him (the 
King of the South). That is, the “King of the North” 
will return the attack of the “King of the South.” 

We know from our study of chapter 8, that the 
“Four Kingdoms” into which Alexander the Great’s 
Empire was divided are to be revived, and that in 
the “latter time of their kingdom” a King of “Fierce 
Countenance” shall stand up. Dan. 8:21-23. Now 
one of those “Four Kingdoms” was SYRIA, known 
as the “Kingdom of the North,” and as the “Little 
Horn” of chapter 8 appeared on the “Syrian Horn,” 
then the King of “Fierce Countenance” of chapter 8 
must be the “King of the North of. the revived 
“Syrian Kingdom,” or the “WILFUL KING,” the 
“King of the North,” of chapter 11. Here again we 
have proved that the “Little Horn” of chapter 7, the 
‘Little Horn’otschapter 8)’and'the® Wilful Kins” 
are one and the same person. 

Those who claim that the “Wilful King” is “Anti- 
christ,” and not to be confounded with the last Roman 
Emperor, and that the “Beast” that comes up out of 
the sea, of Rev. 13: 1-10, is the last Roman Emperor, 
while the “Beast” that comes up out of the earth (Rev. 
13: 11-18), and called three times the “False Prophet” 
(Rev. 16:13, 19:20, 20:10), is the Antichrist, forget 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 249 


that the “False Prophet” is not a King. His Office- 
work is to exalt the first Beast. So as he is not a King, 
and the “Wilful King” is, then if the “Wilful King” is 
Antichrist, the “False Prophet” cannot be, and vice 
versa. 

The “Wilful King” shall do according to his will. 
He shall “exalt” and “magnify HIMSELF above every 
god,” and shall speak “marvellous things” against the 
“GOD of Gods” (Jehovah), and he shall prosper until 
the “Indignation” (The Great Tribulation) is accom- 
plished, for that which God has “determined” for the 
TIME OF THE END “shall be done.” He shall not 
regard the “God of his fathers,” the God of Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob. That means he will. be a JEW. 
Neither shall he regard the “desire of women.” If this 
means the desire of Jewish women to be the mother of 
the Messiah, and we must not forget that to the Jews 
the Messiah has not yet come, then he will not regard 
THE SON, and this characteristic of the Antichrist is 
foretold by the Apostle John, who says—“He is Anti- 
christ, that denieth the Father and the Son.” 1 John 
2:22. But in His place (Jehovah’s) he shall honor the 
“God of Forces,” or “Fortresses.” That is, he shall de- 
pend on the “god” that can secure for him the King- 
doms of this world, and that is the “God of this World 
(Age)”—SATAN, who offered the “Kingdoms” of the 
world to Christ. Matt. 4: 8-9. Christ refused them at 
the hand of Satan, for He knew that He would re- 
ceive them at the hand of the Father (Dan. 7: 13-14, 
Rev. 11:15), but the Antichrist will accept, for we 
read that—“the DRAGON (Satan) shall give him (the 
Beast) his power, and his seat (Throne), and great 
authority.” Rev. 13:2. By the help of this “strange 
god” the “Wilful King” shall secure the “strongholds” 
(Fortresses), or the fortified cities, of the Ten Feder- 
ated Kingdoms, and shall garrison them with Imperial 
troops on pretense of maintaining peace and concord. 
Thus he shall “increase the glory” of all who acknowl- 
edge him, and give them authority, and for “graft” 
(gain) he will divide the land. 


250 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


At this time the “King of the South” reappears. 
Who he will be we do not know. But he will be one 
of the “Ten Federated Kings,” for he is to appear 
after the “Four Kingdoms,” into which Alexander’s 
Empire was divided, shall reappear, and he will be 
some future King of Egypt who will oppose the claims 
and military success of the “Wilful King,” the “King 
of the North.” The “King of the North” will lose no 
time in opposing the “King of the South,” and will 
swoop down on him like a “whirlwind,” with chariots, 
and horsemen, and a large navy, and shall overflow 
many countries. But Edom, Moab, and the land of 
Ammon shall escape. But the “Glorious Land” and 
Egypt shall not escape. He shall confiscate the treas- 
ures of Egypt, and the Libyans and Ethiopians shall 
fall at his feet. 

But in the midst of his conquest of Egypt bad tid- 
ings shall come to him from the East, from Babylon. 
his Capital City, and from the North. These will fill 
him with rage, and he will depart from Egypt with 
“great fury” and will plant (pitch) the “Tabernacles of 
his Palace;” that is, the “Royal Tents” in which he 
dwelt while in the field, “between the seas,” the Medi- 
terranean and Dead Seas, on the “GLORIOUS HOLY 
MOUNTAIN.” And there, with none to help, he shall 
come to his end. See Zech 14. 


MICHAEL THE PRINCE 


VERSE, Chap. 12:1... “Andjat THAT TIME 
shall Michael stand up, the ‘Great Prince’ which 
standeth for the Children of thy (Daniel’s) 
People.” 


Here again we see that there should be no chapter 
division, for there is no break in the subject treated. 
The twelfth chapter begins with the words, “And at 
THAT TIME.” What TIME? The time of the “Wil- 
ful King,” which we have seen is the “TIME OF THE 
END.” Dan. 11:40. At that time Michael shall stand 
up. Stand up for, and take the part of Daniel’s People. 


THE SCRTP PUREOr TRUTH ot 


Who is Michael? He is mentioned three times in Dan- 
tel Danws LO ijpeoliiarizeely where thePis called “a 
“Prince” who stands for Daniel’s People—the Jews. 
Eiemismcalied Sinm jude 9Mthes Archangelss He has his 
angels, and in Rev. 12:7 he is seen in command of the 
“Angelic Army” of Heaven. His work seems to be to 
deliver God’s people, particularly the Jews, from the 
power of Satan, and finally to oust him and his angels 
from the Heavenlies, and cast them down on to the 
earth. Rev. 12: 7-9. He also has something to do with 
the resurrection of the dead, for he is associated with 
the “Resurrection” mentioned in Dan. 12: 1-2, and he 
contested with the Devil the resurrection of Moses 
(Jude 9), and the “voice” of the Archangel that will be 
heard when the “Dead in Christ” shall rise (1 Thess. 
4:16) will be the “voice” of Michael, for he is the only 
Archangel mentioned in the Scriptures. 


THE GREAT TRIBULATION 


VERSE 12:1—‘“And there shall be a ‘TIME 
OF TROUBLE,’ such as never was since there 
was a nation even to that same time: and at that 
time thy People shall be delivered, every one that 
shall be found written in the Book.” 


The Scriptures speak of a “Great Tribulation” that 
is coming on the earth. Christ in his “Olivet Dis- 
course,” uttered on the Mount of Olives on the Tues- 
day evening before His Crucifixion, said— 


“Then shall be GREAT TRIBULATION such 
as was not since the beginning of the world to this 
time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those days 
should be shortened, there should no flesh (human 
or animal) be saved: but for the Elect’s Sake (the 
elect of Israel) those days shall be shortened.” 


That the “Great Tribulation” spoken of by Christ 
was not the terrible sufferings that befell the Jewish 
people at the time of the destruction of Jerusalem in 
A. D. 70 is clear. That was local, and fell upon the 


Zoe THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


Jews only, while the Tribulation that Christ foretold 
is to come upon the whole world, and is to be immedi- 
ately followed by great physical changes, and the re- 
turn of the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven with 
power and great glory. 


“IMMEDIATELY after the Tribulation of 
those days shall the sun be darkened, and the 
moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall 
fall from heaven, and the Powers of the heaven 
(the Principalities and Powers of Evil) shall be 
shaken: and then shall appear the Sign (a cloud) 
of the Son of Man in heaven: and then shall all 
the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see 
the SON OF MAN COMING IN THE CLOUDS 
OF HEAVEN WITH POWER AND GREAT 
GLORY.” Matt. 24: 29-30. 


Now none of these things happened immediately 
after the Destruction of Jerusalem, nor have they hap- 
pened as yet. It will not do to say that the “physical 
changes,” such as the darkening of the sun, etc., are 
figurative, and represent the downfall of rulers, gov- 
ernments and authorities from the Political Firma- 
ment, for such “physical changes” have happened be- 
fore, and they will happen again. They happened in 
the days of Moses, when there was “Darkness” in 
Egypt for three days (Ex. 10: 21-23), and they shall 
happen again when the “Vials” of the Book of Reve- 
lation are poured out, as they will be during the “Great 
Tribulation” (Rev. 16:1-21), for four of the “Vial 
Plagues” are repetitions of four of the Plagues of 
Egypt. And if they were literal so must the “Vial 
Plagues” be. Christ also said that at that time, the 
time of the “Great Tribulation,” the “Powers of the 
heaven shall be shaken.” Now these “Powers of the 
Heavenlies,” the “Principalities and Powers of Evil,” 
of which the Apostle Paul warns us (Eph. 6:12), have 
not as yet been shaken, but in the Middle of Daniel’s 
“Seventieth Week,” when the “Great Tribulation” be- 
gins, there will be “War in Heaven,” and Satan, who is 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 293 


the PRINCE of these “Evil Powers of the Air,” will, 
with them, not only be shaken, but “shaken out” of 
the Heavenlies onto the earth, and it will be his 
presence, incarnate in the Antichrist, that will cause 
the Great Tribulation. Once more, immediately after 
~The Great Tribulation” the “Sign” of the “Son of 
Man” will be seen in the heavens. That “Sign” is a 
“cloud.” He ascended in a “cloud” and He is to re- 
turnyin, thesclouds @aNLatt.-24., 30. But as the Son 
of Man” (Jesus) did not return immediately after the 
destruction of Jerusalem in A. D. 70, then the de- 
struction of Jerusalem was not the “Great Tribula- 
tion” spoken of by Matthew. 


But our Lord’s Prophecy does not stand alone. It 
is backed up by other prophecies both in the Old and 
New Testaments. Turning to the Old Testament, we 
find that there were other Prophets beside Daniel who 
spoke of a “Time of Trouble” for Israel.. Jeremiah 
called it the time of “Jacob’s Trouble,” and compared 
its sufferings to the “birth-pangs” of a woman. Jer. 
30: 4-7. Ezekiel speaks of it as the time when Israel 
shall “Pass under the Rod,” Ezek. 20: 34-38; and when 
God shall gather Israel into the midst of Jerusalem, 
and cast them into His “Melting Pot,” where they are 
to be refined as silver is refined. Ezek. 22:18-22. See 
also Zech. 13:9 and Malachi 3:1-3. While the Old 
Testament Prophets, and Christ, foretell of this “Time 
of Trouble,” the Apostle John in the Book of Revela- 
fionmhevemliZeat oslo. 2 1 \soivesmis the details. brom 
these references we see that the “Great Tribulation” 
will be a time of JUDGMENT for the Jews, through 
which, as a “refining process,” they will be made fit to 
again be God’s chosen people. The “Great Tribula- 
tion” is not for the “perfecting” of the Saints. It has 
nothing to do with the Church. The Book of Revela- 
tion is written in chronological order, and the Church 
is “caught out” through the “Open Door” in chapter 
4:1, before the “Tribulation Period” begins, and is not 
seen again until she reappears with Christ at His Sec- 
ond Coming as the “Lamb’s Wife.” Rev. 19:6-9. If 


254 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


the Church is to pass through the “Great Tribulation,” 
then the Church should be watching for the Tribula- 
tion, and not waiting for His Son from Heaven. 
1 Thess. 1:10. During Daniel’s “Time of Trouble” all 
of Daniel’s People whose names are written in the 
Book will be miraculously “delivered.” These will be 
the “godly remnant” of the “END TIME.” 


A JEWISH RESURRECTION 


VERSE 12:2—“And many of them that sleep 
in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to ever- 
lasting life, and some to shame and everlasting 
contempt.” 


The Scriptures speak of three kinds of resurrection. 
1, SPIRITUAL. ‘This refers to those who are spirit- 
ually dead in “Trespasses and Sins.” Eph. 2: 1-16; 
5:14. Rom. 6:11. This is a “Present Resurrection” 
and is going on continually. Every time a soul is 
“born again” there is a passing from “death” unto 
“life,” this is a “Spiritual Resurrection.” John 5:24. 
2. PHYSICAL. This is of the dead body. The “Spirit” 
of man does not die, it goes back to God who gave it. 
All that goes into the grave is the body, and all that 
can come out of the grave is the body. The bodies of 
both the “Righteous” and the “Wicked” shall rise, 
but not at the same time. There will be a thousand 
years’ difference. The “Righteous” shall rise to the 
“Resurrection of LIFE” before the Millennium, and 
the “Wicked” to the “Resurrection of DAMNATION” 
at the close of the Millennium. John 5: 28-29.* 
3. NATIONAL. This refers to Israel who are now 
nationally dead and buried in the “Graveyard of the 
Nations,” but who are to be revived and restored to 
their own land. Jer. 16: 14-15. 

When the Children of Israel shall be restored to 
their own land the whole “Twelve Tribes” will return. 
Paul says—“ALL Israel shall be saved.” Rom. 11: 26, 
Ezekiel, in his Vision” of the “Valley of Dry Bones,” 


*See the Chart on “The Resurrections” in the writer’s book on 
“The Spirit World.” 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 259 


was told that the bones represented the “Whole House 
of Israel.” Ezek. 37:11. There are some who teach 
that what is here meant is, that previous to the Mil- 
lennium God will resurrect all the descendants of 
Israel and put them back in the Land of Palestine, 
and they base it on the statement in Ezek. 37: 12— 


“Behold, O my People, I will open your graves, 
and cause you to come up out of your graves, and 
bring you into the Land of Israel.” 


Now such an interpretation cannot be true for sev- 
eral reasons. First, the Land of Palestine is not large 
enough to hold and sustain such a multitude, and sec- 
ondly, this is not a description of a physical resurrec- 
tion of dead bodies, but of a “National_Resurrection”’ 
Girawlieople. (lL hescrysoi the, bones a verse: LL) where 
they say—‘“Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: 
we are cut off for our parts,” is not the cry of individ- 
ual dead Israelites, but the cry of a DEAD NATION 
that has been “cut off” from its own land. It is the 
cry of a Spiritually and Nationally dead People. By 
the word “graves” we are not to understand “literal 
graves,” for the bones were not in graves but scattered 
over the Valley. Ezek. 37:1-2. What the passage 
means is, that God is going to_bring back His People 
Israel, who are figuratively buried in the “Graveyard 
of the Nations,” and place them again in their own 
land. This is clear from what follows— 


“I will open your graves (among the nations), 
and cause you to come up out of your graves (that 
is back from among the nations), and bring you 
into thes Landsorlsrael?. zek.437 2125215922. 


Notice that nothing is said here of the opening of 
any graves in the Land of Israel, where the Patriarchs, 
Judges, Prophets and Kings of Israel were buried. 
This therefore could not be. a “General Resurrection” 
of all the DEAD OF ISRAEL, but only of those who 
died in other lands. But the next two verses settle the 
question, for the Lord says— 


256 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


“When I have opened your graves, O My 
People, and brought you up out of your graves 
(that is back in their own land), and shall put MY 
SPIRIT (Holy Spirit) in you, and ye shall live 
(Nationally) and I shall place you in your own 
Land (according to your Tribes, as described in 
Ezek. 48: 1-29): THEN shall ye know that I the 
Lord have spoken it, and performed it.” Ezek. 
37: 13-14. 


This is in exact accord with other Scriptures that 
teach that Israel is to be gathered back into their own 
Land (Jer. 16:14-15. Isa. 43:5-7. Amos 9: 14-15), 
where they are to pass through the “Fiery Judgment” 
of the “Tribulation Period” (Ezek. 20: 34-38; 22: 19-22. 
ZLechwise Ceevlalachi=o.-3),thersuiterings otewhicn 
will cause them to call on the Lord for deliverance, 
and He will pour out upon them the “Spirit of Grace 
and Supplication” (Zech. 12:10), and they shall “Na- 
tionally Repent” (Zech. 12:11-14), and be “Con- 
verted’ — 

“T will take you from among the Heathen (the 
Gentiles), and gather you out of all countries, and 
will bring you into your own Land. THEN will 
I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be 
clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your 
idols, will I cleanse you. A New Heart also will I 
give you, and a New Spirit will I put within you: 
and I will take away the ‘Stony Heart’ out of your 
flesh, and I will give you an ‘Heart of Flesh.’ And 
I will put MY SPIRIT within you, and cause you 
to walk in My Statutes, and ye shall keep My 
Judgments, and do them.” Ezek. 36: 24-27. 


Then will be fulfilled Isa. 66: 8— 


“Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen 
such things? Shall the earth be made to bring 
forth in ONE DAY? or shall a NATION be Born 
at Once? for as soon as ZION TRAVAILED 
(the Tribulation was her “birth pangs’), she 
BROUGHT FORTH HER CHILDREN.” 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH Zoh 


Then a “Nation,” the “Jewish Nation,” shall be con- 
verted, or “Re-born” IN A DAY. 


This interpretation of Ezekiel’s Vision of the “Val- 
ley of Dry Bones” is confirmed by the “Object Lesson” 
ot the Two sticks” that follow it. “Ezek? 37 715-28. 
The Prophet was told to take a stick and write on it— 
“For JUDAH and for the ‘Children of Israel’ his com- 
panions.” Which means the “Two Tribes,” Judah and 
Benjamin, known as “Judah.” Then he was told to 
take another stick, and write on it—“For JOSEPH, 
the stick of Ephraim.” Ephraim was the son of Joseph, 
for whom the “Ten Tribes” were sometimes called 
after Jeroboam’s insurrection. When the Prophet had 
marked the “Sticks,” he was told to join them to- 
gether “end to end,” so as to make ONE STICK, 
which when He had done, the Lord said— 


“When the children of thy (Ezekiel’s) people 
shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not shew 
us what thou meanest by these?... Say unto them. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take the 
‘Children of Israel’ from among the heathen (Gen- 
tiles), whither they be gone, and will gather them 
on every side, and bring them into their own 
Land, and I will make them ONE NATION in 
the Land (Palestine) upon the Mountains of 
Israel; and One King shall be King to them all: 
and they shall be no more “I'wo Nations,’ neither 
shall they be divided into “‘T'wo Kingdoms’ ANY 
MORE AT ALL.” Ezek. 37: 18-22. 


From this we see, that the “WHOLE HOUSE OF 
ISRAEL,” that is, the Whole Twelve Tribes, are to 
be gathered back to their own land, and redistricted 


upon it, according to the manner described in Ezek. 
48. Then will be fulfilled the words of Jer. 3: 18— 


“In those days the ‘House of Judah’ shall walk 
with the ‘House of Israel,’ and they shall come to- 
gether out of the land of the North (the bulk of 
the Jews are in Russia) to the Land (Palestine) 


258 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


that I have given for an inheritance unto your 
fathers.” 


Now we must not forget that in these “Scriptures 
of Truth” the Angel Gabriel was trying to make Dan- 
iel understand—‘ What shall befall his PEOPLE (the 
Jews) in the LATTER DAYS” (Dan. 10:14), or the 
STINE ORALHE -EN Dae Wang lili 5 el 2a seNate- 
rally therefore we should expect the Angel to have 
something to say about the “National Resurrection” 
of the Jewish Nation, and as it is to follow the “Time 
of Trouble” (Tribulation), how better could it be fore- 
told than in the words of verse 12: 2—‘“‘And many of 
them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, 
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and ever- 
lasting contempt.” If we claim that the words mean 
a “physical resurrection of dead bodies” we will find 
that the verse conflicts with the teaching of the New 
Testament as to the Resurrection. While, as we have 
seen, the New Testament teaches that there is to be 
an OUT Resurrection of the “Righteous” before the 
Millennium, and a thousand years before the “Wicked” 
rise, the verse we are considering declares, that while 
many (not all) shall rise, thus making it an Out Res- 
urrection, some shall be to “Everlasting Life,” and 
some to “Shame and Everlasting Contempt,” thus 
making it a resurrection of a mixed character. Again 
the time of Daniel's Resurrection is after the “Time of 
Trouble,” while the New Testament declares that the 
“First” or “OUT Resurrection” of the Righteous pre- 
cedes the Tribulation. But you say, there is to be a 
Resurrection of the “Righteous” after, or at the close, 
of the Tribulation, the Resurrection of the “Tribula- 
tion Saints.” Rev. 20:4-6. This is true. But it is not 
a mixed Resurrection. It is only of those who died 
during the Tribulation, and who were beheaded for 
the witness of Tesus, and for the word of God, and 
who did not worship the Beast. In other words, a 
Resurrection of Righteous persons. 

Some commentators try to get over the difficulty by 
paraphrasing the text. For instance, Tregelles trans- 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 259 


lates the verse thus, “Many from among the sleepers 
of the dust of the earth shall awake; these shall be 
unto everlasting life, but those (the rest of the sleep- 
ers) shall be unto shame and everlasting contempt.” 
But this is neither satisfactory or Scriptural, for it is 
only a separation into two classes of the “many” that 
rise, leaving the vast majority of the dead in the grave. 
While the words—“sleep in the dust of the earth” 
seem to imply physicai death, and under ordinary cir- 
cumstances would so mean, we must not forget that 
the verse refers to a condition of Daniel’s people in 
their “latter days.” Not a condition of “death,” but of 
“National Existence.” If therefore we interpret the 
words “sleep in the dust of the earth” to mean the 
same as the words of Ezekiel—“I will open your 
graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves” 
(Ezek. 37:12), which we saw means a “National Res- 
urrection” of the Jewish People of the “End Time,” 
t(heminerninomaitienvcioe icnclcatmmn iat i6.micntireans 
not a Physical or Spiritual, but a “National” Resur- 
rection of the Jewish People after the Tribulation, and 
before the Millennium. That is where Christ in His 
Olivet Discourse puts it— 


“Immediately after the Tribulation of those days 
. Shall appear the Sign of the Son of Man in 
heaven: and then shall all the tribes mourn (pos- 
sibly the Twelve Tribes of Israel are meant), and 
they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds 
of heaven with power and great glory. And He 
shall send His angels with a great sound of a 
trumpet,. and they shall gather together His 
ELECT from the four winds, from one end of 
heaven (the atmosphere of the earth) to the 
other.” Matt. 24: 29-31. 


The “Elect” here are not those of the Church. They 
were caught out before the Tribulation. These are 
caught out after the Tribulation, and as the passage 
is Jewish, they must be the “Elect” of Israel. Notice 
it is not a “catching up,” but a “gathering together.” 


260 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


The scene is earthly. The Jews are looked upon at 
present as those that “dwell in dust,” but who are yet 
to “awake and sing.” Isa. 26:19. The Apostle Paul 
says of them—“If the casting away of them (Israel) 
be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiv- 
ing (back) of them be but LIFE FROM THE 
DEAD?” Rom. 11:15. Israel, while lost, is not dead. 
The Prodigal Son, while lost, was called “dead,” but 
when he returned home his father said of him that 
he was “alive again.” Luke 15:24. If we accept this 
interpretation of Israel’s Résurrection, then the 
“many” that shall awake reveals the fact that not all 
the Jews in the world will return to Palestine, and that 
the “some to Everlasting Life” will be Righteous, 
while those to “shame and Everlasting Contempt” will 
be Unrighteous. 


THE REWARD OF THE WISE 


VERSE 12:3. “And they (the Teachers) that 
be wise shall shine as the ‘Brightness of the 
Firmament,’ and they that turn many to righteous- 
ness as the Stars forever and ever.” 


The marginal reading in the Revised Version for 
the word “they” is “Teachers,” and the passage should 
read—‘‘And the Teachers that be WISE,” inferring 
that, as in our time, some will not be wise. We must 
not forget that the “Gospel of the Kingdom” shall be 
again, preached, aior uteimustbeppreachedsin all@the 
world for a witness unto all nations, and then shall 
the END COME (the End of this Dispensation). 
Matt. 24:14. We must not forget that there are “Four 
Gospels” spoken of in the New Testament. 


1. The Gospel of the KINGDOM. 

The Gospel of the GRACE OF GOD. 
The GLORIOUS GOSPEL. 

The EVERLASTING GOSPEL. 


ae aa 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 261 


The word “Gospel” means “Good News.” The “Gos- 
pel of the Kingdom” is the “Good News” that God is 
going to set up a Kingdom of the earth over which 
David’s Son, JESUS, shall reign. Luke 1: 32-33. This 
Gospel was proclaimed by John the Baptist and Jesus 
and His Disciples, in the words—“Repent, for the 
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.” The call to repent was 
not to individuals but to the Nation. The Nation re- 
fused, rejected the King, and crucified Him. But be- 
fore the King’s death the “Gospel of the Kingdom,” 
which up to that time had been preached only in Pal- 
estine, and not to all the world, was withdrawn. It is 
to be preached again after the Church has been 
“caught out,” and then not only in Palestine but in 
the whole world. And as it is a call to Israel as a 
Nation to repent, and a proclamation that Christ is 
coming to set up the “STONE” (Dan. 2: 34-35, 44-45) 
or Millennial Kingdom, the Kings of the earth, par- 
ticularly Antichrist, will hate such a “Gospel” that 
proclaims the downfall of his Kingdom. This will ac- 
count for Antichrist’s hatred of the Jews, and his per- 
secution of those who preach that Gospel. 

Between the two preachings of the “Gospel of the 
Kingdom” we have the preaching of the “Gospel of the 
Grace of God.” It is the proclamation of Salvation 
through faith in the “Atoning Sacrifice” of Christ on 
the Cross. The “Glorious Gospel is the Gospel of the 
“Glorious Appearing,” or “Second Coming” of our 
Eordmand@ oavioure jesus Christ. “WDitus 27.137 The 
“Everlasting Gospel” will be preached by an Angel 
just before the “Vial Judgments” are poured out on 
the earth, and it will be “good news” to all who are 
passing through the “Great Tribulation,” because it 
declares that their sufferings will soon cease, and it 
will be “bad news” to Antichrist and his followers be- 
cause it will proclaim that the “hour of God’s judg- 
ment” for them has come. Rev. 14:6-7. There is also 
“ANOTHER GOSPEL” (Gal. 1:6-12, 2 Cor. 11:4), 
which is not another, and which Paul repudiated. It 
is a perversion of the true Gospel, and has many se- 


262 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


ductive forms, and in the main teaches that “FAITH” 
is NOT SUFFICIENT to Salvation, nor able to keep 
and perfect, and so emphasizes “GOOD WORKS.” 
Golf 218-23 shiebs 6: Gao 14 Nev apostleah aulspro- 
nounces a fearful “Anathema” upon its preachers and 
teachers Gaia -3-9) 

The “wise” teachers of the “End time” will be like 
the children of Issachar, “which were men that had 
understanding of the Times.” 1 Chron. 12:32. They 
shall understand the Scriptures, and being mostly 
Jews, the Old Testament: particularly the prophecies 
relating to Israel. So prominent and noted will they 
be, they will shine as the brightness of the firmanent 
on a clear winter’s night, and as “stars” in the “Pro- 
phetic Heavens,” and like the great Prophets of old, 
Moses, Isaiah, Ezekiel and Daniel, they shall shine 
forever and ever. So true and clear and forceful will 
be their exposition of the Word of God, that it will 
convict the hearers and they shall turn many to 
righteousness. 


THE SEALED BOOK 


VERSE 12:4. “But thou, O Daniel, shut up 
the words, and SEAL THE BOOK, even to the 
‘TIME OF THE END? many shall run to and 
fro (then), and knowledge (Prophetic Knowl- 
edge) shall be increased.” 


Notice the difference in the command to Daniel the 
Prophet, and John the Apostle. Daniel was told to 
“SEAL UP” the revelations given to him, while John 
was told to “SEAL NOT” the prophecies of the Book 
of Revelation. Rev. 22:10. And the reason is evident. 
When the Disciples came to Jesus and said— 


“Why speakest Thou unto them (the multi- 
tude, ety Jews) in Parables? He answered and 
said unto them, Because it is given unto you -(the 
Disciples) to know the MYSTERIES of the King- 
dom of Heaven, but to them it is not given.... 
Therefore speak I to them in Parables: because 
they seeing see not; and hearing they hear nc., 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 263 


neither do they understand. And in them is ful- 
filled the Prophecy of Esaias (Isa. 6: 9-12), which 
saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not un- 
derstand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not 
perceive: for this péople’s (the Jews) heart is 
waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, 
and their eyes THEY have closed; lest at any 
time they should see with their eyes, and hear 
with their ears, and should understand with their 
heart, and should be converted, and I should heal 
thems = Matt 13-10-15 


From these words of Christ we learn that the Jews. 


of His time were “wilfully ignorant” of the Prophetic 
Scriptures. They had ears to hear, but they did not 
understand, because they did not want to. And so, 
not to add to their sin, Christ had to unveil the “Mys- 
teries” of the Kingdom of Heaven in Parables. And 
the reason was because the “Veil of Unbelief” was on 
their hearts. Of the Children of Israel, Paul says— 


“Their minds were BLINDED: for until this 
day remaineth the same VEIL untaken away in 
the reading of the OLD TESTAMENT: .. 
Nevertheless when it (a man, R. V. margin) shall 
TURN TO THE LORD, the ‘Veil’ shall be taken ‘ 
away.” 2 Cor. 3: 14-16. 


Therefore, as far as the Jews are concerned, the 
Book of Daniel is a “sealed book.” But it is only sealed 
up to them until the “Time of the End.” When that 
“Time *comes*many of Daniel’s* People shall “run to 
and fro,” and their “knowledge (of the Book) shail be 
increased,” and they shall be comforted and sustained 
amid the sufferings) and trials of that “Time of 
Trouble.” 

But the Book of Daniel is no longer sealed to the 
Christian believer. He has seen its prophecies being 
fulfilled in history. And now that the Book is being 
better understood, it is more and more studied, which 
is a sign of the near approach of the “Time of the 
End.” 


264 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


THE LENGTH OF THE “TIME OF THE END” 


VERSES 12: 5-12—‘‘Then I Daniel looked, and, 
behold, there stood other two, the one on this 
side of the bank of the River, and the other on 
that side of the bank of the River. And one said 
to the ‘Man Clothed in Linen,’ which was upon 
the waters of the River, How long shall it be to 
the END of these Wonders? 

“And I heard the ‘Man Clothed in Linen,’ which 
was upon the waters of the River, when he held 
up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven, 
and sware by him that liveth forever that it shall 
be for a TIME, TIMES, AND AN HALF; and 
when he shall have accomplished to scatter the 
power of the Holy People, all these things shall be 
FINISHED. 

“And I heard, but I understood not: then said 
I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these 
things? And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the 
words are closed up and sealed till the TIME 
OF THE END. Many shall be purified, and 
made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do 
wickedly: and none of the wicked shall under- 
stand; but the WISE shall understand. 

“And from the time that the ‘Daily Sacrifice’ 
shall be taken away, and the ‘Abomination that 
maketh Desolate set up,’ there shall be a THOU- 
SAND TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY 
DAYS. Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to 
the THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED AND 
FIVE AND THIRTY DAYS.” 


We must not forget that Daniel was still standing 
by the side of the River Hiddekel (Tigris), and that 
chapters 10 to 12 inclusive are one “Vision.” There- 
fore the “Man Clothed in Linen” is the same men- 
tioned in chapter 10:5-6, and has been already de- 
scribed. But at this point in the “Vision” Daniel no- 
ticed two other angelic beings, one on each side of 
the River. One of them addressed the “Man Clothed 


THE SCRIPTURE OF TRUTH 265 


in Linen,” supported in a cloud over the River, and 
asked—“How long shall it be to the END of these 
Wonders?” And the “Man Clothed in Linen’ lifted 
up both hands and sware by the Almighty, that it 
should be for a “TIME, TIMES, AND A HALF,” or 
three and a half years. 


Now there are two things in this answer, the “Oath,” 
and the “Length of the Time,” that remind us of Rev. 
10: 1-6. And as the Book of Revelation is the inter- 
preter of the Book of Daniel we turn to the reference. 


“And I saw another MIGHTY ANGEL come 
down from Heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a 
Rainbow was upon His head, and His face was as 
it were the sun, and His feet as pillars of Fire: and 
He had in His hand a ‘LITTLE BOOK’ open: 
and He set His right foot upon the SEA, and His 
left foot on the EARTH, and cried with a loud 
voice as when a LION roareth: and when He had 
cried ‘SEVEN THUNDERS’ uttered their voices. 
And when the ‘SEVEN THUNDERS’ had ut- 
tered their voices, I was about to write: and I 
heard a ‘Voice from Heaven’ saying unto me, 
SEAL UP those things which the ‘SEVEN 
THUNDERSY’ uttered, and write them not. And 
the ‘ANGEL’ which I saw stand upon the sea and 
upon the earth lifted up His hand to Heaven, and 
‘sware’ by Him that LIVETH FOREVER AND 
EVER, Who created Heaven, and the things that 
therein are, and the earth, and the things that 
therein are, and the sea, and the things which are 
therein, that there should be TIME NO LONGER 
(delay no longer, R. V.)/’ 


As the description of this “MIGHTY ANGEL,” in 
His appearance and actions, harmonizes with that of 
the “MAN CLOTHED IN LINEN” (Dan. 10: 5-6; 
12:6-7), they must be one and the same, or the Lord 
Jesus Christ. The description corresponds to that of 
Him as He stands in the midst of the “Lampstands” 
in Rev. 1:12-16, and we know that in the Old Testa- 


266 THE BOOK OF DANIEL 


ment He was called the “ANGEL OF THE LORD” 
(Ex. 3: 2-18), and that the “I AM” of the Old Testa- 
ment is the same as the “I AM” of the New Testa- 
ment. John 6:35; 8:12; 10:9. Now as these closing 
chapters of Daniel deal with Israel, and as Christ was 
to them the “ANGEL OF THE LORD,” what more 
appropriate title could He have in chapters 6 to 19 
of Revelation, that also deal mainly with Israel, than 
that» ofea - MIGHT Y#ANGHLe” she aact thateiie 
cried with a loud voice, as a “Lion roareth,” identifies 
Him as the “LION OF THE TRIBE OF JUDAH.” 
Revano: 


This “Mighty Angel,” like the “Man Clothed in 
Linen,” swears by the Almighty, that there shall be 
“TIME NO LONGER,” or as the margin of the King 
James Version, and the Revised Version, translate it— 
“DELAY NO LONGER.” And as the “Mighty 
Angel” uttered these words in the “Middle” of Dan- 
iel’s “Seventieth Week,” there was only three and a 
half years to run or forty-two months (Rev. 13:5), 
which is the exact time given by the “Man Clothed 
in Linen,” for forty-two months is equal to Daniel’s 
“TIME, TIMES, AND A HALF.” Verse 7. Thus we 
see that Daniel and Revelation agree as to the 
LENGTH’ of the “Time of the Endi=andathateit as 
given by the same Person, the Lord Jesus Christ. 

While Daniel heard the answer, he did not under- 
stand the meaning, so he himself repeated the question, 
but no explanation was vouchsafed him, and he was 
told to go his way, for the words were “closed up and 
sealed” till the “TIME OF THE END,” when the 
“WISE shall understand.” Then two other measures 
of time were revealed to Daniel, 1290 and 1335 days. 
These days were to date from the time when the 
“Daily Sacrifice” was taken away, and the “Abomina- 
tion of Desolation” set up, which we know will be in 
the “Middle” of Daniel’s “Seventieth Week.” Dan. 
9:27. Thus we have three measures of time given in 
Daniel, all dating from the “Middle” of his “Seven- 
tieth Week.” First, the 2300 days of Dan. 8: 13-14, 


PibeoCh Ie RU RE TORE RUA EH 267 


and these two measures of 1290 and 1335 days. The 
termini of these three measures of time are respec- 
tively 1040, 30, and 75 days beyond the “End” of Dan- 
iel’s “Seventieth Week.” The 2300 days have to do 
with the cleansing of the Sanctuary, but we are not 
told what events the other two measures of time lead 
up to. But we do know that after the return of the 
Lord at the “End of the Week” there will be other 
events of national importance to the Jews, that will 
precede the setting up of the Millennial Kingdom. 


DANIEL’S GLORIOUS LOT 


VERSE 12: 13—“‘But go thou thy way till the 
end be: for thou shall rest, and stand in THY 
LOT at the END OF THE DAYS.” 


Daniel was over ninety years of age. He had lived 
in Babylon, away from his beloved Land and City, for 
over seveuty years. His life had not been an idle one. 
He had been active in the public affairs of two Em- 
pires. His religion had received the severest tests. 
God had honored him by taking him into His confi- 
dence, and revealing to him the history of the “Times 
of the Gentiles.” In his last Vision he had the blessed 
privilege of seeing and hearing the voice of his Lord. 
But his work was done. The time for rest had come. 
So he was told to “go his way,” depart to his home, 
and rest there until the summons came for him to make 
his “Exodus” from Babylon to the Heavenly Land. 
Then when the “Times of the Gentiles” have run their 
course, Daniel will stand in HIS LOT. What that 
“Lot” is to be we are not told. But if the Apostles 
are to be raised and sit on “Twelve Thrones,” judging 
the “Twelve Tribes” of Israel (Matt. 19:28). what 
may not Daniel’s lot be, who participated in the af- 
fairs of Empires, and was the trusted adviser of kings. 


oe “tame 


Cr en ith ie 
ETRE OME 
gohlite 

rn wear a ny 
ti Vee oer ee a | 
flint sinks i) Wael zyRe ha | 
it Moe er eetin tM the erhaee 


| | 7 oi) Alley) Feat ua 
Had sng ck Wd UR mn ay 
om elentet« Seat antighl gh he i RAP 


aaah, nha ay" aed THIER © ‘ le 
YO RIOIAOLD BISTMAG: vat 


; yer cng. 4 # nh 0 » ae tuk ‘on Meet 
as Fal . Ly «thi liegt Ae ey aifeee-gelt* 
*¢ "+ te ays sid A308 oe TI etl Bald 


(ay 4 7 ee 

mite ety rye ALY owe Bas eratgiee, 2 
pang nat? Binh Peer ah eas ORR Le tatahy ae 

wih —hky oe On “ele ing tt Nil as} rth aha : 
rad weedy) diy arate pe i hsdet- Hi Bl | cay 
arn nt Ones os y ENR Sho hort, Gis wT Le 
Prraeiviheavud ‘neamete) heer, aang | 
eat tied “RE Wits ty Fi oe aoe Ser | i] 
Ceeertee a 6 fet : bag = ; 
aaa ioaenah eh A fay Sd 


peat; Deneh iva «Hem a 
etre! WOT. a1 es 
yy ital get he ‘; ; _ 4 
hae by atoatte ‘ +e 
visti? hue 6ah | 


donate cakil #4 Pe, Sita 
as ae . 
| ag bal ERT eur.) 


ee m "ty ete 
sage St ee ee 


eri at ae ee yee 


OTHER BOOKS BY THE SAME AUTHO 


Dispensational ‘Truth 


or 


God’s Plan and Purpose in the Ages 


The book contains 34 chapters of descriptive matter and 42 
splendid prophetical charts 9x20 inches, 48 one page charts, and 
15 cuts. The charts and cuts are interspersed through the de- 
scriptive matter. There are 300 columns of reading matter, each 
column 414x8'% inches, equivalent to any ordinary book of 450 
pages. The charts are unique, simple, clear, uniform in style, 
and present every phase of “Dispensational Truth.” The book 
is bound in cloth, atlas form, size 11x1l inches, and the large 
charts spread over two pages. 


The book is the result of 30 years’ study of “Dispensational 
Truth.” It is sane. Not a “time-setter.”. Contains no specula- 
tive matter. Is not made up of quotations from other writers, 
but is based solely on the Scriptures from the “Futurist” stand- 
point. It is of permanent value, and a standard authority on 
“Dispensational Truth,” and is a mine of information on “Pro- 
phetic Truth” for the busy pastor, evangelist, Bible teacher, and 
all lovers of the Word. 


This work is not an experiment. Is no longer in its elemen- 
tary form, but has been revised and enlarged and is now in its 
fourth edition, is widely circulated over the world, is highly 
commended by leading prophetical scholars, and is being used 
in many Bible schools. The author has been a preacher and 
teacher of “Dispensational Truth” for 35 years, but only recently 
has put into printed form the result of his studies, with the 
hope that they may be a blessing to the world. : 


TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS 


Whe Prophetic Word—Pre-Millennialism—Mountain Peaks of 
Prophecy—The Second Coming of Christ—Rightly Dividing the 
Word—The Present Evil World—The Dispensational Work of 
Christ—The Dispensational Work of the Holy Spirit—The Jews— 
The Gentiles—The Chureh—The King—The Kingdom—The Spirit 
World—Spiritism—The Resurrections—The Judgments—Satan— 
Antichrist—The Satanic Trinity—The Four Gospels—The Seven 
Churches—The Tribulation—Babyion the Great—Renovation of the 
Earth—The Covenants—The Mysteries—Types and Antitypes—The 
Feasts of the Lord—The Offerings—The Three Trees to Which 
Israel is Compared in the Scriptures—The Dispensational Teach- 
ing of the Great Pyramid—Scripture Numerics—The Signs of the 
Times- 


TITLES OF THE CHARTS 


(Only the Prominent Ones Named) 


The Ages as Viewed From Different Standpoints—The Moun- 
tain Peaks of Propheey—ihe Perspective of Prophecy—Tne Two 
Comings—7000 Years of Human Histery—Rightly Dividing the 
Word—lelation of Jew, Gentile and Church to Each Other—The 
Times and Seasons—The Creation of the Enrth—Six Days of Re- 
Creation—7 Cesmic Phases of the EKarth—Bock of Genesis—The 
World’s 7 Great Crises—The Prophetic Days of Seripturce—Greater 
Life and Work of Christ—The Jews—-Book of Exodus—The Royal 
Grant to Abraham—Book of Daniel—-Prophetical Chronology—Dan- 
ie’s Seventy Weeks—-Map of Gld Reman Empire—The Gentile Na- 
tions—The Chureh—WPailure of Christianity—The King—Kingdom 
of God Versus Kingdom of Heaven—The Kingdom—The Church 
Versus the Kingdom—Hingdom of Hcaven Parables—Book of Mat- 
thew—The Miliennial Land—BHock of Ezckiei—The Spirit World— 
Threefold Nature of Man-——Fhe Resurrections and Judgments— 
Judgment of Reward—Saian—Antichrist and “Times of the Gen- 
tiles”—The Four Gospels—When, the New Testament Books Were 
Written—Book of Revelation——Messages to the 7 Churches—Dan- 
jel’s Seventicth Week—Daniel and Revelation Comparcd—The 
Covenants—The Mystcries—Types and Antitypes—The HWeasts of 
the Lord—The Tabernacle—Book of Leviticus—The Great Pyramid 
—Christ and the Saints Compared to the Heavenly Bodies-—The 
Weeks of Scripture—The Signs of the Times. 


The Book of Revelation 


This book is the result of 25 years’ study of the Book of 
Revelation. The Book is interpreted from the Futurist Stand- 
point The writer's purpose is to show that the Book is to be 
taken literally, and that it is written in chronological order. The 
text of the Old Version is used, and is printed at the top of each 
subject. The text and descriptive matter is emphasized by the 
use of capitals and black type. 

The book is illustrated with over 30 charts, maps, and dia- 
grams. There are aiso numerous cuts of the symbols, beasts, 
etc., spoken of in the Book of Revelation, distributed through 
the book. These help to elucidate the text and add to the value 
of the book, and save much explanatory matter. The make-up 
and printing of the book is unique. The divisons and headings 
of the subjects are all printed in heavy black type. This adds 
to the cost of the book, but makes the subject matter of the book 
stand out in bold relief. While there are but 225 pages in the 
book, the size of the tvpe, and the enlarged page, 6 x 9 inches, 
make it equivalent to an ordinary book of 400 pages. 

The book is sane, contains no speculative matter, nor opin- 
ions of the writer. The book is not a commentary made up of 


quotations from other writers. The writer is neither a copyist 
nor compiler. The only Author the writer has sought to follow 
is the Author of the Book, the LORD JESUS CHRIST. He 
has simply sought to interpret the “MIND OF CHRIST” as 
revealed in the Book of Revelation. The writer’s aim has been 
to prepare a standard work on the Book of Revelation, from the 
Futurist Standpoint, that can be used as a text-book in Theo- 
logical Seminaries and Bible Schools, and a help to Ministers, 
Missionaries, and Bible Students, generally. Its appearance at 
this time is timely, when the prophetic utterances of the Book 
of Revelation are rapidly approaching their fulfilment. 


Rightly Dividing The Word 


el ome> OO lO ME ARE Se INE LU ey Der een eiic 
BOOKZON® DISPENSATIONALAL RUT Heil SseUREOSE 
PS DOmhiGH Pe Yep IVIDEST HE FUNDAMEN DAL DOC- 
TR b Sel N APH RIES OF “CONTRASTS 2AS CAW AND 
GRACH St HAlTIeANDAWORKS 2 LC 


The author has made it the work of his ministry to preach 
the “Fundamentals.” This volume contains the cream and meat 
of his sermons and Bible lectures. The book contains twenty- 
nine chapters and fifty-five charts. The charts are one page 
charts, clear and simple, and suitable for lantern slides, or biop- 
ticon, in Bible class’work. The book contains 330 pages, and is 
bound in cloth. 

CHAPTERS 


Rightly Dividing the Word—Ages and Dispensations—Jew and 
Gentile—Chureh and Kingdom—The Four Gospels—The Two Ad- 
vents—The Spirit World—Satan—The Sutanie Trinity—“The Mys- 
tery of Godliness” and “The Mystery of Iniquity’—Resurrection 
of Jesus—The Resurrection—The Judgments—The Two Adams— 
Atonement and Redemption—Sin and Salwation—Law and Grace— 
Faith and Works—The Trwwo Natures—Standing and State—Regen- 
eration and Baptism—Election and Free-will—The Reciprocal In- 
dwelling of Christ and the Believer—The Thkreefold work of Christ 
—Christ Qur Passover—Heaven and Hell—Judaism and Christian- 
ity—The Circles of the Christian Life—Palace Heautiful. 


CHARTS 


The Prophetic Days of Scripture—The Times and Seasons— 
Ages and Dispensations—The Three Stages of the Earth—The 
Prophetic EKarth—First and Second Re-creative Days—Third and 
Fourth Re-ereative Days—VFifth and Sixth Re-creative Days—The 
Dispensation of Judgment—The Jews-—The Five Great World- 
Wide Kingdems—The Gentiles—The Chureh—The Church Versus 
the Kingdom—Kingdom of God—Kingdom of Heaven—The Church 
—The Feur Gospe!ls—The Two Cemings—-The Mountain Peaks of 
Fourth Re-creative Days—Fifth and Sixth Ke-ecreative Days—The 
Dispersation of Judgment—The Jews—The Five Great World- 
Wide Kingdoms—The Gentiles—The Church-—The Church Versus 
the Kingedom—Kingdem of God—Kingtiaem of Heaven—The Church 
—The Four Gespels—The Two Comingnxn—-~The Mountain Peaks of 


Prophecy—The Two Advents—Daniel’s “Seventy Weeks”—The 
Tabernacle—The Threefold Nature of Man—The Underworld— 
Satan—The Satanic Trinity—The Greater Life and Work of Christ 
—The Virgin Birth—The Christ—The Antichrist—Antichrist and 
the Times of the Gentiles—The Resurrections—The Judgments— 
The Two Judgments of the Believer—The Judgment of Reward— 
The Two Adams—Law and Grace—Feeling Versus Faith—The Two 
Natures—Which is My Heart?—The Natural Man—The New Man— 
The Worldly Christian—The Sanctified Man—Standing and State— 
Believer’s Baptism—Reciprocal Indwelling of Christ and the Be- 
liever—Christ the Vine—The Threefold Work of Christ—Christ 
Our Passover—The Heavens—Judaism and Christianity—The Cir- 
cles of the Christian Life—Palace Beautiful—First Floor Plan of 
Palace Beautiful—Second Floor Plan of Palace Beautiful. 


The Second Coming of Christ 


THIS HS)AecBOOKLET? (OF ei26 PAGES 8 SIZER GO 
INCHES, AND IS ILLUSTRATED WITH EIGHT FINE 
CHARTS, 4%x8 INCHES. 


This “Booklet” was written for those who desire a little 
treatise on the “Second Coming” to circulate among their 
friends and to give to those who know nothing of the doctrine, 
or who desire to know more. It gives a history of the doctrine, 
vividly describes the two stages of the Coming, and points out 
the “Signs of the Times.” It is timely, contains no speculative 
matter, is no “time-setter,” is of permanent value and is a sim- 
ple, clear, sane and Biblical exposition of the Blessed Hope of 
the Lord’s Return. 


The Spirit World 


‘LHESMEB OOK GV S MeL ae A Grin Come ©) tages 
HOLY SCRIPLTURESZASS LO TH ERO PUR UieWOKL Dae 
CONTAINS #19 GHAPLERS SAND Malo ECUS PRATED 
WARIS 2Z7@P I ChURES@AN Dal7sCGle ties: 


It treats of the “Powers of Good and Evil,” of the “Under- 
world,” of “Satan,” of the “Fallen Angels,” of “Deamonism,” of 
“Soul Sleep,” the “Intermediate State,” the “Resurrections” and 
“Judgments” and of “Heaven and Hell.” 


These books for sale by 
REV. CLARENCE LARKIN ESTATE 
2802 N. Park Avenue, Philadelphia 32, Pa. 
Remit by Money Order 


DATE DUE 


2 = 
» 


4 ae] d 
_ e 2 

+3 ‘* oi ‘ 

(@ 

BY 

43 


Bar kiters 


ae. a cet ™ 
ron ey ue 


Ws 


ML Bie 
= 


o 
& 


GAYLORD 


PRINTED IN U.S.A, 


