"F'RF 


THE 


THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM 


LORD  JESUS,  THE  CHRIST 


AS  COVENANTED  IN 


THE  OLD  TESTAMENT, 


AND   PRESENTED  IN 


THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


BY 


GEO.  K  H.  PETEKS,  AM., 

EVANG.  LUTH.  MlNISTEB. 


"Yea,  if  thou  criest  after  knowledge,  and  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  understanding  ;  if  thou  scekest  her 
as  silver,  and  searchest  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures:  then  shalt  thou  understand  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
and  find  the  knowledge  of  God."— Prov.  2  :  4-6. 


Vol.  III. 


TD  FUNK   &  WAGNALLS 

NEW   YORK  1S84  LONDON 

10  and  12  Dey  Street  44  Fleet  Street 

All  Rights  Reserved 


THENEWYORK 

PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


ASTOR,   LENOX  AND 
TILDEN    FOUNDATIONS. 

1897. 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  CongTese,  in  the  year  1884,  by 

F^IJfK  &  WAGNALLS, 

In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington,  D.  C. 


THIS     VOLUME 

is 

BespectfuUg  Z3eTn'catc*r 

TO 

W.    H.    CONLEY,    Esq., 

AND 

dr.  j.  t.  Mclaughlin, 

To  whom  the  author  is  deeply  indebted  for  sympathy  and  j>ecuniary  aid  in  the 
prosecution  and  publication  of  the  work.* 

The  divine  assurances  (as  e.g.  Prov.  11 :  25  ;  19:17;  Matt,  5:7;  Isa.  32  :  8 ; 
Matt.  10:42,  etc.)  of  an  ultimate  repayment  given  by  God  Himself  indicates 
the  cognizance  of  Oxe  abundantly  able  to  fulfil  His  promises.  May  an  ample 
realization  of  His  faithfulness  be  their  happy  experience.  Faith  in  the  same 
"  blessed  Hope,"  in  the  same  TJicocratic  Kingdom,  influenced  them  to  give  their 
needed  assistance,  and,  therefore,  it  is  but  proper  for  me  to  express,  in  this  form, 
the  desire  and  prayer,  that  the  mighty  llieocratic  King — whom  they  thus  hon- 
ored— may  honor  them   in  His   Cuming  Kingdom. 

THE    AUTHOR. 


*T7ie  author  likewise  acknowledges  his  deep  indebtedness  to  Hon.  J.  W.  Bookwalter  ; 
S.  A.  Bowman,  Esq.;  Ed.  P.  Christie;  Augustus  Kountze,  Esq.;  A.  D. 
Jones,  Esq.  ;  P.  Schindler,  Esq.,  and  others,  for  aid  and  sympathy  extended. 
A  sense  of  gratitude  prompts  this  brief,  but  deserted,  mention. 


"§Utb  as  it  is  bcerccb  tbat  tbe  fobole  scheme  of  Scripfnre  is  not  get  nnberstoob, 
so  if  it  ebcr  comes  to  be  nnberstoob  before  tbe  restitution  of  all  things,  anb  foitbout 
miraculous  interventions,  it  must  be  in  tbe  same  brag  as  natural  kaofcolcbgc  is  come  at, 
ba  tbe  continuance  anb  progress  of  learning  anb  Iibertg,  anb  ba  particular  persons 
attenbing  to,  comparing,  anb  pursuing  intimations  scatterrb  up  anb  bofrw,  fobiclj  are 
obcrlookcb  anb  bisregarbcb  ba  tbe  majoritg  of  tlje  foorlb.  Jor  tljis  is  ilje  brag  in 
tobicb  all  improbemenfs  are  mabe  bg  tjjouqbtful  men,  tracing  on  obscure  bints,  as  it 
foerc,  broppcb  to  us  ba  nature  accibcntallu,  or  tobat  seems  to  come  into  our  miubs  bg 
cbanec.  Jlor  is  it  iucrrbiblc  tbat  a  book  tobicb  Iras  been  so  Ioag  in  possession  of 
mankinb  sboulb  contain  mang  truths  as  get  unbiscobcrcb,  for  all  %  pbenomena  anb 
%  same  faculties  of  inbesttgatiou  from  fobjdj  SttC'j  SrEa*  biscoberics  Irabe  been  mabe  in 
tbe  present  anb  tbe  past  age  (acre  eqnalla  in  possession  of  maahinb  scbcral  tljousanb 
gears  before,  ^nb  possiblg  it  migjit  be  intenbeb  tbat  ebeats  as  %g  come  to  pass 
sboulb  open  anb  ascertain  tbe  meaning  of  scbcral  parts  of  Scripture." — Butler's 
Analogy,  Part  II.,  Ch.  3. 

Cyprian,  Pref.  to  Testimoxia  :  "  |ttorc  strength  fail!  be  imparteb  to 
%e,  anb  tlje  eges  of  tbiue  unberstanbing  toil!  continuallg  grofa  clearer,  if  tljou  searcbest 
more  carefnlla  tbrougb  tbe  ©lb  anb  SJefo  (Lest.,  anb  biligentlg  pcrusest  all  parts  of 
tbe  |lola  Scriptures;  for  $  Ijabe  oala  brafon  a  little  out  of  tbe  bibinc  fonataiu  to 
scab  tbee  in  tbe  meaatime.  oTbou  caast  brink  more  topionslg  anb  satisfa  ibgself, 
foben,  toitb  us,  tbon  also  approacbest  to  %  same  fountain  of  bibinc  fulness,  in  orber 
to  brink  after  %  same  manner."— Quoted  by  Dr.  Xeander,  Genl.  Ch.  His., 
Vol.  2,  p.  U1. 


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS. 


Peop.  165. — The  doctrine  of  this  Kingdom  enables  us  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of 

human  governments 11 

Pkop.  166. — The  rudimentary  reorganization  of  the  Kingdom  will  be  made  at  Mount 

Sinai 17 

Pkop.  167. — The  re-establishment  of  this  Kingdom  embraces  also  the  reception  of  a 

New  Kevelation  of  the  Divine  Will 29 

Pkop.  168. — This  Kingdom  has  its  place  of  manifested  royalty 32 

Peop.  169. — The  Theocratic  Kingdom  includes  the  marriage  of  Christ  to  the  New 

Jerusalem , 39 

Peop.  170. — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  fully  sustained  by  "the  Father's  house" 

of  John  14:2 53 

Peop.  171. — This  Kingdom  is  connected  with  the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Spirit) 

and  of  Fire 64 

Peop.  172. — This  Kingdom,  when  restored,  does  not  require  the  re-introduction  of 

bloody  sacrifices 83 

Peop.  173. — The  Kingdom  of  the  Lord  Jesus  may  be  near  at  hand 92 

Peop.   174. — This   Kingdom  of  the  Messiah  is  preceded  by,  and   connected  with, 

signs 109 

Peop.  175. — The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  is  greatly  obscured  and  perverted  by  the 
prevailing  one  of  the  conversion  of  the  world  prior  to  the  Advent  of  Jesus 171 

Peop.  176. — Our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  embraces  the  conversion  of  the  world,  but 

in  the  Scriptural  order 210 

Peop.  177. — This  doctrine  of   the    Kingdom  will   not  be   received  in  faith  by  the 

Church,  as  a  body 217 

Peop.  178.- — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  and  its  essentially  related  subjects,  are 
so  hostile  to  their  faith,  that  numerous  organized  religious  bodies  totallv  reject 
them 248 

Peop.  179. — The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  or  essentials  of  the  same,  are  directly 
allied  by  various  bodies  with  doctrines  that  are  objectionable,  and  hence  are 
made  unpalatable  to  many 260 

Peop.  180. — This    doctrine   of  the  Kingdom  will   not  be  received  in  faith  by  the 

world -. 278 


8  CONTENTS. 

Peop.  181. — Our  doctrinal  position  illustrated  and  enforced  by  the  Parable  of  the 

Ten  Virgins 293 

Peop.  182. — This  Kingdom  embraces  "  the  One  Hope" 309 

Peop.  183.  — The   doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  and  its  related  subjects,  have  a  direct 

practical  tendency 320 

Peop.  184. — In  this  Kingdom  will  be  exhibited  a  manifested  unity 335 

Peop.  185. — This  doctrine  enforces  that  of  Divine  Providence 340 

Peop.  186. — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  sustained  by  the  Analogy  of  Scripture, 

the  Analogy  of  Faith,  and  the  Analogy  of  Tradition 343 

Peop.  187. — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  gives  coherency  to  the  Gospels,  and  in- 
dicates the  unity  of  design  in  each  of  them 349 

Peop.  188. — This  doctrine  indicates  the  unity  of  the  Epistles 361 

Peop.  189. — It  is  only  through  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  that  the  Apocalypse 

can,  or  will,  be  understood  and  consistently  interpreted 366 

Peop.  190. — Our  views  sustained  by  the  addresses  to  the  Seven  Churches 377 

Peop.  191. — Our  doctrine  enforced  by  the  general  tenor  of  the  Apocalypse 382 

Peop.  192. — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  greatly  serves  to  explain  Scripture 388 

Peop.  193. — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  meets,  and  consistently  removes,  the  ob- 
jections brought  by  the  Jews  against  Christianity 408 

Peop.  194. — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  materially  aids  to  explain  the  world's 

history 427 

Peop.  195. — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  may,  analogically,  give  us  a  clew  to  the 

government  of  other  worlds 443 

Peop.  196. — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  gives  us  a  more  comprehensive  view  of 

the  work  of  Christ  for  Redemptive  purposes ....  449 

Peop.  197. — This  Kingdom,  although,  visible  with  a  wrorld-dominion,  being  Theo- 
cratic, is  also  necessarily  spiritual 400 

Peop.  198. — The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  confirms  the  credibility  and  insjiiration  of 

the  Word  of  God 467 

Peop.  199. — This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  materially  aids  in  deciding  the  great 

Christological  question  of  the  day 512 

Peop.  200. — While  the  Kingdom  is  given  to  Jesus  Christ  as  "the  Son  of  Man,"  He 
becomes  thereby  the  actual  Representative  of  God,  manifesting  God  in  the  per- 
son of  One  related  to  humanity 537 

Peop.  201. — If  a  Kingdom  such  as  is  covenanted  to  "the  Son  of  Man,"  David's  Son, 
is  not  set  up,  then  God's  effort  at  government,  in  and  through  an  earthly  ruler- 
ship,  proves  a  failure 544 

Peop.  202. — If  the  Kingdom  of  "the  Son  of  Man,"  as  covenanted,  is  not  established, 

then  the  earth  will  lack  in  its  history  the  exhibition  of  a  perfect  government. . . .  548 

Peop.  203.  —The  exaltation  of  the  Christ  is  not  lessened  or  lowered  by  thus  referring 

the  promises  of  the  Kingdom  to  an  outward  manifestation  in  the  future 552 


CONTENTS.  9 

Prop.  204.— Suck  a  view  gives  definiteness  and  a  continued  exaltation  to  the  human 
nature  of  Christ,  and  indicates  the  majestic  relationship  that  it  sustains 
throughout  the  ages  to  the  race  of  man 557 

Prop.  205. — The    doctrine  of  the   Kingdom  materially  aids  us  in  preaching   "  the 

Christ,"  the  distinctive  "Messiah" 567 

Prop.  206.—  This  earth  will  yet  witness  the  re-establishment  of  a  glorious  Theocracy 

— a  Theocracy  in  its  perfected  form 582 

Conclusion 603 


THE 

THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM 

OP    OUB 

LORD  JESUS    THE  CHRIST. 


Proposition  165.  The  doctrine  of  this  Kingdom  enables  lis  to 
form  a  correct  estimate  of  human  government*. 

This  already  appears  from  the  contemplated  cessation  of  all 
Gentile  domination,  the  complete  overthrow  of  all  kingdoms  and 
states,  and  the  bringing  of  all  nations  directly  (by  the  rule  of  the 
saints,  etc.)  under  the  one  great  central  Theocratic  authority.  For, 
whatever  purposes  the  institution  of  human  government,  in  the 
past  and  the  present  dispensation,  may  subserve,  it  is  distinctly 
announced  that  so  much  of  imperfection  and  evil  is  attached  to  it 
in  all  its  varied  forms  that  it  is  incompatible  with  the  new  order  of 
things  which  shall  be  presented  in  "  the  age  to  come." 

Obs.  1.  In  the  consideration  of  this  subject  men  have  been  apt  to  rush 
to  extremes,  presenting  conclusions  which  are  not  warranted  by  Scripture. 
One  party  lauds  and  magnifies  human  government,  as  it  has  existed  and 
now  exists,  as  a  Divine  institution,  speaking  loudly  of  "  the  divine  rights 
of  kings,"  or  of  "  the  sovereignty  of  the  people,"  etc. — so  numerous 
writers  of  the  past  and  present.  Another  party,  only  regarding  the 
threats,  etc.,  against  such  government,  and  misapprehending  the  time, 
manner,  etc.,  of  God's  kingdom  to  replace  it,  undertake  to  break  down 
such  government  by  substituting  one  of  their  own  ;  so  the  Anabaptists, 
Fifth  Monarchy  Men,  in  the  days  of  the  Eeformation,  the  Mormons,  etc. 
Still  another  party  so  decry  all  human  government,  that  they  insist  upon 
it,  that  it  is  the  duty  of  believers  to  avoid  having  any  personal  connection 
with  them  in  any  official  capacity,  or  in  upholding  them  in  any  form  as  a 
participator  ;  so  e.g.  Quakers,  Christadelphians,  some  Adventists,  Seventh 
Day  Baptists,  etc.  We  avoid  all  such  extravagant  deductions  by  allowing 
the  Scriptures  to  testify  to  three  things  pertaining  to  human  government, 
viz.,  (1)  its  necessity;  (2)  its  character;  (3)  its  ultimate  destiny.  The 
necessity  of  having  such  government  is  grounded  in  the  constitution  of 
man,  and  is  a  legitimate  outgrowth  of  his  relations  to  society,  finding  its 


12  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  165. 

support  in  the  proposed  protection  and  maintenance  of  mutual  rights, 
privileges,  etc.  As  such,  it  is  an  ordinance  of  God  (just  as  man  himself, 
society  in  its  simplest  form,  the  family  relation,  etc.,  are  ordinances  or 
appointments  of  God,  resulting  from  established  law),  and  so  expressly 
declared  in  Kom.  13  :  1-5,  while  the  particular  form  in  which  it  is  specifi- 
cally manifested  is  also  the  ordinance  or  appointment  of  man  (growing  out 
of  the  former)  and  so  designated  1  Pet.  2  :  13.  In  the  absence  of  the 
contemplated  Theocratic  Kingdom,  it  is  God's  will  and  pleasure  that  men 
should,  in  order  to  avoid  anarchy  and  greater  evils,  be  placed  under 
government,  which,  more  or  less,  exerts  a  restraining  influence — arising 
from  moral  law — upon  the  outbreaks  of  depravity.  Therefore  obedience, 
excepting  only  when  God's  law  (Acts  4  :  19  and  5  :  29)  is  to  be  directly 
violated,  is  enjoined  as  a  duty.  But  while  this  is  so,  and  necessarily 
follows  from  the  laws  which  God  has  established,  it  does  not  by  any  means 
assert  that  the  character  of  such  government  is  acceptable  to  Him,  for  the 
very  power  which  Paul  tells  us  is  thus  ordained  by  God  is  at  the  same 
time,  so  far  as  its  character  is  concerned,  described  by  the  Spirit  as  "a 
Beast,"  exceedingly  dreadful,  etc.,  in  Dan.  7  :  7,  19,  23  ;  Rev.  17  :  4,  16, 
etc.  Instead  of  being  divine,  it  is  beastial  and  wicked  ;  its  conduct  is 
denounced,  and  its  doom  declared.  The  same  is  true  of  the  Babylonian 
and  of  all  other  kingdoms  delineated  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  destiny 
of  all  of  them  is  to  perish  ;  but  at  the  time,  in  the  manner,  and  by  the 
agencies,  which  God  has  also  ordained.  Man  is  not  to  assume  that  which 
God  has  placed  in  the  hands  of  His  own  Son  to  accomplish,  when  the 
ordained  "  Times  of  the  Gentiles"  have  come  to  an  end.  The  visible 
Sovereignty  of  this  world  only  becomes  the  Sovereignty  of  our  Lord  at 
the  expiration  of  a  pre-determined  period,  and  for  that  we  must  patiently 
wait.  In  reference  to  the  participation  of  believers  in  such  government, 
the  AVord  also  gives  a  clear  utterance  ;  while  preserving  integrity  and 
indorsing  it  only  in  so  far  as  it  does  right,  we  are  to  accept  it,  rendering 
obedience,  as  a  necessity  for  the  protection  of  society.  When  the  Theoc- 
racy was  overthrown  the  righteous  Daniel  and  his  companions  found  it 
justly  compatible  with  the  laws  of  God  to  hold  official  stations  under  the 
Babylonian  monarchy.  Before  the  Theocracy  was  established,  the  pious 
Joseph  was  thus  associated  in  the  Egyptian  kingdom.  After  the  Theocracy 
was  delayed  and  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles  announced,  obedience  is  en- 
joined, the  support  of  the  government  by  the  payment  of  taxes  enforced, 
the  protection  of  the  government  (as  in  the  case  of  Paul)  invoked,  submis- 
sion even  under  injustice  recommended,  the  whole  embraced  by  the  general 
and  yet  special  affirmation  :  "  Render  unto  Ccesar  the  things  that  are 
Ccesar's,  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's." 

Baldwin  (Armageddon,  Sec.  3,  p.  26),  gives  place,  in  bis  one-sided  eulogy  of  Repub- 
licanism, to  a  tirade  against  "  all  human  monarchy,"  saying  that  God  "  bates  it  as  a 
feature  of  hell  and  the  devil,"  "that  God  considers  human  monarchy  as  exceeding 
sinful,"  "  that  God  is  therefore  hostile  to  human  monarchy  because  the  system  is 
iniquitous  in  principle,  and  he  will  destroy  it  because  of  its  wicked  nature."  But  he 
overlooks  entirely,  (1)  that  human  government  is  necessary  ;  (2)  that  God  Himself  insti- 
tuted and  favored  a  monarchy  ;  (3)  that,  in  the  absence  of  a  Theocratic  government,  God 
favors  even  monarchical  governments  as  essential  to  the  framework  of  societj-,  and  result- 
ing from  the  laws  instituted  by  Him  ;  (4)  that  God  only  regards  governments,  of  every  kind, 
with  disfavor  when  the  spirit,  acts,  etc.,  of  the  same  are  opposed  to  His  truth  and  people; 
(5)  and  that  human  governments,  so  essential  to  avoid  anarchy,  are  no  longer  to  be  toler- 
ated when  He  sets  up  again  His  own  Theocratic  Kingdom  under  the  Messiah,  which 
Kingdom  is  not  one  dependent  on  the  boasted  and  regenerating  "  Popular  Sovereignty" 


Prop.  165.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  13 

of  Baldwin.  Over  against  such  wholesale  denunciation,  we  have  a  remarkable  delicacy 
manifested  in  Scripture.  It  has  been  noticed  that  in  Daniel,  when  giving  the  succession 
of  kingdoms  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  Spirit  employs  as  symbols  the  precious  and  baser 
metals  to  indicate  (cli.  2)  the  material  progress,  etc.,  but  when  the  same  Spirit  delineates 
the  same  kingdoms  for  Daniel  and  His  own  people,  he  emplovs  symbols  expressive  of  the 
character  sustained  by  them.  We  must  be  sufficiently  candid  to  allow  that  the  word 
"  ordained  "  (Rom.  13  : 1-7)  intimates  the  divine  sanction,as  agreeable  to  the  divine  will, 
because  an  essential  agency  in  society,  and  discriminative  in  seeing  that  God  has 
ordained  many  things  that  are  perverted. 

Obs.  2.  This'doctrine  enables  us  to  detect  the  fallacy  in  the  writings  of 
some  devoted  men  (Fulton,  etc.)  when  they  assume  the  existence  of 
Christ's  kingdom  as  already  established,  believers  being  its  subjects,  etc., 
and  then  reason  from  this  assumption  that  believers  being  already  the  sub- 
jects of  an  instituted  kingdom,  they  must  stand  aloof  from  all  human 
government.1  Our  whole  argument  utterly  disproves  such  premise,  demon- 
strating that  the  kingdom  is  postponed,  and  that  believers,  in  virtue  of 
their  relationship  to  Christ,  are  only  now  "  heirs  of  the  Kingdom."  The 
Kingdom  of  the  Messiah  not  being  set  up,  and  yet  the  relation  of  man  to 
civil  society  making  some  form  of  government "««  absolute  necessity,  the 
believer  is  directed  to  conform  to  the  present  arrangement  of  things,  with- 
out sacrificing  his  Christian  principle  or  violating  the  commands  of  God, 
until  the  time  that  the  King  Himself  comes.  This  is  done  too  bv  way  of 
trial  and  to  prepare  him,  as  well  as  the  race,  to  appreciate  more  fully  the 
Divine  government  of  the  Messiah  when  manifested.  Man,  as  a  punish- 
ment and  a  test,  is  left  to  work  out  his  ideas  of  government  practically  in 
order,  as  the  end  will  prove,  that  depravity  in  the  highest  exhibition  of 
man's  relations  (i.e.  in  the  civil)  will  gain  the  ascendency,  and  that  human 
nature  in  the  mass,  when  prosperity  or  greatness  is  attained,  cannot  with- 
stand corruption.  Hence  it  is,  that  these  "  heirs  of  the  Kingdom"  to 
come,  are  exhorted  not  to  place  their  affections  upon  these  things,  and  that 
eulogies  of  such  human  governments  are  lacking  in  God's  Word  ;  for  the 
Spirit  ever  keeps  in  view— whatever  excellent  and  virtuous  actions  may  be 
performed— the  great  predicted  fact  that  the  character  and  destiny  of  earthly 
kingdoms,  as  exhibited  at  the  time  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  renders  them 
utterly  unworthy  of  them.  They  become  the  instruments  of  persecution 
and  cruelty  (as  even  an  inchoate  fulfilment  in  the  past  evidences),  culminat- 
ing in  one  great  combined  confederation  against  God's  people.  The 
Spirit  in  forming  His  estimate  looks  at  human  government,  not  as  it  may 
present  itself  at  this  or  that  particular  favorable  crisis  in  history,  but,  at 
the  general  spirit  and  tendency  which  finally  assumes  full  sway  at  the  end. 
This  leads  us  to  add  :  while  it  is  true  that  government  is  necessary,  not- 
withstanding its  past  or  future  unfriendliness  to  the  Church,  it  is  "owing 
to  this  manifestation  of  character  that  believers  are  exhorted  to  hold  them- 
selves in  patience,  and  to  anticipate  for  the  future  an  increased  wickedness, 
which  will  be  severely  afflictive  to  them  ;  to  discharge  their  duties  as  far 
as  possible  and  to  surfer,  if  needs  be,  for  the  sake  of  tbe  truth.  This  also 
gives  a  satisfactory  answer  to  Shaftesbury,  etc.,  who  objects  to  the  Xew 
Test,  that  it  does  not  enjoin  "patriotism"  or  an  expression  of  love  and 
esteem  for  the  government  under  which  believers  may  live.  While  it  does 
give  precepts,  etc.,  which  if  followed  out  will  largely  contribute  to  the 
welfare  of  any  government  ;  while  it  insists  upon  that  which  is  right  and 
just,  and  enjoins  the  same  upon  all,  yet  this  distinctive  point  is  indeed 


14  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  165. 

lacking,  and  the  reason  is  only  additional  evidencetof  the  Divine  inspira- 
tion of  the  Word,  seeing  that  the  ultimate  end  of  such  government  is  con- 
templated, and  in  view  of  the  facts  in  relation  to  it,  it  would  be  against 
both  the  character  and  destiny  of  such  government  to  enjoin  "  the  heirs" 
of  a  future  nobler  government  to  come,  and  withdraw  their  hopes  and 
affections  from  the  latter,  and  set  them  upon  that  which  is  fated  to  miser- 
ably perish.  Shaftesbury's  objection  is  taking  a  mere  transient  view  of 
government  ;  the  Bible  considers  its  culminated  wickedness  and  end  still 
future.  The  simple  truth  is,  as  the  Church  will  yet  most  painfully  experi- 
ence (Prop.  102),  that  this  very  government,  for  which  unbelief  calls  for 
patriotic  demonstrations,  will  yet  most  bitterly  persecute  her,  so  that  the 
silence  of  Scripture  complained  of  is  fitting  and  just.  Therefore,  at 
present,  we  indorse  Luther's  position  (Kurtz,  Ch.  His.)  "  that  the  Gospel 
secured  spiritual  liberty,  but  did  not  subvert  civil  government  and  social 
institutions,"  but  enables  us  under  such  government  to  exemplify  Christian 
character.2 

1  This  is  only  bringing  to  a  strictly  logical  conclusion  a  premise  laid  down  by  numerous 
writers.  Thus  e.g.  Neander,  advocating  a  present  existing  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah, 
says  :  "  The  fundamental  principle  of  the  Christian  community  is,  that  there  shall  be  no 
other  subordination  than  that  of  its  members  to  God  and  Christ,  and  that  this  shall  bo 
absolute,"  etc.  Now  while  Neander  himself,  as  is  well  known,  would  have  protested 
against  pushing  this  to  its  logical  sequence,  Fulton  and  others  have  done  it.  The  truth 
is,  that  we  are  also,  in  this  dispensation,  to  be  individually  subordinate,  i.e.  render 
obedience  to  civil  power,  but  make  the  authority  of  God  supreme.  Many  honest  men, 
under  a  mistaken  idea,  unnecessarily  excite  against  themselves  odium  by  an  attitude  of 
unscriptural  hostility  to  governments. 

2  How  men  have  endeavored  to  give  a  degree  of  sanctity  to  Gentile  government  is 
apparent  e.g.  in  anointing  kings  with  "  the  holy  unction,"  thus  professing  to  transform 
them  into  "  the  Lord's  anointed,"  of  which  Gibbon  (2)ecZ.  and  Fall.,  vol.  5,  p.  29),  sneei1- 
ingly  says  :  "  this  Jewish  rite  has  been  diffused  and  maintained  by  the  superstition  and 
vanity  of  modern  Europe."  This  was  supposed  to  confer  a  Divine  or  Theocratic  right, 
and  this  "divine  right  of  kings"  was  often  exhibited  in  the  most  fantastic  manner 
possible,  as  e.g.  in  the  proudest  of  men  and  women  regarding  it  an  honor  to  perform  the 
most  menial  of  services,  even  to  the  holding  and  presenting  the  divine  king's  shirt,  etc, 

Obs.  3.  This  estimate  and  end  of  human  government  not  only  enables 
us. to  discard  the  Utopian  notion  of  its  development  into  a  state  of  Per- 
fectibility, but  the  attempted  union  of  Church  and  State  during  the 
"  Times  of  the  Gentiles:"  The  character  and  destiny  of  the  State  forbids 
such  a  union.  The  State,  as  now  constituted,  is  selfish,  and  for  the  sake 
of  self-interest,  as  the  history  of  the  past  painfully  illustrates,  and  us  the 
history  of  the  future  predicted  shows,  will  sacrifice  the  Church.  The 
State,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  cannot  be  safely  attached  to  the 
Church,  seeing  that  the  sanctifying  Theocratic  element,  which  alone  can 
elevate  it  to  the  position  of  a  truly  Christian  organization  in  perfect  unity 
with  the  religious,  is  lacking.  The  feeling,  however,  is  greatly  to  be 
respected  which  would  endeavor  to  bring  about  such  a  union  with  the  idea 
that  the  highest  interests  of  mankind  in  the  highest  form  of  organization 
should  be  the  Protector  and  Advancer  of  truth  and  happiness.  This  feel- 
ing, so  honorable,  will  be  realized  but  not  now  ;  humanity,  owing  to 
depravity,  is  not  prepared  for  it,  and  will  not  be,  as  predicted  in  this  dis- 
pensation ;  it  can  only  be  verified,  under  the  Christ  personally  in  the  cove- 
nanted Theocratic  Kingdom. 

Many  writers,  not  satisfied  with  a  general  supremacy  of  God  over  the  nations  of  the 


Prop.  165.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  15 

earth  (Prop.  79) — God's  ability  to  overrule,  exert  a  divine  providence — must  unite  with 
it  the  Theocratic  element,  as  e.g.  exemplified  in  the  Theocratic  History  of  English  History, 
in  which  the  adverse  circumstances  are  carefully  kept  in  the  background,  and  the  esti- 
mated providential  brought  forth  prominently,  and  then  men  as  honored  divine  instru- 
mentalities are  eulogized  beyond  their  merits.  While  "God  is  in  History,"  and  the 
order  of  events  are  under  His  supervision  and  control,  it  is  also  true  that  no  such  alleged 
Theocratic  rule  exists,  for  that  Theocratic  relationship  is  confined  to  the  Jewish  nation 
and  to  the  future.  The  fact  is,  that  from  the  head  of  the  image  (Dan.  2)  this  existing 
world-dominion,  can  be  denominated  "Babylonish,"  seeing  that  the  same  spirit  runs 
from  the  head  to  the  feet.  While  the  former  dominion  is  taken  away  from  Babylon, 
Medo-Persia,  Macedonia,  yet  the  spirit  actuating  all  such  in  the  nations  is  perpetuated 
(Dan.  7  :  12),  so  that  when  the  image  is  smitten  on  its  feet  and  overthrown,  we  have 
virtually  the  whole  image,  (gold,  silver,  brass,  and  iron),  representing  this  spirit  of  world 
dominion,  also  overthrown  (Dan.  2  :  35,  io),  for  in  the  last  world-power,  the  Roman,  we 
have  these  included  and  intensified.  As  these  empires  are  si;ccessive,  we  look  for — as 
the  analogy  of  Scripture  teaches — a  revival  of  the  spirit  of  all  these  in  the  last  head  of 
the  fourth  beast,  who  dominates  over  the  nations,  and  concentrates  in  himself  their  past 
hostility  to  God  and  man. 

Obs.  4.  The  student,  in  corroboration  of  our  position,  will  observe  a 
singular  feature,  viz.,  that  although  the  Eoman  Empire  (and  its  divisions) 
has  loudly  proclaimed  its  profession  of  religion,  appealed  in  laudation  to 
its  conversion  under  Constantine,  praised  itself  as  "  most  Christian,"  and 
even  pronounced  itself  as  a  "  Holy  Empire,"  yet  God,  in  view  of  no 
radical  change,  takes  no  notice  ivliatever  of  all  this  boasted  profession,  and 
by  this  very  significant  silence  (excepting  in  liev.  where  the  Empire  is  still 
recognized  to  be,  as  in  Daniel,  a  "  beasV)  places  over  against  the  extrava- 
gant eulogies  of  men  His  own  estimate  of  such  conversion  and  profession. 
The  same  is  true  of  England,  Germany,  the  United  States,  and  others, 
for,  notwithstanding  the  professed  claim  of  "  Christian  nation,"  none  of 
these  receive  the  slightest  recognition  as  such  in  the  AVord.  The  reason  for 
such  omission  is  self-evident. 

In  looking  over  the  history  of  "  Christian  nations,"  we  sometimes  wonder  that  right 
and  justice  do  not  triumph  over  wrong  and  oppression.  Thus  e.g.  when  Russia,  Prussia, 
and  Austria  proceeded  to  the  spoliation  of  Poland,  the  Poles,  in  their  declaration  against 
this  iniquitous  measure,  said  :  "  And  lastly,  full  of  confidence  in  the  justice  of  the 
Almighty,  we  lay  our  rights  at  the  foot  of  His  eternal  throne,  and  put  our  cause  into  the 
hands  of  the  King  of  kings,  the  Supreme  Judge  of  nations  ;  and,  in  the  full  assurance 
of  His  succor,  we  protest  solemnly  and  before  the  whole  universe,  against  every  step 
taken,  or  to  be  taken  toward  the  dismemberment  of  Poland  "  (art.  "  Poland  and  the 
Poles,"  Galaxy,  vol.  18,  187-1,  p.  40).  This  nation  which  was  the  least  persecuting,  the 
most  tolerant,  falls  underneath  the  intolerant  and  highly  professing  Christian.  Now 
while  Poland  itself,  as  its  history  too  plainly  attests,  was  but  nominally  Christian  (and 
consequently  in  view  of  its  character  could  not  expect  the  divine  blessing  to  answer  a 
prayer  so  confidently  expressed),  and  was  dismembered  by  nominal  Christian  nations,  yet 
God  does  not  entirely  disregard  such  a  prayer  and  appeal.  Those  nations  have  suffered, 
and  will  yet  more  bitterly  suffer,  on  account  of  their  sins. 

Obs.  5.  It  is  a  fact,  as  various  able  writers  on  the  laws  of  the  Theocracy 
have  shown,  that  the  nearer  governments  adopt,  and  carry  out,  the  great 
principles  underlying  the  Theocracy,  the  purer  and  more  elevated  is  the 
civil  polity,  and  the  greater  strength,  security  and  happiness  is  imparted  to 
all  classes,  rulers  and  ruled.  The  reverse  of  this  holds  true  as  exemplified 
in  the  history  of  nations  ;  for  the  greater  the  departure  from  those  princi- 
ples, the  more  oppressive  aud  ruinous  has  been  the  result.  But  while  this 
is  so,  the  reader  will  not  fail  to  notice  that  a  mistake — serious — is  made  by 
supposing,  that  the  Theocracy  is  merely  given  as  a  pattern — an  enuncia- 


16  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  165. 

tion  of  principles — for  other  governments  to  follow  because  it  is  to  be  super- 
seded by  others,  instead  of  its  being,  as  the  Bible  plainly  predicts,  for  a 
time  held  in  abeyance,  owing  to  depravity,  until  the  proper  material  is 
gathered  out  for  its  overwhelming  inauguration. 

Hence  able  writers  (as  Wines,  Michaelis,  Graves,  Lowman,  Jahn,  and  others),  -while 
justly  noticing  the  political  features  of  the  Theocracy,  and  showing  how  worthy  of 
adoj>tion  by  the  nations  are  its  fundamental  principles,  either  overlook,  or  are  in  igno- 
rance of  this  divine  intention  ;  and  besides  they  do  not  realize  the  simple  fact  that  that 
which  gave  vitality  and  force  to  a  Theocracy  (viz.,  God's  personally  acting  as  the  Ruler  of 
the  nation)  is  lacking  in  all  other  governments,  and,  therefore,  no  other  can  possibly  hope 
to  be  substituted  in  its  place.  Again,  men  of  the  highest  eminence  assume  the  perpe- 
tuity of  earthly  governments  from  the  fact  that  man  is  so  constituted  by  God  that  he 
must,  in  view  of  his  adaptedness,  live  under  some  form  of  government — that  society 
cannot  jn-operly  exist  without  it — that  it  commends  itelf  as  a  positive  necessity,  etc. 
Now  while  it  is  true  that  civil  government  is  required,  yet  the  perpetuity  of  the  same  in 
the  way  advocated  does  not  follow.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Bible  distinctly  teaches,  that 
until  God  claims,  by  an  actual  re-establishment  of  His  Theocracy,  the  Sovereignty  of 
the  world,  these  civil  governments  must,  even  if  under  beastial  influence,  exist  in  order 
to  meet  the  requirements  and  necessities  of  man.  God  ordains  their  existence  as  a 
necessity  springing  from  man's  constitution,  but  only  until  the  Theocracy  is  revealed. 
Then  the  highest  possible  form  of  civil  (united  with  the  religious)  government  shall  be 
substituted  for  the  present  forms.  Civil  government  is  not  set  aside  (for  this  is  forbidden 
by  the  nature  of  man,  the  demands  of  social  position,  the  continued  aptitude  and  neces- 
sity for  government,  the  analogy  drawn  from  God's  working,  nature,  uses  of  government 
etc.),  but  it  is  set  forth  in  its  God-given  and  God-enforced  form,  abrogating  the  mere  human 
form.  The  fact  that  civil  government,  as  now  constituted,  is  the  result  of  the  Divine 
Will,  and  that  obedience  is  inculcated  as  a  duty,  etc.,  does  not  necessitate  its  perpetuity,. 
All  depends  on  the  Divine  Will,  and  we  must  form  our  conclusions  respecting  the  future 
in  accordance  with  the  declarations  of  that  Will.  It  has  never,  in  any  place,  asserted  the 
perpetuity  of  earthly  governments,  but  the  exact  reverse.  That  Will,  and  its  contem- 
plated  expressed  determination,  is  the  foundation  of  the  Coming  Theocracy,  and  that 
Will  shall  be  made  manifest  in  the  Theocratic  person  and  rule  of  Jesus  "  the  Christ." 
This  effectually  settles  the  question  of  perpetuity  and  the  predictions  based  upon  it. 

To  indicate  how  others  express  themselves  on  the  subjects  embraced  in  this  and  the 
previous  Prop.,  a  few  illustrations  are  in  place.  Fausset  (Com.,  Dan.  7)  remarks: 
"  Daniel  sees  the  world  kingdoms  in  their  essence  as  of  an  animal  nature  lower  than  the 
human,  being  estranged  from  God  ;  and  that  only  in  the  Kingdom  of  God  ('  the  Son  of 
Man,'  the  representative  Man)  is  the  true  dignity  of  man  realized."  "  Nebuchadnezzar's 
colossal  image  represents  mankind  in  his  own  strength,  but  only  the  outward  man. 
Daniel  sees  man  spiritually  degraded  to  the  beast  level,  led  by  blind  impulses,  through 
his  alienation  from  God.  It  is  only  from  above  that  the  perfect  Son  of  Man  comes,  and 
in  His  Kingdom  man  attains  his  true  destiny.  Cf.  Ps.  8  with  Gen.  1  :  26-28.  Humanity 
is  impossible  without  divinity  ;  it  sinks  to  beastiality  (Ps.  32  :  9,  and  49  :  20,  and  73  : 
22).  Obstinate  heathen  nations  are  compared  to  '  bulls  '  (Ps.  G8  :  30)  ;  Egypt,  to  the 
dragon  in  the  Nile  (Isa.  27  :  1,  and  51  :  9  ;  Ezek.  29  :  3).  The  animal  with  all  its  sagacity 
looks  always  to  the  ground,  without  consciousness  of  relation  to  God.  What  elevates 
man  is  communion  with  God,  in  willing  subjection  to  Him.  The  moment  he  tries  to 
exalt  himself  to  independence  of  God,  like  Nebuchadnezzar  (ch.  4  :  30),  he  sinks  to  the 
beast's  level."  Lange's  Com.,  Dan.  7,  Doc.  5,  remarks:"  The  ideal  and  fundamental 
thought  of  the  prophecy,  which  substantially  coincides  with  that  of  the  image  of  the 
monarchies  in  chap.  2,  and  may  be  expressed  by  the  statement,  '  that  all  the  kingdoms 
of  the  earth  must  be  put  to  shame '  (Eev.  11  :  15  ;  12  :  10)  before  the  Kingdom  of  the 
everlasting  God  and  of  His  Anointed,  must  evidently  be  made  prominent"  (without  enter- 
ing largely  into  "  the  details  of  its  realization  in  the  history  of  the  world  ").  The  same 
gives  the  Tiibingen  Bible  as  declaring  :  "  In  His  eternal  decree  God  has  fixed  a  limit  to 
every  kingdom  ;  beyond  this  it  cannot  go,  and  the  Divine  Providence  exerts  a  special 
agency  to  this  end."  "  How  uncertain  is  the  glory  and  majesty  of  the  kingdoms  of  earth  ! 
Even  when  they  have  attained  to  the  highest  prosperity  they  must  yet  be  humbled,  fall, 
and  pass  away,  like  every  other  earthly  good  and  honor.  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  alone 
is  immutable,  and  forms  the  hope  of  every  believer,  Ps.  145  :  13."  Such  expressions 
drawn  from  the  writings  of  Auberlen  (On  Daniel),  Newton  (Diss,  on  Proph.),  and  many 
others  might  be  presented. 


PEOP.  166.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  17 


Proposition  166.     Tlie    rudimentary    reorganization    of    this 
Kingdom  ivitt  be  made  at  Mt.  Sinai. 

The  organization  of  the  Theocracy  was  affected  before  the  Jewish 
nation  entered  Palestine.  The  appointment  of  officials,  the  giving 
of  laws,  the  commandments  to  destroy  the  enemies  of  God,  etc., 
were  issued  at  Mt.  Sinai.  It  is  eminently  suitable  that  the  reor- 
ganization of  the  same  should  be  effected  in  the  same  place.  The 
reasons  will  be  adduced  in  the  following  observations. 

This  is  one  of  the  Propositions,  which,  if  torn  from  its  connection,  can  be  injuriously- 
employed  against  us.  The  writer  felt  the  force  of  Prov.  12  :  '23  "  a  prudent  man  con- 
cealeth  knowledge,"  but  in  view  of  the  importance  of  the  subject,  its  instructiveness 
especially  pertaining  to  the  interval,  and  the  encouragements  to  instruct,  etc.,  he  felt 
persuaded  that  in  this  case,  Prov.  13  :  16,"  every  prudent  man  dealeth  with  knowledge," 
and  Prov.  15  :  2,  "  the  tongue  of  the  wise  useth  knowledge  aright,"  insured  its  presenta- 
tion to  be  acceptable  to  the  class  whose  good-will  we  ought  to  esteem.  We  only  now  say 
that  this  Prop,  serves  to  clear  up  some— otherwise — difficult  passages.  Thus  e.g.  it 
throws  light  on  the  question  where  Jesus  and  the  saints  are  during  the  interval  ;  on  the 
fact  that  during  the  interval  Jesus  is  spoken  of  as  being  present  on  the  earth  ;  on  the 
setting  up  and  existence  of  thrones  (Rev.  20  :  4)  indicative  of  a  formative  Kingdom  ;  on 
the  stages  of  the  same  Advent  ;  on  the  object  of  the  first  res.  and  translation  ;  on  the 
Kingdom  not  coming  with  observation,  being  concealed  and  sudden  ;  on  the  hatred  and 
intentions  of  the  Antichrist  ;  on  the  march  of  the  Christ  and  His  saints  ;  on  the  subse- 
quent war  and  its  results  ;  and  on  various  Mill,  predictions. 

Obs.  1.  Taking  it  for  granted  that  the  Theocracy  will  be  again  reorgan- 
ized in  its  Theocratic-Davidic  form,  so  that  God  in  the  person  of  David's 
descendant  (inseparably  connected)  again  condescend*  to  dwell  with  the 
Jewish  nation,  and  act  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly  ruler,  we  may  suggest, 
that  if  such  is  the  divine  order,  no  place  on  earth  could  be  selected  more 
suitable  or  better  adapted  for  such  an  arrangement  than  Mt.  Sinai,  and  its 
adjoining  territory.  It  is  a  place  so  isolated,  separated  from  other  coun- 
tries, that  such  a  work  undertaken  would,  for  a  time,  at  least,  attract  but 
little  attention  among  other  nations.  It  lies  at  the  same  time  contiguous 
to  the  inheritance  of  David's  Son,  which  at  the  time  will  be  sorely  pressed 
by  the  Antichrist  with  its  confederated  power.  The  Holy  Land  occupied, 
as  it  then  will  be,  by  the  forces  of  enemies,  and  all  other  lands  having  their 
kingdoms  or  civil  power  in  full  sway,  forbids  in  them  a  peaceful,  previous 
arrangement  as  indicated  ;  and  hence  this  locality,  surrounded  by  its  sandy 
deserts,  under  no  special  civil  jurisdiction,  occupied  only  by  wandering 
tribes,  is  well  adapted  to  secure,  as  it  once  did  before,  uninterrupted  facil- 
ities for  a  preliminary  national  organization.  Besides  this,  it  is  a  place 
already  highly  distinguished,  having  enjoyed  the  presence  of  God,  and 
having  witnessed  the  entrance  of  God  and  people  into  the  desirable  Theo- 
cratic relationship,  being  honored  by  the  camp  of  the  elect  nation,  and  the 
manifestations  of  the  King,  made  memorable  by  the  giving  of  the  law,  and 
expressly  pronounced,  in  view  of  its  associations,  to  be  "holy."     In  all 


18  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  166. 

respects,  therefore,  considering  thnfc  the  nations  will  then  be  hostile  to  the 
Saviour  (in  fact  arrayed  against  Him),  it  is  of  all  places  the  one  most  suit- 
able to  be  used  for  such  a  purpose.  The  question  is,  do  the  Scriptures  give 
us  sufficient  intimations  to  believe  the  Proposition  ?  We  shall  present  the 
reasons  for  holding  to  such  a  belief,  premising  (1)  that  they  are  not  nearly 
so  indistinctive  as  predictions  relating  to  the  First  Advent  ;  and  (2)  that,  if 
mistaken  in  this  particular,  it  cannot  affect  our  main  leading  argument, 
which  is  independent  of  the  discussion  of  minor  points  relating  to  the  order 
or  introduction  of  the  Kingdom,  upon  which  differences  of  opinion  are 
reasonably  to  be  anticipated. 

The  critical  student  will  observe  (what  Mede  on  the  one  hand,  and  Brown  on  the 
other,  insist  on)  that  Dan.  2  :  44  particularly  declares  that  "  in  the  days  of  these  kings 
shall  the  God  of  heaven  set  up  a  kingdom."  That  is,  previous  to  the  final  ending  of  the 
Roman  Empire,  of  Gentile  domination,  of  the  horns  that  arise,  this  kingdom  will  be 
already  commenced,  organized.  These  writers,  Bengel,  and  many  others,  declare  that 
the  position  assigned  to  the  time  of  setting  up  the  Messianic  Kingdom  must  be  maintained 
in  order  to  meet  the  conditions  annexed.  This  Sinaitic  view  meets  them  fully,  and  in 
the  only  place,  and  under  the  only  circumstances  possible,  in  view  of  the  conflicts  in 
Idumea  and  Palestine.  It  harmonizes  all  the  predictions,  and  presents  us  with  an  easy 
Scriptural  solution  of  what  otherwise  would  be  full  of  difficulties. 

Obs.  2.  In  considering  this  subject,  some  preliminary  matters  must  be 
duly  regarded,  viz.  (1)  That  the  most  prominent  students  of  prophecy  are 
now  agreed  that  the  Second  Advent,  to  be  appreciated,  must  be  compre- 
hended in  its  several  phases,  being  at  first  secret,  hidden  to  carry  out 
certain  purposes,  and  finally  open,  revealed.  The  reasons  for  this  belief 
are  given  under  Prop.  130.  (2)  That  the  First  Advent,  embracing  within 
itself  about  thirty-three  years,  teaches  us  not  to  limit  the  acts  of  Jesus  at 
the  Second  within  a  brief  period  of  time  ;  and  that  His  preparatory  private 
life  of  about  thirty  years  before  His  open  manifestation  to  the  nation, 
should  lead  us  not  to  circumscribe  His  Second  Advent  to  an  immediate 
open  Revelation,  unless  a  comparison  of  Scripture  makes  it  absolutely 
necessary.  (3)  That  if  it  be  admitted  that  the  establishment  of  the  Theoc- 
racy at  Mt.  Sinai  was  a  pattern  of  something  that  should  follow  in  the 
future  (which  nearly  all  writers  confess  however  much  they  may  differ  in 
the  ultimate  fulfilment),  then  an  open  door  is  at  once  presented  for  the 
introduction  of  our  Proposition.  (4)  That  the  passages  bearing  on  this 
subject  are  to  be  considered  in  their  general  scope,  in  their  connection  with 
context  and  analogy,  and  shall  involve  no  contradiction  of  Scripture. 

The  student  will  also  observe  the  following  :  (l)that  dispensations  may,  as  the  Jewish 
and  Gospel  overlap  each  other  for  some  years  ;  (2)  that  this  Theocratic  Kingdom  is  re- 
organized before  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  ended  ;  (3)  the  breaking  and  consuming 
process  upon  which  the  Kingdom  immediately  enters,  is  expressive  of  a  previous  organi- 
zation—for it  is  evidently  an  intelligent  organized  force  that  is  set  in  motion  against 
■the  kings  of  the  earth  and  their  armies  ;  (4)  Rev.  10  :  7  implies,  in  view  of  finishing  the 
mystery  of  God  (which  appertains  to  the  Kingdom),  that  to  the  believing  there  will  be 
such  a  manifestation,  that  before  the  epoch  is  concluded  this  will  be  done  ;  (5)  the  Coming 
of  the  Son  of  Man  in  His  Kingdom  (implying  a  previous  organization)  is  to  be  distin- 
guished from  His  thief-like  Coming. 

Obs.  3.  The  Bible  seems  to  declare  that  Jesus,  the  Messiah,  at  His 
Second  Advent,  will  especially  exhibit  two  acts  or  phases  in  this  Coming, 
and  between  these  two,  He  and  His  saints  will  pass  the  intervening  period 
at  Mt.  Sinai.     That  he  comes  "  as  a  thief  "  for  the  removal  of  the  saints 


Prop.  166.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  19 

is  clearly  taught,  and  that  He  also  openly  comes  with  these  saints  on  the 
Mt.  of  Olives  (Zech.  14  :  4)  is  unmistakably  announced.  But  He  and  His 
saints  are  also  represented  as  being  at  Mt.  Sinai.  A  comparison  of  Script- 
ure shows,  that  when  the  saints  are  removed  by  the  power  of  resurrection 
and  translation,  they  do  not  remain  in  "  the  air,''''  but  are  conveyed  to  Mt. 
Sinai,  where,  as  at  the  establishment  of  the  Theocracy,  positions  are 
assigned,  the  kingship  and  priesthood  inaugurated,  the  instructions  given 
preparatory  to  the  ushering  in  of  "  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times.' ' 
After  all  the  preparations  are  completed,  and  the  time  has  come  for  "  the 
manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God,"  the  deliverance  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
the  destruction  of  Antichrist,  this  associated  body  of  Rulers  with  the  King 
of  kings  at  their  head  (Rev.  19)  present  themselves  to  the  confusion  of  all 
enemies,  and  to  the  joy  of  the  ancient  elect  nation.  Let  the  reader  ponder 
the  G8th  Psalm,  and  its  references  to  Mt.  Sinai.  This  Psalm,  allowing  its 
prophetic  character,  was  never  fulfilled,  as  is  generally  supposed,  at  the 
appearing  of  God  in  the  wilderness  at  the  institution' of  the  Theocracy. 
The  reasons  are  the  following  :  (1)  the  description  is  too  exalted  to  meet 
the  facts  as  they  transpired  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  march  to  Canaan,  and 
in  obtaining  possession  of  the  land.  The  comparative  feebleness  and  re- 
peated transgressions  of  the  nation  ;  their  inability,  owing  to  sin,  to  extend 
their  power  as  here  predicted  ;  the  continued  existence  of  their  enemies  ; 
their  final  subjection  to  other  nations,  etc. — all  this  is  opposed  to  the 
spirit  of  the  Psalm.  (2)  The  Psalm  is  Messianic,  and  relates  not  to  the 
past  but  to  the  future.  This  is  proven  by  the  direct  reference  and  applica- 
tion of  a  portion  of  the  Psalm  to  Christ.  This  is  done  by  Paul  in  Eph. 
4  :  9,  where  he  applies  it  as  significant  of  results  produced  by  the  resurrec- 
tion and  ascension  of  Jesus.  The  Spirit  thus  gives  us  a  key  to  its  inter- 
pretation. (3)  Its  reference  to  the  future  is  cri>t<-i>d  by  its  allusion  to  the 
resurrection  (v.  20)  ;  the  great  slaughter  and  complete  overthrow  of  all 
enemies  (v.  1-3,  14,  21-23,  30)  ;  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation  (see 
v.  22  and  notice  force  of  "again")  although  oppressed  by  a  multitude 
("sea")  ;  the  restoration  of  Theocratic  rule  (v.  24-35)  ;  the  kings  of  the 
earth  bringing  presents,  and  the  extended,  world-wide  dominion  exerted 
(v.  29-35).  On  the  other  hand,  what  is  here  delineated  to  occur  corre- 
sponds fully  and  accurately  in  every  respect  with  the  predictions  pertaining 
to  the  ushering  in  of  the  Millennial  age  or  Christ's  Kingdom.  Then,  we 
know,  the  enemies  will  indeed  be  removed  as  here  described  ;  then  the  exalta- 
tion, the  purity,  beauty,  rejoicing,  safety,  and  power  of  the  righteous  will  be 
witnessed  as  here  portrayed  ;  then  the  dwelling  of  God  with  man,  the  exer- 
tion of  supernatural  power,  the  power  of  delivering  from  death,  the 
restoration  of  the  people,  the  universal  dominion,  the  re-organization  of 
the  nation  under  rulers,  kings  coming  to  present  their  allegiance  and  wor- 
ship at  Jerusalem,  nations  submitting  themselves,  the  praise  and  glory 
manifested—  all  this,  as  here  predicted,  will  come  to  pass.  Hence  seeing 
that  the  general  tenor  of  the  Psalm  does  not  suit  the  history  of  the  past,  in 
the  non-fulfilment  of  large  portions  of  it,  but  faithfully  describes  the 
future,  it  is  not  an  arbitrary  act  to  interpret  verses  8  and  17  as  also 
realized  in  the  future,  and  this  the  more  readily  because  this  Advent 
accords  with  what  is  ascribed  to  Christ  at  His  Second  Coming.  Let  the 
mighty  King  come  as  predicted  in  other  places,  and  there  is  nothing  in 
these  verses,  unless  it  be  the  locality  designated,  which  differs  from  the 
others.     But  why  object  to  the  specified  locality  ?     Can  a  reason  be  as- 


20  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  166. 

signed  for  the  rejection  of  it  in  such  a  connection  ?  No,  we  are  content  to 
receive  it  as  it  reads,  believing  that  as  Sinai  at  the  inauguration  of  the 
Theocracy  witnessed  the  presence  of  the  Theocratic  King,  so  when  God's 
Son  comes  to  restore  the  Theocratic  rule  "  even  Sinai  itself  is  moved  at 
the  presence  of  God,  the  God  of  Israel"  (v.  8.),  and  in  view  of  His  sur- 
roundings it  can  be  said  (v.  17)  "  the  chariots  of  God  are  twenty  thousand 
{myriads)  even  thousands  of  angels  {even  many  thousands  or  thousands  of 
heavenly  powers);  the  Lord  is  among  them  as  in"  (or  simply,  "  in"  or  "  so 
Sinai  among  the  holy  mountains,'1''  as  rendered  by  Lederer)  "  Sinai  in  the 
holy  place."1  Accepting  of  the  Psalm  as  a  prophetic  announcement  of  the 
future,  it  is  impossible,  without  violence,  to  rid  ourselves  of  the  persuasion 
that  at  the  future  Advent  the  Messiah  will  appear  not  only  on  the  Mt.  of 
Olives,  but  antecedently  on  Mt.  Sinai,  where  evidently  the  gathering 
together  occurs,  with  which  gathered  body  Christ  is  afterward  accompanied. 
In  all  this,  there  is  eminent  propriety,  if  we  but  consider  that  this  Theocratic 
Kingdom  is  to  be  restored  and  manifested  through  the  Seed  of  David,  and 
hence  in  its  relations  to  humanity  and  to  the  Jewish  race,  necessarily 
requires  an  outward  exhibition  of  its  earthly  reinauguration.  There  is 
also  a  peculiar  fitness  in  the  choice  of  place  where  this  is  done,  inasmuch 
as  Sinai  itself  is  identified  with  the  organization  pertaining  to  Theocratic 
rulership." 

1  Reineke,  Proph.  Times,  Nov.,  1864,  p.  163,  renders  "The  horsemen  of  God  are  two 
companies  of  myriads,  thousands  of  changed  ones  ;  the  Lord  in  them  Sinai  in  holiness," 
or  "  The  horsemen  of  God  are  two  companies  of  thousands  of  myriads  ;  the  Lord  in 
them  Sinai  in  holiness."  Eabbi  Greenabauin  renders  the  verses  :  "  The  earth  quaked, 
also  the  heaven  dropped  at  the  presence  of  God  ;  yea  this  Sinai,  at  the  presence  of  God, 
the  God  of  Israel."  "  The  chariots  of  God  are  two  myriads  ;  thousands  of  angels  follow 
him  ;  the  Lord  is  among  them,  so  is  Sinai  holy  among  mountains."  Lange's  Com.,  Exeg. 
has  "  Yon  Sinai  before  the  face  of  Elohim,  the  God  of  Israel,"  and  "  The  Chariots  of  God 
are  myriads,  thousands  and  again  thousands,  the  Lord  among  them,  a  Sinai  in  sanctity." 

*  Sinai  was  even  esteemed  holy  before  the  giving  of  the  law  (Stanley's  Sinai  and 
Palestine,  p.  48,  Josephus,  Ant.,  3,  v.  1),  and  the  only  reason  that  can  be  satisfactorily 
assigned  is  that  pertaining  to  its  foreknown  Theocratic  usage,  making  it  a  special  favorite 
of  God's.  What  a  distinguished  place  Mt.  Sinai  will  be  in  the  future  ages  !  The  place 
of  God's  marriage  (so  according  to  Oriental  usage,  the  inauguration  of  a  liuler),  with  the 
Jewish  nation  ;  the  place  where  Jesus'  marriage  takes  place  before  the  bridal  procession 
proceeds  to  Jerusalem.  God  in  view  of  this,  may,  as  we  anticipate,  adorn  the  wilderness 
and  make  it  a  place  of  resort.  We  cannot  help  but  feel  that  Elijah  will  again,  under  far 
different  circumstances,  visit  this  place.  This  prophet  visited  Horeb  (Smith's  Bib.  Die. 
makes  Sinai  and  Horeb— tbe  latter  standing  in  the  shadow  of  the  former — to  be  used 
interchangeably  as  e.g.  Deut.  1  :  2,  6,  19,  and  4  :  10,  15,  and  9  :  8,  and  29  :  1,  1  Kings 
8  :  9,  and  19  :  8,  and  2  Chron.  5  :  10  ;  Mai.  4  :  4)  when  persecuted  (1  Kings  19),  and  in 
"  the  mount  of  God  "  found  special  nearness  to  God,  and  realized  that,  amid  the  general 
defection,  God  had  reserved  for  Himself  a  people.  How  changed  the  relations,  and  what 
a  glorious  reservation  he  will  there  meet !  If  faithful  our  glad  eyes  will  behold  the  same, 
and  our  glad  hearts  will  associate  with  those  "  myriads." 

Obs.  4.  If  this  deduction  were  founded  simply  on  one  passage  it  might 
suggest  doubt,  but  we  find  it  sustained  in  other  places.  Thus  take  Deut. 
33  :  1-2,  which  embraces  the  blessings  pronounced  on  the  several  tribes, 
and  which  from  other  predictions  we  know  shall  only  be  fully  realized  at 
the  restoration  of  the  nation  at  the  Second  Coming  of  its  King.  Now 
these  blessings  are  introduced  by  a  description  which,  however  applicable 
in  some  particulars  to  the  giving"  of  the  law,  was  never  verified  in  the  past. 
For  we  read  :  "  Tlie  Lord  came  from  Sinai  arid  rose  up  from  Sier  unto 
them,  He  shined  forth  from  Mt.  Paran,  and  He  came  with  ten  thousands  of 


Prop.  166.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  21 

saints  ;  from  His  right  hand  went  a  fiery  laic  to  them,"  etc.1  Such  a  Com- 
ing with  myriads  of  saints  is  only  predicated  of  the  still  future  Advent. 
We  have  no  account  of  any  other,  and  this  correspondence  with  what  will 
occur  at  the  predicted  Second  Advent  of  Jesns  (when  myriads  of  saints 
are  with  Him)  is  indicative  of  its  intended  application.  In  Hab.  3  :  3  we 
have  another  allusion.  Intending  to  refer  to  the  chapter  at  length  in 
another  place,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the  opinion  so  generally  held  that 
it  refers  to  the  past  manifestation  of  God  at  Mt.  Sinai  and  in  the  wilder- 
ness, is  utterly  untenable.  Aside  from  various  considerations,  the  simple 
fact  that  the  prophet  himself  locates  it  in  the  future  and  prays  (v.  16)  that 
he  may  find  deliverance  when  it  takes  place,  is  ample  to  remove  the  pre- 
vailing interpretation.  It  most  certainly — if  we  preserve  its  unity  and  com- 
pare with  other  Scripture— pertains  to  the  future  Advent.  The  prophet 
tells  us  "  God  came  from  Teman  (or  the  South)  and  the  Holy  One  from  Mt. 
Paran"  at  a  time  when  an  overthrow  of  enemies  and  a  deliverance  is 
experienced  on  a  scale  so  great  that  the  past  sinks  into  insignificance  before 
it.  Even  Judges  5  :  4,  5,  may  in  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  be  far-reaching  ; 
and  many  predictions  respecting  "  the  wilderness"  may  have  a  deeper, 
more  significant  meaning  than  is  usually  attached  to  them.  Let  there  be 
such  a  restoration  of  Theocratic  rule  inaugurated  at  Mt.  Sinai,  and  it 
imparts  new  force  to  Isa.  35  :  1  "  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall 
be  glad  for  them  and  the  desert  shall  rejoice,''''  etc.,  or  to  Isa.  32  :  15,  16 
"  the  wilderness  (shall)  be  a  fruitful  field,"  "  then  judgment  shall  dwell  in 
the  wilderness,"  or  to  Isa.  35  :  6  ""for  in  the  luilderness  shall  waters  (i.e. 
people)  break  out  and  streams  in  the  desert.'"  In  view  of  the  apportionment 
of  the  stations,  etc.,  in  the  Kingdom  at  such  a  time  and  place,  it  may  even 
be  questioned  whether  the  planting  in  the  wilderness  of  those  several  trees 
mentioned  by  Isa.  41  :  19,  20  is  not  to  be  interpreted  of  the  assignments  of 
rank,  etc.,  in  this  Theocracy,  seeing  that  the  Spirit  likens  in  other  places 
the  saints  to  "  Trees  of  righteousness,  the  planting  of  the  Lord"  (Isa.  61  : 
3),  and  men  and  rulers  are  thus  designated.  The  specific  mention  of 
rejoicing,  shouting,  singing,  etc.,  in  the  wilderness  at  some  period  still 
future  is  seen,  if  this  idea  is  accepted,  to  be  highly  appropriate,  and  what 
under  the  circumstances  is  to  be  anticipated.  Surely  "  the  grace  in  the 
wilderness,"  Jer.  31  :  2,  which  is  yet,  as  the  prophecy  indicates,  to  be 
realized  by  the  Jewish  nation  in  an  unexampled  restoration  ;  the  pleading 
in  the  wilderness,  Ezek.  20  :  35-36)  still  future  with  that  people  ;  the 
speaking  comfortably  to  His  people  in  the  wilderness,  Hos.  2  :  14 — this, 
with  similar  intimations,  should  teach  us  that  the  wilderness,  just  as  in  the 
beginning,  is  an  important  feature  strikingly  associated  with  the  re-estab- 
lishment of  the  Theocracy.2 

1  Lederer,  The  Israelite  Indeed,  Dec,  1863,  p.  141,  renders  it  :  "Jehovah  is  coming  from 
Sinai,  and  rises  nnto  them  from  Seir  ;  He  beams  from  Mt.  Paran,  and  comes  (out)  from 
the  myriads  of  saints,  from  His  right  hand  (the)  fire  statue  unto  them,"  etc.  This  "  fiery- 
law"  or  "  fire  statue"  is  also,  as  every  one  can  see,  a  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the 
Sec.  Advent  with  the  saints,  being  expressive  of  "  judgments." 

-  Hos.  2  :  14  deserves  special  attention,  and  the  connection  evidently  shows  the  time 
of  fulfilment  to  be  in  the  future.  If  the  student  observes  two  things  he  cannot  fail  to 
catch  its  spirit.  (1)  The  elect  now  gathered  being  engrafted,  and  thus  become  identified 
with  the  true  Israel,  are  inseparable  with  this  period  of  blessing  ;  (2)  the  time  of  this 
marriage,  Pre-Millennial,  as  noticed  Props.  118,  169,  etc.  Ps.74  :  14  will  be  impressively 
realized  :  "  Thou  breakest  the  heads  of  leviathan  in  pieces,  and  gavest  him  to  be  meat  to 
the  people  inhabiting  (sojourning  in)  the  wilderness." 


22  THE  XHEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PiJOP.  166. 

Obs.  5.  Isa.  63  :  1-G  cannot  possibly,  without  the  grossest  inconsistency, 
he  applied  to  the  First  Advent  of  Jesus.  For,  aside  from  other  reasons,  it 
is  not  true  that  He  then  came  in  anger,  fury  and  vengeance,  and  shed  the 
blood  of  His  enemies,  until  His  own  garments  were  stained,  seeing  that 
His  mission  was  one  of  love,  mercy  and  submission  to  death.  But  at  His 
Second  Advent  numerous  passages  expressly  mention  wrath,  vengeance  on 
enemies,  and  a  fearful  slaughter  and  supper.  It  is  therefore  a  description 
only  applicable  to  the  Second  Advent,  as  the  early  Church  taught  (see 
Prop.  121)1.  But  the  prophet  in  vision  sees  Him  Coming  from  the  direc- 
tion of  Mt.  Sinai,  asking  :  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edam,  with  dyed 
garments  from  Bozrahf  Indeed,  when  we  come  to  compare  Scripture 
with  Scripture,  we  have  the  route  taken  by  the  mighty  King  from  Mt. 
Sinai  until  He  arrives  at  Jerusalem  clearly  pointed  out.  Prophecy  dis- 
tinctly mentions  Mt.  Sinai,  Paran,  the  Wilderness,  Mt.  Seir,  Edom,  Teman 
or  the  South,  Bozrah,  giving  us  a  direct  route  from  Sinai  northward  to 
Palestine.  This  does  not  occur  by  chance,  but  is  descriptive  of  ivhat  shall 
truly  take  place.  Having  the  Mighty  One  with  His  Saints  manifested  at 
Sinai,  and  also  by  way  of  the  wilderness  of  Paran  on  through  Idumea,  it 
seems  to  us  faithless  not  to  accept  of  these  things.  Especially  when  we 
find  an  under-current  of  prophecy,  which  serves  to  bring  them  out  in  more 
distinctive  proportions.2  Thus,  e.g.  in  "  the  new  thing"  (Isa.  43  :  18-21), 
which  God  is  to  perform,  He  "  will  even  make  a  way  in  the  wilderness, 
rivers  (notice  its  figurative  meaning)  in  the  desert.3  1  give  waters  in  the 
wilderness  and  rivers  in  the  deserts,  to  give  drink  to  my  people,  my  chosen. 
This  people  have  I  formed  for  myself  j  they  shall  show  forth  my  praise." 
Here  we  have  intimated  under  impressive  figures  the  blessings  that  will  result 
from  a  re-formation  of  Theocratic  rule  out  of  a  people  expressly  raised  up 
(and  gathered)  for  this  purpose,  and  this  is  done  in  the  wilderness,  the 
very  place  where  the  Theocracy  wax  originally  instituted.  If  such  a  restora 
tion  as  the  Proposition  states  is  really  contemplated  and  intended,  could 
the  language  of  the  prophet  be  more  expressive  of  the  fact?  The  saints, 
that  body  of  "  peculiar  people "  and  engrafted,  thus  constituting  the  "  holy 
nation'''1  (and  thus  forming  "  a  river,''''  etc.,  in  the  figurative  language  of 
Scripture),  gathered  to  Mt.  Sinai,  and  associated  with  Christ  in  the  for- 
mative reorganization  of  the  fallen  Theocracy,  would  fulfil  in  the  most 
impressive  manner  such  predictions.  Then  again,  if  we  turn  to  Isa.  40  : 
3,  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  we  have  more  than  a  mere  typical  ful- 
filment in  John's  mission.  And,  when  the  prediction  is  carefully  studied  in 
the  light  of  other  predictions,  the  doubt  resolves  itself  into  a  certainty  that 
this  also  (whatever  inchoate  fulfilment  there  may  be)  refers  to  this  period  of 
time.  Let  the  reader  notice  (1)  that  this  cry  in  the  wilderness,  etc.,  is  taken 
as  commentators,  Barnes,  etc.,  inform  us  from  the  approach  of  a  mighty 
Conqueror,  and  is  expressive  of  irresistible  power  and  a  triumphant  march  ; 
(2)  that  the  preparations  are  suitably  completed,  and  "  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  revealed  "  so  that  "  all  flesh  shall  see  it ;"  (3)  that  before  the 
march  of  Jehovah,  all  flesh  being  as  grass,  opposition  shall  be  overcome  ; 
(4)  and  the  results  of  this  triumphal  appearance  in  deliverance  and  rule. 
To  say  that  all  this  was  strictly  fulfilled  at  the  First  Advent,  having  before 
us  the  rejection  of  John,  and  Jesus,  in  the  triumph  of  enemies,  and  no 
such  experience  of  deliverance  of  the  nation,  etc.,  as  delineated,  is  cer- 
tainly a  lowering  and  altering  of  the  prophecy.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
offer  of  the  Kingdom  at  the  First  Advent  necessitated  a  typical  representa- 


PEOP.  166.]  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  23 

tion  of  this  act  in  the  wilderness  (and  hence  applied  to  John),  but  owing 
to  the  foreknown  unbelief  and  sinfulness  of  the  nation  both  the  Kingdom 
and  the  real  preparatory  acts  here  predicted  were  postponed.  Jesus  did  not 
exhibit  Himself  as  the  King  ;  His  glory  was  concealed  under  humilia- 
tion ;  the  time  had  not  yet  arrived  for  such  a  triumphal  passage  ;  He  Him- 
self locating  it  in  the  future  at  His  Sec.  Coming.  Admit  such  a  re-estab- 
lishment of  the  Theocracy  at  Mt.  Sinai  in  the  wilderness — consider  the 
route  from  there  through  the  wilderness  to  Judea,  and  then  the  prophecy 
shines  forth  with  a  clearness  and  vividness  that  is  startling.  "  The  Voice  of 
him  that  crieth  in  the  wilderness,*  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make 
straight  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our  God" — the  completeness  of  the 
preparation,  the  majestic  march  revealing  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  the  help- 
lessness of  His  enemies  contrasted  with  His  power,  the  reward  bestowed, 
the  blessed  rule  and  safety  experienced  ;  all  prince  such  an  exalted  con- 
dition of  manifested  Kingly  authority,  etc.,  and  connected  with,  as  a  start- 
ing point,  the  wilderness,  that  it  is  only  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  future.  At 
least  such  a  fulfilment  accords  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  His  work  as 
connected  with  the  Second  Advent,  and  we  can  see  no  valid  reason  to 
reject  its  indentification,  in  some  way,  with  the  wilderness,  as  the  place 
from  whence  this  King  of  kings  comes,  and  before  whom  "  a  highway," 
like  that  of  a  mighty  conqueror,  shall  be  opened.  Such  passages  include 
the  idea,  that  the  authoritative  manifestation  of  Theocratic  rale  is  exhibited, 
before  it  issues  forth  from  the  desert.  It  is  a  form  ready  for  action  before 
it  emerges  from  the  wilderness.  Considering  the  formation  of  the  Theoc- 
racy with  its  added  hosts  of  kings  and  priests  in  so  isolated  a  place,  seclud- 
ed from  the  observation  of  the  nations,  and  its  sudden  and  overwhelming 
appearance,  it  may  be  a  question  whether  Christ  had  not  this  initiatory 
stage  in  view  when  He  told  the  Pharisees,  "  the  Kingdom  of  God  comet  h 
not  with  observation"  seeing  that  it  is  not  only  divinely  instituted,  but 
this  is  done  in  a  secluded  manner  and  place,  so  that  when  it  appears  it  is 
already  so  organized  as  to  be  irresistible,  etc.5 

1  The  reader  will  find  information  in  Lange's  Com.  Isa.  ch.  63,  showing  that  Calvin, 
Musculus,  Schultetus,  and  others,  rejected  the  idea  of  its  application  to  tlie  passion  of 
Jesus,  and  Vitringa  expressly  says  :  "  the  hero  is  not  set  forth  as  suffering  but  as  acting, 
not  as  sprinkled  with  His  own  blood  but  with  the  blood  of  enemies,  not  as  satisfying  the 
justice  of  God/or  shis  but  as  executing  the  justice  of  God  in  punishing  enemies."  Ziethe 
is  quoted  as  saying  :  "  Our  text  (Isa.  63  :  1-6)  bids  us  (1)  To  look  on  the  Man  of  Sorrows, 
who  redeemed' us  ;  (2)  To  contemplate  in  faith  the  great  work  which  He  has  accom- 
plished for  us  ;  (3)  For  this  to  render  to  Him  the  thank-offering  which  we  owe  Him"  — 
upon  which  the  American  editor  (Rev.  Moore)  justly  observes  :  "  It  is  strange  that  an 
eminent  modern  preacher  should  so  misrepresent  the  teaching  of  this  passage.  If  we  wish 
to  lead  men  to  contemplate  Christ  as  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  by  whose  blood  we  are 
redeemed,  we  should  choose  a  passage  of  Scripture  that  exhibits  Him  in  this  character. 
But  it  is  either  culpable  ignorance,  or  something  worse,  to  affirm  that  the  Scripture 
before  us  contains  the  lessons  set  forth  in  the  above  mentioned  heads  of  a  sermon." 
Many,  alas  deserve  this  rebuke  and  even  Bh.  Hobart  (Works,  vol.  3.  p.  298),  has  a 
sermon  arbitrarily  applying  it  to  the  sacrifice  on  the  cross.  Steir  is  of  the  opinion  that 
the  one  who  is  seen  as  coming  is  Christ,  "  coming  from  the  fulfilment  of  what  is  related 
Rev.  14  :  20,  and  19  :  18,  21."  "  The  destruction  of  Antichrist  is  regarded  by  Delitzsch 
simply  as  the  New  Test,  counterpart  to  this  piece."  And  Weber  is  thus  quoted  :  "  The 
prophecy  which  is  here  directed  against  Edom  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  prophecy  of  the 
judgment  which  will  befall  the  antichristian,  persecuting  world  in  the  last  days.  On 
this  account  the  Seer  of  the  New  Test.,  John,  has  described  the  Lord  as  coming  to  judge 
the  world  after  the  model  of  Isa.  63  (Bev.  19)."  The  Amer.  editor  says  :  "  Messiah  is 
the  conqueror  of  Edom  as  Balaam  of  old  predicted  (Numb.  24  :  17,  18).  Not  ////  lie 
raises  up  the  fallen  tabernacle  of  David,  is  possession  in  the  highest  sense  taken  of  Edom 


24  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.    166. 

and  of  all  the  heathen  (Amos  9  :  11,  12).  As  we  understand  the  Lord's  work  of  destruc- 
tion depicted  in  Ps.  110  :  5,  6,  so  must  we  understand  the  judgment  on  Edotn  here 
described."  We  only  add,  that  nearly  all  expositors  not  knowing  what  else  to  do  with 
the  names  "Edom"  and  "  Bosrah"  have  regarded  them  as  mystical  or  figurative  terms 
expressive  of  enemies,  but  this  view  gives  a  deeper  significance  to  them — just  as  the 
names  relating  to  the  First  Advent.  Hannah's  prayer  will  be  verified  (1  Sam.  2),  and 
the  nations  (Zeph.  3  :  8,  etc.),  be  crushed  under  the  long  predicted  (Deut  32  :  41-43) 
vengeance.  If  the  reader  turn  to  Props.  115  and  163,  he  will  find  by  connecting  the  same 
with  this  one,  additional  reasons  for  our  position. 

s  The  student  will  observe  that  the  place  where  the  First  Advent  occurred  is  but 
indirectly  given,  and  that  all  other  accounts  of  the  same  imply  the  coming  first  to  Beth- 
lehem. So  in  the  Sec.  Advent,  when  the  locality  is  once  stated  that  is  amply  sufficient, 
and  all  other  predictions  imply  it.  This  at  once  opens  a  wide  field  for  reference  which 
can  only  be  indicated.  Thus  e.g.  take  Isa.  63  :  1-6,  and  notice  in  connection  the  ven- 
geance, the  Redemption,  etc.  This  compared  with  numerous  parallel  passages  presents 
us  additional  points  of  identification.  Such  a  comparison  having  been  instituted  under 
various  Propositions,  it  is  not  requisite  to  repeat.  Several  passages  not  before  specified, 
may  briefly  be  suggested  :  Isa.  42  :  11,  is  remarkable,  as  the  context  indicates  that  "  new 
things"  are  to  be  performed,  introducing  Millennial  blessedness  and  glory,  worthy  of  "  a 
new  song."  This  is  done  in  the  manner  we  have  advocated  :  "  The  Lord  shall  go  forth 
as  a  mighty  man,  He  shall  stir  up  jealousy  like  a  man  of  war,  He  shall  cry,  yea  war  ;  He 
shall  prevail  against  His  enemies,"  etc.  (see  context).  But  notice  verse  11,  and  its 
manifest  allusions  (as  Bh.  Lowth,  and  others),  to  the  desert  of  Arabia  Deserta,  to  the 
rocky  country  of  Arabia  Petraaa,  etc.,  and  surely  the  careful  student  of  the  Word  must 
be  impressed  that  some  deep  reason  underlies  such  references.  What  other  reason  so 
applicable  as  the  one  advocated  by  us?  For  aught  we  know,  such  references  as  Zech. 
9  :  14,  going  "  with  whirlwinds  of  the  South  ;"  as  Ps.  126  :4,  "as  streams  in  the  South  ;" 
and  similar  phraseology,  may  contain  allusions  which  a  fulfilment  will  render  expressive 
in  this  direction.  The  student  will  not  overlook  Isa.  9  :  1  (Delitzsch's  rendering),  Isa. 
59  :  16-20  (comp  Lowth  and  the  Chaldee). 

3  Delitzsch's  rendering  is  impressive  :  "  Behold  I  work  out  a  new  thing  :  will  ye  not 
live  to  see  it"  (resurrection)  ?     "  Yea,  I  make  a  road  through  the  desert,"  etc. 

4  Lowth  and  Noyes  separate  the  clause  as  follows  :  A  voice  crieth,  "  In  the  wilderness 
prepare  ye  the  way  of  Jehovah"  and  Barnes  loci  declares  "  the  parallelism  seems  to  require 
the  translation  proposed  by  Lowth."  This,  if  correct,  would  add  to  its  significancy.  So 
Delitzsch  :  ' '  Hark  a  crier  !  In  the  wilderness  prepare  ye  a  way  for  Jehovah,  make  smooth 
in  the  desert  a  road  for  our  God." 

5  An  additional  reason  is  found  in  Prop.  163  on  the  meaning  of  "  Armageddon"  (which 
see),  and  to  this  idea  of  "the  Assembling"  or  "the  Gathering"  many  passages  refer,  as 
e.g.  Ps.  110  :  3  (Barker's  Bible,  London  1815,  renders),  "  Thy  people  shall  come  willingly 
at  the  time  of  the  assembling  thine  army  in  holy  beauty,"  etc.  Ps.  46  according  to  the  title 
refers  to  "  the  hidden  ones  or  virgins,"  and  is  highly  expressive  of  this  period  (comp.  Isa. 
26  :  20,  21  ;  Jer.  2:3;  Luke  21  :  36,  etc.).  Even  the  "  fleeing  to  the  mountain"  of  Ps. 
11  :  1,  if  we  are  to  receive  some  renderings,  may  refer  to  this  withdrawal.  The  passages 
which  speak  of  the  removal  and  hiding  of  God's  people  just  before  the  last  great  tribula- 
tion breaks  forth  might  be  used  as  illustrative  of  this  period.  Here,  indeed,  they  would 
be  in  safety  and  honor.  The  world  will  be  more  or  less  unconscious  of  this  gathering, 
the  days  of  Noah  repeating  themselves,  and  persistent  unbelief  in  such  a  preparation 
existing  until  too  late.  The  secrecy  of  all  this,  is  plainly  implied,  even  in  the  meeting  of 
the  Bridegroom  and  those  that  were  ready,  which  no  one  of  the  world  will  witness. 
Those  taken  to  Mt.  Sinai  are  pre-eminently  favored,  and  as  then  "  the  door  will  be  shut" 
it  will  be  too  late  for  others  to  be  added  to  the  special  blessed  number.  These  are  "  the 
firstfruits"  of  the  harvest— specially  belonging  to  the  Lord— the  harvest  itself— "  the 
great  multitude'  '—follows  later  in  the  divine  order.  Various  passages  relating  to  this 
subject  are  worthy  of  consideration,  such  as  Isa.  16  :  1-5  ;  Isa.  chs.  34,  35,  13,  etc.  When 
these  things  are  realized,  men  will  be  amazed  to  find  how  largely  and  minutely,  all  this  has 
been  described  in  the  Word,  and  yet  how  little  it  has  been  noticed  and  appreciated,  just 
as  the  things  relating  to  the  First  Advent  were  overlooked. 

There  is  only  one  difficulty,  suggested  by  a  friend  (Dr.  Morehead\  viz.,  that  in  Eev. 
19  at  the  open  Advent  of  Jesus  and  His  saints  it  is  represented  that  "  heaven  opened  " 
and  "  the  armies  in  heaven  followed  Him,"  so  that  He  and  the  saints  literally  come  from 
the  third  heaven  and  not  from  Sinai,  etc.  But  this  is  simply  to  overlook  the  symbolical 
meaning  of  the  word  "  heaven"  as  used  in  Revelation.    If  we  are  to  give  it  this  meaning, 


Prop.  166.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  25 

then  e.g.  ch.  12  :  7  there  was  literally  "  war  in  heaven,"  ch.  4  :  1,  2,  John  was  literally  in 
heaven,  etc.  Hence  all  commentators  e.g.  Barnes,  Lange,  etc.,  refer  the  expression  to 
the  introduction  of  a  new  vision  and  its  relation  to  the  heavenly  powers.  Faber,  etc., 
give  us  correct  ideas  of  its  reference,  and,  for  aught  we  know,  if  reference  is  made  to 
the  same  heaven  mentioned  in  ch.  6  :  13,  it  would  be  sustained  if  the  symbolical  import 
is  accepted,  and  even  if  the  literal,  without  including  the  third  heaven  (for  Jesus  and 
His  saints  can  and  will  come  transported  in  the  aerial  by  supernatural  power).  A  con- 
sistent interpretation  of  the  "Word  in  accordance  with  its  usage  (see  Prop.  107)  in  the  book 
will  remove  the  objection  ;  and  we  are  not  to  force  the  language,  just  as  we  do  not  that 
which  relates  or  pertains  to  the  sword  out  of  His  mouth,  etc.  It  is  a  symbolical  repre- 
sentation of  the  authority,  majesty,  power,  etc.,  of  the  Advent. 

Obs.  6.  This  view  instead  of  conflicting  with  the  other  predictions, 
serves  to  illustrate  and  enforce  them.  Take,  e.g.  Dan.  7,  and  there  is 
something  remarkable  in  the  structure  of  the  prophecy,  which  on  any 
other  hypothesis  baffles  interpretation.  The  investiture  (Prop.  83)  of  the 
Son  of  Man,  David's  Son,  with  the  Kingdom,  and  the  bestowment  of 
judgment  or  rulership  upon  the  saints  associated  with  Him,  is  done  by 
the  Ancient  of  Days,  for  the  Kingdom  is  given  by  Him  to  the  Son  of  Man 
and  His  saints.  But  this  is  done  here  on  the  earth — as  the  representation 
in  its  entire  scope  demands — even  while  the  Antichristian  power,  so 
arrogant  and  hostile,  is  in  existence  and  holds  sway  over  the  nations.  A 
difficulty  at  once  presents  itself,  how  could  such  an  investiture  which  pre- 
supposes an  order  of  arrangements,  etc.,  take  place  without  exciting  imme- 
diate attention  and  attack  from  the  enemy  if  conducted  within  his  terri- 
tory and  in  a  public  manner.  The  prophecy  implies  on  its  face  a  perfectly 
free  unembarrassed,  and  even  unexpected  by  the  enemy,  accomplishment  of 
preliminary  arrangements  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom.  Admit  that  Sinai 
and  the  wilderness  is  the  locality  where  the  Ancient  of  Days  invests 
David's  Son  and  His  own  with  Theocratic  power,  and  bestows  upon  Him 
and  the  saints  the  convenanted  dominion,  and  the  difficulty  vanishes. 
The  prophet  looks  in  vision  at  the  horn,  and  then,  looking  away  from 
him,  turns  to  gaze  upon  the  prophetic  picture  presented  at  Mt.  Sinai  with- 
out specifying  the  locality  ;  thus  passing  from  one  to  the  other  without  a 
commingling  of  them.  Although  the  investiture  (i.e.  the  public  official 
recognition  in  the  presence  of  holy  intelligences)  is  on  the  earth,  yet  it  is 
effectually  concealed  from  the  interference  and  annoyance  of  the  power- 
ful enemy  which  it  is  to  destroy.  Such  an  explanation,  to  say  the  least,  is 
more  natural  and  reasonable — if  the  Theocracy  is  indeed  to  be  restored 
in  David's  Son — than  that  usually  given,  which,  against  the  Coming  of  the 
Ancient  One  and  the  evident  description  of  scenes  witnessed  on  earth, 
makes  this  a  transaction  in  the  third  heaven.  When  the  Theocracy  was 
originally  established,  it  was  done  amid  the  most  solemn  and  glorious 
manifestations,  and  Mt.  Sinai  was  purposely  selected  for  the  same  ;  now 
when  the  same  Theocracy  is  to  be  reorganized  in  the  most  august  manner 
under  the  leadership  of  the  King  specially  provided,  is  it  not  reasonable 
that  (instead  of  the  third  heaven  or  the  air,  etc.)  it  should  be  effected  in 
precisely  the  same  place  and  with  exhibitions  of  splendor  and  power  far 
more  impressive  than  any  hitherto  given.1  Is  it  not  also  suitable  that  such 
an  arrangement  when  taking  place  on  earth,  should  receive  the  most  solemn 
outward   official  sanction  of  the  Most  High  GodP 

1  There  is  nothing  whatever  in  the  Scriptures  which  teaches  directly  or  indirectly  that 
Jesus  during  this  interval  is  in  the  third  heaven.  Wilson  (Proph.  Times,  N.  S.,  Aug.,  1877, 
p.   183),   correctly  makes  an  extended  period  between  the  two  stages,  but  misled  by  the 


26  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PKOP.  166. 

withdrawal  of  the  saints  to  the  air  (or  aerial),  concludes  that  Christ  and  His  saints  are 
in  the  air  during  the  forty  years.  But  his  view  of  an  organized  form  of  government  being 
established  during  this  interval  is  eminently  just  :  "  And  so,  when  they  shall  come  with 
Christ  at  the  end  of  the  forty  years  they  will  be  a  completely  organized  body  politic." 
To  apjjly  the  title  "  Ancient  of  Days*'  to  the  Son  is  harsh  and  utterly  untenable,  although 
many  do  this,  not  knowing  how  else  to  interpret  it,  although  the  prophecy  distinguishes 
between  the  two,  the  one  being  the  giver  and  the  other  the  receiver.  We  cannot  receive 
the  view  that  this  investiture  is  a  transaction  in  the  third  heaven,  as  held  by  Tregelles 
and  others,  because  the  Ancient  of  Days  Coming  (v.  22)  and  the  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man 
in  the  clouds  of  heaven  (v.  13),  cannot  have  a  reference  to  the  third  heaven,  but,  as  the 
entire  tenor  of  the  prophecy  demands,  is  a  Coming  to  this  earth  where  the  judgment  is  to 
be  executed  and  the  rule  enforced.  Hence  we  cannot  receive  Fausset's  (Cum.  Dan.  7  : 
13)  that  this  Coming  and  investiture  was  "  at  His  ascension,"  and  this  title  is  exercised 
invisibly,  but  "at  His  Second  Coming  it  shall  be  invisible  administration,"  for  this 
violates  the  unity  of  the  prediction  by  the  introduction  of  an  interval  utterly  unauthor- 
ized, and  is  based  on  a  misapprehension  of  the  Kingdom  that  belongs  to  the  Son  of  Man 
as  David's  Son.  This  investiture  is  certainly  not  witnessed  before  the  rise  of  the  ten 
horns,  the  little  horn,  etc.,  and  before  the  time  has  arrived  for  judgment  (upon  which 
the  action  of  the  Ancient  of  Days  is  founded).  The  only  interpretation  that  we  can 
safely  follow  is  the  one  that  does  not  violate  the  natural  order,  relating  to  time  and 
events,  given  in  the  prophecy.  The  Ancient  of  Days  did,  at  one  time,  visit  Mt.  Sinai 
when  His  Kingdom  was  instituted,  and  it  is  most  reasonable,  aside  from  the  Scripture 
intimations,  to  believe  that  when  it  will  be  gloriously  reorganized  with  the  Son  ot  Man 
at  its  head,  that  He  will  again  manifest  Himself,  as  predicted,  in  the  same  place.  We 
deem  it  not  a  little  significant  that  a  number  of  highly  interesting  works  (like  Stanley's 
Sinai  and  Palestine)  have  recently  been  published  calling  special  attention  to  Sinai. 
Hence  we  reject  Thomas's  (Exp.  of  Ban.  p.  1G),  view  that  the  Ancient  of  Days  is  equiv- 
alent to  the  Coining  of  Jesus  (see  Prop.  83),  and  Smith's  {Thoughts  on  Dan.,  p.  71),  idea 
that  the  scene  of  investiture  is  in  the  third  heaven.  "Whatever  the  right,  exaltation,  etc., 
of  Jesus,  we  must  keep  in  mind  that  this  predicted,  is  a  special  inauguration  scene 
visibly  exhibited  to  the  saints  at  the  restoration.  (Wild,  Ten  Lust  Tribes,  p.  156,  has  the 
wildest  conception,  when  he  makes  the  two  witnesses  of  Eev.  to  be  the  Ancient  of  Days 
and  the  Son  of  Man — the  former  being  Moses  and  the  latter  Elijah  !) 

2  This  subject  may  also  throw  light  on  such  passages  as  1  Thess.  5  :  1-5,  "  But  ye 
brethren  are  not  in  darkness  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief,"  etc.  Consider 
that  this  was  addressed  to  Thessalonian  brethren  and  includes  them.  Now  if  they  are 
thus  raised  up,  brought  to  Mt.  Sinai,  and  made  part  of  that  reorganization,  preliminary 
to  the  terrible  scenes  following,  and  even  with  Christ  participate  in  them — will  it  not  be 
pre-eminently  true  that  being  the  acknowledged  "  children  of  the  day"  they  cannot 
possibly  be  "in  darkness."  Again,  the  Passover  is  only  partly  fulfilled,  the  Lamb  has 
been  slain,  the  eating  of  its  flesh  in  faith  has  been  going  on  for  centuries  (showing  forth 
His  death  until  He  come),  but  the  Passover  itself  we  are  told  by  Jesus  (Luke  22  :  15,  16), 
is  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  Kingdom  of  God.  In  this  Sinaitic  arrangement,  preparatory  to 
"  the  day  of  vengeance,"  Jesus  the  mighty  King  will  indeed  be  a  refuge,  etc.,  and  no  evil 
will  befall  them.  The  reader  can  find  for  himself  other  references  to  this  period  of 
deliverance  from  incoming  judgments,  all  indicative  of  a  visible  manifestation  and 
ordering  in  behalf  of  the  covenanted  Theocratic  Kingdom. 

Obs.  7.  Other  intimations  are  to  be  found,  which,  owing  to  their  obscu- 
rity, have  greatly  perplexed  critics.  Let  the  student  carefully  examine  the 
structure  of  La*  1G  :  1-5,  and  it  is  self-evident,  however  we  may  give  it 
an  inchoate  fulfilment,  or  make  it  typical,  that  it  has  not  yet  been  ful- 
filled, seeing  that  in  the  immediate  connection  (v.  5)  the  throne  is  to  be 
established,  the  Ruler  is  to  sit  upon  it  in  the  Kingdom  of  David,  produc- 
ing righteousness  by  His  reign,  which  has  not  yet  been  verified.  Seiss 
(Apoc,  Sec.  10,  p.  282,  footnote)  corrects  our  version  (which  reads  : 
"  Send  ye  the  Lamb  to  the  Ruler  of  the  land  from  Sela  to  the  wilderness, 
unto  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion")  by  giving,  as  the  Vulgate, 
Luther,  and  other  translations,  the  following  :  "  Send  ye  (or,  I  will  send) 
the  Lamb,  the  Ruler  of  the  land,  from  Sela  of  the  wilderness  unto  the 


Prop.  166.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  27 

mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion."  The  Chaldees  makes  it  allude  to  "  the 
Messiah,  the  Anointed  of  Israel."  This,  with  the  hiding  of  certain  ones, 
the  overthrow  of  the  oppressor,  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom  of  David 
with  the  Kuler  (after  He  has  come  "from  Selaof  the  wilderness"  to  Jeru- 
salem) reigning  in  it  makes  it  to  coincide  with  the  other  Scripture  adduced. 
The  Lamb  is  put  for  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  Word  fully  identifies,  in  the 
future  Coming  of  the  Lamb,  in  His  wrath,  His  marriage,  His  war,  His 
throne,  etc.  (comp.  Apoc),  this  Lambhood  with  the  Kulership  that  Ho 
shall  exert  over  all  the  earth  from  the  established  throne  and  Kingdom  of 
David. 

Attention  is  invited  to  a  passage,  upon  which  a  variety  of  opinion  has  been  ex- 
pressed, and  which,  perhaps,  no  one  can  confidently  interpret,  excepting  as  general 
analogy  sustains,  viz.,  Isa.,  ch.  41,  and  the  connected  chapters.  Who  is  this  "  righteous 
man  from  the  East?"  Let  anyone  look  at  the  majesty,  power,  and  glory  declared  of 
him.  at  the  numerous  promises  descriptive  of  the  same  applied  directly  to  the  Messiah 
at  His  future  Coming,  at  the  Spirit's  application  of  portions  of  the  prediction  expressly 
to  Christ,  and  we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  the  usual  reference  of  this  "  right- 
eous man"  to  Abraham  or  to  Cyrus  is  utterly  untenable — although,  as  some  do,  we  make 
Abraham  or  Cyrus  merely  typical  of  the  Christ,  having  a  double  fulfilment,  etc.  The 
trouble  witb  interpreters  is  that  they  cannot  explain  how  this  "  righteous  man,"  if  Jesus, 
comes  "from  the  East."  But  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  term  "  East"  (see  e.g. 
Home's  Introd.,  vol.  2,  p.  230,  Encyc.  R.  Knoucl.,  art.  "  East,"  etc.)  has  a  wide  range,  and 
is  apjdicable  to  Arabia  Deserta,  Idumea,  etc.,  from  whence  Jesus  comes,  as  we  have 
pointed  out.  Hence  the  applicability  of  these  predictions  to  Jesus,  as  the  ancients  held 
(e.g.  Barnabas,  Tertullian,  Augustine,  etc.),  can  be  received  in  every  particular.  As  the 
approach  of  Jesus  and  His  saints  will  follow  the  route  of  the  Israelites,  and  hence  the 
coming  to  Jerusalem  will  be  literally  from  the  East,  it  is  well  to  notice  that  Stanley  (Sinai 
and  Palestine,  p.  167)  pronounces  the  approach  from  Jericho  and  Bethany  to  be  "  really 
grand."  It  is  the  very  route  taken  in  the  triumphal  entry  of  the  Gospels,  and  indica- 
tive of  this  future  triumphal  entry.  Stanley  (p.  315)  quotes  Palmer  as  saying,  "From 
the  Castle  of  Rubad,  north  of  the  Jabkok,  are  distinctly  visible  Lebanon,  the  Sea  of 
Galilee,  Esdraelon  in  its  fullest  extent,  Carmel,  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  whole  range 
of  Judah  and  Ephraim.  It  is  the  finest  view  that  I  ever  saw  in  any  part  of  the  w'<  :ld. " 
We  may  add,  that  this  view  may  be  used  as  confirmatory  of  Fausset's  (Chr.  Herald,  Aug. 
14th,  1879),  respecting  the  "  Kings  from  the  East"  (Rev.  16)  viz.,  to  be  "  Christ's  trans- 
figured saints  returning  from  the  East  to  reign  as  king  priests  with  Him  (Isa.  40  :  3  ; 
Ezek.  43  :  2  ;  Zech.  14  :  4,  5  ;  Rev.  1  :  6,  and  19  :  8,  13,  14).  Babylon  must  fall,  that 
Jerusalem,  literal  and  spiritual,  may  rise.  '  The  kings  of  the  earth '  (Rev.  16  :  14)  shall 
be  superseded  by  the  Lord  from  heaven  and  '  the  kings  of  (from)  the  East '  with  Him 
(Ezek.  21  :  27)." 

Ohs.  8.  This  removal  to  Mt.  Sinai,  and  the  union  there  consummated 
of  Theocratic  relationship  (likened  owing  to  its  intimate,  enduring,  and 
jiermanent  character,  to  a  marriage),  satisfactorily  explains  some  allusions 
to  the  future  marriage,  which  many  writers  ignore  or  fail  to  conciliate. 
Notice  :  In  Matt.  25  :  1,  the  Bridegroom  is  Coming  and  the  invited  ones 
who  are  watching  go  with  Him  to  the  marriage,  the  rest  being  left  ;  in 
Luke  12  :  36,  the  exhortation  is  to  wait  for  the  Lord  "  when  He  will 
return  from  the  wedding ;"  in  Kev.  19  a  marriage  is  announced  preceding 
this  overthrow  of  Antichrist ;  in  Rev.  21,  a  marriage  follows  the  removal 
of  God's  enemies.  And  how  reconcile  the  exhortation  to  watch  for  the 
Bridegroom  Coming  to  the  wedding  and  the  warning  to  watch  for  Him  Com- 
ing from  the  wedding,  and  both  these  with  Kev.  ?  If  we  keep  in  view  how 
(as  explained  Props.  118  and  1G9),  the  figure  of  the  marriage  relation  is 
employed  to  denote  a  variety  of  unions,  and  then  notice  this  Theocratic 
union  formed  at  Mt.  Sinai  previous  to  the  open  Advent  of  Jesus  and  His 
saints,  and  previous  (as  was  observed  e.g.  Prop.  130,  and  Obs.  4)  to  the 


28  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  166. 

overthrow  of  the  Antichristian  powers,  we  have  the  hey  of  an  easy  solu- 
tion. The  one  (Matt.)  refers  to  the  thief -like  Coming  followed  by  the 
union  at  Mt.  Sinai  ;  the  other  (Luke)  to  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  after 
this  union  at  Mt.  Sinai  (likened  to  a  marriage)  and  specially  addressed  to 
Jews  and  others  ;  the  one  (Rev.  19),  refers  to  the  union  at  Mt.  Sinai,  and 
is  the  same  explained  under  "  the  married  wife"  Prop.  118;  the  other 
(Rev.  21)  follows  the  overthrow  of  Antichrist,  and  is  the  union  delineated 
under  Prop.  169.  Thus  several  phases  in  the  Sec.  Adventj  with  respec- 
tive unions  entered  into,  are  presented  before  us  ;  the  reconcilation  being 
found  complete  in  the  order  as  presented  to  us. 

The  fact  is,  it  helps   us  to  see.  how  a  number  of  things,  which  must  transpire  before 
the  open  Advent,  can  take  place.     Thus  e.g.  how  and  where  the  judgment  of  believers  is 
consummated,  so  that  their  respective   stations  in  the  Kingdom  are  assigned  (Prop.  135). 
It  teaches  us  that  that  special  preparedness  for  the  direct  establishment  of  the  Kingdom 
is  of  a  supernatural  nature,  and  done  under  the  divine  auspices  at  Mt.  Sinai,  and  hence 
we  cannot  possibly  receive  the  suppositions  e.g.  of  the  Catholic  Apostolic  Church  that  it, 
through  the  Apostolate  established,  is  doing  this  work,  or  of  Mormonism  that  it  by  its 
system,  etc.,  is  performing  it.     It  evinces  that  Jesus,  in  more  aspects  than  is  generally 
supposed,  is  a  "  Prophet  like  unto  Moses."     It  shows  that  in  the  great  work  specially 
delegated  to  Moses,  for  which  he  was  particularly  commissioned  by  the  Almighty,  viz., 
to  erect  and  organize  a  Theocratic  government,  in  this  Jesits  will  follow  his  footsteps,  and 
evidence  the  same  work,  only  on  a  grander  scale.      The  non-rejientance  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  its  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  caused  the  postponement  of  this,  the  mighty  work, 
to  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  then  will  it  be  performed,  and  in  the  identical  place,  too,  where  Moses 
stood  forth  the  head  of  the  nation.    The  supernatural,  which  necessarily  accompanied  the 
setting  up  of  a  Theocracy  (which  unbelief  rejects  as  unworthy  of  credence,  although  the 
absence  of  it  would  vitiate  the  Theocratic  idea),  will  again  be  manifested  in  the  gathering 
of  the  people  ;  in  the  august  inauguration  ;  in  the  march  to  Palestine  ;  in  the  encounter 
with  the  enemies  of  the   Theocracy  ;    in  the    establishment   at   Jerusalem,  and  in   the 
advancement  and  progress  of  its   power  over  the  nations  of  the  earth.     The  investiture 
of  the  Sovereignty  of  the  world  is  so  magnificent  a  feature  that  it  justly,  in  view  of  its 
magnitude,  design,  the  worthiness  of  the  person  invested,    etc.,   demands  a  manifestation 
of  it  here  on  earth,  and  this  it  receives  at  Mt.  Sinai,  where  again  a  scene  'will  be  enacted, 
which  will  present  an  overwhelming  sense  of  the  majesty,  power,  and  glory  of  the  Ruler. 
But  in  the  reinauguration  there  will  be  this  great  difference,  that  while  the  saints  will 
undoubtedly  be   deeply  affected  by  the  wonderful    transactions   going  on — while  pro- 
foundly moved  at  the  sublimity  of  the  investiture,   yet  they  will  not  be  affected  by  fear, 
as  the  Jewish  nation,  and  pray  that  the  glorious  manifestations  may  cease,  for  prepared 
by  previous  glorification  for  this  service,  and  realizing  their  dearest  Friend  in  the  person 
of  the  Ruler,  they  have,  as  Paul  says,  "boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment  /'  for  the  scene 
before  them,  and  in  which  they  participate,  is  not  one  of  death,  as  the  Jews  apprehended, 
but  one  of  salvation,  joy,   blessedness,   and  glory.      When   the   covenants  are   so  vividly 
remembered  and  exalted  by  fulfilment,  then  such  Psls.  as    the   98th   will  be  verified. 
Then  will  be  fulfilled  the  saying  of  Cummings  :  "  The  world's  greatest  tribulation  is  the 
hour  of  the  Christian's  most  magnificent  deliverance."     When  the  year  of  the  redeemed 
and  the  day  of  vengeance  both  come,  Jesus,  the  Theocratic  King,  will  be  glorified  and 
admired  by  His  own  (Isa.  63  comp.  with  2  Thess.  1  :  5-9).     The  Theocracy  is  estab- 
lished over  "  a  willing  peopte,"  who  will  exult  and  rejoice  with  fulness   of  joy  in  their 
King  and  Redeemer.     Vengeance  does  not  touch  the  saints  ;  and  when  Jesus  appears 
"  a  polished  shaft  hid  in  God's  quiver"  (Isa.  49  :  2),  "  in  whom  God  will  be  glorified  " 
when  employed  against  His  enemies,  these  saints  themselves,  by  association  of  rulership 
and  Theocratic  power  conferred  on  this  "  mount  of  God,"  shall  participate  in  its  execu- 
tion, Ps.  149  :  6-9  ;  Rev.  2  :  26,  27,  etc. 


Prop.  167.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  29 


Proposition  167.  The  re-establishment  of  this  Kingdom  em- 
braces also  the  reception  of  a  JVeio  Hevelation  of  the  Divine 
Will 

This  necessarily  results,  for  while  the  Theocratic-Da vidic  King- 
dom is  restored,  its  restoration  is  accompanied  by  great  and  won- 
derful changes.  The  inaugurated  rule  of  the  Theocratic  King, 
as  predicted,  the  participation  of  the  saints  in  such  rule,  the  world- 
wide extent  of  the  Kingdom,  the  supremacy  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
the  entering  upon  a  new  age  or  dispensation,  the  change  that  will 
result  in  the  condition  of  believers  in  this  Kingdom,  etc.,  calls  for 
a  revelation  by  which  not  only  the  official  position  of  the  saints  is 
to  be  governed,  but  that  of  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  nations  is  to  be 
controlled. 

We  have  only  to  ponder  the  Theocratic  idea  embraced  in  the  reign  of  Jesus  and  His 
saints,  and  the  reasonableness  of  our  Prop,  at  once  appears.  We  cannot  possibly  con- 
ceive of  a  restored  Theocracy  with  the  extraordinary  changes  predicted,  without  in- 
creased Revelation  as  a  directory  to  rulers  and  subjects. 

Oos.  1.  The  reader  will  observe  that  our  entire  argument  insists  upon 
the  present  and  continued  sufficiency  of  Eevelation  down  to  the  Sec. 
Advent,  over  against  St.  Simonians,  Friends  of  Light,  Swedenborgians, 
Mystics,  Mormons,  Spiritualists,  etc.  The  Scriptures,  as  we  now  have 
them,  are  not  only  the  highest  but  the  last  Revelation  down  to  that 
period  ;  and,  hence,  we  reject  all  others,  no  matter  by  whom  presented  or 
by  what  argument  enforced.  Until  the  arrival  of  the  Bridegroom,  there 
is  a  sufficiency  given  to  gather  out  and  guide  the  elect.  Nothing  is  luck- 
ing to  meet  the  Divine  Purpose  respecting  this  dispensation,  either  in  the 
way  of  instruction,  motive,  encouragement,  etc.  ;  and,  therefore,  it  is 
unreasonable  to  anticipate  another  Revelation  until  we  enter  another  and 
more  glorious  dispensation.  Our  position  protects  us  against  all  vagaries, 
all  pretended  Revelations,  on  the  one  hand,  and  likewise  against  that 
assumed  by  some  few,  viz.,  that  they  are  called  upon  to  organize  a  Theo- 
cratic Society  similar  to  the  Mosaic  and  amalgamate  Mosaic  and  Christian 
ordinances,  etc.  We  gratefully  accept  of  the  apostolic  arrangements  for 
our  present  good,  and  await  the  arrival  of  Him,  the  Christ,  who  alone  has 
the  authority  to  institute  the  changes  deemed  necessary.  Before  we  are 
enticed  into  any  of  the  schemes  which  so  largely  prevail  under  the  garb 
of  piety,  zeal,  increased  knowledge,  bestowed  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  etc.,  we 
are  content  to  "  occupy"  with  the  things  that  are  legitimately  given  to  us 
until  He,  the  King,  comes. 

Emerson  once  declared,  "  the  need  was  never  greater  of  a  new  revelation  than  now  ;" 
we,  from  our  standpoint,  would  say  the  need  was  never  greater  of  returning  to  the 
Revelation  already  given  than  now.     We  have  no  sympathy  whatever   for  pretended 


30  THE   THEOCKATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  167. 

revelations  given  by  professed  prophets  and  prophetesses,  or  drawn  from  a  professed 
"  inner  light,"  etc.     Our  position  has  been  fully  set  forth  under  Props.  9  and  10. 

Obs.  2.  The  Theocracy  under  David's  Son  and  Lord,  being  God's  own 
ordering,  will  embrace  in  some  formal  manner  God's  Will  in  regard  to  it. 
Thus,  e.g.  the  assignment  of  the  positions  in  the  coming  Kingdom,  as 
intimated  by  Jesus,  Matt.  20  :  23,  will  call  forth  an  expression  of  the 
Divine  pleasure.  The  entire  structure  of  the  Millennial  predictions  or 
prophecies  pertaining  to  this  Kingdom,  assume  or  intimate  such  a  Revela- 
tion. In  Isa.  2,  and  Micah  4,  (which  refer,  as  we  have  shown,  to  this 
period),  it  is  said  that  in  that  day,  "  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law  and 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem  ;"  in  various  predictions  (as  e.g. 
Zech.  14  :  16,  etc.)  the  nations  shall  send  their  representatives  to  Jeru- 
salem, to  ascertain  and  perform  the  Will  of  the  King  ;  in  that  dispen- 
sation so  largely  shall  the  Spirit  be  poured  out  that  many  shall  prophesy 
Joel  2  :  28,  29  (comp.  Prop.  171)  ;  at  that  time  the  Lord  shall  instruct,  so 
that  "  all  thy  children  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord,"  Isa.  54  :  13,  filling  the 
earth  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Isa.  11  :  9  ;  in  Ps.  68  :  11  (which, 
Prop.  166,  also  is  fulfilled  at  this  time)  it  is  said  :  "  The  Lord  gave  the 
Word:  great  was  the  company  {or  Heb.  army)  of  those  that  published  it  f 
in  brief,  so  permeated  are  the  promises  pertaining  to  this  era  with  the  idea 
that  God  shall  then  specially  and  more  abundantly  reveal  His  Will,  that  it 
is  made  the  matter  of  praise  and  rejoicing.  The  saints  who  inherit  this 
Kingdom,  i.e.  are  rulers  in  it,  are  designated  as  Priests,  whose  office  can 
only  be  explained  by  referring  it  chiefly  to  an  official  position  (Prop.  156) 
in  which  they  make  known  the  Will  of  God.  The  removal  of  darkness, 
the  closing  of  the  mystery  of  God,  the  impartation  of  perfect  knowledge, 
the  bestowal  of  "  a  pure  language,"  etc.,  is  indicative  of  the  same,  and  is 
fully  implied  in  the  tabernacling  of  God  again  with  man,  etc.,  in  Kev., 
chs.  21  and  22. 

A  little  observation  can  extend  such  references,  as  e.g.  in  Ps.  138  :  4,  "  All  the  kings  of 
the  firth  shall  praise  Thee,  0  Lord,  when  they  hear  the  icords  of  Thy  mouth."  Now  down  to 
the  Sec.  Advent  this  is  not  fulfilled  (for  the  kings  of  the  earth  even  at  the  Advent  are 
arrayed  against  Christ),  but  when  "  the  kings"  associated  with  Christ  (Prop.  154)  shall 
reign  over  the  earth  then  when  Christ  gives  His  "  words"— the  Revelation  of  His  will, 
etc.,  "  all, "  without  exception  shall  praise  Him.  Numerous  Propositions  indicative  of 
the  reign  and  priesthood  of  Jesus  and  His  saints,  the  restoration  of  the  Jews,  the  nature 
of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  etc.,  all  evidence  that  in  "the  ages"  to  come,  God's  will,  as 
circumstances  require,  shall  be  expressed  and  gloriously  advanced. 

Obs.  3.  The  Revelation  respecting  the  Theocratic  ordering,  (viz.,  the 
manner  of  organization,  etc.)  originally  was  given  outside  of  Palestine  at 
Mt.  Sinai.  So  also  the  special  Revelation  concerning  the  restored  Theo- 
cratic arrangement  will  again  be  given  at  Mt.  Sinai  (See  Prop.  166). 

Christlieb  (Mod.  Doubt,  p.  133),  in  his  ch.  on  the  relation  between  Reason  and  Revela- 
tion, after  illustrating  the  aid  Revelation  gives  to  reason  by  the  telescope  assisting  the 
naked  eye  in  the  study  of  astronomy,  and  that  still  lacance  exist  which  involve  no  contra- 
diction/ then  adds  :  "  Revelation  and  nature  are  developing  toward  one  great  goal  at 
which  they  will  coalesce.  The  perfecting  of  the  one  is  that  of  the  other.  The  fixed 
tendency  of  Revelation  to  become  nature,  to  make  itself  more  and  more  a  citizen  of  earth 
in  order  to  make  the  earth  the  chosen  place  of  divine  Revelation,  this  tendency  is  one 
day  to  be  completely  realized ;  the  consummated  Kingdom  of  God  will  combine  both 
elements  ;  the  highest  degree  of  Revelation  and  the  highest  development  of  nature." 
This  necessarily  follows  from  this  instituted  Theocracy,  for  the  King  revealing  Himself 


Prop.  167.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  31 

openly,  Revelation  in  its  highest  form  is  manifested.  The  restitution  brings  with  it  that 
nearness  and  access  to  God,  which  was  forfeited  by  the  fall.  The  Baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  (see  Prop.  171)  imparts  to  each  king  and  priest  the  power  of  giving  knowledge 
received  by  special  influences.  Bickersteth  (Divine  Warning,  p.  316),  thinks,  that  the 
kings  and  priests  shall,  like  the  old  prophets,  present  at  times  li  oral  revelation." 
Although  this  idea  is  ridiculed  by  Dr.  Brown  and  others,  yet,  in  view  of  their  station, 
gifts,  etc.,  there  is  nothing  incredible  in  the  statement.  But  Dr.  Brown  (Christ's  Sec. 
Coming,  p.  112),  while  endeavoring  to  rebut  the  idea  of  a  new  Revelation  of  the  Divine 
"Will,  siiitable  for  the  age  to  come,  concedes  this  :  ' '  Who  can  fail  to  see  that  a  new 
dispensation  necessarily  implies  a  new  Bevelaiion  to  usher  it  in  ;  in  other  words  to  authorize 
and  organize  it."  Precisely  so  ;  and  hence  the  question  to  be  decided  is  whether  a  dis- 
pensation is  to  follow  this  one.  Our  entire  line  of  argument  conclusively  proves  that 
this  will  be  the  result.  Brown  in  the  same  work  largely  employs  as  an  argument  against 
us,  our  inability  to  explain  satisfactorily  or  decisively  certain  details  respecting  the  Mill. 
Age  (as  e.g.  if  the  righteous  Jews,  etc.,  are  translated,  or  whether  they  die,  and  if  so, 
when  resurrected,  etc.).  "We  inform  such  that  we  await  the  future  Revelation  to  embody 
the  details  and  believe  that  if  such  were  now  given  in  connection  with  the  outlines,  they 
would  meet  the  same  fate  precisely  at  the  hands  of  unbelief  and  captious  critics  as  the 
more  essential. 

Obs.  4.  This  feature  enables  us  to  meet  an  objection  urged  by  some 
against  our  view,  viz.,  that  Revelation  as  now  existing,  would  not  be  adapt- 
ed (as  e.g.  in  its  requirements)  to  such  an  age  and  kingdom  as  we  advocate. 
This  is  freely  admitted  ;  for  Revelation  as  now  given  only  brings  us  down  to 
the  restitution  of  things  under  Christ,  and  when  the  forfeited  blessings  are 
restored,  then,  of  course,  another  Revelation  of  the  will  of  God  pertaining 
to  the  order  of  that  age  is  to  be  anticipated.  Now  the  condition  thus  future 
is  only  expressed  in  the  most  general  terms  ;  now  the  Bible  appropriately 
begins  with  the  fall  and  ends  with  the  rescue,  without  giving  a  detailed 
account  of  "  the  world  to  come"  in  its  governmental,  civil,  and  religious 
aspect  ;  then  the  fulfilment  of  those  general  statements  will  require  specific 
orderings,  and  then  the  developments  of  that  age  will  demand,  to  carry  it 
out,  a  more  extended  Revelation  of  the  Divine  Purpose,  both  in  its  admin- 
istrations and  dispositions,  and  in  the  end  which  it  is  to  subserve.  The 
reason  why  such  details  are  not  now  given  is  not  merely  because  it  would 
be  premature  and  unnecessary,  but  evidently,  judging  from  the  sad  per- 
version of  that  already  given,  to  avoid  its  being  grossly  misapplied,  and 
even  caricatured  by  the  most  shabby  imitations. 

"We  sometimes  read  authors  who  assume,  so  far  as  the  early  Church  is  concerned,  as 
if  the  Montanists  alone  believed  in  a  future  new  Revelation.  The  Millenarianism  so 
prevalent  in  the  Primitive  Church  led  the  Fathers,  as  Papias,  Barnabas,  Justin,  etc.,  to 
Hold  to  additional  Revelation  only  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  while  Montanists  and  some  others 
allowed  antecedent  Revelation  :  and,  if  we  are  to  credit  history  as  given,  some  enthusiasts 
even  then  claimed  to  be  inspired  to  impart  Revelation. 


32  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  168, 


Proposition  168.  This  Kiixgdom   has   its  place   of  manifested 
royalty. 

If  the  Kingdom  is  such  a  Theocratic-Davidic  one  here  on  earth  ; 
if  it  claims  the  Throne  and  Kingdom  of  David  as  its  central  basis  ; 
and  if  this  Throne  and  Kingdom  is,  as  promised,  to  be  re-estab- 
lished ;  then,  if  the  reign  of  David' s  Son  is  described,  there  should 
be  undoubted  references  to  His  reigning  in  the  place,  and  exhibit- 
ing His  royalty  in  the  very  place  where  David's  throne  was  located, 
viz.,  in  Jerusalem. 

Ohs.  1.  This  has  already  heen  largely  met  in  showing  how  David's  Son 
inherits  the  throne,  the  Kingdom,  and  the  land  (see  Props.  49  and  122)  ; 
but  the  prophets  are  even  more  explicit  in  particularizing  the  place  of 
manifestation.  Leaving  the  New  Jerusalem  and  its  connection  with  the 
earthly  for  future  notice  (see  Prop.  109),  attention  is  now  only  called  to  that 
class  of  passages  which  predict  that  the  Christ  shall  reign  in  Jerusalem 
and  on  ML  Zion,  Thus,  e.g.  just  at  the  time  "  the  high  ones"  and  "  the 
kings  of  the  earth"  are  punished  (comp.  Rev.  19,  etc.),  and  "  gathered  in 
the  pit  and  shut  up  in  the  prison,"  then  also  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall 
reign  in  Mt.  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem,  and  before  His  ancients  gloriously," 
Isa.  24  :  23.  So  also  Jer.  3  :  17,  Joel  3  :  17,  Zech.  2  :  10-13,  etc.,  for, 
as  all  admit,  the  references  to  the  Christ  reigning  in  Mt.  Zion  and  in 
Jerusalem  are  numerous.  But  in  the  application  of  these  passages  we  are 
met,  at  the  start,  with  the  objection,  that  they  are  typical,  or  figurative, 
of  something  else,  either  of  the  Church,  visible  or  invisible,  or  of  the 
Gospel,  or  of  God's  reign  in  the  heart,  or  of  heaven.  Aside  from  the 
arguments  already  presented  which  amply  answer  this  objection,  there  is 
another  provided  by  the  Spirit,  and,  in  a  way  too,  that  certainly  should 
arrest  attention.  Briefly  stated,  it  is  this  :  the  very  same  Jerusalem  that 
was  overthrown,  and  made  desolate  and  oppressed,  is  the  one  to  which  this 
Jesus  comes  and  in  which  He  is  to  reign.  The  proof  is  decisive.  Take 
e.g.  Zech  8,  when  the  Lord  will  be  "jealous for  Zion1^  with  " great fury '," 
when  He  will  "  return  unto  Zion  anil  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem, 
and  Jerusalem  shall  he  called,  a  City  of  Truth :  and  the  Mountain  of  the 
Lord  of  Hosts,  the  Holy  Mountain."  That  the  earthly  Jerusalem  is 
denoted  follows,  not  only  from  the  affirmation  of  a  restoration  of  the  Jews 
to  it,  and  an  astonishing  multiplication  and  longevity  of  the  people  in  it 
(designated  as  "  marvellous,")  but  in  verse  13,  15,  22  this  is  designated  as 
the  identical  Jerusalem  once  deprived  of  its  inhabitants  and  suffering  ill,  so 
that  God  says:  "  as  I  thought  to  punish  you  when  your  fathers  provoked 
^ne  to  wrath,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and,  L  repented  not:  so  again  have  I 
thought  in  these  days  (i.e.  when  He  returns  and  dwells  in  Jerusalem)  to  do 
well  unto  Jerusalem,"  etc.     Or,  let  this  same  prophet  speak  in  the  14th. 


Prop.  168.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  33 

ch.,  and  the  same  Jerusalem  overthrown  is  the  one  to  which  the  Lord  and 
the  saints  will  come  ;  in  which,  after  it  is  restored  and  exalted,  the  Lord 
is  King,  for  the  nations  come  to  it  to  worship  Him,  and  tender  their  alle- 
giance. The  Lord  "  shall  choose  Jerusalem  again.'"  The  same  contrast  is 
preserved  in  Micah  3  and  4.  For  the  identical  Zion  that  was  "  ploughed 
as  a  field"  and  the  same  Jerusalem  that  "  became  heaps,"  is  to  be  re-estab- 
lished and  exalted,  and  "  the  Lord  shall  reign  in  Mt.  Zion  from  henceforth, 
even  forever.'"  Isaiah  frequently  represents  this,  as  e.g.  in  chs.  1  :  1-26, 
4  :  3,  4  ;  60  :  14,  15  ;  62  :  1-4  ;  65  :  19,  etc.,  and  in  view  of  such  plain 
statements  that  the  place  from  whence  God.  withdrew,  and  which  met 
with  sore,  heavy,  prolonged  disasters  should  be  restored  and  elevated  into 
the  very  position  assigned  to  it  by  a  solemnly  given  covenant,  it  does 
appear  a  matter  of  amazement  that  learned  men  should  close  their  eyes  to 
this  constant  reiteration  and  its  meaning.  The  "  babes"  (so  esteemed  by 
many)  of  the  early  Church  verify  Matt.  11  :  25  and  21  :  16,  for  they 
received  with  faith  the  plain  covenant  promises,  and  did  not  believe  what 
"wise  men  now  so  confidently  assert,  that  the  prophets  and  ancient  worthies 
grossly  misapprehended  the  predictions  of  God  and  walked  in  darkness 
respecting  Messiah's  inheritance  and  Kingdom.  No!  they  placed  "  the 
thrones  of  the  house  of  David"  (Ps.  122  :  5,  Isa.  2  :  3,  etc.)  where  God 
has  ordained  them,  viz.  in  Jerusalem;  and  they  trusted  that  "  the  Lord 
doth  build  up  Jerusalem,"  Ps.  147  :  2,  and  that  when  He  "redeems  Jeru- 
salem," causing  the  "  waste  places  of  Jerusalem"  to  "  break  forth  into 
joy,"  it  is  (Isa.  52  :  9,  10)  because  "  the  Lord  hath  made  bare  His  Italy  arm 
in  the  eyes  of  all  nations,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salva- 
tion of  our  God."  God's  faithfulness  and  honor  is  pledged  in  this  matter  ; 
and,  therefore,  we  also  hope  in  Him  to  see  "  Jerusalem  comforted"  in  the 
abundance  of  God's  people  in  her,  and  in  the  worship,  praise,  and  glory 
that  shall  yet  be  witnessed  there. 

It  would,  indeed,  be  a  mere  frittering  away  of  God's  promises  to  limit  them  to  the 
past.  It  will  yet  come  to  pass  as  God  has  sworn  Num.  14  :  21,  "  But  as  truly  as  1  live, 
all  the  earth"  (Clarke  :  all  the  land,  i.e.  land  of  Canaan)  "shall  be  filed  with  the.  glory  of  the 
Lord."  What  Sir  Maundeville  says  in  the  prologue  to  his  Travels,  will  yet  be  acknowl- 
edged in  a  higher  and  nobler  sense  :  "  The  Holy  Land,  which  men  call  the  land  of 
promise  or  behest,  passing  all  other  lands,  is  the  most  worthy  land,  most  excellent,  and 
lady,  and  sovereign  of  all  other  lands,"  "  the  heart  and  the  middle  of  the  world,"  etc. 
The  student  is  reminded  of  the  central  position  of  Palestine.  Mohammed,  Pope  Urban, 
and  many  others,  have  asserted,  in  view  of  its  geographical  position,  that  Jerusalem 
was  "  placed  in  the  very  centre  of  the  world."  This  is  pushing  the  matter  to  an 
extreme,  although  all  admit  the  admirable  central  location  of  the  land,  easily  accessible 
from  all  sides,  etc.,  placing  it  as  Kurtz  (Sac.  His.,  p.  65),  remarks,  "  in  the  centre  of  the 
activity  of  the  world."  This  same  writer  (His.  Old  Gov.,  vol.  1,  p.  147),  says  :  "  Viewed 
geographically,  politically,  or  commercially,  Palestine  is  the  '  umbillicus  terrarum  '  of  the 
ancient  world,"  etc.  (and  on  p.  148,  he  refers  to  Ezek.  5  :5—  comp.  Lam.  2  :  15 — as 
an  allusion  to  the  central  situation  of  the  land  of  promise,  and  defends  it  against  Calvin 
and  Havernick  who  regarded  it  as  a  Rabbinical  fancy.  Theodoret  and  others,  favor 
Kurtz's  position.  However  this  may  be  in  reference  to  particular  passages,  it  certainly  is 
plain  to  every  reader  that  the  situation  of  the  land  is  such  as  to  make  it,  geographical^, 
the  most  suitable  for  the  Divine  Purpose  relating  to  the  future  (comp.  Props.  1G9,  122, 
etc.).  Comp.  for  central  position  of  Palestine,  Stanley's  Sinai  and  Palestine,  p.  116  (he 
also  refers  to  the  old  mediaeval  maps),  Reland's  Palestine,  ch.  10,  p.  52  (who  quotes 
Jerome,  Theodoret,  and  Kimchi),  Warner's  In  the  Levant  (who  refers  to  an  actual  centre 
as  exhibited  by  superstition  in  the  Greek  and  Armenian  chapels  at  Jerusalem,  an  imita- 
tion perhaps  of  the  centre  in  the  Kaaba  at  Mecca),  and  Bish.  Arnulf's  Travels  (about  a.d. 
700),  who  p.  3,  speaks  of  Jerusalem  being  "  the  centre  of  the  earth,"  the  geographical 
idea  being,  through  a  popular  notion,  founded  on  Ps.  74  :  12.  So  Lange's  Com.  Gen., 
Herzog's  Ency.,  art.  Palestine,  Kitto,  Thompson,  Coleman,  etc. 


34  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  168. 

Obs.  2.  This  Kingdom  follows  an  overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  and  is  identi- 
fied with  its  restoration.  By  merely  observing  the  former,  multitudes  have 
made  a  mistake,  constituting  the  Church  the  Kingdom  and  the  Church  a 
Jerusalem.  But  such  forget  what  the  prophets  unitedly  testify,  that  the 
Messiah's  Kingdom  cannot  possibly  exist  here  on  earth  while  the  city  the 
special  inheritance  of  David's  Son,  lies  desolate.  The  covenant  and  Mil- 
lennial descriptions  positively  forbid  it,  and  demand  its  restoration  as  the  seat 
of  the  Theocratic -Davidic  government.  The  Kingdom  then  and  a  con- 
temporaneous desolation  of  Jerusalem,  is  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case, 
impracticable.  Yet,  as  Olshausen  and  numerous  writers  have  remarked, 
in  Matt.  24,  etc.,  the  Kingdom  follows  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and 
fixing  the  attention  only  on  the  destruction  of  the  city  by  the  Romans  in 
the  first  cent.,  great  perplexity  is  felt  in  showing  how  this  was  accom- 
plished unless  the  Church  is  admitted  to  be  the  promised  Messiah's  King- 
dom. To-day  it  is  an  exegetical  question  of  importance  (Van  Oosterzee, 
Theol.  N.  T.,  p.  121,  Schmid,  Bib.  Theol.  N.  T.,  p.  2G5,  etc.)  why  Christ 
associates  the  last  times,  the  ending  of  the  age  or  dispensation  with  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  If  we  allow  the  prophecies  to  throw  light  on 
the  subject  the  question  is  easily  answered.  1.  The  predictions  of  Christ 
directly  teach  a  long  continued  destruction  and  desolation  of  Jerusalem, 
viz.,  that  it  shall  be  trodden  down  during  the  times  of  the  Gentiles.  This 
is  still  in  the  course  of  fulfilment.  2.  When  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  end 
it  shall  be  restored.  3.  But  during  this  allotted,  appointed  period  the  city 
is  in  a  sadly  reduced  condition,  in  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  4.  Now,  if  we 
turn  to  other  predictions  it  is  declared  that  Jerusalem  just  previous  to  the 
Sec.  Advent  of  Christ — also  embraced  by  Matt.  Mark  and  Luke — shall 
experience  in  a  remarkable  manner  the  animosity  (after  a  partial  return  of 
Jews  to  the  city,  probably  under  the  auspices  of  some  nation,  or  from  love 
to  it,  or  desire  to  restore  and  elevate  it)  of  Gentile  nations.  5.  This  last 
adverse  is  part  of  the  imposed  tribulation;  and  it  is  only  when  this  is 
accomplished  that  the  open  Advent  occurs,  and  the  Kingdom  is  estab- 
lished. G.  This  is  satisfactorily  presented  in  Zech.  14,  taken  in  connec- 
tion with  Christ's  prophecy.  For,  after  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  have 
nearly  run  their  course,  just  before  the  end  of  it,  the  gathering  of  the 
nations  against  Jerusalem,  described  by  the  prophet  takes  place — an  event 
\ery  different  from  that  under  the  Romans,  as,  the  subsequent  occurrences 
show.  Just  when  the  city  is  at  the  last  extremity,  God  interferes,  the 
Saviour  comes  to  this  very  city,  the  saints  come  with  Him,  His  Kingship 
is  manifested  over  the  earth,  Jerusalem  is  the  metropolis  of  His  power,  etc. 
6.  It  is  true  then,  that  the  Personal  Advent  is  connected  with  the  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem,  but  not  with  that  under  the  Romans,  or  other  Gentile 
powers  until  we  come  to  the  period  when  it  shall,  still  under  Gentile 
domination  as  the  closing  scene  proves,  come  to  a  final  end.  Then,  as  our 
whole  argument  involves,  He  comes  as  the  prophets  describe. 

The  extremes  of  various  parties  are  easily  avoided  by  simply  allowing  a  comparison 
of  predictions  to  give  us  the  order  of  fulfilment.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  those  (as  e.g. 
Jowett,  Com.  1  Thess.)  who  make  the  prophecies  a  failure  because  not  realized  at  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  overlook  the  association  of  the  same  with  "  the  times 
of  the  Gentiles."  On  the  other  hand,  those  who,  like  the  Perfectionists  (Art.  28  of  their 
Confessions,  quoted  in  Oberlin  Quart,  lieview,  May,  1847),  declare,  "  We  believe  that  at  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  end  of  the  Jewish  dispensation,  Christ  came  to  believers  the 
second  time  according  to  promise,"  spiritualize  and  pervert  the  Sec.  Advent  to  suit  their 
notion  of  chronological  connection.    Jerusalem,  so  long  oppressed,  will  yet  drink  the  dregs 


Prop.  168.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  35 

of  the  bitter  cup,  and  then  she  will  arise  in  glory  at  the  Coming  of  her  Redeemer  and 
King.  Terribly  punished  for  rejecting  the  Messiah,  that  same  Messiah  will  comfort  and 
raise  her  up  to  a  state  of  splendor  and  majesty  most  magnificent.  Clarke  (Com.,  Zech.  14) 
says:  "  After  this  final  restoration  of  Jerusalem,  it  shall  never  more  be  destroyed  ;  but  as 
it  was  the  first  city  of  the  living  God  upon  earth,  so  it  shall  be  the  last  ;  it  shall  be  safely 
inhabited.  It  shall  see  war  no  more."  Its  Theocratic  relationship  will,  of  necessity,  exalt 
it  above  every  other  city  in  the  world,  and  ever  preserve  it  from  evil.  What  thoughts 
must  have  filled  the  mind  of  this  King  when,  with  His  knowledge  of  the  future,  He 
walked  the  streets  of  the  city  destined  to  such  long-continued  downtreading  and  then  to 
such  honor  and  glory. 

Obs.  3.  Perhaps  the  reason  why  Jerusalem  itself  fell  into  the  hands  of 
unbelievers,  and  remained  but  a  brief  period  in  the  power  of  professed 
Christians  at  the  time  of  the  Crusades,  was  to  prevent  the  laudatory  and 
extravagant  expressions  respecting  the  supposed  set  up  Kingdom  of  God, 
and  to  avoid  the  false  inferences  respecting  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy, 
arising  from  a  possession  of  the  city.  Let  the  reader  recall  the  eulogies 
passed  by  flatterers  on  the  Emperors  and  the  Empress  Helena  that  adorned 
the  city,  and  that  the  city  itself  was  called  "  the  New  Jerusalem."  Let  him 
consider  the  expectations  excited  in  Popes  and  others  at  its  possession,  the 
feeling  evidenced  to  some  extent  in  Tasso's  Jerusalem  Delivered,  and  the 
believer  in  Divine  Providence  will  feel  that  the  failure  of  Christian  nations, 
after  fearful  struggle,  to  secure  Jerusalem,  lies  deeper  than  mere  history 
records  ;  in  brief,  not  only  a  desire  to  vindicate  and  fulfil  prophecy,  but 
even  to  remove  the  impediments  to  an  understanding  of  the  Word  that 
would  inevitably  have  arisen  if  Jerusalem  would  have  become  a  noted 
Christian  city,  prevailed  in  this  marshalling  of  hostile  races  around  the 
ancient  city  of  God. 

But  this  very  denial  of  possession  causes  men  to  spiritualize  the  more,  looking  for  no 
special  external  prosperity.  Thus  e.g.  Ralston  (On  the  Apoc.,  p.  191),  in  his  arbitrary 
arrangement  of  the  Millennium  (for  example,  introducing  into  it  four  trumpets,  the  two 
witnesses,  etc.),  apologizes  for  bringing  into  it  his  witnesses  i7i  sackcloth,  making  it  indic- 
ative of  humility,  and  then  adds  :  "  The  Millennial  day  will  be  distinguished  for  gra- 
cious gifts,  for  devotedness,  for  humility  and  every  concomitant  virtue  ;  but  they  who 
anticipate  worldly  magnificence  will  likely  be  mistaken.  The  Pagan  tale  of  a  golden 
age  and  the  Jewish  tradition  of  a  temporal  Messiah  were  never  realized.  And  it  is  truly 
painful  to  hear  the  idle  fancies  of  the  present  generation,  in  associating  temporal  splendor 
with  the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  future  time."  This  writer  is  only  pained  because  his 
Mill,  theory  is  rejected  by  others,  who  feel  that  the  predicted  splendor  of  the  Theocracy, 
of  the  King  and  ruleis,  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  of  a  world- 
dominion,  etc.,  is  utterly  opposed  to  a  sackcloth  and  martyr  Millennium. 

Obs.  4.  Indeed,  it  would  be  difficult  to  identify  this  earthly  Jerusalem 
more  decisively  than  God  has  done.  In  Ezek.  16,  Jerusalem  is  personified 
under  the  figure  of  a  woman,  taken  when  a  child,  and  finally  married,  i.e. 
most  intimately  related  to  God.  As  if  to  meet  the  very  mistake  now  so 
current,  even  among  theologians,  of  changing  this  into  the  Church,  etc., 
it  is  said  that  her  habitation  is  "  the  land  of  Canaan,1"1  that  her  "father 
was  an  Amorite"  and  her  "  mother  a  HUtite"  (a  parentage  that  cannot  be 
given  to  the  Church),  and  then  after  describing  her  adulteries,  her  pro- 
longed punishments,  God  still  professes  that  He  will  remember  "  His 
Covenant  with  thee  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  and  I  will  establish  unto  thee 
an  everlasting  covenant. ."  That  is,  the  same  Jerusalem  joined  to  God  in  a 
Theocratic  relationship,  severely  punished  for  her  sins,  shall  again  be 
restored  to  this  relationship  under  the  surety  afforded  by  the  covenant. 


36  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  168. 

When  the  covenant  is,  after  long  delay,  finally  realized,  Isa.  26  :  1,  "  in 
that  day  shall  this  song  be  sung  in  the  land  of  Judah ;  We  have  a  strong 
city/'  etc.  It  shall  become  "  the  city  of  righteousness,  the  faithful  city/' 
Isa.  1  :  26,  "  A  city  of  truth  and  the  Mountain  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the 
Holy  Mountain."  This  last  expression,  the  city,  owing  to  its  being  the 
capital,  etc.,  called  "  the  mountain"  opens  a  field  of  references  to  the 
student  corroborating  our  view  of  "  the  city  of  habitation''''  (Ps.  107)  into 
which  go  "  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,"  yea  those  "  He  hath  redeemed 
from  the  hand  of  the  enemy,"  when  they  are  "  gathered  from  the  east  and 
from  the  west,  from  the  north  and  from  the  south,"  being  "  brought  out 
of  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death."  The  removal  of  the  wicked  out  of 
the  land  that  "  wicked  doers  may  be  cut  off  from,  the  city  of  the  Lord,"  Ps. 
101  :  8  (as  delineated  in  Ps.  48  :  compared  with  other  Scripture,  when 
"  kings  are  assembled"  against  "  the  city  of  the  greed  King"  but  meet 
with  a  terrible  overthrow),  also  confirms  our  doctrine.  If  we  take  any  other 
view,  then  we  make  the  prayers  (Isa.  62  :  6,  7)  of  the  ancient  saints  for,  the 
longings  and  hopes  inspired  by  the  promises  relating  to,  Jerusalem  merely 
great  blunders  ;  and  God,  Himself,  the  Truth,  becomes  chargeable  with 
misleading  the  most  holy  of  desires,  on  the  ground  that  the  language,  as 
all  admit,  in  its  natural,  grammatical  sense  plainly  leads  to  the  hope  of 
a  literal  restoration  of  "  the  beloved  city.'"  If  the  prevailing  view  is  the 
correct  one,  then  consistency  requires,  that  Grigen,  with  inspired  creden- 
tials, ought  immediately  to  have  followed  the  giving  of  the  covenants,  so 
that  man  might  have  apprehended  them. 

It  is  noticeable  that  even  writers  who  advocate  a  spiritual  Millennium,  seeing  the 
prominence  given  to  this  point  in  the  Scriptures,  conclude  that  at  some  future  time 
Christianity  will  obtain  the  sway  in  Palestine,  and  the  holy  land  will  play  an  important 
part  in  the  world's  history.  The  early  Church  view  on  this  subject  has  been  repeatedly 
given,  and  may  be  reproduced  in  John  Bunyan's  faith  (Conf.  of  Faith  presented  to 
Charles  II.,  a.d.  1660,  sec  Crosby's  His.  of  Baptists)  that  "  at  or  after  His  Coming  the  second 
time,  He  will  not  only  raise  the  dead,  and  judge  and  restore  the  world,  but  will  also  take 
to  Himself  His  Kingdom,  and  will,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  reign  on  the  throne  of  His 
father  David,  on  Mount  Zimi,  in  Jerusalem,  forever."  Of  course  Millenarians,  ancient  and 
modern,  indorse  this  view  as  essential  to  the  complete  fulfilment  of  covenant  promise. 
We  even  find  Dr.  Chalmers  (Posth.  Works,  vol.  3,  p.  69,  On  Ps.  68  :  18,  35)  saying  :  "  But 
God  has  in  reserve  for  His  people  still  another  restoration.  He  will  bring  them  again, 
as  of  old,  from  Bashan  and  the  Red  Sea  to  their  own  land.  His  people  will  '  see  Him 
whom  they  have  pierced,'  perhaps  when  His  feet  stand  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and 
Jerusalem  will  again  become  the  great  central  sanctuary,  by  becoming  the  metropolis  of  the  Chris- 
tian  world."  Many  old  works  clearly  present  this  faith.  Thus  e.g.  Eichter's  ErhUirte 
Haus  Bibel,  torn.  6,  p.  1134,  after  dwelling  on  the  first  res.  and  the  reign  of  the  saints  on 
earth,  says  :  "Jerusalem  shall  again  be  the  central  city  of  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  during 
the  1000  years,  as  it  is  so  often  promised  in  the  Old  Test."  The  faith  of  the  early 
Church,  as  given  by  Justin  and  others  (quoted  by  us  under  preceding  Props.)  on  this 
point,  has  been  entertained  by  many  noble  believers. 

Obs.  5.  The  most  bitter  of  our  opponents,  who  on  this  very  ground  also 
reject  a  large  portion  of  the  Scriptures,  frankly  admit  the  teaching  of  holy 
men  in  this  respect.  Thus,  e.g.  Westm.  Review,  Oct.  1861,  art.  5, 
declares  that  the  Apoc.  asserts  that  "  the  great  battle  which  is  to  deter- 
mine whether  the  monarchy  of  the  world  shall  be  Christ's  or  Antichrist's 
is  fought  within  the  circle  of  his  (John's)  native  hills,  and  the  conquering 
King,  during  His  Mill,  reign,  has  the  metropolis  of  the  old  Hebrew  princes, 
endeared  by  a  thousand  glorious  memories,  for  His  imperial  residence." 
The   same  is   repeated   by  numerous  writers,  evincing  how  the  language 


Prop.  168.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  37 

itself  arrests  unbelievers,  and,  in  consequence,  leaving  them  inexcusable 
in  rejecting  the  truth  as  given.  The  same  objections  urged  against  the 
incarnation  of  Christ,  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus,  are  also  presented 
against  this  doctrine,  not  one  of  them  daring  to  look  at  the  foundation  of 
all  this  in  the  covenant,  and,  at  the  general  agreement  of  centuries  of 
Revelation  on  the  subject. 

Now,  aside  from  the  close  and  most  intimate  connection  of  the  New  Jerusalem  with 
the  Old  (comp.  Prop.  169),  the  student  will  see  abundant  reason  why  Jerusalem  (the 
earthly)  should  thus  again  be  elevated  (as  Justin  Martyr  said,  "  rebuilt,  adorned,  and 
enlarged,  as  the  prophets  Ezekiel,  Isaiah,  and  others  do  unanimously  attest' ')  as  the  cen- 
tral, metropolitan  city.  Its  relationship  to  the  Theocracy,  which  must  have  some  place  of 
royal  manifestation  ;  its  elective  privilege,  being  divinely  chosen  and  desired  as  the  place 
of  royal  abode  ;  its  immediate  and  abiding  connection  with  the  elect  nation  and  its  pre- 
dicted supremacy— all  show  why  it  is  thus  exalted.  If  God  again  (as  He  has  promised) 
condescends  to  act  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly  Ruler  (which  He  will  do  in  the  Person 
of  His  Son  Jesus,  as  predicted),  He  most  certainly  will  select  Jerusalem,  where  He  once 
thus  ruled,  and  show  that  a  Theocracy,  such  as  He  inaugurated  there,  is  no  failure.  The 
predictions,  therefore,  on  the  subject  are  not  only  plain,  but  the  most  reasonable  for  us 
to  receive.  Rome  has  proudly  in  the  past  arrogated  to  itself  the  title  of  "  The  Capital 
of  the  World"  (even  depicted  on  coins,  e.g.  Gibbon's  Decl.  and  Fall,  vol.  6,  p.  437), 
which  became  an  intoxicating  dream  of  scheming  Popes,  but  this  title,  according  to 
God's  Word,  alone  belongs  to  the  despised  and  down-trodden  city  of  Jerusalem,  because 
it  is  the  Messiah's  special  inheritance.  As  God  disciplines  and  chastens  man  before  He 
elevates  him  to  kingship,  as  the  Messiah  Himself  passed  through  humiliation  and  suffer- 
ing before  His  exaltation,  so  also  the  city  destined  to  such  high  distinction  and  grandeur 
passes  through  its  allotted  period  of  depression  and  tribulation. 

Obs.  6.  The  student  is  reminded  that  if  the  Ch.  Church  is  to  be  compre- 
hended under  Mt.  Zion,  it  is  singular  that  Mt.  Moriah  where  the  temple 
stood,  and  the  highest  religious  worship  was  exhibited,  was  not  substituted, 
by  the  prophets,  for  Mt.  Zion.  Why  should  Zion  have  this  peculiar  and 
distinctive  preference  over  Moriah?  The  answer  is  found  in  the  cove- 
nanted relation  of  Zion,  as  the  place  where  the  Messiah,  David's  Son  should 
reign.  If  these  things  are  merely  typical,  as  our  opponents  allege,  why 
this  careful  avoidance  of  Moriah?  The  reply  is,  that  these  promises  are 
not  typical  but  blessed  realities,  to  be  verified  at  the  Second  Advent.  God, 
foreseeing  the  lack  of  faith  induced  by  the  prevailing  spiritualistic  typical 
application,  leaves  it  utterly  inexcusable  by  the  uniform  utterances  on  the 
subject,  combined  with  circumstances  (as  we  have  shown)  which  cannot 
possibly  be  applied  to  the  present  Church.  Simple  faith  in  God's  promises 
should  prevent  the  substitutions  which  are  to-day  offered  in  place  of  Alt. 
Zion  and  Jerusalem. 

"We  give  a  few  illustrations.  Brown  (Ch.  Sec.  Com.,  p.  370),  in  reply  to  Dr.  Bonar, 
says  :  "Ah  !  brother,  never  more  shall  Jerusalem  be  '  the  city  of  the  great  King,'  the 
place  of  Jehovah's  special  presence  and  power,  grace  and  glory,  in  connection  with  cere- 
monial worship.  '  In  Salem  was  his  tabernacle  and  his  dwelling  place  in  Zion ' 
(Ps.  76  : 1).  But  by  the  work  of  Christ  these  localities  are  stripped  forever  of  their  cere- 
monial sacredness.  '  Salem  '  and  '  Zion  '  are  now  in  every  place  where  '  the  Father  is 
worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth.'  "  Well  may  we  ask  then,  why  predict  their  restoration 
in  connection  with  Messiah's  glorious  reign  and  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation,  when 
"  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  fulfilled?"  No  !  Dr.  Bonar' s  position  is  founded  on  an 
oath-bound  covenant,  and  confirmed  by  the  plainest  of  predictions.  Moreover,  this  very 
worshipj^ing  of  the  Father  "  in  spirit  and  in  truth"  everywhere,  which  Brown  considers 
so  antagonistic  to  the  restoration  of  these  places,  is  one  of  the  grand  characteristics  of  the 
Mill,  age  and  the  Messiah's  reign  on  David's  throne,  for  all  nations  shall  yield  obedi- 
ence, and  God's  worship  be  tendered  everywhere,  etc.  Again  :  the  Mormons  hold  (Jos. 
Smith  in  his  History  of  the  Latter-Bay  Saints,  Rupp's  Or'vj.  His.  of  Belig.  Denom.,  p.  410) 


38  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.   168. 

"  that  Zion  will  be  built  upon  this  continent" — a  woik  in  which  they  are  now  engaged  at 
Salt  Lake  City  ;  which,  foolish  as  it  may  sound,  is  on  a  par  with  Dr.  Berg  and  others, 
making  the  Fifth  Universal  Monarchy,  of  Daniel,  to  find  its  centre  in  the  United  States. 
Fanatics,  in  order  to  exalt  their  pretentions  to  authority  and  reverence,  have  at  different 
times  presented  other  places — where  they  happened  to  meet  success — than  the  ones 
designated  in  Scripture,  as  Jerusalem  or  Mt.  Zion.  Some  churches  lay  special  claim  to 
these  titles,  delighting  to  designate  themselves  as  "Jerusalem"  or  "Zion,"  esteeming 
themselves  thus  particularly  favored.  This  sad,  sad  perversion  of  covenant  and  predic- 
tion extensively  prevails,  and  the  wildest  extravagances  of  scriptural  interpretation 
springs  from  it.  Even  persons  who  have  more  or  less  sympathy  with  Chiliasm,  express- 
ing decided  Pre-Mill.  views,  have  so  little  studied  the  requirements  of  the  Davidic  oath- 
confirmed  covenant,  and  of  Christ's  promised  inheritance,  that  they  allow  mere  fancy  to 
be  the  interpreter.  Thus  e.g.  Talmage,  in  a  Sermon  on  Luke  9  :  55  (preached  Jan.  25th, 
1880,  and  contained  in  The  Ch.  Herald),  places  "  the  regeneration  of  the  race  on  this  (the 
American)  continent,"  saying  :  "  If  Christ  comes  to  reign  on  earth  personally,  as  millions 
of  good  people  anticipate,  I  think  He  will  set  up  His  throne  somewhere  between  the 
Alleghanies  and  the  Eocky  Mountains  ;  and  I  think  He  will  walk  the  streets  of  our  great 
American  cities.  Would  that  the  heavens  might  open  to-day,  and  that  our  Lord  would 
descend  to  take  possession  of  this  continent.  How  we  would  rush  out  of  our  churches 
to  greet  Him,  and  by  clanging  bells  and  thundering  cannonade,  we  would  announce  His 
arrival,"  etc.  No  covenant  or  prediction  sustains  such  utterances.  While  Talmage  and 
a  few  others  might  be  disposed  to  thus  greet  the  Messiah,  the  multitude  would  appre- 
hend His  coming  with  fear.  Indeed,  the  vast  majority  of  church-members,  having  vastly 
different  views  of  a  Messiah's  Coming,  and  being  influenced  by  the  Whitbyan  dream  of 
conquest,  peace,  and  safety,  would  reject  such  a  Coming  Messiah.  Alas  !  the  Church's 
position  as  predicted  (see  Prop.  177,  etc.)  is  very  different  from  the  portraiture  thus  de- 
lineated. When  our  opponents  can  make  Zion  or  Jerusalem  to  mean  the  Church  in  gen- 
eral, or  an  individual  congregation,  or  a  denomination,  or  religion,  or  the  Gospel,  or  the 
third  heaven  at  pleasure— when  they  can  be  made  synonymous  with  American  Kepubli- 
canism  (Baldwin's  Armageddon,  p.  33),  etc.,  they  are,  of  course,  unprepared  to  accept  of 
the  meaning  contained  in  the  plain  grammatical  sense. 

Ohs.  7.  How  simple,  child-like,  but  grand  was  the  faith  of  the  early 
persecuted  Church  in  these  promises  of  inheriting  the  earth  !  They 
believed  God  because  He  plainly  promised,  and  with  the  hope  inspired  by 
such  promises,  laid  down  their  lives  for  Jesus'  sake.  Thus,  to  illustrate 
the  faith  of  the  early  martyrs,  and  to  show  how  Scripturally  it  was 
founded,  we  quote  Irenaeus  (the  disciple  of  Polycarp,  the  pupil  of  St. 
John,  and  martyred  about  a.d.  203)  :  "  Thus,  therefore,  as  God  prom- 
ised to  Abraham  the  inheritance  of  the  earth,  and  he  received  it  not  dur- 
ing the  whole  time  he  lived,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  receive  it,  to- 
gether with  his  seed,  that  is,  with  such  of  them  as  fear  God  and  believe  in 
Him,  in-the  resurrection  of  the  just.  .  .  .  They  will,  undoubtedly,  receive 
it  at  the  res.  of  the  just  :  for  true  and  unchangeable  is  God  ;  wherefore  He 
also  said,  '  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth.'  " 
Surely,  martyr  faith  thus  expressed,  ought  at  least,  to  secure  the  respect 
of  believers.     (Comp.  Prop.  142.) 

Greg  (The  Creed  of  Christendom)  objects  to  the  manner  in  which  God  is  represented 
as  revealing  Himself,  in  appointing  a  special  place  where  He  might  be  enthroned,  accessi- 
ble, etc.  He  ridicules  it  as  incompatible  with  the  declaration  "  the  heaven  of  heavens 
cannot  contain  Him,"  etc.  But  such  fault-finding  results  from  a  total  misapprehension 
of  the  nature  of  a  Theocracy — as  scripturally  explained  by  us — which  must,  according  to 
its  fundamental  idea  (if  God  really  rules  as  an  earthly  ruler  over  the  Jewish  nation), 
make  the  King  personally  accessible  ;  and,  therefore,  to  facilitate  and  honor  His  mani- 
fested Kingship,  appropriate  a  place  for  that  presence.  The  land  thus  favored  becomes 
a  "  sanctuary"  (so  called,  Ex.  15  :  17,  comp.  with  Ps.  78  :  54)  being  cleansed  and  made 
holy. 


PH0P.  169.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  39 


Proposition  169.   This  Theocratic  Kingdom  embraces  the  mar- 
riage of  Christ  to  the  New  Jerusalem. 

This  is  so  evident  from  reasons  given  in  preceding  Propositions, 
snch  as  the  identity  of  the  new  heaven  and  new  earth  of  Isaiah, 
Peter  and  John,  the  marriage  of  Christ  with  the  city  being  an- 
nounced just  previous  to  Millennial  age,  the  incorporation  of  pre- 
cisely the  same  language  and  ideas  in  describing  the  New  Jerusa- 
lem state  that  is  found  in  Millennial  predictions,  etc.,  that  we  need 
not  repeat  the  arguments  proving  the  marriage  to  be  Pre-Millennial. 
Our  object  under  this  heading  is  merely  to  show  who  the  Bride  is, 
and  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  the  marriage  relation. 

The  reader  is  cautioned  that  the  explanation  that  we  give  is  not  essential  to  our  argu- 
ment. It  is  presented  merely  as  a  matter  of  interest  to  believers,  and  to  induce  investi- 
gation and  consideration.  Many  Millenarians  (Lord,  Fausset,  etc.)  regard  the  city  as 
figurative  or  symbolic,  or  both,  as  well  as  Anti-Millenarians,  and  so  far  as  the  Pre- 
Millennial  position  of  it  is  concerned,  or  its  connection  with  the  Messiah's  Kingdom,  it 
matters  little  what  view  is  entertained  respecting  the  city.  Yet  even  here  it  is  better  to 
follow  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  and  endeavor,  if  possible,  to  ascertain  the  real  meaning. 
This  we  endeavor  to  do,  and  the  reader  will  find  that  we  are  again  forced  to  receive 
the  Primitive  Church  view  on  the  subject.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  repeat  that  the 
early  Fathers  all  believed  that  those  who  had  part  in  the  first  resurrection  would  enjoy 
the  New  Jerusalem  in  Messiah's  Kingdom,  as  e.g.  Tertullian  has  it,  "  in  a  city  of  divine 
workmanship,  viz.,  Jerusalem  brought  down  from  heaven,"  which  he  tells  us  "  John 
saw,"  etc. 

Obs.  1.  The  Bride  is  the  city  New  Jerusalem,  for  a  city  is  in  prophetical 
language,  (as  well  as  in  that  of  other  writers),  personified  by  a  woman  or 
virgin.  Eminent  and  pious  writers  entertain  different  views  respecting 
the  city.  One  party  makes  it  a  figurative  or  symbolical  representation  of 
the  Church,  but  still  (as  Barnes's  Com.)  speak  of  it  as  " a  residence,'''' 
"habitation''1  ox  "  abode"  which  contains  "  its  inhabitants."  Another, 
(as  Lord,  Expos,  of  the  Apoc.)  rigidly  confines  it  to  a  symbolical  meaning, 
indicative  of  the  risen  and  glorified'saints.  One  view  is  that  (as  Dwight, 
Theology)  it  is  a  magnificent  emblem  of  the  future  state — including  resi- 
dence— of  the  redeemed,  differing  very  little  from  the  first  one  stated. 
Another  is  (as  Grit.  Eng.  N.  Test)  that" which  makes  it  a  figurative  repre- 
sentation of  this  Church,  and  also  includes  the  literal,  i.e.  a  literal  city  or 
habitation.1  One  opinion  is  (as  Kurtz,  Sac.  His.)  that  it  denotes  a 
restored  Eden  or  Paradise,"1  God  again  dwelling  with  man.  Another  is, 
that  (as  Prop.  170,  Obs.  2  footnote)  it  means  the  third  heaven  or  a  scene  or 
place  in  heaven,  being  "eternal  in  the  heavens"  (thus  ignoring  the  com- 
ing down,  etc.)  Whitby  (Quest,  in  Eschat.  by  Seiss,  p.  4?)  makes  it  "  the 
Jewish  Church  and  nation").  One  party  (as  Swedenborgians)  make  it 
symbolical  of  a  renewed  state  of  the  Church  as  represented,  e.g.  by  them- 
selves, etc.     Another  (as  Eraser,  Key  to  Proph.)  applies  to  it  the  mean- 


40  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  169. 

ing  of  its  adumbrating,  "  the  national  polity  of  the  Jews  during  the  Mil- 
lennium." And  still  another  (as  early  Church,  etc.)  hold  that  it  represents 
a  literal  city.  Slight  modifications  (Eichhorn,  etc.)  of  these  exist,  but  do 
not  vary  to  any  extent. '  Two  extremes  are  noticeable  in  the  interpretation  of 
this  New  Jerusalem  ;  the  Ebionistic,  which,  if  we  are  to  credit  some  state- 
ments (for  the  matter  of  Ebionism  is  involved  in  obscurity  and  dispute) 
applied  these  predictions  too  exclusively  to  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  and  the 
Gnostic,  which  either  spiritualized  it  or  applied  it  to  heaven  itself.  The 
truth  seems  to  stand  between  these  two  extremes  ;  the  heavenly  and  the 
earthly  being  united  in  the  earth  at  the  time  of  restitution.  The  idea 
most  prevalent  is,  that  the  New  Jerusalem  is  the  Church,  and  consequently 
the  saints  in  their  associated,  aggregate  capacity  forms  the  Bride.4  This 
conception  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  Church  is  in  different  places  repre- 
sented under  the  figure  of  a  woman,  the  woman  in  the  wilderness  and  in 
sackcloth,  and  as  a  chaste  virgin,  presented  to  Christ.  Husbands  are 
exhorted  to  love  their  wives  as  Christ  also  loves  the  Church,  etc.  The 
Israelites  are  held  forth  as  "  the  Fathers  to  whom  God  was  a  husband," 
and  as  backsliding  children  to  Avhom  He  was  "  married,"  and  who  acted 
as  a  treacherous  wife.  These  beautiful  and  forcible  figures  (2  Cor.  11  :  2, 
3,  Eph.  5  :  23,  24  ;  Jer.  3  :  14  and  31  :  32  ;  Hos.  2  :  19,  etc.)  drawn  from 
the  marriage  relation — like  those  of  building,  planting,  etc. — convey  the 
idea  of  Christ's  love  for,  union  with,  and  care  over  the  Church.  This  has  led 
many — owing  to  the  phraseology  used  in  connection  with  the  city,  viz.,  that 
of  Bride  and  Lamb's  Wife — to  believe  that  the  Church  is  here  also  desig- 
nated the  Bride.  But  this  does  not  necessarily  follow  ;  for  just  as  the 
earthly  Jerusalem  to  which  God  is  represented  as  married  is  spoken  of  as 
distinct  and  yet  including  the  Jewish  nation  as  her  children  (owing  to  her 
Theocratic  position,)  so  also  the  New  Jerusalem,  while  including  her 
children,  is  spoken  of  as  something  with  which  they  are  associated,  indicat- 
ing also  its  distinctiveness.  Indeed  the  Church  is  (as  we  shall  show  here- 
after) married,  i.e.  brought  into  intimate  and  endearing  union  with 
Christ,  even  in  a  higher  and  nobler  sense  than  this  city,  inasmuch  as  a 
glorification  after  the  pattern  of  Christ,  and  co-heirship  with  Him  in  the 
Rulership,  etc.,  of  the  Kingdom  is  greater  and  more  closely  related  to 
Christ  than  that  of  being  wedded  to  the  capital  city.  Let  it  be  also  under- 
stood, in  all  our  remarks,  that  while  advocating  a  literal  city,  we  neces- 
sarily include,  because  the  city  is  specially  designed  for  them,  the  union  of 
the  saints  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  their  abiding  with  the  King  in  this  same 
city.  But  while  the  happiness,  honor  and  glory  of  the  Church  is  insepar- 
ably connected  with  the  New  Jerusalem — while  the  Church  of  the  first-born 
is  intimately  and  permanently  united  with  the  King  in  the  New  Jerusalem 
— it  does  not  follow  from  the  figure  of  marriage  used,  that  the  Church  is  the 
Bride  here  intended.  Before  presenting  the  reasons  why  this  city  is  not 
the  Church,  but  a  literal  city,  a  singular  feature  connected  with  the  sub- 
ject may  be  noticed.  Namely  :  That  whatever  opinion  may  be  theoreti- 
cally applied  in  the  interpretation  of  the  city,  the  expectations  of  the  Chris- 
tian heart  (abstractly,  perhaps,  advocating  a  mere  "  state"  or  "  condi- 
tion") favors  the  opinion  of  a  literal  city.  For,  from  the  days  of  the 
apostles  down  to  the  present,  believers  look  forward  to  the  New  Jerusalem 
as"  a  place,"  "  an  abode,"  "  habitation,'1  "  dwelling-place ,"  " the  bridal 
city"  "the  royal  dowry,"  "the  King's  Palace,"  etc.  Even  those  most 
inclined  to  spiritualize  it,  speak  and  write  of  it  as  of  something  literal, 


Prop.  169.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  41 

as  e.g.  Prof.  Stuart  (Com.  Apoc,  vol.  1.  p.  190), "  The  New  Jerusalem 
comes  forth  in  all  the  splendor  of  the  upper  world,  a  dwelling-place  fit  for 
the  habitation  of  God  and  the  saints."  Some  of  the  views  mentioned, 
identifying  it  with  a  restored  Eden  or  earth,  or  symbolizing  a  place,  of 
course,  give  it  materiality  in  the  application.  Multitudes,  who  make  it 
figurative,  still  admit,  that  it  also  represents  a  place  of  residence,  a  locality, 
etc.  Writers,  who  at  great  length  have  applied  it  to  the  Church,  still 
acknowledge  that  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  habitation  for  the  saints,  a  Para- 
dise regained,  a  glorious  city  having  mansions,  i.e.  places  of  abode,  for  the 
righteous,  and  in  which  Christ  shall  personally  dwell.  In  sermons,  prayers, 
hymns,  in  our  conversation,  hopes  and  longings  we  generally  present  this 
literal  aspect,  as  the  one  most  naturally  suggested,  and  the  most  consonaut 
with  our  desires  and  anticipations.  Hence,  the  advocacy  of  a  literal  city  is 
not  so  far  removed  from  Christian  feeling,  longing  and  concurrence,  as 
many  suppose.5 

1  The  Crit.  Eng.  Test.,  loci  mingles  the  literal  and  symbolical,  saying  :  "  The  literal 
and  the  figurative  may  perhaps  be  mingled  in  some  parts  of  the  description  of  the  New 
Jerusalem,  but  the  symbolical  appears  to  be  the  most  prevalent."  The  chief  evidence 
adduced  for  the  latter  is  derived  from  "  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wire,"  which  it  is  sup- 
posed could  not  apply  to  a  material  city.     This  objection  will  be  fully  met. 

2  Dr.  Kurtz  (Sac.  His.,  p.  50),  speaking  of  Paradise,  remarks  :  "  The  original  itself,  as 
the  renewed  habitation  of  redeemed  man.  will  hereafter  descend  to  the  earth  ;"  and  (p. 
434)  "  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  realizes  not  only  the  conception  involved  in  the  Taber- 
nacle, but  fulfils  and  completes  the  one  set  forth  in  Paradise,"  etc.  Dr.  Hamilton  (The 
Lamp  and  the  Lantern,  p.  55)  more  explicitly  :  "While  the  Apocalyptic  curtain  slowly 
rises — while  through  its  fringe  of  fire  the  New  Jerusalem  comes  down  from  heaven, 
and,  gazing  on  the  pearly  gates,  and  peaceful  streets,  and  bowers  of  sanctity,  our  planet 
can  scarce  believe  that  she  is  gazing  on  herself — that  this  is  old  mother  earth  grown 
young  again — that  this  vision  of  holiness  and  bliss  is  nothing  more  than  Paradise 
restored — that  '  new  '  but  ancient  '  earth  '  in  which  dwelleth  righteousness." 

3  Some  refer  it  to  "  the  grace  of  God,"  or  "  the  existing  Church,"  or  "  the  glorified 
Church."  Waggoner  in  a  lecture  stated  that  a  person  informed  him  that  he  had  this  city 
in  his  heart,  upon  which  he  remarked,  that  he  must,  indeed,  be  "  lai-ge-hearted  "  to 
carry  within  himself  such  a  city  with  its  foundations,  walls,  gates,  and  mansions. 
Thomas  (Eureka,  vol.  3,  p.  694),  because  of  the  expression,  after  "  the  measure  of  an 
angel,"  makes  the  New  Jerusalem  in  its  corporate  glorified  capacity  "  an  Angel-Man." 
Those  who  apply  the  New  Jerusalem  to  the  saints  also  differ  as  to  the  saints  indicated, 
the  majority  including  the  saints  of  all  former  dispensations,  while  Brown  (evangelist) 
and  others  make  them  to  consist  only  of  the  saints  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  We 
pass  by  those  given  by  destructive  criticism,  which  makes  niuch  of  "  Oriental  imagina- 
tion," etc.,  failing  to  see  the  exquisite  ending  of  a  Divine  Plan  in  its  perfection  of 
accomplishment.  While  some  of  this  class  confine  themselves  merely  to  an  announce- 
ment of  its  being  "  ideal,"  the  result  of  a  poetic,  fervid  imagination,  some  others,  in  bad 
taste  and  worse  spirit,  proceed  to  ridicule  that  which  for  centuries  has  supported  the 
hearts  of  multitudes  in  trouble,  sorrow,  bereavement,  etc.  The  influence  it  has  exerted, 
the  esteem  in  which  it  is  held  by  multitudes,  and  even  as  a  literary  specimen  of  an  early 
age,  will  ever  prevent  the  real  student — whatever  his  opinion — from  writing  disrespect- 
fully of  it. 

4  Bernard  (Prog,  of  Doc,  Lee.  8,  p.  217)  gives  a  figurative  or  spiritualistic  definition 
(which,  as  taught  in  other  Scriptures,  we  include  as  one  of  the  features  of  the  restora- 
tion) as  follows  :  "  The  city  is  a  constitution  of  society  complete  in  its  local  habitation  ; 
the  visible  collection  of  buildings  being  a  symbol  of  the  organized  life  within.  It  is  the 
most  perfect  realization  and  the  most  convenient  representation  of  society  in  its  matu- 
rity, in  which  the  various  relations  of  men  so  combined  as  to  promote  the  welfare  of 
the  several  members  and  secure  the  unity  of  a  common  life  to  the  whole.  '  It  is  '  (as  has 
been  said)  '  the  perfecting  of  the  self  provisions  of  nature  and  the  condition  of  the 
highest  well-being  of  man.'  "  Comp.  Lange's  Com.,  Rev.,  p.  381  and  442,  who  makes  this 
a  "  picture  of  the  consummation  and  fulfilment  of  the  whole  Theocracy,"  etc. 

5  The  student  will  be  interested  in  some  references.     Thus  e.g.  Macnight  (Com.,  Heb. 


42  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  169. 

12  :  22)  cannot  spiritualize  the  New  Jerusalem  away,  but  advocates  it  as  designating 
locality,  or  "  the  place  of  their  (i.e.  saints)  abode,"  and  as  corroborative  evidence  refers 
to  John  14  :  2  ;  2  Pet.  3  :  13  ;  Rev.  21  :  1,  adding  :  "  That  these  accounts  of  the  future 
felicity  of  the  righteous  are  not  to  be  interpreted  metaphorically,  may  be  gathered  from 
the  Gospel  doctrine  of  the  resurrection,"  etc.  He  approvingly  quotes  the  Spectator,  vol. 
8,  No.  580.  Even  Augustine,  with  all  his  spiritualizing,  could  (Meditations,  c.  35)  make  it 
a  real  city:  "O  heavenly  Jerusalem  !  .  .  .  how  happy  will  my  soul  perceive  itself, 
when  it  shall  be  admitted  to  see  thy  glory,  thy  beauty  ;  to  view  the  gates,  the  streets,  the 
stately  buildings,  the  splendor  of  thy  inhabitants,  and  the  triumphant  pomp  of  thy 
King  enthroned  in  the  midst  of  thee  !"  (Comp.  Baxter's  Saints'  Best,  ch.  15.)  Lincoln 
(Lects.  on  Rev.,  vol.  2,  p.  202)  applies  the  city  to  the  Church,  and  then,  in  the  second 
place,  says  :  "  This  city  is  the  home  of  these  saints  of  His.  The  thought  here  may 
appear  somewhat  complex  when  it  is  conjoined  with  the  preceding.  Still  it  is  the  truth. 
Even  as  a  human  bodjr  is  the  '  house  '  of  a  man  (Eccl.  12  :  3)  and  yet  is  a  part  of  the  man 
himself,  so  this  New  Jerusalem  is  the  Church  of  God,  and  at  the  same  time  is  her 
home,"  and  afterward  adds  :  "  This  Bride,  this  city,  is  the  home  or  house,  or  '  taber- 
nacle '  of  God."  His  reasoning  might  have  force,  provided,  as  in  the  analogy  of  the 
body  produced  (the  spirit  or  soul  dwelling  in  it),  we  were  told  that  only  the  spirits  or 
souls  dwelt  in  the  city,  whereas  we  are  informed  that  saints  glorified  in  person  abide 
there.  Numerous  writings  evince  how  exceedingly  difficult  it  is  for  those  who  make  the 
city  a  figure  of  something  else,  to  rid  themselves  of  its  literalness.  Thus  e.g.  Rev.  Bur- 
dick  {New  York  Evang.,  Feb.  3d,  1870)  says  :  "  This  means  the  whole  Church  triumphant, 
put  under  the  symbol  of  the  holy  city,  New  Jerusalem,  descending  from  God  out  of 
heaven.  It  may  also  mean  more.  It  may  comprehend  the  dwelling-places  which  God  will 
fit  up,  as  from  heaven,  for  His  people  to  dwell  in,  '  the  house  of  many  mansions, '  which 
shall  be  upon  the  new  earth."  Our  religious  periodicals  have  many  allusions  like  the 
following  :  Rev.  Snowden  (Luth.  Obs.,  July  19th,  1878)  speaks  of  the  New  Jerusalem  as 
presenting  "  a  material  substance,"  etc.  Ten  thousand  such  illustrations  could  be  given, 
but  the  reader  can  easily  verify  our  position  from  his  own  reading. 

Obs.  2.  The  reasons  which  indicate  that  the  New  Jerusalem  is  a  literal 
city  are  the  following.  1.  In  the  usage  of  the  east  when  a  king  entered 
his  capitol  to  rule  therefrom,  or  a  prince  ascended  the  throne,  it  was 
represented  under  the  figure  of  a  marriage,  i.e.  he  was  wedded,  intimately 
and  permanently  milled  to  the  city,  or  throne,  or  people.  The  use  of  the 
figure  in  the  Scriptures  shows  that  we  are  not  to  limit  it  unless  specilied 
to  the  Church.  While  employed  to  denote  Christ's  union  with  the  Church, 
it  has  been  used  to  mean  other  unions.  It  designates  the  permanent  union 
of  a  people  with  the  land,  as  in  Isa.  G2  where  in  the  Millennial  description 
the  land  is  called  "  Beulah,"  that  is  "married"  (marg.  read.),  and  it  is 
said  :  "  thy  land  shall  be  married,  for  as  a  young  man  marrieth  a  virgin,  so 
shall  thy  sons  marry  thee,''''  etc.  Then  the  figure  rises  still  higher,  includ- 
ing God's,  marriage  (i.e.  dwelling  again  with  man  on  the  earth)  with  the 
land,  for  it  is  added  :  "  as  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  bride,  so  shall 
thy  God  rejoice  over  thee.''''  The  earthly  Jerusalem  is  personified  as  a 
woman,  and  God,  when  dwelling  there  by  a  visible  representation,  is 
declared  to  be  married  to  her,  i.e.  to  the  city  itself.  But  just  as  soon  as 
the  city  was  filled  with  wickedness,  she  is  represented  as  an  adulterous 
woman,  and  God  withdraws  from  her.  In  Ezek.  16,  is  such  a  description 
of  marriage,  which,  in  view  of  the  alleged  birth,  parentage,  etc.,  can  only 
be  applied  directly  to  the  city,  which  becomes  by  virtue  of  this  relationship 
the  representative  of  the  nation  (see  Prop.  118  on  Barren  Woman).  Then 
again,  God  is  spoken  of  as  married  to  the  nation,  because  abiding  with 
them,  as  Ruler  in  a  special  manner.  Now,  considering  that  (Prop.  170) 
Jesus  has  gone  before  to  prepare  a  place  for  us  to  be  incorporated  into  the 
Father's  house,  that  this  place  or  inheritance  is  "  ready  to  be  revealed  in 
the  last  time"  (so  context  demands,  including  saints) ;  that  when  the  last 


PKOP.  169.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  43 

time  does  come  it  is  represented  as  descending  from  God  out  of  heaven 
upon  the  new  earth,  that  the  figure  of  marriage  is  applied  to  a  literal  city 
(as  the  old  Jerusalem),  there  is  no  impropriety  but  rather  eminent  fitness 
that  the  union  of  the  King  of  kings  with  His  metropolitan  city  should  be 
designated  under  the  same  figure,  implying  the  most  intimate  and  permanent 
relationship.  Thus  the  figure  of  marriage,  which  to  many  is  the  main  ob- 
jection to  the  idea  of  a  literal  city,  serves  rather  to  indicate  it.  2.'  For,  the 
figure  itself  is  explained  in  the  description  of  the  city  in  so  significant  a  man- 
ner, and  in  such  complete  contrast  to  the  use  made  of  it  formerly  in  refer- 
ence to  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  that  it  cannot  possibly  be  applied  to  any 
other  but  a  literal  city.  It  is  expressly  declared  that  "  the  throne  of  God 
and  the  Lamb,' "  is  in  this  city.  This  affirms  its  Theocratic  position,  as 
the  capitol  of  the  Kingdom.  Covenant  and  promise,  as  we  have  seen, 
make  David's  Throne  the  Throne  of  God,  for  God  adopts  and  incorporates 
it  into  His  Theocratic  arrangement,  and  promises  that  David's  seed  who  is 
to  occupy  it  forever,  etc.,  is  to  be  His  Son,  to  whom  He  is  the  Father. 
The  Throne  of  David  then  is  the  Throne  of  God  and  that  of  the  Lamb, 
and  this  Throne  is  to  be  set  up  in  this  very  city,  the  New  Jerusalem.  (The 
union  of  the  heavenly  and  that  of  the  earthly,  thus  making  one  city,  will 
be  noticed  below — the  locality  where  David's  throne  was  in  existence  is 
implied.)  Hence,  at  this  period  and  the  identification  of  the  earthly 
Jerusalem  with  this  descended  city,  "  at  that  time  they  shall  call  Jeru- 
salem the  Throne  of  the  Lord,  and  all  nations  shall  be  gathered  int>>  if,  to  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  to  Jerusalem,"  etc.  Thus  we  have  the  metropolitan  char- 
acter, the  royal  precedency  of  the  city  designated.  The  only  throne  that 
covenant  and  prophecy  recognize  in  its  Theocratic  ordering  (for  the  Divine 
Sovereignty  is  something  separate  and  distinct,  and  even  sets  up  this 
Throne,  Props.  79,  84),  is  the  Davidic  and,  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
case,  if  restored  as  predicted  and  sworn  to  by  God,  it  necessarily 
embraces,  in  view  of  its  relationship  to  the  elect  Jewish  nation  and 
through  them  to  the  Gentiles — the  notion  of  a  material  city  which  contains 
it.  Now  the  setting  up  of  this  Throne  in  it,  is  the  act  of  marriage;  it  is 
that  which  makes  the  union.  For,  just  as  God  was  formerly  married  to 
the  earthly  Jerusalem  when  His  Theocratic  Throne  was  there,  so,  carrying 
out  the  same  beautiful  prophetical  figure,  He  is  again  married,  when  the 
New  Jerusalem  comes  down  from  heaven  upon  the  earth,  by  the  very  act  of 
erecting  His  Theocratic  Throne  there  and  ever  abiding  in  it  in  His  glorified 
humanity,  as  David's  Son,  "  The  Christ."1  3.  The  dwelling-place  of  God, 
the  place  where  He  tabernacled  among  men  always,  in  former  days  (as 
in  the  tabernacle  and  temple)  assumed  a  material  form  adapting  it  not 
only  to  the  actual  requirements  of  humanity,  but  looking  forward  to  the 
period  when  a  glorified  humanity,  united  to  the  divine,  in  its  accessibility, 
etc.,  should  again  dwell  with  man.  Now  materiality  in  the  Theocratic 
sense  and  relationship  is  always  associated  with  the  dwelling  of  God  with 
the  Jewish  nation  ;  they  are  not  and  cannot  be  separated  without  violence. 
The  place  was  a  specific  one  to  which  the  nation  could  come  to  worship  and 
honor  the  Mighty  Euler.  Now  when  the  prophet  announces  (Rev.  21  :  2) 
the  coming  down  of  "  the  holy  city  New  Jerusalem,''''  a  great  voice  is  heard 
saying  :  "  Behold  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men  and  He  will  divcll  with 
them,''''  etc. — thus  designating  the  city  itself  as  the  tabernacle  or  special 
place  where  God  shall  manifest  Himself.  That  dwelling-place  which  was 
once  a  tent,  then  a  temple,  now  is  exhibited  as  a  city,  but  still  designated 


44  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  169. 

"  the  tabernacle  of  God"  as  if  purposely  to  associate  with  it  the  idea  of 
locality— of  a  place  to  which  the  nations  can  go  to  honor  and  worship  the 
King.  In  view  of  God  and  David's  Son  being  united  as  the  One  Theocratic 
Euler  ;  in  view  of  the  body  of  Saints  being  associated  as  joint  Rulers  ;  in 
view  of  the  extent,  majesty,  and  glory  of  the  Kingdom  inaugurated  ;  and  in 
view  of  the  restoration  of  forfeited  blessings  and  the  grand  Redemptive 
process  going  on,  a  tent,  and  a  temple,  and  even  earthly  surroundings  as 
were  attached  to  the  Davidic  Throne,  must  give  place  to  a  city,  which  in- 
cludes in  it  the  glory  of  the  tent,  and  of  the  temple,  and  of  Paradise,  and 
of  the  heavenly  world.  4.  In  the  portraiture  of  the  city,  the  saints  or  in- 
habitants of  it  and  the  righteous  are  represented  as  separate  and  distinct  from 
it,  as  in  Rev.  21  :  24,  25,  26,  27  and  Rev.  22  :  2,  3,  4,  5,  9, 14, 19.  That  is, 
they  are  permitted  to  enter  and  enjoy,  or  to  witness  and  participate  in  its 
splendor  and  glory  ;  so  that  the  city,  which  one  of  the  brethren  (Rev. 
22  :  9)  shows  is  portrayed  as  a  place  into  which,  and  to  which  the  right- 
eous come,  and  not  as  the  saints  themselves.  This  distinction  the  apostle 
Paul  closely  makes  in  Heb.  12  :  22,  23  between  "  the  city  of  the  living  God, 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem"  and  "  the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the 
first-born,"  as  admitted  by  numerous  commentators  (as  Barnes,  Bloom- 
field,  Stuart,  etc.)2  thus  according  with  the  discrimination  made  by  the 
prophets  (as  e.g.  Isa.  65  :  17,  18  in  which  God  promises,  "  to  create  Jeru- 
salem a  rejoicing  and  her  people  a  joy").  The  same  contrast  is  presented 
by  Paul  in  Gal.  4,  where  he  speaks  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem  and  then  of 
her  inhabitants,  and  of  those  related  to  her  as  her  children,  and  preserves 
the  same  distinction  in  speaking  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  and  her  chil- 
dren. 5.  The  declaration  (Rev.  21  :  22)  that  the  city  had  no  temple  (such 
as  the  earthly  Jerusalem)  excepting  that  constituted  by  "  the  Lord  God 
Almighty  and  the  Lamb"  (with  which  the  temple  formed  by  the  saints  is 
associated  because  of  their  co-heirship  with  Jesus  Christ),  can  only  be  pred- 
icated of  a  material  city.  While  indicative  of  the  visibility  of  the  Mighty 
King,  the  whole  city  being  become  "a  holy  of  holies,"  the  language 
expressive  of  seeing  no  one  building  separated  specially  as  a  temple  has 
only  force  when  applied  to  a  literal  city.  6.  The  distinction  betiveen 
the  saints  and  the  city,  also  implying  the  literalness  of  the  latter,  is 
evidenced  by  a  large  class  of  passages  which  speak  of  the  ancient  saints 
"looking  for  a  city,"  of  all  believers  "seeking  a  continuing  city,"  and 
of  God  "  Itu ring  prepared  for  them  a  city,"  etc.  We  have  only  to  open  the 
commentaries  of  our  opponents,  and  there  we  Gnd  numerous  interpreta- 
tions which  declare  that  this  "  city,"  held  in  reserve  for  these  saints  and 
believers,  and  which  God  prepares,  is  a  place,  an  actual,  real  abiding 
dwelling-place,  etc.,  for  them.  Hence,  taking  their  own  comments  con- 
cerning "  the  city"  in  other  places  of  the  Scriptures,  we  certainly  are  justi- 
fied in  applying  them  to  the  city  when  it  is  revealed  from  heaven.  If  a 
locality,  etc.,  in  the  third  heaven,  the  descent  from  thence,  surely  does  not 
change  its  nature  ;  while  its  coming  down  confirms  the  relationship  that 
the  saints  sustain  to  it  in  the  renewed  earth,  etc.  7.  This  again  corre- 
sponds with  another  class  of  passages  which  describe  Jerusalem  as  putting 
on  her  beautiful  garments,  binding  the  saints  or  righteous  upon  her,  as  a 
bride  putteth  on  her  ornaments,  arraying  herself  in  the  righteousness  and 
glory  of  the  saints,  making  herself  &  glorious  city  by  reason  of  the  number, 
holiness  and  happiness  of  her  citizens,  etc.  Now,  while  some  of  these  pro- 
phetic announcements  refer  more  particularly  to  that  earthly  portion  of 


PEOP.  169.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  45 

Jerusalem  which  will  be  rebuilt,  yet  it  includes  that  portion  (the  new")  which 
will  be  added  to  or  joined  with  it.  The  descriptions  are  too  lofty  and 
grand,  the  phraseology  and  ideas  are  so  similar  to  that  employed  in  the 
delineation  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  that  they  cannot  be  separated  ;  both 
are  embraced  by  the  prophets.  If  the  student  will  e.g.  compare  Isa.  54  : 
11,  12  and  Isa.  60  :  14-20  with  the  description  of  the  city  by  John,  he  can 
see  how  the  Spirit  recognizes  the  descending  city,  which  John  long  after 
more  minutely  describes,  as  forming  a  magnificent  portion  of  the  great 
metropolis  of  the  Messiah.  8.  But  that  the  saints  are  not  denoted,  and 
that  the  reference  is  to  a  material  city,  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the  saints 
are  represented  (Rev.  19  :  9)  when  the  marriage  (i.e.  this  setting  up  of  the 
Theocratic  Throne)  takes  place  as  guests,  the  called  or  invited,  who  enjoy 
the  marriage  supper,  the  feast  that  the  prophets  describe.  They  cannot 
be,  in  this  case,  the  Guests  and  the  Bride  at  the  same  time ;  and,  as  we 
have  shown  in  several  places,  the  Spirit  is  careful,  even  in  the  employment 
of  figures,  not  to  introduce  a  violation  of  propriety.  Hence,  in  reference 
to  this  wedding — this  particular  union  also  represented  by  the  marriage  re- 
lation— believers  are  the  invited  guests,  the  called,  who  are  virgins  waiting 
for  the  Bridegroom  and  Bride,  and  who  have  on  the  wedding  garment  not 
as  the  Bride  but  as  guests  who  now  participate  in  and  enjoy  the  unbound- 
ed blessings  resulting  from  this  splendidly  restored  Theocratic  enthronement 
in  a  city  prepared  for  the  King.  The  appropriateness  and  exquisite 
delicacy  of  calling  the  result  of  this  union  ''a  feast  of  fat  things,"  "a 
marriage  supper,"  etc.,  fully  appears  when  we  come  to  understand  what  is 
meant  by  the  Bridegroom,  the  Bride,  the  Marriage,  and  the  Guests.  Meed 
we  wonder  at  the  exalted  language  held  by  prophets,  when  attempting  to 
describe  either  of  them  separately  or  all  of  them  conjoined.  The  grandeur, 
unspeakably  great — the  blessings,  beyond  imagination — the  glory,  exceed- 
ing the  conceptions  of  man,  spriug  from  the  pre-determined,  continuously 
held,  and  finally  triumphant  manifested  Theocratic  plan.'  9.  Allow  this 
Theocratic  ordering,  accept  of  the  Covenanted  Throne  and  Kingdom  as 
specifically  given  to  David's  Son,  and  reason  itself  dictates,  in  view  of  the 
glorification,  greatness,  and  majesty  of  this  King,  that  in  His  enthrone- 
ment here,  a  citg  commensurate  with  the  august  Personage  should  be  pro- 
vided. Instead  of  the  splendor  of  the  city  reflecting  doubt  upon  its  materi- 
ality, it  is  just  such  a  city  as  is  worthy  of  the  now  exalted,  stately  Son  of 
David.  It  is  the  most  reasonable  thing  to  expect,  that  the  dwelling-place 
of  the  King  of  kings,  where  His  own  glory  and  that  of  the  Redeemed  is  to 
be  displayed  in  a  striking  manner  to  the  eyes  and  hearts  of  the  nations, 
should  be  exceedingly  beautiful,  rich  and  abounding  in  that  which  man 
regards  precious.  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  a  King  with  such  power 
and  wisdom  will  highly  adorn  the  place  of  His  throne,  or,  as  the  prophet 
says  :  "  beautify  the  place  of  His  Sanctuary,  and  make  the  place  of  His 
feet  glorious."  The  pearly'gates,  the  golden  streets,  the  foundations  of 
costly  stones,  etc.,  which  stagger  the  faith  of  some,  are  only  what  the 
immediate  material  surroundings  of  such  a  Monarch,  uniting  God  and 
Man  in  an  earthly  rule,  should  possess  as  proportionate  to  His  dignity  and 
station.  Therefore,  the  babes  and  the  wise  in  Christ  not  only  exhibit 
their  faith  in  the  city,  but  likewise  in  the  ability  of  God  to  create,  and 
in  its  suitableness  for  the  intended  purpose,  when  they  hope  to  enter  such 
pearly  gates,  walk  such  golden  streets,  etc.  The  partial  particularizing, 
and  the  "like  unto,"  are  of  such  a  nature  that  the  reality  may  greatly 


46  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  169. 

exceed  even  the  description.  At  least,  Jesus  will  give  us  His  idea  of  what  a 
city  ought  to  be  when  destined  to  be  the  metropolitan  city  of  the  renewed 
earth.  The  city  which  God  would  not  allow  man  to  build  (Gen.  11)  to 
make  unto  Himself  a  name  (significant  of  unity  and  exaltation  over  the 
earth)  instead  of  seeking  to  praise  and  exalt  God,  He  now,  when  the  proper 
time  has  arrived,  establishes  upon  earth,  the  centre  of  knowledge,  power, 
honor,  aud  riches,  and  the  expression  of  existing  unity  and  exaltation — the 
city  above  all  cities,  "  the  perfection  of  oeautif  and  "  the  joy  of  the  whole 
earth, "  literally  and  truly  "  The  city  of  the  Great  King."* 

1  Here  (cornp.  Prop.  118)  we  obtain  a  clew  to  the  reason  why  this  Jerusalem  is  called 
"New."  It  is  not  merely  "New"  in  contrast  with  the  "Old"  (also  restored  and 
renewed),  but  "  New"  because  this  city  is  newly  and  specially  made  for  the  Theocratic 
relationship  to  be  manifested  ;  it  is  the  King's  city  in  which  He  is  enthroned,  and,  there- 
fore, expressly  prepared  for  Him.  The  "  Old  "  is  honored  and  blessed,  bitt  "  the  New," 
containing  royalty  and  its  accompaniments,  is  correspondingly  exalted. 

8  It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  so  many  of  our  opponents  totally  forget,  in  their  com- 
ments on  the  New  Jerusalem  of  Heb.  12  :  22,  all  their  objections  to  a  literal  city  as  against 
us  in  interpreting  Rev.,  chs.  21  and  22.  Thus  to  illustrate  :  Barnes  {Com.  loci)  speaks  of 
it  as  "  the  city  where  the  living  God  dwells— the  heavenly  Jerusalem"  — the  place  of 
"  abode,"  e.g.  "  in  a  more  literal  and  glorious  sense  His  abode  in  heaven,"  "  a  magnificent 
city  where  God  and  angels  dwell,"  which  is  to  be  "  the  final  home"  of  Christians,  "  Me 
eternal  home,"  "  dwellers  in  that  city."  So  Barnes  on  Heb.  11  :  10,  referring  it  to  heaven, 
speaks  of  the  city  as  "  a  place,"  "  a  fixed  habitation  and  a  permanent  inheritance,"  "  the 
permanent  abode  of  the  righteous,"  "  fixed  residence  of  the  just  in  heaven,"  "  a  perma- 
nent home  in  a  future  world. "  He  even  forgets  the  symbolic  cast  given  in  his  Exp.  of 
Revelation,  and  refers  to  the  New  Jerusalem  of  St.  John  as  denoting  the  same.  But  in 
such  a  reference  he  and  all  other  similar  commentators  involve  themselves  in  the  most  pal- 
pable contradictions.  Thus  e.g.  while  opposing  the  Millenarian  view,  while  making  the  New 
Jerusalem  of  John  as  much  as  possible  symbolical  of  the  saints  in  order  to  meet  the  force 
of  the  descending  from  heaven,  he  totally  overlooks  the  antagonism  that  he  erects  by 
making  the  New  Jerusalem  the  exact  equivalent  of  the  third  heaven  as  a  fixed  and  per- 
manent abode,  etc.  For,  taking  his  interpretation  in  Hebrews  for  granted,  then  it 
follows  that  the  third  heaven  itself — the  advocated  fixed  and  eternal  dicelling  place  of  the 
righteous— according  to  John,  comes  down  to  earth.  Such  is  the  absurdity  involved, 
while  the  language  of  John,  "  out  of  heaven,"  etc.,  indicates  something  separate  and  dis- 
tinct from  heaven  itself.  The  student  will,  therefore,  notice  that  any  interpretation 
which  does  not  discriminate  between  the  city  itself  and  the  third  heaven,  is  certainly 
defective  and  unscriptural.  The  Spirit  justly  indicates  a  material  difference,  and  we 
must  observe  the  same.  Hence,  we  must  reject  as  utterly  untenable  any  theory  that 
seeks  to  destroy  the  force  of  this  city  "  coming  down  from  God,  out  of  heaven."  The 
plea  sometimes  offered  that  the  New  Jerusalem  is  too  glorious  for  earth,  and  must  remain 
inseparably  with  the  third  heaven,  is  directly  antagonistic  to  God's  promise,  and  His 
glory  as  predicted.  Such  works  as  Heaven  our  Home  (ch.  4),  which  make  the  city  a  type 
of  the  third  heaven,  and  then,  in  the  same  breath,  speak  of  it  as  a  locality,  "  a  habita- 
tion" expressive  of  reality,  and  then,  to  fill  out  its  portraiture,  mix  up  the  present  and 
the  future,  utterly  ignoring— because  hostile  to  its  view — the  promise  of  its  descending, 
are  only  misleading.  In  the  same  category  is  Edwards's  His.  of  Redemp.  (p.  424),  Walde- 
grave's  New  Test.  Mitt.  (Lect.  6),  and  many  others.  The  variety — all  in  the  same  line — is 
great.  Smith  (Key  to  Rev.,  p.  386)  makes  the  New  Jerusalem  "  a  type  of  the  Church  and 
of  heaven,"  and  "  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  man  ;  not  that  heaven  has  come  down  to 
earth,  as  some  imagine,  but  that  the  saints  are  raised  to  God  in  heaven.' '  Language  just 
the  reverse  of  that  given  by  the  Spirit. 

3  See  Bonar's  Eternal  Day,  Cumming's  Lee.  on  Apoc,  first  and  second  series,  Seiss's  Last 
Times,  Noel's  Prospects  of  the  Church,  etc.,  for  more  extended  descriptions  of  the  city, 
inculcating  the  idea  expressed.  The  reader  will  find  some  fine  passages  in  Bickersteth's 
Yesterday,  To-day,  and  Forever.  In  a  note  (p.  437)  to  line  128,  B.  12,  Bickersteth  takes  the 
position  that  the  New  Jerusalem  is  both  real  and  typical,  just  as  Babylon  while  typifying 
a  power  also  included  a  literal  city,  etc.  He,  therefore,  with  the  typical,  speaks  of  "an 
actual  fabric,  composed  of  heavenly  material,  which  shall  never  be  destroyed,"  of  a 
"  home,  a  glorious  reality,  an  abiding  city  yet  to  come,"  and  adds  :  "  For  as  the  glorified 
body  will  be  the  worthy  habitation  of  the  perfectly  regenerate  spirit — a  building  of  God, 


Prop.  169.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  47 

an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens — so  the  celestial  city  will  be  the 
meet  dwelling  place  of  the  saints  forever,  and  their  spiritual  characteristics  will  each  and 
all  find  a  counterpart  in  that  marvellous  structure  prepared  for  them  by  their  God." 

4  Other  considerations  favorable  to  our  view  might  be  pressed,  as  (1)  the  leaves  of  the 
tree  of  life  (con.  with  the  city)  designed  for  the  healing  of  the  nations,  something  sepa- 
rate and  distinct  from  the  glorified  Church  ;  (2)  the  Bride  being  omitted  in  the  Parable 
of  the  Ten  Virgins  and  of  the  marriage  feast,  and  believers  and  the  faithfiil  being  in- 
vited ;  (3)  the  mention  of  "  The  Beloved  City,"  Rev.  20  :  9,  without  figure  in  an  evident 
historical  statement  ;  (4)  the  faith  of  Abraham,  etc.,  who  "  looked  for  a  city,"  evidently, 
as  a  comparison  shows,  not  supported  by  the  conception  that  mysticism  or  symbolism 
suggests  ;  (5)  simple  unity  requires  a  literal  city,  for  God  promises  "  a  city  ;"  Jesus  goes 
to  prepare  a  place — the  city  and  place  are  one— this  city  or  place  an  inheritance  reserved 
for  us — the  same  shall  be  revealed  from  hea^  en  at  the  last  time — this  revelation  takes 
place  when  Jesus  comes— this  city  thus  revealed  and  inherited  must  be  the  promised, 
prepared,  reserved,  and  finally  revealed  city  ;  (6)  the  reference  to  the  natural  sources  of 
light,  the  sun  and  moon,  as  not  needed  (owing  to  the  effulgence  or  brightness  of  the 
Divine  glory),  is  such  as  the  idea  of  a  material  city  suggests. 

Obs.  3.  The  immense  size  of  the  city  forms  in  the  minds  of  many  the 
most  formidable  objection  to  the  reception  of  the  description  as  representa- 
tive of  a  real,  literal  city.  This  is  increased  by  many  commentators  mak- 
ing the  extent  of  the  walls  three  hundred  and  seventy-five  miles,  and  then, 
as  our  version,  "  the  length  and  the  breadth  and  the  height  of  it  are 
equal,"  some  make  a  height  of  nearly  ninety-five  miles  and  others  of  three 
hundred  and  seventy-five.  The  latter  consideration  causes  Barnes  {Com. 
loci)  to  pronounce  it  "  absurd"  to  entertain  "  the  idea  of  a  city  literally 
descending  from  heaven  and  being  set  upon  the  earth  with  such  propor- 
tions— three  hundred  and  seventy-five  miles  high,  made  of  gold."1  It  is 
exceedingly  doubtful  whether  such  a  criticism  is  just  to  the  meaning  of 
the  description,  for  even  persons  who  make  the  city  a  symbolical  represen- 
tation (and  hence  have  no  reason  for  introducing  such  a  definition)  make 
the  same  to  denote  simply  uniformity.  Thus  e.g.  Lord  (Expos.  Apoc.) 
says  :  "  that  the  length  of  the  city  is  equal,  and  its  breadth  and  its 
height  denotes  not  that  its  length,  breadth,  and  height  are  the  same, 
but  simply  that  its  length  is  the  same  at  all  points,  its  breadth  the 
same  at  all  points,  and  its  height  at  all  points  the  same."  (This 
then  implies  that  this  city  has  not  a  number  of  streets,  or  a  portion 
of  the  place,  grandly  built,  and  the  rest,  like  our  cities,  of  an  inferior 
quality,  but  that  all  the  mansions,  from  centre  to  circumference,  are  all 
magnificent  and  glorious.)  While  the  precise  measurement  of  the  city 
according  to  an  announced  standard  is  also  in  favor  of  a  literal  city,  we  are 
not  specially  concerned  in  advocating  either  of  the  views  here  expressed — 
although  the  latter  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  angel.2  For  we 
anticipate  remarkable  things,  quite  beyond  the  course  of  nature,  to  take 
place  at  the  Second  Advent.  This  city  is  not  more  incredible  than  that 
a  virgin  should  bring  forth  a  Son,  that  angels  can  fly  as  quickly  through 
great  distances  as  Daniel  makes  them,  and  a  number  of  other  things 
recorded  requiring  for  their  fulfilment  the  intervention  and  support  of 
the  supernatural.  Therefore,  while  the  objection  has  a  certain  propriety 
coming  from  the  unbeliever  in  the  Supernatural,  it  certainly  is  illogical 
and  miscriptural  coming  from  a  believer  in  the  Word,  and  in  the  attributes 
of  the  Mighty  God  presented  by  the  Word — seeing  that  it  virtually  limits 
the  power,  wisdom,  and  skill  of  the  Divine  Architect.3  Behold  the  Builder 
of  this  city  place  this  ponderous  earth  in  its  orbit,  suspended  on  nothing, 
swiftly  passing  along  its  allotted  course  ;  then  see  Him  place  a  massive  body 


48  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  169. 

in  its  orbit  around  the  earth,  and  other  earths  or  worlds  each  in  their  orbits 
around  the  vast  planted  sun  and  thus  on  and  on  in  the  immensity  of  space 
exhibiting  illimitable  power,  etc. — and  then  doubt  if  you  can,  the  ability 
of  the  Almighty  to  produce  a  city  so  vast  in  extent,  so  grand  in  its  propor- 
tions. The  question,  in  this  case,  is  not  whether  we  can  comprehend  hoio 
such  a  city  can  be  erected,  etc.  (for  like  Abraham  we  are  to  receive  the 
promise  if  we  cannot  tell  how  God  will  accomplish  it,)  but  whether  it  is 
really  promised.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  such  a  literal  city  is  not  required 
by  the  Theocratic  ordering,  or  that  its  production  would  conflict  with  the 
moral  attributes  of  God,  or  that  it  is  opposed  by  previously  given  Revela- 
tion— in  brief,  by  an  appeal  to  reason  proving  it  to  be  unreasonable  out- 
side of  an  appeal  to  our  limited  comprehension  and  a  lessening  of  the 
Divine  power  (which  is  itself  unreasonable),  then  indeed  an  argument 
would  be  formed  worthy  of  serious  consideration.  We  may  well  leave  the 
height,  which  is  a  matter  of  controversy,  with  the  Builder,  who  will  give 
it  that  proportion  and  that  extent  best  adapted  to  contain  the  mansions  of 
the  saints,  and  to  manifest  His  own  glory.  It  manifests  "  the  Glory  of 
God,"  verifying  Jno.  17  :  22,  etc. 

1  This  is  almost  equivalent  to  what  a  writer  ( Westm.  Review,  Oct.,  1861,  Art.  5)  sarcas- 
tically observes  :  "  The  architecture  of  the  Theocratic  metropolis  is  purely  ideal.  Like 
the  impossible  Parthian  army  of  a  previous  passage,  which  amounted  to  a  fifth  or  per- 
haps only  a  sixth  part  of  the  present  entire  population  of  the  world,  we  have  a  city  whose 
length,  breadth  and  height  are  equal  (about  fifteen  hundred  miles),  suggesting  the  notion 
of  rather  an  awkward  ultra-equatorial  protuberance,  which  seems  to  trouble  even  the 
ruridecanal  intellect,  so  that  the  secular  mind  may  safely  confess  to  some  irreligious  mis- 
givings." 

2  Other  views  are  given,  as  that  the  measurement  includes  the  entire  circumference  ; 
that  the  height  is  that  of  the  city  above  the  earth,  etc.  There  is  a  statement  made  by 
Mr.  Begg,  quoted  by  Brooks,  Elem.  of  Proph.  Inter]).,  that  is  worthy  of  notice  :  "  John,  in 
his  measurements,  does  not  specify  its  length  or  breadth,  but  having  mentioned  that  it 
is  square,  he  gives  the  measurement  accordingly  :  '  And  the  city  lieth  four  square  and 
the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth.  And  he  (the  angel)  measured  the  city  with  the 
reed,  twelve  thousand  furlongs.  The  length  and  the  breadth  and  the  height  are  equal.' 
It  was  not  the  length  or  breadth  or  height  which  the  angel  measured.  These,  indeed,  he 
declares  equal,  but  tho  twelve  thousand  furlongs,  instead  of  being  the  dimensions  of  each 
or  any  of  its  sides,  as  is'  commonly  supposed,  are  the  measurement  of  the  city  'four 
square.'  We  consider  this,  therefore,  as  neither  the  length  nor  the  breadth,  but  as  the 
measurement  of  the  area  of  the  city,"  etc.  He  thus  makes  the  sides  nearly  ten  miles, 
etc.,  using  the  Jewish  furlong  of  Maimonides.  So  also  a  friend  of  mine,  Bev.  Eowe, 
makes  the  same  measurement.  The  critical  student  will  observe  that  our  position  must 
be  the  correct  one,  for  otherwise  the  all-intelligent  Spirit  would  introduce  an  outrageous 
disproportion  between  the  walls  of  the  city  and  the  city  itself  ;  with  our  view  the  walls 
are  proportionate  to  the  extent.     Vitringa  and  others  favor  the  area  theory. 

8  Hence  we  dislike  to  see  believers  (as  e.g.  Wilson  in  Proph.  Times,  New  Ser.,  March, 
1876,  p.  96)  in  advocacy  of  the  symbolic  nature  of  the  city,  ground  the  same  upon  such 
reasoning  :  "Asa  literal  city,  it  must  be  regarded  as  grotesque  and  improbable  ;  for  what 
could  be  more  so  than  that  a  city  of  its  materials  and  dimensions  should  be  built  in  the 
aerial  heaven,  and  descend  upon  the  earth."  If  it  is  symbolic,  this  must  be  proven  from 
other  considerations  than  those  of  improbability  or  impossibility  (as  seen  e.g.  in  the 
interpretation  of  the  incarnation,  etc.),  seeing  that  God  "  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly 
above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,"  etc.  Wilson  in  Proph.  Times  for  April,  1876,  p.  116,  etc., 
makes  the  New  Jerusalem  the  symbol  of  the  saints  associated  with  Christ  in  a  new  polity, 
and  refers  to  Bev.  3  :  12  (which  distinguishes  between  the  saints  and  the  city  in  the 
name  of  the  latter)  ;  Heb.  12  :  22  (which  also  distinguishes  between  the  two),  and  Gal. 
4  :  26),  which  by  the  very  contrast  to  the  one  literal  Jerusalem,  the  earthly,  indicates 
that  the  other,  the  New,  is  not  symbolic).  The  New  Jerusalem  is,  indeed,  connected 
with  "  a  new  polity,"  and  saints  identified  with  the  city  are  "  a  divinely  chosen  hier- 
archy of  kings  and  priests,"  but  this  does  not  constitute  them  the  same.  The  origin  of 
the  city  as  purely  and  exclusively  heavenly  (like  glorified  body),  and  its  coming  down 


PEOP.  163.]  THE   THEOC11ATIC   KINGDOM.  49 

out  of  heaven  from  God,  alone  distinguishes  it  from  the  saints,  who,  under  divine  power 
from  above,  are  made  such  by  probation,  trial,  etc.,  here  on  the  earth.  Wilson,  in  the 
same  article,  finds,  however,  so  much  that  is  favorable  to  a  material  city  in  the  prophets 
that  he  forcibly  advocates  the  same  as  the  residence,  metropolis,  of  Christ  and  the  saints. 
He  thus  virtually,  while  making  the  New  Jerusalem  a  mere  polity,  gives  us  the  city  that 
we  advocate  "  enlarged  and  adorned,"  and  brings  the  saints  into  an  intimate  and  abiding 
union  (figuratively  represented  by  Oriental  nations  by  "  marriage")  with  the  same. 

Obs.  4.  The  restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  the  occupation  of  it 
by  David's  Son,  necessarily  includes  the  fact,  so  plainly  predicted  by  the 
prophets,  that  when  the  Messiah  comes  to  reign,  He  will  set  up  His 
throne  at  the  same  place  formerly  occupied  by  David's  throne.  This 
throne  was  not  il  in  the  third  heaven"  and  not  "  in  the  air  above  the 
earth"  but  was  located  on  the  earth,  in  Palestine,  at  Jerusalem.  Any 
theory  that  locates  that  throne  away  from  the  locality  it  once  possessed,  is 
certainly  defective,  being  contrary  to  the  predictions  and  the  desire 
expressed  by  the  Theocratic  King  Ps.  132  :  13,  14.  The  covenant  made 
with  David,  if  faithfully  curried  out  as  sworn  to,  requires  His  immortal 
Son  to  reign  gloriously  in  the  same  place  formerly  occupied  by  David  Him- 
self. Therefore  to  make  the  New  Jerusalem  to  be  heaven  itself,  as  some 
do  ;  or  a  place  forever  in  the  third  heaven,  as  others  do  ;  or  that  it  will 
not  come  down  (as  declared),  but  that  a  communication,  typified  by 
Jacob's  ladder,  will  alone  exist  between  the  New  and  the  Old,  as  others 
hold  ;  or  that  there  is  no  Jerusalem,  a  city,  which  comes  down,  as  still 
others  maintain1 — is  utterly  irreconcilable  with  the  entire  tenor  and  spirit 
of  both  covenant  and  prophecy  which  insists  upon  a  literal,  personal  mani- 
festation of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Messiah,  upon  the  throne  of  David,  in 
David' s  city  and  in  the  midst  of  the  restored  Jewish  nation.  The  Theo- 
cratic relationship  is  not  fully  restored  without  this  future,  and  the 
inheritance  of  David's  Son  is  not  possessed  unless  Zion's  hill  is  again 
occupied  by  Him.  Indeed  we  cannot  help  being  surprised  at  the  emi- 
nently consistent  and  scriptural  statements  on  this  point  contained  in  the 
Confession  of  Faith  presented  to  Charles  II.  a.d.  1GG0  (Crosby's  Hist,  of  the 
Baptists,  Appendix)  signed  by  John  Banyan  and  forty  others  ;  in  which 
after  declaring  that  Christ  will  come  and  "take  to  Himself  His  King- 
dom, and  will,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  reign  on  the  throne  of  His 
Father  David,  on  Mount  Zion,  in  Jerusalem,  forever"  the  following 
occurs  :  "  We  believe  that  the  New  Jerusalem  that  shall  come  down  from 
God  out  of  heaven,  when  the  tabernacle  of  God  shall  be  with  them,  and 
He  will  dwell  among  them,  will  be  the  metropolitan  city  of  this  Kingdom, 
and  will  be  the  glorious  place  of  residence  of  both  Christ  and  His  saints 
forever,  and  will  be  so  situated  as  that  the  Kingly  palace  will  be  on  Mount 
Zion,  the  holy  hill  of  David,  where  His  throne  was."  Now,  while  it  is 
extremely  difficult,  owing  to  our  having  no  detailed  explanation  but  only 
general  statements  respecting  its  location,  to  explain  all  the  particulars  con- 
cerning it,  yet  the  Scriptures  give  us  hints  which  serve  to  confirm  the 
interpretation  that  the  New  Jerusalem  will  embrace  in  its  area  the  locality 
of  Mount  Zion.2  While  discarding  the  explanations  given  by  some  (Begg 
and  others)  derived  from  Ezekiel's  description  (for  the  reasons  assigned 
under  Prop.  172,  making  that  arrangement  conditional  on  the  repentance 
of  the  people)  yet  those  very  explanations  are  valuable,  because  they  fully 
evince  that  God  allies  the  enthronement  of  the  Prince,  David's  Son,  in  this 
same  locality — that  Mount  Zion,  David's  hill,  and  the  restored  throne  of 


50  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  169. 

David  are  not  to  be  separated.  Let  the  reader  carefully  consider  that  in 
the  description  of  the  rebuilding  and  adornment  of  the  earthly  portion  of 
ancient  Jerusalem  such  rebuilding  is  only  directly  affirmed  and  described 
to  extend  from  a  certain  part  of  the  city  northward,  westward  and  east- 
ward, and  for  a  particular  reason  southward  is  omitted.  Thus  Zech.  14  : 
10  (comp.  Jer.  31  :  38-40)  which  has  so  greatly  preplexed  commentators 
specifies  an  enlargement  of  the  old  Jerusalem  northward,  extending  to 
Geba  and  Rimmon  (south  from  them  to  Jerusalem),  and  then  in  the 
rebuilding  appears  only  to  include  a  portion  of  the  city,  leaving  out  the 
city  of  David  proper,  for  a  straight  line  running  across  from  the  point  of 
the  city  mentioned  to  where  the  king's  wine-presses  are  usually  located, 
would  leave  out  David's  part  of  the  city.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of 
such  an  interpretation  of  the  passage  ;  whether  admissible  or  not,  it  is 
certain  that  Zechanah  by  the  Spirit  includes  the  con  junction  of  the  New 
Jerusalem  with  the  rebuilt  Old  in  "  the  waters  that  go  out  of  Jerusalem,'' 
as  compared  with  Rev.  22  :  1,  2.  At  least  it  is  entirely  consistent  with 
the  spirit  of  prophetical  delineation  to  make  the  New  Jerusalem  planted 
with  its  north  side  within  the  bounds  of  the  old  Jerusalem,  taking  in 
David's  city,  and  then  extending  southward,  etc.,  embracing  a  portion  of 
the  desert.  The  prominence  that  is  given  to  Mount  Zion  above  the  rest  of 
the  city,  the  descriptions  of  it  so  characteristic  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  the 
making  of  Judah's  territory  especially  holy,  the  inheriting  (Zech.  2  :  12, 
etc.)  of  the  Messiah  of  His  portion  in  the  land,  the  changes  that  are 
attributed  to  the  rejoicing  desert,  the  constituting  Jerusalem  "  the  throne 
of  the  Lord,"  the  astonishing  transformations  that  are  to  bo  witnessed, 
the  linking  it  with  the  new  heaven  and  earth,  the  inexpressible  glory 
attributed  to  the  restored  Davidic  throne,  etc. — these  things  considered 
connectedly ,  relating  to  the  same  period  of  restitution  and  enthronement, 
leave  a  strong  and  irresistible  impression  that  the  Old  and  New  Jerusalem 
are  permanently  united  ;  the  one  part  specially  designed  for  the  King  and 
the  saints  into  which  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  representatives  of  the 
nations,  enter,  and  the  other  part  intended  for  the  restored  Jewish  nation, 
as  a  kind  of  suburb  or  extension  of  the  city  embracing  some  of  its  subjects 
constantly  living  in  the  light  and  beholding  the  glory  of  the  former.  To 
this  there  may  be  an  allusion  in  Ps.  122  :  3,  "  Jerusalem  is  built  as  a  city 
that  is  compact  together"  which  is  rendered  by  others  (as  e.g.  Crit.  Eny. 
Test.,  by  Blackley  i!t  llawes,  p.  872)  "Jerusalem  that  is  built  as  a  city  that 
is  coupled  or  joined  together  to  itself. "  Instead  of  making  the  Old  rebuilt 
the  New  (as  even  e.g.  Eusebius  in  flattery  to  Constantine  and  his  mother, 
Helena),  or  constituting  two  Jerusalems  in  that  age  (as  many  do)  the 
prophets,  whom  we  endeavor  to  imitate,  speak  of  them  as  one,  sometimes 
describing  one  portion  and  then  again  the  other,  because  of  the  immediate 
close  conjunction  existing  between  them,  for  the  New  is  added  as  an 
addition,  most  glorious  and  suitable  for  such  a  David's  Son,  to  the  Old, 
thus  making  it  (Isa.  62  :  3,  llebrew)  "  a  diadem  of  a  Kingdom."  3 

i  Waggoner  (fief,  of  Age  to  Come,  p.  63)  says  :  "  I.  M.  Stephenson  quoted  Dr.  Thomas  to 
show  that  there  is  not  any  New  Jerusalem  really  in  heaven,  Imt  that  '  Jerusalem  which  is 
above '  is  above  only  in  the  sense  of  being  exalted,  which  denotes  the  position  she  will 
occupy  in  the  Age  to  Come  ;"  and  he  justly  adds  :  ' '  But  if  the  word  '  above  '  signifies  her 
honor  and  glory,  and  not  her  location,  then  her  '  coming  down,'  Rev.  21  :  2,  must  denote 
her  abasement  and  deprivation  of  that  glory.  This  criticism  of  Dr.  Thomas  is  not  cor- 
rect." Graff,  Greybeard's  Lay  Sermons,  No.  35,  correctly  makes  the  New  Jerusalem 
"  the  official  residence"  of  the  saints,  and  in  "  visible  association  with  the  earth,"  but  he 


Prop.  169.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  51 

has  it  suspended  in  the  air,  and  remarks  :  "  That '  glory,'  like  a  star — an  added  satellite 
to  the  planet  on  which  we  live — will  appear  immediately  over  Jerusalem  in  Judea,  and 
its  light  will  dim  the  glory  of  the  sun."  This  picture,  however  pretty,  is  not  according 
to  scriptural  analogy.  Rev.  J.  Denham  Smith,  who  approvingly  quotes  Bellett  (Uhr.  Her- 
ald, June  oth,  1879),  carefully  locates  the  city  in  the  air  and  not  on  the  earth,  in  order  to 
avoid  the  charge  of  carnality  and  a  lowering  of  saints.  Such  sensitiveness,  where  God's 
Theocratic  ordering  and  the  covenanted  inheritance  of  David's  Son  is  in  question,  is 
misplaced.  Baxter  (Chr.  Herald,  March  27th,  1879)  insists  upon  placing  it  in  "  the  air," 
and  urges  two  reasons  :  (1)  Its  size  making  it  incongruous  "to  be  poised  upon  a  globe 
only  five  times  (2-1,000  miles)  greater  in  circumference."  This  is  answered  in  the  text. 
(2)  It  "  is  nowhere  stated  to  come  on  the  earth."  To  this  we  reply  :  It  is  undoubtedly 
implied  in  Rev.  21,  coming  down  from  God,  out  of  heaven,  into  this  renewed  earth,  and 
its  identification  with  the  earth  itself  is  positive  from  the  exact  location  of  the  place  of 
inheritance  and  of  David's  throne  (not  in  the  air !),  and  by  the  manner  in  which  the  proph- 
ets (e.g.  Isa.,  chs.  45  and  GO)  describe  it  as  pertaining  actually  to  the  earth,  and  easy  of 
access  to  the  nations  who  visit  it,  etc.     (Comp.  Prop.  168,  On  Place  of  Manifested  Royalty.) 

2  The  critical  student  will  observe  a  feature  that  strongly  confirms  our  position  over 
against  the  sj>iritualizing  system.  If  the  spiritualizing  ajDplieation  to  the  Church  were 
correct,  then  the  predictions  ought  to  relate  more  to  Mt.  Moriah,  where  the  teruple  was 
and  God's  worship  was  specially  conducted  ;  but  instead  of  this,  the  decided  and  con- 
stant preference  is  given  to  Mt.  Zion,  where  David's  throne  was  located.  Why  such  a 
preference  ?  Our  entire  line  of  argument  shows  why  it  is  thus  presented,  viz.,  the  Theo- 
cratic ordering  which  had  its  real  centre  associated  with  Mt.  Zion.  This  in  itself  shows 
that  when  Zion  is  restored,  the  Theocracy  under  the  Messiah  is  also  established.  Hence, 
in  view  of  the  inseparable  conjunction  of  Zion  and  the  New  Jerusalem,  we  have  the 
Spirit  in  prophecy  using  the  one  or  the  other  to  express  the  Theocratic  ordering  still 
future.  This  at  once  indicates,  as  our  argument  shows,  that,  as  to  locality,  the  New 
Jerusalem  is  connected  with  Mt.  Zion  in  Palestine,  and  that  it  is  not,  as  e.g.  Baxter 
( Coming  Wars),  suspended  in  the  sky,  from  which  the  Lord  Jesus  and  the  saints  descend 
every  day  for  governmental  purposes,  and  retire  to  at  night  (and  at  the  end  of  one  thou- 
sand years  these  visits  to  the  earth  are  discontinued).  This  is  simply  to  overlook  the 
locality,  etc.,  of  the  covenanted  restored  Davidic  throne,  which  the  Messiah  occupies,  the 
nature  and  perpetuity  of  the  Kingdom.  In  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  we  must  not 
overlook  that  this  includes  the  inheritance  of  God  Himself,  as  the  portion  of  "  the  royal 
priesthood  "  (comp.  e.g.  Numb.  18  :  20  ;  Deut.  10  :9  and  18  :  1,  2  ;  Josh.  13  :  33  ;  Ps.  16  :5, 
etc.,  in  their  relationship  to  the  people  gathered  out).  This  forms  the  climax  of  the 
saints'  glory  ;  the  unchangeable  foundation  of  eternal  bliss  ;  the  exaltation  and  divinity 
of  the  Theocratic  King  ;  the  splendor  and  majesty  of  the  Kingdom. 

3  This  future  New  Jerusalem,  dependent  upon  a  personal  Sec.  Advent  and  associated 
with  the  covenanted  Theocratic  Kingdom,  enables  us  to  set  aside  the  vagaries  of  the  past 
and  present,  which  misapply  the  promises  pertaining  to  the  same,  as  e.g.  the  appropria- 
tion of  New  Jerusalem  by  the  Swedenborgians  ( Works),  the  Zion  by  the  early  Anabap- 
tists (Mosheim,  etc.),  the  New  Zion  by  the  Zionites  (Rousdorf,  Kurtz's  Ch.  JJis.,  vol.  2, 
p.  273),  the  Zion  by  the  Mormons  ( Works),  Morin's  effort  to  found  the  New  Jerusalem 
("  Bastile,"  Edec.  Mag.,  Ap.,  1876),  the  New  Jerusalem  of  Eva  Von  Buttlar  (Kurtz's  Ch. 
IBs.,  vol.  2,  p.  273),  and  of  the  prophet  Proli  (Kurtz's  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2.  p.  40),  etc., 
including  the  Protestant  misapplications  to  their  respective  churches,  or  to  the  Church 
as  a  whole. 

This  subject  in  connection  with  the  Prop,  on  the  place  of  manifested  royalty,  etc.,  evi- 
dently, by  implication,  teaches  us  where  Eden  or  Paradise  was  originally  located.  If  we 
take  the  articles  in  Relig.  Encyclops.  on  Eden  or  Paradise,  we  find  various  conjectures 
(taken  e.g.  from  the  present  formation  of  the  earth,  without  considering  the  vast  changes 
that  were  since  introduced)  as  to  locality,  such  as  Armenia,  India,  "the  highest  place  of 
the  earth,"  Palestine,  China,  Ceylon,  Syria,  Persia,  Babylonia,  Arabia,  Ethiopia,  etc.  It 
is  the  most  reasonable  to  suppose  Palestine  (of  which  the  promise  is  that  it  shall  be  like 
the  garden  of  Eden)  was  thus  originally  favored,  because  it  will  be  the  place  where  the 
Second  Adam  is  manifested  in  His  glory,  it  being  His  chosen  place,  and  where  His 
saints  exhibit  their  redemption.  The  place  forfeited  by  sin  will  be  restored  in  greater 
grandeur,  and  in  it  we  find  "  the  tree  of  life"  again  made  accessible  to  man.  We  only 
add,  as  suggestive,  that  by  the  direct  supernatural  intervention  great  and  astounding 
changes  will  be  made  in  levelling  the  land,  etc.,  making  it  suitable  for  the  reception  of 
the  city.  In  addition,  many  writers  of  prophecy  believe,  as  the  Dead  Sea  is  about  1300 
feet  lower  than  the  Mediterranean  Sea  (so  e.g.  Warner,  In  the  Levant,  p.  107),  a  channel 


52  THE  TIIEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  161). 

of  communication  will  be  cut  from  the  latter  to  the  former,  and  from  thence  to  the  Bed 
Sea. 

Dr.  Craven  in  Lange's  Com.  Rev.,  p.  390,  etc.,  gives  the  idea  that  the  New  Jerusalem 
"  will  exist  :  1.  As  a  real  city — the  glorious  home  and  capital  of  a  glorified  community. 
2.  As  a  material  symbol  of  that  community,  its  order  and  glory."  The  reason  why  he  has 
the  second  notion  attached,  arises  from  the  city  being  called  "the  Bride,"  which  he  is 
forced  to  apply  to  the  Church.  Our  explanation  conclusively  shows  that  this  does  not 
logically  follow,  because  the  marriage  relation  is  scripturally  used  to  denote  the  intimate 
and  enduring  relationship  existing  between  the  King  and  His  capital  where  He  is 
enthroned.  Craven  insists  upon  the  materiality  of  a  great  city  as  the  most  natural  con- 
clusion, as  being  necessary,  as  fitting  for  the  glorified,  as  properly  related  to  the  restitu- 
tion, etc.  He  also  correctly  distinguishes  "  between  the  material  city  and  the  new 
earth,"  "  the  citizens  of  the  city  and  the  nations,"  etc.  The  order  of  time  when 
revealed,  etc.,  is  carefully  noticed  under  Prop  151,  compared  with  Props.  148,  149,  and 
150.  We  must  object  to  Craven's  locating  the  New  Jerusalem  after  the  Mill,  age  for  the 
reasons  there  assigned.  When  the  Davidic  throne  is  restored  and  the  Theocratic  order- 
ing once  inaugurated  at  Mt.  Zion,  it  will — as  the  prophets  agree — be  perpetual.  The 
saints  occupy  this  city,  not  a  thousand  years  after  the  Kingdom  is  established,  but  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Mill,  era  ;  and  being  here  on  the  earth  at  the  close  of  the  Mill.,  they  do 
not  descend  from  the  third  heaven  after  the  Mill.  age.  The  time  of  marriage,  the  unity 
of  prediction,  the  relation  of  the  city  to  the  Theocracy,  etc.,  demand  itsPre-Mill.  arrival. 
We  thus  agree  with  Justin,  Irenaeus,  Tertullian,  Elliott,  and  many  others  in  making  the 
New  Jerusalem  also  Millennial. 


Prop.  170.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  53 


Proposition  170.   This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  fully  sustained 
by  the  "  Father's  House"  of  Mm  14:2. 

It  is  important  to  consider  this  Scripture  referred  to,  since  it  is 
supposed  by  many  to  form  an  objection  to  our  doctrine  of  the  King- 
dom ;  whereas  correctly  apprehended  according  to  the  analogy  of 
Holy  Writ,  it  forms  an  additional  proof  in  behalf  of  our  position. 

Obs.  1.  Probably  no  passage  of  Revelation  has  received  in  modern  times 
such  extravagant  interpretation  as  John  14  :  1-3.  The  early  Church  well 
posted  in  the  meaning  of  the  "  Father's  house,"  and  assigning  to  it  only 
its  scriptural  definition,  had  no  difficulty  with  it  (seeing  that  none  is 
intimated).  It  was  described  to  them  by  covenant  and  prophecy  ;  it  was 
handed  to  them  by  inspired  teachers  ;  it  was  so  universally  comprehended 
by  them,  as  a  result  of  the  general  instruction  and  belief  in  the  Theocratic 
Kingdom,  that  it  required  centuries  before  the  theories,  now  so  prevalent, 
found  an  entrance  into  the  Church.  Those  early  believers  more  logically 
consistent  than  many  eminent  moderns,  rested  satisfied  with  the  descrip- 
tion of  the  house  as  given  in  the  Old  Test.,  and  hence  were  protected 
against  those  interpretations  afterward  fastened  upon  the  passage.  They 
instead  of  isolating  these  verses  and  explaining  them  independently  of  all 
others,  interpreted  them  in  the  light  of  previously  given  Revelation. 
We  are  mainly  indebted  again  to  Origen  for  a  departure  from  the  primi- 
tive faith.  He  (in  De  Princip.,  B.  2,  ch.  11)  makes  out  the  Father's 
house  to  mean  "  spheres,  i.e.,  globes"  or  "  heavens,''1  and  (in  B.  11,  S.  6) 
he  speaks  of  it  as  follows  :  "  I  think,  therefore,  that  all  the  saints  who 
depart  this  life  will  remain  in  some  place  situated  on  the  earth  which 
Holy  Scripture  calls  Paradise"  (comp.  with  Justin)  "  as  in  some  place  of 
instruction  ;"  then,  after  certain  progress,  these  saints  ascend  to  "  spheres" 
or  heavens,  reaching  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  ;  and  in  proof  of  their  pass- 
ing through  various  places,  he  directly  quotes:  "  In  my  Father's  house 
are  many  mansions,"  etc.  Origen's  progeny  has  been  prolific.1  This 
notion  of  his  entirely  adopted  by  some  and  extended  into  imaginary 
details,  finds  its  indorsement  in  popular  commentaries,  as  e.g.  Barnes 
(Com.  Jno.  14  :  1)  who  says  this  "  house"  "may  include  the  Universe,'" 
and  speaks  of  "  removing  from  one  apartment  of  God's  universal  dwelling- 
place  to  another."  Imagination  has  painted  this  "house"  in  as  many 
varied  forms  and  hues  as  either  fancy,  or  the  astronomical  knowledge  of 
the  parties  could  suggest,  as  e.g.  that  it  was  the  universe,  the  mansions 
being  the  planets  or  worlds  ;  or,  that  it  was  the  central  part  of  the 
universe  around  which  all  planets  and  systems  revolve,  etc.  Others,  more 
soberly,  define  it  to  be  "  the  third  heaven"  without  indicating  its 
position.  Numerous  works,  such  as  Our  Eternal  Home,  Our  Heavenly 
Home,  Heaven,  Meet  for  Heaven,  Gates  Ajar,  etc.,  etc.,  while  containing 


54  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PeOP.   170. 

much  that  is  interesting  and  valuable,  embrace  this  change  of  interpreta- 
tion suggested  by  Origen,  adopted  by  the  faithful  forerunners  of  the  Papacy, 
incorporated  by  the  Popish  doctors  viz.  that  this  "  house"  is  either 
"  the  third  heaven"  or  some  place  "  above  or  beyond  the  stars,"  which  is 
"the  special  dwelling-place  of  the  Father"  or  "the  Palace  of  God." 
Eloquence,  poetry,  hvnmology,  theology,  etc.2  endeavor — without  the  least 
proof  and  resting  solely  on  mere  assnmjrtion — to  elevate  this  into  the 
truth  of  God.  Men  of  eminence  and  ability,  of  earnest  and  devoted  piety, 
resting  in  the  misconceived  notion  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom  and 
inheritance,  accept  of  these  changes  as  in  accord  with  their  conceptions 
of  the  Kingdom  and  inheritance,  and  hence  do  not  stop  to  examine  the 
passage  as  it  stands  related  to  both  covenant  and  prophecy.  Some,  un- 
necessarily perplexed  by  the  numerous  suppositions  unauthorized  by  the 
Word,  have  fallen  into  another  and  equally  untenable  position,  viz.  "  that 
where  the  place  (i.e.  Father's  house)  is,  cannot  be  determined,"  and  that 
"  it  becomes  us  to  be  silent  when  Divine  revelation  is  so" — thus  taking 
it  for  granted  that  the  Bible  is  silent  on  the  subject  because  they  fail  to 
compare  Scripture  with  Scripture,  and  to  regard  the  phraseology  of  Christ 
in  its  Jewish  or  rather  Prophetical  aspect.  As  intimated,  the  cause  of  all 
such  departures  lies  in  the  misconception  of  the  Kingdom  that  is  covenanted 
to  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  which  the  saints  are  to  have  their  inheritance. 

1  As  e.g.  Swedenborg's  mystical  theory  of  the  spheres  ;  or  the  idea  of  some  popular 
writers  of  successive  stages  of  progressive  life  evolved  by  successive  transportations  from 
planet  to  planet  ;  or  the  notion  of  Isaac  Taylor  (1'hys.  Theory  of  Another  Life)  of  an  invisi- 
ble, although  to  some  extent  material,  world  or  universe  inside  of  the  one  cognizable  to 
us,  and  "  not  connected  by  any  active  affinities"  to  this  one  ;  and  others  ot  a  similar 
tendency,  all  of  which  ignore  the  believer's  inheritance  as  promised  by  the  Spirit  (sub- 
stituting their  own  conceived  one  in  place  of  it),  and  by  their  vague,  mystical  concep- 
tions deliberately  reject  God's  sworn  statement  respecting  it,  making  redemption,  both  of 
man  and  creation,  from  the  curse  incomplete. 

2  Science  might  have  been  added  according  to  the  lavish  statements  of  Figuier  (27ie 
To-Morrow  of  Death,  ch.  3),  who,  after  telling  us  that  "  the  space  above  our  atmosphere" 
is  "  heaven,"  adds  that  science  corroborates  what  is  asserted,  viz.,  that  "  the  most  wide- 
spread modern  religions — Christianity,  Buddhism,  and  Mohammedanism— assign  to  hea- 
ven the  home  of  God's  chosen  people."  "  So  science,  tradition,  and  religion  join  hands  in 
this  matter  ;  arid  the  holy  priest  who,  attending  the  royal  martyr  on  the  revolutionary 
scaffold,  cried,  '  Son  of  the  holy  St.  Louis,  ascend  to  heaven,'  uttered  a  veritable  scien- 
tific truth."  This  suggests  how  far  the  Church  is  indebted  to  outside  views  respecting 
the  regions  of  the  blessed— that  is,  to  heathen  mythology — for  a  departure  from  the 
primitive  belief.  The  writer  just  quoted  (Figuier)  affirms,  what  others  only  conjectured, 
that  the  sun  is  the  ultimate  radiant  home  of  the  purified  souls.  That  is  the  Father's 
house  ;  thus  reintroducing  in  another  form  the  ancient  regard  for  the  sun.  So.  C.  Bonnet 
(Philosophic  Palingenesis),  Dupont  de  Nemours  (Ihe  Philos.  of  the  Universe),  and  others 
have  the  saints  passing  from  world  to  world,  ascending  to  heaven,  etc.  ;  and  the  former 
locates  the  New  Jerusalem  forever  in  heaven  (ignoring  the  promise  that  it  shall  descend 
to  the  earth),  and  adds  to  Christ's  language,  in  John  14,  "  He  will  return  and  take  us  with 
Him,  that  we  may  be  where  He  will  be,"  etc.,  thus  implying  a  leaving  again  after  return. 
The  poets  need  not  be  mentioned,  and  the  reader  perhaps  is  familiar  with  Dick's  Philos. 
of  a  lAdure  State,  and  kindred  works,  where  the  astronomical  idea  is  developed. 

Obs.  2.  Let  us  endeavor  to  ascertain  the  scriptural  meaning  of 
"  Father's  house."  The  word  "  house,"  with  Father,  or  God,  or  Lord, 
attached,  in  some  places  denotes  the  tabernacle  ;  in  other  places  the 
temple  ;  and  still  in  others  the  Church,  because  God  is  specially  present, 
and  these  in  a  special  manner  belong  unto  Him.  So  Jerusalem,  owing  to 
its  Theocratic  \relationship,   containing  the  throne  of  David,   being  the 


PEOP.  170.]  THE   THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  55 

capital  of  the  Messianic  King,  being  the  place  where  God  will  dwell  again, 
etc.,  is  called  "  the  house  of  the  Lord,'"  Ps.  ,122,  Zech.  8,  etc.,  just  as 
Xebuchacinezzar  designated  the  city  Babylon  (Dan.  4  :  30)  "  the  house  of 
the  Kingdom."  It  is  His  "  habitation"  or  "  dwelling-place"  because 
specially  covenanted  to  Him,  Ps.  132  :  13,  14  "  For  the  Lord  hath  chosen 
Zion;  lie  hath  desired  it  for  his  habitation.  This  is  my  rest  forever; 
here  will  I dwell  for  I  have  desired  it,"  etc.  Here  it  is  that  God  will  again 
through  His  Son — who  is  also  the  promised  seed  of  David  to  occupy 
(according  to  oath)  David's  throne — manifest  his  rulership.  In  the 
prophetic  delineations,  this  idea  of  "  a  house,"  "  a  dwelling-place,"  etc., 
is  inseparably  connected  with  that  of  the  Kingdom  ;  that  is,  it  is  the 
house  of  the  Kingdom  in  which  the  regal  representations  are  exhibited, 
and  to  which  all  must  look  for  the  central  place  of  dominion.  It  must 
not  be  separated  from  the  Kingdom  ;  it  being  the  head  of  the  King- 
dom and  designed  for  its  establishment  and  perpetuation.  So  closely 
are  the  two  united,  that  the  Kingdom  itself  —  flowing  out  of  this 
"house"  — is  called  "the  house"  that  was  found  and  left  desolate 
by  Jesus  (Matt.  23  :  38  etc.)  "  the  tabernacle  of  David  fallen"  and 
in  ruins,  or  the  royal  house  of  David  (called  "house"  and  "mine 
house"  i.e.  adopted  as  God's  in  2  Sam.  7  :  1  seq.  and  1  Chron.  17  : 
11-27)  in  an  abject  condition.1  Or,  to  express  ourselves  more  accur- 
ately, "  the  house"  of  David  becoming  God's  "  house"  in  virtue  of  His  Son 
being  incorporated  to  constitute  the  Theocratic  King  contemplated,  it 
and  the  Kingdom  are  associated  (comp.  even  Gen.  41  :  40)  ideas,  with 
which  Jerusalem  as  the  place  of  special  royal  manifestation  and  residence 
is  annexed  ;  the  one  virtually  and  necessarily  recalling  the  other.  This, 
therefore,  explains  why  in  the  prophecies  they  are  interchangeably  used  ; 
the  one  suggesting  and  being  contained  in  the  other.  The  word  "  house" 
linked  with  God,  naturally  suggests  a  particular  relationship  j  that  He  in 
some  manner  is  identified  with  it  ;  and  this  is  fully  sustained  in  the 
position  that  Jerusalem  will  occupy  (as  e.g.  Zech.  8:3)  in  the  restored 
Theocratic  arrangement.  This  accounts  for  the  praises,  etc.,  lavished 
upon  Jerusalem,  the  exalted  place  it  becomes  in  the  eyes  of  all  nations, 
etc.,  but  as  these  have  been  presented  under  Props.  168  and  1G9,  nothing 
more  need  to  be  added.  (The  only  objection,  derived  from  Christ  prepar- 
ing a  place,  will  be  noticed  below  Obs.  5,  and  under  Prop.  152,  etc.) 
It  now  becomes  necessary  to  verify  the  meauing  that  we  have  attached  to 
"  the  Father's  house."  Let  us  closely  follow  the  guidings  of  Scripture 
and  see  the  result.  Turn  e.g.  to  Micah  3  :  12  and  Zion  shall  "  be  ploughed 
as  a  field,  and  Jerusalem  shall  become  heaps,  and  the  mountain  of  the 
house  as  the  high  places  of  the  forest."  Here  the  once  favored  city  of  God 
and  the  Kingdom  is  described  as  fallen.  "  But  (Micah  4  :  1-3)  in  the 
last  days"  all  this  is  to  be  changed  ;  a  restoration  is  asserted  of  the  same 
Zion,  the  identical  Jerusalem  and  mountain,  and  notice,  it  is  expressly 
affirmed,  when  this  restitution  takes  place,  to  be  God's  "  house,"  in  the 
expressions,  "  the  mountain  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  the  house  of  the  God 
of  Jacob,"  with  the  location  definitely  fixed  in  the  words  :  "for  the  law 
shall  go  forth  of  Zion  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem"  (comp. 
Isa.  2  :  1-4  "  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house,"  etc.)  No  wonder  that 
Jews  acquainted  with  prophecy  understood  Jesus  by  "  the  Father's 
house"  to  refer  to  these  very  predictions  where  it  is  geographically  portrayed 
(for  evidence,   see,  e.g.  the  opinion  of  the  disciples,   who  heard  Jesus, 


56  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  170. 

indirectly  or  rather  directly  given  Acts  1  :  6)2  Jnst  as  Jerusalem  is 
called  "the  throne  of  the  Lord"  (Jer.  3  :  17),  being  "  the  city  of  the  great 
King"  "the  city  of  our  God"  (Ps.  48  :  1-2)  "  Hie  holy  mountain"'  and 
"  the  mountain  of  the  Lord  of  hosts"  (Zech.  8  :  3)  "  a  crown  of  glory  in 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of  thy  God"  (Isa.  62  : 
3)  because  "  the  delight"  of  God  and  married  to  Him  (i.e.  intimately 
united  to  Him) — so  Jerusalem  is  designated  "  the  house  of  God,"  etc. 
The  word  "  Father"  joined  to  it  specially  recalled  the  fact  that  God  the 
Father  is  there  as  promised  ;  that  the  Father  (privately  acknowledged) 
is  the  One  that  bestows  (Dan.  7)  "  the  throne  of  the  Lord"  upon  the  Son  ; 
that  He  (by  covenant)  acknowledges  David's  Son  as  His  Son  ruling  in 
His  might  so  that  Theocratically  the  Kingdom  then  established  is  properly 
named  the  Kingdom  of  the  Father  and  also  of  the  Son  (comp.  e.g.  Matt. 
26  :  29  ;  Eev.  11  :  15  ;  2  Pet.  1  :  11,  etc.).  Hence  the  apostles  and  early 
Christians,  placing  these  predictions  in  the  future  at  the  Second  Advent, 
and  well  knowing  that  God  the  Father  would  again  dwell  in  and  "  rejoice 
in  Jerusalem"  when  "  the  new  heaven  and  new  earth"  (Isa.  65  :  17-19) 
were  created,  thus  making  it  His  Habitation  or  House,  could  not  interpret 
Christ's  language  in  any  other  way  than  as  applicable  to  that  period.  It 
was  only  when  the  direct  prophecies  relating  to  God's  House  in  this  sense 
were  alleged  to  be  fulfilled  in  this  dispensation  and  Church  (against  exist- 
ing fact,  viz.  that  such  supremacy,  deliverance  from  war,  suffering,  etc., 
are  not  witnessed,  and  will  not  be  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent),  that  men 
found  it  necessary  to  seek  out  another  meaning  for  the  predicted  "  House 
of  the  Lord."  Let  the  student  notice  that  John  gives  this  promise  of 
the  Father's  house  after  the  determination  of  Judas  to  betray  Him,  and 
in  view  of  His  approaching  death  ;  now  if  we  turn  to  Luke,  we  find  sub- 
stantially the  same  promise  given  in  other  phraseology  which  corroborates 
our  interpretation.  In  Luke  22  :  29,  30,  Jesus  appoints  unto  them  a 
Kingdom  as  the  Father  appointed  unto  Him,  etc.,  which  when  compared 
with  Matt.  19  :  28  and  other  Scripture  is,  "when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  sit 
on  the  throne  of  His  glory.' ''  The  spirit  or  intent  of  the  promise  is  thus 
confirmed,  and  this  will  be  strengthened  by  considering  the  numerous 
promises  given  to  the  righteous  of  inheriting,  dwelling  in,  abiding  in 
Jerusalem,  this  Lord's  house  in  the  future,  and  of  their  securing  such 
extraordinary  exemption  from  evils  and  the  reception  of  positive  bless- 
ings such  as  can  only  be  attributed  to  the  state  of  believers  after  the 
Advent.3  The  Father  and  the  Christ  being  One,  as  John  proceeds  to  state 
in  the  words  of  Jesus,  shows — if  faith  is  willing  to  accept  of  it — that  "  the 
Father's  house,"  and  "  the  Lord's  house"  established  at  the  Second  Com- 
ing by  the  Mighty  King,  are  one  and  the  same.  An  overwhelming  stream 
of  prophecy  indicates  the  identity ;  and  Jesus  sustains  it  in  the  most 
delicate  manner  by  calling  it,  in  view  of  the  relation  that  He  sustains  in 
the  Theocratic  order,  "  the  Father's  house,"  which  the  prophets,  in  their 
relationship,  did  not  directly  employ,  but  substituted  "  TJie  house  of  the 
Lord,"  "  The  city  of  the  Lord,  the' Zion  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  etc. 
The  only  correct  method  of  dealing  with  the  passage  under  consideration 
is  to  regard  it  as  in  unison  with  the  previously  given  statements  concern- 
ing "  the  Lord's  house,"  which  is  to  be  witnessed  and  realized  in  all  its 
glory  in  the  renewed  earth.4 

1  The  Oriental  usage  must  be  observed  in  this  connection,  which  represented  a  King, 
doni  under  .the  figure  of  a  "  house,"  with  the  evident  idea  of  presenting  the  notion  of  a 


Prop.  170.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  57 

paternal  government,  a  relationship  of  parent  and  children  in  the  headship  and  obedi- 
ence, etc.  It  is  only  necessary  to  direct  attention  e.g.  to  Heb.  3  :  2,  5,  6,  where  it  is 
asserted  that  Moses  was  faithful  in  bis  "  house,"  or  government  or  headship  over  the 
children  of  Israel,  and  so  Christ  also  has  a  "  house,"  a  government  or  headship,  which 
"house"  we,  if  persevering  to  the  end,  shall  become,  i.e.  having  reference  to  our  associ- 
ated rulership  with  Christ,  being  exactly  equivalent  to  Luke  12  :  32,  etc.  The  Ency.  Relig. 
Knowledge,  in  art.  "  House,"  correctly  observes  that  owing  to  a  house  being  for  dwelling 
and  a  tent  being  also  for  the  same,  they  are  called  the  same  (beth)  in  Hebrew.  The 
tabernacle  of  God,  the  tabernacle  of  David  incorporated  as  His,  is  this  house,  and  it  is 
restored  here  upon  the  earth — for  God  dwells  in  it  as  Ruler,  the  Sovereign  Head — it 
being  a  Theocratic  House. 

2  From  explanations  previously  given,  it  is  unnecessary  to  stop  and  argue  that  e.g. 
"  mountain"  denotes  Kingdom,  for  even  our  opponents  fully  admit  this  when,  in  their 
own  way,  they  make  Micah  and  Isaiah  descriptive  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  But 
that  it  is  thus  employed  the  reader  can  verify  by  reference  to  Isa.  25  :  6,  7  ;  Dan.  2  :  35  ; 
Ezek.  17  :  23  ;  Isa.  41  :  15,  etc.  The  latter  (Daubuz,  Perp.  Com.,  quotes)  a  Targiim 
renders  :  "  Thou  shalt  slay  the  people  and  shalt  consume  the  kingdoms  (i.e.  mountains); 
thou  shalt  make  them  as  stubble."  Lord,  in  reply  to  Berg,  says  that  "  mountain"  is  not 
used  as  a  Kingdom,  but  symbolically  to  designate  "  the  rulers  who  exercise  the  govern- 
ment over  the  State,  not  the  State  itself,  as  a  mountain  is  part  of  the  earth  that  is  largely 
elevated  above  the  lower  portions  that  surround  it."  While  we  are  inclined  to  think 
that  "  mountain"  is  sometimes  used  for  Kingdom,  yet  it  is  also,  as  Lord  states,  employed 
to  designate  the  ruling  authority,  the  places  of  power  and  authority,  the  high  places  of 
a  Kingdom.  And  thus  it  seems  to  be  employed  in  Isa.  2  and  Mic.  4,  or  otherwise  we 
have  a  redundancy  in  the  expression,  viz.,  the  Father's  house  is  already  the  Kingdom  as 
established  at  Jerusalem,  and  the  mountain  must  be  descriptive  of  the  ruling  authority, 
which  is  thus  exalted  above  all  others.  Lord's  idea  coincides  with  the  one  here  ad- 
vanced, since  Jerusalem  is  the  place  of  manifested  royalty,  the  representative  of  the  rul- 
ing authority,  the  centre  of  the  widespread  dominion.  As  a  contrast  we  refer  to  the 
Father  of  modern  deviations,  Origen,  who  {Ag.  Celsus)  makes,  in  Isa.  2,  the  mountain  of 
the  Lord  to  be  the  Word  ;  the  house  to  be  the  Church  ;  the  tops  of  the  mountains  to  be 
the  predictions  of  the  prophets  ;  the  hills  to  be  individuals  who  make  a  profession  of 
superior  attainments  in  wisdom,  etc. 

3  It  is  this  feature  which  forms  the  key-note  of  many  passages.  Thus,  e.g.  the  barren 
woman  "  dwelling  (marg.)  in  a  house,"  Ps.  113  : 9,  "  they  shall  be  abundantly  satisfied  iciih 
the  fatness  of  tin/  house,"  etc.,  Ps.  36  :  8  (with  which  compare  feast  of  Isa.  25,  etc.).  So 
also  Ps.  84  ':  4,  10  ;  Ps.  58  :  2  ;  Isa.  56  :  5  ;  Ps.  65  :  4  ;  Isa.  60  :  7,  etc. 

4  The  reader  is  reminded  (as  indicative  of  the  use  of  the  word  "  house")  that  in  this 
Jerusalem — this  "  house  of  the  Lord  "—which  belongs  to  God  in  virtue  of  its  TJieocratic 
relationship,  there  is  to  be  another  "  house"  or  "  building,"  called  "a  spiritual  house," 
1  Pet.  2  :  4-10  ;  "  God's  building,"  1  Cor.  3:9;"  house  of  God,"  1  Tim.  3  :  15  ;  1  Pet. 
4  :  17.  This  "  house"  is  incorporated  with  the  other,  forming,  Eph.  2  :  19-22,  "  an  Holy 
Temple  in  the  Lord,"  "  for  the  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit."  It  is  so  desig- 
nated because  forming  that  "  royal  priesthood,"  etc.,  who  "in  the  ages  to  come"  shall 
show  forth  "  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace,"  etc.  How  this  "  house"  is  connected 
is  shown  under  various  propositions. 

Obs.  3  In  this  "  house"  are  "  many  mansions. "  Commentators  inform 
us  that  the  word  translated  "mansions"  may  denote  either  the  act  of 
dwelling,  or  the  place  where  one  dwells,  or  a  station  or  position  occupied 
therein.  It  is  of  little  consequence  which  idea  is  intended,  for  either  one 
of  them  imply  that  in  this  house  the  saints  will  dwell  possessing  stations  of 
honor  and  glory.  How  this  accords  with  the  descriptions  relating  to  the 
capital  of  the  Coming  Theocratic  Kingdom,  need  not  be  repeated  after 
the  intimations  already  given.  But  the  reader  will  notice  that  these 
disciples  are  encouraged  with  the  hope  of  being  specially  near  to  Him  in 
the  very  place  of  royal  manifestation,  which  is  explained  in  other  passages 
as  sitting  upon  thrones  and  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  agreeably 
to  the  Theocratic  ordering.  "  Many"  gives  an  assurance  of  sufficiency, 
and,  perhaps,  as  some  think,  of  "  grades"  agreeably  to  1  Cor.  15  :  40,  41. 


58  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  170. 

Tertullian  (On  ihe  Fes.,  ch.  41)  says  the  many  mansions  "  may  possibly  be  under- 
stood of  the  domicile  of  this  world."  A  remark  may  be  appropriately  added  :  These 
"  mansions,"  while  "  many,"  still  are  only  designed  for  a  certain  class,  viz.,  the  elect. 
The  number  of  kings  and  priests  is  determined  ;  only  so  many,  and  no  more,  are  to  be- 
come such  ;  and  hence  also  the  number  of  crowns  and  mansions  are  determined  for  the 
same.  This  is  a  peculiar,  separate,  exalted  people  specially  formed  for  His  name,  who 
are  associated  with  Christ  in  the  administrations  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom.  These  are 
now  in  process  of  being  gathered  out  of  the  nations.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  shall  be 
among  those  so  highly  honored.  If  believers,  let  us  be  careful  lest  some  other  man  take 
the  mansion  that  we  can  attain  unto  ;  for  it  is  just  as  true  of  the  mansion  as  it  is  of  the 
crown  (the  latter  being  equivalent  to  or  including  the  former),  Eev.  3  :  11,  "  to  hold  that 
fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown."  No  crown,  no  mansion.  How 
terrible,  how  remorseful,  if  another  man  take  the  position,  the  dwelling-place,  so  happy, 
exalted  and  glorious,  once  offered  to  me  and  within  my  reach. 

Obs.  4.  "  If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you.'"  Here  Jesus  appeals 
to  His  own  truthfulness.  The  student  will  please  observe  the  force  of  this 
reference.  (1)  It  takes  for  (/ranted  that  the  disciples  after  having 
preached  this  Father's  house,  after  having  identified  it  with  the  Theo- 
cratic- David ic  Kingdom — understood  the  nature  of  this  house  and  antic- 
ipated places  of  honor  and  glory  in  it.  Hence  the  expressive  :  "  If  it 
were  not  so,"  i.e.  if  you  believed  wrong — if  your  faith  and  hope  were  erro- 
neous, etc.  (2)  Jesus  confirms  them  in  their  expectations  of  the  ultimate 
restoration  of  this  Theocratic  "  Father's  house,"  in  the  words  :  "  I  would 
have  told  y oil."  By  this  expression  Ho  affirms  that  He  would  not,  as  a 
faithful  Teacher,  leave  them,  if  misapprehending  the  truth,  under  a  mis- 
take. He  would  enlighten  them.  The  honesty  of  Jesus  is  involved  in  this 
matter.  If  the  disciples  were  wrong  in  their  view  of  the  Father's  house, 
then  it  was  the  place  of  the  Divine  Teacher  not  to  leave  them  in  the 
continued  (see  Acts  1  :  6)  belief  that  it  related  to  the  Theocratic  ordering. 
(See  this  matter  discussed,  Props.  43,  69,  70,  71,  etc.)  (3)  If  the  modern 
notions  engrafted  on  this  passage  are  correct,  then  it  follows  that  there 
ought  to  have  been  a  complete  revulsion  in  the  views  of  the  disciples, 
seeing  that  the  popularly  received  interpretations  of  the  Father's  house  are 
utterly  antagonistic  to  the  idea  of  a  restored  Theocratic-Davidic  house — 
once  under  the  special  relationship  of  the  Father.  But  such  a  change  of 
meaning  never  resulted  under  apostolic  preaching  (Props.  70,  71)  as  seen 
in  the  belief  (Props.  72,  73,  74,  75,  76)  of  the  early  Church.  Our  inter- 
pretation vindicates,  therefore,  the  integrity  of  Jesus,  the  knowledge  of 
inspired  teachers,  and  the  belief  of  the  Primitive  Church. 

Ohs.  5.  u  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  By  this  going  Jesus  cm- 
braces  His  death  and  ascent  to  heaven  ;  and  includes  the  provision  made 
for  salvation,  such  as  securing  His  own  power  over  death  (i.e.  becoming 
David's  immortal  Son,  capable  of  meeting  and  fulfilling  the  terms  of  the 
covenant)  to  rescue  others,  His  acknowledgment  by  the  Father  in  exalta- 
tion, etc.  By  thus  preparing  a  place  for  you,  He  evidently  refers  to  the 
same  inheritance  that  Peter  speaks  of  (1  Pet.  1  :  4-7)"  reserved  in  heaven," 
but  "  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time,"  "at  the  appearing  of  Jesus 
Christ  :"  or.  to  the  Xew  Jerusalem,  the  special  home  of  the  ransomed, 
which  John  tells  us  (Bev.  21)  at  the  creation  of  "  the  new  heaven  and 
new  earth,"  "  comes  down,  from  God,  out  of  heaven,"  and  which,  as  we 
have  shown  (Prop.  169)  is  most  intimately  connected  with,  joined  to, 
the  earthly  Jerusalem,  giving  to   the  latter  its  inexpressibly  great  glory. 


Prop.  170.1  the  theocratic  kingdom.  59 

No  one  doubts  that  the  New  Jerusalem  state,  whatever  it  denotes,  is 
related  to  this  "  Father's  house.'"'  But  in  strict  conformity  with  our 
doctrine,  when  the  time  comes  for  this  Father's  house  (Theocratic  capital) 
to  be  restored  in  its  contemplated  grandeur  and  predicted  splendor,  this 
New  Jerusalem  "  descends  out  of  heaven  from  God,"  upon  an  eartb  from 
which  the  curse  is  repealed,  forming — owing  to  its  preparation — the  great 
object  of  attraction,  power,  honor,  and  magnificence  identified  with  that 
"  house."  The  stations,  places,  or  mansions,  determined  previously,  are 
bestowed  upon  those  who  are  worthy  of  them.  Bat  this  by  no  means 
exbausts  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  prepare."  The  careful  student  of  the 
Word  well  knows  bow  the  Spirit — to  whom  time  is  nothing — in  the  large- 
ness of  his  comprehension  links  things  together  which  we,  shortsighted  and 
fettered  by  time,  are  apt  to  overlook.  Jesus  is  not  only  the  Divine 
Architect  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  but  in  the  full  and  complete  preparation 
of  the  place  for  the  Redeemed  is  included  the  creation  of  the  New  Heaven 
and  New  Earth,  the  restoration  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  the  making 
of  all  tilings  new.  By  going  in  the  way  appointed,  He  is  the  recognized 
authority  to  receive  the  Kingdom  for  which  He  makes  preparation  in 
heaven  itself  and  completes  it  at  His  return.  He  is  even  engaged  in 
preparing,  i.e.  qualifying,  testing,  etc.,  the  believers  for  the  places 
inteuded  for  them  in  the  Father's  house.  The  phraseology  appears  to 
intimate  that  the  preparation  is  not  immediately  complete,  but  con- 
tinuous, extending  even  to  His  Coming  again. 

The  reader  will  observe  that  the  expression,  "  prepare  a  place  for  you,"  forbids  the 
engrafted  Popish  idea  of  this  place  being  "  the  third  heaven,"  the  place  where  the 
Divine  .Sovereignty  is  specially  manifested,  seeing  that  such  preparation  implies  that  it 
did  not  previously  exist,  which  cannot  be  said  of  the  third  heaven.  Fairbairn  (  Typology, 
vol.  1,  p.  312)  says  that  the  going  to  prepare  denotes  "  His  directing  the  events  which 
are  to  issue  in  its  full  establishment,"  and  while  inclined  to  accept  of  this  we  make  it  to 
include  much  more.     (Coinp.  Alford,  Lange,  etc.,  loci.) 

Obs.  6.  We  now  come  to  the  clause  which  is  supposed  to  militate  the 
most  against  our  view,  viz.  "  I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  my- 
self ;  that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  he  also."  Some  commentators  tell  us 
that  by  this  Coming  again,  etc.,  is  meant  His  Coming  by  death  to  remove 
saints  to  this  "house."  But  this  is  opposed  not  only  by  the  spirit  of 
the  passage  and  by  parallel  passages  but  even  many  of  our  opponents 
themselves  refuse  to  accept  it  owing  to  its  harshness.  Being  present 
personally,  speaking  of  departing  per son  ally,  .the  Coming  again  must  also 
allude  to  a  personal  Coming  or  return  ("  I  am  to  comeback,"  so  Bloomtield). 
That  He  will  come  again  personally  is  abundantly  attested  (Prop.  121). 
Jesus  does  not  come  in  or  through  death  ;  death  being  an  enemy  and 
penal  in  its  character.  Hence  even  Barnes  (Com.  Acts  1  :  11)  while  inten- 
tionally silent  on  the  Coming  again  on  John  14  :  3.1  quotes  it  as  a  Coming 
"  at  the  Day  of  Judgment.  So  also  Bloomtield  rejecting  the  notion  of  a 
Coming  at  death,  indorses  what  he  calls  the  interpretation  "maintained 
by  most  ancient  and  earlier  moderns,  viz.  as  referring  to  the  period  of 
the  Sec.  Advent,  and  which  he  adds  :  "  Is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  1  Thess. 
4  :  16,  where  the  language  of  the  apostle  is  the  best  comment  on  that  of  his 
Lord."  The  changing  of  the  text,  also  to  make  it  read  :  "  I  will  return 
and  take  you  with  me"  (Campbell's  Transl.  Four  Gospels),  thus  making 
the  impression  that  they  are  removed  from  this  earth,  is  not  sustained 
either  by  critics  or  the  analogy  of  Scripture.     When  Jesus  comes  again, 


60  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  170. 

He  remains  upon  this  earth  ;  the  Bible  closes  with  leaving  Him,  the 
saints,  and  the  New  Jerusalem  here,  and  it  is  an  unwarranted  adding  to 
the  Word,  a  violation  of  an  oath-bound  covenant,  a  removal  of  Him  from 
His  inheritance,  throne  of  glory,  and  Theocratic  Kingdom,  to  say  that  He 
is  taken  away,  or  goes  away  again  from  this  "  New  Heaven  and  New 
Earth."  Jesus  comes  again  to  restore  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  and  as 
the  saints  are  associated  with  Him  in  rulership,  they  then  receive  the 
portions  assigned  them  in  this  "  Father's  house."'  Hence,  2  Thess.  2  :  1, 
2,  etc.,  "  the  Coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  our  gathering  unto 
Him,"  are  united.  This  Coming  is  itself  dependent  upon  the  completion 
of  certain  preparatory  measures,  such  as  :  until  the  last  one  of  the  chosen, 
elect,  determined  number  of  saints  is  gathered  out  of  this  dispensation 
who  are  to  be  kings  and  priests  in  the  Coming  one  ;  until  the  decreed 
consumption  of  the  land  and  people  has  culminated  to  its  closing  ;  until 
the  ordained  times  of  Gentile  domination  are  about  accomplished.  Then 
when  all  things  are  ready,  "  The  Christ"  comes,  sent  by  the  Father,  One 
with  the  Father,  to  accomplish  and  perfect  the  Father's  will,  and  in  the 
place,  selected  in  preference  to  all  others,  where  the  Theocratic  Presence 
alone  is  vouchsafed,  there  will  he  receive  His  believing  brethren  that  they 
may  ever  be  with  Him.  The  possession  of  this  "  house"  is  conditional 
on  that  Coming — so  all  the  prophets,  all  the  sacred  writers.  In  the  inter- 
mediate state  the  saints  are  waiting  for  the  period  of  manifestation,  when 
the  reward,  the  crown,  the  inheritance,  etc.,  is  bestowed  by  the  Theocratic 
King  and  they  forever  enter  the  enjoyment  of  their  several  "  mansions" 
in  "  the  everlasting  Kingdom,"  of  which  the  glorious  "  Father's  House" 
forms  the  crowning  head,  adorned  and  ennobled  by  the  descended  New 
Jerusalem  with  which  it  is  evermore  One.  Thus  the  Scriptures  har- 
monize, making  (instead  of  several  and  many  localities  and  worlds,  etc.) 
covenant  promises,  predictions,  and  doctrines  consistent  one  with  the 
oilier,  referring  to  one  period,  one  place,  one  great  Kingdom,  one 
magnificent  royal  city  (the  Old  and  the  New  in  union)  and  one  mighty 
King  of  kings  swaying  lordly  dominion,  as  David's  Son  and  Theocratic 
Ruler,  over  all  the  earth  restored  to  the  favor  and  blessing  of  the  Father.2 

1  Although  he  afterward,  on  the  words,  "  Ye  may  be  also,"  says  :  "  He  would  come  again 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  and  gather  all  His  friends  to  Himself,  and  they  should  be  ever 
with  Him,"  Heb.  9  :  28.  His  entire  comment  on  Acts  1  :  11,  "  Shall  so  come,"  is  the 
following  :  "  At  the  day  of  judgment,  John  14  :  3,  '  If  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I 
will  come  again,'  "  etc.  Brown  (Com.,  John  14)  makes  no  attempt  to  explain  the  Father's 
house,  and  on  the  phrase,"  I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  myself,"  he  says: 
"  Strictly,  at  His  personal  appearing  ;  but  in  a  secondary  sense,  to  each  individually" 
(evidently  meaning  by  the  last  death,  with  which  opinion  the  reader  is  desired  to  contrast 
his  own  strong  protest  against  it  in  his  "  Christ's  Sec.  Coming,"  quoted  by  us,  Prop.  121). 
Origen,  Calvin,  Lampe,  Meyer,  Luthardt,  Briickner,  Ewald,  and  many  others  refer  this 
Coming  again  to  the  still  future  jiersonal  Parousia  of  Jesus,  which  is  far  more  consistent 
with  the  analogy  of  Scripture  than  to  make  this  Coming  that  of  the  Spirit  (Neander, 
Godet,  etc.)  or  that  of  death  (Grotius,  Knapp,  Keuss,  etc.). 

'-'  Taking  the  Spirit's  description  of  this  "  house,"  we  have  something  real,  tangible  ; 
something  that  mind  and  heart  can  grasp  ;  something  adapted  to  the  longings  and  aspira- 
tions of  fallen  humanity  ;  something  in  accord  with  man  in  his  individual,  social,  and 
national  relations  ;  something  consistent  with  a  perfected  recovery  from  the  fall,  instead 
of  an  ethereal,  unearthly,  distant  something  that  no  one  can  describe,  no  one  can  tell 
where  it  exists,  etc.  The  Coming  again  of  Jesus,  as  held  by  us,  is  confirmed  by  another 
class  of  passages,  as  1  Cor.  11  :  26  ;  Heb.  9  :  27,  28,  etc.  In  brief,  a  multitude  of  writers 
(like  Schmid,  Bib.  Iheol.  N.  T.,  p.  222)  refer  this  Coming  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  which  alone 
accords  with  general  analogy.     In  reference  to  the  misapplication  of  this  passage  to 


Prop.  170.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  61 

death,  by  which  so  many  are  led  astray,  it  is  sufficient  to  quote  the  pointed  affirmation 
of  our  leading  opponent,  Dr.  Brown,  who  (Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  ch.  2)  not  only  concedes, 
but  defends  our  application  of  the  passage.  He  argues  that  death  cannot,  without  undue 
violence,  be  transmuted  in  Christ's  Coming,  and  quotes  this  Scripture  as  follows  :  "  '  Let 
not  your  heart  be  troubled  (said  Jesus  to  His  sorrowing  disciples)  :  in  my  Father's  house 
are  many  mansions  ;  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  And  if  I  go  away  '—what  then  ? 
'  Ye  shall  soon  follow  me  ?  Death  shall  shortly  bring  us  together '?  '  Nay  :  but  'If  I  go 
away,  1  wilt  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  myself:  that  where  1  am,  there  ye  may  be  also,' 
John  14  :  1-3.  '  And  while  they  looked  steadfastly  toward  heaven  as  He  went  up, 
behold,  two  men  stood  by  them  in  white  apparel  ;  which  also  said,  "  Ye  men  of  Galilee, 
why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven,  this  same  Jesus  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven, 
s]iall  "—what  ?  '  Take  you  home  soon  to  Himself,  at  death  ?  Nay  ;  but  shall '  so  come  in 
like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go  into  Heaven,'  "  Acts  1  :  10,  11. 

Obs.  7.  To  indicate  the  line  of  argument  adopted  by  others,  we  present 
an  epitome,  with  added  remarks  of  ours  in  parenthesis,  from  the  more 
recent  and  interesting  work  of  Dr.  D.  W.  Clark,  entitled  Man  all 
Immortal.  In  the  chap.,  'Heaven"  (chap.  16)  after  correctly  insisting 
upon  it  "  that  heaven  is  real  as  earth  is  real,"  he  directs  attention  to 
what  he  calls,  the  "  types  of  heaven."  These  are  (1)  Eden  ;  (if  Eden  is 
a  type,  then  Eden  is  not  to  be  regained,  and  Satan  has  succeeded  in  defraud- 
ing the  race  of  its  original  grant.  A  substitution  of  something  else,  is 
not  Paradise  restored.  Hence  the  Bible  begins  with  an  earthly  Paradise 
lost,  and  ends  with  the  same  restored  with  added  blessings).  (2)  Canaan  ; 
(but  this  is  pure  imagination  ;  it  is  nowhere  asserted,  excepting  by  men 
mystically  inclined.  More  :  Canaan  is  expressly  promised  (Prop.  210)  to 
the  Patriarchs  and  their  seed  ;  they  are  to  be  raised  up  to  inherit  it  ;  this 
dispensation  closes  with  Jesus  and  His  saints  in  it,  as  the  central  part  of 
the  Kingdom.)  (3)  Jerusalem  ;  (but  this  is  never  proclaimed  as  a  type; 
what  is  said  of  Canaan  in  a  great  measure  applies  here.)  (4)  "  Heaven  is 
typically  represented  by  the  temple  and  the  Church"  (but  the  temple 
and  the  Church  only  represent  an  ordering  or  future  arrangement).  (5) 
"  In  an  especial  sense  was  the  Holy  of  Holies  a  type  of  heaven  ;  (yes  but 
only  of  the  third  heaven  as  it  stands  related  to  the  sacrificial  work,  Heb. 
9  :  24,  to  Christ,  and  not  to  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  ;  the  saints  were 
never  allowed  to  enter  it,  etc.).  (0)  "  The  house  and  the  family  are  also 
used  as  types  of  the  heavenly  place  and  relations  ;"  (they  simply  afford 
illustrations  to  indicate  future  relationship  in  the  inheritance  but  are  no 
types  of  the  inheritance  itself).  (7)  "  The  Sabbath  is  also  made  to 
symbolize  heaven  ;"  (this  is  a  mistake  ;  it  does  not  symbolize  the  place,  but 
only  the  time  of  inheritance,  the  coming  rest  in  it,  and  the  worship  and 
enjoyments  pertaining  to  it).  Next  Clark  presents  what  he  calls  "  figures 
employed  to  represent  heaven."  Here  again  he  falls  into  error  ;  for 
among  these  figures  he  designates  "  Place"  "  City,"  •'  Building,"  "  King- 
dom," "Country,"  "Inheritance."  But  these"  actually  and  really  de- 
scribe what  exists,  for  heaven  is  "  a  place,"  Clark  himself  calling  it  "a 
local  habitation;"  it  contains  "a  City,"  the  "  Building"  of  God;  it 
really  possesses  "  a  Kingdom,"  located  in  "  a  country,"  and  which  is 
actually  "  inherited."  Thus  taking  his  own  admissions,  these  are  not 
figures,  i.e.  a  mere  tropical  representation.  When  he  comes  to  discuss  the 
locality  of  heaven,  he  adopts  Dr.  Dick's  notion  of  making  "  heaven  the 
astronomic  centre  of  the  material  universe,"  and  this  view,  he  admits,  is 
based  solely  on  probability,  saying  :  "  the  exact  locality  of  heaven,  in  rela- 
tion to  the  earth,  the  Scriptures  do  not  fix  ;  but  they  do  refer  to  it  as 


62  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  170. 

occupying  a  place  in  the  universe."  Dr.  Dick  and  others  are  approvingly 
quoted.  Now  in  relation  to  a  mere  admitted  supposition,  let  it  be 
suggested  :  (1)  that  a  confounding  of  two  things  is  apparent.  The  central 
part  of  the  universe,  which  may  indeed  be  the  special  place  of  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Father,  is  mistaken  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints,  for- 
getting that  from  this  heaven  of  the  Father  the  holy  city  comes  to  this 
earth,  and  that  the  Father  is  represented  by,  and  seen  in,  His  reigning 
Son  when  here  ;  (2)  that  while  the  exact  locality  of  the  third  heaven  is  not 
given,  the  exact  locality  of  the  future  inheritance  of  the  saints  is  pre- 
sented ;  (3)  that  the  Primitive  Church  for  three  centuries  had  no  doubt 
respecting  their  inheritance,  believing  that  the  Scriptures  did  locate  the 
place,  even  here  on  earth  ;  (4)  that  this  theory  ignores  the  promises  per- 
taining to  this  earth,  the  promises  made  to  Christ,  the  promises  based  on 
the  covenants  ;  (5)  that  it  is  derogatory  to  the  Word  to  believe,  that 
Christ's  inheritance  and  that  of  the  saints,  so  specifically  given,  cannot  be 
ascertained  i.e.,  in  locality.  Dr.  Clark  briefly  refers  to  our  view  (p.  445) 
quoting  Dr.  Griffin  as  teaching  that  this  earth  purified  and  refurnished 
shall  he  the  inheritance  of  the  saints,  saying  :  "  It  has  received  the  sanc- 
tion of  many  learned  and  pious  men."  But  he  adds  :  "  It  is  in  many 
respects  a  grand  idea,  and  it  is  countenanced  by  some  beautiful  analogies  ; 
but,  after  all,  it  is  unproved."  The  objections  he  urges  in  the  briefest 
manner  against  us  as  "  insuperable"  are  the  following  :  (1)  "  The  surface 
of  the  earth  would  be  insufficient  for  the  habitation  of  so  great  a  number  ;" 
(all  this  is  fully  answered  elsewhere  ;  besides  the  reader  will  notice  that  it 
is  a  mere  human  deduction).  (2)  "  Then,  too,  heaven  is  represented  as  the 
home  of  not  only  the  saints,  but  also  of  the  angels  of  God,  and  of  Christ 
and  God  Himself  ;"  (this  scarcely  needs  a  reply,  seeing  that  all  Mil- 
lenarians,  ancient  and  modern,  have  the  renewed  earth  and  the  third 
heaven  intimately  united,  Jacob's  dream  verified,  and  God  ruling  in 
Christ).  (3)  "  Then  again,  it  is  referred  to  as  a  building,  a  city,  a  King- 
dom already  prepared  ;"  (this  is  overlooking  (1)  what  may  be  prepared 
and  what  is  in  course  of  preparation,  placing  together  in  time  what  God 
has  separated  ;  and  (2)  that  things  still  future  in  view  of  their  certainty, 
are  spoken  of  as  present  or  realized  by  anticipation  ;  and  (3)  that  God's 
determination  to  accomplish  a  certain  thing,  in  view  of  His  all  sufficiency, 
etc.,  is  alluded  to  as  an  accomplished  fact.)  We  are  profoundly  glad, 
in  view  of  the  covenants,  the  promises  to  inherit  the  earth,  the  deliverance 
of  creation  from  the  curse,  etc.,  that  such  a  talented  writer  as  Dr.  Clark 
could  not  urge  stronger  objections.  In  the  light  of  the  Word,  they  are  of 
no  moment.  These  have  been  answered  under  various  Props.,  so  that  a 
refutation,  at  length,  is  unnecessary. 

Briefly,  the  statements  of  others  may  be  contrasted.  It  is  almost  a  caricaturing  of 
the  promise  to  make  (as  Martensen,  Ch.  Bog.,  p.  348)  the  universal  Church  "  the  Father's 
House,"  and  the  many  mansions  :  "  these  various  confessions  must  be  looked  upon  as 
various  chambers,  various  dwellings  in  the  house  of  the  one  Lord."  As  the  word 
"  house"  has  a  variety  of  applications,  it  must  here  be  interpreted  to  suit  the  analogy  of 
Scripture  respecting  the  inheritance  of  the  saints — as  something  separate  and  distinct 
from  the  saints  themselves— as  something  which  they  inherit.  That  class  of  our  oppo- 
nents who  concede  a  future  inheriting  of  the  earth  virtually  concede  the  correctness  of 
our  interpretation.  Surely  the  Scriptures  are  not  antagonistic  concerning  the  place  in- 
herited. Hence  we  must  reject  Keerl's  {His.  Creation  and  Doc.  of  Paradise)  opinion  that 
the  universe  is  God's  house  and  the  fixed  stars  the  many  mansions,  or  MacDonald's  (My 
Father's  House  :  or  the  Heaven  of  the  Bible)  view  that  "  the  third  heaven"  is  thus  desig- 
nated,  simply  because  these  are  never  promised  to  the  saints  as  their  inheritance  or 


PEOP.  170.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  63 

reward,  or  Kingdom  in  which  they  reign.  Lincoln  (Lects.  on  Rev.),  although  a  Pre- 
Millenarian,  misapplies  this  promise  to  the  third  heaven,  thus  ignoring  covenant  and 
promise  ;  and  feeling  an  incongruity,  he  says  (vol.  2,  p.  11)  :  "  The  Father's  house  pre- 
cedes, in  point  of  time,  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  and  the  Kingdom  of  the  Son  of 
man."  It  does  neither  ;  for  it  contains  the  throne  of  the  Christ,  and  is  itself  the  King- 
dom of  the  Son  of  man  ;  and  being  once  obtained  remains  to  every  saint  an  ever-abiding 
possession.  Beecher,  in  a  sermon  on  "  The  Future  State,"  based  on  John  1-4  :  1-4,  takes 
it  for  granted  that  this  house  refers  to  the  third  heaven,  and  not  the  slightest  proof  is  vouch- 
safed for  such  an  assumption.  Then  a  second  unfounded  supposition  is  engrafted  upon 
the  first  one,  viz.,  that  by  death  we  enter  this  house  and  the  mansions,  the  coming  again 
of  Jesus  and  the  receiving  being  thus  interpreted  :  ''  I  think  you  will  see  Christ  ;  but  you 
will  see  Him  on  the  other  side.  You  will  go  to  Him,  He  will  not  come  to  you"  (thus  revers- 
ing the  phraseology  of  the  text  ;  see  Chr.  Union,  Sept.  5th,  1877).  A  writer  in  the  Prince- 
ton Review  (Ap.,  1855,  p.  274  etc.)  defines  (1)  "  the  Father's  house"  to  be  the  entire 
created  universe,  embracing  "  heaven  ;"  (2)  the  "  many  mansions"  are  descriptive  of 
"  space  sufficient  to  accommodate  innumerable  companies  ;"  (3)  the  place  prepared  is 
the  third  heaven,  and  this  preparation  was  made  when  Jesus  "  went  into  heaven  in  a 
glorified  human  nature,  as  the  great  High  Priest  of  the  Church,  to  present  as  it  were  His 
own  blood,  and  take  possession,  as  their  Forerunner,  of  thepromised  inheritance."  "  It  is 
His  interceding  work,  in  the  presence  of  God,  which  has  already  prepared  heaven  for 
His  people  ;"  and  hence,  He  informs  us,  He  comes  to  them  at  death  and  brings  them  to 
heaven,  and  then  also  comes  at  the  resurrection  and  takes  them  back  to  heaven  ;  (4)  He, 
then,  concedes  a  renewed  earth  to  arise,  but,  not  knowing  exactly  what  to  do  with  it  in 
his  system  of  eschatology,  he  hesitatingly  adds  :  "  Does  it  follow  that  this  earth  is  to  be 
the  seat,  the  exclusive  seat  of  heaven  ?  We  feel  much  inclined  to  the  literal  interpreta- 
tion of  the  passage  that  it  teaches  that  the  present  earth,  after  its  predicted  destruction, 
will  come  forth  renewed  ;  and  yet  we  cannot  hold  that  any  such  pre-eminence  is  to  be 
assigned  to  it  as  that  it  shall  become  the  exclusive  seat  or  fixed  bounded  limit  of 
heaven."  We  do  not  say"  exclusive"  heaven,  but  we  do  affirm  their  special,  exclusive 
covenanted,  predicted,  and  promised  inheritance.  We  turn  to  another  writer,  G.  S.  Faber 
(  The  Many  Mansions  inthe  House  of  the  Father),  who  makes  the  "  house"  to  be  "  the  real 
temple  of  the  Omnipresent, "  or  "  the  immense  mundane  house  of  God,"  i.e.  the 
universe,  and  "  the  many  mansions"  are  the  many  spheres,  planetary  and  stellar,  which 
astronomy  reveals  to  us.  But  the  place  which  our  Lord  promised  to  prepare  for  us  is  this 
earth  (one  of  the  mansions)  restored  to  an  Edenic  or  perfected  condition,  which  the 
saints  shall  occupy  after  the  Sec.  Advent.  This  theory  tries  to  unite  the  popular  concep- 
tion with  the  promises  relating  to  the  inheriting  of  the  earth,  but  fails  in  consistency, 
simply  because  it  is  not  founded  on  a  correct  conception  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  of  the 
Lord  Jesus. 


64  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  171. 


Proposition  171.     This  Kingdom  is  connected  with   the  Bap- 
tism of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  Fire. 

That,  at  the  time  this  Kingdom  is  established  and  during  its  con-  t 
tinuance,  the  saints  will  be  under  the  special  influence  and  power 
of  the  Spirit,  is  clearly  taught  in  many  predictions.  Even  many 
of  our  opponents  frankly  admit  that  the  Millennial  descriptions 
can  never  be  realized  without  a  remarkable,  astounding  and  even 
miraculous  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  exceeding  everything  that 
the  world  has  ever  witnessed.  The  careful  student,  weighing  the 
promises  on  this  subject,  must,  from  a  consideration  of  the  passages 
teaching  this,  come  to  the  same  conclusion.  It  is  reasonable,  too, 
that  the  same  Spirit,  which  exhibited  its  power  in  all  great  events, 
in  periods  of  transition,  should  in  the  establishing  of  the  Theocracy 
be  eminently  conspicuous  in  this  the  culminating  era  of  its  own 
glorious  predictions  and  works. 

Fausset  (Com.,  Isa.  2  :  3)  remarks  :  "  If  the  curse  foretold  against  Israel  has  been 
literally  fulfilled,  so  shall  the  promised  blessing  be  literal.  We  Gentiles  must  not,  while 
giving  them  the  curse,  deny  them  their  peculiar  blessing  by  spiritualizing  it.  The  Holy 
Ghost  shall  be  poured  out  for  a  general  conversion  then,  Jer.  50  :  5  ;  Zech.  8  :  21,  23  ; 
Joel  2  :  28."  To  this  we  add  :  In  order  to  comprehend  the  greatness  and  glory  of  the 
coming  Theocracy,  we  must  locate  the  divine  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  given  in 
the  divine  record,  and  allow  to  them  the  extent  as  promised,  both  as  they  pertain  to  the 
Jews,  the  Gentiles,  and  the  glorified  saints.  By  limiting  and  transposing,  the  predictions 
are  shorn  of  their  beauty,  consistency,  and  strength. 

Obs.  1.  To  avoid  misapprehension  in  what  follows,  it  is  proper  to  say, 
that  we  cordially  adopt  the  doctrine  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  renewer 
and  sanctifier,  through  the  truth,  of  all  who  are  redeemed,  and  that  such 
renewing  influences  are  necessary  unto  salvation.  While  accepting  of  the 
ordinary  work  of  the  Spirit  in  enlightening  and  sanctifying  men,  we  do  not 
find  that  this  comes  under  the  phrase  "  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  which 
rather  denotes  the  hestowment  of  all  other  gifts,  even  the  miraculous,  in  con- 
nection with  the  ordinary.  The  very  phraseology  evinces  such  a  lavish  he- 
stowment of  the  Spirit,  that  the  gifts  which  the  apostle  enumerates,  as 
often  more  or  less  divided  (1  Cor.  12  :  7-11),  are  bestowed  upon  the  person 
thus  "filled"  or  "baptized,"  to  an  unusual  degree.  Passing  over  the 
Eecord,  and  carefully  noticing  the  cases  of  such  baptism  with  their  results, 
will  prepare  us  to  appreciate  the  Proposition  and  guard  us  against  the  mis- 
application of  language  and  facts  so  prevalent  at  the  present  day. 

We  have  to-day  ten  thousand  works  which,  unable  to  discriminate  between  the 
ordinary  and  extraordinary  operations  of  the  Spirit,  urge  us  to  "  pray  for  the  baptism  of 
the  Holy  Ghost"  to  be  experienced  at  present.  Certain  religious  bodies,  deserving  credit 
for  insisting  upon  the  believer's  dependence  upon  the  Divine  Spirit,  run  into  an  extreme 
by  adopting  this  phrase  as  a  familiar  one  to  designate  present  experience.  See  Obs.  7 
and  note.     In  commentaries,  sermons,  etc.,  we  are  exhorted  to  repent  and  believe  so  that 


Prop.  171.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  65 

we,  at  present,  may  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  as  given  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  which  is 
designated  a  "  Pentecostal  shower,"  etc. 

Obs.  2.  John  the  Baptist  predicts  that  the  One  Coming  after  him,  even 
Jesus  Christ,  "  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire"  (Matt. 
3  :  11  ;  Mark  1:8;  Luke  3  :  16  ;  John  1  :  33  ;  Acts  1  :  5).  Leaving  the 
baptism  of  fire  for  a  following  observation,  and  confining  ourselves  to  that 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  may  be  stated  that  according  to  Acts  1  :  5,  whatever 
influences  and  power  Jesus  bestowed  upon  the  disciples  and  His  apostles 
from  the  time  of  John  to  His  ascension,  this  specific  baptism  of  the  Spirit 
was  not  supposed  to  be  conferred,  for  it  is  asserted  that  to  fulfil  this  prom- 
ise of  John's,  and  to  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high,  they  must  re- 
main at  Jerusalem  until  the  Comforter  came,"  for  John  truly  baptized  with 
water  ;  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost  not  many  days  hence.'" 
Hence  the  phrase  is  only  used  by  way  of  promise  in  the  Gospels.1  The 
apostles  who  were  to  be  favored  with  this  baptism  had  previously  experienced 
the  ordinary  operations  of  the  Spirit,  for  as  Christ's  prayer  indicates  (John 
17  :  16-20),  they  were  already  renewed  men,  worthy  believers,  who  having 
"  received,'"1  "  kept,'''  and  "  believed  "  the  Word  were  acknowledged  as  His 
brethren,  and  who  in  their  preaching  and  labors  had  been  remarkably  sus- 
tained by  the  Spirit,  before  obtaining  this  special  baptism  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost.  The  baptism  then  must  include  something  more  than  the  pro- 
duction of  "  piety,"  "  worship,"  "  religious  principles" — in  brief,  than  the 
characteristics  of  a  divine  life.2  In  turning  to  the  account  of  the  actual 
reception  of  this  baptism,  it  is  found  to  embrace  the  reception  of  miracu- 
lous gifts  and  powers,  such  as  the  imparting  supernaturally  the  understand- 
ing of  truth,  the  prophetic  spirit,  the  speaking  with  other  tongues,  the 
working  of  miracles,  etc.  Of  course,  with  such  a  portrayal  of  what  consti- 
tutes the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  dare  not  limit  it  to  anything  less 
than  such  an  experience.  And  in  this  we  arc  sustained,  if  we  find  all  other 
instances,  in  which  such  a  baptism  is  mentioned  as  given  comporting  with 
the  one  realized  by  the  apostles.  In  Acts  8  :  5-24,  we  have  another  account 
of  other  persons  who  were  already  believers,  having  been  baptized  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  afterward  obtained  this  baptism  through  which 
they  received  miraculous  power,  it  being  a  special,  added  blessing.  So  in 
Acts  10  :  14-46,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  thebelicvers  bestowing  supernatural 
power,  and  this  Peter,  Acts  11  :  15-17,  calls  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
saying  :  "  then  remembered  I  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  how  that  He  said :  John 
indeed  baptized  with  ivater  ;  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,1" 
etc.  The  uniform  testimony  of  Scripture,  wherever  the  baptism  itself  is 
described,  is,  that  it  was  not  designed  for  the  renewing  of  the  heart  and 
conferring  of  Christian  graces  (whatever  influence  it  may  have  exerted  in 
confirming  faith  and  its  fruits)  but /or  the  bestowal  of  supernatural  power 
and  endowments.  The  reader,  if  he  wishes  more  proof,  can  find  additional 
instances  in  Acts  19  :  6  ;  Heb.  2:4;  Acts  5  :  32  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  12  ;  Acts 
15  :  8  ;  Pom.  15  :  18,  etc.  The  fact  is  indisputable  that  believers  who  had 
been  baptized  and  were  acknowledged  Christians  had  by  this  baptism  super- 
natural power  added  to  their  other  attainments.  It  is  therefore  equivalent 
to  the  conferring  of  such  power.3 

1  A  mistake  made  by  some  writers  (as  e.g.  Sturges)  in  making  the  command  to  baptize 
in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Matt.  28  :  19,  an  equivalent  to  receiving  "  the  baptism  of 
the  Holy  Ghost"  is  so  self-evident,  that  it  only  deserves  mention  to  indicate  its  inconsis- 


66  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  171. 

tency  in  designating  the  act  performed  by  another  only  in  the  name  of  the  Spirit  to  be 
the  performance  of  the  .Spirit  itself,  etc. 

2  Hence,  undoubtedly  Oishausen  misapprehends  this  baptism,  when  he  makes  it  to  be 
the  ordinary  work  of  "  the  inward  cleansing  in  faith,  the  Spirit  being  conceived  of  as 
the  regenerating  principle."  So  also  Kendrick  when  he  spiritualizes  it,  making  the 
baptism  merely  indicative  of  Christ's  ministry,  being  "  more  profoundly  searching  and 
spiritual. "  The  same  mistake  occurs  in  Barnes,  etc.,  who  make  it  equivalent  to  the 
ordinary  regenerating  operations  of  the  Spirit  on  the  heart  and  life  of  men,  only  to  a 
greater  extent.  Some  (as  e.g.  the  Christian  Union.,  July  11th,  1877),  would  even  limit 
John  14  :  12—"  the  greater  works" — to  the  moral  and  spiritual  as  exhibited  in  Luther, 
Wesley,  Moody,  etc.  A  Eoman  Catholic  version,  given  by  Dr.  Eutter  (Life  of  Jesus,  p. 
102),  follows  the  same  :  "  '  He  shall  baptize  you  in  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  fire '  of  His 
divine  love,  in  order  to  purify  you  from  your  sins."  Various  commentaries  make  the 
same  mistake,  owing  to  a  lack  of  comparison  of  Scripture  on  the  subject. 

3  An  honored  friend,  the  same  to  whom  this  work  is  dedicated,  suggests  that  another 
reason  which  evinces  the  distinction  here  maintained  is  the  fact,  that  the  apostles  them- 
selves exhorted  their  followers  to  desire  and  covet  the  ordinary  renewing  operations  be- 
fore those  of  the  extraordinary  or  miraculous,  and  that  they  intimate  that  the  one  can 
exist  without  the  other.  To  this  may  be  added  :  the  reason  why  such  a  distinction  exists, 
lies  in  the  truth,  that  the  ordinary  must  precede  in  order  to  qualify  us  for  this  future  bap- 
tism, and  the  apostles  well  knowing  that  all  who  believe  and  become  heirs  will  eventually 
experience  it  in  a  greater  measure  than  then  witnessed,  lay  the  greater  stress  od  the 
necessary  and  important  antecedent  preparatory  work.  Every  believer  is  now  in  the 
chrysalis  state  of  grace,  but  then  in  the  perfected  state. 

Obs.  3.  The  question  arises  whether  this  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as 
promised  by  Join),  was  fulfilled  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  and  afterward.  The 
answer  is  that  it  was  a  fulfilment  of  Acts  1  :  5  containing  a  promise  given 
personally  to  the  apostles  but  only  a  partial  inchoate  fulfilment  of  the  other, 
seeing  that  the  Lord  manifested  in  comparatively  a  few  persons  what  He 
proposes  hereafter  to  bestow  upon  all  the  believing  brethren  associated  with 
Him.  The  Baptism  of  Pentecost  is  a  pledge  of  fulfilment  in  the  future, 
evidencing  what  the  Holy  Ghost  will  yet  perform  in  the  coming  age.  The 
proof  of  its  inchoate  nature  is  seen  in  the  following  :  (A)  John's  promise 
extends  to  the  believers  baptized  by  himself,  and  some  of  these,  but  not  all, 
experienced  this  peculiar,  distinguishing  Baptism.  For  if  narrowly  scanned 
it  embraces  the  idea  of  universality  as  given  by  Joel  in  his  prediction. 
The  Baptism  of  the  apostles  and  others  was  indeed  a  realization  of  Joel's 
prophecy,  but  only  in  a  few  individuals  thus  leaving  out  the  universality 
predicted.  Many  of  ouropposers  admit  that  Peter  in  Acts  2  :  15-20  cites 
Joel  "  only  in  the  way  of  application,"  but  we,  conceding  even  more  than 
application,  viz.,  a  real  fulfilment  on  a  smaller  scale  than  delineated  by  the 
prophet,  view  this  as  an  earnest  of  what  is  yet  to  come.  God's  "Word  will 
be  fulfilled,  every  prediction  will  find  its  mate,  and  with  this  principle,  it 
is  impossible  to  regard  Joel's  prediction  exhausted,  or  fully  mated  in  the 
events  of  Pentecost.  For  the  prophecy  embraces  events,  that  we  know 
never  took  place  when  the  apostles  received  this  baptism,  such  as  a  con- 
tinued prediction  relating  to  one  period  of  time  demands.  Thus,  e.g.  there 
was  no  complete  overthrow  of  anti-Christian  powers,  no  such  restoration  of 
the  Jews  to  their  own  land,  no  such  fruitfulness  of  the  land,  no  unex- 
ampled peace  and  prosperity,  no  blessedness  of  Millennial  glory  as  Joel 
presents  in  connection.  The  reverse  of  all  this  followed  :  enemies  tri- 
umphed, the  nation  was  overthrown,  the  saints  were  persecuted,  calamity 
and  barrenness  succeeded.  The  declaration  that  the  Spirit  shall  be  poured 
out  "  upon  all  flesh"'  includes  more  than  was  realized.  For,  fully  admit- 
ting that  the  word  "  all  "  is  used  sometimes  in  a  restricted  sense,  yet  the 


Prop.  171.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  67 

notion  of  universality,  or  at  least  of  generality,  is  combined  with  it  owing 
to  this  flesh  including  "sons,"  "daughters,"  "the  old  men,"  "the  young 
men,"  "the  servants"  and  "the  handmaids."  The  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  was  confined,  at  most,  to  a  few  (how  many 
were  gathered  is  not  known,  Beza  and  others;  following  some  mss.,  think 
that  the  apostles  were  alone  included  ;  others  embrace  more),  and  after- 
ward only  a  small  proportion  comparatively,  of  the  increasing  number  of 
believers  received  these  miraculous  powers.  Hence  if  fulfilled  at  all  in  the 
spirit  and  general  affusion  promised,  it  must  relate  to  the  future.  In  addi- 
tion, Joel  predicts  that  when  this  takes  place,  "  I  will  show  wonders  in  the 
heavens  and  in  the  earth,  blood  and  fire  and  pillar*  of  smoke.  The  sun- 
shall  be  turned  into  darkness  and  the  moon  into  blood,  before  the  great  and 
terrible  day  of  the  Lord  come."  Now  it  is  admitted,  even  by  those  who  are 
disposed  to  regard  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  that  given  to  all  be- 
lievers in  the  renewing  and  sanctifying  influences,  that  if  these  wonders 
are  "  to  be  limited  to  the  day  <fi  Pentecost,  it  is  certain  that  no  suet/  events 
occurred  at  that  time"  (so  e.g.  Barnes,  Com.,  Acts  2  :  19),  and  they  likewise 
acknowledge  that  these  astonishing  displays  of  God's  power  have  not  been 
witnessed  down  to  the  present  day,  and  will  only  be  seen  at  the  period  of  the 
Sec.  Advent.1  Admissions  like  these  so  fully  sustain  our  position,  that  it  is 
unnecessary  to  show  that  such  wonders,  etc.,  are  related  to  the  day  of  the 
Son  of  Man,  or  Lord  Jesus,  at  His  Sec.  Coming.  To  separate  the  baptism,  a 
part  of  the  prophecy,  from  the  rest,  and  have  it  fulfilled  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  and  the  remainder  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  is  simply  an  evasion  and 
dislocating  of  what  the  prophet  has  joined  together.  The  reasons  given  are 
amply  sufficient  to  show,  that  both  John's  and  Joel's  predictions  still  look 
onward  to  afar  more  striking  and  illustrious  fulfilment.  (B)  This  baptism 
was  predicted  (as  by  Joel,  etc.),  by  the  prophets  before  John  (the  latter 
only  more  concisely  stating  and  applying  to  Jesus,  and  thus  confirming 
what  the  former  announced),  to  occur  in  connection  with  the  restoration  of 
the  Theocracy  and  the  ensuing  Millennial  era.  This  opens  a  wide  field 
which  we  can  only  indicate.  Take  the  context  of  Ezek.  3G  :  27  ;  Isa. 
32  :  15  ;  Ezek.  37  :  14  ;  Isa.  41  :  3  ;  Ezek.  39  :  29  ;  Isa.  59  :  21,  etc.,  and 
we  invariably  find  the  eye  of  faith  pointed  to  a  period  still  future  when  an 
extraordinary  baptism  of  the  Spirit  shall  be  experienced.  The  distinctive 
landmarks  (such  as  association  with  the  restored  nation  and  kingdom,  and 
reign  of  David's  Son,  etc.),  by  which  we  recognize  the  occurrence  of  the  out- 
pouring, are  so  clearly  given,  that  even  a  host  of  writers  who  differ  from  us, 
frankly  confess,  that  these  prophecies,  as  they  stand  related,  are  not  yet 
fulfilled,  and  that  we  are  fully  warranted  to  look  for  a  Pentecostal  taptism, 
immensely  superior  in  all  respects  still  future  and  connected  with  the 
Millennium.  This  necessarily  involves,  seeing  that  the  Pentecostal  baptism 
is  referred  to  by  Peter  as  an  earnest  or  a  specimen  of  what  the  prophets 
predicted,  a  widely  diffused  and  happily  experienced  supernatural  power. 
No  student,  who  examines  the  ancient  prophecies,  and  notices  the  partial 
fulfilment,  regarding  the  latter  as  explanatory  of  the  meaning  intended  by 
the  former,  can  come  to  any  other  conclusion.  (C)  This  again  is  confirmed 
by  the  analogy  of  faith.  'The  apostle  in  2  Cor.  1  :  22  ;  ch.  5:5;  Eph. 
1  :  14,  tells  believers  that  they  have  "  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit,"  which  im- 
plies that  what  they  now  realize  through  the  Spirit  is  only  a  kind  of  first- 
fruits  or  pledge  of  what  this  same  Spirit  will  perform  in  "  the  day  of  the 
Lord  Jesus."     Eor,  in  that  day  both  body  and  soul  shall  experience  this 


68  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.    171. 

remarkable  baptism  of  the  Spirit ;  the  body  in  the  Spirit's  resurrecting, 
quickening,  glorifying  power  (comp.  Rom.  8  :  11  ;  2  Cor.  5  :  15  ;  John 
6  :  63  ;  Eph.  1  :  13,  and  4  :  20  ;  1  Pet.  3  :  18,  etc.),  and  the  soul  in  the 
Spirit's  conferring  wisdom,  knowledge,  utterance,  prophecy,  miraculous 
gifts,  etc.  And  what  is  remarkable — observing  that  the  ministrations  of 
this  Spirit  varied  in  imparting  to  some  more  and  to  others  less  of  this 
supernatural  power — this  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  is  not  to  be  confined  to 
the  saints  who  have  "  the  earnest"  (although  their  position,  etc.,  indicates, 
as  their  glorification  effectively  proves,  that  they  will  be  specially  honored), 
for  it  extends  to  the  Jewish  nation  (of  which  individual  members  were 
favored  with  a  foretaste),  and  to  the  spared  Gentile  nations  (of  which 
Cornelius,  and  others,  obtained  the  pledge),  but  even  to  the  earth  and  its 
creatures  in  removing  the  curse,  renewing  and  augmenting  the  original, 
condition  and  destination  of  all  things.  The  Spirit,  as  a  creating  and  re- 
newing agent,  will  be  experienced  as  widely  as  the  curse  extended,  the  only 
exception  being  in  the  case  of  those  who  "  rebelled  against  and  vexed"  this 
Spirit.  (D)  This  feature  is  also  noticeable,  that,  in  the  predictions  relat- 
ing to  the  Millennial  period,  this  outpouring  attains  to  a  perspicuity  and 
outward  prominence  so  as  to  be  witnessed  by  all.  The  fulfilment  in  part 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  being  distinctly  regarded  as  of  the  same  kind, 
unmistakably  proves  the  correctness  of  this  interpretation,  and  in  every  re- 
corded instance  of  its  reception  the  same  is  directly  or  indirectly  affirmed. 
It  was  of  such  a  nature  that  the  persons  under  its  influence  were  impelled 
to  exhibit  its  power  publicly,  or  in  a  manner  to  make  it  cognizant  to 
others.  It  even  in  many  cases  manifested  itself  in  a  way  that  the  very 
mode  of  influence  was  indicative  of  something  supernatural.  The  baptism 
was  bestowed  in  a  special  'manner,  and  was  regarded  as  a  special  favor 
added  to  the  ordinary  ones  given  by  the  same  Spirit.  God  directly  favored 
some  with  its  communication,  but  others  could  not  possibly  receive  it 
without  special  provision.  Thus  e.g.  Philip  preached  in  Samaria,  and, 
having  himself  experienced  this  baptism,  performed  miracles  in  attestation 
of  the  truth.  Now  although  he  possessed  these  gifts,  and  many  became 
believers  through  his  instrumentality,  yet  he  could  not  (and  God  did  not), 
confer  this  particular  baptism  without  the  special  mission  and  prayers  of 
Peter  and  John — thus  indicating  that  it  was  something  widely  different 
from  the  ordinary  operations  of  the  Spirit  given  to  form  and  develop 
Christian  character,  and  showing,  when  received,  that  it  was  of  a  nature 
which  arrested  attention  and  produced  astonishment  on  account  of  the 
outiuard  characteristics  belonging  to  it.  Hence,  Acts  5  :  32  ;  Ileb.  10  :  15, 
not  the  apostles  alone  are  witnesses  but  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself.  This  alone 
then,  when  the  prophecies  relating  to  the  future  are  verified,  satisfactorily 
explains  some  of  the  wonderful  exhibitions  of  power  and  glory  which  are 
connected  with  this  Kingdom.2 

1  Some  writers,  not  seeing  how  they  diminish  the  force  of  the  prophecies,  make  "  the 
dark  day*'  (experienced  in  the  early  history  of  our  country,  May  19th,  1780),  and  the 
notable  falling  of  meteors  (witnessed  in  Nov.,  1833),  to  be  a  fulfilment  of  Joel  and  Matt. 
24  :  '29.  They  forget  that  these  special  signs,  as  Matt,  indicates,  follows  "  immediately 
after,  the  tribulation,"  i.e.,  it  does  not  precede  them.  Those  things  which  they  take  for 
"  signs,"  are  indeed  such  as  they  evince  that  the  powers  of  nature  are  under  a  control 
beyond  man's  power  of  knowledge,  and  what  God  can  do  when  the  time  arrives  for  fulfil- 
ment, but  they  are  not  the  signs  given  by  Joel,  Matthew,  etc.  The  application  of  Joel 
(and  Mai.  4  : 5,  6)  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  overthrow  of  the  Jewish  polity 
(e.g.  by  Brown  in   Christ's  Sec.  Coining;  Henderson  in  Minor  Prophets,  etc.),  necessarily 


Prop.  171.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  69 

leaves  out  of  the  fulfilment  much  that  is  predicted  (as  if  it  were  Oriental  exaggeration), 
that  multitudes,  not  Pre-Millenarian  extend  the  ultimate  complete  fulfilment  in  the 
future  (as  Calvin,  Howe,  etc.).  Fausset  {Com.  loci)  unhesitatingly  locates  this  at  the 
future  restoration  of  the  Jews,  saying  :  "  That  the  promise  is  not  restricted  to  the  first 
Pentecost  appears  from  Peter's  own  words  :  '  The  promise  is  (not  only)  unto  you  and  to 
your  children  (but  also)  to  all  that  are  afar  off  (both  in  space  and  in  time),  even  as  many 
as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call  '  (Acts  2  :  39).     So  here  '  upon  all  flesh.'  " 

2  This,  of  course,  will  enable  the  reader  to  discriminate  between  the  opinions  of  men 
and  the  Scriptural  idea.  In  many  most  excellent  (i.e.  containing  valuable  truths)  dis- 
courses on  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  to  be  found  a  lack  of  discrimination  (as  e.g.  in  Barrow's 
Sermons, vol.  2,  p.  137,  etc.),  which  vitiates  much  that  is  stated.  Men  are  exhorted  to 
seek  that  now  (viz.,  "the  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost"),  which  only  pertains  to  the 
future  ;  and  that  which  a  comparison  of  Scripture  clearly  separates  and  distinguishes, 
these  join  together  in  a  confusion  of  ideas.  The  latter  process  being  so  popular  both  in 
the  pulpit  and  the  pew,  and  being  allied  with  those  who  have  much  to  say  of  a  spiritu- 
ality obtained  by  such  a  baptism,  it  is  difficult  even  to  secure  attention  to  a  serious  con- 
sideration of  this  subject.  The  "Perfectionists"  have  much  to  say  of  this  experienced 
(by  them)  "  Baptism."  The  Quakers  (see  Summary  of  Faith  by  Jos.  Gurney,  etc.,  attached 
to' vol.  3,  Mosheim's  Ch.  His.)  assert  that  the  prophecy  of  Joel  is  "  a  peculiar  mark  of 
this  dispensation  ;"  and  locating  its  fulfilment  in  the  present  necessarily,  from  their 
premise,  base  upon  it  a  variety  of  inferences  and  corresponding  practice  relating  to  the 
ministry,  revelations,  etc.  Taking  Joel  isolated  from  its  immediate  connection,  and  re- 
fusing to  regard  the  fulfilment  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  merely  inchoate,  they  make  it  a 
foundation  for  a  series  of  inferential  doctrines.  The  same  is  true  of  many  others,  and  it 
is  a  sad  fact  that  men  and  women  claim  through  this  alleged  conference  of  "  the  Baptism 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  to  possess  a  special  enlightenment  which  directed  them  into  an  in- 
terpretation of  Scripture.  It  is  consolatory  to  those  who  make  no  such  pretensions  and 
loud  professions,  that  they  evidence  the  falsity  of  their  position  by  the  blunders  made  in 
interpretation  and  application.  All  that  are  mystically  inclined,  exaggerate  and  eulogize 
the  present  dispensation  and  present  individual  experience  in  order  to  bring  out,  if  pos- 
sible, a  fulfilment  of  Joel  and  kindred  passages.  Two  extremes  are  to  be  avoided  :  the 
Montanistic  idea  (Neander,  Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  526),  of  a  continuous  fulfilment  of  all  that 
Joel  predicted  at  the  present  ;  and  the  view  of  some  antagonists  that  a  complete  and 
final  fulfilment  was  found  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  Our  view  is  a  medium  between 
these,  and  is  based  on  the  gr<  neral  analogy  of  Scripture.  We  prefer  Olshausen's  declaration 
(Com.,  Acts  2  :  17,  21)  :  "the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  powerful  and  mighty  as  it 
was,  is  yet  characterized  as  a  partial  effusion  ;  so  that  the  prediction  of  Joel  in  its 
original  form  still  remains  for  the  future."  Dr.  Xr^elsbach  (Lange's  Com.,  Isa.  32  :  15  ; 
Horn.  7)  justly  observes  :  "When  once  the  Spirit  of  God  is  poured  out  on  all  flesh  (Joel 
2  :  28),  then  the  personal  and  impersonal  creation  will  be  glorified.  Then  Satan  will  be 
bound,  and  the  Lord  alone  will  rule  in  men,  and  in  nature.  Then  at  last  it  will  be  beau- 
tiful on  earth.  For  then  right  and  righteousness  will  reign  on  earth,  and  peace,  and  that 
rest  that  is  promised  to  the  people  of  God,  (Heb.  4  :  9)."  For  the  student  we  quote 
Faber's  {Diss,  on  Proph.,  p.  79,  footnote)  remarks  on  Acts  2  :  16,  17  :  "  it  (i.e.  prophecy 
of  Joel)  is  undoubtedly  applied  by  St.  Peter  to  the  miraculous  effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
upon  the  Day  of  Pentecost  ;  yet  it  is  as  undoubtedly  cited  by  him  only  in  the  way  of  ap- 
plication. The  whole  prophecy,  of  which  that  text  forms  a  part,  relates  to  the  ravages  of 
some  fierce  and  lawless  people  symbolized  by  a  flight  of  locusts,  the  restoration  of  the 
Jews,  the  overthrow  of  Antichrist  and  his  congregated  vassals  between  the  two  seas  in 
the  valley  of  concision,  and  the  glorious  rest  of  the  people  of  God  during  the  blessed 
days  of  the  Millennium  ;  consequently  it  can  only  be  applied  by  St.  Peter  to  the  times  of 
the  First  Advent  of  our  Lord,  as  typical  in  some  measure  of  the  times  of  his  Second  Advent. 
It  ought  to  be  observed,  that,  although  in  his  citation  of  the  text,  the  apostle  introduces  the 
phrase  of  the  last  days  (which  undoubtedly  in  his  application  of  it  means  the  times  of 
Christianity),  the  phrase  does  not  occur  in  the  original  text  of  Joel  ;  no  argument,  therefore, 
can  be  drawn  from  this  circumstance  to  prove,  that  the  Old  Test,  phrase  the  end  of  days 
is  equivalent  to  the  New  Test,  phrase  of  the  last  days."  We  only  add,  commentators  too 
readily  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  because  of  Peter's  amendment  of  Joel,  ' '  afterward  " 
must  be  equivalent  to  "  in  the  last  days,"  and  thus  overlook  the  connection  of  "  after- 
ward "  in  the  original  prediction.  Faber,  also,  is  too  sweeping,  when  he  declares  that 
Peter's  phrase  must  necessarily  mean  "  the  times  of  Christianity  ;"  it  rather  denotes — 
being  employed  previously  to — what  the  same  expression  means  in  Heb.  1  :  2,  the  closing 
period  of  the  Jewish  dispensation. 


70  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  171. 

Obs.  4.  As  intimated,  the  phrase*"  baptism ■  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  conveys 
the  idea  of  a  copious,  abundant,  remarkable  bestowment  of  the  Spirit.  It  is 
a  being  "filled  with  Spirit"  so  that  some  of  the  wonder-working  power  of 
the  mighty  Spirit  manifests  itself  through  the  person  thus  filled.  We  see 
this  stated  wherever  in  the  Bible  such  a  representation  of  being  filled  with 
the  Spirit  is  given.  Does  the  Spirit  rest  on  the  Elders  (Num.  11  :  25,  26), 
then  they  prophesy  ;  does  it  come  upon  Balaam  (Num.  24  :  2),  upon 
Saul  (1  Sam.  10  :  10),  or  even  upon  his  messengers  (Num.  19  :  20),  or 
upon  David  (2  Sam.  23  :  2),  or  upon  the  prophets  (Acts  28  :  25  ;  Neh. 
9':  30  ;  Ezek.  7  :  12,  etc.),  then  they  predicted  ;  was  John  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  (Luke  1  :  15),  or  Elizabeth  (Luke  1  :  41),  or  Mary  (Luke 
1  :  35),  or  Zecharias  (Luke  1  :  67),  or  Simeon  (Luke  2  :  25,  26),  or  Agabus 
(Acts  9  :  28;,  or  the  disciples  (Luke  12  :  12),  it  in  every  instance  exerted  a 
supernatural  influence  in  imparting  knowledge  of  the  future,  etc.  But  in 
all  this  must  be  considered  the  fact,  that  in  these  cases  the  Spirit  was 
given  "  by  measure"  (John  3  :  34),  i.e.  restricted  to  one  or  several  particu- 
lars only,  while  the  specially  promised  baptism,  still  given  "  by  measure," 
included  more  in  the  same  persons  than  had  been  previously  bestowed,  as 
seen  in  the  case  of  the  apostles  and  others,  who  not  only  predicted,  not  only 
understood  their  own  predictions,  not  only  obtained  visions  and  constant  in- 
structions, but  were  under  such  a  continued  influence  that  they  performed 
"mighty  signs  and  wonders  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,"  (Rom.  15  :  18)  ; 
so  that  God  bore  to  them  "  witness  with  signs  and  wonders  and  with  divers 
miracles  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Ileb.  2  :  4).  In  the  case  of  the  dis- 
ciples, it  is  expressly  intimated,  that  whatever  of  supernatural  power  was 
communicated  by  the  Spirit  previously  to  the  day  of  Pentecost,  it  was  not 
the  bestowment  of  that  "measure"  of  the  Spirit's  power  afterward  re- 
ceived. This  then  leads  the  student,  if  wise,  to  consider,  that  if  the  Spirit 
is  given  by  "  measure"  to  men  to  suit  certain  exigencies,  etc.  (Christ  only 
being  excepted,  John  3  :  24)  ;  and  if  that  "  measure"  Avas  increased  to  such 
an  extent  that  it  can  be  truly  called  "a  baptism,"  surely  then  when  those 
stupendous  events  connected  with  "  the  appearing  and  the  Kingdom"  are 
regarded,  it  is  most  reasonable  to  anticipate,  as  holy  men  have  predicted, 
an  increase  of  measure,  afar  more  extended  manifestation  of  the  Spirit's 
almighty  energy,  etc. 

It  is  a  sad  fact  that  men  have  rashly  antedated  this  period,  and  have  ascribed  to 
themselves  what  belongs  to  a  future  age.  Thus  to  additionally  illustrate  :  The  Romish 
Church  professes  to  give  the  Holy  Ghost  as  e.g.  in  Confirmation  (27(,e  Path  to  Paradise, 
p.  223,  approved  by  Archb.  Hughes,  in  which  "  Confirmation  is  a  sacrament  by  which  the 
faithful  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  prayer  and  imposition  of  the  hands  of  the 
Bishop,"  etc.,  quoting  Acts  8  :  14-17  in  proof.)  One  of  the  ordinances  of  the  Mormons 
is  "  the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  This  feature  has  been  fear- 
fully perverted,  as  e.g.  in  the  fanatics  Storch,  Stubner,  Thomas,  Munzer,  etc.  (D'Aubigne's 
His.  lief.,  vol.  3,  p.  55,  etc.),  by  the  Bohemian  woman  Wilhelmina  (hence  "  the  Wilhel- 
minians,"  see  Encyps.)  who  professed  such  a  baptism  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  became 
incarnate  in  her.  The  leaders  of  sects  professed  this  baptism  as  e.g.  Jemima  Wilkinson 
(1776),  Joanna  Southcott  (1792),  Ludivic  Muggleton  (time  of  Cromwell),  the  "  Men  of 
Understanding"  (1511),  Anna  Lee  (1770),  Joan  Leadly  (beginning  of  18th  century).  It  is 
made  a  prominent  factor  in  various  sects  as  e.g.  with  the  "  Camisards  or  French  Proph- 
ets" (art.  on  Ency.  Eelig.  KnowL),  the  "  Duchobortze,  or  Wrestlers  of  the  Spirit"  (art.  on 
Ency.  Iielig.  KnowL),  and  with  mystically  inclined  sects  in  general.  It  is  a  singular  fact 
also,  and  worthy  of  notice,  that  all  those  who  have  hitherto  claimed  to  give  mankind 
new  revelations,  to  be  added  to  or  else  to  supersede  the  Bible,  have  done  so  under  the 
plea  that  they  received  this  "  Baptism  of  the  Spirit,"  and  under  its  influence  attained 
their  alleged  knowledge.     The  student  can  readily  verify  this  statement.     Persons  to-day 


Prop.  171.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  71 

exist  who  aspire  to  prophecy,  etc.,  because,  as  they  claim,  they  were  "  baptized  by  the 
Spirit."     Fanaticism  repeats  itself,  and  attracts  its  simple  followers. 

Obs.  5.  The  Kingship  and  priesthood  of  the  saints  who  inherit  the  King- 
dom, implies  such  a  reception  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
glorification  that  they  experience  ;  the  promises  given  to  them  ;  the 
exalted  position  that  they  occupy  ;  the  work  that  they  will  perform  ;  the 
intimate  association  with,  and  likeness  unto,  Christ — all  this  involves  a 
baptism  of  the  Spirit,  by  which  they  realize  such  a  measure  as  will  perfectly 
qualify  them  for  their  rulership.  Indeed,  if  we  take  a  comprehensive  view 
of  this  baptism  or  the  clay  of  Pentecost,  and  consider  how  it  relates  to  the 
Divine  Plan,  it  will  be  found  that,  aside  from  the  ordinary  reasons 
assigned  for  its  occurrence,  it  was  given  to  fill  out  the  signs  or  evidences  of 
what  is  to  be  seen  and  experienced  when  the  prophecies  are  verified  in  the 
Coming  of  the  King  and  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom.  The  super- 
natural, as  we  have  shown  (Props.  6,  7,  120,  etc. ),  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
accomplish  this  work,  and  while  it  was  manifested  previously,  as  e.g.  in 
the  miracles  of  Christ,  yet  its  distinctive  association  with  the  Spirit  and 
with  the  company  of  believers,  as  predicted,  was  not  before  brought  out 
with  prominence.  This  premonitory  sign  or  evidence  is  thus,  if  we  will 
but  receive  it,  presented.  It  indicates  how  the  pious  wish  of  Moses  (Num. 
11  :  29)  may  be  realized,  "  would  God  thai  all  the  Lord's  people  wire  pro/di- 
ets, anil  that  the  Lord  would  put  II  is  Spirit  upon  them."  It  becomes  thus 
not  only  a  proof  that  Christ's  sacrifice  has  been  accepted,  that  His  exalta- 
tion and  intercessorship  is  prevailing,  that  the  apostle's  mission  and 
authority  is  attested,  that  certain  qualifications  are  bestowed,  but  it  also 
becomes  evidence  of  the  ample  fulfilment  of  prophecy  on  the  scale,  the 
very  extent  announced.  Indeed,  when  we  regard  the  promises  of  Christ 
given  in  this  direction  to  believers,  it  is  impossible  In  confine  them  to  the 
present  dispensation,  seeing  that  they  have  not  yet  been  fully  realized. 
Thus  e.g.  the  promise  is  to  everyone  that  believeth  (John  11  :  12,  13),  "  ///'; 
works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also  ;  and  greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do," 
which  in  its  amplitude  undoubtedly  extends  to  the  period  of  this  still 
future  predicted  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  by  which  we  know,  from  the 
evidence  already  presented  in  a  limited  extent,  that  it  is  not  only  possible 
to  be,  but  that  it  will  be,  actually  fulfilled.  To  be  made  equal  unto  angels, 
to  possess  the  power  attributed  unto  saints,  etc.,  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
case,  requires  the  conferring  of  the  Spirit  through  whom  alone  those  great 
wonders  are  performed.  When  the  body  of  Christ,  the  elect  Church,  is 
completed,  then  the  Oneness,  now  existing  by  faith  and  grace  through  the 
Spirit,  will  be  perfected  by  this  superior  baptism,  in  the  bodies  being  made 
like  unto  Christ's,  and  in  the  souls  possessing  divine  power,  and  in  their 
union  with  Christ  as  associated  rulers  and  priests  performing  similar  offices 
and  acts.  This  opens  up  before  us  the  most  astonishing  and  enrapturing 
views  of  the  honor,  power,  and  glory  of  the  saints  ;  explaining  the  source 
from  whence  derived  ;  showing  how  it  can  be  verified,  and  teaching  us  that 
these  promises  are  not  exaggerated  but  sober,  joyful  realities.  The  whole  is 
connected  ivitli  the  Coming  of  the  King  and  of  the  Kingdom  ;  to  this 
period  belong  the  promised  Kingship,  priesthood,  equality  with  angels,  ex- 
tended wisdom  and  knowledge,  power  to  work  signs  and  wonders,  un- 
bounded influence  with  the  Father,  through  Christ,  ability  to  perform  all 
things  requisite  to  rulership,  etc.     Such  is  the  lofty  and,  unspeakably  great 


72  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  171. 

destiny  offered  to  the  heir  of  the  Kingdom  through  the  Spirit.  When  this 
baptism  is  realized,  then  indeed  may  the  heir  say  with  Micah,  only  in  a 
more  extended  sense,  because  verified  in  his  beautiful  glorified  body  and  in 
his  greatly  endowed  spirit  :'  "  But  truly  I  am  full  of  power  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  and  of  judgment,  and  of  might."  It  is  Christ,  who  will  thus  bap- 
tize His  brethren,  the  Spirit  being  His  co-operator  and  the  executor  of  His 
will.  Christ  has  the  Spirit  without  measure,  and  it  is  simply  to  be  faith- 
less to  doubt  His  ability  to  produce  through  the  Spirit,  thus  working  in 
harmony  with  His  will,  all  the  glorious  things  predicted  by  this  same 
Spirit. 

Many  pei'sons  take  the  predictions  relating  to  this  future  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  and 
dislocate  them  from  their  connection  with  the  presence  and  reign  of  Jesus  Christ.  What 
Joachim  (Mosheim's  Oh.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  312),  did — the  Spirituals  adopting  the  same— ad- 
vocating "  the  age  of  the  Holy  Spirit"  without  the  personal  Advent,  etc.,  of  Jesus, 
multitudes  are  doing  to-day.  A  friend  of  mine,  who  may  represent  an  existing  class, 
holds,  that  in  the  coming  age,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  reign,  thus  reviving  Joachim's  theory, 
and  misapprehending  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  and  King.  Nagelsbach  (Lange's  Com., 
Isa.  32  :  15),  remarks  in  reference  to  the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit  :  "  The  expression  is 
very  strong,  meaning  properly  ;  the  Spirit  from  on  high  will  be  emptied  out  on  us,  com- 
pletely poured  out,"  which  he  says  is  indicative  "  of  nature  and  of  persons  as  wholly  per- 
vaded by  Spirit."  The  fact  is,  that  so  wonderful  is  it  in  its  work  and  extent  that  its 
wonder-working  power  is  linked  with  the  incoming  dispensation  in  which  nature,  be- 
lievers, and  the  nations  enjoy  its  blessing.  If  we  are  to  take  the  earnest  as  given  on 
Pentecost  as  an  indication  of  this  outpouring,  then  it  will  come  suddenly,  with  a  rushing 
sound,  etc.  We  cannot  tell  ;  time  and  happy  experience  must  impart  the  information. 
But  this  we  do  know,  that  varied  gifts  of  the  Spirit  will  then  be  imparted,  such  as  speak- 
ing with  tongues  and  inteqiretation,  prophecy,  wisdom  and  knowledge,  teaching,  dis- 
cerning spirits,  miracles,  judgment,  etc. 

Obs.  G.  Hence  it  is  not  correct  to  distinguish  this  dispensation  as  one  of 
the  Spirit  exclusively,  or  even  as  pre-eminent  over  all  that  shall  be  given. 
The  very  same  Spirit  manifested  His  renewing,  sanctifying,  and  even  in- 
spiring and  miraculous  power  under  the  Antediluvian,  Patriarchal,  and 
Mosaic  dispensations,  and  now  in  the  Christian  He  has  done  this  in  a  still 
more  striking  manner.  But  to  limit  His  work  to  these,  is  to  ignore  a  mul- 
titude of  blessed  predictions,  which  declare  that  "  the  day,"  or  "  the  age," 
or  "the  world  to  come,"  is  to  be  emphatically  the  great  dispensation  in 
which  the  Spirit  will,  in  the  most  extraordinary  manner,  exhibit  his  power, 
so  that  what  has  preceded  is  a  mere  earnest  of  that  which  shall  follow.  His 
supernatural  power  will  be  felt  in  recreation,  in  delivering  a  groaning  crea- 
tion, in  raising  and  quickening  the  bodies  of  believers,  in  qualifying  them 
for  their  position  of  kinghood  and  priesthood,  in  bestowing  Pentecostal  gifts, 
etc.  ;  and  hence,  seeing  that  the  perfection  and  completeness  of  His  work  is 
only  to  be  witnessed  in  the  coming  age,  we  must  attribute  the  most  remark- 
able outpouring  of  the  Spirit  to  that  future  period,  thus  making  \ip>re-emi- 
nently  a  dispensation  of  the  Spirit. 

It  will  not  answer,  as  some  do,  to  limit  "the  Ministration  of  the  Spirit"  (2  Cor. 
3  : 8),  to  the  present  dispensation,  for  the  apostle  proceeding  to  assign  the  reasons  for  his 
"  hope"  distinctly  teaches  how  much  of  this  glorious  ministration  relates  to  the  future, 
as  e.g.  in  its  connection  with  the  resurrection,  the  removal  of  the  Jewish  veil,  the  glori- 
fication of  saints,  etc.  Many  able  writers  in  the  past  have  advocated  the  Spirit's  work 
in  the  coming  dispensation,  so  that  we  only  reproduce  in  a  more  logical  and  scriptural 
form  the  views  of  Millenarians.  Even  Joachim  (and  others),  contended  for  an  astonish- 
ing outpouring  of  the  Spirit  to  be  witnessed  in  the  future  age,  but  he  fell  into  the  error 
of  making  this  dispensation  that  of  the  Son,  and  the  future  one  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
—reversing  the  order  laid  down  in  the  Word,  that  this  dispensation  is  the  one  in  which 


Prop.  171.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  73 

the  Comforter  specially  leads  and  instructs,  leading  to  Christ,  and  that  the  age  to  come 
is,  by  way  of  pre-eminence  (agreeably  to  covenant  promise),  called  "  the  day  (or  period) 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  " — and  that  in  this  day  of  Christ,  when  Jesus  appears  as  the 
Theocratic  King,  the  Holy  Ghost  also  is  manifested  in  extraordinary  power  in  and  through 
Him  who  has  the  Spirit  without  measure  (comp.  John  3  :  24  ;  2  Cor.  3  :  17,  18,  etc.). 
We  have  shown  under  Prop.  120,  etc.,  that  our  opponents  concede  that  the  Millennial 
age  cannot  be  introduced  as  predicted  without  a  special  Divine  interference  and  exertion 
of  power.  We  give  another  illustration  :  Ralston  (Apoc,  p.  163),  while  largely  addicted 
to  spiritualizing  yet,  admits  that  "  supernatural  gifts  in  a  pre-eminent  degree  must  be 
requisite."  On  the  other  hand,  Dr.  Brown  [Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  ch.  6),  labors  to  prove 
that  the  work  of  the  Spirit  for  saving  piirposes  will  cease  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  we 
desire  the  reader — over  against  the  abundant  Scripture  against  it— to  ponder  the  extra  - 
ordinary  Scripture  proof  adduced,  viz.,  John  7  :  38,  39,  and  14  :  26,  and  17  :  26,  and 
15  :  36,  and  16  :  7,  14  ;  Acts  2  :  33  ;  Tit,  3  :  5,  6  ;  Rev.  3:1,  and  5:6.  As  we  meet  this 
fully  under  another  Proposition,  it  is  sufficient  to  say,  that  this  promised  baptism  of  the 
Spirit  alone  sets  aside  this  objection  urged  by  Brown,  Berg,  and  others  (viz.,  that  the 
Spirit's  work  ceases  at  the  Sec.  Advent),  seeing  that  it  stands  closely  and  inseparably 
connected  with  the  outpouring  on  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  nations.  They  give  no  direct 
proof  but  only  inferential  ;  we,  however,  present  direct  testimony  to  the  contrary,  as 
e.g.,  Joel  2  :  28,  32  ;  Acts  3  :  19-21  ;  Ezek.  36  :  26,  27,  and  37  :  14, 'and  11  :  19,  etc. 

There  is  only  one  passage  which  at  first  sight  might  be  deemed  to  conflict  with  our 
view  of  a  future  bestowment  of  miraculous  power,  viz.,  1  Cor.  13  :  8,  13,  which  is  sup- 
posed to  teach  the  entire  cessation  of  prophecy  and  tongues.  But  this  involves  an  in- 
terpretation at  once  antagonistic  to  the  analogy  of  Scripture  respecting  the  future  ;  and 
hence  this  passage  must  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  the  general  teaching  on  the  sub- 
ject. The  Apostle  in  Corinthians  must  be  understood  in  a  comparative  manner,  viz.,  as 
eulogizing  the  supremacy  of  love,  its  superiority  (including  also  faith  and  hope — which 
in  another  place  he  also  represents  as  ceasing  comparatively  only )  over  the  manifestations, 
imperfectly  displayed,  of  the  present  time.  The  key  is  found  in  the  verses  9  and  10, 
which  indicate  that  the  present  "  in  part"  shall  give  place  to  "  the  perfect,"  indicating 
the  higher  plane,  the  perfected  state  under  this  baptism.  Otherwise  we  must,  if  consis- 
tent, affirm  that  knowledge  itself  shall  cease,  which  no  one  believes. 

Ohs.  7.  This  inculcates  the  avoidance  of  those  extravagant  appropriations 
of  this  phraseology,  and  applying  it  to  the  individual  experience  of  every 
believer.  If  we  were  to  credit  the  professions  of  multitudes  at  the  present 
day,  then  they  also  have  experienced  this  "baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
But  the  credentials  belonging  to  it  are  lacking,  viz.,  that  of  having  received 
supernatural  power.  In  many  instances,  this  self-appropriation  arises 
from  confounding  the  extraordinary  manifestations  of  the  Spirit  given 
under  this  phrase  for  the  ordinary  ;  and  those  who  thus  profess  it,  do  not 
mean  the  conference  of  unusual  or  extraordinary  gifts  and  powers  ;  but  in 
other  cases,  it  is  done  with  the  annexed  idea  of  being  thus  specially  favored 
with  gifts  above  their  fellows.  It  is  really  sad  to  observe  in  looking  over 
the  past  that,  notwithstanding  the  distinctive  description  of  this  baptism 
and  what  it  confers,  it  has  been  claimed  by  a  great  company,  and  it  has  be- 
come fruitful  of  misunderstanding,  perversion,  and  extravagances.  It  is  to 
be  regretted  that  able  writers,  unaware  of  its  real  import,  have  aided  to 
perpetuate  this  error.  This  is  true  even  down  to  the  most  recent,  as,  e.g. 
Eeuss  {His.  Ghr.  Theol.  Apos.  Age,  p.  123),  says  :  "  it  is  precisely  for  this 
reason  that  the  least  of  those  who  enter  the  Kingdom  of  Christ"  (i.e.  the 
Church)  "  having  received  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  is  greater  than  John 
the  Baptist."  In  another  place  (Prop.  39),  is  shown  how  unjust  to  John 
such  a  representation  is,  and  it  may  well  be  asked,  in  this  connection, 
whether  it  can  be  said  of  "  the  least"  in  the  Church  that  like  John  he  was 
"filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Luke  1  :  15).  Eeuss  himself  calls  John  "  a 
prophet,"  thus  indicative  of  his  having  had  the  Spirit  in  an  extraordinary 


74  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  171. 

degree,  which  of  itself  is  sufficient  to  set  aside  his  extravagant  eulogy  of 
weak  Church  members. 

Alas  !  what  vagaries  have  passed  under  this  misunderstood  phrase  !  Multitudes 
under  its  professed  reception  have  claimed  special  honor.  Only  this  week  a  large  eccle- 
siastical body  in  session  discussed  this  matter  one-sidedly,  and  nearly  every  speaker 
urged  in  eloquent  terms  the  importance  of  a  renewed  "Baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  to  he 
experienced  individually.  With  such  the  opinion  does  no  great  injury,  because  under 
the  phrase  they  understand  simply  the  ordinary  operations,  but  it  has  often  been  used 
by  fanaticism  in  a  way  to  dishonor  the  truth — men  claiming  under  it  special  power  to 
perform  great  works,  etc.  It  has  ushered  in  many  extravagances,  such  as  e.g.  in  the 
Cathari,  who  (Kurtz,  Oh.  Ills.,  vol.  1,  p.  454)  only  allowed  those  to  be  of  the  "  perfecti," 
who  received  it,  denying  eternal  life  without  it.  (With  them  it  was  obtained  by  laying 
the  Gospel  and  the  hands  of  the  elder  upon  the  head  ;  it  was  commonly  delayed  until 
near  death,  etc.)  The  student  finds  the  same  in  "  The  Sect  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  in  the 
Fratricelli  (illustrated  forcibly  in  the  case  of  Tauchelm  ;  see  Kurtz,  Ch.  Ills.,  vol.  1,  p. 
458),  the  Anabaptists,  Jumping  Sect,  Calling  Voices,  etc.,  etc.  Ten  thousand  fanciful  and 
exorbitant  claims  in  more  modern  times  are  to  be  traced  to  this  professed  baptism.  For 
illustrations,  see  notes  to  previous  Observations. 

Obs.  8.  This  may  throw  light  upon  the  disputed  point,  when  authentic 
miracles  ceased,  or  when  this  special  baptism  of  the  Spirit  no  longer  trans- 
pired. The  Eoman  Church,  and  various  sects,  parties,  and  individuals, 
even  down  to  the  present  day,  not  only  claim  the  perpetuation  and  posses- 
sion of  supernatural  power  given  by  the  Spirit,  but  insist  upon  it,  that  it  is 
mi  essential  characteristic  of  the  true  Church.  Others  claim  that  it  ceased  to 
be  experienced  not  long  after  the  apostolic  age,  and  that  the  accounts 
transmitted  long  afterward  are  to  be  received  as  fabulous.  Unbelievers  not 
only  judge  all  the  earlier  by  the  later,  but  ask  when  and  why  miracles 
should  have  ceased  and  the  later  ones  should  not  be  credited.  The  usual 
reasons  assigned  for  their  cessation  are  these  :  that  they  were  discontinued 
because  the  design  originally  contemplated  of  qualifying  the  early  ministers, 
attesting  to  their  mission  and  the  truth,  was  duly  accomplished,  and  that 
afterward  they  were  not  needed  ;  or,  that  they  were  taken  away  on  account 
of  grieving  the  Spirit  by  the  abuse,  perversion,  or  denial  of  those  gifts,  or 
by  the  fulling  away  from  the  faith  of  the  Church,  etc.  But  we  hold  to  a 
better  reason,  viz.,  that  if  continued  on,  perpetuated  on  in  the  Church 
without  intermission,  the  Baptism  of  the  Spirit  would  have  failed  in  its 
significance  as  a  sign,  a  pledge  of  the  future  fulfilment.  It  was  eminently 
suitable  at  the  beginning  of  this  dispensation,  as  illustrative  of  Christ's 
power  and  will  to  manifest  this  baptism  as  predicted  by  the  prophets,  to 
give  to  a  limited  extent  an  evidence  of  its  exhibition.  This  is  a  sign  that 
the  prophets  will  be  fulfilled  in  this  very  particular  ;  but  had  the  sign  been 
perpetuated  (as  many  claim  it  ought  to  have  been,  and  was),  then  it  would 
have  defeated  itself  in  causing  the  mistake  (which  was  made,  and  is  now  so 
tenaciously  held  by  the  multitude),  that  all  that  the  prophets  predicted  re- 
lated to  the  present  dispensation,  and  that  we  need  not  look  for  any  better 
here  on  earth.  Besides  this,  its  continuance  was  unsuitable  both  to  the 
predictions  of  the  prophets  and  to  the  times  that  ensued.  Fully  admitting 
the  ordinary  operations  of  the  Spirit,  and  that,  as  in  previous  dispensa- 
tions, the  Spirit  is  not  limited,  but  can  and  does,  even  in  an  extraordinary 
manner,  in  certain  cases  respond  to  faith  in  the  believer  and  work  in 
Providence,  yet  this  is  no  equivalent  to  this  Baptism  of  the  Spirit,  which 
affects  believers  and  communities  of  them  continuously  and  conspicuously 
as  evidenced  in  the  apostles  and  others.1     Now  the  prophecies  associate  this 


Prop.  171.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  75 

peculiar  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  with  the  Jewish  nation — it  is  not  isolated 
from  it,  but  inseparably  joined  with  its  restoration,  and  the  period  of  the 
restored  Theocracy.  While  it  was  suitable  to  exhibit  even  the  signs  or 
pledges  of  future  fulfilment  when  the  temple,  .city,  land,  and  people  were 
prospered,  the  propriety  ceased  after  the  destruction  of  the  temple  and  city, 
and  the  captivity  of  the  land  and  the  people.  The  consideration  due  to  the 
prophets  inspired  by  the  Spirit  itself  (who  locate  the  period),  the  respect 
due  to  Jerusalem,  etc.,  which  the  Spirit  itself  expresses  in  the  Word  (owing 
to  its  relationship  to  David's  Son  and  God  Himself),  now  prevents  the  rep-  • 
etition  of  those  signs  so  long  as  Jerusalem  is  trodden  down  by  the  Gen- 
tiles. A  perfect  realization  of  this  baptism  as  described  by  the  prophets  is 
an  utter  impossibility  so  long  as  the  Jewish  nation  remains  unrestored,  be- 
cause it  is  linked  with  the  period  of  restoration  ;  and  to  have  continued  the 
prelude  to,  or  earnest  of,  better  things,  would  have  not  only  contradicted 
the  prophets,  but  would  have  made  a  kind  of  imperfect  fulfilment  take  the 
juace  of  the  true  and  perfect  one.  As  it  is,  this  dispensation,  so  exceed- 
ingly precious  especially  to  us  Gentiles,  has  been  by  many,  exalted  out  of 
cdl proportion  in  comparison  with  others  ;  and  if  this  baptism  had  con- 
tinued, then  under  its  influence,  an  antagonism  between  prediction  and  fact 
would  have  at  once  existed,  and  this  dispensation  would  have  been  greatly 
magnified  to  the  exclusion  of  any  such  gifts  being  connected  with  the 
Jewish  race — with  the  loss  of  them,  Gentiles  have  become  so  "high- 
minded"  that  anything  distinctively  '"Jewish"  is  obnoxious— with  the 
retention  of  them  they  really  would  possess  an  argument  against  our  being 
"  too  Jewish,"  for  then  they  could  triumphantly  point  to  the  very  proph- 
ecies pertaining  to  the  Jews  and  claim  that  they  too  realized  them  without 
having  arrived  at  the  period  designated.  This  baptism  then  ceased  from 
the  time  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  both  that  it  might  be  a  sign  dur- 
ing the  prevalence  of  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  and  that  the  Spirit 
might  preserve  the  integrity  and  consistency  of  His  own  glorious  and  truth- 
ful predictions.2 

1  Bushnell  (Xature  and  Supernatural,  ch  14)  claims  that  the  miraculous  is  continued 
down  to  the  present,  but  by  this  he  means  that  the  supernatural  is  exerted  in  behalf  of 
man,  that  God's  special  Providence  is  exhibited  in  behalf  of  faith  and  prayer,  and  that 
these  things  pertaining  to  the  individual  are  matters  of  personal  experience.  This  of 
course,  all  believers  will  allow  ;  but  this  is  something  widely  different  from  the  miracu- 
lous wrought  by  man  through  professed  divine  power.  God  is  able  to-day  to  aid  super- 
naturally,  but  for  any  man  to  claim  that  God  has  given  him  the  power  to  work  miracles, 
that,  like  the  Apostles,  he  can  work  wonders,  etc.,  is  simply  pretending  to  a  "  Baptism  of 
the  Holy  Ghost"  which  he  has  not  received.  We  wish  distinctly  to  be  understood  as  not 
narrowing  down  faith  or  the  prayer  of  faith,  so  that  it  cannot  rely  in  any  emergency  upon 
the  interference,  if  needed,  of  the  Supernatural.  After  the  recorded  religious  experi- 
ences given  in  Scripture,  after  the  testimony  of  believers  in  behalf  of  faithful,  persever- 
ing prayer  ;  after  the  encouragaments  and  promises  given  to  prayer  ;  after  the  practical 
realization  by  the  writer  himself  of  the  fulfilments  of  God's  directions  in  this  matter,  we 
dare  not  limit  its  prevailing  power— but  all  this  falls  in  with  the  ever  prevailing  (in  all 
dispensations)  ordinary  Providence,  working  mediately  or  immediately,  directly  or  indi- 
rectly, wholly  under  God's  oicn  direction.  The  other  is  special  and  extraordinary,  being  the 
conference  of  particular  and  abiding  power  upon  man,  to  be  exercised  as  his  will  or 
circumstances  determine.  The  Supernatural  always  exists  and  is  constantly  available, 
dependent  upon  the  Divine  Will  ;  the  conference  of  miraculous  power,  of  supernatural 
gifts,  upon  the  individual,  as  once  experienced  as  a  "  sign"  or  "  earnest"  of  future  pos- 
session, is  postponed  until  that  period,  when  men,  elevated  by  redemption  to  a  higher 
plane,  will  employ  it  nobly  and  grandly  to  exalt  the  Divine  Purpose  in  Theocratic  rule. 
Hence  the  Supernatural  in  answers  to  prayer,  marvellous  escapes  from  danger,  special 
deliverances,  divine  guidance,  etc.,  has  always  manifested  itself,  and  is  an  element  in 


73  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  171. 

religious  experience  which  we  are  encouraged  to  invoke  and  expect,  for  God  can,  and 
does,  interfere  in  behalf  of  any  creature  at  the  request  and  perseverance  of  faith,  but 
this  is  very  different  from  a  miraculous  power  lodged  in  an  individual.  The  former 
belong — as  regeneration  and  sanctification — to  the  ordinary  Supernatural  bestowments 
promised  to  faith  ;  while  the  latter  are  special  exhibits  of  an  extraordinary  nature, 
enabling  the  person  thus  endowed  to  perforin,  in  virtue  of  supernatural  power  existing 
with  him,  the  miraculous.  Even  while  the  latter  was  evidenced  in  the  days  of  Jesus  and 
the  Apostles,  the  former  was  not  stayed  or  superseded,  but  when  the  one  was  withdrawn 
the  other  remained  in  full  force.  The  one  is  given  to  aid  the  individual  spiritually  or 
temporarily,  the  other  as  a  special  honor  and  medium,  and  the  supernatural  is  the 
foundation  of  both. 

2  This  serves  to  explain  the  untenable  and  mistaken  position  of  Ed.  Irving  and  his 
followers.  It  is  to  the  credit  of  that  truly  pious  and  noble  man  that  he  was  too  honest 
to  possess  what,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  he  had  no  reason  to  expect.  It  is  sad,  how- 
ever, that  his  line  of  argument  materially  aided  others  into  a  fatal  error.  In  this  he  was 
eminently  sincere.  He  was  correct  in  not  limiting  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  which  works 
according  to  His  will  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  bat  wrong  in  believing  that  that  Spirit  must 
repeat  the  signs  already  sufficiently  given  before  the  time  expressly  designated,  viz.,  at  the 
appearing  and  Kingdom,  or  at  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation.  Correct  even  in  his 
belief  that  the  Spirit  must,  according  to  the  prophecies,  manifest  itself  by  such  a  bap- 
tism, for  what  preceded  was  inadequate  to  meet  the  universality,  etc.,  indicated,  he 
mistook — and  a  grevious  mistake  it  was — by  antedating  the  time  when  this  should  take 
place.  Irving's  history  as  given  by  Mrs.  Oliphant  is  one  of  the  saddest  on  record.  But 
it  was  not  only  Irving  but  many  others  (as  e.g.  Grotius,  Lavater,  Hess,  Lange,  etc.  ;  see 
Com.  Mark  16  :  14-18,  doc.  G)  who  held  this  notion  of  a  continual  perpetuation  of  mira- 
cles based  chiefly  on  Mark  16  :  17,  18,  overlooking  the  fact  that  the  two  oldest  Greek  mss. 
(Sin.  and  Vat.)  and  other  authorities  omit  these  verses,  or,  if  to  be  retained,  forgetting 
that  the  extent  of  such  signs  as  to  time  must  be  graduated  by  the  analogy  of  the  Scriptures 
on  the  subject.  The  "  Baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  is  an  essential  factor  in  the  system 
of  faith  of  the  "  Believers,"  who  after  separating  from  other  churches  to  form  a  new  one, 
have,  it  is  alleged  (Six  Letters  or  Church  Questions,  p.  27),  in  their  "  Assembly"  the  "gifts 
of  the  ministry,  in  terms  of  Eph.  4  :  8-13  ;  Rom.  12  :  6-8  ;  1.  Cor.  12  :  28."  That  is, 
through  the  profrssed  direction  of  the  Spirit  each  one  becomes  duly  impressed  and  quali- 
fied for  the  station  or  position  he  is  to  occupy.  The  door  that  this  opens  to  pretension, 
spiritual  pride,  imposition,  etc.,  is  not  very  inviting.  But  this  is  of  the  same  tenor  with 
the  affirmation  (28,  and  given  by  one  of  these  Spirit  impressed  instructors),  which  makes 
baptism  something  entirely  outside  of  the  Church,  as  follows  :  "Since,  however,  baptism 
is  nowhere  in  the  Word  made  a  thing  to  be  done  in,  or  bj%  the  assembly  or  its  authority, 
but  is  always  a  matter  between  the  evangelist  and  his  converts,  and  since  no  divine  pre- 
cept marks  out  the  mode  or  time  of  baptism,  so  the  when,  the  where,  and  the  how  belong 
not  to  the  assembly's  responsibilities,  but  to  those  of  the  individuals  before  God." 
(Thus  by  ignoring  the  common-sense  implication  of  Scripture,  the  universal  usage  of  the 
Apostolic  Church,  the  initiatoiy  and  confessional  idea,  we  might  make  sad  work  of  vari- 
ous things  pertaining  to  the  Church.)  The  fact  is  that  such  claimants  of  special  spiritual 
influence  and  power,  evidence  by  their  divergence  from  the  Scriptures  and  the  common 
usage  of  the  Apostolic  Church,  that  they  are  not  thus  specially  enlightened  and  inspired 
— for  the  Spirit  does  not  contradict  Himself — but  that  they  take  their  own  mental  deduc- 
tions and  imaginings  for  such  as  are  divinely  derived  and  authorized.  Such,  too,  more 
or  less  influenced  by  their  supposed  elevation  to  a  plane  higher  than  that  enjoyed  by 
others  are  exceedingly  exacting  and  bigoted,  as  the  history  of  the  past  and  present  at- 
tests in  various  professed  churches,  parties,  and  individuals— salvation  out  of  their  own 
standpoint  being  impossible,  or,  at  least,  a  matter  of  the 'utmost  difficulty. 

In  reference  to  the  later  Patristic  miracles  our  line  of  argument  cannot  receive  them  as 
legitimate,  and  discards  them  as  not  only  unnecessary  but  weakening  the  design  intended 
by  miraculous  interference,  because  their  frequency,  puerility,  etc.,  destroy  the  influ- 
ence and  earnest  designed.  An  uninterrupted  continuation  of  miracles  would  really 
have  vitiated  their  intended  use  as  indicated.  Hence,  with  many  others  who  have  stud- 
ied the  subject,  we  cannot  extend  the  Primitive  miraculous  period,  the  time  of  authentic 
miracles,  beyond  the  Apostles  and  their  immediate  successors,  for  if  we  go  farther  down 
to  the  close  of  the  second  or  third  centuries  as  Newton  and  others  suggest,  or  to  the  days 
of  Constantine,  as  Oxford  divines  contended  for,  then  as  Locke,  and  recently  Lecky,  have 
reasoned,  we  do  find;  so  far  as  mere  human  testimony  is  concerned,  no  place  for  a  stop- 
page, seeing  that  the  same  continuous  flow  of  evidence  is  found  after  these  respective 


PEOP.  171.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  77 

periods  forming  an  unbroken  current.  Arnold  (Stanley's  Life  of,  vol.  2,  p.  18)  remarks  : 
"  None  but  the  Apostles  ever  conferred  these  gifts,  and  that  therefore  they  ceased  of 
course  after  one  generation."  Arnold's  position  is  strongly  confirmed  by  Philip's  (Acts 
8  :  14-17)  experience,  who  with  all  his  abilitj*,  evangelistic  position,  etc.,  could  not  make 
others  partakers  of  it,  showing  that  the  power  of  transmission  pertained  only  to  the  apos- 
tles, a  favored  few.  Middleton  (Free  Inquiry)  discards  the  later  Eccles.  miracles  on  the 
ground  that  they  were  "  contrived  or  authorized  at  least  by  the  leading  men  of  the 
Church  for  the  sake  of  governing  with  more  ease  the  unruly  spirit  of  the  populace,"  and 
refers  to  more  modern  "  impostures"  that  were  thus  invented  and  would  receive  counte- 
nance and  support  if  the  former  were  sustained.  So  others,  as  Bh.  Douglas  (Oriterion), 
reject  them  as  "  the  inventions  of  bold  and  interested  deceivers."  We  need  not  be  so 
sweeping  in  our  denunciations,  for,  we  doubt  not,  that  many  were  the  result  of  vivid, 
morbid,  sincere  imaginings  ;  others  proceeded  from  the  occurrence  of  extraordinary 
events,  or  remarkable  coincidences,  or  astonishing  providences,  to  which,  for  the  purpose 
of  adding  to  the  sanctity  of  the  person  or  occasion,  sundry  embellishments  were  added. 
While  some  are  purely  apocryphal,  and  others  have  a  slight  foundation  in  the  things 
stated,  it  is  not  requisite  to  question  in  a  summary  and  wholesale  manner  the  honesty  or 
sincerity  of  the  parties  concerned.  Denunciation  is  not  the  assignment  of  reason  for  the 
rejection  of  this  vast  claimant  of  miraculous  power.  If  it  be  asked  what  shall  we  then  do 
with  this  mass  of  miraculous  history  (which  is  defended  by  those  of  a  highly  mystical 
tendency,  and  by  such  as  are  under  a  Romanizing  influence),  the  reply  is  something  like 
the  following  :  (1)  The  stream  from  the  Apostles'  time  to  the  third  century  is  very  feeble 
as  admitted  by  many  writers  (so  e.g.  Middleton  aimed  his  attack  chiefly  at  the  Fathers  of 
the  fourth  century)  and  the  little  knowledge  that  we  have  (aside  from  the  New  Test.)  of 
miracles  during  that  period  is  principally  due  to  later  writers.  But  admit,  which  is  true, 
that  Justin  Martyr  and  others  following  him  speak  of  miracles  still  continuing,  (a)  it  only 
indicates  what  has  been  witnessed  in  every  age,  that  great  and  good  men  (as  in  witch- 
craft, etc.)  can  be  led  to  indorse  from  hearsay,  or  a  love  of  the  marvellous,  or  supersti- 
tion, what  may  not  be  strictly  correct  ;  (b)  it  proves  how  wise  the  Apostles  were  in  fore- 
seeing such  abuse  and  in  urging  care  upon  this  very  point  so  that  no  one  might  be  de- 
luded after  their  departure  ;  (c)  the  integrity  and  honesty  of  such  narrators  is  not  vitiated 
in  other  respects  (as  little  as  we  would  condemn  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  Sir  Thorn.  Browne, 
Cotton  Mather,  Baxter,  etc.,  for  believing  in  and  condemning  witches)  seeing  that  they 
do  not  give  them  as  having  been  performed,  experienced,  or  even  witnessed  by  them- 
selves ;  (d)  the  paucity  of  miracles  in  the  first  two  centuries  after  the  death  of  the  Apostles 
(when  such  a  death,  it'  the  miracles  were  really  given  for  the  purposes  so  many  contend 
for,  reasonably  ought  to  have  strikingly  augmented  them  to  encourage  the  Church)  is 
evidence  that,  with  all  that  extraordinary  love  for  the  Supernatural  then  existing  and  so 
prevalent,  there  must  have  been  a  gradual  cessation  of  miracles  after  the  decease  of  the 
Apostles.  Mistaken  belief  in  the  essential,  and  misdirected  zeal,  afterward  eagerly 
accepted  of  the  continuation  as  a  requisite  continued  evidence  of  the  divine,  and  corre- 
spondingly adorned  and  eulogized  it.  (2)  As  to  the  Fathers  after  the  third  century,  we 
have  no  special  desire  to  defend  them  even  from  Middleton' s,  in  some  respects,  unjust 
attack.  No  doubt  some  were  imposed  upon  ;  others  gladly  accepted  of  a  general  belief 
to  aid  as  they  supposed  the  truth,  and  with  credulity  received  all,  or  nearly  all,  stories  of 
the  miraculous  without  examination  ;  and  others  we  fear,  as  Middleton  charges  them, 
manufactured  them  to  suit  the  times  or  to  exalt  some  saint.  (3)  The  fulfilment  of 
prophecy — as  e.g.  the  prevention  of  Julian  to  rebuild  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  in  order 
to  invalidate  the  prophecy  of  Jesus— is  not  to  be  rejected,  for  the  Supernatural  element 
is  evidenced  by  the  exactness  of  fulfilment  whether,  as  in  the  illustration  adduced,  the 
result  of  foreknown  natural  causes  or  of  direct  intervention— for  neither  the  sneers  of 
Gibbon  nor  the  credulity  of  writers  on  the  subject  vitiate  the  miraculous  knowledge 
exhibited  by  oiir  Saviour,  (-1)  The  Raman  Catholic  Church  lays  special  claim  to  a  con- 
tinuous power  of  working  miracles  from  the  days  of  the  Apostles  down  to  the  present 
(even  asserted  by  Dr.  Milner  in  Lett.  26,  p.  163,  etc.).  Bellarmine  (Opera,  vol.  2,  etc.) 
endeavors  to  frame  an  argument  from  this  in  favor  of  the  Romish  Church  and  against 
Protestants,  viz.,  that  miracles  being  found  lacking  in  the  Protestant  Church,  the  true 
Church  is  only  found  in  his  own  communion.  So  profusely  too  are  they  given  that  those 
attributed  e.g.  to  Ignatius  Loyola  (Nicolini's  His.  of  the  Jesuits,  p.  262)  are  more  numerous 
than  those  ascribed  to  Moses  or  an  Ajsostle.  The  Mormons  and  others  hold  that  this 
power  of  working  miracles  was  intended  to  be  continuous  but  was  lost,  and  now,  as  evi- 
dence of  divine  power  and  of  being  the  true  Church,  is  again  restored  in  their  respective 
communions.     But  unfortunately  for  all  such  claims,  the  miracles  will  not  stand  the  test 


78  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  171. 

of  criticism  ;  many  of  them  by  their  evident  absurdity,  puerility,  lack  of  design,  confirm- 
atory of  error,  etc.,  containing  their  own  condemnation.  Writers  like  Cummings,  Home, 
Bh.  Newton,  Jenkin,  Campbell,  Lardner,  Leland,  Conybeare,  Taylor,  Farmer,  Adams, 
and  others,  having  fully  exposed  their  pretensions  and  shown  that  the  original  fountain 
is  not  the  source  of  such  a  stream.  (5)  These  miraculous  manifestations  were  originally 
given  as  "signs,"  and  not  merely  as  "divine  credentials"  to  accredit  an  inspired  mes- 
senger or  the  truth,  for  they  indicate  that  the  truth  to  which  they  are  linked  and  which 
constantly  looks  forward  to  the  "  restitution"  as  the  ultimate  outcome,  evidences  by 
these  tokens  that  the  Supernatural  really  exists  to  insure  a  fulfilment,  Communicating 
truths  which  demand  Supernatural  power  for  their  realization  it  is  the  most  reasonable 
and  just  to  have  some  demonstration,  some  sign,  to  show  that  the  Supernatural  is  not 
lacking.  If  such  "  signs,"  were  not  given  unbelievers  would  be  the  very  first  to  demand 
them.  But  the  constant  repetition  of  such  "  signs"  would  weaken  if  not  defeat,  their 
significancy.  Habitual  and  commonplace,  they  would  altogether  lose  their  representative 
character.  To  sustain  even  this  position  consistently  and  honorably  it  must  be  shown 
that  the  truths  they  attest,  the  doctrines  they  authenticate,  the  Divine  Plan  they  sub- 
stantiate,- are  worthy  of  the  Supernatural. 

In  Buckle's  Mis.  Works,  vol.  2,  art,  447,  is  this  reference  :  "  I  perceive  in  the  language 
of  the  Fathers  who  lived  in  the  middle  and  end  of  the  second  century,  when  speaking  on 
this  subject  something  which  betrays  if  not  a  conviction  at  least  a  suspicion,  that  the 
power  of  working  miracles  was  withdrawn,  combined  with  an  anxiety  to  keep  up  a  belief 
of  its  continuance  in  the  Church"  (The  Eccl.  His.  of  the  Sec.  and  Third  Centuries,  illus- 
trated from  the  writings  of  Tertullian,  8vo.  1845,  3d  ed.,  pp.  93-95.  See  also  p.  133  of  the 
Bh.  of  Lincoln's  Works).  The  Bh.  of  Lincoln  (Eccl.  His.,  p.  92)  and  Beaven  (Life  of 
IrencPAis,  p.  70)  are  of  the  opinion  that  miracles  ceased  after  the  apostolic  age.  Papias 
and  Irenams  so  closely  related  to  this  age,  speak  of  the  raising  of  the  dead.  But  the 
Fathers  down  to  the  fourth  century  (as  Bh.  Douglas  remarked)  relate  no  miracles,  and 
the  Fathers  after  the  fourth  century,  when  they— aside  from  oratorical  and  panegyrical 
writings— theologically  discuss  the  question  of  miracles,  admit  the  cessation  of  such 
evidence,  e.g.  Augustine  (/><■  ytilitale  Oredendi,  and  Ue  Vera  Jieligione),  Chrysostom  (Ser.  33 
and  36,  and  in  Epistolam  1,  ai  Corinth,  Homil.  6.  2,  and  Horn.  29),  with  which  compare  Fr. 
Xitzsch's  Augustinus'  Lehre  vom  Wunder,  and  the  admissions  of  Prof.  Newman  in  Two 
Essays  on  Scripture  Miracles  mid  on  Ecclesiastical  (2d  ed.),  Dr.  Schaff's  statements  (Ch.  His., 
vol.  1,  p.  206,  etc.),  Taylor's  Ancient  Christianity,  Killen's  Ancient  Church,  p.  278,  Prof. 
Wnrman's  art,  "  Miracles  Ecclesiastical"  in  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.,  Olshausen's 
Com.,  vol.  3,  p.  683,  Knapp's  Thed.,  p.  255,  etc.  Dr.  Neander,  Bh.  Kaye,  and  many 
others  incline  to  a  gradual  cessation  theory,  and  base  it  on  the  ground  (different  from  the 
one  advanced  by  us)  that  miracles  were  gradually  withdrawn  as  the  necessity  of  such  out- 
ward  attestation  was  removed  by  the  firm  establishment  of  the  Church.  Much  that  is 
written  to  account  for  this  cessation  we  cannot  receive.  To  illustrate  :  Dr.  Tyng  in  Ik 
Will  Come,  p.  169.  savs  that  miracles  ceased  suddenly  on  account  of  unbelief— "  the  sin 
of  unbelief  is  the  thief"  that  caused  "  the  sudden  cessation  of  extraordinary  gifts  and 
powers  in  the  Church."  This  makes  their  appearance  contingent  on  faith  and  materially 
aids  the  claims  of  those  who  profess  to  have  such  faith  (as  e.g.  "  Catholic  Apostolic 
Church  ;"  see  art.  on  in  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.,  the  "  Believers,"  "  Mormons,  ' 
etc.).  The  fact  is  that  the  Baptism  of  the  Spirit  was  conferred  when  the  number  of 
believers  was  but  small,  and  they  had  no  conception  of  its  gifts  or  extent.  Troutman 
(The  Apost.  Church,  p.  309,  quoted  by  Schaff)  remarks  :  it  "could  not  and  must  not  con- 
tinue in  the  Church.  It  could  not  because  the  earthly  human  nature  is  not  able  con- 
stantly to  hear  the  bliss  of  ecstacy  and  such  mighty  streams  of  power  from  above,  as  is 
shown  by  the  example  of  the  three  chosen  disciples  on  the  Mt.  of  Transfiguration.  It 
must  not  be— because  the  continuance  of  the  blossom  would  have  hindered  the  develop- 
ment of  the  fruit.  The  splendor  of  these  higher  powers  would  unavoidably  have  fixed 
the  eye  and  the  heart  too  much  on  externals,  and  the  proper  object  and  work  of  faith,  the 
inward  conquest  of  the  world  would  have  been  neglected."  This  is  simply  manufactur- 
ing reasons  to  account  for  the  cessation,  and  which  overlook  (1)  that  the  same  power 
which  imparted  the  gifts  could  also— and  did— bestow  the  ability  to  endure  the  recep- 
tion ;  and  (2)  that  the  union  of  blossom  and  fruit,  of  eye  and  heart,  of  the  object  and 
work  of  faith,  of  external  and  internal,  is  abundantly  evidenced  in  the  purity,  faithful- 
ness, activity,  etc.,  of  its  first  recipients.  Dr.  Schaff  (His.  Apos.  Ch.,  p.  471)  advocates 
the  cessation  of  "  the  temporary  form"  but  the  retention  of  "  the  essence,"  by  which  he 
probably  means  that  the  Supernatural  which  is  the  basis  of  miraculous  manifestations  in 
still  retained,  and  evidences  its  retention  e.g.  in  regeneration,  sanctification,  Providence, 


Prop.  171.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  79 

answers  to  prayer,  etc.  We  have  no  objection  to  the  idea  but  to  the  manner  in  which  it 
is  introduced,  failing  to  do  justice  and  give  significancy  to  "the  earnest."  It  may  be 
asserted  that  the  Bible  does  not  expressly  declare  the  revocation  of  Supernatural  gifts. 
But  the  reason  for  this  is  apparent  ;  the  First  and  Second  Advents,  owing  to  their  instru- 
mentality in  Redemption,  etc.,  are  co-joined  (Prop.  34),  this  dispensation  being  inter- 
callary,  and  nothing  is  expressed  to  indicate  its  long  continuance  for  the  reasons  previ- 
ously given  (which  such  a  temporary  revocation  would  imply)  ;  hence  the  gifts  are  linked 
with'  the  Advents  as  expressive  of  the  Supernatural.  A  revocation  also  might  be  easily 
misapprehended  and  misapplied  as  e.g.  causing  doubt  respecting  their  future  conference  ; 
or  exciting  unbelief  in  God's  accessibility  and  willingness  to  bless  and  deliver  in  His 
ordinary  Providence  ;  or  weaken  faith  in  the  divine  attributes  and  Will,  by  representing 
God  as  bound  not  to  exert  special  Supernatural  power  if  emergencies  demanded  the 
same.  We  add  in  conclusion  that  this  temporary  suspension  may  give  us  a  clew  to  the 
cessation  of  demoniacal  possessions  in  the  form  attributed  to  them  in  the  Gospels.  For 
as  Ebrard  (Gospel  History,  p.  31)  says  :  "  It  was  ordained  in  the  counsels  of  God  that 
Supernatural  power  should  only  be*  granted  while  the  foundations  of  the  Church  were 
being  laid,  and  that  the  Church  should  then  by  simply  natural  development  proceed  in 
her  world-conquering  career.  And  it  naturally  followed  that  God  henceforth  restrained 
these  demoniacal  influences  also."  (The  student  may  consider  ;  if  so,  may  not  such 
influences  be  again  let  loose  under  Antichristian  control  just  previous  to  the  reintroduc- 
tion  and  exertion  of  these  miraculous  gifts,  and  the  professed  wonders  and  miracles  of 
Antichrist  be  met  by  the  true  Supernatural  power  thus  restored  by  the  Baptism  of  the 
Spirit  V) 

Obs.  9.  It  also  aids  in  our  interpretation  of  other  Scripture.  Thus  e.g. 
the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  which  cannot  be  forgiven  (Matt. 
12  :  31,  32  ;  Mark  3  :  29  ;  Luke  12  :  10)  obtains  a  peculiar  significancy  and 
enormity,  when  it  is  considered  that  this  baptism  of  the  Spirit  was  re- 
garded and  so  pronounced  (Acts  5  :  32),  as  a  direct  witnessing  and  testifying 
of  the  Spirit,  and  hence  to  mock,  deride,  or  falsely  ascribe  such  signs  or 
evidence  proceeding  from  the  Spirit,  was  to  vilify  the  mighty  Agent  itself 
through  which  humanity,  yea  the  Son  of  Man  Himself  (regarded  as  David's 
Son),  was  to  experience  the  fulfilment  of  covenant  promises  and  predic- 
tions. The  inexcusablcness  of  the  sin  arises  from  the  conspicuous  manner, 
powerful  manifestations  (above  nature),  and  character  of  the  Agent.  And, 
it  may  well  be  considered  whether  this  sin  can  be  committed  now  as  it  was  in 
the  days  when  these  special  gifts  were  bestowed,  by  mocking  at  the  record 
of  them.  The  culpability  of  those  who  witnessed  these  wonders  (for  Jesus 
addressed  those  who  were  to  see  them,  and  we  are  told  that  some  mocked 
and  others  derided  them),  is  of  course  greater  in  one  respect  than  that  of 
others  who  have  not  seen  them,  and  yet  the  record  itself  is  so  interwoven 
with  additional  evidences  that  the  guilt  of  those  who  now  ridicule  them  is 
certainly  great.  Again,  take  the  promise  (Matt.  6  :  33),  "  Seek  ye  first  the 
Kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added 
unto  you."'  If  we  consider  that  this  was  said  before  the  postponement  of 
the  Kingdom  when  the  Kingdom  was  offered  on  the  condition  of  repent- 
ance, we  see  at  once  how  this  would  have  been  fulfilled  just  as  given.  For, 
if  the  nation  had  repented  and  the  Kingdom  would  have  been  re- established 
then  under  the  marvellous  influence  of  the  Spirit,  just  as  predicted  by  the 
prophets,  "  all  these  things"  would  have  been  added,  seeing  that  under  this 
Spirit's  influence  abundance  and  plenty  for  all  classes  is  expressly  prom- 
ised. Aside  from  the  grace  of  God  which  now  even  in  response  to  faith  so 
often  inchoately  verifies  the  promise,  it  still  points  us  on  when  the  King- 
dom itself  shall  be  attained  and  there  will  be  no  lack,  owing  to  the  power 
and  manifestation  of  the  Spirit. 

The  student,  of  course,  will  see  here  a  reason  why  the  terrific  vengeance  of  God  will 


80  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  171. 

fall  so  heavily  upon  Antichrist  and  his  confederates.  This  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit 
will  be  repeated  on  a  grander  scale  than  ever  by  the  blasphemous  declarations  of  unbe- 
lief, and  the  result  announced  by  Jesus  follows,  viz.,  that  no  forgiveness  will  be  allowed. 
The  two  passages  selected  for  reference  afford  a  fine  contrast  to  the  blasphemy  of  one 
party  and  their  inevitable  fate,  and  to  the  faith  of  another  party  and  the  blessings  result- 
ing. 

Obs.  10.  If  the  reader  will  turn  back  to  Props.  12G-128,  and  notice  what 
is  said  respecting  the  being  "  bom  of  wafer  and  of  the  Spi?,it,"  he  will  see 
that  its  meaning  extends  (whatever  application  may  be  made  of  it  to  the 
present)  to  this  very  future  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  Without  repeating 
what  has  already  been  suggested,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  to  the  student,  that 
Christ's  appeal  to  Nicodemus  that  he  ought  to  know  these  things,  evi- 
dently because  recorded  in  the  Scriptures,  indicates  that  reference  is  made 
to  the  prophecies  which  predict  the  sprinkling  with  "  clean  water,"  the 
obtaining  of  "  a  new  spirit,"  the  putting  of  God's  Spirit  "within"  them, 
and  the  raising  up  of  the  dead  out  of  their  graves  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit,  all  of  which  is  represented  as  essential  to  the  introduction  of  the 
Kingdom,  and  its  blessings,  and  as  related  to  the  glorious  reign  of  David's 
Son.  The  language  of  Christ  is,  therefore,  far  from  being  exhausted  in 
the  experience  of  believers  in  the  present  dispensation. 

Obs.  11.  The  reader  is  reminded  how  this  view  at  once  completely  re- 
moves the  ungenerous  objection  urged  against  us.  that  we  do  not  make  out 
a  spiritual  but  "  carnal  "  Kingdom.  When  the  King  has  this  Spirit  with- 
out measure  ;  when  He  baptizes  His  associated  body  of  rulers  in  a  large, 
wonderful  measure,  and  the  subjects  in  a  measure  indicative  of  the  variety 
of  the  Spirit's  ministrations  ;  when  the  Spirit  exerts  His  Almighty  energy  in 
every  direction  extending  even  to  the  material  creation  ;  surely  the  govern- 
ment swayed  under  such  imparted  and  revealed  power,  must  be  also  pre- 
eminently  spiritual.     So  plain  is  this,  that  it  needs  no  additional  remarks. 

Obs.  12.  Let  us  now  return  to  the  consideration  of  another  baptism  to  be 
experienced  at  the  same  time,  viz.,  the  baptism  of  or  with  fire.  The  ex- 
planations usually  given  of  this  baptism  are  evidently  incorrect.  Fire 
being  used  as  a  figure  of  afflictions,  trials,  etc.,  it  is  supposed  by  some  com- 
mentators to  denote  a  baptism  of  such  afflictions.  But  this  is  harsh  for 
John  was  undoubtedly  predicting  a  blessing  and  not  trial.  Others  again 
make  fire  the  emblem  "of  judgment,  wrath,  or  vengeance  (for  it  is  thus  em- 
ployed), and  pronounce  this  a  baptism  of  vengeance  upon*the  enemies, 
while  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  one  of  blessing  upon  the  friends  of  God. 
But  this  is  arbitrarily  dividing  the  promise  and  making  part  of  it  a  curse. 
Others  even  make  the  fire  to  mean  "  the  fire  of  hell  torment"  which  Reuss 
justly  calls  "  a  very  unskilful  exegesis.^  But  Reuss,  and  others,  do  not 
mend  the  matter,  when  they  make  the  fire  only  to  be  the  symbol  of  the 
Spirit,  for  that  introduces  a  harsh  redundancy,  causing  the  promise  to  read: 
"  He  shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Others  think  that  it  denotes  that  the  ministry  of  Christ  would  be  refining, 
trying,  powerful,  purifying,  etc.,  but  this  does  not  accord  with  the  spirit  of 
the  prediction,  which,  as  it  is  linked  with  the  previous  prophecies,  indicates 
a  special  blessing  added  to  the  one  conferring  miraculous  or  supernatural 
gifts.  To  ascertain  its  meaning,  we  have  only  to  allow  scriptural  usage 
to  give  us  the  key  which  enables  us  to  interpret  this  promise  consistently 


Prop.  171.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  81 

with  the  analogy  of  Bible  promise,  thus  avoiding  the  making  it  a  mere  em- 
blem of  the  Spirit  or  of  His  presence,  or  of  His  purity  and  power,  or  of  the 
reception  by  believers  of  affliction  instead  of  happiness,  dishonor  instead  of 
honor,  pain  instead  of  pleasure,  and  punishment  instead  of  triumph.  Fire 
is  employed  to  denote  the  power  of  judging,  or  rather  of  executing  judgment 
upon  others.  Such  passages  as  Deut.  4  :  24  ;  Heb.  12  :  29  ;  Amos.  1  :  4, 
and  5  :  6,  etc.,  show  that  such  a  power  is  intended.  Now  in  reference  to 
the  saints,  the  chosen  elect  body,  who  shall  reign  with  Christ,  we  find  Rev. 
19  :  14  ;  Jude  14,  etc.  (see  Prop.  154),  that  they  are  united  with  Christ  in 
executing  judgment,  that  Rev.  2  :  20-27,  they  shall  have  "  power  over  the 
nations"  to  "  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  ;"  and  hence  it  is  written,  Ps. 
149  :  9  that  "  this  honor  have  all  His  saints"  "  to  execute  the  judgment 
written,"  etc.  Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  Scriptures  need  scarcely 
be  told  that  Rev.  14  :  18  ;  Isa.  10  :  17  ;  Isa.  1  :  27  ;  Isa.  62  :  1,  etc.,  relate 
to  this  time.  As  to  the  Jewish  nation,  such  predictions  as  Zech.  12  :  6  ; 
Zech.  14  :  12-21  ;  Micah  7  :  16-17,  etc.,  give  us  a  clew  to  the  power  that 
they  shall  possess,  when  (Micah  4  :  8  see  Prop.  114),  "  the  first  dominion" 
among  nations  is  granted  unto  it.  At  this  period  such  a  bestowment  of 
baptism  is  indispensably  necessary,  owing  to  the  plain  predicted  fact,  that 
the  anti-Christian  power  will  be  dominant  and  must,  before  the  Theocracy 
is  firmly  re-established,  be  overthrown.  Hence  in  the  spirit  of  this  prom- 
ised baptism,  Christ  and  His  messengers  come  "  in  flaming  fire"  (2  Thess. 
1  :  8),  and  these  "  messengers  of  His  power*'  or  "  ministers"  of  His 
pleasure  shall  be  so  many  "flames  of  fire"  possessing,  in  virtue  of  this  bap- 
tism, the  ability  to  pour  out  "  the  consuming  fire"  that  God  has  threatened 
against  the  ungodly,  the  rebellious,  and  the  enemies  of  His  people.  Let 
the  reader  turn  to  Props.  115,  161,  102,  163,  and  he  will  see  what  a  fearful 
time  this  will  be,  and  how  the  saints  and  Jewish  nation  participate  in  it ; 
and  here  he  finds  the  link  in  the  chain  which  tells  him  how  they  are 
qualified  for  this  particular  agency.  That  we  are  not  mistaken  in  this  in- 
terpretation is  proven  by  the  limited,  partial  fulfilment  on  the  day  of  Pen- 
tecost. The  "  cloven  tongues  like  as  fire"  which  "  sat  upon  each  of  them" 
is  an  emblem  of  this  power,  it  being  added  to  the  other  gifts  as  expressive 
of  the  promised  baptism  of  fire  which  was  to  be  associated  with  that  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  ;  it  being  virtually  an  outgrowth  or  adjunct  to  it.  But  owing 
to  its  enormous  power,  and  to  the  danger  of  its  being  perverted  even  in  the 
hands  of  good  men,  it  was  purposely  circumscribed  or  limited  to  a  very  feio 
persons.  It  was  sufficient  to  give  "  a  sign"  that  it  was  imparted,  and  then 
to  exhibit  the  reality  of  its  conference  by  actual  performance.  The  power 
thus  designated  by  "  fire"  (also  indicated  John  20  :  23  after  the  previous 
symbolic  act  stated  in  verse  22)  the  apostles  rarely  used,  it  being  more 
specially  intended  for  the  coming  age.  Hence  only  in  the  cases  of  Ananias 
and  Sapphira  (Acts  5),  of  Elymus  (Act  13),  of  the  incestuous  person  (1 
Cor.  5),  and  a  few  others,  was  it  really  exercised.  We  may  rest  assured, 
however,  that  the  time  is  coming,  when  it  shall  be  exerted  on  a  scale  that 
will  confound  the  enemies  of  God. 

Dr.  Schaff  (Lange's  Com.  loci)  justly  points  out  the  harshness  of  separating  the  Holy- 
Ghost  and  the  fire  as  referring  to  opposite  classes  of  persons  as  some  of  the  Fathers  and 
modern  expositors.  This  harshness  even  Nast  (Com.  loci)  perpetuates  when  making  the 
"  you"  to  represent  two  parties,  viz.,  the  believing  who  are  baptized  with  the  Spirit,  and 
the  unbelieving  who  are  baptized  with  fire,  i.e.  with  "  the  consuming  fire  of  God's  judg- 
ments." On  the  other  hand  Schaff  pertinently  points  to  the  day  of  Pentecost  where  this 
baptism  in  both  particulars  was  given  to  the  same  persons.     The  views  which  make  this 


82  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  171. 

fire  the  love  of  God,  the  sanctifying  influences  of  the  Spirit,  the  fire  of  hell,  the  fire  of 
purgatory,  the  fire  of  tribulation,  the  fire  of  penitence  and  mortification,  the  fire  of 
grace,  a  material  fire,  temporal  and  eternal  punishments,  "  the  consummation  and  com- 
plete triumph  of  the  new  and  higher  life  in  its  peculiar  nature,"  Christ's  ministry — are 
all  seeking  after  a  meaning  which  is  not  warranted.  The  confining  of  this  promise  to 
the  day  of  Pentecost  is  to  limit  its  extent  and  to  overlook  the  inchoate  nature  of  the 
Pentecostal  manifestations.  The  perversions  are  strange  from  Origen's  notion  (Hagen- 
bach's  His.  of  Doc,  vol.  1,  p.  223)  that  all  at  the  end  of  the  world,  not  excepting  even 
Paul  or  Peter,  would  have  to  experience  this  fire,  a  literal  fire  (connected  with  the  last 
conflagration)  as  a  test,  the  pure  not  being  materially  affected  by  it,  down  to  the 
"  Morelschiki"  ("  the  Self-sacrificing  ;"  so  Kurtz,  Uh.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  222),  who  submit  to 
a  "baptism  of  fire"  by  actually  burning  themselves.  In  the  Life  of  Eel.  Irving,  by  Mrs. 
Oliphant  (p.  535  and  569),  we  find  how  the  phrase  was  niisajDprehended  by  one  of  "  the 
prophets."  In  interpretations  and  applications,  1  Cor.  3  :  13  has  played  an  important 
part,  overlooking  other  usages  of  the  Scriptures.  We  only  add  that  our  view  of  the  sub- 
ject gives  us  a  proper  conception  of  the  ability  and  power  of  the  rulers  in  this  Theocratic 
ordering,  and  how  all  nations,  all  kingdoms  must  submit  to  a  sovereignty  so  directly, 
impressively,  and  powerfully  sustained  by  the  Supernatural.  Hence  we  must  discard 
much  that  is  professed  sincerely  but  unwarrantedly  at  the  present  time,  as  e.g.  Rev.  Harri- 
son (the  revivalist)  at  the  Loveland  Camp-meeting,  as  reported  (e.g.  the  Times-Star,  Aug. 
3d,  1881),  stated  in  his  religious  experience  that  he  had  received  "  the  baptism  of  fire." 
We  may  say,  for  the  reasons  already  given,  that  we  very  much  doubt  it. 


Prop.  172.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  83 


Proposition  172. — This  Kingdom  when  restored  does  not  re- 
quire the  re  introduction  of  bloody  sacrifice. 

The  Theocratic  arrangement  binds  together  into  one  the  Church 
and  State,  manifesting  in  wonderful  condescension  God  ruling  as 
earthly  Ruler  in  and  through  David's  Son.  This  by  no  means  de- 
mands the  restoration  of  Mosaic  sacrifices,  seeing  that  the  King,  in 
virtue  of  His  sinlessness,  perfection,  etc.,  made  one  sacrifice  which 
is  amply  sufficient  to  cover  all  redemptive  purposes  in  the  past, 
present  and  future.  Heb.  7  :  22-27.  The  perfection  and  complete- 
ness of  the  sacrifice  is  insisted  upon,  as  e.g.  Heb,  10  :  1-18.  There 
is  nothing,  therefore,  in  the  Kingdom  itself,  i.e.  in  a  Theocratic 
rule,  which  should  cause  us  either  directly  or  by  implication,  to 
advocate  a  return  to  sacrifices,  which  "could  not  make  perfect" 
(Heb.  9 :  9),  which  were  "  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come'1''  (Heb. 
10  :  1),  and  which  would  seem  by  their  restoration  to  lessen  the 
value  and  perfection  of  Christ's  offering  of  Himself.  Indeed,  if,  as 
our  argument  indicates,  this  Kingdom,  by  virtue  of  Christ's  work 
and  the  efficacy  of  His  blood  in  sealing  and  fulfilling  the  covenant, 
is  a  bringing  the  world  back  into  its  Edenic  state  as  it  would  have 
existed  without  the  introduction  and  results  of  human  depravity, 
then  such  a  restored  state,  to  exhibit  justice  to  the  merits  which 
brings  in  its  restoration,  should  be  one  in  ichich  bloody  sacrifices 
do  not  exist. 

The  reader  will  observe  that  in  the  ages  to  come  one  distinctive  peculiarity  is  the 
deliverance  of  the  creature  from  its  bondage  (Prop.  146).  If  the  animals  are  not  to  de- 
stroy each  other,  much  less  will  they  be  slain  for  sacrificial  purposes,  for  such  a  destiny 
would  indicate  the  reverse  of  Millennial  promises.  We  leave  this  thought,  affording  an 
inferential  reason  for  more  direct  statements.  To  the  student  we  remark  that  it  is 
remarkable  that  even  some  Jewish  authorities  take  the  view  of  a  cessation  of  sacrifice. 
Thus  Fairbairn  ( Typology,  vol.  2,  p.  260)  quotes  from  Schoettgen  (Hor.  Heb.  et  Tal.  2,  p. 
612)  some  as  follows  :  "  In  the  times  of  the  Messiah  all  sacrifices  will  cease,  but  the  sacri- 
fice of  praise  will  not  cease."  "When  the  Israelites  were  in  the  holy  land,  they  took 
away  all  diseases  and  punishments  from  the  world,  through  the  acts  of  worship  and  the 
sacrifices  which  they  performed  ;  but  now  Messiah  takes  these  away  from  the  sons  of 
men. "  "  That  He  (the  Messiah)  would  pour  out  His  soul  unto  death  and  that  His  blood 
would  make  atonement  for  the  people  of  God."  (The  last  is  quoted  by  Bahr  from  Eisen- 
heimer's  Eatdecles  Judenthum,  vol.  2,  p.  720.)  But  as  Fairbairn  justly  observes,  these 
isolated  expressions  of  individual  opinion  are  opposed  by  the  multitude  of  directly  oppo- 
site ones. 

Obs.  1.  Attention  is  called  to  the  question  of  sacrifices  in  this  form,  see- 
ing that  Dr.  Brown  (The  Sec.  Coming,  etc.),  Dr.  Hodge  (Si/s.  Div.),  Dr. 
Eice  (Signs  of  the  Times),  etc.,  make  the  advocacy  of  a  return  to  sacrifices 
(as  is  done  by  some  Millenarians,  e.g.  D.  N.  Lord,  Tyso,  Shimeall,  Begg, 
etc.),  a  serious  objection  to  the  reception  of  our  doctrine.     They  allege  that 


84  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  172. 

such  a  restoration  would  be  a  return  to  "  bondage,"  "  beggarly  elements," 
etc.,  and  tbat  it  invalidates  the  sufficiency  of  Christ's  offering.  We  are 
free  to  admit,  that  if  our  system  necessarily  involves  such  a  restoration  of 
sacrifice  it  would  indeed  form  a  grave  objection  against  our  view  in  the 
light  of  Galatians  and  Hebrews.  The  argumentation  of  its  advocates  that 
such  sacrifices  are  merely  "commemorative,"  "retrospective,"  etc.,  do 
not  help  the  matter  very  much,  so  that  while  the  objection  is  not  suffi- 
ciently strong  in  itself  to  set  aside  all  the  other  truths  pertaining  to  this 
subject,  yet  it  is  ample  enoug'h  to  cause  hesitation  and  doubt  in  the  minds 
of  many.  Fully  agreeing  with  the  idea  that  if  such  a  return  is  clearly 
taught,  it  should  not  hinder  us  from  accepting  it,  even  if  we  cannot  recon- 
cile its  readoption  ;  fully  persuaded  also,  that  if  taught,  it  would  not  be 
essential  to  our  doctrine  being  connected  with  the  revelations  and  arrange- 
ments of  "  the  world  to  come  ;"  yet  the  question  naturally  arises  whether 
such  a  restoration  of  sacrifices  is  really  taught.  After  carefully  regarding 
the  prophecies  and  weighing  the  reasoning  assigned  in  its  behalf,  we  are 
forced  to  the  conclusion,  that  it  is  nowhere  taught  in  the  Bible  ;  that, 
therefore,  no  such  apparent  "  contradiction,"  as  our  opponents  allege,  can 
be  legitimately  forced  upon  our  system  ;  and  that  as  some  of  our  friends 
have  supposed,  the  sacrifices  are  not  necessary  to  "  illustrate  the  great 
work  of  Redemption,"  and  to  bring  out  more  "  significantly"  faith  in 
Christ's  offering.     The  reasons  for  taking  such  a  position  follow. 

Fry  (Sec.  Advent),  Freemantle  (Lent  Led.  for  1847),  Thomas  (The  Kingdom  of  God), 
Bonar  (Lent  Led.  for  1847),  and  others  hold  to  this  reintroduction,  and  speak  of  it  as 
"  retrospective,"  "  visible  exposition  of  His  sin-bearing  work,"  etc.  In  Bohn's  ed.  of  the 
Ecdes.  His.  of  Philosiorgius,  p.  4'JO,  b.  8,  in  a  footnote,  reference  is  made  to  Apollinaris 
and  Basil,  as  if  they  taught  that  after  the  resurrection  there  would  be  a  return  to  Jewish 
rites  and  ceremonies  for  a  thousand  years.  On  the  other  hand,  such  men  as  Increase 
Mather  (The  Mysteries  of  IsraeVs  Salvation),  a  Pre-Millenarian,  opposed  the  reintroduction 
of  bloody  sacrifices,  and  insisted  that  the  Primitive  Church  (Pre-Mill.)  objected  to  it,  and 
represented  that  the  Jews,  after  their  conversion,  would  be,  not  under  the  Mosaic,  but 
under  a  new  ordering.  So  also  Perry  (Glory  of  Christ's  Visible  Kingdom),  the  Duke  of 
Manchester  (  The  Finished  Mystery),  and  others.  Comp.  also  Baumgarten  (Herzog's  Real 
Encydop.,  4,  p.  298,  etc.),  Auberlen  (Daniel  and  the  Rev.,  p.  384). 

Obs.  2.  It  is  universally  agreed  that  the  main,  leading  argument  in  favor 
of  a  return  to  sacrifices  is  found  in  the  last  chapters  of  Ezekiel.  If  this 
portion  of  Scripture  can  be  reasonably  explained  so  as  to  satisfactorily  re- 
move the  notion  of  such  a  return,  the  difficulty  itself  disappears.  How  are 
we  to  understand  Ezekiel  ?  The  theories  given  are  the  following  :  1.  That 
the  whole  is  to  be  spiritualized,  i.e.  another  sense  than  that  conveyed  by 
the  language  is  to  be  given  to  it.  This  leaves  it  at  the  mere  fancy  of  the 
interpreter,  and  results  in  various  inconsistencies.  The  latest  effort  in  this 
direction  by  Cowles,  is  a  sufficient  commentary.  2.  That  it  relates  ex- 
clusively to  the  future,  and  that  all  will  be  fulfilled  as  written.  But 
against  this  we  have  (a)  the  utterances  of  Paul  in  Galatians  and  Hebrews, 
(b)  contradictions  evolved,  as  e.g.  respecting  the  Prince,  which  render  it 
untenable.  3.  That  it  pertains  to  the  future,  and  that  sacrifices  with  some 
other  particulars  are  omitted  in  the  fulfilment.  But  this  is  an  arbitrary 
ami  dangerous  interpretation,  seeing  that  the  prophecy  stands  or  falls  as  a 
consistent  whole.  4.  That  it  was  mere  human  prediction,  and  the  prophet 
was  mistaken  in  his  conjectures.  Xo  believer  of  the  Word  can  accept  of 
so  unworthy  an  opinion.     5.  That  it  relates  to  the  future  and  involves  an 


Prop.  172.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  So 

apparent  contradiction,  which  we  cannot  reconcile  but  will  be  fully  cleared 
up  in  the  new  dispensation.  This  view  takes  it  for  granted  that  only  a 
difficulty  of  comprehension,  i.e.,  how  this  will  be  done  (as  in  the  case  of 
Isaac),  exists,  while  in  reality  there  is  much  more  connected  with  it,  viz., 
a  real  contradiction  with  other  Scriptures.  6.  That  like  all  prophecies 
pertaining  to  the  Jews,  it  is  conditional,  and  that  the  mention  of  sacrifices 
sufficiently  proves  its  conditionally.  Whatever  our  opinion  may  be  con- 
cerning this  particular  prediction,  the  conditionality  of  it  must  be  based  on 
other  grounds  than  those  thus  expressed,  for  (a)  all  prophecy  is  not  con- 
ditional Prop.  18,  and  (b)  the  mention  of  anything  in  a  prediction  which 
may  not  suit  our  ideas  of  the  fitness  of  things,  is  no  pi  oof  without  addi- 
tional testimony  of  its  being  conditional. 

The  notion  that  it  was  partly  fulfilled  at  the  return  from  Babj'lon  and  partly  in  this 
dispensation,  need  not  to  be  refuted  in  detail.  The  arbitrary  dividing,  etc.,  of  the 
prophecy  is  a  sufficient  refutation.  The  unbelieving,  symbolistic,  spiritualizing  views 
(e.g.  given  in  detail  in  Lange's  Com.  on  Ezek.,  concluding  chapters),  which,  without 
venturing  on  the  explanation  or  reception  of  details,  rush  to  conclusions  on  general  prin- 
ciples dominating  and  influencing  the  interpreter — may  be  dismissed  on  the  ground  of 
doing  injustice  to  the  prophet  and  violence  to  the  prophecy.  The  allegorical,  typical, 
and  mystical  are  simply  arbitrary  and  depend  for  their  one-sidedness  upon  the  imagina- 
tion or  speculations  of  the  interpreter  in  order  to  form  an  accommodation  with  Chris- 
tianity as  now  existing,  just  as  if  the  particulars  of  the  extended  prediction  met  with  a 
fulfilment  in  the  Church.  The  recent  efforts  of  Fairbairn  and  Henderson  to  show  that 
we  have  merely  an  ideal— Christian  or  spiritual  typical  representation  of  the  good  to  be 
bestowed  upon  the  Church  in  this  dispensation,  evidence  the  fact  that  it  is  utterly  impos- 
sible for  them,  from  their  standpoint,  to  incorporate  the  numerous  particularisms  of  the 
prophecy,  but  which  we  are  to  receive  simply  as  embellishments,  added  to  adorn  the 
main,  leading  idea  of  ideal  or  symbolic  import.  It  is  supposed  by  many  that  ..it  simply 
conveys  the  idea,  through  abounding  imagery  or  symbolism,  of  the  future  subjection  of 
the  Israelites  to  the  Messiah.  In  support  of  this  opinion  the  entire  prophecy  is  made 
figurative,  and  the  figures  are  spiritualized  to  suit  the  Messianic  views  of  the  interpreter. 
Dr.  Brown  [Chrises  8ec.  <  'oming,  p.  37>>,  note)  declares  his  inability  (like  Jerome)  to  explain 
Ezekiel  as  a  whole,  but  thinks  that  the  figurative  explanation,  as  it  applies  to  parts  of  it, 
will  ultimately,  by  "  a  sober  and  patient  investigation  of  the  typical  and  symbolical  lan- 
guage of  the  Old  Test,  in  the  light  of  the  New,"  find  the  proper  solution.  Fausset  (Com. 
Ezek.)  applies  this  to  a  future  "  Theocratic  temple,"  but  does  not  know  how  far  it  is  to 
be  interpreted  literally  or  figuratively,  thinking  that  when  the  event  occurs  it  will  clear 
up  all  seeming  difficulties.  Many  find  it  so  difficult  that  they  avoid  any  expression  of 
opinion  as  to  its  meaning  and  application. 

Obs.  3.  Taking  the  position  that  this  prophecy  is  conditional,  we  must 
present  other  reasons  than  those  last  alleged  in  order  to  keep  within  the 
limits  assigned  under  Prop.  18.  For,  no  prediction  ought  to  be  regarded 
as  such,  unless  it  contains  within  itself,  or  in  the  context,  or  future  ex- 
planation, the  elements  clearly  indicative  of  conditionality.  Ezekiel's  pre- 
diction unmistakably  contains  the  requisite  evidence,  which  places  it  clearly 
among  the  conditional  prophecies.  The  Jcey  to  it  is  found  in  ch.  43  :  7-11 
where  the  re-establishment  of  the  Theocratic  rule  is  conditioned  by  "  now 
let  them  put  away  their  whoredom  and  the  carcasses  of  their  lings,  and  I 
will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  them  forever"  "  if  they  be  ashamed  of  all  that  they 
have  done,"  etc.  It  is  expressly  asserted  that  this  prediction  is  given, 
"  that  they  may  be  ashamed  of  their  iniquities"  in  order  that  what  is  prom- 
ised may  also  be  verified.  The  simple  question  to  be  asked  is  this  :  did  the 
Jewish  nation  after  the  prophecy  was  given  repent  of  its  sinfulness  and 
manifest  by  its  shame  that  it  was  worthy  of  such  a  reconstruction  of  the 
government?     Let  the  facts  as  given  in  history  witness,  and  we  are  forced 


8G  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  172. 

to  the  conclusion  that  the  reason  why  no  such  Theocratic  restoration  (com- 
pare Jer.  17  :  25  with  context — same  conditionally  expressed)  was  affected, 
was  owing  simply  to  the  lack  of  a  national  repentance  commensurate  with 
a  bringing  it  into  operation.  The  repentance  and  acknowledgments  of  in- 
dividuals and  of  a  portion  of  the  nation,  is  not  sufficient  to  bring  back  this 
richly  forfeited  blessing.  If  it  be  asked,  why  does  God  give  this  lengthy 
prediction  foreknowing  that  it  will  never,  in  the  shape  given,  be  realized 
owing  to  continued  national  sinfulness  and  unworthiness,  the  answer  is 
plain  :  judging  from  other  portions  of  the  Word,  it  is  done  in  necessary 
accommodation  to  the  free  agency  of  man.  Let  the  reader  consider,  that 
this  prophet  predicts  this  previous  to  a  partial  restoration  of  the  nation  to 
its  own  land.  Now  in  connection  with  even  such  a  foreknown  restoration, 
it  is  eminently  proper  for  God  to  offer  also  {conditioned  by  repentance,  as  at 
the  First  Advent,  see  Props.  57,  58,  etc.),  a  restoration  of  the  Theocratic 
government.  This,  as  every  student  admits,  is  done  here,  and  we  may 
reasonably  conclude,  that  if  the  conditions  imposed  by  God  had  been  ac- 
cepted by  the  nation,  then  all  would  have  been  abundantly  verified.  Hence 
as  the  conditions  were  not  complied  with — only  in  a  very  imperfect  manner 
and  which  never  resulted  in  a  widespread  and  continuous  reformation — the 
prophet  gives  us  a  sad  representation  of  blessings  that  were  lost,  and  most 
fully  answers  the  question,  what  the  state  of  the  Jewish  nation  would  have 
been  provided  it  had  on  its  restoration  been  obedient  to  God.  Taking  this 
view  of  it,  the  prediction  is  necessary  in  filling  out  what  otherwise  would 
prove  a  blank  in  Jewish  history.  It  teaches  us  in  what  form  the  Theocracy 
would  have  been  restored,  had  the  Jews  been  "  ashamed,"  etc.,  thus  mani- 
festing God's  willingness  to  bless  and  His  love  for  His  people  and  land. 

The  Jews  no  doubt  will  be  largely  influenced  by  Ezekiel  to  attempt,  during  their 
partial  Pre-Millennial  restoration  to  Palestine,  to  carry  out  this  prediction  in  the  building 
of  a  temple,  a  return  to  the  Mosaic  ritual  in  which  bloody  sacrifices  will  be  again  promi- 
nently brought  forth.  Jewish  writers  (according  to  Fairbairn)  have  maintained  that  this 
prediction  was  imperfectly  realized  after  the  captivity  and  under  Herod,  but  that  "  it 
waits  to  be  properly  accomplished  by  the  Messiah,  who,  when  He  appears,  shall  cause  the 
temple  to  be  reared  precisely  as  here  described,  and  carry  out  all  the  other  subordinate 
arrangements."  We  should,  therefore,  in  our  interpretation  of  Ezekiel,  be  guarded  lest, 
indirectly,  we  encourage  through  it  such  a  restoration.  Exhibiting  and  enforcing  its  past 
conditionality,  we  give  them  no  hope  of  such  a  realization  and  yet  preserve  intact  the 
integrity,  apparent  meaning,  etc.,  of  the  text.  Fairbairn  and  others  denominate  this 
Jewish  view  "  carnal,"  etc.,  but,  aside  from  the  future  application  of  fulfilment,  the 
Jewish  idea  of  its  real  meaning  is  far  superior  to  their  own  figurative  view,  for  it  accords 
— as  the  identity  of  particular  description  shows  -with  the  language  and  particularism  of 
the  Pentateuch.  If  the  one  can  be  spiritualized  at  the  will  of  the  interpreter,  so  also 
may  the  other. 

Obs  4.  Having  thus  shown  the  conditionality  of  the  prediction  fairly  ex- 
pressed within  itself,  we  may  now  add,  that  the  entire  structure  of  the 
prophecy  indicates  that  it  by  no  means  refers  to  the  final  fulfilment  of  the 
covenant,  but  is  also  preparative  to  such  a  fulfilment.  Persons  have  been 
misled  into  the  idea  that  it  must  refer  to  the  predicted,  covenanted  reign 
of  Jesus  Christ,  owing  to  a  kind  of  correspondence  between  the  Theocratic 
rule,  the  city,  temple,  worship,  etc.,  and  that  of  the  future  under  Christ, 
which  caused  the  hasty  conclusion  that  they  were  identical,  thus  overlook- 
ing (1)  the  points  of  divergence  ;  (2)  the  utter  inaptitude  oi  applying  some 
things  to  Christ's  reign  ;  (3)  the  inapplicability  of  certain  statements  con- 
cerning the  Prince  to  the  person  and  character  of  Christ  ;  (4)  the  unfitness 


Prop.  172.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  87 

of  a  portion  to  describe  either  the  characteristics  of  the  Mill,  era,  or  the 
nature  and  employments  of  the  glorified  saints  associated  with  Christ. 
Similarity  of  description  in  some  respects — which  the  Theocracy,  the  same 
inheritance,  throne,  kingdom,  etc.,  necessarily  includes — is  no  evidence  of 
identity.  This  will  be  seen  by  passing  over  some  of  the  statements  con- 
tained in  the  prophecy,  which  prove,  that  it  is  not  intended  to  describe  the 
reign  of  the  promised  seed,  David's  Son  and  David's  Lord.  This  will,  of 
course,  be  corroborative  of  its  conditionally  as  shown  under  Obs.  3. 
Notice  :  1.  This  Prince  is  a  mortal  man  ;  for  to  him  are  ascribed  "  sons" 
to  whom  he  may  give  gifts  etc.  (ch.  45  :  16-18),  and  he  is  exhorted  not  to 
do  wrong.1  2.  This  Prince  being  thus  mortal  and  unglorified,  is  subject  to 
sinfulness,  for  he  is  exhorted  to  offer  "  a  sin-offering"  in  behalf  of  "  him- 
self" as  well  as  for  all  the  people,  which  cannot  be  applied  to  Christ,  see 
ch.  45  :  17-22.  3.  The  entire  tenor  of  the  prediction  in  its  relation  to  the 
Prince,  the  Priests,  the  Sacrificers,  etc.,  makes  a  decided  impression  that 
it  describes  a  continuation  of  the  Mosaic  ritual,  not  retrospectively  or  coin- 
memoratively  but  prospectively  in  the  form  instituted  under  Moses  and  re- 
tained by  David  (e.g.  Ezek.  45  :  17-25).  4.  The  priesthood  of  the  Prince, 
is  not  allowed  (ch.  4G  :  2),  while  Christ  is  a  Priest  forever  on  His  throne. 
5.  The  priests  are  mortal  men,  for  they  are  subject  to  marriage  and  death 
(ch.  44  :  22),  which  is  very  different  from  the  priesthood  pertaining  to  the 
saints  in  the  Mill,  era,  and  who  are  associated  with  Christ  in  His  reign.  It 
is  true,  that  other  priests,  aside  from  the  saints,  might  be  introduced,  yet 
in  the  Mill,  descriptions  we  find  only  the  saints  specifically  denominated 
the  priests,  and  if  this  were  a  Mill,  prediction  then  the  exalted  priesthood 
of  the  saints  would  be  entirely  passed  by.  The  spirit  of  the  prophecy  does 
not  accord  with  the  predictions  relating  to  the  Millennium  or  reign  of 
Christ.  6.  The  character  ascribed  to  the  Princes,  a  strong  tendency  to  ex- 
actions (ch.  45  :  9),  does  not  correspond  with  that  given  to  the  Eulers  (as 
e.g.  apostles  ruling  over  twelve  tribes),  who,  immortal  and  ever  holy,  reign 
with  Christ  over  Israel  and  the  world.  7.  The  extent  of  the  dominion, 
power,  and  glory  of  the  Prince  and  of  his  Theocratic  rule,  is  too  circum- 
scribed and  limited  to  meet  the  requirements  of  Mill,  portrayals.  From 
such  considerations  as  these,  it  is  simply  impossible,  with  any  degree  of 
consistency,  to  apply  and  interpret  this  prophecy  as  relating  to  the  prom- 
ised Messiah's  reign.  To  do  this,  is  to  violate  the  intent  of  this  Scripture, 
the  sublime  descriptions  of  the  character  and  perfection  of  Christ,  and  to 
fasten  upon  our  doctrine  an  unnecessary,  and  unbelief  producing,  interpre- 
tation. The  Theocratic  rule  here  delineated,  is  very  different  from  that 
exhibited  under  Christ  and  His  associated  body  of  rulers  ;  and  before  we 
can  accept  of  it  as  Messianic,  i.e.  descriptive  of  the  future  reign  of  Jesus 
Christ,  it  must  be  shown,  that  the  reigning  Prince  here  presented  is  iden- 
tical with  Christ.  The  only  answer  that  might  be  given  is  this  :  that  this 
Prince  is  a  mortal,  ruling  over  the  Jewish  nation  at  its  future  restoration 
under — subject  to — the  reign  of  Christ.  But  this  reply  only  increases  the 
difficulty,  for  then  (1)  we  have  a  lengthy  Mill,  description  without  Christ 
being  introduced  ;  (2)  a  Theocratic  rule  without  the  reed  Theocratic  King 
being  noticed  ;  (3)  a  King  seated  on  David's  throne  and  ruling  over 
David's  Kingdom  (Christ's  special  inheritance,  as  David's  Son),  without 
the  covenanted  King  who  shall  do  this  being  mentioned  ;  (4)  a  mortal  man 
thus  exalted  to  rule  over  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  over  and  above  the 
apostles  who   j,re  specially  designated  in  other  places  ;  (5)  a  lodgment  of 


88  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  172. 

Theocratic  rulership  in  a  person  who  is  liable  to  sin  and  corruption,  which 
is  opposed  to  the  Plan  of  God  now  carried  on  to  secure  a  government  which 
in  its  rulers  is  far  beyond  all  evil  influences.8 

1  A  Jewish  Eabbi  (Bibas)  asserted  that  the  Messiah  must  be  a  mere  man,  because  in 
Ezek.  46  :  16  "  the  Prince  and  his  sons"  are  mentioned  (Miss,  of  Inq.  to  Jews,  p.  395).  The 
Com.  of  Inquiry  answered  that  the  Messiah  was  not  spoken  of  but  the  Prince  over  Israel 
under  Him.  The  Eabbi  replied,  "  Oh  !  then  you  give  us  two  rulers."  We  have  at  least 
here  nothing  of  the  twelve  Apostles  ruling  over  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  as  promised  to 
them  by  Jesus.  And  we  may  rest  assured  that  no  mortal  prince  will  ever  be  exalted  as  a 
superior  Euler  over  the  glorified  Eulers. 

*  Many  points  of  convergence  might  be  adduced  which  fortify  our  position,  as  e.g.  the 
enforcement  of  circumcision  of  the  fiesh,  ch.  44  :  9,  which  the  New  Test.  (e.g.  Gal.  5  :  1-6) 
regards  as  something  ot  the  past,  etc.  The  view  of  some  (Eev.  Eowe)  that  this  is  only  a 
temporary  arrangement  at  the  beginning  of  the  Mill,  era,  is  open  to  the  same  objections 
already  enumerated.  The  positive  assertions  of  Thomas  (Elpis  Israel,  p.  280,  etc.)  that 
Jesus  will  build  this  temple,  is  to  be  rejected,  seeing  that  Jesus,  as  represented  in  the 
New  Test.,  and  as  glorified,  is  not  mentioned,  the  saints  are  not  introduced,  and  the 
entire  description  does  not  accord  with  other  Mill,  predictions.  The  simple  fact  is  that 
every  such  application  introduces  an  antagonism  irreconcilable  with  the  future  Messianic 
reign  as  portrayed  by  other  prophets. 

Obs.  5.  The  highly  significant  phraseology  combined  with  this  prophecy, 
such  as  "  the  mime  of  the  city  from  that  day  shall  be,  the  Lord  is  there,'''' 
etc.,  lias  led  many  to  suppose  that  this  alone  is  applicable  to  the  era  after 
the  Second  Advent  when  Christ  shall  personally  come  and  reign,  and  thus 
"  the  Lord  is  there,"  etc.  As  a  matter  of  course,  when  the  Theocratic  rule 
under  Jesus  Christ  is  restored,  such  will  be  the  fact,  and  the  language  ap- 
plies, but  it  must  not  be  overlooked  that  it  would  be  equally  applicable  fa 
the  Theocratic  rule  under  any  of  the  seed  of  David,  if  it  had  been  reinstated 
by  the  acceptance  of  the  conditions  imposed  by  God.  In  the  very  nature 
of  the  case,  when  God  condescends  to  act  as  earthly  Ruler  over  the  nation 
in  and  through  David's  throne  (which  He  has  called  His  own),  "  the 
Lord  is  there"  in  His  anointed  one.  Much  of  the  language  is  expressive  of 
Theocratic  Rule  and  its  results,  and  must  be  explained  in  its  rehitionship 
to  the  peculiar  and  distinctive  stage  of  it  that  is  here  meant.  The  fact, 
that  similar  language  can  be  used  in  reference  to  Christ's  reign,  does  not 
prove  identity,  but  only  shows,  that  His  rule  is  also  Theocratic  in  its  nature 
and  results.  Even  the  city  with  its  similarity  of  gates  named  after  the 
twelve  tribes,  is  only  a  pattern  of  the  restored  Theocratic  city  (Rev.  21  :  12) 
under  Christ. 

It  is  this  similarity  which  has  induced  many  to  seek  an  identity  at  the  expense  of  the 
prophetic  language  and  ideas.  Dr.  Baumgarten  (Herzog's  Encyclop.,  art.  "  Ezekiel  ") 
under  its  influence  advocates  a  renewal  of  "  glorified  sacrificial  feasts,"  etc.  Dr.  Lange 
in  his  Bremen  Lectures  (p.  249)  ridicules  this  position,  speaking  of  "  slaying  with  glo- 
rified knives  glorified  oxen,"  but  the  simple  truth  is  that  Lange,  Keil,  Fairbairn,  and  a 
host  of  others  who  make  sport  of  Baumgarten,  Auberlen,  Hofman,  Volch,  etc.,  do  not 
mend  the  matter  when,  inconsistently  to  the  tenor  of  the  prophecy,  they  give  to  it,  by 
spiritualizing  and  forcing,  a  Mt-ssianic  turn.  The  one  party  at  least  endeavor  to  preserve 
the  language  and  unity  of  the  prediction,  the  other  by  figurative  applications  make  it  to 
teach  the  very  opposite  of  that  which  its  language  grammatically  presents.  The  one 
party  mistakes  as  to  its  fulfilment  ;  the  other,  with  all  its  boasting  and  condemnation  of 
others,  falls  into  a  similar  mistake. 

Obs.  6.  The  conditionally  of  this  prophecy,  by  no  means  can  be  adduced 
as  proof  (so  Waggoner,  etc.),  that  the  Jews  will  never  be  restored  and  the 
Davidic  kingdom  will  never  be  rebuilt.     If  it  indeed  referred  to  the  cove- 


Prop.  172.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  89 

wanted  reign  of  Christ,  then  an  argument  might  be  formed  against  us,  on 
the  ground  of  the  conditional  terms  embraced  in  the  prediction.  But  it 
must  first  be  shown  that  it  has  such  a  connection.  Being  strictly  in  the 
line  of  conditional  prophecies,  and  delineating  only  a  provisional,  prepara- 
tory stage  (not  realized  owing  to  sin),  it  does  not  fall  within  the  category  of 
predictions  relating  to  tlie  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  in  the  person  and  the 
rule  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Obs.  7.  Ezekiel's  prediction,  owing  to  its  circumstantial  relation  of  sacri- 
fices, being  the  almost  exclusive  proof  presented  against  us — if  this  is  satis- 
factorily explained  there  can  be  but  little  difficulty  with  other  passages. 
Indeed  all  else  is  more  or  less  inferential,  as  is  seen  in  Isa.  2  :  3 ;  Isa. 
60  :  1-22  ;  Isa.  61  :  6  ;  Isa.  66  :  21  ;  Jer.  30  :  17-22  alleged  by  some  to 
teach  it,  but  which  are  susceptible  of  an  easy  and  natural  explanation,  thus 
avoiding  an  unnecessary  antagonism.  These,  as  well  as  the  more  serious 
ones  of  Jer.  33  :  18,  21,  and  Zech.  11  :  16-21,  are  to  be  interpreted  by  the 
principle  laid  down  by  the  apostles,  and  intimated  even  by  the  Spirit  in 
the  Old  Test.  For,  aside  from  the  simple  fact  that  a  change  in  the  priest- 
hood is  reasonably  to  be  anticipated  in  view  of  the  change  (more  exalted, 
etc.),  in  the  king,  in  the  form  of  government,  in  the  priests  adopted  spe- 
cifically for  the  Kingdom  in  place  of  the  old  order,  etc.,  it  is  sufficient  to  call 
attention  to  a  mode  of  speech  introduced  into  the  Word  which  solves  all 
such  difficulties.  It  is  a  figure  of  speech  called  by  Lord  and  others 
"  hypocatastasis"  by  which  one  thing  is  employed  as  a  substitute  or  equiva- 
lent for  another.1  This  figure  is  employed  by  the  prophet  to  portray  a 
future  existing  priesthood,  using  for  this  purpose  the  priesthood  then 
known,  just  as  future  enemies  of  God  are  presented  under  the  names, 
Moab,  Babylon,  etc.,  of  enemies  then  existing.  That  this  is  to  be  thus  un- 
derstood appears  evident  from  the  sacrifices  themselves  (which  these  priests 
are  to  offer)  being  used  to  denote  another  and  differing  form  of  offering  or 
act  of  worship.  Thus,  e.g.  Christ  is  the  Paschal  Lamb  and  the  Lord's 
Supper  is  called  the  passover  ;  sacrifice  denotes  the  offering  of  ourselves 
Bom.  12  :  1,  the  worship  or  tender  of  the  Gentiles  in  reception  of  the  Gos- 
pel Rom.  15  :  16  marg.  read.,  the  devotion  of  faith  Phil.  2  :  17,  acts  of 
benevolence  or  love  Phil.  1  :  18,  praise  as  the  fruit  of  thanksgiving  Heb. 
13  :  15,  etc.  This  usage  of  the  word,  '  sacrifice"  shows  that  it  is  employed 
as  an  equivalent  for  worship  or  religious  conduct  in  this  dispensation,  and 
to  place  the  matter  beyond  all  dispute  it  is  expressly  affirmed  by  Peter 
(1  Pet.  2  :  5,  9),  that  the  design  of  this  new  order  of  priests,  when  thus 
gathered  out  and  forming  "  a  holy  priesthood"  "  a  royal  priesthood,"  is 
'"  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices'' 'and  not  bloody  ones.  This  again  is  con- 
firmed by  what  is  stated  in  Mill,  descriptions,  and  in  promises  pertaining 
to  this  future  priesthood.  Xowhere,  including  the  last  testimony  given  by 
Jesus  (Apoc),  do  we  find  these  priests  represented  as  offering  to  God  the 
victims  of  a  Mosaic  ritual.  Hence  those  isolated  passages  which  speak  of 
worship  and  sacrifice,  even  if  they  are  clad  in  language  which  at  first  sight 
might  suggest  a  return  to  the  Mosaic  ritual,  are  to  be  interpreted  in  the 
light  of  the  more  extended  predictions,  of  the  changes  that  are  to  be  intro- 
duced in  the  coming  dispensation,  of  the  express  affirmations  concerning 
the  future  priesthood,  and  of  the  examples  given  in  the  usage  of  the  word 
"  sacrifice."     Otherwise  an  antagonism  is  raised,  which  is  altogether  un- 


90  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  172. 

necessary,  and  which  leads  to  unfriendly  doubt,  and  to  rejection  of  other 
truths.  If  the  ancient  sacrifices  were  typical,  if  they  were  only  "  a  shadow 
of  things  to  come,"  then  we  are  fully  warranted  to  regard  such  passages  as 
presenting  under  a  tropical  sense  (customary  to  all  language)  another  kind 
of  sacrifice,  suitable  to  the  then  existing  dispensation,  and  that  a  new  order 
of  priests,  under  the  name  of  the  old  because  a  prolongation  or  continua- 
tion of  a  priesthood,  are  introduced  as  forever  associated  with  Jesus  in  the 
age  to  come.     Hence  Heb.  9  :  28  will  be  realized.2 

1  These  writers  abundantly  verify  the  figure,  showing  how  a  verb,  act,  or  class  of  acts, 
or  name  of  one  kind,  is  used  as  a  substitute  for  another  that  is  meant.  Thus,  e.g. 
taking  up  the  cross  is  equivalent  to  labor  and  self-denial,  the  boring  Christ's  ears  equiva- 
lent to  the  pledge  of  His  service  to  the  Father,  sinking  into  deep  waters  equivalent  to 
being  overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  trouble,  etc.,  plucking  out  the  right  eye  equivalent  to 
removal  of  prized  passions  that  lead  to  sin,  etc.  We  add  to  avoid  misconception  :  this 
figure  cannot  be  applied  to  the  words  Israel,  Zion,  etc.,  unless  (1)  we  accept  of  the  idea 
of  a  real  engrafting  or  adoption  into  the  elect  nation  thus  designated,  etc.,  (2)  and  observ- 
ing that  from  the  context,  general  tenor,  etc.,  the  same  elect  people  are  denoted,  etc. 

8  Thus  e.g.  Zech.  14  :  16,  we  regard  simply  as  the  antitype  or  equivalent  of  the  Jewish 
feast  of  tabernacles.  The  type  was  "  a  renewal  of  religious  youth,"  a  bringing  into 
remembrance  the  past  goodness  of  God  in  order  to  renew  the  claims  Of  gratitude,  love, 
self-consecration,  and  devotedness  to  God,  and  also  looked  to  the  present  ingathering  ;  so 
the  antitype  will  likewise  be  a  joyful  festival,  in  which  there  will  be  a  public  acknowledg- 
ment of  indebtedness  to  God  and  praise.  The  feast  of  tabernacles  being  the  most  suit- 
able of  all  feasts  to  express  this  public  recalling  of  the  past,  this  realization  of  the  fulness 
of  divine  blessing,  it  is  employed  by  the  prophet  to  describe  this  still  future  joyful 
period.  So  we  point  the  critical  student  to  the  Sabbatical  year  (Prop.  143,  Obs.  3,  and 
note),  in  which  God's  purpose  is  minutely  described  and  yet  icas  never  realized,  owing  to 
the  sinfulness  of  the  nation.  It  indicates,  however,  (1)  what  a  Theocratic  ordering 
would  have  produced,  (2)  if  the  nation  had  been  obedient  and  holy  ;  and  (3)  it  fore- 
shadows or  typifies  what  ultimately  on  a  grander  scale  will  be  carried  out.  So  precisely 
with  Ezekiel,  which  evidences  what  a  Theocratic  ordering  would,  on  compliance  with 
certain  conditions,  have  resulted  in,  and  thus  foreshadows  and  evinces  the  Theocratic 
spirit  and  nearness  under  the  Messiah  in  His  Kingdom. 

Obs.  8.  The  typical  application,  or  the  substitution  of  equivalent 
phraseology,  is  also  seen  in  the  use  of  the  word  "  temple."  Admitting 
that  in  the  earthly  Jerusalem  a  temple  will  be  rebuilt  in  order  to  manifest 
in  a  public  manner  the  worship  of  God,  yet  much  confusion  of  ideas  is 
found  in  not  noticing  that  the  way  in  which  the  word  is  employed  fully 
shows,  that  it  does  not  necessarily  involve  the  notion  of  a  restoration  of 
sacrifices.  The  temple  can  exist  without  the  introduction  of  the  Mosaic 
ritual.  Besides  this,  it  has  a  latitude  of  meaning  ;  for,  e.g.  in  John  2  :  19 
it  denotes  Christ's  body  ;  in  1  Cor.  3  :  10  ;  2  Cor.  G  :  1G,  it  represents  the 
saints  ;  in  Rev.  21  :  22  it  denotes  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb, 
etc.  In  the  latter  passage  John  says  he  "  saw  no  temple  therein,"  except- 
ing as  God  and  the  Lamb  formed  one.  In  Eev.  3  :^2  "  Him  that  over- 
cometh  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,"  and  in  Rev.  7  :  15 
the  saints  shall  "  serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple."  Such  expres- 
sions, as  commentators  abundantly  show,  involve  no  contradictions,  simply 
indicating  tinder  the  substitution  of  a  word  an  equivalent  denoting  either  a 
permanent  union  with  God  or  Christ,  or  the  body  of  the  elect  who  are  holy 
and  worthy  of  honor.  This  teaches  us,  that  if  we  are  not  to  press  the  word 
"  temple"  beyond  its  legitimate  use  in  the  Word,  so  also  ought  we  not  to 
press  the  word  "  sacrifice"  which  is  associated  with  the  temple.  _  Figures 
of  speech,  lawfully  drawn  from  the  structure  of  language,  and  indicated 


Prop.  172.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  91 

thus  by  the  Spirit,  should  have  due  weight  in  our  interpretation.  Thus, 
e.g.  much  that  pertains  to  the  dispensation  still  future,  being  beyond  our 
present  experience  and  knowledge,  must  necessarily  be  presented  to  us 
through  the  medium  of  things  of  which  we  have  cognizance.  But  when 
the  idea  presented  by  the  figure  is  legitimately  drawn,  it  is  a  violation  of 
language  to  engraft  upon  it  another  and  additional  sense,  Prop.  4. 


92  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  173. 


Proposition  173.  This  Kingdom  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may 
be  near  at  hand. 

To  the  Spirit,  speaking  with  that  comprehensiveness  mentioned 
by  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  90  :  4),  and  Peter  (2  Pet.  3  :  8),  it  is  near  ;  to 
man,  with  his  ideas  of  the  vastness  of  incoming  ages,  it  is,  preceded 
by  comparatively  a  short  period,  also  near ;  to  the  student,  who 
carefully  studies  the  Divine,  Plan,  comparing  the  duration  of  dis- 
pensations, the  typical  hints,  etc.,  it  is  near  at  hand ;  and  to  the 
inquirer,  who  considers  the  various  predictions  and  intimations 
relating  to  its  Coming,  it  is  always  nigh  at  hand.  Before  entering 
into  the  discussion  of  signs,  etc.,  which  (following  Prop.)  indicate 
its  nearness,  we  may  appropriately  allude  to  some  general  reasons 
that  lead  to  the  same  result. 

We  desire  to  say  at  the  outset  that  the  discussion  of  time,  the  nearness  or  remoteness 
of  the  Second  Advent,  does  not  effect  in  the  slightest  the  truthfulness  of  the  Pre-Millen- 
nial  doctrine.  The  one  is  based  on  conjecture,  or  at  best  on  approximative  evidence  ; 
the  other  has  a  solid  Scriptural  basis.  We  are  led  to  this  remark  because  men  are  led  to 
misapprehend  our  position.  Thus  e.g.  the  book  editor  of  the  Luih.  Observer  (Oct.  25th, 
1878),  in  a  notice  of  a  Pre-Mill.  pamphlet  (Jesus  is  Coming  ;  by  W.  E.  B.)  speaks  favorably 
of  the  advocates  of  our  doctrine  as  men  of  eminence,  piety,  etc.,  but  rejects  our  doctrine 
for  this  one  assigned  reason  :  "  But  after  all,  the  fact  that  the  Pre-Millennial  advocates 
and  believers  of  all  previous  ages  have  been  shown  by  events  to  have  been  mistaken  in 
their  interpretations,  predictions,  and  expectations,  is  a  stronger  argument  against  the 
correctness  of  their  views  at  the  present  day  than  anything  else  that  can  be  adduced  on 
the  subject."  But  suppose  Pre-Millenarians  are  mistaken  as  to  time  (just  as  our  oppo- 
nents, Barnes,  etc.,  have  been),  that  does  not  effect  the  foundation  of  the  doctrine  because 
the  same  is  based— not  on  the  express  time  of  fulfilment — but  on  the  plain  grammatical 
sense  of  Scripture.  The  doctrine  is  one  thing  ;  the  exact  period  of  its  realization  is 
another,  the  former  may  be  true,  and  the  latter  may  be  a  mistake.  Dr.  Gumming  in  The 
Great  Tribulation  (p.  197),  after  referring  to  the  believer's  aptitude  to  misinterpret  the 
signs  of  nearness  just  as  a  voyager  on  a  great  sea  may  his  nearness  to  land,  and  that  "  if 
he  find  that  he  has  fallen  into  error  in  so  interpreting,  he  will  not  therefore  despair,  or 
give  up  his  investigation,"  adds  :  "  And  far  better  have  the  character  of  him  who  intently 
looks,  and  in  his  intense  longing  treats  that  as  a  sign  which  is  not,  than  the  sceptic  and 
freezing  apathy  of  the  man  whose  heart  is  dead  and  whose  hopes  are  cold,  and  who  cares 
for  and  looks  for  none  of  these  things.  The  incidental  error  of  a  few  cannot  shake  or 
shatter  the  trust  of  many  ;  and  the  error  that  is  made  by  one  watcher  for  the  Advent  will 
only  lead  another,  like  a  buoy  upon  a  wreck  in  the  channel,  to  avoid  the  reef  on  which 
his  predecessor  may  have  suffered."  Hence  the  stress  laid  on  "  Pre-Millennial  Mistakes" 
by  a  writer  in  the  New  York  Tribune  (quoted  and  indorsed  by  the  LutJi.  Observer,  Oct. 
25th,  1878),  concluding  with,  "  All  expectations  of  Christ's  Coming  for  almost  2000  years 
have  been  mistakes,"  only  indicate  how  little  such  persons  know  of  the  foundations  upon 
which  our  doctrine  rests.  If  true  in  their  position,  then  it  will  be  true  to  the  actual 
Advent,  and  no  one  is  encouraged  to  honor  God's  command  and  occupy  the  posture  of  a 
watching  servant.  Besides  this,  such  writers  conveniently*ignore  the  mistakes  of  Anti- 
and  Post-Millenarians. 

Obs.  1.  The  precise  time  for  the  Kingdom  to  be  established  is  not  given. 
Men  may  assume  this,  but  the  language  of  Scripture  is  too  precise  (Mark 


PKOP.  173.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  93 

13  :  32,  33)  :  "  But  of  that  day  and  that  hour  knoiveth  no  man,  no,  not 
the  angels  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  hut  the  Father.  Take  ye 
heed,  watch  and  pray  ;  for  ye  Tcnoio  not  when  the  time  is,  etc.1  With  this 
compare  Matt.  24  :  36,  42-51  and  25  :  13  ;  Luke  12  :  40,  and  21  :  35,  and 
consider  that  such  declarations  accompany  or  follow  directions  to  observe 
the  signs  of  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  as  indicative  of  nearness.  Jesus 
directs  us  to  signs  to  show  us  the  time  in  which  we  live,  and  how  near 
we  may  be  to  the  end,  and  not  to  definite  time,  and  this  is  also  true  of  the 
apostles.  The  Spirit  does  not  contradict  Himself  ;  if  it  were  possible  to 
obtain  accurate,  definite  time,  then  e.g.  Luke  12  :  40  would  be  incorrect ; 
because  some  would  then  really  know,  and  be  thinking  of  the  time,  etc. 
But  this  very  indefiniteness  and  uncertainty  in  regard  to  exact  time,  can 
be  justly  claimed  as  favoring  the  expectation  of  its  nearness.  If  those  who 
rely  solely  upon  this  class  of  passages  can  deduce  from  them  the  notion  that 
the  time  of  the  Sec.  Advent  is  distant  (as  multitudes  do),  we  certainly,  when 
coupling  such  Scripture  with  those  referring  to  signs  given  for  guidance, 
are  not  guilty  of  any  impropriety,  when  we  deduce  the  opinion  that  the 
same  event  may  be  near.  The  lack  of  knowledge  respecting  the  definite 
time  does  not  in  itself  determine  either  the  remoteness  or  the  near- 
ness. If  it  is  an  extreme  to  set  aside  the  passages  referred  to,  and  fix 
upon  definite  time,2  it  is  also  one  to  infer  from  them,  that  that  time  must 
be  in  the  distant  future.  It  being  beyond  our  ability  to  give  the  date, 
prudence,  if  nothing  else,  ought  to  dictate  to  us  that,  for  aught  we  know 
to  the  contrary,  it  may  be  near.  The  fact,  too,  as  Gildas,  Luther,  etc., 
remarked,3  is,  that  as  every  succeeding  year  and  day  brings  us  nearer  to 
that  which  the  Spirit  pronounced  "  nigh  at  hand,''''  so  the  lapse  of  many 
(1800)  years  has  certainly  brought  the  Sec.  Advent  and  Kingdom  so  much 
the  nigher  to  us.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  signs  to  which  the  Saviour 
directs  us  that  have  been  constantly  fulfilling,  accumulating,  and  inten- 
sifying. It  is  reasonable,  then,  to  conclude,  and  say,  as  we  now  do,  that 
it  may  be  near  at  hand.4, 

1  Some  press  this  passage  beyond  its  meaning  in  another  direction,  viz.,  that  Christ 
Himself  even  now  does  not  know  it.  But  this  was  spoken  in  His  day  of  humiliation,  when 
He  only  (John  12  :  49  and  17  :  8)  uttered  the  words  given  to  Him  by  the  Father.  The 
times  and  the  seasons  the  Father  had  reserved  (Acts  1  :  7)  to  Himself  as  a  revelation  not 
suitable  to  be  presented  at  that  period  of  Christ's  work  ;  and  to  this  Jesus  alludes  that  the 
knowledge  of  such  a  time — definite  time— was  not  suitable  even  for  Him  to  express. 
That  He  knew  the  time  is  evident  from  several  considerations,  (1)  by  the  predictions  He 
gave  concerning  the  Jewish  nation,  postponement  of  Kingdom,  Gentile  domination, 
expressed  purposely  in  general  terms,  which,  however,  indicate  an  intimate  acquaintance 
with  the  subject  ;  and  (2)  after  his  ascension,  as  it  was  proper  to  reveal  more,  the  Apoca- 
lypse is  given,  in  which,  under  symbolic  imagery,  etc.,  a  perfect  acquaintance  with  both 
events  and  time  is  evinced.  In  the  passage  there  is  a  gradual  ascending  in  knowledge 
on  the  subject  ;  man  knows  nothing  concerning  definite  time — angels  knowing  more  (as 
e.g.  the  angel  revealing  time  to  Daniel)  than  man,  still  are  unacquainted  with  the  exact 
day  and  hour,  while  able  to  form  a  near  estimate  ;  Jesus,  as  David's  Son,  knows  more 
than  all,  and  yet  even  He  is  bound  not  to  reveal  what  He  knows  respecting  definite  time 
because  such  time — its  revelation — belongs  to  the  Father.  On  this  very  difficult  point  a 
few  additional  remarks  are  in  place.  Some  ancient  Fathers,  and  so  Wordsworth,  explain 
that  Jesus  knew  personally,  but  did  not  know  officially  ;  this  is  argued  by  Pres.  Mahan 
(Oberlin  Quarterly  Review,  1847)  who  insists  (1)  that  the  word  "Son"  denotes  not  merely 
the  human  nature  but  the  divine  and  human  united  ;  (2)  that  as  divine  He  was  omnis- 
cient— "  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things,"  etc.  ;  (3)  but  by  virtue  of  His  subordination  as 
the  Messiah,  it  was  proper  for  Him  to  conceal  or  refuse  to  reveal  His  knowledge  without 
special  communication  ;  and  brings  in  the  analogy  of  an  ambassador,  who  when  asked  in 
reference  to  things  which  he  is  instructed  not  to  reveal,  answers  "  I  know  nothing"  — 


94  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  173. 

not  absolutely  but  officially  ;  ignorance  being  merely  relative.  The  older  orthodox 
Fathers,  and  some  moderns,  teach  that  Christ  knew  as  God  but  not  as  man — assuming  a 
dualistic  separation  between  the  two  natures.  Some  (as  Alford)  think  that  there  was  a 
real  ignorance  during  the  time  of  humiliation.  Lange  (Life  of  Jesus  and  Com. )  places  this 
in  a  holy  unwillingness  not  to  know,  or  to  a  self-limitation  of  knowledge  ;  so  also  Schaff 
(Lange' s  Com.  Matt.,  p.  430,  note)  advocates  "  a  voluntary  self-limitation  of  knowledge." 
Fairbairn  (On  Proph.,  p.  182)  in  view  of  the  union  of  the  two  natures,  likewise  indorses 
a  voluntarily  refraining  from  knowing  it.  Brown  (Com.,  Mark  13  :  32)  says  :  "  Some  of 
the  most  eminent  of  the  ancient  Fathers,  Luther,  Melanchthon,  most  of  the  elder  Luther- 
ans, Bengel,  Lange,  Webster  and  Wilkinson,"  held  "  simply  that  it  was  not  among  the 
things  which  he  had  received  to  communicate."  On  the  question,  "  whether  the  Son 
was  not  at  that  time  in  possession  of  the  knowledge  referred  to,"  he  says  :  "  Chrysostom 
and  others  understood  it  to  mean  that  as  man  our  Lord  was  ignorant  of  this.  It  is  taken 
literally  by  Calvin,  Grotius,  De  Wette,  Meyer,  Fritzsche,  Steir,  Alford,  and  Alexander." 
Gleig  (His.  Bible,  vol.  2,  p.  249)  makes  "  not  to  know"  synonymous  with  "  not  to  speak 
of  a  thing."  Dr.  Rutter  (Rom.  Cath.  in  Life  of  Jesus,  p.  416)  holds  that  Jesus  even  as 
man  knew  the  time  "  by  a  knowledge  inseparable  from  a  union  of  his  human  nature  with 
the  divine  person,"  and  adopts  (St.  Greg.  Epis.  42)  this  view  :  "  But  though  while  man 
He  knew  the  day  of  judgment,  yet  this  knowledge  was  not  due  to  Him  as  He  was  man,  or 
because  He  was  man,  but  because  He  was  God  as  well  as  man."  He  lefers  to  the  Fathers 
as  holding  that  Jesus  ' '  here  speaks  to  His  disciples  only  as  He  was  the  ambassador  of 
His  Father,  and  so  He  is  said  only  to  know  what  He  is  to  make  known  to  men.  He  is 
said  not  to  know,  says  St.  Augustine,  what  He  will  not  make  known  to  others."  Morris 
represents  (Littell's  Liv.  Age,  vol.  24,  4  ser.,  p.  443)  John  Gerard,  a  Jesuit  Father,  as 
arguing  that  Christ  knew  the  day  and  the  hour  but  employed  equivocations.  Archb. 
Tillotson  in  a  sermon  on  this  passage  refers  the  not  knowing  to  the  human  nature.  It  is 
sufficient  to  say  that  the  view  which  best  accords  with  the  divine  united  with  Jesus  is 
this  :  the  Kingdom  is  covenanted  to  David's  Son,  "  the  Son  of  Man."  The  time  of  the 
bestowal  of  the  Kingdom  and  consequences  of  the  Advent  (Acts  1  :  6,  7)  is  in  the  Father's 
hands,  and  Jesus  therefore  speaks  of  the  time  in  the  covenanted  direction,  and  refers  this 
lack  of  knowledge  to  His  Messianic  relationship  as  the  Son  of  Man  and  of  God,  as  a  matter 
unsuitable  for  Him  to  express,  being  contradictory  to  the  state  of  humiliation  assumed. 
Besides  this,  a  revelation  of  the  precise  period  of  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  of 
the  duration  of  the  Gentile  times,  of  the  interval  preceding  the  Sec.  Advent,  would  have 
prevented  the  expression  of  faith,  hope,  and  practical  results  afforded  by  the  posture  of 
constantly  looking  and  watching  for  the  Sec.  Advent. 

2  Several  writers,  whom  we  esteem  but  cannot  follow,  make  the  injunction  to  "  watch" 
a  proof  that  the  time  can  be  definitely  known,  overlooking  the  simple  fact  that  the  in- 
junction for  watching  is  based  on  our  alleged  ignorance  of  the  exact  time.  Even  the 
illustrations  given  to  enforce  their  views  teach  the  reverse,  seeing  that  the  parties  warned 
are  presumed  to  be  in  ignorance  until  the  signal  of  explosion  is  given,  etc.  It  is  only 
such  who  have  some  favorite  chronological  scheme  to  advocate  who  will  deliberately  over- 
ride what  is  so  plainly  taught. 

3  Guildas  (Works,  s.  44),  who  lived  about  a.d.  546,  quoting  Isaiah  as  describing  the 
speedy  approach  of  the  end,  after  "  Howl  ye,  because  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near  at 
hand,"  pertinently  adds  :  "  If  so  near  at  that  time,  what  shall  it  now  be  thought  to  be?" 
Luther  (quoted  by  Seiss,  Last  Times,  p.  255)  on  Daniel  12  :  7  says  :  "  I  ever  keep  it  before 
me,  and  I  am  satisfied  that  the  last  day  must  be  before  the  door  ;  for  the  signs  predicted 
by  Christ  and  the  Apostles  Peter  and  Paul  have  all  now  been  fulfilled,  the  trees  put  forth, 
the  Scriptures  are  green  and  flourishing.  That  we  cannot  know  the  day  matters  not  ; 
some  one  else  may  point  it  out  ;  things  are  certainly  near  their  end."  "  We  certainly 
have  nothing  now  to  wait  for  but  the  end  of  all  things,"  etc.  Long  ago  men  entertained 
opinions  respecting  the  time  of  the  year,  the  week,  and  even  the  day  when  Christ  would 
be  likely  to  appear.  Even  Luther,  as  is  well  known,  held  (without  fixing  the  year)  that 
it  would  be  at  or  about  Easter  day.  Bengel  (Gnomon,  Apoc.  1  :  10)  refers  to  Jerome  say- 
ing on  Matt.  25,  concerning  midoight  :  "  Let  us  say  something  which  perhaps  may  be 
useful  to  the  reader  :  there  is  a  tradition  of  the  Jews  that  Christ  will  come  at  midnight, 
in  consonance  with  the  time  in  Egypt,  when,  the  passover  was  celebrated  and  the  destroy- 
ing angel  came  and  the  Lord  passed  over  the  tents.  .  .  .  Whence  I  suppose' '  (let  the 
reader  carefully  notice  how  this  evinces  the  prevalence  of  Chiliasm)  "  also  that  the  apos- 
tolic tradition  has  continued,  that  on  the  eve  of  the  passover  it  is  not  permitted  to  dis- 
miss the  people  before  midnight,  expecting  the  Coming  of  Christ  ;  and  when  that  time 
shall  have  passed,  security  being  now  presumed  upon,  all  keep  the  festival."     Bengel 


Prop.  173.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  95 

himself  inclines  that  the  day  will  be  the  first  day  of  the  week,  hence  called  as  he  alleges 
"  the  Lord's  day"  (others,  however,  as  Dr.  Seiss,  and  many  others,  make  "  the  Lord's 
day"  in  Rev.  1  :  10  refer  to  the  entire  period  after  the  Sec.  Advent  down  to  the  last  judg- 
ment). Jesus  predicts  it  to  be  "  in  that  night,"  as  the  First  Advent  was  also  acknowledged 
in  the  night. 

4  Lange's  Com.  Mark,  Horn.,  p.  136,  takes  the  same  view  that,  while  discarding  defi- 
nite time,  the  Saviour's  language  induces  a  certainty  of  His  speedy  and  unexpected  Com- 
ing, and  urges  the  necessity  of  watching.  Dr.  Schaff  (Lange's  Com.  Matt.,  p.  430,  note) 
in  speaking  of  Jesus  not  knowing,  regards  it  as  "a  warning  against  chronological  curi- 
osity and  mathematical  calculation  in  the  exposition  of  Scripture  prophecy,"  and  then 
adds  :  "It  is  not  likely  that  any  theologian,  however  learned,  should  know  more,  or 
ought  to  know  more,  on  this  point  before  the  end  than  Christ  Himself,  who  will  judge 
the  quick  and  the  dead,  chose  to  know  in  His  state  of  humiliation."  This  evidently  is 
levelled  against  those  who  dogmatically  assert  the  exact  time  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  but  cer- 
tainly is  not  appropriate  to  a  study  of  the  chronological  prophecies,  and  the  giving  of  an 
approximative  opinion  (which  is  done  in  the  same  commentary).  Christ's  declaration 
must  be  interpreted  in  harmony  with  the  exhortations  to  study  prophecy,  the  example 
of  the  prophets,  and  the  posture  of  constant  watching.  Exact  knowledge  of  the  precise 
time  cannot  be  received,  no  matter  by  whom  professed,  otherwise  the  words  of  Jesus 
would  not  be  true,  as  e.g.  "  Watch  therefore :  for  ye  know  neitlier  the  day  nor  the  hour  wherein 
the  Son  of  Man  comelh." 

Obs.  2.  The  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  is  indefinite  as  to  time,  for 
where  it  is  specifically  stated  it  is  always  in  connection  with  phraseology 
(such  as  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  or  until  he  comes  again,  etc.)  which 
gives  no  regular  chronological  date  or  succession.  While  this  is  so,  it  is 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  a  Gentile  domination  so  long  continued,  a 
Jerusalem  so  long  trodden  under  foot,  an  elect  people  so  long  scattered, 
a  coming  so  long  delayed,  is  evidence,  at  least,  that  a  large  portion  of 
time  included  in  such  a  postponement  has  already  passed,  and  that  there- 
fore the  Kingdom  is  proportionately  near.  Contrasting  the  respective 
duration  of  dispensations,  materially  aids  in  impressing  the  same  idea. 

It  can  be  estimated  approximative^  as  near  because  the  Second  Advent  is  a  neces- 
sary antecedent  (as  we  have  shown)  of  predicted  events  which  follow  such  periods.  Thus 
e.g.  is  it  not  a  fact  that  we  are  in  the  last  period  of  the  Roman  Empire,  a  period,  too,  in 
which  the  Son  of  Man  is  to  come  and  introduce  that  world-wide  dominion  ?  Our  posi- 
tion, therefore,  in  the  scale  of  prophetic  fulfilment,  is  indicative  of  its  nearness.  We 
may  consequently  adopt  Lange's  (Com.  Matt.,  p.  433)  language  :  "  Watchfulness  is  above 
all  the  duty  of  those  who  bear  the  office  of  watchmen.  The  greater  the  insecurity  and 
danger  the  more  needful  the  watchfulness.  Watchfulness  the  distinguishing  character- 
istic of  the  true  servants  of  Christ :  (1)  It  is  a  tribute  to  the  treasure,  which  is  to  be 
guarded  ;  (2)  it  points  to  conflict  with  an  enemy  ;  (3)  to  the  danger  of  the  time  of  night  ; 
(4)  to  fidelity  in  waiting  for  the  Lord.  The  security  of  the  world  should  arouse  and  keep 
effectually  awake  the  servants  of  Christ."  Cramer  "(p.  434)  well  said  :  "  The  more  daring 
the  blasphemers  are  in  their  riot  and  debauchery,  the  nearer  the  Lord."  So  also  Osian- 
der  :  "  The  more  secure,  the  nearer  the  Judge." 

Obs.  3.  This  Kingdom  as  we  have  seen  in  previous  Propositions  (as  e.g. 
Props.  64-65)  is  dependent  upon  a  certain  number  of  elect  ones  that  must 
previously  be  gathered  out.  After  the  rejection  of  the  Jewish  nation  for 
a  set  time,  a  seed  must  be  raised  up  unto  Abraham  to  inherit  the  prom- 
ises ;  this  seed  is  now  in  process  of  adoption,  and  when  a  determinate 
number  has  been  thus  engrafted — a  sufficiency  to  fill  out  the  Divine 
Theocratic  purpose — then  will  the  Kingdom  come.  This  number 
requisite,  God  only  knows  ;  it  is  one  of  the  secrets  that  pertains  to  Him- 
self alone  as  the  bestower  of  the  Kingdom  to  David's  Son,  and  His  Co- 
heirs, and  which  He  has  purposely  clad  in  symbolic  vesture,  and  in  the 


96  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.    173. 

most  general  expressions.  To  make  up  this  predetermined  number,  is 
assigned  as  a  reason  why  God  is  delaying  His  promises  (as  e.g.  2  Pet.  3  : 
8,  etc.).  So  that  by  the  exercise  of  long-suffering,  men  may  be  led  to 
repentance,  and  become  of  the  number  of  the  elect,  chosen  ones.  Hence, 
while  this  necessarily  forbids  the  fixing  of  a  definite  time,  owing  to  man's 
utter  inability  to  fathom  the  Theocratic  ordering  of  the  Kingdom  in  its 
appointments,  etc.,  yet,  at  the  same  time,  the  thoughtful  student  will  feel, 
when  looking  at  the  number  already  gathered  during  eighteen  centuries  of 
contest  and  trial,  that,  at  least,  a  very  large  advancement  has  been  made 
in  gathering  out  such  a  seed  for  Abraham  to  be  co-inheritors  with  the 
Christ.  Therefore  from  this  even,  it  is  reasonable  to  think  that  the 
Kingdom  is  not  far  distant,  seeing  that  already  so  much  has  been  done 
to  secure  such  a  class. 

A  writer  in  the  Proph.  Times,  Oct.  1870,  p.  150,  misapprehending  the  design  of  this 
dispensation  in  gathering  out  an  adopted  seed  for  Abraham,  etc.  (Props.  59-65),  makes 
the  assertion  that  "  prophetic  times"  do  not  belong  to  "  the  Gentile  Church."  This  is 
wrong,  because  (1)  there  is  no  "  Gentile  Church  ;"  and  (2)  the  Gentiles  being,  by  faith, 
engrafted  and  adopted  are  fellow  heirs  with  the  Jews  in  all  the  promises.  Hence  all 
prophetic  announcements,  etc.,  pertain  both  to  Gentile  and  Jewish  believers.  "We,  then, 
may  well  say  with  Paul  (Rom.  3  :  11,  and  comp.  Olshausen  loci)  that  we  are  constantly 
approaching  nearer  and  nearer  to  salvation.  If  he  could  say  so,  much  more  we  after  so 
long  a  time. 

Obs.  4.  This  Kingdom  is  dependent  upon  the  Coming  of  the  King,  but 
the  Advent  of  this  King,  in  its  several  aspects,  is  noivhere  positively  con- 
joined to  the  ending  of  any  chronological  period,  and,  in  view  of  this  fact, 
may  I"'  mar — indeed  may  occur  at  any  time.  It  is  true,  that  very  many 
prophetical  writers  have  presented  us  with  chronological  data,  the  closing 
of  certain  years  (as  e.g.  1260,  1290,  1335,  etc.)  as  respectively  the  time  of 
the  Sec.  Advent,  but  in  every  instance  as  pure  inference.  For  no  one 
has  yet  ventured  to  assert,  that  such  dates  have  positively  connected  with 
them  the  Sec.  Advent ;  such  dates  have  been  supposed  to  imply  such  an 
event,  and  the  supposition  has  been  too  easily  accepted  as  a  fixed  fact. 
Now  without  discussing  the  merits  of  the  literal  day  or  year  day  fulfilment 
of  such  dates,  it  is  sufficient  to  say,  that  in  neither  case  is  the  Advent  (in 
the  sense  we  use  it,  viz.  as  embracing  dif.  stages)  said  to  occur  at  the  end 
of  such  dates.  So  far  as  the  period  and  the  closing  of  such  dates  is  con- 
cerned, they  all  are  stated  to  embrace  the  history  or  events  of  either  the 
Jewish  nation,  or  of  the  Church,  or  of  some  hostile  power  during  a  certain, 
thus  specified,  time.  The  Sec.  Advent,  so  far  as  particulars  are  given, 
and  the  immediate  connection  it  may  sustain  even  by  implication  to 
such  dates,  may  take  place  some  time  before  or  after  their  close  ;  and  in 
reference  to  some  even  a  length  of  time  before  they  commence.  It  is 
true,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  mistake  is  made  by  numerous  writers, 
that  one  stage  or  act  of  the  Sec.  Advent  is  directly  joined  to  the  close  of 
some  of  those  periods  (being  allied  with  the  destruction  of  Antichrist  and 
the  deliverance  of  the  Jewish  nation,  etc.),  viz.  His  risible  open  Coming 
with  His  saints.  But  this  is  very  different  from  His  previous  Coming  for 
those  saints,  who  participate  with  Him  in  the  destruction  of  Antichrist, 
and  thus  leads  us  to  allow  an  interval  (short  or  long,  as  the  case  may  be) 
before  such  a  Coming  in  "  vengeance."  This  teaches  (see  Props.  130,  etc.) 
us  not  to  limit  the  Sec.  Advent  by  dates  ;  it  is  not  bound  by  them  only 
as  the  last  grand  act  of  Coming  for  the  overthrow  of  the  Confederation  is 


Prop.  173.]  the  theocratic  kingdom,  97 

concerned  ;  for,  as  previously  intimated,  Scripture  surely  points  out  that 
even  before  this  last  Confederation  is  formed  (so  e.g.  Rev.  14,  etc.  Comp. 
preceding  Props.),  and  the  great  tribulation  is  entered,  that  saints  are 
removed  in  a  manner  which  can  only  be  attributed  to  the  Sec.  Advent, 
being  specifically  joined  to  it  by  the  Spirit  as  a  result.  This  conclusively 
instructs  us  that  this  Advent — concealed  to  the  world  and  known  only  by 
experience  to  the  favored  ones — precedes  for  a  time — not  given  by  such 
dates — the  visible  world  manifestation  and  destruction  of  Antichrist.1  If 
any  one  asks,  why  is  it  not  then  more  prominently  set  forth  also  in 
connection  with  such  chronological  dates,  the  answer  is  plain — such  a 
method  would  defeat  the  posture  of  constant  watching  enjoined,  and  would, 
in  a  great  measure,  relieve  it  of  a  characteristic  purposely  designed,  viz. 
that  it  shall  come  as  "  a  snare."  A  sufficiency  is  given  to  instruct  us,  if 
we  will  only  compare  Scripture  :  if  the  exact  time  of  this  first  secret  Com- 
ing were  given,  it  would  invalidate  the  express  declarations  that  no  one 
shall  be  cognizant  of  it.  Hence  it  is,  that  this  Coming — this  Advent 
embracing  from  its  first  stage  to  the  last  a  distinctive  interval  of  time — is 
represented  as  one  that  may  happen  at  any  time  ;  one  that  we  are  to  watch 
for  constantly  ;  one  that  we  are  to  look  for  without  placing  anything  inter- 
vening (to  be  yet  fulfilled)  between  it  and  the  present,  seeing  that  the  stage 
or  manifestation  (to  saints)  at  its  beginning  is  never  included  in  dates,  but 
always  enshrouded  in  mystery  ;  always  represented  as  coming  unknown  to 
all  men  and  to  the  angels.  From  this  it  follows,  not  knowing  the  length 
of  this  interval,  and  not  having  definite  events  (for  those  are  embraced  in 
this  interval)  to  guide  us  into  a  recognition  of  the  time  when  the  Advent 
really  begins,  that  such  a  Coming  and  its  resultant  (the  Kingdom)  may 
be  near,  so  near  that  we  dare  not  positively  assert  that  it  shall  be  delayed 
a  single  day,  week,  year,  etc.2 

1  Hence  it  is  that  some  sanguine  writers  press  such  passages  as  Dan.  12  :  9,  12  :  "  The 
words  are  closed  up  and  sealed  till  the  time  of  the  end" — "  none  of  the  wicked  shall 
understand,  but  the  wise  shall  understand,"  out  of  all  proportion.  Admitting,  as  every 
student  must,  that  knowledge  will  be  increased  (for  as  Sir  I.  ^Newton  justly  remarked, 
there  is  scarcely  a  jjrophetical  writer  but  he  adds  something  through  his  investigations 
to  our  stock  of  knowledge),  yet  it  is  nowhere  asserted  that  it  shall  be  to  the  extent 
assumed  by  some,  viz.,  in  reference  to  definite  time.  More  than  this,  we  more  than  sus- 
pect that  "  the  time  of  the  end  "  alluded  to  by  Daniel  has  reference  to  the  interval  of 
time  between  the  first  and  last  stage  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  a  time  still  future,  and  which 
relates  exclusively  to  the  end  (Prop.  130).  At  least  the  utmost  caution  and  moderation 
ought  to  be  exercised  in  this  direction,  least  well  meant  labors  become  serious  drawbacks 
to  inquirers.  We  can  clearly  see  how  during  that  interval  "  the  wise  shall  understand," 
and  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  knowledge  obtained,  so  that  they  will  rather  suffer 
martyrdom  than  deny  the  same,  and  also  how  "  the  wicked  shall  not  understand"  until 
overwhelmed  by  the  vengeance,  etc.  This,  however,  does  not  forbid  some  knowledge 
respecting  coming  events,  and  a  degree  of  knowledge,  too,  which  makes  it  essential  to 
be  "  watching"'  constantly  so  as  to  verify  the  promise  that  to  some  "  the  day  of  the 
Lord  "  does  not  come  unawares  or  unprepared. 

2  This  impresses  what  Lange  (Com.  Mad.,  p.  433)  calls  "  the  fearful  solemnity  of  the 
thought,  that  the  Judge  of  the  world  may  come  at  any  moment,"  or  (Com.  James,  p.  135) 
"  The  Coming  of  the  Lord  is  nigh.  Literally  :  it  has  already  drawn  nigh  in  its  Coming 
nigh.  It  is  not  a  fixed  nearness  but  a  constant  drawing  nearer,  and  that  not  in  the  sense 
of  a  chronological  definition,  but  in  the  sense  of  a  religious  expectation  and  assurance, 
which  does  not  calculate  the  time  and  the  hour,  or  rather  looks  at  time  in  the  spirit  of 
the  Lord  before  whom  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day  (2  Pet.  3  :  8).  In  the  Apostles' 
sense  of  the  expression,  it  could  be  said  and  may  be  said  at  all  times  :  the  Coming  of  the 
Lord  is  nigh."  So  Vaughan  (Lange's  Apoc,  p.  433)  remarked  :  "The  peculiarity  of 
Christ's  Coming  is,  that  everything  which  seems  to  defer  really  brings  it  near;  every- 


98  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PKOP.  173. 

thing  which  seems  to  make  it  improbable  is  an  argument  of  its  certainty  and  of  its 
approach.     '  Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief. '  " 

Obs.  5.  While  this  is  so,  chronology  itself  teaches  us  that  the  Kingdom 
may  be  near.  We  admit  that  chronology  is  subject  to  difficulties  (owing 
to  several  small  chasms  and  uncertain  dates,  bringing  in  therefore  proba- 
bility, etc.)1  ;  tbat  it  is  so  uncertain  that  the  exact  date  of  Christ's  birth  is 
a  subject  of  dispute  (for  some  extend  the  time  from  a.d.  4004  to  4128  or 
4132,  owing  to  an  alleged  error  in  Judges,  etc.)  ;  that  scarcely  two  chron- 
ologists  are  agreed  in  all  respects,  and  that  they  differ  in  reference  to  the 
present  age  of  the  world,2  etc. ,  yet  one  thing  that  their  valuable  labors  in  this 
perplexing  Held  has  clearly  stated,  is  the  fact,  that  we  at  this  day  are  living 
on  thevery  border  of  the  ending  of  the  sixth  Milliad.  As  to  the  general  result, 
clironologers  differ  by  a  comparatively  few  years,  one  having  more  and  others 
less,  but  the  substantial  agreement  amid  a  diversity,  brings  forth  the  remark- 
able feature  that  we  arc  not  distant  from  the  close  of  the  six  thousandth 
year.  Wo  believe  that  this  very  diversity — this  inability  by  a  unanimity 
to  fix  the  exact  closing  of  the  sixth  Milliad — the  introduction  of  those 
chasms,  and  the  obscurity  of  certain  dates,  is  intentional  in  order  to  place 
us  in  the  commanded  position  of  watching.  Now  let  the  reader  consider, 
that  it  was  upon  this  ending  of  the  sixth  Milliad  that  the  Church  has  .so 
often  through  its  greatest  representative  men  fixed  her  eye  as  the  important 
crisis  of  the  world's  history  ;  let  him  ponder  what  Prop.  143  has  presented, 
and  its  relationship  to  our  present  chronological  position  ;  let  him  even  con- 
sider that  from  the  analogy  of  the  past  it  is  most  reasonable  to  anticipate 
some  great  movements  and  changes  in  the  dispensational  orderings — and 
from  such  reflections  he  must  conclude  not  only  that  we  live  in  a  period 
when  great  changes  are  to  be  expected,  but  in  one  not  very  distant  from  the 
introduction  of  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  God.  But  in  addition  to  this, 
chronology  reveals  another  matter  which  forces  us  to  the  same  conclusion, 
viz.  that  all  writers  whether  Pre-  or  Post-Millenarians,  who  undertake  to 
give  us  chronological  calculations  (we  say  nothing  respecting  their  correct- 
ness)regarding  the  incoming  Millennial  age  unite  in  asserting  that  that  age 
is  nigh  at  hand.  In  commentaries,  prophetical  treatises,  etc.,  this  is 
presented  as  something  undoubted  ;  and  numerous  writers,  while  giving  only 
approximative  dates,  declare  that  a  study  of  chronology  in  its  application 
to  prediction  necessarily  and  inevitably  leads  to  such  a  conclusion.  The 
reason  for  this  lies  in  the  circumstance,  that  all  the  prophetical  dates  are 
of  such  a  limited  duration  that  no  matter  what  plausible  beginning  is 
assigned  to  them,  the  end,  in  any  case,  cannot  be  far  distant.  While 
such  dates  refer  to  the  rise,  progress  and  overthrow  of  enemies,  or  to  the 
struggles  of  the  Church  and  her  ultimate  triumph,  yet  we  find  from  a 
comparison  of  Scripture  that  to  bring  about  the  last  (that  is,  the  overthrow 
and  triumph),  the  Advent  of  Christ  is  connected  with  the  same  before 
such  a  result  is  accomplished,  leaving  the  time  preceding  it  unknown,  and 
that  the  same  is  also  witnessed  at  the  time  of  overthrow  and  triumph 
introductory  to  the  Kingdom  itself.  Therefore  linking  the  Advent  and 
Kingdom  to  the  Millennial  age  as  accessory,  prerecpiisite  and  indispensable, 
the  admissions  thus  made  are  all  of  a  tenor  to  show  us  that,  according  to 
the  views  expressed  by  the  most  intelligent  and  able  students  of  various 
Expositions  (Pre-  and  Post-Mill.)  the  Kingdom,  as  prophesied,  is  not  very 
distant  from  us.* 


Prop.  173.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  99 

1  In  chronology  we  encounter  the  differences  existing  between  the  Hebrew,  SamaritaD, 
Septuagint,  and  Josephus  ;  the  chasms  from  Moses'  death  to  the  first  servitude  (Josh. 
24  :  31),  and  from  Samuel's  death  to  Saul's  election  in  the  Kingdom  (comp.  Judges 
15  :  20  ;  16  :  31,  and  1  Sam.  4  :  1  ;  7  :  13  ;  12  :  2)  ;  and  the  disputed  point  of  the  period 
of  the  Judges  (comp.  1  Kings  G  :  1  and  Acts  13  :  18-22).  Whatever  ojiinion  may  be 
deemed  the  most  trustworthy,  yet  the  intelligent  student,  appreciating  the  difficulties,  will 
not  dogmatize  but  simply  approximate.     And  this  is  all-sufficient  to  urge  to  "  watching." 

*  To  indicate  how  largely  men  who  make  chronology  a  specialty  differ  in  their  esti- 
mates, we  give  the  dates  (Time  of  theEnd,  pp.  113-115)  of  a  tabular  statement  of  several 
with  the  result  appended.  Thus  Bowen  has  b.c.  4128  (-(-a.  1881=6009]  ;  Clinton,  b.c. 
4138  (+1881=6019)  ;  Usher,  b.  c.  4003  (-{-1881=5884}  ;  Jams.  b.c.  4019  (-(-1881=5000)  ; 
Cmminghame,  b.c.  5478 -f-B.=  7359)  ;  Hales,  b.c.  5411  (-(-1881  =  7292);  the  Amer. 
editor,  b.c.  4120  (-(-1881=6001).  Surely  in  this  one  representation  there  is  sufficient 
difference  to  make  us  feel  that  chronology  is  beset  with  difficulties.  Numerous  varia- 
tions from  the  above  exist  that  make  it  less  and  others  more,  so  that  but  very  few  are 
found  to  agree  either  in  estimates  of  particular  dates  or  the  final  result. 

3  Some  persons  are  disposed  to  ridicule  the  utterances  of  Luther,  who  could  only  put 
off  the  end  at  most  200  or  300  years,  of  Whiston,  who  computed  the  end  of  this  dispensa- 
tion for  1776,  of  Qurieu,  for  17*85,  Stilling,  for  1816,  Bengel,  Wesley,  and  others,  for  1836, 
Wood,  Miller,  Cunninghame.  and  others,  for  1843,  Sander,  Shimeall,  Wolff,  and  others, 
1847,  Chytraeus,  Pareus,  Scott,  Faber,  Barnes,  etc.,  for  1866,  Bickersteth,  etc.,  for  1868, 
Brown,  etc.,  for  1873,  besides  others  for  1870,  1871,  1875,  1880,  etc,  and  reason  from 
such  failures  that  the  dates  announced  for  the  future  (as  e.  g.  1883,  1885,  1893,  etc.)  will 
equally  pass  away  without  the  Advent  and  kingdom.  But  the  reflecting  student  sei  a  no 
cause  for  ridicule  in  such  attempts  to  fix,  if  possible,  the  chronological  position  of  the 
Church.  On  the  other  hand,  they  teach  him  (1)  that  these  very  failures  evince  the  pro- 
priety of  constant  watching,  seeing  the  uncertainty  of  chronology  in  determining  the 
exact  time  ;  (2)  that  they  show  how  eminent  men  of  all  classes  believe  that  we  are  near- 
ing  the  end  ;  (3)  that  past  failure  is  no  security  of  long  postponement,  and  hence  it 
would  be  unwise  to  reject  a  continuous  testimony  respecting  our  nearness  to  the  end  ; 
(4)  that  such  mistakes,  while  teaching  us  what  the  Spirit  expressly  has  predicted,  the 
inability  of  man  to  know  the  exact  period,  at  the  same  time  have  a  practical  tendency  to 
lead  the  wise  to  understand  that  the  Millenarian  system,  in  agreement  with  the  Bible, 
demands,  not  the  looking  for  the  Advent  (excepting  only  in  its  last  aspect)  at  any  definite 
fixed  time  (which  alone  is  given  by  the  first  stage  in  resurrection  and  translation),  but  a 
constant  looking,  praying,  and  watching  for  it  at  any  time.  Surely,  wisdom  does  not 
make  itself  merry  at  the  expense  of  truth.  Writers  have  endeavored  to  enforce  the  near- 
ness of  the  Advent  by  the  seven  times  of  Lev.  26  (making  2520  years),  the  year  of  release, 
Deut.  15  :  1  ;  Jer.  24  :  14  (i.e  Prophetic  years  ;  7x360  =  2520) ;  by  the  typical  Sabbath 
(i.e.  Jubilee=7x7,  and  49x50  =  2450)  ;  by  allusion  to  Hos.  6  :  1-3* (i.e.  after  2000  years), 
making  Luke  13  :  32  parallel  ;  by  the  2300  days  of  Dan.  8  :  13,  14  (i.e.  2300  years)  ;  by 
the  time,  times,  and  a  half  of  Dan.  12  :  7  (i.e.  1260  years)  ;  by  the  1290  days  of  Dan. 
12  :  11  (i.e.  years)  ;  by  the  1335  days  of  Dan.  12  :  12  ;  by  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials 
of  the  Apoc. ;  by  the  two  witnesses  of  Rev.  11:3;  the  woman  in  the  wilderness,  Rev.  12  : 
6,  14,  the  42  months  of  Rev.  13  :  5,  the  number  666  of  Rev.  13  :  18.  Whatever  may  be 
said  of  the  fanciful  deductions  from  some  of  these,  of  the  dogmatic  assertions  made  in 
behalf  of  others,  and  of  the  erroneous  conclusions  exhibited  in  confidently  expressed 
mathematical  calculations,  yet  it  is  true  that  all,  whether  positive  or  approximative, 
whether  Pre-  or  Post-Millenarian,  infer,  as  a  legitimate  deduction,  that  we  are  very 
near  the  commencement  of  the  Mill,  era  (which  we  hold  is  introduced  by  the  personal 
Advent  of  Jesus).  It  is  simply  impossible,  in  view  of  the  limited  nature  of  the  pro- 
phetic periods,  and  the  time  that  has  already  elapsed  —  whatever  the  difficulties 
encountered  respecting  an  exact  beginning  and  ending  of  such  periods — to  come  to  any 
other  conclusion.  Hence  a  student  of  the  Word,  conversant  with  bearings  of  the  subject, 
will  not  make  himself  merry  over  the  mistaken  chronological  estimates  of  others,  as  e.g. 
that  of  1666  (Burnet's  Lives,  p.  108)  ;  or  1694  (Evelyn's  Diary,  vol.  2,  p.  342)  ;  or  1796 
(Austin's  theory,  Luth.  Observer,  June  1st,  1877)  ;  or  1532  (Carion's  view,  Disraeli's.  Cur. 
of  Lit.,  vol.  3, 'p.  272)  ;  or  1786  (Napier,  Lord,  etc.)  ;  or  1716  or  1717  (Mede,  etc.)  ;  or 
1793-94  (Mann)  ;  or  1798  (Valpy)  ;  or  1789  fBichino)  :  or  1800  (Sharpe)  ;  or  1656  (in  A  Voice 
out  of  the  Wilderness,  by  M.  S.)  ;  or  1843-44  (Habershou)  ;  or  1873  (Balfour,  Russell, 
etc.)  ;  or  1878  (Swormstedt)  ;  or  1870  (Mahan)  ;  or  1872  (Bowen.  Scott,  etc.);  or  1880 
(Hales)  ;  or  1881  (Brothers,  Bliss,  etc.)  ;  or  1881-82  (in  the  pyramid  theory  by  Smyth, 
Piazzi,  and  others),  etc.     So  likewise  the  estimates  made  concerning  the  future,  whether 


100  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM  [PROP.  173. 

dogmatic  or  approximative,  do  not  affect  the  constant  posture  of  the  obedient  watching 
servant  ;  as  e.g.  the  date  1890  (Chr.  Herald,  Feb.  17th,  1881,  in  an  Art.)  ;  or  1935  (Wild, 
The  Lost  Ten  Tribes,  p.  193)  ;  or  2016  (Lowman's  Apoc.) ;  or  1902-47  (Clarke)  ;  or  1987 
(Newton)  ;  or  1966  (Ralston)  ;  or  2018  (Fleming)  ;  or  1885,  1887,  etc.,  given  by  others. 
Such  a  diversity  of  expression  is  precisely  that  which  we  ought  reasonably  to  antici- 
pate, if  it  is  true  that — as  we  have  advocated — the  Father  has,  for  wise  reasons, 
reserved  the  exact  time  within  His  own  knowledge. 

Obs  6.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  this  indefiniteness  as  to  the  exact 
time  is  to  the  thoughtful  not  only  evidence  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Word, 
hut  a  reason  why  the  end  should  always  he  regarded  as  near.  Let  the 
student  compare  the  chronological  dates,  and  see  how  they  are  presented, 
purposely  in  a  form  so  obscure  or  hidden,  that  the  wisest  of  scholars 
adr  it  a  degree  of  uncertainty  appertaining  to  a  decided  apprehension  of 
the  same  ;  and  yet  so  framed  in  with  the  text  of  prediction  given  by  vari- 
ous prophets  thac  they  harmonize  with  it  and  each  other,  and  he  must 
conclude  that  men,  separated  from  each  other  by  ages,  etc.,  could  not 
unaided  have  gi\en  to  us  such  a  wonderful  combination,  bo  indefinite  as  to 
exact  time,  and  yet  so  definite  as  in  the  general  course  to  point  each  age  to 
a  future  that,  was  imminent.  Such  a  framework,  which  caused  the  early 
Church,  the  later  Fathers,  and  able  men  in  every  successive  century  to 
apprehend  the  nearness  of  the  Advent  and  events  following,  is  not  acci- 
dental. It  is  designed  by  the  Spirit  in  order  to  bring  forth  the  commanded 
posture  of  believers,  viz.  to  be  constantly  looking  Phil.  3  :  20  ;  Heb.  11  :  28  ; 
2  Pet.  ■'!  :  12,  14,  etc.)  forBuch  a  Coming  in  view  of  its  practical  influence  (as 
e.g.  Phil.  3  :  20  :  Col.  3  :  4,  5  ;  1  Tim.  6  :  14  ;  2  Tim.  4  : 1,  2,  8  ;  1  Pet,  5  :4.) 
of  its  being  the  great  hope  of  the  Church  (as  e.g.  Tit.  2  :  12,  13  ;  1  Pet.  1  : 
13  ;  Col.  2  :  4)  etc.  Suppose  that  a  precise  unmistakable  date  were  given  ; 
then  many  commands  (as  e.g.  Matt.  24  :  43-51  and  25  :  13  ;  Mark  13  :  33- 
37,  etc.)  could  not  be  observed  ;  then  those  exhortations  to  be  in  constant 
readiness  for  it  (as  e.g.  Luke  12  :  35,  36,  40,  and  21  :  34,  etc.)  would  lose 
their  force  ;  because  it  would  be  impossible  to  watch,  etc.,  as  the  Spirit 
enjoins  (for  our  personal  good)  until  the  time  stated  definitely  had  come. 
(Therefore  well-meaning  persons  who  give  positive  dates  in  so  far  violate 
Scripture,  and  do  injury  to  others,  because  instead  of  watching  every  day 
they  wait  for  specific  time,  etc.)  'Sow  the  singular  and  most  striking 
feature  in  the  matter  consists  in  this,  that  while  the  Spirit  gives  us  certain 
chronological  data,  yet  they  are  presented  in  such  a  manner  as  not  to  con- 
flict with  the  assigned  posture  of  constant  watching.  Hence,  we  have  not 
only  a  defence  for  the  logical  position  of  the  Primitive  Church  (aided  too, 
no  doubt  by  the  use  of  the  Sep.  chronology  which  made  the  end  much 
nearer)  but  an  excuse  even  for  that  class  of  writers  (as  Bengel,  Wes- 
ley. Klliott,  etc.)  who  approximative^  fixed  the  period  and  failed  in 
definite  time  ;  because  they  maintained  the  scriptural  injunction  of  con- 
stant looking  for  the  Advent,  etc.,  and  gave  their  views  as  to  time  simply 
as  an  opinion,  not  proven  but  uncertain,  without  denying  the  possibility 
of  an  instant,  immediate  Coming.  Surely  it  is  to  the  honor  of  commen- 
tators (as  e.g.  Barnes)  that  while  approximatively  fixing  the  time  of  the 
ushering  in  of  the  Millennial  age  (as  an  expression  of  opinion  when  dealing 
with  chronological  dates),  yet,  they  deem  even  such  an  approximation  so 
liable  to  mistake  that  in  other  portions  they  exhort  to  an  observance  of 
the  attitude  of  watching,  freely  and  fully  admitting  the  possibility  of 
Christ's    Coming  at  any  time.     From  the  arrangement,  therefore,  of  the 


Prop.  173.]  the  theocratic  kixgdom.  101 

Scriptures  in  that  chronology  and  the  command  to  constant  watchfulness 
sustain  each  other,  and  which  is  confirmed  by  the  experience  of  the  past, 
it  would  be  unreasonable  and  unscriptural  if  we  did  not  acquiesce  in  main- 
taining such  a  position  :  and,  in  view  of  our  want  of  definite  knowledge, 
insist  upon  it,  that  the  Advent  and  Kingdom  may  be  nigh  at  hand.  When 
the  apostolic  Fathers  wrote  (as  e.g.  Clement)  ';  Let  us  every  hour  expect 
the  Kingdom  of  God  ;"  When  the  Eeformers  (us  e.g.  Luther)  long  after  < 
said  :  "  Though  the  signs  may  seem  uncertain,  yet  no  man  can  despise 
them  without  danger  ;  seeing  there  can  be  not  only  no  danger,  but  also  great 
profit,  if,  reckoning  them  as  true,  thou  shalt  prepare  thyself  to  meet  thy 
Saviour  ;  that  is,  if,  bidding  farewell  to  present  things,  thou  shalt  be 
'wholly  taken  up  with  the  desire  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  that  is  Coming  ;" 
when  eminent  men  in  Europe,  America,  etc.,  at  this  day  proclaim  that 
"  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh  ;"  all  these  only  occupy  the  posi- 
tion and  maintain  the  attitude  assigned  to  believers. 

We  cannot  but  feel  that  as  at  the  First  Advent  there  was  a  widespread  opinion  that 
the  Messiah  should  come  (based  chiefly  on  chronology,  Dan.  9  :  2-4),  so  at  the  Second 
Advent  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the  same  result  to  follow.  It  is  a  matter  of  amazement 
that  even  unbelief,  pertinently  but  in  ignorance,  honors  this  scriptural  feature  by  appro- 
priating its  language  and  time.  Thus,  Woodhull  and  Claflin's  Weekly  (New  York,  1876) 
has  for  a  motto  on  the  first  page  :  "  In  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  the  mys- 
tery of  God  shall  be  finished."  Papers,  too,  from  which  we  do  not  expect  very  strong 
Pre-Millennial  assertions  occasionally  enforce  our  position.  Thus,  e.g.  "  An  Inquirer" 
in  the  Ch.  Union  (Jan.  2d,  1878)  asks  to  be  enlightened  respecting  the  hope  in  a  speedy 
Advent  expressed  by  the  Apostles.  The  editor  replies  :  "  The  Apostles  were  taught  by 
the  Lord  to  expect  His  Coming  ;  to  wait  and  watch  for  it.  What  He  said  to  them.  He 
also  says  to  us  :  '  What  I  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all,  Watch.'  But  it  was  not  disclosed 
to  them  any  more  than  it  is  to  us  when  that  Coming  should  take  place.  Christ  Himself 
did  not  know  (Mark  13  :  32).  Their  uncertainty  led  them  to  watch,  and  hope,  and 
expect,  not  with  certainty  but  with  yearning,  and  they  were  not  inspired  to  know  when 
it  should  be  ;  therefore  they  lived  in  perpetual  expectation.  They  lived  as  children  whose 
father  is  at  sea,  who  watch  every  day  for  his  coming,  hoping  from  day  to  day  because 
they  do  not  know  when  the  ship  will  come  in  "  The  same  paper  (Feb.,  1878)  in  reply  to 
what  the  Scriptures  teach  concerning  the  Sec.  Advent,  says  :  "  The  orthodoxy  which 
declares  that  Christ  cannot  come,  and  the  Sec.  Adventism  which  declares  that  He  must 
come  within  a  specified  time,  equally  run  counter  to  the  scriptural  command,  '  Be  ye 
also  ready,  for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  Man  cometh."  Certainly 
those  who  hold  such  sentiments  cannot  consistently  intervene  a  thousand  years  (Mill, 
era)  between  the  present  and  the  Advent  ;  and  they  cannot  with  propriety — if  practically 
believed — preach  "  peace  and  safety."  Sir  Th.  Browne  (Religio  Medici,  sec.  45)  quaintly 
remarks  :  "  I  believe  the  world  grows  near  its  end  ;  yet  is  neither  old  nor  decayed,  nor 
will  ever  perish  upon  the  ruin  of  its  own  principles."  (He  advocated  mutation,  and  de- 
clared it  impossible  for  any  one  to  fix  the  precise  time  of  the  change,  etc.)  The  Earl  of 
Carlisle  (The  Sec.  Vision  of  Dan.)  only  expresses  the  opinion  of  a  multitude,  when  he 
affirms  :  "  The  high  probability,  when  this  chapter  is  viewed  in  connection  with  the 
associated  prophecies  and  chronologies  of  the  Book  of  Daniel  and  of  the  Revelation,  is  that 
we  are  even  now  upon  the  threshold  of  great  events,  and  of  the  close  of  our  present 
economy."     (See  next  Prop.,  where  others  are  given.) 

Obs.  7.  It  is  suitable  in  this  connection  to  advert  to  the  methods  by 
which  the  scripturally  enjoined  posture  of  watching  for  the  Advent  (which 
precedes  the  Kingdom)  is  violated.  (1)  This  is  done  by  those  who  either 
locate  such  an  Advent  in  the  past  (as  e.g.  at  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  etc.) 
or  else  spiritualize  it  away  as  something  constantly  taking  place  in  the 
Church,  or  as  something  very  different  from  the  biblical  descriptions  of  it. 
It  is  not  necessary,  in  view  of  previous  Propositions,  to  dwell  upon  this 
point.     (2)  Others  interpose  between  this  and  the  possible  occurrence  of  the 


102  THE  TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  173. 

Advent  a  definite  date.  Cheerfully  admitting  that  in  Commentaries,  Expo- 
sitions, etc.,  in  which  prophetical  dates  are  necessarily  involved,  it  is  emi- 
nently proper  to  discuss  and  explain  them  within  the  limits  of  probability, 
yet  this  is  very  different  from  that  positive,  dogmatic  assertion  that  such 
or  such  a  date  is  the  correct  one,  and  that  consequently  the  Advent  can 
only  take  place  at  such  a  fixed  time.  It  will  be  found,  too,  that  the  more 
positive  this  class  is,  the  less  credence  are  we  to  bestow  upon  them,  because 
they  evidently  are  unacquainted  with  the  difficulties  pertaining  to  their  sub- 
ject. Nearly  all  writers  upon  chronology  and  prophetical  dates  have 
manifested  commendable  modesty,  and  while  giving  in  their  judgment  an 
approximation  to  the  truth,  do  not  conceal  from  themselves  or  readers  the 
diiliculties  connected  with  the  subject.  To  this  class  our  remarks  do  not 
apply,  for  it  is  only  the  former,  who,  by  such  positiveness,  do  injury  to 
the  truth  :  first,  by  leading  men  away  from  a  daily  looking  for  the 
Advent  to  a  'particular  time  for  such  watching  :  and,  secondly,  by  causing 
those  who  have  but  a  slight  knowledge  of  prophecy  to  turn  away  from  the 
"whole  subject  through  disgust,  etc.,  induced  by  the  failures  in  positive 
time.  If  moderation  should  characterize  writings  upon  any  subject  what- 
ever, it  certainly  ought  to  be  upon  this  one.1  (3)  Others  again  interpose 
between  us  and  the  Advent  the  fulfilment  of  certain  events  as  prerequisites. 
We  are  thus  led  to  watch  for  these  events  instead  of  looking  for  the 
Advent  ;  and  the  latter  instead  of  being  liable,  as  the  Scriptures  repre- 
sent, to  come  at  any  lime  (so  to  us  on  account  of  the  hick  of  definite  knowl- 
edge, but  to  God  a  definite  time),  cannot  possibly  take  place  without  the 
previous  arrival  of  forerunning  events.  Having  already  shown  how  this 
mistake  arises  (viz.  by  looking  only  at  the  last  stage  of  this  Advent  before 
the  ushering  in  of  the  Mill,  age),  it  is  sufficient  now  to  say,  that  it  virtu- 
ally neutralizes  commands  directly  appertaining  to  the  Advent,  and  for 
this  Advent  substitutes  other  particulars.  This  is  misleading  (however, 
honestly  and  sincerely  intended),  and  causes  many  to  interpose  several 
events,  as  certain  to  happen  between  the  present  time  and  Sec.  Coming, 
thus  delaying  the  latter.  It  is  significant,  and  we  most  gladly  record  it, 
that  writers  of  ability  in  this  and  other  countries,  are  so  impressed  with 
this  point,  that  they  insist  upon  it,  that  no  event  whatever  is  to  be  thus 
interposed  lest  it  prove  "  a  snare"  to  put  us  off  our  guard.  Indeed,  we 
may  add,  that  the  Coming  of  Eljiah  as  promised  in  Mai.  4  :  5,  G — upon 
which  some  lay  so  much  stress  as  a  positive  interposition  of  a  coming  event 
before  (as  a  Forerunner)  the  Sec.  Advent — is  something  that  folloios  the  first 
stage  of  the  Advent.  It  cannot  precede  for  a  number  of  reasons,  among 
which  are  these  :  that  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  secret,  concealed 
Advent  of  Christ;  that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  state  of  faith  and 
nn preparedness,  etc.,  of  the  Church  and  world  ;  that  it  would  violate  the 
order  of  events  alleged  as  preceding  the  Advent,  as  e.g.  in  the  actual 
condition  of  the  Jews,  etc.  The  truth  seems  to  be,  that  Eljiah  is  a  Fore- 
runner of  Jesus,  not  to  the  Gentiles  but,  as  John,  to  the  Jewish  nation; 
his  mission  pertains  to  them  exclusively,  'and  has  no  reference  whatever 
to  the  Church  as  now  constituted.  Hence,  observing  the  condition  of  the 
Jews  down  to  this  first  stage  of  the  Advent,  which  shows  that  no  such 
mission  has  to  that  time  been  undertaken  among  them  (the  proof  is  that 
they  are  to  suffer  fearfully  under  the  Antichrist,  being  also  left  for  this 
purpose),  we  conclude,  that  Eljiali's  Coming  is  at  some  period  during  the 
interval  between  the  first  and  last  stages  of  the  Advent  (and  we  strongly 


Prop.  173.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  103 

incline  to  the  opinion  but  a  short  time  before  the  last  stage)  in  order  to 
prepare  the  Jews  for  the  open  visible  manifestation  of  the  King  with  His 
saints.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  nature  of  the  first  stage  of  the  Advent, 
which  is  designed  specially  for  the  Church,  and  is  only  preparative  for 
what  follows  respecting  the  nation.  Thus,  in  brief,  it  will  be  found,  by 
comparison  of  the  Word,  that  every  event  which  is  alleged  to  precede  the 
Advent,  and  is  really  sustained  by  Scripture  as  something  to  take  place, 
finds  its  appropriate  location  during  this  interval.3  (4)  Others,  however, 
not  content  with  simply  interposing  a  few  events  between  the  present  and 
the  Advent,  actually  include  the  entire  Millennial  era  as  elapsing  before  the 
Sec.  Advent  can  be  reasonably  expected.  As  this  is  a  popular  view  and 
extensively  prevailing,  it  will  be  proper  to  illustrate  the  inconsistency  which 
it  entails  in  interpreting  the  Scripture  relating  to  the  last  things.  For 
this  purpose  we  again  select  Barnes's  Com.  (because  of  its  popularity  and 
the  high  standing,  correctly  too,  of  its  amiable  author),  directing  atten- 
tion e.g.  to  his  comments  upon  Phil.  3  :  20.  After  describing  it  as  "  one 
of  the  characteristics  of  the  Christian  that  he  believes  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
will  return  from  heaven,  and  that  he  looks  anil  waits  for  it  ;"  that  this 
was  the  firm  belief  and  attitude  of  the  early  Christians — a  leading  doctrine 
resultant  in  good — and  that  "  it  may  be  asked,  with  great  force,  whether 
Christians  in  general  have  now  any  such  expectation  of  the  second  appear- 
ing of  the  Lord  Jesus,  or  whether  they  have  not  fallen  into  the  dangerous 
error  of  prevailing  unbelief,  so  that  the  expectation  of  His  Coming  is 
allowed  to  exert  almost  no  influence  upon  the  soul,"  he  proceeds  to  con- 
trast such  unbelief  and  refusal  to  look  for  the m  Advent  with  the  early 
Church,  and  then  adds  :  "  So  we  should  look,"  but  neutralizes  the  whole 
by  asserting  that  this  relates  only  to  looking  for  a  Sec.  Advent  without 
reference  to  the  time  of  that  Coming.  For,  his  Com.  develops  the  theory 
of  an  intervening  Millennium  followed  by  the  Sec.  Advent.  Such  a  passage, 
therefore,  he  correctly  explains  but  shifts  it  in  order  to  fit,  if  possible,  his 
Millennial  theory.  There  are,  however,  passages  which  he  cannot  thus 
reconcile,  and  the  attempt  is  not  made  to  do  this,  as  e.g.  1  Thess.  5  :  5,  6, 
"  But  let  us  watch,  that  is,  for  the  Coming  of  the  Lord.  Let  us  regard 
it  as  an  event  which  is  certainly  to  occur;  and  which  may  occur  at  any 
moment,''''  etc.  :  Tit.  2  :  13,  "we  are  to  be  in  a  posture  of  expectation,  not 
knowing  when  He  will  come,"  etc.  (comp.  his  comments  on  2  Pet.  3  :  12 
etc.).  Accepting  of  his  comments  thus  given  it  is  simply  impossible  to 
expect  the  Advent  to  take  place  "  at  any  moment"  with  the  reservation  of 
at  least  an  intervening  one  thousand  years.3  The  same  exhortations  to 
watch,  etc.,  for  the  Advent,  while  a  Millennial  age  is  advocated  to  precede 
it,  is  to  be  found  in  various  commentaries,  and  not  one  of  them  endeavors 
to  reconcile  or  remove  the  involved  self-contradiction.  This  much,  how- 
ever, we  learn  from  the  admissions  and  concessions  forced  upon  writers, 
who  would  gladly  for  the  sake  of  theory  not  make  them,  that  the  King- 
dom of  the  prophets  is  not  so  distant  but  what  the  events  preceding  it  may 
suddenly  burst  upon  us  "  at  any  moment."* 

1  While  running  into  an  extreme  yet  we  may  admire  at  least  the  spirit  of  a  certain 
Rabinnical  interdiction,  designed  to  remove  an  evil.  To  check  the  rise  of  false  Messiahs 
and  a  morbid  curiosity  respecting  the  time  of  the  Messiah's  Advent,  some  writers  tell  us 
that  an  interdict  was  repeated  at  one  time  in  the  synagogues.  "  Cursed  is  he  who  calcu- 
lates the  time  of  the  Messiah's  Coming."  This,  however,  did  not  preclude  a  constant 
lookiDg  for  His  Coming.     Again,  we  have  noticed,  that  if  a  Millenarian  has  fallen  into 


104  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  173. 

some  error  respecting  date,  it  is  jubilantly  seized  and  paraded  by  a  class  of  religious 
papers  us  the  strongest  evidence  that  the  whole  Chiliastic  scheme  or  doctrine  is  unworthy 
of  credence  ;  but  these  papers  are  careful  never  to  allude  to  the  failures  of  Iheir  own  class, 
commentators,  etc.,  in  this  field,  as  e.g.  in  reference  to  the  nearness  of  the  Mill  age,  etc. 
The  fact  is,  that  such  failures  prove  nothing  respecting  the  doctrine  of  either  parly,  but 
pertain  solely  to  the  then  one  point,  viz.,  chronological  subject  in  hand. 

'2  We  are  forced  to  differ  from  many  esteemed  writers,  not  being  able  to  accept  either 
of  the  dates,  or  the  events,  that  they  intervene  between  the  present  and  the  Second 
Advent.  Some  interpreters  most  confidently  inform  us  that  certain  events  (as  e.g.  the 
pouring  out  of  some  vials,  the  formation  of  the  confederation,  the  gathering  of  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  etc.)  must  first  transpire  before  the  Advent.  The  favorite  event  with  many 
is  the  restoration  of  the  Jews.  To  illustrate  the  latter  :  Wilson  (Proph.  Times,  July,  1877, 
p.  1G7)  in  answer  to  the  question,  "  Do  you  think  our  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  before  the 
restoration  of  Israel  ?"  says,  ' '  No.  His  Coming  to  take  His  saints  out  of  the  earth  will  not 
take  place  till  this  dispensation  ends,  and  this  dispensation  will  not  end  till  Israel  is 
restored.  The  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nationality  will  be  effected  before  the  Coming  of 
the  Lord,  but  how  long  before  no  one  can  tell.  And  it  will  be  to  all  true  believers  the  svjn 
that  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  is  near,  even  at  the  doors.  When  it  does  take  place  we  Mill 
lift  up  our  heads  with  rejoicing."  This  is  misleading,  directing  our  watching  to  signs 
intervening  and  not  to  the  Advent.  It  contains  several  errors.  (1)  Christ's  Coming  is 
most  certainly  befon  this  dispensation  ends,  as  seen  e.g.  in  the  removal  of  saints,  in  the 
preparative  acts,  in  the  existing  Gentile  domination  overthrown  after  His  Coming,  etc. 
(2)  He  mistakes  the  partial  restoration  before  the  open  manifestation,  which  according  to 
Zechariah  is  doomed  to  sore  tribulation,  for  the  restoration  which  follows  the  Advent 
under  the  Messiah  (for  proof,  see  PropB.  Ill,  112,  113,  161,  etc.).  ('.i)  This  dispensation 
will  not  end  until  Antichrist  is  destroyed,  until  the  restoration  under  the  Messiah  per- 
sonally is  ell. cted,  until  the  covenanted  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  is  restored,  etc., 
and  the  Advent  necessarily  precedes  these  events.  (4)  Even  the  partial  restoration  of  the 
Jewish  nation  under  the  ausjnces  of  some  nation  has  no  chronological  connection  with 
the  thief-like  Coming  of  Christ.  (5)  Jesus  comes  in  "  tin;  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  hence 
in  this  dispensation.  (6)  Jesus  removes  saints  from  a  coming  persecution,  hence  in  this 
dispensation.  (7)  Christ  comes  icith  His  saints  in  aid  of  a  partially  restored  nation, 
hence  in  this  dispensation.  (8)  The  thief-like  Coming  is  not  discoverable  by  a  particular 
sign,  but  is  impressed  by  general  ones  (for  proof,  next  Prop.).  If  persons  incautiously 
wait  tor  this  alleged  sign,  they  may  and  will  be  most  wofully  deceived.  We  dare  not 
substitute  anything  in  place  <>t'  the  Advent. 

3  Barnes,  as  well  as  other  commentators,  involve  themselves  in  numerous  inconsisten- 
cies. In  order  to  their  future  avoidance  it  is  thus  requisite  to  notice  them.  To  present 
another  illustration  :  On  ltev.  10  :  7  Barnes  fully  admits  that  "  Then  at  the  time  when 
the  seventh  angel  should  sound — would  be  the  consummation  of  all  things."  This  view 
is  repeated  on  Rev.  1 1  :  15,  etc.  But  if  this  is  so,  he  forgets  to  inform  us  why,  according 
to  his  theory  of  a  lengthy  Millennial  period  intervening,  such  a  vast  disproportion  in 
time  should  exist  between  this  and  former  trumpets;  why,  if  the  consummation  then 
takes  place,  it  should  be  postponed  for  thousands  of  years  ;  why,  if  the  Millennial  glory 
thus  precedes  "  the  end,"  there  should  be  such  a  consummation  as  he  advocates  to  fol- 
low, etc.     Suoh  discrepancies  are  conveniently  ignored,  although  hostile  to  his  theory. 

4  Wilson  (Proph.  limes,  Jul}',  1877,  p.  168),  in  order  to  invalidate  our  position,  utters 
the  following  half  truth,  viz.,  that  "  the  Coming  of  Christ  is  not  capricious,  that  '  it  may 
occur  at  any  moment  ; '  it  is  a  fixed  event  which  cannot  take  place  until  the  time  appointed." 
This  is  true  so  far  as  God  is  concerned,  for  He,  knowing  definitely  the  time,  cannot  look 
for  it  at  "  any  moment."  This  feature  we  have  fully  advocated,  and  repeatedly  shown 
that  it  cannot  occur  until  certain  times  and  events,  known  definitely  only  to  God,  are  ful- 
filled. But  this  is  not  true  of  man,  for  owing  to  his  lack  of  knowledge  it  may  to  him 
"  occur  at  any  moment."  Man  indeed  cannot  hasten  or  retard  it,  and  this  very  feature 
confirms  our  position.  The  principal  passage  that  Wilson  relies  on  to  make  the  Advent 
subsequent  to  this  dispensation  is  Matt.  24  :  14.  But  this  Scripture  does  not  embrace 
his  order  ;  it  only  shows  the  end  to  come  without  giving  the  manner  how  it  is  to  be 
brought  about.  In  other  passages  we  firui  that  the  Advent  itself  is  one  of  the  means  to 
introduce  "  the  end."  All  that  the  passage  teaches  is  that  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
as  a  witness  precedes  "  the  end."  Hence  on  page  184  to  enforce  his  interpretation  he 
makes  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  to  end  before  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  ;  but  that  this  is 
a  wrong  inference  is  self-evident  from  the  simple  fact  that  after  Christ's  open  manifesta- 
tion a  fearful  Gentile  domination,  crushing  God's  people,  exists,  and  that  Jesus  Himself, 
after  His  Revelation,  ends  the  Gentile  times. 


Prop.  173.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  105 

Obs.  8.  That  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures  is  the  only  correct  one, 
which  can  truly  and  freely  accept  of  all  the  divine  utterances  without  the 
least  attempt  to  soften  them,  or  to  explain  them  away,  or  to  receive  them 
with  a  sort  of  mental  reservation.  The  test  in  this  case  is  the  incorpora- 
tion of  and  using  without  contradiction,  the  identical  phraseology  of  the 
Bible.  Any  theory  which  cannot  do  this,  is  most  certainly  defective,  and 
open  to  the  gravest  objection  ;  especially  is  this  true  of  the  last  things  in 
view  of  the  mighty  issues  resulting  therefrom.  An  Eschatology  which 
leaves  out  the  biblical  exhortations  respecting  the  nearness  of  the  day  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our  duty  to  watch  for  it,  really  takes  the  life 
out  of  the  subject,  and  gives  us  but  a  cold  dead  body  for  faith  and  hope  to 
grasp.  Those  who  do  this,  strive  to  make  amends  by  so  exalting  the 
intermediate  state  and  the  condition  of  the  saints,  that  if  we  were  to  credit 
them,  the  Advent  itself  is  of  comparatively  little  consequence  so  far  as  the 
increased  happiness  and  honor  of  the  saints  is  concerned.  This  however 
is  anti-scriptural,  and  hence  we  reject  all  theories  which  would  disparage 
or  lower,  or  set  aside  "the  blessed  hope,''  and  the  language  employed  in 
reference  to  it.  Our  position  is  one  that  cordially  embraces  the  exact 
phraseology  of  the  Bible,  and  glories  in  the  same.  It  is  precisely  the  one 
exemplified  in  the  history  of  the  early  Church,  so  that  to-day  we  can  say 
with  Clement  (First  Epis.,  ch.  35)  :  "  Let  us  therefore  earnestly  strive  to 
be  found  in  the  number  of  those  that  wait  for  Him,  in  order  that  we  may 
share  in  the  promised  gifts,"  or,  (Sec.  Epis.  ch.  12)  "  Let  us  expect, 
therefore,  hour  by  hour  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  love  and  righteousness, 
since  /re  know  not  the  day  of  the  appearing  of  God."  The  adoption  of 
Scripture  phraseology  with  hearts  of  faith,  the  cordial  reception  and  belief 
in  the  language  given  by  inspired  men,  leads  us  to  the  same  logical  posi- 
tion occupied  by  the  primitive  Church. 

Hence  we  admire  the  faithfulness  of  the  Reformers  and  others  in  insisting  upon  and 
retaining  the  biblical  idea  of  constant  watching  for  the  Advent.  Thus  (quoted  Lange's 
Com.  Thess.,  p.  87)  e.g.  "  Zwvngli:  The  Lord  hides  from  us  this  day,  that  we  may  contin- 
ually watch,  ami  never  relax  through  ease  and  the  immoderate  desire  of  pleasure  ;  Calvin: 
that  we  may  stand  ever  upon  the  icatch."  So  Burkitt  :  "That  we  maybe  on  our  watch 
every  hour.  .  .  .  No  hour  when  wo  can  promise  ourselves  that  He  will  not  come." 
For  expressions  from  Luther,  Melanchthon,  etc.,  see  Barnes's  Rev.,  p.  292,  etc.,  Elliott's 
llorce  Apoc,  Lord's  Apoc,  Seiss's  Last  Times,  Taylor's  Voice  of  the  Church,  Time  of  the  End, 
by  aCongregationalist,  Bickersteth's  Guide,  Brookes' s  El.  Proph.  lnterp.,  Michelet's  Life  of 
Luther,  B.  2,  ch.  5,  and  also  pp.  255,  257,  290,  342,  344-45,  etc.  See  likewise  an  art.  in 
The  Presbyterian,  July  6th,  1881,  entitled,  "  John  Knox,"  in  which  is  given  Knox's  belief 
(drawn  from  The  His.  of  the  Martyrs,  Epitomized,  2  vols.,  1747)  in  the  nearness  of  the 
Advent,  in  the  duty  of  believers  to  watch  and  pray,  and  look  for  the  speedy  Coming  ;  and 
in  its  power  to  console  the  Church,  being  a  blessed  hope. 

Obs.  9.  The  student  who  passes  over  the  history  of  the  Church,  keeping 
in  view  the  utterances  of  her  eminent  leading  minds  respecting  the  near- 
ness of  the  end,  will  be  surprised  at  the  lengthy  catalogue  presented.  In- 
deed we  have  books  (such  as  Taylor's  Voice  of  the  Church,  Tlie  Time  of  the 
End,  by  a  Congregationalist,  Bickersteth's  Guide  to  the  Prophecies,  Seiss's 
Last  Times,  etc.),  which  give  us  hundreds  of  names,  taken  from  all 
denominations,  proclaiming  this  nearness.  The  reader  is  referred  to  such 
works  for  extracts  indicative  of  the  same.  Having  alluded  to  many  under 
the  Props,  pertaining  to  the  history  of  Millennial  doctrine,  we  may  briefly 
say  here  that  such  an  expectation  is  far  from  being  confined  to  Millenarians. 
Thus  e.g.  even  many  of  those  who  make  the  Millennium  in  Bev.  20  spiritual 


106  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  173. 

and  already  past,  still  hold  to  the  view  expressed  by  Bishop  Hall  (Bicker- 
steth's  Guide,  p.  184)  :  "  For  my  part,  I  am  persuaded  in  my  soul,  that  the 
Coming  of  our  Saviour  is  near  at  hand."  Many  also  who  rigidly  hold  to 
the  teaching  of  Luther,  or  to  that  of  the  Fathers  as  Augustine,  Chrysostom, 
Jerome,  etc.,  still  declare  with  Luther  (Walch's  Luth.,  13  vols.  Cols.  34-43 
on  Luke  21  :  25-30)  "  the  Lord  admonishes  us  Christians  not  to  place  the 
date  of  our  lives  here  upon  the  earth,  but  to  know  that  our  Lord  and  Re- 
deemer shall  come  from  heaven,  and  thus  be  prepared  every  hour  to  expect 
His  Coming  ;  likewise,  that  we  should  be  but  half,  and  with  the  left  hand, 
in  this  world,  while  with  the  right  hand,  and  with  the  whole  heart,  we  are 
in  ivaiting  for  that  day  when  our  Lord  shall  come  in  His  glorious  majesty 
and  power,  which  no  man  can  describe."  "  Let  us  have  respect  to  the 
words  of  Christ  and  expect  His  Coming,"  etc.  (Comp.  Barnes's  JVotes  on 
Rev.  10  :  G. )  Besides  this  large  class,  there  is  another  still  larger,  who, 
while  spiritualizing  the  Millennium  and  locating  it  in  the  future,  yet, 
frankly  admit  the  possibility  of  the  nearness  of  the  Advent,  etc.,  by  exhort- 
ing to  a  constant  watchfulness  for  the  same.  Having  already  illustrated 
this  feature  from' the  writings  of  Albert  Barnes,  the  reader  is  directed  to 
another  drawn  from  Dr.  David  Brown  (the  more  valuable,  since  he  has 
specially  written  against  the  Millcnarian  doctrine),  in  his  work,  Christ's 
Sec.  Coming.  In  this  work  we  are  expressly  assured  (p.  27-29)  that  in 
reference  to  the  Millennial  period,  "  the  same  uncertainty  overhangs  this  as 
all  the  great  periods  of  the  Divine  economy  ;"  and  he  informs  us  (p.  32-33) 
that  it  is  a  plain  Scriptural  injunction  to  look,  wail,  watch  and  pray  for  the 
coming  of  Christ,  quoting  Wodrow  approvingly  :  "  Hence  Ave  are  com- 
manded to  be  looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the  Coming  of  the  day  of  God  ; 
hence  it  is  the  closing  prayer  of  the  Church,  '  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus  ;' 
and  hence  it  should  be  often  the  prayer  of  believers,  individually  and  col- 
lectively, '  Make  haste,  my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart 
upon  the  mountain  of  spices.'  "  Literally,  volumes  could  be  filled  with 
the  testimony  given  by  able  divines  and  scholars  upon  this  subject.  The 
commentaries  of  greatest  ability  such  as  Bengel's  Gnomon,  Olshausen, 
Alford,  Lange,  Meyer,  Stier,  Greswell,  Ebrard,  and  others,  now  in  general 
use,  are  so  well  known  to  be  in  sympathy  with  our  views  in  this  respect 
that  it  is  unnecessary  to  quote  passages  from  them.  The  same  is  true  of 
the  class  in  a  measure  superseded  by  others,  but  still  containing  much  that 
is  valuable,  such  as  Clarke's,  Gill's,  Coke's,  Calvin's,  Benson's  Henry's, 
Wesley's,  and  others,  which  present  exhortations  to  a  constant  watching  for 
the  Advent,  that  can  only  be  grounded  (also  expressed)  on  a  belief  in  its 
nearness,  or  that  it  may  take  place  at  any  time.  It  would  be  a  pleasure, 
had  we  space,  to  present  extracts  from  these,  and  many  others,  whose 
praise  is  in  all  the  churches.  The  intelligent  reader,  no  doubt  is  aware, 
that  the  ablest  of  scholars  and  divines  both  in  this  country  and  Europe, 
have  expressed  the  decided  opinion  that  we  are  rapidly  nearing  the  end  of 
this  dispensation,  or  approaching  the  greatest  crisis  in  the  world's  history. 
In  recent  books,  tracts,  and  periodicals,  lengthy  communications  and  ex- 
tracts appear  from  such  men  as  Candlish,  Newton,  Hitchcock,  Spurgeon, 
Duff,  Archd.  Browne,  Bh.  Tillotson,  Tyng,  Bonars,  Bh.  Chase,  Krum- 
macher,  Elliott,  Faber,  Bh.  Mellvaine,  Wilson,  Duflield,  Stephenson,  Bh. 
Henshaw,  in  brief,  from  hundreds  representing  various  denominations  and 
forms  of  belief,  but  all  united  in  the  proclamation  of  the  nearness  of 
Christ's  Coming,  and  insisting  upon  our  occupying  the  posture  of  watching 


PEOP.  173.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  107 

servants.  Many  of  these  extracts,  etc.,  we  have  verified  by  actual  refer- 
ence ;  others  we  receive  upon  the  authority  of  reliable  writers.  The  time 
has  gone  by,  in  view  of  such  unanimity  among  the  intelligent  and  learned, 
for  any  one  to  discard  the  subject  as  one  confined  simply  to  a  party  or  sect, 
or  as  one  the  result  of  ignorance  and  folly.  Wlien  authors  like  Auberlen, 
Delitzsch,  Kurtz,  Hofman,  Luthart,  Van  Oosterzee  and  others,  do  not 
hesitate  to  express  themselves  decidedly  as  favoring  the  shortness  of  time 
between  us  and  the  Advent  ;  when  leading  preachers  (as  Cummings,  Tyng, 
McXeile,  Noel,  Cox,  Dallas,  Gordon,  Demarest,  Forsyth,  etc.),  pointedly 
preach  the  speedy  Advent  ;  wl/en  able  popular  writers  (as  Kyle,  Trench, 
Birks,  Stier,  Brookes,  Margoliouth,  Tregelles,  McCaul,  etc.),  make  the 
nearness  to  the  Advent  "  the  generation  truth  ;"  when  ecclesiastical  bodies 
(as  e.g.  Pan- Anglican  Conf.  held  at  Lambeth  and  embracing  such  biblical 
scholars,  etc.,  as  Trench  and  Bhs.  Ellicott,  Wilberforce,  Browne,  Selwyn, 
Talbot,  Lay  Quintard,  etc.),  solemnly  in  a  synodieal  letter  declare, 
"  Brethren  beloved,  with  one  voice  we  warn  you  ;  the  time  is  short ;  the  Lord 
cometh  ;  watch  and  be  sober;"  when  many  of  the  faithful  sons  of  the 
Church  plant  themselves  on  the  Scriptural  basis  announced  by  Candlish 
iLcct.  on  Genesis,  Lect.  17)  :  "  Looking  for  Christ  now  is  waiting  for 
Him  with  '  loins  girt  and  lamps  bur ning.'  It  is  watching  also,  as  not 
knowing  at  what  hour  the  Master  may  come  ;  but  yet  '  knowing  the  time, 
that  now  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep,'  (liom.  13  :  11)  " — surely 
even  the  gathered  testimony  of  so  many  of  God's  people,  running  con- 
tinuously from  the  early  Church  down  to  the  present,  and  becoming  within 
the  last  twenty  years  intensified  (as  evidenced  by  the  numerous  books, 
pamphlets,  tracts,  periodicals,  etc.,  published  in  order  to  uphold  it),  cor- 
roborates our  position — being  in  accord  with  Bible  language  and  command 
—  viz.,  that  the  Advent  and,  as  a  result,  the  Kingdom  may  be  nigh  at 
hand.1  As  already  intimated,  the  lapse  of  time,  since  this  expectation  was 
excited  in  believers,  should  certainly  cause  us  to  infer,  that  we  living  at 
this  period  ought  to  feel  that  "  the  little  while7'  of  Paul  (Heb.  10  :  37)  has 
certainly  been  greatly  diminished,  and  this,  adopting  the  inference  of  the 
same  apostle  (Heb.  10  :  25),  "  so  much  the  more  as  ye  see  the  day  ajiproach- 
ing."  * 

1  Even  the  Jews  believe  (the  orthodox  portion)  that  the  time  of  their  restitution  is  not 
far  distant,  and  that  the  Coming  of  the  Messiah  is  near.  In  various  publications  have 
we  noticed  this  belief  expressed,  as  e.g.  in  Miss,  of  Inq.  to  the  Jews,  p.  13,  it  is  said  that 
the  Jews  in  Jerusalem  have  a  strong  hope  of  Messiah's  soon  Coming.  In  several  places 
the  same  hope  was  stated,  as  entertained,  to  the  Committee  of  Inquiry.  Some  Jewish 
Rabbis  in  Russia  and  other  places  (p.  402)  take  advantage  of  this  belief  in  a  speedy 
Coming  of  the  Messiah  in  the  way  of  exalting  themselves  as  special  favorites  of  that 
Messiah  who  shall  visit,  stay  with  them,  etc.  Some  even  as  Bauske  in  Courland  (men- 
tioned by  Colman  Miss.)  and  others,  pretend  to  be  a  sort  of  forerunners.  Rabbi  Sol. 
Spitzer,  of  Vienna,  has  published  (so  Luth.  Observer  of  Aug.  9th,  1872)  the  decisions  of 
four  hundred  Rabbis  of  Germany,  Austria,  and  Russia,  who  all  agree  that  the  "  omission 
of  prayers  for  the  Advent  of  the  Messiah  and  the  restoration  of  the  sacrifices,  involves  a 
denial  of  the  heavenly  promises,  and  that  those  who  omit  such  prayers  are  not  allowed 
to  become  members  of  the  religious  body."  Rabbi  Carillon,  of  Jamaica  Island,  affirms 
(Proph.  Times,  vol.  1,  p.  3)  that  "  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  latter  days  aro 
not  far  off  ;  let  us,  therefore,  be  on  the  watch  and  in  continual  prayer."  The  same  is 
said  to  be  the  position  of  Rabbi  Sol.  Herschel,  of  London,  and  of  others.  The  writer 
noticed  that  in  the  reception  of  a  convert  by  the  Jewish  synagogue  through  the  Rabbi 
Messing  (described  in  Nathaniel,  vol.  13,  p.  18,  19)  at  Chicago,  Feb.  20th,  1869,  one  of  the 
questions  asked  was  the  following :  "  Are  you  acquainted  with  the  Articles  of  Faith  of 
our  nation  ?"     The  reply  of  the  candidate  was  in  the  affirmative,  and  as  evidence  the 


108  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  173. 

articles  were  repeated,  one  reading  :  "  I  believe  with  a  perfect  faith,  that  the  Messiah 
will  come,  and,  although  His  Coming  will  be  delayed,  I  will  still  in  daily  hope  patiently 
await  His  appearance."  (Comp.  Forty  Years  in  the  Turkish  Empire,  Goodell's  memoirs  by 
Prime,  p.  241  ;  Bead's  God  in  History,  p.  353  ;  the  "  Chasidim  or  Pietists,"  art.  on,  Ency. 
Bel.  Knowl.  ;  Gibbon's  Bed.  and  Fall,  vol.  2,  p.  4  ;  The  Life  of  Leila  Ada,  p.  24  and  33,  who 
says  respecting  the  nearness  of  the  Messianic  Advent  expressed  by  some  Babbis,  "  that 
this  feeling  is  becoming  very  general  among  Jews  in  Germany  and  other  parts  of  Europe, 
and  also  in  Africa  ;  art.  "  Caraites,"  Ency.  Eel.  Knowl.,  etc.).  Periodicals  like  Nathaniel, 
The  Proph.  News,  The  Proph.  Times,  etc.,  contain  various  quotations  and  references  in- 
dicative of  such  a  feeling  existing. 

8  We  may  conclude  with  Lange's  declaration  (Matt.  p.  430)  :  "  '  Therefore  be 
ye  also  ready — Because  it  is  the  fundamental  law  of  watchfulness  to  be  always  watch- 
ing ;  and  because  the  Son  of  Man  will  be  generally  unexpected  when  He  comes— therein 
like  a  thief  in  the  night,  that  is,  at  a  time  when  the  world  will  be  buried  in  profound 
sleep."  The  contemplation  and  study  of  these  things  ought,  therefore,  to  excite  no 
prejudice  in  the  mind  of  a  believer.  We  give  as  illustrative  of  this  spirit  the  injunctions 
of  two  writers,  one  a  Post  and  the  other  a  Pre-Millenarian.  Scott  (Com.  Eev.  1  :  3),  even 
in  reference  to  the  most  difficult  and  the  most  decided  of  prophecies,  remarks  :  it 
"  seems  to  have  been  prophetically  intended  to  obviate  or  answer  the  objections,  and 
obliquy,  and  ridicule  which  would,  in  after  ages,  be  raised  against  the  study  of  this  mys- 
terious book,  and  all  endeavors  to  bring  others  acquainted  with  it."  Craven  (Lange's 
Com.,  Eev.  1  :  3)  says  :  "  These  words  imply  the  duty  of  striving  to  understand— a  duty 
still  further  implied  by  the  direction  to  keep.  How  can  that  be  kept  which  is  not  under- 
stood? There  are  those  who  refrain  from  the  study  of  unfulfilled  prophecy  upon  the 
ground  that  '  the  prophecies  -were  not  designated  to  make  us  prophets.'  This  is  true  ; 
but  a  prophet  is  one  thing,  and  an  understander  of  prophecy  is  another.  There  is, 
indeed,  a  curious  prying  into  things  not  revealed,  an  effort  to  make  determinate  those 
times  and  seasons  which  our  Lord  has  expressly  declared  are  (for  us)  left  indeterminate 
(comp.  Matt.  24  :  36,  Acts  1  :  7).  Such  conduct,  however,  is  entirely  different  from  the 
reverential,  prayerful  study  of  the  Word  as  revealed.  It  should  be  remembered  that  our 
Lord  rebuked  the  Jews  and  His  disciples  for  not  understanding  the  prophecies  relating 
to  His  First  Advent  (comp.  John  5  :  39,  46  ;  Luke  11  :  52  ;  Matt.  16  :  3  ;  Luke  24  :  25)  ; 
and  that  His  last  great  eschatologieal  discourse  was  delivered  that  His  people  might  be 
forewarned  (comp.  Matt.  24  :  4,  15,  24,  25,  33),  the  implication,  of  course,  being  that  it 
'should  h<>  studied.  It  is  not  intended  by  these  remarks  to  assert  that  a  full  and  complete 
understanding  of  all  prophecies  will  be  attained  to,  by  all  who  faithfully  study  ;  their 
design  is  to  set  forth  the  duty  of  study.  Doubtless  many  things  will  remain  dark  to  the 
must,  earnest  students,  even  to  the  beginning  of  the  end  ;  it  may  be  confidently  believed, 
however,  that  to  such  much  important  knowledge  will  be  vouchsafed  which  will  be  withheld 
from  the  negligent  ;  and,  furthermore,  that  all  knowledge  expedient  for  them  to  possess 
will  be  granted."  Some  indeed  press  scriptural  language  beyond  its  intent  in  order  to 
sustain  some  definite  time  theory,  as  e.g.  1  Thess.  5  :  1-8,  "  But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in 
darkness,  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief."  For  it  is  self-evident  (1)  that 
the  Thessalonians  did  not  obtain  definite  time  and  yet  were  "  not  in  darkness  ;"  (2)  that 
the  practical  knowledge  obtained,  leading  to  preparation  and  watchfulness,  caused  the 
Apostles'  declaration  ;  (3)  that  the  assurance  thus  given  points  to  their  Pre-Mill.  resur- 
rection. Hence  the  faith  that  we  insist  upon,  so  far  as  the  believer's  posture  is  con- 
cerned, is  thus  expressed  by  Poor  (Lange's  Com.  1  Cor.,  p.  26)  :  "  The  Sec.  Advent  of 
Christ  is  possible  for  any  generation,  and  ought  constantly  to  be  looked  for,  desired,  and 
prayed  for."  (Comp.  e.g.  the  utterances  of  Van  Oosterzee,  Lohe,  Brentius,  etc.,  in 
Lange's  Com.  Luke,  p.  326,  etc.). 


PllOP.  174.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  109 


Proposition  174. — This  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah  is  preceded  by 
signs. 

This,  intimated  in  the  last  Proposition,  has  been  so  clearly  an- 
nounced in  Scripture  and  has  been  so  constantly  the  belief  of  the 
Church  (as  related  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  which,  as  we  have  shown, 
necessarily  precedes  the  Kingdom),  that  it  deserves  separate  and 
careful  notice  owing  to  its  importance  in  confirming  the  nearness 
of  the  Kingdom,  and  in  urging  us  to  occupy  the  commanded  posi- 
tion of  watching  servants. 

Eiggenbach  (Lange's  Com.  1  Thess.,  p.  86)  comments  :  "  In  exact  accordance  with 
Christ's  teaching,  the  Apostle  declines  all  close  definition  or  calculation  of  the  times,  and 
points  instead  to  the  signs  which  the  disciples  of  Christ  are  recpiired  to  consider.  For 
those  secure  in  their  ungodliness  there  are  no  signs  ;  on  them  the  thief  comes  suddenly, 
the  pangs  seize  them  all  at  once.  But  they  themselves  are  for  a  sign  to  believei's  who 
watch  and  observe.  It  is  the  triumph  of  the  cause  of  God  that  even  the  despisers  must 
render  it  the  service  of  their  testimony.  Stupidity  in  divine  things,  security  and  self- 
confidence  increase  more  and  more  ;  as  it  was,  says  Christ,  in  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot 
(Luke  17  :  26,  etc.).  They  ate,  they  drank,  they  married  and  were  given  in  marriage  ; 
thus  Jesus  does  not  once  upbraid  them  with  the  scandalous  crimes  which  they  committed, 
but  with  that  very  thing  in  their  way  of  life  which  was  commendable,  but  which  becomes 
hideous,  when  nothing  higher  can  be  told  of  an  age  ;  when  its  whole  life  is  a  worldly  life, 
in  which  God  is  no  longer  taken  in  account.  A  great  increase  of  outward  power  and 
culture,  reliance  on  science,  industry,  the  conquest  of  the  external  world,  lead  to  an 
arrogance  that  no  longer  admits  its  dependence  on  God." 

Obs.  1.  Storr  (Diss,  on  Kingdom),  justly  says,  that  Jesus  "  is  ready  and 
prepared  to  make  the  exhibition  of  His  Majesty  whenever  it  pleases  Him," 
and  then  in  a  footnote  referring  to  Christ's  Coming  unawares  to  some,  adds  : 
"  But  as  this  time  was  to  be  unknown  ;  teachers  merely  human  could  not 
exhort  to  watchfulness  those  during  whose  lifetime  the  destined  period  for 
retribution  will  be  just  at  hand,  unless  they  gave  this  advice  to  men  of  all 
periods  of  the  world."  But  this  is  only  giving  us  part  of  the  truth,  viz., 
that  it  is  also  the  pleasure  of  Jesus  that  men  should  attentively  consider 
and  ponder  the  signs  preceding  the  exhibition  of  His  Majesty,  and  that  men 
should  be  exhorted  to  watchfulness  by  the  concurrent  signs  around  them. 
While  the  exact  time  is  known  only  to  God,  yet  in  accommodation  to  our 
weakness,  and  to  urge  us  to  the  attitude  so  honorable  toward  Himself  and 
so  provocative  of  piety,  He  graciously  points  out  to  us  approximative  signs 
indicative  of  its  nearness.  That  some,  or  even  all,  of  these  signs  are  char- 
acteristic, more  or  less,  of  every  succeeding  generation,  forms  no  valid 
objection  to  their  rejection,  seeing  that  they  fall  in  with  the  Spirit's  design 
that  all  the  godly  shall,  in  every  age,  thus  ivatch  ;  that  faith  and  hope  shall 
be  tested  ;  that  the  apprehensions  of  unbelievers  shall  be  quieted  ;  and 
that  the  discerning  shall  observe  their  due  force  in  the  increased  energy, 
etc.,  manifested  through  them  as  the  end  draws  nigh.  Hence  the  propriety 
of  Martensen's  (Ch.  Dog.,  s.  279),  utterance  :  "  But  though  believers  '  know 


110  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  ;'  though  it  is  not  for  them  '  to  know  the 
times  and  the  seasons  which  the  Father  hath  put  into  His  own  power  ;  ' 
yet  they  are  commanded  to  mark  the  signs  of  the  times  ;  and  certain  prognosti- 
cations are  given  to  them."  '  It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  very  connection 
with  the  declaration  that  man  cannot  know  the  exact  time  of  His  Coming 
(which  the  experience  of  the  past  corroborates),  Jesus  points  believers  to 
certain  signs  as  preceding  His  Coming,  saying  in  Matt.  24  :  32,  "  Noiv  learn 
a  parable  of  the  fig-tree:  When  his  branch  is  yet  tender,  and  putteth  forth 
leaves,  ye  know  that  summer  is  nigh  :  so  likewise  ye,  when  ye  shall 
see  all  these  things,  know  that  it  is  near,  even  at  the  doors  f  and  in  Luke 
21  :  27  the  phraseology  includes  a  direct  reference  to  the  Coming  of  the  Son 
of  Man  with  power  and  great  glory,  adding  :  "  And  when  these  things  be- 
gin to  come  to  pass,  then  look  up  and  lift  up  your  heads ;  for  your  re- 
demption draweth  nigh,"  to  which  the  same  parable  is  appended  :  "  Behold 
the  rig-tree  and  all  the  trees  :  When  they  now  shoot  forth,  ye  see  and  know 
of  yourselves  that  summer  is  now  nigh  at  hand  ;  so  likewise  ye,  when  ye  see 
these  things  come  to  pass,  know  ye  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  nigh  at 
hand  "  (Murk  13  :  28,  29  also  gives  the  parable  and  lesson).  These  signs 
are  to  be  cognizant  to  every  believer,  and  are  observable  independent 
(Olshausen  on  phrase,  "  Jcnow  of  your  own  selves")  of  another's  guidance. 
After  such  explicit  directions  ;  after  an  appeal  to  the  reasonableness  of  so 
doing  ;  after  rebuking  (Matt.  16  :  3)  the  Spirit  which  refuses  to  "  discern 
the  signs  of  the  times;"  after  implying  (which  is  elsewhere  plainly 
taught)  that  many  would  neglect  such  signs  and  suffer  loss  thereby  ;  surely 
it  would  argue  disrespect  to  the  Saviour,  want  of  attention  to  our  own  in- 
terests, as  well  as  folly,  if  we  refused  to  look  at  and  consider  the  signs  pre- 
sented. Aside  from  the  obligation  to  receive  all  that  God  has  revealed, 
aside  from  the  duty  of  performing  His  commands,  the  simple  fact  that  these 
are  graciously  communicated  not  only  to  sustain  the  Church  in  her  fight- 
ing, struggling  condition,  not  only  to  prepare  her  for  a  season  of  severe 
trial,  but  to  enable  the  believer  himself  to  watch,  to  exhort  others  to 
watchfulness,  and  to  receive  the  blessings  promised  to  him  who  thus 
watches — this  ought  to  make  them  exceedingly  precious  to  us.  God,  before 
the  introduction  of  those  stupendous  events  pertaining  to  the  last  times, 
will  not  leave  Himself  without  some  witness,  which  shall  reach  the  hearts 
of  the  discerning,  and  excite  a  powerful  testimony  in  behalf  of  an  all-per- 
vading Providence  ratifying  what  Omniscience  has  previously  described. 
Indeed,  love,  fervent  love,  for  an  absent  Saviour,  a  deep  longing  for  His 
pleasure-bestowing  Presence — an  earnest  desire  for  perfected  salvation, 
should  cause  the  believer  to  ponder  those  signs  with  an  interest  such  as 
a  heart,  anxious  for  deliverance  and  imbued  with  the  strongest  attachment 
for  "  the  Christ,"  can  possibly  prompt.9 

1  Martensen  gives  as  signs  :  signs  in  nature,  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  great  regenera- 
tion in  Israel,  the  climax  of  Antichrist  and  general  corruption.  We  commend  one  sen- 
tence of  his  to  the  particular  notice  of  the  reader.  After  remarking  that  "  the  day  of  the 
Lord  must  ever  hover  in  spiritual  nearness  before  the  Chiirch  militant"  and  pointing  out 
how  this  was  exemplified  e.g.  in  the  Primitive  Church  and  at  the  time  of  the  Reforma- 
tion, he  adds ;  "  Is  it  not  a  matter  of  experience  which  Church  history  in  every  part  of  it 
confirms,  that  in  those  times  when  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  and  the  last  great  day  have 
been  looked  upon  as  in  infinite  distance  off,  wrapped  in  the  darkness  and  obscurity  of 
the  future,  Christian  life  also  has  borne  an  indefinite,  loose,  and  careless  aspect."  Ho  Van 
Oosterzee  (Lange's  Com.  Luke,  p.  209)  remarks:  "The  recognition  of  the  signs  of  the 
times  is  one  of  the  most  sacred  obligations  which  our  Saviour  imposes  on  all  those  who 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  Ill 

wish  to  be  capable  of  passing  an  independent  judgment  on  the  concerns  of  His  Kingdom. 
However  the  blindness  of  His  contemporaries  still  shows  itself  continually  under  all 
manner  of  forms." 

8  Differences  of  opinion  as  to  the  meaning  of  some  signs  (i.e.  whether  literal  or  figura- 
tive, or  both)  or  to  the  details  (i.e.  the  order  in  which  they  are  to  be  observed)  should 
not  remove  us  from  the  expectancy  of  constant  watching.  This  is  to  be  anticipated  in  so 
vast  a  subject,  and  arises  from  the  prepossessions,  education,  amount  of  study,  etc.,  of 
interpreters.  If  it  is  observable  in  the  plainest  of  matters,  much  more  will  it  be  in  one 
which  is  purposely  shrouded  in  language  (to  induce  watchfulness),  which  a  diligent 
comparison  of  Scripture  can  alone  explain.  Hence  it  is  wrong  to  advocate  any  view  with 
bitterness  toward  others.  It  is  the  part  of  kindness  to  point  out  the  opinion  that  we  re- 
gard erroneous,  and  to  sustain  our  own  by  an  appeal  direct  to  Scripture,  and  no  one  who 
holds  to  the  supremacy  of  Scripture  will  object  to  this  ;  but  to  direct  attention  to  the 
opinion  of  others  merely  to  ridicule  the  same  and  to  call  into  question  the  honesty, 
veracity,  etc.,  of  its  upholders  is  unworthy  of  a  student  and  of  a  Christian.  The  writer 
was  forcibly  struck  with  a  remark  of  Edward  Bickersteth  (as  given  by  Dr.  Bell,  p.  124, 
Proph.  Times,  vol.  2):  "  "We  ought  with  humility  to  go  to  God's  Word  together"  (he 
referred  to  students  of  prophecy)  "  and  seek  to  come  as  near  as  possible  together  in  a 
general  outline,  and  then  go  and  proclaim  to  the  Church  at  large  with  something  of  a 
united  testimony  that  the  Lord  is  at  hand.  This  need  not  hinder  our  continued  investi- 
gation, and  our  friendly  discussion  of  the  various  opinions  we  hold  in  respect  to  matters 
of  detail."  When  Jesus  speaks,  Matt.  '24  :  3(>,  of  no  man  knowing  the  day  and  the  hour, 
the  student  will  observe  that,  while  definite  time  is  excluded,  two  things  are  implied  : 
(1)  a  correct  knowledge  of  the  event  but  not  of -the  exact  time  ;  and  (2)  an  approximative 
knowledge  even  of  time,  for  "  day  and  hour"  are  very  limited  as  to  time,  thus  corre- 
sponding with  the  Saviour's  appeal  to  signs  in  the  context.  Hence  that  time— the  day 
and  hour— is  not  definitely  known,  is  again  implied  by  the  taking  or  translation  from 
"  the  field,"  "the  mill,"  "  the  bed  ;"  for  the  employment  shows  that  its  occurrence  was 
sudden  and  unexpected,  although  by  signs  an  approximative  knowledge  may  have  been 
attained. 

Obs.  2.  The  intelligent  student  of  the  Bible  will  be  profoundly  im- 
pressed with  this  feature  of  the  Word,  viz.,  that  as  the  Old  Test,  points  to 
a  Coming  Messiah,  so  also  the  New  Test,  directs  us  to  a  Coming  Messiah  ; 
that  as  the  Old  Test,  prophecies  declare  that  men  will  not  believe  when  the 
Messiah  comes,  so  the  New  predicts  that  men  will  not  have  faith  when  the 
Messiah  comes  ;  that  as  the  brightest  prospects  of  the  Old  Test,  cluster 
around  a  Coming  Messiah,  so  the  most  glorious  promises  are  continued  in 
the  New  related  to  as  still  Coming  Christ;  and  that,  while  Old  and  New 
join  in  urging  belief  in,  and  looking  for,  a  Coming  Saviour,  loth  also 
present  signs  by  which  that  Coming  shall  be  recognized  as  nigh  at  hand. 
Leaving  for  the  present  the  signs  referring  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  the  Old 
Test,  gives  as  signs  pertaining  to  the  First  Advent,  e.g.  an  existing  Gentile 
domination,  a  time  of  peace,  a  time  of  corruption  and  unbelief  which  would 
lead  to  the  Messiah's  rejection,  etc.,  including  a  chronological  hint  derived 
from  the  seventy  weeks  of  Daniel,  and  a  longing  of  the  pious  for  His  Com- 
ing. But  mark  it  well,  not  one  sign  of  a  startling  or  Supernatural  nature 
— only  signs  falling  in  with  the  natural,  ordinary  development  of  the 
times,  and  yet,  if  carefully  scrutinized,  sufficiently  distinctive  to  arrest  at- 
tention. The  startling  signs,  the  Supernatural,  all  appeared  after  the  birth 
of  Jesus,  in  the  interval  or  space  from  His  actual  birth  to  His  ascension, 
such  as  the  announcement  of  angels,  the  star,  the  descent  of  the  Spirit,  the 
public  acknowledgment  from  heaven,  the  miracles,  etc.  So  will  it  be 
again.  Men  wonderfully  deceive  themselves  if  they  think  that  the  Sec.  Ad- 
vent will  be  preceded  by  such  signs  of  astonishing  magnitude  and  Super- 
natural power,  that  the  attention  of  the  world  will  be  arrested,  and  that  all 
men  will  be  forced  to  acknowledge  their  existence.     It  is  true,  that  such 


112  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  174. 

signs  will  appear  before  the  final  open  manifestation  of  Christ  with  His 
saints,  and  that  they  will  occnr  in  the  interval  between  His  secret  Coming 
for  His  saints  and  His  public  Coming  with  them  for  "  vengeance"  and 
"salvation."  Not  distinguishing  between  the  two  stages  of  the  Advent, 
not  discerning  the  space  of  time  existing  between  the  two,  and  blending 
what  is  separate  and  distinct  into  one,  has  led  to  the  prevailing  theorizing 
on  the  subject.  A  little  comparison,  when  attention  is  once  drawn  to  this 
point,  abundantly  confirms  our  view,  as  already  shown  in  the  Proposition 
on  the  Translation  (130).  Indeed,  the  parallels  given  by  Jesus  Himself,  as 
exactly  descriptive  of  the  period  immediately  before  His  Advent,  would 
fail  in  correspondence,  if  the  world  was  to  be  aroused  by  antecedent  miracu- 
lous and  astounding  signs.  The  days  of  Noah  and  of  Lot,  as  described  by 
Jesus  (Luke  17  :  26-30,  etc.),  are  representative  of  the  days  when  the  Son 
of  Alan  comes,  but  in  them  are  no  signs  which  arouse  fear  and  consterna- 
tion, only  a  pursuing  the  ordinary  avocations  of  life  with  a  sense  of  secur- 
ity, and  an  ardent  attachment  to  the  things  of  this  world.  If  such  signs 
were  to  appear  and  produce  the  effects  upon  the  world  as  many  contend,  it 
would  be  difficult  to  explain  the  statements,  that  this  Coming  is  to  be 
"  unatqares,"  as  "  a  snare"  as  "  a  thief"  etc.,1  seeing  that  men  would,  in 
the  very  nature  of  the  case,  apprehend  something  important,  etc.,  to  occur. 
The  only  signs  vouchsafed  in  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot,  were  those  which 
sprung  from  the  general  corruption  of  the  world,  and  from  the  faith  of 
Noah  and  Lot  themselves,  running  in  the  channel  of  regular,  natural 
development.  There  was  nothing  Supernatural  until  the  time  had  arrived 
for  Noah's  and  Lot's  withdrawal  and  for  God's  judgments.  Thus,  we  may 
rest  assured,  it  will  be  again, ;  signs  will  indeed  exist,  but  in  such  a  form 
that  the  world  will  not  lay  them  to  heart,  will  "  /enow  not"  until  the  pent- 
up  floods  of  God's  wrath  are  ready  to  overtake  them  in  a  deluge  of  tribula- 
tion utterly  unexpected.  The  passage  which  some  suppose  militates  against 
our  view,  is  easily  and  satisfactorily  explained  in  consistency  with  it,  viz., 
Matt.  24  :  29,  "  Immediately  after  the  tribulation  of  those  days,"  etc.,  an 
openly  manifested  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  is  designated,  and  hence  it  is 
inferred  that  the  miraculous  and  startling  signs  precede  the  Advent.  Cor- 
rectly, however,  they  only  precede  this  particular,  public  manifestation  of 
the  Advent,  and  not  the  Advent  considered  as  a  whole,  i.e.  embracing 
several  singes  and  a  considerable  interval  between  these.  If  stress  is  laid 
upon  the  words  "  immediately  after  the  tribulation,"  this  objection  proves 
too  much,  for  the  Advent  itself  is  productive  of  great  tribulation  ;  the  ex- 
pression therefore  has  undoubted  reference  to  a  particular  tribulation  and 
not  to  tribulation  in  general.  While  it  is  proper — as  we  have  done  in  pre- 
vious Propositions — to  employ  this  phraseology  to  prove  in  a  general  way 
that  the  Sec.  Advent  is  not  to  be  confined  to  the  past  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  by  the  Romans,  and  that  it  is  Pre-Millennial,  yet  when  we  come 
to  explain  the  Advent  itself,  descending  from  the  general  to  the  particular, 
we  have  to  discriminate  what  belongs  to  this  or  to  that  stage  of  it  (just  as  we 
do  in  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Test,  respecting  His  First  Advent,  in  His 
Coming  as  a  child,  in  His  Coming  in  the  temple,  in  His  Coming  riding 
upon  an  ass,  etc.)  ;  and  this  is  done  by  carefully  collating  the  Scripture  on 
the  subject.  A  comparison  thus  instituted  incontestibly  proves  that  a  cer- 
tain tribulation  is  spoken  of,  viz.,  the  Jewish  (beginning  with  the  over- 
throw of  Jerusalem  and  the  scattering  of  the  nation  down  to  the  closing  of 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles),  seeing  that  the  Advent  of  Jesus,  as  numerous 


PEOP.  174.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  113 

plain  predictions  declare,  will  bring  most  terrible  tribulation  upon  the 
Gentiles  confederated  together.  Now  it  is  a  fact,  corroborated  by  Zech.  14, 
etc.,  that  when  the  last  treading  down  of  the  Jews  is  accomplished  by  the 
Antichrist,  when  their  cup  of  sorrow  is  completely  filled,  and  when  be- 
lievers, engrafted  as  Jews,  i.e.  the  seed  of  Abraham,  have  passed  under  the 
same  Antichristian  scourge,  that  then  Jesus  thus  comes  with  His  saints  ; 
aud  it  is  to  this  open  Coming  after  tbe  Jews  are  smitten  and  the  martyrs 
have  been  sacrificed  by  Antichrist,  that  Jesus  reveals  Himself  to  pour 
tribulation  and  anguish  upon  him  and  his  allied  hosts,  followed  by  a 
gathering  of  His  elect  people  the  (Jewish  nation  as  tbe  prophets  all  predict 
— His  own  special  inheritance),  thus  previously  smitten,  from  all  parts  of 
the  earth.  This  Coming  is  distinguished  by  remarkable  signs  which  take 
place  between  its  occurrence  and  the  concealed  (from  the  world)  stage  of 
the  Advent.  And  in  view  of  this  prediction  being  specially  given  in  refer- 
ence to  the  Jewish  nation,  its  downfall  and  continuance  under  Gentile 
domination  for  a  long  period,  it  was  eminently  proper  for  Jesus  to  desig- 
nate that  particular  stage  of  His  Coming,  which  is  to  be  exhibited  in  a 
marked  manner  in  its  behalf  when  the  final  blow  has  befallen  it.  The 
perfect  accuracy  of  prediction,  in  its  agreement,  one  with  another,  is  thus 
vindicated  ;  no  conflict  arises  either  in  the  prescribed  order  of  events,  or 
in  the  stated  condition  of  the  world  preceding  the  Advent,  or  in  the  proph- 
ecies pertaining  to  the  manner  of  the  Advent.  (Comp.  remarks  on  Ad- 
vent, Prop.  130.) a  Therefore  it  is,  that,  departing  from  tbe  usual  course 
pursued,  we  divide  the  signs  relating  to  the  Advent  into  two  classes  j  one  per- 
taining to  those  which  precede  the  entire  Advent  or  the  first  stage  of  it  ; 
and  the  other  relating  to  the  last  stage  of  the  Advent  or  embracing  the  signs 
in  the  interval  between  the  two  stages  ;  the  one  stage  occurring  when  even 
the  righteous  "think  not,"  being  suddenly  "in  that  night;"  and  the 
other  taking  place  when  the  righteous  know  that  it  must  and  will  happen.3 

1  Sir  Th.  Browne  {ReJigio  Medici,  S.  46)  long  ago  shrewdly  remarked  ;  "  '  There  shall 
be  signs  in  the  moon  and  stars  ; '  how  comes  He  then  like  a  thief  in  the  night,  when  He 
gives  an  item  of  His  Coming  ?"  Comp.  Prop.  130  and  related  ones.  The  Advent  coming 
as  "  a  snare"  and  "  a  net,"  unbelief  need  not  look  for  startling,  miraculous  signs  ;  this 
would  defeat  the  predictions.  Lange  (Com.  Matt.  24  :  38)  makes  an  important  statement 
well  expressed  :  "  The  chronological  end  of  the  world  is  concealed  by  its  seeming  prosperity 
in  the  last  days  as  in  the  days  of  the  flood."  The  Saviour  in  Matt.  24  did  not  give  the 
time  when  these  things  should  be,  but  He  encouraged  the  inquiry  respecting  it  by  gra- 
ciously presenting  certain  signs  to  indicate  their  nearness.  Thus  in  reference  to  Jerusa- 
lem He  did  not  give  the  exact  time  of  its  destruction,  but  specific,  signs  by  which  believers 
— accepting  of  them — saved  themselves  from  its  ruin.  So  precisely  is  it  with  reference 
to  the  Sec.  Advent— the  signs  are  given  and  we  must — if  desirous  to  secure  divine  pro- 
tection— avail  ourselves  of  them. 

2  The  only  other  passage  that  has  been  adduced  to  the  contrary,  viz.,  2  Thess.  2  :  8, 
we  have  already  considered  under  Prop.  130  on  Translation.  This  has  also  reference  to 
the  open  manifestation  of  Christ  which  precedes  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus" — a  day  how- 
ever also  preceded  by  the  tribulation  under  the  Antichrist  aud  by  the  removal  of  some 
who  shall  not  endure  it.  Hence  the  Thess.  brethren  are  assured  that  they  are  not  in 
darkness,  that  that  day  shall  not  come  to  them  as  a  thief,  etc.,  because  if  faithful  they 
shall  be  raised  up — being  children  of  the  day— to  witness  its  incoming.  The  arguments 
of  the  Apostle,  to  allay  their  fears  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  had  already  come,  and  they 
were  not  escaped,  etc.,  is  directed  not  so  much  to  the  Advent  as  to  the  day  itself,  and  im- 
plies, upon  the  face  of  it,  that  owing  to  this  incoming  apostasy  and  the  final  revelation 
of  the  man  of  sin,  not  only  that  the  Advent  had  not  taken  place,  not  only  that  the  day 
of  the  Lord  had  not  come,  but  distinctively  refers  to  the  latter  as  not  coming  until 
Antichrist  is  revealed  and  destroyed  by  the  open  manifestation  of  Jesus  ;  and  therefore 
the  removal  of  the  Thessalonian  brethren  before  the  last  event  is  a  matter  taken  for 


114  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  174. 

granted,  the  promise  being  in  the  first  Epistle.  There  is  a  delicacy  most  remarkable  in 
Paul  in  not  directly  telling  them  hoio  their  escape  should  be  brought  to  pass,  leaving  to 
them  the  bright  prospect  and  continued  hope  that  Jesus  ■would  protect  them. 

3  The  reader  will  see  from  this  and  the  statements  under  Prop.  130,  etc.,  how  utterly 
unreasonable  has  been  the  conduct  of  those  who,  like  the  Millerites  and  Sec.  Adventists 
(differing  widely  from  us  on  essential  Millenarian  points  still  held  to  a  speedy  Sec. 
Advent),  professed  to  fix  the  exact  day  and  hour  of  Christ's  Coming  and  assembled 
together,  in  ascension  robes,  to  witness  the  Advent,  totally  overlooking  the  fact  that  the 
first  stage  of  the  Advent  is  the  Coming  like  a  thief,  and  not  the  open  manifestation  they 
anticipated.  Without  questioning  the  sincerity  or  piety  of  the  parties,  it  evinces  a  lack 
of  comparison  of  Scripture  and  of  prudence,  being  eminently  calculated  to  bring  dis- 
credit and  ridicule  upon  the  hope  of  the  Advent.  Strange  that  this  shoidd  be  so  often 
repeated,  as  e.g.  recently  a  band  of  Sec.  Adventists  of  Lewiston,  Maine,  under  Elder 
Thurman,  spent  the  evening  of  Good  Friday,  1876,  in  watching  until  midnight.  But 
Stranger  still,  that  men  who  believe  in  the  Bible,  its  teachings  and  warnings  respecting  the 
Sec.  Advent,  should  be  influenced  by  such  fanaticism  to  cast  aside  tbe  whole  subject  as 
unworthy  of  Berioua  consideration,  just  as  if  the  misdirected  zeal  and  enthusiasm  of 
others  could  cancel  the  declarations  of  Scripture.  For  while  it  is  true  that  Jesus  said, 
':  Ye  know  not  when"  the  time  is  :  "  what  I  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all,  watch"  (see 
Mark  13  :  ■>'>  37),  yet  the  very  injunction  of  watching  includes  the  idea  of  our  ability  to 
attain  approximative  knowledge  a  sufficiency— so  that,  as  Jesus  also  said,  that  day  shall 
not  come  upon  us  unawares.  Three  extremes  are  to  be  avoided  :  (1)  to  fix  definite,  posi- 
tive time  ;  (2)  to  ignore  the  signs  ;  (3)  and  to  encourage  any  interpretation  or  application 
that  forbids  or  hinders  a  daily  posture  of  watching. 

Ohs.  3.  The  signs  preceding  the  first  stage  of  the  Advent  are  all  of  such 
a  nature,  that  they  appear,  more  or  less,  in  every  generation  ;  and  hence  in 
view  of  their  continued  existence,  have  caused  men  in  the  various  succeed- 
ing centuries  to  hold  (as  e.g.  Gregory  the  Great,  Luther,  and  many  others), 
that  the  end  was  very  near,  because  the  signs  indicative  of  the  same  were 
really  present.1  These  men  too  were  not  mistaken — as  misapprehending 
and  faultfinding  unbelief  would  have  it— in  the  signs  ;  many  of  them  were 
indeed  painfully  present,  and  it  is  to  the  honor  and  piety  of  these  believers 
in  the  Word  that  they  recognized  them,  and  assumed  the  posture  of  servants 
looking  for  the  Coming  of  the  Master.  Having  already  alluded  to  the 
practical  reason  for  presenting  signs,  thus  testifying  before  every  succeed- 
ing generation,  it  may  be  added  :  that  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  such 
will  assume  ^greater  magnitude  as  the  time  of  the  end  draws  nigh,  or,  at 
least,  that  they  appear  in  such  proportions  that  the  believing  (for  whom 
alone  they  are  intended)  cannot  mistake  in  their  presence  and  import.  The 
signs  to  which  the  Spirit  calls  our  attention  are  the  following  : 

1.  The  world  will  be  in  a  comparative  state  of  peace  and  prosperity  ;  at 
1<  ast  to  a  degree  that  it  fondly  hopes  for  "  peace  and  safety,"  so  that  at  the 
( loming  of  Jesus  for  Eis  sleeping  and  living  saints  the  usual  routine  of  the 
world  shall  be  going  on,  men  claiming  that  (2  Pet.  3:4)'"  all  things  con- 
tinue as  they  were  from  the  beginning  of  (he  creation.' ■  Men's  thoughts  and 
atl'i  ctions  will  be  fixed  on  the  things  of  the  world,  unapprehensive  of  the 
evil  nigh  at  hand.  Jesus  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  the  time  when  he  says 
(Luke  i  7  :  26-30),  that  men  shall  be  engaged  in  "  eating,  drinking,  marry- 
ing, and  giving  in  marriage,  buying,  selling,  planting,  and  building" — a 
representation  not  only  of  fancied  security,  but  of  a  period  of  trust  and 
confidence  in  the  stability  and  perpetuity  of  a  then  existing  state  of  things. 
Now  while  this  has  been  the  actual  condition  of  the  world,  more  or  less, 
since  the  first  century,  is  it  not  true  that  this  feeling,  this  confidence  in 
the  endurance  of  the  present  ordering  of  nature  is  at  the  present  time 
greatly  intensified?     When  intelligent,  scientific  men  send  forth  a  multi- 


PEOP.  174.]  THE    THEOCRATIC    KIXGDO^E  115 

fade  of  books,  when  leading  periodicals  and  journals  go  forth  among  the 
masses,  all  teaching  with  a  bold  exaggeration  tbe  past  and  the  future 
stability  of  things  under  the  garb  of  "  the  unalterable  laws  of  nature,"  etc., 
it  does  not  require  any  answer.  Xo  age  before  this  has  ever  exhibited  such 
extraordinary  activity  in  producing  a  Xoahic  condition  of  man  in  this 
direction.  And  so  much  are  the  minds  and  the  affections  of  the  people 
taken  up  with  the  world,  that  not  only  are  the  things  mentioned  by  Jesus 
made  the  special  subjects  of  books,  tracts,  periodicals,  organizations,  etc., 
but  they  are  the  engrossing  subjects  of  life  for  the  immense  majority.  So 
patent  is  this,  that  it  needs  no  additional  remark  ;  for  thoughtful  men,  of 
all  classes,  have  sufficiently  commented  on  this  feature.  Things  in  them- 
selves not  sinful  become  such  when  allowed  to  reign  siijiremely  over  the 
heart  of  man,  and  the  trust,  which  God  justly  demands,  is  placed  in  them.2 

2.  The  existence  of  widespread  unbelief  in  the  warnings  and  words  of 
God  were  characteristic  of  the  days  of  Noah,3  and  Jesus  informs  us  that  it 
will  be  equally  so  at  the  time  of  His  Coming,  for  "  ichen  the  Son  of  Man 
cometh,  shall  US  find  faith  on  the  earth?"  (Luke  18  :  8).  While  unbelief 
has  been  evermore  largely  found  in  every  age,  yet  it  is  more  intensive  and 
commanding  now  than  ever  before,  resulting  not  merely  in  the  vast  num- 
bers thus  given  to  unbelief  but  in  the  sad  fact  that  multitudes  of  the  leaders 
of  society,  scholars,  statesmen,  lecturers,  etc.  (see  Frops.  177  and  180),  are 
moulding  society  into  such  a  Xoahic  condition.  Unbelief  has  its  able  and 
earnest  advocates  by  the  thousand,  and  counts  its  hosts  by  the  million  :  it 
has,  amid  its  varied  forms,  enlisted  into  its  service  vigorous  intellects  aided 
by  a  powerful  press,  who  are  pushing  on  the  assault  against  the  Bible  and 
Christianity  with  a  boldness  and  a  success  (because  acceptable  to  human 
nature),  that  is  astonishing.  One  hundred  years  ago  it  would  scarcely  have 
been  credited,  if  any  one  had  foretold  what  we  see  to-day,  so  swift  and 
abounding  has  been  the  inroad  of  an  unbelief  which  Antediluvian-like  ridi- 
cules the  idea  of  believing  in  God's  commandments  and  threats, and  even  dares 
to  call  into  question  His  divine  character  and  existence.  The  substitution 
of  nature,  or  law,  or  humanity,  or  science,  etc.,  in  the  place  of  the  God  of 
the  Bible,  is  only  too  favorable  in  producing  the  predicted  result  and  sign.4 

3.  This  unbelief,  however,  leads  to  the  rising  up  of  "scoffers"  and  to  a 
direct  denial  of  a  certain  truth.  Peter  after  exhorting  us  to  "  be  mindful 
of  the  words  spoken"  (2  Pet.  3  :  3,  4),  adds  :  "  Knowing  this  first"  ("  as 
one  of  the  predictions  which  demand  your  special  regard  " — so  Barnes  loci) 
"  that  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  scoffers,  walking  after  their  own 
lusts,  anil  saying  :  Where  is  the  jirmnise  of  His  Coming?"  Xoah  warned 
the  people  of  coming  wrath  against  ungodliness,  so  now  the  Word  warns 
the  world  of  coming  judgments  at  the  Advent  of  the  Son  of  Man,  but  men 
perversely  ridicule  both.  However  true  this  has  been  in  the  past,  to-day  it 
is  specially  manifested.  Books  and  papers  are  abundantly  circulated,  which 
regard  the  Deluge  as  "  a  huge  joke,"  and  scoff  and  sneer  at  a  Coming 
Saviour  as  "  an  idle  dream,"  fit  only  for  weak,  snperstitious  minds.  Men 
in  the  highest  ranks  of  intelligence  and  society  lend  themselves  to  this 
scoffing,  and  broadly  record  it  in  the  current  literature.  The  very  plea, 
too,  which  Peter  foretells,  is  now  employed  by  them,  viz.,  that  the  prophets 
were  mistaken  ;  that  the  proof  of  their  mistake  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 
world  has  existed  ever  so  long  without  their  predictions  being  realized,  so 
that,  judging  from  the  past,  the  uniformity  of  law  forbids  such  Supernatural 
interference,  and  that  those  who  confidently  looked  for  those  things  were 


HG  THE   THEOCEATIC    KUSTGDO^r.  [PeOP.  174. 

miserably  deceived,  etc.  The  general  reader  needs  not  to  be  told  hoiv 
extensively  such  views  are  circulated  and  embraced,  and  how  offensively, 
scoffingly,  they  are  uttered  among  the  high  and  the  low  of  the  earth.  And, 
the  manner  in  which  this  objection  is  uttered,  the  spirit  in  which  it  is 
urged,  also  shows  what  Peter  declares,  viz.,  that  they  "  are  willingly  igno- 
rant," i.e.,  that  they  desire  to  hold  such  an  opinion,  that  it  suits  their 
pleasure  or  will  to  be  thus  ignorant.  How  this  is  exhibited  at  present  in 
hatred  to  the  Bible,  in  a  wilful  procedure  to  undermine  its  authority,  etc., 
is  only  too  evident.5 

4.  This  injunction  of  Peter's  to  notice  "first,"  us  important  evidence, 
how  scoffers  will  arise  and  deny  the  Lord's  Coming,  implies  not  only  that 
such  an  Advent  is  "the  blessed  hope,"  but  that  it  is  largely  dwelt  upon, 
prominently  brought  to  public  notice  and  represented  as  near,  when  the  end 
approaches.  Good  and  great  men  in  the  past  centuries  have  thus  held  up 
the  Coming  of  Jesus  ;  and  it  is  a  most  significant  truth  that  Eschatology 
has  never  been  so  intently  studied  ;6  that  the  nearness  of  Christ's  Coming 
has  never  been  so  widely  and  presistently  proclaimed  ;  that  the  cry  : 
"  Behold  the  Bridegroom  Cometh,"  has  never  been  so  loudly  sounded  in 
the  ears  of  the  Church  and  the  world  ;  that  the  warnings  of  prophets, 
apostles,  and  Jesus,  to  be  constantly  on  the  watch  have  never  been  so 
urgently  pressed  upon  the  attention  of  others,  as  within  the  last  few  years. 
While  the  number  of  advocates,  compared  with  the  multitude  of  unbe- 
lievers, are  comparatively  few  yet  they  can  be  counted  by  the  hundred 
and  thousand  ;  they  can  be  found  in  all  our  leading  churches,  and  have 
among  them  many  who  are  noted  for  learning,  ability,  piety  and  use- 
fulness.7 Periodicals  specially'  devoted  to  the  subject,  books  and  tracts 
in  various  languages  enforcing  the  same,  are  scattered  over  the  earth,  so 
that  the  sign  becomes  exceedingly  significant.8 

5.  But  the  most  saddening  sign  is  that  this  questioning  and  unbelief  re- 
specting the  reality  and  nearness  of  the  Coming  of  Jesus  is  not  confined  to  the 
world  but  is  to  be  found  in  the  Church,  among  professing  believers.  The 
urgency  and  frequency  with  which  Christ  points  out  that  those  who  declare 
themselves  to  be  servants  shall  neglect  to  watch  for  His  Coming  and  shall  suf- 
fer loss— the  repeated  exhortations  to  watchfulness  implying  the  neglect  of  it 
in  the  Church,  and  the  startling  question  (Luke  18  :  8)  respecting  faith  in 
His  Coming  from  which  our  best  critics  and  commentators  have  inferred, 
rightfully  that  there  will  be  but  little— all  this  finds  its  mate  in  the  Church 
of  to-day.  Large  bodies  of  professing  Christians  (e.g.  Swedenborgians, 
Unitarians  and  others)  have  spiritualized  the  Advent  away ;  minis- 
ters in  high  standing  (as  e.g.  recently  Desprez  in  John  or  the  Apoc.) 
recommend  the  ruling  out,  as  unreliable  and  false,  of  everything  relating  to 
this  Second  Advent  f  Christian  authors  of  celebrity  (as  e.g.  Prof.  Stuart, 
Dr.  Brown,  etc.)  insist  upon  it  that  the  Millenarian  doctrine  of  the  speedy 
Coming  of  Christ  is  to  be  rejected  as  folly,  etc.  ;  while  thousands  of  others, 
leaders  too,  either  entirely ig nore  it,  or  reproachfully  allude  to  it  as  "  fanat- 
ical" etc.  It  is  but  too  true,  that  now  men  substitute  death,  or  provi- 
dence, or  Jerusalem,  or  spiritual  gifts,  or  something  else,  in  the  place  of  the 
Advent ;  and  that  as  Mather  aptly  expressed  it,  "  the  sleeping  medicine"  is 
profusely  administered  and  gladly  received.  The  Advent  is  placed  so  re- 
motely in  the  distance,  or  is  so  indefinitely  regarded,  that  its  practical  in- 
fluence (comp.  Olshausen  Com.,  vol.  2,  p.  200)  is  lost.  Even  "  the  wise 
virgins11  are  affected  thereby  until  the  cry  arouses  them  betimes.10 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  117 

G.  The  Church  shall  be  under  trial.  At  no  period  in  her  history  down  to 
the  Advent,  shall  she  be  entirely  freed  from  the  testing  and  suffering  pre- 
scribed for  her,  as  can  be  seen  in  the  epitome  of  events  from  the  First 
Advent  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent  given  in  Matt.  2-4  ;  Mark  ]3  ;  Luke  21  ; 
2  Tliess.  2,  and  in  the  positive  assertions  of  the  Spirit  that  the  world  shall 
always  hate,  etc.,  the  godly.  This  has  always  been  true  in  the  past  ;  even 
in  the  most  prosperous  external  condition  of  the  Church  has  she  been  com- 
pelled to  fight  against  her  enemies  from  within  and  without.  This  is 
true  to-day :  her  enemies  are  numerous,  they  assault  her  from  all  sides, 
and  however  outwardly  prosperous  in  some  countries,  in  others  her  condi- 
tion is  feeble,  aud  she  finds  herself  overwhelmingly  oppressed.  The 
saddening  reports  of  delegates  at  the  last  Evang.  Alliance  at  New  York 
tell,  in  part,  the  sorrowful  story.  AVe  have  only  to  look  at  the  once 
favored  Germany,  at  Austria,  Spain,  etc.,  and  the  truth  of  God's  Word  is 
apparent.  And  yet  there  are  intimations  in  the  Word,  that  men  shall 
overlook  the  imposed  condition  of  trial,  and  shall  prophesy  "  peace  and 
safety,"  increased  prosperity,  and  extended  influence,  etc.,  just  as  we  now 
see  the  most  eminent  men,  over  against  the  most  explicit  declarations  to 
the  contrary,  predict  a  most  glorious  future,  world  wide  to  the  Church 
in  its  present  ordering.  These  things  thus  conjoined,  and  practically 
witnessed,  make  careful  students  the  more  confirmed  in  the  wisdom  of 
constant  watchfulness.11 

7.  The  Church  under  trial  shall  (like  the  Primitive  Church,  etc.)  con- 
tinue to  proclaim  the  Gospel  until  it  forms  "  a  witness  unto  all  nations, 
and  then  shall  the  end  come"  Matt.  24  :  14.  (Xot  to  convert  the  nations 
but  to  be  a  testimony  to  them,  see  Prop.  175,  and  also  consider  how  the 
word  "  all'.'  "  in  all  the  world"  etc.  may,  according  to  Scripture  usage, 
denote  a  large  portion,  etc.,  of  it.)  We  have  here  a  very  extensive, 
general  proclamation  of  the  Gospel  predicted,  but  nothing  said  that  the 
testimony  will  be  received  ;  indeed  we  do  know  that  while  the  Gospel  saves 
them  that  believe,  it  also  condemns  those  who  reject  it.  Here,  however, 
the  preaching  of  it  widespread  among  the  nations  over  the  earth,  is  given 
as  a  sign  of  the  approaching  end  of  this  age  or  dispensation.  This  sign 
has  always,  more  or  less,  existed  even  in  the  apostle's  day  (Col.  1  :  G,  23, 
etc.),  but  never  as  it  presents  itself  to-day.  The  astonishing  missionary 
labors  over  the  globe,  the  Bible  and  Tract  Societies  with  their  astounding 
publications  scattered  over  the  earth,  the  remarkable  revivals  of  religion 
(such  were  at  Jerusalem  before  its  destruction)  in  various  countries,  the 
union  of  prayer  and  effort,  the  Sunday-school  interest,  the  Christian 
Alliances  bringing  into  fraternal  converse  brethren  of  all  climes,  the 
extended  work  of  the  various  individual  denominations  through  their 
several  Boards,  Institutions,  etc. — these  are  things  so  pertinent  in  fulfilment 
that  they  bring  out  this  sign  to  the  observant  with  great  and  thrilling  dis- 
tinctness. Melville,  Newton,  and  a  host  of  able  writers,  have  aptly 
said  :  "  that  the  Gospel  preached  for  a  witness,  conveys  the  idea  of  rejec- 
tion rather  than  of  acceptance,'''' and  this  is  abundantly  corroborated  by 
other  Scripture,  making  it  true  down  to  the  end  itself  that  "  many  are 
called  but  few  chosen."  This  then  is  a  sign,  not  as  many  take  it,  of  the 
conversion  of  the  nations,  but  of  the  approaching  end,  just  as  the  entire 
early  Church,  instructed  by  the  inspired  preachers  of  this  same  Gospel, 
held  and  taught.  Jesus  expresses  this  sign  in  the  most  general  terms,  so 
that  as  the  amount  of  witnessing  to  each  nation  or  to  all  of  them  combined 
* 


118  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  174. 

is  not  stated  definitely,  it  may,  for  aught  we  know  to  the  contrary,  close 
almost  any  day.  The  leading  nations  of  the  earth  have  long  had  this 
witness,  and  it  has  been  borne  to  almost  every  tribe  upon  the  face  of  the 
earth,  how  much  more  before  the  Sec.  Advent  is  yet  to  be  done  God  alone 
knows.12 

8.  While  the  Gospel  is  preached  as  a  witness,  while  the  devotion  of  those 
who  love  Jesus  leads  to  advocacy  of  the  truth,  another  sign  is  the  condition 
of  the  Church  itself.  It  is  not  merely  the  continued  mixture  of  the  tares 
with  the  wheat  but  a  fearful  preponderating  of  the  tares  over  the  wheat. 
Outward  prosperity,  the  budding  of  massive  churches,  the  increase  of 
riches,  the  influx  of  numbers,  etc.,  is  no  criterion  of  piety  as  the  Word 
and  the  history  of  the  past  shows.  The  Laodicean  state  has  been  too 
often  repeated  (which  has  often  led  good  men  to  think  that  the  end  was 
near)  to  mislead  us.  Now,  aside  from  the  Scripture  which  teaches  us 
that  the  Gentiles  shall  become  "  high-minded  ;"  that  there  will  be  a  woful 
lack  of  faith;  that  "many,"  who  prophecy,  etc.,  in  His  name  shall  be 
rejected  ;  that  the  Church  as  a  body,  shall  be  unprepared  for  His  Coming, 
it  is  sufficient  to  direct  the  reader  to  the  simple  fact,  that  something  of 
the  kind  must  necessarily  precede  the  end,  because  the  Church  must 
endure  the  last  great  tribulation  under  the  Antichrist.  If  worthy  and 
pure,  she  would  escape  it,  but  in  view  of  her  moral  condition  she  is  to 
pass  through  its  purifying  fires.  Seeing  then  what  is  before  her,  as  the 
end  draws  nigh  we  ought  to  behold  in  her  that  evil  which  will  bring  the 
heavy  predicted  infliction  upon  her.  Alas  !  looking  around  and  contrast- 
ing the  Church  with  the  positive  requirements  of  the  Word,  what  do  we 
behold?  Admitting  the  piety  and  fervent  love  and  labor  existing  in  all 
denominations  (for  if  it  were  not  for  this,  the  time  would  be  shortened  in 
judgment),  yet  do  not  godly  men  in  all  Churches  deplore  the  existing 
divisions — bigotry — intolerance — mere  nominal  profession — undue  eleva- 
tion of  the  Sacraments — exaltation  of  creed  above  the  Bible — substitution 
of  tradition  for  Revelation — yielding  up  of  inspiration  and  truth  to 
science — faith  exchanged  for  reason — ignoring  of  vital  doctrines  and 
practical  truths — the  lowering  of  the  Supernatural  to  a  more  natural  basis 
— neglect  of  prayer  and  worship — the  feasting,  etc.,  to  procure  Church 
and  benevolent  funds — aping  after  fashion,  extravagance  of  dress,  and 
exhibition  of  pride — fashionable  music  and  accommodating  preaching — 
the  spirit  of  covetousness,  together  with  the  ostentation  and  parade  in  giv- 
ing— the  ostentatious  eulogy  of  past  benevolence — greater  attachment  and 
love  for  measures  and  reforms  outside  of  the  Church — the  puffing  of  insti- 
tutions, men,  books,  and  sermons  beyond  truth — the  non-confessing  of 
Christ  during  the  week — the  advance  of  infidelity  among  the  ministry 
and  laity — sensational  preachers — the  use  of  scriptural  terms  while  the 
reality  is  denied — the  debasement  of  duty  to  policy — the  direct  Romaniz- 
ing tendencies — the  fanaticism  and  sectarianism  on  the  one  part  and  a 
broad  tolerance  upon  the  other — the  coldness,  even  deaclness  manifested — 
the  study  of  human  systems,  etc.,  to  the  neglect  of  the  Bible — the  soften- 
ing and  toning  down  of  God's  rebukes — the  lack  of  family  religion — the 
straining  at  a  gnat  and  swallowing  of  a  camel — the  trust  in  self-righteousness 
— the  confidence  in  man's  ability  and  regenerating  power  of  humanity — 
the  seeking  after  earthly  things  to  the  neglect  of  the  spiritual — the  return- 
ing evil  for  evil — the  envy,  contention,  want  of  charity,  slandering,  etc., 
too  often  manifested — the  intemperance,    impatience,    murmuring    arro- 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom:.  119 

gance,  flattery,  boasting,  etc.,  exhibited — the  form  of  godliness,  bnt  denying 
the  power — the  merely  sentimental,  poetical,  philosophical,  scientific 
preaching — the  spirit  so  prevalent  to  entertain  or  amuse  the  people  by  the 
introduction  of  novelties,  etc. — in  brief,  through  the  whole  category  of 
things  forbidden  by  the  Word.  It  is  eminently  true  to-day,  that  while 
"  many"  profess  and  loudly  too,  the  real  followers  of  Christ  are  "few." 
Hence  judgment  may  come  at  any  time.13 

9.  But  this  is  not  all  :  while  the  immense  majority  of  the  professing 
Church  is  only  nominally  Christian,  and  given  to  mere  formalism  (often 
propagated  with  mistaken  zeal),  it  is  a  significant  sign  of  the  present  day, 
that  overlooking  the  real  condition  of  things  and  mistaking  the  mission 
of  the  Church,  so  many  of  its  representative  men  looking  only  at  the 
riches  and  increase  in  goods,  at  the  professing  numbers,  etc.,  stand  up 
and,  imitating  the  example  of  others  in  the  days  of  Constantino,  predict 
continued  and  ever  growing  prosperity.  Blinded  by  the  magnificent  and 
numerous  churches,  by  the  revivals  of  religion,  by  the  vast  operations  of 
the  institutions,  etc.,  they  prophesy,  not  of  coming  tribulation,  not  of 
a  nearness  to  the  end,  not  of  God's  coming  controversy  with  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  but  of  peace  and  triumph  through  existing  instrumentalities. 
The  Jubilee  Hymns,  thousands  of  books,  periodicals,  etc.,  are  full  of  it  ; 
we  hear  it  in  singing,  prayer  and  preaching  all  over  the  earth.  Xow  if 
the  Advent  is  really  as  predicted,  to  come  upon  the  Church  unawares, 
unexpectedly ',  when  both  "wise  and  foolish  virgins"  are  asleep,  reason 
teaches  us  that  preliminary  to  such  a  Coming  and  condition  of  the 
Church,  there  must  be  a  course  of  teaching,  a  popular  representation  of 
doctrine  to  bring  the  Clmrch  into  so  false  and  dangerous  a  position.  And 
well,  too,  may  we  suppose  this  cannot  and  will  not  be  accomplished  unless, 
men  of  eminent  ability  and  devotion — acknowledged  leaders — perform  this 
saddening  work  of  influencing  the  minds  of  the  masses.  The  student, 
whose  faith  is  in  God's  predictions,  accepts  this  as  a  sign  remarkable  in 
this  age.14 

10.  There  is  another  sign  attached  to  the  Church,  the  worst  of  all,  and 
the  most  significant,  viz.,  the  fearful  apostasy  witnessed  in  her. l5  The 
reason  why  Paul  so  guardedly  expresses  himself,  e.g.  2  Thess.  2,  concern- 
ing the  falling  away  and  the  rise  of  Antichrist  is,  that  in  every  generation 
such  apostatizing  and  (as  John  says  even  existed  in  his  day)  Antichristian 
powers  should  be  witnessed,  so  that  the  believing  might  be  influenced  to 
occupy  the  position  of  watchfulness.  We  see  how  it  did  this  in  the  past, 
and  surely  it  ought,  in  view  of  what  we  behold,  have  the  same,  and  even 
greater,  tendency  to-day.  See  how  vast,  the  most  powerful  organizations 
have  fallen  away  from  truth  ;  how  bodies  counting  their  millions  of 
adherents  are  in  direct  opposition  to  Bible  doctrine  and  primitive  belief  ; 
how  hundreds  of  smaller  sects,  communities,  etc.,  in  the  aggregate  swell- 
ing to  a  great  multitude,  deny  the  most  fundamental  truths,  dishonor  the 
Christ  by  their  views  and  practices,  and  elevate  their  own  human  derived 
revelations,  etc.,  above  the  Scriptures.  Bad  and  extended  as  the  apostasy 
was  in  the  past,  yet  it  is  a  fact,  undeniable  that  so  far  as  mere  numbers  or 
the  variety  of  form  is  concerned,  that  to-day  more  of  mankind  are  enthralled 
at  one  time  in  the  meshes  of  apostasy  than  ever  before.  Behold  the  Papacy 
(crippled  indeed  in  her  temporal  power  but  as  vigorous  as  ever  in  aposta- 
tizing as  witnessed  recently  in  the  promulgation  of  the  immaculate  concep- 
tion, infallibility  of  the  Pope,  etc.),  the  Greek  Church  (in  its  exaltation  of 


120  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  '  [PEOP.    174. 

sacraments,  etc.)  the  Mormons,  and,  in  brief,  a  large  number  out  of  the 
hundreds  of  conflicting  systems  of  belief  now  extant  in  the  world,  and  is  it 
not  true  that  while  old  forms  of  heresy  and  antagoriism  are  retained  and 
revived,  new  forms  have  sprung  up  in  all  directions.  Seeing  this  state 
among  the  professing  people  of  God,  a  state  to  which  infidelity  (not  recog- 
nizing how  God's  spirit  has  predicted  it  as  a  result  of  human  nature)  sneer- 
ingly  points  as  indicative  of  the  unreality  of  Christianity,  a  state  in  which 
is  fearfully  realized  Paul's  (2  Tim.  4  :  3,  4)  prediction  :  "  For  the  time  will 
come,  when  they  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine;  but  after  their  own  lusts 
shall  they  heap  to  themselves  teachers,  having  itching  cars;  and  they  shall 
turn  a  wag  their  ears  from  the  truth  and  shall  be  turned  unto  fables.''1  Alas  ! 
how  true  in  the  past,  and  how  true  at  the  present  time.  The  thoughtful 
may  well  ponder  it,  when  witnessing  the  wonderful  activity  of  all  con- 
nected therewith.  Such  a  condition,  however  painful,  is  a  prerequisite  to 
the  development  of  the  culminated  Antichrist.18 

11.  Another  sign  is  the  continued  conversion  of  some.  JSTo  matter  how 
great  the  apostasy,  how  mighty  the  defection,  yet  as  the  design  of  this 
dispensation  is  to  gather  out  them  that  believe,  to  call  and  save  some 
in  order  to  form  a  chosen  body  in  the  Theocratic  ordering,  there  al- 
ways must,  and  will  be,  a  true  and  faithful  people  of  God  ;  not  indeed, 
as  some  foolishly  and  arrogantly  claim,  all  belonging  to  this  or  that  body 
of  professing  believers,  but  found  in  the  various  denominations,  God-obey- 
ing and  fearing  men  and  women  who  have  heartily  embraced  the  Saviour 
provided  for  them.  The  preached  Word  now,  as  ever,  will  find  its  differ- 
ent classes  of  hearers,  but  among  them  is  one,  the  minority  it  maybe,  which 
receives  the  truth  in  honest  hearts  and  develops  the  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness pertaining  to  it.  This  lias  always  been  so,  even  in  the  darkest  period, 
but  it  is  eminently  the  east;  now.  "While  the  tares  are  numerous,  tall  and 
great,  there  is  more  wheat  to  day  in  the  field  than  ever  before  at  one  time. 
In  all  countries  it  is  growing,  ready  to  fill  the  garner.  This  encourages 
us  to  believe  that  the  end  is  near,  for  it  shows  the  present  success  in  gather- 
ing out  that  elect  number  who  are  to  inherit  the  Kingdom,  and  that  the 
number  is  being  rapidly  completed.  The  recent  successful  labors  of 
ministers  and  laymen  are  encouraging  amid  the  widespread  lukewarmness, 
coldness,  deadncss  and  apostasy  of  the  Church,  and  like  the  remarkable 
success  of  apostolic  preaching  in  Jerusalem,  may  be  the  immediate  fore- 
runners of  the  speedy  Coming  end.  God  is  graciously  and  mercifully 
working,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  such  grace  and  mercy 
must  not  be  received  as  indicative  of  the  non-fulfilment  of  His  own  predic- 
tions. The  past  dealings  of  God  show,  that  just  before  the  infliction  of 
righteous  judgment  lie  has  been  most  kind  and  condescending,  and  thus 
it  may  be  again.17 

12.  Another  sign  is  the  present  recovering  strength  of  the  Papacy.  Men, 
in  view  of  the  loss  of  her  temporal  dominions  have  predicted  her  contin- 
ued diminution  of  power  among  the  nations,  but  this  down  to  the  con- 
cealed or  first  stage  of  the  Advent  cannot  and  will  not  take  place.  The 
mistake  has  arisen  from  confounding  the  culminated  Antichrist  with  the 
Papacy,  a  mistake  that  is  now  generally  avoided  by  prophetical  writers  (see 
Prop.  161,  etc.).  It  is  distinctly  predicted  that  the  Papacy  (the  only  body 
existing  that  fully  meets  in  every  particular  the  prophetical  description) 
shall  exist  down  beyond  the  gathering  of  the  144,000  (Rev.  14  :  8),  and 
shall  come  to  an  end  before  (Rev.  17  :  10)  the  battle  of  the  great  day  (Rev. 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  121 

19  :  19,  20,  for  the  "false  prophet"  is  thus  unmistakably  shown  to  be 
different  from  the  Papacy).  It  is  yet  to  play  an  important  part,  and  to 
experience  a  terrible  ordeal  from  the  nations  whom  it  has  seduced,  even 
after  the  resurrection  and  translation  of  a  chosen  body.  Ilence  it  is 
reasonable  not  to  look  for  its  destruction,  but  rather  for  increased  vigor 
and  reneived  claims.  These  are  accordingly  found  in  it,  for  notwithstand- 
ing the  blows  it  has  received,  it  is  yet  the  most  power ful  in  numbers,  and 
its  influence  is  widening  in  England,  America  and  other  countries.  Its 
recent  dogmas  give  it  a  certain  maturity  that  in  this  age  is  significant  ;  its 
ancient  spirit  is  revived  and  is  manifested  in  extraordinary  missionary 
efforts  and  a  propagandism  that  is  successful  in  gaining  converts  among 
the  influential  and  powerful,  as  well  as  among  the  weak  and  lowly.  Antici- 
pating her  doom  as  delineated  in  prophecy,  her  present  struggles  to 
regain  a  supremacy  over  the  nations  of  the  earth,  are  of  deep  interest,  in- 
asmuch as  they  indicate  precisely  that  state  of  affairs  which,  by  the  revival 
of  Hildebrandic  claims,  etc.,  will  inevitably  bring  upon  her  that  hatred  of 
nations  resulting  in  her  final  and  total  ruin.  Therefore  the  position  and 
assumptions  of  the  Papacy  are  way-marks  of  nearness  that  the  thoughtful 
will  do  well  to  consider.  She  invites  the  storm,  and  it  will  come  in  due 
time  with  overwhelming  fury.18 

13.  "  The  confidence  in  the  fiefhf1  or  the  schemes  for  the  regeneration  of 
Society  through  the  development  of  Humanity,  is  a  noted  sign,  of  the 
present  day.  While  the  spirit  has  always,  more  or  less,  existed,  it  is  only 
more  recently  that  it  has  been  wonderfully  developed.  Socialism,  Com- 
munism, Ilarmonial  Philosophy,  Pantheism,  nationalism,  Politics,  etc.,  are 
all  endeavoring  to  show  how  the  world  is  to  be  reformed.  It  is  not  simply 
unbelief  in  the  Word  that  exists,  but  such  confidence  in  the  ability  of  man 
to  elevate  himself  to  the  highest  state  of  perfection,  that  multitudes  of  the 
intelligent  and  able  are  suggesting  and  advocating  plans  for  the  ameliora- 
tion and  exaltation  of  the  race,  independent  of,  and  esteemed  far  better 
than,  God's  plan.  Some  present  an  Eclectic  scheme  which  even  praises 
Christ  as  a  model  of  humanity  while  denying  His  being  a  Redeemer  ;  others 
cut  loose  from  the  Bible  entirely  and  give  us  new  plans  of  "  Reform," 
"  Rights,"  "  Liberty,"  etc.  All  agree  in  denying  what  God  says  respect- 
ing humanity,  and  the  necessity  of  having  a  Mediator  and  Redeemer.  Its 
advocates  are  to  be  counted  by  the  thousand,  and  embrace  leading  writers 
of  all  classes,  from  those  who  endeavor  to  make  their  views  as  little  offen- 
sive as  possible  to  Christian  belief  to  those  who  are  most  outrageous  blas- 
phemers. Now  let  the  reader  consider  the  state  of  the  world  as  predicted 
immediately  before  the  end  ;  the  world  arrayed  in  hostility  to  Christ  and 
His  Word,  confederated  against  Him,  and  surely  if  we  are  drawing  near  to 
that  period,  it  is  reasonable  to  see  the  elements  already  working  prelimi- 
nary to  such  a  result.  Hence,  this  condition  is  the  very  one  that  ought  to 
be  anticipated,  viz.  that  men  under  the  plausible  pleas  of  perfectibility, 
etc.,  should  be  led  astray.19 

14.  The  most  insidious  forms  and  elements  are  used,  to  lead  to  a  prac- 
tical unbelief 'of  the  Word,  and  to  induce  a  spirit  of  worldliness.  Thus  e.g. 
the  cry  of  toleration  raised  in  many  quarters.  While  intolerance  is  mani- 
fested in  some  directions  in  sects  and  in  the  world  (and  infidelity  rejoices 
in  holding  up  the  intolerance  of  the  old  Genevan,  Scottish  and  Puritan 
state,  without  any  effort  at  considering  the  motives  and  the  age),  yet,  so 
far  as  the  Church  is  concerned,  the  leaven  of  toleration,  as  now  advocated 


122  THE  TIIEOCPATlC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

by  leading  minds,  is  far  more  dangerous.  Cheerfully  admitting  the 
unity  of  believers  in  Christ,  and  the  fraternal  feeling  and  association  that 
should  characterize  such,  our  remarks  are  not  intended  for  that  toleration 
of  others  who  hold  to  the  fundamental  truths  pertaining  to  Christ,  and  who 
in  faith  receive  Him  as  the  Saviour  ;  and  we  exclude  not  the  allowing  to 
others  the  liberty  of  worshipping  God  according  to  the  dictates  of  con- 
science and  knowledge  possessed.  They  apply  to  that  looseness  of  doctrinal 
position,  which  pretends  to  make  life  all  and  doctrine  nothing  ;  which  is 
willing  to  receive  into  fraternal  union  and  cordial  sympathy  those  who 
deny  the  necessity  of  repentance  and  faith,  of  having  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  of 
having  a  divine-human  Saviour,  etc.  It  is  painfully  evident  that  many 
truths  clearly  taught  in  the  Bible,  and  always  esteemed  as  fundamental  in 
forming  a  Christian,  are  now  discarded  by  ministers  and  laymen.  A 
"  Broad  Church"  embracing  the  reception  of,  and  affiliation  with,  virtual 
unbelievers,  denying  or  explaining  away  inspiration,  rejecting  long 
portions  of  the  Word  as  impracticable  at  this  day,  exaggerating  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  present  day  over  that  of  inspired  men,  etc.,  is  advocated  by 
large  numbers  of  sclwlarly  men.  A  "  blood  bought"  Church,  is  to  them  a 
superstition  of  the  past ;  an  humble  trust  and  reliance  upon  all  Script- 
ure as  given  by  holy  men,  is  to  them  evidence  of  folly  ;  the  limiting  of  the 
capabilities  of  human  nature,  making  a  direct  divine  interference  necessary 
in  Salvation  is  to  them  an  exploded  theory  ;  and  thus,  through  a  large 
category.  They  pride  themselves  in  a  man-devised  Reformation  with  a 
sufficient  interpolation  of  Scripture  and  religious  phraseology  to  give  it 
a  Christian  coloring,  and  to  conceal  the  false  views  of  man  and  of  the 
Gospel  entertained,  and  often  eloquently  expressed.  This  fraternizing 
with  and  acknowledging  of  those  as  brethren  in  Christ  who  deny  the  claims 
of  Christ,  not  only  paves  the  way  for  the  condition  of  unbelief  at  the 
Advent  but  prepares  many  for  the  spirit  of  antagonism  and  intolerance 
which  is  to  be  fearfully  exhibited.20 

15.  Thoughtful  men  too  will  ponder  a  remarkable  feature  presented 
in  our  day,  viz.  the  earnest  desire  for  union  upon  a  truly  script  unit 
basis.  The  impending  struggle  with  unbelief,  the  diversity  and  dangers 
existing  within  and  without  the  Church,  the  threatening  aspect  of  multi- 
tudes, has  led  pious  and  devoted  men  of  various  creeds  to  long  for,  and 
inaugurate,  measures  which  should  bring  true  believers,  throughout  the 
Avorld,  into  closer  connection  and  fraternal  interchange.  The  General 
Alliances  as  well  as  the  more  particular,  indicate  this  feeling  and  the  exteut 
to  which  it  is  carried.  So  also  the  Week  of  Prayer  in  which  so  many 
participate.  In  view  of  what  is  in  store  for  the  Church,  viz.  the  terrible 
persecution  so  clearly  predicted,  and  which  must  infallibly  come,  it  is 
significant  that  godly  men — no  matter  how  they  are  regarded  by  intol- 
erant brethren  confessionally  or  sacramentally  bound — everywhere  feel 
the  importance  and  necessity  of  movements  in  this  very  direction.  In- 
deed, it  is  precisely  what  we  ought  to  anticipate,  being  preliminary  to  the 
encouragement  that  the  Church  wrill  need  and  the  work  she  will  have  to 
perform  when  the  hour  of  trial  shall  come.  1  Cor.  13  is  fulfilling  on  a 
scale  never  before  witnessed.21 

16.  The  existence  of  widespread  corruption,  just  as  it  was  in  the  da}'s  of 
Noah,  is  characteristic  of  the  period  preceding  the  Advent.  Such  corrup- 
tion has,  more  or  less,  continuously  existed,  and  at  certain  intervals,  when 
specially  manifested,  has  called  forth,  from  the  godly,  belief  in  a  speedy 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  123 

Advent.  But  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  such  wickedness  is  always  propor- 
tionate to  the  amount  of  light  enjoyed,  and  if  the  advantages,  privileges, 
testimony,  etc.,  of  the  present  day  are  regarded,  the  wickedness  is  far 
greater  than  at  any  other  time,  being  the  more  inexcusable.  Consider  the 
crime  annually  committed  :  the  awful  statistics  of  our  towns  and  cities  ; 
the  arson,  robbery,  adultery,  fornication,  rape,  prostitution,  divorce,  free- 
loveism,  swindling,  fraud,  strikes,  profanity,  drunkenness,  violence,  murder, 
assassinations,  etc.,  reported  by  our  newspapers  (and  which  really  is  but  a 
small  portion  of  what  is  actually  done),  and  all  this  committed  where  the 
Gospel  is  accessible,  and  who  can  estimate  the  enormity  of  such  sinfulness. 
So  great  and  widely  spread  is  it  too,  that  many  even  of  the  secular  press 
direct  attention  to  it  as  something  deplorable,  indicating  a  state  of  morals 
which  must,  if  not  in  some  way  checked,  lead  to  disastrous  consequences. 
Can  we  take  up  a  newspaper  without  seeing  evidence  of  such  a  state  ? 
Admitting  the  good,  at  the  side  of  it  stands  an  immense  amount  of  evil. 
And  this  is  only  introductory  to  that  which  is  yet  to  come.  If  the  sinful- 
ness of  the  world,  of  our  cities  and  towns  were  steadily  diminishing  ;  if 
the  statistics  of  crime  would  indicate  a  constantly  lessening  number  ;  the 
sign  would  fail,  but  as  the  end  is  approaching  when  an  overwhelming  Hood 
of  evil  springing  out  of  corrupt  human  nature  is  to  be  experienced,  the 
evidence  of  such  corruption,  if  we  arc  near,  in  its  preliminary- forms  must 
be  existing.  That  they  do  so,  no  believer  in  the  denunciations  of  sinful- 
ness by  God  can  possibly  deny.  Hence  we  hold  them,  as  the  Spirit  has 
taught  us,  a  siyn  of  approaching  judgments." 

17.  But  this  is  not  all,  for  while  the  Saviour  has  in  general  terms 
directed  us  to  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot,  the  Spirit  has  more  particularly 
described  the  time  preceding  the  Advent,  and  we  have  only  to  compare  such 
predictions  with  the  present  to  satisfy  ourselves  that  they  are  painfully  urn  in- 
fested. Thus  e.g.  1  Tim.  4  :  1-1,  "  Now  the  Spirit  speaketh  expressly, 
that  in  the  latter  times  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to  seduc- 
ing spirits,  and  doctrines  of  devils  ;  speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy  ;  having  their 
conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron  ;  forbidding  to  marry  ami  commanding  to 
abstain  from  meats,"  etc.  However  applicable  this  may  be  to  Socialistic 
and  other  theories  ;  however  prevalent  in  some  of  its  features  here  and  there, 
yet  more  recently  a  system  has  arisen,  which  in  view  of  the  number  and 
respectability  of  its  defenders  is  a  significant  fulfilment  of  the  prediction. 
"While  Spiritualism  has  existed  in  some  of  its  forms  before  (even  table-rap- 
ping, etc.,  practised  by  the  Jews,  p.  3G9  Delitzsch's  Sys.  of  Bib.  Psyc.),*3 
yet  it  is  only  recently  that  extensive  works,  numerous  writings,  etc.  have 
perfected  it  into  a  sort  of  religious  system,  claiming  a  large  host  of 
adherents.  However  much  the  Papacy,  etc.,  has  invoked  the  aid  of  demons 
(i.e.  the  souls  of  men  who  have  died,  in  prayer,  or  of  Mary  as  a  kind  of  god- 
dess, or  of  supposed  divine  agents),  this  is  pre-eminently  characteristic  of 
Spiritualism — its  leading,  fundament  cd  doctrine.  "Doctrines  of  Devils,'" 
or  rather  "  of  demons,"  has  been  by  the  best  of  interpreters  and  by 
numerous  critics,  in  view  of  the  meaning  of  the  original,  applied,  and 
justly,  to  doctrines  respecting  or  derived  professedly  from  the  souls  of 
departed  ones.  The  word  "  demons"  translated  "  devils"  may  denote  "  a 
god  or  goddess,  or  a  divine  being,  or  the  souls  of  deceased  persons,  forming 
tutelary  divinities,  geniuses,  or  teachers,  and  lastly  a  demon  in  the  Jewish 
sense,  a  bad  spirit  subject  to  Satan" — so  Barnes  Com.  loci,  and  many  others.2* 
The  fulfilment  determines  what  meaning  is  to  be  applied,  and  this  we  find 


124  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

in  the  system  now  arising,  viz.,  the  teaching  of  doctrines  pertaining  to,  and 
professedly  derived  from,  the  souls  of  deceased  persons.  A  system  so  ex- 
clusively based  upon  this  feature  is  certainly  a  sign  that  ought  to  arrest 
attention.  Departing  from  the  faith  as  laid  down  ;  giving  heed  to  seduc- 
ing spirits  ;  such  doctrines  are  received  in  place  of  divine  Revelation.  The 
briefest  summary  of  some  of  these  doctrines  will  sufficiently  illustrate  the 
anti-Christian  nature  of  it.  It  claims  to  be  a  "  New  Dispensation"  (Judge 
Edmonds)  ;  a  "  new  way  of  religious  Light"  (Hare)  ;  its  authority  to  be 
superior  to  that  of  the  Bible  (Harris)  ;  which  teaches  that  there  is  no 
Divinity  in  Christ  (excepting  as  belongs  to  all  men  in  common),  and  that 
He  was  only  a  medium  (Harris)  ;  that  there  is  no  atonement  in  Him  and 
no  salvation  by  faith  (Harris)  ;  that  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead  and 
no  eternal  judgment  (Owen)  ;  that  sin  is  an  impossibility  and  rightly  con- 
sidered vice  is  virtue.25  It  is  taught  by  some  that  "  nature  is  God  "  and 
that  "  all  things  originate  in  nature"  (Harris)  ;  that  all  men  irrespective  of 
character  will  be  saved  (Harris)  ;  that  we  can  even  pray  to  the  devil  (so 
Mi.<s  Doten,  Banner  of  Light,  Dec.  21,  18GI,  and  March  1,  1802,  etc.)  ; 
and  that  marriage  as  now  constituted  and  enjoined  is  a' curse  and  should 
be  abrogated  for  "spiritual  affinities"  (Spear,  Banner  of  Light,  Spi. 
Telegraph,  etc).  The  sickening  list  could  well  be  extended  as  held  by 
extremists,  and  more  or  less  connived  at  by  the  moderates,16  but  this  will 
suffice  to  show  how  accurately  God's  Holy  Word  is  fulfilling  before  our  eyes, 
and  in  things  too  which  are  said  to  be  given  as  "  exptessly"  illustrative  of 
"  the  Inst  I i hips."  But  in  connection  with  these  things,  so  many  others  are 
added  adapted  to  the  longings  and  spiritual  cravings  of  man,  that  a  large 
number  iniluenced  by  the  boasted  "  life  and  immortality  brought  to  light" 
by  it,  accept  of  the  system  without  seeing  or  appreciating  the  depths  of  in- 
iquity. Now  the  careful  student  of  the  Word,  who  sees  it  clearly  predicted, 
that,  as  the  tjnie  of  the  end  draws  nigh,  there  must  be  a  powerful  spirit  of 
"  man- worship' *  gradually  introduced  to  pave  the  way  for  the  great  Anti- 
christ, looks  around,  as  an  evidence  of  the  approaching  end,  for  this  spirit. 
He  beholds  it,  alas,  fearfully  predominant  not  only  in  Rationalism,  Social- 
ism, etc.,  but  again  lifted  up  in  this  widespread  delusion  extending  to  the 
pulpit  and  the  pew,  to  all  classes  and  professions,  and  so  fascinating  in  its 
appeals  to  the  heart,  that  men  of  intelligence  and  high  position  become  its 
willing  converts  and  defenders.21 

18.  The  Spirit  widens  the  evidence  or  signs  by  giving  us  a  cluster  of  them 
in  2  Tim.  3  :  1-9  :  "  This  know  also,  that  in  the  last  days  perilous  times 
shall  come,'1''  etc.  Now  while  the  characters  following  have  always  more  or 
less,  existed,  it  is  also  true — as  needs  be  for  a  sign — that  they  are 
abundantly  manifested  to-day.  Let  us  briefly  survey  them,  (a)  "  For  men 
shall  he  lovers  of  their  oivn  selves" — selfishness  is  eminently  characteristic 
of  these  times,  so  much  so  that  it  needs  no  corroboration,  (b)  "  Covetous  ;" 
the  love  of  money  is  another  marked  feature  of  the  age,  evidencing  itself  in 
a  thousand  ways,  (c)  "  Boasters  ;"  how  much  this  is  exhibited  in  the 
arrogation  of  things,  in  inordinate  self-conceit,  etc.,  we  leave  the  reader  to 
judge,  (d)  "  Proud;"  unreasonable  self  esteem,  an  overweaning  conceit 
of  supposed  superiority,  in  wealth,  position,  talents,  beauty,  dress,  accom- 
plishments, station,  knowledge,  etc.,  is  so  abundant  on  all  sides  that  it 
needs  no  proof,  (e)  "  Inventors  of  evil  things  ;"  behold  the  various  de- 
vices to  gratify  passion  without  discovery,  the  introduction  of  new  forms  of 
luxury,  new  modes  of  gratification,  new  arts  and  plans  to  practice  evil,  etc. 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  125 

Some  tilings  are  of  so  dark  a  nature  that  a  hint  alone  must  suffice.  In  the 
moral,  religious,  social,  physical,  such  things  exist,  and  to  so  great  an  ex- 
tent that  statesmen  and  eminent  jurists  have  directed  attention  to  it  as  ex- 
ceedingly lamentable,  (f)  "Disobedient  to  parents  ;"  how  largely  this  is 
indicative  of  the  age  has  been  the  complaint  of  many  writers,  witnessed  as 
it  is  in  a  disregard  to  home  influence,  and  congregating  in  places  of  public 
resort,  in  idleness,  wilfulness,  vanity,  want  of  honor  in  speech  and  atten- 
tion, etc.,  that  it  has  become  common  to  speak  of  "  young  America," 
"  fast  young  men  and  women,"  etc.  The  saloons,  numerous  public  enter- 
tainments, etc.,  foster  this  spirit,  (g)  "  Unthankful,"  i.e.,  manifesting 
ingratitude — how  this  is  made  apparent,  needs  no  commentary,  both  toward 
God  and  man.  (h)  "  Unholy,"  i.e.,  are  regardless  of  duty  to  God  and  man, 
possess  no  piety  and  are  irreligious.  The  multitudes  in  this  sad  condition 
and  boasting  even  of  it,  is  the  mate  to  the  prediction,  (i)  "  Without 
natural  affection,"  i.e.,  a  want  of  regard  for  children.  It  is,  aside  from 
other  considerations,  amply  sufficient  that  the  most  eminent  medical  men 
have  pointed  out  as  a  crying  sin  of  this  and  other  nations  the  child-murder 
in  the  womb  and  the  preventives  (so  boldly  advertised  and  circulated  in 
books)  employed.  Statistics  of  decrease  in  some  localities  perfectly  start- 
ling are  presented,  (j)  "  Truce  breakers,"  i.e.,  those  who  violate  com- 
pacts or  agreements.  A  disregard  of  one's  word,  an  aversion  to  be  held 
by  a  giv.en  compact,  a  violation  of  trust,  is  undoubtedly  a  char- 
acteristic of  the  age  as  evidenced  in  the  frequent  failures  of  trust,  the 
swindling  operations,  etc.  (k)  "  False  accusers ;"  that  is,  those  who  are 
(marg.  read.)  "  makeoates,"  given  to  exciting  contention  and  quarrels. 
Society  suffers  greatly,  in  all  its  relations,  from  this  class.  (1)  "  Inconti- 
nent," i.e.,  without  strength  to  resist  the  solicitations  of  passion.  How 
mightily  this  is  evidenced  in  intemperance,  sensuality,  places  of  assigna- 
tion, etc.,  is  self-evident.  (m)  "Fierce ;"  i.e.,  harsh,  severe  toward 
others.  The  lack  of  gentleness,  mildness,  meekness,  and  the  exhibition  of 
harshness  and  cruelty  is  so  general,  that  scarcely  a  newspaper  can  be  read 
without  containing  its  illustrations  of  the  fact,  (m)  "  Despisers  of  those 
who  are  good;"  how  largely  this  is  characteristic  of  the  times  is  loudly 
proclaimed  in  the  multitude  of  books  and  papers  which  speak  disparagingly 
and  contemptuously  of  the  ministry  and  all  upholders  of  Christianity,  (n) 
"Traitors" — persons  who  are  willing  to  betray  friend  and  country — to  be- 
tray the  trust  of  friend,  employer,  and  company — to  betray  the  confidence 
even  of  wife  or  husband,  etc.,  are  but  too  abundant,  (o)  "  Heady,"  i.e.. 
precipitate,  rash.  There  is  no  enterprise  or  project,  however  fooiish  and 
inconsiderate,  but  what  crowds  are  hurried  into  it,  even  if  it  leads  to  dis- 
turbing the  order  and  peace  of  society,  and  ultimately  to  ruin.  Every  day 
is  this  tendency  illustrated  the  world  over,  (p)  "High-minded"  i.e., 
puffed  up,  inflated  with  pride.  Men,  not  merely  proud  but  overbearing  in 
pride,  esteeming  themselves  better  than  all  others  in  attainments,  wisdom, 
knowledge,  etc.  are  but  too  frequent,  (q)''  Lovers  of  pleasures  more  than 
lovers  of  God ;"  how  true  i3  this  of  the  multitude,  who  are  willing  to 
sacrifice  God  and  His  truth  for  the  sake  of  pleasures,  gratification,  and  dis- 
sipation, (r)  "  Having  a  form  of  godliness  but  denying  the  power  thereof;" 
many  profess  religion,  make  a  parade  of  the  forms  of  some  religion,  but 
practically  allow  true  piety  to  have  no  controlling  influence  upon  the  heart 
and  life.  Alas,  we  have  this  noticeable  in  the  most  bigoted  adherence  to, 
and  show  of,  forms.     Thus  far  this  Scripture  corroborated  by  others, 2S  and 


126  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  174. 

as  all  these  characters  are  existing — not  one  missing — and  that  too  in  large 
growing  numbers,  no  wonder  that  godly  men  esteem  such  a  fulfilment  be- 
fore our  eyes  evidence  of  nearness.29 

19.  The  continued  unbelief  of  the  Jewish  nation  down  to  the  Advent. 
Some  infer  the  contrary  and  promise  us  a  great  previous  conversion  of  the 
Jews.  The  fig-tree  putting  forth  its  leaves  is  taken  for  a  figurative  repre- 
sentation of  the  nation  (but  it  proves  too  much  as  Luke  21  :  29  adds  "  and 
all  the  trees,^)  in  this  transition  state,  while  the  parable  is  simply  illustra- 
tive of  our  ability  to  discern  the  signs  of  the  times.  Aside  from  other  con- 
siderations, the  continued  unbelief  of  the  nation  is  made  apparent  from  two 
things  :  first,  the  misei'able  condition  it  will  be  in  just  previous  to  the  open 
manifestation  of  Christ  and  His  saints,  as  e.g.  portrayed  in  Zech.  14,  which 
state  is  the  result  of  their  unbelief.  Second,  the  manner  of  their  conversion 
is  specifically  made  concomitant  with  the  Advent  itself — unbelief  continuing 
down  (Prop.  113)  until  they  shall  see  Ilim  whom  they  pierced.  The 
144,000  in  Rev.  alleged  to  be  Jews,  are  indeed  such,  but  engrafted  ones — with 
some  natural  Jews  with  them — into  the  Jewish  stock.  If  Jewish  tribula- 
tion, or  Jewish  unbelief,  were  to  cease  before  the  Advent,  then  one  of  the 
signs  would  fail  us,  but  being  seen,  and  having  now  already  extended  over 
a  dreary  eighteen  centuries,  well  may  we  ask,  how  long  yet  ?  Surely  the 
time  elapsed,  has  very  materially,  greatly  shortened  what  yet  remains. 
The  unbelief  of  the  Orthodox  and.  Liberal  Jews  is  sufficiently  manifested.30 

20.  While  this  is  so,  yet  another  sign,  which  a  comparison  of  prophecy 
develops,  is  important,  viz.,  that  as  there, shall  bo  a  restoration  of  a  portion 
of  the  Jews  to  Jerusalem  before  or  when  the  last  great  Antichrist  (who  at- 
tacks them)  arises,  if  we  are  really  nearing  the  end,  a  special  interest  should 
be  taken  by  the  Jews  in  the  Holy  Land  with  a  view  toward  its  ultimate  re- 
covery. How  this  has  been  recently  exhibited  by  prominent  Jews  in 
Europe  and  other  countries  is  well  known  ;  how  earnestly  they  desire  to  be 
there  is  still  apparent  from  their  pilgrimages  to  the  city,  the  high  esteem  in 
which  they  hold  it,  and  the  fervent  prayers  uttered  in  behalf  of  it.  The 
amelioration  of  their  condition  in  leading  countries,  the  wealth  possessed, 
and  power  exerted,  by  them,  etc.,  are  all  requirements  requisite  to  bring 
about  a  speedy  fulfilment  of  the  Word.31 

21.  In  addition  to  this  one,  if  the  Jews  are  again  to  return  and  occupy 
Jerusalem,  then  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  such  a  wasting  or  weakening  of 
the  Ottoman  power  which  holds  the  Holy  Land,  should  be  witnessed  as  to 
make  it  comparatively  easy,  when  the  full  time  comes,  for  them  to  regain 
it.  It  is  contrary  to*  all  precedent  that  Turkey  would  yield  up  such  a 
province,  so  contiguous  and  advantageous,  without  a  struggle.  But 
crippled  and  gradually  exhausted,  the  enterprise  becomes  less  and  less  diffi- 
cult. Now  if  we  really  are  approaching  toward  the  end,  are  nigh  to  it,  we 
ought  to  see  this  process  of  demolition  going  on,  converting  one  of  the 
most  powerful  of  empires  into  so  weak  a  power  as  has  happened,  that  for 
many  years  its  civil  and  political  integrity  was  preserved  mainly  through 
foreign  powers,  and  Turkey  has  been  proclaimed  "  the  dying  man."  All 
prophetical  writers,  without  exception,  find  it  a  truly  significant  sign.32 

22.  Another  is,  that  we  are  not  only  living  under  the  divided  form,  the 
disintegrated  condition  of  the  Roman  Empire,  the  lower  part  of  the  image 
representative  of  Gentile  times,  amid  the  mingling  and  commingling  of 
nations,  etc.,  but  during  the  headless  condition  of  this  empire,  a  condition 
which,  as  Revelation  teaches,  is  not  far  removed  from  the  end,  Prop.  1G0. 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  127 

The  chronological  position  that  we  to-day  occupy  in  its  history,  is  intensely 
suggestive  to  the  careful  prophetic  student.  Xo  intelligent  man  can  study 
it,  and  the  connection  that  it  sustains  to  the  whole,  without  being  deeply 
and  powerfully  impressed  with  a  sense  of  nearness  to  the  end.  From  the 
days  of  the  distinguished  Mede  to  the  present,  every  writer  on  the  subject 
lias  expressed  this  conviction  necessarily  growing  out  of  it.33 

23.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  nations  shall  be  confederated  against  the 
Christ,  the  student  of  prophecy  in  connection  with  the  evils  enumerated, 
will  not  forget  to  notice  the  signs  in  tlte  political  horizon.  The  political  in- 
trigue and  corruption,  the  vast  indebtedness,  the  tax  of  standing  armies, 
the  elements  of  discord  in  sectional  interests,  the  strife  between  capital  and 
labor,  the  monopolies  so  largely  fostered,  the  ineffectiveness  of  law,  the 
bribery  in  elections  and  high  places,  the  lobbying  of  legislative  interests, 
the  national  sins  of  the  past  and  present,  the  direct  antagonism  of  existing 
parties,  etc.,  we  see  giving  abundant  fuel  already  prepared  for  the  fiery  out- 
burst of  that  wild  and  destructive  storm  which  is  to  revolutionize  the 
nations,  and  make  them  confederate  in  anti-Christian  policy  and  attack. 
It  is  true,  that  the  prophecy  points  us  more  directly  to  the  old  Eoman 
earth,  but  all  nations  shall,  more  or  less,  feel  the  incoming  whirlwind. 
The  unsettled  condition  of  European  nations,  the  social  agitation,  the 
destructive  elements  (again  and  again  pressed  down  by  force),  the  revolu- 
tionary spirit  within  them,  the  imperial  and  republican,  the  ultramontane 
and  liberal  forces,  etc.,  are  things  so  well  known  that  a  mere  mention  will 
suffice.     Yet  these  are  the  very  things  that  nearness  indicates.31 

24.  Another  sign  is  the  vast  activity  of  the  press  in  behalf  of  evil.  Grate- 
fully acknowledging  the  amount  of  good  that  it  has  done,  the  millions  of 
Bibles,  religious  books,  papers,  tracts,  etc.,  that  it  has  printed,  yet  it  is  a 
fact  that  we  ought  not  to  conceal  from  ourselves  that  it  is  still  more  power- 
fully used  in  behalf  of  evil.  We  leave  a  man,  who  has  no  sympathy  with 
our  doctrinal  position,  and  who  fondly  predicts  continued  progress  merg- 
ing into  a  Millennium,  give  us  the  statistics  of  one  country.  John  Angell 
James  (Church  in  Earned,  p.  89),  gives  some  lengthy  statistics  of  the  press 
in  Great  Britain,  the  footing  of  which  shows,  that,  while  in  one  year  the 
issues  of  absolutely  vicious  and  corrupting  literature  was  28,82<i,0(>0  that  of 
Bibles,  Testaments,  tracts,  newspapers,  and  periodicals  of  all  kinds  pertain- 
ing to  religion,  amounted  to  24,418,020,  leaving  a  balance  of  4,407,380  in 
favor  of  pernicious  papers.  To  this  startling  balance,  we  are  assured  that 
millions  more  can  be  safely  added.  Since  then  such  publications  have 
multiplied,  catering  to  the  corrupt  passions  of  man.  It  is  simply  appalling 
and  has  become  so  glaring  even  in  this  country,  that  at  times  the  govern- 
ment had  to  interfere,  in  forbidding  the  circulation  of  the  worst  forms 
through  the  P.  0.,  and  in  seizures.  Places  like  Xew  York,  Boston, 
Chicago,  etc.,  send  forth  daily  and  weekly  an  enormous  amount.  Xow  if 
evil  is  to  be  predominant  as  soon  as  we  anticipate  ;  if  it  is  surely  and 
steadily  drawing  nigh  ;  such  an  element  of  power  as  the  press  ought  to  be 
wielded  with  telling  force  in  its  interest.  Alas  !  this  too  is  already  accom- 
plished.35 

25.  The  astonishing  increase  of  knowledge  (Dan.  12  :  4),  is  another  sign. 
If  this  refers,  as  many  believe,  to  knowledge  respecting  prophecy,  then  is  it 
verified  in  the  diligent  and  successful  labors  of  life-long  prophetical  stu- 
dents within  the  last  fifty  years,  and,  especially,  in  the  recent  efforts  of 
European  and  American  writers  on  the  same  subject.     But  if  (to  which  we 


128  THE   TIIEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

now  more  specially  direct  attention)  it  includes  an  increase  of  knowledge  in 
general,  connected  with  a  general  activity,  etc.,  thetilet  this  age  with  its 
marked  progress  in  all  the  sciences,  wonderful  discoveries  and  inventions, 
etc.,  be  considered,  and  is  it  not  strictly  true,  that,  with  the  facilities  now 
enjoyed,  there  is  a  rapid  and  constant  advance  among  the  nations  in  the 
dissemination  of  knowledge  of  all  kinds.  The  multiplication  of  educa- 
tionil  advantages,  institutions,  and  the  devotion  of  multitudes  to  varied 
branches  of  learning,  as  well  as  the  astonishing  increase  of  books  on  all 
known  subjects  brought  within  easy  reach  of  all,  is  doing  wonders  in  this 
direction.  If  it  were  sanctified,  it  might  be  a  sign  of  good,  but  unsanctified 
as  the  mass  is,  it  becomes  a  sign  of  apjiroaching  evil.  Mere  knowledge  and 
progress,  is  not  holiness,  but  adds  greatly  to  responsibility  ;  instead  of 
being  regenerators  of  the  world  (as  many  dream)  they  are  mercifully 
designed  to  lead  us  to  the  only  Eegenerator,  the  Christ.  The  thoughtful 
ponder  such  things,  in  view  too  of  steam  and  electricity  bringing  the 
nations  into  daily  communication  and  removing  the  effect  of  distances,  as 
a  state  necessarily  preparative  to  the  mighty  changes  which  still  await  the 
world.36 

26.  Even  what  men  regard  as  the  ordinary  outgrowth  of  nature,  or  as  in- 
cidentals in  the  history  of  nations,  are  s'gns,  such  as  hurricanes,  earth- 
cpxakes,  pestilences,  wars,  famines,  fioods,  hailstorms,  cyclones,  meteors, 
plagues,  etc.  Such  things  are  indeed  continuously  to  exist,  more  or  less, 
down  to  the  end  itself  as  a  part  of  the  entailed  curse.  And,  if  they  should 
fail,  if  any  one  of  them  should  rail,  then  God's  Word  would  fail.  Being 
connected  with  the  curse,  standing  related  to  the  moral,  it  is  reasonable  to 
anticipate,  that  as  we  reach  toward  the  end,  and  especially  when  humanity 
is  boasting  itself  in  progress  and  hopes  of  deliverance  that  God  would 
continue  these,  if  not  intensify  them,  loth  as  a  sign  to  those  who  fear  Him, 
and  as  evidence  to  the  worshippers  of  nature  that  her  hidden  forces  are  be- 
yond man's  control  to  regenerate.  Naturalists  and  Scientists,  unbelieving, 
laugh  at  our  credulity  in  believing  such  things  to  stand  for  signs,  when 
they  themselves  within  the  grasp  of  these  terrible  messengers  are  compelled 
to  admit  their  inability  to  cope  with  them,  and  are  as  helpless  to  avert  the 
evil  as  the  babe.  Oosterzee  (Ch.  Doy.,  vol.  2,  p.  796)  says  :  "  Consider- 
ing the  inseparable  connection  between  the  natural  and  moral  Avorld, 
which  is  made  manifest  in  many  a  word  and  fact  of  saving  Revelation,  it 
cannot  sound  incredible  to  us  that  inanimate  nature  also  shall  feel  the  thrill 
of  the  shocks,  which  cause  the  heart  of  the  animate  to  cpiail  ;  although  we 
hold  ourselves  utterly  incompetent  to  determine  what  in  this  part  of  the 
Eschatological  proclamation,  is  to  be  taken  literally  and  what  is  not." 
This  is  true  ;  hence  while  abstaining  from  particularizing,  yet  there  is  a 
sufficiency  given  to  show  that  the  feeling  so  universally  held  by  the  Church 
in  the  past,  that  nature  itself,  as  a  sufferer  and  as  a  witness  of  God's  tvoitld 
participate  in  testifying  to  coming  wrath,  is  undoubtedly  a  correct  one. 
Material  forces  have  constantly  in  the  past  been  employed  by  God  to  sub- 
serve moral  ends,  and  it  is  the  most  reasonable  to  conclude  that  He  will 
specially  do  so  as  the  end  of  this  dispensation  draws  nigh  ;  which  is  corrob- 
orated, not  only  by  the  past  understanding  of  the  great  and  good  but,  even 
by  an  instinctive  dread  which  thus  anticipates  them,  both  being  founded  on 
the  correct  idea  that  they  are  forces  under  God's  control  and  command. 
Now  let  the  reader  consider  the  events  of  the  last  twenty  years,  the  con- 
stantly recurring  evils  and  inflictions  over  all  the  earth,  the  lack  of  no 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  129 

former  ones  with  the  introduction  of  new  ones,  and  with  all  that  is  past 
and  present  history,  consider  the  constantly  recurring  wars — as  if  purposely 
to  show  how  vain  the  hopes  of  humanity — the  present  attitude  and  warlike 
attitude  of  nations  in  their  heavy  armaments,  etc.,  and  all  these  instrumen- 
talities for  the  destruction  of  human  life  and  property  on  an  enlarged 
scale,  are  evidences  not  merely  of  the  continued  corruption  of  human 
nature  but  of  approaching  wrath.  They  teach  a  lesson  if  we  will  hearken 
to  it,  of  the  long  delayed  vengeance  coming  which  even  now  occasionally 
gleams  across  the  bosom  of  nature  and  fitfully  plays  with  the  wrath  of  man. 
If  the  thunderbolts  shot  forth  from  disturbed  nature  upon  helpless  man  ; 
if  the  woes  and  horrors  of  cruel  war  springing  from  depraved  human 
nature,  cannot  and  do  not  arrest  the  attention  of  proud  man  leading  him 
to  acknowledge  that  God  must  come  to  remove  them  if  ever  removed,  and 
to  pray  to  Him  to  speedily  come  and  perform  so  glorious  a  work  (according 
to  His  Word),  then  indeed  the  lessons  intended  by  Providence  and  enforced 
by  sad  experience  fail  in  inspiring  the  faith  and  hope  which  God  mercifully 
intends  by  them.31 

27.  Another  sign  is  the  distinct  "peace  and  safety"  cry.  We  do  not 
refer  to  that  resulting  from  the  denial  of  the  Supernatural,  or  the  rejec- 
tion of  the  nearness  of  the  Second  Advent  or  the  spiritualizing  of  Script- 
ure, or  the  dreams  of  progress  and  the  ultimate  conversion  of  the  world, 
but  to  that  significant  utterance  given  by  "  Peace  Societies."  Such  are 
organized  with  a  large  membership  of  eminent  ministers  and  laymen, 
publishing  periodicals,  pamphlets,  books  and  tracts  in  behalf  of  their 
predictions  and  dreams  of  "  Peace  and  Safety."  Refusing  to  accept  of 
God's  delineation  of  this  dispensation  down  to  the  end  (including  war  and 
rumors  of  war,  etc.),  and  placing  in  this  age  the  "  peace  and  safety"  that 
only  results  from  the  personal  Advent  and  reign  of  Jesus  and  His  glorified 
saints,  they  present  a  glorious  (but  false)  representation  of  the  future,  that 
is  eminently  calculated  to  mislead  many.     (Oomp.  175  and  176. )M 

28.  The  wealth  of  the  Church  is  another  sign.  She  is  now  saying, 
"  I  am  rich  ami  increased  with  goods"  (Lange,  "  yea,  I  hare  become  exceed- 
ingly rich"1),  Rev.  3  :  17.  Whatever  it  may  include  respecting  professed 
spiritual  riches  (Lange,  etc.)  the  language  itself  decidedly  refers  to  riches 
literally,  so  much  so  that  some  (Stuart,  Wetstein,  Yitringa,  etc.)  confine  it 
thus  to  earthly  wealth,  while  others  (as  Barnes)  include  both  ideas.  Even 
such  as  favor  the  one  idea  do  not  exclude  the  other,  for  as  Lange  (loci) 
remarks:  "  the  connection  between  external  riches  and  the  danger  of  an 
inward  conceit  of  riches  cannot  be  ignored."  The  immense  endowments, 
the  costly  churches,  the  large  investments  looking  to  perpetuity,  the 
boasted  incomes,  the  parade  of  vast  yearly  contributions,  the  large  salaries, 
the  societies  with  established  funds,  the  educational  and  publishing  inter- 
ests, etc.,  all  evidence  a  state  of  prosperity  and  riches  which  is  more  and 
more  becoming  the  pride  and  boast  of  the  Church — so  much  so,  that  it  is 
taken  as  evidence  of  substantial  progress  to  Millennial  glory,  and  the  cry  is 
virtually  raised,  we  "have  need  of  nothing,"  i.e.,  Ave  are  indeed  rich,  hav- 
ing enough  of  everything.  Having  wealth,  with  a  spirit  of  self-compla- 
cency, they  deem  themselves  elevated  to  a  high  and  favored  condition.39 

29.  The  almost  universal  desire  to  become  rich,  the  methods  resorted  to 
in  order  to  increase  wealth,  the  gigantic  monopolies  arising,  the  hoarding 
of  riches,  the  aggressiveness  of  capitalists  (James  5  :  1-3,  etc.)  is  not  the 
least  sign  of  approaching  nearness  to  the  end.     Mammon  worshipping, 


130  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  174. 

a  determination  to  be  rich  without  regard  to  principle,  encroachments 
upon  the  poor,  oppressive  measures  to  secure  opulence  and  luxury,  these 
are  characteristics  of  the  last  days.  How  prevalent  they  are  to-day  is  self- 
evident,  since  movements  (England,  Ireland,  Russia,  France,  United  States, 
etc.)  are  on  foot  on  a  fearful  scale  protesting  against  the  power  and 
usage  of  wealth.40 

3U.  Another  sign  is  found  in  the  conferences  of  believers  in  the  near- 
ness of  the  Second  Advent  and  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  and  His  saints, 
strikingly  verifying  Mai.  3  :  16  as  it  stands  related  to  the  sparing  and  the 
last  period  of  the  age.  These  have  been  held  publicly  in  England, 
Canada,  and  this  country  ;  more  private  all  over  the  world.  Thus  faith  in 
God,  the  covenanted  Messiah,  the  utterances  of  the  Spirit,  is  manifested 
to  sustain  the  believer  amid  the  prevailing  unbelief  and  godlessness.41 

31.  The  prophetical  student  finds  a  feature  pertaining  to  the  present 
period  exceedingly  suggestive.  As  the  time  is  approaching  for  the  ending 
of  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  it  is  evident  (in  view  of  nearness)  that, 
because  of  the  predicted  arraying  of  the  nations  against  the  Messiah,  there 
should  be  a  wide  prevailing  interest  taken  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  a  Per- 
son. This  is  apparent  by  the  large  number  of  "  Lives  of  Jesus"  issued 
within  the  last  few  years,  both  Rationalistic  and  Christian,  in  which  He  is 
prominently  portrayed  either  from  an  infidel,  liberal,  or  believing  stand- 
point. It  is  a  matter  of  grave  importance  to  find  that  the  former  have 
been  most  extensively  circulated — edition  after  edition  being  rapidly  ex- 
hausted— thus  moulding  multitudes  to  regard  Jesus  simply  as  a  man  of 
mistaken  genius,  or  a  liberal  Reformer,  or  a  dreamy  enthusiast  (made  so  by 
the  prophecies  of  the  nation),  or  a  harmless  fanatic,  or  even  a  downright 
deceiver.  This  becomes  a  suitable  preparation  of  heart  and  mind  for  the 
drama  that  is  to  be  enacted  against  Him  and  the  Church.42 

32.  The  remarkable  prominence  given  to  the  Scriptures  is  indicative  of 
the  same  nearness.  The  cheap  publication  and  extended  circulation  in 
almost  every  language  of  the  globe,  the  numerous  aids  to  its  comprehen- 
sion, the  varied  versions  and  translations,  the  revisions  and  their  discus- 
sions, the  works  in  defence  of,  or  against  them,  etc.,  has  had  a  tendency  to 
bring  tlte  Wprd  of  God  before  the  people  with  such  startling  conspicuous- 
ness,  that  God.  justifies  Himself  in  first  warning  before  bringing  upon  the 
nations  the  terrible  threatened  judgments.  The  nearer  we  are  to  the 
end,  the  more  prominent  should  be  this  interest  in  the  Scriptures.43 

33.  A  growing  sign  is  the  exceeding  hitterness  of  unbelief.  If  nearing  the 
persecution  still  future,  the  spirit  of  intense  hostility,  manifesting  itself 
in  threats — the  mutterings  of  the  incoming  storm — should  also  appear. 
We  have  already  in  another  connection,  exhibited  by  quotations  and 
extracts  this  desire  to  crush  Christianity  by  persecution.  The  hatred, 
intense  and  unrelenting,  is  already  fully  exhibited,  and,  when  the  time  for 
organized  action  comes,  will  find  its  victims  ready  for  its  vengeance.44 

34.  The  turning  away  from  the  true  Messiah,  Jesus  the  Christ,  and 
invoking  another  Coming  Messiah;,  is  a  sign  of  the  times.  If  the  coming  of 
Antichrist,  the  culminated  head  is  near,  we  should  find  men  already 
expressing  their  faith  and  hope  in  the  Advent  of  some  false  Messiah.  In 
the  schemes  of  self- regeneration  and  progress,  we  are  called  to  "  the  Com- 
ing Man"  (of  whom  Coleridge,  Mill,  Kant,  Compte,  and  others,  are 
designated  "forerunners"  and  "harbingers")  who  shall  "renovate 
society"  and  bring    "a  redemption   of   the  world."     In  the  eulogy  of 


PKOP.  174.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  131 

unbelief,  in  contrast  with  the  Christian  Messiah,  some  kind  of  a  future 
Messiah  is  spoken  of,  and  urged  to  "  a  cordial  reception."45 

35.  A  continuous  sign  is  the  raising  up  of  false  Messiahs  ;  not  merely 
the  proclamation  of  a  Coming  one,  as  in  the  preceding  sign,  but  the  actual 
claim  by  persons  that  they  are  such,  calling  for  adherents.  They  have 
been  in  the  past,  and  they  exist  at  the  present  time.46 

3fi.  The  moral  and  religious  condition  of  our  great  cities  is  a  significant 
sign  of  the  end.  In  view  of  their  position,  influence,  privileges,  etc.,  they 
ought — if  the  notion  of  progress  is  correct — to  be  great  centres  of  religion, 
morality,  virtue,  justice  and  piety.  The  special  advantages  that  they  have 
possessed,  the  highest  talent  and  ability,  the  leading  ministers,  the  relig- 
ious organizations  and  churches,  the  missionary  operations,  the  publica- 
tions of  a  Christian  character,  etc.,  all  should  tend  to  make  them  better, 
more  devoted  to  God,  more  free  from  vice  and  crime.  But  what  are  the 
facts  us  reported,  by  various  classes  of  writers?  We  have  already  shown 
that  they  are  noted  for  wickedness  of  all  kinds,  for  irreligion  and  impiety, 
for  all  the  evils  that  curse  depraved  humanity.17 

37.  The  great  stress  laid  on  secular  education,  as  a  means  of  improve- 
ment and  progress  ;  its  extensive  usage  under  State  patronage  to  elevate 
the  ignorant,  insure  refinement,  and  secure  the  welfare  of  its  recipients  ; 
its  eulogy  as  a  grand  instrumentality  to  stem  vice,  immorality,  and  crime 
— is  a  sign  of  the  last  times  in  the  actual  fruitage  that  it  produces.  Ac- 
complishing good,  especially  in  giving  the  advantages  of  education  and 
intelligence  to  the  poor,  yet  it  must  be  sorrowfully  acknowledged  that  it  is 
becoming  more  and  more  separated  from  the  religious  and  moral  teaching, 
and  that  it  is  falling  into  the  hands  of  thousands  who  infuse  their  own  spirit 
of  unbelief  into  their; pupils.  Education  is  not  molality  or  religion,  for,  as 
the  history  of  the  past  and  the  present  abundantly  evidences,  intelligence 
can  exist  with  lawless  principles,  impurity  of  heart,  and  atrocious  crimes. 
Thousands  of  educators  are  religious,  or  moral,  or  sincere  in  advancing  the 
highest  interests  of  pupils,  but  thousands,  on  the  other  hand,  are  ir- 
religious, or  immoral,  or  bitter  in  covert  and  open  hostility  to  the  Bible 
and  Christianity.48 

38.  The  signs  are  varied,  and  some  are  not  as  distinctive  as  others,  and 
yet  they  are  worthy  of  mention.  (1)  If  we  are  allowed  to  take,  as  many 
do,  the  mixing  of  the  clay  and  iron  of  Dan.  2  :  43,  as  symbolic  of  the 
union  of  constitutional  governments  with  a  popular  element,  more  or  less 
pervading,  or  a  commingling  of  Aristocratic  and  Republican  forms,  this  is 
astonishingly  manifesting  itself  among  the  nations.  (Or,  if  it  be  applied 
to  the  intermingling  of  nations  by  marriage,  amalgamation,  etc.,  this  has 
received  and  still  receives  a  striking  fulfilment.)  (2)  The  extraordinary 
answers  to  prayer  and  faith.  In  Hearing  the  end,  judging  from  analogy, 
it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  God  would  specially  exhibit  His  favor  to 
His  people  of  strong  faith.  This  is  done  in  a  remarkable  manner,  as  if 
purposely  to  rebuke  the  existing  unbelief,  as  e.g.  exemplified  in  Mailer  and 
others.  (3)  The  treatment  of  prophecy  by  unbelief  in  and  without  the 
Church.  Its  neglect,  scornful  allusions,  contempt,  etc.,  evidence  that  we 
are  nearing  the  end.49  (4)  The  renewed  attention  paid  by  scholars  and 
theologians  to  an  intimate  and  abiding  relationship  existing  between  the 
Old  and  the  New  Testaments,  and  the  numerous  works  recently  published 
urging  this  upon  our  attention.  For  as  "  the  time  of  the  end"  draws 
nigh,  it  is   reasonable  to  expect  that — in  view  of  speedy  fulfilments — 


132  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.    174. 

special  prominency  be  given  to  it.  (5)  A  clear  and  distinctive  idea  of  the 
original  and  true  conception  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  is  becoming  more 
and  more  prevalent.  Books,  tracts,  etc.,  are  issued  which  revive  and 
restore  to  its  prophetic  position  and  nature  the  glorious  Kingdom  of  God. 
Such  writings,  as  e.g.  Dr.  Craven's  Excursus  on  the  Basilea  (Lange's 
Com.  Rev.  p.  93),  are  becoming  witnesses,  which  we  ought  to  anticipate  as 
the  Kingdom  itself  again  draws  nigh.  (6)  Pre-Millenarians  are  beginning 
to  realize,  as  they  have  never  before  (unless  we  except  the  quite  early 
Church)  that  the  foundations  of  their  faith  rest  on  two  everlasting  cove- 
nants, the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic.  This,  as  the  day  is  rapidly  approach- 
ing, we  ought  to  expect.  (7)  The  very  large  number  of  works  which  have 
been  recently  published  on  the  Theology  of  the  New  Testament,  giving, 
without  bias,  the  actual  views  held  in  the  Apostolic  age  (and  which  we 
freely  use  and  quote),  are  not  an  insignificant  sign,  recalling  the  Church, 
if  she  heed  the  call,  to  the  Primitive  belief,  before  the  catastrophe  comes. 
(8)  The  astonishing  number  of  works  particularly  directed  to  the  history 
of  the  Roman  Empire  (the  fourth  Beast  of  Daniel),  and  tracing  its  varied 
career  and  changes,  as  if  purposely  to  direct  attention  to  its  connection 
with  the  end.  (9)  The  Lord's  table  which  is  a  sign  (1  Cor.  11  :  20)  has  not 
only  been  a  continuous  one,  urging  to  the  posture  of  constant  watching, 
but  having  been  such  for  eighteen  centuries,  and  now  set  forth  all  over  the 
earth,  indicates  the  nearness  of  the  Lord.60  (10)  The  great  riches  heaped 
together  for  the  last  days  (James  5  :  3)  is  regarded  as  a  sign,  no  period 
exhibiting  such  numerous  vast  fortunes,  such  gigantic  wealthy  companies 
etc. 

Such  are  the  signs  which  precede  the  first  stage  of  Christ's  Advent.  Not 
one  of  them  (just  as  there  was  none  before  the  First  Advent)  shall  be  of  a 
strictly  Supernatural  nature  ;  all  of  them  are  connected  with  the  natural, 
or  are  regularly  produced  in  an  onward  course  of  development.  If  men 
look  for  other  signs,  they  will  wofiilly  deceive  themselves  ;  they  must  be  in 
order  to  preserve  the  consistency  of  constant  watching,  etc.,  all  of  this  very 
class.  They  do  not  intervene  anything  between  the  present  and  the 
Advent  ;  they  were  present  in  the  days  of  the  Primitive  Church  and  led 
the  faithful  to  watching  ;  they  were  present,  more  extended,  in  the  days  of 
the  Reformation,  and  caused  the  Reformers  to  hope  in  a  speedy  Coming 
of  the  day  of  Redemption  ;  they  are  present  to-day  still  more  intensified, 
and  should  cause  us,  if  wise  and  prudent,  to  occupy  the  same  position. 
AVe  know  not  the  day  or  the  hour,  tntl  the  signs  are  here  ;  men  of  intelli- 
gence and  ability  have  failed  in  their  approximative  dates  but  this  matters 
nothing  (being  what  ought  to  be  expected),  for  the  signs  are  what  we  are 
particularly  directed  to  observe,  and  they  are  present ;  men  of  eminence 
and  piety  predict  a  long  delaying  of  the  Lord,  a  long  continued  absence  of 
the  Bridegroom,  and  tell  us  that  the  cry  raised  that  He  speedily  cometh  is 
vain,  but  we  take  to  our  hearts  of  passionate  love  and  desire  the  signs  that 
are  here ;  others  ridicule  our  hope,  hold  it  up  as  "  Jewish  error,"  "  fanat- 
icism," etc.,  but  these  reproaches  fade  away  in  the  light  of  a  Saviour'' s 
command  and  present  existing  signs.  Let  a  cautious  writer  instruct  us: 
Dr.  Kurtz  {His.  of  the  Cov.,  vol.  1,  p.  101,  taken  from  his  Bible  and 
Aslrom.)  says:  "  Reasoning  from  Scripture,  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  con- 
ceive that  the  end  should  be  so  delayed.  If  wre  think  of  the  incarnation  as 
taking  place  in  the  middle  age  of  the  world,  if  we  consider  the  increasing 
distinctness  in  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  the  approach  of  those  signs 


PEOP.  174.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  133 

and  harbingers  of  the  end,  we  cannot  but  feel  that  the  termination  of  the 
present  dispensation  must  be  at  hand."  And,  if  we  but  reflect,  that  the 
first  stage  of  the  Advent  precedes  this  termination  by  an  interval  of  time 
unknown  to  us,  it  may  therefore  occur  at  any  day  for  aught  we  know.61 
We  have  long  felt  whatever  truth  there  is  in  the  year-day  fulfilment  of 
the  Apocalypse  (and  the  Apoc.  has  been  most  remarkably  constructed  to 
induce  watchfulness,  and  afford  a  kind  of  inchoate  fulfilment — in  fact  to 
impress  each  century  with  the  idea  of  a  Coming  One),  yet  its  main  fulfil- 
ment, the  leading  features  of  portions  of  it  at  least,  are  to  be  realized  dur- 
ing this  interval  between  the  two  stages  of  the  Advent  (and  with  this  view, 
there  cannot  be  sufficient  caution  in  the  assignment  of  time,  seeing  that 
the  time  specified  in  the  Book  itself  is  not  connected  with  the  whole  but 
only  parts  of  it).  Even  those  writers  who  have  advocated  and  confine 
themselves  to  a  year-day  fulfilment  coincide  in  asserting  the  nearness  of 
the  Advent  from  their  point  of  view,  as  e.g.  two  of  the  most  recent,  prom- 
inent and  able  wrriters,  Dr.  Elliott,  author  of  the  Hone.  Apoc,  says  : 
"  Our  present  position,  we  have  been  led,  as  the  result  of  our  investiga- 
tions, to  fix  at  but  a  short  time  from  the  end  of  the  now  existing  dispensa- 
tion, and  the  expected  Second  Advent  of  Christ,"  etc.,  and  D.  N.  Lord, 
former  editor  of  the  Theol.  and  Lit.  Review,  author  of  an  Exp.  of  the  Apoc, 
etc.,  gives  it  as  his  decided  impression  from  long  and  close  study  :  "  Christ 
is  within  a  brief  period  to  come  from  heaven  in  person."  Such  testi- 
monies, from  scholars  and  leading  divines  in  the  various  churches,  could 
be  multiplied,  but  are  unnecessary,  because  every  one  can  see  for  himself 
that  there  is  not  a  sign  but  what  is  already  fulfilled,  mil  a  token  but  what 
is  even  to-day  abundantly  verified,  so  that  whenever  it  comes  God's  Ward 
is  fully  vindicated  and  J I  is  truthfulness  made  manifest.  Scientists,  un- 
believers, and  those  weak  in  the  faith  demand  a  Supernatural  sign,  the 
exertion  of  direct  miraculous  power,  but  all  in  vain,  because  the  very  signs 
are  intended  to  test  faith.** 

1  Thus,  e.g.  Pope  Gregory  (Bede's  Eccl.  His.,  ch.  32)  in  a  letter  forwarded  to  King 
Ethelbert,  says  :  "  Besides,  we  would  have  your  glory  know,  we  find  in  the  Holy  Script- 
ure, from  the  words  of  the  Almighty  Lord,  that  (he  end  of  this  present  world  and  the 
Kingdom  of  the  saints  is  about  /<<  come,  which  will  never  terminate."  He  then  gives  some 
signs  as  harbingers  of  this  Coming.  (Comp.  Lactantius,  J>-  \">l>i  Beata,  c.  14,  25,  Cyprian 
JSpist.  58,  Augustine,  City  of  God,  B.  22,  c.  6,  7,  etc.)  Luther  in  his  Bis.  on  Luke  21  :  25-36 
gives  a  number  of  signs  as  being  even  then  fulfilled,  and  strongly  expresses  his  hope  in  a 
speedy  Advent  ;  see  lengthy  translations  given  in  Proph.  Times,  vol.  4,  p.  145,  etc.,  and 
vol.  3,  p.  177  (comp.  Props.  78  and  173).  Our  position  respecting  these  signs  (that  is, 
being  of  a  general  nature),  is  shown  by  what  was  noticed  in  Prop.  110,  Obs.  2,  on  the 
word  "  observation,"  to  which  the  careful  student  is  referred,  seeing  that  the  Word  does 
not  contradict  itself. 

2  In  view  of  this  extended  Humanistic-Infidel  movement  and  its  advance,  some  (as  e.g. 
Harper's  Weekly,  June  22,  1878)  advocate  a  special  reunion  of  the  churches  in  opposition  ; 
but,  unfortunately,  the  churches  themselves  (as  we  shall  show,  Prop.  177)  are  largely 
leavened  with  unbelief  and  pleased  with  their  prosperity.  The  editor  of  The  Luth. 
Evangelist,  Aug.  2,  1878,  has  a  timely  reference  to  the  signs  of  the  times  as  "  worthy  of 
study,  especially  the  tendencies  of  unbelief,"  and  after  showing  that  "  in  our  day  the 
very  foundations  of  religion  are  attacked,"  and  that  "  efforts  of  this  kind  have  become 
common  in  books  and  periodicals,  on  the  rostrum  and  in  the  social  circle,"  he  continues, 
"  Observing  believers  view  this  state  of  things  with  alarm,"  and  urges  to  special  efforts 
to  meet  these  tendencies  and  to  a  union  of  believers  on  the  basis  of  fundamental  doc- 
trines and  principles.     Numerous  papers  in  editorials  and  articles  sound  this  alarm. 

3  Barbour  and  others  endeavor  to  confine  the  similarity  of  the  days  of  Noah  to  the 
time  after  the  Advent  of  Jesus.  But  while  it  necessarily  includes  the  time  after,  it  also 
embraces  the  time  at  and  just  previous  to  the  Advent,  seeing,  as  all  critics  have  shown, 


134  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  174. 

that  the  catastrophe  evidences  a  previous  long-continued  unbelief  in  God's  warnings. 
We  therefore  cannot  thus  limit  it. 

4  We  only  need  append  one  testimony  to  those  already  given.  Ponder  the  statement 
of  Dr.  Draper  (His.  Conflict  between  Religion  and  Science,  Pref.)  respecting  the  "  extensive 
departure  of  intelligent  classes,  etc.,  "  from  the  public  religious  faith,"  adding,  "So 
widespread  and  so  powerful  is  this  secession  that  it  can  neither  be  treated  with  contempt 
nor  with  punishment.  It  cannot  be  extinguished  by  derision,  by  vituperation,  or  by 
force.  Tlie  time  is  rapidly  approaching  ichen  it  will  give  rise  to  serious  political  results." 
The  last  sentence  is  expressive  of  our  views  concerning  the  political  power  of  the  coming 
Antichrist.  One  of  the  distressing  signs  in  connection  is  the  affiliation  of  professed  be- 
lievers with  unbelievers.  Out  of  a  host  of  examples  we  illustrate  our  meaning  by  refer- 
ring to  Dean  Stanley's  address  to  the  students  at  the  University  of  St.  Andrews,  Scot- 
land, published  in  the  July  No.  (1877)  of  the  Eclectic,  and  entitled  :  "  Hopes  of  Theol- 
ogy," in  which  the  enemies  of  Christianity  are  eulogized,  and  claimed  as  friends,  etc. 
Such  liberality  can  only  result  in  producing  and  increasing  unbelief.  It  is  well  known 
how  many  universities  and  colleges  have  been  fettered  by  this  class  of  men.  On  the 
other  hand,  many  religious  papers  have  eulogized  the  valuable  labors  of  Joseph  Cook, 
just  as  if  his  effoi-ts  would  succeed  in  overthrowing  the  unbelief  and  destructive  work  of 
inflrel  scientists,  forgetting  the  sad  truth — corroborated  by  all  past  experience — that 
infidelity  being  more  in  accord  with  the  natural  man — being  willingly  embraced  as  more 
desirable  than  the  restraints  imposed  by  God's  law — will  ever  reproduce  and  exalt  the 
reasoning  so  oft  refuted.  To  Mr.  Cook  we  are  largely  indebted  for  valuable  services 
rendered  against  scientific  unbelief,  but  in  his  enthusiastic  admiration  of  science  and  its 
progress,  he,  connecting  it  with  a  Whitbyan  view  of  the  course  of  Christianity,  unhesi- 
tatingly in  a  number  of  his  lectures  predicts  that  under  its  influence  unbelief  will  be 
beaten  down,  and  the  world  will  be  converted  to  a  high  and  universal  Theistico-Scientific 
and  religions  position.  He  asserts  e.g.  (Biology,  p.  212)  :  "  There  is  no  darkness  that  can 
quench  the  illumination  which  now  rises  on  the  world,"  and  which  is  to  go  on  to  a  glori- 
ous victory,  until  the  world  is  illuminated,  and  there  arises  "  the  bridal  couch  of  a  new 
day  in  a  future  civilization  !"  Alas  !  what  a  contrast  such  predictions  are  to  those  given 
by  Jesus  !  Our  reply,  given  in  detail,  to  such  unscriptural  predictions,  will  be  found 
under  Props.  175  and  176. 

5  Eeber,  in  The  Christ  of  Paul  (ch.  18),  argues  that  the  delineation  of  the  characters  to 
be  found  "  in  the  last  days"  as  presented,  in  2  Tim.  ch.  3,  is  a  forgery.  He  may  well  find 
some  excuse  to  get  rid  of  the  portraiture,  as  he  finds  himself  too  faithfully  described.  Otheis 
reject  every  such  portrayal  of  the  future  as  "  idle  tabs"  unworthy  of  men  of  reason  who 
trace  their  origin  back  to  the  animal.  The  proclamation  of  the  Sec.  Advent  and  its  cog- 
nate doctrines  are  indicated  by  the  arising  of  these  "scoffers"  whose  attention  is  thus 
excited,  and  by  whom  they  are  derided.  This  derision  and  scorn  shows  that  a  believing 
people  present  their  testimony  on  the  subject  Noahdike,  but,  like  Noah,  are  made  the 
subject  of  taunt  and  sneering.  As  the  New  Eevision  has  it,  "  mockers  shall  come  with 
mockery, "  or  others  (comp.  Lange's  Amer.  ed.  loci),  "  scoffers  in  scoffing" — thus  indicat- 
ing the  spirit.  Dr.  Brown  (  Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  p.  41)  and  Dr.  Urwick  endeavor  to  make 
out  that  those  who  said  "  My  Lord  delayeth  His  Coming,"  were  Pre-Millenarians  (!),  who 
being  mistaken  as  to  the  nearness  of  Coming,  then  utterly  repudiated  its  nearness.  In 
this  astonishing  specimen  of  interpretation,  they  fail  to  give  a  single  reason  how  this,  with 
the  context,  is  reconcilable  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Sec.  Advent.  The  doctrine  of  the 
Advent  is  presented,  and  its  remoteness,  or  a  denial  of  its  occurrence  is  stated.  117(0  are 
chargeable  with  teaching  its  remoteness  can  be  easily  found  in  the  works  of  Drs.  Brown 
and  Urwick.  (Such  a  statement  we  may  expect  from  men  who,  pleading  that  the  Primi- 
tive Church  was  mistaken  as  to  the  meaning  of  Jesus,  make  out  that  the  Apostles  were 
mistaken  as  to  nearness,  and  thus  invalidate  their  inspiration).  In  reference  to  a  denial, 
we  give  the  following  illustrations  :  Dr.  Nast  ( West.  Ch.  Advocate,  Aug.  Gth,  1879)  says  : 
"  Some  years  ago  H.  W.  Beecher,  whose  influence  upon  the  public  mind  in  this  country 
was  scarcely  surpassed,  declared  in  the  N.  Y.  Independent :  '  I  know  not  whether  the  Sec. 
Advent  of  Christ  is  at  hand  or  not.  I  know  not  even  what  the  meaning  of  it  is.  That  there 
is  to  be  a  literal  visit  of  Christ  to  earth  again  they  may  believe  who  are  wedded  to  phys- 
ical interpretations  of  Scripture.  I  do  not  so  read  the  Word  of  God  '  (as  e.g.  Acts  1  :  11). 
'  I  believe  in  a  glorious  period  of  development  that  is  to  make  the  world's  history  bright 
as  noonday.  What  it  may  be  I  know  not.'  Still  more  sad  is  it  to  hear  a  man  like  Dr. 
Bushnell  of  Hartford,  say  :  '  Nothing  could  be  a  profounder  affliction  than  a  locally 
descended  and  visibly  present  Saviour.'  "  Alas  !  when  infidels  and  Christians  unite  in 
such  repudiation,  the  sign  becomes  very  significant.     To  illustrate  how  eminent  men 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  135 

totally  discard  the  Sec.  Advent  we  point  to  Emerson  (P.  W.  Emerson :  Philosopher  and 
Poet,  p.  33)  who  discredits  the  authority  of  Paul,  whose  "  mind  had  not  escaped  the  prev- 
alent error  of  the  Primitive  Church — the  belief  that  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ  would 
shortly  occur."  When  men  once  "assume  a  superiority  of  knowledge — which  many  to- 
day do— over  the  Apostles,  it  is  scarcely  practicable  to  influence  them. 

6  It  is  one  of  the  signs  that,  as  Oosterzee  (<'h.  Dog.,  vol.  2,  p.  777)  says  :  "  In  the  nine- 
teenth (century)  the  importance  of  the  Eschatological — almost  overlooked  by  the  Re- 
formers— becomes  constantly  more  universally  recognized  ;"  or  as  Kling  (quoted  by 
Oosterzee)  :  "  It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  our  age  enters  with  an  earnestness  and  inten- 
sity, such  as  no  earlier  one  has  done,  into  the  Eschatological  examination,  and  presses 
forward  in  the  complete  develojoment  of  this  doctrine,  one  sign  among  many  that  we  are 
hastening  toward  the  great  decision."  This  reminds  us  of  Hurst  {His.  of  Rationalism,  p. 
382)  saying  that  "  there  are  many  good  men  in  the  Church"  in  Holland,  who  now  cherish 
"  a  warm  attachment  to  the  doctrine  of  the  speedy  Coming  of  Christ :  It  is  now  a  more 
common  expression  than  ever  before  in  that  country,  '  Christ  cometh.'  "  This  is  true,  as 
we  show  in  the  His.  of  the  doctrine  (Props.  75-78)  in  almost  every  country,  from  the 
time  of  Bengel,  Mede,  Wolf,  etc.  Consequently  many  cordially  agree  with  the  declara- 
tion of  Dr.  Kling  (art.  "  Eschatology,"  Herzog's  Encyclop.),  that  the  study  of  Eschatology 
so  earnestly  and  successfully  prosecuted  in  recent  times,  is  a  sign  that  we  are  approach- 
ing the  great  crisis. 

7  Thus  e.g.  Macaulay  (in  1831  wrote,  since  which  time  there  has  been  a  great  increase), 
"  Essays  on  the  Jews,"  speaking  of  the  Millenarians,  says  :  "  Many  Christians  believe 
that  the  Messiah  will  shortly  establish  a  Kingdom  on  the  earth,  and  reign  visibly  over  all 
its  inhabitants.  Whether  this  doctrine  be  orthodox  or  not  we  shall  not  inquire.  The 
number  of  people  who  hold  it  is  very  much  greater  than  the  number  of  Jews  residing  in 
England.  Many  of  those  who  hold  it  are  distinguished  by  rank,  wealth,  and  ability  ;  it 
is  preached  from  pulpits,  both  of  the  Scottish  and  of  the  English  Church.  Noblemen 
and  members  of  Parliament  have  written  in  defence  of  it,  who  expect  'that,  before  this 
generation  shall  pass  away,  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  will  be  swallowed  iq>  in  one 
Divine  Empire.'''  Compare  "The  Voice  of  Warning,"  by  D.  T.  Taylor,  who  gives  a 
large  list  of  able  writers,  theologians  and  others,  who  direct  attention  to  these  things, 
including  about  three  hundred  in  America,  seven  hundred  or  more  in  England,  others  in 
Scotland,  the  Continent,  etc. 

8  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  most  impressive  sign  that  so  many  books,  tracts,  etc.,  are 
published  against  us.  To  say  nothing  of  those  which  are  unbelieving  and  Antichristian 
in  spirit,  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out  the  works  of  Brown,  Waldegrave,  Fairbairn,  Berg, 
and  others,  and  in  connection  the  numerous  articles  in  our  religious  reviews  and  papers. 
The  theories,  antagonistic,  of  Stuart,  De  Wette,  Liicke,  etc.,  effect  but  comparatively 
few,  while  the  sentiments  of  Davidson,  Hengstenberg,  Barnes,  Bush,  etc.,  are  widespread. 
Conceding  due  respect  for  our  opponents,  and  without  questioning  their  honesty  or  sin- 
cerity, we  may  be  allowed  to  say  as  a  resultant  of  our  position  and  views,  that  they  as  a 
body  compose  a  sad  sign,  illustrative  of  Christ's  learning  respecting  unbelief.  In  our  esti- 
mation it  is  a  very  serious  thing  to  issue  works,  expressly  designed  to  destroy  faith  in 
the  Second  Advent  concerning  its  nearness,  the  fluty  of  constant  watching  for  it,  etc. 
Such  must  inevitably  "  suffer  loss,"  and  great  loss,  being  engaged  in  misleading  others, 
in  darkening  "  the  blessed  hope,"  and  in  inducing  unbelief  in  the  plainest  of  predic- 
tions and  admonitions. 

9  The  faith  of  the  Fathers  is  no  longer  regarded  as  practically  tenable.  Thus  e.g.  the 
Baptists  as  a  body  reject  the  faith  of  Bunyan  and  his  co-subscribers  to  the  Confession  of 
Faith  presented  to  Charles  II.  The  Methodists  as  a  body  are  far  removed  from  the  faith 
of  the  Wesleys,  Fletcher,  and  others  on  this  point.  The  Lutherans  as  a  body  but  little 
regard  the  warnings  of  a  Luther,  Melanchthon,  and  others.  So  with  other  bodies.  How 
many,  e.g.  will  cordially  receive  even  the  scriptural  position  of  the  Saybrdok  platform 
(taken  from  the  Westminster  Assembly's  formula),  art.  32  :  "  So  will  He  have  that  day 
unknown  to  men,  that  they  may  shake  off  all  carnal  security,  and  be  always  watching, 
because  they  know  not  at  what  hour  the  Lord  will  come  ;  and  may  be  ever  prepared  to 
say,  '  Come  !  Lord  Jesus  !     Come  quickly  !     Amen.'  " 

10  No  matter  that  Jesus  Himself  (Mark  13  :  23  ;  Matt.  24  :  25,  comp.  Dr.  Leask's 
admirable  remarks  on  these  verses,  p.  193,  etc.,  Proph.  Times,  vol.  4,  No.  12)  in  direct 
reference  to  His  Sec.  Advent  and  the  events  connected  therewith,  says  :  "  But  take  ye 
heed.  Behold,  I  have  told  you  before" — men  refuse  to  take  "  heed,"  and  multitudes, 
even  of  professed  followers,  totally  ignore  the  caution,  and  rail  upon  those  who  may 
remind  them  of  the  words  of  Jesus.     If  this  refusal  pertained  to  the  unlearned  and  weak, 


136  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  174. 

it  would  be  sufficiently  sad,  but  it  is  characteristic  of  the  learned  and  leaders  of  opinion. 
Novels  and  newspapers,  reviews  and  able  works,  refer  to  our  views  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  make  them  ridiculous  or  to  provoke  a  smile  ;  the  most  serious  subjects  and  the  most 
precious  of  hopes  are  made  a  matter  for  witticism  or  sarcasm,  just  as  unbelief  has  made 
itself  merry  at  the  expense  of  Primitive  Christianity  and  martyrdom.  The  reproaches 
cast  upon  those  who  receive  these  things  is  also  one  of  the  signs.  Noah  was  ridiculed, 
and  so  will  the  true  believer  be  likewise  by  the  thoughtless.  Indeed,  so  confident  are 
some  respecting  the  complete  removal  of  our  doctrine  by  unbelief  that  they  predict  the 
same.  Thus  e.g.  The  Princeton  Review,  Ap.,  1850,  p.  329,  in  an  unfavorable  notice  of 
Rev.  Imbrie's  Millenarian  sermon  "The  Kingdom  of  God,"  prophesies  in  view  of  the 
revival  of  the  primitive  doctrine  :  "  In  our  day  it  has  experienced  a  new  resurrection, 
and  if  we  may  judge  from  the  past,  is  destined  to  a  long  sleep  after  a  short  and  turbulent 
life."  More  recently  Kev.  Gladden  {Lath.  Obs.,  Jan.  3,  1879)  denounced  "  The  Prophetic 
Conference"  at  New  York  as  "  a  compound  of  literalism,  ritualism,  and  pessimism,"  and 
protests  that  the  world  is  growing  "  purer  and  truer,  and  juster  and  better."  Multi- 
tudes express  similar  sentiments.  To  illustrate  the  spirit  which  opposes  us,  we  give 
tha  following  :  A  writer  in  The  Luth.  Evangelist,  Sep.  21st,  1877,  in  "  Recollections  of  a 
Pastor,"  informs  us  that  the  world  is  gradually  improving,  but  that  at  the  present  rate 
"it  may  require  as  long  a  period  to  effect  even  an  approximate  transformation  as  some 
of  those  immense  geological  periods,  say  sixty  thousand  years."  After  expressing  no 
faith  in  our  doctrine,  and  after  eulogizing  the  Gospel  which  "  is  abundantly  able  to  this 
great  work  (i.e.  regenerate  the  human  race)  without  any  new  miracles,"  he  introduces  a 
Dr.  Dobbs,  who  is  made  to  say  :  "I  have  read  no  less  than  1793  authors  (!)  on  the  sub- 
ject (i.e.  Millennium),  each  of  whom  has  proved  with  mathematical  accuracy  that  it 
would  open  at  a  given  hour  (!),  on  a  given  day  (!),  or  a  given  month  (!),  in  a  given  year  (!). 
And  in  no  instance  was  there  a  possibility  of  disputing  the  accuracy  of  the  computa- 
tion." (This  is  a  slur  on,  or  slandering  of,  hundreds  of  most  excellent  men  and  scholars 
who— like  Bengel,  Mede,  etc.,  Pre-Millenarians,  and  Barnes,  Faber,  etc.,  Post-Millenari- 
ans — only  give  approximative  dates.  In  the  course  of  investigation  we  have  found  only 
a  few  out  of  hundreds  who  have  even  remotely  assumed  the  spirit  intimated.)  He  in- 
forms us  that  Dr.  Dobbs's  sage  conclusion  was,  "  it  is  well  to  put  off  the  event  as  far  as 
possible,"  with  which  he  fully  agrees,  adding  :  "  Then  let  us  put  off  the  Millennium  as 
far  as  possible,  not  because  it  is  not  desirable,  but  because  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth 
no  man,  not  even  the  angels.  And  then  let  us  strike  heavy  blows  at  Satan's  kingdom 
with  the  Gospel  hammer  until  it  falls,  and  ujion  the  ruins  be  built  the  glorious  Kingdom 
of  our  God.  Let  us  no  longer  be  star-gazers,  or  visionaries,  trying  to  discover  the  signs  of 
the  times,  but  hard  workers  in  the  Kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ.  Thus  we  will 
most  effectually  hasten  the  good  time  coming."  The  logic  that  can  intervene  e.g.  sixty 
thousand  years  because  we  know  not  the  day  or  hour,  is  only  equalled  by  "  the  Gospel 
hammer"  which  knocks  away  the  injunction  of  Jesus  to  observe  "  the  signs  of  the  times." 
And  yet  just  such  logic  and  Gospel  hammering  is  continuously  spread  before  us  in  our 
religious  papers. 

11  This  reminds  us  how  Cotton  Mather  imitates  the  direct  language  of  Luther  in  his 
Student  and  Preacher:  "  They  indulge  themselves  in  <t  ruin  dream,  not  to  say  insane,  who 
think,  pray,  and  hope  contrary  to  the  whole,  sacred  Scripture  and  sound  reason,  that  the 
promised  happiness  of  the  Church  on  earth  will  be  before  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  appear  in 
His  Kingdom.  Without  doubt  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  will  not  become  the  king- 
doms of  God  and  His  Christ  before  the  preordained  time  of  the  dead,  in  which  the 
reward  shall  he  given  to  the  servants  of  God,"  etc.  In  reference  to  another  point,  Ch. 
Sabine  (a  layman)  in  his  letter  to  Dr.  Raffles,  author  of  the  Jubilee  Hymn  (a  hymn  illustra- 
tive of  this  sign),  says  :  "  We  find  that  some  ministers  are  preaching  that  the  world  is 
ripening  into  glory  ;  others,  that  it  is  ripening  for  judgment.  We  know  that  built  cannot 
be  true.  We  take  the  standard  of  truth  in  our  hands  at  home,  in  our  closets,  and  we  find 
that  one  class  is  teaching  a  Bible  truth,  the  other  a  Popish  fable.  Ought  these  things  so 
to  be  ?  '  If  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound,  who  shall  prepare  himself  for  the  bat- 
tle? '  If  one  pulpit  proclaims  :  'Peace  and  safety  !  The  Lord  delayeth  His  Coming  ! ' 
and  another,  '  Watch,  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  when  the  Son  of  Man 
cometh,'  who  can  be  surprised  if  the  joyous  world  looks  on,  listens  and  laughs?  And 
listen  and  laugh  it  does — such  a  laugh  of  meriy  mockery  !  And  Satan  listens  and 
laughs  too — oh,  such  a  laugh  of  malicious  joy  !  And  the  harlot  laughs  as  she  hands 
round  the  gilded  cup,  and  sings  for  very  wantonness,  '  I  sit  a  queen  forever  ;  I  shall  see 
no  sorrow.  The  Lord  delayeth  His  Coming.  Thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many 
years.     Eat,  drink  and  be  nierry.'  "     Let  the  reader  compare  Prop.  175  for  other  refer- 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  137 

ences.  In  this  connection  the  student  "will  not  forget  that  the  Church  itself  is  repre- 
sented as  esteeming  itself  rich  and  on  the  road  to  prosperity,  when  really  on  the  broad 
road  to  a  terrible  ordeal.     Alas  !  the  blindness  of  men. 

12  Farrar  {Life  of  Christ,  vol.  2,  p.  261)  alluding  to  "  dreadful  persecutions,"  "  abounding 
iniquity,"  "  decaying  faith,"  and  "  wide  evangelization  as  the  signs  of  a  coming  end," 
adds  :  "  And  as  we  learn  from  many  other  passages  of  Scripture,  these  signs,  as  they  did 
usher  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  so  shall  reappear  on  a  larger  scale  Uefore  the  end 
of  all  things  is  at  hand.  1  Thess.  5  :  3  ;  2  Thess.  2  :  2,"  etc.  Justin  Martyr  reminds  the 
Jew  Trypho  :  "  There  are  some  countries  in  which  none  of  his  nation  ever  dwelt  ;  but 
there  is  not  so  much  as  one  nation  of  men,  whether  Greek  or  Barbarian,  Scythian  or 
Arabian,  among  whom  prayers  and  thanksgiving  are  not  offered  up  to  the  lather  through 
the  name  of  Jesus  crucified."  Hence  in  the  Apostolic  days  and  afterward  this  sign  of 
the  Gospel  proclaimed  among  the  known  nations  stimulated  their  faith.  For  a  beautiful 
and  forcible  description  of  the  extent  of  this  sign  at  the  present  day,  see  Cumming's  The 
Great  Tribulation,  Lecture  G,  "  The  Last  Witness.  '  He  renders  Matt.  21  :  14,  "And  there 
shall  be  proclaimed,  as  by  a  herald's  voice  or  trumpet,  this  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  in  all 
the  habitable  globe  as  a  witness"  (that  may  be  accompanied,  as  the  Word  indicates,  with 
martyrdom)  "  to  all  the  nations  and  then  the  end  shall  come."  But  the  critical  student 
is  reminded  of  the  peculiar  phrase  "the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,"  i.e.  the  Gospel 
preached  is  glad  tidings  concerning  the  covenanted  Messianic  Kim/, lorn.  It  is  not  simply 
glad  news  of  repentance,  faith,  etc.,  but  distinctively  of  the  Kingdom.  Now  this  was 
done  in  the  Primitive  Church,  and  it  is  done  to-day.  We  have  shown  in  the  history  of 
the  doctrine  and  under  various  Propositions  that  this  specific  Messianic  Kingdom,  still  in 
the  future,  is  preached  in  England,  the  United  States,  Germany,  Canada,  France,  Russia, 
Italy,  Holland,  Denmark,  etc.,  and  by  numerous  missionaries  in  the  various  x>arts  of  the 
globe.  This  witness  is  not  lacking.  Lange  (Com.  Mutt.  p.  -432)  remarks  :  "  The  preach- 
ing of  the  Gospel  or  missionary  efforts,  the  most  comforting  signs  of  the  Coming  of 
Christ."  Alford  (Com.  Matt  24  :  14)  :  "  The  apostasy  of  the  last  days,  and  the  universal 
disjjersion  of  missions,  are  the  two  great  signs  of  the  end  drawing  near."  Von  Gerlach 
(quoted  by  Dr.  Schaff,  Lange,  vol.  1,  p.  424)  :  ''  The  gigantic  missionary  operations  of  our 
clays  have  brought  us  considerably  nearer  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  word  of  our  Lord." 
Steir  (Matt.  24  :  14)  :  "  When  the  two  signs  which  are  connected,  apostasy  of  Christen- 
dom and  extension  of  missions,  in  their  wonderful  contrast  and  coincidence,  shall  have 
reached  their  highest  development,  then  the  end  is  at  hand."  Many  eminent  men  assert 
that  the  extension  of  evil  and  of  missions,  going  on  in  strong  contrast,  is  a  strong  sign  of 
the  nearness  of  the  end.  Compare  e.g.  the  views  of  Auberlen,  Judge  Jones,  Ryle,  Bengel, 
Elliott,  Lord,  Olshausen,  Greswell,  Seiss,  Bonar,  Bickersteth,  Brooks,  Chester,  etc.  A 
number  of  writers  (Prof.  Gosse  and  others)  declare  "  that  there  is  not  a  nation  on  the 
earth  in  which  there  is  not  a  witness  either  by  the  Word  of  God  or  by  living  missiona- 
ries." 

u  The  attentive  reader  may  compare  Props.  177,  178,  180,  161,  162,  etc.  In  addition 
to  the  testimonies  adduced,  the  student  may  refer  to  Harper's  M<«).,  Dec,  1874,  p.  131, 
where  a  correspondent  of  the  New  York  World  asserts  that  in  England  "  the  real  belief 
in  the  Incarnation,  the  Resurrection,  and  the  Ascension  scarcely  exists  among  us."  See 
Gregg's  art.  in  Contemp.  Review,  1875,  entitled  "  Rocks  ahead,"  also  "  The  Religious  Out- 
look," introductory  to  Freedom  and  Fellowship  in  Religion.  The  portraiture  of  the  Church 
as  given  by  unbelief  (as  e.g.  Potter,  in  Christianity  and  Us  Definitions),  although  highly 
colored,  contains  many  truthful  touches  indicative  of  the  wide  contrast  between  profes- 
sion and  practice,  the  commands  of  Christ  and  obedience.  Fronde,  in  the  International 
Review,  1878,  has  two  articles  on  the  decay  and  ultimate  overthrow  of  Christianity, 
reiterating  the  spirit  of  a  large  number  of  writers.  While  some  of  his  statements  are 
worthy  of  consideration  and  based  on  painfully  self-evident  facts,  yet  the  general  tenor 
of  his  articles  concluding  that  Christianity  is  a  failure  shows  that  he  has  no  idea  what- 
ever of  the  design  of  the  present  dispensation  (Prop.  86)  and  that,  notwithstanding  the 
evil,  he  does  not  appreciate  its  past  and  present  power.  Scrihner's  Monthly  in  repeated 
numbers  (as  e.g.  Oct.  No.,  1874)  declares  "  an  inevitable  revolution  befalling  religion," 
now  in  progress,  seeing  that  plenary  inspiration,  and  with  it  a  mass  of  theology  "  goes 
by  the  board,"  and  "  the  result  will,  probably  and  most  naturally,  be  a  reign  of  infidelity, 
out  of  which,  after  weary  wretched  years,  we  shall  slowly  emerge  with  our  Christianity 
purged  of  its  extraneous  doctrines  and  with  a  new  class  of  teachers,"  etc.  It  is  amply 
sufficient  for  us  to  find,  corroborative  of  our  position,  that  when  the  Millennial  glory  is 
to  be  introduced  there  will  be  such  unbelief  and  retrogression,  that  (as  Isa.  60  :  2)  "  dark- 
ness shall  cover  the  people."     Much  that  men  eloquently  describe  as  "  light"  is  "  dark- 


138  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  174. 

ness"  with  God,  and  this  holds  good  both  in  and  out  of  the  professing  Chnrch.  Draper 
(His.  of  Conflict,  p.  327,  and  Preface)  speaks  of  "  a  great  and  rapidly  increasing  departure 
from  the  public  religious  faith,  and  that,  while  among  the  more  frank  this  divergence  is 
not  concealed,  there  is  a  far  more  extensive  and  far  more  dangerous  secession,  private 
and  unacknowledged,"  and  hence  "  a  religious  crisis  is  impending,"  and  "  in  all  direc- 
tions we  see  the  lowering  skies,  we  see  the  mutterings  of  the  coming  storm/'  Admit 
that  exaggeration  exists,  yet  the  simple  fact  that  thousands,  including  the  most  earnest 
and  faithful  sons  of  the  Church,  sound  the  same  warning — this  should  cause  the  reflect- 
ing to  ponder  this  existing  sign.  How  true  is  the  declaration  of  Jesus  (Matt.  24  :  12) 
"Because  (1.)  iniquity  shall  abound  (2.)  the  love  of  many  shall  wax  cold."  The  influence  that 
the  first  exerts  in  producing  the  second  has  been  painfully  evidenced  in  the  history  of 
the  past,  and  is  sadly  manifested  at  the  jiresent  day.  Let  us  give  a  few  statements  from 
religions  writers,  whose  testimony — not  being  Millenarian — is  unbiassed.  The  Lidh. 
Observer,  Oct.  18th,  1878,  in  an  editorial,  "  Popular  Religion,"  says  that  the  Chicago 
"  Alliance"  sent  reporters  to  all  the  churches  of  that  city  to  count  the  actual  number  of 
worshippers,  and,  under  the  most  favorable  circumstances,  reported  "  that  on  an  average 
only  forty-two  per  cent  of  the  seats  in  the  churches  were  occupied  by  worshippers." 
The  editor  then  refers  to  "  the  City  of  Churches,"  Brooklyn,  and  then  reports  from 
recent  statements,  "  that  out  of  a  population  of  GOO, 000  in  that  city,  only  90,000  could  be 
accommodated  in  the  churches,  and  that  about  300,000  of  the  people  were  not  under  any 
kind  of  religious  training,"  and  this  notwithstanding  the  numerous  churches,  distin- 
guished preachers,  and  exceedingly  large  congregations  there  found.  The  editor  then 
sadly  remarks  on  these  facts  applying  to  all  other  places,  and  to  their  grave  raid  discour- 
aging aspect.  He  then  points  out  the  most  disheartening  feature  of  all,  that  "  the  most 
who  do  attend  have  become  so  worldly-minded,  and  manifest  so  little  spiritual  life  and 
piety  that  the  difference  between  them  and  irreligious  people  is  scarcely  observed,"  etc.; 
and  calls  for  "  a  revival  needed."  If  we  turn  our  ( -yes  to  countries  once  highly  favored 
as  religious  and  leading,  what  a  condition  they  to-day  present !  Mr.  Bauer,  chaplain  to 
the  Imperial  family  of  Germany,  preached  (1878)  a  sermon  before  the  Emperor  and 
Court,  in  which  he  gives  a  bold  and  exceeding  sad  account  of  the  widespread  immor- 
ality and  irreligion  in  that  country  ;  so  extended,  indeed,  that  the  sentence  occurs  : 
•'  Affection,  faith,  and  the  Word  of  God  are  now  unknown  in  this  country,  in  this  our 
great  German  Fatherland  which  formerly  justly  was  called  the  home  of  the  faith." 
"  Germanicus,"  in  the  Lidh.  Observer  of  July  26th,  1878,  gives  extracts  from  a  correspon- 
dent (an  American  minister,  Lutheran)  in  Germany,  who  describes  the  condition  of  the 
l  Ihurch  "  to  be  that  of  desolation,"  and  that  "  its  state  even  among  the  most  eminent  and 
godly  leaders  is  that  of  supineness,  "waiting  for  the  incoming  judgments.  Speaking  of 
the  prevailing  opinion  that  these  are  nigh  at  hand,  the  writer  adds  significantly  :  "  The 
judgments  are  coming  fast  enough.  It  needs  no  inspiration  to  behold  the  signs  of  the 
sky.  Germany  is  on  the  eve  of  a  frightful  catastrophe.  Sober-minded  men  everywhere, 
be  they  preachers,  or  merchants,  or  statesmen,  speak  with  horror  of  the  prospect  in  view." 
As  Germany  is  regarded  the  fountain-head  of  the  Protestant  movement,  we  add  a  few 
more  sad  testimonies.  An  intelligent  and  observant  friend,  Dr.  Stuckenberg,  writes  for 
the  Lidh.  Observer  (Feb.  25th,  1881)  on  "  The  Religious  Tendencies  of  Germany,"  and 
gives  a  gloomy  statement  of  the  parties,  confusion,  and  chaos  existing  in  theology  and 
religion.  Among  other  things,  he  says,  "  Our  minister,  Mr.  White  (i.e.  U.  S.  Minister) 
recently  told  me,  that  he  could  not  agree  with  Mr.  Joseph  Cook  in  his  statements  that 
orthodoxy,  taken  in  the  usual  sense  of  evangelical  Christianity,  was  on  the  increase."  He 
concludes  his  article  thus  :  "  If  the  above  leaves  the  impression  that  Germany  is  still  in 
a  state  of  religious  conflict,  whose  issues  are  very  doubtful,  it  makes  just  the  impression 
which  I  want  to  make.  There  is  great  fermentation,  there  is  much  anxiety,  and  there  is 
an  uncertain  and  unsettled  condition  of  religious  affairs."  In  "  Letters  on  the  State  of 
Religion  in  Germany"  in  the  Times  (1870)  it  is  said  :  "  Who  that  knows  modern  Germany 
will  call  it  a  Christian  land,  either  in  the  sense  Rome  gives  to  the  term,  or  in  the  mean- 
ing Luther  attached  to  it."  So  also  in  an  art.  in  Appleton's  Journal  (1879,  p.  121)  it  is 
said,  "in  Protestant  Prussia  the  very  profession  of  Christianity  has  well-nigh  died  out," 
as  seen  e.g.  in  the  attendance  upon  public  worship.  Dr.  Davies,  who  extensively  visited 
Germany,  presented  a  most  deplorable  account  of  religion  before  the  Board  of  Missions 
of  the  Methodist  Church  (1878),  from  which  we  give  a  few  extracts.  "  Germany  is  Prot- 
estant only  in  name.  The  great  mass  of  the  German  people  pay  no  attention  whatever 
to  religion.  They  are  epicureans  in  every  sense  of  the  word.  Millions  of  them  are 
Rationalists,  while  millions  more  are  materialists  and  atheists.  And  although  the  coun- 
try is  full  of  learned  theological  professors,  yet  very  few  of  them  are  orthodox.     Thou- 


Prop.  174]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  139 

sands  of  the  preachers  have  no  experimental  knowledge  of  religion.  Few  of  these 
pastors  believe  in  inspiration,  and  even  those  who  stand  high  among  other  nations, 
occupy  the  platform  of  the  Unitarians.  The  Sabbath  in  Germany  is  a  dead  letter.  The 
churches  are  almost  empty  ;  none  but  women  go  to  church.  Take  the  city  of  Halle  for  an 
illustration.  Forty  years  ago,  when  it  had  a  population  of  15,000,  it  had  six  churches, 
and  now  with  a  population  of  55,000  it  has  still  only  six,"  etc.  "While  we  do  know  that 
there  are  hundreds  and  thousands  in  Germany  who  deplore  this  state  of  things,  it  will 
not  do  to  ignore  such  statements  made  by  Americans  and  others,  seeing  that  they  are 
strongly  corroborated  and  mourned  over  by  Germans  of  eminence,  ability,  and  piety. 
Similar  facts  respecting  Holland,  England,  Switzerland,  France,  and  other  countries  might 
be  produced,  but  the  thoughtful  will  recognize  those  significant  signs  of  the  times.  Recent 
reviews  and  papers  have  taken  up  and  discussed  an  evidence  of  retrogression  and  non- 
conversion,  viz.,  that  in  the  statistics  of  several  denominations,  the  exclusions  have 
exceeded  the  number  of  deaths,  and  by  adding  together  the  deaths  and  the  exclusions  a 
fearful  roll  is  presented.  The  uncharitableness,  strenuous  exclusiveness,  and  biogtry  of 
bodies  of  professing  Christians,  elevating  human-devised  Confessions,  or,  without  a  con- 
fession, some  engrafted  peculiarities  (distinctive  either  in  some  doctrines,  form  of  gov- 
ernment, or  some  ' '  shibboleth")  to  a  test  of  fellowship  and  love,  they  deliberately  un- 
christianize  all  others.  All  outside  of  their  communion  afid  belief  is  "  Babylon."  The 
fact  is  that  nominal  Christianity  on  the  one  hand,  and  uncharitable  Christianity  on  the 
other,  have  a  large  following.  "We  commend  the  following  utterance  by  a  layman  : 
"  Greybeard,"  in  No.  Gl  of  his  Lay  Sermons,  after  showing  that  Church  observances  and 
practices  are  right  and  tending  to  aid  a  believer  in  the  divine  life,  truthfully  observes 
that  a  mere  observance  of  them  alone  does  not  constitute  a  Christian,  adding  :  "  Neither 
an  eloquent  tongue,  nor  the  ability  to  teach,  nor  a  profound  understanding  of  hidden 
mysteries,  nor  great  knowledge,  nor  large  liberality  even  to  the  bestowing  of  all  that  a 
man  hath  to  feed  the  poor,  is  in  itself  a  proof  of  Christianity.  A  man  may  possess  these 
and  still  be  only  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal  (1  Cor.  13).  The  Spirit  of  God  in 
the  heart  and  the  fruits  of  that  Spirit  in  life,  alone  can  attest  the  fact  of  a  Christian,  and 
the  reality  of  his  Christianity.  These  are  things  apart  from  and  above  all  outward  forms  ; 
they  are  inseparable  from  the  life-giving  and  the  life-preserving  love  of  God  shed  abroad 
in  the  hearts  of  believers  ;  they  are  not  subject  to  any  rules  or  regulations  of  sects,  and 
never  can  be." 

14  Ministers  who  are  favorable  to  our  view  are  but  too  often  denounced  in  public,  and 
their  reputation  attacked  in  private.  Many  such  instances  have  come  under  our  observa- 
tion ;  and  we  know  men  who  have  largely  suffered  from  this  source— extending  even  to 
covert  opposition  to  their  preferment  in  the"  Church.  A  recent  illustration  of  such  a 
spirit  may  answer.  Moody,  the  Evangelist,  is  a  decided  advocate  of  the  Pre-Mill.  Advent 
of  Christ,  and  having  given  expression  to  his  views  in  a  sermon  on  2  Tim.  :»  :  Hi  (pub.  in 
the  Chicago  Interior,  Jan.  11th,  1877),  Dr.  R.  Weiser— "  as  a  warm  friend  of  Mr.  Moody"  — 
attacks  him,  affirming  (1)  that  "  it  cannot  but  lessen  confidence"  in  him,  (2)  that  "  it  will 
create  a  doubt  in  the  minds  of  many  of  his  friends  (?)  as  to  the  soundness  of  his  judg- 
ment"—and  this  is  supported  by  mere  assertions  such  as,  that  "  the  personal  reign  of 
Christ  on  earth  is  a  chimera,"  that  Christ's  Coming  in  Matt.  21  refers  to  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem,  that  in  verse  44  it  alludes  to  death,  etc.  The  assault  is  sustained  by  the 
weakest  of  reasoning. 

15  What  stress  the  Reformers  and  others  laid  upon  this  sign  is  aptly  illustrated  by  the 
language  of  Luther  on  Luke  21  :  25-27  (Eng.  Transl.  Proph.  Tunes,  vol.  4,  p.  145,  etc.) 
when  referring  to  the  apostasy,  he  says  :  "  And  this,  above  all,  constrains  me  firmly  to 
believe  that  Uirist  icill  soon  come;  for  such  sins  are  too  great  for  heaven  to  look  upon 
much  longer,  and  provoke  and  defy  the  judgment  of  God  to  an  extent  which  must 
speedily  bring  it  upon  them.  If  it  were  mere  uncleanness,  like  that  before  the  flood,  or 
only  the  common  sins  of  the  world,  as  those  of  Sodom,  I  would  not  hold  so  strongly  that 
the  day  of  judgment  must  be  near  ;  but  when  God's  service,  God's  Word,  God's  sacra- 
meats,  God's  children,  and  everything  appertaining  to  God,  is  disturbed,  borne  down, 
condemned,  blasphemed,  and  the  devil  put  in  His  place,  worshipped  and  honored,  and 
Satan's  lies  heldfoi-  God's  truths,  this  must  make  an  end  of  things.  As  I  look  around  me, 
I  have  not  the  slightest  misgiving  upon  this  point.     Amen." 

16  Notwithstanding  this,  and  the  actual  condition  of  things  specified  previously,  thou- 
sands of  men  in  the  Church  deliberately  close  their  eyes  to  both  Scripture  and  fact,  and 
prophesy  "  smooth  things."  We  give  a  fair  specimen  of  this  style,  taken  from  the  Lntli. 
Observer,  Oct.  8th,  1875,  the  peroration  of  an  article  by  "  Cyanthropos,"  against  Millena- 
rianism,  marking  the  questionable  statements  as  they  are  crowded  together,  in  brackets. 


140  THE  THEOCEATIC  KINGDOM!.  [PROP.  174 

The  art.  is  headed,  "  Is  the  World  Getting  Better  ?"  and  the  writer  affirms  that  it  is  in 
every  respect  (while  we  affirm  that  in  some  respects  it  is  better  and  in  others  worse  ; 
good  and  evil  both  abounding).  "We  give  the  conclusion  :  "  Lucifer,  the  son  of  the 
morning,  is  waning  in  the  increased  glory  of  the  coming  day"  (?  we  acknowledge  our 
ignorance  respecting  this  "  son  of  the  morning"),  "and  even  now  the  gold  is  upon  the 
borders  of  the  clouds  and  the  mountains  are  tinged  with  a  new-born  splendor"  (as  e.g.  in 
Germany,  England,  etc.).  "  He  who  sees  only  darkness  and  gloom,  has  his  back  to  the 
light,  and  is  gazing  at  the  distoi"tions  of  his  own  shadow"  (we  know  of  no  Millenarian 
who  sees  only  darkness  and  gloom).  "  Blind  indeed  must  be  the  eyes  which  mark  no 
hues  in  the  morning  (?)  of  these  auspicious  times"  (and  blind  must  be  the  eyes  that  see 
not  the  evils  existing  in  the  Church  and  the  world).  "  Perhaps  those  whose  eyes  are  so 
beclouded,  have  been  too  long  looking  into  the  clouds  of  heaven  to  see  the  Coming  Son 
of  Man,  instead  of  observing  that  he  is  already  here  (?)  in  the  triumphs  of  His  Gospel. 
Looking  for  a  physical  appearing,  they  do  not  see  His  spiritual  Kingdom  (?)  rising  on  the 
ruins  of  sin"  (with  the  covenanted  Kingdom  spiritual,  and  the  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man 
spiritualized,  it  is  easy  to  discern  things  not  existing).  "  They  are  so  expectant  of  an 
avenging  God  to  destroy  sinners,  that  they  forget  (?)  the  God  who  pardons  and  saves" 
(this  seems  to  be  a  virtual  denial  that  God  will  come  for  vengeance).  ''Expecting  a 
'  first  resurrection '  of  saints,  -and  a  Millennium  of  material  and  political  blessedness, 
they  forget  (?)  the  more:  important  work  of  seeking  the  quickening  of  souls  from  death  of 
sin  and  the  reign  of  Christ  in  their  hearts  by  faith"  (we  do  not  envy  the  man  who  can 
thus  deliberately  underrate  the  eminent  and  pious  men  of  the  Church,  see  Proj>s.  73-78). 
"  Pre-Adventism  is  always  looking  for  the  return  upon  the  earth  of  antediluvian  violence 
and  wrong,  and  of  the  conduct  of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  thinks  of  no  other  way  of 
terminating  these  enormities  than  by  desolating  judgments  and  the  coming  of  an  angry 
and  implacable  avenger"  (we  only  follow  the  precise  and  definite  language  of  Jesus,  and 
of  inspired  men,  in  preference  to  the  mere  assertions — to  the  contrary,  as  exhibited  by 
this  writer—of  men  ;  see  e.  g.  Props.  123,  147,  161, 162,  163  >.  "  And  to  make  this  Coming 
an  early  necessity,  it  must  be  shown  that  the  world  is  rapidly  ripening  for  such  a  doom  as 
will  overwhelm  the  ungodly  with  utter  ruin"  (we  leave  our  Propositions  to  speak  for  them- 
selves, sustained  as  they  are  so  largely  by  his  own  class  of  believers).  "  The  world  can- 
not be  converted  "  (our  only  reply  is  found,  Props.  175  and  176,  for  we  hold  to  its  con- 
version, but  in  the  time  and  manner  designated  by  the  Spirit).  "  The  Gospel  is  inade- 
quate" (we  never  say  so  ;  it  accomplishes  all  that  was  intended  by  it,  see  e.g.  Prop.  86, 
etc.),  "and  it  is  vain  to  preach  it  with  any  hope  of  such  results"  (if  a  man  preached  it 
with  the  hope  of  converting  the  world,  which  the  preaching  of  eighteen  centuries  has 
not  accomplished,  it  would  be  a  vain  hope,  but  if  he  preaches  it  with  the  expectation  of 
"saving  some,"  "  them  that  believe,"  etc.,  he  will  be  reasonable  and  scriptural).  "  Its 
impotence  must  be  confessed  by  substituting  force  for  persuasion,  fire  and  brimstone 
for  truth,  and  a  general  conflagration  for  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit"  (?  we  trust  the 
writer  may  lie  able  to  comprehend  what  is  meant  by  "  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  and 
ultimately  experience  it,  see  Prop.  171.  If  so,  he  will  assuredly  feel  that  he  has  unwit- 
tingly called  into  question  God's  own  ordering  respecting  the  future,  and  doubted  its 
propriety,  etc.).  An  ample  apology  for  our  statement  is  already  found  under  sign  8. 
The  Laodicean  condition  so  vividly  presented  ;  the  self-exaltation  in  view  of  wealth  and 
position  ;  the  multitude  of  liberals,  semi-believers,  occupying  positions  of  influence  and 
honor  ;  the  amazing  progress  of  mere  confessional  religion  ;  the  grave  concessions  that 
are  made  to  unbelief  ;  the  stealthy  or  open  presentation  of  doctrines  to  misguide,  blind, 
and  enslave  the  conscience  ;  the  denial  of  fundamental  truths,  essential  to  the  vitality  of 
the  Christian  religion,  as  e.g.  those  relating  to  the  person  and  work  of  Jesus,  the  Super- 
natural, the  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures,  the  conditions  of  salvation,  the  sacraments, 
etc.  What  we  have  already  said  of  the  condition  of  countries  and  cities,  favored  for  ages 
by  the  Gospel,  fully  sustains  our  position.  It  is  not  only  the  region  permeated  by  the 
spirit  of  the  Roman  or  the  Greek  Church,  but  those  that  imbibed  that  of  Protestantism, 
that  evidence  such  a  falling  away  from  the  truth.  There  is  a  sad  force  in  the  art.,  "  The 
Religion  of  To-Day"  (North  Amer.  Review,  Dec,  1879),  when  the  writer  claims,  as  witnessed 
in  France,  Germany,  England,  etc.,  that  "  the  intellectual  world  of  to-day  is  drifting 
away  from  the  religious  belief  and  dogmatic  theology  of  the  past,"  and  remarks  :  "  Few 
can  have  any  doubt  either  of  its  reality,  or  of  the  direction  which  it  is  taking.  Its  great 
feature  is  the  slow  elimination  of  all  those  tenets  which  have  heretofore  been  considered 
as  essentials  of  religious  belief."  He  shows  that  this  is  not  merely  outside  of  the  Church 
by  "  leading  intellects  of  the  world,"  but  largely  in  the  Church  itself,  and  which,  he 
thinks,  leads  to  the  displacement  of  Christianity  and  the  substitution  of  "  a  new  relig- 


PeOP.  174.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  141 

ion,"  that  is  to  "  tend  to  the  elevation  of  the  human  soul  and  the  unceasing  progress  of 
spiritual  development."  Bunsen,  in  his  Preface  to  Hippolytus  and  His  Age,  gives  a 
gloomy  picture  of  the  state  of  the  Church  and  the  outlook,  and  his  reviewer  (North  Brit. 
Review,  May,  1853)  fully  concurs  in  the  statement  made,  saying  :  "  One  thing  is  sure,  that 
we  are  at  the  termination  of  an  old  and  perishing  one  (i.e.  era)— that  there  are  spreading 
all  around  us  the  symptoms  of  decay  and  extinction.  God  forbid  that  we  should  speak 
in  the  language  of  exaggeration,  or  that  we  should  not  feel  deeply  sorrowful  that  the  old 
landmarks  of  our  fathers'  faith  should  no  longer  receive  the  reverence  of  their  children's 
children.  Yet  we  cannot  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  before  us.  We  cannot  say,  peace, 
peace,  where  there  is  no  peace."  Froude  {North  Amer.  Review,  1879)  says  :  "  .In  every 
corner  of  the  world  there  is  the  phenomenon  of  the  decay  of  established  religions.  In 
Catholic  countries  as  well  as  Protestant,  nay,  among  Mohammedans,  Jews,  Buddhists, 
Brahmins,  traditionary  creeds  are  loosing  their  hold.  An  intellectual  revolution  is 
sweeping  over  the  world,  breaking  down  established  opinions,  dissolving  the  foundations 
on  which  historical  faiths  have  been  built  up.  Science,  history,  philosophy,  have  com- 
bined to  create  universal  uncertainty,  and  Catholic  France  and  Italy  are  no  better  off  in 
this  respect  than  Germany,  or  England,  or  America."  We  are  not  concerned  in  Buckle's 
estimate  (His.  Civ.,  vol.  1,  p.  257)  that  even  Theology  is  diminishing  in  force  and  power, 
since  no  great  works,  according  to  him,  have  appeared  for  a  long  time,  for  our  concern  is 
in  the  spread  of  unbelief,  heretical  views,  worldliness,  semi-religion,  confessionalism, 
etc.  Eev.  Clutz  and  others  combat  the  statements  given  by  Goldwin  Smith  in  his  Decay 
of  Faith,  endeavoring  to  show  that  faith  still  extensively  exists.  This  is  also  true — for, 
as  our  expressed  views  show,  a  true  faith  and  a  false  faith  or  no  faith  exist  contempo- 
raneously, and  either  party  who  excludes  the  one,  in  order  to  give  exclusive  prominence 
to  the  other,  is  incorrect  as  to  fact,  and  unjust  in  estimate.  Christianity  also,  no  matter 
what  apostasy  and  evil  exists,  is  constantly  fulfilling  the  design  of  this  dispensation 
(Prop.  8G).  Therefore  we  have  no  sympathy  with  the  untruthful  and  revolting  statement 
made  by  "  The  Teacher"  (quoted  by  Mattison  in  Spirit  Rapping s  Unveiled,  p.  95),  that  the 
"  Church  is  a  dead  and  rotten  organization,  which  is  ready  to  crumble  and  dissolve,"  etc. 
For,  notwithstanding  the  evils  enumerated  within  hef,  the  design  of  God  and  of  His 
Christ  in  her  establishment  has  been  faithfully  and  continuously  carried  out,  viz.,  to 
gather  out  a  people  for  His  name. 

11  It  is  gratifying  that  among  others  so  many  able  Millenarians  (see  Props.  73-78)  have 
been  successfully  engaged  in  this  work.  It  is  also  gratifying  that  evangelists  like  Moody, 
Henry  Varley,  Wells,  and  others,  so  extended  in  labors,  are  distinctively  Millenarian, 
thus  answering  the  uncandid  reproaches  like  those  under  Obs.  10,  note.  Moody  in  ser- 
mons, etc.,  has  given  no  uncertain  sound,  and  Henry  W.  Beecher  (Lecture,  Nov.  19th, 
1875),  conversing  with  him,  attributes  his  power  and  zeal  to  his  bein<_'  "  a  believer  in  the 
Sec.  Advent  of  Christ  and  in  our  own  time" — to  his  "  thinking  that  Christ  may  come 
even  to-morrow,"  etc.  At  a  meeting  in  Glasgow  (187G,  reported  by  the  Christian  Weekly) 
Moody  said  :  "  Like  some  others,  I  was  originally  much  opposed  to  this  doctrine  until, 
from  constantly  meeting  with  it  in  the  reading  of  Scripture,  I  was  constrained  to  become  a 
believer  in  it  ;  and  now  it  is  to  my  mind  one  of  the  most  precious  truths  in  the  whole 
Bible.  And  I  should  feel  self-condemned  were  I  to  leave  Glasgow  without  speaking 
about  it.  All  Scripture  from  Genesis  to  Eevelation  should  bo  read  as  an  entire  whole, 
and  not  a  few  favorite  portions  dwelt  upon  to  the  exclusion  of  other  parts  ;  nor  should 
our  views  of  divine  truth  be  merely  grounded  upon  the  opinions  of  others,  as  every  one 
is  responsible  for  his  own  individual  belief  ;  and  it  will  be  no  excuse  for  persons  to  say 
as  a  reason  for  not  believing  any  doctrine  of  the  Bible,  that  they  never  had  it  taught  to 
them.  The  promise  and  statements  regarding  Christ's  Second  Coming  are  among  the 
things  that  are  freely  given  to  us  by  God,  and  are  very  much  spoken  about  in  the  Bible. 
One  verse  in  every  thirteen  in  the  New  Test,  refers  more  or  less  directly  to  the  subject." 
"  Surely  if  the  Holy  Spirit  has  dwelt  upon  this  theme  so  much  in  the  inspired  Word,  and 
has  brought  it  before  our  notice  in  one  thirteenth  jjart  of  the  New  Test.,  it  must  be  a  truth 
of  great  moment  to  all  who  love  the  Saviour.  Although  the  event  itself  is  certain,  yet  the 
exact  time  of  its  occurrence  is  spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  being  uncertain,  and  therefore 
calling  for  constant  watchfulness.  Although  there  will  be  signs  of  its  approach  discerned 
by  those  who  watch,  yet  upon  the  world  at  large  it  is  predicted  to  come  suddenly."  So 
Varley  (Prophetic  Times,  new  ser.,  vol.  2,  p.  8),  Wells  (Springfield  Republic.  Dec.  7th,  1875) 
and  others  in  public  discourses  confess  their  faith  and  urge  to  the  reception  of  Jesus, 
etc.  But  it  fares  with  these  men  as  with  all  others  of  like  faith  ;  their  belief  is  "  un- 
soundness of  judgment,"  as  e.g.  seen  in  note  (1)  Obs.  9.  To  indicate  the  bitter  hostility 
that  these  views  excite— as  signs  of  the  times — we  give  two  additional  illustrations:  A 


142  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

writer  in  the  Ch.  Union,  March  28th,  1877,  remarks  of  Moody  :  "  His  Advent  views  are 
a  crudity  which  time  has  outlawed  : 

'  He  cometh  not  a  King  to  reign  ; 
The  world's  long  hope  i^  dim  ; 
The  weary  centuries  watch  in  vain 
The  clouds  of  heavun  for  Him.'  " 

How  "  outlawed,"  when  so  many  leading  commentaries,  divines,  and  scholars  (Prop.  78) 
still  hold  to  it  V  How  "  outlawed,"  when  it  was  the  faith  of  Apostles,  confessors,  martyrs, 
and  is  contained  in  the  plain  grammatical  sense  of  Scripture  V  "What  daring  unbelief 
these  few  lines  contain  ;  misleading  and  soporific  assertions.  But  again,  let  the  reader 
consider  how  we  have  shown  the  oath-bound  relationship  of  the  future  Kingdom  to  the 
Messiah's  honor  and  glory,  etc.,  and  then  read  what  the  Lath.  Observer  (Aug.  23d,  1878) 
reports  Pres.  Porter  of  Yale  College,  to  have  said  respecting  Moody's  preaching  Advent- 
ism  at  New  Haven,  viz.,  that  it  is  a  "  belief  which  tends  to  bring  back  the  spirit  of  Juda- 
ism. I  feel  bound  as  a  minister  of  Christ  to  pronounce  this  conception  of  the  Kingdom 
of  Christ  to  be  most  dishonorable  to  that  Kingdom  and  injurious  to  its  interests."  We 
venture  to  say  that  this  esteemed  president  leaves  "  the  everlasting  covenant"  of  David 
the  inheritance  of  David's  Son,  the  predictions  of  the  prophets  respecting  a  restored 
Theocracy,  etc.,  out  of  his  theology  as  too  trivial ! 

God's  work  is  progressing,  and  when  we  see  men  and  women  converted,  and  exemplify- 
ing the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  and  the  mind  of  Christ  in  their  lives,  no  matter  in  what 
denomination,  or  sect,  or  organization,  we  see  the  sign  of  the  approaching  end,  since  the 
gathering  out  is  advancing  toward  completion.  Hence  we  have  no  sympathy  for  that 
class  of  men,  who,  under  misguided  zeal  and  bigotry,  take  the  phrase  "  Babylon  and  her 
daughters,"  and,  while  giving  in  the  main  a  correct  exposition  of  its  meaning,  press  it  to 
<ni  injurious  extreme,  as  if  it  embraced  without  exception  everything  relating  to  Roman 
Catholicism,  Protestantism,  State  and  confederated  churches,  Confessional  churches,  in 
brief,  ail  outside  of  their  own  limited  little  sect.  This  spirit  is  exemplified  e.g.  in  Christadel- 
phianism,  Seventh-Day  Adventism,  Believers,  Shakensm,  Mormons,  etc.,  etc.  These  men 
overlook  several  things  :  that  while  there  has  been  evil  in  all  these  churches,  there  have 
also  been  godly  men  in  them  who  were  keenly  alive  to  them,  deplored,  and  resisted 
them  ;  that  to  sit  in  wholesale  and  indiscriminate  judgment  upon  all  is  to  do  gross  in- 
justice to  that  "small  Hock"  which  was  gathered  out  before  such  sects  saw  the  light ; 
that  the  call  "  to  come  out  of  her"  (which  means  to  come  into  their  own  sect)  addressed 
to  men  and  women  who  are  devoted  to  Jesus  and  willing  to  give  up  all  for  Him,  if 
obeyed  would  only  result  in  infusing  the  same  narrow  contracted  view  of  "  charity" 
exhibited  by  those  callers  :  that  if  this  wholesale  denunciation  is  to  be  received,  no 
Christian  Church  can  possibly  be  traced;  that  those  who  employ  this  language,  call 
upon  us  to  come  into  their  distinctive  faith,  without  being  in  agreement  as  to  that  faith 
(i.e.  various  sects  use  it,  and  each  one  claims  to  be  the  pure  Church  alone)  ;  that  while 
the  ultimate  overthrow  of  the  churches  under  Antichristian  persecution  is  clearly  taught, 
we  are  also  taught  that  faithful  men  and  women  are  in  them,  seeing  that  the  true  Church 
for  many  centuries  has  only  been  perpetuated  through  them,  amid  apostasy,  contention 
for  the  truth,  and  persecution  ;  that  we  must  discriminate  between  piety,  reverence  for 
God's  Word,  love  to  Jesus,  etc.,  and  error,  ignorance,  etc.,  that  may  be  allied  with  the 
same  ;  that  in  the  sight  of  heaven  a  condemnatory,  uncharitable,  and  self-exalting  spirit 
is  even  worse  than  the  entertainment  of  error  with  a  heart  full  of  love  to  God  and  man. 
Hence  such  writings  as  Dr.  Thomas's,  Lincoln's,  Barbour's, White's,  etc.  (however  valuable 
in  interesting  matter),  are  vitiated  by  a  species  of  denunciation,  which  claim,  for  their 
respective  sects  or  organizations,  per  se  to  be  the  only  true  Church,  and  denounce  all 
others  as  false  and  Babylonish.  These  are  simply  one-sided,  and  judge  everything  by 
their  own  humanly-devised  standard,  speaking  evil  of  men,  whose  nobleness,  usefulness, 
imitation  of  Christ,  etc.,  is  immensely  above  their  belittling  vision. 

We  only  point  out  that  the  Prophetical  Parable  of  the  Supper  is  being  most  strikingly 
verified  at  the  present  day.  In  the  scale  of  procuring  the  guests  mentioned,  we  certainly 
find  ourselves,  by  evangelistic  and  missionary  labors,  nigh  to  the  Supper.  Let  the 
student  compare  Luke  14  :  16-24  with  the  present  existing  exertions  in  behalf  of  the  last 
classes  specified,  and  he  will  find  a  remarkable  fulfilment. 

18  The  celebrated  prophecy  of  St.  Malachi  (Arch,  of  Armagh,  died  1148)  was  made, 
apologetically  over  against  Protestantism,  to  show  "  that  the  Papacy  would  maintain  the 
Church  to  the  Coming  of  Christ"  (Kurtz's  Oh.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  163).  This  will  be  verified, 
according  to  the  Scriptures,  in  that  it  will  exist  at  the  first  stage  of  the  Advent  but  meet 
its  fall  between  (Rev.  14  :  8  and  17  :  16)  the  secret  and  the  open  manifestation.     While 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  143 

the  Papacy  is  thus  virtually  gaining  ground  again  in  the  number  and  devotedness  of  her 
adherents,  she  is  compromising  herself  in  the  effort  to  secure  power,  so  that  she  will  not, 
and  cannot,  gain  the  leadership  and  ascendancy  ascribed  to  her  by  various  prophetical 
writers.  The  principles,  past  record,  aims,  etc.,  are  so  diametrically  op  posed  to  the 
principles  and  aims  of  the  coming  Antichrist,  that  (as  seen  in  Rev.  14  and  17)  she  too 
must  fall  under  a  terrible  persecution,  fearfully  paying  for  her  pretensions  to  universal 
sovereignty.  Ultramontanism,  however  it  may  for  a  time  materially  serve  to  prop  up  the 
Papacy,  is  doomed  by  its  utterances,  arrogancy,  and  claims,  to  alienate  the  Antichristian 
confederation  ;  and  prophecy  directly  teaches  this  by  the  fate  predicted  and  graphically 
delineated. 

19  Our  remarks  are  intended  to  apply  to  the  classes  indicated,  but  they  can  even  be 
widened  to  include  the  temperance  movement  in  some  of  its  aspects.  Take  e.g.  the 
Murphy  movement  with  which  the  Church  has  so  largely  affiliated.  Now  the  Church 
itself  is  God's  temperance  organization,  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  among  which  is 
temperance,  are  the  result  following  repentance  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
This  all  orthodox  churches  admit,  but  going  out  and  striking  hands  with  the  world  it 
reverses  all  this,  and,  in  place  of  repentance  and  faith  as  the  preliminaries,  it  substitutes 
the  pledge  and  in  a  vague  manner  appeals  to  God's  help  and  grace  without  coming  in 
God's  appointed  way,  i.e.  repenting  not  merely  of  one  sin,  drunkenness,  but  of  all  sin,  etc. 
This  suits  human  nature  so  well  that  all  classes  can  associate  together,  promising  them- 
selves the  greatest  victory.  But  the  end  can  be  readily  foreseen  ;  like  all  other  waves  of 
excitement,  founded  in  a  one-sided  view  of  God's  Word,  it  will  pass,  making  it  more  diffi- 
cult in  the  future  to  arrest  the  attention  of  men  to  the  truth.  To  illustrate  the  enthusi- 
astic but  mistaken  (being  anti-scriptural  and  misleading)  notions  entertained,  it  is  suffi- 
cient to  quote  from  a  despatch  forwarded  (May  7th,  1877)  to  Springfield,  O.,  by  Murphy 
himself,  saying  :  "  The  country  is  to  be  conquered  for  our  King,  whose  right  it  is  to 
reign."  "  We  are  going  on  to  victory."  If  the  Murphy ites  and  their  co-abettors  are  to 
do  this  for  Jesus  Christ,  then  the  Bible  teaching  on  this  subject  is  most  certainly  incor- 
rect. What  the  Church  itself  cannot  perform  (Prop.  175,  etc.)  no  outside  influence  can 
possibly  accomplish.  Hence  good,  pious,  honest,  sincere,  and  able  men  are  doomed  to 
meet  disappointment.  So  it  is  also  with  those  conventions,  etc.,  that  draw  together 
great  talent,  novelties,  sensational  things,  etc. — whatever  good  is  accomplished  is  clouded 
by  the  insidious  notion  of  prosperity,  the  conversion  of  the  world,  etc.  The  proof  is 
found  in  this  :  that  a  scriptural  representation  of  the  nearness  of  the  Advent,  of  coming 
persecution,  etc.,  would  be  regarded  as  entirely  out  of  place  in  them.  With  Moody  we 
hold  that  "  the  only  hope  of  the  drunkard  is  in  a  renewed  heart,"  and,  therefore,  are 
little  influenced  by  advocates  of  temperance  and  reform  publicly  expressing  their  faith 
in  God's  help  in  the  deliverance  from  some  particular  sin  iclien  unrepentant  of  others. 
While  appreciating  the  noble  efforts  of  Gough  and  others — for  all  true  believers  are 
advocates  of  temperance — we  cannot  possibly  receive  their  high-wrought  eulogies,  which 
represent  the  temperance  movement  as  one  of  "  the  great  moral  enterprises  which  shall 
usher  in  the  day  of  the  final  triumph  of  the  cross  of  Christ:"  The  Bible  teaches,  as  we 
have  shown,  just  the  reverse.  Hence  all  those  great  conventions,  assemblies  and  organ- 
izations which — whatever  truth  may  be  presented  or  good  done — eagerly  anticipate,  and 
with  loud  praises  predict,  the  conversion  of  the  world,  the  unlimited  advancement  of  the 
Church,  and  the  ushering  in  of  Millennial  glory  through  their  instrumentality,  are  predict- 
ing falsely  and  misleading  the  multitude.  A  Pre-Millenarian  would  be  condemned,  if  he 
ventured  to  call  attention  to  the  biblical  statements  ;  and,  indeed,  there  is  little  danger 
of  any  one  ever  doing  so,  since  particular  care  is  taken  to  exclude  such,  lest  a  strain  of 
discord  mar  the  smooth  prophesyings  so  fashionable  and  palatable  at  such  gatherings.  Men 
on  the  brink  of  fearful  times  encourage  each  other  by  unscriptural  but  pleasing  pictures 
of  reform  and  progress. 

-°  The  Bishop  of  Oxford  at  a  missionary  meeting  in  England  made  some  remarks 
(reprinted  in  the  Guardian,  Aug.  23d,  1865)  so  apt  (as  "  the  footfalls  of  the  coming  of  the 
great  Antichrist")  that  we  reproduce  them.  After  stating  that  it  was  his  belief  that  the 
last  attenqjt  against  the  truth  would  come  not  so  much  in  open  denial  as  in  a  kind  of 
admission  while  sapping  the  distinctive  features  of  truth,  and  describes  it  as  "  universal 
toleration,"  "a  deep  respect  for  religiousness  everywhere,  always  providing  that  it  is 
not  that  troublesome  thing  which,  by  being  believed,  affects  men's  conduct,  is  any  limita- 
tion upon  their  thoughts,  or  even  troubles  what  is  called  the  course  of  society.  That 
they  will  all  agree  to  put  out.  I  have  no  doubt  myself  that  unbelief  contains  within 
itself  the  seed  of  the  most  intensely  hating  persecution  the  world  has  ever  yet  seen.  In- 
stead of  being  tolerant,  I  believe  it  is  the  very  perfection  of  intolerance.     I  believe  that 


144  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  174. 

the  veiy  moment  it  has  achieved  its  own  victory,  toleration  will  be  the  thing  above  all 
others  it  will  hate  with  an  intensity  short  only  of  the  hatred  the  evil  spirit  himself  has  for 
the  simple  faith  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  must  be  so,  I  think,  because 
unbelief  in  whatever  form  it  comes  is  the  exaltation  of  the  human  intellect  and  the 
human  will  over  the  voice  of  revelation  and  revealed  knowledge.  It  is  thwarted  to  the 
utmost  the  very  moment  that  it  is  met  and  confronted  by  the  mighty  rock  of  revealed 
truth.  The  stream  flows  on  with  the  most  delicious  smoothness  when  there  is  nothing 
to  thwart  it.  '  Let  us  love  one  another.  Let  us  be  tolerant  of  each  other's  views.  If 
you  choose  to  worship  the  devil,  worship  him  if  you  only  do  it  quietly.  If  you  choose  to 
worship  an  anti-devil,  do  so  if  you  do  so  quietly.  Let  us  go  on  altogether  in  our  worldly 
ways  and  worldly  thoughts,  holding  nothing  that  may  be  disagreeable  or  troublesome. 
Anything  disagreeable  in  religion  is  such  a  shocking  thing.'  Well,  then  comes  in  the 
most  disagreeable  thing  possible,  the  revelation  of  an  absolute  truth  which  says  :  '  We 
will  have  nothing  to  do  with  this  fellowship  of  evil.  You  are  leading  men  into  absolute 
destruction  ;  you  are  promising  them  liberty  and  making  them  slaves  ;  you  are  handing 
them  over  to  the  devil  under  the  pretence  of  liberty  and  emancipation  from  their 
shackles  :  '  and  forthwith  these  men  turn  upon  this  stern  declaration  of  the  eternal 
verity  of  God  with  all  the  haired  of  the  human  heart  which  the  greatest  rebel  himself  can 
stir  up  within  it."  Thus  extremes  meet  :  on  the  one  hand,  intense,  selfish  bigotry  and 
exclusiveness,  and  on  the  other,  a  tolerance  which  ignores  the  plainest  precepts  and 
most  fundamental  truths.  It  is  sad,  that  many  professed  preachers,  pretending  to  be 
evangelical  in  sentiment  (as  e.g.  Eev.  Murray)  affiliate  with  unbelief,  and  tell  us  that  the 
Christianity  of  the  past  and  present  must  give  place  to  "  a  new  religion  of  feeding  the 
poor,  visiting  the  sick,  reforming  the  vicious,  ministering  to  the  insane,' '  etc. 

21  We  cannot  help  express  surprise  that,  notwithstanding  the  teachings  of  1  Cor.  13,  the 
command  of  the  Saviour  to  love  one  another,  etc.,  that  men,  from  a  confessional  stand- 
point, or  a  prejudiced  exclusiveness,  will  speak  in  terms  of  contempt  and  reproach  of 
such  an  approach  to  fraternal  feeling  and  good-will.  The  day  is  coming,  sooner  or  later, 
when  the  terrible  persecution  <  f  the  Church  will  cause  all  believers  to  lose  sight  of  their 
minor  differences,  and  to  receive  in  fraternal  relationship  all  who  sincerely  and  de- 
votedly love  the  Saviour  and  exhibit  His  mind. 

M  It  is  a  mooted  point  whether  the  world  is  growing  better  or  worse  ;  both  having  their 
advocates.  We  only  say  that  progress  is  not  piety,  and  that  while  a  greater  amount  of 
good  exists  so  also  a  greater  amount  of  evil  is  to  be  witnessed.  Thus  e.g.  take  any  large 
city,  as  London,  while  more  good  men  are  in  London  to-day  than  perhaps  ever  before, 
its  population  of  criminals,  etc.,  has  been  also  increased.  Besides  this,  taking  the  stand- 
ard of  the  Word,  increased  light  and  increased  responsibility  and  wickedness,  there  can 
be  no  question  that  "  wicked  men  wax  worse  and  worse,"  etc. 

An  immense  array  of  statistics  might  be  produced  to  confirm  such  statements.  An 
illustration  or  two  will  be  sufficient.  "  The  New  York  Prison  Association,"  "  the  New 
York  State  Charities  Aid  Association, "  and  others  give  alarming  confirmatory  statements 
on  one  point  alone,  viz.,  on  the  hereditary  transmission  of  evil,  evincing  (1)  that  heredity 
itself  entails  increased  corruption  and  evil  ;  (2)  that  our  large  cities  are  growing  worse 
and  worse  in  this  direction  ;  (3)  that  something  must  be  speedily  done  to  avoid  an  over- 
whelming flood,  and  State  help  is  suggested.  Those  who  so  confidently  hold  that  science 
and  art  and  human  development  are  to  elevate  the  morality  of  nations,  may  well  con- 
sider Rousseau's  Treatise,  which  received  the  prize  offered  by  the  Academy  of  Dijon,  on 
the  question,  "  If  the  re-establishment  of  sciences  and  arts  has  contributed  to  render 
morals  more  pure'"  Eousseau's  references  to  past  history  (as  well  as  history  since  his 
time  exemplified  in  France  itself),  teaches  us  that  these,  without  the  sanctifying  and 
guiding  influences  of  religion,  are  no  barrier  against  the  outbreaks  of  depravity  and  cor- 
ruption ;  that  they  may  be  employed  in  advancing  pride,  ambition,  vice,  and  dissolute 
morals.  So  Wallace  (Malay  Archipelago)  contends  that  while  civilized  communities 
"  have  progressed  vastly  beyond  the  savage  state  in  intellectual  achievements,  we  have 
not  advanced  equally  in  morals  ;"  and  even  adds  :  "it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the 
mass  of  our  populations  have  not  advanced  beyond  the  savage  code  of  morals,  and  have 
in  many  cases  sunk  below  it."  This  view  is  sustained  by  various  philosophical  writers, 
and  as  illustrations  point  to  the  facts  that  highly  civilized  and  enlightened  nations  are 
guilty  of  encroachments  and  acts  upon  nations  lower  in  the  scale,  which  place  them  on  a 
common  level  as  to  morality,  as  e.g.  the  opium  trade,  past  official  indorsement  of  idola- 
try in  India,  unjust  wars,  the  treatment  of  Indians  in  Florida,  etc.  On  the  other  hand 
the  advocates  of  progress,  as  e.g.  Sir  Lubbock  ( The  Origin  of  Civilization),  Lord  Dunraven, 
and  others,  contend  "  that  man  has,  perhaps,  made  more  progress  in  moral  than  in  either 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  145 

material  or  intellectual  advancement."  The  "believer,  taking  the  scriptural  view,  holds 
that  on  the  one  hand  a  greater  advance  has  been  made,  but  that  on  the  other  hand  this 
very  advancement,  considered  in  the  light  of  increased  light,  privilege,  blessing,  in- 
creases not  only  responsibility  but  sinfulness.  Every  treatise  on  morals  admits  this 
standard,  and  even  courts  of  justice  take  such  in  consideration,  making  allowance  for 
ignorance  and  superstition.  Such  advocates  of  progress  indulge  in  generalities  ;  they 
do  not  explain  the  simplest  statistics.  They  avoid  such  as  the  following  :  the  report  of 
Chancellor  Hartson  of  Napa,  Chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Prisons,  to  the  California 
Legislature,  gives  the  following  startling  statistics,  viz.,  that  the  cost  of  maintaining 
criminals  and  paupers  has  increased  far  in  excess  of  the  increase  of  population.  Thus 
in  1850  :  Pop.  23,191,870,  and  cost  $2,954,806  ;  in  1860,  31,443,321,  and  cost  $4,445,143  ; 
in  1870,  38,558,374,  and  cost  $10,930,429  ;  so  that  for  1880  the  cost  is  estimated  to  exceed 
$20,000,000. 

23  Also  notice  Douay  Version,  which  renders  Deut.  18  :  11  "  or  that  seeketh  the  truth 
from  the  dead  ;"  Eng.  Ver.,  "  or  a  necromancer  ;"  Luther's  Rend.,  "  or  who  questions 
or  asks  of  the  dead,"  etc.  Dr.  Seiss  (Proph.  Times,  vol.  9,  p.  126)  quotes  Mede  as  giving 
an  old  writer,  Epiphanius,  paraphrasing  the  passage  in  text  :  "  Some  shall  apostatize 
from  the  sound  doctrine,  giving  heed  to  fables  and  doctrines  of  demons  ;  for  they  shall 
be  worshippers  of  dead  men  as  they  worshipped  in  Israel." 

24  Compare  Seiss's  Wonderful  Confederation,  Daniel's  On  Spiritualism,  Britton's  Modern 
Amer.  Spiritualism,  Fairfield's  Ten  Years  with  Spiritual  Mediums,  Hammond's  Spiritualism, 
Tuttle's  Arcana  of  Spiritualism,  Wolfe's  Startling  Facts  in  Mod.  Spiritualism,  Eeecher's 
Review  of  Spiritual  Manifestations,  Berg's  Demons  and  Guardian  Angels,  Ramsay's  Spiritual- 
ism, Oldfield's  To  Damonion,  Maskelyne's  On  Spiritualism,  Carpenter's  Lectures  on  Mes- 
merism, Odylism,  Tabh-turning,  and  Spiritualism  (Eclec.  Mag.  for  1877),  Marvin's  The  Phil- 
osophy of  Spiritualism,  Mansel's  On  Mod.  Spiritualism,  Dod's  On  Spirit  Manifestations, 
Mahan's  Mod.  Mysteries  Explained,  a  work  Spiritism  in  the  Bible,  Mattison's  Origin,  etc.  of 
Spirit  Rapping,  McDonald's  On  Spiritualism,  a  work  Sober  Words  of  Table  Talk,  Spicer's 
Sights  and  Sounds,  North  Brit.  Review,  39  :  174,  Quarterly  /.'<  i  £<  w,  lli:  179.  Eitto's  Journal, 
Vaughn's  Letter  and  Spirit,  Blackwood's  Mag.,  73  :  629,  Eclectic  Mag.,  July,  1876,  Feb.,  1876, 
Evang.  Review,  vol.  7,  No.  26,  Crooke's  Spiritualism  Viewed  in  II"'  Light  of  Mod.  Science, 
Pond's  On  Spiritualism,  Psychic  Force  and  Mod.  Spiritualism,  Inquiry  into  the  Phenomena 
('idled  Spiritualism,  Hints  for  the  Evidences  of  Spiritualism,  etc.  These  and  other  writers 
are  not  agreed  as  to  the  origin  of  the  phenomena  claimed  by  Spiritualism.  Some  ascribe 
it  simply  to  trickery  ;  others  to  Satanic  or  demoniac  influence.  Some  to  "  Psychic 
Force"  (i.e.  to  the  existence  of  a  force,  the  law  and  origin  of  which  are  still  unknown)  ; 
others  to  natural  causes,  susceptible  of  explanation.  Some  to  "  the  agency  of  disembod- 
ied spirits,"  others  to  "an  exclusively  mundane  origin."  Some  attribute  it  to  a  natural 
force  set  in  motion  by  the  brain  of  the  medium  ;  others  to  part  imposition,  part  unob- 
served natural  causes,  and  part  Satanic  influence.  Some  to  "  odic  force  ;"  others  in  part 
to  mesmerism  and  clairvoyance.  Some  to  the  departed  spirits  of  wicked  men  ;  others 
"  to  transparent  wicked  imposition  and  delusion."  Whatever  opinion  we  may  entertain 
respecting  it,  nearly  all  agree  that  it  is  "  a  revival  of  necromancy,"  or  "a  Seeking  after 
the  Dead,"  and  hence  in  an  enlarged  sense  " Demonology."  Whatever  explanations  may 
be  given  of  its  varied  manifestations,  it  is  sufficient  for  the  prophetical  student  to  know 
that  its  main  leading  idea  and  profession  is  particularized  as  a  sign  of  the  last  times. 
And  when  we  see  tens  of  thousands,  including  intelligent,  learned  and  eminent  men,  its 
advocates,  and  when  we  observe  its  hostility  to  the  truth  and  the  Church,  the  sign  be- 
comes a  signal  one. 

25  As  this  is  a  very  grave  charge  it  will  be  necessary  to  verify  it.  See  Harris's  Mod. 
Spiritualism,  McDonald's  Spiriiualisni,  and  the  testimony  given  in  the  latter  work  by  men 
formerly  prominent  Spiritualists,  such  as  Fishbaugh,  Coan,  Hatch,  and  Whiting.  See 
also,  e.g.  Miss  Doten's  Remarks  in  Banner  of  Light,  Dec.  3d,  1862,  Dr.  Hare's  Spirilu.  Sci. 
Bern.,  the  writings  of  Dr.  Childs,  Newton,  Gardner,  Wilson,  etc.  We  give  an  extract 
from  the  Religio- Philosophical  Journal,  Feb.  20th,  1869:  "  In  licentiousness  we  find  an 
outcropping  of  the  God-element  in  man.  It  seems  somewhat  difficult  to  attain  the  end 
desired,  and  to  make  plain  to  all  that  rice  may  be  virtue,  and  discord  harmony.  We  do 
say,  however,  that  virtue  is  one  condition,  vice  another  ;  both  equally  commendable  to  God." 
No  one  but  a  man  whose  conscience  was  dreadfully  seared  could  pen  such  a  sentence  as 
this,  which  Jesuitry,  bold  as  it  was  in  perversion,  never  dared  to  present  so  broadly. 
The  fact  is,  that  in  such  papers  as  the  Herald  of  Progress,  the  Banner  of  Light,  etc.,  and 
in  such  books  as  The  Thirty-two-  Wonders  :  or  the  skill  displayed  in  the  miracles  of  Jesus,  The 
mistake  of  Christendom,  Communication  from  Tom  Paine,  and  a  host  of  others,  the  rankest 


146  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  174. 

infidelity  and  blasphemy  is  boldly  avowed.  On  the  one  hand,  the  grossest  unbelief,  and 
then  on  the  other  a  professed  admiration  for  the  Bible  as  inculcating  Spiritualism — one 
blowing  hot  and  another  cold  to  suit  every  latitude.  The  saddest  feature  of  all  is,  that 
it  has  evidently  well  meaning  men  entangled  in  its  toils,  forming,  in  view  of  adaptedness 
to  spiritual  cravings  in  others,  a  powerful  magnet  to  draw  in  others.  But  this  is  to  be 
expected  ;  an  object  all  repulsive  would  become  speedily  loathsome  ;  but  clothe  the  skele- 
ton with  silks  and  rich  fabrics  to  hide  the  deformity,  paint  the  mask  with  a  bright  coun- 
tenance, and  many,  who  otherwise  would  be  repelled,  hug  it  in  fond  delusion. 

26  The  moderates  would  still  exhibit  a  show  of  respect  for  Christ,  speak  of  Him  as  "  a 
model  man,"  etc.,  but  emphatically  deny  His  teaching  in  many  things,  ridiculing  the 
fundamental  doctrines  of  Christianity.  The  bold  hypocrisy  mentioned  by  Paul  is  appar- 
ent in  all  of  them,  in  that,  professing  to  admire  Jesus,  they  refuse  to  accept  of  His  doctrinal 
utterances,  which  can  be  tested  at  any  time  by  simply  inquiring  whether  the  sacrifice  of 
Jesus  is  of  an  atoning  nature  for  sin.  Take  the  very  best  of  this  class  in  point  of  preten- 
sion and  ability,  as  e.g.  A.  J.  Davis,  "  the  great  Apostle"  and  "  High  Priest,"  and  although 
claiming  a  superior  perception  of  all  truth  in  his  "  superior  condition,"  he  and  others 
deny  the  resurrection  (p.  90,  Phil,  of  Spi.  Intercourse),  the  Bible  doctrine  of  depravity 
(p.  88,  same),  the  atonement  (p.  44,  Life  of  the  Spheres),  deride  Revelation  (p.  129,  same), 
ridicule  prayer  (p.  35,  PhUos.  of  Spi.  Infer.),  sneer  at  the  Bible  heaven  (p.  7G,  Life  of  the 
Spheres),  etc.  All  will  use  the  Bible  only  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  interpreted  to  contain  the 
elements  of  Spiritualism  and  no  farther.  The  whole  matter  is  summed  up  in  Davis's 
Autobiography,  p.  489  :  "  I  have  no  sympathy  with  any  scheme  of  salvation  which  rests 
upon  the  teachings  of  any  one  book  in  the  Bible,  or  out  of  it,  nor  yet  on  all  books  com- 
bined. On  the  contrary  I  believe  in  the  progressive  growth  and  harmonization  of  the 
whole  human  family,"  etc.,  and  on  p.  519  he  promises  us  "  the  day  when,  through  its 
influence,  the  discordant  powers  and  principalities  of  this  world  will  become  one  King- 
dom of  love,  wisdom,  and  harmony."  It  is  stated  in  various  sources  that  to  do  this  it 
must  supplant  Christianity,  as  e.g.  Banner  of  Light,  Ap.  10th,  1869,  and  addresses  of 
Middlebrook,  Higging,  etc.,  at  Chicago  Convention,  1874),  etc.,  comp.  Dr.  Potter's,  him- 
self once  a  leading  member  and  medium,  pamphlet  On  Spiritualism,  pub.  18GG,  for  the 
internal  working  of  the  same. 

-1  Various  estimates  of  the  numbers  connected  with  Spiritualism  are  given  running 
into  its  millions.  Thus  e.g.  the  Contemp.  Review,  Aug.,  1872,  p.  439,  says  they  are  esti- 
mated "  from  six  to  ten  millions."  The  Pop.  Science  Monthly,  which  has  no  sympathy 
with  it,  occasionally  refers  (as  e.g.  Sep.,  1879)  to  the  large  extent  of  its  following  among 
scientific  men  in  England,  Germany,  etc.,  and  the  adhesion  to  it  in  this  country.  It  is  a 
matter  of  surprise  that  intelligence  can  tolerate  "the  trash"  which  is  represented  as 
coming  from  Jesus,  Bacon,  Luther,  Washington,  and  a  host  of  eminent  deceased  persons 
(seeing  that  it  would  evidence  a  wonderful  retrogression  of  sense,  genius,  power,  etc.),  or 
(  Westminster  Ttevu  vo,  Jan.,  18.18)  the  story  of  "  a  lady  who  was  brought  to  bed  of  a  motive 
power,"  "  the  doggerel  verses  purporting  to  emanate  from  the  Saviour  Himself,  com- 
pounds of  the  ludicrous  and  horrible  in  which  the  laugh  due  to  their  absurdity  is 
checked  by  the  shudder  at  their  blasphemy."  Even  such  a  writer  as  Howitt  (His.  of  the 
Supernatural),  in  his  apostleship  of  Spiritualism,  endeavors  to  shield  the  practice  of  mod- 
ern necromancy  from  the  condemnation  of  the  law  of  God  by  (p.  197)  saying  that  in  the 
transfiguration  Christ  "  sought  to  the  spirit  of  the  dead,"  and  "  broke  the  law  before  the 
face  of  Moses."  A  man  must  certainly  be  easily  satisfied  with  proof  favorable  to  his 
system,  who  can  find  in  this  occurrence  any  likeness  whatever  to  the  present  necro- 
mancy. It  can  only  be  made  out  by  a  gross  perversion  and  prostitution  of  a  sublime 
typical  representation  (Prop.  153).  The  author  of  "Modern  Sorcery"  {Brit.  Quart. 
Review,  repub.  in  Eclec.  Mag.,  Feb.,  1876)  refers  to  the  fact  that  Paul,  Jewish  saints,  and 
prophets,  and  even  Jesus  are  represented  as  visitants  attending  seances,  and  uttering 
sentiments  antagonistic  to  their  historical  character,  but  in  accord  with  the  unbelieving, 
humanitarian  spirit  of  the  mediums.  No  wonder  that  it  requires  a  darkened  chamber  to 
bring  forth  these  manifestations  of  darkness,  from  which  no  name  of  the  past,  however 
venerable,  is  safe.  In  our  remarks  on  Spiritualism,  we  do  not  include  all  as  entertain- 
ing the  same  spirit,  for  some  are  evidently  sincere  in  a  reverence  for  the  Bible,  and  seem 
pained  at  the  extremes  of  the  ultraists,  but  still  their  adhesion,  etc.,  is  injurious,  and 
confirms  unbelief.  Mrs.  Hardinge  Britten's  Spiritualistic  Lectures  at  Melbourne,  Aus- 
tralia (  West.  Gh.  Adwcate,  Aug.  6th,  1879),  were  unsuccessful,  and  she  assigns  for  it  the 
following  reason,  which  speaks  for  itself  :  "  Because  of  the  splits  in  the  Spiritualistic 
camp,  and  because  there  were  those  who  believed  in  the  doctrine  and  rejoiced  in  the  up- 
rooting of  old  institutions,  and  made  use  of  the  new  creed  as  an  excuse  to  relieve  them 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  1-17 

from  all  restraint  and  for  indulgence  in  licentiousness."  The  truth  is,  that  whatever  esteem 
may  be  professed  for  the  Bible  in  behalf  of  Spiritualism,  the  animus  is  seen  in  the  con 
stant  efforts  made  to  lower  its  inspiration,  credibility,  and  authority.  The  proof  for  this 
can  be  readily  seen  in  any  extended  Spiritualistic  catalogue  of  books,  as  e.g.  in  the  cata- 
logue of  the  "  Banner  of  Light  Book-store,"  containing  the  works  of  Tom  Paine,  Voltaire, 
Volney,  etc.,  specially  recommended.  Then  we  have  such  writers,  bitter  and  unrelent- 
ing, as  Denton,  Fish,  Finney,  Cooper,  Winans,  etc.,  on  the  Bible,  Tuttle  on  Nature,  Mrs. 
King  on  Man,  Hull  on  Reason,  Craven  on  the  Old  Test.,  Randolph  on  Pre- Adamite  Man, 
Frothingham  on  Humanity,  and  a  multitude  of  others,  who  all  endeavor  to  make  the 
Scriptures  unreliable,  opposed  to  science,  nature,  and  the  true  progress  of  humanity. 
Nor  need  we  be  surprised  at  this,  when  Childs  has  the  effrontery  to  proclaim  as  a  funda- 
mental truth,  "  whatsoever  is,  is  right  ;"  when  Reade  makes  the  individual  man  "lots  of 
animated  jelly,"  to  be  swallowed  up  in  a  perfected  humanity  ;  when  Wright  makes  his 
co-workers  have  as  much  of  God  in  them  as  Jesus  ever  exhibited.  They  exult  in  dispos- 
ing and  circulating  the  intensely  hostile  works  of  Bradlaugh,  Bob  Ingersoll,  Holyoake, 
Underwood,  Parker,  Voysey,  Feuerbach,  Bauer,  Renan,  Harrison,  Marvin,  Watts,  Bar- 
nard, Buechner,  Lum,  Meredith,  Off  en,  Orcutt,  Schefer,  Weiss,  Alberger,  Hazard,  Putnam, 
Peebles,  Watson,  Smythe,  Doten,  etc.,  etc.  However  we  may  account  for  Spiritualistic 
phenomena,  whether  to  mind  reading,  natural  causes,  Satanic  influence,  demonology,  or 
imposition,  its  impolency  as  a  Supernatural  agent  is  clearly  evidenced  by  a  simple  test, 
viz.,  let  any  one  carry  with  him  to  a  medium  a  communication  in  a  sealed  envelope  given 
by  a  third  person,  of  whose  contents  he  himself  is  ignorant,  and  no  Spiritualistic  influ- 
ence can  tell  what  is  in  the  envelope.  The  Pop.  Science  Monthly  (June,  1879)  refers  to  the 
fact  that  a  one  hundred  pound  note  was  left  in  a  sealed  envelope  in  the  Bank  of  England, 
the  owner  having  promised  to  give  it  to  any  Spiritualist  who  could  tell  the  number  of 
the  note  ;  bat  not  even  an  application  was  received.  Some  of  its  advocates,  as  R.  D. 
Owen  (Debu(al)le  Lund,  p.  239),  are  candid  enough  to  admit  that  mistakes,  errors,  delusion, 
etc.,  may  exist  in  connection  (but  claim  the  process  of  sifting  as  necessary),  and  that  in- 
fallibility cannot  be  attributed  to  its  teachings. 

2b  The  sorrowful,  judgment-denounced  catalogue  can  be  readily  swelled,  as  e.g.  in  the 
open  blasphemy  and  oaths  so  widely  prevalent  and  foiling  even  from  the  lips  of  chil- 
dren ;  the  extravagance  in  dress  in  meeting  the  demands  of  imperious  fashion  leading  to 
many  sad  consequences  ;  the  increasing  boldness  of  so  many  girls  and  women  in  follow- 
ing after  pleasure  and  amusement,  etc.,  by  which  modesty,  home  life,  etc.,  are  sacrificed 
for  the  sake  of  publicity  and  vulgar  notoriety  ;  the  immense  traffic  in  and  use  of  intoxi- 
cating liquors  with  its  resultant  evils  ;  the  direct  trade  kept  up  in  maintaining  the 
means  for  gratifying  sensuality  with  its  demoralizing  effects  ;  the  fearful  increase  of 
divorces  and  the  easy  manner  in  which  many  are  obtained  ;  the  unhappiness  and  infi- 
delity connected  with  the  conjugal  relation  arising  from  the  violation  of  law,  etc.  ;  the 
increase  of  murder,  so  that  often  several  are  embraced  in  the  same  daily  newspaper  ;  the 
spirit  of  free-lovism  ;  the  publication  of  obscene  pictures,  books,  and  papers  ;  the 
racing,  games  of  chance,  etc.,  leading  to  gambling  ;  the  manipulations  of  stocks,  provi- 
sions, etc.,  for  the  purpose  of  making  money  at  the  sacrifices  of  others,  etc. 

29  Van  Oosterzee  (Lange's  Com.  loci)  refers  the  fulfilment  of  this  passage  in  particular  to 
"  tho  last  days  of  this  era,  which  precede  immediately  the  last  personal  Parousia  of  the 
Lord  "  (1  Pet.  1  :  5  ;  2  Pet.  3  :  3),  and  says  :  "  It  is  here  also  revealed  that  the  optimistic 
view  of  the  world,  which  expects  but  a  continuous  triumph  of  humanism,  an  advance 
steadily  to  a  higher  freedom,  culture,  and  dignity  in  the  future,  cannot  stand  before  the 
tribunal  of  Scripture."  So  on  1  Tim.  4  :  1-5  he  remarks  in  the  same  spirit  :  "  The  dark 
visions  which  Paul  opens  to  us  of  the  future  directly  conflict  with  the  optimistic  and 
sanguine  hopes  of  those  who  believe  that,  from  the  unceasing  growth  of  knowledge,  all 
on  earth  and  in  the  Church  of  Christ  is  becoming  always  better,  more  harmonious,  more 
peaceful.  The  same  Scripture  which  gives  the  promise  of  the  last  glorious  day  for  the 
Christian,  utters  its  ever-increasing  lamentations  over  the  last  times  which  are  to  j:>recede 
that  day."  The  newspapers  are  constantly  portraying  such  characters,  and  the  number 
is  increasing.  While  writing,  a  reference  to  to-day's  Gin.  Enquirer  (July  22d,  1881)  finds 
its  accustomed  burden  of  sad  and  fearful  news  ;  and  one  of  the  columns  contains  this 
declaration  :  "  Comet  or  no  comet,  this  year  (1881)  starts  in  right  to  become  famous  for 
murders,  assassinations,  shipwrecks,  tornadoes,  conflagrations,  floods,  scandals,  and 
other  sensations.     Deviltry  seems  to  move  with  the  speed  of  an  express  train." 

30  As  stated  previously,  large  numbers  are  Rationalistic,  and  eagerly  adopt  the  conclu- 
sions of  Strauss,  Bauer,  Renan,  and  unbelieving  scientists.  Others  remain  orthodox  (i.e. 
hold  to  the  old  faith)  as  e.g.  Rabbi  Artour  (in  Sermons  Freached  in  Several  Synagogues, 


14S  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  174. 

1874),  avow  their  belief  and  expectation  of  a  Supernatural  Person  in  the  Coming  of  a 
Messiah,  but  reject  the  claims  of  Jesus  to  the  Messiahship.  Another  party  make  the 
Messiah  only  "  a  figurative  personification  of  a  Millennial  period,"  etc.  But  this  very 
unbelieving  condition  of  the  Jews,  and  hence  an  unwillingness  to  return  to  Palestine,  is 
given  as  a  distinctive  sign  in  Ezek.  20  :  30,  etc.  They  give  up  faith  m  the  predictions 
of  God,  and,  therefore,  say,  "  "We  will  be  as  the  heathen."  "While  this  has  always  been, 
more  or  less,  true  of  the  ten  tribes  who  have  become  amalgamated  among  nations,  it  is 
now  specially  true  of  the  whole  nation.  While  a  large  portion  is  orthodox  in  its  faith  of 
a  Coming  Messiah,  and  await  Him,  another  large  and  growing  portion  is  unbelieving,  and 
desire  to  be  incorporated  with  the  natiuns  among  whom  they  live.  This  is  seen  in 
America  and  Europe  e.g.  by  the  purchase  of  real  estate,  the  funding  of  local  interests, 
and  intermarriage  with  Gentiles.  We  only  add  that  the  recent  terrible  persecution  of 
the  Jews  in  Eussia  and  Poland  calls  the  attention  of  the  nations — if  they  will  heed  it — to 
the  prophetical  status  of  that  nation. 

B1  The  prophetical  student  will  not  overlook  the  significant  fact  that  just  as  the  Pre-Mil- 
lennial  prophetical  periods  are  expiring  (as  all  admit),  the  greattst  power  is  lodged  in  the 
hands  of  Jews,  not  merely  monetary  but  political,  as  e.g.  in  Lord  Beaconsfield,  the  Prime- 
Minister  of  England.  This  assumes  importance  when  the  additional  fact  is  observed  that 
nearly  all,  if  not  all,  commentators  are  agreed  that  the  friendly  power  ("  the  ships  of 
Tarshish")  which  ill  aid  the  Jews  to  a  partial,  preliminary  restoration  is  England.  As 
the  time  is  approaching,  such  indications  should  be  witnessed,  and  their  appearance  are 
confirmatory  and  strengthening.  Indeed,  there  has  been  a  lively  interest  taken  in  the 
Jews  by  eminent  Englishmen  (Lord  John  Russell,  etc.),  and  that  friendly  feeling  is  widen- 
ing and  extending,  until  policy  itself  allied  with  it  shall  indicate  the  restoration  of  the 
Jewish  nation  as  the  best  means  to  secure  a  friendly  ally  in  the  East  as  a  protection  to 
England's  interests. over  against  Russia's  encroachments.  In  view  of  the  large  and  in- 
creasing Jewish  population  in  Palestine,  Dr.  Edersheim  well  said  :  "  The  return  of  the 
Jews  to  their  own  land  may  he  said  to  have  already  commenced."  Various  disabilities, 
formerly  enjoined  by  the  Turkish  power,  have  been  removed  ;  the  freedom  of  purchasing 
property  and  of  building  has  been  given  them,  and  (London  limes,  March  20th,  1877) 
numerous  new  buildings  are  erected  by  individuals  and  societies.  Assistance  is  fur- 
nished from  Europe  and  America  to  establish  a  permanent  and  flourishing  settlement. 
The  placing  of  Asia  Minor,  including  Palestine,  by  the  Treaty  of  Berlin  (July,  1878), 
under  the  l'roteetorate  of  England,  has  facilitated  confidence  in  this  direction.  The 
great  leading  Jews  of  the  old  world,  with  their  vast  wealth  and  influence,  are  taking  a 
deep  interest  in  this  matter.  Prctestants  are,  likewise,  impelled  by  the  prophecies  relat- 
ing to  the  future  of  the  nation,  having  an  increasing  interest  in  the  restoration  of  the 
Jews.  This  is  apparent  from  the  numerous  works  published  advocating  their  restoration 
and  conversion,  such  as  by  Faber,  Bichino,  Calvert,  Scott,  Fletcher,  Colyer,  Cooper, 
Thelwall,  Bickersteth,  Crool,  Durell,  Herschel,  McNeile,  Tyso,  Maurice,  "Winston,  Mait- 
land,  "Wood,  Eyre,  Whitaker,  the  Bloomsbury  Lent  Lectores,  fourth  series,  1847,  and 
eighth  series,  1850,  Da  Costa,  Cunninghame,  Frey,  Thomas,  Girdlestone,  Guers,  McCaul, 
Keith,  Maton,  and  others.  The  German  Jews  alone  (Luth.  Obs.,  July  17th,  1S7!>)  have 
sixteen  charity  associations  in  Jerusalem,  and  where  eighty  years  ago  the  Turks  only 
allowed  300  Israelites  in  the  city,  thousands  are  found,  entire  new  streets  being  laid  out 
and  built.  The  Palestine  Exploration  Society  has  already  mapped  out  on  an  inch  scale 
about  three  fourths  of  Palestine,  while  the  chart  of  Jerusalem  and  its  environs  are  on  the 
large  scale  of  ten  feet  to  the  statute  mile.  The  Palestine  Exploration  Fund  in  its  pros- 
pectus said  that  it  was  organized  to  pierce  those  mounds  of  dust  and  stones  around 
Jerusalem,"  which  some  think  is  a  fulfilment  of  Ps.  102  :  14,  "  God's  servants  shall  take 
pleasure  in  her  stones,  and  favor  the  dust  thereof."  Many  items  of  interest  are  given  in 
Jewish  and  Prophetical  periodicals,  indicative  of  the  spirit  actuating  many  Jews,  who  are 
looking  forward  to  are-possession  of  their  land  of  promise.  The  influence  and  rank  that 
the  Jews  have  attained  is  favorable  to  such  a  development.  George  Eliot  (Impressions 
qf  Theophrastus  Such,  p.  223)  remarks  :  "A  significant  indication  of  their  natural  rank  is 
seen  in  the  fact  that  at  this  moment  the  leader  of  the  Liberal  party  in  Germany  is  a  Jew, 
the  leader  of  the  Republican  party  in  France  is  a  Jew,  and  the  head  of  the  Conservative 
ministry  in  England  is  a  Jew."  In  science,  art,  literature,  politics,  wealth,  etc.,  they 
are  becoming  a  power. 

32  Numerous  prophetical  writers  have  insisted  upon  it  that  the  weakening  of  the 
Mohammedan  power,  the  overthrow  of  the  temporal  sovereignty  of  the  Papacy,  the  be- 
ginning of  a  gradual  return  of  the  Jews  to  Palestine,  and  the  political  and  social  perplexi- 
ties of  nations,  being  synchronous,  form  indisputable  evidence  of  the  nearness  to  the  end 


PEOP.  174.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  149 

of  the  age.  In  reference  to  the  state  of  the  Ottoman  power,  the  works  of  Dr.  Cumniings, 
Keith,  and  others  (as  well  as  leading  papers,  such  as  the  London  Times,  N.  Y.  Herald,  etc.) 
contain  abundant  evidence  of  its  growing  decrepitude.  Its  tires,  taxation,  indebtedness, 
wars,  loss  of  territory,  internal  and  external  complications,  corrupt  principles  and 
officials,  etc.,  has  wonderfully  crippled  its  resources  and  strength.  "We  give,  out  of  a 
multitude  of  testimony,  a  single  extract,  taken  from  the  North  Brit.  Review  (Nov.,  1860, 
p.  179)  :  "  The  days  of  Turkey's  power  and  independence  have  long  since  gone.  The 
Empire  exists  only  upon  sufferance.  Nay,  its  tottering  throne  and  rotten  constitution 
are  upheld  by  the  united  efforts — or  rather  united  jealousies — of  the  European  mon- 
archs.  From  the  attacks  of  enemies  without,  and  rebels  within,  England  and  France  have 
been  for  years,  and  are  at  this  moment,  its  only  defence.  Every  Englishman  knows  that 
but  for  the  unceasing  exertions  of  our  ambassadors  at  Constantinople,  and  of  our  consuls 
in  the  Paschalics,  the  vast  Empire  would,  long  ere  this,  have  gone  to  pieces.  "We  venture 
to  affirm  that  were  these  influences  wholly  withdrawn,  and  were  Turkey  left  t )  her  own 
unbiassed  counsels,  it  could  not  hold  together  six  months. "  It  is  a  universally  known 
fact  that  the  interference  of  other  nations  has  alone  saved  Turkey  from  being  over- 
thrown and  rooted  out  by  its  powerful  and  covetous  neighbor,  Russia. 

33  And  here  we  would  observe  :  whatever  defect  may  appear  in  the  details,  the  grand 
outlines  always  remain  unimpaired.  Men  have  foolishly  made  themselves  merry,  e.g.  at 
Baxter's  Napoleon  III.  scheme,  without  ever  considering  that  the  detailed  scheme  pre- 
sented by  him  failing  in  particulars  and  as  an  entirety,  does  not  affect  in  any  essential 
point  the  outlines  of  this  prophecy  (upon  which,  and  within  which,  his  theory  was 
erected),  or  his  view  of  the  nearness  (although  he  antedated)  of  time.  To-day,  with  all 
his  failure,  we  would  rather  be  in  his  position,  honoring  God's  Word,  than  in  that  of 
those  who  neglect  it. 

34  The  forces  at  work  in  nations,  and  which  effect  the  political  action,  are  of  such  a 
tremendous  influence  that  statesmen,  philosophers,  etc.,  have  freely  uttered  their  belief 
in  a  coming  crisis.  Not  merely  the  Nihilistic,  Communistic,  Socialistic,  etc.  give  war- 
rant to  such  a  view,  but  the  manifest  distrust  of  nations  toward  each  other  (exhibited  in 
their  vast  standing  armies,  heavy  armaments  of  war,  improved  engines  of  destruction— 
Krupp  alone,  as  the  papers  state,  turning  out  every  mouth  300  cannon,  some  of  the  largest 
calibre,  while  the  standing  armies  of  the  five  great  European  powers,  including  reserves, 
form  a  total  of  16,471,918),  and  the  intense  hatred  and  jealousy  existing  between  them 
(as  e.g.  between  Germany  ami  France,  Austria  and  (Jermany,  Russia  and  Turkey,  Italjr 
and  France,  England  and  Russia,  etc.)  will  inevitably  had  to  commotions  and  great 
changes.  The  future  formation  of  the  ten  kingdoms  and  their  confederation  under  Anti- 
christ will,  inevitably,  be  preceded  by  revolutions  and  wars  in  which  the  nations  will 
become  involved.  While  we  locate  the  formation  and  confederation  in  the  interval,  yet 
if  near  to  such  an  interval  signs  expressive  of  agencies  at  work  to  produce  the  same 
ought  even  now  to  be  manifested.  These,  in  the  present  condition  of  the  earth,  are  only 
too  manifest  ;  but  it  is  too  soon  to  map  out  (as  some  writers  attempt)  with  any  degree  of 
accuracy  the  order  of  events.  The  prophecies  bearing  on  them  are  exceeding  brief,  and 
deal  chiefly  with  results,  so  that  both  wisdom  and  j^rudence  suggest  the  suppression  of 
such  efforts,  which,  at  most,  would  be  based  on  conjecture.  When  such  men  as  Disraeli, 
Hyacinthe,  Peel,  Victor  Hugo,  Chase,  and  many  others  judge  from  "the  signs  ot  the 
times"  that  we  are  entering  upon  a  conflict  that  will  convulse  the  nations,  and  predict  a 
period  of  terror  and  bloodshed,  it  certainly  cannot  be  charged  against  them  that  they  are 
biassed  by  Pre-Millenarian  sentiments.  Indeed,  it  is  folly  to  close  our  eyes  to  existing 
facts,  which  elicit  such  gloomy  forebodings  from  eminent  men  ;  especially  when  men  of 
a  calm  and  reflective  mind  like  Dr.  Arnold  (quoted  by  Cummings,  Lects.  Apoc,  1  ser.,  p. 
469),  looking  at  the  antagonistic  and  corrupting  influences  at  work,  declares  :  "  My  sense 
of  the  evils  of  the  times  that  are  coming,  and  of  the  prospects  to  which  I  am  bringing  up 
my  poor  children,  is  overwhelming  ;  times  are  coming  in  which  the  devil  will  fight  his 
best,  and  that  in  good  earnest." 

35  The  student  can  refer  to  other  statistics,  given  by  Pierson  On  Infidelity,  and  by  The 
Power  of  the  Press.  Christlieb's  Modern  Doubt  (p.  33)  confirms  such  statements,  and  the 
extent  of  infidel  publications  is  pronounced  (sec.  1)  to  be  "fearful."  Why  deliberately 
ignore  facts  evidencing  the  strength  of  the  enemy  ;  is  it  wise  or  prudent  ?  Appleton's 
Vyclop.,  art.  "  Bookselling,"  says  that "  it  was  in  evidence  before  the  House  of  Commons 
in  1851  that  the  sale  of  immoral  and  infidel  publications  amounted  to  29.000,000 
annually  ;  more  than  the  total  issue  of  the  Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Christian  Knowl- 
edge, the  Religious  Tract  Society,  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society,  the  Scottish 
Bible  Society,  and  some  seventy  religious  magazines  combined."     This  list,  as  eminent 


150  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  174. 

writers  assure  us,  has  been  greatly  swelled,  catering  to  the  multitude  outside  of  the 
churches.  I  have  myself  noticed  entire  and  lengthy  catalogues  filled  with  this  class  of 
works,  and  many  of  them  recently  published.  They  embrace  books  of  the  most  blas- 
phemous nature  down  to  a  more  refined  kind  which  substitute  morality,  the  religious 
sentiment  in  man,  etc.,  for  Christianity.  It  is  a  matter  of  surprise  that  even  some  relig- 
ious writers,  not  seeing  the  dangerous  tendency  of  sceptical  literature,  apologize  in  its 
behalf,  as  e.g.  the  Christian  Union,  Aug.  1st,  1877,  speaks  of  Buckle's  His.  of  Eng.  Civiliza- 
tion, Draper's  Intellectual  Development  of  Europe,  and  his  Contest  between  Science  anil  Religion, 
Lecky's  His.  of  the  Rise  of  Rationalism,  his  Supernatural  Religion  etc.,  as  simply  a  prepara- 
tive work  for  Christianity.  Alas  !  thus  the  signs  of  the  times  are  read,  respecting  works 
which  generate  and  confirm  unbelief  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  thousands  of  readers — a 
class  of  readers,  too,  that  exert  influence.  The  Princeton  Review  (Ap.,  1854,  p.  375),  after 
reluctantly  admitting  that,  as  "  PierSon  on  Infidelity"  showed,  the  press  was  employed 
more  extensively  against  the  truth  than  in  its  behalf,  says  :  "  There  are  constantly 
issued  in  our  cities  publications  which  are  powerfully  destructive  in  their  tendencies.  We 
cannot  better  define  the  class  than  to  describe  one  which  came  to  hand  not  long  since. 
It  offered  itself  as  a  Gospel  to  the  poor,  and  then  proceeded  by  an  appeal  to  Scripture — ■ 
introducing  our  Saviour  Himself  as  a  great  Eeformer—  to  establish  these  two  principles  : 
that  the  poor  have  an  equal  right  to  the  possessions  of  the  rich,  exhorting  them  to  bide 
their  time,  but  to  be  in  readiness  to  take  what  belonged  to  them  when  the  time  should 
come,  or  when  opportunity  should  offer  ;  and,  secondly,  that  marriage  was  an  unjust 
and  tyrannical  institution,  and  ought  to  be  destroyed.  All  this  was  done  not  in  the  bare 
form  in  which  we  have  stated  it,  but  in  the  most  plausible  method,  and  with  a  style  cal- 
culated to  persuade  men  of  the  sincerity  and  purity  of  the  author."  The  writer,  slim- 
ming up  the  appalling  statistics,  and  the  various  classes  of  works,  adds  :  "  Taking  the 
whole  field  in  which  the  press  operates,  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  its  preponderating  influ- 
ence for  the  present,  is  against  the  truth,  or  indifferent  to  its  interests-  that  that  instru- 
mentality which  God  has  chosen,  above  all  others,  for  the  advancement  of  truth  and 
goodness,  has  been  strangely  turned  to  work  their  overthrow."  The  Lulh.  Observer  (June 
6th,  L879)  remarks  :  "  Infidelity  has  its  publications  almost  everywhere.  Dr.  W.  Fleming 
Stevenson  says  that  the  commonest  book  in  the  Calcutta  Bazaar  is  a  cheap  edition  of 
Tom  Paine,  and  that  there  are  a  number  of  antichristian  papers  published  in  Bombay." 
Such  testimonies,  coming  from  parties  not  Pre-Millennial  in  view,  could  be  multiplied, 
but  every  reader  can  make  a  comparison  for  himself,  when  considering  the  number  of 
directly  and  semi-infidel  works  and  periodicals,  the  fashionable  literature  of  an  irrelig- 
ious character,  the  unbelieving  scientific  and  metaphysical  books,  the  histories  and 
school  books  leavened  with  error,  the  licentious  works  circulated,  etc. 

36  Both  of  these  conditions,  an  increase  of  prophetical  knowledge  and  an  increase  of 
knowledge  pertaining  to  nature  and  the  utilization  of  its  forces,  are  demanded  as  fore- 
runners of  the  Millennium  ;  the  one  as  a  warning  to  watching,  and  the  other  as  an  indi- 
cation of  coming  fulfilment  of  events  that  can  only  be  compassed  by  extraordinary  means 
utilized  by  Antichrist  and  his  confederated  forces.  Therefore  we  bring  them  together  in 
the  form  given  in  the  text,  although  we  firmly  hold  that  the  knowledge  spoken  of  by 
Dan.  12  :  4  pertains  exclusively  to  the  one  vision  that  was  sealed,  which  will  not  (as  to  its 
conclusion)  be  fully  understood  until  "  the  time  of  the  end  "  (which  we  place  in  the  in- 
terval between  the  two  stages),  when  it  will  be  thoroughly  comprehended  in  view  of  the 
events  transpiring,  and  the  precise  chronological  status  being  recognized.  Evidently  the 
meaning  of  the  Prophet  (Lange's  Com.  Dan.  loci)  is  :  "  But  (And)  thou,  O  Daniel,  shut  up 
the  words  and  seal  the  book,  even  to  (till)  the  time  of  the  end  :  many  shall  run  to  and 
fro  (run  through  the  book),  and  the  knowledge  (of  it)  shall  be  increased,"  or  "  many  shall 
search  it  through,  and  the  understanding  shall  become  great."  Unity  requires  that  the 
running  about  (for  the  purpose  of  searching)  and  the  knowledge  spoken  of  as  gained, 
must  be  applied  to  the  vision  that  is  sealed..  Consistency  likewise  demands  that  so  far 
as  this  particular  vision  is  concerned  (for  the  sealing  does  not  refer  to  the  other  prophe- 
cies), the  full,  complete  understanding  of  it  (as  e.g.  to  the  several  dates,  the  time  of  resur- 
rection of  the  saints,  the  conflicts  pertaining  to  the  last  Antichrist,  etc.)  will  only  be 
attained  at  "  the  time  of  the  end  "  (which  we  locate,  not  in  the  present  but  in  the  future 
interval,  Prop.  130).  This,  at  once,  sets  aside  much  that  has  been  derived  from  the 
phrase  in  support  of  certain  ultra  prophetical  expositions  (as  White's,  Swormstedt's,  etc.) 
as  if  they  were  heaven-derived.  It  also  refutes  the  notion  that  the  verse  refers  to  the 
present  rapid  locomotion  by  steam,  or  to  missionaries  going  about  to  preach,  or  to  the 
prophecies  in  general  (compare  Fausset,  Barnes,  Gill,  Clarke,  Henry,  etc.).  The  declara- 
tion that  a  complete  understanding  of  this  prophecy  in  its  details  and  dates  is  still  some- 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  151 

thing  which  pertains  to  the  future,  does  not  forbid  our  understanding  its  general  mean- 
ing, its  location  as  to  the  period  of  fulfilment,  its  reference  to  the  resurrection,  or  the 
Antichrist,  or  Jewish  deliverance,  its  correspondence  with  other  predictions.  This  limi- 
tation as  to  the  one  vision  does  not  effect  our  comprehending  other  predictions,  or  being 
impressed  and  guided  by  the  signs  given  respecting  the  nearness  of  the  Advent.  The 
reason  for  the  non-comprehension  of  a  part  (conclusion)  of  this  vision,  is  found  in  the 
fact  that  a  portion  of  it  runs  into  and  through  the  interval  between  the  concealed  and 
open  Advent.  The  assurance  given  that  it  also  shall  be  fully  understood,  shows  how  im- 
portant a  vision  it  shall  be  regarded  by  believers  during  this  interval.  In  reference  to 
prophecy  in  general  it  is  still  true  (Hos.  14  :  9),  "  Who  is  icise,  ami  he  shall  understand  these 
things ?  prudent  and  he  shall  know  them?"  for  it  is  requisite  to  search  after  the  truth  so 
that  we  may  follow  Christ's  injunction  (Matt.  24  :  15  ;  Mark  13  :  14),  "  Whoso  readelh,  let 
him  understand."  All  things  really  necessary  to  form  an  intelligent  and  just  view  of  the 
incoming  future  with  its  events  of  vengeance  and  redemption  are  fully  and  freely  given  ; 
and  it  argues  a  lack  of  respect  to  refuse  their  consideration  and  study.  This  gives  pro- 
priety and  force  to  the  caution  of  Jesus  (Mark  13  :  23)  :  "lint  lake  //<  heed  ;  behold  I  hare 
foretold  you  all  things."  The  promise  of  Deut,  29  :  29  (Houbigant's  rendering)  :  "  The 
things  which  were  hidden  with  the  Lord  our  God,  are  made  manifest  I"  us  and  our  children  for 
many  generations,"  has  been  richly  verified,  but  to  reali/.u  this  practically,  it  is  still  essen- 
tial to  "  search  the  Scriptures."  Owing  to  Abraham's  interest  in  the  covenant  God 
revealed  (Gen.  18  :  16)  to  him  things  of  the  future,  and  it  is  owing  to  the  deep  personal 
concern  that  believers  have  in  the  same  covenant  that  God  has  enlarged  our  views  of  the 
times  to  come.  He,  therefore,  perpetuates  persons  who  are  like  "  the  children  of 
Issachar,  which  were  men  that  had  understanding  of  the  times,"  in  order  that  believers 
maybe  sustained  and  strengthened,  and  that  an  abundant  testimony  may  he  given  to  the 
Church  and  world  before  the  incoming  Hood.  The  fact  that  the  study  of  Eschatology 
and  prophecy  has  wonderfully  extended  is  it  strong  sign  of  our  nearness  to  the  end.  Dr. 
Seiss  (Vh.  Herald,  June  21th,  1879)  says  :  "  How  evidently  and  significantly  has  this  mark 
of  the  end  been  manifesting  itself  within  the,  last  fifty  years!  Though  the  multitude 
will  turn  from  prophecy  as  from  a  sealed  book,  yet  what  a  stir,  anxiety,  and  study  has  it 
awakened  in  many  earnest  minds  !  By  some  in  every  denomination  and  in  .very  Chris- 
tian country  the  subject  is  being  studied  and  agitated.  Everywhere  there  are  men  of  God 
proclaiming  the  great  doctrine  of  Christ's  speedy  Coming  to  reign  with  If  is  saints  upon 
the  earth.  In  England,  in  Scotland,  in  France,  in  our  country,  in  Germany,  in  Russia, 
in  India,  in  the  isles  of  the  sea,  the  cry  has  been  raised,  '  Behold,  the  Bridegroom 
cometh  :  go  ye  out  to  meet  Him.'  Nt  ver,  never,  since  the  days  of  the  early  Christians,  has 
there  been  so  much  earnest  longing,  expecting,  preaching,  believing,  ami  praying  upon 
the  subject  of  thenearness  of  Christ's  Coming.  The  interest,  the  study,  and  the  faith  are 
by  no  means  as  general  as  they  should  be,  but  general  and  intense,  earnest  and  enlight- 
ened enough  to  warrant  us  in  saying  that  this  sign  of  the  end  has  appeared."  (Comp.  pre- 
ceding Prop,  on  this  point.) 

31  Our  position  is  that  of  thoughtful  men- -persons  too  that  cannot  be  accused  of  much 
sympathy  with  us  in  our  doctrinal  attitude.  Thus  e.g.  Dr.  Arnold  [Lift  of,  by  Stanley, 
vol.  1,  p.  270),  in  a  letter  to  Rev.  Blackstoce,  first  refers  to  successive  ages  and  the  coming 
of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  and  then  expresses  his  belief  in  physical  and  moral  convulsions  at 
the  termination  of  those  ages  (with  which  compare  Niebuhr's  /,</„  ,,s  Nachrichten,  vol.  2,  p. 
169).  Farrar  (Life  of  Christ,  vol.  2,  p.  263)  makes  the  darkening  of  the  sun  and  moon,  the 
falling  of  the  stars  and  shaking  of  the  heavens,  "  signs  which  may  have  a  meaning  both 
literal  and  metaphorical."  Van  Oosterzee  (Lange's  Com.  Luke  21  :  25)  asserts  that  we 
should  "  simply  believe  our  Lord  at  His  "Word  ;  that  His  Parousia  will  be  accompanied 
with  cosmic,  revolutions,  whose  actual  course  can  be  as  little  calculated  as  their  possibility 
can  be  denied  a  priori.  It  was  known  even  from  the  Old  Test,  that  fearful  si<^ns  in  the 
realm  of  nature,  would  herald  the  day  of  the  Lord  (Jer.  4  :  23  :  Joel  2  :  30,  etc.)."  (Com- 
pare Alford,  Whedon,  Owen,  Wordsworth,  Olshausen,  Calvin,  Meyer,  Lange,  etc.").  In 
the  Obs.  it  is  said  that  such  signs  shall  be  intensified — this  will  necessarily  lead  to  de- 
struction of  life.  Thus,  e.g.  take  earthquakes  :  let  such  an  earthquake  as  that  which 
had  its  centre  at  Madrid  on  the  Mississippi  be  repeated,  and,  owing  to  the  large  cities 
and  towns  erected  (with  high  stories  and  weak  walls)  within  its  radius,  terrible  indeed 
would  be  the  loss  of  life— frightful  and  overwhelming  devastation.  So,  likewise,  with 
plagues,  pestilence  of  animal  and  vegetable  life,  famines,  storms,  floods,  earthquakes, 
disasters,  strange  and  marvellous  occurrences — these  too  will  be  made  manifest,  so  that 
the  worshippers  of  nature  (believing  that  through  nature  man's  condition  can  be 
ameliorated  and  made  perfect)  shall  feel  their  own  incompetency  to  remove  the  pressing 


152  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

curse,  which  presses  the  more  heavily  as  the  end  approaches.  The  signs  are  continuous 
and  multiplying  (as  e.g.  see  the  tabular  statement  of  the  increase  of  earthquakes,  Proph. 
Times,  vol.  7,  p.  177),  and  "  the  dark  day"  and  "  memorable  falling  of  the  stars" 
(meteors),  which  some  few  writers  utilize  to  make  out  some  favorite  dates,  are  only  in 
the  line  of  things  which  it  is  most  reasonable,  from  Scripture  representations,  to  antici- 
pate. Such  a  sign  as  that  given  in  Hab.  3  :  17,  the  failure  of  crops,  is  more  or  less 
manifested,  and  will  be  severely  realized  at  the  time  of  the  Advent,  and  especially  dur- 
ing the  interval,  to  teach,  if  possible,  men  their  dependence  upon  a  higher  power,  and 
their  impotency  to  relieve  themselves  from  the  entailed  curse. 

38  The  "  Peace  Congresses,"  the  "  Prize  Essays  on  a  Congress  of  Nations,"  the  writings 
of  Upharn,  Gurney,  Webster,  Spiess,  Burritt,  Allan,  Buckingham,  Godwin,  MahaD, 
Clarkson,  and  others,  in  behalf  of  Peace,  certainly  contain  much  that  Religion,  Morality, 
Reason,  Prudence,  and  Humanity  urge  upon  us.  The  claims  of  peace,  the  inestimable 
blessings  that  would  flow  therefrom  are  forcibly  presented.  But  the  predictions,  the 
eloquent  prophecies  presented,  the  flattering  portrayal  of  the  future,  the  unfounded 
quotations  and  perversions  (as  to  order  of  realization)  of  the  Scriptures,  axe  flatty  contra- 
dicted by  the  Word  of  God.  The  Spirit  that  knows  all  things,  and  what  is  in  man, 
plainly  informs  us  that  such  representations  are  vain  dreams,  for  we  are  distinctly  told 
that  war  will,  more  or  less,  continue  during  the  entire  dispensation  down  to  the  Second 
Advent.  It  is  given  as  one  of  the  signs  of  the  end,  and  it  culminates  in  the  dreadful 
war  inaugurated  by  the  Antichrist,  being  cherished  by  the  perpetuated  depravity  of 
man,  which  in  its  selfishness  fosters  the  inhumanity  and  iniquity  of  war.  That  the 
reader  may  judge  of  the  tone  and  tenor  of  these  predictions,  we  present  a  few  extracts 
illustrative  of  their  spirit.  Victor  Hugo,  before  the  Peace  Congress  assembled  in  Paris, 
1849,  said  :  "  Gentlemen,  this  sacred  idea,  universal  peace,  all  nations  bound  together 
in  a  common  bond,  the  Gospel  for  their  supreme  law,  mediation  substituted  for  war — this 
holy  sentiment,  I  ask  you,  is  it  practicable  ?  Can  it  be  realized  ?  Many  practical  men, 
many  public  men  grown  old  in  the  management  of  affairs,  answer  in  the  negative.  Bi;t  I 
answer  with  you,  and  1  answer  without  hesitation.  Yes  !  and  I  shall  shortly  try  to  prove 
it  to  you.  I  go  still  further.  I  do  not  merely  say  that  it  is  capable  of  being  put  into 
practice,  but  I  add,  that  it  is  inevitable,  and  that  its  execution  is  only  a  question  of  time, 
and  may  be  hastened  or  retarded."  He  eulogizes  Peace,  the  ability  of  man  to  realize  it, 
and  portrays  the  day  when  nations  will  be  blended  in  harmony,  battle-fields  will  no 
longer  exist,  bullets  and  bombshells  will  be  displaced  by  arbitration,  and  cannon  will  be 
exhibited  as  a  curiosity  of  former  torture,  declaring:  "Nor  is  it  necessary  that  four 
hundred  years  should  pass  away  for  that  day  to  come."  At  the  close  of  the  Congress,  he 
bursts  forth  :  "  Dare  now  to  deny  progress  !  But,  know  this  well,  the  man  who  denies 
progress  is  a  monster  oj  impiety:  the  man  who  denies  progress  denies  Providence,  for 
Providence  and  progress  is  only  one  of  the  human  names  of  the  Eternal  God."  (See 
"Prize  Essays  mi  the  Peace  Congress"  in  the  North  Brit.  Review,  Nov.  1851.)  At  this 
same  Congress.  "  In  answer  to  the  presumptuous  declaration  that  Peace  is  impossible, 
M.  Coquerel  asserted  that  nothing  is  impossible  but  that,  which  is  false,  which  is 
wicked,  which  is  antihuman,  and  antichristian.  But  everything  that  is  true  and  good, 
everything  that  is  Christian  and  divine,  is  possible  ;  if  it  were  not  so,  we  could  do 
nothing  but  despair  ;  the  way  of  progress  would  be  closed  forever  to  man  ;  and  to  sum 
up  all  in  one  word,  man  would  be  no  longer  man,  and  God  no  longer  God."  Sir  David 
Brewster  says  at  another  Congress  in  England,  1851  :  "  If  the  sure  word  of  prophecy 
has  told  us  that  the  time  must  come  when  men.  shall  learn  the  art  of  war  no  more,  it  is 
doubtless  our  duty,  and  it  shall  be  our  work,  to  hasten  its  fulfilment,  and  upon  the  anvil 
of  Christian  truth,  and  with  the  brawny  arm  of  indignant  reason,  to  beat  the  sword  into 
the  ploughshare  and  the  spear  into  the  pruning-hook, "  etc.,  etc.  All  this  is  simply  a 
perversion  of  prophecy,  ascribing  to  man  what  alone  will  be  performed  by  Christ.  Emi- 
nent men,  by  isolating  prediction,  and  disconnecting  it  from  the  order  of  fulfilment  given 
by  God's  Spirit,  thus  express  sentiments  (applauded  and  admired  by  the  unthinking) 
contradictory  to  the  truth.  The  "  presumption"  is  theirs  to  deny  the  scriptural  delineation 
of  a  fearful  future  to  come,  of  a  continued  wickedness  and  antichristian  spirit,  which 
is  to  crdminate  in  persecution  and  dreadful  war. 

39  Indeed,  so  great  is  the  desire  to  increase  this  wealth,  that  the  highest  talent  and  ability 
is  invoked  to  devise  means  and  plans  by  which  money  can  be  gained,  endowments,  etc., 
enlarged.  In  many,  instead  of  "  love  for  His  appearing,"  love  of  money  is  the  ruling 
passion,  and  projects  are  devised  which  exclude  any  reference  whatever  to  the  com- 
manded position  of  watching.  Vast  sums  are  placed  on  interest,  and  the  latter  alone  is 
used,  thus  keeping  a  hoard  of  wealth  to  eventually  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  grasping 


Prop.  174.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  153 

antichristian  confederation.  The  most  singular  -ways  are  employed  to  procure  money  ; 
fairs,  lotteries,  shows,  festivals,  lectures,  etc.,  being  liberally  utilized.  Recently  a 
printed  circular  has  gone  the  rounds  of  the  papers,  urging  churches  to  "  buy  cheap  lands 
in  the  West,  and  start  colonies,  reserving  sections,' '  and  thus  profit  by  the  subsequent 
increase  in  the  value  of  lands  thus  secured.  Thus  real  estate  specidations,  investments  in 
stocks,  etc.,  is,  according  to  the  ideas  of  some,  an  astonishing  proof of  the  progress  of  the 
Christian  Church  toward  the  Millennium.  "We  read  the  Bible,  and  understand  its  teach- 
ing, as  condemnatory  of  such  a  spirit.  Many  are  retained  in  the  churches  on  account  of 
their  wealth,  who  are  morally  unfit,  because  their  money,  and  gifts,  and  position  give 
influence.  "  Is  he  rich  V" — this  is  a  question,  when  affirmatively  answered,  that  covers  a 
multitude  of  sins.  t 

4U  The  protests  of  Land  tenantry,  Socialism,  Communism,  Nihilism,  etc.,  speak  for 
themselves,  for  however  we  may  object  to  the  principles  of  reform  advocated,  the  oppres- 
sion and  necessities  give  abundant  reason  in  behalf  of  the  same.  The  conflicts  between 
capital  and  labor,  the  fearful  increase  of  pauperism  in  city  anil  country  at  the  side  of  an 
increased  material  prosperity,  the  immense  and  increasing  landed  estates  falling  into  the 
possession  of  a  few  to  the  detriment  of  the  many,  are  subjects  that  have  profoundly  agi- 
tated statesmen.  The  organization  of  Cajdtal  in  self-protection,  and  the  organization  of 
Labor  to  resist  encroachments  ;  the  vast  wealth  secured  by  the  labor  of  others  (who  remain 
poor),  and  the  numerous  strikes  of  laborers  to  increase,  if  possible,  their  wages  ;  the  fer- 
ment going  on  in  our  business  centres  and  the  periods  of  depression  when  but  little 
employment  is  afforded,  all  indicate  the  danger  that  threatens  all  countries.  Zech. 
8  :  10  will  again  be  largely  verified  in  the  experience  of  multitudes.  In  this  connection, 
we  refer  to  one  fact,  viz. ,  the  utilization  by  Capital  of  machinery.  A  number  of  eminent 
writers  and  statesmen  are  discussing  the  tremendous  influx  of  manual  labor-saving 
machinery,  and  the  impression  made  upon  cautious  minds  is,  that  these  esteemed  bless- 
ings may  finally  so  culminate  as  to  bring  in  a  whirlwind  of  distress  and  sorrow  by  re- 
ducing the  cost  of  labor  and  throwing  out  of  employment  tens  of  thousands  through  the 
substitution  of  steam,  iron,  and  steel.  This  already  is  done  on  a  small  scale,  when 
manufactories,  owing  to  a  manufacture  beyond  the  market,  shut  down  for  a  time  to  await 
a  returning  demand— a  condition  which  is  on  the  increase.  Men  are  beginning  to  fear 
the  final  result,  and  anxiously  canvass  the  expediency  of  urging  agricultural  pursuits, 
etc.,  in  order  to  provide  some  means  of  escape,  and  to  furnish,  at  hast,  bread.  This 
entire  labor  question  is  so  gigantic  and  involved,  both  Capital  and  Labor  having  rights 
that  ought  to  be  respected,  that  we  feel  incompetent  to  hazard  an  opinion,  and  hence 
merely  direct  attention  to  it  as  one  of  the  signs,  feeling  assured  that  the  predicted  sel- 
fishness of  the  last  times  will  make  it  an  important  factor  in  the  misery  entailed  upon 
the  nations. 

41  These  gatherings  for  mutual  encouragement  and  sympathy,  have  been  made  the  sub- 
ject of  ridicule  by  the  secular,  and  professed  religious  press.  Infidel  and  Church-mem- 
ber, the  learned  and  ignorant,  a  multitude  of  all  classes  and  opinions,  expressed  their 
scorn  and  contempt  ot  those  who  could  thus  testify  to  "  the  Blessed  Hope."  The  notice 
that  these  have  received,  has  been  amply  sufficient  to  indicate  that  their  testimony  is  a 
sign  of  "  the  last  days."  In  addition,  another  sign,  that  of  Isa.  66  :  5,  appears  in  con- 
nection with  this  one,  viz.,  the  hatred  manifested,  the  threats  employed,  the  epithets  used 
toward  such  believers.  The  sjnrit  of  Luke  12  :  45  is  exhibited  on  all  sides,  and  many  a 
believer  feels  in  his  person,  influence,  preferment,  reputation,  church  relationship,  etc., 
the  inflictions  of  professed  "fellow-servants"  who  say  in  their  heart,  and  boldly  pro- 
claim it  also  "  my  Lord  delay  dh  His  Coming."  Persecution,  under  various  forms,  has 
been  used,  and  the  hearts  of  many  are  hostile  and  bitter  against  us,  because  we  express 
faith  and  hope  in  the  nearness  of  a  Coming,  loving  Saviour.  The  writer's  heart  has  been 
saddened  and  pained  by  bitter  experience  in  this  direction,  but  likewise  encouraged  and 
strengthened  because  divinely  forewarned  in  the  Word  that  such  trial  is  to  be  expected. 

4-  This  point  will  again  be  noticed  under  Prop.  199.  The  main  point  of  attack  and 
defence  between  unbelief  and  faith,  is  the  Person  of  the  Christ.  Rev.  Dr.  Wynn  in  a 
recent  address  to  the  Theol.  Alumni  of  Wittenberg  College,  June,  1881,  emphasized  the 
fact  that  the  great  object  of  sceptical  attack  was  the  Coming  of  Jesus  in  the  flesh,  the 
union  of  the  divine  and  human  in  His  Person. 

43  The  publication  and  circulation  of  the  Scriptures  within  a  few  years  has  been  marvel- 
lous ;  the  issue  of  commentaries  on  the  whole  Bible  or  separate  books  has  been  unexam- 
pled ;  works  on  hermeneutics,  criticism,  philology,  antiquities,  history,  geography, 
chronology,  dictionaries,  doctrines,  evidences,  etc.,  pertaining  to  the  Bible  form  an  im- 
mense array.     Not  merely  faith  in  God's  Word  brings  forth  such  fruitage,  but  unbelief 


154  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  174. 

has  recently  published  and  circulated  its  tens  of  thousands  of  books  and  millions  of 
tracts,  attacking  and  criticising  the  Scriptures,  thus,  while  unfriendly  and  evil-minded, 
directing  attenion  to  them.  The  reader  is  also  directed  to  a  new  and  interesting  study 
of  the  constellations  in  their  Christian  teaching,  as  presented  by  Eev.  Dr.  Seiss  in  his 
lately  published  work  "  The  Gospel  in  the  Stars."  The  union  of  teaching  with  the 
Scriptures,  relating  to  Redemption  in  Christ,  is  wonderful. 

44  The  writings  of  Murray,  Boynton,  Ambler,  Ballou,  Hammond,  Post,  and  a  host  of 
others,  are  filled  with  hatred  to  the  Church,  the  ministry,  Gospel,  etc.,  and  ardent  appeals 
are  made  for  their  "final  overthrow  and  extinction."  The  cry  of  many  is  "  Down  with  the 
Churches, "  and  the  Telegraph  (No.  8)  asserts  in  view  of  the  extended  and  increasing 
unbelief  :  "  This  is  the  commencemftnt  of  the  Millennium,  and  it  will  be  established  on 
the  ruins  of  all  Ike  churches."  Even  women  participate,  as  e.g.  the  N.  Y.  Tribune  (Feb.  27, 
1878)  refers  to  a  female  Socialist  Congress,  held  at  Berlin,  in  which  the  animus  of  the  sex 
under  the  influence  of  unbelief  is  fully  exhibited,  "exhorting  humanity  to  revolt  en 
masse  against  ecclesiastical  restraints  and  every  form  of  Christianity."  Thus  "  Frau 
Halm  cried  with  a  loud  voice  that  the  Christian  Church,  deformed  as  it  is  by  immoral 
ignorance,  must  be  despoiled  of  its  trophies  and  possessions" --advocating  the  turning 
out  of  the  ministry,  the  removal  and  selling  of  fixtures,  the  transformation  of  church 
property  into  dwelling-places  and  cheap  lodging-houses,  etc.  The  hostility  of  infidelity 
is  something  fearful  to  contemplate.  Brookes  (Maranaiha,  p.  1582)  truthfully  remarks  : 
"  The  respectable  people  who  attend  preaching  do  not  seem  to  know  that  they  are  saun 
tering  in  their  gay  clothing  to  the  House  of  God  over  a  slumbering  volcano.  If  they  felt 
sufficient  interest,  and  took  the  slightest  pains  to  inquire  into  the  moral  condition  of  the 
rough-clad  and  rough-handed  workingmen,  who  constitute  the  overwhelming  majority 
of  the  population,  they  would  be  astounded,  and  perhaps  alarmed  to  discover  how  fierce 
and  sullen  is  the  infidelity  which  sleeps  like  a  tiger  in  the  bosoms  of  thousands  around 
them,  and  how  rapid  has  been  the  spread  throughout  Christendom  of  Communism  that 
may  burst  forth  at  any  moment  in  a  Milder  conflagration  than  that  which  destroyed 
Paris."  The  Gin.  Daily  Times  (March  11th,  1880)  asks  "  What  is  Nihilism  ?"  and  says  that, 
"  In  a  speech  made  at  Geneva  in  1868,  Michael  Bukunin,  who  has  been  called  the  father 
of  Nihilism,  asserted  :  '  The  first  duty  of  mankind,  is  to  obliterate  from  the  heart  any 
belief  in  a  God,  who  is  but  the  personification  of  absolute  tyranny  invented  with  the  idea 
that  nine  tenths  of  the  world  should  be  subject  to  the  remaining  tenth.  Tear  out  of 
your  hearts  the  belief  in  the  existence  of  God,  for  as  long  as  an  atom  of  that  superstition 
remains  you  will  never  know  what  freedom  is.  The  second  lie  is  right.  Might  invented 
the  fiction  of  right,  in  order  to  insure  her  reign.  When  you  have  freed  your  mind  from 
the  fear  of  God,  and  that  childish  respect  for  the  fiction  of  right,  then  all  the  remaining 
chains  which  bind  you,  and  are  called  science,  civilization,  property,  marriage,  morality 
and  justice,  will  snap  asunder  like  threads.  Let  your  own  happiness  be  your  own  law.'  ' 
These  views  are  extremely  ultra  and  destructive  and  pertain  to  the  extremists,  but  even 
the  more  moderate  advocate  sentiments  which,  in  the  hands  of  the  multitude  that 
desire  to  be  freed  from  moral  restraint,  become  highly  dangerous  in  their  tendencies. 
When  e.g.  Frothingham  (Introd.  to  Freedom  and  Fellowship)  declares,  "  The  devout 
intelligence  of  modern  times  does  demand  precisely  this —  the  indefinite  modification  of 
theology  ;  and  it  will  press  the  demand  until  every  vestige  of  the  theology  is  swept  away, 
and  reason  is  alone  and  supreme  in  the  domain  of  truth" — this  is  only  paving  the  way 
for  persecution.  When  Victor  Hugo  and  the  multitude  of  "illuminated  literati"  cele- 
brate the  centenary  of  Voltaire,  and  when  at  Geneva  the  centenary  of  J.  J.  Rousseau  is 
observed,  and  when  special  honor  is  paid  to  the  memory  of  Tom  Paine,  etc.,  these  are 
only  exhibitions  of  the  feeling  of  antagonism.  Prof.  Bowen  (Pref.  to  Modern  Philos- 
ophy), in  reviewing  the  tendencies  of  the  times,  says  :  "  Let  me  be  permitted  also  to  re- 
peat the  opinion,  which  I  ventured  to  express  as  far  back  as  1849,  that  the  time  seems  to 
have  arrived  for  a  more  practical  and  immediate  verification  than  the  world  has  ever  yet 
witnessed  of  the  great  truth,  that  the  civilization  which  is  not  based  on  Christianity  is 
big  with  the  elements  of  its  own  destruction."  As  to  the  widening  influence  and  extent  of  in- 
fidelity, Van  Oosterzee  (Lulh.  Observer,  Dec.  19th,  1879)  declares  "  that  a  wave  of  infidelity 
was  steadily  advancing  over  Protestant  Europe,  which  not  even  the  most  favored 
country  could  escape,"  etc.  Pressense  (Pref.  to  Early  Tears  of  Christianity),  re- 
marks of  the  extension  of  unbelief  :  "  It  is  present  in  the  very  air  we  breathe  ;  it  finds  its 
way  into  the  lightest  publications  ;  the  novel  and  the  journal  vie  with  each  other  in 
its  diffusion  ;  short  review  articles,  skilled  in  giving  grace  and  piquancy  to  erudition 
furnish  it  with  arguments  that  appear  weighty  because  they  are  so  in  comparison  with 
the  pleasantries  of  Voltaire.     Such  a  condition  of  things  is  critical,  and  calls  for  grave 


Prop.  174.]  tue  theocratic  kingdom.  155 

and  special  consideration.  If  those  who  are  convinced  of  the  divinity  of  Christianity 
slumber  on  in  false  and  fatal  security,  they  must  be  prepared  to  pay  dearly  for  their  sloth- 
fulness  ;  and  the  Church  and  mankind — which  have  need  of  each  other — will  pay  dearly 
for  it  also.  The  voice  of  scepticism  will  alone  be  heard,  and  the  sweeping  assertions  of 
an  unbelief — often  more  credulous  than  bigotry — will  pass  for  axioms."  A  multitude 
of  similar  utterances  and  warnings,  from  men  of  all  classes  (who  have  no  sympathy  with 
Pre-Millenarianism),  might  be  adduced,  and  the  tendencies  (as  e.g.  in  the  new  creed  of 
Strauss  called  by  some  "inhuman  Prussianism, "  the  "Moral  Reform  of  France, "  by 
Renan.  the  "Origin  and  Development  of  Religious  Belief,"  by  Baring-Gould,  the 
"  Lectures"  of  Col.  Ingersoll,  the  articles  of  the  fortnightly  Review,  Popular  Science 
Monthly,  etc.,  the  blasphemous  writings  of  Profs.  Clifford,  Greg,  Morley,  Stephen,  and, 
literally,  a  host  of  others),  at  work  presented,  but  we  content  ourselves  with  producing 
the  views  and  spirit  of  two  writers,  illustrative  of  the  many.  In  the  North  Brit.  Review 
(Sep.  1879)  is  an  art.  "  Confessions  of  an  Agnostic,"  in  which  are  loud  boasts  of  the 
general  unbelief  prevailing  ;  of  eminent  men  falling  away  from  belief  in  the  Supernat- 
ural ;  of  an  intellectual  development  showing  that  "  all  religion  must  disappear  /'  of  a 
present  "  turmoil"  which  "  will  end  in  a  settled  state  of  confirmed  unbelief  ;"  of  col- 
leges, universities,  periodicals,  works  of  history,  fiction,  etc.,  being  largely  leavened  ;  of 
science,  philosophy,  etc.,  sustaining  the  attacks  of  infidelity,  and  concludes,  that  the 
freedom  he  seeks  must  be  obtained  by  effectually  crushing  all  enemies.  (This  man,  as  evi- 
dence of  consistency  to  principles,  avows  in  the  same  art.,  that  he  lives  with  a  mistress 
with  whom  he  has  had  several  children,  and  refused  her  pleading — when  softened  by  his 
illness — for  a  marriage,  because  he  ha<l  "  the  courage"  to  reject  "  a  legal  bond").  Gold- 
win  Smith  in  "  The  Prospect  of  a  Moral  Interregnum"  (Atlantic  Monthly,  Nov.  1N79)  after 
dilating  on  the  universal  unbelief,  concludes  as  follows  :  "  The  object  of  this  short 
paper  is  only  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  experience  of  his- 
tory, a  crisis  in  the  moral  sphere,  which  will  probably  bring  with  it  a  political  and  social 
crisis,  appears  to  have  arrived."  The  same  writer  in  an  art.  "The  Proposed  Substi- 
tutes for  Religion"  (Eclectic  M>i<j.,  l*7s,  taken  from  Macmillan's),  speaks  at  a  fearful 
crisis  at  hand.  After  giving  the  success  of  destructive  criticism,  unbelieving  science, 
etc.,  he  is  forced  (unbelieving  as  he  is)  to  add  :  "  But  at  the  same  time  the  foundations 
of  general  morality  have  inevitably  been  shaken,  and  a  crisis  has  been  brought  on,  the 
gravity  of  which  no  one  can  fail  to  see,  and  nobody  but  a  fanatic  of  materialism  can  see 
without  the  most  serious  misgiving.  There  has  been  nothing  in  the  history  of  man  like 
the  present  situation.  The  decadence  of  the  ancient  mythologies  is  very  far  from  afford- 
ing a  parallel.  The  connection  of  those  mythologies  with  morality  was  comparatively 
slight.  Dull  and  half-animal  minds  would  hardly  be  conscious  of  the  change  which  was 
partly  veiled  from  them  bjr  the  continuance  of  ritual  and  state  creeds  ;  while  in  the  minds 
of  Plato  and  Marcus  Aurelius  it  made  place  for  the  development  of  a  moral  religion. 
The  Reformation  was  a  tremendous  earthquake  ;  it  shook  down  the  fabric  of  mediaeval 
religion,  and,  as  a  consequence  of  the  disturbance  in  the  religious  sphere,  filled  the 
world  with  revolutions  and  wars.  But  it  left  the  authority  of  the  Bible  unshaken,  and 
men  might  feel  that  the  destructive  process  had  its  limit,  and  that  adamant  was  still 
beneath  their  feet.  But  a  world  which  is  intellectually  and  keenly  alive  to  the  signifi- 
cance of  these  questions,  reading  all  that  is  written  about  them  with  almost  passionate 
avidity,  finds  itself  brought  to  a  crisis,  the  character  of  ichich  any  one  may  realize  by  dis- 
tinctly presenting  to  himself  the  idea  of  existence  without  a  God." 

45  Thus,  e.g.  the  Gh.  Herald  (Jan.30th,  1879)  reports  that  "  the  Spiritualists  boldly  assert 
that  in  '  the  coming  regeneration,'  the  present  state  of  society,  and  all  existing  creeds 
and  religions,  will  be  swept  away  by  a  personage  whom  they  call  the  '  Comforter, '  who  is 
shortly  to  appear  in  order  to  heal  the  wounds  of  our  afflicted  race."  It  also  gives  in 
detail  the  statements  of  a  medium  respecting  the  introduction,  by  Spiritualism,  of  "  the 
great  Day  of  Jubilee,"  "the  Coming  of  a  glorious  Future — the  Coming  of  a  New 
Messiah."  Numerous  allusions  of  this  kind  can  be  quoted  ;  some  in  earnest,  others, 
probably,  of  a  rhetorical  order.  Reason  itself,  or  Truth,  is  elevated  to  a  Messiahship. 
Thus  e.g.  Rabbi  Wise  (Freedom  and  Fellowship,  p.  380),  says  :  "  Reason,  the  understand- 
ing, is  the  Guide  which  God  has  given  us  ;  the  highest  and  last  arbiter  in  all  matters, 
human  and  divine.  Reason  is  the  supreme  authority  ;  and  there  is  no  appeal  from  its 
decisions.  Faith,  conscience,  history,  and  the  Bible,  must  submit  to  reason,"  etc.,  and 
then  tells  us  :  "  Truth  is  the  only  Messiah.  Reason,  says  a  Jewish  authority,  is  the  angel 
(the  mediator)  which  stands  between  God  and  man.  Reason  has  redeemed  the  human 
family  from  barbarism  and  will  complete  the  work  of  Redemption."  No  wonder,  in 
view  of  such  utterances  and  the  signs  of  the  organization  of  evil,  of  the  Messianic  hopes 


156  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

expressed  in  unbelieving  mass  conventions,  that  believers  should  deem  the  coming  of 
Antichrist  near  at  hand.  Thus  e.g.  Archb.  Trench  in  his  Charge  to  the  Clergy 
(Oct.  1879,  quoted  Ch.  Herald,  Jan.  15th,  1880)  speaks,  in  view  of  the  prevailing  un- 
belief and  its  attacks,  of  the  speedy  development  of  the  Antichrist  :  "  The  Man  in 
whom  will  finally  concentrate  itself  all  the  hatred  of  the  world  against  the  idea  of  a  liv- 
ing God,  the  great  Antichrist  who  is  yet  to  be  revealed,  who  will  oppose  and  exalt  him- 
self above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  is  worshipped  ;  even  the  false  religions  of  the  world, 
in  so  far  as  they  are  worships  at  all — acknowledgments  by  men  of  a  greater  than  man  — 
will  be  hateful  to  him,  no  less  than  the  true.  '  The  Kingdom  of  Man  is  at  hand' — such 
will  be  the  good  tidings  of  great  joy  which  he  will  proclaim,  which  his  servants  and  fore- 
runners are  proclaiming  already.  What  will  be  the  end  of  the  Kingdom  of  that  Wicked 
One  a  sure  word  of  prophecy  has  told  us  ;  but  meanwhile  the  waves  of  the  sea  rage  hor- 
ribly, and  it  must  be  sorrowfully  owned  of  the  ship  of  the  Church  that  it  is  but  illy  pre- 
pared to  meet  the  storm."  He  adds  :  "A  tremendous  crisis  is  at  hand  for  the  Church  of 
Christ — Universal  Church — and  is  growing  nearer  and  more  threatening.  We  are  in- 
deed wrapped  already  in  the  skirls  of  the  Coming  storm." 

46  The  Ency.  Relig.  Knowledge  gives  in  art.  "  Messiah"  a  number  of  pretended  Mes- 
siah's who  have  appeared  in  the  past  ;  so  also  M'Clmtock  and  Strong's  Cyclopaedia. 
others  may  be  included  as  Mathias,  the  projihet  of  Winchester  Co.  N.  Y.,  David  George 
founder  of  the  Davidists,  Itichard  Brothers  (died  1824 — see  art.  Appleton's  Cyclop),  etc. 
More  recently  we  have  had  Isrolka  (see  Nathaniel,  for  Jan.  and  Feb.  1868)  in  Russia  ; 
one  reported  in  the  East,  at  Sana,  in  the  Kingdom  of  Yeman  ;  another  spoken  of  in  the 
Fremdenblatt  (1872)  as  officially  communicating  with  the  Jewish  congregation  at  Berlin;  and 
several  with  but  slight  following  in  the  United  States.  Every  now  and  then  the  papers 
report  something  of  the  kind,  but  it  is  generally  attributed  rather  to  insanity  than  to  im- 
posture. Men  may  ridicule  such  claims,  but  the  day  is  coming  when  one  will  utilize  the 
same  with  terrible  effect — the  Antichrist.  When  Science  arrays  itself  against  Revela- 
tion ;  Naturalism  strives  to  eradicate  the  Supernatural  ;  Metaphysics  assails  the  Divine  ; 
Ethics  severs  morality  from  belief  ;  Geology  scorns  the  cosmogony  of  Moses  ;  Astron- 
omy denies  Inspiration  ;  Criticism  laughs  at  the  Received  Text  ;  Neology  introduces  its 
myths  ;  Pantheism  and  Spiritualism  give  us  mystical  inteipretations  ;  History  sub- 
verts facts — when  ten  thousand  agencies  like  these  are  at  work  with  restless,  disinte- 
grating, reforming  spirit,  the  way  is  surely  paving  for  such  a  claim.  Just  as  it  was  at 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  with  fanatical  and  enthusiastic  claims  forming  dreadful 
signs,  so  it  will  be  again,  but  only  pondered  by  the  thoughtful.  Thus,  e.g.  such  items 
as  the  following  do  not  escape  our  notice  :  in  the  Times-Star,  Aug.  1881,  it  is  stated  that 
Dr.  St.  Simon  P.  Munger  professes  to  be  "  Christ  Jesus,  the  second  time  in  flesh  without 
sin  unto  salvation  ;"  and  his  professed  mission  is  to  select  the  144,000  virgins,  etc. 
Let  (his  be  characterized,  as  it  deserves  to  be,  insane  folly  ;  yet  precisely  such  madness 
and  delusion,  and  even  worse,  is  to  be  manifested  in  the  last  days. 

4:  We  leave  others  to  tell  the  sad  story  of  a  condition,  which  demands  a  heavy  police  force 
to  be  constantly  exerted  in  order  to  protect  property  and  life.  John  Buskin  in  "  The 
Lord's  Prayer  and  the  Church"  (Cnnhin/i.  Review,  republished  in  the  Library  Mag., 
Jan.  1880),  speaking  of  the  Church  so  lightly  dealing  with  sin,  and  in  many  instances 
conniving  at  iniquity  "  by  steadily  preaching  away  the  penalties  of  it,"  adds  :  "  So  that 
the  great  cities  of  the  earth,  which  ought  to  be  the  places  set  on  its  hills,  with  the 
Temple  of  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  them,  to  which  the  tribes  should  go  up — centres  to 
the  Kingdoms  and  Provinces  of  Honor,  Virtue,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Law  of  God 
— have  become  instead  loathsome  centres  of  fornication  and  coveiousness — the  smoke  of  their 
sin  going  up  in  the  face  of  heaven  like  the  furnace  of  Sodom,  and  the  pollution  of  it 
rotting  and  raging  through  the  bones  and  the  souls  of  the  peasant  people  round  them, 
as  if  they  were  each  a  volcano  whose  ashes  broke  out  in  blains  upon  man  and  beast. 
And  in  the  midst  of  them,  their  freshly  set  up  steeples  ring  the  crowd  to  a  weekly  pray- 
er-meeting that  the  rest  of  their  lives  may  be  pure  and  holy,  while  they  have  not  the 
slightest  intention  of  purifying  and  sanctifying,  or  changing  their  lives  in  any,  the 
smallest,  particular  ;  and  their  clergy  gather,  each  into  himself,  the  curious  dual  power, 
and  Janus-faced  majesty  in  mischief,  of  the  prophet  that  prophesies  falsely,  and  the 
priest  that  bears  rule  by  his  means.  And  the  people  love  to  have  it  so."  Such  is  the 
picture  of  an  unbeliever,  who  cannot  discern  that  amid  all  this  corruption  and  perver- 
sion of  the  good,  God  has  still  reserved  unto  Himself  "  a  remnant"  of  Godly,  pious  souls, 
who  mourn  at  the  gigantic  evils  surrounding  them.  The  great  cities  of  the  earth,  such 
as  London,  Paris,  Berlin,  New  York,  Brooklyn,  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  Cincinnati,  etc.  etc., 
exhibit  an  exceeding  low  religious  and  moral  condition.     Talmage,  from  persolna  ob- 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  157 

servation  in  exploring  the  sinks  of  iniquity,  declares  that  the  enormity  of  hidden  vice  is 
such,  that  "  the  foundations  of  New  York  and  Brooklyn  are  struck  through  with  rottenness," 
and  that  "  if  iniquity  makes  the  same  advancement  in  the  next  hundred  years  that  it 
has  in  the  past  one  hundred  years,  the  last  moral  and  religious  influence  will  have 
perished  from  our  cities.  It  is  only  a  sum  of  moral  subtraction  and  addition.  The 
people  know  not  the  spread  of  this  virus,"  etc.  "I  tell  you,  that  I  have  explored  the 
vaults  and  cellars  of  the  city,  and  that,  underneath  all  our  American  cities  are  deathful 
and  explosive  influences  ready  to  be  hurled  off  into  a  very  earthquake  of  moral  calamity." 
It  does  not  require  such  an  exploration  to  see  the  same  sad  and  terrible  condition.  Our 
leading  newspapers  again  and  again  have  referred  to  the  dangerous  conditions,  while 
judges,  brought  in  constant  contact,  have  expressed  its  depth  and  extent.  Every  one  can 
see  it  that  takes  a  daily  paper,  for  the  daily  rejmrts  of  vice  and  crime  are  constant  and 
appalling.  For  the  "Paganism  of  Paris, "  see  the  art.  on,  by  Pere  Hyacinthe  (Eclectic 
Mag.,  for  1880,  taken  from  the  Nineteenth  Cent.).  Dr.  Thompson  in  art.  "  Drift  of 
Europe"  (Princeton  Review,  1878,  p.  753),  who  is  disposed  to  take  a  flattering  view  of  the 
ultimate  future,  however,  candidly  remarks  on  the  increase  of  infidelity  and  religious 
indifference  :  "  In  the  city  of  Berlin,  with  a  population  of  a  million  of  souls,  there  are 
barely  seventy  houses  of  worship,  including  Jewish  synagogues  as  well  as  Protestant  and 
Catholic  churches,  chapels,  and  suburban  stations  ;  and,  excepting  on  the  days  of 
church  festivals,  the  majority  of  these  churches  are  seldom  half  filled."  We  have  in 
another  place  had  reference  to  "  the  City  of  Churches,"  Brooklyn,  showing  its  condition 
made  by  the  ministers  of  the  place,  so  that  we  are  not  surprised  that  recent  N.  Y. 
papers  say  that  the  police  records  of  the  city  indicate  an  increase  of  arrests  and  crime. 
Take  Cincinnati's  statistics  as  given  by  Rev.  Wendle  (the  Journal  arid  Messenger, 
Nov.  15th,  1878),  and  the  population  is  250,000  ;  of  these  65,000  are  Roman  Catholics, 
7000  Jews,  20,000  foreign  Protestants,  making  92,000  ;  add  to  this  12,000  for  English 
Protestant  churches  of  all  classes,  yet  it  leaves — aside  from  the  merely  nominal  relig- 
ious, of  which  there  is  a  large  class — a  fearful  number  under  no  religious  influence  what- 
ever. Mr.  Wendle  was  not  wrong  when  he  attributed  such  a  preponderance  on  the  side 
of  irreligion,  when  he  said  that  "  it  lies  in  the  scejitical  unrest  and  unbelief  peculiar  to 
the  age  that  we  live  in."  Similar  statistics  are  given  of  St.  Louis,  Chicago,  and  other 
cities,  and  the  general  lamentation  (as  we  have  shown  elsewhere)  is,  that  the  sittings 
already  provided  are  not  utilized,  unless  on  exceptional  times.  Such  illustrations  could 
be  multiplied,  and  we  append  another  to  indicate  that  this  state  is  attracting  sjiecial 
attention.  Under  the  heading  "  Decline  of  Religion  in  Cities, "  the  Lutheran  Evangelist 
(Nov.  22,  1878)  refers  to  a  large  meeting  held  in  the  Philharmonic  Hall,  London,  fire- 
sided  over  by  Mr.  S.  Morley,  M.  P.,  in  which  was  presented  as  a  startling  fact,  that 
"  the  great  feature  of  the  present  day  was  a  growing  indisposition  to  attend  public  wor- 
ship."  Mr.  Morley  "  held  London  to  be  one  of  the  most  heathenish  parts  of  her  Majesty's 
dominions.  It  was  considered  that  if  58  per  cent  of  the  people  were  anxious  to  attend  the 
churches  and  chapels  Sunday  morning  there  would  bo  required  1,000,000  more  sittings, 
than  were  provided.  The  most  appalling  statement,  full  of  discouragement,  connected 
with  that  fact,  was  this  :  that  of  the  sittings  provided,  not  more  than  one  half  were  occupied." 
This  lamentation  has  come  up  from  various  cities,  that  ought — if  the  theory  of  progress 
so  current  is  true,  or  if  the  perversion  of  the  parable  of  the  leaven  so  extensively  made  is 
correct— to  be  models  of  Christianity.  But  the  fact  that  these  great  centres  of  influence 
and  power  are  so  corrupt  and  irreligious,  that  Christianity  is  utterly  unable  to  stem  the 
swollen  and  incoming  tide,  forbodes — if  we  accept  of  the  significant  sign — the  dreadful 
Coming  storm  concerning  which  prophecy  writes  and  warns.  The  Presbyterian  (July  23d, 
1881)  contains  a  flattering  account  of  "  relative  increase,"  viz.,  by  taking  all  professing 
Christians  (nominal,  etc.)  it  makes  the  increase  much  greater  proportionately  than  that 
of  population.  But  any  one  who  confronts  himself  with  such  a  comparison,  overlooks 
the  tremendous  emigration  which  swells  such  a  contrast  by  its  multitude  of  nominal 
Christians.  In  the  same  paper,  occurs  this  pregnant  fact  :  "  The  Rev.  Charles  H.  Spur- 
geon  took  occasion  in  a  recent  sermon  to  urge  the  necessity  for  evangelistic  work  in  Lon- 
don, which,  he  said,  was  getting  to  be  the  most  heathenish  city  under  the  sun."  Such  state- 
ments outweigh  all  such  delusive  contrasts.  The  Lutheran  Observer  of  July  29th,  1881, 
declares  of  the  churches  of  Berlin  :  "  The  German  imperial  city  has  only  sixty-six  Protes- 
tant churches,  capable  of  seating  but  six  per  cent  of  the  population. "  We  very  much  doubt, 
if  we  are  to  credit  other  statements  made,  whether  these  churches  are  all  Protestant ;  for 
some  are  liberal,  others  infidel,  and  others  belong  to  unorthodox  bodies. 

48  Look  at  the  boasts  of  unbelief  in  this  direction,  which,  in  part,  we  have  quoted.    Be- 
hold the  practical  results  of  such  education  separated  from  religion  in  the  general  un- 


158  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  174. 

belief  prevailing  in  Germany.  See  how  boards,  colleges,  universities,  and  schools  are 
leavened  with  the  spirit  of  infidelity.  Observe  how  school  books  are  becoming  infused 
with  the  deadly  posion  ;  how  scientific  unbelief  is  openly  taught  ;  how  the  teachings  of 
unbelieving  philosophy,  metaphysics,  etc.,  are  prof  usely  extended  ;  how  teachers  impreg- 
nated with  Socialism,  or  Spiritualism,  or  Pantheism,  or  Naturalism,  or  Humanitarian- 
ism,  etc.,  are  in  leading  positions  ;  how  literary  and  scientific  lectures  are  presented  by 
this  class,  utterly  subversive  of  religion  and  morals,  and  do  we  not  see  the  danger  before 
us — that  education— the  boasted  medium  of  progress  and  Millennial  splendor— is  fast 
falling  into  the  hands  of  unbelief,  and  becoming  instrumental  in  developing  the  mind 
and  heart  which  is  to  introduce  Antichrist.  A  thousand  significant  tokens  bespeak  the 
fatal  mistake  that  Protestantism  (Eoman  Catholicism  was  more  wise  and  prudent,  as  a 
matter  of  merepollcy)  made  when  it  gave  up  the  education  of  its  children  to  the  State  with- 
out the  Bible.  Such  a  policy  would  answer,  provided  we  were  assured  of  the  pro])er  Chris- 
tian class  of  teachers,  but  when  infidelity  sends  forth  its  thousands  of  unbelieving 
teachers  to  take  possession  of  the  land  to  destroy  the  very  foundation  of  Christian  belief, 
what  can  the  righteous  do?  Our  forefathers — "old  fogies"  though  they  were— were 
wiser  in  their  day,  when  at  the  side  of  each  church  they  established  a  parochial  school, 
resting  thus  assured  that  no  infidel  teachers  could  come  in  to  leaven  the  children  with 
unbelieving  notions  of  a  non-personality  of  God,  a  non-divinity  of  Jesus,  a  non-infallibility 
of  the  Bible,  a  non-divine  government,  etc.,  etc.  The  majority  rules,  and  when  infidelity 
feels  itself  in  the  majority  it  will  override  all  Christian  objection  and  evidence  its  spirit. 
This  is  now  exhibited.  Thus  e.g.  "  A  year  ago  (Christian  Union,  Aug.  28th,  1878)  the 
School  Board  of  Chicago  ordered  the  words  '  God'  and  '  Christ'  to  be  stricken  out  of  the 
school  readers,  and  this  year  (1878)  they  refused  to  reinstate  them."  How  the  Bible, 
the  New.  Test,,  and  selections  of  the  Scriptures  (although  heathen  and  civilized  of  all 
other  descriptions  are  allowed)  have  been  removed  from  the  schools,  is  too  well  known 
to  require  special  mention.  The  idea  of  separating  education  of  the  young  from  religion 
is  more  than  heathenish  (e.g.  the  Greeks,  Romans,  etc.,  never  dreamed  of  such  irrelig- 
ion)  ;  it  is  already  antichristian  in  spirit  and  tendency.  Its  fruits  are  already  suffi- 
ciently evidenced  in  the  increased  unbelief  among  the  young  ;  the  avidity  with  which 
unbelieving  and  demoralizing  literature  is  published,  circulated,  and  read  ;  in  the  pro- 
jection and  pursuit  of  Naturalistic  and  Humanitarian  schemes  ;  in  the  extension  of 
worldliness,  desire  of  wealth,  love  of  gayety,  grasping  after  power,  public  conventions  to 
advocate  the  most  ultra  principles,  depraving  influences  and  agents,  vitiating  literature, 
etc.  The  truth  is,  that  intelligence  without  Christianity,  learning  without  love  to  God, 
education  without  religious  basis,  adds  strength  andenlarged  capacity  to  do  evil.  As  we  sow, 
so  shall  we  also  reap  :  sow  without  Christianity,  and  we  shall  reap  without  Christianity, 
and  the  harvest  immensely  exceeds  the  seed  sown.  Sow  the  wind  of  irreligion,  false  doc- 
trine, etc.,  and,  sooner  or  later,  comes  the  whirlwind.  AVe  call  attention  even  to  the 
concessions  of  persons  outside  of  the  Church.  Thus  e.g.  the  editor  of  Scribner's  Monthly 
(Vol.  16,  p.  432)  in  an  art.  "  Culture  and  Christianity,"  truthfully  and  forcibly  shows 
that  intelligence,  devotion  to  science  and  culture,  the  highest  artistic  development,  can- 
not purify,  restrain  selfishness,  elevate  morality,  exalt  virtue,  without  religion.  A  study 
of  the  past  and  the  present,  of  eminent  men  of  the  highest  attainments  with  depraved 
hearts  and  lives,  confirms  the  Bible  teaching  on  this  point  ;  religion  and  religion  alone, 
can  elevate  the  moral  nature  and  character,  and  preserve  it  from  the  selfishness  and 
vices  into  which  all  others— with  exceptional  cases— so  largely  enter.  Our  system  of 
irreligious,  secular  education  is  furnishing  the  vast  army  of  unbelieving  writers,  lecturers, 
organizers,  etc.,  which  array  themselves  against  God  and  His  Christ,  the  Bible  and  be- 
lievers, being  furnished  with  the  mental  capabilities  and  furniture  requisite  for  the  de- 
structive work.  As  a  manifestation  of  irony  and  art,  even  Christian  phraseology  is 
adapted  (as  e.g.  Savage  in  Christianity  the  Science  of  Manhood,  and  The  Religion  of  Evolution, 
etc.)  to  make  such  unbelieving  teaching  the  more  palatable  and  deceptive',  so  that 
others  may  substitute  the  God  of  nature  for  the  God  of  the  Bible.  So  great  is  the  leaven 
working  that  Fowle  (Coniemp.  Review,  Aug.  1872)  not  satisfied  with  the  yielding  ot  the 
Church  to  have  her  strength  shorn,  accuses  the  Church  of  fatally  retrograding  by 
arrogant  power  (i.e.  by  not  conceding  more  still  and  ceasing  her  protests),  and  then 
adds  by  way  of  apology  :  "  And  then  we  wonder  that  religion  is  discredited  in  an  age  of 
positive  thought,  and  fall  to  and  abuse  the  Rationalist  or  the  Sceptic  as  the  author  of 
that  dark  cloud  of  suspicion  and  doubt  which  is  descending  upon  the  world,  so  that  all 
hearts 'begin  to  gather  blackness.' "  There  is  .force  in  this  sharp  accusation,  for  the 
Church  is  largely  I"  blame,  by  its  connivance  with  worldly  and  secular  schemes  (as  in 
education),  in.  the  training  up  and  developing  of  unbelief.     The  Pop.  Science  Monthly 


PROP.  174.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  159  % 

repeatedly  censures  the  Church  for  not  being  still  more  meek  and  submissive  to  the 
course  of  popular  and  scientific  education.  Numerous  periodicals  regard  the  secular 
system  as  the  very  best  possible  provision  to  extend,  at  the  least  expense  and  labor,  the 
principles  of  unbelief.  Even  those  who  profess  to  occupy  a  middle  ground  (making 
themselves  large  and  dangerous  concessions)  find  fault  with  Christian  educators  that  they 
are  not  sufficiently  liberal  ;  while  hundreds  are  fondly  anticipating  a  cordial  union  and 
agreement  with  the  modern  phrases  of  unbelieving  thought, which  becomes  "  a  snare  and 
delusion."  What  union  or  fellowship  is  there  e.g.  between  Christianity  and  Strauss' s 
New  Faith  ("  We  believe  in  no  God,  but  only  in  a  self-poised,  and  amid  eternal 
changes,  constant  Universum  !")or  Huxley's,  or  Mill' s,  or  ten  thousand  others'  expressed 
belief '?  None  ;  the  latter  lead  our  young  men  and  women,  our  boys  and  girls,  on  and 
on  to  the  culminated  Antichrist.  This  God's  Spirit  predicts,  and  we  believe  it,  especially 
when  the  means  and  instrumentalities  for  doing  the  same  are  to-day  present  at  work. 
We  thank  God,  that  so  many  noble  men  still  stand  firni  in  behalf  of  Christian  education 
and  Christian  science,  and  thus  resist  the  encroachments  of  unbelief. 

49  The  ignoring  or  spiritualizing  of  it  by  the  many,  the  perversive  application  of  that 
which  belongs  to  the  future,  to  the  past,  and  the  present  ;  the  wholesale  appropriation 
or  denunciation  of  it  ;  the  scoffing  and  sneering  heaped  upon  it— of  which  we  give  numer- 
ous instances— all  indicate  a  condition  such  as  must,  if  the  prophetic  portraiture  of  the 
times  is  fully  met,  exist  previous  to  the  end,  and  the  nearer  we  come  to  the  end,  the 
more  will  it  be  developed.  Is  it  not  true  that  recently  more  books  have  been  published 
in  this  direction,  than  all  the  preceding  centuries  have  brought  forth. 

60  Some  of  the  Jewish  Rabbis  give  special  signs  as  preceding  the-  sudden  Advent  of  the 
Messiah,  and  among  them  are  such  as  the  New  Test,  assigns  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  Thus 
e.g.  those  quoted  in  art.  "Messiah"  in  Herzog's  Oychp.,  of  which  we  give  the  following 
extract;  :  R.  Jochanan  (Bab.  Sauh.  f.  96 — Ugol.  25,  954)  says,  "  The  Son  of  David  comes 
not,  until  the  Denunciator  defends  himself  ;  also,  until  the  disciples  are  few  in  number  ; 
also,  until  money  disappears  from  the  purse  ;  also,  until  man  doubts  concerning  Redemp- 
tion. "  Thus  wickedness,  unbelief,  poverty,  and  infidelity  are  characterized.  So  even 
the  Mohammedans  (art.  on  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.),  give  a  variety  of  signs, 
chiefly  drawn  from  the  Jewish  Talmud  and  Midrash. 

51  The  reader  scarcely  needs  to  be  reminded  that  Luther,  Melanchthon,  Latimer,  and 
many  prophetical  writers,  believed  that  the  time  would  be  shortened.  Numerous  writers 
of  marked  ability  contend  for  the  suddenness  of  the  Advent,  its  impending  imminency, 
but  weaken  their  language  (and  even  raise  an  antagonism)  by  not  observing  the  differ- 
ence between  the  first  and  last  stage  of  the  Sec.  Advent  (see  e.g.  Prop.  130).  Thus  to 
illustrate  :  Buck  (Harm,  and  Exp.  of  Matt.  24)  exhorts  to  constant  watchfulness  and 
preparation,  etc.,  but  vitiates  his  own  properly  given  cautions  (even  while  correctly  cen- 
suring the  fixing  of  an  exact  positive  time  for  such  coming,  as  opposed  to  the  posture  of 
watching — by  intervening  certain  events  as  e.g.  "  it  will  not  take  place  before  the  Jews 
have  re-possessed  Jerusalem,  and  the  nations  of  the  earth  meet  for  the  conflict  against 
Israel,  Zech.  14."  He  thus  directs  attention  to  the  last  stage  of  the  Advent  (the  open 
Parousia  of  Jesus  icith  His  saints)  and  not  (as  he  should  do)  to  the  first  stage  (the  thief-like 
Parousia  of  Jesus  for  His  saints).  Having  specially  called  attention  to  this  feature,  we 
need  not  repeat  reasons  already  given. 

52  When  the  Spirit  of  God  gives  us  the  signs  ;  when  Jesus  urges  us  to  their  observ- 
ance ;  when  the  Word  declares  that  they  are  significant  of  nearness  ;  when  eminent  men 
like  Mede,  the  Newtons,  Delitzsch,  Auberlen,  Olshausen,  Bengel,  Bickersteth,  and  a 
thousand  others  call  attention  to  the  signs  and  urge  them  as  indicative  of  nearness, 
certainty  it  ill  becomes  any  believer  to  close  his  eyes,  mind,  and  heart  to  them.  Let 
unbelief  avoid  them  ;  let  infidelity  deride  them  ;  let  lukewarmness  turn  away  from  them 
with  unfriendly  spirit,  yet  Abrahamic  faith  and  love  for  His  appearing  will  constantly, 
in  view  of  them,  hold  -what  Paul  says  in  Rom.  13  :  11,  12.  Having  used  this  last  passage 
before,  we,  to  substantiate  our  reference,  quote  as  illustrative,  two  authorities.  Dr.  Brown 
(Com.  loci)  says  :  "  '  For  now  is  our  salvation' — rather  '  the  salvation,'  or  simply  '  salva- 
tion'— '  nearer  than  when  we  (first)  believed.'  This  is  in  the  line  of  all  our  Lord's  teaching, 
which  represents  the  decisive  day  of  Christ's  second  appearing  as  at  hand,  to  keep  believers 
ever  in  the  attitude  of  wakeful  expectancy,  but  without  reference  to  the  chronological 
nearness  or  distance  of  that  event.  '  The  night  (of  evil)  is  far  spent,  the  day  (of  con- 
summated triumph  over  it)  is  at  hand.'  "  (Coinp.  Lange,  Olshausen,  DeWette,  Phillippi, 
Meyer,  and  others,  who  hold  to  such  a  reference  as  only  tenable.)  Alford  observes  : 
"  A  fair  exegesis  of  this  passage  can  hardly  fail  to  recognize  the  fact,  that  the  apostle 
here,  as  well  as  elsewhere  (1  Thess.  4  :  17  ;  1  Cor.  15  :  51)  speaks  of  the  Coming  of  the 


•     160  TIIE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

Lord  as  rapidly  approaching"  (see  his  references).  We  add  :  the  Jewish  usage  of 
"  salvation,"  and  its  use  in  the  Scripture  (as  e.g.  Isa.  25  :  9  ;  Heb.  9  :  28,  etc.)  is  in  itself 
sufficient  to  sustain  our  interpretation  and  application  of  the  passage. 

Obs.  4.  Now  we  come  to  consider,  in  the  briefest  manner,  the  signs 
which  follow  the  first  stage  of  the  Advent,  and  which  being  more  particu- 
larly confined  to  a  distinctive  interval,  and  embracing  far  greater  ones  will 
be  readily  recognized  by  all  the  believing  children  of  God.  1.  The  first 
sign  indicative  of  the  Coming  open  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  Man  will 
be  the  Translation  of  living  saints  (Prop.  130)  in  connection  with  a  secret 
resurrection  of  saints.  This  will  be  recognized  by  many  as  a  sad  (to  them 
that  must  remain  to  endure  tribulation),  but  still  joyful  (because  verifying 
approaching  deliverance)  sign  of  a  Saviour  already  present  and  observant 
of  the  interests  of  His  own. '  2.  While  this  is  recognized  by  those  who 
accept  of  God's  Word,  and  leads  to  a  correspondent  recognition  and  asser- 
tion of  the  Advent,  the  denial  of  such  an  Advent  will  become  the  more 
emphatic  and  ardent  over  the  world.  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  Com- 
ing," will  proceed  from  multitudes  of  "  scoffers"  to  neutralize  the  effects 
of  what  has  taken  place.  3.  Notwithstanding  the  opposition  and  bitter- 
ness of  unbelief,  we  are  assured  in  Rev.  14,  that  after  the  removal  of  the 
symbolical  number  144,000,  there  will  be  resulting  from  the  given  signs,  a 
specific  p reaching  over  the  earth  of  two  messages  most  appropriate  for  the 
times,  viz.  the  proclamation  to  "fear  God  and  give  glory  to  Him,  for  the 
hour  of  His  judgment  is  come ,"  and  in  view  of  the  incoming  worship  of 
Antichrist,  "and  worship  Him  that  made  heaven ,"  etc.  This  Avill  he  a 
simultaneous,  powerful  preaching  preparing  the  Church  for  the  terrible 
Antichristian  struggle  before  her,  and  with  such  success  that  "  a  in  all i- 
hul<:'  shall  pass  through  the  great  tribulation,  willingly  sacrificing  life  rathe* 
than  yield  up  faith  and  hope  in  the  Christ,  Rev.  8  :  0,  14  and  20  :  4.2  4. 
While  this  energetic  work  of  the  Church,  now  fully  recognizing  her 
chronological  position,  and  that  the  time  is  short,  is  going  on,  at  the  same 
period,  increase  of  corruption  in  all  the  varied  forms  previously  described 
will  be  experienced  ;  the  perilous  times  will  become  more  perilous  ;  the 
characters  delineated  will  become  more  and  more  determined  in  their 
hostility  to  the  good  ;  human  efforts  at  regeneration  will  be  more  boldly 
proclaimed  and  accepted  at  the  side  of  a  witnessing  Gospel.  The  moral 
and  religious  signs,  given  under  the  previous  Observation,  will  become 
more  sharp///  defined  ami  intensified.  5.  Without  giving  the  order  of 
events,  we  notice  next,  the  rise  of  the  last  great  Antichrist  and  the  forma- 
tion of  a  mil  federation  of  nations  under  him,  Prop.  100,  161,  etc.  6.  The 
fall  of  Babylon  under  his  influence  and  power,  which  includes  the  Papacy 
and  all  State  Churches,  as  well  as  all  Hierarchical  institutions  ;  the  hatred 
of  the  Antichrist  even  finally  extending  to  all  ecclesiastical  organizations 
that  professedly  or  otherwise  favor  Christ.  We  need  not  enter  into  the 
mooted  question  .how  much  is  comprehended  under  the  term  "  Babylon," 
and  what  is  meant  by  "  her  daughters,"  because  in  the  ruin  of  Babylon 
herself,  that  of  "  her  "daughters,"  whoever  they  may  be,  as  well  as  that  of 
the  overthrow  ecclesiastically  (i.e.  as  outwardly  organized)  of  the  Churches 
will  also  be  affected  at  the  same  time.  While  the  Papacy  will  meet  her 
doom,  State  Churches,  and  all  others  will  most  cruelly  suffer  at  the  hands  of 
the  Antichristian  Confederation.  The  former,  however,  preceding  the 
latter  in  point  of  time.     7.  For,  after  the  downfall  of  Babylon,  Rev.  14  : 


Prop.  174.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  161 

9-13,  comes  the  fearful  persecution  of  all  true  believers  and  their  heroic 
martyrdom,  Prop.  161  and  162.  The  demand  made  for  worship  will  be  a 
sign  so  striking  and  particularized  in  fulfilment,  that  it  will  be  unmistak- 
able to  the  believing.  The  requirement  to  worship  the  beast  and  his 
image,  will  be  withstood  by  faithful  souls  whom  God  will  also  honor  for  a 
triumphant  exhibition  of  faith.  The  "  wise  then  will  understand"  and 
wisdom  will  preserve  them  indomitable.  8.  An  astonishing  sign  will  be  a 
return  to  idol  'worship.  Even  now  the  Pantheistic,  Naturalistic  current  is 
sweeping  in  this  direction,  and  no  doubt  to  meet  the  fulfilment,  the  plea 
will  be  made,  that  worship  will  be  aided  in  the  masses  by  and  through 
material  objects,  and  that  in  such  an  outward  expression  the  adherents  of 
the  new  faith  will  be  known.  Men  may  now  sneer  at  this  as  ridiculous, 
but  even  hatred  to  Christ  is  sufficient,  when  the  time  comes,  to  introduce 
it  as  a  test  and  the  most  certain  methodby  which  to  make  the  weak  succumb 
and  place  themselves  in  a  positive  unchristian  attitude;  The  alarming  re- 
introduction  of  heathen  doctrine  and  leaning  upon  Naturalism,  even 
already  makes  thoughtful  men  seethe  entering  wedge  by  which  this  can  be 
effected  in  the  laying  down  and  advocacy  of  principles  that  naturally  devel- 
op the  idea.3  One  thing  is  certain,  let  men  acknowledge  it  or  not,  that 
it  is  predicted  (as  e.g.  Rev.  13  :  4,  14-17  and  9  :  20,  21,  etc.)  to  take  place 
before  the  last  stage  of  the  Advent.  The  degradation  of  humanity,  after 
all  its  boasted  enlightenment,  after  all  its  vaunted  efforts  at  regeneration, 
shall  be  manifested  (as  in  the  French  Revolution)  in  a  pitiful  return  to  heath- 
enism somewhat  refined  under  modern  Pantheistic  manipulations.  Forsak- 
ing the  God  of  the  Bible  for  Nature,  it  partakes  the  nature  of  a  just  retri- 
bution. 9.  A  sign  which  the  student  ponders  with  a  feeling  of  awe,  because 
of  the  influence  for  destruction  that  it  will  exert  over  multitudes,  weak 
and  credulous  enough  to  be  entrapped  by  it,  is  the  'performance  of  miracles, 
the  exercise  of  miraculous  powers  as  stated,  e.g.  Rev.  13  :  13,  14,  and  16  : 
14,  and  19  :  20.  2  Thess.  2  :  9,  etc.  It  appears  a  just  punishment  that 
unbelief  now  so  bitterly  opposed  to  Revelation  because  of  its  connection 
with  the  Supernatural  and  miraculous,  should  at  the  time  of  the  end,  to 
secure  its  supposed  victory  over  Christianity,  lay  hold  of  and  exhibit  to  the 
admiration  of  its  hosts  "  signs  and  lying  wonders."  What  these  miracles 
consist  in,  that  period  must  determine  ;  the  outlines  of  some  of  them  are 
sufficiently  given  to  make  them  recognizable  when  they  are  proposed  for 
acceptance.  Even  now  the  leaven  may,  for  aught,  we  know,  be  creeping 
in,  if  we  are  to  credit  one  half  that  Spiritualism  gives  us  now  of  wonders 
performed  by  their  distinguished  mediums,  and  which  many  distinguished 
men  profess  themselves  unable  to  explain.  Let  the  present  indications  in 
this  direction  be  what  they  may,  it  is  revealed,  that  when  the  set 
time  has  come,  the  nations  of  the  earth  will  be  wofully  deceived  by  pre- 
tended miraculous  power,  given  evidently  as  proof  (now  declared  by 
many  to  be  impossible)  of  the  correctness  of  their  faith.  It  is  a  wonderful 
ordering,  that  the  line  of  final  punishment  comes  in  that  of  long  continued 
previous  denial.4  10.  The  restoration  of  a  portion  of  the  Jews  to  Pales- 
tine, whom  Antichrist  will  attach  and  overiohelm,  is  a  significant  sign. 
The  condition  of  the  Jews  and  of  Jerusalem  at  that  time — which  implies 
also  the  previous  loss  or  grant  of  Palestine  by  Turkey — will  be  carefully 
noted  by  the  believing  that  may  be  spared.  11.  The  tears  of  the  Anti- 
christian  power,  its  success,  its  march  to  the  Holy  Land,  etc.,  will  all  find 
their    mates    in   prophecy  and  be  thus  signs,    one  following  the  other, 


162  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM  [PllOP.  174. 

of  the  rapidly  approaching  catastrophe.     12.    But  even  hefore   this,    the 
unsettled  condition  of  nations,  their  perplexity,  distress,  etc.,  preparatory 
to  their  confederated  capacity  must  be  witnessed,  and  all  those  commo- 
tions, revolutionary  movements,  the  preliminary  overthrowing  of  thrones, 
etc.,  will  meet  with  corresponding  awakened  interest  in  the  mind  of  the 
prophetic   student.     13.   Before,   probably  but  a  very  short  time   before, 
the  open  Revelation  of  Jesus  with  His  saints  in  behalf  of  the  Jewish  nation 
(Zech.  11),  Elijah  the  Prophet  will  be  sent  to  the  Jews  as  predicted  (Mai. 
4  :  5,  6),    being  unto  them  a  forerunner  as  John  the  Baptist  at  the    First 
Advent — comp.  Prop,  on  Antichrist.     The  early  Church  (as  e.g.  Justin  in 
Dial,  with  Trypho.)  and  many  teachers  have  correctly  held  to  this  coming 
of  Elijah  before  the  Second  Advent,  but  more  definitely  it  pertains  to  this 
stage  of   it,  and  is  designed  only  for  the  Jewish   nation.5     14.  For   the 
reasons   already  given,   nature  may  be  expected  now    to  greatly  increase 
her  signs.     In  comparison  of  Scripture,  the  student  will  become  impressed 
with  the  idea  of  Oosterzee  (Theol.  of  JV".  Test.)    that  the  Sec.  Advent  will 
be   ushered     in    with   impressive    signs,    accompanied    with    stupendous 
changes  in  the  cosmical  and  moral  spheres.     Whatever  of  figure  may  be 
connected  with  the  description  of  these  last  times,  yet  the  past  belief  that 
nature  itself  will  sympathize  in  the  last  great  struggle  by  the  giving  forth 
of  terrific  tokens  in  violent  earthquakes,  etc.,  is  one  that  commends  itself 
as  eminently  suitable  for  those  who  have  again  returned  to  nature's  wor- 
shippers.    That  which  they  esteem  their  god,  shall  be  employed   against 
them  ;  so  that  event  after  event,  in  the  heavens  above  and  in  the  earth 
beneath,  shall  occur  which  unbelieving  science,  with  all  its  inflation,  shall 
be  unable  to  recognize  and  explain  as  the  result  of  natural  law.     The  curse 
will  press  the  more  heavily  ;  groaning  creation  nearing  deliverance  will, 
as  tokens,    enter   upon  her  last  throes,    as   if   acknowledging   the   secret 
presence  of  her  King  and  Liberator.6     15.   Then,  too,  will  appear  the  sign 
of  the  Son  of  Man  following,  and  perhaps  in  some  way  connected  with, 
the  translation,  etc.,  either  at  its  occurrence  or  afterward  at  Sinai.     If  it 
takes  place  shortly  before  the  open  Revelation  and  not  in  the  way  suggested 
(Prop.  130),  as  related  to  the  removal  of  the  saints,  or  to  their  appearance 
in  clouds,  etc.,  afterward,  then  it  may,  probably,  refer  to  some  such  sign 
as  Amos  8:9;  or  Joel  3  :  15  ;  or  2  :  31,  etc.     Whatever  it  is,  for  at  present 
we  can  only  conjecture,  it  will  be  found  so  significantly  predicted   in  the 
"Word  that  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  recognizing  it  in  fulfilment  as  a 
sign  of  the  Christ.7     10.   Other  signs  are  found  scattered  hero  and  there, 
which    will  then  be  duly  considered  by  the  faithful,  such  as  the  formation 
of  a  confederacy,  a  great  contest  by   Antichrist  and  his  hosts  with  some 
other  power  preliminary  to  the  final  one  with   Christ  and   Itis  army;  the 
union  of  the  false  prophet  with  the  Antichrist  (for  whatever  inchoate  fulfil- 
ment there  maybe  found  in  the  Papacy  according  to  prophetical  writers,  it 
must  be   home  in  mind  that  this  prophet  endures  to  the   bitter  end,   is  in 
the  last  battle,   while  the  Papacy  has  been  previously  destroyed,  Rev.  17  : 
16)  ;  the  incoming  of  certain  plagues  and  woes,  of  developments  and  con- 
tests,   the   three   unclean  spirits,   etc.,  all  couched  in  figurative   or   sym- 
bolical language  and  pertaining  to  that  period  still  future,  so  that  it  would 
be  mere  conjecture  to  attempt  an  elucidation  of  the  same  in  the  way  of 
particularizing  who  or  what  is  really  designated.     It  is  for  the  develop- 
ments of  that  time  of  the  end  to  bring  these  forth  distinctively ',  when  they 
shall  be  duly  appreciated  and  mated  by  the  observant,  watching  ones.8 


PUOP.  174.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  1G3 

1  We  cannot  possibly  receive  the  notion  entertained  by  a  small  party  of  Separatists, 
under  the  leadership  of  Barbour  and  Russell,  viz.,  that  Jesus  is  already  present.  The 
mystical  conception  that  leads  to  this,  we  meet  elsewhere.  For  the  present  we  only  say 
that  a  non-resurrection  and  non-translation  of  the  saints  is  sufficient  proof  to  show  that  the 
Sec.  Advent  has  not  yet  taken  place,  for  these  are  inevitably  and  at  once  associated  with 
the  first  stage  of  the  Advent.  Their  claim  of  this  particular  presence  being  "  spiritually 
discerned"  is  precisely  equivalent  to  that  of  the  Shakers,  who  also  claim  such  a  "  spirit- 
ual discernment"  of  the  Second  Advent  transpired,  and  even  of  an  existing  Millennium 
already  begun. 

2  Consequently  we  cannot  possibly  receive  the  notion  entertained  by  some  (as  e.g.  par- 
tially by  Lincoln's  Lecis.  on  Bev.,  and  totally  by  Swormstedt  The  End  of  the  World  Near, 
etc.,  etc.)  that  after  the  resurrection  and  translation,  there  is  no  more  proclamation  of 
the  truth,  no  more  saved,  the  Holy  Ghost  being  withdrawn,  etc.,  for  this  is  a  perversion 
of  the  order  of  Rev.  14,  a  non-recognition  of  the  first  and  second  stages  of  the  same 
Advent,  and  an  ignoring  of  the  interval  and  the  events  connected  therewith.  Having  re- 
ferred to  this  in  another  place,  we  only  now  add  :  of  course  those  who  so  arrogantly  and 
selfishly  apply  to  themselves  the  noble  portraiture  of  the  144,000,  and  the  angel  mes- 
sages, as  is  done  by  the  Seventh-Day  Adventists  (under  the  enlightened  guidance  of  a  pro- 
fessed prophetess,  Mrs.  White)  it  is  not  surprising  (as  was  done  by  one  of  their  evan- 
gelists, Mr.  Stone,  at  Springfield,  O.,  July,  1878)  that  they  should  say — to  sustain  their 
unjustifiable  self-application  of  noble  and  elevated  prediction— that  it  is  "  senseless"  to  look 
for  the  Second  Advent  of  Jesus  to  precede  these  angel  messages.  On  the  other  hand, 
when  Rev.  Randolph  (Danville  Tribune,  March  12th,  1880)  says  :  "  The  time  is  coming, 
and  is  not  far  distant,  when  the  believing  Church  will  take,  openly,  the  ground  of 
Irenaeus  the  Great,  the  glory  of  his  time,  and  write  Post-Millenarianism  as  a  heresy 
against  the  truth  of  God" — we  believe  this,  but  that  it  will  only  take  place  during  this 
interval,  and  after  the  resurrection  and  translation  of  a  chosen  body  at  the  first  stage, 
thief-like  Coming.  When  the  Church  sees  hmv  it  has  been  blinded  and  deluded  by  false 
hopes  so  eloquently  expressed  ;  when  she  recognizes  her  position  in  the  order  of  events 
and  what  is  before  her,  then  this  doctrine  so  derided,  anil  branded  in  many  quarters  as 
heretical,  will  be  the  very  doctrine  to  raise  the  believer  from  despair  ;  remove  despond- 
ency and  darkness  ;  impress  the  divine  promises  and  covenants  ;  infuse  renewed  faith, 
hope,  and  courage  ;  restore  "  the  blessed  hope,"  to  its  exalted  strength-imparting  posi- 
tion ;  and  nerve  small  and  great,  learned  and  ignorant,  old  and  young  to  resist  anti- 
christian  efforts  and  persecution  even  unto  death. 

3  We  say  nothing  respecting  the  failures  of  a  class  of  Spiritualists  to  form  a  human 
image  with  a  vocal  apparatus  to  be  manipulated  by  the  spirits — to  serve  as  a  sort  of  uni- 
versal medium  and  direction — for  a  more  dangerous  manifestation  is  in  the  excessive 
laudation  and  glorification  of  nature,  so  prevalent  in  numerous  books.  We  give  a 
single  illustration  to  show  our  meaning  :  when  (Mod.  Doubt,  by  Christlieb,  p.  32)  men 
once  say  :  "  Brahma,  Buddha,  Jupiter,  and  Jehovah  must  now  yield  to  worthier  succes- 
sors in  reason  and  philanthropy"  (so  Wichern),  or,  "  what  we  want  is  a  new  Church.  I 
am  for  a  free  stage.  The  theatre  is  my  temple,  where  I  would  see  inaugurated  a  new  form 
of  worship.  The  theatre  should  be  regarded  as  a  house  of  God,  as  it  was  among  the 
ancient  Greeks.  Religion  and  the  drama  I  would  fain  see  identified"  (so  Eckardt)— then 
there  is  but  a  short  step  to  a  return  to  an  idol-worship  patterned  after  the  ancient  Magi, 
Greeks,  and  Romans.  The  worship  of  the  "Imperial  Sun"  as  an  "  all-powerful  and 
Omnipresent  Creator"  is  more  than  hinted  at  in  that  degraded  and  rotten  work  Tlie  Mas- 
culine Cross.  In  another  place  (Prop.  161)  we  introduce  some  who  boldly  advocate  idol- 
worship. 

4  The  student  will  observe  how  significantly  the  signs  in  this  direction  are  fulfilling. 
While  unbelief  shall  continue  to  exist,  and  the  Supernatural  of  the  Bible  is  dismissed 
as  unallowable — expressly  to  break  down  its  moral  requirements,  its  humiliation  of  man, 
etc. — yet  it  is  predicted  that  men  shall,  with  such  unbelief  of  Revelation,  entertain  a 
faith  in  the  extraordinary  and  miraculous  in  their  own  concocted  religio-infidel  faith. 
Already  thousands  of  intelligent  but  unbelieving  men  are  forsaking  the  ground  of  Strauss 
(Life  of  Christ,  Introd. )  :  "  We  may  summarily  reject  all  miracles,  prophecies,  narra- 
tives of  angels  and  demons,  and  the  like,  as  simply  impossible  and  irreconcilable  with 
the  known  and  universal  laws  which  govern  the  course  of  events, "  as  untenable.  True, 
indeed,  in  their  case,  so  far  as  the  Bible  is  concerned,  but  not  correct  as  to  the  incoming 
"regeneration"  or  "  reformation"  of  mankind  which  is  to  introduce  an  acquaintance 
with  "  higher  and  nobler  mysteries"  than  were  ever  before  divulged  to  man.  The  move- 
ment is  singular  and  striking,  and  worthy  of  close  and  thoughtful  attention.     Such  a 


164  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

union  of  unbelief  with  the  manifestation  of  the  lowest  credulity— of  contempt  for  Holy 
"Writ  with  the  unhesitating  acceptance  of  human  teaching— of  denial  of  Christianity  with 
the  formation  of  some  kind  of  religious  faith  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  man's  nature — is 
certainly  most  remarkable. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  object,  as  misleading  and  unscholarly,  the  application  that 
Waggoner  and  Stone  (Seventh-Day  Adventists),  and  others,  make  of  2  Thess.  2  :  9,  as 
if  the  "  Coming"  of  Jesus  took  place  literally  "  after"  this  wonder-working,  because  it 
says  in  our  version  "after  the  working  of  ISatan."  That  is,  they  take  the  word  "  after" 
to  mean  time,  when  it  denotes  only  likeness  or  resemblance,  and  this  they  press  so  as  to 
favor  their  theory  of  the  Papacy,  etc.  Now  it  is  true  that  Jesus  comes  openly  after  this 
extraordinary  manifestation  of  wickedness,  but  He  conies  thief-like  before  it.  This  takes 
place  during  the  interval.  We  allow  Barnes  {Com.  loci)  to  give  a  correct  statement  as  to 
the  meaning  of  the  passage  :  "  The  word  rendered  after,  it  need  not  be  said  to  one  who 
looks  at  the  Greek,  does  not  refer  to  time,  but  is  a  preposition,  meaning  according  to; 
in  conformity  with,  meaning  that  the  manner  of  His  appearing  would  be  accompanied 
by  such  works  as  should  show  the  agency  of  Satan  employed,  and  such  as  he  only 
could  produce.  It  does  not  mean  that  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  would  be  after 
Satan  had  worked  in  this  manner,  but  that  the  manifestation  of  that  wicked  one  would 
be  with  such  demonstrations  of  power  and  wonder  as  Satan  only  could  effect." 

6  The  prophetical  student  will  ever  keep  in  mind  that  Eljiah's  mission  is  one,  not  to 
the  Gentiles,  but  expressly  to  the  Jewish  nation,  and  that  down  to  the  scene  delineated 
in  the  first  part  of  Zech.  14,  he  certainly  has  not  put  in  his  mission.  His  coming  is  after 
the  first  stage  of  the  Advent  of  Jesus,  and  after  this  last  tribulation  of  the  Jews  under 
Antichrist,  for  previous  to  this  there  is  no  conversion  of  the  nation.  We  doubt  not  that 
in  the  darkest  hour  of  gloom,  when  feeling  the  persecuting  power  of  the  Antichrist,  and 
when  all  hope  seems  to  have  perished,  Elijah,  according  to  promise,  will  come,  and  will 
prepare  the  remnant  to  accept  so  heartily  the  Lord  Jesus. 

6  The  darkening  of  the  sun,  the  moon  not  giving  her  light,  the  stars  falling,  the  powers 
of  the  heaven  shaken,  is  immediately  after  the  Jewish  tribulation,  Matt.  24  :  29;  Mark 
13  :  24,  25  (hence  the  folly  of  making  "  the  dark  day"  and  "  the  falling  of  the  stars"  of 
the  past  these,  as  some  do  to  make  out  a  favorite  date,  etc.),  and  cannot  (whatever 
symbolical  meaning,  as  some  hold,  is  connected  with  it)  wholly  be  figurative,  but  refer 
to  natural  darkness,  etc.,  as  evidenced  e.g.  by  the  parallel  passage  of  Joel.  2  :  30,  31, 
indicative  (as  God  ERmself  ■will  show  wonders)  of  what  took  place  in  Egypt  (Ex.  10  :  21- 
23),  or  in  Palestine  (Matt.  27  :  45).  Such  signs  shall  only  be  produced  on  a  grander 
scale.  D.  N.  Lord  (Theol.  ami  J. it.  Journal,  Oct.  1800,  p.  223)  takes  the  position  (the 
more  noticeable,  since  he  is  so  strict  in  the  application  of  symbolical  language)  that  as 
Luke  21  :  25,  26,  makes  these  things  "signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the  moon,  and  in  the 
stars,"  such  things  (as  the  darkening  of  the  sun,  etc.,  mentioned  by  Matt,  and  Mark)  are 
to  be  understood  literally  as  "  processes  of  which  those  orbs  are  to  be  the  subjects,  and 
that  are  to  be  visible  to  men."  "With  this  view,  as  we  have  shown,  men  of  the  highest 
ability  coincide.  We  incorporate  this  idea,  for  the  reasons  already  assigned,  with  its 
figurative  import,  for  as  men  are  urged  on  to  their  final  rebellious  attitude  by  a  firmly 
expressed  trust  in  (he  unalterable  condition  of  nature,  and  openly  avowed  faith  in  "  the 
unalterable  laws  ordaining  ever-enduring  continuance,"  a  reverence  for  (while  ignoring 
the  Creator  and  His  claims)  the  forces  of  "  the  Universnm,"  it  is  but  just  and  reasonable 
that  God -so  despised  and  dishonored— should  give  such  natural  si^ns,  to  bring  their 
trust,  faith,  and  reverence  to  a  tost,  which  will  result,  as  the  sure  Word  testifies,  in  in- 
spiring "  men's  heart's  failing  them  for  fear,  and  for  looking  after  those  things  ichich  are  com- 
ing  mi  the  earth."  They  are  the  precursors  of  terror  and  vengeance  ;  they  will  be  recog- 
nized with  abject  fear  of  coming  evil  and  despair  ;  they  will  be  regarded  by  others  with 
the  hope  of  a  speedy  and  glorious  deliverance. 

:  Some  make  this  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  to  be  a  cross  in  heaven  ;  others,  the  star  of 
the  Messiah  ;  others,  the  Messiah  Himself  ;  others,  the  sign  mentioned  in  preceding 
context  ;  some,  a  luminous  appearance  ;  others,  the  appearance  of  a  man  ;  some,  a 
Shekinah,  or  the  glory  of  Christ  ;  others,  the  cloud  of  light  that  bears  Him  ;  others,  the 
last  plagues  ;  others,  a  sword  shining  forth,  or  falling,  from  heaven  ;  some,  the  transla- 
tion of  the  saints  ;  others,  the  resurrection  body  of  Jesus.  We  cannot  now  determine  ; 
the  day  will  come  when  the  believers  will  recognize  and  exult  in  it. 

8  Men  may  turn  away  from  the  prophetic  picture  thus  drawn,  declaring  it  impossible 
for  human  nature  to  manifest  such  depravity,  especially  in  the  way  of  persecuting  the 
Church.  But  the  spirit  is  in  man,  and  even  now  begins  its  threatenings,  as  is  evidenced 
by  the  bold  language  of  ten  thousand  utterances.     Having  given  (Props.  161-163)  some 


Prop.  174.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  165 

illustrations,  a  few  more  must  suffice.  In  the  Luth.  Observer,  Sep.  15th,  1876,  it  is  stated 
that  "a  correspondent  of  the  Boston  Investigator  proposes  the  enactment  of  a  law,  which 
he  calls  '  An  Act  to  Protect  the  People  from  Religious  Imposition.'  It  makes  it  a  penal 
offence  to  conduct  puhlic  worship,  or  to  preach  the  Gospel  for  a  compensation,  on  the 
ground  that  those  who  do  so  are  obtaining  money  under  false  pretences."  Literally 
multitudes  would  delight — as  their  public  affirmations  show — in  such  enactments.  Take 
Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  the  great  leader  of  the  Spiritualists,  and  such  is  his  language 
(comp.  Review  of  Buslmell,  p.  3,  187,  etc.)  :  "  You  may  be  assured  of  the  truth  of  this 
approaching  crisis.  The  world  must  recognize  it,  because  it  will  be  accompanied  with  war  ; 
for  politics  are  inseparably  connected,  all  over  the  world,  with  religious  systems.  Re- 
ligion will  develop  reason  ;  but  politics  will  impel  the  masses  to  unsheath  the  sword,  and 
to  stain  the  bosom  of  nature  with  blood  /  Friends  of  Progress  !  be  not  discouraged  ;  for  the 
final  crisis  must  come  ;  then  the  strange  interregnum."  He  predicts  political  and  moral 
revolutions  that  shall  overthrow  both  Protestantism  and  Catholicism,  and  then  under 
the  auspices  of  reason,  Spiritualism,  etc.,  "the  children  of  earth  will  then  be  compar- 
atively free  and  happy  !  for  the  Millennial  epoch  will  have  arrived  !"  Alas  !  the  vanity  of 
human  predictions,  and  "  the  snare"  and  "  the  pit"  they  form  for  multitudes  ! 

Obs.  5.  Here  then  are  the  main,  leading  signs  which  precede  the  Com- 
ing Kingdom  of  God  ;  those  that  pertain  to  the  first  stage  of  the  Advent 
and  its  preliminary  ordering  at  Mt.  Sinai,  and  then  those  that  relate  to  the 
open  manifestation  of  the  King  at  Jerusalem  and  the  re-establishment  of 
the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  embracing  also  the  conversion  and 
restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation.  These  are  the  warnings  that  the  Spirit 
has  given,  but  however  earnestly  and  faithfully  presented  by  any  one,  they 
are  unheeded  by  the  multitude,  like  the  warning  of  Lot  or  the  preaching 
of  Noah,  and  to  many  the  believer  in  them  ((Jen.  19  :  14)  "  seems  as  one 
that  mocked."  Excuses  abundantly  suggest  themselves  why  they  should 
not  be  regarded,  but  childlike  Ahrahamic  faith  sees  in  them  the  strongest- 
possible  motives  for  increased,  constant  watchfulness.  When  not  only  the 
signs  preliminary  to  the  Coming  of  the  saints  are  here,  but  when  even 
these  throw  their  shadows  forward  into  the  fearful  interval  between  the 
first  and  second  stages,  then  indeed  is  it  inexcusable  to  be  faithless. 
When,  e.g.  rejecters  of  the  Divine  Plan  of  Redemption,  under  the  teach- 
ing of  professed  spirits  of  the  dead,  give  us  another  sustained  by  "  signs 
and  wonders  "  ;  when  this  is  a  spirit  largely  at  work  in  various  bodies  (i.e. 
professing  wonder-working  power,  revived  again  ;  also  e.g.  in  Roman 
Catholicism,  Mormonism,  etc.)  ;  and  when  this  is  associated  with  a  pre- 
vailing Naturalistic  tendency,  we  can  readily  see  the  elements  already 
existing  and  moulding  men's  minds  and  hearts  for  the  wonder-working 
period  still  future.  When  a  time  of  abounding  demon  worship,  of  idol- 
atry, and  of  corresponding  corruption,  is  surely  coming,  and  if  we  are 
indeed  nearing  it,  then  the  things  specified  are  precisely  those  which  ought 
to  appear.  They  are  present  ;  growing  too  by  the  fostering  care  of  many 
able  minds  into  a  fruitage,  such  as  the  Omniscient  Spirit  has  portrayed. 
It  is  simply  folly  to  close  our  eyes  to  existing  facts  ;  and  the  denial  of 
them  does  not  lessen  the  danger,  but  may  greatly  mislead  ourselves  and 
others.  The  sign  that  the  signs  themselves  will  be  neglected  is  a  sad  one, 
and  will  not  be  overlooked  by  the  wise.  Calvin's  remark  on  Luke  18:8 
ever  remains  true  :  "  Christ  expressly  foretells  that,  from  His  ascension  to 
Heaven  till  His  return,  unbelievers  will  abound  ;  meaning  by  these  words 
that  if  the  Redeemer  does  not  speedily  appear,  the  blame  of  the  delay  will 
attach  to  men,  because  there  will  be  almost  none  to  look  for  Him.  Would 
that  we  did  not  behold  so  manifest  a  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  !"  A 
positive  denial  of  His  Coming  is  pronounced  (2  Pet.  3  :  IT)  to  be  "the 


166  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

error  of  the  wicked;"  ■while  a  refusal  to  watch  for  His  Coming  or  the 
declaration  that  "my  Lord  delay  eth  His  Comi  ng"  to  say  the  least,  is  a 
violation  of  enjoined  duty.  Esteemed  men  of  ability  and  usefulness,  are 
certainly  assuming  grave  responsibility  in  this  matter,  when  in  books,  etc., 
they  teach  that  Christ's  Advent  is  not  to  be  watched  for  as  He  commanded, 
but  that  it  is  still  postponed  for  many,  many  long  centuries,  and  that, 
instead  of  incoming  wrath  and  tribulation,  the  Church  is  to  anticipate 
triumph  and  continued  progress.  The  signs  given  for  faith  do  not  startle 
them  ;  the  position  assigned  for  watching  does  not  move  them  (for  they 
conveniently  substitute  death  or  Providence,  etc.)  ;  the  announcement  of  a 
sudden,  unexpected  Coming  upon  a  faithless  Church  does  not  affect  them  ; 
what  then  will  arouse  them?  The  event  itself  secretly  occurring,  and  mak- 
ing itself  known  and  felt  by  the  removal  here  and  there  of  a  small  minority 
of  watching  ones  !  That,  that  will  so  startle,  move,  and  deeply  affect  them 
that  they  will  proclaim,  with  mighty  energy,  the  long  neglected  signs  con- 
nected with  a  Second  Advent.  Brethren  must  not  censure  us  for  plain 
writing  ;  with  such  views,  impressed  by  a  sense  of  duty  and  responsibility, 
it  would  be  a  violation  of  them  not  thus  to  express  them.  A  deep 
interest  in  the  welfare  of  others,  and  a  sincere  desire  to  promote  the  happi- 
ness of  our  brethren,  influences  us  to  write  these  things.  Allow  that  we 
are  mistaken  ;  yet  a  consideration  of  honesty  upon  our  part  in  giving  what 
we  hold  to  be  truth,  will  prevent  the  honest  from  getting  angry  at  our 
words.  We  gratefully  acknowledge  their  intelligence,  piety,  and  useful- 
ness, and  it  only  grieves  us  the  more  that  so  much  thai  is  excellent  should 
be  weighted  against  some  of  the  plainest  truths  in  the  Bible.  A  surprising 
feature  connected  with  these  signs,  and  precisely  that  which  ought  to 
exist  provided  the  injunction  of  constant  watching  is  to  be  observed,  is, 
that  they  all  previous  to  the  first  stage,  are  of  a  nature  observable  from  the 
early  Church  down  to  the  present  day.  It  is,  therefore,  doing  injustice  to 
believers  in  the  past  to  say,  that  they  were  credulous  and  foolish  to  look 
for  the  Advent,  seeing  that  they  were  mistaken,  etc.  ;  on  the  contrary,  it 
evinces  their  faith  in  God's  Word  and  their  conscientiousness  in  oc- 
cupving  the  commanded  position  when  beholding  the  signs  existing  around 
them  they  believed,  thus  showing  love  and  desire  for  "  the  blessed  hope," 
etc.  Let  them  indeed  be  mistaken  in  their  apprehension  of  its  nearness, 
yet  the  observance  of  such  faith,  the  practical  results  attained  by  it,  the 
honoring  of  Christ  evinced  by  it,  the  hope  and  prayer  elicited  by  it,  etc., 
will  not — as  little  as  the  cup  of  water — fail  in  its  reward  at  the  Revela- 
tion of  Jesus.  The  shortness  of  time  in  the  Spirit's  comprehension,  is 
indeed  brief  ;  these  preparatory  dispensations,  when  compared  with  the 
eternal  ages  that  follow,  are  but  of  short  duration  ;  and  since  these 
utterances  were  given,  and  these  worthies  thus  believed,  the  length  of  this 
dispensation  has  been  so  materially  shortened  that  prude?ice  alone  dictates, 
aside  from  other  considerations  pressed,  the  faith,  hopes  and  longings 
inspired  by  these  signs — thus  constantly  augmenting,  accumulating,  and 
becoming  more  and  more  distinctive — as  ever  presented  by  godly  men  who 
"  love  the  appearing."  Better,  a  thousand  times  better,  be  mistaken  as 
to  time,  than  to  ignore  those  signs  and  be  caught  faithless,  unobservant, 
and  worthy  of  rebuke. 

While  Millenarianism  is  something  very  different  from  Millerism,  it  has  often  oc- 
curred to  the  writer  that  it  would  even  be  far  preferable  to  occupy  Miller's  position,  mis- 
taken as  it  was  in  reference  to  time,  to  the  Millennial  age,  etc.,  than  to  be  indifferent  as 


PKOP.  174.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  167 

multitudes  of  professing  Christians  are,  both  to  the  signs  and  the  Advent.  Mr.  Miller 
at  least  honored  Christ's  Word,  and  however  mistaken  in  particulars  (which  his  followers, 
we  are  told,  pressed  beyond  his  more  prudent  opinions)  yet  the  principle  involved  of 
watching  for  Christ's  Advent  is  a  just  one,  eminently  scriptural,  and  will  redound,  if 
not  now,  in  the  age  to  come,  to  his  honor.  The  same  is  true  of  others  ;  for  while  unable 
to  accept  of  their  particularizing,  or  of  their  prophetical  schemes  in  the  order  laid  down 
by  them,  yet  the  evident  love  and  desire  for  "  the  appearing"  which  prompted  their 
labors,  the  urgency  of  entreaty  and  warning  to  occupy  the  biblical  position  of  watching 
servants,  has  so  commended  them  to  us,  with  all  their  faults,  that  we  must  highly  esteem 
them  as  brethren  beloved.  If  there  is  any  force  in  the  scriptural  cautions  and  injunctions 
upon  this  point,  we  must  believe,  provided  true  Christian  character  is  maintained 
therewith,  such  will  stand  immensely  higher  and  nearer  to  the  King  than  many,  now 
leaders  in  the  Church,  who  take  a  pleasure  to  show  off  their  wit  and  sarcasm  at  others' 
expense.  The  reviling,  scorning,  deriding,  sneering,  etc.,  will  in  either  case  meet  with 
its  due  reward.  God  is  the  Judge,  and  not  man  ;  whoever  honored  His  Word — feebly, 
brokenly  it  may  be — will  be  honored  by  Him. 

Obs.  6.  It  is  to  us,  whatever  it  may  prove  to  others,  cheering  evidence 
of  the  inspiration  of  the  Word  that  it  is  so  formed,  that,  instead  of  giving 
positive  certainty  as  to  time,  it  points  us  to  signs  which  are  calculated, 
eminently  so  by  reason  of  a  continuous  fulfilment,  to  impress  and  lead  us, 
if  only  considered,  to  watch.  This  indefinite  and  yet  sign  impressing 
imminency  is  to  us  decided  proof  of  the  Divine  wisdom  ;  man  could  not 
— as  man's  failures  and  man's  precipitancy  evidence — have  so  presented  the 
matter  as  to  cause  every  succeeding  age  to  respond  more  or  less  to  the 
practically  intended  result,  viz.  to  preserve,  in  view  of  a  constantly 
recurring  contingency  indicated  by  constantly  recurring  witnessed  signs,  a 
constant  state  of  vigilance.  In  conclusion  :  let  the  frequency  with  which 
the  Spirit  presents  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  the  signs  preceding  and  connected 
with  it,  be  regarded  ;  let  the  mighty  issues  related  with  the  same  bearing 
heavily  upon  the  individual  believer  (in  cautions  respecting  personal  respon- 
sibility in  watching),  the  Church  (multitudes  in  it  being  taken  unprepared 
and  unobservant  of  Divine  direction)  and  the  world  (scoffing  at  the  whole 
subject)  be  contemplated  ;  let  the  happiness  and  reward  of  the  wratching 
servant,  and  the  rebuke  and  loss  of  the  unvigilant  be  pondered  ;  and  surely 
we  are  not  wrong  in  thus  urging  all  to  occupy  this  believing  position.  If 
the  Word  makes  it  so  prominent  and  important  ;  if  so  much  that  is  desir- 
able is  identified  with  it ;  if  the  neglect  of  it  is  both  an  act  of  disobedi- 
ence and  dangerous  ;  if  a  completeness  of  Christian  attitude  and  character 
requires  it ;  surely  we  cannot  make  it  less  prominent  and  desirable.  Here 
then  is  our  apology,  if  in  the  estimation  of  any  one  an  excuse  is  needed,  for 
holding  forth  upon  these  scriptural  topics,  and  urging  the  warnings  given 
by  Christ  and  the  apostles. 

Again  we  urge  professors  of  religion,  believers  in  the  Bible,  to  consider  that,  if  their 
affections  are  really  fixed  on  Christ — if  He  is  all  in  all — this  subject  instead  of  being  un- 
welcome ought,  in  virtue  of  their  profession  ami  love,  to  be  intensely  interesting  and  de- 
sirable. This  looking  for  the  Advent,  expressive  of  faith,  hope,  love,  and  obedience,  is 
described  as  the  crowning  excellence  of  God's  gifts  in  1  Cor.  1  :  7  "  so  that  ye  come  behind 
in  no  gift,  waiting  for  the  Coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (thus  confirming  "  the  testimony 
of  Jesus"  Rev.  1  :  3).  On  this  passage  Olshausen  appropriately  remarks  :  "  The  expec- 
tation of  Christ's  Coming  is  a  testimony  of  inward  spiritual  life,  and  one  of  the  fruits  of 
faith  ;  for  this  '  waiting'  (Rom.  8  :  9)  is  not  a  dry  historical  assertion  of  the  fact  that  the 
Lord  will  return  again  one  day,  but  the  expression  of  an  earnest  desire  for  it,  which  is 
not  to  be  conceived  without  love,  faith,  and  hope,  1  Cor.  13  :  13."  Barnes  loci,  says  : 
"An  earnest  wish  to  see  Him,  and  a  confident  expectation  and  firm  belief  that  He  will 
return,  is  an  evidence  of  a  high  state  of  piety.  It  demands  strong  faith,  and  it  will  do 
much  to  elevate  the  feelings  above  the  world,  and  to  keep  the  mind  in  a  state  of  peace." 


168  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  174. 

(Comp.  Prop.  182  and  183.)  Dr.  Seiss  (the  Apoc,  p.  35)  alluding  to  the  "  peculiar 
efficacy  and  power  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  speedy  return,"  adds:  "It  is  the  most 
animating  and  most  sanctifying  subject  in  the  Bible.  It  is  the  soul's  serenest  light  amid 
the  darkness  and  trials  of  earth,"  etc. 

Obs.  7.  We  again  insist  that,  for  the  reasons  already  fully  assigned,  we 
should  occupy  the  commanded  posture  of  expectancy,  and  allow  no  event  to 
intervene  between  us  and  the  Advent.  As  Calvin  declares  in  1  Pet.  4:7: 
"  Moreover,  it  must  be  laid  down  as  a  first  principle,  that  ever  since  the 
appearing  of  Christ,  there  is  nothing  left  to  the  faithful,  but  with  wakeful 
minds  to  be  always  intent  on  His  Sec.  Advent. "  The  signs  are  all  present 
—  not  one  is  omitted — and  it  becomes  us,  as  believers,  to  recognize  the  fact, 
and  correspondingly,  look,  watch,  and  pray. 

"We,  therefore,  regard  it  as  both  unscriptural  and  misleading  to  intervene  a  number 
of  events  between  the  present  and  the  Advent.  Able  writers,  a  large  number,  are  en- 
gaged in  this  work,  especially  insisting  upon  a  restoration  of  the  Jews,  etc.,  as  prelimi- 
nary, overlooking  how  //<<'  interval  embraces  much  that  they  locate  before  the  thief-like 
Coming.  Some  works  have  chapters  entitled  "  Events  that  must  Precede  the  Second 
Advent,"  and  periodicals  have  articles  on  the  same,  and  yet  urge  to  a  constant  watching 
for  the  Advent  as  immediate  when  they  give  a  series  of  events  which,  at  least,  will  re- 
quire quite  a  number  of  years  to  bring  about.  There  is  some  inconsistency  in  this,  for 
it  may  well  be  queried  how  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  regard  the  Advent  as  possible  at 
any  <\<nj  when  he  has  events  to  occur  previously,  and  which  he  informs  us  "must" 
first  take  jdace.  Our  opponents  (as  Waldegrave  in  New  Test.  Millenarianism,  Lect. 
6)  positively  assert  that  the  Advent  cannot  be  imminent,  because  certain  events 
(such  e.g.  as  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  as  a  witness,  a  partial  restoration  of 
the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  antichristian  hosts  meeting  at  Armageddom)  must  first 
be  witnessed.  So  Wild  [The  Lost  Ten  Tribes,  p.  57)  kanq:>ered  by  his  peculiar  wild 
theory,  and  looking  for  events  based  upon  it,  to  precede  the  Sec.  Advent  says  :  "  It 
is,  therefore,  unwise  on  the  part  of  any  person  to  claim  that  Christ  may  come  any 
day,  and  that  his  Millennial  reign  may  be  begun  at  any  moment."  The  signs  that 
he  enumerates  are  precisely  those  which  are  to  be  realized  driring  the  interval  and 
the  Mill.  age.  (It  is  only  necessary  to  say  that  Wild  reproduces  in  England,  the  out- 
rageous theories  of  some  Americans  (Berg  and  others),  only  changing  the  nomenclature. 
Thus  e.g.  Berg  and  others  make  the  Stone  of  Dan.  2  to  be  the  United  States,  while  Wild 
makes  it  to  be  England  (!),  the  two  feet  of  the  image  being  France  and  Spain  (!)  upon 
which  feet  England  fell  and  pounded  them  ( !),  and  will  smite  the  whole  image  whose 
head  now  is  Russia  (!),  after  which  England  will  remove  her  royal  residence  and  throne 
to  Jerusalem  (!).  It  is  a  matter  of  amazement  that  such  writers  have  a  following.).  Dr. 
Brown  [Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  p.  50)  intervenes  certain  events,  and  then  objects  to  "the 
impossibility  of  watching  for  Christ's  Coming  on  the  common  view  of  it,  or  rather 
on  any  view  of  it,  which  does  not  admit  of  our  expecting  it  at  almost  any  mo- 
ment," and  thinks  that  he  watches  for  the  Sec.  Advent  when  he  discards  all  chron- 
ology, interposes  a  long  series  of  events,  and  makes  even  the  Milliage  to  intervene,  and 
simply  allows  faith  and  hope  to  hold  it  as  near.  But  how  this  juxtaposition  is  brought 
about,  he  does  not  inform  us,  and  shelters  himself  by  quoting  men  who  did  not  hold  his 
(the  Whitbyan)  view,  but  the  Augustinian  theory.  Alas!  many  such  writers  could  be 
quoted.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  gratifying  to  find  so  many  who,  discerning  the  indefi- 
niteness  as  to  time,  or  the  stages  and  interval,  occupy  the  scriptural  position,  and  urge  it. 
Dr.  Kellogg,  in  a  paper  presented  to  the  Convention  in  Dr.  Tyng's  church,  in  New  York, 
quotes  Archb.  Trench  [On  the  Parables)  as  saying  :  "  It  is  a  necessary  element  of  the 
doctrine  concerning  the  Sec.  Coming  of  Christ,  that  it  should  be  possible  at  any  time,  that 
no  generation  of  believers  should  regard  it  as  impossible  in  theirs,"  and  then,  after 
urging  the  scriptural  attitude  of  constant  watching,  the  Dr.  adils  :  "  Inasmuch,  there- 
fore, as  no  candid  person  will  deny  that  the  Lord  does  command  His  disciples  in  all  ages 
to  watch  for  His  Coming,  it  follows  irresistibly  that  the  Lord  intended  that  we  should 
think  of  His  Advent  as  always  possible,  and  forbids  us  to  interpose  any  such  fixed  period  of 
time  between  us  and  His  Coming,  as  shall  make  it  impossible  for  us  to  believe  that  He 
may  come  in  our  day."  Dr.  Brookes  (the  Truth,  vol.  4,  p.  117)  quotes  Trench  as  above, 
and  then  adds  these  two  :  Augustine  saying  :  "  The  last  day  is  unknown,  that  every  day, 
may  be  observed,"  and  the  Westminster  Confession  :  "  So  will  He  have  that  day  unknown 


Prop.  174.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  169 

to  men,  that  they  may  shake  off  all  carnal  security,  and  be  always  watchful,  because  they 
know  not  at  what  hour  the  Lord  will  come;  and  may  be  ever  prepared  to  say,  Gome, 
Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly,  Amen."  (Compare  Brookes's  Maranaiha.)  So  Dr.  Wood  (Last 
Things),  in  answer  to  the  question  whether  any  events  are  to  intervene  previous  to  the 
Lord's  Coming  remarks  :  "  It  is  enough  to  say  that  while  it  seems  to  me  that  there  may 
be  some  things  to  be  done  before  Antichrist  shall  be  destroyed,  and,  therefore,  before 
the  Millennium  shall  actually  commence,  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  that  there  is 
one  event  of  which  we  can  say  with  certainty  that  it  must  precede  the  ajjpearing  of  the  sign 
of  the  Son  of  Man  in  heaven,  and  the  gathering  of  His  saints  to  meet  Him  in  the  air. 
This  is  the  result  of  long  and  patient  inquiry  on  my  part,  and  not  merely  the  rash  lan- 
guage of  a  moment  of  excitement.  Most  sincerely  do  I  wish  I  could  live  more  constantly 
under  the  influence  of  this  conviction,  and  that  all  my  brethren  were  partakers  along 
with  me  of  the  '  Strong  Consolation'  it  affords."  (Comp.  the  decisive  language  of  Dr. 
Seiss,  Prnph.  Times,  New  Ser.  1875,  vol.  1,  p.  53-5,  and  in  Last  Times  and  Apoc.  ;  Spur- 
geon's  declaration  that  the  Advent  may  occur  at  any  time,  Proph.  Times,  vol.  4,  p.  74, 
etc.).  It  is  sufficient  to  point  out  that  the  State  Prophetical  Convention  at  New  York, 
took  this  decided  position,  when  it  adopted  the  following  resolution  :  "  This  Second  Com- 
ing of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  everywhere  in  the  Scriptures  represented  as  imminent,  and  may 
occur  at  any  moment  ;  yet  the  precise  day  and  hour  thereof  is  unknown  to  man  and  known 
only  to  God."  We  hold  to  Cunninghame's  position  (  Visions,  p.  100)  :  "If  we,  who 
have  watched  every  sign  in  the  spiritual  horizon  for  a  long  series  of  years,  were  now 
asked,' 'Is  any  sign  of  His  Coming,  yet  accomplished  ?' we  should  be  constrained  to 
answer,  '  To  our  view,  not  one  sign  remai?is  unaccomplished.'  If  we  were  further  asked, 
'  Shall  He  come  this  year '?'  our  answer  would  be,  '  We  know  not  ;  but  this  much  we 
know  and  believe,  that  He  is  at  hand,  even  at  the  door'  "  Numerous  such  testimonies 
might  be  given,  and,  for  the  truth's  sake,  we  are  glad  that  they  are  presented. 

Obs.  8.  The  commanded  position  of  constant  watching  given  by  Jesus 
and  the  apostles,  throws  light  on  the  reason  why  we  have  the  extraordinary 
omission  of  a  directory  or  form  of  Church  government.  Such  an  avoidance 
is  intentional,  because  it  alone  accords  with  the  spirit  of  looking  for  the 
Saviour's  speedy  return,  and  the  proof  is  found  in  the  historical  fact 
(Props.  76  and  77),  that  just  so  soon  as  men  devised  codes  and  forms  of 
government — aside  from  the  few  simple  directions  given  for  guidance — 
then,  in  view  of  the  idea  of  permanency  entailed,  the  looking  and  watching 
for  the  Advent  was  relaxed,  and  finally  almost  ignored. 

Our  position  in  reference  to  the  signs  vindicates  the  attitude  of  the  Primitive  Church. 
Now  men  sneeringly  point  to  the  early  Church,  and  scoffingly  tell  us  that  that  Church, 
under  the  teaching  of  inspired  apostles  and  their  immediate  successors,  was  utterly 
mistaken  and  too  credulous,  evincing  an  erroneous  belief.  But  we  hold,  that  simple 
consistency  demanded  the  faith  expressed  by  them,  because  the  Advent  (as  we  have 
shown)  is  not  limited  by  any  chronological  period  ;  the  signs  predicted  to  precede  such 
an  Advent  were  witnessed  even  in  their  day,  and  the  culminated  Antichrist  is  only  re- 
vealed between  the  two  stages  of  the  Sec.  Advent.  Hence  their  attitude  was  scriptural 
and  demanded  by  the  times.  Even  the  sign  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  least 
visible,  viz.,  the  extension  of  the  Gospel,  was  sufficiently  manifested  to  excite  the 
spirit  of  watching.  Thus  e.g.  let  any  one  ponder  the  statements  of  Col.  1  :  6,  23  ;  Rom. 
10  :  18  ;  Acts  2  :  9-11,  and  1  Pet.  1  :  1,  and  they  meet  the  conditions  of  witnessing. 
The  same  language  was  continued  by  Justin  Martyr  :  "  There  is  no  people,  whether 
Greek  or  Barbarian,  among  whom  prayers  and  thanksgiving  are  not  offered  to  the  Father 
and  Creator  of  the  world  in  the  name  of  Christ  crucified  ;"  so  Irenasus  speaks  of  the 
Church  extending  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  even  to  Libya,  Egypt,  among  the  Celts, 
Iberians  and  Germans  ;  so  Tertullian  :  "  Even  all  the  boundaries  of  the  Spaniards, 
and  the  different  nations  of  the  Gauls,  and  those  parts  of  Britain  which  were  inaccessible 
to  the  Romans  are  become  subject  to  Christ,"  or  "  Everywhere  are  to  be  found  the  disci- 
ples of  the  Crucified — among  the  Parthians  and  Medes,  the  Elamites  and  Mesopotamians, 
in  Armenia  and  Phrygia,  Cappadocia  and  Pontus,  Asia  Minor,  Egypt  and  Cyrene, 
mingled  with  the  various  tribes  of  the  Getuli  and  Moors,  in  Gaul  and  Spain,  and  Brit- 
ain and  Germany  ;"  so  also  Origen,  referring  to  Ezekiel  says  :  "  When,  before  the 
Advent  of  Christ,  did  the  land  of  Britain  agree  in  the  worship  of  one  God  ?    But  now, 


170  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  174. 

on  account  of  the  churches  which  are  spread  to  the  uttermost  bounds  of  the  world,  the 
whole  earth  invokes  the  God  of  Israel."  Thus  individuals,  in  every  part  of  the  world, 
are  represented  as  testifying  ;  the  Gospel  was  extensively  circulated,  so  that  even  this 
sign  was  not  lacking,  but  stood  forth  with  great  prominency  and  lustre.  How  can  any 
one,  therefore,  censure  them  for  their  expressed  faith  and  hope  ? 

Obs.  9.  These  signs,  so  saddening  because  of  the  evil  unfolding,  should 
not  unduly  depress  the  believer.  They  should  rather  confirm  his  faith, 
urge  to  increased  watching  and  prayer,  influence  to  a  firm  and  vigilant 
occupying  until  He  comes,  and  fill  him  with  renewed  hope  and  love  at  the 
speedy  Coming  of  the  Beloved  One.  Yea,  as  the  Master  declared  (Luke 
5il  :  28)  we  should  "lookup  and  lift  up  our  heads, for  our  redemption 
draweth  high."  For  these  purposes  they  are  given,  and  hence  a  practical 
application  of  them  to  heart  and  life  is  designed,  and  not  a  mere  theoretical 
acquiescence  without  a  corresponding  influence. 

Dr.  Seiss  (ImsI  Times,  p.  299),  beautifully  and  forcibly  says:  "God's  method  of 
progress  is  to  make  darkness  the  way  to  light,  death  the  prelude  to  life,  despair  the 
introduction  to  salvation,  and  corruption  and  confusion  the  road  to  order  and  glory.  It 
is  not  in  what  seems  hopeful,  but  in  what  seems  gloomy  and  untoward,  that  we  are  to 
look  for  the  signs  of  the  speedy  forthcoming  of  God's  wonder-working  goodness.  It  is  the 
stirring  upon  the  face  of  the  dark  waters  that  gives  prognostic  of  the  breaking  forth  of 
light,  life,  and  beauty.  The  bursting  glories  of  spring  come  directly  out  of  the  bleak 
winter.  It  is  from  the  corrupting  seed  that  we  obtain  the  harvest.  The  darkest  hour  is 
said  to  be  that  which  immediately  precedes  the  day.  The  period  most  hopeful  is  that 
when  the  apparent  motives  for  despondency  are  most  overwhelming.  The  stress  of  the 
controversy  between  hope  and  fear  always  falls  upon  the  eve  of  triumph.  Those  dim 
hours  of  dismay  to  the  scattered  followers  of  Christ  at  His  Crucifixion,  were  but  the 
preludes  to  the  bringing  in  of  light  and  immortality  for  man.  The  bloody  persecutions 
under  the  Roman  Emperors  which  threatened  the  extinction  of  Christianity,  were  the 
immediate  precursors  of  its  victory  over  even  the  throne  of  the  Caesars.  And  so  the 
Scriptures  teach  that  it  will  be  in  the  ushering  in  of  the  great  consummation.  The  sun 
must  darken,  and  the  moon  withhold  her  light,  and  then  shall  the  Sun  of  righteousness 
arise  with  healing  in  His  wings."  So  Brookes  {Lects.  during  Lent,  p.  152)  remarks: 
"  Though  I  distinguished  only  some  few  signs  as  in  themselves  cheering,  yet  when  con- 
sidered as  the  tokens  of  our  Lord's  approach,  all  are  cheering  :  therefore  He  bids  us,  as 
in  the  text,  'when  we  shall  see  these  things  only  begin  to  come  to  pass,  to  lift  up  our 
heads  because  our  redemption  draweth  nigh.'  And  if  the  beginnings  of  these  things  are 
calculated  to  inspire  us  with  hope  and  joy,  how  much  more  their  fulness !  Yes  those 
things  which  are  dark  and  appalling  to  the  world — like  the  pillar  and  the  cloud — will  be 
as  light  and  brightness  to  the  saints  ;  who,  when  all  is  roaring  and  raging  and  upheaving 
round  about  them,  shall  be  ardently  waiting  for,  but  most  surely  expecting,  and  in  the 
midst  of  it  obtaining,  deliverance  from  corruption,  into  the  glorious— glorious  liberty  of 
the  children  of  God."  We  are  sometimes  censured  as  taking  too  gloomy  a  view  of  the 
world  existing,  and  that  we  entertain  "  no  love  for  the  world."  Our  apology  is,  that 
we  receive,  embrace,  and  defend  the  view  thai  the  Spirit  gins  of  the  present  and  future, 
and  that  it  is  true,  that  we  strive  to  set  " our  affections  on  things  above  and  not  on  things 
qfihe  world,"  well  knowing  that  "  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in 
him,"  1  John  2  :  15. 


PEOP.  175.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  171 


Peopositiox  175.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  is  greatly  ob- 
scured and  perverted  by  the  prevailing  one  of  the  conversion 
of  the  world  prior  to  the  Advent  of  Jesus. 

The  Whitby  an  theory  of  the  conversion  of  the  world  previous  to 
the  Second  Advent  is,  probably,  in  the  minds  of  many  the  chief 
obstacle  to  the  reception  of  our  doctrine.  It  may,  therefore,  form 
the  subject  of  additional  remarks. 

Obs.l.  Those  who  hold  that  the  Church,  being  the  covenanted  King- 
dom, is  to  extend  itself  until  it  embraces  within  its  fold  all  nations,  ought 
to  be  able  to  explain  how  it  conies  that  none  of  the  churches  founded  by  the 
apostles  and  their  immediate  successors  believed  in  such  a  conversion  of  the 
world.  Surely  if  a  scriptural  doctrine,  it  ought  at  that  time,  and  under 
such  auspices,  to  have  been,  by  way  of  encouragement,  presented.  It  too 
would  have  been  eminently  calculated  to  remove  (see  Prop.  08,  Obs.  3), 
limited  views  of  the  Divine  Purpose.  The  nature  of  the  Kingdom  believed 
in,  their  belief  in  a  speedy  Advent,  their  doctrinal  position,  positively  for- 
bid the  entertaining  of  the  opinion  that  the  world  is  to  be  converted  prior 
to  the  Advent  (see  e.g.  Prop.  73).  "  The  vivid  hope  of  the  speedy  return 
of  Christ  to  the  earth  of  the  first  Christians"  (so  Schlegel,  Philos.  His., 
Lee.  10),  alone  prevented  such  a  doctrine  from  being  received  (see  Props. 
74  and  75).  When  a  change  was  gradually  introduced  (Props.  70  and  77), 
and  the  Origenistic  theory  was  advocated  by  which  a  triumph  of  the  Church 
was  predicted  running  almost  parallel  with  the  dispensation,  Xeander  tells 
us  (His.  Gh.,  vol.  1,  p.  120),  "  such  an  anticipation  was  foreign  to  the 
thoughts  of  the  older  teachers  of  the  Church.  They  could  conceive  of  the 
Pagan  state  in  no  other  relation  than  one  of  constant  hostility  to  Chris- 
tianity, and  expected  the  triumph  of  the  Church  only  as  the  result  of  a  super- 
natural interposition  at  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ.' "  It  is  not  necessary 
to  detain  ourselves  on  a  point  so  universally  conceded,  viz.,  that  the  Apos- 
tolical and  Primitive  Fathers  only  looked  for  Millennial  blessedness  through 
the  Second  Advent  of  Jesus.  Their  utterances  of  "  the  last  times"  (Igna- 
tius) of  evil,  of  an  "  unrighteous  age"  (Lactantius)  to  give  place  to  "  a  Sab- 
bath" only  at  the  Advent,  etc.,  and  the  expressed  hope  of  deliverance,  etc., 
for  themselves  and  the  race  at  that  period,  are  too  definite  to  be  denied. 
Neander  (comp.  Prop.  74,  Obs.  2)  hence  {His.  Dog.,  p.  247)  says  :  "In  the 
first  age  the  earnest  gaze  of  the  believers  was  directed  only  to  the  last  Com- 
ing of  Christ,"  and  he  informs  us  that  "  this  anticipation  of  the  end  was, 
perhaps,  necessary  for  that  age."  But  why  should  such  an  "error"  (so 
pronounced)  be  necessary?  Was  not  truth  equally  as  well  adapted  to  the 
early  Christians  as  to  Origen,  or  Augustine,  or  Whitby  ?  Such  a  plea  is 
derogatory  to  the  founders  of  Christianity.  In  another  place  (Prop.  74,  etc.) 
it  has  been  shown  that  the  belief  in  the  Kingdom  which  was  linked  with 


172  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  "175. 

the  Advent  was  the  cause  of  those  ardent  longings  for  the  Advent,  thus 
preserving  due  consistency  between  the  doctrine  entertained  and  the  hope 
expressed.  Their  faith,  however  explained,  shows  how  believers,  instructed 
by  inspired  men,  understood  the  commission  to  preach  the  Gospel,  and 
comprehended  the  covenants  and  prophecies.  But  we  go  a  step  farther 
back,  to  the  Apostles  themselves,  who  did  not,  and  in  the  nature  of  the 
case  could  not,  teach  the  conversion  of  the  world  prior  to  the  Advent.  We 
will  allow  a  scholarly  opponent,  who  would  only  have  been  too  glad  to  avail 
himself  of  a  teaching  in  support  of  his  own  theory  if  it  had  existed,  to  tell 
us  what  the  Apostles  believed  and  taught  on  the  subject.  Neander  (Ad.  to 
His.  Ch.  Church,  vol.  2,  p.  65,  Bohn's  ed.),  after  reiterating  that  the 
Apostles  did  not  look  for  the  conversion  of  the  world,  but  rather  for  the 
Advent  of  Christ  (saying  :  "Every  unprejudiced  reader  of  the  New  Test. 
cannot  fail  to  perceive  that  such  an  expectation  filled  the  souls  of  the  Apos- 
tles"), adds  :  "It  was  not  the  idea  of  a  renovated  time  that  Christianity 
endeavored  to  realize,  but  everything  appeared  only  as  a  point  of  transition 
to  a  neiv,  heavenly,  and  eternal  order  of  things  which  would  commence  at  the 
Second  Advent.''''  '  Schmid  (Bib.  Thcol.  New  Test.,  p.  510)  speaks  of 
Paul' 8  teaching  in  such  a  way  that  the  idea  of  a  conversion  previous  to  the 
Advent  cannot  be  maintained,  for  it  includes  a  constant  conflict  going  on 
between  the  Church  and  the  world  until  it  culminates  in  the  Antichrist 
and  the  Advent.  Thus  numerous  writers.  If  the  reader  will  turn  to 
Propositions  70,  71,  72,  73,  74  and  75,  reasons  are  given  in  detail  for  our 
position  on  this  subject.  With  the  views  of  the  Kingdom  entertained,  the 
manner  of  introduction,  etc.,  it  was  simply  impossible  for  them  to  preach 
a  doctrine  like  the  Whitbyan,  now  so  fashionable  and  prevailing.  In  an 
argument  like  this,  bearing  upon  the  great  burden  of  prophecy,  it  is  no 
small  matter  that  our  doctrine  accords  so  remarkably  and  fully  with  that  of 
the  first  centuries.2 

1  Neander  is  so  admirably  candid  (would  that  all  imitated  him  !)  that  we  cannot  refrain 
from  adding  some  more  extracts.  In  His.  Plant.  Ch.  Church,  vol.  1,  pp.  182-3,  he  frankly 
admits  that  the  apostles  did  not  look  for  the  conversion  of  the  world,  but  exhorted  all  to 
put  their  hope  in  a  personal  Advent  of  Christ  and  that  while  they  anticipated  the  Gospel 
to  be  preached  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  yet  "  they  also  believed  that  the  persecu- 
tions of  the  ruling  power  would  continually  become  more  intense  till  the  Saviour  by  His 
divine  power  should  achieve  the  triumph  of  the  Church  over  all  opposing  power."  He 
thinks  this  "  an  enthusiastic  longing  that  outstripped  the  tedious  development  of  history." 
But  if  Paul  was  wrong  in  believing  that  persecution,  more  or  less,  should  accompany  the 
Church  and  finally  culminate,  and  that  the  Church's  triumph  could  only  thus  be  secured 
— how  areVe  sure  that  he  is  not  wrong  on  other  subjects.  If  a  man  of  apostolic  character, 
under  the  special  training  of  the  Spirit,  called  to  be  "  an  instrument  for  publishing  divine 
truth  in  unsullied  purity"  (Neander)  could  be  mistaken  in  this  respect  and  give  us 
"  error"  (some  friends  kindly  call  it  in  us  "  heresy")  instead  of  truth,  why  should  he  not 
be  in  "  error"  in  other  respects.  This  is  a  dangerous  method  of  dealing  with  the  Word, 
as  is  evidenced  by  the  reasoning  of  unbelief.  We  commend  Neander's  candor  when 
he  comes  to  explain  Paul's  language  to  the  Thessalonians  {Plant.  Ch.  Church,  vol.  1,  p. 
203,  etc. )  in  which  he  acknowledges  that  Paul  does  not  deny,  to  meet  their  expectation 
of  Christ's  immediate  re-appearance,  that  they  were  mistaken  in  their  ideas  that  Christ 
would  thus  come,  set  up  His  Kingdom,  etc.,  but  corrects  their  notion,  respecting  its 
being  so  imminent,  etc.  After  informing  us  with  frankness  how  Paul  tells  them  that 
certain  events  must  intervene  in  the  rise  and  progress  of  evil,  he  adds  :  "  then  wordd 
Christ  appear,  in  order  by  His  victorious  divine  power  to  destroy  the  kingdom  of  evil, 
after  it  had  attained  its  widest  extension,  and  to  consummate  the  Kingdom  of  God." 
With  all  Neander's  greatness  and  attempt  to  excuse  Paul  (on  the  ground  that  he  "  was 
not  aware  that  similar  phenomena"  i.e.  great  conflicts  with  evil — "  must  often  recur  until 
the  arrival  of  the  final  crisis' '),  we  would  raiher  take  Paul's  statement,  simple  as  it  is,  than 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  173 

Meander's,  fortified  by  a  philosophical  development  theory.  Paul's  testimony  is 
divine;  Neander's  is  fallible.  Besides  this:  such  "often"  recurring  "phenomena" 
are  utterly  opposed  to  his  "  leaven"  theory  if  logically  pressed. 

*2  Our  historical  references,  etc.,  show  what  estimate  we  are  to  form  of  the  sweeping 
assertions  of  some  of  our  opponents.  Thus  e.g.  Prof.  Sanborn  (Millenarianism :  An  Essay) 
declares  against  the  indisputable  facts  of  history  :  "  The  Church  of  Christ,  with  great 
unanimity,  in  all  ages,  has  taught  that  the  world  is  to  be  converted  by  '  the  foolishness 
of  preaching, '  accompanied  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven."  This  may 
mislead  the  ignorant,  certainly  not  the  scholar  or  student.  Sometimes  when  reading  such 
statements,  we  scarcely  know  what  to  think  of  those  who  make  them  ;  but  in  charity 
suppose  that  prejudice  blinds  them  to  the  plainest  historical  facts.  On  the  other  hand 
it  is  refreshing  to  find  writers  who  present  the  historical  truth.  Thus  e.g.  Dr.  Fisher  in 
art.  "  Millennium"  (M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  declares  that  the  idea  of  the  con- 
version of  the  world  and  its  subjection  to  the  Church  was  a  great  reason  prompting  to  the 
rejection  and  proscribing  of  our  doctrine.  He  then  informs  us  that  Origen  was  ' '  the  first 
of  the  ancient  ecclesiastical  writers  to  affirm  the  practicability  of  such  a  triumph  of  the 
Gospel  through  its  own  inherent  efficacy."  He  also  adduces  Augustine  as  confirming 
and  establishing  the  opinion  "  that  the  earthly  Kingdom  of  Christ  is  the  Church,  which 
was  even  then  in  the  Millennial  era,  and  on  the  road  to  a  glorious  ascendency  over  all  its 
enemies."  The  Whitbyan  theory  that  the  Millennium  proper  was  still  future  had  not 
then  been  concocted,  for,  by  a  perversion  of  prediction  and  chronology,  the  Church  was 
represented  as  already  realizing  it,  as  we  have  shown  in  the  history  of  the  doctrine. 
The  early  Church,  as  all  history  testifies,  as  our  learned  opponents  candidly  admit,  did 
not  hold  the  views  as  expressed  by  modern  writers,  as  e.g.  in  the  art.  "  Infallibility  of 
the  Bible  and  Recent  Theories  of  Inspiration"  (North  Brit.  Review,  Nov.  1852),  which 
confidently  predicts,  that  "  the  mission  of  the  Bible  is  to  conquer  the  age  and  not  to 
yield  to  it,"  for  it  "  is  going  forth  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  conquering  and  to  conquer," 
etc.;  or  to  the  art.  "  The  Conversion  of  the  World  to  Christ"  (Quarterly  Review,  Ap.  1873) 
which  gives  us  similar  prophecies.  Such  specimens  of  an  abounding  class,  are  directly 
antagonistic  to  the  early  faith  and  hope  of  the  Church  ;  and  the  simple  fact  that  such  an 
opposition  exists  ought  to  lead  the  careful  student  to  reflection,  nothwithstanding  its 
advocacy  by  eminent  and  talented  writers,  lecturers,  etc. 

Obs.  2.  Let  the  reader  carefully  notice  a  feature  (that  is  overlooked  even 
hy  men  of  ability)  which  shows  hoiv  deeply  rooted  some  portions  of  the  early 
Church  doctrine  remained.  However  much  the  Origenistic  and  Augustin- 
ian  views  (which  allied  the  Millennial  predictions  with  this  dispensation, 
commencing  with  the  Advent  of  Christ  or  the  day  of  Pentecost,  etc.)  pre- 
vailed and  the  prophetic  delineations  of  the  Kingdom  in  its  glory  were — 
especially  after  Constantine's  conversion — applied  to  the  Church  as  her 
jiredicted  triumph  and  dominion,1  yet  even  then  the  adherents  of  such 
opinions  never  advocated  such  a  conversion  of  the  world  that  all  evil  would 
cease,  etc.  For  we  find  in  their  writings  the  most  abundant  evidence  that 
they  anticipated  more  or  less  evil  down  to  the  Advent,  the  culmination  of 
Anti-christian  power  before  the  Advent,  etc.,  thus  retaining  in  a  great 
measure  the  early  characteristics.  Even  men  of  eminence,  who  greatly 
assisted  the  development  of  the  Papacy  and  quoted  the  Millennial  proph- 
ecies as  applicable  to  the  existing  Church,  had  no  conception  of  the  Whit- 
Injini  doctrine,  for  even  Gregory  the  Great  (a.d.  590,  Neander's  Mem.  of 
Ch.  Life,  p.  387)  said  :  "As  the  end  of  the  world  approaches,  the  times 
are  full  of  disquiet  and  evil  increases."  The  universal  feeling  of  anxiety, 
etc.,  caused  by  the  partial  rejection  of  the  early  Church  view  and  the  adop- 
tion of  a  spiritualistic  interpretation  of  prophecy,  in  the  year  a.d.  1000  and 
succeeding  dates  (supposed  to  he  the  closing  of  the  Millennium  of  the 
Church)  forms  the  best  evidence  that  a  general  conversion  of  the  world 
prior  to  the  Advent  was  not  adopted.  The  student  needs  no  extracts  from 
this  period  to  verify  the  statement,  seeing  that  the  universal  consternation 
(of  which  historians  speak  at  the  ending  of  the  successive  periods  supposed 


174  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  175. 

to  embrace  a  spiritual  Millennium)  is  abundant  proof.  Even  when  the 
Popish  doctors  settled  down  into  the  conviction  that  the  thousand  years 
was  merely  a  round  indefinite  number  indicative  of  an  indefinite  period 
embracing  this  dispensation  ;  and  when  in  accordance  with  this  opinion 
Millennial  predictions  were  unhesitatingly  adopted  as  descriptive  of  the 
Papacy,  and  the  Popes  with  faithful  adherents  dreamed  of,  and  claimed, 
an  universal  monarchy,  yet  even  then  all  this  was  done  under  the  assump- 
tion— not  that  the  Millennial  state  was  future  but — that  the  Millennial  era 
was  then  existing,  had  existed  from  the  first  Advent,  and  would  exist  down 
to  the  Second  Advent  preceded  by  the  Antichrist.2  Such  views  even  were 
still  greatly  modified  and  restricted  by  the  utterances  given  at  various  times 
by  advocates  of  the  Papacy,  who  claimed  the  nearness  of  the  Advent,  the 
con fi ' mial  wickedness  of  the  world,  and  the  corruption  constantly  manifested 
in  the  Church  itself.  It  would  be  interesting,  although  foreign  to  our 
design,  to  present  the  warnings,  faithful  rebukes,  etc.,  that  came  not  only 
from  the  protesting  Albigenses  and  others,  but  from  even  those  regarded  as 
the  faithful  allies  of  Rome. 

1  Of  which  Dr.  Arnold  {Life  of ,  by  Stanley,  vol.  1,  p.  59,)  remarks  :  "The  pretended 
conversion  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  to  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  in  the  fourth  and  fifth 
centuries,  which  I  look  upon  as  one  of  the  greatest  tours  a"  adresse  that  Satan  ever 
played,  except  his  invention  of  Popery."  Comp.  Mosheim,  Neander,  Kurtz,  etc.,  who 
show  that  this  conversion  to  Christianity  was  largely  nominal,  for  aside  from  the  con- 
tinued corruption  of  the  masses,  the  king  himself  was  not  free  from  indulging  in  law- 
less license.  Leckey,  in  his  His.  Europ.  Morals  points  out  with  evident  relish  that  kings 
and  princes,  converted  from  barbarism,  who  are  regarded  as  famous  fosterers  of  the 
Church,  were  guilty  of  gross  violations,  some  of  them,  most  eminent,  having  (e.g.  vol. 
2,  p.  363)  their  several  wives  and  numerous  concubines.  Comp.  Killen's  Ancient  Church, 
p.  280,  etc. 

2  It  is  a  matter  of  surprise  that  the  old  Popish  view  of  a  past  Millennium  dating  its  rise 
from  the  First  Advent,  or  from  the  day  of  Pentecost,  or  from  the  conversion  of  Constan- 
tino, etc.,  should  be  advocated  by  a  few  Protestants.  By  far  the  strongest  advocate  of 
this  view  is  Prof.  Bush  (Millennium),  but  it  is  very  unsatisfactory  and  most  arbitrary,  call- 
ing for  spiritualizings,  and  for  a  Millennium  still  requiring  martyrs  (owing  to  persecution, 
etc.)  utterly  apposed  to  the  Millennial  predictions.  A  theory  of  the  Kingdom  which 
demands  for  the  sake  of  consistency,  such  a  sacrifice  of  prophecy  to  adapt  the  latter  to 
the  past,  is  most  certainly  defective.  So  plain  is  it,  by  comparing  the  history  of  the 
Church  with  Millennial  prophecy,  that  the  Millennium  has  not  yet  appeared  that  but  few 
venture  to  adopt  such  a  theory — so  repulsive  to  fact — and  the  immense  majority  of  our 
opponents  concede  its  location  in  the  future.  While  some  of  the  Popes,  acutated  by 
ambition  and  desire,  dreamed  that  under  them  and  their  successors  the  world  would  be 
made  subject  to  the  Papacy,  they  held  this  as  a  result  of  present  existing  Millennial 
predictions  being  realized,  and  taught  svith  it  continued  existing  unbelief  to  be  followed 
by  a  season  of  trial,  etc.,  for  the  end  was  always  dreaded.  Any  claim  of  alleged  uni- 
versality, as  e.g.  in  the  Romish  Church  (comp.  Bh.  Newton's  Diss.,  p.  439,)  is  in  itself 
suspicious,  being  the  mark  of  the  Antichrist),  who  shall,  as  prophecy  pi-oclairns,  declare 
a  universality.  The  boast  and  glory  of  universality  is  condemnatory  and  the  result  of 
apostatizing,  because  owing  to  the  predicted  (comparative)  fewness  of  believers  in  con- 
trast with  a  prevalence  of  the  rejection  of  the  true  faith  those  who  eulogize  it  and  make 
it  an  evidence  of  divine  foundation,  those  who  dream  after  it  as  desirable,  only  give  a 
decided  proof  of  a  total  misapprehension  of  the  design  of  this  dispensation. 

Obs.  3.  The  Reformers  and  their  immediate  successors  still  more  or  less 
under  the  influence  of  the  Augustinian  method  of  applying  the  prophecies, 
refused  to  believe  in  a  Millennium  still  future  prior  to  the  Advent  of  Jesus. 
However  contradictory  they  may  have  been  in  some  of  their  expositions  of 
Scripture,  one  thing  is  certain,  from  the  positive  statements  made  and 
opinions  entertained  at  the  close  of  life,  that  they  could  give  no  encourage- 
ment to  a  triumph  and  deliverance  of  the  Church  previous  to  the  Advent 


PltOP.   175.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM*  175 

of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  A  few  references  may  be  in  place.  In  com- 
menting on  John  10  :  11-16  (Walch's  Luther,  vol.  2,  cols.  1082-83)  :  "This 
is  not  true  and  is  really  a  trick  of  the  devil,  that  people  are  led  to  believe 
that  the  whole  world  shall  become  Christian.  It  is  the  devil's  doing,  in 
order  to  darken  sound  doctrine  and  to  prevent  it  from  being  understood. 
.  .  .  Therefore  it  is  not  to  be  admitted,  that  the  whole  world,  and  all  man- 
kind shall  believe  on  Christ ;  for  we  must  continually  bear  the  sacred  cross, 
that*they  are  the  majority  who  persecute  the  saints."  His  belief  in  the 
nearness  of  the  Advent  (Prop.  78),  as  evidenced  in  his  Exp.  of  Dan.  12, 
(comp.  also  Walch's  Luther's  Schriften  22,  col.  21,  Table  Talk,  ch.  2,  etc.), 
and  as  Bengel  noticed  :  "  he  believed  also,  with  many  others,  that  the 
duration  of  the  world  "  (as  at  present  constituted,  see  Prop.  140),  "  from 
its  commencement,  would  be  only  6000  years  ;  and  hence  considered  its  end 
so  near,  that  he  could  see  no  spare  for  a  future  Millennium"  (see  Prop. 
143). '  Calvin  is  also  outspoken,  as  e.g.  Com.  on  Matt.  24  :  30,  "  Then  is 
no  reason,  therefore,  why  any  person  should  expect  the  conversion  of  the 
world,  for  at  length — when  it  shall  be  too  late,  and  will  yield  them  no 
advantage,  they  shall  look  on  Him  whom  they  have  pierced."  So  in  his 
comments  on  Matt.  13  :  24-43  ;  Luke  18:8;  John  15  :  18  ;  1  Tim.  4:1; 
2  Tim.  3  :  1-7  ;  2  Pet.  3  :  3  (quoted  by  Dr.  Seiss  in  A  Question  in  Eschar- 
tology)  and  in  his  Psychophannychia,  p.  55  (quoted  Time  of  the  End,  p.  3), 
Insti.,  B.  3,  ch.  9,  etc.,  we  have  it  distinctly  announced  that  the  Church 
down  to  the  Second  Advent  will  be  a  mingled  body  of  good  and  bad  ;  will 
be  "  burdened  with  the  reprobate  to  the  end  of  the  world  ;"  will  have 
"  unbelievers  to  abound,"  so  that  "  there  will  be  almost  none  to  look  for 
Him;"  will  find  it  "  never  possible  for  its  godly  teachers  to  avoid  the 
hatred  of  the  world  ;"  will  have  reason  to  expect  "  that  as  false  teachers 
formerly  gave  annoyance  to  the  people  of  Israel,  so  they  will  never  cease  to 
disturb  the  Church  ;"  and  "  that  there  will  not  be  even  under  the  Gospel. 
such  a  stale  of  perfection,  that  all  vices  shall  be  banished  and  virtues  of 
every  kind  shall  flourish  ;  and  that,  therefore,  the  pastors  of  the  Christian 
Church  will  have  quite  as  much  to  do  with  wicked  and  ungodly  men  as  the 
prophets  and  godly  priests  had  in  ancient  times"  (adding:  "  this  is  the 
lot  of  the  Church").2  Those  who  desire  individual  testimony  can  find  the 
earnest  and  emphatic  declarations  of  several  hundred  of  the  most  eminent 
men  in  the  Church  from  the  days  of  the  apostles  down  to  the  present,  given 
in  works  specially  devoted  to  the  subject.3  As  an  indication,  all  sufficient, 
of  the  feeling  at  the  Reformation,  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out  the  fact  that 
the  great  leading  Confession  of  Faith,  the  Augsburg  Confession,  positively 
forbids  the  entertainment  of  a  belief  in  the  conversion  of  the  world  prior 
to  the  Second  Advent  (see  Prop.  78,  Obs.  2,  (4),  (b) ).  The  Anabaptists,  as 
evidenced  by  history,  attempted  to  set  up  the  predicted  universal  Kingdom 
of  Christ,  and  the  Seventeenth  Article  of  the  Confession,  specially  designed 
against  them,  "  condemn  those  who  spread  abroad  Jewish  opinions,  that, 
before  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the  godly  shall  occupy  the  kingdom  of 
the  world,  the  wicked  being  everywhere  suppressed  "  (Muller's  Symb.  Books, 
p.  43),  and  in  the  Twenty-third  Article  the  Reformers  evince  no  hope  in  a 
future  Millennium  before  the  Advent  by  stating  that  they  were  then  living 
in  "  the  last  times  and  days  foreshown  in  Holy  Scripture,  in  which  the 
world  is  to  become  ever  more  and  more  degenerate,  and  mankind  more 
sinful  and  weak"  (Midler's  Symb.  Books,  p.  50).  Nothing  need  be  added 
to  such  plain  statements.4 


176  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  175. 

1  See  the  same  views  given  by  Melanchthon,  Knox,  Hntter,  Hunnius,  Quenstedt,  as 
quoted  bv  Dr  Seiss  in  A  question  in  Eschaiology,  pp.  42-47.  Also  Piscator,  Osiander, 
Flavins,  Chrytrreus,  Bullinger,  and  Pareus,  presented  in  Shimeall's  Eschatology.  Also, 
these  and  many  others  given  by  Elliot  Horce  Apoc.  and  Taylor  The  Voice  of  the  Church, 
and  in  The  Time  of  the  End  by  a  Congregationalist.  That  Luther  was  decidedly  opposed 
to  the  idea  of  such  a  conversion,  see  Michelet's  Life  of  Lutlier,  pp.  343-4.  The  Opinion 
of  Luther  as  given  by  the  Theolog.  Faculty  of  the  University  of  Dorpat  to  the  Iowa 
Synod,  etc.  Luther  in  one  or  two  places  seems  to  contradict  himself.  Thus  e.g.  Lisco 
(On  the  Parables,  p.  80)  quotes  Luther's  Exp.  of  the  Mustard  Seed,  as  saying  :  "  By  which 
He  means  to  inform  us  that  the  world  should  be  converted  to  the  faith  in  a  manner 
fitted  to  excite  wonder  and  give  offence,  namely,  through  weakness,  in  opposition  to  all 
power,  wisdom,  righteousness,"  etc.  But  while  opposed  "  it  shall  itself  prevail  at  last 
over  all  Kingdoms,  and  convert  them  to  itself  through  the  mighty  power  of  God." 
Turning  to  his  Exp.  of  the  Leaven  (Lisco,  p.  85,  86,)  he  limits  this  as  follows  :  "  When  the 
Gospel,  as  a  piece  of  new  leaven,  has  once  mixed  itself  with,  the  human  race,  which  is 
the  dough,  it  will  never  cease  till  the  end  of  the  world,  but  will  make  its  way  through 
the  whole  mass  of  those  who  are  to  be  saved,  and  come  to  all  who  are  worthy  of  it,  despite 
of  all  the  gates  of  hell."  Suppose,  however,  this  contradiction  to  exist,  the  student  Mill 
see  the  propriety  of  retaining  those  views  given  in  detail,  and  matured  by  age  and  study, 
and  confessionally  expressed. 

-  Calvin  (according  to  Dr.  Brown  in  his  Reply  to  Seiss's  ''  Question  in  Escha- 
tology,") also  seems  to  be  contradictory,  for  on  Ps.  2  :  8,  he  says  :  "  Who  (Christ)  alone 

subdues  the  world  to  Himself,  and  embraces  all  lands  and  peoples  in  His  power 

so  that  not  one  comes  only,  but  the  whole  earth  is  subject  to  His  sway."  But  by  this 
Calvin  does  not  necessarily  include  the  conversion  of  the  world,  but  only  the  fact — as 
believed  in  by  us — that  Christ  will  ultimately  crush  all  opposition  so  that  all,  both  the 
righteous  ami  wicked  existing  down  to  the  Advent  shall  acknowledge  His  power,  etc.  This 
reconciles  His  statements.  Or,  his  meaning  may  be,  that  the  Divine  Sovereignty  bends 
all,  even  wickedness,  to  subserve  the  Divine  Purpose  in  Christ.  The  views  of  Knox  we 
have  previously  given,  and  need  no  special  mention.  The  declaration  of  the  Westmin- 
ster Confession,  as  quoted  under  Prop.  174,  to  be  constantly  watching  for  the  Advent, 
alone  sustains  our  position. 

3  E.  G.,  Taylor's  Voice  of  the  Church  and  The  Time  of  the  End  by  a  Congregationalist, 
contain  the  protest  of  hundreds  of  witnesses  against  the  prevailing  Whitbyan  theory. 
Ko  Brookes's  El.  cff  Proph.  Inter.,  Bickersteth's  Guide  to  the  Prophecies,  Seiss's  Istst  Times, 
Cox's  MiUenariari s  Answer,  Shimeall's  Eschatology,  A  Reply  to  Prof.  Shedd,  and  various 
other  Millenarian  authors,  contain  a  large  number  of  quotations  from  eminent  men  in  all 
the  various  denominations  against  Whitby's  "New  Hypothesis." 

-1  Rev.  Dr.  Seiss  in  quoting  the  Confession  in  his  able  treatise  A  Question  in  Eschatology 
refers  to  Melanchthon' s  explanations  (Corp.  Ref.  Melanchth.  Op.,  vol.  26,  p.  361,)  and  gives 
along  extract  from  John  Conrad  Goebel's  Exp.  of  the  Augsburg  Confession,  commencing  : 
"  The  idea  of  a  golden  age  in  this  world,  before  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  is  a  mere 
phantasm,  not  only  contrary  to  the  entire  Holy  Scripture,  but  especially  contrary  to  the 
char  and  lucid  prophecies  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His  beloved  apostles,  when  they 
speak  of  the  times  immediately  preceding  the  day  of  judgment,  Matt.  24  :  23  ;  1  Tim. 
4  :  1  ;  2  Tim.  3:1:2  Pet.  3  : 3,  and  other  places,  where  more  may  be  seen  upon  the  sub- 
ject." He  also  refers  to  the  Apology  of  the  Augsburg  Confession  (Miiller's  Symb.  Rooks, 
p.  245),  Articles  of  Sm/ilcald  (.Mailer's  Symb.  Ranks,  p.  298),  and  to  various  other  leading 
confessions,  embracing  the  same  views,  and  thus  giving  no  hope  of  a  Millennial  age  be- 
fore the  Advent.  The  Confessions  were  so  worded  on  this  point  that  both  Millenarians 
and  Anti-Millenarians  could  subscribe  to  them  ;  a  notable  instance  of  which  is  found 
in  the  Westminster  Assembly  Confession,  an  Assembly  largely  composed  of  Millenarians 
(comp.  Props,  on  the  His.  of  our  Doctrine).  In  reference  to  the  Reformers,  we  only  need 
to  give  the  views  of  an  opponent.  Thus  to  show  that  the  Reformers  did  not  look  for  a 
future  conversion  of  the  world,  but  for  the  reverse,  we  have  Barnes  (Com.  Rev.,  ch.  10  : 
6)  saying:  "The  Reformers,  in  interpreting  the  prophecies,  learned  to  connect  the 
downfall  of  the  Papacy  with  the  Coming  of  Christ,  and  with  His  universal  reign  upon 
earth  ;  and  as  they  saw  the  evidences  of  the  approach  of  the  former,  they  naturally 
anticipated  the  latter  as  about  to  occur.  Comp.  Dan.  12  :  11  ;  2  Thess.  2:3;  Dan.  2  : 
34  ;  2  Thess.  2  :  8.  The  anticipation  that  the  Lord  Jesus  was  about  to  come  ;  that  the 
affairs  of  the  world,  in  the  present  form,  were  to  be  wound  up  ;  that  the  reign  of  the 
saints  would  soon  commence  ;  and  that  the  permanent  Kingdom  of  righteousness  would 
be  established,   became  almost  the  current  belief  of   the  Reformers,   and  was  frequently 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  177 

expressed  in  their  writings."  He  instances  Luther,  and  for  proof  refers  to  Merle 
D'Aubig.  vol.  2,  pp.  166,  275  ;  Milner,  pp.  692,  796,  and  then  quotes  Melanchthon,  and 
Bh.  Latimer.  Comp.  also  the  extracts  given  from  Luther  and  Melanchthon  by  Lord  in 
his  Apoc.,  pp.  236-240.  Brookes  (Maranatha,  p.  339)  says  :  "  Page  after  page  might 
be  filled  with  extracts  from  the  writings  of  Luther,  Calvin,  Knox,  and  others,  who 
were  forced  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  foreground  of  the  battle,  showing  how  clearly  they 
saw,  and  how  eagerly  they  embraced  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  personal  Coming,  and  not 
1  the  universal  reception  of  the  true  religion,' as  the  proper  object  of  believing  contempla- 
tion. They  have  grace  given  them  to  bear  testimony  against  the  fanaticism  of  some  who 
believed  in  a  gross  and  sensuous  Millennium,  '  but, '  as  Dr.  Lillie  says,  '  that  they  did, 
at  the  same  time,  generally  and  steadfastly  hold  to  the  ideas  of  a  restored  Israel,  and  a 
renewed  earth,  and,  in  particular,  that  not  one  of  them  ever  allowed  the  modern  notion 
of  an  intervening  Millennium  to  becloud  his  solemn,  earnest  outlook  for  the  Lord's  Sec.  Com- 
ing— so  much  is  perfectly  icell  known  to  all  who  have  a  moderate  acquaintance  with  their  writ- 
bvjs."  We  only  add,  that  such  a  position  is  the  more  honorable  to  them,  because  men, 
owing  to  success  in  their  labors  and  the  increase  of  adhei'ents,  are  apt  to  judge  the  future 
from  their  personal  influence,  etc.,  but  they  swerved  not  from  God's  expressed  judg- 
ment.    (We  refer  to  the  Augsburg  Confession  under  Props.  78,  7,  etc.) 

Obs.  4.  "While  the  opinion  of  such  a  conversion  of  the  world  was 
suggested,  and  at  once  opposed  (as  e.g.  by  Luther,  Calvin,  etc.,  in  preced- 
ing Obs.)  no  writer  of  any  prominence,  or  theologian,  or  commentator, 
appeared  to  advocate  a  Millennium  still  in  the  future  before  the  Advent  of 
Christ,  until  Daniel  Whitby  (an  English  commentator,  born  a.d.  1638, 
dred  172G),  appeared,  unless  we  except  the  dreams  of  aggrandizement 
suggested  by  some  of  the  Jesuits  (see  Prop.  78,  Obs.  19).  Bh.  Henshaw, 
Drs.  Lillie,  Duffield,  Seiss,  and  others,  have  doubted  whether  a  writer  could 
be  found  before  the  time  of  Whitby  who  suggested  such  a  Millennial  period 
still  future  and  prior  to  the  Advent  ;  and  after  years  of  research  on  sub- 
jects pertaining  to  Millenarianism  we  can  find  none  unless  we  except  the 
ravings  of  some  Anabaptists  or  the  schemes  of  some  ardent  followers  of 
Loyola.1  Whitby  himself,  being  no  mean  scholar  but  well  posted  in 
Patristic  learning  and  Church  history,  calls  his  theory  of  a  Millennium 
(spiritual)  still  future  to  be  introduced  by  Gospel  means,  a  "  New  Hypoth- 
esis "  (a  mere  new  supposition),  which  he  could  and  would  not  have  done 
if  such  a  "  hypothesis"  had  previously  been  propounded.  Many  Anti- 
Millenarians  (as  e.g.  Bh.  Russell,  Bis.  on  Mill.,  Archd.  Woodhouse  On  the 
Apoc.,  Prof.  Bush  On  Mill.,  and  others)  have,  while  criticising  the  theory, 
never  called  into  question  Whitby's  clyim  to  newness  of  a  hypothetical 
Millennium.  Now  it  is  this  theory,  adopted  by  able  and  pious  men  (as  e.g. 
Edwards,  Hopkins,  Scott,  D wight,  Jay,  Barnes,  and  many  others),  which 
in  a  short  time,  has  deeply  and  almost  universally  intrenched  itself  in  the 
Church.  Its  advocates  differ  somewhat  among  themselves  as  to  the  means 
and  instrumentalities  by  which  it  is  to  be  ushered  in  (thus  e.g.  some  simply 
advocating  present  means  ;  others,  increased  and  marvellous  outpourings 
of  the  Spirit  ;  others,  some  remarkable  divine  spiritual  interposition  of 
Christ  ;  and  recent  writers,  even  miraculous  and  supernatural  interference), 
but  still  substantially  agree  in  the  outlines  of  the  "  hypothesis."  The  in- 
fluence of  such  a  theory  upon  the  reception  of  our  doctrine  can  be  readily 
seen  ;  for  it  is  hostile  to  it,  being  in  direct  conflict  with  it.  Locating  the 
Kingdom  in  this  dispensation  and  prior  to  the  Advent,  having  no  need,  of  a 
Pre- Millennial  Personal  Coming  of  Jesus,  spiritualizing  the  throne,  the 
Kingdom  and  the  prophecies  pertaining  thereto,  it  conceives,  from  its 
"•  hypothetical  "  Kingdom  thus  spread  over  the  earth,  that  no  such  King- 
dom as  is  covenanted  and  grammatically  expressed  in  the   Word  is  to  be 


178  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.   175. 

established  after  the  Advent  of  Christ.  Such  a  spiritual  fulfilment  of 
prophecy  is  all,  they  think,  that  we  are  to  anticipate,  and  the  early  Church 
belief  on  the  subject  is,  therefore,  discarded  as  "  an  idle  dream,"  or  "  a 
Jewish  fable."  What  the  immediate  followers  and  churches  of  the  Apos- 
tles could  not  possibly  entertain  on  account  of  their  "  Jewish  prejudices," 
and  "  the  materialistic  husk,"  is  at  last  presented  and  elucidated  in 
Whitby's  "  New  Hypothesis."  It  becomes  necessary  consequently  for  the 
sake  of  completeness  in  our  argument  to  notice  the  unscriptural  character 
of  this  theory,  so  productive  of  widespread  unbelief  in  the  doctrines  of 
God's  eternal  Word.2 

1  Some  intelligent  writers  not  observing  the  proper  distinction  between  the  Origenistic 
and  Augustinian  view  and  that  of  Whitby's,  have  called  this  statement  into  question, 
but  no  one  has  yet  succeeded  in  producing  an  author,  acknowledged  by  the  Church,  who 
lived  before  Whitby's  time  who  advocated  what  is  now  known  as  the  Whitbyan  theory. 
A  spiritual  Millennial  theory,  locating  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  either  in  the 
past  or  as  running  in  connection  with  the  dispensation  is  something  very  different 
from  one  like  Whitby's,  which  locates  the  realization  in  the  future,  etc.  For  Whitby's 
own  views,  see  his  Treatise  on  tl<<-  true  Millennium,  and  for  an  extension  of  them,  see 
Bogue's  Dis.  on  Uk-  Mill,  and  Johnston  On  the  Rev.  The  nearest  approach  to  Whitby's 
views  is  that  found  in  Joachim's  prophecies  (see  Von  Dbllinger's  Proph.  of  the  Middh 
Ages,  vii.,  p.  380),  or  the  statements  of  St.  Catherine  of  Siena  (p.  330),  or  Eoger  Bacon 
(p.  358),  or  Dolcino  (p.  363),  or  Gorgius  (p.  312).  Luther,  in  his  Com.  on  John,  that  we 
quoted,  must  have  referred  to  the  Jesuitical  idea  of  a  conversion  of  the  world,  or  to  the 
Anabaptist  view,  or  to  some  Popish  writer  similar  to  the  preceding.  For  however  in 
some  respects  diverse  to  the  purely  spiritual  view  of  Whitby,  the  notion  of  a  conver- 
sion of  the  world  to  Christianity  prior  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  hence  of  the 
Sec.  Advent,  has  had  its  abettors,  who  daringly,  to  the  ordinary  operations  of  the 
Gospel,  added  that  of  the  sword  and  persecution.  The  history  of  the  Romish  Church 
in  the  persons  of  some  of  its  most  aggressive  Popes,  and  of  Loyola  and  his  successors, 
are  sufficiently  illustrative.  The  multitude  who  arose  in  the  days  of  the  Reformers  with 
arms  in  their  hands,  and  under  leaders  who  wielded  "  the  sword  of  Gideon  ;"  even  the 
dialectician  Carlstadt  and  many  a  perverted  believer  thought  that  the  harvest  was  ripe, 
that  they  were  the  appointed  reapers,  and  that  the  Gospel  combined  with  the  sword 
should  subjugate  the  world  to  Jesus.  Self-constituted  ministers  of  vengeance  and  of 
mercy,  under  the  guidance  of  a  false  doctrine.  Alas  !  what  scenes  of  crime,  bloodshed, 
and  horror  have  been  enacted  under  a  fanatical  plea  that  the  extension  of  God's  truth 
and  rule  demanded  them.  Thus  e.g.  in  the  Miinster  Faction  (a. n.  1534)  "  Bockelson" 
or  John  of  Leyden  (Kurtz,  Gh.  His.  vol.  2,  p.  81 )  "  proclaimed  king  of  the  whole  earth 
by  one  of  his  co-prophets,  set  up  a  splendid  court  and  introduced  the  most  heinous 
abominations.  He  claimed  authority  to  inaugurate  the  Millennium,  sent  out  twenty-eight 
apostles  to  spread  his  kingdom,  and  appointed  twelve  dukes  to  govern  the  earth  as  his 
vicegerents."  The  same  spirit  was  shown  in  the  Wittenberg  Fanaticism,  in  the  Mtinzer 
teaching,  culminating  in  the  Peasant's  War.  The  same  spirit  was  revived  in  the  Fifth 
Monarchy  men,  and  others.  The  enemies  of  the  Word  sneeringly  point  to  many  such 
instances  of  compulsory  conversion  or  vengeance,  as  shown  in  the  sternness  of  some  of 
Knox's  converts,  Cromwell's  troopers,  Geneva's  town-councillors,  etc.,  just  as  if  the  Word 
itself  indorsed,  and  was  responsible  for  conduct  and  action  emphatically  condemned. 
Our  doctrine,  in  view  of  the  Millennial  age  being  contingent  on  the  Advent  of  Jesus  and 
the  res.  of  the  saints,  positively  forbids  the  entertainment  of  such  dangerous  vagaries. 
Those  who  hold  to  them  cannot  be  regarded  as  affiliated,  in  the  slightest  degree,  with 
Pre-Millenarians,  seeing  that  in  the  fundamentals  there  is  no  point  of  contact.  They 
are  rather  in  sympathy  with  all  such  who,  prior  to  the  Sec.  Advent  and  the  res.  of  the 
saints,  look  for  a  conversion  of  the  world  to  subjection  to  Christ,  the  only  difference 
being  in  the  one  party  relying  upon  the  Gospel  and  the  other  adding  the  sword.  Craven 
(Lange's  Com.  Eev.  p.  346)  refers  to  Elliott  saying  :  "  Yitringa,  however,  who  alludes  to 
Whitby's  work  just  published,  makes  brief  citations  from  two  earlier  writers,  Conrad  of 
Mantua  and  Carollus  Gallus,  as  expressive  of  the  same  general  view."  If  this  is  so, 
then  to  Whitby  belongs  the  honor  of  systematizing  and  inaugurating  the  view  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  secure  its  extensive  adoption. 

2  An  impartial  consideration  is  solicited,  in  view  of  the  important  bearing  this  subject 
necessarily  has  upon  many  related  ones  in  the  Scriptures.     It  is  to  the  honor  of  many 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  179 

eminent  men,  that,  after  having  held  to  the  Whitbyan  theory,  they  have  not  been 
ashamed  to  acknowledge  their  past  error,  and  that  the  decided  weight  of  testimony 
forced  them  to  occupy  the  Primitive  Church  doctrine.  Thus  e.g.  Bh.  Hopkins 
(Winthrop's  Letters,  p.  6)  declares  that  his  opinions  have  undergone  "  a  thorough  revolu- 
tion," and  adds,  "  And  I  cannot  but  think  that  any  man  whose  mind  is  ready  to  submit, 
with  the  humility  of  a  child-like  faith,  to  the  only  infallible  teacher — the  Word  of  God 
— must  yield,  even  at  the  sacrifice  of  his  previous  prejudices,  to  the  vast  amount  of  testi- 
mony which  the  Scriptures  furnish  to  that  important  doctrine,  the  personal  Advent,  and 
reign  upon  the  regenerated  earth,  of  the  glorious  Redeemer,"  etc.  The  honored  friend 
to  whom  this  work  is  dedicated,  informed  me  years  ago  how  he  also  changed  his  views, 
being  impelled  to  it  by  Scripture  testimony,  and  the  reasoning  of  McXeile,  Noel,  etc. 
On  the  evening  of  March  27th,  1873,  in  a  conversation  on  this  very  subject,  the  Dr. 
alluded  to  the  biblicist  Beck  and  read  Dr.  Kurtz's  estimate  of  Beck  in  which  the  latter 
is  quoted  as  saying  that  his  hope  of  the  ultimate  salvation  of  the  world  was  in  the  direct 
interposition  of  God.  Commenting  on  this  language,  Dr.  Sprecher  remarked,  that  by 
this  direct  interposition,  Beck  evidently  referred  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  Then  alluding  to 
Bengel's  and  Auberlen's  views,  he  continued,  that  since  he  had  adopted  such  ideas, 
time  and  study  had  only  strengthened  them  ;  that  he  had  no  hope  of  the  conversion  of 
the  world  under  present  instrumentalities  ;  that  it  was  painfully  evident  that  human 
depravity  would  always  exist  in  this  dispensation  ;  that  whatever  advance  the  Church 
made,  there  was  a  corresponding  advance  on  the  side  of  Satan  ;  that  the  future  was  a 
serious  one  for  the  Church  as  Bhe  was  yet  to  meet  a  terrible  enemy  ;  and  that  to  save  the 
Church,  there  must  be,  as  Beck  affirmed  a  remarkable  divine  interposition,  etc.  Such, 
briefly,  is  the  outline  of  a  deeply  interesting  conversation — the  ideas  of  which  were 
repeated,  with  additions,  at  subsequent  interviews.  In  conversations  with  students, 
in  articles  from  the  Lutheran  Observer,  in  sermons,  and  in  an  appeal  to  the  churches  in 
behalf  of  the  college  (of  which  he  was  then  President),  he  alluded  to  the  coming  struggle 
between  the  Church  and  infidelity,  the  fatal  results  of  indifference  —  the  consequent 
depression  of  the  Church  and  the  incoming  of  sore  tribulation  to  be  ended  only  by  the 
Advent  of  the  Christ.  He  also  informed  me  that  his  forthcoming  work  of  systematic 
divinity  would  occupy  a  Pre-Millenarian  position. 

The  prevalence  of  the  Whitbyan  theory  is  something  marvellous,  and  the  tenacity 
with  which  men  cleave  to  it,  notwithstanding  its  lurk  of  proof,  is  wonderful.  Out  of  a 
multitude  of  protests  we  select  the  two  following:  Rev.  Randolph  {Danville  Tribune, 
March  12th,  1880),  referring  to  the  Whitbyan  theory  and  to  Whitby's  bolstering  up 
his  view  by  transforming  2  Thess.  2  :  8  into  a  spiritual  Coming  by  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel,  then  adds  :  "  We  feel  indignant  as  we  think  of  it,  and  how  the  Church  and 
common  people  have  been  enslaved  to  it  so  long.  It  has  been  sent  whirling  like  thistle- 
down in  the  air  by  scholars  in  every  denomination,  and  its  doctrine  that  the  Millennium 
comes  by  means  of  Revivals,  and  the  gradual  progress  of  Christianity  one  thousand  years 
before  Christ  comeSj  has  been  riddled  to  atoms,  and  is  now  riddled  again  by  the  best 
scholarship  of  the  century.  Thanks  to  Rev.  Henry  Dana  Ward,  a  true  Puritan,  for  the 
bugle-blast  he  gave  not  many  years  ago,  arousing  the  American  ministry  to  their  duty, 
in  reference  to  Whitbyism,  saying,  '  scarcely  a  newspaper  can  be  found  of  high  standing 
with  its  own  sect,  that  will  admit  an  article  boldly  questioning  this  proud  Philistine, 
who  has  seized  the  ark  of  our  faith  and  defies  the  hope  of  Israel.  This  state  of  things 
calls  for  mourning  as  well  as  indignation,  that  an  innovation  so  bold  in  its  departure 
from  the  primitive  faith  and  the  Confessions  of  all  churches  should  have  intrenched  itself 
in  the  heart  of  all  denominations,  which  innovation  the  Reformers,  themselves,  expressly 
condemn  and  brand  as  opposed  to  the  Scriptures  '  {His.  Mill.,  p.  58).  Thanks  to  Dr. 
Hastings  (  Voice  of  the  Church)  for  his  manly  utterance  challenging  the  insolence  of  the 
great  and  acute  innovator  in  these  words  :  '  Was  it  reserved  for  Daniel  Whitby  to 
correct  the  faith  of  those  who  had  listened  to  Apostolic  teachings,  and  followed  Apostolic 
footsteps  ?  Has  that,  which  was  an  unknown  doctrine,  or  a  condemned  heresy  in  the 
true  Church  for  seventeen  hundred  years,  come  at  last  to  be  accepted  as  the  truths  of  the 
Gospel?  And  shall  we  whose  fathers  have  steeled  themselves  against  earth's  flatteries, 
ever  sounding  the  word,  '  The  Coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh  !'  now  fold  our  arms 
in  lazy  lock  and  say  in  our  hearts,  if  not  on  our  lips,  '  My  Lord  delayeth  His  Coming  !' 
To  all  which  we  say,  '  God  forbid  !'  And  thanks  to  the  noble  Christian  men  of  such  com- 
petence and  piety,  in  both  Europe  and  America,  and  of  all  denominations,  who,  by  pulpit, 
conference,  and  publications,  are  once  more  recalling  the  Church  to  the  faith  of  the 
Reformers,  Martyrs,  and  Apostles,  the  faith  of  all  the  prophets,  and  of  Christ  Himself." 
Dr.  Morehead  in  the  Christian  Instructor  (Chicago,  March  and  April,  1879),  in  a  series  of 


180  THE   TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  175. 

articles  controverts  the  Whitbyan  view,  and  in  the  close  of  the  second  article,  after 
referring  to  the  primitive  expectation  (quoting  Scripture,  Olshausen,  Calvin,  etc.)  of  the 
constant  ininiinency  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  deduces  :  ''  (1)  The  Apostolic  Christians  waited 
for  Christ.  They  knew  not  how  long  he  might  tarry  ;  they  knew  not  how  soon  He  might 
appear.  They  might  fall  asleep,  but  death  itself  could  not  destroy  their  '  blessed  hope.' 
(2)  They  waited  for  Christ.  Therefore,  their  hope  was  not  the  reformation  of  mankind, 
nor  the  civilization  of  the  race,  nor  the  elevation  of  society,  nor  the  education  of  the 
masses,  nor.  the  conversion  of  the  world.  (3)  They  icaited  for  Christ.  Therefore,  they 
did  not  look  for  the  overthrow  of  the  world-spirit  of  evil  through  the  instrumentality  of 
the  Gospel  which  they  preached.  Their  heroic  endeavor  was  to  save  souls  from  the 
curse  and  condemnation  of  the  world.  (4)  They  icaited  for  Christ.  Therefore,  they 
did  not  wait  for  an  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  for  the  world's  conversion.  The  Spirit 
had  been  poured  out  ujdou  them,  according  to  the  promise  of  the  Saviour,  and  to  have 
waited  for  His  Coming  would  have  been  a  practical  denial  of  His  presence  in  the  Church. 
(5)  They  waited  for  Christ.  Therefore,  they  did  not  look  for  the  world's  subjugation 
first.  Where  in  all  the  New  Test,  is  the  Church  put  in  the  posture  of  expectancy  as  to 
the  conversion  of  the  world?  Let  one  passage  be  cited  that  she  waited  for  that — was  so 
taught  to  wait.  (6)  They  icaited  for  Christ.  Therefore,  they  could  not  have  waited  for 
a  Millennium,  brought  about  by  the  agencies  even  then  at  work,  to  be  had  and  enjoyed 
before  Christ's  Coming,  for  if  so,  how,  in  all  human  reason,  coidd  they  have  waited  for 
the  Saviour  V  They  icaited.  We,  on  the  contrary,  having  succeeded  to  otir  satisfaction  in 
putting  off  Hi-s  Coming  to  a  far,  far  distant  future,  naturally  enough  concern  ourselves 
very  little  about  it,  and  have  taken  to  make  the  best  of  the  present  evil  world." 

In  view  of  the  Scripture  testimony  and  that  of  the  Church,  it  is  a  matter  of  surprise 
that  eminent  Apologetical  works  (as  e.g.  Roger's  /Superhuman  Origin  of  the  Bible,  p.  65, 
etc.)  should  assert  that  the  New  Test,  propounds  a  system  of  religion  "  which  aspires  to 
universal  dominion,  and  that  to  be  achieved  without  violence,  and  by  moral  force  alone." 
Turning  to  the  New  Test,  we  see  how  Christ  Himself  comes,  and  uses  force  over  the  Anti- 
christian  nations,  and  yet  in  the  face  of  the  plainest  predictions,  Kogers  confidently 
affirms  :  "  It  is  equally  incontrovertible  that  He  renounced  for  Himself,  and  that  His 
apostles  renounced  for  Him,  all  employment  of  force  in  the  establishment  of  His  novel 
Kingdom."  This  is  true  of  the  Church  and  the  gathering  out  of  a  people  for  God,  but, 
as  our  whole  line  of  argument  shows,  it  is  not  correct  when  applied  to  the  conversion  of 
the  world,  or  to  the  establishment  of  the  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom.  The  reason 
why  this  Whitbyan  doctrine  is  a  favorite  with  many,  and  is  so  prominently  paraded  in 
recent  Apologetics,  is,  that  it  serves  to  exalt  a  fundamental  misconception,  viz.,  their 
spiritual-Church  Kingdom  notion.  Alas  !  that  so  many  able  writers  fall  into  this  error, 
which  has  been  a  fitful  dream  of  some  of  the  mystics,  as  seen  e.g.  in  the  Life  of  Julia 
Von  Kriidener,  who.  according  to  the  prophecy  of  Maria  Kummrin,  was  destined  to  a 
"  high  vocation  in  the  reign  of  the  Lord,"  having  connected  with  her,  "  Fontaine  as  the 
apostle  chosen  to  work  with  her  for  the  conversion  of  the  world"  (Weslm.  lieview,  Jan. 
1852,  p.  <J0.) 

Obs.  5.  Let  us  direct  attention  to  some  of  the  reasons  already  assigned 
which  are  opposed  to  the  Whitbyan  theory.  For  the  sake  of  brevity  and 
to  avoid  undue  repetition,  reference  will  be  made  to  Propositions  giving 
details,  and  the  reader  is  solicited,  if  desirous  to  investigate  the  subject,  to 
turn  to  them  for  additional  information.  1.  The  principle  of  interpretation 
adopted,  viz.,  the  grammatical,  Prop.  4,  is  the  only  one  that  is  proper  for  a 
doctrinal  position  upon  this  subject.  But  if  the  literal  interpretation  is 
acceded  to,  then,  as  our  opponents  themselves  admit,  our  doctrine  is  clearly 
and  unmistakably  taught.  For  the  difference  between  us  and  the  followers 
of  Whitby,  is  not  whether  the  Word  contains  our  doctrine  in  its  literal 
sense,  but  whether  such  a  sense  is  to  be  retained.  Let  the  reader  decide 
this  question,  and  in  how  far  it  is  consistent  with  the  honor  of  God  to  pre- 
sent such  a  sense  that  has  led  a  host  of  ancient  worthies  and  Christians  to 
believe  in  our  doctrinal  position.  If  the  literal  sense  is  accepted,  of  course, 
then  the  interpretation  of  prophecy  utterly  forbids  the  adoption  of  the 
Whitbyan  ''hypothesis."  2.  The  prevailing  theory  is  based  upon  and  is 
the  logical  outgrowth  of,  the  notion  that  the  Church  is  the  covenanted 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  181 

Kingdom  of  David's  Son.  This  has  been  fully  met  in  Propositions  96,  97, 
98,  99,  100,  101,  102,  103, 104,  105,  106,  107,  108,  and  109.  3.  The  script- 
ural idea  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  as  covenanted  and  prophesied,  is 
strictly  that  of  a  Theocracy — overthrown,  Prop.  32,  but  again  restored, 
Props.  33,  34,  35,  etc.,  fully  identified  with  the  restoration  of  the  Davidic 
throne  and  Kingdom.  Props.  48,  49,  51,  52,  118,  etc.  The  conversion 
even  of  all  nations  could  not  restore  the  Kingdom.  4.  The  following  par- 
ticulars are  all  opposed  to  the  Whitbyan  doctrine  (a)  It  overrides  and 
degrades  the  hopes  of  the  pious  Jews,  Props.  20,  21  ;  (b)  it  ignores  and 
lowers  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist,  Props.  22,  38,  39,  40,  41,  and  of 
the  disciples,  Props.  43,  44  ;  (c)  it  overlooks  the  fact  that  the  Kingdom  of 
God  to  be  established  is  the  ancient  Theocracy  acknowledged  by  God  to  be 
His  special  Kingdom,  Props.  25,  26,  etc.,  into  which  the  Davidic  line  is 
incorporated,  Prop.  31,  and  which  was  not  in  existence  when  Jesus  came, 
Props.  41,  56  ;  (d)  the  unmistakable  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  the 
previous  gathering  out  of  a  people  to  whom  the  Kingdom  is  given,  the 
consequent  preaching  of  the  Apostles,  Props.  54  inclusive  to  73,  is  all 
passed  by  as  unworthy  of  notice,  although  specifically  presented  ;  (e)  it  is 
opposed  to  the  distinctively  announced  facts  (which  show  that  piety,  con- 
version, etc.,  are  not  denoted),  that  the  Kingdom  belongs  to  Christ  as  the 
Son  of  Man  (see  Prop.  81),  that  it  is  a  visible  restoration  of  forfeited  domin- 
ion (Prop.  82),  that  it  is  given  by  the  Father  to  the  Son  as  the  result  of 
obedience  (Props.  83,  84,  90),  and  that  it  is  promised  to  the  saints  as  an 
inheritance  (Props.  89,  90).  5.  The  Millennial  glory  which  is  to  follow  in 
the  restoration  of  the  Barren  Woman  after  the  married  wife,  Prop.  118,  is 
against  its  reception.  6.  The  Visible  external  organization  of  the  Kingdom, 
Props.  116  and  117,  and  its  introduction  alone  by  the  power  of  Christ, 
Prop.  120,  forbids  such  a  view  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  as  is  now  prev- 
alent. 7.  The  visible  reign  of  Christ,  Prop.  131  :  the  visible  reign  of  the 
saints,  Prop.  154  ;  the  Judgeship  of  Christ,  Prop.  132  ;  the  Judgment 
Daij,  Prop.  133  ;  "  The  World  to  come:'  Prop.  137  ;  "  The  Day  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  Props.  138  and  139  ;  the  "Rest,"  Prop.  143  ;  "  The  End  of  the 
age,"  Prop.  140  ;  "  The  JVew  Heavens  and  New  Earth,"  Props.  148, 149, 150, 
151,  144,  146  ;  the  transfiguration,  Prop.  153  ;  the  manner  of  the  Jewish 
restoration  and  its  design,  Props.  Ill,  112,  113,  114  ;  the  mixed  condition 
of  Church  evinced  in  the  parables,  Prop.  118  ;  all  present  phases  of  argu- 
ment converging  from  different  points  against  the  Whitbyan  notion. 
8.  Besides  all  these,  the  doctrine  of  the  Pre- Millennial  Advent,  Prop.  121  ; 
of  the  Pre- Millennial  resurrection,  Props.  125,  126,  127,  128  ;  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Antichrist  by  the  Personal  Advent  of  Jesus,  Prop.  123  ;  the 
marriage  of  Christ,  Prop.  169  ;  the  perpetuity  of  the  Kingdom  when  once 
established,  Prop.  159,  etc.,  are  all  of  a  nature  irreconcilable  with  a  conver- 
sion of  the  world  prior  to  the  Advent.  To  accept  of  the  Whitbyan  theory 
demands  that  all  these  several  Propositions,  with  a  large  number  of  related 
evidences,  be  logically  set  aside — an  undertaking  that  can  alone  be  per- 
formed by  seeking  refuge  in  the  Origenistic  system  of  interpretation.  The 
advocates  of  such  a  theory  forget  how  clearly  and  distinctly  the  design  of 
the  present  dispensation,  Props.  86  and  87,  is  pointed  out  in  Scripture, 
representing  the  Church  as  a  preparatory  stage,  Prop.  88,  to  the  ushering 
in  of  the  glorious  Messianic  Kingdom.  It  is  remarkable  that  for  the  com- 
plete success  of  our  argument  not  one  link,  essential  to  its  perfection,  is 
missing  in  the  Scriptures. 


182  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  175. 

The  Year  of  Jubilee  was  a  type  of  the  highest  deliverance  (Prop.  143),  and  is  correctly 
applied  by  many  writers  to  the  Millennial  period  on  earth.  Even  our  opponents,  many 
of  them,  concede  this,  and  declared  in  positive  terms,  that  "  the  promise  of  a  Jubilee  to 
the  Church  of  God  cannot  fail."  Let  the  reader  observe  that  the  Jewish  nation,  owing 
to  depravity,  never  came  under  the  restorative  power  of  this  Year  of  Jubilee,  for  their 
wickedness  brought  as  a  punishment  rest  (2  Chron.  36  :  21)  to  the  land.  So  the  world 
and  the  Church  can  never,  as  the  Bible  plainly  teaches  (it  being  the  personal  work  of 
Jesus  and  His  Advent)  bring  about  this  time  of  Jubilee.  Men  may  by  a  species  of 
exaggeration  insure  its  Coming,  but  a  glance  at  the  type  and  the  predictions  based  upon  it 
shows  that  it  is  beyond  mortal  power.  Burton  (Anat.  of  Melancholy,  vol.  3,  p.  429)  was 
wiser  ;  for  after  giving  a  graphic  description  of  the  evils  pertaining  to  various  religions, 
heresies,  etc.,  he  adds  :  "  To  purge  the  world  of  idolatry  and  superstition,  will  require 
some  monster-taming  Hercules,  a  divine  iEsculapius,  or  Christ  Himself  to  come  in  His 
own  Person,  to  reign  a  thousand  years  on  earth  before  the  end,  as  the  Millenaries  will 
have  Him."  Van  Oosterzee  (Oh.  Dog.,  vol.  2,  p.  580),  speaking  of  the  reasonableness  of 
the  Second  visible  Coming  of  Jesus,  remarks  :  "  History  and  experience  even,  give  every 
reason  to  doubt  whether  without  such  a  personal  appearing  and  intervention  of  the 
King,  the  Kingdom  of  God  could  indeed  ever  arrive  at  the  complete  development 
and  triumph,  to  which  it  is  designed  to  come."  Eminent  men,  unwilling  to  receive  the 
plain  grammatical  sense  of  the  Word,  and  having  faith  in  God's  promises,  see  no  hope  for 
the  realization  of  the  Whitbyan  theory  (although  in  accord  with  their  spiritualizing 
system),  and  hence  reject  it.  Dr.  Arnold  {Life  of,  by  Stanley,  vol.  1,  p.  271)  expresses 
his  faith  in  the  ending  of  successive  ages  by  great  physical  and  moral  signs,  in  the  Com- 
ing of  "the  day  of  the  Lord,"  and  then,  in  view  of  these  convulsions  and  the  signs  of 
the  times,  says  :  "  But  I  have  not  the  slightest  expectation  of  what  is  commonly  meant  by 
the  Millennial,  and  I  wonder  more  and  more  that  any  one  can  so  understand  Scripture 
as  to  look  for  it.  As  for  the  signs  of  the  times  in  England,  I  look  nowhere  with  confi- 
dence," etc.  On  the  other  hand  so  confident  are  the  adherents  of  the  Whitbyan  scheme 
of  their  ultimate  success,  that  they  make  the  matter  largely  contingent  on  the  reception 
of  money  !  Many  quotations  might  bo  given  ;  a  recent  one  by  Bh.  Wiley  (West.  Gh. 
.  Idvocate,  July  30th,  1ST'.))  in  a  letter  to  a  friend  is  sufficiently  illustrative  :  "  Money  seems 
now  the  great  need  for  taking  the  world  for  Jesus."  While  money  is  a  requisite  for 
Church  work,  and  piety  is  required  to  contribute  as  evidence  of  its  faith,  gratitude  and 
love,  yet  money  will  only  indirectly  aid  in  carrying  out  the  design  of  the  dispensation  ; 
it  may  bring  the  truth  to  others,  but  it  cannot  convert  a  soul,  much  less  "  take  the 
world  for  Jesus."  Compare  with  such  a  view,  the  scathing  remark  of  Cotton  Mather 
(Prop.  78,  Obs.  9,  note),  or  the  firm  protest  of  Van  Oosterzee  (Lange's  Corn.  1  Tim., 
p.  50),  etc. 

Obs.  G.  It  seems  scarcely  requisite  to  add  anything  to  "what  has  preceded, 
and  yet  a  few  additional  remarks  may  aid  in  bringing  out  the  matter  moro 
clearly.  1.  The  exhortations  given  respecting  the  nearness  of  the  Second 
Advent  and  the  constant  duty  enjoined  in  looking  for  it,  is  irreconcilable 
with  a  Millennium  prior  to  that  Advent.  So  also  the  same  incorporated 
into  Confessions,  as  e.g.  "Westminster  exhorting  us  owing  to  the  uncertainty 
of  the  same  to  "  be  always  watchful,  because  they  lenow  not  at  what  hour  the 
Lord  will  come."  The  advocates  of  the  Whitbyan  theory,  locating  an  in- 
tervening one  thousand  years  definitely  before  the  Advent,  palpably  contra- 
dict themselves  when  commenting  on  such  scriptural  injunctions.  Thus, 
e.g.  Barnes  in  various  places  in  his  Commentary  urges  it  as  a  duty  for 
believers  to  be  looking  and  expecting  the  Second  Advent,  telling  us  even 
(1  Pet.  4  :  7)  that  "  No  man  can  tell  certainly  at  what  time  it  will  come  ; 
no  man  can  demonstrate  that  it  may  not  come  at  any  moment"  etc., 
and  yet  in  the  face  of  these  and  similar  explicit  statements  he  en- 
deavors by  the  adoption  of  the  Whitbyan  "  hypothesis"  to  "  demon- 
strate" that  it  is  at  least  a  thousand  years  from  us.  A  theory  which  in- 
volves such  inconsistencies  is  certainly  wrong.  2.  The  inability  to  meet 
the  demands  of  Scripture  and  constitute  an  agreement  between  theory  and 
Holy  Writ  is  met  with  in  the  writings  of  the  ablest  of  the  Whitbyan  class. 


Prop.  175.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  183 

"We  give  two  illustrations.  Dr.  Brown  in  Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  unable  to 
rid  himself  of  the  passages  which  speak  of  a  mixed  condition  even  in  the 
Church,  of  good  and  bad  down  to  the  Advent,  advocates  a  Millennial 
period  in  which  the  preponderating  mass,  the  large  majority  shall  only  be 
righteous,  and  then  taxes  us  with  a  kind  of  exaggerating  the  Millennial 
descriptions.  But  this  is  directly  antagonistic  to  the  predicted  universality 
of  righteousness  given  in  Ileb.  8  :  11  ;  Jer.  31  :  34  ;  Isa.  54  :  13  ;  Isa.  11  :  9, 
etc.  Which  are  we  to  credit,  the  Spirit  or  the  imperfect  Millennial  era 
thus  presented  ?  Again  :  Dr.  Neander  {Life  of  Christ)  ably  and  elaborately 
presents  his  development  theory  (derived  from  the  leaven)  until  ho  has  (as 
in  Sec.  52)  the  whole  world,  universally  subdued  and  there  is  "  a  real 
world-dominion,''''  "  a  perfect  world-dominion  of  Christ  and  of  His  organs; 
a  world  purified  and  transformed,  to  become  the  seat  of  His  universal 
empire."  All  this  is  done  morally  and  spiritually  through  the  agency  of 
the  Church.  But  when  we  come  (Sec.  214)  to  his  interpretation  of  Luke 
17  :  22-37  (into  which  Jerusalem,  the  Romans,  etc.,  could  not  be  con- 
veniently crowded),  then  he  admits — although  he  must  have  felt  how  con- 
tradictory to  his  favorite  theory — that  there  will  be  "«  corrupt  world," 
and  that  "  the  glorified  Son  of  Man''  must  appear  and  "precede  the  consum- 
mation of  the  Kingdom,"  The  leavening  process,  according  to  his  own  con- 
fession, is  acknowledged  to  be  a  failure,  and  that  world-wide  dominion, 
which  Daniel  says  is  ever-enduring,  he  cither  must  bring  to  a  downfall 
through  this  corruption  or  must  postpone  until  after  the  Advent  of  Christ.1 
3.  The  Spirit's  description  of  this  dispensation  (as  e.g.  in  2  Thess.  2  : 1-14  ; 
Dan.  11  and  12  ;  1  Pet.  1  : 1-25  ;  2  Pet.  3  : 1-14  ;  Matt.  chs.  24  and  25,  etc.) 
abundantly  evidence  the  fact  that  down  to  the  Second  Advent  wickedness 
shall  constantly  exist  and  finally  culminate  into  widespread  infidelity,  etc. 
Satan,  instead  of  being  bound,  is  busily  engaged  in  sowing  tares  down  to 
the  period  of  the  harvest,  or  the  end  of  the  age.  Wicked  men  are  repre- 
sented as  ever  attached  to  the  Church,  the  "  few"  out  of  the  "  many"  only 
being  the  really  faithful  obedient  believers.  Xow  a  development  theory  or 
conversion  "hypothesis,"  which  engrafts  itself  upon  the  parable  of  the 
leaven  and  of  the  mustard  seed,  but  "ignores  the  teaching  of  the  parable  of 
the  tares  and  wheat  and  of  the  drag-net  -and  the  statements,  positively 
given,  of  a  continuance  of  evil  and  evildoers  dozen  to  the  Advent,  is  cer- 
tainly one-sided  and  sadly  defective.  The  retrogressions,  relapses,  contin- 
ued mixed  condition,  etc.,  of  the  Church  itself,  shows  what  confidence  can 
be  placed  in  this  leavening  process.  This  is  so  sensibly  felt  that  recent 
writers  against  us  (as  e.g.  Waldegrave,  New  Test.  Mill.)  frankly  admit  that 
the  antichristian  powers  will  exist  down  to  the  Second  Advent  ;  that  the 
Church  will  continue  to  struggle  on  against  wickedness  down  to  the  same 
period,  and  even  proceeds  to  the  revolting  acknowledgment — forced  by 
these  Scriptures  and  by  his  placing  the  Advent  after  the  Millennium— -that 
toickedness  will  so  abound  during  the  thousand  years  that  martyrdom  itself 
shall  be  experienced  by  believers.  Others,  however,  like  Brown,  Barnes, 
etc.,  are  content  with  giving  a  mixed  Millennial  period  sufficiently  per- 
vaded with  wickedness  to  make  a  revival  of  the  martyr  spirit  a  necessity. 
How  such  statements  can  be  reconciled  with  those  of  the  prophets  relating 
to  the  same  period,  we  cannot  comprehend,  itnless  the  inspired  man  is  to 
give  place  to  the  uninspired.2  4.  The  blessings  allied  to  the  Millennial  era, 
associated  with  the  Messianic  reign  are  of  such  a  nature  that  the  simple 
moral  and  spiritual  means  of  the  G-ospel,  even  if  the  whole  world  were  con- 


184  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  175. 

verted,  cannot  introduce  them  (this  has  been  pointed  out  in  Props.  120,  6, 
etc.).  Knowledge,  piety,  material  prosperity,  etc.,  cannot  remove  the 
suffering  and  evils  attendant  to  human  nature,  for  what  Froude  (Shorter 
Studies,  p.  272)  says  specially  of  the  latter  is  still  true  of  all  :  "  Let  us 
build  our  streets  of  gold  and  they  will  hide  as  many  aching  hearts  as  hovels 
of  straw.  The  well-being  of  mankind  is  not  advanced  a  step. "  Knowl- 
edge, wealth,  and  piety  cannot  remove  the  curse  with  its  consequent  ills. 
If  the  predictions  of  the  Prophets  are  received,  it  is  impossible  to  see  how 
they  can  be  fulfilled  by  existing  means.  This  is  beginning  to  be  realized 
by  our  opponents,  so  that  the  most  recent  of  them  (as  Fairbairn,  On 
Proph.,  pp.  4G5,  451,  etc.)  frankly  admit  that  to  introduce  and  continue 
the  Millennial  blessedness  and  glory  predicted,  additional  means  of  an 
extraordinary  character,  supernatural  and  miraculous,  are  necessary  and 
will  be  employed.3  5.  While  we  do  not  concede  that  the  "  Variations  of 
Protestantism,"  or  the  disagreements  of  churches,  or  the  "  denudation"  or 
retrogressive  periods,  can  be  urged  against  the  claims  of  Christianity  (for 
such  a  state  is  foretold  and  is  a  consequent  of  human  freedom),  yet  it  must 
be  admitted  that  it  has  force  against  the  notion  of  a  conversion  of  the 
world.  AVhile  there  is  progress  arising  from  the  Divine  Purpose  to  save 
them  that  believe  and  to  gather  out  a  certain  number  of  pre-determined 
ones  (pre-determined  in  relation  to  His  Kingdom),  and  from  the  intellect- 
ual activity,  etc.,  incident  to  man,  yet,  account  for  it  as  we  may,  there  have 
been  periods  of  depression  of  the  truth  and  these  have  been  caused  not  only 
by  direct  persecution  but  even  by  that  which  humanity  so  highly  prizes — 
reason,  philosophy,  etc.  This,  at  least,  should  make  us  cautious  in  deduc- 
ing such  a  conversion  as  many  do,  from  the  establishment  of  Christianity 
and  the  history  of  the  past.  And  this  cautious  handling  of  the  subject 
should  be  increased  by  considering  that  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  and 
even  its  success  is  no  criterion  whatever  that  God's  judgments,  if  predicted 
to  come,  will  not  be  poured  out  upon  the  world.  For  although  Jerusalem 
was  the  centre  of  great  missionary  operations  and  multitudes  were  con- 
verted (Acts  2  :  41  ;  G  :  7,  etc  ;  21  :  20),  and  the  Gospel  was  successfully 
preached  over  the  known  Roman  world,  yet  all  this  did  not  prevent  the 
vengeance  of  God  from  being  -poured  out  at  the  appointed  time.  Hence, 
the  lack  of  success,  or  even  success  itself,  is  no  just  criterion  of  the  ultimate 
design  of  the  Almighty  in  reference  to  this  dispensation  ;  for  the  object 
intended  by  both  the  one  and  the  other  must  be  gathered  from  direct  speci- 
fications pertaining  to  them.4  G.  This  age  or  period  is  denominated  an 
"  evil  age,''  i.e.  "  marked  by  sin  and  misery,  this  world,  as  compared  with 
the  future  and  heavenly  one"  (so  Blomfield,  etc.),  and  hence  the  very 
name  bestowed  upon  it  is  indicative  that  it  will  never  become  the  good  and 
blessed  age  that  many  dream.  The  language  of  Gal.  1  :  4  that  Christ 
"  gave  Himself  for  our  sins  that  He  might  deliver  us  from  this  present  evil 
world  (or  age''),  and  of  John  15  :  19  ;  17  :  14-1G  ;  1  John  5  :  19,  etc.,  is 
plainly  significant  of  the  fact,  evidenced  by  the  sad  experience  of  nearly 
nineteen  centuries,  that  this  age  is  evil,  and  continues  to  remain  such, 
from  which  we  can  only  expect  deliverance  through  Christ.5  7.  The  fight- 
ing, struggling  condition  of  the  pious  and  of  the  Church,  as  presented  in 
numerous  passages  as  well  as  the  promises  of  encouragement  under  persecu- 
tion, etc.  (2  Tim.  3  :  12  ;  Acts  14  :  22  ;  1  Cor.  15  :  19  ;  1  Thess.  3  :  3, 
etc.),  so  clearly  evince  the  continued  and  often  triumphant  existence  of 
wickedness  down  to  the  Advent,  that  the  same  is  irreconcilable  with  the 


PkOP.  175.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  185 

previous  fulfilment  of  the  Millennial  predictions.6  8.  The  condition  of  the 
world  at  the  time  of  the  Advent  is  one  of  such  extensive,  prevailing  wicked- 
ness that,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  it  shows  that  it  is  only  the  out- 
growth of  previously  long-continued  wickedness.  For  so  widespread, 
cumulative  a  state  of  evil  does  not  exist  without  a  preparative  course.  For 
days  to  return  like  "  the  days  of  Noah"  and  "the  days  of  Lot"  (Luke 

17  :  26-30),  when  but  little  ':  faith"  will  be  found  "  on 'the  earth"  (Luke 

18  :  8),  when  "  perilous  times"  (2  Tim.  3  :  1-5)  will  come,  when  men  shall 
be  "  mockers,"  etc.  (Jude  18),  when  a  mighty  confederation  of  wickedness 
(Rev.  19,  etc.)  shall  exist,  etc.,  etc. — all  this  demands  a  previous  course  of 
evil  training,  which  is  consonant  only  with  other  descriptions  pertaining 
to  this  age.7  9.  The  representations  given  concerning  the  ministry  ;  the 
endurance  of  hardship  and  trial  ;  the  being  a  savor  of  life  unto'life  to  some 
aud  of  death  unto  death  to  others  ;  the  rejection  of  them  by  those  who  can- 
not "  endure  sound  doctrine,  but  after  their  own  lusts  shall  heap  to  them- 
selves teachers,"  etc.,  etc.,  are  all  of  a  nature  correspondent  only  with  a 
mixed  state  in  the  Church  and  of  extensive  wickedness  in  the  world.  Even 
the  charge  of  preaching  and  faithfulness  m  the  ministry  is  based  by  Paul, 
in  perfect  agreement  with  our  position  on  the  simple  gathering  of  the  elect 
and  not  upon  the  conversion  of  the  world.  In  the  charge  given  to  Timothy 
to  make ''full  proof  of  his  ministry"  in  "doing  the  work  of  an  Evan- 
gelist," there  is  not  the  remotest  allusion  to  an  anticipated  successin  being 
instrumental  in  converting  the  world,  but  a  direct  reference — as  if  to  crush 
such  a  notion  if  it  should  arise — to  "His  (Christ's)  appearing  and  His 
Kingdom"  (2  Tim.  4  :  1-5).  10.  Thus  many  incidental  reasons  might  be 
adduced  confirmatory  of  our  doctrinal  position,  such  as  (1)  the  existence  of 
'"the  times  of  the  Gentile^,"  by  which  Gentile  domination  during  this 
period  is  denoted  ;  (2)  the  fearful  persecution  to  which  the  Church  is  to  be 
exposed  at  the  closing  of  this  period  ;  (3)  the  harvest  (because  the  "  wicked- 
ness is  great,"  Joel  3  :  13)  precedes  the  Millennial  era,  Eev.  14  :  14-20  ; 
(4)  the  instruction  imparted  by  analogy  in  the  ending  of  former  dispensa- 
tions so  expressive  of  human  depravity  ;  (5)  the  conversion  of  the  Jews 
induced  by  "  looking  upon  Him  whom  they  have  pierced  ;"  (6)  the  delinea- 
tion of  the  dispensation  by  John,  1  John  2  :  18,  28  ;  (7)  the  bestowal  of  the 
sovereignty  of  this  world  upon  Christ  is  linked  with  the  resurrection  and 
rewarding  of  the  saint*,  as  e.g.  Rev.  11  :  15-18  ;  (8)  the  Millennial  era  is 
preceded  by  the  overthrow  and  destruction  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,  as  e.g. 
Rev.  19  :  18,  19,  compare  Ps.  110  :  5,  6  ;  (9)  the  gathering  out  of  the 
people  in  place  of  the  Jewish  nation  which  rejected  the  truth,  is  followed 
by  the  terrible  vengeance  of  God,  first  upon  the  Jewish  nation  and  then  at 
the  close  of  their  tribulation  upon  the  Gentiles,  as  e.g.  Deut.  32  :  21-43  ; 
(10)  the  nations  shall  come  and  worship  God  when  His  judgments  are  made 
manifest,  as  e.g.  Rev.  15  :  4  ;  Isa.  26  :  9  ;  Zeph.  3  :  8-20  ;  Zech.  14  :  16, 
etc.  ;  (11)  the  conversion  of  the  world  is  nowhere  given  as  a  sign  (followed 
by  an  apostasy)  of  the  approaching  Advent  of  Christ  ;  (12)  the  large  class 
of  passages  which  speak  of  the  removal  of  the  wicked  at  a  set  time  out  of 
the  earth  by  "  a  consumption,"  "  destruction,"  etc.,  as  e.g.  Mai.  4  ;  Ps.  37  ; 
Ps.  104  :  35,  etc.  •,  (13)  the  manner  in  which  the  Apostles  quote  Millennial 
predictions  identifying  them  with  the  period  of  the  Advent  and  resurrection 
of  the  saints,  as  e.g.  1  Cor.  15  :  54  ;  (14)  the  elect  body  of  saints,  converted 
and  thus  gathered  out  of  the  nations,  are  represented  (James  1  :  18)  to  be 
"  a  kind  of  first  fruits  of  His  creatures"  (comp.  Eph.  1  :  12  with  connec- 


186  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  175. 

tion)  ;  (15)  the  waiting  position  of  the  martyrs  (Rev.  G  :  10,  11),  and  of  the 
saints  (Heb.  11  :  39,  40,  etc.),  corresponds  only  with  a  depressed  and  not  a 
triumphant  condition  of  the  Church  ;  (16)  the  Jewish  tribulation,  now 
witnessed,  is  to  extend  down  to  the  personal  Advent  of  Jesus  as  e.g.  Matt. 
24  ;  Zech.  14,  etc.  ;  (17)  at  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  to  plead  with  all 
nations,  nations  are  represented  as  unconverted  and  some  even  as  not  con- 
versant with  the  rudimentary  knowledge  of  Him,  as  in  Isa.   6G  :  15-19  ; 

(18)  the  continued  use  of  the  Lord's  prayer  down  to  the  end  of  the  age  ; 

(19)  the  fact  that  individual  believers  and  not  nations  are  elected  ;  (20)  the 
believers  are  "  witnesses' ''  set  to  testify  to  the.  truth  before  others,  and  of 
these  comparatively  few  are  found,  for  "  many  are  called  but  few  are 
chosen,"  etc.  ;  (21)  the  narrowness  of  the  way  and  straitness  of  the  gate  is 
the  same  down  to  the  Advent,  and  it  always  remains  a  truth  to  that  period 
that  "few  there  be  that  find  it  ;"  (22)  the  saving  of  "  some"  of  "  them 
that  believe,"  of  a  certain  pre-determined  number  corresponds  with  the 
difliculties  often  entailed  upon  the  ministry  (the  Apostles  not  being  exempt) 
in  proclaiming  the  Gospel  and  in  the  facilities  afforded  for  the  same  ; 
(23)  the  finishing  of  "  the  mystery  of  God  "  under  the  seventh  trumpet 
(Rev.  10  :  7)  includes  a  preceding  time  of  trouble  and  wrath  with  a  Pre- 
Mill.  Advent  (Rev.  19)  and  incoming  Kingdom,  vindicating  God's  pro- 
cedure in  redemption  ;  (24)  the  Kingdom  is  established  at  the  very  time 
"  the  nations  were  angry"  (Rev.  11  :  15,  18)  linked  with  a  time  of  resurrec- 
tion (which  even  some  of  our  opponents,  as  Prof.  Stuart,  Com.  Apoc, 
admit  to  be  literal)  ;  (25)  the  conversion  of  the  nations  is  positively  asserted 
to  follow  the  pouring  out  of  the  judgments  of  God,  as  e.g.  Rev.  15  :  4  ; 
Zepli.  3  :  8-20  ;  (20)  the  conversion  cannot  possibly  precede  the  persecution 
of  the  Church  and  the  downfall  of  the  Antichrist  Avhose  overthrow  is 
effected  by  Christ  and  His  army  (comp.  Props.  102,  1G3)  :  (27)  Christ's 
delineation  and  opinion  of  the  Church,  taking  the  seven  churches  of  the 
Apoc.  as  prophetic  (comp.  Seiss's  Lects.  Apoc,  No.  2,  p.  174,  etc.)  :  (28) 
the  consternation  of  the  world  at  the  open  Parousia  of  Jesus,  Rev.  1:7; 
Rev.  G,  last  seal  ;  Matt.  24  :  30,  etc.  ;  (29)  the  multitude  destroyed  at  the 
Sec.  Advent,  Joel.  3  ;  Zech.  14  ;  Mich.  4  ;  Rev.  14  ;  Isa.  GG,  etc.";  (30)  the 
continued  apostatizing  in  the  Church  down  to  the  Advent  itself,  2  Thess.  2  ; 
Matt.  24,  etc.  ;  (31)  the  comments  and  concessions  of  our  opponents  on 
such  passages  as  1  John  2  :  18  ;  2  Thess.  2:8;  Matt.  24  ;  Mark  13  ;  Luke 
21,  etc.  ;  (32)  Jesus,  John  17  :  9  (comp.  1  John  5  :  19)  not  praying  for  the 
world,  but  for  His  own  gathered  out  of  the  same  ;  (33)  the  parable  of  the 
sower,  applying,  as  prominent  critics  of  all  classes  affirm,  to  the  present 
dispensation,  indicates  that  down  to  the  Second  Advent  there  will  be,  as 
Christ  portrayed,  a  constant  rejection  of  the  Gospel  (some  writers,  as  e.g. 
Brookes  in  The  Truth,  vol.  2,  No.  12,  declare  that  "  only  one  fourth  part 
of  the  seed  will  take  effect,"  Matt.  13  :  1-23,  but  we  are  not  prepared  to 
press  the  parable  so  closely,  but,  to  say  the  least,  it  is  significant,  that  Jesus 
makes  only  a  small  proportion  effectual)  ;  (34)  the  Jewish  view  of  the  non- 
conversion  of  the  world  previous  to  the  personal  Messianic  reign,  confirmed 
by  Jesus  and  the  Apostles  in  the  language  employed,  so  that  all  the  early 
converted  Jews  retain — as  we  have  shown — the  same  views  ;  (35)  the 
positive  evidence  afforded  by  Isa.  GG  :  19,  etc.,  that,  at  the  Sec.  Advent, 
not  all  the  world  have  heard  the  Gospel  ;  (3G)  this  world  not  to  be  con- 
verted but  condemned,  1  Cor.  11  :  32,  owing,  as  numerous  passages  assert, 
to  its  wickedness  ;   (37)  if  the  world  were  converted,  then  the  saints  would 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  187 

reign  because  a  world  dominion  would  be  theirs,  but  they  reign  only  after 
the  Second  Advent  (Prop.  154). 

1  His  remarks  in  Sec.  149  would  be  beautiful  if  true,  but  being  in  open  violation  of  the 
Spirit's  delineation  of  this  dispensation  their  force  is  marred.  We  reproduce  it  to 
heighten  the  contrast  with  Luke  17.  For  he  says  "this  world-dominion"  shall  be 
obtained  by  Christians  in  an  "  increasing  sway  over  mankind  and  the  relations  of 
society,  until,  in  its  final  consummation,  the  whole  earth  shall  own  its  dominion  ;  and 
the  Power  which  is  to  gain  this  world-dominion  is  meekness  ;  the  quiet  might  of  gentle- 
ness it  is  with  which  God's  Kingdom  is  to  subjugate  the  world."  The  ''  rod  of  iron," 
the  "  treading  of  the  wine-press,"  the  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb,"  etc.,  which  precedes  the 
Millennial  era  are  widely  different  from  Neander's  "  meekness."  The  prophets  are  far 
from  predicting  the  introduction  of  the  Kingdom  by  such  means  for  they  unite  in  tell- 
ing us  that  men  will  learn  righteousness  when  God's  judgments  are  in  the  world.  The 
"  meekness"  or  "  gentleness"  of  the  saints  finds  its  culmination  in  martyrdom. 

2  It  is  nothing  unusual  to  find  sermons  advocating  the  Whitbyan  view  based  on  texts, 
which  the  context  itself  would  not  allow,  such  as  Zech.  14  :  8,  as  e.g.  in  Dr.  Belfrage, 
Suddard's  Brit.  Pulpit,  Ser.  40.  Millennial  predictions  are  thus  used  without  the  least 
attempt  to  explain  the  warrant  for  thus  employing  them.  Let  the  reader  compare 
Barnes  on  Isa.  45  :  23  when  he  has  in  this  dispensation  "  all  men  shall  have  embraced 
the  true  religion,"  etc.,  with  his  delineation  of  the  Millennial  period  in  Revelation 
where  this  is  contradicted.  Such  expositions  conveniently  ignore  a  class  of  Scripture  to 
make  out  a  mere  human  opinion. 

3  The  careful  student  will  see  that  this  is  a  return  to  the  theory  of  Philo  (Neander's 
Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  65)  who  denied  the  Advent  of  a  personal  Messiah  under  the  influence 
of  "  the  idealistic  element  and  Grecian  culture,"  but  still  held  that  the  golden  age  of  the 
prophets- identified  with  the  then  existing  dispensation  -would  be  brought  about  "  by 
some  extraordinary  appearance  from  heaven,"  etc.  This  indicates  both  how  early  under 
Alexandrian  philosophy  the  simple  idea  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom  was  abandoned, 
and  vain  conjectures  substituted,  and  how  such  old  ideas  are  revived  and  adopted.  Rev. 
Hall  in  reviewing  Foster's  essay  On  the  Application  of  the  Epithet  Romantic,  expresses  his 
satisfaction  at  Foster's  "  treating  with  poignant  ridicule  those  superficial  pretenders, 
who,  without  positively  disavowing  any  dependence  on  divine  agency,  hope  to  reform 
the  world,  and  to  bring  it  back  to  a  paradisiacal  state,  by  the  mere  force  of  moral  instruc- 
tion." But  Hall  himself  is  not  sufficiently  explicit  in  telling  us  how  this  "  divine 
agency,"  whether  mediate  or  direct,  is  to  perform  this  work,  shielding  himself  behind 
generalities  (such  as  that  the  work  will  be  done  by  God,  etc.)  without  any  explanation 
of  the  order  or  manner. 

4  Therefore,  we  are  not  concerned  in  the  controversy,  respecting  the  success  of  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel  (excepting  in  so  far  as  it  will  gather  the  elect)  as  a  criterion  of  the 
ultimate  conversion  of  the  world.  Bolingbroke,  Froude,  Proudhon,  M.  Compte  and 
many  others  may  pronounce  Christianity  "  a  failure"  because  of  its  want  of  success; 
because  that  not  a  single  nation  or  city  where  it  flourished  the  most  has  "  been  effectually 
reformed."  But  this  is  taking  it  for  granted  that  the  design  of  the  dispensation  is  to 
convert  the  world  and  not  to  save  them  that  believe.  It  has  thus  far  accomplished  its 
mission.  The  same  reply  is  applicable  to  the  non-importance  of  the  efforts  made  in 
nations  now  dying  out  (see  Dr.  Geekie's  Christian  Mssions,  and  an  art.  in  Frazer's  Mag. 
or  in  Littell's  Liv.  Age,  p.  360,  4  Ser.  vol.  24  for  1872,  entitled  "  Wanted— A  Religion 
for  the  Hindoos.").  For  if  any  of  the  elect  have  been  gathered,  then  the  Divine  Pur- 
pose is  accomplished,  and  the  same  is  true  if  none  are  gathered  in  that  the  Gospel  was 
preached  as  a  witness  to  them.  Hence  on  the  one  side,  such  articles  as  that  on  ' '  Chris- 
tian Missions  to  the  Heathen"  (West.  Review,  Jan.  1874)  or  Macaulay's  Essay  (Edinb. 
Review,  "  Ranke's  His.  of  the  Popes."(  taking  the  ground  that  Protestantism  is  gaining 
nothing  over  Catholicism,  which  is  repeated  by  Bh.  Spaulding  of  Peoria,  and  refuted  in 
Harper's  Weekly,  Ap.  20th,  1878)  in  Essays,  vol.  3,  p.  305,  etc.,  or  Owen's  Debai. 
Land,  7th  chapter,  or  the  numerous  attacks  on  missions  in  various  publications,  or  the  ad- 
missions of  Protestants  respecting  the  want  of  success,  etc.,  amount  to  nothing  in  a  script- 
ural argument,  for  all  that  is  alleged  might  be  true  and  yet,  if  such  is  God's  purpose, 
the  conversion  of  the  world  could  be  effected  when  the  time  came.  But  on  the  other 
hand,  the  extravagant  eulogies  of  missions,  the  arithmetical  calculations  presented  by 
friends  of  missions,  the  confident  predictions  relating  to  the  future,  are  all  of  no  weight 
in  a  sober  argument,  for  much  might  be  admitted,  and  yet  it  would  fail  to  prove  that  past 
and  present  success  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  the  supposed  future.     What  God  pur- 


1SS  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  175. 

poses  in  regard  to  the  future  must  be  ascertained  by  a  comparison  of  His  Word,  and  not  by 
the  want  of  success  or  by  the  success  of  His  preached  Word.  Hennel,  Kenan  and  others, 
may  doubt  the  Divine  origin  of  Christianity  when  measured  by  its  progressive  advance- 
ment ;  others,  as  Neander,  etc,  may  claim  it  divine  because  of  such  progress  ;  while  we 
claim  it  to  be  from  God,  whether  progressive  or  not,  because  in  adverse  or  prosperous 
circumstances,  constantly  calling  and  preparing  the  elect  ones.  With  our  view  mission- 
aries need  not  be  discouraged  at  their  lack  of  success  (as  witnessed  in  a  conference  of 
missionaries  held  in  Calcutta  1855,  and  reported  by  the  Calcutta  Christian  Observer) 
for  whether  few  or  many  accept  the  terms  of  the  Gospel,  they  are  performing,  successful- 
ly, the  appointed  work.  We  thank  God  for  the  success  of  His  preached  Word,  a  success 
sufficiently  commensurate  with  the  design  of  the  dispensation,  and  sufficiently  extended  to 
evidence  the  faithfulness  of  His  promises.  We  have  no  sympathy  with  e.g.  the  one- 
sided statement  in  Frazer's  Mag.  for  1877,  which  in  an  art.  stated  that  "  there  are  no 
converts  in  India,  that  the  failure  of  the  missionaries  is  complete" — to  which  Dr.  Daly, 
a  missionary  in  India  replies  :  "  there  are  from  7  to  800,000  baptized  converts  in  India" 
(I/uth.  Observer,  Oct.  11th,  1878).  Since  the  famine  large  additions  having  been  made, 
as  one  Baptist  missionary  alone  reports  several  thousand  lately  gained.  Sir  Baker  ( The 
Albert  N'Yanzn,  etc.)  may  give  the  most  gloomy  and  sad  details  of  tbe  lack  of  missionary 
success  in  Africa,  and  pronounce  the  nations  utterly  worthless  and  sunken  in  corrup- 
tion ;  we  may  read  such  articles  as  "  Indian  Missions"  (Littell's  IAv.  Age,  vol.  25,  p.  515), 
"Christian  Missions"  (North  Brit.  Review,  Aug.  1856),  "Christian  Missions  in  West 
Africa"  (Littell's  Liv.  Age,  Nov.  18th,  1876)  "  Struggles  and  Tendencies  of  German  Prot- 
estantism" (North  Brit.  Review,  Feb.  1854),  Prof.  Max  Midler's  "  Lecture  on  Missions," 
and  many  others,  and  they  all,  whatever  side  they  may  advocate  and  portray,  only  evi- 
dence the  truthfulness  of  our  position,  viz.,  that  God  instead  of  contemplating  the  con- 
version of  nations,  or  of  the  world,  is  taking  out,  here  and  there,  from  among  the  nations, 
a  people  for  His  name. 

5  The  empathic  declarations  of  Jesus  are  that  His  testimony,  His  sacrifice,  His  prom- 
ises, His  Spirit,  His  ministry,  all  shall  be  finally  -after  careful  and  persevering  presenta- 
tion, after  a  fair  test— be  rejected,  so  that  this  age,  like  })receding  ones,  shall  end  in 
judgments,  evoked  by  the  continued  and  increasing  wickedness  of  man.  When  "Westmin- 
ster" (New  York  Evangelist,  Jan.  2d,  1879)  so  confidently  asserts  that  "the  Church  of 
Christ  has  not  gone  on  from  bad  to  worse  and  worst  through  nineteen  centuries  ;  but  with 
Christ  its  King,  at  its  head,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  in  its  heart,  it  has  advanced  in  life  and 
doctrine  all  along  the  line  of  the  centuries,  and  will  continue  so  to  do  until  the  end  of  the 
world,"  he  simply  ignores  all  history  respecting  the  result  of  Constantine's  conversion, 
the  inroads  of  Papacy,  the  dark  ages,  the  necessity  of  Reformation,  the  corruption  of 
doctrine,  and  the  apostatizing  from  the  truth.  We  thankfully  admit  that  Christ  has 
always  maintained  a  true  Church  in  this  evil  world,  and  will  continue  so  to  do,  and  that 
its  numbers  have  increased,  but  this  is  no  reason  for  shutting  our  eyes  to  the  sad  fads 
evidenced  in  its  history,  and  seen  in  Eccles.  history. 

6  The  student  will  observe  that  before  Satan,  "  the  Prince  of  this  World,"  is  cast  down 
and  bound  (Rev.  20)  direct  Supernatural  intervention  (and  not  the  ordinary  means  of 
grace,  Gospel  truth)  is  allied  with  it,  as  a  necessary  cause.  This  Princeship  of  Satan,  we 
are  told  by  the  Spirit,  is  to  be  specially  manifested  in  the  last  Antichrist,  who  shall  dread- 
fully persecute  the  Church.  He  is  overthrown,  not  by  spiritual  or  Church  appliances, 
but  by  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus,  who  appears  in  behalf  of  His  struggling,  persecuted 
people.  The  Church's  victory  is  given  to  her  by  him  who  died  for  her  ;  she  can  never 
accomplish  it  herself.  A  singular  and  close  relationship  exists,  according  to  the  Script- 
ures, between  this  world  and  the  fallen  angels.  It  is  not  necessary  to  enter  into  details, 
since  it  will  be  admitted — whatever  theory  may  be  entertained  respecting  them  and 
Satan  in  particular — that  man  and  his  redemption,  the  restoration  of  the  world  to  an 
Edenic  condition,  are  in  a  remarkable  manner  the  object  of  Satanic  hate  ;  and  that,  in 
view  of  Satan's  power,  activity,  etc.,  he  is  called  "  the  prince  of  this  world"  (John  12  : 
31,  and  14  :  30)  "  the  god  of  this  world"  (2  Cor.  4  :  4),  "  the  power  and  magistracy  of 
darkness"  (Col.  1  :  13),  "  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world"  (Eph.  6  :  12),  "  the 
world  lying  in  the  wicked  one"  (1  John  5  :  19).  Indeed,  as  Kurtz  has  well  expressed 
it,  it  is  no  "  mendacious  appearance  of  truth,"  no  mere  assumption  of  power,  that  Satan 
promises  to  Christ  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  if  He  will  but  worship  him,  Matt.  4  :  9, 
for  Luke  4  :  6  declares  that  it  was  delivered  to  him  and  he  could  give  it  to  whom  he 
pleased  (comp  Prop.  100).  In  view  of  the  last  declaration  some  theologians  have  con- 
tended, "  that  he  (Satan)  cannot  be  deprived  of  his  dominion  until  deprived  by  a  legiti- 
mate judiciid  decision"  (see  e.g.  Tlte  His.  of  Creation,  and  Doc.  of  Paradise,  and  Man  the 


Prop.  175.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  189 

Image  of  God,  by  P.  F.  Keerl,  1861).  Whatever  notion  may  be  adopted  respecting  the 
latter  idea,  it  is  evident  from  Eph.  2  :  2,  and  6  :  12,  etc.,  that  Satanic  influence  and 
government  is  exerted,  and  that  it  will  be  exerted  down  to  the  Advent  itself.  Abundant 
proof  is  at  hand  to  sustain  this  position,  but  our  line  of  argument  makes  it  unneces- 
sary to  adduce  it  in  this  connection.  It  may  be  supposed  that  John  12  :  31  is  opposed 
to  this,  but  as  all  commentators  (Barnes,  etc.)  admit,  the  casting  out  of  Satan  was  not  then 
performed,  has  not  been  down  to  the  present  day,  and  will  not  be  until  the  Second 
Advent  or  judgment.  They  agree  that  the  provision  was  made  for  the  casting  out,  and 
which  so  insures  it,  that  owing  to  its  certainty  the  future  is  spoken  of  as  present.  Hence 
the  doom  of  Satan  and  the  wicked  is  united,  and  both  experience  the  same  fate  at  the 
same  time.  Hence  Satan  is  and  remains,  the  prince,  ruler,  god  of  this  world  down  to  the 
Second  Coming  of  the  Lord,  when  he  is  cast  out  (Rev.  20). 

1  The  reader  of  the  Bible  will  find  that  the  Scriptures  predict  at  the  closing  of  this  dis- 
pensation—as introductory  to  the  glorious  reign  of  Christ  on  earth,  as  preliminary  to  bring- 
ing the  nations  under  the  sway  and  blessings  of  the  Kingdom — a  time  of  Justice,  made 
necessary  by  the  actual  development  of  human  depravity  ;  a  stern  administration  of 
justice,  which  shall  overwhelm  the  wicked  with  confusion,  shame  and  destruction.  After 
wonderful  mercy  and  long  forbearance,  inflexible  justice,  with  its  fearful  judgments 
executed,  shall  be  adtninstered  over  the  nations,  over  the  Antichrist  and  his  armies. 
A  thousand  prophecies  unerringly  point  to  this  period.  Now  the  Gospel  message  is  one 
of  peace,  of  mercy,  of  continued  patience,  and  of  tendered  love,  and  this  must  con- 
tinue  until  "  the  day  of  vengeance"  has  arrived.  This  teaches  us  two  things  incom- 
patible with  a  conversion  of  the  world  prior  to  the  Advent  :  (1)  That  nations  are  in  such 
a  state  of  open  rebellion  and  wickedness,  that  such  a  time  of  justice  must  come  ;  and 
(2)  that  such  a  time  of  vengeance  with  its  direful  inflictions,  indicates  that  God  will 
employ  something  beside  the  Gospel  to  bring  the  world  to  a  dutiful  consideration  and 
obedience. 

Obs.  7.  Our  argument  might  by  some  be  deemed  incomplete  if  we  did 
not,  at  least  briefly,  indicate  how  the  passages  usually  quoted  in  favor  of 
the  conversion  of  the  world  are  to  be  explained.  1.  The  favorite  text  of 
many  is  found  in  Ps.  2  :  8  "  Ask  of  Me  and  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen 
for  thine  inheritance  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  posses- 
sion.'''' This  wrested  from  its  connection,  is  supposed  to  be  conclusive 
proof.  But  leaving  the  context  and  parallel  passages  to  have  due  force,  it 
is  found  that  this  is  fulfilled,  (a)  when  "  the  nations  rage"  (comp.  Rev.  11  : 
18)  ;  (b)  when  a  confederation  of  "  the  kings  of  the  earth"  and  "  the  rulers'* 
is  formed  against  Christ  (comp.  Rev.  19  :  19)  ;  (c)  when  the  scorn  and 
derision,  the  wrath  and  sore  displeasure  of  the  Lord  shall  be  manifested 
(comp.  wrath  of,  Rev.  11  :  18  and  14  :  10,  etc.)  ;  (d)  when  the  Mighty 
King  shall  be  at  Jerusalem  (comp.  Zech.  14  :  4,  5,  etc.)  ;  (e)  ivhen  instead 
of  being  converted,  "  Thou  shalt  break  them  with  a  rod  of  iron;  Thou 
shall  dash  them  to  pieces  like  a  potter' s  vessel  ;  (f)  and  w7ae»  "  the  Son"  shall 
be  "angry"  and,  if  not  repentant,  they  shall  "perish.'''  It  is  folly  to  make 
this  ruling  with  a  rod  of  iron,  a  converting  process  in  the  light  of  such 
parallel  Scripture  as  Rev.  19  :  15  and  2  :  27  which  not  only  locate  the  time 
of  its  fulfilment  to  be  after  the  Advent,  but  express  the  process  as  one 
terrible  in  its  results  to  the  enemies  of  God  thus  threatened.  2.  Another, 
often  quoted,  text  is  in  Isa.  2  :  18,  20  "  And  the  idols  He  shall  utterly 
abolish."  "  In  that  day  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols 
of  gold  which  they  made  each  one  for  himself  to  worship,  to  the  moles  and 
to  the  bats."  But  the  context  unmistakably  shows  that  this  is  the  result 
of  the  fearful  manifestations  of  God's  judgments.  Particular  emphasis  (as 
if  the  Spirit  foresaw  the  deceptive  interpretation  fastened  upon  the  pas- 
sage) is  laid  upon  the  fact  (repeated)  that  this  is  done  "for  fear  of  the  Lord 
and  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord  "  ("  before  the  terrible  look  of  Jehovah "  so 
Delitzsch.  with  which  comp.  Rev.  19  :  12,  etc.),  "  when  He  ariseth  to  shake 


190  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  175. 

terribly  the  earth"  (or,  "  to  put  the  earth  into  terror,"  so  Delitzsch,  with 
which  comp.  Rev.  1  :  7,  etc.).  It  is  simply  a  perversion  of  language  to 
make  that  which  plainly  describes  a  period  of  terror  and  awe  to  mean  the 
gracious  influences  of  spiritual  converting  power,  etc.  3.  Still  another 
frequently  employed  is  found  in  Isa.  11  :  9  The  earth  shall  be  full  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  ivaters  cover  the  sea."  The  context  informs 
us  when  this  shall  be  fulfilled.  In  the  4th  verse  it  is  said  :  "  He  shall 
smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  His  mouth  and  with  the  breath  of  His  lips 
shall  He  slay  the  wicked."  Now  this  instead  of  being  a  converting  process 
is  described  in  Rev.  19  :  15  at  the  Advent  of  the  King  of  kings,  as  an  act  of 
vengeance,  for  "  out  of  His  mouth  gocth  a  sharp  sword,  that  with  it  He  should 
smite  the  nations  ;  and  He  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  and  He  tread- 
eth  the  wine-press  of  the  fierceness  and  wrath  of  Almighty  God  "  (see  what 
follows).  The  Spirit  thus  locates  the  period  of  fulfilment,  and  to  confirm  it 
gives  us  a  beautiful  Millennial  prediction  (vers.  6,  7,  8)  which  is  repeated  in 
Isa.  65  :  17-25  as  taking  place  when  "  the  New  Heaven  and  the  New  Earth" 
are  created  (see  Prop.  148).  4.  Isa.  25  :  G-12  ;  Micah  4  :  1-4  ;  Isa.  2  :'  2-4 
or  portions  of  it,  are  quoted  as  sustaining  a  conversion  of  the  world  prior  to 
the  Advent,  but  that  this  is  a  perversion  of  these  Scriptures  is  evident  from 
the  context  and  texts.  For  these  passages  stand  related  to  the  terrible 
punishment  inflicted  upon  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  resurrection  of  the 
saints  (as  e.g.  Isa.  25  :  8  comp.  with  1  Cor.  15  ;  54)  the  restoration  of  the 
Jews,  the  reigning  of  the  Messiah  in  Mt.  Zion,  the  removal  of  all  suffering, 
war,  etc.  (comp.  with  Rev.  21:4,  etc.).  They  fall  into  correspondence 
with  numerous  Propositions  already  presented.  5.  Isa.  60  and  54  are 
largely  appropriated  in  behalf  of  the  Whitbyan  theory,  but  how  erroneously 
can  be  seen  in  Props.  148,  151,  146  and  118.  6.  Dan.  2  and  7  are  also  thus 
applied,  but  wrongfully  as  is  evident  from  Props.  121,  123,  126,  127,  128, 
etc.1  7.  Zech.  2  Til  "And  many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord  in 
that  dug  a  ml  shall  he  tug  people  ;"  Zech.  9  :  10  "  He  shall  speak  peace  to  the 
heathen,  and  His  dominion  shall  be  from  sea  even  to  sea  and  from  the  river 
even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;"  Zech.'  8  :  20-23  and  Zech.  14  :*  9  "  The  Lord 
shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth  ;  in  that  day  there  shall  be  one  Lord  and 
His  name  One."  But  if  we  allow  the  same  Spirit  which  gives  such  gracious 
promises  to  locate  their  fulfilment,  it  will  be  found  to  be  at  the  restoration 
of  the  Jewish  nation  when  the  fearful  vengeance  of  God  is  poured  out  upon 
its  enemies  who  have  oppressed  it — when  the  Lord  will  come  and  dwell 
again  with  man,  "choosing  again  Jerusalem"  and  "inheriting  Judali  His 
portion  in  the  holy  land"— when  "  His  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon 
the  Mt.  of  Olives,"  "the  Lord  my  God  shall  come  and  all  the  saints  with 
Thee,"  and  the  wicked  shall  be  utterly  destroyed  out  of  the  earth  and  "  the 
left  of  all  the  nations"  shall  come  and  worship  the  mighty  King.  8. 
Zeph.  3  :  9  promising  the  bestowal  "  to  the  people  a  pure  language,  that 
they  may  all  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve  Him  with  one  con- 
sent," is  realized  only  when  as  context  shows,  "  J  (the  Lord)  rise  up  to  the 
prey  ;  for  my  determination  is  to  gather  the  nations,  that  L  may  assemble 
the  Kingdoms,  to  pour  upon  them  mine  indignation,  even  all  my  fierce 
anger  ;  for  all  the  earth  shall  be  devoured  with  the  fire  of  my  jealousy."  The 
context  points  to  this  preceding  vengeance,  and  then  to  the  restoration  and 
safety  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  to  the  dwelling  of  "  the  King  of  Israel, 
even  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  thee."  9.  The  parable  of  the  Leaven  is  a 
favorite  with  many,  but  we  only  need  to  remark  that  whatever  interpreta- 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  191 

tion  is  given  to  it,  one  thing  is  certain  that  it  does  not  oontradict  the  para- 
bles of  the  tares  and  wheat  and  of  the  drag  net  (see  Prop.  108).  The 
small,  definite  measure  in  which  the  leaven  is  placed  shows  that  it  is  not 
applicable  to  the  world.  10.  Isa.  27  :  6  "  Israel  shall  blossom  and  bud  and 
fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit."  Bat  this  follows  the  destruction  of 
4i  the  Leviathan,'-'  corresponding  with  numerous  other  predictions,  such 
as  Rev.  19  ;  Joel  3,  etc.  11.  Rom.  11,  has  been  examined  in  detail  (Props. 
112,  121,  etc.),  and  the  conversion  of  the  world  is  shown  to  be  identified 
with  the  ending  of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,  the  Advent  of  Jesus  (verse 
26  comp.  with  Matt.  23  :  37-39  ;  Zech.  12  :  10,  etc.)  and  the  restoration 
of  the  Jewish  nation.  12.  Isa.  59  :  19  "  So  shall  they  fear  the  name  of  the 
Lord  from  the  west  and  His  glory  from  the  rising  of  the  sun.  When  the 
enemy  shall  come  in  like  a  flood,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  stand- 
ard against  him.'"  Having  already  shown  that  the  Spirit  has  worked  in  all 
dispensations  and  that  His  most  glorious  displays  belong  to  the  coming  age 
(Prop.  171),  it  is  only  necessary  to  direct  attention  to  the  context  of  this 
passage.  This  state  of  things  predicted  is  preceded  by  the  "  coming  in  of 
the  enemy  as  a  flood"  (viz.  the  last  great  Antichristian  confederation)  and 
the  Coming  of  the  Lord  clad  in  "  the  garments  of  vengeance"  and  pouring 
out  "fury  to  His  adversaries,  recompense  to  His  enemies.'"'*  "  The  Redeemer 
shall  come  to  Zion,"  and  then  the  Spirit  and  truth  shall  evermore  remain 
with  the  Jewish  nation.  The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  Joel  2  :  28-3'.* 
connected  with  Joel  3,  is  allied  with  the  day  of  the  Lord,  the  presence  of 
the  King,  the  overthrow  of  confederated  enemies  and  the  glory  of  restora- 
tion, which  is  abundantly  confirmed  by  various  parallel  passages.  13.  The 
position  occupied  by  some  (as  e.g.  Stearns,  Proph.  Times,  Dec.  18G6,  p. 
186)  that  the  Coming  of  Christ  and  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  "are 
one  and  the  same  thing,"  needs  no  refutation  in  the  light  of  such  declara- 
tions contained  in  John  16  :  7,  Luke  21  :  19,  John  11  :  16,  Acts  2  :  33,  etc. 
14.  Rom.  5  :  20  "  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound,"  is 
adduced  to  prove  the  world's  conversion  before  the  Advent,  but  it  proves 
too  much  for  if  the  deduction  drawn  from  it  is  just,  then  the  Jewish  nation 
instead  of  being  rejected,  etc. ,  ought  to  have  been  converted,  and  so  all 
other  nations  who  have  heard  the  Gospel.  This  passage  only  shows  the 
marvellous  grace  of  God  toward  sinners,  the  freeness  and  largeness  of  prof- 
ferred  salvation,  but  this  grace,  such  salvation,  can  be  refused.  15.  Ps. 
72  :  7,  8,  9,  10  expressive  of  a  world-wide  dominion,  takes  place  when  the 
King  judges  (Prop.  132)  the  people,  having  broken  "  in  pieces  the  oppres- 
sor," having  "  come  down,"  and  the  nations  are  situated  as  represented  in 
Isa.  60,  and  Rev.  21.  16.  The  ending  of  the  Priesthood  of  Christ  (and 
hence  no  more  salvation,  etc.,  for  the  race)  with  this  age,  has  been  noticed, 
Prop.  155,  etc.,  as  opposed  to  Scripture.  17.  The  non-perpetuation  of 
the  race  (and  hence  no  more  probation,  etc.)  at  the  Sec.  Advent  received 
due  attention  under  Prop.  152.  18.  The  commission  as  given  in  Mark 
16  :  15,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature''' 
(or,  as  Sirr,  Lit.  vol.  3,  p.  151,  "  going  into  the  whole  world  announce  the 
glad  tidings  for  the  whole  creation")  and  Matt.  28  :'  19  "  Go  ye  therefore 
and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them"  etc.,  is  supposed  by  many  to  embrace 
the  conversion  of  the  world.  But  it  says  nothing  of  such  conversion  ;  only 
enjoining  the  duty  of  preaching  the  Gospel,  and  plainly  declaring  that  only 
some  shall  be  saved  in  the  attached  language  :  "  He  that  believe/h  and  is 
baptized  shall  be  saved ;  Met  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned.'"2     19. 


192  THE   TTIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.    175. 

Eaton  and  others  lay  much  stress  upon  the  cosmopolitan  nature  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  their  adaptability  to  all  people,  etc.  But  this 
does  not  prove  that  they  will  be  universally  received,  seeing  that  with  all 
their  suitableness  to  make  man  happy,  etc.,  the  large  number  have  thus  far 
rejected  them,  and  that  even  communities  and  countries  that  once 
possessed  the  Gospel  (as  Asia  Minor,  Egypt,  etc.)  have  it  only  to-day  by 
renewed  missionary  effort.  However  well  adapted  to  promote  man's  wel- 
fare, man,  owing  to  the  duties  enjoined  and  self-denial  required,  can  reject 
it.  20.  The  same  is  true  of  the  argument  based  on  the  permanency  and 
duration  of  Christianity,  this  only  indicating  the  constant  carrying  out  of 
the  Divine  purpose  in  saving  some.  The  present  arrangement  is  wholly 
dependent  upon  the  Will  of  God,  and  what  that  Will  contemplates  in 
reference  to  continuation,  etc.,  must  be  ascertained,  not  from  the  estab- 
lishment and  perpetuation  thus  far  of  the  present  ordering,  but  from  the 
design  He  has  in  view  respecting  it.  21.  Finally,  some  refer  us  to  Matt. 
24  :  14  "  This  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world 
for  a  witness  unto  all  nations,"  etc.  Without  showing  how  largely  this 
has  been  already  done  (even  in  apostolic  days,  Col.  1  :  6,  23,  etc.) 
without  the  conversion  of  the  world  following,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that 
the  passage  itself  limits  this  preaching  "'for  a  witness  unto  all  nations. " 
That  is,  the  truth  is  to  be  testified  to  whether  men  accept  of  it  or  not,  so 
that  when  God's  judgments  come  a  reasonable  and  seasonable  warning  shall 
be  given.  It  is  only  a  witness  (comp.  Lange's  Com.  loci,  and  remarks 
of  Alford,  Nast,  Gerlach,  etc.)  and,  if  wo  were  to  take  the  limited  sense4 
applied  to  it  by  Barnes  (Com.  loci)  was  amply  fulfilled  before  the  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem.  Extending  it  down  to  the  end  of  this  age  it  is  still  a 
witness  for  the  truth,  implying  by  the  very  phraseology  that  some  reject  the 
Gospel.  So  that  even  Chrysostom  on  this  passage  says:  "Attend  with 
care  to  what  is  read.  He  said  not  when  it  hath  been  believed  by  all  men, 
but  when  it  hath  been  preached  to  all.  For  this  cause  he  also  said,  ''for 
a  witness  to  cdl  nations,'  to  show  that  He  doth  not  wait  for  men  to  believe, 
and  then  for  Him  to  come,  since  that  phrase  ''for  a  witness'  hath  this 
meaning — for  accusation,  for  reproof,  for  condemnation  of  those  that  have 
not  believed."  Home  (J n trod.,  vol.  1,  p.  137),  in  answer  to  an  objection 
drawn  from  the  possession  of  the  Gospel  by  countries  that  afterward  fell 
into  gross  unbelief,  aptly  remarks  :  "  we  conceive  that  the  prophecies  are 
fulfilled  when  all  parts  of  the  world  shall  have  had  the  offer  of  Chris- 
tianity."6 

1  Thus  Gregory  (Four  Gospels,  p.  124),  makes  Matt.  28  :  10-20  to  include  "  the  spiritual 
conquest  of  the  world."  But  we  need  not  be  surprised  at  such  an  interpretation  when 
he  has  it  verified  in  the  prophetic  announcements  of  Dan.  2  :  44,  45,  and  7  :  27,  etc. 
Multitudes  arrive  at  the  same  illogical  and  unscriptural  conclusion. 

5  So  in  Isa.  G2  :  10,  when  the  standard  is  to  be  lifted  up  for  the  people,  it  is  linked  with 
the  Advent  of  the  Saviour,  and  as  this  Advent  is  described  as  a  Coming  in  vengeance  and 
to  recompense  and  to  deliver  (so  especially  next  ch. )  it  corresponds  with  other  Scripture. 
A  standard  is  emblematic  of  the  gathering  and  war  then  resulting,  and  is  engrafted  in  the 
Mill,  descriptions  as  in  Isa.  49  :  22. 

3  As  the  commission  seems  to  be  the  main  proof  of  various  writers,  a  few  words  may 
be  added.  If  the  commission  is  to  be  pressed  to  such  an  extent,  then  the  same  principle 
would  have  the  world  converted  in  the  days  of  the  Apostles,  Col.  1  :  23  ;  Rom.  10  :  18  ; 
Horn  1:8;  Acts  26  :  16-18.  Those  to  whom  the  commission  was  given  never  stated  that 
its  intention  was  to  convert  the  world  by  preaching  the  Gospel.  When  explaining  the 
object  and  results  of  their  preaching,  it  is  simply  that  they  "  are  ambassadors  for  Christ" 
p raying  us  to  be  "reconciled  to  God  "  and  that  "  the  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to  them  that 


Prop.  175.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  193 

perish  foolishness,  but  unto  us  which  are  saved,  it  is  the  power  of  God."  Therefore  they 
declare,  "  it  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe"  and 
that  they  are  "  made  all  things  to  all  men  that  they  might  by  all  means  save  some." 
Compare  the  language  of  Clement,  Epis.  to  Cor.  ch.  5,  Eusebius  B.  2,  ch.  3,  and  Theodoret 
(Bh.  Newton's  Diss.,  vol.  2,  p.  46),  Home's  Introd.,  p.  131,  Justin,  Dial,  with  Irypho,  p. 
345,  Irenaeus  Gont.  llozres,  I.  3,  Tertullian  Adv.  Judceos,  c.  7  and  14,  showing  by  usage 
that  the  word  "all,"  etc.,  is  not  to  be  pressed  (Col.  1  :  6,  etc.),  to  a  universality  embrac- 
ing literally  all  individuals  or  even  nations  (simply  denoting  a  general  diffusion  of  the 
truth)  which  led  Neander  (His.  Ch.  Church,  vol.  1,  p.  183),  to  say  that  Paul  was  mistaken 
because  he  could  not  "  estimate  correctly  the  population  of  the  globe  at  that  period. " 
That  it  has  its  limitations  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  millions  have  died,  since  the  Gospel 
was  given,  who  never  as  much  as  heard  of  it.  Dr.  Brown  (Ch.  Sec.  Com.,  p.  317),  takes,  in 
order  to  make  out  an  argument  against  us,  an  unwarranted  liberty  with  Matt.  28  :  19,  read- 
ing :  "  Go  ye,  therefore,  and  make  disciples  of  all  nations."  This  undue  liberty  is  seen 
(1)  by  ignoring  the  limitation  given  to  this  commission  by  other  Scripture  ;  (2)  by  confin- 
ing the  discipleship  to  nations,  instead  of  individuals  out  of  nations  ;  (3)  by  rejecting  the 
overwhelming  testimony  of  critics,  versions,  commentators,  etc.,  which  limits  the  idea  to 
teaching  and  making  disiples  out  of  all  nations,  i.e.,  excluding  none  from  the  Gospel; 
(4)  by  extreme  rigidity  of  application,  he  would  make  the  Apostles  themselves  disobedient 
to  the  commission  and  practically  failing  in  carrying  it  out  ;  (5)  by  ignoring  the  past, 
which  has  failed  to  disciple  a  single  nation  ;  (6)  and  by  ignoring  the  future  which  shows 
the  nations  undiscipled  at  Sec.  Advent. 

4  Attention  is  called  to  the  contradictions  in  which  our  opponents  involve  themselves 
when  quoting  this  passage  of  Matt.  24  against  us.  Nearly  all  tell  us  that  Matt.  24  refers 
to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  But  observe  that  if  this  is  so,  then  they  have  no  right 
to  quote  one  verse  in  the  same  connection,  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  against  us,  be- 
cause in  consistency  with  their  own  interpretation  it  must  relate  only  to  the  time  previous 
to  that  destruction.  Again,  if  they  thus  limit  it  in  time,  as  consistent  apiJication  from 
their  standpoint  demands,  then  according  to  their  idea  of  its  meaning,  comprehending 
the  conversion  of  the  world,  it  never  was  fulfilled,  and  Jesus  failed  in  His  prophecy. 
The  Gospel  in  the  early  ages  was  widely  disseminated  as  a  witness,  and  so  late  a  writer 
as  Arnobius  Jr.  (a.d.  4G0)  on  Ps.  147  (quoted  by  Lond.  Quart.  Review,  in  an  art.  on  "  The 
Anc.  Brit.  Church,")  remarks  :  "  So  swiftly  runneth  the  Word  of  God,  that  whereas  for 
so  many  thousand  years  He  was  known  in  Judea  alone,  now  within  a  few  years  He  has 
been  revealed  to  the  Indians  on  the  East  and  to  the  Britons  on  the  West."  Dr.  Leask 
has  conclusively  shown  that  Matt.  24,  in  view  of  the  warnings,  cautions,  and  events  given 
by  Jesus,  which  extend  down  to  the  Second  Advent,  positively  forbids  the  conversion  of 
the  world  prior  to  it  (Proph.  Times,  vol.  4,  No.  12).  5lany  writers  of  the  greatest  ability 
affirm  the  same,  and  that  this  melancholy  prophecy,  unbroken  by  a  single  ray  of  Whit- 
byan  prediction — now  so  popular — inc'ontestibly  proves  no  Millennium  previous  to  the 
Advent.     (Comp.  Prop.  174.) 

5  Dr.  Brown  (Com.,  Mark  13  :  10)  makes  this  "  witness"  to  be  one  of  warning.  Books 
have  appeared  with  the  significant  title  :  The  Christian  Ministry,  (as)  the  Divinely 
Appointed  Agency  ><>  reform  the  World.  Christ's  work  is  thus  specifically  deputed  to  the 
ministry.  It  is  well,  briefly,  to  notice  the  Scripture  statements  on  the  subject  :  (1)  that 
they  are  to  preach  to  all  nations,  none  excluded,  Matt.  28  :  18-20,  etc.  ;  (2)  that  some  will 
believe  and  others  will  not,  2  Thess.  2  :  10-12  ;  1  Cor.  1  :  21  ;  2  Cor.  4  :  3,  etc.  ;  (3)  that 
they  are  sent  as  Jesus  was  sent,  John  20  :  21  ;  (4)  that  they  labor  for  the  elect's  sake, 
2  Tim.  2  :  10,  etc. ;  (5)  that  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent  they  must  suffer  for  the  truth's  sake, 
2  Tim.  3  :  11,  12  ;  1  Tim.  4  :  10,  etc.  ;  (5)  that  their  message  can  be  received  in  vain, 
2  Cor.  6  : 1,  etc.  ;  (O)that  in  continued  opposition  to  such  a  ministry  a  false  one  shall  also- 
exist,  1  Tim.  4:1-3;  2  Tim.  3  :  5  ;  2  Thess.  2  ;  Acts  20  :  30  ;  2  Cor.  11  :  13,  etc.  ;  (7) 
that  many  shall  after  their  ministry  be  themselves  rejected,  Matt.  7  :  22,  23,  etc. ;  (8)  that 
they  shall  always  be  despised  by  some,  2  Tim.  4  :  3,  4  ;  1  Thess.  4  :  8,  etc.  Now  the 
divine  portraiture  is  very  different  from  the  pleasing  but  misleading  picture  presented  in 
such  works.  On  the  other  hand,  when  Rev.  Dr.  Ewer,  of  Christ  Church,  New  York,  in 
his  discourses  on  the  "  Failure  of  Protestantism,"  makes  much  of  not  holding  the 
masses,  of  retrogressions,  etc.,  (and  hence  advocates  a  return  to  the  high  hierarchical 
system)  he  simply  fails  to  recognize  the  scriptural  design  of  this  dispensation  (which  has 
been  carried  on  without  a  failure),  and  substitutes  his  own  ideas  in  its  place. 

Obs.  8.  On  a  subject  of  this  kind,  in  view  of  the  influence  exerted, 
it  may  be  in  place  to  add  the  testimony  of  some  additional  witnesses  to 


194  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  175. 

aid  the  student  in  forming  a  judgment  respecting  the  same.  Having 
already  alluded  to  the  early  Church,  Reformers  and  Confessions,  the 
declaration  of  the  Latter  Confession  of  Helvitia  (15G6)  may  be  annexed. 
After,  in  the  eleventh  article,  saying  that  Jesus  shall  return  again  "  even 
then  when  wickedness  shall  chiefly  reign  in  the  world,"  etc.,  the  Confessors 
proceed  :  "  Moreover  we  condemn  the  Jewish  dreams,  that  before  the  day 
of  judgment  there  shall  be  a  golden  world  in  the  earth  ;  and  that  the  godly 
shall  possess  the  Kingdoms  of  the  world,  their  wicked  enemies  being 
trodden  under  foot  :  for  the  evangelical  truth,  Matt.  24  and  25,.  and  Luke 
21,  and  the  Apostolic  doctrine  in  the  2d  Epis.  to  the  Thess.  2,  and  in  the 
2d  Epis.  to  Tim.  3  and  4,  are  found  to  teach  far  otherwise."  Olshausen, 
Com.  vol.  1,  p.  117,  and  in  various  places  is  very  decided  in  rejecting  the 
Whitbyan  theory,  advocating  "  that  with  the  arrival  of  this  reign  of  peace 
there  will  be  connected  on  the  one  hand,  the  appearance  of  Jesus  Christ 
and  a  resurrection  if  many  saints  and  pious  men,  and  on  the  other,  a 
previous  mighty  si  niggle  on  the  part  of  evil,"  etc.  Nissen  in  his  Lectures 
on  Luther's  Smaller  Catechism  on  the  doctrine  of  the  Millennium,  pointedly 
rejects  the  conversion  of  the  world  before  the  personal  Advent  of  Jesus, 
saying  :  "  It  is  a  false  widespread  idea  to  which  we  yield  quite  too  readily, 
that  the  Gospel  once  introduced  into  the  world  and  embodied  in  the 
Church,  must  now  even  more  and  more  impregnate  and  pervade  every- 
thing with  its  blessing  :  state,  art,  science,  and  civilization  ;  and  that 
just  in  this  way  a  universal  renovation  of  the  world  is  to  be  brought  about. 
But  the  Holy  Scriptures  everywhere  and  throughout,  in  all  the  prophecies, 
as  well  in  the  Old  Test,  as  in  the  Xew,  present  a  very  different  concep- 
tion of  things."  He  advocates  the  continued  existence  of  evil  powers, 
which  shall  culminate  in  intense  hatred  toward  the  Church  and  the 
exaltation  of  Antichrist,  until  Christ  personally  comes,  remarking  : 
"  When  the  pride  of  Antichrist,  and  the  self-security  and  fearful  sins  of 
the  world,  as  the  straits  and  griefs  of  God's  people,  have  reached  their 
highest  point,  then  shall  Jesus  Christ  be  revealed  from  heaven,  to  make  an 
end  if  lite  course  of  this  world  and  to  establish  His  glorious  Kingdom  upon 
the  earth"  Dean  Alford's  (Crit.  Com.  on  New  Test.)  sentiments  are  well 
known,  and  hence  we  only  need  to  quote  one  passage  illustrative  of  the 
same  :  "  Tlie  Lord  will  come  in  person  to  this  earth;  His  risen  elect  will 
reign  herewith  II  im.  This  is  my  firm  persuasion,  and  not  mine  alone, 
but  that  of  multitudes  of  Christ's  waiting  people,  as  it  was  that  of  His 
Primitive  Apostolic  Church,  before  controversy  blinded  the  eyes  of  the  Fathers 
to  the  light  of  prophecy."  Dr.  Marsh,  after  many  years  of  prophetic  study, 
declared  (Mem.  by  his  daughter)  :  "  The  complete  victory  of  truth  I  do 
not  expect  until  the  Second  Advent  of  our  blessed  Lord.  I  have  no  hope 
of  a  general  or  universal  spread  of  Christian  knowledge  till  He  comes." 
"  When  lie  has  taken  out  of  the  Gentiles  a  people  for  His  name  and 
called  a  remnant  of  the  Jews  according  to  the  election  of  grace,  then  He 
will  return  and  convert  the  Jewish  nation,  put  down  all  rule  and  nil 
authority  and  power  opposed  to  His  Gospel,  and  cause  the  Jcnotvledge  of  Him- 
selfto  cover  the  earth.  So  I  read  in  every  passage  of  Holy  Writ,  and  long 
for  the  day  ;  for  then  Satan  will  be  bound  and  Creation  will  cease  to 
groan."  "  Not  till  then  will  the  enemy  be  bound  and  error  be  banished, 
and  Jew  and  Gentile  form  one  flock,  under  one  Shepherd."  Such 
extracts  might  be  multiplied  from  Lange's  Com.  (Especially  from  the 
Expos,  of  1st  and  2d  Thess.  and  1st  and  2d  Peter  by  Dr.   Lillie),  Bengel's 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  195 

Gnomon.  Eyle's  Expos.  Thoughts  on  the  Gospels,  Tholuck's  Writings, 
Kelly's  Commentaries,  Auberlen's  Works,  Pridham  On  the  Psalms, 
Jones's  Notes,  Demarest's  Com.  Second  Peter,  Delitzsch's  Works,  and  many 
others,1  indicative  both  of  the  retention  of  the  primitive  faith  by  some  able 
men,  and  that,  on  the  score  of  advocacy,  it  has  no  lack  of  talented  de- 
fenders. Indeed  the  latter  is  so  much  the  case  that  Dr.  Ed.  Beecher,  a 
sympathizer  with  the  Whitbyan  theory,  calls  attention  to  the  fact  in 
the  Independent  of  Aug.  24th,  1871,  and  declares  that  "  their  power 
seems  to  be  increasing,"  that  "  the  more  recent  Commentaries  are  tending 
to  undermine  the  views"  of  the  "Whitbyan  hypothetical  advocates,  and 
adds:  "this  is  true  of  Alford,  Ellicott,  Lunge  and  his  co-laborers, 
especially  Drs.  Littie,  Auberlen,  and  Riggeribach.  To  these  we  must  add 
the  writings  of  English  and  American  Millenarians,  the  older  and  the  more 
recent.  And  there  is  at  present  no  adequate  counterpoise  to  the  weight  of 
the  authority  of  the  commentators  whom  we  have  mentioned."2  This 
frank  confession  is  followed  by  warnings  to  urge  his  party  to  renewed 
efforts  to  meet  this  "  undermining"  process.  Alas,  prophecy  teaches  that 
the  multitude  will  only  too  eagerly  follow  the  same.  Very  few,  compara- 
tively, are  willing  to  investigate  the  subject  as  Bh.  Henshaw.  who  says  : 
(Epis.  Recorder,  1815)  "  Although  we  have  formerly  advocated  the  popular 
theory  (viz.  Whitbyan)  ourselves — the  common  belief  that  there  will  be  a 
conversion  of  all  nations  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  a  state  of  universal 
peace  and  holiness  throughout  the  world  for  the  space  of  a  thousand  years 
before  the  Sec.  Advent  of  our  Lord,  is,  to  our  view,  utterly  irreconcilable 
with  what  the  Scriptures  teach."  Many  too,  convinced  of  the  unten- 
ableness  of  the  prevailing  opinion  and  of  the  soundness  of  our  deductions, 
instead  of  proclaiming  their  views  and  enjoying  the  happy  consciousness  of 
having  warned  and  encouraged  the  Church  (as  e.g.  Rev.  John  King  Lord, 
on  his  death-bed)  hold  them  back  from  the  public,  and  at  the  close  of 
life  express  their  regret  for  such  reticence  (as  e.g.  the  talented  Rev.  Hall, 
see  Duffield  Diss,  on  Proph.  p.  259). 

1  For  the  sake  of  the  student  who  desires  to  prosecute  researches  in  this  direction,  we 
append  a  few  more  references.  Dr.  Seiss's  essay  A  Question  in  Eschatology,  Shimeall's  / 
will  come  Again  and  Reply  to  Prof.  Shedd,  The  Literalist  5  vols.  8vo,  containing  writings 
from  Brooks,  McNeile,  Noel,  Bickersteth,  Anderson,  Cunninghame,  Cox,  Sirr,  Haber- 
shon,  Thorpe,  Woodward  and  others,  Bloombury  Lent  Leetures,  10  vols.  Duffield's 
Diss,  on  Proph.,  Lord's  Coming  and  Reign  of  Christ,  Ramsey's  Messiah's  Reign,  Taylor's 
Voice  of  the  Church,  Time  of  the  End  by  a  Congregationalist,  Hasting's  Signs  of  the  Times, 
Brookes's  Maranatha,  expose  the  unscriptural  character  of  the  Whitbyan  theory.  The 
same  is  true  of  the  works  of  H.  and  A.  Bonar,  Mede,  Begg,  Bh.  and  Sir  I.  Newton,  Birks, 
Keith,  the  Duke  of  Manchester,  Sir  E.  Denny,  Byant,  Gumming,  Frere,  Ogilvy,  Leask, 
Dallas,  Henshaw,  Oswald,  Maitland,  Auberlen,  Luthardt,  Heubner,  Lord,  Von  Gerlach, 
Ward,  and,  in  brief,  a  large  ntimber  of  Millenarian  writers.  See  extended  lists  given  in 
Seiss's  Last  Times,  Ap.,  Bickersteth's  Guide,  etc.  For  additional  commentaries  and  expo- 
sitions bearing  on  the  subject  the  following  can  be  advantageously  consulted,  Greswell's 
Expos.  Parables,  etc.,  Mcintosh's  Corns.,  Bonar' s  Com.  on  Psalms,  Tregelles  on  Daniel, 
Elliott's  Horce  Apoc.  Auberlen's  Proph.  of  Diniel,  Lord's  Apoc,  Roos's  Daniel.,  etc., 
Snell  on  Rev.,  Gill's  Com.,  etc.  For  more  fugitive  references  and  expressions  see  Dr. 
Giesy's  sermon  (Proph.  Times,  Feb.,  1871),  John  Foster's  opinion  (Life,  vol.  1,  p.  91), 
Chalmers's  Sabbath  Readings,  p.  311,  on  Ps.  50  :  1-6  ;  Ps.  68  :  18-35,  and  Evidences,  vol.  2, 
p.  372,  etc.,  the  Confession  of  Faith  presented  to  Charles  II.  and  signed  by  John  Banyan 
and  others  (Crosby's  Bis.  Bap.,  Ap.),  Fletcher's  Letter  on  the  Prophecies,  (dated  a.d.  1775, 
Works,  vol.  10),  Hewitson's  Memoirs,  p.  86,  etc.,  Gilfillan's  Bards  of  the  Bible,  p.  348,  etc., 
Sabine's  Letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr. Raffles  author  of  the  Jubilee  Hymn,"  a.d.  1846,  Bhs.  Mcllvaine 
and  Hopkins  cited  in  Winthrop's  able  Letters,  Heber's  Hymns,  Oetinger's  Sermons, 
Spurgeon's  Sermons,   vol.  7,  p.  373,   Spaulding's  Lee,  pp.  45,   51,   214,   etc.,   Spencer's 


196  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  175. 

Conformity  to  the  Augs.  Confession,  John  Wesley's  Works,  New  York  ed.,  vol.  5,  pp.  726-7 
and  vol.  6,  p.  7-43,  Charles  Wesley's  Hymns,  Toplady's  Sers.,  B.  3,  p.  470,  Tyng's  Lectures, 
Tholuck's  essay  Evang.  Theol.  in  Germany,  and  Christlieb's  Essay  on  Infidelity,  and  several 
other  papers  in  Proceedings  of  Evang.  Alliance,  N.  Y.,  1873,  indicating  prevalence  and 
continuation  of  wickedness,  etc.,  etc.  Last,  but  not  least,  such  works  as  Van  Oosterzee's 
Christian  Dogmatics,  Breckenridge's  Knowledge  of  God,  Subjectively  Considered,  p.  677, 
Duffield's  Sermon  (delivered  at  the  opening  of  the  Synod  of  New  Jersey,  1866),  and  his 
Essay  in  Pre-Mill.  Essays,  p.  405,  etc.,  Lillie's  Miss.  Sermon  (deliv.  at  the  Synod  of  New 
York,  1865),  etc. 

2  This  counterpoise  is  sought  in  issuing  new  editions  of  some  older  commentaries 
(Scott,  Henry,  Doddridge,  etc.),  in  circulating  commentaries  of  a  popular  cast  (as 
Barnes's,  the  Amer.  Tract  Society's  Notes,  etc.,)  and  in  efforts  to  produce  new  ones  (as 
The  Speaker's,  etc.)  But  unfortunately  none  of  these  allow  our  reasons  to  appear  for  our 
interpretation,  and  then  present  reasons  why  they  should  not  be  accepted,  excepting  such 
as  they  suppose  are  easily  refuted. 

Ohs.  9.  Attention  may  be  appropriately  called  to  a  number  of  partic- 
ulars connected  with  this  subject.  1.  Various  parties  have  noticed  that 
the  very  name  given  (in  Greek)  to  the  Church,  is  significant  of  a  part 
being  taken  from  the  whole.  "  Ekklesia,"  as  critics  assure  us,  denotes  a 
calling  forth  out  of,  or  from  among,  others,  meaning  therefore  a  body 
separated  from  others  or  the  mass  ;  these  form  the  company  of  believers, 
the  assemblage  of  the  faithful.  Therefore,  the  name  chosen  to  designate 
God's  people  in  this  dispensation  being  applicable  down  to  the  end  of  the 
age,  itself  intimates  that  it  always,  to  the  end  of  this  dispensation,  will 
only  compose  a  portion  taken  out  of  the  nation.  This  is  confirmed  by  the 
applied  terms  elect"  if  chosen,"  etc.,  which  in  themselves  convey  the 
idea  that  others  remain  outside  of  this  favored  body.  2.  The  preaching  of 
the  Gospel  and  the  acceptance  of  the  same  has  always  more  or  less  been 
accompanied  by  the  division  predicted  by  Christ,  Luke  12  :  51-53,  and  the 
hatred  prophesied  John  15  :  19.  Innumerable  instances  from  the  days  of 
the  apostles  to  the  present  evidence  its  continued  truthfulness.  But 
comparatively  few  families  are  all  believers,  while  no  city,  town  or  village, 
however  great  the  advantages  but  has  its  unbelievers,  and  such  in  the 
majority.  The  cities,  too,  that  have  been  the  most  highly  favored  by 
able  preaching,  possessing  the  highest  talent  of  the  Church,  and  being  the 
centres  of  great  missionary  societies,  have  an  overwhelming  'majority  on 
the  side  of  evil,  thus  teaching  us  that  the  true  sons  and  daughters  of 
God  always,  in  comparison  with  the  mass  around  them,  compose  a  "  small 
flock."1  'S.  The  conversion  of  the  world,  at  some  period  of  time,  is  most 
certain,  for  God  has  sworn  to  bring  it  about.  Thus  e.g.  Isa.  45  :  23,  "  / 
have  sworn  by  Myself,  the  Word  is  gone  out  of  my  mouth  in  righteousness  and 
shall  not  return,  That  unto  me  every  knee  shall  bov),  every  tongue  shall 
swear."  But  in  strict  accordance  with  our  argument,  Paul  quotes  this 
Eom.  14  :  10,  11  as  applicable  to  the  time  when  Christ  is  seated  upon  the 
judgment  seat  or  throne  after  His  Advent  (see  Props.  17G,  132  and 
133). 2  4.  Taking  into  consideration  the  efforts  made  at  Christianizing 
the  nations,  the  amount  of  success,  the  losses  and  retrogressions,  the  millions 
in  heathen  darkness,  the  millions  only  nominally  Christian,  the  millions 
in  unbelief,  the  appliances  of  evil,  etc.,  we  are  not  surprised  that  some 
advocating  the  Whitbyan  opinion,  express  themselves  (misconceiving  the 
design  of  the  dispensation),  as  Dr.  Lyman  Beecher  (Taylor's  Voice  of  the 
Church,  p.  9.),  "  It  would  take  to  all  eternity  to  bring  the  Millennium  at 
the  rate  that  modern  revivals  progress. "    Dr.  Leask  states  in  Happy  Tears 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  197 

that  an  eminent  missionary  made  a  calculation  how  long  it  would  take  the 
world  to  be  converted  and  gave  "  as  the  result  the  astounding  answer  of  a 
million  of  years."  Numerous  calculations,  some  exceedingly  sanguine, 
exist,  but  the  Millennium  is  not  dependent  upon  any  such  anticipated 
results.  It  solely  depends  upon  the  number  of  the  elect  that  God  has 
determined  to  gather  out,  and  when  the  number  is  completed,  no  sooner 
or  later,  then  will  it  come.  Hence  missionaries,  ministers,  and  others, 
engaged  in  proclaiming  the  Gospel  have  no  reason  to  be  discouraged  at  the 
apparent  want  of  success  ;  for  whether  men  accept  or  reject  the  truth,  the 
appointed  work  of  procuring  these  elect  ones  is  going  on,  and  also  that  of 
making  the  Gospel  a  witness.3  5.  No  important  creed  or  confession  of 
faith  has  incorporated  the  Whitbyan  hypothesis,  while  a  number  of  them 
employ  language  which  is  irreconcilable  with  its  adoption.  This  indicates 
both  the  more  ancient  faith  and  the  more  recent  origin  of  the  prevailing 
view  ;  and,  may  we  add,  the  modern  departure  from  the  spirit  of  the  older 
confessions,4  6.  The  limited  chronological  periods,  no  matter  from 
what  point  we  may  reckon  their  commencement,  are  opposed  to  the 
Whitbyan  theory.  For  they  are  connected  in  their  ending  with  events 
which  can  only  transpire  at  the  Advent  of  Christ,  such  as  e.g.  the 
resurrection  in  Daniel  12  ;  Rev.  11,  etc.  These  periods  embrace  the 
depression  of  the  Church  under  Antichristiau  influence.  7.  The  declara- 
tions respecting  an  incoming  dispensation  are  ignored  by  the  advocates  of 
this  theory,  as  e.g.  the  facts  adduced  under  Props.  133,  137,  138,  139,  110, 
and  113.  8.  This  is  a  subject  of  prophecy.  When  the  pulpit,  platform, 
and  press  describe,  in  glowing  terms  and  with  beautiful  figures  of  speech, 
the  Whitbyan  golden  age,  few  men  stop  to  think  that  the  speaker  or  writer 
is  entering  the  region  of  unfulfilled  prophecy.  The  stale  objection  that 
prophecy  can  only  be  understood  after  its  fulfilment,  levelled  against  us, 
is  no  more  thought  of,  and  the  utmost  positiveness  is  manifested.  Such, 
however,  are  predicting  and  as  the  prediction  happens  to  harmonize  with 
the  popular  view,  no  feeling  is  excited  against  it,  but  it  is  greeted  with  the 
heartiest  approbation.  We  could  point  to  numerous,  and  really  finely 
executed,  sermons,  hymns,  etc.,  on  this  subject  that  are  highly  esteemed  but 
which  do  not  contain  one  solitary  script  a  rally  derived  proof  in  favor  of  the 
position  maintained,  and  yet  they  are  favorites.  Just  so  soon  as  our  view 
is  stated  and  defended,  then,  owing  to  its  opposition  to  popular  concep- 
tions, and  the  humilating  facts  connected  therewith,  it  is  immediately  felt 
to  be  one  relating  to  unfulfilled  prophecy,  and  some— overlooking  their  own 
confident  entrance  into  the  identical  field  of  inquiry — are  ready  to  censure 
us  for  discussing  the  matter.  Wisdom  and  prudence  dictate  that  both  are 
dealing  with  the  future,  and  as  that  future  can  only  be  ascertained  in  so 
far  as  God  has  revealed  it,  he  only  is  correct,  whose  view  is  the  most  solidly 
based  on  the  Word  of  God.  9.  How  widely  the  two  views  differ  in  the 
instruction  which  they  impart  to  the  people.  The  one  tells  them  that 
they  are  to  look  for  peace  and  prosperity  ;  for  wars  to  cease  ;  for  a  uni- 
versal spread  of  holiness  and  happiness — in  brief — for  "  the  year  of 
Jubilee"  to  come  in  this  dispensation  through  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel. 
The  other  flatly  contradicts  this,  saying  that  instead  of  peace  and  pros- 
perity to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  they  must  expect  the  future  to  bring 
forth  war,  distress,  and  perplexity  ;  that  unbelief  and  wickedness  will 
exist  down  to  Christ's  Advent  and  just  previous  to  His  Coming  will  greatly 
increase  ;  that  instead  of  happiness  widely  extended  and  universally  diffused, 


19S  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  175. 

we  must  await,  before  the  Mill,  age  is  introduced,  the  most  fearful 
calamities  to  befall  the  earth.  The  Whitbyan  view  takes  the  Millennial 
predictions  and  applies  them  to  this  dispensation,  promising  that,  by  the 
Gospel  and  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  evils  shall  be  rooted  out  and  "  the 
glory  of  the  latter  day  be  brought  about."  The  Primitive  Church  view 
makes  no  such  vain  promises,  telling  the  people  that  apostatizing  from  the 
truth  shall  prevail  ;  that  the  awful  scenes  predicted  by  Daniel,  Isaiah,  and 
John  must  first  be  witnessed  ;  that  the  time  of  trouble  to  come  upon  the 
nations  mentioned  by  all  the  prophets  must  first  be  realized,  and  the  last 
great  earthquake  convulsing  the  earth  must  first  be  felt  ;  that  the  terrors 
and  the  joys  of  the  Second  Advent,  the  fearful  tribulation,  the  terrible  tread- 
ing of  the  wine-press,  the  dreadful  supper  of  human  flesh  must  first  come 
to  pass  before  this  world  is  ever  converted  to  God,  and  King  Jesus  will 
introduce  the  promised  blessedness.  The  contrast  between  the  two  views 
is  great.  The  one  prophesies  "  smooth  things,"  administering  to  the 
Church,  what  Mather  called  "  the  sleeping  medicine,"  until,  as  predicted, 
not  merely  the  foolish  but  also  the  wise  virgins  slumber  and  sleep  not  look- 
ing for  the  Coming  of  the  Bridegroom.  It  lauds  and  magnifies  the 
Church  until  it  deems  itself  "  rich  and  increased  in  goods  and  having  need 
of  nothing,"  not  knowing  that  it  is  "poor  ami  blind  ami  miked;"  for 
ignoring  faith  in  the  Coming  of  the  Master,  and  in  the  events  connected 
therewith,  it  is  utterly  unprepared.  It  places  that  Advent  into  an  indefi- 
nite, distant  future,  that  it  loses  all  practical  force.  Denying  the  literal 
fulfilment  of  the  covenants,  and  of  prophecy  based  upon  the  same  ;  reject- 
ing the  power  of  a  first  resurrection,  and  the  tremendous  issues  related 
thereto  ;  refusing  to  warn  the  people  ;  putting  death  in  the  place  of  the 
Advent,  etc.,  it  soothes  nations,  corporations,  bodies  ecclesiastical,  and 
individuals  into  the  complacent  and  fatal  idea  that  present  institutions, 
means,  etc.,  are  to  be  prepetuated  for  ages  to  the  gradual  and  final  exalta- 
tion of  the  race.5  The  other  prophesies  both  joyful  and  terrible  things — 
joyful  to  him  who  can  embrace  "the  blessed  hope,"  but  fearful  to  him 
who  cannot  hope  for  salvation  when  Christ  comes.  It  faithfully,  amid  com- 
passionate expressions  of  pity  and  affected  wit  at  its  ignorance  and  folly, 
warns  the  Church  and  world  of  coming  events,  exhorts  to  be  constantly 
watchful  and  prepare  for  the  return  of  the  Lord,  and  encourages  the 
faithful  to  observe  the  thickening  signs  of  approaching  deliverance,  and 
"  to  look  up  and  lift  up  their  heads  for  their  Redemption  drawefh  nigh."  It 
tells,  pointing  to  Iloly  Writ  for  proof,  them  that  Jesus  and  His  co-heirs 
are  to  introduce,  after  smiting  and  overthrowing  all  confederations  of 
wickedness,  the  knowledge  and  glory  of  the  Lord  which  is  to  fill  the 
whole  earth,  earnestly  cautioning  every  one  to  stand  in  awe  and  sin  not 
lest  they  perish  under  coming  wrath.  10.  Notice,  briefly,  the  individual 
responsibility  we  are  under  in  holding  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  views. 
If  accountable  to  God  for  our  doctrinal  position,  and  the  manner  in  which 
we  understand  and  treat  His  Word,  especially  is  this  true  of  a  doctrine 
involving  such  important  matter  and  results.  If  our  doctrine  is  wrong, 
we  are  held  responsible  for  it,  and  must  render  an  account  for  holding  it. 
But  in  the  last  day,  we  at  least  can  put  in  two  pleas  before  the  Judge  that 
wrould  largely  palliate  our  error,  viz.,  that  our  doctrine  was  contained  in 
the  plain  grammatical  sense  of  the  Word  :  and  that  we  injured  no  man  in 
urging  him  to  live  soberly,  righteously  ami  godly,  because  of  an  impending 
Advent,  because  of  frightful  judgments  soon  to  be  poured  out,  because  the 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  199 

coveted  first  resurrection  was  nigli  at  hand,  because  the  wicked  would  be 
destroyed,  this  earth  be  renewed  and  Christ  and  His  saints  reign.  AVTe  can 
justly  claim  that  the  entire  tendency  of  our  view,  thus  given  in  the  literal 
sense  of  Scripture,  was  to  preserve  men  from  sin  that  they  might  inherit 
with  Christ  and  participate  in  His  glory.  But  what  if  our  doctrine  is 
true  and  the  opposite  is  an  error  ?  Will  not  God  hold  such  account- 
able for  the  error  entertained?  Undoubtedly  so,  as  Jesus  Himself  declared 
Matt.  5  :  19.  See  the  tendency  of  the  doctrine  as  noticed  in  Obs.  9,  aud  con- 
sider that  if  those  fearful  scenes  of  tribulation  shall  come  upon  the 
Church,  as  predicted,  then  multitudes  that  have  been  deceived  by  "  the  peace 
and  safety"  cry,  when  aroused  from  their  Whithyan  dream  of  security  by 
the  persecuting  and  bloody  demands  of  a  culminated  Antichrist,  will 
accuse  the  ministry  of  having  blinded  them  to  the  truth.  To  lead  men  on 
and  on  by  a  false  hope  until  it  gives  place  to  appalling  despair  and 
martyrdom  under  Antichristian  power  is  no  trifling  affair.  Alas,  that 
good  and  learned  men  should  engage  in  such  a  work,  urging  on  by  their 
vivid  and  flattering  portrayals  of  the  conversion  of  the  world,  the  even 
now  generally  accepted  opinion,  "  My  Lord  delay  eth  His  Coming,"  etc. 
The  best  of  motives,  and  the  plea  of  ignorance,  may  indeed  lessen  to 
some  extent  the  weight  of  censure,  but  the  plainness,  with  which  such 
things  are  recorded  in  the  Word,  the  testimony  on  this  subject  in  the 
Church,  and  the  apparent  neglect  of  a  careful  comparison  of  Scripture 
bearing  upon  it,  do  not  clear  the  parties  who  entertain  and  proclaim  it.  In 
kindness,  this  personal  accountability  is  presented  for  consideration,  in 
the  light  of  such  passages  as  Ezek.  33  :  6,  Acts  20  :  20,  27,  etc.,  illustra- 
tive of  the  duty  of  proclaiming  the  truth  as  God  has  given  it.6  11.  The 
advocacy  of  the  early  Church  view  by  so  many  and  prominent  men  in  the 
Church,  thus  bringing  the  subject  to  the  attention  of  believers,  is  not 
merely  a  coincidence,  but,  if  we  read.  Providence  correctly,  just  what  ive 
ought  to  anticipate.  As  the  prophetical  periods  are  drawing  to  their  close 
and  the  time  is  rapidly  approaching  for  the  astounding  events  preceding 
and  accompanying  the  Advent  of  the  mighty  King,  it  is  reasonable  that 
God  should  revive  in  His  believing"  people  the  ancient  faith  to  serve  both 
as  a  source  of  warning  and  encouragement.  12.  The  pervading  extent 
and  intrenchment  of  the  Whitbyan  hypothesis  in  the  Church  is  a  matter 
of  amazement.  Modern  in  its  conception,  yet  with  such  favor  has  it  been 
received  that  it  is  firmly  planted  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  multitude. 
Our  view  is  regarded  under  its  influence,  with  such  disdain  that  thousands 
do  not  consider  it  worthy  of  serious  attention  ;  that  few  papers  venture 
to  publish  our  communications  ;  that  few  pulpits  are  willingly  opened  to 
admit  discussion  ;  that  books,  hymn  books,  etc.,  favoring  our  doctrine,  in 
reprints  have  the  same  omitted  ;  and  that  we  are  classed  with  heretics, 
fanatics,  etc.  13.  But  this  is  precisely  the  state  of  things  that  we  ought  to 
expect  to  find  as  the  end  draws  nigh.  If  the  entire  Church  would  receive 
our  view,  if  it  were  the  great  popular  doctrine,  all  recognizing  it  as 
scriptural,  etc.,  then  indeed  we  might  doubt  its  truthfulness.  For  one  of 
the  evidences  that  the  world  will  not  be  converted  before  the  Advent,  is 
the  predicted  sign  that  the  Church,  under  the  influence  of  delusive  hope 
(just  such  an  one  as  the  Whitbyan  theory  presents)  will  be  in  a  state  of 
fancied  security  and  prosperity  not  looking  for  the  Advent  of  Christ. 
Relying  upon  the  Prophetic  Word,  it  would  be  foolishness  for  us  to  imag- 
ine that  our  doctrine  should  become  the  popular  one,  like  the  Whitbyan. 


200  THE  THEOCEATIC  KINGDOM.  [PROP.  175. 

All  that  we  anticipate  is,  that  it  will  be  received  by  the  faithful  few, 
until  the  time  arrives  when  the  sad  and  awful  tribulation  of  the  Church 
will  open  the  blinded  eyes  of  the  Church.  14.  The  primitive  view  alone 
enables  us  to  accept  and  adopt  the  exact  language  of  the  Bible,  such  as  e.g. 
"  The  Coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh,"  "  Watch  therefore,  for  ye  knoiv 
neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of  Man  Cometh, "  "  The  end  of 
all  things  is  at  hand,'4 "  and  kindred  passages.  The  Whitbyan  theory  can 
only  receive  these  in  consistency  either  by  referring  them  to  something  else 
(as  Providence,  death,  etc.),  or  by  spiritualizing  them  into  something 
indefinite.  15.  The  Whitbyan  theory  is  one  cause  why  prophecy  is  so 
greatly  neglected  by  many.  The  prosperity  and  continued  progress  of  the 
Church  and  the  world  toward  Millennial  blessedness  is  taken  for  granted, 
and  it  is  not  regarded  essential  to  investigate  the  subject.  Indeed  in  a 
multitude  of  instances  investigation  is  most  unwelcome. 

Prophecies  in  antagonism  to  the  prevailing  view  are  called  "  dark," 
"  hidden,7'  "  mysterious,"  etc.,  and  they  are  avoided  on  the  alleged  ground 
"  that  they  cannot  be  comprehended  until  after  the  fulfilment.'7  In  place  of 
a  personal  consideration  and  comparison  of  Scripture  relating  to  the  sub- 
ject, reliance  is  placed  upon  some  theological  work  or  commentary — how- 
ever contradictory — and  the  labor  of  study  thus  prevented.  Men,  whose 
special  business  it  is  to  proclaim  the  Word  of  God,  are  found  in  large  num- 
bers, who  have  never  made  the  prophecies  a  careful  and  serious  study. 
1G.  No  Millenarian,  owing  to  the  distinctive  design  of  the  Gospel  now 
preached  (viz.,  to  save  them  that  believe)  has  ever  pronounced  it  "  a 
failure.'"  It  was  no  "failure"  when  preached  by  Jesus  and  the  apostles 
and  it  has  been  none  since,  for  it  goes  on  steadily  and  unweariedly  in 
accomplishing  the  object  intended.  17.  Hence  all  Millenarians,  if  true  to 
their  own  avowed  sentiments,  must  take  a  deep  and  lively  interest  in  the 
proclamation  of  tbe  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom.  For,  it  is  only  by  the 
preached  Word,  or  by  the  acceptance  of  the  truth  in  Christ  Jesus,  that 
"  the  elect"  are  gathered  out,  and  it  is  only  when  these  elect  are  all  gath- 
ered that  the  Advent  of  Jesus  and  the  resultant  glory  follows.  That  such 
is  their  feeling  is  evidenced  by  the  acknowledgments — perhaps  unde- 
signed— of  our  opponents,  who  praise  the  missionary  efforts  and  Christian 
labors  of  the  first  centuries.  A  recent' notable  example  of  the  kind  is  found 
in  "  An  Appeal  to  the  Churches"  favoring  a  General  Revival  of  Religion, 
etc.,  issued  from  Boston  1867,  and  signed  by  sixty  clergymen,  headed  by 
Albert  Barnes.  In  this  "  Appeal"  the  first  three  centuries  are  lauded  for 
the  zeal,  etc.,  manifested,  and  a  decline  in  the  fourth  century  noticed,  and 
the  significant  sentence  occurs  :  "  It  is  also  abundantly  evident  that  the 
conversion  of  the  world  was  advancing  far  more  rapidly  during  the  first 
three  centuries,  and  was  prospectively  much  nearer  its  final  completion 
fifteen  hundred  years  ago,  than  it  is  to-day."  Discarding  the  notion  that 
the  Church  then  labored  for  the  conversion  of  the  world,  which  is  contra- 
dicted by  the  writings  of  the  Fathers,  we  accept  of  this  impartial  testi- 
mony to  the  faithfulness,  activity,  and  piety  of  those  who  were  Millenarian 
in  doctrine,  and  labored  earnestly  to  call  the  elect,  and  hasten  the  day  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Those  who,  perhaps  unguardedly,  have  so  much 
to  say  about  "  the  injurious  tendencies"  of  our  doctrine  and  "  the  weakness 
of  intellect"  allied  with  its  reception  (notwithstanding  the  large  number 
of  eminent  and  scholarly  men  who  have  entertained  it)  would  do  well  not 
only  to  consider  the  missionary  spirit  and  success  of  the  early  Church  but 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  201 

also  the  motives  which  urged  them  on  in  their  labor  of  love  and  devotion 
— motives  grounded  in  the  doctrines  advocated  in  this  work.7 

1  Brookes  (Maranatha,  p.  380),  says  that  in  the  Protestant  city  of  Berlin,  out  of  a  popu- 
lation of  about  81)0,000  "it  is  said  that  less  than  4000  attend  public  worship  on  the 
morning  of  the  Lord's  day."  "  In  the  Protestant  city  of  London  it  is  stated  that 
2,500,000  persons  never  enter  a  place  where  the  Gospel  is  proclaimed."  "  In  the  Protes- 
tant city  of  Glasgow,  according  to  a  statement  recently  published  by  its  leading  ministers 
after  making  large  allowance  for  the  aged,  the  infirm,  and  the  very  young,  it  is  shown 
that  125,000  souls  never  hear  the  Word  of  God."  "  The  same  astounding  and  humilia- 
ting results  are  seen  in  all  our  American  cities.  It  St.  Louis  (his  own  cit}r),  for  example, 
it  is  said  that  scarcely  15,000  persons,  large  and  small,  out  of  a  population  of  more  than 
400,000  are  found  in  all  the  Protestant  places  of  worship  put  together,  and  in  some  of 
those  numbered  as  evangelical,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  preaching  does  not  contain  the 
slightest  flavor  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  The  same  enormous  proportion  of  those 
who  do  not  attend  the  worship  of  God  is  no  doubt  found  in  other  places  (comp.  Prop. 
174  for  other  statements),  and  the  religious  statistics  of  every  leading  city  will  show  that 
those  who  really  believe  in  Christ  are  not  gaining  ground,  and  they  are  not  holding  their 
own,  because  not  increasing  in  the  ratio  of  the  world's  lost  and  ruined  population  around 
them."  In  reference  to  the  frightful  disproportion  of  churches  to  the  population  of 
London,  compare  the  statements  of  the  Bish.  of  London  and  Lord  John  Russell  as  given 
in  the  art.  on  "  The  Growth  of  London"  (Cornhill  Mag.,  reprinted  in  the  Libr.  Mag., 
Feb.,  1879).  Comp.  Props.  178,  177.  Let  us  take  a  single  American  State  as  an  illustra- 
tion, one  of  the  oldest  and  most  highly  favored  by  past  religious  instruction,  and  see  the 
result?  We  will  allow  those  who  have  no  sympathy  with  our  views  to  testify.  Thus  e.  g. 
the  Princeton  Review,  July,  1855,  in  the  "  Report  of  the  General  Assembly  ;"  Mr.  Storrs 
(delegate  from  the  General  Association  of  Massachusetts),  "  said  he  was  surprised  to 
learn,  since  his  visit  to  the  West,  that  the  people  of  Massachusetts  were  regarded  as  a 
staid,  sober,  and  settled  community  ;  whereas  in  fact  there  is  no  State  in  which  thought 
is  so  unsettled,  where  Infidelity  and  Romanism  are  so  active,  if  not  so  powerful,"  and 
the  editor  remarks  :  "  This  is  a  statement,  the  correctness  of  which  we  do  not  question." 
But  since  this  declaration  what  a  fearful  increase  of  unbelief  has  been  witnessed.  The 
vast  increase  of  Spiritualists  according  to  Judge  Edmonds,  Owen,  etc.,  and  of  Liberals, 
Socialists,  Communists,  etc.,  as  witnessed  all  over  the  country  and  world,  tells  its  own 
sad  story.  The  statistics'  of  the  world  are  fearfully  suggestive.  The  editor  of  Sir  Th. 
Browne's  Religio  Medici,  in  a  footnote  attached  to  S.  25,  gives  the  following  :  "  The 
population  of  the  world  has  been  estimated  at  1,000.000,000,  viz.,  of  Pagans,  630,000,000; 
of  Mohammedans,  188,000,000  ;  of  Jews,  12,000,000  ;  of  Christians,  170,000,000."  The 
Eccles.  Gazette  of  Vienna,  1853  (quoted  in  Alzog's  Univ.  Church  His.,  vol.  3,  p.  1023),  has 
"  total  number  of  Catholics,  200,000,000  ;  Oriental,  Schismatical,  and  non-Catholic  Chris- 
tians, 75,000,000  ;  Protestants  of  all  classes,  80,000,000,  or  according  to  more  recent  re- 
ports 89,000,000."  Sparry  (The  Luth.  Evangelist,  Ap.,  1878),  presents  the  statistics  of 
the  world's  population  and  its  relation  to  religion,  and  then  says  :  "  If  only  every  third 
nominal  Christian  in  the  world  be  regarded  as  a  true  believer,  the  proportion  of  true 
believers  to  unbelievers  is  as  1  to  36  nearly  ;  that  is  to  say,  for  25,000,000  of  true  be- 
lievers or  Christians,  there  are  875,000,000  of  unbelievers."  The  Ch.  Union,  March  5th, 
1879,  gives  from  Peterman's  Mittheilungen,  these  statistics  :  Pop.  of  the  globe,  1,439,145, 
300  ;  of  which  7,931,080  are  Jews,  186,860,076  are  Roman  Catholics,  82,926,049  are  of  the 
Greek  Church,  103,453,594  are  Mohammedans  131,091,941  are  Protestants,  1,007,190  are 
Majians  and  Parsees,  483,015,475  are  Buddhists,  religions  of  the  East  and  Pagans." 
Another  estimate  is  added  thus  :  Jews,  8,000,000  ;  Christians  of  every  name,  371,000,- 
000  ;  Mohammedans,  371,000,000  ;  Hindoos,  139,500,000  ;  Buddhists  and  religions  of  the 
East,  483,000,000  ;  Pagans,  189,000,000."  The  Gh.  World,  Aug.,  1876,  gives  Prof.  Schem's 
estimate  :  Pop.  of  earth  1,396,841,000  ;  of  which  685,459,411  are  under  Christian  govern- 
ment, and  711,382,589  are  under  non-Christian.  The  great  cities  ought  to  be,  in  view  of 
the  centralization  of  intelligence,  etc.  to  be  the  centres  of  virtue,  honor  and  religion,  but 
what  are  they?  We  leave  John  Ruskin,  who  has  no  sympathy  with  our  views,  to  describe 
them  (comp.  the  Proposition  174)  on  signs,  where  a  note  from  Ruskin  is  given  ;  also 
London,  in  Proph.  Times,  March,  1867  ;  New  York  as  delineated  in  the  N.  Y.  papers  for 
the  last  twenty  or  more  years,  etc.).  The  increase  of  evil,  appalling  crimes,  is  self- 
evident  by  the  most  casual  reading  of  the  dailies,  freighted  as  they  are  with  the  sad  news 
of  fornication,  adultery,  drunkenness,  murder,  etc.,  etc.  Even  a  minister  who  takes  in 
the  Times-Star  (1880,  Nov.),  a  hopeful  view  of  the  condition  of  Cincinnati,  because  of  the 


202  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  175. 

increase  of  the  membership  in  the  churches  (much  of  it  nominal  at  that),  admits  that  the 
places  where  liquor  is  sold  under  license  have  multiplied  until  they  alone  number  3500, 
while  other  powerful  agencies  advancing  in  power  are  ignored. 

2  Dr.  Brown  (Oh.  Sec.  Com.,  p.  313)  objects  to  Pre-Millenarianism  because  it  has  other 
agencies  besides  those  now  employed  in  the  conversion  of  the  world  to  Christ.  To  this 
we  reply  :  (1)  Many  who  receive  the  Post-Millenarian  theory  freely  admit  that  the  Mill, 
conversion  will  be  largely  affected  by  superadded  agencies,  even  Supernatural,  forced  to 
such  a  conclusion  by  the  predictions  ;  (2)  the  things  associated  with  this  period  of  con- 
version are  of  such  a  nature  that  present  means  and  agencies  cannot  possibly  produce 
them  ;  (3)  we  simply  receive  God's  own  declarations,  believing  that  He  alone  is  able  to 
impart  information  concerning  the  agencies  employed  ;  (4)  by  comparing  Scripture  with 
Scripture  we  find  that  several  things  will  bring  about  this  result,  such  as  the  destruction 
of  Antichrist,  the  judgments  on  Antichristian  nations,  the  personal  manifestation  of 
Christ  and  the  saints,  the  labor  of  Elijah,  the  personal  pleading  of  Jesus,  the  phenomena 
witnessed,  the  great  effusion  and  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  rule  of  the  Christ  and  of 
the  saints,  and,  according  to  Isa.  04,  65,  54  ;  Zech.  14,  etc.,  truth  presented  and  thus 
enforced  will,  together  with  the  worship  assigned,  have  its  saving,  sanctifying  influ- 
ences ;  (5)  when  Brown  narrows  down  the  means  leading  to  conversion  "  to  the  recep- 
tion by  sinners  of  a  preached  Gospel, "  he  certainly  limits  it  even  in  this  disjiensation, 
for  the  Gospel  is  now  often  received  through  afflictions,  bereavements,  providences. 
We  do  not  reject  but  magnify  "  the  Gospel,"  for  we  hold  that  the  Gospel— partly  exiin- 
plified  in  realized  Redemption,  partly  enforced  by  providential  movements  and  judg- 
ments, partly  exhibited  in  the  manifestation  of  the  King  and  His  rule,  partly  shown  by 
the  instrumentality  of  the  saints  and  by  the  aid  of  the  restored  and  happy  Jewish  nation 
— will  attain  a  power  ami  majesty  which  it  never  had  previously  ;  simply  because  instead 
of  its  then  being  "  the  Gospel  of  a  Kingdom"  still  future,  it  is  "the  Gospel  of  a  King- 
dom" now  established  and  manifested  in  power  and  glory,  and  hence  as  "  a  Gospel  "  the 
good  news,  exhibited  and  proven  to  be  true,  will  bring,  as  prophets  so  graphically  de- 
scribe, the  nations  under  its  blessed  influence,  and  into  peaceful  subjection  to  the  Christ. 

3  Surely  when  religious  bodies  (as  e.g.  to-day  the  New  York  Presbytery,  Feb.,  1880,  etc.) 
meet  to  discuss  the  causes  of  the  Church's  decline,  and  when  eminent  opponents  of  ours 
frankly  but  sadly  admit  that  such  a  decline  "  was  painfully  manifest,"  and  when  the 
enemies  of  Christianity  jubilantly  present  it  in  a  multitude  of  articles  and  books,  we  may 
well  assume  our  scriptural  position,  which  explains  all  and  gives  the  needed  faith  and 
courage.  To  indicate  whether  the  parochial  success  of  ministers  should  encourage  the 
Whitbyan  theory,  we  select,  because  acquainted  with  the  brethren,  the  j^arochial  reports 
of  an  Ohio  Synod  for  1879.  The  Pres.  of  the  Synod  preached  a  Whitbyan  sermon  from 
the  text,  "The  field  is  the  world,"  and  in  his  report  gives  two  congregations  and  eight 
additions  while  the  losses  are  seventeen.  Another  Whitbyan  divine  reports  for  the  entire 
year  an  addition  of  three,  while  the  losses  are  six.  Others  are  more  successful,  yet  the 
entire  Synod  of  twenty-five  ministers  report  only  a  net  increase  of  119.  We  admit  that 
success  is  no  measure  (and  the  most  successful  of  ministers,  as  Tyng,  etc.,  and  evangelists, 
as  Moody,  etc.,  do  not,  although  successful,  forsake  our  views),  but  these  brethren  do,  by 
appealing  to  the  past  and  present,  make  it  a  standard,  find  it  is  well  to  remind  them  how 
it  fails  to  meet  the  requirements  they  exact  from  it.  Many  like  Dr.  Fairchild  (Pres. 
Oberlin  Coll.,  on  "  The  Needed  Phases  of  Christianity' ')  admit  a  wane  of  faith,  and  yet 
multitudes,  discarding  facts,  confidently  predict  that  in  50  years,  more  or  less,  the  Gospel 
will  be  in  every  household  (comp.  e.g.  art.  by  Clark  in  Littell's  Liv.  Age,  1872,  "Wanted 
— a  Religion  for  the  Hindoos"),  or  as  an  example  of  arithmetical  calculation,  which 
ignores  human  depravity  and  the  scriptural  predictions  relating  to  it,  Dr.  Schmucker's 
hopeful  estimate  in  his  Popular  Theology.  C.  M.  Nichols,  of  the  Spring-field  Republic 
(Nov.  25th,  1874),  is  not  quite  so  sanguine,  saying  :  "  Christ  told  His  disciples  nearly 
2000  years  ago  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature,  and  they  have  not  done  it  yet.  It 
is  estimated  that  it  will  require  3000  more  years  to  complete  the  work." 

4  We  have  referred  to  the  Confessions  in  the  history  of  the  doctrine,  and  it  may  be 
sufficient  to  refer,  in  this  connection,  to  the  leading  Protestant  one,  viz.,  the  Augsburg 
Confession,  giving  the  view  of  one  of  its  expounders.  John  Conrad  Goebel,  in  his  ser- 
mons on  the  Confession  (quoted  by  Dr.  Seiss,  footnote  in  Apoc,,  No.  2,  p.  213),  interprets 
it  as  utterly  repudiating  the  conversion  of  the  world  prior  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  saying  : 
"'  The  idea  of  a  golden  age  in  this  world,  before  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  is  a  mere 
phantasm,  not  only  contrary  to  the  entire  Holy  Scripture,  but  especially  contrary  to  the 
clear  and  lucid  prophecies  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His  beloved  Apostles,  where  they 
speak  of  the  times  immediately  preceding  the  day  of  judgment — Matt.  24  :  23  ;  1  Tim. 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  203 

4  :  1  ;  2  Tim.  3  :  1  ;  2  Pet.  3  :  3,  and  other  places,  where  more  may  be  seen  upon  the 
subject.  Nothing  is  there  said  or  predicted  of  a  golden  age,  but  only  crosses  and  tribula- 
tions, which  touch  all  the  estates  of  the  world.  Concerning  ecclesiastical  affairs,  it  was 
predicted  that  in  the  last  times  many  false  Christs  and  false  prophets  shall  arise,  and 
shall  do  great  signs  and  wonders,  and  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,  the  very  elect.  Con- 
cerning hearers,  it  was  predicted  that  love  would  wax  cold  in  the  hearts  of  many,  and 
faith  wane  to  such  a  degree  that  Christ  Himself  asks  :  '  When  the  Son  of  Man  Cometh 
shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  '  Will  that  be  a  golden  age  ?  Concerning  matters  of 
state,  it  was  predicted  that  unrighteousness  shall  sway  them,  and  there  shall  be  wars  and 
rumors  of  wars,  nation  rising  against  nation,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom.  Will  that 
be  a  golden  age  ?  Concerning  the  family,  it  was  predicted  that  the  son  shall  be  against 
the  father,  the  daughter  against  her  mother,  and  that  a  man' s  foes  shall  be  those  of  his 
own  house.  Will  that  be  a  golden  age  V  Concerning  common  life,  it  was  predicted  that 
there  shall  be  distress  of  people  on  earth,  and  trembling,  and  fainting  for  fear,  and  for 
looking  after  the  things  that  are  to  come  upon  the  earth,  and  tribulation  such  as  was  not 
from  the  beginning  and  never  shall  be  again.  Will  that  be  a  golden  age  ?  And  if  we 
will  only  consider  this  matter  a  little  in  the  fear  of  God,  it  will  be  seen  that  this  fanatical 
notion  contradicts  all  Scripture,  as  it  is  contrary  to  this  article  of  our  common  Christian- 
ity." And  to  give  his  own  views,  he  afterward  adds  :  "Here  on  earth,  while  the  world 
lasts,  we  are  in  the  militant  Church,  and  have  to  suffer  as  God  wills,  waiting  patiently  for 
the  true  golden  age  and  the  Kingdom  of  the  adorable  Trinity — not  in  this  world  here  on 
earth,  but  in  the  future  Kingdom  of  eternal  glory  and  blessedness." — Die  XXI.  art.  Aug. 
Conf.  in  Predigen  Erklari,  pp.  1256-59.  So  also  a  recent  writer  in  Das  Tausend-jarige  Reich 
gehort  nicht  der  vergangenheit,  soudern  d<  r  Zukumft  an;  Gutersloh,  I860,  takes  the  same  view 
of  the  Confession.  Dr.  Seiss  truthfully  says  :  "  There  is  not  a  respectable  Creed  in  all 
Christendom  that  embodies  any  such  doctrine." 

5  So  contagious  is  the  false  spirit  of  prediction,  that  even  a  college  paper  ( Wittenberger, 
vol.  1,  No.  1)  is  welcomed  as  "  an  auxiliary  force  to  lift  up  the  race,  and  to  usher  in  the 
day  of  gold,  the  age  of  light  and  love,  and  so  to  reveal  the  Jasper  City  and  the  Emerald 
Gates."  Woman  suffrage,  temperance,  and  other  moral  movements  are  thus  elevated, 
with  high-sounding  phraseology,  as  exalted  agencies  in  this  work,  and  pious  people,  in 
the  sincerity  of  their  hearts,  thinking  to  secure  God's  blessing,  eulogize  them  in  the 
most  extravagant  terms — overlooking  the  simple  fact  that  if  Jesus  will  ignore  even  profes- 
sors who  do  not  give  up  all  sin  and  make  an  entire  consecration  of  self  to  Him,  much 
more  will  He  refuse  to  acknowledge  those  who  are  willing  to  give  up  one  sin  and  retain 
the  rest,  or  who  elevate  human  schemes  into  the  place  of  the  regenerating  means  of  grace 
provided  by  God,  or  who  put  their  trust  in  man  instead  of  placing  it  in  God.  Whatever 
of  good  may  be  outside  of  the  divinely  ordained  means,  however  it  may  be  accepted  and 
commended,  it  should  never  run  in  direct  opposition  to  God's  own  declarations,  and  thus 
cause  false  hopes  to  arise.  The  only  Saviour  from  sin  and  its  sad  consequences  that  the 
intelligent  believer  can  recognize  is  Jesus — Jesus  accepted  and  appropriated  as  the  Script- 
ures so  plainly  teach.  John  Q.  Adams,  Phi  Beta  Kappa  Address,  said  that  "  Opinion  is 
the  Queen  of  the  World."  Here  is  the  danger  ;  if  such  opinion  is  solidly  built  on  the 
declarations  of  God's  Word  it  will  be  favorable  in  its  influence,  and  just  in  proportion  as 
it  departs  from  it  will  its  tendency  be  evil.  But  notwithstanding  the  extent  of  evil, 
many,  influenced  by  a  false  apjflication  of  prophecy,  predict  e.g.  that  infidelity,  so  wide- 
spread, will  be  of  "  short  duration,"  and  that  "  by  permitting  to  a  certain  extent  the  prev- 
alence of  infidelity,  Providence  is  preparing  new  triumphs  for  religion."  How  many 
Christians  even,  at  the  commencement  of  the  French  Revolution,  misguided  by  the  loud 
professions  made  in  behalf  of  man,  loudly  proclaimed  :  "  The  devout  mind  will  behold 
in  these  momentous  changes  the  finger  of  God,  and  discern  in  them  the  dawn  of  that 
glorious  period  in  which  wars  shall  cease  and  Antichristian  tyranny  shall  fail,"  etc.  It 
woidd  be  superfluous  to  recall  those  predictions  and  eulogists,  for  the  most  of  them  lived 
long  enough  to  see  and  acknowledge  their  mistake.  The  world  is  again  full  of  such 
prophecies,  and  professed  believers  hasten  to  adopt  and  echo  them,  imparting  to  them  a 
more  scriptural  garb. 

6  It  is  a  responsible  matter  to  predict  that  which  is  erroneous,  Ezek.  22  :  28  ;  it  is  a 
serious  matter  to  refuse  to  impart  the  warnings  that  God  has  given,  Ezek.  3  :  19-21  ;  it  is 
a  duty  to  turn  from  those  who  pervert  God's  threatenings  and  predict  "  peace"  and  "  no 
evil,"  Jer.  23  :  16,  17,  and  14  :  13,  14,  and  6  :  14.  But  unfortunately  an  incentive  to 
such  predicting  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the  multitude  desire  it,  so  that  Jer.  5  :  31  is  con- 
stantly fulfilling, and  when  prophesying  prosperity,  Mic.  2  :  11,  they  are  so  full  and  in  need 
of  nothing,  that  they,  Mic.  3  :  5,  oppose  the  true  prophets.     When  truth  is  accessible  and 


204  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  175. 

it  is  deliberately  rejected,  an  apology,  Matt.  7  :  22,  will  scarcely  avail  with  the  Christ, 
even  although  done  in  His  name.  In  reference  to  the  future  we  are  solely  dependent 
upon  what  God  Himself  has  declared  concerning  it,  Isa.  44  :  24,  25,  26. 

1  The  student  will  observe  that  our  doctrine  alone  affords  the  most  ample  encourage- 
ment to  the  earnest  layman,  preacher,  and  missionary  ;  for,  whatever  success  awaits  our 
labor,  we  are  engaged  in  the  work  contemplated,  viz.,  fulfilling  the  design  of  the  dispensation 
in  gathering  out  a  people  for  His  name,  and  in  presenting  the  Gospel  as  a  witness. 
Hence  whether  men  bear  or  forbear  ;  whether  the  results  are  small  or  large,  we  are 
acceptably  performing  our  duty,  and  will  meet  with  the  divine  approval.  We  cannot  be 
indifferent  to,  or  undervalue,  any  efforts  made  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  God's  Word, 
even  if  it  be  more  or  less  connected  with  error  or  fanaticism,  because  if  Christ  is 
preached,  if  the  Scriptures  of  truth  are  presented,  if  repentance  and  faith  are  urged, 
these  things  aid  in  accomplishing  the  number  of  the  elect.  We  do  not  (as  e.g.  Harris  in 
his  (rreal  Commission,  p.  115,  etc.)  make  success  the  criterion  and  incentive  to  duty  ;  love 
to  Christ  and  His  commands,  love  to  our  fellow-men,  love  for  the  election  and  its  eternal 
results,  love  for  the  blessed  hope  and  incoming  inheritance,  these  are  sufficient  incen- 
tives. Harris  (pp.  115-117)  has  grossly  misrepresented  our  view  and  the  tendency  of  our 
doctrine,  when  he  declares  that  we  proclaim  no  success,  no  valuable  results  but  mere 
defeat,  and  that  those  who  are  supporters  of  Missions,  etc.,  do  it  in  violence  to  their 
creed,  being  "  the  result  of  principles  which  date  anterior  to  their  peculiar  views  of 
prophecy."  Such  statements  evidence  a  luck  of  knowledge  of  our  principles,  doctrine,  and 
history.  As  we  asserted  in  previous  paragraphs,  no  Millenarian  holds  to  a  lack  of  success 
or  to  a  failure,  simply  because  he  sees  the  real  design  of  the  dispensation  successfully 
carried  out,  whether  few  or  many  believe.  A  reference  alone  to  the  Primitive  Church 
refutes  and  rebukes  Harris's  assertions,  while  the  missionary  activity  and  labors  of  many 
dates  from  the  adoption  of  Pre-Mill.  views,  a  belief  in  a  speedy,  Pre- Mill.  Advent  quicken- 
ing zeal.  Kev.  Randolph,  in  an  art.  on  "  The  Sec.  Advent  of  Christ"  (Kentucky  Tribune, 
Feb.  13th,  1880),  answers  fidly  the  stale  objection  "  that  Pre-Mill.  views  paralyze  mis- 
sionary effort,"  and  quotes  as  follows  :  "  Dr.  Woods  well  says,  '  I  challenge  Post-Millen- 
nialists  to  produce,  on  the  one  hand,  one  single,  passage  of  Scripture  in  which  a  Millennium 
is  connected  with  a  subsequent  Advent ;  and  I  challenge  them,  on  the  other  hand,  to  bring 
forward  one  single  passage  in  which  the  Advent  is  spoken  of  in  connection  with  a  preced- 
ing Millennium.'  With  equal  triumph  has  Edward  Garbett,  one  of  England's  first  scholars 
— author  of  that  celebrated  book  "  Dogmatic  Faith,"  and  also  of  one  of  the  ablest  replies 
ever  written,  to  John  Stuart  Mill — said  in  the  recent  Wimbledon  Prophetic  Conference,  '  I 
challenge  the  friends  of  this  old  objection '  (respecting  missions)  '  to  produce  from  the 
Word  of  God  one  single  passage,  in  either  the  Old  or  New  Testament  to  show  that  the 
world  is  to  be  converted  to  Christ  before  Christ  comes.'  This  challenge  has  never  yet 
been  accepted,  and  we  may  safely  predict  that  it  will  not  be."  Chalmers  (as  quoted  by 
Drs.  llonar,  West,  etc.)  said  :  "  Of  this  I  am  satisfied,  that  the  next  Coming  of  Christ  will 
be  a  Coining  not  to  final  judgment,  but  a  Coming  to  usher  in  the  Millennium.  I  utterly 
despair  of  the  universal  prevalence  of  Christianity  as  the  result  of  a  missionary  process. 
I  look  for  its  conclusive  establishment  through  a  widening  passage  of  desolations  and 
judgments,  with  the  demolition  of  our  civil  and  ecclesiastical  structure"  (comp.  his 
"  Sabbath  Readings,"  vol.  1,  p.  311).  In  other  places  we  give  the  utterances,  Pre-Mille- 
narian,  of  able  and  well-known  missionaries. 

Ol)S.  10.  This  idea  of  the  conversion  of  the  world,  or  development 
theory,  under  existing  instrumentalities  and  law,  has  been  seized  by  semi- 
infidels  and  infidels,  the  advocates  of  "The  Absolute  Religion,"  and  in 
their  hands  resolves  itself  into  a  gradual  education  of  the  world,  the 
earliest  ages  being  compared  to  infancy  with  its  delusions,  the  middle  to 
childhood  with  its  follies,  the  later  to  manhood  with  its  riper  deductions, 
and  the  present,  if  we  are  to  credit  them,  is  bringing  forth  the  matured 
man  with  his  intellectual  strength  and  wisdom.  The  wisest  men  of  all 
generations  live  noiv,  and  will,  it  is  assumed,  leaven  the  mass  until  all  pos- 
sess full  moral  and  religious  truth  through  a  generally  diffused  and  con- 
stantly abiding  inspiration  equal  to,  yea,  superior  to,  that  of  Paul  or  any  of 
the  prophets.  To  give  an  idea  of  the  swelling  words  issuing  from  these 
"  inspired  "  men,  we  give  an  extract  from  Frothingham's  Sermon  "  On  the 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom:.  205 

New  Religion  of  Nature."  "Nature's  seers,  running  their  eye  along  the 
line  of  the  moral  law,  catch  vistas  in  the  future  brighter  than  those  that 
now  are  fading  from  the  Old  Test,  page ;  and  Nature's  prophets,  putting 
their  ear  to  the  ground,  hear  the  murmur  of  nobler  revelations  than  were 
ever  given  to  the  old  oracles  now  moving  their  stiffened  lips  in  death.'"  If 
this  were  the  infatuated  ravings  of  a  few  men,  it  might  be  passed  by  in 
silence,  but  unfortunately  it  forms  the  belief  of  a  growing  multitude,  in- 
cluding men  eminent  in  science  and  literature.  The  utterauces  of  Parker, 
Carpenter,  Draper,  and  a  host  of  others  are  so  well  adapted  to  human 
nature,  calling  for  no  Christian  repentance  and  self-denial,  and  so  pleasing 
and  acceptable  to  the  natural  inclinations  and  desires,  demanding  no  Chris- 
tian's cross  to  be  borne,  that  human  depravity  eagerly  seizes  upon  their 
prophecies,  and  exalts  them  as  the  hope  of  humanity.  Such  is  the  progress 
made  in  this  direction  that  the  predictions  given  by  Guizot  {His.  of  Civ.), 
Hutton  (Essays),  Eaton  (Pcrmein.  of  Chris.),  and  others  are  superseded  by 
later  and  more  extravagant  ones,  which,  owing  to  their  disrespectful*  allu- 
sions to  Christ,  etc.  (which  even  a  decent  literary  regard  for  the  relation 
that  Christianity  has  sustained  in  the  past  to  literature  and  men  of  learn- 
ing, if  not  respect  for  the  opinions  and  feelings  of  a  large  class,  ought  to 
have  prevented),  we  omit  repeating.  We  select  one  or  two  of  the  more 
respectable  class  to  illustrate  the  predictions  given.  A  liberal  writer, 
Johnson  (Oriented  Religions),  presents  us  with  "  the  delusive"  hopes  enter- 
tained by  positive  religions  through  an  "  instinct  of  universality,"  which 
contain  a  germ  of  truth,  viz.,  that  the  emancipation  of  the  race  will  be 
brought  about  by  the  natural  development  of  human  nature,  and  then  pre- 
dicts that  in  this  developing  process  all  existing  religions  must  fall  before 
the  Free,  Liberal,  Universeil  Religion  of  human  nature.  He  speaks  of 
"  the  Religion  of  religions,  whose  Bible  shall  be  the  full  Word  of  Human 
Nature,''''  produced  mainly  through  physical  and  mental  science,  having  its 
basis  in  the  axiom,  "  the  stability  of  law  is  the  guarantee  of  universal 
good.'''1  He  says  :  "  In  their  natural  impatience  to  count  these  unknown 
millions  as  converts  to  Christian  theologv,  the  churches  but  feebly  compre- 
hend the  seriousness  of  the  situation"  (which  we  can  well  believe,  seeing 
the  number  of  "  Free  Religious  Associations"  organized  in  many  countries 
and  even  extending  to  India,  as  mentioned  by  him).  "  Christianity,  as 
well  as  heathendom,  is  on  the  eve  of  judgment.^  "  I  firmly  believe  that  in 
making  the  worship  of  Jesus  as  '  the  Christ '  a  prescriptive  beisis  of  faith, 
it  will  strike  against  a  mass  of  outside  human  experience  so  overwhelming 
as  to  put  beyond  a  doubt  the  futility  of  pressing  either  this  or  any  other 
exclusive  claim  as  authoritative  for  mankind."  "  The  change  from  distinc- 
tive Christianity  to  Universal  Religion  is  a  Revolution  compared  with 
which  the  passage  from  Judaism  to  Christianity  itself  teas  trivial.'"  This 
he  holds  forth  as  "  a  promise  of  Science  and  a  consee/uence  of  Liberty." 
Alas  !  turning  to  the  Bible,  it  will  be  found  that  these  predictions  concern- 
ing the  future  agree  with  those  that  the  prophets  themselves  give,  viz.,  that 
men,  forsaking  the  truth,  shall  lay  such  stress  on  the  stability  of  nature, 
that  scoffingly  they  shall  ask,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  Coming  ?" — 
that  there  shall  be  such  a  self-glorification  of  man,  such  a  deification  of  the 
same,  that  it  shall  result  in  the  fearful  confederation  of  the  nations  against 
"  the  Christ."  This  revamping  of  the  old  Pantheistic  theory,  and  urged 
from  a  humanitarian  standpoint,  is  performing  its  predicted  work,  prepar- 
ing the  way  for  the  downtreading  of  the  Church  and  the  fatal  overthrow 


206  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  175. 

of  the  fondly  cherished  Whitby  an  theories.  "Works  designed  for  popular 
reading,  and  sent  broadcast  into  the  world,  eulogize  this  coming  religion 
which  all  shall  embrace,  as  e.g.  Figuier  (The  To-morrow  of  Death,  p.  341, 
etc.)  tells  us  that  it  is  a  religion  as  yet  in  its  embryotic  state,  "  until  the 
growth  of  reason  in  the  popular  mind  has  helped  to  create  the  religion  of 
science  and  nature  ;"  and  "  this  new  religion  will  be  the  work  of  the 
twentieth  century."  The  development  theory,  so  unguardedly  seized  by 
Christian  apologists  to  gloss  over  the  supposed  errors  of  the  Apostolic 
Church,  becomes  in  the  hands  of  the  infidel  a  formidable  tceapon  against 
Christianity  itself,  making  the  latter  only  a  stepping-stone  in  the  advance- 
ment of  the  race  under  the  present  ordering  of  the  world.  Our  doctrine, 
on  the  other  hand,  makes  no  concessions  and  affords  no  arguments  of  which 
unbelief  can  avail  itself  and  turn  against  the  truth. 

Some  persons  have  unbounded  confidence  in  education,  literary  elevation,  science, 
art,  etc.,  as  the  means  by  which  the  world  is  to  be  reformed.  Let  any  one  impartially 
read  tHe  history  of  literature  as  given  by  Sismondi  and  others,  and  he  will  find  the  sad 
confession  made  that  periods  resplendent  in  literary  excellence  were  followed  by  a  cor- 
rupt inn  of  sentiment  and  morals  (as  e.g.  in  Arabia,  Greece,  Spain,  Italy,  etc.).  However 
valuable  literary  effort  in  the  various  fields  may  be,  a  reliance  upon  it  to  reform  the 
depravity  of  man,  is  vain.  Indeed,  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  some  of  the  most  aban- 
doned and  corrupt  of  men  have  given  us  some  of  the  finest,  most  chaste  and  elevated 
works  in  poetry,  science,  art,  etc.,  making  it  self-evident  that  the  mere  intellectual  had 
but  Utile  corrective  power  upon  themselves.  Intelligence  perverted  becomes  a  most  dan- 
gerous power.  D'Aubigne,  in  his  first  eh.  of  the  His.  of  the  Reformation  (p.  84),  when 
enumerating  the  causes  why  Italy,  so  refined  and  enlightened,  could  not  receive  the  re- 
form, says  :  "  But  the  very  nature  of  their  mental  culture  was  a  still  greater  obstacle  than 
the  presumption  of  their  hearts.  Could  men,  who  admired  the  elegance  of  a  well- 
cadenced  sonnet  more  than  the  majestic  simplicity  of  the  Scriptures,  be  a  propitious  soil 
for  the  seed  of  God's  Word?  A  false  civilization  is,  of  all  conditions  of  a  nation,  that 
which  is  most  repugnant  to  the  Gospel."  So  it  is  to-day  ;  multitudes  take  far  greater 
pleasure  in  poetry,  art,  the  drama,  literature,  etc.,  than  in  the  sublime  truths  of  the 
Word  ;  multitudes  elevate  science  above  the  Bible  as  being  alone  authoritative  and 
worthy  of  credence  ;  and  multitudes  turn  away  from  God's  Word  to  find  their  highest 
pleasure  in  the  fictional  of  the  day.  And  in  reference  to  the  latter,  Hurst  (Jlis.  of 
Rationalism,  p.  391)  finds  "  consolation"  in  the  fact  that  the  works  of  Sue,  George  Sand, 
Dumas,  father  ami  son,  are  so  extensively  read  ;  and  while  insisting  that  their  tendency 
is  "  pernicious,"  he  adds  :  "  If  we  may  think  they  will  serve  as  a  medium  of  passage  for 
the  French  masses  to  the  reading  and  adoption  of  the  truths  of  the  Gospel,  let  us  not  be 
too  slow  to  accept  the  consolation."  The  idea  of  making  such  things  preparatory  stages  to 
the  Gospel  is  certainly  original,  and  must  be  flattering  to  that  class  of  writers,  who  never 
dreamed  of  making  such  an  application,  scorning  the  Gospel  and  its  proffered  salvation. 

In  Spencer's  Philos.  of  Evolution,  Huxley's  Lay  Sermons  and  Addresses,  Michelet's  Bible 
Of  Humanity,  Wright's  Principia,  Lecky's  His.  of  Rationalism,  and  in  hundreds  of  similar 
works  (as  well  as  inEeviews  of  eminence  like  the  Cordemporary,  etc.,  in  papers  like  Owen's 
Millennial  Gazette,  in  thousands  of  articles  like  that  on  "  Immortality"  in  Littell's  Liv. 
Age,  1872),  we  have  prophecies  of  a  glorious  future  worked  out  by  man  himself  (although 
some  sadly  confess  doubts  whether  it  can  remove  the  curse  which  now  burdens  humanity, 
and  others  acknowledge  that  sorrow  and  trial,  sickness  and  death,  the  dreadful  outbursts 
of  nature,  etc.,  are  beyond  its  reach).  The  introduction  of  a  philosophical  Utopia 
through  the  agency  of  boasted  material  and  intellectual  agencies  (which  have  no  tendency 
to  control  the  heart  or  remove  the  curse),  as  e.g.  represented  in  Realized  Meals  (Greg's 
Enigmas  of  Life),  is  a  favorite  with  many.  The  philosophical  schools  have  elaborated 
various  theories  respecting  the  future  amelioration  of  the  race  ;  some  having  confidence 
in  the  gradual  progress  of  humanity  toward  such  a  goal  by  the  aid  of  a  natural  religion, 
science,  and  philosophy  ;  others  discard  religion  as  unnecessary  to  such  a  development, 
science  and  reason,  with  all  that  pertains  to  humanity  and  nature,  being  amply  suffi- 
cient.*    The  former  assert  that  when  the  predicted  end  is  attained,  then  God  will  be 

*  Prof.  Cocker,  Clarke,  Neander,  Pressense,  and  others,  insist  that  Greek  philosophy 
prepared  the  way  for  Christianity,  and  that  it  was  "  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  men  to 


Prop.  175.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  207 

acknowledged  as  Supreme,  being  manifested  in  and  through  man,  a  progress  to  a  Theistic 
or  Pantheistic  position  ;  the  latter  are  equally  positive  that  the  only  religion  then  extant 
will  be  a  religion  or  worship  of  humanity  and  nature,  being  a  Rationalistic,  Humanita- 
rian, or  Naturalistic  conclusion.  All,  however,  are  forced  to  admit  that  emancipation 
thus  promised  is  immeasurably  below  the  high  standard  promised  in  the  Holy  Script- 
ures, since  it  cannot  as  God's  Word,  hold  out  a  perfect  deliverance  to  the  individual  (as 
e.g.  victory  over  death),  to  nature  (as  e.g.  from  its  convulsions),  or. to  the  race  (as 
e.g.  its  restoration  to  an  Edenic  condition).  We  have  from  various  sources  numer- 
ous labored  efforts  to  prove  that  every  religion  that  has  ever  existed  is  only  a  step, 
or  sort  of  preparatory  staging,  in  the  progress  of  humanity,  and  to  establish  this 
point  all  history  is  rudely  violated,  which  testifies  that  every  nation  as  it  ad- 
vanced in  age  and  strength  also  advanced  in  luxury  and  vice,  immorality  and  in- 
fidelity, notwithstanding  its  religion  and  the  impression  made  by  it  upon  the  few.  _  By 
only  giving  the  good  and  the  moral  that  may  exist  in  the  more  prominent  religions 
special  prominence,  and  leaving  out  of  the  count  the  bad  and  immoral  also  existing  (and 
which  the  good  could  not  overbalance  and  restrain),  such  a  one-sided  theory  can  be  made 
out.  It  is  only  by  men  closing  their  eyes  to  stubborn  fads  that  they  console  themselves 
with  such  specious  reasoning,  dreaming  that  it  gives  hope  for  the  future.  However 
plausible  in  some  of  its  arguments  and  artful  in  some  of  its  representations,  stripped  of 
its  pretensions,  it  resolves  itself  in  an  effort  to  exalt  Pantheism,  Rationalism,  Humanity, 
or  Nature,  affording  no  well-grounded  hope,  based  on  the  real  facts  of  the  past,  for  the 
development  advocated.  While  we  would,  on  the  one  side,  avoid  the  wholesale  con- 
demnation of  ethnic  religions,  admitting  that  they  were,  to  some  extent,  the  outgrowths 
of  a  sense  of  accountability  and  a  recognition  of  dependence  and  conscience,  yet,  on  the 
other  hand,  we  equally  avoid  making  these  the  necessary  stepping-stones  or  handmaidens 
to  Christianity  ;  or  of  placing  them  on  an  equality  with  the  Christian  religion  ;  or  even 
(as  some  do  in  their  boasted  veneration  of  human  nature)  giving  them  a  superiority  over 
the  divine  utterances  ;  or  of  making  them  in  connection  with  Christianity  natural  out- 
growths which  are  to  develop  into  a  new  and  perfected  state  by  continued  progress.  So 
e.g.  Johnson  {Freedom  of  Religion)  says  :  "  Buddha,  Pythagoras,  Jesus,  Luther,  and  the 
rest,  are  children  of  their  times  ;  out  of  Greece  and  Judea  came  Christianity  ;  out  of 
Christianity,  and  Brahminism,  and  Parseeism,  and  Judaism,  and  Islam,  and  all  the  grand 
currents  of  this  centurv's  civilization,  flows  the  vaster  tidal  wave  of  Universal  Religion." 
Sand.  Longfellow  {Freedom  and  Fellowship,  Essay  2),  in  the  lofty  delineation  of  his 
"Church  of  the  Future,"  makes  it  to  be  "  the  Broad  Church"  (reminding  one  of  Jesus's 
teaching  of  "the  broad  way"),  or  "  the  Birth-right  Church  of  Man."  Christianity  is 
reduced  to  the  level  of  heathen  religions,  and  in  defence  it  is  said  :  "Beligious  is  a  higher 
and  broader  word  than  Christum,  and  so  is  Human.  Jewish,  Brahmin,  Buddhist,  Parsee, 
Mohammedan,  these,  too,  are  churches  of  the  One  Living  God,  the  Father  of  All."  And  this 
new  "  Broad  Church  is  the  Eternal  Gospel  ;  this  the  true  Church  Catholic  ;  the  Church 
not  of  Rome,  nor  of  England  ;  the  Church  not  of  Buddha,  nor  of  Moses,  nor  of  Christ, 
but  of  God  and  Man."  And  these  "  great  swelling  words  of  vanity"  (2  Pet.  2  :  18)  contain 
the  unbeliever's  hope  of  Redemption  !  the  regeneration  of  the  world  !     Some,  too,  pre- 

Christ,"  and  as  proof  point  to  the  churches  established  in  Greece,  etc.  While  there  is 
some  truth  attached  to  their  views,  yet  too  much  stress  is  laid  upon  it,  being  made  too 
great  a  factor  in  the  introduction  of  Christianity.  For,  instead  of  bringing  men  to  Jesus, 
its  tendency,  as  fads  of  history  incontesiibly  prove,  was  to  repel  men  from  Him,  seeing  that 
the  churches  of  Greece  (as  Paul  testifies) 'had  but  few  of  those  who  entertained  the  views 
of  the  philosophers  ;  that  the  most  violent,  bitter,  and  unrelenting  opponents  and  perse- 
cutors were  adherents  of  this  philosophy  ;  and  that  the  effects  of  this  same  philosophy, 
so  far  as  incorporated  in  teaching  and  doctrine,  was  to  bring  untold  evils  upon  the 
Church.  This  class  of  writers  generally,  imbued  by  a  philosophical  spirit,  zealously,  m 
advocating  the  conversion  of  the  world,  advocate  the  division  of  the  history  of  the 
Church,  into  three  or  more  periods  (as  e.g.  the  Petrine,  Pauline,  and  Johannean),  more 
or  less  fanciful.  They  do  not  even  pause  to  learn  that  their  favorite  theory  of  such  suc- 
cessive and  distinctive  periods  is  found  in  the  vaticinations  of  the  monk  Joachim,  set 
forth  with  all  the  pretensions  of  a  special  illumination  received  to  elucidate  the  future 
Philosophy,  as  history  corroborates,  too  often  strikes  hands  with  fanaticism.  We  need 
not  be  surprised  that  James  Freeman  Clarke  {Ten  Great  Religions)  says  in  confirmation  ot 
his  theory  that  all  religions  are  a  kind  of  forerunners  :  "  Islam  is  a  John  the  Baptist  cry- 
ing in  the  wilderness,  '  Prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord  ; '  Mohammed  is  a  schoolmaster  to 
bring  men  to  Christ." 


208  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  175. 

tend  that  Christianity  itself  (which  they  never  received,  and  never  experienced)  forces  thern  to 
take  this  position,  as  e.g.  the  author  of  the  Ancient  His.  of  the  East,  in  the  Preface 
remarks  :  "  Thus,  above  all,  it  is  that  I  arn  almost  invincibly  attached  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  constant  and  unlimited  progress  of  humanity — a  doctrine  unknown  to  Paganism,  a 
doctrine  born  of  Christianity,  and  whose  whole  law  is  found  in  the  words  of  the  Evan- 
gelist, '  Be  ye  perfect.'  "  Unbelief  seizes  the  words  addressed  to  believers,  urging  them 
to  completeness  of  character,  and  applies  them  to  this  universal  progress,  a  process  of 
reasoning  in  which  they  are  materially  aided  by  an  allegorizing,  spiritualizing,  and  philo- 
sophical Christianity,  but  which  is  plainly  and  emphatically  condemned  by  the  Scriptures, 
as  we  have  shown.  Men  of  a  religious  and  devout  mind,  like  Schlegel  (Philos.  of  His., 
Lect.  18,  etc.)  express  their  faith  and  hope  in  a  rapidly  approaching  era — nearer  than 
many  suppose — when  by  the  aid  of  philosophy  linked  with  Christianity  there  will  be  "  a 
thorough  religious  regeneration  of  the  State  and  science,"  by  which  "the  cause  of  God 
and  Christianity  may  obtain  a  complete  triumph  on  the  earth" — thus  directly  opposing 
the  biblical  statement,  that  States  and  nations,  instead  of  being  regenerated,  shall  oppose 
the  truth  and  at  the  close  of  the  age  be  found  in  direct  conflict  with  the  cause  of  God. 
Schlegel' s  hope  is  not  in  the  Advent  of  Jesus  (where  the  Bible  places  it),  but  "  the  relig- 
ious hope  of  a  true  and  complete  regeneration  of  the  age  by  a  Christian  system  of  govern- 
ment and  a  Christian  system  of  science' '  (the  latter  expression  being  elsewhere  explained 
"  by  the  establishment  of  a  Christian  philosophy  or  Catholic  science").  The  author  of 
Tin  Hand  of  Man  mid  the  Finger  of  God  in  the  Misfortunes  of  France,  predicts  a  glorious 
future — in  which  France  is  prominently  to  participate — and  triumph  of  "  the  Catholic, 
Apostolic,  Eoman  and  Holy  Church."  Protestants  reiterate  like  predictions  jiertaining 
to  Protestantism.  A  hundred  sects  bring  them  forth  as  a  motive  power  to  exertion. 
Even  Mormonism  (The  Pop.  Science  Monthly,  Dec,  1876)  anticipates  in  the  near  future, 
with  a  serene  confidence,  "  the  conversion  of  all  who  inhabit  their  vast  continent." 
These  predictions,  by  changing  the  phraseology,  are  boldly  appropriated  by  unbelief, 
either  by  modifying  Christianity  by  additions  ;  or  by  making  it  simply  preparative  for 
another  religion  ;  or  by  pronouncing  it  a  failure  and  its  assumed  successor  to  be  the  des- 
tined triumphant  one.  Works  like  The  Oriental  Religions  are  multiplying,  and  the  leaven 
is  already  widely  working  in  literary  journals,  newspapers,  text  books  of  colleges  and 
high  schools,  etc. 

The  observer  of  prevailing  literature  must  have  noticed  the  change  in  the  more  recent 
attacks  of  unbelief.  Many  disliking  the  reasoning  of  Bh.  Butler,  Leland,  Foster,  Lard- 
ner,  Paley,  Whately,  and  others  in  favor  of  Christianity,  arc  shifting  the  struggle  from 
the  Supernatural,  infallibility,  inspiration,  etc.,  to  another  field  of  inepjiry,  viz.,  making 
the  ultimate  success  of  Christianity  the  measure  of  its  truth.  This  is  an  insidious  and 
dangerous  attack,  and  has  been  provoked  by  Christians  themselves  ;  for  misapprehending 
the  nature  and  design  of  the  present  dispensation,  they  have  paraded  in  philosophical, 
historical,  religious,  and  other  works  the  progressive  nature  and  final  triumph  of  Chris- 
tianity as  dow  (''instituted,  in  and  through  the  Church.  Indeed,  sometimes  the  only 
reply  to  infidi  Lity  lias  been  the  production  of  this  unscriptural  reason.  This  now  has  be- 
come an  important  question,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  recently  a  large  number  of 
works  have  appeared  taking  sides  ;  the  one  party  contending — from  facts  of  history,  the 
advancement  of  man  in  intelligence,  the  present  position  of  the  Church,  the  growing  un- 
belief, etc.— that  the  Christian  Church  will  not  triumph,  and  hence  conclude  that  it  is 
not  adapted  to  the  nature  and  progress  of  man  and  the  race  ;  the  other  party  affirm — 
from  past  periods  of  success,  supposed  divine  assurances,  prophecies  torn  from  their 
connection,  etc. — that  its  ultimate  triumph  is  undoubted,  and  hence  declare  in  glowing 
language  that  it  is  in  all  respects  adapted  to  the  conversion  of  the  world.  To  indicate 
how  this  point  is  regarded,  we  quote  the  words  of  a  mild  Pantheistic-Naturalistic  writer, 
favorably  disposed  to  receive  Christianity,  if  the  cross  of  Jesus  is  removed  and  "  the 
strait  gate"  is  cut  some  wider.  He  says,  after  a  sarcastic  allusion  to  the  school  of  Lard- 
ner,  Paley,  and  Whately  :  "  But  the  real  question  between  Christians  and  unbelievers  in 
Christianity  is,  not  whether  our  religion  is  or  is  not  Supernatural  ;  not  whether  Christ's 
miracles  were,  or  were  not  violations  of  law  ;  nor  whether  the  New  Testament  as  it 
stands  is  the  work  of  inspired  men.  The  main  question,  back  of  all  these,  is  different 
and  not  dependent  on  the  views  we  may  happen  to  take  of  the  universality  of  law.  It  is 
this  :  Is  Christianity,  as  taught  by  Jesus,  intended  by  God  to  be  the  religion  of  the 
human  race  ?  Is  it  only  one  among  the  natural  religions  ;  is  it  to  be  superseded  in  its 
turn  by  others  ;  or  is  it  the  one  religion  which  is  to  unite  all  mankind?  '  Art  Thou  he 
that  should  come,  or  look  we  for  another?  '  This  is  the  question  which  we  ask  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  and  the  answer  to  which  makes  the  real  problem  of  apologetic  theology."     He 


PKOP.  175.]  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  209 

states  that  this  answer,  if  favorable,  will  "  show  it  to  be  true,"  because  it  evinces  its 
adaptedness  to  human  nature,  which  infers  design,  and  leads  to  God  the  designer  of  it. 
This  is  a  most  deceptive  and  dangerous  mode  of  reasoning,  and  must,  sooner  or  later, 
lead  to  a  bald  infidelity.  Let  the  reader  observe  that  it  is  very  significant  that  previous  to 
the  coming  of  the  culminated  Antichrist  with  his  triumph  over  the  Church  (as  surely  pre- 
dicted), the  triumph  of  that  Church  should  be  made  so  prominent  a  criterion.  It  is  a 
snare  artfully  contrived  to  entangle  the  masses  when  depression,  disaster,  and  terrible 
persecution  again  comes.  It,  too,  is  based  on  the  false  assumption  that  Christianity,  if 
divine,  must  rescue  and  reunite  the  race,  when  the  design  of  this  dispensation  is  the  reverse. 
Those  who  indorse  this  presumption,  instead  of  adopting  God's  declared  Divine  Purpose 
in  reference  to  this  dispensation,  virtually  undertake  to  decide  for  themselves  what  is, 
and  what  is  not,  worthy  of  divine  procedure,  thus  giving  aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemies 
of  the  truth.  This,  too,  is  done  under  an  honest  and  sincere  misapplication  of  the 
facts  of  history  and  the  predictions  of  God's  Word.  Thus  e.g.  Kev.  Dr.  Helwig,  in  a 
temperance  lecture  reported  in  the  Springfield  Republic,  Dec.  2-itk,  1877,  indorses  the 
statement  of  multitudes,  that  the  triumph  of  truth  is  always  certain,  saying  that 
"  although  the  wrong  may  at  times  seem  triumphant,  it  is  but  for  a  day.  Right  has 
might  and  power  for  its  allies,  and  will  triumph,  for  it  is  the  truth."  All  history,  as  well 
as  the  Bible,  contradicts  this  as  illustrated  in  the  antediluvian  world,  the  overthrow  of 
the  Theocracy,  the  closing  of  the  Mosaic  economy,  the  continued  unbelief  and  punish- 
ment of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  dark  ages,  the  gigantic  proportions  of  error  even  in  organ- 
ized forms,  the  future  coming  conflict  with  the  culminated  Antichrist,  the  predicted  end- 
ing of  this  age,  etc.  No  !  the  Word  assures  us,  that  while  God  will  see  to  it  that  truth, 
the  light,  shall  always,  more  or  less,  exist  as  a  testimony  and  to  accomplish  the  Divine 
Purpose  intended  by  this  dispensation,  its  triumph  will  only  be  secured  by  the  personal 
Coming  of  Him,  who  is  the  Truth.  All  this  looseness  of  expression,  confirms  the  hopes 
of  the  worshippers  of  humanity,  as  e.g.  expressed  in  the  funeral  oration  of  Wm.  Haller 
delivered  by  Sir.  Clark  (Cin.  Enquirer,  March  -ith,  1881)  who,  after  eulogizing  humanity, 
after  giving  no  hope  to  the  individual  of  a  future  but  an"  endless  rest"  in  the  green  and 
flowery  earth,  after  praising  the  labors  of  humanitarians  and  of  the  deceased,  concludes  : 
"  Thus  such  lives  as  thine,  beating  themselves  out  in  strife  with  hoary  wrongs,  shall  not 
be  lived  in  vain.  Those  wrongs,  though  they  seem  '  rock-ribbed  and  ancient  as  the 
sun,'  shall  crumble  and  fall,  and  Astrea  shall  hang  her  scales  in  the  sky,  and  a  Golden 
Age  dawn  upon  the  earth,  brighter  even  than  thy  hope."  We  may  well  conclude  with 
the  words  of  Van  Oosterzee  (Lange's  Com.  Luke,  p.  269)  :  "  There  is  a  heaven-wide  dis- 
tinction between  the  eschatological  expectations  which  the  friends  of  modern  liberalism 
cherish,  and  those  which  are  called  forth  by  this  teaching  of  our  Lord.  It  is  commonly 
supposed  that  in  the  proportion  in  which  the  principles  of  humanitarianism,  culture,  free 
thought,  and  the  like,  are  more  widely  diffused,  the  world  will  become  ever  increasingly 
wiser,  better,  and  happier.  The  Saviour  here  opens  to  us  a  very  different  view  of  the 
times  immediately  before  the  end.  Of  culture  and  the  false  semblance  of  external  secidar 
enlightenment,  there  will  then  undoubtedly  be  as  little  lack  as  in  the  days  of  Noah  and 
Lot.  But  instead  now  of  the  great  mass  becoming  continually  better  and  more  earnest, 
we  have  to  expect,  on  the  other  hand,  according  to  the  Saviour's  words,  a  time  of  care- 
lessness, hardening,  and  carnal  security,  just  like  that  which  preceded  the  destruction  of 
the  ancient  world  and  the  rain  of  Sodom.  These  are  the  perilous  times  in  the  last  clays, 
of  which  Paid  also  speaks,  2  Tim.  3:1;  and  all  which  in  the  Apoc.  is  prophesied  of  the 
great  apostasy  of  the  last  period  of  the  world,  is  only  a  wider  expansion  of  the  theme 
here  (Luke  17  :  20-37)  given." 


210  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  176. 


Proposition  176.   Our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  embraces  the  con- 
version of  the  world,  but  in  the  Scriptural  order. 

While  rejecting  the  Whitbyan  theory  of  a  future  conversion  of 
the  world  2irevious  to  the  Second  Advent  of  Jesus  as  unscriptural 
and  misleading,  we  at  the  same  time  firmly  hold  to  a  future  blessed 
and  glorious  conversion  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  after  the  Sec. 
Advent,  as  plainly  taught  in  the  Word. 

Hence  we  reject  as  utterly  unreliable  that  large  class  of  works  which  predict"  smooth 
things"  respecting  the  Church.  Take  as  an  illustration  Bunsen's  Church  of  the  Future, 
and  it  will  be  found  irreconcilable  with  a  large  class  of  predictions,  which  it  quietly 
ignores.  However  valuable  some  of  its  suggestions,  they  are  neutralized  by  the  false 
motive  for  effort  presented  ;  however  desirable  the  result  advocated,  it  is  vitiated  because 
directly  contrary  to  the  one  the  Scriptures  portray.  The  ' '  Church  of  the  Future"  instead 
of  converting  the  nations,  is  to  be  itself  under  fearful  trial,  persecution,  and  suffering. 
It  is  useless— yea,  dangerous — to  portray  a  Church  as  our  hope  widely  different  from  that 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  delineated.  A  critic  of  Bunsen,  placing  his  hope  in  this 
direction,  remarks  :  "  All  hail,  to  such  a  Church  of  the  Future  !  The  world  yearns  for 
it  ;  creation  groans  for  it.  Society  is  sick  at  heart  ;  sick  of  sore  maladies  which  politics 
can  scarcely  cure  ;  sick  of  many  empirics  and  few  physicians.  And  Christ's  Church 
alone  has  the  panacea — the  universal  cure."  Alas  !  thus  the  Church  is  deliberately  sub- 
stituted in  Christ's  ]>l<tcp,  and  the  Church  is  made  to  do  the  work  which  the  Spirit  attrib- 
utes alone  to  Christ  at  His  Second  Coming.  Thousands  of  works  take  this  false  position, 
leading  the  Church  into  a  state  of  unbelief,  from  which  some  day  there  will  be  a  terrible 
awakening. 

Obs.  1.  Such  Scriptures  as  Ps.  72  :  8-11  ;  Zech.  9  :  10  :  Isa,  CO  :  11-22  ; 
Dan.  7  :  14,  27  :  Hub.  2  :  11  :  Isa.  11  :  9,  etc.,  are  undoubtedly  to  he  ful- 
filled, being  the  legitimate  outgrowth  of  covenant  promises,  and  jiertaining 
to  the  promised  Kingdom,  honor,  and  glory  of  the  Redeemer.  The  cer- 
tainty of  realization  is  apparent  not  only  because  given  by  the  Omniscient 
Spirit  conversant  with  "  the  deep  things"  of  God,  but  by  its  being  bound 
up  with  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  Purpose.  Hence  it  is  that  the  proph- 
ecies bearing  on  this  point  are  among  the  unconditional  (comp.  Prop.  18), 
for  such  a  state  of  things  is  connected  with  the  sway,  extent,  splendor,  and 
glory  of  the  TJieocraei/  itself.  The  completeness  of  redemption,  the  perfec- 
tion of  restitution,  the  greatness  of  an  Almighty  Redeemer,  cannot  and  will 
not  be  satisfied  with  anything  less.  The  Theocratic  ordering  aims  to  bring 
all  into  subjection,  and  when  established  in  its  might  will  proceed  in  this 
glorious  undertaking.  This  conversion  is  so  interwoven  with  the  descrip- 
tions of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  its  extent  and  greatness,  and  with  the 
Theocratic  King,  His  sway  over  the  nations  and  majesty,  that  it  cannot 
possibly  be  ignored,  or  be  removed,  without  a  serious  flaw.  Therefore  it  is 
that  God  has  affirmed  it  to  be  as  sure  of  realization  as  that  He  Himself 
existed  (Numb.  11  :  21).  uBut  as  truly  as  I  live,  all  the  earth  shall  he  filled 
with  /he  glory  of  the  Lord,"  which  glory,  as  numerous  parallel  passages 
(e.g.  Isa.  60)  show,  is  identified  with  the  restoration  of  the  race  as  such,  to 
its  former  Edenic  holiness  and  happiness. 


Prop.  176.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  211 

Dr.  Finney,  Dis.  on  the  Sec.  Advent,  makes  the  world's  conversion  one  of  necessity, 
being  based  on  the  attributes  of  God.  The  argument  is  certainly  a  very  bold  one  when 
applied  to  the  present  dispensation,  for  it  proves  entirely  too  much,  making  the  infinite  be- 
nevolence of  God  the  sole  standard  by  which  to  judge  of  the  number  of  the  saved— the 
very  reasoning  that  the  Universalists  employ  for  the  same  purpose.  It  is,  therefore, 
placing  ourselves  in  the  place  of  judges  respecting  the  expediency  of  the  divine  purposes, 
and  the  manner  in  which  they  should  be  carried  out,  which  is  always  a  dangerous  pro- 
cedure. We  dare  not  confine  God's  purposes  to  one  dispensation  unless  it  is  specifically 
stated  ;  we  must  follow  the  purpose  as  it  is  unfolded  and  declared,  observing  how  and 
when  it  is  to  be  realized.  If  Dr.  Finney's  argument  had  been  used  by  a  Jew  before  the 
first  Advent — and  it  would  have  been  a  priori  just  as  reasonable — it  would  not  have  been 
verified  in  that  dispensation  as  history  demonstrates,  and  so  now,  if  we  allow  the  Scrijit- 
ures  to  testify,  it  will  still  remain  unrealized  in  the  present  dispensation.  His  reason- 
ing, therefore,  is  only  pertinent  to  its  certainty  and  accord  with  God's  own  ultimate 
glory.  This  we  accept,  while  the  limitation  to  the  present  dispensation  we  reject,  be- 
cause the  exact  reverse,  as  we  have  shown  under  the  preceding  Propositions,  is  the  plain 
and  decisive  teaching  of  Scripture.  Van  Oosterzee  (Uh.  Dog.,  vol.  2,  p.  795),  speaking  of 
"  the  consummation  of  all  things"  as  presented  by  Scripture,  remarks  :  "  The  prospect 
here  opened  up  is  well  adapted  to  put  to  shame  every  optiniistic-hunianistic  dream,  as 
though  in  this  best  of  worlds  things  should  grow  better,  the  nearer  the  stream  of  time 
rolls  to  the  ocean  of  eternity."  Extremes  meet,  seeing  that  Is.  Taylor  (His.  of  Enthusi- 
asm, p.  183)  thinks  that  the  speedy  conversion  of  the  world  would  probably  cause  evils  to 
arise,  etc.,  instead  of  founding  its  non-arrival,  as  the  Scriptures,  on  human  depravity. 

Obs.  2.  This  Prop,  is  the  more  necessary,  since — notwithstanding  the 
Primitive  Church  teaching,  and  the  reiterated  statements  of  numerous  Pre- 
Millenarian  writers — works  are  circulated,  like  The  Kingdom  of  Grace, 
which  boldly  misrepresent  our  doctrine,  making  us  to  teach,  like  themselves 
(i.e.  Anti-Millenarians),  or  like  the  Millerites,  some  Second  Adventists,  and 
Seventh-Day  Adventists,  that  after  the  Second  Advent  there  is  no  more 
probation,  no  salvation  for  the  race,  and  no  "  increase  of  the  Kingdom  of 
the  Messiah."  These  are  their  own  deductions  and  not  ours,  being  dis- 
carded by  almost  every  Pre-Millenarian  from  the  early  Church  down  to  the 
present.  The  objection  is  only  plausible  by  classing  men  with  us,  who, 
aside  from  expecting  the  speedy  Advent,  have  no  special  doctrinal  affilia- 
tion with  us,  but  entertain  the  popular  views  respecting  the  judgment, 
conflagration,  and  consequences  of  the  Advent  in  its  relation  to  the  race. 
Such  misconceptions  of  our  belief  might  be  passed  by  without  notice,  if 
they  were  not  repeated  in  respectable  reviews,  journals,  etc.,  as  e.g.  in  The 
Presbyterian  Quarterly  Review  for  1853.  Those  not  conversant  with  our 
doctrine,  rinding  the  most  positive  declarations  respecting  such  a  conver- 
sion, and  God's  own  existence  pledged  for  its  ultimate  verification,  at  once 
conclude  that  we  are  in  gross  error,  and  thus  become  prejudiced  against  us. 

Dr.  Brown  (Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  p.  313),  following  others,  charges  Pre-Millenarians 
with  "  sneering"  at  Bible  and  missionary  societies,  and  with  indulging  in  "ill-disguised 
insinuations — sometimes  not  disguised  at  all — against  the  Word  and  the  blessed  Spirit 
themselves,  as  inadequate  to  accomplish  the  predicted  evangelization  of  the  world." 
This  is  a  perverted,  false  statement,  eminently  calculated  to  prejudice  others  against  us. 
No  Pre-Millenarian  speaks  slightingly  or  disrespectfully  of  the  Word  or  the  Spirit,  or 
refuses  to  acknowledge  the  eminent  services  of  Bible  and  missionary  societies  (unless  it 
be  some  unsound,  erratic,  or  fanatical  person  belonging  to  some  small  sect,  whom  Dr.  B. 
is  afraid  to  quote,  seeing  that  the  quotation  itself  would  prove  our  defence),  for  we  all 
ascribe  the  failure  of  such  non-conversion,  not  to  the  Spirit  or  Word,  not  to  the  lack  of 
abundant  provision  or  merciful  invitation,  but  to  the  depravity  of  man  which  rejects  the 
provision  made.  It  is  our  reverence  for  the  truth  which  causes  us  to  insist  that  a  true 
honoring  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  demands  that  we  receive  the  Scriptural  teaching  respect- 
ing the  design  of  this  dispensation  (Props.  86,  87),  and  not  ignore  the  Sec.  Advent  and 
the  events  produced  by  it.     Even  those  persons  who  deny  any  future  conversion  Pre-  or 


212  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  176. 

Post-Advent,  do  not — as  simple  justice  demands — base  the  same  on  the  inadequacy  of  the 
Word  or  Spirit.  We,  however,  accept  of  a  future  conveision,  but  locate  it  later,  and 
indorse  the  instrumentalities  specifically  mentioned  by  the  Spirit  in  the  Word  as  neces- 
sary to  its  fulfilment.  The  attacks  in  this  direction  are  painfully  onesided,  and  often  so 
sweeping  that  the  exhibited  prejudice  and  ignorance  gives  the  requisite  answer.  Thus 
as  illustrative  :  The  Princeton  Review,  April,  1851,  contains  an  art.,  "  Foreign  Missions 
and  Millenarianism, "  which  speaks  of  "the  extremely  injurious  tendency  of  the  Millena- 
rian  theory  ;"  of  its  "  restraining  the  zeal  and  activity  of  God's  people  ;"  of  its  "  forbid, 
ding  the  exercise  of  faith,"  "  sweeping  away  our  interest  in  prayer  and  our  agonizing 
dc  jpendence  on  the  Holy  Spirit;"  and  of  its  "baneful  influence  on  the  cause  of  mis- 
sions." Our  refusal  to  indorse  his  theory  of  the  conversion  of  the  world  and  to  pray  for 
that  which  the  Word,  in  our  estimation,  clearly  condemns,  causes  the  writer  to  impute 
all  these  evils  to  us,  forgetting  the  large  number  of  missionaries  who  have  been  and  are 
Millenarian,  who  have  manifested  a  faith,  prayer,  dependence  on  the  Spirit,  etc.,  which 
he  will  find  hard  to  imitate.  When,  therefore,  he  eulogizes  the  missionaries  as  "  the 
most  successful  preachers  who  have  lived  for  the  last  fifteen  hundred  years,"  he,  without 
knowing  it,  includes,  of  course,  the  large  body  of  Pre-Millenarians,  who  have  been  so  suc- 
cessful in  founding  and  sustaining  missions,  and  who  showed  that  faith  in  taking  out  a 
people  for  His  name,  faith  in  hastening  the  number  of  the  elect  and  the  subsequent 
glory,  faith  in  witnessing  for  the  truth  whether  successftd  or  not,  in  performing  the 
allotted  work  and  last  command  of  the  Master,  etc.,  was  amply  sufficient  to  cause  them 
to  make  the  heaviest  sacrifices  and  to  accept  of  the  severest  self-denial  "  to  save  them 
that  believe."     (The  reader  will  comp.  Props.  78  and  183.) 

Obs.  3.  The  Eschatology,  in  systems  of  belief,  which  rejects  this  future 
conversion  of  the  Jews  ami  Gentiles — as  e.g.  in  Millerism,  Second  Advent- 
ism,  Seventh-Day  Adventism,  Anti-Millennial,  etc. — is  most  certainly 
defective.  It  is  alike  derogatory  to  the  Word  which  plainly  predicts  it,  to 
the  completeness  of  salvation  which  requires  it,  and  to  the  honor  and  glory 
of  the  Redeemer  which,  in  view  of  the  promises  associated  with  the  same, 
demands  it.  Fettered  by  their  Kingdom  theory,  or  by  a  class  of  passages 
dislocated  from  their  dispensational  connection,  they  see  no  place  for  such 
a  Millennium  as  the  Scriptures  present,  in  which  the  nations  are  brought 
into  subjection  to  the  Messiah's  reign  and  saints'  rule.  Some  even  take 
the  Millennial  predictions,  interwoven  with  the  perpetuation  and  subjection 
of  the  race,  which  describe  an  era  of  blessedness  here  on  the  earth,  and 
without  the  least  authority  transfer  the  whole  to  the  third  heaven.  This  is 
a  most  arbitrary  way  in  disposing  of  Scripture,  and  indicates  clearly  that 
the  central  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  is  entirely  misapprehended. 

Under  various  Propositions  these  views  arc  presented  in  detail,  and  require  no  special 
refutation.  The  argument  alleged  (as  e.g.  by  Waggoner,  7/'./'.  of  Age  to  Come)  against  the 
conversion  of  the  world  after  the  Advent  derived  from  the  nature  and  expressions  of 
Revelation  designed  for  the  present  dispensation  (such  as  "  the  narrow  way,"  "  come  out 
of  tribulation,' '  "  some  shall  only  believe,"  etc.)  is  exceedingly  weak  and  imperfect  (infer- 
ential, and  wrong  in  the  same)  against  the  impregnable  covenants,  postponement  of  the 
Kingdom,  the  perpetuation  of  the  race,  the  age  to  come,  etc.  Such  writers  mistake  the 
Kingdom,  the  relation  of  the  Jewish  nation  to  it,  and  various  other  considerations,  which 
we  present  in  their  logical  connection,  exhibiting  the  scriptural  basis  snpporting  the 
same.  Such  Props,  as  relate  to  the  events  associated  with  and  following  the  Sec.  Advent, 
and  show  that  the  covenants,  both  Abrahamic  and  Davidic,  are  unmistakably  fulfilled  in 
their  plain  grammatical  sense,  that  ages  follow  this  one,  that  the  race  is  perpetuated, 
that  Revelation  will  be  continued,  that  all  the  forfeited  blessings  and  not  merely  a  part 
are  restored,  etc. — cannot  be  set  aside  by  mere  inference  and  an  ignoring  of  Scripture  ; 
for  over  against  the  denial  of  such  a  future  conversion  we  have  God's  promises  fortified 
by  oath.  This  doctrine  is  not  man's,  but  is  given  by  God,  having  reference  to  His  own 
glory,  and  must  be  received  by  accepting  of,  and  comparing,  all  Scripture  on  the  subject. 

Obs.  4.  We  make  the  conversion  of  the  world,  when  it  does  occur,  a  sub- 
lime)', more  enduring  and  exalted  transaction  than  that  proposed  by  other 


Prop.  176.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  213 

theories.  Instead  of  making  it  a  mere  Constantinean  era  or  a  Gospel  dis- 
pensation, or  one  in  which  Antichrist  and  wicked  confederations  exist,  or 
one  of  a  mixed  condition  subject  to  the  curse,  etc.,  we,  under  the  direct 
auspices  of  Christ  and  His  co-rulers,  and  with  the  wonder-working  aid  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  have  the  age  ushered  in,  and  continued  on,  realizing  iu  all 
its  fulness  the  ample  and  complete  fulfilment  of  the  Millennial  prophecies, 
just  as  they  read,  embracing  a  world-wide  dominion  and  the  richest  bless- 
ings. While  this,  at  the  close  of  the  thousand  years,  gives  place  to  a  brief 
rebellion,  yet  this  dominion,  this  subjection  of  the  nations,  this  supreme 
acknowledgment  of  the  King,  is  ever  afterward  secured. 

The  history  of  man  in  epochal  or  dispensational  endings,  as  the  Edenic,  Antedilu- 
vian, Patriarchal,  Mosaic,  Personal  Messianic,  of  the  past,  and  of  the  present  Christian 
as  delineated  e.g.  in  Revelation,  conclusively  shows  that  just  such  a  dispensation,  em- 
bracing the  Personal  rule  of  Jesus  and  the  saints,  as  we  advocate,  is  needed  to  bring  about 
this  submission  and  allegiance  of  the  nations.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  plain  scriptural 
statements  and  the  conclusion  can  only  be  avoided  by  displacing  or  denying  the  Advent 
itself,  or  by  dislocating  passages  which  are  united,  or  by  applying  to  one  dispensation 
things  which  belong  to  another,  or  by  bestowing  upon  the  Gentiles  that  which  exclusively 
belongs  to  the  Jews.  "We  freely  admit  that  to  obtain  a  proper,  consistent  knowledge  of 
the  subject,  a  study  of  the  Scriptures  is  required.  The  importance  of  it,  and  its  bearing 
(as  we  have  repeatedly  shown)  on  related  subjects,  especially  demands  such  a  study  from 
the  ministry,  who  are  supposed  to  be  leaders  in  teaching  Scripture  doctrine.  A  pro- 
fessed ignorance  is  culpable  ;  a  false  modesty  under  the  assumption  of  a  clear  logical 
announcement  by  the  Spirit  being  a  felt  want,  is  a  reflection  upon  the  divine  teaching. 
Such  utterances  as  the  following,  eagerly  seized  and  paraded  by  our  opponents,  are  to  be 
regretted  :  The  Gh.  Union,  (Sep.  19th,  1877)  compliments  the  "good  sense  from  Mr.  Spur- 
geon  on  the  Sec.  Advent,"  by  quoting  him  as  saying  :  "  The  more  I  read  the  Scriptures 
as  to  the  future,  the  less  I  am  able  to  dogmatize.  I  see  conversion  of  the  world,  and  the 
Personal  Pre-Millennial  reign,  and  the  sudden  Coming,  and  the  judgment,  and  several 
other  grand  points,  but  I  cannot  put  them  in  order,  nor  has  any  one  else  done  so  yet." 
"We  have  only  to  say  that  if  this  is  Spurgeon's  utterance,  (1)  it  is  not  flattering  to  his 
many  utterances  where  he  presents  an  order  ;  (2)  it  is  contradictory,  as  e.g.  in  asserting 
a,  Personal  Pre-Millennial  reign  which  involves,  of  necessity,  an  order  ;  (3)  it  indicates  a 
lack  of  special  attention  to  the  covenants  ;  (4)  it  implies  that  on  great  leading  subjects 
which  ministers  are  expressly  to  teach,  they  are  purposely  left  in  ignorance  ;  (5)  it  ignores 
the  labors  of  others,  as  e.g.  that  of  the  early  Church  (which  had  an  order  in  Eschatology), 
and  will  not  allow  to  them  that  which  he  himself  has  not  done  ;  (6)  it  is  misleading, 
since  (aside  from  minor  details)  the  Scriptures  do  give  a  complete  and  harmonious  order 
of  the  things  referred  to  by  him  ;  (7)  it  deters  others  from  the  subject  under  the  false 
idea  that  if  he,  so  great  and  popular  a  minister,  has  failed  to  make  out  an  order,  others 
cannot  do  it,  when  the  truth  is,  as  his  works  abundantly  evidence,  that,  able  and  useful 
as  he  has  been,  Pre-Millennial  in  tendency  as  various  utterances  show,  he  has  a  defective 
and  contradictory  Eschatology,  the  radical  defect  of  which  is  that  it  is  not  rooted  and 
grounded  in  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic  Covenants,  but  sustains  itself  by  a  commingling  of 
literal  and  spiritualistic  interpretations. 

Obs.  5.  The  position  that  we  thus  occupy  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  those 
"who  declare  that  we  dishonor  the  Spirit  by  not  admitting  that  the  work  of 
universal  conversion  will  be  performed  in  this  dispensation.  For  we  honor 
the  Spirit  in  first  receiving  what  He  lias  said  on  the  subject,  and,  secondly, 
in  showing  that  His  work  will  be  accomplished  more  fully  and  perfectly  in 
the  age  to  come  than,  as  our  opponents  are  willing  to  admit,  it  will  be  in 
this  age.  He  is  now  doing  His  work  in  the  process  of  gathering  a  people 
for  God,  and  this,  we  conteud,  is  only  the  earnest  of  a  greater  still  to  come. 
(Oomp.  Prop.  171.)  May  we  say  to  our  opposers  that,  perad venture,  in 
their  efforts  to  glorify  the  Spirit,  they  may,  unconsciously,  dishonor  the 
Lord  Jesus,  for  as  one  (Dr.  Cummings)  has  well  said  :  "  The  Spirit  is  not 


214  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  176. 

a  substitute  for  Jesus."  The  Spirit  points  us  to  the  Christ  and  teaches  us 
what  to  await  for  at  His  Coming,  and  in  implicit  trust  our  hearts  accept  of 
the  same. 

In  view  of  our  doctrines  respecting  the  conversion  of  the  world,  the  Kingdom  of 
Christ,  etc.,  we  are  unjustly  accused  as  "  traitors  to  the  Church,"  or,  at  least,  of  taking 
"  little  interest  in  her  welfare."  "While  this  is  effectually  disproved  by  the  zeal,  labori- 
ous, lives,  missionary  sjfirit,  martyrdom,  sacrifices  of  thousands  of  Chiliasts  in  the  juast, 
and  by  the  fact  that  our  belief,  if  properly  apprehended  in  their  logical  connection,  im- 
measurably exalts  the  Kingdom  of  Jesus  and  increases  the  number  of  the  ultimate  con- 
verted (saving  not  merely  the  fragments  of  a  race,  but  finally  the  race  itself),  yet  it  may 
be  said  that  such  a  charge  is  by  no  means  new  or  strange.  When  men,  accepting  of 
God's  Word,  deal  in  unwelcome  truths,  they  are  thus  characterized.  Dealing  in  prophecy, 
Isaiah  and  other  teachers  were  branded  as  traitors  to  God's  people.  When  e.g.  Jeremiah 
(ch.  27)  insisted,  in  accordance  with  the  predictions  of  God,  that  the  Jews  should,  in 
order  to  obtain  quiet,  submit  to  the  King  of  Babylon,  he  was  regarded  as  unfaithful  and 
a  visionary.  The  gravest  suspicions  were  entertained  concerning  him,  which  finally 
resulted  even  in  his  imprisonment.  Still  relying  on  the  prophetic  Word,  he  unfalteringly 
declared  his  faith  in  the  Spirit's  predictions,  and  that  safety  and  peace  depended  on  the 
reception  of  these  truths,  however  unpalatable  or  unseemly  they  were  to  the  masses. 
The  result  proved,  in  the  safety  of  believers  and  in  the  destruction  of  the  unbelievers, 
that  the  estimate  formed  respecting  the  prophet  and  God's  predictions  were  not  only  un- 
worthy of  faith  in  God,  but  dangerous  to  those  who  were  faithless.  Thus  it  ever  has 
been.  Had  the  Church  heeded  the  warnings  given  by  prophecy,  many  and  great  evils 
would  have  been  averted.  Blinded,  however,  by  a  worldly  policy,  guided  by  human 
wisdom,  she  has  been  Hooded  with  error  and  crippled  by  submission  to  human  inventions 
and  power.  Even  to-day,  when  men  arise  and  point  us  to  the  prophetic  Word  with 
warnings  of  danger,  persecution,  judgment,  and  bloodshed  still  in  the  future,  and  per- 
adventure  not  very  distant,  multitudes  arise  in  antagonism,  and  brand  them  as  Jeremiah 
was  branded,  and  would,  if  they  dared,  proceed  to  severer  measures.  "Heretics"  and 
'•  fanatics"  are  but  mild  terms  in  comparison  with  some  that  have  caught  the  writer's 
eye.  Threats  of  Church  trial  and  excommunication  are  freely  made.  Men,  too,  of 
acknowledged  ability  and  learning,  cater  to  this  opposition  by  deliberately  showing  from 
reason,  false  philosophy,  and  wrested  Scripture  that  such  danger  does  not  exist.  The 
plain  unvarnished  statements  of  God's  Word  are  frivolously  set  aside,  and  all  events  in 
the  future  relating  to  the  Church  are  prosperously  arranged  to  suit  their  own  ideas  of  the 
fitness  of  things,  or  what  they  deem  proper  to  exist  under  the  moral  government  of  God. 
Accepting  a  portion  of  the  truth  and  ignoring  a  larger  portion,  they  bend  it  in  a  manner 
to  accommodate  their  favorite  system  of  divinity.  Such  works  as  Harris's  Great  Commis- 
sion (judged  worthy  of  a  prize  of  two  hundred  guineas),  filled  with  illogical  and  unscript- 
ural  conclusions,  are  favorites,  predicting  that  which  is  pleasing  to  human  nature.  We 
are  censured  because  we  condemn  that  which  is  exceedingly  misleading  and  attributes  to 
the  Church  that  which  is  the  work  of  Jesus  after  His  Sec.  Coming. 

Obs.  G.  Our  doctrine  making  no  imperfect  conversion  of  the  world,  but 
allying  with  it  a  restoration  to  a  former  Paradisaical  condition,  augments 
the  glory  of  the  Redeemer.  It  gives  Him  no  hesitating,  or  even  general, 
possession  of  the  world,  but  an  entire  possession.  It  gives  Him  no  world 
still  groaning  under  the  works  of  the  devil,  and  feeling  the  direful  effects  of 
a  constant  pervading  curse,  but  a  world  out  of  which  all  evil  shall  be 
rooted,  in  which  the  works  of  the  devil  are  destroyed,  the  curse  repealed, 
all  things  restored  and  made  new.  Our  view,  therefore,  is  far  from  being, 
as  alleged,  "  derogatory  to  the  power  of  God  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and 
"  a  lowering  of  Christ,"  because  it  demands  and  exalts  this  power  and 
Christship.  We  honor  the  same  now  in  the  measure  hitherto  graciously 
experienced,  but  Ave  look  for  far  more  in  that  which  is  yet  to  be  realized, 
and  to  a  degree,  so  vast  in  extent,  by  manifestations  of  power,  of  royalty, 
of  the  supernatural,  that  our  opponents  dare  not  venture  to  assume.  Our 
whole  trust  is  in  the  revealed  and  abiding  Theocratic  Ruler,  the  mighty 
Restorer. 


Prop.  176.]  the  tiieoceatic  kingdom.  215 

When  the  Theocratic  ordering  is  in  full  sway,  then  this  will  be  forcibly  realized.  To 
this  period  belong  such  passages  as  the  following  :  Ps.  22  :  27,  28,  "  All  the  ends  of  tlte 
world  shall  remerribi  r  and  turn  unto  the  Lord  ;  and  all  the  Kindreds  of  the  nations  shall  worship 
before  thee.  Fur  the  Kingdom  is  the  Lord' s  ;  and  Me  is  the  Governor  among  the  nations."  Ps. 
9:1-8;  Ps.  21  :  7-13,  etc. 

Obs.  7.  Oar  doctrine  makes  the  saints,  counted  worthy  to  inherit  the 
Kingdom  with  David's  Son,  happy  participants  in  this  process  of  convert- 
ing the  nations  of  the  earth.  This  opens  before  ns  a  bright  and  beautiful 
aspect  of  saint  In  agency  in  the  future,  when  "  the  elect"  are  manifested  as 
the  revealed  kings  and  priests  of  the  earth. 

The  reader  will  find  this  feature  extended  in  detail,  with  Scripture  proof,  under  Props. 
154  and  156.  It  is  delightful  to  contemplate,  that  we  who  are  the  redeemed  "  first- 
fruits,"  shall  be  able  practically  to  manifest  our  supreme  love  to  God  by  bringing  others 
to  experience  its  blessings  in  acknowledgment  of  the  supremacy  and  majesty  of  the 
King. 

Obs.  8.  Our  doctrine  of  the  conversion  of  the  world  coincides  with  the 
general  tenor  of  the  Word,  seeing  that  nowhere  do  we  find  the  language 
and  appeals  so  prevailing  in  modern  addresses,  sermons,  and  books  pervaded 
by  the  spirit  of  the  Whitbyan  theory.  The  Apostles,  the  first  preachers 
and  missionaries,  nowhere  encourage  the  Primitive  Church  in  its  trials  and 
persecutions  by  the  hope  of  ultimate  and  complete  success.  If  it  be  a 
truth,  as  our  opponents  allege,  it  certainly  was  the  very  one  needed  in  their 
circumstances.     The  absence  of  it  strongly  corroborates  our  position. 

One  of  the  indirect,  but  most  powerful,  evidences  of  the  divine  inspiration  of  the 
Scripture  is  found  in  the  fact  that  nowhere  do  we  find  those  eulogistic  descriptions  of 
"the  triumph  of  the  Gospel  in  subduing  the  world"  which  now  so  largely  adorn  the 
eloquence  of  Whitbyan  missionary  discourses.  Nothing  of  the  kind  is  exhibited  even 
when  reference  is  made  to  the  rapid  extension  of  the  preached  Word  over  the  then 
known  world,  for  the  Spirit  evidently  foresaw,  what  history  testifies  to,  the  ultimate 
overthrow  and  fallen  condition  of  the  churches,  then  so  widely  extended.  If  the  hopes 
and  efforts  of  believers  are  to  be  quickened  by  such  appeals  — as  men  now  say — why  were 
they  not  given  at  a  time  when  Christians  endured  the  severest  trials  from  a  persecuting 
Roman  Empire?  Surely  the  lack  of  these  is  evidence  of  the  unity  of  the  Scriptures  ;  it  is 
testimony  in  favor  of  its  inspiration,  seeing  that  men,  intoxicated  by  success  and  catch- 
ing at  the  predictions  relating  to  an  ultimate  conversion,  would  only  too  gladly  have 
used  such  pleas,  and  in  their  behalf  have  perverted  (as  now  done)  the  prophecies  them- 
selves, unless  withheld  by  the  spirit  of  truth.  The  absence  of  this  prediction  of  success, 
and  the  careful  reference  to  prophecy  by  locating  its  fulfilment  at  the  same  period  in  the 
future,  and,  then  superadded,  that  the  reverse  of  the  modern  view  is  most  carefully  in- 
culcated—all this  certainly  adds  consistency  and  strength  to  our  line  of  reasoning.  As 
numerous  eminent  writers  have  pointed  out,  Matt.  24  ,  Mark  13  ;  Luke  21  ;  2  Thess.  2.  in 
themselves  considered,  are  amply  sufficient  to  invalidate  the  Whitbyan  theory.  To  illus- 
trate how  men,  by  ignoring  the  facts  of  history  and  the  direct  tenor  of  prophecy,  deal 
with  such  passages,  we  introduce  Eev.  Robinson,  who,  in  a  sermon  (Springfield,  0.,  Nov., 
1878),  asserted  that  in  the  first  century  Christians  thought  that  the  world  was  to  be  con- 
verted immediately,  and  hence  Paul  gives  2  Thess.  2  to  show  that  such  a  conversion  was 
to  be  delayed.  The  record  shows  conclusively  that  the  Thessalonians  indulged  no  such 
false  hope,  and  Paul  does  not  give  his  statement  to  correct  any  such  anticipations,  but 
what  he  does  give  does,  inferentially,  most  conclusively  (as  Bh.  Mcllvaine  and  others 
have  observed)  overthrow  Robinson's  view  of  the  conversion  of  the  world  in  the  present 
dispensation.  This  passage  gives  no  possible  support  to  a  Millen.  age  from  the  time  of 
its  utterance  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  for  as  Dr.  Morehead  (art.  i,  Chris.  Instructor,  March 
13th,  1879)  pertinently  observes  :  "  The  mystery  of  iniquity  was  then  already  working 
and  this  was  to  continue  to  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  that  the  hindrance  removed  is  not  followed 
by  a  Millennium  but  by  the  Advent  ;  and  that  the  Advent  itself  is  designed  to  crush  the 
culmination  of  iniquity.     .     .     .     Thus  we  are  guarded  by  the  Apostle  at  the  beginning, 


216  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  176. 

middle,  and  end  of  the  -whole  period.  The  Mill,  cannot  come  before  the  Man  of  Sin,  for 
the  mystery  of  iniquity  and  the  apostasy  precede  and  issue  in  his  revelation.  It  cannot 
come  after'(i.e.  before  the  Advent),  for  the  end  of  the  period  is  accomplished  by  the 
Advent  of  Christ.  We  are  thus  shut  up  to  the  inevitable  and  irresistible  conclusion,  on  any 
fair  exegesis  of  the  passage,  that  if  we  are  ever  to  have  a  Mill,  of  rest  for  the  world,  it  must 
be  (it  cannot  otherwise  be)  after  the  appearing  of  the  Saviour.  With  Dr.  Lillie,  I  affirm 
that  if  there  be  a  Mill,  during  this  entire  age,  '  our  hope  for  the  world  is  limited  to  a 
Millennium  during  which  Antichrist  reigns.'  " 

Obs.  9.  This  doctrine  of  ours  prominently  holds  forth,  as  a  cardinal 
point,  the  design  of  the  present  dispensation,  and  insists  upon  it  that 
wherever  the  design  is  specifically  mentioned,  it  is  "  to  gather  out  a  people 
for  His  name,"  "  to  save  them  that  believe,"  or  to  bring  appropriated  sal- 
vation to  "  the  few"  in  contrast  to  "  the  many"  who  reject  it — a  process 
which  has  been  going  on  uninterruptedly  for  eighteen  centuries. 

In  direct  contrast  with  this  biblical  teaching,  eminent  and  eloquent  men  teach  that 
its  design  is  the  reverse,  viz.,  to  gather  all  people,  to  save  the  many,  to  convert  all 
nations.  Take  e.g.  Castellar  in  Old  Borne  and  Xeic  Italy,  p.  187,  and  he  has  this  world 
regenerated  by  moral,  religious,  and  political  truth,  so  that  "Liberty,  Equality,  and  Fra- 
ternity are  not  solely  evangelical  formulas,  but  also  social  truths  capable  of  creating  a 
new  earth,  ami  of  extending  above  it  new  heavens  of  blessed  and  perennial  radiance.' ' 
Such  high-sound Lug  predictions,  so  forcibly  expressed,  are  not,  however,  given  in  accord 
with  God's  required  Christian  repentance  and  faith,  but  really  flow  from  unbelief,  enliv- 
ened by  a  vivid  imagination  and  a  religious  fervor,  because  (p.  185)  they  result  from 
making  miracles  and  prophecies,  not  "real  acts  which  actually  occurred,"  but  merely 
"  symbols  of  systems  to  come,  of  regeneration  periods  in  the  successive  life  of  the  spirit 
ami  of  the  planet."  The  truth  is  that  Castellar' s  theory  is  a  more  unscriptural  and  a  far 
wilder  one  than  that  of  the  Jesuits,  who,  as  a  spur  to  their  exertions,  presented  the  idea 
of  a  "  universal  monarchy"— all  nations  converted  and  brought  under  the  Papal  sway. 


Prop.  177.]  the  theocratic  kixgdom.  217 


Proposition  177.  This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  ivill  not  be  re- 
ceived, in  faith,  by  the  Church  as  a  body. 

This  is  distinctly  announced  in  the  declarations  pertaining  to  the 
period  immediately  preceding^  the  Advent.  The  Church,  instead 
of  developing  into  that  condition  of  knowledge  and  faith  which  so 
many  writers  confidently  predict,  is  represented  as  occupying  a 
position  the  very  opposite.  Jesus  significantly  (Luke  18  :  8)  asks  : 
"  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh  shall  He  find  faith  (the  faith)  on 
the  earth  f  i.e.  will  the  Church  be  in  such  a  condition  of  trial,  of 
testing,  that  it  will  fail  to  exercise  faith  in  the  very  provision  made 
for  deliverance  \ l  Faith  in  a  variety  of  things  may  indeed  be 
found,  hut  will  it  believe  in  and  pray  for  that  "  blessed  hope''' 
which  alone  can  bring  in  glorious  salvation  f 

1  Dr.  Rutter  (Roman  Catholic),  in  his  Life  of  Jesus,  p.  357,  on  Luke  18  :  8  remarks,  that 
at  "  the  latter  end  of  the  world  the  faithful  shall  be  oppressed  by  all  manner  of  persecu- 
tions," and  adds:  "  An  expression  descriptive  of  tin-  extreme  rarity  of  that  perfect  faith 
which  is  necessary  to  perseverance  in  prayer.  In  effect,  if  we  are  to  judge  from  the  pres- 
ent alarming  state  of  opinionated  infidelity  in  the  world,  anil  from  the  seeming  indiffer- 
ence with  which  many  Christians  consider  the  great  duty  of  prayer,  is  there  not  reason 
to  fear  that  mankind  are  fast  approaching  to  that  general  apostasy  from  the  faith  here 
foretold  by  our  blessed  Redeemer?"  So  Lange,  and  many  others,  properly  apply  this  to 
the  Second  Coming  of  Jesus,  and  the  period  immediately  preceding  and  connected  with, 
that  Coming.  The  lack  of  faith,  as  the  connection  demands,  is  not  simply  a  denial  of 
the  Messiah,  but  a  refusal  to  believe  in  Him  as  Coming  "  speedily"  to  avenge  and  deliver 
His  own  elect.  The  question  itself,  the  expressive  '*  ara,  indeed,"  the  analogy  of  other 
Scripture,  express  a  diminution  or  falling  away  of  faith.  Faith  has  not  entirely  ceased 
(for  His  elect  cry  to  Him  to  come),  but  will  be  greatly  diminished,  and  that  just  previous 
to  the  Parousia. 

Obs.  1.  The  reply  is  found  in  various  predictions.  Even  the  parable  of 
the  ten  virgins,  united  as  it  is  by  the  word  "  then"  with  the  time  of  the 
Second  Advent,  plainly  teaches  us  how  the  ignoring  of  the  Coming  of  the 
mighty  King  affects  not  merely  the  foolish  (i.e.  the  unprepared),  but  even 
the  wise  (i.e.  those  otherwise  morally  qualified)  :  and  this  state  arises  from 
a  want  of  faith  in  "the  tilings  concerning  the  Kingdom" ;  seeing  that  a 
proper  conception  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  as  still  future,  and  an  under- 
standing of  the  manner  of  its  re-establishment  could  not  possibly  bring 
them  into  the  situation  assigned.  A  believer  in  the  Kingdom,  as  cove- 
nanted, predicted,  preached,  postponed,  connected  with  the  Sec.  Advent, 
etc.,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case  occupies  the  position  of  the  Primitive 
Church,  and  looks,  tongs,  andjpraysfor  the  Corning  One.  The  faithlessness 
of  the  Church — manifested  by  a  disregard  to  the  speedy  Advent,  by  a  lack 
of  interest  in,  and  a  positive  dislike  to,  the  subject,  by  an  unwarranted  sub- 
stitution of  other  things  (as  e.g.  death,  providence,  etc.)  in  place  of  the 
appearing  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  interposition  of  a  long  definite  period 


218  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  177. 

between  us  and  the  Advent,  by  decrying  the  position  of  watching,  study 
of  these  things,  etc.,  in  others ; — clearly  springs  from  a  total  misconception 
of  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  that  David's  Son  shall  establish  here  on  the 
earth.  Engrafting  a  mystical  or  spiritualistic  interpretation,  in  place  of 
the  grammatical,  upon  the  Scriptures  ;  rejecting  the  belief  of  pious  Jews 
and  of  the  early  Church  as  erroneous  and  unworthy  of  the  enlightenment 
of  this  age— a  Kingdom  is  set  up  which  being  in  existence,  of  course,  does 
not  require  the  faith  once  the  distinguishing  feature  and  characteristic  of 
the  saints. 

"Well  may  we  ask  those  faithless  ones  who  will  not  believe  in  the  personal  Advent  of 
Jesus  and  His  reign  with  His  saints  on  earth,  to  look  at  the  First  Advent.  Is  our  doc- 
trine more  astounding  or  more  testing  to  faith  and  reason  than  that  God  should  humble 
Himself  in  the  child  Jesus,  that  this  Messiah  should  suffer  and  die  ?  Our  doctrine  has 
nothing  so  amazing,  nothing  so  humiliating,  and  consequently  those  who  accept  of  the 
facts  of  the  First  Advent  are  inexcusable  when  they  refuse  credence  to  the  alleged  facts 
of  the  Second,  when  all  the  latter  speak  of  a  coming  honor,  dominion,  and  glory. 

Obs.  2.  Believers  in  the  Word  ought  to  be  startled  by  the  solemn,  most 
terrible  descriptions  of  the  state  of  the  whole  world,  as  found  in  the  context 
mill  text  of  Millennial  predictions.  The  fearful  strife,  and  antagonism  with 
the  doom  annexed,  is  stated  to  arise  from  "  a  gross  darkness,"  a  perversion 
of  God's  truth.  Take  even  that  splendid  prediction  of  Isa.  GO,  find  when 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  comes  (which  cannot  be  confined  to  the  First  Advent 
as  the  context  and  parallel  passages  show)  it  is  added  :  "Behold,  the  dark- 
ness shall  cover  the  earth  and  gross  darkness  the  people."  The  mighty 
confederation  of  wickedness,  the  utterly  subdued  condition  of  the  few  faith- 
ful ones,  the  warnings  of  sore  trial,  tribulation  given  to  the  Church  and 
exhortations  to  be  faithful,  etc.,  evidence  the  extent  and  the  time  of  this 
darkness.  Such  a  state  of  darkness,  of  unbelief  in  God's  way  of  procedure, 
etc.,  cannot  be  suddenly  produced  ;  it  takes  time  and  in  view  of  the  intel- 
lectual and  moral  nature  of  man  must  call  to  its  aid  reasoning,  eloquence, 
null  eminent  ability.  The  opposition  that  Jesus  meets  at  His  Coming,  an 
opposition  already  previously  organized  and  terrible  in  persecution,  is  of 
such  a  nature  that  it  cannot  arise  without  a  long  Introductory  process.  Now 
it  is  not  only  infidels  and  semi-believers  who  prepare  the  way  for  the  final 
culmination  of  unbelief,  but  men  whose  piety  and  integrity  (wise  virgins) 
we  would  not  for  a  moment  epiestion  ;  men  of  great  learning  whom  we 
highly  esteem  for  the  knowledge  imparted  on  many  subjects,  men  whose 
praise  is  deservedly  high  in  the  Church,  are  also  engaged,  whether  con- 
sciously or  not,  in  producing  this  unfaithless  condition.  They  by  their 
spiritualizing  system  are  bountifully  sowing  the  seeds  which  will  surely 
spring  up  into  an  abundant  harvest  of  unbelief.  The  first-fruits  of  it  are 
already  beginning  to  appear  in  the  scientific  and  intellectual  world:  the 
dreadful  harvest  is  still  future.  It  is  saddening  to  read  works,  written  by 
talented  and  good  men  and  containing  much  that  is  excellent,  which 
endeavor  to  explain  away  some  of  the  most  precious  truths  and  the  most 
terrible  realities,  either  by  confining  themselves  to  one  portion  of  the  Word 
and  ignoring  another  (thus  violating  the  unity  of  Scripture)  ;  or,  by  engraft- 
ing another  sense  not  recognized  by  the  laws  of  language  (thus  without 
proof  making  the  Bible  an  exception  to  such  laws)  ;  or,  by  regarding  the 
things  predicted,  etc.,  as  exaggerated  expressions  induced  by  the  state  of 
mind  in  which  the  writer  then  was  (thus  making  the  communication  a 
human  instead  of  a  divine  one  through  human  instrumentality)  ;  or,  by 


PEOP.  177.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  219 

assuming  that  due  allowance  must  be  made  for  the  elevated  style  of  poetry, 
the  vivid  imagination,  and  fanciful  language  of  the  Oriental  mind  (thus 
ascribing  its  utterances  to  human  origin)  ;  or,  by  declaring  that  all  things 
must  be  received  and  explained  according  to  the  teaching  of  present  reason 
and  experience  (thus  setting  up  within  themselves  the  standard  by  which 
the  Word  is  to  be  measured,  and  overlooking  that  many  things  relating  to 
the  past  and  future  are  beyond  present  personal  experience),  etc.  It  is  not 
merely  the  destructive  critic  like  Strauss,  Bauer,  or  Kenan,  who  under- 
mines the  authority  of  the  Bible,  but  multitudes  who  would  shrink  from 
such  a  charge,  are  virtually  doing  it  by  the  principles  of  interpretation 
adopted,  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  received,  etc.,  which,  when  con- 
trasted with  the  teachings  of  the  Book  and  reception  of  the  truth  by  those 
who  had  the  special  privilege  of  being  taught  by  the  Apostles  and  their 
immediate  successors,  lead  to  a  proclamation  of  a  "  Gospel  of  the  King- 
dom" widely  different  from  that  contained  in  the  Bible  and  the  early 
Church.  Multitudes,  who  are  no  professed  unbelievers,  reject  the  plain, 
contained  grammatical  sense,  and  insist  upon  giving  a  sense  which  shall 
harmonize  with  their  own  ideas  of  the  fitness  of  things,  thus  paving  the  way 
for  unbelieving  license,  forging  the  weapons  for  unbelief,  and  preventing 
the  use  of  a  consistent,  manly  Apologetics.  Numerous  works  are  issued 
from  the  press  which  swell  the  unbelieving  ranks  and  sustain  the  unbeliev- 
ing attacks  upon  the  primitive  Church,  by  openly  and  directly  ridiculing 
the  early  hope  of  the  Church  in  its  view  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom.  Able 
and  honest  writers,  under  the  influence  of  misconception  and  prejudice, 
have  sent  forth  works  the  most  insidious  and  dangerous,  pre-eminently 
adapted  to  crush  what  little  faith  exists  in  various  denominations  respecting 
this  Kingdom.  Such  writers  make  the  prophecies  conditional  :  heap  the 
curses  on  the  Jews  and  the  blessings  upon  the  Gentiles  ;  hesitate  not  to 
mutilate  and  transfer  predictions  directly  associated  with  the  Jewish  nation; 
make  God's  throne  in  the  third  heaven  to  be  represented  by  David's  :  spir- 
itualize all,  only  so  that  it  can  be  applied  to  the  Church  ;  scoff  at  what 
they  are  pleased  to  call  "  a  Jewish  Kingdom  ;"  ignore  the  personal  Advent 
of  Jesus  Christ,  etc.  Many  of  these  works  are  regarded,  owing  to  the  repu- 
tation of  the  authors,  as  standards,  and  the  writers  are  loudly  lauded  and 
loaded  with  titles  of  honor.  Alas,  that  friends  of  Jesus,  and  not  enemies, 
aid  in  the  destruction  of  faith  in  the  promises  of  God  :*alas,  that  friends  as 
well  as  enemies,  are  engaged  in  administering  the  soporifics  which  must 
inevitably  lead  to  the  sleeping,  unbelieving,  lamentable  state  which  is  pre- 
dicted. Let  no  one  censure  us  for  the  plainness  of  speech  employed,  for 
the  time  has  arrived  when  faithfulness  to  the  Word  and  Church  demands  a 
frank  and  candid  statement  of  facts  and  their  dangerous  tendency. 

The  latter  class  of  writings  are  to  be  found  in  reviews,  periodicals,  etc.  Works  "writ- 
ten by  talented  and  pious  authors  of  this  class  are  painfully  illustrated  in  Dr.  Brown's 
Christ's  Sec.  Coming:  Will  it  be  Pre-Hillennial?  or  in  Fairbairn  On  Prophecy,  or  in  Dr. 
Berg's  The  Sec.  Advent  of  Christ  not  Pre- Millennial,  etc.  Eeferences  under  various  Props, 
are  made  to  others,  but  these  will  suffice  to  indicate  the  talent  thus  directed  to  an  over- 
throw of  the  primitive  and  commanded  posture  of  faith  and  watching.  Multitudes  of 
works  take  passages  directly  referring  to  the  Sec.  Advent  and  deliberately  pervert  their 
designed  teaching,  as  e.g.  illustrated  in  Jay  (Exercises,  vol.  2,  p.  24),  who  interprets  Mark 
13  :  33,  "Take  ye  heed,  watch  ami  pray  :  for  ye  know  not  when  the  time  is,"  by  no  reference 
whatever  to  the  time  stated  in  the  context,  but  informs  his  readers  that  it  relates  (1)  to 
the  time  of  duty,  (2)  the  time  of  danger,  (3)  the  time  of  trouble,  (4)  the  time  of  death. 
Alas  !  Ten  thousand  thousand  just  as  fanciful  applications  are  given  in  the  present  relig- 
ious literature. 


220  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  177. 

Obs.  3.  This  want  of  faith  is  also  caused  by  reason  wrongfully  rejecting 
the  past  and  the  future  of  this  Kingdom.  In  reference  to  the  past,  it  for- 
gets the  primary  step  of  noticing  when  it  was  established,  how  it  progressed 
and  incorporated  the  Davidic  line,  why  it  was  overthrown,  and  how  con-. 
stantly  the  Prophets  predicted  its  (same  Kingdom)  restoration  in  a  glorious 
form  under  the  Messiah,  and  in  immediate  relationship  with  the  Jewish 
nation.  It  closes  its  eves  against  the  preaching  of  this  identical  Kingdom 
(indisputably  proven,  see  e.g.  Props.  70-75),  and  the  valid  reasons  assigned 
for  its  postponement  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  ended.  The  past, 
even  in  its  naked  historical  connection,  is  not  received,  but  in  place  of  it 
reason  is  put  under  the  guidance  of  an  Origenistic  rule  of  interpretation 
which  makes  the  Old  Test,  say  one  tiling  respecting  the  Kingdom  but  mean 
another ;  and  which  causes  the  Prophets  to  predict,  in  the  grammatical 
sense,  one  thing  (believed  in  by  the  ancients)  concerning  the  Kingdom  but 
which  must  be  understood  differently.  Again,  in  reference  to  the  future, 
this  Kingdom  being  still  the  subject  of  prediction  and  promise,  and  hence 
must  be  received  by  faith  (for  all  that  we  can  possibly  know  of  its  re-estab- 
lishment is  only  found  in  the  Word),  we  have  eminent  writers  objecting  to 
the  reception  of  the  plain  grammatical  meaning  of  the  promises  precisely 
on  the  same  ground  occupied  by  the  most  ultra  unbelief,  viz.,  that  it  brings 
forth  too  much  of  the  Supernatural  element.  Reason  they  tell  us  cannot 
accept  of  this  doctrine,  for  it  is  not  credible  that  such  occurrences  as  are 
related  to  the  restoration  of  the  Kingdom  can  possibly  take  place.  Fully 
indorsing  (as  we  have  shown  in  the  previous  Proposition)  Dr.  Alexander's 
saying  (fivid.  of  Christianity,  p.  10)  that  "  truth  and  reason  are  so  inti- 
mately connected  that  they  can  never  with  propriety  be  separated,"  yet  at 
the  same  time  things  which  refer  to  the  future  must  be  accepted  solely  be- 
cause <  I od  announces  them,  and  their  reasonableness  must  be  observed  by 
the  connection  which  they  sustain  to  the  Divine  Purpose,  to  the  divine 
ability  to  perform,  and  to  the  necessity  of  their  occurring  in  order  to  fulfil 
God's  prophets,  and  to  secure  redemption  in  the  form  needed  by  the  world. 
In  relation  to  things  still  future,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  leaven  of 
m fidelity  has  pervaded  the  Church  to  such  an  extent  that  in  this  particular, 
many  exalt  reason  aborr  faith.  While  reason  has  its  appropriate  sphere  in 
the  investigation  of  truth,  and  is  necessarily  allied  with  faith,  yet  in  things 
pertaining  to  futurity  we  are  entirely  dependent  for  knowledge  on  Him  who 
is  omniscient,  and  reason  must  occupy  a  subordinate  place,  willing  to  accept 
of  and  to  be  guided  by,  divine  revelation.  It  is  sad  to  reflect  that  Chris- 
tians refuse  to  believe  in  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  in  its  true  grammatical 
sense,  in  this  Kingdom,  because  in  their  estimation  it  involves  a  mode  of 
procedure  which  seems  to  them  incredible  and  contrary  to  the  nature  of 
things.  Having  already  met  the  objection  urged  by  reason  against  the 
Supernatural  and  miraculous,  it  is  sufficient  to  direct  such  a  class  to  the 
fact  that  in  no  other  way  is  it  possible  to  fulfil  the  Millennial  descriptions. 
How  can  the  curse  be  repealed  :  how  can  death  be  overcome  ;  hoiv  can  all 
the  fearful  evils  pertaining  to  man  and  nature  be  removed  :  how  can  the 
unspeakably  great  blessings  be  obtained  :  all  of  which  are  to  be  realized  in 
this  Kingdom  under  Messiah's  reign,  without  a  mighty  display  of  Super- 
natural power  beyond  anything  that  the  world  has  ever  witnessed,  and 
beyond  the  understanding  of  weak,  mortal  man  with  his  limited  powers. 
If  there  is  a  truth  conspicuously  displayed  in  Holy  Writ,  it  is,  that  this 
Kingdom,  the  tabernacle  of  David  now  in  ruins  but  then  gloriously  rebuilt 


Prop.  177.]  the  theocratic  kingdom:.  221 

under  David's  Son,  cannot  be  manifested  without  the  most  wonderful  dis- 
plays of  Almighty  energy.  Strange  to  say,  many  who  refuse  credence  in 
this  Kingdom  and  ridicule  it,  are  willing  to  accept  of  the  Supernatural  in 
the  birth  of  Isaac  and  of  Christ,  of  the  miracles  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ments, but  unwilling  to  accept  of  the  Supernatural  and  miraculous  pertain- 
ing to  this  Kingdom.  From  whence  springs  this  reluctance  which  involves 
an  inconsistency  of  position  ?  Do  they  simply  believe  the  former  because 
the  past  is  fulfilled  and  has  become  history,  and  do  they  reject  the  latter 
because  being  unfulfilled  it  is  an  open  question  whether  it  ever  will  be  in 
the  manner  grammatically  expressed  ?  Is  this  trust  in  the  Word  of  the 
Lord?  Is  it  even  reasonable,  seeing  that  faith  in  the  past  fulfilment  is 
based  on  the  same  antecedently  given  Word,  and  should  lead  to  implicit 
and  extended  faith  in  the  things  relating  to  the  future.  How  painful  it  is 
to  find  e.g.  such  a  talented  writer  as  Fairbairn  {On  Proph.,  p.  820,  etc.) 
tell  us  respecting  Zech.  12;  that  God's  providence  with  the  Jews  has  ren- 
dered the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  "  manifestly  impossible,"  and  that 
"  it  does  violence  to  reason"  to  expect  a  restoration  of  the  families  indicated 
by  the  prophecy.  And  this  from  one  who  believes  that  (as  recorded  Matt. 
3  :  9)  God  would  have  been  able,  if  requisite,  "  of  these  stones  to  raise  up 
children  unto  Abraham."  The  same  line  of  reasoning  would  hold  equally 
good  in  the  case  of  Sarah,  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  etc.  Xo  !  with  belief  in  the 
truthfulness  and  Almighty  power  of  God,  as  evidenced  in  the  past  astonish- 
ing provisions  for  carrying  out  a  definitely  stated  Divine  Plan,  we  can 
surely  stay  ourselves  in  faith,  that  the  same  power — which  now  so  amaz- 
ingly for  over  eighteen  hundred  years  preserves  the  Jewish  nation  (as  Moses 
thousands  of  years  ago  foretold),  and  keeps  Jerusalem  itself  (as  Jesus  pre- 
dicted) under  continued  Gentile  rule — will  be  equal  to  the  fulfilment  of  every 
prediction.  Such  lack  of  faith,  such  a  process  of  reasoning  is  dangerous  ; 
for  it  invalidates  whatever  apologies  or  accommodations  may  be  presented 
to  excuse  the  non-fulfilment,  the  truthfulness  of  the  Word,  and  brings  it 
down  to  a  human  level.  Numerous  illustrations  might  be  adduced  of  this 
method  of  dealing  with  the  Word,  of  receiving  just  as  much  as  suits  the 
taste,  opinions,  system,  etc.,  of  the  interpreter,  or  of  explaining  it  most 
arbitrarily  to  accommodate  it  in  some  way  with  a  theory.  In  the  eagerness 
to  maintain  the  position  of  an  advocate,  seeing  how  largely  this  Kingdom 
relates  to  the  future  and  is  consequently  the  subject  of  prophecy,  one  of  the 
most  prominent  of  our  opponents  (Dr.  Brown,  Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  p.  HO) 
lays  down  the  faithless  principle  "that  doctrines  are  not  to  be  built  upon 
prophetic  or  symbolical  Scripture"  calling  it  "  an  old  maxim  in  divinity." 
He  thus  perverts  the  old  maxim,  "  Theologia  prophetica  non  est  argu- 
mentiva"  (prophetic  theology  is  not  argumentative),  which  confirms  our 
position  that  we  are  to  receive  the  specific  announcements  of  prophecy 
respecting  the  future  as  given  by  God  and  beyond  our  power  to  dis- 
cern :  and  he  rejects  by  its  one-sided  adoption,  if  logically  carried  out, 
some  of  the  most  precious  doctrines  pertaining  to  Redemption,  as  the 
Sec.  Advent,  resurrection,  reign,  glory,  inheritance  of  the  saints,  re- 
newal of  the  earth,  etc.,  all  of  which  are  subjects  of  prophecy.  While 
this  is  so,  yet  in  relation  to  the  Kingdom  itself  and  the  Advent  which  is  to 
introduce  it,  reason,  if  it  desires  to  know  something  of  the  expediency  and 
reasonableness  of  the  establishment  of  such  a  Kingdom  under  David's  Son, 
will  fall  back  upon  the  preliminarily  given  Theocracy,  study  its  nature, 
design,  connections,  and  then  regard  the  utterances  of  the  Prophets  in  the 


222  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  177. 

light  of  the  Divine  Purpose  previously  indicated  and  determined.  Proph- 
ecy thus  finds  itself  confirmed  by  a  solid  foundation  of  noteworthy  facts, 
which  calls  for  unbounded  faith  in  the  things  still  future.  Past  and*  pres- 
ent fulfilment,  in  behalf  of  a  divinely  ordained  Plan,  insures  future  fulfil- 
ment in  the  interest  of  the  same  purpose,  and  hence  the  extraordinary  con- 
sistency (now  by  many  called  "  weakness")  of  the  early  Church  in  its  belief 
based  upon  a  union  of  reason  and  faith,  of  knowledge  and  trust. 

In  the  attacks  upon  us,  the  foundations  upon  which  our  system  of  faith  is  based  are 
entirely  ignored,  and  the  early  Church  view  is  explained  away  as  the  result  of  enthusi- 
asm. Thus  e.g.  Prof.  Hopkins  in  the  N.  Y.  Evangelist,  Feb.  6th,  1879,  has  the  "  Histori- 
cal conditions  of  the  Sec.  Advent 'enthusiasm, "and attributes  Pre-Mill.  views  to  the  con- 
ditions of  society  and  of  nations  in  the  recurrence  of  natural  phenomena,  political  dis- 
turbances, revolutions,  etc.  (and  in  his  eagerness  to  make  out  a  case,  actually  introduces 
the  views  of  Post-Millenarians  as  identical  with  ours— thus  showing  that  he  never 
studied  the  subject).  The  spirit  of  the  writer  is  self-evident  ;  for  passing  by  the  Script- 
ure teaching  respecting  our  doctrine  and  posture  of  waiting,  he  claims  that  it  is  merely 
enthusiasm  excited  by  the  phenomena  and  disorders  mentioned,  and  concludes  by  pro- 
nouncing the  Prophetic  Conference,  held  at  New  York  in  Dr.  Tyng's  church,  "  an  assem- 
bly of  heated  enthusiasts,'"  who  expected  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  as  "  imminent  ;"  and  to 
give  his  defamatory  opinion  some  kind  of  a  scriptural  aspect,  he  places  the  restoration 
of  the  Jews  as  a  preliminary  to  the  See.  Advent  and  asserts  that  it  will  require  "  several 
centuries"  to  bring  about  such  a  restoration,  so  that  "  it  is  still  true  that  they  (Pre-Millen- 
ariuiis)  and  all  now  on  earth,  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  will  have  been  many  years  in 
Paradise  before  that  great  and  notable  day  of  the  Lord  come"— extending  its  delay 
"  through  the  r<,,i<n,<i  ages."  How  reconcile  this  with  the  commanded  posture  of  watch- 
ing ?    Is  this  not  expressly  teaching  " My  Lord  delayeih  His  Coming  "?    Is  it  not  unbelief  ? 

Obs.  4.  The  Old  and  New  Testaments  describe  the  same  Kingdom — the 
same  Theocratic  arrangement  under  David's  Hon.  All  the  writers,  sepa- 
rated by  centuries,  independent  of  each  other,  residing  in  various  countries 
but  still  under  the  influence  of  the  same  Spirit,  locate  this  Kingdom  in  the 
future,  link  it  with  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  agree  in  portraying  its  distin- 
guishing peculiarities  and  blessings.  In  a  comparison  of  their  writings, 
entering  even  into  details,  there  is  no  contradiction  between  them.  Even 
the  diversity  of  style,  the  different  modes  of  relation  and  shades  of  charac- 
ter, only  increases' the  value  of  the  testimony,  indicating  an  essential  quality 
in  witnesses,  that  of  entire  independence  from  others  in  giving  evidence. 
The  disagreement  is  found  in  the  interpreters  and  not  in  the  writers  of  the 
Bible  ;  for  the  latter  all  start  from  the  same  point,  holding  up  the  same 
covenant  as  an  everlasting  one  under  which  we  receive  the  promises,  and 
all  declare  the  same  provisionary  and  preparatory  process,  and  all  insist 
upon  the  same  literal  fulfilment.  Harmony  of  design,  unity  of  purpose  is 
seen  throughout  their  writings,  but  only  so  long— as  the  infidel  even  has 
forcibly  slated  and  proven — as  the  plain  grammatical  sense  is  retained. 
Forsake  this  sense,  and  then,  notwithstanding  all  the  protests  to  the  con- 
trary, this  harmony  is  violated,  this  unity  is  destroyed  to  the  confirmation 
of  unbelief.  If,  as  multitudes  do,  we  reject  the  literal  and  engraft  a  spirit- 
ual meaning  foreign  to  the  common  usage  of  language,  it  may  well  be  asked 
how  it  comes  that  all  the  writers  employ  language  which  in  its  literal 
adaptation  distinctly  teaches  the  Kingdom  that  we  advocate  :  and  that 
they  did  not  use  the"  language,  ideas  and  rensonings  now  so  prevalent  and 
first  introduced  about  the  third  century.  Why  this  disruption  of  a  marvel- 
lous unity  ?  Is  it  really  necessary  for  the  sake  of  the  truth  that  such 
a  transformation  of  meaning — so  hostile  to  these  "  Jewish  conceptions" — 


Prop.  177.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  223 

should  spring  up  and  be  cherished  in  "  the  consciousness  of  the  Church  ?" 
Is  it  requisite  that  such  an  antagonism  should  exist  between  the  plain  lan- 
guage of  the  Bible  and  that  of  the  dominant  Theology  ?  No  !  never,  for 
this  would  at  once  argue  imperfection  in  God's  Word,  a  mere  accommoda- 
tion to  human  weakness,  and  that  He,  the  God  of  all  truth,  purposely  led 
a  host  of  believing  people  (both  Jews  and  Christians)  into  gross  error  per- 
taining to  the  leading  doctrine  of  the  Bible.  Before  such  a  change  of 
meaning  can  be  adopted,  it  must  be  shown  that  God  Himself  directed  such 
a  transformation  of  the  import  and  signification  of  language  ;  that  He 
cancelled  the  covenant  made  with  David  and  the  elect  position  of  the  Jewish 
nation  :  that  He  recalled  the  predictions  of  prophets,  and  that  He  altered 
the  Divine  Plan  originally  proposed.  When  we  ask  why  this  introduction 
of  a  sense  so  radically  diverse  from  that  entertained  for  thousands  of  years 
(and  which,  the  latter,  was  a  source  of  confident  hope  and  joy  to  so  many 
believers),  the  answer  is  given,  that  as  the  Kingdom  as  predicted  by  the 
prophets  was  not  literally  established  at  the  First  Advent,  the  Christian 
Church  being  then  instituted,  the  Church  must  be  the  Kingdom  intended. 
Upon  this  presumption — seized  and  used  against  Christianity  by  the  de- 
structive school — the  superstructure  of  a  Kingdom  now  present  is  reared, 
and  the  language  of  covenant,  prophet,  Jesus,  and  Apostle  is  spiritualized 
to  jit  the  assumed  theory.  And  in  the  contest  it  is  strange  to  find  that 
men  materially  differing  in  the  use  they  make  of  it  (as  e.g.  the  author  of 
Ecce  Homo  on  the  one  side,  and  the  writer  of  Ecce  JJeus  on  the  other)  still 
agree  in  taking/or  granted  a  premise  utterly  unproven,  actually  resisted  by 
the  Word,  and  which  in  its  nature  and  tendency  makes  the  Scriptures  and 
Theology  irreconcilable.  Did  the  Jewish  nation  obey  the  condition  of 
repentance  upon  which  the  Kingdom  was  offered  to  them  ?  Did  the  disci- 
ples preach  a  Kingdom  which  was,  in  their  ignorance,  "  a  mere  chimera?" 
Did  Jesus  predict  the  continued  desolation  of  the  Kingdom  until  His  return 
the  Second  time  ?  These  and  numerous  other  questions  suggested  by  our 
previous  Propositions  must  first  be  reasonably  and  scripturally  answered 
before  the  far-reaching  and  destructive  premise,  now  so  confidently  paraded 
and  intrenched  in  the  Church,  can  be  received  by  the  careful  student  of 
God's  Word.  With  such  a  sandy  foundation  to  stand  on,  with  conclusions 
drawn  from  a  false  construction  of  the  leading  doctrine  of  the  Bible  :  with 
a  host  of  inferences  derived  from  such  a  source  making  the  faith  of  pious 
Jews,  of  John  the  Baptist,  of  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  misconceptions  of  the 
real  truth — need  we  be  surprised  at  the  want  of  faith  in  this  Kingdom  of 
the  Messiah.  A  most  fruitful  source  of  infidelity  in  Church  and  world  is 
the  making  the  Church  the  predicted  Kingdom  of  God  instead  of  a  pre- 
paratory stage  for  the  revelation  of  this  Kingdom.  Apologetics  has  not, 
and  cannot,  fairly  meet  destructive  critics  so  long  as  it  retains  such  a 
theory,  for  the  latter  triumphantly  points  to  the  plain  teachings  of  the 
prophets,  the  equally  plain  belief  of  the  early  Church,  and  contrasts  it  with 
present  teaching  and  belief,  and  justly  claims  an  irreconcilable  antagonism. 
The  Church  has  not  and  cannot  have  faith  in  the  Kingdom  so  long  as  it 
holds  to  a  view  which  of  necessity  destroys  all  hope  of  its  ever  being  real- 
ized. This  lack  of  faith  in  a  firmly  covenanted  and  oath-bound  Kingdom 
is  based  on  a  false  premise,  and  then  sustained  (as  it  only  can  be)  by  a  mys- 
tical or  spiritual  interpretation.  It  is  so  arbitrary  and  unscientific  that  it 
cannot  even  define  the  Kingdom  without  having  a  variety  of  meanings  or 
definitions.     It  claims,  in  order  to  make  its  conclusions  the  stronger,  to  be 


224  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIXGDO.U".  [PROP.  177. 

guided  by  the  Spirit.  But  a  change  has  taken  place  ;  for  in  the  contest 
now  waging  between  destructive  criticism  and  the  friends  of  the  Bible,  the 
original  sources  of  Christianity  are  laid  bare  and  examined  as  they  perhaps 
were  never  before  studied.  The  lofty  claims  of  divine  origin  in  theories  are 
sifted,  and  where  antagonism  is  found  and  proven,  these  very  claims  create 
a  revulsion  in  the  thinking  portion  of  the  community.  Rationalism  prop- 
erly insists  upon  the  Bible  being  explained  in  its  doctrinal  asjiects,  etc.,  by 
the  universally  received  laws  of  language,  but  the  immense  mass  of  the 
Church  has  cut  itself  loose  from  the  plain  grammatical  sense,  and  this  has 
led  to  a  state  of  uncertainty  in  the  minds  of  many,  which  the  accumulated 
theological  learning  of  generations,  drifting  in  the  same  channel,  has  been 
utterly  unable,  with  all  its  eloquent  pleadings,  beautiful  thoughts,  meta- 
physical ability,  and  incorporated  truths,  to  remove.  Leaving  the  well- 
beaten  path  trodden  by  believing  Jews  and  early  Christians  as  entirely 
"too  Jewish"  for  Gentiles;  ignoring  "the  letter"  as  "  too  carnal  and 
sensual  "  for  spiritual  reception — the  Kingdom  itself  is  dwarfed  down  from 
the  magnificent  proportions  given  to  it  by  the  prophets  to  make  it  fit  the 
fighting,  struggling,  suffering  Church.  From  this  standpoint  it  is  not 
surprising  to  read  the  introductory  sentence  of  the  Duke  of  Somerset  to  his 
recent  work  {Christian  Theol.  ami  Mod.  Scepticism):  "  It  is  humiliating 
to  be  obliged  to  confess  that  after  eighteen  hundred  years  of  Christian 
teaching,  man  has  made  no  advance  in  certainty  of  religious  knowledge." 
The  duke,  whose  language  has  been  unduly  censured,  evidently  bases  his 
utterance  upon  the  palpable  differences  now  existing  between  the  prevailing 
theology  of  the  day  and  the  belief  once  so  prevalent  in  the  early  Church. 
The  degree  of  certainty  that  we  now  possess  is  solely  derived  from  the  plain 
grammatical  sense  of  the  Scriptures,  and  so  long  as  there  is  a  continued 
rejection  of  this  sense  and  the  substitution  of  others,  just  so  long  will  un- 
certainty continue  and  increase.  We  believe  the  Word  because  the  aston- 
ishing  Plan,  so  well  adapted  to  secure  the  redemption  of  the  world,  has 
been  all  along  verified  by  facts,  attested  by  history  and  the  experience  of 
man,  just  as  they  sin  ml  recorded.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  being 
the  burden  of  the  Word  and  including  the  blessings  of  salvation,  is  no 
exception  to  such  faith,  as  is  shown  by  past  and  present  fulfilments  and 
pro1*  isions.  To  exercise  no  faith  in  a  Kingdom  once  firmly  believed  in  by 
saints  and  proclaimed  by  them  under  divine  sanction,  is  at  once,  with  the 
weak  and  often  contradictory  reasons  assigned,  sufficient  cause  to  many  for 
denying  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures.  The  largo  body  of  the  Church  is 
occupying  this  very  position  :  the  Kingdom  believed  in  and  so  highly  eulo- 
gized is  the  direct  opposite  of  that  once  universally  received  by  the  faith  of 
the  Church.  The  predictions,  therefore,  which  intimate  such  a  change  of 
faith  in  the  Church  are  rapidly  verifying  before  our  eyes,  and  correspond- 
ingly no  interest  is  felt  in  the  Advent  of  the  great  King  by  whom  this 
Kingdom  is  to  be  re-established.  The  extravagant  claims  set  up  for  the 
Church  as  the  Kingdom  is  bearing  its  fruit  in  the  denial  of  the  blessed 
covenanted  Kingdom  of  David's  Son,  under  the  mistaken  notion  that  by 
so  doing  they  really  honor  the  Son.  But  no  one  who  ventures  upon  such  a 
method  has  been  able  to  designate  in  what  particulars  this  supposed  King- 
dom meets  the  requirements  of  the  covenant  which  specifies  the  Theocratic 
throne  and  Kingdom  of  David  as  the  one  denoted,  excepting  only  by  em- 
ploying the  most  arbitrary  exposition  which  by  acceptance  degrades  the 
ancient  faith  to  the  lowest  level  of  error  and  fanaticism, 


Prop.  177.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  225 

One  reason  for  this  lack  of  faith  in  the  Church  results  from  eminent  divines,  who 
hold  to  the  cardinal  outlines  of  our  doctrine  being  afraid  to  express  them  with  a  becom- 
ing freedom,  or  giving  but  a  faint  and  indistinct  utterance,  or  when  declaring  their  faith 
neutralizing  the  whole  by  endeavoring  to  incorporate  the  leaven  or  development  theory. 
From  those  who  ought  to  give  no  "  uncertain  sound,"  we  have  but  vagueness  or  silence! 
We  could  give  several  striking  illustrations,  but,  for  the  sake  of  others,  forbear.  To  their 
own  Master  they  must  give  account  for  the  influence  exerted  ;  but  the  fear  may  be  stated, 
that  while  the  dread  of  controversy,  antagonism,  loss  of  patronage,  etc.,  causes  the  adopl 
tion  of  such  a  procedure,  the  pleasantness  of  the  present  life  is  no  compensation  for  "  the 
loss"  that  will  be  sustained  because  of  a  concealment,  or  neutralizing  presentation  of 
truth.  The  number  that  occupy  this  position  is  not  a  small  one,  and  the  plea  of  "  pru- 
dence" is  presented  in  order  to  shield  themselves  from  the  charge  of  not  proclaiming 
these  doctrines,  and  thus  warning  the  Church  and  world.  What  weight  such  a  idea 
will  have  with  the  Judge  Himself,  we  leave  them  to  estimate  after  contrasting  it  with  His 
expressed  commands. 

Ohs.  5.  Another  serious  cause  of  unbelief  in  this  Kingdom  arises  from 
the  infirmity  of  human  nature,  its  reliance  upon  authorities  outside  of  the 
Bible.  With  perverted  ideas  of  the  real  position  and  design  of  the  Church 
and  this  dispensation,  they  will  accept  of  the  formularies  of  some  denomi- 
nation, or  the  doctrinal  basis  of  some  reformer,  or  the  theological  system  of 
some  prominent  divine  or  school,  and  with  scholastic  dogmatism  lay  more 
stress  on  these  than  upon  the  Scriptures  (although  professing  that  the  same 
are  based  on  them),  and  make  them  the  standard  of  appeal  and  of  faith  ; 
and  because  these  ignore  the  Kingdom,  designate  it  as  ''Jewish,"  and 
accept  of  the  Church-Kingdom  view,  they  do  the  same.  Admitting  the 
great  value,  the  priceless  influence  of  many  human  compositions,  yet  in  our 
search  after  the  truth  they  should  not  stand  between  us  and  God's  own 
revelation  ;  for  as  the  tree,  however  lovely  ami  fruitful,  standing  between 
us  and  the  sun  will  cast  its  shadow,  so,  more  or  less,  will  be  the  shading, 
the  interception  of  light  when  humanity,  however  sincere  and  honest,  is 
placed  between  us  and  the  divine  truth.  The  source  of  all  true  knowledge 
of  the  Kingdom  is  found  alone  in  God's  Word,  and  to  that  Word,  if  wise 
and  prudent,  we  should  come  for  instruction  and  guidance,  seeing  that  the 
words  of  God  are  weightier  and  more  truthful  than  those  of  men,  however 
pious  and  learned.  Indeed,  in  not  a  few  cases,  the  lack  of  faith  can  be 
traced  to  a  certain  disposition  of  the  heart,  mentioned  by  Jesus  (John 
5  :  44),  "How  can  ye  believe,  which  receive  honor  one  of  another,  and  seek 
not  the  honor  which  cometh  from  God  only?'"  In  this  day  of  unbelief  and 
reproach  cast  upon  our  doctrine,  it  requires  courage  to  oppose  the  sweeping 
popular  current  of  belief  on  the  subject.  Especially  when  a  return  to  the 
early  Church  faith  causes  the  charge  of  "  credulity,"  "  fanaticism," 
"  heresy,"  etc.,  to  come  from  the  multitude,  and  even  from  brethren  united 
by  the  same  denominational  ties.  How  many  have  had  their  attention 
directed  to  this  subject,  have  promised  investigation,  have  been  persuaded 
of  the  truth,  but  have  recoiled,  fearful  of  the  loss  of  reputation,  influence, 
honor,  and  preferments.  No  one,  either  in  this  country  or  in  Europe,  who 
has  prominently  held  to  the  primitive  faith,  has  escaped  the  censures  of 
numerous  writers,  while  some  ecclesiastical  bodies  have  even  suggested, 
under  the  ascendency  of  confessional  faith,  excommunication.  Strange, 
indeed,  that  those  who  make  so  much  of  Church  confession  and  authority 
should  forget  that  our  doctrine,  if  it  is  to  be  judged  by  such  criterions;  has 
decidedly  the  greatest  weight  upon  its  side,  owing  to  the  universality  with 
which  it  was  received  and  perpetuated  by  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  churches 
established  by  the  Apostles  and  their  immediate  successors.     If  honest, 


226  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  177. 

however,  with  ourselves  and  with  God,  human  approval,  however  desirable 
and  agreeable,  should  iveigh  nothing  against  truth,  especially  when  warned 
that  there  will  be  a  great  departure  from  the  truth  as  the  times  of  the  Gen- 
tiles draw  to  a  close.  The  injury  that  error  may  do  to  others,  the  use  to 
which  it  may  be  applied  by  others,  should  deter  us  from  its  known  embrace, 
should  urge  us  to  a  free  examination  of  the  Wordiest  we  be  found  entertain- 
ing it.  Error  is  far  from  being  harmless  to  ourselves,  for  our  future  eleva- 
tion and  corresponding  happiness  largely  depends  upon  our  acceptance  of 
and  faith  in  all  the  truths  given  to  us.  The  test  is  stated  by  Jesus  (Matt. 
5  :  19),  and  it  follows  that  we  cannot  be  too  careful  in  our  doctrinal  posi- 
tion, especially  when  it  has  respect  to  so  vital  a  point  as  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  the  Gospel  of  which  we  are  to  preach  and  receive.  So  perverse,  how- 
ever, is  human  nature,  that  while  a  party  occupies  the  attitude  assigned  in 
the  first  part  of  the  observation,  another  will  take  directly  the  opposite  one, 
viz.,  that  they  care  little  for  doctrine  being  satisfied  with  practical  piety. 
To  this  class,  who  do  not  want  doctrine  but  piety,  it  may  be  said  that  two 
extremes  are  to  be  avoided  ;  first,  theoretical  knowledge  of  doctrine  without 
practical  application  of  the  same,  or  personal  piety  conjoined  ;  second, 
piety  isolated  from  doctrine,  just  as  if  it  could  exist  without  a  previous 
knowledge  of  the  truth.  The  persons  who  make  this  objection  against  our 
doctrine  are  the  very  ones  who  deal  largely  in  doctrine  concerning  the 
Church-Kingdom,  Millennium,  etc.,  in  prayer,  preaching,  writing,  etc..  but 
as  soon  as  something  is  said  in  conflict  with  their  own  doctrinal  position 
then  we  need  no  doctrine.  Besides  this,  the  fact  is  overlooked  that  piety 
has  regard  only  to  the  personal  qualifications  of  the  individual  for  the 
Kingdom,  it  cannot  change  or  alter  the  Divine  Purpose  respecting  the 
Kingdom.  It  may,  if  wanting1,  postpone  the  Kingdom  as  was  the  case  with 
the  Jews  ;  it  may,  if  it  is  to  he  possessed  by  all  who  shall  become  inheritors 
or  rulers,  delay  the  Kingdom  until  the  number  of  the  chosen,  elect  body  is 
completed,  but  it  cannot  affect  the  nature,  design,  etc.,  of  the  Kingdom 
itself.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  is  the  teaching  of  God  concerning  it, 
and  is  not  derived  from  the  piety  of  men,  but  from  God's  Word. 

Ob*.  6.  Many  refuse  faith  in  the  doctrine  of  this  Kingdom  because  of 
the  claimed  piety,  sanctity,  prayerful  spirit,  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  etc., 
bestowed  upon  those  who  have  I  uracil  away  from  the  ancient  belief.  Mul- 
titudes are  swayed  by  this  sentiment,  and  numerous  illustrations  might  be 
adduced  where  it  is  gravely  offered  as  a  motive  for  the  rejection  of  this 
Kingdom.  Alas,  history  gives  but  too  many  instances  which  prove  that 
eminent  piety,  or  goodness  of  heart  cannot  he  substituted  for  Knowledge, 
for  it  has  been  too  often  allied  with  error  (e.g.  various  denominational 
doctrines  in  direct  opposition  to  each  other,  etc.),  and  with  severity,  injus- 
tice, and  persecution  (e.g.  Luther  and  Zwingli,  Calvin  and  Servetus,  Knox 
and  Balfour,  etc.).  If  this  is  to  be  the  criterion  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
Kingdom — while  making  no  claims  to  extraordinary  sanctity,  but  realizing 
that  after  all  that  we  can  do  we  still  remain  unprofitable  servants,  and 
while  making  no  great  professions  of  humility,  seeing  that  to  God  we  stand 
or  fall,  and  that  professions  are  no  index  of  character,  yet — we  may  point 
to  the  faithful  believers  in  this  Kingdom  who  suffered  persecution  and- 
death,  to  the  Jong  list  of  distinguished  confessors,  etc.,  who  have  mani- 
fested a  consistency  of  life,  integrity  of  character,  love  to  God  and  man, 
etc.,  which  has  endeared  them  in  the  memory  of  the  Church.     Without 


PKOP.  177.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  227 

calling  into  question  the  undisputed  piety  of  many  of  our  opponents,  with- 
out making  (although  numbering  many  martyrs  among  us),  martyrdom 
illogically  a  proof  of  doctrine,  without  denying  that  doctrine  and  piety 
ought  to  be  connected  to  make  the  former  more  efficient,  it  is  sufficient  to 
say  that  piety  itself  may  become  enlightened  by  additional  truth  or  become 
deformed  by  ignorance  and  superstition.  More  than  this  :  this  claim  is 
often  put  forth — mere  pretension — in  behalf  of  dangerous  error  and  systems 
the  most  antagonistic.  We  see  it  existing  in  every  heresy  from  the  earliest 
ages  down  to  the  present — towering  forth  in  Roman  Catholicism  and  lifting 
its  head  in  the  latest  development  of  fanaticism  (as  e.g.  Mormonism) — ap- 
pealing, in  order  to  gain  strength,  to  a  natural,  honorable  feeling  in  man. 
It  is  a  cheap  claim,  easily  produced,  and  if  persistently  pressed  by  numerous 
names  and  quasi  authority,  it  will  impress  the  minds  not  only  of  the  igno- 
rant but  even  of  the  learned.  While  not  disputing,  in  many  cases,  the 
sincerity  and  honesty  of  the  parties  who  present  it,  yet  a  dispassionate  view 
both  of  them  and  the  contradictory  results  flowing  "from  them,  evidence  to 
us  that  it  is  no  criterion  of  the  truth,  being  frequently  imaginary  and  often 
designedly — from  misconception — advanced  to  protect  the  weakness  of  a 
doctrinal  position.  Gratefully  acknowledging  the  connection  that  holi- 
ness, prayer,  and  divine  influence  with  the  truth  has  in  our  study  of  the 
Bible — that  they  are  necessary  to  a  comprehension  of  the  whole  truth  (for 
the  meek  He  will  guide,  etc.),  yet  we  positively  object  to  our  making  the 
experience  of  man  the  measure  by  which  we  are  authoritatively  to  judge 
the  Bible.  Experience  whatever  it  may  be,  moral  qualifications  however 
they  may  aid  in  understanding  the  truth,  do  not  and  cannot  change  (he  doc- 
trines as  contained  in  Holy  Writ.  Admitting  the  piety  and  goodness  of 
others,  their  statements  respecting  the  contents  of  the  Bible  are  to  be  ac- 
cepted (as  e.g.  Prop.  If),  only  in  so  far  as  they  accurately  and  fully  corre- 
spond with  the  Book.  Hence,  e.g.  we  must  reject  as  utterly  untenable  that 
philosophical  gloss  which  is  so  boldly  and  ably  advocated  by  a  class  of 
Apologists  (in  order  to  apologize  for  the  early  Church  belief  against  the 
Rationalistic  party),  that  the  real  truth  respecting  the  Kingdom  was  to  be 
developed  "  in  the  consciousness  of  the  Church."  And  again  :  this  is  a 
virtual  indorsement  of  the  semi-infidel  and  infidel  statement  that  "  doc- 
trines are  of  little  importance  if  the  life  is  only  right."  How  can  the 
teaching  of  things  which  God  alone  knows  and  therefore  reveals,  be  trans- 
formed into  truth  by  mere  human  agency  ;  and  how  important  is  the  most 
valuable  life  in  comparison  with  the  Divine  Purpose  which  involves  the 
truthfulness  and  honor  of  God  and  the  glory  of  His  Son  ?  Yet  to  produce 
unbelief  or  indifference  to  our  doctrine,  it  is  asserted  by  many  that  it  is, 
in  comparison  with  other  things,  unessential  and  unimportant.  The  great 
leading  doctrine  of  the  Bible  is  thus  designated,  but  only  ffor  their  own 
theories  of  the  kingdom,  with  varied  meanings  and  definitions  are  alleged 
to  be  essential  and  important),  to  frame  an  argument  and  excite  prejudice 
against  us.  We  freely  admit  that  so  far  as  the  individual  personally  is 
concerned,  he  might  know  all  truth,  and  yet  without  a  personal  appropria- 
tion of  the  same,  it  would  do  him  no  good.  In  this  respect,  of  course,  it 
is  more  important  to  experience  the  power  of  truth,  and  it  is  precisely  for 
this  reason  that  we  also  urge  others  to  accept  of  this  doctrine,  because  by 
so  doing  they  increase  their  own  appreciation  of  God's  truth,  confirm  their 
hope  in  covenant  promises,  open  the  Scriptures  to  a  better  understanding, 
give  due  prominency  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  encourage  themselves  to  culti- 


228       •  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  177. 

vate  the  Christian  graces  to  secure  an  inheritance  in  the  Kingdom,  accept 
it  as  a  motive  to  patience,  mortification,  comfort,  etc.,  and  place  them- 
selves in  the  commanded  position  of  servants  looking,  watching,  praying, 
loving,  desiring  the  appearing  of  the  King  and  Kingdom.  Alas,  how 
often  are  we  asked,  "  what  is  the  practical  worth  of  your  doctrine,"  just  as 
if  God's  utterances  are  to  be  measured  by  man's  practice.  Fortunately, 
even  to  meet  such  an  invalid  objection,  aside  from  the  numerous  (see  App. 
to  Dr.  Seiss's  Last  Times,  ch.  1,  sec.  10,  for  Scripture  references),  declara- 
tions of  its  practical  value,  the  very  fact  that  it  is  pre-eminently  designed 
to  warn  and  guard  us  against  placing  ourselves  in  the  position  stated  in  the 
Proposition — this  alone  is  amply  sufficient  to  vindicate  its  preciousness  to 
the  believer.  Can  tbe  man  who  holds  firmly  to  such  a  Kingdom,  himself 
feel  so  little  interest  in  tbe  coming  Bridegroom  as  to  fall  asleep,  to  neglect 
preparation  for  His  coming,  to  urge  others  not  to  expect  His  Coming,  to 
tell  the  world  that  it  is  still  distant,  etc.  ?  Can  such  an  one  aid  in  advanc- 
ing unbelief  until  it  finally  bursts  in  fury  upon  a  Church  unprepared  for  a 
terrible  persecution  ?  The  time  will  sorely  come  when  the  neglect  of  this 
doctrine  will  he  bitterly  regretted.  In  the  mean  time,  no  effort  is  spared  to 
make  it  something  of  little  estimation  and  even  contemptible.  Men  tell  us 
that  it  is  not  "  the  Gospel,"  and  that  it  ought  not  to  be  preached  from  the 
pulpit.  Such  forget  that  the  Gospel  is  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  ;" 
that  the  early  preachers  as  Philip  "preached  the  things  concerning  the 
Kingdom;"  and  that  all  the  Apostles  proclaimed  the  same,  so  that  the 
greatest  of  them  (Paul)  said  :  "  J  hare  gone  preaching  the  Kingdom  of 
God."  To  leave  out  the  Kingdom  and  substitute  the  means  for  obtaining 
the  Kingdom  for  the  Kingdom  itself,  is  only  a  small  part  of  "  the  Gospel." 
The  insincerity,  however,  of  the  objection,  urged  only  to  palliate  hick  of 
faith,  is  seen  by  the  parties,  who  present  it,  proclaiming  without  stint  their 
own  views  and  theories  of  the  Kingdom.  Ministers  tell  us,  as  if  it  were  an 
am  pie  excuse  for  neglect,  that  they  are  to  preach  "  Christ  and  Hint  cruci- 
fied," dud  "win  souls  to  Christ."  The  Apostles  did  this,  and  at  the  scone 
time  preached  "  the  Kingdom.*'  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  those  who 
thus  object  really  appreciate  the  deep  significancy  of  the  word  "  Christ" 
the  name  pointing  to  "  Thy  Kingdom  come"  in  His  being  "  the  Anointed 
One,"  the  covenanted  King.  To  preach  "  Christ"  as  the  prophets  and 
Apostles  announced  Him  demands  a  knowledge  of  this  Kingdom  (Prop. 
205),  for  which  He  is  the  appointed,  ordained  One  ;  and  thus  having  the 
proper  understanding  of  II ts  covenanted  relationship  to  it  as  the 
Anointed  One,"  we  can  the  better  appreciate  Him  as  "  the  crucified  One," 
through  whose  perfect  obedience  and  sacrifice  the  requisite  provisions  are 
made  by  which,  the  Kingdom  can  be  most  gloriously  re-established  under  an 
immortal  David's  Son,  and  by  which  Ave  can  become  "  heirs  of  the  King- 
dom." Glorying  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  exulting  in  the  crucified  One,  as 
essentials  in  the  Redemptive  process,  we  receive  these,  like  Paul  did,  as 
important  parts  of  the  Gospel,  but  not  as  the  whole  Gospel,  for  without  the 
Divine  Purpose  exhibited  m  the  Kingdom  the  death  of  Christ  would  lose 
much  of  its  significance.  Paul  by  no  means  confined  himself  to  the  name 
and  death  of  Jesus  Christ  but  showed,  as  his  writings  abundantly  evidence, 
the  relationship  that  these  sustained  to  our  obtaining  the  Kingdom  and  to 
the  Kingdom  itself.  Besides  this,  let  us  remind  the  reader  that  there  can 
be  but  one  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  the  same  proclaimed  by  the  prophets, 
preached  by  John  the  Baptist,  Jesus,  the  seventy  disciples,  and  the  twelve 


Prop.  177.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  229 

Apostles.  Now  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  that  we  hold  is  precisely  the  one 
held  by  the  Primitive  Church  ;  and  its  good  news  is  dependent  upon  the  cove- 
nants confirmed  by  oath,  the  predictions  of  the  prophets,  the  declarations  of 
,  Jesus  Christ  and  His  Apostles,  and  the  provisions  made  by  God  in  Christ  for 
the  Kingdom.  "  The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom"  as  now  generally  entertained 
is  diverse  from  that  once  held  by  the  Church,  and  it  really  becomes  a  serious 
cpiestion,  no  matter  how  much  even  of  life  imparting  power  by  faith  in 
Christ  etc.,  there  may  be  attached  to  it,  whether  men  are  not  amenable  and 
will  not  suffer  loss  by  such  a  perversion  of  "  the  Gospel."  Especially  since 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  understanding  what  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  is, 
if  we  only  allow  the  Scriptures  to  speak  in  their  naked,  natural,  grammati- 
cal sense,  and  receive  that  meaning  so  apparent  upon  its  surface  as  did  the 
early  Church.  Indeed  when  tracing  the  preaching  of  this  Gospel  and  see- 
ing bow  many  varieties  of  Gospels  have  been  introduced  through  a  mystical 
and  spiritual  interpretation  and  with  them  corresponding  faith  and  hopes, 
the  warnings  of  the  New  Test,  against  the  foreseen  innovations  obtain 
special  force.  The  truth  is,  that  the  very  plainness,  the  remarkable  sim- 
plicity of  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom"  is  its  chief  est  obstacle  in  the  minds 
of  many,  for  while  it  may  do  for  ignorant  Jews  and  unlettered  fishermen, 
etc.,  as  "  a  harmless  error"  adapted  to  their  capacities  and  circumstances, 
it  is  not  sufficiently  refined,  etc.,  for  the  enlightenment  afterward  be- 
stowed. Do  we  exaggerate  or  are  we  too  severe  when  such  a  scholarly  and 
amiable  man  as  Prof.  Bush  (On  the  Mill.)  influenced  by  theory,  can  repre- 
sent the  early  Church  faith  in  the  Kingdom  as  such  ? 

Obs.  7.  What  must  we  say  then  to  that  large  class  of  professed  believers, 
who  establish  unbelief  in  themselves  and  others  by  denouncing  our  doctrine 
of  the  Kingdom  (under  the  garb  of  superior  piety,  spirituality,  etc.),  as 
"sensual"  "carnal,"  "  fleshly,"  etc.  Do  they  not  see  that  by  so  doing 
they  not  only  caricature  the  faith  of  the  early  Church  at  the  expense  of 
Christianity,  but  direct  a  deadly  blow  at  the  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  as 
given  in  the  opening  of  the-  New  Testament  by  which  the  knowledge,  in- 
tegrity, etc.,  of  the  first  preachers,  specially  and  divinely  sent  forth,  are 
sacrificed?  A  definite  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  was  proclaimed  by  John 
the  Baptist,  disciples,  etc.,  and  this  is  the  identical  Gospel  that  we  still 
hold  to,  sealed  and  attested  by  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus,  con- 
firmed by  the  predictions  of  postponement  fulfilled  before  our  eyes.  Now 
if  this  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  is  thus  stigmatized,  what  is  it  else  but 
denouncing  holy  men  of  old  who  were  specially  commissioned  to  preach  it? 
What  is  it,  but  the  denouncing  of  the  faith  of  saints,  who  had  particular  i 
instruction  and  divine  guidance,  and  whose  message  concerning  the  King- 
dom was  confirmed  by  miraculous  power?  What  must  we  think  of  a  doc- 
trine of  the  Kingdom  which  is  erected  only  by  invalidating  the  character 
of  the  first  ministers?  It  is  amazing,  and  illustrative  of  the  power  of  pre- 
conceived opinion  and  unrelenting  prejudice,  that  men  of  the  greatest 
ability  and  piety,  are  engaged  in  this  destructive  work  when  heaping  such 
terms  upon  us.  If  Jesus,  as  He  Himself  states,  was  sent  to  preach  the 
Kingdom  and  preached  it  through  His  disciples  ;  if  the  good  things  pre- 
dicted by  the  prophets  are  contained  in  the  Kingdom  thus  forming  "  the 
Gospel  or  good  news  of  the  Kingdom,"  let  such  before  they  censure  us,  or 
refuse  to  believe,  explain  how  it  comes  that  all  at  that  period  held  to  the 
Kingdom  as  expressed  in  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  Old  Test.,  and  that 


230  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.   177. 

such  a  belief  continued  to  exist  uninterruptedly  for  centuries?  When  this 
explanation  is  rationally  given,  without  reflecting  upon  God  who  gives  the 
Gospel  and.  commands  all  men  to  receive  it  (which  can  only  be  just  if  the 
sense  alluded  to  is  the  true  one),  without  calling  into  question  the  respect 
and  reverence  due  to  persons  who  ought  to  have  known  what  they  preached, 
then  it  will  be  time  to  sit  in  condemnatory  judgment  over  us.  Considering 
the  foundation  of  our  doctrine,  established  upon  the  plain  grammatical  sense 
of  covenant  and  prophets,  the  consistent  historical  account  of  the  Theo- 
cratic order,  the  belief  and  preaching  of  the  early  Church,  those  men  (ac- 
cepting the  Bible)  certainly  assume  a  heavy  responsibility  who  speak  and 
write  concerning  it  so  disrespectfully  and  reproachfully.1  What  if  it  should 
after  all  be  God's  own  arrangement — as  we  have  shown  it  is — how  can  they 
excuse  the  terms  of  dishonor  heaped  upoD  His  own  Divine  Plan?  Surely 
prudence,  if  nothing  higher,  should  cause  such  to  avoid  offensive  epithets 
(which  are  always  indications  of  weakness  and  lack  of  solid  argument)  to  a^ 
doctrine  thus  contained  (in  the  sense  we  maintain  and  admitted  even  by 
our  opponents),  in  the  Bible,  and  once  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  churches, 
lest  perad venture  they  be  found  resisting  the  truth  of  God.  The  sarcasms 
against  "  the  Jewish,"  "degrading,"  '"worldly"  faith  of  the  Primitive 
Church  come  with  bad  grace  from  religious  writers  ;  and  if  the  evil  were 
confined  to  them  alone  might  not  result  in  much  injury,  but  such  terms 
prejudice  the  multitude  against  the  Kingdom.  When  found  in  systems  of 
Theology,  etc.,  used  as  text-books,  need  we  wonder  at  the  influence  and  ex- 
tent of  unbelief.  The  Jews  misapprehended  how  and  when  the  Kingdom 
was  to  be  brought  in,  but  it  is  left  to  Gentiles — also  professing  faith  in  the 
Scriptures — not  only  in  their  "  high-mindedness"  to  misconceive  the 
how  and  when,  but  to  deny  the  Kingdom  itself.  Wiser  than  Jews  divinely 
guided,  more  enlightened  than  disciples  who  preached  under  the  great 
Teacher  the  Kingdom,  claiming  more  understanding  of  the  Kingdom  than 
men  who  were  directly  taught  by  the  Apostles,  they  profess  in  a  meridian 
blaze  of  light,  that  thai  which  God  has  plainly  promised  and  sworn  to  He 
dors  not  mean  but  something  else  which  the  ingenuity  and  wisdom  of  man 
attaches  to  it.  It  is  surely  surprising  that  intelligent  men  (as  e.g.  Prof. 
Garbett  in  Bampton  Lectures),  when  endeavoring  to  make  the  Personal 
reign  of  Jesus  on  the  earth  (although  admitting  it  to  be  "  venerable  from 
its  unquestionable  antiquity,"  and  traceable  to  the  apostles")  degrading  and 
a  Coming  again  in  "  a  new  humiliation"  (the  Bible  says  "  in  glory,")  with 
"«  secular  kingdom"  (i.e.  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  the  Theocracy), 
should  declare  that  "  those  carnal  interpretations  of  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Messiah,  which  formed  in  the  Jewish  mind  the  great  obstacle  to  the  recep- 
tion of  the  Lord,  and  which  nothing  but  the  searching  fires  of  persecution 
and  the  gradual  opening  of  their  eyes  to  the  spirituality  of  Christ's  King- 
dom, seems  to  have  eradicated  from  the  heart  of  even  the  Apostles  them* 
selves."  What  satisfaction  such  a  passage  must  afford  to  the  infidel,  for 
here  we  have  the  acknowledgment  that  our  view  was  at  one  time  at  least 
entertained  by  the  Apostles,  who  preached  it  under  Christ,  and  that  it  was 
eradicated  (?)  not  by  the  truth,  instruction,  but  by  persecution  which  grad- 
ually opened  their  eyes  although  inspired  teachers.  In  what  a  position  of 
weakness,  etc.,  this  places  inspired  men  ;  and  if  persecution  had  this  effect 
upon  them  how  comes  it  that  their  churches  and  successors  who  also  endured 
persecution  should  fail  to  have  their  eyes  opened?  It  is  a  line  of  argumen- 
tation unworthy  of  enlightened  piety,  seeing  that  it  undermines  the  teach- 


Prop.  177.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  231 

ing  and  authority  of  the  divinely  commissioned  and  instructed  Apostles, 
and  brings  into  contempt  the  fervent  faith  of  the  churches  established  by 
them.  Any  theory,  no  matter  by  whom  advocated,  that  introduces  so 
fatal  an  antagonism  between  primitive  and  present  faith,  is  to  be  discarded 
as  irreconcilable  with  the  truth.  But  instead  of  this,  the  masses  follow 
such  reasoning  and  the  substitutions  intended,  led  by  the  authority,  repu- 
tation, etc.  of  others,  and  swayed  by  the  reproach  cast  upon  our  faith.3 

1  Whatever  views  are  entertained  respecting  the  Kingdom,  one  thing  must  be  self- 
evident  to  the  reflecting  mind,  viz.,  that  because,  as  our  leading  critics  freely  admit, 
however  they  may  explain  or  apologize  for  it,  the  literal  sense  does  teach  the  Kingdom 
and  the  Advent  ushering  it  in,  etc.,  it  is  the  part  of  prudence  not  to  stigmatize  it  as 
"  carnal,"  etc.  Suppose  it  is  spiritual  and  that  another  sense  is  to  be  received,  then  this 
even  is  derogatory  to  the  Word  giving  it  "  a  carnal"  element,  etc.  But  suppose  the 
Kingdom  is  as  we  represent  it,  and  as  many  eminent  and  pious  men  have  held,  then, 
there  evidently  will  be  a  disparaging  of  God's  own  appointments,  a  deriding  of  our  in- 
heritance and  of  things  pertaining  to  the  glory  of  Jesus  Christ.  Prudence,  in  view  of 
the  language,  suggests  carefulness.  We  fear  that  many  who  professed  themselves  to 
have  been  called  to  preach  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,"  will  ultimately  find  themselves 
to  have  preached  "  another  Gospel,"  mere  human  opinions. 

2  Some  recent  writers,  seeing  the  inconsistency  involved  in  a  wholesale  condemnation 
of  our  doctrine,  make  concessions  that  are  favorable  in  so  far  as  a  Churchly  position  is 
concerned.  Thus  Dr.  Patterson  (Princeton  Review,  1878)  in  an  art.  against  us,  concedes 
that  it  is  not  "  heresy,"  indorsing  the  following  :  "  This  doctrine  (says  the  latest  Church 
His.  which  has  come  into  our  hands)  though  ultimately  rejected  by  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church,  was  too  frequently- held  by  the  early  Fathers  to  be  ranked  as  a  heresy."  (Comp. 
our  Props,  on  the  history  of  the  doctrine,  70-78.) 

Obs.  8.  But  to  insure  the  demolition  of  our  doctrine,  to  make  it  unpala- 
table to  others,  argument  is  laid  aside  and  recourse  is  had  to  personal  abuse. 
We  are  sorry  even  to  be  compelled  to  notice  these  attacks,  but  since  the 
most  eminent  and  pious  men,  through  weakness,  have  in  standard  works, 
histories,  etc.,  referred  to  us  as  "  weak,"  ''unbalanced,"  "credulous," 
"fanatical,"  etc.,  and  have  linked  us  with  Cerinthus,  Montanus,  Anabap- 
tists, etc.,  it  is  proper  to  indicate  it  as  a  fruitful  source  of  unbelief.  For 
multitudes  who  cannot  be  reached  by  an  argument  appealing  to  reason, 
will  permit  themselves  to  be  influenced  by  invectives.  When,  e.g.  the  author 
just  alluded  to,  Prof.  Garbett  says  of  our  doctrine,  "  few  opinions  have  in 
feeble  minds,  created  more  extravagance,  or  even  in  our  own  time  taken 
more  unhappy  possession  of  powerful  though  unregulated  intellects  ;" — this 
is  remembered  against  us  while  the  antidote  given  by  the  same  writer — 
when  he  says  of  our  theory  that  it  "  has  always  had  and  now  has  sober  and 
learned  advocates— pious  ones  it  has  never  wanted  ;  and  antiquity  it  may 
certainly  plead,"  etc. — is  forgotten.  Whitby's  scornful  allusions  are 
paraded  while  his  manly  admissions  of  universality,  etc.,  are  carefully 
avoided  ;  Mosheim's  uncandid  and  unhistorical  criticisms  are  carefully  pre- 
sented, while  his  scholarly  testimony  to  the  antiquity  and  generally  re- 
ceived doctrine,  and  the  ability  and  position  of  its  advocates,  is  as  carefully 
suppressed.  Numerous  illustrations  of  this  mode  of  attack  might  be  given, 
but  the  student  does  not  require  them,  since  reason  teaches  him  that  the 
proof  of  a  doctrine  does  not  exist  in  the  persons  who  advocate  it,  or  in  the 
extravagances,  error,  etc.,  that  may  be  engrafted  upon  it.  For,  if  the  lat- 
ter is  the  criterion,  then  there  is  no  doctrine  of  the  Bible  but  what  might 
be  justly  cast  aside,  seeing  how  all  of  them  have  been  allied,  in  persons 
entertaining  them,  with  fanaticism,  etc.1  Indeed  the  wise  man  will  have 
his  suspicions  aroused  by  the  very  abuse  heaped  upon  advocates,  seeing  that 


232  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  177. 

it  savors  of  a  lack  of  scriptural  argument.  "When  the  testimony  of  the 
Bible  can  be  adduced,  no  necessity  exists  for  personal  defamation.  We 
freely  and  frankly  admit  the  learning,  piety,  and  eminent  ability  of  our  op- 
ponents, and  by  so  doing  not  only  perform  an  act  of  simple  justice  but  ele- 
vate the  importance  and  necessity  of  our  defending  tbe  ancient  faith  against 
them.  The  more  honorable  our  opponents,  the  more  honorable  the  contest 
with  them.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  however,  that  in  some  recent  works 
issued  against  us  there  has  been  a  marked  change  ;  our  doctrine  is  treated 
with  respectful  attention,  and  its  advocates  are  spoken  of  as  "  able,  pious, 
learned,'"  etc.,  which  must  inevitably  be  the  result  if  the  writer  is  scholarly 
and  well  posted  in  the  history  of  our  doctrine.  For,  if  the  men  who  have 
believed  as  we  do  are  denounced  in  the  way  indicated,  it  then  follows  as  a 
natural  secjuence,  that  the  Church  itself  can  for  centuries  only  be  traced 
through  "  weak  intellects,"  through  "  Cerinthian-heresy  advocates,"  and 
that  many  of  the  brightest  ornaments  and  strongest  writers  of  the  Church 
arc  "  credulous,"  "fanatical,"  etc.  The  fact  is  that  the  charge  is  too 
sweeping  and  endangers  the  integrity  of  the  Church  itself  ;  and  intelli- 
gence, seeing  this,  avoids  such  a  prejudicial  mode  of  procedure.  Having 
already  in  the  brief  history  of  the  doctrine  shown  (Props.  73-79),  how 
incorrectly  our  doctrine  is  associated  with  heresy  and  fanatical  bodies  ; 
leaving  the  honored  names  of  its  advocates  to  speak  for  themselves  ;  having 
given  in  detail  the  arguments  upon  which  we  rely  in,  favor  of  our  position  ; 
— we  may  justly  claim  that  t ho  upholders  and  defenders  of  this  doctrine 
have  been  protected  against  fanatical  and  unscriptural  views  of  this  King- 
dom. The  early  Church  with  our  faith  resisted  Cerinthus  and  others,  and 
this  has  been  a  characteristic  of  its  followers  to  protest  against  all  such 
views,  even  if  they  have  incorporated  some  of  (he  truth  concerning  it. 
For,  instead  of  having  the  word  of  man,  or  professed  revelations  of  pre- 
tended sanctity  and  divine  guidance  to  give  us  proper  conceptions  of  the 
Kingdom,  we  lake  (tod's  own  Word  ami  accept  of  the  declarations  concern- 
ing it  as  contained  and  repeated  on  the  surface  of  revelation's  stream. 
This,  at  once,  protects  us  against  mystical,  allegorical,  hierarchical, 
spiritualistic,  and  rationalistic  conceptions.  We  see,  in  view  of  its  nature, 
characteristics,  and  manner  of  introduction,  that  it  has  not  been  re-estab- 
lished, and  this,  at  once,  sets  aside  the  multitude  of  clamorous  claims  of  the 
past  and  present.  It  has  not  been  erected  under  the  Papacy  or  by  Protes- 
tants, or  sects,  or  fanatics.  Not  merely  Koller's  (Stilling's  Theobald,) 
feeble  attempt  to  build  the  New  Jerusalem  and  act,  with  his  wife,  as 
Vicegerent  ;  not  only  the  Anabaptist  effort  in  the  same  direction  ;  not 
merely  that  of  the  Papacy  to  builcl  up  a  splendid,  universal  Kingdom  ;  not 
only  that  now  made  to  erect  a  spiritual  New  Jerusalem  with  men  in  it  as 
rulers  ;  not  only  all  these  are  rejected  as  contradictory  to  the  truth,  but 
every  effort,  from  whatever  source  it  emanates,  to  constitute  a  Kingdom  of 
Jesus  Christ  different  from  the  one  expressly  covenanted  to  Him.  The  atti- 
tude thus  assumed  shields  us  against  giving  place  to  impressions,  feelings, 
spirit  communications,  human  inspiration,  etc.,  bearing  upon  the  subject,  so 
that  while  not  claiming  freedom  from  errors  in  some  things  or  from  the 
failings  of  human  infirmity,  yet  with  this  reliance  and  trust  in  a  plainly 
revealed  Kingdom — this  firm  foundation  of  covenant  and  prophecy  in  its 
grammatical  sense — we  are  guilty  of  far  less  extravagance,  less  varied  inter- 
pretation, etc.,  than  our  numerous  opponents.  Differing  in  details,  we  are 
at  least  a  unit  on  the  subject  of  the  Coming  Kingdom  at  the  Sec.  Advent, 


PEOP.  177.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   EINGDOM.  233 

while  our  opponents  present  us  differing  and  antagonistic  kingdoms. 
According  to  our  previously  announced  principles,  such  unity,  etc.  is  no 
evidence,  however,  of  the  truthfulness  of  a  doctrine,  and  it  is  not  presented 
as  such,  but  only  to  indicate  that  if  the  charge  urged  against  us  has  any 
force  in  the  eyes  of  some,  it  may  be  applied  against  themselves.  In  refer- 
ence to  this  Kingdom,  against  the  most  plausible  speculations  and  asser- 
tions of  unbelief,  against  the  profound  sophistry  of  a  faithless  philosophy, 
against  the  epithets  bestowed  upon  us,  we  can  say  with  those  of  old  :  "  It 
is  written,''''  and  what  God  causes  to  be  written  is  true.  If  the  Kingdom 
is  ridiculed,  and  our  k"  ignorance  and  folly"  is  deplored,  we  have  at  least 
the  great  satisfaction  of  knowing  that,  "  It  is  written  ;"  that  the  meaning 
we  contend  for  is  plainly  and  unmistakably  contained  in  the  text,  while 
our  opponents  infer  theirs  at  the  expense  of  the  first  preachers  of  "  the 
Gospel  of  the  Kingdom."  We  hold  to  this  Kingdom,  because  we  receive 
as  an  axiomatic  truth,  "  the  Scriptures  cannot  be  broken"  (John  10  :  35), 
and  implicitly  rely  upon  the  saying  of  the  Saviour,  "  Till  heaven  and  earth 
pass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law,  till  all  be  ful- 
filled" (Matt.  5  :  11).  We  may  indeed  be  "  ignorant  and  foolish"  in  many 
things,  but  we  are  not  so  ignorant  and  foolish  as  to  set  ourselves  up  against 
the  grammatical  sense  of  the  Bible,  to  deny  the  former  existence  of  the 
same  Kingdom  of  God,  to  tear  the  predictions  of  the  prophets  away  from 
their  connection  with  the  Jewish  nation,  and  to  make  out  that  God's 
effort  to  act  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly  "Ruler  will  forever  prove  a  fail- 
ure, and  to  erect  a  plan  of  Redemptioii  which  leaves  out  some  of  the  for- 
feited blessings  and  gives  us  in  so  far  an  imperfect  Redeemer.  The  reasons 
for  all  this  are  given  in  the  previous  Propositions,  and  do  not  need  repeat- 
ing, so  that  we  may  conclude  by  saying,  that  no  truth  of  importance  has 
ever  existed  which  has  not  had  its  opposers.  Opposition  is  to  be  looked 
for,  and  is  predicted,  as  a  constant  companion  to  the  truth.  This  with- 
standing, often  bitter,  is  frequently  bestowed  under  the  specious  plea  of 
glorifying  God  (see  e.g.  Isa.  66  :  5)  and  of  honoring  Christ,  but  whatever 
the  plea,  the  only  test  applicable  to  judge  of  its  real  merits  is  to  be  found 
in  Holy  Writ.  Hence  it  is,  that  no  one  should  stumble  over  the  varied 
and  contradictory  definitions,  meanings,  and  interpretations  ascribed  to 
this  Kingdom.  If  the  truth  exists,  its  opposite,  error,  will  also  be  found, 
and  the  latter  more  widely  diffused  than  the  former.  God  tells  us  this 
Himself,  and  warns  us  distinctively,  that  such  will  be  especially  the  state  of 
things,  just  previous  to  the  Advent  of  Christ,  among  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth,  when,  if  the  prevailing  theories  are  correct,  we  ought  reasonably  to 
expect  through  development,  etc.,  the  contrary  to  occur.  Diversity  of 
view  must  not  be  mistaken  for  the  opposition  we  speak  of  for,  as  Bicker- 
steth,  Bh.  Van  Mildert,  and  others,  have  shown,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect 
the  former  when  the  great  extent  of  prophecy,  the  wonderful  details,  the 
conciseness  of  statements,  etc.,  are  taken  into  consideration  ;  and  our 
remarks  do  not  include  a  fair  hearing  and  examination  of  the  opinions  of 
others  under  the  influence  of  justice  and  love  for  the  truth,  but  are 
directed  against  that  distortion  of  facts,  misrepresentation  of  statements, 
ascription  of  unworthy  motives  and  personal  attacks,  which  characterize  so 
many  productions  of  the  day.  Every  writer  should  feel  willing  and  desir- 
ous that  his  work  should  be  subjected  to  rigid  examination  and  criticism, 
but  only  in  the  spirit  inculcated  by  the  Divine  Master,  and  in  the  light  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures.     The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  so  essential  and  lead- 


234  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.    177. 

ing,  should  not  be  obscured  or  rejected,  because  of  the  errors  in  interpre- 
tation, prophecy,  covenant,  etc.,  by  others  ;  and  such  errors  should  not  be 
joyfully  held  np  as  evidence  of  their  being  no  truth  in  the  system  upheld, 
but  true  wisdom  and  scholarship  suggest  that  the  truth  by  due  examina- 
tion and  comparison  with  Scripture  be  separated  from  error.  Infallibility 
does  not  belong  to  man,  and  hence  the  best  of  men — as  if  to  encourage  us 
in  our  own  efforts — give  us  evidences  of  weakness  and  imperfection  in  some 
things.  Fortunately  for  us,  our  destiny  is  in  God's  hands,  and  as  He  is 
more  merciful  and  pitiful  than  man,  we  can  rely  upon  Him  in  our  labors, 
imperfect  as  they  are,  provided  they  are  the  result  of  a  sincere  search 
after,  and  desire  for,  the  truth,  and  are  not  merely  the  production  of  jier- 
sonal  feeling,  contention,  etc.  This  does  not  forbid  the  use  of  plain  and 
decided  language  in  reference  either  to  the  statements  made  by  others,  or 
the  doctrines  promulgated,  or  the  tendencies  that  they  may  have  (no  author 
can  object  to  this  if  correctly  given)  with  the  proof  attached  drawn  from 
Scripture,  and  the  facts  of  history.  Therefore  it  is,  that  the  mode  of  con- 
troversy, so  long  maintained  against  our  doctrine  and  its  advocates,  is  to  be 
deprecated  as  not  only  unjust,  but  wrongfully  calculated  to  prejudice  the 
multitude  against  us  without  a  hearing.  It  is  in  a  great  measure  due  to 
this  feature  that  so  many  are  unwilling  even  to  examine  the  subject,  and  see 
what  foundation  it  has  in  the  Scriptures,  and  through  it  largely  the  pro- 
fessing Church  has  lost  faith  in  the  Kingdom,  once  the  hope  and  joy  of  the 
pious  Jew  and  devout  early  Christian.2 

1  Thomas  Harley  said  :  "  Among  the  many  arts  practised  in  order  to  bring  any  truth 
into  discredit,  none  is  more  popular  than  that  of  exhibiting  it  to  public  view  joined  with 
the  absurd  tenets  of  some  that  have  espoused  it,  and  which  is  not  improperly  called 
dressing  up  truth  in  a  fool's  coal  on  purpose  to  make  it  ridiculous  ;  and  this  often  suc- 
ceeds with  the  undiscerning  vulgar,  who  judge  only  from  the  outward  appearance  of 
things."  Dr.  Seiss,  who  quotes  Harley,  justly  adds  (p.  338  Last  Times)  :  "  tt  is  this  art 
which  has  been  practised  for  the  most  part  by  the  enemies  of  Millenarian  doctrine,  and 
that,  too,  with  a  goodly  degree  of  success.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  time  is  at  hand 
when  men  will  deal  with  the  subject  with  some  degree  of  that  candor  which  it  really 
deserves."  Such  candor  is  manifested  by  a  few  learned  opponents,  but  we  cannot, 
judging  human  nature  from  the  past,  expect  it  to  be  largely  adopted.  For  so  bitter  and 
unrelenting  is  the  feeling  against  us  in  some  quarters  that  every  advantage,  however 
illogical  and  unworthy,  is  taken  against  us.  Such  are  even  more  autocratic  in  their 
reception  of  us  than  Louis  XIV.  was  in  his  court.  The  spirit  of  Dr.  Schell wig  (Quart. 
Review,  Ap.,  1874),  a  Professor  in  Rostock,  discussing  the  question  whether  Spener  was 
saved  and  deciding  negatively,  is  still  transmitted  (as  well  as  that  of  the  Faculty  of 
Wittenberg  in  1695  publishing  a  tract  in  which  Spener  was  charged  with  two  hundred 
and  eighty-three  errors)  and  as  lynx-eyed.      May  we  add  that  the  false  statements  made 

res] ting  others  reminds  one  of  the  "  Death-Blow  to  Corrupt  Doctrines,"  published  by 

the  Chinese,  and  noticed  in  the  Dublin  Univ.  Mag.  for  1872,  and  republished  in  Littell's 
Liv.  Age,  under  the  title,  "  A  Looking-Glass  for  Christians." 

8  It  may  be  properly  added  :  to  judge  another,  who  may  not  believe  in  all  things  as  we 
do,  and  pronounce  him  to  be  no  Christian  (although  cleaving  to  Christ  and  bringing  forth 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit)  is  evidence  of  a  narrow,  contracted  mind  and  an  illiberal  heart, 
and  is  a  virtual  disobedience  of  divine  injunctions  and  rebukes  on  the  subject.  It  places 
the  individual  or  sect  or  party  in  the  position  to  which  Paul's  language  justly  applies, 
Rom.  14  :  4  ;  1  Cor.  13  :  1-13,  etc.  It  savors  of  the  spirit  of  the  disciples  when  they 
wished  to  call  down  fire,  and  is  the  reverse  of  that  apostolic  mind  which  rejoiced,  even 
if  the  whole  truth  was  not  proclaimed,  that  Jesus  was  preached.  Enlightened  piety  is 
willing  to  "  forbear  with  our  brethren  in  love."  We  do  not  overlook  the  sad  fact  stated 
by  Guesses  ai  Truth  (p.  492)  :  "  One  of  the  saddest  things  about  human  nature  is  that  a 
man  may  guide  others  in  the  path  of  life,  without  walking  in  it  himself  ;  that  he  may  be 
a  pilot,  and  yet  a  castaway."  Men,  like  Brown,  Waldegrave,  etc.,  may  endeavor  to  over- 
throw our  position,  while  neglecting  to  establish  their  own  or  refusing  to  notice  our 
proofs,  but  this  very  omission  is  indicative  of  an  eagerness  to  find^fault  with  us.     As 


PEOP.  177.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  235 

Mencins  says  :  "  The  disease  of  men  is  this  :  that  they  neglect  their  own  fields  and  go  to 
weed  the  fields  of  others,  and  that  what  they  require  from  others  is  great,  while  what 
they  lay  upon  themselves  is  light." 

Obs.  9.  Xot  content  with  the  motives  presented  to  cause  disbelief  in  our 
doctrine,  it  is  remarkable  (owing  to  its  contradictory  nature)  that  a  pre- 
vailing one  urged  by  the  most  respectable  writers  (e.g.  Rev.  David  Brown 
in  Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  etc.,  Steele's  Essay  on  Christ's  Kingdom),  handed 
down  from  one  to  the  other  (and  evidently  adopted  without  examination), 
and  found  in  nearly  every  one  of  their  books  is  the  following  :  viz. — that 
such  a  belief  in  the  Kingdom,  and  of  necessity  in  the  Pre-Mill.  Advent 
of  King  Jesus,  paralyzes  efforts  for  the  salvation  of  others,  and  is  an  obstacle 
to  missionary  labor.  Those  who  make  the  objection  forget  the  activity  and 
missionary  labors  of  the  early  Church  so  extensively  Millenarian  in  view  ; 
they  overlook  the  large  number  of  missionaries  and  friends  of  missions 
who  have  been  and  are  Millenarians  ;'  they  pass  by  and  condemn  some  of 
the  noblest  men  in  their  respective  denominations  (Episcopalian,  Lutheran, 
Reformed,  Presbyterian,  Baptist,  Methodist,  etc.),  who  have  been  Mille- 
narians, and  yet  noted  for  abundant  Christian  work  ;  they  ignore  the  nu- 
merous practical  writings,  the  preaching,  the  success,  the  founding  of  mis- 
sionary organizations,  etc.,  by  Millenarians,  and  are  utterly  unable  to  des- 
ignate a  single  writer  of  them  who  has  ever  expressed  a  word  against  mis- 
sionary effort.  Indeed  the  doctrine  we  hold  cannot,  in  the  nature  of  the 
case,  produce  the  effect  thus  confidently  proclaimed.  Let  them  show  how 
it  can  paralyze  activity  and  zeal,  when  its  entire  tenor  and  scope  is  to  pre- 
sent us  with  motives  to  increased  earnestness,  etc.,  in  behalf  of  the  truth. 
Let  them  prove  that  a  servant  who  watches  for  the  speedy  return  of  his 
master  is  more  likely  to  prove  unfaithful  and  inactive  than  he  who  believes 
that  the  master  will  not  return  for  a  long  time.  Is  the  proclamation  of 
the  truth  hostile  to  the  Kingdom  or  the  Advent  ?  Do  the  Scriptures  urge 
diligence,  piety,  etc.,  grounded  on  the  fact  that  the  Lord  may  come  at  any 
time?  Do  those  who  unreflectingly  persist  in  loading  our  faith  with  such 
an  accusation,  even  think  that  by  so  doing  they  are  virtually  sitting  in 
judgment  over  and  condemning  the  motives  that  the  Spirit  has  given? 
How  can  this  even  be  reconciled  with  the  frank  concessions  in  our  behalf 
made  by  opposersin  sympathy  with  themselves,  as  e.g.  Waldegrave  {Lee.  on 
N.  T.  Millenarianisin.  p.  G)  tells  us  "  that  the  advocates  of  the  Pre-Millen- 
nial  Advent  are  found,  as  th>>y  most  certainly  are,  among  the  best  men  of 
our  day,  and  the  most  faithful  sons  of  the  Church.'"  Desprez  (John,  or  the 
Apocalypse),  while  totally  rejecting  our  doctrine,  still  frankly  admits  that 
"  it  was  the  impelling  power  of  the  first  missionaries,  which  icon  all  the 
grand  victories  of  early  Christianity"  (see  Proph.  Times,  p.  172,  Nov. 
1870). 3  In  "  An  Appeal  to  the  Churches,"  issued  in  18G7,  from  Boston, 
subscribed  by  sixty  clergymen  with  Albert  Barnes  at  the  head  of  the  list, 
reference  is  made  to  the  first  three  centuries  as  a  model  for  revival  and 
missionary  exertions — the  very  Church  so  diffused  with  the  Millenarian 
leaven.  This  obviously  intended  objection  may  well  be  dismissed  with  the 
remark,  that  a  proper  understanding  of  this  Kingdom,  the  manner  of  its 
introduction,  the  gracious  purposes  involved  in  its  postponement,  the  fear- 
ful displays  of  wrath  and  the  wonderful  exhibitions  of  faithfulness  and 
mercy  accompanying  it,  etc.,  are  amply  sufficient  to  subdue  the  heart  of 
the  believer  in  to  "a  glad  willingness  to  occupy  the  posture  of  a  waiting, 


236  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  177. 

watching  and  laboring  servant,  who  feels  the  importance  of  redeeming  the 
time  and  working  while  it  is  day — who  desires  to  hasten  the  restitution  by 
gathering  the  people  required — who  knowing  the  night,  is  not  discouraged 
by  a  lack  of  success,  but  testifies  to  secure  God's  approval. 

1  See  David  N.  Lord's  Theol.  and  Lit.  Journal  for  July,  1850,  art.  1,  where  he  at  length 
rebuts  this  charge,  giving  the  proofs  as  derived  from  various  denominations,  showing 
that  very  many  missionaries  are  Millenarians,  that  their  warmest  supporters  are  such  that 
both  domestic  and  foreign  missions  are  upheld  by  them,  etc.  ,  So  also  Brookes,  Bieker- 
steth,  McNeile,  Cox  and  others.  Recently  in  the  Proph.  Times,  Feb.,  1875,  p.  36,  the 
editor,  lie  v.  Wilson,  referring  to  the  matter,  shows  that  a  large  proportion  of  missiona- 
ries in  the  foreign  field — as  stated  to  him  by  missionaries  themselves — are  believers  in 
our  doctrine.  And  reveals  the  fact  that  some  were  forbidden  by  the  officers  of  the  socie- 
ties to  express  their  views  in  this  country  "  for  fear  of  discouraging  our  people."  And  in 
reference  to  the  large  number,  he  adds  :  "  This  we  were  told  two  years  ago  by  a  promi- 
nent missionary,  who  held  this  view  (i.e.  our  doctrine)  and  lamented  to  us  that  he  was 
compelled  to  be  so  tongue-tied  (i.e.  in  missionary  addresses)  in  the  enunciation  of  it  in 
this  country."  Some  missionaries,  as  Wolf  and  others,  have  written  their  views  on  the 
subject.     (Comp.  Prop,  on  His.  of  Doctrine.) 

2  It  is  a  matter  of  reflection  how  in  the  biographies  of  eminent  men  the  writers  have 
taken  leave  to  strike  out  all  allusions  to  their  faith  in  our  doctrine  or  give  it  a  bare  men- 
tion. Various  examples  can  be  given,  but  a  recent  one  will  suffice.  Dr.  Wayland  in  his 
account  of  Midler's  Labors  in  Life  of  Trust  has,  "  in  a  great  measure  suppressed  or  ignored 
the  fact  that  the  apostolic  faith  and  labors  of  this  faithful  servant  of  God,  according  to 
his  own  testimony,  was  mainly  upheld  and  cheered  by  the  blessed  hope  of  the  literal 
Coming  ami  Kingdom  of  the  Lord."  (See  a  writer,  E.  M.,  in  Proph.  Times,  art.  1,  Nov., 
1 B67. )  Bo  e.g.  in  various  Lives  of  John  Wesley,  his  sentiments  on  the  subject  are  quietly 
ignored,  as  a  recent  biographer  (Tyerman  ;  see  Prop.  78)  noticed  and  rebuked. 

Obs.  10.  In  giving  the  causes  which  produce  in  the  Church  such  want  of 
faith  in  the  Kingdom,  prominently  may  be  noticed  the  Whitbyan  hypoth- 
esis" of  the  conversion  of  the  world  by  the  Church,  through  which  it  is 
hoped  this  Church  Kingdom  will  finally  assume  the  proportions  and  attain 
to  the  characteristics  of  the  Kingdom  as"  predicted.  Even  a  Bampton  Lect- 
urer, and  others,  under  a  vivid  imagination,  can  apply  Isa.  60,  as  already 
"magnificently"  verified  in  the  history  of  a  struggling  persecuted  church. 
Having' already  (Prop.  175)  briefly  examined  this  theory,  it  may  be  well 
to  suggest,  that  before  it  is  made  into  an  argument  against  us,  it  would  be 
well  first  to  establish  its  scriptural  foundation,  and  show  how  it  can  be  recon- 
ciled with  the  expectations  and  hopes  of  the  apostles  and  Primitive  Church. 
Yet  many,  assuming  it  to  be  true,  ground  their  entire  opposition  against  us 
upon  its  truth.  The  Roman  Catholic  idea,  indorsed  by  some  Protestants, 
viz.,  that  Christ's  Kingdom  is  in  the  third  heaven,  that  saints  are  trans- 
ported to  it,  that  it  ever  will  remain  there,  and  that  a  branch  of  that  King- 
dom under  a  Vicegerent  or  Hierarchical  rule  exists  here  on  the  earth  for 
a  time — is  so  flatly  contradicted  by  our  doctrine,  and  by  the  postponement 
of  the  Kingdom,  and  is  so  condemnatory  of  the  powers  and  rule  claimed, 
that  it  is  no  wonder  the  doctrine  is  so  bitterly  opposed  by  them.  It  is  utter- 
ly impossible  for  a  Millenarian  to  become  a  follower  of  a  Church  which  as- 
sumes in  its  head  the  titles  and  prerogatives  of  a  King  over  the  Church,  and 
it  is  equally  impossible  for  that  Church,  as  Chillingworth  long  ago  pointed 
out,  to  reconcile  its  belief  with  the  Millenarian  faith  of  the  Primitive  Church. 
The  Swedenborgian  notion  that  the  Xew  Jerusalem  state  is  already  intro- 
duced and  is  destined  to  spread  over  the  earth  ;  in  brief,  all  the  various 
theories  running  down  to  Shakerism,  Mormonism,  etc.,  have  by  their  dis- 
tinctive teachings  of:  the  Kingdom  as  now  existing  in  some  form,  visible  or 


Prop.  177.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  237 

invisible,  outward  or  inward,  a  decided  authority  and  influence  in  the 
minds  of  many  to  cause  them  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  scriptural  delinea- 
tions of  the  Kingdom.  No  matter  what  the  covenants  say,  what  the  proph- 
ets describe,  what  the  disciples  preached,  what  the  early  Church  believed, 
these  live  in  a  new  era  of  enlightenment,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  "  the 
old  paths. "  Without  seeing  how  all  this  saps  the  foundations  of  the  Script- 
ures, making  them  unreliable  and  untrustworthy,  they  tell  us  to  accept  of 
their  mode  of  interpreting  the  Bible,  and  then  we  shall  see  as  they  them- 
selves perceive.  Others,  not  caring  how  it  will  fare  with  God's  Word, 
boldly  declare  that  a  man  now  with  the  accumulation  of  the  past,  knoivs 
more  of  doctrinal  truth  than  the  apostles.  To  preserve  the  sinking  credit 
of  the  Papacy,  infallibility  is  proclaimed  to  sustain  the  faithful  in  their 
belief  in  the  Kingdom  governed  by  the  Pontiff.  Many,  who  can  ridicule 
this  claim  in  Popery,  are  no  better  when  they  claim  an  infallible  guide  in 
some  Confession,  prophet,  teacher,  in  short,  anything  outside  of  the  Bible. 
The  reflection  follows  :  when  we  behold  ail  those  theories  and  systems  of 
faith — all  hostile  to  our  doctrine — with  numerous,  learned,  powerful,  adher- 
ents, and  these  actuated  by  party  attachments  and  associated  inclinations 
and  regard,  it  seems  impracticable  to  hope  for  any  large  additions  to  our  num- 
ber. Indeed,  taking  Holy  Writ  for  our  guide,  we  dare  not  anticipate  it, 
for  if  there  were  a  revulsion  in  the  Church  making  our  doctrine  as  popular 
as  it  once  was  in  the  early  Church,  then  the  Bible  would  lose  one  of  its 
landmarks  of  prophecy  and  prove  untrue  to  itself.  All  that  we  can 
reasonably  expect  is,  that,  as  Cod  will  not  leave  His  truth  ivithout  wit- 
nesses, a  few,  here  and  there  in  all  denominations  as  now,  will  test  their 
theories  by  the  plain  grammatical  sense  of  the  Word,  as  advocated  by  us  ; 
and  under  its  guidance  return  to  the  blessed  faith  and  hope  characteristic 
of  the  Church  in  apostolic  times.  But  in  the  utmost  candor  and  with  due 
respect  to  our  opposers,  may  it  be  suggested,  that,  in  all  probability,  the 
secret  reason  for  rejecting  faith  in  our  doctrine  lies  with  some  in  dislike  to 
the  humbling  features  of  the  doctrine,  viz.,  that  it  utterly  discards  all 
human  schemes  and  plans  for  "  the  regeneration"  of  society  and  the  world. 
This  Kingdom  that  we  teach,  being  God's  own  Theocratic  arrangement  for 
the  government  of  the  world,  repudiates  all  human  organizations;  it 
will  completely  set  them  aside  and  put  in  place  of  them  the  Theocracy 
under  Jesus  Christ  and  His  associated  Ruler.  This  takes  such  a  low 
estimate  of  things  that  men  prize  so  highly  ;  this  abases  what  so  many 
now  pride  themselves  in  ;  this  so  degrades  the  boasted  advancement  and 
development  of  the  race  ;  this  so  debases  the  pet  theories,  hierarchical 
tendencies,  claims  of  superiority,  etc.,  advanced  by  multitudes — that  it 
is  too  humiliating  to  their  own  dignity  and  the  loftiness  of  humanity  to 
accept  of  it.  A  doctrine  which  threatens  the  perpetuity  of  institutions, 
organizations,  etc. — which  teaches  that  they  are  all  imperfect,  and  must 
give  place  to  a  divine  revelation  of  the  Theocracy,  is  far  from  being  accept- 
able to  powerful  bodies,  to  partisan  adherents,  to  wealthy  corporations,  to 
laborers  for  the  conversion  of  the  world,  to  ecclesiastical  rulers,  etc.  The 
Kingdom  requires  a  radical  change,  resurrection  and  glorification  in  its 
inheritors,  a  complete  conversion  and  revolution  of  faith  and  practice  in 
the  Jewish  nation,  and  an  entire  submission  and  consecration  of  the  Gentiles 
to  its  dominion.  Its  rulership,  its  Theocratic  guidance,  its  fountain  head 
of  authority  and  power,  is  committed  to  a  body  of  resurrected  and  glorified 
ones,  Jesus  being  the  Chief,  and  its  very  nature,   design,  accomplishment 


238  THE   TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  177. 

being  for  the  Redemption  of  the  race,  all  mere  human  systems,  whatever 
their  merit  for  the  present  dispensation,  must  give  place  to  the  new  order- 
ing, the  renewed  Theocracy.  Men,  instead  of  studying  and  appreciating 
God's  plan  for  "  regeneration"  and  "  restitution,"  hug  their  own  delusive 
plans  and  existing  forms  for  the  salvation  of  the  race  and  world.  Over- 
looking the  sign  of  the  present  dispensation,  which  is  not  to  convert  the 
world,  but  to  gather  out  them  that  believe  to  form  the  irresistible  body  of 
rulers  in  the  Coming  Theocracy,  men  engraft  tip  on  it  their  own  faith  and 
hopes  and  correspondingly  act.  If  there  is  a  truth  distinctly  taught  in  con- 
nection with  this  Kingdom,  it  certainly  is,  that  all  existing  forms  of 
polity,  government,  etc.,  shall  give  place  to  the  new  ordering  when  Mes- 
siah's Kingdom  is  set  upas  covenanted  and  predicted.  Hence,  this  doctrine 
instructs  us  to  think  less  of  the  present  world  and  more  of  "  the  Avorld  to 
come" — less  of  existing  organizations  and  more  of  the  mighty,  all-prevail- 
ing One  to  come.  This  doctrine  condemns  man  ;  finds  fault  with  his  proj- 
ects for  reforming  humanity  ;  makes  him  entirely  dependent  for  the 
amelioration  of  the  race  on  God  and  His  Coming  Son  :  tells  him  that  his 
lofty  fabrics  shall  be  overthrown,  that  his  expected  reformation  shall  be  a 
failure,  that  his  anticipated  prosperity  shall  end  in  ruin,  that  his  alliance 
with  the  world  in  hope  of  gain  and  ascendency  shall  be  met  by  a  destruction  ; 
and  therefore  it  is,  that  this  doctrine  is  so  hated  by  many,  so  abused  by 
others,  and  regarded  with  unfriendly  hearts  by  the  mass.  It  is  a  protest 
against  human  nature  in  man,  society,  ecclesiastical  systems,  Church  and 
State — that  depravity  exists  in  them  all,  and  that,  whatever  good  each  and 
all  may  subserve  under  the  present  order,  they  are  not  fitted  for  "  the 
Kingdom  of  Heaven"  without  radical  and  sweeping  alterations  (beyond 
human  ability  to  effect)  which  shall  fit  them  for  the  happy  Theocratic 
ordering.  There  is  no  hope  in  humanity  developing  itself  by  its  projects, 
allied  as  it  may  be  to  systems  which  contain  more  or  less  good,  and  this 
is  proven  by  the  position  it  occupies  just  previous  to,  and  at,  the  Second 
Advent  as  delineated  by  the  Spirit. 

Obs.  11.  This  lack  of  faith  in  this  Kingdom  is  the  more  inexcusable  since 
it  is  not  only  protested  against  in  the  plain  grammatical  sense  of  the  Word, 
but  God  has  raised  up  men,  in  all  denominations,  to  direct  special  atten- 
tion to  it.  It  is  true  that  in  many  instances  in  the  past  some  have  fared 
very  much  as  Jeremiah  (20  :  10),  yet  like  the  prophet,  urged  by  the  com- 
mands of  the  Saviour,  the  importance  of  the  subject,  and  the  welfare  of 
others,  they  continued  to  testify.  In  strict  analogy  with  the  past  dealings 
of  God,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect,  that,  as  the  time  approaches  for  the  times 
of  the  Gentiles  to  end,  and  for  the  setting  up  of  this  Kingdom,  the  simple 
early  Church  view  should  be  revived.  It  is  with  gratitude  that  we  notice 
some  of  the  most  profound  scholars  and  theologians  of  Europe  and  this 
country  indorse  the  Primitive  Church  doctrine,  while  others  are  veer- 
ing more  and  more  in  that  direction.  It  is  significant  (in  refer- 
ence to  the  latter)  e.g.  that  Van  Oosterzee  seizes  upon  the  doctrine  of  the 
Kingdom  as  the  basis  of  theology,  embracing  the  Divine  Purpose,  and 
accords,  in  his  way,  a  Pre-Mill.  Advent  of  Jesus  Christ,  etc.  It  is  expres- 
sive, that  some  of  our  recent  opponents,  forced  to  it  by  prophecy  (as  e.g. 
Fairbairn,  etc.)  leave  the  former  line  of  argument,  and  frankly  admit  that 
the  Kingdom  as  represented  in  Millennial  descriptions  can  never  be  realized 
without  a  special  Divine  interference  and  manifestation  of  Supernatural 


Prop.  177.]  the  theocratic  kixgdo^.  239 

power,  etc.  Taking  our  leading  commentaries  (as  e.g.  Lange,  Alford, 
Bengel,  Crit.  Eng.  Test.,  etc.) — expositions  of  portions  of  the  Scripture 
(as  e.g.  Elliot.  Lord,  Ryle,  etc.)— sermons  on  the  subject  (as  e.g.  McXeile's, 
Camming,  Cox,  etc.)  ;  books  written  in  defence  (as  e.g.  Bickersteth, 
Shimmeall,  Birks,  Brookes,  etc.)  ;  periodicals  published  in  behalf  of  the 
doctrine  (as  e.g.  Bonar's,  Leask's,  Seiss's,  etc.)  besides  a  large  number  of 
publications1  giving  no  uncertain  evidence,  it  is  certain  that  sufficient  testi- 
mony has  been  given  to  arouse  an  unwilling  Church  and  world  to  consider 
this  doctrine.  This  very  testimony  fills  a  landmark  of  prophecy,  fulfilling 
the  cry,  "  Behold  the  Bridegroom  Cometh,"  reiterating  the  apostolic  warn- 
ing, uthe  Coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh,"  and  holding  forth  the  last 
communication  of  Jesus  :  "  Behold  I  come  as  a  thief,"  "  Surely  I  come 
quickly,"  etc.  If  it  were  wanting,  a  link  in  the  chain  of  evidence  would 
also  be  missing.  Being  present — however  it  may  have  been  used  by  some 
for  mere  sensationalism  or  excitement — and  held  by  witnesses  of  probity 
and  learning,  who  find  it  authoritatively  in  the  Scriptures,  and  give  the 
reason  for  the  faith  that  is  in  them  based  upon  Holy  Writ  it — thus  accu- 
rately corresponding  with  the  waiting,  longing  position  of  the  Primitive 
Church,  with  the  apostolic  cautions,  and  with  the  admonitions  of  the 
Master  Himself — commends  itself  to  the  reason  and  heart  of,  alas,  the  com- 
paratively few.  When  Whitby  enumerates  the  noble  list  of  Fathers  in  the 
Eastern  and  Western  Church  who  held  and  taught  our  doctrine  ;  when 
Albert  Barnes  {Com.  Rev.  p.  407)  tells  us  that  "  the  opinion  (i.e.  Millena- 
rianism)  here  adverted  to  was  held  substantially  by  Papias,  Justin  Martyr, 
Irenaeus,  Tertullian,  and  others,  among  the  Christian  Fathers,  and,  it  need 
not  be  said,  is  held  by  many  modern  expositors  of  the  Bible,  and  by  large 
numbers  of  Christian  ministers  of  high  standing,  and  other  Christians;" 
when  various  opponents  pronounce  it  even,  "  a  splendid,  magnificent  phan- 
tom" (the  very  reproach  forcing  an  indirect  admission  of  its  desirable- 
ness, adaptedness,  completeness,  etc.) — it  is  proof  that  the  attention  of 
the  Church  has  been  duly  called  to  it,  and  that  the  responsibility  of  its 
rejection  does  not  cling  to  the  skirts  of  its  advocates.  There  is  not  an 
objection  or  argument  urged  against  it,  that  has  not  been  duly  met  by  an 
appeal  to  the  Word  ;  and  there  is  scarcely  a  proof  text  in  the  Bible  that 
has  not,  in  some  form,  been  presented  in  its  behalf,  always  appealing  to 
the  grammatical  sense.  Notwithstanding  this,  it  is  a  sad  fact,  that  too 
many  in  the  Church  have  measured  the  ways  of  God  as  exhibited  in  our 
doctrine  by  the  same  standard  employed  by  infidels,  The  latter  tells  us 
that  the  test  applied  to  Abraham  in  the  proposed  sacrifice  of  Isaac  was 
unworthy  of  Clod,  that  the  Incarnation  is  derogatory  to  the  Deity,  that  the 
Mosaic  law  was  degrading,  etc.,  and  precisely — after  all  our  appeals  to  its 
being  literally  expressed  in  the  Scriptures  and  to  its  having  been  believed  in 
under  apostolic  teaching — the  same  rule  is  applied  to  this  Kingdom — 
reiterated  in  many  works  as  the  culminating  objection — and  it  is  rejected 
as  unworthy  of  God.  Reason  sits  in  judgment  over  the  reasoning,  the 
testimony  assigned,  and  thus  far  correctly,  but  when  she  assumes  to  meas- 
ure the  fitness,  the  worthiness  of  God's  plans,  she  transcends  her  mission. 
If  it  can  be  shown  that  the  plan  is  unreasonable  in  its  adaptation  to  secure 
the  result  aimed  at,  then,  of  course,  a  logical  argument  is  raised  against 
us  to  which  we  must  yield.  The  objection  must  not  cover  God's  ability  to 
perform  wind  He  has  promised.  Let  us  ask,  where  is  the  opponent  of  our 
doctrine  who  has  ever  vindicated  the  charge  thus  urged  against  us  by  shoiv- 


240  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  177. 

ing  that  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  thus  restored  under  the  Messiah  and  risen 
saints  is  not  adapted  to  secure  the  Redemption  of  the  race,  etc.?  If  honest 
to  themselves  and  to  us,  they  must  admit  that  there  is  not  a  feature  dis- 
tinctively relating  to  this  Kingdom,  but  what  if  carried  out  as  our  doctrine 
portrays,  will  result  in  producing  the  blessing  predicted.  If  so — and  this  is 
unquestionable — why  then  urge  an  excuse  for  unbelief  which  necessarily 
reflects  upon  the  character  and  ability  of  God,  and  sets  man  over  Him  as 
the  judge  of  the  worthiness  of  His  Divine  Purposes?  True  reason,  allied 
with  faith,  cannot  present  it,  without  doing  violence  to  the  abundant  testi- 
mony given  ;  and  hence  the  root  of  it  must  be  found  in  things  previously 
mentioned  and  to  a  desire  to  crush,  if  possible,  the  doctrine  by  loading  it  with 
corruption.  As  an  indication  of  this  spirit,  it  is  only  necessary  to  recall 
what  we  find  gravely  presented  by  many  writers  in  view  of  our  doctrine 
being  so  largely  allied  with  prophecy,  viz.  that  prophecy  cannot  be  under 
stood  until  after  the  fulfilment,  etc.  The  insincerity  of  this  pretext 
for  unbelief  is  abundantly  witnessed  in  their  professed  ability,  over  against 
us,  to  comprehend  these  same  predictions,  apply  them  to  their  own  Church- 
Kingdom  and  to  their  notions  respecting  the  future.  Prophecy  has  no 
difficulties  and  can  be  readily  comprehended  when  related  to  their  own 
theories,  but  just  so  soon  as  we  insist  upon  the  grammatical  sense  being 
retained  and  their  connection,  with  the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  overthrown 
Theocracy  being  observed,  then,  owing  to  the  apparent  antagonism  which 
this  gives  to  their  doctrines,  prophecy  is  fearfully  obscure.  Does  not  this 
evince  thai  disposition  has  more  to  do  with  the  matter  than  reason.  The 
Jews,  because  they  did  not  deal  faithfully  with  prophecy,  were  pronounced 
by  Jesus  Himself  guilty  of  hypocrisy,  and  how  narrowly  some  escape  the 
same  censure  is  evidenced  by  the  manner  in  which  they  employ  it.  Surely 
it  is  no  small  matter  to  have  the  prophets,  all  testifying  to  this  Kingdom, 
in  our  hands  ;  and  God  justly  holds  us  accountable  for  the  manner  in  which 
we  receive  and  understand  them.  This  He  does,  not  because  of  the  mysti- 
cal, spiritual,  rationalistic  senses  which  must  be  learned  in  the  writings 
of  men,  but,  because  the  unequivocal  sense  brought  out  by  the  generally 
received  laws  of  language,  is  the  one  accessible  to  all.  We  ere  not  required 
to  wade  through  the  volumes  of  the  Schoolmen,  the  folios  of  Swedenborg, 
etc.,  to  find  out  the  meaning  of  the  prophets,  the  Word — it  is  found  upon 
its  very  surface.  Therefore  it  is,  that  notwithstanding  the  plain  predic- 
tions of  unbelief  in  this  Kingdom,  its  mode  of  re-establishment  by  the  per- 
sonal Advent,  etc.,  the  Kingdom  itself  (caused  either  by  a  neglect  or  per- 
version of  the  prophecies  and  the  testimony  given)  will  be  preceded  by  a 
general  incredulity  for  which  God  will  hold  men  strictly  responsible,  as 
evidenced  by  the  outgoings  of  His  wrath  at  that  period.  It  is  in  view  of 
this  (aside  from  the  personal  honor  and  happiness,  the  special  promises  to, 
and  blessings  bestowed  upon  believers)  that  we  should  give  this  testimony 
due  and  most  candid  examination,  without  allowing  the  reproaches  or 
theories  of  men  to  affect  our  judgment,  lest,  pcradventure,  we  find  our- 
selves answerable  for  a  faith  which  God  will  not  recognize  as  a  proper  one. 
In  such  an  investigation  every  step  should  be  founded  upon  Scripture,  not 
upon  isolated  passages  from  which  inferences  can  be  wrongfully  drawn, 
but  upon  the  general  connection  as  found  in  covenant,  history,  prophecy, 
preaching,  fulfilment,  etc.,  lest  in  making  our  deductions  we  be  found  to  be 
"  wise  in  our  own  eyes  and  prudent  in  our  own  sight."  The  question  to  be 
decided,  is  not  what' the  Bible  may  mean,  what  it  ought  to  mean,  what  this  or 


Prop.  177.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  241 

that  church  says  it  means,  but  what  it  really  and  honestly  means  ;  and 
this  of  course  again  involves  the  principle  of  interpretation  as  fundamental 
which  is  the  basis  of  our  doctrine,  otherwise  the  Book  may  assume  any 
shape,  any  meaning  at  the  pleasure  of  the  Interpreter.  The  inspiration 
(not  of  a  recondite  but)  of  the  plain  sense  of  the  Bible  is  with  us  an  estab- 
lished fact  (proven  by  the  Divine  Unity,  etc.)  and  upon  it  we  advance,  in 
confirmation  of  our  doctrinal  position,  chapter  and  verse,  confidently  rely- 
ing upon  what  it  teaches.  That  a  sense,  not  contained  in  the  express  lan- 
guage (as  e.g.  converting  David's  throne  into  the  Father's  in  the  third 
heaven,  etc.)  is  inspired,  must  first  be  proven.  Warned  that  men  will 
reject  the  truth,  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine,  will  turn  to  fables  etc., 
we  are  gratified  with  our  position,  which  accords  with  the  charge  made  by 
Paul  to  Timothy  (2  Tim.  4  :  1-5,  see  entire  connection)  that  he  should  be 
faithful  to  the  Word  because  of  Christ's  "  appearing  and  Kingdom"  when 
He  comes  to  judge  "  the  quick  and  the  dead."  Thus  cautioned,  we  cling 
the  closer  to  "His  appearing  and  Kingdom,"  and  proclaim  the  Word  in  its 
light,  persistently  refusing  all  that  may  interfere  with  this  relationship. 
This  "  appearing"  and  the  Kingdom  following,  as  Dr.  Auberlen  justly 
remarks,  "  does  not  rest  upon  isolated  passages,  but  is  essential  to  a  right 
understanding  of  the  entire  body  of  the  Old  Test.,  and  is  the  fundamental 
idea  of  the  New,  in  which  the  sum  and  substance  of  Messianic  Prophecy  is 
concentrated."  It  may  be  that  such  a  course  may  result  in  others  calling 
us  "  alarmists,"  "  croakers"  (although  none  are  more  cheerful  and  hope- 
ful in  faith  than  such  believers)  because  of  the  attitude  of  protest  against 
the  worldly  spirit,  of  warning  against  unbelief  and  its  sure  tendency,  of 
entreaty  against  the  danger  incurred,  of  great  hope  only  in  Christ's  Com- 
ing, etc.,  but  we  are  satisfied  if  it  secures  from  the  Saviour  the  approval 
and  blessing  of  the  watching  servant  (e.g.  Luke  12  :  37-49,  etc.),  the  des- 
ignation of  "  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  CltrisV  (1  Tim.  4  :  G,  context),  the 
removal  of  unfaithfulness  (Ezek.  33  :  0,  etc.),  the  bestowal  of  blamelessness 
(1  Cor.  1  :  5-8),  etc. 

1  See  Elliott's  Apoc,  Taylor's  Voice  of  the  Church,  Brookes's  El.  Proph.  Interpretation, 
Bickersteth's  Guide,  Seiss's  Last  Times,  App.,  Shimeall's  Reply  in  Prof.  Shedd,  etc.,  for  long 
lists  of  eminent  names  in  the  Church,  European,  American,  etc.  Compare  also  our  own 
extended  and  detailed  list  given  under  Prop.  78  and  preceding  ones. 

Obs.  12.  While  it  is  unnecessary  to  exhibit  in  detail  the  declining  of 
faith  —  so  triumphantly  paraded  by  one  party,  so  sadly  lamented  by 
another,  so  weakly  denied  against  existing  facts  by  still  another  class — it 
may  be  in  place  to  illustrate  out  of  the  abundant  material,  by  a  recent  and 
striking  case,  the  practical  workings  of  unbelief.  Let  us  take,  for  example, 
a  work  (already  alluded  to,  being  highly  indorsed)  John,  or  the  Apocalypse 
of  the  New  Testament,  by  Rev.  Desprez.  This  is  a  singular  book,  owing 
to  its  copious  concessions  to  our  doctrine  up  to  a  certain  point,  and  then  to 
its  sudden  turning  to  unbelief,  casting  itself  into  the  embraces  of  a  de- 
structive criticism.  The  honesty  and  candor  of  the  writer  is  conspicuously 
displayed  in  numerous  statements,  and  affords  in  consequence  painful 
evidence,  in  its  contrasts,  of  the  influence  of  no  faith  in  Divine  utterances. 
The  author  fully  sustains  our  position,  and  proclaims  it  incontrovertible, 
that  our  doctrine  is  fully  and  explicitly  taught  in  the  Gospels,  Acts, 
Epistles,  and  Apocalypse  ;  that  it  was  held  by  "  the  first  two  or  three 
centuries,''''  that  it  is  so  interwoven  in  the  New  Test,  and  so  incorporated 


242  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  177. 

with  motives  to  obedience,  salvation,  etc.,  with  every  form  of  Christian 
expectation,  hope,  doctrine,  etc.,  that  it  cannot  be  denied  by  lawful  inter- 
pretation, exegesis,  reasoning,  and  attention  to  facts.  Although  hostile  to 
our  views,  he  fully,  freely,  unreservedly  admits  that  they  exist  in  the  Word 
just  as  we  claim,  and  that  we  cannot  be  confuted  from  the  standpoint  of 
Scripture  or  history.  He  takes  precisely  the  same  view  of  the  early 
preaching  of  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom"  that  we  advocate  in  tins  work, 
and  asserts  it  to  be  impregnable,  etc.  Finding  our  doctrine  so  firmly  fixed 
in  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  Word  and  in  the  history  of  these  times  ; 
ascertaining  by  examination  and  comparison  that  it  cannot  be  logically 
and  consistently  eradicated,  being  part  of  the  Bible  itself,  he  coolly,  most 
deliberately  proposes,  in  the  spirit  of  the  Tubingen  school,  to  cut  out  of  the 
Scriptures  all  that  pertains  to  this  doctrine,  on  the  ground,  that  such  a 
Kingdom  never  was  realized  as  preached  and  believed  in,  and  hence  cannot 
possibly  be  true.  Even  words  put  into  the  mouth  of  Jesus  (as  e.g.  Matt. 
24  ;  Mark  13  ;  Luke  21,  etc.)  must  be  discarded  or  else,  because  the  events 
spoken  of  did  not  soon  after  take  place,  Jesus  is  convicted  of  error.  What 
a  destructive  theory  !  Suppose  all  the  allusions,  references,  direct  teach- 
ings, etc.,  upon  the  subject  are  removed  (being  incorporated  with  and  per- 
meating the  New  Test,  as  he  admits)  what  is  left  of  the  New  Test.,  and 
what  becomes  of  the  authenticity,  credibility,  and  inspiration  of  the  Apos- 
tles ?  Does  not  the  whole  Bible  then  become  what  he  pronounces,  from 
his  sweeping  procedure,  the  Apocalypse  to  be  "  a  grand  chimera  of  the 
approaching  Kingdom  of  God" — "  the  offshoots  of  a  pious  yet  wayward 
imagination,  the  creations  of  a  loving,  trustful,  yet  fevered  and  heated 
brain''' '?  The  New  is  based  upon  the  Old  Testament,  and  this  criticism 
sweeps  away  the  Covenant  that  God  swore  should  be  fulfilled  ;  blasts  like  a 
simoon  the  inspiration  of  prophets  ;  convicts  the  apostles,  or  at  least  the 
writers,  of  gross  error,  weakness,  and  imposition,  and  naturally  leads 
(because  this  and  that  is  not  true)  to  a  rejection  of  the  whole.  What  reli- 
ance can  be  placed  in  a  Book,  which  then  (according  to  this  author)  con- 
tains such  palpable  falsehoods,  which  misguided  multitudes  by  shameful 
fabrications,  and  which  is  crowded  from  beginning  to  end  with  fiction  and 
untruth.  This  distructive  work,  this  effort  to  get  rid  of  our  doctrine  is 
not  the  performance  of  Strauss,  Bauer  and  Kenan,  but  of  a  clergyman  of 
the  Church  of  England,  indorsed  by  high  names  in  England  and  this 
country.  It  is  simply  the  judgment  of  this  writer  that  our  doctrine  is  a 
mistake  ;  and  as  it  cannot  be  logically  taken  out  of  the  Bible,  every  portion 
containing  it  must  be  rejected  as  unworthy  of  credence.  But  let  us  remind 
him,  his  indorsers  and  readers,  that  our  doctrine  haa  other  evidences  be- 
sides those  which  he  produces.  These  are  stubborn  facts  which  cannot  be 
set  aside,  and  which  prove  that  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  knew  of 
the  things  which  they  affirmed.  Look  at  this  covenanted  Kingdom  as  it 
once  existed,  as  it  ivas  overthrown,  and  then  notice  how  the  prophecies  em- 
brace that  which  was  and  is  a  reality.  Trace  the  historical  connection  and 
behold  the  fulfilment.  Then  notice,  what  Desprez  takes  wrongfully  for 
granted,  that  Jesus  and  none  of  the  Apostles  teach  that  the  Kingdom  shall 
be  immediately  set  up,  but  that  they  unite  in  locating  it  indefinitely 
in  the  future  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  Especially  observe,  that  the  first  preach- 
ing of  the  Kingdom  was  conditioned  by  the  repentance  of  the  Jews,  and 
that  Scripture  and  history  attest  that  the  nation  did  not  repent,  and  that 
as  a  result  of  non-repentance  the  Kingdom  was  expressly  withdrawn  and 


Prop.  177.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  243 

postponed  during  a  period  called  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles."  The  dura- 
tion of  this  era  is  dependent  upon  the  gathering  out  of  an  elect  people, 
while  the  evidence  of  such  postponement  is  found  in  the  express  language 
of  Jesus  (see  for  proof  Props.  58,  66,  67,  68,  etc.)  conveniently  overlooked 
by  the  author,  in  the  terrible  fall  and  continued  scattered  (yet  preserved) 
state  of  the  Jewish  nation,  in  the  Gentiles  treading  dowu  Jerusalem,  in  tha 
establishment  of  the  Church  and  the  gathering  out  of  a  people.  Such  evi- 
dences accumulated  for  many  centuries,  the  positive  outgrowth  of  the  post- 
poned Theocratic  Plan,  and  yet  in  some  respects  preparatory  to  its  accom- 
plishment, must  have  their  due  weight  in  deciding  upon  the  credibility, 
etc.,  of  the  writers  of  the  Bible,  and  yet  in  the  entire  argument  this  author 
most  carefully  avoids  them,  just  as  if  they  had  no  existence.  Surely  before 
judging  in  so  important  a  matter,  prudence,  if  not  wisdom,  ought  to 
suggest  the  reception  of  the  entire  testimony,  without  the  suppression  of 
the  leading,  essential  part  which  gives  the  key  to  the  understanding  of  the 
remarkable  change  in  the  offer  of  this  Kingdom,  and  of  the  reason  why  it 
was  not  established.  While  the  book  cannot  injure  a  believer  in  the  doc- 
trine, yet  it  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  others  who  cannot  detect  the  fallacy 
underlying  its  argumentation.  Yea,  more,  forming  an  opinion  from  a 
comparison  of  prophecies  relating  to  the  last  times,  it  seems  more  than 
probable,  that  the  method  by  which  multitudes  will  refuse  faith  in  the 
Coming  Kingdom,  is  indicated  in  the  manner  and  style  employed  by  the 
author,  involving  a  denial  of  "  the  blessed  hope,"  the  inheritance  of  David's 
Son,  and  the  faith  and  hope  of  apostles,  martyrs,  confessors,  and  others. 

One  of  the  editors  of  the  Proph.  Times,  Nov.,  1870,  in  a  just  criticism  of  this  work, 
aptly  remarks  in  the  language  of  another  :  "  It  is  a  rule  with  me,  the  more  I  hear  people 
deny  the  Coming  of  Christ,  the  day  of  judgment,  and  the  conflagration,  with  other 
things  of  the  like  nature,  the  more  to  hold  on  to  them,  for  their  denial  is  to  me  one  of 
the  highest  proofs  of  the  certainty  of  those  events."  There  is  profound  wisdom  in  this 
remark,  for  such  denial  is  predicted  ami,  as  God's  Word  is  truth  and  every  "jot  and 
tittle"  shall  be  fulfilled,  it  is  the  most  reasonable  thing  in  the  world  to  expect,  as  confirma- 
tory both  of  inspiration  and  our  faith,  just  such  works  as  Desprez's,  and  just  such  efforts 
as  the  Tubingen  school  puts  forth,  and  just  such  opposition  to  our  doctrine  as  the  Church 
and  world  presents.  A  general  unbelief,  involving  a  denial  of  the  Advent  and  Kingdom, 
is  most  certainly  predicted  ;  certainly  then  the  state  of  Christendom  rapidly  drifting 
through  such  labors  into  such  a  state,  should  strengthen,  and  not  weaken  our  faith  in  the 
Word,  which  thus  proves  its  own  inspiration  in  describing  these  teachers  of  unbelief  and 
their  success.  Simple  faith  in  what  God  says  is  the  best  protection  against  all  such 
efforts,  and  in  this  fortunately  unlearned  are  as  well  protected  as  the  most  learned. 

Obs.  13.  Will  our  opponents  receive  in  all  kindness  some  suggestions  of 
the  mode  of  argumentation  that  is  required  to  fairly  meet  our  doctrinal  posi- 
tion. We  desire  light  ;  and  if  we  point  out  what  difficulties  are  to  be 
explained,  and  what  objections  are  to  be  removed,  it  may  enable  some  one 
to  deal  with  the  subject  in  a  way  thaji  will  at  least  commend  itself  to  us  as 
a  sincere  and  honest  method  of  answering  us.  The  works  issued  against  us 
thus  far,  will  never  influence  a  single  believer  in  our  doctrine  (however 
much  they  may  establish  unbelievers)  for  the  reason  that  in  many  cases 
they  do  not  answer  the  objections  urged  against  them  by  us  in  the  interpre- 
tation of  Scripture,  but  chiefly  confine  themselves  to  their  own  interpreta- 
tion, and  then  take  it  for  granted  that  we  are  answered.  We  on  the  other 
hand,  give  fearlessly  our  own  and  theirs,  and  compare  them.  Take  e.g.  the 
struggle  over  Kev.  20  :  4,  5,  6, — now  in  every  exposition  of  theirs  we  are 


244  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PliOP.  177. 

told  that  "  souls"  cannot  possibly  mean  persons,  etc.,  and  no  notice  is 
taken  of  the  proof  to  the  contrary  alleged  by  us.  Indeed  their  exegetieal 
comments  are  given  on  the  passage  without  venturing  to  contrast  ours 
alongside  of  it,  for  fear  of  exposing  their  own  weakness.  On  the  other  hand 
our  leading  expositions  boldly  contrast  the  two,  and  show  by  the  very  con- 
trast which  is  most  worthy  of  credence.  This  line  of  thought  was  suggested 
by  the  fact  too,  that  all  the  recent  works  contain  without  exception  the  same 
formula  of  proof  without  the  least  effort  to  show  in  what  respect  our  interpre- 
tation of  Scripture  is  defective,  saving  only  that  it  does  not  correspond  with 
their  own.  It  was  reasonably  expected  that  such  a  writer  as  Dr.  Hodge,  es- 
pecially in  view  of  the  opinions  of  prominent  men  in  his  own  denomina- 
tion, would  meet  the  cjuestions  at  issue  in  his  Sys.  Theology  in  a  new  and 
interesting  manner,  but  to  the  surprise  and  disappointment  of  not  a  few, 
he  gives  but  a  reproduction  (unworthy  of  his  ability)  of  Dr.  Brown's 
Christ's  Sec.  Coming,  and  Barnes's  Revelation.  Let  it  be  understood  by  all 
that  the  old  and  oft-repeated  statement  (harmless  to  us,  but  perhaps 
weighty  to  the  ignorant)  that  Rev.  20  contains  the  foundation  (some  say  the 
only  recital)  of  our  doctrine  must  be  proven  or  recalled.  Mere  assertion — 
in  the  face  of  the  early  Church,  and  all  believers  since,  apjicaling  to  the 
covenants  and  prophecies,  to  the  gospels  and  epistles  as  containing  the 
doctrine — cannot  produce  conviction  ;  the  mere  distinctive  mention  of  the 
one  thousand  years  (measuring  the  interval  between  the  two  lesurrections 
and  the  binding  of  Satan)  or  of  the  resurrection  and  reigning  of  the  saints 
(for  these  are  contained  in  other  Scriptures)  does  not  make  it  such.  Our 
appeal,  with  Barnabas  and  all  other  Millenaiiaus,  for  our  foundation  is  in 
the  covenanted  Theocratic  Kingdom.  To  show  that  we  are  fundamentally 
incorrect,  to  get  at  the  root  of  our  doctrine,  let  them  go  to  the  Davidic 
Covenant  and  prove  that  the  grammatical  sense  of  that  covenant  is  not 
'meant;  that  another  meaning  is  to  be  engrafted  upon  it  ;  that  they  have 
an  express  authoritative  Scripture  for  making  such  an  alteration  ;  and  that 
a  covenant  sioom  to  be  fulfilled  can  be  ignored  or  explained  away.  Let  our  op- 
ponents, in  this  connection,  proceed  to  indicate  how  we  are  wrong  in  cleav- 
ing to  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  Bible  in  doctrine  ;  and,  if  wrong,  let 
them  produce  the  unvarying  rules  of  a  spiritual  or  Origenistic  interpreta- 
tion to  be  a  guide  to  us  so  as  not  to  leave  us  at  the  pleasure  of  the  expositor. 
The  common  resort,  when  we  bring  forward  the  grammatical  sense,  is  to 
pronounce  it  wrong,  then  to  assert  that  it  may  have  another  meaning,  and 
adopt  the  latter  without  first  showing  that  it  is  the  true  meaning,  the  very 
tiling  at  issue.  If  the  spiritual  interpretation  is  safe  and  reliable,  then  it 
certainly  ought  to  have  fixed,  definite  rules,  accessible  to  all,  by  which  we 
can  be  governed  and  protected  from  error.  Where  are  they,  and  who  will 
la y  them  doivn?  Our  rules  can  be  found  in  every  grammar  and  rhetoric, 
and  are  common  to  all  languages.  In  addition,  let  such  inform  us  why  the 
covenant  does  not  yet  specially  pertain  to  the  Jewish  nation  ;  why  it  is  not 
still  the  elect  nation  owing  to  its  Theocratic  relationship,  and  why  the  proph- 
ecies, which  declare  that  the  fallen,  ruined,  scattered  but  still  preserved 
nation  shall  ultimately  be  restored  to  its  lofty  Theocratic  position  with  the 
Gentiles  engrafted,  shall  not  be  fulfilled.  Let  them  inform  us  by  what 
process  they  can  logically  apply  predictions  given  exclusively  (as  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  curses  evince)  to  the  Jews — and  which  declare  that  the  iden- 
tical people,  land,  and  capital  afflicted,  oppressed,  and  downtrodden,  shall 


PlJOP.  177.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  245 

be  restored  again  under  Messiah's  reign  in  the  re-established  throne  and 
Kingdom  of  David — to  the  Gentiles  in  their  Church  relationship.  Will  they 
point  out  by  what  authority  they  divide  Millennial  descriptions  of  this  King- 
dom, and  refuse  credence  to  a  literal  resurrection  joined  with  them  when 
Paul  expressly  quotes  them  and  locates  the  resurrection  of  the  saints  at 
that  period,  as  e.g.  1  Cor.  15  :  54?  Will  they  tell  us  why  the  most  of  them 
admit  two  literal  resurrections  under  the  last  trumpet  (as  in  1  Cor.  15  and 
Rev.  11  :  18),  and  refuse  to  believe  in  the  portrayal  of  another  (Rev.  20  :  4, 
5,  6)  under  the  same  trumpet ;  and  why  the  same  word  used  in  the  last 
passage  named,  to  denote  the  corporeal  resurrection  of  Jesus  is  not  adapted 
to  mean  that  of  His  followers  in  the  same  sense?  Will  they  attempt  to 
reconcile,  without  degrading  them,  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist,  of 
the  disciples,  of  the  early  Church,  with  their  theory  of  the  Kingdom?  It 
would  afford  us  great  pleasure  to  see  it  tried  without  involving  them, 
although  specially  sent  forth  and  supported,  in  error.  Can  they  explain 
Acts  1  :  G  consistently  with  the  previous  preaching  of  the  Kingdom,  and 
with  the  subsequent  faith  of  the  churches  under  the  preaching  of  the  same 
apostles.  Will  they  inform  us  how  it  was  passible  for  inspired  men  to  be- 
lieve in  the  Kingdom  as  now  upheld,  when  their  constant  expressed  hope 
was  in  the  Advent  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  Kingdom,  for  which  they  ex- 
horted all  believers  to  look,  pray,  and  watch.  Instead  of  simply  clinging 
to  the  Popish  view  of  the  judgment  and  judgment  day  and  insist  from  it 
that  they  are  right,  will  they  follow  our  scriptural  proof  as  to  the  meaning 
and  representations  of  these,  and  show  that  we  are  wrong,  and  wherein  our 
argument  is  defective?  This  is  the  more  important  since  Brown,  Barnes, 
Hodge,  etc.,  reiterate  the  old  objection  without  the  least  attempt  to  prove 
that  their  interpretation  is  correct,  or  that  ours  is  erroneous.  To  test  the 
matter  between  us,  will  they  inform  us  whether  our  application  of  the  fire 
in  Matt.  25  :  41,  to  the  lake  of  tire  in  Rev.  19  :  20  (comp.  after  Millennial 
era,  Rev.  20  :  10)  is  incorrect,  and  if  so,  why  erroneous  ?  (Here  is  suggested 
the  cause  of  just  complaint  upon  our  side,  viz.,  that  reasons  assigned  why 
certain  passages — test  ones  between  us  as  the  one  now  indicated — are  to  be 
understood  in  a  certain  sense  and  assigned  to  a  certain  period  of  time,  are 
entirely  ignored,  and  the  passages  triumphantly  claimed,  as  if  such  reasons 
ivere  never  repeatedly  presented  and  urged.  On  the  other  hand,  no  reason 
has  been  given  by  them,  but  what  has  also  been  duly  considered  by 
Millenarians.  While  some  of  us  may  have  been  more  or  less  guilty  of  the 
same  procedure,  yet,  as  a  perusal  of  our  leading  works  on  our  side  abun- 
dantly evidence,  the  rule  is  to  acknowledge  and  reply  to  all  the  reasons 
given  by  our  opponents  either  in  general  or  in  particulars.  Feeling  the 
solidity  and  importance  of  our  doctrine,  we  are  only  too  anxious  to  meet, 
for  the  sake  of  inquirers  and  others,  the  proof  given  for  interpretation  and 
application  of  texts,  etc.  Common  justice  in  argumentation,  aside  from 
other  considerations,  demands  this,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  it  may  be 
more  practised.)  Will  they  tell  us  what  Coming  of  the  Lord  and  saints  is 
denoted  in  Zech.  14  :  5,  and  hotv  this  Coming  nan  be  reconciled  with  the 
remainder  of  the  chapter  ;  what  Coming  is  meant  in  2  Thess.  2  :  8,  and  how 
this  Advent  and  the  context  can  be  made  to  correspond  with  a  previ- 
ous Millennial  period  ;  how  the  Coming  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  the 
utter  destruction  of  the  wicked,  and  the  exaltation  of  the  righteous  in  Mai. 
4  :  1-3  can  be  reconciled  with  their  interpretation  of  numerous  passages, 


216  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.   177. 

as  e.g.  the  parable  of  the  tares  and  wheat ;  how  the  Advent  of  the  Lord  in 
Hab.  3  can  be  transformed  into  a  Coming  of  God  to  deliver  the  Israelites 
out  of  Egypt,  etc.,  tvhen  the  prophet  in  verse  16  expressly  locates  it  in  the 
future  ;  how  the  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,  Matt.  21  :  29,  30,  "immedi- 
ately after''''  the  tribulation  spoken  of  can  be  a  Coming  before  the  same  ; 
how  even  the  Coming  of  a  man  can  be  a  spiritual  Coming,  etc.?  Will  they 
prove  that  there  is  no  priority  in  the  resurrection,  in  the  judgment,  in  the 
gathering  of  the  elect,  in  the  position  of  nations  in  the  Kingdom  ;  that 
they  understand  the  ordinary  use  of  language  better  (see  many  comments 
on  Rev.  20,  and  the  declarations  that  it  "  cannot  possibly  mean''1  what  we 
contend  for)  than  men  who  wrote  and  spoke  it  as  the  early  Church  ;  that 
Christ's  Second  Advent,  instead  of  fulfilling  the  Scriptures  in  bringing 
salvation,  through  a  glorious  Kingdom,  to  saints  and  nations,  really 
"  exhausts  the  object  of  the  Scriptures  ;"  that  the  unchanging  Priesthood  of 
Christ  comes  to  an  end  at  the  Sec.  Advent?  In  advocating  the  ending  of 
the  Kingdom  given  to  Jesus  Christ,  will  they  tell  us  what  to  do  with  the 
passages  predicting  its  perpetuity  ;  in  applying  Isa.  G3  :  1-6  to  the  First 
Advent,  will  they  explain  how  this  blood,  etc.,  of  His  enemies  can  be 
transmuted  into  His  own  blood  ;  in  interpreting  Dan.  7,  will  they  inform 
us  by  what  reasoning  they  make  the  Coming  of  "  the  Son  of  Man"  to  pre- 
cede the  divided  form  of  the  Roman  Empire,  the  rise  of  the  horns  and  the 
little  horn  ;  in  postponing  the  Second  Advent  until  after  the  definite 
Millennial  era  still  future,  will  they  show  hoio  it  is  possible  to  occupy  the 
posture  commanded  of  looking,  watching,  and  praying  for  that  Advent ;  in 
asserting  that  the  Old  Testament  must  only  be  viewed  through  the  New, 
will  they  teach  us*  why  this  is  preferable  to  our  saying  that  Old  and 
New  (containing  the  Will  of  God)  must  be  considered  as  embracing  a  whole 
so  that  one  serves  to  illustrate  the  other  ;x  in  adverting  to  differences 
(although  in  essentials  a  unit,  viz.,  as  to  the  covenanted  Kingdom)  of 
opinion  on  some  points  as  an  objection  to  the  doctrine  itself,  will  they 
make  known  to  us  why  such  a  rule  of  judgment  should  not  be  even  more 
applicable  to  themselves,  seeing  that  they  cannot  agree  in  defining  the  King- 
dom? If  the  mixed  condition  of  the  Church,  if  the  Antichrist] an  powers, 
are  to  exist  down  to  the  very  Advent,  let  them  inform  us  how  the  Millennial 
descriptions  that  "  all  shall  be  righteous,"  etc.,  can  be  realized  before  that 
Advent ;  if  all  the  blessings  forfeited  by  sin  are  not  restored,  can  they  tell 
us  in  what  the  completeness  of  restoration  and  restitution  consists  ? 
These  and  similar  questions  we  earnestly  desire  to  be  answered  and  to  be 
answered  by  a  direct  (not  inferential)  appeal  to  Scripture,  and  to  the 
same  grammatical  sense  (unless  this  is  shown  to  be  invalid)  which  they 
employ  to  sustain  other  great,  cardinal  doctrines  of  the  Word.  They  de- 
fend the  birth,  life,  death,  etc.,  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  rest  of  the  doc- 
trines of  Salvation,  the  character,  attributes,  etc.,  of  God,  the  sinfulness  of 
man  and  necessity  for  Redemption,  etc.,  by  this  sense  ;  they  deem  their 
position  on  any  other  point  impregnable  if  sustained  by  this  sense,  and  hence 
when  we  find  ourselves  so  amply  sustained  by  it,  we  are  justified  in  main- 
taining  it  until  it  is  clearly  made  manifest  that  this  sense  opposes  our 
doctrine.1 

1  Dr.  Fairbairn  and  a  few  others  form  an  exception  here  since  they  believe,  with  us, 
that  the  Divine  Purpose  of  God  relating  to  the  future  is  to  be  ascertained  through  the 
prophecies  of  Old  and  New. 


PKOP.  177.]  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  247 

2  "We  present  the  following  as  a  fair  specimen  of  the  style  of  argumentation  adopted  : 
Dr.  Swartz  (Lulh.  Observer,  Feb.  10th,  1882)  insists  that  the  world  is  far  better  and  cannot 
possibly  fall  back  into  its  old  sins,  as  follows  :  "  Those  pessimist  Millenarians  who  are 
evermore  prophesying  evil  days,  and  are  telling  the  world  that  before  the  Millennium  it 
will  be  as  in  the  days  of  Noah,  prophesy  of  evils  which  Christianity  has  made  impossible." 
Then  Jesus  and  His  Apostles  were  also  "  pessimists,"  and  grossly  mistook  the  design  of 
the  present  dispensation,  for  we  take  their  oicn  words  and  believe  in  them.  Ten  thousand 
just  as  unscriptural  declarations  are  popularly  proclaimed  and  received,  indicative  of  the 
prevailing  lack  of  faith  in  some  of  the  plainest  teachings  of  the  Word. 


248  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  178. 


Peopositioist  178.  Tliis  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  and  its  essen- 
tially related  subjects,  are  so  hostile  to  their  faith,  that  numerous 
organized  religious  bodies  totcdly  reject  them. 

These  doctrines,  once  so  precious  to  the  early  Church,  have  not, 
and  cannot  have,  a  place  in  their  expressed  systems  of  belief. 
Simple  consistency  forbids  their  incorporation,  seeing  that  they 
stand  opposed  to  their  fundamental  tenets  respecting  the  covenants, 
the  Christ,  the  Church,  Redemption,  etc.  (comp.  previous  Prop.). 

Ols.  1.  While  in  the  aggregate  Pre-Millenarians  form  a  respectable  body, 
and  are  found  (as  e.g.  evidenced  in  the  Proph.  Conferences  in  England 
and  America)  in  various  denominations,  yet  in  comparison  with  the  im- 
mense body  which  rejects  our  doctrine  they  form  a  small  minority,  thus 
according  with  the  Spirit's  prediction.  The  fact  is,  that  large  religious 
organizations  exclude  it  from  their  respective  systems  of  faith  ;  that  many 
sects  condemn  it  as  "  an  exploded  superstition  ;"  and  that  even  those  who 
may  tolerate  it  in  individual  believers,  as  a  body  do  not  give  it  any  official 
sanction,  but  rather  seek  to  crush  it.  Works  on  Systematic  Theology,  de- 
signed for  general  guidance,  either  entirely  omit  any  references  to  our  doc- 
trine, or,  if  mentioned,  give  it  in  a  brief  mutilated  form  with  a  lengthy 
rejoinder,  without  allowing  our  main  reasons  to  appear. 

From  Romanism,  Unitarianism,  Universalism,  etc.,  we  can  only  anticipate  a  decided 
rejection,  but  from  none  of  these  have  originated  works  specially  directed  against  our 
doctrine.  It  is  in  the  Presbyterian,  Reformed,  Lutheran,  Episcopal,  Methodist,  Baptist, 
and  Congregationalist  communities  that  we  find  the  authors  who  devote  themselves  to  a 
persistent  and  bitter  attack  upon  us.  Reference  is  frequently  made  to  such  in  the  pres- 
ent work,  and  to  the  arguments  employed.  Some  of  the  doctrines  thus  rejected  may  be 
briefly  enumerated  ;•  no  faith  in  the  Kingdom  as  covenanted  and  predicted  (must  be 
spiritualized)  ;  no  faith  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant  (unless  spiritualized)  ;  no  faith  in  the 
everlasting  Davidic  covenant  (excepting  in  the  seed  promised)  ;  no  faith  in  a  Pre-Mill. 
Sec.  Advent  ;  no  faith  in  the  signs  preceding  the  Advent  ;  no  faith  in  the  announced 
design  of  this  dispensation  ;  no  faith  in  the  delineations  of  the  Church  ;  no  faith  in  the 
hopes  and  expectations  of  pious  Jews  ;  no  faith  in  the  preaching  of  the  disciples  ;  no 
faith  in  the  teaching  of  the  primitive  Church  ;  no  faith  in  the  postponement  of  the 
Kingdom  to  the  Second  Advent  (the  Church  being  substituted)  ;  no  faith  in  the  predic- 
tions relating  to  the  Jewish  nations  (the  blessings  promised  to  it  being  duly  appropriated 
and  the  curses  left  to  it)  ;  no  faith  in  the  inheritance  of  David's  Son,  in  a  Pre-Mill.  resur- 
rection and  translation,  in  the  saint's  inheritance,  in  the  personal  agency  of  Jesus  to 
introduce  Mill,  blessedness,  the  reign  of  the  Christ  and  His  saints  on  earth,  in  the 
complete  restoration  of  all  forfeited  blessings,  in  the  proper  Judgeship,  Judgment  Day, 
World  to  Come,  Day  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  etc.  ;  in  brief,  no  faith  in  "  the  things  of  the 
Kingdom,"  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom." 

Obs.  2.  Under  the  plea  of  Church  authority  (by  which  is  understood 
the  confessional  standards,  or  the  utterances  of  distinguished  writers,  etc.) 
our  doctrine  is  repudiated  because  at  variance  with  the  systems  of  faith 


Prop.  178.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  249 

elaborated.  And  this  is  the  more  amazing  when  these  same  advocates  of 
the  alleged  faith  of  the  Church  pass  by  as  unworthy  of  credence,  and  as 
utterly  unauthoritative,  the  expressed  belief  of  the  Apostolic  and  Primitive 
Church.  Surely  if  Church  authority  has  any  special  weight  in  establish- 
ing the  true  faith,  it  certainly  ought  to  be  found  in  the  Church  which  had 
the  advantage  of  the  teaching  of  the  apostles,  elders,  and  their  immediate 
successors. 

Even  the  views  of  Reformers  (as  Luther,  Calvin,  etc.)  are  deliberately  ignored  or 
denied,  as  illustrated  by  us  in  the  history  of  the  doctrine.  There  is  a  disposition  in 
many  never  to  receive  a  doctrine  unless  certain  favorite  writers  also  receive  it.  Thus 
thousands  reject  Millenarianism  simply  because  learned  men,  in  whom  they  repose  confi- 
dence, refuse  to  accept  of  it.  Thus  imitating  the  multitude  at  the  First  Advent,  who  fol- 
lowed the  lead  of  the  Pharisees,  Scribes,  and  Rulers.  To  realize  the  prediction  that  the 
Church  shall  have  no  faith  in  Christ's  Coming,  it  is  requisite  that  the  leaders  of  the 
people  should,  by  precept  and  example,  pave  the  way.     This,  alas,  is  done. 

Obs.  3.  Ecclesiastical  bodies  in  their  general  meetings  totally  ignore  the 
commanded  posture  of  watching.  Indeed  if  any  one  should  have  the 
temerity  to  offer  a  resolution  recommending  the  Scripture  attitude,  and  pre- 
senting the  imminency  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  he  would  be  ridiculed  by  the 
large  majority.  The  tender  of  such  a  resolution,  or  one  in  reference  to  the 
covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom,  would  be  offensive,  since  the  spirit,  busi- 
ness, and  tendency  of  such  meetings,  confidently  look  for  perpetuity,  con- 
tinued prosperity,  the  conversion  of  the  world,  an  extension  of  a  present 
Messianic  Kingdom  through  their  instrumentality. 

The  general  meetings  of  denominations  are,  almost  always,  introduced  and  enforced 
by  unscriptural  Post-ilillennial  appeals.  To  enforce  these.  Scripture  is  wrested  from  its 
connection  and  confidently  quoted.  Thus  to  illustrate  :  Dr.  Ort,  as  President,  in  open- 
ing the  General  Synod  (of  1879,  Evang.  Luth.  Church),  presses  into  his  service,  to  sup- 
port his  Whitbyan  predictions,  Isa.  63  as  follows  :  "  When  we  see  Him  coming  from  Edom 
and  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah,  glorious  in  apparel  and  travelling  in  the  greatness 
of  His  strength,  speaking  in  righteousness  and  mighty  to  save— it  is  the  Missionary  of 
the  Almighty  that  we  behold."  This  may  answer  as  the  adornment  of  a  sermon  in  sound, 
but  it  is  a  perversion  of  Scripture,  applying  to  the  present  what  relates  to  the  future. 
But  this  is  common. 

Obs.  4.  One  feature  alone  evidences  the  spirit  and  aim  of  the  Church, 
and  that  is  the  endowment  system  so  largely  adopted  by  individual  congre- 
gations, synodical  bodies,  religious  organizations,  etc.  Investments  in 
real  estate,  mortgages,  bonds,  and  stocks  are  made  in  a  manner  so  declara- 
tive of  perpetuity,  of  the  Lord  delaying  Ilis  Coming,  of  faith  in  the  conver- 
sion of  the  world,  etc.,  that  it  manifests  a  wide  departure  from  the  script- 
ural injunction  and  the  primitive  belief.  These  endowments,  tending  to 
the  support  and  ease  of  many  able  men,  rivet  the  prevailing  unbelief  by  the 
personal  interest  involved  in  their  continuance.  It  is  hard  to  make  the 
sacrifices  which  the  simple  truth  demands.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the 
richer  the  endowments,  the  more  extended  the  investments,  the  less  in- 
clination is  there  to  return  to  the  early  belief  of  the  Church. 

11  the  student  will  turn  to  the  history  of  our  doctrine,  he  will  find  that  just  so  soon 
as  the  Church  arose  from  its  depressed  condition  and,  through  the  emperors  and  the  gifts 
of  the  wealthy,  possessed  large  endowments,  the  early  faith  was  discarded  as  hostile  to 
the  spirit,  condition,  and  aims  of  the  Church.  The  entire  endowment  system,  which 
directs  the  funding  of  the  principal  and  the  interest  only  to  be  expended  in  the  promo- 
tion of  some  pious  scheme,  is  based  on  the  Lord's  delaying  His  Coming.  It  is  a  worldly 
policy,  founded  on  the  idea  of  perpetuity,  introduced  into  almost  every  communion  and 


250  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  178. 

largely  practised  ;  -which  unmistakably  declares  that,  at  least  for  a  very  long  time,  there 
is  no  necessity  to  look  and  pray  for  the  Lord's  Coming.  Many  even  boast  of  this  wealth 
thus  amassed,  not  knowing,  as  God's  predictions  unmistakably  show,  that  they  are  thus 
saved  and  hoarded  up  eventually  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  terrible  persecuting  enemies 
of  the  Church.  Imagine,  if  you  can,  the  Apostles  and  the  elders  with  their  expressed 
views  concerning  the  expectant  attitude  of  believers,  asking  for  and  commending  such 
perpetual  endowments  and  investments  !  The  funded  revenues  of  many  denomina- 
tions are  a  source  of  hostility  to  our  doctrine,  seeing  that  it  protests  against  them  be- 
cause of  their  advocacy  of  perpetuity  over  against  the  commands,  cautions,  and  rebukes 
of  the  Divine  Master. 

Obs.  5.  In  many  of  our  congregations  this  doctrine  is  an  interdicted  sub- 
ject (as  the  writer  knows  from  personal  observation  and  experience),  and 
what  a  writer  (Proph.  Times,  vol.  0,  p.  17G)  confessed,  many  can  truth- 
fully declare  :  •  Although  trained  and  educated  in  the — Church,  I  know 
no  more  about  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ  and  His  reign  on  the  earth 
than  a  heathen  in  the  jungles  of  India  knows  of  the  story  of  the  Cross." 
Indeed  such  regard  the  doctrine  as  fanaticism  and  heresy,  and  do  not 
desire  their  pulpits  to  announce  the  warnings  of  Jesus,  or  to  exhibit  the 
primitive  faith  and  its  scriptural  foundations. 

Indeed,  where  pulpits  are  supplied  by  Pre-Millenarians,  efforts  are  made  to  close 
them  against  them.  A  number  of  such  cases,  including  professorships,  etc.,  have  fallen 
under  my  own  observation.  To  illustrate  the  spirit  :  The  Advance  of  Chicago  reports  the 
facts  in  a  case  which  occurred  July  14th,  1878,  in  that  city.  Dr.  Goodwin,  the  pastor 
of  the  First  Congregational  Church,  preached  a  series  of  discourses  on  the  Kingdom  of 
Christ  and  His  Sec.  Coming,  presenting  the  views  of  Moody,  etc.  At  the  close  of  the  last 
discourse,  Rev.  Hammond,  a  member,  read  a  protest  publicly— which  led  to  confusion — 
against  the  doctrines  proclaimed  as  non-spiritual,  Judaistic,  unscriptural,  discouraging  to 
prayer  and  efforts  to  convert  the  world,  multiplying  religious  croakers,  delusive,  revolu- 
tionary, etc.  "  Greybeard  "  in  his  Lay  Sermons,  No.  106,  referring  to  Christ's  Sec.  Com- 
ing and  its  preciousness,  adds  :  "  We  might  suppose,  therefore,  that  the  prospective 
'  appearing  '  of  Christ  would  form  a  prominent  feature  in  the  preaching  and  teaching  of 
the  Christian  ministry  ;  yet  there  is  no  part  of  revelation  more  habitually  overlooked  ;" 
and  he  declares  it  to  be  regarded  "either  with  indifference  or  with  positive  dread." 
Dr.  Least  (Proph.  Times,  vol.  6,  p.  144)  even  reports  two  ministers,  "who  have  been 
preaching  against  the  Pre-Millennial  Advent  from  the  text,  '  Where  is  the  promise  of  His 
Coming?'"  They  certainly  must  have  utterly  discarded  the  context,  or  else  they  were 
willing  to  be  numbered  among  the  predicted  "  scoffers. :'  While  some  have  the  hardihood 
thus  to  use  it,  many  would  gladly  do  so— have  the  inclination — if  the  reference  in  the 
context  to  the  "  scoffers' '  did  not  prevent  them,  for  they  virtually  indorse  the  question  in 
other  forms  and  answer  it  in  a  similar  manner.  Observe  e.g.  1  Thess.  5  :  2,  3,  4,  and  2 
Thess.  2  :  5,  15,  and  see  how  familiar  those  early  converts  were,  through  the  teaching  of 
an  Apostle,  with  the  things  relating  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  Brookes  (Maranatka,  p.  104) 
well  says:  "There  are  thousands  of  ordained  clergymen  at  the  present  day  who  really 
plume  themselves  on  their  profound  ignorance  of  a  truth  perfectly  familiar,  more  than 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  to  men,  women,  and  children  just  delivered  from  idolatry, 
and  who  give  as  an  excuse  for  this  ignorance  that  they  are  occupied  with  something  more 
important  than  that  which  the  inspired  Apostle  thought  it  needful  to  teach  at  the  very 
beginning  of  his  ministry  among  the  Thessalonians."  And  (p.  106)  again  he  remarks  : 
"  Can  these  things  be  of  less  importance  now,  when  the  lapse  of  eighteen  hundred  years 
has  certainly  brought  us  that  much  nearer  the  great  event  to  which  the  minds  of  the  early 
Christians  were  habitually  turned  in  eager  waiting  and  watching?  Surely  it  does  not 
become  the  disciples  of  Christ  to  speak  slightingly  of  a  truth  to  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  assigned  the  chief  place  in  the  first  communications  He  was  pleased  to  make,  no  less 
for  our  instruction,  than  for  the  benefit  of  those  to  whom  they  were  immediately  ad- 
dressed." Alas  !  what  a  marked  and  general  departure  from  the  teaching  and  attitude  of 
the  early  Church  ! 

Obs.  0.  The  religious  press,  which  has  such  a  powerful  denominational 
influence,  is  almost  en  masse  against  us.     Quarterlies,  monthlies,  weeklies, 


Prop.  178.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  251 

and  reviews  not  only  refuse  to  publish  articles  from  us,  but  delight  to  insert 
anything  that  may  cast  detraction  upon  the  doctrine.  They  cater  to  the 
taste  and  bow  to  the  influence  of  the  preponderating  majority,  and  thus 
secure  their  patronage.  It  is  felt  that  our  doctrine  is  so  antagonistic,  to 
the  prevailing  views  of  the  various  denominations,  that  the  press  avoids 
giving  our  views  in  detail,  and  contents  itself  with  presenting  articles 
opposed  to  us,  or  in  quoting  that  which  may  bring  ridicule  upon  us. 

A  few  papers  (a  rare  indulgence)  have  the  manliness  to  publish  some  articles  in  our 
favor,  and  to  such  our  thanks  are  extended.  The  late  Convention  of  Pre-Millenarians, 
held  in  Dr.  Tyng's  church.  New  York  (1878),  brought  out  the  animus  of  the  religious 
press.  It  was  joyfully  reported  that  "  it  is  a  notable  fact  that  the  religious  press  of  New 
York  City  have  given  no  welcome  or  aid  to  the  Conference  of  Second  Adventists  held  in 
that  city.  In  fact,  some  of  the  prominent  papers  have  denounced  the  whole  affair  as 
foolish  in  the  extreme,"  etc.  Dr.  Tyng  and  others  remarked  that  no  favor  could  be 
obtained  from  them.  This  is  true  almost  everywhere,  and  has  necessitated  the  publica- 
tion of  papers  and  monthlies  specially  devoted  to  the  subject.  Many  leading  and  influen- 
tial journals  utterly  refuse  the  insertion  of  a  single  article,  even  if  only  confined  to  the 
historical  questions  respecting  the  doctrine.  They  seem  to  be  afraid  of  its  antiquity,  and 
of  the  noble  array  of  advocates  in  the  past  and  present.  Friends  of  mine,  as  well  as 
myself,  have  knocked  at  the  door  in  vain.  As  a  prominent  professor  wrote  to  me  :  "  It  is 
scarcely  worth  while  to  apply  to  a  Post-MLUenarian  editor  ;  they  gladly  publish  articles 
against  us  and  ask  for  us  to  support  their  respective  publications,  but  refuse  us  a  hear- 
ing. The  bitterness  of  many  papers  is  notorious,  and  to  excite  prejudice  against  us 
everything  that  conveys  a  sarcasm  or  ridicule  is  eagerly  published  with  evident  relish." 
Thus  e.g.  to  illustrate  :  The  Luth.  Observer,  Aug.  23d,  1878,  gives  Pres.  Porter's  remarks 
against  Moody's  Chiliasm,  and  also  states  that  "  Dr.  Edward  Beecher  characterized  the 
doctrine  of  Millenarianism  as  '  beginning  in  the  spirit  and  being  made  perfect  in  the 
flesh.'  "  Let  the  reader  refer  back  to  our  history  of  the  doctrine  and  see  for  himself  the 
eminent  sons  of  the  Church,  the  martyrs,  missionaries,  etc.,  that  are  thus  grossly  slan- 
dered by  Beecher  and  the  paper  indorsing  his  utterance.  In  the  next  number  (Aug.  30th) 
it  reproduces  an  article  from  the  Independant  entitled,  "  Wise  Overmuch, "  which  starts 
out  in  abuse  of  Moody  and  Tyng,  Jr.,  because  they  believe  in  the  commanded  posture  of 
watching  for  the  speedy,  visible  Coming  of  the  Christ,  saying  in  derision  :  "  Perhaps  the 
doctrine  may  seem  to  be  fitted  to  frighten  drowsy  sinners.  We  are  inclined  to  think  that 
a  textual  study  of  the  Bible,  seeking  for  hidden  meanings  and  deep  types  and  allegories, 
to  which  some  of  these  Millenarians  are  given,  makes  them  ready  to  accept  of  the  im- 
probable, and  to  imagine  that  thefein  they  are  honoring  the  WTord."  After  this  sneer  at 
the  motives  and  biblical  study  of  prophetic  students,  there  follows  a  torturing  of  Scripture 
to  make  out  that  Millenarians  are  "  troubling  the  churches  on  this  subject."  Thus  e.g. 
"  some  inquisitive  and  meddlesome  saints  of  Thessalonica— and  we  have  such  now — 
would  be  likely,  St.  Paul  knew,  to  turn  away  from  the  comfort  (i.e.  as  united  with  the 
resurrection,  etc.)  to  speculate  about  the  speediness  of  the  Lord's  Coming.  The  Apostles, 
therefore,  instantly  anticipated  their  curiosity  and  rebuked  it,  saying,  '  But  of  the  tiinos 
aDd  seasons,  brethren,  ye  have  no  need  that  I  write  unto  you.'  "  What  a  master-stroke  of 
exegesis !  How  it  eclipses  the  comments  of  our  commentators,  by  simply  ignoring  the  con- 
text ami  analogy  of  the  Word  !  We  are  then  informed  that  Paul  rebukes  them  again  in 
the  Second  Epistle  ;  that  the  Second  Coming  is  substantially  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead  (!)  ;  and  should  be  treated  of  simply  as  a  reference  to  immortality  and  future  rewards 
and  punishments  (!)  ;  that  Millenarians  are  "  guilty  of  clear  disobedience  to  the  inspired 
instructions"  when  insisting  that  the  Advent  is  imminent  or  impending  ;  that  when  they 
refer  to  "  times  and  seasons,"  which,  "  says  Paul,  are  something  not  necessary  to  write 
about, "  and  which  Jesus  rebuked  in  the  words  "It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and 
seasons,"  and  which  as  to  day  and  hour  no  one  knows,  they  are  guilty  of  "  a  presump- 
tion little  less  than  blasphemous."  It  concludes,  respecting  this"  presumption"  border- 
ing on  blasphemy  :  "  We  see  it  on  every  side,  in  a  mild  form,  as  exemplified  in  the 
Chiliasm  of  the  two  largest  Lutheran  bodies  in  the  country,  and  in  the  teachings  of  Mr. 
Moody,  Dr.  S.  H.  Tyng,  Jr.,  and  Dr.  Goodwin  ;  and  more  grossly  in  the  babble  of  Advent- 
ists, Timeists,  Dr.  Wild,  Dr.  Seiss,  and  the  Pyramidologists,  who  hold  that  we  are  now  in 
a  narrow  passage  of  the  Pyramids,  which  indicates  '  troublous  times '  from  187(5  to  1882, 
preceding  the  Coming  of  Christ.  '  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means.'  "  Such  is  a 
fair  specimen  of  many  articles  which  refute  themselves  by  their  grossness,  indiscriminate 


252  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  178. 

denunciation,  lack  of  scriptural  knowledge,  and  a  careful  ignoring  of  the  foundations  of 
our  faith.  When  such  instruction  is  constantly  paraded  and  such  invectives  are  contin- 
ually exhibited,  what  must,  necessarily,  be  the  result  among  the  masses  ? 

To  illustrate  how  means  are  employed  to  excite  hostility  against  us  and  to  enforce  the 
faithlessness  of  the  Church,  we  refer  to  the  use  made  by  the  religious  press  of  the  Free- 
man tragedy.  From  the  published  accounts  and  the  trial,  it  appears  that  Freeman  fanat- 
ically deemed  himself  called  on  by  a  divine  vision,  or  Supernatural  call,  to  kill  his  own 
child  as  a  sacrifice  demanded  of  his  faith,  being,  as  he  thought,  assured  of  speedy  restora- 
tion to  life.  It  happened  that  Freeman  belonged  to  the"  Second  Adventists."  This 
was  too  good  an  opportunity  to  be  lost,  no  matter  how  many  similar  acts  had  occurred 
through  fanaticism  in  persons  of  other  beliefs,  and  the  press  throughout  the  country 
utilized  it  to  decry  Pre-Millennialism,  the  study  of  prophecy,  etc.  The  secular  press 
joined  in  the  cry,  so  that  e.g.  the  New  York  Tribune  in  an  editorial,  exhibits  its  amazing 
knowledge  of  the  whole  subject  by  classing  Second  Adventists,  Fifth-Monarchy  men, 
Anabaptists,  Cromwellians,  Brethren  of  the  Free  Spirit,  and  Pre-Millenarians  together, 
and  makes  this  sacrifice  a  legitimate  outgrowth  of  prophetical  studies,  thus  indirectly  vili- 
fying the  ablest  and  purest  men  who  have  been  students  of  prophecy.  The  dogmatic, 
magisterial,  offensive  tone  of  the  secular  and  political  papers  was  effectually  reproduced 
by  the  religious  press,  which  overlooked  the  fact  that  the  religion  it  professed  forbade  the 
wholesale  slandering  '.  1  which  it  indulged  at  our  expense.  Thus  e.g.  the  Luth.  Observer, 
whose  editor  rarely  failed  to  pick  up  any  floating  sarcasm  against  us,  found  ' '  the  Free- 
man Tragedy"  a  specially  fine  morsel  for  an  editorial  (May  30th,  1878)  with  the  signifi- 
cant heading  :  "  Prophetic  Fanaticism."  The  article  is  designed  to  make  the  impression, 
most  unjustly,  that  this  sacrifice  is  an  outgrowth  of  Pre-Mill.  doctrine.  The  writer  un- 
dertakes to  show  how  such  delusions  as  Freeman's  are  reached  (1)  by  affirming  that  this  is 
done  "  through  an  attempt  to  interpret  the  prophecies  in  a  literal  sense."  We  deny  this 
conclusion,  (a)  Ecclesiastical  history  proves  to  us  (as  e.g.  Stilling  has  well  pointed  out 
in  his  Theobald,  etc.)  that  more  dreadful  delusions,  culminating  at  times  in  murder,  have 
resulted  from  the  spiritualistic  and  mystical  interpretation  ;  (b)  Freeman,  as  the  trial  evi- 
denced, did  not  confine  himself  to  a  literal  interpretation,  but  was  so  largely  under  the 
influence  of  a  prevailing  spiritual  and  mystical  interpretation  that  he  looked  for  continued 
revelations  of  God's  will,  and  in  his  hallucinations  supposed  himself  to  be  thus  person- 
ally favored  ;  (c)  one  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  our  teaching  is  the  completeness 
of  revelation  in  this  dispensation  to  guide  and  direct,  while  the  contrary  is  the  result  of 
mystical  and  spiritualistic  teaching,  which  opens  the  door  to  all  sorts  of  vagaries  ;  (d)  it 
is  unjust  to  charge  us  with  a  crime,  which  our  teaching  and  tendency  reprobate  ;  (e)  it  is 
unjust  to  the  long  line  of  noble  men  in  the  Church  who,  although '' interpreting  the 
prophecies  in  a  literal  sense,"  have  been  noted  for  purity  of  life  and  usefulness  in  labor  ; 
(/)  it  is  unjust  to  the  "  Second  Adventists"  as  a  body  (although  their  views  in  many 
respects  differ  from  ours,  and  are  more  in  accord  with  this  editor's  than  ours),  seeing 
that  many,  and  their  ablest  advocates,  limit  their  teaching  within  bounds  that  forbids  so 
sad  and  fearful  a  result  ;  (g)  it  is  unjust  to  charge  this  sacrifice  upon  the  faith  of  any 
body  of  men,  because  it  was  the  individual  act  of  a  weak,  unbalanced  mind,  excited  by 
religious  fanaticism,  fostered  by  a  mystical  tendency  which  led  him  to  regard  himself  as 
favored  by  divine  revelation.*  Then  (2)  the  writer  declares  that  a  literal  interpretation  is 
incorrect  (a)  because  the  Church  affirms  it  to  be  such.  Where  he  gets  this  affirmation 
from  we  are  at  a  loss  to  conceive  ;  certainly  not  from  Luther,  whom  he  professes  to 
admire.  (For  an  extended  reply,  see  Prop.  4.)  He  then  (b)  asserts  :  "  that  most  of  the 
prophecies  concerning  the  First  Coming  of  Christ  were  not  fulfilled  in  a  literal,  but  in  a 
figurative  or  spiritual,  sense,  like  many  other  prophecies,  and  for  this  reason  they  were 
not  understood  until  after  their  fulfilment."     We  deny  that  any  of  the  prophecies  were 

*  Every  intelligent  reader  has  met  with  cases  reported  where  crime— even  murder — 
has  been  committed  under  an  alleged  religious  guidance,  but  that  such  have  been  justly 
ascribed  to  the  individual,  and  not  to  the  Church  to  which  he  belonged.  We  give  a 
single  illustration  :  Every  Evening  (of  Wilmington,  Del.,  and  copied  in  the  Geavga  Leader, 
June  13th,  1879)  cites  the  case  of  Gilles  Hntchins,  who  was  tried  twenty-two  years  ago  in 
the  Georgetown  court  for  the  murder  of  his  own  child,  and  acquitted  on  the  ground  of 
insanity.  He  had  attended  a  Methodist  meeting,  and  heard  a  sermon  concerning  Abra- 
ham and  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac.  Being  under  conviction  and  excited,  he  imagined,  as  a 
test  of  his  own  faith,  that  God  commanded  him  to  offer  up  his  own  child  The  tragedy 
followed.  It  would,  of  course,  be  utterly  unjust  to  charge  the  Methodists,  as  a  body, 
with  the  morbid,  feverish  excitement  and  imaginings  of  this  murderer. 


Prop.  178.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  253 

spiritually  or  figuratively  fulfilled,  but  all  as  grammatically  expressed  ;  and  it  was  this 
very  literal  fulfilment  in  the  person,  life,  and  death  of  Jesus  that  we,  to-day,  employ 
against  Jewish  and  Gentile  unbelief,  as  seen  in  the  Christian  apologetical  writings.  It  is 
the  Church-Kingdom  view  that  confuses  the  writer's  idea  of  fulfilment  ;  for,  in  support 
of  such  an  opinion,  he  must  of  necessity  largely  draw  on  spiritualizing.  In  reference  to 
the  old  declaration  that  prophecies  are  only  to  be  understood  after  their  fulfilment, 
replies  are  given  under  various  propositions.  It  is  sufficient  now  to  say  that,  if  this  is 
so,  then  it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  rebukes  of  Jesus  and  the  exhortations  to  study 
prophecy,  to  regard  it  as  a  light,  to  esteem  it  as  a  warning  (of  which  e.g.  the  believers 
availed  themselves  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem),  etc.  But  (3)  he  declares  that  all 
expecting  the  literal  Second  Advent  have  been,  from  the  day  of  ascension  down,  disap- 
pointed. Suppose  that  they  have  been,  does  that  change  the  commanded  posture  of 
watching  ?  Did  it  detract  from  their  piety  or  motives  to  faithfulness  ?  Did  not  the 
Spirit  which  urged,  in  view  of  personal  benefit,  etc.,  this  attitude  which  they  obediently 
occupied,  know  that  they  would  be  disappointed  ?  Are  we  to  neglect  watching  for  a 
certain  predicted  event,  in  which  redemption  and  glory  culminate,  because  it  has  not 
yet  arrived,  and  because  others,  who  thought  it  might  soon  arrive,  were  disappointed  in 
its  coming  ?  Such  and  similar  questions  evidence  that,  according  to  the  writer's  estimate, 
the  divine  injunctions  on  this  point  are  a  mistake,  and  that  the  history  of  the  past  should 
cause  us  not  to  look,  long,  and  pray  for  "  the  Blessed  Hope."  .Comp.  the  caution  of 
Mark  13  :  33-37.)  He  concludes  with  the  sweeping  assertion  :  "It  is  only  the  ignorant 
and  illiterate  that  are  deluded  by  this  fanaticism"  (viz.,  literal  prophetical  interpretation). 
But  as  if  conscience  pricked  him  somewhat  at  the  vast  array  of  able  writers  on  its  side, 
he  generously  adds  :  "  It  has  a  strange  fascination  also  for  some  learned  and  otherwise 
well-balanced  and  sensible  persons,"  but  who  have  "  a  kind  of  mental  hypnotism,"  etc. 
The  mental  capacity  of  the  editors  may  indeed  be  great,  but  they  certainly  do  not  add  to 
its  greatness  or  afford  proof  of  the  same,  by  such  an  attack,  only  calculated  to  produce 
prejudice,  and  confirm  the  unbelief  of  the  Church. 

Ohs.  7.  The  mass  of  the  Church,  both  in  ministry  and  laity,  is  so  leav- 
ened with  the  spirit  of  unbelief  and  opposition,  that  threats  of  excommuni- 
cation, deposal,  etc.,  are  boldly  announced,  notwithstanding  the  antiquity, 
antecedents,  reception,  scriptural  foundation  of  the  doctrine.  Not  satis- 
fied to  meet  us  in  argument,  to  deny  our  "  hope,"  to  make  it  ridiculous,  to 
pervert  or  ignore  history,  to  brand  us  as  guilty  of  "  heresy,"  etc.,  the 
antagonism  must  culminate  in  threats,  as  e.g.  illustrated  recently  in  Prof. 
Briggs  of  New  York,  whose  spirit  and  that  of  the  Romanist  Baronius 
(whom  he  approvingly  quotes)  correspond. 

Prof.  Briggs,  alarmed  at  the  number  of  his  Presbyterian  brethren  who  were  Pre-Mil- 
lenarian,  and  finding  that  his  attacks  were  resolutely  and  Scripturally  met,  finally  con- 
descended to  threaten  them,  if  they  did  not  yield  up  their  "  heresy"  and  omit  meeting  in 
public  conferences  on  the  subject,  with  an  ecclesiastical  trial.  Fortunately  man}'  of  his 
brethren  were  more  in  accord  with  Paul's  delineation  of  charity,  and  deemed  such  a 
course  too  extreme.  But  the  spirit  is  abroad  and  widening.  A  writer  in  the  Interior, 
Jan.  9th,  1879,  quotes  Dr.  Brookes  as  saying  in  the  Truth  :  "  Not  only  is  there  opposition, 
but  the  most  determined  hostility  to  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  personal  return  as  the 
hope  set  before  us  in  the  Gospel,  and  he  who  is  '  looking  for  that  blessed  hope  '  is  sure 
to  be  denounced  as  a  fanatic,  and  slandered,  and  ostracized."  This  statement  is  ques- 
tioned, but  is — as  e.g.  illustrated  in  "Westminster's"  (Prof.  Briggs)  attacks,  charges  of 
heresy,  arrogant  threats  of  expidsion,  and  in  the  numerous  articles  in  various  religious 
papers  manifesting  the  same  spirit,  of  which  we  give  in  this  work  a  few  specimens- 
abundantly  sustained.  A  movement  is  now  on  foot  to  remove  a  brother  holding  these 
views  from  a  high  and  responsible  position,  solely  because  of  his  teaching  our  doctrine, 
and  this  has  been  repeated  again  and  again  within  a  few  years.  The  writer  knows  per- 
sons who,  either  have  been  forced  from  their  pastorates,  or  have  been  unable  to  secure 
any,  through  the  machinations  of  ministers  and  laymen  who  opposed  them  because  Pre- 
Millenarians.  Such  are  not  merely  in  the  sleeping  condition  reprimanded  by  the  Master, 
but  they  are  sufficiently  aroused  and  interested  to  fight,  openly  and  secretly,  against  the 
doctrine.  Rev.  Dr.  Goodwin,  in  his  address  before  the  Prophetic  Conference,  said  that 
he  anticipated  bitter  hostility  from  the  very  men  who  ought  to  extend  Christian  love — 


254  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  178. 

from  men  who  teach  theology,  occupy  the  pulpits  of  the  land,  and  direct  the  great  de- 
nominational and  religious  newspapers  of  the  day.  This  has  been  manifested  repeatedly, 
and,  judging  from  human  nature,  must  be  anticipated  in  the  future.  We  do  not  envy 
the  minds  and  hearts  of  those  who,  overlooking  the  fundamental  test  of  charity,  can 
carry  our  belief — a  belief  placing  us  in  the  commanded  posture  assigned  by  Jesus  Him- 
self —up  to  the  ecclesiastical  tribunals  of  the  churches  to  have  it,  if  possible,  condemned 
as  "  heresy,"  and  its  holders  ignominiously  expelled.  Aside  from  ignoring  history. 
Scriptural  evidence,  Christian  love,  etc.,  it  exemplifies  an  innate  meanness  of  disposition, 
a  devilish  desire  to  involve  brethren  in  difficulties,  diminish  their  reputation,  usefulness, 
and  happiness — a  characteristic  which  even  many  unbelievers  would  spurn  as  dishonorable. 
These  remarks  apply  equally  to  that  class  of  Millenarians,  of  whatever  sect  or  party,  who 
designate  all  who  do  not  receive  their  distinctive  views  or  system  as  non-Christian,  over- 
looking their  personal  reception  of  Jesus  and  the  manifestation  of  the  graces  of  the 
Spirit. 

Obs.  8.  The  faith  of  multitudes  is  influenced  hy  that  expressed  by  pious 
and  useful  laborers  of  the  Church,  and  when  our  doctrine — which  evidently 
has  never  been  studied,  either  in  its  historical  or  scriptural  aspects — is 
curtly  dismissed  by  them  as  unworthy  of  credence  or  attention,  the  reputa- 
tion, the  godly  life  of  such  sways  many  to  treat  it  with  indifference  and 
even  with  contempt.  Misrepresentations,  perversions,  detractions,  ex- 
pressed or  implied  disdain,  coming  from  such  a  source  become  measur- 
ably authoritative  in  the  eyes  of  not  a  few,  forgetting,  as  the  history  of  the 
Church  abundantly  proves,  that  error  may  exist  in  connection  with  great 
piety,  fervor,  zeal,  and  usefulness. 

It  is  painful  to  notice  how  men  eminent  for  piety,  under  the  profession  of  humility,  that 
they  are  not  to  meddle  with  things  too  high,  condemn  our  doctrine,  without  even  an  ex- 
amination, and  then  think  themselves  sufficiently  humble,  and  the  things  sufficiently  low,  to 
give  a  positive,  dogmatic  expression  of  their  views  pertaining  to  Eschatology.  They 
deem  themselves  strong  enough  to  give  us  a  complete  system  pertaining  to  future  things, 
but  when  we  endeavor  to  present  the  same,  then  the  cry  is  raised,  "  Secret  things  belong 
to  God."  This  affected  modesty  does  not  prevent  them  from  leaving  "  the  milk"  and 
seeking  "  the  strong  meat,"  from  entering  into  "  the  deep  things  of  God  "  and  attempt- 
ing to  explain  them,  from  occupying  the  domain  of  prophecy  and  endeavoring  to  inter- 
pret and  apply  the  same  ;  but  let  us  attempt  this  course,  and  instantly  tne  charge  of  pre- 
sumption is  presented  against  us.  Indeed,  in  justification  of  their  own  procedure  they 
justly  claim  that  these  things  are  revelations,  written  for  our  study  and  instruction,  and 
hence  worthy  of  attention  ;  but  as  soon  as  our  interpretation  and  application  of  them  arc 
made,  they  object  on  the  ground  that  they  are  beyond  our  understanding,  etc.  Take 
e.g.  one  of  the  mildest  illustrations  of  our  meaning  :  J.  A.  James,  in  The  Church  in  Earliest 
(a  work  containing  excellent  thoughts  and  forcibly  expressed),  expresses  (p.  289)  his 
humility  as  follows  :  "  How  many  centuries  shall  roll  before  this  blessed  era  (Millennium) 
of  harmonized,  sanctified  humanity  shall  arrive-  how  much  more  of  its  history  our  world 
is  to  spend  in  sin  and  rebellion,  and  in  groans  and  tears,  it  is  not  for  any  of  us  to  say. 
Some  imagine  they  hear  the  clocks  of  prophecy  and  providence,  both  set  in  harmony  to 
the  divine  decree,  striking  the  eleventh  hour.  I  am  not  so  skilled  in  prophetical  arith- 
metic or  mystic  symbols  ;  '  it  is  not  for  me  to  know  the  times  and  seasons  which  the 
Father  hath  put  in  His  own  power  ; '  and  I  am  content  with  the  promise  and  the  hope, 
that  the  time  is  coming,  when  '  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of 
our  God  and  of  His  Christ.'  What  vials  of  wrath  have  yet  to  be  exhausted  upon  the 
world,  or  through  what  tribulations  the  Church  has  yet  to  pass  on  her  way  to  her  millen- 
nial, and  to  her  triumphal  state,  it  is  not  for  us  even  to  conjecture,"  etc.  After  this  exhi- 
bition of  personal  modesty,  and  under  its  garb  to  deal  a  stab  at  noble  students  of  proph- 
ecy, one  should  suppose  that  he  is  simply  "  content  with  the  promise  and  the  hope," 
and  makes  no  effort  to  explain  it  and  the  manner  of  its  realization.  But  the  reverse  is 
true  :  he  enters  the  field  of  controversy,  and  his  published  statements  are  open  to  investi- 
gation and  criticism.  At  length,  against  the  most  positive  statements  of  God's  Word,  by 
the  use  of  mistaken  inferences  and  the  cpiotation  of  Scripture  passages  isolated  from 
their  connection,  he  endeavors  to  prove  that  the  Millennium  and  its  glory  is  introduced 
by  the  labors  of  the  Church.     To  make  out  such  a  proof  the  parables  are  made  antago- 


Prop.  178.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  255 

nistic  to  each  other,  the  commission  is  made  to  declare  what  it  does  not  contain,  sentences 
detached  from  their  context  are  pressed  to  an  extreme,  Millennial  predictions  are  given 
without  reference  to  the  order  of  fulfilment,  the  agency  of  Jesus  and  the  necessity  for 
the  supernatural  to  intervene  to  bring  forth  a  realization  are  ignored,  the  Sec.  Advent  is 
taken  for  granted  as  delayed  for  centuries,  etc.,  and  the  grand  result  of  this  extremely 
modest  effort  is  to  emphatically  teach  (p.  291)  that  "  the  direct  and  chief  instruments  of 
accomplishing  this  greatest  of  all  happy  revolutions  —this  wondrous  spiritual  renova- 
tion, "of  bringing  in  "the  Millennial  glory,"  are  "the  ministers  of  religion  and  the 
members  of  our  churches,"  "  Yes,  these  are  the  men  to  whom  the  world  will  stand  in- 
debted for  its  restoration  to  God,  to  happiness,  and  immortality.' '  What  a  sad  p<  rversion 
of  Scripture  teaching  on  the  subject  !  He  winds  up  his  work  with  the  double  italicized 
sentence,  showing  the  emphasis  given  to  it  :  "  What  is  wanted — and  all  that  is  wanted, 
under  God's  blessing,  for  the  world's  conversion  to  Christ,  is— an  earnest  ministry,  and 
an  earnest  Church."  How  different  the  instruction  and  the  warnings  given  by  the 
Spirit  !  Such  illustrations  could  be  multiplied,  and  they  serve  to  show  that,  in  view  of 
the  character  and  reputation  of  the  men,  their  example  and  teaching  form  a  pattern 
which  many  copy,  some  taking  it  for  granted  that  whatever  emanates  from  them  must  be 
good,  while  others  rest  satisfied  with  their  one-sided  exhibition  of  the  subject.  Some- 
times even  long  refutations  appear  which  contain  no  appeal  whatever  to  the  Scriptures, 
the  more  remarkable  seeing  that  our  constant  reference  is  to  the  Word.  Brookes  (Mara- 
natha,  p.  19)  says  :  "  Recently  a  very  long  article  from  the  pen  of  a  distinguished  Theo- 
logical professor  appeared  against  the  Pre-Mill.  Advent,  and  it  did  not  contain  a  single 
text  of  Scripture,"  and  then  aptly  adds  :  "  There  could  hardly  be  stronger  presumptive 
proof  of  the  doctrine  he  so  bitterly  denounced."  No  matter  what  the  piety,  or  position, 
or  talents  of  the  writer  on  the  subject,  in  Eschatology,  which  God  gives  us,  appeal  must 
be  made  to  the  Spirit. 

Obs.  9.  It  is  not  merely  the  controversial  books  and  articles  (such  as 
Brown's,  Waldegrave's,  etc.)  that  tend  to  this  rejection  of  our  doctrine, 
but  a  multitude  of  works  are  issued,  either  by  private  individuals  or  soci- 
eties, which  take  the  opposite  for  granted,  and  predict  in  a  dogmatic  form 
"smooth  things"  for  the  Church.  These  are  extensively  circulated  and 
read,  and  thus  by  precept  and  example  confirm  the  existing  faithlessness. 
Indeed,  it  is  a  fact  that  many  are  so  familiarized  to  such  a  "  Church 
Literature,"  that  they  are  utterly  unacquainted  with  our  doctrines,  and 
the  scriptural  reasons  assigned  in  their  behalf. 

Among  these  may  be  mentioned  popular  commentaries,  specially  designed  to  mould 
the  opinions  of  Sunday-schools.  Thus  e.g.  Albert  Barnes's  series  of  Notes.  To  illustrate 
its  spirit,  a  single  example  is  sufficient  :  When  explaining  prophecy  relating  to  the  Mil- 
lennial age,  he  constantly  weakens  the  force  of  the  promises  by  a  set  phraseology  indica- 
tive of  a  lack  of  faith  in  its  plain,  grammatical  meaning.  The  favorite  phrase  is  "  as  if  f 
and  to  give  it  due  emphasis  and  impress  it  on  the  favorable  notice  of  the  reader  it  is  gen- 
erally printed  in  italic,  letters.  Take  up  any  Mill,  description  at  random  (or  particularly 
the  Apoc),  and  the  interpretation  will  have  its  italic  dress.  Take,  as  an  illustration, 
Isa.  65  :  17-25,  and  we  have  the  following  examples  :  "  That  there  should  be  a  state  of 
glory  as  great  as  if  a  new  heaven  and  new  earth  were  to  be  made  ;"  "  that  there  would 
be  changes  in  the  condition  of  the  people  of  God  as  great  as  if  the  heavens,  overcast  with 
clouds  and  subject  to  storms,  should  be  re-created  so  as  to  become  always  mild  and 
serene,  or  as  if  the  earth,  so  barren  in  many  places,  should  become  universally  fertile  and 
beautiful  :"  "  changes  as  great  as  if  a  barren  and  sterile  world  should  become  universally 
beautiful  and  fertile  ;"  "  the  change  is  represented  to  be  as  great  as  (/"a  new  heaven  and 
a  new  earth  should  be  created  ;"  "  it  is  figurative  language  designed  to  describe  the  com- 
paratively happy  state  referred  to  by  the  prophet,  as  if  human  life  should  be  lengthened 
out  to  the  age  of  the  patriarchs,  and  as  if  he  who  is  now  regarded  as  an  old  man  should 
then  be  regarded  as  in  the  vigor  of  his  days  ;"  "  that  is,  that  the  state  of  things  under 
the  Messiah  would  be  as  if  human  life  were  greatly  prolonged  ;"  "  changes  shall  take 
place  as  great  as  if  his  nature  (lion's)  were  changed,  and  he  should  graze  with  the  herds 
of  the  field  ;"  "  the  state  of  security  would  be  as  great  under  the  Messiah  as  if  the  most 
deadly  and  poisonous  kinds  of  reptiles  should  become  wholly  innoxious,  and  should  not 
attempt  to  prey  upon  men  ;"   "  in  future  times,  there  will  be  a  state  of  security  as  great 


256  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  178. 

as  ?/ the  whole  serpent  tribe  were  innocuous  and  should  live  on  the  dust  alone."  This  is 
no  caricature,  but  a  specimen  found  under  one  prediction  alone,  and  is  written  by  a  sin- 
cere, pious,  and  able  man,  who  leads  thousands  into  such  faithless  interpretations.  One 
cannot  help  imagining  how  such  a  commentator,  with  such  a  faith,  constantly  appealing 
to  the  impossibility  of  fulfilment,  would  have  dealt  with  the  predictions  relating  to  Jesus, 
had  he  lived  to  comment  on  them  just  before  the  First  Advent.  We  fancy  that  the  pre- 
diction of  a  virgin  conceiving  and  bearing  Him  would,  with  such  a  spirit,  have  been 
interpreted  to  mean  a  figurative  expression  indicating  a  purity  as  great  as  if  He  had 
been  born  of  a  virgin  ;  the  predictions  pertaining  to  His  humiliation,  sufferings,  and 
death,  would  mean  a  condescension  or  spirit  of  benevolence  as  great  as  if  He  had  actually 
passed  through  it  all  ;  the  predictions  relating  to  His  being  sold  for  money,  betrayed, 
forsaken,  despised,  beaten  and  spit  on,  drinking  vinegar,  casting  lots,  etc.,  would  mean 
that  He  exercised  the  most  extraordinary  patience  and  forbearance,  as  great  as  if  men  had 
really  treated  Him  so  fearfully. 

The  works  Witnessing  Church,  The  Active  Christian,  The  Great  Commission,  The  World's 
Salvation,  Redeemer's  Last  Command,  Evangelization  of  the  World,  and  literally  hundreds  of 
others  (comp.  Prop.  175),  present  the  idea  of  a  future  Millennial  age,  give  many  of  its 
predicted  characteristics,  but  urge,  as  an  incentive  to  action,  that  it  must  result  from 
preaching  the  Gospel,  extending  missions,  widening  and  increasing  the  zeal  and  activity 
of  the  Church.  Christ's  specific  and  siipernatural  work  is  relegated  to  the  Church,  and 
only  so  much  of  the  Scripture  is  quoted  and  applied  as  they  suppose  inferentially  to 
teach  the  same  ;  while  that  portion  antagonistic  is  carefully  excluded,  no  attempt  being 
even  made  toward  a  reconciliation.  The  positive  manner  of  presentation,  the  frequent 
eloquent  and  fervent  appeals  attached,  the  interlarding  of  Scripture  phraseology,  mislead 
the  masses  ;  and  in  view  of  the  praises  extended  to  them  and  the  efforts  made  to  circu- 
late them  by  eminent  men  and  societies,  they  become  favorites  and  guides  to  multitudes. 
To  object  to  their  teaching  as  on  many  essential  points  erroneous,  and  to  their  tendency 
as  producing  a  lack  of  faith  in  "  the  Blessed  Hope,"  is  to  cause  many  — so  wedded  are 
they  to  them — to  question  our  piety  and  zeal.  Under  such  exclusive  instruction,  which 
really  perverts  the  divine  as  given  to  us,  the  masses,  interpreting  Scripture  in  a  like 
manner,  are  unable  to  discriminate,  and  become  prejudiced  against  an  examination  of 
the  subject. 

Obs.  10.  The  state  of  no  faith,  the  indifference  to  the  subject,  the  inter- 
posing of  long  periods,  etc.,  is  also  in  a  measure  produced  by  the  long- 
delayed  return  of  Jesus.  Good  men  like  Luther,  etc.,  expected  His  return 
in  their  day,  and  able  men  like  Bengel,  etc.,  fixed  upon  approximative 
dates,  but  these  expectations  and  data  passed  by  without  His  return,  and 
many,  because  of  the  non-fulfilment,  remain  sunken  in  a  state  of  apathy  and 
unbelief — just  as  if  the  event  depended  on  man's  estimate  or  measuring 
of  time,  and  not  on  God's  own  appointment.  More  than  this  :  such  dis- 
appointments are  made  the  subject  of  scoffing,  in  order  to  heap  ridicule 
upon  the  whole  subject. 

Since  eighteen  hundred  years  have  passed,  some  act  and  speak  as  if  this  very  delay 
meant  a  far  longer  one  in  the  future  ;  while  others  assert  that  it  is  proof  that  He  will 
never  come.  Both  misapprehend  the  Spirit's  estimate  of  time.  The  class,  like  Elihu 
Burritt,  etc.,  who  deny  a  future  Sec.  Advent,  making  it  already  past  ;  those,  like  Sweden- 
borgians,  etc.,  who  transform  it  into  something  else  ;  those  who  admit  its  futurity,  brut 
make  providence  death,  etc.,  also  Advents,  and  intervene  a  long  indefinite  period  ;  those 
who  ignore  it  as  an  idle  fable  ;  all  classes  unite  in  taking  advantage  of  the  expressed 
hopes  of  Millenarians,  and,  because  not  realized,  to  make  themselves  merry  at  their  ex- 
pense. The  antedating  of  the  Advent  and  the  Millennial  age  (the  latter  done  even  by 
many  of  our  opponents),  can  only  affect  the  faith  of  the  weak,  or  ignorant,  or  preju- 
diced ;  the  student,  who  knows  the  foundation  upon  which  all  rests,  makes  even  these — 
the  disappointments,  scoffings,  and  unbelief —reasons  ichy  he  should  be  the  more  observ- 
ant and  watchful.  Scoffing  is  no  argument  ;  ridicule  is  no  adornment  of  the  truth  ;  and 
names  of  obloquy  add  no  force  to  reasoning.  The  vagaries  of  some  individual,  or  the 
dogmatic  assertions  in  reference  to  definite  time  by  some  person  or  sect,  are  gladly 
paraded,  as  if  these  were  amply  sufficient  to  crush  our  doctrine  based  on  covenants  and 
a  multitude  of  divine  promises  ;  as  if  these  should,  of  necessity,  force  us  to  say,  ' '  My 


Prop.  178.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  257 

Lord  delayeth  His  Coming,"  or  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  His  Coming?"  as  if  these  could 
override  the  solid  Scriptural  statements  of  able  and  learned  men,  and  cause  lis  no  longer 
to  look,  pray,  long,  and  watch  for  "the  Blessed  Hope."  The  perversion  of  any  one 
point,  or  the  rashness  of  men  in  dealing  with  a  doctrine— seeing  that  every  important 
truth  of  the  Bible  has  been,  by  some,  either  perverted  or  rashly  dealt  with— has  no  weight 
with  the  real  student.  He  knows  that  failure  as  to  time,  that  rashness  and  enthusiasm  as 
to  the  meaning  of  symbolic  prophecies,  that  dogmatic  assertions  based  on  chronology, 
that  approximative  applications  which  resolve  themselves  into  mistakes — all  these  do  not 
touch  the  covenanted  relationship  of  the  Kingdom,  the  Pre-Millennial  Advent,  or  any  one  of 
the  main,  leading,  or  essential  doctrines  of  our  system.  And  yet  men  profess  themselves 
as  confirmed  in  their  unbelief  by  the  failure  of  learned  expositions  on  prophecy,  which 
enter  into  a  systematic  chronological  series  of  events,  and  virtually,  by  approximation  or 
positively,  predict  events  to  take  place  at  certain  times  that  are  not  verified.  This  fail- 
ure causes  them  to  regard  an  elucidation  of  prophecy  with  suspicion,  and  to  turn  from  it 
with  aversion— provided  it  has  a  Pre-Millennial  cast.  For  when  their  own  prophetical 
writers  and  commentators  (as  e.g.  Barnes  and  others  on  the  Apoc.)  enter  into  a  system- 
atic chronological  order  and  give  approximative  dates,  or  give  place  to  the  greatest  vaga- 
ries and  applications  (as  e.g.  Berg,  etc.),  the  whole  thing  is  reversed  ;  they  justly  claim 
that  these  are  individual  opinions  which  do  not  affect  the  main  doctrines  of  a  Post-Millennial 
Advent,  "Whitbyan  Millennium,  etc.  The  religious  press,  as  we  have  shown,  is  eager  to 
take  tip  all  such  mistakes,  individual  extravagances,  etc.,  and  make  Pre-Millenarianism 
responsible  for  them,  a  process  of  reasoning  adopted  by  Draper  and  others,  when  they 
endeavor  to  make  Christianity  responsible  for  wars,  persecxitions,  martyrdoms,  etc.  It 
is  Bossuet's  argument  against  Protestantism,  levelled  against  our  doctrine,  in  editorials 
headed  "  Prophecy  at  a  Discount,"  etc.  It  is  the  infidel's  mode  of  attack,  fuMy  indorsed 
and  adopted  by  believers  I 

Obs.  11.  Many  writers,  like  M.  Guizot  (Med.  upon  the  Chris.  Relig.,  etc.), 
seeing  the  predictions  relative  to  an  ultimate  exaltation  of  the  Church, 
take  it  for  granted,  hy  utilizing  a  philosophical  idea  of  progress,  that 
the  Church  will  be  universally  dominant  in  the  present  dispensation.  Xo 
effort  is  made  to  establish  this  by  an  examination  of  Scripture  or  of  tbe 
early  Church  view,  but  we  are  left  the  option  to  accept  of  it,  because  in 
accordance  with  philosophy,  the  deductions  of  reason,  and  the  wishes  of 
human  nature — thus  occupying  the  same  ground  and  urging  tbe  same  con- 
siderations presented  by  tbe  extreme  Liberal  party.  Many  intelligent  and 
able  men,  leaders  of  others,  indorse  this  development  theory,  and  extend 
the  prevailing  unbelief. 

To  indicate  what  reasoning  is  employed,  and  a  certain  hesitancy  manifested,  by 
some  in  this  direction,  attention  is  directed  to  an  interesting  article  in  the  Bib.  Sacra  for 
Jan.,  1851,  by  Rev.  Washburn.  He  forcibly  shows  that  there  is  a  parallel  between  the 
philosophical  relations  of  early  and  modern  Christianity  ;  that  the  same  antagonistic 
forces  are  now  at  work,  and  that  history,  only  on  a  wider  scale,  is  repeating  itself.  Then 
at  the  conclusion  of  the  article,  seeing  where  legitimately  his  own  reasoning  would  lead 
him,  viz.,  that  such  a  repetition  is  to  be  ever  anticipated  as  a  natural  result,  he  endeavors 
to  rid  himself  of  the  same  in  the  following  manner.  He  says  :  "  It  is  rather  the  design 
of  God,  while  the  foundations  of  the  faith  are  eternal,  to  allow  His  religion  to  have  its 
natural  career,  in  connection  with  the  free  activity  of  the  human  intellect.  Nor,  while 
we  have,  and  may  have,  in  the  creed  and  worship  of  Christianity,  the  settled  ground-work 
of  practical  religion,  may  we  expect  to  attain  a  perfect,  changeless  system  of  Christian 
science,  until  the  advancing  knowledge  of  man  has  reached  its  fullest  harmony  with  the 
truths  of  revelation."  He  then  anticipates  an  objection  :  "  It  may  be  said  indeed  that, 
allowing  a  necessary  progression,  in  Christian  science,  it  is  a  real  progression,  not  a  retro- 
gression or  a  ceaseless  oscillation,  we  should  look  for  ;  and  that,  after  eighteen  centuries, 
it  is  somewhat  discouraging  to  behold  the  world  still  in  the  state  of  primitive  chaos. 
And  viewed  in  itself  it  is  so  ;  viewed  in  regard  to  the  self-will  of  men,  it  is  lamentable  ; 
yet  it  is  a  fact,  capable  of  an  explanation  that  supplies  hope  and  assurance.  It  has  not 
been  a  retrogression,  but,  as  has  been  said  of  social  progress,  '  an  advancement  in  a  spired 
line.'"     Looking  for  the  explanation,  we  find  it  to  be  this  :  that  certain  causes  led  t<? 


258  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.   178. 

certain  results,  without  his  being  able  to  show  that  these  may  not  continue  to  repeat 
themselves,  and  he  is  forced  to  say  :  "  But  we  can  only  take  refuge  in  a  Christian  optim- 
ism, and  believe  that  as  it  (state  of  ours,  etc.)  sprang  from  natural  and  necessary  causes, 
it  will  yet  come  out  in  a  right  channel  ;"  and  to  illustrate  it  he  brings  in  the  Deluge,  etc., 
while  to  enforce  it,  he  says  that  "  on  every  hand  is  felt  the  demand  of  reconstruction." 
Instead  of  leaving  God's  Word  tell  what  the  outcome  shall  be  (as  e.g.  in  the  days  of  Noah, 
etc.),  he  expresses  hope  to  be  in  this  "  spiral  line."  We  quote  him  :  ' '  Such  was  and  such 
is  yet  the  chaotic  state  of  Christendom  ;  such  its  phenomena  and  such  their  causes. 
Never  since  the  birth  of  our  religion  has  been  seen  so  stupendous  a  conflict  as  has  been 
waged  between  the  truth  of  God  and  human  error  ;  no  other  age,  excejJt  the  primitive, 
whatever  its  importance  in  philosophy  or  religious  culture,  can  compare  with  this  in 
which  we  live,  in  the  grandeur  of  its  efforts,  the  variety  of  its  issues,  the  momentous 
problems  which  hang  on  its  results.  Nor  have  we  yet  reached  its  conclusion.  The  bat- 
tle is  not  j'et  over,"  etc.  "  On  the  one  side  the  transcendental  unbeliever  expects  a  time 
when  Christianity  shall  be  acknowledged  the  transient  phenomenon  of  a  less  advanced 
period— a  Millennium  of  pure  reason  in  science,  in  art,  in  society,  in  worship  being  in- 
troduced ;  on  the  other,  the  timid  religionist  sees  only  the  signs  of  despair  ;  and,  between 
the  two,  are  found  many  who  remain  in  utter  doubt,  hardly  knowing  whether  to  fear  or 
hope  the  more  for  the  cause  of  truth."  He  professes  his  confidence  in  the  final  result, 
because  truth  must  ultimately  triumph,  faith  "  is  the  substance  of  that  hoped  for,"  prim- 
itive Christianity  obtained  the  victory  and  so  will  the  present,  and  as  the  struggle  is 
greater  and  deeper,  so  the  result  will  be  greater,  grander,  and  more  permanent.  Truth, 
indeed,  will  ultimately  triumph,  but  not  through  man.  Jesus,  the  Truth,  will  come 
Himself  and  vindicate  it.  Truth  did  not  gain  the  victory  from  creation  to  the  deluge, 
nor  from  the  deluge  to  the  First  Advent,  nor  from  the  First  Advent  to  the  present  ;  and, 
we  are  abundantly  assured  from  the  predictions  relating  to  the  future,  that  it  will  not 
from  the  present  time  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  (Comp.  e.g.  the  remarks  of  Ecce  Deus- 
Homo  on  the  three  great  eras  in  the  history  of  the  race.)  "  Faith  is  indeed  the  substance 
of  things  hoped  for,"  but  it  is  still  a  question,  which  Scripture  alone  can  decide,  when, 
and  how,  '".</  through  whom  the  realization  shall  come.  The  primitive  Christianity  did 
not  obtain  the  alleged  victory,  for  the  history  of  the  Church  conclusively  proves  that  the 
Alexandrian  philosophy,  the  hierarchical  tendencies,  etc.  prevailed,  and  that  colossal 
error  gained  the  day,  as  witnessed  in  the  fearful  usurpations  and  the  dark  ages  that  fol- 
lowed. Analogy  fails  to  sustain  his  position  ;  it  does  the  reverse,  indicating  that  there  is 
no  hope  in  man.  How  sad  it  is  that  able  men  bolster  up  a  hojie  on  such  slender  grounds, 
when  so  flatly  contradicted  by  the  predictions  of  the  Word — our  only  safe  guide  in  such 
matters— respecting  both  the  condition  of  the  world  and  the  Church  at  the  Second  Advent 
of  Jesus. 

Obs.  12.  It  may  probably  be  asked,  "Why  is  it  that  God  allows  so  many 
prophets  to  arise  and  predict  "  peace  and  safety,"  and  make  the  Church, 
as  a  body,  complacently  look  forward  to  continued  prosperity,  increased 
wealth  and  power,  and  wide  extended  dominion  ?  The  reason  was  long  ago 
assigned  by  Moses  (Deut.  13  :  3)  in  the  words  :  "  for  the  Lord  your  God 
proveth  you,  to  know  whether  ye  love  the  Lord  your  God  with  all  your 
heart  and  with  all  your  soul."  It  is  done  to  test  the  love  of  His  people,  to 
discriminate  between  those  who  reverently  receive  all  that  He  has  spoken 
and  honor  His  Son,  and  those  who  will  follow  the  views  and  doctrines  of 
men,  giving  the  honor  which  exclusively  belongs  to  the  Son's  work  to  men. 
When  persons  wilfully  ignore  oath-bound  covenants,  ridicule  "  the  Blessed 
Hope,"  even  the  Coming  of  Jesus,  and  mock  at  the  inheritance  of  Jesus 
and  His  saints,  then  it  is  but  just  that  they  should  put  their  trust  in  smooth 
but  false  predictions  instead  of  the  Word  of  God. 

Those  who  say  that  they  do  believe  in  a  Second  Advent,  and  that  in  consequence  of 
such  a  belief  do  not  come  unto  censure,  are  desired  e.g.  to  ponder  the  express  language 
of  Jesus  (Luke  12,  Matt.  24,  etc.),  who  rebukes,  not  unbelievers,  but  those  who  profess  to 
believe  in  His  Coming,  because,  notwithstanding  their  profession  and  His  injunctions  to 
a  constant  watchfulness,  they  say  in  their  hearts,  " My  Lord  delayeth  His  Coining  /'  and 
their  conduct  is  influenced  by  their  belief  in  abusing  their  brethren  (and  by  implication 


Prop.  178.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  259 

those  who  look  for  the  Coming),  and  in  a  sense  of  security  leading — as  illustrated  in  some 
— to  scenes  of  revelry,  feasting,  festivals,  etc.,  in  the  churches  and  families.  As  the  end 
approaches  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  a  clearer  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  King- 
dom and  its  cognate  doctrines  will  be  presented,  but  this  very  exhibition  will  meet  with 
continued  unbelief  and  opposition.  Some,  misled  bj-  their  own  feelings,  and  enthusiastic 
over  the  number  of  Pre-Millenarians  of  eminence  and  ability  in  the  various  churches, 
trust  that  "  The  Doctrine  of  Christ's  Coming  and  Keign  is  soon  to  be  held  by  the  Evan- 
gelical Church  generally"  (see  e.g.  an  article  thus  entitled  in  the  Theol.  and  Lit.  Journal, 
Oct.,  1859).  But  let  the  student  consider  the  previous  propositions,  the  predictions  of 
God  quoted,  the  condition  of  the  Church  previous  to  and  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  he 
will  see  that  it  is  only  after  the  thief-like  Coming  and  before  the  open  Parousia  of  Jesus 
that  the  Church,  startled  from  its  indifference  and  unbelief  and  opposition  by  the  resur- 
rection and  translation  of  chosen  ones,  will  seek  for  the  truth  and  in  its  behalf  even 
sacrifice  life  itself. 


260  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  179. 


Proposition  179.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  or  essentials  of 
the  same,  are  directly  allied  by  various  bodies  with  doctrines 
that  are  objectionable,  and  hence  is  made  unpalatable  to  many. 

It  is  a  sad  fact  that  many  persons  not  being  able  to  discriminate 
between  truth  and  error,  reject  both  because  they  happen  to  be 
thus  connected  in  the  faith  of  some  denomination  or  sect.  Truth 
is  not  vitiated  by  error,  for  if  it  were,  then  there  is  not  a  single 
doctrine  of  the  Bible  but  what  would  have  to  be  rejected,  seeing 
that  they  have  been  more  or  less  connected  with  erroneous 
doctrine. 

All  organized  religious  bodies  have  more  or  less  of  error,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  diver- 
sity existing— no  two  exactly  agreeing  in  all  things.  Even  such  an  ultra  sect  as  Mormon- 
ism  has  some  truth  obtained  by  its  eclecticism,  and  no  one  dreams  of  rejecting  the  truth 
because  allied  with  their  distinctive  tenets.  It  is  deemed  proper  to  present  this  Prop,  in 
connection  for  two  reasons  :  (1)  it  is  a  continuation  of  the  history  of  Chiliasm  as  adopted, 
in  part  or  whole,  and  incorporated  in  the  belief  of  various  bodies  present  and  past  ;  (2)  it 
may  serve  to  remove  unnecessary  prejudice,  and  place  Chiliasm  in  its  proper  position, 
viz.,  that  of  a  doctrine  which  can  be  received  by  all  denominations  without  interfering 
with  their  distinctive  denominational  characteristics.  We  have  already  shown  that  mul- 
titudes who  are  as  widely  removed  as  possible  from  all  fanaticism  and  extravagance,  who 
are  honored  by  the  Church  as  pious  and  able  men  of  God,  have  no  affiliation  with  others, 
who  endeavor  to  impress  other  doctrines,  held  to  be  erroneous,  in  connection  with  Chil- 
iasm or  some  of  its  features.  The  space  given  to  those  mentioned  here  is  necessary,  be- 
cause they  are  more  or  less  met  with,  and  a  knowledge  of  them  may  remove  prejudice. 

Obs.  1.  The  Christadelphians,  owing  to  a  union  of  Fre-Millenarian  views 
with  other  doctrines,  are  seriously  injuring  the  former  in  the  estimation  of 
others  because  of  the  latter.  Wherever  they  find  a  lodgment,  their  hostile 
attitude  toward,  and  denunciations  of  all  others,  directs  attention  to  their 
opinions,  and  in  the  feeling  of  opposition  and  repulsion  excited'  against 
them,  our  doctrines  being  supposed  to  belong  to  them  distinctively  and 
exclusively,  suffer  an  unjust  condemnation.  A  little  reflection  ought  to 
convince  any  one,  even  from  an  historical  position,  that  this  conclusion  is 
highly  erroneous.  Christadelphianism  is  very  modern  ;  its  founder,  Dr. 
Thomas,  only  died  a  few  years  ago.  It  is  impossible  in  the  history  of  the 
Church  (with  which  Jesus  promised  to  be  continuously  from  His  First 
Advent)  to  find  any  writer  or  any  document  which  brings  forth  the  Chris- 
tadelpliian  faith  as  exhibited  by  Dr.  Thomas  and  his  followers.  The 
shielding  of  themselves  under  the  plea  that  they  have  no  creed,  that  the 
Bible  is  their  creed,  and  hence  nothing  but  the  Bible  is  required,  does  not 
meet  the  case,  for  noivhere  do  we  find  the  formulated  statements  of  belief, 
which  they  assert  as  essential  to  salvation  and  to  constitute  a  Christadel- 
phian,  until  we  come  to  Dr.  Thomas.  Surely  a  faith  so  essential  as  asserted, 
ought  in  the  history  of  the  Church  for  eighteen  centuries  have  found  some 
one  to  formulate  it  sufficiently  indicative  of  its  existence.     Pre-Millenarian- 


Prop.  179.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  261 

ism,  on  the  other  hand,  is  fonnd  'prominently  in  the  Primitive  Church, 
and  has  a  history  to  sustain  it  as  a  Church  faith  centuries  before  Dr. 
Thomas  lived.  Even  in  the  discussion  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  no 
acknowledgments  are  made  of  the  previous  holding  of  the  truth  by  a  line 
of  positive  witnesses,  but  the  impression  is  made,  designedly  or  undesign- 
edly, that  Dr.  Thomas  by  his  superior  enlightenment  presented  the  doc- 
trine after  it  had  been  totally  ignored  by  all  others.1 

Pre-Millenarians  are  to  be  found  in  the  early  Church,  and  in  all  Protestant 
denominations,  whereas  Christadelphianism  is  a  small  body  with  a  system 
of  formulated  (i.e.  as  given  by  writers)  doctrines  which  must  be  held  as 
essential  to  salvation.  Jesus,  the  Christ,  is  not  "  very  God,"  but  only  in- 
habited by  the  Father  through  the  Spirit  (and  even  that  was  only  accom- 
plished at  His  baptism)  ;  the  Holy  Spirit  is  only  the  instrumental  power  of 
the  Father  ;  while  the  devil  is  only  a  personification  of  sin  in  the  flesh  (so 
that  was  a  striking  illustration,  when  they  went  into  the  swine).  Unable 
to  explain  the  union  of  spirit,  soul,  and  body  in  man,  they  dogmatically 
explain  all  that  refers  to  the  personality  of  the  Deity,  of  Satan,  etc.,  and 
those  who  may  differ  from  them  are  stigmatized  as  "  ignorant,"  "  error- 
ists,"  "  unbelievers,"  etc.  Baptism  is  so  completely  hedged  around  by  a 
series  of  doctrines,  including  the  grossest  materialism,  that  whosoever  does 
not  believe  their  precise  system  of  theology  cannot  be  baptized,  and  conse- 
quently will  inevitably  be  damned.  As  their  system  of  faith  embraces  a 
variety  of  features,  and  is  complicated,  taking  days  of  patient  study  to 
understand,  an  unbeliever  naturally  feels  surprise  that  such  large  numbers 
could  be  converted  and  baptized  in  one  day  by  the  Primitive  Church,  and 
that  Philip  so  hastily  baptized  the  eunuch,  etc.  Such  facts,  however,  have 
no  weight  with  them,  for  their  distinctive  faith  and  baptism  are  made 
essential  unto  salvation,  and  by  this  exclusiveness  they  debar  all  others, 
asserting  it  boldly  and  arrogantly.2 

The  grossest  materialism,  such  as  the  wildest  unbelief  has  suggested,  is 
characteristic  of  the  system,  so  that  soul  and  body  are  material,  or  rather 
the  former  is  a  simple  product  of  the  latter  and  dies  with  it.  Such  passages 
as  Matt.  10  :  28,  Stephen's  prayer,  etc.,  cannot  repress  the  extreme  dog- 
matism expressed.  The  logical  outgrowth  of  the  whole  is  found  in  the 
horrible  doctrine  that  infants  and  little  children  utterly  perish  by  death  ; 
that  the  heathen  and  infants,  at  least,  will  never  be  raised  from  the  dead.3 
Pre-Millenarians,  whatever  their  private  views  may  be  respecting  immor- 
tality (either  natural  or  acquired)  and  the  ultimate  destiny  of  the  wicked 
(either  preserved  in  positive  punishment  or  given  over  to  ultimate  destruc- 
tion), do  not  put  forward  such  unbelieving  materialism,  which  neutralizes  a 
class  of  passages  indicative  of  the  soul  being  something  higher  and  nobler 
than  the  body.  They  do  not  regard  the  belief,  one  way  or  the  other  con- 
scientiously held  as  essential  to  salvation,  for  they  elevate  neither  ordinance 
nor  doctrine  to  the  level  of  a  faith  appropriating,  even  amid  weakness  and 
imperfect  knowledge,  Jesus  as  the  Saviour  who  died  for  us,  and  our  obedi- 
ence sincerely  rendered  to  Him  according  to  the  knowledge  imparted.4 

The  intense  and  selfish  bigotry  actuating  this  body  is  a  sad  commentary 
on  human  infirmity.  Without  the  least  compunction,  all  outside  of  them- 
selves arc  condemned;  no  one  can  be  saved  but  themselves.  Taking  no 
warning  from  Jesus'  rebuke  to  the  disciples,  they  denounce  as  worthy  of 
damnation  those  who  supremely  love  the  Christ  and  labor — let  it  be  in 
weakness — for  Him  ;  ignoring  what  the  apostles  say  of  charity,  they  elevate 


262  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  179. 

knowledge — such  as  they  possess — far  above  it ;  overlooking  the  caution  of 
the  Spirit,  they  sit  in  judgment  over  all  who  differ  from  them  and  threaten 
them  with  endless  destruction.  Let  the  same  graces  of  the  Spirit,  which 
they  themselves  profess  to  possess,  appear  in  others,  and.  it  is  nothing  but 
the  workings  of  the  flesh  ;  let  the  Church  of  the  past  be  appealed  to,  it3 
martyrs,  its  confessors,  its  missionaries,  its  eminent  and  noble  men,  and  if 
not  Christadelphians  their  love,  sacrifices,  toil,  life,  etc.,  are  nothing  but 
the  developments  of  the  flesh  ;  let  them  be  reminded  that  weak  brethren  j 
with  imperfect  knowledge  may  exist — that  men  may  through  lack  of  proper 
understanding  build  imperfectly  on  the  foundation  and  suffer  great  loss 
and  yet  be  saved — that  such  a  diversity  may  exist  so  that  some  are  fed  on 
"  milk"  and  others  on  "  strong  meat" — it  is  nothing  except  they  be  Chris- 
tadelphians. An  unchristian  spirit,  an  imprudent  and  arrogant  claim  of 
superior  holiness  and  special  enlightenment,  cannot  be  pressed  beyond  this 
one.  Now  Pre-Millenarianism  from  the  Primitive  Church  down  has  con- 
stantly repudiated  such  a  selfish  and  unwarranted  attitude.  Its  writers, 
numbering  hundreds,  scorn  such  an  uncharitable  manifestation.5 

1  The  proof  is  found  in  Dr.  Thomas's  works,  as  e.g.  in  condemning  and  anathematizing 
Pre-Millenarians  of  all  classes  as  unbelievers,  unworthy  of  a  following,  etc.,  and  the 
utter  inability  of  pointing  to  a  single  writer  preceding  himself  who  interprets  and  applies 
the  Scriptures  as  himself,  and  in  the  apparent  boasting  manner  by  which  he  elevates 
himself  to  the  position  of  an  expositor  whose  dicta  must  be  followed  on  pain  of  condem- 
nation. No  works  have  ever  been  published  so  dogmatical  and  uncharitable  as  those  of 
Dr.  Thomas.  The  spirit  is  like  the  exclusive  spirit  of  Mohammedanism,  and  the  inter- 
pretation is  almost  as  great.  He  is  like  Abd-el-Latesf  (Palgrave's  Travels — Library  JS'otes, 
p.  382),  whose  one  sect,  out  of  seventy-three,  alone  could  be  saved.  When  Michael  did 
not  rail  against  Satan,  he  complacently  designates  Protestantism  in  all  its  forms  "  the 
Accursed  Hierarchy  of  Satan." 

2  So  precise  and  determined  is  their  faith,  that  the  least  variation  inevitably  causes  a 
division.  Hence  wherever  they  have  obtained  a  footing  and  increased  in  numbers,  they 
have  almost  invariably  divided  into  separate  parties.  As  no  liberty  is  allowed,  any  devia- 
tion is  at  once  denounced,  and  its  adherents  repudiated  as  anti-Christian.  In  the  city 
of  the  writer  it  has  happened  that  when  they  numbered  forty  or  fifty  they  divided  into 
two  or  more  parties,  and  became  exceedingly  embittered  against  each  other.  Such  fruit 
must  be  anticipated. 

3  In  reference  to  Jesus  saying  to  the  children,  Matt.  19  :  13,  14,  etc.,  they  give  two 
interpretations  to  avoid  its  force.  One,  as  given  in  "  the  Declaration  of  Principles,"  is 
that  "  the  little  children"  denotes  "  believers"  who  are  so  called.  A  prominent  Christa- 
delphian  (Dr.  Reeves),  to  whom  the  writer  referred  this  passage,  repudiated,  in  view  of 
Christ's  actually  blessing  little  children,  this  application  as  "  childish,"  and  stated  that 
Jesus  simply  meant  that  little  children  should  not  be  forbidden  to  come  to  Him  in  order 
that  He  might  heal  them  of  their  diseases,  for  of  such  children  some  would  become  be- 
lievers. Having  hewed  out  a  system  of  resurrection  to  suit  their  materialistic  scheme, 
any  passages  that  seem  to  conflict  (as  e.g.  Rev.  20  :  12,  13  ;  John  5  :  28,  29,  etc.)  must  be 
so  shaped  as  to  accommodate  themselves  to  it.  To  get  rid  of  Rev.  20  :  5,  they  reject  it 
as  unscriptural  because  one  ancient  mss.  by  a  mere  error  (Tischendorf's  N.  Test,  loci) 
omitted  it,  forgetting  that  all  the  other  ancient  mss.  have  it,  and  that  it  is  quoted  and 
indorsed  as  existing  in  Scripture  by  writers  still  more  ancient  than  any  of  our  mss. 

4  With  the  strongest  materialistic  notions  are  combined  the  most  spiritualistic  concep- 
tions. Thus  e.g.  according  to  their  tenets,  they  adopt  in  full  the  TJniversalist  conception 
that  Satan,  or  Devil,  is  in  all  instances  merely  "  a  personification  of  sin  in  the  flesh." 
Because  the  word  is  used  in  Scripture  to  denote  an  adversary,  slanderer,  false  accuser, 
etc.,  and  is  thus  applied  to  persons,  they  conclude  that  it  must  in  all  cases  have  the  same 
meaning,  simply  indicative  of  sin,  or  a  carnal  mind,  as  manifested  in  the  individual, 
society,  nation,  and  world.  The  inconsistency  of  pushing  this  to  an  extreme  is  evidenced 
when  they  come  to  explain  how  the  devils  entered  into  the  swine,  how  proposal  and 
rejection  is  presented  in  the  temptation  of  Jesus,  how  devils  are  spoken  of  as  separate 
and  distinct  from  men,  how  Satan  is  described  as  an  accountable  agent  who  will  be  pun- 
ished, how  not  only  activity  but  attributes  and  passions  (as  faith,  fear,  etc.)  are  ascribed 


Prop.  179.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  2G3 

to  him  indicative  of  personality  and  intelligence,  how  they  spoke  and  acted  in  demoniacs, 
how  the  Jews  had  their  views  confirmed  by  the  words  of  Jesus,  how  the  early  Church 
received  their  impressions  from  the  first  preachers,  etc.  Admitting  its  figurative  appli- 
cation at  times  does  not,  by  any  means,  force  us  to  their  conclusions.  The  plain  gram- 
matical sense  so  often  presented  urges  us  to  a  belief  in  sympathy  with  the  Primitive 
Church. 

5  The  charitable  and  Christian  spirit  exhibited  by  Pre-Millenarians  was  illustrated  in 
the  recent  Prophetic  Conference  held  in  Dr.  Tyng's  church  in  New  York,  in  which  over 
three  hundred  ministers  and  numerous  laymen,  representatives  of  the  various  Protestant 
denominations,  participated.  The  same  has  been  witnessed  in  prophetic  conferences  in 
England.  Pre-Millenarians  are  found  in  all  Protestant  denominations,  and  do  not  form 
a  party,  sect,  or  denomination  separate  and  distinct  from  all  others.  They  are  a  unit  on 
the  grand  outlines  of  the  system  of  belief  (such  as  the  Pre-Mill.,  Sec.  Advent,  the  first 
and  second  resurrection,  the  translation,  the  judgment,  the  future  Kingdom  of  the  Mes- 
siah, etc.),  while  they  may  differ  from  each  other  in  the  details,  the  order  of  events,  or  in 
reference  to  other  doctrines  not  directly  associated  with  Pre-Millenarianism. 

Ols.  2.  The  Seventh-Day  Adventists  uniting  the  doctrine  of  the  near- 
ness of  the  Second  Advent  with  their  peculiar,  distinctive  views,  injure  it 
in  the  minds  of  those  who  overlook  the  fact,  that  no  sect  has  ever  existed 
which  has  not  mingled  some  truth  with  its  error.  Pre-Millenarianism  es- 
pecially is  thus  judged  by  the  prejudice  engendered  by  Seventh-I  >ay  Advent- 
ists, when  the  truth  is,  that  so  little  of  our  doctrine  is  entertained  by  them, 
and  so  hostile  are  they  to  our  essential  views,  that  they  cannot  be  classed 
with  Pre-Millenarians,  since  they  do  not  in  any  sense  hold  to  a  Millennium 
here  on  the  earth  during  the  thousand  years.  This  is  seen  in  the  restora- 
tion of  an  old  monkish  idea,1  that  during  the  1000  years  or  Millennium,  this 
earth  is  to  be  a  fiery  hell  in  which  the  wicked,  the  mortal  race,  and- all 
things  are  to  be  destroyed,  and  then  at  the  end  of  the  thousand  years  Jesus, 
the  Christ,  and  His  saints,  who  during  the  1000  years  were  in  the  third 
heaven  and  reigned  there,  return  to  this  earth  which  has  been  renewed.'2 

This  organization  is  of  very  modern  growth  ;  its  founders  and  leaders, 
Mrs.  White  and  her  husband,  are  still  living.  Ecclesiastical  history  records 
the  existence  of  no  body  like  them,  with  their  peculiar  formulated  faith 
(as  presented  by  their  writers),  although  it  gives  persons  and  parties  who 
arose  now  and  then,  and  insisted  upon  the  observance  of  the  Seventh  Day. 
Their  system,  like  Mormonism,  is  eclectic,  and  a  variety  of  doctrines  are 
incorporated,  such  as  a  gross  materialism  as  taught  by  the  Storrites  and 
Christadelphians,  a  speedy  Advent  with  the  exegesis  attached  to  it  as  pre- 
sented by  the  Millerites,  a  non-perpetuation  of  the  race,  and  a  non-restora- 
tion of  the  Jews  as  taught  by  some  of  the  Sec.  Adventists,  a  denial  of  the 
unchangeable  priesthood  of  Jesus,  co-existent  with  His  own  existence,  as 
affirmed  by  Post-Millenarians,  a  special  adherence  to  the  doctrine  of  meats 
and  drinks  (e.g.  pork,  coffee  and  tea)  as  illustrated  by  the  Jews,  a  lack  of 
charity  toward  all  who  refuse  to  receive  their  system  of  faith,  hedged  in  by 
a  declarative  baptism,  as  in  turn  enforced  against  them  by  various  other 
sects  in  a  spirit  of  exclusiveness.  They  claim  for  themselves  a  particular 
mission  (as  we  shall  show)  and  introduce  things  in  support  of  it  not  only 
new  but  astounding,  as  shown  in  the  wonderful  interpretations  given  to 
prophetic  Scripture  in  support  of  their  special  claims  as  God's  people. 
Ignoring  the  everlasting  Davidic  Covenant  in  its  plain  grammatical  sense, 
and  the  prophecies  in  vindication  of  the  same,  they  spiritualize  the  same, 
and  hence  have  no  correct  conceptions  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom.  Their 
theory  makes  it  a  purely  spiritual  Kingdom — like  that  of  Post-Millenarians. 
They  have  but  little  in  common  with  Pre-Millenarians.3 


284  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.    179. 

The  prophetism  of  Mrs.  White  is  highly  objectionable,  because  the  falsity 
of  her  alleged  ability  to  prophecy  is  made  palpably  evident  by  her  interpre- 
tation and  application  of  Scripture,  thus  showing  that  her  predictions  are 
only  the  result  of  her  own  imaginings,  probably  of  a  diseased  mind  strongly 
affected  by  religious  ideas.4  One  illustration  of  her  interpretation  under 
prophetic  influence  will  suffice,  and  this  is  selected  because  it  serves  to 
show  both  her  mission  (and  that  of  her  followers),  and  the  manner  in  which 
all  things  must  be  bent  to  subserve  the  Seventh-Day  interest.  Let  the 
reader  turn  to  Rev.  14,  and  she  has  the  audacity  to  claim  that  the  Seventh- 
Day  Adventists  at  present  compose  those  144,000  thousand.  That,  which  so 
many  interpreters  apply  to  the  glorified  saints,  they  refer  to  themselves  in 
their  present  mortal  and  imperfect  state.  Surely  the  pride  that  can  thus 
exclusively  appropriate  this  select  band  Avith  its  new  song  and  distinguish- 
ing blessings  to  one  sect,  is  not  to  be  envied.  She  violates  the  conspicuous 
contrast  presented  by  the  "  first-fruits"  as  a  part  previously  taken  away  from 
"  the  harvest"  that  follows,  making  their  sect  continuous  down  and  pre- 
parative in  effect,  to  the  harvest  ;  and  she  destroys  the  order  of  the  fulfil- 
ment in  making  such  an  arrogant  claim,  because  she  makes  the  first  angel 
message  to  symbolize  the  Millerites  and  the  third  angel  message  to  denote 
the  special  mission  of  the  Seventh-Day  Adventists,  thus  virtually  making 
— if  the  order  is  to  be  followed — the  Millerites  to  follow  chronologically 
after  the  rise  of  the  Seventh-Day  Adventists  (which  is  not  the  fact)  and 
thus  assuming  that  the  144,000  are  identical  with  the  party  symbolized  by 
the  third  angel.  The  entire  interpretation  of  the  passage  and  its  connec- 
tions is  so  formed  as  to  exalt  the  Seventh-Day  Adventists  and  the  Seventh 
Day.5 

Adventism  is  linked  with  the  Seventh  Day,  the  latter  being  re- 
garded as  essential  to  the  former  (hence  the  name)  for  they  declare  that 
if  the  assumed  truth  of  the  Seventh  Day  is  presented  to  any  one  and  he 
rejects  it,  then  there  is  no  salvation  for  him,  although  he  may  otherwise 
bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.6  In  view  of  this  connection  it  is, 
probably,  advisable  to  consider,  briefly,  this  Seventh- Day  question.  The 
line  of  argument  adopted  by  them  is  exceedingly  plausible,  and  most 
admirably  adapted  to  impress  the  unwary  and  ignorant.  Indeed,  since 
many  who  oppose  them  admit  some  of  their  premises,  they  cannot  logi- 
cally or  consistently  meet  them  in  a  discussion  without  defeat.  They  assert 
the  following  :  that  the  Seventh  Day  alone  was  instituted  as  a  Sabbath  ;  that 
this  was  incorporated  in  the  ten  commandments  ;  that  these  command- 
ments were  never  abrogated,  and  hence  are  binding  upon  us  ;  that  Jesus 
only  kept  the  Seventh  Day,  and  we  are  exhorted  to  follow  His  example  ; 
that  unless  we  keep  the  ten  commandments  as  given  we  have  no  right  to 
enter  the  New  Jerusalem  ;  that  the  New  Test,  contains  no  passage  affirm- 
ing a  change  to  be  made  from  the  seventh  day  to  the  first ;  and  that 
the  change  from  the  seventh  day  to  the  first  is  due  to  the  Papacy.  These 
are  the  salient  points  urged  by  them.  Now  the  only  position  from  wbich 
they  can  be  met,  is  the  one  occupied  by  the  Reformers.  The  Sabbath, 
i.e.,  the  Seventh  Day,  or  day  of  rest  instituted  at  creation,  was  incorporated 
directly  in  the  Theocratic  government  established  at  Mt.  Sinai,  and  was 
made  obligatory  upon  the  Jewish  nation  ;  it  was  kept  down  to  the  day  of 
Pentecost  when  the  Christian  Church  Avas  erected,  and  partly  down  to  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Jewish  converts  ;  Jesus  as  a  minister  of  the 
circumcision  and  to  qualify  himself  for  His  work  by  obedience,  had  to  keep 


Prop.  179.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  265 

this  commandment  ;  but  the  death  of  Jesus,  His  sacrifice,  abrogated  the 
entire  Mosaic  law  as  given  to  the  Jewish  nation,  and  this  included  the  ten 
commandments  in  the  form  presented  to  that  nation  ;  but  as  the  ten  com- 
mandments contain  moral  duties  which  are  eternal  as  to  their  nature,  we 
have  these  fully  repeated  and  inculcated  in  the  New  Test,  writings  given 
after  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  ;  nine  of  the  commandments  are  thus  directly 
enforced,  but  the  one  respecting  the  keeping  of  the  Seventh  Day  is  not 
repeated.  If  the  keeping  of  that  special  day  is  so  essential  as  the  Seventh- 
Day  Adventists  affirm,  surely  it  is  excessively  strange  that  so  remarkable, 
so  striking  an  omission  has  occurred.7  On  the  other  hand  we  have  posi- 
tive assertions  which  show  that  the  omission  is  designedly  done,  and  that 
we. are  no  longer  bound  by  the  Seventh  Day  observance,  as  found  in  Col. 
2  :  16  ;  Eom.  14  :  5-6  ;  Gal.  4  :  10. e  The  question  then  may  be  asked, 
"Why  was  Sunday  substituted  for  the  Seventh  Day  as  a  day  of  public  wor- 
ship? The  answer  is  found  in  this  :  worship,  and  the  assembling  of  our- 
selves together  for  public  worship,  is  required  ;  a  time  must  be  set  aside 
for  its  observance.  This  was  done  in  the  Apostolic  age  and  under  Apostolic 
sanction,  and  was  perpetuated.  Ecclesiastical  history  shows  that  down 
to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (which  demonstrated  the  removal  of  the 
Mosaic  observances)  the  Jewish  congregations  observed  the  seventh  and  the 
first  day  ;  the  Gentiles  observed  the  first  day,  and  this  latter  became  the  uni- 
versal custom — a  custom  which  God  has  signally  blessed  in  the  conversion, 
spiritual  improvement,  etc.  of  multitudes  of  believers.9 

They  elevate  the  observance  of  a  day  to  an  essential  of  salvation,  making  it 
virtually  as  requisite  as  the  reception  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  favorite 
passage  levelled — by  perversion — at  the  observers  of  the  first  day  or  Sun- 
day is  Rev.  22  :  14.  Allowing  the  text  to  stand  as  it  is  in  our  version  (for 
the  Sinaitic  mss.  reads  "are  thev  that  wash  their  robes,"  Tischendorf's 
JV.  T.),  a  sufficient  reply  is  found' in  John  14  :  15,  21,  23,  and  15  :  10.  If 
they  can  point  to  a  commandment  given  by  Jesus  or  His  inspired  Apostles 
in  His  name,  to  keep  the  Seventh  Day,  then  their  bigoted  and  spiritually 
proved  interpretation  might  hold  good. 

1  In  the  Fourth  B.  of  Esdras,  an  apocryphal  writing,  we  have  such  a  state  of  desola- 
tion for  seven  days  ;  this  they  extend  to  one  thousand  years.  In  the  opinion  of  the 
monk,  specified  under  another  proposition,  this  state  embraces  a  thousand  years.  The 
early  Church  taught  the  contrary,  abiding  by  covenant  and  prophecy. 

2  The  eternal  hell  on  earth  of  Edwards  (His.  of  Redemp.)  they  reduce  to  the  thousand 
years  ;  and  the  Post-Mill,  reign  of  Jesus  and  the  saints  in  the  third  heaven  they  limit  to 
the  thousand  years  in  the  same  place.  A  passage  proving  such  a  return  of  Jesus  and  His 
saints  to  the  third  heaven  after  His  Sec.  Advent,  and  a  passage  proving  such  a  reign  of 
theirs  in  the  third  heaven,  and  a  passage  teaching  their  return  to  the  earth  after  a  thousand 
years,  they  cannot  produce,  but  build  entirely  upon  inference  and  the  assumed  inspiration 
of  their  prophetess,  Mrs.  White.  It  is  a  theory  so  flatly  contradicted  by  sound  exegesis, 
that  it  is  a  matter  of  amazement  that  it  should  be  entertained.  It  overrides  all  logical 
connection  of  prophecy.  Thus,  to  illustrate  :  they  very  eagerly  quote  Zech.  14  :  4,  5  as 
having  reference  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  but  wrest  it  from  its  connection  and  make  it  fit  into 
their  assumption,  notwithstanding  the  immediate  context  shows  a  reign  upon  the  earth 
as  following,  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  and  Millennial  blessedness  on  the  earth  as  suc- 
ceeding such  an  Advent,  without  the  interposition  of  a  thousand  years,  which,  according  to 
their  theory,  would  make  an  end  of  the  Jewish  nation  in  the  flesh,  and  of  all  other 
nations,  and  thus  render  the  fulfilment  an  impossibility. 

3  We  do  not,  on  this  ground,  affirm  that  they  are  no  Christians.  They  have  among 
them  pious  and  devoted  persons,  who  conscientiously  hold  to  their  doctrines  and  labor 
for  their  dissemination.  Being  for  the  Christ,  doing  much  for  the  love  of  Him,  we  can- 
not, and  do  not,  reject  them.     Their  doctrines  are  public  and  challenge  our  attention, 


266  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PltOP.  179. 

and  consequently  they  cannot  censure  us,  if  conscientiously  and  -with,  the  inalienable 
liberty  of  --  private  judgment,"  we  thus  find  fault  with  them. 

4  Charity  causes  us  to  adopt  this  opinion  in  order  that  her  sincerity  and  conscientious- 
ness may  not  be  questioned.  History  in  the  past  shows  us  tnat  many — just  as  Mormon- 
ism  and'others  at  present— in  the  past  have  set  up,  in  support  of  their  doctrines,  the 
claim  of  being  prophets.  "When  tested  by  the  Scriptures,  their  palpable  antagonism  to 
some  of  its  teachings  and  their  misapprehension  of  its  predictions  and  promises,  show  us 
that  their  pretension  to  be  under  the  special  enlightening  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
cannot  be  admitted.  We  know  Mrs.  White  only  from  her  writings,  and  these  are  amply 
sufficient  to  set  aside  her  prophetism.  In  the  first  edition  of  her  prophecies,  nearly  an 
entire  volume  is  taken  up  with  disputes  concerning  herself,  and  with  affidavits  respecting 
her  moral  character,  which,  to  say  the  least,  were  in  exceeding  badtaste,  and  which,  conse- 
quently, are  omitted  in  the  later  republication.  It  is  a  matter  of  amazement  that  so 
many  persons,  with  the  rejseated  warnings  of  history  before  them  and  with  her  own  asser- 
tions to  compare  with  the  Scriptures,  can  be  led  to  follow  her  and  adopt  her  hallucina- 
tions. Those  that  I  have  come  in  contact  with  affirm  that  she  has  shown  her  union  with 
the  special  supernatural  gift  by  being  able  to  see  things  transpiring  at  a  distance. 
Surely  if  that  is  a  test,  then  Swedenborg  and  many  others,  who  far  exceed  her  in  such 
proofs,  ought,  with  their  teaching,  to  be  received  in  preference  to  her  ;  the  claims  of 
Eomish  saints,  of  Mormon  prophets,  etc.,  are  not  a  whit  more  arbitrary  and  unsatisfac- 
torv  than  Mrs.  White's.  History  is  constantly  repeating  itself,  and  evidencing  how  easily 
human  nature  is  deceived.  Mrs.  White  might  be  profited  by  studying  the  claims  of  Jane 
Leade,  Mother  Lee,  and  many  others. 

5  That  the  reader  may  observe  this  still  more  clearly  we  append  a  brief  epitome  of  the 
connected  application,  which,  perhaps,  for  ignorance  and  audacity  stands  unsurpassed. 
The  144,000  are  the  Seventh-Day  Baptists  ;  the  first  angel  message  represents  the  Mil- 
lerite  proclamation  ;  the  third  angel  message  again  symbolizes  the  mission  of  the  Sev- 
enth-Day body.  Then  follows  :  this  body  sounds  the  alarm  that  the  first  beast  is  the 
Papacy,  "which  established  Sunday  instead  of  the  seventh  day;  the  second  beast  is  the 
UDited  States  (!),  which  worships  the  first  beast  and  makes  an  image  to  him  by  adopting 
Sunday;  the  seal  of  the  angel  is  the  commandment  to  keep  the  Sabbath  or  seventh 
day  ;  the  mark  of  the  beast  is  Sunday-keeping  ;  the  mark  in  the  forehead  is  thinking  of 
and  defending  the  same  ;  the  mark  in  the  hand  is  resting  on  that  day,  etc.  .Can  any- 
thing more  childish  and  extravagant  be  foisted  on  prophecy  ;  and  yet  it  is  sad  to  think  that 
persons,  intelligent  to  a  great  degree,  adopt  such  extreme  views,  and  go  around  the  coun- 
try to  defend  them. 

6  This  is  publicly  preached  as  a  logical  result  of  their  system.  Elders  Waggoner  and 
Stone,  who  proclaimed  this  at  Springfield,  O.,  had,  however,  the  charity  to  say  that  those 
who  were  ignorant,  who  had  had  no  access  to  the  truth  as  possessed  by  them,  might  be 
saved  ;  but  if  you  once  heard  their  vagaries  and  Mrs.  White's  alleged  prophetism  (which 
as  a  body  they  adopt)  and  rejected  them,  the  door  of  salvation  was  shut ! 

1  The  critical  student  will  not  fail  to  notice  that  both  the  Sabbatarians  (i.e.  those  who 
hold  to  the  premise  that  the  ten  commandments  are  binding  in  the  Theocratic  form 
given)  and  the  Seventh-Day  Adventists  are  in  the  same  quandary  precisely.  The  latter 
triumphantly  point  out  these  admissions  (respecting  the  binding  nature  of  the  ten  com- 
mandments as  given),  and  then  ask  for  a  Scriptural  proof— a  thus  saith  the  Lord— for  a 
change  from  the  seventh  day  to  the  first.  To  this  no  Scriptural  reply  can  be  given, 
excepting  through  sheer  inference.  But  the  triumph  of  the  Seventh-Day  Adventist  is 
premature  as  against  us,  for  denying  the  premise,  in  which  we  are  supported  by  the 
abundant  declarations  of  the  Apostles,  we  ask  them  to  show  a  Scriptural  proof  that  at 
the  establishment  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  afterward,  a  command  was  given  by  in- 
spiration to  keep  the  seventh  day.  The  Sabbatarians  fail  in  their  proof,  but  in  precisely 
the  like  manner  do  the  Seventh-Day  Adventists.  And  yet  they  proceed  in  pushing  their 
theory  to  an  extreme,  as  if  they  had'  express  warrant  to  do  so  from  Jesus  and  His  Apostles. 
It  is  another  verification  of  Thucydides'  assertion,  "  that  ignorance  is  bold  and  knowledge 
reserved,"  which  may,  as  Eccl.  History  shows,  be  extended  into  this,  that  ignorance  is 
condemns- tory  and  denunciatory,  while  knowledge  is  charitable  and  indulgent.  The 
reader  will  observe  that  our  remarks  apply  only  to  such  who  receive  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
and  who  unchristianize  others  who  refuse  to  receive  their  inteqn-etation  of  the  same, 
although  they  may  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit. 

8  The  exegesis  given  by  them  of  Col.  2  :  16  is  exceedingly  weak,  based  on  the  idea  of 
"  a  shadow  of  things  to  come,"  asserting  (1)  that  the  Sabbaths  alluded  to  were  the  Jubilee 
Sabbath,  etc.,  and  not  the  ordinary  Sabbath,  and  (2)  that  the  seventh  day  was  not  used 


PkOP.  179.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  267 

as  a  type.  To  this  we  reply  :  (1)  that  the  plural  form  includes  all  ;  (2)  that  the  Colos- 
sians  would  be  better  acquainted  with  the  ordinary  than  with  the  extraordinary  Sabbath, 
and  if  Paul  desired  the  observance  of  one  out  of  the  number,  he  ought  to  have  made  the 
distinction  ;  (3)  that  the  ordinary  Sabbath  is  used  as  a  type  in  Heb.,  being  the  very  day 
on  which  God  rested.  The  other  passages  positively  forbid  that  which  is  the  distin- 
guishing characteristic  of  the  Seventh-Day  Adventists,  viz.,  a  species  of  "  will-worship" 
in  affected  humility,  evidencing  itself  in  a  self-imposed  superiority  over  all  others. 

9  To  indicate  the  lack  of  candor  in  their  advocates,  we  present  the  following  illustra- 
tion :  Elder  Waggoner  (July,  1878)  publicly  declared  in  Springfield,  O.  (what  their  books 
repeat),  that  Sunday  was  made  into  a  Sabbath  by  Constantine  in  the  fourth  century,  and 
that  we  are  indebted  to  the  Papacy  for  the  substitution,  thus  leaving  the  impression 
(1)  that  previous  to  that  time  the  seventh  day  was  observed  by  the  Church,  and  (2)  that 
Constantine  and  the  Papacy  first  introduced  the  change.  This  is  utterly  false,  a  slander 
upon  observers  of  the  first  day,  and  although  the  proof  was  pointed  out  to  this  elder,  he 
and  his  coadjutors  go  on  repeating  the  falsehood  in  behalf  of  their  system.  The  truth, 
as  attested  to  by  history,  is  this  :  In  the  union  of  state  and  Church  instituted  by  Con- 
stantine (and  which  all  good  men  must  deplore,  in  view  of  the  results),  he  made  numer- 
ous decrees  regulating  the  Church  (incorporating  truths  which  Waggoner  also  holds),  and 
among  others  pertaining  to  Sunday,  but  he  accepted  in  the  latter  what  was  already  an 
established  fact  in  the  Church.  The  proof  that  the  Church  universally  held  to  the  first  day 
as  the  day  of  public  worship  is  found  in  Justin  Martyr's  Apology,  presented  to  the 
Emperor  Antoninus  Pius,  a.d.  150,  where,  giving  an  account  of  the  public  worship  of 
Christians,  lie  says  :  "  On  the  day  which  is  called  Sunday,  all,  whether  dwelling  in  the 
towns  or  in  the  villages,  hold  meetings  ;  and  the  Memoirs  of  the  Apostles,  and  the  writ- 
ings of  the  projDhets,  are  read,"  etc.  "  We  all  commonly  hold  our  assemblies  on  Sunday, 
because  it  is  the  first  day  on  which  God  converted  the  darkness  and  matter,  and  framed 
the  world  ;  and  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  on  the  same  day,  arose  from  the  dead." 
Barnabas  of  the  first  century  (quoted  by  Neander,  Ch.  His.)  makes  the  same  statement 
and  assigns  the  same  reason.  (If  Barnabas  be  a  Jewish-Christian,  and  not  Barnabas  who 
was  with  Paul,  it  only  serves  to  show  how  Jewish  believers  regarded  the  first  day.)  Now 
here  is  an  apology,  written  by  the  most  distinguished  man  of  the  second  century,  flatly 
and  fully  contradicting  Waggoner's  statements.  When  pressed  on  this  point,  and  to 
adduce  proof  on  his  side  equally  satisfactory  historically,  the  reply  was  that  the  pious 
and  devoted  ones  had  no  time  to  write,  or,  if  they  had  written,  the  writings  were  de- 
stroyed. 

Obs.  3.  "  Millerism"  is  most  frequently  associated  with  Pre-Millenarian- 
ism,  when  the  simple  truth  is  this  :  it  has  more  points  of  association  in 
belief  with  Post-Millenarianism  than  with  Chiliasm.  The  proof  is  found  in 
the  doctrines  proclaimed,  as  e.g.  they  agree  with  Post-Mills,  in  ignoring 
the  Davidic  Covenant,  in  denying  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  and  the  same 
Davidic  Kingdom  overthrown,  in  not  discriminating  between  the  first  and 
second  resurrection,  in  refusing  the  perpetuation  of  the  race  after  the 
Advent,  in  holding  to  the  dissolution  of  the  earth,  in  the  views  of 
judgment,  the  Judgment  Day,  the  world  to  come,  etc.  The  only  points 
of  contact  between  Millerism  and  Pre-Millenarianism  are  the  nearness  of 
the  Sec.  Advent,  and  the  duty  of  constant  watchfulness.  It  evidently  had 
pious  and  sincere  advocates,  and  is  not  characterized  by  that  intense  exclu- 
siveism  and  bigotry,  observed  in  those  preceding.  But  the  idea  of  a  blessed 
Millennial  age  over  the  spared  nations  of  the  earth  under  the  personal  reign 
of  Jesus  and  His  saints,  was  not  entertained,  the  Popish  views  of  Eschatology 
being  generally  retained,  just  as  they  exist  prevailing  in  the  churches  of  to- 
day. According  to  their  doctrinal  position,  they  cannot  be  called  Mille- 
narians,  because  the  Sec.  Advent  was  "a  winding  up  of  all  sublunary 
affairs." 

Notwithstanding  the  essential  difference  between  Millenarianism  and  Millerism,  men 
will  persistently  and  unjustly  class  them  together.  An  illustration  is  given  in  the  N.  Y. 
Independent  (Dec,  1878)  by  Prof.  Norman  Fox,  who  classes  the  members  of  "  the  Proph. 


268  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  179. 

Conference"  (1878)  with  "  Millerism,"  and  then  adds  :  "  The  history  of  Millerism  shows 
that  this  (the  nearness  of  the  Advent)  is  a  dangerous  doctrine,  except  to  some  strong- 
natured  men,  who  are  able  to  quaff  the  sparkling  wine  of  this  glowing  conception  ;  tend- 
ing  to  throw  the  shallower-headed  brother  off  his  balance,  and  leave  the  broken-down 
disciple  shrieking  in  a  madhouse  in  the  delirium  tremens  of  the  doctrine  of  an  impend- 
ing Advent."  Surprising  that  a  believer  in  the  Bible  should  thus  speak  of  "  the  Messed 
Hope,"  and  thus  caricature  the  most  eminent  and  pious  men  that  lived  in  the  Church, 
and  overlook  the  important  fact  that  the  elements  that  unhinged  some  of  the  Millerites 
were  precisely  those  of  judgment  and  the  universal  destruction  of  the  earth,  as  probably 
held  by  Fox  himself  and  related  to  that  Advent.  The  Popish  ideas,  pertaining  to  Escha- 
tology  and  to  the  Advent,  have  more  largely  influenced  those  Mho  unfortunately  were 
weak-minded  than  ever  the  Pre-Millenarian  ;  for  the  latter  holds  forth  the  Sec.  Advent 
as  a  source  of  joy  and  blessedness  to  the  believer,  and  not  one  of  terror  and  consterna- 
tion. Some  few,  to  indicate  their  scorn  of  Pre-Millenarianism  speak  of  it,  by  allying  it 
with  "  Millerism,"  as  if  it  sprung  from  the  same,  thus  exhibiting  either  their  ignorance 
or  malice,  seeing  that  the  former  is  ancient  and  that  the  latter,  like  Whitbyism,  is  mod- 
ern. "  Millerism"  was  connected  with  "  time,"  i.e.  the  exact  period  of  the  Sec.  Advent 
was  diligently  sought  and  definitely  fixed. 

Obs.  4.  "  Second  Adventism"  is  the  outgrowth  of  "  Millerism,"  and  is 
far  more  systematic  in  its  statements,  and  contains  more  scriptural  truth 
relating  to  Eschatology.  But  strictly  they  cannot  be  called  Pre-Millena- 
rian. They  have  more  views  in  common  with  us,  but  on  the  essential  points 
of  a  Millennial  Messianic  Kingdom  over  the  Jewish  nation  and  spared  Gen- 
tile nations  under  the  personal  reign  of  Jesus  and  His  saints,  they  are 
defective  (some,  however,  are  coming  closer  and  closer  to  us  in  doctrine). 
In  the  art.  "  Second  Advent  Believers"  (Rupp's  Orig.  His.  Iielig. 
Denominations),  written  by  a  "  Second  Adventist"  (N.  Southard,  editor  of 
the  Midnight  Cry)  it  is  seen  that  Millenarianism  as  held  by  the  Primi- 
tive Church  and  by  many  eminent  men  in  various  denominations,  is  not 
taught  by  them.  The  Scriptures  relating  to  the  Millennium  they  either 
make  conditional,  or  locate  them  after  an  Advent  which  ends  this  world 
by  a  universal  conflagration.  The  new  creation  that  they  advocate,  and 
the  reign  of  Christ  and  His  saints  in  it,  is  equivalent  to  that  taught  by 
many  Post-Millenarians.  While  they  discriminate  more  in  the  doctrine  and 
order  of  the  resurrection,  insist  upon  the  speedy  Advent,  the  non-conver- 
sion of  the  world  prior  to  the  Advent,  the  restitution  of  the  earth  to  its  para- 
disaical state,  its  ultimate  possession  by  Christ  and  the  saints,  they  omit  vital 
doctrines  which  would,  strictly,  mark  them  as  Pre-Millenarian,  viz.,  they 
reject  the  future  literal  fulfilment  of  the  Davidic  Covenant  upon  which  the 
future  Messianic  Kingdom  is  based  ;  they  deny  the  restoration  of  the  Jews 
and  the  prophecies  relating  to  them  (applying  the  latter  just  as  Post-Mil- 
lenarians) ;  they  refuse  the  perpetuation  of  the  race  after  the  Second 
Advent,  thus  making  a  Millennium  as  described  impossible;  they  Largely 
incorporate  the  Romish  (but  now  prevailing  views)  ideas  of  the  judgment, 
Judgment  Day  and  its  accessories,  etc.  (compare  arts,  on,  in  Buck's  Theol. 
Die;  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.,  etc.).  They  are  earnest,  pious,  and 
devoted  ;  numbering,  perhaps,  near  thirty  thousand.  They  have  some 
excellent  writers,  who  have  done  good  service  in  presenting  doctrines  essen- 
tial to  the  Chiliastic  system,  and  they  are  not  characterized  by  a  spirit  of 
exclusiveism  and  lack  of  charity,  but  cordially  recognize  as  brethren  all 
who  love  Jesus  and  His  appearing. 

As  a  marked  illustration  of  the  difference  between  "  Second  Adventism"  and  "  Pre- 
Millenarianism,"  we  direct  attention  to  Rev.  Litch's  Discussion  on  the  Millennium  (Boston, 
1874),  which  is  a  reply  to  Rev.  Dr.  Brown's  work  against  us.     Dr.  Brown  has  nine  points 


Prop.  179.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  269 

against  us  ;  Rev.  Litch  agrees  with  Brown  in  seven  of  them,  and  therefore  only  opposes 
two  out  of  the  nine.  He  disagrees  with  Brown  as  to  the  time  of  the  Advent  and  reign, 
and  concerning  the  time  and  order  of  the  resurrection,  but  agrees  with  him  in  limiting  the 
mediatorial  work  to  this  dispensation  ;  in  making  no  salvation  possible  after  this  age  ;  in 
removing  the  priesthood  from  Jesus  ;  in  giving  up  the  race  to  ultimate  destruction  ;  in 
denying  the  oath-bound  Davidic  covenant  to  be  realized,  unless  spiritually  ;  in  advocat- 
ing a  universal  conflagration  which  destroys  all  things  ;  in  rejecting  the  restoration  of  the 
Jews  ;  in  not  allowing  a  reign  over  mortal  men  in  the  flesh,  etc.  The  fact  is,  that  they 
are  in  sympathy  in  more  points  of  doctrine  with  Post-YIillenarians  than  with  us,  as  this 
reply  evidences.  Still  on  cardinal  points,  which  Post-Millenarians  bitterly  oppose,  they 
are  in  unison  with  our  views,  and  the  prominency  of  the  latter  brings  them  more  distinct- 
ly before  the  public.  Many  of  them  were  formerly  "  timists, "  but  ajarge  number  have 
succeeded  in  making  the  chronological  question  merely  approximative  and  subsidiary. 

Obs.  5.  A  number  of  small  bodies,  that  may  be  illustrated  as  follows  : 
"  Storrites"  or  "  Destructionists"  (the  followers  of  Stores,  who  publishes 
a  paper  in  New  York),  which  is  a  mingling  of  Materialism  and  Second 
Adventism,  the  complete  and  final  destruction  of  the  wicked  being  the 
leading  characteristic  of  their  faith.  "  One-Faith  People"  being  a  mixture, 
as  far  as  we  can  understand  them,  of  Storrism,  Sec.  Adventism,  Christadel- 
phianism,  etc.  "  Barbourism"  or  "  Restitutionists"  (the  followers  of 
Barbour,  who  published  the  TJirce  Worlds,  etc.)  which  is  a  revival,  in  part, 
of  Rell)rism  (see  preceding  Prop,  and  note),  for  the  ultimate  restoration  of 
the  wicked  is  advocated  by  pressing  "  all  things"  to  an  extreme,  and  reject- 
ing the  general  analogy  of  Scripture  in  behalf  of  a  few  passages  which  are 
susceptible  of  a  different  explanation.  "The  Xo-Age  People,"  some  of 
whom  are  connected  with  these  and  others,  while  others  stand  independent 
and  prefer  to  be  thus  designated.  They  are  characterized  by  two  peculiar- 
ities, viz.,  materialistic  views,  and  a  denial  that  the  Sec.  Advent  is  to  be 
succeeded  by  an  age  to  come.  All  these  ignore  the  fundamental  positions 
upon  which  Pre-Millenarianism  rests,  viz.,  the  Davidic  Covenant  and  the 
resultant  Messianic  Kingdom,  making  it  (excepting,  I  believe,  "  the  One- 
Faith  People")  a  purely  spiritual  Kingdom,  very  different  from  the  one 
covenanted.  The  Gnostic,  mystical,  spiritualistic  reasons  assigned  for  such 
a  view  have  been  and  will  be  noticed  and  answered  under  previous  and 
following  Props.  The  distinctive  peculiarities  associated  with  some  of  our 
views,  make  the  whole  subject  to  be  ignored  by  many,  who  either  are  in- 
capable, or  refuse,  to  distinguish.  Amiable,  sincere,  and  pious  men  are 
connected  with  these,  as  is  evidenced  by  their  writings. 

It  is  difficult  to  keep  track  of  the  divisions  of  these  small  parties.  Thus  e.g.  Russell, 
of  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  who  was  at  one  time  a  colaborer  of  Barbour's  (Rochester,  N.  Y. ),  sepa- 
rated from  him  and  is  at  the  head  of  another  party  :  even  this  is  again  subdivided  by  the 
withdrawal  of  Jones  and  others.  Parties  arise  on  all  sides,  fulfilling  the  predictions  of 
the  Saviour.  Thus  e.g.  we  have  Groves  and  Goodnight,  two  Cumberland  Presbyterian 
ministers  (as  reported  by  Lidh.  Observer,  Sept.  19th,  1879),  who  professed  to  have 
"received  a  special  divine  revelation,  in  which  the  end  of  the  world  within  ten  years 
was  foretold."  Expelled  by  the  Presbytery,  they  started  a  new  sect,  called  "  The  Taber- 
nacle of  the  Coming  Lord  "  (thus,  in  the  title  assumed,  evidencing  their  ignorance  of  the 
covenanted  tabernacle  of  the  Coming  Lord).  They  cannot  be  successful,  seeing  that  they 
have  exhibited  themselves  as  false  prophets,  if  the  editor  reports  them  correctly,  as  fol- 
lows :  "  Among  their  other  vagaries,  they  prophesy  that  General  Grant  will  be  re-elected 
President  in  1880,  and  will  then  invade  and  conquer  Europe,  overthrow  Romanism,  and 
finally  meet  with  a  downfall — after  which  the  Millennium  will  be  ushered  in."  Other 
small  parties  have  fallen  under  our  notice,  and  it  is  a  peculiarity  with  them  all  that  they 
lay  claim  to  a  very  special  spiritual  enlightenment,  and  are,  more  or  less,  condemnatory 
of  all  who  do  not  receive  their  expressed  tenets  of  faith. 


270  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  179. 

Obs.  6.  Chiliasm  is  frequently  allied  with  the  following  :  "  The  Anabap- 
tists" at  the  time  of  the  Reformation.  But  a  reference  to  their  doctrines 
shows  conclusively  that  they  are  far  more  in  sympathy  and  unity  with  the 
Post-Millenarian  view  than  with  ours,  because  they  believed,  as  the  "Whit- 
byans  do,  that  they  themselves,  without  the  Second  Advent  and  prior  to  the 
res.  of  the  saints,  could  introduce  the  promised  Mill,  glory.  A  candid 
perusal  of  Mosheim,  Kurtz,  Neander,  Hase,  Gieseler,  and  other  Ch.  histo- 
rians (comp.  e.g.  Dorner's  His.  Prot.  TheoL;  Lord's  Apoc,  arts,  in  Ency- 
clops.,  etc.),  will  show  that  they  sought,  by  arms  and  force,  to  secure  the 
supreme  power  and  install  themselves  in  the  government  of  the  earth,  mak- 
ing the  Church  under  themselves  the  covenanted  and  predicted  Messianic 
Kingdom.  Their  views  are  in  direct  antagonism  to  Millenarianism,  and 
to  associate  us  with  them  is  to  manifest  either  ignorance  of  Church  history 
or  malice.  "  The  Fifth- Monarchy  Men,"  that  arose  later  in  England, 
entertained  precisely  similar  views,  believing  that  they  themselves  were 
called — without  a  prior  Advent  or  res. — to  set  up  the  Fifth  Universal 
Monarchy  predicted  by  Dan.  (comp.  Hists.  of  England,  Hume's,  Pictorial, 
Burnet,  etc.,  etc.,  and  arts,  on,  in  Cyclops.).  What  Millenarians  attribute 
to  Christ's  Coining  and  His  reign  (and  that  of  the  saints),  they,  like  Post- 
Millenarians — thought  they  could  perform,  or  the  Church  through  them. 
The  only  difference  between  Whitbyanism  and  these  two  classes  mentioned 
— we  admit  a  great  one — is  this,  that  the  former  seeks  to  gain  its  dream  of 
conquest  through  moral  and  spiritual  means,  while  the  latter  invoked 
violent  measures  to  aid  them.  The  dream,  however,  is  common  to  both, 
making  a  Millennium  without  Christ  a  possibility. 

It  is  but  just  to  say  (comp.  arts,  in  Apjiletons'  Cyclop.,  Encyclop.  Ilelig.  Knowledge, 
etc. )  that  not  all  Anabaptists  must  be  classed  with  these  fanatical  ones  ;  we  must  distin- 
guish, in  common  justice,  between  the  extravagant  party  and  the  more  moderate  one.  See 
a  fair  and  impartial  statement  of  the  forerunners  and  immediate  causes  of  this  Anabap- 
tist movement  as  given  by  Seebohm  in  The  Era  of  the  Protestant  Revolution.  According  to 
Robertson's  Jfuldle  Ages  and  numerous  writers,  these  fanatics,  who  strove  to  reinstate 
"  the  throne  of  David  "  and  have  John  Boccold  "  King  of  Zion,"  were  guilty  of  the  most 
heinous  crimes.  Now  to  link,  as  many  do,  Millenarians,  including  the  purest  and  noblest 
men  in  the  Church,  with  such  bloody  and  blasphemous  men,  is  evidence  of  a  malicious,  slan- 
derous disposition.  This,  however,  is  sometimes  done  by  mistake,  being  repeated  from 
others  without  adequate  knowledge  of  the  facts.  In  reference  to  the  Fifth-Monarchy 
men,  of  whom  Evelyn  (Diary,  vol.  1,  p.  339)  says  that  they  "  pretended  to  set  up  the 
Kingdom  of  Christ  with  the  sword, "  wo  present  an  illustration  of  careless  historical  state- 
ment, and  a  lack  of  doctrinal  discrimination,  afforded  by  Neal  in  his  Els.  of  the  Puritans 
(vol.  2,  p.  220-21 ).  Speaking  of  the  Fifth-Monarchy  men,  he  correctly  represents  them 
as  considering  themselves  commissioned  to  introduce  a  universal  Kingdom.  He  informs 
us  that  the  Congregationalists  and  Baptists  drew  up  declarations  against  them,  and 
asserts  :  "  They  disown  the  principles  of  a  Fifth  Monarchy,  or  the  personal  reign  of  King 
Jesus  on  earth  as  dishonorable  to  Him."  Neal  gives  us  his  own  impressions,  or  that  of 
Anti-Mill enarians,  for  ilte  facts  are  that  while  they  disowned  the  principles,  manner  of 
propagation,  and  rebellion  of  the  Fifth-Monarchy  men,  they  did  not  deny  the  universal 
Kingdom  still  future  or  the  personal  reign  of  Jesus.  The  proof  is  overwhelming  ;  for  a 
single  glance  at  the  Confession  of  John  Bunyan  and  other  Baptists  (which  we  quote),  and 
the  known  Millenarian  position  of  ministers  whom  he  names  (and  we  also  quote),  shows 
that  they  could  not  possibly  make  the  declaration  assigned  to  them. 

Hatred  or  ignorance  sometimes  allies  Pre-Mill.  with  Shakerism  (this  is  noticed  in  pre- 
ceding Prop.)  or  with  Mormonism  (this  is  observed  in  preceding  Prop.),  or  with  the 
"  Camisards"  or"  the  French  Prophets"  (see  arts,  on,  in  M'Clintock  and  Sh-ong's  Cyclop., 
the  Ency.  Relig.  Knowl.,  etc.).  Of  the  latter  it  may  be  said  that,  under  the  profession  of 
an  abounding  "  Baptism  of  the  Spirit,"  resulting  in  miraculous  endowments,  they  hoped 
to  become  the  instruments  of  introducing  the  predicted  Mill,  glory  by  signs,  wonders, 
judgments,  etc.     Both  Millenarians  and  Post-Millenarians  objected  to  their  extravagances 


Prop.  179.]  the  tiieoceatic  kingdom.  271 

and  fanaticism,  and  they  soon  came  to  an  end.  Malice  lias  again  recently  allied  tis  with 
Mormonism  ;  and  if  the  principle  is  a  just  one,  how  few  would  escape  such  a  connection, 
seeing  that  many  doctrines  are  held  by  them  common  to  nearly  all,  if  not  all.  The  fact 
is,  they  are  more  in  sympathy  with  the  spirit  of  Post-Mill,  than  with  ours,  as  e.g.  illus- 
trated in  the  profession,  that ' '  the  Church  of  the  Latter-Day  Saints  is  the  Stone  foretold 
by  Daniel  to  smite  the  Image  ;"  or  in  Miss  Eliza  R.  Snow's  poem,  "  Our  Prophet,  Brigham 
Young,"  saying  : 

"  Help  him  to  found  thy  kingdom 
In  majesty  and  power,"  etc. 

Obs.  7.  We  mention  two  bodies  with  reluctance,  because  they  contain 
eminently  pious  and  able  men,  and  yet  in  view  of  the  direct  prominency 
given  to  Chiliastic  views  in  connection  with  doctrines  that  are  regarded  as 
erroneous  by  the  large  majority  of  Protestant  denominations,  they  prej- 
udice many  against  the  truth.  The  "  Catholic  Apostolic  Church"  (the 
offshoot  of  Irvingism)  is  Chiliastic,  but  in  connection  has  an  extreme 
hierarchical  and  liturgical  formalism,  having  revived  (as  the  Mormons)  the 
Apostolate,  and  claims  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit  perpetuated  in 
their  Church,  thus  having  prophets,  etc.,  in  their  midst.1  The  "  Plymouth 
Brethren,"  or  "  Believers,"  or  Darbyites,  are  just  at  the  opposite  extreme  ; 
being  noted  for  their  absolute  Independentism.  While  strongly  Chiliastic, 
they  prominently  set  forth  that  all  clericism  and  ecclesiastical  forms  are 
evil — Romish  and  Protestant  Churches  alike  are  .Battel — that  there  is 
only  one  office,  the  spiritual  priesthood  of  all  believers,  and  every  one  has  a 
right,  as  the  spirit  moves  him,  to  preach,  administer  the  sacraments,  dis- 
cipline, etc.  They  also  claim  the  special  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  and  have  a 
mystical  tendency.2 

1  This  Church  claims  the  perpetuation  of  the  Apostolate,  having  twelve  Apostles,  who 
are  the  chief  rulers.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the  distinctive  number  of  twelve,  the 
calling  by  Jesus  in  person,  the  inspiration  and  infallibility  connected  with  the  office,  the 
being  the  founders  of  the  Church,  the  specific  reward  (Matt.  19  :  28)  assigned  to  them 
indicative  of  a  limited  select  body,  the  declaration  (Rev.  21  :  14)  of  this  continued  select 
limited  number  in  the  future,  the  general  sense  of  the  Church,  especially  the  primitive, 
on  the  subject — these  considerations  are  ample  to  set  aside  any  such  assumptions,  how- 
ever sincerely  maintained.  All  this  is  based  upon  mere  inferential  proof.  When  the 
Church  general  speaks  of  "  apostolic  men"  aside  from  the  Apostles,  it  simply  means 
either  men  associated  with  the  Apostles,  or  living  in  their  days,  or  distinguished,  like  the 
Apostles,  for  piety  and  abundance  of  labors.  The  "  Baptism  of  the  Spirit,"  which  pro- 
duces such  abundant  fruitage,  will  be  noticed  under  Prop.  171.  Another  point  may  be 
adduced  :  Rev.  Andrews,  in  behalf  of  "  the  Cath.  Apost.  Church,"  in  stating  "  its  relation 
to  other  churches"  (Bib.  Sacra,  Ap.,  186(5),  glowingly  specifies  its  mission  to  be  to  restore 
the  Church  to  a  state  of  strength,  faith,  etc.,  preparatory  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  But  this  is 
(1)  to  ignore  positive  prediction  that  it  will  not  be  accomplished  ;  (2)  to  reverse  predic- 
tion, which  places  the  awakening  and  faith  to  be  after  the  secret  stage  of  the  Advent,  the 
resurrection  and  translation  ;  and  (3)  to  exalt  this  organization  as  a  preparative  of  the 
Coming,  when  that  Coming  depends  on  the  completed  number  of  the  first-fruits  gathered 
out  from  all  denominations,  and  many  gathered  out  before  it  had  any  existence.  The 
tendency  of  all  such  departures  is  specially  to  exalt  their  own  mission,  thus  apologizing 
in  behalf  of  their  special  claims. 

2  The  principles  are  disintegrating,  and  have  a  decided  tendency  to  alienate  any  person 
adopting  tbem  from  his  denomination  ;  indeed,  in  their  published  works,  the  advice  of 
withdrawal  is  boldly  given  as  an  alleged  Christian  duty.  They  arrogate  to  themselves, 
and  to  all  who  really  belong  to  the  Ch.  Church,  the  above  privilege  of  inheriting  the 
Kingdom,  forgetting  that  Christians  inherit  with  the  ancient  worthies,  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob.  The  mystical  views  are  illustrated  e.g.  in  their  writers  maintaining  a  real, 
tangible  impartation  of  the  divine  nature  in  the  soul,  and  making  this  the  basis  of  union 
with  Christ,  and  hence  speaking  slightingly  of  faith.  Thus  Lincoln  (Lecis.  on  Epistles  of 
St.  John,  p.  125),  in  his  eagerness  to  make  out  this  divine  impartation,  says :  "  We  are 
not  united  to  Christ  by  faith  ;  there  is  a  time  when  faith  shall  not  be.     Do  you  think  our 


272  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  179. 

union  will  end  then?  No  !  it  is  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  (Such  views  are  not  new  ;  they 
are  constantly  reproduced,  sometimes  in  a  higher  Pantheistic  form.)  Now  the  Script- 
ural teaching  is  plain.  (1)  We  are  united  to  Christ  by  faith,  as  seen  e.g.  Eph.  3:7;  Gal. 
2  :  20  ;  Col.  2  :  5-7,  etc.  (2)  The  Holy  Spirit  aids  this  faith,  1  Cor.  12  :  8,  9  ;  Gal.  5  :  22, 
etc.  (3)  Faith  through  the  aid  of  the  Spirit  applies  the  blood  of  Christ — appropriates  it 
—hence  justification,  Acts  13  :  39  ;  Rom.  3  :  22,  25,  26,  28,  30,  and  15  :  1  ;  Gal.  2  :  16, 
etc.  (4)  Faith  is  never  done  away  ;  the  realization  only  confirms  it  and  increases  it  the 
more.  We  cannot  possibly  conceive  of  its  non-existence,  just  as  little  as  of  the  non-con- 
tinuance of  love,  peace,  or  any  other  of  the  graces.  (5)  The  Hoty  Spirit  is  in  us  just  as 
Christ — His  mind,  jn-inciples,  etc. — is  in  us,  for  the  sealing  of  the  Spirit,  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit,  and  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit  are  the  same  (coinp.  Edwards  on  The  Affections). 
(6)  Eternal  life  is,  indeed,  a  believer's  (because  he  is  justified  by  faith),  but  this  life  (i.e. 
its  realization)  is  in  Him  (Jesus,  the  Christ),  and  will  be  revealed  at  His  Coming  through 
the  Spirit's  power  of  resurrection  and  glorification.  Then  there  are  also  small  bodies, 
as  e.g.  the  followers  of  Barbour  of  Rochester,  the  followers  of  Russell  of  Pittsburg,  etc.. 
who  affiliate  largely  with  the  last  in  their  opposition  to  denominations,  etc.  According 
to  their  periodicals  and  tracts,  their  chief  characteristics  are  in  enforcing  a  spiritual  king- 
dom, a  future  restoration  of  the  wicked  to  access  to  forgiveness  and  life,  the  present 
being  the  season  of  harvest,  etc.  As  their  views  are  considered  under  various  proposi- 
tions, no  detailed  statement  is  necessary.  To  return  to  the  "Brethren  :"  R.  Hoklen 
(Corinth  and  Sects,  p.  14)  declares  that  a  man  who  receives  the  truth  and  acts  conscien- 
tiously cannot  go  into  any  of  the  churches  of  the  various  denominations  to  worshijj,  for 
in  so  doing  he  virtually  connives  at  schism,  divisions,  etc.  All  that  we  now  say  is  this  : 
suppose  others  are  weak,  babes,  or  worse,  in  comparison  to  themselves,  should  they  not 
remain  where  they  might  exert  a  direct  and  healthy  influence,  instead  of  multiplying 
parties?  And  would  it  not  be  well  if  such  zealous  brethren  possessed  the  piety,  the 
graces,  and  usefulness  that  many  in  these  same  condemned  churches  manifest?  Jesus 
Himself  has  cautioned  us  :  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 
The  spirit,  the  motive,  may  override  knowledge. 

Obs.  8.  The  differences  between  Pre-Millenarianism  and  Post-Millena- 
rianism,  Anti-Millenarianism,  Spiritualism,  are  numerous  in  the  interpreta- 
tion and  application  of  Scripture.  These  are  pointed  out  in  detail  as  we 
proceed,  arising  from  the  principle  of  interpretation  adopted,  and  relate  to 
the  manner  of  understanding  the  Abrahamic  Covenant,  the  Davidic,  the  re- 
newal of  the  covenant,  the  inheritance  of  the  Christ,  the  Pre-Mill.  Advent, 
the  non-conversion  of  the  world  before  the  Advent,  the  first  and  second 
resurrections,  the  Judgeship  of  Jesus,  the  Judgment  Day,  the  world  to 
come,  the  Rest,  the  reign  of  Jesus  and  His  saints,  the  restoration  of  the 
Jewish  nation  and  their  supremacy,  the  Antichrist  and  results,  the  Theo- 
cratic Kingdom,  the  Supernatural  introduction  of  the  Mill,  age,  the  per- 
petuity of  the  earth  and  race,  the  design  of  this  dispensation,  the  nearness 
of  the  Advent,  the  commanded  posture  and  duty  of  believers,  the  promi- 
nency of  "  the  blessed  hope,"  and  various  related  subjects.  Of  course  the 
correctness  of  belief  must  be  decided  by  an  appeal  to  Scripture,  and  the 
student  must  determine  for  himself  which  party  obtains  the  strongest  sup- 
port from  Holy  Writ. 

Hence  the  appeals  to  superior  piety,  to  special  enlightenment,  to  personal  assaults,  to 
claims  of  exclusiveness,  are  of  no  weight  whatever  in  an  argument  or  presentation  of 
truth.  The  question  is,  What  do  the  Scriptures  teach,  not  inferentially  or  spiritually, 
but,  directly  and  in  their  plain  grammatical  sense?  We  may  say  here  that,  judging  from 
the  writings  of  a  number  that  we  have  mentioned  under  this  Prop.,  a  large  part  of  the 
capital  used  in  attempts  of  prophetical  writing  consists  in  the  store  afforded  by  "  Baby- 
lon" and  "  Babel."  The  constant  use  and  changes  are  bewildering.  Here  a  party,  with 
sufficient  pride,  self-esteem,  represents  itself  as  the  only  body  of  true  believers  ;  all  out- 
side are  "  Babylon"  and  "  Babel."  Another  party  acts  similarly,  and  makes  the  other 
party  "  Babylonish."  So  we  find  body  after  body  with  this  exclusive  vanity  painfully 
presented,  and,  in  their  assumed  perfectibility  of  doctrine  and  knowledge,  condemning 


Prop.  179.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  273 

all  others — no  matter,  if  they  can  only  trace  up  tbeir  origin  to  a  brief  period.  Valuable 
truth,  precious  matter,  is  mixed  up  with  a  violence  of  bigotry  saddening  10  observe.  It 
is  true  that  much  of  this  defeats  itself  by  its  own  extravagance,  but  it  is  also  true  that 
sincere,  honest,  and  pious  souls  are  entangled  in  its  toils,  deeming  their  position  one 
demanded  by  religious  principle.  All  these  various  parties  and  sects  run  the  Babylonish 
interpretation  to  an  extreme,  and  if  we  were  to  give  credit  to  their  exclusive  and  Phari- 
saic claims,  we  must  believe  that  their  several  bodies  are  composed  of  "  the  pure  wheat," 
and  "  tares"  cannot  co-exist  ;  that  martyrs,  confessors,  missionaries,  eminent  and  labori- 
ous ministers,  who  evidenced  a  devoted  love  for  Jesus,  are,  after  all,  because  they  did  not 
or  do  not  hold  to  the  same  views,  nothing  but  "  Babylonians  ;"  that  Babylon,  instead  of 
denoting  a  wide  departure  from  God  (as  e.g.  witnessed  in  the  legislative,  executive,  and 
propagating  spirit  of  the  Papacy,  nationalized  churches,  and  others)  is  a  complete  and 
total  corruption,  never  suspecting  that  its  spirit  is  also  manifested  in  their  own  selfish- 
ness ami  bigotry  ;  that  they  themselves  making  "Babylon"  to  arise  centuries  after  the 
First  Advent,  they  do  not  make  the  least  effort  to  contrast  the  history  of  the  Church 
then  with  its  status  at  present,  with  the  legitimate  conclusions  derived  therefrom  ;  ami 
that  those  who  locate  the  fulfilment  in  the  future  are  guilty  of  a  singular  inconsistency, 
viz.,  taking  upon  themselves  the  responsibility  of  calling  others  "  out  of  Babylon"  (by 
which  they  mean  "  out  of  all  other  churches"),  when  the  fulfilment  is  future.  We  cer- 
tainly locate  the  call  in  the  interval  (as  we  explain  in  detail  under  other  Props.),  and  wo 
regard  those  who,  however  siacere,  undertake  such  a  call,  as  running  'before  they  are  called. 
It  is  passing  strange  that  just  so  soon  as  a  party  deems  itself  the  pure,  unadulterated 
Church  and  meets  with  decided  opposition,  then  its  opposers  become  "  Babylon,"  and 
the  self-imposed,  but  evidently  agreeable,  duty  is  enjoined  to  call  others  out  of  this  Baby- 
lon. Thus  even  the  amiable  Edward  Irving,  falling  into  extremes  (art.  on,  Princeton 
Review,  Ap.,  1863  ;  comp.  Life  of,  by  Mrs.  Oliphant),  finally  said  :  "  I  do  solemnly  declare 
my  belief  that  the  Protestant  churches  are  in  the  stato  of  Babylon  as  truly  as  is  the 
Romish  Church.  And  I  do  separate  myself,  and  my  flock  standing  in  me,  from  that 
Babylonish  confederacy."  To-day  various  sects  exist  that  denounce  his  church  and  off- 
shoots as  also  belonging  to  Babylon  ;  but  this  is  to  be  expected,  seeing  that  they  throw 
the  Babylonian  shaft  at  each  other  with  such  evident  relish.  Indeed,  if  this  Babylonish 
weapon  were  taken  from  them,  it  would  leave  them  in  a  manner  defenceless,  seeing  that 
their  greatest  skill  is  manifested  in  its  use.  We  hold  to  the  present  and  future  existence 
of  Babylon  ;  we  regard  the  name  as  symbolic  and  highly  expressive  ;  we  firmly  believe 
its  culmination  and  punishment  is  future  (just  previous  to  which,  in  the  interval,  the 
call  is  made),  as  has  already  been  presented.  Hence  we  cannot  receive— on  the  other 
hand — that  extreme  view  (e.g.  in  Briefs  on  Prophetic  Themes,  by  a  member  of  the  Boston 
Bar  ;  Waymarks  In  the  Wilderness,  vol.  3,  No.  3,  etc.),  which  holds  that  in  the  future  the 
literal  ancient  Babylon  will  be  rebuilt,  etc.  Rev.  17  and  18,  compared  with  other  Script- 
ure, abundantly  refute  it.  Fausset  (Oh.  Herald,  Aug.  14th,  1879)  more  correctly  makes 
"  Babylon"  to  lie  primarily  the  apostate  Romish  Church,  but  adds  :  "  Even  the  profess- 
ing evangelical  churches,  so  far  as  they  contain  Babylonian  elements,  shall  share  in  Baby- 
lon's doom.  The  Church,  going  after  the  world,  as  if  it  were  the  reality  instead  of  wit- 
nessing against  its  godlessness,  is  false  to  her  profession,"  etc. 

Obs.  9.  Pre-Millenarians  differ  among  themselves  as  to  details,  and  this 
is  seized  by  some  opponents  and  paraded  (as  e.g.  by  Brown)  as  if  fatal  to 
the  doctrine,  overlooking  the  simple  fact  that  no  doctrine  (not  even  bap- 
tism, the  Lord's  Sapper,  etc.)  exists,  to  which  its  adherents  do  not  give  a 
diversity  of  explanation  and  application.  The  weakness  and  imperfection 
of  human  nature  in  its  comprehension  of  truth  is  not  to  be  made  the  stand- 
ard by  which  to  measure  the  truth  itself.  In  the  grand  outlines  of  Mille- 
narianism,  all  Pre-Millenarians  are  united.  Thus  e.g.  they  all  hold  to  a 
future  Millennial  age  ;  this  age  to  be  preceded  by  the  personal  Advent  of 
Jesus  ;  this  Millennial  period  to  be  bounded  by  a  literal  first  and  second 
resurrection,  the  former  at  the  beginning  and  the  latter  at  its  ending. 
They  all  believe  in  a  still  future  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom  introduced 
by  the  Sec.  Advent,  the  resurrection  and  translation  of  the  saints,  and  the 
restoration  and  repentance  of  the  Jewish  nation.  They  all  teach  the  same 
design  respecting  this  dispensation,  the  non-conversion  of  the  world  before 


274  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM!  [PROP.  179. 

the  Sec.  Advent,  the  same  Judgeship  of  Jesus,  the  same  Judgment  Bay, 
and  related  subjects.  They  differ  as  to  the  exact  nature  of  the  Kingdom, 
the  manner  and  duration  of  the  reign,  the  stages  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  and 
in  the  interpretation  and  application  of  passages  and  predictions  of  Script- 
ure ;  and  this  difference  arises  solely  from  the  removal  of  the  everlasting, 
oath-bound  covenant  of  David  out  of  their  system  (a  fundamental  neg- 
lect, inevitably  leading  to  misapprehension)  and  from  a  spiritualizing 
interpretation  incorporated,  more  or  less,  notwithstanding  the  plain 
grammatically  expressed  sense. 

Many  who  express  themselves  hastily  or  incautiously  are  still  somewhat  under  the 
influence  of  the  widespread  spiritualistic  and  mystical  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures. 
It  is  reasonable  to  anticipate  such  divergences,  especially  relating  to  subjects  so  vast  in 
extent  and  so  largely  incorporated  in  prophecy.  What  George  Eliot  (in  Scenes  of  Clerical 
Life,  "  .Janet's  Repentance,"  p.  125)  said  is  still  true  :  "  Religious  ideas  have  the  fnte  of 
melodies  which,  once  set  afloat  in  the  world,  are  taken  up  by  all  sorts  of  instruments, 
some  of  them  woefully  coarse,  feeble,  or  out  of  tune,  until  people  are  in  danger  of  crying 
out  that  the  melody  itself  is  detestable."  This,  we  may  add,  arises  frequently  from  drop- 
ping notes,  inserting  variations,  or  engrafting  unsuitable  additions.  Then,  persons 
utterly  unable  to  discriminate  obtain  the  crudest  or  the  wildest  interpretations  of 
prophecy,  and  judge  all  other  performances  by  these  specimens.  Thus  e.g.  Wild's  Ten 
Losl  Tribes,  which  totally  ignores  covenant,  and  overrides  everything,  to  aid  its  interpre- 
tation of  David's  throne,  the  Stone,  and  a  hundred  other  things.  (On  p.  117  he  says  : 
"  I  charge  you  to  beware  of  prophetic  dentists  who  put  false  teeth  in  the  mouth  of 
prophecy."  Whatever  this  new  thing,  a  "  prophetical  dentist,"  may  be,  he  seems  to  fill 
his  own  warning.)  Or,  take  Swormstedt's  The  End  of  the  World  Near,  the  truth  and  kind 
warnings  in  it  are  overshadowed  by  the  palpable  nonsense  entailed  by  a  rejection  of  the 
symbolistic  and  the  substitution  of  a  literalism  that  is  astounding  in  its  results.  Hun- 
dreds of  books,  tracts,  etc.,  in  this  way  do  a  decided  injury,  repelling  inquiry  and  load- 
ing the  subject  with  a  reproach  that  it  does  not  deserve. 

Obs.  10.  We  may  add  :  when  regarding  the  history  of  this  doctrine,  how 
it  has  been  treated  ;  how  it  has  been  perverted  ;  how  it  has  been  held  in 
bigotry  ;  how  believers  in  it  are  held  apart  by  incorporated  erroneous  doc- 
trines ;  how  bitterness,  malice,  and  presecution  have  arisen  concerning  it ; 
how  on  the  one  hand  it  is  hated  and  abused,  and  on  the  other  loved  and 
cherished,  we  are  sad  at  heart,  and  feel  to  say,  "  How  long,  0  Lord."  Its 
history  impresses  the  view  that  we  need  our  infallible  Head,  Jesus,  to 
come,  so  that  He  Himself  may  vindicate  His  own  truth,  verify  His  own 
promises,  and  bring  His  brethren  into  the  promised  unity.  How,  then, 
men  will  rejoice  ;  how,  then,  men  will  be  ashamed. 

The  intense  bigotry  presented  by  some  is  more  saddening  than  the  unbelief  of  others, 
for  the  love  which  a  profession  entails  is  lacking.  Professing  to  obey  Jesus  in  love  for 
His  brethren,  they  refuse  to  acknowledge  them  as  such  and  condemn  them  as  debarred 
from  salvation  ;  professing  to  receive,  e.g.  1  Cor.  13,  they  deny  in  practice  its  teaching. 
How  sad  e.g.  it  is  to  take  up  a  tract  "  The  Apostolic  Church  Extinct.  No  Gospel  Be- 
lievers on  the  Globe"  (by  J.  K.  Speer),  and  others  of  a  similar  tenor,  which  make  all 
churches  "  Babel,"  and  deny  Christian  faith  or  union  to  any  but  themselves,  and  thus 
evidence  that  tin;  first  and  fundamental  principle  of  true  religion,  that  of  charity,  is  lack- 
ing in  them.  The  variations  even  of  error  allowed  e.g.  by  the  Apostle  in  1  Cor. 
3  :  11-15,  and  instanced  by  "  the  wood,  hay,  and  stubble,"  without  excluding  ultimate 
salvation  (whatever  of  "  loss"  may  be  incurred),  has  no  influence  upon  the  condemnatory 
spirit  and  wholesale  denunciations  of  Dr.  Thomas  and  his  followers,  and  a  host  of  others. 
Let  any  one  presume  to  differ  from  them,  and  they  at  once  are  denounced  as  no  Christians. 
Some  men  naturally  have  the  disposition  of  the  "  Lifters  and  Anti  Lifters"  (see  art.  on 
M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  and  seem  to  enjoy  themselves  in  "  heresy  hunting," 
but  carefully  omit  Sir  Th  More's  "  hair  shirt,  and  whip,"  because  they  make  it  a  pleas- 
ure and  gratification.     Bigotry  does  not  now  denounce  the  Greek  language  as  "  hereti- 


Prop.  179.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  275 

cal,"  but  it  approximates  very  closely  to  the  same  ignorance.  Bigotry,  which  exhibits 
itself  by  persecution  and  intolerance  in  defending  adherence  to  a  system,  is  still  extant 
to  a  wide  extent.  Instead  of  investigation,  reliance  upon  truth,  it  refuses  the  liberty  of 
inquiry  and  fortifies  itself  by  prejudice.  Fettered  by  circumstances  it  evinces  the  spirit 
of  persecution  without  the  power  of  manifesting  it  excepting  in  a  feeble,  but  annoying, 
way  ;  unfettered  and  having  power,  it  breaks  forth  into  unrelenting  persecution,  exhibit- 
ing the  malignity  which  is  its  root.  Alas  !  notwithstanding  the  divine  injunctions  to 
charity,  etc.,  so  insidious  is  it  that  but  few  men  in  the  past  entirely  escaped  its  spirit, 
as  painfully  exemplified  in  the  best  of  men,  as  e.g.  in  Luther  (vs.  Zwingli)  ;  Calvin 
(vs.  Servetus)  ;  Wesley,  the  Moravians,  Toplady,  etc.  (as  given  in  Tyerman's  Life  of 
Wesley)  ;  Bh.  Ridley  (us.  the  burning  of  JoanBocher  and  Paris)  ;  Knox  (justifying  Archb. 
Benton's  murder)  ;  the  Parliament  of  Scotland  (1560,  condemning  persons  to  death  at  the 
third  offence  in  saying  or  attending  mass)  ;  the  Kirk  Sessions  ( fining,  whipping,  branding 
with  hot  iron,  imprisoning,  etc.  For  these  last  see  Buckle's  His  Civ.,  vol.  2,  ch.  5,  with 
authorities  quoted) ;  the  authorities  of  Basil  (digging  up  the  buried  body  of  Joris  and 
burning  it)  ;  Baxter  (against  the  Baptists,  exemplified  in  Baxter's  Plain  Scriptural  Proof,  p. 
134-36)  ;  Archb.  Laud  (causing  Leighton,  Prynne,  and  Burton  to  loose  their  ears  under 
High  Church  pressure) ;  Swedenborg  (in  his  bitterness  against  the  Quakers,  see  Diary  of, 
Oct.  28th  and  29th  in  1748,  for  illustration  of  intolerance  divinely  revealed— which  is  the 
more  striking  as  in  direct  opposition  to  his  usual  amiableness  of  disposition)  :  Lutherans 
and  Calvinists  (enmity  between,  Motley's  Dutch  Republic,  vol.  2,  p.  69  ;  comp.  controversies 
between  as  given  by  Kurtz,  Mosheim,  etc.,  in  Ch.  Hist.)  ;  Protestants  (lack  of  sympathy 
between,  as  e.g.  illustrated  in  some  designating  the  English  martyrs —Rogers,  Cranmer, 
Ridley,  and  others — "the  devil's  martyrs,"  see  Hopkins's  Puritans  ami  Queen  Elizabeth, 
vol.  1,  p.  74,  and  notice  Melanchthon's  condemning  such  a  spirit)  ;  Melanchthon  coincid- 
ing with  Calvin  in  the  Servetus  case  (Kurtz's  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  154)  ;  Jeremy  Taylor  help- 
ing to  crush  Dissenters  (Froude's  English  in  Ireland,  p.  156-58),  Fenelon  against  the 
Jansenists  (as  seen  in  his  denunciatory  memoir  addressed  to  Clement  XI.)  ;  Bossuet  and 
Massillon  praising  the  merciless  Revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes  and  eulogizing  the 
character  of  the  profligate  and  cruel  Louis  XIV.,  besides  ten  thousand  thousand  other 
instances  in  the  history  of  the  Primitive  Church,  of  Roman  Catholicism,  of  Protestant- 
ism, Puritanism,  and  various  sects  that  have  arisen.  The  slaughter  of  Bartholomew,  the 
Sicilian  Vespers,  the  dark  deeds  of  "the  dark  ages,"  the  bloody  bitterness  of  the  French 
Revolution  are  striking  landmarks  in  its  history.  It  is  a  part  of  human  nature,  an  out- 
growth of  depravity,  and  has  been  more  or  less  exhibited  in  every  age,  as  exemplified  even 
in  the  history  of  the  Persians,  Egyptians,  and  Romans  (Guizot,  note  to  ch.  15  of  Gibbon's 
Decl.  and  Fall,  vol.  1,  p.  506).  Not  merely  a  Loyola,  a  Mohamet,  a  Catharine  de  Medicis, 
or  an  Innocent  have  manifested  an  intense  bigotry,  rendered  so  baneful  by  the  posses- 
sion of  power  to  enforce  it,  but  multitudes  have  exhibited  it,  and  often  in  the  most  petty 
or  spiteful  manner.  What  must  we  think  e.g.  of  the  book  entitled  "  Dirt  Whipt  Off  " 
(printed  1672  and  levelled  against  John  Bunyan)  ;  of  the  learned  Salmasius  ridiculing  the 
personal  appearance,  and  even  the  loss  of  sight  of  Milton  ;  of  the  utter  rejection  of  piety 
in  others,  illustrated  by  Fecht's  publicly  denying  that  Spener  died  a  Christian  ;  of  the 
ostentatious  ornamenting  of  shirt  bosoms  with  texts  of  Scripture  (Ben  Jonson's  Works, 
vol.  2,  p.  55,  Gifford's  note)  ;  of  the  cropping  <>f  hair,  the  cut  of  the  garments,  the  exclu- 
sive use  of  hooks  and  eyes  in  place  of  buttons,  the  making  the  use  of  tobacco  the  tot  of 
Church  or  ministerial  fellowship  (comp.  Buckle's  Mis.,  vol.  2,  art.  720),  etc.  Bigotry 
manifests  itself  not  merely  in  Auto-da-fe's,  in  the  condemnation  of  a  Galileo,  or  in  the 
hanging  of  Thomas  Aikenhead,  etc.,  but  in  the  sarcastic,  contemptuous  expression  in- 
dicative of  no  belief  in  piety.  This  is  illustrated  in  Dr.  Johnson,  of  whom  it  is  said 
(Library  Notes,  p.  257)  :  "  Although  'a  majestic  teacher  of  moral  and  religious  wisdom,' 
when  he  was  in  Edinburgh,  although  personally  acquainted  with  the  celebrated  Dr.  Rob- 
ertson, he  declined  going  to  hear  him  preach,  because  he  '  would  not  be  seen  in  a  Presby- 
terian church  ; '  and  upon  being  asked  by  Boswell  where  John  Knox  was  buried,  burst 
out,  'I  hope  in  the  highway.'  "  Van  Laun  (His.  French  Lit.,  vol.  2,  p.  11)  shows  how 
professed  Christians,  imbued  with  the  bigotry  of  the  times,  presented  "  a  deliberate  indi- 
cation and  justification  of  murder,"  exalting  those  who  were  guilty  of  the  same.  He  in 
one  place  (vol.  2,  p.  365)  mentions  Massillon,  Madame  de  Maintenon,  Madame  de  Sevigne, 
Mademoiselle  de  Scuddery,  Abbe  Tallemant  des  Reux,  Corneille,  Fontenelle,  La  Fontaine, 
La  Bruyere,  Quinalt,  Madame  Deshouliers,  as  praising  and  rejoicing  over,  the  persecution 
of  Protestants.  Montaigne,  who  denounced  cruelty  as  "  the  extreme  of  vices,"  was  still 
the  friend  of  the  Guises  and  of  the  bloody  Montlac,  and  affectionately  spoke  of  those 
who  participated  in  the  barbarous  cruelties  of  St.  Bartholomew.     Charles  V.  (Prescott's 


276  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  179. 

Philip  II.,  vol.  1,  p.  305),  even  in  his  last  will,  conjures  his  son  Philip  to  persecute  every 
heretic  without  favor  or  mercy,  and  thus  insure  his  blessing  and  prosperity  from  the 
Lord.  The  cruelty  of  a  Torqueniada,  or  Yaldes,  mingled  with  fervent  expressions  of 
piety  is  significant.  "  The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury"  (see  art.  on  "  Sir  John  Oldcastle" 
in  M'Clin.  and  St.  Cyclop.),  "accompanied  by  a  large  body  of  the  clergy,  waited  upon 
Henry,  and  having  laid  before  him  the  offence  of  Lord  Cobham  (entertaining  the  works 
of  Wickliffe),  begged,  in  all  humility  and  charity,  that  his  majesty  would  suffer  them,  for 
Christ's  sake,  to  put  him  to  death."  The  spirit  of  bigotry  has  been  exemplified  in  Prot- 
estantism in  the  history  of  Germany,  Switzerland,  England,  Scotland,  New  England, 
and  others.  No  country  has  escaped  its  baleful  influence  ;  no  land  but  has  witnessed 
the  cries,  the  tears,  the  prayers,  the  sufferings  entailed  by  its  existence.  It  crops  out 
largely  in  Cyril's  treatment  of  Hypatia  (enlarged  upon  by  Gibbon,  Voltaire,  Toland, 
etc.)  ;  in  the  Puritans'  condemnation  of  the  Quakers  ;  in  the  strife  of  Remonstrants  and 
Counter-Remonstrants  (Motley,  etc.) ;  in  the  Antinomian,  Synergistic,  Crypto-Calvinistic, 
and  a  thousand  other  controversies  ;  in  trifles  being  elevated  to  essentials  (as  e.g.  see 
Wallace's  Russia,  p.  307,  where,  in  a  portion  of  the  Greek  Church,  adherence  to  the  in- 
terjection "  O,"  the  repetition  of  "  Allelujah,"  and  the  position  of  the  fingers  in  making 
the  sign  of  the  cross,  are  all  essential).  It  has  sheltered  itself  under  piety,  humility, 
love,  doctrine,  metaphysical  distinctions,  prophecy,  rites  and  ceremonies,  sect  spirit, 
superstition,  etc.  (Comp.  e.g.  Bh.  Lavington's  Enthusiasm  and  kindred  works.)  Bigotry 
is  the  breeder  of  unreasonable  prejudice,  most  uncharitable  judgments,  blind  and  obsti- 
nate zeal,  persecution,  and  cruelty.  It  crushes  brotherly  affection  and  love  ;  it  fosters 
spiritual  pride  and  selfishness  ;  it  produces  anger  and  malice  ;  it  cherishes,  where  it  has 
the  power,  fetters  and  torture,  ferocity  and  bloodshed.  When  it  cannot  reach  its  victim 
personally,  it  will  at  least  unchurch  him,  and  consign  him  to  perdition.  It  v>  ill  do  this 
under  the  cloak  of  superior  sanctity,  under  the  plea  of  greater  knowledge  and  holiness. 
If  it  can  do  no  more,  it  will  —  instead  of  meeting  the  arguments  of  an  opponent — blacken 
character  by  an  array  of  epithets  that  a  bigot's  heart  and  mind  can  only  concoct,  as  e.g. 
illustrated  m  Walsingham's  portrayal  of  the  illustrious  WM-liffe  :  "  He  was  the  devil's 
instrument,  the  Church's  enemy,  the  people's  confusion,  the  heretic's  idol,  the  hypocrite's 
minor  ;  ;i  sower  of  hatred,  a  forger  of  lies/ a  sink  of  flattery  ;  who,  at  his  death,  desjused 
like  Cain,  and  stricken  by  the  horrible  judgment  of  God,  breathed  forth  his  wicked  soul 
to  the  dark  mansions  of  the  black  devil." 

To-day  this  spirit  exists  widespread,  implanting  evil  passions  and  unreasonable  zeal  in 
behalf  of  some  confessional  standard  or  certain  held  tenets.  In  Jerusalem  where  Chris- 
tianity arose  and  urged,  as  a  crowning  excellence,  the  spirit  of  charity,  it  exists  ;  and  in 
almost  every  place  where  Christianity  lias  found  a  lodgment  it  is  also  found.  Thousands 
and  thousands  are  under  its  influence  :  entire  bodies  are  so  thoroughly  leavened  with  it 
that  salvation  outside  of  their  own  organization  or  sect  is  an  impossibility.  Belief  in 
their  symbolism,  or  creed,  or  principles,  or  particular  tenets,  or  rites  and  ceremonies,  is 
made  the  criterion  of  salvation.  Bigotry  has  the  hardihood  to  express  it  openly  and 
frankly  in  published  sermons,  tracts  and  books,  glorying  in  its  oAvn  shame.  It  makes  no 
distinction  between  the  published  sentiments  of  opponents  (which  are  proper  subjects 
for  legitimate  criticism,  etc.)  and  their  Christian  character,  but  attacks  and  portrays  the 
latter  in  the  blackest  colors  Truth,  for  its  vindication,  does  not  require  scorn,  obloquy, 
and  detraction  ;  it  does  not  demand  the  repression  of  patience,  forbearance,  meekness, 
long-suffering,  and  charity  ;  it  commends  itself  if  supported  by  the  Word.  Truth  to  be 
efficacious  does  not  place  itself  under  a  yoke  that  weighs  down  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
and  brings  in  a  wholesale  condemnation  and  vituperation.  We  are  thankful  that  the 
large  majority  of  Pre-Mill.  writers,  ancient  and  modern,  foreijn  and  American,  present 
the  subject  of  Pre-Mill.  in  a  Christian  spirit.  However  they  may  differ  from  others,  or 
criticise  the  statements  of  others,  or  express  their  decided  dissent,  this  does  not  interfere 
with  a  due  respect  for  Christian  profession  and  love  toward  those  who—whatever  error 
they  may  possess — love  the  Saviour.  Such  "bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak"  (Rom. 
15  :  1),  and  keep  in  mind  the  injunction  :  "  Grudge  not  one  against  the  other,  lest  ye  be 
condemned:  behold  the  Judge  standeth  at  the  door."  The  charitable  believer  ever 
keeps  in  view  that  none  is  so  perfect  but  that  error,  more  or  less,  may  be  attached  to 
him.  He  does  not  forget  that  in  the  prophetical  seven  churches  all,  even  the  worst,  had 
some  believers  (Seiss's  Apoc,  p.  218).  Tillotson's  declaration  may,  in  spirit,  prove  true  : 
"  We  shall  have  two  wonders  in  heaven  ;  the  one,  how  many  come  to  be  absent,  whom 
we  expected  to  find  there  ;  the  other,  how  many  are  there,  whom  we  had  no  hope  of 
meeting."  (Some  have  added  to  this  :  "  The  greatest  wonder  will  be  that  we  ourselves 
are  there.")     Harris  (Mammon,  Lee.  6)  justly  rebukes  the  selfishness  of  the  sect,  creed, 


Prop.  179.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  277 

pulpit,  and  pew.  Alas  !  Sectism  is  still  in  many,  more  powerful  than  love  for  the 
Church  generally  ;  Creedism  is  still  erected  into  the  standard  by  which  the  Word  itself  is 
to  be  measured  and  all  others  judged  ;  Pulpitism  is  still  in  many  cases  limiting  the  true 
sons  and  daughters  of  God  within  its  own  hearing  and  influence  ;  Pewism  is  yet  flatter- 
ing itself  with  its  personal  connection  as  infinitely  superior  and  holier  than  that  of 
others  ;  and  all  this  is  offensively  paraded  before  us  as  a  warning  how  depravity  can  and 
does  override  grace.  Luther  (quoted,  Sprecker's  Groundwork  Tlieol.,  p.  38)  once  said  : 
"  A  Christian,  holy  people  is  to  be  known  by  this,  that  it  has  the  Word  of  God,  although 
this  be  unequally  treated.  Some  have  it  entirely  pure  ;  some  not.  Wherever  God's 
Word  has  free  course,  there,  also,  there  will  always  be  believers.  Further,  if  I  see  that 
they  preach  and  acknowledge  Christ  as  sent  of  God  the  Father,  that  He  might,  through 
His  death,  obtain  for  us  reconciliation  and  grace  with  Him,  then  we  are  one  in  sub- 
stance, and  I  regard  them  as  dear  brethren  in  Christ,  and  as  members  of  the  Christian 
Church."  (So  Luther  loved  Zwingle  notwithstanding  differences  of  doctrine  ;  for  at  the 
death  of  Zwingle  and  (Ecolanipadiu-s  he— D'Aubigne's  His.  lief.,  vol.  4,  p.  -178 — said: 
"  Their  death  filled  me  with  such  intense  sorrow  that  I  was  near  dying  myself.")  Glad- 
stone (Oontemp.  Review,  187G,  in  "  The  Courses  of  Relig.  Thought")  says  that  the  eminent 
Dr.  Norman  Macleod  declared,  "  that  many  an  opponent  of  dogma  is  nearer  to  God  than 
many  an  orthodox  believer."  This  arises  simply  upon  what  Dr.  Sprecher  (Groundw. 
Theol.,  p.  22)  so  forcibly  expresses  :  "  Saving  faith  depends  not  so  much  upon  the  recep- 
tion of  fundamental  articles  of  doctrine,  as  upon  the  surrender  of  one's  self  to  the  per- 
sonal Saviour — an  act  of  which  the  young  child  as  well  as  the  mature  man,  the  ignorant 
peasant  as  well  as  the  learned  theologian,  is  capable.  The  works  of  the  intellect  can,  no 
more  than  those  of  the  will  of  the  Church,  be  regarded  as  necessary  to  salvation."  Two 
extremes  are  to  be  avoided  :  first,  the  idea  that  knowledge,  expressive  presentation  of 
truth  or  faith,  and  zeal  is  sufficient  without  love  (1  Cor.  13)  ;  second,  that  ignorance, 
lack  of  doctrinal  correctness,  etc.,  may  not  exist  (1  Cor.  3)  in  connection  with  salvation. 
(As  to  rewards  in  salvation,  see  Prop.  135.)  Men  distinguished  for  high  theological  talent, 
ministers  of  renowned  eloquence  and  ability,  have  manifested  less  of  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit,  less  amiable  and  affectionate  Christian  spirit,  less  of  pervading  love  to  Jesus,  than 
persons  far  their  inferiors  in  knowledge,  attainments,  and  culture.  Those  who  reflect 
over  this,  imparted  by  Scripture  and  observation,  will  be  slow  to  condemn.  Rather 
would  we  take  and  appropriate  Maoleod's  prayer  (Memoirs,  vol.  2,  p.  317):  "Oh,  my 
Father,  keep  me  humble.  Help  me  to  have  respect  toward  my  fellow-men,  to  recognize 
their  several  gifts  as  from  Thee.  Deliver  me  from  the  diabolical  sins  of  malice,  envy,  or 
jealousy,  and  give  me  hearty  ]oy  in  ray  brother's  good,  in  his  work,  in  his  gifts  and 
talents  ;  and  may  I  be  truly  glad  in  his  superiority  to  myself,  if  Thou  art  glorified.  Root 
out  all  weak  vanity,  all  devilish  pride,  all  that  is  abhorrent  to  the  mind  of  Christ.  God 
hear  my  prayer.  God  grant  me  the  wondrous  joy  of  humility,  which  is  seeing  Thee  as 
all  in  all."  The  man  that  can  truly  imbibe  the  spirit  of  such  a  prayer  cannot  be  bigoted. 
He  will  not  blacken  others  to  exalt  himself,  but  will  deal— firmly  if  argument  demands  it, 
but — courteously  with  others,  as  e.g.  Bh.  Lowth  to  John  Wesley  (Tyerman's  Life  of  Wes- 
ley, p.  252,  vol.  3).  He  will  not,  like  the  Abbot  Adam  of  Persiquy,  esteem  himself  so  able 
that  he  apprehends  the  mysteries  of  the  Bible  as  clearly  as  the  original  writers  :  or,  like 
men  at  the  present  day,  that  he  vastly  exceeds  them  in  knowledge.  Like  Bh.  Leighton 
(Stanley's  Zee.  His.  Gh.  Scotland)  he  rather  says,  virtually  acknowledging  his  inferiority 
and  liability  to  error:  "  Deliver  me,  O  Lord,  from  the  errors  of  wise  men,  yea,  and  of 
good  men."  Richard  Baxter,  said  to  be  the  author  of  one  hundred  and  sixty-eight  theo- 
logical works,  and  to  have  been  frequently  in  stern  controversy,  wrote  near  the  close  of 
his  life  :  "  I  now  see  more  good  and  more  evil  in  all  men  than  heretofore  I  did.  I  see 
that  good  men  are  not  so  good  as  I  once  thought  they  were,  and  I  find  that  few  are  so 
bad  as  either  their  malicious  enemies  or  censorious  separating  professors  imagine."  "  I 
will  not  be  one"  (he  says  in  another  place — Works,  23  :  27,  and  16  :  368  ;  Littell's  Liv. 
Age,  vol.  127,  art.  on  Baxter,)  that  shall  condemn  or  reject  a  lover  of  God  and  Christ  and 
holiness  for  want  of  distinct  particular  knowledge,  or  words  to  utter  it  aright.' '  "  ( >wn 
no  man's  errors  or  sins,  but  own  every  man  that  owneth  Christ,  and  whom  Christ  will 
own,  notwithstanding  those  errors  and  infirmities  that  he  may  be  guilty  of.  Bear  with 
those  that  Christ  will  bear  with  ;  especially  learn  the  master  duty  of  self-denial,  for  it  is 
self  that  is  the  greatest  enemy  of  Catholicism."  A  thousand  similar  quotations  might  be 
adduced  from  God's  children,  but  these  will  suffice  ;  for  they  sufficiently  indicate  the 
spirit  of  the  writer,  viz.,  that  however  he  may,  in  the  esteemed  interests  of  truth,  ques- 
tion and  criticise  the  statements  of  friend  and  opponent,  he  does  not  condemn  them  as 
condemned  by  Christ.  Jesus  is  the  Judge,  and  those  who  love  Him,  even  in  weakness, 
He  also  loves. 


278  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PltOP.  180. 


Proposition  180.   Tliis  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  ivill  not  be  re- 
ceived, in  faith,  by  the  World. 

Whatever  the  force  of  argument  presented,  whatever  the  intellect- 
ual or  moral  aspect  relating  to  it,  whatever  the  historical  attest- 
ment  bearing  upon  it,  however  even  desirable  it  may  be  in  its  meet- 
ing the  wants  of  humanity,  etc.,  this  same  Word  teaches  us  that  it 
never  will  find  acceptance  with  the  multitude  ;  that  it  will  be 
opposed  by  successive  unbelief,  which  will  finally  culminate,  at  the 
time  this  Kingdom  is  to  be  manifested,  in  asserting  its  sway  (Rev. 
19,  etc.)  over  the  nations  and  mighty  men  of  the  earth.  The  faith 
required,  from  its  inception  to  completion,  in  the  Supernatural,  is 
alone  sufficient  to  ostracize  it  in  the  estimation  of  a  host.  But  even 
our  opponents  must  concede  that  with  the  guide  we  have  received, 
the  implicit  trust  evinced  in  its  teaching  thus  far,  the  evidences 
adduced  in  support  of  our  faith  in  the  final  accomplishment  of  the 
Plan  proposed,  it  would  argue  inconsistency  or  insincerity  in  us 
if  we  did  not  also  earnestly  receive  and  believe  in  the  predictions 
winch  portray  the  extraordinary  state  of  unbelief  universally  pre- 
vailing just  before  the  ushering  in  of  this  Kingdom.  Especially  so 
in  a  day  when  it  is  so  widely  intrenching  itself  in  the  hearts  and 
minds  of  able,  learned,  and  eminent  men,  and  from  thence  reaching 
for  and  extending  over  the  swarming  armies  of  invited  followers. 

The  increase  of  infidelity  is  so  palpable  in  the  present  day  that  it  needs  no  confirma- 
tion. Van  Oosterzee,  Christlieb,  Dale,  Tholuck,  and  others  have  eloquently  represented 
the  matter.  The  press  is  throwing  off  a  multitude  of  evidences  which  speak  for  them- 
selves, and  popular  literature  is  filled  with  the  same.  As  an  illustration  simply  of  its 
widespread  workings,  let  the  reader  turn  to  art.  3,  Westminster  Review,  Jan.,  1862,  which 
indorses  a  "Free  Religion"  (by  which  it  means  that  man  can  believe  and  do  as  he 
pleases),  which  appoints  "  intellect  a  guide,  conscience  a  judge,  and  history  a  guardian 
and  prophet"  (not  allowing  a  superior),  and  which  rejoices  over  the  numerous  "  heresies 
within  the  Church  pale,"  declaring  that  "  the  discoverers  and  writers  in  literature  and 
science  are  necessarily  heretics  ;"  that  "  the  men  of  letters  who  are  either  servants  of,  or 
worshippers  in,  the  orthodox  churches  are  few  in  number  and  minor  celebrities  at  the 
best  ;"  that  "  the  popular  theology  has  only  a  Sunday  existence  ;  human  nature  and  com- 
mon-sense claim  the  rest  of  the  week  ;"  that  "  among  the  working  classes  indifferentism 
and  utter  unbelief  extensively  prevail,"  etc.  So  art.  8,  July,  1861,  etc.  So  e.g.  Brookes's 
art.  in  March  No.  of  the  Princeton  Review,  1879,  sadly  confesses  that  unbelief  is  widely 
extending  both  in  the  Church  and  outside  of  it,  becoming  "a  very  pervading  thing" 
among  all  classes,  etc. 

Obs.  1.  Let  no  fault  be  found  with  us  by  true  intelligence,  when  honesty, 
to  the  principles  avowed  and  to  the  Booh,  compels  us,  aside  from  lower  con- 
siderations that  could  be  urged,  to  assign  the  trite  reason  for  such  unbelief. 
This  Theocratic  Order  covenanted  can  be  seen  in  its  historical  standing, 
its  design,  etc.,  and  may  even  be  appreciated  in  its  adaptability  to  secure 


Prop.  180.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  279 

the  end  contemplated,  but  unfortunately  for  the  multitude — fortunately 
for  the  few — it  sustains  more  than  an  intellectual  relationship,  viz.,  a 
moral  or  religious,  and  demands  in  view  of  the  latter  certain  qualifications 
for  entrance  into,  and  enjoyment  of,  the  Kingdom  which  requires  a  prep- 
aration that  is  humiliating  to  man,  such  as  repentance  and  a  faith  which 
appropriates  the  Gosjiel  of  the  Kingdom  in  its  gracious  provisions,  mani- 
fested by  acceptance  of  and  obedience  to  them.  This  necessarily  leads  to  a 
confession  of  sinfulness  (which  the  truth  of  God,  adapted  to  the  receptive 
powers  of  man,  if  received,  enforces  by  self-consciousness)  that  is  so  dis- 
tasteful to  the  natural  man,  so  derogatory  to  the  high  praises  of  Humani- 
tarian ideas  respecting  the  dignity  of  man,  that  we  are  gravely  told  by 
Parker  and  others  that  Christianity  "degrades  man.'"  The  very  Plan 
designed  to  restore  man,  the  race  and  the  world  to  forfeited  blessings,  to 
remove  the  curse  oppressing  nature,  to  bring  humanity  into  thf  most  inti- 
mate and  endearing  relations  with  the  Creator  Himself,  to  introduce  the 
long-desired  relief 'by  the  world-wide  dominion  of  the  Theocratic  King  with 
the  first-born  of  past  generations  glorified  and  reigning  with  Him  ;  all  this, 
and  more  (including  the  love  and  mercy  displayed  in  the  gift  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  death),  is  an  alleged  degradation  of  man  !  Why  this  express 
charge  aguinst  the  noblest  design  of  Kedemption  and  the  most  glorious 
manifestation  of  love  that  the  world  has  ever  witnessed?  The  naked  truth, 
which  this  same  Word  gives,  respecting  the  unwillingness  of  men  to  receive 
Divine  Revelation  in  its  totality,  arises  not  so  much  from  dislike  to  repre- 
sentations made  concerning  the  Plan  of  Redemption  and  its  blessings  as 
evinced  in  the  Theocratic  arrangement,  but  in  the  demands  made  upon  the 
heart  and  life.  Pride  revolts  at  the  humiliation  that  must  precede  exalta- 
tion ;  pride  rebels  against  the  duties  that  are  enforced  before  victory  is 
attained  ;  pride  turns  away  from  a  cross  that  must  be  borne  before  the 
wished-for  glorification  can  be  received  ;  the  heart  inclined  to  love  evil,  to 
cherish  selfishness,  to  seek  pleasure  and  gratification,  rejects  the  denial  oj 
self  and  of  evil  imposed  by  the  Word,  and  hence  seeks,  in  order  to  escape 
the  obligations  thus  presented,  to  invalidate  the  Word  itself.  Admitting 
that  some  (as  we  have  repeatedly  intimated)  are  swayed  by  other  motives — 
are  honest  and  sincere  in  their  convictions  against  the  truth  (perhaps 
moved  by  surrounding  influences,  education,  etc.),  yet  it  is  also  true  (even 
of  all  when  once  brought  into  contact  with  the  truth)  of  a  large  class — the 
immense  majority — that  "  this  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into 
the  world  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  titan  light,  because  their  deeds  were 
evil.  For  every  one  that  doeth  evil,  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the 
light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be  reproved,"  John  3  :  19,  20.  Here  a  masterly 
hand  in  a  few  sentences  lays  bare  the  leading  cause  of  opposition  to  the 
Bible.  The  condemnatory  nature  of  both  law  and  Gospel,  the  require- 
ments of  the  Bible  from  the  individual,  the  humbling  doctrines  associated 
with  Redemption — alas,  these  form  the  great  stumbling-blocks  to  the  Chris- 
tian religion.  These,  as  the  Spirit  teaches  us,  form  the  cause  why  not  only 
the  Biblical  idea  of  God,  of  the  world,  of  the  means  of  Redemption,  but 
even  the  most  gracious  help  afforded  through  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus 
Christ,  are,  notwithstanding  the  appeal  made  to  our  necessities  and  to  a 
responsive  consciousness,  set  aside  for  mere  theories,  often  the  most  antag- 
onistic and  condemnatory  of  each  other.  If  the  opposition,  so  natural  to 
man,  and  for  which  he  is  held  responsible,  had  developed  itself  into  one 
grand  systematic  method — the  boasted  offspring  of  pure  reason,  etc. — then 


280  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  180. 

it  might  in  virtue  of  its  unity  at  least,  commend  itself  for  strength,  and 
thus  inspire  respect,  but  let  any  one  read  the  history  of  the  diversified 
views,  successive  philosophies,  hostile  to  the  Bible,  and  he  must  be  struck 
with  a  marked  feature  in  them  all,  viz.,  a  lack  of  cohesion,  a  positive  differ- 
ence forbidding  combination,  a  palpable  contradicting  of  each  other,  etc., 
so  that  the  only  bond  that  really  unites  them  is  the  same  spirit  of  hostility 
to  the  Bible  evinced  by  each  of  them.  The  differences  of  Christians  are 
alleged  (and  often  with  force  and  a  degree  of  justness,  forgetting,  however, 
that  it  is  predicted  by  the  Word,  and  is  a  resultant  of  free  moral  agency)  a 
reason  for  rejecting  the  truth,  and  if  a  reason  proper  to  receive  as  a  rule 
for  guidance,  its  application  to  our  opponents  ought  to  be  even  more  forci- 
ble, seeing  that  their  differences  are  immensely  greater  and  more  irrecon- 
cilable, extending  from  Atheism  and  Theism  and  Optimism  down  through 
every  grade  of  opinion  to  its  latest  revived  forms  of  Pessimism  and 
Nihilism,  affording  an  index  of  tin1  heart  as  well  as  of  the  reason.  And  in 
this  wide  range  we  have  the  professedly  higher  scientific  and  philosophical 
attacks  which  busy  themselves  with  questions  pertaining  to  man,  the 
world,  and  the  universe  (assuming  man  to  be  the  umpire  of  truth,  present 
nature  to  be  the  measurer  of  the  past,  the  Supernatural  to  be  impossible, 
what  the  Absolute  only  can  do,  the  eternal  unohangeableness  of  nature's 
laws,  etc.)  down  to  those  lower  attacks  (which  the  former  with  us  utterly 
condemn)  upon  the  moral  character  of  Jesus,  of  God,  of  Christianity, 
outraging  all  feeling  of  propriety,  and  prostituting  the  moral  sense.  For, 
as  caricatures  of  Christianity  exist,  so,  in  justice  to  even  our  opponents  of 
intelligence  and  refinement,  we  must  say  that  caricatures  of  their  higher 
opposition  exist  in  a  way  that  they  themselves  repudiate  with  deserved  in- 
dignation.1 But  candor  requires  us  to  add  that  the  highest  even  to  the 
lowest  criticism  which  (;ise.g.  Modern  Christian!! '>/  a  Civilized  Heathenism, 
which  ignores  Jesus  in  His  social  aspect,  etc.)  makes,  against  experience, 
etc.,  it  impossible  to  live  the  life  required  by  Christ,  originates  mainly  from 
the  cause  just  assigned.  Hence,  the  Bible  challenges  each  one  to  test  the 
truth  by  an  experimental  knowledge  of  it  :  "  if  any  man  will  do  His  will, 
he  shall  "know  of  the  dnr/rine,  whether  it  be  of  God  or  whether  J  speak  of 
myself,"  John  7  :  17.  It  is  owing  to  this  simple  fact,  the  adaptedness  of 
the  truth  to  man's  moral  nature  and  needs,  and  upon  its  acceptance  the 
resultant  effect  upon  himself,  that  the  unlearned  believer,  ignorant  of 
many  things,  and  even  holding  to  things  which  are  erroneous,  is  so  well 
fortified  against  unbelief  ;  for  against  all  adverse  argument  which  he  cannot 
answer  he  has  one  that  triumphantly  meets  the  same,  viz.,  personal  experi- 
ence of  the  truth.  Intellectual  unbelief  (i.e.  unbelief  derived  from  reason), 
while  it  may  and  does  exist  independently,  is  greatly  prompted  and  influ- 
enced by  what  the  Word  calls  "  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief"  (Ileb.  3  :  12),  i.e. 
an  unbelief  springing  more  directly  from  our  sentient  nature,  the  affec- 
tions, desires,  etc. — and  the  reason  why  so  much  stress  is  laid  upon  the 
heart  in  the  question  of  receiving  and  rejecting  the  truth  of  the  Word  (as 
e.g.  Bom.  10  :  \),  10  ;  G  :  17,  etc.)  is  because  it  is  the  great  prompter  (as  ex- 
perience shows)  of  human  action,  too  often  overriding  the  understanding 
and  will,  crushing  conscience  and  judgment  beneath  its  ascendency.  Rea- 
son has  witnesses,  the  understanding  has  demonstrations,  the  judgment  has 
evidence,  all  given  by  God,  to  testify  to  the  truth,  but  the  heart  is  unwilling 
to  be  bound  and  controlled  by  them.  God,  who  knows  what  is  in  man, 
warns  us  that  right  here  is  the  main,  leading  difficulty,  and  sincere  faith  in 


Prop.  180.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  281 

His  wisdom  leads  ns  unhesitatingly  to  adopt  this  view,  corroborated  by  the 
united  testimony  of  all  who  bave  ever  received  and  obeyed  the  truth  against 
the  pleadings,  promptings,  and  dislikes  of  the  heart.  The  fact  is  that  this 
very  constant  appeal  to  the  heart,  constituting  it  the  main  factor  of  belief, 
laying  open  its  power  and  influence,  is  in  itself  evidence  of  a  divine  knowl- 
edge of  human  nature  exceeding  that  of  mere  man.2 

1  As  e.g.  such  outbursts  of  malevolence  as  the  following  :  The  Free  Thinkers  (Luth. 
Obs.,  Jan.  30th,  1874)  of  Palermo,  Italy,  started  a  paper  called  the  Journal  of  the  Disciples 
of  Satan.  The  association  greeted  the  paper  with,  "  We  salute  the  birth  of  a  paper  which 
bears  the  name  of  the  true  God,  the  God  of  science,  liberty,  and  progress — the  God  we 
worship— Satan."  Many  intelligent  and  refined  unbelievers  recoil  from  such  exhibitions 
of — to  say  the  very  least — bad  taste.  Of  course  the  utterances  of  the  Free-love  branch, 
the  ultra-Communistic  branch,  etc.,  are  in  the  same  category. 

2  Even  as  far  as  reason  is  concerned,  we  commend  this  utterance  of  Dr.  Sprecher 
(Groundwork  of  Theol,  p.  68),  who,  after  ably  showing  that  the  Christian  consciousness  is 
independent  of  science,  being  based  upon  a  personal  experience  of  the  truth,  "  a  spiritual 
realism,"  concludes  :  "  And,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  proper  place,  there  is  really  no  room 
for  mere  rationalism  at  the  present  day  ;  that  the  more  complete  analysis  of  thought  has 
shown  that  the  only  consistent  ground  of  an  intelligent  opposition  to  special  or  miracu- 
lous revelation,  is  that  of  pure  atheistic  naturalism  ;  that  in  the  high  stage  of  thinking  to 
which  the  human  has,  at  last,  come,  the  final  choice  must  be  between  heathenism  <in>\  Chris- 
tianity, down-right  atheism  or  true  theism  —  the  theism  which  admits  the  possibility  and  de- 
sirableness of  special  revelation."  The  Scriptures  tell  us  what  the  dunce  will  be  ;  and  the 
tendency,  to-day,  is  seen  in  eminent  scientists  p.nd  scholars  taking  this  naturalistic 
ground  and  approvingly  quoting  the  maxims  and  lessons  of  ancient  heathen.  Bushnell 
(Nat.  and  Supernal.,  p.  453)  speaking  of  the  lack  of  faith  in  the  Supernatural  (which 
strikes  a  deadly  blow  at  Jesus,  His  claims,  and  the  appropriation  of  Him),  says  :  :'  The 
Christian  world  has  been  gravitating  visibly,  more  and  more,  toward  this  vanishing  point 
of  faith,  for  whole  centuries,  and  especially  since  the  modern  era  of  science  began  to 
shape  the  thoughts  of  men  by  only  scientific  methods.  Religion  has  fallen  into  the 
domain  of  mere  understanding,  and  so  it  has  become  a  kind  of  wisdom  not  to  believe 
much,  therefore,  to  expect  little."  And  (p.  21),  "thus  far  the  tendency  is  visible,  on 
every  side,  to  believe  in  nature  simply,  and  in  Christianity  only  so  far  as  it  conforms  to 
nature  and  finds  shelter  under  its  laws.  And  the  mind  of  the  Christian  world  is  becom- 
ing every  day,  more  and  more  saturated  with  this  propensity  to  naturalism  ;  gravitating, 
as  it  were,  by  some  fixed  law,  though  imperceptibly  or  unconsciously,  toward  a  virtual 
and  real  unbelief  in  Christianity  itself."  Such  utterances  from  men  of  all  classes  could 
be  multiplied.  Indeed,  so  widespread  has  this  become  that  scientific  writers  triumph- 
antly refer  to  it  as  an  indication  and  assurance  of  ultimate  victory,  as  seen  e.g.  in  the 
writings  of  Draper,  Darwin,  Huxley,  Spencer,  Fiske,  etc.  Professed  believers,  having  no 
practical  belief  and  experience,  having  a  form  of  godliness  and  denying  the  power,  assist 
in  this  work  and  congratulate  themselves  in  the  efficiency  of  their  agency,  as  e.g.  exem- 
plified in  the  writings  of  the  "  Broad  Church"  party.  Christianity  suffers  severelj'  from 
professed  friends  and  adherents,  who,  Judas-like,  betray  with  an  alleged  kiss  of  peace. 
Open  infidelity  is  more  honest,  more  honorable,  and  less  dangerous.  The  fair  and  plain 
statements  of  the  latter,  evidence  at  least  candor.  Let  the  student  ponder  the  conces- 
sions of  one  of  these  (corroborative  of  Dr.  Sprecher's  preceding  statement),  "  Physicus" 
in  his  Candid  Examination  of  Theism.  After,  in  detail,  showing  how  science  refutes  the 
idea  of  the  existence  of  a  God,  and  how  he  is  forced  to  such  a  conclusion,  he  laments  his 
inability  to  accept  of  the  once  consoling  and  inspiring  Theism,  admits  the  chilling 
nature  of  his  natural  faith,  refers  to  its  depressing  influence  upon  himself,  and  declares 
that,  "'  so  far  as  the  ruination  of  individual  happiness  is  concerned,  no  one  can  have  a 
more  lively  perception  than  myself  of  the  possibly  disastrous  tendency  of  my  work." 
Hypocrites  rejoice  in  it. 

Obs.  2.  There  is  no  doubt  that  unbelief  is  largely  generated  by  the  opin- 
ion, entertained  in  various  quarters,  that  the  expression  given  by  the 
Church  in  formularies,  etc.,  in  different  periods  of  the  Church,  must  be 
"  unconditionally  accepted,"  and  that  the  Bible  itself  "  can  only  be  under- 
stood in  the  light  of  that  faith  which  we  receive  from  the  Church."     This 


282  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  180. 

assumption  is  built  upon  the  arrogated  premise  of  a  universal  faith  ex- 
pressed in  these  formularies.  Admitting  a  few  general  truths,  as  e.g.  those 
pertaining  to  God,  Christ,  etc.,  to  exist  in  them  all,  yet  when  the  premise 
is  tested  even  by  fundamental  truths  it  is  found  to  be  incorrect  and  unveri- 
fied in  the  history  of  the  Church,  and  the  diversity  of  doctrine  pertaining 
even  to  the  admitted  general  truths  disclose  the  same.  Thus,  to  illustrate  : 
take  the  leading  subject  of  preaching,  that  of  "the  Gospel  of  the  King- 
dom"— the  main  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom — and  contrast  the  prevailing 
views — said  to  be  derived  under  this  fostering  light  of  the  creeds,  etc. — 
respecting  these  things,  with  the  faith  exhibited  by  pious  Jews  and  the 
early  Christian  Church,  and  the  wide  contrast  between  ancient  and  modern 
faith  is  seen  at  once.  The  multiplicity  of  meanings  given  to  the  Kingdom 
of  God  alone  indicates  Iwiv  much  reliance  can  be  placed  in  a  "  universal 
Church  faith"  which  places  itself  first  and  the  Bible  second  ;  which  con- 
tends that  the  "Word  of  God  cannot  be  properly  understood  without  first 
receiving  the  word  of  man.  The  faith  of  others,  however  valuable  and 
precious,  is  only  corroborative  and  not  a  foundation  ;  confirmative,  but  not 
positive  proof.  It  may,  or  it  may  not,  be  in  unison  with  the  Bible.  This, 
too,  is  based  on  an  exaggerated  view  of  the  Church,  constituting  it  the 
covenanted  Kingdom  of  David's  Son  and  continuing  and  manifesting  pro- 
phetic, priestly,  and  kingly  offices  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  ministry,  etc. 
The  man  of  intelligence  with  the  Bible  before  him,  with  the  history  of  the 
apostolic  and  primitive  Church,  with  the  evidences  of  human  infirmity  in 
the  dogmatic  formulation  of  Biblical  statements,  with  the  changes,  modifi- 
cations engrafted,  with  the  assumptions  of  Church  authority,  etc.,  feels 
that  if  he  accepts  of  the  faith  as  now  generally  expressed,  with  the  varia- 
tions as  existing,  he  must  exercise  a  belief  in  a  great  measure  the  very  oppo- 
site of  that  entertained  by  ancient  worthies  ;  and  hence,  without  endeavoring 
to  account  for  such  substitution  on  the  ground  of  human  weakness,  with- 
out considering  that  such  differences  do  not  alter  the  contents  and  doctrines 
of  Holy  Writ,  without  regarding  the  predictions  which  describe  such  a 
state  as  certain  to  follow,  owing  to  man's  imperfection,  without  reflecting 
that  amid  these  differences  a  bond  of  union  on  the  practical,  experimental 
side  (finding  its  responsiveness  in  the  moral  nature)  still  exists — he  unfor- 
tunately rejects  both  the  ancient  and  modern  faith,  loth  the  Bible  and.  the 
formulated  creeds,  loth  the  Word  and  the  Church.  And  the  feeling  that 
there  is  such  an  antagonism  between  the  old  faith  and  the  new  is  deepening 
and  widening,  finding  its  expression  in  numerous  works,  which  triumph- 
antly point,  e.g.  to  the  Jewish  belief  and  the  primitive  Christian,  and  then 
to  the  one  introduced  later  and  now  so  prevailing,  concerning  the  Church 
and  Kingdom.  The  Apologetics,  instead  of  fairly  meeting  this  question  of 
change  by  directing  attention  to  the  predictions  and  passages  which  teach 
it,  finding  no  Scripture  to  sustain  the  alterations  of  belief,  while  admitting 
the  early  belief  (forced  to  it  by  historical  necessity)  apologize  for  it  in  a 
manner  (as  an  accommodation,  as  justifiable  error,  as  still  containing  a 
germ  to  be  developed  into  the  produced  truth,  etc.)  which  not  only  excites 
the  ridienle  of  our  opponents,  confirms  them  in  unbelief,  sustains  their 
critical  deductions,  but  actually  makes  out  the  multitude  of  ancient  pious 
believers  to  have  lived  in  the  grossest  misconception  of  the  leading  burden 
of  prophecy,  that  of  the  Kingdom. 

Instead  of  faith  in  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  they  speak  (as  in  a  Liberal  paper  called 
Man)  of  the  future  glorious  "Kingdom  of  man."     They  boast  of  this  departure  as  e.g. 


Prop.  180.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  283 

illustrated  in  the  meeting  of  the  "  Free  Religionists"  at  New  York,  in  opposition  to  the 
Evang.  Alliance,  when  Tilton  (of  The  Golden  Age)  and  others  eulogized  their  "  Church  of 
the  Future"  a  Kingdom  of  union,  love,  freedom,  etc.  At  this  meeting  (Lath.  Obs.,  Oct. 
31st,  1873)  Gannett  of  Boston  said  :  "  They  call  us  infidels  and  we  accept  the  name." 
Frothingham  in  the  Introduction  to  Freedom  and  Fellowship  refers  with  evident  satisfac- 
tion to  the  weaknesses  of  Protestantism,  the  history  of  the  Evang.  Alliance,  the  sectarian 
divisions,  dogmatic  prejudices,  party  jealousies,  pressure  and  increase  of  rationalism, 
modifications  of  theology,  etc.,  and  says  :  "  The  '  Christian  World  '  contains  more  non- 
Christians  and  anti-Christians  than  Christians  ;  more  unbelievers  than  believers  ;  more 
unworshipful  than  worshipful  ;  more  luke-warm  than  ardent  ;  more  irreverent  people 
than  reverent.  The  naturalists  outnumber  the  supernaturalists.  The  rationalists  carry 
more  weight  than  the  fideists.  This  is  so,  at  all  events,  in  the  centres  of  thought,  and 
the  centres  of  thought  are  the  fountains  of  thought.  The  live  mind  of  the  world — mean- 
ing by  the  live  mind  the  incpiisitive  mind — is  deserting  Christianity  for  philosoimy, 
science,  and  literature."  The  conclusion  will  be  that  humanity  emancipated  and 
brought  into  unity  of  fellowship,  will  erect  a  Kingdom  of  humanity.  In  "  Faith  and 
Verification"  (art.  in  Littell's  Liu.  Age,  Nov.  16th,  taken  from  the  Xineteenth  Century)  Mal- 
lock,  after  denouncing  the  foundations  of  Christian  faith,  after  saying  "  perhaps  the 
reign  of  faith  is  over,"  still  thinks  that  there  is  yet  some"  stuff  left  in  the  world  as  relig- 
ious dreams  are  made  of,"  and  that  there  may — owing  to  religious  elements  still  existing 
— be  after  a  while  a  return  to  faith  (i.e.  a  liberal  one),  and  declares  that  many  now 
prayerless  and  creedless,  "  would  exclaim  in  a  moment,  could  they  think  such  a  Coming 
possible,  'Even  so,  come  Lord  Jesus.'  "     What  a  condemnatory  sarcasm  ! 

Obs.  3.  Some  late  writers  (as  e.g.  D.  H.  Olmstead  in  a  Lee.  on  the  Prot- 
estant Faith),  to  vindicate  their  position  of  unbelief,  have  endeavored  to 
show  (philosophically)  that  faith  is  involuntary,  and  that  hence  man  is  not 
responsible  for  what  he  believes.  Without  entering  into  a  discussion 
whether  faith  is  voluntary  or  not,  whether  the  product  of  reason,  or  of 
reason  and  the  will  combined,  whether  the  result  of  evidence  or  intention, 
or  divine  aid  annexed,  it  is  amply  sutneient  for  our  purpose  to  merely  indi- 
cate a  few  things  which  clearly  demonstrate  that  God  justly  holds  us  respon- 
sible for  our  belief.  Take  the  extreme  ground  that  it  is  involuutary  in  any 
sense,  yet  it  is  properly  demanded  from  us  in  view  of  its  being  in  some  way 
(explain  it  as  we  may)  the  outgrowth  of  our  nature,  so  that  the  moral  sense 
of  the  world  has  always  held  man  accountable  for  faith  resulting  in  corre- 
sponding action.  While  human  law  does  not  take  cognizance  of  faith,  of 
belief  in  the  abstract,  it  does  so  when  either  faith  or  unbelief  evinces  itself 
in  action  contrary  to  the  law.  Thus  e.g.  refusal  to  obey  law  because  of  un- 
belief is  never  excused  ;  the  commission  of  crime  under  the  plea  of  faith  ia 
never  admitted.  It  is  true  that  the  faith  required  by  God,  in  its  gracious 
appropriating  power,  may  not  and  cannot  be  exercised  without  a  certain 
amount  of  truth,  to  which  the  moral  nature  responds,  being  brought  to 
bear  upon  the  heart,  just  as  intellectual  faith  cannot  be  produced  without 
the  evidence  adduced  which  persuades  reason  to  accept  of  the  same.  But 
in  this  case,  faith  being  the  resultant  of  a  condition  in  which  man  can,  and 
is  invited  to,  place  himself,  so  long  as  he  refuses  to  place  himself  in  the 
position  favorable  to  receive  faith  and  experience  its  power,  man  is  respon- 
sible for  the  lack  of  faith.  Faith  is  both  a  necessity  and  an  elevator  of 
man,  for  while  knowledge  may  and  does  precede,  yet  faith  is  the  producer 
of  action.  Truth  may  be  without  us,  objective,  and  it  may  even  be  coldly 
received  by  reason,  but  faith  makes  it.  subjective,  living  within  us,  appro- 
priating it  and  sending  it  forth  in  action,  in  works,  in  teeming  volumes, 
etc.  Besides  this,  the  faith  which  God  calls  for  and  with  which  alone  He 
is  satisfied,  is  created  by  things  which  God  alone  can  present.  Let,  e.g. 
the  truth  respecting  man's  sinfulness  find  (by  meditation,  etc.)  a  response 


284  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  180. 

in  man's  self-consciousness,  then  comes  the  divine  plan,  which  God  has 
given,  through  Christ  for  deliverance  from  such  a  state,  commending  itself 
by  its  adaptability  to  meet  our  necessities  and  to  bestow  the  promised  bless- 
ings, which  the  heart,  softened  by  the  truth  through  the  Spirit,  receives, 
gratefully  accepts  and  conscientiously  applies,  thus  forming  (Heb.  9  :  1) 
"  the  substance  (ground,  confidence)  of  things  hoped  for  and  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen,"  in  its  corresponding  effect  upon  the  individual.'  The 
Bible,  without  any  scientific  definition  of  faith,  or  nice  philosophical  dis- 
tinctions respecting  its  rise  in  man,  certainly  teaches  that  in  some  way  faith 
is  voluntary  (we  do  not  say  necessarily  or  directly,  but  at  least  indirectly), 
seeing  that  it  is  commanded  (e.g.  1  John  3  :  23,  etc.),  that  men  can  refuse 
to  believe  (John  20  :  27,  etc.),  and  that  they  are  condemned  for  the  lack  of 
it  (John  3  :  18  ;  Heb.  10  :  38,  39  ;  Eev.  21  :  8,  etc.).  Whatever  God  may 
do  to  produce  it  either  in  the  bestowal  of  our  mental  and  moral  constitu- 
tion, or  in  bringing  the  truth  in  contact  with  our  hearts,  etc.,  it  is  also  said 
to  be  excited  by  the  evidence  presented  in  the  Word  (John  20  :  31),  and  by 
the  proclamation  of  the  truth  (Rom.  10  :  8-17),  evincing  that  reason  or  the 
understanding  (Acts  8  :  30-37,  and  Paul  with  the  Jews,  etc.)  and  the  will 
(John  5  :  39,  40)  are  concerned  in  it.  From  all  this  it  is  proper  to  infer 
that  such  is  the  constitution  of  man,  that  he  is  impelled  to  believe  when  the 
proper  evidence  is  given  and  it  receives  due  attention,  and  that,  there- 
fore, it  is  folly  for  any  one  to  deny  the  faith  God  asks  for  before  he  has 
actual! g  placed  himself  in  the  position  requisite  to  secure  the  evidence.  The 
difficulty  with  the  multitude,  who  hold  with  Lord  Byron  that  "  man  is  not 
responsible  for  his  belief,"  is,  that  the  responsibility  arises  from  a  deliberate 
rejection  of  the  evidence,  from  a  wilful  choosing  not  to  pay  attention  to  it, 
from  an  unwillingness  to  place  themselves  in  the  only  position  favorable  to 
its  attainment,  because  it  makes  self  sacrifice  imperative.  The  position  of 
the  faithless  man  is  well  represented  in  Rev.  3  :  20  ;  Jesus  stands  at  the 
door  and  knocks,  i.e.  waiting  patiently  and  calling  attention  to  His  gra- 
cious presence  ;  now  "  if  any  man  hear  My  voice  and  open  the  door,  I  will 
come  in  to  him,"  etc.,  i.e.  the  door  will  not  be  forced,  but  man  himself  must 
"hear,"  regard  the  invitations,  and  manifest  willingness  to  receive  the 
Saviour,  and  then  the  blessings  will  follow.  With  these  prefatory  remarks 
the  reason  why  so  many  (as  the  writer  alluded  to)  excuse  themselves  from 
the  exercise  of  faith  in  God's  Word  becomes  apparent  ;  and  to  confirm  the 
same,  claim  the  right  of  being  ///'*  supreme  judge  in  matters  of  faith  and  of 
thus  making  the  Bible  submit  to  their  own  judgment,  because  of  a  universal 
moral  law  which  is  antecedent  to  revelation.  But  admitting  the  antece- 
dency of  morality,  instead  of  elevating  man  to  a  supreme  judgeship  and  of 
giving  to  him  the  absolute  authority  to  receive  or  reject,  it  places  him  in  a 
subsidiary  position.  For  the  very  conformity  of  revelation  to  the  demands 
of  the  moral  sense,  to  the  dictates  of  conscience  enforcing  morality,  is  not 
merely  a  proof  of  the  prior  existence  of  the  moral  nature,  and  that  an 
appeal  is  thus  made  to  it,  for  judging  of  its  correctness,  but  proof,  in  virtue 
of  its  adaptability  or  suitableness  to  meet  the  conditions  of  such  a  nature, 
of  the  divine  origin  of  revelation.  It  evinces  also  the  claim  of  Revelation 
that  God  has  implanted  the  moral  nature,  and  that  having  made  it  respon- 
sive— constitutionally — to  certain  truths,  when  the  latter  are  presented  and 
duly  considered,  the  former  will  be  duly  affected.  The  relationship  between 
the  two,  evidenced  by  the  effects  produced  (as  between  the  seed  and  the 
means  of  fruitage,  the  eye  and  light,  etc.)  shows  that  both  proceed  from  the 


Prop.  180.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  285 

same  Almighty  Maker  and  Governor.  The  lowest  form  of  unbelief  denies 
the  power  of  conscience,  but  latterly  numerous  writers,  realizing  that  it  was 
utterly  untenable,  take  the  higher  form  of  admitting  it,  but  constituting  it 
the  supreme  judge  over  all  things,  including  the  Bible  itself.  But  this,  in 
connection  with  what  has  been  said,  is  disproven  by  the  fact  that,  judge  or 
monitor  as  it  may  be,  its  monitions  or  judgments,  its  sense  of  moral  fitness 
and  obligations,  are  frequently  overridden  ;  that  its  judgments  may  by 
repeated  violations,  etc.,  become  imperfect,  weakened,  and  defective,  which 
makes  it  unsuitable  to  occupy  the  position  of  an  absolute  judge,  seeing  that 
the  decisions  are  trampled  upon  and  remain  unenforced.  The  feelings  of 
self-consciousness,  arising  from  obeying  or  violating  the  moral  sense  or 
conscience,  indicate  in  self-approbation  or  self-abasement  the  sense  of 
accountability  to  a  higher  power.  To  this  God  appeals  in  the  approval  of  a 
good  conscience  and  in  the  condemning  of  our  own  hearts,  in  the  accusing 
or  excusing  process.  The  authoritative  decisions  of  conscience  stand 
related  to  both  man  and  God — to  man  as  a  guide  if  properly  received,  and 
to  God  as  a  means  of  enforcing  an  acknowledgment  of  His  supremacy  and 
man's  accountability  to  Himself.  The  possession  of  such  a  monitor  is  de- 
cisive proof  that  man  is  under  moral  government,  and  the  correspondence 
between  the  demands  of  the  moral  law  as  given  in  the  Word  of  God  and  the 
untrammelled  dictates  of  conscience  confirm  man's  responsibilities  by  point- 
ing out  the  Being  under  whose  government  he  lives,  and  to  whom  he  is 
accountable.  But  to  make  man's  conscience  or  reason  the  supreme,  sole, 
absolute  judge  under  the  controlling  influence  of  a  will  which,  after  all, 
may  choose  to  obey  or  disobey  its  dictates  or  reasoning,  is  to  say  that  man  is 
under  moral  obligation,  but  only  to  himself,  and  that  after  all  the  only  law 
"which  is  binding  upon  him  is  that  of  his  own  will.  The  Word  of  God 
takes  still  higher  ground  when  it  assumes  and  enforces  its  authority  over 
conscience,  reason,  will,  etc.,  by  its  declarations  of  moral  obligation  existing 
unimpaired — however  violated  by  man — in  virtue  of  the  relationship  that 
man  sustains  to  God  and  to  his  fellow-men,  and  to  which  man's  conscious- 
ness bears  conclusive  evidence  in  the  eulogies  bestowed  upon  the  unchange- 
ableness  of  moral  law.  Besides  this,  in  making  up  a  decision  in  reference 
to  this  matter,  the  experience  of  the  individual  in  the  heartfelt  reception  of 
the  Bible,  ought  to  be  taken  in  account,  seeing  that,  as  the  Word  challenges 
every  one  to  the  test,  the  influence  of  the  truth  upon  the  heart,  the  evi- 
dences of  its  perfect  adaptedness  and  adjustment  to  man's  nature  personally 
experienced,  the  relationship  that  the  moral  and  spiritual  sustain  to  one 
definite  Divine  Plan,  elevates  the  Bible  at  once  into  the  supreme  arbiter  and 
sole  rule  of  faith  and  action.  The  attack,  insidious  as  it  may  be  ;  the  ex- 
cuse, flattering  as  it  is  to  man,  is  inexcusable,  because  based  on  part  of  the 
truth  only,  considering  man's  capabilities  only,  and  then  ignoring  man's 
experience  and  man's  relationship  to  a  higher  Being.  Hence,  owing  to  the 
moral  aspect  of  the  Word,  its  moral  demands  and  requirements,  men  seek 
to  justify  their  non-acceptance  of  it  on  various  and  often  contradictory 
grounds.  And  this  is  not  confined  simply  to  one  portion  of  the  Word,  for 
with  its  moral  side  rejected,  of  course  everything  else  falls  with  it.  There- 
fore it  is,  that  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  will  find  no  favor,  not  because 
of  the  Theocratic  order  assigned,  or  the  blessings  included  in  it,  or  the 
glory  of  the  reign  predicted,  etc.,  but  because  of  the  moral  fitness,  moral 
requirements,  the  believing  Christian  life  that  is  so  imperatively,  so  authori- 
tatively demanded  by  God  before  it  can  be  inherited  by  us.     The  life  of 


2S6  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  180. 

faith  required  before  entrance  into  it,  is  not  a  life  of  blind  faith,  but  of 

seeing  faith,  of   appropriating  faith,  of  faith  resulting  in  corresponding 

action  ;  and  such  a  faith  being  unpalatable  to  man,  forms  the  secret  spring 
of  opposition.2 

1  While  rejecting,  on  the  one  hand,  the  notion  that  justifying  faith  is  mere  assent, 
and,  on  the  other,  that  it  is  something  entirely  superadded,  the  mean  between  the  two 
may  be  stated  as  follows  :  Man  is  so  constituted  mentally  and  morally  that  truths,  when 
subjected  to  his  understanding  intuitively  awaken  faith  by  influencing  the  will  ;  the  rela- 
tion between  truth  and  man's  consciousness  of  moral  fitness,  etc.,  arousing  it.  Evangelical 
truth  affects  this  by  first  enlightening  the  understanding  through  the  Word,  applied  by 
the  Spirit,  and  justifying  faith  is  such  an  acceptance  of  and  confiding  in  the  truth,  or  in 
the  mercy  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ  on  the  conditions  imposed  by  the  Gospel.  There- 
fore it  is  (1)  a  voluntary  act  because  largely  dependent  upon  voluntary  action  in  man 
necessarily  preceding  it  ;  (2)  that  for  the  proper  exercise  of  it  man  is  dependent  upon 
God,  whose  help  is  promised  ;  (3)  that  its  exercise,  viewed  as  an  outgrowth  of  man's 
nature  when  brought  into  contact  with  the  truth,  as  a  result  of  God-given  truth  and 
divine  assistance  imparted,  is  in  a  legitimate  sense  "  the  gift  of  God."  Apprehension  of 
the  truth,  however  brought  about,  must  stand  connected  with  faith.  In  one  sense  then 
faith  is  involuntary,  being  the  product  of  our  constitution  under  certain  conditions  ;  in 
another  it  is  rightly  called  voluntary  because  it  is  optional  with  man  to  place  himself 
under  the  conditions  which  produce  it. 

8  Let  not  the  reader  think  that  we  enter  too  much  in  detail  and  defence  of  the  truth 
and  of  the  believer's  position.  These  very  objections  will  again  and  again  be  renewed, 
and  finally  culminate  in  bringing  about  the  adhesion  ot  the  masses  to  the  future  incom- 
ing rule  and  power  of  the  last  Antichrist.  We  only  add :  men,  unaided,  could  never 
have  devised  the  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom  with  its  requirements  for  inheriting  the 
same,  bemuse  opposed  to  human  nature.  In  man's  devising,  we  have  a  variety  of  kingdoms, 
but  none  that  aspire  to  the  purity,  majesty,  and  grandeur  of  that  pertaining  to  David's 
Son.  Man  never  invented  the  God  of  the  Bible  and  His  glorious  perfections,  brought 
into  direct  Theocratic  relationship  to  man  in  the  most  perfect  of  governments.  To  see 
what  man  can  do,  it  is  only  necessary  to  consider  Mill's  imperfect  and  impotent  God. 
Man  never  concocted  the  biblical  scheme  of  Redemption,  on  the  one  side  so  humiliating 
to  man,  and  on  the  other  so  daring  that  it  reaches  to  the  sacrifice  of  God's  own  dear 
Son.  To  see  this  it  is  only  requisite  to  notice  the  naturalistic  and  humanitarian 
schemes  of  redemption,  which  exalt  man  and  pride  themselves  in  rejecting  Supernatural 
aid  to  get  rid  of  sin  and  the  curse.  Men,  naturally  loving  sin,  could  never  have  devised 
the  denunciations  of  sin  and  the  holiness  of  life  demanded  as  given  in  the  Bible.  To 
see  this,  it  is  only  necessary  to  look  at  that  which  multitudes  of  its  rejecters  have  offered 
in  substitute. 

Obs.  4.  Hume  stated,  what  is  now  so  often  reiterated,  that  "  Onr  holy 
religion  does  not  rest  on  reason,  but  faith  ;"  and  some  of  the  Apologists  of 
Christianity,  overlooking  that  revelation  itself  by  its  very  bestowal,  indicates 
the  capability  of  man  to  examine,  learn,  and  know  its  contents  ;  that  it 
appeals  to  and  makes  demands  upon  reason,  have  conceded  that  Hume  is 
correct,  and  have  endeavored  to  confirm  it  by  hypotheses  concerning  the 
limits  of  reason,  making  all  truth  subjective,  etc.  This,  however,  is  un- 
just both  to  the  Bible  and  the  experience  of  true  believers.  The  Word  of 
God  introduces  both  reason  and  faith  as  essential  to  a  true  Christian  life,  to 
a  correct  reception  of  the  truth.  '  Theoretically,  i.e.  in  its  doctrinal  aspect, 
it  depends  on  reason,  and  hence  we  are  urged  to  use  reason  ;  practically,  i.e. 
personal  experience  of  the  power  of  truth,  it  depends  on  faith,  and  faith  is 
enforced.  To  comprehend  the  nature,  design,  necessity,  etc.  of  the 
Divine  Plan,  reason  is  required  ;  to  realize  its  application  to  ourselves  indi- 
vidually, faith,  leading  to  personal  acceptance  and  corresponding  works, 
must  be  conjoined  ;  to  test  the  whole  truth  in  its  objective  and  subjective 
relationship,  both  are  needed,  both  are  commanded.     Disconnecting  what 


Prop.  180.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  287 

God  has  joined  together,  is  the  cause  why  so  many  are  "  ever  learning  and 
never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  The  Bible  is  not 
afraid  of  reason  ;  fori/  confidently  appeals  to  reason,  knowing  that  its  sacred 
truths,  its  Divine  Plan,  if  apprehended  by  reason  as  it  should  be,  will,  by 
the  very  laws  controlling  the  intellectual  nature  of  man,  commend  them- 
selves to  us.  It  is  true  that  reason  may  be  restrained,  turned  aside,  or  its 
decisions  be  rejected  by  the  love  of  self  and  darkness,  by  the  contraction  of 
Bible  utterances  to  the  preconceived  prejudices  entertained  or  to  the 
limits  of  some  confessional  standard,  human  system,  etc.  It  is  also  true 
that  reason  may  be  so  sanctified,  brought  under  the  influence  of  the  truth, 
that  it  will  still  more  clearly  apprehend  the  truth  through  a.  personal  prac- 
tical experience  of  the  same.  But  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  as  Reve- 
lation is  a  communication  to  man  in  his  own  language,  appeals  to  sinners 
in  the  usage  of  their  own  language,  it  follows  that  reason  is  not  to  be  dis- 
carded as  some  teach,  who  (as  e.g.  Mansell,  Miller,  etc.)  manifest  this 
to  be  an  extreme  by  their  cogent  reasoning  on  other  points,  and  even 
in  presenting  such  a  conclusion  through  a  process  of  reasoning.  The  ap- 
plication of  the  laws  of  language,  the  comparing  of  Scripture  with  Script- 
ure, the  criticism  of  the  text,  the  study  of  analogy,  etc.,  are  all  evidences 
of  the  intellectual  inseparably  connected  with  faith,  fostering  and  cherish- 
ing faith,  and  assigning  reasons  for  the  faith  within  us.  Moral  qualifica- 
tions, so  precious,  cannot  dispense  Avith  the  intellectual  ;  purification,  so 
valuable,  cannot  cast  aside  but  includes  reason.  It  is  owing  to  the  consti- 
tution of  man  in  this  respect  and  his  ability  to  understand  God's  Word  by 
using  the  capacity,  the  faculties,  given  to  him,  by  interpreting  the  Book 
according  to  the  universally  received  laws  of  language,  that  God  justly 
holds  him  accountable  for  its  rejection,  and  declares  that  the  truth  thus 
refused — owing  to  his  capacity  to  understand  it — shall  judge  him  in  the  last 
day.  While  reason  is  not  the  rule  of  faith  (as  shown  by  numerous  writers, 
e.g.  Prof.  Loy,  Evang.  Quart.  Review,  Jan.,  1871),  it  is  also  true  that  faith 
is  not  the  rule  of  reason  ;  for  they  are  sisters,  going  hand  in  hand  and 
"mutually  supporting  each  other,  making  the  Word  of  God  alone  the  rule,  the 
guide,  as  received  by  them.  Where  reason  fails,  as  in  things  beyond  its 
comprehension,  faith*  steps  in  and  aids  reason  to  settle  down  into  the  rea- 
sonable conviction  (yea,  even  to  make  it  an  evidence  of  the  divine),  that  as 
there  are  things  in  nature  utterly  inexplicable,  etc.,  so  in  "  the  things  of 
God,"  we  ought  to  expect  things  beyond  our  power  to  fully  explain.  As 
Pascal  said  :  "  the  last  step  of  reason  is  to  know  that  there  is  an  infinitude 
of  things  which  surpass  it."  For,  the  supreme  authority  of  Scripture 
over  both  reason  and  faith  is  found,  not  only  in  its  adaptability  to  man's 
necessities,  but  in  the  fact  that  man,  with  all  his  powers,  is  utterly  incapa- 
ble of  presenting  a  Plan  and  devising  the  means  for  the  removal  of  the  evils 
and  the  bestowment  of  the  blessings  longed  for  by  humanity  as  they  are 
given  in  God's  Word.  A  consideration  of  our  needs  and  that  of  the  world, 
and  then  of  the  remarkable  Divine  Purpose  in  Redemption  Avhich  so  accu- 
rately meets  and  provides  for  these,  in  connection  with  an  earnest  of 
experimental  knowledge;  the  historical  evidences,  the  past  and  present 
fulfilment  of  prophecy,  etc.,  form  such  a  combination  of  proof,  such  a 
union  of  necessity  and  provision,  that  reason  and  faith  acknowledge  it  as 
immensely  superior  to  anything  that  humanity  can  produce.  Faith,  with 
its  practical  results,  its  invigorating  influence,  its  blessed  fruits,  confirms 
and  strengthens  reason  in  its  deductions  ;  reason,  in  turn,  by  searching  the 


288  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  180. 

Scriptures  (Acts  17  :  11),  by  proving  all  things  (1  Thess.  5  :  21),  etc., 
enlarges  the  scope  of  faith  and  establishes  more  firmly  its  power  over  man  ; 
while  both  together  recognize,  impelled  by  the  unity  existing  between  the 
intellectual  and  moral,  and  between  seeing  and  experiencing,  the  authority 
of  God's  Word.  Hence,  when  we  say  that  this  Kingdom  of  God  is  a  sub- 
ject of  faith,  that  it  can  only  in  its  entirety  be  received  by  faith,  we  do  not 
at  the  same  time  discard  reason.  The  meaning  simply  is  that  it  is  a  matter 
exclusively  of  Divine  Revelation,  Procedure,  and  Consummation.  Man 
could  not' plan,  reveal,  prepare  for,  and  finally  establish  it.  This  is  seen  by 
the  divine  incorporated  with  it  and  forming  its  earthly  Ruler,  and  by  the 
Supernatural  elements  mingled  with  it.  It  is  above  reason  in  inception, 
provisions,  establishment,  etc.,  and  at  the  same  time  it  is  not  opposed  to 
reason,  but,  on  the  contrary,  when  we  regard  the  Scriptural  statements 
respecting  it,  the  Kingdom  appeals  to  our  reason  as  most  desirable,  as 
perfectly  adapted  to  secure  complete  restoration  from  all  evil  and  as  being 
pre-eminently  fitted  to  bestow,  through  such  a  David's  Son,  the  blessings 
promised.  Reason,  bowing  before  its  covenanted  equity,  happiness,  and 
glory,  gratefully  recognizes  the  authority  expressing  it,  while  faith  appro- 
priates" those  things,  affecting  the  heart  and  life,  urging  on  to  such  an 
obedience  as  insures  the  hope  of  ultimate  participation  in  it.  Many  things 
pertaining  to  the  Kingdom,  yea,  even  the  Kingdom  itself  as  still  future 
and  to  be  re-established  at  the  Advent  of  Jesus  Christ,  are  matters  of 
promise,  and  therefore  can  only  be  received  by  faith  in  God's  promises. 
Such  faith,  however,  is  confirmed  by  reason,  tracing  the  Theocratic  order 
as  laid  down  in  the  Word,  seeing  its  connection  with  the  initiatory  and 
preparatory  measures  instituted  (of  which  he  himself  is  a  living  witness,  if 
believing),  and  in  beholding  the  evidences  of  a  progressive  and  ever  advanc- 
ing Divine  Purpose  in  the  past  and  the  present.  Those  who  exalt  reason 
to  the  disparagement  of  faith,  who  constitute  reason  the  supreme  judge  (as 
e.g.  Frothingham  in  Religious  Aspects  of  the  Age)—  telling  us  that  "the 
only  real  infidelity  which' is  a  sin  in  the  sight  of  God  is  a  disbelief  in  the 
primary  faculties  of  the  human  soul  ;  disbelief  in  the  capability  of  man's 
reason  "to  discriminate  between  truth  and  error  in  all  departments  of  knowl- 
edge, sacred  and  profane,"  etc.— will  not  receive  theVloctrine  of  the  King- 
dom, because  they,  disliking  the  requirements  attached  to  it,  assign  to 
humanity  the  capacity  of  working  out  its  own  destiny  and  of  becoming  its 
own  Saviour  through  the  mediumship  of  reason.  The  Kingdom,  together 
with  the  Theocratic  King  so  mercifully  provided,  will  be  to  them  a  source 
of  ridicule  and  contempt,  a  return  to  "  the  error"  of  the  Primitive  Church 
and  "  to  cast  off  Jewish  forms,"  because  reason— rejecting  the  authority  of 
God's  Word,  refusing  to  regard  the  Divine  Purpose  as  a  grand  whole,  declin- 
ing to  consider  the  evidences  in  behalf  of,  and  the  provisions  made  for,  the 
Kingdom,  repelling  all  union  with  co-operative  faith,  stubbornly  resisting 
the  conditions  requisite  to  know  practically  the  divine  truth— regards  itself 
as  eminently  qualified  to  construct  a  plan  for  alleviating  the  sufferings  and 
removing  the  evils  incident  to  humanity.  Making  reason  the  infallible 
guide,  man  the  absolute  judge — only  so  that  he  is  cut  loose  from  the  Script- 
ures as  the  authority— is  followed,  not  by  uniformity,  not  by  union  of  plan, 
sentiment,  etc.,  but  by  a  tvhirlpool  of  varied  opinions,  making  man  the 
mere  plaything  of  a  shifting  mass  of  human  theories.  Behold  to-day  the 
opponents  of  Christianity  and  of  the  Bible,  and  we  can  scarcely  find  two 
prominent  leaders  among  them  who  are  agreed  even  in  the  fundamentals  of 


Prop.  180.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  289 

a  system,  much  less  in  the  details.  What  reason  will  do,  unrestrained  by 
any  authority  outside  of  itself,  uninfluenced  by  a  purifying  and  self-elevat- 
ing faith,  is  evidenced  to-day  by  the  vast  number  of  theories  propagated  by 
unbelievers  of  all  classes,  forming  more  sects  (if  they  may  thus  be  named) 
than  Christianity  in  its  unauthorized  divisions  has  created.  While  the 
latter  have  still  a  bond  of  union  by  their  faith  in  and  love  for  Christ,  the 
former  possess  only  a  bond  of  affiliation  in  their  common  dislike  to  the 
authority  of  the  Bible  and  in  their  present  exaltation  of  man.  If  the  be- 
lievers may,  by  way  of  reproach,  be  designated  "  Bibliolaters,"  indicative 
of  their  profound  reverence  for  the  supreme  authority  of  Holy  Writ,  surely 
it  cannot  be  a  matter  of  discredit  to  call  the  others  Reason  or  Man-worship- 
pers, seeing  that  such  a  phrase  is  expressive  of  the  elevation  of  man  and  the 
praise  bestowed  upon  him  in  the  theories  presented.  In  justice  to  another 
class  (also  divided  in  opinion),  however,  it  must  be  added  that  some  mani- 
fest no  belief  either  in  the  Scriptures  or  in  man  ;  neither  possess  any 
authority,  neither  can  produce  anything  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the 
world  ;  both  of  them  are  merely  the  products  of  an  irresistible  destiny. 
Everything  is  bound  by  unyielding  Fate  or  by  a  dreamy  Idealism,  or  by  an 
all-devouring  Pantheism,  etc.,  but  still  humanity  is  manifesting  itself,  in 
spite  of  its  philosophical  speculations,  in  the  utterance  of  yearnings  that 
cannot  be  suppressed  (Fichte,  Goethe,  etc.),  and  in  shrinking  back  from  its 
own  strictly  logical  conclusions  (as  in  Nihilism  and  Pessimism),  still 
heart-hoping  against  reasoning  that  something  better  is  in  store  for  man. 
There  is  nothing  so  sad  under  the  sun  as  intelligence  fettered  by  unbelief,  as 
reason  bound  by  pride,  as  the  intellectual  nature  held  irresponsive  to  the 
moral,  as  man  attempting  to  stand  alone  without  the  counsel  and  aid  of  his 
Maker.  In  looking  over  the  writings  of  such,  how  often  does  the  heart, 
knowing  the  truth  through  peaceful  obedience,  bleed  at  the  utterance  of 
longings  that  are  irrepressible  and  at  the  expression  of  hopes  which  must 
forever  remain  unrealized,  unless  a  Saviour  who  can  control  nature  and 
nature's  laws  is  accepted.  These  significant  declarations  are  more  or  less 
common  to  all  unbelievers  in  the  Scriptures,  showing  that  however  they 
may  deny  the  authoritative  voice  of  God,  they  cannot  entirely  crush  the 
outgoings  of  the  nature,  which  God  gave,  after  a  still  future  good.  Thus, 
e.g.  Hennell  (An  Inquiry  Concerning  the  Origin  of  Christianity,  p.  489), 
after  discarding  the  testimony  of  Scripture  as  unreliable,  concludes  by 
"  indulging  the  thought  that  a  time  is  appointed  when  the  cravings  of  the 
heart  and  of  the  intellect  will  be  satisfied,  and  the  enigma  of  our  own  and 
the  world's  existence  be  solved."  It  is  a  remarkable  feature  that  many  in 
their  unbelief,  still  holding  to  some  First  Great  Cause,  to  an  intelligent 
Creator,  anticipate  in  some  unexplained  way  a  Revelation,  or  a  manifesta- 
tion, that  will  explain  this  enigma  and  satisfy  these  cravings,  but  they  dare 
not  enter  into  explanations  or  details,  for  the  moment  they  do  so,  every 
sentence  would  condemn  their  opposition  to  the  Bible,  seeing  that  it  would 
evince  reliance  upon,  and  faith  in,  the  Supernatural,  miraculous,  etc.  Tied 
by  their  own  previous  confessions  of  unbelief,  an  intelligently  expressed 
faith  in  the  divine  interference  in  behalf  of  man  and  the  exertion  of  cre- 
ative power  in  removing  the  evils  of  a  groaning  creation,  would  be  so  hostile 
to  their  assumed  position  that  consistency,  if  not  pride,  forbids  its  indul- 
gence to  any  extent.  Having  given  some  general  features  pertaining  to 
unbelief,  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter  into  particulars  or  to  specify  the  varied 
classes,  ranging  from  professed  Atheism  to  Spiritualism.     The  last,  scorn- 


290  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  180. 

ing  the  authority  of  the  Bible,  finds  its  authoritative  utterances  in  a  spirit 
world,  given  in  detached  and  often  contradictory  messages,  out  of  which  a 
scheme  promising  deliverance,  etc.,  is  manufactured  very  different  from  the 
detailed  Plan  of  the  Word.  Yet  it  concedes  the  Supernatural  and  the  mir- 
aculous, in  its  own  way,  which  makes  it  consequently  the  more  inexcusable 
and  dangerous.  Inexcusable — because,  admitting  the  necessity  of  aid  out- 
side of  man  and  nature,  instead  of  receiving  that  which  God  has  provided 
through  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  it  seeks  it  in  spirits  ;  dangerous — because  it  J 
draws  nearer  by  its  admissions  of  the  Supernatural,  etc.,  to  the  nature  and 
wants  of  man  than  many  other  systems  of  unbelief  do,  and  hence  binds  him 
the  more  effectually  in  its  embraces.  The  characteristic  common  to  almost 
all  forms  of  unbelief  is,  that  denying  the  authority  of  the  Bible,  they 
endeavor  to  find  an  authority  outside  of  it,  either  in  man  or  in  nature,  or 
in  a  philosophical  conception  of  the  universe,  or  in  the  invisible,  unseen, 
spirit  world.  It  is  a  serious  cjuestion  how  largely  believers  in  the  Word  have 
aided  in  producing  such  unbelief,  when  they  have  discarded  reason,  when 
eminent  men  have  incautiously  and  unwarrantedly  declared  that  no  one 
can  possibly  understand  the  Bible  without  a  superadded  aid  directly  given 
by  God.  Forgetting  that  Revelation  denotes  revealed  truth  ;  mistaking  the 
influence  of  the  moral  upon  the  intellectual  for  the  intellectual  itself  ;  mis- 
apprehending the  relationship  that  reason  and  faith  must  always  sustain  to 
each  other  ;  overlooking  the  fact  that  whatever  advantages  and  power  the 
practical  experience  resulting  from  faith  may  impart,  it  does  not  close  the 
Bible  to  reason — they  make  the  Bible  a  sealed  book  to  all  others  but  them- 
selves. Making  the  theoretical  and  practical  identical,  causing  the  knowl- 
edge of  special  truths  to  cover  the  understanding  of  all,  they  lay  down 
a  criterion  which  they  themselves  constantly  violate  in  appealing  to  the 
reason  of  the  unconverted  and  in  presenting  the  evidences  of  Christianity 
to  the  disbelieving.  Having  treated  of  this  feature  under  the  Prop.  per- 
taining  to  the  interpretation  of  Scripture,  it  is  only  necessary  to  add,  that 
unbelief  is  not  excused  by  the  standards  set  up  by  man,  since  God's  appeal 
and  commands  are  to  each  one  individually  (having  so  constructed  us  that 
every  mind  'and  heart  when  brought  into  contact  with  the  truth  will 
respond  to  it)  to  study  His  "Word,  not  in  the  light  of  mere  human  inter- 
pretation, but  according  to  the  universally  received  principles  of  language. 
This  is  based  upon  the  fact  that  the  Bible  is  designed  for  all  classes  and 
conditions  of  men,  is  adapted  for  the  mind  and  heart,  and  finds  a  corre- 
sponding adaptation  in  man,  which  is  only  true  when  it  is  studied  in  accord- 
ance with  the  laws  of  language  with  which  all  men  are  more  or  less  con- 
versant and  under  which  the  processes  of  communication,  reasoning,  etc. 
are  conducted.  The  simplicity  of  such  a  procedure — a  simplicity  gratefully 
accepted  by  the  ancient  pious  -Jews  and  by  the  Primitive  Church — is  not 
suited  to  the  mystical,  spiritualistic  tendencies  of  the  age.  It  is  too  com- 
monplace, fitted  indeed  for  the  unlearned,  but  scarcely  accommodated  to 
that  professedly  higher  intelligence  which  seeks  the  transcendental,  mys- 
tical, mysterious.  Hence  the  persistent  ignoring  of  this  Kingdom — the 
simplicity  of  its  government  (although  connected  with  the  divine),  its 
union  with  a  despised  nation  (although  its  union  with  humanity  ought  to 
form  a  plea  in  its  behalf),  its  provisions,  design,  order,  establishment  all 
referring  to  this  world  (although  standing  related  through  its  Ruler  to  the 
universe) — all  this  is  so  widely  different  from  the  theorizing  which  under- 
takes, in  its  wisdom  and  sovereignty,  to  describe  what  is  expedient  or  proper 


Prop.  180.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  291 

for  God  to  adopt  in  Redemptive  purposes,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom 
is  set  down,  without  examination,  as  an  exploded  "Jewish  conception," 
originating  in,  and  carried  out  by  national  prejudice  and  superstition. 

Obs.  5.  Having  already  alluded  to  the  unnecessary  conflict  raging  between 
science  and  faith  ;  having  pointed  out  the  connection  existing  between 
reason  and  faith  ;  having  shown  that  the  highest  proof  of  divine  communi- 
cation in  the  Bible  is  found  when  that  Book  is  approached  and  studied  in 
the  way  science  is  apprehended,  viz.,  by  a  strictly  logical  process  of  reason- 
ing  ;  having  repeatedly  intimated  that  the  relationship  of  truth  to  the 
whole  as  one  great  system  can  never  be  satisfactorily  solved  by  confining 
ourselves  to  one  department  of  knowledge,  or  to  one  side  of  man  and  the 
world — it  may  be  proper  to  notice,  briefly,  the  charge  of  "  credulity'''' 
brought  against  believers.  Having  already  given  the  evidences,  the  proc- 
ess of  reasoning,  and  the  fundamental  laws  upon  which  our  alleged 
"  credulity"  is  based;  it  is  but  reasonable  that  we  should  require  the  same 
from  our  opponents.  Instead  of  negation,  assumption,  hypothesis,  specu- 
lation, etc.,  our  position  advances  the  most  positive  proof  in  its  support  by 
appealing  to  facts  in  the  past  and  present ;  facts  existing*  in  the  nature  of 
man  and  of  truth  ;  facts  appertaining  to  a  developing  Divine  Purpose 
which  in  its  totality,  design,  progress,  etc.,  evince  the  intelligent  guidance 
and  control  of  a  Creator  ;  facts  which  when  united  the  one  to  the  other 
form  a  connected  chain  of  Divine  Procedure  in  the  attainment  of  a  definite 
specified  Plan  ;  facts  too,  which  any  one  can  verify  by  personal  application 
of  the  truth  ;  and  facts  which  appertain  both  to  reason  and  experience — 
thus  manifesting  the  reasonableness  of  the  same.  In  comparison  with  the 
deductions  of  science,  as  given  by  Darwinism,  Biichnerism,  etc.,  we  certainly 
cannot  be  charged  with  "  credulity,"  provided  our  deductions  are  reasonable. 
To  believe  that  all  creatures  are  sprung  from  some  low  form  of  organism, 
that  all  have  their  common  origin  in  some  ancient  unknown  formation 
of  matter  and  force,  that  man  himself  is  thus  originated  from  a  lower 
bestial  form,  that  homologous  structure  and  common  instincts  in  man 
and  lower  animals  necessarily  prove  a  common  descent,  that  mental  and 
moral  faculties  were  given  by  gradual  progression,  etc.,  etc.,  this  certainly 
makes  a  greater  demand  on  fa  if  h  than  the  Bible  statements.  Dr.  Dawson 
(before  Evang.  Alliance  of  1873)  expressed  this  fully  :  "  When  you  talk  of 
Darwinism  you  talk  of  theories  that  make  vaster  demands  on  our  faith 
than  on  our  science."  We  confess  to  incredulity  in  these  accepted  theories 
of  natural  development,  when  ten  thousand  facts  multiplied  by  thousands 
exhibit  its  extreme  ultra  reasoning  (as  e.g.  in  the  continued  smallness  of  the 
atomical  intelligent  brain  or  head  of  the  ant,  the  lack  of  poisonous  fangs 
in  the  black-snake,  etc.)  based  on  assumptions  (as  e.g.  hundreds  of  thou 
sands  of  years  being  assumed  as  requisite  for  certain  processes  of  develop- 
ment, successive  formation  of  strata,  accumulation  of  debris,  etc.,  which 
more  recently  are  cut  down  greatly  in  figures)  founded  on  reasoning  in  a 
circle  (as  e.g.  man  was  formed  by  naturally  slow  processes  ;  these  processes 
being  slow,  the  time  was  necessarily  great,  embracing  long  ages,  etc.),  and 
established  upon  data  the  mere  result  of  hypothetical  speculation  (as  e.g. 
in  the  intervention  of  enormous  ages  between  certain  supposed  definite 
periods,  the  origin  of  life,  instinct,  intellectuality,  moral  sense,  etc.).  Be- 
cause we  do  not  forsake  the  Bible  with  its  Divinely  attested  Plan,  and 
receive  in  its  place  mere  conjectural  statements  from  which  conclusions  (as 


292  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  180. 

in  Craniology)  are  drawn  hostile  to  the  Book,  we  are  called  "  credulous." 
Let  it  be  so  then,  token  it  is  a  credulity  which  speaks  to  the  heart,  meeting 
its  necessities  and  longings  ;  which  provides  food  for  the  intellectual  and 
moral  nature  of  man  ;  which  gives  a  Saviour  in  all  respects  adapted  to  the 
need  of  humanity  ;  which  supplies  a  Kingdom  fitted  to  secure  the  bless- 
ings desired,  and  to  remove  all  the  evils  so  long  deprecated,  by  man  ;  which 
restores  to  us  a  God  again  dwelling  with  man,  and  brings  us  into  intimate 
and  endearing  relationship  with  Himself.  How  much  is  this  to  be  pre- 
ferred to  that  process  of  reasoning  which  cannot  lift  us  above  nature  ;  which 
binds  us  to  inexorable  law  ;  which  introduces  us  to  a  great  "  Perhaps," 
to  a  probably  Intelligent,  but  distant,  cold,  and  unfeeling  First  Cause  ; 
which  seeks  relief  only  in  the  comprehension  of  natural  law  and  the  appro- 
priation of  physical  forces  ;  which  casts  no  light  into  the  grave,  affords  no 
comfort  to  the  mourner,  bestows  no  mediation  to  a  self-accusing  moral 
sense,  and  finds  the  only  Saviour  in  doomed  man  himself,  or  in  enthralled 
nature.  Which  is  the  most  reasonable,  that  which  unites,  or  that  which 
separates,  the  Creator  and  the  created  ;  that  which  makes  law  the  final 
cause,  or  that  which  gives  the  maker  of  law  continued  power  over  His 
creatures  ;  that  which  makes  the  being  of  God  a  great  central  truth,  or 
that  which  continually  tries  to  obscure  it  through  that  which  is  created  ; 
that  which  insists  upon  the  ability  of  God  to  communicate  His  Will  as  He 
pleases,  or  that  which  asserts  that  to  do  so  would  argue  imperfection  ;  that 
which  views  man  as  having  the  capacity,  intellectually  and  morally,  to  re- 
ceive Divine  truth,  or  that  which  makes  both  intellect  and  morality  to  pro- 
ceed from  some  unknown  source  ;  that  which  makes  man  from  the  very 
constitution  of  his  nature  the  subject  of  moral  government,  or  that  which 
makes  him  merely  the  creature  of  progressive  circumstances,  releasing  him 
from  moral  obligations  to  a  Higher  Power  ;  that  which  declares  that  man's 
necessities,  subjection  to  evils  which  fall  upon  all  alike,  imperatively 
demands  Divine  assistance,  or  that  which  calls  upon  man  to  work  out  des- 
tiny in  his  own  strength  ;  that  which  allies  the  Supernatural  with  salva- 
tion, or  that  which  proposes  that  it  is  not  needed  ?  Such  contrasts  abound 
and  can  be  supplied  by  the  reader,  and  a  mere  comparison  of  them  will  at 
once  go  far  to  prove  why  it  is  that  the  Bible  takes  such  a  firm  hold  upon 
even  the  unlettered  man  of  faith.  It  is  because  Divine  Revelation  in  its 
adaptation  to  man  finds  a  response  in  man's  nature,  ueed,  and  experi- 
ence, which  stamps  it  as  God's  truth.  Admitting  that  some  are  led  in  their 
opposition  to  the  Scriptures  by  the  fascination  of  some  favorite  theory 
(connected  with  a  low  view  of  Christianity  as  exemplified  in  history), 
yet  of  many  and  even  partially,  at  least,  of  those  just  mentioned,  it  can  be 
said,  as  Peter  states  (2  Pet.  3  :  5),  that  "  they  willingly  are  ignorant"  of 
the  truth  as  evidenced  both  by  Creation  and  Redemption,  and  as  enforced 
in  the  Bible.  This  is  evinced  by  three  things.  First,  by  the  amount  of 
faith  that  is  required  to  cover  the  missing  links  in  their  systems  ;  to  fill  up 
the  gaps  between  matter  and  life,  and  the  material  and  intellectual  ;  to 
receive  the  wholesale  conclusions  derived  from  the  induction  of  a  few 
facts  ;  to  accept  of  hypotheses,  suppositions,  conjectures,  as  demonstrated 
truths — all  of  which  indicates  such  a  strain  on  reason,  such  a  demand  upon 
belief,  that  it  can  only  be  explained,  as  the  Bible  does,  on  the  ground  that 
men  willingly — as  suited  to  their  purpose — accept  of  it,  and  reject  the 
Word  as  antagonistic  to  their  claims.  Secondly,  by  the  special  delight  and 
pains  manifested  whenever  it  can  introduce  any  factor  point  as  a  departure 


Prop.  180.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  293 

from  Scripture,  without  the  least  regard  to  the  faith,  hopes,  feelings,  etc. 
of  others,  thus  exhibiting  a  wilfulness,  a  hostility  to  Holy  Writ,  which  by 
the  very  spirit  and  tenor  of  their  writings  only  proves  how  willing  and 
ready  they  are  to  be  ignorant  of  a  Word  which  makes  such  disliked  (to 
them)  practical  requirements.  Thirdly,  by  the  unwillingness  of  each  and 
every  one  of  them — taking  the  explanation  given  by  the  Word  of  God  as 
our  guide — to  place  themselves  in  the  position  to  really  know  and  appreciate 
the  power  of  the  truth.  Coming  to  the  Bible  with  prejudice  ;  rejecting 
the  means  of  grace  instituted  as  useless  in  their  case  ;  refusing  to  acknowl- 
edge as  a  primary  condition  the  corruption  of  sin,  and  consequently  the 
necessity  of  some  mediation  ;  elevating  themselves  into  judges,  instead  of 
being  impartial,  teachable  students  ;  scorning  to  bow  the  knee  in  supplica- 
tion, and  to  evince  that  humility  which  is  a  prerequisite  to  a  fair  testing 
of  the  whole  truth  ;  declining  to  view  the  Bible  as  containing  a  Plan  of 
Redemption,  and  therefore  to  notice  the  perfect  adaptability  of  it  and  the 
provisions  made  ;  conlining  themselves  to  detached  portions,  separated 
from  their  connection  with  the  Divine  Purpose  ;  repelling  the  Saviour 
who  (as  they  themselves  admit — if  it  were  true)  possesses  the  power  to 
save — all  this  certainly  denotes  an  unwillingness  to  allow  the  unbiassed  trial 
which  the  importance  of  the  Book  solicits.  Let  any  one  read  the  works 
that  proceed  from  those  who  reject  the  Supernatural  and  miraculous 
in  the  Bible,  and  many  sentences  show  forth  far  more  than  mere  indiffer- 
ence, mere  reasoning,  for  on  the  very  surface  appears  a  delight  in  being 
thus  antagonistic,  a  dislike,  and,  in  not  a  few  instances, positive  detestation 
of  Bible  statements.  Even  the  most  courteous  of  our  opponents,  who 
cannot,  and  do  not,  condescend  to  the  lower  gross  criticism,  manifest  the 
same  spirit  in  the  evident  gratification  that  their  theories,  hypotheses,  etc. 
afford  to  them  in  lessening  the  authority  of  the  Bible  among  the  multi- 
tude. Flattering  as  this  may  be  to  the  intellectual  power  of  eminent  and 
talented  men — to  the  believer  in  the  Word,  it  gives  evidence  of  a  ivilling- 
oiess,  arising  from  moral  considerations  more  or  less  concealed,  to  remain 
ignorant  of  the  main  proofs  underlying  Christianity.  Let  such  give  us 
credit  for  honest  adherence  to  the  Book,  and  not  censure  our  plainness  of 
speech  derived  from  it,  if  we  also  announce  to  them,  that  inspiration  fore- 
tells, that  in  this  conflict  between  unbelief  and  faith,  between  reason  alone 
and  reason  and  faith  in  harmony,  between  the  authority  of  man  and  the 
authority  of  the  Bible,  etc.,  the  former  will  be  triumphant.  Unbelief,  led 
by  talent,  eminent  ability,  elocpience,  etc.,  will  gain  its  adherents  until 
they  form  a  mighty  host.  The  condition  of  the  world  as  delineated  in  the 
Word  just  previous  to  the  Second  Advent  presents  to  us  the  nations 
under  the  influence  of  an  unbelieving  Naturalism  and  self-glorified 
Humanity,  arrayed  in  open  hostility  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The 
Church,  largely  leavened  with  the  spirit  of  the  age,  shall  feel  most  disas- 
trously the  incoming  flood,  and  the  pious  shall  endure  the  bitterness  of  a 
sifting,  terrible  persecution.  The  picture  tendered  to  us  by  faithful  proph- 
ecy is  dreadful  to  contemplate  ;  for  it  indicates  the  loosening  of  moral 
obligation,  the  outgoing  of  the  worst  passions  in  man,  the  formation  of  a 
vast  confederation  to  crush  Christianity,  and  the  putting  forth  of  bloody 
efforts  to  effect  its  destruction.  The  very  last  words  of  Jesus  teach  us, 
what  man  will  yet  attempt  to  perform  in  his  hatred  to  the  Bible  and  its 
divinely  appointed  Saviour.  Having  abundantly  given  scriptural  proof  to 
sustain  this  view  of  the  ultimate  (but  short-lived)  triumph  of  infidelity 


294  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  180. 

over  the  Church,  may  it  not  he  in  place  to  appeal  to  a  class  of  opponents 
who  engage  in  this  work  of  undermining  the  Bible  without  desiring  the 
overthrow  of  Christianity  (which  they  still  regard  as  exerting,  with  all  its 
faults,  a  restraining  moral  influence),  without  wishing  harm  to  society,  or 
any  member  of  it,  without  even  considering  the  tendency  of  their  specula- 
tions when  once  they  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  masses  ?  Those  attacks, 
if  only  confined  to  a  class  of  scholars,  if  only  regarded  as  hypotheses 
worthy  of  consideration  by  the  intelligent,  would  do  comparatively  little 
harm,  but  when  directed  by  another  class  who  advance  them  in  a  popular 
form  for  the  multitude,  they  become  a  destructive  social  power,  for  the 
masses  (caring  little  for  scientific  and  philosophical  reasoning)  are  only  too 
glad  to  avail  themselves  of  anything  that  will  deliver  them  from  the  moral 
and  religious  requirements  imposed  by  the  Word  of  Cod,  that  will  excuse 
the  violations  of  the  moral  sense  within  them,  and  that  will  palliate  in  any 
degree  their  self-indulgence.  The  real  responsibility  of  shaping  society  in  this 
direction  and  of  the  destructive  fruits  resulting  from  it,  rests  upon  men, 
who — if  they  ventured  to  accept  of  the  experience  of  the  past  (as  e.g. 
French  Revolution,  Communism,  etc. ),  to  receive  the  portraiture  of  the 
future  as  given  in  the  Word,  to  weigh  the  inevitable  fruitage  that  corrupt 
human  nature  will  produce  when  fostered  by  a  release  from  authority — 
would  themselves  shrink  from  their  self-imposed  labor.  It  seems  to  the 
writer  that  the  taking  away  of  a  faith  which  sustains  in  trouble,  bereave- 
ments, death,  etc.,  without  being  able  to  substitute  anything  better  (that 
only  which  cannot  comfort,  etc.),  is  Bad  enough,  but  in  connection  with 
this  to  remove  the  moral  restraints  and  responsibilities  arising  from  rela- 
tionship to  a  Creator  and  His  revealed  Will,  and  thus  making  man  the 
supreme  authority — this,  with  the  awful  history  of  human  depravity,  given 
in  the  pages  of  history,  from  the  earliest  period  to  the  present,  is  most 
dangerous  and  ruinous  in  tendency  and  results.  Clinging  to  the  words 
of  the  holy  men  of  old,  we  must  believe,  that  works  are  written,  which 
will  exert  such  an  influence  in  directing  the  coming  outburst  of  corruption 
and  violence,  and  which  will  introduce  by  the  ascendency  of  principles 
promulgated,  such  scenes  of  misery  and  horror  that  the  writers,  if  they  could 
foresee  them,  would  stand  aghast  at  the  appalling  spectacle  and  most 
bitterly  regret  their  agency  in  creating  it.  Standing  upon  the  sure  pro- 
phetic Word  and  surveying  the  future,  this  representation  falls  far  short  of 
the  stem  reality.  Let  the  sincere,  candid,  honest  doubter  read  for  him- 
self the  delineations  given  by  that  Word,  and  even  the  possibility  of  being 
in  the  remotest  degree  instrumental  in  bringing  forth  such  a  state  of 
things  will  cause  him  to  hesitate  long  before  he  will  lend  himself  to  the 
work.  If  such  would  consider  that  the  Word  predicts  the  triumph  of 
itself,  and  of  the  Church,  not  through  the  power  and  labor  of  man,  but 
through  the  power  and  mighty  works  of  a  Coming  Redeemer  (the  very 
opposite  of  what  man  would  naturally  suggest  if  he  were  giving  a  revela- 
tion) ;  that  it  makes  both  the  Word  and  the  Church  at  the  last  time 
struggling  under  a  fiery  trial  from  which  it  is  delivered  by  the  appointed 
Son  of  Man,  they  may  in  such  extraordinary  announcements  find  a  reason 
irli  n  the  Bible  is  given  in  its  present  form,  grandly  simple  and  unyielding, 
exhibiting  traits  most  admirably  adapted  to  allow  intellectual  pride  and  pre- 
sumption tn  stumble  awl  fall — forming  a  pit  and  a  snare  for  the  intellectual 
as  well  as  the  moral — in  order  to  reveal  what  is  in  man,  and  to  what  lengths 
humanity  will  reach  in  opposition  to  the  sublimest  Plan  of  Redemption,  that 


Prop.  180.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  295 

the  love  and  mercy  of  a  God  could  furnish.  If  men  desire  to  find  objections 
to  the  Word,  its  very  construction  and  simplicity,  its  ignoring  of  scientific 
and  philosophical  preciseness,  the  gradual  unfolding  of  the  Divine  Plan  and 
its  details  given  at  different  periods  and  by  various  writers,  etc.,  afford 
them  all  the  opportunity  needed.  It  is  left  optional  with  men  to  receive  it 
as  a  blessing,  or  to  convert  it  into  a  curse  ;  God  Himself  will  justify  it  in 
due  time,  when  every  jot  and  tittle  (Matt.  5  :  18)  shall  be  fulfilled.  In  the 
mean  time  the  believer,  sustained  by  "  the  blessed  hope"''  and  taught  by  Holy 
Writ,  confidently  looks  for  the  raging  flood  of  infidelity  which  shall  sweep 
nearly  all — excepting  a  few  faithful  ones — before  it  ;  which  shall  introduce 
a  systematic  and  stern  hostility  provocative  of  martyrdom  ;  which  shall 
strive  with  fury  to  set  aside  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Redeemer  of  the  world  ;  and 
which  shall  be  guilty  of  unbounded  wickedness  and  blasphemy  ;  but  he  as 
confidently  looks  beyond  this  to  the  sudden  Coming  of  the  glorious,  mighty 
King  of  kings,  when  these  raging  waters,  this  destructive,  persecuting 
career,  shall  be  stayed  ;  when  these  Antichristian  hosts  shall  be  utterly 
crushed  ;  and  when  the  foe,  so  jubilant  and  proud  of  numbers  and  fancied 
success,  shall  fall  panic-stricken  under  the  wrath  of  the  same  Lamb  whose 
mission,  sufferings,  death,  warnings,  and  entreaties  they  have  despised. 

Obs.  6.  No  faith,  aside  from  other  reasons,  will  be  exercised  in  this 
Kingdom  because  of  the  manner  of  its  introduction  through  Supernatural 
intervention,  and  of  the  Personage  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom  it  is  to  be 
accomplished.  To  the  student  of  the  Word  who  carefully  notices  how  this 
Kingdom  is  to  be  re-established  at  the  close  of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,  it 
is  significant  and  startling  to  find  that,  in  strict  correspondence  with  predic- 
tion, the  greatest  efforts  are  now  made  by  the  Gentiles  to  decry  the  Super- 
natural, to  cast  out  the  miraculous,  and  to  bring  Jesus  to  the  level  of 
erring,  weak,  fate-bound  humanity.  Denying  the  power  and  authority  of 
the  appointed  King,  as  a  matter  of  course  the  Kingdom  is  also  rejected, 
virtually  saying,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  How  can 
He  thus  come  and  reign  when  His  resurrection,  ascension,  etc.,  is  dis- 
believed ;  when  the  attributes,  by  which  alone  such  a  Kingdom,  as  cove- 
nanted and  predicted,  can  beset  up,  are  derided?  They  never  consider 
that  Jesus  Christ,  the  God-man,  must  be  studied  in  the  light  of  this  Theo- 
cratic arrangement ;  that  to  invalidate  His  claims,  etc.,  the  Divine  Plan 
itself,  which  makes  the  Advent  of  such  a  Person  a  necessity,  must  be 
logically  set  aside.  They  never  regard  the  historical  connection  existing 
between  Jesus  and  the  Kingdom  as  it  once  existed,  and  as  it  is  now  solemnly 
covenanted  to  Him  as  David's  Son,  unless  it  is  to  show  (as  Renan,  etc.) 
that  the  Kingdom  not  being  set  up  now  as  predicted  and  believed  in,  it  will 
never  be  established,  deliberately  overlooking  the  passages  which  distinctly 
prove  that  after  His  rejection  by  the  Jews  and  their  conspiring  to  put  Him 
to  death,  He  proclaimed  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  to  His  Second 
Coming.  We  admit  that  if  Jesus  or  His  Apostles  had  proclaimed  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Kingdom,  as  covenanted  immediately  or  shortly  after  His 
death,  then  indeed  a  powerful  argument,  owing  to  the  patent  dissimilarity 
between  the  two,  would  be  presented,  but  such  an  establishment  (which  the 
primitive  Church  totally  ignored)  is  taken  for  granted,  and  from  a  premise 
thus  falsely  grounded  the  most  adverse  conclusions  respecting  Jesus  are 
entertained  and  promulgated.  The  existing  facts,  too,  which  materially 
aid,  as  parts  of  the  Divine  Purpose,  to  cod  firm  such  a  postponement  and 


296  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  180. 

hence  the  certainty  of  this  Coming  Kingdom,  are  carefully  avoided  and 
never  allowed  to  sustain  the  utterances  of  Jesus.  A  painful  lack  of  candor 
toward  the  entire  truth,  a  specious,  unsound  form  of  reasoning,  which  takes 
just  as  much  as  suits  its  purpose  and  leaves  out  the  most  important  in  its 
hearing,  characterizes  the  attacks  upon  the  King  and  Kingdom.  Such  a 
spirit  and  process  are  necessarily  unproductive  of  faith.  How  largely  this 
is  chargeable  to  the  prevailing  views  in  the  Church — equally  hostile  to  the 
true  notion  of  the  Kingdom  and  thus  making  an  uncalled  for  antagonism 
between  covenant,  prophecy,  preaching,  etc.,  and  the  Church — is  self-evi- 
dent, seeing  that  a  large  proportion  of  argument  is  derived  from  the  unfort- 
unate conclusions  arrived  at  by  believers.  For,  if  the  Church  is  the  King- 
dom, then  the  infidel  can  well  say,  and  firmly  maintain  his  position,  that  it 
is  not  the  Kingdom  which  loas  covenanted  to  David 's  Son  ;  which  was  pre- 
dicted by  the  prophets,  preached  by  John  the  Baptist,  Jesus  Christ,  the 
disciples,  Apostles,  and  primitive  Church.  Logically,  historically,  criti- 
cally, he  is  correct  thus  far  ;  but  critically,  historically,  and  logically  he  is 
incorrect  when  he  assumes  from  this  that  it  never  will  be  verified,  and  from 
such  a  deduction  endeavors  to  undermine  the  authority,  credibility,  etc.,  of 
the  Redeemer.  Our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  cannot  be  accused  of  aiding 
and  strengthening  the  unbelief  thus  manifested,  for  it  receives  the  unan- 
swerable grammatical  interpretation  of  this  Kingdom  as  given  by  eminent 
unbelievers,  and  instead  of  covering  it  up  by  pitiful  subterfuges  and  lame 
apologies,  relies  upon  it  as  the  God-given  truth.  It  acknowledges  the  pro- 
priety and  the  force  of  unbelieving  argumentation  respecting  the  preaching 
of  this  Kingdom  by  the  Apostolic  and  primitive  Church,  and  instead  of 
making  out,  to  the  gratification  of  unbelief,  that  these  ancients  were  enter- 
taining a  harmless  and  useful  error,  or  that  they  were  unconsciously  present- 
ing the  truth  in  "  a  materialistic  husk"  to  be  developed  into  fruitage,  it 
cordially  adopts  and  defends  this  very  preaching,  this  alleged  error,  as 
necessitated  by  the  oath-bound  Word  of  God.  It  admits  "  the  Jewish  con- 
ceptions'' and  "  the  Jewish  expectations"  incorporated  with  the  New  Test., 
as  joyfully  paraded  by  prominent  opponents,  but  shows  that  these  are 
demanded  by  the  nature,  design,  and  plan  of  the  Divine  Purpose.  On  a 
variety  of  points,  our  doctrine  makes  the  concessions  to  infidelity  which 
simple  justice  demands,  and  in  so  doing  gains  poiuer,  consistency,  and  unity 
•which  the  prevailing  Apologetics  lack  on  account  of  their  fundamental 
principles.  Thus,  e.g.,  we  agree  with  infidelity  in  the  principles  that  un- 
derlie the  interpretation  of  the  Book,  viz.,  that  it  must  be  interpreted  by 
the  ordinary,  universally  received  laws  of  language,  and  that  when  the 
meaning  is  thus  obtained  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  substitute  another  and 
differing  sense,  which  is  given  as  the  taste,  inclination,  imagination,  etc.,  of 
the  interpreter  may  suggest.  This  is  fun  (lamented  ;  and  unbelief  has  a  just 
right  to  object  to  the  vast  number  of  interpretations  foisted  upon  the  Word 
by  its  constant  and  flagrant  violation.  Unbelief  occupies  a  proper  position 
when  it  requires  that  every  doctrine  taught  by  us  should  be  found  in  the 
plain  grammatical  construction  of  the  language  ;  it  is  not  wrong  when  it 
says,  that  if  the  prophecies  are  truly  inspired,  then  they  cannot  be  condi- 
tional so  far  as  the  purpose  of  God  is  concerned  ;  it  is  not  foolish  when  it 
proclaims  that  this  Kingdom  is  Jewish — that  between  the  apostolical  belief 
and  the  one  generally  entertained  there  is  a  world-wide  difference — that  if 
there  is  any  force  in  election  the  Jewish  nation  ought  still  to  be  an  elect 
nation ;  that  the  Kingdom,  if  manifested  as  the  prophets  describe,  must 


PEOP.  180.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  297 

have  a  continued  revealed  Snpornaturalism  connected  with  it ;  that  the 
Kingdom  as  predicted  is  associated  with,  even  founded  upon,  a  restored 
Jewish  nation  and  its  subsequent  exaltation  ;  that  an  intimate  relationship 
exists  between  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  ;  that  in  our  study  of  the 
Bible  we  should  not  be  fettered  by  the  alleged  authoritative  utterances  of 
our  fellow-men  as  embraced  in  creeds,  confessions,  systems,  etc.  Chris- 
tianity, in  the  controversies  raging,  has  suffered  by  incorporating  principles 
indefensible  (unknown  to  the  early  Church),  and  by  endeavoring  to  defend 
much  that  is  utterly  untenable  ;  unbelief,  only  too  glad  to  seize  upon  such 
indications  of  weakness,  has  taken  advantage  of  the  incautious  and  unscript- 
ural  attitude  assumed,  and  has  pressed  the  prevailing  Theology  with  a  line 
of  argument  that,  taking  the  naked  Scripture,  is  wholly  unanswerable  and 
but  feebly  met  by  those  who  reject  the  early  Church  doctrine  of  the  King- 
dom. This  feature  is  beginning  to  be  seen  and  felt  by  able  writers  ;  and  it 
is  with  pleasure  that  we  notice  many  of  the  most  eminent  men  (as  e.g. 
Olshausen,  Lange,  Delitzsch,  Auberlen,  Van  Oosterzee,  last  work,  etc.) 
falling  back,  more  and  more,  to  the  identical  position  occupied  by  tbe  early 
Christian  Church.  It  is  indeed  the  only  ground  upon  which  infidelity  can 
be  opposed  honorably  (i.e.  without  apologizing  for  or  sacrificing  the  lan- 
guage of  the  Bible),  and  which  fairly  meets  its  argumentation  respecting 
the  King  and  the  Kingdom.  In  this  way  we  cannot  be  censurable  for 
giving  unbelief  so  many  advantages  in  reasoning,  and  thus  virtually  helping 
it  on  in  its  efforts  of  destructive  criticism.  Admitting  fully  and  freely  the 
weight  and  authority  of  a  certain,  defined,  distinctive  teaching  in  the  Bible, 
and  which  cannot  possibly  be  denied  without  doing  the  utmost  violence  to 
the  Book  itself,  yet  the  same  can  be  proven  to  be — instead  of  hostile  to  the 
truth  and  the  claims  of  Jesus — essential  to  the  Plan  of  Redemption  as 
developed  through  the  Coming  King  and  Kingdom.  But  relying  upon  the 
far-seeing  and  sure  knowledge  of  the  future  as  contained  in  this  Book,  it  is 
certain  that  this  return  to  the  primitive  faith  will  be  accepted  by  the  few  ; 
and  that  the  protestations  of  these,  however  logically  and  forcibly  presented, 
will  utterly  fail — for  reasons  previously  given — to  stem  the  torrent  of  un- 
belief which  now  receives  its  already  swollen  tributaries  from  all  sides. 
God's  glorious  Plan  for  the  deliverance  of  the  world  through  a  divinely 
instituted  Theocratic  arrangement  will  be  rejected  by  the  wisdom  of  the 
world.  David's  Son,  so  admirably  qualified  to  bring  about  "  the  golden 
age"  of  prophecy  and.  human  longings,  will  be  despised  and  treated  with, 
contemptuous  scorn.  Human  nature  will  again  exhibit  itself  in  its  naked- 
ness, its  inherent  corruption.  Analogy,  pointing  to  the  past  teaching  that 
every  great  providential  movement  in  the  progressive  advancement  of  the 
Divine  Purpose  was  met  by  a  corresponding  condition  of  unbelief,  teaches 
that  when  the  last,  which  finishes  "  the  mystery  of  God,"  shall  be  made, 
then  it  is  reasonable  to  anticipate  a  period  of  unbelief — and,  may  we  add, 
being  the  final  one  introductory  to  the  Kingdom  itself,  will  be  answerably 
great.  The  warning  that  the  Apostle  Paul  gives  to  the  Gentiles,  and  his 
portrayal  of  the  Antichristian  power  that  will  arise  before,  and  only  to  be 
destroyed  at,  the  Personal  Advent  ;  the  fearful  portraiture  of  the  corruption 
of  mankind  just  previous  to  the  Advent  like  in  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot 
(Matt.  24  :  39,  "knew  not  until  the  flood  came,"  etc.)  making  a  divine 
personal  interference  imperative  ;  the  openly  hostile  attitude  of  the  nations, 
the  exaltation  of  reason  and  humanity,  the  oppressed  condition  of  the 
pious,  the  lamentable  state  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  formation  of  a  vast 


298  THE   THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  180, 

confederation  and  its  merciless  acts  toward  witnesses  of  the  truth  ;  and  all 
this  at  the  closing  of  this  dispensation  evinces  such  a  state  of  unbelief,  such 
a  fruitage  of  the  seeds  now  sown  broadcast  in  a  too  favorable  soil,  such  a 
continuation  and  powerful  development  of  infidelity,  such  a  turning  away 
from  God's  Redemptive  Purpose  in  Christ  Jesus  and  trust  in  humanity, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  entertain  any  other  opinion,  consistent  with  faith  in 
the  Word,  than  that,  whatever  may  be  said  in  defence  of  the  truth,  men  will 
resist  it  and  gain  adherents  until  the  time  arrives  for  a  violent  outburst 
engendering  a  revolution  most  disastrous  to  the  Church,  most  ruinous  to  the 
moral  interests  and  eternal  loelfare  of  the  multitude  swayed  by  it,  and  most 
fatal  to  those  who  shall  in  that  day  venture  to  testify  in  behalf  of  the  truth. 
Indeed,  so  fully  persuaded  is  the  writer  of  the  certainty  of  this— judging 
simply  from  past  and  present  fulfilment— that  the  hope  of  writing  for  that 
very  period — of  warning  the  weak  in  faith  not  to  yield,  of  encouraging  the 
believing  to  suffer  and  endure  to  the  end,  of  cautioning  the  doubting  how 
to  decide,  and  of  admonishing  all,  friends  and  foes,  what  they  must  expect 
— has  greatly  sustained  him  in  his  labor. 


Prop.  181.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  299 


Proposition  181.   Our  doctrinal  position  illustrated  and  enforced 
by  the  Parable  of  the  Ten  Virgins. 

In  view  of  the  important  teaching  of  this  parable,  it  deserves, 
however  occasionally  mentioned  under  several  Propositions,  special 
consideration,  seeing  how  strongly  it  corroborates  our  doctrinal 
conclusions. 

Obs.  1.  The  linking  of  the  parable  by  the  word  "  then"  to  the  preceding 
context,  and  the  tenor  of  the  parable  itself,  has  led  a  multitude  of  able 
writers,  including  our  opponents,  to  interpret  it  as  illustrative  of  the  atti- 
tude of  the  Church  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  Consistency  forces  such  an  appli- 
cation because  of  the  express  mention  of  the  Sec.  Advent  (Matt.  24  :  30, 
31),  and  the  admonitions  and  warnings  to  be  watchful  adjoined  (vs.  32-51), 
so  that  the  parable  itself  is  properly  regarded  as  illustrating  and  enforcing 
the  previously  given  instruction.  The  succeeding  context,  in  the  parable 
of  the  talents,  and  in  the  judgment  of  the  nations,  warns  us  in  reference  to 
the  ultimate  reward  dispensed  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  The  context,  therefore, 
as  well  as  the  parable,  enforces  the  importance  and  duty  of  watchfulness 
and  faithfulness. 

Our  opponents  concede  this  teaching  and  application.  Thus  e.g.  Brown  (Com.  Matt. 
25  :  1)  says  on  "  then"  :  "  At  the  time  referred  to,  at  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter  ; 
the  time  of  the  Lord's  Second  Coming  to  reward  His  faithful  servants  and  take  vengeance 
on  the  faithless."  Neander  (Life  of  Christ,  sec.  258)  admits  that  it  "was  designed  to 
set  vividly  before  the  disciples  the  necessity  of  constant  preparation  for  the  uncertain  time 
of  Christ's  Sec.  Advent."  Barnes  (Com.  loci)  says  :  "  The  meaning  is,  when  the  Son  of 
Man  returns  to  judgment,  it  shall  be  as  it  was  in  the  case  of  ten  virgins  in  a  marriage 
ceremony."  "  The  circumstances  of  the  parable  do  not  seem  at  all  to  apply  to  His 
Coming  to  destroy  Jerusalem,  but  are  aptly  expressive  of  His  Advent  to  judge  the  world." 
Liseo  (On  the  Parables,  p.  180)  makes  the  "  train  of  thought  in  the  parable"  to  be,  "  the 
proper  preparation  for  the  Advent  of  our  Lord."  So  Lange  (Com.  loci)  says  :  "  The  lead- 
ing idea  is  the  readiness  of  the  Church  for  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  ;"  and  (p.  447)  holds 
that  the  parable  must  be  placed  at  the  beginning  or  ushering  in  of  the  thousand  years. 
(Corup.  Alford,  Greswell,  Olshausen,  Bengel,  etc.) 

Obs.  2.  The  application  of  it,  therefore,  to  the  Romans  at  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem,  to  death,  to  divine  providence,  etc.,  is  foreign  to  the  intent 
of  the  parable.  The  previous  references  to  the  Coming  of  "the  Son  of 
Man"  (expressive  of '  personal  humanity),  the  manner  of  His  Coming 
(sudden  and  unexpected,  etc.),  the  time  of  His  Coming  (as  in  the  days  of 
Noah),  the  translation  united  with  it  (one  taken  and  the  other  left),  the 
power  and  glory,  the  angels  connected  with  it,  the  gathering  of  the  elect, 
the  fate  of  the  unwatchful — all  as  well  as  the  succeeding  ones,  show  that 
the  same  future  Advent  so  repeatedly  mentioned  afterward  and  embodied  in 
the  expressed  faith  of  the  Church,  is  the  one  intended. 


300  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  181. 

This  application  of  the  parable  by  Universalists  and  others,  if  legitimately  carried 
out  (as  e.g.  in  Elihu  Burritt,  etc.),  would  give  us  no  personal  Sec.  Advent  in  the  future. 
Not  only  the  general  scope  and  design  forbid  it,  as  seen  in  the  subject-matter  preceding 
and  the  declaration  subjoined,  but  the  universal  opinion  of  the  quite  early  Church,  hav- 
ing the  advantage  of  nearness  to  inspired  guidance,  repudiate  such  engrafted  meanings. 
The  most  varied  expositions  are  given  by  some  in  order  to  get  rid  of  a  future  personal 
Sec.  Advent.  Portions  of  it  are  used  on  fuDeral  occasions  to  illustrate  sudden  death, 
and  the  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,  the  Bridegroom,  is  made,  not  a  "  blessed  hope"  but 
penal  in  its  nature  (comp.  Pro}).  121).  One  of  the  harshest  interpretations  is  that  of  Dr. 
Rutter  (Rom.  Cath.)  in  his  Life  of  Jesus,  p.  420,  for  while  retaining  the  future  Sec. 
Advent,  he  makes  the  slumbering  (drowsiness)  of  the  virgins  to  be  "  sicknesses,"  and 
the  sleeping  to  be  "  death  ;"  the  cry  is  the  last  trumpet  waking  the  dead  ;  preparing  the 
lamps  is  jjassing  in  review  their  actions,  and  the  oil  represents  good  works,  etc. — an  in- 
terpretation violating  the  scope  of  the  parable,  making  none  living  at  the  Sec.  Advent. 
It  is  derived  from  Chrysostom,  Basil,  Hilary,  etc.,  and  has  been  adopted  by  Wordsworth 
and  a  few  modern  writers. 

Obs.  3.  In  the  interpretation  of  the  parable,  its  parabolic  form  must 
constantly  be  observed  ;  and  hence  not  every  particular  expression,  intro- 
duced to  fill  out  the  figure  or  image  introduced,  is  to  be  pressed  to  denote  a 
corresponding  relationship  in  the  Church  or  future. 

The  violation  of  this  principle,  and  applicable  to  parables  generally,  has  led  to  fanci- 
ful explanations,  an  accumulation  of  resemblances  not  intended,  accommodations  not 
within  the  design.  To  illustrate  :  Luther  (Misc.  Sermons,  18,  36),  speaking  of  the  foolish 
having  no  oil  and  going  to  purchase  it,  says  :  "  Wherefore  do  they  not  cry  to  the  bride- 
groom that  they  have  no  oil  ?  Why  do  they  run  to  their  fellows  for  oil  ?  The  cause  is 
that  they  have  never  truly  known  the  bridegroom,  otherwise  they  would  run  to  him." 
Now  such  an  application  is  a  violation  of  the  marriage  customs  in  vogue,  and  was  not 
designed  ;  the  language  accords  with  the  usage  of  the  day  and  simply  illustrates  the  un- 
preparedness  of  the  foolish  virgins.  So  much  stress  is  laid  on  the  "  lamps,"  "  the  oil," 
the  "  midnight  cry,"  the  "  slumbering  and  sleeping,"  and  exact  resemblances  are  sought 
out,  and  insisted  on,  when  the  imagery  of  the  parable  derived  from  the  prevailing  cus- 
toms demands  such  an  introduction  in  order  to  more  clearly  illustrate  the  leading  idea 
intended,  viz.,  the  Titter  unpreparedness  of  some  for  the  sudden  Coming  of  the  Master, 
and  hence  the  necessit}'  of  looking  for  the  same  with  constant  preparation.  If  every  part 
of  the  imagery,  designed  simply  to  illustrate  and  enforce  a  leading  idea  or  ideas,  is  to  be 
pressed  to  find  an  analogy,  confusion  and  diversity  (comp.  Lange's  Com.  loci)  must 
ensue,  as  fancy  or  imagination  may  frame  analogies. 

Obs.  4.  This  parable  is  prophetic,  being  designed  to  express  and  enforce 
the  future  unexpected  (because  not  exactly  known)  Coming  of  the  great 
Bridegroom,  the  certainty  of  that  Coming  although  delayed,  the  condition 
of  certain  parties  at  His  Advent,  and  the  result  to  themselves  arising  from 
the  state  in  which  they  are  found. 

The  leading  idea  as  Lange  (Com.)  remarks,  is  readiness  for  the  Coming  of  the  Lord, 
and  Dr.  Schaff  correctly  points  to  verse  13,  which  contains  the  lesson  of  the  parable, 
confirming  this  view.  So  e.g.  Barnes  (Com.)  remarks  :  "  Circumstances  in  parables  are 
not  to  be  pressed  literally.  They  are  necessary  to  keep  up  the  story,  and  we  must  look 
chiefly  or  entirely  to  the  scope  or  design  of  the  parable  to  understand  its  meaning.  In 
this  parable  the  scope  is  to  teach  us  to  watch  or  be  ready,  v.  13." 

Obs.  5.  The  force  of  the  illustration  can  only  be  properly  appreciated  by 
the  consideration  of  the  truth  which  it  is  designed  to  confirm,  and  of  the 
custom  from  whence  it  is  derived.  The  doctrine  to  be  enforced  is,  as  the 
context  shows,  the  future  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,  who  will  come  at  a 
time  when  persons  will  not  look  for  Him,  because  the  exact  time,  the  day 
and  hour,  is  not  known,  and  hence  the  caution  (Matt.  24  :  42),  ''Watch 


PKOP.  181.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  301 

therefore  :  for  ye  know  not  what  liour  your  Lord  doth  come."  The  custom 
from  whence  the  parable  is  taken,  was  one  familiar  to  the  East.  Jesus 
selects  a  particular  time  in  the  marriage  ceremonial,  to  illustrate  the  uncer- 
tainty of  His  Coming,  and  the  consequences  of  heeding  or  not  heeding  the 
cautions  He  already  had  given  respecting  it.  It  is  the  time  after  the  wed- 
ding at  the  house  of  the  bride's  parents  (Home's  Introd.,  vol.  2,  p.  161, 
Barnes's  Com.  loci,  Lisco's  On  the  Parables,  p.  183,  Encyclop.  Relig. 
Knoivl.,  art.  "  Mar.  Ceremony,"  Smith's  Die.  Bible,  Meyer's  Com.  etc.), 
and  after  the  wedding  festival  there  (which  lasted  several  days — we  are  told 
seven  for  a  maid  and  three  for  a  widow),  when  the  bridegroom,  with  the 
nuptial  guests,  conducts  the  bride  to  his  own  house  or  to  that  of  his  father, 
that  is  chosen.1  The  procession  generally  started  in  the  evening  or  night 
with  great  pomp,  having  torches,  songs,  and  music.  This  company  with 
the  bridegroom,  was  met  by  another,  friends  of  the  bridegroom  and  bride, 
which,  at  or  near  the  bridegroom's  house,  waited,  ready  at  the  first  notice 
of  approach  to  go  forth,  meet  the  procession,  unite  with  it,  enter  the  house, 
and  participate  in  the  entertainment  or  marriage  supper.  This  last  com- 
pany not  knowing  precisely  the  hour  or  time  when  the  procession  would 
come,  made  preparation  and  watched  for  its  arrival,  so  that  it  could  enter 
in  with  the  bridal  party — its  union  with  the  other  and  privilege  of  admit- 
tance, being  indicated  by  the  bearing  of  lamps,  or  burning  torches,  thus 
showing  that  they  were  friends,  and  as  such  could  properly  be  admitted  as 
guests  at  the  marriage  feast.  After  the  procession  entered  the  house  with 
those  who  actually  participated  in  the  escort  and  man i tested  their  friend- 
ship and  respect  for  the  bridegroom  and  bride,  the  door  was  shut  and 
admittance  refused.  Now  Jesus  takes  this  parabolic  representation  from 
actual  life,  and  shows  from  the  uncertainty  of  the  bridegroom's  arrival  and 
the  preparedness  of  the  company  awaiting  him,  how  it  will  be  (as  the  word 
"  then"  implies)  at  His  future  Advent,  and,  consequently,  enjoins  watch- 
fulness.2 

1  Some  of  the  versions  expressly  indicate  the  time.  Thus  the  Syriac,  Vulgate,  Coptic, 
the  Cranmer  Bible,  and  also  Van  Ess,  Alioli,  Knapp,  three  mss.,  etc.,  read,  "  the  Bride- 
groom and  the  Bride."  This,  of  course,  locates  the  period  to  be  when  the  Bridegroom  is 
going  to  His  own  house  with  the  Bride.     So  also  Trench,  On  the  Parables,  Maldonatus,  etc. 

2  It  is  significant  that  Jesus  does  not  take  the  bridegroom  and  his  friends  as 
they  proceed  to  the  wedding,  but  in  coming  from  the  wedding,  which  is  fully 
enforced  by  Luke  12  :  35-38,  "  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about  and  your  lights 
burning  ;  and  ye  yourselves  like  unto  men  that  wait  for  their  Lord,  when  He 
shall  return  from  the  wedding ;  that,  when  He  cometh  and  knocketh,  they  may  open 
unto  Him  immediately.  Blessed  are  those  servants,  whom  the  Lord  when  He 
Cometh  shall  find  watching  ;  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  He  shall  gird  Himself,  and  make 
them  to  sit  down  to  meat,  and  will  come  forth  and  serve  them.  And  if  He  shall  come  in 
the  second  watch,  or  come  in  the  third  watch,  and  find  them  so,  blessed  are  those  ser- 
vants." This  then,  while  the  main  idea  of  watchfulness  is  of  general  application  (as  the 
context  and  analogy  of  Scripture  show),  is  specially  designed  for  a  class  of  persons  who 
await  the  Lord's  return  from  the  wedding.  Who  tliese  are  will  appear.  Some  assume  a 
"  modification  of  the  usual  custom  and  a  procession  of  the  virgins  to  meet  the  bride- 
groom on  his  way  to  the  house  of  the  bride."  But  this  is  against  the  general  usage  (comp. 
Trench,  Notes  on  the  Parables),  Lange's  Com.  loci  says  :  "  It  was  the  custom  among  the 
Jews  and  Greeks  that  the  bridegroom  accompanied  by  his  friends,  went  to  the  house  of 
the  bride  to  lead  her  to  his  own  house,  and  was  joined  by  the  virgins,  the  friends  of  the 
bride,  not  on  his  going  to  fetch  the  bride,  but  on  his  returning  with  her  to  his  own 
house."  (Comp.  De  Wette,  Meyer,  Lightfoot,  Wetstein,  etc.).  Such  a  custom  prevails 
even  to  this  day  in  Sicily  (Hughes's  Travels  in  Sicily,  vol.  2,  p.  20).  Hence  it  is  that 
some  of  the  old  readings  add  to  the  first  verse  "  and  the  bride,"  which  Trench  (On  Par., 
p.  237)  thinks  the  sense  recpiires. 


302  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  181. 

Obs.  G.  The  parable  being  prophetic,  and  thus  delineating  what  shall 
truly  take  place  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  return  from  the  wedding,  it 
must  accord  fully,  be  in  perfect  agreement,  with  all  the  other  predictions 
relating  to  the  subject.  The  unity  of  the  Word,  the  integrity  of  Script- 
ure, the  truthfulness  of  Jesus  as  a  Teacher,  demand  such  a  harmony.  It 
must,  e.g.  accord  with  Rev.  19,  in  which  is  foreshown  that  the  marriage  of 
the  Lamb,  and  the  calling  to  the  marriage  supper,  is  something  that  apper- 
tains to  His  Sec.  Advent  and  the  commencement  of  His  glorious  reign  on 
earth.  But  it  must  do  more  than  this  ;  it  must  correspond  not  merely  to 
the  general  statements  on  the  subject,  but  to  the  exact  order  of  fulfilment 
pertaining  to  that  future  period.  Thus  it  has  been  shown  (Prop.  130)  that 
the  Second  Advent,  like  the  First,  is  expressive  of  a  period  of  years  ;  that 
its  beginning  is  characterized  by  a  thief-like,  concealed  Coming  and  its  end 
by  an  open  Advent.  The  question,  therefore,  is  with  which  stage  of  the 
Advent  does  the  parable  best  correspond  ?  To  this  there  can  be  but  one 
answer  :  it  pertains  to  the  last  stage,  the  open  parousia.  Let  the  following 
considerations  be  regarded.  (1)  It  does  not  relate  to  the  thief-like  Coming 
because  that  period,  and  the  events  connected  therewith,  do  not  corre- 
spond with  the  parable  in  the  following  particulars  :  (a)  There  is  no  public 
Coming  of  the  Bridegroom  with  open  pomp  and  splendor  :  (b)  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  first-fruits  and  the  sudden  translation  of  the  little  flock  do  not 
accord  with  such  a  public  manifestation  being  secret  and  invisible  in  their 
nature  ;  (c)  there  is  no  return  from  a  wedding,  the  first  stage  preceding  it  ; 
(d)  believers  in  Jesus  do  not  at  that  time  all  even  profess  to  look  for  the 
Advent,  much  less  go  forth  to  meet  the  Bridegroom — the  great  lack  of  faith 
evidencing  the  contrary  ;  (e)  the  midnight  cry  (however  applied  by  some  to 
the  past  and  the  present)  has  not  been  sounded,  as  shown  by  its  effects  both 
on  the  wise  and  the  foolish  virgins,  who  recognized  it,  and  all  arose  and 
trimmed  their  lamps,  and  it  will  not  be  true  at  this  stage  that  the  cry, 
"  Behold  the  Bridegroom  Cometh"  will  cause  all  believer's,  wise  and  foolish, 
to  arise  and  indicate  a  looking  for  the  Bridegroom,  as  seen  e.g.  in  the  pre- 
dictions relating  to  the  faithlessness  of  the  Church  ;  (/)  the  cry  is  not  raised 
by  any  of  these  virgins,  for  it  comes  outside  of  them,  and  hence  the  incon- 
gruity of  persons  representing  themselves  to  be  "  wise  virgins"  and  raising 
the  cry,  whom  the  Saviour  represents  with  the  foolish  to  be  drowsy  and 
asleep,  being  themselves  aroused  by  the  cry  ;  it  follows  that  the  illustration 
does  not  fit  the  particulars  of  the  first  stage  ;  (g)  the  parable  does  not 
express  the  condition  of  the  Church  in  general  as  composed  of  believers 
and  mere  professors,  or  of  two  parties,  but  the  image  is  drawn  from  a  party 
who  expected  the  coming  of  the  bridegroom  (took  their  lamps  and  went 
forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom"),  made  preparation  for  his  coming  (with 
lamps  and  oil  in  them),  and  when  his  coming  was  announced  acted  in 
response  to  their  previous  expectation  {"then  all  those  virgins  arose  and 
trimmed  their  lamps"),  and  simple  analogy  requires  that  it  should  be  ful- 
filled in  such  a  body  of  persons.  (2)  But  it  does  apply  forcibly  to  the 
second  stage  of  the  Advent  and  to  the  events  connected  therewith  as  pre- 
dicted :  (a)  the  open  parousia  of  Jesus  with  His  saints  is  after  the  wedding 
(Prop.  1GG)  at  Mt.  Sinai— the  figure  of  marriage  (Prop.  169)  being  used  to 
indicate  the  intimate  Theocratic  relationship  of  the  saints  with  the  King, 
or  the  inauguration  of  the  saints  there  as  co-kings  and  co-priests  with  Him 
in  His  Kingdom  ;  (b)  the  procession  of  the  bridegroom  after  the  wedding 
to  his  own  house  to  have  the  marriage  publicly  consummated  by  a  marriage 


Prop.  181.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  303 

supper,  finds  its  exact  parallel  in  Jesus  Coming  with  His  saints  and  the  holy 
angels  from  the  celebration  of  a  Theocratic  inauguration  at  Mt.  Sinai  ; 

(c)  the  bridegroom  comes  after  the  wedding  to  his  own  house,  and.  his 
friends  await  him  there  to  receive  the  procession  and  participate  in  the  pro- 
posed marriage  feast,  finds  its  precise  fulfilment  in  Jesus,  after  the  Theo- 
cratic ordering  instituted  at  Mt.  Sinai,  taking  His  course  to  His  own  inheri- 
tance,  to   Jerusalem,   where   He   meets   a   body   of  His   "  own"    people  ; 

(d)  those  who  thus  waited  all  professed  affection  for  the  bridegroom,  and 
thus  this  remnant  of  Jews,  after  experiencing  the  merciless  persecution  of 
the  last  Antichrist  (whom  they  as  a  body  had  received  in  preference  to 
Jesus)  which  restores  them  earnestly  and  longingly  to  the  nation's  hope  of 
Messianic  deliverance  (as  evidenced  by  the  cordial  manner  in  which  they 
hail  His  Coming  and  yield,  obedience),  turn  their  minds  (influenced  by 
Elijah)  to  a  looking  and  waiting  for  the  Messiah  ;  (e)  those  who  wait  ex- 
pect the  coming  of  a  bridegroom  (not  themselves  to  be  the  bride)  and  a 
participation  in  the  marriage  feast  in  the  bridegroom's  inheritance,  which 
indicates  a  marked  change  in  their  views  (i.e.  of  the  Jews),  viz.,  that  the 
terrible  persecution  endured,  the  proclamation  of  the  truth  by  the  Chris- 
tian Church  during  the  interval,  the  precise  realization  of  the  prophetic 
announcements  in  their  own  experience,  the  culmination  of  their  tribula- 
tion as  foreshown  by  the  Spirit  in  connection  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  has 
at  length  caused  this  remnant  at  Jerusalem  to  decide  favorably  to  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  and  to  await  His  Coming  as  the  promised  One,  even  as  the 
bridegroom  ;  (/)  the  entering  in  with  the  bridegroom  and  participating  in 
the  marriage  festivities,  finds  a  precise  fulfilment  in  the  announced  predic- 
tions that  the  Jews  shall  at  the  personal  Coming  of  Jesus  experience  the 
special  favor  of  the  Messiah,  and  be  restored  to  Theocratic  nearness  to 
God,  having  an  assured  supremacy  over  the  nations  ;  (g)  the  reception  of 
some  and  the  rejection  of  others,  owing  to  that  of  preparation  and  attitude 
occupied,  finds  its  exact  parallel  in  the  verifications  of  the  predictions  that 
a  portion  of  the  Jews  will  be  accepted  and  another  portion  be  rejected — 
that  a  sifting  and  separation  will  ensue  ;  (h)  the  midnight  cry,  uttered  by 
the  escort  with  the  bridegroom's  procession  or  by  believing  Gentiles,  so 
arrests  the  attention  of  the  Jews,  that  they,  in  their  extremity,  begin  to 
believe  in  Him  whom  they  have  pierced,  exemplified  by  their  willingness 
then  to  accept  of  Him  ;  (t)  the  posture  occupied  by  the  virgins  is  indicative 
of  a  belief  in  a  Coming,  expected  Messiah,  and  this  is  in  accord  with  the 
Jewish  position  then  occupied,  for  seeing  the  accurate  fulfilment  in  the 
distress  accumulated  upon  them  by  the  last  Antichrist,  they  will  also 
believe  in  the  promised  deliverance  (as  e.g.  shown  in  Zech.  14),  and  some 
will  be  suitably  prepared  (morally)  while  others  will  neglect  preparation  ; 
(j)  the  prophecy  preceding  (comp.  Mark  13  and  Luke  21)  had  a  special 
mention  of  the  Jewish  nation,  of  its  long-continued  tribulation,  etc.,  and 
it  is  reasonable  that  in  the  final  result  Jesus  should  illustrate  the  condition 
of  the  Jews,  addressing  Himself  to  them  ;  (k)  the  Second  Advene  of  the 
Messiah  has  a  twofold  specific  relationship,  as  previous  Propositions  unfold, 
viz.,  first,  to  the  Church  which  is  associated  with  Him  in  the  highest 
Theocratic  relationship,  in  rulership,  etc.  ;  and  second,  to  the  Jewish 
nation  which  occupies  a  subordinate,  but  as  to  other  nations  a  supreme, 
Theocratic  position  ;  in  view  of  this,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the 
duty  of  watching  and  being  prepared  would  be  enjoined  upon  both  ;  (I) 
the  virgins  are  invited  guests,  specially  called  to  participate  in  the  mar- 


304  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  181. 

riage  feast  ushering  in  the  Millennial  era,  and  so  numerous  predictions  call 
and  invite  the  Jews  to  that  "  feast  of  fat  things,"  and  we  are  assured  of  a 
response  ;  (m)  the  virgins  who  joined  the  bridal  procession  evidently  con- 
gratulated the  bridegroom  on  his  marriage  and  expressed  their  wishes  in 
his  behalf  and  that  of  the  bride,  as  implied  by  their  attitude,  by  honoring 
the  coming  with  their  union  with  it,  etc.,  and  this  finds  a  realization  in 
the  joy  of  the  Jews,  their  honoring  of  tbe  Messiah,  their  triumph  and  glory 
at  the  open  Parousia  of  Jesus,  the  Christ  ;  (n)  the  time  of  Christ's  Coming, 
at  "  midnight,"  i.e.  at  the  very  close  of  this  dispensation,  just  when  the 
glorious  "  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  is  to  be  ushered  in,  with  which  '*  day" 
the  Jews,  as  we  have  shown,  are  inseparably  connected,  in  view  of  their 
covenanted  Theocratic  relationship. 

Other  points  might  be  presented,  but  we  doubt  the  propriety — as  already  expressed 
—  of  pressing  every  part  of  the  parable.  That  "  they  all  slumbered  and  slept"  is  cer- 
tainly not  taken  in  a  bad  sense  (as  some  suppose,  who  make  it  to  denote  being  "  cold 
and  careless,"  "  careless  and  insensible,"  "  diminution  of  watchfulness,  fervor  and 
activity, ""  spiritual  declension,"  or  even  "  pre-occupied  with  the  secular  pursuits  of 
life,"  "engrossed  with  pleasures  and  cares,"  etc.,  for  this  would  prove  too  much  for 
their  own  application,  showing  that  no  one— for  all  slepl—  watched  for  the  coming  of  the 
bridegroom),  because  the  Saviour  does  not  censure  them  for  being  asleep,  a  natural 
result  of  long  waiting,  but  for  the  lack  of  previous  preparation,  so  that  they  were  not 
ready  when  the  bridegroom,  whom  they  «//  anticipated,  came.  The  imagery  is  drawn 
from  actual  life  and  natural  sleep  is  not  rebuked  in  the  wise  or  the  foolish,  but  the  lack 
of  oil,  the  neglect  in  laying  in  a  suitable  supply.  Therefore  the  sleeping  is  not  censured, 
and  the  reason  lies  in  the  simple  fact  that  the  figure  is  derived  from  what  actually  trans- 
pired in  usage  at  so  long  a  delay,  viz.,  when  the  parties  had  made  suitable  preparation,  if 
the  bridegroom  was  long  delayed,  they  then  deemed  it  not  unsuitable,  in  view  of  their 
subsequent  wakefulness  at  the  coming  of  the  bridegroom  in  the  lengthy  festivities,  to 
snatch  a  little  refreshing  sleep.  The  watching  that  the  Saviour  inculcates  is  not  a  self- 
denial  of  natural  sleep— required  to  repair  our  strength— but  a  state  of  tbe  mind  which 
anticipates  the  Advent  and  makes  previous  pr-eparation  for  it.  If  an  analogy  should  be 
pressed,  then  it  might  resolve  itself  simply  in  weariness  and  flagging  of  interest  at  the 
long  delay.  Storr  (Diss,  on  Parables)  says  that  the  sleeping  of  the  wise  virgins  is"  intro- 
duced not  as  a  defect  in  the  wise  virgins,  who,  on  the  contrary,  are  an  example  of  vigi- 
lance and  prudent  circumspection  ;  but  on  account  of  its  being  necessary  to  the  order  of 
the  narrative."  It  evinces  the  extreme  carelessness  of  the  foolish,  who  deemed  their 
preparation  ample  enough  for  the  occasion.  Trench  also  (to  which  Nast,  Co»n.  is  in- 
clined) regards  the  falling  asleep  a  circumstance  required  by  the  parabolic  narration.  To 
make  this  sleeping  the  universal  condition  of  the  Church  (as  some  do  because  all  slept) 
at  the  period  of  the  first  stage  of  the  Advent,  is  virtually  to  declare  that  none  are  then 
found  occupying  the  posture  of  watching,  which  is  forbidden  by  declarations  and  the 
translation  o'f  the  watching  ;  if  thus  applied  to  the  Church  during  the  interval  between 
the  two  stages,  it  is  also  forbidden  by  the  preaching  during  the  interval,  the  resistance 
against  the  Antichrist  even  to  death,  the  multitude  that  come  out  of  the  great  tribula- 
tion, etc.  Dr.  Seiss  (Parable  of  the  Ten  Virgins,  p.  41)  makes  the  sleeping  to  be  that 
"  their  enthusiasm  on  the  near  Advent  of  their  Lord  had  abated.  Their  expectation  had 
lost  its  ardor."  To  bring  out  an  analogy,  he  has  recourse  to  a  history  of  our  doctrine, 
its  decline  and  revival,  thus  making  the  parable  illustrative  not  of  the  period  "  then"  to 
which  it  refers,  but  of  the  entire  period  of  the  Church's  history.  Our  view  avoids  this, 
and  other  (as  midnight  cry,  by  whom  given  ?)  incongruities. 

Obs.  7.  This  application  is  enforced  by  considering  the  stress  of  "  then" 
as  connected  with  the  preceding  context.  The  Saviour  had  just  referred 
to  the  translation  (which  we,  Prop.  130,  locate  at  the  first  stage  of  the 
Advent),  and  to  the  cutting  off  of  the  unfaithful  and  unwatching  from  the 
portion  of  those  who  look  for  the  Coming  and  are  prepared,  and  the  nat- 
ural conclusion  follows  :  "then,"  that  is,  after  this  removal  and  judg- 
ment, then  shall  follow  the  realization  of  this  illustration. 


PllOP.  181.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  305 

Able  writers,  as  Dr.  Seiss  (Last  Times,  Ap.  to  last  Ed.,  p.  351),  Rev.  Beineke  (Proph. 
Times,  vol.  9,  p.  46),  and  others,  take  the  position  that  the  parable  will  only  be  verified 
at  the  open,  revealed  Parousia,  or  last  stage  of  the  Advent,  although  they  apply  it  to  the 
Church  in  general.  This  reference  to  the  Church  at  that  period  might  be  consistently 
allowed,  if  it  were  not,  in  view  of  the  reasons  assigned,  more  natural  to  apply  it  to  the 
people  addressed.  The  mention  of  "  virgins"  upon  which  so  much  emphasis  is  laid,  is 
simply  a  part  of  the  parabolic  dress,  being  actually  derived  from  the  customs  existing, 
viz.,  that  maidens  thus  met,  in  compliment,  the  bridegroom  and  bride.  For  although 
thus  designated,  a  part  of  them  were  foolish  ;  the  simple  idea  being  that  just  as  such  a 
party  on  such  an  occasion,  were  prepared  and  unprepared  so  it  will  be  again  at  this  period. 
There  is  danger  in  pressing  every  particular,  and  even  the  persons  designated  in  the 
parable,  as  seen  e.g.  in  the  parable  of  the  unjust  judge.  So  in  reference  to  "  the  lamps" 
and  "  the  oil"  which  are  supposed  by  many  to  find  their  esact  fulfilment  in  profession 
and  grace,  they  are  only  introduced  (as  seen  e.g.  in  the  recommendation  to  the  foolish  to 
go  to  the  oil  merchants  to  buy)  to  fill  out  the  imagery  of  the  custom,  and  bring  forth  the 
fact  of  preparation  and  the  lack  of  it.  The  number  "  ten"  is  still  more  applicable  to  the 
Jew  than  to  the  Church,  seeing  (Lange's  Com.  loci)  that  "  ten  formed  a  company  with  the 
Jews,  also  a  family  to  eat  the  passover  ;  ten  Jews  living  in  one  place  formed  a  congrega- 
tion and  should  be  provided  with  a  synagogue  ;  ten  lamps  or  torches  were  the  usual 
number  in  marriage  processions."  The  main  idea,  however,  that  some  would  be  pre- 
pared and  others  unprepared  for  this  Coming  is  to  be  pressed. 

Obs.  8.  If  it  were  allowable  to  read  in  the  first  verse,  "  And  went  forth 
to  meet  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride"  (as  Maldonatus  and  others,  and  de- 
cidedly favored  by  Trench,  Notes  on  the  Parables,  p.  237),  it  would  con- 
firm our  view.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  certain,  from  the  usage  referred 
to,  that  these  virgins  join  the  procession  on  the  return  of  the  bridegroom 
with  the  bride  to  their  future  abode  (Obs.  5  and  note).  This  accords  with 
the  previous  withdrawal  of  the  144,000  (Prop.  130),  with  the  Theocratic 
marriage  at  Mt.  Sinai  (Prop.  1GG),  and  with  the  procession  of  the  bride- 
groom and  bride  to  their  future  glorious  abode  on  Mt.  Zion.  This  agrees 
with  the  simple  fact  that  these  virgins,  prepared  to  unite  and  enter  into 
the  marriage  supper,  are,  not  the  bride,  but  guests  who  honor  the  bride- 
groom and  the  bride — virgins  who  follow  the  cmeen. 

This  distinction  between  the  bride  and  these  virgins  who  are  guests,  is  observed  by 
numerous  writers  (as  e.g.  Steir,  Seiss,  Alford,  etc.).  Dr.  Schaff  in  Lange's  Com.  loci 
remarks  :  "  According  to  the  Jlillenarian  theory  the  bride  is  the  restored  Jewish  Church 
and  the  ten  virgins  represent  the  Gentile  congregations  accompanying  her."  And  he 
favors  some  such  distinction,  saying  :  "  We  may  perhaps  say  that  she  is  here,  in  the 
strict  interpretation,  the  Jewish  Church  and  these  ten  virgins  Gentile  congregations  accom- 
panying her."  It  may  be  repeated  that,  whatever  explanation  is  given,  the  bride  is 
separate  ami  distinct  from  those  invited  guests.  For  usage  compels  us,  as  well  as  the  analogy 
of  Scripture  on  the  point,  to  make  such  a  discrimination.  Hence  on  the  phrase  "  went 
in  with  Him  to  the  marriage.'1''  Barnes  (Com.)  remarks  :  "  The  marriage  ceremony  took 
place  before  the  bride  left  her  Father's  house,  but  a  feast  was  given  at  the  house  of  her 
husband,  and  which  was  also  called  the  marriage,  or  a  part  of  the  marriage  solemnities." 
In  the  Truth,  vol.  3,  No.  9,  Dr.  Brookes  makes  the  bride  to  be  "  the  redeemed  and 
restored  Israel,"  and  the  virgins  to  be  the  entire  number  of*  Gentile  converts  which  fol- 
low her,  as  illustrated  in  Ps.  45.  But  all  such  methods  to  solve  the  difficulty  and  to 
avoid  making  the  Church  both  to  represent  the  bride  and  the  guests,  are  arbitrary,  since, 
as  we  have  shown  under  former  Propositions  in  detail,  the  Gentile  converts  are  not  a  sep- 
arate body  to  occupy  a  lower  position,  but  are  engrafted  into  the  Israel  and  shall  obtain 
with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  the  highest  Theocratic  position. 

Obs.  9.  The  personality  of  the  Sec.  Advent  is  decidedly  implied  and  en- 
forced by  the  parable.  The  previous  and  succeeding  context  clearly 
teaches  it,  and  the  parable  is  expressly  designed  to  illustrate  what  will  oc- 
cur, in  relation  to  certain  parties,  at  its  realization.     The  coming  of  the 


306  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  181. 

bridegroom  and  bride  is  personal,  the  entire  imagery  is  realistic  in  the 
marriage,  etc.,  and  the  simple  fact  that  Jesus  selects  the  same  as  illustra- 
tive of  His  own  Coming,  abundantly  confirms  our  position,  and  shows  that 
the  same  is  Pre-Millenarian. 

Obs.  10.  "  The  Kingdom  of  heaven"  is  thus  likened.  That  is,  the 
Kingdom  of  heaven  in  its  manner  of  introduction  or  realization  will  meet 
with  such  a  reception,  or  bring  forth  such  a  result.  The  covenanted  Mes- 
sianic Kingdom,  as  we  have  in  detail  proven,  pertains  to  the  period  of  this 
Sec.  Advent,  and  will  meet  such  a  reception  by  the  Jews,  some  being  pre- 
pared and  others  unprepared. 

Obs.  11.  In  reference  to  the  mooted  point  whether  the  foolish  virgins 
are  wicked,  ungodly,  mere  professors  (or,  as  some  even  designate  them, 
"hypocrites,"  etc. ),  or  merely  inconsiderate,  lacking  forethought;  if  we 
were  to  allow  the  particulars  of  the  parable  to  have  any  force,  then  cer- 
tainly the  foolish  virgins  cannot  be  regarded  as  wicked,  much  less  as  hypo- 
crites, or  mere  professors.  For  they  go  out,  as  friends  or  invited  guests,  to 
meet  the  bridegroom  ;  they  also  have  lamps  which  contained  some  oil ; 
with  the  wise  they  awaited  the  Coming,  and  with  them  they  slept  ;  when 
they  found  that  not  a  sulhciency  of  oil  had  been  previously  provided,  they 
were  solicitous  to  repair  their  error,  and  actually  (for  they  went  to  buy  and 
then  returned)  did  furnish  their  lamps  with  oil  (which,  if  it  denotes 
"grace,"  etc.,  shows  their  moral  condition),  but  too  late.  The  only 
marked  difference  between  the  two  classes  consisted  in  this  :  the  wise  with 
the  oil  in  their  lamps  took  oil  in  vessels  toiththem  to  give  a  needed  supply  ; 
the  foolish  neglected  this  precaution,  and  hence  were  not  ready.  The  fool- 
ish, therefore,  are  only  excluded  from  these  marriage  festivities,  but  will 
ultimately  be  saved. 

The  writer  is  forced  by  the  parable  itself,  and  the  general  analogy  of  the  Word  on 
this  point,  to  accept  of  the  view  held  by  Alford  (who  also  lays  stress  on  the  present 
tense  :  "  they  are  going  out,"  showing  that  the  lamps  had  oil,  but  not  a  sufficiency), 
Olshausi-ii.  Poiret,  Fr.  Von  Meyer,  Eudolph,  Stier,  Bayford,  Seiss,  and  others,  viz.,  that 
the  five  foolish  virgins  will  only  be  excluded  from  the  special  blessings  connected  with 
this  marriage  feast,  seeing  that  they  are  not  divided  into  good  and  bad,  or  into  believers 
and  unbelievers  ;  and  it  is  not  said  that  the  foolish  virgins  could  not  purchase  any  oil, 
but  we  are  left  rather  to  the  conclusion  that  as  they  went  to  buy,  they  secured  it  although 
too  late.  This  application  is  resisted,  on  the  other  hand,  by  able  writers.  Thus  e.g.  Dr. 
Brookes  (Tin  Truth,  vol.  3,  No.  9)  regards  it  as  "  a  dangerous  speculation,"  etc.,  because 
we  are  not  to  allow  the  five  foolish  virgins  to  have  been  believers,  having  a  mere  lifeless 
wick  and  no  oil  ;  being  designated  "  foolish  ;"  also,  the  "  door  shut,"  and  the  bridegroom 
saving,  "  I  know  you  not."  He  deprecates  mere  human  opinion,  when  he  certainly 
advances  the  same,  by  asserting,  over  against  the  parable,  that  they  were  no  believers — 
when  faith  in  the  coming  brjdegroom  caused  them  to  go  forth  to  meet  him — that  they  had 
a  lifeless  wick — when  the  lamp  Iiad  been  burning  until  midnight — that  they  had  no  oil — 
when  the  lamps  were  not  out  but  merely  going  out,  needing  replenishing,  and  they  went  to 
purchase  more. 

Obs.  12.  The  "  door  being  shut"  and  the  declaration  "  I  know  you  not," 
are,  therefore,  simply  expressive  of  exclusion  to  a  position  which  the  others, 
because  of  their  preparation  and  readiness,  obtain.  It  is  a  fact,  as  we  have 
previously  shown,  that  the  faithful  children  of  Abraham,  including  the 
engrafted  and  adopted  Gentile  believers,  shall  through  the  power  of  resur- 
rection and  translation  at  the  first  sta<re  of  the  Advent  be  associated  with 


Prop.  181.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  307 

the  Christ  as  co-heirs  or  rulers  in  the  Theocratic  ordering  (this,  owing  to 
the  intimate,  endearing,  and  enduring  relationship  being  also  represented 
as  a  marriage).  To  this  marriage  the  Jewish  nation  is  specially  invited 
under  the  figure  of  guests  ;  and  those  who  at  its  inauguration  will  accept  of 
the  invitation  and  qualify  themselves  by  a  previous  preparation,  sliall  also 
he  particularly  associated  and  honored.  These  filling  the  stations  allotted 
to  them  in  the  Kingdom,  no  others  can  be  admitted,  however  they  may 
afterward  enjoy  the  peace,  prosperity  and  blessedness  brought  about  by  the 
dominion  and  supremacy  exercised.  The  period  of  the  inauguration  and 
manifested  establishment  of  the  Kingdom,  is  one  also  in  which  those  will 
be  honored  who  honor  Jesus  the  Christ. 

Attention  is  invited  to  the  parable  of  the  marriage  of  the  king's  son  (Matt.  22  :  1-14) 
in  its  contrast  to  this  one,  and  yet  teaching  precisely  the  same  result.  Here  the  door 
was  shut  and  no  one  could  enter  unless  he  had  a  burning  lamp  ;  there  even  one  was 
found  who  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment,  but  he  only  entered  the  outer  apartment  or 
one  separated  from  the  room  where  the  marriage  feast  was  given,  where  the  scrutiny  was 
undergone.  So  that,  so  far  as  the  feast  was  concerned,  "  the  door  was  shut"  to  him  like- 
wise ;  and  this,  too,  took  place  (Home's  Inbrod.,  vol.  2,  p.  1G2)  "  after  the  procession  in 
the  evening  from  the  bride's  house  was  concluded."  Both  refer  to  the  same  period  and  to 
a  certain  qualification  needed  in  order  to  participate  in  the  marriage  festivities.  But  the 
latter  introduces  some  very  significant  features,  such  as  the  invitation  to  the  Jewish 
nation  to  enter  into  the  Theocratic  relationship  (marriage  of  the  Son)  for  the  Kingdom 
was  tendered  to  them  ;  the  refusal  of  the  nation  to  accept  of  the  same  ;  the  destruction 
of  the  murderers  and  burning  up  of  their  city  ;  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  ;  and  then,  at  the 
time  of  the  marriage  the  scrutiny  of  invited  guests  reveals  one  utterly  unprepared  and  who 
is  rejected,  thus  in  a  parabolic  manner  exhibiting  the  fate  of  a  certain  class,  who  at  the 
time  of  marriage  festival  shall  be  considered  entirely  unworthy — because  in  no  sense 
honoring  the  occasion,  but  showing  manifest  disrespect — of  participation  in  it.  The 
same  idea  of  sifting  is  presented,  and  some  manifest  inconsiderateness,  making  no  suit- 
able preparation,  and  are  excluded,  while  others  exhibit  positive  disrespect  and  are  cut 
off.  The  lack  of  faith,  resulting  in  lack  of  moral  qualifications  essential  to  a  participa- 
tion in  Messianic  blessedness,  is  evidently  presented. 

Obs.  13.  The  midnight  cry  is  one  that  arose  not  before  the  wedding,  but 
after  ;  not  before  the  procession  had  started,  but  after  ;  not  before  the  very 
last  period,  but  just  ivhen  expiring.  It  therefore  cannot  possibly  be  applied 
as  many  now  do,  viz.,  to  the  past  and  present  condition  of  the  Church, 
some  arising  and  specifically  directing  attention  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  seeing 
that  the  cry  as  located  in  the  parable  with  the  bridal  procession  forbids  it. 

Besides  this,  the  juarable  shows  that  when  the  cry  was  raised,  both  wise  and  foolish 
were  aroused  by  it  and  acknowdedged  that  Coming,  etc.,  which  is  not  true  of  any  warn- 
ings uttered  by  Pre-Millenarianism,  Millerism,  etc.  Indeed,  before  the  first  stage  of  the 
Advent  it  could  not  possibly  be  applied,  as  the  Church  is  represented  as  faithless,  etc., 
on  the  subject.  It  pertains  to  the  interval  between  the  two  stages,  when  these  virgins 
recognize  this  marriage,  acknowledge  their  relationship  to  the  bridegroom  and  bride  (as 
predicted),  and  then,  just  when  the  bridal  procession  is  to  be  awaited,  anticipate  its  com- 
ing. It  represents  an  occurrence  at  a  specified  time,  viz.,  when  the  bridegroom  returns 
from  the  wedding,  and  we  cannot,  in  consistency  with  the  decisive  representation  of  the 
parable,  antedate  its  utterance.  The  cry  itself  does  not,  as  claimed,  come  from  the  wise 
virgins;  they  themselves  are  aroused  by  it.  It  proceeds  either  from  heralds  preceding 
the  procession,  or  from  the  procession  itself,  or  else  from  Gentiles.  The  most  probable 
opinion,  however,  is  that  it  proceeds  from  Elijah,  who  (as  we  show  elsewhere  in  detail) 
is  specially  sent  to  the  Jews  during  this  interval  to  prepare  them  for  the  open  Parousia. 
The  interval  itself,  as  we  have  contended,  is  not  a  brief  period,  but  may  extend  to  fifty, 
seventy-five,  or  more  years,  and  its  extent  (after  the  capture,  etc.  of  the  city  by  Anti- 
christ, Zech.  1-4)  serves  to  explain  the  delay  intimated  in  the  parable. 


308  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  181. 

Obs.  14.  The  precise  time  of  the  open  Parousia,  the  Epiphany,  is  un- 
known, just  as  the  thief-like  Coming  is  unknown  as  to  exact  time.  The 
determinate  duration  of  the  interval  is  something  that  belongs  to  God  alone. 
Approximately,  as  the  virgins  themselves  did,  we  may  conclude  its  approach 
to  be  near.  The  attitude,  professions,  etc.,  of  the  virgins  indicates  this, 
while  the  precise  time  of  the  manifestation  was  something  which  they  did 
not  know.  Hence  the  express  caution  annexed  :  "  Watch,  therefore,  for  ye 
know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour,  wherein  the  Son  of  Man  cometh." 

The  caution  here  is  of  general  application,  and,  in  view  of  its  decisive  language,  is 
certainly  opposed  to  that  dogmatic  mathematical  calculation  which  would  determine  not 
only  the  exact  time  of  the  thief-like  stage,  but  also  the  precise  duration  of  the  interval. 
While  all  such  chronological  estimates  may  serve  to  give  an  approximative  idea  of  near- 
ness, on  the  other  hand  the  confident  and  positive  exhibitions  of  time  are  opposed  to  the 
caution  of  Jesus.  The  very  uncertainty  of  the  Coming  is  made  the  reason  why  watchful- 
ness and  due  preparation  should  be  preserved.  The  conclusion  of  the  parable  (v.  13)  is, 
therefore,  of  general,  present  application  ;  while  specially  to  be  realized  in  the  manner 
stated,  the  caution  embraces  the  Advent  as  a  whole,  being  comprehensive  in  its  meaning. 
Hence  the  application  of  the  past  in  enforcing  the  constant  duty  of  watching  for  the 
Advent,  is  correct  in  view  of  the  summing  up  of  the  duty  thus  enjoined,  requisite  to 
both  of  the  stages  of  the  Advent. 

Obs.  15.  The  parable  enforces  our  position  that  there  will  be  no  conver- 
sion of  the  world  prior  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  The  condition  of  the  virgins, 
the  division  into  prepared  and  unprepared,  the  reception  of  one  class  and 
rejection  of  the  other,  even  at  the  closing  period  (midnight),  all  indicates 
that  "  all  are  not  righteous,"  etc.  It  evidences  that  even  in  reference  to 
the  Jews,  God's  own  covenanted  people,  there  will  be  a  period  of  sifting — 
as  often  predicted — in  order  to  determine  who  are  worthy  of  participating 
in  the  glorious  marriage  festival. 

Obs.  1G.  Xo  matter  whether  this  parable  be  interpreted  as  applying  to 
the  Church  at  the  first  stage  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  or  to  the  same  at  the  last 
stage,  or  to  the  Jews  at  the  open,  manifested  parousia  as  distinguished 
from  the  previous  thief-like  Coming,  it  corroborates  and  enforces  our  doc- 
trine respecting  the  attitude  of  watchfulness  and  preparation  for  the  Sec. 
Advent,  the  certainty  and  personality  of  that  Coming,  and  the  blessed 
results  flowing  to  the  righteous  from  that  Advent.  Whatever  our  views 
may  be  respecting  it  in  detail,  yet  the  leading  ideas  are  so  unmistakably 
given  that  we  cannot  mistake. 

Hence,  while  differing  in  the  details  and  the  application  of  a  portion  of  the  parable, 
the  Pre-Millenarian  aspect  of  it  is  decided,  and  the  constant  duty  of  watchfulness  is 
enforced  by  all  writers.  The  concluding  verse  agrees  with  the  general  analogy  on  the 
duty  of  looking  for  the  Coming  of  the  Saviour.  Dr.  Seiss  (Par.  Ten  Virgins,  ch.  6),  and 
others  ably  present  this  feature,  urging  an  efficient  preparation.  Both  the  thief-like 
stage  and  the  open  Parousia  demand  this  attitude  and  qualification.  The  sjiecial  favor 
and  blessing  of  the  Son  of  Man,  the  glorious  Theocratic  King,  can  only  be  secured  by 
the  acceptance  of  His  instructions,  and  a  manifested  obedience  to  the  same. 


PROP.  182.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  309 


Proposition  182.   This  Kingdom  embraces  the  "One  Hope? 

Our  argument  presents  the  "One  Hope"  (Eph.  4  :  4),  that  actu- 
ated the  ancient  worthies,  the  pious  Jews  at  the  First  Advent,  the 
disciples,  apostles,  and  early  believers,  and  many  an  humble 
believer  down  to  the  present  day.  This  hope  is  continuously 
expressed  not  only  in  this,  but  in  the  preceding  dispensation. 
Abraham  "  believed  in  hope"  (Rom.  4  :  18)  and  so  do  his  seed  ;  a 
hope  expressed  in  the  covenants,  reiterated  by  the  prophets, 
renewed  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  preached  by  the 
apostles  ;  a  hope  centred  in  God  (Jer.  14  :  8  and  17  :  7,  13,  etc.\ 
manifested  in  Jesus  (1  Tim.  1:1;  Col.  1  :  27  ;  1  Thess.  1  :  2,  3, 
etc.),  and  wrought  by  the  Spirit  (Rom.  15  :  13). 

Hence  the  reason  why  the  intelligent  believer  so  earnestly  desires  (2  Pet.  3  :  12)  and 
ardently  prays  (Luke  18  :  1-8)  for  the  Advent  and  deliverance.  For  as  Seiss  (Par.  Ten 
Virgins,  p.  150)  says  :  "  As  Christians,  set  to  be  and  to  do  all  that  we  can  for  ourselves, 
and  that  Redeemer  who  has  bought  us  with  His  blood,  His  return  was  never  meant  to 
be  a  terror  to  us,  but  a  j<>;/  and  the  essence  of  our  iftuhlest  lope.  That  day  is  to  be  our  hap- 
piest day — the  day  when  all  present  woes  and  disabilities  shall  cease— the  day  of  release 
from  servitude  and  toil,  the  day  of  return  from  exile  and  privation,  the  day  of  triumph 
and  everlasting  jubilee,  the  day  when  our  Saviour  will  take  us  to  Himself,  to  be  with 
Him  and  like  Him  forever." 

Obs.  1.  Much  vagueness  exists  among  believers  at  the  present  day  in 
reference  to  this  Hope,  owing  to  the  simple  fact  that  the  announcement  of 
this  Hope  (as  e.g.  by  the  angel,  Luke  1  :  32,  33)  is  spiritualized  or  explained 
away,  and  something  else  substituted  in  its  place.  Hence  it  is  that  we  are 
taught,  that  in  order  to  appreciate  this  Hope  we  must  be  enlightened  ; 
Eph.  1  :  18,  "  the  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  enlightened,  that  ye  may 
know  what  is  the  Hope  of  His  calling  and  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  His 
inheritance  in  the  saints,"  etc.  This  opening  of  the  eyes  of  the  under- 
standing only  comes  from  a  searching  of  the  Scriptures.  Enlightenment  is 
necessary  (hence  the  caution  is  given,  as  if  to  imply  a  falling  away  from  the 
Hope  without  it),  because  the  Hope  is  based  upon  what  is  past,  present,  and 
future.  To  appreciate  it  intelligently  the  rise  and  progress  of  this  Hope 
must  be  traced — its  foundation  in  the  covenants,  and  its  confirmation  by 
Jesus  must  be  particularly  noticed,  and  then  the  eye  of  faith  must  look 
onward  to  the  Sec.  Advent  for  its  realization.  A  portion  of  the  Hope  (also 
called  Hope  because  firmly  attached  to  it,  as  e.g.  the  resurrection,  eternal 
life,  etc.)  must  not  be  mistaken  for  the  whole  Hope.  This  caution  of  be- 
coming enlightened  is  especially  applicable  to  the  Gentiles,  to  whom  it  is 
addressed,  because  as  we  have  shown  this  is  pre-eminently  a  Jewish  Hope, 
i.e.  a  Hope  connected  with  the  Jewish  nation,  through  covenants  given  to 
the  Jews  and  through  a  King  appertaining  to  them.  The  apostle,  there- 
fore, informs  the  same  Ephesians  (2  :  11)  that,  without  being  engrafted 


310  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  182. 

into  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  becoming  the  seed  of  Abraham,  they 
can  have  "no  hope."  Our  Hope  is  "  the  Hope  of  Israel"  (Acts  28  :  20), 
'*'  the  Hope  of  the  promise  made  of  God  unto  our  fathers,  unto  which  prom- 
ise our  twelve  tribes,  instantly  serving  God  day  and  night,  hope  to  come1' 
(Acts  26  :  6,  7).  This  Hope  is  embraced  in  the  Kingdom  as  delineated, 
e.g.  Isa.  9:7:  Jer.  23  :  50,  etc.,  and  is  reiterated  in  our  being  "  called 
unto  His  Kingdom  and  glory"  (1  Thess.  1  :  12) — "the  Kingdom  which 
He  has  promised  to  them  that  love  Him"  (James  2  :  5,  so  inheriting,  etc., 
comp.  Luke  12  :  32  ;  Matt.  25  :  34  ;  2  Pet.  1  :  11  ;  Luke  13  :  29,  etc.). 
And,  as  Jesus  Christ  is  the  One  through  whom  this  Hope  is  to  be  realized, 
He  is  called  "  our  Hope"  (1  Tim.  1:1);  and  as  this  hope  is  to  be  experi- 
enced at  His  Sec.  Advent,  His  Coming  is  designated  "  the  blessed  Hope" 
(Tit.  2  :  13).  It  is  highly  significant,  that  the  mighty  Agent  through 
whom  Hope  shall  be  realized  is  called  "  the  Hope,"  and  if  received  by 
appropriating  faith  becomes  "  Christ  in  us  the  Hope  of  glory"  (Col.  1:  27)  ; 
but  this  should  not  prevent  us  from  apprehending  that  He  is  only  the 
Introducer,  Verifier,  Fulfiller  of  "  the  Hope  of  the  Gospel."  The  Gospel 
is  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,"  and  while  it,  of  necessity,  largely  per- 
tains to  the  King  of  the  Kingdom,  it  is  chiefly  as  this  King  shall  manifest 
His  power  and  glory  in  the  Coming  Kingdom  as  it  has  been  covenanted 
and  predicted. 

In  view  of  this  Hope  the  believer  can  say  as  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  130  :  5,  6),  or  as  the 
prophet  (Isa.  25  :  9)  ;  but,  unfortunately,  comparatively  few  do  this  without  spiritualizing 
the  Hope.  Many  works  that  embrace  the  topic  of  salvation  through  Christ  have  much  to 
say  respecting  present  and  future  salvation,  and  give  biit  a  small  portion  of  the  Hope. 
Indeed,  the  most  of  them  ignore  the  distinctive  Hope  entirely,  and  the  covenant  upon 
which  it  is  based  is  never  mentioned.  While  the  Bible  holds  up  to  us  the  Coming  of 
Jesus  as  "  the  blessed  hope"  of  the  world,  by  which  "  the  hojJe"  of  the  fathers  relating 
to  the  Kingdom  can  be  realized,  the  multitude  reject  this,  so  that  even  papers  adopt  as 
their  title,  "  The  Golden  Age,"  or  as  their  motto,  "  An  Evangelical  Ministry,  an  active 
Church,  and  a  sanctified  Press,  the  Hope  of  the  World."  Alas!  if  this  were  our  only 
hope.  Alas  !  how  many  hopes  are  substituted  for  the  Sec.  Advent  and  its  related  bless- 
ings. One  has  death,  another  the  First  Advent  ;  one  has  Christianity,  another  develop- 
ment ;  one  has  the  law,  another  the  Gospel  ;  one  has  education,  another  humanity  ;  one 
has  science,  another  philosophy  ;  one  has  Spiritualism,  another  has  the  Church  with  its 
sacraments  ;  one  has  some  special  dogma,  another  the  progression  of  the  Spirit,  etc.,  so 
that  numerous  hopes  are  substituted  for  the  Biblical  one.  It  also  is  not  observed  that 
the  Old  and  New  Tests,  are  identical  in,  and  united  in,  the  same  Mope.  A  Coming  Mes- 
siah with  a  Coming  Kingdom  is  the  Hope  of  the  Old  and  the  Hope  of  the  New,  only  that 
the  Hope  of  the  latter  is  confirmed  and  strengthened  by  a  Messiah  who  has  already  come 
and  departed,  leaving  the  precious  promise  of  a  speedy  return  and  a  then  incoming  King- 
dom. Schaff  (His.  Apos.  Church,  p.  604)  says  :  "The  grand  theme  of  Old  Test,  prophecy 
is  the  First  Coming"  (we,  however,  would  also  include  the  Second — see  Prop.  34),  "  that  of 
the  New  Test,  prophecy  the  Second  Coming  of  the  Lord  and  His  Kingdom,  with  all  the 
preparatory  and  attendant  events.  We  expect  not  a  Messiah  as  did  the  Jews,  but  the 
reappearing  of  the  Lord  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  to  glorify  His  bride. 
Hence  Hope  is  a  cardinal  virtue  of  the  Church  militant."  The  realization  of  Hope,  as 
presented  in  the  covenants  and  promises  of  salvation,  is  invariably  linked  in  the  Script- 
ures with  the  still  future  Sec.  Advent  of  the  Messiah. 

Obs.  2.  If  we  are  to  credit  a  multitude  of  writers,  this  "  One  Hope"  so 
long  entertained  by  God's  ancient  people,  and  which  formed  so  remark- 
able a  feature  of  the  Primitive  Church,  and  for  which  believers  suffered 
even  death,  was  changed  to  another  Hope.  We  are  gravely  informed  by 
theologians  and  expounders  of  God's  Word,  that  the  Hope,  which  once  so 
continuously  existed,  was  well  enough  for  the  age  in  which  it  was  enter- 


Prop.  182.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  311 

tained,  but  that  it  was  modified  to  remove  its  "  carnal"  features  and  adapt 
it  to  "  the  enlightened  and  spiritual"  age  in  which  we  live.  Well  may  we 
ask,  what  then  becomes  of  "  the  One  Hope,"  and  what  becomes  of  the 
Hope  so  fondly  and  passionately  embraced  by  the  ancient  believers?  Our 
argument  clearly  shows,  that  according  to  the  Scriptures,  no  such  change 
or  modification  was  ever  made  under  divine  direction,  and  the  same  is  fully 
sustained  by  the  history  of  the  early  Church.  Men,  uninspired  men,  led 
by  mere  reason  and  supposing  that  they  could  improve  what  Scripture 
so  plainly  has  given,  under  the  mistaken  notion  of  elevating  "  the  One 
Hope"  by  spiritualizing  its  substance,  tampered  with  it  and  finally  modi- 
fied and  so  changed  it,  that  as  it  appears  in  many  works  it  bears  no  re- 
semblance whatever  to  "the  hope  of  the  Gospel"  as  recorded.  The  worst 
is,  that  so  intrenched  has  this  departure  from  "  the  One  Hope"  become 
in  the  churches,  that  many  eminent  and  pious  men  assist  in  maintaining 
it,  and  take  offence  if  the  facts,  as  they  exist,  are  plainly  stated.  Willing 
to  make  out  that  the  multitude  of  pious  before  and  after  the  First  Advent 
deluded  themselves  with  a  false  Hope,  they  are  unwilling,  owing  to  sup- 
posed  superior  knowledge,  to  acknowledge  themselves  to  be  under  a  delusive 
Hope.  The  redeeming  feature  in  some,  however,  is,  that  they  make  their 
Hope  (delusive  as  it  may  be  in  the  manner  and  place  of  realization)  centre 
in  Christ,  and  thus  honoring  Christ  with  us,  they  are  still  accounted 
worthy  to  experience  the  hope  of  the  promise  made  to  the  Fathers.  Alas  ! 
so  embedded  is  this  modified  Hope'm  the  affections  of  many,  that  if  we  point 
to  "  the  One  Hope,"  sustained  by  Scripture  and  Tradition,  and  held  by 
men  whose  praises  are  in  the  churches,  it  is  pronounced  "  foolishness," 
or  "  heresy,"  or  "  a  return  to  carnal  Jewish  notions,"  etc.  To  all  such, 
who  may  honestly,  from  the  amount  of  knowledge  in  their  possession  and 
the  prejudice  imbibed  against  our  doctrine,  hold  such  sentiments,  Ave  will 
only  say  this,  that  our  Hope,  the  One  Hope  entertained  by  the  ancient 
Church,  is  confirmed  to  us  by  the  oath  of  God  Himself  (Heb.  6  :  17-19)  ; 
and  therefore,  we  cleave  to  it  the  more  persistently,  well  knowing  how,  as 
predicted  such  a  hope  was  changed  through  the  application  of  erroneous 
principles  of  interpretation.  Let  the  reader  turn  back  to  Prop.  21,  and 
see  how  all  admit  that  the  prophecies  grammatically  understood  sustain 
this  Hope  of  the  pious  Jews  ;  then  refer  to  Prop.  35,  etc.,  which  shows 
that  but  one  Kingdom  was  predicted,  and  is  it  consistent  to  reject  a  hope 
which  is  unmistakably  presented  in  the  Word  of  God  ?  How  can  we 
substitute  one  which,  as  frankly  admitted  even  by  many  of  our  opponents, 
was  gradually,  as  the  Church  was  able  to  bear  it,  developed  and  put  in  the 
place  of  the  preceding  one  ?  Whatever  others  may  do,  we  dare  not  accept 
of  this  transmutation  introduced  by  uninspired  men  (who  gave  evidence  to 
much  weakness)  and  which  was  firmly  established  in  the  Church  by  the 
rise  and  progress  of  the  Papacy.  Besides  this,  the  sanctifying  (Heb.  3:6; 
1  John  3  :2,  3  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  13,  etc.)  influence  of  this  Hope,  when  appreciated, 
as  exemplified  in  Jewish  history  and  in  the  Christian  confessors  of  the  truth, 
is  still  connected  with  it,  seeing  that  instead  of  a  vagueness  and  indefinite- 
ness  thrown  around  the  promises,  it  brings  them  forth  with  clearness  and 
vividness,  distinctly  perceiving  and  embracing  the  great  object  of  Hope — 
the  Kingdom. 

This  is  embraced  or  summed  tip  in  the  titles  of  Millenarian  works,  as  e.g.  Altinguis's 
Spes  Israelis;  the  Bloomsbury  Lent  Lectures,  Third  Ser.,  1845  ;  The  Hope  of  the  Apostolic 
Church ;   The  Restoration,  or  the  Hope  of  the  Early  Church  Realized,  by  Riley  ;   The  Hopes  of 


312  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  182. 

the  Church  of  God,  by  Darby  ;  Spes  Fidelium,  or  the  Believer's  Hope  ;  The  Hope  of  Israel,  by 
Girdlestone  ;  Janeway's  Hope  for  the  Jews  ;  Cox's  Millenarian'  s  Answer  of  the  Hope  that  is  in 
Him,  etc.     For  a  specimen  of  the  treatment  of  this  Hope,  see  Prop.  121  and  sec.  53. 

Obs.  3.  "  The  Blessed  Hope"  is  so  precious,  so  full  of  comforting  Re- 
demptive meaning,  that  it  is  distinctly  pointed  out  in  its  plain  gram- 
matical sense.  It  is  not  predicted  "  obscurely"  or  "  uncertainly,"  or 
"  typically,"  or  "  figuratively,"  as  many  allege.  It  is  not  given  as  multi- 
tudes tell  us,  in  such  a  way  that  we  cannot  possibly  recognize  its  meaning, 
until  after  the  fulfilment,  for  then  it  would  be  unwise  for  the  Master  to 
urge  us  to  desire,  pray,  look,  and  watch  for  its  realization.  If  we  cannot 
understand  its  meaning,  or  comprehend  its  relationship  to  Redemption,  it 
would  be  folly  to  make  it  so  prominent  in  faith  and  promise.  The  Script- 
ures assume  to  teach  that  it  is  a  hope  so  well  grounded  and  so  clearly 
expressed,  that  we  can  fully  appreciate  it. 

1  It  is  utterly  impossible,  without  a  cordial  reception  of  the  oath-bound  covenants  in 
their  literal  meaning,  without  a  correct  apprehension  of  the  Theocratic  ordering  under 
the  Messiah  as  plainly  given,  without  a  proper  appreciation  of  the  future  kingship  and 
priesthood  of  the  saints,  and  without  a  knowledge  of  the  Messianic  inheritance  with 
which  we  are  joined  as  co-heirs,  to  know  the  Hope.  Many  sermons  e.g.  are  given  upon 
Eph.  1  :  18-20,  which  eloquently  tell  us-  that  the  third  heaven  with  its  blessings  is  the 
hope  and  inheritance  ;  but  in  the  light  of  covenant  and  promise  of  an  inheritance  con- 
firmed by  the  oath  of  God,  all  this  eloquence,  with  its  beautiful  imagery,  is  misplaced 
and  misleading. 

Obs.  4.  Some  turn  from  "  the  Blessed  Hope,"  the  appearing  of  Jesus, 
and  make  it  a  secondary  matter,  putting  death  in  its  place.  But  the 
Bible  reverses  all  this,  making  the  Sec.  Coming  with  its  glory  the  primary 
thing  and  death  a  subsidiary  affair.  The  latter,  at  most,  has  only  refer- 
ence to  the  preparation  of  the  individual,  and  leaves  an  incompleteness  of 
Redemption,  while  the  former  pertains  to  all  believers,  brings  in  perfect 
salvation,  and  reveals  the  glory  of  the  Saviour.  In  comparison  with  the 
Second  Advent  and  its  glorious  consequences,  its  grand  results,  death 
sinks  into  insignificance.  Nothing,  so  far  as  the  destiny  of  man  or  of 
the  world  is  concerned,  can  be  compared  to  it.  The  First  Advent  brings 
the  saving  grace,  but  the  Second  perfects  it  ;  the  First  brought  the  earnest 
of  Redemption  in  humiliation,  the  Second  completes  it  in  glory.  Hence 
the  intentional  scope  and  profound  interest  given  to  it  in  the  New 
Test.,  lest  (as  foreseen)  men  and  believers  should  give  it  its  modern  sec- 
ondary position. 

This  is  so  clearly  felt  and  admitted  by  our  opponents  that  some  who  have  expressly 
written  against  us  (as  e.g.  Dr.  Brown),  not  only  concede,  but  in  their  way  uphold,  this 
primary  position.  Brown  (Christ's  's'"'.  Coming,  p.  13)  remarks:  "  Pre-Millennialists 
have  done  the  Church  a  real  service,  by  calling  attention  to  the  place  which  the  Sec. 
Advent  holds  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  scheme  of  divine  truth  ;"  and  he  declares, 
"  the  Redeemer's  Sec.  Appearing  is  the  very  Polestar  of  the  Church,"  referring  to  numer- 
ous passages  affirming  its  preciousness  and  practical  tendency.  Others  give  the  same 
decisive  testimony,  as  e.g.  the  Christian  Union  (Aug.  14th,  1878),  commenting  on  the  de- 
cision of  the  Congregational  Church  of  Chicago  in  the  case  of  Dr.  Goodwin  and  Ham- 
mond (deciding  favorably  for  the  former,  who  was  persecuted  by  the  latter  on  account  of 
his  Pre-Millennial  faith),  declares,  that  while  it  differs  from  Dr.  Goodwin's  Second  Advent 
views,  yet  because  of  the  neglect  of  the  subject  and  of  its  position  and  importance,  "  it 
is  occasion  for  thanks  that  he  gives  any  outlook,"  and  invites  renewed  investigation  by 
'•  the  thoughtful  and  scholarly."  The  Sec.  Advent  brings  in  a  realization  of  Hope,  and 
hence  we  are  "  to  wait  for  His  Son  from  heaven,"  to  desire,  look,  pray,  and  watch  for  it. 


Prop.  182..]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  313 

Fausset  (Com.  Tit.  2  :  13)  incidentally  remarks,  "  there  is  but  one  Greek  article  to  both 
'  hope  '  and  '  appearing,'  which  marks  their  close  connection"  (the  hope  being  about  to 
be  realized  only  at  the  appearing  of  Christ).  Our  hopes  are  reflected  from  this  one  great 
Hope,  as  e.g.  1  Thess.  2  :  19,  20,  "  What  is  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of  rejoicing?  Are 
not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  His  Coming  ?"  It  is  then  that 
we  "  enter  into  the  joy  of  the  Lord  "  (Matt.  25  :  21  ;  comp.  Alford). 


Obs.  5.  Such  is  the  preciousness  of  this  Hope,  that  we  are  grateful  to 
any  who  have  expressed  it,  and  urged  others  to  accept  of  its  comforting 
influences.  There  is  (alas  !)  a  tendency  among  some  to  disparage,  and  even 
unchurch  others,  because  in  some  things  their  system  of  faith  is  defective, 
or  contradictory,  or  erroneous  ;  but  making  due  allowance  for  human 
weakness  and  imperfection  (which  for  the  sake  of  the  truth  we  may  specify, 
without  unchristianizing,  etc.),  the  simple  fact  that  this  "blessed  Hope" 
is  entertained  and  presented,  causes  our  hearts  to  warm  toward  them.  It 
is  a  bond  of  union,  or,  at  least,  of  interested  regard,  for  in  it  we  see  them 
honoring  "  the  Christ,"  and  in  such  honoring  we  rejoice,  hoping  that 
some  day,  when  hope  is  realized,  to  see  eye  to  eye  in  all  tilings.  For,  if 
any  one  "  loves  His  appearing ',"  he  certainly  loves  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
we  love  Him. 

Hence  we  so  much  admire  the  expressed  Hope  of  the  Reformers  and  others,  many  of 
whom  we  have  quoted  in  this  work.  Such  adhesion  to  the  Hope  is  indicative  of  fellow- 
ship with  Jesus,  and  of  a  "  conscience  void  of  offence."  When  e.g.  Stockton,  in  the  Book 
Above  All,  expresses  his  faith  in  the  exceeding  preciousness  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  in  the 
fulfilment  of  the  signs,  in  his  waiting  for  the  Lord,  in  a  wish  that  it  may  be  soon,  in  the 
declaration  that  the  only  hope  of  the  world  is  in  Jesus,  then — whatever  differences  of  view 
may  exist  on  other  points—  our  heart  warms  toward  the  brother  as  one  who  is  a  friend 
and  brother  of  Jesus.  No  one  can  express  such  heartfelt  desires  and  longings,  who  is 
not  warmly  and  truly  attached  to  the  Saviour. 


Obs.  (5.  The  exceeding  prominency  given  to  "  the  blessed  hope"  in  the 
New  Test.,  should  in  view  of  its  contents  most  certainly  influence  us  to 
give  it  a  like  prominency  in  our  faith.  In  reference  to  the  Sec.  Advent, 
Brookes  (Bible  Headings)  savs  :  "  It  is  mentioned  318  times  in  the  260 
chapters  that  make  up  the  Xew  Test.,  or  if  the  whole  book  is  divided  into 
verses,  it  occupies  one  of  twenty-five  verses  from  the  first  of  Matthew  to 
the  last  of  Eevelation. " 

If  so  prominent  in  the  Scriptures,  how  can  professed  Christians  censure  us  for  hold- 
ing it  forth  prominently,  and  urging  special  attention  to  it?  Seeing  that  it  is  such  an 
exceeding  precious  event,  so  pregnant  with  perfected  and  glorious  redemption,  how  can 
we  be  censured  and  abused,  if  we  take  a  deep  interest  in  the  time  of  its  occurrence,  im- 
itating the  prophets  of  old,  1  Pet.  1  :  10,  11  ?■  If  so  conspicuously  set  forth,  how  comes  it 
that  so  much  bitterness  and  hostility  is  manifested  toward  those  who  present  its  claims 
to  our  consideration  ?  It  is  thus  impressively  j^resented  in  order  that  every  believer  may 
"  love  His  appearing,"  and  when  such  love  is  not  entertained,  it  is  strong  evidence  that 
the  heart  and  life  is  not  right  ;  that  the  professor  is  unprepared  for  such  an  appearing  ; 
that  he  entertains  a  false  hope.  Evei-y  consideration  urges  us  (1  Pet.  1  :  13)  to  "  gird  up 
the  loins  of  our  mind,  be  sober,  and  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  us  at 
the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  We  joyfully  confess  this  Hope  and  its  prominency,  and, 
through  the  assurance  of  faith,  the  glory  of  a  Christ  pledged  in  its  behalf,  cling  to  it. 
"  The  Parousia  of  Christ  is  the  Epiphany  of  God,  in  brilliancy  like  fl"'  most  precious  jt  voel  " 
(Lange's  Com.  Rev.,  p.  382).  We  desire  Paul's  prayer  (Rom.  15  :  13)  to  be  more  and  more 
realized  in  us  :  "  Now  the  God  of  Hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  that 
ye  may  abound  in  Hope,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 


S14  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  QPbOP.  182. 

Obs.  7.  Hope  is  entertained  and  expressed  in  the  absence  of  the  Redeemer. 
Having  told  us  that  He  would  speedily  come,  we  believe  Him  ;  and,  as  we 
love  Him,  we  hope.  Now  we  are  in  the  period  affirmed  by  Luke  17  :  22, 
and  we  hope.  The  Bridegroom  is  taken  away  from  us  (Luke  5  :  34,  35), 
but  He  has  told  us  that  He  would  come  soon  again,  and  we  have  sweet 
hope. 

Hope  is  the  root  of  a  Christian's  happiness  ;  the  hope  of  faith  brings  peace  and  joy. 
It  has  been  well  said  (Lange's  Com.  1  Pet.,  p.  19)  :  "  Christianity  is  essentially  a  life  of 
hope  —it  is  founded  on  living  hope.  The  eye  of  faith  looks  out  for  the  glorious  revela- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ  from  heaven,  for  the  first  resurrection,  for  the  heavenly  city  of  peace 
(Jerusalem),  for  the  precious  inheritance,  for  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth." 
Brown  [Christ' s  Sec.  Cuming,  p.  18),  referring  to  this  absence  of  the  Bridegroom  and  His 
promised  return,  says  that  it  would  be  "  incongruous  not  to  cherish  the  feeling  of  desola- 
tion in  His  absence.  And  never  do  we  please  Christ  so  much  as  when  we  '  refuse  to  be 
comforted,'  even  with  His  own  consolations,  save  in  the  prospect  of  His  personal  return" 
(comp.  John  1G  :  19-22).  "  Greybeard"  (Lay  Sermons,  No.  107)  remarks  :  "  That  the 
Coming  of  the  Lord  will  bring  evil  to  some  people  on  the  earth  is  very  clear  ;  but  the  fact 
that  Christians  are  told  to  patiently  '  wait  for,'  and  to  '  love  His  approaching '  is  proof  that 
the  evil  will  not  be  to  them.  God  does  not  require  His  children  to  anxiously  expect  and 
ardently  wish  for  that  which  will  do  them  harm.  The  '  trouble'  will  fall  upon  God's 
enemies.  Nor  could  God  exhort  His  people  to  hold  themselves  in  constant  readiness  for 
the  Bridegroom's  return  if  He  intended  that  an  interval  of  a  thousand  years  of  peace  and 
blessing  on  earth  were  to  intervene  before  it  came  to  pass.  That  would  be  like  admonish- 
ing a  man  intending  to  take  a  journey  to  keep  watch  all  night  at  a  railway  station  for  a 
train  which  was  expected  to  arrive  some  time  during  the  following  day." 

Obs.  8.  In  connection  with  preceding  Prop,  something  may  be  added 
concerning  the  reasons,  why  we  should  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  view  of  such 
a  nearness.  Long  ago  Justin  said  :  "  You  see  all  sorts  of  men  big  with  the 
hopes  of  His  Second  Coming  in  glory,"  which  is  eminently  characteristic 
©f  the  present  time  ;  for  well-known  statesmen  and  humble  members  of 
the  State,  noblemen  and  the  untitled,  wealthy  and  poor,  learned  and  un- 
learned, prominent  divines  and  laymen,  in  brief,  men  of  all  classes  and 
rank,  look,  wait,  watch,  and  pray  for  the  Advent  of  the  blessed  Lord  Jesus 
and  the  then  incoming  Kingdom.  And  this  they  do  heartily,  sincerely, 
without  the  reservation  of  a  definite  or  Millennial  intervening  period  (for 
it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  a  person  can  watch  and  pray — much  less,  2 
Pet.  3  :  11,  12,  "hasting  unto,"  i.e.  earnestly  desiring,  wishing,  long- 
ing— for  the  coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord  with  a  mind  impressed  with  a 
theory  which  negatives  such  watching  and  praying),  because  it  is  the  most 
desirable  event  that  can  occur.  It  is  an  event  desirable  to  Christ  (only 
delayed  through  motives  of  mercy  and  grace),  because  then  He  obtains  His 
inheritance,  and  His  glory  is  revealed  ;  desirable  to  the  Father,  because 
then  His  oath-bound  covenants  are  verified  and  His  praise  promoted 
through  the  Son  of  His  love  ;  desirable  to  the  Spirit,  because  then  His 
faithfulness  and  power  will  be  specially  manifested  ;  desirable  to  the 
angels,  because  then  the  things  in  which  they  are  so  deeply  interested  will 
be  disclosed  in  the  glory  that  follows  ;  desirable  to  saints,  because  then  will 
come  to  them  glorification,  kingship  and  rulership  ;  desirable  to  the  Jew- 
ish nation,  because  then  shall  this  King  most  wonderfully  interpose  in  its 
behalf  ;  and  desirable  to  the  race  as  such,  because  then  shall  proceed  a 
series  of  acts  which  shall  result  in  lifting  the  race  itself  out  of  its  present 
condition  into  the  enjoyment  of  Millennial  blessedness.  There  is  only  one 
class  to  whom  it  is  undesirable,  viz.,  to  the  wicked — to  those  who  are  so 


PEOP.  182.]  THE   TIIEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  315 

unbelieving  that  they  continue  unrepentant,  rejectors  of  Christ,  and 
wilfully  disobedient  to  the  Divine  commands.  Hence,  every  one  who  truly 
loves  the  Saviour  will  (2  Tim.  4  :  8)  "  love  His  appearing;"  even  those 
who,  either  by  education  or  prejudice,  etc.,  may  be  unprepared  to  receive 
the  primitive  Church  doctrine  respecting  the  Kingdom,  still  feel  that  the 
Advent,  with  its  blessed  results  (however  imperfectly  comprehended),  is  in- 
deed "  the  blessed  hope."  Sir  Thomas  Browne  (Ch.  Morals,  sec.  26) 
remarks  :  "If  the  end  of  the  world  shall  have  the  same  foregoing  signs 
as  the  period  of  empires,  States,  and  dominions  in  it,  that  is,  corruption  of 
manners,  inhuman  degenerations,  and  deluge  of  iniquities,  it  may  bo 
doubted  whether  that  final  time  be  so  far  off,  of  whose  day  and  hour  there 
can  be  no  prescience."  After  proposing  the  question  why  the  world  has 
already  endured  so  long,  he  adds  :  "  However,  therefore,  the  wisdom  of 
the  Creator  hath  ordered  the  duration  of  the  world,  yet  since  the  end 
thereof  brings  the  accomplishment  of  our  happiness,  since  some  would  be 
content  that  it  should  have  no  end,  since  evil  men  and  spirits  do  fear  that 
it  may  be  too  short,  since  good  men  hope  it  may  not  be  too  long,  the 
prayer  of  the  saints  under  the  altar  will  be  the  supplication  of  the  righteous 
world,  that  His  mercy  should  abridge  their  languishing  expectations  and 
hasten  the  accomplishment  of  their  happy  state  to  come."  Barnes  says 
{Com.  1  Thess.  1  ;  Rem.  9)  :  "  It  is  our  duty  and  privilege  to  '  wait  for  the 
Son  of  God  to  return  from  heaven.'  We  know  not  when  His  appearing, 
either  to  remove  us  by  death  or  to  judge  the  world,  will  be — and  we 
should  therefore  watch  and  be  ready.  The  hope  of  His  return  to  our 
Avorld  to  raise  the  dead,  and  to  convey  His  ransomed  to  heaven,  is  the 
brightest  and  most  cheerful  prospect  that  dawns  on  man,  and  we  should  be 
ready,  whenever  it  occurs,  to  hail  Him  as  our  returning  Lord,  and  to  rush 
to  His  arms  as  our  glorious  Redeemer.  It  should  be  always  the  character- 
istic of  our  piety,  as  it  was  that  of  John,  to  say,  '  Even  so,  come,  Lord 
Jesus.'  "t  Commenting  on  2  Tim.  4  : 8,  he  says:  "To  believe  in  the 
Sec.  Advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  judge  the  world,  and  to  desire  His  re- 
turn, became  a  kind  of  a  criterion  by  which  Christians  were  known.  No 
others  but  true  Christians  were  supposed  to  believe  in  that,  and  no  others 
truly  desired,  it.  It  is  so  now.  It  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  a  true 
Christian  that  he  sincerely  desires  the  return  of  his  Saviour,  and  ivould  wel- 
come His  appearing  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  On  2  Pet.  3  :  13  he 
remarks  (explaining  the  "  hasting  unto"  to  denote  "  to  await  with  eager 
desire")  :  "  The  true  Christian  does  not  dread  the  Coming  of  that  day. 
He  looks  forward  to  it  as  the  period  of  His  redemption,,  and  would  wel- 
come, at  any  time,  the  return  of  his  Lord  and  Saviour.  While  he  is  willing 
to  wait  as  long  as  it  shall  please  God  for  the  Advent  of  His  Redeemer,  yet 
to  Him  the  brightest  prospect  in  the  future  is  that  hour  when  He  shall  come 
to  take  him  to  Himself."  (Comp.  his  comments  on  Phil.  3  :  20  ;  1 
Thess.  1  :  10  ;  Heb.  9:  28,  etc.)  We  give  so  much  space  to  the  testimony 
of  one  who,  while  advocating  a  theory  which  virtually  delays  the  Coming 
of  the  Lord  at  least  a  thousand  years,  yet  has  such  a  love  for  the  Saviour, 
such  a  regard  for  the  plain  injunctions  of  Scripture,,  and  such  a  just  ap- 
prehension of  the  blessedness  resulting  from  the  Advent,  that  he  adopts  the 
language  and  spirit  of  the  most  ardent  Millenarian.  Such  expressions 
from  this  class  could  be  multiplied  until  they  filled  volumes,  for  they  are 
the  outburst  of  a  heart  of  love  which  clearly  perceives  how  much  depends 
upon  such  a  coming,  and  hoio  largely  it  will  be  productive  of  the  highest 


316  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  182. 

joy  and  happiness.1  The  desire,  longing  and  prayer  of  the  early  Church 
is  well  known,2  influencing,  e.g.  even  Gibbon  to  ascribe  it  as  one  of  the 
causes  of  the  Church's  endurance  of  persecution,  etc.,  and  urging  a  Cyprian 
to  say  concerning  Jesus  :  "  He  whose  speedy  coming  we  daily  desire,  whose 
presence  among  us  we  ardently  long  for,"  and  an  Augustine  to  exclaim 
of  the  same  that  this  "  is  what  we  look  and  pray  for!"  True  faith  and 
fervent  piety  cannot  help  but  express  itself  thus,  as  e.g.  Baxter  :  "  0  my 
►Saviour,  hasten  the  time  of  thy  return  ;  send  forth  thy  angels,  and  let  that 
dreadful,  joyful  trumpet  sound  !  Delay  not,  lest  the  living  give  up  their 
hopes  ;  delay  not,  lest  earth  should  grow  like  hell,  and  thy  Church,  by 
division,  be  all  crumbled  to  dust ;  delay  not,  lest  thine  enemies  get  advan- 
tage of  thy  flock,  and  lest  pride,  hypocrisy,  sensuality,  and  unbelief  pre- 
vail against  thy  little  remnant,  and  share  among  them  thy  whole  inher- 
itance, and  when  thou  comest,  thou  finclest  not  faith  on  the  earth  ;  delay 
not,  lest  the  grave  should  boast  of  victory,  and,  having  learned  rebellion  of 
its  guest,  should  refuse  to  deliver  thee  up  thy  due  !  .  .  .  '  Keturn,  0 
Lord,  how  long?  Oh,  let  Thy  Kingdom  come.''  Thy  desolate  '  Bride  saith, 
Come!'  for  thy  Spirit  within  her  saith,  Come;  and  teacheth  her  thus  to 
'  pray  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered  ;  yea,  the  whole  creation 
saith,  Come,  waiting  to  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into 
the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.'  Thou  thyself  hast  said, 
'  Surely  I  come  quickly  ;  Amen.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus.'  "  (Conclu- 
sion of  the  last  ch.  of  his  Saints'  Best).3  But  why  repeat  that  which  is  so 
clearly  taught  both  in  Scripture  and  in  the  experience  of  intelligent  piety. 
Millenarian  authors  have  directed  attention  to  this  feature,  and  justly  in- 
sist upon  it  as  a  characteristic  of  enlightened  faith  and  hope  ;  because  of  the 
excellent  things  connected  with  the  Advent,  such  as,  that  then  death  will 
be  swallowed  up  in  victory  ;  that  sorrow  and  sighing  and  tears  shall  be 
banished  ;  that  the  enemies  of  God  shall  be  removed  and  the  Church  be 
triumphant ;  that  peace  and  righteousness  shall  universally  prevail  ;  that 
Christ's  glorious  Kingdom  will  be  established  never  to  be  removed  ;  that 
the  saint's  rewarding  and  crowning  shall  be  experienced  ;  that  Paradise 
will  be  restored  with  augmented  glory  ;  that  heaven  and  earth,  God  and 
man,  nature  and  the  supernatural  shall  be  in  open  union  and  fellowship 
the  one  with  the  other  ;  that  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  even  creation, 
shall  rejoice  and  exult  in  a  manifested  Messiah  ;  and  that  the  saints  shall 
be  evermore  with  the  Lord,  who  bought  them  with  His  own  blood,  in  the 
New  Jerusalem  state,  intimately  associated  with  so  gracious  and  mighty  a 
King,  and  experiencing  the  ample  fulfilment  of  covenant  and  prophetic 
promise.  AVe  know  (Prop.  120,  121,  etc.)  that  until  this  Saviour  returns 
the  promises  of  inheriting  the  Kingdom,  etc.,  cannot  possibly  be  realized  ; 
that  the  curse  will  continue  to  press  heavily  upon  the  individual  believer, 
the  Church,  and  the  world  ;  and  that  sorrow,  trial,  tears,  etc.,  are  our 
common  lot  until  He  comes.  Looking  at  the  present  and  contrasting  it 
with  the  blessings  of  "  the  Day  of  the  Lord  Jesus" — our  present  weakness 
and  frailty  with  the  being  "fashioned  like  unto  His  glorious  body,"  our 
present  imperfectly  experienced  salvation  with  completed  Redemption,  our 
present  tempted,  suffering  condition  with  appearing  with  Him  in  glory, 
our  present  heirship  while  Pilgrims  with  the  actual  inheriting  of  a  King- 
dom, etc. — who  would  not  desire,  yea,  earnestly  desire  the  Coming  of  the 
Lord  and  His  Kingdom,  and  who  would  not  cordially  respond  to  the  lan- 
guage of  the  late  Dr„  Marsh  {Propth.  Times,  vol.  5,  p.  159):  "  Let  me  speak 


Prop.  182.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  317 

to  you  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  which  is  the  Christian's  great  hope,  as  the  First 
Advent  is  the  foundation  of  his  faith  ;  for  then  Christ  will  assume  His 
office  of  King  ;  and  not  till  then  will  the  great  enemy  of  souls,  the  accuser 
of  the  brethren,  be  bound,  error  be  banished,  sin  be  subdued,  and  creation 
cease  to  groan  ;  because  at  His  Coming  He  will  establish  the  Kingdom  of 
truth,  and  righteousness,  and  peace.  What  Christian  is  there,  who,  believ- 
ing this,  when  he  hears  the  Saviour's  voice  saying,  '  Surely  I  come  quickly,' 
will  not  reply,  '  Amen,  even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus.'  "4 

1  Olshausen  makes  a  just  remark  (Com.,  vol.  1,  p.  117).  Alluding  to  the  reign  of  Christ 
here  on  earth  after  His  appearance,  and  the  resurrection  of  the  saints  and  the  consequent 
blessedness,  he  says  of  the  latter  :  "  Millions  desire  this  most  earnestly,  hope  and  pray 
for  it  even,  without  ever  imagining  that  it  (viz.,  Millenarian  doctrine)  is  the  very  doctrine 
which  they  think  themselves  bound  to  oppose,  or  at  least  unable  to  admit,  without  de- 
viating from  a  correct  belief." 

2  Compare  Prop.  75,  etc.  A  writer  (Proph.  Times,  vol.  3,  p.  166),  referring  to  the  Prim- 
itive Church  loving  the  appearing,  remarks  :  "  And  Massillon  may  speak  for  them  all, 
when  he  affirms  of  the  first  Christians,  they  deem  it  one  step  in  apostasy,  not  to  sigh  after 
this  return."  Massillon  evidently  grounds  his  opinion  upon  what  Justin  said  concerning 
"  the  exactly  orthodox." 

3  Baxter  in  other  places  expresses  himself  decidedly,  that  "  the  thoughts  of  the  Coming 
of  the  Lord  are  most  sweet  and  joyful  to  me  ;"  earnestly  prays  for  the  Advent  and  Kingdom, 
saying  :  "Alas  !  fellow  Christians,  what  should  we  do  if  our  Lord  should  not  return?" 
This  is  the  day  that  all  believers  should  long,  and  hope,  and  wait  for,  as  being  the  accom- 
plishment of  all  the  work  of  their  redemption  and  all  the  desires  and  endeavors  of  their 
soulj."  The  language  of  Baxter  strongly  reminds  us  of  Alleino's  :  "  Thi  s  is  the  day  (vi~., 
the  return  of  Christ)  I  look  for,  and  wait  for  and  have  laid  up  all  my  hopes  in.  If  the 
Lord  return  not,  I  profess  myself  undone  ;  my  preaching  is  vain,  and  my  suffering  is 
vain  ;  and  the  bottom  in  which  I  have  intrusted  all  my  hojies  is  forever  miscarried,"  etc. 
So  Bullin^er  said  :  "All  the  godly,  with  si^'lis  unspeakable,  wish  for  the  Coming  of  the 
Judge  in  idory  ;"  so  Luther,  Melanchthon,  Tyndale,  Latimer,  Bradford,  Bunyan,  Piscator, 
Ridley  and  a  host  of  others.  Seiss,  Last  Times,  Dis.  12,  gives  extracts  from  Luther,  Mil- 
ton, Cox,  Rutherford,  and  others  ;  many  of  a  like  tenor  are  to  be  found  in  Taylor's  Voice 
of  the  Church,  etc.  The  writer  has  been  forcibly  reminded  in  looking  over  the  writings 
of  all  classes  in  the  Church  how  general  is  the  feeling  that  the  Advent  is  eminently  desir- 
able, and  hence— while  referring  mainly  to  the  expressed  sentiments  of  believers  who 
cannot  be  charged  with  a  Millenarian  bias — the  thought  has  occurred  to  him  that  the 
Millenarian  system  which  pre-eminently  holds  forth  this  Advent,  assigns  the  strongest  rea- 
sons for  its  acceptance,  and  cultivates  faith,  hope,  and  love  in  it,  ought,  at  least,  from  this 
point  of  view  to  meet  with  respectful  attention  and  due  examination  from  all  believers.  If 
the  Advent  is  so  desirable,  as  a  host  of  witnesses,  including  all  shades  of  opinion,  testify 
to,  then  anything  that  serves  to  explain  or  throw  light  upon  it  ought  to  be  candidly  con- 
sidered. 

4  While  penning  the  last  sentences,  the  thought  presented  itself  to  the  writer  that  in 
the  Coming  Kingdom  we  shall  meet  many  who  thus  watched,  desired,  and  prayed  for  the 
blessed  Advent  whose  names  are  either  incidentally  mentioned  in  print  or  utterly  un- 
known ;  as  e.g.  of  the  one  class,  Alfieri  (Michelet's  Life  of  Luther,  Ap.,  p.  405)  who,  in  an 
address  to  Luther  (1542  in  name  of  the  churches  of  Venice,  Vicenza  and  Trieso),  expresses 
his  hope  :  "  Wandering  and  dispersed,  we  icail  with  impatience  the  Coming  of  the  Lord's 
Mighty  One, ' '  etc.  (reminding  us  of  Rutherford' s  saying  :  ' '  Though  the  time  be  very  short, 
yet  love  and  longing  make  it  tedious")  ;  and  of  the  other  class,  the  case  of  some  pious 
slaves  (recorded  in  the  Life  of  the  Methodist  preacher  Cartwright)  who,  at  the  occurrence 
of  an  earthcpiake  and  at  the  falling  of  the  meteors  years  ago,  instead  of  being  alarmed, 
exulted  and  rejoiced  in  it  as  a  sign  of  a  Coming  Saviom1,  while  the  masters  were  greatly 
frightened.  During  the  persecutions  of  past  centuries  how  many  sighed  for  the  Advent. 
What  happiness  to  meet  such  and  hear  from  their  own  glorified  lips  the  story  of  faith 
and  hope.  Love  cannot  transform  "  the  blessed  hope'1  into  one  of  terror  ;  it  is  sin  or 
unbelief  that  thus  transmutes  it.  It  is  delightful  to  think  of  the  time  when  in  glorified 
social  converse  we  shall  hear  from  the  quickened  lips  of  an  Irenams,  or  Justin,  or  Luther, 
or  Calvin,  or  Zwingli,  and  many  others,  how  they,  amid  trial  and  darkness,  loved  "  the 
appearing"  of  Jesus— how  this  hope  sustained  them,  etc. 


318  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  182. 

Brookes  (Maranalha,  p.  365-66)  says  :  "  It  was  a  leading  characteristic  of  the  early 
Christians  that  they  loved  His  appearing  ;  and  if  any  who  now  profess  to  be  Christians 
do  not  love  it,  they  ought  to  be  made  to  understand  that  there  is  no  promise  of  a  crown 
of  righteousness  (2  Tim.  4  :  8)  for  them  at  that  day.  What  would  you  think  of  an  exile 
if  he  were  to  exhibit  the  deepest  distress  and  grief  at  the  summons  to  return  home  after 
years  of  lonely  wandering  in  distant  lands?  What  would  you  think  of  a  citizen,  if  he 
were  to  turn  pale  on  hearing  that  the  court  will  soon  convene,  and  the  judge  will  ascend 
the  tribunal  ?  What  would  you  think  of  a  wife,  if  she  shuddered  and  trembled  at  the 
announcement  that  she  might  expect  her  absent  husband  any  hour  ?  There  is  a  con- 
scious guilt  there  that  makes  them  cowards  ;  and  when  those  who  claim  to  be  Christians 
cry  out  that  they  cannot  bear  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Sec.  Advent,  they  give  melan- 
choly evidence  of  not  knowing  that  there  is  an  unsettled  controversy  between  them  and 
God.  They  cannot  think  without  terror  of  Christ's  Coming,  because  they  are  not  pre- 
pared for  it,"  etc.  The  least  that  can  be  said  is  that  they  exhibit  gross  ignorance  of  the 
object  of  Christ's  Advent  in  relation  to  believers.  Jesus  Himself  (Matt.  9  :  15)  has  ex- 
pressed the  sorrow  that  His  absence  should  cause  in  the  hearts  of  those  yearning  for  His 
presence,  but  alas  !  multitudes  reverse  this,  and  consider  that  His  absence  is  a  cause  for 
joy  ;  His  presence  is  not  desirable  even  when  professing  ardent  and  supreme  love  for 
Him  !  Seiss  (Last  Times,  p.  308)  says  :  "  No,  no,  no  ;  the  doctrine  of  the  Saviour's 
speedy  Coming  is  not  a  thing  of  gloom  and  sadness.  It  is  Gospel — pun  Gospel — nothing 
but  good  news.  If  it  has  anything  distressing  in  it,  you  yourself  must  put  it  there  by 
your  hard-heartedness,  your  prayerlessness,  and  unforsakeu  sin.  If  you  have  fixed  your 
heart  and  faith  on  Jesus  as  jour  Prophet,  Priest  and  King,  you  have  naught  to  fear  and 
everything  to  hope."  "  Is  He  your  Alpha  and  your  Omega — your  all  in  all  ?  Then  fear 
not.  Only  be  faithful  a  little  longer,  and  the  day  will  come  which  will  be  to  you  a  glad- 
der day  than  ever  you  thought  it  possible  for  you  to  see.  And  as  you  behold  the  fig 
leaves  putting  forth  as  the  heralds  of  its  approach,  '  look  up  and  lift  up  your  head  ;  for  your 
redemption  draweth  nigh.1  "  Dr.  Hodge  (Com.  1  Cor.  1  :  7)  says  that  the  Sec.  Advent, 
owing  to  its  connected  blessings,  "  was  the  object  of  longing  expectation  to  all  the  early 
Christians  ;"  and,  "  so  general  was  this  expectation  that  Christians  were  characterized  as 
those  '  who  lore  His  apjipariug,'  2  Tim.  -4  :  8,  and  as  those  '  who  wait  for  Him,'  Heb.  9  :  28." 
After  showing  that  "  the  Spirit  awakens  desire  for  that  event,"  he  adds  :  "  If  the  Second 
Coming  of  Christ  is  to  Christians  of  the  present  day  less  an  object  of  desire  than  it  was  to 
their  brethren  during  the  apostolic  age,  it  must  be  because  they  think  the  Lord  is  '  slack 
concerning  His  promise,'  and  forget  that  with  Him  a  thousand  years  is  as  one  day." 
Thus  compare  Trench's  remarks,  On  the  Parables,  as  e.g.  in  the  Parable  of  the  Ten 
Virgins.  Hackett  (Com.  Acts  3  :  20)  indorses  the  early  Church  belief,  that  the  Sec.  Advent 
"  was  always  near  to  the  feelings  and  consciousness  of  the  first  believers.  It  was  the 
great  consummation  on  which  (he  strongest  desires  of  their  souls  were  fixed,  to  which  their 
thoughts  and  hopes  habitually  turned.  They  lived  in  expectation  of  it  ;  they  labored  to 
be  prepared  for  it  ;  they  were  constantly,  in  the  expressive  language  of  Peter,  looking  for 
and  hastening  unto  it,"  etc.  He  speaks  of  it  as  "  filling  their  circle  of  view,"  being  "  the 
grand  object"  of  hope,  so  that  they  were,  "  in  such  a  state  of  sympathy  with  an  event  so 
habitually  present  to  their  thoughts,  they  derived,  they  must  have  derived,  their  chief 
incentives  to  action."  But  alas  !  let  a  believer  to-day  occupy  this  position  of  the  early 
Christians,  making  the  Sec.  Advent  the  object  of  desire,  longing,  prayer,  conversation, 
preaching,  etc. — let  him  assume  the  spirit  and  motive  which  even  our  opponents  in  their 
commentaries,  etc.,  profess  to  admire,  admit  to  be  eminently  scriptural  and  practical, 
and  inform  us  is  positively  enjoined  by  the  Saviour  as  characteristic  of  a  true  believer, 
and  what  is  the  sad  result  ?  Why  this  :  that  his  brethren  in  the  Church  regard  him  as 
"  fanatical,"  given  to"  an  unwholesome  enthusiasm,"  evidencing  "  a  disordered  mind," 
presenting  "  an  unhealthy  eccentricity,"  etc.  In  many  works,  reviews,  newspapers,  etc., 
these  charges  are  reiterated,  and  brethren  who  "  love  the  appearing"  are  held  up  to  ridi- 
cule and  scorn.  In  this  connection  we  will  quote  Dr.  Gordon's  {Christian  Intelligencer, 
1865)  remarks  on  "  the  Difficulties  of  Post-Millenarianism,"  where  he  says  :  "  Their  ob- 
jections thought  to  be  most  damaging  to  our  views,  in  many  instances  recoil  upon  their 
own,  and  give  prominence  to  the  difficulties  they  encounter  in  their  defence.  For  in- 
stance, one  writer,  too  eager  to  overthrow  the  Millenarian  doctrine  respecting  the  speedy 
Coming  of  Christ,  says  :  '  From  the  first  period  of  the  Church's  history,  this  dogma  has 
been  associated  with  the  most  deplorable  fanaticism.'  Others  add,  '  It  results  in  Infidel- 
ity.' It  is  remarkable  that  the  putters-forth  of  this  objection  do  not  see  into  what  a  posi- 
tion they  are  placed  by  it.  They  profess  to  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  will  literally  come 
at  some  time,  as  well  as  we,  and  when  He  comes  it  will  be  speedily  to  the  men  of  that 


Prop.  182.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  319 

generation  then  living.  The  doctrine  will  then  be  productive  of  fanaticism,  and  perhaps 
infidelity,  because  according  to  their  showing,  these  evils  are  inseparable  from  a  belief  in 
Christ's  speedy  Advent.  The  objection,  then,  lies  not  only  against  His  speedy  Coming, 
but  against  His  Coming  at  all  ;  for  if  such  be  the  necessary  consequences  of  the  doctrine, 
certainly  it  ought  never  to  be  preached,  and  ought  never  to  have  been  revealed.  The 
objection,  therefore,  impeaches  the  wisdom  of  Christ  in  making  known  to  man  the  fact  of 
His  Coming  again  in  the  clouds,  and  thence  drawing  an  argument  for  our  constant  watch- 
ing. If  'from  the  very  first  period  of  the  Church's  history,  this  doctrine  was  associated 
with  the  most  deplorable  fanaticism,'  and  if,  according  to  Post-Millenarian  writers — 
who  tell  us  that  the  first  three  centuries  constituted  the  purest  age  of  the  Church — 
Chiliasm  for  all  that  time  was  the  orthodox  faith,  then  beyond  question  the  purest  age  of 
the  Church  was  the  age  of  the  most  deplorable  fanaticism  ?  And  for  this  great  defection, 
who  were  responsible  but  the  fanatical  Apostles?  Paul  said  the  grace  of  God  taught  nil 
men  to  look  for  the  glorious  appearing  of  Christ.  He  therefore  converted  men  not  only  to 
Christianity  but  to  fanaticism,  according  to  our  brethren,  for  he  says  expressly  that  they 
turned  to  God  from  idols  to  icait  for  His  Son  from  heaven/  Was  not  this  an  unfounded 
expectation,  and  has  not  the  lapse  of  time  proved  this  waiting  to  have  been  just  as 
fanatical  as  in  any  of  us,  who  are  thus  ridiculed  for  '  that  blessed  hope.'  And  was  not 
John  just  as  far  astray  as  Paul,  when  to  the  assurance  of  the  Redeemer,  '  Surely  I  come 
quickly,'  he  appended  the  prayer,  'Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus.'  Nearly  eighteen  centuries 
have  passed  away  and  He  has  not  come  yet !  Who  does  not  see  that  '  it  results  in  infi- 
delity ?  '  We  do  not  wish  to  utter  an  iinbecoming  word,  but  we  think  that  many  of  the 
objections  of  our  brethren,  deemed  most  formidable,  only  serve  to  force  their  own  .system 
between  the  millstones  of  Reduclio  ad  absurdum."  "  Greybeard  "  (Lay  Sermons,  No.  105) 
justly  observes  :  "  The  proper  attitude  of  all  true  believers,  as  the  constituents  of  the 
Bride,  during  our  Lord's  absence,  is  that  of  waiting  patiently  for  His  Second  Coming, 
2  Thess.  3:5."  Consequently  of  every  one  it  should  be  said  (Conybeare  and  Howson's 
rendering  of  1  Thess.  1  :  10):  "Now  you  wait  with  eager  longing  for  the  return  of*  His  Son 
from  (he  heavens,  even  Jesus,  whom  He  raised  from  the  dead,  our  deliverer  from  the  coming 
vengeance."  Dr.  Willis  Lord  concludes  his  little  volume,  The  Blessed  Hope,  as  follows  : 
"  This  then  is  that  blessed  hope  ;  the  glorious  Coming  of  the  Lord.  It  is  the  next  great 
epoch  of  the  future.  The  Old  Test,  saints  looked  forward  to  the  First  Coming  of  Christ. 
It  was  their  Polar  Star.  After  weary  ages,  faith  was  turned  to  sight.  Men  saw  the  Son  of 
God  incarnate.  Simeon  took  Him  in  his  arms.  Mary  sat  adoring  at  His  feet.  Peter 
pressed  close  to  His  side.  John  rested  on  His  bosom.  Paul,  too,  saw  Him  on  His  way  to 
Damascus,  and  the  sight  was  his  salvation.  Jews  and  Gentiles  saw  Him,  and  put  Him  to 
death  on  the  cross.  The  New  Test,  saints  look  forward  to  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ. 
This  is  their  Polar  Star.  Again  the  ages  have  been  long  and  weary,  but  the  end  cometh. 
The  world  may  scoff  ;  and  the  Church  even  may  let  go  this  holy  faith  ;  but,  at  the  ap- 
pointed time,  the  Church  and  the  world  will  see  the  Lord  Coming  in  power  and  for  right- 
eous judgment.  They  will  see  the  dead  in  Christ  living,  and  sitting  with  Him  on  His 
throne,  and  then  the  Millennial  glory.  This  vast  truth  pervades  and  inflames  the  Script- 
ures. They  declare  it  as  a  divine  certainty.  They  make  it  the  ground  of  argument. 
They  hold  it  up  as  a  most  powerful  motive.  They  use  it  to  strengthen  faith,  encourage 
hope,  promote  humility,  fortify  patience,  mitigate  sorrow,  incite  watchfulness,  impel 
obedience,  inspire  prayer,  increase  holiness,  and  awaken  joy.  What  a  great  blank  there 
would  be.  without  it  in  even  the  Word  of  God  !  What  a  serious  subtraction  there  would 
be  from  those  sacred  resources,  by  which  His  people  are  made  strong  for  the  work  and 
battle  of  life,  and  to  win  the  Conqueror's  crown.  What  wonder  that  Paul  calls  it,  moved 
by  his  own  sense  of  its  grandeur  and  by  the  special  light  and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  : 
'  That  blessed  hope,  even  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.'  " 


520  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  183. 


Proposition  183.     The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  and  its  re- 
lated subjects  have  a  direct  practical  tendency. 

Its  practical  nature  and  tendency  is  already  sufficiently  manifest 
from  the  preceding  propositions,  the  history  of  the  doctrine,  the 
life  of  those  who  held  it,  the  prominence  given  to  it  in  the  Script- 
ures, and  its  fundamental  relationship  to  an  enlightened  faith  and 
hope.  But  in  justice  to  ourselves,  and  by  way  of  self-defence 
against  unfounded  objections,  it  deserves  special  mention. 

Nearly  every  Millenarian  work  lias  something  to  say  on  the  practical  nature  of  the 
doctrine,  and  has  a  chapter  or  more  devoted  to  the  subject.  We  direct  attention  to  a  few 
recent  publications,  as  e.g.  the  following  papers  given  at  the  Prophetic  Conference  at 
New  York  :  Dr.  Brookes,  The  Coming  of  the  Lord  in  its  Relation  to  Christian  Doctrine  ;  Dr. 
Clark,  Hope  of  Christ's  Coming  as  a  Motive  to  Holy  Living  and  Active  Labor ;  Dr.  Craven, 
The  Coming  of  the  Lord  in  its  Relation  to  Christian  Doctrine.  Brookes's  Maranaffia,  ch.  7, 
Seiss's  Last  Times,  Ap.,  pp.  3G4-83,  and  nameious  Pre-Mill.  writeis  advert  to  the  subject. 
The  last  Prop,  contains  the  statements  of  several  eminent  men,  and  under  various  Props, 
(as  e.g.  Martensen's,  Prop.  17-4,  Obs.  1,  note,  etc.)  similar  expressions  are  given.  Dr. 
Itiggenbach  (Lange's  Com.  1  Thess.,  p.  79)  refers  to  the  hope  of  the  nearness  of  the  Sec. 
Advent  and  its  practical  tendency,  and  takes  the  ground  that  it  is  a  chief  characteristic 
of  the  true  Christian  ;  after  reference  to  the  example  of  the  early  Church,  he  says  :  "  But 
only  too  frequently  does  this  way  of  thinking  assume  such  a  form,  that  the  longing  for 
the  Coming  of  the  Lord  and  the  glory  of  His  holy  Kingdom,  as  well  as  sympathy  in  the 
fortunes  of  the  Church  at  large,  is  too  much  impaired.  At  times,  on  the  other  hand,  and 
among  the  pious,  when  the  life  of  faith  miles  in  due  force,  we  again  meet  likewise  with  the 
apostolic  hope  and  aspiration  in  living  freshness.  That  watching  and  hoping  are  so  un- 
familiar to  us,  is  a  defect.  Tbe  more  we  become  heavenly  in  our  character  and  thoughts, 
the  more  also  does  the  stream  of  human  history  appear  to  us  a  hasting  toward  the  Coming 
of  the  Lord." 

Obs.  1.  Constantly  is  the  question  asked,  "  Of  what  practical  use  is  the 
doctrine  of  Christ's  Sec.  Coming  and  of  His  Millennial  Kingdom  ?"  And 
often  it  is  added,  by  way  of  response,  "  If  we  are  saved,  that  is  sufficient." 
Ignorance  of  the  nature  and  results  of  "  the  Blessed  Hope"  alone  can  pro- 
duce such  an  interrogatory  and  position  ;  an  ignorance,  too,  utterly  unjus- 
tifiable in  any  believer  of  the  Scriptures. 

This  question  of  its  being  practical,  before  willing  to  accept  of  it,  is  not  one  for  the 
believer  to  ask.  7s  it  God's  Word?  Does  He  ask  me  to  believe  and  act?  These  are  the 
questions  to  be  answered.  It  would  be  an  act  of  gross  unbelief  to  reject  it  even  if  not 
practical  (in  the  sense  the  objector  uses  it)  in  its  nature.  Did  Abraham  pause  to  ask 
and  decide  such  a  question  when  called  on  to  offer  up  Isaac  ?  Did  any  of  the  ancient 
worthies  refuse  any  truth  revealed,  unless  it  could  be  shown  that  it  was  practical  ?  Even 
if  nothing  else  could  be  asserted  respecting  it  than  that  it  is  a  revealed  truth  without 
any  special  bearing,  we  ought  to  receive,  and,  if  demanded,  proclaim  it.  Like  Abraham, 
Bom.  4  :  18-21,  we  give  glory  to  God  and  secure  His  divine  approval,  by  our  faith  in 
His  word.  We  live  a  life  of  faith,  and  faith  honors  God  and  His  Christ.  But  to  leave 
us  utterly  without  excuse,  this  doctrine  is  eminently  practical  ;  and  it  requires  perverse- 
ness  and  a  willing  blindness  to  avoid  seeing  it.  Some,  particularly,  urge  the  objection 
(to  show  its  unpractical  tendency)  that  we  preach  the  doctrine,  and  it  makes  the  minister 


PkOP.   183.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  .321 

necessarily  polemical,  which  is  not  a  following  Christ.  "When  the  objectors  preach  the 
opposite,  write  against  us,  etc.,  it  is  not  polemical  but  a  following  after  Christ  !  We 
leave  the  good  sense  of  the  reader  to  dispose  of  the  excuse. 

Obs.  2.  Its  decisive  and  far-reaching  influence  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  it 
materially  affects  the  interpretations  of  the  Bible  (see  e.g.  Prop.  4).  The 
covenants,  prophecies  of  the  Old  and  New  Tests.,  parables,  thousands  of 
passages,  and  even  entire  chapters  are  understood  very  differently  from  the 
meaning  attributed  to  them  by  others.  The  Kingdom,  the  Gospel  of  the 
Kingdom,  the  reign  of  the  Christ,  and  a  vast  number  of  related  subjects 
have  an  import  very  diverse  to  the  sense  usually  attributed  to  them.  Of 
course,  any  doctrine  which  has  such  an  influence  in  determining  the 
meaning  of  Scripture,  its  application,  etc.,  must  be  of  great  importance. 

This  e.g.  is  clearly  recognized  by  our  opponent,  Dr.  Brown,  when  (Christ's  Sec.  Com- 
ing, p.  6)  he  says  of  Pre-Millenarianism  :  "It  is  a  school  of  Scripture  interpretation  ;  it 
infringes  upon  and  affects  some  of  the  most  commanding  points  of  the  Christian  faith  ; 
and,  when  suffered  to  work  its  unimpeded  way,  it  stops  not  till  it  has  pervaded  with  its 
own  genius  the  entire  system  of  one's  theology,  and  the  whole  tone  of  his  spiritual  character, 
constructing,  I  had  almost  said,  a  world  of  its  own  ;  so  that  holding  the  same  faith  and 
cherishing  the  same  fundamental  hopes  as  other  Christians,  he  yet  sees  things  through  a 
medium  of  his  own,  and  finds  everything  instinct  with  the  life  which  this  doctrine  h^s 
generated  within  him."  He  also  (p.  12)  declares  :  "  When  they  dilate  upon  the  promi- 
nence given  to  this  doctrine  in  Scripture,  and  the  practical  uses  which  are  made  of  it, 
they  touch  a  chord  in  the  heart  of  every  simple  lover  of  his  Lord,  and  carry  conviction  to 
all  who  tremble  at  His  Word  ;  so  much  so,  that  I  am  persuaded  that  nine  tenths  of  all 
who  have  embraced  the  Pre-Millennial  view  of  the  Sec.  Advent  have  done  so  on  the  sup- 
position that  no  other  view  of  it  will  admit  of  an  unfettered  and  unmodified  use  of  the 
Scripture  language  on  the  subject— that  it  has  its  proper  interpretations  and  full  force 
only  on  this  theory." 

Obs.  3.  Our  doctrine  deals  largely  in  Eschatology,  of  which  Van  Ooster- 
zee  (Lange's  Com.,  Luke,  p.  326)  says  :  "  It  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  case 
that  Christian  eschatology,  the  more  the  course  of  time  advances,  must 
become  less  and  less  an  unimportant  appendix,  and  more  and  more  a  locus 
primarius  of  Christian  doctrine.''  The  personal  relationship  that  we  sus- 
tain to  the  future,  the  nature  of  the  things  discussed,  the  interest  of  the 
world,  the  honor  and  glory  of  the  Redeemer — all  indicates  that  our  doc- 
trine must  necessarily  assume  a  prominence  and  corresponding  influence. 

The  subjects  thus  connected  are  of  vast  importance  and  of  the  highest  interest,  such 
e.g.  as  the  nature,  manner  and  time  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  to  be  set  up  ;  the  nature, 
manner  and  time  of  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  the  nature,  manner  and  time  of  the  completion  of 
redemption  ;  the  precise  destiny  of  the  believer,  the  Church  and  the  world  ;  the  destiny 
of  the  enemies  of  God  ;  the  destiny  of  the  Jewish  people  ;  the  course  and  order  of  events 
pertaining  to  the  last  times  ;  the  signs  preceding  the  Advent  and  pertaining  to  the  inter- 
val ;  the  stages  of  the  Advent  ;  the  resurrection  and  translation  ;  the  rise,  progress  and 
end  of  the  culminated  Antichrist  ;  the  Millennial  reign,  blessedness  and  glory.  Our  doc- 
trine gives  Eschatology  a  grandeur  which  even  some  of  oiir  opponents  admit,  as  e.g.  in  the 
destiny  of  the  race  as  a  race  under  the  reign  of  the  mighty  Theocratic  King  and  His  in- 
corporated rulers.  When  looking  at  the  extent  and  sublimity  which  we  give  to  it,  no 
wonder  that  some  of  them  pronounce  it  at  least,  "a  magnificent  theory."  In  relation  to 
ita  central  doctrine,  Dr.  Fronmiiller  (Lange's  Com.  1  Pet.  p.  18)  says  :  "  Our  Lord's  return 
has  been  one  of  the  fundamental  articles  of  the  faith  of  universal  Christendom  in  every 
age  of  the  Church's  history.  To  hide  this  important  doctrine  under  a  bushel,  is  at  once 
a  defect  of  teaching  and  in  opposition  to  the  mind  of  Christ  and  Ills  Apostles.1' 

Obs.  4.  Indeed,  some  things  connected  with  our  doctrine  are  regarded  so 
essential  to  tlie  completeness  of  Christian  character,  that  the  true  believer 


322  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  183. 

is  represented  as  in  possession  of  them.  Thus,  e.g.  1  Cor.  1  :  7  "  /So  that 
ye  come  behind  in  no  gift;  waiting  for  the  Coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  Here  we  have  undoubtedly  presented  a  leading,  distinguishing 
characteristic  of  a  believer.  A  symmetrical  character  demands  the  heart 
and  attitude  of  a  waiting,  watching  servant.  Dr.  Klink  (Lange's  Com. 
loci)  observes  :  "  This  constant  expectation  of  our  Lord's  Second  Coming 
(Rom.  8  :  19,  etc.),  when  He  shall  be  revealed  in  His  glory  unto  all  (Col. 
3  :  4),  is  one  of  the  characteristic  features  of  primitive  Christianity." 
(Comp.  Phil.  3  :  20  ;  1  Thess.  1  :  10  ;  Tit.  2  :  13  ;  2  Tim.  4  :  8.)  No  matter 
how  we  may  interpret  the  connection,  it  is  a  fact,  plainly  evidenced  by  the 
passage,  that  the  believers  specially  trained  under  the  apostleship  had  this 
characteristic,  and  are  commended  for  its  possession. 

Alford  (Com.  loci)  justly  makes  this  posture  of  "waiting"  to  be  "  the  greatest  proof 
of  maturity  and  richness  of  the  spiritual  life  ;  implying  the  co-existence  and  co-operation 
of  faith,  whereby  they  believed  the  promise  of  Christ —  hope,  whereby  they  looked  on  to  its 
fulfilment — and  love,  whereby  that  anticipation  was  lit  up  with  earnest  desire."  It  evi- 
dences the  highest  obedience  to  the  command  of  their  Saviour,  and  that  the  mind  was 
fidl  of  the  promises  relating  to  His  Coming.  It  shows  that  influenced  and  urged  on  by 
this  prospect  of  the  Advent  and  their  waiting  for  it,  Christians  are  excited  to  attain  a  high 
spiritual  growth  or  as  Kling  puts  it  in  the  Homilet.  and  Practical  part  :  "  The  right  wait- 
ing for  the  Coming  of  Christ  allows  us  to  remain  neither  idle  nor  unfruitful,  but  inspires 
us  with  an  earnest  zeal  constantly  to  appropriate  and  imj>rt>ve  every  spiritual  gift."  Comp. 
the  decisive  utterances  of  Barnes  given  in  Obs.  8  of  the  preceding  Proposition.  We  ap- 
pend another  on  the  passage  before  us.  He  says  on  1  Cor.  1  :  7,  the  waiting  :  ' '  This  was, 
certainly,  one  of  the  endowments  to  which  he  referred,  to  wit,  that  they  had  grace  given 
them  earnestly  to  desire  and  to  wait  for  the  second  appearing  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  An 
earnest  wish  to  see  Him,  and  a  confident  expectation  and  firm  belief  that  He  will  return, 
is  cm  evidence  of  a  high  stale  of  piety.  It  demands  strong  faith,  and  it  will  do  much  to  ele- 
vate the  feelings  above  the  world,  and  to  keep  the  mind  in  a  state  of  peace. "  Bengel,  on 
the  same,  quaintly  refers  to  the  prevailing  substitution  thus  :  "Leaving  to  others  their 
'  memento  mori '  (remember  death)  do  thou  earnestly  cherish  this  joyous  expectation  of 
the  Lord's  Coming."  Dr.  M'Caul  (The  Blessed  Hope,)  well  remarks  :  "  The  practice  of 
waiting  for  the  Sec.  Advent  is  an  essential  feature  in  the  character  of  a  true  Christian." 
Calvin  (quoted,  Lange's  Com.  1  Pet.  4  :  7)  took  the  same  view  when  he  said  :  *'  It  ought 
to  be  the  chief  concern  of  believers  to  fix  their  minds  fully  on  His  Sec.  Advent."  Luther, 
in  his  "  Sermon  of  Consolation"  (p.  23  ;  quoted  Proph.  Times,  vol.  12,  p.  151)  pointedly 
remarks  :  '"  If  thou  lie  not  filled  with  a  desire  after  the  Coming  of  this  day,  thou  canst 
never  pray  the  Lord's  prayer,  nor  canst  thou  repeat  from  thy  heart  the  creed  of  faith. 
For  with  what  conscience  canst  thou  say,  '  I  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body  and 
the  life  everlasting,'  if  thou  dost  not  in  thy  heart  desire  the  same?  If  thou  didst  believe 
it,  thou  must,  of  necessity,  desire  it  from  thy  heart,  and  long  for  that  day  to  come  ; 
which,  if  thou  dost  not  desire,  thou  art  not  yet  <i  Christian,  nor  canst  thou  boast  of  thy 
faith."  (It  has  been  well  remarked:  "The  ajjplication  of  such  a  rule  as  this  to  the 
churches  of  Christendom  would  unchristianize  many  in  our  day.")  John  Knox  (John 
iKnox  and  the  Churches  of  England,  by  Dr.  Lorimer,)  took  this  as  a  leading  characteristic  of 
a  Christian,  that  he  addressed  (1554)  a  letter  "  To  the  Faithful  in  London,  New  Castle, 
and  Berwick,  and  to  all  others  in  the  realm  of  England,  that  love  the  Coming  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ"  (in  which  letter  he  expresses  his  hope  of  the  Lord's  speedy  return).  Com- 
pare Hackett  on  Acts,  p.  63-64,  who  impressively  shows  how  "  the  stro7igest  desires  of  the 
soul  "  were  fixed  "  habitually"  upon  and  "  the  chief  incentives  to  action"  derived  from  it. 
Olshausen  on  1  Thess.  1  :  10,  affirms  that  "  to  wait  for  the  Son  of  God  is  the  most  appro- 
priate mark  of  a  true  Christian,"  and  Auberlen  (Lange's  Com.  loci)  says  :  "  The  Apostle 
defines  the  life  aim  of  the  converts  into  two  particulars,  the  service  of  God  and  the  wait- 
ing for  the  return  of  His  Son  from  heaven,"  and  (Horn,  and  Prac),  "  The  Christian  is  a 
man  who  serves  God  and  waits  for  Jesus."  Calvin  (same)  is  made  to  say  :  "  In  the  ser- 
vice of  God,  which  in  the  corruption  of  our  nature  is  a  more  than  difficult  matter,  we  are 
kept  and  established  by  the  expectation  of  Christ  ;  otherwise  the  world  drags  us  back  to 
itself,  and  we  grow  weary.  Waiting  for  the  Lord  is  a  main  point  (1)  in  the  doctrine  of 
Jesus  and  His  Apostles  ;  (2)  in  the  life  of  faith  of  the  Apostles  and  first  Christians. " 
Out  of  a  multitude  of  similar  testimonies,  we  quote  another  from  Theophilus  Gale  (taken 


PeOP.  183.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  323 

from  his  "  Discourse  on  Christ's  Coming,"  London,  1673,  and  given  in  Load.  Quart.  Jour- 
nal of  Proph.,  vol.  7,  p.  289)  :  "  We  see  the  true  reason  why  so  many  professors,  and  some 
truly  godly,  are  so  far  behind  in  their  Christian  race,  and  have  so  much  of  their  work 
before  them.  .  .  .  Whence  comes  all  this  but  from  want  of  serious,  lively  expectatioi  s 
of  their  Lord's  approach?  Believe  it,  there  is  a  deep  mysterie,  a  spiritual  art  and  skill  in 
Godlinesse  which  none  arrive  unto  so  soon  as  they  who  wait  for  the  Coming  of  their 
Lord.  What  made  the  Thessalonians,  in  a  short  time,  to  arrive  unto  such  high  pitches 
of  Christianitie,  but  they  imbibed  or  sucked  in,  at  their  first  conversion,  this  principle  of 
waiting  for  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  (1  Thess.  1  :  10)?  and  O  !  that  professors  would  trie  this 
experiment !  Verily,  we  should  not  have  such  complaints,  decays,  follies,  and  scandals, 
among  professors,  as  we  now  everywhere  find.  It  is  a  sure  and  fixed  rule,  that  no  one 
hath  made  a  further  proficience  in  the  schole  of  Christ,  than  he  can  with  hope  and  joy 
expect  the  Coming  of  Christ."  Hence  Van  Oosterzee  (Lange's  Com.  2  Tim.,  p.  114)  de- 
clares :  "  The  affectionate  longing  for  the  appearing  of  the  Lord  in  glory,  presupposes  a 
high  degree  of  spiritual  life  ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  is  admirably  fitted  to  nourish,  to 
perfect,  to  purify  that  life." 

Obs.  5.  It  is  only  requisite  to  point  out  how  the  New  Test,  uses  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Second  Advent,  in  order  to  show  how  essential  it  is  to  Chris- 
tian doctrine,  duty,  and  character.  This  we  will  do  in  the  briefest 
manner.  It  is  given  1,  to  interest  us  in  a  blessed  coming,  Matt.  23  :  39  : 
Luke  13  :  35  and  21  :  27  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  10  ;  Heb.  9  :  28  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  7,  13  ; 
Rev.  22  :  7,  20  ;  2,  to  encourage  faithfulness  by  a  reward,  Matt.  16  :  27 
and  24  :  47  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  7-11  ;  2  Tim.  4:8;  Rev.  22  :  12  ;  3,  to  bring 
out  the  hope  of  reward  in  a  "  regeneration,"  Matt.  19  :  28,  29  ;  Acts  3  : 
19-21  ;  4,  to  avoid  deception,  Matt.  24  :  23-27  ;  Luke  17  :  23,  24  ;  2  Tim. 

4  :  1-5  ;  5,'  to  hold  forth  the  culmination  of  the  age,  Matt.  24  :  30,  etc. ;  6, 
to  show  the  condition  of  the  world,  Matt.  24  :  37-39  ;  Luke  17  :  26-30  ;  1 
Thess.  5  :  1-4  ;  7,  to  teach  a  translation,  Matt.  24  :  39-41  ;  Luke 
17  :  34-36  ;  1  Thess.  4  :  17  ;  8,  to  urge  to  watchfulness,  Matt.  24  :  42  and 

25  :  13  ;  Mark  13  :  33,  37  ;  Luke  12   :  35-37  and  21   :  34-36  ;  1  Thess, 

5  :  4-6  ;  Rev.  16  :  15  ;  9,  to  influence  to  constant  readiness,  Matt.  24  :  44 
and  25  :  1-13  and  22  :  11  ;  Luke  12  :  35-40  ;  10,  to  incite  ministerial 
fidelity,  Matt.  24  :  45-47  ;  Luke  12  :  42-44  ;  1  Thess.  2  : :  19,  20  ;  2  Tim. 
4  :  1-5  ;  1  Pet.  5  :  1-4  ;  11,  to  rebuke  ministerial  unfaithfulness,  Matt. 
24  :  48-51  ;  Luke  12  :  45-48  ;  12,  to  teach  the  condition  of  the  Church, 
Matt.  25  :  1-12  ;  Luke  18  :  8  ;  2  Thess.  2  :  1-12  ;  13,  to  hold  forth  coming 
judgment,  Matt.  25  :  19,  27,  31-4U  ;  2  Thess.  1:8,  9  ;  Jude  14-16  ; 
Rev.  1  :  7  and  19  :  11-16  ;  14,  to  show  us  His  majesty  and  glory,  Matt, 

26  :  64  and  25  :  31  and  24  :  30  ;  Mark  13  :  26  and  14  :  61 ;  15,  to  a 
confession  of  Christ,  Mark  8  :  38  ;  Luke  9  :  26  ;  16,  to  incite  prayer, 
Mark  13  :  33  ;  Luke  21  :  36  ;  1  Pet.  4:7:  Rev.  22  :  20  ;  17,  to  waiting. 
2  Thess.  3  :  5  ;  1  Cor.  1  :  7  ;  1  Thess.  1  :  10  ;  Luke  12  :  36  ;  18,  to  expec- 
tation and  looking,  Tit.  2  :  13  ;  Phil.  3  :  20  ;  Heb.  9  :  28  ;  2  Pet.  3  :  12, 
14  ;  Rev.  1  :  7  ;  19,  to  love  and  desire,  2  Tim.  4:8;  Rom.  8  :  23  ;  2  Cor. 
5:2;  Rev.  22  :  20  ;  Tit.  2  :  13  ;  20,  to  promised  honor,  Luke  12  :  37,  39  : 
Matt.  24  :  46,  47  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  7  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  10  ;  1  Pet.  5  :  4  ;  21,  to  oc- 
cupation during  postponement  of  Kingdom,  Luke  19  :  11-27  ;  Matt.  25  : 
14-30  ;  22,  to  encourage  joy  and  peace  in  approaching  redemption,  Luke 
21  :  28  ;  John  16  :  16-33  ;  1  Thess.  1  :  10  ;  23,  to  impart  comfort,  John 
14  :  1-3,  28  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  7  ;  2  Tim.  2  :  12  ;  24,  to  bestow  assurance. 
Acts  1  :  11  and  3  :  19-21  ;  Rom.  11  :  26  ;  Luke  21  :  34,  36  ;  25,  to  test 
character,  1  Tbess  1:9,  10  and  5  :  4-9  ;  1  Cor.  1  :  7,  8  ;  26,  to  avoid 
misjudging,  1  Cor.  4:5;  27,  to  remembrance  and  celebration  of  His 
Coming,  1  Cor.  11  :_  26  ;  28,  to  inspire  hope  in  the  resurrection,  1   Cor. 


324  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  183. 

15  :  23  ;  Pliil.  3  :  20,  21  ;  1  Thess.  4  :  13-18  ;  29,  to  inculcate  mod- 
eration, Phil.  4:5;  30,  to  excite  heavenly  mindedness,  Col.  3  :  1-4  ;  31, 
to  arouse  brotherly  love,  1  Thess.  3  :  12,  13  ;  32,  to  future  rejoicing  in 
successful  labor,  1  Thess.  2  :  19,  20  ;  33,  to  sanctification,  1  Thess.  5  :  23  ; 
1  John  3  :  2,  3  ;  34,  to  comfort  in  bereavement,  1  Thess.  4  :  18  ;  35,  to 
urge  steadfastness,  2  Thess.  2  :  1,  2  ;  1  Tim.  6  :  14  ;  1  Pet.  5  :  4  ;  36,  to 
consideration  of  Antichrist  and  his  doom,  2  Thess.  2  :  8  ;  37,  to  infuse 
diligence  and  activity,  2  Tim.  4  :  1-8  ;  2  Pet.  3  :  14  ;  38,  to  mortification 
of  the  flesh,  Col.  3  :  4,  5  ;  Tit.  2  :  12,  13  ;  Luke  21  :  34  ;  2  Pet.  3  :  12  ; 
39,  to  soberness,  1  Pet.  1  :  13  ;  1  Thess.  5:6;  Phil.  4:5;  40,  to  regard 
it  as  the  great  hope,  Tit.  2  :  13  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  13  ;  Col.  3  :  4  ;  41,  to  induce 
perseverance,  Rev.  2  :  25  and  3  :  3,  11  ;  42,  to  an  abiding  with  Christ,  1 
John  2  :  28  and  3:2;  43,  to  patience  under  trial,  James  5  :  7*.  8  ;  2 
Thess.  3  :  5  and  1  :  4-10  ;  1  Pet.  4  :  12,  13  ;  44,  to  patience,  Ileb.  10  : 
36,  37  :  James  5:7;  45,  to  a  proclamation,  Tit.  2  :  11-15  ;  1  Cor.  1  : 
4-10  ;  2  Tim.  4  :  1-8  ;  46,  to  suitable  preparation,  Rev.  16  :  15  ;  47,  to 
urge  men  to  turn  to  God,  Acts  3  :  19-21  ;  Rev.  3  :  3  ;  48,  to  enforce  obe- 
dience, 1  Tim.  4  :  13,  14  ;  2  Tim.  4:1;  49,  to  bring  salvation,  Ileb. 
9  :  28  ;  50,  to  coming  gladness  and  exceeding  joy,  1  Pet.  4  :  13. 

This  can  be  greatly  enlarged,  a??  e.g.  pertaining  1,  to  induce  sincerity,  Phil.  1  :  9-10  ; 
2.  to  holy  conversation  and  godliness,  2  Pet.  3  :  11-13  ;  3,  to  brotherly  love,  1  Thess. 
3  :  12,  13  ;  4,  to  confidence,  Phil.  1  :  6  ;  5,  to  a  hope  of  a  crown,  Eev.  3  :  11  ;  G,  to  mani- 
lestation  of  saints,  2  Cor.  5  :  16  ;  Col.  3  :  4  ;  7,  to  retribution,  2  Thess.  2  :  7,  8  ;  8,  to 
promised  dominion  and  authority,  Matt.  16  :  27  ;  1  Cor.  4  :  5,  etc.  ;  9,  to  future  kingship 
and  priesthood,  Eev.  1  :  6  ;  10,  to  reigning  on  the  earth,  Eev.  5  :  10,  and  20  :  4  ;  11,  to 
Jewish  restoration,  conversion,  and  supremacy,  Eom.  11  :  15,  etc.  ;  12,  to  the  binding  of 
Satan,  Eev.  20  :  1-6  ;  13,  to  the  deliverance  of  creation,  Eom.  8  :  19-23  ;  14,  to  the  new 
heavens  and  new  earth,  2  Pet.  3  :  13  ;  Eev.  21  :  1  ;  15,  to  the  New  Jerusalem,  Eev. 
21  :  10,  etc.  Any  reader  of  the  present  work  will  see  the  multiplicity  of  subjects  with 
which  our  doctrine  stands  related  and  interwoven.  Hence  the  extreme  significance  of 
the  adjuration  of  the  Apostle,  2  Tim.  4  :  1-8  (comp.  Lange,  Conybeare  and  Howson, 
Alford,  etc.) 

Obs.  6.  The  light  that  it  throws  on  single  doctrines  is  something  worthy 
of  consideration,  such  as  e.g.  the  resurrection,  making  a  distinctive  first 
and  second  resurrection  ;  the  judgment  of  believers,  distinguishing  between 
a  judgment  unto  eternal  life  and  a  judgment  according  to  works  ;  the  con- 
version of  the  world,  the  time,  order,  and  manner  ;  the  future  glorious 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  when  and  its  extent ;  the  Father's  house,  what 
it  is,  and  when  established  ;  the  Gentile  domination  and  its  ending  ;  the 
persecution  of  the  Church  and  its  results  ;  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  and  its 
perpetuity  ;  the  durability  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  ;  the  nature,  advan- 
tages, etc.,  of  a  Theocratic  Kingdom  ;  the  restitution  and  its  realization  ; 
the  "  Rest"  and  its  definite  meaning  ;  the  design  of  the  dispensation  and 
its  practical  accomplishment  ;  the  Day  of  Judgment  and  its  manifesta- 
tions, etc.  Indeed,  there  is  scarcely  a  subject  in  the  Bible  with  which  it 
is  not  linked,  and  upon  which,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  it  does  not 
impart  information. 

Thus  it  defines  and  vindicates  the  Judgeship  of  Jesus,  the  inheriting  of  the  earth, 
the  perpetuation  of  the  race,  the  intermediate  state,  the  "  world  to  come,"  the  perpetuity 
of  the  earth,  the  ending  of  the  age,  a  future  revelation  of  the  divine  will,  the  unity  of 
Scripture,  the  work  of  Christ  for  redemptive  purposes,  the  entailment  of  the  curse  and 
its  ultimate  removal,  the  credibility  and  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures,  the  Church  and 
the  Kingdom  of  God  with  the  relation  that  the  one  sustains  to  the  other,  the  divine  Sover- 


Prop.  183.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  32j 

eignty  and  the  Kingship  of  Jesus,  the  exaltation  of  the  Christ,  etc.  It  serves  largely  to 
explain  Scripture,  by  furnishing  the  means  which  indicate  the  relationship  of  one  part  to 
the  other.  It  enables  us  to  discriminate  what  pertains  to  this,  or  to  the  future,  dispen- 
sation. It  enlightens  us  in  reference  to  Providence  and  the  history  of  the  world,  by 
showing  the  Theocratic  Purpose  and  Plan,  and  the  methods  instituted  in  order  to  secure 
their  final  and  complete  accomplishment.  It  brings  forth  a  perfect  vindication  of  the 
preaching  of  the  disciples,  Apostles,  and  Primitive  Church.  It  holds  forth  prominently 
and  logically  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  assigning  the  rea- 
sons for  the  same.  It  enforces  the  mutual  connection  existing  between  the  Old  and  New 
Tests.  It  develops,  as  no  other  can,  the  doctrine  of  election,  the  process  of  engrafting, 
and  the  continuation  of  the  election.  It  gives  to  portions  of  the  Word,  as  e.g.  the  trans- 
figuration, temptation,  etc.,  new  force  and  beauty.  It  brings  out  with  vividness  and 
power  the  covenanted  inheritance  of  the  Son  of  David,  and  that  of  His  co-heirs.  It 
enables  one  to  readily  detect  and  avoid  the  erroneous  interpretations  placed  on  the  cove- 
nants and  the  promises  of  God.  It  upholds  and  confirms  the  necessity  of  the  Supernat- 
ural, the  supremacy  of  Scripture,  the  study  of  prophecy,  the  faith  of  the  pious  Jews,  and 
the  watching  posture  of  martyrs  and  confessors.  It  gives  to  us,  what  no  other  system 
presents  so  grandly,  a  perfect  Redeemer  and  a  \»  rfect  Redemption.  Surely  a  doctrine  which 
permeates  and  gives  new  life  and  vigor  to  so  many  other  related  doctrines  ;  which  lays 
its  beautifying  hand  on  so  many  subjects  pi  rtaining  to  our  highest  personal  interests, 
must,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  be  pre-eminently  practical. 

Obs.  7.  Notwithstanding  the  evidence  (Scriptural)  to  its  practical  nature 
and  tendency,  and  the  admissions  of  opposers  to  the  same,  some  men,  not 
merely  ask  the  question  under  Obs.  1,  but  flatly  deny  that  it  possesses  any 
practical  value.  Such  declarations  evidently  spring  from  prejudice  and 
bitter  animosity  ;  they  cannot  possibly  be  the  conclusions  of  a  calm  and 
impartial  survey  of  the  subject.  The  wholesale  denunciation,  the  un- 
limited denial  defeats  itself  by  its  contradiction  to  the  express  affirmations 
of  Scripture  and  the  testimony  of  believers. 

Thus  e.g.  Rev.  McCook  (as  reported  in  the  Messiah's  Herald,  Jan.  loth,  1879)  says  : 
"  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  general  teaching  of  such  a  doctrine  would  be  disastrous  in 
effects.  Its  tendency  would  be  to  destroy  reliance  upon  all  ordinary  means  of  grace, 
such  as  preaching,"  etc.  Many  declare  that  it  converts  us  into  "  heretics,"  "  fanatics," 
"  dangerous  errorists,"  etc.  Comment  is  unnecessary.  It  is  especially  supposed  that 
the  looking  for  the  speedy  Coming  of  the  Lord  is  "  a  great  practical  evil,"  subversive  of 
the  interests  of  society,  the  Church,  and  the  individual.  We  are  not  concerned  in  de- 
fending the  childish  attitude  of  some  Millerites  and  a  few  Sec.  Adventists  who  equipped 
themselves  in  ascension  robes,  etc.,  for  this  only  indicates  a  lack  of  intelligence  in  grasp- 
ing the  subject,  to  which — as  past  history  testifies — all  doctrine  has  been  more  or  Less 
exposed,  and  consequently  perverted  or  rendered  ridiculous.  It  certainly  had  not  this 
influence  upon  the  early  Church,  the  Reformers,  and  ten  thousand  others,  noted  for 
piety,  ability,  and  usefulness  ;  for  all  stich,  keeping  in  view  the  command  of  Christ  to 
"  occupy  until  I  come,"  and  the  fact  that  the  precise  day  and  hour  is  unknown,  at- 
tended with  diligence  and  hope  to  all  the  proper  callings  and  duties  of  life,  so  that  if 
Jesus  should  come  He  might  find  them  engaged  at  their  respective  posts.  (In  Props. 
155,  156,  130,  etc.,  we  quote  what  opponents  declare,  over  against  the  facts  stated  under 
this  one.) 

Obs.  8.  It  may  be  well  to  notice  a  few  testimonials  respecting  its  per- 
sonal application  and  practical  tendency,  aside  from  those  already  given. 
George  Mtiller  (Sermon  at  Mildmay  Park.  June  29th,  1879),  after  referring 
to  the  apostles  and  early  Christians  as  looking  for  the  return  of  Jesus,  and  to 
the  command  to  watch,  adds  ;  "  Now,  my  beloved  Christian  friends,  how 
is  it  with  us  ?  Let  us  honestly  ask  ourselves,  Are  we  looking  for  the  return 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Are  we  waiting  for  the  return  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ?  Next  month,  it  will  be  fifty-three  years  with  me  that  I 
have  been  waiting  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and,  by  God's  grace,  I  am 


326  THE   THEOCKATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  183. 

not  less  looking  for  Him  now.  I  stay,  waiting  for  His  return  now  as  I  did 
at  the  first.  Now,  I  ask  my  beloved  Christian  friends  here,  are  you  looking 
for  His  return  ?  Do  you  with  joyful  anticipation  go  forward  to  the  return 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  Is  it  a  pleasant  thought  to  you  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  coming  to  you  ?  That  He  is  coming  again,  that  He  will  return, 
that  He  will  not  always  be  absent  ?  If  the  bridegroom  leaves  the  bride, 
she  looks  for  his  return.  The  sooner  the  better,  the  bride  says.  So  if  the 
Church  is  in  a  right  state,  if  there  is  attachment  to  the  person  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  she  longs  for  His  return  ;  she  looks  for  His  return.  How  is 
it  with  us  regarding  this?"  Lisco  (On  the  Parables,  p.  183)  remarks: 
"  The  believers  of  the  old  covenant  looked  for  the  Coming  of  Messiah,  Isa. 
60  :  1  ss.  and  G4  :  1  ;  Luke  2  :  25.  The  believers  who  live  under  the  new 
covenant  look  for  His  Second  Coming,  Phil.  3  :  21  ;  Heb.  9  :  28  ;  Tit. 
2  :  11,  ss.  This  expectation  is  a  powerful  means,  in  the  hand  of  God,  for 
raising  and  sanctifying  the  heart  ;  it  springs  out  of  faith  in  the  promises 
of  the  Lord,  Matt.  25  :  31  ;  John  11  :  3  and  17  :  24  ;  Acts  1  :  9-11,  and  is 
at  once  the pr oof  a net  the  nourishment  of  love  to  Him;  we  look  for  Him 
because  we  love  Him,  and  could  not  love  Him  if  we  were  not  looking  for 
Him  ;  we  look  for  Him  because  we  have  already  experienced  love  to  Him 
when  absent,  1  Pet.  1:8;  and  this  expectancy  toward  Christ's  Coming 
and  preparation  for  it,  is  the  lead  in  g  purpose  and  main  concern  of  all  true 
Christians,  Col.  3  :  1,  ss. " 

Dr.  Dorner  (Person  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  409-15)  has  again  and  again  insisted  on  the 
practical  tendency  of  Chiliasm.  We  reproduce,  as  an  illustration,  several  remarks  :  "  It 
is  unjustifiable  to  say  that  Chiliasm  degrades  faith  and  sanctity  in  this  life,  to  the  rank  of 
mere  means  whose  end  lies  outside  of  themselves.  They  continue  to  be  ends  them- 
selves, though  at  the  same  time  regarded  as  preparing  the  way  for  a  new  and  more  per- 
fect stadium.  The  present  world  is  a  period  of  suffering,  especially  for  the  members  of 
the  one  thousand  years'  Kingdom."  "  Chiliasm,  therefore,  was  the  form  in  which 
Christianity  first  gave  conscious  expression  to  the  conviction  of  its  destiny  to  rule  the 
world.  Chiliasm  was  the  assertion  of  the  fact,  that  Christianity  is  related,  positively  as 
well  as  negatively,  to  the  world.  Chiliasm  declared  that  Christianity,  by  renouncing, 
was  called  to  glorify  the  world.  -Chiliasm  was  the  fruit  and  sign  of  the  advance  of  Chris- 
tendom to  the  conviction  that  nature  is  destined,  by  its  inmost  essence  and  idea,  to  stand 
in  a  positive  relation  to  spirit.  The  truth  which  it  asserted  justly  claimed  a  realization 
by  Christendom  at  every  stage  of  its  existence  in  even  higher  forms  and  increasing  meas- 
ure." Grosse  (pastor  at  Bridford,  England,  1047  ;  quoted  by  Lond.  Quart.  Journal  of 
Proph.,  1855,  p.  194)  declares  :  "  No  man  rightly  desires  Christ's  Coming,  but  he  that 
hath  assurance  of  the  good  and  benefit  of  His  Coming.  To  them  the  day  of  Christ  is  as 
the  day  of  harvest  to  the  husbandman,  as  the  day  of  deliverance  to  the  prisoner,  as  the 
day  of  coronation  to  the  king,  as  the  day  of  wedlock  to  the  bride — a  day  of  triumph  and 
exaltation,  a  day  of  freedom  and  consolation,  a  day  of  rest  and  satisfaction  ;  to  them  the 
Lord  Jesus  is  all  sweetness,  as  wine  to  the  palate  and  ointment  to  the  nostril,  saith  Solo- 
mon ;  honey  in  the  mouth,  saith  Bernard  ;  music  in  the  ear,  and  a  jubilee  in  the  heart. 
Get  assurance  of  Christ's  Coming,  as  a  ransomer  to  redeem  you,  as  a  conqueror  to  sub- 
due all  your  enemies  under  you,  as  a  friend  to  comfort  you,  as  a  king  to  honor  you,  as  a 
physician  to  heal  you,  as  a  bridegroom  to  marry  you,  and  then  shall  you  with  confidence 
and  boldness,  with  joy  and  gladness,  with  vehement  and  holy  longings,  say,  '  Come  Lord 
Jesus.'  "  Col.  Kawlandson  (Ch.  Herald,  Oct.  30th,  1879)  remarks  :  "  The  Christian  who 
puts  away  from  him  the  doctrine  of  the  Sec.  Coming  of  the  Lord  puts  away  his  strength, 
and  is  like  a  icounded  lark,  unable  to  soar  to  elevated  heights.  He  who  looks  for  his 
reunion  with  his  Lord  only  at  the  hour  of  death,  is  like  the  maimed  bird,  and  cannot 
sing  anything  but  Lenten  dirges.  It  is  a  sad  thing  thus  to  shut  out  the  comfort  and  joy 
of  this  precious  hope."  Boos  (Interpretation  of  Daniel)  says  :  "  It  is  revealed,  not  to  sat- 
isfy curiosity,  but  to  strengthen  our  faith  and  to  quicken  our  hope.  It  is  easy  for  us  to 
bear  good  and  joyful  events  whenever  they  come,  though  they  are  not  circumstantially 
foretold.  But  it  consoles  a  Christian,  who  is  often  grieved  and  distressed,  in  these  dark 
times,  and  who  has  a  zeal  for  the  honor  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  Kingdom,  to  look  for- 


Prop.  183.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  327 

ward  to  the  golden  times,  when  all  pia  JpsJrfer'a  will  be  fulfilled  and  realized,  and  to  see 
them,  even  now,  in  the  mirror  of  the  divine  Word."  Janeway  (Voice  of  the  Church,  p. 
180)  was,  by  grace,  enabled  to  declare  :  "Of  this  I  am  confident,  through  infinite  mercy, 
that  the  very  meditation  of  that  day  hath  ever  ravished  my  soul  ;  and  the  thought  of  the 
certainty  and  nearness  of  it  is  more  refreshing  to  me  than  the  comforts  of  the  world." 
Dr.  Goodwin  (Address  before  the  Proph.  Conference  at  New  York)  stated  in  reference  to 
our  doctrine  :  "  I  take  it  into  my  heart  and  into  my  life  because,  above  all  things  else,  I 
have  been  driven  on  my  knees  in  spite  of  the  most  resolute  and  determined  antagonisms 
bred  in  the  head  and  bred  in  the  blood  not  to  accept  ;  because  it  is  to  me  the  clear,  un- 
mistakable truth  of  God  ;  because  it  carries  in  it  the  vitals  of  Christianity,  the  hopes  of  the 
Church,  tlie  glory  of  God  and  the  ages."  It  is  corroborative  that  at  this  Proph.  Confer- 
ence, so  largely  attended,  the  practical  nature  of  the  doctrine  was  rejjeatedly  asserte'd  by 
such  men  as  Drs.  Tyng,  Kellogg,  Gordon,  Imbrie,  Mackay,  Parsons,  Nicholson,  Brookes, 
Craven,  Cooper,  West,  Duffield,  Clark,  and  others.  One  of  the  resolutions  adopted  em- 
braces its  practical  side  :  "The  duty  of  the  Church  during  the  absence  ot  the  Bride- 
groom is  to  watch  and  pray,  to  work  and  wait,  to  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach  thi 
Gospel  to  every  creature,  and  thus  hasten  the  Coming  of  the  day  ot  God  ;  and  to  His 
latest  promise  'Surely  I  come  quickly,'  to  respond,  in  joyous  hope,  'Even  so;  come  Lord 
Jesus.'  "  Lange's  Com.  1  Thess.  (p.  50)  quotes  Chrysostom  as  saying:  "To  keep  the 
Coming  of  the  Lord  at  all  times  before  our  eyes,  that  is  to  be  likeminded  with  the  Apos- 
tles ;"  and  Rieger  as  declaring  :  "  In  the  Gospel,  the  Lord's  Coming  shines  in  upon  us 
so  near,  that  it  affords  us  already  at  evexy  step  much  light  for  our  feet."  (Coiup.  Lange's 
comments,  Com.  James,  p.  144.) 

Obs.  9.  Our  doctrine,  if  entertained  merely  as  a  speculation  or  "  splen- 
did theory"  with  which  reason  may  entertain  itself,  or  as  a  basis  from 
which  to  excite  the  enriosity  of  others  by  rash  prophetical  interpretations, 
by  chronological  calculations  fixing  the  exact  date  of  the  Advent,  and  by 
dogmatical  self-exclusiveness,  cannot  possibly  be  of  much  practical  value. 
A  man  may  hold  the  doctrine  theoretically,  and  even  present  portions  of  it 
in  a  brilliant  manner,  without  having  his  heart  or  life  lunched  by  it,  as  e.g. 
evidenced  by  his  irascible,  morose  temper,  his  invectives  upon  all  who  dis- 
agree from  him,  his  intense  bigotry,  his  special  claims  of  divine  enlighten- 
ment.    The  doctrine  legitimately  produces  love,  brotherly  love. 

We  cannot  be  too  guarded  in  the  practical  application  of  truth.  A  Bacon,  with  his 
high  and  instructive  teaching,  fell  through  his  love  of  money  ;  Solomon,  with  his  wisdom 
and  knowledge,  was  dragged  down  by  sensuality  ;  multitudes,  with  large  advancements 
in  learning  and  splendid  abilities,  have  sacrificed  honor  and  character,  in  neglecting  to 
do  the  divine  will.  Any  doctrine  can  be  held  intellectually  or  speculatively  without  pro- 
ducing any  effect  on  heart  and  life  ;  so  this  doctrine  can  be  entertained,  as  illustrated  by 
some  painful  examples.  To  have  a  proper  influence,  it  must  become  (James  1  :  21)  "  an 
ingrafted  word  "  in  which  we  feel  and  realize  a  personal  interest,  urging  to  faith  and  holy 
living,  to  patience  and  endurance,  to  hope  and  love,  or  (as  Brookes  expressed  it  at  the 
Conference)  "  make  the  Coming  of  Jesus  a  practical  and  life-controtting  fact  in  our  daily 
experiences."  Auberlen  (Lange's  Com.  1  Thess,  p.  25)  remarks  :  "  We  must  be  in  earnest 
with  the  expectation  of  Christ's  Coming,  if  we  would  stand  in  the  fulness  of  apostolic 
Christianity.  This  carries  with  it  (1)  a  warning  (a)  against  every  kind  of  worldly  happi- 
ness and  service  of  perishable  things  and  men,  especially  against  the  modern  absorption 
in  practical  and  theoretic  materialism,  even  of  a  refined  sort  ;  (b)  against  the  Romanizing 
overvaluing  of  wdiat  we  already  have  even  in  the  Church,  and  against  striving  for  the 
Church's  outward  dominion  and  glory  ;  (c)  against  false  ideals  of  a  great  future  of  the  life 
of  nations,  to  be  introduced  by  our  own,  be  it  even  Christian,  power  and  activity  ;  and 
against  the  so  frequent  intermixture,  concurrent  therewith,  of  the  world  and  the  King- 
dom of  God  ;  (2)  comfort  (a)  in  regard  to  imperfections  and  sins  in  ourselves,  in  the 
world,  in  the  Church  ;  it  has  not  yet  appeared  wdiat  we  shall  be  (1  John  3:2);  (h)  in 
regard  to  the  sufferings  and  afflictions,  which  are  the  divinely  appointed  way  to  the  future 
glory,  2  Cor.  4  :  17  sq.,  Rom.  8  :  17."  Compare  also  Riggenbach  (same,  p.  78-79)  who,  at 
length,  insists  on  its  personal  application,  saying  :  "  The  certainty  that  the  Lord  is  Com- 
ing with  His  salvation,  is  so  stirring,  bright,  overpowering,  that  the  man  who  is  full  of  it 
says:   Quickly.''     The  doctrine  must  be  enforced  by  a  personal  application,  illustrated 


328  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.   183. 

e.g.  by  Fkilpot  (The  Priest  upon  His  Throne,  p.  285)  :  "  Am  I  looking  for  the  Coming  of 
the  Lord  ?  Amicl  the  conflicts  of  the  wilderness  am  I  wearing  '  for  an  helmet  the  hope 
of  salvation  ?  '  and  having  that  hope,  am  I  '  purifying  myself  even  as  He  is  pure  ?  '  If 
these  questions  can  be  met  with  confidence,  then  is  there  animating  proof  that  our  hope 
of  seeing  the  Coming  Saviour  as  He  is,  and  reigning  with  Him  on  the  earth,  is  a  sure  and 
'  blessed  hope  ; '  and  '  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  not  overtake  us  as  a  thief  in  the  night  ; ' 
yea,  rather,  it  will  accomplish  our  '  perfect  consummation  and  bliss,  both  in  body  and 
soul,  in  His  eternal  and  everlasting  glory.'  "  So  Noel  (Brief  Inquiry,  p.  124)  :  "  If  the 
reign  of  Christ  be  not  first  within  our  renewed  souls,  we  shall  never  share  it  in  a  renewed 
world.  If  He  legislate  not  over  our  passions  and  our  affections,  we  shall  never  bear  rule 
in  the  regions  of  His  rescued  earth.  If  God  the  Holy  Ghost  regenerate  not  our  hearts, 
He  will  never  regenerate  our  bodies.  Our  conformity  to  Christ  must  be  entire.  We 
must  first  be  crucified  ere  we  can  be  glorified.  His  sceptre  must  be  in  our  hearts  ere 
His  crown  can  rest  upon  our  heads."  Ten  thousand  such  practical  directions  could  be 
quoted  from  eminent  Pre-Millenarians  of  the  past  and  the  present.  It  would  be  a  sad, 
sad  thing,  a  terrible  calamity,  if  we  should  proclaim  the  Sec.  Advent  as  "  the  Blessed 
Hope,"  and  the  Kingdom  as  containing  joy  unspeakable  and  fulness  of  glory  and  yet  fail 
to  find  acceptance  at  the  one  and  admission  into  the  other  ;  if  we  should  urge  those  who 
know  what  sorrow  and  sighing  and  tears  mean  to  live  in  such  faith  and  hope  and  love 
that  sorrow  and  sighing  may  flee  away  and  tears  be  wiped  from  all  faces  at  the  glorious 
revelation  of  Jesus,  and  yet,  after  all  our  warnings  to  others,  multiply  our  own  sorrow, 
sighing,  and  tears.  Alas  !  when  men  professedly  hold  to  this  hope  and  teach  it,  and  yet 
exhibit  a  most  unamiable  temper,  an  unforgiving  disposition,  and  other  unchristian 
manifestations,  we  have  reason  to  apprehend  their  dangerous  condition,  or,  at  lectst,  their 
liability  to  great  loss  in  future  position. 

Obs.  10.  "We  should  be  tints  affected  not  merely  by  the  present  practical 
influence  upon  the  heart  and  life,  or  by  the  reception  of  it  to  lead  (2  Tim. 
3  :  17)  the  man  of  God  to  "  be  perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good 
works,"  but  likewise  by  the  ultimate  benefit  to  be  derived  from  such  a 
position,  the  divine  approval  and  reward  at  the  judgment  of  believers 
(Prop.  135  and  130).  We  may  rest  assured  that  a  reverent  reception  of  the 
commands  and  teaching  on  these  subjects  will  not  only  prevent  our  suffer- 
ing loss,  but  increase  our  ultimate  reward,  because  those  who  thus  honor 
God  will  eventually  be  honored  by  Him. 

It  is  no  small  matter,  ichen  the  Scriptures  are  so  full  of  it,  when  the  cautions  and  warn- 
ings are  so  pertinent,  ichen  the  injunctions  are  so  precise  and  direct,  to  turn  away  from  it 
and  influence  others  to  reject  it.  Such  assume  a  heavy  responsibility  that  must  be  met  ; 
and  the  plea  of  superior  piety,  increased  spirituality,  honoring  of  Christ,  or  ignorance, 
will  avail  nothing  before  the  plain  teaching  of  the  Word.  Some  think  that  by  a  continu- 
ous adhesion  to  "  milk,"  "  the  first  principles,"  they  are  advancing  in  the  divine  favor 
and  assure  themselves  of  a  reward,  but  even  such  "milk"  is  diluted  and  weakened  by 
the  rejection  of  the  "  cream"  and  the  "  meat"  imparted  by  our  doctrine  ;  faith  and  hope 
are  dwarfed,  comfort  and  strength  diminished,  and  the  final  reward  is  lessened.  If  God, 
under  the  penalty  of  excommunication,  prohibited  even  the  making  of  the  anointing  oil 
and  perfume  (Ex.  30),  it  should  teach  us  that  He  is  equally  careful  to  preserve  His  truth 
from  adulteration,  and  no  one  can,  therefore,  add  to  it  or  reject  it  without  incurring 
guilt.  If  He  destroyed  Nadab  and  Abihu  for  introducing  innovations  in  rites  and  cere- 
monies, it  may  well  be  considered  whether  He,  a  God  jealous  of  His  own  truth,  will  not 
be  displeased  if  we  innovate  by  substitution,  spiritualizing,  etc.  Thus  to  illustrate  : 
Waldegrave  (The  New  Test.  MMenarianism)  concludes  his  work  with  a  reference  to  per- 
sonal religion  (excellent  and  essential),  but  in  such  a  way  that  it  is  taught  that  if  such  is 
secured,  then  these  things  can  be  properly  and  safely  neglected  ;  as  e.g.  "  O  my  Saviour, 
while  others  weary  themselves  with  the  disquisition  of  Thy  personal  reign  here  upon 
earth  for  a  thousand  years,  let  it  be  the  whole  bent  and  study  of  my  soul  to  make  sure  of 
my  personal  reign  with  Thee  in  heaven  to  all  eternity.' '  (The  reader  will  observe  (1)  the 
charge  of  "  wearying"  and  (2)  as  if  we  limited  the  reign  to  one  thousand  years.)  Thus  a 
false  hope  is  made  a  motive  power,  and  he  makes  himself  chargeable  with  slighting  an 
oath-bound  covenant,  "the  sure  mercies  of  David,"  ami  the  plainest  promises  relating  to 
the  glory  of  Christ  and  His  saints.     Not  only  so,  but  he  endeavors  with  might  and  main 


Prop.  183.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  329 

to  lead  others  to  a  similar  neglect  and  contempt.  Snrely  such  an  one  must  bear  his  self- 
imposed  burden,  and  give  an  account  for  his  lack  of  faith.  Thousands  are  in  this  category- 
To  many  Isa.  42  ;  18-20  is  still  applicable,  for  the  proverb  of  Ezek.  12  :  22  is  virtually 
promulgated  by  them.  Isa.  G6  :  5  will  be  verified.  The  spirit  of  Ezek.  13  :  2,  G,  7,  10,  16 
is  carried  out  in  the  vain  predictions  of  "  peace  and  safety,"  and  God  will,  certainly,  hold 
such  accountable.  Some  by  a  time-serving,  man-fearing,  prudential  spirit  refrain  from 
accepting  or  proclaiming  these  things,  lest  they  be  designated  enthusiasts  or  fanatics, 
and  thus  become  unpopular.  Such  will  meet  the  decision  of  a  Saviour,  icho  urged  them 
not  to  fear  man,  not  to  be  influenced  by  a  seeking  after  their  personal  popularity,  but  to 
receive  and  present  the  truth  as  given.  The  ignoring,  substitution,  apologizing  for  non- 
reception,  neglect,  etc.,  will  assume  very  different  proportions  from  those  now  presented, 
when  standing  before  the  Judge  to  render  an  account  for  the  same.  There  is  something 
heart-searching  in  Luke  19:11;  for  of  many  who  profess  to  love  Jesus  (but  do  not  desire 
His  personal  Coming  and  presence)  it  may  be  said  :  "  But  his  citizens  hated  him,  and 
sent  a  message  after  him,  saying,  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  lis."  Many 
virtually  do  this  very  thing,  by  their  emphatic  and  decided  hostility  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  imminency  of  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  for  they  treat  it  as  if  the  personal  Coming,  instead 
of  being  "  the  blessed  hope"  and  a  joyful  event  to  the  believer,  were  something  to  be 
deplored  and  resisted. 

Obs.  11.  We  insist,  in  view  of  what  has  been  said,  that  our  Pre-Mille- 
narian  doctrine  stands  forth  pre-eminent  as  practical.  The  subjects,  the 
hopes,  the  warnings  and  cautions,  the  attitude  of  watching,  the  beart- 
familiarity  with  eschatology,  the  incited  study  of  prophecy,  the  stimulated 
meditations  on  grand  themes,  the  glory  and  blessedness  revealed — all  serves 
to  make  it  most  conducive  to  piety  and  godly  love.  Brookes  (Address 
before  Proph.  Conference),  speaking  of  the  important  relations  of  the  Sec. 
Advent  as  specified  in  the  Bible,  well  says  :  '"  It  may  almost  be  said  to 
form  the  basis  of  every  argument,  to  give  direction  to  every  appeal,  to  fill 
out  every  exhortation,  to  terminate  every  warning  ;  so  that  it  is  to  other 
truth  as  a  foundation  to  the  building,  as  a  feather  to  the  arrow,  as  ripened 
fruit  to  the  bud  and  blossom,  as  eternity  to  time." 

The  same  writer  in  Maranatha,  after  having  passed  over  the  Scriptural  use  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  Second  Advent,  showing  how  it  is  employed  as  a  motive  under  forty 
distinct  aspects,  beyond  that  of  every  other  doctrine  (being,  as  Rev.  Ker  expressed  it, 
"  moreover  in  the  New  Test.,  the  great  event  that  towers  above  every  other''),  adds  the 
following  :  "  Can  the  same  be  said  of  any  other  doctrine  whatever?  Is  it  employed  in 
the  same  manner  now  in  the  preaching  of  the  modern  pulpit  ?  Of  course  it  will  be  as- 
serted that  it  is,  but  the  assertion  may  be  met  by  a  Hat  denial  ;  and  the  reader  can  judge 
for  himself  how  often  he  has  heard  it  mentioned  in  sermons,  or  in  prayers,  since  he  first 
began  to  attend  the  ministry  of  the  word  and  the  meetings  of  the  saints.  He  may  have 
heard  frequent  mention  made  of  death,  or  the  judgment,  or  heaven,  or  hell,  but  how 
seldom  he  has  listened  to  a  distinct  statement,  or  even  a  faint  reference,  concerning  the 
Coming  of  the  Lord.  This  is  not  written  to  find  fault  or  to  censure  thousands  of  ex- 
cellent brethren,  who  only  need  to  have  their  attention  awakened  to  a  neglected  truth  ; 
but  it  is  important  to  show  that  the  manifold  practical  uses  made  of  the  Second  Advent 
by  the  inspired  writers  ought  to  be  made  of  it  still,  if  we  accept  of  the  sacred  Scriptures  as 
the  infallible  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  A  Rationalist  may  sneer  at  the  ever-recurring 
testimony  of  these  Scriptures  with  regard  to  the  Second  Coming  of  our  Lord,  but  all  who 
bow  to  their  authority  as  the  very  Word  of  God  must,  after  examination,  place  the  doc- 
trine here  advocated  very  high  in  their  esteem.  Their  experience  will  be  something  like 
that  of  the  gifted  and  saintly  Hewitson,  of  whom  his  biographer  says  :  "  The  blessed  hope 
took  its  place  thenceforth,  not  only  in  his  understanding,  but  in  his  heart.  He  not  only 
believed  in  the  speedy  appearing — he  loved  it — icaited  for  it; — watched  for  it.  'Faith,'  we 
find  him  saying,  '  looks  back  to  the  cross,  and  is  at  peace  ;  it  looks  forward  to  the  crown, 
and  pants  for  glory.  Oh,  to  have  more  of  the  life  and  power  of  such  a  faith  ! '  So  mighty 
a  motive  power  did  it  become,  that  he  used  to  speak  of  it  ever  afterward  as  bringing 
with  it  a  kind  of  second  conversion.  It  is  interwoven  with  the  texture  of  his  whole 
future  life."  Lange  (Com.,  Matt.  24)  remarks  :  "  Christians,  waiting  in  a  heavenly  frame 
of  mind  for  their  Lord,  will   find  that   He  is  their  Friend,  their  legitimate  Lord,  their 


330  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  183. 

Royal  Bridegroom.  If  they  think  of  His  coming  with  an  earthly  mind,  He  appears  to 
them  as  a  thief  who  will  strangely  and  unrighteously  break  in  upon  their  earthly  re- 
lations and  possessions."  "Readiness  for  Christ's  Advent  diffuses  somewhat  of  the 
brightness  of  His  future  glorification  over  life."  Hence  Trench  (On  the  Parables)  observes 
that  the  leaving  the  time  of  the  Advent  indefinite  presents  a  "  powerful  motive  to  holi- 
ness and  diligence,  supplied  to  each  generation  of  the  faithful  by  the  possibility  of  the 
Lord's  return  in  their  time' ' — it  being  designed  that  all  should  be  impelled  by  it  and 
enabled  to  rejoice  in  its  preciousness.  Its  pre-eminent  practical  power  is  seen  in  the  apos- 
tolic age,  in  the  believers  formed  under  their  preaching — in  the  Primitive  Church,  in  con- 
fessors and  martyrs,  in  a  host  of  pious,  devoted, and  useful  followers  of  Jesus  ;  it  will  again 
be  seen  and  realized  with  overwhelming  power  when  the  martyrs  are  sustained  by  it 
under  the  death-dealing  persecution  of  the  culminated  Antichrist.  The  spirit  of  Hab. 
2  :  1-4  is  constantly  made  manifest.  The  Jews  feel  its  practical  bearing  now,  and 
hundreds  have  been  converted  under  its  influence,  and  the  day  is  coming  when  thou- 
sands, yea  the  nation  itself,  will  respond  to  its  motive  power.  It  separates  more  and 
more  from  the  present  world,  and  causes  us  to  fix  our  hopes  and  affections  on  that  which 
is  to  come.  It  fills  the  mind  and  heart  with  God's  truth,  and  enables-us  calmly  to  look 
at  events  transpiring  in  the  light  of  revelation.  It  enables  us  with  Dr.  Tyng  (Hill's 
Saints'  Inheritance,  p.  271)  to  say  :  "  In  the  great  view  of  the  Saviour's  personal  reign  on 
a  regenerated  earth,  as  the  final  and  everlasting  abode  of  His  redeemed,  I  rest  with  con- 
fidence and  delight."  We  conclude  with  quoting  Stewart's  declaration  and  wish  {Lectures 
during  Lent,  p.  351  and  355)  :  "  If  there  be  any  one  topic  more  than  another  calculated  to 
solemnize  the  mind,  to  bring  us  as  lowly  suppliants  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  to  lead 
to  watchfulness  and  prayer,  while  at  the  same  time  it  cheers  and  animates  the  spirit, 
filling  it  with  that  blessed  hope  which  led  the  apostles,  the  array  of  martyrs,  and,  wo 
may  add,  our  Protestant  forefathers  to  '  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  their  Lord' — if  there  be  any  subject  calculated  to  produce 
these  blessed  effects,  it  is  'the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saxriour  Jesus 
Christ.'  "  "  Oh,  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  of  His  infinite  mercy  and  goodness,  would  deeply 
impress  our  minds  with  this  important  truth  ;  so  that,  instead  of  being  like  those  to 
whom  the  Lord  shall  come  unawares,  we  may  be  of  thai  happy  number  who  are  making 
ready  for  His  appearing,  and  who,  when  He  does  come,  shall  be  able  to  say,  '  Lo  !  this  is 
our  God;  ice  have  waited  for  Him,  and  He  will  save  us  :  this  is  the  Lord  ;  we  have  waited  for 
Him,  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  His  salvation.' 

Obs.  12.  One  objection,  constantly  reiterated,  notwithstanding  its  abun- 
dant answer,  deserves  special  attention,  as  it  is  paraded  to  prove  the  im- 
practicable tendency  of  our  doctrine.  It  is  asserted  that  our  doctrine  tends 
to  injure  missions  and  destroy  their  spirit.  We  emphatically  pronounce 
this  a  baseless  slander  cast  upon  noble  believers  of  the  past,  and  which 
originates  not  merely  in  ignorance  of  the  facts,  but  arises  from  a  desire  to 
make  our  belief  odious.  We  have  shown  in  another  place  how  largely  the 
missionary  spirit  pervaded  the  early  Chiliastic  believers,  how  missionaries, 
founders  of  missions,  evangelists,  ministers  of  extended  usefulness, 
martyrs,  etc.,  were  express  Chiliasts,  and,  therefore,  how  any  one,  in  the 
face  of  such  overwhelming  testimony,  can  reproduce  and  urge  such  a  false 
accusation,  we  leave  others  to  judge.  Look  at  the  legitimate  outgrowth  of 
the  doctrine  as  evidenced  in  the  lives  of  men  who  held  that  the  design  of 
this  dispensation  was  to  save  them  (out  of  all  nations)  that  believe,  to 
gather  out  a  people  for  His  name  ;  who  taught  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the 
Church  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature  and  aid  in  this  outgathering 
in  order  to  hasten  the  glorious  manifestation  and  Kingdom  ;  who  declared 
that,  in  view  of  the  uncertainty  and  shortness  of  time,  special  diligence 
and  activity  were  demanded  ;  who  expressed  the  earnest  hope  that,  by 
their  labors  in  winning  souls  to  the  Christ,  they  might  increase  their  pres- 
ent and  eternal  joy  ;  and  who  emphatically  announced  that  their  faith  in 
these  things  confirmed  them,  and  urged  them  on,  in  efforts  to  bring  sin- 
ners to  Jesus.     Because  we  do  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  enthused  with  a 


PkOP.  183.]  THE  TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  331 

false  hope  (viz.,  that  of  the  conversion  of  the  world  in  the  present  dispen- 
sation), this  charge  is  made,  when  the  whole  tendency  of  our  doctrine — if 
heartily  embraced — is  to  make  us  solicitous  of  the  salvation  of  others,  so 
that  they  with  us  may  reign  with  Christ,  inheriting  His  Kingdom  and 
glory. 

We  write  plainly  and  with  deep  feeling,  because  in  our  researches  we  have  repeatedly 
met  this  objection,  asserted  again  and  again  as  if  it  had  never  obtained  a  reply.  Some 
of  our  opponents  are  too  Christian  in  spirit  and  feeling  to  reproduce  it  ;  others,  however, 
seem  to  esteem  it  a  choice  morsel  of  "  bitter  herbs."  The  reader  is  referred  to  Prop.  175, 
Obs.  2,  and  note  ;  Prop.  156,  Obs.  9,  16  ;  Prop.  158,  Obs.  8,  and  note,  etc.,  for  quotations  of 
this  objection  (several  in  most  offensive,  wholesale  terms  indicative  of  the  spirit)  for  our 
defence,  and  for  a  reference  to  eminent  and  pious  Chiliasts  actuated  by  a  missionary  spirit 
and  renowned  as  missionaries.  We  are  sorry  to  be  compelled  (in  self-defence)  thus  to  re- 
fer to  and  meet  such  a  detracting  charge,  but  the  eminence  given  to  it  and  the  apparent 
weight  of  authority  is  so  well  calculated  to  mislead  and  prejudice  that  it  deserves  our  atten- 
tion. The  unfounded  charge  is  even  repeated  by  Dr.  Fisher  in  the  art.  "  Millennium"  in 
M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Oyclop.,  for  he  says  :  "  The  tendency  of  the  MillenariTm  theory 
to  chill  the  hopes,  and  thus  repress  the  missionary  activity  of  Christians  by  exhibiting  the 
world  as  in  a  progress  of  deterioration,  and  by  representing  the  efforts  of  Christians  to  con- 
vert mankind  as  fruitless  until  the  Coming  of  Christ,  constitutes  not  the  least  serious  ob- 
jection to  such  opinions."  Nearly  every  work  against  us  contains  the  same,  often  ex- 
pressed with  bitterness  and  scorn.  The  most  unfair  contrasts  (as  e.  g.  Princeton  Review, 
Ap.,  1851,  Art.  "Foreign  Missions  and  Millenarianism" )  are  instituted  by  suppressing 
the  facts  in  reference  to  missionaries,  and  the  actual  faith  held  by  us.  We  may  well 
ask  Dr.  Fisher  what  Pre-Millenarian  ever  held  the  view  "  that  the  efforts  of  Christians 
to  convert  mankind  were  fruitless"  (when  they  expressly  teach,  Mark  16  :  15,  16  ;  Luke 
24:47;  Jno.  17:20,  etc.),  or  ever  sought  to  "repress  the  missionary  activity  of 
Christians"  (when  many  of  them  were  successful  missionaries  themselves).  We  may 
well  ask,  did  ever  Luther,  Calvin,  and  a  host  of  others,  who  did  not  hold  to  the  Whitbyan 
theory  of  a  universal  conversion,  but  did  hold  "  the  world  as  in  a  progress  of  deteriora- 
tion," repress  missionary  activity,  and  represent  Christian  efforts  at  conversion  a  failure 
or  fruitless?  The  charge  is  too  sweeping,  and  defeats  itself;  it  is  too  denunciatory,  and 
recoils  upon  its  originators  and  abettors.  Dr.  llandolph  (the  Kentucky  Tribune,  Feb.  13th, 
1880)  has  well  said  :  "  No  man  of  common  intelligence  ought  to  be  willing  to  risk  the 
statement  that  the  preaching  of  Christ's  speedy  coming  tends  to  paralyze  missionary 
exertion.  Asa  question  of  fact  it  is  not  true.  First,  and  above  everything  else,  the  Bible 
contradicts  the  assertion.  The  parables  of  Jesus  contradict  it.  The  history  of  the 
Apostolic  Church  contradicts  it.  The  history  of  the  Post-Apostolic  Church  contradicts 
it.  The  great  and  overwhelming  fact  that  a  majority  of  the  missionaries  in  the  foreign 
field  to-day  are  Pre-Millenarians,  in  thunder  tones  contradicts  it.  What  must  be  the 
attitude  of  those  who,  in  the  face  of  such  evidence,  stand  up  to  repeat  these  thoroughly 
exploded  objections  ?  The  only  answer  that  can  be  made  is — it  can  only  be  due  to  igno- 
rance, want  of  comprehension,  or  blind  and  incurable  prejudice."  The  concession  of 
Barnes  and  fifty-nine  others  respecting  the  early  Church  (Prop.  156,  Obs.  9,  16)  is 
already  decisive.  The  challenge  of  Wood's  and  Garbett  (same)  has  never  yet  been 
met.  Dr.  Brown's  (Prop.  175,  Obs.  2,  note)  assertions  respecting  our  position  cannot 
be  maintained  in  consistency  with  the  truth.  Steele's  (Prop.  158,  Obs.  8  and  note) 
declarations  lack  proof,  and  are  erroneous  deductions,  putting  into  our  faith  that  which 
we  positively  discard.  The  evidence  of  Pre-Millenarians  being  actively  engaged  as 
missionaries  is  cumulative.  (Comp.  e.  g.  that  given  by  Lord,  Wilson  etc.,  note  to 
Prop.  158,  Obs.  8).  One  of  the  editors  of  the  Proph.  Times  (vol.  10,  p.  Ill)  declares  that 
a  missionary  "  remarked  to  us  that,  including  British  missionaries,  two  thirds  of  those 
now  engaged  in  this  work  in  India  are  Millenarians  ;"  (and,  in  connection,  gives  Dr. 
Kellogg's  testimony  to  the  faith  of  the  recently  deceased  missionary,  Bev.  Joseph  H. 
Myers,  published  in  the  Presbyterian,  May  18th,  1872).  The  Hermansburg  congregation, 
that  has  done  so  much  for  missions,  does  not  regard  the  looking  for  the  speedy  Ad- 
vent (comp.  Proph.  Times,  vol.  5,  p.  40)  as  adverse  to,  but  provocative  of,  a  missionary 
spirit.  The  eminent  missionaries  mentioned  in  other  connections  (as  e.  g.  under  the 
History  of  the  Doctrine)  speak  for  themselves.  So  e.  g.  West  (Address  before  the  Proph. 
Conference)  refers  to  "devoted  missionaries  like  Duff,  the  opener  of  India,  Gutslaff.  the 
opener  of  China,  Bettleheim,  the  opener  of  Japan,  Heber,  Bertram,  Wolff,  Herschell, 
Poor,  Lowry,  and  many  more  were  Pre-Millenarians,  and  are  followed,  if  recent  informa- 


332  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  183. 

tion  is  correct,  by  a  majority  of  missionaries  now  in  the  foreign  field  of  the  same  faith." 
With  such  names  and  lives  before  him,  how  can  an  opponent  repeat  this  gross,  un- 
warranted charge  !  We  are  glad  to  record  the  fact  that  enlightened  Christian  opposers 
do  not  urge  it.  Thus  e.  g.  Dr.  Paterson  in  Art.  "  Pre-Millenarianism"  (Princeton  Re- 
view, 1878,  p.  415)  pointedly  asserts  :  "One  charge,  however,  which  is  made  against  it,  is 
unjust — that  it  must  cut  the  nerve  of  preaching  and  missionary  effort,"  and  adds  :  "  For 
ourselves  we  confess  that  among  our  personal  friends  who  hold  this  error  are  the  most 
spiritually  minded  of  Christians  and  the  most  earnest  and  successful  of  pastors  and  preach- 
ers." As  an  indication  and  practical  illustration  of  Pre-Millenarian  feeling  on  the 
subject,  we  call  attention  to  the  late  "Prophetic  Conference"  held  at  New  York  (1878) 
in  Dr.  Tyng's  church,  where  over  three  hundred  ministers  and  a  large  audience  adopted, 
as  a  decided  expression  of  belief  and  practice,  the  following  resolution  :  "  Resolved  :  That 
the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  Pre-Millennial  Advent,  instead  of  paralyzing  evangelistic  and 
missionary  efforts,  is  one  of  the  mightiest  incentives  to  earnestness  in  preaching  the  Gospel 
to  every  creature  '  till  He  cometh.'  "  Dr.  Kellogg,  himself  formerly  a  missionary, 
testified  to  its  being  such  in  his  own  experience  and  in  that  of  other  missionaries  ; 
that  out  of  his  class  (sixty  graduates)  at  the  Theological  Seminary  (where  our  doctrine 
was  not  taught)  "  there  were  in  all  seven  men  who  appeared  to  go  as  foreign  missionaries. 
They  were,  every  one  of  them,  Pre-Millenarians,  and  there  was  not  a  single  other  one  in 
that  class  that  so  much  as  offered  to  go  ;"  that  "  the  objection  has  no  foundation,  either 
in  logic,  in  facts,  or  the  experience  of  Christian  life."  He  emphatically  announced  that 
when  in  the  mission  field  he  took  a  census  of  the  Presbyterian  missionaries,  with  this 
result :  "  I  know  at  that  time  the  Pre-Millenarians,  as  proportioned  to  the  others,  were 
about  two  to  one  ;  and  I  am  happy  to  remark,  that  two  of  those  honored  comrades  of 
mine  I  have  seen  in  this  house  to-day— missionary  brethren— are  both  Pre-Millenarian." 
Major  Whittle,  the  evangelist,  gave  a  similar  testimony  how  it  incited  him  and  other 
evangelists—"  Henry,  Varley,  Moorehouse,  Moody,  and  Needham— and  all  these  beloved 
brethren  in  Christ  through  all  the  country  so  far  as  I  know  them.  Certainly,  I 
must  protest  in  their  name  and  in  my  own  name  against  the  statement  that  accepting 
the  truths  of  the  coming  of  Christ  paralyzes  missionary  or  evangelistic  effort.  It  was 
thai  which  sent  me  out  in  the  field  ;  it  is  that  which  has  kept  me  in  the  field  when  op- 
pressed by  the  flesh  and  the  world."  And  in  reference  to  the  truths  presented  at  the 
conference,  he  said  :  "  I  never  felt  in  my  life  such  an  inspiration  as  I  have  felt  after  listen- 
ing to  these  beloved  brethren  to  go  out  and  save  souls,  and  to  reach  them  and  bring  them 
to  the  Gospel  and  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  they  may  share  with  us  in  the  coming 
glory."  (So  evident  is  it  that  the  evangelists  as  a  class  are  on  our  side,  that  Dr.  Hall,  of 
New  York,  in  the  Presbyterian—  quoted  in  Lath.  Observer,  Dec.  6th,  1878— sounds  the  alarm, 
and  warns  the  churches  against  those  who  entertain  "  Pre-Millennial  views,"  and  most 
falsely  charges  them  as  "getting  ready  themselves  and  preparing  some  others  for  enter- 
ing'Plymouth-brotherism,' if  a  man  can  be  said  to  enter  that  which  is  without  land- 
mark or  definite  boundary.")  Dr.  Goodwin,  at  the  same  conference,  said  :  "They  tell  us 
that  we  shall  destroy  the  incentive  to  Christian  effort,  that  we  shall  break  up  our  mission- 
organization,  that  we  shall  dishearten  the  whole  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  as  for 
me— and,  I  believe,  I  am  speaking  for  these  brethren— the  thought  of  the  night  that 
hastens,  the  thought  of  the  woe  that  impends,  the  thought  of  the  gnat  shipwreck  that 
is  about  us  now,  and  the  thought  of  the  thousands  that  shall  perish  if  they  die  unsaved, 
moves  me  to  pray,  Oh,  that  I  may  help  to  do  with  my  might  what  my  hands  find  to  do  ! 
That  is  why  this  doctrine  is  to  me  so  sweet.  It  makes  prayer  mighty  ;  it  makes  Christ  more  ; 
it  makes  souls  exceedingly  precious.  Let  us  go  home  praying  that  the  power  of  the 
doctrine  may  be  in  our  hearts  first,  and  then  upon  our  lips  and  in  our  lives."  Such 
testimony  was  also  given  by  others.  Eev.  Dr.  Mackay,  at  the  Mildmay  Conference  (1879) 
refers  to  the  extent  that  our  views  are  held  by  missionaries,  and  states  that  a  Pre-Mille- 
narian missionary  being  asked,  "  Are  you  going  to  the  heathen  holding  these  pessimist 
views?  What  good  will  you  do ?"  He  replied  :  "  I  hold  neither  pessimist  nor  optimist 
views,  or  any  such  thing— I  am  a  truthist,"  and  then  added,  "If  I  did  not  hold  these 
views  I  would  never  go  to  the  heathen."  Dr.  Andrew  Bonar  (Lund,  Quart.  Jour.,  Proph- 
ecy, vol.  1,  p.  317)  declared  :  "  He  has  heard  missionaries  '  regret  deeply  that  the  Church 
at  home  should  be  dazzled  by  the  vain  hope  of  conversions  on  a  grand  scale.'  If  the 
missionary  would  '  see  that  the  gathering  oid  of  the  elect  is  his  sole  hope,'  he  would  be  'far  less 
disheartened  by  opposition  than  when  he  vainly  expected  every  day  to  see  symptoms  of 
national  and  universal  conversion. "  A  returned  missionary,  Whitbyan  in  view,  when 
abroad,  informed  me  that  with  our  doctrine  he  would  have  been  greatly  encouraged  in 
his  work,  avoiding  many  discouragements  and  gloomy  hours  of  despondency.     For,  as 


Prop.  183.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  333 

Auriol  (Leds.  during  Lent,  p.  31)  :  "Our  Church  teaches  us  to  pray  that  the  Lord  would 
' shortly  accomplish  the  number  of  His  elect,  and  hasten  His  Kingdom.'  Will  not  a 
believer,  to  whom  (after  he  has  realized  the  great  truths  on  which  his  own  salvation 
rests)  the  speedy  Coming  of  his  Lord  has  become  the  chief  object  of  earnest  expectation — 
will  not  such  an  one  be  animated  with  a  most  eager  desire  to  be  an  instrument,  in  the 
Lord's  hand,  for  the  fulfilment  of  those  events  which  are  yet  to  be  accomplished?  What 
a  stirring  echo  to  the  longing  of  his  own  heart  is  the  cry  of  the  '  whole  creation,'  through 
sin  and  the  miserable  prevalence  of  heathenism,  '  groaning  and  travailing  with  pain  to- 
gether until  now  ! '  What  a  motive  for  fervor  and  zeal  in  the  missionary  cause  has  he  who 
can  look  at  every  soul  converted  to  God  as  a  fresh  earnest  of  the  near  approach  of  the 
'  day  of  redemption  ! '  When  he  thinks  of  the  hopes  set  before  him  in  connection  with 
the  Bridegroom's  return,  how  will  he  long  that  many  should  '  come  from  the  east,  and  from 
the  west,  and  from  the  north,  and  from  the  south,  to  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  Kingdom  of  God.'  "  We  only  add  that  our  doctrine  sustains  and 
strengthens  a  believer,  whether  largely  successful  or  not,  because  he  realizes  that  he  is 
working  for  the  Lord,  and  that  the  Lord  at  His  coming  will  reward  him  ;  and  that,  at 
least,  he  is  bearing  "  the  witness"  which  is  a  necessary  antecedent  to  the  blessed  con- 
summation. It  is  reported  that  the  result  of  the  Mildmay  Prophetic  conference  (1879) 
was  the  commission  of  eight  young  men  to  the  foreign  field,  and  that  of  other  conferences 
is  equally  striking.  Nast  (Com.,  Matt.  24  :  49)  pronounces  the  idea  that  the  Pre-Millen- 
nial  doctrine  has  a  tendency  to  "  dampen  missionary  zeal"  as  unfounded,  quotes  Buck 
(Harm  and  Expos  )  as  showing  that  watching  for  the  Advent  tends,  necessarily,  to  wean 
men  from  the  world,  to  make  them  solicitous  to  save  others,  to  make  them  liberal 
in  their  contributions,  to  cause  them  to  consume  less  in  self-gratification,  etc.  Those 
who  urge  this  charge  against  us  virtually  affirm  that  we  ought  not  to  look,  watch, 
and  pray  for  the  Second  Advent  lest  we  weaken  Christian  effort  ;  that  to  make 
and  develop  missionary  zeal  we  must  declare  that  "  My  Lord  delayeth  His  Coming"  until 
the  world  is  converted  ;  that  "the  blessed  hope"  which  inspired  so  many  in  the  past 
has  lost  its  power  in  the  improved  development  of  the  modern  Church  ;  that  the  early 
Church,  missionaries,  and  all  who  entertained  it,  were  not  nearly  as  well  equipped  for 
activity  and  service  as  those  who  have  put  on  the  Whitbyan  panoply  ;  and  that  the  ap- 
peals and  motives  urged  by  Harris's  Qreat  Commission,  and  kindred  works  based  on  "the 
conversion  of  the  world"  are  a  decided  improvement  on  the  lack  of  such  appeals  and 
motives  in  the  New  Testament.  What  must  we  think  of  a  theory,  which  sets  itself  up 
as  directly  antagonistic  to  some  of  the  plainest  injunctions  of  the  Word?  Brookes  (Mar- 
anatha,  p.  384—5)  quotes  a  letter  received  by  himself  "from  Rev.  Dr.  J.  Nawton,  one  of 
the  oldest,  and  certainly  one  of  the  most  devoted  and  honored  of  the  Presbyterian 
missionaries  in  India,  in  which  he  incidently  writes  :  '  A  large  proportion  of  the  mission- 
aries I  am  acquainted  with,  both  American  and  English,  are  looking  forward  to  the  Advent 
of  Christ  and  the  establishment  of  His  glorious  Kingdom  on  earth  as  events  which  are 
to  consummate  our  hopes  both  for  ourselves  and  the  nations.  It  is  sometimes  said  that 
these  views  of  prophecy  have  an  anti-missionary  tendency.  But  it  so  happens  that 
many  of  the  most  earnest  and  hard-working  missionaries  are  just  the  men  who  are  most 
widely  known  as  Milk-narians.'  "  To  this  Brookes  adds  :  "  Other  missionaries  testify  that 
perhaps  four  fifths  of  the  young  men  who  leave  this  country  to  carry  the  tidings  of  salva- 
tion to  the  heathen  embrace  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Pre-Millennial  Advent,  and  that, 
too,  in  the  face  of  the  powerful  influence  of  their  theological  training.  They  leave  their 
homes  deeply  prejudiced  against  the  doctrine,  or  profoundly  ignorant  of  it,  and  yet,  as  a 
rule,  they  do  not  remain  long  in  dark  and  distant  lands  before  they  become,  as  was  the 
case  with  Walter  Lowrie  and  many  others,  its  enthusiastic  advocates."  Dr.  Duff,  in  his 
speech  (1850)  before  the  Scotch  General  Assembly,  showed  that  if  Pre-Millennialists 
ignored  missions,  it  was  against  their  acknowledged  principles.  He  said  :  "  I  desire  not  to 
dogmatizeon  the  subject.  All  I  would  say  is,  that  whether  the  one  or  the  other  view  (Pre- 
or  Post-Millennial)  be  true,  our  duty  is  to  do  all  in  our  power  until  the  trumpet  shall  sound. 
This  is  the  practical  result.  If  we  believed  that  to-morrow  at  noon  the  trumpet  would 
sound,  methinks,  instead  of  resting  from  our  labors,  none  of  us  ought  to  go  to  sleep, 
but  would  take  our  stand  upon  the  watch-tower,  and  proclaim  to  a  slumbering  people, 
Awake  !  Arise  !  for  to-morrow  is  the  Day  of  Doom.  If  I  believed  that  to-morrow  at  twelve 
o'clock  the  world  would  come  to  an  end,  I  would  take  no  sleep,  but  would  be  up  and  do- 
ing. And  if  we  believe  that  the  Dispensation  is  approaching  its  end,  this,  instead  of 
paralyzing  us,  ought  only  to  induce  those  who  are  called  Pre-Millenarians,  of  all  others, ' 
to  go  forth  and  preach  in  all  lands,  in  a  mighty  phalanx,  sounding  the  alarm." 

In  addition  :  To  indicate  the  unfairness  with  which  our  doctrine  is  treated  in  this 


334  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  183. 

direction,  we  refer  to  the  remarks  made  upon  Dr.  Seiss's  refusal  to  affiliate  with  the 
Moody  and  Sankey  movement  in  Philadelphia.  The  Methodist  Recorder  and  other  papers 
deemed  this  a  good  opportunity  to  aim  sarcasms  at  Pre-Millenarianism,  as  if  that  was  the 
cause  of  the  doctor's  refusal,  when  (1)  Moody  himself  was  a  Pre-Millenarian  ;  (2)  when 
many  Post-Millenarians  take  precisely  the  same  attitude  toward  lay  evangelism  that  Dr. 
Seiss  does  ;  (3)  when  Dr.  Seiss  distinctly  grounded  his  refusal,  not  upon  Millenarian 
grounds,  but  upon  his  views  of  Church  organization,  the  ministry,  the  system  of  indoc- 
trinating applicants  for  Church  membership,  and  the  abuses  of  evangelism  ;  (4)  when  the 
doctor,  as  editor  of  the  Prophetic  Times,  several  times  alluded  to  Moody  as  a  Millenarian 
and  Christian  ;  (5)  and  when  many  Pre-Millenarians  cordially  aid  lay  evangelism,  not 
being  controlled  by  the  conscientious  scruples  and  motives  influencing  Dr.  Seiss.  The 
doctor  is  warmly  attached  to  missions,  has  ably  seconded  missionary  effort,  and  is  him- 
self a  successful  preacher.  His  Church  view  forces  him,  as  a  matter  of  consistency,  to 
think  that  all  effort  of  this  kind  is  to  be  promoted  in,  what  he  conceives,  a  legitimate 
way  under  a  regularly  constituted  ministry.  These  are  views  held  outside  of  those  enter- 
tained concerning  our  doctrine,  and  Millenarianism  cannot  be  held  accountable  for  them, 
just  as  Anti-  or  Post-Millenarianism  cannot  be  for  a  similar  position  entertained  by  many 
of  its  advocates.  The  writer  himself,  not  being  trammelled  by  the  scruples  that  influence 
others,  wishes  lay  evangelism  abundant  success,  indeed,  every  method  to  bring  sinners 
to  Jesus,  pi'ovided  proper  prudence  and  wisdom  is  exercised  to  avoid  self-deception  and 
mere  animal  excitement.  Guiness  and  many  others,  well-known  writers  and  themselves 
active  supporters  of  missionary  enterprises,  abundantly  refute  ail  such  alleged  objections. 


Pnor.  184.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  33j 


Proposition  18-4.     In  this  Kingdom  ivill  be  exhibited  a  Mani- 
fested Unity. 

This  is  positively  predicted,  not  only  in  reference  to  the  Jews 
(Isa.  11  :  13  ;  Ezek.  37  :  18-22,  etc.,  excluding  all  envy,  division, 
etc.),  but  in  reference  to  the  Gentiles,  all  being  embraced  in  one 
greed  universal  Kingdom  to  which  all  render  obedience  and  homage 
(as  e.g.  Dan.  7  :  14,  27  ;  Zech.  14  :  9,  1G  ;  Micah  4:1-7,  etc.).  A 
Theocracy  so  extended  and  realized,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  can- 
not tolerate  disunion  ;  and  under  the  rule  of  the  supernaturally 
endowed  King  and  His  co-rulers  all  tendencies  to  separation,  dis- 
sent and  discord  will  be  effectually  crushed. 

01)8.  1.  Men  have  sought  for  a  present  manifested  unity  by  misappre- 
hending two  things.  (1)  Unity  is  desirable,  and  it  ought  to  exist,  hence 
God  commands  it,  and  good  men  advocate  and  endeavor  to  exemplify  it. 
God  can  do  no  less  than  to  require  it  (just  as  He  demands  holiness,  etc.), 
but  does  God  teach  us  that  it  will  be  perfectly  manifested  in  this  dispensa- 
tion ?  Instead  of  teaching  the  preservation  of  outward  unity,  we  are  ex- 
pressly taught  to  expect  divisions,  etc.,  even  in  the  early  Church  (Acts  20  : 
29,  30  ;  1  Cor.  11  :  17,  18,  19  ;  2  Tim.  4  :  3,  4,  etc.).  The  condition  of 
the  Church  down  to  the  harvest,  a  mingling  of  tares  and  wheat,  good  and 
bad  fish,  foolish  and  wise  virgins,  forbids  the  attainment  of  a  manifested 
unity  however  desirable  to  man  and  acceptable  to  God,  seeing  that  such  a 
mixture  itself — allowed  for  purposes  of  mercy — is  productive  of  diversity. 
Had  an  external  unity  been  the  aim  of  God,  then  undoubtedly  the  apostles 
would  have  presented  us  with  a  regular  ecclesiastical  government  (some- 
thing, perhaps,  like  the  Papacy  developed),  Canon  laws,  a  Synoptical  Con- 
fession of  Faith,  etc.  But  we  are  told  that,  for  wise  purposes  (as  e.g.  to 
test  character,  faith,  life),  diversity  and  antagonism  were  permitted,  so  that 
through  trial  and  suffering,  fighting  and  struggling,  the  faithful  members 
may  be  perfected.  God  now  permits  many  things,  which  in  themselves 
are  not  agreeable  to  Him,  and  which  form  a  source  of  sorrow  to  pious 
souls.  The  history  of  the  Church  is  the  best  commentary  on  this  subject. 
(2)  Unity  now,  however,  exists  (not  outwardly  but)  between  Christ,  the 
Head,  and  all  faithful,  believing  members  (inasmuch  as  all  receive  from  Him 
the  same  blessings,  spiritual  life,  etc.),  and  even  between  such  believers 
when  the  inward  religious  experience  is  permitted  to  testify  (for  all  having 
the  same  faith,  the  same  graces  of  the  Spirit,  same  experience  in  spite  of 
denominational  ties,  the  likeness  in  one  will  respond  to  the  same  in 
another),  and,  in  view  of  this  spiritual  unity  (the  only  one  that  is  promised 
to  exist  in  the 'present  dispensation),  many  able  and  most  amiable  writers 
have  supposed  that  it  ought  to  be  manifested  outwardly  in  a  general  amal- 
gamation of  all  denominations,  or  in  some  external  union  embracing  the 


336  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  184. 

various  churches.  Here,  however,  we  must  distinguish  between  things  that 
differ.  The  union  between  Christ  and  His  members  is  necessarily  spirit- 
ual, invisible,  until  the  day  that  He  appears  with  them,  and  such  union  is 
openly  revealed.  The  union  between  His  members,  resulting  from  the 
former,  and  evidenced  by  a  like  experience  of  grace  and  power,  is  undoubt- 
edly to  be  evidenced  by  an  expression  of  the  same  (as  e.g.  in  the  present 
alliances,  public  meetings  of  the  representatives  of  various  denominations, 
etc.),  but  irrespective  (as  now  done)  of  particular  forms  of  doctrine, 
church  government,  etc.,  being  founded  solely  upon  the  religious  experi- 
ence of  the  individual  believer,  a  common  Church  love  and  adhesion  to  the 
One  Messiah.     Outward   diversity  will,  notwithstanding,  necessarily  exist. 

Men,  also,  have  been  searching  for  a  bond  that  might  bind  into  historic  union  the 
past  Christian  centuries.  The  secular  and  ecclesiastical  institutions,  civil  and  religious 
wars,  the  State  and  Church  persecutions,  the  antagonistic  forces  arrayed  against  each 
other — these  with  a  multitude  of  facts  cannot,  however  able  writers  attempt  it,  be  com- 
pressed within  a  bond  of  unity.  Civilization,  Christianity,  development,  etc.,  do  not 
meet  and  unite  the  antagonism.  Philosophy  and  science  vainly  seek  to  unravel  the  mys- 
tery, and  to  account  for  the  perversity  manifested.  Open  the  Bible,  and  it  tells  us  that 
for  certain  reasons  we  are  now  in  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles"- — times  that  give  no  bond  of 
unity  owing  to  Gentile  domination  being  adverse  to  the  only  influences  that  could  develop 
the  same.  These  are  times  in  which  truth  and  error,  piety  and  wickedness,  faith  and 
unbelief,  reason  and  cavil,  etc.,  are  to  be  exhibited  in  constant  convict.  The  unity  is 
alone  found  in  the  Divine  Purpose,  which  allows  this  period  as  a  punishment  to  the 
Theocratic  nation  (i.e.  the  Jews),  and  as  a  mercy  to  the  Gentiles  (i.e.  inviting  to  an 
engrafting,  etc.).  This  very  lack  of  unity  externally  is  part  of  the  Divine  Plan,  and  its 
historic  relationship  is  seen  when  the  Divine  Purpose  is  completed.  Hence,  we  must  not 
look  for  that  which  can  only  be  made  manifest  at  the  end.  Unity,  in  reference  to  the 
believer,  is  now  found  in  what  Julius  Miiller  in  the  Evang.  Union  calls.  "  an  absolute  and 
truthful  surrender  of  one's  self  to  the  personal  Saviour  ;  a  surrender  of  which  the  simplest 
child  is  capable."  This  leads  to  fellowship  one  with  another,  seeing  that  the  same  mind 
which  was  in  Christ  actuates  all.  That  sellish,  lordly,  alleged  holy,  exclusiveness,  char- 
acteristic of  some,  is  not  the  fruitage  of  true  Christian  love  ;  its  source  is  human. 

Obs.  2.  Dr.  Nevin,  in  his  sermon,  "  Catholic  Unity"  (attached  to  the 
Principle  of  Prot.),  justly  reasons  that  unity  is  preserved  even  with  a  cer- 
tain denominational  diversity.  Dr.  Hodge,  in  his  address  (delivered  before 
the  Ch.  Alliance  at  New  York),  "  Union 'by  Faith  with  Christ,  the  Basis  of 
Christianity,''  defines  this  unity,  pleading  for  its  observance,  and  remarks 
that  it  does  not  exist  in  an  external  organized  form  or  in  an  entire  uniform- 
ity of  doctrine  or  government.  Dr.  Schmucker,  who  wrote  and  labored 
much  on  this  his  favorite  topic,  correctly  represents  this  unity,  and  advo- 
cated its  expression  (giving  a  detailed  plan  in  Fraternal  Appeal,  etc.), 
without  discarding  a  diversity,  denominational  organizations,  which,  as 
human  nature  now  constituted,  and  as  the  visible  church  now  established, 
could  not  be  avoided  in  the  freedom  allowed  to  it.  Others  could  be  quoted 
maintaining  the  same  position  (see  e.g.  Barrows,  "  Dis.  on  the  Unity  of 
the  Church"),  the  only  tenable  one  ;  for  even  in  single  churches  (as  e.g. 
Roman  Catholic,  Lutheran,  Reformed,  Episcopalian,  Baptist,  Methodist, 
Presbyterian,  etc.)  much  diversity  exists  either  in  doctrine  or  in  other 
particulars,  developing  itself  in  direct  antagonisms,  so  that  unity  at  pres- 
ent must  be  placed  where  the  Word  places  it,  not  in  any  outward  organiza- 
tion, but  in  a  common  union  in  and  with  Christ.  Our  feelings  must  always 
be  touched  with  the  efforts  of  Bucer,  Pareus,  Calixtus,  Dury,  Grotius,  Bos- 
suet,  and  a  host  of  others,  to  have,  if  possible,  a  manifestation  of  external 
unity  ;  efforts  that  are  at  least  honorable  to  their  hearts,  but,  if  designed  to 


Prop.  184.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  337 

secure  an  outward  unity,  must  prove  futile  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  It  is  a 
painful  fact  that  we  have  large  and  small  bodies  of  professing  believers, 
who,  discarding  a  common  religious  experience,  make  their  own  church  or 
sect  the  exemplification  of  the  Biblical  idea  of  unity,  and  therefore  either 
ignore  the  professions  of  all  others,  refusing  to  allow  them  to  be  also  believ- 
ers, or  else,  while  thoretically  conceding  that  they  may  be  Christians,  prac- 
tically refuse  them  the  title  by  debarring  them  from  the  Lord's  table,  etc. 
Numerous  sad  illustrations,  implicating  the  names  of  excellent  men  actu- 
ated by  sincerity  and  honesty,  from  past  and  present  history,  might  be  ad- 
duced to  show  lioiv  hopeless  it  is,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Scripture, 
to  expect  ever  denominational  differences  to  disappear  in  "one  grand  out- 
ward union  of  the  churches  in  this  dispensation. 

Gurney,  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  has  pointed  out  in  the  following  language  (quoted 
by  Neander,  Pref.  to  Vast  Planting  of  the  Church)  the  basis  of  union,  the  bond  of  fellow- 
ship :  "  It  can  scarcely  be  denied  that  in  that  variety  of  administration,  through  which 
the  saving  principles  of  religion  are  for  the  present  permitted  to  pass,  there  is  much  of 
a  real  adaptation  to  corresponding  variety  of  mental  condition.  Well,  therefore,  may  we 
bow  with  thankfulness  before  that  infinite  and  unsearchable  Being,  who  in  all  our  weak- 
ness follows  us  with  His  love  and  through  the  diversified  mediums  of  religion  to  which 
the  several  classes  of  true  Christians  are  respectively  accustomed,  is  still  pleased  to  reveal 
to  them  all  the  same  crucified  Redeemer  and  to  direct'their  footsteps  into  one  path  of  obedi- 
ence, holiness,  and  peace."  The  editor  (Prof.  Stuckenberg)  of  the  Luth.  Evangelist,  Aug. 
2d,  1878,  has  a  sensible  and  needed  article  on  the  "  Union  of  Believers,"  made  impor- 
tant by  the  tendencies  of  unbelief,  "on  the  basis  (without  discarding  denominational 
peculiarities)  of  the  fundamental  doctrines  and  principles  of  Christianity,  which  are 
recognized  by  all  evangelical  churches."  After  quoting  a  German  writer  who  insists 
upon  such  a  union,  because  in  the  contest  with  unbelief  "  the  very  existence  or  non- 
existence of  religion  and  theology  is  involved,"  the  writer  concludes  :  "  That  believer  is 
to  be  pitied,  who  can  look  at  the  present  attitude  of  infidelity,  and  can  at  the  same  time 
foster  animosity  among  brethren.  Unity  in  diversity,  true  Christian  love  between  those 
of  different  churches,  and  hearty  co-operation  and  true  union  of  effort  in  the  interests  of 
Christianity,  are  possible  now  and  are  greatly  needed."  Alas  !  how  small  a  proportion 
of  nominal  Christianity  responds  to  such  sentiments  ;  it  is  only  those  who  have  hugely 
imbibed  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  that  can  and  do  feel  such  sentiments. 

Obs.  3.  Infidels  may  parade  the  differences,  the  antagonisms,  and  even 
the  hostility  of  the  various  churches,  and  from  this  deduce  the  unreliabil- 
ity of  Christianity,  because  a  unity,  which  they  assert  is  promised,  is  not 
manifested  ;  even  Sir.  Thomas  Browne  (Relig.  Med.)  may  say  :  "It  is  the 
promise  of  Christ  to  make  us  all  one  Hock  ;  but  how  and  when  this  union 
shall  be  is  as  obscure  to  me  as  the  last  day  ;"  men  may  fondly  dream  of 
such  a  manifested  unity  still  to  come  under  prevailing  instrumentalities, 
but  the  Bible  gives  a  derided  answer  to  all  such  objections,  professions  of 
ignorance,  and  visions  of  unity  outwardly  expressed,  by  directing  us  onward 
to  the  revelation  of  Christ,  to  the  power  which  He  shall  exert  in  the  over- 
throw of  existing  institutions,  etc.,  and  to  the  establishment  of  a  new  order 
of  things  in  His  Kingdom.  If  the  Bible  did  not  plainly  predict  the  divi- 
sions, etc.,  of  the  church,  then  infidelity  might  bring  in  a  plea  ;  if  it  did 
not  as  plainly  locate  the  period  when  unity  is  to  be  manifested,  then  igno- 
rance respecting  it  might  be  justly  claimed  ;  and  if  it  did  not  as  plainly  put 
the  promised  unity  in  the  age  to  come,  and  as  a  result  of  Christ's  estab- 
lished Kingdom,  then  dreams  of  present  outward  unity  might  be  enter- 
tained. But  with  the  Scriptures  before  us,  and  thus  far  amply  sustained 
by  the  sad  record  of  history,  it  is  imprjssible  to  locate  this  manifested 
period  otherwise.     Let  us  take  the  strongest  passages  alleged  against  our 


338 


THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  184. 


view  and,  if  properlv  considered,  they  fully  sustain  it.  Thus  e.g.  the 
prayer  of  Jesus  (John  17  :  21-26),  "  that  they  all  may  be  one,''  etc  is 
linked  with  the  time  when  all  believers  are  gathered,  and  when  His  glory 
shall  be  revealed.  So  evident  is  this,  if  the  parallel  passages  are  also  ex- 
amined, that  manv  of  our  opponents  frankly  admit  this,  as  e.g.  Origen ADe 
Prin  B.  1.  ch.  6),  who  locates  the  unity  prayed  for  by  Jesus  in  John 
17  •  20  21  in  the  future  New  Heavens  and  New  Earth ;  and  Pressense 
(Early  Years  of  Chris.,]).  403)  thinks  that  it  will  only  he  fulfilled  at  the 
return  of  Christ.  Now,  indeed,  the  believer  is  united  to  Christ,  and  feels  that 
he  is  one  with  all  God's  dear  children  ;  but  when  the  Bridegroom  comes, 
and  a  blissful  unity  is  manifested  in  the  marriage  consummated,  then  shall 
the  world  believe  when  it  beholds  this  wonderful  unity  and  its  resultant 
glory. 

A  Roman  Cath.  writer,  Job.  Ad.  Milkier,  presented  the  strongest  defence  of  Roman 
Catholicism  in  his  work,  Die  Einheit  der  Kirclie,  od.  das  Princip  des  Catholicismus  (replied 
to  bv  Nitsch,  Bauer,  etc.).  Now  whatever  may  be  successfully  alleged  against  the  Eccles. 
unity  there  advocated,  one  thing  is  self-evident  that  in  doctrinal  unity  it  is  historically 
opposed  (as  e  g.  in  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom)  to  the  Primitive  Church.  No  single 
denomination,  whether  Romish  or  Protestant,  can  set  up  such  a  claim,  for  a  divergence, 
more  or  less  apparent,  can  in  every  case  be  detected  and  exposed.  This  is  so  seriously 
felt  that  but  few  care  to  exhibit  the  same.  We  may  say  here  that  notwithstanding  the 
hieh  professions  of  union  and  the  excellent  advances  made  in  this  direction,  there  is  but 
a  small  proportion  of  professed  Christianity  that  entertains  the  proper  mind  and  heart  in 
this  direction  It  is  with  sadness  that  this  confession  is  penned.  Lest  it  be  thought 
that  our  doctrinal  position  bads  us  to  prejudge  the  matter  we  leave  an  earnest  ad vocate 
of  union  and  no  Millenarian  to  present  his  impressions.  Rev  Dr  ^  edekind  (New  loik) 
in  an  article  ''  About  Christian  Union  :  Is  it  in  tke  Ascendant  (  (the  Luth.  Observer,  Aug. 
16th  1878}  after  giving  interesting  facts  to  substantiate  his  position,  asserts  that  it  is 
evident  that  the  loose  talk  so  flippantly  reiterated,  that  we  live  in  a  period  when  union- 
ism and  liberalism  are  making  wonderful  strides,  is  more  of  a  sham  than  a  reality,  it  is 
the  intensest  sect  age  in  the  entire  history  of  the  Church. "  "  Out  upon  such  transparent 
S^ocrisy  about  Christian  union!  It  is  skua  -nothing  but  a  sham!"  We  feel  assured 
that  nothing  but  the  judgments  of  God  poured  out-nothing  but  the  dreadful  period  of 
persJcutiS gnnder  Antichrist  still  future-can  release  the  multitude  from  that  intense 
sectism  bigotry,  creedism,  etc,  so  characteristic  of  the  history  of  the  Church  past  and 
Present'  The  persecution  that  drove  the  primitive  churches  to  love  each  other  and  to 
sacrifice  the  one  for  the  other,  will  again  perform  its  painful  but  good  work. 

Ohs  4  The  Theocracy,  in  the  King  and  His  co-rulers,  must  necessarily 
exhibit  a  oneness  subsisting  between  them  :  but  the  Bible  also  speaks  of, 
embraced  even  in  the  notion  of  a  perfect  Theocratic  government  a  unity  ot 
the  Kingdom  resulting  from  a  union  of  Church  and  State,  lhis  union 
men  also  now  seek  against  the  direct  testimony  of  the  Word  ;  and  m  every 
instance,  when  attempted  to  be  realized,  with  injurious  results  to  the  truth. 
The  arguments  e.g.  employed  bv  Dr.  Curry  (in  his  address  Jivils  ot  a 
Union  of  Church  and  State,"  del.  before  Evang.  Alliance  for  1873)  are 
emphatically  forcible,  and  apply  to  this  dispensation,  indicating  how  impos- 
sible, without  direct  injury,  it  "is  safely  to  effect  the  same.  But  m  this  and 
similar  addresses  three  things  are  ignored  :  (1)  the  emphatic  predictions 
that  such  a  union  shall  exist  at  some  period  in  the  future  ;  (2)  that  it  did 
once  exist  in  the  Theocracy,  and  that  if  the  Theocracy  is  restored,  as  nu- 
merous prophecies  declare,  it  must  again  be  witnessed  ;  (3)  that  such  a 
union,  however,  is  onlv  safe,  reliable,  etc.,  ivnder  the  direct  personal  aus- 
pices of  Christ  and  His  associated  rulers,  where  God  places  it.  Such  a 
unity  is  pointed  out  in  Isa.  2  :  1-5  ;  Isa.  CO,  etc.,  when,  through  the  mam- 


Prop.  184.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  339 

fested  unity  of  Christ  and  His  brethren,  all  the  relations  of  man,  civil  and 
religious,  shall  be  brought  under,  and  be  directed  by,  a  government,  not 
only  supreme,  but  in  harmonious  unity,  the  civil  and  the  religious,  the 
State  and  the  Church  being  united  in  the  same  great  and  glorious  Head. 

Killen  (The  Ancient  Church,  p.  656),  after  having  properly  noticed  what  alone  can  pro- 
duce unity  in  this  dispensation  (an  internal  unity  of  faith,  hope,  and  affection),  as  op- 
posed to  the  Romish  idea  of  external  unit}-,  finally  predicts  that  this  unity  will  eventually 
be  realized  in  the  present  dispensation,  and  as  proof  of  his  correctness  quotes  these  three 
Scriptures,  viz.,  Isa.  40  :  4,  5  ;  Isa.  52  :  8,  and  Zech.  14  :  9.  But  let  the  student  glance 
at  the  passages  named  and  he  will  find  that  they  are  linked  with  the  Coming  of  God,  the 
Messiah,  and  all  His  saints,  with  the  deliverance  and  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
with  the  setting  up  of  a  glorious  Kingdom  and  the  introduction  of  events  that  other 
Scriptures  declare  are  not  to  be  witnessed  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  The  position  that 
we  have  assumed  is  impregnable,  seeing  that  it  is  based,  not  on  isolated  passages  torn 
from  their  connection,  but  on  the  expressed  statements  and  analogy  of  the  whole  Word 
of  God.  "Believers,"  "Christadelphians,"  "  Seventh-  Day  Adventists,"  and  others, 
speak  loudly  of  "man's  concocted  churches,"  and  urge  some  painful  facts  from  the  his- 
tory of  the  past,  and  then  to. make  things  better  multiply  sectism.  They  insist  upon  a 
separation  from  all  others  and  a  union  with  themselves  as  the  only  proper  scriptural 
position.  None  but  endeavors  to  prove  that  they  alone  are  guided,  exclusively,  by  God 
and  His  Word  through  the  Spirit.  None  but  proceed— also  Scripture  or  Spirit-derived — 
to  erect  as  their  minds  or  imaginations  are  directed — another  organization  or  society,  and 
then  claim  that  in  it  alone  is  fonnd  the  unity  desirable.  But  this  union  is  only  specious, 
for  the  diversities  of  opinion,  the  disagreements  of  parties  (thus  e.g.  in  this  city,  Spring- 
field, the  Christadelphians,  or  followers  of  Thomas,  form  three  separate,  small  parties, 
hostile  to  each  other),  evidence,  what  past  history  so  painfully  teaches,  an.l  what  the 
practical  spirit  of  Christianity  entails,  that  unity  in  a  common  centre  Jesus,  in  a  common 
love  to  God  and  man,  etc.,  is  the  only  imity  that  we  can  expect  in  this  dispensation, 
owing  to  the  depravity  of  man.  However  sincere  or  honest  such  brethren  are,  they  only 
increase  the  evils  by  separation,  antagonisms,  and  sectism.  Alas  !  how  many — diverse  one 
from  the  other— challenge  our  acceptance  as  the  Christ-founded,  the  only  true  Church, 
possessing  the  only  true  faith  and  practice.  We  may  safely  lay  it  down  "as  a  rule,  that 
the  louder  this  claim  is  urged  and  the  more  pretentious  it  is  made,  the  less  credence  should  be 
given  to  it,  seeing  that  in  its  intense  bigotry  and  intolerance  it  violates  at  every  step  the 
greatest  of  Christian  graces,  love.  The  efforts  made  by  the  "  Christo  Sacrum"  (1801) 
"  to  unite  all  denominations  on  the  basis  of  the  divinity  of  Christ  and  redemption  by  the 
merits  of  His  passion,"  met  with  but  little  success  ;  other  efforts  since  made  have  proven 
a  failure,  and  it  is  only  in  the  addresses  of  Prof.  Flint,  Dr.  Dykes,  and  others  (in  the 
Pan-Presbyterian  Council,  1877)  that  the  only  scriptural  basis  is  found,  viz.,  an  agree- 
ment in  essentials,  allowing  diversity  to  exist.  In  the  interval  between  the  two  stages, 
persecution  and  bitter  trial  will  draw  believers  together. 


340  THE   TIIEOCKATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  185. 


Proposition  185.     This  doctrine  enforces  that  of  Divine  Provi- 
dence. 

God  is  not  indifferent  to  the  establishment  of  this  Theocratic 
Kingdom,  and  His  divine  oversight  respecting  it  is  constantly  made 
manifest,  e.g.  in  the  selection,  training,  and  covenant  with  Abra- 
ham, in  the  selection,  adoption,  and  covenant  with  David,  in  the 
selection  of  Mary  and  the  birth  of  Jesus,  in  the  announcements 
made  of  His  Purpose,  in  the  provisions  established  to  carry  out  to 
ultimate  completion  the  Theocratic  conception. 

Obs.  1.  God  has  a  Divine  Sovereignty  and  exercises  it  (Props.  79,  80)  ;  a 
definite  Divine  Purpose  and  will  perform  it  (Isa.  14  :  26,  27)  ;  a  predeter- 
mined Theocratic  Plan,  which  will  be  accomplished  (Prop.  2);  oath-bound 
designs,  which  will  be  realized  (Prop.  50);  an  omnipotence  in  Providence 
that  is  irresistible  (Jer.  18  :  2-G);  an  end  in  view  that  will  result  according 
to  His  will  (Rom.  9  :  9-21).  From  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  this  doc- 
trine, as  given  in  Scripture,  from  the  inception  of  the  Theocratic  idea  to  its 
final  perfect  realization,  God  stands  before  us  as  One  who  is  personally  in- 
terested in  the  matter,  and  who,  for  the  sake  of  His  own  honor,  praise,  and 
glory,  overrules  all  to  bring  forth,  at  the  appointed  time,  a  glorious  con- 
summation that  shall  vindicate  and  embellish  the  Divine  perfections  en- 
listed and  employed  in  this  grand  redemptive  work. 

Even  now  we  can  clearly  see  that  the  Divine  Purpose,  as  exhibited  in  the  Plan  of 
Redemption  and  culminating  in  the  Theocratic  ordering,  evinces  a  Supreme  Being,  who 
upholds  and  governs  all  things.  The  outlines  of  this  Purpose,  the  provisional  arrange- 
ments, the  bestowal  of  certain  covenants  to  certain  persons,  the  guidance  and  announce- 
ments, the  Coming  of  the  Messiah,  the  establishment  of  the  Church,  etc.,  already  indi- 
cate the  perfections  of  God  definitely  employed  in  its  behalf.  But  what  must  be  our 
conception  of  Divine  Providence  when  the  Kingdom  is  once  established  in  all  its  sjjlendor 
and  blessedness,  vindicating  the  wisdom  and  knowledge,  the  goodness  and  power,  the 
mercy  and  love  of  our  God  ?  The  study  of  that  Providence,  the  contemplation  of  its 
resultant  work,  the  experience  of  it  in  past  suffering  and  present  deliverance,  <he  con- 
sideration of  it  under  the  curse  and  under  glorification,  will  exalt  God  in  our  minds  and 
forever  make  Him  the  Supreme  in  our  hearts.  The  Sec.  Advent  will  maintain,  in  a  halo 
of  glory,  the  Divine  Providence,  for  it  itself  is  the  sublime  and  joyful  result  of  Provi- 
dence. Now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  (hen  clearly  ;  now,  because  of  our  limited 
understanding,  we  may  be  unable  to  form  a  perfect  Theodicy,  then  it  will  be  constructed, 
and  all  will  understand  the  wonderful  ways  of  the  Lord. 

Obs.  2.  The  Providence  of  God,  both  general  and  particular,  is  suffi- 
ciently evidenced  in  the  call  of  Abraham  ;  the  raising  up  of  the  Jewish 
nation  ;  the  distinction  made  between  Esau  and  Jacob  ;  the  history  of 
Joseph  ;  the  removal  from  Egypt  ;  the  establishment  of  a  Theocratic 
Kingdom  ;  the  varied  transactions  of  that  Kingdom  ;  the  care  of  good 
and   punishment  of  wicked  kings;  the  raising  up   of  prophets;  the  re- 


Prop.  185.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  341 

moval  of  the  Theocracy  ;  the  provisions  made  for  its  re-establishment  ; 
the  rejection  of  the  nation  ;  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  ;  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  and  in  hundreds  of  particulars  ;  so  much  so  that  the  student 
of  the  Theocratic  Plan  is  constantly  impressed  with  it,  and  feels  it  to  be  a 
living  reality  in  which  he  can  evermore  trustingly  confide.  Every  step  in 
the  progress  of  events,  every  unfolding  of  time,  every  reference  to  the 
Theocratic  ordering,  every  provision  made  for  the  future  Messianic  King- 
dom teaches  him  that  underlying  all,  and  having  control  over  all,  is  a 
Divine  Providence  which  has  occupied  itself  with  the  high  and  the  low,  the 
lofty  and  the  minute,  the  nation  and  the  individual,  the  rich  and  the  poor, 
the  happy  and  the  suffering,  the  pious  and  the  wicked — all  tending  toward 
the  one  great  goal  in  the  future. 

A  Pre-Millenarian  must,  from  the  very  nature  of  his  faith,  be  a  strong  believer  in 
Providence.  The  Theocratic  idea  as  developed  in  the  past,  and  as  predicted  to  be  real- 
ized in  the  future  at  the  Second  Coming  of  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  necessarily  embraces,  as 
fundamental  and  essential,  an  existing,  superintending  Providence.  It  enforces  a  thou- 
sand Scripture  declarations  respecting  that  Providence  in  preservation,  control  over 
nature,  birth,  life,  disease,  death,  affliction,  prosperity,  trial,  adversity,  rewards,  punish- 
ments, etc.  And  all  this  not  simply  mediately,  but  at  pleasure  (if  requisite)  immedi- 
ately, as  is  finally  evidenced  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  when  both  mediate  and  immediate  power 
is  exercised  far  beyond  anything  that  has  yet  been  experienced.  It,  therefore,  inspires 
prayer  with  faith,  and  worship  with  hope  and  joy  ;  it  imparts  tranquillity  to  the  mind 
and  confidence  to  the  heart  ;  it  animates,  comforts,  strengthens,  and  blesses  ;  it  makes 
God  as  our  Father,  and  Jesus  as  our  Brother,  those  who  care  for  us,  who  manifest  their 
interest  in,  and  love  for  us,  who  even  (Rom.  8  :  28)  cause  "  all  things  to  work  together  for 
good  to  them  that  love  God  who  are  the  called  according  to  His  purpose.7' 

Obs.  3.  The  special  Providence  of  God  is  most  remarkably  enforced  and 
illustrated  in  the  birth  and  life  of  David's  Son,  and  in  the  continuous 
provision  made  for  the  future  re-establishment  of  the  Theocracy  under  the 
supervision  of  this  Son  and  His  associated  rulers.  It  is  seen  in  the  strik- 
ing acts  of  that  life  and  its  results  ;  it  is  witnessed  in  the  perpetuation  of 
the  Church  by  which  a  people  are  gathered  out  for  the  Kingdom  ;  it  is 
seen  in  the  qualified  and  waiting  King  ;  it  is  witnessed  in  the  people,  de- 
signed for  associated  rulers,  in  the  process  of  formation.  The  announce- 
ment, the  star,  the  birth,  the  flight  to  Egypt — all  in  the  life,  the  death, 
burial,  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  this  covenanted  seed  proclaim  it  ; 
the  call  of  the  apostles,  the  founding  of  the  Church,  the  gathering  out  of 
the  nations — all  in  the  work  of  procuring  co-heirs  with  the  Christ,  an- 
nounce it.  AVe  behold  this  Providence  encircling  us,  embracing  us,  aiding 
us,  elevating  us,  and  finally  crowning  us. 

It  confirms  within  us  a  self-consciousness  of  our  constant  dependence  upon  God 
and  His  loving  care  for  us.  Faith  in  the  Theocratic  idea  and  glory  embracing  even  us  in 
a  personal  present  realization  of  its  provisionary  measures,  urges  us  on  to  increased 
trust  and  hope,  purity  of  heart  and  life,  watchfulness  and  reverent  submission,  patient 
confidence  in  the  ultimate  result.  The  pattern  set  by  the  life,  teachings,  and  acknowl- 
edgments of  the  King  are  not  lost  upon  the  Coming  inheritors  of  the  Kingdom.  It  estab- 
lishes them  in  the  direct  and  consoling  affirmations  of  Jesus,  that  the  notice  and  will  of 
God  iMatt.  6  :  25-34,  and  10  :  29-31,  etc.)  extends  even  to  the  feeding  of  the  fowls  of  the 
air,  to  the  flower  withering  in  the  field,  to  the  sparrow  falling  to  the  ground,  to  the  num- 
bering of  the  very  hairs  of  our  head,  and  hence  must  pre-eminently  be  exercised  toward 
believers.  It  makes  Acts  17  :  28  a  vital  reality  and  unbounded  source  of  trust.  It  gives 
force  to  Jer.  10  :  23  ;  Heb.  12  :  1-15  ;  Ps.  127  :  1,  2  ;  1  Sam.  25  :  29  ;  Acts  5  :  38,  39,  and 
a  multitude  of  other  passages,  such  as  John  7  :  30  and  8  :  20,  etc.  In  the  contemplated 
fulfilment  of  the  Abrahamic  and  Davidic  covenants,  a  particular  Providence  has  been  ex. 
tended  down  to  all  the  believing  children  of  Abraham  ;  in  some  instances  astonishingly 


342  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  185. 

exhibited  and  in  others  less  marked,  but  still  existing  as  the  divine  assurances  declare 
and  personal  experience  confirms.  We  only  add  :  The  relationship  that  saints  now  sus- 
tatn  to  Jesus  as  intended  co-rulers  in  the  Coming  Kingdom  insures  from  Him  a  deep  and 
abiding  interest  in  their  welfare  (even  trial  and  suffering  being  intended  to  bring  m  addi- 
tional rank  and  honor),  because  His  own  glory  and  that  of  His  Kingdom  is  connected 
with  it  The  believer  feels  that  the  acknowledgment  of  such  a  Providence  is  essential 
(Isa.  10  :  15),  being  His  workmanship  (Eph.  2  :  10  ;  Isa.  43  :  21  : ;  Phil.  2  :  13,  etc.)  de- 
pendent upon  Him  (1  Cor.  1  :  26-29),  vessels  of  mercy  prepared  unto  glory  (Rom.  9  .  23) 
manifesting  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  (Eph.  3  :  9-11),  and  showing  forth  the  praise  of 
His  glory  (Eph.  1  :  4-12). 


Prop.  186.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  343 


Proposition  186.  This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  sustained  by 
the  Analogy  of  Scripture,  the  Analogy  of  Faith,  and  the 
Analogy  of  Tradition. 

A  doctrine  so  important  and  fundamental  as  this  ought  to  be 
fully  sustained  by  the  analogy  of  Scripture  and  faith,  and,  subor- 
dinate^ to  these,  by  the  analogy  of  tradition.  This  we  pre-emi- 
nently claim  for  it. 

Archb.  Usher,  in  his  advice  to  young  ministers  (Life  of  Usher,  by  Parr,  p.  87)  says  : 
"  Take  not  hastily  op  with  other  men's  opinions  without  due  trial  ;  nor  vent  your  own 
conceits  ;  but  compare  them  first  with  the  analogy  of  faith  and  rules  of  holiness  recorded 
in  the  Scriptures,  which  are  the  proper  tests  of  all  opinions  and  doctrines." 

Obs.  1.  In  relation  to  the  analogy  of  Scripture,  which  exhibits  a  general 
connection  and  agreement  subsisting  between  the  truths  contained  in  Holy 
Scripture,  such  connection  and  correspondence  is  strikingly  manifested. 
Thus  we  have  first  the  covenant  with  its  promises  ;  then  a  Theocracy  with 
a  special  ordering  growing  out  of  it  ;  then  the  amplification  of  this  cove- 
nant with  David,  owing  to  the  foreseen  fall  ;  then  the  overthrow  of  the 
Theocratic  Kingdom  on  account  of  sinfulness  ;  then  the  prophetic  an- 
nouncements, based  on  the  covenants,  of  the  restoration  of  this  Theocratic 
Kingdom  (under  a  new  arrangement)  by  David's  Sun  arid  Lord  ;  then  the 
First  Advent  of  the  promised  Messiah,  David's  Son,  and  the  tender  of  this 
Kingdom  on  condition  of  repentance  ;  then  the  rejection  of  it  by  the 
nation  and  the  atoning  death  of  Jesus,  with  the  postponement  of  the  King- 
dom to  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  then,  to  provide  a  seed  for  Abraham,  the  call  of 
the  Jews  and  Gentiles  ;  the  establishment  of  the  Chr.  Church  ;  the  connec- 
tion that  this  Church  sustains  to  the  postponed  Kingdom  ;  the  relation  that 
the  Messiah  maintains  toward  it  ;  the  assurances  that  we  have  in  Christ's 
ability  in  virtue  of  His  death,  resurrection,  and  exaltation  to  fulfil  the  cove- 
nanted promises  ;  the  fulfilment  of  covenant  and  promises  at  the  Sec.  Ad- 
vent ;  the  condition  of  the  Church  during  this  intermediate  period,  and 
the  attitude  of  nations  during  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles — are  all  given,  so 
unmistakably  and  connectedly  by  the  different  writers,  as  to  form  a  com- 
pletechain,  one  link  firmly  fastened  to  another.  A  perfect  historical  coti- 
nection  is  apparent  in  the  Word,  and  is  repeated  in  verified  history,  show- 
ing us,  if  we  will  accept  of  it,  an  agreement  of  Scripture  in  affirming  Grod's 
purpose  to  raise  up  a  glorious  Theocratic  Kingdom,  strengthened  by  the 
present  abundant  provision  made  through  Christ  for  its  consummation. 
Revelation,  in  all  its  varied  utterances,  constantly  responds  to  this  Theo- 
cratic idea,  and  upholds  the  blessed  work  of  Redemption  that  is  to  be  per- 
fected and  realized  in  the  Theocratic  Kingdom.  So  naturally  does  this  run 
through  Scripture,  that  we  need  not  depreciate  or  set  aside  any  portion  of 
the  Word  (as  e.g.  the  distinctive  preaching  of  John,  Jesus,  and  the  disci- 


344  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PltOP.  186. 

pies)  ;  there  is  no  part  of  it  that  we  find  antagonistic  (as  e.g.  Zech.,  ch.  14)  ; 
there  are  no  promises  that  we  need  to  spiritualize  away  (as  e.g.  those  to 
the  Jewish  nation  as  such);  there  is  no  portion  that  we  must  regard  with 
mistrust  (as  e.g.  the  Apoc,  2  Pet.,  etc.);  there  are  no  utterances  that  re- 
quire toning  down  (  aj  e.g.  in  reference  to  watching  for  the  Advent,  etc.); 
there  are  no  sections  of  it  that  we  must  separate  and  subdivide  in  the 
most  arbitrary  manner  (as  e.g.  Mill,  prophecies  in  Isa.  25,  etc.).  Instead 
of  this,  one  part  of  Scripture  fully  sustains  another,  and  combined  form  a 
distinct  related  series  from  which,  taken  in  its  plain  grammatical  sense,  we 
would  not  remove  an  iota  either  by  direct  denial,  or  by  fastening  upon  it 
a  sense  not  grammatically  expressed  in  the  words.  But  having  already 
shown  such  a  connection  to  exist  under  our  propositions,  we  only  add 
that  this  feature  is  corroborative  of  the  truthfulness  and  logical  correctness 
of  our  position.  If  this  were  lacking — if  such  a  connection  were  wanting 
(as  e.g.  in  the  announcement  of  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom) — then  a 
material  flaw  would  be  found  in  our  doctrinal  teaching,  and  the  Analogy 
of  Scripture  (which  is  the  foundation  of  the  Analogy  of  Faith)  would  lead 
to  mistrust  and  doubt,  instead  of  being,  as  now,  confirmatory  of  faith  and 
strength. 

Obs.  2.  The  Analogy  of  Faith  (closely  allied  with  the  preceding)  deals 
more  with  the  connection  that  one  doctrine  sustains  to  another  and  to  the 
whole  system  of  truth,  or  to  the  great  end  designed  in  Redemption. 
While  fully  agreeing  with  Martensen  (Ch.  Dug.,  p.  42)  that  the  Analogy 
of  Faith,  to  be  duly  appreciative  and  effective,  requires  "  a  Christian  mind 
which  lias  come  into  possession  of  Christian  truth,"  etc.,  yet  even  the  his- 
torical aspect  and  connection  of  doctrine  must  commend  itself  to  every 
considerate  mind  ;  for  if  it  can  be  shown  that  one  doctrine  contradicts 
another,  it  does  not  demand  piety  or  faith  to  perceive  the  antagonism. 
But  we  justly  claim  that  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  instead  of  being 
antagonistic  to  other  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  confirms,  either  directly  or  in- 
directly, other  doctrines,  or  serves  to  explain  and  illustrate  them,  or  ex- 
hibits them  in  their  natural  connection  and  proper  relations.  Take  the 
Kingdom  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  and  it  brings  into  view  a  large 
number  of  indispensable  doctrines  related  to  it.  Thus  e.g.  the  doctrine  of 
election  (Props.  24,  55,  etc.),  of  the  engrafting  of  Gentiles  (Props.  61,  62, 
63,  etc.),  of  postponement  (Props.  66,  67,  87,  etc.),  of  the  church  (Props. 
89-102),  of  the  speedy  Advent  (Prop.  74,  etc.),  of  the  Pre-Mill.  Advent 
(Prop.  121),  of  a  Pre-Mill  resurrection  (Props.  124-128),  of  the  Judgeship 
of  Christ  (Prop.  132),  of  the  Judgment  Day  (Prop.  133),  besides  many 
others,  are  intimately  united  with  it — in  fact,  showing  how  it  can  be  realized, 
thus  evincing  an  intimate  harmony  existing  between  them,  without  violat- 
ing or  contradicting  each  other  in  any  statement.  The  doctrine  of  sin 
(Prop.  8),  the  inability  of  man  to  secure  the  forfeited  blessings  (Prop.  120), 
the  necessity  toward  fulfilment  of  Christ's  death  (Prop.  50,  84,  etc.),  the 
Divine  Sovereignty,  which  answers  ample  realization  (Props.  79,  80),  and 
others  are  maintained  in  their  integrity,  while  repentance  and  appropriat- 
ing faith  in  Jesus,  as  the  Christ,  in  order  to  secure  co-heirship  with  Him  in 
the  Kingdom,  are  strongly  enforced.  Indeed,  the  Kingdom  being  the  great 
end  designed  through  which  completed  redemption  is  to  be  attained  and 
manifested  in  behalf  both  of  the  saints  (resurrected,  translated,  and  glori- 
fied) and  the  Jewish  nation  and  Gentile  nations,  it  will  be  seen  that  the 


Prop.  186.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  345 

different  doctrines  all  sustain,  more  or  less,  an  intimate  connection  with  the 
same.  As  presented  in  the  propositions,  there  is  no  conflict  between  them 
— one  supporting  the  other — unless  we  interpret  unhistorically,  ungram- 
matically, or  one-sidedly.  By  wresting  passages  from  the  dispensation  to 
which  they  belong  and  applying  them  to  another  ;  or,  by  building  upon  a 
single  passage  and  isolated  without  allowing  the  general  scope  or  the  whole 
tenor  of  truth  to  illustrate  and  explain  ;  or,  by  giving  preference  to  obscure 
and  figurative  passages  over  against  covenant  and  enlarged  explanation  and 
promise  ;  or,  by  not  permitting  one  doctrine  to  receive  its  due  enforcement 
because  of  its  relationship  to  another  ;  or,  by  not  considering  all  the  Script- 
ure pertaining  to  one  doctrine  and  its  cohesion  with  others  before  advocat- 
ing it — by  these  and  similar  expedients  the  analogy  of  faith  is  seriously 
violated.  This  might  be  illustrated  by  appealing  to  various  doctrines  which 
assume  prominence  in  their  relation  to  the  Kingdom,  but  a  few  only  are 
selected  to  enforce  our  meaning.  Thus  e.g.  the  doctrine  of  a  peculiar,  dis- 
tinguishing first  resurrection  is  found  to  be  conditioned,  not  merely  by  the 
passages  which  teach  it  (Props.  124-128),  but  by  the  fact  that  without  it 
the  Kingdom  itself  could  not  possibly  be  inherited  and  established  as  cove- 
nanted and  'predicted.  It  is  a  legitimate  outgrowth  of  covenant  promise,  of 
Kingdom  prediction,  as  well  as  of  promise  to  individual  believers.  Then, 
take  the  doctrine  of  the  Restoration  of  the  Jews,  and  we  find  that  it  is  to 
be  received  not  merely  on  account  of  the  prophecies  bearing  on  ihe  subject 
(Props.  111-114),  but  because  it  necessarily  follows  from  the  convenanted, 
elected  position  occupied  tig  that  nation.  So  also  the  Pre-Mill.  Advent  of 
Jesus  is  grounded  in  the  Personal  relationship  that  Jesus  bears  (Props.  48, 
49,  81,  82,  83,  etc.)  to  the  Kingdom,  and  the  impossibility  of  fulfilling 
either  covenant  or  promise  without  it.  Even  the  injunction  to  be  watching 
for  that  Advent  receives  its  consistent  and  proper  significance  in  the  light 
of  the  Kingdom.  Tims  likewise  the  Judgeship  of  Jesus,  the  Day  of  Judg- 
ment, the  world  to  come,  and  numerous  other  doctrines  are  shown  to  be 
requisite  to,  and  in  strictest  accord  with,  the  Kingdom.  One  of  the  sweet- 
est consolations  that  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  affords,  is  that  it  thus 
supports,  strengthens,  and  elucidates  the  other  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  and 
binds  them  into  a  symmetrical  vdiole,  required  to  attain  to  the  majestic  de- 
sign held  by  the  Divine  Purposes. 

Obs.  3.  Subordinately,  we  also  introduce  the  Analogy  of  Tradition,  see- 
ing that  some  lay  so  much  stress  upon  tradition,  and  which,  to  a  certain 
extent,  is  reasonable  and  allowable.  Our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  is  fully 
sustained  by  the  Analogy  of  Tradition,  by  which  we  mean  that  it  accurately 
agrees  with  the  teaching  and  tradition  of  the  Church  in  the  formation  and 
primitive  period  (Props.  74,  To,  76,  77,  78).  Instead  of  confining  ourselves 
to  the  tradition  of  the  third  and  succeeding  centuries  (like  the  Roman 
Catholics,  Puseyites,  Mystics,  etc.),  we  go  back  to  the  first  and  second  cen- 
turies for  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  as  held  by  the  Church.  This  tradi- 
tion, we  claim,  justly,  ought,  so  far  as  this  leading  doctrine  is  concerned,  to 
be  the  most  reliable  because  of  its  nearness  to  the  inspired  teachers  and 
leaders  of  the  Church.  How  well  this  tradition  corresponds  with  the  doc- 
trine has  been  presented  in  numerous  quotations  from,  and  references  to, 
Hie  Apostolic  and  Primitive  Fathers.  Xo  other  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom 
than  that  of  this  covenanted  one,  defended  in  these  pages,  finds  the  least 
support   in,  or  agreement  with,  the  quite  early    Church.     This  to  us  is  a 


346  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  186. 

source  of  self-congratulation,  seeing  that  if  the  doctrine  is  thus  contained 
in  the  Bible,  and  if  it  was  thus  proclaimed  by  inspired  men,  then  we  ought 
— if  indeed  the  truth — to  find  it  distinctively  taught  and  held  by  the  Church 
at,  and  immediately  after,  the  period  when  she  is  favored  with  the  teaching 
and  explanations  of  inspired  men.  If  our  doctrine  is  untrue,  then  the  spir- 
itualizing, mystical  view  of  the  Kingdom  ought  to  have,  at  least,  been 
stated  and  defended  by  the  quite  early  Fathers.  The  lack  of  the  latter — 
postponed  to  a  later  period,  and  then  the  product  of  fastening  additional 
senses  upon  Scripture — is  evidence,  corroborative,  of  the,  justness  of  our 
position  ;  and  the  prevalence  of  our  view  is  testimony,  additional,  that  we 
apprehend  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  on  this  point  just  as  the  Church, 
favored  by  personal  inspired  direction,  apprehended  them.  To  weaken  the 
force  of  this,  it  must  be  explained  how  our  doctrine  should  be  so  universally 
held  without,  if  erroneous,  a  protest  from  the  apostles  and  the  elders  ;  and 
how  it  comes  that,  in  reference  to  so  vital  and  fundamental  a  doctrine,  the 
whole  Church,  east  and  west,  north  and  south,  should — if  in  error — indulge 
in  the  hopes  excited  by  a  huge  mistake,  and  that  it  should  be  left  to  the 
emasculated  Origen  or  the  Arian  Whitby  to  develop  the  truth.  But  this 
must  be  done  without  charging — indirectly  at  least— inspired  men  with 
conniving  at  error  (to  prepare  men  for  persecution,  etc.,  as  some  say)  and 
without  tracing  the  Church  through  men  guilty  of  error  and  wide-reaching 
mistake  in  the  leading,  most  prominent,  theme  of  the  Bible.  Our  doctrine 
is  the  only  one  that  receives  this  tradition  and  clears  the  early  Church  of 
the  prevailing  charge  of  error,  etc.,  vindicating  her  veracity,  purity,  and 
testimony. 

Compare  on  the  Fathers  and  their  use,  the  articles  in  the  Cyclops.,  the  writings  of 
Daille,  Lightfoot,  Waterland,  Isaac  Taylor,  Bull,  Usher,  Andrews,  Priestley,  Middleton, 
etc.  We  cannot  receive  the  Romish  or  Puseyite  view  that  tradition  is  of  equal  authority 
as  a  rule  of  faith  and  practice  with  the  Scriptures  ;  for  they  are  simply  witnesses  of  so 
much  truth  as  they  possessed,  not  being  constituted  judges  or  authorities.  We  cannot, 
either,  as  some  High-Church  parties,  elevate  them  to  the  position  of  bein^c  such  exclusive 
and  proper  expositors  of  Scripture  that  no  views  opposed  to  those  expressed  by  them  are 
to  be  tolerated  ;  for  this  limits  religious  freedom,  opposes  a  barrier  to  advancement  in 
knowledge,  and  places  the  Fathers  in  a  false  position,  repudiated  by  themselves.  The 
prevailing  Protestant  view,  which  we  uphold,  is,  that  they  are  to  be  received  as  any  other 
theological  writers,  and  that  truth,  found  to  be  such  by  a  comparison  with  Scripture, 
presented  by  them  is  to  be  received  with  deference.  In  important  and  essential  doc- 
trines, it  is  reasonable  to  expect  a  presentation,  in  part  or  in  whole,  of  the  same,  evidenc- 
ing its  reception,  apprehension,  etc.  (comp.  Props.  'J  and  10  for  our  position  in  detail.) 

Obs.  4.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  supported  by  the  analogies  of 
Scripture,  faith,  and  tradition,  utterly  repudiates  the  insidious,  extreme 
theory  of  Petrine,  Pauline,  and  Johannine  theologies,  the  one  following 
the  other  in  course  of  development.  This  is  advocated  in  order  to 
strengthen  the  departureof  more  modern  thought  from  the  Primitive  Church 
position.  It  has  no  foundation,  in  fact,  Scripturally  or  historically,  and  is 
an  idea  broached  by  Joachim,  in  his  famous  prophecies,  making  Peter, 
Paul,  and  John  the  representatives  of  successive  periods,  and  now  pressel 
into  service  to  indicate  how,  by  wray  of  apology  for  the  change,  the  Church 
came  to  be  removed  from  the  early  belief  on  this  and  kindred  subjects.  The 
diversity  and  peculiarities  arising  from  style,  temperament,  etc.,  cannot 
thus  be  forced,  without  injury,  into  a  divinely  contemplated  succession  of 
Church  stages.  It  is  simply  it  human  opinion,  without  the  lens/  Scriptural 
basis,  eloquently  and  even  forcibly  expressed,  and  thus  the  more  likely  to 


Prop.  188.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  347 

mislead.  Its  leading  idea  is  that  the  Petrine  teaching  was  more  of  an 
accommodation  to  Jewish  thought  and  forms  (as  e.g.  prevailed  in  the  Prim- 
itive Church),  while  the  Pauline  and  Johannine  are  better  adapted  to  an 
advanced  stage  (as  e.g.  the  modern).  On  the  other  hand,  the  doctrine  of 
the  Kingdom  insists  upon  it  that  the  teaching,  spirit,  comprehension  of  the 
truth,  etc.,  of  the  three,  are  not  only  the  same  in  reference  to  the  Kingdom, 
but  that  they  are  intended  to  be  combined  (not  to  represent  successive 
stages)  to  bring  out  peculiar  features  pertaining  to  it.  The  analogies  fully 
confirm  this  view. 

Obs.  5.  In  view  of  these  analogies  confirming  the  doctrine  of  the  King- 
dom, we  may  well  ask  whether  this  mutual  relationship  of  doctrine,  grad- 
ually bestowed,  given  by  various  writers  in  different  ages,  and  yet  evincing 
an  intimate  connection,  necessary  for  a  continuous  and  harmonious  Plan, 
was  merely  accidental  ?  Can  such  a  remarkable  correspondence,  attested  to 
at  every  step  historically,  in  upholding  and  developing  the  establishment  of 
snch  a  Kingdom,  be  accounted  for  in  any  other  way  than  that  it  is  the 
Divine  Purpose,  as  stated  in  the  covenants  and  prophets,  to  accomplish  it? 
Against  Wiinch,  Paine,  Paalzow,  etc.,  who  assert  that  Jesus  was  a  deceiver, 
mere  enthusiast,  we,  aside  from  numerous  other  reasons  to  the  contrary, 
find  one  in  this  correspondence  of  truth,  viz.,  that  David's  Son  came  in  ac- 
cordance to  covenant  promise,  and  the  reasons  why  the  covenant  promises 
were  not  realized  at  the  First  Advent  are  prominently  given  in  the  Xew 
Test.,  but  which  such  writers  conveniently  ignore,  just  as  if  they  were  not 
also  recorded.  Against  Bahrdt,  Reimarus.  etc.,  who  pronounce  the  Script- 
ures, the  rise  of  Christianity,  the  life  of  Christ,  etc.,  to  be  attributable  to 
natural  causes,  we  show,  from  this  standpoint,  that  the  agreement  of  one 
with  the  other  in  doctrinal  relationship — although  separated  in  the  be- 
stowal by  centuries,  etc. — testifies  to  an  intelligent  Plan  beyond  the  power 
of  nature  or  man  to  devise  without  the  introduction  of  that  which  would 
mar  its  harmony  of  inception,  unfolding,  and  execution  ;  seeing  that,  in- 
stead of  one  distinctive  mind  controlling  it,  the  minds  of  man}"  would  be 
engaged  in  its  formation  and  development.  Against  Kant,  Thiess,  De 
Wette,  Wegschneider,  etc.,  who  make  Christianity  divine  and  Jesus  a 
messenger  from  God  (doing  good  service  against  ultra-Rationalism),  and 
yet  seem  inclined  to  do  away  with  the  manifested  supernatural  and  the 
miraculous,  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  with  its  related  doctrines  is  so 
firmly  based  on  the  supernatural,  that  if  the  one  is  rejected  the  other  falls 
with  it,  seeing  that  the  supernatural  accompanies  it  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end,  as  e.g.  in  giving  of  covenants,  in  establishment  of  Theocracy, 
in  the  birth,  etc.,  of  Christ,  in  the  provisions  made  for  accomplishment, 
etc.  The  analogies  which  exist  forbid  mere  abstraction  and  half-way  meas- 
ures in  the  reception  of  the  Scriptures  ;  they  either  contain  a  Divine  Phut 
supported  in  its  Theocratic  manifestations  and  provisions  by  exhibitions 
of  the  supernatural,  or  else  they  are  grossly  deceptive  in  pretensions,  etc. 
Against  another  class,  Doderlein,  Moms,  Amnion,  Bretschneider,  etc.,  who 
reform  the  Word  to  accommodate  it  to  reason  ;  and  hence  (while  professing 
even  that  Revelation  may  contain  some  things  above  but  not  against  reason) 
guage  all  things  pertaining  to  the  future  by  reason  (i.e.  by  their  ideas  of  fit- 
ness, etc.),  and  make  it  (i.e.  reason)  virtually  the  tribunal  before  which  to 
judge  God's  purposes  and  manner  of  accomplishing  them — this  doctrine  of 
the  Kingdom  with  its  remarkable  correspondences  of  nece,  sity,  in  order  to 


348  THE   THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  186. 

secure  the  Redemption  contemplated,  must  contain  things  that  unaided  reason 
(incapable  of  devising  and  executing  such  a  Plan)  could  neither  reveal, 
and  cannot  even,  when  revealed,  explain  how  they  are  to  be  accomplished  ; 
as  e.g.  the  person  of  Christ  to  constitute  Him  the  covenanted  Theocratic 
King  (i.e.  God-man),  the  resurrection,  the  glorification,  the  renewal  of 
creation,  etc.  For  what  such  writers  overlook  is  clearly  presented  by  these 
analogies,  viz.,  that  all  such  wonderful  works,  which  reason  cannot 
explain,  are  legitimate  outgrowths  from,  and  conditioned  by,  the  design 
intended  b>/  the  Kingdom  of  God  (which  reason  itself  declares  otherwise 
cannot  be  realized),  and  that,  if  thus  performed,  will  secure  the  great  end 
contemplated — an  end  which  reason  itself  not  only  commends  as  desirable 
and  noble,  worthy  of  God,  but  the  heart  longs  after. 


Prop.  187.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  349 


Proposition  187.  TJiis  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  gives  coherency 
to  the  gospels,  and  indicates  the  unity  of  design  in  each  of 
them. 

This  must  follow,  provided  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  is  as 
leading  and  doctrinally  fundamental  as  represented.  It  has  been 
objected  to  the  gospels  that  they  are  greatly  composed  of  detached, 
fragmentary  parts  strung  together  without  unity  of  design,  present- 
ing varied,  and,  in  a  measure,  contradictory,  sketches  of  the  life  of 
Jesus.  This  is  effectually  disproven  by  looking  at  the  gospels 
from  the  Kingdom  standpoint ;  for  then  it  appears  that  each  writer 
had  a  definite  object  in  view,  viz.,  to  evince  unity  and  a  consistent 
development  of  Divine  Purpose  in  a  pre-determined  Plan  corre- 
sponding with  the  covenants  and  prophecies  relating  to  the  King- 
dom. 

For  the  authenticity  and  credibility  of  the  Gospels,  etc.,  the  reader  is  referred  to 
works  specially  devoted  to  the  subject,  such  as  Westcott's  His.  of  the  Canon  of  the  Xew 
Test,  Tichendorf's  Where  were  our  Gospels  Written^  Sandy's  Authorship  of  the  Fourth 
Gospel,  Reuss's  His.  of  the  Xew  Test.,  Norton's  Genuineness  of  the  Gospels,  Davidson's  Intro- 
duction to  the  New  Test.,  Stowe's  Books  of  the  Bible,  etc.,  the  general  and  particular  intro- 
ductions of  our  leading  commentaries,  and  the  articles  in  our  latest  biblical  dictionaries. 

Obs.  1.  In  order  to  ascertain  the  design  of  the  gospels  and  to  comprehend 
the  unity  therein,  the  student  must  place  himself,  not  in  the  modern  posi- 
tion of  thought,  hut  in  the  posture  of  those  to  whom  these  gospels  were 
first  presented.  Then,  all  who  read  the  Old  Test,  entertained  the  Theo- 
cratic-Davidic  idea  of  the  Messiah  and  Kingdom  ;  all  believed  that  a  de- 
scendant of  David,  specially  related  (Theocratically)  to  God,  would  appear, 
who  would  restore  the  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David  and  reign  majestically 
as  the  prophets  predicted.  Now,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  writing  for 
such  persons  who  received  the  covenants  and  prophecies  in  their  gram- 
matical construction,  it  was  requisite,  in  view  of  what  actually  occurred,  to 
show  that  Jesus  was  a  descendant  of  David  ;  that  He  was  related  to  and 
acknowledged  by  God  ;  that  lie  was  the  powerful  Messiah  ;  that  the  King- 
dom was  tendered  to  the  elect  nation  ;  that  the  nation,  through  its  repre- 
sentative men,  rejected  the  Messiah  and  Kingdom  ;  that  this  Messiah,  fore- 
seeing His  rejection  and  death,  must  give  assurances  indicative  of  the  post- 
ponement of  the  Kingdom  ;  and  that,  notwithstanding  His  death,  He  is 
able  to  re-establish  the  Kingdom.  Now,  these  are  precisely  the  points  that 
are  fully  presented  in  the  gospels  ;  thus  most  admirably  adapted  to  meet 
the  objections  that  in  the  quite  early  age  would  be  urged  against  the 
claims  of  Jesus  to  be  "  the  Christ."  If  a  strictly  logical  history  of  Jesus 
is  ever  written,  it  must  embrace  something  like  these  divisions  :  (1)  The 
offered  Messiah  and  His  claims,  how  evidenced  ;  (2)  the  rejected  Messiah 


350  TILE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  187. 

and  His  utterances  from  the  time  the  representative  men  conspired  to 
put  Him  to  death  ;  (3)  the  crucified  and  resurrected  Messiah,  showing 
how  covenant  and  prophecy  can  still  be  fulfilled.  The  great  lack  in  all 
previous  histories  has  been  that  the  writers  have  taken  too  much  a  modem 
standpoint  from  which  to  view  Jesus,  and  have  thus  failed  to  show  the 
intimate  connection  existing  between  previously  given  covenants  and  pre- 
dictions and  His  life.  In  other  words,  His  life  has  been  too  much  consid- 
ered isolated  from  a  previously  presented  Divine  Purpose,  from  covenants 
understood  in  their  plain,  grammatical  construction,  from  a  relationship  to 
an  elect  nation,  from  a  tender  of  the  Kingdom,  its  rejection  and  sub- 
sequent postponement,  and  the  result  has  been  that,  while  all  these  are 
given  by  the  evangelists  as  necessary  to  preserve  the  unity  and  claims  of 
that  life,  the  omission  introduces  defects  which  mar  the  otherwise  self- 
evident  coherency  of  the  gospels.  The  more  the  gospels  are  contemplated 
in  the  light  of  the  covenants  and  of  the  facts  as  they  existed  at  the  First 
Advent,  the  more  logically  consistent,  the  more  connected  and  admirably 
adapted  to  secure  the  design  intended,  will  they  appear. 

The  critical  student  will  observe,  what  we  have  abundantly  proven,  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  Kingdom  was  promulgated  before  the  Gospels  and  Epistles  were  written,  as  evi- 
denced by  the  general  belief,  and  that  the  Gospels  all  take  it  for  something  well  understood. 
So  fundamental  is  the  .Messiahship  of  Jesus  and  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  that,  in 
the  very  nature  of  the  case,  it  must  have  been  leading  in  its  doctrinal  teaching  ;  and  the 
Gospels  and  Epistles  being  afterward  written— if  genuine  and  apostolical— must  not  con- 
tradict the  covenants  and  predictions  but  be  in  accurate  correspondence  with  them.  In 
other  words,  there  must  be  an  agreement  with  the  faith  that  the  plain  grammatically 
expressed  sense  of  the  Old  Test,  had  led  the  pious  Jews  to  entertain.  This  we  find,  and 
the  fact  that  it  is  found  evinces  both  their  logical  connection  with  the  Old  Test.,  and 
that  they  could  not  possibly  have  had  the  late  origin  assigned  to  them  by  some  destruc- 
tive writers.  The  unity  of  the  Gospels,  Acts,  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse  is  observed  best 
by  noticing  :  (1)  their  connection  with  the  Messianic  idea  of  the  Old  Test.,  and  (2)  the 
retention  of  the  Christ  idea  after  the  First  Advent.  Numerous  and  able  writers— how- 
ever they  may  have  handled  the  subject — have  shown,  by  the  repeated  references,  etc., 
that  the  New  Test,  is  based  on  the  Christ-idea  contained  in  the  Old.  This  position  can- 
not be  controverted.  Now  the  New  Test,  first  gives  the  fulfilment  of  the  Scriptures  in 
the  Person  of  Jesus,  indicates  why  He  is  "  the  Christ,"  and  proceeds  to  prove  that  the 
crucified  Jesus  is  "  the  Messiah,"  because  He  is  raised  up,  exalted,  and  will  come  again. 
But  in  all  this  it  retains  the  Jewish  idea  of  "  the  Messiah,"  because  that  one  was  precisely 
the  idea  that  was  covenanted  and  predicted.  From  this  an  important  deduction  is  to  be 
made,  viz.,  that  the  form  in  which  the  New  Test,  is  given,  is  designedly  the  best  in  order 
to  retain  and  develop  with  power  and  consistency  the  Christ-idea.  (1)  The  four  Gospels  are 
given  to  show  why  Jesus,  although  He  died  on  the  cross,  is  the  Messiah  ;  (2)  then  the 
Acts  are  presented  to  indicate  the  same  feature  in  connection  with  the  fulfilment  of 
promises  relating  to  the  present,  and  of  promises  to  be  realized  at  the  Sec.  Advent  ; 

(3)  then  the  Epistles  are  given  to  confirm  and  strengthen  the  belief  in  the  same,  and 

(4)  lastly,  the  Apocalypse  to  direct  the  eye  of  faith  to  the  future  Coming  of  the  Christ,  His 
triumphant  manifestation  of  Messiahship,  and  the  great  glory  that  shall  follow.  "We  only 
now  refer  to  the  fact,  as  corroborative,  that  no  controversy  (see  Props.  40,  44,  71,  72,  73) 
was  raised  between  the  early  Christians  and  the  Jews  respecting  the  meaning,  etc.,  of  the 
Christ  (for  the  controverted  point  between  them  was  whether  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  or 
not),  and  that  many  Jews,  even  priests,  with  their  intense  devotion  to  the  covenanted 
and  predicted  Messiah,  cordially  received  Jesus  as  the  same,  fully  believing  that  at  His 
Second  Coming  the  postponed  Kingdom  and  glory  would  be  realized.  It  is  painfully  sad 
to  find  how  this  simple  scripturally-i'ouuded  belief  was  soon  overwhelmed  by  a  mass  of 
rubbish,  which  the  wisdom  of  the  world  conceived  to  be  better  adapted  to  subserve  the 
truth  and  God's  praise. 

Obs.  2.   Briefly  consider  Matthew's  statements  to  vindicate  the  claims  of 
a  crucified  Jesus  to  the  Messiahship  as  covenanted.     Matthew  in  the  first 


Prop.  187.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  351 

verse  recognizes  the  covenant  relationship  of  Jesus  in  His  being  "  the  Son 
of  David,  the  Son  of  Abraham"  and  then  follows  the  recital  of  His  mir- 
aculous birth  (ch.  1),  indicative  of  this  Jesus  being  related  to  the  Divine  and 
of  His  being  super  naturally  endowed,  just  as  became  the  "  horn  King  of 
the  Jews'1  "  that  shall  rule  my  people  Israel"  (ch.  2).  The  tender  of  the 
Kingdom  on,  condition  of  repentance  by  John  the  Baptist,  the  baptism  of 
Jesus,  and  the  assurance  given  of  Divine  recognition,  are  presented  (ch.  3). 
The  Kingdom  is  also  thus  conditionally  offered  by  Jesus  and  His  disciples 
(chs.  4-10,  etc.).  The  promised  Messiah  is  one  who  mijst,  in  order  to  ful- 
fil the  convenants  and  promises  as  given,  be  able  to  exert  supernatural 
power;  and  hence  this  power,  as  an  earnest,  is  exhibited  (chs.  8,  9,  10, 
11,  etc.).  The  Jews  reject  Jesus,  refusing  to  repent  (ch.  11  :  10-24)  ;  the 
truth  is  known  to  some  (ch.  11  :  25-27)  ;  the  Pharisees  find  fault  with 
Him,  and  actually  "  held  a  council  against  Him,  how  they  might  destroy 
Him"  (ch.  12  :  14),  so  that  He  charged  those  He  healed  not  to  make  Him 
known.  (And  here,  foreseeing  the  result,  already  intimations  are  given  of 
the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  ch.  12  :  17-21.)  Then  we  have  repeated  condemna- 
tions of  the  wickedness  of  the  Jews  (ch.  12),  followed  by  parables  illustra- 
tive that  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  could  not  be  realized  until  "  the  end  of  the 
age"  (ch.  13).  Although  despised  by  His  own  countrymen  (ch.  13  :  54- 
58),  yet  He  vindicates  His  Messiahship  by  supernatural  power  exerted  (chs. 
14,  15,  etc.),  by  the  confession  of  Peter  (ch.  16  :  13-20),  by  foretelling  His 
own  death  and  resurrection  (ch.  10  :  21-24),  by  the  transfiguration  (ch. 
17  :  1-10),  and  by  specifically  predicting  His  betrayal  (ch.  17  :  22,  23). 
After  the  presentation  of  various  teachings,  exhortations,  and  commands 
(chs.  18,  19,  20),  Jesus,  to  bring  the  matter  of  His  Messiahship  to  a  public 
test,  and  to  leave  the  Jews  inexcusable,  makes  His  public  entry  into  Jeru- 
salem (ch.  21  :  1-14),  which  the  representative  men  (chief  priests  and 
scribes),  although  enforced  by  the  exercise  of  miraculous  power  in  the 
temple  itself,  refuse  to  accept  (ch.  21  :  15).  This  led  to  a  collision  between 
Jesus  and  the  chief  priests  and  elders  (ch.  21  :  23,  etc.),  in  which  the  latter 
question  Christ's  authority,  and  are  silenced  by  the  reply  of  Jesus.  The 
crisis  is  then  nigh  at  hand,  for  He  tells  them  (ch.  21  :  28-40)  that  they 
were  unrepentant,  and  that  the  Kingdom  so  graciously  offered  to  them,  and 
in  which  they  enjoyed  a  covenanted  right,  should  be  taken  from  them  and 
given  to  others.  Jesus  speaks  even  more  plainly  (chs.  22  and  23),  culminat- 
ing in  expressly  predicting  that  the  desolate  Davidic  house,  the  tabernacle 
in  ruins,  should  remain  thus  until  His  Second  Coming  ;  that  (ch.  24)  the 
city  and  temple  would  be  overthrown  and  the  nation  be  smitten  and  in 
tribulation  down  until  the  Second  Advent  ;  and  that  at  His  Coming  again 
as  the  King  (ch.  25)  the  righteous  should  inherit  the  promised  Kingdom. 
Finally  comes  the  recital  of  the  last  tragedy — the  betrayal,  trial,  sufferings, 
death  and  burial,  with  incidents  connected  therewith  (chs  27  and  28) — 
followed,  however,  by  a  single  fact,  briefly  stated,  sufficiently  comprehensive 
in  itself  to  vindicate  the  ability  of  Jesus  Christ  to  fulfil  the  covenants  at 
His  Second  Advent,  viz.,  His  resurrection.  Matthew's  Gospel  is  thus  ex- 
hibited as  a  strictly  consecutive,  logical  array  of  facts  to  establish  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus  over  against  objectors  who  would  allege  the  non-ful- 
filment of  the  convenanted  promises  in  that  no  Kingdom,  such  as  cove- 
nanted, was  then  established.  The  reasons  for  such  non-establishment  are 
pointedly  given,  the  postponement  is  specifically  stated,  the  time  when  it 
shall  be  restored  (at  Sec.  Advent)  is  clearly  presented,  and  then,  as  a  climax, 


352  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.    187. 

to  assure  us  of  the  certainty  of  such  fulfilment,  the  resurrection  of  the 
crucified  Jesus  is  affirmed.  Matthew,  as  well  as  the  other  evangelists,  takes 
it  for  granted  that  the  reader  of  the  Gospel  is  previously  well  posted  in 
covenant  and  prophecy,  and  hence  writes  for  such  persons.  Therefore,  a 
simple  statement  of  facts,  as  they  occurred,  is  all  that  is  required  to  lead  a 
believer  in  covenant  and  prophecy  to  acknowledge  Jesus  as  "  the  Christ," 
■who  will  yet  fulfil  them,  as  claimed,  at  His  Second  Coming.  This  was  the 
universal  belief  of  those  Christians  who  first  received  and  perpetuated  the 
Gospel,  thus  verifying,  in  the  reception  of  it,  our  doctrinal  position. 

Gregory  (Four  Gospels,  p.  125)  and  others  are  correct  when  they  make  "  the  Messiah," 
and  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  "the  central  idea  of  Matthew's  Gospel,"  but  Gregory 
(p.  126)  falls  into  a  great  error,  when  he  declares  that  Matthew  was  appointed  "  to  correct 
the  false  Jewish  notions,  at  that  day  so  prevalent,  concerning  the  Kingdom  of  the  Mes- 
siah," and  adds  :  "  He  accordingly  exhibits  the  Kingdom  not  as  a  temporal  one,  like  the 
Roman  Empire,  but  as  Theocratic,  or  as  a  spiritual  reign  of  God  Himself,  in  the  Person  of 
the  Messiah,  in  the  hearts  of  men"  (chs.  5  : 3-12,  and  12  :  1-50,  etc.)."  Let  the  reader  look 
at  the  proof  alleged,  and  see  how  the  preparation  for  the  Kingdom  is  converted  into  a 
Kingdom.  He  can  find  not  a  particle  of  proof  in  Matthew  to  sustain  his  position,  or  his 
notion  of  what  composes  a  Theocracy.  So  Ebrard  [Gospel  History,  p.  68)  goes  beyond  the 
recorded  facts  when  he  says  that  Matthew's  Gospel  was  designed  to  furnish  proof  "  that 
in  this  capacity  (viz.,  Messianic)  Jesus  had  founded  a  Kingdom,  not  circumscribed  by  the 
contracted  forms  of  the  ancient  Theocracy,  but  a  Kingdom  of  faith  and  of  the  Spirit, 
comprehending  all  nations,  and  fulfilling  the  promise  given  to  Abraham."  (Comp.  for 
answer  e.g.  Props.  67,  69,  70,  etc.)  A  thousand  such  statements,  which  have  no  foun- 
dation in  anything  that  Matthew  writes,  pass  current,  at  present,  as  if  they  were  axio- 
matic truths. 

Ohs.  3.  Mark's  Gospel  follows  precisely  the  same  method.  In  the  first 
verse  the  Theocratic  relationship  of  Jesus  is  presented  in  the  words  : 
"  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,"  the  Kingdom  is  offered  conditionally, 
upon  repentance  (ch.  1),  the  Messiahship  is  indicated  by  His  baptism  and 
works,  so  that  He  is  "  the  Holy  One  of  God"  (ch.  1  and  2).  But  the  Phari- 
sees (ch.  3  :  G)  conspire  "  how  they  may  destroy  Him,"  and  the  Scribes 
reject  (ch.  3  :  22)  Him.  After  instruction,  works,  etc.  (chs.  4,  5,  G,  7), 
which  show  forth  the  wisdom,  power,  and  treatment  of  Jesus,  we  come  to 
plainer  statements  based  upon  His  rejection  by  the  Jews  (ch.  8),  to  which 
are  appended  the  confession  of  Peter,  the  prediction  of  His  death  and 
resurrection,  and  the  transfiguration  (ch.  9).  Instead  of  a  Messianic  King- 
dom, He  again  foretells  (ch,  9  :  30,  31)  His  death  and  resurrection  (oh.  10  : 
32-34),  and,  after  sundry  exhortations,  we  are  brought  to  His  public  entry 
into  Jerusalem  (ch.  11),  which  so  inflamed  "  the  scribes  and  chief  priests" 
that  they  "  sought  how  they  might  destroy  Him."  The  efforts  of  His 
enemies  to  entangle  Him,  and  how  they  were  silenced  are  given  (chs.  11 
and  12).  Instead  of  the  setting  up  the  expected  Messianic  Kingdom,  comes 
the  foretelling  (ch.  13)  of  the  destruction  of  the  temple  and  a  long-con- 
tinued calamity  down  to  the  Second  Advent.  Then  we  have  the  details  of 
the  betrayal  and  death  (chs.  14,  15),  ending  with  the  resurrection  (ch.  16), 
which  insures  the  continued  Messiahship  of  Jesus  and  His  ability,  at  the 
appointed  time,  to  fulfil  all  that  is  written. 

We  cannot  receive  Gregory's  (Four  Gospels,  p.  161)  ingenious  "  Key  to  Mark's  Gos- 
pel," viz.,  that  the  Gospel  is  for  the  Roman,  and  hence  Jesus  is  presented  "  from  the 
Roman  side  or  point  of  view,  as  answering  to  the  idea  of  divine  power,  work,  law,  con- 
quest, and  universal  sway."  (Neither  can  we  accept  of  his  "  Keys'  to  the  other  Gos- 
pels.) Gregory,  as  fundamental  to  his  theory,  assumes,  without  determinate  proof,  that 
Jesus  is  already  exercising  the  power,  etc.,  of  the  covenanted  King,  whereas  He  is  rep. 


Prop.  187.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  353 

resented  as  Coming  in  humiliation,  suffering,  and  being  a  rejected,  crucified  Redeemer. 
The  Gospels  alike  are  designed  for  all  men,  for  they  in  a  similar  manner  tell  the  story  of 
the  crucified  one,  that  He  is  the  Messiah,  that  He  tendered  the  Kingdom  on  condition  of 
national  repentance,  that  He  was  rejected,  etc.  One  enters  into  more  details  than  the 
others,  or  presents  facts  that  the  others  omit,  or  gives  a  different  arrangement.  Much 
that  is  written  on  the  peculiarities  of  these  Gospels  as  to  personal  peculiarities,  style, 
etc.,  we  may  accept  ;  much,  however,  we  can  only  accept  in  a  relative,  and  not  absolute, 
sense  ;  much  we  must  reject  being  founded  exclusively  on  modern  notions,  the  develop- 
ment and  Church-Kingdom  theory. 

Obs.  4.  Luke,  writing  at  the  time  he  did,  must  also'follow  the  same 
course,  viz.,  to  meet  the  objections  that  might  be  alleged  against  a  cruci- 
fied Messiah  and  the  non-appearance  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom.  In  the 
first  and  second  chapters  he  shows,  by  the  birth  and  office  of  John,  and  by 
the  birth  and  announcements  respecting  Jesus,  that  He  is  the  destined 
Theocratic  King,  who,  while  son  of  David,  is  also  (v.  32,  33)  "  the  Son  of 
the  Highest,  and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  Him  the  throne  of  His 
Father  David.  And  He  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  forever,  and  of 
His  Kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end — "  and  this,  too,  is  done  in  view  of  (v. 
72  and  73)  "His  holy  covenant,"  etc.  Having  thus  exhibited  in  the  intro- 
duction full  faith  in  the  covenants,  and  that  Jesus  was  the  One  through 
whom  they  were  to  be  realized,  he  now  proceeds  in  a  narrative  which  shows 
why  they  were  not  then  fulfilled,  and  why  we  should  continue  to  exercise 
faith  in  Jesus  that  they'ioill  yet  be  verified.  He  gives  us  John  preaching 
the  Kingdom  conditioned  on  repentance,  John's  testimony  to  Jesus,  the 
baptism  and  genealogy  of  Jesus  (ch.  3),  the  preaching  of  Christ  and  how 
He  was  treated,  the  works  of  Christ  and  how  lie  was  recognized  as  "  the 
Holy  One  of  God,"  as  "Christ,  the  Son  of  6W  "(ch.  4).  The  supernatural 
power,  etc.  of  Jesus  is  presented  (ch.  5),  and  yet  the  scribes  and  Pharisees 
are  angered  (ch.  6  :  11)  against  Him,  so  that  both  John  and  He  are  rejected 
by  them  (ch.  7  :  30-35).  Yet  He  continues  to  exhibit  the  Messianic  attri- 
butes (ch.  8),  how  Christ  sends  forth  the  twelve  to  preach  a  Kingdom  con- 
ditioned by  repentance,  brings  forth  the  confession  of  Peter,  describes  the 
foretelling  of  Jesus'  death  and  resurrection,  the  transfiguration,  etc.  (ch.  9). 
He  gives  us  the  particulars  of  the  sending  forth  and  the  preaching  of  the 
seventy,  which  is  also  a  tender  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  upon  the  repent- 
ance of  the  nation  (ch.  10),  but  comparatively  few,. and  those  "babes," 
accept  of  the  truth,  for  the  mass  are  unrepentant  (ch.  11  :  14-32),  being 
"  an  evil  generation"  (also  vs.  42-54).  The  position  of  the  representative 
men  of  the  nation  calls  forth  severe  rebukes  (ch.  12),  mingled  with  intima- 
tions that  the  rewards  and  the  Kingdom  itself  are  to  be  received  and 
enjoyed  «£  another,  still  future  Advent  of  the  Son  of  Man,  for  which  Coming 
believers  are  exhorted  to  watch.  Such  intimations  finally  culminate  in  a 
direct  assertion  of  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  until,  and  the  restora- 
tion of  the  desolate  Davidic  house  at,  the  Second  Advent  (ch.  13  :  35). 
The  inexcusableness  of  the  Jews  in  rejecting  Him  is  illustrated  (chs.  14, 
15,  1G),  and  in  consequence  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  until  Sec. 
Coming  enforced  (ch.  17  :  20-37).  (See  Prop.  110.)  Again  Jesus  fore- 
tells His  death  and  resurrection  (ch.  18  :  31-34),  makes  His  public  entry 
into  Jerusalem  (ch.  19),  which  so  excites  "  the  chief  priests  and  the  scribes 
and  the  chief  of  the  people"  that  they  "  sought  to  destroy  Him."  The  tri- 
umph of  Jesus  over  His  enemies  when  they  dispute  His  authority  is  stated 
(ch.  20)  ;  the  destruction  of  the  temple  and  the  calamities  connected  with 


354  THE   TIIEOCKATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  187. 

it,  and  extending  during  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent, 
are  foretold  (ch.  21)  ;  the  duty  of  watchfulness  is  enjoined  (ch.  21)  ;  and 
then  (chs.  22,  23,  24)  comes  the  history  of  betrayal,  suffering,  death,  burial, 
resurrection  and  ascension.  Luke  adds,  what  the  other  two  Gospels  take 
for  granted  (ch.  24  :  44-53),  that  the  wonderful  exhibition  of  the  Messiah 
confirmed  the  faith  of  the  disciples  in  believing,  that  this  crucified  but  res- 
urrected Jesus  was  indeed  the  Messiah,  in  and  through  whom  the  Scriptures 
would  be  fulfilled. 

We  cannot  possibly  receive  Gregorjr's  (Four  Gospels,  p.  215)"  Key  to  Luke's  Gospel," 
based  on  the  alleged  supposition  that  the  same  was  written  for  the  Greek,  for  the  Greek 
not  being  interested  in  the  Messianic  idea,  Luke  presents  "  the  perfect  man  to  meet  the 
Greek  ideal,"  etc.  It  is  amazing,  after  Luke's  testimony  to  the  Messianic  idea  and  the  fact 
that  the  proper  conception  of  the  same  is  just  of  as  fundamental  importance  to  the  Greek 
as  to  Jew  or  Roman,  that  such  unfounded  statements  can  be  penned.  Much  of  such 
misleading  learned  assertion  is  circulated  and  retailed  from  the  pulpit  and  press.  We 
select  Gregory  because,  being  a  valuable  work  in  many  respects,  it  is  so  often  quoted  as 
authority. 

Obs.  5.  Now  we  come  to  John's  Gospel,  which  the  Tubingen  school 
(recently  reiterated  in  Supernatural  Religion,  etc.)  declares  cannot  be 
reconciled  with  the  other  Gospels,  inasmuch  as  it  describes  a  different  per- 
sonage, etc.  Let  us  follow  John's  portraiture  of  Jesus — keeping  in  view 
John's  idea  of  the  convenanted  Kingdom — and  it  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  all 
such  criticism  to  show  that  John  treads  precisely  the  same  path  gone  over 
by  the  other  Gospels,  in  answering  the  objections  that  might  be  brought 
against  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  on  the  ground  of  His  crucifixion  and  the 
non-establishment  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom.  The  substantial  agreement 
of  the  Gospels  is  readily  seen  by  also  rapidly  passing  over  John's  Gospel  ; 
for,  while  John  adds  particulars  that  the  others  omit,  he  fully  incorporates 
their  statements  and  presents  the  identical  line  of  defence.  In  the  opening 
chapter  the  great  Theocratic  element  at  once  appears,  viz.,  that  the  Messiah, 
who  is  to  reign  as  predicted,  is  God  ruling  in  and  through  David's  Son; 
and  therefore  while  He  is  "Jesus  of  Xazareth,  the  Son  of  Joseph,"  He  is  also 
"  the  Son  of  God"  the  destined  "King  of  Israel."  Miraculous  power,  di- 
vine attributes  are  ascribed  to  Him,  thus  holding  Him  forth,  as  in  the  other 
Grospels,  to  be  the  very  Messiah  who  is  able  to  fulfil  the  prophecies  pertain- 
ing to  the  Kingdom.  Mattthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  in  the  conferring 
of  supernatural  power,  which  embraces  the  same  ability  to  perform  all 
things,  hold  forth  Jesus  as  the  predicted  One,  who,  as  David's  Son,  is  higher 
than  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  promised  Theocratic  King.  Even  the 
rejection  of  Him  by  the  Jews  (v.  11),  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  intimated 
(v.  12),  His  manifestation  to  Israel  (v.  31)  because  the  elect  nation,  the 
ascription  of  the  removal  of  all  evil  from  the  world  (v.  29),  which  He  will 
yet  perform,  the  supernatural  still  future  to  be  exhibited  (v.  51),  etc.,  all 
assume  a  deeper  significancy  if  we  place  ourselves  in  John's  position  when 
he  wrote,  viz.,  regarding,  owing  to  the  sinfulness  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the 
Kingdom  as  postponed  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  now  endeavoring  to  hold 
forth  the  characteristics,  sayings,  etc.,  in  Jesus  which  should  inspire  con- 
fidence in  the  hope  that  at  the  Second  Coming  this  Theocratic  King  will 
restore  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom.  The  proper  humanity  (ch.  2)  is 
acknowledged,  and  the  mere  mention  of  the  motber  and  brethren  of  Jesus, 
as  of  something  well  known,  is  indicative  of  an  early  narrative  ;  while  the 
power  of  working  miracles,  the  manifestation  of  authority  in  the  temple, 


Prop.  1ST.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  355 

the  prediction  of  His  own  death  and  resurrection,  and  His  refusal  to  com- 
mit Himself  to  the  Jews,  show  that  allied  with  Him  is  more  than  mere 
humanity.  Next  comes  the  discourse  with  Nicodemus,  which,  appealing  to 
him  as  "  a  master  in  Israel  "  (i.e.  one  who  ought  to  be  conversant  with  the 
covenants  and  their  requirements),  who  ought  to  know  what  the  promises 
of  God  demanded,  evinces  that  the  Kingdom,  the  Theocratic  arrangement, 
as  described  by  the  prophets,  cannot  be  set  up  Without  provision  made  for 
its  inheritors,  both  to  purify  them  and  to  raise  them  up  from  the  dead. 
The  careful  student  will  notice  that  John,  in  the  very  beginning  of  his 
Gospel,  proclaims  the  rejection  of  Jesus  by  the  Jews  (so  ch.  1  :  5,  11,  ch. 
2  :  24),  and  now  again  (ch.  3  :  10)  repeats  it,  while  holding  Him  up 
as  the  appointed  Saviour,  and  declaring  that  even  His  death  (already 
predicted,  ch.  2  :  2L,  22)  was  an  appointed  means  (e.g.  through  the 
resurrection,  etc.)  to  save  the  world.  In  ch.  4,  after  the  prediction  of  His 
death  (based  upon  His  rejection  by  the  nation),  lie  tells  the  Samaritan 
woman  that  "  salvation  is  of  the  Jews"  (see  Prop.  68),  and  yet,  in  view  of 
the  contemplated  engrafting  of  others,  gives  encouragement  and  reception 
to  the  Samaritans,  who  acknowledge  Him  as  "  the  Christ."  Hence  the 
Gospel  of  John  exhibits  one  trait  differing  from  the  preceding  gospels  (and 
yet  also  mentioned  by  them)  which  gives  it  a  remarkable  complexion,  viz., 
it  commences  at  once  ivith  His  rejection  and  death,  with  the  implied  postpone- 
ment of  the  Kingdom,  and  call  of  the  Gentiles.  What  the  other  evangelists 
only  mention  after  a  regular  series  of  introductory  statements,  John  speci- 
fies at  once  as  something  well  understood  in  his  day.  Here  we  find  the  true 
logical  attachment  of  John's  Gospel  with  the  others,  and  the  perfect  har- 
mony existing  between  them  becomes  apparent.  This  is  the  more  distinc- 
tive as  we  proceed  to  point  out  the  more  salient  connections  following. 
After  showing  (ch.  5)  how  salvation  was  offered  to  the  Jews  (an  offer  con- 
firmed by  the  manifestation  of  supernatural  power),  and  how  they,  instead 
of  accepting,  "  persecute  Jesus  and  sought  to  slay  Him,"  he  refers  again  to 
the  sublime  Theocratic  relationship  which  Jesus  justly  claimed,  and  links 
its  manifest  at  inn  with  the  period  of  the  resurrection  and  the  judgeship  of 
the  Son ;  thus  agreeing  with  the  other  gospels  which  also  claim  that  Jesus 
is  the  Messiah,  but  postpone  His  covenanted  reign  to  the  Sec.  Advent. 
This  is  repeated  (ch.  0),  and  causes  many  to  take  offence  because  they  could 
not  understand  how  the  sacrifice  of  Himself  was  necessary  to  make  Him  the 
immortal  Son  of  David  and  to  give  Him  the  power  to  raise  up  His  own  at 
the  last  day.  The  constant  allusion  to  death  and  the  end  of  the  age 
implies  as  a  consequence  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom.  The  Jews 
(ch.  7  :  19,  25)  desire  to  kill  Him,  notwithstanding  His  doctrine  and 
works,  and  make  the  attempt  to  take  Him  (v.  30,  45),  which  influences 
Jesus  to  again  predict  His  death  and  the  gracious  results  flowing  from  it. 
In  the  conflict  with  the  Jews  (ch.  8),  the  Saviour  justifies  His  claims  to 
their  acceptance,  declares  His  death  through  their  instrumentality,  shows 
that  His  death,  instead  of  extinguishing  or  diminishing  His  Messiahship, 
only  perfects  the  same,  and  that  they  ''seek  to  kill"  Him,  which  is  evi- 
dence that  they  are  not  of  faith  as  Abraham  was,  and  that  they  shall  ex- 
perience death.  The  controversy  between  Jesus  and  the  Jews  continues 
(ch.  9),  for  after  Jesus  hid  Himself  to  escape  the  stones  (ch.  8  :  59)  they 
designed  to  cast  at  Him,  He  again  appears  in  His  mission  of  mercy  and 
love,  healing  the  man  born  blind,  which  excites  still  more  the  animosity  of 
His  enemies.     Jesus  again,  (ch.  10)  proclaims  His  Coming  death  (through 


356  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  187. 

which,  however,  being  perfected  as  the  Redeemer,  ultimate  salvation  is 
attained),  appeals  to  His  works  to  sustain  His  oneness  (Theocratic  relation- 
ship as  covenanted)  with  the  Father,  and  "  the  Jews  took  up  stones  again  to 
stone  Him."  The  reader  will  please  notice  that  in  this  chapter  Jesus,  in 
explanation  of  the  declaration,  "I  and  my  Fattier  are  One,"  declares  it  an 
equivalent  to  (vs.  36,  38)  "i  am  the  Son  of  God,'''  "  the  Father  in  Me  and  I 
in  Him,"  and  this  corresponds  with  the  covenanted  language  that  David's 
Son  was  also  to  be  God's  Son,  in  whom  the  Theocracy  is  to  be  evermore 
established,  and  with  the  language  of  the  other  gospels,  which  in  miracu- 
lous birth,  baptism  of  Holy  Ghost,  supernatural  power  exerted,  and  the  use 
of  the  phrase  "  the  Son  of  God  "  (as  Matt.  4  :  3  ;  8  :  29  ;  14  :  33  ;  27  :  43, 
54  ;  Mark  1:1;  3  :  11  ;  5:7;  15  :  39  ;  Luke  1  :  35  ;  4  :  41  ;  8  :  28  ; 
22  :  70),  are  in  perfect  agreement  respecting  the  Person  of  the  Messiah. 
The  enmity  of  the  Jews  increases  in  consequence  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus 
from  the  dead  (ch.  11),  which  culminates  in  the  holding  of  a  council  by  the 
chief  priests  and  Pharisees,  in  which  it  is  fully  determined  to  put  Jesus  to 
death  (vs.  47-53).  This  death  foreshown  (eh.  12),  is  followed  by  the  public 
entry  into  Jerusalem  the  foretelling  of  His  death  and  resurrection,  and  the 
continued  disbelief  of  the  Jews.  Then  comes  the  prediction  of  His  betrayal 
(ch.  13),  Peter's  denial,  His  coming  death,  with  several  discourses  (chs. 
14,  15,  16,  17)  designed  to  comfort  and  sustain  His  disciples  in  the  coming 
trial.  The  betrayal,  trial,  sufferings,  death,  burial,  are  given,  crowned  by 
the  resurrection  (chs.  18,  19,  20,  21).  which  "  are  written,  that  ye  might 
believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Sun  of  God,  and  that  believing  ye  might 
hare  life  in  His  name.'"  Thus  the  objections  that  could  be  urged  against 
Jesus  crucified  are  fully  met  and  answered  ;  seeing  that  the  MessiaiishijJ  of 
Jesus  is  manifested  by  His  life,  works,  death,  and  resurrection,  and  that 
the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  is  shown  to  result  from  the  impenitence, 
unbelief  and  hostility  of  the  Jewish  nation.1  It  is  remarkable  that,  taking 
John's  Gospel  connectedly,  it  enters  more  fully  into  a  detailed  account  of 
the  enmity  of  the  Jews  toward  Christ,  its  manifestation  and  result  thus 
powerfully  corroborating  the  preceding  gospels  in  their  more  briefly  given 
accounts  of  the  same,  and  thus  presenting  on  all  sides  strong  points  of 
logical  attachment.  The  design  John  had  in  view,  necessarily  introduced 
new  material,  as  e.g.  facts  which  excited  such  hatred,  the  conduct  of  Jesus 
while  thus  exposed,  and  the  encouragements  and  promises  given  to  His 
disciples  while  thus  persecuted.  The  true  key  to  the  proper  comprehension 
of  John's  Gospel  is  to  notice  the  first  point  of  contact  between  it  and  the 
previously  given  Gospels,  viz.,  that  the  God-given  Divine  Messiah  was 
rejected  by  His  own  elect  nation,  and  consequently  the  implication  (after- 
ward enforced)  that  the  blessings  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  (as  covenanted 
and  predicted)  are  delayed  until  He  is  again  manifested  at  "  the  last  day."  - 

1  The  critical  student  will  also  see  that  this  peculiarity  of  John's  Gospel  gives  us  the 
proper  key  to  harmonize  the  Apoc.  with  the  Gospel.  The  Gospel  refers  to  the  First 
Advent,  the  Apoc.  to  the  Second  Advent  ;  the  one  is  a  proof  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus 
and  gives  the  reason  for  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  ;  the  other  presents  us  with 
what  this  Messiah  will  do  when  the  period  of  postponement  is  ended,  etc.  In  addition, 
the  whole  truth  only  becomes  apparent  when  we  regard  the  meaning  attached  to  "  the 
Christ"  by  the  quite  early  believers.  This  is  noticed  under  several  Propositions,  espe- 
cially Prop.  205. 

2  A  few  remarks  concerning  the  method  and  spirit  instanced  by  destructive  criticism  in 
reference  to  the  Gospels,  may  be  in  place.  Various  critics  assign  the  composition  of  the 
Gospels,  in  the  form  now  received,  to  the  later  portion_of  the  second  and  beginning  of 


PUOIV  187.]  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  357 

the  third  century.  In  this  way  an  alleged  proof  against  inspiration  is  derived,  by  making 
the  Gospels  "  unhistorical. "  But  in  this  discussion,  as  coaducted  by  them,  three  things 
are  noticeable  :  (1)  That  although  the  historical  cpiestion  of  the  Gospel  is  of  immense 
value,  seeing  how  deeply  it  affects  the  interests  and  hopes  of  multitudes,  yet  so  little 
regard  have  such  writers  for  the  interests  and  feelings  of  their  fellow  men,  that  they  only 
produce  the  class  of  evidence  which  they  deem  favorable  to  themselves,  and  carefully  ignore 
another  class  which  is  against  their  theory.  Where  is  the  writer  among  them  who  has 
noticed  what  Norton,  Tischendorf,  and  a  host  of  writers  show  respecting  the  general 
reception  of  the  Gospels  in  the  early  part  of  the  second  century?  Who  has  e.g.  invali- 
dated the  testimony  of  Celsus  (Origen  C.  Celsum,  p.  77),  who  mentions  them  as  existing 
under  various  collections  in  his  time  ?  The  simple  fact  that  they  are  unwilling  to  bring 
forward  all  the  evidence  ;  that  they  exclude  it,  leaving  their  readers  in  ignorance  of  it 
just  as  if  it  did  not  exist,  lowers  their  honesty  as  critics  and  evidences  a  pre-determined 
design.  Yet  such  men  gain  the  ear  and  the  minds  of  multitudes.  (2)  The  disagreement 
among  themselves,  so  that  e.g.  one  will  reject  all  the  Gospels,  and  another  (like  Renan, 
Life  of  Christ,  p.  33,  The  Anti-Christ,  p.  33)  will  admit  the  apostolic  authority  of  several 
portions  of  the  same,  and  even  of  John's  Gospel  ;  one  will  make  them  as  early  as  possi- 
ble owing  to  "  Jewish  conceptions,"  and  another  as  late  as  practicable  on  account  of 
"  doctrinal  development,"  etc.  Every  conceivable  and  antagonistic  theory  is  presented 
in  order  to  depreciate  them.  (3)  They  do  not  allow  the  testimony  of  the  Fathers,  being 
in  conformity  with  the  Gospel,  to  speak  ;  i.e.  they  do  not,  as  Christian  Apologists,  pre- 
sent the  evidence  on  either  side  and  from  these  draw  conclusions,  but  withdrawing  the 
testimony  given  depreciate  the  Fathers  as  witnesses  and  as  unworthy  of  credence.  Hence 
they  who  live  at  present  are  more  worthy  of  belief  than  those  who  lived  the  nearest  to 
the  time  the  records  were  given.  These  features  sufficiently  indicate  the  intent  and 
spirit  actuating  their  authors.  Out  of  numerous  illustrations  we  present  the  following  : 
Fiske  (The  Unseen  World,  ch.  on  "  The  Jesus  of  History" — a  one-sided  eulogy  of  Strauss, 
Bauer,  Renan,  etc.,  which  defeats  itself  by  its  extravagance)  endeavors  to  make  out  that 
John's  Gospel  was  written  long  after  John  because  Anti-Millenarian  and  Anti-Pauline. 
Thus  e.g.  he  makes  (p.  79)  this  unsupported  statement,  given  as  proof  :  "  It  cannot  for  a 
moment  be  supposed  that  such  a  book,  making  such  claims,  could  have  gained  currency 
during  John's  lifetime  without  calling  forth  his  indignant  protest.  For,  in  reality,  no 
book  in  the  New  Test,  collection  would  so  completely  have  shocked  the  prejudices  of  the 
Johannine  party.  John's  own  views  are  well  known  to  us  from  the  Apocalypse.  John 
was  the  most  enthusiastic  of  Millenarians,  and  the  most  narrow  and  rigid  of  Judaizers. 
In  his  antagonism  to  the  Pauline  innovations  he  went  farther  than  Peter  himself.  In- 
tense hatred  of  Paul  and  his  followers  appears  in  several  passages  of  the  Apocalypse, 
where  they  are  stigmatized  as  '  Nicolaitans, '  'deceivers  of  the  people,'  '  those  who  say 
they  are  Apostles  and  are  not,'  '  eaters  of  meat  offered  to  idols,' '  fornicators,'  '  pretended 
Jews,'  '  liars,'  '  synagogue  of  Satan,'  etc.  (ch.  2).  On  the  other  hand,  the  fourth  Gospel 
contains  nothing  MUlenarian  or  Judaical  ;  it  carries  Pauline  universalism  to  a  far  greater 
extent  than  Paul  himself  ventured  to  carry  it,  even  condemning  the  Jews  as  children  of 
darkness,  and  by  implication  contrasting  them  unfavorably  with  the  Gentiles  ;  and  it 
contains  a  theory  of  the  nature  of  Jesus  which  the  Ebionitish  Christians,  to  whom  John 
belonged,  rejected  to  the  last."  To  this  crowd  of  misstatements  it  may  very  brielly  be 
said  :  (1)  That  it  is  strange  that  men  at  so  late  a  day  should  find  this  bitter  hostility  and 
antagonism  between  the  Apostles,  of  which  the  early  Church  in  all  its  extent  knew  noth- 
ing ;  (2)  that  if  the  Gospel  is  so  intensely  opposed  to  Millenarianism,  how  it  comes  that 
all  the  early  MUlenarian  Fathers  received  it  just  as  they  did  the  others  ;  (3)  that  a  large  un- 
believing party  do  find  in  John's  Gospel  such  a  Judaizing  particularism  (as  e.g.  "  Salva- 
tion is  of  the  Jews,"  etc.)  that  they  reject  it  on  this  account  ;  (4)  that  it  is  remakable  that 
the  correspondence  between  the  Apocalypse  and  the  Gospel  (respecting  the  divinity, 
etc.),  pointed  out  in  the  various  works  on  the  subject,  should  be  totally  ignored  as  if  they 
did  not  exist  ;  (5)  that  the  testimony  of  the  Fathers  is  laid  aside  and  the  modern  conclu- 
sions (pre-judged)  of  unbelief  are  coolly  substituted  ;  (6)  that  the  statements  of  our  lead- 
ing Church  historians,  Neander,  Mosheim,  Giessler,  Kurtz,  etc.,  respecting  Ebionism 
and  Johns  relation  to  it,  should  be  set  aside  without  confirmatory  proof  ;  (7)  that  the 
agreement  of  John  and  Paul  on  all  essentials  should  be  deliberately  contradicted  ;  (8)  that 
the  correspondence  between  Paul  and  John  in  locating  the  Kingdom  and  Millennial  glory 
at  the  Sec.  Advent  is  flatly  contradicted  by  mere  assertion.  The  fact  is,  that  Fiske 
exhibits  his  want  of  knowledge  respecting  the  Millenarian  doctrine.  Paid  and  John 
were  both  Millenarian,  and  in  the  design  of  the  Gospel,  as  presented  by  us,  the  Millena- 
rian tendency  is  constantly  exhibited,  and  the  unity  with  the  entire  New  Test,  is  pre- 


358  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  187. 

served  in  showing  the  postponement  to  the  Second  Coming  of  the  re-establishment  of  the 
Kingdom,  etc.  As  this  has  been  specially  pointed  out  in  detail,  it  is  noticeable  that 
J/iske's  assertions  are  without  the  slightest  foundation,  historically  and  scripturally. 

Obs.  6.  Our  position  is  abundantly  confirmed  by  the  succeeding  Acts. 
The  line  of  argument  in  preceding  propositions  so  fully  portrays  this  that 
a  few  remarks  need  only  be  appended.  In  all  that  was  afterward  recorded, 
the  same  class  of  objections  are  answered  in  the  same  manner,  viz.,  the  Mes- 
siahship  of  a  crucified  Jesus  is  affirmed,  and  is  mainly  supported  by  His 
resurrection  from  the  dead  and  ascension  into  heaven  ; '  and  at  the  same 
time  the  unbelief  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  rejection  of  Christ  by  it,  the 
call  and  engrafting  of  Gentiles,  the  fighting,  mixed  condition  of  the  Church 
down  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  of  God 
(until  a  people  are  gathered  out)  down  to  the  Second  Coming  of  this  same 
Jesus,  is  directly  declared,  and  each  statement  directs  the  eye  of  the  believer 
onward  to  that  joyful  perioi  still  future,  when  "  the  blessed  hope"  shall  be 
realized.  Such  a  view  hinds  the  contents  of  both  Old  and  Xewr  Tests,  into 
a  unity,  which  no  other  can  present,  and  evidences  the  pre-eminent  logical 
position  occupied  by  the  first  churches  of  believers  in  "  the  gospel  of  the 
Kingdom.""  Such  a  view  indeed  leaves  much  for  faith,  seeing  that  it  places 
much  in  the  future  ;  but  our  position  ought  to  be  that  of  faith,  not  blind, 
unreasoning  faith,  but  of  faith  suggested  and  sustained  by  the  accumu- 
lated evidences  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus.2 

1  Keeping  before  ns  the  design  of  the  Gospels,  it  is  essential  that  each  one  should 
specify  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  for  that  is  the  culminating  fad  which  makes  tht  Mi  ssianic 
ossible.  Hence  the  inconsistency  of  those  (e.g.  Schleiermacher)  who  refuse  to 
regard  it  as  a  doctrine  relating  to  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  and  Van  ( losterzee  (Ch.  Bog., 
vol.  1,  p.  142)  aptly  quotes  Riggenbacb  as  saying  :  "I  cannot  understand  how  any  one 
can  assert.  '  I  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,'  and  then  explain  this  belief  as  a  mat- 
ter of  secondary  consideration."  The  Gospels  are  framed  to  show  that  a  crucified  Jesus  is 
Messiah,  and  this  is  also  the  design  of  Acts  (in  which  the  resurrection  is  specially 
repeated  twenty-four  times),  and  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  is  regarded  as  amply  sufficient 
to  vindicate  the  same.  The  acknowledgment  of  Paul  to  the  Christship  of  Jesus  was 
founded  on  the  revelation  of  this  crucified  Jesus,  etc. 

J  The  reader  has  seen  what  a  powerful  use  we  make  of  such  passages  in  Acts  :  Ch. 
1  :  3.  6,  7.  8  ;  ch.  2  :  24-36  ;  eh.  3  :  19-26  :  ch.  7:5;  ch.  13  :  23,  34,  46  ;  ch.  15  :  13-18  ; 
ch.  26  :  6,  7  :  ch.  2s  :  20,  23,  etc.  And  our  usage  of  the  same  is  abundantly  fortified 
the  grammatical  sense  of  the  covenants  and  prophecies  ;  (2)  by  the  sense  attrib- 
uted to  the  Bame  by  the  pious  Jews,  and  (3)  by  the  early  expressed  faith  of  the  believers 
brought  to  acknowledge  Jesus  by  the  Apostles,  evangelists,  and  their  immediate  succes- 
sors.    Our  position  is  an  impregnable  one. 

Obs.  7.  The  critical  reader  will  observe  that  our  argument  respecting  the 
Gospels  brings  forth  new  and  additional  reasons  why  the  Gospels  could  not 
have  been  written  at  as  late  a  period  as  some  destructive  critics  assume. 
The  very  form  in  which  the  Gospels  are  given  indicates  an  early  origin  ;  for 
the  design  manifested  in  answering  certain  objections  shows  that  it  meets 
the  only  objections  that  were  current  immediately  after  the  death  of  Jesus 
and  opposed  to  His  claims  of  Messiahship.  Had  they  been  written  later, 
the  writers  could  not  have  placed  themselves  in  complete  sympathy  with 
the  early  age  (first  century),  but  would  undoubtedly  have  incorporated 
later  objections  and  the  then  existing  style  of  thought.  The  simple  form  of 
ending  each  Gospel  with  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  the  omission  of  any  de- 
tailed statement  of  the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  the  points  of  contact  with  the 
Jewish  position,  the  firm  and  unwavering  conformation  with  covenant  and 


PROP.  187.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  359 

prophecy,  are  all  opposed  to  the  notion  of  a  later  origin,  seeing  that  the 
inevitable  tendency  of  enlargement,  apology,  change,  reflections,  etc.,  from 
the  more  modern  standpoint  (already  feeling  the  effects  of  an  incorporated 
philosophy  and  division  of  sentiment,  etc.)  would  have  been,  more  or  less, 
made  manifest. 

Against  the  theory  of  Strauss  and  all  others  springing  from  unbelief,  it  is  amply 
sufficient  to  say  that  Jews  wedded  to  the  plain  grammatical  sense  of  covenant  and  proph- 
ecy, who  believed  in  the  grand  fulfilment  of  these  under  the  Messiah,  could  not  possibly 
have  brought  themselves  to  present  such  a  history  of  the  Messiah  as  we  find  recorded  in 
the  four  Gospels — a  rejected,  crucified  Messiah.  But  carefully  look  at  the  Gospels  from 
the  Jewish  standpoint  just  mentioned,  and  the  solution  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the  Gospels 
are  an  apology  for  and  defence  of  the  crucified  One,  and  the  key  of  reconciliation  is  given 
in  the  expressed  faith  that  this  identical  Jesus,  crucified,  dead,  buried,  resurrected,  and 
ascended  to  heaven,  wilt  again  come,  and  then  restore,  in  great  power  and  'jlory,  "  (he  fallen 
down  tabernacle  of  David."  This  gives  us  the  proper  clew  to  their  form,  their  early  pro- 
duction, their  Jewish-Christian  origin,  their  method  of  vindicating  the  Messianic  idea 
related  to  Jesus.  It  evidences  the  correctness  of  Renan  (Origin  of  the  Gospels)  when  he  is 
forced  to  admit,  over  against  the  Strauss  school  and  other  objectors  (advocating  a  late 
origin),  that  the  composition  of  the  Gospels  took  place  between  the  years  a.d.  60  and  80. 
The  manner  of  narration,  method,  etc.,  clearly  evidence  the  truthfulness  of  such  conces- 
sions from  unbelief,  over  against  the  mere  assertions  (in  which  some  professed  believers, 
as  Giles  in  Hebrew  and  Christian  Records,  join)  of  infidelity. 

Obs.  8.  Thus  comprehended,  the  Gospels  answer  the  question,  which  un- 
belief has  never  yet  been  able  to  meet,  how  it  comes  that  Jews,  looking  for 
a  Messiah,  as  described  by  covenant  and  prophecy  exalted  to  the  restored 
throne  and  Kingdom  of  David,  should  accept  of  a  crucified  Jesus  as  such  a 
Messiah.  The  replies  usually  given  in  answer  do  not  fully  meet  the  condi- 
tions of  the  expectant  Jews.  The  secret  for  such  an  acceptance  lies  in  the 
fact  that  every  inspired  teacher  took  the  position  that  both  covenant  and 
prophecy  would  be  fulfilled  by  this  same  Jesus  at  His  Second  Advent,  and 
that  His  claims  to  the  Messiahship  were  so  sustained  by  His  birth,  life, 
death,  and  resurrection  that  we  could  have  the  strongest  assurance — in  a 
thus  far  fulfilled  Word  of  God — that  that  which  has  been  postponed  will 
inevitably  be  realized. 

The  same  explains  also  the  reason  xchy  the  late  Gospel  (John's)  should  lay  more  stress 
on  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  ;  why  Jews,  inheriting  the  grand  idea  of  Monotheism,  should 
ascribe  divinity  to  "  the  Christ  ;"  why  the  narrators  so  artlessly  relate  how  His  own 
mother  did  not  fully  recognize  His  calling,  how  His  disciples  were  rebuked,  how  they 
denied  Christ  in  time  of  trial,  and  exhibited  incredulity  respecting  His  resurrection,  etc. 
—all  of  which  is  not  in  the  line  of  imposture,  but  comes  forth  as  <t  natural  resvH  of  cove- 
nanted position  and  circumstances.  The  phenomenon  of  "  resemblance  in  the  Gospels," 
the  subject  of  much  inquiry  and  controversy  is  explained,  as  we  have  seen,  by  the  design 
of  the  writers,  viz.,  to  teach  that  the  crucified  One  is  "  the  Christ,"  and  the  filling  up  of 
the  details  is  indicative  of  the  conversion  of  the  Apostles  to  a  decided  and  firm  faith  in 
the  same.  Various  reasons  are  given  respecting  there  being  four  Gospels,  such  as  to 
make  the  testimony  abundant,  to  make  them  supplementary  one  to  the  other,  to  make 
them  correspondent  (so  Allegorists)  with  Ezekiel's  man,  lion,  ox,  and  eagle,  etc.  Gregory 
in  "  Why  Four  Gospels?"  has  the  idea  that  Matthew  wrote  for  the  Jews,  Mark  for  the 
Romans,  Luke  for  the  Greeks,  and  John  for  the  Church  at  large.  This  is  non-essential, 
and  Gregory's  view  is  hardly  sustained  from  the  fact  that  all  have  the  same  design,  and 
wrote  for  the  Church  in  common. 

Obs.  9.  This  view  of  the  design  of  the  Gospels  shows  how  unfounded  is 
the  assertion  of  Schleiermacher  and  others,  that  it  is  impossible  to  prove 
that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah  from  the  prophecies.     The  defence  of  the  Mes- 


360  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  187. 

siahship  of  Jesus  in  the  Gospels  is  based  upon  two  facts,  constantly  appealed 
to,  viz.,  that  Jesus  in  His  manifestation,  etc. .  fulfilled  the  prophets,  and 
that  by  a  certain  determinate  fulfilment  He  gives  us  sufficient  evidence 
that  the  remainder  will  he  fulfilled  at  the  period  of  time  designated.  And 
such  proof  ought  really  to  be  stronger  to-day,  since  reason  can  add  to  the 
Gospels  a  continuous  fulfilment  only  announced  in  them,  as  e.g.  the  disper- 
sion of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  treading  down  of  Jerusalem,  the  Gentile 
domination,  the  gathering  out  of  believers,  the  mixed  and  struggling  con- 
dition of  the  church,  etc.  We  are  even  in  a  better  position,  owing  to  over 
eighteen  hundred  years'  continuous  fulfilment,  than  the  Apostles  were,  to 
test  the  truthfulness  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus.  For,  we  accept  not 
merely  the  fulfilled  prophecies  in  the  life,  etc.,  of  Jesus  pointed  out  by 
Himself  (as  e.g.  John  13  :  19,  etc.),  or  by  the  Evangelists  (as  e.g.  John 
19  :  35,  30)  as  pledges  of  His  Messianic  character,  but  in  addition  to  these, 
eighteen  centuries  confirm  such  pledges  by  an  uninterrupted  verification  of 
leading  and  most  important  statements. 


PE0P.  188.]  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  361 


Peop.  188.  This  doctrine  indicates  the  unity  of  the  Epistles. 

They  all  agree  (1)  in  expressing  faitli  and  hope  in  the  covenants 
and  prophecies  ;  (2)  in  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  ;  (3)  in  a  complete  ful- 
filment of  both  covenant  and  prophecy  at  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  (4)  in 
locating  the  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom  in  the  future  at  the 
Sec.  Coming  of  Jesus  ;  (5)  and  in  urging  all  to  accept  Jesus  as  the 
promised  Messiah,  so  that  they  may  become  qualified  to  enter  into 
His  coming  Kingdom. 

Obs.  1.  Let  us  take  Eomans  and  see  how  it  corresponds  with  a  plain 
grammatical  interpretation  of  covenant  and  prophecy.  Paul  asserts,  ch. 
1  :  3,  -A,  that  Jesus  was  "  made  of  the  seed  of  David,  according  to  the  flesh" 
and  His  power  as  Son  of  God  "  by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  ;"  that,  chs. 
1,  2,  3,  salvation  is  obtained  by  faith,  "  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Gen- 
tile," for  all  have  sinned  and  all  need  salvation  ;  that  all  that  believe  shall 
attain  unto  it,  provided  their  faith  is  provocative  of  good  works,  Jesus 
being  purposely  raised  up  for  our  justification.  That,  ch.  4,  we  are  justi- 
fied by  faith  like  unto  Abraham  and  become  his  children  so  that  with 
Abraham — who  is  "the  heir  of  the  world" — we  inherit  the  covenanted 
promises,  being  "  heirs"  with  him  ;  and  reference  is  made  to  the  res- 
urrection for  its  fulfilment  in  the  words  "who  quickeneth  the  dead." 
That,  ch.  5,  being  thus  "justified"  and  at  "peace"  with  God  through 
Jesus,  we  "  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God,"  to  be  realized  through 
grace  in  Jesus  by  the  bestowal  of  "eternal  life,"  which  enables  us  to 
experience  the  fulfilment  of  promise.  We,  ch.  G,  should,  therefore,  not 
live  in  sin  or  serve  sin,  but  in  holiness  and  newness  of  life,  so  as  to  obtain 
through  Jesus  "  the  end  everlasting  life."  We,  ch.  7,  obtain  deliverance 
from  sin  and  its  legal  results  through  "Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Being 
thus,  ch.  8,  believing,  justified,  and  holy,  we  shall  experience  a  glorious 
resurrection  and  exaltation,  because  reckoned  as  joint-heirs  with  Christ 
(and  inheriting  with  Jesus,  implies  that  we  participate  with  Him  in  His 
covenanted  Theocratic  inheritance),  when  creation  itself  shall  share  in  de- 
liverance from  the  curse  ;  and  for  such  glorification  and  inheritance  we 
have  the  strongest  possible  assurances  in  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 
He  shows,  ch.  9,  his  interest  in  the  Jews,  the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
argues  that  those  who  are  heirs  with  Jesus  are  the  children  of  promise  ;  the 
faithful  among  the  natural  descendants  of  Abraham,  and  the  faithful 
among  the  engrafted  Gentiles,  for  so  God  had  predetermined  it  in  mercy. 
He  follows,  chs.  10  and  11,  with  answering  the  question,  Who  shall  be 
saved  ?  by  declaring  both  Jew  and  Gentile  through  faith  in  Jesus  the 
Christ  ;  and  then  points  out  the  fall  of  the  Jews,  their  restoration  at  the 
Coming  of  Jesus,  etc.  (which  we  have  already  used,  as  indispensably  neces- 
sary in  order  to  verify  covenant  promises).     Then  come,  chs.  12,  13,  14, 


362  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  188. 

15,  16,  practical  directions,  interspersed  with  declarations  concerning  the 
nearness  of  the  day  of  salvation,  the  power  of  Jesus  to  save,  the  ability  to 
perforin  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers,  etc.  All  is  confirmatory  of  our 
position,  for  the  hope  is  decisively  expressed  that  at  the  Sec.  Advent  of  this 
Messiah  all  the  promises  of  God,  given  in  covenant  and  prophecy,  shall  be 
abundantly  verified  in  fulfilment.  If  any  truth  is  uttered  by  Paul  with 
distinctness  it  is  this  :  that  David's  Son  now  removed  will  return  again, 
and  that  at  this  return  of  the  Messiah  (through  whom  we  can  now  enter- 
tain the  hope  of  salvation)  the  faithful  will  inherit  with  Him,  a  resurrection 
taking  place,  a  deliverance  of  the  creature  occurring,  a  certain  complement 
of  Gentiles  being  gathered,  a  restoration  of  the  Jews  from  their  fallen  con- 
dition being  experienced  because  the  Deliverer  comes. 

Again  we  protest  against  the  arbitrary  assumption  put  forth  with  much  learning  that 
we  have  a  Pauline,  Petrine,  and  Johannine  theology  and  Eschatolog3r,  one  following  the 
other  in  the  course  of  development ;  the  Petrine  being  reckoned  the  lowest  (most  Jewish). 
Such  a  distinction  exists  only  in  imagination,  and  not  in  fact,  and  is  introduced  by  some 
as  an  apology  for  their  divergence  from,  and  antagonism  to,_  the  early  Church  belief. 
Whatever  distinctive  peculiarities  exist  in  Peter,  Paul,  and  John  (as  to  style,  method, 
manner  of  presenting  subject,  etc.),  they  are  a  unit  in  presenting  the  same  faith  and  hope. 
This  we  unmistakably  show  by  our  quotations  from  them.  No  deserved  eidogy  of  Paul 
can  detract  from  Peter's  accurate  knowledge  of  the  Kingdom,  etc.,  seeing  that  to  him, 
first  of  all,  was  given  the  keys.  No  praise  of  John's  loving  disposition  can  lessen  Paul's, 
evidenced  by  his  abundant  labors,  etc.  It  is  unjust  to  these  ancient  worthies  to  suggest 
a  diversity  of  belief,  where  none  exists,  and  then  manifest  amazement  when  unbelief 
seizes  such  suggestions  and  presses  them  to  an  extreme.  Blinded  by  the  rejection  of  the 
plain  grammatical  sense  of  covenant  and  prophecy,  prejudiced  against  the  simple  biblical 
faith  of  the  early  Church,  and  prejudged  under  the  influence  of  a  favorite  development 
theory,  one  or  the  other  is  "  too  Jewish"  and  must  give  place  to  "  a  higher  spiritual  de- 
velopment" found  in  this  or  that  writer.  The  fundamental  idea  of  the  Kingdom  proves 
that  they  are  in  unison. 

Obs.  2.  With  this  accord  all  the  Pauline  Epistles.  In  1  Corinthians  he 
makes  the  return  of  this  Messiah  to  fulfil  the  promises  exceedingly  promi- 
nent, speaks  of  the  still  future  "  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  urges  to 
preparation  for  it  that  we  may  be  rewarded,  declares  that  we  shall  then 
"  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God,"  exalts  the  judgeship  of  the  saints  in  that 
day,  and  shows  how  it  is  introduced  by  a  resurrection  of  the  righteous,  ful- 
filling Millennial  predictions.  In  2  Corinthians  precisely  the  same  strain 
is  kept  up  respecting  the  future  "  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  the  then  fulfil- 
ment of  God's  promises,  the  resurrection  introductory  to  that  day,  the 
glory  to  be  revealed,  all  of  which  should  influence  us  to  faith  and  holiness. 
Galatians,  as  we  have  shown,  is  pre-eminently  in  advocacy  of  our  doctrine, 
seeing  what  stress  it  lays  on  the  continuance  of  the  covenant  and  its  realiza- 
tion at  the  Sec.  Advent,  when  Ave  "  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God."  In 
Ephesians  he  refers  to  the  coming  "  dispensation"  in  which  the  Messiah, 
when  He  returns,  shall  "gather  together  all  tilings,"  and  we  shall  obtain  an 
inheritance  in  "  the  world  to  come"  so  that  in  the  ages  to  come  He  may 
show  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace  in  His  kindness  toward  us  through 
Jesus,  the  Christ;  we  then  being  in  "the  commonwealth  of  Israel" 
(adopted  even  now)  and  experiencing  the  blessings  of  "  the  day  of  Redemp- 
tion," having  "  inheritance  in  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God."  In 
Philippians  the  future  "  day  of  Jesus  Christ"  is  prominently  set  forth,  the 
distinctive  resurrection  of  the  righteous  is  presented,  and  the  looking  for 
this  Saviour,  who  comes  again  to  subdue  all  things  unto  Himself  and  give 


Prop.  188.]  the  tiieoceatic  kingdom.  363 

glory,  as  "  at  hand"  is  expressed.  So  likewise  in  Colossians,  1  and  2  Thessa- 
lonians,  1  and  2  Timothy,  Titus,  etc.,  we  have  a  necessary  preparation  for 
inheriting  the  Kingdom  to  be  revealed  at  the  Sec.  Coming  of  this  Messiah 
Jesus  ;  a  hope  that  then  the  covenanted  promises  will  be  fulfilled  ;  a  wait- 
ing for  His  Son  from  heaven  in  order  to  inherit  the  promises  ;  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  just  at  that  Coming  and  the  glory  that  follows  ;  a  looking  for 
that  "  day  of  the  Lord  ;"  the  loving  of  His  appearing  and  constituting  it 
"  the  blessed  hope"  in  view  of  its  results.  In  brief,  every  Epistle  that 
Paul  wrote  is  in  perfect  agreement  with  our  doctrinal  position. 

It  has  been  objected  that  the  New  Test,  writers  never  contemplated  the  bringing 
together  of  their  writings  into  its  present  canonical  form  ;  that  this  was  done  by  fallible 
men,  and  that  the  New  Test,  never  received,  as  a  collection,  the  approval  that  the  Old 
Test,  did  from  Jesus  and  inspired  men.  To  all  this  the  reply  is  ample  :  The  Old  Test, 
contains  the  covenants  and  predictions,  each  writing  of  the  canon  corresponds  with 
these,  and  hence  under  the  Christian  consciousness  that  these  were  supplemental  (show- 
ing how  they  are  realized,  etc.)  the  canon  arose  ;  the  force  of  the  relationship  is  self- 
evident  ;  the  authorship  is  vindicated  by  the  unity  ;  and  the  divine  blessing  following 
their  reception  is  corroborative  of  their  value  and  authority. 

Obs.  3.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  being  specially  singled  out  by  some 
as  hostile  to  our  doctrine,  it  deserves  separate  notice.  The  writer  is  largely 
employed  in  proving  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  that  His  death  was  neces- 
sary, that  the  atonement  by  Him  is  valid,  and  that  the  condition  of  faith  in 
Him  is  a  requisite  for  forgiveness  of  sin  and  divine  acceptance.  But  in 
various  ways  he  shows  his  correspondence  in  doctrine  :  in  "  the  world  to 
come;"  the  salvation  linked  with  the  Sec.  Advent;  the  Jewish  view  of  the 
Rest,  and  its  reference  to  the  Sec.  Coming  :  a  High-Priest  for  the  ages  ;  the 
certainty  that  the  Abrahamic  covenant  will  be  fulfilled  :  the  qualifications 
of  Jesus  in  virtue  of  His  work  and  endless  life  to  verify  the  promises  of 
God  ;  the  "  looking  for  Him  to  appear  the  second  lime  without  sin  unto  sal- 
vation  ;"  the  certaintv  that  His  enemies  shall  all  be  overcome  ;  the  "  see- 
ing fl/c  dag  approaching ;"  the  "  yet  a  little  while,  and  He  that  shall  come 
will  come,  and  ivill  not  tarry  ;"  the  positive  declaration  that  the  ancient 
worthies  "  died  in  faith,  not  having  received  the  promises,  being  strangers 
and  pilgrims,"  and  expecting  their  inheritance  promised  to  them  through 
the  Messiah;  the  "  better  resurrection;"  the  promises  received  by  them 
and  us  at  the  same  time  ;  the  continuing  city  to  come  ;  the  firstborn  ;  the 
everlasting  covenant  ;  the  future  shaking  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  aud  "  a 
Kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved."  Such  statements  clearly  evidence  the 
author  as  in  perfect  accord  with  our  position. 

This  Epistle  has  been  attributed  to  Paul,  Barnabas,  Clement,  Luke,  Mark,  Aquila, 
Silas,  and  Apollos  (the  last  being  a  favorite  with  ruany,  e.g.  Bleek,  Alford,  Pressense, 
Kendrick  ;  while  Paul  is  upheld  by  numerous  writers),  and  the  author  cannot  be  dog- 
matically asserted.  We  are  not  concerned  respecting  the  author,  for  its  reception  into 
the  canon,  the  early  use  made  of  it,  and,  especially,  its  perfect  agreement  with  all  other 
portions  of  the  Word,  commend  it  as  worthy  of  due  acceptation.  Efforts  have  been 
made  to  make  it  stand  in  opposition  to  Paul  and  consequently  unauthoritative,  as  by 
Schultz  and  others.  Thus  e.g.  Schultz  and  Peuss  (Lange's  Com.  on  Hebrews,  and  Introd. 
by  Moll.)  maintain  that  its  Christology  has  a  "  decidedly  spiritualistic  tendency  whereby 
obscurity  is  thrown  upon  Christ's  connection  with  humanity."  But  aside  from  the 
direct  refutation  found  in  ch.  2  :  14-17  ;  7  :  14  ;  10  :  12,  and  12  :  3-4,  etc.,  it  must  not  be 
overlooked  that  this  Epistle  was  specially  addressed  to  Jews  to  whom  the  Messianic  con- 
nection with  David  was  familiar,  but  who,  not  knowing  God's  Plan  in  fulfilling  the  cove- 
nants and  predictions  relating  to  David's  Son  and  Lord,  were  apt  to  stumble  over  the 
crucified  One  and  the  attributes  ascribed  to  Him.     Hence  the  line  of  reasoning  culaptcd  to 


364  THE  TIIEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  188. 

•meet  the  objections  and  knowledge  of  the  readers.  The  Gospels,  the  preaching,  the 
general  faith  had  already  manifested  Jesus  as  David's  Son  (which  is  stated  when,  ch. 
7  :  14,  "  it  is  evident  that  our  Lord  sprang  out  of  Judah"),  and  now  is  shown  how  Jesus, 
once  a  dead,  crucified  Messiah,  could  fulfil  the  covenants.  Therefore  we  have  these 
points  clearly  made  manifest  :  (1)  The  necessity  and  reasons  assigned  for  that  death  ; 
(2)  the  fact  pointed  out  that  it  renewed  and  confirmed  the  covenant  ;  (3)  the  acceptance 
of  His  sacrifice  and  exaltation  qualified  Him  to  fulfil  all  covenanted  and  predicted  prom- 
ises ;  (4)  that  He  will  come  again  and  bring  the  salvation  thus  promised  ;  (5)  that  owing 
to  the  union  of  the  divine  and  human  in  Him,  being  thus  greater  than  man,  we  can  have 
every  confidence  in  His  ability  and  power,  (G)  and  that  by  receiving  this  Jesus,  trusting 
in  Him,  living  a  life  of  practical  faith  in  Him,  we  shall  enjoy  the  blessings  at  His  return. 
The  Epistle  is  thoroughly  Messianic,  showing  how  and  wherefore  the  Messiah  suffered, 
how  and  when  the  Messiah  will  come  again,  etc.,  and  His  connection  with  humanity  is 
clearly  pointed  out  as  to  His  person  ("  the  seed  of  Abraham"),  and  as  to  His  present  and 
future  relations.  So  decisive  is  this  that  some,  running  to  the  opposite  extreme,  object 
to  the  Epistle  as  being  "  intensely  Jewish"  in  its  complexion.  Another  thing  is  obvious, 
viz.,  that  its  teaching  is  in  complete  accord  with  the  Pauline  spirit  and  theology. 

Ohs.  4.  James  preserves  the  unity  of  teaching,  for  he  makes  us  gathered 
out  to  be  "  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of  His  creatures'"  and  "  heirs  of  the  King- 
dom which  He  has  promised  "  (by  covenant  and  prophet  and  Saviour).  In 
his  short  Epistle  he  prominently  sets  before  us  "  the  last  days"  and  "  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  as  drawing  nigh."  The  entire  tenor  and  spirit  of  his 
brief  letter  is  to  exhort  believers,  by  practical  deductions,  so  to  live  that 
when  the  Messiah  Jesus  returns  again  they  may  be  rewarded  in  His,  then, 
established  Kingdom,  obtaining  "  a  crown  of  life." 

The  student  well  knows  how  James  has  been  treated  by  able  men  (e.g.  by  Luther, 
called  "  a  straw-epistle"  when  compared  with  others,  so  Pref.  to  Edition  of  the  N.  Test., 
1524).  Various  writers,  unable  to  reconcile  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  and  the 
judgment  according  to  works,  have  taken  a  similar  unjust  view.  A  recent  one,  Strobel 
(Lange's  Com.,  James,  Pref.,  p.  23),  declares  :  "  No  matter  in  what  sense  we  take  the 
Epistle  of  James,  it  is  always  in  conflict  with  the  remaining  parts  of  Holy  Writ."  Un- 
belief (as  in  the  Tubingen  school)  gladly  accepts  of  such  an  opinion  as  an  acceptable 
weapon  against  the  canon.  Many  receive  him  very  coolly,  as  e.g.  illustrated  in  Hase 
{His.  t'lt.  Church,  p.  25),  who  says  that  James  was  "  the  principal  leader  of  the  Christian 
Jews,' '  and  then  adds  :  "  To  judge  from  the  Epistle  bearing  his  name,  he  must  have  been 
a  pious  and  earnest  teacher,  especially  in  his  admonitions  in  favor  of  morality,  but  with 
no  prominent  characteristics  peculiar  to  Christianity.''  It  is  prejudice,  a  prejudging,  that 
prevents  a  calm  survey  of  the  doctrines  held  by  the  Apostles,  that  can  deliberately  thus 
lower  the  claims  of  James.  Because  Paid  e.g.  insists  upon  justification  by  faith  (Eom. 
3  :  28  and  4  :  1,  etc.— and  such  a  justification  James  allows,  ch.  2  :  1,  5,  23,  etc.)  and 
James  upon  justification  by  works  (ch.  2  :"14-26,  which  justification  Paul  also  allows,  as 
e.g.  in  making  the  faith  he  advocates  productive  ot  works  which  graduate  our  reward  or 
loss),  it  is  concluded  that  an  antagonism  exists  between  them.  Now,  aside  from  the 
union  of  vital  faith  with  works,  and  godly  works  with  living  faith  (which  forms  the  huu<l  of 
unity  between  James  and  Paul),  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  if  we  properly  discriminate 
between  the  justification  of  believers  (a  judicial  act  at  the  outset  of  a  Christian  career) 
by  faith  in  Jesus,  and  the  judgment  of  believers  at  the  Sec.  Advent  (which  was  promi- 
nent with  James)  according  to  their  works  (also  taught  by  Jesus,  Paul,  and  the  other 
Apostles)  we  have  a  perfect  agreement  between  them  ;  because  the  latter's  justification  is 
measured  by  the  works,  and  if  works  are  altogether  lacking  there  will  be  not  merely  loss, 
as  Paid  taught,  but  far  more  as  James  teaches,  a  dead  faith  which  neither  justifies  in  the 
sense  of  present  divine  acceptance  nor  in  the  sense  of  an  ultimate  rewarding.  Dead  and 
fruitless  it  cannot  justify  ;  living  and  active,  the  justification,  present  and  future,  is  evi- 
denced by  works  ;  this  Jesus  taught,  this  Pattl  and  all  the  Apostles  taught,  and  this  James 
likewise  teaches.  The  writer  sees  no  valid  reason  whatever  for  rejecting  any  of  the 
writings  contained  in  the  canon.  Aside  from  the  historical  and  critical  evidence  given 
in  their  behalf  by  various  able  works  and  commentaries,  they  are  all  in  such  strict  accord 
with  the  rest  of  the  Word,  so  confirmatory  of  the  Divine  Record,  that  they  cannot  be  dis- 
placed without  undue  violence.     Hence  we  cordially  receive  James,  Hebrews,  2  Peter, 


Prop.  188.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  365 

etc.,  feeling  that  they  corroborate  the  covenants  and  predictions  containing  the  Divine 
Purpose  and  the  great  central  Theocratic  idea.  Besides,  He  who  overruled  the  bestowal 
and  preservation  of  the  Scriptures  would  not  have  permitted  them  to  become  the  gen- 
erally recognized  part  of  divine  revelation  for  man's  guidance  unless  they  were  given 
under  His  auspices,  and  calculated  to  confirm  the  truth. 

Obs.  5.  Peter  is  full  of  our  doctrine,  as  is  readily  seen  in  his  "  reserved 
inheritance "  and  "  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time;"  in  his 
"  praise,  and  honor,  and  glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ,"  and  "  the 
grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  us  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  ;"  in 
his  "  strangers  and  pilgrims"  and  ''  chosen  generation,  royal  priesthood, 
holy  nation,  and  peculiar  people  ;"  in  his  exhortations  to  piety  and  endur- 
ance so  "  that,  when  His  glory  shall  be  revealed,  ye  may  be  glad  also  with 
exceeding  joy,"  being  "  partakers  of  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  ;"  in 
his  injunctions  to  humble  ourselves  "  that  He  may  exalt  us  in  due  time  ;" 
or  in  the  solemn  motive  presented  :  "  But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand.  ; 
be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer."  Or  (as  in  the  Sec.  Epistle), 
in  the  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises"  to  be  realized  in  Jesus  at 
His  return,  "  for  so  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly 
into  the  everlasting  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ;"  in 
"  the  sure  word  of  prophecy,"  "  the  last  days,"  "  the  thousand  years  as 
one  day,"  "  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  "  the  looking  fur  and  hasting  unto  the 
coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  and,  "  looking  for,  according  to  promise, 
new  heavens  and  new  earth  in  which  dwelleth  righteousness."  All  this 
indicates  the  faith  that  actuated  him — a  faith  grounded  in  the  Messianic 
idea  as  contained  in  covenants  and  prophecy. 

Obs.  6.  Lastly  is  John,  who  presses  upon  us  personal  religion,  so  that  we 
may  "  abide  in  Him  :  that  when  I/>  shall  appear,  we  may  have  confidence, 
and  not  be  ashamed  at  His  Coming."  The  Second  Advent  with  its  result- 
ant blessings  is  prominent  before  him,  and  he  urges  withdrawal  from  the 
love  of  the  world  and  its  lusts  in  order  that  we  may  experience  the  happi- 
ness and  glorification  that  shall  then  be  revealed.  He  warns  of  "  the  last 
time,"  of  "  antichrists,"  and  insists  upon  our  perfecting  our  love  so  that 
"  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment,"  receive  "  eternal  life," 
and  obtain  "  a  full  reward."  The  present,  in  his  estimation,  is  simply  a 
preparatory  period,  designed  to  qualify  us  for  the  Messiah's  return,  when 
the  glorious  promises  of  God  will  be  realized. 

Thus  we  find  a  remarkable  unity  respecting  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom.  No  one 
teaches  the  prevailing  modern  theories  respecting  the  Kingdom  of  God  ;  none  of  the 
meanings  usually  assigned  are  to  be  found.  It  would  be  a  fatal  flaw  to  the  inspiration  of 
any  one  if  we  e.g.  found  a  direct  application,  as  now  so  confidently  made  by  many,  of 
Daniel's  fifth  Kingdom  to  the  existing  Church  ;  it  would  be  a  violation  of  covenant  and 
prophecy.  But  such  antagonism  exists  only  in  writings  outside  of  the  Scriptures.  The 
faith  of  all,  the  hope  of  all,  points  to  the  Second  Coming  of  Jesus  ichen  He  shall  return 
to  re-establish  tli>'  covenanted  and  predicted  Theocratic  Kingdom,  in  which  glorious  salvation 
is  to  be  realized.  A  sufficiency  is  given,  with  marked  distinctness,  to  teach  this,  and  in- 
spire us  with  like  faith  and  hope.  In  reference  to  Jude's  Epistle,  it  is  sufficient  to  say 
that,  owing  to  his  decided  testimony  to  our  position  respecting  the  personal  Advent, 
condition  of  the  dispensation  and  last  times,  some  reject  his  testimony  as  "  too  Jewish." 
With  many  his  declarations  have  but  little  weight.  Even  Smith's  Die.  of  the  Bible,  art. 
"  Jude,"  says  :  "  The  Epistle  of  Jude  is  too  unimportant  to  be  a  forgery  ;  few  portions 
of  Scripture,  with  reverence  be  it  spoken,  could  have  been  more  easily  spared."  We 
thankfully  accept  of  Jude  as  one  of  the  decided  witnesses  of  the  truth,  evidencing  the 
general  agreement. 


360  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  189* 


Proposition  189.  It  is  only  through  this  doctrine  of  the  King- 
dom that  the  Apocalypse  can  or  will  he  understood  and  con- 
sisten  tly  in  terpreted. 

The  reason  for  this  lies  in  the  simple  fact  that  it  announces  the 
Coming  and  the  events  connected  with  the  Advent  of  the  Theocratic 
King.  Now  to  enter  fully  into  its  spirit  and  appreciate  its  force, 
to  form  an  adequate  conception  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus  either  as 
a  whole  or  in  its  several  aspects,  there  must  of  necessity  be  a  pre- 
vious acquaintance  with  the  covenants  and  a  correct  apprehension 
of  the  burden  of  prophecy  based  on  those  covenants,  resolving 
itself  into  the  promised  Kingdom. 

Ohs.  1.  The  Theocratic  idea,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  must  ever  be 
kept  in  view,  for  with  it  the  Apocalypse  begins  and  ends.  It  begins  with 
announcing  His  Future  Advent,  and  delineates  His  Theocratical  character 
as  "  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth/''  and  *'  the  Alpha  and  Omega,''1 
etc.,  and  ends  with  the  Theocratical  rule  inaugurated  here  on  earth.  The 
Kingdom  being  the  goal  of  prophecy,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  the 
very  last  predictions  would  largely  enter  into  the  subject,  and  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  show  how  the  older  prophecies  will  bo  ultimately  fulfilled. 
To  understand  such  fulfilment,  however,  it  is  requisite  to  carefully  notice 
the  prophecies  previously  given  by  the  same  Spirit,  and  which,  without 
undue  repetition  (it  being  taken  for  granted  that  the  reader  knows  them 
because  they  embrace  "  the  Hope''),  may  be  partially  incorporated  by 
quotations,  etc.  With  a  knowledge  of  the  covenants  and  prophecies  per- 
taining to  the  Kingdom,  the  student  is  placed  in  the  only  position  suitable 
to  the  contemplation  and  study  of  a  book,  which  largely  deals  in  a  restored 
Theocracy,  as  is  clearly  evidenced  not  only  by  the  Advent  of  David's  Son, 
but  by  the  corresponding  adoption  of  older  Theocratic  predictions,  and 
enforcing  them  by  identifying  and  linking  them  with  such  an  Advent. 

This  position  enables  the  student  to  appreciate  the  grandeur  of  the  Person  who  gives 
testimony  of  coming  events  to  John,  to  notice  His  distinctive  Theocratic  relationship, 
and  to  observe  His  continued  determination  to  perfect  the  work  of  redemption.  This 
alone  will  reconcile,  as  fitting,  just,  and  glorious,  the  revealed  purposes  and  actions  pre- 
sented in  the  Apoc,  connected  with  previous  revelation— introducing  a  restitution  pre- 
dicted, an  administration  covenanted,  a  blessedness  and  glory  faintly  foreshadowed  and 
described,  a  perfection  and  vastness  of  redemption  formerly  implied  in  the  Divine  Pur- 
pose and  in  the  Person  of  the  Redeemer.  The  reason  why  Luther  expressed  himself  so 
slightingly  respecting  the  Apoc.  arose,  as  various  writers  have  remarked,  from  his  limited 
idea  of  the  Kingdom.  Thus  e.g.  Olshausen  (Gen.  Introd.  Com.,  ch.  10)  says:  "This 
(Apoc.)  was  obscure  to  him  from  the  fact  that  he  could  not  thoroughly  apprehend  the 
doctrine  of  God's  Kingdom  upon  earth,  which  is  exhibited  in  Revelation,  and  forms  the 
proper  centre  of  everything  contained  in  it."  Luther,  in  his  views  of  the  Kingdom,  was 
too  much  under  the  influence  of  the  Augustinian  teaching,  and  he  allowed  doctrinal  con- 
siderations (as  in  the  rejection  of  James's  "  strawy"  Epistle)  to  unduly  influence  him  in 


Prop.  189.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  867 

criticism — always  a  dangerous  and  one-sided  procedure.  "We  may  add  :  the  authenticity 
and  credibility  of  the  Apocalypse  is  the  most  powerfully  sustained  of  any  of  the  Script- 
ures, being  fully  indorsed  by  the  earliest  Fathers,  by  the  Alexandrian  fathers  (who  were 
Anti-Millenarian),  and  by  the  admissions  of  the  ablest  critics  of  the  destructive  school. 
(Comp.  the  introductions  of  commentaries  generally  and  works  specially  devoted  to  evi- 
dences, as  e.g.  Alford,  Stuart,  Lange,  etc.  ;  Wordsworth  on  the  Apoc,  Elliott's  Horce 
Apoc,  etc.,  and  arts,  on  the  Apoc.  in  Herzog's  TSncydop.,  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Oydop. 
etc.)  From  these  and  others  we  learn  the  historical  fact  that  some,  who  could  not  enter 
into  the  spirit  and  end  designed  by  the  Apoc.  (viz.,  too  Millenarian  and  Jewish),  doubted 
its  genuineness  and  authority,  but  that  no  book  of  the  New  Test,  is  so  fully  proven  to  be 
genuine  as  this  one  ;  so  much  so  that  unbelievers  of  the  schools  of  Bauer,  Strauss, 
Schwegler,  etc.  (whatever  motives  may  actuate  them),  stamp  its  genuineness  as  simply 
incontrovertible. 

Obs.  2.  It  has  been  the  custom  of  some  to  write  of  the  book  as  if  it  were 
to  be  estimated  isolated  from  all  others,  standing  or  falling  on  its  own 
merits.  This  involves  a  grave  mistake,  and  overlooks  both  the  Divine  Plan 
in  Redemption  continuously  unfolded,  and  that  a  Revelation  pertaining  at 
all  to  such  a  Plan  must  be  in  full  accord  with  previously  given  ones. 
Owing  to  this  oversight  some  excellent  writers,  as  even  Barnes,  Stuart,  etc., 
have  made  sad  work  with  various  portions,  not  willing  to  concede,  e.g.  that 
Millennial  descriptions  in  precisely  similar  language  with  precisely  similar 
acts,  blessings,  etc.,  are  identical  with  those  uttered  by  older  prophets. 
Others  again,  like  Reuss,  Desprez,  etc..  entirely  ignoring  the  covenanted 
Kingdom  and  finding  in  it  much  that  favors  "  Jewish  conceptions,"  pro- 
nounce it  a  sort  of  "  Judmo- Christian"  publication,  very  artistically  put 
together,  but  unworthy  of  credence.  Of  course,  with  their  ideas  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God  and  of  wdiat  must  constitute  the  proprieties  in  its  estab- 
lishment, the  Apocalypse  is  already  prejudged.  No  book,  having  such  a 
wreight  of  evidence  for  its  retention  in  the  Canon,  has  been  so  strangely 
handled.  Rejected  or  doubted  by  Cains  and  Dionysius,  on  the  ground  of 
its  interpretation  indorsing  our  view  of  the  Kingdom,  it  has  remained  for 
modern  writers  to  revive  the  old  rejection  precisely  for  the  same  reason. 
The  view  entertained  concerning  the  Kingdom  will  inevitably  largely  in- 
fluence our  interpretation  of  it  ;  and  the  proper  conception  of  the  Kingdom 
must  be  entertained  before  the  book  can  be  consistently  examined,  seeing 
that  if  a  Kingdom  has  been  covenanted,  predicted,  preached,  made  the 
subject  matter  of  previous  Revelation,  nothing  in  conflict  with  such  a 
Kingdom  can  or  will  be  found  in  a  later  one.  To  decide,  however,  that  no 
real  conflict  exists,  the  student  must  be  sure  that  he  has  the  idea  of  the 
Kingdom  as  expressly  given  in  Scripture.  It  certainly  is  unscholarly  to 
doubt  and  reject  a  book  on  premises  that  themselves  remain  unproven  ;  and 
yet  this  is  precisely  the  position  occupied  by  a  host  of  writers.  They  either 
reject  the  book  or  else  ignore  and  explain  away  its  teachings,  because  they 
are  "  too  Jewish,"  without  attempting  to  show  that  this  Jewish  form  is  not 
taught  in  the  other  Scriptures,  or  that  their  own  view  is  contained  in  pre- 
vious Revelation.  And  such  is  the  perversity  and  antagonism  of  human 
deductions  from  mere  reason,  that  what  is  "  too  Jewish"  for  some  is  not 
sufficiently  ''  Jewish"  for  others  ;  and  the  latter  is,  therefore,  made  an  ex- 
cuse for  discarding  it.  But  such  forget,  what  we  have  already  intimated, 
that  if  there  are  some  omissions  in  making  out  all  the  links  of  a  connected 
chain  in  the  Divine  Order,  these  missing  links  are  found  farther  bach,  for 
the  book  must  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  its  connection  with  other  Scripture. 
Thus  to  illustrate  :  it  is  objected  that  in  the  re-establishment  of  the  Theoc- 


368  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  189. 

racy  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation  forms  an  important  feature,  and 
yet  this  is  not  stated  in  specific  terms  in  the  Apocalypse.  To  this  we  reply 
that  a  specific  mention  is  unnecessary  because  numerous  other  predictions 
are  already  given  and  those  in  the  Apoc.  are  inseparably  joined  ivith  them 
by  incorporating  features  contained  also  in  them  and  requisite  for  fulfilling 
them,  thus  forming  a  bond  of  identity  and  union.  When  express  promises 
taken  directly  from  Old  Test,  predictions  relating  to  Jewish  restoration  are 
adopted  and  assigned  to  a  certain  time  and  order  for  realization,  surely 
there  is  nothing  inconsistent  to  hold  that  such  portions  are  indicative  of  a 
fulfilment  of  a  ivhole,  seeing  that  in  the  Old  Test,  they  are  thus  related. 
The  Old  and  the  New  Test,  must  be  considered  as  indicated  in  Prop.  16. 
But  there  is  a  stronger  reason  why  no  specific  mention  is  necessary,  which 
does  honor  to  the  Spirit  which  gave  the  book,  and  which  forms  an  indirect 
but  most  powerful  argument  in  favor  of  its  inspiration.  An  impostor 
would  undoubtedly  have  followed  in  imitating  the  precise  track  and 
language  of  the  former  prophets  and  thus  have  introduced  Jewish  restora- 
tion as  these  objectors  urge,  and  to  have  stated  when  it  is  to  transpire. 
This  the  Spirit  could  not  do,  not  only  because  He  was  describing  a  transi- 
tion state  in  which  Gentiles  are  a  large  party,  but  because  He  takes  it  for 
granted,  what  we  have  abundantly  shown  under  Election  and  engrafting 
into  the  elect  nation,  that  He  is  all  the  time  speaking  of  the  Jewish  nation 
and  its  restoration.  The  Spirit  only  recognizes  Jews  as  the  ones  that  are 
participants  in  the  Kingdom  established.  Gentiles  to  inherit  with  the 
Jews  must  be  adopted,  engrafted,  and  as  such  form  part  (Props.  61-03)  of 
the  elect  nation.  Hence,  the  Spirit  rightfully  and  with  remarkable  consis- 
tency virtually  describes  Jewish  restoration  when  it  portrays  the  establish- 
ment of  the  glorious  Theocracy,  and  the  ancient  saints  with  all  engrafted 
ones  participating  in  it.1  The  righteous  dead  of  the  elect  nation— no 
others  are  mentioned — with  the  living  translated  form  already  with  Christ 
the  King  such  a  mighty  Jewish  restoration  that  the  lesser  one,  i.e.  of  the 
nation  in  the  flesh,  follows  as  a  matter  of  course.  When  the  entire  seed  of 
Abraham,  either  natural  or  grafted  in  worthily,  triumph  in  a  Theocracy,  it 
is  on  the  already  granted  basis  that  it  is  a  Jewish  victory  which  includes 
the  lesser.  Certainly  the  Jewish  King  and  Jewish  rulers  of  a  professedly 
Jewish  kingdom,  when  such  a  kingdom  is  said  to  be  ruled  over  by  them,  is 
amply  sufficient  to  remove  the  objection.  This  necessary  assumption  is 
sustained  by  the  direct  and  indirect  references  (Obs.  following),  and  there 
can  be  no  misconception  of  the  matter  to  him  who  notices  :  (1)  that  the 
saints  here  exalted  to  Theocratic  positions  are  really  and  truly  a  portion  of 
the  Jewish  nation  ;  (2)  that  the  very  formation  and  representation  of  a  re- 
stored Theocracy  in  which  they  alone  figure  as  associates  with  the  King 
necessarily  implies  that  the  rest  will  follow  as  given  in  other  places  ;  (3) 
that  the  prophecy  is  given  to  show  how  and  under  what  circumstances  the 
Mighty  King  comes  and  introduces  the  promised  Theocracy  ;  and  as  it 
only  relates  in  its  beginning  to  that  Jewish  portion  of  the  nation,  the  elect, 
to  whom  the  Kingdom  is  specially  given  (as  stated  by  Jesus  Himself),  it 
fills  out  a  part  of  prophecy  not  before  given  in  detail,  and  teaches  us  how 
the  prediction  of  the  Saviour  relating  to  the  inheriting  of  the  Kingdom 
(which  materially  differs  from  the  remaining  restoration),  is  verified  ;  (4) 
that  the  Spirit,  accepting  of  the  principle  of  engrafting,  and  recognizing 
every  believer  as  a  member  of  the  Jeivish  commonwealth,  cannot  make  any 
distinction  between  Jews  and  those  grafted  in,  as  e.g.  He  did  not  do  in  the 


PeOP.  189.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  369 

prophecies  of  Daniel  which,  notwithstanding  the  future  adoption  of  Gen- 
tiles, speaks  of  the  nation  as  a  continuous  elect  one,  all  believers  in  it  being 
saints.2 

1  This  is  so  clearly  intimated  by  the  general  analogy  of  Scripture  that  we  have  excel- 
lent writers  falling  into  an  opposite  extreme,  viz.,  that  no  other  restoration  of  the  Jews 
but  those  resurrected  and  translated  ones  is  to  be  expected.  (See  e.g.  art.  1,  Proph. 
Times,  Nov.,  1874,  and  also  Waggoner  and  others.)  But  aside  from  the  answers  that  we 
have  given  under  other  Propositions,  it  is  sufficient,  once  for  all,  to  say  that  this  makes 
an  imperfect  redemption,  for  one  of  the  forfeited  blessings,  viz.,  the  perpetuation  of  the 
race  in  a  state  of  innocence,  cannot  possibly  be  carried  out  without  such  a  restoration 
embracing  also  blessings  to  Gentile  nations,  to  creation,  etc. 

2  The  student  also  will  notice  that  a  direct  amplified  description  pi  the  restoration  of 
the  nation  is  purposely  avoided  because  it  would  unnecessarily  provoke  the  jealousy  and 
persecution  of  the  Koman  power.  A  sufficiency  for  faith  and  hope  is  given,  provided  the 
believer  receives  the  Bible  as  a  whole.  One  distinctive  feature  is  constantly  taken  for 
granted,  viz.,  that  the  reader  of  this  book  receives  as  preparatory,  in  their  plain  gram- 
matical sense,  the  everlasting  covenants,  Abrahamic  and  Davidic.  Coming  thus,  the 
student  readily  sees  how  the  oath-bound  promises  of  God  are  verified  in  the  statements 
of  the  Apoc.  Strauss  says,  respecting  the  Apoc,  that  it  "  gives  us  a  melancholy  impres- 
sion of  the  imperfect  way  in  which  Christ  was  understood  by  His  most  intimate  dis- 
ciple ;"  but  the  Book  forms  a  perfect  supplement  (as  we  have  shown)  to  His  teaching, 
showing  how  and  when  the  postponed  Kingdom  shall  be  manifested,  and  the  promises  of 
God  be  realized  in  all  their  fulness. 


Obs.  3.  Keeping  in  view  the  distinguishing  feature,  grounded  in  the 
Election  and  Covenants,  that  Jews  are  denoted  when  the  saints  are  men- 
tioned, we  find  much  incidently  expressed  confirmatory  of  this  position. 
Let  the  reader  place  himself  in  the  position  of  the  early  believers  to  whom 
the  book  was  given,  holding  firmly  to  the  hope  of  a  restored  Theocratic 
rule  under  David's  Son  at  His  Second  Coming,  and  he  will  find  abundant 
material  for  encouraging  such  a  hope.  The  very  titles  of  the  Coming  One 
were  understood  to  relate  to  the  Theocratic  King,  being  previously  thus 
used;  "  the  first  begotten  of  the  dead'''1  and  other  characteristics  of  Jesus 
were  regarded  as  prerequisites  for  such  a  reign  ;  the  poiver  described, 
adequate  to  remove  death,  was  essential  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenanted 
promises,  as  anticipated;  the  continued  designation  of  "Son  of  Man,'1'' 

the  root  and  offspring  of  David,"  as  required  ;  the  restitution  presented 
through  Him,  as  predicted  by  the  prophets  ;  tins  power  over  all  enemies  and 
the  same  given  to  those  associated  with  the  King,  as  promised  ;  the  relation- 
ship to  the  promised  Theocratic  rule  impressively  given  in  His  having  "  the 
hey  of  David,"  and  in  His  being  "  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,"  hence 
the  covenanted  King  and  Deliverer  ;  the  exaltation,  ascriptions  of  praise, 
the  saints  waiting  for  deliverance,  the  judgments  on  nations,  the  wrath  of 
the  Son  of  Man,  the  harvest  and  vintage,  the  first  resurrection,  the  re- 
warding of  the  dead,  the  Sovereignty  given  to  and  exercised  by  the 
Messiah,  the  universality  of  rule,  the  new  heavens  and  earth  incorporating 
Mill,  descriptions,  the  order  announced  agreeing  with  ancient  prophets,  all 
this  coincided  with  and  fostered  the  notion  of  a  still  future  coming  cove- 
nanted Kingdom.  The  significant  and  special  mention,  according  with 
Election,  of  "  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel,"  showing  that  according 
to  the  Spirit  the  saints  are  regarded  (whether  Jews  or  engrafted  Jews)  the 
elect  seed  of  Abraham,  the  holy  elect  Jewish  nation.  The  division  of  these 
into  "twelve  tribes"  -when  obtaining  "salvation,''''  indicating  the  revival 
of  the  Theocratic  order  ;  this,  in  connection  with  other  allusions,  is  amply 


370  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  189. 

sufficient  to  prove  "  the  Jeivish  cast"  of  the  incoming  Theocracy  and  its 
identity  with  the  One  predicted  by  former  prophets. 

The  Origenistic  method  of  interpretation,  the  Church's  connection  with  the  state,  the 
dogmatism  of  synods,  the  writings  of  spiritualistic  and  mystical  interpreters,  the  deduc- 
tions of  a  destructive  and  unbelieving  criticism,  a  fettered  system  of  Eschatology,  pre- 
vented this  connection  from  being  seen  and  appreciated.  The  Church-Kingdom  theory, 
with  unlimited  development,  darkened  the  doctrine  of  election,  the  engrafting  of  Gen- 
tiles, the  nature  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  etc.,  and  hence  arose  the  varied  and  conflict- 
ing views  respecting  this  Book. 

Obs.  4.  Hence  it  followed  that  all  the  early  Christians  had  no  difficulty 
in  embracing  the  Apocalypse  as  a  Divine  Revelation,  seeing  that  it  both 
accorded  with  the  previously  given  predictions  of  God,  and  that,  owing  to 
the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  and  withdrawal  for  a  time  of  the  King, 
it  filled  up  a  void  by  detailing  His  Coming  again  and  the  measures  that 
would  be  taken  in  effecting  the  restored  Theocracy.  Taken  in  connection 
with  the  covenants  and  prophecies,  as  further  explanatory  of  the  mode  of 
ultimate  realization,  the  Apocalypse  is  most  admirably  constructed  to  estab- 
lish a  Jinn  faith  in  the  Kingdom  wo  have  delineated.  This  is  seen  in  the 
early  Church  and  Fathers,  who  understood  and  interpreted  it  thus,  and  that 
its  first  opponents  knew  not  (until  Origen  devised  the  remedy)  how  to  refute 
it  without  denying  the  authority  of  the  book  itself.  Owing  to  the  feeling, 
that  it  necessarily  taught  our  view,  it  narrowly,  as  various  writers  have 
observed,  escaped  (although  more  canonical  as  to  authority  than  many 
others)  proscription.  To-day  it  is  unjustly  rejected  by  a  large  number  be- 
cause of  its  assigned  "  JudcBO- Christian  Eschatology."  A  Kingdom  await- 
ing the  Coming  of  David's  Son  ;  preceded  by  a  first  resurrection  ;  intro- 
duced as,  and  containing  what,  the  older  prophets  declared  ;  incorporating 
a  tribal  division  ;  holding  forth  a  glorious  reign  here  on  earth,  etc.,  all 
this  corresponds  too  accurately  with  "  Jewish  conceptions"  to  suit  the  taste 
of  those  who  are  anxious  to  rid  themselves  of  everything  distinctively 
"  Jewish."  Let  unbelief  take  such  a  position  ;  but  faith,  supported  by  the 
general  analogy  and  unity  of  Revelation,  jot/fully  seizes  upon  the  book  as 
explanatory  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Millennial  predictions  are  to  be 
fulfilled  in  this  Coining  One,  and  in  His  most  Messed  Theocratic  rule. 

Hence  it  follows  that  the  only  class  of  interpreters  that  deserve  consideration,  is  that 
one  which  makes  the  Advent  and  Kingdom  still  future.  More  than  this  :  which  makes 
the  Advent  ;i  personal  one,  the  resurrection  literal,  the  Kingdom  a  covenanted  and  pre- 
dicted Theocratic-Davidic  restored  (the  only  one  covenanted  and  predicted),  and  a  Mil- 
lennial £lory  that  fulfils  the  prophets. 

Obs.  5.  The  objection  of  Schott  and  others,  that  this  reign  of  Jesus  is 
too  much  in  the  Apocalypse  made  out  to  be  a  reign  of  the  Son  of  David 
(Prop.  53,  Obs.  9),  is  found  to  be  a  decided  proof  of  its  inspiration.  How 
else,  taking  the  covenants  ami  the  promises  based  on  them,  could  this  reign 
be  represented  ?  If  the  Kingdom,  as  we  have  proven,  is  the  restored  Theo- 
cratic-Davidic Kingdom  in  and  through  David's  Son,  then,  indeed,  the 
phraseology  objected  to  is  entirely  in  place  and  expressive  of  the  fact. 
The  trouble  with  many  writers  is  simply  this  :  the  manner  in  which  this 
Kingdom  is  introduced  and  the  Kingdom  itself  is  presented,  does  not  fit  in 
with  their  development  theory,  being  too  much  indebted  to  supernatural 
cower  and  indicating  a  too  close  relationship  to  a  restored  Theocracy,  and 


Prop.  189.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  371 

hence  it  is  coolly  set  aside  or  spiritualized.  Even  eminent  men  under  the 
influence  of  this  theory,  not  knowing  what  to  do  with  it,  or  how  to  engraft 
it  into  their  system,  deliberately  turn  away  from  it  (see  e.g.  Neander.  His. 
and  Plant.  C.  Church,  vol.  1,  p.  396-97).  This  evinces  the  influence  of  pre- 
conceived opinions  respecting  the  Kingdom,  and  as  a  test  is  unfairly  ap- 
plied to  the  Apocalypse,  being  precisely  in  the  line  of  those  produced  by 
unbelief.  To  invalidate  the  reliability  of  the  Apocalypse  in  this  direction, 
it  must  first  be  shown  that  the  Kingdom  it  delineates  is  one  in  opposition 
or  antagonism  to  the  Kingdom  expressly  covenanted,  once  existing  but  over- 
thrown and  predicted  in  numerous  prophecies  to  be  restored.  Such  a  mode 
of  procedure  would  be  logical,  and,  if  consistently  carried  out,  will  most 
certainly  lead  to  a  hearty  reception  of  early  Church  doctrine  on  the  sub- 
ject. 

We  have  only  e.g.  to  refer  to  Rev.  20  :  1-6,  and  see  the  interpretations  given  to  the 
first  resurrection  and  the  Millennial  reign,  and  how  these  are  applied  without  any  refer- 
ence whatever  to  the  demands  of  the  covenants  (Abrahamic  and  Davidic),  and  to  the 
general  analogy  of  the  Word  concerning  the  same,  and  we  must  conclude  that  many  (as 
Hengstenberg,  Davidson,  etc.)  interpret  with  a  mind  fully  biassed  in  favor  of  an  already 
existing  Messianic  Kingdom,  and,  therefore,  strive  to  make  all  bend  to  the  support  of 
such  a  theory. 

Obs.  6.  This  feature  of  a  connection  existing  between  the  Apoc.  and  the 
prophets,  forming  a  unity  of  Divine  Purpose,  is  alone  sufficient  to  set  aside 
the  expositions  of  that  class  who  make  the  Apoc.  fulfilled  in  the  past, 
either  in  the  events  preceding,  allied  with,  and  immediately  following,  th  • 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  or  even  extending  down  and  embracing  the  con- 
version of  Oonstantine,  etc.  Such  interpretation  can  only  succeed  by 
arbitrary  handling,  by  a  violation  of  unity,  and  by  a  total  misconception  of 
the  nature  of  Christ's  Kingdom.  Allowing  inchoate  force  m  the  historical 
(Bh.  Newton,  Elliott,  etc.)  interpretation,  making  a  fulfilment  continuous 
from  the  first  century  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  admitting  pertinence  to 
the  suggestions  (Dr.  Arnold,  etc.)  that  the  historical  is  an  imperfect, 
typical  fulfilment  foreshadowing  another  and  higher  still  future  ;  consider- 
ing that  there  is  also  propriety,  etc.,  in  interpreting  (as  Dr.  Seiss,  etc.)  the 
wdiole  as  still  future,  we  are  not  now  concerned  with  these  several  modes  of 
interpretation,  only  as  they  severally  bring  out  distinctively  the  Theocratic 
relationship  that  the  Apoc.  contains  in  common  with  previously  given 
prophecies.  That  system  which  does  this  the  most  effectively  is  the  most 
worthy  of  our  reception  ;  that  which  ignores  this  the  most,  is  the  most 
unreliable. 

Compare  e.g.  the  different  systems  of  Apoc.  interpretation  as  given  in  the  Preface  to 
Lange's  Com.  on  the  Apoc,  in  Davidson's  Introd.  to  the  New  Test.,  etc.,  or  to  our  his- 
tory of  the  doctrine,  or  to  such  a  Proposition  as  158,  and  it  becomes  painfully  evident 
that  a  total  misconception  of  the  Messianic  covenants  and  Kingdom  illy  qualified  many 
to  write  on  the  subject.  The  Theocratic  idea,  as  a  bond  of  union,  and  the  previously 
given  prophecies,  as  a  basis  for  amplification,  are  not  noted. 

Obs.  7.  Whatever  advances  have  been  made  in  interpreting  the  Apoc, 
and  whatever  valuable  additions  have  been  presented  by  various  writers, 
especially  recent,  a  full,  complete,  and  satisfactory  exposition  of  the  Book 
is  something  that  is  still  lacking.  Xot  one — however  valuable — but  bears 
grave  defects. 

The  expositions  of  a  Preterite  class,  such  as  Grotius,  Hammond,  Wetstein,  Eichhorn, 


372  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  189. 

Ewald,  De  Wette,  Liicke,  Stuart,  Bush,  Lee,  and  others,  are  so  palpably  one-sided  and 
unjust  to  the  Apoc,  that  they  have  but  a  small  following.  The  extravagances  of  some  of 
this  class  (as  e.g.  in  making  the  Apoc.  a  drama  with  its  acts,  descriptive  of  the  spiritual 
victory  of  Christianity  over  Judaism  and  Paganism),  are  self-refuting.  Take  the  exposi- 
tions of  the  Continulsl  class,  such  as  those  given  by  Mede,  Bengel,  Woodkouse,  Barnes, 
Cunningham,  Birks,  Brightman,  Lord,  Elliott,  and  many  others,  and  it  will  be  found 
impossible,  provided  due  allowance  is  made  for  the  prophetic  language  used,  to  reconcile 
their  continuation  of  fulfilment  (in  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials)  with  the  fads  stated  by 
prophecy  and  given  in  history.  Thus  e.g.  if  we  examine  Elliott,  perhaps  the  best  and 
most  profound  of  this  party,  we  find  his  order  of  fulfilment  utterly  untenable  (although 
plausibly  and  forcibly  expressed).  As  an  illustration — which  will  apply  to  a  large  num- 
ber of  similar  works — he  applies  the  sixth  seal  to  the  downfall  of  Paganism  and  the 
adoption  of  Christianity  by  Constantine  and  the  Empire.  But  when  we  look  at  the 
prophecy  of  the  seal,  it  contains  "  the  great  day  if  His  wrath,"  "theface  of  Him  (hat  sitteth 
<>,,  the  throne,"  ami  "the  wrath  of  the  Lamb."  It  contains  the  identical  things  which  are 
found  in  Matt.  24  :  29,  30  ;  Isa.  24  :  23  ;  Joel  chs.  2  and  3  ;  Isa.  ch.  2  ;  Zeph.  3  :  8-17  ; 
Luke  21  :  26,  27  ;  Dan.  7  :  9-13  ;  Eev.  19  :  15-17  ;  Isa.  24  :  21,  etc.  To  refer  its  fulfil- 
ment to  the  overthrow  of  Paganism  is  simply  to  misapply  language  which  the  Spirit  has, 
in  other  places,  directly  applied  to  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus  and  the  terrible  overthrow  of 
His  enemies  at  that  tune.  Some  realizing  the  tremendous  force  of  the  prophetic  lan- 
guage under  the  sixth  seal,  and  feeling  that  nothing  has  ever  yet  occurred  in  history  at 
all  commensurate  with  it,  adopt  (as  e.g.  Alford,  Isaac  Williams,  Victorinus,  Primasius  ; 
comp.  Fausset's  Introd.  to  Com.  Rev.)  a  parallel  connection  of  the  seals,  trumpets,  and 
vials,  moving  side  by  side,  the  second  and  third  series  filling  up  details,  etc.,  and  thus 
the  last  seal,  trumpet,  and  vial  have  a  simultaneous  ending.  But  this  scheme  has  pre- 
cisely a  similar  difficulty  in  respect  to  the  vials.  It  is  evident  and  conclusive  that  the 
vials  which  contain  "  the  seven  last  plagues,"  follow  after  the  deliverance  of  the  martyrs  and 
victors  over  the  culminated  Antichrist  (Rev.  15  :  2-4).  They  pertain  to  the  period  of 
vintage,  and  are  rjoured  out  (ch.  16  :  2)  on  the  adherents  of  the  last  Antichrist.  Nothing 
has  yet  taken  place  in  the  slightest  degree  commensurate  with  the  prediction.  Now  any 
interpretation  and  application  wdiich  violates  the  order  laid  down,  and  fritters  away  the 
meaning  of  prophecy,  must  be  discarded  as  untenable.  We  cannot,  therefore,  accept  of  a 
past  and  present  continuous  fulfilment  of  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials, or  of  a  disloca- 
tion of  their  order  (as  e.g.  by  Barbour  in  Three  Worlds,  who  has  the  trumpets  fulfilled 
and  the  seals  and  vials  still  future  ;  or  by  Ralston  <>u  the  Apoc,  who  arbitrarily  places 
four  of  the  trumpets  in  the  Millennial  era,  and  has  the  vials  outpoured  before  the  action 
of  the  trumpets)  in  a  partial  fulfilment.  The  diversity  and  antagonism  of  all  such 
schemes  are  great,  as  e.g.  illustrated  by  the  first  seal  ;  one  (as  Elliott,  etc.)  insists  that  it 
refers  to  the  Roman  Empire  ;  another  (as  Lord,  etc.)  to  the  Christian  Church  ;  one  (as 
Brightman,  etc.)  to  truth  :  another  (as  Mede,  etc.)  to  the  Son  of  God  ;  one  (as  Wood- 
house,  etc.)  to  ecclesiastical  affairs,  another  (as  Barnes,  etc.)  to  secular  ;  one  (as  Ralston, 
etc.)  to  the  Papacy  ;  another  (as  Baldwin)  to  union  of  the  Church  and  State  ;  another  (as 
Craven)  to  science,  etc.  As  we  proceed  the  diversity  increases.  We  may  dismiss  a  mul- 
titude of  such  interpretations  by  simply  keeping  in  view  a  few  fundamental  points. 
Some  schemes  are  so  palpably  absurd,  and  others  so  shocking  to  propriety,  that  it  seems 
strange  that  they  should  ever  have  been  published.  Take  e.g.  Hengstenberg's  theory, 
which  culminates  i-n  making  the  battle  of  ch.  19  to  denote  the  Christianization  of  the 
Germans  (!),  the  Millennium  being  past  (!),  and  Satan  after  his  binding  (!)  now  being 
liberated.  Or,  take  Baldwin's  view,  which  evidences  its  spirit  by  making  the  woman 
with  twelve  stars  and  her  man-child  to  be  the  Church  and  the  United  States  (!),  the  war 
of  Michael  to  be  the  overthrow  of  monarchies  by  the  United  States  (!),  the  Son  of  Man 
and  the  Coming  as  a  thief  to  be  applied  to  the  United  States  (!  !),  the  Advent  of  the  Ring 
of  kings  is  that  of  the  United  States  (!  !  !),  which  shuts  up  monarchy  in  the  wilds  of  Asia 
for  a  thousand  years,  introducing  a  Millennium  of  democracy  (!).  So  the  shallow  ravings 
of  Davis,  who  e.g.  makes  the  wilderness  America,  the  Man-child  Jesus,  who  will  be  born 
again  by  a  natural  birth  (!).  who  is  already  come  (!),  and  will  lead  the  American  Republic 
to  a  great  victory  over  the  nations  of  Europe  ;  Kossuth  being  "  the  angel  ascending  from 
the  East,  and  having  the  seal  of  the  living  God.' '  It  appears  almost  incredible,  that  these 
and  similar  works  appear,  and  so  basely  prostitute  this  Book,  and  pervert  its  sublime 
predictions,  to  eulogize  and  exalt  Republicanism.  Another  class  are  so  completely 
opposed  to  the  nature  and  intention  of  the  Book,  and  to  its  representations  of  "  the 
Christ,"  that  a  refutation  is  not  required,  as  e.g.  in  Gascoyne's  Ne w  Suit/lion  of  'he  Con- 
temporaneous Symbols  of  the  liev.  of  St.  John.     A  writer  defeats  himself  when,  as  this  one, 


PROP.  1S9.]  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  373 

he  requires  us  to  believe  that  the  magnificent  and  consoling  representations  of  chs.  -i 
and  5  are  portrayals  of  an  apostatizing  from  the  truth  ;  that  the  elders,  living  creatures, 
etc.,  symbolize  apostatizing  men  and  civil  rulers  on  earth  ;  that  the  grand  worship  de- 
picted pictures  an  idolatrous  worship  ;  that  the  sealed  book  and  the  taking  of  it  is  indic- 
ative of  "  high  pretensions  to  divine  authority  in  the  Church,"  and  that  "  the  Lamb" 
Himself  denotes  "  the  positive  idolatry  set  up  in  the  Church  during  the  fourth  century," 
or  "  the  worship  of  the  crojS."  Such  a  procedure  is  caricaturing  the  most  sublime  teach- 
ing. Another  class,  without  entering  such  extremes,  engraft  such  monstrosities  upon 
their  schemes  as  to  make  them  ridiculous.  Thus  e.g.  Swormstedt  (7he  End  of  the  World 
Near)  indulges  in  the  wildest  conceits,  as  e.g.  Satan  occujiies  the  moon  ;  the  moon  is  the 
bell  of  the  Bible,  and  there  will  be  fought  a  great  battle  between  Satan  and  the  angels  ; 
Satan,  infuriated,  lashes  about  with  his  tail  (being  the  dragon)  and  hurls  some  of  the 
guardian  angels  out  of  the  moon  into  the  earth  ;  this  is  done  after  the  bridal  tour  of  the 
Bride,  who  alights  on  the  sunny  side  of  the  moon,  having  the  moon  under  her  feet  anil  the 
twelve  constellations  around  her — and  similar  trash  which  vitiates  any  valuable  sugges- 
tions that  the  book  contains,  forming  a  mixture  of  gross  literalism  and  high  spiritualism 
— all  bent  to  show  that  the  end  was  chronologically  fixed.  No  book  has  ever  rec 
such  outrageous  treatment  from  the  hands  of  its  enemies  and  professed  friends.  Men, 
however,  of  soberness  and  intelligence  have  always— whatever  mistakes  thej-  themselves 
may  have  made  in  interpretation — redeemed  it  from  such  unworthy  handling. 

Take  almost  any  of  those  continuist  interpreters  (as  e.g.  Eureka  of  Dr.  Thomas),  aril 
we  find  them  largely  influenced  by  their  Church  views,  and  constantly  seeking  for  points 
of  attachment.  It  is  not  only  belief  and  unbelief  that  evince  great  divergencies,  but  we 
find  it  in  Protestant  and  Romanist,  High  Church  and  Low  Church,  professed  orthodox 
and  heterodox,  sects  with  peculiar  dogmas  and  schismatics.  Much  of  the  interpretation 
receives  a  distinctive  coloring  from  the  theological  standpoint  of  the  interpreter.  'While 
some  present  this  almost  unconsciously  and  inoffensively,  others  bring  it  £orth  most  dog- 
matically and  offensively.  Few,  comparatively  few,  have  been  the  writers  who  have 
approached  this  book  unbiassedly,  while  some  seem  to  have  made  it  a  medium  through 
which  to  vent  their  scorn  at  opposers.  With  such  a  spirit,  although  the  claim  is  loudly 
sounded  "Eureka"  no  symmetrical  or  consistent  interpretation  can  possibly  be  given.  If 
we  take  a  higher  grade  of  continuists,  the  main  stress  of  warning,  etc.,  is  laid  upon  these 
vials,  and  we  are  assured  that  we  are  now  living  under  the  fifth,  or  sixth,  or  even  at  the 
commencement  of  the  seventh!  (When,  as  we  have  briefly  shown  elsewhere,  the  very 
order  in  which  they  stand  related  to  resurrected  and  translated  saints,  and  the  culmi- 
nated Antichrist,  shows  conclusively  that  they  are  still  future.)  Take  e.g.  the  sixth  vial  as 
illustrative  of  the  manner  in  which  the  language  is  tortured,  and  explanations  given,  to 
make  it  fit  the  present  time.  Thus  the  three  agents  ("  three  unclean  spirits,"  Rev. 
1G  :  13)  are  made  out  to  be  Infidelity,  Socialism.  Ultramontanism,  Spiritualism,  Mon- 
archical-Republicanism, Revolution,  Naturalism,  Puseyism,  Broad-Churchism,  Paganism, 
Greek-Churchism,  Mohammedanism,  Popery,  Pantheism,  Communism,  Nihilism,  Inter- 
nationalism, Ecclesiasticism,  etc.,  as  it  happens  to  strike  the  mind  of  the  interpreter  to 
classify  three  controlling  principles  or  movements  now  at  work.  ("What  these  great  lead- 
ing influences  or  agents  are,  the  true  believer  will  fully  recognize,  when  the  time  comes, 
as  the  key  will  be  found  in  their  urging  on  the  last  confederation.)  The  same  efforts  and 
diversity  to  make  out  a  fulfilment  is  found  in  the  other  vials.  Such  illustrations  could 
be  multiplied,  and  they  teach  us  how  guardedly  we  should  aproach  this  Book,  lest  we  add 
our  mite  to  the  number  of  those  who  have,  more  or  less,  niisap jibed  its  predictions.  So 
far  as  the  chronological  deductions  of  many  such  writers  are  concerned,  time  itself  has 
shown  that  their  continuist  schemes  have  not  been  solidly  based.  We  gratefully  acknowl- 
edge, however,  the  great  value  of  the  researches  of  this  class  in  symbolism,  laws  of  sym- 
bolism, criticism  of  text,  etc.,  of  which  the  student  can  avail  himself. 

Obs.  8.  While  great  advances  have  been  made  in  interpreting  this  Book, 
we  believe  that  God  will  raise  up  some,  who,  for  the  sake  of  the  truth  per- 
taining to  "  the  Christ,*'  will  be  enabled  to  give  in  regular  order  a  correct 
interpretation  of  the  Apoc.  As  the  time  approaches  for  its  fulfilment,  as 
•the  interval  draws  nigh  in  which  its  most  stupendous  scenes  will  be 
witnessed,  as  a  preparation  to  those  who  shall  be  persecuted  under  the 
Antichrist,  as  a  source  of  comfort  and  hope  to  the  believing,  and  even  as  a 
warning  to  the  world,  such  will  be  the  result.     The  researches  of  recent 


374  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  189. 

writers  and  the  fulfilment  of  prediction  before  our  eyes  explanatory  of 
divine  utterance,  paves  the  way  for  such  a  work.  Happy  the  man  who 
shall  thus  be  favored  in  becoming  the  instrument  of  interpreting  so  glorious 
a  Revelation. 

We  must  believe  that  the  works  of  Seiss,  Burgh,  Maitland,  Benj.  Newton,  Todd, 
Lincoln,  Kelly,  Brooks,  Litch,  and  others  (whatever  defects  they  have,  e.g.  in  departing 
from  the  symbolistic  idea  and  insisting  too  much  upon  the  literal),  are  in  the  right  direc- 
tion. The  year-day  system,  once  so  popular,  with  its  antagonistic  applications  (as  illus- 
trated e.g.  in  the  writings  of  Bengel,  Lord,  Elliott,  Barnes,  etc.)  is  fast  losing  ground, 
not  only  for  the  reasons  assigned  by  Dr.  Tregelles  (On  Daniel,  p.  110),  but  owing  to  the 
widely  divergent,  and  yet  plausible,  applications,  and  the  flat  contradictions  to  a  regular 
chronological  series  which  it  involves.  Whatever  good  it  may  have  accomplished  by 
making  out  a  kind  of  inchoate  fulfilment,  it  is  certain  that  such  a  chronological  realiza- 
tion as  its  various  schemes  affirm,  has  never  yet  been  realized,  as  seen  e.g.  by  the  applica- 
tion made  of  the  sixth  seal.  We  are  strongly  impressed  with  the  idea  that  the  chief,  in- 
tended fulfilment  will  be  witnessed  during  the  interval  between  the  two  stages  of  the 
Advent,  and  this  we  dare  not  limit  (as  some,  Lincoln,  etc.)  to  seven  years,  for  the  reason 
that  those  years  only  refer  to  the  period  of  Antichristian  persecution,  whereas  other  and 
great  events  are  included  in  the  interval  (which  may  include  seventy-five  or  more  years). 
No  doubt  the  declaration  of  ch.  1  :  1,  "  things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass,"  had  led 
many  to  conclude  that  there  must  be  of  necessity,  an  immediate  and  continuous  fulfil- 
ment from  the  time  the  Apoc.  was  given  down  to  the  present.  One  of  the  healthy  signs 
of  Eschatological  study  is,  that  students  begin  to  see  that  such  egressions  are  not  to  be 
measured  by  the  human  standard  of  time,  but  by  that  of  the  Spirit's  measure,  who  e.g.  in 
Isa.  54,  calls  a  long  series  of  centuries  "  a  little  moment."  (Comp.  with  this  Dr.  Craven's 
note  and  ref.,  to  Alford,  in  Lange's  Com.  Rev.,  p.  89.)  A  close  examination  of  the  tenor 
of  Rev.,  with  a  comparison  with  other  Scripture  leads  us  to  accept  of  the  futurist  inter- 
pretation as  the  most  consistent  and  agreeable  to  the  order  of  the  Book.  The  progress 
made  in  this  direction  is  assuring  ;  and  we  trust  that  the  defects,  more  or  less,  clinging 
to  this  mode  of  application  will  be  removed  by  succeeding  writers.  The  tendency,  so 
natural,  to  explain  every  detail  of  symbolic  prophecy  relating  to  the  future,  leads  the  best 
of  writers  to  preseDt  merely  what  they  conceive  to  be  the  fulfilment,  and  divergencies 
and  antagonisms  spring  up  between  the  different  interpreters.  This  might  be  avoided 
to  some  extent,  at  least,  if  the  interpreter  would  confine  himself  simply  to  the  symbolical 
representations,  give  its  meaning,  show  its  attachment  to  the  order  of  fulfilment  and  the 
( )ld  and  New  Test,  predictions,  without  entering  into  full  details  respecting  the  exact 
mode,  etc.,  in  which  it  is  to  be  realized.  These  symbolic  pictures  being  concise,  repre- 
sentative of  a  leading  idea  rather  than  given  to  details,  much  is  left  to  conjecture.  Some 
recent  writers  begin  to  realize  this  more  and  more,  and,  while  rooted  and  grounded  in 
the  futurist  interpretation,  express  themselves  with  becoming  modesty  (dogmatical  asser- 
tion has  nothing  to  do  with  symbolistic  prophecy)  in  the  manner  indicatt  d. 

As  illustrative  of  the  grave  defects  of  futurist  interpreters  we  select  two,  who  have 
written  largely  on  the  subject,  and  are  well  known  as  having  given  most  excellent  and 
valuable  instruction  and  suggestions  on  various  points.  These  two,  Bagster  and  Lincoln, 
vary  also  in  their  method  of  applying  the  futurist  application  ;  the  former  incorporates 
a  year-day  fulfilment  as  inchoate  to  a  still  future  literal-day  one  ;  the  latter  discards  the 
past  inchoate  fulfilment  and  confines  himself  (from  ch.  4)  exclusively  to  a  future  one. 
Bagster's  theory,  so  far  as  the  published  chronology  and  analogy  existing  between  the 
year-day  and  the  literal-day  fulfilment  is  concerned,  might  be  dismissed  as  not  proven 
by  the  fact  that  his  estimates,  based  on  such  analogy  and  chronology,  have  all  failed  to 
be  realized.  The  times  have  passed  with  a  non-fulfilment.  His  writings  are  constantly 
marred  by  the  interweaving  of  this  view,  and  the  utter  inconsistency  of  making  the  same 
prediction  to  speak  tiro  languages  seems  never  to  be  perceived.  Thus,  on  the  year-day 
fulfilment  the  seals,  trumpets  and  vials  are  symbolistic  and  not  literal  (i.e.  utter  a  dis- 
tinct meaning,  which  he  appropriates),  but  on  the  literal-day  theory,  the  same  prophecy 
is  literal,  and  must  be  literally  understood  (i.e.  giving  a  meaning  very  different  from  the 
former).  Now,  such  an  interpretation  and  application  is  a  violation  of  iinity  of  language  and 
meaning,  and  cannot  be  adopted  without  doing  violence  to  the  plainest  rules  of  language, 
and  especially  of  symbolistic.  To  incorporate  it  into  an  interpretation  of  prophecy 
necessarily  leads  to  confusion  and  misapplication.  Then  when  we  come  to  the  futurist 
explanation  the  symbolical  or  representative  nature  of  the  book  is  lost  sight  of,  and  the 
grossest  literalism  is  presented.     Thus  e.g.  literal  hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood  falls 


Prop.  189.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  375 

on  the  earth  ;  the  third  part  of  trees  and  grass  is  burnt  up  ;  a  literal  mountain  or  pillar 
of  fire  will  be  cast  into  the  sea  ;  the  third  part  of  salt  and  fresh  water  becomes  blood, 
and  the  third  part  of  the  creatures  die  ;  the  third  part  of  the  waters  become  literally  im- 
pregnated with  wormwood  (i.e  some  bitter  ingredient)  ;  a  great  battle  is  fought  in  the 
literal  atmosphere  out  of  which  Satan  is  cast  ;  the  interior  of  the  earth  ^i.e.  "  bottomless 
pit")  is  opened,  and  literally  "  swarms  of  locusts  will  then  come  forth  on  the  earth," 
"  devouring  every  green  thing"  and  "  stinging  the  ungodly,"  etc.  Such  a  literalism, 
from  which  at  times  he  himself  recoils  (as  e.g.  in  Rev.  8  :  10,  the  "  great  star"  may 
"  signify  an  angel  or  person  of  distinction,"  etc.)  evidences  that  the  writer  has  no  funda- 
mentally correct  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  symbolic  language.  Yet  a  number  of 
writers  indulge  in  this  very  strain  of  interpretation,  and  do  great  and  serious  injury  to 
the  truth  by  their  gross  applications.  Lincoln  is  more  consistent  in  avoiding  the  contra- 
diction involved  by  making  one  fulfilment  symbolistic  and  another  literal.  But  his 
work  on  Revelation  is  likewise  defaced  by  serious  errors.  We  do  not  now  refer  to  his 
ultra  churchly  views  and  his  indiscriminate  attack  upon  all  clericalism,  to  which  he 
makes  everything  bend  (for  this  we  have  previously  noticed),  but  to  interpretations  and 
applications.  Some  of  these  we  will  now  designate.  In  the  delineation  of  the  sixth  seal 
he  makes  it  simply  a  crisis,  preparatory  to  the  trumpets  and  vials,  declaring  that  "  the 
great  day  of  His  wrath  is  come,"  was  the  belief  of  those  frightened  ones,  but  that  it  had 
not  yet  come  !  This  cannot  be  so,  for  the  reasons  assigned  under  the  previous  note.  It 
belittles  the  prediction  to  favor  his  order  of  arrangement.  He  makes  the  144,000  not  to 
be  "  the  Church  of  God,"  but  Jews,  thus  showing  that  he  does  not  appreciate  the  force 
of  being  engrafted  into  the  Jewish  Commonwealth,  the  continuation  of  the  election  in 
adopted  ones  who  become  "  the  children  of  Abraham."  While  inclined  to  the  symbolistic 
view,  he  again  and  again  violates  the  same  by  a  gross  literalism,  as  e.g.  when  he  has 
"  hordes  of  lost  spirits  being  allowed  to  possess  the  bodies  of  men,"  and  "  the  devil  and 
his  angels  being  cast  down  from  (third)  heaven  to  the  earth  by  the  heavenly  saints." 
The  "  bottomless  pit"  is  "  the  heart  or  centre  of  the  earth,"  and  "  the  well "  is  a  shaft 
leading  to  this  centre,  while  "  the  key"  to  this  gives  power  to  loose  two  hundred  millions 
of  "lost  spirits"  confined  in  that  "  centre,"  who  come  and  possess  men  as  the  old 
demons  did  in  demoniacal  possessions.  The  two  witnesses  are  Elias  and  Moses  or 
Enoch,  who  must  experience  a  violent  death,  as  if  reserved  for  such  a  fate.  He  has  no 
church  during  the  interval,  and  thus  violates  the  order  laid  down  consecutively  in  ch.  14. 
Such  and  similar  comments  detract  from  much  that  is  interesting  and  valuable.  It  is 
sad  to  find  persons  who  "  love  the  appearing,"  and  earnestly  desire  to  win  others  to  the 
same  love,  weaken  their  appeals  by  the  incorporation  of  such  deductions.  It  seems  to  be 
a  legacy  derived  from  human  imperfection  which  enters,  more  or  less,  into  our  best  per- 
formances. Although  Lincoln  is  a  futurist,  yet,  for  the  sake  of  making  a  present  appli- 
cation, he  again  and  again  loses  sight  of  the  future  idea,  as  e.g.  under  the  sixth  seal  is 
"  found  a  feeble  earnest  in  some  measure  in  the  French  Revolution  of  1791,"  and  "  the 
frogs"  of  Rev.  16  :  13  are  "  stump  or  loquacious  orators"  already  at  work,  and  the 
"  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird  "  are  "  clericals"  who  have  been  such  in  the  past  and 
present,  etc.  When  reading  such  explanations,  one  feels  (as  in  the  Eureka,  etc.)  that  the 
animus  of  the  writer  had  much  to  do  with  the  same  in  order  to  make  out  a  preconceived 
theory.  Personal  feeling,  theological  bias,  prejudice  must  give  place  to  a  strict  adherence 
to  the  meaning  of  symbolical  language.  It  appears  to  the  writer  that  one  chief  defect  in 
numerous  expositions  is  the  following  :  the  symbols  being  seen  in  vision  are  picture-writ- 
ings,  capable  of  being  reproduced  by  good  artists  on  canvas,  and  are  representative  of  sown 
leading  idea  which  they  are  specially  designed  to  convey.  Now  the  seals,  trumpets,  vials, 
etc.,  have  been  interpreted  too  much  as  many  persons  interpret  parables,  viz.,  every  par- 
ticular is  made  significant,  when  really  intended  to  fill  out  the  picture,  and  the  stress  is 
not  sufficiently  laid  on  the  picture  as  a  ichole  or  upon  the  main  idea  represented  by  it. 
Take  a  symbolical  picture  of  the  past  or  present,  and  no  one  would  be  disposed  to  make 
every  accessory  to  its  filling  out  to  denote  a  special  meaning,  but  would  be  satisfied  if  he 
received  the  leading  idea  intended  by  the  artist.  The  same  is  true  of  symbols  in  writing, 
and  we  can  only  be  assured  of  a  cautious  handling  of  the  Apoc.  if  we  observe  this  self- 
evident  rule,  observing  the  simplicity  and  definiteness  of  symbolical  representations,  as 
illustrated  in  Egyptian,  Oriental,  Indian,  and  biblical  symbols.  A  pictorial  representa- 
tion of  the  symbols  of  the  Apoc,  consecutively  given  by  a  competent  artist,  and  carefully 
studied  to  catch  the  main  idea  conveyed,  would  certainly  aid  in  getting  rid  of  much 
looseness  concerning  them.  Such  a  representation  can  be  mentally  made  and  profitably 
considered  by  the  .interpreter,  with  the  abundant  help  that  is  given  in  symbolistic  litera- 
ture. 


376  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  189. 

In  conclusion,  we  append  the  opinions  of  two  able  men  as  illustrative  of  a  pervading 
feeling.  Dr.  Schaff  {His.  Apos.  Church,  p.  605)  says  of  the  Apoc.  :  "  The  purpose  of 
edification  it  has,  in  fact,  ever  served,  notwithstanding  the  very  various  and  sometimes 
altogether  contradictory  historical  expositions,  which  it  has  met  even  at  the  hands  of 
truly  pious  theologians,  who  in  other  more  important  jjoints  perfectly  agree.  We  may 
fully  concede  the  unsatisfactory  character  of  all  attempts  yet  made  to  explain  it,  from 
Irenaeus  down  to  Liicke  and  Hengstenberg— and  for  our  own  part  we  must  confess  that 
none  of  the  many  commentaries  are  altogether  satisfactory,  however  much  light  they  may 
throw  on  the  details— we  may  be  honestly  persuaded  that  the  proper  key  to  the  full 
scientific  and  historical  understanding  of  this  remarkable  book  has  not  yet  been  found 
without  thereby  being  obliged  in  the  least  to  doubt  its  divine  origin  and  high  practical  value." 
Dr.  Bonar  in  his  "  Opening  Address"  at  the  Prophetic  Conference  at  Mildmay  Park,  Lon- 
don, says  :  "  I  feel  uncertain  in  reference  to  systems  of  interpretation  of  the  Apoc.  I 
confess  that  I  do  not  adhere,  I  may  say,  to  any  of  the  different  schools.  I  profess  to  be 
a  learner  still  in  regard  to  the  Apoc,  and  I  am  waiting  for  light,  and  I  believe  the  Holy 
Spirit  will  give  it,  and  that  we  shall  erelong,  it  may  be,  understand  that  marvellous  book 
which  the  Church  has  been,  age  after  age,  trying  to  comprehend,  but  which  I  believe  it 
has  hitherto  failed  in  a  great  measure  to  unravel."     We  are  learners,  "  waiting  for  light." 


PeOP.  190.]  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  377 


Peoposition  190.     Oar  views  sustained  hy  the  addresses  to  ike 
Seven  Churches. 

This  is  seen  in  one  simple  fact  presented  in  all  of  them.  Lange 
{Com.  Rev.,  p.  114)  has  well  observed  :  "  The  fundamental  idea  of 
all  the  seven  epistles  is  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  Apocalypse 
itself — the  Coming  of  the  Lord."  This  is  the  key-note  of  the  intro- 
ductory to,  and  the  solemn  admonition  and  anticipation  in,  all  of 
them. 

Ols.  1.  We  cannot  possibly  receive  the  view  entertained  by  some 
(Barnes,  Stuart,  etc.)  that  these  Epistles  are  simply  historic,  and  are  only 
intended  for  us  in  so  far  as  the  principles  laid  down  and  the  admonitions 
given  are  of  general  application.  The  fact  that  these  representations  ex- 
tend to  the  Second  Advent,  while  the  seven  historic  churches  have  long 
since  passed  away,  is  in  itself  sufficient  to  set  aside  such  an  interpretation. 

It  will  not  answer  to  make  this  Coming  of  Jesus  alluded  to  in  the  Epistle,  a  Coming 
in  providence,  or  death,  etc.,  because  the  Coming  to  which  constant  reference  is  made 
must,  in  consistency,  be  the  same  in  the  introductory,  ch.  1  :  7  (which  Barnes,  Com.  loci, 
/describes  as  a  literal,  personal  Coming).  To  make  theni  merely  temporary  addresses 
exclusively  pertaining  to  the  seven  Churches,  so  named,  in  Asia,  as  destructive  criticism 
suggests,  is,  of  course,  to  violate  the  symbolical  or  prophetic  import  of  those  addresses 
and  the  far-reaching  extent  contained  within  them.  To  make  them  (as  Litch,  Harmony 
of  Danl.  and  the  Apoc.)  mere  pastoral  letters,  altogether  personal  to  the  seven  ministers  to 
whom  they  are  sent,  and  pertaining  only  to  their  standing  and  ministration,  is  to  over- 
look the  Sjnrit's  appeal  to  "  the  churches,"  the  direction  for  all  believers,  everywhere,  to 
hear  and  receive,  and  the  fact  that  the  Coming  of  Jesus  is  directly  asserted  respecting 
them,  showing  that  they  then  are  in  existence.  Even  Lord  (Apoc.)  does  not  assign  to 
these  churches  a  symbolical  or  representative  character,  owing  to  his  adhesion  to  an 
(with  him)  inflexible  rule,  viz.,  that  analogy  rejects  the  idea  of  using  a  symbol  or  repre- 
sentative of  the  same  species  that  is  symbolized  or  represented.  Now  while  a  general 
usage  is  favorable  to  such  a  position  in  the  Apoc,  yet  even  there  we  find  exceptions  to 
it,  for  he  himself  admits  (p.  231)  that  in  the  reception  of  the  open  book  the  Apostle  is  a 
symbol  or  representative  of  other  believers  (thus  a  man  is  representative  of  men)  and 
(p.  518)  the  martyrs  represented  themselves  or  other  martyrs,  and  (p.  509)  Jesus  and  the 
saints  are  representative  of  themselves.  The  laws  of  symbolism  as  illustrated  in  ancient 
and  Indian  symbolism  allow  this,  as  e.g.  when  man  is  used  to  represent  man,  etc.  Aside 
from  this  :  these  churches  are  first  symbolized  (ch.  1  :  12,  13)  and  then  the  symbol  is 
explained  (v.  20),  and  then  after  the  explanation,  the  addresses  are  given  on  the  basis  of 
the  explanation.  A  variation  from  the  species  is  frequent  when  e.g.  some  characteristics, 
special  traits,  are  to  be  prominently  set  forth.  The  variety  of  statements,  admonitions, 
cautions,  as  well  as  the  relationship  of  the  churches  to  Jesus,  made  it  eminently  suitable 
for  churches  themselves  to  be  representative  of  churches. 

Ols.  2.  We  cannot  accept  of  the  opinion  (so  Vitringa,  etc.)  that  these 
seven  churches  are  typical  or  representative  of  seven  successive  periods  of 
Church  history.  The  variety  of  application  made  (for  no  two  advocates  of 
this  view  are  agreed  as  to  the  time  of  this  succession^  or  the  parties  to  whom 


378  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  190. 

it  is  to  be  referred)  evidences  the  inability  of  forming  such  an  order  of 
fulfilment — the  same  being  largely  influenced  by  the  personal  Churchly 
views  of  the  interpreter.  Besides  this,  not  a  particle  of  proof  can  be  found 
in  the  Book  to  show  such  a  succession,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  warnings 
respecting  Christ's  coming  to  punish  or  reward  as  their  respective  condi- 
tion will  be  at  such  a  Coming,  clearly  proves  that  they  are  not  successive, 
being  in  existence  at  the  Sec.  Advent. 

The  applications  of  Brightruan,   Moore,  and  others,  in  this  respect,  are  repeated  by 
recent  Writers,  as  e.g.  Sworrnstedt,  who  (The  End  of  the   World  Near,  p.  60)  makes  the 
seven  churches  symbols  of  the  Church  "  during  seven  distinct  periods  of  the  Church  age, 
reaching  from  the  Apostolic  Church  until  the  end  of  the  Gospel  or  Church  age."     So  also 
Barbour  (Three    Worlds,  p.  176),  and  others,  who  make  out  a  chronological  succession  to 
suit,  as  they  suppose,  the  characteristics  of  each  Epistle,  long  or  short,  as  they  find 
resemblances.     Anything  that  can  be  construed  into  a  likeness  is  eagerly  seized  and 
applied  by  this  class.     No  matter  what  contradictions  are  involved  historically  or  doc- 
trinally,  all  must  bend  to  their  own  doctrinal  position.     We  append  as  illustrations  of 
antagonistic  application  two  recent   ones.     Lincoln  (Zeds,   on  Rev.)  makes  out  seven 
stages,  as  follows  :  1.  Ephesus  =  heart-wrong,  clericalism,  outwardly  wrong  ;  2.  Smyrna  = 
Judaized  Christianity,  spreading  worldliness  ;  3.  Pergamos  =  union  of  Church  and  world  ; 
4.  Thyatira  =  Papacy  in  full  development  ;  5.  Sardis  =  Protestantism  but  fails  ;  6.  Phila- 
delphia =  those  who  come  out  of  this  apostatizing,  a  separate  group  of  believers,  of  which 
the  author  is  one  ;  7.  Laodicea  =  final  rejection  of  the  professing  Church  at  Advent. 
Barbour  (Three  Worlds)  makes  out  these  :  1.  Ephesus  =  chief,  desirable,  the  first  or  apos- 
tolic phase  of  Christianity  ;  2.   Smyrna  =  sweet  odor,  the  Church  in  the  first  persecution 
under  the  Roman  emperors  ;  3.  Pergamos  =  elevated,  the  Church  at  and  after  the  conver- 
sion of  Constantine  ;  4.  Thyatira  =  sacrificed,  the  Clrarch  as  the  woman  in  the  wilder- 
ness ;    5.  Sardis  =  that   which   remains,  the    Church  prior  to  the   great   Reformation  ; 
6.  Philadelphia  =  brotherly  love,  the  Reformation  Church  ;  7.  Laodicea  =  judgment,  the 
Church  at  the  time  of  the  end.     (Compare  as  antagonisms,  a  Roman  Catholic  and  a  Prot- 
estant portrayal  of  such  successions,  p.  139,  Lange's   Com.  Rev.).     Now  to  indicate  the 
spirit  of  the  interpreter  ;  Lincoln,  who  (as  a  "  Believer")  is  intensely  hostile,  from  his 
standpoint,  to  the  ministry  of  the  Church,  must,  of  necessity,  find  something  to  sustain 
his  position   of   exclnsivcness.     This   he    does  e.g.    in  "  Nicolaitanism,"  which    means 
"  those  who  conquer  the  people,"  that  is,  "  Clerisy  or  Clericalism,"  and  hence  proceeds 
to  denounce  all  forms  indiscriminately.     Here  we  have  (1)  a  dogmatical  assumption  that 
he  has  definitely  succeeded  in  applying  this   difficult  name,  and  which,  whatever  its 
meaning,  certainly  is  not  applicable  (comp.  Church  Histories  and  Encyclops.  on  the  same) 
to  a  godly  ministry  ;  (2)  he  defames  an  age  of  the  Church  which  started  out  under  the 
auspices  of  inspired  apostles  and  their  immediate  successors  ;  (3)  history  attests  that  the 
only  form  of  clericalism  which  brought  the  people  under  its  despotic  power  and  was  pro- 
ductive of  evil,  was  that  which  secularized  the  clergy,  made  them  a  superior  class,  with 
hierarchical  power,  while  another  party  resisted  such  encroachments — to  make  no  distinc- 
tion is  to  violate  the  facts  of  history  ;  (4)  that  a  successive  clerisy  is  unmistakably  taught 
in  the  New  Test.,  is  a  self-evident  truth,  being  universally  acknowledged,  saving  by  a 
few  one-sided  persons  ;  (5)  the  simple  fact,  that  in  all  these  past  centuries  God  has  abun- 
dantly and  richly  blessed  clericals  who  have  been  godly  and  devoted,  should  forbid  such 
wholesale  denunciation  ;  (6)  the  fact  that  clericals  have  been  among  the  noblest,  purest, 
self-sacrificing,  and  life-offering  people  of  God,  should  teach  a  discrimination  in  the  use 
of  "  Nicolaitans  ;"  (7)  the  fact  that  he  can  only  trace  the  Church  and  his  own  indebted- 
ness for  the  Scriptures  and  Christianity  to  a  Church  having  a  "  clerisy"  should  forbid 
the  dishonoring,  uncharitable,  and  exclusive  interpretation   given  by  him  ;  and  (8)  to 
make  out,  in  behalf  of  his  unjust  theory,  that  "  the  angel  "  of  the  churches  is  "  ominous," 
a  representation   of   Christendom   being   away   from   Christ   (after   it   being   expressly 
asserted,  as  indicative  of  nearness  to  Jesus  and  special  relationship  to  Him,  that  they  were 
held  in  His  hand),  only  shows  to  what  extremes  men  can  go  in  order  to  find  some  supposed 
support  to  a  doctrinal  speculation.     No  matter  how  sincere,  honest,  and  even  pious,  such 
writers  are,  their  writings  do  great  harm  by  exciting  unnecessary  prejudice,  and  disinclin- 
ing others  to  study  these  subjects. 

Ols.  3.  We  are  forced  by  a  variety  of  considerations  to  accept  of  one  or 
the  other  of  the  following  views  :  1.  That  these  seven  churches  symbolize 


PEOP.   190.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  379 

or  represent  the  general  Church  and  various  phases  in  it,  more  or  less  con- 
tinuous in  it,  down  to  the  Advent.  2.  That  they  are  prophetic  of  the 
general  Church,  giving  characteristics  that  shall  prevail,  but  especially 
preceding  the  Sec.  Advent.  3.  That  the  seven  churches  historically  named 
possessed  those  special  characteristics,  and  are  thus  presented  as  typical  of 
the  Church  universal  in  its  development  down  to  the  Coming  again  of 
Jesus.  4.  That  these  churches  having  such  traits  are  representative  of 
seven  distinctive  characteristic  periods  without  making  a  succession  (i.e.  all 
the  characteristics  are  co-existing),  but  one  more  prominent  and  that  just 
before  the  Advent,  they  will  be  contemporaneous.  We  prefer  the  simple 
idea  that  the  seven  churches,  as  they  contemporaneously  existed,  are  typi- 
cal, representative,  prophetical  of  seven  prominent  phases  or  conditions  of 
the  Church,  contemporaneously  present,  but  becoming  more  and  more 
intensive  as  we  near  the  Second  Advent.  The  reasons  for  this  prophetical 
or  representative  character  are  the  following  :  it  is  the  introduction  to  a 
book  of  this  nature  ;  the  entire  book,  ch.  1  :  4,  11,  10,  is  designed  for  the 
Church  universal  given  through  the  medium  of  these  seven  ;  the  Head  of 
the  Church  is  represented  in  His  relation  to  the  whole  Church  by  these 
seven,  ch.  1  :  13-19;  the  "mystery,''  ch.  1  :  20,  attached  to  these  seven 
is  indicative  of  a  prophetic  depth  ;  the  number  seven,  as  all  admit,  is  of  sym- 
bolic import  (Comp.  e.g.  Auberlen's  Gnomen  and  his  Dan.  and  Rev.), 
implying 'completeness,  perfection,  etc.,  and  hence  "  the  seven  churches 
represent  the  Church  catholic  in  its  totality  ;"  the  universality  of  appeal  in 
reference  to  hearing,  ch.  2  :  7,  11,  IT,  20  and  ch.  3  :  6,  13,  22  ;  the  appro- 
priateness of  the  addresses  to  the  Church  universal  in  cautions,  warnings, 
promises,  commendations,  rebukes,  and  encouragements  ;  the  past  and 
present  fulfilment  of  the  conditions  specified  in  the  history  of  the  Church 
(for  without  attempting  a  regular  succession,  it  must  be  admitted  that  such 
phases  or  conditions  have  always,  more  or  less,  existed  down  to  the  pres- 
ent) ;  that  seven  and  only  seven  churches,  and  these  by  far  from  being  the 
most  prominent,  are  selected  ;  that  these  churches  are  represented  as 
enduriny  to  the  end,  while  the  literal  churches  have,  for  many  centuries, 
fallen  ;  the  intimations  within  them  of  a  futurity  which  cannot  be  confined 
to  the  period  of  time  in  which  the  types  or  literal  churches  existed  ;  what 
was  addressed  to  one  church  was  designed  for  all  the  churches,  showing  the 
non-limitation  implied — all  which  unmistakably  shows  that  far  more  was 
intended  than  seven  addresses  to  seven  literal,  obscure,  individual 
churches.  We  have  before  us  an  address  to  the  Universal  Church,  which 
the  relation  to  the  Christ,  their  names,  graces,  defects,  etc.,  fully  enforces. 

Lange  (Com.  Rev.,  p.  139)  makes  these  seven  epistles  "prophetic  letters,  constituting 
the  first  part  of  the  Apoc.  itself,  and  forming  a  foundation  for  the  whole."  "  Hence,  the 
life  pictures  of  the  seven  churches  are  not  merely  historical  portraits  of  the  Apostolic 
Church  (issued  through  an  episcopal  medium,  but  of  prophetic  depth  and  form)  ;  they  are 
also  prophetic  types  of  churchly  conditions,  which  shall  hold  good  until  the  end  of  the 
world."  While  he  accepts  of  an  "  ideal  foundation,  the  prophetic  view  of  a  spiritual 
world  historical  process  of  development  (so  that  "  Ephesus  is  manifestly  a  picture  of  the 
Church  toward  the  end  of  the  apostolic  time,  while  Laodicea  pictures  it  as  it  shall  be  in 
the  last  time,  according  to  the  fundamental  traits  of  that  time,  as  predicted  Matt.  24  :  37 
scl-").  3'efc  he  refuses  a  chronologically  formed  seven  distinct  periods  of  Church  history, 
and  adds  :  "  We  can  affirm  with  certainty  that  the  seven  life  pictures  are  continued  side 
by  side  through  all  the  ages  of  the  Church  ;  now  one,  and  now  another,  predominating  ; 
one  prevailing  at  this  place,  another  at  that.  There  have  been  illustrations  of  the  figure 
of  Jezebel  in  all  ages.  And  were-  there  no  Philadelphia  in  the  very  last  time,  where 
would  the  Lord  find  His  Bride?"     Trench  (The  Epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches)  declares 


380  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  190. 

that  they  are  "written  for  the  edification  of  the  Universal  Church,"  for  "these  seven 
churches  of  Asia  are  not  an  accidental  aggregation,  which  might  just  as  conveniently 
have  been  eight,  or  six,  or  any  other  number  ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  a  fitness  in 
this  number,  and  that  these  seven  do  in  some  sort  represent  the  Universal  Church ;  that 
we  have  a  right  to  contemplate  the  seven  as  offering  to  us  the  great  and  leading  aspects, 
moral  and  spiritual,  which  churches  gathered  in  the  name  of  Christ  out  of  the  world 
assume."  "  That  these  churches  are  more  or  less  representative  churches,  and  they  were 
selected  because  they  are  so  ;  that  they  form  a  complex  within  and  among  themselves, 
mutually  fulfilling  and  completing  one  another  ;  that  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  con- 
templates them  for  the  time  being  as  symbolic  of  the  Universal  Church,  implying  as 
much  in  that  mystic  seven,  and  giving  many  other  indications  of  the  same."  He  forcibly 
says  :  "  The  seven  must  be  regarded  as  constituting  a  complex  whole — as  possessing  an  ideal 
completeness.  Christ,  we  feel  sure,  could  not  have  placed  Himself  in  the  relation  which 
He  does  to  them — as  holding  in  His  hand  the  seven  stars,  walking  among  the  seven  golden 
candlesticks,  these  stars  being  the  angels  of  the  churches,  and  the  candlesticks  the  churches 
themselves— unless  they  ideally  represented  and  set  forth,  in  some  way  or  other,  the  Univer- 
sal Church  militant  here  upon  earth."  Dr.  Craven  in  Lange's  Com.  Rev.  (p.  140,  Amer.  Ed.), 
adopts  the  view  :  "1.  That  the  seven  churches  are  representative  of  the  Universal  Church  ; 
2.  That  they  are  representative  of  different  forms  of  Church  life,  each  of  which  is  always 
existent,  to  a  greater  or  less  degree,  in  every  period  of  Church  history  ;  3.  That  they  are, 
in  their  order,  representative  of  the  predominant  characteristics  of  the  Church  in  seven 
periods  of  her  history  between  the  writing  of  the  Apoc.  and  the  Second  Advent  of 
Christ."  (But  of  the  last,  he  does  not  affirm  distinct  termini.)  Dr.  Seiss  (The  Apocalypse) 
takes  a  similar  view,  declaring  :  "  These  seven  churches,  then,  besides  being  literal  his- 
torical churches,  stand  for  the  entire  Christian  body,  in  all  periods  of  its  history."  They 
"  represent  seven  phases  or  periods  in  the  Church's  history,  stretching  from  the  time  of 
the  Apostles  to  the  Coming  again  of  Christ."  They  "  represent  seven  varieties  of  Chris- 
tians, both  true  and  false.  Every  professor  of  Christianity  is  either  an  Ephesian  in  his 
religious  qualities,  a  Smyrnaote,  a  Pergamite,  a  Thyatiran,  a  Sardian,  a  Philadelphian, 
or  a  Laodicean."  "  Nor  are  we  to  look  for  one  sort  in  one  period,  or  in  one  denomina- 
tion only.  Every  age,  every  denomination,  and  nearly  every  congregation  contains  speci- 
mens of  each,"  etc.  "  If,  in  dealing  with  these  Epistles,  every  man,  of  every  age,  has  a 
divine  thermometer  whereby  to  tell  exactly  where  he  and  his  Church  stands  in  Christ's 
judgment,  and  one  constructed  and  delivered  to  him  from  Christ  Himself  for  this  specific 
purpose,  then  this  fulness  and  unlimitedness  of  urgency  is  comprehensible  and  fitting  ; 
but  on  any  other  assumption  it  degenerates  into  mere  poetry  and  rhetoric."  Such  testi- 
monies could  be  multiplied  ;  for,  so  far  as  this  representative  character  is  concerned, 
hundreds  of  eminent  writers  in  the  Church,  from  an  early  period  down  to  the  present, 
have  urged  it  as  essential  to  a  proper  comprehension  of  the  epistles.  The  earliest  com- 
mentator, Victorinus,  fully  endorses  it  ;  recent  commentators,  as  Bengel,  Olshausen, 
Alford,  Lange,  etc.,  adopt  it  ;  men  of  the  greatest  ability  and  learning,  like  Mede,  regard 
it  as  clearly  presented.  Thus  e.g.  Mede  {Works,  b.  5,  ch.  10,  p.  90)  pertinently  asks  : 
"  If  we  consider  their  number,  being  seven  (which  is  the  number  of  revolution  of  times, 
and  therefore  in  this  book  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials  also  are  seven)  ;  or  if  we  con- 
sider the  choice  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  that  He  taketh  neither  all,  no,  nor  the  most 
famous  churches  then  in  the  world,  as  Antioch,  Alexandria,  Pome,  and  many  others,  and 
such,  no  doubt,  as  had  need  of  instruction  as  well  as  those  here  named  ;  if  these  things 
be  well  considered,  it  will  seem  that  these  seven  churches,  besides  their  literal  respect, 
were  intended  to  be  as  patterns  and  types  of  the  several  ages  of  the  Catholic  Church  from 
the  beginning  thereof  unto  the  end  of  the  world  ;  that  so  these  seven  churches  should 
prophetically  sample  unto  us  a,  sevenfold  successive  temper  and  condition  of  the  whole 
visible  Church,  according  to  the  several  ages  thereof,  answering  the  pattern  of  the  s£ven 
churches  here."  Dr.  Schaff  (His.  Apns.  Church,  p.  604)  presents  the  most  simple  and 
consistent  explanation,  when  he  makes  these  churches  to  "  represent  the  xchole  Church  in 
its  various  forms  and  tendencies."  Ebrard  (Rev.  of  John)  makes  the  churches  to  be 
prophetic  or  typical  of  actual  conditions  or  states  of  the  Church,  not  during  seven  suc- 
cessive periods  as  Vitringa,  etc.,  not  as  seven  co-existing  phases  presented  by  the  Church 
immediately  preceding  the  Advent  as  Hofman,  etc.,  but  partly  consecutive  and  partly 
co-existent— the  first  four  successive,  the  last  three  contemporaneous,  extending  side  by 
side  to  the  end.  (He  gives  the  following  scheme  :  1.  Ephesus  =  Apostolic  Church  ; 
2.  Smyrna  =  martyr  Church  from  John  down  to  Constantine  ;  3.  Pergamos  =  Church  from 
fourth  to  ninth  century  ;  4.  Thyatira  =  Church  of  the  middle  ages  ;  5,  6  and  7.  =  phases 
springing  from  the  Eeformation  ;  (5)  Sardis  =  High  Lutherans  ;  (6)  Philadelphia  =  Re- 


Prop.  190.]  the  tiieoceatic  kingdom.  381 

formed  of  Europe  and  America  ;  (7)  Laodicea  =  no  particular  church  organization,  but 
may  be  found,  more  or  less,  in  the  general  Church.  It  is  readily  seen  how,  in  such  esti- 
mates, men  are  influenced  largely  by  their  Church  inclinations,  etc.) 

Obs.  4.  Let  ns  take  this  representative  character  of  the  seven  churches, 
almost  universally  conceded  by  able  writers,  and  it  is  in  full  accord  with 
our  doctrinal  position.  Thus,  to  notice  only  a  few  points  indicative  of  this 
agreement,  let  the  reader  consider  the  following  :  1.  The  condition  of  the 
Church  itself— mixed,  containing  tares  and  wheat,  tempted  and  tried,  false 
profession  and  true  love,  defection  and  faithful  adhesion — is  evidence 
that  we  have  properly  delineated  the  same,  and  the  design  of  the  present 
dispensation.  2.  This  condition  of  the  Church  existing  down  to  the 
Sec.  Advent,  unmistakably  shows  that  no  Millennial  age  can  possibly 
intervene.  The  prophetic  portrayal  positively  forbids  it.  It  accords  only 
with  our  doctrinal  faith,  seeing  that  such  a  conversion  of  the  world,  as 
multitudes  advocate,  is  entirely  removed  from  the  description.  3.  The 
Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus  assumes  the  prominence  that  we  give  it,  being 
urged  as  warning,  encouragement,  and  hope.  It  is  the  special  feature, 
relating  to  Eedemption  and  fulfilment  of  covenant  promise,  which  our 
faith  is  to  grasp  and  our  hearts  to  respond  to  in  order  that  it  may  be  to  us 
an  inestimable  blessing  and  not  a  curse.  4.  The  special  promises  to  incite 
to  faithfulness  are  not  made  dependent  upon  death,  but  upon  this  Sec.  Com- 
ing. Inconsistency  with  our  position  and  teaching,  the  honor  and  glory  to 
be  brought  to  the  redemed  is  identified  with  the  Coming  of  the  Christ. 
5.  These  epistles  unite  with  this  Sec.  Advent,  the  restoration  of  Paradise 
and  the  tree  of  life,  the  Millennial  exemption  from  afflictions,  sorrow,  tears, 
and  death,  the  exaltation  and  glorious  reign  of  the  saints,  the  realization  of 
co-heirship  and  co-judgship  with  the  Christ.  These  things  alone  are 
abundantly  confirmatory  of  our  expressed  belief  and  interpretation  of  the 
Scriptures. 

Indeed,  these  epistles  if  in  agreement  with  the  general  analogy  of  the  Word,  must,  of 
necessity,  make  the  Church  a  probationary  and  preparatory  stage,  and  must  designate 
with  special  prominence  the  Second  Advent,  because  then  the  glorious  promises  of  God, 
covenanted  and  predicted,  will  be  amply  realized. 


382  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  191. 


Proposition  191.     Our  doctrine  enforced  by  the  general  tenor  of 
the  Apocalypse. 

The  concluding  book  of  the  Canon  ought  to  inform  us — being  a 
revelation  of  the  future — when  and  how  the  glorious  promises, 
covenanted  and  predicted,  pertaining  to  Christ,  the  saints,  and  the 
world,  are  to  be  realized.  This  it  does  in  complete  harmony  with 
the  previous  teaching  of  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  the 
design  of  the  dispensation,  etc. 

So  clear  and  decisive  did  this  appear  in  the  early  ages  that  the  opposers  to  onr  doc- 
trine of  a  Pre-Mill.  Advent,  etc.,  refused  to  credit  the  canonical  authority  of  the  Apoc. 
This  we  have  proven  by  reference  to  various  authorities  in  the  history  of  the  doctrine. 
We  append  several  more.  Killen  (Ancient  Church,  p.  183)  remarks  :  "  The  Apoc.  was 
acknowledged  to  be  a  divine  revelation  as  soon  as  it  appeared  ;  and  its  credit  remained 
unimpeached  until  the  question  of  the  Millennium  began  to  create  discussion.  Its 
authenticity  was  then  challenged  by  some  of  the  parties  who  took  an  interest  in  the 
controversy  ;  but  it  still  continued  to  be  regarded  as  a  part  of  Holy  Scripture  by  the 
majority  of  Christians,  and  there  is  no  book  of  the  New  Test,  in  behalf  of  which  a  title 
to  a  divine  original  can  be  established  by  more  conclusive  and  ample  evidence."  (Comp. 
Davidson's  Introduction,  vol.  3,  pp.  540-555.)  Kurtz  (Ch.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  232)  says  :  "  The 
Council  of  Laodicea  omitted  from  the  Canon  only  the  Book  of  Revelation,  manifestly  from 
its  dislike  to,  and  dread  <>f,  Millenarianism."  The  connection  of  the  Apoc.  with  the  Old 
Test,  can  be  seen  in  books  specially  devoted  to  the  subject,  as  e.g.  in  the  work  of  Dr. 
Tregelles,  Passages  in  the  Book  of  Rev.  connected  with  the  Old  Test.  Scriptures  (also  in  his 
Book  of  Rev.  in  Greek,  with  a  new  English  Version).  The  same  is  found,  more  or  less,  in 
Keith's  Harmony  of  Prophecy,  and  works  of  a  similar  nature.  Such  a  comparison  will 
satisfy  the  student  that  the  Apoc.  is,  as  many  writers  have  declared,  a  most  fitting  conclu- 
sion of  the  Canon,  summing  up  in  itself  the  glorious  outcome  of  Old  Test,  prophecy  and 
New  Test,  prediction. 

Obs.  1.  The  simple  fact — no  matter  how  we  may  interpret  the  hook  as 
a  whole  or  as  to  details — that  the  seals,  trumpets,  and  vials  predict  such  a 
state  of  things  as  only  agrees  with  our  teaching,  is  alone  sufficient.  Thus 
e.g.  it  is  only  when  the  seventh  and  last  trumpet  sounds  that  the  King- 
dom, universal,  of  Jesus  is  revealed,  and — consider  it  well — linked  with 
(Eev.  11  :  15-18)  angry  nations,  a  time  of  wrath,  of  resurrection,  and  of 
reward.  When  the  Millennial  age  itself  is  introduced  (Rev.  20  :  1-G)  it  is 
preceded  by  the  Personal  Advent  of  Jesus  and  His  saints,  and  the  destruc- 
tion of  a  mighty  confederation  of  wicked  (Rev.  19:  11-21).  The  great 
revelation  of  glory,  sovereignty,  etc.,  follows  a  series  of  trial  and  judg- 
ments, in  which  the  Church  and  the  world  are  both  included.  Xo  Mil- 
lennial period,  no  Kingdom,  no  triumph,  until  the  Coming  of  Jesus. 

This  proves  that  the  development  theory,  so  extensively  prevalent,  has  no  foundation 
in  fact  or  scriptural  representation.  For,  instead  of  a  progressive  development  culmi- 
nating in  the  Millennial  Kingdom,  we  have  a  fearful  culmination  of  wickedness,  a  world  in  a 
state  similar  to  Noah's  and  Lot's  time,  and  a  Church  tempted  and  tried,  suffering  and 
persecuted.  The  student  must  not  overlook,  as  cardinal  facts,  that  before  the  Millen- 
nium itself  is  introduced  there  first  comes  (Rev.  14)  a  harvest  and  a  vintage.     Everything 


Prop.  191.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  3S3 

in  the  book  evinces  that  the  Church  is  in  constant  conflict  with  antagonistic  forces  ;  that 
the  latter  finally  so  develop  and  endanger  even  the  Church  that  Supernatural  interference, 
in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  becomes  recpiisite  in  order  to  crush  unholy  usurpations  by 
enemies,  and  deliver  His  people  from  cruel  persecution.  The  entire  tenor  of  the  book 
shows  that,  without  a  special  Advent  of  Jesus,  a  special  interference  by  His  power,  there 
can  be  no  deliverance  of  His  Church,  and  no  complete  subjugation  of  His  enemies.  After 
the  Saviour  comes,  after  the  infliction  of  terrible  judgments,  after  events  in  which  Jesus 
is  personally  manifested  and  employed,  then  comes,  and  only  then,  redemption  perfected, 
and  a  Kingdom  in  which  dwelleth  righteousness. 

Obs.  2.  This  book  has  for  its  end  the  covenanted  and  predicted  King- 
dom of  the  Messiah.  Dr.  Lange  (Apoc,  p.  402)  justly  asserts  :  "That  it 
(the  Apoc.)  is  to  be  recognized  as  the  most  developed  phase  of  the  New- 
Testament  doctrine  bearing  upon  its  theme — the  hope  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God  and  the  advent  of  that  Kingdom  in  the  world — although  it  is  couched 
in  Biblico-artistic,  allegorical,  and  symbolical  forms." 

The  book  concludes  with  the  Messianic  Kingdom,  in  which  those  who  have  part  and 
lot  in  the  first  resurrection  reign  with  Christ.  The  tabernacling  of  God  with  men  again 
evinces  its  Theocratic  ordering.  The  greatness  and  majesty  of  the  King  ;  His  Humanity 
and  Divinity  ;  His  covenanted  relationship  to  David  ;  His  authority  and  worthiness  of 
homage  ;  His  power  to  save  and  His  Coining  unto  salvation  ;  the  Divine  Sovereignty 
ascribed  to  Him  as  Deity  and  a  special  Kingdom — a  Theocracy— attributed  to  Him  as 
Man  and  upheld  by  the  divine  united  with  Him  ;  the  deliverance,  honor,  glory  brought 
by  His  Kingdom— all  indicates  that  the  design  of  the  book  was,  by  the  description  of  the 
King,  the  coming  events,  the  Advent,  the  glorious  Kingdom,  to  confirm  the  faith  in  cove- 
nanted and  predicted  promises  that  the  same  Theocracy— -withdrawn  on  account  of  sin, 
declared  by  all  the  prophets  to  be  restored,  postponed  to  the  Sec.  Advent—  wiU  be  reinau- 
gurated  with  sublime  accessions  under  the  heir,  David's  Son.  Men  may  slightingly  call 
this  "  Judaistic,"  etc.,  but  let  them  bear  in  mind,  first,  that  logical  consistency  demands 
this,  and  second,  that  the  quite- early  Church,  founded  and  directed  by  inspired  men 
and  their  immediate  successors,  was  so  instructed  that  they  believed  the  Apocalypse 
clearly  taught  such  a  doctrine.  The  book  narrowly  escaped  proscription  because  the 
first  opponents  of  Chiliasm  believed  that  it  taught  the  same. 

It  makes  one  sad  to  read  how  this  book  is  treated  by  recent  writers,  some  of  them  pro- 
fessed Christian  teachers.  We  give  an  illustration  :  Reuss  (His.  of  Ch.  Tin,, I.  of  the 
Apost.  Age),  in  his  ch.  on  "  The  Revelation,1'  asserts  that  all  hitherto,  in  their  efforts  to 
explain  the  book,  had  been  engaged  in  "  a  blind  search,"  in  an  "  eager  pursuit  after  an 
imaginary  end  ;"  and  then,  after  dilating  on  "  sick  brains"  and  "  excited  imaginations," 
he  undertakes  (with,  of  course,  healthy  brains  and  a  calm  imagination)  to  tell  us  how  to 
understand  Revelation,  which,  in  his  estimation,  if  we  cast  aside  "  preconceptions,"  is 
"  the  most  simple,  most  transparent  book  that  prophet  ever  penned."  After  such  bold- 
ness of  assertion,  which  puts  to  the  blush  all  that  "  sick  brains"  ever  before  said  on  the 
subject,  we  await  with  expectancy  the  proffered  solution.  It  is  this  :  the  book  is  a 
JudaDO-Christian  performance,  taken  chiefly  from  older  writings,  very  artfully  constructed 
in  an  overwrought  Oriental  style,  but  containing  nothing  new,  being  only  a  re-hash  of 
Jewish  expectations,  which  is  'fated—  having  performed  its  part— to  be  set  aside  by  prog- 
ress !  This  is  no  caricature  that  we  present  of  Reuss,  but  an  epitomized  statement  of  his 
position  (which  honestly  concedes,  all  through,  that  it  clearly  and  unmistakably  teaches 
our  doctrine).  His  professions  of  admiration  at  the  skill,  poetic  fervor,  and  artistic  de- 
sign of  the  author  cannot  blind  any  one  to  the  fact  that  he  is  attempting  to  take  all  truth 
and  life  out  of  the  last  Revelation,  simply  because  he  finds  himself  unable  to  incorporate 
its  Sec.  Advent  and  Kingdom  into  his  Rationalistic  system  of  faith.  The  truth  is  that 
he  has  no  proper  conception  of  the  covenanted  and  predicted  Messianic  Kingdom,  etc. 
According  to  his  high  spiritualistic  development  view,  the  Apoc.  is  only  valuable  as  in- 
dicative of  a  formative  state,  a  transition  period,  which  the  progress  of  Theology  (human) 
leaves  far  behind.  The  fact  is,  if  his  own  statements  were  true  concerning  it  (which 
they  are  not),  we  could  only  estimate  it  as  a  gross  forgery  palmed  off  upon  the  Church. 
Alas  !  how  such  men  help  to  cause  the  lack  of  faith  in  the  Church.  They,  too,  shall  bear 
their  burden,  for  it  is  not  a  little  thing  to  defame  this  last  testimony  of  Jesus  and  teach 
others  to  do  the  same.  Alas  !  many  are  engaged  in  this  destructive  work.  Pressense 
(The  Early  Bays  of  Christianity,  Ap.,  Note,  L,  p.  500)  admits  the  charge  of  Lucke,  Reuss, 


384  THE   TIIEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  191. 

and  the  Tubingen  school,  that  the  Apoc.  has  a  "Hebraic  coloring,"  a  "  Judaizing  ten- 
dency," which  he  attributes  to  its  connection  with  the  Old  Test,  prophecies,  and  to  a 
symbolism  borrowed  from  the  same.  Some  writers  (as  Reville),  to  account  for  its  Judaic 
allusions,  make  the  Apoc.  to  be  written  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  affirm 
that  the  inspired  Apostle  was  at  that  period  still  enthralled  by  "  Judaistic  illusions" — 
thus  overlooking  the  key  found  in  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  which  explains  all. 

Obs.  3.  The  great  theme  of  Revelation  is  the  one,  "He  Cometh." 
This  is  in  the  introductory  ;  this  is  presented  in  the  epistles  and  under 
the  seals,  and  under  the  trumpets,  and  under  the  vials  ;  this  forms  the 
conclusion  of  the  whole.  This  coming  from  introductory  to  conclusion 
relates  only  to  one  visible,  personal  Coming,  answering  to  the  promise  of 
Acts  1  :  11.  And  in  perfect  accord  with  the  constant  watching  posture 
insisted  upon  by  Jesus  and  the  apostles,  and  in  complete  agreement  with 
no  intervening  Millennial  age,  the  very  last  caution  and  injunction  is  (Rev. 
22:  7,  12,  20),  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly;"  "Surely,  I  come  quickly, 
Amen." 

The  Pre-Millennial  view  in  the  only  one  that  can  receive  this  prominence  and  near- 
ness of  the  Advent,  fully  adopt  it,  and  make  it  an  essential  element.  It  has  no  definite 
intervening  period  to  neutralize  its  force,  and  no  substitution  for  this  Advent  (as  e.g. 
death)  to  destroy  its  redemptive  preciousness.  Dr.  Craven  (Lange's  Corn.  Eei\,  p.  400) 
remarks  :  "  that  the  Corning  mentioned  in  verse  7  is  the  one  foretold  ch.  1  :  7  (and  also 
Dan.  7  :  13  ;  Matt.  24  :  27,  30  and  26  :  64  ;  Mark  14  :  62  ;  Acts  1  :  9,  11,  etc.),  seems  to  be 
evident  by  a  comparison  ;  and  that  that  Advent  has  not  taken  place  seems  also  to  be 
evident  upon  an  examination  of  the  passages  referred  to,  together  with  their  contexts — - 
there  has  been  nothing  in  history  that  satisfies  the  description  of  events  accompanying 
the  Advent.  We  roust  look  for  an  explanation  of  the  quickly  in  the  declarations  of  2  Pet. 
3  :  18  and  Luke  18  :  7,  8."  "  In  the  prayer  'Amen  ;  come,  Lord  Jesus,'  the  Apostle 
pours  forth  the  longing  of  his  instructed  heart  for  the  realization  of  '  that  blessed  hope ' 
of  the  Church— '  Me  glorious  Appearing  <>/  the  great  Cod  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ' 
(Tit.  2  :  13).  In  this  prayer  is  summed  up  all  that  the  Christian  heart  can  desire — the 
destruction  of  the  power  of  Satan  ;  the  deliverance  of  the  creature  from  the  bondage  of 
corruption  ;  the  banishment  of  sin  and  sorrow  from  the  individual  heart  and  from  the 
world  ;  the  restoration  of  all  things  ;  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom  and  righteous- 
ness ;  the  beholding  by  Jesus  in  fulness  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  ;  the  bestowment 
upon  Him  in  completeness  of  his  promised  reward.  Let  each  member  of  the  Church 
militant,  mourning  the  absence  of  her  Head,  but  cheered  by  the  promise  that  He  will 
come  again,  unite  with  the  Apostle  in  the  longing  cry  :  Amen  ;  Come,  Lord  Jesus."  So 
Lange  in  the  Introd.  (p.  3)  finely  says  :  "  Therefore,  also,  does  the  individual  Christian, 
together  with  all  believing  Christendom,  long  for  the  consTimination  ;  and  all  the  objec- 
tive and  subjective  goals  of  longing  are  summed  up  in  the  one  aspiration  with  which  the 
Apocalypse  closes  :  Come,  Lord  Jesus.  To  this  longing  and  to  it  alone,  is  the  Apocalyptic 
Revelation  given."  Schaff  (His.  Apos.  Church,  p.  427)  says:  "The  mystic  John,  the 
Apostle  of  completion,  was,  by  his  sanctified  natural  gifts,  as  well  as  by  his  position  and 
experience,  predestinated,  so  to  speak,  to  unveil  the  deep  foundations  of  the  Church's 
life  and  the  ultimate  issue  of  her  history  ;  so  that  in  the  Apocalypse  the  rejuvenated 
Apostle  simply  placed  the  majestic  dome  upon  the  wonderful  structure  of  his  Gospel, 
with  the  golden  inscription  of  holy  longing  :  'Even  so,  Come,  Lord  Jesus.'  " 

Obs.  4.  The  introduction,  continuation,  and  conclusion  of  the  book  is 
designed  to  urge  upon  every  believer  that  the  great  object  of  his  love  and 
hope  is  the  Sec.  Coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  That  is  made  paramount 
in  his  faith,  hope,  and  love  ;  and,  consequently,  if  he  devotedly  loved  his 
Saviour,  believed  in  His  revelation  of  glory,  hoped  to  inherit  with  Him  in 
His  Kingdom,  that  Coming  must  assume  a  corresponding  and  relative  im- 
portance and  confirmation  in  his  heart  and  life,  in  his  meditations,  prayers, 
and  teaching. 

As  illustrative   of  the  teachings  of  others  on  this  point,  we  present,  out  of  many,  the 


Prop.  191.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  385 

following.  Dr.  Seiss  (Apoc. ,  p.  31),  after  having  referred  to  the  prominency  given  to  the  Sec. 
Advent,  etc.,  adds  :  "  There  is  also  a  peculiar  efficacy  and  power  in  the  d/actrine  of  Christ's 
speedy  return.  Like  a  magnet,  it  lifts  the  heart  of  the  believer  out  of  the  world  and 
out  of  his  low  self,  and  enables  him  to  stand  with  Moses  on  the  mount,  and  transfigures 
him  with  the  rays  of  blessed  hope  and  promise  which  stream  upon  him  in  those  sublime 
heights.  It  is  the  most  animating  and  most  sanctifying  subject  in  the  Bible.  It  is  the 
soul's  serenest  light  amid  the  darkness  and  trials  of  earth.  And  the  great  aim  and  end  of 
this  book  (Apoc.)  is  to  set  forth  this  doctrine.  The  things  of  which  it  treats  are  things 
touching  the  Apocalypse  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  which  it  describes  as  '  things  which  must 
shortly  come  to  pass.'  The  impending  Advent  is  the  theme  which  pervades  it  from  its 
commencement  to  its  close.  And  just  in  proportion  as  he  who  is  awake  to  the  great 
truth  of  the  Saviour's  speedy  Coming,  and  is  engaged  in  waiting  and  preparing  himself 
accordingly,  is  a  better  man,  and  in  a  safer  condition,  and  really  more  happy  than  the 
half-Christian  and  the  lukewarm;  in  that  same  proportion  is  he  who  reads,  hears  and 
keeps  the  words  of  this  prophecy  blessed  beyond  other  people.  This  book,  at  least  its 
subject  matter,  thus  becomes  to  him  an  instrument  of  security  and  attainment  to  save 
him  from  surprise  when  his  Lord  Cometh,  and  from  the  tribulations  which  shall  try  the 
indifferent  ,  as  well  as  a  passport  to  admit  him  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb,  and 
to  the  highest  awards  of  eternity.  Precious  book  !  and  happy  they  who  study  it."  Again 
(p.  51-55),  ''John  was  present  when  that  blessed  One  left  the  earth.  He  had  heard  the 
angels  say,  '  Ye  men  of  Galilee,  this  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven, 
shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go  into  heaven '  (Acts  1  :  11).  He  had 
seen  how  '  a  cloud  received  Him  out  of  sight,'  and  thenceforward  carried  in  his  memory 
what  the  words  of  the  angels  authorized  him  to  regard  as  a  picture  of  something  in  the 
future  to  which  he  ever  looked  with  the  profoundest  interest.  And  all  the  stupendous 
visions  of  the  Apoc.  did  not  for  one  moment  disturb  that  picture,  or  divert  his  mind 
from  it.  However  variously  he  may  have  been  moved,  as  scene  followed  scene  in  the 
great  exhibition  of  the  Divine  Purpose,  the  key-note,  to  which  he  ever  returned,  was  the 
Coming  and  Kingdom  of  that  ascended  Lord.  Even  in  all  the  long  course  of  unending 
ages,  that  upon  which  his  thoughts  most  firmly  faatened  was  the  Coming  again  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  With  this  he  begins,  with  this  he  continues,  and  with  this  he  ends."  .  .  . 
"  'He  Cometh.'  Here  is  the  great  fact  unequivocally  stated.  Christ  has  not  gone  to 
heaven  to  stay  there.  He  has  gone  for  His  Church's  benefit  ;  and  for  His  Church's 
benefit  He  will  return  again  ;  not  in  spirit  only,  not  in  providence  only,  not  in  the  mere 
removal  of  men  by  death,  but  in  His  own  proper  person  as  '  the  Son  of  Man.'  Few 
believe  this,  and  still  fewer  lay  it  to  heart.  Many  sneer  at  the  very  idea  and  would  fain 
laugh  down  the  peojfie  who  are  so  simple  as  to  entertain  it.  But  it  is  nevertheless  the 
immutable  truth  of  God,  predicted  by  all  His  prophets,  promised  by  Christ  Himself,  con- 
firmed by  the  testimony  of  angels,  proclaimed  by  all  the  Apostles,  believed  by  all  the 
early  Christians,  acknowledged  in  all  the  Church  creeds,  sung  of  in  all  the  Church  hymn- 
books,  prayed  about  in  all  the  Church  liturgies,  and  entering  so  essential^  into  the  very 
life  and  substance  of  Christianity  that  without  it  there  is  no  Christianity,  except  a  few 
maimed  and  mutilated  relics  too  powerless  to  be  worth  the  trouble  or  expense  of  preser- 
vation. That  religion  which  does  not  look  for  a  returning  Saviour,  or  locate  its  highest 
hopes  and  triumphs  in  the  judgment  scenes  for  which  the  Son  of  Man  must  reappear,  is 
not  the  religion  of  this  book,  and  is  without  authority  to  promise  salvation  to  its  devotees. 
And  those  addresses  to  the  churches  which  have  no  '  Behold  He  Cometh '  pervading  or 
underlying  them,  have  not  been  indited  by  '  the  Seven  Spirits  of  God,'  nor  sent  by  Him 
whose  Apocalypse  is  the  crown  of  the  inspired  Canon.  Murmur  at  it,  dispute  it,  despise 
it,  mock  at  it,  put  it  aside,  hate  it,  and  hide  from  it,  as  men  may,  it  is  a  great  fundamental 
article  of  the  Gospel  that  that  same  blessed  Lord,  who  ascended  from  MountOlivet,  and 
is  now  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father  Almighty,  shall  come  from  thence  to  judge 
the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  to  stand  again  upon  that  very  summit  from  which  He  went 
up.  This  is  true,  as  Christ  Himself  is  true  ;  and  '  he  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  let  him  hear.'' 
Amen.''  On  the  words  "  Even  so,  Amen,"  ch.  1  :  7,  he  (p.  59)  says  :  "  I  find  in  them 
John's  acquiescence  in  all  that  the  great  day  is  to  bring,  and  his  prayer,  as  repeated  at 
the  end  of  the  book,  that  the  Lord  would  hasten  its  coming.  Terrible  as  it  will  be  to  the 
wicked,  and  the  unprepared,  and  those  who  refuse  the  warnings  which  we  give  them,  it 
is  a  precious  day  to  the  saints,  a  day  to  be  coveted,  and  to  be  prayed  for  with  all  earnest- 
ness of  desire.  The  poor  faint-hearted  Christianity  of  our  times  can  hardly  contemplate 
it  without  trembling  and  annoyance.  Many  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians 
Would  rather  not  hear  about  it,  and  would  prefer,  if  they  had  their  choice,  that  Christ 
might  never  come.     It  was  not  so  in  the  days  of  Christianity's  pristine  vigor.     Then  the 


386  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  191. 

anxious  inquiry  of  disciples  was,  '  Tell  us,  when  shall  these  things  be  ?  and  what  shall  be  the 
sign  of  the  Coining,  and  of  the  end  of  the  world?  '  'Lord,  loilt  Thou  at  tliis  time  restore  the 
Kingdom  to  Israel?  '  Then  Christians  wrote  to  each  other  in  joyous  congratulation,  that 
their  citizenship  was  in  heaven,  whence  they  looked  for  the  Coming  of  the  Saviour  ;  and 
comforted  one  another  in  the  assurance  that  the  Lord  Himself  is  to  descend  from  heaven 
with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  tramp  of  God  ;  and,  as 
directed  by  their  Lord,  lifted  up  their  heads  and  looked  up  with  joyful  hope  at  every 
turn  in  human  affairs  which  they  could  by  any  means  construe  into  a  probable  herald  of 
His  nearing  Epiphany.  Then  the  prayer,  'Thy  Kingdom  come,'  had  a  depth  of  meaning 
and  lively  anticipation  which  now  has  well-nigh  been  lost.  Then '  the  appearing  of  Jesus 
Christ '  had  a  power  over  the  soul  which  made  it  '  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full 
of  glory  ; '  and  the  most  earnest  and  constant  call  of  Apostles  and  their  followers  was 
'Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly.  Even  so.  Amen.'  Nor  can  the  Church  ever  be  her  true 
self,  or  enter  into  the  true  spirit  of  her  faith,  or  rise  to  the  sublimity  of  her  hope,  where 
this  is  not  the  highest  object  of  her  deepest  desire.  For  how,  indeed,  can  we  regard 
ourselves  as  rightly  planted  upon  the  apostolic  foundation  if  we  cannot  join  with  heart 
and  soul  in  this  apostolic  prayer?"  Gerlach  (Bibelwerk,  Rev.  22  :  17)  says  :  "  To  inflame 
the  longing  of  the  faithful  for  the  return  of  their  Saviour  is  one  of  the  principal  designs 
of  this  book."  Henry  (Com.  Rev.  22  :  20)  declares  :  "  Christ  will  come  quickly  ;  let  this 
word  be  .always  sounding  in  our  ear,  and  let  us  give  all  diligence  that  we  may  be  found 
of  Him  in  peace,  without  spot,  and  blameless.  'Surely  I  come  quickly.  Amen.  Even  so, 
come,  Lord  Jesus.'  What  comes  from  heaven  in  a  promise  should  be  sent  back  to  heaven 
in  a  prayer."     (Cornp.  Props.  182  and  183.) 

Obs.  5.  It  follows,  therefore,  as  the  Apocalypse  is  the  Revelation  of 
Jesus  pertaining  to  His  Churches  ;  His  resurrected,  translated,  and  glori- 
fied saints  ;  His  judgments  ;  His  triumph,  Kingdom,  and  reign  ;  His 
power,  majesty,  and  glory  ;  His  bestowal  of  the  greatest  blessings  in  a  per- 
fected Redemption — it  ought  to  receive  our  heartfelt  and  most  careful 
study.  The  emphatic  declarations  of  ch.  1  :  3  and  ch.  22  :  7  are  suffi- 
cient. Justin  proportion  as  we  love  and  appreciate  the  Appearing  of  Jesus, 
as  we  earnestly  desire  the  deliverance,  blessings  and  glory  that  are  depen- 
dent on  and  related  to  the  Second  Advent,  in  that  proportion  will  this  book, 
which  tells  us  the  grandest  and  most  sublime  things  of  the  King  and  King- 
dom, be  dear  to  us.  It  tells  us  so  much  of  the  Christ  and  His  future  glory, 
so  much  of  the  saints  and  their  coming  exaltation,  so  much  of  the  King- 
dom of  righteousness  and  its  manifestations,  so  much  of  the  enemies  of 
Jesus  and  of  His  people  with  their  ultimate  overthrow,  so  much  of  the  in- 
coming ages  and  their  heavenly  excellencies,  that  it  must  be — if  Ave  love 
the  Coining — exceedingly  precious  to  us. 

Dr.  Craven  (Lange's  Com.  Rev.,  p.  390)  says  :  "  That  it  is  the  duty  of  every  Christian 
to  study  this  book  appears  from  the  following  declarations  of  the  Epilogue  :  1.  The 
Apoc.  was  given  for  the  information  of  the  saints,  vs.  6,  16.  2.  It  was  designed  to  be 
read  in  the  congregations,  v.  18  (I  testify  unto  every  one  that  heareth)  ;  see  also  comment 
on  ch.  1:3.  3.  Its  utterances  were  not  sealed,  i.e.  closed  up  from  individual  compre- 
hension, v.  10.  4.  A  blessing  is  to  be  bestowed  upon  those  who  keep  the  words  of  the 
prophecy,  v.  7  ;  which  keeping  requires,  of  course,  preceding  study.  5.  A  woe  shall  be 
visited  upon  all  who  add  to,  or  diminish  from,  the  words  of  the  Book,  vs.  18,  19.  The 
Epilogue,  in  implying  the  duty  of  study,  agrees  with  the  Prologue  ;  see  ch.  1  :  3."  We 
leave  another  who  has  but  little  sympathy  with  our  doctrine  (Smith's  Key  to  Rev.,  p.  23) 
inculcate  the  duty  of  studying  this  book  as  follows  :  1.  "  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  demands 
this  duty,  as  well  as  encourages  it  ;"  2.  "  The  tact  that  a  great  section  of  the  Bible  con- 
sists in  prophecies  of  events  then  future,  tacitly  enforces  this  duty  ;"  3.  "  Much  of  the 
ancient  preaching  of  a  Saviour  then  to  come,  was  in  types  and  figures  not  less  dark  than 
are  most  of  the  prophecies  of  the  Revelation.  .  .  .  The  condemnation  of  those  who 
would  not  investigate  that  figurative  preaching  of  Christ  was  their  want  of  faith." 
4.  "  This  neglect  is  to  set  our  own  wisdom  above  the  Word  of  God,  and  against  it,  as  is 
manifest."  5.  "  The  prophecies  were  kindly  given  of  God  to  warn  His  people  of  inter- 
esting events,  while  they  are  still  future."     G.   "  Events  of  modern  date  have  much  facili- 


Prop.  191.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  387 

tated  the  exposition  of  prophecy."  7.  "  The  prophecies  of  Rev.  open  a  rich  field  of 
devout  contemplation."  Even  writers  who  have  perverted  the  Apoc,  questioned  its 
authority,  ridiculed  its  "  Judaistic  tendency  and  ground,"  still  admit  that  much  that  it 
contains  is  grand  and  sublime,  worthy  of  attention  and  study.  The  "  pilgrim  and  stran- 
ger" finds  it  "  blessed  "  in  his  weary  pilgrimage  and  sojourning.     (Comp.  e.g.  Prop.  17.) 

Obs.  6.  This  Book  was  specially  designed  to  sustain  the  Christian  and 
the  Church  under  sore  trial ;  its  magnificent  portrayals  of  ultimate  deliver- 
ance, reward,  and  glory  at  the  Coming  of  Jesus  being  most  admirably 
adapted  for  such  a  purpose.  It  has  doue  this  in  the  past,  comforting  and 
strengthening  the  persecuted  in  his  flight  or  in  his  dungeon,  sustaining  the 
martyr  at  the  stake  or  in  the  presence  of  the  wild  beasts.  It  has,  from  the 
days  of  John  down  to  the  present,  consoled,  cheered,  and  confirmed  in  faith 
and  hope  many  a  depressed,  discouraged,  tried  believer.  It  will  again  do 
this  work  during  the  interval  between  the  two  stages  of  the  Advent,  when 
the  Church,  enduring  her  most  bitter  and  unrelenting  persecution,  needs 
special  aid  and  strength  to  endure  unto  the. end.  Then  this  Book,  so  full 
of  the  events  then  experienced,  so  full  of  Antichrist  and  his  doom,  so  full 
of  ultimate  glorious  deliverance,  will  be  studied  with  <///  interest  mid  inten- 
sity never  before  realized.  Then,  too,  it  will  impart  the  needed  consolation 
and  hope,  so  that  a  multitude,  fortified  by  its  precious  promises,  will  come 
out  of  the  great  tribulation,  and  receive  their  reward  for  faithfulness  and 
endurance. 

Dr.  Schaff  (Ills.  Apos.  Church)  says  :  "  The  Apoc.  accordingly  is  a  book  of  warning, 
encouragement,  and  hope,  and  is  best  understood  practically  In  times  of  trial  and  persecu- 
tion.'" "  Hypercritics,  bringing  to  the  study  of  the  Old  and  New  Tests.,  not  the  thankful 
disposition  of  children  and  heirs,  but  the  heartless  analytics  of  a  special  pleader,  may  say 
what  they  please  against  it  ;  their  own  wisdom  will  be  forgotten,  but  the  book  that  they 
despise  will  be  hereafter,  as  heretofore,  to  thousands  of  the  best  and  noblest  souls  <i  star 
of  hope  in  the  darkness  of  midnight,  a  stimulant  to  holy  desire,  an  earnest  of  future  Miss- 
ings, and  will  afford  them  from  time  to  time  a  foretaste  of  the  new  heavens  and  the  new 
earth,  till  the  Lord  shall  come  to  take  home  His  longing  Bride."  He  quotes  Bengel  us 
follows:  "  It  (Apoc.)  was  given  to  John  in  his  affliction,  and  under  trial  it  is  best  under- 
stood and  appreciated.  In  seasons  of  great  security  it  was  almost  forgotten,  but  under 
the  persecutions  by  the  heathen  emperors  and  those  subsequently  endured  by  the  Wal- 
denses,  the  Bohemian  Brethren,  etc.,  it  has  been  turned  to  good  account.  Many  a  one 
too  may  soon  be  glad  of  the  book  who  now  refuses  to  receive  it."  The  last  sentence  will 
be  in  a  remarkable  manner  verified  by  the  thief-like  Coming  of  Jesus  ;  then  the  book, 
once  neglected  and  despised,  will  assume  a  prominence  and  preclousness  which  a  Pre-Mill. 
Advent  assures.  In  Bernard's  "  Progress  of  Doctrine"  (Bampton  Lects.  8)  it  is  stated  that 
the  Apoc.  contains  a  doctrine  of  consummation  in  the  procuring  cause  (Jesus),  in  its  history 
(connecting  events  with  a  Higher  power),  in  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  ("  the  key-note"  of 
the  whole  book),  in  the  victory  announced,  in  the  judgment  of  usurping  power,  and  in 
the  restoration  taking  place  ;  and  this  declaration  appears  :  "  Differences  and  uncertain- 
ties of  interpretation  as  to  the  details  of  this  progressive  history  still  leaves  us  under  the 
sense  that  it  is  the  history  of  the  power  and  Coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This 
assurance,  enjoyed  at  all  times,  grows  clearer  In  the  days  of  trouble,  rebuke  and  blasphemy, 
and  the  darkest  times  which  the  prophecy  forebodes  will  be  those  in  which  its  fullest 
uses  will  be  found." 


388  THE  THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  192. 


Proposition  192.     This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  greatly  serves 
to  explain  Scripture. 

This  results  from  the  fact  that  being  a  leading  doctrine  of  the 
Bible  and  embracing  the  great  end  contemplated,  it  must  necessa- 
rily serve  to  interpret  passages  that  are  indistinct,  obscure,  and 
ambiguous.  And  this  it  does  without  straining  such  passages  into 
a  forced  compatibility  with  the  general  tenor  of  Revelation  con- 
cerning the  Kingdom,  but  by  simply  allowing  the  plain  grammati- 
cal sense  to  connect  itself  naturally  with  the  comprehensive  knowl- 
edge respecting  the  ordering  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom.  A  few 
illustrations  are  appended  to  indicate  our  meaning,  in  addition  to 
the  many  already  presented,  and  to  show  how  passages,  subject  to 
diverse  interpretation  and  contention,  can  be  clearly  apprehended 
in  the  light  of  covenanted  and  predicted  Purpose  already  explained. 

Obs.  1.  Take  simple  promises  like  that  of  Matt.  7  :  33,  "  But  seek  ye 
first  tin'  Kingdom  of  Gad  and  His  righteousness;  and  all  these  things  shall 
oe  added  unto  you,'"  while  applicable  in  spirit  to  believers  now  (i.e.  in  incul- 
cating reliance  upon  Divine  Providence),  vet,  as  given,  is  directly  applica- 
ble to  the  Jewish  nation,  and  conveys  a  promise  which  would  have  been 
specially  fulfilled  in  their  case.  This  promise  was  given,  at  the  time  the 
Kingdom  was  tendered  to  them  on  condition  of  repentance,  and  had  they 
repented  and  accepted  of  the  Messiah  the  temporal  blessings  included  in  the 
" all  things"  would  have  been  conferred  upon  them,  in  accordance  "with 
the  prediction  of  the  prophets.  Again,  take  more  extended  promises, 
which  are  designedly  so  constructed  as  to  comfort  and  sustain  believers 
under  all  the  most  trying  circumstances  of  life  (even  as  the  greater  bless- 
ings include  the  lesser),  yet  many  of  these  are  specifically  related  to  the 
future.  Thus.  e.  g.  Ps.  23,  so  well  known  and  full  of  present  consola- 
tion, only  receives  its  ample  "ad  perfect  fulfilment  in  the  future.  This  is 
clearly  shown  by  comparing  Scripture  and  keeping  in  view  the  connection 
it  sustains  to  the  Kingdom.  Let  us  briefly  present  this,  as  follows  : 
'•  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd,"  completely  fulfilled  when  Jesus  comes  the 
second  time  as  the  Shepherd,  1  Pet.  5  :  4  ;  Isa.  40  :  11  ;  Ezek.  34  :  11-23  ; 
Jer.  23  :  4,  etc.*  "  1  shall  not  want,"  which  is  so  distinguishing  a  feature 
of  the  Coming  Kingdom  that  it  needs  no  proof  texts  for  verification.  "  He 
maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures  (or,  in  pastures  of  tender  grass); 
He  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters."  This  figurative  language,  expressive 
of  the  supply,  protection,  and  happiness  of  the  sheep,  is  found  in  connec- 
tion with  His  Coming  Theocratic  reign,  as  e.  g.  Ezek.  34  :  14  ;  Isa.  23  :  21 ; 

*  Kings  in  ancient  times,  among  the  Greeks,  were  denominated  "  shepherds  of  the 
people,"  and  this  is  in  accord  with  Oriental  usage  (conip.  Clarke's  Com.  on  2  Sam.  5  :  25j. 


Prop.  192.]  the  theocratic  kingdom:.  389 

35  :  1,  2,  7  ;  40  :  10,  11  ;  41  :  18,  etc.  The  preceding  is  fully  corrobo- 
rated by  llev.  7  :  17  being  linked  with  Millennial  predictions,  as  in  Isa.  25  ; 
Rev.  21,  etc.  "  He  restoreth  my  soul  ;"  and  this,  as  has  been  abundantly 
shown  under  Prop.  12G,  etc.,  finds  its  completed  fulfilment  in  the  resur- 
rection allied  with  the  coming  again  of  the  .Shepherd.  The  proof  is  found 
not  only  in  the  general  analogy  of  the  Word,  but  in  the  phrase  itself.  For 
'*  soul,"  as  has  been  proven  (Prop.  120),  is  used  to  designate  the  person  or 
body  ;  and  the  restoration  from  Sheol,  Hades,  or  the  grave  is  thus  stated, 
e.g.  Ps.  49  :  15,  "  God  will  redeem  my  soul  from  the  power  of  the  grave," 
Ps.  89  :  4,  "  Shall  he  deliver  his  sou]  from  (lie  hand  of  the  grave,'''  so  Ps. 
1  6  :  10,  etc.  Simple  consistency  must  allow  an  allusion  to  the  resurrec- 
tion, because  otherwise  it  would  not  be  true  that  his  soul  was  delivered 
from  death,  seeing  that  the  common  interpretation  of  verse  4  supposes  a 
reference  to  the  death  of  the  believer.  If  it  be  alleged  that  amoral  restora- 
tion is  meant  this  is  rebutted  by  the  employment  of  this  phraseology  in  de- 
scribing a  deliverance  from  death,  as  e.g.  Ps.  116  :3-8,  etc.,  "  He  leadeth  me 
in  the  paths  of  righteousness  for  His  name's  sake  ;" — this  is  so  characteristic 
of  Mill,  descriptions  that  it  requires  no  references,  "  Yea,  though  I  walls 
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.'7  The  "  shadow  of  death"  is 
death  itself,  as  in  Ps.  44  :  19  ;  Job  10  :  21.  22,  and  this  has  led  multitudes  to 
infer,  wrongfully,  that  the  saint  is  to  experience  the  death  here  mentioned. 
But  the  allusion  here  is  to  the  fearful  slaughter,  awful  exhibition  of  death, 
in  the  valley  mentioned  by  the  prophets  (Joel  3  :  2,  11,  etc.)  at  the  Ad- 
vent of  "  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  "  and  of  His  saints.  Then  His 
people  will  witness  death,  which  shall  approach  them,  in  its  most  terrible 
aspect,  when  the  slain  sball  be  over  tbe  earth,  the  blood  shall  be  to  the 
horses'  bridles,  the  beasts  and  fowls  shall  have  a  great  supper,  etc.  (Props. 
115,  123,  161,  162,  and  163.)  "  1  will  not  fear  ;"  the  saint  witnessing 
(for  all  shall  see  it)  this  terrific  destruction  of  the  wicked  arrayed  against 
Christ  at  His  Sec.  Coming  will  not  fear.  This  is  repeatedly  asserted  in 
prophecies  relating  to  this  period,  and  needs  no  additional  illustration  ; 
for  then  will  be  fulfilled  Ps.  3  :  5,  6,  when,  after  the  resurrection  (repre- 
sented by  sleeping  and  then  awakening),  it  is  said  :  "  I  will  not  he  afraid 
of  ten  thousands  of  people  that  have  set  themselves  against  me  round  about,"" 
etc.  "For  Thou  art  with  me;  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff,  they  comfort  me" 
(comp.  Ps.  118  :  0,  7,  10,  13,  18,  etc.).  Jesus,  then,  is  personally  present 
(Prop.  121),  and  hence  the  assurances  of  safety,  etc.  (Zeph.  3  :  8-16  ;  Isa. 
43  :  2  ;  Zech.  9  :  14-16  ;  Micah  2  :  12,  13,  etc.),  are  undoubted.  The  saints 
then,  too,  are  publicly  identified  (the  ingrafting  thus  acknowledged)  with 
Israel,  "  the  rod  of  His  inheritance  "  (Jer.  10  :  16,  Ps.  74  :  2).  Rod  and 
staff  being  emblematic  of  power,  authority,  and  rulership,  the  allusion 
here  is  to  the  predicted  reign  of  Christ,  which  not  only  sustains  the  saints, 
but  in  which  they  shall  also  participate  (Prop.  154).  Rod  and  staff  being 
representative  of  kingly  state  or  rule  (as  e.  g.  Jer.  48  :  17,  29  ;  2  Kings 
18  :  21  ;  Isa.  14  :  4,  5  ;  Isa.  9  :  4,  etc.).  Christ's  kingly  authority,  mani- 
fested in  connection  with  His  people,  is  thus  designated,  as  in  Micah  7  :  14  ; 
Ps.  110  :  2.  "  Thou  preparest  a  table  before  me  in  the  presence  of  my  ene- 
mies.'1'' The  reader  will  notice  that  the  enemies  are  present  when  the  Lord 
Christ  comes  with  His  saints  (Zech.  14;  Rev.  19,  etc. ),  and  two  tables  are 
spoken  of  as  being  witnessed  by  the  believer  in  that  day,  viz.,  the  table  or 
feast  for  the  beasts  and  fowls,  Ezek.  37  :  17-22,  who  shall  be  "filled  at  mil 
table,"    etc.,  significantly   called,  Rev.   19   :  17,   18,   "the  supper  of  the 


390  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  192. 

Great  God,"  and  also  the  table,  embracing  the  blessings  spoken  of  by 
Jesus,  Luke  22  :  30,  and  described,  in  connection  with  deliverance  from 
death,  by  Isa.  25  in  "  the  feast  of  fat  things."  "  Thou  anointest  my  head 
with  oil  ;"  every  student  knows  that  this  is  an  expression  indicative  of 
appointment  or  consecration  to  Rulership  and  Priesthood  ;  and  hence 
here  denotes  the  Kingship  and  Priesthood  of  those  who  reign  with  Christ, 
Prop.  154  (comp.  Ps.  92  :  10  ;  Ps.  89  :  20  ;  Ps.  45  :  7,  etc.).  "  My  cup 
runneth  over  ;  this  needs  no  elucidation,  it  being  sufficient  to  say  that 
when  such  blessings  as  the  resurrection,  the  presence  of  the  Great  Shep- 
herd, freedom  from  evil,  kingship  and  priesthood  are  experienced,  then, 
indeed,  the  happiness  of  the  saints  will  be  overflowing,  so  great  and  con- 
tinuous that  it  is  added  :  "  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me  all 
the  days  of  my  life,"  "And  I  will  dwell  in  (or  return  to,  so  Clarke,  Com., 
etc.)  the  house  of  the  Lord  forever  (or,  to  length  of  days)."  The  ran- 
somed of  the  Lord  will,  indeed,  then  return  (Isa.  35  :  10,  and  51  :  11,  etc.)  to 
the  restored  house  (Props.  122,  131,  142,  etc.),  and  evermore  dwell  in  it  as 
the  anointed  ones.  Thus  we  find  thePs.  descriptive  of  the  happy  lot  of  the 
saint  at  the  Second  Advent  in  the  promised  Kingdom,  containing  a,  fulness 
of  meaning,  which  is  only  brought  out  in  its  relation  to  that  Kingdom. 
Accepting  of  the  abundant  encouragement  that  it  gives  to  faith  and  hope 
now  (for  the  Shepherd  noiv  careth  for  His  sheep  and  supplieth  their 
w^ants),  yet  it  would  be  inconsistent  to  limit  such  glorious  promises  of  the 
Spirit  to  a  present  experience,  when  they  point  onward  to  the  time  when 
the  Shepherd  Himself  appears  with  all  His  gathered  sheep  in  the  presence 
of  their  (for  they  are  also  such  to  the  saints,  owing  to  their  peculiar  Theo- 
cratic calling)  enemies,  and  rejoice  in  the  victory,  honor,  power,  and  glory 
bestowed.1  Thus  a  variety  of  promises  receive  a  deeper  significancy  and 
assurance  of  perfect  fulfilment  when  considered  as  standing  related  to  this 
Kingdom.  Such  e.  g.  are  the  passages  in  John  14  :  12-14  and  1G  :  23,  24, 
for  whatever  application  we  may  make  of  them  to  the  present  (owing  to  the 
mediatorial  position  of  the  Saviour  and  the  invitation  and  encouragements 
given  to  prayer)  or  to  the  apostolic  period,  yet  such  an  inchoate  fulfilment 
is  far  from  exhausting  its  promise.  For,  aside  from  its  being  in  one  place 
(John  14  :  12)  a  general  affirmation  relating  to  the  future  and  in  the 
other  (John  16  :  22,  23)  directly  connected  with  His  personal  presence, 
we  must  not  forget  that  such  promises  are  given,  as  belonging  to  the 
saints,  in  that  apprehension  of  time  pertaining  to  the  Spirit  by  which  the  in- 
termediate period,  so  long  to  man  is  deemed  but  a  brief  period.  Beside  this, 
the  day  is  coming,  when,  as  numerous  passages  testify,  such  will  be  the 
honored  position  of  the  saints,  such  their  glorification  and  resemblance  to 
Christ,  that,  in  this  Kingdom,  they  shall,  indeed, perform  great  works  and 
be  accounted  worthy  to  receive  from  the  Father  the  things  that  they  re- 
quest, owing  to  their  co-inheriting  with  Jesus,  "the  Christ."  Thus 
promises  which  are,  on  the  one  hand,  perverted  by  fanaticism  and,  on  the 
other,  form  a  stumbling-block  to  unbelief  (ridiculing  non-fulfilment),  are 
preserved  in  all  their  integrity,  fulness,  and preciousness.* 

1  Those  who  are  disposed  to  limit  this  and  other  similar  Psalms  to  the  present  dispen- 
sation, or  who  think  that  they  have  perfectly  comprehended  their  depth  of  meaning,  may 
derive  a  lesson  from  Luther,  who  (Michelet's  Life  of,  p.  272)  professes  :  "  I  candidly  avow 
my  ignorance  as  to  whether  I  rightly  understand  the  Psalms  in  their  legitimate  sense," 
and  adds  :  "  Others  who  come  after  me  will,  I  am  aware,  perceive  much  that  has  escaped 
me,"  etc. 

-  Let  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  with  its  restored  forfeited  blessings,  its  glorious  rule 


Prop.  192.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  391 

over  the  earth,  etc.,  be  regarded,  and  then,  when  it  is  fulfilling  the  Lord's  prayer  (the 
spirit  of  which  even  Luther  located  in  the  future,  so  Michelet's  Life,  p.  343)  in  causing 
the  will  of  God  to  be  done  on  earth  as  in  heaven,  it  will  be  seen  that  such  passages  as 
John  1  :  29,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,"  etc.,  are  veri- 
fied on  a  scale  far  exceeding  the  limited  view  usually  taken  of  them,  i.e.  confining  them 
more  to  a  provisionary  than  to  an  actual  realization.  Comp.  Isa.  65  :  16  ;  Joel  2  :  28,  29  ; 
Zeph.  2:11,  etc.  Such  declarations  as  Ps.  1  :  4,  5,  and  a  host  of  others  are  verified 
when  this  Kingdom  is  established  and  the  tares  are  separated  ;  the  conflict  is  described 
in  Ps.  2,  the  result  in  Ps.  9  ;  Ps.  18,  etc.  (comp.  Keith's  Harmony,  ch.  9,  which  brings  Psls. 
2,  9,  18,  45,  46,  48,  50,  53,  67,  68,  75,  96,  97,  98,  118,  72,  60,  107,  76,  110,  106,  145-150  in 
direct  contrast  with  Revelation  and  other  Scriptures — indicating  their  portrayal  of  the 
future).  This  is  a  wide  field,  opening  up  many  a  precious  vein  to  the  student  of  the 
Word. 

Obs.  2.  An  aptness  of  description,  grand  in  conception  and  power,  is 
noticeable  in  various  predictions,  provided  the  time  of  fulfilment  is  care- 
fully observed.  Thus  e.  g.  if  we  take  Ps.  93,  short  but  inexpressibly  ex- 
pressive, and  locate  it  (as  analogy  teaches)  just  at  the  opening  of  this 
Kingdom,  at  its  glorious  re-establishment,  it  will  be  found  a  song  of 
triumph,  exulting  in  the  majesty  of  the  Theocratic  King  and  the  overthrow 
of  the  mighty  confederation  (compared  to  a  great  "  flood  "  and  "  mighty 
waves  of  the  sea  ")  of  wickedness  ac  the  end  of  the  age.  It  is  just  such  a 
victorious  hymn  as  is  suitable  for  the  saints  (more  or  less  oppressed  down 
to  that  time),  saved  from  their  enemies,  to  sing.  The  same  can  be  said  of 
many  other  Scriptures,  such  as  Ps.  96,  97,  98,  99,  100,  etc.,  and  eminently 
serves  to  illustrate,  as  we  have  already  stated  (Prop.  115),  those  Psalms 
(which  unbelief,  owing  to  the  rejoicing  over  vengeance  and  the  overthrow 
of  enemies,  regards  as  inconsistent  with  piety),  because  the  fulfilment  of 
them  is  embraced  at  this  period,  and  the  Theocratic  relationship  of  the  saints 
of  necessity,  calls  for  the  exercise  of  such  power  against  the  mighty  con- 
federation of  wickedness  which  would  prevent,  if  it  could,  the  Theocratic 
arrangement.  Fronde  (Newman's  Gram,  of  Assent)  may  say  that 
"  those  who  accept  of  the  109th  (Ps.)  as  the  Word  of  God  are  already  far 
on  the  way  toward  auto-da-fes  and  massacres  of  St.  Bartholomew  ;"  Bun- 
sen  and  learned  men  may  recoil  from  "  the  cursing  Psalms"  as  not  "  evan- 
gelically inspired  ;"  apologetic  writers  may  lamely  attribute  them  to  a  past 
imperfect  or  degenerate  age  ;  fanatics  may  claim  them  as  an  excuse  for 
persecution  and  deeds  of  violence  ;  but  if  they  are  located  at  the  period  in- 
tended by  the  Spirit  and  connected  with  the  last  culminating  outbreak  of 
depraved  humanity  in  open  rebellion  against  the  Divine  Theocratic  order- 
ing (willingly  entered  into  by  man),  then  the  propriety  and  depth  of  such 
predictions  can  be  realized.  So,  in  the  same  way,  all  those  passages  refer- 
ring to  the  coming  wrath  of  the  Lamb  are  to  be  understood.  Now,  He  is 
merciful  and  tenders  love  to  all,  but  the  result  will  be,  as  ever,  that  divine 
mercy  and  love  will  be  rejected,  believers  will  be  derided  and  persecuted, 
etc.,  until,  as  the  Word  teaches,  the  forbearance  of  God  shall  cease,  and 
vengeance  (now  also  forbidden  to  the  saints  as  something  belonging  only 
to  God,  and  to  be  exerted  under  His  authority  and  direction)  shall,  long 
delayed,  finally  come.  To  intensify  this,  against  the  ridicule  of  unbelief 
that  laughs  at  all  such  threats  as  idle,  it  compresses  it  all  into  the  astonish- 
ing phrase  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  ;"  thus  showing  how  the  same  Saviour, 
who  loved  us  even  to  a  shameful  and  cruel  death,  will  ultimately  at  His 
coming  manifest  His  anger  against  those  who  wilfully  and  malignantly  re- 
ject Him.     If  we  consider  what  God  intends  to  perform,  viz.,  to  set  up 


392  THE   TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  192. 

the  fallen  Davidic  Kingdom  in  the  glorious  manner  covenanted  and  pre- 
dicted, and  then  what  opposition  God's  Purpose  will  meet  with  at  the  time 
when  it  is  to  he  accomplished,  we  have  the  key  to  the  proper  understanding 
of  a  host  of  passages  descrihing  this  wrath,  this  awful  vengeance,  this  strik- 
ing through  of  kings  and  enemies,  this  fearful  slaughter  of  the  mighty,  etc. 
(such  as  e.  g.  Ps.  76,  08,  46,  and  similar  utterances,),  and  also  to  the  joy 
of  the  saints  (as  expressed  e.  g.  Ps.  48,  98,  113,  97,  etc.) 

It  is  a  gratification  to  a  Pre-Millenarian,  and  a  strong  evidence  in  favor  of  his  posi- 
tion, that  his  doctrine  alone  can  incorporate  and  cordially  receive,  as  veritable  truth,  the 
plain  grammatical  sense  and  meaning  of  predictions  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  given. 
Thus  e.g.  Zech.  14,  in  the  tribulation  of  Jerusalem,  the  Advent  of  Jesus,  the  successful 
fighting  of  Judah,  the  plagues,  the  Millennial  glory — all  is  received  just  as  recorded,  being 
in  perfect  accord  with  the  general  analogy  of  faith.  Any  system  of  belief  which  can  do 
this,  evidences  by  this  fact  alone  that  it  is  solidly  based  on  the  Holy  Scriptures.  On  the 
other  hand,  look  at  the  expositions  of  our  opponents  and  see  how  utterly  unable  they  are 
to  explain  it,  without  undue  violence  to  its  tenor.  To  refer  it  (as  Grotius,  Dathius,  Acker- 
man  and  others)  to  the  times  of  the  Maccabees,  is  simply  a  perversion  of  the  whole, 
seeing  that  nothing  in  the  history  of  those  times  can  sustain  such  a  reference.  To  apply 
it  (as  Jerome,  Lowth,  Scott,  Clarke,  Henderson,  and  others)  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusa- 
lem under  Titus,  is  to  neglect  the  facts  of  history  which  do  not  correspond,  and  the  con- 
nection  and  relationship  existing  between  the  first,  middle,  and  concluding  part  of  the 
chapter.  To  get  rid  of  it  (as  Hitzig,  Knobel,  Ewald,  and  others)  by  a  reference  to  a 
period  immediately  preceding  the  Babylonish  captivity,  and  accounting  for  its  non-fullil- 
ment  in  history  on  the  ground  of  its  conditionality  and  ethical  intent,  is  to  pervert  the 
prophecy  and  seek  a  meaning.  The  opinion  (so  Hengstenberg,  Keil,  Chambers,  etc.) 
that  it  describes  in  general  figurative  language  the  whole  development  of  the  Church 
from  the  commencement  of  the  Messianic  era  to  its  close,  or  the  view  (so  Moore,  Cowles, 
Xc  wcome,  etc.)  to  a  period  yet  future  in  which  is  represented  in  figurative  language  an 
assault  upon  the  Church,  her  safety,  exaltation,  blessing,  etc. — only  shows  how  difficult  it 
is  for  men,  who  reject  the  true  idea  of  the  Kingdom  and  its  relationship  to  the  Jewish 
nation,  to  interpret  and  apply  such  predictions.  Their  Church-Kingdom  theory  must 
make  everything  bend  to  its  support,  and  Jerusalem  besieged,  Judah  lighting,  the  plagues 
— in  brief,  everything  must  be  spiritualized  and  another  meaning  substituted,  so  that  it 
may  be  incorporated.  The  key  to  the  proper  comprehension  and  adoption  of  such 
prophecies  they  do  not  possess,  for  they  apply  all  either  to  the  past,  present,  or  future  in 
such  a  way  as  either  does  not  accord  with  the  facts  of  history,  or  else  not  with  the 
expressed  design  of  this  dispensation. 

Obs.  3.  Continuing  our  illustration  in  this  direction,  the  grand  proph- 
ecy of  Hah.  3  (which,  it  is  said,  Dr.  Franklin  caused  literary  unbelievers 
at  Paris  to  acknowledge  as  the  most  sublime  in  language)  is  selected. 
The  common  interpretation  which  would  (against  the  prophet's  expressly 
locating  it  in  the  future  in  verse  16)  locate  this  in  the  past  (as  e.  g.  at  the 
coming  out  of  Egypt  and  conquest  of  Canaan),  or  which  would  dwarf  it 
by  making  it  a  kind  of  Oriental  exaggeration,  or  specimen  of  fine  writing, 
or  allegorical  representation  of  Divine  Providence,  etc.,  is  unworthy  of  re- 
ception on  exegetical  and  analogical  grounds.1  Let  us  in  the  briefest 
manner  point  out  how  this  prediction  accurately  corresponds  with  the 
things  pertaining  to  the  introduction  of  the  Kingdom.  Introductorily, 
however,  it  may  lie  remarked,  that  the  Jews  regarded  this  as  a  prediction 
relating  to  the  Coming  of  the  Messiah,  and  derived  encouragement  (as  e.  g. 
Jon.  13.  Uzziel  in  dial.  Targum,  p.  221,  vol.  1,  Bh.  Newton's  Diss.), 
therefore,  that  the  Jews  would  be  restored  ;  and  this  view,  after  the  First 
Advent,  was  still  retained  (applying  it  to  the  Second  Advent  on  account  of 
the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  and  the  continued  Gentile  domination 
over  the  Jews)  by  the  primitive  Church,  and  so  deeply   imbedded  was  it 


Prop.  192.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  393 

in  the  faith  then  extant  that  even  Origen  in  the  sixth  version  of  his  "  Poly- 
glot" renders  Hab.  3  :  13  "  Thou  wentest  forth  to  save  thy  people  through 
Jesus  the  Christ''  (Home's  Introd.,  vol.  1,  p.  269).  This  belief  has 
been,  more  or  less,  perpetuated,  and  corresponds  with  the  general  agree- 
ment of  the  Word  respecting  the  future.  V.  2.  "  0  Lord,  I  have  heard 
thy  speech,  and  I  ivas  afraid" — afraid  of  the  fearful  manifestations  of 
wrath  accompanying  this  Advent  described,  and  which  is  implied  that  the 
prophet  should  witness.  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the 
years,"  or,  as  some,  "  as  the  years  approach") ;  God's  special  work,  as 
the  covenant  with  David  testifies,  is  this  Theocratic  Kingdom  in  David's 
Son  and  Lord,  and  which,  when  accomplished,  the  saints  are  to  inherit  as 
"  theioorh  of  God's  hands,'"  Isa.  GO  :  21.  In  numerous  places  God  claims 
the  establishment  of  the  Theocracy,  and  even  its  overthrow,  the  predictions 
and  the  provision  made  concerning  it,  and  its  final  re-establishment  as  His 
own  peculiar  work.  The  prophet  having  already  predicted  the  over- 
throw of  "  the  special  work  "  that  God  had  commenced  in  Israel  and  the 
subjection  of  the  people  under  Gentile  rule,  now  directs  attention  to  the 
revival  (comp.  Ps.  85  :  5-7  ;  Isa.  63  :  15,  17  ;  Hos.  5:6)  of  this  work,  the 
covenanted  and  sure  mercies  of  David.  "  In  the  midst  of  the  years" 
(or,  "  as  the  years  approach")  "  make  known  (Isa.  61  :  1,  2  ;  Ezek. 
39  :  7):  in  wrath  remember  mercy.'"  (Augustine,  City  of  God,  B.  18, 
ch.  32,  gives  a  singular  rendering  :  "  While  the  years  draw  nigh,  Thou 
wilt  be  recognized  ;  at  the  Coming  of  the  time,  Thou  wilt  be  shown.") 
The  appeal  here  is  for  God  to  show  mercy,  inasmuch  as  the  Jewish  nation 
has  fallen  under  God's  wrath,  and  will  continue  thus  until  the  time  ap- 
pointed for  deliverance.  There  also  is  reference  to  the  fact,  that,  while 
wrath  is  manifested  (even  as  we  see  it  to-day),  yet  mercy  is  likewise  prom- 
ised (as  e.  g.  Deut.  32  :  39-43),  based  upon  the  "oath-bound  covenant  itself. 
Now,  if  the  mercy  promised  to  the  Fathers  is  ever  fulfilled  and  the  wrath 
which  overturned  "  the  tabernacle  of  David"  and  made  his  "  house  deso- 
late "  is  ever  removed,  it  must  be  in  the  future  and  in  the  way  we  have 
already  designated,  viz.,  by  the  Advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  power 
and  glory.  That  such  is  the  hope  of  the  prophet  appears  from  what  fol- 
lows, B.  3,  "  God  came  from  Teman  and  the  Holy  One  from  Mt.  Pa  ran  ;" 
that  this  relates  to  the  future  (for  even  the  Mohammedans,  p.  151,  Clarke's 
Ten  Religions,  thus  claim  it,  referring  it  to  Mohammed)  Advent  of  Jesus 
has  been  pointed  out  in  Prop.  166  and  the  reasons  given  for  the  same,  so 
that  instead  of  repeating  the  proofs  there  assigned,  we  shall  proceed  to 
notice  how  the  same  are  supported  by  the  remainder  of  the  prophecy. 
"  His  glory  covered  the  heavens  (Matt.  24  :  30),  and  the  earth  was  full  of  his 
praise,"  or,  as  some,  "  splejulor."  That  this  shall  be  the  result  of  Christ's 
Advent  is  reiterated  in  a  multitude  of  predictions.  V.  4,  "  And  His  bright- 
ness was  as  the  Light  ;"  Jesus  comes  as  the  bright  Morning  Star,  as  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  (comp.  e.  g.  Rev.  1  :  13,  17,  and  21  :  23,  24).  "  He 
had  horns  "  (or,  as  some,  bright  beams")  "  coming  out  of  His  hand  ;  and 
there  was  the  hiding  of  His  power.'"  Remembering  that  "  horns  "  are  em- 
blematic of  power,  authority  (or,  if  "  bright  beams  or  rays  "  are  preferred, 
considering  how  the  righteous  are  compared  to  the  stars,  etc.);  that  the 
horns  of  the  righteous  are  to  be  exalted  at  the  Second  Advent ;  that  they 
are  represented  as  "  hidden  ones  "  (Ps.  83  :  3)  ;  that,  instead  of  being 
''shut  up  in  the  hand  of  the  enemy  "  (Ps.  31  :  8),  the  saints  shall  be  in 
the  hand  (Ps.  37   :  24  ;  31  :  5,  etc.)  i.  e.  under  the  Sovereign  disposal, 


394  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  192. 

and  identified  with  the  might  of  God  ;  that  in  that  period  they  shall  be  "  a 
crown  of  glory  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of 
God,"  Isa.  62  :  3);  and  that  "  the  hand  of  the  Lord  shall  be  known  toward 
His  servants  and  His  indignation  toward  His  enemies"  (Isa.  66:  14),  it 
teaches  ns  that  the  righteous  shall  be  with  Him  (coxnp.  Zech.  14  ;  Rev. 
19,  etc.)  and  manifest  power  and  authority  (Prop.  154)  through  His  power 
(Props.  82,  83,  etc.);  for  as  Christ  rules  the  assembled  nations  with  a  rod 
of  iron,  so  also  do  the  saints.  And  hence,  just  as  it  is  said  of  Jesus  (Isa. 
49  :  2),  "  in  the  shadow  of  His  hand  hath  He  hid  me  and  made  me  a 
polished  shaft  "  etc.,  so  saints,  the  brethren  of  Christ,  those  who  inherit 
with  Him,  are  employed  (Ps.  149  :  9)  "  to  execute  the  judgment  written" 
thus  exhibiting  the  irresistible  power  of  God.  The  hand  that  was  pierced 
holds  this  power.  "  Before  Him  went  the  pestilence,  and  burning  coals 
(marg.  burning  diseases)  went  forth  at  His  feet  ;"  this  is  eminently  a 
characteristic  pertaining  to  the  Second  Advent,  for  it  is  after  the  Coming 
of  the  Lord  with  all  His  saints  that  the  pestilence,  etc.,  of  Zech.  14  :  5,  12, 
15,  18  is  experienced  ;  it  is  after  the  wicked  are  "  gathered  together  for 
war"  (comp.  Itev.  19)  that  "burning  coals  shall  fall  upon  them"  (Ps. 
140  :  10).  Ps.  11  :  6  refers  to  this  time  :  "  Upon  the  wicked  He  shall 
rain  snares,  fire,  and  brimstone  (Rev.  19  :  20),  and  a  horrible  (marg.  burn- 
ing) tempest.  This  shall  be  the  portion  of  their  cup."  (Comp.  Ezek. 
38  :  20-22,  etc.).  V.  G,  "  He  stood  and  measured  the  earth  ;  He  beheld  and 
drove  asunder  tin-  nations  :  and  the  everlasting  mountains  (Luther  :  Welt 
Berge)  were  scattered,  the  perpetual  (or  long-enduring)  hills  did  bow  j  His 
wags  are  everlasting.'"  This  gives  a  vivid  representation  of  the  supremacy, 
dominion  and  power  exercised  by  King  Jesus,  that  all  things,  including 
the  whole  earth  and  its  nations,  are  under  His  control  and  submit  to  His 
commands.  And,  keeping  in  view  prophetic  usage  in  which  Kingdoms 
and  States  are  denoted  by  mountains  and  hills,  long-enduring  and  great 
powers  shall  be  overthrown,  the  heads  over  many  countries  shall  be 
wounded,  and  a  feast  for  the  beasts  and  fowls  shall  be  prepared  (Rev. 
19  :  17,  18)  out  of  their  sustainers.  V.  7,  "  I  saw  the  tents  of  Cushan  (or 
some,  Arabia,  others  Mesopotamia,  others  Ethiopia)  in  affliction  and  the 
curtains  of  the  land  of  Midian  did  tremble" — indicative  not  only  of  the  extent 
and  power  of  the  swayed  "  rod  of  iron,"  but  points  even  to  localities  where 
vengeance  will  be  specially  manifested.  V.  8,  "  Was  the  Lord  displeased 
against  the  rivers?  Was  thine  anger  against  the  rivers?  Was  Thy  wrath 
against  the  sea  ?"  The  force  of  this  is  seen  by  accepting  of  the  fact  that  "  riv- 
ers" are  symbolic  of  invading  armies,  hostile  kingdoms,  and  overflowing  in- 
vasions, as  e.g.  in  Jer.  4G  :  7,  8,  Egypt  is  represented  as  "  a  flood  whose  waters 
are  moved  as  rivers,"  in  Jer.  47  :  2,  "  waters  shall  rise  up  out  of  the  north 
and  shall  be  an  overflowing  flood  ;"  and  in  Isa.  8  :  7,  8,  the  King  of  Assyria  is 
called  "  a  river"  that  shall  "  overflow"  Judah.  "Sea  "  is  a  prophetical  word 
which  intensifies  this  meaning,  denoting  a  vast  army,  a  mighty  confedera- 
tion, or  a  great,  tumultuous  gathering,  as  e.  g.  Isa.  51  :  42,  "  the  sea  is 
come  upon  Babylon,  she  is  covered  with  the  multitude  of  waves  thereof" 
(comp.  Nahum  1:4;  Ps.  89  :  9  ;  Isa.  5  :  30  ;  Ezek.  23  :  6,  etc.)  We  are  as- 
sured that  just  such  "  rivers" — viz.,  "  the  kings  of  the  earth  with  their  ar- 
mies"— just  such  a  "  sea" — viz.,  "  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  of  the  whole 
world  gathered  to  the  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  Almighty" — shall  arise, 
(vide  Props.  115,  123,  161,  162,  163,  etc.).  "  That  thou  didst  ride  upon 
thy  horses  and  thy  chariots  of  salvation."     This  reminds   us   of  the   Ian- 


Prop.  192.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  395 

guage  employed  in  Rev.  19,  descriptive  of  the  Second  Advent,  in  which 
this  "  King  of  kings  "  together  with  his  army  are  represented  as  riding 
upon  horses.  This  similarity  of  representation,  together  with  the  same  re- 
sult, viz.,  salvation,  identifies  the  period  of  fulfilment.  (We  are  also  re- 
minded of  "  the  chariots"  of  Ps.  G8  :  17,  see  Prop.  166).  V.  9,  "  thy  bow  was 
made  quite  naked,  according  to  the  oaths  of  the  tribes,  even  thy  word" 
(Augustine  renders  :  "  Bending,  thou  wilt  bend  thy  bow  against  the  scep- 
tres, saith  the  Lord'').  Taking  our  version  and  the  correction  of  Clarke  {Com. 
loci)  "  according  to  oaths  of  the  tribes,"  then  the  idea  seems  to  be  that 
the  bow  made  naked  or  uncased  (taken  out  of  its  case)  is  declarative  of 
God  being  now  fully  prepared  to  wage  war  (Ps.  7  :  12, 13  ;  Ps.  45  :  45)  and  to 
fulfil  the  covenant  and  promises  which  were  confirmed  by  solemn  oaths  to 
the  twelve  tribes  (comp.  Acts  26  :  6,  7)  of  Israel.  Whatever  version  may 
be  adopted,  it  is  descriptive  of  His  ability  to  overcome  ;  and  the  reference 
to  the  tribes,  recalling  Zech.  0  :  11-17  ;  Isa.  41  :  2-4,  etc.,  implies  that  this 
Man  of  war  is  engaged  for  their  deliverance.  "  Thou  didst  cleave  the  earth 
with  rivers,"  or,  marg.  read..  "  Thou  didst  cleave  the  rivers  of  the  earth  ;" 
that  is,  He  subjects  the  Kingdoms  of  the  earth,  Zech.  14,  etc.  etc.  V. 
10,  "  The  mountain*  saw  Tliee  and  trembled" — expressive  of  the  majesty 
of  this  great  King,  at  whose  glorious  Presence  the  Kingdoms  will  be  put  to 
fear,  Isa.  2  :  10-22  ;  Rev.  6  :  15,  16,  etc.  "  T/ie  overflowing  of  the  water 
passed  by  ;  the  deep  altered  his  voice,  and  lifted  up  his  hands  on  high." 
This  massing  of  waters  (i.e.  confederation  of  people)  shall  be  beaten  back 
(as  e.g.  Ps.  93  :  3-5)  and  placed  within  bounds.  V.  11,"  The  Sim  and 
Moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation."  Some  think  that  there  is  here  an 
allusion  to  Joshua  (10  :  11,12)  and  the  miracle  then  performed,  and  that 
this  is  simply  introduced  to  denote  that  by  supernatural  means  these 
enemies  are  destroyed.  But  we  go  beyond  this,  viz.,  that  it  directly 
teaches  that  when  He  comes,  far  greater  than  Joshua,  to  destroy  His  enemies, 
that  a  miracle  similar  to  Joshua's  will  be  performed.  That  very  miracle, 
which  above  all  others  has  been  the  standing  jest  of  unbelief  (which  fails  to 
see  why  it  was  wrought  both  in  virtue  of  the  nation's  Theocratic  relation- 
ship and  as  an  earnest  of  the  supernatural  power  exerted  when  the  Great 
Leader  and  Judge  of  the  nation  appears),  will  be  repeated — as  if  in  derision 
of  man's  supposed  superior  knowledge — when  unbelief  has  reached  its  cul- 
minated point  and  forms  a  dreadful  confirmation  of  long-delayed  but  now 
experienced  vengeance  ;  seeing  that  nature  itself,  upon  which  unbelief  so 
proudly  and  arrogantly  relied,  contributes  to  the  certainty  of  their  doom. 
In  the  light  of  various  Scripture,  and  recognizing  the  similarity  of  these 
engagements,  we  dare  not  limit  the  direct  statement  of  the  passage,  but 
believe,  that  as  the  Theocratic  position,  in  the  effort  to  overcome  its 
enemies,  was  thus  sustained,  so  it  will  be  again,  as  asserted,  when  the  same 
Theocratic  ordering  under  the  Mighty  King  Himself  shall  be  maintained 
against  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  their  armies.  Yea,  we  may  anticipate 
even  a  greater  miracle  in  connection  with  this  one  (comp.  e.  g.  Isa. 
24  :  23  ;  Joel  3:15;  Matt.  24  :  29,  etc.).  "  At  the  light  of  thine  arrows  they 
went ;  and  at  the  shining  of  thy  glittering  spear.'''  or,  as  some,  "  By  their 
light,  thine  arrows  went  abroad  ;  by  their  brightness,  the  lightning  of  thy 
spear,'"  comp.  marg.  read.,  etc. — holding  up  the  idea  of  a  mighty  con- 
queror marching  in  "the  greatness  of  his  strength,"  and  overcoming  all 
opposition,  or  performing  this  in  the  miraculous  light  of  the  sun,  etc. 
Y.  12.     "  Thou  didst    march  through  the  land  in  thine  indignation  ;   Thou 


396  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  192. 

didst  thresh  the  heathen  in  thine  anger — with  which  it  is  only  necessary  to 
compare  Isa.  G3  :  1-5,  Micah  4  :  11-13  ;  2Thess.  1  :  7-10  ;  Rev.  19,  etc.— 
(Augustine  has  :  "  And  in  fury  Thou  shalt  cast  down  the  nations"). 
V.  13.  "  Thou  wentest  forth  for  the  salvation  (Isa.  35  :  44,  24  :  9)  of  Thy 
people,  even  for  salvation  (Rev.  12  :  10)  with  Thine  anointed"  (some  mss. 
and  some  copies  of  the  Septuagint,  see  Clarke's  Com.  loci,  have  "  anointed 
ones") — it  is  at  this  period  that  King  Jesus  comes  the  second  time  unto  Sal- 
vation, Heb.  9  :  28,  and  delivers  His  people  ;  and  when  He  thus  comes,  He 
has  His  anointed  ones  (viz.  the  saints  accounted  worthy  of  rulership)  to  par- 
ticipate with  Him  in  the  infliction  of  judgments  as  stated,  e.g.  Ps.  149  :  6-9, 
Rev.  2  :  20-27,  etc.  "  Thou  woundest  the  head  out  of  the  house  of  the  wicked, 
by  discovering  (or  making  naked)  the  foundation  unto  the  neck.'1''  The 
confederation  of  the  wicked  under  a  leader  or- head  is  alluded  to,  and  the 
utter  subversion  (Ps.  110  :  G)  of  the  same  ;  the  house  laid  bare  even  to  its 
foundations,  destroying  it  root  and  brand)  (as  e.g.  Mai.  4)  fully  indicates  it. 
V.  14.  "  Thou  didst  st^ijee  through  with  his  staves  the  head  of  his  villages  : 
(or  as  Clarke  :  Thou  hast  pierced  a  mid  their  tribes  the  head  of  their 
t lroops)  :  they  came  out  as  a  whirlwind  to  scatter  me  ;  their  rejoicing  was  as 
to  devour  the  poor  secretly."  The  same  idea  of  the  coming  and  over- 
throw of  the  last,  gigantic  confederation,  is  presented  with  the  additional 
hint  of  the  at  first  covert  design  of  the  house  of  the  wicked,  viz. — to  over- 
come and  root  out  the  people  of  the  Lord.  V.  15.  "  Thoudidst  walkthrough 
the  sea  with  thine  horses,  through  the  heaps  of  great  waters" — descriptive  of 
the  power  of  King  Jesus,  that,  notwithstanding  the  greatness  of  this  con- 
federation, He  can  safely  and  triumphantly  resist  it,  for  it  is  expressly  pre- 
dicted of  Him  (Ps.  89  :  23-25)  "  I  will  heat  do  urn  His  foes  In  fore  His  face 
ami  plague  them  thai  hale  him.  Hut  my  faithfulness  ami  my  mercy  shall 
he  with  Him  ;  and  iu  mg  ua me  shall  His  horn  he  exalted.  1  will  set  Bis  hand 
also  iu  the  sea.  and  Bis'  right  hand  in  the  rivers."  V.  10.  "  When  I  heard,  my 
belly  I  rem  tiled  ;  mg  lips  quivered  at  the  voice  ;  ndteuness  enteral  into  my  hones 
and  I  trembled  in  myself;  that  1  might  rest  in  the  dag  of  trouble  j  when  Be 
cometh  up  unto  the  people,  He  will  invade  them  (or,  cut  them  in  pieces)  with 
II is  troops."  The  prophet  trembles  at  the  description  of  th is  day  of  sore 
affliction  and  tribulation,  of  carnival,  of  pestilence  and  sword,  of  the  vin- 
tage of  blood,  and  prays  for  the  "  rest"  (com}).  2  Thess.  1  :  7-8),  the  de- 
liverance that  Jesus  will  bestow  (Rev.  11  :  18)  upon  His  saints  at  His 
Coming  with  His  "  troops,"  or  "the  armies  of  heaven."  The  desire  of 
the  prophet  to  be  among  those  who  shall  have  "  rest"  in  that  day,  thus 
showing  that  this  Advent  is  future,  at  once  disposes  of  a  vast  amount  of 
erroneous  interpretation  fastened  upon  the  prophecy.  V.  17.  "Although 
the  fig 'tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  he  in  the  vines;  the  labor 
of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall  'yield  no  meal  ;  the  flock  shall  be 
cut  off  from  the' fold,  and  there  shall  be  no  herd  in  the  stalls."  This  is 
connected  with  the  same  period  of  time  (comp.  Luther's  rendering)  as 
something  that  shall  also  be  witnessed.  Nature  itself  shall  be  affected  so 
that  failures  of  fruit  and  crops,  and  plagues  upon  cattle,  greatly  tending 
to  the  hardships  experienced,  shall  be  sent  upon  the  world.  This  corre- 
sponds with  various  other  Scripture  (Prop.  174)  relating  to  the  period  of 
the  Sec.  Advent.  Since  men  have  set  aside  the  God  of  Revelation  and  the 
Son  of  His  Love,  and  have  relied  upon  nature,  making  it  their  God,  nature 
itself  shall  justly  be  employed  in  their  signal  punishment  and  in  a  manner  so 
striking  that  it  brings  (Luke  21  :  25-2G)  "  distress  of  nations  with  perplex- 


Prop.  192.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  397 

ity  ;  the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring  ;  men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear,  and 
for  looking  after  those  tilings  which  are  coming  on  the  earth. "  Or,  if  the 
reader  insists  upon  referring  this  verse,  according  to  some  versions,  to 
something  that  the  nation  then  and  afterward  was  to  realize,  then  the  idea 
is,  let  all  the  threatenings  of  God  relative  to  the  Jewish  nation  be  verified 
in  their  suffering  and  desolate  condition  yet  God's  covenanted  promises, 
after  the  season  of  affliction,  shall  not  fail  (see  the  connection  with 
following).  Y.  18  "  Yet  1  trill  rejoin-  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  God 
of  my  salvation  ";  or  as  the  Vulgate  makes  the  reference  :  "  Yet  I  in  the 
Lord  will  rejoice,  and  will  exult  in  Jesus  my  God — that  is,  either  because 
of  the  "  rest"  obtained  at  this  time  of  tribulation,  or  because  God's 
mercy,  notwithstanding  the  evil  brought  upon  the  nation,  will  bring  glo- 
rious restitution.  V.  19.  "  The  Lord  God  is  my  strength'''' — now  indeed 
at  the  contemplation  of  those  scenes  in  the  future  I  may  tremble  through 
my  weakness,  but  then  God  will  save  and  strengthen  me,  so  that  I  shall  pass 
through  them  unscathed.  Yea,  more  than  this  :  "  //.  will  make  my  feet  Wee 
hind"1  s  feet  and  he  trill  make  me  to  walk  upon  my  higti  places'" — expressing 
the  exaltation  of  the  prophet  at  this  day  after  (Rev.  11  :  18)  the  Advent  of 
"  the  King  of  kings,"  being  then  also  a  "  King  ami  Priest,'"  in  the  al- 
lotted "high,  places"  reigning  with  Christ,  participating  in  His  divine 
administrations  and  government.  Thus  passing  over  this  prophecv  and 
allowing  the  things  pertaining  to  the  ushering  in  of  this  Theocratic  King- 
dom to  aid  in  its  interpretation,  we  find  that,  instead  of  its  referring  to  the 
past  or  instead  of  being  simply  a  specimen  of  sublime  writing  (exhibiting 
"versatility  of  imagination,"  etc.),  it  presents  us  in  the  most  forcible 
manner  stern  realities  and  joyful  anticipations — "  the  treading  of  the 
wine-press"  and  "the  salvation"  of  God's  people — connected  with  the 
Second  Advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  rebuke  of  Jesus,  Luke 
21  :  25,  is  applicable  to  many,  who,  with  perverted  notions  of  the  King- 
dom, fail  to  see  how  the  prophets  with  one  voice  testify  to  the  Coming  and 
marvellous  power  of  David's  Son  and  Lord.  Dr.  Keith  in  Harmony  of 
Prophecy  properly  calls  attention  to  this  in  comparing  the  Song  of  Moses, 
a  number  of  Psalms,  prophecies  of  Isa.  this  prayer  of  Hab.,  etc.  with 
the  Apocalypse  and  other  Scripture,  and  in  abundantly  showing  that  a 
comparison  of  Scripture  indicates  how  largely  the  spirit  of  prophecy  deals 
with  the  things  pertaining  to  the  Sec.  Advent.2 

'  Even  Fairbairn  (On  Proph.,  p.  171)  not  knowing  -what  to  do  with  this  prophecy,  and 
failing  to  catch  its  connection,  makes  it  a  providential  Coming  of  God  to  punish  sin, 
"  first  among  the  backsliding  Jews  and  then  among  the  proud  and  lordly  Chaldeans  ;" 
and  he  and  others  interpret  the  Coming  from  Teman,  the  mention  of  Paran,  etc.,  as  lan- 
guage taken  from  the  past  to  heighten  the  effect  ;  or,  to  be  plain,  a  poetical  license  is 
taken  to  give  proper  coloring  to  the  picture.  Alas  !  when  able  writers  thus  explain 
prophecy,  what  confidence  can  we  have  in  its  inspiration  ?  How  can  we  possibly  dis- 
criminate the  play  of  fancy  or  imagination  from  the  intended  realities  ?  Such  interpreta- 
tion is  both  dangerous  and  derogatory  to  the  Word. 

2  This  was  written  before  the  writer  saw  Delitzsch  "  On  Habakkuk"  'Bib.  Bepos.  and 
Princeton  Review,  Jan.,  1851),  who  rejects  as  utterly  untenable  its  reference  to  the  past, 
and  decidedly  advocates  the  prophetic  sense,  rendering  "  God  came"  by  ' '  God  shall 
come,"  in  the  future  in  a  grand  descent  to  judgment  upon  His  enemies,  and  that  in  the 
final  conflict  there  will  be  a  terrible  overthrow  of  nations  in  the  route  and  manner  indi- 
cated. He,  however,  makes  the  mountains,  hills,  and  rivers  too  literal,  overlooking  too 
much  the  analogy  of  Scripture  figure  in  this  respect.  Fully  admitting  that  nature  itself 
will  be  in  full  sympathy  with  this  Coming  and  manifest  its  feeling  the  Supernatural 
power  of  its  Creator  and  Redeemer,  yet  why  should  God's  wrath  be  kindled  against  inani- 
mate objects  ?     Analogy  teaches  us  that  it  is  to  be  manifested  against  animate  objects, 


398  THE   THEOCRATIC   KIXGDOM.  [PltOP.  192. 

forming  an  Antichristian  confederation  against  Him  and  His  people.  He  makes  "  the 
bow"  made  "bare"  to  mean  "stripped  from  its  covering  so  that  it  may  be  ready  for 
use,"  and  "  the  arrows"  "  sworn  by  Thy  Word  "  to  express  that  "  the  command  of  God 
has  bound  them  by  oath  to  execute  their  commission,  they  shall  not  fail  to  strike  wher- 
ever they  are  aimed;"  i.e.  the  entire  prophecy  indicates  the  certainty  of  this  Coming 
vengeance  and  deliverance.  He  applies  "  to  save  His  anointed  '*  to  the  King,  to  Jesus  as 
the  Davidic  King  (the  Son  of  Man),  and  if  this  reference  is  intended,  it  finds  corrobora- 
tion in  other  Scripture,  as  e.g.  Dan.  7  ;  Ps.  22,  etc.  Having  a  correct  and  definite  view 
of  the  future  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom,  associated  with  His  saints  and  the  restora- 
tion of  the  Jewish  nation,  enables  one  to  avoid  that  indefinite  reference  to  a  future  Com- 
ing, so  characteristic  of  numerous  expositions  (as  e.g.  Lange's  Cum.  on  Hob.,  and  the 
references).  Even  Luther  (quoted,  p.  40,  in  Lange)  could  not  refer  all  to  the  past  and 
present  but  brings  in  the  future,  as  e.g.  on  v.  19,  "  The  Lord  is  still  my  God.  Of  this 
we  will  be  so  glad,  that  we  will  run  and  spring  like  hinds,  so  nimble  are  our  feet  to 
become  ;  and  we  will  no  longer  wade  and  creep  in  mire,  but  for  perfect  delight  we  will 
soar  and  fly  in  the  high  places,  and  do  nothing  but  sing  joyfully,  and  pursue  all  kinds  of 
delightful  employment.  This  is  to  take  place  when  the  Babylonian  sceptre  is  cursed 
and  destroyed,  and  we  are  redeemed  and  the  Kingdom  comes."  In  Fausset's  Cum.  are 
found  some  interesting  statements,  especially  in  the  rendering  "  according  to  oaths"  to 
mean  "  Thy  oaths  of  promise  to  the  tribes  of  Israel,  Ps.  77  :  8  ;  Luke  1  :  73,  71  ;"  "  Thine 
Anointed,"  which  may  mean,  as  some,  "the  Messiah,"  or,  as  others,  "Israel,"  the 
anointed  people,  or,  as  others,  "  the  Messiah  and  His  anointed  ones,"  etc. 

Obs.  4.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  not  only  serves  to  explain  what  other- 
wise would  be  inexplicable  (as  e.  g.  the  Married  and  Barren  Woman,  Prop. 
118,  references  to  the  morning,  Prop.  139,  etc.),  but  aids  materially  in  con- 
firming renderings  of  the  Scripture  not  correctly  given  in  our  version,  in 
explaining  the  meaning  of  Scripture  phraseology,  and  in  interpreting  pas- 
sages upon  which  a  variety  of  opinions  have  been  offered.  Having  given 
examples  of  the  first  (as  e.g.  the  end  of  the  world,  Prop.  140,  etc.  )'  and 
of  the  second  (as  e.g.  the  meaning  of  Judge  and  judgment-day  Props.  132 
and  133,  etc.),  it  will  be  sufficient  to  illustrate  the  third  advantage,  viz. — that 
in  the  passages  where  a  variety  of  conflicting  views  exist,  the  correct  inter- 
pretation will  he  suggested.  Thus,  e.g.  take  the  celebrated  prophecy  of 
the  Shiloh,  Gen.  49  :  10,  "  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judith,  nor  a 
lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh  come,  and  //  //to  Him  shall  the 
gathering  of  the  people  be.'*  Amid  the  great  diversity  of  renderings3  only  a 
few  of  them,  sustained  also  by  excellent  critical  authority,  are  in  corre- 
spondence with  both  the  requirement  of  historical  fact  and  of  other  predic- 
tions. Our  version,  together  with  many  others,  is  not  in  agreement  with 
fact,  for  the  seep/re,  hud  deported  from  Judali  long  before  Jesus  came,  and 
His  First  Advent  occurred  when  the  Jews  were  under  the  Roman  domin- 
ion. Hence  one  of  the  following  renderings,  admissable  according  to  the 
original  must  be  adopted.  The  most  preferable  is  given  first  as  follows  : 
"  The  sceptre  shall  not  be  removed  from  Judah  nor  the  lawgiver  from 
between  his  feet  forever;  for  Shiloh  will  come,  and  to  Him  shall  the  gather- 
ing of  the  nations  be"  (so  e.g.  Lederer,  Editor  of  the  Israelite  indeed, 
Jan.  No.,  1863,  p.  157,  Rev.  Wilson,  Editor  of  Proph.  Times,  new  series, 
June,  1875,  p.  139).  This  translation  is  also  that  of  the  modern  Jews 
who  instead  of  following  the  masoretic  notes  give  the  signification  "for- 
ever" (and  which  also  belongs  to  it,)  to  the  word  usually  translated 
"  until" — the  latter  word  being  a  favorite  as  it  was  supposed  to  point  out 
the  first  Advent,  etc.  Taking  this  rendering  we  have  still  a  strong  Mes- 
sianic prophecy  (made  the  stronger  because  perfectly  accordant  with  his- 
torical fact,)  but  directing  the  eye  of  faith  onward  to  the  Second  Advent. 
It  then  teaches,  that  although  (implying  what  really  occurred,  the  over- 


Prop.  192.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  399 

throw  of  royalty,)  the  dominion  or  power  shall  be  taken  away  from  Jndah, 
yet  it  should  not  be  "forever,"  i.e.  perpetual,  for  the  Messiah  would  come 
and  re-establish  it  so  gloriously  that  other  nations  would  recognize  and 
acknowledge  His  sway.  It  is  simply  concisely  stating  a  fact,  which  Ezek. 
21  :  2G,  27  has  amplified,  viz.  that  the  regal  power  would  be  taken  away 
from  Judah,  and  remain  thus  until  the  Christ  comes  to  restore  it  :  "  Re- 
move the  diadem  and  take  off  the  crown.  .  .  .  I  will  overturn,  overturn, 
overturn  it,  and  it  shall  be  no  more,  until  lie  come  whose  right  it  is  and  to 
Him  will  I  give  it."  We  live  in  the  days  of  fulfilment,  but  are  directed  to 
believe  (as  our  entire  argument  from  covenant,  prophecy,  and  history 
proves)  that  this  withdrawal  of  Kingly  rule  shall  not  be  "forever  ;"  but 
that  the  removed  sceptre,  and  suspended  law-giving  authority — the  crown 
profaned  by  casting  to  the  ground  Ps.  89  :  39 — shall  again  be  restored 
when  the  throne  and  kingdom  of  David  shall  be  re-established  by  the  Coming 
David's  Son  and  Lord.  The  next  rendering  is  that  of  Bh.  Newton  (On 
the  Pro[)h.  p.  50),  following  Bh.  Sherlock,  who  translates  :  "  The  tribe- 
ship"  (i.  e.  the  rod  or  staff  which  the  word  usually  rendered  "  sceptre" 
also  denotes  the  ensign  of  a  tribe,  hence  the  tribe  itself  as  under  one  rod, 
etc.)  shall  not  depart  from  Judah.  nor  a  Judge  from  between  his  feet,  until 
Shiloh  come  and  to  Him  shall  be  the  obedience  of  the  people."  This,  while 
open  to  objections,  yet,  if  it  can  be  referred  to  the  tribeship  of  Judah  (comp. 
Bush  on  Gen.  who  advocates  it),  would  sustain  fact,  viz.  the  distinction 
of  being  a  tribe  and  of  having  expounders  of  the  law  down  to  the  First  Ad- 
vent. The  latter  clause  would  only  then,  probably,  refer  to  the  Sec. 
Advent,  seeing  that  the  nation  was  dispersed  and  the  saints  were  scattered 
over  the  Roman  Empire,  etc.  Kurtz  {His,  of  Old  Gov.,  vol.  2,  p.  27  etc.) 
gives  the  following  :  "Tlie  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  the 
ruler's  rod  from  the  place  between  His  feet,  till  Il<  attain  torest,and  the  na- 
tions obey  Him."  Several  other  versions3  are  given,  varying  but  little  from 
the  last,  and  the  impression  is  largely  gaining  ground  among  the  ablest  of 
critics,  that  the  prophecy  contains  the  prediction  that  the  Sceptre  shall  in 
some  way  be  identified  with  Judah,  still  in  the  future,  when  this  sove- 
reignty shall  command  the  obedience  of  the  nations.  This  accords  fully 
with  the  general  analogy  of  Scripture  on  this  point;  Kurtz,  Baumgarten, 
Huvernick,  in  brief,  a  large  number  of  able  writers  declare,  whatever  in- 
choate fulfilment  there  may  be  in  the  past,  that  Jacob's  predictions  to  his 
sons  respecting  "  the  end  of  days"  have  reference  to  "  the  closing  period, 
the  end  of  days,  the  time  of  fulfilment,  in  a  word,  the  Messianic  era,"  and 
hence  largely  pertain  to  the  future.  Of  course,  Millenarians,  comparing 
Scripture  with  Scripture,  have  always  taken  this  position,  viz.  that  at  the 
future  restoration  of  the  nation  these  promises  will  be  abundantly  verified, 
and  pre-eminent  among  them  the  one  to  Judah,  owing  to  his  special  near- 
ness to  the  King.*  Winston  {Boyle's  Led.  vol.  2.  p.  311)  presents  the 
general  opinion  when  thus  referring  the  fulfilment  to  the  Sec.  Advent  and 
restoration  of  the  nation,  because  if  we  limit  these  prophecies  to  the  past 
then  indeed  history  does  not  sustain  their  grandeur  and  extent,  and  espe- 
cially because  in  the  prophecies — more  detailed — respecting  this  nation 
(Preps.  Ill,  112,  113,  114),  precisely  such  an  exalted  fulfilment  is  again 
and  again  declared  to  await  it  in  the  future.5 

1  A  correspondent  of  Dr.  Clarke's,  "  M.  A.  B."  gives  a  consistent  rendering  to  Zech. 
2  :  8,  9  (Clarke's  Com.  loci)  :  "  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  who  hath  sent  me  (so 
also  Luther's  version)  the  future  glory  (or  the  glory  which  is  to  come)  unto  the  nations," 


400  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  192. 

etc.  Sirr  (First  Res.)  translates  2  Thess.  1:9,"  Who  shall  suffer  punishment,  the  slaying 
(olethron  being  used  by  the  Sep.  in  1  Kings  13  :  3,  4)  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and 
from  the  glory  of  His  might,  in  that  day,  when  He  shall  come  to  be  glorified,"  etc. 
Whatever  verbal  change  a  critic  might  suggest,  yet  it  is  true  as  Sirr  suggests  that  this 
slaying  corresjionds  with  Isa.  66  :  15-17,  Rev.  19  :  21,  etc. 

'-'  We  reproduce  a  number  for  the  reader's  information,  and  especially  as  some  of  them 
are  interesting  as  evidence  of  Jewish  opinion  respecting  its  reference  to  the  Messiah. 
Sep. — "  A  Prince  shall  not  fail  from  Judah,  nor  a  captain  out  of  his  loins,  until  the 
things  come  that  are  laid  up  for  Him,"  or  as  Eusebius  in  another  copy  :  "  Until  He  shall 
come  for  whom  it  is  reserved."  Chal. — "  One  having  principality  shall  not  be  taken  from 
the  house  of  Judah,  nor  a  scribe  from  his  children's  children,  until  the  Messiah  come 
whose  the  Kingdom  is  and  Him  shall  the  people  obey."  Targum  of  Onkelos. — "There 
shall  not  be  taken  away  one  having  the  principality  from  the  house  of  Judah  nor  a  scribe 
from  his  children's  children,  till  Messias  come  whose  is  the  Kingdom,  and  whom  the 
nations  shall  obey."  Targum  Jerusal. — "  Kings  shall  not  fail  from  the  house  of  Judah, 
nor  skilful  doctors  of  the  law  from  their  children's  children,  till  the  time  when  the  King 
Messiah  shall  come,  whose  is  the  Kingdom  and  whom  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  are 
about  to  serve."  (The  Babyl.  Targum  also  makes  it  refer  to  the  Messiah  :  "  The  Messiah 
shall  come,  whose  is  the  Kingdom").  Syriac. — "  The  sceptre  shall  not  fail  from  Judah, 
nor  an  expounder  from  between  his  feet  .  .  .  and  Him  shall  the  peoples  wait  for." 
Samar. — "  The  sceptre  shall  not  be  taken  away  from  Judah,  nor  a  leader  from  his  ban- 
ners, until  the  Pacific  shall  come,  and  to  Him  shall  the  people  be  congregated  ;"  so  Prof. 
Bush,  Com.  /<»■;.  Arab. — "  The  rod  shall  not  pass  away  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from 
under  his  rule,  until  He  shall  come  whose  He  is,  and  to  Him  shall  the  people  be  congre- 
gated." Augustine  {City  of  God,  b.  18,  ch.  45)  :  "  There  shall  not  be  lacking  a  Prince  out 
of  Judah,  nor  a  teacher  from  his  loins,  until  He  shall  come  for  whom  it  is  reserved  ;  and 
He  is  the  expectation  of  the  nations."  Douay  Bible:  "The  sceptre  shall  not  be  taken 
away  from  Judah,  nor  a  ruler  from  his  thigh,  till  He  come  that  is  to  be  sent,  and  He 
shall  be  the  expectation  of  nations." 

3  We  give  the  one  found  in  Cox's  Coming  and  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  p.  79  : 
"  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet  eternally, 
because  Shiloh  shall  come  and  gather  the  people  unto  Him."  The  gathering,  Cox  justly 
argues,  implies  a  previous  scattering,  and  the  whole  predicts  that  although  (as  Hos. 
3  :  4,  5)  the  sceptre  shall  depart,  yet  it  will  return  with  the  Advent  of  Shiloh,  etc.  This 
agrees  with  the  first  rendering  which  we  have  given.  Kurtz's  version  (as  well  as  that  of 
the  Eng.  Ver.  and  many  others  commonly  received)  is  opposed  to  fact  as  already  observed. 
The  best  effort  to  make  it  consistent  with  history  is  that  of  Rollins  (Anc.  His.,  vol.  4,  p. 
282)  who  endeavors  to  make  out  a  fulfilment  (1)  in  the  continued  pre-eminent  existence. 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah  over  the  other  tribes,  and  (2)  that  when  Herod,  the  Idumean,  a 
stranger  was  made  king,  the  tribe  lost  its  pre-eminence  and  authority,  which  was  after 
the  Messiah  had  come.  The  facts  of  history  show,  however,  that  Judah  itself  was  fre- 
quently subject  to  foreign  authority,  etc.,  long  before  the  Advent. 

4  While  upon  the  subject,  it  may  be  regarded  advisable  briefly  to  consider  the  objec- 
tion alleged  against  the  rendering  of  Shiloh  in  a  Messianic  sense.  Eichhorn,  Bleek,  and 
others,  following  the  example  of  some  modern  Jews,  make  Shiloh  a  city  of  Ephraim. 
This  has  been  fully  answered  by  Hofman,  Kurtz,  Hengstenberg,  etc.,  and  proven  to  be 
inadmissible.  Dr.  Etheridge,  in  his  Introd.  to  Targums  of  Onkelos,  etc.  (vol.  2,  p.  19), 
says  that  Shiloh  is  the  name  of  the  Messiah  ;  that  some  modern  Jewish  interpreter  make 
it  the  name  of  a  place  and  read  "  until  or  even  though  they  come  to  Shiloh  ;"  but  this 
"  does  violence  to  the  very  grammar  of  the  words.  Shiloh  is  the  nominative  and  the 
verb  is  in  the  singular,  '  He  shall  come.'  The  Targums  translate  Shiloh  by  '  the  King 
Messiah  ;'  the  Palestine  one  describes  Him  as  a  '  Son  of  Jehudah.'  The  Talmud  (Sank.) 
takes  the  same  view.  So  does  Aravanel  in  his  Com.  on  the  text  ;  and  that  found  in  the 
Zohar  lays  down  the  same  doctrine  with  the  addition  that  the  letter  i,  yod  (the  initial  of 
Jehovah)  in  the  name,  indicates  that  the  Messiah  will  be  a  divine  person."  Kurtz  and 
others  assert  that  not  only  the  ancient  synagogues,  but  the  early  Christian  Church  with- 
out exception  referred  this  passage  to  a  personal  Messiah.  Those  who  advocate  it  as  not 
alluding  to  a  personal  Messiah  give  us  several  interpretations  ;  "  till  he  or  one  comes,  or 
they  come  to  Shiloh,"  or  "till  rest  comes,"  or  "till  he  or  one  (relating  to  Judah) 
comes  to  rest  or  the  place  of  rest."  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  favor  a  reference  to  a 
personal  Messiah  give  us  :  Shiloh  as  a  proper  name  of  the  Messiah"  until  Shiloh  come," 
or  (as  Samaritan)  "  Until  the  Pacificus,  i.e.  the  Peace-maker,  comes"  (comp.  Bush  Com. 
loci,  "  the  Tranquillizer,  the  Pacificator,  or  the  Giver  of  Peace"),  or  (as  Sep.)  "  Until  the 


PROP.  192.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  401 

things  come  which  are  reserved  or  laid  up  for  Him,  or  (other  copies)  "  Until  He  for 
whom  it  is  reserved  comes,"  or  (as  Vulgate)  "  Until  He  who  is  to  be  sent  conies,"  or  (as 
Junius,  etc.)  "  Until  his  (Judah's)  Son  comes,"  or  (Luther's  Version)  "  Until  the  Hero 
comes,"  or  (Gesenius) "  Until  the  Rest  (of  the  Messianic  age)  comes,"  or  as  others  explain 
the  last,  "  the  Bringer  of  Rest  or  the  Man  of  Rest  comes."  Le  Clerc  (Bh.  Newton  On 
Proph.,  p.  53)  stands  almost  alone,  "  Until  His  end  or  ceasing." 

5  Some  writers  (as  e.g.  Russell's  Object  and  Manner  of  the  Lords  Return,  p.  8)  make  this 
promise  to  be  "  fulfilled  to  the  letter,"  by  making  the  sceptre  to  be  merely  "  the  symbol 
of  nationality,"  and  that  "that  tribe  (Judah)  represented  the  nation  until  the  Christ 
came."  Many  concur  in  this,  being  desirous  to  make  out  a  fulfilment  in  favor  of  Jesus 
at  the  First  Advent.  It  is  sufficient  to  say,  aside  from  what  has  been  stated,  that  the 
connection  points  more  especially  to  the  Second  Advent,  when  "  the  gathering  (or  obedi- 
ence) of  the  people"  shall— as  repeatedly  predicted — be  abundantly  verified.  Some  of 
the  applications  are  strange,  as  e.g.  Gregory  (Four  Gospels,  p.  58)  makes  Shiloh  fulfilled  in 
Herod  the  Great,  which,  aside  from  Herod  being  a  Roman  and  not  a  Jewish  king,  does 
not  cover  the  continuity  of  the  prophecy  and  the  predicted  result.  (When  Joanna  South- 
cote  pretended  that  she  was  to  bring  forth  the  Shiloh,  the  very  opposite  extreme  was 
entertained  by  Sir  W.  Drummond,  who  made  Shiloh  the  ancient  Asiatic  name  of  a  star  in 
Scorpio!  Numerous  vagaries  have  been  fastened  on  this  prediction.)  We  must  not 
overlook  the  fact  that  this  central  prediction  of  Judah  stands  related  to  "  the  last  days" 
mentioned  in  the  beginning.  This  expression  (comp.  e.g.  Lange's  Com.  loci,  p.  649)  "  at 
the  end  of  days"  does  not  denote  "  the  future  in  general,  but  the  closing  future,  in  fact, 
the  Messianic  time  of  completion"  (with  which  compare  its  usage  in  the  New  Test.).  We 
cannot,  therefore,  accerjt  any  interpretations  which  would  limit  it  to  the  past,  or  make  it 
non-Messianic,  or  give  it  vagueness  and  indefiniteness  of  expression.  It  is  sufficiently 
distinctive  and  determinate  if  interpreted  by  the  facts  of  history  and  the  Divine  Purpose 
relating  to  the  still  future  covenanted  Messianic  Kingdom.  We  are  glad  to  find  that 
recent  Jewish  writers  take  the  position  we  have  done  in  the  text;  Thus  e.g.  Isaac  Leeser, 
in  his  Translation  of  the  Old  Test.,  gives,  among  others,  the  following  rendering  :  "  The 
sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah  nor  the  lawgiver  from  his  descendants  forever ; 
because  Shiloh  shall  come  ;  and  to  Him  shall  be  the  gathering  of  the  nations."  He 
appends  this  significant  sentence,  expressive  of  his  own  opinion  :  "  The  sceptre  will 
return,  when  the  Shiloh,  the  King  Messiah,  shall  come,  and  to  Him  shall  be  both  the 
obedience  and  the  assembling  of  people  or  nations."  This  is  precisely  what  the  general 
analogy  of  Scripture  teaches,  and  this  sublime  prediction  is  in  full  accord  with  the  same. 

Obs.  5.  Balaam's  prophecy,  which  has  provoked  the  ridicule  of  unbelief, 
will  find  its  strongest  support  in  the  Theocratic  relationship  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  by  which  even  an  enemy  was  made,  unwillingly,  to  testify  to  the 
same.  The  miraculous  intervention  sprung  out  of  the  fact,  that  God  was 
then  the  acknowledged  earthly  King  of  the  nation,  and  that  it  was  emi- 
nently fitting  for  one  outside  of  the  nation  to  predict  the  irresistible  power 
of  the  Theocracy  and  the  certain  overthrow  of  its  enemies.  Hence  the  repeti- 
tion of  it,  enforces  the  idea  of  its  certainty  to  conquer — however  long 
delayed — all  opposition.  The  remarkable  part  of  the  prophecy  is,  that, 
aside  from  the  general  affirmation  bearing  upon  this  point,  it  even  passes 
from  the  present — as  if  foreseeing  the  downfall  of  the  Theocracy  and  the 
miserable  condition  of  the  nation  for  centuries,  and  yet  not  allowing  the 
mouth  of  an  enemy  to  proclaim  it — to  the  far  distant  future,  and  enters 
into  details  respecting  the  triumphant  Theocracy  then  established  with  this 
same  elect  people  who  then  shall  overcome  a  still  more  formidable  con- 
federation, etc.  It  will  richly  repay  us  to  direct  our  attention  to  portions 
of  the  prophecy  illustrative  of  this  passing  from  the  present  to  the  future, 
— from  the  existing  Theocratic  ordering  to  that  of  the  future  one  under  tho 
Messiah — for  it  will  confirm  the  arguments  adduced  by  Kurtz,  Henarsten- 
berg,    Newton,   and    many  others,   in  favor  of  its    Messianic  character. 

Num.  ch.  23,  after  announcing  that  Israel  is  held  in  special  favor  by 
God  (owing  to  this  Theocratic  relationship,)  so  that  he  cannot  curse  them, 


402  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  192. 

Balaam  adds  :  v.  9.  "  So,  the  people  shall  dwell  alone  and  shall  not  be 
reckoned  among  the  nations."  The  Targum  of  Onkelos  :  "So!  the  people 
by  themselves  are  to  possess  the  world,  and  among  the  nations  they  shall  not 
be  judged  with  consumption.'''  Dr.  Kurtz  (His.  of  Old  Gov.  vol.  3,  p. 
426)  :  "  Behold,  it  is  a  people  dwelling  apart,  not  reckoning  itself  among 
the  heathen. "  This  lias  direct  reference  to  the  elect  condition  of  the 
nation,  and  which  election  we  have  shown  continues  and  will  yet  be  wonder- 
fully manifested  in  the  special  exaltation  and  supremacy  of  the  nation  at 
the  Second  Advent,  Props.  24,  G8,  114,  etc.  To  confine  this  to  the  past  is 
taking  but  a  low  estimate  of  the  elect  position,  of  the  nation.  Then 
follows  v.  10  :  "  Who  can  count  the  dust  of  Jacob  and  number  the  fourth 
part  of  Israel,''  or,  as  the  Targum  of  Onk.,  *'  Who  can  number  the  dust 
of  the  house  of  Israel,  of  whom  it  is  said,  they  shall  increase  as  the  dust  of 
the  earth'" — which  evidently  relates  to  that  still  future  mighty  increase 
when  the  Kingdom  is  restored.  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous 
and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his,"  or  as  the  Targ.  Onk. — "  Let  mine  be  the 
death  of  His  truthful  ones,  and  let  my  end  be  like  theirs"  * — expressive  of  the 
exaltation  awaiting  those  who  die  in  faith  and  are  raised  up  to  the  dis- 
tinguishing Kingship  and  priesthood  under  the  Messiah,  or,  of  the 
supremacy  and  dominion  in  general,  awaiting  the  nation  under  the  Messiah 
in  which  the  resurrected  saints  enjoy  a  pre-eminence.  Then  stating  the 
reason  why  lie  must  bless  the  nation,  another  is  added,  v.  21,  "  He  hath 
not  beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob,  neither  hath  He  seen  perverseness  in  Israel:  the 
Lord  His  God  is  with  Him,  and  the  shout  of  a  King  is  among  them,"  or  as 
Kurtz  :  "  He  bcholdeth  not  iniquity  in  Jacob,  and  seeth  no  wrong  in  Israel ; 
Jehovah  His  God  is  with  JFim  a  ml  the  shout  of  a  King  is  in  the  midst  of 
Him" — that  is,  as  freely  predicted,  God  in  His  abundant  mercy  will  for- 
give the  past  sinfulness  of  the  nation,  blot  out  its  transgressions  (comp. 
Micab  7  :  L9,  even  the  rejection  and  death  of  the  Messiah),  receive  it  to  His 
favor  as  if  it  had  not  been  guilty  of  sin,  be  specially  present  with  it,  and 
even  manifest  the  Theocratic  King  in  its  midst.  And  this  the  more  so,  seeing 
that  the  righteous  seed  of  Abraham  together  with  the  righteous  King  at  the 
head,  insures  the  blessings  of  the  Most  High.  In  v.  24,  it  is  predicted  : 
••  Behold  the  people  shall  rise  up  as  <>  great  lion  (or  Kurtz,  lioness)  and  lift 
up  himself  as  a  younglion  ;  he  shall  not  lie  down  unlilheeat  of  the  prey  and 
drink  I  he  blood  of the  slain,"  and  as  repeated  (ch.  24  :  8,  0)  "  Ilehath  as  it 
were  the  slniiglii  of  the  unicorn  ;  heshalleatup  thenations  h  is  enemies,  and 
shall  break  their  bones  and  pierce  them  through  (or  break}  with  h  is  arrows.  He 
couched,  he  lay  down  as  a  lion,  and  as  a  great  lion  ;  who  shall  stir  him  up  ?" 
This  language  reminds  us  of  Jacob's  prediction  (Gen.  49  :  9)  "  Judah  is  a 
lion's  whelp  ;  /'ran/  the  prey,  my  son,  thou  art  gone  up;  he  stooped  down, 
he  couched  as  a  Han,  and  as  an  old  lion  ;  who  shall  rouse  him  up?"  If  the 
reader  will  refer  to  Props.  115,  123,  103,  etc.,  he  will  find  that  this — how- 
ever partially  fulfilled  in  the  past — is  a  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the 
future.  It  is  in  view  of  this  future  overthrow  of  the  enemies  of  God  at  the 
Sec.  Advent,  that  the  King  Himself,  in  view  of  the  important  part 
assumed  by  Him,  is  designated  "  The  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah";  noio  a 
Lamb  but    then   a   Lion   because  the  executioner  of  delayed  vengeance. 

*  The  Targum  of  Palestine  paraphrases  :  "  If  the  house  of  Israel  kill  me  with  the  sword, 
then  it  is  made  known  to  me,  1  shall  have  no  portion  in  the  world  to  come  :  nevertheless 
if  I  may  hut  die  the  death  of  the  true  !  O  that  my  last  end  may  be  as  the  least  among 
them."     So  also  the  Jerusalem  Tarawa  in  substance. 


Prop.  192.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  403 

Micah  5:4;  Isa.  31  :  4,  and  other  passages  will  be  fulfilled  on  a  scale 
that  woe  betide  the  people  upon  whom  this  Lion  shall  fall  as  a  prey.  Balaam 
describes  the  future  honored  position  of  the  nation  in  the  words  ch.  24  :  5, 
etc.  :  "  How  goodly  are  thy  tent*,  0  Jacob,  and  thy  tabernacles,  0  Israel  :" 
(which  the  Targ.  Onk.  has  :  "  How  goodly  is  thy  land  0  Jacob,  and  the 
house  of  thy  habitation,  0  Israel  /")  "  As  the  valleys  are  they  spread  forth, 
as  gardens  by  the  riverside,  as  the  trees  of  lignaloes  which  the  Lord  hath 
planted  and  as  cedar  trees  beside  the  waters."  How  this  corresponds 
with  the  Millennial  descriptions  has  already  been  sufficiently  noticed. 
V.  7.  "He  shall  pour  the  wider  out  of  Ins  buckets,  and  his  seed  shall  be 
in  many  wafers,  and  his  king  shall  be  higher  than  Agag,  and  his  king- 
dom shall  be  exalted.'"  We  give  other  renderings  :  The  Targ.  Onkelos  : 
"  The  king  anointed  from  his  sons  shall  increase,  and  have  dominion  over 
rnany  nations;  his  King  shall  be  mightier  than  Agag,  and  his  kingdom 
shail  be  exalted" — Dr.  Hales,  following  the  Sep. — "There  shall  come 
forth  a  man  of  his  seed,  and  shall  rule  over  many  nations ;  and  his 
king  shall  be  higher  than  Gog,  and  his  kingdom  shall  be  exalted";  Dr. 
Boothroyd  :  "  Water  shall  flow  from  the  urn  of  Jacob,  and  his  seed  shad 
become  as  many  waters;  their  king  shall  In-  higher  than  Agag,  and  his 
kingdom  more  highly  exalted."  All  renderings  are  united  in  the  main 
idea,  viz.  that  the  King  over  this  nation  shall  be  above  all  other  kings 
(for,  as  Kurtz,  His.  of  Old  Cor.  vol.  p.  43 7,  following  Moses  Gerundensis, 
p.  65  Newton  On  Proph.,  shows  Agag  is  a  general  or  official  name  of 
all  the  kings),  which  at  once  recalls  Ps.  80  :  27  "  /  will  make  Him  my 
firstborn,  higher  than  the  kings  of  the  earth."  His  Kingdom  is  to  be 
over  all  the  earth.  So  Messianic  was  this  regarded  even  by  the  Jews,  that 
to  this  part  of  Balaam's  prophecy  the  paraphrase  was  annexed  (Targ. 
Palestine),  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  their  God  is  their  help  and  the  trum- 
pets of  the  King  Messiah  resound  among  them,"  or  [Jerusalem  Targ.) 
"  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  with  them,  and  the  trumpet  of  their  glorious 
King  protecteth  them,"  or  again  (Jerus.  Targ.)  "  Their  King  will  arise 
from  among  their  children,  and  their  Redeemer  will  be  of  them  and  among 
them;  and  he  will  gather  their  captives  from  the  cities  of  their  adversaries, 
and  their  children  shall  have  rule  among  the  peoples.  And  the  Kingdom 
of  the  King  Messiah  shall  be  made  great  ;  stronger  is  He  than  Saul  who 
vanquished  Agag  the  King  of  Amalkaah"  (so  Targ.  Onk.  ''From  them 
their  King  shall  arise  and  their  Redeemer  be  of  tbem  and  among  them, 
etc.)  We  now  come  to  the  most  noted  part  in  which  Balaam  says,  "  / 
will  advertise  what  this  people  shall  do  to  thy  people  in  the  latter  days," 
viz.,  verses  17-19 — "  I  shall  see  Him,  but  not  now  :  I  shall  behold  Him  but 
not  nigh  ;  there  shall  come  a  Star  out  of  Jacob,  and  a  Sceptre  shall  rise  out 
of  Israel,  and  shall  smite  the  corners  of  Moab  (marg.  read. — smite  through 
the  princes  of  Moab),  and  destroy  all  the  children  of  Sheth  (marg.  read. — 
Tumult).  And  Edom  shall  be  a  possession,  Seir  also  shall  be  a  jjossession 
for  His  enemies  ;  and  Israel  shall  do  valiantly.  Out  of  Jacob  shall  come 
He  that  shall  have  dominion,  and  shall  destroy  him  that  remaineth  of  the 
city."  Targum  Onkelos:  <(  I  see  Him  but  not  now;  I  behold  Him  but  not 
nigh.  When  a  King  shall  arise  out  of  Jacob,  and  the  Messiah  be  anointed 
from  Israel,  He  will  slay  the  princes  of  Moab,  and  reign  ovev  all  the  chil- 
dren of  men.  And  Edom  shall  be  an  inheritance,  and  Seir  a  possession  of 
His  adversaries  ;  but  Israel  shall  prosper  in  riches.  One  will  descend  from 
the  house  of  Jacob,  who  will  destroy  him  that  escapeth  from  the  city  of  the 


404  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  192. 

peoples."   Kurtz  renders  :  "  I  see  Him,  but  not  now  ;  I  behold  Him,  but  not 
nigh.   Out  of  Jacob  goeth  forth  a  Star,  and  out  of  Israel  riseth   up  a  Sceptre, 
and  shattereth  Moab  right  and  left,  and  destroyeth  all  the  sons  of  tumult.  A  nd 
Edom  becometh  His  possession,  and  Seir becometh  His  possession,  His  enemies, 
mill  Israel  doeth  mighty  things.    A  Ruler  riseth  out  of  Jacob,  and  He  destroy- 
etli  what  remaineth,   out  of  the  cities/'1     It  is  simply  a  mutter  of  amaze- 
ment that  any  one  who  professes  to  believe  in  the  Word  of  God,  should 
confine  the  fulfilment  of  this  to  Saul  or  to  David,  or  even  to  the  First 
Advent,   seeing    that    later    prophets,    one  after  the  other,   take  up  the 
same    prediction    declaring    the    Corning  of  a   mighty  King  who    shall 
wonderfully    destroy  the    enemies    confederated  against  Him  and  obtain 
•widespread  dominion.     It  is  faithless  1"  limit  it,  as  some  do,   when  the 
identical  coming,  overthrow  of  foes  (same  word  designative  and  descriptive 
of  enemies  being  used),  and  reign  is  sung  by  1  >avid,  reiterated  by  the  prophets 
following  down  to  Malachi,  then  taken   up    by  the  apostles,   and  finally 
specially°revealed  in  the  last  Revelation.     ITengstenbcrg  well  observes  that 
"  the  star  is  so  natural  an  image  and  symbol  of  the  greatness  and  splendor 
of  a  ruler,  that  nearly  all   nations  have  employed  it ;"  and    Kurtz  justly 
adds:    "The  star  out  of  Jacob  evidently  denotes  the  Israelitish  monarch 
in  its  highest  personal  culmination,  which  was  in  the  person  of  the  Mes- 
siah." and  that    this    was  so    understood    by  the   Jews    appears    from    the 
Targums,  etc.     Ebon  Ezra  (as  quoted  by  Dr.  Etheridge  in    Targams)  says 
that  many  Hebrew  commentators  agree  in  explaining  it  of  the  Messiah. 
(We  give  one  by  way  of  illustration:  Rabbi  Moses  ben  Maimon  remarks: 
'•  '  Destroy  all  the  children  of  Sheth.'      This  is  the  King  Messiah  of  whom 
it  is  written,    l's.    VI  :  8,  "  He  shall  have  dominion  from  sea  to  sea/  ") 
I  low  widely  this  idea  was  extended  is  evident  from  the  pretended  Messiah, 
Barkokab,  who,  in  Hadrian's  reign,  derived  his  prestige  from  the  fact  that 
name,  "the  sou  of  the  slur,'''  was  supposed  to  be  a  fulfilment  of  this 
prediction.     Jesus  justly  claims  to  be  the  Star,  and  conjoins  with  it  the 
additional  fact  that  He  is  "  the  Morning  Star/'  which  ushers  in  the  morn- 
i    _  of  the  glorious  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  thus  Himself  linking  it  with  His 
future  revelation.     Indeed,  owing  to  the  sinfulness  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
the  fulfilment  was  postponed  from  the  First  to  the  Second  Advent,  when 
He  comes  to  smite  His  enemies  and  establish  the  covenanted  Kingdom. 
This  will  be  a  terrible  time  to  the  wicked,  and    hence  Balaam  adds,  v.  23, 
«  Alas  I  who  shall  live  when  God  doeth  this?"  which  the  Tar g.  of  Onk. 
renders:    "Woe  to   the  wicked  who  may  Her  when  God  doeth  this!"  the 
Targum  of  Palestine  :  "  Woe  to  them  who  are  alive  at  /he,  Hair  /hi'  Word  of 
the  Lord  shall  be  reveal ed,  to  give  the  good  reward  to  the  righteous,  and  to 
take  vengeance  on  the  wicked,  to  smile  the  nations  and  the  kings,  and  bring 
these  things   upon   them  I "  and   the  Jems.    Targum  :  "  Woe.  to  him   who 
is  alive  when  the  Word  of  the  Lord  setteth   Himself  to  give  the  good  reward 
/,,  the  just  and  to  take  vengeance  on  the  wicked!  "  'How  fearful,  can  be  seen 
by  glancing  over  the  description  of  it  given  by  Malachi  (ch.  4),  or  Revela- 
tion  (ch.  I'M,  and  numerous  confirmatory  prophecies,  when  He  who  is  the 
Word  of  G-od,  the  King  of  kings,  comes  to  save  His  own  people  and  to 
utterly  confound  all  Hisenemies.2     Balaam's  prediction,  coming  when  the 
confederation  arises  against  the  Theocracy,   directs  the  eye  of  faith 
onward  to  the  time  when  the  last  great  confederation  shall  be  broken  by 
the  Theocratic. King. 
1   Targum  of  Palestine  :  "  I  shall  see  him,  but  not  now  ;  I  shall  behold  him,  but  it  is  not 


PkOP.  192.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  405 

near.  "When  the  mighty  King  of  Jacob's  house  shall  reign,  and  the  Messiah,  the  Power- 
Sceptre  of  Israel,  be  anointed,  He  will  slay  the  princes  of  Moabaee,  and  bring  to  nothing 
all  the  children  of  Sheth,  the  armies  of  Gog  who  will  do  battle  against  Israel,  and  all  the 
carcasses  shall  fall  before  Him.  And  the  Edomaee  will  be  utterly  driven  out,  even  the 
sons  of  Gabela  from  before  Israel  their  foes,  and  IsAel  will  be  strengthened  with  their 
riches  and  possess  them.  And  a  Prince  of  the  house  of  Jacob  will  arise  and  destroy  and 
consume  the  remnant  that  have  escaped  from  Constantina  the  guilty  city,  and  will  lay 
waste  and  ruin  the  rebellious  city,  even  Kaiserin,  the  strong  city  of  the  Gentiles."  Jeru- 
salem Targum  :  'I  shall  see  Him,  but  not  now  ;  I  shall  behold  Him,  but  He  is  not  nigh. 
A  King  is  to  arise  from  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  a  Redeemer  and  Ruler  from  the  house  of 
Israel,  who  will  slay  the  strong  ones  of  the  Moabaee,  and  bring  to  nothing,  and  consume 
all  the  children  of  the  East.  And  Edom  may  inherit  Mount  Gabela  from  their  enemies, 
but  Israel  will  be  stronger  with  a  mighty  host.  A  King  will  arise  from  the  house  of  Jacob 
and  destroy  what  shall  remain  of  the  strong  city." 

2  For  the  sake  of  those  who  are  interested  in  the  things  pertaining  to  the  last  times, 
we  apj)end  a  few  additional  extracts  from  the  Targums  upon  the  difficult  concluding 
portion  of  Balaam's  prophecy,  which  show  that  they  were  interpreted  as  relating  to  the 
future,  and  to  the  times  of  the  Messiah.  Thus  e.g.  on  verse  20,  the  Targum  qf  Palestine  : 
"  The  first  of  the  nations  who  made  war  with  the  house  of  Israel  were  those  of  the 
house  of  Amalek  ;  and  they  at  last  in  the  days  of  the  King  Messiah,  with  all  the  children 
of  the  East,  will  make  war  against  Israel  :  but  all  of  them  will  have  eternal  destruction 
in  their  end."  Jerusalem  Targum:  '"The  house  of  Amalek  was  the  first  of  the  peoples 
to  make  war  with  Israel,  and  at  the  last,  in  the  end  of  the  days,  they  will  array  battle 
against  them  ;  but  their  end  is  to  perish  and  their  destruction  to  be  forever."  On  verses 
21,  22,23,  the  Targum  <>f  Palestine:  "How  strong  is  thy  habitation,  who  hast  set  thy 
dwelling-place  in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks  !  Yet  so  is  it  decreed  that  the  children  of 
Shalmaia  must  be  despoiled,  but  not  until  Sancherib  the  King  of  Athur  shall  come  and 
make  them  captive."  Jems.  Targum  :  "  How  strong  is  thy  abode,  who  hast  set  the  house 
of  thy  dwelling  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock  !  But  the  Shalmaia  will  not  be  spoiled  until 
Athuria  shall  arise  and  take  the  captive."  Tunjnm  t,f  rales.  :  "  Woe  to  them,"  etc., 
already  quoted,  then  follows  :  "  And  ships  (lit.  sails)  armed  for  war  will  come  forth  with 
great  armies  from  Lombarina  and  from  the  land  of  Italia  (Vulgate  :  Venient  in  trieribus 
de  Italia)  conjoined  with  the  legions  that  will  come  from  Constantina  and  will  afflict  the 
Atheniaee,  and  bring  into  captivity  the  sons  of  Eber  (comp.  Pesckilo :  and  subjugate  all 
the  Hebrews),  nevertheless  the  end  of  these  and  of  those  is  to  fall  by  the  hand  of  the 
King  Messiah  and  be  brought  to  everlasting  destruction."  Jerus.  Targum  :  "  Woe,"  etc., 
then  adds  :  "  And  great  hosts  in  Livernia  will  come  from  the  great  city  and  will  conjoin 
with  them  many  legions  of  the  Romance  and  subjugate  Athuria  and  afflict  all  the 
children  beyond  the  river.  Nevertheless  the  end  of  these  and  of  those  is  to  perish  ami 
the  destruction  to  be  everlasting.' '  '/"</•;/.  Onkelos  on  same  verses  :  "Strong  is  the  house 
of  thy  dwelling,  and  in  a  strong  fortress  hast  thou  set  thy  abode  ;  but  yet  Shalmaah  shall 
be  destroyed,  for  Athuria  will  make  thee  captive."  "  Woe, "  etc.,  then  follows:  "And 
ships  will  come  from  the  Kittaee  (comp.  Syriac  :  "  And  the  legions  shall  come  forth 
from  the  land  of  the  Kittoyee ' ')  and  afflict  Athur,  and  subdue  beyond  the  Phrat  ;  but  they 
also  shall  perish  forever." 

Obs.  G.  This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  confirms  the  already  overpower- 
ing reasons  given  for  the  retention  and  inspiration  of  the  later  prop!/ ecies 
of  Isaiah,  seeing  that  they  form  a  consistent  outgrowth  of  covenant  and 
promise,  incorporating  precisely  that  which  is  requisite  to  carry  out  the 
Theocratic  ordering  in  the  Redemption  of  the  world.  It  also  maintains 
the  integrity  of  Daniel  in  this  respect,  showing  how  his  prophecies  stand  con- 
sistently related  with  all  others  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom,  and  to  a  constant 
and  even  present  fulfilment  establishing  historically  its  inspiration.  It 
confirms  the  force  and  propriety  of  many  of  the  ancient  Messianic  prom- 
ises, which  modern  Jews  and  destructive  criticism  would  apply  to  some- 
thing else.  It  aids  in  ascertaining  the  meaning  of  words  (i.  e.  when  several 
meanings  are  presented,  by  applying  analogy  in  connection  with  the  other 
tests),  in  interpreting  the  figurative  and  symbolical  language,  in  applying 
some  of  the  types,  and  in  reconciling  apparent    contradictions.     In  brief, 


406  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PbOP.  192. 

it  is  the  testimony  of  every  one  who  has  given  this  subject  any  careful 
study,  that  it  is  such  "a  solvent  of  difficulties"  that  its  application  has  given 
great  joy  of  heart  and  delighted  surprise  in  discovering  the  import  of  pas- 
sages which  otherwise  proved  either  to  be  unsatisfactory  or  dark.  Among 
many  others,  Riley,  in  The  Restoration,  makes  this  confession,  and  proceeds 
to  show  how  our  doctrine  removes  difficulties,  as  in  the  promises  of  inherit- 
ing and  possessing  the  earth,  in  the  parables,  in  the  resurrection,  in  the 
renewal  of  creation,  in  the  scene  described  by  Matt.  25  :  31-46  (viz.,  in  the 
ground  of  approval  and  of  condemnation — for  instead  of  the  heart,  the  mo- 
tives being  examined,  external,  outward  deeds  are  considered,  etc.),  in  watch- 
ing for  the  Advent,  and  in  the  wonderful  results  of  Redemption,  culminat- 
ing in  the  salvation  of  the  race  as  a  race.  But  these  and  other  points  having 
been  duly  considered  under  their  proper  heading  no  more  need  be 
added. 

"We  append,  however,  a  few  illustrations.  Thus  e.g.  it  suggests  that  if  we  are  author- 
ized to  accept  of  "  Alamoth"  of  Ps.  45  to  denote  (so  many  critics)  "  virgins,  or  hidden 
ones,  or  hid  things,' '  how  to  appropriate  and  apply  the  same.  Again  :  if  we  are  per- 
mitted to  receive  the  correction  of  critics  made  in  the  clause  (Ps.  93  :  2),  "  Thy  throne  is 
established  of  old,"  by  substituting  "Thy  throne  is  established  from  then"  (or  as 
Luther  :  "  Von  dein  an  stehet  dein  Stuhl  vest"),  we  have  not  only  the  Messianic  reign 
described,  but  the  perpetuity  of  the  same  asserted.  Again  :  in  view  of  the  striking 
language  of  Isa.  41,  so  applicable  to  the  Messiah,  we  can  adopt  Fausset's  {Com.  loci) 
suggestion  that  the  chapter  makes  a  typical  fulfilment  in  Cyrus,  but  a  complete  one  in 
Jesus,  the  Messiah.  Again  :  a  deeper  significancy  and  depth  is  given  to  promises,  which 
are  generally  regarded  as  fulfilled  in  the  past.  Thus  e.g.  take  Noah's  prophecy  (Gen. 
9  :  25-27),  and  while  it  had  a  striking  fulfilment  in  the  past  (comp.  Bh.  Newton's  Diss. 
on  Proph.,  Diss.  1),  yet  it  will  continue  to  be  still  more  strikingly  fulfilled  in  the  future 
Kingdom.  While  the  curse  is  being,  by  degrees,  removed,  the  distinction  predicted  will 
still  remain.  Thus  to  illustrate  :  (1)  God  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  the  Christ,  "shall 
dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem,"  and  this  is  done  when  He  enters  upon  His  inheritance  ; 

(2)  Japheth  shall  be  enlarged,  which  is  done  in  the  perpetuation  of  the  race  (Prop.  152)  ; 

(3)  the  descendants  of  Ham  and  Canaan  shall  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  Shem  (Prop. 
114).  Even  Ps.  29,  which  is  usually  applied  to  a  poetical  description  of  a  thunder-storm 
when  applied  to  this  future  period  becomes  more  intensely  expressive.  This  "  voice  of 
the  Lord  "  (so  called  because  instituted  and  directed  by  Him,  and  proclaiming  His 
power),  ridiculed  by  unbelieving  science,  will  again  be  heard  so  expressively  and 
terrifically  that  unbelief  will  quail  before  its  dreadful  sound— even  the  boldest  and  most 
bloody  of  sinners  will  have  their  guilty  consciences  aroused  by  it.  For,  let  it  be 
observed,  however  in  some  places  it  may  have  a  symbolic  import,  yet  the  repeated  men- 
tion of  it,  its  use  in  deliverance  (e.g.  Ex.  9  :  23,  29,  33),  in  inauguration  of  the  Theocracy 
(Ex.  19  :  16  and  20  :  18),  in  the  Theocratic  King  employing  it  against  enemies  (as  e.g. 
1  Sam.  7  :  10),  in  attestation  of  Theocratic  rule  (1  Sam.  12  :  17,  18),  indicates  that  this 
agencv,  so  impressive,  will  again  be  employed  (2  Sam.  22  :  14  ;  Ps.  77  :  18  ;  Ps.  18  :  13  ; 
Isa.  29  :  6,  etc.). 

Obs.  7.  This  doctrine  also  aids  in  our  understanding  the  allusions  and 
language  of  the  early  Fathers  of  the  Church.  If  it  is  requisite,  in  order  to 
understand  any  author,  to  enter  into  his  spirit  and  to  comprehend  the 
reasoning  which  leads  him  to  definite  conclusions,  this  is  equally  true  of  the 
primitive  writers.  Without  a  knowledge  of  the  Covenant  promises,  the 
prophecies  based  upon  them,  etc.,  it  is  simply  impossible  to  do  justice  to  cer- 
tain expressions  and  even  doctrinal  positions  assumed  by  the  Fathers. 

A  recent  case  of  misunderstanding  will  illustrate  our  meaning.  Thus  Froude  (Short 
Studies,  p.  223)  adduces  a  passage  from  Clement  (adopted  by  him)  in  order  to  invalidate 
his  credibility  and  to  make  himself  merry  at  Clement's  expense.  "  The  most  strange 
words"  which  "no  hypothesis  will  explain,"  are  the  following  :  "  The  Lord  being  asked 
when  His  Kingdom  should  come,  said  :  '  When  hco  shall  be  one,  and  that  which  is  without 


PEOP.  192.]  THE    THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  407 

as  that  which  is  within,  and  the  male  with  the  female  neither  male  nor  female.'  "  This 
enigmatical,  and  to  Froude  nonsensical,  expression  is  not  so  inexplicable  as  he  imagines, 
if  we  only  keep  in  view  Clement's  belief  in  the  Kingdom.  It  is  susceptible,  according  to  the 
things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom,  of  a  rational  explanation.  Thus,  e.g.  the  Kingdom 
comes  after  (as  we  have  shown,  Props.  125-129)  the  first  resurrection  and  male  and  female 
(i.e.  the  distinctive  sexual  organization)  is  swallowed  up  in  the  glorified  form  as  even 
Jesus  intimates,  Luke  20  :  34-36.  Again  the  two  being  made  one  may  refer  to  several 
things,  such  as  the  reunion  (separated  by  death)  of  soul  and  body,  the  two  kingdoms 
united  as  the  prophets  predict,  the  world  reconciled  to  God,  the  Jew  and  Gentile  united 
in  Kingdom,  etc.  While  the  meaning  to  be  attached  to  the  without  being  made  or 
becoming  like  that  within  is  found  either  in  the  glorification  of  the  body,  or  the  marriage 
of  the  saints  with  Christ,  or  the  promised  unity  and  rulership,  or  the  extension  of  the 
Theocratic  relationship  from  the  Jews — the  elect — over  all  nations,  etc.  The  promises 
pertaining  to  the  Kingdom,  if  accepted,  do  not  make  the  language  of  Clement  unreason- 
able or  the  proper  subject  of  ridicule  ;  at  least  they  give  him  credit  for  honesty  and  con- 
sistent belief,  so  that  he  is  not  chargeable  with  endeavoring  to  break  down  a  faith  with- 
out being  able  to  substitute  a  better  one. 


408  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PltOP.  193. 


Proposition  193.  This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  meets,  and, 
consistently  removes,  the  objections  brought  against  Christianity 
by  the  Jews. 

This  is  a  wide  field,  and  we  can  only  briefly  point  out  how,  from 
our  standpoint,  a  consistent  answer  can  be  given  to  the  objections 
urged  by  Jewish  unbelief  against  the  reception  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Obs.  1.  The  student,  if  observant,  must  have  noticed  a  remarkable  feat- 
ure in  the  history  of  this  nation,  viz.,  that  immediately  and  sometime 
after  the  First  Advent  many  Jews  were  converted  to  Christianity,  form- 
ing even  churches  composed  almost  entirely  of  them.  The  history  of  the 
first  and  second  centuries  shows  that  it  was  nothing  unusual  for  Jews  to 
embrace  Jesus  Christ  as  the  promised  Messiah.  But  gradually  such  con- 
versions became  rarer,  until  they  either  entirely  ceased  or  formed  exception- 
able cases.  If  we  inquire  into  the  causes  of  this  change,  it  will  be  found 
that  it  resulted  almost  entirely  in  the  departure  of  the  large  body  of  the 
Church  from  the  Millenarian  ground  occupied  by  the  early  Church.  The 
Origenistic,  Augustinian,  and  succeeding  theology  discarded  what  was 
pronounced  to  be  "  the  Jewish'' '  element,  and  engrafted  another,  the  Gen- 
tile, into  its  place.  The  result  was  seen  in  its  contracting  Jewish  conver- 
sions and  in  its  confirming  Jewish  unbelief.  On  the  other  hand,  a  return  to 
the  theology  of  the  early  Church  invites  the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  seeing 
that  it  materially  aids  in  removing  the  principal  objections  which  hold 
them  in  unbelief. 

The  Jews,  as  the  Messianic  idea  of  the  Kingdom  was  lost  sight  of  and  the  prophecies 
were  spiritualized,  became  less  and  less  accessible.  They  were  then  met  rather  with  in- 
vectives than  arguments.  This  is  illustrated  even  by  the  titles  of  treatises,  as  e.g. 
Agobard's  1)<'  Tnsoleniia  Judceorum,  Be  Judaic  Huperstitionibus,  or  Martini's  Gapistrum 
Jiiild'uriui),  or  tlie  Halter  or  Muzzle  of  the  Jews,  etc.  How  much  injury  the  self-conceit  and 
pride  of  Gentileism  has  inflicted  it  is  impossible  to  calculate.  The  position  of  the  Jew 
was  beyond  description  painful  and  trying  ;  on  the  one  hand  under  the  cloud  of  God's 
withdrawal  and  displeasure,  and  suffering  the  prophetic  announcements  of  punishment, 
and  then,  on  the  other  hand,  having  a  Messianic  Kingdom  urged  upon  them  by  those  in 
power  contradictory  to  covenant  and  prophecy.  Need  we  wonder  that  at  times  they 
almost  despaired,  and  that  some  should  yield  up  faith  and  hope  ?  Need  we  be  surprised 
that  a  Jew,  Maimonides,  should  be  regarded  by  many  as  the  Father  of  Rationalistic 
Theology,  when,  brooding  under  the  persecution  of  centuries  and  the  rejection  of  the 
promises  made  to  his  nation  by  professed  Christianity,  he  should  endeavor  to  remove,  as 
much  as  possible,  the  Supernatural  from  the  Old  Test.?  The  wonder  is  that  so  many 
Jews  still  hold  to  the  Messianic  idea  and  to  God's  covenanted  promises.  It  is  a  sad 
commentary  on  human  nature  that  prominent  men  in  the  Church  (as  e.g.  Cyril,  see 
Gibbon's  Ms.,  vol.  4,  p.  501)  persecuted  the  Jews  instead  of  striving  to  win  them  by 
kindness  and  truth.  It  is  gratifying  that  a  strong  reaction  has  set  in,  and  that  not 
merely  toleration  is  accorded,  but  a  deep  interest  is  felt  in  their  welfare,  evidenced  by 
special  societies  organized  in  their  behalf. 

Owing  to  our  Pre-Millenarian  views,  the  Jews  are  more  accessible,  as  evi- 
denced   by   the    conversions    of    Jews,    and    the    numerous    Jewish    Pre-Millenarian 


Prop.  193.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  409 

writers  in  Europe  and  this  country.  LecTerer,  formerly  editor  of  the  Israelite  Indeed 
(vol.  8,  p.  82),  and  a  missionary  among  the  Jews,  after  delineating  our  doctrine  as 
particularly  adapted  to  reach  the  Jews,  declares  that  "  Indeed,  by  the  preacbing 
of  a  full  Gospel  to  the  Jews,  there  have  been  more  Jews  converted  in  the  last  twenty- 
five  years,  than  during  seventeen  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  All  converted  Jews, 
therefore,  with  but  few  exceptions,  are  Pre-Millenarians."  Our  most  bitter  opponents 
concede  that  converted  Jews  are  almost  exclusively  Millenarian.  Thus  e.g.  the  author 
of  God  is  Love  (Pref.  vol.  3)  candidly  says  :  "  It  must  afford  some  satisfaction  to  Millena- 
rians  to  find  that  all  the  Jews  who  embrace  the  religion  of  Jesus  (there  are  niany  such  in 
England)  do  become  zealous  supporters  of  the  theory  of  our  Lord's  personal  reign  on 
earth."  We  acknowledge,  gratefully,  the  "  satisfaction"  that  this  affords.  The  Gospel 
still  remains  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jews,  arising  chiefly  from  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus, 
but  this  is  greatly  increased  by  the  peculiar  Messianic  ideas  engrafted  upon  the  same. 
We  need  not  apprehend  the  spirit  of  Ambrose,  Justinian,  Ferdinand  and  Isabella, 
Agobard,  or  Torcpiemada  toward  the  Jews,  for  an  enlightened  Christian  sentiment 
abjures  such,  but  we  have  reason  to  deprecate  the  Messianic  views,  so  current,  which  the 
Jew  finds  utterly  irreconcilable  with  the  Old  Test,  statements.  It  was  difficult  even  in  the 
primitive  Church,  with  the  aid  of  the  conciliating  Pre-Millenarian  views,  to  reach  th i 
Jews  (as  e.g.  evidenced  by  the  persecutions  excited  by  them  against  Christianity,  and  by 
the  testimony  of  Justin  Martyr — see  Apol.,  1.  2,  f.  83,  and  Neander's  Gh.  His.,  vol.  1,  p.  63), 
but  this  difficulty  is  seriously  enhanced  by  the  rejection  of  this  conciliating  element. 
We  call  the  attention  of  the  student  to  Dr.  'Neander's  (Genl.  Gh.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  423)  im- 
portant observation.  After  referring  to  Justin's  omission  of  Chiliasm  in  his  Apologies, 
and  to  his  introduction  of  the  same  into  the  Dial,  with  Trypho  the  Jew,  he  says  :  "  On  the 
contrary,  in  a  dialogue  designed  to  vindicate  the  Christian  doctrine  against  the  objec- 
tions of  the  Jews,  he  had  special  reason  to  give  prominence  to  this  point,  in  order  to 
show  that  the  Christians  were  orthodox  in  this  particular,  even  according  to  the  Jewish 
notions." 

.  Some  doubt  the  Jewish  conversions  rex>orted.  So  e.g.  Dr.  Spring  reports  (art.  "  Gen- 
eral Assembly"  in  Princeton  Review,  July,  1853,  p.  466)  very  few  converted  through  the 
instrumentality  of  "  the  Jews'  Society  of  London."  But  Dr.  Baird,  on  the  other  hand, 
testified  to  such  conversions,  and  to  "  great  success, "  being  himself  personally  acquainted 
with  missionaries  and  many  converts.  The  Luth.  Observer  (Aug.  2d,  1878)  states  that  "  in 
LSI)'.),  when  the  London  Soc.  for  Promoting  Christianity  among  the  Jews  was  founded,  it 
is  said  that  the  most  diligent  search  would  only  discover  thirty-five  Christian  Hebrews  in 
the  whole  of  England.  Since  then  more  than  twenty  thousand  have  embraced  the  faith, 
and  been  baptized.  Harper  s  Weekly  (March  16th,  1878)  reports,  from  statements  made 
by  the  English  Independent,  that  there  are  between  fifty  and  sixty  thousand  Jewish  Chris- 
tians in  Great  Britain,  of  whom  one  hundred  and  thirty  are  clergymen  of  the  Established 
Church.  The  Southern  Churchman  (quoted  in  Luth.  Observer,  Aug.  30th,  1878)  "  declares 
that  there  have  been,  since  1815,  more  than  one  hundred  clergymen  of  the  Church  of 
England,  including  two  bishops,  who  were  converted  Jews  ;  and  in  one  English  chapel, 
in  the  same  period,  there  have  been  seven  hundred  and  eighty  adult  Jews,  and  six  hun- 
dred and  five  children,  converted  and  baptized. "  The  Bishop  of  Ripon  (quoted  in  Projjh. 
Times,  vol.  5,  p.  89)  says  :  "  In  London  alone  there  are  now  three  thousand  converted 
Israelites.  The  London  Jews'  Society  can  tell  of  twenty  thousand  converts,  of  whom  it 
is  assumed  that  they  are  members  of  the  invisible  as  well  as  of  the  visible  Church  of 
Christ.  More  than  one  hundred  ordained  clergymen,  originally  members  of  the  Jewish 
communion,  but  now  converted  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  are  preaching  the  Gospel."  Such 
testimonies,  which  might  be  extended  to  other  countries,  speak  for  themselves.  In  the 
art.  "Poland,  Mission  among  the  Jews  in"  (M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  it  is  said 
that  before  the  Jewish  Mission  in  Poland  was  broken  up  by  the  government  (owing  to 
the  war  with  England— the  mission  being  planted  and  supported  by  Englishmen),  it  had 
baptized  quite  a  number  of  Jews  (in  the  year  1851  there  were  three  hundred  and  twenty- 
six  baptized),  but  the  missionaries  had  to  leave  Jan.,  1855.  After  a  suspension  of  twenty 
years,  the  mission  was  resumed  in  1877,  by  permission  of  the  Emperor.  The  Jews  issued 
there  excommunication  against  those  who  would  have  any  intercourse  with  the  mis- 
sionaries. Many  Bibles,  Testaments,  and  Tracts  were  also  circulated.  Some  of  the 
converts,  it  is  said,  occupy  "  the  highest  stations  in  life,"  being  persons  of  prominence 
and  ability.  The  Ch.  Herald  (Aug.  21st,  1879)  reports  that  a  colony  of  Jews  at  Hamadan, 
in  Persia,  has  been  agitated  by  the  question,  "  Is  not  Jesus  the  Messiah  ?"  Four  of  the 
chief  men,  the  heads  of  one  thousand  houses  (about  five  thousand  people)  have,  after 
long  trial,  been  publicly  baptized,  and  others  are  asking  to  confess  Christ.     A  number  of 


410  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  193. 

conversions,  chiefly  through  Jewish  missionaries,  have  taken  place  in  this  countrv,  and 
hold  a  membership  in  various  denominations. 

Obs.  2.  The  principle  of  interpretation  adopted  by  ns,  especially  in  ref- 
erence to  the  prophecies,  at  once  commends  itself  to  the  Jew.  We  do  not, 
dare  not,  divide  the  prophecies,  which  describe  one  connected  series  of  events, 
by  the  introduction  of  a  new  and  most  arbitrary  mode  of  interpretation, 
which  is  not  indicated  in  the  text.  Thus  e.  g.  take  the  predictions  re- 
lating to  the  Jewish  nation,  and  interpret  the  one  part  referring  to  its  tribu- 
lation, desolation,  etc.,  literally,  and  then,  when  the  prophecies  go  on 
without  any  sign  of  a  change  to  speak  of  the  same  nation,  proceed  to  spirit- 
ualize the  rest  and  apply  it  to  ns  Gentiles,  we  do  a  violence  to  the  text  and 
manifest  injustice  to  the  nation  of  whom  the  things  are  specially  pre- 
dicted. And  yet,  rejecting  the  interpretation  of  the  early  Church,  which 
logically  held  these  prophecies  to  be  continuous  in  their  relation  to  the 
same  people,  this  has  been  the  very  posture  of  the  Church,  with  here  and 
there  an  honorable  exception,  for  many  long,  long  centuries.  To  such  an 
extent  has  this  been  carried  that  it  is  almost  a  proverb  that  curses  belong 
to  the  Jews  and  blessings  to  the  Gentiles.  It  is  needless  to  say  how  such 
an  interpretation  would  necessarily  affect  a  Jew  ;  for  he,  with  the  Old. 
Test,  in  his  hands,  however  much  he  may  overlook  the  predictions  of  a 
suffering  Messiah,  still  clings  to  the  triumphant  Messianic  predictions  with 
which,  if  there  is  any  meaning  in  language,  his  nation  is  connected.  The 
Orthodox  Jews  confess  the  sovereignty  of  God,  admit  that  through  sin- 
fulness (not  that,  however,  of  rejecting  Jesus)  they  have  been  cast  out,  etc., 
and,  realizing  in  their  past  history  the  sad  truthfulness  and  reality  of 
prophetic  announcements,  stillfondly  anticipate  a  further  fulfilment  of  the 
same  Word — now  finding  its  mate  in  their  condition — in  the  removal  of  the 
curse  and  the  bestowment  of  blessing.  The  Reformed  or  Rationalistic 
class,  having  given  up  the  hope  of  a  Messiah  as  predicted  (in  fact  discard- 
ing almost  everything  but  a  belief  in  God  and  His  unity),  are  also  utterly 
unprepared,  owing  to  the  spiritualizing  away  of  the  predictions  pertain- 
ing to  their  nation,  to  give  credit  to  the  system  of  Christianity.  Eagerly 
availing  themselves  of  the  criticisms  of  Strauss,  Bauer,  Kenan,  etc.,  they 
triumphantly  point  to  the  prophecies,  to  the  early  Church  doctrine,  and 
then  to  the  immensely  transformed  view  now  so  generally  entertained  by 
the  Church,  and  claim,  justly  too,  that  if  the  fulfilment  attributed  to  those 
prophecies  exhaust  them  in  the  way  believed,  then  there  is  a  gross  violation 
of  language,  etc.  Both  Orthodox  and  Rationalistic  deem  the  principle  of 
interpretation  thus  upheld  irrelevant  and  untrustworthy,  making  the  Old. 
Test,  to  predict  on  its  plain  surface  what  shall  never  be  realized  in  the 
form  announced.  The  Jew,  however,  cannot  object  to  our  system  of  in- 
terpretation, charging  it  with  inconsistency,  seeing  that  we  apply  the 
prophecies  pertaining  to  their  nation  continuously  ;  not  only  receiving  the 
temporary  rejection,  the  punishment  inflicted,  but  also  fully  admitting  the 
importance  of  the  nation,  its  near  (Theocratic)  relation  to  God,  and  its 
ultimate  restoration  and  triumph  just  as  the  grammatical  sense  predicts. 

The  Press  (quoted  Proph.  Times,  June,  1877)  remarks  :  "  Rabbi  Marks,  of  London,  in 
a  sermon,  says  the  Jews  reject  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Messiah,  because  '  of  the  three  distinc- 
tive facts  which  the  inspired  seer  of  Judah  inseparably  connects  with  the  Advent  of  the 
Messiah,  viz.,  the  cessation  of  war  and  the  uninterrupted  reign  of  peace,  the  prevalence 
of  a  perfect  concord  of  opinion  on  all  matters  bearing  upon  the  worship  of  the  one  and 


Prop.  193.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  411 

only  God,  and  the  gathering  of  the  remnant  of  Jndah  and  of  the  tribes  of  Israel ' — not  one 
of  these  prophecies  has  yet  been  fulfilled."  Now  our  system  of  interpretation  cordially 
receives  these  three  characteristics  as  plainly  taught  and  connected  with  the  Advent  of  the 
Messiah.  We  just  as  folly  as  the  Jew  believe  that  they  will  yet  be  realized  just  as  pre- 
dicted.  And  this  confirms  lis  the  more  in  the  Messiahship  of  the  crucified  Jesus,  because 
(1)  all  these  "  distinctive  facts"  are  attributed  to  His  Second  Advent  ;  (2)  the  reasons  why 
they  were  not  realized  at  the  First  Advent  are  fully  given  in  the  non-repentance  of  the 
nation,  its  rejection  of  the  Christ,  as  shown  in  both  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments  ;  (3) 
the  First  Advent  with  its  results,  confirmed  by  a  continuous  fulfilment  of  prediction  and 
promise  down  to  the  present,  confirms  the  ability  of  this  Jesus  to  fulfil  the  covenants 
and  prophecies  at  the  specified  Advent  ;  (1)  but  we  do  not  confine  ourselves  to  these 
"  three  distinctive  facts,"  but  compare  and  receive  all  the  prophecies  relating  to  the 
Messiah.  Doing  this,  we  find  one  class  referring  to  the  humiliation,  rejection,  suffering, 
and  death  of  the  Messiah  verified  in  Jesus,  and  this  only  immeasurably  confirms  our 
faith  in  Him  and  that  ultimately,  as  promised,  all  tin-  Scriptures  will  be  realized  in  and 
through  Him.  Thus  that  which  forms  an  objection  to  the  Jewish  mind  by  onby  receiving 
a  part  of  God's  Word,  becomes  to  us,  when  believing  the  whole  Word,  a  tower  of  strength. 

Obs.  2.  The  doctrine  of  election,  as  held  by  us,  removes  Jewish  prejudice. 
The  Jew  finds  in  the  Old  Test,  a  clear  announcement  of  the  elect  condi- 
tion of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  its  election  practically  confirmed  by  the 
Theocratic  and  Theocratic-Davidic  arrangement.  He  reads,  that,  however 
much  the  nation  may  be  punished  for  its  sinfulness,  and  however  individ- 
uals of  the  nation  may  forfeit  blessings  coming  through  this  election,  yet  God 
will  never  utterly  forsakeit  ;  but  will,  when  the  time  has  arrived,  show  His 
own  faithfulness  to  Covenanted  promises,  His  respect  to  His  own  election,  and 
reinstate  them  in  a  position  by  which  the  election  is  fully  vindicated.  He 
even  points  to  the  oath  of  God  as  confirmatory  of  all  this,  and  resting  in 
the  most  solemnly  pledged  Word  of  God,  rejects  the  anti-scriptural  views 
largely  incorporated  with  professing  Christianity,  and  with  them,  wrong- 
fully supposing  them  to  be  part  of  it,  Christianity  itself.  The  notion  that 
the  nation  has  forfeited  its  election,  which  is  now  simply  conferred  on  in- 
dividuals, chiefly  Gentiles  who  remain  such,  is  a  stumbling-block  in  the 
way  of  the  Jew.  Our  doctrine  entirely  meets  his  objections,  seeing  that 
we  cordially  acknowledge  this  Jewish  election  ;  that  we  insist  upon  it  that 
notwithstanding  their  temporary  cast-off  condition,  and  their  blindness, 
yet  "  as  concerning  the  Gospel,  they  are  enemies  for  your  sakes,  but  as 
touching  the  election  they  are  beloved  far  the  fathers'  sakes,  Rom.  11  :  28  ; 
that  we  distinctly  prove,  that,  owing  to  this  very  election,  the  Gentiles,  in 
order  to  participate  in  the  promises  covenanted  to  the  Jews,  must  be  grafted 
in,  adopted  as  part  of  the  elect  nation,  virtually  becoming  the  seed  of  Abraham 
and  thus  inherit  the  promises  with  Abraham  ;  and  that,  when  this  incorpora- 
tion of  Gentiles  (produced  by  Jewish  defection)  has  been  sufficiently  carried 
out  to  raise  up  a  seed  unto  Abraham  (for  Theocratic  purposes)  then  will  the 
elect  Jewish  nation  be  restored  to  its  covenanted  Theocratic-Davidic  rela- 
tion, thus  vindicating  and  establishing  its  election  before  all  nations. 
(Comp.  e.g.  Props.  24,  57,  Gl,  G3,  111,  112,  etc. 

It  is  sad  to  find  Jews  deliberately  receiving  the  Rationalistic  interpretations  of  the 
Old  Test,  and  incorporating  them  in  a  regular  commentary.  Thus  Kalisch  in  his  Histori- 
cal and  Critical  Commentary  on  the  Old  Test.,  rejects  the  Messianic  predictions  or  promises 
of  Genesis,  etc.  (making  the  Messianic  conception  to  originate  with  the  prophets)  and 
thus  vitiates  the  noble  covenanted  election  and  unity,  which  is,  correctly  appreciated, 
the  glory  of  the  Jewish  nation.  From  this  elect  position  of  the  nation,  it  is  impossible  to 
separate  the  Messianic  idea.  Alas  !  how  true  it  is  to-day  of  many  a  Jew,  that — as  Dorner 
remarked  of  Philo — the  Messianic  idea  has  become  in  him  a  burnt-out  cinder,  of  which 
only  the  ashes  are  left.     Will  such  only  consider  how  the  New  Test,  retains  the  idea  of 


412  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  193. 

the  nation's  continued  election  and  its  ultimate  glorious  result,  and  in  view  of  this  spe- 
cial honoring  of  the  nation  ask.  with  unprejudiced  minds,  why  this  retention  and  its  in- 
separable connection  with  a  pure  Theocratic,  Messianic  conception  ? 

The  Reformed  Jews  (art.  ''Messiah"  in  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  in  1840,  at 
Frankfort,  declared  that  '  a  Messiah  who  is  to  lead  back  to  Palestine  is  neither  expected 
nor  desired  by  the  associated,  and  that  they  acknowledge  that  alone  to  be  their  country  to 
which  they  belong  by  birth  or  civil  relation."  In  1869  at  a  meeting  held  in  Leipsic,  the 
following  resolution  was  passed,  rejecting  Jewish  restoration  :  "  Those  portions  of  our 
prayers  which  refer  to  the  re-establishment  of  the  annual  sacrifices  at  tbe  Messianic 
period,  or  to  the  return  of  the  Jews  to  Jerusalem,  must  be  modified."  The  London 
Jewish  Chronicle,  a  conservative  journal  standing  between  the  Orthodox  and  the  Reformed 
parties,  says  :  "  Although  every  Jew  is  bound  to  believe  in  a  Messiah,  the  question 
whether  that  expression  indicates  a  person  or  a  time,  and  whether  he  or  it  has  arrived  or 
not,  is,  according  to  the  Talmud  an  open  question."  The  Messiah,  then,  may  be  a  per- 
sonage, or  a  conjunction  of  events  producing  moral  power,  or  a  period  of  regeneration, 
or  the  Jewish  nation  itself  as  a  regenerator.  The  liberal  and  reformed  Jews  of  this 
country  present  similar  declarations  in  their  journals.  They,  of  course,  reject  the  plain 
grammatical  sense  (thus  far  so  notably  fulfilled  in  their  nation,  etc.)  of  prophecy,  and 
with  it  the  grand  future  portrayed  of  their  nation  under  David's  Son  in  a  restored  The- 
ocracy. On  the  other  hand,  the  Orthodox  Jews  cleave  to  the  prophecies  and  the  Mes- 
sianic idea  and  Kingdom.  While  many  Jews  cordially  receive  Renan's  Life  of  Jesus  (and 
similar  works)  and  eulogize  it,  there  are  others  who  condemn  it  (and  similar)  as  utterly 
unfair  and  untrustworthy.  Thus  e.g.  Prof.  Stowe  in  the  Hooks  if  the  Bible  (p.  284) 
quotes  a  Jewish  Rabbi,  Dr.  Philippson,  of  Magdeburg,  who  pronounces  Benan  "no 
critic  ;  he  is  merely  a  rationalist,"  and  says,  that  his  work  can  "  gain  no  great  importance 
in  the  domain  of  science  and  historical  criticism,  fur.  after  all,  much  of  the  work  rests 
upon  arbitrary  assumptions,"  etc.  Surely  this  ought  to  be  the  view  of  Jews  who  respect 
the  Old  Test,  and  their  own  nation,  when  they  rind  the  same  d<  grad<  <3  by  an  uncritical 
attack  upon  Jesus.  As  to  Jesus  Himself,  we  can  only  say.  that  when  Mos<  s  Mendelssohn 
wrote  (see  art.  on  him  in  M'Clin.  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  to  Lavater  expr<  ssing  his  "  venera- 
tion for  the  moral  character  of  the  founder  of  Christianity,"  we  may  well  pass  by  the 
declarations  of  inferior  minds. 

Obs.  3.  Our  doctrine  has  no  sympathy  with  the  destructive  criticism,  which 
even  believers  in  their  apologies  present — that,  on  the  ground  of  "  Jewish 
prejudices,"  "  Jewish  ideas,''*  etc. — rejects  some  portions  of  the  Gospels  or 
Epistles  or  Apocalypse.  This  has  an  unhappy  influence  upon  the  Jews,  as 
is  evinced  by  their  adopting  it  so  largely  and  asking  the  question  proposed 
by  Levi  (Letters  to  Dr.  Priestly,  p.  82),  How  are  ice  sure  that  the  remain- 
der is  authentic  t"  While  it  is  a  matter  of  surprise  that  Jews  should  ac- 
cept of  the  results  of  a  criticism  based  on  prejudice  against  their  ancestors 
(i.  e.  their  views),  yet  they  avail  themselves  of  it  as  a  retaliation  against  the 
system  of  Christianity  which  generally  indorses  the  same  prejudice.  The 
doctrine  defended  by  us  has  no  need  of  such  mutilation  of  the  Word  to  ac- 
commodate it  to  modern  notions  of  the  fitness  of  things,  and  certainly  not 
when  derived  from  antipathy  to  Jewish  views.  It  does  not  cast  contempt 
upon  the  faith  of  ancient  and  pious  Jews  who  were  satisfied  with  the 
literal,  grammatical  sense  ;  it  does  not  denounce  such  as  in  error  or  in 
holding  to  a  "  materialistic  husk  "  utterly  unworthy  of  modern  recep- 
tion ;  it  does  not  reflect  on  the  intelligence  of  prophet  and  people,  who 
believed  in  covenants  and  promises  just  as  they  were  given  ;  it  does  not  set 
itself  up  in  direct  antagonism  to  "Jewish  conceptions,"  and  denounce 
them  as  so  "  carnal  "  as  to  be  unfit  for  our  enlightened  age  ;  but  it  receives 
the  Word  just  as  prophet  and  people  did,  as  Jews  who  are  represented  as 
specially  favored  by  God  did,  as  Jews  who  were  preachers  of  the  promises  did, 
and  finds  no  necessity  existing  to  decry,  in  order  to  establish  itself,  God's  an- 
cient people,  making  them  to  live  in  darkness  and  entertaining  a  vain  faith 
and  hope.     Surely  the  manner  in  which  our  doctrine  manifests  such  high 


Prop.  193.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  413 

respect  for  the  intelligent  piety  of  these  ancient  worthies,  indicates  the 
wisdom  and  logical  accurateness  of  their  expectations,  preserves  and 
elevates  the  character  of  their  faith  and  hope,  and  does  this  all  on  a  true 
scriptural  basis — this  ought,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  to  find  more  favor 
with  the  Jew  than  those  theories  which  degrade  his  forefathers,  while 
under  direct  teaching  from  heaven,  into  believers  of  fables.  Admitting 
the  idle  tradition  existing  in  the  nation  obtained  by  adding'  largely  to  the 
Word,  yet  so  far  as  the  Covenants,  both  Abrahamic  and  David ic  are  con- 
cerned, there  was  an  undoubted  correct  apprehension  entertained  concern- 
ing them  by  the  nation  at  large,  and  especially  by  the  Jews  mentioned  in 
the  Scriptures.  This  is  seen  by  the  general  belief  on  the  subject,  and  which 
wsls perpetuated  in  the  first  Christian  churches,  uncontradicted  by  its  found- 
ers. Thus,  instead  of  mutilating  Scripture  under  the  plea  of  their  being 
"  too  Jewish,"  we  find  this  very  element  a  most  powerful  and  indispens- 
able argument  in  favor  of  their  inspiration.  Hence  this  feature  should 
commend  itself  to  every  Jew,  who  feels  that  his  national  connection  is 
worthy  of  defence,  that  his  ancestors  were  not  a  set  of  blind,  deluded 
believers  ;  and,  instead  of  arraying  himself  (as  many  now  do)  on  the  side  of 
those  who  are  engaged  in  the  work  of  lowering  and  degrading  his  noble 
and  eminent  forefathers,  he  should  rather  be  inclined  to  those  who  show 
forth  the  praises  due  to  an  expectant,  believing  people  as  found  in  the 
Scriptures,  even  if  it  does  include  the  testimony  of  the  Xew  Test,  in  its 
entirety. 

Let  prejudice,  so  unfavorable  to  investigation  and  truth,  be  laid  aside,  and  allow  the 
just  claims  of  Judaism  and  of  Christianity  to  be  presented.  Having  given  under  various 
Propositions  certain  doctrines  of  Judaism  retained  by  Christianity,  and  for  which  Chris- 
tianity is  preparing  a  perfect  realization,  let  us  under  this  one  urge  the  claims  that 
Christianity  has  to  the  respectful  attention  of  the  Jew.  As  preliminary,  a  few  points 
may  be  introduced.  (1)  It  certainly  is  eminently  worthy  of  the  candid  Jew  to  notice  how 
largely  the  Jewish  nation  is  indebted  to  Jesus  for  the  large  and  increasing  respect  which 
the  nation  has  attained.  Benj.  Disraeli  (Lord  Beaconsfield)  in  his  Life  of  Lord  Bentick, 
refers  to  this  feature,  of  which  we  only  give  the  opening  sentences,  as  follows  :  "  Per- 
haps, too,  in  this  enlightened  age,  as  his  mind  expands  and  he  takes  a  comprehensive 
view  of  this  period  of  progress,  the  pupil  of  Moses  may  ask  himself  whether  all  the 
princes  of  the  house  of  David  have  done  so  much  for  the  Jews  as  that  Prince  who  was 
crucified  on  Calvary.  Had  it  not  been  for  Him  the  Jews  would  have  been  comparatively 
Tinknown,  or  known  only  as  a  high  Oriental  caste  which  had  lost  its  country.  Has  not 
He  made  their  history  the  most  famous  history  in  the  world  V  '  etc.  The  hate  and  mutual 
animosities  of  the  past  centuries  have  given  place  to  a  better  feeling  and  Tinderstanding, 
and  Jesus  of  Nazareth  and  His  teachings  have  inspired  a  regard  for  the  nation  that  ought 
to  be  recognized  and,  may  we  add,  reciprocated.  (2)  The  Jews,  with  their  intense  devo- 
tion to  the  prophecies,  and  their  earnest  desire  for  deliverance  under  persecution,  were 
frequently  imposed  on  by  False  Messiahs  (see  articles  on,  in  various  Bib.  dictionaries 
and  cyclopaedias  which  give  lists  of  them  as  they  appeared  in  the  various  centuries),  pro- 
ducing great  misery  to  individuals  and  the  nation.  Now  not  one  of  these  came  in  the 
way  designated  by  the  prophecies,  and  this  imposition  might  all  have  been  avoided  if  the 
scriptural  representations  of  the  manner  of  the  Messiah's  Coming  had  been  observed. 
The  First  Advent  of  Jesus  is  so  remarkable  that  it  should  urge  the  Jew  to  compare  it 
with  the  Old  Test,  in  order  to  see  for  himself  whether  the  manner  and  events  connected 
therewith  are  in  correspondence  with  prediction.  Without  such  a  comparison  carefully 
instituted  the  Jew  is  inexcusable  ;  with  it,  we  have  no  fears  of  the  result,  as  evidenced 
in  the  past  history  of  eminent  and  learned  men  among  them.  Simpson  (Plea  for  Religion) 
makes  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Test,  to  be  fulfilled  in  Christ,  literally  in  one  hundred 
and  nine  instances  ;  Home  (Introd.,  vol.  1,  pp.  1:26  and  451),  and  many  others,  produce  a 
wonderful  array  of  literal  fulfilment  as  to  (1)  descent,  (2)  time  of  Coming  and  forerunner, 
(3)  place  of  birth,  ft)  particulars  of  birth,  (5)  life  and  qualifications,  (6)  miracles,  (7)  spe- 
cial events,  (8)  rejection  and  sufferings,  (9)  death,  (10)  burial,  (11)  resurrection  and  exalta- 
tion.    These  embrace  an  astounding  array  of  minute  particulars,  so  that  we  can  readily 


414  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  193. 

see  how  (Acts  18  :28)  "  the  Apostles  mightily  convinced  the  Jews  shewing  by  the  Scriptures  that 
Jesus  teas  the  Christ"  in  a  reference  to  them,  confirmed  as  they  were  by  their  personal 
witnessing  of  them.  The  Jew  certainly,  in  view  of  the  high  interests  involved,  should 
dispassionately  consider  an  array  of  testimony  which  has  so  largely  influenced  the  most 
cultivated  of  intellects  of  the  Gentile  world  to  accept  of  the  Jew  Jesus  as  the  very  Mes- 
siah predicted  by  their  own  Jewish  Scriptures.  No  impostor  could  possibly  have  thus 
far  fulfilled  the  Old  Test.,  seeing  that  in  the  predictions  and  fulfilments  there  are  in- 
volved things  beyond  the  power  of  mortal  man  to  verify.  Only  one  being  has  thus  far 
appeared,  in  whom  the  Messianic  prophecies  have  a  determined  and  noble  fulfilment, 
and  that  one  is  Jesus  in  whom  so  many  Gentiles  hopefully  and  lovingly  trust.  This 
very  fact  should  lead  the  Jew  to  a  renewed  and  impartial  examination.  (3)  The  Jews,  in 
order  to  reconcile  the  statements  of  the  prophets  respecting  the  Messiah,  resort  (see 
articles  "  Messiah,"  "  Jews,"  etc.,  in  our  encyclopaedias,  etc.)  to  a  twofold  Messiah,  one 
in  a  state  of  poverty  and  suffering,  the  other  in  a  state  of  splendor  and  glory.  They  thus 
make  two  persons  and  two  Messiahs,  whereas  the  Old  Test,  speaks  only  of  one  Messiah, 
as  covenanted  and  predicted,  viz.,  that  glorious  David's  Son  who  shall  restore  the  Theoc- 
racy. How  are  these  Scriptures  to  be  reconciled  ?  By  arbitrarily  and  violently  making 
two  Messiahs,  or  by  making  two  Advents,  the  one  in  humiliation,  etc.,  and  the  other  in 
triumph  and  glory  ?  Let  the  Jew  consider  the  reasonableness  and  consistency  of  Chris- 
tianity in  bringing  forth  this  twofold  prediction  and  fully  reconcile  it  by  applying  it  to 
the  same  person  (as  the  prophets  do)  under  two  Advents — the  one  literally  fulfilled  in  a 
hundred  particulars,  the  other  remaining  postponed,  and  this  postponement  being  con- 
firmed by  the  prophets  and  the  predictions  of  the  Messiah.  This  position  occupied  by 
the  believer  in  Jesus  is  worthy  of  special  attention,  seeing  that  he  thus  accepts  of  the  one 
Messiah  covenanted  and  promised,  in  whom  all  that  the  prophets  have  spoken  admirably 
finds  its  mate,  making  the  suffering  Messiah,  as  God's  Word  does,  the  ultimate  triumph- 
ant one  who  fulfils  covenant  and  prophecy.  (4)  We  earnestly  request,  as  a  preparatory 
act,  the  unbelieving  Jew  to  consider  that  the  Old  Test,  predicts  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah 
by  the  nation  as  evidenced  by  the  predictions  (as  e.g.  Ps.  118  :  22),  "  the  stone  which  the 
builders  refused,"  etc.),  and  by  the  subsequent  repentance  of  the  nation  (as  e.g.  Zech. 
12  :  9-14,  etc.)  which  is  based  on  a  previous  rejection.  That  the  Messiah  should  become 
"  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  ruck  of  offence"  has  been  sadly  verified  by  a  most  painful 
experience  ;  that  the  repentance  and  subsequent  exaltation  will  likewise  be  experienced 
the  same  prophets  declare.  Will  the  Jew  honestly  ponder  the  reasons  assigned  for  such  a 
stumbling,  and  then  in  this  connection  reflect  upon  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  and  their 
adoption  as  believers  when  their  own  people  should  suffer,  for  a  time  appointed,  the 
withdrawal  of  God's  special  favor,  which  even  Moses  predicted  (Deut.  32  :  21).  The 
wonderful  fulfilment  thus  far  and  the  astonishing  reception  of  the  Messiah  spurned  by 
the  nation,  should  awaken  deep  attention.  (5)  Again,  will  the  Jew  accept  of  the  state- 
ments of  his  own  Scriptures  that  the  Messiah  was  to  come  while  the  temple  was  still 
standing  within  the  weeks  designated  by  Daniel  (!)  :  24-27)  ;  if  so,  who  but  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  came  within  the  stipulated  time  and  place?  Surely  the  variety  and  converging 
testimony  should  awaken  the  Jewish  mind  and  heart  to  dispassionately  consider  the 
claims  of  that  Jesus,  who,  in  the  most  remarkable  manner,  possesses  all  the  requisite 
marks  of  a  true  Messiah.  It  will  not  answer  to  make  out,  as  many  Jews  do,  that "  Daniel 
was  no  prophet"  (so  e.g.  Dr.  "Wise,  editor  of  the  Amer.  Israelite,  May  30th,  1879),  because 
we  have  too  much  evidence  how  Daniel  was  estimated  and  understood  previous  to  the 
Advent  of  Jesus,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  statements  of  the  Gospels  (e.g.  in  quoting 
from  him  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  received  by  the  High-priest).  A  fair  reading 
of  works  on  Daniel,  as  Hengstenberg's,  Havernick,  Delitszch,  Auberlen,  Kliefoth.  etc.,  as 
well  as  an  unbiassed  consideration  of  the  historical  fulfilment  thus  far  of  his  predictions, 
clearly  and  unmistakably  show  that,  while  "  not  a  prophet  by  virtue  of  his  office,  yet, 
like  David  and  Solomon,  he  possessed  the  gift  of  prophecy"  (so  Delitszch,  etc.).  (G)  Will 
the  Jew  honestly  consider  that  to  avoid  the  Christian  application  of  suffering  and  humili- 
ation to  Jesus,  as  predicted,  many— rejecting  the  older  ai^plications  — withdraw  such  a 
Messiah  entirely  from  the  Messianic  prediction,  declaring  that  all  such  passages  (as  e.g. 
the  celebrated  Isa.  53)  relate  to  some  other  person,  or  to  the  nation  itself.  Why  this 
contradiction  to  earlier  expositions  and  to  later  ones  (see  art.  "  Messiah"  in  Herzog's 
Cyclop.)  unless  it  be  simply  to  repel  Christian  argument?  Auberlen  (Div.  Rev.,  p.  83) 
remarks  that  Jews,  when  Isa.  53  was  read  to  them  by  missionaries,  passionately  asserted 
that  it  could  not  be  in  the  Old  Test.,  but  was  interpolated  by  Christians,  so  strikingly 
and  convincingly  was  the  impression  made  by  its  mere  reading.  The  variations  and 
shifts  (see  art.  "  Prophet"  in  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  to  which  men  give  play 


PEOP.  193.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  415 

when  endeavoring  to  make  Isa.  53  (and  similar  predictions,  as  Ps.  22  :  16  ;  Ps.  42,  43,  69, 
72,  110  ;  Zech.  12  :  10,  etc.)  un-Messianic,  are  largely  the  result  of  prejudice  and  hostil- 
ity. (7)  Can  a  Jew  be  induced  to  cut  himself  loose  from  the  most  powerful  leverage  con- 
structed by  Jewish  ingenuity  against  the  reception  of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  viz.,  the 
Talmudical  system  ?  About  the  third  century  the  Mishna  or  Second  Law  was  compiled 
from  legendary  tradition,  to  which  afterward  were  added  the  Gamara  of  Jerusalem  and 
the  Gemara  of  Babylon,  and  these  being  appended  to  the  laws  of  Moses  so  prejudiced 
the  Jews  against  Jesus  and  His  recognition  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  induce  them 
to  consider  the  subject.  (Comp.  arts,  on  these  in  Cyclops.,  etc.)  We  allow  a  Jew  to  speak 
on  this  point.  Felix  Adler  in  an  art.  on  "  Reformed  Judaism"  (North  Amer.  Review, 
Sept. -Oct.,  1877)  says  :  "  The  Talmud  itself,  that  corner-stone  of  orthodoxy,  was  a  stu- 
pendous innovation  on  the  simplicity  of  the  Bible  religion,"  and  adds  in  a  note  :  "  The 
theory  of  an  Oral  Law,  delivered  to  Moses  on  Sinai  and  handed  down  from  generation  to 
generation,  until  it  was  finally  embodied  in  the  ordinances  of  the  Talmudical  academies, 
is  a  palpable  fiction  invented  by  the  Talmudists  in  order  to  lend  to  their  own  decisions 
the  sanction  of  divine  authority."  A  good  sign  among  the  Jews  at  present  is  the  ques- 
tioning of  such  authority  with  its  entailed  fetters.  (8)  Can  a  Jew  be  brought  to  consider 
dispassionately  the  Christian  and  critical  verbal  (as  e.g.  Ps.  22  :  16,  etc.)  and  prophetical 
(as  e.g.  Daniel's,  etc.)  examinations  and  expositions,  then,  provided  a  diligent  comjiari- 
son  is  instituted  in  the  Old  Test.,  there  is  hope.  If  we  can  influence  a  Jew  to  read  such 
works  as  Hengstenberg's  Chrisiology,  John  Pye  Smith's  Scripture  Testimony  /<<  the  Messiah, 
M' Caul's  Messiahship  of  Jesus,  Browne's  Messiah  as  Foretold  and  Expected,  Reibur's  Mes- 
sianic Prophecy,  and  numerous  other  works  of  a  similar  character,  a  sufficiency  will  be 
found,  impressive  by  its  weight  of  authority  and  unity  and  Jewish  concessions,  to  induce 
an  independent  and  conscientious  search  of  the  Scriptures.  If  such  a  posture  is  once 
assumed,  we  have  no  fears  respecting  the  final  result. 

Obs.  4.  The  main  leading  objection  against  Jesns  Christ  is  met  in  a 
more  satisfactory  manner  through  our  doctrines.  The  Jew  is  especially 
hostile  to  the  divinity  of  Jesus  ;  and  the  present  Rationalistic  attacks,  not- 
withstanding their  lowering  of  Jewish  character  and  doctrine,  are  hailed 
and  accepted  on  this  account  with  delight  by  multitudes  of  them.  Now 
aside  from  the  usual  proofs  assigned  for  the  divinity  of  Jesus,  our  inter- 
pretation of  Scripture  furnishes  others  which  must,  if  duly  considered, 
have  considerable  weight.  For  we  plainly  prove  from  the  Scriptures,  that 
the  restored  Tlieocracy,  as  predicted,  demands  a  God- mini,  a  di vine-human 
person  to  sit  on  David's  throne  and  rule  over  his  kingdom.  He  must  be 
One,  as  Covenant  and  prophets  declare,  who  reigns  forever,  who  has  un- 
limited power,  who  is  both  David's  Son  and  David's  Lord,  who  can 
perform  mighty  wonders  and  exert  Supernatural  power  in  restoring  all 
things.  We  show  that  the  perfection,  highest  consistency,  and  beauty  of 
a  Theocracy  is  thus  manifested  in  the  very  form  so  desirable  and  necessary 
for  Redemptive  purposes.  If  a  Theocracy,  such  as  the  Old  Test,  portrays 
would  be  erected  under  a  David's  Son  lacking  the  divine  attributes  ascribed 
to  Him,  then  there  would  be  a  failure,  in  so  far,  of  God's  own  Word. 
This  is  fully  admitted  by  the  concessions  of  ancient  rabbis,  who  under- 
stood the  prophecies  on  this  point  just  as  we  present  it.  That  the  projme- 
cies  plainly  teach  the  divinity  of  Jesus,  especially  as  associated  with  the 
Theocracy,  is  apparent  from  this  faith  of  the  Jews,1  so  that  Lederer  (him- 
self a  Jew,  in  the  Israelite  Indeed,  Aug.  18<iG,  p.  37)  says  :  "  there  are  many 
passages  in  ancient  Hebrew  writings  which  plainly  show  that  the  great 
men  of  Israel  believed  in  the  Sonshipof  the  Messiah,  not  in  the  sense  in 
which  modern  rabbis  would  make  us  believe,  viz.,  in  that  sense  in  which 
Israel  is  sometimes  called  '  my  firstborn  son,'  but  in  the  real,  Divine  Son- 
ship,  the  incarnation  of  the  God-head  in  the  flesh  of  David's  Son.  Wo  will 
quote  but  one  passage  :  Rabbi  Hunah  (Midrash  Shocher  Tob  on  Prov.  ch. 


416  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  193. 

19)  says,  '  Messiah  has  six  names,  viz.,  Yihon,  Tsemach,  Menahem,  David, 
Shiloh,  and  Jehovah  Tsidkenn.'  '  Such  evidence  could  be  multiplied, 
but  is  unnecessary  to  the  student.2  Our  entire  argument  makes  the 
mighty  King  not  only  "  the  Branch  of  David  "  (i.e.  his  Son)  but  "  the 
Branch  of  Jehovah  "  (i.  e.  His  Son)  and  shows  that  a  Theocracy  brought 
to  its  perfected  state,  bringing  God  and  man  in  union  in  a  plan  of  gov- 
ernment, necessarily  implies  it,  which  is  distinctly  affirmed  by  the  dura- 
tion, extent,  works,  power,  results,  etc.  of  His  reign.  (See  Prop,  183, 
184)3 

1  The  nature  of  the  Theocracy  as  predicted  by  the  prophets  assured  the  union  of  the 
divine  in  David's  Son.  Of  this  the  Jews  at  the  First  Advent  were  fully  persuaded  as  we 
see  e.g.  in  Peter's  expression  :  "Thou  art  the  Christ  (or  Messiah),  the  Son  of  the  living  God." 
The  general  expectation,  founded  on  the  Scriptures  (as  Ps.  2  ;  Isa.  9  :  6,  7,  etc.),  is  ■well 
stated  in  the  High  Priest's  question  :  "  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  thou  tell  us 
whether  thou  be  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  Ood."  The  charge  of  "  blasphemy'  against  Jesus 
when  He  assumed  the  same,  indicates  fully  and  clearly  in  what  light  this  Sonship  was 
regarded  ;  for  otherwise  the  conduct  of  the  Council  is  contradictory  and  absurd.  In  the 
promised  reign  of  the  Messiah,  the  Jews  expected  the  fulfilment  of  the  Millennial  pre- 
dictions, and  hence  they  were  able  to  say  what  the  prophet  declares  in  Isa.  25  ;  9,  "So, 
this  is  our  Ood  ;  toe  have  waited  for  ffim  and  He  "■ill  sun  us:  this  is  the  Lord;  vc  have  waited 
for  Him,  !>■'■  Kill  I"'  glad  and  n-join  in  Uis  sairaliort."  Gibbon  (D<<-1.  and  Fall,  vol.  4,  p.  489) 
may  indeed  sneer  at  the  notion  of  "  a  human  and  temporal  King"  entertained  by  some 
Jews,  but  this  is  merely  onesided,  having  out  of  the  question  the  mass  of  testimony 
which  introduces  higher  estimates  of  the  Messiah  among  the  Jews,  so  that  Milman  (in 
footnote)  correctly  remarks  :  "  Most  of  the  modern  writers,  who  have  closely  examined 
this  subject,  and  who  will  not  be  suspected  of  a  theological  bias,  Eosenmuller  on  Isa. 
9  :  5-7,  and  on  Ps.  45  :  7,  and  Berthohlt,  Christologia  Judceorum,  c.  20,  rightly  ascribe 
much  higher  notions  of  the  Messiah  to  the  Jews."  If  it  be  said  that  the  Jews  object  to 
the  Trinity,  charging  us  with  Polytheism,  we  leave  a  Jewess(Zeita  Ada,  p.  207)  to  answer  : 
"  A  literal  Jew  would  be  willing  to  excuse  us  from  this  charge  (Polytheism),  because  he 
would  say  that  our  faith  necessarily  involves  three  persons  in  one  God,  or  else  there 
could  be  no  atonement."  But  to  this  we  add,  that  this  necessity  arises  from  the  script- 
ural plan  of  a  pure  Theocracy  in  an  incorporated  Davidio  line,  so  that  whoever  sees  this 
Theocratic  ruhr  in  the  glorified  Son  of  David  also  beholds  the  Father — i.e.  God  ruling  in 
ami  through  Him.  Com]),  e.g.  M'Caul's  Messiahship  of  Jesus  j  Black's  Messiah  ami  Anti- 
Messiahs ;  Brown's  Messiah  as  Foretold  and  Expected;  Higgenson s  Heon  k  Messianic  Hope 
and  Christian  Reality,  etc. 

-  We  append  a  tew  more  references  for  the  accommodation  of  those  who  may  not  have 
access  to  them.  The  title  of  Jesus,  "  I  am  He  who  Am,  and  Was,  and  Will  be"  is  used 
in  the  Targum  of  Palestine,  which  in  itself  embraces  the  divine.  Dr.  Etheridge  in  his 
Trans,  of  the  'r>ir<i>iins  (vol.  2,  p.  686)  says  that  the  old  Jewish  theologians  gave  the  name 
of  "  the  King  of  the  kings  of  kings"  to  God,  and  also  the  one  "  the  King  of  Peace,  or  the 
King  with  whom  there  is  Peace,"  which  were  also  attributed  to  the  Messiah,  and  which 
(the  first  one)  reproduced  in  the  Apocalypse  is  one  reason  why  the  destructive  critics 
pronounce  it  "Jewish."  In  the  Israelite  I  mind,  a  periodical  under  the  editorship  of  a 
converted  Jew,  Lederer,  are  found  numerous  admissions  of  the  divine  Supernatural 
nature  in  connection  with  the  human  attributed  by  the  Jews  to  the  Messiah,  among 
these  are  quotations  from  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  Alien  Ezra,  Yarchi,  Eashi,  Aberbanell, 
Berechiah,  Hoona,  Eimchi,  etc.  In  the  writings  of  Lightfoot,  in  Commentaries,  in  vari- 
ous Sys.  of  Div.  are  also  found  an  abundance  of  quotations  which  confirm  the  fact  that 
many  of  the  identical  Scriptures  quoted  (as  e.g.  Ps.  2  ;  Jer.  23  :  5,  f>,  etc.)  by  Christians 
as  Messianic,  are  regarded  such  by  Jewish  raid. is  and  that  a  divine  origin  and  nature  is 
also  ascribed  to  Him.     Our  space  forbids  a  repetition  of  them,  however  interesting. 

3  Eev.  Isaac  Leeser  gives,  in  the  "  His.  of  the  Jews  and  their  Eeligion"  (see  Eupp's 
Or'xg.  His.  of  Ji'-lig.  Diiuniiinalions),  the  belief  that  Moses  "  was  the  greatest  of  all  the 
prophets  and  wise  men  who  have  lived  before  him  or  will  come  after  him,"  and  "  the 
belief  in  the  Coming  of  the  King  Messiah,  who  is  to  accomplish  for  the  world  and  Israel 
all  that  the  prophets  have  foretold  concerning  Him,"  and  then  (p.  365)  he  explains  :  "  The 
Messiah,  whom  we  expect,  is  not  to  be  a  god,  nor  a  part  of  a  godhead,  nor  a  Son  of  God 
in  any  sense  of  the  word  ;  but  simply  a  man  eminently  endowed  like  Moses  and  the 
prophets  in  the  days  of  the  Bible,  to  work  out  the  will  of  God  on  earth  in  all  that  the 


Prop.  193.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  417 

prophets  have  predicted  of  him."  But  he  fails  to  tell  us  how  a  mere  man  can  fulfil  the 
requirements  of  the  prophets,  in  the  restitution  of  all  things  and  the  realization  of  Mil- 
lennial descriptions.  He  overlooks  the  simple  fact  that  this  Messiah  is  to  be  immeasu- 
rably superior  to  Moses  in  every  respect,  and  that  in  numerous  predictions  what  is 
ascribed  to  this  Messiah  is  fully  ascribed  to  God  Himself.  He  conveniently  passes  by  the 
ancient  belief  of  the  Jews  and  engrafts  another  faith,  as  e.g.  see  Prop.  159,  Obs.  2  (comp. 
Props.  199,  200),  where  it  is  shown  that  the  Jews  believed  that  this  Messiah  would  be 
"the  eternal  King,"  and  His  Kingdom  "the  eternal  Kingdom  of  David,"  etc.,  which 
cannot  possibly  be  asserted  of  a  mere  mortal,  seeing  that  such  perpetuity  necessarily  em- 
braces the  divine.  The  study  of  the  nature,  design,  etc.,  of  the  Theocracy,  as  it  is  to  be 
restored,  will  inevitably  lead  to  the  firm  belief  that  God  Himself  in  the  Person  of  David's 
Son  is  the  Theocratic  King.  How  this  wonderfully  exalts  the  King  and  the  nation,  need 
not  be  pointed  out,  and  yet,  is  it  not  strange  that  the  very  feature  needed  to  crown  the 
Theocratic  ordering  with  its  highest,  most  desirable  excellence  should  be  objected  to  so 
strenuously  by  the  Jew?  Indeed  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  nation  has  brought  upon 
itself  for  so  many  centuries  the  dread  punishment  of  God.  For  let  it  be  considered  that 
nowhere  is  it  asserted  in  direct  terms  that  the  nation  shall  be  driven  from  the  land  and 
scattered  among  the  nations  for  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  but  this  is  directly  pre- 
dicted as  a  result  of  their  rejection  of  God  as  their  Ruler,  etc.  Now  we  ask  the  Jew  how 
his  nation  thus  rejected  God  and  incurred  the  fearful  destruction  of  the  temple,  of  Jeru- 
salem, of  the  nation,  etc.,  unless  it  be  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  as  He  expressly  claimed.  If 
the  Jewish  theory  (or  rather  Rabbinical)  is  correct,  then  the  rejection  of  an  alleged  im- 
postor ought  to  have  brought  them  the  favor  and  blessing  of  God,  but  instead  of  this  the 
exact  reverse— as  predicted  by  this  Messiah — has  occurred.  To  what  conclusion  can  we 
come  excepting  that  in  this  Messiah  they  rejected  God  Himself,  the  Theocratic  King. 

Later  writers  among  the  Jews  have,  as  is  notorious,  contradicted  older  writers  in  the 
applications  of  Scrijiture,  in  order  to  weaken,  if  possible,  the  interpretations  and  appeals 
of  Christians  in  favor  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus.  This  is  frankly  acknowledged  by 
David  Kimchi  on  2d  Ps.  We  give  an  illustration  :  Ps.  2,  as  Fairbairn  (Typology,  vol.  1, 
p.  97,  etc.)  has  shown,  is  fairly  applicable  to  "  the  Christ,"  as  maintained  even  by  the 
old  Jewish  doctors  (as  Solomon  Iarchi  agreed  that  "  it  should  be  expounded  of  King 
Messiah,"  but  added  :  "  In  accordance  with  the  literal  sense  and  that  it  may  be  used 
against  heretics"  (i.e.  Christians)  "it  is  proper  to  explain  it  as  relating  to  David  him- 
self.") Fairbairn  justly  observes  that  the  Rationalistic  interpretation  which  would  apply 
it  to  David  is  not  sustained  by  the  acts  here  ascribed  to.  the  One  specified  (as  e.g.  David 
was  not  opposed  in  establishing  his  throne  by  heathen  nations,  and  when  established  he 
did  not  seek  dominion  over  the  kings  and  rulers  of  the  earth,  etc.).  This  is  so  plain  that 
"  some  even  of  those  who  formerly  espoused  it  (i.e.  the  Davidic  application) — such  as 
Rosenmiiller — have  at  length  owned  that  "  it  cannot  well  be  understood  as  applying 
either  to  David  or  to  Solomon,  much  less  to  any  of  the  later  Hebrew  kings,  and  that  the 
judgment  of  the  more  ancient  Hebrews  is  to  be  followed,  who  considered  it  as  a  celebra- 
tion of  the  mighty  King  that  they  expected  under  the  name  of  the  Messiah."  The  same 
is  true  of  Ps.  132  ;  Ps.  110  ;  Ps.  89,  and  others  ;  and  what  binds  those  Psalms  into  an 
irresistible  Messianic  prediction,  is  the  simple,  uncontrovertible  fact  that  the  Messiah  of 
the  covenant  and  the  Messiah  of  the  Psalms  is  still  the  same  Messiah  predicted  by  the 
prophets  after  David's  and  Solomon's  reign.  The  expectation  of  the  Jews  at  the  First 
Advent,  and  their  utter  inability  (as  e.g.  evidenced  Matt.  22  :  42-45)  to  withstand  the 
Messianic  application,  as  well  as  the  abundant  concessions  of  later  rabbis,  teach  us  how 
to  receive  them.  But  if  so  then  their  application  to  One  who  is  far  more  than  a  mere 
man  inevitably  follows,  and  with  it,  that  the  birth,  life,  works,  etc.,  of  Jesus  alone  fully 
meet  all  the  conditions  imposed  by  the  predictions.  Micah  5  :  2,  3,  4  alone — if  pon- 
dered in  the  light  given  by  Jesus — should  be  sufficient  to  convince  the  Jew  that  the  high 
and  glorious  nature  we  Christians  ascribe  to  the  Messiah  is  essential  to  the  fulfilment  of 
God's  own  Word.  Modern  Jews  (Leila  Ada,  p.  180)  may  make  Isa.  53  "an  allegorical 
representation  of  their  own  sufferings,"  but  this  cannot  be  its  meaning  without  undue 
violence  to  the  passage,  and  without  contradicting  the  large  number  who  have  applied  it 
to  a  suffering  Messiah.  Barnes  (Corn,  on  Hebrews,  ch.  1  :  6)  informs  lis  :  "Two  Jewish 
rabbis  of  distinction — Raschi  and  Kimchi — affirm  that  all  the  Psalms  from  93  to  101  are 
to  be  regarded  as  referring  to  the  Messiah.  Such  was,  and  is,  the  opinion  of  the  (ortho- 
dox) "  Jews."  Let  the  reader  pass  over  these  Psalms,  and  he  will  find  that  the  Messiah 
therein  described  can  be  none  other  than  the  Mighty  God,  seeing  that  the  dominion, 
power,  exaltation^  glory,  etc.,  ascribed  to  Him  cannot  be  applied  to  mere  man.  The  stu- 
dent who  desires  to  investigate  the  Scripture  passages  of  a  Messianic  nature  and  their 


418  TIIE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  193. 

application  to  Jesus,  will  find  these  in  works  specially  devoted  to  the  subject,  and,  more 
or  less,  in  the  commentaries  on  the  Bible.  The  abundance  of  material  in  this  direction 
is  vast  and  satisfactory.  Thus,  e.g.  Fairbairn  (Typology,  vol.  1,  p.  332)  remarks  respecting 
Isa.  chs.  61,  62,  49,  53,  that  "it  is  a  matter  of  certainty  that,  in  the  judgment  of  the 
ancient  Jewish  Church,  the  person  spoken  of  in  all  these  passages  was  the  Messiah" — 
and  refers  to  "  Lightfoot,  Hor.  Heb.  on  Matt.  12  :  20  and  John  5  :  19  :  Schottgen  de 
Messiii,  pp.  113,  192  ;  Hengstenberg's  Christology,  on  Isa.  42  :  1-9  and  chs.  49  aDd  53  :  2. 
Also  Alexander  on  the  same  passages  and  ch.  61."  The  student  may  compare  what  Glad- 
stone (Studies  on  Homer,  vol.  2,  pp.  48-51,  and  Juventus  Mundi,  p.  205-6)  says  of  the  Jew- 
ish traditions  respecting  the  divinity  of  the  Messiah,  being  "  the  glory  of  God,"  having 
two  natures,  being  the  Logos,  "Word,  or  Wisdom,  "  the  Lord  of  Hosts,"  the  Light,  the 
Mediator,  having  abundant  Supernatural  power  and  divine  attributes,  conquering  the 
■evil  one,  delivering  from  the  dead,  etc.  (comp.  Schottgen's  ITorce  Hebraiece.) 

It  is  self-evident  that  the  ascension  of  the  Messiah  to  the  right  hand  of  God  (Ps.  110) — 
fulfilled  in  the  history  of  Jesus — shows  that  He  is  exalted  far  above  mere  man  :  that  the 
righteous  Branch  of  David  (Jer.  23  :5,  6),  when  designated  "Jehovah,  our  Righteousness, 
must  be  divine  ;  that  the  ancient  Jewish  applications  of  Messianic  predictions  (such  e.g. 
as  Ps.  2  ;  Isa.  11  ;  Ps.  80  :  14  (15)  ;  Mic.  5:1;  Hag.  2:7-9;  Mai.  3  : 1,  etc.),  exalt  this  Mes- 
siah immeasurably  above  mortal  man,  and  hence,  the  New  Test,  standpoint,  which 
ascribes  so  much  of  the  divine  to  Jesus,  is  the  correct  one  in  the  portrayal  of  a  true 
Messiah.  Philo  of  Alexandria  (between  a.d.  40  and  50),  a  Jewish  theologian,  advanced 
views  of  a  Logos  so  striking  in  its  counterpart  to  John's  Gospel  that  it  has  excited  con- 
siderable discussion.  One  party  (as  Semisch,  etc.)  think  that  Philo's  Logos  was  a  per- 
sonal hypostasis  ;  another  (as  Dorner,  etc.)  deem  it  merely  a  personification  of  wisdom 
or  a  divine  attribute  ;  and  others  (as  Schaff,  etc.)  that  Philo  "  vibrates  between  the  two 
views."  Now  whatever  position  we  may  assume,  one  thing  is  conclusive,  viz.,  that  Philo 
had  no  idea  of  a  mere  man  being  the  Messiah  to  fulfil  the  promises,  but  that  he  attrib- 
uted deliverance  and  the  fulfilment  of  Millennial  predictions  to  something  that  was 
superhuman.  This  is  precisely  the  position  assigned  to  the  Logos  in  the  New  Test.,  only 
that  the  covenanted  union  with  David's  Son  is  distinctively  asserted  in  connection,  thus 
in  the  Person  of  Jesus  uniting  the  two,  and  preserving  the  unity  of  covenant  and  proph- 
ecy. We  add  :  the  time  is  coming  when  all  objections  to  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  shall  be 
forever  removed.  And  that  is,  when  the  Jews  shall  say  (Isa.  25  :  9),  "Lo,  this  is  our 
God  ;"  for  as  Fausset  (Com.  loci)  has  well  remarked  :  "  The  Jews  have  a  special  share  in 
the  words,  '  This  is  our  God.'  "  Repentant  and  believing  they  shall  yet  exult  in  the 
Crucified  One. 

Obs.  5.  The  doctrine  meets  the  more  modern  Jewish  ohjection  urged 
.against  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  For  it  points  significantly  to  the  proph- 
ets (as  e.g.  Isa.  9  :  6,  7  ;  Ps.  72  :  7,  17  ;  Ps.  89  :  35-37  ;  Ps.  104  :  4,  etc.) 
which  teach,  that  David's  Son  is  immortal  in  that  His  reign  endures  for- 
ever, and  that  with  Him  are  associated  the  pious  dead,  etc.  Then  it  refers  to 
the  expectations  of  pious  Jews  before  the  Advent,  who  held  (John  12  :  34), 
to  such  an  immortal  Messiah,  and  such  a  resurrection  of  dead  ones,  and 
shows  how,  as  the  apostles  explain  hy  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  Jesus 
now  never  dies  again  and  how,  also,  through  that  resurrection  a  pledge  is 
given  that  the  prophets  will  be  fulfilled  in  the  resurrection  of  others.  The 
resurrection  is  proven  to  be  a  necessary  and  indispensable  preparation  for,  and 
adjunct  of,  the  Tlieocracy.  How  else  can  David's  Son  reign  as  the  prophets 
describe  unless  immortal?  And  how  can  man  born  of  a  woman  become 
immortal  unless  he,  in  someway,  triumph  over  death?  And  what  greater 
triumph  is  required  than  that  ascribed  to  Jesus?  Hence,  when  the  resur- 
rection is  regarded  as  a  part  of  the  Divine  Plan,  in  its  prerequisite  rela- 
tionship to  the  Theocracy,  it  is  the  very  thing  which  ought  to  be  mani- 
fested in  order  to  fulfil  the  prophets  and  give  us  undoubted  faith  in  such 
fulfilment  (comp.  Props.   46-50,  125). 

How  far  the  Scriptures  were  fulfilled  in  the  First  Advent  of  Christ  has  been  shown 
by  many  writers,  such  as  Home,  Newton,  Keith,  Simpson,  etc.,  and  to  such  an  extent 


Prop.  193.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  419 

that  no  one,  with  unprejudiced  mind,  can  deny  a  remarkable  literal  fulfilment.  In  the 
consideration  of  this  subject  this  fulfilment  ought  to  be  regarded.  We  then,  in  general, 
have  (1)  the  predictions  which  declare  the  immortal  continuance  of  David's  Son  (with 
which  is  allied  His  character,  attributes,  etc.)  ;  (2)  the  predictions  of  His  death  and  resur- 
rection, contrasting  them  with  the  fulfilment  recorded  in  the  Gospel  ;  (3)  the  manner  in 
which  this  corroborates  the  Theocratic  ordering,  providing  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  the 
covenanted  Messiah.  Leila  Ada  (p.  120)  brings  in  the  following  points  in  her  appeal  to 
her  Jewish  father,  as  predicted  in  the  prophets  and  realized  in  Jesus  :  He  was  to  be 
(1)  David's  descendant  ;  (2)  His  mother  a  virgin  ;  (3)  born  in  Bethlehem  ;  (4)  humble 
birth  ;  (5)  without  external  recommendations  to  public  notice  ;  (6)  reside  in  Galilee  ; 
(7)  a  life  of  suffering  ;  (8)  rejected  by  the  Jews  ;  (9)  betrayed  by  a  friend  ;  (10)  treated  as 
a  malefactor  ;  (11)  mocked  and  insulted  ;  (12)  display  meekness  and  patience  ;  (13)  put  to 
a  violent  death  ;  (11)  His  executioners  were  to  divide  His  apparel  ;  (15)  cast  lots  for  His 
vesture  ;  (16)  interred  in  a  rich  man's  tomb  ;  (17)  rise  from  the  dead  ;  (18)  His  body  not 
undergoing  corruption  ;  (19)  He  was  to  leave  the  world  ;  (20)  ascend  to  heaven.  The 
Scriptures  involved  can  be  seen  in  detail  (as  e.g.  in  the  Appendix,  No.  VI.  of  Home's 
Introd.)  in  works  specially  devoted  to  this  fulfilment.  The  most  careless  cannot  help 
being  struck  by  the  numerous  and  startling  fulfilments  in  reference  to  essential  points  and 
minute  particulars.  Time,  regular  descent,  place,  offices,  preaching,  works,  public  entry 
into  the  city,  etc.,  are  mingled  with  the  price  of  betrayal,  the  spitting,  reviling,  vinegar 
and  gall,  unbroken  bones,  pierced  side,  dying  with  malefactors  but  honorable  burial,  etc., 
so  that  a  firm  believer  in  God's  Word  must  see  how  they  all  meet  in  Jesus  ;  and  that,  in 
view  of  their  publicity  and  of  their  occurring  under  Roman  jurisdiction,  they  could  not 
have  been  concocted,  etc.,  by  the  evangelists.  If  the  question  is  asked  why,  then,  did  not 
t  Lie  nation  that  witnessed  these  coincidences  receive  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  (1)  when  it 
was  the  earnest  wish  of  the  nation  to  have  the  Messiah  to  come  and  deliver  it  from  the 
Roman  power,  and  (2)  when  this  desire  was  exhibited  afterward  in  the  success  of  one 
who  pretended  to  be  "  the  Christ,"  drawing  a  large  portion  of  the  nation  into  open  revolt 
against  the  Romans,  and  (3)  when  the  Jews  did  not  deny  the  miraculous  works  of  Jesus 
(even  the  scandalous  Toldolh  Jeshu  conceding  these),  but  ascribed  them  either  to  the 
power  of  the  Beelzebub,  or  to  the  influence  of  magic,  or  to  the  supposed  mystic  virtue  of 
the  Shem-hamphorash,  the  Ineffable  Name,  although  such  works  were  believed  to  accom- 
pany the  Messiah  ?  The  answer  is  plain  and  decisive  ;  the  Gospels  are  specially  written 
to  show  why  Jesus  was  thus  rejected.  The  ground  of  objection  was  the  unpalatable  doc- 
trine of  repentance  by  which  the  Kingdom  was  conditioned.  A  theocracy,  in  the  nature 
of  the  case,  cannot  be  set  up  over  a  nation  so  steeped  in  sin  and  crime  as  the  Jewish 
nation  was— as  evidenced  by  Josephus,  etc. — at  the  First  Advent.  The  refusal  of  the 
Messiah  to  establish  it  until  the  nation  made  itself  worthy  of  it  by  repentance  and  obedi- 
ence to  the  Word  of  God — this  excited  the  hostility  and  bitterness  of  the  representative  men 
of  the  nation,  until  it  culminated  m  the  death  of  their  own  Messiah.  They  expected  a 
Messiah  to  come  and  set  up  His  Kingdom  without  calling  them  to  forsake  sin — to  be  a 
temporal  Deliverer  without  urging  faith  and  obedience  with  its  resultant  fruits — to  re- 
establish and  exalt  the  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David  without  requiring  an  antecedent 
manifestation  of  humble  confession  of  sin  and  an  honest  turning  to  God  with  reverence 
and  love.  Hence  the  preaching  of  the  forerunner  of  Jesus,  of  the  disciples  and  Apostles, 
and  the  wonderful  works,  signs,  and  fulfilments,  while  persuading  many — even  of  the 
priests — to  receive  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  and  endure  persecution  for  His  sake,  left  the 
bjdy  of  the  nation  unrepentant  and  intensely  prejudiced  against  Him. 

Look  at  this  Jesus  in  the  light  of  all  these  particulars,  and  then,  if  Jews  will  believe 
their  own  Scriptures,  they  see  how  it  constitutes  Him  one  who  can  be  "  the  Judge  of 
Israel."  How  can  this  Judgship  be  better  proven  than  by  Paul  in  Acts  17  :  31  ?  How 
can  "  the  tree  of  life  (which)  was  not  created  in  vain,  but  the  men  of  the  resurrection 
shall  eat  thereof  and  live  forever"  (so  e.g.  R.  Elias  ben  Mosis,  and  R.  Menahem,  in  Ans- 
worth  on  Gen.  2),  be  restored  unless  it  be  through  a  Second  Adam  like  Jesus  (Rev.  2  :  7 
and  22  :  14)  ?  How  can  the  covenanted  promises  made  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  to 
inherit  the  land  personally  be  realized  without  resurrection,  and  who  so  able  to  perform 
this  as  a  Messiah  that  has  vindicated  His  power  over  the  grave,  like  Jesus  ?  How  can 
the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  return  to  Zion,  and  how  can  the  supernatural  results  pertain- 
ing to  a  perfected  and  glorious  redemption  be  experienced,  rinless  the  Messiah  is  such  an 
one  as  Jesus  is  represented  to  be  in  the  New  Test.  ?  Such  questions  might  be  multi- 
plied, and  show  that  the  portraiture  of  Jesus,  as  given  in  the  Gospels,  Acts,  Epistles,  and 
Apocalypse  is  just  such  an  one  as  is  demanded  by  the  Old  Test,  in  order  to  secure  its 
fulfilment. 


420  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  193. 

Obs.  6.  It  brings  in  with  greater  force  and  pertinency  the  necessity  of 
the  Messiah  making  a  sacrifice  of  Himself  for  sin.  Aside  from  the  usual 
arguments  presented,  and  the  appeals  made  to  the  predictions  of  a  suffering 
Saviour  by  the  prophets,  and  fulfilled  in  Jesus,  it  specially  directs  attention 
to  the  necessity  of  His  death  in  order  that  the  Abrahamic  Covenant  itself 
may  (as  Paul  argues)  be  sealed  or  confirmed.  By  the  efficacy  of  this  death, 
abundant  provision  is  made  for  the  ample  realization  of  the  covenant  :  an 
immortal  King  is  provided  who  is  able  to  save — through  Him  all  that 
believe,  can  and  will  be  saved  as  predicted,  for  He  now  has  power  to  for- 
give sin,  to  save  from  the  results  of  sin,  to  raise  up  the  dead,  etc.  The  en- 
tire spirit  of  the  Old  Test,  evinces  that  the  Covenant  can  never  be  fulfilled 
without  such  a  sacrifice,  for  it  contemplates  a  restoration,  ample  and  com- 
plete, to  forfeited  blessings.  To  make  the  Covenant  available,  provision 
must  first  be  made  to  meet  the  sinfulness  and  results  of  sin  even  in  believers, 
which  the  typical  sacrifices  could  not  effect.  This  is  strikingly  and  effec- 
tively done  in  Him  who  is  to  be  the  Head  of  the  Theocracy.  Our  argu- 
ment does  not  simply  ascribe  salvation  through  Christ,  but  salvation 
through  Him  in  and  for  this  Theocratic  elevation.  He  is  indeed  the  born 
King  of  the  nation,  being  the  promised  seed,  and  who  so  worthy  (being 
sinless  as  the  prophets  predict)  to  make  atonement,  to  effect  reconciliation, 
to  stand  as  mediator  as  this  King.  For,  if  the  Jew  will  but  consider  what 
this  Theocracy  demands,  if  ever  realized  as  prophecy  represents  it,  such  as 
moral  purity,  the  triumph  over  the  grave,  the  presence  of  God,  the 
return  to  an  Edenic  state,  the  removal  of  the  curse,  etc.,  he  must  see  that 
such  an  important  transformation  can  never  take  place  unless  He,  through 
and  in  whom  God  again  condescends  to  act  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly 
ruler,  is  both  sinless  Himself,  and  has  power  to  act  as  Mediator  and  Ee- 
deemer  of  sinful  man.  It  is  through  the  King  that  the  blessings  of  Ke- 
demption  enjoyed  under  a  restored  Theocratic  rule  arc  to  be  realized,  so 
all  the  prophets  with  one  voice  testify — and  Jesus  Christ  as  described  in 
the  New  Test.,  meets  in  every  respect  the  requirements  of  prophecy,  in 
person,  in  character,  in  work  already  performed,  in  station,  in  promise,  etc., 
preparative  to  the  ultimate  end.  If  in  the  history  of  Jesus,  coming  as 
Messiah,  there  was  no  provision  for  sin,  no  purchase  of  immortality,  no 
triumph  over  death,  no  recognition  and  exaltation  by  the  Father,  an  im- 
portant, yea  deadly,  flaw  would  exist,  and  the  Jew  would  then  be  justified  in 
turning  away  from  him,  saying  that  the  Messiah  really  promised  by  the 
prophets  would  exhibit  His  ability  to  deliver  in  person  and  woik  ;  but  now 
since  these  are  abundantly  evidenced  in  Jesus,  is  lie  justified  in  turning 
away  from  Him?  Indeed,  if  he  reflects  how  shortly  after  the  rejection  of 
Jesus,  who  manifested  in  person  and  work  His  perfect  adaptedness  to  the 
Theocratic  Kingship,  the  nation  guilty  of  rejecting  Him  was  so  terribly 
smitten  and  scattered,  he  finds  that  his  own  reason  alleged  for  the  over- 
throw of  the  nation,  viz.  on  account  of  sinfulness  against  or  rejection  of 
Jehovah,  is  fully  verified  in  Jesus  ;  because,  unless  Jehovah  be  regarded  as 
identified  with  the  person  of  Jesus,  it  would,  owing  to  their  belief  in  and 
worship  of  Jehovah  in  God  the  Father,  be  improper  to  say  that  Jehovah  was 
rejected  by  them,  excepting  it  be  through  Christ.  In  considering  the 
claims  of  Jesus,  it  certainly  ought  to  be  of  weight,  that  the  rejection  of 
Him  and  of  His  sacrifice  Avas  followed  by  a  terrible  overthrow  of 
the  nation  and  a  continued  subjection,  as  He  and  the  prophets  pre- 
dicted, under  Gentile  domination,  down  to  the  present  day.     It  confirms 


Prop.  193.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  421 

the  validity  of   His  Theocratic   Kingship,  and   the   preciousness   of   His 
sacrifice. 

Indeed,  if  Jesus  had  been  an  impostor,  then  the  Father,  instead  of  bringing  such 
terrible  calamities  upon  the  nation  as  predicted,  ought  rather  to  have  blessed  the  nation 
for  its  zeal,  etc.  But  taking  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  what  was  done  against  the  Messiah 
Jesus  was  done,  as  Jesus  claimed,  against  God,  the  Father,  Himself.  If  the  Jew  is  can- 
did in  examining  the  New  Test.,  he  must  be  deeply  affected  by  two  things  :  (1)  that  a 
Messiah  should  predict  His  own  death  and  the  continued  depression  of  a  nation  that  is 
His  own  inheritance.  Imposture  is  incapable  of  such  a  procedure  ;  it  would  inevitably 
bring  forth  the  exact  reverse.  Now,  in  view  of  the  singularity  of  this  teaching,  to  say 
nothing  of  its  astounding  nature,  should  not  the  Jew  be  influenced  to  dispassionatelj' 
consider  the  reasons  assigned  for  such  a  mode  of  procedure  ?  (2)  The  predictions  of  the 
Messiah — so  accurately  fulfilled  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and.  the  temple,  the 
scattering  of  the  nation,  the  treading  down  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Gentiles,  the  continued 
Gentile  domination— should  have  a  mournful  interest  to  the  Jew,  seeing  the  realization  of 
the  same  in  Jewish  history.  And,  may  we  add,  should  not  this  very  fulfilment  have  a 
tendency  to  cause  him  to  feel  that  the  One  that  could  thus  predict  must,  indeed,  have 
been  the  Messiah.  These  predictions  were  based  on  the  sinfulness  of  the  nation,  and 
certainly  the  Jew  cannot  censure  us  for  repeating  this  statement,  when  their  own  prayer- 
books,  accounting  for  dispersion,  captivity,  and  suffering,  fully  and  frankly,  in  general 
terms,  admit  the  past  sinfulness  of  the  nation — an  admission  forcibly  urged  by  the 
prophets.  How  Jewish  writers  inadvertently  fasten  upon  themselves  the  sin  of  crucify- 
ing the  Messiah  is  forcibly  shown  by  Leila  Ada  (a  converted  Jewess),  p.  121,  in  her 
appeal  to  her  father,  saying  that  in  a  Jewish  work  called  Yoma  the  question  is  asked : 
' '  Why  was  the  second  teuiple  destroyed  ?"  And  one  of  the  principal  causes  given  is  this 
one:  "On  account  of  the  hatred  without  cause."  She  then  adds:  "I  refer  them  to 
Ps.  69,  one  which  is  admitted  by  Aben  Ezra  to  be  prophetical  of  the  Messiah.  '  They 
hated  me  without  a  cause,'  is  charged  by  our  Saviour  upon  His  enemies."  Leila  Ada,  p. 
59,  asks  what  terrible  sin  her  ancestors  had  committed  which  called  for  eighteen  centu- 
ries of  removal  from  the  land,  when  her  fathers,  guilty  of  idolatry — the  greatest  sin 
against  God — had  only  seventy  years  of  captivity  enforced,  etc.  She  (p.  122)  remarks  : 
"  Nor  is  it  possible  that  the  Jews  can  be  altogether  blind  to  the  curse  which  has  rested 
upon  our  nation  through  the  eighteen  hundred  years  which  have  elapsed  since  the  cruci- 
fixion of  Jesus.  '  What  adequate  cause  can  be  assigned  for  our  long  protracted  chastise- 
ment ?  '  is  one  of  their  solemn  questions.  '  What  can  that  crime  be,  which  was  commit- 
ted by  otir  ancestors,  and  of  which  to  this  day  we  have  not  repented  ?  Whatever  it  is,  it 
must  be  some  act  or  deed  of  a  most  atrocious  character,  an  act  or  deed  in  the  approval  of 
which  wre  have  steadfastly  persisted,  and  the  guilt  of  which  we  have  obstinately  refused 
to  acknowledge.'  And  if  they  will  seriously  reflect,  they  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion  that 
there  is  no  one  deed,  to  which  in  all  ages  they  have  given  their  adhesion,  except  the 
crucifixion  of  Jesus.  With  that  event,  too  (and  they  cannot  avoid  observing  it),  com- 
mences the  era  of  their  sufferings  and  distresses.  Here,  what  is  related  of  Rabbi  Solo- 
mon Marochan  occurs  to  me  :  while  reflecting  upon  the  iniquities  of  the  Jews,  he  said, 
'  The  prophet  Amos  mentions  a  fourth  crime  for  which  we  have  been  in  our  captivity- — of 
selling  the  Just  One  for  silver.  It  manifestly  appears  to  me  that  for  selling  the  Just  One 
we  are  justly  punished.  It  is  now  one  thousand  years  and  more,  and  during  all  this  time 
we  have  made  no  good  hand  of  it  among  the  Gentiles,  nor  is  there  any  likelihood  of  our 
ever  any  more  turning  to  good.  O  my  God  !  I  am  afraid  lest  the  Jesus,  whom  the 
Christians  worship,  be  the  Just  One  whom  we  sold  for  silver  ! '  "  Can  a  Christian  read 
this  without  being  profoundly  moved  in  sympathy,  or  can  a  Jew  reflect  upon  it  without 
deeply  feeling  the  force  of  its  appeal  ?  Can  a  Jew  ponder  the  statements  of  prophets 
that  the  Messiah  would  be  rejected  by  the  nation,  that  Gentiles  would  be  called  during 
such  a  time  of  rejection,  that  the  nation  would  endure  dispersion  and  suffering  as  a 
result,  that  at  some  future  time  they  would  acknowledge  their  sin  and  repent,  etc.,  with- 
out the  conviction  being  forced  on  him  that  in  and  through  Jesus  this  has  been  most 
wonderfully  exemplified?  Isaac  da  Costa  (see  art.  "  Messiah"  in  M'Clintock  and  Strong's 
Cyclop.)  was  converted  by  reflecting  on  the  long-continued  dispersion  of  the  Jewish 
nation  for  its  sins— the  acceptance  of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  resolving  all  enigmas.  The 
same  is  true  of  others  ;  and  all  such  have  realized  that  in  addition  to  the  argumentation 
appealing  to  reason,  there  was  combined,  on  the  acceptance  of  Jesus,  the  most  satisfac- 
tory of  all  proof,  viz.,  that  derived  from  personal  experience,  enforcing  a  well-grounded 
consciousness  that  Jesus  was  indeed  an  all-sufficient  Saviour  and  "  the  Christ" — as  illus- 
trated e.g.  in  the  life  of  Leila  Ada,  Wolfe,  and  others. 


422  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.   193. 

Ols.  7.  The  Kingdom  as  explained  by  the  prevailing  theories  is  a  stum- 
bling-block to  the  Jew.  With  the  Old  Test,  delineation  of  the  Kingdom, 
its  Theocratic  and  covenant  relationship  to  their  nation,  its  overthrow 
and  promised  restoration  under  the  Messiah,  etc.,  it  is  impossible  to  move 
them  to  receive  a  Kingdom  which  is  widely  different  from  the  covenanted 
one,  and  of  which  professed  believers  are  so  uncertain  that  it  is  the  sub- 
ject of  many  and  contradictory  meanings  and  interpretations.  The  King- 
dom that  the  Old  Test,  plainly  predicts  for  him,  is  one  that  when  estab- 
lished is  so  openly  visible  and  associated  with  the  rebuilt  throne  and. 
Kingdom  of  David,  that  he  rejects  as  utterly  untrustworthy  the  interpre- 
tation which  declares  that  the  ruined  tabernacle  of  David  shall  never  be  re- 
stored  in  the  sense  contained  grammatically  by  the  language  of  the  proph- 
ets. This  spiritualizing  of  the  covenant  promises  and  prophecies  pertain- 
ing to  the  Kingdom,  and  thus  making  them  to  mean  what  the  fancy  of  the 
interpreter  can  apply  to  the  present  dispensation  or  Church,  has  had  a 
powerful  influence  upon  the  Jewish  mind,  and  has  materially  aided  in  con- 
firming unbelief.  For,  when  he  looks  at  the  Church,  or  at  this  age,  he 
finds  no  such  a  Messianic  Kingdom  as  his  prophets  promised,  no  such  a 
glorious  restoration  of  his  nation  under  David ic  rule  as  the  Spirit  pre- 
dicted, and  hence,  influenced  by  the  usurped  claim  of  the  Christian  Church, 
and  warped  by  the  apparent  antagonism,  he  turns  away  from  Christianity 
itself.  Our  doctrine,  on  the  other  hand,  gives  a  simple,  unfettered,  con- 
sistent statement  of  the  promised  Kingdom,  receiving  it  just  as  once  estab- 
lished, just  as  incorporated  with  David's  line  and  people,  without  changing 
the  language  into  something  else  ;  and  thus  by  its  unity  of  purpose  con- 
firms the  truthfulness  of  tbe  grammatical  sense  believed  in  by  the  pious 
Jews.  Hence  it  is  better  adapted  as  evidenced  by  the  history  of  the  primi- 
tive Church,  to  meet  and  obviate  the  objections  of  the  Jews. 

Making  the  Christian  Church,  which  is  only  preparative,  to  be  the  covenanted  Messi- 
anic Kingdom,  forms  a  fruitful  source  of  difficulty  to  the  Jew.  Thus  e.g.  a  Jew  (art. 
"  Messiah,"  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclopedia)  objects  :  "  We  dissent  from  the  proposi- 
tion that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  the  Messiah  announced  by  the  prophets,  because  the 
Church  which  He  founded,  and  which  His  successors  developed,  has  offered,  during  a 
succession  of  centuries,  a  most  singular  contrast  to  what  is  described  in  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures  as  the  immediate  consequence  of  Messiah's  Advent,  and  of  His  glorious  King- 
dom. The  projdiet  Isaiah  declares  that  when  the  Messiah  appears,  peace,  love,  and 
union  will  be  permanently  established  ;  and  every  candid  man  must  admit  that  the 
world  has  not  yet  realized  the  accomplishment  of  this  prophecy.  Again,  in  the  days  of 
the  Messiah,  all  men,  as  Scripture  saith,  '  are  to  serve  God  with  one  accord,'  and  yet  it  is 
very  certain  that  since  the  appearance  of  Him  whom  our  Christian  brethren  believe  to  be 
Messiah,  mankind  has  been  split  into  more  hostile  divisions  on  the  grounds  of  religious 
belief,  and  more  antagonistic  sects  have  sprung  up  than  in  any  historic  age  before  Chris- 
tianity was  preached. "  This,  and  far  more  in  the  same  direction,  could  be  alleged  as 
true  ;  and  the  representation  of  the  Church  as  the  predicted  Messianic  Kingdom  (and  not, 
as  it  is,  a  preparatory  stage  for  the  same)  is  only  increasing  the  difficulties  of  a  Jew's 
acceptance  of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah.  It  likewise  is  disgraceful  to  professed  Christians  to 
take  up  the  stale  falsehoods  that  are  fastened  upon  Jewish  views  of  the  Messianic  King- 
dom, viz.,  that  they  regarded  it  as  something  similar  to  earthly  kingdoms,  like  the  Roman, 
etc.  Now,  while  it  is  true  that  some  Jews  had  a  low  and  gross  view  of  the  Kingdom,  yet 
many  and  leading  minds  had  a  correct  idea  that  it  woidd  be  different  from  mere  earthly 
kingdoms,  because  it  would  be  essentially  Theocratic,  a  restoration  of  the  Theocracy,  to  be 
revived  and  manifested  in  the  Person  of  the  Messiah.  They  are  unjustly  ridiculed  and 
censured  because  of  the  expectation  of  universal  dominion  under  the  Messiah's  rule. 
But  is  it  not  predicted  in  the  plainest  possible  language  that  their  Messiah  should  be  a 
Ruler  over  their  own  nation,  and  also  over  all  other  nations  ?  Did  they  believe  in  the 
ultimate  downfall  of  all  other  kingdoms,  and  which  has  called  forth  thousands  of  sar- 
casms ?     This,  too,  is  clearly  predicted.     Tliat  which,  probably,  has  caused  more  unjust 


Prop.  193.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  423 

accusations  and  witless  ridicule  is  the  notion  entertained  respecting  Jewish  supremacy. 
But  if  there  is  any  truth  distinctively  taught  in  the  Scriptures,  then  that  of  Jewish  su- 
premacy is  one  (see  e.g.  Prop.  114),  destined  to  prove  an  inestimable  blessing  to  all 
other  nations. 

Obs.  8.  How  poorly  in  effectiveness  the  arguments  of  the  Jew  have  been 
met  by  later  Christian  apologists,  is  self-evident  if  we  glance  over  the 
history  of  apologetics.  The  line  of  reply  adopted  by  Origen  in  his  answer 
to  Celsus,  has  been  substantially  readopted  and  repeated  down  to  the  pres 
ent  day.  Thus  e.  g.  to  illustrate  :  when  Celsus  from  a  Jewish  standpoint 
(b.  2,  ch.  29)  urges  the  objection  that  "  the  prophets  declare  the  Coming 
One  to  be  a  mighty  Potentate,  Lord  of  all  nations  and  armies  "  and  de- 
duces from  the  failure  of  such  a  manifestation  of  Jesus  that  He  is  not  the 
One  predicted,  Origen  answers  correctly  when  he  shows  that  there  are  two 
Advents,  a  first  and  a  second,  separated  by  an  interval  of  time,  and  that  the 
Coming  of  Jesus  as  such  a  Potentate  is  to  be  referred  to  the  Sec.  Advent, 
but  he  does  not  really  break  the  force  of  the  objection  when  he  portrays 
the  results  of  such  a  Sec.  Coming  to  be  the  winding  up  of  all  sublunary 
affairs  etc.,  while  the  prophets  describe  a  very  different  state  of  affairs,  viz. 
a  great  glorious  reign  over  the  restored  Jewish  nation,  and  the  nations  here 
on  the  earth — to  follow  such  an  Advent.  The  main  point  of  the  objection, 
that  of  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  as  predicted,  is  not  answered  by  this  mode 
of  reasoning  and  cannot  be  met  by  it.  On  the  other  hand,  our  doctrine 
satisfactorily  meets  it,  showing  how  this  reign,  as  earthly  Potentate  is  post- 
poned until  the  Sec.  Advent  when  the  covenants  and  the  prophets  will  be 
fulfilled  in  the  manner  delineated  by  the  Word.  The  Jewish  expectations, 
drawn  legitimately  from  the  prophecies,  are  by  the  Apostles  linked  with  the 
Sec.  Advent,  and  the  very  phraseology  growing  out  of  these  expectations 
are  thus  adopted  by  them  without  the  least  intimation  that  they  are  to  be 
understood  differently  from  common  usage.  Hence  our  view,  instead  of 
denying  those  legitimate  Jewish  deductions  from  the  prophets,  confirms 
them  as  indispensable  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  Word. 

The  difficulty  with  many  is  this  :  they  insist  upon  one  Advent  of  the  Messiah.  Thus 
e.g.  they  thus  apply  Isa.  11  :1-10.  Accepting  of  the  Messianic  interpretation  of  Kimchi, 
Abrabanel,  and  other  Jewish  commentators,  they  (as  e.g.  Rev.  Prof.  Marks  in  Jewish 
Messenger,  Jan.,  1872)  say  that  with  the  appearing  of  the  Messiah  are  a  series  of  synchro- 
nous events,  such  as  the  final  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation,  universal  peace  and 
harmony,  the  overthrow  of  all  enemies,  etc.,  and  that  the  Messiah  is  known  by  the 
accomplishment  of  these  predicted  events.  Consequently  they  argue  that  taking  one 
Advent  as  alone  taught,  such  events  not  taking  place  at  and  after  the  Advent  of  Jesus, 
but  the  reverse  occurring,  He  cannot,  therefore,  be  the  Messiah.  All  hinges  on  the  one 
Advent  theory.  But  we  have  shown  in  the  body  of  the  work  (e.g.  Prop.  34)  why  the  two 
Advents  are  not  more  distinguished  the  one  from  the  other,  and  why  two  become  neces- 
sary in  order  to  fulfil  all  that  is  predicted.  Besides  this,  it  alone  reconciles  the  two 
states  of  humiliation  and  of  exaltation  attributed  to  the  Messiah.  "We  thus  retain  the 
one  Messiah.  The  invention  of  two  Messiahs  (see  art.  "Messiah"  in  Herzog's  Cyclop.) 
was  utterly  unknown  to  the  earlier  Targums  and  the  earlier  Gemara  of  Jerusalem,  which 
have  but  one  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David.  The  Gemara  of  Babylon  (about  the  sixth  cen- 
tury, so  Home's  Introd.)  has  a  second  Messiah,  the  Son  of  Joseph  ;  and  the  Targum  of  the 
Song  of  Songs  (Tar.  Megil. )  4  ;  5  ;  7,  3,  says,  "  Your  Redeemers  are  two,  who  will  redeem 
you,  the  Messiah  the  Son  of  David,  and  the  Messiah  the  Son  of  Ephraim,  like  unto  Moses 
and  Aaron."  (This  Targum  is  noted — Home's  Introd.,  vol.  1,  p.  263 — for  its  "  dull 
glosses  and  fabulous  additions  ;"  with  which  comp.  arts.  "  Antichrist"  and  "  Messiah" 
in  Smith's  Bib.  Die,  and  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.)  More  modern  writers  to  avoid 
making  two,  apply  the  predictions  of  humiliation  to  some  prophet,  or  king,  or  to  the 
Jewish  nation  itself,  thus  violating  the  earlier  applications.     Our  distinctive  view  of  the 


424  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  193. 

two  Advents  is  of  such  a  nature  that  it  consistently  reconciles  the  prophecies  as  fulfilled  in 
the  one  Messiah,  David's  Son  and  Lord. 

Certainly  the  Jews  should  not  accuse  us  of  folly  in  still  looking  for  the  Messiah,  and  in 
regarding  His  Coming  as  imminent.  This  has  been  the  posture  of  a  multitude  of  Jews 
in  the  past.  Aside  from  the  general  opinion  (e.g.  art.  "Messiah"  in  M'Clintock  and 
Strong's  Cyclop.)  on  the  subject  at  the  Advent  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  imposition  of 
false  Messiahs  (see  arts,  on,  in  above  and  others),  the  calculations  of  Rabbi  Saadia,  Abra- 
ham Ibn-Chija,  Nachman,  Gersoni,  Abrabanel  and  others,  the  repeated  failures  of  esti- 
mates causing  an  interdict  to  repress  calculations  of  time,  the  intense  yearnings  and 
hopes  inspired  in  periods  of  persecution  and  depression,  the  numerous  utterances  -of 
writers,  all  evince  that  in  calling  into  question  and  decrying  our  position,  they  would 
be  deriding  the  pious  and  learned  of  their  own  nation, 

Obs.  9.  But  as  our  object  is  briefly  to  indicate  how  our  doctrine  fairly 
meets  and  removes  Jewish  objections,  it  is  not  necessary  to  enter  into  ad- 
ditional details.  The  attentive  reader  will  not  fail  to  notice,  that  in  many 
points  it  is  well  adapted  for  this  purpose.  The  spirit  of  it  calls  upon  the 
Gentiles  not  to  be"  high-minded,"  to  consider  that  their  call  (as  predicted 
even  by  Moses)  is  the  result  of  Jewish  unbelief,  but  which  unbelief  shall 
finally  give  place  to  a  cordial  reception  of  Jesus  Christ,  when  the  times  of 
the  Gentiles  have  run  their  allotted  course.  It  is  disposed  to  allow  and 
defend  the  distinctive  position  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  necessity  of  iden- 
tification by  engrafting  with  it  to  secure  the  blessings  of  Redemption  cove- 
nanted to  it,  and  even  the  supremacy  of  that  nation  after  the  restoration, 
in  virtue  of  its  Theocratic  position.  It  sympathizes  most  cordially  with 
the  down-trodden  Jerusalem  and  the  scattered  nation,  never  forgetting 
that  the  glory  of  the  adopted  Gentiles  and  that  of  the  Kingdom  itself  can 
never  be  realized,  as  promised,  until  Jerusalem  and  its  nation  experience 
the  returned  mercy  of  God  and  His  Christ.  It  vindicates  Jesus  Christ 
and  His  teaching  from  the  Jewish  ground  itself,  and  thus  commends  Jesus 
as  the  true  f  ulfiller  of  the  prophets. 

The  great  trouble,  however,  in  reaching  the  Jews,  is  their  own  lack  of  candor,  for  the 
modern  Jews  especially  will  not  allow  passages  that  the  ancient  Jews  applied  to  the  Mes- 
siah to  have  any  such  reference,  lest  Christians  should  be  enabled  to  take  advantage  of 
the  same  in  behalf  of  Jesus.  This  is  illustrated  e.g.  by  McCaul  (Aids  of  Faith,  Essay  3,  p. 
100),  who  refers  to  Ps.  2,  as  referred  to  the  Messiah  by  ancient  Jews,  saying  :  "  This  is 
confessed  even  by  Rashi  in  the  eleventh  century,  who  remarks,  '  Our  Rabbis  interpret 
this  Psalm  of  the  Messiah,'  to  which  was  added  in  the  older  copies  of  his  commentary, 
'  but  in  order  to  answer  the  heretics  it  is  better  to  interpret  it  of  David,'  words  still  found 
in  the  commentary  on  the  21st  Psalm."  They  are  especially  unfair  to  the  divinity  of 
Jesus,  denying  e.g.  that  He  is  "  the  Son  of  God,''  when  as  Lederer  (Israelite  Indeed, 
March,  1807,  etc.)  proves  that  some  of  their  writers  declare  that  Jesus  assumed  the  title 
belonging  to  the  real  Messiah.  They  object  to  Jesus  being  called  "  the  Word,"  and  with 
lack  of  frankness  conceal  what  their  own  past  literature  ascribes  to  "  the  Messiah"  (comp. 
Barnes,  Gam.  on  John,  ch.  1  :  1,  where  e.g.  the  Targum  on  Deut.  26  :  17,  18,  says  :  "  Ye 
have  appointed  the  Word  of  God  a  King  over  you  this  day,  that  He  may  be  your  God  "). 
The  plainest  statements  applied  to  the  Messiah,  as  Deut.  18  :  18,  19  (comp.  Kurtz,  His 
Old  Cov.,  vol.  3,  p.  475),  or  Micah  2  :  13  (comp.  Pearson  On  the  Creed,  p.  413,  foot-note) 
must  be  lowered  to  avoid  the  claims  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  the  sayings  of  their 
Targums  (comp.  e.g.  Dr.  Etheridge's  Trans,  of  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  pp.  6,  16,  17,  for 
divinity  of  Messiah)  must  be  concealed  from  the  mass  of  their  people  lest  it  be  found 
favorable  to  the  crucified  one.  Such  language  as  the  following  -highly  indicative  of  the 
Theocratic  ordering,  and  that  instead  of  our  making  more  gods  than  one  we  make  God's 
rule  in  the  Person  of  David's  Son— is  totally  ignored.  Dr.  Hales  (quoted,  Home's  Introd., 
vol.  2,  p.  275)  cites  a  remark  from  the  ancient  Rabbinical  book  of  Ikkarim,  illustrating 
Jer.  23  :  5,  6,  "  The  Scripture  calls  the  name  of  the  Messiah  Jaoh,  Our  Righteousness,  to 
intimate  that  He  will  be  a  mediatorial  God,  by  whose  hand  we  shall  obtain  justification 
from  the  Xante ;  wherefore  it  calls  Him  by  the  name  of  the  name  (that  is,  the  ineffable 


Prop.  193.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  425 

name  Jaoh,  here  put  for  God  Himself").  Especially  do  we  find  modern  writers  unfair  to 
Isa.  53,  for  in  their  efforts  to  make  it  non-Messianic,  they  give  the  most  varied  interpreta- 
tions, applying  it  to  Jeremiah  or  the  Israelitish  people,  or  to  the  godly  portion  of  the 
nation,  or  to  the  prophetical  body,  or  to  Uzziah,  or  to  Hezekiah,  or  to  the  house  of 
David,  or  to  an  interpolation.  They  carefully  ignore  past  Jewish  concessions  (comp. 
Hengstenberg's  Ghristology,  Pye  Smith's  Scripture  Testimony,  art.  "Prophet,"  in  M'Clin- 
tock  and  Strong's  Cyclop.,  etc.,  on  the  passage).  So  in  the  interpretation  of  the  seventy 
weeks  of  Daniel  (comp.  art.  "Messiah,"  M'Clintock  and  Strong's  Oyclop.,  Lange's  Com. 
Daniel,  p.  20G,  etc.),  they  carefully  exclude  from  notice — to  avoid  the  Christian  applica- 
tion— the  concessions  of  Kimchi,  Jarchi,  Rabbi  Saadias,  and  other  learned  Jews.  So  like- 
wise the  Coming  of  the  Messiah  to  the  temple,  His  being  pierced,  sold,  etc.  (Lange's 
Com.  Zech.,  pp.  71,  96,  etc.),  all  must  be  so  interpreted—  over  against  Jewish  concessions 
and  the  strongest  evidence — as  to  forbid  an  application  to  Jesus.  The  entire  spirit  of 
such  a  course  simply  manifests  prejudice,  and  an  unwillingness  to  approach  the  subject 
with  that  candor  which  it  eminently  deserves.  We  cannot  censure  them  more  than  we 
do  a  class  of  professed  Christians  (as  e.g.  Williams  in  Essays  and  Reviews)  who  endeavor, 
in  their  destructive  efforts,  to  make  out  that  the  Messianic  predictions  of  Isaiah  have  no 
reference  whatever  to  Christ,  a  position  which  is  fully  answered  by  the  declaration  of 
Jesus  Himself  (Luke  24  :  25-27,  44-47)  and  the  quotations  from  Isaiah  (Matt.  8  :  17,  and 
12  :  18-21,  and  15  :  8,  9  ;  Acts  8  :  32,  33,  and  13  :  34,  47,  etc.). 

Obs.  10.  Oar  doctrine  brings  forth  with  prominency  the  idea  that  the 
Messiah  is  a  temporal  Deliverer.  With  all  the  inestimable  spiritual  bless- 
ings, the  deliverance  from  sin  and  the  results  of  sin,  we  have  addi'il  as 
inseparably  connected  a  remarkable  temporal  deliverance.  This  is  so  iden- 
tified with  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation  and  the  re-establishment  of 
the  Theocracy  by  the  Messiah,  that  it  is  folly  to  deny  the  expectations  and 
hopes  of  the  pious  Jews  and  primitive  Christians  on  this  point.  If  lan- 
guage has  any  definite  meaning,  and  if  God  will  ever  fulfil  His  covenants 
and  promises  as  written,  then  glorious  temporal  deliverance  must,  in  the 
nature  of  the  case,  be  incorporated.  In  the  "  Ageda''  a  meeting  of  Jewish 
Rabbis  in  the  year  1650,  held  in  the  plain  of  that  name,  about  ninety  miles 
from  Iiuda,  the  question  was  discussed  whether  the  Messiah  had  come  and 
was  decided  in  the  negative.  The  reasons  given  for  this  conclusion — and 
which  have  the  greatest  weight  still  with  the  Jewish  mind — were  based  on 
the  fact  that  the  prophet  linked  the  restoration  and  prosperity  of  the  Jew- 
ish nation,  the  restoration  and  exaltation  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  King- 
dom with  the  Coming  of  the  Messiah.  As  these  events  had  not  yet  trans- 
pired, as  the  nation  has  not  yet  met  with  temporal  deliverance,  etc.,  it  was 
assumed  that  the  Messiah  had  not  yet  come,  thus  overlooking  that  the 
same  prophets  predict  a  previous  rejection  of  the  same  Messiah,  a  conse- 
quent continued  fall  of  the  nation,  a  call  of  the  Gentiles,  and  after  a  long 
endurance  of  punishment  the  return  of  the  Messiah  for  promised  deliver- 
ance. They,  unfortunately,  only  allow  a  portion  of  Scripture  its  due 
weight,  and  ignore,  although  sustained  by  historical  fact,  the  remain- 
der. They  also  refuse  to  examine  the  claims  of  Jesus  to  this  title,  and 
how  this  very  temporal  deliverance,  so  long  and  ardently  prayed  for,  is 
postponed  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  We  can  readily  see,  however, what  decided 
influence  the  prevailing  Christian  theology  which  denies  all  this,  although 
plainly  covenanted  and  predicted,  must  have  had  in  deciding  these  Jews  to 
reject  Jesus  as  "  the  Messiah. "  For  if,  as  many  Christians  declare,  this 
Jesus  is  not  to  restore  the  Jewish  nation  and  elevate  it  in  honor  and  power  ; 
if  He  is  not  to  re-establish  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  exalting  it  in 
dominion  and  glory  over  the  earth,  then  it  necessarily  and  inevitably  follows 
that  Jesus  is  not  the  Messiah  covenanted  to  David  and  predicted  by  the 


426  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  193. 

prophets.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  can  be  shown  and  proven  (as  our 
Propositions  logically  and  scripturally  do)  that  this  Jesus  is  to  return  and 
perform  this  work,  then  it  also  legitimately  follows  that  the  Jew  has  no  ex- 
cuse in  rejecting  Him  as  the  Christ.  This  Jesus  will  yet  come  as  promised, 
and  then  the  full  parallel  between  Him  and  Moses  (Acts  7  :  35-37  ;  Deut. 
18  :  15-18)  will  be  brought  out,  a  Deliverer  of  the  nation  and  the  in- 
strument through  whom  a  Theocracy  is  established.  Our  view,  therefore, 
urges  the  Jew  to  cleave  to  the  most  precious  oath-bonnd  promises  relating 
to  his  nation  and  the  Messiah  ;  it  confirms  the  faith  of  the  nation  in  its 
ultimate  deliverance  and  glory  through  the  power  of  this  returning  Jesus. 

The  Jew  may  again  ask  why  did  not  Jesus  perform  this  work  at  His  First  Advent  ? 
Again  we  remind  him  that  this  was  all  tendered  to  the  nation  on  condition  of  repent- 
ance, for  certainly,  God  could  not  condescend  to  re-establish  a  Theocracy  and  rule  as 
King  over  a  nation  so  corrupt  as  that  nation  was  at  the  First  Advent.  This  wickedness 
has  been  so  faithfully  described  by  a  converted  Jewess  {Leila  Ada,  p.  109)  in  her  interest- 
ing letter  (revealing  her  conversion  to  Christianity  to  her  father)  that  we  quote  it.  After 
alluding  to  the  Jewish  hope  of  temporal  deliverance,  and  how  it  was  expressed  by  Zacha- 
rias,  the  father  of  John  the  Baptist,  she  adds  :  "And  those  who  rejected,  blasphemed, 
insulted,  and  crucified  the  Messiah,  could  it  be  expected  that  He  would  grant  such  hein- 
ous sinners  temporal  deliverance  ?  That  at  about  the  period  of  the  Coming  of  Jesus,  the 
Jews  were  a  most  iniquitous  nation,  is  proved  by  the  testimony  of  Josephus  ;  so  wicked 
that  he  observes,  '  If  God  had  not  sent  the  Romans  as  His  executioners,  the  earth  would 
have  opened  and  swallowed  us  up.'  What  a  dreadful  place  !  And,  doubtless,  the  most 
crying  evil  of  these  people  was  their  rejection  and  treatment  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God.  How  could  such  sinners  expect  deliverance?"  etc.  Let  any  unbiassed  mind  read 
e.g.  the  trial,  condemnation,  and  death  of  this  Jesus  as  presented  in  all  its  simplicity  in 
the  Gospels,  and  see  the  conduct  of  the  representative  men  of  the  nation,  and  is  not  the 
direct  testimony  of  this  Jesus  concerning  the  corruption  extant  most  forcibly  and  fear- 
fully vindicated  ?  Is  it  not  reasonable  that  the  Jew  should  allow  the  New  Testament  to 
assign  its  reasons  why  Jesus  did  not  bring  the  promised  deliverance  ;  why  the  nation  did 
not  repent  ;  why  the  Kingdom  was  postponed  ;  lohy  Jesus  will  come  at  His  Sec.  Advent 
as  the  triumphant  Messiah  ;  why  the  Messianic  prophecies  were  held  in  abeyance  on 
account  of  the  sins  of  the  nation,  etc.,  thus  bringing,  without  destroying  the  brightest  of 
Jewish  hopes,  the  New  Test,  into  cordial  sympathy  and  agreement  with  the  Old  Test. 


PEOP.  194.]  THE   TIIEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  427 


Proposition  194.      This   doctrine   of  the   Kingdom  materially 
aids  to  explain  the  World's  History. 

With  a  knowledge  of  this  Kingdom,  its  germ  in  the  Covenant,  its 
divine  institution,  its  withdrawal,  its  tender  and  rejection,  its  post- 
ponement, its  preparatory  stages,  and,  above  all,  its  final  restora- 
tion under  the  Messiah,  it  is  possible  to  explain  the  history  of  the 
world  in  a  consistent  manner.  This  is  fully  admitted  by  later 
writers  on  history  (however  they  may  explain  the  Kingdom)  as  e.g. 
by  the  Protestant  Neander  (His.  of  the  Church)  and  the  Roman 
Cath.  Schlegel  (Philos.  of  History).  The  better  the  nature,  char- 
acteristics and  the  manner  of  restoring  the  Kingdom  is  attained,  the 
more  satisfactory  will  be  the  solution  of  the  world's  history.  In 
such  an  investigation  Eschatology,1  which  embraces  the  re-estab- 
lishment of  the  Kingdom,  must  necessarily  stand  forth  with  great 
prominence,  seeing  that  the  end  attained  serves  to  explain  the 
causes  in  operation,  the  agencies  employed,  etc.2 

1  The  prominence  of  Eschatology  in  the  primitive  Church  was  a  key  to  former  and  then 
existing  history,  and  it  ought  ever  to  remain  such.  Many  unnecessary  difficulties,  many 
bitter  controversies,  many  foolish  questions  and  answers,  would  have  been  avoided  had 
this  primitive  key  been  retained. 

2  It  has  long  been  felt  by  our  greatest  historians  that  the  loftiest  view  of  history  is  that 
which  makes  it  centre  in  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  eminently  true,  seeing  that  for  Him  and 
by  Him  the  successive  ages  have  been  created.  This  has  been  eloquently  expressed  by 
able  pens,  and  we  have  been  pointed  to  His  being  so  pre-eminentlj'  a  remarkable  person- 
age in  the  past,  present,  and  the  future  — to  the  vast  influence  and  power  that  He  has  and 
will  exert,  etc.,  but  even  a  higher  appreciation  of  this  fact,  constituting  Him  in  fact  (liter- 
ally) the  central  figure  in  the  world's  history,  is  found  in  the  re-establishment  of  the 
Theocratic  Kingdom  and  His  glorious  reign.  It  teaches  us  that  the  Cosmos,  which 
Humboldt  admitted,  notwithstanding  its  destructive  agencies,  was  full  of  harmony,  was 
far  greater  when  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  Coming  Christ  to  complete  the  Divine  Plan. 
It  is  a  remarkable  feature,  and  well  worthy  of  attention  that  the  most  powerful  thinkers 
whose  labors  have  even  been  detrimental  (either  directly  or  by  perversion)  to  Christianity, 
yet  observed  such  a  striking  truthfulness  in  the  portrayal  of  Christ,  in  the  fundamental 
ideas  pertaining  to  Him,  that  they  could  not  positively  reject  Him,  as  witnessed,  for  in- 
stance, in  Kant,  Schleiermacher,  De  Wette,  Hase,  Hegel,  and  many  others,  and  even  in  a 
recent  class  like  Renan,  etc.,  who  wish  to  preserve  a  historical  or  ideal  Christ. 

Obs.  1.  Looking  at  the  end  as  delineated  in  Holy  Scripture  and  tracing 
the  provisionary  movements  which  lead  to  the  portrayed  result,  we  may 
say,  in  a  sense  different  from  Schelling,  that  "  the  whole  of  history  is  a 
divine  revelation";  because  a  divine  ordering  toward  a  specified  end,  is 
manifest  in  all  history.1  This  distinctive  feature  has  been  noticed  even 
from  a  partial  outlook  in  the  fulfilment  of  certain  predictions  in  the  past 
and  the  present  (so  that  the  phrase  "  God  in  History"  is  a  common  one), 
but  it  becomes  more  significant,  if  we  anticipate  history  as  it  will  be  writ- 


42S  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  194. 

ten  after  the  covenanted  Kingdom  is  once  set  up  and  realized.  In  the 
word  of  God  we  have  (Twesten)  a  "  manifestion  of  divine  grace  for  the 
salvation  of  man";  in  the  individual  believer  we  have  a  manifestation  of 
such  grace  in  bestowing  the  pledges  and  earnest  of  promised  redemption  ; 
but  in  history,  as  it  tvi.ll  be,  we  have  a  manifestation  of  the  overruling 
Divine  power  by  which  the  completed  salvation,  the  perfected  redemption, 
is  fully  accomplished.  These  briefly  expressed  hints  are  already  sufficient 
to  show  us  how  important  anticipated  history  is,  to  form  a  correct  estimate 
of  the  history  of  the  world.  To  describe  a  tree  perfectly  its  fruit  must  be 
taken  into  account  ;  to  give  an  accurate  description  of  a  machine  it  must 
embrace  not  merely  its  several  parts  but  the  design  or  end  for  which  it  is 
intended  ;  precisely  so  with  an  attempt  to  portray  the  world's  history,  for 
every  effort  which  does  not  embrace  the  great  end,  the  gracious  design 
(and  exhibited  in  this  Kingdom)  that  God  has  in  view,  will  utterly  fail  to 
do  justice  to  the  problems  of  history.2 

1  Hence  Niebuhr,  the  historian,  says  :  "  It  is  not  true  that  the  study  of  history  weakens 
our  belief  in  divine  providence  ;  history  is  of  all  studies  the  one  which  tends  to 
strengthen  that  belief."  This  is  correct,  provided  an  unprejudiced  comparison  is  insti- 
tuted between  the  facts  of  history  and  the  Word  of  God. 

2  Such  a  position  alone  places  us  in  the  posture  to  seB  the  provisionary  measures 
adopted,  to  appreciate  the  wisdom  of  the  means  instituted,  to  measure  the  efficiency  of 
initiatory  forms,  to  unravel  apparent  inconsistencies,  to  decide  between  the  evident 
antagonistic  forces  at  work,  to  indicate  the  inevitable  result  following  the  long-continued 
conflict,  etc.  Instead  of  making  God  an  imperfect  Being  (as  Mill.)  unable  to  control  the 
world,  or  One  who  lacks  benevolence  toward  His  creatures,  bringing  misery  and  death 
upon  all  ;  instead  of  denying  that  a  Being  exists  who  sways  a  sceptre  over  all,  and  takes 
an  abiding  interest  in  man  ;  this  enables  us  to  confide  in  Him  as  the  Almighty,  Good, 
and  Merciful,  who  by  the  end  accomplished  vindicates  His  perfections,  His  rights,  and  His 
glory.  Before  man  attempts  to  criticise  God  it  is  best  for  him  to  await  the  ultimate  result 
of  these  preparatory  dispensations.  If  the  end  is  secured,  as  covenanted,  predicted,  and 
promised,  then  the  wisdom,  power,  love,  grace,  etc.,  of  God  will  be  so  conspicuously  dis- 
played that  no  one  will  be  able  to  gainsay  it  ;  angels  and  men  uniting  in  a  vast  demon- 
stration of  praise  toward  Him  who  has  removed  all  mystery  in  the  completion  of  salvation 
and  in  the  perfected  redemption  of  a  world.  The  author  of  The  Ancient  History  of  the  East 
in  the  pref.  remarks  :  "  I  see  in  the  annals  of  humanity  the  development  of  a  providen- 
tial plan  running  through  all  ages  and  all  vicissitudes  of  society.  In  it  I  recognize  the 
designs  of  God,  permitting  the  liberty  of  man,  and  infallibly  doing  His  work  by  their 
free  hands,  almost  always  without  their  knowledge,  very  often  against  their  will.  For 
me,  as  for  every  Christian,  all  ancient  history  is  the  preparation  for — modern  history  the 
consequence  of —the  divine  sacrifice  of  Calvary.'  To  this  we  add  that  both  ancient  and 
modern  history  are  only  preparative  for  the  wider  and  grander  results  at  the  Sec.  Advent 
of  the  once  crucified  One,  to  which  all  prophetic  history  points  us.  It  is  this  Advent 
with  its  grand  results  that  illuminates  history,  showing  what  the  Divine  Purpose  intends 
to  accomplish,  bringing  in  an  eventually  world-wide  Theocracy,  a  completed  Salvation, 
a  manifestation  of  God's  glory,  and  the  reflection  of  that  glory  in  His  creatures.  It  is 
this  Advent  with  its  redemptive  agencies  that  enforces  the  fact  that  the  Plan  of  Salvation 
and  its  provisions  are  the  outgrowth  of  love  and  mercy  flowing  from  the  nature  of  the 
Eternal  and  Omnipotent  One. 

Obs.  2.  History  is  imperfect  and  unsatisfactory  unless  some  great  accom- 
plished fact,  or  work  or  condition  is  specified,  and  then  the  causes  and 
manner  leading  to,  and  effecting  the  same  are  traced  and  delineated. 
This  is  true  of  biography,  revolutions,  national  life,  etc.,  and  it  is  emphati- 
cally true  of  the  most  comprehensive  of  all  histories,  viz.  that  of  the 
world.  The  question,  then  arises,  what  great  leading  (biblical)  fact  does 
the  Word  present  for  which  all  others  are  more  or  less  preparatory.  The 
answer  is  plain,  it  is  found  in  this  Theocratic  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah. 


Prop.  194.]  the  theocratic  kixgdoini.  429 

But  to  comprehend  this  fact,  we  must  not  confine  ourselves  to  the  past  or 
to  the  present  but  also  embrace  the  future,  the  end  contemplated  by  the 
Creator  just  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  and  then  trace  back  through  the 
several  ages  the  provisionary  causes  working  toward  the  end  designed.  A 
reasonable,  Christian,  philosophical  history  can  only  thus  be  produced. 
For  then  and  only  then  will  a  Divine  Plan,  a  Divine  Reason  appear,  bind- 
ing together  into  a  harmonious  whole  what  otherwise  must  lack  coherency 
and  form  enigmas.  Then  the  Bible  will  be  found  to  contain  the  grand  out- 
lines of  history,  with  here  and  there  a  particularizing  :  and  history  will 
corroborate  the  existence  of  an  overruling  power  pressing  toward  a  fixed, 
definite,  pre-determined  goal.  The  Bible  has  accurately  described  the  his- 
torical facts  of  the  past,  as  numerous  writers  have  shown.  It  does  the 
same  with  present  history.  The  reader  will  indulge  a  few  remarks  on  this 
point.  Men  may  by  captious  criticism  endeavor  to  pick  flaws  in  the 
past  which  is  now  beyond  our  personal  cognizance,  but  if  the  Bible  is  as 
unreliable  as  they  claim  and  desire  to  make  it,  why  do  they  not  find  these 
in  present  history — a  history  more  difficult  to  foretell  and  portray  than 
that  of  the  past,  inasmuch  as  it  is  more  distantly  removed  from  the  bibli- 
cal writers.  Here,  if  anywhere,  contradictions  ought  to  be  found,  and  if 
found,  they  would  have  special  weight,  because  coming  under  our  personal 
observation.  The  unbeliever  may  take  refuge  in  the  past  and  urge  assump- 
tion upon  assumption,  but  we  ask  him,  if  correct  in  his  position,  to 
point  out  a  single  solitary  contradiction  existing  between  anticipated  his- 
tory and  history  realized  at  the  present  day.  Thus,  e.g.  if  the  Jews  were 
not  a  scattered  people  ;  if  Jerusalem  were  not  in  the  possession  of  Gentile 
nations  ;  if  the  Church  had  not  tares,  divisions,  trials  etc.  :  if  wickedness 
did  not  abound  ;  if  the  Roman  Empire  was  not  divided,  etc.,  then  palpable 
contradictions  would  exist,  and  unbelief  could  triumph.  But  present  his- 
tory contains  no  sucli  adverse  statements  invalidating  the  truthfulness  of 
Holy  "Writ.  Therefore,  for  this  and  other  reasons,  we  hold  implicit  confi- 
dence in  the  history  of  the  future  as  also  given  in  the  same  unfailing  Word  ; 
which  trust  is  especially  confirmed  by  the  remarkable  and  costly  provision 
made  for  its  realization  in  the  Person  of  the  Messiah.  Thus  taking  the 
history  of  the  future  with  that  of  the  present  and  the  past,  reason  perceives, 
and  faith  acknowledges,  a  wonderful  plan  of  redemption  extending  from 
man's  fall  to  his  recovery,  from  Paradise  lost  to  Paradise  regained.  This 
Plan  assumes  definite  form  in  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  in  the  provisions 
instituted  for  its  future  realization.  It  evinces  that  God  originally  (Prop. 
1)  contemplated  a  Theocratic  form  of  government  even  in  the  paradisiacal 
state  (the  only  form  of  government  consistent  with  God's  relation  to  man); 
it  shows  how  man  in  his  present  condition  is  utterly  unfitted  for  such  a 
government  (trial  having  been  made  in  Jewish  history)  ;  it  teaches  how 
God  is  gathering  out,  here  and  there,  from  among  all  nations  the  material, 
the  elements  of  strength,  which  when  united  and  manifested  at  the  deter- 
mined period,  will  insure  its  success  and  perpetuity  ;  it  declares,  by  the 
portraiture  of  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom,  how  we  are  to  regard  the 
preparatory  stages,  the  various  dispensations,  the  Christian  Church,  the 
permission  of  evil,  the  temporary  rejection  of  the  elect  nation,  the  exist- 
ence of  Gentile  domination,  etc.  ;  it  brings  forth  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of 
God  and  the  Son  of  David,  the  promised  Theocratic  King  as  the  central  fig- 
ure of  history,  both  as  the  One  to  whom  all  history  directs  the  heart  of 
faith  and  the  eye  of  hope,  and  as  the  One  in  whom  history  finds  its  fulfil- 


430  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  194. 

ment  and  solution;  and  it  pronounces  the  Theocracy  as  exhibited  in  the 
restored  Davidic  Throne  and  Kingdom  then  world-extended,  the  highest  ex- 
pression of  Messianic  power  in  behalf  of  a  sin-cursed  world,  the  culmination 
of  a  long  series  of  merciful  preparations,  the  climax  of  Messianic  dignity 
and  glory  for  which  all  things  have  been  held  in  sufferance,  abeyance,  sub- 
jection, and  compassionate  trial. 

The  Theocratic  order  unmistakably  teaches  us  that  there  is  a  Divine  Providence 
overruling  all  things,  even  down  to  that  dark  end  when  Antichrist  is  allowed,  for  a  brief 
space,  to  triumph,  making  victory  and  punishment  the  more  signal  and  glorious.  A  plan 
gradually  developed,  consecutively  followed,  its  progress  toward  completion  assured,  its 
end  never  lost  sight  of,  all  things  tending  toward  its  open  manifestation  in  actual  realiza- 
tion, and  all  this  extending  over  thousands  of  years,  may  well  cause  us  to  reject  Feuer- 
bach's  (The  Essence  of  Christianity)  declarations:  "Religion  is  a  dream  of  the  human 
mind,"  "  all  theology  is  anthropology,"  declarations  founded  on  an  exceeding  limited  view 
of  both  history  and  the  covenanted  Divine  Purpose.  Unbelief  is  driven  to  singular  posi- 
tions, as  illustrated  e.g.  in  J.  S.  Mill  (Three  Essays  on  Religion),  who,  influenced  by  exist- 
ing suffering  and  evil,  and  utterly  unable  to  reconcile  it,  concludes  that  if  there  be  a  God 
that  is  good,  He  must  be  limited  in  power.  This  line  of  reasoning  deals  only  with  infer- 
ences and  probabilities,  and  leaves  entirely  untouched  the  Divine  Purpose  as  covenanted, 
as  continuously  unfolded,  and  ultimately  consummated  in  the  removal  of  evil  and  suffer- 
ing ;  it  is  simply  doing  injustice  to  the  Word,  to  past  and  present  history,  to  the  future 
as  contained  in  God's  Plan,  and  to  J.  S.  Mill  himself  (for  it  is  un worthy  of  his  vigorous 
intellect)  because  it  leaves  out  of  its  due  connection  a  Personal  Will  manifesting  itself  in 
a  consecutive  and  historically  revealed  Plan.  The  spirit  inculcated  e.g.  in  Gen.  50  :  20,  will 
ultimately  vindicate  God  from  the  misjudgment  of  men.  When  able  men  strive  to  con- 
struct a  science  of  history  as  the  result  solely  of  natural  law,  leaving  out  a  Divine  Provi- 
dence, etc.,  they  simply  elevate  natural  law  above  the  Lawgiver.  Such  history  must 
necessarily  be  imperfect,  and  when  it  is  allied  to  a  prejudice  which  denies  the  influence 
of  the  Bible  on  civilization  (as  shown  by  Bochart,  Gale,  Stillingfleet,  Usher,  Cudworth, 
Wines,  Neander,  Witsius,  and  many  others),  it  becomes  still  more  onesided  and  mis- 
leading. Just  so  soon  as  we  lose  sight  of  the  scriptural  conception  of  history  and  trace 
all  to  Naturalism,  then  we  are  adrift  on  a  dark  sea  without  compass  or  rudder— as 
evidenced  by  the  varied  and  antagonistic  views  of  the  world's  history  given  by  such 
writers.  Some  of  the  efforts  to  construct  a  consistent  history  of  the  world  are  referred 
to  in  the  art.  "  The  Social  Science  ;  its  History  and  Prospects"  (North  Brit.  Review,  Aug., 
1851),  but  all  such  attempts  are  not  sufficiently  comprehensive  in  that  the  Theocratic 
idea,  so  full  of  light,  is  too  much  ignored  or  entirely  misapprehended.  It  is  true,  as 
Wordsworth  (quoted  Lange's  Com.  Zech.,  p.  69)  said  :  "  We  speak  of  the  connection  of 
sacred  and  profane  history  ;  but  what  history  can  rightly  be  called  profane  ?  What 
history  is  there,  rightly  studied,  which  is  not  sacred  ?  What  history  is  there  in  which 
we  may  not  trace  the  footsteps  of  Christ?"  Glimpses  of  this  are  readily  found  in  the 
allusions  to  and  prophecies  respecting  Gentile  nations  in  the  Bible,  as  well  as  in  the 
ultimate  outcome. 


Obs.  3.  This  Kingdom  explains  why  only  the  briefest  mention  is  made 
of  Antediluvian  history,  and  such  prominency  is  given  to  Abraham's  his- 
tory ;  why  Jewish  history  becomes  such  an  important  factor  in  the  world's 
history,  and  why  comparatively  so  little  is  said  of  Gentile  nations  in  their 
national  development.1  It  enforces  the  account  of  the  creation  of  Adam 
and  Eve  ;  it  indorses  the  fall  of  man  and  the  consequent  withdrawal  of 
God  ;  it  confirms  the  depravity  and  rebellious  spirit  of  the  race  ;  it  shows 
the  design  of  election  and  why,  owing  to  postponement,  the  Kingdom  was 
not  realized  ;  it  explains  the  position  of  the  Chr.  Church  and  the  inter- 
mingling of  tares  and  wheat  ;  and,  in  brief,  it  throws  light  upon  all  the 
great  leading  affairs,  past  and  present  and  to  come,  which  have  a  moulding 
and  controlling  influence  in  the  world.  As  it  is  not  within  our  purpose  to 
enlarge  upon  these  points,  one  may  be  selected  to  illustrate  our  meaning. 


Prop.  194.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  431 

Take  e.g.  the  creation  of  woman,  which  has  been  a  standing  jest  among 
unbelievers,  and  viewed  in  the  light  thrown  upon  it  by  the  Kingdom,  it 
will  be  found  related  to  and  confirmed  by  the  aspect  of  the  Kingdom.  Briefly 
(see  my  art.  in  Proph.  Times,  Feb.,  1870,  for  a  more  extended  notice), 
that  there  is  something  typical  in  this  creation  is  plainly  asserted  by  Paul, 
Eph.  5  :  23-32  ;  not  that  the  marriage  relation  as  it  indiscriminately  ex- 
ists is  a  type,  but  that  the  creation  of  Eve  and  the  relation  she  was  made 
to  sustain  to  Adam  (and  to  which  the  Apostle  alone  refers),  is  a  type  of 
the  creation  of  an  elect,  chosen  body  of  saints  (who  constitute  the  married 
wife,  Prop.  127)  and  of  the  relation  that  they  shall  in  the  future  sustain  to 
the  Second  Adam.*  We  have  (a)  Adam  who  ''  is  the  figure  of  Him  that 
was  to  come"  (Rom.  5  :  14—21  ;  1  Cor.  15  :  45,  etc.)  ;  (b)  the  sleep  of 
Adam  typical  of  the  future  sleep,  i.e.,  death,  Jno.  11  ;  1  Cor.  11  :  30,  etc.  ; 
(c)  while  Adam  slept  God  "took  one  of  his  ribs"  out  of  his  side  from  which 
the  woman  was  made,  i.e.  the  fundamental  part,  etc.,  typical  of  what  took 
place  at  the  death  of  Jesus.  "  Rib"  is  symbolically  used  to  denote  a  nation 
or  people,  so  e.g.  Barnes,  Com.,  Dan.  7  :  5.  Now  a  people  or  nation  is 
taken  out  of  the  side  of  Jesus  when  He  slept  ;  for,  just  as  that  out  of  which 
the  woman  was  made  was  taken  out  of  the  side  of  the  first  Adam,  so  that 
out  of  which  the  woman  is  formed  or  builded  for  the  Second  Adam  is 
taken  out  of  his  side,  and  John  positively  nsst-rts  that  he  saw  this,  John 
19  :  32-35.  Now  by  this  blood  the  sins  of  this  people  are  remitted  (Heb. 
9  :  22),  washed  away  (Rev.  1  :  5),  and  they  are  redeemed  by  it  (Rev.  5  :  9), 
purchased  by  it  (Acts  22  :  28),  delivered  as  prisoners  out  of  the  pit  (an 
allusion  to  the  resurrection)  by  it  (Zech.  9  :  11),  sanctified  by  it  (Heb. 
13  :  12),  etc.  Thus  as  the  first  Adam  slept  that  woman  might  be  formed, 
so  the  Second  Adam  slept  (died)  "  that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all  in- 
iquity and  purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people"  (Tit.  2:11;  2  Cor. 
5  :  15  ;  1  Pet.  2  :  5,  9).  This  blood  is  far-reaching,  extending  to  the 
deliverance  and  manifested  oneness  in  Christ  at  the  resurrection,  when  this 
people  shall  be  publicly  united  to  the  Second  Adam  as  His  wife,  (d) 
After  this  "  rib"  was  taken,  God  "closed  up  the  flesh  instead  thereof." 
Only  one  woman  is  thus  to  be  created  for  Adam,  which  is  also  intimated  in 
"  This  is  now  bone,"  etc.,  which  (according  to  Bush,  Com.  loci,  and  others), 
more  correctly  reads  :  "  This  is  for  this  time  or  this  once  bone,"  etc., 
"  implying  that  it  was  only  on  this  occasion  that  woman  was  to  come  into 
being  this  way."  More  correctly,  however,  we  would  say  that  it  implies 
that  only  for  this  time  "  this  once"  shall  a  woman  thus  derived  bear  a 
special,  most  intimate,  and  endearing  relation  to  Him.  One  Eve  was  thus 
specially  made  for  Adam,  and  according  to  the  uniform  testimony  of  Script- 
ure there  is  one  woman  or  people  peculiarly  chosen  and  formed  and 
specially  designed  for  the  most  intimate  union  with  the  Second  Adam  in 
the  age  to  come,  viz.,  the  married  wife  as  distinguished  from  the  barren 

*  It  has  frequently  been  attempted  to  understand  in  a  scientific  way  (Neander,  Ch.  His., 
vol.  1,  p.  586)  the  true  significance  of  marriage  as  originally  instituted.  All  acknowledge 
from  Paul's  language  that  some  mystery  is  connected  with  it.  Now,  every  effort  from 
the  Valentinian  Gnosis  down  to  the  present,  if  guided  by  science  alone,  has  proven  a 
failure.  It  is  only  by  following  revelation  and  the  early  Patristic  Chiliasm  that  we  obtain 
a  deio  to  a  typical  representation  which  relates  to  the  future  relationship  of  Christ  and  the 
Church.  What  Platonism,  Ebionitism,  Gnosticism,  Montanism,  etc.,  could  not  solve, 
divine  truth  in  its  fulfilment  clearly  places  before  us,  showing  a  deep  significancy  in  the 
peculiar,  marvellous  creation  of  woman. 


432  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  194. 

•woman  (Prop.  118)  restored  and  the  virgins.  While  in  the  age  to  come  the 
blessings  of  Christ  as  Redeemer  will  be  most  liberally  and  gloriously  be- 
stowed upon  the  restored  Jewish  nation  (Prop.  Ill,  etc.)  and  Gentile 
nations,  yet  it  is  also  true  that  no  other  people  will  be  thus  signally 
honored  as  the  first-fruits,  first-born ;  for  no  others  are  thus  taken  and 
exalted  with  a  kingship  and  priesthood,  with  a  similitude  and  power  like 
unto  Christ's  (Props.  80,  121,  130,  151).  (e)  "  Made  He  woman"  or 
(Bush  and  others)  "  Builded  her  to  a  woman  ;"  with  which  compare  Eph. 
2  :  19-22  ;  1  Pet.  2  :  5,  etc.  (f)  God  "  brought"  (or  presented)  "  her  unto 
the  man  ;"  so  the  Father  is  the  One  through  whom  this  woman  or  people 
is  to  be  formed  and  presented  to  Christ.  The  sublime  utterances  of  Jesus 
Himself  in  John,  ch.  17,  fully  show  this  in  Christ's  acknowledgments  that 
they  are  given  to  Him,  etc.  (g)  Then  "  Adam  said,  This  is  now"  (or 
"  this  once")  "  bone  of  my  bones  and  flesh  of  my  flesh,"  etc.  The  apostle 
asserts  the  same  in  Eph.  5  respecting  this  chosen  people  and  Christ,  and 
this  denotes  far  more  than  a  mere  spiritual  union,  viz.,  the  elevation  of 
this  woman  or  people  into  the  most  intimate  relationship  and  oneness  with 
Christ  in  His  manifested  Theocratic  ordering.  They,  as  Peter  says  (2  Pet. 
1  :  1),  are  made  "  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,"  by  being  made  "  like 
unto  Christ,"  "  who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned 
like  unto  His  glorious  body"  ("  like  the  body  of  His  glory"),  "  we  know 
that  when  He  shall  appear  Ave  shall  be  like  Him,"  etc.  But  sufficient  has 
been  stated  to  show  that  the  ordering  of  the  Kingdom  indicates,  that  in 
the  very  creation  of  woman — in  that  it  was  brought  about  rather  in  the 
way  stated  than  in  any  other — God  had  in  view  a  typical  representation  of 
a  "  great  mystery"  (as  Paul  calls  it)  to  be  realized  in  the  Kingdom  of  God, 
when  "  the  helpmeet"  (i.e.  a  help  fit  or  suitable  for  Him)  provided  by  the 
wonderful  grace  and  power  of  God  shall  be  united  with  Jesus  to  carry  out 
the  Divine  Purposes.  Or,  if  we  take  Prof.  Bush's  rendering  this  woman 
is  "  an  help  as  before  him7'  (i.e.  one  corresponding  to  him,  one  adapted  to 
him,  a  counterpart  of  himself,  etc.),  which  finds  its  counterpart  in  the 
association,  companionship,  coheirship,  joint  rulership,  etc.,  of  the  saints 
with  the  Second  Adam  in  His  Kingdom,  an  exaltation  graduated  by  that 
which  the  Son  Himself,  as  David's  Son,  obtains. 

The  antediluvian  world,  as  its  fate  testifies,  was  not  favorable  for  a  Theocratic  order- 
ing, and  hence  it  was  not  attempted  ;  Gentile  nations,  as  their  history  indicates,  could 
not  be  brought  into  the  spirit  and  obedience  requisite  for  such  an  ordering,  and  there- 
fore it  was  not  proposed  to  them  ;  even  the  Jewish  nation,  so  highly  favored,  God  fore- 
knew was  lacking  in  qualifications  (which  was  foretold),  but  God  had  a  plan  to  overrule 
even  this  in  mercy,  and  consequently  the  initiatory  form  was  introduced.  Bunsen 
(Egypt,  1,  23)  says  :  "  History  herself  was  born  on  that  night  when  Moses  led  forth  his  coun- 
trymen from  the  land  of  Goshen,"  but  we  prefer  to  locate  it  where  God  places  its  birth, 
viz.,  in  the  call  and  covenant  with  Abraham,  linked  as  it  is  with  what  preceded  and  what 
follows.  History  is  most  intimately  connected  with  the  Bible.  Moses  has  been  called 
("Wines's  Com.  Jleb.,  p.  317)  "  the  father  of  histor}'."  The  Bible  begins  with  no  uncertain 
account  of  creation,  or  of  the  race,  or  of  the  fall,  or  of  an  entailed  curse  ;  and  then  it 
sweeps  on,  giving  past  and  present  history,  and  history  in  prophetic  prospect,  down 
through  the  ages  until  redemption  is  completed.  History  in  its  more  particular  or  mi- 
nute form  begins  with  Abraham.  His  call  is  a  remarkable  epoch  ;  so  marked  that  the 
Bible  gives  more  place  to  Abraham's  history  than  to  the  antediluvian  period.  His  faith 
could  not  have  sprung  from  the  idolatrous  surroundings,  and  the  covenants,  so  won- 
drously  carried  out  in  preparative  measures  and  earnests  of  blessings,  could  not  have 
originated  with  him.  The  bearing  of  the  facts  of  his  life,  so  far-reaching  in  results  (to 
both  Jew  and  Gentile)  upon  the  world  could  not  have  been  caused  by  mere  natural 
causes.     The  placing  of  himself  at  the  head  of  a  nation,  in  the  line  producing  the  Christ, 


Prop.  194.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  433 

etc.,  was  not  the  operation  of  a  human  mind  but  of  a  divine  will  (comp.  e.g.  Max  Midler, 
Chips  from  a  Ger.  Workshop,  vol.  1,  p.  373).  Out  of  this  call  sprung  forth  the  Theocratic 
idea,  and  its  initiatory  form  in  the  Jewish  Theocracy.  And,  let  the  reader  mark  it  well, 
it  was  owing  to  this  TJieocraiic  idea  and  rule  that  the  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  alone 
assumes  such  prominence  and  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  Almighty  God  (Prop.  154, 
etc.),  while  mighty  nations  and  empires  receive  but  the  slightest  notice.  This,  so  objec- 
tionable and  unaccountable  to  unbelievers,  is  decided  proof  of  divine  inspiration.  For, 
instead  of  this  feature  originating  in  Jewish  exclusiveness,  it  proceeds  from  the  simple 
fact  that  as  the  Earthly  Ruler  of  the  nation,  He  must,  in  virtue  of  this  relationship, 
manifest  a  special  interest  in  the  nation.  Hence  several  of  the  distinctive  peculiarities  of 
the  biblical  history  :  (1)  the  circumstantial  history  of  the  nation  until  the  Theocracy  was 
established  ;  (2)  the  same  continued  during  its  existence  ;  (3)  the  same  giving  the  causes 
of  its  removal  ;  (4)  then  the  withdrawal  of  the  records  of  events  and  the  substitution  of 
prophetic  history  with  a  few  exceptions.  The  particular  and  the  prophetic  history,  just 
as  they  are  given,  are  needed,  together  with  the  Gospel  history,  to  give  us  a  complete  and 
perfect  view  of  God's  Purpose  in  the  re-establishment  of  the  downfallen  Theocracy. 
Everything  relating  to  this  idea,  and  essential  to  its  comprehension,  is  carefully  por- 
trayed ;  all  else  outside  of  it,  is  passed  by  or  referred  to  as  it  may  be  effected*  by  it. 
Hence  the  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  even,  outside  of  this  Theocratic  idea,  has  only 
the  briefest  prophetical  delineation,  such  as  is  given  to  Gentile  nations.  God  shows 
respect  to  His  own  Theocratic  ordering,  and  when  this  Theocracy  is  restored  again  under 
David's  Son,  persons  will  wonder  that  this  feature  was  so  much  overlooked  or  under- 
valued. 

Obs.  4.  Again,  take  the  fall  of  man  and  the  personal  withdrawal  of 
God.  However  the  historical  account  may  be  explained,  fact  demonstrates 
the  truthfulness  of  both,  viz.,  that  restraining  influences  are  requisite  to 
incline  man  to  virtue  and  holiness,  to  moral  law  and  order  :  and  that  God 
is  not  personally  present  with  man.  So  long  as  these  facts  exist,  it  is  folly 
to  deny  them  ;  and  unless  a  better  explanation  than  that  given  in  the 
Word  to  account  for  the  introduction  of  such  facts  is  presented  (which  has 
never  yet  been  doue),  it  is  both  unwise  and  unsafe  to  reject  the  Biblical 
statement  on  the  subject.  And  the  more  so,  seeing  that  the  past  and 
present  history  of  the  world  introduces  a  multitude  of  additional  corrob- 
orating facts,  evolved  by  a  Divine  Plan  for  the  removal  of  such  a  fall  and 
the  restoration  of  the  personal  Divine  Presence.  The  Kingdom,  in  which 
the  curse  entailed  by  the  fall  is  to  be  removed,  necessarily  must  be  con- 
sidered in  its  detailed  announcements  (to  see  whether  it  is  adequate  to 
effect  the  same),  and  in  its  provisionary  measures  (to  see  whether  the  re- 
sults contemplated  will  thus  be  reached).  Hence  to  take  the  fall  and  view 
it  as  an  isolated  fact,  briefly  expressed,  without  observing  its  convection 
with  history,  is  doing  violence  to  Holy  Writ  ;  true  logical  reasoning  and 
impartial  justice  to  the  Word,  will  take  up  the  Divine  Plan  thus  far  mani- 
fested, and  especially  as  it  will  yet  be  realized,  and  regard  the  evidences 
which  have  for  several  thousand  years  accumulated  in  support  of  a  pre- 
viously announced  statement  and  of  the  predictions  relating  to  the  future. 
To  prove  that  the  Biblical  account  is  unworthy  of  confidence,  let  it  be 
shown  that  the  provisionary  means  instituted  in  and  through  Christ,  and 
in  and  through  this  Theocratic  arrangement  (as  it  shall  be  manifested)  are 
inadequate  to  produce  the  deliverance  contemjolated,  and  then  an  argument 
of  vital  strength  will  indeed  be  arrayed  against  the  Word.  While  the  Bible 
appeals  to  the  fall  of  man  as  a  fact  that  self-consciousness  attests  to,  and 
that  the  history  of  the  race  abundantly  confirms,  it  at  the  same  time  pre- 
dicts (which  is  now  so  abundantly  fulfilled)  that  men  will  arise  and  ignore 
this  fall,  decry  the  natural  depravity  of  the  race,  reject  with  scorn  the  pro- 
visions made  for  its  removal  as  unnecessary,  laud  and  magnify  the  natural 


434  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  194. 

ability  of  humanity  to  save  and  exalt  itself,  until  the  Perfectibility  of 
Human  Nature  shall  be  endorsed  and  advocated  by  the  multitude.  The 
testimony  of  all  nations,  savage  and  civilized,  to  a  sense  of  sin  and  guilt, 
of  religious  needs,  mediation,  sacrifice,  prayer,  etc.,  and  the  evidence  of  a 
Word  fortified  by  the  evolution  of  a  regularly  constituted  and  carried-out 
Plan,  are  by  many,  even  now,  regarded  as  proofs  of  superstition.  But  such 
conclusions  invariably  are  based  on  isolated,  detached,  and  fragmentary  ob- 
jections, lacking  force  and  power,  because  not  founded  on  a  comprehensive 
view  of  the  history  (past,  present,  and  future)  of  the  race  as  given  in  the 
Word.  Men  endeavor  to  find  flaws  in  this  or  that  link  in  a  connected 
chain  of  Divine  Purpose,  without  regarding  cither  the  relation  that  one 
link  sustains  to  its  comrades  and  to  the  whole,  or  the  design  intended  by 
its  Maker  in  forming  such  a  united  chain.  To  avoid  misapprehension,  let 
it  be  added  :  While  the  Bible  insists  upon  the  depravity  of  man,  yet  at  the 
same  time  it  also  states  that  such  is  his  condition,  mental,  moral,  and 
physical,  that  God  still  deemed  him  worthy  of  redemption,  and  in  the  de- 
termination of  such  redemption  and  the  provision  made  for  it  through 
Jesus  Christ  elevated  man  to  a  position  of  dignity  which  he  is  now 
at  liberty  either  to  retain,  confirm,  and  enlarge  (viz.,  by  the  reception 
of  Christ),  or  to  degrade  and  forever  forfeit  (viz.,  through  the  rejec- 
tion of  proffered  salvation).  The  establishment  of  this  Kingdom  (in 
the  kingship  and  priesthood  of  the  saints,  in  the  restored  happy  con- 
dition of  the  elect  Jewish  nation,  and  in  the  rich  blessings  bestowed  upon 
Gentile  nations)  vindicates  the  dignity  (bestowed  by  grace)  of  man,  ex- 
hibiting his  capacity  for  (advanced  by  love)  and  enjoyment  of  its  privi- 
leges, honors,  and  happiness. 

The  student  is  also  reminded  that,  owing  to  our  limited  intelligence,  we  will  find  in 
the  history  of  the  world,  as  well  as  in  nature  and  in  the  Scriptures,  mysteries.  It  is 
utterly  impossible  for  any  one  to  form  a  consistent  whole  unless  admitting  that  he  does 
this  "by  faith, "  the  same  faith  that  finds  God,  His  Christ,  and  the  Spirit.  Faith  elevates 
us  to  the  Ruler  of  all  things  and  causes  us  to  unite  the  world  with  its  Creator  just  as  the 
Bible  asserts.  Dr.  Sprecher  (The  Witteriberger,  Oct.,  1877)  refers  to  this  when  advocating 
"  the  Christian  idea  of  the  universe  of  things,"  and  that  "the  unavoidable  is  not  the 
result  of  blind  force,  but  the  words  of  conscious  mind  and  intelligent  thought,"  so  that 
"  the  necessary  and  the  unavoidable  is  the  determination  of  infinite  reason,  and  is 
directed  to  a  rational  end,"  and  from  this  argues,  notwithstanding  the  mysteries  con- 
nected therewith,  the  relationship  that  we  sustain  to  that  Will.  There  is  only  one  solu- 
tion, and  that  contained  in  the  Bible,  to  the  evils  of  the  world,  to  the  removal  of  the 
curse,  to  the  enigmas  of  regeneration  puzzling  the  minds  of  statesmen  and  others  ;  this 
is  found  in  the  Second  Advent  of  "the  Christ,"  and  its  related  truths,  especially  the  one 
pertaining  to  the  Kingdom.  The  six  thousand  weary  and  sad  years  of  humanity,  bound 
in  a  curse  and  adding  to  its  horrors  by  the  effects  of  wilful  wickedness,  are  designed  to 
teach  man  that  he  needs  Theocratic  help  in  the  Person  and  Power  of  the  Theocratic 
King,  Jesus  the  Christ— the  earnest  now,  the  perfect  realization  hereafter.  Faith  holds 
fast  to  this  hope. 

Ois.  5.  This  Kingdom  throws  additional  light  upon  the  problem  of  evil, 
and  if  ever  a  correct  Theodicy  is  formed,  it  must  be  based  upon  the  Theo- 
cratic ordering  as  it  will  ultimately  be  realized.  The  reader  must  place 
himself  in  that  period  when  the  Kingdom  is  restored,  and  all  the  blessings 
forfeited  are  more  than  regained  under  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  and  His 
brethren,  and  then,  too,  he  must  look  back  upon  the  past  few  thousand 
years  with  something  of  that  largeness  of  the  Spirit's  apprehension  of  time 
(for  with  God  those  "thousands  of  years,  so  long  to  man,  are  as  days,  or  as 


PKOP.  194.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  435 

"  a  moment"),  and  then  look  forward  to  the  long,  long-continued,  ever- 
enduring  prosperity  to  which  the  introductory  thousands  of  years  form  the 
briefest  of  episodes.  This  narrows  down  the  prevalence  of  sin  and  the 
provisionary  means  to  overrule  it  to  a  narrow  space  of  time  ;  it  brings  in 
numerous  reasons  in  justification  of  the  goodness  and  wisdom  of  God  over 
against  the  allowance  of  sin  and  misery  ;  it  extends  our  views  of  the  ex- 
pression of  the  Divine  Will,  of  God's  design  in  glorifying  Himself,  of 
securing  man's  happiness,  of  bringing  forth  a  higher  state  of  things 
through  mercy  and  love.  It  vindicates  the  fact  that  originally  God  did 
bestow  happiness  upon  man,  which  was  forfeited  through  his  own  moral 
agency,  and  that  He  will  yet  bestow  happiness  upon  man  (excepting  to 
those  who  wilfully  reject  it)  after  a  brief — very  brief  in  the  light  of  the 
ages  to  come — provisionary  period  has  expired.  It  evinces  then  the  tran- 
sient nature  of  evil  :  that  sin,  so  far  as  the  race  is  concerned,  is  only 
temporary,  and  that  its  dominion  under  the  Theocratic  rule  will  ho  forever 
crushed.  It  also  teaches  that  sin  was  not  a  necessary  means  to  accomplish 
the  greatest  good,  but  that  God  in  spite  of  sin  (resulting  from  the  deter- 
mination of  man's  free  moral  agency)  so  overrules  it  that  great  good  re- 
sults, for  man  restored  under  the  Theocracy  shows  that  sin  was  not  req- 
uisite in  his  case  to  attain  unto  so  high  and  noble  a  destination,  but 
rather  that  he  gained  it  over  against  sin  through  extended  mercy  and  love, 
seeing  that  that  which  sin  marred  called  for  special  interposition  and  pro- 
vision, and  that  sin  itself  will  finally  be  put  down  by  a  terrible  exhibition 
of  supernatural  power  and  vengeance.  The  Kingdom  re-established,  when 
"  all  shall  be  righteous,"  etc.,  here  on  earth,  proves  that  sin  is  no  necessity 
in  the  government  of  God  ;  that  it  can  and  shall  be  effectually  crushed  as 
a  disturbing  element,  originating  in  an  allotted  freedom  to  man.  A  re- 
markable feature  is  also  developed  by  the  rewards  and  stations  in  this 
Kingdom,  viz.,  that  evil  itself,  brought  upon  man  by  himself,  is  made 
disciplinary,  and  that  grace,  in  the  proper  endurance  of  the  same,  will 
even  thus  make  it  a  source  of  benefit  in  the  testing  and  elevation  of  char- 
acter. In  view  of  man's  free  moral  agency  (the  God-given  power  of 
choice),  evil  is  permitted  and  entailed  both  as  a  punishment  (to  magnify 
the  majesty  of  law  and  the  danger  of  sin)  and  as  a  means  (overruled  as 
such)  for  good  (to  arrest  and  lead  to  the  acceptance  of  Redemptive  pur- 
pose, etc.).  Hence,  that  which  God  depreciates  and  forbids  in  man,  and 
which  He  threatens  to  punish  with  severity,  is  allowed  (Rom.  9  :  22,  etc.), 
in  mercy  toward  man,  because  it  could  even  be  made  subservient  to  his 
discipline  and  punishment,  and  it  could  be  finally  rooted  out  without 
detriment  to  the  Divine  character,  thus  displaying  His  wonderful  power 
and  love  in  safely  tolerating  (it  being  against  Himself)  it,  for  a  time,  and 
then  in  effectually  destroying  it.  Finally,  this  Kingdom  teaches  us  in  its 
astonishing  Theocratic  arrangements  (e.g.  in  the  gathering  and  association 
of  the  saints  as  joint  rulers,  etc.)  that  sin  and  its  consequent  evils  in  the 
world  will  only  be  endured  until  a  sufficiency  of  moral  and  religious  power 
(in  the  persons  of  the  elect)  is  gathered  out  to  insure  an  overivhelming, 
triumphant,  and  perpetual  ascendency  of  a  pure  Theocratic  government  over 
all  the  earth,  and  then  sin  and  evil  are  doomed  to  descend  from  their 
ascendency  and  forever  perish.  Looking  at  the  world's  history,  not  dis- 
connectedly (as  at  the  separate,  detached  parts  of  a  machine),  but  con- 
nectedly,, and  especially  at  the  grand  end  to  which  it  is  destined  under  a 
pure,    powerful,    beneficent   Theocratic   rule    by    "  the   man     ordained " 


436  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  194. 

through  "the  Father  of  mercies"— then  instead  of  having  a  world  like 
that  described  by  Carlyle  (Latter-Day  Pamphlets)  sinking  to  ruin  and 
satisfied  with  the  hopeless  mockeries  of  government  and  religion  ;  or,  like 
that  represented  by  Froude  (The  English  in  Ireland,  vol.  3,  p.  1-4),  con- 
stantly passing  through  "  the  long  toil  of  reconstruction,"  ever  repeated, 
we  have  a  world  redeemed,  freed  from  the  curse,  and  restored  to  more  than 
its  former  Paradisaical  state. 

All  the  points  enumerated  in  this  and  preceding  observations  are  studiously  ignored 
by  unbelief,  and  hence  the  deductions  (as  e.g.  Mill's,  Obs.  2,  note  1)  that  are  presented 
to  the  lowering  of  Scripture  authority.  Our  doctrine  necessarily  makes  much  of  the  his- 
torical connection  of  the  Plan  of  Redemption.  While  holding  forth  the  Plan  itself,  it 
also  appeals  to  the  facts  of  history,  past  and  present,  and  from  the  provisionally  aspects 
thus  attested  to,  supports  faith  and  hope  in  the  ultimate  completion.  Spiritualism, 
mysticism,  materialism,  etc.,  close  their  eyes  to  both  the  Plan  and  the  historical  attestation, 
and  such  a  mode  of  procedure,  coming  from  cultivated  minds,  indicates  a  certain  "  will- 
ingness" to  engage  in  this  onesided  consideration.  Science  has  led  some  of  the  deepest 
thinkers,  who  reject  and  refuse  to  follow  the  spiritual  teachings  of  the  Word,  to  refuse 
the  idea  of  a  foreknown  intelligent  design  and  plan  in  the  production  of  material  nature 
leading  to  the  acknowledgment  of  a  wisdom,  will,  etc.,  in  a  personal  Creator.  It  may 
well  be  asked,  will  not  such  allow  the  existence  of  a  purpose,  indicative  of  the  same,  in 
the  past  and  present  history  of  the  world  as  foreshown  by  prophecy,  and  the  preparatory 
measures  instituted  to  fulfil  covenant,  and  as  realized  by  history.  Here  certainly  is  a 
wide  field  for  reason,  if  it  will  only  calmly  and  dispassionately  enter  its  domains— not 
with  a  predetermined  judgment,  but  with  an  unbiassed,  unprejudiced  mind.  _  We  do  not 
then  need  to  occupy  the  position  of  Hume,  who  (as  quoted  by  an  anon,  writer,  Proph. 
Times,  vol.  6,  p.  G)  remarks  respecting  the  suffering  and  evils  of  the  world  :  "  The  whole 
is  a  riddle,  an  enigma,  an  inexplicable  mystery.  Doubt,  uncertainty,  suspense  of  judg- 
ment, appear  the  only  result  of  our  most  accurate  scrutiny  concerning  this  subject." 
Fully  admitting  that  we  now  must,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  see  through  a  glass,  darkly, 
and  that  God  now  hides  Himself  in  Providence  as  in  nature,  yet  certain  great  landmarks 
are  given,  within  whose  limits  we  find  rest  to  our  souls,  peace  to  our  minds,  and 
hope  to  our  hearts.  The  amplitude  of  evidence  respecting  the  Divine  Purpose,  sup- 
ported by  a  personal  experience  derived  from  faith  in  Jesus,  gives  us  the  assurance  and 
confidence  that  evil  is  temporary,  and  will,  in  God's  own  good  time  be  blotted  out  of 
this  world.  The  gradual  preparation  is  going  on,  and  when  Jesus  comes  again  the  con- 
summation will  be  witnessed  ;  and  then,  too,  it  will  be  vividly  realized  that  the  history  of 
the  world  evidences  the  fulfilment  of  a  Divine  Plan,  which,  without  interfering  with  the 
freedom  and  accountability  of  man,  issues  ultimately,  as  promised,  into  a  glorious  per- 
fected Redemption,  to  which  grand  result  evil  itself,  both  individual  and  national,  is  per- 
missively  allowed,  in  order  that,  consistently  with  man's  freedom,  Providence  and  Grace, 
Wisdom  and  Love,  may  evolve  the  preparation  necessary  for  so  great  a  fruitage,  and 
eternally  fix  through  the  ceaseless  ages  the  affections  of  those  who  once  felt  the  curse 
and  experienced  deliverance.  Many  are  now  disposed  to  revive  and  modernize  the  old 
Stoical  theory  that  "  evil  is  absolutely  necessary  in  the  order  of  the  world  as  the  shadow 
is  to  the  light,"  etc.,  but  our  doctrine  of  ultimate  complete  deliverance  (as  well  as  the 
original  creation,  the  work  and  sacrifice  of  Jesus,  and  God's  hatred  to  sin)  clearly  shows 
that  it  is  unnecessary,  that  it  pertains  to  an  imperfect  state,  that  it  is  only  now  permitted 
to  exist  for  wise  purposes,  and  that  it  will  be  so  overruled  as  to  promote  the  honor  and 
praise  of  God,  the  Redeemer. 

Obs.  6.  Much  is  said  respecting  progress,  and  the  praises  of  Perfectibility 
are  loudly  proclaimed  by  rationalistic,  naturalistic,  and  mystical  advocates. 
But  the  history  of  the  world  down  to  the  Second  Advent  shows  that  God's 
estimate  of  human  nature  is  the  only  correct  one.  Progress  there  is  ;  prog- 
ress in  the  developing  of  the  Divine  Purpose  ;  progress  in  the  fulfilment 
of  prediction  :  progress  in  the  gathering  out  of  the  elect  ;  progress  in 
knowledge  of  all  kinds,  etc.,  but  a  decided  and  general  progress  in  the 
highest  of  all  things,  securing  world  ascendency,  viz.,  in  true  piety,  will 


Prop.  194.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  437 

evermore  be  lacking.  The  history  of  the  Antediluvian  era,  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  of  Gentile  nations,  of  great  Empires,  of  the  early  Christian 
churches,  of  this  dispensation  culminating  in  the  widespread  wickedness  of 
the  last  days,  are  painful  evidences  of  advancement  and  retrogression,  of 
progression  and  stagnation,  and  finally  of  positive  general  unbelief,  irre- 
ligion,  and  enmity.  Human  nature — such  is  the  sad  lesson — remains  the 
same  down  to  the  end  of  the  age.  The  lessons  of  the  past  and  present ; 
even  the  exhibition  of  unspeakable  love  in  the  provision  made  for  salvation  ; 
the  tears,  sufferings,  and  death  of  a  Saviour  ;  the  bright  and  glorious  pros- 
pects opened  before  repentance  and  faith,  fail  to  impress  the  race  with  a 
proper  sense  of  moral  obligation  and  allegiance  enforced  by  gratitude  and 
love.  This  calls  for  that  long -delayed  but  surely  coming  wrath  and  ven- 
geance of  Almighty  God.  But  while  human  nature  in  the  aggregate  re- 
mains the  same,  God  has  been  constantly  preparing  for  the  enforcement  of 
His  decree,  by  gathering  out  a  portion  of  the  race  to  form  the  nucleus  of  a 
restored  Kingdom  of  power  which  will  shine  forth  with  great  glory  after 
the  lighting  down  of  sore  trial  and  postponed  wrath  upon  the  last  embodi- 
ment (Props.  1G0-103)  of  human  wickedness.  Then  will  it  clearly  appear 
that  this  long  series  of  repeated  depravity,  finally  culminating  in  the 
Antichrist,  was  only  permitted  in  order  that  during  this  period  this  dis- 
tinctive and  peculiar  people  of  God,  designed  for  coheirship  with  Jesus  the 
Christ,  might  he  formed  for  the  Theocratic  Kingdom. 

Prophecy,  as  has  been  noticed,  finds  its  proof  not  so  much  in  considering  isolated 
predictions  (as  e.g.  those  referring  to  nations,  cities,  or  even  to  Christ)  as  in  a  clear 
historical  development  in  accord  with  it,  and  in  a  continuous  unfolding  of  the  Divine 
Purpose  culminating  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  not  only  as  to  the  past  but  much  more  as 
to  the  future,  who  is  to  perfect  it.  This,  no  doubt,  has  had  its  influence  upon  many 
minds,  such  e.g.  as  Ewald'a.  (A  liberal  writer  in  the  Westm.  Review,  July,  1874,  p.  98, 
amusingly  refuses  to  acknowledge  the  advances  of  Ewald  as  follows  :  "  Ewald  clearly 
shows,  in  spite  of  his  sympathies  on  many  points  with  the  Rationalists,  that  he  is  still  at 
bottom  a  Supernaturalist,  admitting  as  he  does  a  specific  distinction  between  the  pro- 
phetic revelation  of  Israel  and  that  of  other  nations.")  Prophecy  siruply  teaches  us  what 
history  will  be  in  the  future  ;  it  does  not  itself  make  history,  for  that  which  gives 
prophecy — a  power  more  potent  than  prophecy — makes  history,  either  directly  or  per- 
missively.  Hence  we  cannot  receive  the  opinion  of  Myers  (Present  Day  Papers),  who 
makes  prophecy  not  "to  be  conceived  of  under  the  image  of  history  thrown  from  the 
future  upon  the  present,  but  rather  under  that  of  a  prominent  jjrinciple  continually 
reproducing  itself  in  the  future."  This  does  not  sufficiently  discriminate  between 
prophecy  as  recorded,  and  the  power  that  bestows  prophecy  ;  it  is  the  latter  that  vindi- 
cates the  former,  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  former  indicates  that  the  Supernatural  has  given 
it.  Besides  this,  much  of  prophecy  is  given  not  merely  to  foretell  future  events,  but  to 
inform  us  how  and  when  certain  things  pertaining  to  the  Divine  Purpose  are  to  be  real- 
ized, and,  therefore,  is  a  portrayal  of  what  God  will  do  to  carry  out  His  Plan.  It  is  thus 
the  revelation  of  God's  will  and  design. 

Obs.  7.  This  Kingdom  realized,  throws  light  upon  the  doctrine  of 
atonement  and  its  relationship  to  the  history  of  the  world.  It  is  unneces- 
sary to  dwell  upon  that  feature  which  Biblical,  Systematic,  and  Dogmatic 
Theology  has  so  fully  and  ably  discussed,  viz.,  how  the  death  of  Jesus,  the 
shedding  of  His  blood,  is  conducive  to  the  remission  of  the  sins  of  the  be- 
liever. It  is  only  our  object  to  designate  a  few  things,  too  much  over- 
looked, which,  in  the  knowledge  of  this  Kingdom,  were  affected  by  His 
death.  Our  entire  argument  unmistakably  evinces  that  Jesus  died,  among 
other  reasons,  in  order  to  fulfil  the  covenants  (vide,  e.g.  Prop.  50).  For 
when  He  came  and  tendered  the  Kingdom  on  condition  of  repentance  and 


438  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  194. 

the  nation  refused  to  repent,  and  He  was  rejected  (Prop.  57),  it  became 
necessary  to  provide  both  a  sacrifice  for  the  nation  (that  it  should  not 
utterly  perish),  and  for  Gentiles  (that  they  might  by  repentance  and  faith 
in  His  blood  be  brought  into  the  adopted  line).  This  was  affected  by  the 
voluntary  offering  of  Jesus,  so  that  through  it  God's  forbearance  and  love 
could  be  manifested  in  continuing  (against  the  sinfulness  of  the  nation  and 
world)  His  gracious  purpose  to  fulfil  the  covenants.  It  is  a  matter  of  pro- 
found amazement,  that  the  greatest  preparation  for  such  a  fulfilment  is 
made  in  a  manner  that,  humanly  speaking,  seems  to  defeat  it,  viz.,  by  His 
death.  But  its  necessity  and  eminent  fitness  is  evidenced,  not  merely  in 
the  manner  already  intimated,  but  by  the  results  flowing  from  it,  for  "  He 
died  for  our  offences  and  was  raised  for  our  justification."  Jesus  and  the 
apostles  justly  unite  the  death  and  the  resurrection,  ascribing  to  the  latter 
evidence  that  the  former  was  not  endured  in  vain.  Now  let  us  see  what 
the  Kingdom  gains  by  the  union  of  this  death  and  resurrection  in  the  ivay 
of  fulfilling  the  covenant  promises  of  God.  By  this  death  and  resurrec- 
tion Jesus  Christ  as  David's  Son  becomes  the  covenanted  immortal,  glori- 
fied Son  of  David.  He  gives  the  highest  possible  expression  of  obedience 
to  the  Divine  Will  ;  and  He  that  has  thus  obeyed  is  worthy  also  to  reign. 
By  these  He  gains  power  over  death,  so  that  lie  is  able  to  deliver  His  own 
from  the  prison  house  at  the  time  appointed.  These  constitute  Him  a  King 
worthy  of  all  love,  for  the  Theocratic  King,  the  King  of  glory  died  and 
was  raised  to  deliver  His  coheirs  and  subjects.  By  these  He,  as  David's 
Son,  is  made  worthy  of,  yea  perfect  for  (so  the  Scriptures,  Prop.  84),  the 
exalted  Theocratic  position.  His  death  and  resurrection  are  the  pledges 
or  evidence,  if  we  will  receive  them,  that  the  covenants  will  be  most  amply 
realized  ;  for  by  the  same  we  have  not  only  the  perpetuation  of  the  Jewish 
nation  and  final  restoration  insured,  the  door  of  faith  opened  to  Gentiles, 
the  gathering  out  of  a  seed  unto  Abraham  manifested,  but  we  have  the 
Theocratic  fitness,  the  immortality,  the  resurrecting  power  of  the  Son  of 
Manfully  vindicated,  constituting  Him  the  One  predicted,  able  to  perform 
the  promises  of  God,  and  bring  deliverance,  at  His  Coming,  to  a  sin-bur- 
dened and  groaning  world.  His  death  and  resurrection  are  the  two  most 
noted  events  that  history  thus  far  records,  and  they  form  the  real  basis  of 
past,  present,  and  coming  history,  inasmuch  as  they  show  that  through  the 
provision  made  by  them  all  history  thus  far  has  been  possible,  and  that 
future  history,  as  represented  in  the  Word  by  anticipation,  will  exist. 

The  question  is  sometimes  asked  why  God  does  not  reveal  Himself  to  a  nation  as  He 
did  to  Israel  ;  why  He  does  not  personally  communicate  with  man  as  He  once  did.  The 
answer,  from  our  position,  is  plain  and  decisive.  Because  no  nation  occupies  a  Theo- 
cratic relationship  ;  when  this  is  restored  then  He  will  again  be  present  and  accessible. 
Until  a  people  is  prepared  for  a  Theocratic  ordering,  the  dignity  and  honor  of  the  Mighty 
One  refuses  such  a  personal  communication.  Preparatively  He  only  reveals  Himself  in 
and  through  faith,  training  a  people  for  the  coming  revelation  of  Himself.  But  the  time  is 
near  when  God  will  again  reveal  Himself  and  dwell  with  man  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  the 
Christ.  The  prevailing  idea  of  many  writers  is  to  make  the  incarnation  the  greatest 
event  in  history  (as  e.g.  by  Dr.  Nevin  in  Mercersburg  Theology,  Dr.  Turnbull  in  Christ  in 
History,  etc.),  and  this  certainly  cannot  be  eulogized  too  highly,  seeing  that  through  it 
the  means  are  provided  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenants.  But  even  this  should  not  be 
allowed  to  overshadow  the  glorious  manifestation  of  this  humanity  in  the  future,  and  the 
Kingdom  resulting  therefrom.  Dr.  Schaff  (llis.  Apos.  Church,  Introd.,  Sec.  39)  says  : 
"  Christ  is  the  centre  and  turning-point,  as  well  as  the  key  of  all  history."  This  is  eminently t 
true,  for  history  before  the  First  Advent  is  introductory  to  Him  ;  history  after  this 
Advent  is  preparatory  to  His  future  manifestation  as  Theocratic  King  ;  history,  both  past 


PEOI\  194.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  439 

and  present,  has  a  constant  reference  in  its  ultimate  import  to  Him.  So  Lange  (Corn., 
Introd.  to  Genesis,  p.  5)  makes  "  the  one  pervading  theanthropic  subject  of  Holy  Script- 
ure, Christ  and  the  Kingdom  of  God."  Numerous  writers,  however  they  may  explain 
this  Christ  and  Kingdom,  take  the  same  position,  and  a  comparison  of  the  whole  Bible, 
Old  and  New  Tests.,  inevitably  enforces  such  a  conclusion.  The  culmination  of  all,  the 
explanation  of  all,  is  found  in  the  Christ  and  His  Kingdom. 

Obs.  8.  It  has  become  very  fashionable,  both  in  theological  and  scientific 
circles,  to  associate  almost  everything  with  "  the  Universe,"  imitating  the 
inflated  style  of  Orientalism,  which  imagines  that  things  are  honored  and 
exalted  in  proportion  to  the  application  of  high-sounding  words.  Some 
works  teem  on  almost  every  page  with  such  wide-sweeping  phraseology, 
that  if  we  were  to  credit  them,  the  Son  of  Man  died  for  the  Universe  and 
was  destined  to  reign  in  the  Covenanted  Kingdom  over  the  Universe.  "We 
6nd  nothing  of  the  kind  in  Holy  Scripture.  He  died  for  man,  for  this 
world,  to  redeem  it,  and  in  this  world  the  Christ,  David's  Son,  is  to  reign 
in  the  promised  Kingdom.  Such  language  arises  from  mistaking  the 
sovereignty  of  the  Logos  with  the  Father  for  the  covenanted  Kingdom, 
Prop.  79,  80,  and  81.  The  history  of  Jesus  as  Theocratic  King  is  united 
with  the  future  history  of  this  world.  Having  under  various  Propositions 
fully  established  this  ;  and  also  that,  by  means  of  this  Theocratic  reign, 
this  world  shall  be  brought  into  harmonious  relationship  to  the  Universe, 
it  is  sufficient  to  ask  theologians  and  writers  to  consider  that  the  Bible  very 
pointedly  confines  itself,  almost  exclusively,  to  the  history  of  this  world,  to 
the  fall,  the  intermediate  period,  and  the  recovery,  and  has  but  little  to  say 
concerning  the  Universe  so  persistently  paraded  by  men.  When  the  status, 
destiny,  etc.,  of  the  earth  is  comprehended,  it  will  be  time  to  receive  the 
labored  conjectures  respecting  the  Universe.  While  neither  of  them  can 
be  passed  by,  we  are  more  directly  interested  in  the  earth  and  its  Redemp- 
tion. The  history  of  the  earth  is  revealed  :  the  history  of  a  Universe  is 
not  designed,  even  in  its  broadest  possible  outlines,  in  the  Bible  :  and  it  is 
therefore  passing  beyond  the  Record  to  ascribe  to  the  Universe  what  really 
and  truthfully  belongs  to  our  own  known  world.  The  temptation 
of  presenting  illustrations  upon  this  point  is  resisted,  lest  we  might  be 
charged  with  caricaturing  men  whom  we  love  and  esteem.  A  mere  men- 
tion is  sufficient  for  the  wise  and  prudent.  While  it  is  proper  and  neces- 
sary to  introduce  the  Universe  itself,  it  is  highly  objectionable  to  give  it 
the  prominency  mentioned. 

The  Plan  of  Redemption  reconciles  this  world  to  the  universe,  and  opens  the  way  of 
access  to  it.  When  this  world  is  brought  under  Theocratic  rule,  when  the  curse  is 
repealed  and  Satan  bound,  when  the  renewal  and  restitution  are  effected,  then  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  universe  will  be  immeasurably  increased.  Science,  divinely  directed  and 
under  the  protection  of  those  who  no  longer  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  refined  and  puri- 
fied under  the  reign  and  power  of  glorified  beings,  becomes  the  hallowed,  cherished 
handmaid  of  faith,  hope  and  love,  and  aids  in  swelling  the  praises  of  God  and  His  Christ. 

Obs.  9.  In  such  a  conception  of  the  world's  history,  including  a  view  of 
the  whole  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  from  the  provisionary  to  the 
completed  design,  we  have  confirmed  the  statements  made  by  comparative 
theology  when  non-partisan  (as  e.g.  in  the  hands  of  Max  Miiller,  Science 
of  Religion,  etc.).  This  Kingdom  embraces,  as  our  argument  shows,  the 
deliverance  of  man,  as  man,  from  the  thraldom  in  which  he  is  now  placed. 


440  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PltOP.  194. 

But  this  itself  asserts  the  superiority  of  man,  his  origin  as  given  in  the 
Word,  and  his  capabilities  for  a  high  destiny.  Scientific  research,  thus 
conducted,  after  the  primitive  man,  corroborates  what  the  Bible  appeals  to 
as  a  subsidiary  witness,  viz.,  that  man — all  men — in  every  age,  however 
sunken  or  advanced,  degraded  or  civilized,  has  exhibited  a  moral,  a  re- 
ligious, an  intellectual  nature  above  that  of  the  mere  physical  and  animal, 
which  constitutes  him  the  noblest  of  God's  creatures  on  earth,  eminently 
worthy  (evidenced  and  increased  by  the  death  of  Jesus  in  his  behalf,  which 
proclaimed  him  in  the  light  of  moral  law  unworthy,  and  yet,  in  the  light 
of  God's  love  and  as  God's  own  special  creation,  worthy  in  view  of  his 
capacity,  etc.)  of  the  scheme  of  Redemption  instituted  for  his  recovery. 
The  provisionary  means  toward  this  Kingdom  constantly  refer  to  the 
truthfulness  of  even  "Natural  Religion,"  exhibited  in  the  varied  forms  of 
religion  and  in  the  outcroppings  of  truth,  doctrine,  and  feeling,  springing 
from  the  constitution  and  surroundings  of  man,  so  that  the  commendation 
of  the  Word  of  God  finds  its  response  in  the  heart  of  man  itself.  Science, 
as  the  writings  of  eminent  men  abundantly  testify,  establishes  the  moral 
and  religious  nature  of  man,  the  unity  of  the  race,  the  abiding  sense  of 
God,  the  consciousness  of  dependence  and  accountability — in  brief,  the  ex- 
istence of  all  those  great  leading  religious  ideas  which  form  the  basis  of  a 
receptive  revelation  and  of  man's  adaptedness  for  advancement  (with  the 
promised  aid)  in  the  way  of  salvation.  The  advances  made  in  science  (used 
onesidedly  by  a  growing  class  in  hostile  attack  upon  the  Bible)  are  by 
many  thoughtful  men  (as  e.g.  Dr.  Ulrici  in  God  and  Nature)  deemed  con- 
firmatory of  God,  being  made  the  postulate  of  physical  science.  Valuable 
works  from  various  sources  come  laden  with  the  fact,  that  all  truth  illus- 
trates and  corroborates  what  the  Bible  insists  upon  as  most  reasonable, 
viz.,  faith  in  God,  and  in  a  God  of  the  Bible  as  therein  presented.  For 
truth  is  never  isolated  ;  it  belongs  to  a  grand  system,  and  when  deep 
thinking  men  come  to  place  this  or  that  truth  in  the  connection  which  it 
sustains  to  the  whole,  then  inevitably  comes  also  the  notion  of  the  Infinite 
who  has  established  the  truth,  made  as  responsive  to  it,  etc.  But  while 
even  science  teaches  how  rational  it  is  to  reject  that  gross  materialism, 
which  allies  man  in  his  early  history  with  the  brute,  and  severs  him  from 
accountability  to  a  moral  governor — how  reasonable  it  is  to  refuse  credence 
to  that  rationalism  which  confines  itself  to  a  natural  development  of  re- 
ligious ideas  without  acknowledging  the  Higher  Power  which  has  thus  con- 
stituted the  capability  of  development,  and  the  right  of  such  a  Power  to 
command  and  to  be  obeyed — how  just  it  is  to  pass  from  the  law  to  the 
Lawgiver  and  not  to  make  the  latter  subordinate  to  the  former — yet  with 
all  this  confirmatory  evidence  (corresponding  as  we  have  seen  with  the 
doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  both  in  the  provision  for,  and  in  the  final  estab- 
lishment of,  the  Kingdom),  much  more,  immensely  more,  is  needed  .to  reveal 
how  man's  necessities  can  be  met  and  man's  salvation  can  be  secured. 
This  is  revealed  alone  in  Holy  Scripture.  The  Divine  Purpose  in  relation 
to  man,  to  the  institution  of  law,  and  the  present  arrangement  of  the 
world,  is  alone  found  in  Holy  Writ  ;  and  science,  philosophy,  in  brief,  all 
real  knowledge  derived  outside  of  that  Word,  only  establishes  that  the  facts 
in  the  constitution  of  man,  of  law,  and  of  the  world,  are  such  as  to  make 
such  a  Purpose  necessary,  reasonable,  and  eminently  worthy  of  a  Creator, 
Preserver,  Benefactor,  and  Redeemer.  And  may  we  add,  that  as  the  lesser 
or  subordinate  ought  always  to  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  the  higher  or 


Prop.  194.]  the  theocratic  kixgdom.  441 

superior,  so  the  deductions  of  science — all  knowledge  outside  of  the  Word 
— ought  always  to  be  considered  in  the  light  of  a  constantly  developing  and 
finally  completed  Divine  Purpose.  Surely  in  this,  as  the  all-wise  God  Him- 
self teaches  us,  is  true  wisdom. 

There  is  an  undercurrent  of  sadness,  of  utter  hopelessness,  that  appeals  to  our  hearts 
in  the  writings  of  some  unbelievers.  It  is  found  in  that  class  of  sceptics  who,  amid  the 
grave  doubts  and  deductions  of  reason,  deplore  their  own  lack  of  faith  in  the  future,  and 
regret  that  they  have  nothing  better  to  substitute  in  place  of  the  one  deemed  over- 
thrown. It  evidences  at  least  a  misguided  sincerity,  which  strongly  calls  for  sympathy. 
Even  such,  however,  endeavor  (as  e.g.  Hennellin  An  Inquiry  concerning  the  Origin  of  Chris- 
tianity) to  comfort  themselves  by  "  indulging  the  thought  that  a  time  is  appointed  when 
the  cravings  of  the  heart  and  of  the  intellect  will  be  satisfied,  and  the  enigma  of  our  own 
and  the  world's  existence  be  solved  "  (quoted  by  Owen  in  Deb.  Land,  p.  160).  The  time 
appointed  by  God  is  overlooked,  the  agencies  prepared  for  that  time  are  ignored,  the 
Divine  Purpose  which  embraces  such  a  time  remains  unconsidered,  and  the  result  fol- 
lows, viz.,  that  no  intelligent  faith  and  hope,  based  on  the  past  and  present  history  of  the 
world  as  manifesting  the  gradual  but  sure  development  of  God's  Redemptive  Plan,  can 
be  entertained  and  expressed.  Men  will,  however,  deliberately  and  intentionally  close 
their  eyes  to  any  delineation  of  divine  purpose.  Even  the  influence,  past  and  present, 
exerted  by  the  Jewish  and  Christian  religion  and  theology  is  passed  by  without  special 
notice.  Thus  e.g.  why  does  Herbert  Spencer  in  his  system  of  philosophy  based  on  evolu- 
tion and  framed  by  an  alleged  inductive  plan  omit  this  theological  aspect  ?  Why  must 
his  system  ignore  such  an  important  element,  having  so  wide  an  influence  over  man  and 
nations,  having  so  regular  a  development  sustained  by  well-known  historical  progres- 
sion ?  What  answer  can  we  possibly  give  ?  Spencer  strives  after  a  certain  unity  (an  in- 
tellectual necessity)  and  centres  it  in  the  Unknown,  but  the  Bible,  without  such  an  effort 
to  build  up  a  system  of  philosophy,  does  far  more  when  it  brings  all  to  the  Will  of  a  per- 
sonal God,  and  centres  it  in  the  Knowable.  The  former,  after  all,  is  mere  inference,  while 
the  latter,  owing  to  origin  and  continuity,  to  design  and  piirpose,  finds  its  proof  in  self- 
consciousness  and  reason.  Prof.  Adler  in  "  The  Evolution  of  Hebrew  Religion"  (Pop. 
Sci.  Monthly,  Sept.,  1876)  says  that  "  scientific  inquiry"  has  concluded  "  that  the  trans- 
mission of  historical  information  had  in  no  wise  been  the  object  of  the  Hebrew  writers" 
(of  the  Pentateuch) ;  and  that  the  Bible  is  no  "  text-book  of  history."  But  this  position 
we  can  reasonably  expect  from  a  man  who  receives  the  Bible  as  he  does  Homer  ;  who 
manifests  his  prejudice  by  seeking  out  discrepancies,  and  who  comes  to  it  biassed  by  a 
previously  constructed  history  of  his  own.  Every  step  evinces  an  evident  anxiety  to  dis- 
credit its  statements  by  substituting  the  so-called  deductions  of  science  ;  and  the  objec- 
tion?, so  abundantly  answered  by  apologists,  are  repeated  as  if  never  met.  Schopen- 
hauer in  TheWorld  regarded  as  a  Manifestation  of  Will,  utterly  denies  the  origin  and  con- 
tinuance of  the  world  under  a  Personal  God  and  Divine  Government,  and  hence  history 
is  only  a  description  of  human  wretchedness,  pain,  misery,  and  ever-returning  suffering. 
Life  is  undesirable  ;  to  be  born  is  a  misfortune  ;  to  marry,  and  be  the  means  of  introduc- 
ing new  life  is  an  unworthy  action,  seeing  that  it  only  perpetuates  sorrow  and  torture  ; 
living  beings  end  in  man,  for  no  superior  Being  would  allow  such  a  wretched  comedy  or 
tragedy  to  exist  ;  to  long  for  annihilation,  to  believe  in  no  future  existence  under  any 
form,  to  die  and  that  to  be  the  end  of  all  is  the  noblest  philosophy  and  best  support. 
Such  a  view  of  history  and  the  destiny  of  man  is  the  result  of  gloom,  despair,  unreason, 
and  from  which  unbelief  itself  so  largely  recoils.  Hartman  in  the  Philosophy  of  the  Un- 
conscious sees  nothing  but  evil  preponderating  in  the  world  ;  no  divine  plan  or  all-power- 
ful God  is  overruling  to  a  beneficent  end  ;  in  this  the  best  of  possible  worlds  wretched- 
ness prevails  ;  philosophy  teaches  the  sad  fact  that  existence  is  a  curse  ;  that  man  is 
deluded  by  false  hopes  to  cling  to  that  existence  ;  that  such  hopes  prompted  by  instincts 
are  a  blessing  in  that  they  finally,  through  progress,  reveal  the  utter  misery  of  his  state  ; 
that  the  highest  desire  is  to  wish  for  the  annihilation  of  self  and  others  ;  that  enlighten- 
ment of  our  state  only  brings  disgust  and  a  desire  to  be  rid  of  it  ;  that  a  true  knowledge 
of  our  real  condition  will  in  the  future  precipitate  fearful  catastrophes  and  loss  of  life  ; 
that  the  future  threatens — as  a  blessing—  annihilation  as  the  end  of  all  woe,  for  religions, 
progress,  the  notion  of  future  life,  etc.,  are  illusions  imparting  vain  hopes.  He,  however 
(like  Mill,  etc.),  constructs  a  God  or  Power  that  lacks  ability  to  control  the  evil,  remove 
it,  etc.,  and  hence,  logically  (from  his  standpoint)  leads  on  the  world  to  its  destined  end, 
annihilation.  In  even  allowing  a  Creator  of  a  world  of  wretchedness,  he  gives  us,  to  save 
this  Creator's  honor,  an  "  unconscious"   God.     To  avoid  an  alleged  "  absurdity"  he 


442  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  194. 

plunges  into  one  that  is  greater.  Take  the  God  of  the  Bible  and  contrast  it  with  Hartman's 
God,  and  the  One  is  light,  while  the  other  is  darkness.  Take  the  biblical  account  of  the 
evil  'and  misery  of  the  race,  with  the  design  connected  with  provisionary  means,  of  ulti- 
mate release,  and  contrast  it  with  his  declarations,  and  the  one  imparts  hope  of  deliver- 
ance, while  the  other  gives  nothing  but  despair.  We  repeat  :  the  creation  of  the  world 
and  its  races,  its  evils  and  antagonisms,  its  fearful  experiences  from  nature  and  man,  its 
repeated  stages  and  changes  involving  terrible  suffering,  etc.,  woiild  form  an  inexplicable 
mystery  if  it  were  not  for  the  light  of  the  Bible,  presenting  a  connected  and  sustained  re- 
demptive scheme,  holding  forth  a  definite  and  magnificent  end  worthy  of  such  a  Creator 
and  creation.  Contemplating  not  merely  the  preparatory  stages  in  their  ascending  scale, 
but  the  great  End  which  brings  praise,  honor,  and  glory  to  God  and  His  Christ,  we  find 
the  key— which  philosophy  and  reason  outside  of  this  can  never  obtain— to  the  world's 
sad  history. 


PEOP.  195.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  443 


Peoposition  195.     This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  may,  analogi- 
cally',  give  us  a  cleiv  to  the  Government  of  other  worlds. 

m 

The  astronomical  idea  of  the  vast  plurality  of  worlds  (which 
Paine  and  others  so  offensively  parade  over  against  the  reasonable 
representations  of  Newton,  Boyle,  Bacon,  Chalmers,  Fuller,  Brew- 
ster, etc.)  is  in  all  probability  the  correct  one.  The  Scriptures  deal- 
ing almost  exclusively  with  man  and  this  world,  still  indirectly,  by 
speaking  of  intelligences  outside  of  this  world  and  by  various  refer- 
ences to  the  creative  power  of  God,  the  magnitude  of  His  work, 
etc.,  make  the  view  a  consistent  one.  Such  worlds  inhabited  by 
rational  creatures  are  necessarily  under  the  moral  government  of 
God.  This  is  admitted  by  all,  but  we  go  a  step  beyond  by  adding, 
also  under  the  civil  government  of  God.  For,  considering  how 
God  institutes  government  here  and  perfects  it,  we  may,  from  anal- 
ogy, draw  the  inference  that  other  worlds  are  also  governed  by 
similar  Theocratic  government ;  God  in  each  case  condescending 
to  act  as  the  specific  world  ruler.  In  this  way  two  in^ortant  ob- 
jects are  attained  :  (1)  a  desirable  Unity  in  the  universe  is  obtained 
and  (2)  the  happiness  of  each  world  is  secured. 

In  reference  to  other  worlds  being  inhabited,  it  seems  to  the  writer  that  a  considera- 
tion of  Isa.  45  :  18  is  amply  sufficient  to  justify  such  an  opinion.  In  declaring  that  God 
formed,  made,  and  established  the  earth,  it  is  added  :  "He  created  it  not  in  vain  (or,  iobe 
empty),  He  formed  it  to  be  inhabited."  Here  the  reason  assigned  for  creating  a  world  is  spe- 
cifically given,  viz.,  that  it  may  be  the  dwelling-place  of  living  creatures.  It  is  most  un- 
reasonable to  suppose  that  the  numerous  worlds,  some  of  immense  size,  are  formed  in 
order  to  remain  empty.  The  Omnipotence  of  God,  His  creative  power,  is  certainly  not 
only  employed  in  filling  the  heavens  with  pondei'ous  insensible  bodies,  utterly  incapable 
of  appreciating  His  glory  and  majesty  intelligently.  He  places  upon  these,  therefore,  as 
upon  the  earth,  creatures  with  reason  and  moral  powers  capable  of  showing  forth  His 
praise  and  enjoying  the  blessings  flowing  from  creative  goodness. 

Obs.  1.  It  is  true  that  this  Theocratic  arrangement  by  which  God  and 
man  are  brought  into  union  and  fellowship  is  one  instituted  in  a  fallen 
world,  and  a  peculiarity,  distinguishing  it  from  others,  may  exist  in  the 
union  of  God  with  David's  Son  for  Redemptive  purpose.  But  the  Theo- 
cratic idea,  God  ruling,  is  prominently  preserved,  so  that  where  Redemp- 
tion is  not  needed,  it  alone  exists  in  the  form  in  which  it  would  have  existed 
if  man  had  not  fallen,  or  in  that  form  evinced  before  the  Theocratic- 
Davidic  order.  That  is,  in  each  world  God  is  the  recognized  Ruler  of  the 
same,  either  directly  by  communications  given  by  Himself,  or  by  some 
Agent  or  Agents  taken  into  special  union  with  Himself.  The  isolation  of 
each  world  from  all  others  (without  forbidding  intercommunication  with 
heavenly  beings),  and  the  necessity  of  having  law  and  order  with  its  resul- 


444  THE   THEOCRATIC    KIXGDOM.  [PROP.  195. 

tant  for  each  one  separately  (without  ignoring  the  common  bond  which 
thus  binds  them  into  one  grand  whole),  make  this  Theocratic  arrangement 
available  for  the  highest  and  noblest  society  of  creatures  that  exist  in  any  of 
the  planets.  It  may  even  suggest,  how,  if  other  creatures  have  fallen  like 
man,  this  Theocratic  idea  can  be  made  available,  in  their  case  by  the  union 
of  the  Divine  with  a  sinless  being  connected  with  a  fallen  race  thus  forming 
a  bond  of  inseparable  union  between  God  and  the  race.  And  for  aught 
we  know  this  bond  may  exist  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  as  God-man,  related  to 
fallen  humanity,  may  in  virtue  of  His  obedience,  etc.,  be  the  Saviour  pro- 
claimed for  other  worlds,  if  indeed  a  Saviour  is  needed,  simply  on  the 
ground  that  the  proclamation  of  the  sacrifice  made  for  sin  through  Him  is 
sufficient  to  teach  a  Universe  the  sublime  nature  of  law,  of  sin,  the  neces- 
sity of  having  a  Mediator,  etc.  It  is,  however,  extremely  doubtful  whether 
other  worlds  need  Redemption  like  ours,  and  as  the  subject  is  one  of  pure 
speculation,  it  may  be  dismissed  with  the  single  remark,  that  unf alien  or 
fallen,  the  very  relationship  of  the  creature  to  the  Creator,  presupposes  some 
such  order  of  government,  and  as  we  only  know  how  our  world  is  to  be 
governed,  viz.,  in  the  Theocratic  form,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  others 
will  likewise  be  thus  controlled. 

To  avoid  misapprehension  and  the  charge  of  making  thus  many  Christs  (which  we 
expressly  guard  against),  we  may  properly  explain  more  fully  our  meaning,  which  is 
this  :  While  the  Divine-Human  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  is  specifically,  in  virtue  of 
the  covenanted  seed,  appointed  to  reign  here  on  the  earth,  we  do  not  and  dare  not  limit 
the  divine  in  its  sweep  and  manifestations  over  and  in  any  part  of  the  universe  (Props. 
7!)  and  80).  This  is  illustrated  by  the  presence  of  the  divine  even  now  everywhere,  and 
which  was  characteristic  of  it  even  when  David's  Son  was  living  here  on  earth.  Besides, 
this  part  of  the  subject  is  given  not  as  a  dogmatic  truth,  but  as  an  interesting  specula- 
tion. In  this  view  the  phrase  "only-begotten  Son"  may  refer  to  the  fact  that  He  is 
revealed  as  such  to  our  world  without  limiting  the  power  of  the  divine  in  Him  as  to  other 
worlds.  The  reader  will  notice,  as  a  matter  worthy  of  reflection,  that  Jesus  has  the 
Kingdom  most  specifically  promised  to  Him  as  to  His  humanity  (Props.  81,  82),  because 
the  divine  in  the  Theocratic  idea  is  something  that  in  the  very  nature  of  a  Theocracy  is 
taken  for  granted.  The  unbeliever  says  that  it  is  inconceivable  that  when  other  worlds 
also  need  a  Saviour  that  God  should  send  His  Son  to  this  world  alone.  Chalmers,  it  is 
said  (by  a  writer  in  North  Brit.  Review,  May,  1854,  p.  7),  "  has  rather  cut  than  untied  the 
knot,  when  he  expresses  the  opinion  that  the  inhabitants  of  these  worlds  may  not  have 
required  a  Saviour."  It  is  contended  that  creatures  living  in  worlds  of  matter,  subject 
to  material  laws,  will  not  be"  exempt  from  sin,  suffering,  and  death."  But  this  does 
not  follow  legitimately,  unless  it  can  be  shown  conclusively  that  Adam  and  Eve  must,  of 
necessity,  have  fallen  under  the  curse.  We  see  abundant  provision  made  to  secure  their 
immortality,  and  the  divine  record  impresses  us  with  the  belief  that  had  they  remained 
innocent,  the  mortal  would  have  been  swallowed  up  in  life  by  access  to  the  tree  of  life. 
On  the  other  hand,  admit  that  such  creatures  likewise  endure  probation  and  a  fall,  the 
writer  referred  to  argues  that  just  as  Christ's  death  extended  in  its  divine  influence  and 
healing  back  to  the  past  and  forward  in  the  future,  to  all  lands,  to  all  men,  so  it  may 
extend  to  all  places  needed  in  the  universe  ;  its  beneficence  may  not  be  limited,  and  its 
manifestations  of  love  and  mercy  may  not  be  satisfied  short  of  the  extension  of  sin  and 
need  of  redemption.  But  we  need  not  Origen's  ultra  view,  which  makes  the  starry 
world,  living  beings,  animated  by  souls,  subject  to  vanity  and  corruption,  and  also  de- 
siring release. 

Obs.  2.  The  "Will  of  God  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,  evinces  the  fact 
that  it  is  only  performed  or  carried  out  when  nations  are  thus  Theocrati- 
cally  governed  ;  and  hence,  that  the  Divine  Will  favors  such  a  form  of 
government,  as  being  correspondent  with  heaven  itself.  Xow,  if  God  thus 
identifies  Himself  with  so  small  a  world  in  the  interest  and  happiness  of 


Prop.  195.]  the  theoceatic  kingdom.  445 

His  creatures,  and  even  condescends  to  a  relationship  with  humanity 
through  David's  Son  to  cause  the  Will  of  God  to  be  done  on  earth  as  in 
heaven,  we  may  readily  conclude  that  He  will  not  be  less  identified  with 
other  worlds  in  a  form  of  government  similar  in  kind,  modified  to  suit  the 
peculiar  status  of  the  creature,  and  influenced,  if  need  be,  by  the  special 
manifestation  of  it  here  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  Small  as  this  world 
is,  it  is  undoubtedly  true,  seeing  the  interest  angelic  beings  are  represented 
as  taking  in  it,  that  the  Redemptive  work  of  God  in  Christ  causes,  in  view 
of  the  principles  and  amazing  love  involved,  the  most  profound  sensation 
and  feeling  wherever  made  known  in  the  Universe.  The  happy  illustration 
used  by  some  writers  of  a  rebellious  province,  small  in  territory  as  it 
may  be,  affecting  the  general  welfare,  can  be  greatly  extended  if  we  allow 
the  perpetuity  of  this  Theocratic  order  in  a  constantly  visible  and  now 
accessible  (i.e.  to  other  worlds,  vide  below,  Obs.  4)  salvation.  The  manner 
in  which  it  was  affected,  and  is  continued  forever,  closes  the  door  to  the 
dreary  thought  of  rebellion,  and  forever  secures,  through  the  noblest  of 
motives,  the  heartfelt  allegiance  of  all  intelligences.  The  Universe  cannot 
but  esteem  this  world  as  a  wonderful  theatre,  because  of  the  actors  engaged 
in  it,  the  government  of  God  involved  in  it,  the  astonishing  results 
wrought  out  in  it  ;  and  to  estimate  with  any  degree  of  correctness  its  vast 
influence,  we  must  wait  until  the  work  is  completed,  and  the  hosts  of  God 
rejoice  with  us  in  perfected  Redemption.  Of  one  thing  we  may  rest 
assured,  that  because  of  its  vital  relationship  to  the  honor  and  glory  of 
God  and  of  His  Son  and  of  the  Spirit,  it  will  he  made  known  wherever  the 
government  of  God  extends,  both  to  glorify  God  and  to  benefit  the  creat- 
ure. 

Dr.  Sprecher  (Groumhcork  Theol.,  p.  36,  etc.)  has  some  fine  thoughts  respecting  this 
world  being  a  moral  nursery  to  prepare  intelligent  creatures  for  other  worlds  in  the 
course  of  preparation  for  the  occupation  of  rational  creatures.  We  only  add  to  his  idea 
of  "  a  training  school,"  that  if  we  incorporate  the  Theocratic  idea,  and  that  such  in  view 
of  their  relationship  to  Jesus  are  fitted — being  like  Him  and  filled  by  His  spirit — to  im- 
press an  existing  Theocratic  ordering,  or  to  inaugurate  and  carry  on,  through  the  Christ 
a  Theocratic  government,  the  force,  beauty,  and  sublimity  of  the  whole  is  advanced. 
This  the  above  writer  hints  at  in  the  expression,  "  and  in  all  worlds,  instructing  and  gov- 
erning their  more  youthful  and  inexperienced  inhabitants  ;"  we,  however,  bring  it  forth 
prominently.  Numerous  writers  of  great  ability  declare  that  the  redeemed  will  visit 
other  worlds,  angelic  like,  to  tell  the  wondrous  story  of  redemption,  exhibit  in  their  own 
persons  its  results,  show  forth  the  praises  of  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  etc.  To  this  we 
add  :  their  powers  will  be  exerted  in  enforcing  the  highest  and  noblest  of  all  relations, 
the  Theocratic. 

Obs.  3.  The  questions  of  David  (Ps.  8  :  3,  4)  and  Solomon  (3  Chron. 
6  :  IS)  are  only  satisfactorily  answered  on  the  supposition  of  the  vast  ex- 
tent and  inhabited  (intelligent)  condition  of  other  worlds,  and  that  the 
visiting  and  dwelling  of  God  spoken  of  have  reference  to  this  Theocratical 
order,  a  relationship  similar  to  that  enjoyed  by  other  worlds,  but  for 
which  this  world  has  made  itself  unworthy  on  account  of  sin.  It  is  a  mat- 
ter of  no  surprise  that  God  should  manifest  Himself  thus  nearly  in 
government  to  unfallen  beings,  but  it  is  a  matter  of  the  highest  amazement 
that  so  great  a  God  should  be  so  merciful  in  condescending  to  fallen  man, 
requiring,  in  order  to  affect  a  restoration,  a  costly  sacrifice  of  love. 

The  reader  will  find  some  writers  who,  in  order  to  meet  the  objections  of  infidelity 
respecting  the  insignificancy  of  the  earth,  contend  that  this  world  is  the  only  one  inhab- 


446  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  195. 

ited  by  intelligent  creatures,  as  e.g.  the  author  of  The  Plurality  of  Worlds  (with  Introd.  by 
Pres.  Hitchcock).  But  this  is  virtually  a  lowering  of  the  creative  power,  moral  and  civil 
government,  etc.,  of  God,  and  a  darkening  of  the  immensity  of  the  universe  over  against 
the  light  thrown  upon  it  in  Scripture.  "We  would  rather  take  the  views,  as  more  biblical, 
reasonable,  and  worthy  of  God's  greatness,  of  that  class  of  writers  illustrated  by  Sir 
David  Brewster's  work,  More  Worlds  than  One  the  Creed  of  the  Philosopher  and  the  Hope  of 
the  Christian.  (Comp.  also  an  anon,  work  entitled  Tlie  Universe  no  Desert,  the  Earth  no 
Monopoly,  Huygen's  Celestial  Worlds  Discovered,  Dick's  Ch.  Philosophy,  Fontenelle's  Plu- 
rality of  Worlds,  and  the  writings  of  Bruno,  Galileo,  Chalmers,  and  others.)  We  cannot 
receive  Whewell's  view,  that  this  earth  alone  is  inhabited,  and  outside  of  it  there  is  a 
"  universe  of  vast  watery  balls,  each  wrapped  around  a  central  cinder,"  etc.  Some,  how- 
ever, add  to  this  the  idea  that  the  earth  becomes  the  centre  of  other  worlds  which  event- 
ually also  become  habitable.  But  such  theories  exalt  our  planet  beyond  all  others  in 
point  of  favor,  when  it  is  but  small  in  comparison  with  what  astronomy  reveals.  Proctor 
in  "  Other  "Worlds  and  Other  Universes"  (Eclec.  Mag.,  April,  1877)  occupies  a  medium 
between  the  two  views,  making,  in  brief,  different  stages  of  preparation,  inhabitation, 
desolation,  renewal,  occupying  countless  ages,  so  that  some  (not  all,  because  others  are 
represented  in  a  stage  of  preparation,  or  else  in  a  course  of  desolation)  are  inhabited. 
So  also  in  "  Life,  past  and  future,  in  other  Worlds  "  (Science  and  Byways)  he  asserts,  as  a 
culmination,  that  "  every  member  of  every  order — planet,  sun,  galaxy,  and  so  onward  to 
higher  and  higher  orders  endlessly — has  been,  is  now,  or  will  hereafter  be,  life-support- 
ing '  after  its  kind.'  "  Dr.  Sprecher  (Groundwork  of  Theol.,  p.  3G7)  takes  the  position 
that  all  other  globes  may  be,  like  the  earth  once  was,  merely  in  a  gradual  preparatory 
state  to  receive  ultimately  rational  creatures.  Admitting  that  such  may  be  the  case  with 
many,  yet  it  seems  to  be  opposed  to  analogy  and  Scripture  intimations  to  conclude  that 
this  is  the  case  with  all,  because  (1)  it  would  exalt  our  globe,  but  an  atom  compared  with 
the  universe,  out  of  all  proportion  in  the  scale  of  creation  ;  (2)  it  would  lessen  our  idea 
of  the  declarative  glory  of  God,  promoted  by  an  intelligent  creation  ;  (3)  it  would  limit 
the  creation  of  intelligent  creatures,  such  like  man,  to  a  very  brief  period  ;  (4)  the  main 
reasons  urged  in  favor  of  such  an  opinion,  derived  from  the  observation  of  a  few  planets 
(viz.,  that  they  are  unfitted  for  men  to  live  in,  etc.)  have  no  special  force,  because 
(a)  others  may  be  fitted  and  inhabited,  while  such  are  in  a  transitory  or  preparative  stage, 
and  (6)  the  conditions  under  which  life  may  be  sustained  in  other  planets  may  vary  con- 
siderably from  ours,  evidencing  the  variety  in  creation.  The  deductions  of  astronomy 
and  of  science  do  not  invalidate  the  opinion  of  older  writers,  and  in  the  language  of  a 
writer  (North  Brit.  Review,  May,  1854)  the  inhabitation  of  such  worlds  "  assigns  the  cause 
of  their  existence,"  for  to  beiieve  that  all  these  ponderous  bodies  were  created  in  order 
to  give  light,  and  "  that  the  descendants  of  Adam  might  study  their  motion  and  write 
books  of  astronomy,  is  an  opinion  which  could  only  find  credence  in  minds  of  the  most 
limited  capacity,  and  in  hearts  devoid  of  all  sympathy  and  feeling."  While  unable  to 
form  so  harsh  a  judgment,  yet  it  seems  that  a  proper  consideration  of  honor,  power, 
glory  belonging  to  God  as  Creator,  should  forbid  our  limiting  the  intelligences  created  to 
praise  and  adore  Him  as  the  Almighty.  (On  Plurality  of  World's  comp.  Lord's  Lit.  and 
Theol.  Journal,  Oct.,  1854,  Proph.  Times,  Nos.  9  and  10,  1874,  etc.) 

Ob*.  4.  This  Kingdom — Theocratic-Davidic — is  represented  as  bringing 
this  world  into  direct  communication  and  fellowship  with  the  Universe. 
Owing  to  rebellion,  the  angelic  hosts,  which  once  shouted  for  joy  at  the 
exhibition  of  creative  energy,  withdrew  from  this  world,  and  only  occasion- 
ally have  they  been  permitted  to  reveal  themselves  to  man.  But  this  in- 
terdiction, caused  by  sinfulness,  will  be  withdrawn,  for  on  the  restoration 
of  this  Kingdom,  under  the  blessed  reign  of  Christ,  they  shall  freely  com- 
municate with  this  earth  as  Jesus  told  Xathaniel  (John  1  :  51).  This  also 
indicates  that  the  government  thus  instituted,  which  restores  such  inter- 
communication, is  in  full  accord  with  that  in  other  parts  of  the  Universe. 
And  as  many  able  writers  have  asserted  as  highly  probable,  there  may  be, 
the  saints  being  made  equal  unto  angels,  and  their  transportation  being 
dependent  upon  their  will,  communication  by  the  saints  with  other  worlds 
thus  practically  and  effectively  presenting  in  the  persons  of  the  redeemed 
the  work  of  Redemption.     Thus  the  redeemed  may  be  employed  to  show 


Prop.  195.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  447 

forth  (Eph.  3  :  10)  "  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,"  and  "the  unsearch- 
able riches  of  Christ,"  answerable  to  the  desire  (1  Pet.  1  :  12)  of  even 
angels,  and  to  the  wide  extent  (Rev.  5  :  13)  to  which  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lamb  and  ascriptions  of  praise  to  Him  shall  progress. 

In  Prop.  179,  Obs.  8,  we  guarded  our  doctrine  against  a  perversion  so  far  as  the 
covenanted  Theocratic  Kingdom  of  David's  Son  is  concerned,  and  the  biblical  statement 
on  the  subject.  While  the  Bible  is  only  concerned  with  the  redemption  of  the  world 
and  largely  excludes  the  universe,  yet  it  finds,  as  we  have  shown,  its  attachment  to  the 
universe  likewise  in  its  ultimate  outcome.  This  Theocratic  idea  thus  urged  also  presents 
us  with  an  argument  against  the  deductions  of  unbelief  drawn  from  the  alleged  smallness 
of  the  earth  when  contrasted  with  the  greatness  of  the  universe  (as  urged  by  "White, 
Draper,  and  others,  and  which— Curtis's  Life  of  Webster,  vol.  2,  p.  GS4 — affected  Webster's 
reason  but  could  not  remove  his  faith),  because  it  shows  us  the  unity  of  government 
existing,  the  intimate  and  enduring  relationship  of  all  worlds  to  the  Almighty.  It  en- 
hances the  majesty  of  God,  the  extent  and  benevolence  of  His  Divine  Cognizance,  the 
importance  and  value  of  religious  and  civil  principles,  the  love  and  mercy  shown  to 
creatures. 

Obs.  5.  This  union,  however,  with  other  worlds,  is  evidenced  by  the  very 
constitution  of  the  Theocracy  itself  as  realized  and  exhibited  in  the  person 
of  the  Theocratic  King  and  His  associated  Rulers.  If  the  King  were 
merely  David's  Son  then  the  Kingdom  would  be  isolated  and  confined  to 
humanity — the  precious  Theocratic  element  would  be  lacking.  But  with 
David's  Son  is  inseparably  connected  the  fulness  of  God,  the  invisible  God 
(Col.  1  :  15-20,  etc.),  the  Divine,  so  that  God  rules  in  and  through  this 
Son.  The  Divine-Human  makes  Him  the  specific  Theocratic  King  by 
whom  this  world  is  brought  into  desirable  and  blessed  subjection.  The 
Divine — the  same  to  which  creative  power  and  all  the  divine  attributes  are 
ascribed  before  its  conjunction  with  David's  Son — forms  the  link,  in  its 
union  with  humanity,  by  which  the  latter  is  brought  into  its  true  relation- 
ship with  the  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  Universe,  attracting  and  binding  it  to 
the  Divine  in  the  firmest  of  bonds,  and  then  through  the  Divine  (for 
Father  and  Son  are  One)  attracting  and  binding  it  to  the  general,  univer- 
sal system  of  law,  order,  blessedness,  etc.,  under  the  Sovereignty  of  God 
Himself.  Even,  as  intimated,  this  might  be  adduced  from  the  associated 
Rulers,  for  they  are  represented  as  partaking  of  the  divine  both  in  soul  and 
body — in  soul  specially  baptized  by  the  Spirit,  thus  imparting  of  the  ful- 
ness given  to  Jesus,  and  in  body  made  like  unto  Christ  by  the  power  of 
resurrection  and  glorification — so  that  this  very  impartation  of  the  divine, 
by  which  they  are  elevated  to  an  equality  with  angels,  leads  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  barrier  hitherto  existing 'between  this  world  and  others  is 
broken  down  by  the  raising  up  of  humanity  to  the  plane  occupied  by  other 
intelligences,  the  divine  cementing  and  perpetuating  the  union  thus  effected. 
The  comprehensiveness  of  the  blessings  pronounced  on  the  saints  go  far  to 
strengthen  such  a  position,  while  the  distinctive  relationship  they  sustain 
to  the  King  of  kings  fully  confirms  it. 

^  The  student  may  be  interested  to  notice  the  work  The  Unseen  Universe ;  or  Physica 
Speculations  on  a  Future  State,  in  which  a  need  for  Christ  is  found  in  the  general  economy 
of  the  universe.  This  is  based  on  the  creative  power  attributed  to  the  divine  in  Christ, 
making  Him  "  the  mysterious,  infinitely  energetic,  intelligent,  developing  agency,  resid- 
ing in  the  universe  and  therefore  being,  in  some  sense,  conditioned."  While  constitut- 
ing the  Father  unconditioned,  "  the  unconditioned  First  Cause  of  all  things,"  the  work 
also  concludes  the  Son  to  be  God  "  of  the  same  substance  as  the  Father,  but  different  in 
person,  and  who  has  agreed  to  develop  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  thus  in  some  raysteri- 


448  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  195. 

cms  sense  to  submit  to  conditions  and  to  enter  the  universe.  The  relation  of  this  Being 
to  the  Father  is  expressed  in  Hebrews,  in  the  words  of  the  Psalmist  :  '  Then  said  I,  Lo, 
I  come  ;  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me  ;  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O  my 
God  ;  yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  heart.'  "  "In  fine,  such  a  Being  would  represent  that 
conditioned  yet  infinitely  powerful  developing  agent,  which  the  universe,  objectively 
considered,  appears  to  lead  up  to.  His  work  is  twofold  ;  for  in  the  first  place  He  de- 
velops the  various  universes  or  orders  of  being,  and  secondly,  in  some  mysterious  way 
He  becomes  Himself  the  type  or  pattern  of  each  order,  the  representative  of  Deity,  as  far 
as  the  beings  of  that  order  can  comprehend,  especially  manifesting  such  divine  qualities 
as  could  not  otherwise  be  brought  to  light,"  etc.  He  thus  "  fills  all  things."  Whatever 
force  the  student  may  allow  to  such  representations,  the  work  is  vitiated  (however  it  may 
incline  to  the  divme  aspect  of  the  Son  of  God,  etc.)  by  not  discriminating  between  the 
Divine  Sovereignty  appertaining  to  Deity  and  the  union  of  Deity  and  humanity  in  the 
Person  of  David's  Son  for  a  specific  purpose,  viz.,  to  exhibit  in  and  through  Him  a  Theo- 
cratic rule  here  upon  the  earth.  Hence  the  work  does  not  observe  that  "  the  Christ"  is 
not  a  title  pertaining  to  the  universe  or  to  creation,  but  a  title  and  office  belonging  to 
this  earth,  revealing  God  to  us  as  actual  real  earthly  Theocratic  Ruler  in  the  humanity  of 
Jesus.  We  find  too  much  resemblance  to  the  utterances  of  the  Neo-Platonic  school  of 
Alexandria  (comp.  Kingsley's  Schools  of  Alexandria,  Neander's  Ch.  History,  etc.),  which 
diverges  from  the  biblical  statements  in  exalting  the  divine  and  ignoring  the  human  :  for 
as  Augustine  long  ago  stated,  there  is  a  wide  difference  between  the  two  representations, 
in  that  the  Platonist  utterances  simply  affirm  the  divine  nature  of  the  Logos  (Philo's 
"  Divinity  articulate"),  while  the  Scriptures  insist,  as  forming  "  the  Christ"  an  incarna- 
tion, humiliation,  suffering,  death,  resurrection,  exaltation,  return  of  the  Son  of  Man, 
etc.,  relating  to  this  earth.  The  objection,  then,  to  such  works  is  this  :  they  swallow  up 
the  distinctive  Christ  and  covenanted  work  in  the  divine. 


PkOP.  196.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  449 


Peopositiox  196.  TItis  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  gives  us  a 
more  comprehensive  view  of  the  work  of  Christ  for  liedanp- 
tive  purposes. 

This  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  our  doctrine  makes  much  of  what 
Christ  is  yet  to  do  at  His  Sec.  Advent.  Even  many  of  our  oppo- 
nents concede  what  Dr.  Gerhart  (art.  on  Christianity  and  the  Ad- 
vent) asserts  that  Christianity  is  "  only  relatively  complete"  but 
advocating  its  completion  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  spying :  "  In  the  Sec. 
Advent,  accordingly,  Christianity  will  become  the  absolutely  com- 
plete divine  revelation,"  i.e.  realized.  But  our  view  embraces  not 
merely  the  completion  of  salvation  in  the  saints  of  this  and  former 
ages  by  experiencing  the  resurrection,  etc.,  but  includes  salvation 
in  restoration  to  all  forfeited  blessings  pertaining  to  saints,  to  the 
Jewish  nation  and  the  race.  The  Kingdom  itself,  while  embracing 
salvation,  becomes  the  medium  of  salvation  to  the  world.  When  this 
period  of  re-establishment  comes,  then  to  the  preparatory  work  of 
Christ  is  added  the  direct  supernatural  Theocratic  power  by  which 
deliverance  is  obtained  and  evermore  sustained.  Without  detract- 
ing from  the  necessary  and  precious  work  already  performed  and 
now  in  progress,  our  view  lays  great  stress  on  that  ♦which  is  yet  to 
follow  (founded  on  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary),  and  unites  the  two  in 
order  to  give  the  true  and  comprehensive  sense  under  which  it  is  to 
be  regarded,  thus  making  His  Sec.  Coming  "  the  blessed  hope"''  and 
a  coming  "  unto  salvation"''  in  its  widest  reach. 

Obs.  1.  The  careful  student  will  have  noticed  that  the  Jews  before  and 
at  the  Advent  of  Jesus  were  accustomed  to  designate  the  period  or  results 
when  the  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David  should  be  restored  under  the 
Messiah,  as  "  the  Salvation."  This  phrase  is  strictly  biblical,  summing 
up  in  a  word  the  totality  of  blessing,  and  was  derived  from  the  Millennial 
descriptions  of  the  prophets,  as  e.g.  Isa.  25  :  9.  The  Kingdom  of  the 
Messiah  and  salvation  were  in  the  Jewish  mind  convertible  terms  ;  and 
it  needs  no  reflection  to  show  how  appropriate  the  term  is,  seeing  that  it 
was  employed  by  the  prophets  to  designate  the  deliverance  from  all  evil 
and  the  bestowment  of  all  blessings  in  this  Kingdom.  The  term  "  salva- 
tion," correctly  apprehended  by  the  primitive  Church,  was  from  Origen's 
time  applied  too  much  to  the  present  life  and  to  the  intermediate  state.  If 
we  turn  to  the  apostolic  teaching  we  find,  on  the  other  hand,  a  full  and 
free  adoption  of  the  Jewish  phraseology,  without  placing  upon  it  another 
and  widely  differing  interpretation,  and  its  direct  reference  to  the  future, 
when,  as   prophets   teach,  it   will    be    realized.     Thus    e.g.   Ileb.   9  :  28  ; 


450  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  196. 

2  Tim.  2  :  10  ;  1  Thess.  5:9;  Rom.  13  :  11,  and  kindred  passages  take  for 
granted  that  the  salvation  spoken  of  is  the  same  that  pious  Jews  expected. 
If  otherwise  it  would  have  been  differently  explained,  and  the  first 
churches  would  have  been  enlightened  concerning  it.  The  expectation  of 
salvation  related  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  and  restoration  of  the 
nation  is  well  stated  by  Zacharias  (Luke  1  :  G9-75)  as  embraced  by  the  holy 
prophets,  and  this  salvation  the  apostles  declared — whatever  the  earnest 
might  be  in  the  present  or  intermediate — to  be  still  future. 

It  is  saddening  to  see  the  modern  conceptions  of  "  salvation,"  and  to  observe  how- 
intelligent  men,  in  order  to  exalt  them,  decry  the  ancient  views— although  sustained  by 
the  plain  grammatical  sense — as  "  carnal."  What  a  contrast  exists  between  the  present 
prevailing  spiritualistic,  indefinite  belief  and  the  one  based  on  the  oath-bound  cove- 
nants !  If  we  even  venture  to  call  attention  to  this  antagonism,  and  to  question  the 
modern  faith,  multitudes  are  ready  to  designate  our  course  as  "  heretical,"  if  not  some- 
thing worse.  Alas  !  what  an  astonishing  change,  when  "  the  Christ,"  "  the  Kingdom," 
and  even  "  salvation"  itself  are  transformed  from  their  covenanted  and  predicted  meaning. 
The  most  selfish  and  mystical  conceptions  are  adopted  in  preference  to  the  simple  truth. 


Obs.  2.  Hence  the  Gospel  is  denominated  "  the  word  of  salvation,"  Acts 
13  :  26,  which  is  to  be  realized  through  Christ — the  reception  of,  and 
obedience  to,  Jesus  is  "  the  way  of  salvation,"  Acts  16  :  17— the  lecep- 
tion  of  the  truth  in  Christ  imparting  remission  of  sin  is  "  the  knowledge  of 
salvation,'"  Luke  1  :  77— the  Gospel  of  Christ  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation  to  evert/  one  that  believeth,"  Rom.  1  :  10.  Such  references,  im- 
plying the  distinctive  salvation  as  future,  could  be  easily  multiplied.  The 
reader  will  notice,  as  e.g.  in  Eph.  1  :  13,  14  ;  Phil.  1  :  27-29,  that,  what- 
ever we  now  receive  from  "  the  Gospel  of  salvation,"  it  is  only  "  the 
earnest"  of  the  distinguishing  salvation — the  specific  salvation — held  forth 
by  the  covenant  and  promises.  The  least  reflection  will  indicate  the  pro- 
priety  of  this  feature  and  of  the  careful  language  of  the  apostles  when  re- 
ferring to  it.  For  certainly  in  this  life,  subject  still  to  trial,  suffering, 
death,  etc.,  the  saint  is  not  delivered,  and  surely  in  the  intermediate  state, 
whatever  it  may  be,  with  the  body  in  the  grave,  the  non-fulfilment  of 
covenant  promises,  the  postponement  of  the  reign  on  earth,  etc.,  the  saint 
is  not  enjoying  the  predicted  inheritance,  crown,  reward,  etc.,  only  to  be 
given  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  Therefore  it  is  that  the  apostles  so  constantly 
contrast  the  present  condition  of  saints  with  that  which  will  be  experienced 
at  the  Coming  of  Christ,  as  e.g.  1  John  3:2;  Rom.  8  :  24  ;  Rom. 
5  :  1,  2  ;  1  John  2  :  28  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  5,  7,  13  ;  4  :  13  ;  5  :  1,  4,  10  ;  James 
1  :  12  ;  2  :  5  ;  5  :  7-9  ;  2  Thess.  1  :  5-1],  etc.  Indeed,  it  is  in  view  of  this 
inexpressibly  great  salvation  still  future,  that  Paul  makes  the  much- 
admired  argument  in  1  Cor.  15,  where  he  says,  "  If  in  this  life  only  we  have 
hope  in  Christ  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable,"  showing  that  by  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  we  have  a  firm,  sure  hope  of  being  also  finally  saved 
through  Him  by  the  power  of  the  resurrection  in  the  order  and  manner 
delineated  in  the  chapter.  Therefore  it  follows,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that 
believers,  even  receiving  "the  token"  and  "  the  earnest"  of  salvation 
should  be  exhorted  to  "  work  out  their  own  salvation,"  Phil.  2  :  12 — to 
put  on  "  for  a  helmet  the  hope  of  salvation"  that  they  may  "  obtain  salva- 
tion by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Thess.  5  :  8,  9  (and  which  is  linked  by 
the  context  with"  the  day  of  the  Lord")  —  to  "stand  fast"  that  they 
may  make  manifest  that  they  are  indeed  "  chosen  and  called  unto  salvation 


Prop.  196.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  451 

through  sanctifieation  of  the  Spirit  and  belief  of  the  truth,"  2  Tliess.  2  :  13, 
15 — to  "  endure  all  things  for  the  elect's  sakes,  that  they  may  also  obtain 
the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  glory,"'  2  Tun.  2  :  10-12 
to  hold  to  the  Holy  Scriptures  which  are  able  to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation 
through  faith  which  is  in  Jesus  Christ,  2  Tim.  3  :  15 — to  take  heed  unto 
themselves  and  unto  the  doctrine,  continuing  in  the  same,  that  they  may 
be  saved,  1  Tim.  4:10:  etc. — so  that  those  who  are  added  to  the  Church 
are  "such  as  should  be  saved,"  Acts  2  :  47 — that  those  who  are  sharply 
dealt  with  may  "  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  1  Cor.  5:5  — 
that  those  for  whom  we  patiently  labor  "  may  be  saved,"  1  Cor.  10  :  33  and 
15  :  2  —  that  salvation  through  the  truth  is  freely  tendered  to  all  men,  1 
Tim.  2:4;  Acts  15  :  11  ;  Rom.  5  :  9,  10,  etc.,  in  order  that  they  may  be- 
come Heb.  1  :  14,  "  heirs  of  salvation.' "  The  great,  the  emphatic  salvation 
is  then  still  future,  and  hence,  the  work  of  Christ,  is  not  yet  completed. 
The  solid  foundation  is  indeed  laid,  the  preparatory  work  is  progressing, 
but  the  lime  for  the  perfect  realization  of  salvation  has  not  yet  arrived. 

This  most  effectually  sets  aside  those  extravagant  eulogies  of  the  present  and  of  the 
intermediate  state,  so  loudly  proclaimed  by  numerous  writers.  Whatever  these  may  be- 
stow upon  us,  they  are  only  the  earnests  of  the  great  salvation,  and  it  is  a  disparagement 
of  the  Sec.  Advent  and  its  results  to  disconnect  and  transpose  that  which  the  .Spirit  has 
joined  together.  To  elevate  the  preparatory  to  completion,  to  exalt  the  initiatory  to  con- 
summation, to  substitute  human  hopes  and  expectations  for  the  express  promises  of  the 
Scriptures  is  tinwise  ami  derogatory  to  the  Word.  Salvation  includes  far  more  than  moral 
and  bodily  regeneration,  for  it  embraces  the  covenanted  Kingdom  of  God,  the  inheritance 
of  David's  Son,  the  joint-heirship  and  reign  with  the  Christ,  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish 
nation  and  its  Theocratic  exaltation,  the  willing  subjection  of  the  nations,  the  renewal  of 
creation,  the  blessings,  honor,  and  glory  of  the  ages  to  come.  This  is  a  salvation  indeed, 
far-reaching  and  wide-sweeping,  commensurate  with  the  necessities  and  happiness  of  the 
individual,  the  elect  nation,  the  Gentile  nations,  the  race  and  the  world. 

Obs.  3.  The  apostles  not  only  freely  adopt  the  current  phraseology  of  the 
Jews  concerning  salvation — thus  indorsing  them — but  in  the  most  posi- 
tive manner  point  out  that  the  expected  salvation  to  which  the  tribes  hope 
to  come  is  delayed  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  Let  the  reader  place  himself  in 
the  position  of  Jewish  expectation  based  on  the  prophets — let  him  enter- 
tain the  Messianic  ideas  of  the  Kingdom,  viz.,  the  Messiah  sitting  on  the 
restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom  reigning  over  the  earth  and  which 
was  expressively  summed  up  in  the  prophetically  derived  word..  "  Salva- 
tion"— and  with  such  views  let  him  read  the  utterances  of  the  apostles 
respecting  salvation,  and  he  will  be — as  the  early  churches  were — confirmed 
in  his  Jewish  ideas.  Thus  e.g.  to  illustrate— take  Paul's  instructions  to 
Titus  (eh.  2  :  11-13).  and  the  salvation  that  the  grace  of  God  brings,  in- 
stead of  being  manifested  "in  this  present  world  "  (in  which  we  are  to 
"  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godlv,")  is  postponed  to  "  the  glorious  ap- 
pearing of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  so  that  now  we 
are  exhorted  to  be  "  looking  for  that  blessed  hope"  inspired  by  the  proph- 
ets. In  Heb.  2  :  3-5,  the  "great  salvation'"  is  linked  with  "  the  ivorld  to 
come,"  the  Jewish  aspect  of  which  has  already  been  sufficiently  indicated 
under  Prop.  137.  Jude,  verse  3,  writes  of  a  "  common  salvation,"  but 
unites  this  in  his  short  epistle  with  the  Coming  of  the  Lord  and  of  His 
saints  (v.  14),  and  with  the  presence  of  His  glory  (vs.  21  and  24).  But 
Peter  (1  Pet.  1  :  3-13)  declaring,  that  those  who  are  saved  "  are  kept  by  the 
power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last 


452  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  196. 

time,''''  and  after  asserting  that  this  salvation  still  future  is  identical  with 
that  prophesied  by  the  prophets,  in  the  most  positive  manner  (vs.  7  and 
13)  teaches  that  it  will  only  be  realized  "  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  and  "  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Surely  this  ought  to  be 
decisive  of  the  matter. 

Surely  such  plain  and  emphatic  Scripture  as  has  been  thus  presented  ought  to  sweep 
out  of  existence  that  abundance  of  religious  literature — so  darkening  to  the  truth  and  so 
deadly  to  a  proper  appreciation  of  "  the  blessed  hope"  — which  makes  "the  salvation"  so 
complete  in  this  life  and  after  death  that  it  practically  reduces  such  passages  to  no  special 
value  and  preciousness.  To  make  the  earnest  equivalent  to  the  glory,  and  to  elevate 
death  into  the  place  of  "  the  Christ"  coming  unto  salvation,  renders  its  believer  incapable 
of  a  correct  apprehension  of  the  Divine  Purpose  in  "  salvation,"  or  to  appreciate  even 
what  the  Scriptures  mean  by  "  salvation." 

Oos.  4.  Seeing  that  the  apostles  refer  the  salvation  spoken  of  by  the 
prophets  to  the  time  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  it  may  be  corroborative  of  our 
position  to  glance  at  some  of  the  prophecies  which  describe  it,  and  notice, 
briefly,  what  things  are  included  under  the  phrase.  If  we  take  Isa.  25  :  9 
we  find  by  the  context  that  it  embraces  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  in  Jerusa- 
lem, the  resurrection  of  the  righteous,  the  overthrow  of  all  enemies,  uni- 
versal dominion,  etc.  The  salvation  of  Ps.  9  :  14  is  identified  with  "  the 
lifting  up  from  the  gates  of  death,"  the  removal  of  enemies,  the  judging  of 
the  world  in  righteousness,  etc.  The  salvation  of  the  righteous  in  Ps. 
37  :  39  is  linked  with  the  inheriting  of  the  earth  when  the  wicked  are 
utterly  rooted  out  of  it.  When  "  the  Lord  makes  known  His  salvation" 
Ps.  98  :  2  it  is,  when  He  comes  "  to  judge  the  earth,"  when  He  has  done 
"  marvellous  things,"  and  "  His  right  hand  and  His  holy  arm  hath  gotten 
Him  the  victory,"  and  "  lie  hath  remembered  His  mercy  and  His  truth 
toward  the  house  of  Israel."  When  "the  Lord  becomes  our  salvation" 
Ps.  118  :  14,  lie  overthrows  the  confederation  of  nations  that  compass  the 
righteous.  He  remembers  mercy  for  the  elect  nation  and  doeth  valiantly  ; 
the  righteous  "  shall  not  die  but  live,"  for  He  will  not  give  them  "  over 
unto  death."  When  God  will  "clothe  the  Priests  with  salvation"  Ps. 
132  :  16,  it  is  said  that  David's  Son  shall  sit  upon  David's  throne,  "  for  the 
Lord  hath  chosen  Zion,  He  hath  desired  it  for  His  habitation.  This  is  my 
rest  forever  ;  here  will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it" — "  there  will  I  make 
the  horn  of  David  to  bud  "  and  "  His  enemies  will  I  clothe  with  shame, 
but  upon  Himself  shall  His  crown  flourish,"  etc.  At  the  time  the  Lord 
"will  beautify  (comp.  2  Thess.  1  :  10)  the  meek  with  salvation"  Ps. 
149  :  4,  then  Israel  will  rejoice  in  their  King,  the  saints  will  be  joyful 
in  glory,  and  the  honor  of  executing  judgment  is  conferred  upon  them. 
Thus  the  Psalmist  portrays  salvation,  and  it  is  wrorthy  of  remark  that  the 
personal  presence  of  the  Messiah  (comp.  marg.  reading  of  Ps.  42  :  5)  is 
requisite  (see  Prop.  120  and  121)  to  secure  it,  and  that  it  necessarily 
embraces  a  restoration  from  dispersion  and  captivity  (comp.  Ps.  85  :  9  ; 
Ps.  14  :  7  ;  Ps.  53  :  6).  One  of  the  most  mournful  and  pathetic  represen- 
tations of  the  downfall  of  the  nation,  the  desolations  of  Zion,  the  treading 
down  of  God's  own  inheritance,  is  found  in  Ps.  74,  and  here  the  inspired 
writer,  recognizing  the  election  and  the  consequent  Theocratic  union 
which  (interrupted  as  it  may  be  for  a  while)  can  never  be  entirely  re- 
moved, asks  God  "  how  long"  this  shall  continue,  and  rests  himself  upon 
the  Theocratic  idea  "  for  God  is  my  King  of  old,  working  salvation  in  the 


PKOP.  196.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  453 

midst  of  the  earth,"  believing  that  He  will  "  have  respect  unto  the  cove- 
nant.''1 If  there  is  force  in  language,  the  certain  inference  follows  of  a 
complete  restoration  of  Theocratic  rule  over  the  nation  with  which  it  is 
specially  identified.  Turn  to  Isaiah,  and  the  same  strain  is  continued. 
When  "  God  is  our  salvation"  and  we  shall  "  draw  with  joy  water  out  of 
the  wells  of  salvation"  Isa.  12  :  2.  3,  it  is,  as  the  context  shows,  when  He 
arises  to  smite  the  earth,  to  slay  the  wicked,  to  reign  gloriously,  to  recover 
the  remnant  of  His  people  "  the  outcasts  of  Israel  and  the  dispersed  of 
Judah,  and  when  "  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  "  is  present.  Comp.  Isa. 
33  :  16-22  ;  45  :  17  context  ;  49  :  8-11  ;  59  :  10-21  ;  60  :  1-22  ;  63  :  5  ; 
61  :  10  ;  62  :  1,  etc.  Such  references  could  be  multiplied,  the  prophets 
being  filled  with  them,  in  which  this  salvation  is  connected  with  the  Com- 
ing of  the  Lord,  the  resurrection  of  saints,  the  entire  removal  of  enemies, 
the  return  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  restoration  of  the  David ic-Theo- 
cratic  order  under  the  Messiah,  the  universal  dominion  and  blessedness  re- 
sulting out  of  this  arrangement,  the  removal  of  the  curse,  and  the  regain- 
ing of  Edenic  conditions,  the  bestowment  of  additional  honor,  power, 
glory.  Taking  even  such  a  brief  survey  of  the  prophets,  seeing  how 
the  apostles  united  their  fulfilment  with  the  future  Advent  of  King  Jesus, 
surely  the  early  Church  was  consistent  and  logical  when  it  thus  received 
and  understood  "salvation,"  and  looked  for  Jesus  to  come  and  finish  the 
work  so  happily  begun. 

How  is  it  possible,  then,  with  such  a  connected  series  of  things  pertaining  to  the  one 
salvation,  that  men  so  persistently  close  their  eyes  to  the  same,  and  believe  in  and  repre- 
sent to  us  a  salvation  materially  different  from  this  portrayal  ?  Is  there  not  a  heavy 
weight  of  responsibility  somewhere?  Take  up  our  respective  systems  of  divinity,  and, 
with  scarcely  an  exception,  they  teach  a  salvation  which  the  primitive  believers  could  not 
possibly  recognize  as  the  scriptural  salvation  covenanted  and  predicted.  Many  of  those 
systems  are  satisfied  with  securing  in  some  (an  imperfect)  way  the  happiness  and  blessed- 
ness of  the  individual,  and  if  they  can  land  him  sately  in  the  third  heaven,  they  deem 
their  work  complete.  If  such  succeed  in  spiritualizing  the  inheritance  of  Jesus  and  of 
His  saints,  and  in  having  the  humanity  completely  absorbed  in  the  divine,  they  consider 
their  task  fully  accomplished,  no  matter  how  antagonistic  it  may  be  to  the  express  lan- 
guage of  Scripture  and  to  the  faith  of  pious  Jews  and  early  believers. 


Obs.  5.  An  essential  part  of  the  work  of  Christ,  is  to  fulfil  the  covenants 
and  the  prophets.  This  He  has  done  to  a  certain  extent,  and  is  now  per- 
forming in  the  Church  and  world,  but  the  most  remarkable  and  desirable 
portion  is  still  unfulfilled.  The  sealing  of  the  covenant  with  His  own 
precious  blood,  etc.,  is  exceedingly  precious,  but  the  fulfilment  of  the 
covenant  in  actual  realization  is  described  as  blessed  beyond  description. 
Indeed,  if  we  but  stop  to  reflect,  that  the  prophets  scarcely  dwell  upon  the 
intermediate,  intercallary  state  but  hasten  on  to  describe,  under  every 
variety  of  expressive  language,  the  astounding  work  that  the  Lord  shall 
perform  in  the  day  when  the  Covenanted  Kingdom  and  its  attendant  bless- 
ings shall  be  experienced,  then  we  have  evidence,  afforded  by  the  Spirit, 
how  much  of  the  utmost  value  is  still  related  to  the  future. 

The  prophets  give  place  to  a  very  small  space  in  describing  the  humiliation,  suffer- 
ings, and  death  of  the  Messiab,  when  compared  with  the  larger  one  appropriated  in  por- 
traying the  realization  of  salvation  under  His  Theocratic  rule.  The  former,  indispensa- 
ble, was  a  sad,  mournful  subject,  the  latter  a  triumphant  one  ;  the  former,  exceedingly 
precious,  was  a  means  to  secure  a  glorious  end,  the  latter  a  description  of  the  splendid 
results  attained  by  it.     We  would  not  for  worlds  detract  from  the  glory  of  the  cross,  but 


454  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  196. 

■while  surveying  it  with  love  and  reverence,  it  would  be  weakness  and  lack  of  wisdom  if 
we  did  not  look  with  hope  and  joy  at  the  sublime  end  which  it  is  intended  to  subserve. 
We  are  too  apt  by  confining  ourselves  to  the  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  to  limit  the  range  of 
Scripture  passages.  The  intent  and  scope  that  the  Spirit  had  in  view,  is  marred  by  our 
not  constantly  keeping  in  view  the  entire  Divine  Plan  which  the  blessed  sacrifice  so 
vitally  subserves.  Thus  e.g.  John  1  :  29  ;  Gal.  1  :  4,  etc.  receive  deeper  significancy 
when  we  contemplate  redemption  perfected,  and  then  consider  by  whom  it  is  perfected, 
and  by  what  a  costly  and  necessary  sacrifice  its  ultimate  completion  and  realization  are 
secured.  The  full  meaning  of  Jesus  being  the  propitiation  of  our  sins  and  of  the  world, 
will  be  only  seen  and  appreciated  when  covenants  and  prophecy  are  amply  fulfilled. 

Obs.  6.  The  work  of  Jesus  is  also  that  of  restoring  the  Kingdom  of  God, 
as  instanced,  e.g.  Acts  15  :  16.  We  have  seen  how  this  was  evidenced  even 
by  the  first  preaching  of  this  Kingdom.  The  Kingdom  was  overthrown  ; 
it  was  offered  on  condition  of  repentance  ;  it  was  rejected  and  then  post- 
poned. Will  it  ever  thus  remain  postponed  ?  No  !  the  entire  spirit  of  the 
Old  and  New  Test,  points  to  the  future  manifestation  of  Jesus  Christ  as 
the  Theocratic  King,  when  this  glorious  work  of  restitution  will  he  per- 
formed. The  titles  of  Messiah,  Christ,  Lord,  and  King,  whatever  applica- 
bility they  may  have  to  the  present,  have  reference  to  this  specific  ap- 
pointed work  of  rebuilding  the  fallen  tabernacle  of  David  and  reigning 
over  it,  bringing  all  nations,  through  it,  in  willing  subjection  to  His  world- 
wide dominion.  Even  the  names  of  Jesus,  Saviour,  and  Redeemer  assume 
a  deeper  significancy,  when  the  power  of  the  first  resurrection,  the  bestow- 
ment  of  Kingship  and  priesthood,  the  actual  inheriting  of  the  Kingdom 
and  its  attendant  blessings,  are  experienced.  Let  the  Kingdom  be  re  estab- 
lished as  predicted  with  Jesus  Christ  at  its  head,  dispensing  the  grace  of 
His  reign,  and  the  world  has  practically  evidenced  the  sublime  truth  that 
it  is  through  Christ  alone  that  the  world  is  saved.  He  and  He  alone  is  the 
procuring  cause  and  most  efficient  instrumentality  in  doing  this  by  the 
establishment  of  a  Kingdom  in  every  way  adapted  to  the  necessities,  wel- 
fare and  happiness  of  man. 

Our  entire  work  has  this  for  its  definite  purpose,  viz.,  to  show  how  and  when  the 
covenanted  Theocracy  of  the  Messiah  is  to  be  established  by  Him  at  His  return.  This  is 
the  grand  goal  of  both"  covenant  and  prophecy,  and  by  it  the  honor  and  glory  of  God  is 
fully  and  perfectly  manifested  ;  by  it  the  redemption  of  the  creature  and  world  is 
completely  secured. 

Obs.  7.  The  work  of  Jesus,  which  is  to  "  destroy  the  ivories  of  the  devil  " 
(1  John  3  :  8),  is  only  partially  performed.  The  requisite  preliminaries 
have  been  graciously  provided  in  His  own  sufferings,  death,  resurrection, 
ascension,  and  exaltation — the  gathering  out  of  an  elect  people  is  going 
on,  and  the  earnest  of  Eedemption  is  thus  mercifully  presented — salvation 
is  freely  tendered  to  all  who  will  comply  with  the  conditions  of  repentance 
and  faith — but  the  great  culminating  work,  which  results  in  the  complete 
overthrow  of  Satan,  and  the  restoration  of  all  the  blessings  forfeited 
through  him,  is  postponed — mercifully  also,  seeing  that  by  it  a  chosen  body 
of  first-fruits  is  secured — until  the  time  of  the  revelation  of  this  Kingdom. 
Eedemption  is  still  incomplete  ;  the  works  of  Satan  still  exist  ;  and  he  is 
the  god  of  this  world  ;  the  saints  even  fall  under  the  power  of  the  enemy 
death  and  are  not  delivered  from  the  grave  ;  sin  and  its  sad  results  are 
visible  on  all  sides  in  the  continued  curse  fallen  upon  creation.  Modern 
theology  has  too  much  confined  the  work  of  Christ  in  the  destroying  the 


PEOP.  196.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  455 

works  of  the  devil  to  this  dispensation  or  intermediate  period,  and  over- 
looking, or,  underrating  what  Christ  is  yet  to  do  (directly  and  by  super- 
natural power,  which  alone  can  reach  those  works),  in  order  to  accomplish 
this  work.  Indeed,  so  far  has  this  advanced  under  spiritualistic  and 
mystical  influences,  that  multitudes  have  such  exalted  views  of  the  Re- 
demption of  the  saints  in  present  deliverance  from  the  works  and  power  of 
Satan  and  present  resultant  happiness  in  Christ,  that  nothing  further 
seems  necessary  to  secure  its  perfection,  so  that  even  the  resurrection,  the 
Edenic  state,  the  removal  of  the  curse  from  creation,  and  other  grave 
points  involved,  are  either  discarded,  or  ignored  or  slightly  esteemed  as  of 
no  real  importance  to  the  perfect  accomplishment  of  the  work.  On  the 
other  hand,  relying  on  perfect  Redemption  through  a  perfect  Redeemer, 
our  doctrine  carefully  notices,  what  are  the  works  and  results  of  sin,  and 
presents,  in  strict  accord  with  the  Divine  Word,  an  ample  and  complete  re- 
moval of  all  of  them,  and  a  restoration  to  the  position  occupied  by  the  race 
before  the  fall— the  grand  work  which  Jesus  is  yet  to  perform. 

Hence  through  the  sacrifice  and  power  of  our  Coming  Saviour  we  hold  to  the  highest 
redemption  of  Israel  from  the  grave,  and  from  all  enemies,  the  entire  sanctification  of 
His  people  and  devotedness  to  His  service,  restoration  to  all  forfeited  blessings,  and 
increased  blessedness  resulting  from  ample  deliverance  from  evil  and  the  bestowal  of 
eternal  good. 

Obs.  8.  The  sacrifice  made  by  Christ  on  the  cross,  is  more  fully  and 
effectively  presented  in  this  Kingdom.  Instead  of  confining  its  efficacy  to 
the  present  dispensation  and  making  it,  after  this  age  ends,  something  of 
the  past,  its  efficiency  and  power  is  constantly  and  ever  more  exerted. 
For,  aside  from  its  moral  influence  in  the  world  to  come,  aside  from  its 
being  the  source  of  inestimable  blessings,  forgiveness,  exaltation,  etc.,  to 
the  saints,  it  continues  to  wield,  through  faith,  its  saving  power  over  the 
nations  in  the  flesh.  The  simple  fact  that  such  a  King  died  for  sin,  that 
the  acceptance  and  honored  acknowledgment  of  the  sacrifice  by  the  Father 
is  made  apparent  in  Christ's  visible  reign  and  in  that  of  the  splendidly 
arrayed  associated  Rulers  (who  were  purified  and  saved  by  His  blood),  will 
so  magnify  God's  law,  portray  the  vileness  of  sin,  afford  assurance  of  par- 
don and  mercy,  confirm  the  condemnation  of  wickedness,  exalt  the  love  of 
God  toward  man  in  and  through  His  Son,  that  the  time  has  at  length  come 
when  all  shall  feel  the  importance,  necessity,  and  nobleness  of  living  faith 
in  this  sacrifice.  The  benefits  flowing  from  it  are  now  visibly  presented, 
and  become  more  practically  extended,  until  the  world  itself  is  embraced 
in  their  enjoyment.  Following  the  Word  step  bv  step,  it  will  be  found 
that  the  sacrifice  forms  an  eternal  basis  for  the  Kingdom  itself.  For  it 
constitutes  the  Theocratic  King  a  Saviour  who  now  saves  from  sin  with- 
out violation  or  lessening  of  law,  He  having  died  "  the  just  for  the  unjust," 
and  even  qualifies  Him  as  such  a  King,  so  that  in  virtue  of  His  obedience 
unto  death  He  is  given  authority  over  all  enemies,  and  to  restore  all  things. 
It  ennobles  His  royalty,  and  binds  His  associated  Rulers  and  subjects  to  a 
loving  recognition  of  His  amazing  love  and  worthiness  to  receive  all  honor 
and  praise.  It  purchased  this  inheritance,  the  glorification  and  rulership 
of  the  saints,  and  so  long  as  inheritance,  glorification  and  rulership  lasts, 
will  the  procuring  cause  be  esteemed  and  lauded.  This  sacrifice  affects  the 
restoration  of  the  Jewish  nation  ;  for  when  the  happy  time  comes  that  they 
shall  look  upon  Him  whom  they  have  pierced,  faith  in  that  sacrifice  shall 


456  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  196. 

also  in  them  bring  forth  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.  The 
allegiance  of  the  nations,  and  all  the  Millennial  and  New  Jerusalem 
descriptions  are  realized  as  resultants  flowing  from  this  sacrifice  being  duly 
appreciated  and  gratefully,  yea  joyfully,  acknowledged.  It  is  ever  the 
inexhaustible  fountain  from  whence  the  abundant  mercies  of  God  flow  to  a 
world  redeemed  by  it.  For  then  the  world  is  truly  in  the  highest  sense, 
reconciled  to  God  through  Christ,  and  forgiveness  uf,  and  restoration  from 
sin,  is  illustrated  and  enforced  in  the  wonderful  deliverance  vouchsafed, 
ami  in  the  unmerited  blessings  bestowed,  while  the  glorious  truth  that 
Christ  died  for  the  good  of  man,  the  race,  and  the  world  is  openly  mani- 
fested in  the  abundant  good  received  and  evermore  experienced.  The 
work  of  Christ  in  all  its  fulness,  even  that  relating  to  the  sacrifice  already 
made,  cannot  be  properly  estimated  unless  we  notice  the  end  that  God  pur- 
poses in  this  Theocratic  Kingdom.  Without  the  Sacrifice  and  the  ad- 
ditional work,  it  could  not  possibly  exist,  either  in  the  person  of  its  im- 
mortal King,  or  in  its  immortal  Rulers,  or  in  its  repentant  and  believing 
Jewish  nation,  or  in  the  worshipping  and  obedient  nations  of  the  earth. 
Sin,  as  evinced  in  its  past  power  and  melancholy  results,  would  be  a  barrier 
to  its  erection.  Human  depravity  is  incapable  of  erecting  such  a  Kingdom, 
and  as  history  sadly  attests,  is  incapable  of  sustaining  it  when  erected. 
Hence  before  its  re-establishment,  a  sure  foundation  must  be  laid  against 
sin  ;  and  this  is  done  in  the  sacrifice  made  for  sin,  in  the  gathering  out  of 
those  who  avail  themselves  of  it  and  are  therefore  accounted  worthy  to 
enter  into  and  inherit  or  participate  in  the  Kingdom,  as  well  as  in  the  ex- 
ecutive, legislative,  and  judicial  power,  that  will  be  exerted  by  this  King 
when  the  period  arrives  for  the  Kingdom  to  be  revealed.  It  will  not,  can- 
not be  exhibited,  until  it  comes  with  a  w&\fe<tjr)reponderating,  overwhelm- 
ing, irresistible  manifested  right con snoT]d  \s  sry(  easily  crushes  all  opposi- 
tion, and  insures  stability  and  p  ,.i>--  -ihc  Kingdom  itself  is  the 
culminated  fruit  of  the  sacrifice  (^  the  sense  that  without  the  latter 
the  former  could  not  exist),  but  receives  for  its  accomplishment  additional 
aid,  in  the  Omnipotence  then  exerted  in  its  behalf  by  the  Mighty  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 

Tes  !  let  us,  in  imagination,  take  our  position  in  the  established  Theocratic  King- 
dom, and  we  can  easily  realize  the  simple  fact  that  the  Theocratic  King  — so  exalted  and 
majestic,  so  mighty  and  the  Purchaser  of  salvation  — having  died  to  secure  redemption, 
will  ever  preserve  the  loyalty  and  love  of  His  subjects.  Saints  experiencing  the  blessings 
of  perfected  salvation  are,  of  course,  self-devoted  to  the  Theocracy  ;  Jews,  repentant  and 
believing,  1  tored  and  exultant  with  their  station  after  painful  ages  of  affliction,  are 
jubilant  in  their  adhesion  to  a  Messiah  once  scorned  and  rejected  ;  and  Gentiles,  coming 
under  and  realizing  the  blessings  of  the  Theocratic  sway,  cheerfully  honor  and  praise  the 
King.  Imagine  ourselves  in  such  a  happy  state,  and  in  it  to  read  Rom.  5  :  10  ;  2  Cor. 
5  :  19  ;  Eph.  2  :  16,  and  a  thousand  similar  passages,  and  will  not  our  hearts  be  so  bound 
up  with  this  King  and  the  welfare  of  His  Kingdom  that  to  serve  and  honor  Him  will  be 
our  highest  joy  ?  Well  can  we  see  how  the  future  mission  of  the  Church  (Eph.  3  :  21)  and 
of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  (Rom.  11)  will  be  verified  by  glorious  experience. 

Obs.  9.  The  continuance  of  the  saving  work  of  Christ  in  the  age  to 
come,  is  confirmed  by  the  eternal  priesthood  of  Christ. 

This  is  set  forth  under  Prop.  155  and  others,  so  that  it  requires  no  special  mention. 
If  the  reader  will  turn  e.g.  to  Props.  200  and  204,  he  will  find  that  the  Incarnation  of  the 
Eternal  Word,  the  Self-manifestation  of  the  Father  in  the  Son,  the  Humanity  derived 
from  David  united  with  Deity,  is  yet  to  exhibit  itself  in  behalf  of  humanity  on  a  scale 
made  possible  by  the  consummation  of  the  preparatory  measures,  viz.,  in  a  direct,  pure 


PEOP.  196.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  457 

Theocratic  reign  and  priesthood,  throngh  which  the  world,  so  longsuffering  and  in  mis- 
cry,  will  experience  "  the  refreshing  and  restitution." 

Obs.  10.  There  is  a  part  of  the  work  of  Christ  exclusively  confined  to  the 
elect,  first-born  saints  who  inherit  the  Kingdom,  which  so  far  exceeds  all 
our  powers,  that  it  can  only  be  stated,  leaving  the  future,  by  blessed  ex- 
perience, to  determine  its  nature  and  glory.  "  Flesh  and  blood  cannot 
inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God,'1  i.e.  one  who  is  accounted  worthy  of  being  a 
King  and  Priest  in  this  Kingdom  must  be  such  in  a  different  form  from 
the  present.  To  be  qualified  for  rnlership  he  must  not  only  be  lioly,  etc., 
in  reference  to  soul  but  must  have  an  immortal,  indestructible,  mighty, 
heavenly  body  as  Paul  describes  in  1  Cor.  15.  Hence  it  is  distinctly  stated 
that  saints  shall  be  made  (1  John  3  :  2)  like  unto  Christ,  and  Phil.  3  :  21, 
Christ  at  His  appearing  "  shall  change  this  vile  body  that  it  may  be 
fashioned  like  unto  His  glorious  body,"  etc.  The  body  itself  undergoes  a 
transformation,  resulting  in  glorification.  Just  as  Christ  assumed  human 
nature  to  bring  Himself  in  covenanted  relationship  to  man,  and  to  obtain 
the  covenanted  Theocratic  order  as  David's  Son  and  Lord,  and,  by  virtue 
of  the  sacrifice  offered  by  Himself,  took  upon  Himself  human  nature  in  its 
glorified  form  to  be  qualified  for  His  reign,  so  we,  if  united  with  Christ  in 
salvation  and  the  higher  Theocratic  relationship,  must,  by  His  aid,  take 
upon  ourselves  the  same  transformed  nature  to  receive  the  proper  qualifica- 
tions. This  future  identity  with  Christ  and  actual  assumption  of  His  (i.e. 
like  unto  His)  transformed  human  nature,  is  in  some  theologies  too  much 
abstracted  from  the  glorified  state  (still  future),  and  applied  to  the  present 
age  or  intermediate  state.  Scripture,  however,  specifically  locates  its  recep- 
tion at  the  Sec.  Advent.  ^?nflu°re  are  things  connected  with  Christ  in  His 
person  and  aims,  in  His  diC .u e  ui eg.glorified  humanity,  which  transcend 
the  grasp  of  our  present  kmr  '  -o,,,^  'i  virtue  of  this  union  with  Christ 
and  the   consequent   transformau  ..}   His  likeness,   there    are  things 

which,  owing  to  our  limited  understanding,  we  see  but  imperfectly,  and 
others  which  are  now  beyond  our  comprehension. 

Obs.  11.  The  benefits  resulting  from  the  work  of  Christ  are  both  spiritual 
and  temporal  ;  refer  to  soul,  body,  race,  and  earth.  It  is  painful  to  take 
up  some  Systems  of  Divinity  (as  e.g.,  even  the  more  moderate  one  of 
Knapp,  Sec.  118),  and  mystical  works  (Schoolmen  and  others),  and  find  it 
directly  asserted  that  through  Christ,  and  obedience  to  Fin,  wQ  only  are 
to  receive  "  spiritual  blessings"  and  no  "  earthly  good  " — blessings  relating 
to  the  soul  and  not  to  the  body,  etc.,  and  that  hence  "  the  Jewish  idea  of 
the  Coming  of  a  Millennial  Kingdom  of  Christ  upon  earth  is  entirely  objec- 
tionable." Now  aside  from  the  self-contradiction  in  which  some  of  these 
writers  involve  themselves  when  referring  to  the  Divine  Providence,  the 
resurrection  of  the  body,  the  removal  of  the  curse,  the  restoration  of  the 
earth  to  an  Edenic  state,  the  future  dominion  over  the  earth,  etc.  (which 
necessarily  embrace  great  blessings  superadded  to  those  conferred  on  the 
soul),  it  is  astonishing  that  they  cannot  see  that  Redemption  itself  would 
be  imperfect  without  the  direct  conference  of  earthly  good  and  bless- 
ing. Indeed  more  than  this,  the  very  nature  of  the  Kingdom  includes  a 
bountiful  and  continuous  supply  of  temporal  good  for  the  restored  Jewish 
nation  and  spared  Gentiles.  Prophecy  is  full  of  delineations  on  this  point 
in  the  removal  of  sickness  and  of  bodily  infirmity,  in  the  bestowal  of  fruit- 


458  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  196. 

fulness  and  of  increase,  etc.  The  Kingdom  of  Christ,  with  all  its  extraor- 
dinary spiritual  manifestations,  is  over  nations  living  in  the  flesh,  and  in 
an  earth  dispensing  the  favors  of  bountiful  seasons.  As  David's  Son,  His 
own  inheritance  is  a  material  land  and  a  material  nation  (Prop.  122),  from 
which  shall  issue  forth  the  choicest  blessedness  over  all  the  material  earth. 
This  objection  has  already  been  noticed  (Prop.  146,  etc.),  and  attributed  to 
the  revived  Gnostic  idea  of  the  innate  sinfulness  of  matter  (  at  least  it 
assumes  or  takes  for  granted  some  such  notion),  which  the  Bible  repudiates 
in  the  person  of  Jesus,  in  the  original  creation,  and  in  the  recreation.  To 
confine  Ptedemption  exclusively  to  one  aspect,  either  spiritual  or  temporal, 
is  to  make  it  one-sided  and  imperfect  ;  both  must  be  included  to  give  a  per- 
fect representation. 

Ohs.  12.  "While  advocating,  what  the  Bible  clearly  teaches,  a  work  of 
Christ  still  future,  which  is  added  to  what  has  already  been  done  in  order 
to  perfect  salvation  and  extend  it  over  the  earth,  we  must  not  be  understood 
(as  already  intimated  in  the  Prop,  on  sacrifices)  as  including  in  that  future 
work  any  additional  atoning  work.  Hence,  we  cannot  receive  the  recent 
theory  of  Waggoner  and  others  (inculcated  in  tracts  and  books),  viz.,  that 
Christ  is  yet  to  perform  an  atoning  work  in  the  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary 
in  heaven  by  His  blood,  blotting  out  the  sins  borne  into  it  and  there  stand- 
ing recorded,  and  placing  them  on  the  head  of  the  scapegoat  (explained  by 
them  to  be  Satan).  This  theory  is  objectionable  for  various  reasons.  (1) 
It  is  based  on  the  phrase  "  then  shall  the  sanctuary  be  cleansed,"  and  con- 
cludes from  the  word  "  sanctuary"  that  it  denotes  the  sanctuary  in  heaven. 
But  we  find  the  land  of  Israel  called  "  the  sanctuary"  in  Ex.  15  :  17  ;  Ps. 
78  :  54  ;  and  at  the  very  time  intimated  by  Daniel,  viz.,  when  the  Anti- 
christian  power  is  terribly  overthrown  (at  the  end  of  these  days),  we  find 
by  reference  to  Ezek.  39  :  12-15,  when  this  power  is  vanquished,  a  cleans- 
ing of  the  land  or  sanctuary.  This  in  itself  would  be  sufficient  to  explain 
Daniel's  statement  without  referring  it,  unless  specific  proof  can  be  given, 
to  another  sanctuary.  (2)  It  assumes  an  entire  new  covenant  to  begin 
with  Christ's  death,  which  is  shown  to  be  erroneous  under  Prop.  50.  (3) 
It  makes  the  atonement  of  Christ  defective  in  so  far  that  sins  that  are  for- 
given (as  e.g.  Christ  forgave  on  earth),  are  still  retained  in  record  against 
the  individual  and  are  brought  up  in  judgment  against  him  in  the  future, 
thus  constituting  a  sort  of  salvation  through  works.  For  this  view  cer- 
tainly makes  the  salvation  of  the  saint  dependent  on  his  own  personal 
righteousness,  while  we  regard  the  latter  (i.e.  works)  as  a  necessary  result- 
ant of  the  obtaining  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  which  being  of  grace 
and  in  the  line  of  simple  duty,  merits  no  salvation  (see  Prop.  135).  Then 
too,  the  sins  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  the  host  of  believers,  are  still 
uncancelled,  and  of  course,  if  in  this  state,  unforgiven.  It  thus  introduces 
an  unnecessary  and  injurious  antagonism.  (4)  It  separates  the  atonement 
and  the  remission  of  sins  which  were  joined  the  one  to  the  other  in  the 
typical  observances  (Lev.  10)  by  a  long  interval  in  the  priestly  office  of 
Christ.  This  is  opposed  by  the  entire  spirit  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
in  which  it  is  positively  asserted  that  Christ  not  only  made  atonement  once 
for  all  (Heb.  10  .  12  ;  8  :  27  ;  11  :  25,  etc.).  for  sin,  but  that  through  that 
atonement  already  made,  present  remission  of  sin  can  be  obtained  (Heb. 
9  :  13,  14,  15  ;  10  :  10-14,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  etc.),  and  that  through  that 
blood  we  may  be  led  to  resist  sin  (Heb.  13  :  20-21,  etc.).     Indeed,  present 


PEOP.  196.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   EI^GDOiT.  459 

remission  is  declared  in  the  warning  (Heb.  10  :  26,)  that  if  we  sin  wilfully- 
after  receiving  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  "  there  remaineth  no  more 
sacrifice  for  sins."  The  one  then  is  not  separated  from  the  other  by  a  long 
interval  of  time.  (5)  The  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary  is  not  performed,  as 
alleged,  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  sins  from  the  sanctuary  and  placing  them 
on  the  head  of  the  scapegoat.  For,  according  to  Waggoner,  the  heavenly 
sanctuary  has  remained  for  centuries  and  still  remains  uncleansed.  But 
in  referring  to  the  typical  observances  and  then  to  Heb.  9  :  23.  we  find, 
that  the  purification  is  made  by  the  atoning  blood,  so  that  God  can  be 
gracious  and  forgive  sin,  retaining  the  Divine  purity  of  law  and  essential 
holiness  of  Himself.  "  The  heavenly  things"  are  already  purified  by  the 
sacrifice  made — and  this  is  denominated  expressively  "  reconciling  the  holy 
place,"  which  reconciliation  is  made  manifest  by  the  continued  exaltation  of 
Jesus  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  High.  Admitting  that  the 
scapegoat  or  Azazel  (as  many  believe)  is  typical  of  Satan — upon  whom  sin 
rests  and  shall  rest  at  the  consummation — it  is  sufficient  to  say,  that  this 
act  connected  with  him  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  purifying  of  the  sanc- 
tuary since  it  is  expressly  declared  that  it  was  done  after  (Lev.  1G  :  20), 
"  an  end  "  was  made  "  of  reconciling  the  holy  place."  All  that  relates  to 
the  heavenly  sanctuary  in  the  way  of  affecting  reconciliation,  making  God 
propitious  has  been  already  done  by  Jesus.  (6)  Rev.  11  :  19  and  10  :  7 
affirm  (as  supposed)  nothing  respecting  the  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary. 
(7)  The  judgment  of  Dan.  7  :  9-11  which  is  made  to  synchronize  with  and 
denote  this  cleansing  is  not  a  judgment  in  the  third  heaven  but  here  on  the 
earth.  The  assertion  that  the  Ancient  of  Days  does  not  leave  heaven  for 
earth,  is  refuted  by  the  carefully  overlooked  phrase  of  verse  22  "  until  the 
Ancient  of  Days  came"  to  the  theatre  where  this  war  with  the  saints  is  pro- 
gressing. (8)  "  Investigative  judgment"  as  it  is  called  by  them,  viz.,  the 
scrutiny  of  individual  character,  whatever  it  may  be,  whether  progressive, 
continuous,  or  for  a  definite  period,  in  order  to  apportion  the  rewards  and 
stations,  certainly  does  not  refer  to  the  cleansing  of  the  heavenly  sanctuary 
for  in  that  case  they  have  heaven  cleansed  just  previous  to  the  Sec.  Advent, 
when  really  it  is  not  cleansed  in  the  sense  they  advocate  by  the  admission 
that  the  wicked  are  only  thus  judged  long  after,  viz.,  at  the  close  of  the 
one  thousand  years.  The  record  of  man's  sins  are  kept,  according  to  their 
views,  in  the  same  place,  and  hence  that  of  the  wicked.  (9)  The  blotting 
out  of  sins  upon  which  so  much  stress  is  laid,  is  derived  from  Acts  3  :  19, 
but  that  it  does  not  refer  to  the  place  and  manner  indicated  by  them  is 
evident  from  the  way  in  which  it  is  used  in  the  Old  Test,  in  Ps.  51  :  1, 
9  ;  Isa.  13  :  25  ;  Jer.  18  :  23  ;  Isa.  11  :  22  ;  Xeh.  1  :  5,  where  it  denotes, 
(1)  the  present  forgiveness  of  sin,  and  (2)  the  forgiveness  of  the  Jewish 
nation  at  the  time  of  its  restoration.  The  entire  removal  of  sin,  of  which 
an  "  earnest"  is  given,  may,  and  indeed  does,  include  the  destruction  of 
the  sad  results  of  sin,  but  the  latter  is  affected  only  at  the  Sec.  Advent  and 
not  previously.  (10)  And  finally,  the  fallacy  of  the  theory  is  made  apparent 
by  giving  one  extract  from  a  tract  (entitled  "  The  Sanctuary  of  the  Bible" 
by  J.  X.  A.)  :  "  the  sins  of  the  overcomers  being  blotted  out,  and  the 
sanctuary  (above)  cleansed,  the  Son  of  God  is  no  longer  needed  as  a  great 
High  Priest.  He  therefore  ceases  from  the  office  forever  and  becomes  a 
King,"  etc.  Any  view  that,  over  against  the  expressly  announced  un- 
changeable, ever-enduring  Priesthood  of  Jesus,  takes  the  liberty  of  ending 
the  same,  is  most  certainly  deeply  defective  and  unworthy  of  reception, 
however  it  may  be  sincerely  held  by  good  men.     Prop.  155. 


460  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  197. 


Proposition  197.     This  Kingdom,  although  visible  with  a  world 
dominion,  is  also  necessarily  spiritual. 

This  Proposition  is  the  more  needed  since  we  are  charged  with 
gross  carnality,  etc.,  because  we  insist  upon  retaining  the  plain 
grammatical  meaning  assigned  to  the  Kingdom  in  the  Holy  Script- 
ures. While  a  purely  material,  naturalistic  Kingdom,  without 
spirituality,  is  unscriptural,  so  likewise  an  entire  spiritual  King- 
dom, without  the  sanctified  union  of  the  material  or  natural,  is 
utterly  opposed  to  the  Word  of  God. 

Under  various  Props,  we  have  insisted  upon  the  union  of  the  visibility  and  spiritual- 
ity of  the  Kingdom,  as  e.g.  Prop.  58,  Obs.  7  ;  Props.  67  and  68  ;  Prop.  156,  Obs.  23  ; 
Prop.  155,  Obs.  11  ;  Prop.  171,  etc.  The  visibility  and  outward  nature  of  the  Kingdom 
is  seen  under  Props.  48,  49,  68,  122,  131,  etc.,  and  this  is  the  specific  covenanted  Mes- 
sianic Kingdom.  We  know  of  no  other  having  a  solid  scriptural  foundation.  Hence  we 
are  pained  at  numerous  statements  made  by  writers  who  evidently  totally  misapprehend 
the  Kingdom  established  by  the  Messiah.  To  illustrate  :  an  excellent  writer  in  many 
respects  concludes  an  article  (1'roph.  Times,  1870,  pp.  145-150)  :  "  But  should  the  Church, 
or  any  portion  of  the  Church,  assume  an  inheritance  in  that  which  pertains  to  the  Jew, 
she  becomes  herself  an  Antichrist  and  a  deceiver,"  This  is  only  true  of  the  present  time, 
but  when  the  covenanted  Kingdom  is  inherited  at  the  Sec.  Advent  it  is  incorrect  ;  for 
the  Jewish  inheritance  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Jesus,  the  Apostles,  etc.,  is  also  our 
inheritance— being  the  fallen  tabernacle  of  David  restored  in  Messianic  grandeur  and 
world-embracing.  The  foundation  is  Jewish  and  pertains  to  the  Jew  (comp.  e.g.  Props. 
68,  46-52). 

Obs.  1.  Any  reader  that  has  followed  the  scriptural  line  of  argument 
can  see  for  himself  that  we  are  logically  and  irresistibly  driven  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  future  Messianic  Kingdom  is  a  visible,  external,  world- 
dominion.  The  covenants  and  prophecy  declare  this  emphatically,  and  the 
very  nature  of  a  restored  Theocracy  demands  it.  What  Kingdom  is  it  that 
was  once  existing,  then  withdrawn,  and  shall  again,  under  the  Messiah,  be 
restored  ?  The  same  Kingdom  in  which  God  ruled  on  earth  as  an  earthly 
king  is  to  be  reinstated.  To  this  all  the  prophets  with  one  voice  testify, 
and  this  is  the  one  postponed  to  the  Second  Advent.  Now  any  other  king- 
dom, not  having  a  visible,  world  dominion,  not  having  Theocratic  rulers, 
organization,  subjects  and  territory,  could  be  the  one  thus  held  up  to 
our  faith  and  hope.  A  Kingdom,  not  Theocratic,  not  one  in  which  God 
Himself  rules,  cannot  possibly  fill  the  divine  portraiture  ;  and  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  a  Kingdom,  without  its  material  aspects,  without  its  subjects 
and  territory,  can  possibly  correspond  with  the  covenants  and  predictions 
on  the  subject. 

A  Kingdom  e.g.  such  as  Reuss  (His  Oh.  Theol.  of  Apos.  Age),  or  Shenkel  (Chris.  Dog.), 
and  others,  advocate,  so  spiritual  that  it  has  not  distinctively  a  single  marked  feature 
characteristic  of  the  covenanted  Theocracy  that  is  to  be  restored,  must  be  dismissed  as  a 
Kingdom  of  human  derivation.     Has  the  same  Kingdom  once  existing,  then  removed  for 


Prop.  197.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.     .  461 

many  centuries,  been  reinstated  with  additional  (as  promised)  glory  and  power  ?  If  this 
is  asserted,  then  we  ask  for  the  proof,  which  cannot  be  given.  A  substitution,  a  com- 
plete transformation,  a  spiritualizing  only  increases  the  difficulties  of  such  teachers.  We 
add :  the  very  nature  of  a  Theocracy,  God  Himself  ruling  as  an  earthly  Ruler,  evidences 
the  spirituality  co-existing. 

Obs.  2.  Because  we  contend  that  the  fallen  down  tabernacle  of  David  is 
to  be  restored  with  increased  splendor  and  glory  by  David's  Son,  "  the 
Son  of  Man,"  at  His  return,  as  the  Scriptures  abundantly  declare,  it  is 
asserted  by  those  who  do  not  fathom  the  depth  of  the  Theocratic  idea  also 
pertaining  to  it  that  our  view  is  materialistic,  carnal,  fleshly,  etc.  The 
ciiarge  of  "  carnality"  is  sufficiently  met  in  Prop.  203  (to  which  the  reader 
will  please  turn  and  connect),  but  this  lurking  Gnostic  conceit  that  matter 
must  be  evil,  when  even  thus  associated,  is  amply  met  if  the  opposer  will 
only  consider  how  this  reflects  upon  the  person  of  the  Son  of  Man  Himself. 
When  in  humanity,  humiliated,  suffering  and  dying  was  He  carnal  ?  or  did 
the  union  and  association  of  the  material  forbid  the  highest  spirituality  ? 
Is  it  not  true  that  humanity  itself  was  adorned  and  sanctified  by  such  a 
relationship,  without  preventing  the  purest,  noblest,  and  highest  of  spirit- 
ual conceptions,  actions,  and  living  to  be  manifested  ?  In  the  humanity  of 
Jesus  we  have  the  embodiment  of  sinlessness  and  of  truth.  So,  in  the  con- 
sideration of  this  restoration,  it  must  ever  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  Theo- 
cratic-Davidic  Kingdom  will,  in  virtue  of  the  Euler  at  its  head  and  its  puri- 
fied, exalted  condition,  be  the  embodiment  of  purity  and  holiness.  It  is 
"the  fallen  down  tabernacle  of  David,"  not  with  its  imperfections  and 
weaknesses,  not  with  its  past  sinfulness  and  errors  of  conduct,  but  restored 
in  a  purified,  strengthened,  perfected  condition  to  adapt  it  to  the  honor 
and  glory  of  its  Ruler,  and  to  its  becoming  an  instrument  of  power  and 
blessing  to  the  world. 

We  simply  point  to  the  fact  that  the  early  believers  accepted  of  this  restored  Theoc- 
racy as  their  hope  and  joy,  and  associated  with  it  the  purest  "/<<'  highest  spiritual  blessings 
and  enjoyments.  Thus,  they  united  with  it  resurrection,  translation,  glorification,  over- 
coming of  enemies,  blessed  reign  on  the  earth,  joyful  worship,  unspeakable  honor  and 
exaltation  with  the  Christ.  They  incorporated  with  it  the  presence  of  the  King,  the 
heavenly  city,  fulness  of  knowledge,  perfection  of  holiness,  ever-abiding  love,  blissful 
communion,  etc.  The  most  exalted  spiritual  excellences  are  combined  with  the  temporal 
aspects  of  the  Kingdom  in  its  relation  to  the  nations  and  the  earth  itself.  Take  the  old 
Fathers  and  of  them  it  can  be  said  that,  like  Tertnllian  (Neander's  Antignosticus,  p.  484, 
Bonn's  Ed.),  although  "  a  zealous  advocate  of  Chiliasm,  was  at  the  same  time  an  oj)po- 
nent  of  a  gross  sensual  form  of  it."  They  have  been  fully  vindicated  (as  we  showed 
under  the  history  of  the  doctrine)  from  the  erroneous  charges  of  carnality  bestowed  upon 
them,  and  this  justification  comes  largely  from  persons  who  are  not  in  sympathy  with  us. 
Irenreus,  Justin  Martyr,  and  many  others,  speak  of  our  receiving  "  the  glory  of  God," 
"  conversation  and  communion  and  unity  of  spiritual  things  with  the  holy  angels," 
"  intercourse  with  God,"  "  things  eternal  and  incorruptible,"  "  the  holy  inheritance  of 
God,"  "  the  abundance  of  spiritual  good  things,"  etc.  The  simple  fact(comp.  Dr.  Seiss's 
Last  Times,  last  Ed.,  p.  335,  Note  E.)  that  the  most  faithful,  pure,  devoted,  holy  believers 
have  entertained  this  doctrine,  and  attributed  the  greatest  spirituality  to  the  future  visi- 
ble Kingdom  of  Jesus  and  His  saints,  should  forbid  the  charge  of  carnality,  seeing  that 
in  it  a  distinguishing,  pre-eminent  characteristic  is  constantly  held  forth,  viz.,  the  relig- 
ious and  the  divine  element — the  Supernatural  and  holy  exercising  an  all-pervading  influ- 
ence. We  leave  Dr.  Greswell  (quoted  by  Seiss)  to  give  the  decided  opinion  :  "  If  I  can  form 
any  reasonable  conjecture  about  the  sentiments  of  the  advocates  of  the  Millennium,  in 
ancient  times,  from  such  of  their  writings  as  have  come  down  to  us — if  I  know  anything 
of  the  opinions  of  the  most  rational  and  sober-minded  of  its  supporters  still— and.  in 
particular,  if  I  am  not  altogether  ignorant  of  my  own  views  and  expectations  concerning 
it,  I  cannot  hesitate  to  affirm  that  they  are  very  greatly  mistaken,  or  very  grossly  pervert 


462  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  197. 

and  misrepresent  crar  conceptions  of  the  nature  and  purposes  of  this  dispensation,  who 
charge  us  with  entertaining  a  sensual  and  carnal  idea  of  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  and  at- 
tempt to  raise  a  prejudice  against  us  on  that  account." 

Obs.  3.  We  ask  our  opposers  to  be  very  guarded,  if  reverent  believers  of 
the  Word,  in  their  denunciations  of  our  doctrine,  lest,  peradventure,  they 
be  found  to  disown  and  disparage  God's  own  appointments.  Will  such 
reflect  that  a  Theocracy  was  established  only  by  God  Himself,  and  that 
when  again  restored  it  is  a  work  that  He  alone  can  and  will  perform.  In 
the  very  nature  of  the  case  a  Theocracy  is  not  a  human  government  but 
one  set  up  by  God,  and  its  form  of  government  comes  from  Him  and  per- 
tains to  Him.  It  is,  therefore,  not  carnal,  for  the  authorship,  supporter, 
and  Ruler  forbids  this  ;  and  it  is  not  purely  spiritual,  for  its  necessary 
sway  (to  meet  the  conditions  of  covenant  and  prophecy)  is  over  the  Jewish 
and  Gentile  nations.  Much  confusion  unnecessarily  arises  on  this  point 
by  not  observing  the  nature  of  a  Theocracy,  the  intent  that  it  is  to  sub- 
serve, and  that  it  must,  in  consequence  of  its  divine  connection  and  Head, 
be  pervaded  with  spirituality.  The  simple  fact  that  in  a  Theocracy  God 
again  dwells  with  man  and  becomes  truly  the  earthly  lluler,  is  sufficient  of 
itself  to  sustain  our  Prop. 

It  is  a  matter  of  surprise  to  find  some  persons  eulogizing  in  the  highest  manner  the 
spirituality  connected  with  the  Theocracy,  once  established  (praising  the  noble  charac- 
ters produced,  the  lofty  writings  given,  the  astonishing  exhibitions  of  the  divine,  etc.), 
but  just  so  soon  as  they  come  to  this  future  Theocracy,  reinstituted  by  the  Messiah  with 
mighty  additions,  they  find  no  spirituality  in  it.  It  assumes  "  the  carnal"  aspect.  If 
sincere  in  their  Theocratic  raptures  in  the  one  case,  we  see  no  justifiable  reason  why  they 
should  not  be  continued  when  contemplating  a  Theocracy  still  future,  that  shall  be  far, 
far  superior  to  the  former  one  in  its  associations,  surroundings,  manifestations,  and 
accomplishments.  The  Theocracy  as  covenanted  and  to  be  established  in  the  future  is 
made  pre-eminently  spiritual  by  its  King  and  associated  Rulers,  by  its  civil  or  political 
being  pervaded  by  righteousness,  and  by  the  divine  exerting  a  supreme,  controlling  in- 
fluence. The  question  of  2  Chron.  6  :  18  being  then  affirmatively  answered,  alone  decides 
the  question  of  spirituality. 

Obs.  4.  The  perfect  and  harmonious  union  of  Church  and  State,  an 
essential  in  a  Theocracy  under  the  Headship  of  Jesus,  the  Mighty  One,  is 
in  itself  evidence  of  the  correctness  of  our  position.  Here  we  find  a  blend- 
ing of  the  material  and  the  spiritual,  of  the  outward  and  the  inward,  the 
external  and  invisible,  and  a  separation  of  these  cannot  be  made  without 
violating  the  union  that  God  has  proclaimed  shall  be  made.  The  Church 
insures  the  highest  attainable  religious  culture;  the  State,  the_  greatest 
civil  advancement  ;  while  both,  the  most  advanced  stage  of  spirituality 
and  material  good.  These  are  inseparable  in  the  coming  Messianic  King- 
dom, and  we  cannot,  if  grounded  in  covenant  and  prophecy,  conceive  of  any 
other  kingdom  that  is  promised. 

Men  do  assume,  however,  to  find  another,  a  pure  spiritual  one,  which  is  found  ex- 
clusively outside  of  the  Divine  Record.  Such  an  exclusive  spiritual  Kingdom,  either  in 
the  third  heaven  or  some  invisible  and  unknown  locality  or  sphere,  is  not  the  one  cove- 
nanted (for  that  is  the  restored  Davidic)  ;  it  is  not  the  one  predicted  (for  that  is  the 
restored  Davidic)  ;  it  is  not  the  one  promised  to  the  saints  (for  that  also  is  the  restored 
Theocracy,  in  which  they  bear  rule).  The  general  analogy  of  Scripture  forbids  it,  and  to 
wrest  a  passage,  or  several,  from  this  analogy  and  press  them  to  do  service  in  upholding 
such  a  spiritualistic  theory  is  to  pervert  the  entire  tenor  and  logical  connection  of  Script- 
ure.    Hence  we  cannot  receive  the  views  of  Barbour  and  others  (Prop.  116,  Obs.  G  and  7), 


Prop.  197.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  463 

who  press  the  idea  of  spirituality  to  an  extreme,  vitiating  the  covenanted  relationship. 
There  is  only  one  (Prop.  35)  Messianic  Kingdom  covenanted  and  predicted — not  two,  one 
visible  and  the  other  invisible— here  on  the  earth.  Homogeneity  (Prop.  104,  Obs.  2,  S. 
19,  note  1,  and  S.  20)  demands  it,  and  hence,  in  predictions  like  Daniel,  this  Kingdom 
is  outward,  external,  visible,  just  as  the  preceding  empires  ;  and  hence  also  the  promises 
(as  the  twelve  Apostles  ruling  over  the  twelve  tribes)  include  a  visible  reign.  The  acts 
ascribed  to  the  Kingdom  and  its  rulers,  the  central  place  of  government,  the  laws  pro- 
mulgated, its  territory  and  subjects,  etc.,  all  exhibit  the  same  ;  not  something  ideal  or 
mystical,  but  a  real  state  manifested  visibly  with  increased  spirituality. 

Obs.  5.  Would  David's  Son,  the  glorified  and  exalted  Son,  come  to  this 
world  to  inherit  a  carnal  Kingdom  ?  Or,  would  He  come  to  inherit  a 
purely  spiritual  one  ?  Neither  of  these  would  meet  the  terms  of  the 
expressed  inheritance.  While  His  inheritance  by  direct  covenant  (Prop.  49 
and  122)  is  the  downfallen  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David,  to  which  all 
other  nations  are  added  (and  hence  necessarily  in  the  world),  it  shall  be 
cleansed.  The  nation  itself  that  formed  the  basis  of  the  throne  and 
Kingdom  will  be  purified  and  believing.  It  becomes,  however  external, 
an  holy  inheritance,  and  the  holiness  is  so  great  and  extended,  that  one  of 
the  prophets  (as  if  purposely  to  meet  such  objections),  magnifies  it  before 
us  by  representing  (Zech.  14  :  20,  21)  that  even  the  smalkst  and  trivial 
objects  are  to  be  regarded  holy. 

We  say  this :  when  even  the  bells  on  the  horses  have  the  same  inscription  which 
sparkles  on  the  diadem  of  the  High  Priest  — and  this,  as  the  context  shows,  after  the 
Coming  of  this  King  and  His  saints,  etc. — is  it  not  time  for  men  to  cease  their  excuses 
on  the  ground  of  carnality  or  of  exclusive  spirituality  ?  While  the  inheritance  of  Jesus 
— with  which  saints  are  associated  as  co-heirs — contains  and  manifests  a  glorious  spirit- 
uality, no  man,  without  vitiating  the  covenant  and  prophecy,  can  show  that  it  is  not  also 
outward,  external,  material.  If  language  has  any  definite  meaning,  it  is  an  inheritance 
here  on  the  earth,  embracing  nations,  having  a  world-dominion,  and  yet  while  in  the 
world  it  is  not  of  the  world,  as  its  Origin  and  Head  indicate.  While  natural  in  some  of 
its  aspects,  it  is  governed  and  permeated  by  the  Supernatural. 

Obs.  6.  Consider  that  in  this  Kingdom,  of  which  the  elect  nation  is  the 
basis  and  the  other  nations  willing  subjects,  the  glorified  Son  of  David  is 
King  and  His  glorified  brethren  are  co-rulers,  and  from  the  very  nature 
and  exaltation  of  the  heads  of  government,  we  clearly  perceive  the  spir- 
ituality allied  with  it.  Resurrected,  translated,  glorified,  immortal  rulers 
must  exhibit  in  their  official  stations,  actions,  rule,  intercourse  such  a 
divine  mind,  such  a  holy  spirit,  such  a  refinement  of  pure  affection,  that 
the  Kingdom  under  their  jurisdiction  becomes  permeated,  controlled,  and 
established  in  a  spirituality,  arising  from  the  mental,  moral,  and  religious, 
exceeding  our  present  ability  to  grasp. 

In  reference  to  the  direct  personal  connection  of  the  saints  with  the  Kingdom,  see 
e.g.  Props.  154  and  156,  and  for  the  visibility  of  the  Theocracy,  such  Props,  as  111,  116, 
117,  122,  etc.  Some  few  writers,  as  Barbour  ( Three  Worlds),  make  the  Kingdom  that 
the  saints  inherit  something  very  different  from  the  covenanted  and  predicted  Theo- 
cratic-Davidic,  which  is  the  special  inheritance  of  Jesus  (and,  of  course,  pertaining  to 
His  co-heirs).  Leaving  the  general  analogy  of  the  Scriptures,  they  base  their  view  on  a 
few  isolated  passages,  totally  misapprehending  their  meaning.  Thus  they  tell  us  that 
the  Kingdom  inherited  by  the  saints  is  a  higher  spiritual  one,  and  assign  such  reasons  as 
the  following  :  No  one  can  enter  or  see  the  Kingdom  of  God  unless  born  of  water  and  the 
Spirit.  To  this  we  answer,  this  is  true  of  the  saints,  of  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  nations, 
for  all  to  become  qualified  for  this  Kingdom  must  experience  a  regeneration  (that  of  the 
saints,  in  view  of  their  station,  a  higher  moral  and  physical  one),  for  repentance,  faith, 


464  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  197, 

and  holiness  is  characteristic  of  the  Theocracy.  Again  :  they  say  "  flesh  and  blood  cannot 
inhei'it  the  Kingdom  of  God."  To  this  we  reply  :  most  certainly,  because  this  pertains 
alone  to  the  inheritors  of  a  Kingdom  (not  to  the  subjects),  fitting  and  qualifying  them  for 
their  immortal,  Christ-like  rulership.  Again:  the  greatest  stress  is  laid  on  the  contrast 
between  "  a  natural  and  a  spiritual  body,"  the  assumption  being,  without  proof,  that  the 
latter  is  of  such  a  nature  that  it  cannot  be  allied,  without  degradation,  to  this  restored 
Theocracy  as  a  constant  and  visible  auxiliary  and  glory  pertaining  to  it.  Hence  another 
Kingdom,  or  higher  plane,  separate  and  distinct  from  the  other  is  invented  (utterly  un- 
taught in  the  Scriptures,  and  simply  wrongfully  inferred),  and  the  saints,  glorified,  are 
carefully  placed  in  it  because  they  have  no  "  natural"  but  "  spiritual  "  bodies.  There 
is  an  entire  misconception  of  the  meaning  of  the  terms  ;  the  one,  natural,  refers  to  a 
body  under  the  control  and  laws  of  nature,  the  other,  "  spiritual,"  to  a  body  under  the 
control  and  laws  of  Spirit.  The  spirituality  of  the  latter  adapts  the  co-heirs  for  their 
positions  of  honor,  trust,  and  glory.  The  mystical  conceptions  of  such  writers— however 
they  may  pride  themselves  on  their  conceptions  of  "  the  spiritual  "  above  others— are 
discarded  by  the  Word  of  God  in  that  it  announces,  as  we  have  abundantly  proven,  but 
one  Kingdom  of  God,  embraced  in  "  the  sure  mercies  of  David,"  and  which  contains  the 
salvation  of  the  saints,  the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  Gentile  nations.  Any  other  Kingdom, 
however  derived  from  a  few  disconnected  passages,  is  mythical,  and  destroys  the  unity 
that  God's  Spirit  places  in  this  one  Kingdom.  All  difficulties  vanish  when  the  student 
observes  that  in  this  Kingdom  there  are  higher  and  lower  orders  to  carry  out  its  end. 

Obs.  7.  The  Priesthood  of  the  saints  (Prop.  15G),  a  Royal  Priesthood, 
evinces  the  same.  The  baptism  of  the  Spirit  then  (Prop.  171)  experi- 
enced, declares  unmistakably  the  pervading,  and  powerfully  contained 
spirituality.  The  worship  that  shall  then  be  tendered  to  God  by  the  saints, 
by  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  demonstrate  a  similar  conclusion.  The  redemp- 
tive work  pertaining  to  the  race,  going  on  under  the  auspices  of  this  Christ 
and  His  brethren,  demands  from  us  a  like  deduction.  The  end  contem- 
plated by  this  Theocracy,  in  the  glory  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  in 
the  honor  and  blessedness  of  the  saints,  in  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the 
race,  this  proclaims,  as  a  constant  abiding  agency  for  so  grand  a  result,  the 
highest  spirituality. 

A  number  of  references  seem  to  intimate  a  connection  of  the  spiritual  with  the  natu- 
ral. Thus  e.g.  that  remarkable  passage  in  Matt.  26  :  29,  "  But  I  say  unto  you,  I  will  not 
drink  henceforth  of  this  fruit  of  the  vine,  until  that  day  ichen  I  drink  it  new  with  you  in  my 
Father's  Kingdom."  Now,  however,  men  may  say,  "  This  expression  is  figurative,  signify- 
ing the  highest  happiness,"  we  are  not  so  certain  of  its  figurative  nature  (comp.  Steir, 
Com.  loci),  because  the  act  and  direct  reference  to  "  this  fruit  of  the  vine"  would  indicate 
the  contrary.  The  representation  given  in  the  transfiguration  (comp.  Prop.  153)  likewise 
confirms  our  position. 

Obs.  8.  The  wondrous  power  exerted  by  this  Theocratic  ordering  in  its 
King  and  associated  rulers,  so  that  it  even  extends  to  the  deliverance  of 
creation,  the  final  and  complete  removal  of  the  curse,  exhibits  a  spir- 
ituality far  beyond  our  comprehension.  A  recreative  and  beneficent  force 
is  then  at  work,  which  frees  groaning  nature  itself  from  its  load  of  suffer- 
ing and  corruption.  The  Divine  and  the  human,  the  Creator  and  the 
creature  are  again  in  full  communion  and  sympathy.  The  separation,  once 
existing  and  so  full  of  pain  and  misery,  is  now  removed. 

Turn  e.g.  to  Prop.  120,  and  see  how,  if  ever  the  Millennial  predictions  relating  to  the 
Kingdom  are  verified,  it  demands  an  extraordinary,  supernatural,  spiritual  exeition  of 
power,  and  that  in  and  through  the  appointed  Theocratic  King.  Then,  as  a  contrast, 
read  the  following  illustration  of  spiritualizing  away  the  promises  of  find.  After  effect- 
ually spiritualizing  the  first  resurrection,  Smyth  {Key  to  Rev.,  p.  352)  adds  :  "  His  reign 
(Christ's)  must  be  only  spiritual.     The  days  of  miracles  are  past  ;  the  Bible  is  filled  ;  and 


PeOP.  197.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  465 

they  are  not  needed  ;  and  Christ  can  reign  as  effectually  without  miracles  as  with  them.' ' 
But  how  then  are  the  promises  of  God  pertaining  to  this  very  reign  to  be  fulfilled  ;  to  do 
this  requires  far  more  than  a  mere  spiritual  reign  over  the  heart.  This  is  taking  a  low 
estimate  of  the  grand  results  involved  in  that  predicted  reign,  and  we  turn  away  from  it 
with  relief,  accepting  of  a  better  hope,  of  a  reign  far  more  comprehensive  and  sublime  in  its 
effects  and  consequences. 

Obs.  9.  The  remarkable,  astounding  outpouring  of  the  Holt/  Spirit  as 
presented  in  the  Millennial  descriptions  (Prop.  171,  etc.),  so  powerful  in 
its  transforming,  glorifying,  and  imparting  miraculous  gifts  to  the  saints  ; 
so  pervading  in  and  over  the  Jewish  nation  that  all  shall  he  righteous  from 
the  least  to  the  greatest  ;  so  wide-reaching  over  the  Gentiles  that  they 
shall  rejoice  in  the  light  bestowed  ;  and  so  extended  in  its  operation  that 
the  whole  earth  shall  ultimately  be  covered  with  glory — this,  with  the 
magnificent  portrayals  of  the  Millennial  and  succeeding  ages,  is  so  sublime 
with  the  indwelling,  abiding,  communicated  Divine,  that  no  one  can  con- 
template it,  without  being  profoundly  moved  at  the  display  of  spirituality. 

Aside  from  Jesus  and  the  saints,  who  are  the  kings  and  priests,  the  Millennial  de- 
scriptions give  us  such  an  universal  prevalence  of  holiness  in  the  Kingdom,  that  every 
rank  and  every  class  are  under  its  influence.  This  holiness,  too,  is  represented  as  enter- 
ing in  and  infusing  all  relations  of  life,  civil,  social,  family,  religious.  Here  we  find  God 
and  His  law  restored  to  their  due  supremacy,  to  their  rightful  place  in  the  hearts  and 
minds,  the  thoughts  and  actions  of  the  subjects.  Through  this  grand  instrumentality  of 
Theocratic  power  and  love,  the  earth  itself  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
of  God.  This,  this  can  only  be  accomplished,  as  the  Scriptures  teach,  by  a  union  of  the 
Supernatural  and  the  natural,  the  divine  and  the  human. 


Obs.  10.  We  insist,  in  strict  accord  with  the  Scriptures,  that  this  spir- 
ituality is  manifested,  not  in  the  third  heaven,  not  outside  of  this  world, 
but  in  this  world,  upon  this  earth.  Some  writers  (as  Auberlen,  etc.)  care- 
fully return  (where  do  we  read  of  such  a  "  return")  Christ  and  His 
saints,  after  their  Coming  to  the  third  heaven  from  whence  they  rule  ; 
others  (as  Seiss,  etc.),  have  Jesus  and  His  saints  in  the  air  ruling  from 
thence.  This  evidently  is  done  under  the  mistaken  idea  that  a  higher 
degree  of  spirituality  is  thus  given  to  them.  But  this  is  to  misapprehend 
the  Divine  Sovereignty  for  the  distinctive  covenanted  and  predicted  Theo- 
cratic Kingdom  on  earth  in  which  David's  Son  is  to  rule  (and,  therefore, 
of  His  co-heirs  it  is  said,  not  that  they  rule  in  the  third  heaven,  or  in  the 
air,  but  on  earth).  The  Davidic  throne  (on  which  Jesus,  as  the  Son  of 
Man  is  to  sit)  and  Kingdom  (in  which  He  abides  to  govern)  to  be  restored, 
is  neither  in  the  third  heaven  nor  in  the  air.  It  is  something  visible,  out- 
ward, world-extended,  and  to  this,  as  the  controlling,  exalting,  and  enno- 
bling element,  is  added  the  glory  of  the  highest  possible  order  of  spir- 
ituality. Hence,  we  dare  not  separate  that  which  God  has  united,  nor  vent- 
ure to  improve  by  additions  that  which  He  has  given. 

We  are  perfectly  willing  to  place  Jesus  at  His  return  in  His  covenanted  inheritance 
and  to  have  Him  rule  in  it — not  away  from  it  personally — where  covenant,  prediction, 
and  promise  place  Him  and  the  saints.  (Cornp.  e.g.  Props.  48,  49,  122,  etc.,  where  this 
objection  is  also  noticed.) 

We  vastly  prefer  (as  Hofman,  etc.)  to  place  the  King  and  His  glorified  ones  in  —  as  a 
glorious  essential  part— and  not  outside  of  the  Kingdom,  for  such  a  position  alone  meets 
the  plain  grammatical  meaning  of  Scripture  promise  on  the  subject.  Let  men  deride 
such  a  view,  or  be  loath  to  accept  of  it,  one  thing  is  self-evident,  that,  unless  realized  in 


466  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  197. 

such  a  manner,  a  sense  or  definite  meaning  given  to  language  by  God  Himself  will  never 
be  fulfilled.  As  we  have  the  one  sense  God-given,  and  the  other  is  simply  inferred  or 
conjectured  (seeing  that  not  a  particle  of  Scripture  proof  can  be  given  in  its  behalf),  we 
rest  content  and  hopeful  in  the  one  received.  We  believe  that  the  presence  of  this  King 
of  kings  alone  (aside  from  any  other  consideration)  will  give  His  inherited  Kingdom  such 
a  glory  of  spirituality,  in  His  glorified  form,  in  His  wonderful  personage,  in  His  display- 
ing the  invisible  Godhead,  in  His  exercise  of  power,  and  blessing,  and  grace,  and  work, 
and  love,  that  it  exceeds  our  present  comprehension.  The  delights  of  personal  union 
with  the  King  in  His  beauty  must  first  be  experienced  ;  the  supreme  happiness  of  inherit- 
ing with  Him  personally  must  first  be  enjoyed  ;  the  unspeakable  honor  of  kingship  and 
priesthood  must  first  be  worn  in  His  loving  service  ;  the  glory  of  Jesus,  transcendantly 
great,  must  first  be  reflected  from  ourselves,  and  then,  with  His  likeness  and  glorification 
and  princely  gifts,  we  can  properly  estimate  and  appreciate  the  spirituality  of  His  King- 
dom.    May  we,  through  abounding  grace,  become  worthy  to  attain  unto  it ! 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  467 


Proposition  198.     This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  confirms  the 
credibility  and  inspiration  of  the  Word  of  God. 

Having  given  some  statements  referring  to  inspiration  (Prop.  5), 
it  is  proper  at  this  stage  of  the  subject  after  having  passed  in  review 
the  great  leading  doctrine,  that  of  the  Kingdom,  to  see  whether  we 
do  not  find  strong  additional  p>roof  in  favor  of  a  divine  inspiration. 

At  the  outset  it  confirms  the  Personality  of  the  God  of  the  Old  Test,  over  against  the 
making  it  "  the  deification  of  a  principle,  or  power,  or  law,"  because  the  Rulership  in 
the  Theocracy  forbids  any  other  conception.  It  explains  and  enforces  the  characteristics 
assigned  to  this  Ruler  in  the  record  as  legitimate,  as  e.g.  the  condescension  of  the  Ruler 
in  exhibiting  (what  unbelief  correctly  alleges)  "  the  Patriot  God,"  who  makes  the  enemies 
of  Israel  His  own,  and  who  is  accessible  to  consultation,  entreaty,  etc. ;  for  if  indeed 
"  the  King  of  the  Jews"  as  claimed,  if  the  Head  of  a  Theocracy,  these  things  correctly 
follow  as  a  proper  result.  If  these  were  missing,  then  infidelity  itself  would  seize  upon 
it  as  palpable  evidence  that  no  Theocracy  ever  existed.  The  same  is  true  of  the  Person- 
ality of  "  the  Christ,"  the  Coming  Theocratic  King,  and  shows  that  "  the  apparently  con- 
tradictory portraits  of  our  Lord  which  we  find  in  the  Gospels"  (so  Butler  in  The  Fair 
Haven)  arise,  not  from  what  writers  vainly  imagine  (viz.,  in  contradiction  of  the  evangel- 
ists), but  from  viewing  Jesus  either  as  David's  descendant  in  the  Theocratic  line  of 
earthly  kings,  or  as  God's  identifying  Himself  with  Him  in  the  Theocratic  ordering  which 
in  mercy  incorporated  the  former — the  one  feature  revealing  the  human  and  the  other 
the  divine  element— both  being  requisite  for  symmetry  as  the  covenanted  Theocracy  de- 
mands. No  pure  Theocracy  can  exist  without  God  being  the  Ruler  ;  no  pure  Theocracy 
as  solemnly  presented  by  the  oath-bound  covenant  of  God  can  arise  in  the  future  with- 
out David's  descendant  being  the  King— hence  both  are  united  in  the  one  Person,  called 
in  consequence  "  (he  Christ."  This  paves  the  way  to  consider  "  inspiration"  and  the 
objections  urged  against  it.  For  a  masterly  vindication  of  the  Personality  of  God,  see 
Prof.  Frohshammer's  review  of  Strauss's  "  The  Old  Faith  and  the  New,"  partly  quoted 
in  Brit.  Quarterly,  Jan.,  1874,  p.  31,  etc. 

Obs.  1.  Passing  by  the  evidence  produced  by  Leland,  Newton,  Fuller, 
Gregory,  Keith,  Alexander,  Home,  and  others,  another  of  great  strength 
is  afforded  by  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  which,  if  intelligently  con- 
sidered, stamps  the  Word  as  truly  divine,  and  binds  the  whole  from 
Genesis  to  Revelation  into  one  connected  chain.  In  this  chain,  link  after 
link  consecutively  follows  without  a  single  flaw,  so  forged  and  joined,  and 
at  separate  stages,  as  to  form  a  symmetrical  whole.  Notice  :  (1)  the 
Abrahamic  covenant  out  of  which  arises  the  Kingdom  ;  (2)  the  Theocracy 
in  its  initiatory  form;  (3)  the  change  by  incorporating  the  Davidic  line 
through  which  it  was  to  be  exerted  ;  (4)  the  overthrow  of  this  Kingdom  ; 
(5)  the  prophecies  and  preaching  touching  its  restoration  under  David's 
Son  ;  (6)  the  distinguishing  peculiarities  of  this  Son  ;  (7)  the  postpone- 
ment of  this  Kingdom,  and.  the  reasons  assigned  for  the  same  ;  (8)  the 
unity  of  expression  in  reference  to  the  time  of  its  re-establishment,  viz.,  at 
the  Sec.  Advent  ;  (9)  the  work  that  is  to  be  performed  during  this  period  of 
postponement ;  (10)  the  condition  of  the  Jewish  nation  during  this  time  ; 


468  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  198. 

(11)  the  ultimate  restoration  of  the  Kingdom  as  given  by  covenant, 
prophets  and  apostles  in  perfect  agreement.  These  are  some  of  the  salient 
points  presented,  and,  judging  from  the  history  of  human  nature  as  pre- 
sented outside  of  the  Bible,  it  is  incredible  to  believe  that  such  a  statement 
of  Divine  Purpose  could  be  given  by  men  widely  separated  in  time  with 
human  prejudices,  weaknesses,  etc.,  without  contradictions  unless  divinely 
auided.  To  illustrate  our  meaning  :  unless  the  Kingdom  itself  is  part  of 
the  Divine  Plan,  limo  could  Moses  predict  its  temporary  overthrow,  the 
calling  of  the  Gentiles,  and  its  subsequent  restoration  ?  How  could  the 
prophets  after  its  downfall  predict  its  long  continuance  in  such  a  condi- 
tion, the  period  of  Gentile  domination,  the  gathering  out  of  a  people,  the 
restitution  at  the  Coming  of  the  Messiah  (not  in  humiliation  but)  in  glory  ? 
Hoiv  could  Jesus  proclaim  its  postponement  and  direct  us  as  proof  to  a 
constantly  abiding  historical  fact,  that  of  the  treading  down  of  Jerusalem 
and  the  dispersion  of  the  nation  ?  How  could  Jesus,  against  the  most 
stubborn  prejudice  and  national  pride,  preach  the  fall  of  the  nation,  the 
grafting  in  of  Gentiles,  and  the  delavment  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Sec. 
Advent  ?  These  are  a  few,  out  of  a  multitude  of  similar  questions,  that  must 
-first  be  answered  before  inspiration  is  denied.  The  Kingdom,  its  past, 
present,  or  future  state,  forms  the  Jcey-note  of  Revelation,  and  in  no 
instance  do  we  find  the  writers  involving  themselves  in  expressions  relating 
to  it  that  are  antagonistic  to  each  other.  The  intelligent  student  will  see, 
that  it  is  against  the  national  pride  and  love — against  the  noblest  instinc- 
tive impulses  of  nature  in  its  social  aspects — that  men  for  ages  have  pre- 
dicted the  down-trodden,  despised  condition  of  their  own  nation  and 
Kingdom,  and  that  consequently  we  must  seek  and  find  a  reason  of  suffi- 
cient weight  to  influence  speech  and  action  the  very  opposite  of  that  which 
is  the  natural  outgrowth  of  humanity.  Rationalism,  if  consistent  with 
its  own  professions,  and  if  really  desirous  of  being  philosophically  correct, 
must  not  overlook  but  ouglit  to  account  for  this  remarkable  feature  in  the 
history  alone  of  one  nation  on  earth.  The  men  who  describe  the  Divine 
Purpose — against  and  in  denouncement  of  the  present  natural  wishes  of 
the  people  then  existing — profess  to  do  it  by  inspiration.  Unless  it  can  be 
shown  that  such  a  consecutive  plan,  in  itself  opposed  to  the  wishes,  etc., 
of  the  nation,  would  be  suggested  by  reason,  or  is  a  natural  result  flowing 
from  the  powers  of  man,  it  is  the  most  reasonable  to  accept  of  the  only 
explanation  which  thus  far  alone  covers  the  ground,  viz.,  that  of  inspira- 
tion. It  certainly  is  unwise,  even  unscientific  or  unphilosophical  to  discard 
a  reason  which  is  admitted  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  a  case  until  a  better 
one  is  substituted. 

It  is  refreshing  to  notice  the  coolness  of  certain  statements  made  in  behalf  of  unbe- 
lief, or  in  Broad  Church  theology.  Thus  e.g.  the  Westminster  Review  (Ap.,  1874,  p.  244), 
speaking  for  a  class,  takes  the  position  :  "  Science  is,  and  religion  claims  to  be,  based 
upon  facts.  The  foundation  of  the  one  has  been,  and  that  of  the  other  is  to  be,  experi- 
mentally verified.  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  the  feud  between  science  and  religion  will  be 
at  an  end."  Unfortunately,  while  facts  and  merely  alleged  ones — the  latter  inferred, 
assumed,  and  far-fetched — in  science  are  eagerly  seized  and  admitted,  provided  they  can 
have  any  bearing,  even  the  most  remote,  against  religion,  the  facts  relating  to  the  Word 
are  persistently  denied,  although  history  is  full  of  them  and  the  present  time  exhibits 
them.  It  is  human  nature;  and  the  feud  will  never  end  until  "  the  Christ"  comes  to  end 
it.  It  is  painful  to  observe  how  vigorous  intellects  take  a  wide  departure  from  the  prim- 
itive Chinch  interpretation,  in  the  honest  but  hopeless  mystical  effort  to  bridge  over  the 
chasm  between  Supernaturalisrn  and  modern  forms  of  unbelief.  Thus  e.g.  Arnold's 
Literature  and  Dogma  (comp.  criticisms  as  in  Westm.  Review,  Ap.,  1874)  or  the  efforts  of 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  469 

Fowle  in  The  Reconciliation  of  Religion  and  Science  (which,  admirable  in  some  respects,  is 
weakened  by  assuming  the  modern  phase  of  thought  over  against  the  grammatical  ren- 
dering of  the  Word).  Such  efforts,  well  intended,  are  depressing,  because  laboring  at  a 
compromise  which  more  or  less  sacrifices  Scripture.  The  truth  is,  and  may  as  well  be 
expressed,  that  as  liberals,  on  the  one  hand,  and  orthodox  on  the  other,  have  asserted, 
there  is  no  middle  around  for  compromise — either  the  claims  of  the  Bible  as  a  whole  must 
be  received,  or  else  rejected,  for  just  so  soon  as  man  sets  himself  up  as  a  judge  to  dis- 
criminate between  these  claims,  tolerating  some  and  refusing  credence  to  others,  then  the 
Bible  suffers  in  its  integrity,  authority,  and  power.  It  is  very  sad  to  rind  Apologists  of 
eminence  (as  e.g.  Row  in  "  Ch.  Evidences,"  Bampton  Lectures,  1877,  p.  432,  etc.),  who,  in 
order  to  avoid  conflict  with  theories  of  science,  make  inspiration  to  be  "  not  a  general 
but  a  functional  endowment,  and  consequently  limited  to  subjects  in  which  religion  is 
directly  involved,  and  that  in  those  which  stand  outside  of  it  the  writers  of  the  different 
books  in  the  Bible  were  left  to  the  free  use  of  their  own  faculties."  If  this  were  prop- 
erly limited  (as  we  have  shown  previously)  it  might  be  accepted.  But  it  is  so  generally 
framed  in  order  to  assist  the  endeavor  to  escaj>e  objections  urged  against  Revelation  by 
physical  science  and  modern  criticism,  and  how  the  religious  element  (as  e.g.  in  the  sun 
and  moon  standing  still,  etc.)  is  to  be  separated  from  the  other  subject  we  are  not  in- 
formed. Indeed  it  does  not  help  (as  e.g.  in  creation,  the  deluge,  etc.)  the  matter  a  parti- 
cle, but  only  gives  unbelief  a  leverage  to  cut  out  of  the  Divine  Record  whatever  it  con- 
cedes does  not  directly  involve  religion.  The  discrimination  is  left,  more  or  less,  at  the 
option  of  the  student,  and,  to  say  the  least,  is  a  dangerous  procedure.  Most  excellent 
men,  however,  take  this  ground,  and  the  result  is  that  much  which  belongs  to  the  in- 
tegral part  of  Revelation  is  assigned  to  human  faculties,  the  reason  of  the  writer. 

Obs.  2.  Much  has  recently  been  said  concerning  (what  Locke,  Ess.  Hum. 
Unders.  B.  4,  ch.  18,  calls)  "traditional  revelation  ;"  doubts  being  cast 
upon  the  credibility,  reliability,  inspiration,  etc.  of  the  Word  by  confining 
us  to  isolated  facts  or  detached  portions  (the  favorite  tactics  of  numerous 
writers)  of  it.  It  is  a  fact,  however,  worthy  of  especial  notice  that  not 
one  of  our  opponents  from  the  early  Church  down  to  the  present  day  has 
ventured  to  consider  the  Bible  as  a  whole,  as  containing  one  continuous 
plan,  and  has  noticed  the  Rise,  Progress,  and  Result  purposed  by  it.  In 
this  consists  the  strength  of  the  Bible  ;  in  this  is  found  the  great  and  over- 
whelming proof  of  its  inspiration.  Surely  the  able  men  who  have  hitherto 
endeavored  to  undermine  its  authority  by  attacks  on  its  outworks,  or  by 
objecting  to  certain  details  of  it,  do  not  elevate  the  standard  of  reason, 
which  they  profess  to  follow,  so  long  as  they  refuse  to  receive  into  consider- 
ation and  carefully  study  (for  reception  or  refutation),  the  Word  in  the 
line  indicated.  The  important  question  to  be  answered  is  not  whether 
this  or  that  portion  may  or  may  not  be  defective — but  whether  the  Bible 
contains  a  Plan  of  Salvation  worthy  of  God  and  adapted  to  secure  the 
happiness  of  man  in  all  his  relations — worthy  of  the  sacrifice  alleged  to 
have  been  made  in  its  behalf,  and  adapted  to  the  removal  of  the  evils  now 
unhappily  burdening  the  world.  AVhile  it  is  reasonable  in  studying  a  loco- 
motive to  consider  its  separate  portions  and  descant  on  their  form,  etc.,  it 
would  be  folly  to  confine  ourselves  only  to  these  and  neglect  what  is  of  far 
greater  moment  to  consider,  the  locomotive  as  one  whole — its  capability 
of  performing  the  work  designed  by  its  builder — and  then  to  look  at  its 
various  parts — not  as  misshapen  or  wrongfully  constructed  when  contem- 
plated by  themselves  irrespective  of  their  designed  use — but  only  in  their 
adaptedness  to  subserve  the  intended  end.  This  rule  of  judging  holds  good 
in  the  just  estimation  that  men  form  of  mechanical  efforts,  scientific  pur- 
suits, literary  labor,  etc.,  and  no  valid  reason  can  be  assigned  why  the 
Bible  should  form  an  exception.1  And  yet,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  subject  to 
exceptional  treatment  in  the  writings  of  a  numerous  class  ;  who,  so  far  as 


470  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  198. 

they  can  intimate  the  existence  of  a  Plan,  admit  its  desirableness,  and  even 
the  incorporation  of  some  splendid  features,  but  persistently  refuse  to  trace 
it  from  its  beginning  to  the  end  contemplated.  We  might  fill  pages  of 
laudatory  matter,  incidentally  presented  by  the  Rationalistic  schools, 
developed  by  a  transient  glance  at  the  great,  eternal  ideas  underlying  the 
Divine  Purpose  as  given  in  the  Word,  and  yet  with  all  these  admissions,  so 
courteously  given,  not  one  has  attempted  to  grapple  with  the  subject 
itself.  It  is  true  that  a  lower  grade  of  writers,  very  different  in  spirit  and 
style  from  others,  do  in  general  terms  pronounce  the  Bible,  including  of 
course  its  Plan  of  Redemption,  a  failure,  etc.,  but  in  every  instance  an 
examination  of  their  works,  reveals  the  fact  that  such  an  opinion  is  derived 
from  a  consideration  of  certain  portions  of  the  book  without  noticing  or 
entering  into  a  thoughtful  discussion  of  the  Plan  which  runs  through  the 
whole  professed  Revelation.  Have  we  not  a  right  of  appeal  to  all  such, 
urging  them  to  take  higher  ground  in  their  efforts  at  criticism.  To  take  a 
plain,  common-sense  view  of  the  matter,  it  seems  almost  incredible  that 
many  of  the  highest  intellects — men  of  distinguished  talent  and  worthily 
renowned  in  their  respective  spheres — should  thus  confine  themselves  to 
what  may  be  truthfully  called  the  lowest  form  of  criticism,  and  refuse  to 
enter  upon  what  is  justly  the  highest  and  most  honorable  phase.  To  illus- 
trate from  the  figure  already  introduced  :  If  a  man  forms  his  estimate  of 
the  worthiness,  the  purpose,  the  capability,  etc.,  of  a  machine  only  from 
viewing  its  several  parts  separated  from  the  Plan  designed  by  its  designer, 
he  is  regarded  as  taking  a  low  position  in  judgment,  and  this  too  in  pro- 
portion to  the  complications,  the  numerous  appendages  of  the  machine, 
thus  requiring  for  correct  apprehension  a  constant  reference  to  the  plan. 
If  this  is  true  of  things  of  a  material  interest,  how  much  more  noticeable 
is  this  fact,  when  we  see  it  applied  to  the  greatest  of  all  interests,  those 
relating  to  humanity,  seeing  that  the  Bible  professes  to  be  a  book  given  in 
behalf  of  man.  It  is  therefore  to  be  hoped  that  our  opponents — many  of 
whom  evince  the  spirit  of  scholars  and  affability — will  see  the  propriety 
and  the  importance,  even  from  their  own  standpoint  and  aims,  of  shifting 
their  mode  of  attack  from  the  particulars  to  the  general,  the  outworks  to 
the  main  fortification,  the  details  to  the  whole,  or  of  considering  the  former 
only  in  the  light  of  the  latter.  Such  a  mode  of  attack,  or  of  criticism,  is 
invited  on  the  ground,  that  if  men  of  intelligence  can  be  led  into  the 
requisite  preparatory  study  for  it,  they  will  be  forced  to  see  that  the 
inspiration  of  the  Word  does  not  depend  on  what  they  may  regard  as  excep- 
tionable passages,  or  on  the  performance  of  works  which  they  regard  as 
incredible,  but  that  its  foundation,  its  power,  its  logical  force  and  consist- 
ency appears  in  a  wonderful  Divine  Plan,  plainly  stated  many  ages  ago  ; 
continuously  kept  up  by  a  remarkable  Providence  ;  evolved  in  undoubted 
historical  facts  ;  evidenced  by  the  present  circumstances  and  condition  of 
the  Jewish  nation,  Church,  and  the  world  ;  and  never  in  any  point  contra- 
dicted by  numerous  writers  appointed  to  convey  its  mode  of  progress  and 
result.  A  real  scholarly  method  productive  of  vast  influence,  would  thus 
for  the  first  time  be  presented,  commending  itself  to  a  careful  recognition 
by  the  fact  that  every  alleged  objection  urged  against  the  Bible  is  duly 
regarded  in  its  connection  with  the  whole — the  stated  Divine  Purpose — and 
shown  to  be  defective  or  unsuitable,  to  produce  the  effects  or  results  said 
to  be  contemplated  by  the  Almighty.  Such  a  discussion  would  not  only 
be  fair  and  honest  toward  the  Book  itself,  but  would  prove  highly  interest- 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  471 

ing  both  in  its  sway  over  the  minds  of  writers  and  readers.  It  would  at 
least  indicate  such  a  sense  of  integrity  and  honor  that  causes  the  objector 
to  allow  Kevelation  to  speak  for  itself  in  its  highest  and  most  essential 
argument  so  that  the  very  form,  if  thus  adopted,  would  commend  itself  to 
every  one  as  worthy  of  respectful  and  serious  consideration.3 

1  Philo-Judseus  (vol.  4,  p.  253,  Bohn's  Ed.)  long  ago  justly  observed  :  "  Those  men  act 
absurdly  who  judge  of  the  whole  from  a  part,  instead  of,  on  the  contrary,  forming  their 
estimate  of  a  part  from  their  knowledge  of  the  whole  ;  for  this  is  the  more  proper  way  to 
form  one's  opinion  of  anything,  whether  it  be  a  body  or  a  doctrine  ;  therefore  the  divine 
code  of  laws  is,  in  a  manner,  a  united  creature,  which  one  must  regard  in  all  its  parts  and 
members  at  once  with  all  one's  eyes,  and  one  must  contemplate  the  meaning  and  sense  of 
the  ichole  Scripture  with  accuracy  and  clearness,  not  disturbing  its  harruony  nor  dissever- 
ing its  unity  ;  for  the  parts  will  have  a  very  different  appearance  and  character  if  they 
are  at  once  deprived  of  their  union."  The  reader  may  have  noticed  the  concession  even  of 
Dr.  Kuenen  in  his  The  Religion  of  Israel  to  the  Fall  of  the  Jewish  State.  After  denying  the 
tenableness  of  belief  in  Israel's  selection  (over  against  the  Theocratic  ordering,  evidenced 
in  a  continuous  plan,  in  the  preservation  of  the  nation,  the  present  fulfilment  of  projm- 
ecies  in  their  behalf,  the  continuation  of  the  election  in  them,  etc.)  ;  after  disparaging 
the  covenants,  prophecies,  etc.,  under  the  plea  of  having  at  present  grander  conceptions 
of  God  and  the  universe — he  finally  tells  us  :  "  Although  considered  as  a  ichole,  the  Old 
Test,  may  be  with  justice  adduced  as  testifying  in  favor  of  Supernaturalism,  its  separate 
parts,  regarded  by  the  light  of  criticism,  speaks  loudly  for  a  natural  development,  both 
of  the  Israelitish  religion  itself  and  of  the  belief  in  its  heavenly  origin."  He  endeavors 
to  make  his  admission  still  more  nugatory  by  adding  :  "  He  who  relies  upon  the  impres- 
sions made  by  the  whole,  without  interrogating  the  parts  one  by  one,  repudiates  the  first 
principles  of  all  scientific  research,  and  pays  homage  to  superficiality."  Now  the  simple 
truth  is,  that  neither  can  be  omitted,  and  Kuenen  confines  himself  only  to  the  one  (i.e.  to 
the  separate  facts),  thus  making  himself  liable  to  the  charge  indicated.  For  he  and  his 
fellows  do  not  regard  the  Bible  as  a  ichole;  they  do  not  consider  the  continuous  Divine 
Purpose,  but  interrogate  the  parts  as  separate  and  disconnected  from  the  whole,  and  from 
such  work  draw  inferences,  etc.  We  fail  to  see  any  indication  of  scientific  research  in  a 
process — wdiich  is  easy  for  the  most  illiterate — that  does  not  allow  any  assignment  of 
parts  to  the  relation  that  they  severally  and  individually  sustain  to  a  whole. 

2  Let  us  illustrate  how  the  neglect  of  regarding  the  Bible  as  a  whole  forces  men  to  make 
unwarranted  statements,  and  how  some  even  who  do  this  cannot  wholly  rid  themselves 
of  its  force  as  a  whole.  The  first  point  is  fairly  presented  in  Dr.  Draper  (His.  of  Conflict, 
etc.,  p.  220),  who,  over  against  the  Jewish  view,  the  confirmations  of  Christ  and  Apos- 
tles, etc.,  says  that  the  inspiration  of  the  Pentateuch  was  not  affirmed  "  until  after  the 
second  century,"  and  adds  :  "  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  Christian  Church  has  burdened 
itself  with  the  defence  of  these  books  and  voluntarily  made  itself  answerable  for  their 
manifest  contradictions  and  errors."  "  Their  vindication,  if  it  were  possible,  should  have 
been  resigned  to  the  Jews,  among  whom  they  originated,  and  by  whom  they  have  been 
transmitted  to  us."  This  exhibits  utter  ignorance  of  the  Bible  as  a  whole,  the  absence  of 
due  examination  in  this  direction,  and  proceeds  on  the  idea  that  no  vital  connection,  no  his- 
torical relationship,  no  fundamental  union  exists  between  the  Old  and  the  New  Tests.  It 
ignores  the  Plan  of  Redemption,  the  building  of  Christianity  on  the  ground  marked  out 
in  the  books  objected  to,  the  constant  appeals  of  the  New  to  the  Old  in  proof  of  relation- 
ship, in  brief,  the  Bible  as  a  whole.  It,  too,  is  scarcely  honest,  for  if  the  Church  would 
follow  such  outrageous  advice,  then  Draper  and  his  fellows  would  be  the  first  to  cast  up 
this  relationship  and  our  forsaking  the  fountain-head  of  revelation.  The  regret  (?)  is 
simply  absurd,  and  uncritical,  and  unworthy  of  Dr.  Draper's  abilities.  The  second  point 
is  illustrated  by  Bh.  Colenso  (Lectures  on  the  Pentateuch),  who,  while  engaged  in  his  de- 
structive work,  that  virtually  introduces  ".cunningly  devised  fables"  as  part  of  the  books 
of  Moses  manufactured  to  exalt  Jehovah  and  the  Jewish  nation,  ends  each  discourse  with 
a  long,  devout  meditation  that  is  expressive  of  reverence  for  such  a  record  because  of 
profit  and  instruction  derived  therefrom  through  the  teaching  of  Jesus,  etc.  He  cannot, 
with  all  his  degradation  of  the  Record,  fully  rid  himself  of  the  influence  which  it  exerts 
when  viewed  as  a  whole,  or  in  its  relationship  to  what  follows.  Strange  manifestations. 
It  is  self-evident  (as  seen  e.g.  in  Stephens's  His.  of  English  Thought  in  flu'  Eighteenth  Cent.) 
that  one  class  attacks  the  external  evidences,  another  the  internal,  another  devotes  itself 
to  historical  or  scientific  criticism,  but  none  venture  to  view  the  Bible  connectedly. 


472  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.   198. 

Obs.  3.  If  our  more  complaisant  and  intelligent  opponents  accept  of  this 
evidently  just  method  of  procedure,  it  is  proper  to  suggest  that  the  rules  of 
guidance  laid  down  in  the  first  part  of  this  work — and  which  coincides 
strongly  with  many  of  their  own  reiterated  statements — must  be  closely 
followed.  Thus  e.g.  the  grammatical  sense  must  be  retained  ;  the  Plan  of 
Eedemption  as  given  in  the  Book  and  not  man's  additions  must  alone  be 
noted  ;  the  varied  interpretations  as  presented  by  men  in  extended  creeds, 
systems  of  theology,  etc.,  must  not  be  allowed  to  have  an  undue  influence  ; 
the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  ought  to  be  regarded  as  professed  announcements 
of  truths  and  not  in  a  germ  state  to  be  afterward  developed,  but  truths 
which  stand  completed  in  their  relationship  to  a  general  design  and  must 
be  judged  by  their  fitness  to  produce  the  result  intended.  Recognizing  an 
appeal  to  reason  (for  God  Himself  does  this)  to  be  proper,  it  is  sufficient  to 
add,  that  true  reason  will  never  make  any  proposed  truth  dependent  on  a 
mere  process  of  reasoning,  for  it  accepts  the  universal  verdict  of  wisdom 
that  where  a  Plan  is  purposed  and  drawn  out  with  numerous  details,  that 
every  announcement  and  every  fact  pertaining  to  it  ought  to  be  regarded 
in  the  light  of  its  perfect  adaptability  to  accomplish  the  end  designed,  and 
thus  meet  the  Plan  contemplated.  Reason,  if  true  to  itself,  ought  not  so 
much  to  look  at  things,  or  facts,  or  doctrines,  etc.,  isolated,  torn  from 
their  connection,  but  in  the  relationship  that  they  sustain  to  a  system  or 
purpose.  This  is  true  philosophy.  Reason  is  given  to  discern  truth  ;  and 
to  find  out  the  whole  truth,  the  most  important  part  of  truth,  is  to  ascertain 
its  bearing  or  affinity  to  other  and  more  leading  or  general  truths.  It  is 
this  feature  introduced  into  science,  art,  etc.,  correctly  appreciated  and 
carried  out,  that  enhances  their  interest  and  value  ;  and  the  time  has 
arrived  when  reason  conducting  the  attack  upon,  or  the  defence  of  Bible 
statements  should  firmly  plant  itself  on  the  same  ground,  viz.,  rejecting  or 
receiving  alleged  truths  in  their  unsustained  or  sustained  relationship  to 
the  whole.  Thus,  e.g.  to  illustrate  our  meaning  :  instead  of  viewing  the 
miracles  of  Christ,  separate  and  distinct,  from  the  Divine  Plan,  let  them 
be  regarded  as  incidental  and  even  requisite  indications  of  a  certain  end 
which  is  stated  to  be  accomplished,  viz.,  the  restoration  of  all  things,  which 
includes  a  renewing  power  over  nature,  man,  etc.,  and  these  very  miracles 
appeal  to  us  for  acceptance  on  high er  grounds  than  those  generally  given. 
It  places  them  in  the  light  entertained  by  the  quite  early  Church  as  evi- 
dence or  "  signs"  that  Christ  has  the  power,  and  that  lie  will  accomplish 
the  work  assigned  to  Him.  And,  reason  here  finds  that  instead  of  being 
merely  arbitrary  interferences,  they  sustain  a  just  and  proper  relationship 
to  the  Divine  Plan,  and  are  indicators  of  the  exercise  of  that  Almighty 
energy  promised  in  the  future.  The  miracles  at  the  deliverance  of  the 
Jewish  nation  are  also  thus  found  to  be  only  indicative  of  a  still  greater 
exertion  of  Supernatural  power  at  the  deliverance  of  that  nation  still  future. 
The  argument  for  or  against  miracles  thus  assumes  a  position  which  is  of 
far  greater  sign ificancy  and  force  than  any  other;  and  the  argument  and 
reply  to  be  in  proper  accord  must  occupy  the  same  plane.  The  miracles 
thus  form  part  of  the  Plan  itself,  and  since,  as  we  have  shown,  the  Plan 
cannot  possibly  be  carried  to  its  completion  without  their  presence,  the 
question  that  ought  to  be  considered  and  answered  before  all  others  is  this  : 
whether,  in  view  of  the  necessary  exertion  of  Supernatural  power  to  produce 
the  ultimate  results  contemplated  by  the  Divine  Purpose,  their  absence 
would  not  be  a  very  serious  defect.     Such  a  line  of  procedure,  honorable 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  473 

alike  to  the  student  and  the  "Word,  at  once  indicates  their  reasonableness 
and  importance.  It  also  serves  to  sustain,  by  implication,  the  inspiration 
of  the  Word  ;  for  if  it  can  be  shown  that  they  are  requisite  to  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  predicted  restitution  (still  future),  their  occurrence,  especially 
at  the  First  Advent,  afford  proof  both  of  the  ability  to  bring  forth  the  end 
designed  and  of  the  truthfulness  of  those  who  proclaimed  their  necessary 
connection  with  the  same.  Thus  miracles  regarded  in  the  light  of  the 
wonderful  miraculous  working  of  Jesus  Christ  at  ITis  Sec.  Coming — tak- 
ing in  the  final  result — are  essential  confirmatory  manifestations  that  the 
End  will  be  realized  as  promised  ;  and  to  give  them  their  proper  weight 
and  position  they  must  be  considered  in  this  aspect.  This  makes  them 
both  reasonable  and  required  appendages  to  the  development  of  God's  Plan. 
The  omission  of  them,  in  view  of  the  important  part  assigned  to  them  still 
future,  would  indeed  form  a  great  objection  to  the  Word,  invalidating, 
according  to  the  requirements  of  reason,  its  professed  inspiration.  For,  if 
Christ  is  the  One  wiio  is  to  restore  or  renew  all  things,  as  the  prophets  all 
testify,  then  when  He  comes  even  in  humiliation  it  is  of  moment  that  this 
miraculous  power,  alleged  to  be  lodged  in  Him,  should  be  in  some  way 
evidenced  to  influence  faith  in  Him.  In  other  words,  taking  the  por- 
traiture given  of  the  Messiah  in  the  Old  Test.  Scriptures,  the  Advent  of 
the  same  without  an  exhibition  in  some  form  of  the  Supernatural  allied  with 
Him,  would  leave  out  an  element  of  identification  and  trust.  So  that  on 
this  ground  the  works  of  Jesus  Christ  are  confidently  appealed  to,  as  proof 
that  He  is  indeed  the  predicted  Messiah. 

The  Theocratic  relationship  of  the  line  and  nation  descended  from  Abraham  made  a 
manifestation  of  the  Supernatural,  and  hence  the  miraculous,  a  necessary  consequence. 
God  condescending  to  become  the  earthly  Ruler  of  the  Jewish  nation,  it  was  reasonable 
that  that  very  form  of  manifestation  of  power  (which  other  nations  justly  supposed  a 
prerequisite  of  God-like  interest  and  union  in  human  affairs,  and  therefore  appropriated 
in  their  mythologies)  should  be  given  as  evidence  of  the  reality  of  such  a  kingly  relation- 
ship. Moses  specially  entreated  that  it  should  be  excited  in  their  guidance  and  protec- 
tion, and  we  fail  to  see  how  a  Tin  ocracy  could  be  established  and  carried  on  without  its 
conjunction.  It  is  in  view  of  this  special  nearness  of  God  to  this  nation  that  even 
Ewald  (Die  Lehre  der  Bibel  von  (Jolt)  admits,  however  much  he  may  sympathize  with 
Rationalism  in  some  particulars,  that  the  prophetic  revelations  given  to  Israel  are  to  be 
distinguished  and  elevated  above  those  claimed  by  other  nations.  But  this  Theocratic 
feature  extends  not  merely  to  '  a  miracle  of  knowledge '  (prophecy),  but  to  all 
miracles.  Take  e.g.  the  one  that  is  the  particular  object  of  ridicule  from  men  proud 
of  their  science,  viz.,  Joshua  (Jos.  10  :  12-14),  commanding  the  sun  and  moon  to 
stand  still,  the  language  being  that  adapted  to  a  popular  method  (as  illustrated  by  some 
writers  in  referring  to  the  Greek  of  Acts  27  :  27  "  some  land  was  nearing  them" — i.e. 
not  that  the  land  literally  approaches  when  sailing  toward  it,  etc.),  and  expressive  of  the 
fact  that  the  day  was  supernaturally  lengthened.  To  consider  this  miracle  outside  of  (he 
Theocratic  position  of  the  nation  and  leader — yea,  of  God  Himself  as  the  pledged  Ruler 
of  the  nation,  is  simply  injustice  to  the  Word.  The  Theocratic  order  makes  the  miracle 
a  reasonable  one,  for  the  King  had  given  His  word  to  aid  in  an  emergency,  and  when 
such  arose  it  was  right  and  proper  to  anticipate  the  help  promised.  The  simple  narra- 
tive shows  that  Joshua,  who  acted  as  God's  agent,  deeply  felt  and  realized  this  Theocratic 
relationship,  and  under  the  depth  of  conviction  and  feeling — impelled  by  the  occasion, 
— he  "  spake  to  the  Lord,"  that  is,  turns  to  his  King  for  help,  and  from  the  assurances 
arising  from  faith  in  that  King,  or  from  the  reception  of  the  Spirit,  utters  the  command 
to  the  sun  and  moon,  and  God,  the  King  ordered  the  intent  (viz.,  to  lengthen  the  day — 
the  light),  of  the  command  to  be  carried  out,  thus  proving — not  miraculous  power  alone 
hut — His  Theocratic  relationship  to  the  nation  and  His  faithfulness,  "  for  the  Lord  heark- 
ened to  the  voice  of  a  man  ;  for  the  Lord  fought  for  Israel."  The  miracle  then,  instead  of 
being  unreasonable,  is  precisely  what  ought  to  be  anticipated  in  the  career  of  a  nation 
favored  by  a  Theocracy.     The  language  itself  which  bears  so  heavily  the  shafts  of  wit- 


474  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  198. 

lings  is  not  the  language  of  God,  but  of  Joshua,  and  is  such — proving  the  honesty  of  the 
record — as  would  be  used  by  a  man  like  Joshua  in  that  age  of  astronomical  knowledge, 
or  as  would  be  best  adapted  to  popular  concejotions.  God  takes  the  intent  of  Joshua  and 
fulfils  it,  thus  showing  that  a  veritable  Theocracy  existed.  Kurtz  (Sac.  His.,  p.  155),  justly 
says  :  "The  command  of  faith  is  pronounced  in  the  sense  which  Joshua  assigns  to  the 
words;  the  divine  answer  is  given  in  the  sense  in  which  God  understands  them." 
Joshua  simply  prayed  for  a  prolonging  of  the  day  and  God  gives  it.  It  was  not  simply 
faith  in  God  as  God,  but  in  God  as  Theocratic  King  that  produces  the  result.  It  is 
painful  to  find  how  Christian  apologists  of  high  standing,  failing  to  notice  the  Theocratic 
point  of  view  from  which  the  miracle  must  be  regarded,  have  even  condescended  to 
adopt  the  Rationalistic  conceit  that  Joshua's  command  is  a  piece  of  poetry!  an  ebulli- 
tion of  Oriental  extravagance  !  Liberals  [Westm.  lieview,  etc.),  make  themselves  merry 
over  the  late  "  Speaker's  Commentary"  yielding  up  the  miracle,  and  adopting  Ewald's 
notion  of  poetic  language,  and  well  may  they  do  so,  when  exegesis  can  fall  so  low  as  to 
travesty  a  narrative  so  plainly  recorded.  The  old  explanation  as  given  by  Home  (Introd. 
vol.  1,  p.  421),  and  others,  is  immensely  preferable  to  such  a  degrading  process.  Let  the 
student  consider  several  points  :  (1)  That  unless  the  Sujiernatural  shine  forth  in  some 
way  before  the  nation,  it  could  not  fairly  be  evidenced  that  a  Theocracy  existed  ;  (2) 
that  if  the  Supernatural  in  direct  aid,  etc.,  were  lacking,  infidelity  would  appeal  to  this 
as  positive  proof  that  a  pure  Theocracy  never  existed  ;  (3)  that  the  general  feeling  of 
heathen  nations  has  been,  that  the  nearer  the  approach  to  a  Theocracy,  the  more  of  the 
miraculous  ought  to  be  witnessed  ;  (4)  that  the  question  of  probability  drawn  from  the 
relationship  of  the  two  parties  is  too  much  neglected  in  this  discussion  ;  and  (5)  that 
this  miracle,  like  all  others  is  only  "  a  sign"  of  something  which  is  to  come,  for  as 
Joshua  was  a  type  of  Jesus,  so  when  Jesus  comes  as  "  the  man  of  war,"  we  have  in  this 
very  miracle  — over  which  so  many  foolishly  jest— "a  sign"  of  the  wonder-working  arm  of 
Him  who  is  finally  to  lead  on  God's  people  to  deliverance,  and  to  a  complete  overwhelm- 
ing of  God's  enemies.  (May  we  also  add,  that  it  teaches  us  what  to  think  of  able  Apolo- 
gists, who  fritter  away  answers  to  prayer  as  coming  only  in  the  line  of  natural  causes  (as 
e.g.  Row's  Bampton  Lectures,  1877,  "  Ch.  Evidences"),  notwithstanding  such  examples, 
the  promises  of  Jesus  to  prayer,  the  ministry  of  angels,  etc.).  "We  are  not  especially  con- 
cerned in  the  manner  by  which  God  answered  the  intent  of  Joshua,  whether  by  a 
miraculous  exertion  of  power  on  the  planet,  or  by  a  special  Supernatural  reflection  of 
light  only  confined  to  Palestine,  etc.  (because  no  details  being  given,  we  know  not  the 
precise  method  employed),  but  we  are  concerned  in  insisting  that  the  historical  narrative 
does  present  us  the  miraculous  power  of  a  then  present  Theocratic  King. 

Looking  at  Jesus  Christ  as  a  God-man  (given  by  unlearned  men)  and  admitting  a  First 
Cause— a  God -a  Creator,  it  certainly  is  no  evidence  of  intellectual  strength  (as  seen 
even  in  Hamilton,  Mill,  etc.),  or  of  correct  reasoning,  to  refuse  to  believe  that  snch  a 
Being,  thus  formed,  can  at  pleasure  subject  nature  to  His  own  Will  in  the  matter  of 
change,  etc.,  especially  when  this  is  done  in  the  interest  of  man  against  an  admitted 
disturbing  element  (evil),  and  to  subserve  moral  purpose.  "Which  is  the  most  reason- 
able, to  portray  such  a  Being  meeting  the  exigencies  of  the  world,  or  to  elevate  the  world 
by  a  mechanical  conception,  by  a  rigorous  law  of  uniformity,  above  the  mighty  Designer 
and  Lawgiver  ?  Which  is  the  most  reasonable  to  suppose  that  moral  beings,  subject  to 
great  and  heartrending  evils,  should  be  totally  left  to  shift  for  themselves  without  some 
special  aid,  made  necessary  by  their  condition,  from  a  moral  Governor,  or  to  ignore  the 
moral  and  lay  down  the  principle  that  the  Divine  must  only  be  measured  by  the  human, 
and  that  intellectuality  (the  inductions  and  deductions  of  reason,  and  even  the  deter- 
minations of  the  will,  etc.),  is  a  natural  product,  purely  the  result  of  natural  progression  ? 
Which  is  the  most  in  accord  with  reason,  to  have  a  Saviour,  such  as  these  "  unlearned 
men"  give  to  us,  admitted  if  He  really  possess  the  attributes  attributed  to  Him  to  be 
adapted  for  purposes  of  salvation,  or  to  close  the  door  to  all  hope  excepting  what  natural 
development — which  cannot  save  from  death,  etc. — may  suggest  ?  Thus,  in  correspond- 
ence with  what  preceded,  we  find  converging  testimony  in  favor  of  the  portraiture  given 
of  Jesus,  underlying  the  constitution  of  things  and  arising  out  of  the  moral  necessities  of 
man.  We  need  not  even  press  against  Rationalism  its  own  picture  of  Jesus,  when  it 
gives  "  the  perfect,  ideal  man  of  humanity"  which  includes  freedom  from  sin,  etc.,  with- 
out a  single  hint  or  explanation  how  by  the  laws  of  naturalism  or  development  such  a 
2)ure  Being  could  suddenly  appear  out  of  the  surrounding  mass  of  depravity,  and  could 
as  suddenly  disappear  without  continued  reproduction  in  the  same  form.  This,  to  say 
the  least,  is  an  indication  of  weakness  in  argumentation,  while  the  demand  is  solved  by 
these  supposed  "  unlearned"  writers,  and  until  an  explanation  is  given  more  satisfactory 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  475 

to  reason,  reason  is  justified  in  accepting  of  it.  "We  are  confident  of  one  thing,  viz.,  that 
the  Supernatural  Saviour  of  the  Bible  is  the  only  one  adapted  to  save  us  from  the  conclu- 
sions of  Shopenhauer,  Yon  Hartman,  and  others — that  there  is  and  ever  will  be  an 
uninterrupted  continuance  of  evil  under  natural  law,  and  that  misery  grows  with  con- 
sciousness, intelligence,  and  knowledge.  That,  however,  which  above  all  others  meets 
the  objections  of  Celsus  and  Porphyry,  Voltaire  and  Gibbon,  Hume  and  Strauss,  Huxley 
and  Tyndall,  and  many  others,  is  a  personal  practical  experience  of  the  preciousness  of 
Jesus  by  faith  in  Him  as  the  Redeemer,  for  the  results  in  heart  and  life  are  such  that 
the  believer  possesses  in  himself  a  conclusive  personal  evidence  of  the  truth  and  divinity 
of  the  Scripttires.  The  attacks  of  unbelieving  science  do  not  effect  him,  for  he  realizes 
the  truth  in  God's  dear  Son,  and  he  is  content,  believing  that  in  the  ultimate  outcome 
all  things — even  those  supposed  to  be  antagonistic — will  be  found  to  be  in  harmony  with 
Revelation,  either,  on  the  one  hand,  by  science  enlarging  its  views  and  changing  its  de- 
ductions ;  or  by  faith,  on  the  other  hand,  rightly  apprehending  the  divine  teaching  and 
changing  its  conclusions  ;  or  by  the  Advent  and  its  additional  revelations  affording  us  the 
light  needed  for  a  complete  reconciliation.  The  experience  derived  from  God  in  His 
Son  gives  the  philosopher  and  ignorant,  the  learned  and  unlearned,  the  same  assurance. 

Obs.  4.  But  to  make  our  argument  logically  correct,  let  us  turn  to  the 
great,  leading  doctrine  of  the  Word,  viz.,  that  of  this  Kingdom,  which 
presents  to  us  what  really  is  the  Divine  Purpose.  The  Kingdom  being  the 
burden  of  prophecy,  the  End  which  God  has  in  view  in  the  preparatory 
measures  and  dispensations  introduced,  and  the  goal  toward  which  ail 
things  tend,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  in  a  discussion  involving 
the  inspiration  of  God's  professed  Word,  two  things  should  be  observed  : 
(1)  that  a  proper  knowledge  and  estimate  of  the  Kingdom  itself  should  be 
attained,  and  (2)  that  in  virtue  of  this  Kingdom  being  the  End  proposed 
in  the  Redemptive  process,  all  other  announcements,  facts,  etc.,  must  ho 
regarded  in  their  relationship  to  it.  Casting  aside  the  numerous  meanings 
fastened  upon  the  Kingdom  by  men,  let  the  plain  idea,  the  simple  notion 
of  it  so  characteristic  of  the  Old  Test,  (as  admitted  by  Rationalism  and  by 
Orthodoxy,  however  it  may  be  afterward  explained  by  them)  be  retained  ; 
then  let  it  be  traced  in  its  initiatory  establishment,  its  overthrow,  its 
promised  restoration,  its  predicted  glory,etc.,'  and  with  all  this  before  the 
mind,  let  reason  carefully  examine  its  design,  its  merits,  its  adaptability  to 
secure  the  deliverance  of  man,  the  race,  and  the  world,  and  reason  must 
confess  that  if  carried  out  according  to  the  pre-determined  programme  hud 
down  in  the  Word,  it  wi\]  fully  and  most  perfectly  meet  the  wants  and  the 
desires  of  humanity.  Concerning  the  latter  there  can  be  no  question,  see- 
ing that  it  embraces  within  itself  not  only  the  deliverance  of  man  individu- 
ally, but  that  of  society  in  its  highest  and  most  extended  relations,  includ- 
ing that  of  a  world  now  subject  (explain  it  as  we  may)  to  evil.  The  intel- 
ligent reader  knows  that  many  pages  could  be  filled  with  admissions  taken 
from  Rationalistic  writings  acknowledging  that  the  conceptions  of  the 
Kingdom  as  given  by  the  prophets  form  "  a  splendid,  gorgeous  dream."  and 
one  too  most  desirable  to  humanity,  if  it  could  only  be  realized.  We  are 
not  now  concerned  with  the  question  why  it  was  not  fulfilled  (for  this  is 
answered  under  Props.  56-08)  but  only  with  the  fact,  that  no  man  can  read 
the  descriptions  pertaining  to  this  Kingdom  without,  if  honest,  frankly 
admitting  that  there  is  no  phase  of  imperfection,  suffering,  and  evil  which 
it  does  not  propose  to  remove,  and  that  there  is  no  blessing  which  the 
heart  of  man  has  longed  for  both  for  himself  and  society  which  it  does  not 
intend  to  bestow.  Hence  it  follows,  that  whether  there  be  faith  in  the 
announcements  or  not,  the  concession  at  least  follows,  that,  if  it  could  be 


476  THE  TIIEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  198. 

witnessed  and  experienced,  man  would  indeed  find  a  happy  release  from 
tears,  sorrow,  and  death,  and  that  the  world  itself  would  undergo  the 
much-wished-for  transformation.  Here  then  is  the  main  point  upon 
which  all  are  agreed  ;  and  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  owing  to  the 
precious  interests  involved,  it  ought  in  any  scholarly  discussion  of  the 
Word  occupy  the  prominency  given  to  it.  Rationalism,  if  we  understand 
ifs  position,  has  no  fault  to  find  with  the  blessings  contemplated  to  be  in- 
troduced by  the  Kingdom — it  admits  their  desirableness  and  the  great 
happiness  that  would  inevitably  result  if  thus  introduced — but  it  objects 
to  the  manner  in  which  they  are  to  be  introduced,  to  the  agencies  by  which 
it  is  to  be  effected,  and  hence  refuses  credence  to  their  realization,  mainly 
on  the  ground  of  a  past  non-fulfilment,  and  of  its  requiring  such  a  Super- 
natural intervention  as  cannot  be  credited.  To  such  we  can  only  briefly 
indicate  a  line  of  investigation  that  at  once  removes,  in  accordance  with 
reason,  their  objections.  Let  the  condition  of  man  and  society  be  satis- 
factorily met  by  the  Kingdom,  then  at  once  the  greatest  objection  that 
could  possibly  be  urged  against  Revelation  is  also  met  and  set  aside.  This 
secures  the  proper  leverage  for  continued  investigation.  The  next  point 
for  consideration  follows  :  God  intends  to  secure  the  salvation  of  the  world 
through  the  establishment  of  a  Theocracy  ;  now  does  the  nature  of  a  Theoc- 
racy contain  the  elements  requisite  to  meet  the  conditions  in  which  man  is 
placed  in  all  its  relations?  Is  it  desh'able,  admitting  for  the  time  the  idea 
of  a  Creator  (which  Rationalism  so  largely  indorses),  that  God  should  con- 
descend to  act  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly  Ruler  ;  that  He  should  mani- 
fest the  same  through  some  chosen  instrumentality  ;  that  He  should  thus 
establish  a  permanent,  world-wide  dominion,  etc.  ?  Surely  there  is  noth- 
ing in  the  idea  of  a  Theocracy  but  what  commends  itself  both  to  the  intelli- 
gence and  the  desires  of  the  student  ;  it  being  a  want  which  the  world  has 
long  felt  and  acknowledged  ;  and  which,  not  being  now  visibly  manifested, 
is  presented  by  some  forms  of  infidelity  as  a  reason  why  God's  direct  inter- 
ference with  human  affairs  is  denied.  Our  argument  accepts  of  this  reason 
as  a  correct  one,  provided  (1)  it  can  be  proven  that  no  Theocracy  ever  ex- 
isted, and  (2)  that  no  Theocracy  shall  ever  again  exist.  The  first  is  evi- 
denced (a)  by  history  ;  (b)  by  the  reasonableness  of  representations  ;  (c)  by 
its  design  and  prosecution  (for  its  failure  so  candidly  stated,  with  reasons 
assigned  so  humiliating  to  the  nation,  go  far  to  prove  its  veritv)  ;  (d)  the 
conjoining  in  some  form  of  the  Supernatural  with  the  human,  indicative  of 
the  Divine  being  really  present,  as  shown  e.g.  by  prophecy,  etc.  The 
latter  is  proven,  by  (a)  the  connection  it  sustains  to  the  former  ;  (b)  the 
utterances  given  concerning  it  confirmed  by  prophecy  and  its  resultant 
history  ;  (c)  the  provision  made  and  now  in  progress  for  its  re-establish- 
ment ;  (d)  the  valid  reasons  assigned  for  its  postponement  ;  (e)  the  con- 
dition and  preservation  of  the  chosen  nation  with  which  it  is  identified  ; 
(/)  the  gathering  out  of  a  select  body  to  be  incorporated  with  the  King- 
dom ;  (g)  the  entire  unity  of  purpose  closely  observed  in  all  the  declara- 
tions respecting  it.  These  are  some  of  the  things  which  ought  to  be 
calmly  studied  before  coming  to  a  definite  conclusion  ;  and  if,  peradven- 
ture,  it  should  be  adverse,  the  reasoning  by  which  it  is  reached  should  be 
carefully  given  so  that  the  subject  may  receive  that  intelligent  review 
which  its  importance  demands.2 

1  Two  remarks  are  here  in  place.     The  reader  is  reminded  that  in   reference  to  this 
Theocratic  Kingdom  we  have  (1)  the  fact  that  it  once  existed  in  connection  with  the 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  477 

Jewish  nation  ;  (2)  that  it  incorporated  the  Davidic  line  with  special  promises  of 
enlargement,  grandeur,  etc.,  under  a  descendant  of  David  ;  (3)  that  it  was  overthrown, 
owing  to  the  sinfulness  of  the  nation,  as  a  punishment  ;  (-1)  that  it  was  not  re-established 
at  the  first  Advent,  and  the  reasons  are  given  in  their  plain  historical  connection  ;  (5) 
that  it  was  postponed  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  that  such  postponement  is  verified  by 
numerous  collateral  facts  connected  with  it,  as  e.g.  the  condition  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
of  Jerusalem,  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  world  ;  (6)  that  a  continuous  chain  of  facts  thus 
appealing  to  man's  reason,  forbids  our  rejection  of  faith  and  hope  in  the  predicted 
future  rebuilding  of  that  Kingdom.  Secondly  :  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  as  presented, 
shows  why  the  form  and  structure  of  the  Bible  is  so  largely  historical  and  prophetical, 
and  why  so  much  stress  is  laid  on  the  history  and  future  of  the  Jewish  nation.  The 
Theocratic  idea  and  purpose  require  it.  The  facts  in  reference  to  the  Kingdom  make  this 
feature — considered  objectionable  and  a  blemish  by  some — a  necessity.  It  is  so  histori- 
cal, because  the  covenant,  the  Kingdom,  and  the  downfall  demand  it  ;  prophetical,  be- 
cause the  assured  fulfilment  of  covenant  in  the  restitution  of  the  Theocracy  requires  it  ; 
Jewish,  because  the  Theocratic  relationship  of  that  nation  forbids  a  departure  from  it. 
Hence  narrative,  prophecy,  events  connected  with  the  elect  nation  rather  than  events 
related  to  the  vast  Gentile  monarchies,  etc.,  receive  new  light  in  that  of  the  Theocratic 
ordering. 

"2  The  unbelieving  attack  makes  the  Bible  to  be  merely  the  result  of  human  ideas,  the 
embodiment  of  natural  reason.  But  here  in  the  Theocratic  idea  we  find  the  fundamental 
truth  which  allies  the  Bible  to  the  Supernatural,  which  elevates  it  far  above  the  natural 
conceptions  of  the  mind,  which  places  it  immeasurably  in  advance  of  all  the  thinking  of 
humanity  in  the  past  or  present.  Take  the  highest  thoughts  of  the  sages  of  Asia,  Greece 
and  Rome  ;  the  loftiest  conceptions  of  the  philosophers  of  the  world,  and  they  pale  be- 
fore the  brightness  and  splendor  of  the  Theocratic  conception.  There  is  nothing  so  mag- 
nificent to  be  found  outside  of  the  Bible.  Men  now  endeavor  to  belittle  the  Bible  by 
comparing  its  teaching  with  ancient  religions,  and  deducing  therefrom  a  common  origin 
of  all  religions  (e.g.  Higgens's  Anacalypsis,  etc.),  but  such  writers  are  very  careftd  not  to 
present  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  which  indicates  its  superiority  over  all  others.  Mol- 
lock  (Dogma,  Reason,  and  Morality),  and  others,  have  shown  that  natural  religion — uni- 
versally diffused  owing  to  man's  moral  and  religious  nature — only  confirms  Christianity. 
We  insist  that  the  higher  teaching  of  the  latter,  and  the  unity  of  its  Redemptive  Plan 
through  a  purposed  Theocracy,  evidences  its  Supernatural  origin,  which  is  abundantly 
confirmed  by  the  provisions  made  for  a  future  realization. 

Obs.  5.  Rationalism  admitting  that  the  Kingdom,  if  realized  as  pre- 
dicted, would,  of  course,  secure  the  deliverance  and  happiness  of  the  world, 
must,  if  in  accord  with  reason,  now  proceed  to  ask  whether  the  agencies 
used  and  the  manner  employed  to  affect  this  restoration  are  adapted  to 
secure  this  end.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  there  is  no  adaptation  in  them  to 
obtain  such  a  purpose  Rationalism  gains  the  vantage  ground  ;  but  if,  on 
the  other  hand,  we  can  indicate  their  fitness,  and  even  necessity,  then  the 
superiority  and  logical  consistency  of  argument  is  on  our  side.  This  leads, 
therefore,  to  a  consideration  of  the  Divine  Plan  thus  far  unfolded  and 
carried  out.  Our  object  being  merely  to  give  an  idea  how  the  controversy 
between  Rationalism  and  Orthodoxy,  to  bring  it  to  its  highest  and  logical 
ground  of  attack  and  defence  ought  to  be  conducted  in  order  to  fairly  test 
the  merits  of  each,  we  pass  by  many  points  of  interest  (which  also  must  be 
carefully  observed  as  parts  of  the  Plan,  such  as  the  Covenants,  past  history 
of  the  Theocracy,  the  elect  position  of  the  Jewish  nation,  etc.,  being 
already  presented  in  previous  Propositions)  and  select  several  to  elucidate 
the  matter. 

Take  the  Divinity  and  Humanity  of  Jesus,  the  Christ,  and  view  these, 
not  isolated,  disconnected  from  the  Divine  Plan,  but  as  forming  an  indis- 
pensable part  of  that  Plan,  and  we  have  at  once  the  strongest  possible 
proof  in  favor  of  the  Divinity  of  Jesus.  Observe  (1)  that,  as  we  have  re- 
peatedly proven,  this  Theocratic  Kingdom  if  ever  realized  in   the   form 


478  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  198. 

covenanted  under  David's  descendant  imperatively  demands  One  greater 
than  man,  identified  with  God,  ruling  as  God,  immortal  and  performing 
the  Works  of  God.  David  and  all  the  prophets  predict  this,  so  that  ancient 
Jews,  Christians,  and  even  many  unbelievers  (who  discard  it  as  "  a  dream") 
freely  admit  it.  The  Theocratic  idea  involves  this  feature,  seeing  that 
the  very  essence — that  which  alone  forms  it — of  a  Theocracy  is  that  of  God 
ruling  over  men  as  an  earthly  ruler.  The  burden  of  prophecy  and  promise 
is,  that  snch  a  rule,  the  grandest  that  can  be  conceived,  is  to  be  manifested 
here  on  earth  through  a  David's  Son  who  is  also  to  be  David's  Lord.  Here 
then  is  the  Plan  respecting  the  King  of  this  Kingdom  proposed.  Is  it  wise 
or  prudent  to  discard  it  without  noticing  the  provision  made  for  its  fulfil- 
ment ?  With  those  predictions  before  us,  covering  many  bright  pages  of 
the  Old  Test.,  if  there  were  no  additional  evidence,  if  no  preparatory 
measures,  insuring  an  ultimate  fulfilment,  could  be  pointed  out,  then  in- 
deed there  might  be  room  for  doubt  and  objection.  Cut  reason  prompts 
us  to  proceed,  when  we  find  (2)  that  the  birth  (miraculous)  of  Jesus 
precisely  fills  the  demands  of  the  Plan.  No  such  Theocratic  King  as 
promised  could  possibly  be  raised  up  by  the  ordinary  laws  of  nature — it 
would  be  an  utter  impossibility.  Here  then  is  a  fact,  predicted  to  carry 
out  a  certain  Plan,  which  is  against  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  ;  and 
here  is  the  record  that  it  has  taken  place.  Leaving  the  arguments  usually 
alleged  by  theologians  to  indicate  how  essential  this  incarnation  was  ;  leav- 
ing the  eulogies  bestowed  by  Kenan  and  others  upon  Jesus  in  view  of  His 
purity,  nobleness  of  heart,  teaching,  etc.  (and  which  could  be  applied 
here),  it  is  sufficient  only  to  direct  attention  to  the  fact,  that  by  this  incar- 
nation alone  have  we  the  Theocratic  relationship,  as  promised,  fully  united 
and  sustained  in  one  person.  By  it  God  and  David's  descendant  are  in- 
separably united,  giving  the  Kingdom  an  unchangeable  Head — in  brief, 
bestowing  the  very  characteristics,  attributes,  etc.,  so  requisite  to  carry 
out  the  proposed  Plan.  This  at  once  invests  the  Person  of  Jesus  with  new 
interest ;  and  the  discussion  should  embrace  the  evidence  whether  in  Him 
are  to  be  found  all  the  qualifications  made  requisite  by  the  contemplated 
Theocratic  position  assigned.  If  so — and  in  reference  to  this  there  can  be 
no  question  so  far  as  it  is  claimed  in  the  New  Test.,  and  freely  acknowl- 
edged by  the  destructive  critics — this  is  a  decided  advance  in  favor  of  the 
Divinity  of  Jesus  ;  viz.,  the  correspondence  existing  between  Him  and  the 
One  predicted  to  be  this  King.  (3)  Next  let  reason  judge,  admitting  for 
the  time  the  blessings  that  would  most  certainly  accrue  if  such  a  Theocratic 
Kingdom  were  manifested  under  a  King  possessing  such  attributes  as  are 
ascribed  to  Him,  whether  Jesus,  the  Christ,  if  such  a  Being  as  represented, 
is  not  adapted  in  every  way  to  restore  this  Theocratic  reign  in  a  most 
glorious  manner,  rescuing  the  dead  from  the  power  of  the  grave,  removing 
evils,  etc.  In  other  words,  Jesus  in  every  respect  is  qualified  to  carry  out 
the  remainder  of  the  programme  as  given  by  the  Divine  Purpose.  He  is 
David's  Son  as  covenanted  ;  He  is  Divine  (Isa.  9  :  G  ;  Zech.  13  :  9  ;  Jer. 
23  :  6  ;  Ps.  2  :  7  ;  Rom.  9  :  11  ;  1  Tim.  3  :  16  ;  Tit.  1  :  3  ;  1  John  4  :  15  ; 
Heb.  1  :  8  ;  1  John  5  :  20,  etc.)  ;  He  is  One  and  equal  with  the  Father, 
(John  11 : 7-11  ;  10  :  30  ;  12  :  45  ;  17  :  10,  etc.)  ;  He  is  the  Image  of  God, 
(Phil.  2  :  G  ;  Col.  1  :  15  ;  2  : 9,  etc.)  ;  He  possesses  eternity  (Heb.  13  :  18  ; 
Rev.  1  :  17,  18)  ;  He  has  Omnipresence  (Matt.  17  :  20  ;  28  :  20,  etc.)  ; 
He  is  Omniscient  (John  2  :  24,  25  ;  Rev.  2  :  23  ;  John  1G  :  30,  etc.)  ;  He 
is  Creator  (John  1  :  3,  10  ;  Col.  1  :  1G  j  Heb.  1  :  2,  10  ;  Rev.  3  :  14,  etc.) ; 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  479 

He  in  virtue  of  His  divinity  has  Pre-Existence  (John  8  :  58  ;  13  :  3, 
etc.)  ;  He  is  the  Preserver  (Col.  1  :  17  ;  Heb.  1  :  3,  etc.)  ;  He  is  worthy 
of  worship  (John  5  :  23  ;  Phil.  2  :  10  ;  Heb.  1  :  6  ;  Ps.  72  :  15,  17  ;  Kev. 
5  :  8-13,  etc.),  etc.  Thus  to  qualify  Him  to  act  in  the  capacity  of  a  Theo- 
cratic King,  everything  essential  to  God  is  fully  ascribed  to,  and  possessed 
in  its  fulness  by  Him.  Admitting  then  the  simple  record  as  given,  we 
have  the  very  Person  described  whom  the  Plan  contemplates  as  the  One 
suitable  to  act  as  the  predetermined  Theocratic  King.  We  do  not  pause 
now  to  show  how  incredible  it  is  that  such  a  Theocratic  Plan  in  all  its 
details,  taking  centuries  for  completion  and  embracing  the  Advent  of  such 
a  Person,  should  have  originated  unaided  in  the  minds  of  the  ancient 
writers  ;  and  that  at  the  Advent  of  Jesus,  men  against  national  prejudices 
and  the  impulses  natural  to  human  nature,  should  succeed  in  filling  out  so 
accurately  in  Him  the  portraiture  given  by  the  Prophets.  The  intelligent 
reader  will  take  this  in  account  when  making  up  his  decision.  All  that  we 
assert  at  this  stage  is,  that  thus  far  there  is  no  discrepancy  between  the 
Plan  proposed  and  the  great  leading  Agency  by  which  it  is  to  be  accom- 
plished. Certainly  this  feature  must  commend  itself  to  reason.  (4)  Then 
let  reason  decide  whether  such  a  Being,  as  we  find  described  in  Jesus 
Christ,  is  not  indispensable  to  carry  out  the  Plan  as  given.  The  Divine 
Purpose,  as  we  have  noticed  at  length,  intends  in  this  restored  Theocratic 
Kingdom  to  raise  up  the  dead,  remove  all  the  evils  under  which  the  race  is 
groaning,  and  renew  creation  itself.  This  involves,  of  necessity,  a  mighty 
exertion  of  Supernatural  power.  The  express  Agent  by  which  this  is  to  be 
affected  is  this  promised  King.  Therefore  to  give  us  the  most  ample  assur- 
ance that  the  Plan  which  embraces  such  astounding  changes  shall  be  veri- 
fied, the  Person  Himself  is  provided  through  whom  it  is  to  be  performed. 
This  provision  is  a  prime  necessity;  reason  recpiires  it,  for  otherwise  we 
cannot  see  how  it  is  possible  to  carry  out  the  Purpose  intended.  This 
very  necessity  thus  met  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  the  Christ ;  goes  far  to  prove 
both  the  Divinity  of  the  Plan  and  of  the  Person  who  claims,  by  all  that  is 
related  to  Him,  to  be  the  One  who  is  ultimately  to  carry  it  into  execution. 
(5)  Then  again — the  Theocratic  covenant  relationship  in  the  line  of  David 
necessarily  including  a  God-man,  by  which  the  Theocratic  idea  is  visibly 
presented  and  adapted  to  man's  condition — when  that  God-man  appears 
on  earth,  it  is  most  reasonable  to  anticipate  that  He  would  give  some  evi- 
dences of  the  Supernatural  thus  allied  with  Him.  It  is  but  alow  process  of 
reasoning  which  looks  at  the  Supernatural  in  the  life  of  Jesus  separated 
from  the  conditions  impised  by  the  previously  given  Divine  Purpose.  How 
can  we  possibly  know  that  Jesus  is  the  One  proposed  by  the  covenant  with 
David,  unless  He  in  some  way,  by  superior  knowledge,  works,  etc.,  evinces 
the  lodgment  and  actual  possession  of  the  Divine  in  Himself.  Jesus  with- 
out the  Supernatural  could  not  possibly  be  the  promised  Messiah.  Hence, 
when  we  come  to  the  life  of  Jesus,  regarding  it  simply  in  the  light  of  what 
preceded,  it  is  a,  just  conclusion  to  expect,  that  if  it  meets  the  requirements 
of  promise  and  prediction  at  all,  it  must,  present  us  with  a  strong  Super- 
natural element.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  to  approach  the  life  of  Christ 
with  a  prejudged,  prejudiced  opinion  against  the  Supernatural  is  a  most 
unscholarly  procedure.'  It  is  uncritical,  because  it  makes  no  allowance  for 
the  connection  which  this  Divine  sustains  to  other  matters,  and  it  utterly 
ignores  the  Plan  of  advancement  upon  which  it  is  based.  It  is  opposed  to 
the  true  spirit  of  investigation,   preventing  an  impartial  judgment,  and 


480  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  198. 

being  unjust  to  covenant,  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  and  man.  The  student, 
observing  the  personage  described  and  demanded  by  the  Theocratic 
arrangement,  comes  to  the  Advent  of  a  Messiah  feeling  that  the  lack  of  the 
Supernatural  would  prove  at  once  a  fatal  objection  to  His  claims  ;  and 
hence,  if  disposed  to  be  reasonable  and  impartial,  he  will  give  due  con- 
sideration to  the  manifestations  of  the  Supernatural  as  given  in  the  life  of 
Jesus,  ever  keeping  in  view  the  preliminaries  just  presented.  This,  instead 
of  placing  him  in  the  attitude  assumed  by  Rationalistic  writers  (viz.,  that 
of  prejudging  and  condemning  without  a  careful  summing  up  of  the  evi- 
dence relating  to  the  subject),  enables  him  to  regard  the  Plan  which  con- 
templates this  particular  Theocratic  Personage,  the  claims  which  are  pre- 
sented and  that  so  accurately  fit  the  requirements  of  it,  and  then  to  ex- 
amine whether  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ  gives  sufficient  evidence  to  substan- 
tiate the  claims  asserted  in  behalf  of  Himself  that  He  is  indeed  the  Messiah 
proposed  in  covenant  and  prophecy.  (6)  This  brings  us,  finally,  to  con- 
sider how  far  the  life  of  Jesus  gives  evidence  of  the  possession  of  the 
Divine.  In  this  wide  field,  the  reader  must,  of  necessity,  be  referred  to 
able  works  which  make  this  subject  a  speciality  for  extended  remark. 
Even  the  praise  rendered  to  Jesus  by  Rationalistic  writers  may  be  rendered 
available  as  circumstantial  evidence  to  the  integrity,  etc.,  of  the  Messiah. 
Leaving  the  life,  teaching,  works,  predictions,  etc.,  of  Jesus  for  others  to 
discuss,  let  us  refer  to  His  death,  confessed  to  be  sublime  by  our  opponents, 
and  from  this  alone  show  the  Divinity  that  existed  in  Him.  That  very 
death  which  so  many  now  tell  us  was  so  unpromising  and  closed  forever 
(Renan)  the  hopes  and  career  of  Jesus,  bears  the  unmistakable  stamp  of  the 
Divine.  Passing  by  the  loving  design  of  that  death — (which  in  itself 
forms  a  solid  proof) — and  the  incomparable  simplicity  of  the  narrative  of 
His  death  as  alone  suitable  to  portray  it — (which  could  scarcely  be  imitated 
by  impostors  without  the  introduction  of  extravagant  eulogies,  explana- 
tions, etc.),  let  us  confine  ourselves  to  the  time  of  His  death.2  One  of  the 
declarations  of  Jesus  previous  to  His  death  was,  "  I  lay  down  my  life  that 
I  might  take  it  again  ;  no  one  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of 
Myself.  I  have  power  to  lay  if  down  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again," 
(John  10  :  17,  18).  While  His  death  was  desired  by  Jew  and  consented 
to  by  Roman,  while  both  incurred  guilt  in  engaging  in  the  act  and  persist- 
ing to  the  end,  yet  Jesus,  according  to  the  record,  in  virtue  of  the  power 
lodged  within  Him,  chose  for  Himself  the  moment  when  He  should  yield 
up  His  spirit  to  the  efforts  of  His  executioners.  This  was  done,  as  we  are 
informed  for  two  reasons  :  (1)  This  voluntary  yielding  of  His  life  is  essen- 
tial to  His  nature  as  God-man — nothing  being  able  to  occur  without  the 
permission  of  the  Divine  within  Him — and  such  a  voluntary  offering 
enhances  the  value  of  His  priestly  office,  seeing,  as  the  apostle  argues,  "  it 
is  of  necessity  that  this  man  have  somewhat  also  to  offer,"  and  hence  "  lie 
gave  His  life  for  the  sheep."  Not  being  concerned  at  present  to  develop 
the  reasons  underlying  a  voluntary  sacrifice  of  Himself,  it  is  sufficient  for 
our  purpose  to  direct  attention  to  the  simple  announcements  that  it  must 
be  voluntary  even  down  to  the  very  last,  and  then  to  the  remarkable  evi- 
dence given  in  the  record  that  it  was  indeed  such.  This  is  gathered  not 
from  a  direct  circumstantial  account,  as  if  given  purposely  to  meet  pre- 
vious statements,  but  from  indirect  allusions  and  references  which,  from 
the  very  lack  of  design,  most  powerfully  confirm  the  sad  story  of  the  cross. 
It  was  a  voluntary  death,  thus  enhancing  its  value,  not  merely  in  that  He 


PEOP.  198.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  481 

refused  to  call  for  the  legions  of  angels  at  His  command,  or  to  exert  His 
Supernatural  power  for  deliverance,  but  in  that  He  died  having  the  Super- 
natural within  Him  to  select  the  time  of  departure  without  being  impera- 
tively, at  the  crisis,  urged  to  it  by  the  weakness  or  necessities  of  nature. 
Notwithstanding  the  thirst  and  pangs  endured,  the  sufferings  were  not,  at 
the  moment  of  death,  sufficient  in  themselves  to  cause  death  as  is  seen  by 
the  surviving  of  the  malefactors,  the  frequent  lingering,  long-continued 
death  of  crucified  persons  (the  extremities  and  not  the  vital  parts  being 
first  attacked,  etc.),  the  crying  out  with  a  loud  voice  indicative  of  strength 
just  previous  to  expiring,  and  the  marvelling  of  Pilate,  when  His  body  was 
requested  by  Joseph,  that  He  was  already  dead,  it  being  so  remarkable  and 
unexpected.  Here  then  the  evidence  in  the  most  undesigned  manner  is 
given  showing  unmistakably  its  voluntary  nature,  thus  corroborating  pre- 
vious predictions  relating  to  it.  (2)  But  now  appears  the  Supernatural, 
the  Divine  in  the  very  act  of  dying,  in  a  most  intensely  interesting  form, 
viz.,  in  fulfilling  the  typieof  Himself .  Consider  when  Jesus  died,  at  the 
ninth  Jewish  hour  or  at  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  at  the  very  hour 
that  the  sacrifice  should  be  offered  at  the  temple,  at  the  very  time  selected 
and  observed  for  the  slaying  of  the  Paschal  Lamb.  Was  it  a  mere  coin- 
cidence that  Jesus  died  at  the  very  time  that  the  Paschal  Lamb,  the  alleged 
and  significant  type  of  Himself,  was  slain?  "Was  it  an  artful  presentation 
of  the  writers  of  the  Gospels  to  influence  belief  in  the  Messiah  ?  If  the 
latter  why  then  do  they  not  point  out  the  relation  that  the  one  sustains  to 
the  other,  and  praise  the  same?  Why  do  they  leave  this  characteristic  re- 
lationship to  be  sought  out  and  ascertained  by  an  acquaintance  with  the 
type  and  thofacisas  given  by  themselves  ?  The  truth  is,  that  so  trans- 
cendantlij  sublime  is  the  death  of  this  God-man,  that  any  of  the  ordinary 
deviations— so  natural  to  human  advocates — to  explain  relations,  to  point 
out  significations  in  detail,  and  to  add  expressions  of  admiration  and 
eulogy,  would  vitiate  the  admirable  simplicity  which  (done  should  char- 
acterize the  divine  description  of  such  a  death.3  This  manifestation  of 
God's  love  and  mercy  is  so  unexampled  an  exhibition  of  Divine  Power,  even 
when  apparently  overcome  by  death,  that  it  is  wisely  and  grandly  left  to 
speak  for  itself.  It  needs  no  meritricious  adornments,  no  additions  to  add 
to  its  force  or  value.  Even  while  upon  the  cross,  suffering  the  anguish  in- 
cident to  crucifixion,  the  Divine  exerts  itself  (aside  from  His  God-like 
demeanor,  the  accurate  fulfilment  of  prediction,  etc.),  in  a  silent,  impres- 
sive, testimonitary  manner  which  alone  stamps  Him  the  Messiah.  The 
eye  of  Jesus,  which  saw  Nathaniel  under  the  fig-tree,  which  could  look  into 
men's  hearts  and  observe  their  thoughts,  looked  away  over  the  crowd  of 
Eomans,  Jews,  and  friends  then  around  Him,  to  the  temple  upon  the  typi- 
cal lamb  and  observed — who  can  tell  with  what  deep  interest — the  prep- 
arations going  forward  for  the  sacrifice  ;  and  when  the  time  arrived  for  the 
type  to  die,  the  srreat  antitype — yielding  to  His  enemies — also  expired,  it 
seems  to  the  writer  that  this  deeply  significant  finale,  pre-eminently  worthy 
of  Him,  if  regarded  in  its  connections,  ought  of  itself  to  produce  a.  pro- 
found impression  that  as  the  centurion,  from  other  evidences  less  striking, 
confessed  :  "  Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of  God.'"  The  design  of  this 
work  forbids  more  than  illustrations  of  the  manner  in  which  the  life  of 
Jesus  must  be  considered,  viz.,  in  its  relationship  to  the  Divine  Plan.  The 
death  of  Jesus,  in  virtue  of  this,  assumes  its  proper  position  and  signifi- 
cancy,  and  no  discussion,  either  friendly  or  hostile,  concerning  it,  is  com- 


482  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  198. 

plete  or  takes  a  jnst  rank  until  it  embraces  this  feature.  Separated  from 
the  Divine  Purpose  which  it  is  to  subserve,  detached  from  the  Kingdom 
which  it  is  designed  to  secure,  it  necessarily  loses  much  of  its  meaning  and 
expressiveness.  Thus  it  is  also  with  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  which  is 
dismissed  by  so  many  simply  on  the  ground  of  its  being  incredible,  without 
the  least  attempt  to  regard  it  in  the  light  indicated.4  Its  reasonableness, 
its  necessity,  its  value  and  preciousness,  are  not  derived  from  the  account 
given  of  it  and  the  testimony  of  witnesses  respecting  it.  These,  indispen- 
sable as  they  are  to  form  a  connected  chain,  are  only  subsidiaries.  If  rea- 
son is  to  exert  its  highest  powers,  it  will  regard  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  in 
its  relationship  to  the  Divine  Plan  ;  noticing,  (1)  that  it  is  proposed  in  the 
Theocratic  order  ;  (2)  that  it  is  absolutely  required  before  the  Plan  pro- 
posed can  be  carried  out  ;  (3)  that  to  attain  it,  Supernatural  power  must  be 
exerted  ;  (4)  that  this  linking  of  the  Supernatural  element  with  the  human, 
— even  when  dead — (for  as  we  have  seen  Jesus  claimed  the  power  not  only 
to  lay  down  His  life  but  to  take  it  up  again)  involves  such  a  manifestation 
of  power,  that  if  it  really  has  taken  place,  there  can  be  no  doubt  respecting 
the  nature  of  the  Person  who  has  experienced  it  as  the  One  actually 
designed  ;  (5)  that  admitting  the  resurrection,  as  an  outgrowth  of  the  Plan, 
(we  do  not  stop  now  to  ask  whether  Divine  or  not)  it  is  adapted  to  evince 
the  ability  of  Him  who  experienced  it  to  perform  the  remainder  involved 
in  the  Plan  ;  (0)  that  if  the  account  of  the  resurrection  was  concocted  by 
men  to  meet  the  requirements  of  a  previously  given  Purpose,  these  writers 
evince  (a)  an  extraordinary  clumsiness  in  stating  their  incredulity  on  the 
subject  after  the  instruction  professedly  received,  (b)  their  ignorance  in  not 
pointing  out  more  fully  its  relationship  to  the  prc\iously  given  Plan,  leav- 
ing, in  a  great  measure  the  reader  to  infer  it  ;  (7)  that  the  life  and  death 
of  Jesus  must  be  weighed  when  the  estimate  is  taken  respecting  the  resur- 
rection ;  (8)  that  the  deliverance  of  man  from  the  power  of 'death,  if  it 
really  took  place,  is  thus  secured,  and  that  we  have  no  knowledge  of  any 
other  Plan  given  in  all  the  writings  possessed  by  the  world  that  proposes  the 
sjime.  Let  the  attitude  thus  presented  be  assumed,  let  the  scholar  honestly 
acknowledge  concessions,  similar  in  spirit  to  these  suggested,  and  he  ap- 
proaches the  subject  of  the  resurrection  with  a  higher  critical  resolve, 
which  asks  whether  it  is  really  an  essential  part  of  a  previously  given  Plan, 
whether  it  is  adapted  to  secure  the  results  contemplated,  whether  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Divine  through  it  is  worthy  of  God,  and  even  whether  in 
any  other  possible  way  the  deliverance  of  man  can  be  so  effectively  ob- 
tained, etc.  Concessions  like  these  are  not  asked  as  a  favor  but  demanded 
as  a  simple  art  of  justice  to  the  Book  which  records,  and  to  the  Person  who 
professes  to  have  experienced,  its  power.  If  God-man,  if  the  Messiah  as 
predicted,  it  necessarily  serves  to  identify  Him  as  such  and  imparts  confi- 
dence in  Him.  The  number  of  witnesses,  if  sufficient  to  establish  the  fact, 
is  of  no  moment,  seeing  that  the  Word  wisely  depends — thus  acknowledg- 
ing the  force  of  reason — for  its  reception  to  its  undoubted  relationship  to 
the  Divine  Purpose,  and  to  its  perfect  adaptedness  to  obtain  for  us  the 
promised  blessings.  Actuated  by  wisdom  the  reader  ought,  in  forming  an 
opinion,  to  consider  the  initiatory  process,  the  means,  and  the  end.5 

1  Take  the  Lives  of  Jesus  as  given  e.g.  by  Eenan  and  Strauss,  and  it  is  self-evident,  that, 
from  beginning  to  end,  the  subject  has  been  approached  by  a  previously  formed  opinion 
and  determination  to  eliminate  the  Supernatural  element.     This,  of  course,  leaves  out 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  483 

"the  Christ,''  resulting  from  a  prejudged  attitude,  a  prejudiced  standpoint,  and  a  pre- 
determined wish  to  lower  the  Messianic  claims.  The  proof  is  found  in  studiously  omit- 
ting the  connection  of  "  the  Christ"  with  a  continuous  Divine  Plan,  in  constantly  refusing 
to  discuss  the  adaptability  of  "  the  Messiah"  as  presented  to  carry  out  the  Divine  Pur- 
pose, and  in  purposely  ignoring  all  that  might  cast  doubt  upon  their  own  deductions, 
even  the  language  of  Jesus  as  presented.  But  on  the  other  hand,  many  of  the  Lives  of 
Christ,  that  acknowledge  and  defend  the  Supernatural,  that  contain  much  that  is  valu- 
able, are  seriously  defaced  by  certain  defects.  They  ignore  some  of  the  greatest  events 
in  the  life  of  Jesus,  and  hence  utterly  fail  to  present  a  consistent  and  connected  account  of 
His  life.  Thus  e.g.  the  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  is  either  passed  by  or  perverted,  the 
parables  of  the  Kingdom  are  philosophized  into  accommodations  to  human  weakness  and 
ignorance,  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  is  not  touched,  the  covenant  (Davidic)  and 
Jewish  forms  are  despised,  etc.,  and  a  cloud,  under  the  specious  plea  of  development,  is 
cast  over  much  that  is  written.  Inferences  are  given  as  veritable  history  and  a  kingdom 
substituted  for  the  one  covenanted  and  preached.  The  result  is,  that  infidels  (as  e.g. 
Duke  of  Somerset,  ch.  7,  Christ.  Theol.  etc.),  declare  them  unreliable,  untrustworthy, 
mere  "  conjectural  histories."  A  comparison  with  the  Divine  Eecord,  if  frankly  and 
candidly  made,  will  in  some  respects,  in  some  aspects,  sustain  this  charge. 

2Frothingham  (Luth.  Observer,  May  31,  1878),  is  reported  assaying,  that  "Jesus  Christ 
supposed  Himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God  while  He  was  before  Pilate,  but  found  out  His 
mistake  when  He  came  to  die."  We  show  the  Divine,  the  Supernatural  in  His  death. 
Newman  (Phases  of  Faith,  p.  158),  pronounces  the  going  of  Jesus  to  a  certain  death  at 
Jerusalem  as  a  foolhardy  and  fanatical  act.  Thus  sitting  in  judgment  over,  and  con- 
demning the  sublime  act  pre-eminently  calculated  to  qualify  Him  for  "  the  Christship" 
and  its  blessed  results.  Thousands,  thousands,  alas  !  take  similar  low  and  degrading 
views  of  the  death  of  Jesus. 

3  The  silence  of  Scripture  in  the  way  of  eulogies,  explanations,  etc.,  is  to  the  reflect- 
ing mind  a  powerful  argument  in  favor  of  its  divine  inspiration,  seeing  that  such  a 
silence  is  not  natural  to  ignorance,  fanaticism,  enthusiasm,  special  pleading — in  brief, 
to  man  and  his  impulses.  Comp.  e.g.  Archb.  Whatley's  Essays  on  Certain  Peculiarities  of 
the  Writings  of  Paul ;  Miller's  Silence  of  the  Scriptures ;  Hare's  sermon,  What  is  Better 
than  Bread?  Principles  Better  than  Bales;  art.  in  the  North  Brit  Review,  entitled  The 
Silence  of  Scripture,  etc. 

4  Thus  e.g.  Strauss  (The  Old  Ftilh  and  the  New,  p.  73)  may  dogmatically  pronounce 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  "  ein  Welt  historicher  humbug,"  but  what  is  his  declaration 
worth  when  he  ignores  the  highest  proof  relating  to  it.  The  testimony  of  the  Scripture  in 
reference  to  its  relationship  to  the  Divine  Purpose,  to  its  connection  with  a  previously 
arranged  and  covenanted  Plan,  to  its  requisite  fitness  in  the  Theocratic  ordering— these 
things,  the  foundation  upon  which  the  resurrection  solidly  rests,  are  persistently  over- 
looked, as  if  they  did  not  exist,  by  this  class  of  writers. 

5  The  early  Church  belief  in  the  Divinity  pertaining  to  Jesus  is  illustrated  by  the 
attack  of  Celsus,  who  ridiculed  the  idea  of  its  existence  because  of  His  poverty,  suffer- 
ings, and  death,  not  realizing  the  Christian  view  that  as  the  Human  was  to  be  incorpo- 
rated into  a  permanent  Divine  Theocratic  ordering,  it  was  essential  to  indicate  its 
worthiness  by  making  it  "perfect  in  suffering."  It  is  not  requisite  to  lay  stress  on 
Horsely's  rendering  of  Isa.  9  :  6  ("  God  the  Mighty  man"),  or  on  the  fact  that  in  various 
places  in  the  Old  Test,  where  God  is  spoken  of  (as  e.g.  Zech.  14  :  3,  5  ;  Joel  2  :  32  ;  Ps. 
45  :  6),  it  is  applied  in  the  New  Test,  to  Jesus,  or  on  other  proofs,  when  the  simple  fact 
that  the  Theocratic  King  Himself —which  Jesus  essentially  is — can  be  no  other  than 
Jehovah,  itself  fully  and  amply  establishes  the  Divinity  of  Jesus.  In  reference  to  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  we  may  say  in  addition,  as  a  reply  to  unbelief  which  would  regard 
it  as  an  isolated  statement,  that  it  was  not  the  result  of  an  afterthought  of  the  disciples, 
being,  as  every  one  can  see  for  himself,  an  essential  part  of  a  predetermined  Divine  Plan 
as  revealed  in  the  Old  Test,  and  corroborated  in  the  New.  The  fulfilment  of  covenant 
and  promise  demands  its  reception,  and  hence  the  attitude  and  foreknowledge  of  Jesus 
in  relation  to  it.  Fiske  (Unseen  World),  indorsing  Taine,  says,  "  that  the  dogma  of  the 
resurrection  is  due  originally  to  the  excited  imagination  of  Mary  of  Magdala. "  Thus  an 
ignorant  Jewish  woman,  through  an  "  excited  imagination,"  was  able  to  devise  sofunda- 
mental  a  fact,  essential  in  the  chain  of  evidence,  to  verify  covenant  and  prophecy  !  Such 
declarations  only  evidence,  that  those  making  them  have  never  examined  the  subject, 
for  if  eliminated  from  the  Gospels  even,  it  still  remains  fundamental  and  essential  in  the 
apostolic  writings  and  in  its  covenanted  and  prophetic  relationship.  No  one  of  our  op- 
ponents has  ventured  to  deal  with  it  in  this  direction  or  to  examine  the  design  intended 


484  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  198. 

by  its  realization.     For  a  good  vindication  of  the  resurrection,  Row's  "  Ch.  Evidences," 
Bampton  Lects.,  1877,  will  be  found  interesting. 

Obs.  6.  Let  us  notice  the  main,  leading  objection  urged  by  recent 
writers  against  the  inspiration  of  the  Word  and  the  Divinity  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Rationalistic  writers,  justly  relying  upon  the  estimate  formed  by  a 
multitude  of  the  Orthodox  (who  have  rejected  the  primitive  view),  declare 
that  the  Kingdom  covenanted  and  predicted  by  the  prophets  was  never  set 
up  by  Jesus  in  the  form  promised,  and  that  hence  it  indicates  that  the  proph- 
ets were  not  inspired,  that  Jesus  Himself  in  the  outset  of  His  ministry 
contemplating  such  a  Kingdom  and  finding  it  impossible  to  establish  it, 
changed  His  plan  which  is  indicative  that  He  was  not  Divine,,  and  that  the 
Church,  as  founded  and  perpetuated,  following  the  ministry  of  Jesus  dis- 
proves the  correctness  of  the  Old  Test,  promises,  etc.  The  advocates  of 
the  Church  Kingdom  idea,  admit  the  change  of  form,  declaring  that  those 
promises  are  not  to  be  understood  in  their  grammatical  sense  ;  that  under 
this  materialistic  presentation  of  the  "Word,  spiritual  tilings  are  to  be  com- 
prehended ;  that  they  are  only  the  germ  out  of  which  spiritual  conceptions 
develop,  etc.  The  Rationalists — in  such  a  onesided  discussion  by  which 
Apologists  strive  to  save  inspiration,  etc.,  in  applying  to  the  Church  what 
any  one  can  readily  see  does  not  now  belong  to  it,  and.  which  cannot  by  any 
reasonable  argument  be  made  to  correspond  with  covenant  and  prophetic 
announcements  taken  in  their  unity — have  decidedly  the  vantage  ground. 
Their  appeal  to  the  Jewish  expectations,  the  early  preaching  corresponding 
to  it,  the  faith  of  the  primitive  Church,  etc.,  is  positively  ovenvhehning 
against  such  a  line  of  defence.  History,  too,  in  all  its  phases  sustains  them 
in  the  position  taken,  and  the  development  theory  vainly  set  up  as  a  bul- 
wark against  them  is  seized  and  pressed  into  their  own  service  making 
Christianity  itself  only  one  phase  of  development.  In  the  argument  thus 
conducted,  from  a  false  premise,  intellectually,  historically,  and  logically, 
Rationalism  has  the  decided  advantage.  Here,  however,  both  parties  take 
something  for  granted  wholly  unproven,  and  both  overlook  statements 
which  plainly  and  unequivocally  demonstrate  the  error  of  the  premise  from 
which  their  deductions  are  derived.  The  thing  taken  for  granted  is,  that 
the  Kingdom  immediately  followed  the  ministry  of  Jesus  ;  the  deduction 
made  is,  that  being  diverse  from  the  one  predicted  by  the  grammatical 
sense,  either  a  change  was  made  in  the  Plan,  or  the  predictions  themselves 
must  be  interpreted  in  a  sense  to  make  them  correspond  with  the  changes 
introduced  ;  the  error  of  both  is,  that  neither  one  nor  the  other  pay  any 
attention  to  the  positive  declarations  of  this  same  Jesus  (after  the  represen- 
tative men  of  the  nation  conspired  to  put  Him  to  death)  that,  owing  to  the 
non-repentance  of,  and  His  rejection  by,  the  nation,  this  identical  King- 
dom— the  burden  of  prophecy,  the  subject  of  early  preaching,  the  one 
bound  in  covenant  relationship  with  the  Jewish  nation — is  postponed  to  a 
future  period.  Having  freely  given  the  proofs  relating  to  the  postpone- 
ment of  the  Kingdom  (under  Props.  56-75)  it  is  not  necessary  to  repeat 
them.  Let  us  only  ask,  in  the  light  of  the  various  passages  distinctively 
announcing  it  (and  as  held  by  the  primitive  Church),  is  it  just  for  the 
Rationalist,  when  he  comes  to  charge  Jesus  with  wavering  and  finally 
changing  His  Plan,  substituting  something  else  for  that  which  was  pre- 
dicted, to  bring  in  such  a  serious  and  damaging  impeachment  without 
allowing  the  accused  the  benefit  of  His  own  words  and  reasons  which  fully 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  485 

account  for  any  changes  that  may  temporarily  intervene?  "Would  such  a 
line  of  reasoning  deal  rightfully  with  our  fellow-men  ?  On  the  other  hand, 
we  inquire  of  the  Orthodox,  how,  as  one  who  professes  to  accept  of  every 
portion  of  the  Word,  he  can  totally  ignore  these  passages  bearing  on  the 
subject  as  if  they  had  no  existence,  and  by  this  bring  the  faith  of  the  early 
Church  into  contempt.  We  ask  both,  how  it  is  possible  for  them  not  only 
to  pass  by  the  decided  declarations  of  Jesus  bearing  upon  this  point,  but 
even  to  refuse  credit  to  the  confirmatory  evidence  which  Jesus  gave  to  show 
that  this  postponement  was  a  reality — evidence  too  continuously  j>resent 
with  every  generation  from  the  days  of  Christ  down  to  our  own  era.  For, 
as  has  been  shown  in  detail,  it  is  in  view  of  this  very  postponement  of  the 
Kingdom — the  Jewish  nation  having  shown  itself  un worthy  to  receive  at 
that  time  the  re-establishment  of  the  Theocracy — that  Jesus  foretells  the 
temporary  rejection  and  overthrow  of  the  nation,  the  down-treading  of 
Jerusalem  by  the  Gentiles  during  an  allotted  period,  the  calling  of  the 
Gentiles,  a  continued  national  unbelief  during  a  determined  time,  the  dis- 
persed and  yet  preserved  condition  of  the  nation,  the  establishment  of  the 
Christian  Church  to  secure  a  seed  unto  Abraham.  Surely  if  desirous  to 
allow  Jesus  the  privilege  due  to  Him  of  explaining  the  reasons  why  the 
Kingdom  as  covenanted,  predicted,  preached,  and  believed  in  by  the  pious 
was  not  setup,  and  why  certain  changes — such  as  we  see — were  introduced, 
then  let  its  sincerity  be  exhibited  in  taking  into  deliberate  consideration 
His  own  utterances  upon  the  subject  and  the  confirmatory  proof  that  He 
has  mercifully  allowed  to  us.  Since  a  delay  of  fulfilment,  established  by 
expressly  foretelling  it  and  by  resultant  existing  facts,  is  no  proof  of  a  non- 
fulfilment,  but  rather  indicative  of  the  wonderful  knowledge,  power,  and 
consistency  of  the  Person  through  whom  they  are  given,  it  follows  that  the 
changes,  introduced  for  a  time,  instead  of  being  antagonistic  to  the  in- 
spiration of  the  Word  and  the  claims  of  Christ  astonishingly  confirm  the 
same.  The  longer  the  postponement  the  more  cumulative  the  evidence, 
seeing  that  eighteen  centuries  of  continuous  fulfilment  of  introduced 
change  only  increases  the  display  of  Christ's  wonderful  foreknowledge. 
The  postponement  thus  presented  by  Jesus  forms  the  only  true  consistent 
answer  to  many  of  the  objections  urged  against  the  inspiration  of  the 
Bible,  for  instead  of  leading  us  to  discard  the  obvious  teachings  of  the  Old 
Test.,  the  preaching  of  the  disciples  and  apostles,  the  faith  of  the  churches, 
both  Jewish  and  Gentile,  just  organized,  and,  above  all,  instead  of  placing 
Jesus  in  a  false  position  of  sending  out  disciples  to  preach  what  was  not 
true,  of  holding  out  inducements  which  were  vain,  of  professing  that  which 
He  could  not  perform,  of  predicting  that  which  can  never  be  realized,  and 
of  shifting  His  plans  to  accommodate  His  own  inability  to  give  them  suc- 
cess, it  binds  these  together  into  a  firm  union,  meets  with  a  valid  reason 
each  point,  and  fairly  vindicates  the  nature  and  character  of  the  Messiah. 
These  remarks  need  not  to  be  extended,  since  various  Propositions  meet  all 
the  rerpiirements  of  explanation  demanded,  and  we  may  therefore  conclude 
with  the  suggestion,  that  honest  criticism  will  not  forget  how  exceeding 
difficult  it  would  be  to  eradicate  or  change  the  notion  of  the  Kingdom 
entertained  at  the  time  of  the  First  Adventby  substituting  another  with- 
out at  once  entailing  a  fierce  and  widespread  controversy  between  unbeliev- 
ing and  believing  Jews  ;  and  which  was  evidently  averted,  as  the  early 
Church  belief  indicates,  by  the  retention  of  the  idea  but  postponing  its 
realization  to  the  period  of  the  Sec.  Advent. 


486  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  198. 

The  student  is  now  prepared  to  notice  -what  real  worth  there  is  in  the  deductions  of 
Bauer  drawn  from  his  investigations  of  the  Primitive  Church.  He  undoubtedly  is  cor- 
rect in  many  of  his  presented  and  proven  facts,  as  e.g.  that  the  early  Church  did  firmly 
hold  and  teach  a  Messianic  reign  and  Kingdom  such  as  the  pious  Jews  entertained,  that 
they  located  this  Kingdom  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  etc.  But  Bauer,  in  his  reasoning,  care- 
fully avoids  two  things,  and  these  two  are  palpably  fatal  to  his  deductions  and  super- 
structure, viz.,  (1)  that  this  is  the  very  Kingdom  covenanted  and  prophesied,  and  that,  in 
simple  consistency,  ought  to  be  held  and  preached  by  the  primitive  Church — that  it  is 
part  of  the  Theocratic  plan  ;  (2)  that  this  Kingdom  is  postponed — that  this  postpone- 
ment is  expressly  asserted  and  the  reasons  given  for  the  same  ;  and  may  we  add,  (3)  that 
the  time  is  designated  when  it  will  come,  and  it  has  not  yet  been  proven  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  inadequate  to  its  re-establishment.  Many  things  related  to  the  future  Kingdom 
evidence  direct  inspiration.  Thus  e.g.  unbelief  makes  itself  merry  at  the  primitive  be- 
lief of  the  nearness  of  the  Advent.  But  let  the  reader  refer  to  Prop.  74,  Obs.  5,  where 
the  New  Test,  usage  of  such  language  is  adduced,  and  he  will  find  an  indirect  but  most 
powerful  proof  of  inspiration.  Ignorant  men  could  not  have  thus  imitated  the  ideas  of 
the  Spirit,  for  they  would  have  accommodated  time  to  their  own  ideas  of  remoteness, 
whereas  the  Spirit — speaking  in  and  through  man— retains  the  self-same  prophetic  form 
presented  in  the  Old  Test.,  and  continues  to  speak  of  time  in  the  largeness  of  view  and 
realization  belonging  to  God,  to  whom  "  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand 
years  as  one  day." 

To  indicate  the  wide  field  of  proof  in  behalf  of  inspiration  found  in  our  argument,  we 
briefly  direct  attention  to  the  engrafting  of  the  Gentiles.  Notice  the  chain  of  circum- 
stances, the  union  of  -which  is  beyond  the  power  of  "  ignorant"  fishermen,  and  men  rely- 
ing upon  natural  powers.  (1)  The  Jewish  nation  an  elect  nation,  Deut.  7  :  6  and  14  :  2, 
etc.,  being  specially  chosen  to  develop  the  Theocratic  idea  ;  (2)  this  election  indicated 
by  the  Theocracy  ;  (3)  this  Kingdom  only  tendered  to  the  descendants  of  Abraham  and 
engrafted  Gentiles  ;  (4)  after  the  Theocracy  was  withdrawn  on  account  of  sin,  it  was  again 
offered,  owing  to  the  elect  position  of  the  nation,  on  condition  of  repentance  by  John, 
Jesus,  and  the  disciples  ;  (5)  the  nation  rejected  the  tender  of  the  Kingdom  by  refusing 
to  repent  and  must  now  bear  its  punishment,  but  still  (Pom.  11  :  28,  etc.)  is  the  elect 
nation,  i.e.  the  nation  to  whom,  in  view  of  its  Theocratic  relationship,  the  Kingdom  per- 
tains ;  (G)  now  this  election  (confirmed  by  oath)  must  be  maintained,  but  in  view  of  the 
temporary  rejection  of  the  nation  to  suffer  its  punishment,  a  people— also  elect — must  be 
raised  up  to  Abraham,  perpetuating  his  seed  ;  (7)  God  could  have  done  this  miraculously 
(Matt.  3  :  9),  but  He  purposes  to  do  this  on  the  principle  of  faith  (as  Abraham  originally 
was  received)  and  adoption  ;  (8)  this  people  thus  adopted,  must  be  specially  related  to 
the  Jewish  commonwealth,  i.e.  so  engrafted  that  it  pertains  to  it;  (9)  this  is  positively 
asserted  as  essential,  e.g.  Gal.  2,  Eph.  2,  etc.  ;  (10)  because  of  the  elect  position  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  this  engrafting  could  not  be  done  without  express  divine  revelation  and 
direction,  as  given  to  Peter  ;  (11)  the  people  thus  engrafted,  being  a  continuation  of  the 
elect,  is  designated  such  and  the  seed  or  children  of  Abraham  ;  (12)  to  these  elect  per- 
tains the  Kingdom  in  its  highest  form,  viz.,  as  inheritors  -hence  they  are  described  as 
"heirs  of  the  Kingdom  ;"  (13)  when  fully  gathered  out  they  inherit  the  Kingdom,  when 
the  elect  nation,  to  whom  pertains  the  Theocracy  by  covenant  and  prophecy,  is  again 
restored  to  God's  favor.  Now  here  is  a  consecutive  logical  chain,  every  link  in  it  expressly 
given,  presented  by  different  minds  at  different  times,  foretold  centuries  before  and  ful- 
filled, opposed  to  Jewish  prejudices  and  derogatory  to  the  nation,  objected  to  when  the 
engrafting  was  inaugurated  and  yet  received  on  the  ground  of  direct  divine  interft -n  nee 
and  direction,  showing  throughout  the  unfolding  of  Divine  Purpose.  Human  imposition 
could  not  possibly  have  developed  such  a  marvellous  chain  of  circumstances,  utterly 
opposed  to  the  national  and  individual  prejudices  of  the  Jewish  mind.  The  solution  fcr 
its  existence  must  be  found  where  the  Scriptures  place  it. 

Obs.  7.  This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  meets  on  higher  ground  the 
theories  concerning  inspiration.  It  frames  a  sufficient  answer  to  the  lower 
conceptions  (referring  it  to  genius)  of  Schleiermacher  (Der  Ch.  Olaube), 
De  Wette  (Lehrbuch),  Parker  (Dis.  of  Religion),  etc.,  and  to  the  slightly 
advanced  notions  (making  it  the  result  of  moral  goodness)  of  Newman 
{Essays),  Morell  {On  Christianity),  Carlyle  (  Works),  etc.  It  does  not  need 
to  advocate  the  ideas  of  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  Michaelis,  etc.,  who  ac- 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  487 

knowledge  only  a  part  to  be  inspired,  or  of  Twesten  and  many  others  who 
make  it  universal  but  unequal  (from  whence  is  derived  the  divisions  of 
superintendence,  elevation,  direction,  suggestion,  etc.),  or  of  that  class  who 
make  all  equally  inspired.  It  does  not  even  need  a  theory  which  serves  1o 
explain  with  scientific  precision  (good  and  great  men  differ)  just  how  far 
and  in  what  degree  the  Bible  is  inspired,  for  it  derives  its  idea  of  inspira- 
tion not  from  this  or  that  portion  of  the  Book  but  from  its  contents  re- 
garded as  a  whole.  It  is  the  Divine  Plan  unfolded  in  it,  and  thus  far  most 
wonderfully  carried  out,  that  affords  the  true  and  solid  ground  for-its  in- 
spiration. To  illustrate  by  returning  to  our  figure  :  the  man  who  looks  at 
a  locomotive  forms  his  conclusions  respecting  its  design,  adapted ness,  etc., 
from  its  completeness  as  it  stands  before  him,  and  does  not  detract  from  its 
inception,  plan,  design,  use,  etc.,  because  the  designer  of  it  did  not 
draft  the  exact  shape  of  every  rod,  bolt,  and  screw  employed  in  its  con- 
struction. He  judges  the  locomotive,  its  fitness,  etc.,  by  the  mechanical 
principles  exhibited  in  its  make  and  to  be  specifically  applied  in  its  design. 
Reason  influencing  sound  judgment,  does  not  impel  him  to  lay  down  the 
criterion  that  before  he  can  accept  of  the  conception  of  the  builder,  ho 
must  first  be  assured  that  every  particular  part  of  it  is  shaped  and  framed 
precisely  as  the  inventor  specified,  for  he  knows  that  owing  to  the  numer- 
ous workmen  employed — men  varying  in  skill — in  its  erection,  some  lati- 
tude and  diversity  must  necessarily  be  allowed.  He  is  abundantly  satisfied 
with  the  consideration  of  the  general  outlines,  if  fashioned  according  to 
mechanics,  and  forms  his  judgment  of  the  correctness  of  the  inception,  its 
greatness  and  value — not  so  much  by  the  shape  the  material  assumes  but 
by  its  capacity  to  perform  the  work  intended.  Xow  let  this  principle  of 
judgment,  every  day  practically  observed  and  enforced,  be  applied,  in  judg- 
ing the  inspiration  of  the  Word.  Let  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  run- 
ning from  Genesis  to  Revelation  (and  which  embraces  the  Divine  Purpose) 
be  duly  considered,  its  initiatory  form,  its  modification  to  bring  it  into 
closer  relationship  with  humanity,  its  provisionary  measures,  etc.,  and  it 
will  be  found  at  once  that  it  contemplates  a  scheme  so  noble  in  conception, 
so  admirably  adapted  to  secure  deliverance,  so  extended  in  its  capacity  to 
bring  the  much  desired  and  wanted  blessings  to  man,  so  confirmed  by  past 
and  present  fulfilments  which  form  history,  so  far  beyond  anything  that  can 
be  suggested  by  mere  intelligence  to  remove  existing  evils,  that  it  commend* 
itself  in  design,  adaptability  and  end  contemplated  as  being  of  Divine 
origin.  Much  is  said  in  some  quarters  of  "  the  unlearned  men"  who  have 
written  the  Old  and  Xew  Test.,  so  that  in  view  of  this  mediumship,  Stein- 
bart  and  others  (Fuller's  Calv.  and  Soc.  camp.  Let.  12)  assert,  especially  of 
the  later  writings  :  "  These  narrations,  true  or  false,  are  only  suited  for 
ignorant,  uncultivated  minds,  who  cannot  enter  into  the  evidence  of 
natural  religion."  Such  sweeping  declarations  (shown  to  be  improper  by 
the  higher  class  of  Rationalistic  minds  eulogizing  portions  and  acknowledg- 
ing their  influence  upon  the  intelligence,  civilization,  morality,  govern- 
ment, etc.,  of  nations) 1  only  afford  us  additional  ground  for  defence.  If 
it  were  impossible  for  unskilful,  ignorant  workmen  to  build  a  locomotive 
with  its  complicated  application  of  mechanical  principles  and  its  confine- 
ment and  allotment  of  a  powerful  force  in  nature  (which  in  the  very  nature 
of  the  case  requires,  and  is  indicative  of,  intelligent  comprehension)  how 
much  less  is  it  possible  for  "  ignorant"  men  to  construct,  develop,  and  ex- 
hibit such  a  Theocratic  Plan  as  is  embraced  in  the  doctrine  of  this  King- 


•488  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  198. 

dom  ;  a  Plan  running  through  thousands  of  years,  requiring  the  most  ex- 
traordinary manifestations  and  provisions,  incorporating  an  animating, 
pervading  unity  extending  from  the  entailment  of  the  curse  to  its  removal, 
from  the  loss  of  a  Paradise  to  its  final  restoration,  from  a  withdrawal  of 
God  to  His  dwelling  again  with  man,  from  the  introduction  of  evil  to  its 
complete  overthrow,  from  a  Redemption  needed  to  a  Redemption  fully 
gained.  Is  it  just  to  discard  inspiration  without  first  allowing  reason,  ris- 
ing above  mere  prejudice.,  to  ponder  the  astonishing  historical  (evidenced  by 
continuous  historical  fulfilment)  and  doctrinal  (shown  by  the  perfect 
agreement  of  all  the  writers)  unity  in  the  matter  of  this  Kingdom.  It 
professes  to  be  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  to  judge  correctly  whether  it 
comes  from  God  we  must  not  merely  confine  ourselves  to  the  manner  in 
which  it  is  presented  (the  mediumship)  but  observe  whether  it  is  worthy  of 
God  and  conducive  to  the  highest  interests  of  humanity,  and  the  answer  to 
this  becomes  the  leading  proof  of  inspiration.  The  evolving  of  a  continu- 
ous, unintermitted  unity  of  Purpose  (notwithstanding  the  hindrances  pre- 
sented by  human  nature)  ;  the  distinctive  preservation  of  the  same  decided 
outline  of  belief  from  beginning  to  end  through  writers  separated  by  ages  : 
the  acknowledgments  of  the  writers  themselves  that  in  certain  stages  of  the 
developing  of  the  Plan  they  themselves  were  involved  in  unbelief  not  then 
being  able  to  see  the  connection  ;  the  extraordinary  simplicity  of  the  man- 
ner in  which  the  matters  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  are  recorded,  the  re- 
markable adaptation  consisting  between  the  Plan,  and  the  condition  (need) 
of  man,  and  the  end  (desirable)  intended — these  and  other  considerations 
inspire  such  confidence  in  its  representations  (confirmed  as  they  are  by  per- 
sonal observation  in  present  fulfilments  and  present  experience  in  the  re- 
ception of  the  Word)  that  the  alleged  discrepancies  and  difficulties  (if  even 
unsusceptible  of  explanation  or  reconciliation)  gi\e  place  to  a  film  belief  in 
its  divine  inspiration.  The  very  appeal  to  the  Supernatural  is  found  to  be 
reasonable  from  the  necessary  connection  it  sustains  not  only  to  the  deliver- 
ance of  man — to  which  nature  contributes  nothing  satisfactory  and  for 
which  intelligence  can  substitute  nothing  better — and  to  the  carrying  out 
of  the  Plan,  but  in  the  proposal  of  the  method  itself,  of  the  means  by 
which  it  is  to  be  accomplished,  and  of  the  great  Agent  through  whom  it  is 
to  be  performed.  If  it  is  a  Divine  Plan  at  all  it  must  be  judged  by  the 
Divinity  that  it  contains,  illustrates,  and  enforces — not  by  its  being 
drafted  on  paper,  or  given  through  the  lips  and  pens  of  men,  but  by  its 
design  as  a  whole,  its  practical  results,  etc.  Without  now  insisting  upon 
the  moral  preparation  requisite  (and  so  important  as  the  Bible  justly  states) 
to  receive  the  truth  as  given  ;  without  pressing  an  answer  to  the  question 
whether  knowledge  and  faith  are  necessarily  conjoined  ;  without  urging 
the  existence  of  a  moral  nature  which  responds  through  its  capacities  to 
truth  adapted  to  man's  own  good  ;  without  showing  that  natural  religion 
affords  but  a  reflected  light  and  that  very  dim  ;  without  insisting  that 
humanity  in  every  successive  generation  comes  upon  the  stage  of  life  in  the 
same  way,  commencing  its  culture,  etc.,  from  the  same  point,  exhibiting 
its  utter  inability  in  the  same  earthly  fate  from  the  greatest  to  the  lowest, 
to  remove  the  evils  incident  to  this  world — Reason — when  speaking  as 
reason,  God-given,  should  speak — says  that  the  evidence  cf  truth  is  not  so 
much  in  the  manner,  stvle,  etc.,  in  which  it  is  given  as  in  the  truth  itself, 
i.e.,  in  its  contents,  its  ideas,  its  statements,  etc.  ;  and  that  the  highest 
possible  evidence  is  that  when  the  truth,  thus  stripped  of  its  appendages 


PEOP.  198.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  489 

(which  may  even  serve  to  weaken  it),  commends  itself  by  virtue  of  that 
which  it  contains,  and  by  its  perfect  agreement  with  a  related,  consistent 
Plan.  To  prove,,  therefore,  an  inconsistency,  a  lack  of  inspiration  in  the 
Word  of  God,  there  must  not  be  that  low  form  of  criticism  which  seizes 
upon  the  vehicle  (acknowledged  by  God  to  be  a  weak  instrumentality) 
through  which  the  truth  is  presented,  and  picks  out  a  flaw  here  and  there, 
but  there  must  be  a  direct  showing  either  that  the  whole  Plan  is  defective, 
or  that  this  or  that  portion  is-  utterly  unsuited  to  carry  out  the  purpose 
designed.  Hence  the  assaults  made  upon  the  books  of  Moses  are  one-sided 
uncritical,  and  unjust  to  the  Bible,  simply  because  in  the  attack  the  re- 
lationship that  these  books  sustain  to  an  entire  system  of  truth — to  a 
Divine  Plan — is  totally  ignored.  Dealing  with  Moses  honorably  and  justly, 
requires  an  investigation  of  the  Divine  Plan  which  he  alleges  God  gave  to 
him  to  reveal.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  the  Plan  is  not  adapted  to  secure 
the  end  intended,  that  it  cannot  give  the  deliverance  and  happiness  which 
it  proposes,  then,  of  course,  an  argument  that  appeals  to  sound  reason  is 
made  out.  But  on  the  other  hand,  so  long  as  the  heart,  the  vital  part,  is 
untouched — the  great  leading  truth  stands  uncontradicted — then  the  ref- 
utation of  destructive  criticism  is  found  in  the  books  themselves.  The  in- 
spiration of  the  books  of  Moses  is  shown  not  by  this  or  that  statement,  but 
by  their  design  as  a  whole  and  their  relationship  to  the  rest  of  the  Word  ; 
and  to  effectively  invalidate  it,  men  must  show  that  the  design  contem- 
plated, partly  become  history,  is  unworthy  of  God,  defective  in  adaption, 
and  sustains  no  relation  to  the  final  result  proposed.  The  honest  convic- 
tion of  the  writer,  expressed  with  feelings  of  regard  toward  those  who  think 
and  write  differently,  is  that  the  truthfulness  of  those  books  evidenced  in 
the  therein  predicted  temporary  (though  long-continued)  overthrow  of  the 
Theocracy,  the  dispersion  and  down-trodden  condition  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  the  Gentile  dominancy,  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  the  preservation 
of  the  nation,  etc.,  and  nmo  witnessed  by  us  in  the  world's  history,  out- 
weighs all  the  objections  (hypothetical  at  best)  which  have  been  urged 
against  them.  Living,  direct  present  testimony  is  vastly  to  be  preferred  to 
mere  deductions  when  credibility  is  the  issue  ;  and  when  we  see  before  us, 
as  at  this  day,  the  continued  fulfilment  going  on,  it  is  unreasonable  to 
leave  the  real  for  the  merely  suggestive,  the  demonstrated  for  the  unproven. 
For  Deut.  ch.  32  alone  is  amply  sufficient,  if  studied  in  the  light  of  the 
past  and  present,  to  refute  the  efforts  to  cast  discredit  upon  these  books. 
Beholding  thus  the  intimate  and  necessary  union  existing  between  all  the 
books  even  the  earliest  and  the  latest — every  one  bearing  its  testimony 
to  the  same  Plan — it  is  with  a  feeling  of  sadness  that  we  find  such  a  writer 
as  Parker  (Dis.  of  Religion),  uttering  the  view  of  a  growing  class  :  "  Here 
(in  the  Bible)  are  the  works  of  various  writers,  thrown  capriciously 
together  and  united  by  no  common  tie  but  the  lids  of  the  bookbinder." 
The  wish  is  evidently  the  father  to  the  expressed  thought,  and  as  the  heart 
desired  it  so  reason  adopted  it.  We  have  too  much  respect  for  the  reason- 
ing capacity  of  Parker  to  believe  that  he  could  pen  such  a  sentence  in 
defiance  of  existing  facts,  without  a  controlling  motive  that  biassed  reason. 
It  only  indicates  what  has  been  all  along  urged,  that  our  opponents  do  not 
fairly  meet  the  writers  of  the  Bible  on  their  own  ground.  If  there  is  no 
bond  of  union — such  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  presents — it  can  be 
shown  and  proven  not  to  exist,  but  no  one  has  yet  attempted  this  hopeless 
task,  giving  us  in  place  of  it  mere  assertion.     The  insincerity  of  the  latter 


490  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PKOP.  198. 

is  emphatically  seen  by  the  notorious  fact  that  one  of  the  leading  objec- 
tions of  a  multitude  of  the  Parker  school  is  exactly  the  reverse  of  this,  viz., 
that  such  a  union  does  exist  between  them,  but  being  based  on  the  same 
common  reception  and  promulgation  of  "  Jewish  conceptions"  is  on  this 
ground  to  be  discarded.  Numerous  writers  reject  the  New  Test,  books 
because  a  continuation  and  confirmation  of  the  Jewish  ideas  of  the  Old. 
Both  objections,  however,  are  not  based  on  unprejudiced  reasoning,  for  the 
simple  reason  that  neither  of  them  regards  the  continuity  of  Purpose  or  the 
remarkable  features  of  the  Plan  which  men,  separated  by  many  centuries, 
under  varied  circumstances,  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  freedom  and 
captivity,  ignorant  and  learned,  subjects  and  kings,  reveal  in  a  direct  series 
of  announcements,  forming  one  connected  design  which  they  assert  Divine 
Providence  will  ultimately  carry  out ;  and  as  collateral  evidence,  indepen- 
dent of  that  higher  which  the  Plan  itself  affords,  they  point  to  past  and 
present  fulfilments  to  prove  that  the  design  is  in  progress  toward  comple- 
tion. Let  manliness  in  the  attack  then  meet  the  claim  of  inspiration  right 
here,  in  the  Plan  of  this  Book  given  for  Redemptive  purposes,  showing  its 
unadaptedness  to  produce  the  contemplated  result,  and  in  the  alleged  con- 
firmatory proof,  manifesting  the  absence  of  fulfilment.  Many  portions  of 
the  Scriptures,  such  an  Daniel,  parts  of  Isaiah,  the  Apocalypse,  etc.,  are 
viewed  isolated  from  the  Plan  and  the  relation  that  they  sustain  to  it.  In 
reference  to  Daniel  recent  writers,  like  Arnold,  etc.,  reviving  the  old  ob- 
jection of  Celsus,  discard  him  because  so  largely  and  astonishingly  verified 
by  history,  alleging  that  the  fulfilment  shows  that  his  prophecies  must 
have  been  written  after  the  events,  professedly  predicted,  had  taken  place. 
This  blow  aimed  at  the  nature  and  integrity  of  prophecy  as  contained  in 
the  Old  Test,  and  indorsed  oy  Jesus  and  the  apostles,  utterly  fails  for  two 
reasons  ;  one  is,  that  it  ignores  the  distinctive  position  that  Daniel  occu- 
pies in  reference  to  the  development  of  the  Plan,  not  only  accurately  coin- 
ciding with  what  was  previously  given,  but  adding  necessary  details  which 
accurately  fit  into  and  materially  aid  (as  we  have  seen)  in  filling  out  the 
Divine  Purpose  ;  another  is,  that  Daniel  to-day  is  (as  we  have  shown)  still 
in  continuous  fulfilment,  so  that  his  veracity  as  a  receiver  of  Divine  truth, 
is  evidenced  in  Gentile  rule,  in  the  dispersion  of  his  nation,  in  the  history 
of  the  Church,  in  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  etc.  The  doctrine  of 
the  Kingdom  gives  this  prophet  such  irresistible  force,  unity  of  design, 
continuity  of  purpose,  etc.,  that  no  attack  can  be  logically  successful  unless 
it  meets  this  distinctive  phase  of  his  writings.2  Ignoring  this  relationship, 
pre-eminently  worthy  of  notice  on  account  of  its  being  the  strongest  proof 
of  inspiration,  we  find  some  (as  e.g.  Parker,  Abs.  Relig.,  p.  205)  declare 
that  the  "  writings  of  the  prophets  contain  nothing  above  the  reach  of  the 
human  faculties,"  and  that  "  the  mark  of  human  infirmity  is  on  them  all 
and  proofs  or  signs  of  miraculous  inspiration,"  so  that  it  is  maintained  (as 
e.g.  Foxton  in  Pop.  Christianity,  quoted  by  Fairbairn  On  Proph.,  p.  97), 
"  that  there  are  no  proper  predictions  of  the  future  in  the  Scriptures,  and 
that  there  cannot  be."  The  last  clause  reveals  the  spirit  of  judgment  ap- 
plied by  many  to  the  Bible,  for  coming  to  it  with  a  prejudged  decision  re- 
specting its  contents,  and  what  it  cannot  contain — it  is  easy  work  to  dis- 
card its  teachings.  But  this  is  not  weighing  the  main  evidence  upon  which 
the  Book  relies,  viz.,  its  Divine  Plan  ;  it  is  not  even  considering  the  sub- 
sidiary proof  of  prophecy  which  receives  its  force  and  propriety  owing  to 
its  relationship  to  this  Plan.     If  such  persons  could  be  induced  to  study, 


PEOP.  198.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  491 

impartially,  the  Bible  as  they  do  science,  art,  literature,  etc.,  "would  not  the 
leading  questions  be,  what  is  the  Divine  Purpose  professedly  given  in  it, 
and  what  is  its  adaptation  to  the  necessities  of  man  and  the  world,  and 
what  is  the  proof  that  the  purposed  Plan  in  itself,  as  well  as  in  its  appen- 
dages, gives  in  its  favor.  Let  the  Kingdom  in  which  the  Plan  of  God  cul- 
minates be  considered  in  the  scriptural  light  given  under  previous  Proposi- 
tions (thus  even  confirming  the  position  of  Rationalism  itself  that  the 
Kingdom  as  predicted  is  not  now  visible),  in  its  covenanted  form,  in  its 
manifestation,  in  its  overthrow  or  withdrawal,  in  its  being  tendered  con- 
ditionally, in  its  rejection,  in  its  being  held  in  abeyance,  and,  above  all,  in  its 
design,  suitable  adjustment  to  the  needs  of  man  and  society,  etc. — let  atten- 
tion be  directed  to  the  manner  of  prediction  which  is  not  that  of  man, 
owing  to  the  Jewish  spirit  naturally  being  opposed  to  the  calling  of  the 
Gentiles,  the  disparagement  of  their  own  nation,  the  recording  of  their  own 
sinfulness  and  humiliation,  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  through 
their  own  guilt,  and  rejection,  etc. — let  it  be  pondered  when  these  predic- 
tions relating  to  the  Kingdom  were  given,  when  the  Kingdom  was  estab- 
lished (and  still  its  withdrawal  foretold),  when  overthrown  and  in  ruins, 
when  the  nation  was  down-trodden  by  the  most  powerful  empires,  and 
when  its  postponement  during  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  was  fully  an- 
nounced ;  let  the  provisionary  measures  (previously  announced  as  part  of 
the  Plan)  be  contemplated,  such  as  the  Coming  of  One  in  the  line  of  David 
and  the  portraiture  of  Him  precisely  meeting  the  required  conditions  of 
covenant  and  promise,  the  intercallary  period  introduced  confirmed  by  the 
call  and  gathering  of  the  Gentiles,  the  condition  of  the  Jews,  the  unbelief 
of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  etc.,  let  all  this  (and  more  as  suggested  by  works 
specially  devoted  to  giving  evidences  for  we  are  now  only  concerned  with 
those  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom),  be  regarded,  and  the  Kingdom  itself, 
with  the  vast  and  complicated  (yet  consistent  unity  exhibited)  series  of 
development  necessary  for  its  establishment — -with  the  perfecting  of  its 
King  and  rulers  through  trial  and  suffering — with  the  merciful  prelimi- 
nary preparations — with  its  most  loving  union  with  and  exaltation  of 
humanity — with  its  beginning,  progress,  incorporation  of  David's  Son, 
teaching,  prediction,  promise,  intercallary  period  and  final  re-establish- 
ment blended  together  into  one  harmonious  whole — with  the  Supernatural 
necessarily  connected  with  it  in  its  conception,  organization,  provisions, 
and  reconstitution,  and  all  this  gives  reasonable  and  conclusive  evidence  of 
its  divine  origin — of  its  being  indispensable  to  the  natural  in  order  to  lift 
it  up  out  of  the  evils  which  now  so  fatally  encompass  it.  The  charges  of 
"a  cunningly  devised  fable,*'  of  "  mythical"  accounts,  of  "legendary" 
mixture,  and  of  "  intentional  fiction,"  come  from  those  who  persistently 
refuse  to  study  the  utterances  of  the  several  writers  of  the  Bible  in  the  re- 
lation that  they  sustain  to  the  Divine  Purpose  in  its  beginning,  progress*"; 
and,  especially,  in  its  goal — the  ultimate  end  designed. 

1  One  of  the  strangest  peculiarities  of  unbelief  is  this  :  that,  rising  above  the  old  hatred 
which  totally  ignored  any  worthiness  in  Jesus,  men  like  Kenan,  Mill,  etc.,  should  eulo- 
gize the  sayings,  life,  and  chai'acter  of  Christ,  while  denying  His  claims  upon  them  as 
recorded.  The  religious  confession  of  Mill  may  well  be  reproduced  illustrating  this 
feature.  When  acknowledging  a  historical  Christ,  he  adds  :  "  But  who  among  His  dis- 
ciples or  among  their  proselytes  was  capable  of  inventing  the  sayings  ascribed  to  Jesus 
or  of  imagining  the  life  and  character  revealed  in  the  Gospels  ?  Certainly  not  the  fisher- 
men of  Galilee  ;  as  certainly  not  St.  Paul,  whose  character  and  idiosyncrasies  were  of  a 
totally  different  sort  ;  still  less  the  early  Christian  writers  in  whom  is  nothing  more  evi- 


492  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  198. 

dent  than  that  the  good  which  was  in  them  was  all  derived,  as  they  always  professed  that 
it  was  derived,  from  the  higher  source."  (Quoted  Lit.  Liv.  Age,  taken  from  the  Spectator, 
vol.  123,  p.  511.)  But  such  concessions  are  afterward  crushed  under  an  array  of  doubt 
respecting  Christ's  own  belief,  etc.,  and  not  the  slightest  attempt  is  made  to  view  Christ 
in  His  Theocratic  relationship.  Then,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  saddened  at  the  eagerness 
with  which  intelligent  men  find  fault  with  almost  everything  pertaining  to  Christianity. 
Thus  e.g.  Draper  referring  to  Luther's  opposition  to  the  Aristotelian  philosophy  and  to 
the  school  men  (and,  by  the  way,  conveniently  overlooking  the  fact  that  the  dark  ages 
were  mainly  introduced  through  their  influence),  asserts  :  "  So  far  as  science  is  con- 
cerned, nothing  is  owed  to  the  Reformation."  How  he,  against  the  testimony  of  history 
(Mosheim,  Neander,  Kurtz,  Millman,  etc.),  could  say  "nothing"  we  cannot  comprehend, 
when  under  its  fostering  influence  learning  was  revived,  schools  and  universities  estab- 
lished, chairs  of  philosophy  and  science  were  instituted,  books  and  periodicals  published, 
literature  and  art  were  encouraged,  and  many  sons  of  the  Church  became  able  and  noted 
scientists.  Of  course  such  writers  as  Jacobson,  Ingersoll,  Bennett,  Coleman,  Syphers, 
and  many  others,  can  find  but  very  little  either  in  the  Bible  or  in  Christianity  to  com- 
mend. 

2  There  is  a  most  astounding  correspondence  between  prophecy  and  fulfilment  not  ex- 
pressed, but  which  the  student  finds  by  due  consideration  of  the  two.  Thus  e.g.  Daniel 
(and  so  the  other  prophets)  so  frames  his  predictions,  that  in  the  fulfilment  no  discrep- 
ancy or  antagonism  shall  appear.  Delineating  the  history  of  world  empires  (as  in  ch.  7) 
he  passes  by  (excepting  one  instance)  the  First  Advent  of  Jesus  and  brings  us  down  to 
the  Sec.  Advent,  the  Coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven.  Why  this  omission  of  the  First 
Advent  ?  The  reason,  as  the  past  teaches,  is  found  in  the  simple  fact  that  the  Spirit  in- 
fluencing the  prophet  foreknew  the  tender  of  the  Kingdom,  its  rejection,  and  its  final 
postponement  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  so  that  the  framework  of  the  prediction  in  this  single 
particular  is  based  on  a  foreknown  knowledge  of  the  non-setting  up  of  the  Kingdom  (as  we 
have  proven)  at  the-  First  Advent  and  its  postponement  to  the  Sec.  Coming.  Daniel 
describes  not  only  the  course  of  empires,  the  continued  down-trodden  condition  of  the 
people  of  God,  the  position  of  things  as  we  see  them  to-day,  but  (as  the  design  was  to 
contrast  empires  or  a  world-dominion)  he  omits  that  which,  if  mentioned,  would  be  mis- 
leading—thus bringing  his  predictions  into  wonderful  unity  with  historical  facts,  and  dis- 
playing an  amazing  knowledge  of  the  future  which  is  only  implied  in  connection  with  that 
which  is  expressed. 

Obs.  8.  In  this  connection  it  may  be  expected  that  something  more 
directly  should  be  said  concerning  the  first  chapters  of  Genesis.  Without 
calling  into  question  the  sincerity  and  honest :  intentions  of  many  eminent 
scientists  who  hold  that  these  chapters  are  opposed  to  the  deductions  of 
science,  as  given  by  them,  it  is  sufficient  to  show  that  they  do  not  even 
approach  these  chapters,  much  less  interpret  them,  in  the  spirit  of  a  correct 
scientific  research  and  study.  We  are  not  concerned  in  this  discussion, 
valuable  as  they  may  be,  with  the  theories  of  friends  which  strive  to  recon- 
cile these  chapters  with  science,  or  with  the  fatal  concessions  of  opponents 
(such  as  to  account  for  the  first  organisms,  feeling,  instinct,  intelligence, 
morality)  which  evince  that  many  of  their  statements  are  merely  hypotheti- 
cal. The  explanations  on  the  one  hand  and  the  conjectures  on  the  other, 
are,  in  our  estimation,  superseded  by  an  argument  in  favor  of  their  divine 
Origin,  which  cannot  be,  or  at  least  has  not  been,  controverted.  Instead 
of  taking  up  these  chapters  isolated,  given  with  the  utmost  conciseness  and 
in  the  most  cautious  language  to  adapt  them  to  unscientific  as  well  as  learned 
minds,  with  the  idea  that  they  are  designed  to  teach  with  precision  (making 
no  allowance  for  figure  and  none  for  the  lapse  of  time  that  may  be  denoted 
either  in  the  first  or  second  verse  or  in  succeeding  ones)3  the  scientific 
notions  underlying  the  creation,  we  must  receive  them  with  the  benefit  and 
interpretation  accruing  to  them  by  the  relationship  they  sustain  to  the  rest 
of  the  Bible.  The  student  will  observe  that  the  more  particular,  detailed 
history  of  the  world  rightly  begins  with  the  history  of  Abraham  (which 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  493 

alone  occupies  far  more  space  than  the  whole  antediluvian  period)  owing 
to  its  important  covenanted  relationship.  What  precedes  is  found  in  a 
remarkably  compressed  summary  of  events  without  the  least  attempt  at 
explanation,  or  the  imparting  of  details,  and  thus  forms  a  mere  introduc- 
tion— given  to  preserve  consistency — to  that  which  follows.  Now  how  can 
the  brief  introduction — the  subject  of  special  dispute — be  verified  as  truth- 
ful and  hence  reliable?  Evidently  by  the  body  that  follows,  for  in  the  first 
chapters  we  have  a  description  of  events,  which,  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
case,  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  man  now  to  verify,  or  to  deny,  excepting 
solely  through  inferences.  Being  only  introductory  to  a  Divine  Revelation, 
the  Divinity  of  the  Revelation  is  to  be  inferred  and'  proven  by  what  follows, 
thus  incorporating  the  introduction  itself.  If  there  has  been  such  a  crea- 
tion, such  a  fall,  such  a  withdrawal  of  God,  such  an  expulsion  from  Para- 
dise, such  a  curse  of  sorrow,  trial  and  death  imposed,  such  a  burdening  of 
Creation,  then  surely  in  the  Plan  which  is  built  upon  the  central  idea  of  a 
recovery  from  evil  and  a  restoration  of  forfeited  blessings  there  should  be 
found  the  evidence  of  the  reality  of  this  introduction,  making  the  Plan 
itself  a  necessity.  This  is  the  method  taken  by  the  scientist  in  tracing  his 
own  doctrine  of  evolution,  taking  the  present,  what  he  sees,  and  going  back 
into  past  ages.3  Let  us  take  what  we  see  and  know,  and  thus  go  back  to 
Genesis,  and  we  will  find  its  statements  substantiated  by  a  connected  chain 
of  evidence,  before  which  all  purely  inferential  statements  must  vanish. 
Thus  we  see  man  fallen,  i.e.  naturally  given  to  evil  ;  God  personally  with- 
drawn ;  no  Paradise  ;  Creation  with  all  its  retained  blessings  burdened  with 
evil  ;  the  creature  man  oppressed  with  sorrow  and  death  ;  and  with  all 
this  a  self-consciousness  impressed — arising  out  of  our  moral  nature — of 
dependence  upon  a  Higher  Being,  of  relationship  to  an  extra-mundane  Will, 
and*even  of  accountability  to  a  5loral  Governor.  The  condition  in  which  we 
are  placed  is  thus  far  confirmatory  of  Genesis,  but  to  stop  here  would  be  to 
overlook  the  main  proof  still  remaining.  Upon  these  statements  is  based 
a  Plan  to  recover  man  and  nature  from  the  evils  entailed  and,  at  least, 
experienced.  Now,  in  common  justice,  the  Plan  itself  with  its  accompany- 
ing evidences  ought  to  be  duly  studied  before  deciding  adverse  to  the  Book. 
The  Plan  involves  "restitution"  through  the  mediumship  of  a  divinely 
instituted  Theocratic  arrangement,  which  embraces  in  its  Head,  Jesus  the 
Christ,  the  union  of  the  divine  with  the  human,  thus  restoring  the  presence 
of  God,  bridging  over  the  chasm  now  existing  between  the  world  and  God, 
and  bringing  to  man  in  all  his  relations  the  deliverance  that  he  needs. 
This  restitution  is  intelligently  evolved  in  the  election  of  an  individual, 
family  and  nation,  in  the  establishment  of  a  Theocracy,  in  the  incorpora- 
tion of  a  throne  and  Kingdom,  in  wonderful  preparatory  measures  to  secure 
the  end  aimed  at,  and  all  this  substantiated  by  historical  facts  in  the  past. 
and  existing  before  our  eyes  at  the  present  day.  Restitution  comes  to  us 
in  Genesis,  isfound  in  every  book  of  the  Old  Test.,  is  taught  in  the  Gospels 
and  Epistles,  stands  forth  most  \ividly  and  grandly  in  the  last  communica- 
tion, and  forms  the  Key-note  of  covenant,  prophecy  and  promise.  Thus  it 
proclaims  a  unity  existing  between  the  first  chapters  of  Genesis  and  all  the 
after  books  down  to  the  latest,  which  in  itself  vindicates  the  narrative  of 
Creation  and  the  fall  of  man  ;  and  when  we  closely  examine  the  ultimate 
end  (having  first  noticed  the  provision  made  for  it,  and  the  Agent  through 
whom  it  is  to  be  affected),  and  see  how  wonderfully  this  promised  restora- 
tion meets  what  Genesis  proclaims  forfeited  through  sin,  it  would  be  sheer 


494  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  198. 

presumption  to  yield  up  the  truthfulness  of  a  record  attested  to  by  the  mul- 
titude of  events  relating  to  Redemption  which  have  transpired,  sealed 
by  the  Coming  and  glorious  acts  of  the  Messiah,  and  vindicated  by  the 
movements  of  Providence  in  the  history  of  nations  and  of  the  Church.  The 
God  who  appears  in  Creation,  who  manifests  His  love  for  man  and  then 
His  displeasure  at  sin,  again  appears  in  love  and  mercy,  manifested  by  the 
most  extraordinary  admirably  adapted  measures  of  grace  looking  forward 
to  a  magnificent  re-creation,  and  thus  stamps  the  first  record  as  divine. 
Facts,  a  thousand  of  them,  are  in  their  unison  evidence  of  the  truth  of  that 
which  occurred  before  man  existed,  even  if  we  are  unable  to  give  all  the 
details  which  science  may  demand.  If  the  Bible  professed  not  to  teach 
science  ;  if  it  did  not  adopt,  in  order  to  be  understood,  the  popular  method 
of  speaking  ;  if  it  did  not  encourage  the  prosecution  of  scientific  knowl- 
edge ;  if  it  did  not  urge  us  to  study  the  works  of  Creation  ;  then,  indeed, 
it  might  be  objected  that  in  its  simple  devotion  to  its  grand  conception  of 
Redemption,  it  either  professed  too  much  or  too  little,  but  taken  up  as  it 
is  with  the  development  of  a  world's  recovery  it  still  gives,  without  scientific 
detail  or  annunciation,  the  material  for  science  to  labor  with,  and  in 
friendly  tones  invites  her  to  exertions.  In  Genesis,  as  explained  and 
enforced  by  the  tenor  of  the  entire  Word,  we  have  apiersonal  God  presented 
who  takes  a  deep  and  abiding  interest  in  the  welfare  of  man,  not  only 
filling  out  a  proper  conception  of  the  absolute,  but  bringing  Him  into  inti- 
mate relationship  with  this  world.  We  have  evolution  proceeding  from 
Infinite  Intelligence,  according  with  Divine  Purpose,  manifesting  a  Divine 
Plan,  previously  entertained  and  now  carried  out.  This  is  eminently  more 
satisfactory  than  that  reasoning  which  removes  this  personal  Creator  and 
introduces  matter  and  force  as  the  original  producers  of  life,  making  a  self- 
creative  matter  and  force  (although  some  writers  on  both  sides  advocate 
an  intelligent  cause  directing  this  evolution),  out  of  which,  in  some  way 
unexplained,  the  first  organisms  are  self:developed.4  We  are  gravely  told, 
that  Creation  is,  because  evolution  is  a  necessity  or  a  law  originating  all 
things  ;  or,  that  all  things  have  existed  from  eternity  and  will  continue  to 
exist  under  fixed,  unchangeable  law  (thus  making  evil  itself  eternal)  ;  or 
that  Creation  is  a  manifestation  of  Deity  and  is  God  in  process  of  develop- 
ment, etc.  Even  the  dignity  of  man  so  carefully  preserved  in  the  Word, 
is  lowered  by  many  into  a  self-emancipation  from  the  condition  of  an  ape, 
or  even  lower  creature.5  Such  are  the  theories,  destructive  alike  to  God's 
claims  on  man  and  man's  moral  obligations  to  God,  which  are  presented  to 
satisfy  the  cravings  after  knowledge  and  to  indicate  the  true  position  of 
man  in  this  world.  From  such  hypothesis,  unsuited  to  impart  accurate 
knowledge  of  the  origin  of  things,  and  unadapted  to  remove  the  evils  of 
this  world,  we  turn  with  relief  to  that  Divine  Plan  of  Redemption,  which, 
by  the  abundant  and  glorious  provision  made  for  our  Salvation  through  the 
Theocratic  King  Jesus  the  Christ  seals  the  account  of  Creation,  the  origin 
of  man,  etc.,  with  the  marks  of  divine  recognition  and  approval,  thus 
elevating  both  nature  and  man  ;  making  the  former  the  means  through 
which  His  attributes  are  exhibited,  and  the  latter  through  whom  they  may 
be  recognized  and  glorified.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  which 
cmbiaces  God's  Purpose  in  its  inception,  progress  and  final  result  insures 
the  accuracy  of  the  Mosaic  record/and  hence  the  reliability  of  the  biblical 
history  of  man.  Just  so  soon  as  the  author  of  Ecce  Homo  can  foretell  what 
Moses  so  accurately  did  thousands  of  years  before  the  events  came  to  pass 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  495 

— as  at  this  day — then  we  will  be  prepared,  and  not  before,  to  accept  of  his 
eulogy  of  the  votaries  of  science  when  he  makes  (  p.  353)  "  the  least  among 
them  greater  than  Moses."  But  even  such  evidence,  great  as  it  is,  gives 
place  to  a  far  greater,  viz.,  the  development  through  Moses  of  God's 
Theocratic  order,  and  the  subsequent,  continued  prosecution  of  the  Plan 
in  the  provision  made  for  it,  enforcing  and  explaining  the  personal  God, 
the  relation  of  the  world  and  man  to  Him,  etc.  Hence  we  repeat,  that 
amid  the  mighty  and  unceasing  changes  of  nations  and  kingdoms, 
amid  the  unnumbered  actions  of  the  vast  crowd  of  successive  agents, 
amid  the  constantly  arising  contingencies  and  opposition,  the  Plan,  given 
in  those  books,  having  been  steadily  progressing  toward  the  goal,  Moses 
needs  no  letter  vindication  than  this  affords.  The  covenant,  the  Theoc- 
racy, the  temporary  withdrawal  of  the  same,  the  rejection  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  their  tribulation  and  scattered  and  yet  preserved  condition,  the 
engrafting  of  the  Gentiles,  etc.,  these  speak  in  louder  and  more  convincing 
tones  to  the  wise  and  prudent  than  either  the  scientists,  or  Colenso,  and 
their  abettors,  building  upon  mere  deduction  or  hypothesis6  leading  to 
Materialism,  Naturalism,  Pantheism,  Emanation,  and  even  Optimism, 
ending  again  in  Pessimism  and  Nihilism.  The  happy  combining  of  the 
moral  and  religious  with  the  physical  by  Moses  places  him  at  once,  aside 
from  other  considerations,  immensely  in  advance  of  those  who — against 
the  complex  constitution  of  man — are  striving  to  bring  out  all  truth  from 
the  same  natural  source  ;  or,  if  admitting  a  diversity,  make  the  lower,  i.e. 
the  physical,  the  criterion  by  which  to  measure  the  higher,  i.e.  the  spir- 
itual. If  difficulties  occur  to  the  investigator  or  interpreter,  which, 
in  the  light  of  the  connection  with  a  living  organized  Plan  following, 
unmistakably  proven  by  its  historical  and  doctrinal  unity,  is  the  most 
reasonable  ;  to  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  all  is  false,  or  patiently  to  wait 
for  a  reconciliation  or  interpretation  that  science  or  theology  has  so  often 
opportunely  and  unexpectedly  given  ;  especially  when  many  of  the  most 
eminent  of  scientists  in  the  past  and  a  goodly  number  now  find  no  diffi- 
culty in  maintaining,  on  such  grounds,  the  attitude  of  'true  believers  in 
the  Word.  Prof.  Christlieb  in  his  brief  admirable  essay  (counteracting 
Mod.  Infidelity),  after  giving  some  illustrations  of  reconcilations  affected 
by  enlarged  science,  justly  observes,  "  "We  begin  to  see  proof  positive  for 
Cuvier'sfar-seeing  utterance,  '  Moses  has  left  us  a  cosmogony,  the  exactitude 
of  which  is  confirmed  day  by  day  in  an  admirable  manner.'  ',?  Yes,  and  it 
is  reconfirmed  by  the  very  opposition  made  against  it,  for  the  same  Word 
which  gave  the  cosmogony  has  assured  us  that  men  would  arise  who  (e.g.  2 
Pet.  3  :  6)  would  profess  faith  in  the  perpetuity  of  things,  as  they  now  exist, 
in  endless  succession — would  deny  the  record  of  Moses,  and  the  relation 
that  Creation  sustained  to  the  power  and  designs  of  God.  With  the 
evidence  that  we  now  have,  we  can  hopefully  and  trustingly  await  for  that 
brighter,  most  glorious  corroboration  of  Moses,  when  "the  Theocratic 
Ruler  shall  exert  His  re-creative  power  over  the  same  Creation,  His  resur- 
recting power  over  the  same  race,  and  re-introduce  the  original  purpose  and 
blessing  of  Creation  in  that  Sabbath,  into  which  man  could  not  then  enter 
because  of  sin,  in  which  God  is  All  and  in  ail,  and  which  the  self-conscious- 
ness and  experience  of  man,  even  now  asserting  itself  against  theories 
degrading  to  his  moral,  intellectual,  and  religious  worth  and  dignity,  will 
ever  exult  in  the  beneficence  and  love  of  an  intelligent  present  Creator  and 
Redeemer.     And  honesty  compels  us  to  add  :  when  the  distinction  between 


496  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  198. 

the  righteous  and  the  wicked  will  be  made  manifest,  in  virtue  of  that  very 
Creation  (now  ridiculed)  which  alone  could  bestow  a  moral  nature  conscious 
of  good  and  evil — to  which  the  Bible  from  Genesis  to  Revelation  so  affec- 
tionately appeals — and  which  binds  us,  willing  or  unwilling,  with  unalter- 
able firmness — attested  to  by  the  moral  sense — securely  to  the  scrutiny  and 
judgment  of  an  Almighty  Moral  Governor  who  bestows  the  moral  as  well 
as  the  natural.  Conscientious  and  learned  opponents  are  reminded,  that 
the  creation  of  man  as  given  by  Moses,  in  the  manner  indicated  and  with  the 
moral  superadded  to  the  natural — thus  distinguishing  him  from  the  beasts 
— in  the  very  nature  of  the  case  prepares  the  way  for  the  after  continued 
proclamation  of  man's  accountability,  of  man's  being  under  moral  law,  of 
man's  moral  needs,  and  of  man's  elevation  or  degradation  in  proportion  to 
his  acknowledgments  of  moral  obligations  and  acceptance  of  the  provisions 
made  for  his  moral  nature.  Thus  in  fact  the  first  chapters  of  Genesis  form 
a  basis  for  all  future»Revelation,  and  the  one  cannot  be  adjusted  with  preci- 
sion without  a  constant  reference  to  the  other,  while  the  very  construction 
of  man  himself  physical  and  moral  responds — if  the  whole  truth  is  allowed 
free  access  to  mind  and  heart — to  the  correctness  of  the  portraiture  drawn. 
The  chasm  between  the  origin  of  matter  and  the  results,  the  natural  and 
the  moral,  the  material  and  the  spiritual,  is  an  impassible  gulf  unless  we 
receive  the  explanation  vouchsafed  by  Revelation,  thus  vindicating  its 
inspiration.  Besides  this,  the  heart-felt  reception  of  succeeding  Revela- 
tion, its  influence  and  practical  workings  in  heart  and  life,  its  adaptation  to 
all  our  necessities,  etc.,  this,  as  the  Word  invites  us  to  experience,  most 
conclusively  and  powerfully  contributes  to  the  proving  of  its  Supernatural 
origin.8  While  acknowledging  that  reason  should  weigh  even  probabilities, 
yet  its  chief  concern  is  with  facts,  not  simply  as  they  appear  in  a  concisely 
written  record,  but  as  they  spring  legitimately  developed  therefrom  ;  and 
consistency  demands  that  all  these  must  be  regarded  before  reason  can 
logically  decide  in  the  matter.  Hence  believing  that  many  of  our  oppo- 
nents are  actuated,  in  presenting  their  objections,  by  respect  for  and  love 
of  the  truth,  we  direct  their  attention  to  the  method  by  which  alone  the 
ivliole  truth  can  be  attained.  In  this  way  science  and  philosophy  which 
have  demonstrated  and  argued  so  much  that  is  valuable  and  in  accord  with 
the  principles  of  the  Divine  Word,  will  find  no  antagonism  to  hinder 
research,  no  unfriendliness  to  effort,  but  much  to  aid  and  sustain  after  the 
search  of  truth,  bringing  in  and  enforcing  from  Creation  to  a  re-Creation  a 
divine  order  of  procedure,  which  bends  to  its  purpose  conflicting  powers  and 
overcomes  evil  in  necessary  preparatory  stages  of  progress  and  development.9 

1  Certainly  without  injustice  we  may  make  several  exceptions  to  this  when  we  find 
language  employed  which  indicates  positive  hatred  toward  the  Bible.  To  illustrate  : 
when  in  the  very  title-page  of  books  a  low  enmity  to  the  Scriptures  is  evidenced  as  in 
Darwin  quoting  (in  Introd.  to  Descent  of  Man)  a  work  published  by  Dr.  Barrago  Francesco, 
entitled,  "Man,  made  in  the  image  of  God,  was  also  made  in  the  image  of  the  ape." 
There  is  just  reason  to  suspect  that  the  real  aim  of  some  is  by  any  means,  either  by 
destructive  criticism,  or  by  deductions  of  natural  science,  or  by  the  aid  of  philosophy,  to 
get  rid  of  Supernatural  agencies  owing  to  dislike  to  the  Word.  We  are  to  receive,  unques- 
tioning, alleged  facts,  when  no  proof  is  presented  of  new  species  starting  into  existence, 
of  no  process  of  development  going  on  in  imperfect  formations,  of  no  prolongation  cf 
species  from  individuals  raised  up  by  crossing,  of  no  breaking  clown  of  the  limits  assigned 
in  nature  between  species,  of  no  intermediate  formations  and  changes  in  geological 
strata,  etc.  Fallacious  reasoning,  with  numerous  chasms,  is  to  be  our  guide,  bringing 
no  ray  of  hope  to  man  of  ultimate  redemption.  Strange  cisterns  from  which  to  draw 
water  1 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  497 

■  As  e.g.  Delitzsch,  Kurtz,  Buckland,  Pratt,  Chalmers,  Sedgewick,  Birks,  etc.,  on  the 
first  part,  and  Hugh  Miller,  McCausland,  Macdonald,  Guyct,  etc.,  on  the  latter  portion. 
The  defenders  of  the  Mosaic  record  are  numerous,  including  such  names  as  Auberlen, 
Keil,  Lange,  Zollman,  Wagner,  Ampere,  Da  Serres,  Burmeister,  Fabri,  Cuvier,  Hitch- 
cock, Dana,  J  Pye  Smith,  Jacobus,  Tayler  Lewis,  Blumenbach,  Ebrard,  Shubert,  Karl 
von  Eaumer,  John  Miiller,  Alex,  von  Humboldt,  Gray,  Owen,  Dawson,  Winehell,  Agassiz, 
Jevons,  Thompson,  Lotze,  Beale,  Hemholtz,  Wundt.  Prof.  Mivarfc,  Prof.  Henry.  Bowen. 
The  only  fatal  objections  that  can  be  of  force  against  the  Bible  account  of  creation  would 
be  to  prove  that  the  world  is  eternal  or  self-created,  or  that  man  was  not  preceded  by 
other  creations,  or  that  man  did  not  precede  woman,  etc.  That  is,  prove  something 
directly  in  antagonism  with  the  record.  Until  this  is  done  we  would  rather  contemplate 
the  Paradise  of  the  Bible  than  Strauss's  "  Chaldaic  primeval  slime, "  or  the  scientist's 
"aboriginal  wilds  of  man's  progenitor,  the  ape  ;"  we  would  rather  take  the  biblical  ac- 
count of  man  and  the  destiny  offered  to  him  than  the  gross  materialism  of  Voght  which 
makes  thought  merely  "  a  secretion  of  the  brain,"  ana  of  Moleschott,  which  destines  him 
for  "  manure  for  the  ground." 

3  This  process  of  reasoning  is  rejected,  however,  by  them  when  it  can  be  favorably 
urged  in  behalf  of  the  Scriptures  ;  they  also,  in  the  most  deliberate  manner,  reject,  with- 
out consideration,  the  various  attempts  made  at  reconciliation  in  this  manner  as  wit- 
nessed e.g.  in  Froude  and  Huxley  (as  quoted  in  Scribner's  Monthly,  March,  1873),  who 
coolly  ignore  such  labors  (worthy  of  attention,  in  view  of  the  interests  at  stake),  and  exalt 
the  doctrine  of  evolution,  as  taught  by  them,  above  the  Bible,  and  who,  with  the  bigotry 
that  they  profess  to  despise,  advise  the  rejection  of  "  all  theologies"  based  on  the  Script- 
ures and  the  reception  of  scientific  results.  Lest  we  be  charged  with  injustice,  let  Huxley 
himself  speak  :  "  All  theologies  which  are  based  on  the  assumption  of  the  truth  of  the 
account  of  the  origin  of  things  given  in  the  Book  of  Genesis,  being  utterly  irreconcilable 
with  the  doctrine  of  evolution,  the  student  of  science  who  is  satisfied  that  the  evidence 
upon  which  the  doctrine  of  evolution  rests  is  incomparably  strouger  and  better  than  that 
upon  which  the  supposed  authority  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  rests,  will  not  trouble  himself 
further  with  these  theologies,  but  will  confine  his  attention  to  such  arguments  against  the 
view  that  he  holds  as  are  based  upon  purely  scientific  data."  This,  indeed,  would  be  a 
narrowing  the  field  of  controversy  to  accommodate  an  enemy  :  tin'  moral,  the  religious, 
the  spiritual,  the  theological,  is  to  give  jdace  to  pure  material  science  ;  the  higher  is  to 
bow  to  the  lower.  The  proposition  surely  did  not  originate  in  a  scientific  mind,  but  in 
a  prejudiced  heart,  seeing  that  it  asks  what  only  a  limited,  unscientific  mind,  under  the 
influence  of  bigotry  or  one-sidedness  could  suggest,  viz.,  the  forsaking  of  a  vantage  field 
higher  than  the  mere  plane  of  nature,  in  order  to  accommodate  the  hostility  of  others. 
The  advice,  perhaps,  is  given  to  protect  its  own  weakness,  for  truth  seeks  no  conceal- 
ment and  is  equally  at  home  on  every  contested  field. 

4  We  scarcely  need  to  guard  our  argument  by  saying  that  in  this  process  of  reasoning 
•we  take  for  granted  the  universal  experience  of  man,  viz.,  that  we  only* can  know  the 
intelligence,  the  purpose,  etc.,  of  our  fellow-men  by  their  language,  works,  actions,  not 
by  actual  possession  or  tangible  use  in  ourselves  of  that  intelligence  belonging  exclusively 
to  them,  but  by  facts  produced  through  that  intelligence,  and  which  intelligence,  even 
lower  in  ourselves,  appreciates  when  once  given.  This  we  apply  in  considering  the  in- 
telligent plan  of  the  Creator— an  intelligence  existing  outside  of  us,  yet  which,  when 
established  by  facts,  appeals  to  reason  and  can  be  comprehended  as  reasonable  by  the 
intelligence  within  us.  Indeed,  we  may  safely  add— which  cannot  be  rejected  without 
doing  violence  to  intelligence. 

6  So  Boucher,  de  Perthes,  Lyell,  Lubbock,  Darwin,  Rolle,  Huxley,  Wallace,  Yogt, 
H'ackel,  Carpenter,  etc.,  admitting,  however,  that  there  is  a  missing  link,  which  B'uchner, 
with  childiike  faith,  expects  yet  to  be  found  in  Australia  or  New  Zealand  !  The  faith  of 
these  writers  is  a  lesson  to  us  unbelievers,  and  their  humility  is  most  expressive.  The 
latter  is  given  by  Fry  (quoted  by  Carpenter,  Contemp.  Review,  1872,  in  art.  "  On  Mind  and 
Will  in  Nature  'f  when  he  remarks  :  "  This  dislike  to  acknowledge  a  relationship  with  the 
lower  animals  is  not  an  expression  of  the  truest  Christian  feeling,  but  is  opposed  to  it." 
But  how  a  Christian  can  ignore  the  Bible  testimony  and  yet  remain  a  Christian  with 
"  the  truest  Christian  feeling"  both  Fry  and  Carpenter  fail  to  tell  us. 

6  That  we  justly  characterize  it  thus  is  apparent  (1)  from  the  concessions  of  scientists  ; 
(2)  from  the  conflicting  views  entertained  by  them,  no  two  of  eminence  exactly  corre- 
sponding ;  (3)  from  the  results  flowing  from  their  views,  verging  now  to  materialism, 
then  to  Pantheism,  then  to  extreme  Pessimism  (the  latter  latest  phase  exemplified  e.g.  in 
Von  Hartman's  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious),  etc.  ;  (-4)  from  the  sharp  criticisms  passing; 


498  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  198. 

between  them  (e.g.  Page's  remarks  on  Darwin's  theory  in  Owen's  Debat.  Land,  p.  262)  ; 
(5)  from  the  statements  found  e.g.  in  such  works  as  Lamark's  Man  from  Oysters,  Virey's 
True  Brotherhood  between  the  Baboon  and  Hottentot,  Vincent's  Fifteen  Original  Species  of  Man, 
Maillet's  Parrots  from  Perch,  Oken's  God  is  Rotary  Motion,  and  similar  ones.  See  some  of 
the  assumptions  shown  by  Elam  in  Eclectic  Mag.,  Dec,  1876,  hy  Martineau  in  his  criti- 
cisms of  evolution  in  Contemp.  Review,  1876.,  etc. 

7  The  student  can  advantageously  consult  in  vindication  of  the  credibility  of  Moses  the 
wiitings  of  G.  S.  Faber,  Bryant,  Maurice,  Sir  W.  Jones,  Home,  Jahn,  Hrevernick,  Lisco, 
Wolf,  Turner,  Wordsworth,  Murphy,  Jacobus,  etc.  The  scientific  objections  are  more 
specially  noticed  by  Zochler  (Bremen  Lee.  and  his  His.  of  Creation),  the  Duke  of  Argyle 
(Recent  Speculations  on  Primeval  Man),  Burmeister  (His.  Creation),  Stutz(77ie  His.  of  Crea- 
tion According  to  Geology  and  the  Bible),  Sumner  (Records  of  Creation,  Lewis  (Six  Days  of 
Creation  and  his  special  Introd.  to  Lange's  Com.  Genesis,  Amer.  Ed.),  Birk  (On  the  Creation), 
Pattison  (The  Earth  and  the  Word),  Wiseman  (Lects.),  etc.  Both  combined  are  found  pre- 
sented in  able  works,  such  as  Ulrici's  God  in  Nature,  Hartwig's  God  in  Nature,  Wagner's 
writings,  Kurtz's  Bible  and  Astronomy,  and  the  writings  of  Delitzsch,  Keil,  Hofman, 
Hengstenberg,  Baumgarten,  Sumner,  Hancock,  Green,  Lord,  etc.  While  for  the  defence 
of  the  Supernatural,  including  the  Mosaic  record,  such  writings  as  the  following  are  in- 
teresting and  valuable  :  Rogers's  Superhuman  Origin  of  the  Bible,  Liddon's  Elements  of 
Religion,  Griffith's  Fundamentals,  or  Basis  of  Belief  Concerning  Man,  God,  etc.,  Frazer's 
Blending  Lights,  Heer's  Har.  of  Creation,  Ebrard's  Failh  in  Holy  Writ,  Warring's  Mosaic 
Creation  and  Modern  Science  (Scribner's  Monthly,  vol.  15),  and  numerous  others  of  a  similar 
nature.  The  student  will  not  pass  by  Birk's  Modern  Physical  Fatalism  and  the  Doctrine  of 
Evolution,  Gladstone's  PJoints  of  Supposed  Collision  Between  Scripture  and  Natural  Science, 
and  others. 

8  To  this  the  rejoinder  may  be  made,  that  the  profession  of  multitudes  evinces  but  little 
or  none  of  the  Christian  life  as  portrayed  in  the  Word.  To  this  the  reply  is  ready,  that 
this,  too,  accurately  accords  with  the  statements  of  Christ  that  "  many"  shall  profess,  but 
that  "few"  shall  be  truly  righteous.  The  very  "  mixed  "  condition  of  the  Church  with 
the  sad  fruits,  is  only  evidence  of  the  truthfulness  of  the  Word,  which  full  describes  it 
and  warns  us  in  view  of  it  to  be  the  more  guarded.  The  past  history  of  the  Church,  how- 
ever it  may  prove  a  disgraceful  commentary  on  man's  depraved  nature,  and  a  showing 
forth  of  God's  forbearance,  is  also  one  which  exhibits  the  experience  of  God's  mercy, 
love,  mid  promises  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  mere  profession  of  Christianity  as  witnessed  in 
the  past  undoubtedly  had  its  influence  upon  J.  S.  Mill,  when  he  takes  the  following 
ground  in  his  Utility  of  Religion,  saying  :  "  Belief,  then,  in  the  Supernatural,  great  as  are 
the  services  which  it  rendered  in  the  early  stages  of  human  development,  cannot  be 
considered  to  be  any  longer  required,  either  for  enabling  us  to  know  what  is  right  or 
wrong  in  social  morality,  or  for  supplying  us  with  motives  to  do  right  and  to  abstain 
from  wrong."  But,  unfortunately  for  this  reasoning,  those  who  cast  aside  the  Super- 
natural in  Revelation  as  an  infallible  moral  guide — the  basis  of  moral  law  and  the  sup- 
plier of  motives— are  utterly  unable  to  decide  respecting  the  right  and  wrong  or  the 
motives  ;  they  differing  widely  among  themselves  and  forming  direct  antagonisms,  while 
all  who  receive  the  Word,  even  they  whose  lives  do  not  correspond  with  its  requirements, 
acknowledge  the  binding  force  of  Revelation. 

9  From  the  standpoint  occupied  by  us,  we  are  not  specially  concerned  in  the  various 
efforts  made  to  show  that  the  declarations  of  Moses  accord  with  the  deductions  of 
science.  And  yet  it  is  a  matter  of  congratulation  that  so  much  of  accurate  accord  exists 
between  them.  If  we  refer  to  the  recent  articles  on  "  Cosmology"  in  Relig.  Cyclopedias, 
Bib.  Dictionaries,  Introductions  to  the  Bible,  etc.,  we  find  a  sufficiency,  not  only  in  the 
outlines,  but  even  in  the  details  to  indicate  that  n<>  conflict  need  exist  between  science  and 
the  Bible.  It  has  been  remarked  (which  unbelief  is  loath  to  confess)  that  the  Biblical 
account  of  Creation  "  deviates  far  less  from  the  conclusions  approximative^  reached  by 
the  most  careful  deductions  of  geology,  than  any  other  ancient  cosmogony"  (Gladstone's 
Lect.  on  Faith  and  Free  Thought,  p.  165).  Why  not  admit  this  ?  Simply  because  it  would 
be  praise  given  the  Bible,  which,  to  write  the  truth,  is  despised  or  hated.  If  the  Bible 
says  that  the  world  was  "without  form,"  "void,"  in  "darkness"  in  "mist,"  so  also 
does  science.  If  it  teaches  that  "  light"  came  before  the  sun  appeared,  that  a  division 
-was  made  between  the  waters  and  land,  that  then  organic  life  commenced  its  forms,  that 
the  creation  of  forms  commenced  with  the  lower  and  in  respective  steps  ascended  to  a 
higher,  that  man  was  the  latest  and  highest  development,  so  does  science.  Why  not 
then  frankly  admit  such  a  remarkable  agreement?  Why  e.g.  does  Huxley  (The  Three 
Hypotheses  of  the  His.  of  Nature)  when  he  frankly  acknowledges  that  his  own  theory  has 


Prop.  193.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  499 

no  "  testimonial  evidence"  but  only"  circumstantial  evidence,"  make  sport  of  able  men 
who  endeavor  to  reconcile  the  language  of  Genesis  with  long  periods,  professing  admira- 
tion of  "  the  marvellous  flexibility  of  a  language  which  admits  of  such  diverse  interpreta- 
tions" (i.e.  making  a  day  either  literal  or  representative  of  a  long  period,  etc. — forgetting 
that  before  science  compelled  a  rigid  search  of  language,  Augustine,  when  no  pressure 
made  a  comparison  requisite,  suggested  long  periods  as  contained  in  the  text  of  Script- 
ure)?     Why  are  the  correspondences  as  given  e.g.  by  Warring  (Scribner' s  Monthly,  vol.  15, 
in  The  Mosaic  Creation  and  Modern  Science),  by  Lewis  (Introd.  to  Genesis,  Lange's  Com.), 
by  Dawson  (Archaia  ;  or  Studies  of  the  Cosmogony  and  Naturcd  History  of  the  Hebrew  Script- 
ures), and  by  various  other  writers,  given  but  little  consideration,  notwithstanding  the 
high  interests  at  stake  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  works  like  Powell's  Order  of  Nature  and 
others,  that  endeavor  to  destroy  the  credibility  of  Genesis,  that  make  out  a  "  Hebrew 
mythology,"  that  deal  largely  in  the  hypothetical,  are  lauded  and  magnified  as  superior  to 
the   scriptural  teaching?      Why  is  it  that  the   evolution  of  the   horse  largely  framed 
from  sheer   inference,    supposition,    and  imagination  is  coolly  tendered   as   a  satisfac- 
tory rebuttal  of  biblical  teaching,  and  that  it  is  (Huxley)  "  much  better  evidence  than 
there  is  for  the  authenticity  and  genuineness  of  the  books  called  by  the  name  of  Moses"  ? 
Why  is  it,  that,  to  make  out  a  case  against  the  Bible,  unbelieving  science  has  jumped  to 
the  conclusions  (art.  "  Probable  Age  of  the  World"  in   Quarterly  Review,  1876)   of  hun- 
dreds of  millions  (and  even  thirty  thousand  million)  of  years  employed  in  the  creative 
process,  and  that  when  forced  (as  Tait,  Thompson,  etc.)  to  limit  to  ten  or  fifteen  million, 
this  is  regarded  as  too  favorable  to  the  Scriptures  ?     Why  is  it  that  so  much  stress  is  laid 
on  the  formation  of  strata  (as  if  separately  formed,  consuming  immense  periods  of  time), 
when  eminent  scientists  (as  Agassiz,  etc.)  show  that  they  have  largely  been  formed  simul- 
taneously ?     Why  are  such  conclusions  as  to  long  periods  given  founded  on  the  formation 
of  coal  beds,  when  it  is  admitted  (e.g.  in  Pop.  Science  Monthly,  Oct.,  187-4,  p.  763)  that 
wood  was  converted  into  lignite  within  four  centuries  (hence  the  deduction  was  made  : 
"  From  all  this  it  would  appear  that  the  transformation  of  vegetable  matter  into  coal 
requires  less  time  than  is  usually  estimated  by  geologists  ;  in  the  present  instance  it  can- 
not have  been  over  four  centuries")  ?      Why  are  deductions  constantly  made  which  remove 
the  God  of  the  Bible,  the  work  of  Redemption,  a  Divine  Government,  Providence,  Prayer, 
Prophecy,  etc.,  unless  they  spring  from  a  heart  and  mind  prejudiced  against  the  Script- 
ures ?     It  is  hard  to  understand  these  opponents,  for  at  one  time  they  assert  (Pop.  Sci. 
Monthly,  in  various  editorials)  that  religion  or  Christianity  has  nothing  to  do  with  science, 
and  yet  e.g.  {Pop.  Sci.  Monthly,  March,  1875,  p.  625  and  626)  it  is  declared  in  objection  to 
Martineau's  "  Religion  as  affected  by  Mod.  Materialism,"  that  the  tendency  of  evolution 
as  taught,  is  not  to  lower  the  ideas  of  a  Creator,  but  exalts  the  true  view  of  the  divine 
government  of  the  world  (but  how  and  when  he  fails  to  tell),  and  that  evolution  is  "  a 
Philosophy  of  Nature,  and  gives  a  new  complexion  to  the  great  religious  questions  in 
which  the  interpretation  of  nature  is  involved."     Why  then  censure  theologians  and  be- 
lievers in  their  attempts  to  elucidate,  in  behalf  of  the  Bible,  such  "  great  religious  ques- 
tions," especially  when  it  is  admitted,  again  and  again,  that  antagonism  and  a  conflict 
exist?     Evolution  as  formulated  by  its  advocates  is  "  a  philosophy  of  the  origination  of 
things"  (so  Spencer,  etc.),  and  hence  must,  of  necessity,  come  into  contact  (either  in 
agreement  or  the  reverse)  with  the  Bible  and  Bib.  Theology  which  deals  of  the  origin  of 
things.     Now  evolution  rejects  the  idea  especially  of  "  special  creation"  (allowed  by 
Darwin  in  a  few  primary  forms,  but  which  many  of  his  followers  reject  as  utterly  "  un- 
scientific").    Even  those  (as  Picton's  Mystery  of  Matter,  and  Other  Essays)  who  are  will- 
ing, as  a  starting  point  to  admit  a  relationship  of  the  Infinite  and  Absolute,  are  hostile  to 
the  declarations  of  the  Bible  on  the  origin  of  things.     Others,  however  (as  e.g.  editor 
Pop.   Sci.  Monthly,  July,  1872),  reject  the  idea  of  an  intelligent  mind  originating  and  con- 
trolling the  beginnings  of  nature,  because  both  matter  and  mind  must  be  relegated  to  an 
"Ultimate  Reality."   which  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  know.     Any  position,  however 
absurd  to  reason  and  fact,  is  allowable,  provided  it  can  be  made  to  degrade  the  Bible 
teaching.     No  attention  is  paid  to  the  valuable  considerations  of  eminent  men,  which  go 
far  (as  already  shown)  to  show  that  the  Bible  and  Science  mutually  sustain  each  other, 
and  that  "  ignorant  men"  could  not  have  concocted  such  remarkable  points  of  agree- 
ment.    It  makes  no  concessions  that,  as  able  critics  have  stated,  much  of  the  alleged  dis- 
crepancy is  due  to  our  misapprehension  of  the  force  and  usage  of  Scripture  language 
which  makes  natural  law  the  synonym  of  God's  will  (because  established  and  sustained 
by  His  will),  which  attributes  directly  to  God  what  sometimes  is  done  through  natural 
agents  ;  which  in  the  phrase  "  let  the  waters  bring  forth  abundantly  every  moving  crea- 
ture," etc.,  implies  secondary  agency  to  carry  out  the  will  of  God  (so  also  "  Let  the  earth 


500  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  198. 

bring  forth,"  etc.)  ;  which  simply  places  the  Supernatural  as  the  basis  of  the  Natural,  or 
makes  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  "  the  foundation  of  natural  law  and  its  developments  ; 
which  indicates  the  Supernatural  willing  a  form,  in  fixing  into  it  a  permanent  principle 
to  work  out  its  completion  and  that  remains  as  its  unchanging  law  ;  which  by  statutes, 
covenant,  and  ordinances  applied  to  nature  indicate  simply  that  God  is  the  founder  of 
the  same  ;  which  is  so  possessed  with  the  idea  of  God  being  the  author  of  all.  the  founda- 
tion upon  which  all  rests,  that  in  virtue  of  such  relationship,  acts,  the  product  of  natu- 
ral law,  are  properly  attributed  to  Him.  But  what  do  such  suggestions  amount  to  in  the 
estimation  of  determined,  prejudiced  unbelief,  which  speaks  as  if  all  knowledge  must  be 
found  in  evolution?  John  Foster  once  said  :  "My  efforts  to  enter  into  possession  of 
the  vast  world  of  moral  and  metaphysical  truth  are  like  those  of  a  mouse  attempting  to 
gnaw  through  the  door  of  a  granary,"  but  such  "mice"  claim  that  they  are  in  the 
"granary,  '  and  hold  full  possession  ;  and  who  very  jubilantly  can  find  "  an  irreconcil- 
able antagonism"  between  Gen.  1,  where  the  waters  bring  forth  fowl,  and  Gen.  2,  where 
the  ground  brings  forth  fowl,  just  as  if  water-fowl  were  not  associated  with  waters 
and  land-birds  with  dry  land,  and  deliberately  overlook  the  more  weighty  intima- 
tion of  the  language  indicative  of  production  under  natural  law  instituted  by  the  Creator. 
A  few  words  in  relation  to  the  unity  of  the  human  race  and  its  antiquity.  When  such 
men  as  Blumenbach,  Cuvier,  Shnbert,  Karl  von  Kaumer,  John  Muller  (the  Anatomist), 
Von  Humboldt,  Bachman,  and  other  natural  philosophers,  teach  the  generic  unity  of  the 
race,  we  may  well  consider  the  statements  of  Lubbock,  Biichner,  and  others,  as  merely 
hypothetical.  When  Draper  (His.  of  Conflict,  p.  199)  estimates  man  to  have  existed  sev- 
eral hundred  thousand  years  ago,  he  is  utterly  unable  to  trace  back  reliable  human  history 
five  thousand  years.  The  whole  theory  of  unity  and  antiquity  as  opposed  to  the  Bible 
is  founded  upon  statements  and  suppositions  which  men  eminent  as  scientists  cannot 
possibly  receive  as  established  facts  and  authoritative.  Let  any  unprejudiced  student 
peruse  Lester's  Pre  Adamite,  Lubbock  s  I're-llistoric  Times,  Wilson's  Pre-Historic  May), 
and  the  writings  of  Mueller,  Schmidt,  Geikie,  etc.,  on  the  one  hand,  and  then,  on  the 
other,  the  Duke  of  Argyle's  Primeval  Man,  Wallace's  Difficulties  of  Development  as  Ajyplied 
to  Man  (where  some  of  the  difficulties  are  frankly  stated  by  an  adherent  of  antiquity), 
Mivart's  Lessons  of  Nature,  Elam's  Winds  of  Doctrine,  De  Quatrefages'  Natural  History  of 
Man  and  Crania  of  the  Human  Paces,  Dr.  McCosh's  Reply  to  Huxley's  Lectures,  Cabell's 
Testimony  of  Science  to  Unity  of  Mankind,  and  works  of  a  similar  nature,  and  he  will  see 
for  himself  that  before  the  Bible  teaching  can  be  eradicated  its  opponents  must  present 
a  higher  and  stronger  line  of  reasoning  to  overcome  even  the  difficulties  that  science 
itself  suggests.  Of  course,  men  who  can  make  man  to  be  derived  from  "  the  sea-mucus" 
(Oken),  or  from  "  worms  or  fishes"  (Haeckel),  or  from  "  cosmic  gas"  (to  resolve  itself,  as 
the  ultimate  goal,  into  "  carbonic  acid,  water,  and  ammonia"),  etc.,  will  be  delighted 
over  such  attacks,  and  with  Biichner  (Pref.  to  Force  and  Matter)  will  designate  those  who 
reject  their  far-fetched  theories  a  "howling  pack,"  "mental  slaves,"  "  yelping  curs, " 
"  speculative  idiots,"  etc.  (just  as  if  such  nomenclature  added  proof  to  man's  derivation, 
antiquity,  etc.).  We  have  books  and  articles  by  the  thousand  which  dilate  on  the  vast 
successive  ages  ;  describe  them  so  minutely  and  dogmatically  as  if  the  writers  had  lived 
through  them  ;  make  no  allowance  for  contemporaneousness,  retrogression  of  intelligence, 
co-existence  of  advancement  and  degradation,  etc.  A  subtle  anti-biblical  theory  is  erected 
and  paraded,  built  upon  far-fetched  inferential  evidence,  so  that  even  modern  Indian 
implements  are  made  to  figure  largely  in  it,  and  even  an  Indian  pestle  used  for  pounding 
grain  is  converted  into  an  ancient  Phallus.  Everything  possible  is  made  to  contribute 
to  its  support,  fully  indicating  the  animus,  viz..  an  intense  anti-scriptural  feeling  excit- 
ing and  pervading  the  whole,  in  order  to  invalidate  the  biblical  account  of  creation, 
man's  fall  and  accountability,  the  process  of  redemption,  the  incarnation  and  its  relation- 
ship, etc.  But  we  say  in  reference  to  all  such  topics,  that  the  proof  of  the  correctness  of 
the  Bible  lies  in  the  direction  already  indicated  in  Creation,  and  which  has  been  fully 
presented.  We  only  add  a  caution  given  by  the  editor  of  the  Galaxy  (Feb.,  1877,  p.  280), 
who,  when  speaking  of  the  eagerness  of  some  (e.g.  Cocker  in  The  Theistic  Conception  of  the 
World)  to  reconcile  the  alleged  deductions  of  science  with  the  Bible,  says  :  "  The  diffi- 
culty with  this  method  of  meeting  the  hypothesis  of  science  is,  that  the  scientific  views 
are  themselves  in  a  state  of  unstable  equilibrium.  They  may  topple  at  any  moment,  and 
then  the  correspondence  that  eager  devotees  have  found  between  them  and  the  Bible  is 
a  slur  that  falls  altogether  on  the  religion  and  not  on  the  science.  This  is  a  great  error, 
and  those  who  are  drawn  into  it  belittle  the  cause  that  is  dear  to  them." 

In  our  reading  we  find  two  points  which,  in  addition,  have  called  forth  the  special 
adverse  criticisms  of  unbelief.     The  one  is  noticed  e.g.  by  Bunsen  ("  Bunsen  and   His 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  501 

Wife,"  Liltell's  Liv.  Age,  Dec.  23d,  1876),  who  gleefully  relates  how  "  Buckland  is  perse- 
cuted for  asserting  that  fossil  beasts  and  reptiles  were  Pre- Adamite,"  and  adds  :  "  What 
open  infidelity!  Did  not  death  come  into  the  world  on  account  of  Adam's  sin?" 
Numerous  writers  assert  that  science  positively  teaches  the  existence  of  death  before 
Adam's  fall  and  death.  Suppose  this  to  be  correct,  it  enables  us  to  see  what  the  Script- 
ures plainly  teach,  that  death— to  which  Adam  was  liable  because  the  tree  of  life  was 
designed  to  avoid  it — was  entailed  upon  him  in  consequence  of  disobedience,  for  immor- 
tality was  tendered  to  him  only,  and  not  to  the  animal  creation  (comp.  e.g.  Archd.  Pratt's 
Scripture  and  Science  not  at  Variance,  p.  39).*  A  more  fruitful  source  of  sarcastic  remark 
is  the  Deluge,  specially  indorsed  by  the  utterances  of  Jesus.  We  frankly  acknowledge 
great  difficulties  to  surround  the  theory  of  an  absolute  universal  Deluge  (although  refer- 
ence to  an  Omnipotent  Will  can  set  them  aside)  as  held  e.g.  by  Burnet  (Sacred  Theory  of 
the  Earth),  Winston  (Theory  of  the  Deluge),  and  others.  Now  if  we  adopt  the  view  of  a 
partial  or  local  Deluge — with  which  Scripture  language  corresponds— as  held  by  P>hs. 
Clayton,  Poole,  Stillingfleet,  Pye  Smith,  Le  Clerc,  Rosenmuller,  Lambert,  Schoebel, 
d'Halley,  Quatrefages,  Cuvier,  Lester,  and  others,  the  difficulties  all  disappear.  Let  the 
student  ponder  the  reasons  given  for  a  limited  Deluge  in  Lange's  Com.  on  Genesis  (Amer. 
Ed.),  Murphy's  Com.  on  Genesis,  art.  on  Deluge  in  McClintock  and  Strong's  Cyclopaedia, 
Lenormant  and  Chevallier's  Ancient  His.  of  the  East,  an  art.  in  the  Christian  Review  (vol. 
20)  on  "  The  Extent  and  Character  of  the  Noachian  Deluge,"  and  similar  writings,  and 
he  will  find  the  objections  fully  and  ably  answered.  But  aside  from  all  this,  our  line  of 
reasoning,  as  given  to  sustain  Creation,  meets  the  requirements  necessary  to  the  accept- 
ance of  the  biblical  statements,  even  if  we  were  unable  to  offer  any  other  proofs  for  their 
retention. 


Obs.  9.  This  continuous  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  effectually  disposes  of 
the  argument  so  freely  used  by  the  Rationalistic  or  Naturalistic  party,  and 
recently  reiterated  by  Froude  (Short  Studies)  in  supposing,  that  the  early 
Fathers  were  not  conversant  with  the  Gospels,  did  not  quote  from  them,  and 
that  hence  the  Gospels  must  be  of  later  origin  than  the  apostolic  period. 
From  this  hypothesis,  the  broad  assumption  is  drawn  that  the  Gospels  as 
existing  were  not  written  by  the  apostles,  but  appeared  in  the  second  or 
third  centuries.  Aside  from  the  critical  labors  of  Apologists  which  dis- 
prove this  ;  aside  from  the  concessions  of  later  writers,  not  very  friendly  to 
the  Gospels,  that  they  cannot  historically  have  so  late  an  origin  as  many 
ascribe  to  them  ;  aside  from  the  quotations  and  accurate  knowledge  evinced 
b}r    Celsus  of    their  previous    existence  and  universal  acceptance  by  all 

*  Some  recent  writers  have  advocated  the  introduction  of  evil  as  resulting,  not  from 
the  fall  of  Adam,  but  from  that  of  Satan,  thus  answering  the  objections  of  Vogst,  Combe, 
aDd  others,  that  science  proves  the  introduction  of  death  — as  in  animals — before  the 
creation  of  Adam.  Keerl  in  his  work  (noticed  Bib.  Sac,  1863,  p.  756,  etc.)  instances  a 
large  number  of  theologians  (as  Kanne,  Steir,  Drechler,  Riedelbach,  Guerike,  Tholuck, 
Schneider,  Kurtz,  Ebrard,  Baumgarten,  Hengstenberg,  Richei>.  Delitzsch,  Engelhardt, 
Ranke,  Reichel,  Kniewel,  Wichart,  Lebeau,  F.  W.  King,  Rocholl,  Hotho,  Werner,  L. 
Schmid),  literary  men  (as  F.  von  Meyer,  Rougement.  Hamberger,  Dillmar,  and  others), 
naturalists  (as  Buckland,  Yon  Schubert,  K.  von  Raumer,  A.  Wagner,  etc.),  and  philoso- 
phers (Fr.  von  Schlegel,  Fr.  von  Baader,  Fr.  Hoffman,  F.  Schaden,  Kreuzhage,  and 
Moliter),  as  holding  to  it.  Boehman  and  his  theosophic  successors  advocated  it.  So 
even  King  Edgar  (as  quoted  by  Tholuck)  and  Origen,  besides  others.  Whether  proven 
or  not,  eminent  men  and  deep  thinkers  have  held  to  it.  When  considering  the  end  con- 
templated and  gained,  viz.,  this  Theocratic  ordering,  forfeited  and  so  long  lost  through 
sin,  it  serves  to  give  us  a  clew  to  God's  dealings  with  sin  and  His  withdrawal.  Adam's 
guilt  and  Jewish  sinfulness,  which  to  unbelief  seems  to  have  been  punished  too  severely, 
is  seen  to  receive  its  merited  punishment,  not  so  much  from  the  acts  themselves  com- 
mitted (i.e.  considered  isolated)  as  from  the  effects  which  naturally  resulted  from  them, 
viz.,  making  them  unworthy  of  being  the  representatives  of  God's  Theocratic  rulership, 
and  thus  forcing  God,  in  respect  to  His  own  honor  and  glory,  to  a  personal  withdrawal. 
The  first  sin  is  a  blow  at  Theocracy. 


502  THE   TTIEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.    198. 

believers  ;  aside  from  the  fact  that  another  and  growing  party  make  them 
as  early  as  possible  in  order  to  prove  a  continuous  "Jewish  conception" 
which  enveloped  the  apostles  themselves  ;  aside  from  the  spirit  and  con- 
tradictions involved  which  cause  one  party  to  make  Christ,  after  changing 
His  first  Plan,  the  Founder  of  a  new  religion,  and  another  party  to  make 
Paul  its  founder,  and  still  another,  to  make  neither  of  them  directly  such 
hut  attributing  the  religion  to  an  outgrowth  of  opinion  and  views  previ- 
ously entertained  ;  aside  from  all  this,  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  alone 
utterly  disproves  this  theory.  For,  leaving  the  appeal  which  one  of  the 
earliest  writers  makes  in  support  of  this  doctrine  to  apostles  and  elders  by 
name  as  taught  by  them,  the  simple  fact  of  an  unbroken,  unchanged 
transmission — as  all,  both  attacking  and  defending,  admit — of  the  same 
idea  of  the  Kingdom,  the  same  phraseology,  the  same  outlines,  etc.,  is  con- 
vincing proof  that  the  apostolical  notion  is  fully  retained  as  given  in  the 
Gospels  and  Epistles,  while  the  direct  and  indirect  quotations  or  incorpora- 
tion of  language  drawn  from  evidently  earlier  sources  (so  stated)  i.e.  apos- 
tolical, confirm  this  position.  In  other  words,  the  retention  of  the  Jewish 
covenanted  Messianic  idea  of  the  Kingdom,  and  its  universally  received 
postponement  to  the  period  of  the  Second  Advent,  is  the  most  powerful 
proof  of  the  strict  historical  unity  extending  from  the  ministry  of  Christ 
down  to  near  the  fourth  century.  It  evinces  that  the  apostolic  teaching 
was  in  both  Jewish  and  Gentile  churches  identical,  had  the  same  origin  and 
the  same  end  in  view  ;  and  hence  that  a  teaching  which  could  produce  such 
a  unity  of  doctrinal  position  must  not  only  have  been  continuously  present, 
as  the  Church  contends,  but  must,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  have  also 
assumed  its  alleged  prominency  and  leadership.  Let  it  bo  explained  on  any 
other  ground,  how  the  apostolic  Fathers  and  their  successors,  East  and  West, 
adopted  and  taught  "  the  Jewish  conceptions"  with  a  continuity,  per- 
tinency, and  consistency  with  what  preceded  their  period,  indicative  of 
a  familiarity  with  its  covenanted  relationship,  as  evidenced  by  the  rise  of 
no  controversy  respecting  its  intimate  union  with  covenant,  prophecy  and 
promise.  How  can  all  this  be  explained  without  admitting  a  previous 
acquaintance  with  the  waitings  of  the  apostles?  Is  it  reasonable  that  both 
Jews  and  Gentiles  should  yield  up  their  prejudices,  etc.,  without  a  knowl- 
edge of  apostolic  declarations  on  the  subject  ?  Deny  such  an  acquaint- 
ance with  apostolic  writings,  and  how  can  such  a  phenomenon  of  perfect 
correspondence,  of  uniform  and  continuous  agreement  on  so  vital  a  doctrine 
be  received  without  creating  an  immensely  great  difficulty  (because 
unnatural)  that  in  the  ordinary  solution  at  once  disappears?  Here,  in  the 
unity  of  doctrine  in  this  one  aspect,  is  sufficient  answer,  if  it  did  not  also 
meet  us  corroboratively  in  the  simple  narration  and  peculiar  style  of  these 
Gospels  so  different  from  the  already  more  amplified  and  ornate  style  of 
later  periods.  But  as  our  object  is  only  to  indicate  the  influence  that  this 
doctrine  has  in  this  direction  when  placed  in  the  field  of  controversy,  rather 
than  to  extend  the  argument  itself,  we  may  briefly  give  other  illustrations 
of  its  force  in  answering  objections.  How  crushingly  it  meets  that  alleged 
against  the  primitive  faith  of  the  Church,  first,  as  to  Strauss,  derived  from 
the  Jews  (which  is  shown  by  us  to  be  based  in  covenant  and  prophecy  and 
justly  derived  therefrom  by  the  pious  Jewish  faith)  ;  and  secondly,  as  to 
Bauer,  that  even  this  Jewish  derived  faith  in  a  Messiah  and  His  Kingdom 
was  a  myth  (which  is  logically  proven  by  us  to  have  continuously  existed 
from  the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom  veritably  established  and  its  histori. 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  503 

cal  overthrow  down  to  the  First  Advent).  Nothing  is  taken  for  granted, 
no  point  is  assumed,  upon  our  side  ;  no  apology  is  needed  for  this  ancient 
faith  proven  by  its  necessary  historical  existence  in  past  and  present  facts  ; 
while  the  answer  to  the  Kingdom  not  now  being  in  existence  as  predicted, 
has  its  ready  and  overwhelming  reply  in  its  postponement.  The  ridicule 
heaped  upon  the  Jewish  faith,  the  early  preaching  of  the  Messianic 
Kingdom,  the  hopes  entertained  of  the  Coming  again  of  Jesus  to  establish 
it,  etc.,  is  met,  not  by  abject  apologies  or  philosophical  accommodation  to 
human  weakness,  but  by  a  straightforward,  manly  appeal  to  the  Scriptures 
themselves,  which  give  the  reasons,  as  evidenced  before  us  this  day,  why 
such  faith  has  not  yet  been  realized.  This  doctrine  shows  the  fallacy  of 
Bauer's  effort  to  transfer  the  origin  of  Christianity  from  Jesus  Christ  to 
Paul.  For,  it  proves  a  continuity  of  doctrine  from  the  prophets  through 
Jesus,  descending  to  all  of  the  apostles,  and  makes  Paul  (as  many  Rational- 
ists with  Apologists  admit)  a  teacher  of  this  identical  Kingdom,  delayed  (as 
we  show  from  his  writings)  until  the  Second  Advent.  The  Gospel  of  the 
Kingdom  as  preached  by  Paul,  is  the  same  proclaimed  by  the  other  apostles, 
and  the  proof  is  found  Props.  70,  71,  72,  73,  74,  75,  etc.  Our  doctrine 
removes  the  charge  of  "  fanaticism,"  and  "  unjustifiable  self-glorification" 
of  Jesus  (Strauss),  when  declaring  Ilis  Second  Coming  to  bo  that  of  Judge, 
i.e.  Ruler,  King  of  kings.  For,  it  directs  attention  to  previous  covenant, 
to  the  Theocratic  order  so  essential  to  the  salvation  of  humanity,  to  the 
postponement,  etc.,  which  makes  a  Second  Coming  imperative  ;  and,  in 
view  of  a  consideration  of  the  whole  Divine  Plan  with  its  historical  at- 
testments  based  upon  man's  needs,  vindicates  from  the  nature,  design, 
and  end  contemplated  by  this  Kingdom  the  assurance  thus  given  by 
Jesus.  It  shows  how  the  superhuman  element  in  Jesus  is  not  confined  to 
one  Gospel,  but  stands  forth  in  all  of  them  as  a  necessary  pre-requisite  to 
meet  the  requirements  of  covenant,  prophecy,  and  Kingdom.  It  indicates 
why  the  Supernatural  pertaining  to  the  Exodus — interwoven  with  Jewish 
literature,  rites,  history,  etc. — cannot  be  rejected  owing  to  its  subserving  a 
certain  covenanted  purpose  or  plan  (its  failure  temporarily  also  predicted 
being  unnatural  from  a  mere  human  standpoint),  and  which  stands  inter- 
laced with  and  proven  by  present  promises  experienced  and  present  history 
witnessed.  It  removes  the  arguments  against  the  Bible  statements  drawn 
from  the  theological  theories  concerning,  and  extravagant  eulogies  bestowed 
upon  the  Church,  as  if  it  were  the  covenanted  Kingdom  of  David's  Son, 
etc. — from  which  unbelief  infers  that  if  such,  then  neither  covenant  nor 
prophecy  meet  with  a  fair  and  honest  fulfilment,  and  hence  neither  of  them 
are  true.  For  it  places  the  Church  in  its  proper  relation  as  also  a  noble 
preparatory  stage  (without  denying  God's  sovereignty,  etc.)  to  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Kingdom,  thus  preserving  prophecy  intact,  yea,  even  show- 
ing how  all  this  Avas  predicted  and  is  realized,  before  the  ultimate  fulfil- 
ment ;  and  thus  indorsing,  with  thankfulness  for  the  labor  bestowed,  the 
researches,  in  many  respects,  made  in  the  history  of  the  early  Church  both 
by  Rationalism  and  Apologetics.  It  commends  itself  on  higher  grounds  to 
the  opponents  of  Christianity  on  account  of  the  principle  of  interpretation 
(being  also  their  own)  which  underlies  the  reception  of  this  Kingdom  ;  the 
appeal  to  reason  requisite  to  understand  this  Theocratic  arrangement  ;  the 
necessary  mixed  condition  of  the  Church  ;  the  perpetuity  of  the  earth  ; 
salvation  of  the  race  ;  order  of  government  ;  meaning  of  Judgeship  of 
Christ  and  the  judgment  day  ;  enlarged  view  of  the  Redeemer's  work  and 


C04  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  19S. 

world  position  ;  superadded  agency  of  the  Supernatural  ;  position  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  etc.,  which  find  their  true  intent  brought  out  in  relation- 
ship with  this  Theocratic  Kingdom.  This  doctrine  explains  satisfactorily 
why  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  when  established  never  developed  into  the 
dimensions  of  a  mighty  world  empire  ;  why  it  is  permitted  in  God's  provi- 
dence that  there  should  be  progress  at  one  time  and  retrogression  at 
another  ;  why  earthly  kingdoms  are  allowed  to  oppress  the  Church,  and 
hostile  powers  to  array  themselves  against  the  truth  ;  why  the  great  dis- 
turbing element  of  evil  has  so  long  possessed  the  sway  of  the  world  ;  why 
the  withdrawal  of  God  personally  from  the  world  continues  ;  why  trial  and 
suffering  are  given  to  the  believing  sons  and  daughters  ;  why  so  much  pre- 
paratory work  is  requisite,  etc.,  and  it  does  this  all  by  a  consideration  of  the 
Divine  Purpose  as  contemplated  in  the  Kingdom  itself,  carefully  observing 
the  order  laid  down,  and  demonstrating  that,  whatever  temporary  post- 
ponement may  exist,  both  evil  and  good,  apparent  failure  and  prosperity, 
are  made  to  contribute  toward  a  Plan  which  God  designs  to  accomplish  in 
opposition  to  all  antagonistic  forces  without  interfering  with  the  free  moral 
agency  of  man.1  In  all  this  the  credibility,  etc.,  of  the  Word  is  the  more 
fully  sustained.  But  while  thus,  in  kindness  of  spirit,  opposing  by  argu- 
ment the  Rationalistic  and  Naturalistic  schools  who  endeavor  to  lessen 
these,  we,  on  the  other  hand,  have  not  spared,  with  all  charity,  the  logical 
inconsistencies  of  the  professed  Orthodox.  This  has  been  clearly  set  forth 
under  various  Propositions  and  needs  no  repeating.  Indeed,  from  this  very 
circumstance  and  from  our  frankness,  in  several  places,  to  acknowledge  the 
correctness  and  propriety  of  Rationalistic  objections  imperfectly  met  by 
Apologists,  it  will  not  surprise  us  if  some  of  the  Orthodox  will  attack  us 
with  more  bitterness  than  the  former  party.  But  we  must  fully  indorse 
the  opinion  of  Dawson  (expressed  before  the  Evang.  Alliance  of  18T3)  and 
many  others,  that  the  manner  in  which  unbelief  has  been  met  by  weak 
accommodations,  by  giving  up  of  reason  and  only  seeking  refuge  in  faith, 
by  pitiful  concessions,  by  irrelevant  interpretation,  by  adding  to  the  Word 
of  God  what  does  not  belong  to  it,  by  inconsistency  of  statements,  by  the 
intervention  and  authority  of  human  dogmas,  Church  authority,  decrees  to 
settle  difficulties,  etc.,  has  made — with  most  honorable  exceptions  here  and 
there — the  Church  in  a  measure  justly  chargeable  with  injuring  the  truth 
and  driving  men  struggling  earnestly  and  laboriously  for  light  into  an  un- 
fortunate attitude  of  antagonism  unfavorable  to  impartial  investigation 
and  reception  of  truth.  And,  in  some  of  the  discussions,  rejoinders  and 
answers,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  on  both  sides  there  has  also  been  an 
imitation  of  King  James  (instanced  by  Macaulav,  His.  En(j.~),  who  silenced 
those  who  objected  to  any  of  his  propositions  by  simply  repeating  them  in 
the  same  words  as  the  most  effectual  mode  of  argumentation.  All  this  has 
had  an  influence  (because  no  allowance  is  made  for  human  weakness  and 
imperfection)  upon  the  minds  of  many  in  detracting  from  the  truthfulness 
(although  fairly  delineated  as  something  to  be  expected)  of  the  Word  of 
God.  From  this,  too,  perhaps  in  a  measure,  springs  the  desire  so  recently 
exhibited  in  comparative  theology  of  bringing  forth  a  natural  religion  of 
humanity  formed  out  of  the  various  religious  systems  in  the  world.  The 
effort  now  made  to  build  up  such  a  religion  out  of  the  elements  of  all  others, 
is  an  old  one.  We  find  it  in  the  Alexandrian  teacher,  Ammonius  Saccas 
(Kiilen,  The  Old  Oath.  Church,  p.  11),  "  who  endeavored  to  show  that  all 
systems  of  religion  and  philosophy  contained  the  elements  of  truth."     The 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  505 

effect  of  such  a  theory  on  Origen  and  others  is  apparent  from  their  writ- 
ings.    A  certain  uniformity  of  religious  or  moral  ideas  arising  from  the 
structure  of  man  and  nature,  and  their  relationship  to  a  known  or  un- 
known Supreme  Power,  has  led  recent  writers  to  enter  this  field  (which  Dr. 
Spiess  justly  urged  upon  the  Evang.  Alliance  of  1873  as  worthy  of  special 
cultivation  in  its  bearing  upon  Christian  Apologetics)  with  the  hope,  evi- 
dently, of  invalidating  the  claims  of  Christianity  ;  persistently  overlooking 
how  many  of  the  facts  adduced  by  them  really  confirm  the  biblical  account 
of  man's  creation*  sense  of  moral  responsibility,  need  of  mediation,  etc. 
With  professed  respect  for  the  Christian  religion  (which  their  line  of  argu- 
ment imperatively  demands)  really  an  enthusiastic  regard  for  heathendom 
is  exhibited  to  the  disparagement  of  the  former  ;  for  the  antiquities  of 
heathen  religions  are  placed  not  only  in  the  same  category  with  the  Chris- 
tian, but  even  elevated  above  it.     Eulogy,  excessive  admiration  for  moral 
sayings,  etc.,  in  Oriental  systems  of  belief  (which,  if  the  Bible  is  true, 
ought,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  to  be  manifested  more  or  less  in  man), 
while  the  faintest  praise  is  bestowed  upon  the  sublime  utterances  of  the 
Bible,  lead  us  reasonably  to  suspect  the  intent  of  a  number  of  works  on  the 
subject.     But  every  such  writer,   as  can  be  seen  by  his  writings,  deals 
unfairly  with  the  Bible,  since  in  such  a  comparative  view  the  Divine  Plan 
running  through  the  book,  the  progressive  development  of  Divine  Purpose 
in  Holy  Writ  (as  we  have  indicated  it),  is  entirely  left  out  of  the  question, 
and  the  merits,   common  origin,  etc.,  of  Christianity  or  the  Bible  and 
heathendom  is  to  be  determined  by  detached  portions,  isolated  fragments 
taken  from  each,  and  then  cemented  together  by  speculation  and  hypothe- 
sis.    Of  course  in  such  a  mode  of  comparison  the  Bible  must  suffer.     But 
take  the  line  of    argument  'previously  indicated,   and   the  incomparable 
nature  of  Christianity — as  part  of  a  Divine  Plan  relating  to  the  Kingdom 
of  God,  as  part  of  a  pre-determined  and  historically  attested  Theocratic 
arrangement — shines   forth   pre-eminent  above  all   other   systems,   which, 
whatever  truth  they  may  contain,  are  weighed  down  with  an  oppressive 
load  of   appendages  sufficiently  indicative  of  their  origin.     No,   if  man 
wants  relief,  it  only  comes  through  the  Word  of  God,  and  not  through 
sophistical  or  philosophical  theories,  as  is  singularly  manifested  in  the  fact 
that  many  who  brought  forward  subtle  theories  hostile  in  spirit  and  ten- 
dency to  the  Word,  yet  privately  (vide  Hurst's  History  of  Rationalism,  for 
example)  held  to  the  Bible  as  their  only  hope  and  comfort.2 

1  It  might  be  regarded  invidious  to  specify  by  name  particular  -works  of  Poetic  Panthe- 
ism, Anti-Christian  Theism,  Spiritualism,  Liberalism,  Naturalism,  Communism,  Humani- 
tarianisni,  etc.— together  with  the  recent  revanipings  of  Oriental,  Egyptian,  Pythagorean 
and  Platonic  notions  of  transmigration,  etc.,  with  scientific  (?)  ideas  of  ascension  and 
progression  attached — which  this  doctrine  of  a  covenanted  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom 
in  its  scriptural  unity  is  specially  adapted  to  meet  from  its  peculiar  and  distinctive 
standpoints,  covenanted,  historical,  predicted,  preached,  postponed,  etc.  As  to  the 
adoption,  with  reserved  meanings  of  religious  and  scriptural  phraseology  by  so  many  of 
the  unbelievers,  we  have  only  to  say  that  it  reminds  us  of  the  natural  manoeuvres  of  the 
young  cuckoo  hatched  in  the  nest  of  his  stranger  nurse,  and  then  striving  to  throw  out 
his  foster  sisters  and  brothers. 

s  Briefly  we  may  indicate  how  this  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  serves  to  explain  much 
that  otherwise  will  be  dark.  Thus  unbelief  asks,  why  does  not  God  come  now,  in  this 
dispensation,  and  manifest  Himself  as  He  once  did  under  the  Theocracy  and  in  behalf  of 
the  Jews  ?  The  answer  is  plainly  given  in  the  Word.  The  withdrawal  of  the  Theocracy 
and,  as  a  consequence,  of  God,  is  a  punishment  inflicted  for  an  allotted  period.  We  are 
now  in  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles."     Respect  for  His  own  official  position  as  Theocratic 


506  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  198. 

King  and  a  due  regard  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  threatened  punishment,  causes  this  hiatus 
of  direct  Personal  Supernatural  guidance  and  intervention.  It  is  only  when  the  time  has 
arrived  for  the  restoration  of  the  Theocracy  that  God's  special  jiresence  is  again  restored  ; 
this  is  clearly  revealed.  Again,  exception  is  taken  to  the  testing  of  Abraham's  faith  in 
the  case  of  Isaac,  and  of  various  Mosaic  institutions  that  largely  call  for  prompt  trust 
and  obedience,  but  the  key  to  all  these  is  found  in  the  covenanted  relationship  resulting 
in  a  Theocratic  ordering,  which  as  its  foundation,  requires  supreme  confidence  in  God 
and  unhesitating  obedience  to  His  requirements.  A  Theocracy  without  this  element 
cannot,  injustice  to  the  Euler,  possibly  exist.  Again,  our  line  of  argument  would  power- 
fully sustain  the  points  made  by  Henry  Eogers  in  The  Supernatural  Origin  of  the  Bible  in- 
ferred from  itself,  as  e.g.  (1)  how,  considering  the  inveterate  proneness  of  man  to  idolatry, 
the  Jews  came  to  have  a  monopoly  of  Monotheism  ?  How  was  this  notion  introduced 
and  developed  against  prejudice,  and  the  tendencies  of  human  nature,  unless  by  a  divine 
ordering  ?  The  Theocratic  ordering  indicates  how  it  was  necessarily  given,  fostered,  and 
preserved  as  an  essential  element.  (2)  How  the  supremacy  of  God,  His  will,  etc.,  is  made 
against  natural  tendencies,  so  continuous  and  vital  a  subject,  involving  a  sublimity  which 
must  rise  from  a  divine  source.  The  doctrine  of  the  Eingdom  shows  how  this  was 
brought  about  and  cherished  over  against  revolts  and  rejections.  (3)  The  conception  of 
the  character,  etc.,  of  Jesus  too  high  for  mere  Jews,  and  hence  cannot  be  ascribed  to  a 
purely  human  hypothesis.  This  delineation,  as  we  have  shown,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the 
Theocratic  ordering  in  fulfilment  of  covenant,  etc.  (4)  How  Jews,  rising  above  deep  and 
powerful  prejudices,  could  suddenly  become  preachers  of  the  Gospel  of  love  to  all  men. 
Our  argument  shows  that  it  was  still  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Eingdom"  — a  Eingdom  indeed 
postponed,  but  still  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  dear  to  every  Jew,  to  which,  preparatorily, 
they  could  now  invite  all  to  become,  by  faith  in  the  Messiah,  heirs  and  coheirs  with 
"  the  Christ."  Indeed,  there  is  scarcely  a  jJoint  of  importance  and  interest  to  which  the 
doctrine  of  the  Eingdom  does  not  add  force. 

Obs.  10.  The  logical,  consistent  outgrowth  of  scientific  unbelief  is  the 
denial  of  the  Supernatural.  This  is  plainly  stated  by  its  advocates  and 
must  be  .accepted.  Thus  e.g.  Bastian,  an  Evolutionist  (Pop.  Sci.  Monthly, 
Ap.,  1874),  in  "  Evolution  and  the  Origin  of  Life,"  frankly  declares  that 
evolution  necessarily  implies  such  continuity  and  uniformity,  that  no  possi- 
ble place  can  be  given  to  Supernatural  interference,  special  providences,  etc., 
saying  :  "  Those  who  embrace  the  evolution  philosophy  are  foremost  in 
this  opinion  ;  they  believe  that  no  effects  of  whatsoever  kind  can  occur 
without  adequate  causes,  and,  the  conditions  being  similar,  that  the  same 
results  will  always  follow  the  action  of  any  given  cause.  Their  whole  creed 
is,  in  fact,  pre-eminently  based  upon  this  assumed  uniformity  of  nature. " 
lie  declares  that  consistency  demands  the  unchangeable  laws  of  nature, 
removing  special  creation,  a  divine  government,  a  superintending  provi- 
dence ;  and  takes  to  task  such  scientists  who  venture  out  of  this 
"assumed"  ground  (as  Darwin,  in  allowing  special  creative  act  in  pro- 
genitors ;  as  Spencer  and  Huxley  in  not  admitting  that  life-evolution  can 
take  place  now  ;  as  Tyndall  in  accepting  such  a  limitation,  and  adding  the 
notion  that  "  the  physical  agencies  which  promote  the  growth  of  living 
matter  are  now  incapable  of  causing  its  origination").  Numerous  writers 
take  the  same  decided  position,  viz.,  not  to  limit  nature  in  its  operations. 
Thus  e.g.  Fowle  (Science  and  Immortality)  in  reply  to  Max  Miiller,  attrib- 
utes all,  physical,  mental,  moral,  and  religious,  to  natural  evolution.  It  is 
true  that  some  resist  such  wholesale  deductions,  as  e.g.  Carpenter  (Pop. 
Science  Monthly,  Nov.,  1872)  emphatically  opposes  the  materialism  of  "  the 
Nature  Philosophers"  (illustrated  in  Biicimer's  Force  and  Mattel'),  express- 
ing himself,  "  that  science  points  to  (though  I  should  be  far  from  saying 
that  it  demonstrates)  the  origination  of  all  power  in  mind,"  and  adds  : 
"  When  metaphysicians,  shaking  off  the  bugbear  of  materialism,  will  lion- 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  507 

estly  and  courageously  study  the  phenomena  of  the  mind  of  man  in  their 
relation  to  those  of  his  body,  I  believe  that  they  will  find  in  that  relation 
their  best  arguments  for  the  presence  of  infinite  mind  in  universal  nature." 
While  he  calls  upon  scientific  men  to  resist  the  gross  views  of  Buchner, 
Miss  Martineau,  and  others,  which  make  nature  itself  the  ultimate  out- 
come, it  is  a  sad  fact  that  multitudes  indorse  the  latter  in  preference,  and 
fully  declare  by  their  published  opinions  that  "  the  world  by  wisdom  knew 
not  God.""  Take,  for  instance,  the  mildest  form  of  unbelieving  expression 
as  found  in  Darwin  (comp.  What  is  Darwinism  ?  by  Dr.  Hodge),  and  while 
a  Theism  is  not  absolutely  rejected  as  an  ultimate  cause,  yet  the  scale  from 
evolution  to  natural  selection  (as  the  cause)  culminates  in  making  natural 
selection  to  be  without  design  and  conducted  solely  by  unintelligent  physi- 
cal causes  ;  and  this  a  reviewer  (Scribner's  Monthly,  July,  1874)  correctly 
says,  causes  such  an  irreconcilable  antagonism  between  Darwinism  and 
theology  that  no  alliance  between  the  two  is  possible.  This  assertion  is 
confirmed  by  the  increased  and  constantly  increasing  chasm  existing  be- 
tween them,  as  presented  by  writers  on  both  sides.  The  doctrine  of  evolu- 
tion, with  its  support  of  natural  selection,  may  find  and  has  its  supporters 
among  Christian  Theistic  writers,  but  the  conclusion  engrafted  upon  it  is 
of  a  nature  so  hostile  to  the  direct  teaching  of  the  creative  and  Supernatural 
in  the  Bible  that  all  believers  in  Holy  Writ  must  recoil  from  it.  And  yet 
this  conclusion  of  unintelligent  physical  causes  dominating  over  all,  is 
pressed  upon  us  from  all  sides  as  the  legitimate  one  to  be  received.  We  see 
in  this,  viewed  from  the  standpoint  of  our  doctrine,  three  things  inevitably 
resulting  :  1.  That  it  is  vain  for  men  to  imagine  that  even  a  compromise 
between  such  antagonisms  can  be  effected  ;  2.  that  it  is  absurd  and  foolish 
to  hide  from  ourselves  the  existence  of  such  a  conflict  ;  and  3.  that  it  is  only 
preparatory  to  that  naturalism  and  humanitarianism  which  is  to  introduce 
the  culminated  Antichrist. 

Let  us  observe  a  little  more  extendedly  these  three  particulars  indicative  of  a  denial 
of  inspiration.  First  :  it  is  hopeless  to  anticipate  a  compromise  between  these  extremes. 
It  is  true  that  a  conservative  class  exists  which  thinks  that  the  doctrine  of  evolution  can 
be  reconciled  with  Christianity,  or  that,  at  least,  no  antagonism  need  arise  between 
them.  One  of  the  ablest  of  this  party  is  Asa  Gray  (Darwiniana:  Essays  and  Reviews  per- 
taining to  Darwinism),  "  who  is  (Preface)  scientifically  and  in  his  own  fashion  a  Darwinian, 
philosophically  a  convinced  theist,  and  religiously  an  acceptor  of  '  the  creed,  commonly 
called  the  Nicene,'  as  the  exponent  of  the  Christian  faith."  He  holds  that  there  need  be 
no  conflict  between  true  Science  and  Religion,  that  a  harmony  will  ultimately  exist  be- 
tween them  as  both  advance,  and  that  evolution,  properly  apprehended,  teaches  and  im- 
presses the  doctrine  of  purpose  and  design  in  nature,  etc.  With  this  quite  a  number 
agree,  such  e.g.  as  Leifchild  ( The  Great  Problem),  who  brings  forth  an  "  Evolver"  that 
"  must  be  divine  ;"  or  Principal  Tulloek  (Littell's  Liv.  Age,  Ap.  15th,  1876),  who  brings 
forth  "  spiritual  evolution  ;"  or  Radcliffe  (Lee.  before  the  Royal  Col.  of  Physicians," 
March,  1873,  in  Pop.  Sci.  Monthly,  July,  1873),  who  cleaves  to  a  Creator  of  original  forms  ; 
or  James  Martineau  (Religion  as  Affected  by  Mod.  Materialism),  who  endeavors  to  avoid  the 
extremes  of  evolution  ;  so  likewise  Joseph  Le  Conte  (Religion  and  Science),  Henslow  (The 
Theory  of  Evolution  of  Living  Tilings,  and  the  Application  of  the  Principles  of  Evolution  to 
Religion),  Smythe  (The  Bible  and  the  Doc.  of  Evolution),  etc.  The  Pop.  Set.  Monthly  (Feb., 
1875)  designates  the  following  "  Mod.  Sci.  Materialism"  (in  Blackwood's  Nig.,  Nov., 
187-4),  "  What  would  Tyndall  be  at?"  (in  the  Penn.  Monthly,  Dec,  1874,  by  R.  C.  Thomp- 
son) and  "  Ideas  overlooked  by  Dr.  Tyndall,"  by  Dr.  McCosh  (in  the  lnternaliondl  Reinew, 
Jan.,  1875),  as  agreed  in  the  reception  of  evolution,  provided  it  be  based  on  a  7'heistic 
ground.  It  is  claimed  by  such  that  evolution  only  produces  a  larger  for  a  narrower  view 
of  design  ;  that  it  cannot  and  does  not  dispose  of  divine  design  in  nature,  and  hence  im- 
plies an  intelligent  will  that  put  it  in  operation.  One  of  the  most  eloquent,  Dr.  McCosh, 
says  :  "  Establish  whatever  facts  you  please  in  regard  to  the  workings  of  nature  and  the 


50S  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PliOP.  198. 

order  of  the  universe,  and  behind  the  -whole  phenomenal  scheme  I  find  the  Infinite  Mind 
by  which  it  was  all  designed."  St.  Clair  {Darwinism  and  Design  ;  or  Creation  by  Evolution), 
the  "  Non-Conformist,"  and  others  take  the  same  position,  and  claim  that  such  a  view 
impresses  a  higher  estimate  of  Creative  design.  Allow  that  evolution  and  natural  selec- 
tion can  be,  to  some  extent,  incorporated  without  violence,  yet  this  is  simply  the  opinion 
of  those  who  desire  to  retain,  as  much  as  possible,  the  Bible  teaching  intact.  It  is  not 
the  opinion  of  the  leading  advocates  of  evolution,  for  these  most  deliberately  and  persist- 
ently reject  the  Scriptures,  and  even  if  some  allow  some  kind  of  a  Theistic  element,  as  a 
First  Cause,  it  is  immensely  different  to  the  Personal  God  of  the  Bible.  The  proof  of  a 
direct  hostility  to  the  Bible  is  abundant,  as  presented  in  their  published  statements 
respecting  Genesis,  Moses,  the  Supernatural,  Christianity  based  on  the  reception  of  the 
Old  Test.,  etc.  Contempt  and  scorn  are  freely  expressed  at  the  ignorance  and  credulity 
that  can  accept  of  Biblical  ideas  and  conceptions  respecting  the  world,  the  universe,  the 
origin  of  things,  the  relation  of  the  divine,  etc.  When  es'en  the  effort  is  made  (e.g.  by 
Lowne  in  Actonian  Prize  Essay,  The  Philosophy  of  Evolution,  to  illustrate  "  the  Wisdom 
and  Beneficence  of  the  Almighty")  to  unite  a  Natural  Theology  with  Evolution,  it  finds 
(illustrated  in  Pop.  Sri.  Monthly,  Nov.,  1873,  p.  116)  but  little  favor.  A  personal  Creator, 
a  God  to  whom  we  are  responsible,  a  divine  revelation  which  demands  obedience,  'must 
be  ignored.  The  repentance,  faith,  godliness,  etc.,  required  in  the  Scriptures  is  deemed 
childish.  The  Bible  itself,  and  its  product  Christianity,  are  the  result  of  natural  influ- 
ences, and  must  lie  classed  with  other  natural  religions.  Jevon  ("Evolution  and  the 
Doctrine  of  Design,"  Pop.  Sri.  Monthly,  May,  1874)  may  argue  for  an  infinite  intelligent 
mind  behind  evolution,  and  Smith  {Evolution  and  a  Personal  God,  delivered  in  Christ's 
Church,  New  York)  may  insist  upon  the  Personality  of  the  Being  directing  evolution,  and 
confidently  assert  "  that  it  is  hostile  to  no  interest  of  Christianity,"  "  that  even  if  the 
theory  is  true,  it  affects  no  interest  of  Christianity  injuriously,"  but  the  most  superficial 
acquaintance  with  the  Bible  and  with  the  writings  of  leading  evolutionists,  teaches  the 
reverse.  It  i3  simply  impossible  and  imjiracticable  to  unite  with  the  positive  teachings 
of  the  Bible  such  a  diluted  and  refined  recognition  of  the  Creator  as  these  writers  advo- 
cate ;  for  they  overlook  the  fact  that  evolutionists,  as  a  class,  deny  the  positive  declara- 
tions of  the  Bible  on  the  subject  (hence  the  refining  process  introduced  to  make  the  same, 
if  possible,  palatable),  ami  that  multitudes  are  driven  into  hostility  to  Christianity  by  the 
theory  as  advocated.  Its  reception  by  theologians  is  done  at  a  fearful  sacrifice  of  Bible 
teaching,  unless  it  be  so  modified  that  it  becomes  unpalatable  to  unbelieving  scientists. 

Second  :  it  is  foolish  to  hide  from  ourselves  the  existence  of  such  a  conflict.  Suppose 
it  to  be  true,  as  compromisers  advocate,  that  evolution  in  its  leading  teachings  can  be 
reconciled  to  the  Bible  ;  that  the  seven  Mosaic  creative  periods  are  preserved  ;  that  the 
evolution  of  living  things  through  the  force  of  law  inaugurated  by  a  Creator  can  be 
shown,  etc.,  still  the  fact  remains  that  leading  advocates  of  the  theory  and  a  vast  multi- 
tude of  adherents  refuse  to  accept  of  any  such  compromise,  flatly  deny  the  existence  of  the 
Supernatural,  and  attribute  all  to  the  force  and  perpetuity  of  natural  law.  Admit  that 
no  necessary  conflict  needs  to  exist  between  science  and  religion  ;  that  as  investigation 
progresses  a  complete  reconciliation  can  be  effected,  etc.,  yet  the  fact  remains  that 
science  as  given  by  many  scientific  men  is  in  direct  opposition  to  the  teaching  of  the  Bible. 
A  thousand  works  of  ability  painfully  attest  the  fact.  A  multitude  of  works  for,  or 
against,  evolution,  and  many  endeavoring  to  effect  a  compromise,  evidence  such  a  con- 
flict. Suppose  the  main  facts  of  evolution  can  be  received  in  agreement  with  Bible 
teaching  respecting  the  antiquity  of  the  earth  and  man,  and  it  can  be  shown  (e.g.  Introd. 
to  Genesis,  Lange's  Com.,  Amer.  Ed.,  etc.)  that  there  is  a  wonderful  agreement  as  to 
periods,  time,  evolution  of  inorganic  and  organic  forms,  etc.,  does  this  affect  the  continued 
opposition  of  scientific  unbelief  ?  No  !  the  conflict  between  faith  and  unbelief  is  increas- 
ing, as  seen  ia  the  articles  and  utterances  of  leading  periodicals.  The  deductions  of 
alleged  science,  if  only  hostile  to  the  Word,  are  received  in  preference,  and  efforts  are 
constantly  put  forth  to  heighten  the  antagonism.  When  eminent  men  (like  Huxley, 
Draper,  Carpenter,  Wallace,  Darwin,  Tyndall,  Galton,  Compte,  Mill,  Spencer,  Lubbach, 
Lewes,  Scmidt,  and  others)  frankly  admit  the  hostility  existing  between  their  theories 
and  the  Bible,  and  when  we  behold  the  fruitage  of  unbelief  in  their  followers,  it  is  folly 
to  ignore  that  which  is  self-evident,  dangerous,  and  destructive.  Haywood  ("Spiritual 
Pirates,"  Pop.  Sri.  Monthly,  March,  1875)  certainly  gives  good  advice  not  to  follow  the 
proscriptive  condemnation  of  scientists  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  valuable  acquisi- 
tions, etc.,  but  this  does  not  prevent  their  attacks  upon  the  Bible.  "  Liberal"  theolo- 
gians, caring  very  little  about  preserving  the  integrity  of  the  Bible  (having  themselves  no 
faith  in  its  special  inspiration),  cordially  strike  hands  with  unbelief  and  fritter  away  the 


PeOP.  198.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  500 

Supernatural,  and  this  indication  of  weakness  only  confirms  and  strengthens  the  bitter- 
ness against  Christianity.  When  Draper  insists  upon  a  conflict  existing,  it  will  not 
answer  for  Brownson,  Hill,  Deems,  and  others,  to  deny  such  a  conflict  ;  while  the  former 
pushes  his  view  to  an  extreme  by  making  the  Bible  and  Christianity  responsible  for  the 
opposition  of  some  of  its  adherents  to  scientific  facts  in  the  past,  the  latter  go  to  an 
opposite  extreme  by  ignoring  the  array  of  unbelief  and  hostility  evidenced  by  scientific 
men  and  their  followers.  Chancellor  Winchell  (The  Doctrine  of  Evolution)  may  justly 
argue  that  Spencer's  "  Unknowable"  is  "  Knowable  ;"  Washburn  {Address  to  Medical  Stu- 
dents) may  logically  declare  that  "  evolution  is  but  a  vague  name  for  the  living  action  of 
a  living  God  ;"  Mason  (Evolution  and  the  After  Life)  may  deduct  from  evolution  "  a  great 
first  and  adequate  cause"  which  leads  to  "  a  central  soul  ;"'  Trowbridge  (Science  in  (he 
Pulpit)  and  Smith  (Speculations  in  Science)  may  give  excellent  advice  as  to  the  manner  of 
conducting  controversy  and  indulge  hopes  of  an  ultimate  couiproniise,  but  these,  and 
others  like  them,  cannot  conceal  the  plain  fact  that  multitudes— irresj^ective  of  advice, 
compromises,  explanations,  etc. — persist  in  a  bitter  and  unrelenting  hostility  to  the  Bible. 
Admit  from  the  Christian  standpoint  that  it  is  uncalled  for,  inconsistent,  and  unscientific, 
yet  it  exists  and  extends  itself,  because  adapted  to  the  heart  and  wishes  of  its  advocates. 
If  the  reader  desires  to  know  how  scientific  men  insist  upon  a  conflict  as  actually  exist- 
ing, he  can  readily  find  it,  e.g.  in  Pop.  Sci.  Monthly,  June,  1875  (Draper  and  Ms  Critics), 
May,  1872»(Fowle  on  Science  and  Immortality),  White's  Warfare  <>f  Science,  Youman's 
Herbert  Spencer  and  the  Doctrine  of  Evolution,  etc.  As  illustrative  we  refer  to  Deems's 
Science  and  Religion  in  the  Pop.  Sci.  Monthly,  Feb.,  1876,  where  he  speaks  of  this  conflict 
as  "  ephemeral,''  etc.  The  editor  in  his  notice  of  it  advocates  a  real  and  continued  conflict : 
and  that  it  is  not  illusive  presents  the  attitude  of  many  Christian  believers  who  regard 
the  professed  scientific  statements  concerning  the  origin  of  life,  evolution  of  forms,  an- 
tiquity of  man,  etc.,  as  "dangerous"  and  "materialistic."  After  frankly  declaring  that 
"materialistic  science  is  aiming  to  cut  up  religion  by  the  roots,"  he  candidly  says  : 
"  Science  must  go  on,  and  if  her  results  thus  far  are  bad  there  is  no  prospect  that  they 
will  be  better  in  the  future.  There  can  be  only  one  basis  of  substantial  peace,  and  that 
is  the  entire  indifference  of  religious  people,  as  such,  to  the  results  of  scientific  inquiry." 
Now  what  harmony  can  there  be  with  such  demands,  or  what  confidence  can  we  place  in 
the  assertions  of  Deems,  Bixby,  Murphy,  Pratt,  Hmton,  Peabody,  and  others  of  a  coming 
reconciliation  (at  a  fearful  sacrifice  of  biblical  declarations).  Men  like  Johnson  (Science 
and  Religion)  may  affirm  that  there  is  no  connection  between  science  and  religion,  but  the 
attacks  of  Tyndall,  Mill,  Spencer,  and  a  host  of  others  upon  scriptural  teaching  invali- 
dates all  such  special  pleading.  Hodge  (What  is  Darwinism  ?)  and  others,  are  right  in 
recognizing  this  evil  tendency,  and  from  a  scriptural  standpoint  denouncing  it  as  irrelig- 
ious and  pernicious  ;  the  proof  of  which  is  abundantly  manifested  in  books  and  periodi- 
cals. 

Third  :  Such  scientific  unbelief  is  only  preparatory  to  the  predicted  Naturalism  and 
Humanitarianism  which  will  culminate  in  the  last  Antichrist.  This  has  been  shown 
under  Props.  161,  162,  163,  180,  etc.,  so  that  it  becomes,  as  exhibited  in  Prop.  174,  a  dis- 
tinctive and  highly  important  sign.  Many  writers  already  take  the  position  of  one  i:i 
"  Darwinism  and  Divinity"  (Pop.  Sci.  Monthly,  .June,  1872),  viz.,  that  while  evolution, 
etc.,  removes  the  miraculous  and  Supernatural,  while  it  supersedes  and  banishes  the 
teaching  of  the  Bible,  yet  because  man  is  a  religious  animal  with  organs  "  whose  func- 
tion it  is  to  produce  religion,  because  religious  instincts  are  indestructible,"  a  religion 
of  some  kind — a  natural  religion — must  be  substituted  ;  and  this  religion  will  be  formu- 
lated under  the  rule  :  "  Eeligions  thrive  by  a  kind  of  natural  selection."  What  is  this  but 
the  entering  wedge  to  the  fulfilment  of  God's  Word  respecting  the  culminated  Antichrist ! 
The  highest  intelligence,  the  most  vigorous  minds  are  engaged  in  this  destructive  work, 
to  fulfil  the  prediction  of  Herbert  Spencer  (The  Study  of  Sociology,  under  educational  bias), 
that  "  the  humanity  of  the  remote  future  will  have  but  one  religion,"  i.e.  a  natural  one. 
This  class  have  praise  for  Democritus,  Epicurus,  Lucretius,  etc.  (as  e.g.  Tyndall  in 
Inaugural  Address),  but  not  a  word  in  favor  of  the  Bible  ;  indeed  the  latter  must  be 
attacked  under  the  specious  cloak  of  the  "  Miltonian  hypothesis."  While  some  in  scien- 
tific unbelief  may  retain  a  form  of  Theism,  very  different,  however,  from  the  biblical  con- 
ception, many  resolve  all  into  Naturalism,  of  whom  Gladstone  (Pop.  Sci.  Month.,  Feb., 
1874)  says  :  "  Upon  the  ground  of  what  is  termed  evolution,  God  is  relieved  of  the  labor 
of  creation  ;  in  the  name  of  unchangeable  laws,  He  is  discharged  from  governing  the 
world."  This  is  the  class  that  will  prevail  according  to  prophecy.  Principal  Dawson  (The 
so-called  Conflict  of  Science  and  Religion)  and  others  may  truthfully  say  that  this  is  not  the 
result  of  "  true  science"  and  "  true  religion,"  but  God  who  knows  the  heart  of  man  fore- 


510  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  198. 

tells  us  that  the  depravity  of  man  will  bring  it  forth,  denying  the  claims  of  God.  Many 
j>rophets  arise  who  are  predicting  "  peace,  peace.''  White  (The  Waif  are  of  Science),  will- 
ing to  sacrifice  much  that  is  essential  to  the  insjiiration  and  integrity  of  the  Scrijitiires, 
ridiculing  the  efforts  made  to  resist  the  encroachments  of  unbelief,  predicts  a  glorious 
future  under  the  auspices  of  science.  Spencer  (First  Principles)  holds  to  the  possibility 
of  an  ultimate  reconciliation  between  science  and  religion,  but  only  when  religion  is 
willing  to  abandon  fundamental  biblical  ideas.  Shields  (The  Final  Philosophy)  advocates 
a  complete  harmony  between  science  and  religion  by  the  interposition  of  philosophy,  the 
arbitration  of  the  latter  being  all  powerful.  Gill  (Evolution  and  Progress),  fully  admitting 
the  wide  extent  and  destructive  tendencies  abroad,  urging  the  reception  of  the  Spence- 
rian  philosophy,  predicts  a  union  and  a  glorious  future.  So  numerous  writers  declare 
the  future  supremacy  of  unbelieving  science.  The  Bible,  under  divine  inspiration,  teaches 
us  that  unbelief  will  triumph  ;  and  that  its  victory  is  hastened  by  the  concessions,  advo- 
cated sacrifices,  one-sided  compromises  of  professed  believers  cannot  be  doubted. 

01)8,  11.  We  confess  ourselves  old-fashioned  enough,  and  such  a  believer 
in  the  representations  of  Scripture,  to  believe  that  reason,  honestly  exer- 
cised, can  see  the  work  of  an  intelligent  Creator  in  the  sky  above  us,  on  the 
earth  beneath  us,  and  in  the  world  around  us.  The  old  argument  derived 
from  design,  wisdom,  contrivance,  utility,  etc.,  is  as  fresh  and  vigorous 
to-day  as  when  it  came  from  inspired  teaching  (e.g.  Ps.  91  :  9,  10,  "He 
that  planted  the  ear,  shall  He  not  hear?  He  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  He 
not  see?  He  that  teacheth  man  knowledge,  shall  not  He  know?),  or  fell 
from  the  lips  of  Jesus  (e.g.  Matt.  G  :  25-34,  in  reference  to  "  the  fowls  of 
the  air"  and  "  the  lilies  of  the  field  ").  The  production  of  the  bird  in  the 
egg,  the  animal  in  the  womb,  the  eye  in  darkness,  the  ear  in  seclusion,  the 
mechanical  adaptations,  the  ten  thousand  thousand  contrivances  and  rela- 
tions indicative  of  intelligent  design,  all  force  us  to  the  position  of  Bacon  : 
"  Sooner  would  I  believe  all  the  fables  of  the  Legend,  and  the  Talmud,  and 
the  Alcoran,  than  that  this  universal  frame  is  without  a  mind."  The  book 
of  nature  corroborates  the  announcements  of  the  Book  of  Revelation  re- 
specting the  might,  wisdom,  goodness,  etc.,  of  a  Creator. 

Men  may  ridicule  the  biblical  conception  of  a  Creator  exhibiting  His  divine  attri- 
butes in  Creation,  and  able,  at  any  moment,  to  manifest  His  power  and  control  over  the 
same.  They  may  designate  such  a  God,  "  An  Almighty  Clockmaker,' '  but  after  all  reason 
must  acknowledge  that  the  Bible  gives  the  highest  and  most  comforting  idea  of  the  Power 
which  established  the  order  and  energy  of  the  universe.  To  make  all  the  expression  of 
fixed  law,  or  of  the  natural  development  of  forces,  and  not  allow  an  intelligent  ]\'ill  to  be 
manifested,  or  to  have  control  over  His  own  work  is,  to  say  the  least,  giving  no  hope  of 
ultimate  Redemption  from  the  growing  curse.  The  evidences  of  design  in  Creation  are 
indicative  of  a  Personal  God,  who  predetermined  and  arranged  that  natural  law  should 
bring  forth  the  results  witnessed.  This  is  advocated  by  a  long  list  of  able  writers,  Paley, 
Butler,  Chalmers,  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  McCosh,  Bascome,  Bremer,  Chailbourne,  "Walker, 
Child,  Thompson,  Cook,  and  many  others.  The  effort  is  indeed  made  to  prevent  nature 
from  testifying  in  behalf  of  Bible  statements  (as  Tyndall),  and  some  professed  Christians 
express  their  willingness  to  give  up  all  natural  teaching  to  the  sciences  (as  Martineau), 
but  teleology  refers  its  wonders  to  a  higher  source  than  mere  natural  causes,  and  shows 
us  that  we  are  under  divine  government.  The  last  idea  is  the  one  which  really  excites 
the  most  hostility,  for  it  is  to  rid  themselves  of  the  notion  of  moral  obligation  that  many 
refuse  to  arise  above  nature.  They  want  no  divine  government,  and  in  their  eagerness 
to  crush  such  a  conception,  they  attribute  all  to  matter,  or  force,  or  law.  They,  too,  will 
hastily  announce  as  scientific  conclusions,  as  facts,  theories  which  are  still  unproven 
(see  e.g.  art.  in  Brit.  Review,  May,  1860),  if  they  can  only  be  employed  to  weaken  faith  in 
the  Bible,  or  in  a  Christian  view  of  nature.  Scientific  men  (like  Agassiz,  etc.)  who,  more 
or  less,  favor  a  biblical  conception  of  nature,  are  taken  to  task  for  expressing  stick  a  faith. 
This  is  the  more  astonishing  when  some  of  the  leading  writers  on  evolution  have  expressly 
declared  that  there  is  a  limit  to  our  knowledge  of  nature.  Thus  e.g.  Emil  Du  Bois-Rey- 
mond  in  The  Limits  of  our  Knowledge  of  Nature  (an  address  delivered  at  the  Forty-fifth 


Prop.  198.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  511 

Congress  of  German  Naturalists  and  Physicians  at  Leipsic,  and  found  in  the  Pop.  Set. 
Monthly,  May,  1874),  limits  our  knowledge  of  nature  in  the  ultimate  causes  of  life-evolu- 
tion, the  laws  of  nature,  the  production  of  intelligence  and  consciousness,  the  compre- 
hension of  matter  and  force.  Now  the  only  rational  way — pointed  out  by  the  Scriptures 
— to  bridge  such  chasms  is  the  reception  and  advocacy  of  an  Intelligent  Creator,  whose  in- 
telligence, wisdom,  and  power  is  made  manifest  in  His  works.  And  this  leads  us  not  to 
"nature  worship,"  an  admiration  merely  of  law,  force,  design,  adaptedness,  and  har- 
mony, but  to  a  reverence  for,  and  adoration  of,  nature's  God.  This,  too,  leads  lis  to 
avoid  the  one  extreme  (Duke  of  Argyle  in  his  Reign  of  Law),  which  lays  such  stress  on  the 
existence  of  natural  law  as  to  limit  the  Lawgiver's  ability  to  interfere,  etc.,  at  will,  and 
the  other  extreme  (Bacon  in  his  Reign  of  God  not  the  Reign  of  Law)  which  makes  God's 
Will  constantly  and  directly  exerted  in  all  matters  without  the  establishment  of  an  order- 
ing (in  which  God's  Will  is  manifested)  resulting  in  a  general  uniformity  of  action.  A 
due  medium  between  the  two  is  the  scriptural  teaching,  which  recognizes  law  in  all  ordi- 
nary operations,  beholds  God's  Will  expressed  in  them,  sees  His  wisdom  and  power 
brought  out  through  them,  and  yet  makes  the  Divine  Will,  the  Supernatural,  superior  to 
those  laws,  and  able  to  control  them  at  pleasure.  The  natural  and  the  Supernatural  are 
related  ;  the  former  is  the  product  of  the  latter  ;  a  reference  to  the  one  suggests  the 
other,  and  hence  they  are  not  to  be  separated.  Studying  God's  works,  we  need  not  feel 
alarmed  at  the  startling  theories  sprung  upon  us,  as  e.g.  the  doctrine  of  "  spontaneous 
generation,"  of  which  even  Tyndall  (Dis.  at  the  Royal  Institution,  July  8,  1877)  said 
"  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  evidence  in  favor  of  the  doctrine."  We  need  not  be  very 
much  concerned  respecting  evolution,  when  (so  The  Armory)  man  does  not  "  evolute"  on 
so  that  he  can  fly  as  the  bird,  swim  as  the  fish,  scent  as  the  dog,  run  as  the  deer,  etc. 
Savage  (The  Religion  of  Evolution)  taxes  our  faith  immensely  more  than  the  Bible  does, 
when  he  makes  all  things  and  life  itself  to  be  derived  from  "  a  primitive  tire-mist  or 
nebula."  Fiske,  in  his  attack  upon  Agassiz  (Pop.  Sri.  Monthly,  Oct.,  1873),  exhibits  mar- 
vellous faith  when  he  advocates  the  existence  of  all  things  without  the  producing  cause 
of  a  "  creative  will  "  or  "  free  action  of  an  intelligent  mind  "  (being  "  a  mere  figment  of 
ancestral  imagination")  ;  Tyndall  advances  far  into  the  region  of  faith,  child-like  faith, 
when  e.g.  he  remarks  :  "  Matter  I  define  as  that  mysterious  thing  by  which  all  this"  (i.e. 
the  whole  series  of  phenomena  in  nature  to  the  self-conscious  life  of  man)  "  has  been 
accomplished  ;"  Biichner  exhibits  an  astounding  trust  in  his  delineation  of  Force  and 
Matter,  and  the  ultimate  finding  of  the  missing  links  ;  so  much  is  faith  evoked  that  Sara 
S.  Hennell  in  her  Thoughts  in  aid  of  Faith,  gathered  chiefly  from  recent  works  in  Theology 
and  Philosophy,  quotes  from  Feuerbach,  Spencer,  Buckle,  Powell,  Compte,  Strauss, 
Parker,  and  others  in  behalf  of  a  "  Faith"  that  shall  take  the  place  of  the  "  Old  Theologic 
Faith."  Surely,  in  view  of  all  this,  we  ought  not  to  be  censured  when  we  also,  with  Paul 
(Heb.  11  :  3,  etc.),  introduce  the  element  of  faith,  because  we  "  see  through  a  glass  darkly." 
Strange  that  men  should  deny  the  evidences  of  a  preconceived  intelligent  design  in  Crea- 
tion, and  go  into  ecstasies  of  faith  over  the  evidences  of  design  in  the  rude  "  flint-chips," 
making  them  indicative  of  intelligent  human  design  indefinite  ages  before  Adam  ;  or  as 
Rogers's  (Ch.  Union,  Sept.  19,  1877)  remarks:  "It  seems  strange  that  these  gentlemen 
who  refuse  to  admit  the  evidence  of  design  in  the  whole  material  universe,  should  be  so 
outrageously  indignant  with  any  of  us  if  we  hesitate  for  a  moment  to  admit  the  evidence 
of  design  in  a  flint  chip."  The  fact  is,  that  science  and  philosophy  corroborates  the 
truth  of  man's  position  that  it  is  largely  one  of  faith,  from  which  we  cannot  release  our- 
selves (comp.  Dr.  Sprecher's  Groundwork  of  Theology,  Williamson's  Rud.  Theology  and 
Moral  Science,  etc.),  because  from  a  lack  of  absolute  knowledge  and  a  constant  contact 
with  the  unknown  or  dimly  seen,  we  must  be  content  icith  relative  knowledge,  according 
with  personal  experience  and  consciousness. 


512  THE   THEOCKATIC    KINGDOM.  [PeOP.   199. 


Proposition  199.  This  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  materially  aids 
in  deciding  the  great  C histological  question  of  the  dag. 

It  has  been  justly  remarked  by  many  writers  that  the  question 
that  Jesus  asked  (Matt.  22  :  42)  the  assembled  Pharisees  :  "  What 
think  ye  of  Christ  f"  is  the  great  question  of  the  day,  seeing  that 
the  attack  upon  and  the  defence  of  Christianity,  for  the  last  twenty 
or  more  years,  has  centered  upon  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ.  The 
numerous  works  issued  by  both  parties  respecting  the  Person,  Life, 
and  Work  of  Jesus  is  evidence  of  the  deep  interest  taken  in  the 
subject,  and  which,  in  view  of  the  approach  of  the  Antichrist,  is 
precisely  the  condition  of  things  that  we  ought  to  expect  in  order 
to  insure  a  f  uliilment  of  the  Word. 

How  persons  .approach  this  subject  may  be  illustrated  by  several  examples.  Tims 
the  divinity  of  the  Christ,  the  making  Himself  God,  one  with  the  Father,  is  a  difficulty 
•with  cultivated  unbelievers  as  shown  in  the  case  of  the  intelligent  German  (mentioned  by 
Pentecost  in  the  Christian  Union,  Jan.  24,  1877),  who  justly  observed  that  Jesus  "  died 
in  defence  of  the  claim."  The  difficulty  vanishes  by  noticing  that  the  covenanted  Theo- 
cratic relationship  demands  it  in  order  that  completed  redemption,  as  the  Divine  Purpose 
contemplates,  may  be  obtained  and  God  be  honored  and  glorified.  On  the  other  hand, 
Gibbon— overlooking  for  the  moment  the  general  objection  of  unbelievers  respecting  the 
ascribed  and  claimed  divinity — sneeringly  remarks  (Decl.  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire, 
vol.  4,  p.  48D,  footnote)  :  "  Chrysostom  (Basnage,  His.  of  the  Jeus,  vol.  5,  p.  183)  and 
Athanasius  (Petav.  Dogmat.  TheoL,  torn.  5,  1.  1,  c.  2,  p.  3)  are  obliged  to  confess  that  the 
divinity  of  Christ  is  rarely  mentioned  by  Himself  or  His  apostles."  In  this  no  allowance 
is  made  that  (1)  a  sufficiency  is  given  to  know  "  the  Christ  ;"  (2)  that  this  sufficiency  has 
been  so  ample  as  to  influence  the  believers  (including  Chrysostom  and  Athanasins)  to 
receive,  heartily,  the  claims  of  divinity  as  essential  ;  (3)  that  this  sufficiency  is  so  great 
and  decided  that  it  has  urged  unbelievers  to  make  it  the  leading  objection  to  Jesus  ; 
(4)  that  the  lack  of  reiteration  results,  not  from  a  weakening  of  the  claim,  but  from  the 
simple  fact  that  Jesus,  as  the  Christ,  being  covenanted  in  the  Davidic  line,  requisite 
stress,  for  purpose  of  identification  and  faith,  must  also  be  laid  on  the  human  side  of 
Christ  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  81-84)  ;  (5)  and  that  the  Divine  Purpose  as  exhibited  in  and 
through  "  tlu;  Christ"  can  only  be  obtained  by  a  comparison  and  reception  of  Scripture. 
Again,  Gail  Hamilton  (What  Think  Ye  of  Christ?)  finds  divinity  in  Christ,  but  no 
acknowledged  or  assumed  Deity.  This  follows,  however,  from  only  considering  one  part 
of  the  subject,  viz.,  His  powers  as  derived,  His  expressions  of  inferiority,  etc.  (which  one 
aspect  of  Christ— as  covenanted  in  the  line  of  David— must  necessarily  develop,  being 
also  "  the  Snn  of  Man"),  and  setting  aside  another,  and  equally  positive,  set  of  passages 
which  present  us  with  another  aspect  of  "  the  Christ." 

Miss  Cobbe  (Brol  en  Lights,  p.  155)  asserts  that  through  "  the  invention,"  or  "  exaspera- 
tion, or  homage  of  adoring  disciples,"'  Jesus  was  by  stages  magnified  from  "  the  prophet 
into  the  Messiah,  the  Messiah  into  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Son  of  God  into  the  Incar- 
nate Logos—  Himself  a  God."  She  utterly  fails  to  grasp  the.  Theocratic  idm  involved  in 
the  title"  Messiah"  (comp.  Obs.  2),  which  includes  the  rest,  and  totally  ignores  the  Old 
and  New  Test,  conception  of  "the  Messiah,"  i.e.  the  Theocratic  King,  causing  her  to 
make  "  the  Life  of  Jesus"  "  the  great  Allegory  of  Humanity."  Strauss  (T/n>  old  Faith 
and  the  New)  dogmatically  and  sweepingly  declares:  "An  object  of  religious  adoration 
must  have  a  divinity,  and  thinking  men  have  long  since  ceased  to  regard  the  founder  of 
Christianity  as  such,"     The  concession  in  the  first  part  of  the  sentence  cannot  be  set 


Prop.  199.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  513 

aside  by  the  imperious  and  uncandid  statement  of  the  latter  part.  The  deepest,  most  pro- 
found thinkers  of  the  world  have  bowed  in  adoration  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  men  of  the 
highest  intelligence  and  talent,  impressed  by  the  Divine  Plan  pertaining  to  Christ  and 
the  Truth  in  Him,  continue  to  adore  Him.  The  reasons  for  such  an  adoration  will  fol- 
low. Probably  the  lowest  method  of  attack  against  the  divinity  of  Jesus  is  that  resorted 
to  by  some  Spiritualists,  who  represent  the  spirits  of  former  advocates  of  the  divinity  (as 
e.g.  John  Wesley  in  Boynton's  Unfoldings,  p.  7)  as  now  denying  its  truthfulness.  The 
meanness  of  such  a  procedure  is  only  equalled  by  the  brazen  impudence  that  suggests  it. 

Ohs.  1.  The  truth  and  power  of  Christianity,  the  validity  and  realization 
of  the  covenants  depend  upon  Jesus  "  the  Christ,"  and  hence  the  respec- 
tive answers  that  faith  and  enlightened  reason  on  the  one  hand,  and  unbe- 
lief and  unaided  reason  on  the  other  present  for  our  consideration.  The 
question,  ilWho  is  Jesus?"  will  be,  so  far  as  the  world  is  concerned,  de- 
cided adversely  to  Christianity  ;  for  we  are  assured  that  the  time  is  cer- 
tainly coming  when  the  Christship  of  Jesus  will  be  denied,  the  claims  of 
His  Messiahship  will  be  ignored  and  scorned,  and  Antichrist  shall  gain,  for 
a  brief  period,  the  complete  victory  in  the  contest,  but,  thank  God,  not  by 
the  force  of  reason  or  legitimate  weapons,  but,  as  the  Spirit  informs  us,  by 
"  deceit,"  "  lying  wonders,"  "  making  war  with  the  saints  and  overcoming 
them,"  and  killing  all  who  will  not  worship  him  or  his  image.  The  .loom- 
ing Antichrist  tells  the  sad  story  of  the  final  issue  of  the  present  struggle  ; 
corrupt  humanity — notwithstanding  the  noble  efforts  of  able,  learned,  pious 
defenders  of  tbe  Messiahship— will  secure  a  bloody  triumph,  which  the 
long-suffering  God  will  cut  short  in  righteousness.  The  victory  will  indeed 
be  short  lived  ;  for  (1  John  2  :  22,  etc.)  the  denial  of  Jesus  as  "  the  Christ," 
not  merely  in  theory,  or  in  individual  practice,  or  in  books,  but  then  ex- 
tended to  the  highest  of  earthly  relations  in  civil  and  religious  government, 
and  manifested  in  the  murderous  effort  of  the  nations,  under  tbe  leadership 
of  the  last  head  of  the  revived  beast,  to  blot  out  of  existence  the  adherents 
of  the  hated  name,  will  bring  forth,  to  the  joy  and  triumph  of  the  lovers  of 
Jesus,  such  an  open  decision  of  the  question  that  even  our  enemies,  smitten 
by  terror  at  the  exhibition  of  might  and  majesty,  will  no  longer  doubt. 

In  the  mean  time,  those  who  have  decided  this  question  by  the  noblest  of  tests,  viz., 
a  personal  reception  of  Christ  and  the  actual  realization  of  the  power  of  faith  in  Him, 
must  hold  their  souls  in  patience  ;  must  not  be  alarmed  at  the  inroads  of  infidelity  ; 
must  testify  to  the  truth  whether  men  believe  or  not  ;  must,  according  to  the  ability  given 
to  them,  hold  up  the  preciousness  of  Christ,  and  warn  both  the  Church  and  the  world,  of 
His  Coming  wrath  against  those,  who,  despising  light,  love,  mercy,  pity,  forbearance,  etc., 
refuse  to  answer  this  question  biblically.  In  the  contest  going  on,  no  one  who  is  a  be- 
liever is  exempt  from  witnessing  for  Christ  ;  and  the  man  who  has  an  earnest  of  the 
saving  power  of  Jesus  in  his  own  heart  and  life  is  fully  prepared  by  a  blessed  experi- 
mental knowledge  to  vindicate  the  Christship  of  the  holy  Jesus.  In  this  warfare  for  the 
honor  of  our  Saviour  let  every  lawful  weapon  of  defence  be  employed  by  the  believing 
young  and  old,  learned  and  unlearned,  high  and  low  ;  for  to  every  one  is  furnished  a 
sufficiency,  an  abundant  supply,  which  gratitude,  owing  to  God's  response  to  our  needs, 
should  prompt  us  not  to  hide  or  rest  unused. 

Ohs.  2.  In  considering  the  Person  of  Christ,  we  take  the  position,  so 
often  insisted  on  in  this  work,  that  Jesus  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  Person- 
age separate  and  distinct  from  the  Divine  Plan.  Thus  e.g.  if  He  is  called 
"  the  Son  of  Man,"  instead  of  at  once  concluding  that  this  is  a  phrase 
expressive  of  "  humility,"  let  it  be  contemplated  in  its  relationship  to  this 
Kingdom  (Props.  81,  82,  83,  etc.),  and  its  31essianic  dignity  will  appear. 
When  He  is  claimed  to  be  a  descendant  of  David,  then,  instead  of  putting 


514  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  199. 

this  aside  as  of  minor  consequence,  let  the  covenanted  necessity  of  His  truly 
being  such  be  duly  weighed  (Props.  49,  53,  122,  etc.)  and  an  important 
link  in  the  Christship  is  presented.  If  He  is  "  the  Son  of  God,"  then, 
instead  of  receiving  this  as  an  honorary  title,  or  one  to  indicate  simple 
nearness  to  God,  let  it  be  examined  in  its  unison  with  the  covenanted 
Theocratic  idea  and  intention  (Props.  200,  204,  etc.),  and  at  once  David's 
Son  and  David's  Lord  is  exhibited  before  us.  When  it  is  said  additionally 
that  He  is  the  "  only-begotten  Son"  (John  3  :  16),  it  is  not  that  Ele  enjoys 
merely  a  sort  of  pre-eminence  in  Sonship,  but  it  arises  from  the  fact  that 
He  is  the  only  Theocratic  King  that  was  predicted,  and  that  ever  shall  in 
the  future  exist  upon  this  earth.  Hence  we  insist  that  Jesus  the  Christ 
must,  if  we  will  do  justice  both  to  the  Record  and  to  His  Person,  be  con- 
sidered in  His  Theocratic  relationship.  He  is  the  promised  Theocratic 
King,  and  as  such  His  claims  to  our  acceptance  must  be  impartially  investi- 
gated. But  how  is  this  to  be  done?  Certainly  not  by  scrutinizing  His 
Person  and  claims  isolated  and  disconnected  from  the  Divine  Plan  which 
professes  to  introduce  Him  as  the  One  just  suited  to  carry  out  the  same  to 
the  intended  end.  We  take  the  covenants  and  the  promises  based  upon 
them,  and  in  the  light  of  these  we  contrast  Jesus  in  order  to  ascertain 
whether  He  is  indeed  the  Person  presented  by  them,  and  whether  lie  is 
able  to  fulfil  them.  Thus  to  illustrate  :  one  of  the  distinguishing  peculiari- 
ties of  this  promised  Messiah  is  the  implied  and  apparent  immortality 
attributed  unto  Him,  so  that  the  Jews  themselves  believed  and  asserted 
(John  12  :  34)  that  He  would  never  die.  How  this  was  secured  by  His 
resurrection  we  have  seen.  The  Theocratic  ordering  necessitates  the  same, 
and  therefore  it  is  not  lacking  in  the  Theocratic  King.  Again  :  the  Mes- 
siah that  is  covenanted  to  rule  over  the  Theoeratic-Davidic  throne  and 
Kingdom  is  to  be  possessed  with  God-like  powers  in  order  to  bring  in  the 
predicted  Millennial  blessings,  and  this  was  so  clearly  apprehended  by  the 
Jews  that  they  looked  (John  7  :  31  ;  Matt.  12  :  23)  for  Him  to  perform 
uncommonly  great  miracles.  We  have  shown  how,  in  the  nature  of  the 
case,  the  miraculous  or  Supernatural  must  be,  in  order  to  identify  Him  as 
the  true  Theocratic  King,  connected  with  Jesus.  If  He  is  the  Messiah  at 
all,  He  must  exhibit  the  earnest,  at  least,  of  Messianic  power  so  that  we 
may  have  confidence  in  Him  and  in  His  ability  to  consummate  the  pre- 
dicted Messianic  times.  This  too  is  identified  with  Jesus,  and  that,  which 
so  many  object  to  as  derogatory  to  Him,  we  find  to  be  indispensable  in  the 
revealing  of  Christship  (as  Jesus  asserts  e.g.  John  5  :  36).  If  Jesus  is 
really  the  Theocratic  King,  then  He  must  exhibit  to  us  for  recognition 
some  of  the  characteristics  of  the  same  as  foretold  ;  this,  as  every  one 
admits,  is  done  in  the  New  Test.,  the  only  question  being  whether  the 
account  there  given  is  sufficiently  credible  for  our  belief.  No  one  disputes 
that  the  Christ  of  the  New  Test,  tallies  with  the  prophecies  of  the  Old 
Test.,  but  to  avert  the  reception  of  this  Messiah  we  are  told  by  professed 
intelligence  that  these  things  are  attributed  to  Jesus  in  order  to  make  Him 
out  to  be  the  promised  Christ  i.e.,  it  is  "  a  cunningly  devised  fable."  The 
men  who  tell  us  this  also  inform  us  that  this  was  done  by  "  ignorant  per- 
sons," etc.  We  ask,  which  is  the  most  reasonable,  to  receive  their  account 
as  true  because  supported  in  all  its  details  by  the  long  preceded  predictions 
of  the  Word,  by  the  experience  of  a  reception  of  the  truth  in  our  own 
hearts,  by  the  continued  fulfilment  of  Christ's  Word,  and  by  the  necessities 
of  man  which  it  seeks  to  relieve,  seeing  that  it  is  simply  impossible  for 


Prop.  199.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  515 

learned  men,  much  less  "ignorant,"  to  concoct  a  portraiture  so  perfect 
(and  so  far  in  advance  even  of  Jewish  conceptions)  in  Theocratic  dignity, 
so  confirmed  by  events  that  have  continuously  taken  place  to  the  present 
day,  so  admirably  adapted  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  past,  the  present 
and  the  future,  so  skilfully  adjusted  to  meet  and  supply  the  longings  of  the 
human  heart  as  well  as  the  groanings  of  creation,  and  so  suited  to  the 
moral  and  higher  nature  of  man  that  multitudes  of  the  wisest  and  best  of 
men  have  acknowledged  it  as  supreme,  or  to  reject  their  representations  as 
false  because  "  ignorant  persons"   were  able  to  devise  the  most  complete 
Theocratic  model,  to  fit  it  into  a  consecutive  Plan  without  a  single  flaw, 
and  to  develop  a  Theocratic  ordering  (the  preparatives  and  final  end)  which 
above  all  that  has  ever  yet  been  presented  meets  in  every  particular  the 
evils  under  which  nature  and  man  are  burdened,  and  proffers  the  very 
blessings  which  if  realized  will  restore  the  golden  age  of  longing  humanity. 
The  powerful  reasons  assigned  by  Steudel,  Neander,  Tholuck,  Ullmann, 
Luthart,  Ebrai'd,  Ulhorn,  Weiss,  Christlieb,  Oosterzee,  Delitzsch,  Auberlen, 
Birks,   Schaff,   McCosh,  and   others  for  the    Christological   position   and 
nature  of  Jesus  are  strongly  confirmed  by  the  doctrine  of  this  Kingdom, 
seeing  that  the  Christship  (Prop.   205)  pervades,  gives  power,  and  is  the 
heart  of  this  Kingdom.     So  with  the  Messiahship,  which  is  the  equivalent 
of  Christship,  for,  as  Knapp  (Ch.  Theol.,  p.  ,325)  says  :  "  The  word  Messiah 
grammatically  signifies  king."     Messiah  the  Hebrew  for  Christ  was  univer- 
sally understood  by  the  Jews  as  descriptive  of  the  King,  but  at  present  be- 
ing regarded  as  "  a  doctrinal  word  "  it  is  made  to  express,  not  the  actual 
position,  official  station,  and  person  of  Jesus,  but  the  works  and  blessings 
received  from  Him,  thus  obscuring  the  original  and  scriptural  idea  con- 
nected with  it.1     On  the  one  hand,   we  object  to  the  perversion  of  the 
name,  applying  it  to  something  which  merely  results  from  the  Messiahship, 
and,  on  the  other,  restricting  (as  Eckerman,  Theol.  Beytr.  st.  1)  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Messiahship  only  to  the  Jews  and  not  as  essential  to  pure 
Christianity.     The  latter  is  shown  to  be  erroneous  by  the  simple  fact  that 
believing  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews  are  to  inherit  the  Messianic  Kingdom  ; 
the  former  by  the  undoubted  statements  of  the  Word  that  salvation  with 
all  that  it  imports  comes  to  us  because  this  Jesus  is  the  Messiah.     The  per- 
version and  the  restriction  of  the  words  "  Christ"  and  "  Messiah"  do  much 
to  darken  the  testimony  of  the  New  Test,  on  this  point.     The  Messiah  is 
indeed  the  Saviour,  the  Redeemer,  the  Benefactor,  etc.,  but  let  us  never 
forget  that  He  is  such  because  He  is  the  Messiah.     Hence  the  special  stress 
laid  upon  Peter's  confession   (Matt.    1G  :  1G,    17),   because  as  Holy  Writ 
plainly  teaches,  it  is  owing  to  His  being  "  the  Christ'"  that  He  has  power 
to  save,  and  that  when  the  time  comes  for  the  manifestation  of  His  glorious 
Messianic  dignity,  He  will  abundantly  save  and  deliver  His  people,  even 
taking  them  out  of  the  now  locked  gates  of  Hades.     Now  we  only  receive 
the  earnests  or  pledges  of  the  same  ;  then  we  shall  realize  the  full  mean- 
ing of  that  which  faith  and  hope  now  only  appropriates  to  the  joy  and 
peace   of   the   heart.     This   brief   digression  is  necessary   to    impress  the 
following  upon  the   reader's   mind,  viz.   to  comprehend  the  testimony  of 
the  New  Test,  concerning  the  nature  and  person  of  Jesus  it  is  requisite 
always  to  retain  the  biblical  conception  of  the  words  "Christ"  and  "Mes- 
siah."    This,  of  course,  always  brings  before  us  the  covenanted  relationship 
of  Jesus  to  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  ;  He  is  the  Theocratic  King,  and  be- 
cause He  is  such  He  possesses  the  nature,  power,  etc.,  attributed  to  Him. 


51G  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PliOP.   199. 

Therefore  we  repeat,  owing  to  its  importance,  to  do  justi  to  "  the  Gospel 
of  the  Kingdom,"  witnesses  and  to  Jesus  Himself,  we  must  first  make 
ourselves  fully  acquainted  with  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  what  it  really  is, 
and  what  it  demands,  and  then  see  whether  Jesus  meets  the  requirements  of 
the  Kingdom.  If  such  a  comparison  is  instituted  it  will  be  found  that 
(1)  Jesus  possesses  all  that  the  Theocratic  ordering  demands  ;  and  (2)  that 
such  a  development  in  the  Theocratic  Plan — even  taking  the  lowest  ground, 
its  simple  portraiture  exactly  corresponding  with  the  requirements  of  the 
case — was  beyond  human  capacity.2 

1  Shortly  after  writing  this  a  Prof,  of  Theology  (Prof.  Stuckenberg)  called  to  see  me. 
Asking  him  to  define  the  word  "  Messiah,"  he  most  aptly  replied  :  "  It  is  a  Theocratic 
word,  representing  the  relationship  of  Jesns  to  die  Theocracy."  As  Jesus  foreknew  the 
non-establishment  of  the  Theocracy  through  the  non-repentance  of*  the  nation,  the  Mes- 
siahship  was  kept  in  the  background  and  revealed  only  to  a  few,  etc.  The  reader  will 
observe  that  this  reference  to  "  the  Christship"  is  introductory  to  a  following  Proposition 
(205)  where  the  subject  is  continued. 

'2  The  attacks  upon  Jesus  as  "  the  Christ,"  simply  endeavor  to  pick  flaws  here  and 
there,  but  never  consider  His  relationship  to  the  Theocracy  and  His  eminent  fitness  for 
it.  Or  else  the  entire  claim  of  the  Christship)  (without  noticing  its  covenanted  basis,  its 
necessary  prerequisites,  its  preparatory  "work,  etc.)  is  dismissed  in  the  most  summary  man- 
ner, as  e.g.  in  Freedom  and  Fellowship,  p.  254)  it  is  said  :  "  The  time  has  come  to  see  and 
to  say  that  the  Christian  confession  is  not  a  truth,  Jesus  was  not  the  Christ  of  God.  The 
'  Christ '  prophesied  and  longed  for  has  never  come,  and  will  never  come.  The  office 
and  function  is  a  mythical,  an  impossible  one.  No  individual  man  has  ever  stood,  or 
can  ever  stand,  in  the  relation  of  Lord,  King,  and  Saviour  to  the  whole  world.  It  would 
be  an  infinite  usurpation  for  any  man  to  occupy  that  office,  cither  in  a  temporal  or  spiritual 
sense."  (How  this  extract  serves  to  illustrate  the  spirit  noticed  in  Obs.  1  !).  This,  in- 
deed, would  be  "  an  infinite  usurpation"  if  it  were  claimed  by  mere  man  ;  but  our  argu- 
ment shows  that  such  objections  are  based  on  an  overlooking  of  the  Theocratic  element  as 
once  instituted,  then  incorporated  with  the  human,  ami  as  finally  manifested.  Still  the 
reader  will  observe  that  the  admission  is  made  that  "  the  infinite"  must  be  connected  with 
"  the  Christ."  How  does  it  happen  that  "  ignorant"  men,  separated  by  ages,  draw  out 
a  Theocratic  Plan  and  incorporate  the  "infinite"  as  an  essential  factor  of  the  same — in 
brief,  that  which  unbelief,  wrongfully,  urges  as  an  objection.  We  *'  Bibliolaters"  are 
accused  of  "  ignorance,"  but  our  ignorance  is  founded  on  a  view  of  the  Divine  Pnipose 
taken  as  a  whole,  which  necessitates  as  a  preparatory  Theocratic  ordering  the  incarna- 
tion, divinity,  resurrection,  exaltation,  and  return  of  Jesus  "  the  Christ." 

But  men  (as  predicted)  will  persistently  close  their  eyes  against  the  facts  connected 
with  the  Christ  as  essential  parts  of  a  consecutive  Divine  Plan.  They  will  even  resort  to 
the  following,  viz.,  parade  several  coincidences  between  Christ  as  given  by  the  Gospels 
and  the  Hindu  god  Christna.  Books  are  freely  circulated  calling  special  attention  to  the 
mythical  stories  of  the  Hindu  gods  (as  Higgins's  Anacalypsis,  The  Masculine  Cross,  etc.) 
and  pressing  them  with  evident  delight  (especially  the  latter  work)  against  the  claims  of 
Jesus  the  Christ,  declaring  with  assumption  that  the  story  of  "the  latter  was  copied 
from  the  earlier  almost  entire."  Thousands,  unable  to  discriminate,  receive  with  relish 
a  teaching  that  seems  to  release  them  from  moral  and  religious  obligations.  Such  things, 
however,  only  confirm  us  in  the  veracity  of  God's  Word,  which  forewarns  us  against  such 
efforts,  teaching  us  that  men  will  arise  and  endeavor  to  break  the  force  of  Christ's  mis- 
sion, etc.,  by  employing  subtle  means  calculated  to  entrap  the  unwary.  To  the  strong 
in  faith,  the  spirit  and  malignancy  pervading  them  is  sufficient  for  their  rejection,  but  to 
the  weak  and  the  worldling  they  commend  themselves  because  fitted  to  the  natural  out- 
growth of  human  nature.  It  maybe  added  :  it  certainly  is  attributing  a  profound  knowl- 
edge of  Oriental  religions  to  "  the  ignorant"  evangelists  and  apostles  to  make  them 
"  servile  copyists."  and  to  adduce  Paul  as  "  transforming  the  old  cloak  of  Christna  into 
the  new  mantle  of  Christ"  (basing  it  upon  1  Cor.  4  :  10  and  Bom.  3  :  7),  rises  nearly  to 
the  sublimity  of  audacity.  It  undoubtedly  evinces  great  ignorance  in  the  writings  of 
both  Scripture  and  Jewish  literature. 

Obs.  3.  Let  the  reader  exercise  patience  while  we  necessarily  repeat  a  few 
C:i(ts  which  must  he  noticed  in  order  to  form  an  opinion  whether  "  igno- 
rant men"  were  able  to  produce  such  a  portraiture  of  the  Theocratic  King. 


Prop.  199.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  517 

Notice  (1)  the  e:^  essed  determination  of  God  to  set  np  a  Theocratic  King- 
dom given  by  the  jrophets  in  the  ages  preceding  the  First  Advent ;  (2)  this 
Theocratic  Kingdom  established  in  an  initiatory  form  (some  of  its  adjuncts 
being  merely  provisionary)  ;  (3)  this  Theocracy  incorporates  the  Davidic 
line,  thus  more  closely  in  its  Headship  allying  itself  with  hnmanity  ; 
(1)  when  this  incorporation  takes  place,  it  is  declared  by  covenant  and 
promise  that  this  Theocratic  Kingdom  shall  be  established  in  a  permanent 
and  most  glorious  form  under  a  descendant  of  David  ;  (5)  this  Theocratic 
Kingdom  under  David  and  his  immediate  successors  never  gains  a  world 
ascendency  but,  on  account  of  the  sinfulness  of  kings  and  nations,  is  over- 
thrown ;  (6)  the  Jewish  nation  being  the  covenanted  people  and  the  nucleus, 
owing  to  covenant  relationship  in  and  through  whom  the  Theocratic- 
Davidic  Kingdom  can  only  be  manifested,  that  nation  is  still  preserved  ; 

(7)  the  prophets,  notwithstanding  the  downfall  of  the  Kingdom  still  con- 
tinue to  predict  the  fulfilment  of  covenant  and  promise  in  the  person  of  a 
descendant  of  David  at  some  time  in  the  future,  and  these  predictions 
involve  the  restoration  of  the  identical  throne  and  Kingdom  overthrown  ; 

(8)  this  predicted  and  covenanted  Kingdom  is  preached  and  tendered  to  the 
Jewish  nation,  when  the  promised  David's  Son  comes  by  the  forerunner 
John,  by  the  Son  Himself  and  by  His  disciples,  but  only  conditionally,  viz., 
on  repentance  ;  (9)  this  Kingdom,  owing  to  the  condition  enjoined  not 
being  complied  with,  is  then  postponed  to  a  future  Advent  of  this  Son  ; 
(10)  during  this  intercallary  period  (a)  the  tabernacle  of  David  continues  in 
ruins,  (b)  the  Jewish  nation  is  to  be  subjected  to  continued  and  fearful 
rejection  and  a  scattering  among  the  nations,  (c)  Gentile  domination  is  to 
remain  until  a  certain  time  has  elapsed,  (d)  a  Christian  Church  is  to  be 
established  and  perpetuated  to  raise  up  a  seed  unto  Abraham  and  prepare 
for  the  manifestation  of  the  Kingdom  with  a  moral  power  and  grandeur 
perfectly  overwhelming  ;  (11)  this  Kingdom  is  always  spoken  of  as  still 
future  and  identified  with  the  period  of  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  (12)  and  in  this 
Kingdom,  as  realized  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  the  covenant  and  prophecies  are 
said  to  be  fulfilled,  as  is  seen  e.g.  in  appropriating  the  descriptions  given 
by  these  to  the  Messianic  Kingdom  which  is  to  be  revealed  at  the  Coming 
again  of  this  same  Jesus.  Now  here  is  a  connected  series,  an  unbroken 
chain  of  facts  (some  fulfilled,  others  fulfilling,  and  others  are  yet  to  be 
fulfilled)  without  a  single  defect  to  mar  the  union.  To  contemplate  Jesus 
separated  from  these  facts,  is  to  do  violence  to  His  highest  claim,  His  Theo- 
cratic Kingship.  But  to  consider  Him  in  His  relationship  to  these,  imme- 
diately enforces  Hi's  Messiahship.  For  the  Apostles,  with  strong  Jewish 
prejudices  and  dealing  with  the  same  in  others,  could  not  possibly  have 
persuaded  themselves  and  others  that  a  dead  Jesus,  Son  of  David,  could  be 
the  Messiah  unless  a  strictly  logical  chain — inset  with  the  jewels  of  the 
resurrection,  ascension,  and  exaltation— showed  them — as  it  does  to  us  this 
day — that  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  is  immeasurably  augmented  even  by 
the  very  postponement  of  the  Kingdom.  Thus  e.g.  leaving  the  foretelling 
of  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  and  of  His  own  deatb,  etc.,  who  told 
them  of  the  punishment  to  be  inflicted  upon  the  city  of  Jerusalem  and 
Jewish  nation  (as  seen  to  this  day)  ;  who  informed  them  of  the  establish- 
ment of  the  Church  and  of  its  trials,  mixed  nature,  etc.  (as  seen  to  this 
time)  ;  who  gave  them  various  predictions  that  were  verified  in  their  own 
experience  (and  continue  in  that  of  believers  to  the  present),  and  having 
such  testimony  (1)  in  the  Theocratic  Plan,  (2)  in  personal  experience  and 


518  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.   199. 

observation,  (3)  in  what  transpired  around  them,  (4)  in  the  aim  and  intent 
of  this  intercallary  period,  they  would  indeed  have  been  both  hopelessly 
"  ignorant"  and  debased,  had  they  not  accepted  of  the  Christship  of  Jesus. 
The  present  time,  which  multitudes  claim  makes  shipwreck  of  the  Jewish 
Messianic  hopes,  is  only  the  strongest  possible  proof  of  the  correctness  of 
the  same,  seeing  that  the  power  that  could  postpone  the  Kingdom,  punish 
the  Jewisli  nation  for  its  denial  of  repentance  and  slaying  of  Jesus,  and 
establish  the  Church  to  raise  up  children  to  Abraham  is  already  truly  mani- 
fested as  a  Messianic  power.  To  refute  us,  let  the  unbeliever  point  out  a 
single  prediction  of  Jesus  relating  to  the  present  dispensation  down  to  this 
time  that  has  failed  to  find  its  mate.  Hence,  what  this  Jesus  said  and  per- 
formed, His  life,  death,  and  resurrection,  His  personal  withdrawal  for  a 
period,  and  yet  His  presence  with  and  care  over  believers,  binds  Him  as  the 
covenanted  Theocratic  Messiah  to  all  that  preceded  and  to  all  that  is  yet  to 
follow.  The  sacred  writers  justly  reason  that  the  First  Advent  of  Jesus  is 
a  great  and  necessary  preparatory  measure  to  insure  His  exalted  Christship. 
To  refute  this,  let  unbelief  show  us  the  ignorance  of  these  Apostles  in  be- 
lieving that,  e.g.  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  the  gathering  out  of  material  for 
this  future  Kingdom,  etc.,  would  not  materially  enhance  the  Theocratic 
glory  that  is  predicted  ;  yea,  let  them  point  out  a  solitary  imperfection 
which  can  in  any  possible  way  vitiate  the  exact  fulfilment  of  covenant  and 
promise  ;  yea  more,  let  them  say  whether  any  one  of  the  attributes,  claims, 
characteristics,  etc.,  given  to  Jesus  could  he  omitted  without  lessening,  if 
not  seriously  damaging,  His  Tlieocratic  Kingship.  The  disciples  could  not 
concoct  such  a  Messiah,  because  the  facts  that  we  have  arrayed  show  such  a 
conditional  tender  of  the  Kingdom  (which  was  opposed  to  Jewish  prejudice, 
which  looked  for  it  unconditionally  in  virtue  of  covenant  relationship)  ; 
such  a  rebuking,  rejection,  and  dispersion  of  the  nation  (which  no  Jew 
with  the  well-known  national  deep-rooted  prepossessions  could  possibly 
present,  as  seen  e.g.  in  the  history  of  false  Messiahs)  ;  such  a  postponement 
of  the  Kingdom  and  a  turning  to  the  Gentiles  (which  was  highly  offensive 
to  Jewish  pride  and  bias),  that  to  credit  this  to  be  the  work  of  Jews,  un- 
supported by  the  aid  and  light  they  claimed,  is  to  violate  the  laws  governing 
nature,  making  men  capable  of  doing  that  which  is  not  in  his  nature  to 
perform,  and  thus  attributing  to  mere  reason  what  is  most  unreasonable, 
viz.,  that  heart,  feeling,  and  affection  had  nothing  to  do  with  this  delinea- 
tion of  the  Messiah.  Can  it  be  that  men  of  intelligence  will  persist  in 
rejecting  a  Messiah  on  the  ground  that  a  few  Jews  foisted  upon  the  world  a 
story  of  one,  when  the  improbability  and  impossibility  of  the  same  appears 
in  tne  very  outset,  in  the  very  nature  of  humanity,  seeing  that  it  is  con- 
trary to  all  experience,  all  history,  to  suppose  that  such  Jews,  in  opposition 
to  their  dearest  hopes  and  highest  anticipations  could  portray  this  Messiah 
as  so  hostile  to  the  nation,  so  opposed  to  the  covenanted  people,  that  He 
gives  them  up  for  a  long  time  to  the  domination  of  their  enemies.  Hence 
the  old  view  (originated  by  Celsus,  now  advocated  by  many,  and  one  that 
will  ultimately  prevail  introductory  to  Antichrist),  that  Jesus  was  a  de- 
ceiver, or  that  the  disciples  were  intentional  deceivers,  aside  from  other 
considerations,  falls  before  the  Divine  Plan  of  the  contemplated  Kingdom, 
the  purity  and  perfectness  elicited  in  its  development,  and  the  fact  that  the 
manner  of  its  ultimate  introduction,  based  upon  the  temporary  rejection  of 
the  Jewish  nation  and  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  is  opposed  to  the  natural 
outgrowth  of  a  Jewish  training  and  Jewish  sympathies. 


PeOP.  199.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  519 

The  student  will  not  fail  to  notice  how  these  writers  delineate  the  qualifications  of 
Jesus  for  this  Theocratic  position,  such  as  being  David's  Son,  as  covenant  demands  ;  the 
Son  of  God,  imparting  the  highest  and  purest  Theocratic  element  ;  immortal,  insuring 
continued  government,  etc.  ;  power,  dignity,  and  honor,  indicative  of  His  abilitj'  and 
worthiness  ;  righteousness  and  unchangeableness,  presenting  His  imperial  will  in  accord 
with  the  Father's  and  the  welfare  of  His  subjects  ;  the  attributes  of  the  Godhead,  giving 
stability,  irresistible  power,  etc.,  to  the  Theocracy  ;  the  Personal  appearance,  the  grand- 
eur of  His  throne,  the  splendor  of  His  court,  the  riches  of  His  capitol,  the  homage  and 
praise  tendered,  etc.,  all  of  which  not  only  serve  to  impress,  but  in  the  Theocratic  order- 
ing are  elements  of  importance — and  who  does  not  see  how  impossible  it  is  for  "  ignorant" 
men  to  present  such  a  portraiture.  It  is  not  a  slight  concession  made  to  the  merits  of  this 
Christ-picture  that  men  who  have  done  much  to  injure  Christ  (as  Strauss,  Eenan,  Mills, 
etc.)  still  acknowledge  a  peculiar  grandeur  in  the  scriptural  portrayal.  The  highest  intel- 
ligence, whether  the  heart  respond  or  not,  must  acknowledge  an  incomparable  portrayal. 
Fiske  (Unseen  World,  art.  4)  in  "  the  Christ  of  Dogma"  indeed  labors  to  show  how  the 
attributing  of  such  characteristics  of  the  divine  to  Jesus  were  developed  historically,  but 
this  is  done  in  the  most  arbitrary  manner  by  discarding  as  interpolations,  or  as  subsequent 
additions,  all  that  refers  to  the  divine.  In  his  one-sidedness  he  elevates  himself  to  the 
position  of  a  judge  to  set  aside  every  statement  as  non-apostolic  which  does  not  suit  his 
theory  ;  and  this  is  called  "  criticism." 

Obs.  4.  From  this  standpoint  we  are  prepared  to  answer  various  ob- 
jections urged  by  the  hyrda-headed  unbelief.  Thus  e  g.  recent  writers 
(Renan,  etc.),  who  profess  an  admiration  for  Jesus  (which  they  do  not 
feel),  tell  us  in  a  circumlocutory  manner  that  Jesus  being  enthusiastic, 
etc.,  became  the  victim  of  self-deception,  thinking  Himself  to  be  the  pre- 
dicted One  until  death  crushed  all  His  visionary  hopes.  But  how  could  He 
be  deceived,  who  before  His  death,  when  the  representative  men  of  the 
nation  secretlv  conspired  to  put  Him  to  death.,  plainly  taught  the  postpone- 
ment of  the  Kingdom,  His  own  death,  and  all  the  grand  outlines  pertain- 
ing to  this  dispensation  in  relation  to  Jew  and  Gentile,  to  the  Church  and 
world?  How  can  we  believe  Him  to  be  such  irhen  we  behold  the  Church, 
Jerusalem,  the  Jewish  nation,  Gentile  dominion,  unbelief,  etc.,  just  as  He 
predicted?  How  can  He  be  such  when  the  tender  of  the  Kingdom  was 
conditional,  and  as  long  as  this  conditionally  was  imposed  He  rather  kept 
His  Messiahship  in  the  bad-ground,  but  when  the  restraint,  self-adopted, 
was  removed  by  the  secret  overt  act  of  the  chief  rulers  of  the  nation  (viz., 
to  put  Him  to  death,  thus  rejecting  the  tender  made),  He  in  connection 
with  His  predicted  death  also  proclaimed  His  Messiahship  to  be  publicly 
vindicated  at  some  future  Advent?  Hoiu  can  He  be  a  deceiver,  when  rais- 
ing up,  according  to  promise,  co-heirs  for  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  He 
exhibits  the  faithfulness  of  His  Word  by  bestowing  the  earnests  of  that 
which  is  to  come  ?  The  charge  of  self-deception  springs  from  utterly  ignor- 
ing the  recorded  fact  that  this  Jesus,  instead  of  being  deceived  at  not 
being  able  to  raise  up  the  predicted  Messianic  Kingdom,  Himself  merely 
offered  it  conditionally,  and  when  this  offer  was  rejected  in  His  contem- 
plated and  premeditated  death,  Ho  Himself  withdrew  it,  and  postponed  its 
establishment — as  a  punishment  to  the  nation  and  as  a  mercy  to  Gentiles — 
to  His  Sec.  Advent.  This  is  also  a  sufficient  answer  to  those  who  urge  the 
same  objection  with  the  proviso  that,  rinding  Himself  unable  to  set  up  the 
Kingdom  originally  intended,  He  then  changed  His  plan,  and  endeavored 
to  establish  a  kind  of  purely  spiritual  or  moral  Kingdom.  Such  objectors 
are  very  careful  not  to  allow  the  testimony  of  the  Record  to  appear  which 
witnesses  that  the  tender  was  conditional,  that  it  was  withdrawn  in  a  cer- 
tain contingency,  and  that  instead  of  changing  His  plan  He  postponed  its 


520  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  199. 

execution  until  the  period  of  His  Sec.  Coming,  in  the  meanwhile  arranging 
and  ordering  things  to  be  ultimatively  promotive  of,  and  effectual  in,  the 
prosecution  of  the  postponed  Purpose.  This  also  triumphantly  meets  the 
dishonoring  explanation  given  by  Bauer  that  the  Messiahship  arose  from  a 
developing  process  in  His  own  mind  ;  for  this  is  rebutted  at  once  by  the 
first  preaching  of  the  Kingdom  by  John  the  Baptist,  etc.,  which  shows  both 
the  relationship  that  the  Messianic  idea  sustained  to  all  that  preceded,  and 
that  the  Kingdom,  which  included  of  course  the  Messianic  idea  realized, 
was  in  the  very  beginning  tendered  in  good  faith  to  the  Jewish  nation  on 
condition  of  repentance.  There  is  no  growth  or  gradual  development 
here  ;  and,  in  addition,  when  the  Kingdom  is  rejected  and  with  it,  of 
course,  the  Messiah,  the  Messianic  idea  remains  unchanged,  the  realization 
of  it  being  only  postponed  to  the  future  Advent.  It  is  passing  strange  that 
men,  who  constantly  appeal  to  fairness  and  reason,  will  not  allow  reason  to 
weigh  with  candor  the  testimony  of  Christ's  witnesses.  Again  :  this 
teaches  us  how  to  regard  the  view  that  in  order  to  found  another  (spiritual) 
Kingdom,  Jesus,  in  opposition  to  the  Pharisees,  cuts  Himself  loose  "  from 
all  connection  with  the  Theocracy"  (so  Shenkel,  quoted  by  Christlieb, 
Mod.  Doubt.,  p.  374).  "Well  may  we  ask,  what  Theocracy  was  then  in 
existence,  when  even  James  (Acts  15  :  1G)  informs  us  that  the  Theocratic 
Kingdom  was  in  ruins?  The  truth  is,  none  existed  as  none  note  exists, 
although  writers,  against  the  meaning  of  the  word  (denoting  God's  con- 
descending to  act  in  the  capacity  of  earthly  ruler)  now  apply  it  to  the 
Romish,  Greek,  and  Protestant  Churches.  It  was  the  Theocratic  Kingdom 
that  was  offered  to  the  Jews,  because,  owing  to  sin,  it  had  been  withdrawn 
from  them,  and  when  this  tender  was  refused  Jesus  positively  declared  that 
this  Theocracy  should  not  be  established  until  at  His  Sec.  Advent.  Again  : 
this  enables  us  to  see  how  unwarranted  Strauss  {Life  of  Jesus,  vol.  1,  p.  520) 
is  in  asserting  that  Jesus  at  the  First  Advent  hoped  to  restore  the  Davidic 
Kingdom  by  the  Supernatural  interference  of  God,  and  that  the  disciples 
had  "this  idea  of  restoration  "  gives  us  a  very  small  idea  of  their  powers  of 
comprehension."  The  answer  is  plain  :  the  conditional  tender  of  the 
Kingdom,  and  the  repeated  predictions  of  Jesus  concerning  its  postpone- 
ment, amply  sustain  the  Messianic  position  of  Jesus,  and  that  He  enter- 
tained no  false  hopes.  As  to  the  disciples,  so  long  as  the  Kingdom  was 
preached,  and  until  they  were  fully  enlightened  to  its  postponement  it 
Would  have  been  derogatory  to  their  faith  in  the  Kingdom,  in  the  covenant 
and  predictions,  yea,  in  the  Messiah  Himself  if  they  did  not  believe  in  the 
restored  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom,  that  being  the  only  Kingdom  prom- 
ised to  David's  Son.  The  lack  of  comprehension  in  this  case  is  not  in  the 
disciples,  but  in  unbelievers,  who  are  blinded  by  its  present  non-establish- 
ment, which  they  parade  as  proof  that  it  never  will  be.  The  conditionally 
attached  to  the  offer  of  the  Kingdom,  its  postponement,  etc.,  also  explains 
the  refusal  of  Jesus  to  perform  miraculous  signs  when  solicited  in  attesta- 
tion of  His  being  "  the  Messiah"  (Matt.  16  :  1,  etc.),  and  which  some  of 
these  writers  assume  as  proof  that  the  Messiahship  was  in  a  manner  forced 
upon  Jesus  reluctantly  by  a  chain  of  circumstances.  The  condition  of 
repentance  imposed  does  not  require  miraculous  signs  to  establish  its 
validity  or  enforce  its  obligation  (and  hence  John  the  Baptist  the  special 
preacher  of  it,  performs  none),  for  it  is  based  upon  the  recorded  law  of  God 
and  the  responsive  moral  nature  of  man.  Jesus  having  given  a  sufficiency 
to  indicate  His  Supernatural  endowments — such  as  necessarily  belong  to  a 


PROP.  199.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  521 

Messiah — it  would,  in  view  of  the  foreseen  rejection,  the  moral  freedom,  of 
the  nation,  and  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  have  been  premature 
and  ill-timed  to  have  given  unrepentant  and  unbelieving  Jews  the  direct 
testimonies,  as  demanded,  of  Messiahship,  for  it  would  have  ignored  the 
condition  first  of  all  imposed,  viz.,  repent.  Had  they  repented  the  wonder- 
ful signs  of  Messiahship  would  have  legitimately  followed  in  the  mighty 
work  then  undertaken,  but  unrepentant  the  Kingdom  was  no  longer  nigh, 
and  they  had  no  claim  upon  the  Messiah.  The  refusal  is  therefore 
grounded  upon  the  moral  relations  that  the  nation  sustained  to  the  Mes- 
siah. Again  :  the  theory  of  "  natural"  explanation  (Paulus,  etc.),  which 
endeavors  to  preserve  a  few  fragments  of  the  Gospels  by  eliminating  the 
miraculous  and  Supernatural  under  the  plea  that  we  have  an  exaggerated 
statement  which  must  be  explained  by  natural  causes,  is  (aside  from  its 
outrageous  exegetical  character)  clearly  shown  to  be  untenable,  because  it 
vitiates  the  central  idea  of  the  Messianic  conception,  viz.,  that  He  only  was 
a  Messiah  according  to  the  prophetic  and  Jewish  notion  who  had  the  Super- 
natural closely  allied  with,  and  really  possessed  by,  Him.  For  no  one  else, 
it  was  correctly  believed,  could  possibly  introduce  the  mighty  changes  and 
blessings  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom.  Hence  to  place  any  other  construc- 
tion upon  the  language  of  the  New  Test,  than  it  plainly  in  its  grammatical 
construction  requires,  in  order  to  emasculate  the  marvellous,  is  simply  to 
deny  its  Messianic  belief,  its  Messianic  Kingdom,  its  Theocratic  King. 
For  the  veritable  Christ  of  the  promised  Kingdom  must  correspond  with 
the  covenanted  and  predicted  King,  and  hence  the  writers  correctly  repre- 
sent the  Supernatural  as  connected  with  the  Person  of  this  Messiah.  It 
follows,  therefore,  that  the  most  foolish  and  inconsistent  of  all  attacks 
upon  the  Messiahship,  is  to  explain  the  language  intended  to  convey  the 
notion  of  the  miraculous  to  denote  something  else,  because  the  removal  of 
the  Supernatural  by  this  means  has  no  affinity  with  the  design  of  the  Gos- 
pels, with  the  ideas  then  current,  with  the  prophetic  word  that  preceded, 
and  with  the  Kingdom,  of  God  that  was  then  universally  believed. 

The  efforts  made  to  separate  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels  from  the  Supernatural  and 
miraculous  by  a  host  of  past  and  present  writers  is  simply  a  historical  and  illogical  outrage, 
seeing  (1)  that  the  latter  is  so  connected  and  interwoven  with  all  that  pertains  to  Jesus 
(in  birth,  life,  death,  etc.)  that  it  cannot  be  separated  from  Him  without  the  greatest 
violence;  (2)  that  such  a  separation  can  only  be  effected  at  a  fearful  sacrifice  of  Christ's 
character,  claims,  designs  etc.  ;  (3)  that  it  virtually  makes— no  matter  what  eulogies  are 
given  to  soften  it — Jesus  the  Christ  a  deceiver  and  impostor ;  (4)  that  it  utterly  destroys 
the  veracity  and  authority  of  "  the  Christ,"  leaving  us  simply  a  man  with  noble  but  mis- 
taken aspirations,  who  by  the  force  of  his  mind  and  the  things  inculcated,  aided  by  cir- 
cumstances, worked  a  religious  revolution  in  society  ;  (5)  that  it  leaves  us  a  mere  carica- 
ture of  the  scriptural  Christ,  for  whose  teaching,  actions,  and  claims  we  are  constantly  to 
apologize,  making  them  either  an  accommodation  to  the  spirit  of  the  age,  or  a  remnant 
of  superstition,  or  a  misrepresentation  of  the  evangelists,  etc.  This,  too,  is  done  most 
offensively,  without  the  least  regard  to  the  feelings  or  religious  sentiments  of  others.  We 
append  several  illustrations  :  The  Ileligio- Philosophical  Journal,  March  13th,  1875,  in  the 
art.  "  The  Christ  Question,"  the  writer  refers  to  the  outrageous  work  of  Tuttle's,  "  The 
Career  of  the  Christ-Idea  in  History,"  which  makes  Jesus  a  mere  man  subject  to  imper- 
fection, superstition,  error,  delusions,  etc.,  common  to  all  men,  and  indorsing  Peebles  as 
saying  :  "  The  accepted  Saviour  of  Christian  nations  is  the  theologic  Christ — a  strange 
Hebraic  hybrid,  half-god  and  half-man  ;  a  Church  monster,  shapen  by  the  old  ecclesi- 
astic fathers  and  Roman  bishops  from  the  most  worthless  portions  of  the  cast-off  drip- 
pings of  pagan  traditions."  Here  is  certainly  exhibited  hatred  and  malice  instead  of 
lauded  reason  and  regard  for  logical  consistency.  In  the  same  journal  for  1875  is  pre- 
sented a  series  of  articles  by  Scott  on  the  "  Fall  and  Redemption  of  Man,"  which  ac- 
counts for  what  are  received  as  facts  in  the  Gospels  by  making  them  representative  of 


522  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  199. 

asironomical  occurrences.  It  is  a  re-hash  of  Mackay's  work  The  Progress  of  the  Intellect, 
as  Exemplified  in  the  Religious  Development  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  both  are  prob- 
ably largely  indebted  to  a  French  work  by  Dupuis.  The  absurdity,  and  the  constant 
drain  on  the  imagination,  make  them  utterly  unworthy  of  a  serious  reply.  (Comp.  art. 
"  On  Forms  of  Infidelity  in  the  Nineteenth  Century"  in  the  North  Brit.  Review,  May, 
1851,  and  the  scathing  rebuke  administered  to  such  views  by  Priestley  in  his  Comparison 
of  the  Institution  of  Moses  with  those  of  the  Hindoos  and  Other  Ancient  Nations,  with  remarks 
on  Dnpuis's  Origin  of  Religions.)  Hundreds  of  recent  works,  periodicals  like  the  Truth- 
Seeker,  Iteligio-Philosophical  Journal,  Evolution,  and  others  contain  the  lowest  possible  esti- 
mate of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  "  animus"  in  which  much  is  written  clearly  indicates  that 
it  is  more  the  work  of  the  heart  (objecting  to  His  moral  restraints)  than  that  of  reason. 


Obs.  5.  Let  us  continue  to  notice  other  objections  varying  some  in  form 
from  these,  and  also  intended  to  lower,  if  possible,  the  Messianic  character  ; 
for  such  mention  of  them  is  the  more  important  since  there  is  no  doubt  but 
in  the  coming  struggle  with  unbelief,  preparing  the  way  for  Antichrist's 
revelation,  all  such  objections  will  be  more  persistently  urged  against  Christ. 
It  is  well  to  observe  the  weapons  of  our  enemies  that  are,  and  will  be,  em- 
ployed against  Christ,  in  order  to  ascertain  what  to  oppose  to  them.  Thus 
e.g.  the  view  is  prevalent  in  some  quarters  that  the  Messianic  conception  of 
Jesus,  the  result  of  a  vivid  Oriental  imagination,  forms  an  ideal  that  is  in 
accord  with  prophetic  utterances,  and  which,  however  impracticable,  by 
the  grandeur  of  its  fancy  elevates  Jesus  into  one  of  those  great  harmless 
dreamers  of  fiction,  who  exert  a  good  influence  over  the  minds  and  hearts 
of  others.  The  Messianic  idea  is  discarded  as  a  reality  and  retained  as 
ideal,  the  play  of  exuberant  fancy.  Let  us  ask,  was  the  preaching  of  the 
Kingdom  tendered  on  condition  of  repentance  imaginary?  Was  tbe  post- 
ponement of  the  Kingdom  attested  to  by  the  terrible  downfall  of  Jerusa- 
lem, and  the  dispersion  of  the  nation  mere  imagination  ?  Is  the  establish- 
ment of  the  Church  under  persecution,  the  belief  so  humiliating  to  Jewish 
prejudice,  the  union  of  suffering  and  death  to  bring  forth  in  perfection  the 
Messianic  completeness,  all  fancy?  Surely  in  considering  the  Theocratic 
ordering  in  its  entirety,  and  seeing  how  the  Theocratic  King  is  made  per- 
fect through  suffering,  how  the  Messianic  claims  are  attested  to  by  the 
greatest  of  historical  realities,  the  fancy  belongs  to  the  objectors.  Again  : 
to  depreciate  the  Christ,  it  has  been  represented  that  He  takes  no  interest 
in  science,  art,  trade,  social  amenities,  etc.,  and  therefore  is  One  who  took 
a  contracted  view  of  man's  condition.  But  the  objector  overlooks  the  fact 
that  the  design  of  the  New  Test,  is  merely  to  present  "  the  Gospel  of  the 
Kingdom,"  to  show  how  the  Messiah  came,  how  the  Kingdom  was  ten- 
dered and  refused,  how  it  was  postponed,  and  how  provision  is  made  for  its 
future  establishment.  In  doing  this  the  briefest  incidental  mention,  only 
sufficient  to  preserve  the  requisite  connection,  is  made  of  the  retired  life  of 
Jesus,  and  He  is  at  once  brought  before  us  as  "  the  Christ."  It  is  taken 
for  granted  that  the  greater  blessing,  viz.,  that  of  tbe  Kingdom,  includes 
all  the  lesser,  as  is  seen  in  the  beautiful  prophecies  respecting  this  Kingdom 
introducing  the  highest  civil  and  social  enjoyments,  the  universal  spread  of 
knowledge  and  the  peaceful  pursuits  of  the  avocations  of  life.  Tbe  great 
subject  is  the  theme,  and  hence  we  have  only  incidentally  brought  in 
Christ's  appreciation  of  nature  and  beauty  (as  in  the  lily)  or  His  enjoyment 
and  encouragement  of  social  life  (as  in  the  wedding  party),  etc.,  because 
all  these  things  are  swallowed  up  in  the  Messianic  idea,  which  in  itself 
embrace*  all  that  is  essential  to  man's  future  development  and  happiness. 


Prop.  199.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  523 

Again  :  we  are  told  that  the  Gospel  narratives  respecting  the  Christ  were 
concocted  in  their  present  form  by  post-apostolic  writers,  and  that,  in  view 
of  this,  the  portraiture  of  the  Messiah  must  be  received  with  much  allow- 
ance for  interpolation,  error,  exaggeration,  etc.  Passing  by  the  important 
concessions  of  the  later  Bauer  school,  and  the  numerous  testimonies  which 
refute  this,  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out  the  simple  fact  that,  when  looking 
at  the  connected  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  and  the  exact  correspondence  of 
all  that  pertains  to  the  Messiah  with  it,  the  postponement  of  such  a  Record 
to  the  substituted  later  age  is  an  impossibility.  Because  the  simple  narra- 
tion of  facts  leaving  the  deduction  of  doctrine  from  them  (grounded  upon 
the  notion  that  the  reader  has  a  previous  acquaintance  with  covenant  and 
prophecy),  is  utterly  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  a  succeeding  period,  which 
would  have  interlarded  such  a  production  with  substitutions,  inferences, 
doctrinal  exhibitions,  laudatory  expressions,  etc.,  which  would  inevitably 
have  betrayed  its  later  origin.  The  faithful  portraiture  of  the  Messiah, 
perfectly  agreeing  with  the  Old  Test.  Scriptures  and  with  the  views  of  the 
Apostolic  Church,  is  an  ample  refutation  of  this  theory.  Even  such  inci- 
dents as  Christ's  refusal  to  perform  miracles  to  prove,  on  demand,  His 
Messianic  character,  could  not  have  been  inserted  at  a  later  age,  for  under 
the  notion  of  exalting  Him  the  connection  which  this  refusal  sustains  to 
the  conditionality  of  the  tender  of  the  Kingdom  would  have  been  over- 
looked (as  proven  by  what  really  occurred  in  later  writings).  Again  :  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  is  denied  on  two  grounds  :  (1)  that  the  Kingdom  not 
appearing,  a  resurrection  was  added  (so  Kenan,  etc.)  in  order  to  substitute 
a  spiritual  Kingdom  and  a  spiritual  Christ  ;  and  (2)  that  if  Jesus  rose  from 
the  dead  as  recorded  "why  (so  Schenkel,  Sketch  of  Jesus,  etc.)  did  He  not 
show  Himself  to  His  Jewish  judges  and  to  the  Roman  Procurator?  Why 
did  He  not  appear  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  before  the  people  who  had 
been  so  basely  deceived  as  to  His  Person  ?  Why  did  He  not  by  His  mere 
appearance  inspire  courage  in  His  frightened  followers  everywhere,  and 
utterly  defeat  His  malignant  enemies  ?"  Such  objections  entirely  overlook 
the  facts  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom.  As  to  the  first,  the  postponement  of 
the  Kingdom  was  proclaimed  in  connection  with  the  foretold  death  and 
resurrection,  and  no  substitution  of  a  spiritual  Kingdom,  as  multitudes 
dream,  was  made,  as  is  firmly  proven  by  the  universal  doctrinal  position  of 
the  Church  for  the  first  three  centuries.  All  believers  immediately  after 
the  resurrection  continued,  as  the  promises  jiositively  required,  to  look  for 
the  identical  Kingdom  wdiich  they  believed  in  before  His  death,  only  locat- 
ing its  establishment  at  the  Sec.  Advent.  The  spiritual  Kingdom  that 
these  men  talk  about  is  the  outgrowth  of  a  later,  spiritualistic  system  of 
interpretation.  Besides  this,  the  resurrection,  as  we  have  shown,  is  an 
important pre-requisite  to  secure  the  reorganization  of  the  Davidic  King- 
dom upon  that  unchangeable  Messianic  basis  predicted.  The  resurrection 
makes  no  change  in  the  Kingdom,  but  pre-eminently  qualifies  the  King  to 
bring  it,  when  re-established,  to  its  promised  height  of  permanency  and 
glory.  Indeed,  it  is  an  essential  factor  in  its  re-establishment  in  the  form 
covenanted  and  promised,  elevating  David's  Son  into  the  Immortal  Son 
who  can  reign  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endures,  and  affording  unto  us 
the  pledge  of  His  Messianic  power  to  fulfil  the  promises  to  the  Fathers  and 
all  believing  ones  in  raising  them  also  from  the  dead,  and  causing  them  to 
inherit  His  Theocratic  Kingdom  when  revealed.  Any  theory  which  refuses 
to  receive  the  resurrection  just  as  related  in  the  New  Test,  (making  it  a 


524  THE   THEOCEATTC    KINGDOM.  [PeoP.  199. 

resurrection  of  mere  spirit  as  Shenkel  ;  or  a  historical  account  of  no  prac- 
tical importance  in  the  development  of  Christian  faith,  as  Keim  ;  or  an 
event  that  is  to  be  explained  by  apparent  death,  as  Schleiermacher  ;  or  a 
harmless  deception,  as  Renan  ;  or  a  gross  falsehood,  as  Bardht),  fails  to 
see  its  essential  connection  with  the  Kingdom,  and  its  necessary  existence  in 
order,  at  the  appointed  time,  to  fulfil  the  promises  of  God.  Men  like 
Strauss  inform  us  that  they  want  two  proofs  in  confirmation  of  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus,  viz.,  that  the  reality  of  it  shall  be  vindicated  by  observing 
all  the  conditions  of  historical  testimonies  ;  and  that,  unless  this  resurrec- 
tion took  place,  other  events  now  historically  certain  could  not  have  tran- 
spired. The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  affords  those  evidences,  and  thus 
establishes  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus,  for  it  shows  us  that  the  direct  testi- 
mony given  by  the  professed  witnesses  to  the  fact  are  sustained  by  requisite 
historical  connection  both  with  what  preceded  and  what  is  to  follow.  The 
testimony  is  in  perfect  correspondence  with  the  requirements  of  the  King- 
dom ;  and,  therefore,  in  the  consideration  of  this  subject,  it  is  only  just  to 
weigh  the  credibility  of  the  witnesses  (who  profess  to  testify  to  the  filling 
out  of  a  Divine  Plan)  in  the  light  of  that  history  which  God  has  produced 
and  contemplates  yet  to  introduce.  In  other  words  :  the  resurrection  being 
part  of  the  Divine  Plan  in  reference  to  this  Kingdom,  the  fundamental 
inquiry  ought  to  be  whether  it  is  fully  adapted  to  secure  the  end  intended, 
and  whether  in  the  prosecution  of  such  an  end  it  re-confirms  past  history. 
The  answer  to  this  vindicates  the  testimony  of  the  disciples,  the  absolute 
necessity  of  the  resurrection,  and  the  cordial  reception  of  it  as  a  glorious 
earnest  of  the  power  of  the  Coming  Kingdom.  If  it  be  asked  what  events 
that  certainly  took  place  are  developed  by,  or  connected  with,  the  resurrec- 
tion, the  definite  response  comes  again,  such  as  :  the  continued  belief  in  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus  over  against  the  Jewish  prejudice  immediately  sug- 
gested by  a  crucified  One  ;  the  establishment  of  the  Church  in  the  manner 
predicted  before  His  death,  by  making  Peter  the  one  who  holds  the  keys  of 
knowledge  to  show  that  there  is  still  forgiveness  to  the  Jew,  who  cruelly 
rejected  the  Messiah,  and  that  the  Gentile  can  be  engrafted  on  the  princi- 
ple of  faith  ;  the  perpetuity  of  this  Church  with  its  belief  in  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus  as  a  cardinal  point  ;  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper  be- 
fore His  death  and  its  perpetuation  after  the  death,  but  celebrated  as  a 
memorial  of  triumph  over  death  ;  the  treading  down  of  Jerusalem,  the 
continued  dispersion  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  Gentile  dominion,  the  rising 
up  of  the  apostasy,  persecution,  etc.,  considered  as  depending  for  their 
fulfilment  upon  the  previously  given  word  of  a  crucified  and  resurrected 
Jesus.  Christlieb  has  well  shown  (Mod.  Doubt)  that  the  conversion  and 
history  of  St.  Paul  alone  answers  Strauss's  objection.  As  to  the  second 
explanation  asked,  why  the  resurrected  Jesus  did  not  appear  before  the 
Jewish  judges  to  confound  them,  etc.,  the  least  acquaintance  with  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Kingdom  presents  us  readily  with  the  reason.  The  Kingdom 
having  been  conditionally  offered  to  the  nation  and  having  been  rejected 
because  the  nation  remained  unrepentant,  it  was  postponed  until  the  Sec. 
Advent,  and  therefore,  in  view  of  the  Divine  Purpose  previously  plainly 
announced  before  His  death,  and  thus  embracing  also  a  punishment  upon 
the  unbelief  of  the  nation,  it  would  have  been  incompatible  with  Messianic 
dignity  and  purpose  to  exhibit  Himself  to  any  others  than  believers  in 
Him.  His  enemies  were  to  drink  the  allotted  cup  ;  His  friends  were  to  be 
sustained  by  the  earnests  of  faith  in  His  resurrection  ;  all  were  to  receive 


PROP.  199.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  525 

the  sufficiency  of  evidence  consistent  with  moral  freedom,  with  His  own 
honor,  with  the  predicted  withdrawal,  and  with  an  incorporated  repentance 
and  faith.  If  the  objection  has  any  force,  then  Jesus  ought  thus  to  prove 
His  resurrection  to  every  unbeliever  in  the  world,  which  leaves  no  ground 
for  the  kind  of  repentance  and  faith  that  the  New  Test,  requires  of  us. 

Multitudes  (as  Fowle  in  Science  and  Immortality)  reject  the  resurrection,  no  matter 
what  proof  is  presented,  simply  because  it  introduces  the  Supernatural  element,  which  is 
antagonistic  to  their  idea  of  unchangeable  laws  of  nature.  This  notion  has  spread  widely 
even  in  the  Church,  and  men  who  profess  to  believe  in  Christ  (but  know  but  little  of 
what  constitutes  a  Christ)  entertain  it.  Thus  e.g.  Dr.  Macleod  (Memoirs,  vol.  2,  p.  371) 
says  :  "  I  have  been  astounded  by  a  most  influential  member  of  the  Church  saying  to 
me,  '  What  is  it  to  me  whether  Christ  worked  miracles  or  rose  from  the  dead  ?  We  have 
got  the  right  idea  of  God  through  Him.  It  is  enough  ;  that  can  never  perish  ! '  And 
this  truth  is*  like  a  flower,  which  has  grown  from  a  dunghill  of  lies  and  myths  !  Good 
Lord,  deliver  me  from  such  conclusions  !  If  the  battle  has  come,  let  it  ;  bat  before  God 
I  will  fight  it  with  those  only,  be  they  few  or  many,  who  believe  in  a  risen,  living 
Saviour.  This  revelation  of  the  influence  of  surface  criticism  has  thrown  me  back  im- 
mensely upon  all  who  hold  fast  by  an  objective  revelation."  The  fact  is,  that  unbelief 
which  acknowledges  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  as  recorded,  and  on  this  ground  rejects  Him, 
is  more  consistent  than  such  a  faith  which  receives  a  Saviour,  shorn  of  the  attributes  that 
constitute  Him  the  Redeemer. 

Obs.  6.  Objections  the  most  opposite,  indicative  of  the  heart's  desire  in 
the  matter,  are  urged  to  diminish  indirectly  or  directly  the  Christship  of 
Jesus.  Thus  e.g.  one  tells  us  (as  Bauer)  that  the  world  was  prepared  to 
receive  the  Messianic  idea,  and  that  Christianity  is  the  natural  outgrowth 
of  the  ideas  then  prevalent.  But  this  is  opposed  by  the  postponement  of 
the  Kingdom  owing  to  its  not  being  prepared,  by  the  rejection  of  Jesus,  by 
the  persecution  of  His  followers,  and  by  the  hatred  of  the  world  both 
Jewish  and  Gentile.  In  confirmation,  however,  of  the  world's  preparation 
we  are  additionally  informed  that  Christianity  is  Judaism  spiritualized  by 
means  of  the  allegorical  interpretation  of  the  Old  Test,  introduced  by  the 
religious  philosophy  of  the  Alexandrian  school.  But  if  such  is  the  case, 
why  did  not  the  Church  then  during  the  first  centuries  thus  spiritualize 
away  the  Messiah  and  the  Kingdom  ;  and  why  did  not  those  Jews  addicted 
to  such  allegory  become  Christians?  The  truth  is,  that  the  spiritualizing 
which  tampered  with  the  Messianic  idea  and  the  Messianic  Kingdom  came 
in  later  through  such  men  as  Origen,  etc.  ;  for  history  records  the  fact 
that  both  of  these  fundamental  ideas  were  preserved  intact  by  the  early  be- 
lievers. Jesus  does  not  yield  up  His  Messiahship,  as  including  His  claim 
to  the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  to  be  a  moral  Eeformer  of  Judaism  ; 
this  is  seen  in  the  postponement,  etc.,  of  the  Kingdom,  and  in  the  belief  of 
the  primitive  churches.  As  Apologists  have  remarked,  there  is  no  histori- 
cal evidence,  even  the  slightest,  to  prove  that  the  allegorical  interpretation 
of  Alexandrian  Jews  had  any  influence  whatever  in  forming  the  primitive 
views  pertaining  to  the  Christ  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  reception  of 
the  Old  Test.  Scriptures,  the  retention  of  the  pure  Messianic  conception, 
the  utterance  of  various  predictions,  etc.,  all  to  be  taken  in  their  proper 
grammatical  meaning,  show  that  the  allegorical  interpretation  met  with  no 
favor  in  the  teaching  of  Jesus  or  His  disciples.  Even  when  allegory  is 
admissible  it  is  confined  to  the  subject  in  hand  and  does  not  vitiate  or  alter 
(as  seen  in  Paul)  the  proper,  legitimate  covenanted  Messiahship  and  Messi- 
anic Kingdom.  Again  :  the  apprehension  of  the  Kingdom  meets  and  repels 
the  strange,  yet  oft-repeated  statement,  that  the  establishment  of  the  Ch. 


526  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  199. 

Church  is  the  result  of  a  weak  belief  in  a  Galilean  Rabbi.  Aside  from  the 
usual  effective  replies  given  by  Apologists  and  reasons  already  assigned,  it 
is  sufficient  to  add  that  the  establishment  of  the  Ch.  Church  is  explained  in 
the  New  Test,  to  be  a  positive  necessity  in  order,  while  the  elect  Jewish 
nation  is  for  a  determined  time  held  in  abeyance,  that  a  seed  may  be  gath- 
ered out  to  Abraham,  and  an  unbroken  line  of  election  be  continued.  It  is 
a  carrying  out  of  the  Divine  Purpose  in  preparing  a  people  for  the  incom- 
ing Kingdom  ;  and  the  work  specifically  assigned  to  the  Church  has,  more 
or  less,  been  carried  on  to  the  present.  The  attacks  upon  the  founding  of 
the  Church  thus  overlook  the  connection  that  the  Church  necessarily  sus- 
tains to  the  Divine  Plan,  to  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  and  tempo- 
rary rejection  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  finally  to  the  preparation  that  it 
includes  for  the  Messianic  Kingdom.  (Comp.  Props.  86,  87,  88,  etc.).  In 
addition,  the  same  regard  paid  to  the  things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom 
shows  us  that  when  men  (as  Bauer)  attempt  to  derive  the  call  of  the  Gen- 
tiles and  a  "  Universalism,"  as  suggested  by  the  state  of  the  Roman  Empire 
and  this  confirmed  and  made  effectual  by  a  divergence  of  Paul,  over  against 
Peter,  in  this  direction — they  simply  ignore  the  testimony  that  is  given  upon 
these  points.  They  overlook  the  connection  that  this  call  of  the  Gentiles 
sustains  to  the  postponed  Kingdom,  to  the  rejected  nation,  to  the  Theo- 
cratic Kingdom,  to  the  foretold  (even  already  by  Moses)  anger  of  God  abid- 
ing upon  the  Jewish  nation  influencing  Him  to  call  out  from  among  the 
nations  a  people  for  His  name  ;  and  they  press  this  "  universalism"  to  the 
extent  that  the  Jewish  nation  is  no  longer  in  covenanted  relationship  with 
God  (thus  breaking  God's  oath-attested  covenant,  and  making  Him  with 
His  foreknowledge  to  have  been  mistaken  in  His  Plans),  and  it  can  never, 
any  more  than  the  Gentiles,  expect  any  special  favor  (thus  erasing  many 
precious  prophecies  pertaining  to  the  future  restoration  and  glory  of  this 
nation,  and  blessings  flowing  to  the  Gentiles  through  it).  And,  instead  of 
allowing  the  Record  to  testify,  as  it  docs,  that  Peter  was  the  first  one  who, 
under  divine  guidance,  extended  the  call  to  the  Gentiles,  they  endeavor 
(against  renewed  testimony  to  the  contrary)  to  develop  an  antagonism  be- 
tween Peter  and  Paul,  making  the  former  "contracted"  and  the  latter 
"  liberal"  in  his  views.  Such  efforts  which  seek  in  these  indirect  ways  to 
disparage  the  Messianic  idea  of  the  New  Test.,  are  unavoidably  weak  in  the 
estimation  of  even  the  uneducated  believer,  because  he  sees  at  once  that  to 
make  out  such  an  account  no  attention  whatever  is  paid  either  to  the  plan 
of  procedure,  or  to  the  part  that  was  really  taken  in  this  call  by  those  com- 
missioned to  extend  it. 

Beal,  Graves,  and  others,  to  rid  themselves  of  New  Test,  obligations,  show  that  other 
professed  sacred  writings  and  heathen  mythology  also  taught  an  incarnation.  But  they 
are  very  careful  not  to  mention  ike  immense  contrast  between  such  and  the  New  Test,  doc- 
trine, and  that  they  do  not  stand  related  to  a  definite  developed  Theocratic  Plan  :  for 
they  only  serve  to  show  how  a  deep  latent  feeling  for  some  such  union  with  Deity  is 
expressed  as  a  longing  even  by  the  heathen.  The  sublime  acts,  life,  etc.,  connected  with 
Jesus  are  not  found  in  such  alleged  incarnations,  and  a  continuous  fulfilment  of  predic- 
tion and  preparative  measures  are  totally  lacking  in  them.  Many  of  the  destructive 
works  indeed  scout  (as  e.g.  The  Jesus  of  History)  the  idea  that  Jesus  predicted  with  such 
definiteness  His  own  death  and  resurrection  (making  such  an  after  attachment),  but  they 
cannot  rid  themselves  of  the  other  predictions  fulfilled  continuously  down  to  the  present 
time. 

Obs.  7.  Seeing  how  largely  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus  is  adapted  both  to 
explain  with  consistency  what  otherwise   would   be   inexplicable   (for,  it 


Prop.  199.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  527 

teaches  us  how  the  covenant  and  promises  can  be  realized),  and  to  substan- 
tiate the  Theocratic  position  of  Jesus  (for  He  that  can  thus  come  again  as 
promised  must  be  more  than  mere  man),  unbelievers  have  ever  been  hostile 
to  it,  and  denunciatory  of  it.  The  lowest  form  of  attack  is  to  pronounce  it 
"  an  exploded  myth"  or  "a  base  fabrication."  Strauss  has  no  hesitancy 
in  saying  {Life  of  Christ,  p.  242)  that  when  Jesus  spoke  of  the  power  and 
glory  connected  with  His  Sec.  Coming,  He  appears  "  not  only  as  an  enthu- 
siast,'' but  as  "guilty  of  undue  self-exaltation."  In  other  words,  the 
Saviour  is  convicted  of  uttering  falsehoods,  and  the  charge  is  repeated  in 
all  its  varied  changes,  now  more  indirectly  and  then  more  directly,  by  all 
who  reject  the  Christship  of  Jesus.  It  is  a  doctrine  .so  self-condemning,  so 
humiliating  to  them  that  they  become  offended  at  it,  as  Strauss  candidly 
confesses  (p.  242)  :  ''  What  offends  us  in  all  these  discourses  is  only  the 
one  point,  that  Christ  should  have  attached  that  miraculous  change,  the 
appearance  of  that  ideal  day  of  retribution,  to  His  own  person,  and  that 
lie  should  have  designated  Himself  as  the  Judge  who  would  come  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven,  accompanied  by  angels,  to  raise  the  dead  and  judge  tli3 
world.  The  man  who  expects  such  things  of  Himself  is  not  only  an  enthu- 
siast (or  visionary),  he  is  guilty  of  undue  self-exaltation  in  presuming  to 
except  Himself  from  all  others  so  far  as  to  place  Himself  above  them  as 
their  future  Judge."  Yes  !  this  writer  is  perfectly  consistent  when  he 
takes  the  position  that  no  mere  man  can  assert  such  things  of  himself. 
Others,  who  still  strive  to  bring  forth  adulterated  admiration  for  Jesus, 
and  to  save  the  reputation  of  the  Holy  One,  tell  us  (as  Shenkel,  Sketch  of 
Jesus,  p.  104  and  108)  that  His  Sec.  Advent  is  to  be  taken  impersonally  or 
figuratively  and  that  the  disciples  not  comprehending  the  figure  made  it  a 
personal  Advent.  This  is  based  upon  two  suppositions,  (1)  that  it  is  im- 
possible that  Christ  should  predict  such  a  personal  Advent  with  outward 
glory,  etc.,  to  set  up  an  earthly  kingdom  ;  and  (2)  that  coming  to  found  a 
spiritual  Kingdom,  He  could  not  possibly  have  enumerated  that  outward 
splendor,  etc.,  as  associated  with  a  personal  Advent,  because  a  spiritual 
Kingdom  is  opposed  to  the  idea.  First  in  reply  to  Shenkel' s  class  :  How 
do  they  know  that  when  Christ  postponed  His  Kingdom  to  this  Sec.  Advent 
(as  specifically  stated  by  Himself,  see  Prop.  58,  etc.)  that  He  also  set  up 
another?  (Comp.  Props.  5G-104).  Where  is  the  proof  of  this  premise? 
The  deduction  is  false,  because  no  such  well-founded  premise  exists.  For 
there  is  only  one  covenanted  Kingdom  promised  to  David's  Son  here  on  the 
earth,  and  that  is  the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom  now  still  withdrawn 
and  overturned  as  Bible  and  history  testify.  How  do  they  know  that 
Christ's  Kingdom  is  a  purely  "  earthly"  one,  and  that  it  would  be  deroga- 
tory to  His  dignity  and  to  angelic  precedency  to  come,  as  grammatically 
expressed,  to  inaugurate  such  a  Kingdom  ?  Here  again  a  premise  is  taken 
for  granted,  and  erroneous  inferences  derived  from  it.  The  Theocratic 
Kingdom  (once  instituted,  which  perhaps  is  also  to  these  men  impersonal 
although  historical,  with  great  outward  manifestations)  is  no  mere  earthly 
Kingdom  (and  it  is  anti-biblical  thus  to  call  it),  seeing  that  God  Himself 
as  the  self-constituted  earthly  Ruler  is  the  Head.  Hence  it  is  "  the  King- 
dom of  God,"  etc.,  Prop.  45.  The  non-comprehension  of  the  Kingdom, 
and  the  introduction  of  an  imaginary  one  forms  the  ground  of  the  forced 
explanation  which  does  positive  violence  to  the  language  of  Jesus  (because 
leaving  the  plain  grammatical  meaning  so  highly  indicative  of  personality 
(Prop.  22,  23).     The  most  reasonable  thing  in  the  world,  if  once  the  pro- 


528  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  199. 

phetic  and  covenanted  idea  of  the  Messianic  Kingdom  is  retained,  is  that, 
when  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  is  restored  under  David's  Son  and  Lord,  the 
greatness  and  majesty  of  the  King  should  bring  forth,  as  Jesus  testifies,  a 
splendor  and  glory  far  exceeding  anything  that  the  world  has  ever  wit- 
nessed, or  that  we  can  imagine.  Therefore  Christlieb  (although  retaining 
the  notion  of  an  invisible  spiritual  Kingdom)  says  in  answer  to  Shenkel 
{Mod.  Doubt,  p.  3G7)  :  "  We  ask  in  amazement,  Has  the  idea  never  dawned 
upon  Dr.  Shenkel,  that  '  corporality  is  the  end  of  God's  ways  '  and  must  be 
so?"  and  argues  that  the  visible,  outward  appearance  of  the  Kingdom  is 
essential  to  its  triumph.  We  reason  step  by  step,  and  each  one  firmly 
established  upon  a  scriptural  basis  as  seen  in  the  preceding  Propositions, 
that  if  ever  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  is  restored,  it  must,  in  the  very  nature 
of  the  case,  have  an  external,  outward  manifestation  ;  and  having  for  its 
Kuler  David's  glorified  Son,  and  for  associated  rulers  Christ's  glorified 
brethren,  it  must  exnibit  a  splendor  and  glory  most  striking  and  over- 
whelming. The  Personality  of  the  Sec.  Advent  (substantiated  under 
several  Props.)  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  for  the 
Kingdom  being  postponed  to  this  Advent,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  how 
it  can  be  re-established  without  His  Coming  and  interference,  or  how  a  Son 
of  Man,  a  real  David's  Son,  can  rule  in  a  restored  David's  throne  and 
Kingdom,  as  predicted,  without  being  personally  present,  just  as  the  disci- 
ples believed,  who  heard  these  declarations  fall  from  the  lips  of  Jesus,  and 
after  His  resurrection  conversed  with  Him  forty  days  (Acts  1  :  3),  '*  speak- 
ing of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  of  God.''''  We  believe  that 
these  disciples  knew  more  accurately,  owing  to  their  facilities  and  that  the 
subject  was  made  a  speciality,  the  things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  than 
any  men  that  have  lived  since  their  day.  Let  us  add  :  that  to  change  the 
meaning  of  Christ's  language,  thus  destroying  its  affinity  to  what  is  abso- 
lutely requisite  to  carry  out  the  Divine  Purpose,  and  in  doing  this  to  bring 
discredit  and  dishonor  upon  the  men  who  preached  this  Theocratic  King- 
dom, is  not  a  whit  less  dishonorable  than  to  pronounce  the  Avhole  matter  a 
visionary  notion.  Second,  in  reply  to  both  Strauss  and  Shenkel,  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Sec.  Advent  must  not  be  considered  isolated,  detached  from  its 
connection  with  the  Kingdom  and  a  continuous  Divine  Plan  to  be  consum- 
mated in  the  Kingdom.  Our  likes  or  dislikes  have  nothing  to  do  with  it ; 
the  question  is  whether  such  an  Advent,  as  incorporated  in  the  Plan,  is 
eminently  adapted  and  even  necessary  to  produce  the  result  foretold.  And 
in  deciding  this  the  student  will  not  overlook  how  this  Advent  naturally 
follows  from  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  and  the  rejection  and  with- 
drawal of  Jesus  ;  from  the  intercallary  period  occupied  in  gathering  out  a 
people  to  inherit  the  Kingdom  ;  from  its  having  been  foretold  centuries 
before  Jesus  declared  it  ;  from  the  impossibility  of  the  disciples  with  their 
Jewish  expectations  of  immediate  re-establishment  of  the  Kingdom  receiv- 
ing such  a  doctrine  without  the  assurances  presented  which  they  claim. 
Let  the  unbiassed  reader  take  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  and  trace  it 
through  its  phases,  and  see  for  himself  how  the  Sec.  Advent  grows  out  of 
it  as  an indispensable  factor  in  the  furtherance  of  the  Kingdom,  and  that  it 
is  the  only  thing  revealed  by  which  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  can  possibly 
be  brought  again  into  existence,  and  he  will  see  that  it  would  have  been 
unreasonable  upon  the  part  of  those  who  were  witnesses  of  Jesus,  of  His 
power  and  resurrection,  not  to  have  accepted  of  it,  and  not  to  have  ex- 
pressed it  as  the  grand  instrumentality  through  which  the  promises  were  to 


Prop.  199.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  529 

be  realized.  The  objection  urged  that  such  a  doctrine  is  incompatible 
with  the  limitations  of  a  mere  man  has  no  force  until  it  be  shown  that 
Jesus  is  only  a  man,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  He  is  more  than  man  the 
doctrine  is  eminently  worthy  of  him — in  fact,  is  just  such  an  one  as,  under 
the  circumstances,  must  pertain  to  Him.  Leaving  the  divinity  of  Christ 
(see  below),  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus,  which,  if 
received,  at  once  establishes  that  Jesus  is  also  divine,  is  rejected  by  these 
men  because,  if  accepted,  it  imposes  the  condition  of  accountability  to  Him, 
and  enforces  the  authority  of  scriptural  demands  upon  the  heart  and  life, 
and  this  a  worldly,  fleshly  heart  cannot  entertain.  Hence  they  care  not  to 
regard  it  from  higher  ground  ;  its  necessity  and  connection  with  the  past, 
present,  and  future  ;  its  Theocratic  aspect  and  identification  with  the  Mes- 
sianic idea,  and  its  adaptedness  to  bring  forth  the  fulfilment  of  covenant 
and  promise.  And,  we  protest  against  the  injustice,  so  far  as  the  Record 
is  concerned,  of  judging  the  Messianic  claims  of  Jesus  by  confining  them 
to  the  First  Advent  and  not  including  the  Second.  For,  this  is  taking  a 
narrow  contracted  view  of  the  subject,  and  doing  positive  violence  to  Holy 
Writ,  seeing  that  the  Messianic  idea  in  its  realization  is  pointedly  deferred 
— owing  to  sinfulness,  etc. — to  this  Sec.  Coming.  Therefore  to  form  a 
correct  judgment  whether  it  can  be  verified,  the  Sec.  Advent  must  be  con- 
templated as  a  means  toivard  a  foretold  end.  Here  we  take  our  position  ;  if 
unbelief  can  point  out  a  single  defect  in  the  Sec.  Advent  that  will  indicate 
directly  or  indirectly  the  impossibility  of  realizing  the  covenanted  Messianic 
idea,  then  truly  a  serious  and  valid  objection  is  raised  up  against  us.  Until 
this  is  done  we  are  only  too  happy  to  follow  in  the  steps  of  the  primitive 
Church,  and  to  hold  that  the  Messianic  conception  is  only  realized  in  the 
Messianic  Kingdom  which  is  to  be  established  at  the  Sec.  Advent  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  believing  too  that  it  is  utterly  beyond  the  capacity  of 
"  ignorant  and  unlearned  "  men  to  introduce  and  develop  so  perfect  and 
majestic  an  adaptation  to  an  end  which  purposes  the  most  glorious  and 
desirable  redemption. 

The  writer  may  be  allowed  to  add  :  the  great  defect  of  systems  of  Theology  for  centu- 
ries has  been  the  following  :  they  have  laid  too  much  stress  on  provisional  redemption 
and  not  on  redemption  itself  as  realized  at  the  Sec.  Advent  in  "  the  day  of  Christ." 
Thus  the  mysterious  sacrifice,  exceedingly  precious  by  which  redemption  is  procured 
and  assured  is  deemed  the  only  great  and  central  point  in  Theology,  while  the  comple- 
tion of  redemption  is  merely  secondary  to  that  of  the  means.  This  blemish  in  many 
works  which  reflects  upon  the  Christship  of  Jesus  ought  to  be  removed.  A  little  reflec- 
tion teaches  this  :  if  that  sacrifice  alone  is  sufficient  to  secure  our  salvation,  how  comes 
it  that  it  does  not  save  from  temporal  death,  from  temporal  evil,  corruption,  etc.,  and 
that  it  becomes  absolutely  necessary  for  Jesus  the  Christ  to  come  again  to  salvation  in 
behalf  of  those  who  honor  His  sacrifice.  Something  then  additional  to  that  sacrifice  is 
needed,  viz.,  the  personal  interference  of  the  Saviour  in  our  behalf.  The  sacrifice  made 
by  Him  enables  Him  to  do  this,  constituting  Him,  in  view  of  its  acceptance  by  the 
Father,  a  perfect  Redeemer,  and  enabling  Him  in  accord  with  right,  because  of  its 
acceptance  by  us,  to  exert  His  power  and  Christship  in  our  interests.  If  this  be  so  that 
something  must  be  superadded,  when  the  time  arrives,  to  the  sacrifice  to  secure  what 
faith  and  hope  in  the  sacrifice  sees  and  desires,  why  refuse  to  recognize  distinctly,  as  the 
Bible  does,  that  the  Redeemer  to  perfect  His  own  work  must  come  again  "  the  second 
time  unto  salvation"  ?  The  prevailing  view  makes  that  Second  Coming  a  minor  point,  a 
comparative  insignificant  matter  (alas  !  some  even  who  profess  to  be  ministers  of  "  the 
Christ"  proclaim  it  "an  exploded  doctrine"),  exalts  the  means,  the  preparatory  work 
above  "  the  Christship"  of  the  future,  and  painfully  evidences  its  lack  of  faith  in  salva- 
tion  obtained  under  Theocratic  auspices. 

Obs.  8.  Now  we  come  briefly  to  consider  the  great  stumbling  block  in 


530  TIIE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PllOP.  199. 

the  way  of  all  unbelief  to  the  acceptance  of  the  Messianic  idea,  viz.,  that 
of  the  Divinity  of  this  Son  of  Man.  Unbelief  correctly  asserts  that  what 
the  New  Test,  declares  of  this  Jesus  cannot  possibly  be  applied  to  a  mere 
man  ;  unbelief  sees  and  acknowledges  that  the  attributing  to  Him  the 
power  of  forgiving  sins,  of  judging  the  world,  of  raising  the  dead,  of 
assigning  rewards  and  punishments,  as  well  as  in  the  bestowal  upon  Him 
of  titles,  worship,  honor,  and  glory  that  belong  to  God,  is  utterly  incom- 
patible with  mere  humanity.  This  confession,  as  far  as  it  goes,  is  worthy 
of  notice,  and  is  a  deserving  rebuke  to  some  professed  believers  who,  under 
the  influence  of  theory,  endeavor  to  lessen  the  divine  in  the  Master.  In 
the  consideration  of  so  fundamental  a  point,  upon  which  depends  so  much 
in  the  past  and  future  history  of  the  race,  and  around  which  cluster  the 
dearest  hopes  of  an  evil  burdened  humanity,  we  should  approach  it  with 
the  resolve  to  allow  the  full  force  of  all  the  proof  given  in  its  behalf  to  be 
candidly  weighed.  Passing  by  that  which  has  been  ably  presented  by 
Apologists,  we  confine  ourselves  only  to  that  derived  from  the  doctrine  of 
the  Kingdom,  feeling  assured  that  this  is  ample  enough  to  stamp  Jesus  as 
God-Man.  Let  the  student  reflect  upon  the  nature  of  this  Theocratic 
Kingdom  and  he  will  see  that,  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  it  necessarily 
includes  as  its  promised  King  a  Qod-man.  Turn  back  to  the  ancient  pre- 
dictions (allowed  even  by  unbelief  to  be  such)  respecting  this  Theocratic 
King  and  notice  what  lie  is  to  perform  (e.g.  to  raise  the  dead,  remove  the 
curse,  etc.),  and  reason  at  once  decides  that  no  mere  man  can  be  such  a 
mighty  King.  Consider  that  the  Theocracy  in  its  direct  meaning  includes 
as  its  central  conception  that  of  God  Himself  acting  as  an  earthly  Ruler,  and 
that  the  biblical  portrayed  purpose  is  to  manifest  this  through  the  Davidic 
line  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  and  it  follows  that  if  God  rules  in  and  through 
Jesus,  the  Son  of  David,  He  must  bo  in  some  way  fully  and  closely  identi- 
fied with  Jesus.  The  Theocratic  idea  is  exhibited  in  the  Person  of  Jesus, 
and  hence  Hie  statements  :  "/  and  my  Father  are  One  ;  I  am  in  the  Father 
a  ml  the  Ful  her  in  Me"  (John  10  :  30,  etc.),  "He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath 
seen  the  Father,"  etc.,  which  assume  definitely  that  lie  is  the  Theocratic 
King  in  its  highest  sense,  viz.,  in  the  identical  one  inaugurated  at  Mt. 
Sinai,  when  it  was  justly  believed  that  God  Himself  was  the  King  of  the 
instituted  Kingdom.  This  is  repeated  when  Tie,  from  the  depth  of  His 
Theocratic  consciousness,  declares  "  that  all  men  should  honor  the  Son, 
even  as  they  honor  the  Father"  (John  5  :  23)  etc.  Being  thus  the  Person  in 
whom  the  Theocracy  is  to  be  truly  manifested,  it  is  not  surprising  that 
Paul  should  say  (Col.  1:10  and  2  :  9)  "  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness 
i 'tic 'I'll,"  that  "in  J  Fun  dwelleth  nil  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily." 
Being  thus  the  contemplated  Theocratic  personage,  He  could  not  refute  the 
charge  brought  against  Him  by  the  Jews  (John  5  :  18  ;  10  :  30  ;  19  :  7) 
that  by  designating  Himself  the  Son  of  God,  he  thus  "  made  Himself  equal 
with  God,"  without  doing  violence  to  His  Messiahship.  Because  Jesus  is 
the  Theocratic  King,  He  is  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father'' s  glory  and  the 
express  image  of  /lis  Person"  (TIeb.  1  :  3),  and  the  Kingdom" itself  is  des- 
ignated "  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God  "  (Eph.  5  :  5),  "  the  Kingdom 
of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ"  (Rev.  11  :  15)  ;  and  He  who  is  to  reign 
forever  is  named  bv  Isaiah,  consistently,  "  the  Mighty  God"  (Syriac,  the 
Mighty  God  of  ages),  "The  Everlasting  Father"  (Vulgate,  "  the  Father  of 
the  future  age;"  Lowth,  "  the  Father  of  the  everlasting  ago  ;"  Chaldee, 
''the  Man  abiding  forever").     That  God  should  become  incarnate,  i.e.  be 


Prop.  199.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  531 

united  with  humanity  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  is  not  only  not  incredible,  but 
positively  the  most  reasonable  matter  that  can  be  presented  to  us  when 
regarded  in  its  true  Theocratic  relationship.  Let  the  reader  consider  how 
the  Theocratic  conception  as  covenanted  and  predicted  demands  it  ;  how 
this  was  done  centuries  before  Jesus  came  ;  how  all  the  prophets  unite  in 
giving  Him  a  pure,  exalted  Theocratic  position  in  the  Kingdom  ;  how  in 
His  own  person  He  is  represented  as  reigning  as  David's  Son  and  yet  as 
David's  Lord  ;  how  the  fulfilment  of  the  continued  overthrow  of  the  The- 
ocracy and  the  condition  of  the  covenanted  nation  is  a  standing  proof  of  its 
historical  connection  ;  how  God  is  portrayed  as  made  specially  accessible 
and  present  in  the  person  of  the  Messiah  ;  and  then  how  Jesus  came  as 
predicted,  David's  Son  and  also  the  Son  of  God  ;  how  Ho  claimed  and 
exhibited  a  sufficiency  to  insure  us  that  He  is  indeed  the  Christ  ;  how  He, 
through  the  tender  of  the  Kingdom,  offered  Himself  as  the  Messiah  ;  how 
His  Christship  was  rejected  ;  how  then  still  retaining  His  right  and  privi- 
leges, confirmed  by  the  power  of  God,  He  postponed  the  manifestation  of 
the  Kingdom  and  of  His  Messiahship  to  the  Sec.  Advent  ;  how  so  many 
things  now  existent  in  Jew  and  Gentile,  in  Church  and  world,  attest  to  and 
establish  what  He  as  Messiah  declared,  and  when  ho  has  passed  over  the 
strictly  connected  series  of  events  and  has  seen  how  requisite  all  this  is  to 
meet  the  purest  and  loftiest  conception  of  Rulership  that  has  ever  been  pre- 
sented to  mind  or  heart  of  man,  is  it  possible  that  he,  or  any  one,  can  for  a 
moment  suppose  that  a  set  of  fishermen,  or  "  ignorant"  disciples,  or  the 
most  learned  of  the  ancients,  could  concoct  a  Personage  so  symmetrical,  so 
correspondent  with  covenant  and  promise,  so  perfectly  agreeing  with  the 
highest  form  of  government,  with  the  World's  need,  and  with  a  bridging 
over  the  dark  chasm  between  God  and  man,  Heaven  and  Hades,  Paradise 
and  groaning  Creation.  "No  one  who  receives  the  Theocracy  in  its  true 
Biblical  sense  can  doubt  the  divinity  of  Jesus,  the  Theocratic  King,  be- 
cause to  do  so  would  involve  a  contradiction — a  fatal  antagonism — for  it 
would  take  out  of  the  future  Theocracy  what  even  the  past  possessed — a 
God  ruling.  Hence  the  deep  wisdom  of  the  Apostles,  the  evidence  of  in- 
spiration, in  adopting  the  very  language  so  admirably  adapted  to  express 
the  Theocratic-Davidie  idea,  i.e.  in  uniting  with  David's  Son,  to  whom  as  a 
descendant  the  Kingdom  is  more  specifically  promised  (both  for  identifica- 
tion and  for  a  purposed  union  of  the  Divine),  such  a  Lordship,  Godship, 
etc.,  that  in  Him  the  pure  conception  of  a  Theocracy  is  retained.  Consider, 
too,  that  this  was  done  by  men  hostile  to  all  idol  or  man  worship,  who  were 
surrounded  by  those  who  were  jealous  of  any  lessening  or  misconstruction 
of  the  Messianic  conception,  and  that  therefore  the  language  used  can  only 
be  consistently  explained  on  the  basis  of  the  Theocratic  idea.  Reflect  also 
that  this  was  done  by  persons  and  among  persons  who  were  zealous  de- 
fend?^ of  the  unity  of  God,  and  who  would  have  esteemed  it  sacrilegious 
to  appropriate  to  man  what  belonged  to  God  ;  and  that,  therefore,  the  por- 
traiture of  Jesus,  as  given  by  the  Apostles,  can  only  be  appropriately  recon- 
ciled with  the  Theocratic  conception,  which  instead  of  destroying  the  unity 
of  God  actually  upholds  it,  since  it  brings  God  the  Ruler  into  oneness  (as 
Jesus  claimed)  with  David's  Son,  causing  the  majesty  of  heaven  to  be 
reflected  and  exerted  in  and  through  a  visible  Headship,  thus  mercifully 
and  wonderfully  accommodating  itself  to  the  needs,  desires,  and  glory  of 
Humanity.  Let  the  student  deeply  ponder  the  original  Theocratic  idea, 
retamins  its  original  meaning  then  associated  in  external  manifestation 


532  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  199. 

through  David's  Son,  and  he  will  see  the  reason  why  pas  TC  idea,  viz.,  that 
Old  Test,  are  applied  to  God  are  in  the  New  Test,  unl  .isserts  that  what 
to  Jesus  (as  e.g.  Isa.  45  :  20  ;  comp.  with  Horn.  14  :  10,  ]  ,  isa.  40  :  3  wiin 
Matt.  3  :  1,  3  ;"  Zech.  12  :  10  with  John  19  :  34,  37,  etc.,  tc.)  ;  why  divine 
worship  which  belonged  to  God  as  the  Theocratic  Rule'  is  also  claimed  for 
Jesus  Christ  (as  e.g.  John  5:3;  Matt.  28  :  19  ;  Phil.  2  :  11  ;  Eev.  5  :  13  ; 
Luke  24  :  52,  etc.)  ;  why  perfections  which  exclusively  belong  to  God  are 
without  the  least  scruple  attributed  to  Jesus  (as  e.g.  John  5  :  21  ;  Col.  1  : 
17  ;  Heb.  13  :  8,  etc.)  so  that  the  declaration  is  made  (John  16  :  15),  "  all 
tilings  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine.'"  It  was  under  the  influence  of  this 
Theocratic  conception,  viz.,  that  the  same  Lord  God  who  once  acted  as 
earthly  Ruler  would  be  inseparably  identified  with  the  person  of  Jesus, 
David's  Son,  that  even  creation  (John  1  :  3,  10  ;  Eph.  3:9;  Col.  1  :  16  ; 
Heb.  1  :  2,  etc.)  is  ascribed  to  Him  ;  that  pre-existence  is  postulated 
(John  8  :  58  ;  John  1:1;  Col.  1  :  17,  etc.)  of  Him  ;  that  the  love,  etc., 
rendered  to  Him  are  at  the  same  time  bestowed  upon  the  Father  (John  5  : 
23,  etc.,  1  John  2  :  23)  ;  that  no  one  could  know  the  Father  saving  the  Son 
and  him  to  whom  the  Son  revealed  Him  (Matt.  11  :  27,  etc.,  1  John  1  :  18)  ; 
and  all  this  and  more  because  (John  14  :  10)  "  I  am  in  the  Father  and,  the 
Father  in  Me."  The  least  reflection  will  show,  that  the  Theocratic  idea 
so  impenetrates  the  New  Test,  portraiture  of  Jesus  bringing  forth  such  a 
union  of  the  Theocratic  God  with  David's  Son — forming  the  one  Theocratic 
King  with  one  will,  power,  work,  love,  etc. (John  5  :  19-38,  etc.) — and  yet 
consistently  placing  the  Son  in  view  of  the  incorporation  of  David's  line 
and  descendant  subordinately  to  the  Father  (John  5  :  19  ;  14  :  28,  etc.), 
that  it  demands  unreasonable  credulity  to  imagine  that  the  apostles  through 
their  own  reason  and  to  subserve  their  own  purposes,  created  such  a  match- 
less Theocratic  likeness,  which,  without  a  single  flaw,  combines  the  original 
Theocratic  Ruler  with  the  promised  Theocratic  King  in  David's  line  ;  and, 
without  sacrificing  the  humanity  or  exalting  it  above  the  Fatherhood, 
blends  the  two  together  into  an  inseparable  Oneness,  forming  the  One 
Person  Jesus  the  Christ  ;  that  in  this  unity,  whoever  sees  the  Son  beholds 
also  the  Father.  Such  a  conception,  so  harmonious  in  all  its  details,  so 
forcibly  adapted  to  secure  the  end  contemplated,  and  so  perfectly  in  accord 
with  God's  Theocratic  Purpose,  is,  as  the  Bible  justly  claims  a  divine  one. 
Let  the  reader  test  this  by  contrasting  it  with  those  plans  originated  by 
man,  as  e.g.  Plato's  idea  of  an  ideal  government  and  more  recently  the 
notions  entertained  respecting  a  "  Universal  Republic"  or  a  "Universal 
Monarchy."  Our  opponents  themselves  concede  (leaving  out  the  moral, 
and  only  looking  at  the  results)  that  if  this  portraiture  is  true,  if  it  could 
be  realized  as  expressed,  it  would  undoubtedly  bring  forth  the  effects 
attributed  to  it.  We  know  it  to  be  true  for  the  reasons,  already  assigned, 
flowing  from  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  and  which  in  every  heir  o^.  this 
Kingdom  and  co-heir  of  this  Theocratic  King  is  confirmed  by  the  experi- 
ence of  faith,  and  by  the  constant  and  continued  fulfilling  of  events  fore- 
told by  this  Messiah. 

Leaving  the  offensive  and  daring  expressions  of  unbelief,  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out 
what  little  force  there  is  in  the  affirmation  of  a  more  respectable  class  of  unbelievers. 
Thus  e.g.  Alger  (The  Solitudes,  p.  384)  asserts,  "  To  merge  the  divine  humanity  of  Jesus 
in  factitious  theory  of  His  Deity  is  to  lose  more  than  can  be  gained."  In  plain  words 
the  divinity  (made  inseparable  by  the  Theocratic  plan  running  from  covenant  to  ultimate 
fulfilment)  attributed  to  Jesi;s  must  be  rejected,  for   "  professed  relationship   to  Him 


Prop.  199.1 

j  the  theocratic  kingdom.  533 

united  Wi  1  llir  hip^  arrogating  to  Himself  personally  a  forensic  position  of  incon- 
positiveiv  r/ie  11  andeur— this  language,  if  regarded  as  authentic,  and  taken  in  its 
inerai  sense,  wouiu .  ce  us  to  believe  that  He  labored  under  a  gross  delusion."  Suppose, 
however,  on  the  othi  hand,  that  the  divine  were  not  united  with  Him  as  the  Theocratic 
ordering  demands,  w  dd  not  this  very  class  of  writers  seize  upon  this  omission  as  a  fatal 
flaw,  and  at  once  triu.  'phantly  accuse  the  evangelists  and  Apostles  of  not  comprehending 
the  requirements  of  the  Christ  as  presented  in  the  conception  of  a  Theocracy.  But 
when  given,  perversity  makes  it  an  objection,  although  it  comes  and  supplies  a  yearning 
of  humanity  to  have  the  divine  to  reveal  itself  in  an  accessible  form  to  man,  joining  the 
Infinite  and  the  Finite  in  a  recognizable  manner,  fulfilling  in  a  covenanted  Theocratic 
order  what  some  writers  (as  Parsons' s  The  Infinite  and  the  Finite)  make  progressive  and  to 
be  evolved  in  the  distant  future.  We  cannot  even  agree  with  Luthart  in  his  exceedingly 
interesting  lecture  (No.  4,  Bremen  Lee,  p.  133)  on  "The  Person  of  Christ,"  when  he 
remarks  :  "  A  man  who  is  the  appearance  of  God  Himself,  a  revelation  of  God,  who  is 
God  become  man— this  thought  was  far  off  from  the  whole  ancient  world,  was  far  off 
even  from  the  Old  Test. "  "The  idea  did  not  produce  the  fact,  but  the  fact  j>roduced  the 
idea."  The  reverse  of  this  is  the  truth,  for  (1)  the  Theocracy  embraced  the  idea  of  God 
Himself  ruling  ;  and  (2)  this  was  co-joined  in  the  covenant  and  promises  to  be  realized  in 
David's  Son  ;  (3)  this  led  to  the  production  of  the  fact  ;  and  (4)  this  was  acknowledged 
by  the  chief  priests  when  they  charged  Jesus  with  blasphemy  because  He  claimed  to  be 
this  Son,  "  the  Christ."     There  is  a  logical  and  historical  connection. 

Obs.  9.  The  Theocratic  Kingship  assigned  to  Jesus,  confirmed  by  the 
things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom,  at  once  establishes  His  divinity.  A 
Theocracy  presided  over  by  a  real  Theocratic  King ,  manifested  in  and 
through  a  vital  union  of  God  with  man,  imperatively  requires  a  God- 
man.  Our  entire  argument,  running  through  these  Propositions  calls 
for  just  such  a  Theocratic  King,  with  the  humanity  and  the  divinity, 
the  attributes  and  the  perfections,  the  humiliation  and  exaltation,  the  Son 
of  Man  and  Son  of  God  relationship,  as  the  AVord  presents  us.  There  is 
nothing  to  add  to,  or  subtract  from,  the  Theocratic  portrait  drawn  by 
the  Spirit,  which  understandeth  the  deep  and  true  things  of  God  and 
man.  The  sinlessness  of  Jesus,  which  is  such  an  annoyance  to  unbe- 
lief, and  the  subject  of  many  an  insidious  attack,  is  fully  sustained, 
not  merely  by  the  well-established  reasons  of  Apologists  in  general,  but 
by  its  necessary  relationship  to  this  Kingdom.1  A  Theocratic  King,  in 
the  full  sense  of  the  phrase,  must  be  a  pure,  sinless,  perfect  Being.  He  is, 
therefore,  not  only  covenanted  as  li  the  Just  One,''''  and  in  all  the 
prophecies  represented  as  pre-eminently  spotless,  being  the  Lord  Himself, 
but  carefully  delineated  as  such  by  His  witnesses.  The  least  reflection  will 
show  that  if  the  Theocratic  idea,  which  embraces  the  actual  return  and 
abiding  of  God's  Rulership,  is  actually  to  be  realized  in  the  Person  of 
Jesus,  then,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  sin  cannot  be  predicated  of 
Him  who  is,  by  virtue  of  this  Theocratic  position,  God-man.  From  this 
results  the  unspeakable  worthiness  of  our  King,  His  ability  to  save  those 
who  are  fallen,  and  the  call  upon  all  living  creatures  to  ascribe  "  Blessing, 
and  Honor,  and  Glory,  and  Power'''  (Rev.  5  :  13)  unto  Him.  Indeed,  if 
Jesus  is  viewed,  as,  in  justice  to  Himself  and  the  Record,  He  ought  to  be, 
in  the  light  of  this  Theocratic  position,  His  Divine- Human  appears  with  an 
increased  intensity  and  lustre  that  is  overwhelming.  Has  the  reader,  e.g. 
ever  considered  that  the  very  first  message  respecting  the  Messiah  given  by 
his  forerunner  John,  at  once  impresses  us  with  a  sense  of  His  Theocratic 
dignity.  Who,  unless  He  were  the  Theocratic  King  in  its  highest  sense, 
could  call  a  whole  nation  to  repentance,  and  tender  to  them  the  Theocratic 
Kingdom  upon  the  nation's  concurrence  ?     The  demand  and  offer  are  both 


534  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  199. 

so  God-like,  so  real  Theocratic  that  this  alone,  if  other  proof  were  lacking, 
stamps  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  the  veritable  Christ.  Therefore  it  is  that  a 
large  class  of  passages,  however  explained  by  the  critics  and  however  men 
may  legitimately  or  unlawfully  interpret  them,  still  contain  a  sufficiency  to 
teach  us  the  true  Theocratic  position  of  Jesus  ;  as  e.g.  Tit.  2  :  13,  which 
some  read  as  if  the  great  God  and  the  Saviour  Jesus  were  identical,  and 
which  others  read  as  if  God  designates  the  Father  distinctively  from  the 
Son,  but  which,  whatever  reading  (see  Lange,  Alford,  etc. )  is  preferred, 
still  brings  forth  the  pre-eminent  dignity  of  the  Saviour.  For,  as  Alford 
(loci)  says  :  "  Whichsoever  way  taken,  the  passage  is.  just  as  important  a 
testimony  to  the  divinity  of  our  Saviour  :  according  to  one  way,  by  assert- 
ing His  possession  of  Deity  ;  according  to  the  other,  even  more  strikingly 
asserting  His  equality  in  (/lory  with  the  Father,  in  a  way  which  would  be 
blasphemy  if  predicted  of  any  of  the  sons  of  men."  The  criticism  of 
isolated  passages  does  not  affect  the  main  question,  and  cannot  change  the 
■imbedded  Theocratic  position  assigned  to  Jesus  by  virtue  of  which  we  are 
assured  that  the  revelation  of  the  Father's  glory  is  in  and  through  II im 
(comp.  e.g.  John  17  :  5  ;  2  Pet.  1  :  10,  17  ;  Matt.  16  :  27,  etc.).  We  need 
no  Napoleon  (Montholon's  Memoirs)  to  inform  us  :  "  I  know  men  and  I 
tell  you  that  Jesus  Chiist  is  not  a  man,"  etc.,  for  the  Theocratic  idea,  so 
consecutively  evolved  and  finally  manifested  in  Jesus  requires  no  such 
eulogies  from  man.  The  fainter  praises  of  Kenan,  Mills,  etc.,  are  made 
with  eyes  blinded  and  hearts  closed  to  the  Theocratic  conception.  There- 
fore, we  believe  that,  when  the  time  arrives  for  this  Theocratic  King  to 
come  and  re-establish  the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  then  indeed  (Rev.  21  :  3) 
"  the  tabernacle  of  God"  (the  same  tabernacle  now  taken  away,  comp. 
Acts  15  :  16  ;  Isa.  16  :  5  ;  Isa.  33  :  20,  etc.)  ''  is  with  men  and  He"  (i.e. 
God  in  the  Person  of  the  Theocratic  Ruler)  "  will  dwell  with  than  and  they 
shall  be  His  people,  and  God  Himself"  (being  the  Theocratic  Ruler)  "  shall  be 
with  them  and  be  their  God  " — and  then  shall  be  fulfilled  (Isa.  54  :  5)  : 
"  Thy  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  the  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall 
Hebe  called."* 

1  There  is  something  inexpressibly  saddening  in  the  trial  of  Irving  respecting  the  sin- 
lessness  of  Christ,  both  parties  holding  to  the  vital  fact  that  sinlessness  was  maintained, 
but  differing  concerning  the  power  of  His  humanity  to  maintain  it.  See  Life  of  Irving  by 
Mrs.  Oliphant,  who  well  observes  that  such  an  agreement  in  essentials  should  never  have 
led  to  Irving's  excommunication. 

2  It  is  a  gratifying  fact  that  all  the  early  Millenarian  Fathers  united  in  Jesus  the  Divine 
and  Human  (comp.  Hagenbach's  His.  Doc,  sects.  65  and  66,  Neander's  Ch.  His.,  and  His. 
Dog.,  Dorner's  Person  of  Christ,  Uhlman's  Sinlessness  qf  Christ,  etc.),  but  it  is  not  gen- 
erally noticed  that  such  a  union  is  pai't,  yea,  the  heart,  of  their  Theocratic  belief,  viz., 
that  Jesus  being  the  destined  Theocratic  King,  the  Christ,  is  the  One  in  and  through 
whom  God  reigns.  Priestley  published  a  work  entitled,  History  of  Early  Opinions  concern- 
ing Jesus  Christ,  compiled  from  Original  Writers,  proving  that  the  Christian  Church  was  at 
first  Unitarian"  (-4  vols.,  8vo,  Birmingham,  1782).  Against  this  assumption  of  Priestley's 
it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the  prevailing  Millenarian  view  of  the  first  centuries,  which 
incorporated  as  its  foundation  principle  the  Theocratic  ordering,  necessarily  made  Jesus 
far  more  than  man,  even  divine,  in  and  through  whom  God  ruled.  This  fact  has  very 
recently  been  strongly  proven  by  Rev.  Cook  in  his  Boston  lectures  from  extracts  taken 
from  the  fathers,  although  he  might  have  immensely  strengthened  these  by  showing  their 
intimate  and  necessary  relationship  to  the  Millenarianism  then  held.  A  firm  believer  in 
the  Theocratic  Kingdom,  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  cannot  possibly  be  a  Unitarian.  A 
mass  of  Scripture,  aside  from  the  nature  of  the  Kingdom,  forbids  it,  as  e.g.  a  single  pas- 
sage, Micah  5  :  1  (rendering  given  by  Dr.  Schaff  in  The  Person  qf  Christ,  p.  200),  "  But 
Thou  Bethlehem  Ephratah,  too  small  to  be  among  the  thousands  of  Judah"  (i.e.  the 


Prop.  199.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  535 

central  towns  where  the  heads  of  thoiisands,  or  subordinate  divisions  of  tribes  resided) 
"  out  of  thee  shall  come  forth  unto  me  One  icho  is  to  be  the  Ruler  in  Israel,  whose  origin  is 
from  the  first  of  time,  from  the  days  of  eternity."  Burton  gives  a  mass  of  information  in  bis 
Testimony  of  the  Anie-Nicene  Fathers  to  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  Sears' s  The  Fourth  Gospel,  the 
Heart  of  Christ,  Reubelt's  Scripture  Doctrine  oj~  the  Person  of  Christ,  Lewis's  Divine  Human 
of  the  Scriptures,  Young's  Christ  of  History,  and  others.  The  testimony  of  ancients,  out- 
side of  Christianity,  sustains  the  primitive  view,  so  that  e.g.  Gibbon  (Decl.  and  Fall,  vol. 
2,  p.  9)  does  not  question  the  early  teaching  of  the  Church  on  this  subject,  and  refers  to 
"  Libanius  (who)  praises  Porphyry  and  Julian  for  confuting  tbe  folly  of  a  sect,  which 
styles  a  dead  man  of  Palestine,  God,  and  the  Son  of  God.  Socrates,  His.  Eccles.  3  :  23," 
etc.  (comp.  also  p.  305  and  315).  When  Pliny  (Epis.  Pliny  10,  97)  says  "  that  the  Chris- 
tians were  accustomed  to  sing  hymns  to  Christ  as  to  God  ;' '  when  the  leading  objection 
of  the  Jews  was  to  this  assumption  of  the  divine  ;  when  the  apologists  met  such  objec- 
tions with  reasons  to  sustain  it  ;  when  martyrs  refused  the  application  of  divine  to  em- 
perors and  heathen  gods,  but  joyfully  acknowledged  it  in  Jesus,  we  have  sufficient  evi- 
dence of  early  belief  (comp.  Van  Oosterzee's  art.  "  The  Son  of  Man"  in  Princeton  Review, 
July,  1878).  Pressense  (The  Early  Days  of  Christianity,  p.  62)  remarks  on  the  martyrdom 
of  Stephen  :  "  His  last  prayer  is  addressed  distinctly  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  his  final 
homage  he  renders  dying  testimony  to  His  divinity.  It  was  fitting  that  this  great  truth 
should  be  thus  proclaimed  by  the  first  of  martyrs."  The  Theocratic  idea  vindicates  this 
worship,  and  hence  we  have  John  5  :  23  ;  Phil.  2  :  11  ;  Rev.  5  :  13  ;  7  :  9  ;  15  :  6  ;  Rom. 
9  :  5,  etc. 

Obs.  10.  The  life  of  Jesus  on  earth  has  been  highly  eulogized  even  by 
unbelief,  so  that  He  is  represented,  by  those  unwilling  to  accept  of  His 
claims  to  the  Divine  and  Supernatural,  as  "  the  ideal  of  Humanity," 
"the  Ideal  Man,"  "the  man  pre-eminent,"  etc.  We  accept  of  this 
testimony  as  far  as  it  goes,  and  add  to  it,  that  if  we  consider  the 
covenanted  and  predicted  claims  of  Jesus  to  the  Theocratic  ordering, 
we  find  in  that  life  abundant  evidence,  cumulative  in  fact,  that  in 
every  particular  this  Son  of  David  acted  and  lived  in  the  conscmisness  of 
His  ultimate  Theocratic  position,  so  that  everything  in  Him,  and  coming 
from  Him,  was  eminently  worthy  of  the  Theocratic  King.  Thus 
e.g.  the  contrast  between  His  condition  (one  of  poverty)  and  the 
vast  extent  of  His  knowledge,  the  ability  exhibited  in  meeting  and 
confounding  the  representative  and  intelligent  men  of  the  nation,  the 
high  culture  and  taste  manifested  in  His  teaching  so  that  they  ever  have 
commended  themselves  for  beauty  and  force  to  reason,  the  exalted  senti- 
ments so  far  in  advance  of  the  age  proceeding  from  "  the  carpenter,"  the 
dignity  and  nobleness  of  His  character,  the  remarkable  adhesion  to  His 
principles  and  aims  irrespective  of  a  threatened  death,  the  conduct  at  the 
trial  and  crucifixion,  the  high  virtue,  morality,  and  piety  inculcated  com- 
pared with  the  teaching  then  extant,  His  public  and  private  life  contrasted 
with  that  of  Reformers  and  great  men,  the  authority  assumed  and  sustained 
in  connection  with  an  exceeding  tenderness  of  spirit  and  forgiveness — these 
are  points  Ave  love  to  contemplate  as  indicative  of  the  high  and  noble  char- 
acter of  the  King.  The  superiority  of  Jesus  as  a  man,  as  eminent  Apolo- 
gists have  noticed,  developed  at  a  time  when  gross  impurity  and  corruption 
was  prevalent,  developed  in  antagonism  to  national  pride  and  prejudice,  is 
a  stepping-stone  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  full  Theocratic  idea — of 
something  allied  with  Him  which  elevates  and  exalts  His  humanity,  which 
— fortified  by  the  purest  life  and  sealed  by  the  noblest  death — establishes 
His  claim  to  Oneness  with  the  Father,  constituting  Him  the  needed  per- 
fect Redeemer,  and  "  The  Faithful  and  True.'1 

We   must  receive  the  portraiture  of  Jesus  in  its  entirety  as  given,  or  else  we  mar  it 
with  some  deformity.     Rogers  (Superhuman  Origin  of  the  Bible,  p.  34,  etc.)  at  length  ably 


536  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  199. 

shows  that  the  lofty  character  of  Jesus  could  not  have  originated  with  the  Jewish  disci- 
ples, and  that,  if  a  mere  man,  the  claims  of  authority,  Supernaturalism,  etc.,  would  viti- 
ate the  portrait  and  render  Him  unworthy  of  honor.  He  forcibly  declares  (p.  430,  in 
reply  to  Renan)  that  if  Jesus  pretended  to  work  miracles,  or  simply  fancied  that  He  had 
wrought  them,  His  credibility  and  moral  greatness  would  be  destroyed.  And  yet  a  Jesus 
shorn  of  His  greatness  and  majesty,  stripped  of  His  noblest  attributes  and  jierfection,  is 
made  the  subject  of  eulogy.  An  anon,  writer,  of  "  The  Purpose  of  Existence,"  while 
busily  engaged  in  denying  the  statements  of  the  Bible,  the  Supernatural  element,  and 
the  cardinal  doctrines  pertaining  to  Christ,  professes,  amid  his  destructive  work,  a  high 
sort  of  reverence  for  Jesus,  saying  :  "  All  that  I  believe,  all  that  I  have  said,  and  all  that 
I  have  yet  to  say,  I  have  learned  from  one  to  whom  I  look  up  as  the  wisest  and  most  per- 
fect mortal  that  ever  lived — from  Jesus  of  Nazareth  Himself— purest,  holiest  of  created 
beings  !"  What  does  such  praise  amount  to  after  denying  the  Christship  of  Jesus  and 
rejecting  His  claims  to  the  miraculous  and  divine,  and  after  accounting  for  the  rise  of 
Christianity  and  its  essential  doctrines  as  follows  :  "  The  men  from  Cyprus  and  Gyrene, 
but  more  especially  Lusias  of  the  latter  place,  were  the  true  authors  of  Christianity," 
viz.,  in  ascribing  to  Jesus  a  resurrection,  translation,  divinity,  etc.  What  admirable 
wisdom,  consistency,  and  knowledge  of  the  ancient  records  !  Fairbairn  (Typology,  vol.  1, 
p.  346)  refers  to  the  fact  that  the  lines  of  prophecy  clearly  indicate  the  divine-human 
united  in  the  person  of  the  Christ,  and  insists,  correctly,  that  this  is  a  foundation  indis- 
pensable to  a  realization  of  the  promises  of  God.  Hence  he  observes  that  the  evange- 
lists all  notice  it  ;  John  in  his  formal  statement  that  the  Word  was  made  flesh  ;  Matthew 
and  Luke  in  the  miraculous  conception  constituting  Jesus  ' '  the  Son  of  the  Highest  ;"  and 
Mark  pronouncing  Him  to  be  "  the  Son  of  God." 


PkOP.  200.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  537 


Proposition  200.  While  the  Kingdom  is  given  to  Jesus  Christ 
as  the  Son  of  Man,  He  becomes  thereby  the  actual  representative 
of  God,  manifesting  God  in  the  Person  of  One  related  to  hu- 
manity. 

The  covenants  specify  that  future  Ruler  as  the  seed  of  Abraham 
and  David  ;  David  and  the  Prophets,  corroborated  by  the  Gospels, 
Epistles,  and  Apoc,  describe  Him  as  One  far  greater  than  man, 
having  the  Divine  united  with  Him,  thus  forming  the  desirable 
Theocratic- Damdic  King.  The  remarkable  and  most  forcible  feat- 
ure comes  forth,  that  what  was  once  separated  in  this  Theocratic 
Kingdom  is  united  in  the  person  of  this  King.  When  the  Theoc- 
racy was  first  established,  the  earthly  Ruler  (i.e.,  God  acting  as 
such)  was  separate  (i.e.  in  personality)  from  the  subordinate  human 
ruler  (as  e.g.  God  was  separate  and  distinct  from  the  subordinate 
ruler  David),  but  in  this  revived  form  it  is  God's  Purpose  to  have 
both  joined,  firmly  united  in  the  same  person.  This  wonderful 
Plan  proposes  that  there  shall  be  a  real  Son  of  David  united  and 
identified  with  the  Godhead,  thus  constituting  Him  just  such  a 
Ruler  as  a  perfected  Theocratic  Kingdom  on  earth  should  possess 
to  make  it  powerful  and  absolute,  related  both  to  God  and  man. 
While  sitting  on  the  throne  of  His  glory  as  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  He, 
through  His  God-like  attributes  and  Oneness  with  the  Father,  mani- 
fests the  Father  to  us.  Inspiration  alone  could  produce  such  a 
Theocratic  Plan,  so  glorious,  complete,  and  adapted  to  a  perfect 
rule. 

Lange  (Com.  Bev.,  p.  40G)  justly  observes  :  "  In  the  Coming  of  Christ  God  shall  per- 
fectly manifest  Himself  as  Jehovah,  the  Covenant  God  :  faithful  to  Himself  ;  faithful  to 
His  people  ;  faithful  to  His  justice  toward  all." 

Obs.  1.  This  again  brings  out  prominently  the  doctrine  respecting  the 
Person  of  Christ — a  significant  one  too  as  the  day  is  approaching.  Our 
view  rejects  on  the  one  side  the  old  opinion,  revamped  by  modern  Ration- 
alism, that  Christ  is  a  mere  man,  for  the  acts  that  He  performs,  the  new 
Creation,  the  Supernatural,  the  universal  judging,  the  resurrection  power 
exerted,  etc.,  prove  Him  to  be  more  than  man,  the  Son  of  God  in  the 
highest  sense.  It  rejects  on  the  other  hand  the  Gnostic  idea,  and  its 
modern  philosophical  tendency,  which  either  virtually  ignores  or  despises 
the  human  in  Christ,  or  else  makes  it  play  a  very  subordinate  part  in  His 
history  and  that  of  Redemption,  bringing  forward  the  divine  in  an  exclusive 
onesided  manner.  Looking  only  at  the  covenants,  the  work  of  Redemption 
proceeds  on  the  ground  that  Jesus  is  man,  proper  man,  of  the  seed  of 
David,  thus  identified  with  the  race  and  of  the  same  nature  with  Adam. 


538  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  200. 

Coming  necessarily  in  the  elect  line,  He  professes  complete  humanity,  for 
His  birth,  growth,  expansion  of  intellectual  and  moral  powers,  eating, 
drinking,  temptation,  life,  sufferings,  and  death — all  indicate  this.  But 
looking  at  the  work  which  is  to  be  performed,  the  Supernatural  connected 
with  Him,  the  portrayal  of  His  offices,  attributes,  power,  etc.,  we  apprehend 
one  possessing  in  connection  with  the  human,  a  divine  nature.  Both  are 
united  to  form  a  Saviour  capable  of  performing  in  all  respects  the  great  work 
of  Redemption,  which  is  so  intimately  connected  wither  Theocratic  order- 
ing, with  the  precious  principles  of  moral  and  civil  government,  with  the 
purity  and  glory  of  God  Himself,  and  with  the  highest  interests  of  man 
and  the  race. 

In  brief,  we  accept  of  the  Person  of  Christ  as  given  by  Dr.  Dorner  and  others,  and 
reject  with  them  as  anti-scriptural  the  theories  which  teach  the  identity  of  the  human 
and  divine,  the  conversion  or  transmutation  of  the  one  into  the  other,  or  the  commixture 
of  the  two  to  form  another  nature.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  "yesterday,  today,  and  for- 
ever ;"  and  this  unchangeableness  imparts  faith  and  hope.  Since  there  is  much  vague- 
ness, and  even  rashness  expressed  respecting  the  pre-existence  of  Jesus,  a  few  words  may 
be  in  place.  There  is  no  proper  pre-existence  of  Jesus  as  "  the  Christ,"  the  promised 
"  Messiah."  Fully  admitting  the  pre-existence  of  the  divine,  this  itself  does  not  consti- 
tute "  the  Christ,"  for  it  is  the  union  of  the  divine  and  human  in  David's  Son  that  forms 
"  the  Messiah" — the  historical,  covenanted  Christ.  The  notion  of  a  pre-existent  Christ, 
notwithstanding  the  mystical  theories  finely  wrought  of  Bohme,  Poiret,  etc.,  is  contra- 
dictory to  covenant  and  prophecy,  for  before  David  was  born  to  whom  the  covenant  was 
given  (i.e.  the  assurance  was  given  that  out  of  his  line  should  the  Messiah  spring),  and 
before  Jesus  was  born  as  David's  descendant,  "  the  Christ"  as  such  could  not  exist. 
Therefore  while  the  divine  is  represented  as  pre-existent,  the  human  nature,  and  the 
union  of  the  divine  and  human  in  one  person,  is  never  thus  described.  Lutheran  as  our 
predilections  are,  it  is  but  just  to  say  that  in  this  matter  the  Reformed  (comp.  Hagen- 
bach's  Ills.  Doc,  vol.  2,  p.  352)  were  nearer  the  truth.  Our  line  of  argument,  relating  to 
the  Kingdom,  is  only  concerned  in  the  covenanted  Christ,  the  historical  Messiah.  Hence 
while  believing  e.g.  that  (John  12  :  41)  Isaiah  saw  (6  :  1-10)  the  divine  pertaining  to"  the 
Christ,"  we  cannot  receive  the  inference  of  Edwards  (His.  Bedempt,  p.  148)  that  he  saw 
"  the  human  nature"  of  the  Christ. 


Obs.  2.  Passing  by  the  necessity  induced  by  law  itself  (as  presented  by 
theologians  in  systems  of  divinity)  and  especially  by  the  preordained  Theo- 
cratic ordering  (as  evinced  in  the  course  of  our  argument)  for  such  a 
constituted  Messiah,  attention  is  now  directed  to  the  important  fact,  that 
such  a  union  of  natures,  as  was  sustained  before  His  death  and  continued 
unimpaired  after  it,  evermore  remains.  This  is  a  covenanted  necessity,  for 
David's  Son,  and  no  other,  is  the  appointed  King.  Therefore  the  same 
union  is  still  so  preserved,  the  vital  relationship  of  the  two  natures  is  still 
so  continued,  that  we  have  the  same  Divine-Human  Jesus  to-day  and  ever- 
more. The  same  Jesus  that  the  disciples  saw  ascend  to  heaven  shall  come 
again  in  like  manner,  unchanged.  The  same  Son  of  David  that  ascended 
must  also  descend,  or  else  the  covenant  cannot  be  realized.  Indeed  the 
entire  tenor  of  the  Word  evinces  this,  that  since  his  ascension  there  has 
been  no  conversion  of  human  nature  into  the  Divine  (just  as  little  as  the  op- 
posite advocated  by  some,  that  in  the  incarnation  the  divine  was  converted 
into  the  human — a  transmutation  dogma  doing  violence  to  the  Infinite), 
although  Augustine  rashly  says  :  "  God  became  man  that  man  may  become 
God."  A  glorification  was  indeed  experienced,  but  this  did  not  destroy 
the  human,  just  as  the  glorification  of  the  saints  does  not  change  the  per- 
sonality and  identity  of  their  humanity.     This  is  the  more  essential  to 


Prop.  200.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  539 

notice,  since  eminent  men  overlooking  the  covenant  connection,  teach  the 
contrary. 

Thus  e.g.  Neander  (Prop.  81),  because  it  is  said  that  Jesus  is  declared  to  be  the  Son 
of  God  by  the  resurrection,  hastily  infers  that  He  loses  that  which  distinctively  apper- 
tains to  Him  as  David's  Son.  He  thus  substantially  follows  the  system  of  Schwenkfeld 
(Hagenbach's  His.  Doc,  vol.  2,  sec.  2G6),  who  asserted  :  "  All  that  by  which  Christ  is 
David's  Son,  is  laid  aside  and  lost  (in  His  divine  nature)  ;  His  whole  nature  is  renewed 
and  deified."  (Comp.  Kurtz's  Ch.  His.,  vol.  2,  p.  155).  The  Christology  of  Swedenborg 
(Hagenbach,  vol.  2,  Sec.  299)  also  teaches  that  "  the  human  which  He  received  from  Alary 
was  gradually  laid  aside  and  the  heavenly  divine  body  substituted  for  it."  Many  indorse 
such  views,  substituting  an  "ideal"  Christ  for  the  veritable  "historical"  Christ,  and 
forget  that  God's  own  oath-bound  covenant,  in  order  to  be  realized,  positive!;/  demands  the 
perpetuation  of  David's  descendant.  The  old  opinion  of  Origen  (Hagenbach,  vol.  1,  p. 
177)  that  "  the  humanity  of  Jesus  ceased  to  exist  after  His  exaltation, : '  inflicts  a  deadly 
blow  to  covenant  promise  made  to  David's  Son.  Hence  the  Spirit,  expressly  to  guard  us 
against  such  covenant  destroying  error,  teaches  us  that  when  Jesus  comes  again  He  comes 
as  (Rev.  22  :  16)  "  the  root  and  the  offspring  of  David;"  that  He  comes  to  occupy  "  the 
throne  of  His  father  David  "  (Luke  1  :  32),  because  the  covenant  made  with  David  affirms 
(as  Peter  states)  that  Jesus  after  the  flesh  should  sit  on  David's  throne.  Even  the  Jews 
held  (John  12  :  34)  "  out  of  the  law,  that  Christ  abideth  forever." 

Our  doctrine,  therefore,  is  utterly  opposed  to  the  old  but  revived  Eutychian  theory, 
that  the  human  nature  was  "  deified,"  i.e.  not  simply  glorified,  but  transformed  into 
God  ;  to  the  more  refined  notion  that  it  became  "  divine"  in  the  sense  that  it  was  so 
changed  as  to  lose  the  essence  of  the  human  body  and  could  no  longer  be  recognized  as 
related  to  David  ;  to  the  notion  of  several  bodies  (so  Weigel,  etc.),  the  mere  appearance 
of  a  body  (Docetae,  etc.),  and  all  other  theories  which  deny  a  proper  continued,  recogniz- 
able humanity.  Of  course  it  rejects  as  utterly  untenable  the  view  that  Christ  is  simply 
the  incarnation  of  the  divine  idea,  or  that  it  is  the  outgrowth  of  the  divine  in  the  human 
to  aid  the  race  in  giving  an  exemplar,  in  so  far  as  these  are  pressed  in  hostility  to  the 
covenanted  Theocratic  idea. 

Obs.  3.  Having  thus  defined  our  position,  another  step  in  the  divine 
procedure  results  as  worthy  of  special  notice  :  this  same  Jesus,  the  true 
Son  of  God  and  of  David,  so  distinctive  in  both  divine  and  human,  is  yet 
destined  to  manifest  Himself  in  a  way  (i.e.  Theocratic  order)  by  which  it 
will  be  seen  that  the  Son  of  David  is  to  perform,  in  the  future,  a  trans- 
cendant part  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Even  now  it  has  been  observed 
by  various  writers  that  the  idea  of  humanity  united  with  the  divine  and 
realized  in  Christ,  is  the  Key  to  Protestant  theology  ;  but  our  argxtment 
shows,  that  when  the  still  future  manifestation  of  the  same  is  properly 
considered,  it  forms  the  Key  of  Redemption,  perfected  salvation,  Theocratic 
relationship,  and  the  history  of  the  world.  It  is  the  goal  toward  which  all 
things  are  tending — the  culmination  of  God's  Purpose  in  government  and 
restitution. 

This  totally  disproves  the  inferential  argument  which  fills  entire  volumes  against  the 
personal  reign  of  the  Son  of  David,  as  e.g.  such  a  work  as  Carson's  The  Personal  Reign 
of  Christ  During  the  Millennium  Proved  to  be  Impossible  (London,  1873).  All  such  efforts, 
however  well  meant,  are  derogatory  to  the  Son  of  Man,  to  the  oath-bound  covenants  of 
God,  and  to  the  perfected  redemption  of  man  (which  redemption  includes  not  merely  the 
individual  but  society,  the  race  as  a  race,  and  creation).  Comp.  Props.  81,  19,  120,  146, 
152,  etc. 

Oos.  4.  From  the  Person  of  Jesus  and  His  unchangeableness,  we  deduce  : 
(1)  the  confirmation  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  veritable  Son  of  David  (to 
whom  covenanted).  He  remaining  the  unchangeable  Seed  to  whom  the 
inheritance  of  the  Kingdom  is  promised  ;  (2)  the  grandeur  of  this  King- 
dom, its  irresistible  power,  its  exaltation,  its  universality,  etc.,  in  virtue  of 


540  THE   THEOC RATIO   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  200. 

the  divine  united  with  Him  ;  (3)  the  perfect  Theocratic  rule  exhibited,  so 
that  (what  is  stated  in  the  Proposition  appears)  we  have  the  possession  of  a 
Ruler  who  is  a  real  representative  of  God — who  manifests  God  to  us  in  His 
own  Person  and  Kingship.  In  this  Theocratic  representation  alone,  do  we 
find  the  chasm  between  the  Infinite  and  Finite  completely  and  satisfactorily 
filled.  According  to  "  the  sure  mercies  of  David"  the  Finite  ever  remains 
with  the  Infinite,  and  it  is  the  pleasure  of  the  Infinite  to  glorify,  and 
manifest  itself  through,  the  Finite.  This  truth  we  gladly  accept,  for  it 
has  an  important  relation  to  the  Kingdom. 

Here  we  find  ultimately  the  old  antagonism  of  Lutheran  and  Reformed  reconciled. 
The  old  Lutheran  formula  taught  that  "  the  finite  is  capable  of  the  infinite,"  and  here  in 
the  Rulership  of  a  Person  in  whom  two  natures  are  vitally  and  indissolubly  united,  we 
find  it  true  ;  but  equally  true  is  the  apparent  paradox  of  the  Reformed  when  they  said 
"  the  finite  is  incapable  of  the  infinite,"  seeing  that  it  requires  the  union  of  two  such 
natures,  without  change,  to  effect  it — for  the  one  is  sustained  in  its  action  by  the  other, 
so  that  in  the  Rulership  — the  Theocratic  ride— the  one  cannot  be  separated  from  the 
other.  These  two  contradictory  statements  really  embrace  the  truth  in  its  totality,  and 
therefore  prevent  us  from  regarding  Jesus  as  merely  human  or  merely  divine,  but  as 
having  both  united.  This  prevents  us,  as  stated,  from  entering  the  enticing  Pantheistic 
and  mystical  regions  in  which  man  is  changed  into  God,  in  which  the  divine  exclusively 
appears,  or  in  which  the  humanity  is  thrown  aside  as  something  that  may  have  been  use- 
ful in  its  time,  but  now  is  either  unnecessary,  superfluous,  or  very  subsidiary. 

Obs.  5.  This  Kingdom  being  different  from  (although  given  and  sus- 
tained by)  the  Divine  Sovereignty  of  God  evinced  in  Creation,  etc.,  and 
being  a  restoration  of  the  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom,  which  takes  the 
place  of  human  governments,  it  follows,  that  it  demands,  in  consistency, 
the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  dun-after  of  an  earthly  Ruler,  and  this  is 
done  in  the  Person  of  "  the  Christ."  A  pure  Theocracy  requires  this  repre- 
sentation of  Rulership.  This  is  admitted  (i.e.  the  earthly  Rulership)  by 
writers  on  the  former  Theocracy,  which  we  have  shown  is  only  an  initia- 
tory form  or  a  foreshadowing  of  the  rule  of  this  Kingdom.  Kurtz  {His.  Old 
Gov.,  vol.  3,  p.  107),  speaking  of  the  former,  forcibly  says  :  "  His  inten- 
tion to  become  Israel's  King  could  only  be  understood  as  meaning,  that 
in  the  case  of  Israel,  He  would  raise  and  consolidate  His  universal  rule  into 
one  of  a  special  nature  ;  that  in  His  own  Person  He  would  undertake  the 
duties  and  claim  the  privileges  of  sovereignty,  which  He  left  in  other  cases 
to  earthly  kings.  In  a  word,  Jehovah  was  about  to  stoop  to  be  not  merely 
heavenly  but  earthly  lung  over  Israel.  So  far  as  Israel  was  a  nation,  an 
earthly  political  commonwealth,  He  did  not  refuse  to  place  Himself  in  the 
list  of  earthly  kings."  Now  in  the  change  from  the  Theocratic  to  the 
Theocratic-Davidic,  the  rights  of  God,  as  already  explained,  as  the 
Supreme  earthly  Ruler  were  retained.  The  Kings  of  Israel  acted  as  vice- 
gerents of  the  Theocracy,  and  hence  the  earthly  vicegerent,  who  acted  as 
God's  representative  in  the  Kingdom,  was  specially  anointed,  consecrated, 
or  set  apart  for  the  office  by  God  Himself,  and  was  known  by  the  honorable 
and  significant  title  of  "God's  anointed "  and  "  the  Lord's  anointed."1 
But  notice  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  anointed  for  this  purpose,  this  Theocrat- 
ic representation  assumes  its  highest  and  purest  form,  for  what  the  former 
Theocratic  King  (as  David,  Solomon,  etc.),  could  only  do  as  vicar,  by  act- 
ing as  deputy,  Jesus  Christ  performs  as  a  reed  Representative  of  God — God 
being  united  personally  with  Him.  Hence  the  glory  and  blessedness  of  this 
Theocracy. 


PEOP.  200.]  THE   THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  541 

1  Our  argument  exposes  the  absurdity  and  arrogance  of  Gentile  kings  also  (without  a 
Theocratic  claim)  assuming  to  be  such  "anointed  by  God,"  and  "  ruling  by  special 
divine  appointment."  Not  only  the  Papacy,  but  Prelacy,  etc.,  has  aided  in  keeping  up 
such  a  gloss  over  Gentile  domination.  How  God  regards  such  ruling  is  seen  from  the 
prophecies  and  the  expressive  symbolical  representations  of  "beasts,"  and  yet  such, 
under  the  professed  sanction  of  religion,  are  to  be  transformed  into  "  God's  anointed  " 
to  secure  the  reverence  of  the  multitude  (comp.  Prop.  164). 

Obs.  G.  Jesus,  therefore,  invariably  represents  Himself  as  manifesting 
the  Father;  that  whosoever  (as  e.g.  Thomas)  has  seen  Him  has  seen  the 
Father  aim  ;  that  He  is  One  with  the  Father;  that  He  is  the  expressed 
image  of  God  ;  all  which  is  founded  in  His  being  the  contemplated  Theo- 
cratic 'personage.  As  Son  of  Man  receiving  the  Kingdom  from  the  Father, 
and  as  such  performing  the  will  and  the  work  of  the  Father  in  the  King- 
dom, yet  in  connection  with  this  is  the  intimate  and  enduring  union 
of  the  Godhead  and  in  its  fulness,  so  that  this  very  Theocratic  Kingdom 
re-erected  under  His  auspices  is,  in  view  of  its  unity  and  firm  Theocratic 
position,  interchangeably  called  Christ's  Kingdom,  the  Father's  Kingdom, 
and  the  Kingdom,  of  God  and  His  Christ.  The  Theocratic  relationship 
that  the  Son  of  David  sustains  to  God  the  Father,  necessarilg  brings  forth 
this  representative  condition — one,  too,  that  is  essential  to  His  position. 

By  saying,  therefore,  that  the  Son  of  David  is  the  Representative  of  God  the  Father, 
we  mean  more  than  merely  a  delegated  Representative — we  mean  a  complete  self-mani- 
festation of  the  Father  in  the  Son,  so  that  it  will  be  true  that  he  who  seeth  the  Son  seeth 
the  Father  also.  This  manifestation  is  delicately  expressed  in  the  Greek,  as  e.g.  in 
Titus  2  :  13,  where  but  one  Greek  article  is  applied  to  both  "  God  "  and  "  Saviour" 
cornp.  Fausset's  Com.  loci). 

Obs.  7.  Consequently  attention  is  again  called  to  the  fact,  that  the 
humanity  of  Jesus,  the  groundwork  of  covenanted  promise,  is  never  lost 
sight  of,  but  is  brought  forward  in  the  most  prominent  manner  as  an  essen- 
tial factor  in  redemption.  As  the  Son  of  Man,  He  forgives  sins  and  performs 
miracles  (e.g.  Matt.  9  :  6)  ;  He  is  Lord  over  the  Sabbath  day  (Matt.  12  : 
8)  ;  He  is  the  Mighty  One  (Matt.  13  :  41)  ;  He  is  to  come  and  sit  on  the 
Throne  of  His  glory  (Math.  25  :  31)  ;  He  is  ordained  to  be  the  Judge  of 
the  World  (Acts  17  :  31).  From  these  and  similar  Scriptures,  we  find  that, 
in  the  strictest  agreement  with  the  covenant  and  the  Kingdom  promised  to 
David's  Son,  the  humanity  of  Jesus  must  be  placed  in  the  biblical  position, 
as  the  appointed  means  of  manifesting  God  to  us  Theocratically  in  purposes 
of  Salvation  still  future.  It  is  through  this  very  predetermined  Kingdom 
that  all  this  will  be  performed,  accordiug  with  the  uniform  testimony  of 
the  prophets.  Hence,  even  Fleetwood  {Life  of  Christ,  p.  105),  while 
unable  from  His  standpoint  to  make  any  use  of  it,  admits  that  the  phrase 
Son  of  Man  "  when  applied  to  our  great  Redeemer  denotes  His  human 
nature,  and  at  the  same  lime  conveys  an  idea  of  that  glorious  Kingdom  over 
which  He  was  in  His  nature  to  preside"  (comp.  Prop.  81).  It  has  already 
been  shown  that  this  title  forcibly  recalls  the  Davidic  covenant,  King  or 
Kingdom  ;  the  use  made  of  it  by  Jesus  corroborates  this,  while  the  addi- 
tions appended  by  prophecy  indicate  that  this  Son  of  Man  is,  in  the 
highest,  noblest  sense,  the  actual,  visible  representative  of  God  on  the 
earth,  so  that  when  He  returns  to  rule,  God  Himself  shall  again  Theocrat- 
ically dwell  with  man,  and  exert  a  corresponding  power  over  all  the  world. 


542  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  200. 

Obs.  8.  Hence,  too,  arises  the  sign ificancy  of  the  name  "  Immanuel " 
given  Matt.  1  :  23,  to  the  Son  of  Man.  Keeping  before  us  the  demands 
of  the  covenant,  and  regarding  the  time  of  Christ's  Sec.  Coming  as  one  of 
trouble  (comp.  e.g.  lsa.  7  :  13,  14  and  Matt.  1  :  23  with  Zech.  14,  and 
Eev.  19 — see  Props.  115,  1G0,  161, 162,  103,  etc.)  so  that  He  is  the  Deliverer, 
we  are  assured  that  the  main  fulfilment  spoken  of  by  Matthew  is  still  future. 
In  this  future  Theocratic  rule,  He  will  pre-eminently  be  "  Immanuel"  i.e. 
"  God  with  us."  The  name  is  expressive  of  this  covenanted  Kingly  posi- 
tion by  which  we  obtain  in  our  very  midst  a  powerful,  majestic,  almighty 
Euler,  who  evidences  the  same  by  perfected  salvation  and  government. 
Some,  as  Jerome,  think  the  name  denotes  divine  aid  and  protection  ; 
others,  as  Irenaeus,  the  assumption  of  human  nature  by  God,  but  while 
these  ideas  may  be  derived  from  it,  it  certainly  has  a  deeper  reference  in 
that  it  recalls,  and  compresses  into  a  single  word,  the  covenanted  Theocrat- 
ic Kingdom  in  which,  as  its  leading  characteristic,  God  shall  be  truly  and 
really  with  us.  The  name  is  indicative  of  the  fulfilment  of  covenanted 
promises  in  the  Person  of  Christ  ;  and,  therefore,  in  its  fulness  of  meaning 
is  yet  to  be  verified.  If 'significant  of  (as  Jones,  Notes,  p.  40)  "  the  incar- 
nate relation  of  Jehovah  to  His  people,"  this  will  appear  still  more  impres- 
sively when  this  same  Jesus  returns  to  manifest  and  exert  His  royal  pre- 
rogatives. 

Obs.  9.  This  subject  is  also  suggestive  why  the  Son  of  Man  is  now  placed 
at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Being  the  One  through  whom  the  Father  is  to 
be  manifested  in  the  Coming  Kingdom,  the  relation  existing  between  Cod 
and  David's  Son  is  such  that  no  honor  is  too  great  for  the  latter.  Besides 
this,  the  expressive  nearness  and  exaltation  of  this  descendant  of  David's, 
confirms  the  blessed  hope  that  such  a  representative  Kulership  is  thus 
acknowledged  and  rendered  certain.  As  our  argument  of  the  specific 
Theocratic-Davidic  Rulership  involves,  this  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father  embraces  the  inference,  that  being  the  destined  Representative 
Euler,  He  is  inferior  in  rank  to  the  Father.  This  is  fully  admitted  by  our 
opponents  (as  e.g.  Knapp,  Ch.  TheoL,  p.  355),  who  tell  us  that  He  does 
not  possess  "  full  equality  in  rank  or  dignity."  The  reason  underlying 
this,  is  because  this  Kingdom  is  something  separate  and  distinct  from  the 
Divine  Sovereignty  (Props.  79  and  80)  being  a  specific  form  of  Government 
under  the  Headship  of  a  Representative,  given  to  David's  Son,  who  acts 
only  in  the  predicted  and  covenanted  Theocratic  capacity,  and,  therefore, 
must  necessarily  ever  be  subordinate  to  the  Father  as  Paul  teaches,  1  Cor. 
15  :  27. 

Obs.  10.  The  reader  will  readily  perceive  that  with  such  a  Representative 
Euler— Theocratic  in  Person  and  Office— two  things  will  inevitably  be 
secured.  (1)  The  faithfulness  of  the  Theocratic  King.  Former  Theocrat- 
ic kings,  even  the  best  (as  David)  were  unfaithful,  swerved  from  duty, 
etc.,  and  some  even  rebelled,  but  this  One,  ever  just  and  faithful,  ever  One 
with  the  Father  a  God-man,  insures  a  reign  never  marked  by  a  mistake  or 
defect,  much  less  by  unfaithfulness.  (2)  The  stability  of  the  Theocracy. 
The  former  Theocracy  was  overthrown  because  of  the  sins  of  rulers  and 
people,  but  this  one  restored  shall  ever  remain,  being  founded  on  the 
Divine  Purpose  realized  and  exhibited  in  such  power  and  glory  that 
nothing  can  ever  shake  its  permanency  (comp.  Prop.  159). 


PEOP.  200.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  543 

Obs.  11.  Let  the  student  reflect  :  if  the  Lord  Jehovah  did  not  consider 
it  derogatory  to  His  honor  and  glory  to  act  (as  a  multitude  of  able  writers 
admit)  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly  Ruler  under  the  initiatory  form  of  the 
Theocracy,  how  then  can  it  be  derogatory  to  the  honor  aud  glory  of  the  Son 
of  Man,  David's  Son,  to  come  and  act  in  a  like  capacity  ?  This  in  itself 
should  cause  those  persons,  who  slightingly  and  dishonorably  (to  Christ) 
speak  of  this  future  reign  of  Jesus  on  earth  (as  advocated  by  us),  to  be 
careful  lest  they  be  found  treating  with  disrespect  and  contempt  the  most 
astonishing,  desirable,  and  glorious  of  God's  provisions  for  man's  welfare 
and  the  happiness  of  the  world,  and  which  immeasurably  redounds  to  God's 
praise  and  glory.     (Comp.  Prop.  203  and  204.) 


544  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  201. 


Proposition  201.  If  a  Kingdom,  such  as  is  covenanted  to  the 
Son  of  Man,  Davids  Son,  is  not  set  up,  then  God's  efforts  at 
government  in  and  tlirough  an  earthly  ruler 'ship proves  a  fail- 
ure. 

God  has  had,  a  visible  Kingdom  here  on  the  earth  ;  owing  to  the 
sinfulness  of  the  people  the  goal  contemplated  by  its  erection  was 
not  reached  ;  instead  of  such  a  Kingdom  as  would  have  been  exhib- 
ited if  the  nation  had  been  obedient  (e.g.  Ps.  81  :  8-16,  etc.),  it  was 
taken  from  them,  postponed,  and  will  only  be  restored  after  a  defi- 
nite time  fixed  by  God  ;  now  if  such  a  restoration  here  on  earth  is 
not  effected,  it  places  God  in  the  position  of  a  Ruler  idIio  in  His 
attempt  at  an  earthly  rule  has  been  defeated,  and  who  has  been 
unable  to  erect  His  Kingdom  in  a  permanent  and  universal  form. 
If  not  restored  in  greater  power  and  glory,  God*  lias  failed  to 
establish  a  Theocracy.  Well  may  it  then  be  asked,  is  not  His  own 
honor  involved  in  a  final  re-establishment  \  (Comp.  Prop.  117, 
Obs.  6.) 

Obs.  1.  Our  argument  proves  that  the  covenants,  the  prophecies,  the 
continued  incarnate  relationship  of  Jesus — in  brief,  all  that  lias  been  thus 
far  advanced — clearly  show  that  God  will  not  fail  in  His  Theocratic  Plan 
— His  proposed  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom.  A  postponement  for  the 
wisest  of  purposes,  is  no  failure.  When  contemplating  the  reasons  given 
for  such  a  postponement  ;  when  beholding  the  preparatory  provisions  con- 
stantly going  on  ;  when  seeing  the  Jewish  nation,  notwithstanding  its 
rejection  for  a  time,  remarkably  preserved  in  order  to  facilitate  such  a 
restoration  when  the  period  arrives — we  have  God  and  His  Word  fully 
vindicated  and  we  can  have  a  strong  assurance  that  His  purposes  fail  not. 
God's  pleasure  has  fixed  a  time  for  realization,  and  that  we  reverently  and 
patiently  await. 

Obs.  2.  Let  the  reader  turn  to  Prop.  200,  Obs.  5,  and  see  what  Kurtz 
(who  utters  the  views  of  many  able  writers)  says  of  God  being  "  earthly 
King  over  Israel."  Now  there  is  no  dispute  respecting  the  past  failure  of 
this  Kingdom,  arising  from  the  sinfulness  and  consequent  un worthiness  of 
the  nation  ;  and  all  allow  that  for  many  centuries  this  Theocratic  Kingdom 
has  been  overthrown  and  non-existing.  Notwithstanding  the  strenuous 
efforts  made  to  place  the  Christian  Church  in  the  room  of  this  Theocracy, 
every  candid  writer  freely  admits  that  the  previously  existing  Kingdom  no 
longer  survives,  and  that  at  the  present  God  is  not  manifested,  as  He  once 
was,  an  earthly  Ruler,   ruling  through  a  representative  as  in  the  adopted 


PEOP.  201.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  545 

Davidic  line.  Now  if  this  evermore  continues,  and  God  does  not  re-estab- 
lish Kis  Theocracy,  He  has  then  permanently  failed  in  carrying  out  His 
oimi  Theocratic  idea.  Shall  this  ever  be  said  of  God,  that  He  undertook  a 
work  that  He  cannot  accomplish,  or  that  the  sinfulness  of  man  defeated  His 
ultimate  purpose,  or  that,  unable  to  proceed  in  a  set  purpose,  He  changed 
His  Plan  to  accommodate  Himself  to  human  imperfection.  No  !  when 
God  undertakes  a  work,  we  may  well  abide  His  own  time  for  its  accomplish- 
ment. 

Take  e.g.  the  meaning  given  to  the  Theocracy  by  Fairbairn  (Typology,  p.  379),  viz., 
that  "  the  Jewish  Theocracy  was  an  attempt  to  realize,  on  the  visible,  theatre  of  the  present 
world  and  within  a  circumscribed  region,  the  idea  of  the  Divine  Kingdom,  to  establish 
a  community  of  saints."  Now  shall  this  attempt  at  a  visible  government,  uniting  State 
and  Church  in  such  a  community,  fail  ?  The  answer  is  self-evident  :  never ;  it  may  be 
delayed  in  order  to  make  provision  for  its  realization,  but  failure  is  an  impossibilitj', 
seeing  that  God  has  undertaken  this  work. 

Obs.  3.  The  Church  does  not  meet,  as  we  have  previously  shown,  the  con- 
ditions of  the  Theocracy.  The  Theocratic  incorporated  throne  and  King- 
dom of  David,  the  earthly  Ruler,  the  expressly  covenanted  promises  per- 
taining to  the  Kingdom,  are  plainly  lacking,  and  so  visibly  lacking  that  it 
is  only  by  the  grossest  violation  of  the  grammatical  sense  and  the  most 
extravagant  spiritualizing  of  covenant  language  that  men  can  even  remotely 
make  out  of  the  Church  a  Theocracy.  But  take  even  this  attempt  to  sub- 
stitute the  Church  in  the  place  of  the  Theocracy,  then  God's  effort  at 
Theocratic  rule  as  once  exhibited  proves  an  utter  failure,  simply  because 
the  Church  (however  precious  and  glorious)  fails  to  bring  out  the  peculiar, 
distinctive  features  of  the  Theocratic  rule.  Can  this  be  so?  No  !  never  ; 
the  Church  itself,  as  the  early  Church  (more  logical  and  consistent) 
believed,  is  only  preparatory  to  the  Theocracy. 

It  may  be  added,  as  history  too  plainly  attests,  that  the  union  of  State  and  Church 
does  not  meet,  owing  to  human  infirmity,  the  requirements  of  a  Theocracy,  for  wherever 
the  trial  has  been  made  the  State  has  lorded  it  over  the  Church,  bringing  her  into  servi- 
tude, or  else  the  Church  has  trampled  the  civil  rights  tinder  her  feet.  The  union,  while 
biblical  only  in  the  manner  ami  time  which  God  has  indicated,  is  unnatural  and  forced  in 
the  present  disjtensation.  Men  endeavor  to  forestall  God's  own  appointments  and  to 
antedate  the  period  and  power  designated  by  Himself,  and  thus  only  bring  calamity  and 
reproach  upon  themselves.  There  is  a  foundation  of  truth  even  in  the"extremest  Eras- 
tianism,  viz.,  that  we  are  to  derive  belief  and  worship  from  the  civil  power  ;  there  is  force 
and  pertinency  in  many  of  the  statements  of  Hooker  (Eccl.  Polity),  Grotius  (Treat,  and 
Annots.),  and  others,  but  only  as  we  refer  them  for  a  practical  application  in  the  still 
future  Theocratic  reign  of  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  in  which  State  and  Church  will  be  safely 
and  permanently  united.  To  commingle  now  things  which  are  (in  consequence  of  human 
weakness,  etc.)  opposed  one  to  the  other,  i.e.  in  interests,  aims,  motives,  results,  etc.,  is 
only  to  add  to  our  disappointments. 

Obs.  4.  God  has  instituted,  as  something  pertaining  to  Himself,  a  Theo- 
cratic ordering  ;  He  has  embraced  this  in  a  covenant,  confirmed  its  cer- 
tainty by  oath,  reiterated  His  determination  again  and  again  to  have  it 
realized,  instituted  a  series  of  preparations  having  decided  reference  to 
this  end — how  can  then  the  restoration  of  the  Theocracy  prove  a  failure  ?  It 
is  utterly  impossible.  When  in  the  Coming  Kingdom  at  the  Second 
Advent,  as  predicted,  this  "  Qod-Kiiuf  (so  Kurtz  significantly  calls  this 
Theocratic  King)  is  restored  in  actual  rule,  men  will  be  surprised  that  this 
Theocratic  feature  so  plainly  revealed  should  ever  have  been  doubted  ;  see- 


546  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  201. 

ing  that  all  things,  including  the  very  Person  of  the  Christ,  tend  to  show 
that  God's  Plan  of  Government  cannot  possibly  fail,  because  Jesus  is  most 
admirably,  most  wonderfully  fitted  to  exhibit  the  personal  supervision  of 
a  "  God-King."  Divinity,  humanity,  and  royalty  being  thus  combined  in 
the  Son  of  Man,  there  is  a  return  to  the  old  form  (i.e.  Theocratic,  with 
additions  and  changes  to  adapt  it  to  the  renewed  regime)  in  the  restored 
commonwealth  by  which  the  religious  commandments  again  become  politi- 
cal and  the  political  become  religious — in  which  the  civil,  political,  and 
religious  are  happily  blended  under  one  All-wise,  All-powerful  Theocratic 
Headship.  God's  rule  in  the  covenanted  form  cannot  fail  ;  we  must,  if 
believing  and  honoring  God,  look  to  the  future  for  its  realization. 

Obs.  5.  The  nearest  approach  to  this  Theocratic  rule  by  a  representative, 
is  that  afforded  by  the  Roman  Church,  in  its  professed  vicegerent,  the 
Pope.  But  this,  notwithstanding  its  claims,  power,  etc.,  is  an  arrogant 
imitation  and  assumption  of  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Son  of  Man, 
David's  Son.  Forgetting  under  the  favoring  Origenistic  interpretation, 
that  the  covenants  and  promises  all  delegate  this  earthly  representation  of 
God  in  a  visible  Kingdom  to  the  seed  of  David  alone,  they  assume  to  spir- 
itualize these,  making  the  reign  of  the  Son  of  Man  in  heaven,  delegating 
His  earthly  rule  to  the  Papacy,  and,  in  the  boldness  of  profanation, 
actually  proceeding  to  apply  covenant  and  prophetic  promises,  exclusively 
belonging  to  David's  Son,  to  the  Popes  personally  (even  the  titles  of  "  the 
Christ"  have  been  thus  prostituted).  Their  theologians,  seeing  in  them- 
selves more  of  the  outward  manifestation  of  a  Kingdom  under  a  consoli- 
dated form  and  guiding  head,  claim  on  this  ground  a  decided  superiority 
over  Protestantism  ;  and  that  if  it  did  not  thus  exist  in  such  a  manner,  then 
a  Kingdom  under  the  rule  of  God's  Representative  as  predicted  is  a  failure, 
for  no  such  Kingdom,  unless  in  their  Church,  can  elsewhere  be  found. 
To  this  the  Word  replies  :  it  is  not  necessary  to  look  for  it  now  existing, 
for  it  stands  postponed  until  He  comes  whose  right  it  is  to  re-establish  it. 
When  Jesus  so  plainly  predicts  its  postponement  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  it  is 
pure  assumption  in  men  to  profess  to  found  a  Theocratic  Kingdom,  in  this 
or  that  form,  before  that  Advent.  The  non-existence  of  the  Theocracy  at 
present  (as  covenanted  to  no  other  than  to  Jesus  Himself)  while  no  proof 
of  failure  to  be  set  up  at  the  time  determined  by  God  is  a  standing  rebuke 
to  the  boldness  which  can  assume  that  it  is  the  covenanted  Kingdom  itself, 
and  that  its  Popes  truly  act  in  the  place  allotted  by  God's  oath  to  David's 
Son.  Indeed,  our  entire  argument,  as  we  proceed,  is  hostile  and  condemn- 
ing to  all  these  Papal  pretensions,  showing  them  utterly  subversive  of  the 
prerogatives  belonging  to  the  Son  of  Man. 

Obs.  6.  If  we  are  never  to  see  this  Theocratic-Davidic  Kingdom  re-estab- 
lished under  the  covenanted  seed,  and  the  glorious  predictions  of  the  proph- 
ets realized  in  it,  then  God's  direct  rule,  in  its  Theocratic  outward  manifes- 
tations, has  borne  but  little  sway  in  this  earth.  Infidels,  keen-scented,  have 
seized  this  very  feature,  and  used  it  as  an  argument  against  the  Bible. 
They  contrast  the  comparatively  small  Kingdom  of  Israel,  within  a  very 
contracted  territory,  with  the  mighty  empires  which  ruled  over  large  por- 
tions of  the  earth,  and  which  actually  (permissively)  overthrew  the  Theo- 
cratic Kingdom,  and  from  such  a  comparison  draw  deductions  of  failure, 
insignificancy,  etc.     To  this  we  reply  :  (1)  we  must  allow  God  to  assign  the 


Prop.  201.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  547 

reasons  for  such  a  contracted  condition  and  the  subsequent  withdrawal  of 
His  government ;  (2)  that  in  view  of  the  reasons  given  by  Him  (sustained  by 
a  continuous  chain  of  facts,  our  faith  is  confirmed  in  the  final  renewal  and 
universal  exaltation  of  the  very  throne  and  Kingdom,  which,  because  of 
the  sinfulness  of  the  nation,  at  one  time  remained  contracted  and  inferior 
in  its  outward  dominion  and  world  relationship  ;  (3)  that  when  this 
restoration  takes  place,  the  Theocratic  rule  will  embrace  the  whole  earth, 
all  nations,  as  predicted,  and  hence  wisdom  and  prudence  teach  us  to  await 
the  development  of  God's  Purpose  in  this  direction. 


548  THE  THEOCRATIC  KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  202. 


Proposition  202.  If  the  Kingdom  of  the  Son  of  Man,  as  cove- 
nanted, is  not  established,  then  the  earth  will  lack  in  its  history 
the  exhibition  of  a  perfect  government. 

The  idea,  given  by  .God  in  His  unbounded  wisdom  and  thus  far 
developed,  of  a  "  God-King,"  alone  meets  the  notion  of  a  perfect 
government.  The  union  of  the  human  and  the  divine  in  the  Ruler, 
and  the  perfection  of  the  King  Himself,  these  form  the  solid  foun- 
dation for  a  complete  Kingdom. 

Obs.  1.  The  Bible  emphatically  teaches,  in  its  Millennial  descriptions,  a 
Kingdom  here  on  the  earth  over  man  in  the  Mesh,  which  shall  exhibit  in  a 
striking  administration  the  principles,  laws,  results,  etc.,  of  a  government 
beyond  all  others,  and  adapted  in  every  respect  to  meet  all  the  requisites  to 
secure  stability,  happiness,  etc.  (comp.  e.g.  Isa.  chs.  60,  54,  61,  etc.). 
Simply  admit  that  the  oath-confirmed  covenant  will  be  verified  just  as  it 
grammatically  reads,  and  then  notice  that  the  Son  of  Man,  as  constituted, 
will  be  this  King,  that  associated  with  Him  are  His  chosen  brethren  as 
associated  rulers,  that  the  Millennial  portrayals  describe  this  reign  as  still 
future,  and  it  will  be  seen  how  this  perfect  government  can,  and  will  be, 
realized.  On  the  other  hand,  reject  these  things,  confine  the  Kingdom  to 
the  Church,  limit  the  reign  of  the  Son  of  Man  to  Heaven,  etc.,  and  you 
have  not,  and  cannot  receive,  such  a  visible,  outward  universal  Kingdom 
or  dominion,  in  all  respects  perfectly  adapted  to  the  civil  as  well  as  the 
religions  wants  of  humanity,  as  the  Word  of  God  tells  us — if  we  take  its 
plain  grammatical  sense — to  anticipate. 

The  essential  idea  of  such  a  visible,  outward  world-Kingdom  is  strongly  advocated 
by  recent  leading  theologians,  and  the  Chiliastic  idea  (however  represented  logically  de- 
fective) is  doctrinally  incorporated  to  suit  their  systems.  Thus  e.g  Martensen  (Ch.  Bog., 
S.  281)  proclaims  his  faith,  that  Christianity  will  not  merely  be  a  "  struggling  power  in 
the  world,  but  a  world-conquering,  a  world-ruling  power  likewise."  "  The  State  and 
institutions  of  municipal  life  shall  then  be  governed  by  Christian  principle, "  etc.  But 
he  forgets  to  tell  us  how  to  reconcile  all  this  with  e.g.  S.  279,  where  down  to  the  Sec.  Ad- 
vent he  gives  no  place  for  such  a  Mill,  theory.  The  fact  is,  the  teaching  of  Scripture  is 
decisive  of  such  a  time  and  rule  coming,  and  it  is  equally  decisive  in  giving  no  such  time 
and  rale  between  the  First  and  Sec.  Advents.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  in  accord  with 
primitive  teaching  and  the  scriptural  statements,  it  must  follow  the  Sec.  Advent. 

Obs.  2.  God,  in  view  of  the  conditions  of  nature,  and  to  exemplify  His 
own  power  in  constant  impressions  upon  man,  etc.,  does  not  produce  the 
perfect  fruit  at  once  ;  His  method  of  procedure,  as  seen  in  nature  and  in 
grace,  embraces  an  ascending  scale,  the  reaching  of  an  intended  goal  by 
preparatory  processes  and  means.  This  holds  good  in  the  matter  of  this 
Theocracy.     Therefore,  considering  what  God  has  done  and  is  doing  in 


PEOP.  202.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  549 

this  direction,  we  may  well  expect  the  ultimate  completion  of  His  Plan  in 
actual  manifestation.  Otherwise,  if  G-od  is  not  again  to  be  manifested  in 
union  with  an  earthly  Euler — yea,  as  Kurtz  and  others,  is  not  to  stoop  to 
become  an  earthly  Ruler  Himself — what  avails,  and  how  are  we  to  under- 
stand, the  interest  that  God  has  once  taken  in  earthly  government.  Has 
that  interest  failed,  or,  is  the  highest  of  all  earthly  powers,  that  of  govern- 
ment, to  be  cast  aside  as  unworthy  of  God's  continued  and  special  interest? 
If  this  is  so,  then,  indeed,  earth  will  never  witness  a  perfect  government, 
simply  because  such  is  human  imperfection,  the  depravity  of  man,  the 
deceitfulness  of  power  and  corresponding  wealth,  etc.  (as  evidenced  down 
to  the  Advent  itself  in  wars,  rumors  of  war,  etc.),  that  the  help — direct — of 
heaven  is  requisite  to  lift  the  government  of  the  race  upon  a  higher  plane. 
The  Kingdom  of  the  Son  of  Man  is  alone  the  hope  of  the  world. 

Obs.  3.  The  reign  of  this  Son  of  Man  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  cov- 
enant, and  the  union  of  the  saints  with  Him  in  such  a  rule,  to  ill  alone  satisfy 
the  cravings  of  humanity  for  a  strong  and  most  blessed  government,  which 
shall  break  down  forever  the  opposing,  clashing  interests  of  nations,  dispel 
their  jealousies,  and  unite  them,  freed  from  evils,  under  one  common, 
visible,  and  accessible  Head.  Then  humanity,  both  in  Christ  and  His 
saints,  exalted  and  placed  beyond  the  evils  inherent  in  the  present  life,  still 
sympathetic  and  desirous  to  bless,  will  proceed  to  the  work  of  elevating  man, 
not  merely  in  his  individual,  but  likewise  in  his  social,  national,  and 
universal  life.  Then  that  which  the  heathen  Zeno  faintly  painted,  as  a 
longing  or  earnest  desire  of  his  heart,  will  be  abundantly  verified,  viz., 
that  "  men  should  not  be  separated  by  cities,  states,  and  laws,  but  that  all 
should  be  considered  as  fellow-citizens  and  partakers  of  one  life,  and  that 
the  whole  world  like  a  united  flock  should  be  governed  by  one  common 
law."  Plutarch  (Lives,  Alex.  i.  c.  6)  vainly  thought  that  Alexander's 
conquest  of  nations  and  uniting  them  in  one  general  empire  was  a  fulfil- 
ment of  Zeno  ;  and  others  besides  Plutarch  idly  dream  of  such  a  consum- 
mation outside  of  the  covenanted  line  of  procedure  ;  but  all  such  forget, 
that  unless  a  power  can  be  exerted  over  depraved  nature  to  restrain  or  save 
it,  and  over  nature  itself  to  restore  it  in  harmony  with  such  a  government, 
its  stability  will  be  like  Alexander's.  The  Bible  places  our  hope,  and  the 
gratification  of  the  longings  of  depressed  man,  in  the  Coming  again  of  this 
Son  of  Man  and  the  establishment  of  His  Kingdom,  for  He  is  the  rightful 
heir  to  whom  it  belongs,  and  the  One  for  whom  alone  it  is  designed  by  the 
Father. 

The  simple  faith  even  of  the  heathen  Virgil  condemns  the  belief  of  some  professed 
believers,  when  he  speaks  of  the  "  God-like  Child  "  that  shall  rule  a  reconciled  world, 
and  of  "  the  golden  race"  that  shall  arise,  uttering  the  prayer  :  "  Begin  to  assume,  I 
pray,  your  sovereign  honor,  majestic  Child.  See  the  world  nodding  with  its  ponderous 
vaults  and  lands  and  planes  of  sea — see  how  all  things  exult  in  the  age  to  come." 

Ohs.  4.  Accepting  the  phraseology  of  Ullman,  Neander,  and  others,  that 
"  Christianity  is  Christ  developing  Himself  in  humanity,"  we  add — to 
perfect  the  idea — for  the  purpose  of  its  future  visible  manifestation  in  Him 
and  His  saints  in  behalf  of  the  race  in  an  exhibited  perfect  government,  the 
highest  and  most  honorable  position  in  which  it  can  be  placed.  Now  the 
connection  with  humanity  is  only  preparative  ;  then  it  will  be  operative  on 
a  scale  that  insures  Eedemption  in  all  the  relations  of  society  and  life. 


550  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  202. 

So  also,  keeping  the  covenants  before  us,  we  receive  the  idea  "  that  Christ 
is  God-man  in  so  far  as  He  represents  in  His  own  Person  the  perfect  unity 
of  the  human  and  the  divine,"  but  we  add  to  complete  the  picture  :  which 
representation,  now  accepted  by  faith  and  made  necessary  by  covenant  and 
promise,  shall  in  due  time  be  practically  evidenced  in  His  return  and  Theo- 
cratic reign,  thus  forming  the  perfect  means  for  the  accomplishment  of  a 
perfect  end.  Reference  is  thus  made  to  these  things,  because  the  great 
design  (without  discarding  others)  intended  by  this  very  God-manship, 
viz.,  to  qualify  Him  for  His  covenanted  reign  on  the  Theocratic  throne,  is  by 
many  left  entirely  out  of  sight,  as  if  it  were  not  an  important  and  distin- 
guishing feature  of  the  Divine  Purpose,  while  from  the  covenant  stand- 
point it  is  most  essential.  Admitting,  as  nearly  all  do,  that  in  Him  at  His 
Sec.  Coming  we  find  a  perfect  God-man,  such  as  the  covenanted  mercies 
describe,  we  have  only — as  appertaining  to  the  highest  glory  of  David's 
Son — to  take  another  step  by  admitting  His  reign  and  Kingdom,  and  thus 
find  the  perfect  earthly  Kingdom  which  the  Bible  describes.  The  one 
stands  related  to  the  other  ;  the  latter  is  a  resultant  of  the  former. 

Obs.  5.  Taking  into  consideration  the  ardent  desire  expressed  by  the 
prophets,  that  this  God-man  should  show  Himself  and  reign  in  a 
glorious  manner — or  the  longings  of  the  heathen,  in  fact  including  almost 
all  men,  that  the  Divine  might  interfere  to  remove  the  present  disturbing 
elements,  and  introduce  a  reign  of  peace  and  blessedness — we  may  well  ask 
in  view  of  such  an  almost  universal  desire,  expressed  in  all  religions  and 
entertained  in  all  ages,  whether,  judging  from  the  expressed  wishes  of 
man,  enlightened  and  unenlightened,  it  is  not  a  fact  that  the  highest  possi- 
ble position  in  which  we  can  place  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  its  relation  to 
humanity,  is  that  of  regarding  it  as  a  State  or  Empire,  Theocratic 
Universal,  over  the  earth,  founded,  governed  and  developed  under  direct 
personal  divine  authority,  personally  manifested,  thus  constituting  a  per- 
fectly reliable  and  infallible  Head  and  Rule  ?  Infidelity  now  objects  to  the 
Word  on  the  ground  of  such  a  desirable  Theocratic  rule  not  being  mani- 
fested, but  overlooks  the  Record  which  promises  it,  to  supply  a  great  need. 
It  is  singular,  and  certainly  worthy  of  reilection,  that  God's  Plan  of 
Government  falls  within  the  line  of  man's  wishes,  if  we  will  only  receive 
the  covenants,  prophets  and  apostles  in  their  true  grammatical  sense. 
Judging  then  simply  from  a  long-felt  and  expressed  want  in  the  world, 
which  has  excited  the  desires  alluded  to,  it  seems  eminently  suitable  for 
just  such  a  Kingdom  under  the  Son  of  Man,  as  is  predicted,  to  be  estab- 
lished on  earth.  With  it,  any  one  can  readily  see  how  the  Redemptive 
process,  embracing  not  merely  individuals  but  the  nations  and  the  race,  can 
be  carried  on  until  it  culminates  into  completed  Redemption. 

Treatises,  tracts,  books  have  appeared  from  age  to  age  indicative  of  the  desirableness 
of  a  change  in  the  condition  of  things,  and  proposing  plans  by  which,  at  least,  it  might  be 
ameliorated.  The  advocacy  of  a  Congress  of  Nations,  a  Universal  Code  of  Laws,  a  Gen- 
eral Confederation  under  aCentral  Head,  a  Union  of  Church  and  State,  the  paramount 
and  pre-eminent  claims  of  this  and  that  church  as  a  Leader,  the  general  adoption  of  Re- 
publicanism, Education,  Philosophy,  etc.,  are  all  based  on  the  desire  to  realize  in  some 
form  or  other  such  a  position.  The  history  of  the  past  and  present  plainly  shows  the 
sad  deficiency  in  the  highest  of  human  relations,  that  of  government.  Man's  nature  and 
wdl  have  too  often  made  human  government  the  engine  of  spoliation,  oppression,  war, 
cruelty,  and  grievous  wrong  ;  and  the  very  best  are  far  from  being  free  of  injustice,  cor- 
ruption, and  bloodshed.     History,  with  its  multitudes  of  attesting  facts  of  weakness  and 


Prop.  202.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  551 

depravity,  causes  us  to  adopt,  in  view  of  the  precious  hope  of  deliverance  set  before  us, 
Dr.  Bonar's  language  :  "  Weary  of  man's  rule,  we  long  for  God's."  In  the  Church 
itself,  in  view  of  the  differences,  dissensions,  divisions,  etc.,  who  has  not  longed  for  an 
infallible  head,  teacher,  and  guide,  seeing  that  the  most  pious  and  devoted  are  thus  sep- 
arated both  in  doctrine,  practice,  and  government.  Our  hope  is  in  the  Second  Coming 
of  One  in  whom  is  lodged  all  power  and  wisdom. 

Obs.  G.  The  student  of  the  Word  will  not  fail  to  notice,  that  God's  idea 
of  a  perfect  government  embraces  the  union  of  Church  and  State,  as 
exhibited  in  the  Theocratic  ordering..  But  this,  in  order  to  be  effectual, 
must  bo  under  an  infallible  Divine  Headship.  In  the  hands  of  mortal, 
fallible  men  it  is  only  conducive  to  evil  (as  history  attests),  but  in  the 
guidance  of  God  directly  it  is  productive  of  good  and  happiness.  (Comp. 
Props.  154,  155,  205,  etc.) 

The  most  eminent  men  have  advocated,  as  the  highest  possible  development,  the 
union  of  Church  and  State,  both  forming  one,  as  e.g.  Rothe  (comp.  his  Life,  by  Nippold). 
Dr.  Arnold  (Life  of,  by  Stanley,  vol.  2,  p.  103),  in  a  letter  to  Bunsen,  says  :  "  Connected 
with  this  is  Rothe's  book,  which  I  have  read  with  great  interest.  His  first  position — 
that  the  State  and  not  the  Church  (in  the  common  and  corrupt  sense  of  the  term),  is  the 
perfect  form  under  which  Christianity  is  to  be  developed— entirely  agrees  with  my 
notions."  The  manner  of  realization,  through  the  agency  of  "the  Christ,"  has  been 
given  by  us  in  detail.  Men  have  sought  this  realization  before  the  time,  and  through 
human  agency,  and  the  result  (comp.  e.g.  Baptist  Noel's  Essay  on  the  Union  of  Church  and 
Slate,  and  others)  has  always  proven  baneful  and  one-sided.  While,  therefore,  it  is  right 
and  proper  to  oppose  such  a  union,  as  a  virtual  forestalling  of  God's  own  ordering  and 
as  a  mere  caricature  of  His  Plan,  because  of  its  invariable  painful  consequences,  it  is  an 
extreme,  on  the  other  hand,  to  assert  (as  the  Scottish  Church,  D'Aubigue's  Germ.,  Eng., 
and  Scotland,  p.  158)  that  it  never  ought  to  be  accomplished  (basing  it  on  the  passage, 
"  My  Kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,"  comp.  Prop.  109),  for  this  is  opposed  to  God  s  ulti- 
mate Purpose.  Some  writers,  totally  misapprehending  the  Theocratic  idea,  when  speak- 
iag  of  the  Millennial  Kingdom  make  (as  Baldwin  in  Armageddon,  p.  48),  in  their  imagina- 
tive Republicanism,  disunion  the  great  feature,  saying  :  "  The  disunion  of  Church  and 
State  is  the  great  prophetic  epoch  of  liberty  and  progress  according  to  both  Daniel  and 
St.  John."  The  deep  thinkers,  the  scholars,  conclude  very  differently,  and  find  that 
such  a  union  is  requisite  to  insure  the  highest  happiness  of  man  and  society.  It  would 
be  interesting  and  highly  instructive  if  some  student  would  trace  out  this  union  of 
Church  and  State,  and  how  men  attempted  its  realization  down  to  the  present.  Such  a 
history  would  have  an  abundance  of  material  to  draw  from,  starting  with  the  Theo- 
cratic idea  and  its  sad  perversions  in  the  past.  It  could  e.g.  show  what  has  taken  place 
during  the  Christian  era  ;  how  in  the  early  centuries  there  was  no  union  of  Church  and 
State,  but  the  Church  kept  in  view  its  mission  and  the  design  of  this  dispensation,  gath- 
ering out  a  people  for  His  name  ;  how  under  Constantine  a  union  was  effected,  and  its 
disastrous  results  ;  how  the  Romish  Church  incorporated  and  extended  this  idea,  claim- 
ing, however,  in  itself  both  religious  and  civil  supremacy  ;  how  Protestants  retained  the 
idea  either  in  full,  or  attempted  a  compromise  by  defining  the  rights  of  the  Church  and 
the  rights  of  the  State  :  how  the  extreme  views  were  entertained  making  the  State  God's 
Kingdom  (the  King  His  Vicegerent)  and  the  Church  a  form  of  the  State  and  under  its 
guidance,  or  declaring  both  to  be  essentially  one  with  equal  rights  ;  how  modifications 
of  these  arose  running  from  the  Territorial  (Erastian)  idea  down  to  that  of  a  mere  protec- 
torate, or  voluntary  union.  Some  of  the  most  fearful  wars  and  terrible  crimes  of 
humanity  have  sprung  from  this  fatal  and  sad  perversion  of  the  Theocratic  idea,  costing 
multitudes  of  lives,  millions  of  treasure,  and  incalculable  suffering.  When  men  ignore 
God's  Plan  and  mode  of  fulfilment,  and  attempt  to  make  their  own  and  realize  it,  the 
consequences,  owing  to  human  weakness  and  depravity,  are  always  disastrous,  no  matter 
how  good  the  men,  or  sincere  the  motives,  originating  them.  Under  the  specious  plea 
of  honoring  God  and  exalting  Christ,  man  has  been  crushed  under  a  despotism,  which 
persecuted  to  the  death.  The  blood  of  many,  many  martyrs  still  keeps  up  the  unceasing 
cry,  "How  long,  0  Lord." 


552  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  203. 


Proposition  203.  The  exaltation  of  the  Christ  is  not  lessened 
or  lowered  by  thus  referring  the  promises  of  the  Kingdom  to 
an  outward  manifestation  in  the  future. 

If  we  say  that  Christ  will  do  what  Jehovah  previously  (Prop.  200, 
Obs.  10)  performed,  this  cannot  lower  Him.  In  making  the  Mes- 
siah to  do  the  Will  of  the  Father,  whatever  that  Will  may  be,  we 
honor  Him.  In  saying  that  Jesus  will  fulfil  the  covenants  sealed 
and  attested  to  by  His  blood,  we  exalt  Him.  In  placing  Him  ulti- 
mately on  the  restored  Theocratic-Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom, 
and  through  the  same  exerting  an  universal  dominion,  we  honor 
and  exalt  His  humanity,  as  David's  Son  and  Heir,  without  dimin- 
ishing or  detracting  from  His  divine  nature  or  the  Divine  Sove- 
reignty, He  may,  in  virtue  of  the  divine,  wield  with  the  Father. 
"What  is  divine  ever  belongs  to  Him,  and  while  employed  in  the 
Theocratic  order,  is  not  bounded  by  His  rule  as  the  Son  of  Man. 

Obs.  1.  The  objection  intimated  in  the  Proposition  against  our  doctrine, 
proceeds  from  a  one-sided  view  of  the  Person  of  Christ,  exalting  the  divine 
as  if  exclusive,  and  leaving  out  the  human  as  if  it  were  no  longer  a  factor 
in  Redemption.  We  are  afraid  that  those  who  are  engaged  in  lauding  and 
magnifying  Christ  until  in  their  laudations  the  divine  is  made  to  swallow  up 
or  absorb  the  human,  under  the  impression  that  they  are  honoring  Jesus, 
will  find  themselves  seriously  mistaken  when  God  the  Father  reveals  Him- 
self, through  that  Son,  as  a  covenant-keeping  God.  Such  practically 
ignore  David's  Son,  and  thus  degrade  Him.  (1)  By  denying  His  present 
continued  Davidic  relationship  :  (2)  and  by  refusing  to  believe  that  the 
covenant  promises  can  only  be  realized  through  David's  Son. 

As  the  objection  that  we  lower  Christ  in  advocating  such  a  Kingdom  and  reign  is 
offensively  paraded  in  numerous  works  (men  thus  presuming  to  set  themselves  up  as  the 
judges  respecting  what  it  is  right  and  proper  for  Jesus  to  do  in  this  matter),  and  as  it 
undoubtedly  has  impressed  sincere  and  pious  hearts  with  prejudice  against  us,  it  is  suit- 
able that  attention  is  called  to  this  subject.  Well-meaning  persons,  unable  to  discrimi- 
nate between  the  general  Divine  Sovereignty  and  this  specially  covenanted  Theocratic 
Kingdom,  etc.,  may  honestly  entertain  such  an  opinion  to  our  discredit,  but  those  who 
know  the  foundation  of  this  reigning,  its  Theocratic  nature,  its  glorious  results,  etc., 
will  be  slow  to  receive  it.  Really  so  sensitive,  apparently,  are  some  writers  on  this  point, 
and  so  pressingly  insist  upon  the  force  of  the  objection  that  the  writer  has  sometimes 
wondered  that  in  the  excess  of  zeal  and  theory  they  have  not  combated  the  incarnation 
and  death  of  Jesus  as  a  degradation  of  the  divine.  Surely  if  the  Christ  came,  in  the  cov- 
enanted way,  as  a  babe— if  He  died  on  the  cross  after  a  life  of  humiliation — is  it  unrea- 
sonable or  a  lowering  of  Him  to  expect  His  return  in  great  power  and  glory,  and  to  antic- 
ipate a  reign  which  only  shows  Him  forth  as  the  Mighty  Redeemer  and  the  King  of  kings. 
(Comp.  also  Props.  182,  183,  196,  197,  etc.,  which  serve  to  remove  current  prejudice.) 

Obs.  2.  In  exalting  Jesus  as  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  in  His  descent  from 
David,  in  His  proper  covenanted  humanity,  we,  as  a  corresponding  result, 


PEOP.  203.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  553 

honor  the  divine  which  is  inseparably  united  with  it.  The  simple  biblical 
truth  is,  that  in  bringing  forth  the  covenanted  King,  seated  as  the  Son  of 
Man  on  the  throne  of  His  glory,  attention  is  directed  to  the  distinctive 
covenanted  Christ,  who  is  then  engaged  in  fulfilling  the  oath-bound  promises 
of  the  Father.  What  position  greater  or  more  honorable  than  this  !  Cer- 
tainly we  cannot  degrade  the  Saviour  when  we  make  His  humanity  (as  well 
as  the  divine),  as  the  Bible  does,  a  continued  and  most  important  factor 
in  the  progressive  work  of  Redemption,  actively  and  visibly  engaged  in  its 
accomplishment  (comp.  Props.  81-85  and  196-202)., 

Obs.  3.  Regarding  the  Incarnation  as  part  of  the  continuous  unfolding 
of  the  Divine  Purpose,  especially  in  reference  to  this  very  Kingdom,  we 
certainly  exalt  it,  when  showing  lioiv  necessary  and  indispensable  it  con- 
tinues to  be  in  order  to  carry  out  that  Purpose  as  contained  in  the 
covenants  and  revealed  by  the  prophets.  That  is,  the  Theocratic  ordering 
as  covenanted,  and  which  is  so  admirably  adapted  to  meet  the  longings  and 
remove  the  burdens  of  a  groaning  humanity,  cannot  possibly  be  realized 
(Prop.  120)  without  the  Advent  of  the  King  and  the  resultant  reign.  But 
He  comes  and  reigns  as  "  Son  of  Man,"  as  David's  Son  (Props.  49,  81 
and  122). 

Obs.  4.  This  reign  of  the  Son  of  Man,  including  the  fulfilment  of  God's 
pledged  Word  and  the  Salvation  of  a  world,  is  invariably  represented  in 
Scripture  as  not  only  a  constant  source  of  gladness  and  exultation  in  those 
who  participate  in  its  blessings,  but  of  praise,  honor,  and  glory  to  Christ  and 
the  Father.  Read  the  Millennial  descriptions  of  this  covenanted  Kingdom, 
and  they  are  full  of  passages  expressive  of  the  great  glory  awaiting  the  Son 
of  David  when  He  enters  upon  His  Theocratic  reign.  Surely  then  when 
the  Spirit,  knowing  the  things  of  the  future,  leads  thus  in  honoring  the 
Christ  when  ascribing  to  Him  this  future  reign,  we  cannot  mistake  in 
following  His  guidance. 

Sometimes  these  references  of  the  Spirit  are  presented  under  such  a  figurative  garb 
that  their  full  force  can  only  be  appreciated  by  close  attention.  Thus  e.g.  Isa.  4  :  2, 
■which  many  able  commentators  (comp.  Barnes,  loci)  and  others  apply  (as  also  Chaldee 
Parap.)  to  the  Messiah— some  to  His  human  nature,  others  to  the  human  and  divine  com- 
bined— and,  however  to  be  understood  in  detail,  is  highly  expressive  of  His  glory,  it 
being  declared  that  He  "  shall  be  beauty  and  glory"  (Alexander's  ver.  "  be  for  honor  and  for 
glory"),  "  excellent  and  comely"  (Barnes,  "for  exaltation  and  ornament,"  Alex.  vers,  "for  sub- 
limity and  beauty").  That  is,  He  shall  be  the  chief,  great  object  that  shall  give  honor,  dis- 
tinction, splendor,  and  glory  to  this  period  of  the  world.  It  is  suggested  to  the  critical 
reader  that  the  phrase  "  the  fruit  of  the  earth"  — which  is  by  many  critics  referred  to  the 
human  nature  of  Christ,  and  by  others  simply  to  express  in  Hebrew  parallelism  the  same 
meaning  embraced  in  the  first  member  "  the  Branch  of  the  Lord  "  (which  some  think 
denotes  the  divine  nature,  i.e.  the  Offspring  of  the  Lord,  the  Son  of  God,  and  others 
believe  is  expressive  of  the  human  nature,  the  Branch  of  David  raised  up  through  the 
power  of  the  Lord"  or  pertaining  to  the  Lord)  may  include  in  it,  as  descriptive  of  the 
Christ,  a  reference  to  His  resurrection,  being  raised  up  out  of  the  earth,  etc. 

Obs.  o.  This  reign  of  David's  Son  and  Lord,  presents  to  us  here  on  earth 
a  realization  of  that  yearning  after  a  perfected  humanity  which  has  char- 
acterized man's  history.  This  earnest  longing  is  found  in  the  oldest 
systems  of  religion  in  various  phases,  especially  in  the  man  elevated  gods 
of  Greece  and  Rome,  and  extends  down  into  the  modern  worship  of 
humanity  and  its  ideal  personification.     This  reveals  a  deep  feeling  that 


554  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  203. 

humanity  not  only  itself  needs  and  aspires  after  elevation,  but  also  the 
hope  that  in  some  form  or  other  this  will  be  attained.  Now  certainly  we 
honor  this  expressed  desire,  and  more  particularly  the  Personage  by  and 
through  Avhom  it  is  to  be  realized.  Oar  doctrine,  in  beautiful  simplicity 
and  consistency,  holds  forth  a  Redeemed  humanity  in  the  very  place  where 
the  longings  for  such  Redemption  were  so  universally  expressed  ;  and  any 
such  fulfilment,  in  the  nature  of  the  case  (as  in  the  preciousness  and. 
magnitude  of  the  work  performed,  the  deliverance  from  the  curse,  etc.), 
must  largely  contribute  to  the  glory  of  the  One  through  whom  it  is  accom- 
plished. The  Incarnation  was,  and  is  now,  most  essential  to  carry  out  the 
Divine  Purpose  ;  it  is  in  fact  the  covenanted  grand  means  introduced  to 
work  out  salvation,  and  the  work  happily  and  provisionally  begun  will  be 
completed.  This  is  clearly  seen  both  from  the  Scriptures  and  the  great 
stress  that  is  laid  upon  it  in  the  most  able  systems  of  divinity.  But  our 
faith,  gratefully  acknowledging  the  inestimable  work  already  performed  by 
this  humanity,  looks  forward  to  a  still  greater  (for  it  embraces  perfect 
deliverance  and  eternal  glory),  one  scripturally  ascribed  to  it  (as  "  the  Son 
of  Man")  when  salvation  is  to  be  completed  through  His  Sec.  Advent. 
If  tbe  humanity  is  now  exalted  in  view  of  the  past,  will  this  not  be  equally 
true  because  of  its  future  continued  participation  in  the  Redemptive  Plan. 
Gratefully,  most  reverently  do  we  receive  the  fact  that  the  humanity  of 
Christ  materially  aids — in  its  Theocratic  position — to  the  perfecting  of  the 
glorious  work,  seeing  that  in  its  visible  accomplishment  and  finished 
aspects,  it  is  something  specially  committed  to  Him  as  "  the  Son  of  Man." 
Hence,  in  holding  up  this  future  reign  of  this  Son  of  Man,  we  honor  and 
exalt  Him  as  "  the  Son  of  Man'"  and  in  Him  Redeemed  Humanity. 

It  is  a  singular  and  noteworthy  fact  that,  as  recently  insisted  on  both  by  believers  in 
Christianity  and  some  of  its  opponents,  the  idea  of  incarnation  is  "  a  want,"  "  a  neces- 
sity" fully  recognized  by  man  in  all  ages.  It  seems  a  providential  movement  that  as  the 
Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  approaches,  there  should  arise  on  all  sides  a  renewed  and  mar- 
vellous interest  in  the  Incarnation  itself.  "While  Christian  writers  dwell  upon  it  as  a  lead- 
ing factor  in  the  work  of  redemption,  and  draw  arguments  from  it  to  show  the  adaptation 
of  the  Christian  religion  to  human  nature,  the  accessibility  of  the  Godhead  through  it, 
the  relationship  it  sustains  to  divine  law,  to  the  Plan  of  Redemption,  and  to  the  race  of 
man — on  the  other  hand,  many  liberal  and  unbelieving  writers  enlarge  upon  it  in 
such  a  way,  that,  without  denying  in  direct  terms  the  Incarnation  of  Christ,  they  detract 
from  its  exclusive  Christian  or  biblical  relationship  by  endeavoring  to  show  how  the  doc- 
trine of  Incarnation  is  a  prime  element  in  other  religions.  Instead  of  concluding  how 
this  only  evinces  the  desire  of  man  to  have  God  communicate  Himself  personally  through 
humanity  as  through  an  accessible  and  satisfactory  Mediumship  adapted  to  man,  the 
latter  conclude  that  since  the  yearning  is  not  confined  to  the  Christian  religion,  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Incarnation  is  a  legitimate  deduction  of  reason  resulting  from  a  felt  "  want," 
but  endeavor  to  weaken  its  force  by  making  it  indicative  of  a  sort  of  pantheistic  relation 
to  man,  which  is  found,  more  or  less,  in  all  men.  Rome  recent  writers  (as  e.g.  Goodwin, 
Christ  and  Humanity,  1875)  while  making  Jesus  "  the  archetypal  man"  and  the  incarna- 
tion of  the  divine,  even  speak  (like  Kingsley's  Jlypatia)  of  its  pre-existence,  as  a  sort  of 
anticipative  development  or  illustration  of  the  divine  idea.  However  vitiated  as  all 
these  theories  may  be  by  a  refined  pantheistic  tendency,  by  the  assumption  of  a  divine 
common  in  all  men  but  more  strikingly  and  profusely  exhibited  in  Jesus,  by  a  complete 
ignoring  of  the  Theocratic  Plan  and  its  essential  requirement  in  the  Person  of  the  Theo- 
cratic King,  yet  in  all  of  them  it  is  fully  admitted  that  the  Incarnation  is  "  a  necessity" — 
something  required  in  behalf  of  humanity.  The  discussion  as  it  progresses  in  numerous 
able  works,  evinces  the  paramount  importance  attached  to  the  doctrine.  It  clearly  and  un- 
mistakably reveals  that  man — and  includes  the  deepest  thinkers  and  most  profound 
reasoners — feels  the  necessity  of  Deity  assuming,  or  in  some  way  identifying  Himself  with, 
humanity  in  order  to  secure  elevation  and  accessibility  unto  Him  ;  that,  in  some  form,  it 
is  a  bridging  over  of  the  chasm  now  existing  between  the  finite  and  the  infinite  ;  that  it 


Prop.  203.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  555 

is  essential  for  God  to  be  thus  manifested  in  order  to  enable  us  to  comprehend  Him,  and 
through  His  aid  to  experience  salvation  from  evil.  A  recent  Liberal  writer  (Johnson, 
Oriental  Religions,  483)  candidly  acknowledges  this,  affirming  that  it  is  requisite  to  relig- 
ious sentiment,  although  exhibited  in  various  phases  ;  that  philosophy  affirms— the  heart 
pleads— the  disciples  of  every  positive  religion  insist— and  the  devout  thinker  says  :  "  It 
must  be  so —it  is  so."  Discarding  the  pantheistic  notions  derived  from  this  fact  (as 
utterly  antagonistic  and  fatal  to  covenant  and  fulfilment)  as  unwarranted  and  opposed 
to  the  truth,  we  accept  of  this  general,  if  not  universal,  feeling  as  a  proof  that  a  want  so 
intensely  felt  and  expressed,  so  thoroughly  incorporated  with  religions,  and  so  vividly 
delineated  by  philosophy  as  essential,  is  fully  and  perfectly  met  by  the  incarnation  of  ''  the 
Christ,"  but  expressly— which,  alas  !  so  many  totally  overlook— in  His  openly  manifested 
Theocratic  position  and  reign.  May  every  reader  deeply  ponder  this  inexpressibly  pre- 
cious and  elevating  truth.  We  only  add  that  a  Theocratic  Plan  so  complete,  so  admirably 
adapted  (according  to  the  numerous  concessions  of  unbelief),  to  meet  the  wants  of  a  bur- 
dened humanity,  could  not  possibly  be  evolved  by  "  ignorant  fishermen,"  seeing  that  the 
essentials  of  a  Plan  for  Redemption  are  identical  with  those  that  the  highest  reason  affirms 
must  be  requisite  factors  in  a  satisfactory  and  perfect  work. 

Obs.  6.  In  the  Judgeship  of  Christ,  in  His  august  Kingship,  we  make 
"'  the  Man  ordained"  just  as  the  Bible  does.,  the  central  figure,  the  culminat- 
ing point  in  the  salvation  realized  in  this  Kingdom,  without  discarding 
or  lessening  the  divine  united  with  Him.  In  the  Humanity  of  the  Seed  of 
Abraham  and  David  manifested  in  the  Theocratic  order,  we  have  heaven 
and  earth  united,  indicated  by  the  predicted  ascending  and  descending 
angels  ;  we  have  the  otherwise  invisible  God  dwelling  with  man  (shown  by 
the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  John,  etc.)  bestowing  the  Adamic  blessings  once 
forfeited  by  sin  ;  and  we  have  man  and  the  earth  restored  to  the  goal  origi- 
nally intended.  In  this  reign  we  have  the  earthly  brought  up  to  the  level  of 
the  heavenly,  so  that  God's  will  is  done  on  earth  as  in  heaven,  and  the 
world,  redeemed  from  the  torturing  power  of  the  curse,  exults  in  more 
than  Paradisiacal  blessings.  Surely  in  all  this  we  honor  the  Son  and  the 
Father  ;  we  exalt  and  magnify  in  their  ample  and  veritable  realization  "  the 
everlasting  Covenant."  Let  no  one,  on  this  ground,  censure  us  for 
returning  to  the  early  Church  doctrine,  in  which  is  advocated,  that  finally, 
at  the  Second  Advent  of  the  Son  of  Man,  David's  Son,  the  longing  of  ages, 
the  feeling  of  the  successive  generations  after  a  revealed  Incarnation  of  God 
— openly  manifested  in  regal  power — will  be  fully  realized  ;  not  in  the  now 
vain  effort  of  man  to  find  it  in  man  himself  as  an  outgrowth  of  Deity, 
not  in  the  finding  of  Gocl  in  nature  and  hence  in  man  as  the  highest  exhibi- 
tion of  nature,  but  in  the  Man,  Jesus,  in  and  through  whom  the  Father  is 
seen,  in  and  through  whom  perfected  man  is  beheld,  and  in  and  through 
whom  man  is  elevated  to  the  dignity  of  a  recognized  sonship  with  God. 

From  all  this  the  reader  can  judge  the  propriety  of  a  writer  speaking  of  "  the  low  and 
paltry  conceptions  of  Millenarians,  which  they  have  formed  of  the  Sec.  Advent,"  when 
we  thus  introduce  and  honor  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenants,  the  faithfulness  of  the 
Father,  the  power  and  blessed  >eign  of  Jesus,  the  reign  of  the  saints,  the  realization  of  a 
glorious  dispensation,  the  removal  of  the  curse,  the  rescue  of  the  human  race,  the  resto- 
ration and  exaltation  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  bestowal  of  Millennial  blessedness.  Dr. 
Berg  (Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus  Christ  not  Pre-MUlennial)  declares  that  if  Jesus  thus  returns  and 
reigns  it  produces  "a  second  humiliation,"  that  He  must  "  lay  aside  His  glory,"  that  He 
will  dwell  again  "  upon  a  sin-cursed  earth"  "  amid  scenes  of  sin,  suffering,  and  death," 
etc.  This  is  taking  not  merely  a  superficial,  but  a  low,  degrading  view  of  Christ's  inher- 
itance, power,  and  glory.  It  is  virtually  degrading  what  the  Scriptures  eidogize  in  the 
highest  possible  terms  ;  it  is  ignoring  the  praises  tendered,  because  of  it,  by  the  "  great 
voices,"  Rev.  11  :  15-18,  and  19  :  5,  6.  On  the  other  hand,  Van  Oosterzee  (Oh.  Dog.,  vol. 
2),  advocating  the  Mill.  Kingdom  as  entertained  by  us,  says  :  "  Such  a  manifestation  we 
may  not  expect  before  the  return  of  the  Lord,  but  after  this  return  we  regard  it— even 


556  THE   TIIEOCKATTC   KINGDOM.  [PKOP.  203. 

apart  from  the  letter  of  Scripture — as  on  internal  grounds,  and,  moreover,  as  in  the  highest 
degree  worthy  of  God."  Dr.  Inibrie  (The  Regeneration,  Pre-Mill.  Essays,  p.  159),  after  forci- 
bly presenting  our  doctrine,  asks  :  "  And  what  now,  in  the  presence  of  all  this  concur- 
rent testimony,  is  the  objection  to  this  view  so  plainly  written  ?  The  objection  is,  alas  !  • 
that  it  is  a  carnal,  earthly-minded  view.  Alas  !  Alas !  Yes,  says  the  objector,  that 
plain  meaning  is  just  the  view  which  the  old  Jews  in  Christ's  time  held.  It  is  a  carnal ' 
view,  and  as  such  was  rebuked  by  Christ.  How  strangely  must  the  plain  declarations  of 
Scripture  lead  astray,  if  this  is  the  case  !  But  the  objection  is  unfounded.  It  is  not  a 
carnal  view,  nor  was  it  ever  rebuked  by  Christ.  Is  it  carnal  to  look  for  the  return  of  the 
Lord  from  heaven  ?  or  carnal  to  wish  to  see  all  the  nations  walking  in  holiness  before 
the  Lord  ?  or  to  see  Israel  pre-eminent  in  holy  service  before  the  Lord  ?  or  all  the  earth 
like  the  garden  of  the  Lord  ?  What  is  meant  by  carnal  ?  Does  it  mean  that  all  this  is 
associated  with  this  earth,  and,  therefore,  carnal  ?  If  this  be  meant,  and  if  contact  with 
the  earth  makes  carnal,  then  Christ  must  have  been  carnal  in  living  here  ;  and  Adam  in 
his  innocence  carnal,  simply  because  he  lived  in  Eden  on  earth.  But  the  earth  was 
made  good  by  God  ;  and  the  renewed  earth  will  speak  His  praise  as  the  dwelling-place  of 
His  people."  A  careful  scrutiny  of  the  Word  shows  that  the  only  carnality  that  Jesus 
and  the  Apostles  rebuke  is  that  which  utterly  unfits  man  for  this  Theocratic  Kingdom, 
to  have  part  in  the  first  res.,  the  reign,  and  the  renewed  earth.  With  the  Jew  it  is  that 
adhesion  to  the  flesh  which  causes  him  to  believe  that  as  Abraham's  child  he  will,  with- 
out repentance  and  faith,  without  having  Abraham's  Godfearing  and  loving  spirit,  be 
heir  of  this  Kingdom  ;  with  the  Gentile  it  is  that  subserviency  to  the  flesh  that  it  causes 
him  to  hope  that,  without  a  change  of  heart,  without  a  forsaking  of  sin  and  a  cleaving 
to  holiness,  he  can  enter  this  Kingdom.  Such  carnality  is  steadily,  unswervingly  cen- 
sured, denounced,  and  condemned.  But  that  which  redeems  and  exalts  humanity, 
which  delivers  the  creature  and  elevates  the  world,  which  evidences  the  power  and  pre- 
ciousness  of  Redemption,  which  contributes  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  the  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  very  opposite  of  carnality,  and  those  who,  ignorantly  or  wilfully, 
mistake  the  one  for  the  other  misapply  the  most  ravishing  promises  of  the  Scriptures. 


PEOP.  204.]  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  557 


Proposition  204.  Such  a  vieio  of  the  Kingdom  gives  definite- 
ness  and  a  continued  exaltation  to  the  human  nature  of  Christ, 
and  indicates  the  majestic  relationship  that  it  sustains  through- 
out the  ages  to  the  race  of  man. 

Our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  covenanted  to  David's  Son,  to  be 
manifested  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  (1)  makes  much  of  the  humanity  of 
Jesus,  the  same  humanity  derived  at  His  birth  in  David1  s  line,  and 
necessarily  continued  as  such — subject  only  to  glorification  to 
qualify  it  the  more  for  its  ever-enduring  position — conditioned  by 
the  covenants  and  promises.  It  distinctively  embraces  the  Coming 
Son  of  Man  as  David's  Son  and  Lord,  and  definitely  attributes  to 
His  human  nature  its  just  and  ever-sustained  covenant  relationship 
to  David.  (2)  In  virtue  of  this,  and  His  receiving  the  Kingdom  of 
covenant,  and  ruling  over  it  as  such  a  Son  of  Man,  His  Headship 
over  the  race  as  the  Second  Adam  is  also  fully  recognized  and 
confirmed.  (Comp.  Prop.  82.)  (3)  This  opens  before  us  the  sublime 
view  of  Christ's  majestic  relationship  during  the  coming  ages  to 
the  race  of  man  and  the  world. 

Obs.  1.  If  the  Incarnation  was  the  medium  through  which  (John  14  :  9) 
the  Father  is  manifested  to  men,  will  it  not  continue  to  be  so  at  Christ's 
"  appearing  and  Kingdom  ;"  if  it  was  the  most  stupendous  fact  in  the 
history  of  the  world,  will  it  not  remain  such  and  become  evermore  remark- 
able (because  of  blessings  received  through  it),  in  its  continued  manifesta- 
tion in  a  glorified  form  in  the  future  Kingdom  belonging  to  it  by  Divine 
prerogative  ;  if  the  moral  purposes,  involving  principles  of  law  and  govern- 
ment, enshrouded  in  and  flowing  from  it,  make  it  the  wonder  of  men  and 
angels,  the  object  of  joy  and  admiration,  will  it  not  ever  continue  to  be  such 
when  specially  held  up  to  the  gaze  of  heaven  and  earth  in  its  exalted 
Kingly  position  of  David's  successor  attaining  world-wide  dominion  ;  if  it 
is  related  to,  and  identified  with,  salvation,  and  comes  to  perfect  that 
salvation,  will  it  ever  be  less  related  and  identified  when  it  ennobles  and 
enthrones  humanity  by  union  with  it  in  the  covenanted  manner  of  the 
Kingdom  ?  No  !  the  Incarnate  God,  the  Redeeming  Man,  the  Divine- 
human,  the  Seed  of  Abraham  and  David,  the  Theocratic  King,  forever 
remains  the  same  distinctive  Jesus,  who  in  His  predicted  Kingly  office  as 
the  Covenanted  Ruler  proclaims  and  exerts  His  Redemptive  power  over 
the  whole  world. 

Obs.  2.  This  is  in  direct  contrast  with  the  prevalent  theory,  which  makes 
the  human  nature  very  prominent  in  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus,  less  so 
after  His  ascension,  and  still  less  after  the  judgment  day.  Indeed  after 
the  latter  period  it  seems  to  occupy  a  very  subordinate  position  and  has 


558  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  204. 

lost  in  a  manner  its  significancy  and  value.  Even  such  an  able  writer  as 
Neander  discards  "  all  earthly  relations"  pertaining  to  Davidic  descent 
after  the  resurrection.1  Departing  from  the  plain  teaching  of  the  covenants 
and  predictions,  these  theologians  profess  that  nothing  is  known  or  stated 
respecting  its  position  after  this  epoch,  and  stress  alone  is  laid  on  the 
divine  nature.  This  attitude  evinces  a  serious  defect ;  for  it  is  scarcely 
conceivable  that  an  Incarnation  so  intimately  connected,  and  represented 
as  perpetually  blended,  with  the  Kedemption  of  man,  is  to  be  considered, 
at  any  time  in  the  future,  as  occupying  a  less  important  relationship  to  man 
or  the  dignity  and  honor  of  Jesus.  A  retrogression  is  unreasonable  and 
derogatory  to  "the  Christ;''  once  Theocratic  King,  He  ever  remains  such 
— for  from  the  express  teachings  of  the  covenants,  prophets,  apostles,  and 
Jesus  Himself,  we  must  believe  (as  has  in  detail  been  shown)  that  its  most 
glorious  manifestation,  in  behalf  of  happiness  and  glory,  is  yet  in  the 
future  after  His  Coming  as  "the  Son  of  Man." 

1  It  might  be  regarded  as  invidious  to  quote  from  the  writings  of  men  whom  the 
author  highly  esteems,  and  who  themselves  love  and  honor  Jesus.  It  is  sufficient,  how- 
ever, to  establish  our  position  by  referring  to  works  of  Sys.  Div.,  which  distinctively 
teach  that  the  rule  of  Jesus,  as  the  Son  of  Man,  shall  end  (comp.  Prop.  15'J).  This  in- 
volves that  ultra  subordination  and  consequent  ignoring  of  the  humanity.  Thus  e.g. 
Knapp  (<Jh.  Theol.,  p.  352)  asserts  :  "  It  appears  that  the  government  which  Christ  as  a 
Man  administers  in  heaven,  will  continue  only  while  the  present  constitution  of  the 
world  lasts.  At  the  end  of  the  world,  when  the  heavenly  state  commences,  the  govern- 
ment which  Christ  administers  as  a  Man  shall  cease,"  etc. 

Obs.  3.  The  subordinate  (necessarily  owing  to  the  Theocratic  ordering 
being  founded  on  the  divine  sovereignty  of  the  Father)  condition  of  the 
human  nature  of  Christ  in  the  future  ages  is  presented  in  the  interpretation 
of  1  Cor.  15  :  24  (which  is  examined  and  applied  under  Prop.  159).  In 
accordance  with  the  almost  general  exposition  of  this  passage,  while  indeed 
in  the  minds  of  many  there  is  a  rejection  of  the  idea  of  a  removal,  or 
putting  off,  or  annihilation  of  the  human  nature,  yet,  those  who  receive  it 
are  forced  to  make  it  consist  in  its  laying  aside  some  of  its  honor,  or 
dignity,  or  position,  or  power,  in  a  withdrawal  from  a  Kingdom  over  the 
Redeemed  (although  some  still  insist  that  somehow  "  the  Christ"  reigns 
but  indefinitely  expressed  or  referred  to  the  divine  nature),  or  in  its 
occupying  a  lower  grade  of  prominency,  being  swallowed  up  or  over- 
shadowed by  the  divine.  In  all  this  there  is  a  vagueness  and  a  lack  of 
consistency,  as  well  as  a  lowering  (unintentional)  of  the  majesty  of  Christ 
as  David's  Son,  saddening  to  witness.  On  the  other  hand,  our  argument, 
fortified  step  by  step  with  God's  own  Word,  insists  upon  the  con- 
tinued, undiminished  exaltation  of  the  human  nature  of  Jesus  in  its  Kingly 
office,  not  only  because  of  its  inseparable  union  with  the  divine  and  its 
requisition  to"  constitute  "the  Christ,"  but  because  in  no  other  way  can 
the  covenants  and  promises  be  realized,  the  efficacy  of  the  Second  Adam- 
ship  be  shown,  and  the  perfection  of  Redemption  be  exhibited.  We 
advocate  not  merely  the  eternal  glorification  of  the  human  nature,  but  its 
future  revelation  and  the  presentation  to  it  (Props.  81-84)  of  the  actual 
visible  Sovereignty  of  the  world,  from  which  it  is  never  displaced,  as  will 
be  seen  when  we  speak  of  the  perpetuity  (Prop.  159)  of  the  Kingdom. 

Obs.  4.  Considering  the  highly  important  part  that  this  human  nature 
of  Jesus  has  yet  to  perform  in  the  scheme  of  Redemption  and  in    the 


Prop.  204.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  559 

history  of  the  world,  it  is  a  sad  defect  in  those  learned  and  valuable  works 
relating  to  the  life  and  Person  of  "the  Christ'1  (as  e.g.  Neander's, 
Ullman's,  Lange's,  Dorners,  etc.),  that  they  confine  themselves  almost 
exclusively  to  the  First  Advent,  to  the  intermediate  period  in  heaven,  and 
to  the  present  dispensation  in  order  to  assign  the  reasons  why  that 
humanity  was  taken,  and  to  describe  the  results  that  shall  How  from  it. 
The  Sec.  Advent  with  its  accompaniments,  while  stated  in  part,  is  repre- 
sented as  divine,  and  the  continued  Humanity  and  its  work  for  the  ages 
is  either  passed  by  or  dismissed  with  a  few  general  remarks.  Ignoring  the 
covenants  in  their  plain  grammatical  sense,  overlooking  that  the  future 
Kingdom  is  specifically  promised  to  the  Son  of  Man,  the  most  majestic  and 
magnificent  period,  associated  with  the  Person  of  the  Christ,  is  left  un- 
noticed, notwithstanding  the  decided  references  to  His  relationship  to  the 
Kingdom  after  His  Sec.  Advent  in  the  character  of  David's  Son.  In  their 
estimation  of  the  Christ,  the  divine  so  preponderates  that  it  virtually 
places  Him  in  a  position  directly  opposed  to  the  covenants  ;  the  distinctive 
Christ  is  lost  in  the  divine  :  the  rule  of  David's  Son  is  utterly  absorbed  in 
that  of  God  alone  ;  and  the  Divine  Sovereignty  is  mistaken  for  the  spe- 
cially covenanted  dominion  offered  and  bestowed  upon  the  Seed  of  David. 
Alas  !  how  able  men  desiring  to  honor  "  the  Christ,"  unintentionally 
reduced  the  glory  pertaining  to  Him. 

Obs.  5.  Some  systems  of  theology,  rightfully  apprehending  the  impor- 
tance of  the  Incarnation  in  the  Plan  of  Redemption,  and  impressed  by  the 
great  stress  laid  upon  it  in  Holy  Writ,  endeavor  to  rescue  it  from  the 
neglected  or  one-sided  position  into  which  it  had  fallen,  but  are  themselves 
led,  by  ignoring  its  covenanted  relationship  to  the  Kingdom,  into  another 
extreme,  viz.,  that  the  Incarnation  in  some  mystical  but  real  manner  is 
transfused  into  every  believer.  This  is  virtually  a  transformation  of 
believing  men  into  so  many  subordinated  Christs.1  The  Christ  as  God- 
man  is  not  transfused  into  others  in  His  incarnated  capacity,  for  this  is 
opposed  alike  to  Revelation,  specific  covenant  and  experience.  The  one- 
ness, union,  fellowship,  etc.,  of  believers  with  Christ,  however  intimate, 
does  not  require  this,  for,  as  the  Bible  explains  itself,  this  oneness,  etc., 
consists  in  the  members  being  made  like  unto  the  Head  morally  (i.e.  possess 
same  characteristics,  same  mind  or  spirit,  etc.),  and  finally  through  the 
power  of  the  resurrection,  a  likeness  of  glorified  form.  This  theory,  honor- 
able to  the  idea  of  Incarnation,  is  defective  since  we  must  await  the  Sec.  Ad- 
vent to  realize  (even  in  resurrection  power  and  Theocratic  rule)  the  practical 
relationship  that  the  humanity  of  Jesus  sustains  to  the  race  as  a  race  in 
the  form  of  the  covenanted  blessings,  which  can  only  now  be  anticipated 
by  faith  and  hope. 

1  This  theorf  is  tersely  and  forcibly  stated  by  Rev.  S.  Miller  (Treat,  on  Mercersbunj 
Theol.,  p.  24,  etc.)  as  one  in  which  believers  at  present  "  partake  of  Christ's  humanity." 
For  the  feeling  which  seeks  to  exalt  the  humanity  of  Jesus  we  have  high  respect,  but 
object  to  the  philosophical  (after  the  Hegelian  school)  manner  in  which  it  is  incorpo- 
rated, and  which,  stripped  of  its  surroundings,  resolves  itself  into  a  very  refined  Chris- 
tianized Pantheism.  (Comp.  Dr.  Dorner's  criticism  of  Rev.  Miller's  work.)  This  view 
is  also  seriously  defective  because  (1)  it  too  much  spiritualizes  the  covenants  ;  (2)  it 
ignores  the  relation  that  the  Incarnation  sustains  to  the  covenanted  Kingdom  (applying 
it  to  the  present  Clmrch,  etc.)  ;  (3)  it  greatly  applies  to  the  present  time  promises  relat- 
ing to  the  future  ;  (4)  it  overlooks  that  the  power  of  the  resurrection  and  an  exaltation  in 
this  Kingdom  are  recpiisite  to  secure  a  likeness  to  Jesus,  such  as  is  contained  in  many 


560  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  204. 

promises.  Beautiful  and  attractive  as  the  theory  is  to  some  minds,  it  is  likewise  opposed 
to  Christian  experience,  seeing  that  the  consciousness  of  believers  only  attests  to  a  moral 
work  wrought  in  the  heart,  while  the  body  may  be  sinking  into  decay  under  the  curse. 
Redemption  for  the  whole  man  is  only  promised  through  the  resurrecting  power  of  Jesus. 

Obs.  6.  Passing  by  as  utterly  unworthy  of  reply  the  coarse  attacks  on  the 
Incarnation,  it  is  proper  to  pause  and  notice,  briefly,  another  and  more 
insidious  one.  A  modern  party,  rejecting  the  denial  of  the  Supernatural 
and  willing  in  some  form  to  receive  the  doctrine,  arrays  itself  in  professed 
garments  of  light,  and  with  plausible  words,  claims  the  Incarnation  as 
"  the  law  of  universal  humanity — the  identical  oneness  of  God  and  man," 
and  proceeds  on  this  hypothesis  to  absorb  not  only  Christ,  but  all  men 
into  "the  Absolute."  This  with  some  modifications,  but  Pantheistic, 
withal,  is  eloquently  interwoven  into  various  theological  systems  and  intro- 
duced into  some  church  histories.1  The  result  is  that  Incarnation  is 
represented  as  a  progressive  work,  and  which  finally  results  in  swallowing 
up  the  individuality  into  "  the  Absolute."  The  vaguest  of  dreams,  deemed 
sublime,  are  substituted  for  the  plain  biblical  doctrine,  and  instead  of  the 
covenanted  Humanity  in  its  future  manifested  position  and  glory,  we  are 
lost  and  dazzled  in  speculations  concerning  "  the  Absolute."  The  biblical 
conception,  simple  and  grand  in  its  Theocratic  ordering,  is  very  diverse 
from  the  mystical  and  philosophical  conceptions  adverted  to  ;  the  one 
brings  God  as  a  Person,  a  Ruler,  occupied  in  blessing  man,  near  to  man — the 
other  diffuses  God  among  men  and  leaves  an  indistinct  conception  to 
stand  for  God  ;  the  one  presents  in  simple  terms  a  Theocratic  King  in  the 
form  of  man  produced  by  Supernatural  union  of  the  two  natures,  in  all 
respects  adapted  to  secure  the  welfare  of  man — the  other  places  this  Theo- 
cratic ordering  in  the  race  of  men,  which,  in  connection  with  all  other 
things,  in  its  aggregate  forms  a  kind  of  Pantheistic,  Impersonal  God,  with 
none  of  the  necessary  requisites  to  meet  the  heart,  longings,  practical 
wants,  etc.,  of  a  suffering  humanity. 

1  Comp.  also  the  transmission  of  Christ's  incarnation  to  His  followers  by  the  French 
critical  school  (as  e.g.  Reville  and  others)  in  that  Cod  reveals  Himself  in,  and  identifies 
Himself  with,  every  man  who  receives  the  truth  as  they  understand  it.  Theo.  Parker 
(Dis.  on  Matters  Per.  t<>  Relig.,  p.  478)  extends  this,  saying  :  "  The  divine  incarnation  is 
in  all  mankind."  The  Hegelian  philosophy  first  systematized  this  incarnation  idea  and 
by  having  a  God  manifested  primarily  through  man  and  secondarily  through  nature,  it 
was  easy  to  resolve  all  things  into  "  the  Absolute, "  and  to  have  "  the  Absolute"  exhibit- 
ing Himself  in  all  things.  Writers  of  this  description  are  exceedingly  fond  of  a  high- 
sounding  verbiage  profusely  given,  but  which  convey  anti-scriptural  ideas. 

Another  extreme  is  presented  by  Lincoln  (Lects.  on  the,  Epis.  of  St.  John,  p.  120),  who 
repudiates  as  an  error  "  that  the  Lord  Jesus  coming  into  the  world  identified  Himself 
with  the  human  race.  No  !  it  was  in  deatn  and  resurrection  He  has  got  His  people  iden- 
tified with  Himself.  Apart  from  death  He  has  not  reached  lis.  And  when  they  invent  a 
religion  which  links  Him  in  with  us  because  He  took  human  nature,  they  forget  the  fact 
that  He  was  a  holy  man,  and  that  we  are  not  by  nature  holy  men,  but  wretched  sinners." 
Lincoln,  in  his  eagerness  to  protect  the  results  of  Christ's  mission  to  believers  (which 
pertains  to  them  who  accept  the  truth  in  obedience)  forgets  (1)  that  the  connection  of 
Jesus  with  humanity  is  a  real,  actual  one,  being  "  a  man,"  a  descendant  of  David  "  ac- 
cording to  the  flesh  ;"  (2)  that  this  is  an  essential  preliminary  to  the  work  of  Redemption  ; 

(3)  that  this  alliance  will  only  be  saving  to  those  who  acknowledge  His  claims,  etc.  ; 

(4)  that  even  believers,  the  most  eminent,  can  bear  no  comparison  to  the  purity  and  sin- 
lessness  of  this  Jesus.     Hence  his  position  is  one-sided. 

Obs.  7.  Admitting  that  Christian  philosophy  has  done  much  to  heighten 
and  advance  the  idea   of   Incarnation    as   a   necessary  and  indispensable 


PEOP.  204.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  561 

adjunct  to  Eedemption,  yet  such  a  philosophy  has  too  often  taken  a  low 
and  one-sided  view  of  the  practical  results  of  the  Incarnation.  The  simple 
fact  is,  that  the  philosophical  truth  lying  at  the  basis  of  the  Incarnation  is 
found  not  merely  in  the  provision  made  for  our  salvation  in  the  birth,  life, 
death,  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  this  Jesus,  but  in  the  bestowal  of  the 
covenanted  requirements  in  order  that  He  might  be  properly  constituted 
Theocratic  King,  and  in  what  that  humanity  has  yet  to  perform,  in  fulfil- 
ment of  covenanted  promises,  in  the  ages  to  come.  To  view  only  what  has 
been  done  and  what  is  now  progressing,  is  to  see  one  side  of  the  truth  ;  but 
to  look  in  addition  at  what  shall  be  done  in  the  future,  and  to  combine 
these,  is  to  grasp  the  whole  truth.  Consequently  any  theorizing  respecting 
the  Incarnation  which  leaves  out  the  greater  part  of  the  design  contem- 
plated, the  most  honorable  purpose  intended  by  it  (and  distinctly 
announced  in  the  covenant)  must  necessarily  prove  defective. 

That  is,  it  confines  itself  too  much  to  the  present  dispensation  and  to  the  relieving  of 
spiritual  wants,  and  overlooks  the  grand  work  to  be  performed  hereafter.  This  is  even 
seen  in  the  positive  ignoring  of  a  still  future  Kingdom  pertaining  to  "  the  Christ,"  and 
of  the  Redemptive  work  exercised  over  man  and  Creation  during  that  period.  Hence 
Seiss  (Apoc,  p.  73)  justly  observes  :  "  It  is  a  mischievous  error  to  suppose  that  the  Son  of 
God's  assumption  of  human  nature  was  only  for  the  immediate  private  end  of  redeeming 
fallen  man— a  mere  phenomenon  in  Godhead's  ever  busy  administration — a  simple  act 
the  like  of  which  may  have  been  before,  or  may  be  again.  It  is  the  abiding  miracle  of 
eternity.  It  is,  and  was  meant  to  be,  a  thing  of  abiding  permanence,  the  eternal  contin- 
uity of  which  is  as  vital  to  the  everlasting  future  of  the  redeemed,  and  the  great  purposes 
of  God,  as  the  continuity  of  creative  power  is  to  the  preservation  of  the  universe.' ' 

Obs.  8.  The  quite  early  Church  (during  the  Chiliastic  period)  preserved  a 
strictly  logical  and  consistent  attitude  respecting  the  humanity  of  Christ. 
This  arose  from  ever  keeping  in  view  its  covenanted  aspect  and  insisting 
upon  its  ever  retaining  the  same  in  the  Theocratic  rule.  It  is  sometimes 
alleged  that  the  apostles,  and  their  immediate  successors,  had  no  phi- 
losophv  or  scientific  skill  in  presenting  truth,  but  as  the  conflict  between 
false  philosophy  and  Christianity,  between  false  science  and  religion,  goes 
on,  the  most  profound  thinkers  begin  to  see  and  to  confess  that  they 
exhibited  a  correct  philosophical  knowledge  and  a  real  scientific,  logical 
spirit,  when  they  state  as  leading  facts,  and  ever  keep  in  view  as  funda- 
mental axioms,  that  Revelation  is  the  only  source  of  all  truth  which 
immediately  concerns  Redemption  ;  that  the  covenants  of  God  will  be 
realized  just  as  recorded  in  that  Revelation  ;  and  that  David's  Son,  in 
connection  with  the  Divine  inseparably  united  with  Him,  is  the 
appointed  instrumentality  by  which  all  will  be  accomplished.  Sound 
philosophy  must  run  in  the  channel  that  God  has  indicated,  i.e.  in  the 
covenanted  way,  and  then  it  can  both  decidedly  and  forcibly  bring  the 
Divine  and  human  into  an  intimate  and  living  relation,  and  show  how 
deliverance  to  man  and  creation  is  to  be  effected. 

This  adhesion  to  the  covenanted  Person  of  "  the  Messiah"  gives  us  a  clew  not  only 
to  their  defence  of  the  Person  of  Christ  against  the  attacks  levelled  in  opposition  to  the 
humanity  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  the  divine  on  the  other,  but  to  the  fact,  noticed  by 
Neander,  that  the  Chiliasts  were  exceedingly  hostile  to  the  Gnostics.  Thus  e.g.  Neander 
(Gh.  His.,  p.  362)  says  that  while  Justin  opposed  the  false  Jewish  notions,  he  was  mdder 
toward  them  than  to  the  Gnostic  sects.  The  reason  is  found  in  this  :  Gnosticism,  less 
than  these  Jewish  errorisfs,  gave  no  distinctive  features  as  covenanted  to  "  the  Christ, 
and  hence  allowed  no  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  as  the  sense  demanded. 


562  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  204. 

Obs.  9.  Lecky  and  others  endeavor  to  detract  from  the  biblical  statement 
of  Redemption,  its  importance  and  greatness,  because  of  the  smallness  of 
the  earth  compared  with  the  universe.1  This  reiteration  of  an  old  objection, 
urged  by  Freethinking,  has  led  others  to  make  concessions  (such  as  unduly 
pressing  the  Divine  to  the  practical  neglect  of  Christ's  humanity,  trans- 
planting Christ's  Kingdom  and  His  saints  to  some  central  point  of  the 
universe,  substituting  the  Divine  Sovereignty  over  all  worlds  for  a  The- 
ocracy adapted  to  the  world,  etc.)  which  are  utterly  un scriptural.  The 
concessions  reject  the  letter  both  of  covenants  and  promises,  and  so  spirit- 
ualize them  that  they  may  be  applied  or  accommodated  to  an  exalted  position 
in  the  universe,  supposed  to  be  necessary  by  conceptions  of  the  astronom- 
ical idea.  But  such  an  attitude  is  highly  injurious  to  the  truth  and 
derogatory  to  the  Son  of  Man.  The  Bible  deals  almost  exclusively  with 
this  world — this  earth,  and  not  with  others,  or  the  universe.  It  is  no 
treatise  of  astronomy,  and  it  never  professes  that  this  earth  is  greater,  or 
that  it  occupies  a  more  important  position  in  Creation  than  astronomy 
teaches  and  infers.  The  universe  outside  of  the  earth  it  leaves  for  the 
Divine  Sovereignty  to  control,  and  only  gives  us  glimpses  of  its  vastness 
and  of  its  being  under  subjection  to  the  Almighty.  But  having  refer- 
ence to  man,  fallen  and  to  be  restored,  and  to  creation,  marred  and  to  be 
renewed,  it  teaches  us  how  Divine  Sovereignty  in  and  through  Man  himself, 
by  a  specially  delegated  Kingdom  under  "  the  ordained  Man,"  i.e.  David's 
Son,  is  to  save  man  and  restore  him  to  a  forfeited  position  in  the  moral 
government  of  God  without  any  violation  of  the  immutable  principles  of 
justice — is  to  renew  all  things,  so  that  God's  will  shall  be  done  on  earth 
as  in  heaven. 

1  Lecky  (Introd.  to  Rationalism  in  Europe)  says  :  "  The  astronomical  discovery  that  our 
world  is  not  the  centre  and  axis  of  the  material  universe,  but  is  an  inconsiderable  planet 
occupying  to  all  appearances  an  altogether  insignificant  and  subordinate  position,  and 
l evolving  with  many  others  around  a  sun  which  is  itself  but  an  infinitesimal  point  in 
creation,  in  as  far  as  it  is  realized  by  the  imagination,  has  a  vast  and  palpable  influence 
upon  our  theological  conceptions."  While  Lecky  introduces  this  objection,  he  exhibits 
his  good  taste  by  (His.  Rationalism)  saying  :  "  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  its  justice, 
there  cannot  be  two  opinions  about  the  exquisite  beauty  of  the  suggestion  by  which  Dr. 
Chalmers  sought  to  meet  the  difficulty— that  the  parable  of  the  Shepherd  leaving  the 
ninety-nine  sheep  to  seek  that  which  had  gone  astray,  is  but  a  description  of  the  act  of 
the  Deity  seeking  to  reclaim  the  single  world  that  had  revolted  against  Him,  as  though  it 
were  of  more  importance  than  all  that  remained  faithful."  Figuier  also  (The  To-Morrow 
of  Death,  p.  267)  objects  to  the  Bible  confining  itself  so  much  to  this  earth  and  not  em- 
bracing, in  elucidations,  purposes,  etc.,  the  entire  universe,  pronouncing  it  "  that  strange 
dogma  in  which,  of  the  whole  universe  with  its  innumerable  worlds,  we  see  only  the 
earth,  know  only  the  earth  and  its  inhabitants— the  earth,  a  paltry  atom,  lost  in 
immensity — a  grain  of  dust  compared  with  the  millions  of  globes  with  which  space  is 
filled."  While  admiring  the  faith  of  Figuier  and  others,  which  from  pure  inference 
swells  the  plurality  of  worlds  to  the  highest  scale  accessible  to  the  imagination  (for  it 
heightens  the  effect  of  the  objection  and  is  esteemed  good  writing),  we  certainly  deplore 
the  wrong  attitude  assumed  by  some  (as  e.g.  by  Whewell's  Essay  on  the  Plurality  of 
Worlds)  in  attempting  (vainly)  to  prove  that  religion,  faith,  and  science  are  contrary  to 
the  doctrine  of  such  a  plurality.  Comp.  Chalmers's  Astron.  Dis.,  Fontenelle's  Plurality  of 
Worlds,  Dick's  Ch.  Philos.,  Flammarion's  The  Plurality  of  Inhabited  Worlds,  Brewster's 
More  Worlds  than  One,  Huygens's  Cosmotheoros,  and  others  ;  also  comp.  Prop.  195.  In 
the  briefest  manner  it  may  be  stated  :  (1)  that  the  Bible  is  a  book  for  man,  and  not  for 
the  inhabitants  of  other  worlds,  and  hence  is  adapted  only  for  man  ;  (2)  that  the  Bible 
reveals  a  redemptive  process  for  the  earth,  and  not  for  other  planets  or  worlds,  and  there- 
fore confines  itself  to  this  planet  ;  (3)  the  Bible  does  not  exclusively  confine  itself  to  this 
earth  as  if  it  were  the  only  world  existing,  and  it  does  not  speak  of  it  as  if  the  earth  were 
ihe  centre,  etc.,  oi  the  universe,  or  even  of  a  solar  system  (see  Kurtz's  Astronomy,  Chal- 


Prop.  204.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  563 

mers's  Astron.  Dis.,  etc.)  ;  (4)  the  Bible  so  speaks  that  it  implies  the  earth  to  be  part  of  a 
general  system,  and  which  has  been  visited  by  beings  from  other  worlds  ;  (5)  the  Bible 
begins  with  the  fall  of  man  and  ends  with  his  restoration  to  God's  favor,  and  leaves  the 
relationship  that  the  world  sustains  to  other  worlds  and  to  the  universe  at  large,  for 
future  revelation  ;  (6)  that  if  such  a  future  relationship  were  plainly  stated  in  detail, 
unbelievers,  who  now  reject  the  statement  of  Jesus  concerning  the  descending  and 
ascending  angels  in  the  future,  would  be  the  first  to  deride  it  as  improbable,  etc.  ; 
(7)  that  small  as  the  world  is  in  comparison  with  other  planets,  God,  in  His  manifested 
love  toward  it,  only  exhibits  the  more  strikingly  His  divine  attributes  in  His  condescen- 
sion, care,  mercy,  etc.,  toward  us  to  secure  our  happiness,  etc.  ;  (8)  that  size  is  no  crite- 
rion of  beauty,  special  favor,  etc.,  since  the  most  beautiful  forms  and  the  most  striking 
adaptations  are  found  in  the  most  minute  objects  evincing  God's  favor  and  provisions  ; 
(9)  the  provision  made  for  the  earth  in  its  Theocratic  ordering  being  designed  for  the 
earth,  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  God's  Divine  Sovereignty  over  the  universe,  or 
with  any  other  (if  such  exist)  modes  of  governing  other  planets  ;  (10)  unacquainted  as  we 
are  with  the  inhabitants,  moral  and  civil  regulations,  etc.,  of  other  worlds,  it  is  (a)  unjust 
to  depreciate  the  relation  of  the  Bible  to  man  by  the  institution  of  a  comparison  that 
only  reveals  our  ignorance,  and  (b)  it  is  sufficient,  in  view  of  our  limited  knowledge,  to  con- 
fine ourselves  to  the  earth  and  its  inhabitants  with  whom  the  Bible  deals.  Theologians 
who,  in  their  wisdom,  have  made  the  future  Kingdom  over  the  earth  the  Divine  Sov- 
ereignty of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  over  the  universe  (instead  of  making  it,  as  the 
Bible  does,  a  Kingdom  of  "  the  Son  of  Man"  supported  and  confirmed  by  the  Divine 
Sovereignty,  specially  designed  for  man,  and  confined  here  to  the  earth,  according  to  the 
oath-bound  covenants  of  God)  are  alone  chargeable  with  creating  the  difficulties  drawn 
from  astronomy.  The  Bible  does  not  make  them.  In  virtue  of  the  vastness  of  creation, 
the  Bible  teaches  us  that  it  is  a  wonderful  condescension,  indicative  of  amazing  love 
and  mercy,  to  stoop  to  man  and  rescue  him  in  the  process  of  Redemption.  It  holds  up 
to  our  admiration  a  Creator  who,  amid  the  vastness  of  creation,  observes  and  cares  for 
the  sparrow.  God's  power  is  manifested  through  our  weakness,  and  so  His  greatness 
and  majesty  is  exhibited  through  our  littleness,  even  as  scientists  say  that  God's  love  of 
beauty  is  witnessed  in  the  snowflake  or  minute  crystal,  etc. 

Obs.  10.  "We  advance  another  step  in  showing  that  the  very  Theocratic 
ordering  designed  for  the  future  in  and  through  David's  Son  materially 
confirms  the  greatness  of  the  universe,  the  plurality  of  worlds,  and  that  this 
world  is  but  a  part  of  an  extended  system.  The  adoption  of  the  Theocratic 
form,  manifested  in  and  through  an  "ordained  www,"  clearly  evidences 
that  the  earth  is  not  supposed  to  be  "  the  centre,"  etc.,  of  the  universe, 
for,  as  has  been  shown,  the  Divine  Sovereignty  lodged  in  the  Father  bestows 
(Props.  79-83)  this  Theocratic  Kingdom  upon  David's  Son,  showing  that 
this  rule,  intended  for  the  earth,  is  something  separate  and  distinct  from 
(although  supported  by)  the  Divine  Sovereignty  which  is  exerted  from 
the  highest  heaven.  But  this,  while  true,  also  shows,  on  the  other  hand, 
how  this  earth  will  again  be  reunited  in  the  closest  fraternal  relations  with 
the  universe  in  virtue  of  the  instituted  Theocratic  rule — a  rule  both 
adapted  to  this  world  and  to  bring  this  world  into  closer  union  with  its 
God.  Consider  :  the  Bible  is  the  Book  of  man's  Redemption,  beginning 
with  man's  fall  and  ending  with  his  complete  restoration  here  on  the  earth  ; 
and,  in  delineating  this,  shows  that  when  such  Redemption  is  fully  accom- 
plished, then  also  will  the  Universe,  obedient  to  God's  sway,  be  brought 
into  unison  with  this  earth,  and  that  intercourse  (e.g.  Prop.  157,  etc.) 
between  the  two  will  be  opened  as  originally  intended.  The  presence  of 
the  mighty  God  in  and  through  David's  Son,  while  exalting  and  honoring 
the  mercy,  love,  condescension,  etc.,  of  the  Divine,  while  transfusing 
blessing,  honor,  and  glory  transcendently  great  even  upon  so  comparative 
a  small  portion  of  creation  as  our  earth — will  also  serve  as  the  firm  and 
enduring  basis  of  interchange  between  this  and  other  worlds. 


564  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  204. 

Obs.  11.  To  indicate  this  continued  exaltation  and  the  mpjestic  position 
of  the  Christ,  it  is  only  requisite  to  consider  what  has  already  heen  proven 
in  detail,  viz.,  that  in  this  humanity  is  exhibited,  as  the  early  Church  held, 
in  its  Theocratic  relationship,  the  perfect  union  of  the  Divine  with  man 
without  the  Divine  absorbing  or  lessening  the  same,  so  that  the  Son  of  Man, 
i.e.  David's  Son,  forever  remains  such,  and  the  Son  of  Cod,  i.e.  the  Divine, 
forever  continues  such,  both  combined  constituting  the  Theocratic  Christ. 
This,  aside  from  the  covenanted  necessity,  the  Theocratic  ordering,  etc.,  is 
clearly  taught  in  the  perpetuity  (Prop.  159)  of  the  Kingdom  committed  to 
Jesus  as  the  Son  of  Man  (Props.  81,  83),  the  covenanted  Seed. 

This  Kingdom  in  its  presentation  of  the  King — Theocratic,  God-King — unmistakably 
disproves  the  speculation  of  Fichte  and  others,  viz.,  that  it  is  impossible  to  atttribute  to 
God  personality,  much  less  permanent  union  with  human  nature,  without  making  Him 
a  finite  Being  as  ourselves.  Aside  from  other  reasons,  the  Theocratic  form  of  govern- 
ment itself  indicates  and  enforces  the  personality,  etc.,  of  the  Ruler.  By  the  reign  of 
this  Theocratic  King,  in  that  predicted  Bon  of  God  and  Son  of  Man  order,  will  also  be 
solved  those  problems  which  the  great  thinkers  of  the  world  have  vainly  endeavored,  for 
ages,  to  elucidate,  viz.,  those  pertaining  to  the  relations  existing  between  the  infinite  and 
finite,  the  eternal  and  the  temporal,  God  and  man.  The  solution  will  be  found  when 
this  Theocratic  order  is  practically  manifested  and  fully  realized. 

Obs.  12.  While  the  Person  of  the  Theocratic  King,  His  official  position, 
His  attributes,  the  glorification  of  His  humanity,  the  surroundings  belong- 
ing to  Him,  the  power  exerted  by  Him,  will  all  conduce  to  this  elevation 
and  grandeur  ;  yet  in  addition  to  these  the  hearts  of  all  will  be  influenced 
to  love  and  serve  this  King  because  of  the  then  fully  appreciated  (seeing 
that  the  blessings  resulting  therefrom  are  experienced  in  their  highest 
measure)  fact  that  this  '•Anointed  One,"  this  present  exalted  Theocratic 
Ruler,  died  for  us.  Redemption  through  His  blood  so  exalts  and  fixes  the 
affections  of  His  associated  kings  and  subjects  upon  Him  that  the  predic- 
tion, in  the  love  and  praise  of  mankind,  is  realized  of  their  being  "  a  will- 
ing people." 

Obs.  13.  The  reign  of  "  the  Man  ordained"  in  the  manner  covenanted, 
will  most  certainly  bring  to  man  the  blessings  promised.  The  miraculous 
power  exhibited  at  the  First  Advent  only  typically  shows  the  exertion  of  that 
power  on  an  immensely  larger  scale  at  His  Sec.  Advent.  Hence  with  the 
right  and  power  lodged  in  Him,  we  are  assured  of  the  full  realization  of  all 
that  God  has  promised  to  man  and  the  race.  But  with  this  assurance  must 
be  allied,  as  the  basis  of  its  certainty,  that  "  the  Man  ordained  "  will  only 
bring  this  to  pass  in  the  predetermined,  most  solemnly  covenanted,  Theocratic- 
Davidic  rule  and  Kingdom.  The  covenant,  just  as  it  reads,  must  be  the 
foundation  of  our  faith  and  hope. 

Obs.  14.  This  Kingdom  in  its  relationship  to  "  the  Man  ordained,"  and 
through  Him  to  the  race,  is  not  to  be  explained  by  a  reference  to  one,  two, 
or  a  few  utterances,  but  by  a  comparison  of  many  or  all  ;  and  no  explana- 
tion can  be  considered  as  valid  if  it  is  opposed  by  the  expressed  sense  of  the 
covenant  or  the  general  analogy  of  the  Word.  This  especially  is  proper  in 
view  of  the  two  natures  of  Christ  conjoining  in  a  special  favored  Theocratic 
reign  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  Thus  e.g.  because  "  all  power  in  heaven  and 
earth"  is  given  to  Jesus,  inferences  of  immediate  and  unbounded  exertion 
of  such  power  in  the  form  of  a  Kingdom  and  covenanted  Ruler  ship    are 


Prop.  204.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  565 

found  without  number  in  works  of  theology  and  religion,  but  always,  more 
or  less,  at  the  loss  of  definiteness  and  continued  enthronement  of  the  Man 
Jesus  and  His  Headship  of  the  race  as  David's  Son  in  the  capacity  of 
Ruler.  It  is  easy  to  designate  systems  of  Divinity,  which,  from  one  single 
passage,  infer  and  teach  that  when  a  certain  period  arrives  (comp.  Prop. 
159)  Jesus  the  Christ  will  throw  aside  all  His  distinctive  offices,  and  will 
never  again,  after  that,  be  recognized  as  David's  Son,  but  will  ever  reign 
by  virtue  only  of  His  Divine  nature  with  the  Father.  Now,  all  this  is 
simply  the  reception  of  a  wrong  inference  from  one  or  two  passages  and  the 
ignoring  of  a  multitude  of  other  passages  thai  plainly  teach  the  contrary. 

Indeed,  as  already  stated,  eminent  men  (as  Neander,  etc.)  even  go  to  such  a  length 
as  to  tell  us  that  after  the  resurrection  all  human  relations  were  cast  aside  and  that  He 
now  is  only  to  be  recognized  as  the  Son  of  God.  A  serious  defect  in  many  writers  is 
this  making  all  Scripture  bend  to  inferences  drawn  from  one  or.  two  passages,  and  over- 
looking the  ever  continued  covenanted  Personage  of  the  Christ,  the  covenanted  everlasting 
rule,  the  predictions  based  on  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  the  postponement  of  the  cove- 
nanted Kingdom  to  the  Sec.  Advent,  etc.,  thus  involving  themselves  in  palpable  contra- 
dictions and  making  a  resort  to  spiritualizing  a  necessity,  as  well  as  the  introduction  of 
several  kingdoms  a  refuge  to  cover  deficiencies. 

Obs.  15.  Therefore,  to  preserve  the  due  relationship  that  the  human 
nature  of  Jesus  sustains  even  in  its  exaltation  and  glorification  to  the 
Kingdom  and  to  the  race,  we  must  never  siverve  from  the  covenants.  God 
will,  most  assuredly,  fulfil  these  covenants  ;  in  them  is  delineated  the  posi- 
tion of  David's  Son  and  not  that  of  another  man  or  of  Deity  (i.e.  consid- 
ered independent  of  the  human  nature  assumed)  ;  now  any  theory,  infer- 
ence, or  doctrine  which  militates  against  the  covenants  is  not  only  open  to 
grave  suspicion,  but  must  be  rejected,  no  matter  by  whom  presented  or  how- 
ever eloquently  urged.  God  cannot,  does  not,  contradict  Himself.  In  this 
discussion  the  covenant  is  the  measure  of  accuracy,  being  the  most  solemnly 
given  and  strongly  affirmed  portion  of  God's  Holy  Word.  We  need  not 
repeat  that  the  grammatical  sense  is  alone  allowable   (comp.  Prop.  49). 

Obs.  16.  A  most  fruitful  source  of  misinterpreting  this  Kingdom,  and, 
as  a  result,  the  Person  and  Relationship  of  the  King,  arises  from  not  dis- 
criminating to  whom  this  Kingdom  is  promised  (comp.  Prop.  81,  etc.). 
The  great  defect,  having  a  highly  injurious  influence,  is  this  :  the  Davidic 
covenant,  although  an  everlasting  covenant  and  solemnly  affirmed  by  oath,  is 
totally  suppressed  or  laid  aside  by  theologians  as  something  with  which  we 
have  nothing  to  do,  or,  if  referred  to,  is  dismissed  in  a  sentence  or  two 
either  as  typical  or  something  to  be  spiritualized  ;  Jesus,  consequently,  is 
constantly  spoken  of  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  His  reign  is  based  exclusively 
on  His  Divinity.  Entire  systems  of  Divinity,  given  by  learned  men,  make 
no  mention  whatever  of  the  Davidic  covenant,  and,  as  a  consequence,  exclude 
the  humanity  of  Jesiis  from  any  participation  in  this  reign  with  the  prom- 
inency given  to  it  in  Scripture  ;  the  humanity,  somehow,  simply  by 
virtue  of  its  having  been  related  to  the  divine,  becomes  some  vague,  indefi- 
nite  appendage,  without  bearing  its  noble  covenanted  distinctive  relationship 
in  manifested  Rulership.  Now  this  is  the  Origenistic,  Augustinian,  Popish 
derived  view,  unfortunately  held  and  indorsed  by  many  Protestants. 

Holy  "Writ  carefully  specifies  and  guards  the  humanity  of  Jesus  (1)  in  the  covenant, 
(2).  in  the  prophecies,  (3)  in  preserved  genealogical  tables,  (4)  in  the  preaching  of  Jesus 


566  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  204. 

and  the  Apostles,  (5)  in  recognized  descent  and  title  in  the  last  Revelation,  (6)  in  ascrib- 
ing, in  direct  terms,  the  future  Kingdom  to  Him  as  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  (7)  and  in  de- 
claring the  perpetuity  of  the  Kingdom  given  to  Him  as  "  the  Man  ordained."  Now  a 
rejection  of  the  systematic  and  logical  statements  of  the  Word  forming  a  regular,  un- 
broken series,  is  the  source  of  much  error — error,  too,  in  a  learned  and  attractive  form. 
So  much  is  this  the  case,  that  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  stem  it,  being  fortified  by  hosts 
of  able  and  learned  names,  whose  authority  alone  sways  the  multitude.  It  is  only  the 
deeply  reflective,  who  receive  the  Word  as  spoken,  and  recognize  the  predicted  fact  that 
there  will  be  but  little  faith  in  Christ's  Coming  as  "the  Son  of  Man"  to  sit  on  the 
throne  of  His  glory,  that  ponder  and  accept  these  things.  The  author  anticipates  wn~ 
measured  abuse  from  some  quarters  for  stating  his  views  so  plainly,  and  insisting  so 
strongly  upon  the  future  reign  of  Jesus  as  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  just  as  covenanted.  But 
he  anticipates  it  only  from  those  whose  reverence  for  the  Word  is  outweighed  by  human 
authority,  prejudice,  and  bigotry  ;  men  of  candor,  judgment  and  high  honor,  however  un- 
able to  accept  of  these  views,  yet  seeing  how  they  at  least  have  a  basis  in  the  grammati- 
cal sense  of  covenant,  prophecy,  etc.,  will  treat  them  with  respect,  lest  unhappily  they 
should  be  eventually  found  to  nave  derided  God's  own  ordering. 

Obs.  17.  It  is  sad  to  reflect  that  so  many  of  God's  ancient  elect  people, 
the  Jews,  should  so  far  depart  from  the  covenants  expressly  given  to  them — 
should  so  far  reject  faith  in  the  Son  of  David,  who  is  ultimately  to  reign 
according  to  the  oath  of  the  Almighty,  that  they  put  their  trust  in  man 
himself.  Alas  !  what  a  difference  exists  between  the  covenanted  "  Sure 
mercies  of  David"  as  presented  in  the  Word,  and  that  belief  e.g.  of  Mr. 
Ellinger  (editor  of  the  Jewish  Times),  who  said  (quoted  Lutli.  Observer,  Oct. 
31st,  1873)  at  the  meeting  of  Free  Eeligionists,  held  at  New  York  in 
opposition  to  that  of  the  Evang-Alliance  of  1873,  "  that  humanity  was  the 
Messiah  of  the  Jews." 

Ellinger's  statement  is  too  sweeping,  for  he  only  speaks  in  behalf  of  the  Rationalis- 
tic portion  of  the  Jews  who  have  adopted  the  Humanitarian  views,  while  the  orthodox 
Jews  still  persist  in  believing  that  the  covenant  will  be  realized  according  to  God's  oath. 
Comp.  Prop.  193. 


PkOP.  205.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  567 


Proposition  205.     The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  materially  aids 
us  in  preaching  "  the  Christ  " —  the  distinctive  "  Messiah." 

That  "Christ"  and  "Messiah"  are  titular  ascriptions,  and  not 
merely  doctrinal  words,  has  been  already  presented  under  Props. 
153,  Obs.  2  and  70,  Obs.  11,  and  especially  199,  Obs.  2.  Many 
writers,  some  not  in  sympathy  with  us,  fully  indorse  its  Theocratic, 
Kingly  title.  The  importance  of  this  is  so  fully  sustained  by  our 
entire  argument,  that  a  mere  reference  to  some  things  pertaining  to 
it  is  all  that  is  necessary  for  a  fitting  conclusion,  indicating  how,  by 
reason  of  a  clearer  conception  of  its  meaning  and  design,  it  aids  us 
in  preaching  "  the  Christ.'''' 

Leathes  ("  The  Religion  of  Christ,"  Bampton  Lectures  for  1874,  Pref.)  remarks  : 
"  The  belief  in  Jesus  as  (he  Christ  is  not  only  common  to  every  document  comprised  in 
it  (New  Test.),  but  is  alike  the  very  backbone  and  essential  framework  of  all  the  docu- 
ments." "  We  may  take  it,  therefore,  as  a  position  which  is  unassailable,  that  the  dis- 
tinguishing mark  of  Christianity,  from  the  very  first,  trace  it  back  as  far  as  we  can,  was 
the  belief  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.  So  manifestly  true  is  this  statement  that  the  mere  ex- 
pression of  it  has  all  the  appearance  of  a  truism."  Such  statements  can  be  multiplied 
from  other  writers,  but  are  unnecessary.  Is  this  so?  then  how  essential  it  is  to  have  a 
proper  conception  of  the  Christ — the  real  meaning  to  be  attached  to  the  title — and  the 
official  position  that  it  contemplates.  Alas  !  with  but  comparatively  few  exceptions  the 
modern  Christ  is  not  the  Christ  of  the  primitive  Church,  for  the  meaning  has  been 
changed  and  another  substituted.  He  adds  :  "  Taking  the  very  widest  possible  margin, 
we  may  say  within  the  first  century  and  a  half  of  our  era  this  simple  formula,  Jesus  is 
the  Christ,  had  called  into  existence  the  whole  of  that  literature,  whatever  its  value, 
which  is  comprised  in  the  New  Testament."  That  Jesus  was  the  Christ  he  pronounces 
"  the  underlying  principle,"  "  the  root-principle,"  etc.,  and  declares  that  if  this  is  elim- 
inated "  you  destroy  the  peculiar  and  essential  features  of  their  existence." 

Obs.  1.  Let  the  reader  go  back  to  the  places  referred  to  and  ascertain 
the  meaning  of  "  Messiah"  and  "  Christ,"  viz.,  that,  as  able  men  on  all 
sides  admit,  they  are  equivalent  to  kingship,  or  highly  expressive  of  Theo- 
cratic relationship  (for  the  Theocratic  Kings  were  "  the  Lord's  An- 
ointed"), and  that,  in  view  of  the  covenanted  Theocratic  ordering  pertain- 
ing to  Jesus,  He  pre-eminently  bears  the  title  of  "  the  Anointed,''''  i.e.  the 
Theocratic  King.  Keeping  in  view  the  plain  meaning  (as  held  by  the  Jews, 
the  disciples,  the  early  Church,  etc.),  and  then  noticing  what  our  argument 
prominently  brings  forth,  viz.,  the  non-realization  of  the  Theocratic  order 
at  the  First  Advent  and  the  postponement  of  the  same  to  the  Sec.  Advent, 
it  becomes  apparent  that  the  title  will  only  become  practically  realized 
when,  in  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus  the  Christ,'"  this  Christ  manifests  the 
title  in  the  actual  Theocratic  position  occupied.  When  the  Theocracy  is 
re-established  in  power  and  glory,  then  the  Messiah,  the  Christ,  shines  forth 
as  the  Anointed,  the  King  in  Israel,  having  obtained  His  appointed  inherit- 
ance. 

Covenant,  prophecy,  promise,  the  faith  of  pious  Jews  and  of  the  early  Church,  the 
Theocratic  ordering,  the  time  of  its  re-establishment,  the  present  design  of  this  dispen- 


568  THE  THEOCKATIC   KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  205. 

sation,  and,  in  brief,  nearly  all  of  our  previous  Propositions  bring  in  an  overwhelming 
converging  testimony,  showing  that  while  Jesus  is  now  "  the  Christ"  and  declared  to  be 
such  by  His  life,  teaching,  miracles,  death,  resurrection,  ascension,  Headship  over  the 
Church,  He  is  not  yet  manifested  as  "  the  Christ"  in  the  actual  possession  of  the  Theocratic 
position  indicated  by  the  title.  This  is  so  evident,  that  the  lack  of  faith  in  this  title 
as  expressed,  and  the  substitution  of  a  meaning  not  intended,  is  a  wide  departure  from 
the  truth,  and  must  very  seriously  affect  our  interpretation  of  Scripture,  giving  it  a  color- 
ing that  overshadows  a  proper  understanding  of  fundamental  doctrines.  Such  a  removal 
from  the  primitive  faith  is  painfully  manifest  in  even  our  leading  works  on  "  Christol- 
ogy,"  for,  however  valuable  in  many  respects,  they  utterly  fail  to  bring  forth  the  distinctive 
Christ  and  point  out  His  relationship  to  the  covenanted  Theocracy,  and  this  mars  the 
proper  reception  of  much  Scripture.  Surely,  he  who  professes  to  receive  "  the  Christ" 
ought  to  be  willing  to  bow  to  the  scriptural  meaning  of  the  title.  To  confess  "  the 
Christ"  as  the  primitive  Christians  did  demands  at  the  present  day  moral  courage,  see- 
ing that  the  vast  multitude  spiritualize  its  meaning  away.  To  confess  "  the  Christ,"  as 
it  once  was  done,  will  inevitably  bring  reproach  from  those  even  who  honestly  profess 
to  love  Him.  This  is  one  of  the  sad  features  connected  with  our  present  lot.  This  lack 
of  faith,  this  turning  away  from  so  fundamental  a  view,  only  confirms  our  belief  in  it, 
seeing  that  such  a  state  is  predicted.  We  look  for  the  time  when  this  title  will  be  better 
appreciated — when  it  will  be  publicly  assumed  by  Him  whose  right  it  is,  and  then  men 
Mill  vehemently  and  bitterly  oppose  it  until  stricken  by  the  wrath  of  "  the  Christ." 

Ohs.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  under  the  influence  of  a  supposed  present 
existing  Messianic  Kingdom,  men,  mistaking  the  Divine  Sovereignty  for 
this  speciQc  Theocratic  ordering  and  rule,  have  admitted  the  titular  aspect, 
hut  (  as  e.g.  Ency.  Relig.  Knowledge,  etc.)  give  it  a  doctrinal  cast  as  being 
at  present  fulfilled  in  His  mediatorial  office,  thus  being  the  equivalent  of 
"  Saviour."  Christ  is  truly  the  Saviour,  but  it  is  in  virtue  of  His  Christship 
that  He  perfects  Salvation  ;  the  Christship  appertains  to  Him  as  a  Person  in 
a  specified  position.  Rejecting  the  covenanted  Kingdom,  and  receiving  a 
purely  Spiritual  one,  the  title  itself  is  correspondingly  spiritualized  and  its 
ancient  meaning  discarded.1  Knapp  {Oh.  Theol.,  p.  -325)  sounds  the  key- 
note of  this  perversion,  when  informing  us  that  "  Messiah  grammati- 
cally signifies  King,"  but  that  it  becomes  "«  doctrinal  word'"  also 
equivalent  to  "  Saviour"  or  "  Redeemer."  He  painfully  labors  by  a 
one-sided  reasoning,  by  statements  that  we  have  already  abundantly 
shown  are  not  sustained,  to  set  aside  the  Jewish  covenanted  idea  of  the 
Messiahship,  viz.,  that  "  the  Christ"  is  the  One  Person,  a  descendant  of 
David,  who  is  to  reign  on  the  restored  Theocratic-Davidic  Throne.2 

1  The  spiritualistic  conceptions  are  numerous,  such  as  "  the  representative  man," 
"the  good,"  "  the  leader  of  humanity,"  "  the  ideal,"  etc.  One  of  the  most  singular, 
totally  ignoring  covenant,  etc.,  is  that  of  the  Shakers  (Appletons'  Cyclop.)  as  given  by 
Elder  Evans  :  "  Christ  is  applied  by  them  as  a  generic  term  to  the  highest  or  innermost 
sphere,  exterior  to  the  deitic  sphere  called  in  the  Scriptures  eternity."  The  most  absurd 
view  is  that  of  Taylor  in  Syntagma,  viz.,  that  Jesus  never  existed,  but  that  the  early  Chris- 
tians meant  the  words  '  Jesus  Christ '  to  be  only  a  personification  of  reason,  goodness, 
love,  etc.  Some  make  "  progress"  the  Christ  ;  others  "  humanity  realized."  Some 
make  their  own  system  the  Christ,  as  e.g.  Choate  (Jieligio-Philosophical  Journal,  April  3, 
1875)  says  :  "  To  me  Spiritualism  is  the  new  Christ,  arrayed  in  the  purple  splendor  of 
the  present,  and  haloed  with  the  divine  possibilities  of  the  future."  Scholasticism, 
Mysticism,  Fanaticism,  etc.,  have  greatly  hindered  the  proper  historical  and  scriptural 
idea  of  "  the  Christship" — the  perversion  of  which  reached  its  extreme  in  David  Jorris 
"  the  Christ-David"  or  "  the  true  Christ  after  the  Spirit,"  in  Ann  Lee,  "  the  Female 
Christ,"  and  in  other  fanatics  claiming  the  glorious  title. 

2  He  is  also  contradictory,  as  e.g.  he  charges  (p.  319)  the  Jews  with  exclusiveness,  as 
if  the  Messiah  only  pertained  to  their  own  nation  and  all  others  were  excluded  from  the 
blessings  of  His  reign,  and  yet  (p.  323)  he  informs  us  that  the  Jews  held  that  while 
"  King  of  the  Jews,''  He  would  also  be  "  a  universal  monarch,  who  would  reign  over  all 


PPvOP.  205.]  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  569 

nations.  Thus  they  interpreted  the  passages,  Ps.  2  :  2,  6,  8  ;  Jer.  23  :  5,  6  ;  Zech.  9  :  4 
seq. "  What  is  true  of  Dr.  Knapp  applies  to  many  eminent  divines,  who  acknowledging 
the  import  of  the  title  then  afterward  engraft  upon  it  a  doctrinal  signification  to  suit 
their  respective  theories  of  the  Kingdom. 

Obs.  3.  The  testimony  of  divines,  however,  making  these  words  a  dis- 
tinctive title  is  ample.  In  addition  to  those  already  given,  this  interesting 
and  vital  point  can  well  receive  others.  Van  Oosterzee  (Ch.  Dog.,  vol.  2, 
p.  527)  forcibly  says  :  "  It  (i.e.  Messiah  or  Christ)  is  equivalent  to  saying 
that  He  is  the  King  of  Israel,  promised  in  old  times  by  the  prophets,  sent 
into  the  world  by  the  Father,  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  destined 
to  rule  forever  over  a  Kingdom  which  is  ever  enduring."  "  His  Theocrat- 
ic dignity  is  designated."  Farrar  (Life  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  26)  justly 
observes  that  the  English  version  improperly  uses  "  Christ"  as  a  proper 
name  instead  of  an  appellative,  a  distinction  observed  by  Lactantius,  Div. 
Insti.,  4  :  7,  etc.  Pearson  (On  the  Creed,  p.  107  seq.)  speaks  of  Jesus, 
"  who  is  also  called  Christ,  not  by  name,  but  by  office  and  title"  and  quotes 
Tertullian,  S.  Hieron.,  Lactant.,  Isidor,  and  Cyril  as  defining  it  thus,  a 
name  importing  office,  dignity.  He  correctly  makes  the  name  of  Jesus 
equivalent  to  Saviour,  but  Christ  the  title  of  honor,  royal  station.1  Knapp 
(Ch.  Theol.,  p.  378)  says  that  the  title  "  Christ" — "  in  its  common  use  it 
properly  signifies  King,"  and  then  proceeds  to  show  how,  by  the  ecclesias- 
tical Fathers  (Ambrosius,  Ruffinus,  Clement  of  Ales.,  and  others),  it  was 
extended  to  embrace  other  meanings  to  apply  it  to  the  mediatorial  work  of 
Christ,  and  then,  in  an  alleged  "critical  judgment,"  positively  asserts: 
"  According  to  the  true  use  of  the  Word  in  the  Bible  Messiah  signifies 
only  King.  Many  were  anointed,  but  kings  were  called,  by  way  of  emi- 
nence, the  anointed."  Pressense  ( The  Early  Days  of  Christianity)  gives  the 
utterance  of  many  able  writers,  when  he  justly  pronounces  "  Christ"  to 
be  a  "  Theocratic  Title."  Oehler  (Art.  "Messiah"  in  Herzog's  Ency.) 
says:  "But  pre-eminently  is  'the  Anointed/ Jehovah's  name  of  honor, 
that  of  Theocratic  Ki?ig."2 

1  Ernesti  and  many  others  have  insisted  that  the  Scriptures  by  the  title  of  Christ  in- 
dicated the  kingly  office,  and  this,  in  view  of  the  Jewish  belief,  led  Eckermann  and 
others  (Knapp' s  Oh.  Theol,  pp.  32o,  322)  to  "  declare  that  the  doctrine  that  Jesus  is  the 
Messiah  belongs  only  to  the  Jews  and  is  not  an  essential  doctrine  of  pure  Christianity." 
Such  a  declaration  is  an  utter  ignoring  of  the  covenants  and  predictions  pertaining  to 
Christ,  and  the  specific  position  and  work  assigned  to  Him,  as  "  the  Christ, "  in  the 
future.  It  is  incorporated  by  the  Apostles  as  essential  to  the  Coming  Kingdom,  and  faith 
in  "  the  Christ"  inspires  hope  of  glorious  deliverance  under  His  reign.  Knapp  is  not 
candid  in  his  strictures  on  Eckermann,  for  when  the  latter  asserts  "that  the  Old  Test, 
descriptions  of  the  Messiah  are  not  descriptions  of  Jesus,  but  of  an  earthly  king,"  the 
former  leaves  the  covenant  and  predictions  which  unite  the  earthly  with  the  Theocratic 
ordering  for  purposes  of  salvation,  and  speaks  only  of  the  spiritual  aspects  pertaining  to 
salvation.  The  true  scriptural  answer  to  Eckermann  and  others  is  this  :  the  earthly 
relationship  is  essential  to  the  Theocratic  order,  and  if  it  were  lacking  no  restored  Theoc- 
racy could  ever  be  reared  resulting  in  perfected  redemption.  The  spiritual  and  the 
earthly,  the  divine  and  human,  the  heavenly  and  the  worldly,  are  united  under  the 
Messianic  sway.     (Comp.  Prop.  197.) 

4  A  multitude  of  similar  testimony  might  be  adduced,  but  is  not  requisite  in  view  of 
the  facts  following.  The  application  of  the  title  (Anointed  One)  to  the  priesthood  is  for- 
bidden by  the  simple  fact  that  this  is  spoken  of,  and  relates  to,  not  a  descendant,  of 
Aaron,  but  a  Son  of  David,  and  hence  necessarily  points,  as  covenanted,  to  his  regality. 
In  the  art.  "  Jesus  Christ"  in  McClintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop. ,  it  is  properly  said: 
"  This  double  designation  is  not,  like  Simon  Peter,  John  Mark,  Joses  Barnabas,  com- 
posed of  a  name  and  a  surname,  but,  like  John  the  Baptist,   Simon  Magus,  Bar-Jesus 


570  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  205. 

Elymus,  of  a  proper  name  and  an  official  title. "  It  makes  "  Christ"  to  mean  "  Anointed," 
"  the  official  title  of  our  Saviour,"  so  that  "  Christ  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  a  proper 
name,  but  a  designation  of  office  ;"  but,  after  all,  sight  is  lost  of  those  definitions,  and 
the  official  title  is  changed  into  a  doctrinal  word  !  We  protest  against  this  unauthorized 
change  as  not  only  misleading,  but  placing  a  barrier  to  the  proper  comprehension  of  the 
future  greatness  and  glory  of  Jesus. 


Obs.  4.  The  title  of  Messiah  or  Christ  was  based  by  the  Jews  on  the 
covenanted  and  predicted  King  who  should  descend  from  David,  and 
rule  as  the  Theocratic  King  on  David's  throne.1  The  blessed  times 
resulting  from  His  reign  were  designated  "the  times  of  the  Messiah." 
The  Samaritans  (who  separated  from  the  Jews  before  the  Babylo- 
nian exile)  also  believed  (John  4  :  25,  29,  42)  in  "the  Christ."  It  was 
founded  upon  Divine  Kevelation,  and  consequently  the  Apostles,  and 
even  Jesns  Himself,  appeal  to  the  Scriptures  as  containing  the  Messianic 
idea,  and  use  the  title  without  the  least  attempt  to  explain  its  long-adopted 
meaning.  It  was  this  belief  in  the  Theocratic  sense  that  urged  the  Jews  to 
the  desire  to  proclaim  Him  King  (John  G  :  15,  etc.)  ;  that  gave  Herod  (Matt. 
2  :  4)  his  uneasiness,  and  suggested  his  bloody  persecution  ;  that  influenced 
His  accusers  before  Pilate  (Luke  22  :  2)  to  call  Him  "  the  Christ,  a  King," 
pleading  (John  19  :  12),  when  Pilate  "  sought  to  release  Him,"  "  If  thou  let 
this  Man  go,  thou  art  not  Caesar's  friend  ;  whosoever  maketh  himself  a 
King  speaketh  against  Caesar. "  The  condemnation  of  Jesus  was  based  on 
His  Christship,  understood  as  the  assumption  of  a  Kingship.  Before 
Caiphas  He  was  adjured  whether  He  was  "  the  Christ"  (Math.  26  :  03), 
and  the  reply,  referring  to  Dan.  7,  indicates  (1)  that  He  claimed  the 
title  ;  (2)  that  He  was  understood  as  thus  claiming  it  (comp.  Mark  14  :  61, 
where  the  Evangelist  says  He  replied  "  I  am,"  etc.,  and  Luke  22  :  67-71)  ; 
and  (3)  that  the  charge  of  "  blasphemy,"  "  guilty  of  death,"  was  founded 
on  the  claim,  causing  them  afterward,  in  mockery,  to  say  (showing  their 
views),  "  Prophesy  unto  us,  thou  Christ"  (Matt.  26  :  68).  In  the  Person 
of  Jesus  there  was  a  plain,  decided  rejection  of  "  the  Christ,"  seeing  that 
this  was  the  matter  discussed.  Now,  if  Jesus,  as  moderns  inform  us,  only 
meant  under  this  title  "  a  doctrinal  word,"  how  could  He,  if  an  honest 
Person,  allow  the  Jews  to  remain  under  a  prejudice  as  to  the  name  which 
was  positively  suggested  by  the  grammatical  sense  of  the  Word  ?  No  !  the 
Jews  were  correct  in  their  idea  that  the  name  was  expressive  of  a  real, 
literal  Theocratic  Kingship.2  Before  Pilate  this  Christship  was  made 
synonymous  with  "  the  King  of  the  Jews"  (as  covenanted),  and  Pilate 
understood  that  "  Jesus,  which  is  called  Christ,"  must,  by  the  very  assump- 
tion of  the  title,  claim  to  be  King,  and  therefore  the  j)ertinent  question  : 
"  Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews  ?"  At  the  last  moment  Pilate  asks  (John 
19  :  15),  "  Shall  I  crucify  your  King?"  and  "  the  chief  priests  answered, 
We  have  no  King  but  Caesar."  "  The  Christ"  of  Matthew  is  made  by  Mark 
(15  :  9,  12)  equivalent  to  "  the  King  of  the  Jeics,"  and  the  superseiption 
of  the  cross,  the  mocking,  the  crowning,  the  arraying  with  a  robe,  the 
derision  of  the  soldiers,  "  the  accusation"  (Matt.  27  :  36,  37) — all  is  based 
on  the  assumed  Christship  of  Jesus.  Even  when  suspended  upon  the 
cross,  His  Messiahship  was  derided  bv  the  chief  priests,  etc., (Matt.  27  : 
42)  as  "  the  King  of  Israel"  and  (Mark  15  :  32)  as  the  "  Christ,  the  King  of 
Israel."  Let  the  student  ponder  this  meaning  so  persistently  and  variously 
presented,  and  consider  how  utterly  impossible  it  would  be  after  this  to 


Prop.  205.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  571 

make  it    "a  doctrinal  word"  without  the  most  express  affirmation  that 
the  original  meaning  has  been  authoritatively  changed.3 

1  The  Talmudists  declared  that  "  the  name  of  Messias"  -was  one  of  the  things  consti- 
tuted before  the  world  (Barrow's  Works,  vol.  2,  p.  345).  "  The  Rabbins  and  Cabalists" 
(working  on  the  etymology  of  the  word,  see  Knapp's  Theol,  p.  378)  ascribe  to  the  Mes- 
siah a  threefold  dignity  (crown),  viz.,  the  crown  of  the  law,  of  the  priesthood,  and  of  the 
Kingdom.  Vide  Schoettgen,  in  his  work  on  the  Messiah,  s.  107,  298.  The  customary 
and  pre-eminent  meaning  attached  by  the  Jews  to  it  was  that  of  King  in  the  line  en- 
forced by  our  argument.  In  Nathaniel  (1868-69,  vol.  12,  p.  49,  etc.)  the  editor  refers  to 
the  ancient  prayers  of  the  Hebrews,  still  retained  in  prayer-books,  in  which  the  Coming 
of  the  Messiah  is  prayed  for,  and  He  is  called  "the  Anointed  One,"  "  the  Bianch  of 
David,"  "  the  Son  of  thy  servant  David,"  "  the  King,"  "  the  Son  of  Jesse,  the  Bethle- 
hemite,"  "  our  Anointed  One,"  "  Thy  Anointed  One,"  "  Thy  Anointed  One  of  the  house 
of  David." 

2  "  Was  Pilate  right  in  crucifying  Jesus  ?"  has  been  answered  affirmatively  by  Stephen 
in  Liberty,  Equality,  Fraternity,  and  negatively  by  Innes  in  an  art.  on  The  Trial  of  Jesus 
Christ.  (Judge  Jones,  Notes  on  New  Test.,  an  eminent  jurist,  aptly  shows  the  injustice 
of  His  condemnation.  Innes  (Contemp.  Review,  1877),  on  "  The  Trial  of  Jesus  Christ," 
correctly  represents  how  the  claim  of  the  Christship  was  understood  by  both  the  Jews 
and  the  Romans,  viz.,  an"  a  royal  Messiah,  i.e.  a  Kinrj,"  which  constituted  the  crime 
"Majestas—  the  greatest  crime  known  in  Roman  law,  the  greatest  crime  conceivable  by 
the  Roman  imagination,  an  attack  upon  the  sovereignty  or  supreme  majesty  of  the 
Roman  state,"  "  adequately  expressed  by  one  word,  '  treason.'  "  This  accounts  for  two 
things,  worthy  of  the  critical  student's  notice  :  (1)  the  reason  why  Pilate,  after  being  con- 
vinced that  the  State  had  nothing  to  fear  from  this  single  unarmed  person  whose  death 
was  demanded  by  his  own  people,  still  allowed  his  death  to  ensue,  lest  the  threat  of  the 
Jews  to  report  him  as  no  friend  of  Caesar's  might  involve  him  in  grave  difficulties  with 
the  supreme  power  of  the  State  ;  and  (2)  that  this  explains  why  the  severity  of  prov- 
idential punishment  fell,  not  on  the  Romans  who  were  made  the  triumphant  instru- 
ments of  inflicting  it,  but,  on  the  Jewish  nation.  The  Jews  had  a  correct  Messianic  con- 
ception and  knew  what  it  implied,  and  hence  were  guilty  of  the  crime  of  employing  it — 
when  designed  specially  to  bless  them,  etc.— in  order  to  procure  the  death  of  Jesus.  The 
Romans  were  ignorant  of  its  Theocratic  meaning,  its  covenanted  and  divine  right,  etc., 
and  therefore  did  not  sustain  the  same  relationship  to  Him  in  condemnation  and  death. 
This  is  the  reason  why  the  Scriptures  single  out  the  Jewish  nation  as  the  guilty  party  in 
the  awful  tragedy. 

3  The  announcing  angel  to  Mary  (Luke  1  :  31-33)  gives  the  personal  name  of  Jesus  and 
then  without  expressing  the  title  Christ  describes  the  Christship  in  v.  32  and  33.  So  the 
angels  tell  the  shepherds  (Luke  2  :  11)  of  "a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ,  the  Lord,"  and 
Simeon  (v.  26)  being  permitted  to  see  "  the  Lord's  Christ,"  implies  in  the  very  phraseol- 
ogy the  Theocratic  Kingship.  The  devils  (Luke  4  :  41)  knew  Him  as  "  the  Christ,"  and 
as  we  have  shown  (Prop.  106)  the  temptation  of  Satan  was  addressed  to  "  the  Christship" 
of  Jesus.  The  Kingship  of  Jesus  attributed  by  the  Jews,  Acts  17:7,  implies  "  the 
Christship."  (Comp.  Matt.  2  :  4-6  ;  Mark  15  :  32,  etc.,  and  see  Jewish  testimony  in 
"  Psalterium  Salamonis, "  Prop.  73,  Obs.  5,  note,  and  in  corns,  generally.)  That  the  as- 
sumption of  the  title  "  Messiah"  was  understood  by  the  Jews  to  be  treasonable  to  the 
State,  is  likewise  apparent  in  the  history  of  false  Messiahs,  as  e.g.  in  the  case  of  Sabatai 
Sevi,  of  whom  the  Turkish  Government  was  informed  by  a  disappointed  follower, 
Nehemiah  Cohen,  of  the  dangerous  meaning  couched  under  the  title,  viz.,  the  overthrow 
of  Gentile  rule  and  restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne  and  Kingdom.  All  writers  admit 
that  with  the  Jew  the  title  was  the  equivalent  of  king  in  and  over  the  Theocratic  King- 
dom, seeing  that  kings  were  called  such  (e.g.  Saul,  1  Sam.  24  :  6,  "  The  Lord's  Anointed," 
David,  2  Sam.  23  :  1,  and  Zedekiah,  Lam.  4  :  20,  "  The  Anointed  of  the  Lord"),  and  the 
Messianic  predictions  (as  e.g.  Ps.  2  :  2,  and  22  :  6,  etc.),  designated  the  one  to  come  as 
Ruler,  "  The  Anointed."  So  Dan.  9  :  25  gives  us  "  Messiah  the  Prince,"  in  which  the 
latter  word  may  be  explanatory  of  the  former,  or  else  we  may  receive  Fausset's  (Com. 
loci)  explanation  :  ' '  Messiah  is  Jesus's  title  in  respect  to  Israel  (Ps.  2:2;  Matt.  27  :  37,  42). 
Nagid  (the  Prince),  as  Prince  of  the  Gentiles  (Isa.  55  :  4)."  A  comparison  of  Acts  8  :  5 
with  v.  12  shows  the  relationship  to  the  Kingdom,  which  Philip  preached.  John  shows 
the  distinction  and  importance  of  the  Christship,  e.g.  John  20  :  31  ;  1  John  5  :  1,  etc. 
Even  Ps.  45  :  8  usually  applied  to  the  priesthood  and  prophetical  office,  but  the  being 
anointed  with  "  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows,"  has,  as  the  context  shows,  a  de- 


572  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  205. 

cided  reference  to  His  Kingship,  seeing  that  in  the  first  verse  it  is  positively  stated  that 
the  psalm  contains  the  "  good  matter  :  I  speak  of  the  things  which  I  have  made  touching 
the  King,"  and  hence,  as  His  "  fellows,"  tne  co-heirs,  also  possess  Theocratic  rulership, 
the  superiority  of  this  King  above  all  others  is  asserted.  The  student  will  even  find 
something  in  Hannah's  exultant  prophetic  song  (1  Sam.  2  :  1-10).  Fairbairn  (Typology, 
p.  91,  note)  says  that  the  clause  "  exalt  the  horn  of  His  anointed  "  (connected  with  the 
overthrow  of  enemies  and  judging)  "  might  as  well,  and  indeed  better,  have  been 
rendered,  '  Exalt  the  horn  of  His  Messiah  ;  '  "  and  refers  to  Kimchi  as  applying  it  to  the 
Messiah,  aDd  the  Targum  paraphrasing  it,  "  He  shall  multiply  the  Kingdom  of  the  Mes- 
siah." He  then  remarks  :  "  It  is  the  first  passage  of  Scripture  where  the  word  occurs 
in  its  more  distinctive  sense,  and  is  used  as  a  synonym  of  the  consecrated  or  divine 
king."  (This  Messiah  in  virtue  of  His  relationship  to  David  and  the  meaning  of  David 
(Beloved)  is  called  "  David,"  Isa.  55  :  3,  4  ;  Hos.  3:5;  Jer.  30  :  9  ;  Ezek.  34  :  23,  24, 
and  37  :  24,  25.) 

Frothingham,  in  The  Cradle  of" the  Christ,  repeats  what  hundreds  previously  have  as- 
serted, viz.,  that  the  records  indisputably  teach  that  Jesus  believed  Himself  to  be  "  the 
Messias,"  i.e.  the  King  expected  by  the  Jews.  But  this  is  precisely  what  the  Records, 
if  Jesus  is  the  covenanted  Son  of  David,  ought  to  teach,  and  the  student  is  reminded 
that  we  have  proven  (as  e.g.  under  Projis.  70-76,  etc.)  that  after  the  death  of  Jesus  the 
Messianic  idea  remained  unchanged,  until  the  influence  of  the  Alexandrian  school  per- 
verted it,  and  this  perversion  became  general  and  imbedded  in  theology.  Frothingham 
teaches  in  his  work  that  Paul  was  at  first  a  Messianic  believer  as  the  Jews  held,  but 
suddenly  (in  view  of  his  Greek  associations)  another  idea  of  the  Messiah  revealed  itself 
to  him  — a  kind  of  spiritualizing  of  the  former  notion — and  Paid,  adopting  and  teaching 
this  spiritualized  conception,  commenced  the  origin  of  Christianity.  He  designates 
this  Paul's  "  new  departure."  This  re-statement  of  an  old  objection  is  flatly  contra- 
dicted by  the  postponement  of  the  Kingdom  (and  hence  also  the  manifestation  of  the 
Messiahship)  until  the  Second  Advent  by  Jesus  and  in  which  postponement  and  mani- 
festation Paul  entirely  concurred,  as  is  proven  by  the  Scriptures  (comp.  Props.  58-68, 
and  70-76)  and  by  the  history  of  the  early  Church  (Props.  75-78)  showing  that  the  Jewish 
idea  of  the  Messiah  was  retained,  east  and  west,  by  all  the  churches  established  by  Paul 
and  the  other  disciples.  Such  argumentation  can  only  arise  from  an  ignoring  of  the 
simple  facts  as  given  in  the  New  Test.,  of  the  faith  of  Paul  and  the  early  Church.  The 
alleged  change  in  meaning,  so  frequently  urged  by  unbelievers,  is  historically  a  much 
later  one,  and  was  introduced  by  uninspired  men  spiritualizing  the  Eecord. 


Obs.  5.  We  have  already  shown  that  the  immediate  disciples  and  apostles 
held  to  this  Messianic  idea  (i.e.  Kingship  over  the  restored  Theocratic- 
Davidic  Kingdom),  as  indicated  by  their  preaching,  etc.  This  is  so  incon- 
trovertible that  even  Knapp  (C7i.  TheoL,  p.  323)  concedes  it,  for  after 
giving  the  Jewish  idea  of  Messiah  or  Christ,  he  adds:  "The  apostles 
themselves  held  this  opinion  until  after  the  resurrection  of  Christ,"  Matt. 
20  :  20,  21  ;  Luke  24  :  21  ;  Acts  1  :  0.  The  question  arises,  Were  they 
mistaken  in  this  idea?  The  majority  of  modern  divines  insist  that  they 
were  mislead,  over  against  the  opinion  of  the  early  Church  and  others  that 
they  were  not  mistaken.  If  the  former  opinion  is  correct,  then  it  involves 
the  honesty  and  integrity  of  Jesus,  viz.,  that  He  could  deliberately  allow 
— if  the  word  Christ  means  no  more  than  moderns  assert — the  disciples  to 
be  in  ignorance  on  so  important  a  point,  being  the  heart  of  the  Kingdom 
preached.  Leaving  past  Propositions  to  sustain  the  belief  of  the  disciples 
and  apostles  (thus  vindicating  their  faitli  and  preaching  and  the  honor  of 
Jesus),  attention  is  directed  to  one  passage,  which  ought  to  be  decisive.  In 
Matt.  16  :  16,  Mark  8  :  29.  and  Luke  9  :  20,  Peter,  in  answer  to  the  ques- 
tion, "  Whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ?"  answers ;  "  Thou  art  the  Christ. "  Jesus 
replied  that  he  was  "  blessed"  because  the  Father  had  revealed  this  fact  to 
him.  Now,  how  could  he  be  "  blessed,"  how  could  the  matter  be  revealed 
to  him,   if  he  did  not  understand  the  meaning  of  "Christ?"     That  he 


PKOP.  205.]  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  573 

comprehended  it  in  the  Jewish  Theocratic  sense  is  self-evident  from  e.e. 
Acts  1:6.  . 

My  friend,  Eev.  Dr.  Sprecher,  in  a  conversation  on  this  point,  stated  that  it  is 
abundantly  evident  that  when  Jesus  was  born  it  was  believed  that  He  was  "  the  Christ," 
the  born  "  King  of  the  Jews,"  and  that  in  view  of  this  His  enemies  took  measures,  based 
on  this  claim,  to  put  him  to  death.  And  what  is  remarkable,  thus  agreeing  with  cove- 
nant and  prophecy,  not  the  slightest  hint  is  given  that  His  disciples  or  enemies  were 
mistaken,  but  the  contrary  is  implied  and  asserted.  All  could  say  (John  1  :  41,  and 
4  :  25)  :  "  We  have  found  the  Messias,  ichich  is,  being  interpreted,  the  Christ."  To  this  we 
add,  as  has  already  been  proven,  that  the  Person  of  this  Christ  has  the  divine  and 
human  united— for  the  Kingship  of  David's  Son  and  of  David's  Lord  are  united,  con- 
stituting the  one  King,  the  one  Christ.  This  is  a  sufficient  refutation  of  the  reasoning 
of  Eeber  (The  Christ  of  Paul),  that  in  the  Gospel  of  John  there  is  "  a  labored  effort  to 
sink  the  humanity  of  Christ,"  and  that  the  Gospel  was  written  by  Irenseus  (a  Millena- 
rian).  (Comp.  remarks  of  Oosterzee,  Theol.  New  Test.,  p.  301,  etc.,  on  Paul's  laying  so 
much  stress  on  the  humanity  of  Jesus.)  For,  it  will  be  seen  by  a  comparison,  that  every 
writer  thus  observed  the  Person  of  "  the  Christ,"  one  regarding  Him  more  from  the 
covenanted  human  standpoint,  the  other  from  the  Theocratic  ordering,  but  both  recog- 
nizing the  union  of  the  two  in  Him.  Again  :  Spinoza  and  others  have  objected  to  the 
anthropomorphism  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  and  many  in  reply  have  explained  it  as 
only  such  in  language,  an  accommodation  to  human  imperfection.  May  we  suggest  that 
the  Theocratic  conception,  "  The  Christ,"  may  serve  to  explain  the  matter — viz.,  may 
not  the  Plan  of  Eedemption  contemplating  a  Theocratic  rule  in  a  Person  in  whom  God 
is  united  with  man  thus  foreshadow  the  coming  incorporated  adaptation  ? 

Obs.  6.  The  student  will  also  observe  how  often  (as  in  connection  with 
Peter's  confession,  etc.)  the  disciples  were  charged  not  to  make  Him  known 
as  "  the  Christ."  If  "  Christ"  is  merely  "  a  doctrinal  word,"  no  satisfac- 
tory reason  can  be  given  for  this  prohibition.  Take  the  Theocratic  sense 
and  consider  that  the  Kingdom  was  tendered  conditionally  on  repentance, 
that  the  nation  refused  repentance,  that  the  representative  men  of  the 
nation  conspired  to  put  Jesus  to  death,  that  it  had  already  been  determined 
to  postpone  the  Kingdom  to  a  Second  Coming,  and  the  prohibition — in 
view  also  of  the  use  made  of  the  Christship  to  the  Roman  power — is  in 
accord  with  discretion  and  wisdom.  Having  gone  over  this  before,  it  is 
sufficient  to  add  that  this  prohibition  extended  only  to  the  death  of  Jesus, 
because  afterward  it  became  the  favorite  title,  seeing  (1)  that  in  view  of 
His  death  it  became  essential  to  show  that  He  was  still  "  the  Christ  ;"  (2) 
that  notwithstanding  His  death,  faith  in  "  the  Christ"  evinced  hope  in  the 
ultimate  fulfilment  of  covenant  and  prophecy  pertaining  to  it  ;  and  (3) 
the  death  of  Jesus  would,  owing  to  unbelief,  enable  the  Christship  to  be 
proclaimed  without  the  fear  of  being  regarded  in  rebellion  against  the 
Koman  Empire,  for  what  could  earthly  Kingdoms  fear  from  a  dead, 
cruciGed  Christ? 

This  view,  that  "we  maintain,  can  alone  satisfactorily  explain  the  extraordinary  omis- 
sions in  the  history  of  Jesus,  His  frequent  withdrawals  from  the  public  to  the  private 
shade,  the  lack  of  those  modernized  ideas  respecting  "  the  Christ,"  and  the  persistent 
usage  maintained  throughout  the  entire  Scriptures  concerning  it.  If  it  were  merely  to 
denote  the  moral,  religious,  spiritual,  ideal,  etc.,  that  so  many  attach  to  it,  what  reason, 
conclusive,  can  be  possibly  given  to  account  for  all  this  concealment  of  "  the  Christ"  ? 
Swedenborg  claims  that  he  was  specially  appointed  to  make  known  this  Christ  in  His 
fulness,  and  asserts  that  he  received  his  revelations  from  the  Lord  Himself.  The  man 
may  be  sincere  in  his  imaginings,  but  that  it  is  pure  delusion  is  evident  only  from  two 
considerations  :  (1)  from  his  totally  misapprehending  "  the  Christ"— the  meaning  even 
of  the  word  ;  and  (2)  from  his  pointedly  misconceiving  the  Kingdom,  and  flatly  contra- 
dicting covenant  and  promise  in  reference  to  it.     In  the  Apoc.  Revealed,  vol.  1,  s.  520,  he 


574  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  205. 

makes  "  the  Christ"  to  mean  "  divine  humanity"  and  "  the  reason  why  the  Lord's  divine 
.  humanity  is  meant  by  Christ,  is,  because  Christ  is  the  Messiah,  and  the  Messiah  is  the 
Son  of  God,  who  was  expected  to  come  into  the  world."  Let  the  student  observe  its  ir- 
relevancy :  (1)  because  the  Messiah  (Christ)  is  the  Messiah,  it  denotes  the  divine  human- 
ity ;  (2)  because  the  Messiah  is  the  Son  of  God,  it  means  the  same.  Now  "  the  Christ" 
includes  in  His  Person  and  Sonship  a  divine  humanity  (i.e.  the  human  united  with  the 
divine,  etc  ),  but  this,  as  we  have  abundantly  shown,  only  qualifies  Him  for  the  position 
of  "  the  Christ,"  i.e.  Theocratic  Kingship.  The  Person  eminently  fitted  for  the  office  is 
not  to  be  confounded  with  the  office  itself.  Hence  Leathes  ( The  Religion  of  Christ,  p.  3) : 
"  The  name  of  Christ,  however,  suggests  an  office  rather  than  a  person.  It  implies  the 
supposed  fulfilment  of  various  preconceived  ideas."  While  Leathes  in  his  work  falls 
into  the  common  mistake  of  making  the  Christship  too  imich  the  equivalent  of  Redeemer 
(i.e.  doctrinal),  he  is  correct  in  the  sentence  quoted,  although  now  since  the  assurances 
given  by  Jesus  and  His  acknowledgment  by  the  Father  this  title  belongs  to  Him,  and  the 
Person  and  title  suggest  each  other  and  cannot  be  disconnected. 

Obs.  7.  It  is  taken  for  granted  by  multitudes,  without  a  particle  of  proof, 
that  the  Jewish  meaning  of  "  Christ"  was  (as  Knapp  and  others,  see  note 
to  Obs.  4,  for  example)  changed  after  the  death  of  Jesus.  In  past  Proposi- 
tions it  has  been  proven  that  this  is  a  misapprehension  of  fact,  as  is 
evidenced  e.g.  in  all  the  churches  established  by  the  apostles,  east  and  west, 
retaining  the  Jewish  idea  of  the  Messiah,  viz.,  as  the  Anointed  One  who 
should  come  again  to  re-establish  in  power  and  glory  the  Theocratic- 
Davidic  Kingdom.  Let  the  student  ponder  this  simple  fact,  and  how  can 
he  account  for  it  unless  he  concedes — as  covenant  and  prophecy  demand — 
the  retention  of  the  Theocratic  idea  in  the  title  "  Messiah"  or  "  Christ." 
Let  him  also  reflect  what  the  general  view  was  down  to  the  ascension  of 
Christ,  and  if  a  change  in  so  vital  a  matter — relating  to  the  sense  and  faith- 
fulness of  Scripture,  the  nature  and  establishment  of  the  Kingdom,  the 
highest  interests  of  man  and  the  world — was  really  made,  we  ought  to  find 
it  specifically  mentioned.  But  where  is  such  a  change  intimated?  It  is 
pure  human  inference,  founded  on  a  misconception  of  the  covenanted 
Kingdom.  No  such  advocated  change  could  possibly  take  place  without  a 
rejection  of  the  Davidic  covenant ;  without  informing  the  Jews  that  they 
were  mistaken  in  their  conceptions  of  the  Messiah  and  induce  them  to 
receive  Jesus  as  "  the  Christ"  on  other  grounds  ;  without  a  sufficient  and 
satisfactory  explanation  why  the  Messianic  idea,  entertained  for  ages, 
should  prove  a  failure  or  be  transmuted  into  something  else.  Can  we 
explain  the  sudden  conversion  of  so  many  Jews  who,  above  all  things, 
tenaciously  (urged  both  by  covenant  and  prophecy)  held  to  the  Messianic 
notion  as  presented  by  us,  unless  it  be  shown  that  the  reception  of  Jesus 
also  embraced  the  retention  of  the  most  cherished  idea  of  "  the  Christ." 
This  retention  is  self-evident.  Take  e.g.  the  simple  and  often-repeated 
statement  (proven  again  and  again  in  our  argument  as  under  Props.  44,  G6, 
69,  70,  71,  72,  73,  etc.,  also  111,  121,  122,  etc.)  that  the  apostles,  after  the 
ascension  of  Jesus,  instead  of  changing  the  Messianic  idea,  constantly 
pointed  all  believers  to  the  Sec.  Advent  for  a  glorious  realization  of  the 
promises  connected  with  the  Christship  of  Jesus. 

Paul,  in  view  of  the  manner  of  his  conversion,  was  satisfied  that  the  crucified  Jesus 
was  indeed  the  Christ,  and  hence  at  once  (Acts  9  :  20,  22)  "  he  preached  Christ  in  the 
synagogues,"  "proving  that  this  (Jesus)  is  the  very  Christ.  But  how  did  he  give  this 
proof  ?  Certainly  not  by  changing  the  Messianic  idea,  but  by  representing  that  this 
Crucified  One  (which  was  the  stumbling-block  to  the  Jews  and  foolishness  to  the  Grecians, 
1  Cor.  1  :  23)  should,  as  his  reiterated  statements  in  his  epistles  show,  come  again  and 
manifest  Himself  as  the  Christ.     The  critical  student  will  find  that  according  to  the 


Prop.  205.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  575 

testimony  of  Chnrch  historians  (e.g.  Hase's  His.  Ch.  Church,  ch.  2,  Sec.  45)  the  early  re- 
tention of  the  Messianic  idea  of  the  title  gave  place  finally  among  the  Gentiles — not  con- 
versant with  its  covenanted  relationship — to  a  loss  of  its  special  significance  ;  the  Christ 
being  "  simply  the  Lord  and  the  Son  of  God."  The  truth  is  that  as  century  followed 
century,  and  the  Davidic  covenant  was  more  and  more  set  aside,  the  departure  from  the 
primitive  idea  became  so  fixed  that  no  reference  to  the  covenant,  upon  which  the  Mes- 
sianic title  is  unmistakably  founded,  was  deemed  necessary.  The  Theocracy  itself  was 
converted  into  the  Church,  and  the  Messiahship  was  supposed  to  be  fully  manifested 
through  it.  Potter  (Freedom  and  Fellowship),  in  the  essay  on  "  Christianity  and  its  Defi- 
nitions," points  out  that  historical  and  doctrinal  Christianity  is  based  on  the  confession 
that  Jesus  is  "  the  Christ"  or  "  the  expected  Messiah  of  Jewish  vision  and  prophecy," 
and  that  a  belief  in  the  Christship  was  made  obligatory  upon  the  primitive  Ch.  Church. 
He  then  truthfully  asserts  that  "  in  the  course  of  eighteen  centuries  it  has  come  to  pass 
that  this  confession,  though  continued  accurately  in  terms,  means  practically  something 
very  different  from  what  it  did  to  those  primitive  followers  of  Jesus."  Alas  !  this  is  only 
too  true.  Many  of  the  declarations  of  modern  Christianity  on  this  point  would  not  be 
recognized  by  the  early  Church.  Take  able  writers,  and  this  departure  from  primitive 
belief  is  painfully  evident.  Thus  e.g.  Gregory  (Four  Gospels,  p.  129)  makes  Jesus  acting 
as  the  Messiah  of  "  a  world-wide  spiritual  society,  an  everlasting  state,  the  Kingdom  of 
heaven,"  and  then  following  Principal  Tulloch  in  his  lectures  on  Ilenan,  he  says  :  "For 
whatever  Jesus  may  have  been  besides,  He  was  also  primarily  the  Messiah,  the  highest 
development  of  Judaism  —humanly  speaking,  the  ideal  Jew, "  etc.  The  Messiahship  is 
frittered  away  into  being  "  the  highest  expression  of  all  that  is  good  in  Judaism— the 
inheritor  of  whatever  moral  wisdom,  whatever  spiritual  genius,  survived  it."  Where 
then,  we  ask,  are  God' s  oath -bound  covenant  and  promises  ?  Are  these  also  ideal,  and 
did  God,  for  many  centuries,  leave  His  people  under  the  gross  impression  of  their  reality  ? 
While  not  rejecting  the  Supernatural  ideal  (Gill,  Christian  Conception  and  Experience),  and 
all  that  can  be  said  in  praise  of  Jesus,  this  does  not  lead  us  to  discard  the  fundamental 
and  blessed  meaning  of  the  Messiahship.  The  prevailing  view  (as  illustrated  in 
Edwards's  His.  Redemption)  and  its  application,  are  totally  unknown  to  the  Old  and  New 
Test.  Some  of  the  ablest  defences  of  Christianity  are  vitiated  by  an  entire  misapprehen- 
sion of  "  the  Messiah."  Thus,  Walker's  Philosophy  of  the  Plan  of  Salvation,  ch.  11,  etc., 
prejudging  the  Messianic  Kingdom  and  the  faith  of  the  Jews  in  prophecy  through  the 
influence  of  his  entertained  Church-Kingdom  view,  makes  the  title  a  doctrinal  word,  and 
rejects  as  Jewish  error  the  idea  of  a  restoration  of  a  Davidic  Kingdom  and  the  constitut- 
ing of  Jesus  an  earthly  Ruler.  To  make  out  his  case  he  (1)  ignores  the  Davidic  cove- 
nant, or  spiritualizes  it  ;  (2)  passes  by  the  express  prophecies  which  teach  it,  and  which 
led  the  Jews  to  their  belief  ;  (3)  overlooks  one  class  of  predictions  to  lay  stress  on  an- 
other, relating  to  humiliation  and  death,  i.e.  to  those  pertaining  to  the  First  Advent  ;  (4) 
refuses  the  teaching  of  the  conditional  offering  of  the  Kingdom  and  its  postponement  ; 
(5)  does  not  see  how  the  Scriptures  link  the  realization  of  that  which  he  condemns,  to  the 
Sec.  Advent  ;  (7)  and  throughout  substitutes  a  spiritual  sense  for  the  plain  grammatical 
one.  Such  a  line  of  reasoning,  which  persistently  rejects  fundamental  ideas  clearly  taught, 
is  irrelevant.  The  fulfilling  of  one  class  of  predictions  at  the  First  Advent  is  no  proof 
that  we  are  to  ignore  just  as  literal  a  fulfilment  of  another  class  at  the  Second  Advent, 
but  the  reverse  ;  while  the  application  of  the  latter  class  to  the  past  and  present  (done 
only  by  a  method  of  spiritualizing)  is,  to  say  the  least,  a  changing  of  the  Word. 

Obs.  8.  Our  whole  argument  shows  that  when  He  comes  again ,  He  comes 
as  "  the  Christ,"  the  Anointed  King  who  is  to  reign  as  David's  Son  and 
Lord  just  as  covenant  and  prophecy  require.  Jesus  claims  that  when  He 
comes  again  it  is  as  "the  Christ"  (Mark  14  :  61,  62)  ;  "  the  day  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ"  is  still  future  (Props.  138  and  139)  ;  the  Judgment  seat 
(or  throne)  of  Christ  (Eom.  14  :  10  and  2  :  16)  will  be  established  on  earth 
(Props.  133  and  134),  the  saints  at  Christ's  appearing  shall  appear  with 
Him  in  glory  (Col.  3  :  4),  the  saints  when  He  comes  to  reign  shall  reign 
with  Christ  (Rev.  20  :  4),  in  brief,  compare  2  Thess.  1  :  1,  2  ;  Phil.  3 
20  ;  Rev.  11  :  15  ;  1  Thess.  5  :  9,  23  ;  1  Cor.  15  :  21-23  ;  1  Cor.  1  :  7,  8  ; 
Acts  17  :  30,  31  ;  1  Thess.  2  :  19  and  3  :  13  ;  Tit.  2  :  12,  13  ;  1  Pet.  1  :  7, 
13  :  1  John  2  :  8,  etc.     If  there  is  a  truth  clearly  taught  in  the  Scriptures, 


576  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  205. 

it  certainly  is  this  one,  that  "  the  Christ"  shall  thus  come  and  exhibit  His 
mighty  power  and  glory  as  "  Christ"  in  delivering  His  people,  punishing 
His  enemies,  and  reigning  gloriously  as  "  the  King  of  kings." 

Let  the  attentive  reader  observe,  that  the  Apostles  lay  great  stress  on  the  fact  that 
"  the  Christ"  died  for  us,  gave  Himself  for  our  sins,  in  order  that  He  might  redeem  us. 
This  would  be  exceedingly  forcible  to  the  Jewish  mind,  or  to  any  one  who  received  the 
covenant  and  prophecies  in  their  grammatical  sense.  Then  "  the  Messiah"  gave  Himself 
for  a  sacrifice  in  our  behalf  ;  tlie  Anointed  One,  the  King  Himself  dies  to  save  us  ;  and  this 
very  feature  of  the  case — enhancing  the  greatness  of  the  offering,  the  submission  and 
love  of  the  Saviour — makes  the  title  Christ  such  a  favorite  with  the  Apostles,  pointing  as 
it  does  to  the  past,  the  present  benefits,  and  the  future  perfected  redemption.  If  the 
reader  will  refer  to  Prop.  199,  Obs.  7,  note  1,  he  will  find  the  defect  pointed  out  in  pre- 
vailing theology  which  gives  us  only  a  part  of  "  the  Christ."  Some  systems  make  the 
death  of  Christ  the  central  idea  ;  others  give  us  the  Incarnation  as  such,  but  while  each 
of  these  are  indispensable,  neither  of  them  are  more  than  provisional  in  order  that  the 
covenant  may  ultimately  be  realized  under  "  the  Christ."  It  is  the  Theocratic  King  as 
manifested,  and  the  glorious  Kingdom  that  He  institutes  as  "  the  Christ,"  that  brings 
us  blessed  deliverance.  The  Kingdom  is  the  end — the  centre  around  which  all  revolves, 
while  "  the  Christ"  (not  in  one  aspect,  but  in  His  perfected  manifestation)  is  the  heart 
of  that  centre.  The  King  and  the  Kingdom  cannot  be  separated  ;  the  one  suggests  the 
other,  and  the  one  belongs  to  the  other  in  perpetual  relationship.  It  is  evident  to  any 
student  of  the  Word  that  Dr.  Gleig  (His.  Bible,  vol.  2,  p.  204)  must  have  penned  the  fol- 
lowing sentence  through  inadvertency  :  "  Besides,  it  is  an  error  to  assert  that  the  Mes- 
siah is  more  frequently  or  more  plainly  described  as  a  triumphant  Monarch  than  as  a  suffer- 
ing man."  The  fact  is  that  the  two  classes  of  prophecies  bear  no  comparison  to  each 
other  as  seen  in  these  pages,  for  the  very  title,  official  designation,  itself  suggests— even 
while  suffering — the  triumphant  Monarch.  The  fact,  too,  that  the  early  faith  took  its 
name  "  Christian,"  not  from  the  proper  name  Jesus,  but  from  His  royal  title,  evidences 
how  highly  important  and  declarative  (of  coming  Kingship)  it  appeared  to  those  early 
believers.  Its  exceeding  preciousness  was  a  prominent  feature  in  the  Millenarian  faith, 
for  believing  in  "  the  Christ"  and  His  future  revelation  as  such,  this  confession  of  the 
Christship  of  Jesus  by  its  assumption  in  name  was  the  foundation  of  their  joyful  hopes  of 
deliverance  and  completed  salvation.  Some  prophetical  writers,  not  observing  the 
proper  distinction,  designate  (so  e.g.  Wilson,  Proph.  Times,  N.  S.,  May,  1878,  p.  102) 
the  ministry  of  Jesus  down  to  His  crucifixion  "  The  Ministry  of  Christ  as  the  Messiah," 
and  inform' us  that  "  His  ministry  as  their  Messiah  was  terminated  by  their  final  rejec- 
tion of  Him  ;  and  His  crucifixion  terminated  their  national  covenant."  Now  the  real 
facts  are,  as  we  have  shown  under  various  Propositions,  that  His  ministry  was  only  pre- 
paratory to  the  Messiahship  (publicly  manifested  in  possession  of  that  which  the  title 
implies),  seeing  that  the  Christship  with  what  it  involves,  was,  owing  to  Jewish  non- 
repentance  and  rejection,  held  in  abeyance  and  postponed,  and  the  assurance  is  given  of 
the  nation  finally— after  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  ended— beholding  and  accepting 
of  the  same  Messiah.  While  the  Jewish  ritual  was  abolished  by  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus, 
this  cannot  be  extended,  as  we  have  shown  in  detail  in  other  places,  to  a  termination  of 
"  their  national  covenant."  The  interesting  article  of  Wilson  (same,  June,  1878,  p.  126), 
while  applicable  to  a  ceremonial,  does  not  apply  to  an  enduring,  perpetual  national  re- 
jection, for  this  would  strike  a  deadly  blow  at  oath-bound  promises,  Jewish  election,  our 
engrafting,  Jewish  restoration  and  supremacy,  etc.  This  holding  in  abeyance  of  a 
manifested  Messiahship— i.e.  fulfilling  what  the  title  imports— until  the  Sec.  Advent, 
must  not  be  mistaken  for  rejection. 

Obs.  9.  The  last  opposition  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  is  against  "  the 
Christ"  for  they  are  "  angry,"  Rev.  11  :  18,  that  He  comes  to  assert  His 
covenanted  claims.  He  comes  (e.g.  Rev.  19)  as  the  King  (i.e.  the  Christ), 
and  "  the  Kings  of  the  earth  and  their  armies  are  gathered  together  to  make 
war  against  Him."  In  Acts  4  :  26  we  find  Ps.  2  :  1,  2  applied  in  an 
inchoate  fulfilment  to  the  opposition  of  Herod,  etc.,  "  against  His 
Christ."  In  1  John  2  :  22  the  great  antichristian  spirit,  which  virtually 
denies  by  its  works  and  opposition  the  Father  and  the  Son,  is  designated  : 


Prop.  205.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  577 

"  Who  is  a  liar  but  lie  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Clirist."  As  previ- 
ously intimated,  a  comparison  of  Scripture  indicates  (Prop.  174,  180,  etc.) 
that  at  the  ending  of  this  dispensation  a  knowledge  of  the  Christship  of 
Jesus  and  the  claims  of  Kingship  which  it  necessarily  involves,  will,  more 
or  less,  be  extended  among  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  prove  to  be  one,  if 
not  the  chief,  cause  for  the  unrelenting  hostility  manifested  against  "  the 
Christ."  They  will  feel  that  if  such  claims  are  allowed,  then,  as  predicted, 
their  Gentile  domination  must  inevitably  cease  (Prop.  164).  But  blinded 
by  prejudice,  ambition,  the  love  of  power,  and  unbelief,  instead  (Ps.  2  : 
10-12)  of  being  "  wise,"  acknowledging  "  the  Son,"  and  tendering  obedi- 
ence, they  resist  "  the  Christ,"  and  "  perish"  under  "  His  wrath."  It  is 
the  distinctive  "Christ,"  coming  to  manifest  Himself  as  such,  that  is 
opposed,  and  all  opposition  is  effectually  crushed  under  the  mighty  Theo- 
cratic King. 

It  is  a  sad  fact  that  two  parties  will  afford  the  reasoning  by  which  the  rulers  of 
earthly  governments  and  their  subjects  will  be  influenced,  in  sustaining  their  temporal 
power,  etc.,  against  the  Theocratic  claims  of  King  Jesus,  viz.,  unbelievers  and  believers. 
Unbelievers  (us  seen  e.g.  in  Ecce  Homo,  Schenkel,  Renan,  Furness,  and  others)  will  claim 
that  "  the  Christ"  is  simply  the  ideal  or  representative  man,  the  hero  and  head  of  a  re- 
ligious revolution,  etc.,  or  that  (as  seen  in  the  Telegraph,  No.  37)  "  any  just  and  perfect 
being  is  Christ,"  or  that  (as  seen  in  the  numerous  extracts  given  by  vis)  there  never  was 
such  a  historical  Person,  He  being  the  creature  of  Jewish  imagination  and  religious 
fanaticism,  etc.  All  these,  moderate  and  extremists,  totally  ignore  or  decry  the  specific 
Messianic  claims  as  a  mere  remnant  of  Judaism.  If  we  take  the  most  liberal  utterances 
of  unbelief,  most  eulogistic  and  professedly  founded  on  the  Gospels,  yet  these  claims  are 
contemptuously  set  aside.  Thus  e.g.  Potter  (Christianity  audits  Definitions)  says  :  "  Chris- 
tianity is  the  substance  of  what  Jesus  Himself  taught — that  is,  God's  love  to  man  and 
man's  love  to  God  and  to  his  fellow-men — and  does  not  consist  in  any  doctrine  about  Jesus  ; 
and  the  Christian  is  one  who  lives  habitually  in  the  same  attitude  toward  God  and  man 
as  did  Jesus."  This  "definition"  is  to  be  called  evangelical  as  well  as  liberal,  since  it 
professes  to  find  its  authority  in  the  Gospels.  This  does  not  touch  the  historical  rise 
of  Christianity,  and  leaves  untouched  the  fundamentals  of  Christianity,  and  the  highest 
claims  of  Jesus  to  our  faith  and  reverence.  The  distinctive  Christ  is  entirely  omitted, 
and  an  example  for  imitation  (good  as  far  as  it  goes)  is  alone  presented.  A  solitary 
qualification  is  singled  out  and  made  to  stand  for  the  Messiah.  (2)  It  is  sad  to  find  mul- 
titudes of  believers  who  ignore  and  despise  "  the  Christ"  as  covenanted,  but  it  is  more 
painful  still  to  see  the  most  eminent  and  valuable  of  writers  swaying  an  influence  in  the 
same  direction.  We  select  an  excellent  author  to  illustrate  :  Rogers  (Superhuman  Origin 
of  the  Bible),  in  several  of  his  highly  interesting  Apologetic  lectures,  totally  misappre- 
hends the  Christship,  and  converts  it  into  a  doctrinal  word.  Speaking  of  the  Jewish 
conception  of  the  Messiah,  he  (e.g.  p.  61)  asks  how  the  Jewish  mind  could  receive  Jesus 
as  "  tne  Christ"  when  His  life,  etc.,  was  so  contradictory  to  their  views  of  "a  triumph- 
ant Messiah,  who,  while  swaying  his  sceptre  over  the  subject  nations,  should  confirm 
and  enhance  the  privileges  of  the  favored  people,  and  reflect  upon  them  the  lustre  of  his 
reign,"  etc.  This  he  calls  the  Jewish  "  day  dream  for  centuries,"  and  pronounces  an 
"  illusion."  He  thus  denies  the  covenanted  meaning  of  "the  Christ,"  and  teaches,  by  im- 
plication, that  such  a  claim  as  the  word  indicates  and  was  believed  in  should  be  resisted 
as  a  mere  "  day  dream"  and  "  illusion."  He  overlooks  lehv  the  Jewish  mind  and  heart, 
still  retaining  its  "  day  dream,"  could  receive  the  crucified  Jesus  as  "  the  Christ,"  viz. 
that  His  life,  death,  resurrection  and  exaltation  confirmed  Him  as  "  the  Messiah,"  who  had 
postponed  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenanted  promises  to  the  Sec.  Advent.  Alas  !  Rogers  is 
courteous  in  his  rejection  of  the  pure  Messianic  idea,  in  comparison  with  many,  many 
others,  who  treat  the  Theocratic  order  involved  in  it  as  "  the  grossest  fanaticism,"  and 
the  most  childish  and  foolish  of  conceptions.     These  are  paving  the  way. 

Ols.  10.  This  subject  of  the  Christship  is  exceedingly  important,  for 
without  it  we  could  have  no  hope  of  the  fulfilment  of  covenant  and 
prophecy — of  the  Coming  Kingdom  and  glory.     Oosterzce,  Kahnis,  and 


578  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.    205. 

others  have  well  answered  the  question,  "What  value  must  we  Gentile  Chris- 
tians attach  to  the  truth  and  confession  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus? 
But  in  addition  we  add  that  our  entire  line  of  argument  makes  this  dis- 
tinctively fundamental,  seeing  that  all  our  hopes  of  ultimate  salvation,  the 
restitution  of  all  things,  the  blessedness  and  exceeding  glory  of  the  future 
Kingdom,  depends  upon  the  Christship  of  Jesus.  It  is  as  the  Messiah  that 
He  comes  to  he  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  and,  therefore,  a  proper  concep- 
tion of  "  the  Christ,"  is  a  vital  one  to  a  proper  understanding  of  perfected 
Redemption.  What  "  the  Christ"  has  done  in  the  past  and  present  is  only 
an  earnest  of  what  He  will  do  for  us  when  He  is  revealed  as  "  the  Christ" 
in  Christly  honor,  regality,  power,  and  glory. 

Barrow  (Works,  vol.  2,  p.  34G)  has  well  observed  :  "  That  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  is  the 
principal  article  of  pure  faith  ;  the  most  peculiar  doctrine  of  our  religion  as  such,  and  as 
distinct  from  all  other  religions  ;  it  indeed  virtually  comprehends  all  other  doctrines  of 
moment  therein,  regarding  either  faith  or  practice.  Fur  that  our  being  persuaded  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ,  implies  that  we  apprehend  ourselves  obliged  to  embrace  for  truth  what- 
ever was  taught  by  Him  and  His  Apostles,  to  obey  all  His  laws,  to  rely  upon  Him  for 
attainment  of  all  the  mercies,  and  blessings,  and  rewards,  which  He  promised  to  dis- 
pense, in  that  order  and  upon  those  terms  which  the  Gospel  declareth.  Whence  to  the 
hearty  belief  of  this  point  such  great  commendations  are  given,  so  high  rewards  are 
offered,  so  excellent  privileges  are  annexed  in  the  Scriptures.  Whence  also  the  declar- 
ing, proving,  and  persuading  this  doctrine  was  the  chief  matter  of  the  Apostles'  preach- 
ing, as  both  their  profession  and  practice  do  show."  Barrow,  if  he  had  clearly  appre- 
hended the  covenanted  titular  meaning  of  the  name,  might  have  largely  added  to  this 
eulogy.  For,  as  our  line  of  scriptural  argument  indicates,  this  enables  us  to  interpret 
and  appropriate  the  promises  of  the  great  riches  of  glory  in  Christ,  Fhil.  4  :  19.  Com- 
mentators and  others  too  much  apply  this  to  the  present  time,  when  it  extends  to  and 
embraces  the  period  of  His  glory  as  the  manifested  Christ.  The  riches  flow  from  the 
Christship  of  the  Jesus,  i.e.  from  the  Theocratic  relationship  that  Jesus  will  oj^enly 
exhibit  and  enforce.  Hence  the  promises  of  future  glory,  reigning,  etc.,  at  His  Coming. 
It  is  passing  strange,  and  yet  in  full  accord  with  prediction,  that  professed  believers,  who 
lay  special  stress  on  the  phrase  "  No  Creed  but  the  Christ,"  do  not  even  appreciate  the 
meaning  of  "  Christ."  The  entire  grand  result  of  the  work  of  Jesus  has  for  its  central 
idea  "  the  Christ,"  i.e.  when  its  true  scriptural  meaning  is  realized.  Without  it  the 
Kingdom  is  nothing  ;  without  it  Christianity,  as  the  primitive  form  indicates,  loses  its 
logical  coherency  ;  without  it  there  can  be  no  historical  or  doctrinal  unity  ;  without  it 
there  can  be  no  perfected  Redemption  or  blessed  salvation  which  the  prophets  predict 
and  faith  accepts  ;  and  without  it  all  knowledge  fails  to  bring  us  hope  of  a  world  restored 
to  Theocratic  rule.  We  also  add,  for  the  critical  student,  that  this  title  of  "  Christ,"  in 
view  of  its  relationship,  enforces  the  Divine-Human  in  Jesus, 

Ois.  11.  The  student  will  notice  that  the  saints  who  are  destined  to  bo 
"  kings"  are  specially  declared  to  be  "  Christ's  lodif  (Rom.  12  :  5  ;  1 
Cor.  12  :  27  ;  Eph.  1  :  23,  and  4  :  12,  etc.),  and  being  also  "  anointed"  (2 
Cor.  1  :  21  ;  1  John  2  :  20,  27),  they  are  associated  in  rule  and  Kingship 
(Theocratic  ordering)  with  Him.  The  Christ  is  the  Head,  and  is  above 
His  "fellows"  (Ps.  45  :  7).  The  honor  and  exaltation  of  the  body 
accounted  worthy  to  r  ign  with  Him  are  presented  under  Props.  154,  153, 
and  156. 

It  is  not  a  small  thing  that  Paul,  1  Cor.  3  :  11,  asserts  that  the  foundation  laid  is 
"  Jesus  the  Christ  ;"  and  we  cannot  help  feeling  that  persons  who  are  savingly  united  by 
justifying  faith  to  Jesus,  by  ignoring  the  covenanted  and  predicted  meaning  of  "  Christ," 
and  substituting  in  its  place  humanly  derived  meanings,  are  thus  far  building  on  the 
foundation  material,  that  the  Coming  again  of  the  Messiah  will  show  to  be  "  wood,  hay, 
stubble."  A  writer  in  the  Evangelist  has  much  to  say  respecting  Millenarian  views,  run- 
ning counter  to  prevailing  views,  as  so  polemical  and  opposed  to  the  method  of  Jesus. 


PEOP.  205.]  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  579 

But  in  the  pure  eyes  of  the  writer  there  is  nothing  "polemical  "  in  preaching,  prayer, 
hymns,  etc.,  which  condemn  our  doctrine,  and  substitute  a  Christ  not  covenanted  or  pre- 
dieted.  Jesus  opposed  erroneous  doctrine  as  well  as  practice,  and  if  compelled  to  vindi- 
cate His  honor  and  glory  as  connected  with  His  Christship,  we  only  follow  His  example 
and  the  express  commands  of  Scripture.  Like  the  Philadelphians  (Eev.  3  :  8)  we  desire 
not  to  deny  but  uphold,  if  needs  be  defend,  His  name.  The  very  official  title  of  Jesus 
reminds  us  also  that  it  should  prevent  a  believer  to  assume  that  irreverent  and  undue 
familiarity — evidenced  by  some  in  the  past — with  Him  in  representations  of  His  relations 
to  us  and  ours  to  Him.  "While  duly  appreciating  His  nearness,  friendship  and  love,  the 
immeasurable  superiority  and  majesty  of  "  the  Christ"  should  urge  us  to  reverence  and 
respect  in  address. 

Obs.  12.  The  preaching  of  the  first  preachers  was  that  of  "  the  Christ" 
(Acts  2  :  30,  31,  36  ;  3  :  20  ;  4  :  10  ;  5  :  42,  etc.)  ;  Philip  "preached 
Christ"  and  "  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ"  (Acts  8  :  5,  12)  ;  Paul  "  preached 
Christ"  (Acts  9  :  20,  22);  in  brief,  all  did  as  Paul  given  in  Acts  17  :  3,  and 
18  :  5,  28,  and  19  :  4,  and  20  :  21,  and  28  :  31.  This,  as  we  have  seen, 
was  requisite  and  essential,  for  the  doctrine  cannot  be  eliminated  without 
destroying  the  vitality  of  faith  and  hope.  It  was  necessary  also  to  give  it 
due  prominency  in  order  to  reach  the  Jewish  heart  and  the  longing  of 
Gentileismfor  deliverance.  We  Millenarians  are  sometimes  most  unjustly 
charged  as  if  we  did  not  preach  "  the  Christ,"  when  it  is  a  most  vital  point 
in  our  system—  fundamental  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom,  seeing  that 
without  "  the  Christ"  the  Kingdom  is  impossible.  We  preach  not  only 
"  Christ  crucified"  as  the  means  of  deliverance,  but  with  Paul  we  preach 
['Jesus  Christ  and  Him  (Christ)  crucified"  (1  Cor.  2  :  2,  and  1  :  23),  point- 
ing out  both  what  the  Christship  means  and  designs  (as  covenanted  and 
predicted),  and  then  how  through  faith  in  a  crucified  Christ  we  can  attain 
to  an  inheritance  with  Him  as  "  the  Christ."  With  us  "  Christ  is  all  in 
all" 

It  is  simply  folly  to  confine  the  preaching  of  Christ  to  Him  as  the  Crucified  One,  for 
this  would  leave  out  the  glory  of  "  the  Christ,"  exalting  His  humiliation  and  death  (so 
precious  as  a  means)  to  the  exclusion  of  its  design  in  fitting  Him  for  the  Christship,  and 
in  drawing  those  to  Him  who  should  participate  in  the  revealed  "  Christ."  Let  the 
reader  turn  to  Paul  who  uses  these  expressions,  and  see  how  many  things,  besides  the 
crucifixion,  he  unites  with  the  idea  of  "the  Christ,"  and  how  largely  he  directs  us  to 
the  future  revelation  of  Christ,  and  he  must  conclude  that  the  title  embraces  that  which 
we  have  affirmed.  This  is  clearly  seen  and  acknowledged  by  our  opponents.  Thus  e.g. 
Barnes  (Com.,  2  Cor.  4  :  5)  remarks  on  the  words  :  "  We  preach  not  ourselves  but  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord,"  the  following  :  "  This  important  passage,  therefore,  means  that  they 
made  it  their  sole  business  to  make  known  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  or  the  Christ,  as  the 
Supreme  Head  and  Lord  of  people,  i.e.  to  set  forth  the  Messiahship  and  the  lordship  of 
Jesus  of  Nazareth."  He  then  tells  us  to  do  this  implies,  (1)  to  prove  that  he  is  the 
Messiah  predicted,  (2)  to  proclaim  the  truths  He  taught,  (3)  to  make  known  the  facts  of 
His  life,  (4)  to  set  forth  the  design  of  His  death,  (5)  to  proclaim  His  resurrection,  etc., 
(6)  to  hold  Him  forth  as  Lord.  But  we  show  that  more  than  this  is  implied,  as  e.g.  His 
covenanted  relationship  as  Christ,  His  position  as  "  the  Christ"  in  the  Coming  Kingdom, 
His  Judgeship  as  Christ,  etc.  Hence  it  will  be  seen  that  our  system  of  faith  —which  is 
reproached  by  some  who  evidently  are  unacquainted  with  it—  makes  much  of  Christ,  and 
while  receiving  that  which  is  ordinarily  attached  to  it  (as  above)  includes  precious  cove- 
nanted and  predicted  truths  that  other  systems  either  ignore  or  imperfectly  present. 
Numerous  Propositions  present  a  converging  testimony  to  our  faith  in  the  Christship  of 
Jesus.     May  we  be  so  happy  as  to  realize  its  preciousness  in  all  its  fulness. 

Obs.  13.  The  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  evinces  the  serious  defects  exist- 
ing in  numerous  Lives  of  Christ.     This  is  seen   e.g.    in  making  "  the 


580  THE   TIIEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PEOP.  205. 

Christ"  a  mere  doctrinal  word,  in  misapprehending  the  Kingdom,  in  sub- 
stituting a  Kingdom,  in  invalidating  the  faith  and  preaching  of  the  dis- 
ciples, in  ignoring  the  Davidic  covenant,  in  overlooking  the  postponement, 
in  spiritualizing  prophecies,  in  misapplying  the  fulfilment  of  prediction, 
in  exaggerations  of  the  design  of  the  present  dispensation,  in  not  evincing 
the  relation  that  the  First  Advent  sustains  to  the  Second  and  its  results, 
etc.  No  one  is  properly  qualified  to  write  such  a  life,  unless  acquainted 
with  the  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  ;  otherwise  everything  is  viewed  through 
a  church-Kingdom  medium,  which  injuriously  and  erroneously  affects  the 
truth  pertaining  to  Jesus,  the  Christ.  However  valuable  and  able  many 
such  Lives  are,  the  fact  is  that  they  are  largely  vitiated  by  fundamental 
errors  which  forbids  the  production  of  a  consistent,  Scriptural,  covenanted, 
and  predicted  Life,  such  as  the  Old  Test,  foretells  and  the  New  Test. 
imparts. 

Many  of  those  lives,  aside  from  such  defects,  are  ably  written,  contain  valuable  and 
suggestive  matter,  defend  much  truth  against  unbelief,  and  lead  us  to  admire  and 
reverence  Jesus.  It  is,  therefore,  saddening  to  point  out  blemishes  and  faults,  obtained 
through  the  entertained  theories  of  an  existing  Messianic  Kingdom  as  covenanted  and 
predicted,  because  a  sincere  admiration  of,  and  indebtedness  to,  such  writers  regret  to 
specify  anything  that  may  detract  from  them.  Yet  faithfulness  demands  it,  for  such 
works— owing  to  their  vast  number,  extended  circulation,  and  ability  of  the  authors— are 
moulding  the  minds  of  multitudes  in  opposition  to  the  clear  teaching  of  Scripture 
respecting  "  the  Christ.' '  The  apologies  that  are  frequently  presented  by  them  (of  which 
we  give  in  other  places  various  specimens),  in  behalf  of  their  leaving  the  plain  grammati- 
cal sense  for  a  spiritualistic  one,  are  unworthy  of  the  life  they  describe.  Such  attempts 
also  only  confirm  the  expression  of  modern  unbelief,  as  illustrated  e.g.  in  Abbott's  Genius 
of  Christian)!)/  and  Free  Religion,  Potter's  Christianity  and  its  Definitions,  etc.  It  causes  — in 
view  of  the  alleged  changes  and  transformations — the  author  of  the  Creed  of  Chrish  ndom, 
in  answer  to  the  question,  "  Was  Christ  a  divinely-commissioned  Teacher  of  truth?"  to 
answer  in  the  negative,  notwithstanding  the  high  eulogies  bestowed  upon  Him  as  "  the 
wisest,  purest,  noblest  Being,"  "  highest  ideal  yet  presented  to  us  on  earth"  (while 
engaged  in  denying  His  Christ  claims,  aspirations,  hopes,  etc.).  To  indicate  what  con- 
cessions unbelief  gives  to  the  Christ  idea,  its  importance,  and  the  change  introduced,  we 
append  extracts  from  two  writers.  Abbott  (The  Genius  of  Christianity  and  Free  Religion) 
says  :  "  It  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  Jesus  did  actually  claim  to  be  the  Christ  or  Mes- 
siah, that  is,  the  Founder  and  Sovereign  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  So  all-pervading  is  this 
claim  that  to  eliminate  it  from  the  Gospels  is  to  reduce  them  at  once  to  unadulterated 
myth.  If  misunderstood  on  this  point,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Jesus  has  been 
understood  on  any  point  :  if  His  reported  sayings  on  this  subject  are  genuine,  there  is 
no  reason  to  suppose  any  of  His  sayings  to  be  gemiine.  In  the  words  of  James  Marti  - 
neau  (National  Review,  Ap.,  1863),  '  Whoever  can  read  the  New  Test,  with  afresh  eye  must 
be  struck  with  the  prominence  everywhere  of  the  Messianic  idea.  It  seems  to  be  the  ideal 
framework  of  the  whole  — of  history,  parable,  dialogue  ;  of  Pauline  reasoning  ;  of  Apoca- 
lyptic visions.'  "  "  The  Messianic  faith  is  the  soul  of  the  entire  New  Test.,  giving  unity 
to  the*Gospels,  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse."  But  he  argues — supported  by  the  expressed 
faith  of  multitudes — that  the  original  Messianic  idea  was  changed.  Such  take  the  apolo- 
gists (as  e.g.  Neander's  Life  of  Christ,  etc.)  and  adopt  largely  their  views  respecting  the 
alleged  change.  Thus  Potter  (Christianity  and  its  Definitions)  remarks  :  "  In  that  child- 
like age,  among  a  child-like  people,  something  more  was  needed  than  a  bare  proclamation 
of  moral  and  spiritual  truth,  with  whatever  power  of  personal  genius.  And  this  need 
was  supplied  by  the  old  Hebrew  conception  of  the  speedy  coming  of  the  Messianic  King- 
dom -a  conception  that  appealed  with  all  the  vividness  of  a  drama  to  the  spiritual  imag- 
ination, and  hopes,  and  fears  of  men.  This  idea  is  the  one  thread  of  unity  that  nms 
through  all  the  varieties  of  writings  in  the  New  Test,  from  Matthew  to  Kevelation.  It 
was  this  that  gradually  lifted  Jesus  Himself  out  of  all  human  and  historic  proportions 
into  the  colossal  magnitude  in  which  he  has  been  seen  by  Christendom  for  eighteen 
centuries.  It  was  the  belief,  after  His  crucifixion,  in  His  Second  Messianic  Advent  -  an 
event  which  His  followers  looked  for  in  their  lifetime  — that  gave  the  immediate  animat- 
ing impulse  to  their  cause,  and  attracted  such  numbers  of  people  to  confess  Him  as  the 
expected  Christ.;  for  this  Advent  was  to  solve  all  life's  trials  and  perplexities  ;  it  was  to 


Prop.  205.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  581 

bring  redemption  to  the  sinful,  rest  to  the  weary,  wealth  to  the  destitute,  and  comfort  to 
the  sorrowing.  And  around  this  simple  childish  hope,  which  was  yet  full  to  bursting 
with  the  deep  life  of  spiritual  aspirations  and  yearnings,  the  first  Christian  Church  was 
gathered — a  sect  of  Judaism  accepting  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  and  looking  for  His  Second 
Coming  to  complete  and  establish  His  sovereignty."  Sustained  in  his  belief  that  this  was 
a  "  childish  hope"  by  able  and  learned  Apologists  and  writers  of  the  life  of  Jesus,  ho 
endeavors  to  account  for  the  change  (which  we  fully  meet  in  other  places)  in  order  to 
make  "  Christianity  acceptable  after  it  had  passed  westward  beyond  the  limits  of  Pales- 
tine, and  into  countries  where  the  Hebrew  conception  in  its  original  form  could  have 
little  power." 


582  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  206. 


Proposition  206.    This  earth  will  yet  witness  the  re-establishment 
of  a  glorious  Theocracy — a  Theocracy  in  its  perfected  form. 

Our  entire  line  of  argument  directly  founded  on  the  covenants 
and  prophecies  of  the  Old  Test.,  and  on  the  teachings  and  predic- 
tions of  the  New  Test. ,  enforces  this  Proposition,  the  hope  of 
ancient  believers,  of  the  primitive  Church,  and  of  a  long  and  noble 
line  of  witnesses  for  the  truth.  We  will  now  briefly  bring  together 
the  converging  lines  of  testimony  which  present  this  blessed  pros- 
pect, so  much  needed  by  humanity. 

The  reader  is  expected  to  keep  in  view  the  reasoning  under  the  Propositions  referred 
to,  seeing  that  to  avoid  recapitulation  a  mere  reference  is  deemed  amply  sufficient. 

Obs.  1.  Attention  is  again  called  to  the  fact  that  this  form  of  govern- 
ment, predicted  to  be  established  and  to  extend  itself  over  the  earth,  is  a 
Theocracy,  i.e.  God  Himself,  in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  the  Son  of  David, 
rules  in  it  as  an  earthly  Kuler.  This  form  of  government  is  already  seen 
in  the  Theocracy,  initiatory,  once  established  (Props.  25,  26)  and  which 
incorporated  the  Davidic  line  (Props.  27-33).  God  was  the  Supreme  Ruler 
— the  earthly  King.  This  fundamental  idea  must  necessarily  be  retained, 
if  justice  is  done  to  the  direct  representations  of  Scripture,  seeing  that  the 
entire  tenor  and  analogy  of  the  Record  incontestably  proves  that  the  same 
Theocracy  overthrown,  owing  to  the  sinfulness  of  the  nation,  shall  be  again 
restored  under  the  Messiah  with  increased  splendor  and  power  (comp. 
Props.  31,  32,  33,  34,  35,  and  3G).  As  the  Theocracy  must,  in  the  very 
nature  of  the  case,  include  a  manifested  reign  of  God  as  earthly  Ruler  and 
the  exhibition  of  an  intimate  and  abiding  union  of  the  civil  and  religious, 
this,  of  course,  does  not  allow  us  to  make  the  Church,  as  now  constituted, 
the  covenanted  Kingdom  of  the  Messiah  (comp.  Props.  88-104).  The 
Theocracy  restored  as  covenanted  and  predicted  through  Jesus  at  His 
Second  Advent,  brings  forth  the  Son  of  David  as  the  actual  representative 
of  God  manifesting  God  to  us  in  a  pure  Theocratic  relationship  in  the  Person 
of  One  related  to  humanity — thus  adapting  it  to  the  necessities  of  humanity, 
and  insuring  its  divine  and  permanent  nature  (see  e.g.  Prop.  200).  The 
Theocracy  being  a  form  of  srovernment  in  which  the  State  and  Church  are 
united,  and  in  which  the  ruler  is  accessible  as  the  Head,  etc.,  it  follows,  as  a 
requisite  result,  that  the  Church  in  this  dispensation  cannot  be  the  promised 
Messianic  Kingdom,  and,  therefore,  as  the  Bible  declares,  this  Theocracy 
when  re-established  shall  be  visibly  manifested,  and  the  Messiah's  reign 
shall  be  one  visibly  exhibited  over  the  earth  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  131  and 
1G8).  A  Theocracy,  such  as  God  Himself  has  practically  explained  and 
enforced,  cannot  be  displaced  by  a  substitution  of  something  else,  and  it 
cannot  be  spiritualized  away  without  doing  violence  to  a  thousand 
promises  and  calling  into  question  the  faithfulness  of  Clod. 

Under  Props.  25-37,  etc.,  attention  has  been  directed  to  the  perversion  of  the  Theo- 
cratic idea,  and  its  wholesale  appropriation  to  things  that  lack  its  most  essential  features. 


Prop.  206.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  583 

A  few  additional  illustrations  are  appended  to  evince  the  careless  handling  of  the  subject. 
The  title  of  the  following  work  is  sufficiently  suggestive  :  I'heocracy,  or  the  Principles  of 
the  Jewish  Religion  and  Polity,  adapted  to  all  Nations  and  Times,  by  the  Rev.  Rob.  Craig. 
Objection  is  justly  urged  against  De  Maistre,  "  On  the  Pope,"  claiming  for  the  Pope  the 
office  of  Sovereign  and  Infallible  Arbiter  on  the  ground  of  a  divinely  appointed  Theocratic 
ordering  exhibited  in  the  Roman  Church,  but  some  Protestants  just  as  painfully  mistake 
the  Theocratic  idea  and  misapply  it,  as  exemplified  even  in  the  title  of  the  following 
book  :  The  New  England  Theocracy ;  a  History  of  the  Congregationalists  of  New  England  to 
the  Revivals  of  1710,  by  H.  F.  Uhden,  etc.,  1859.  Unfortunately  writers  of  ability  and 
acknowledged  merit,  as  a  multitude  of  quotations  would  show,  thus  pervert  the  Scriptural 
meaning,  and  make  the  labor  of  restoring  its  original  import  and  intent  correspondingly 
harder.  The  authority  of  others,  and  a  resulting  prejudice,  are  in  the  way  of  appreciat- 
ing the  Scriptural  signification  and  intention  of  a  Theocracy.  We  need  not  be  surprised 
that  the  Papacy  (Alzog's  Univ.  Bis.,  vol.  2,  p.  490,  etc.)  should  designate  itself  "  a  univer- 
sal Theocracy"  or  "  a  system  of  Theocracy,"  but  it  is  surprising  that  Protestantism  so 
largely  adopts  the  same  spirit  when  it  (Meyer,  etc.)  designates  the  Church  as  "  the  Mes- 
sianic Theocracy,*'  when  the  fact  is,  that  if  we  retain  the  simple  meaning  and  application 
practically  of  the  Word,  nowhere  is  a  Theocracy  at  present  existing  on  earth,  because  God 
refuses  to  act  now,  for  any  nation  or  people,  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly  Ruler.  His 
Divine  Sovereignty  is  one  thing  ;  a  special  covenanted  Theocracy  pertaining  to  this 
earth  is  quite  another.  Hence  those  writers,  who  reason  that  the  past  establishment  of 
the  Theocracy  ought  to  be  imitated  by  a  union  of  Church  and  State,  are  most  certainly 
mistaken.  Thus  Craig,  "  Theocracy  ;  or  the  Principles  of  the  Jewish  Religion  and  Polity 
adapted  to  all  Nations,"  while  presenting  many  admirable  things,  concludes  that  the 
Theocracy,  as  once  instituted,  is  a  model  designed  for  future  rulers  and  nations.  This 
is  nowhere  asserted  in  the  Bible,  and  cannot  be  true,  since  an  infallible  head  and  will, 
which  alone  can  control  such  a  union  and  make  it  a  source  of  mutual  strength,  is  lacking. 
The  mistakes  of  the  past  in  this  direction,  the  bitterness,  hatred,  injury,  and  bloodshed, 
sufficiently  attest  the  correctness  of  our  position.  It  is  true  that  there  are  certain  great 
principles  of  law — as  many  writers  have  forcibly  shown — the  rights  of  man,  the  social 
relations,  etc.,  presented,  which  are  worthy  of  study  and  reception  in  practice.  But  to 
make  it  a  model  in  its  fundamental  Theocratic  principles,  is  certainly  erroneous,  and  pro- 
ductive of  great  evil.  Craig  and  others  mistake  when  they  make  the  Jewish  Theocracy, 
as  such,  one  of  universal  application  (this  is  reserved  for  the  future  under  Christ),  and 
when  they  assert  that  Christian  nations  are  equally  under  a  Theocracy  like  the  Jews 
(Christianity  only  being  preparative  to  the  promised  Theocracy).  Why  is  it,  that  men 
will  so  persistently  ignore  the  special  features  which  constitute  a  Theocracy,  and  mistake 
the  Universal  Sovereignty  of  God  for  the  special  covenanted  Kingdom,  in  which  Church 
and  State  are  united  under  God  as  the  earthly,  accessible,  supreme,  infallible  Head  ?  A 
writer  North  Brit.  Review,  May,  1850,  p.  143)  justly  observes  that  without  this  "no  gov- 
ernment should  receive  the  name." 

Obs.  2.  We  press  upon  the  notice  of  the  reader  the  consistency  and 
reasonableness  of  such  a  future  Theocracy.  The  relation  that  man  and 
this  earth  sustains  to  the  most  High  God  requires  that  the  honor  and 
majesty  of  God  should  demand  the  establishment  of  a  Theocracy  here  on 
the  earth,  by  which  the  race  is  brought  under  a  government  honorable 
alike  to  God  and  man.  Our  line  of  argument  strongly  develops  this 
feature,  and  the  student  will  appreciate  its  force,  if  attention  is  called  to  a 
few  points.  (1)  At  the  creation  God  had  determined  upon  this  form  of 
government  (Props.  1  and  2)  ;  (2)  man  by  disobedience  forfeited  a 
dominion  which  God  through  him  was  to  exercise  over  the  earth  (Props.  8 
and  82)  ;  (3)  God  has  resolved  to  restore  that  dominion  in  the  Person  of 
Jesus,  the  Second  Adam  (Prop.  82)  ;  (-4)  God — to  indicate  in  what  form 
of  government  this  dominion  should  be  incorporated  when  restored,  to  test 
man's  present  capacity  for  it,  and  to  make  certain  indispensable  provisions 
for  the  future — erected  a  Theocracy  (Props  25,  2G,  etc)  ;  (5)  man,  owing 
to  sinfulness,  was  unfitted  for  a  Theocratic  ordering,  and,  therefore,  it  was 
withdrawn  (Props.  32,  33,  etc.)  ;  (0)  God  promised   at  some  future  time  to 


584  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  [PliOP.  206. 

restore  it  (Props.  33-3G)  ;  (7)  this  Theocracy  is  God's  own  preference  for 
a  form  of  government,  and  if  not  restored  makes  His  proposed  government 
a  failure  (Prop.  201)  ;  (S)  God  lias  sent  His  Son  to  make  provision  for 
Salvation,  i.e.  to  lift  man  and  the  race  out  of  the  state  of  rebellion  and  to 
restore  all  the  blessings  forfeited  by  the  fall  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  IDG,  182, 
144,  etc.)  ;  (9)  this  Salvation  in  its  ultimate  realization  is  invariably  linked 
with  this  still  future  Coming  Kingdom  (so  e.g.  Props.  120,  121,  etc.)  ;  (10) 
God,  to  insure  the  future  permanent  establishment  of  the  Theocracy,  is 
preparing  a  body  of  rulers  for  the  same  to  be  associated  with  "  the  Christ" 
(Props.  61,  86,  05,  and  153)  ;  (11)  that  until  this  Theocracy  is  set  up  the  race 
is  not  brought  into  subjection  to  God  (comp.  e.g.  Props.  176,  152,  204, 
etc.)  ;  (12)  however  glorious  in  design  this  dispensation  may  be,  there  is 
still  an  incompleteness  in  Redemption  and  which  will  continue  until  "  the 
Messiah"  comes  to  restore  the  Theocracy  (Props.  87,  88,  120,  etc.)  ;  (13) 
when  this  Theocracy  is  re-established,  then  under  the  rulership  of  Christ 
and  His  saints  the  race  itself  is  brought  into  subjection  to  God — a  revolted 
province  is  brought  back  to  its  pristine  allegiance  and  blessedness  (  Props. 
124,  200,  151,  etc.)  ;  (14)  the  Theocracy  is  the  form  of  government  most 
admirably  adapted  to  secure  this  result  (Props.  128,  116,  117,  119,  etc.)  ; 
(15)  a  theocracy  being  in  its  nature  a  visible  government,  such  a  sover- 
eignty and  redemption  completed  must  be  visibly  shown  in  the  sight  of 
the  world,  so  that — as  rightly  belongs  to  God  and  is  done  in  heaven  itself 
— it  be  publicly  recognized  (Props.  121,  122,  131,  154,  etc.)  ;  (16)  the  per- 
sonal relationship  of  God  to  Adam  in  Paradise,  to  the  Theocracy  once  estab- 
lished in  the  past,  toman  in  and  through  Jesus  at  the  First  Advent,  insures 
a  future  special  and  continued  personal  relationship  in  a  restored  throne 
and  Kingdom  (by  way  of  pre-eminence  called  His  own)  as  exhibiting  His 
Supremacy  in  the  most  tangible  and  satisfactory  manner,  and  that  the 
recovery  of  a  rebellious  people  and  race,  as  well  as  the  manifestation  of 
God's  will  being  done  on  earth  as  in  heaven,  includes  such  a  personal 
relationship  in  the  Person  of  Him  who  is  "the  Son  of  Man"  (Props.  81, 
86,  and  199,  204,  etc.). 

The  offices  of  Jesus  as  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  are  united  in  this  Theocracy  ;  the 
Kingship  of  the  Jews,  the  Headship  of  the  Church,  and  the  Second  Adamship,  are  so 
combined  in  this  form  of  government  that  they  are  inseparable,  forming  One.  The 
swaying  of  the  sceptre  in  behalf  of  deliverance  over  the  world  includes  these  relations  in 
a  realized  Theocratic  sense,  a  unity.  Hence  we  do  not,  in  this  future  state,  regard  them  as 
separate  and  distinct  one  from  the  other,  but  united  in  the  same  person.  For,  as  shown 
in  detail,  this  Theocratic  reign  will  result  in  manifesting,  as  something  actually  realized, 
Jesus  as  "  the  Saviour  of  the  World."  To  day  a  favorite  phrase  with  many  theologians 
to  express  the  highest  phase  relating  to  Jesus,  is  that  of  a  "  Christocracy, "  but  whatever 
may  be  asserted  respecting  the  same,  it  is  still  true  that  a  "  Theocracy' '  is  the  more  com- 
prehensive term,  embracing  more,  and  impressing  more  specifically  the  divine  and  the 
result  of  the  Christship. 

Obs.  3.  Nothing  but  a  real  Tlieocracy  can  possibly  satisfy  the  represen- 
tations given  in  the  Scriptures.  Let  the  reader  consider  the  numerous 
reasons  presented  in  its  behalf,  some  of  which  are  the  following  :  (1)  The 
actual  establishment  of  a  Theocracy  which  God  claims  as  His  special 
Kingdom,  and  which  He  withdraws  under  promises  of  future  restoration 
(Props.  25,  33,  etc.).  (2)  The  covenant,  confirmed  by  oath,  positively 
demands  its  future  restoration  under  David's  Son  (Prop  49).  The 
Kingdom  that  is  covenanted  to  that  future  David's  Son  is  not  some  other 


Prop.  206.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  585 

form  of  government,  but  the  identical  Tlieocracy  identified  with  David's 
throne  and  Kingdom  (Props.  31-33).  (3)  The  postponement  of  the  King- 
dom (Props.  GG,  G7,  87)  makes  it  indisputably  certain  that  this  Theocracy  will 
be  restored  at  the  return  of  Jesus.  His  own  words  are  amply  sufficient  to 
sustain  our  faith  in  such  a  blessed,  expectation.  (4)  The  prophecies,  in 
their  plain  sense,  imperatively  demand,  the  Theocracy  to  be  restored  (Props. 
21,  32,  33,  etc.),  seeing  that  the  same  Theocracy  overthrown  is  the  one  that 
they  declare  shall  be  gloriously  re-established.  (5)  The  faith  and  hope  of 
the  pious  Jews  implies  such  a  regained.  Theocracy  (Props.  20,  40,  and  85), 
because  we  cannot  believe  that  God.  would,  thus  incite  and  foster  a  false 
faith  and  hope  by  an  admitted  sense  of  His  Word  to  be  sadly  disappointed. 
No  !  He  will  be  faithful  to  the  sense  given  under  His  own  auspices,  and 
these  ancient  believers  shall  yet  exult  in  the  full  realization  of  anticipated 
deliverance  and  glory  in  the  restored  Theocracy.  (G)  John  the  Baptist's 
faith  and  hope  imply  the  same  (Props.  38-41),  for  it  is  impossible,  without 
degrading  a  person  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost"  and  specially  commis- 
sioned to  preach  the  Kingdom,  to  believe  that  John  should  utterly  misap- 
prehend the  nature  of  the  Kingdom  he  was  to  proclaim.  (7)  The 
doctrinal  views  of  the  disciples,  apostles,  and  primitive  Church  (Props. 
43,  44,  70,  71-78),  in  reference  to  the  Kingdom,  were  such  that  they  cannot 
be  consistently  explained  (without  lowering  their  commission,  inspiration, 
and  faith),  unless  we  receive  their  expectations  of  a  future  re-established 
Theocracy  to  be  the  truth.  (8)  The  confining  by  Jesus  of  the  preaching 
of  the  Kingdom — its  tender — to  the  Jewish  nation  (Props.  54,  55,  etc.), 
indicates  that  the  Theocracy,  which  pertained  to  them,  was  the  Kingdom 
offered.  Hence,  as  the  very  Kingdom  tendered  to  them  is  the  one  post- 
poned to  the  Sec.  Advent  (Props.  G6-G8),  the  same  Kingdom  must  be  the 
one  ultimately  restored.  (9)  The  Kingdom  not  being  established  under 
John's  ministry  (Prop.  41),  not  under  Christ's  (Prop.  5G),  and  not  in  this 
dispensation  (Props.  70,  71,  and  90  to  110)  corresponds  with  the  nature  of 
the  Theocracy,  seeing  that  no  such  form  of  government  has  yet  been  wit- 
nessed. (10)  The  design  of  this  dispensation  (Prop.  8G),  the  preparatory 
nature  of  the  Church  (Props.  88-105),  the  gathering  out  of  a  people  to 
inherit  the  Kingdom  (Props.  Gl-65) — these  are  all  points  in  agreement  with 
our  position  respecting  the  future  Theocracy,  and  thus  aid  in  establishing 
it.  (11)  A  correct  understanding  of  the  Divine  Sovereignty  as  something 
ever  existing,  and  the  covenanted  Kingdom  which  that  Sovereignty  bestows 
(comp.  Props.  79  and  80),  enforces  the  precise  idea  of  a  real  Theocracy, 
pertaining  to  a  special  rule  confined  to  this  earth.  (12)  A  consideration 
of  this  Kingdom  as  belonging,  byway  of  covenant,  specifically  to  "  the  Son 
of  Man,"  and  what  this  implies  (Prop.  81),  brings  forward  the  Theocratic 
ordering  alone  as  intended.  (13)  The  restoration  of  the  dominion  for- 
feited by  the  first  Adam  through  the  Second  Adam  (Prop.  82)  involves  a 
rule  such  as  we  know  can  only  be  realized  after  the  Sec.  Advent  of  Jesus, 
and  which  the  Scriptures  unite  with  this  re-established  Tlieocracy.  (14) 
This  Theocratic  Kingdom  is  given  to  Jesus  by  the  Father  (Prop.  83),  but 
as  a  result  of  His  obedience,  sufferings,  and  death  (Prop.  84),  and,  in  view 
of  the  time  of  bestowal  and  the  reason  for  the  same,  corroborates  our  faith 
in  an  ultimate  real  Theocracy.  (15)  The  promises  to  the  saints  of  inherit- 
ing this  Kingdom  (Prop.  90,  etc.)  at  the  period  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  coincide 
with  so  many  other  declarations  and  predictions  relating  to  this  Theocracy 
and  the   positions   they   shall   occupy   therein,  that  they  corroborate   and 


586  THE   THEOCEATIC    KINGDOM.  [PkOP.  206. 

strengthen  our  belief.  (10)  The  Theocracy  being  Christ's  inheritance 
(Props.  122,  49),  and  as  He  1ms  not  yet  restored  the  same  Theocracy  (down- 
fallen)  which  all  the  prophets  unite  in  testifying  He  will  perform,  we  con- 
fidently hold  that  the  Theocracy  will  be,  must  be,  again  manifested.  (17) 
A  Pre-Millennial  resurrection  (Props.  125-129)  so  admirably  fits  into  the 
future  Theocratic  ordering  as  promised,  that  the  very  fact  of  its  being 
taught  and  allied  with  the  Kingdom  at  the  Sec.  Advent,  in  order  to  pro- 
mote the  efficiency,  grandeur,  and  power  of  the  then  existing  Theocracy,  con- 
firms our  faith  in  the  same.  (18)  The  inheriting  of  the  earth  by  the  meek 
(Prop.  142),  implies  it,  seeing  that  under  such  a  Theocratic  ordering  and 
the  ruling  involved  in  it,  the  saints  have  dominion  over  all  the  earth,  etc. 
(19)  The  predicted  place  of  manifested  royalty  (Prop.  168)  can  only  be 
reconciled,  without  undue  violence  to  the  language,  with  this  doctrine  of  a 
future  Theocracy.  (20)  The  restoration  of  the  Jews  (Props.  111-114) 
unmistakably  proves  the  correctness  of  our  position,  because  that  restora- 
tion is  indispensable  to  the  re-establishment  of  the  same  Theocracy  over- 
thrown (the  nation  being  in  covenanted  relationship  to  it),  and  its  extension 
over  the  world.  (21)  The  supremacy  of  the  Jewish  nation  (Prop.  114),  so 
clearly  taught,  can  only  be  explained  in  view  of  this  future  restored  The- 
ocracy, seeing  that  nation  is  brought  into  special  nearness  to  it  on  account 
of  its  national  covenanted  affinity  (Props.  24,  29,  30,  54,  55-64)  to  it.  It 
strongly  confirms  our  doctrine,  being  just  what  we  might  reasonably  antici- 
pate. (22)  The  simple  fact  that  the  restoration  of  forfeited  blessings  (Prop. 
119)  is  linked  by  the  prophets  with  this  regained  Theocracy,  materially  aids 
in  sustaining  our  view.  (23)  These  forfeited  blessings  thus  united  with 
the  Kingdom  can  only  be  introduced  by  the  power  of  Christ  (Prop.  120), 
and  hence,  to  be  fulfilled  here  on  earth  as  portrayed,  necessitates  a  Pre- 
Millennial  Advent  of  Jesus.  Such  an  Advent  is  abundantly  taught  (Prop. 
121),  and  thus  fully  sustains  our  doctrine.  (24)  The  Barren  Woman 
(Prop.  118),  as  well  as  many  other  predictions  taken  isolated,  can  only  be 
consistently  interpreted  in  the  light  of  such  a  future  Theocracy  in  which 
the  saints  form  a  chosen  corporate  body  intimately  associated  with  Christ, 
and  the  Jewish  nation  one  that  is  specially  favored  by  God.  Such  predic- 
tions, therefore,  afford  additional  proof  in  favor  of  our  position.  (25) 
The  prophecies  relating  to  the  destruction  of  Antichrist  and  the  removal  of 
all  wickedness  (Props.  115,  123,  161,  162,  163),  by  the  personal  interven- 
tion of  Jesus,  are  only  reconcilable  with  our  doctrine  of  the  Kingdom, 
and  form  a  requisite  preliminary  to  a  correct  understanding  of  its  introduc- 
tion and  power.  (26)  The  same  can  be  said  of  the  predictions  relating  to 
the  end  of  Gentile  domination  (Prop.  164),  which  in  intent  exactly  agrees 
with  the  predicted  Theocratic  ordering  extending  over  the  world,  but  can- 
not be  made  to  fit  into  the  prevailing  views  of  the  Kingdom.  The  very 
fact  that  it  ends,  shows  that  it  is  superseded  by  another  form  of  domina- 
tion, even  the  one  that  we  advocate.  (27)  The  predictions  pertaining  to 
a  visible  reign  of  Christ  (Props.  122, 131,  117)  are  alone  perfectly  consistent 
with  a  restored  Theocracy  ;  they  do  not  fit  into  any  other  system  of 
faith  and  hence  are  not  retained  in  their  plain  meaning  but  are  either 
spiritualized,  or  made  typical  of  something  else.  (28)  The  Judgeship  of 
Jesus  (Prop.  132)  in  all  its  fulness  of  detail  and  richness  of  power  exhibited, 
can  only  be  predicated  of  such  a  Theocracy.  Limiting  it  to  simple  judicial 
action  is  to  strip  it  of  its  scriptural  and"  Theocratic  meaning.  (29)  The 
day  of  judgment  (Prop.  133)  in  its  grand  results  and  its  wide  sweep  of  juris- 


Prop.  206.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  587 

diction,  serves  to  indorse  the  Theocratic  idea.  No  other  belief  can  incor- 
porate what  is  stated  in  reference  to  it.  (30)  "  The  world  to  come" 
(Prop.  137)  as  used  by  the  Jews  to  designate  the  restored  Theocracy 
under  the  Messiah,  and  its  retention  and  location  at  the  Sec. 
Advent,  shows  that  our  faith  is  well-grounded.  (31)  The  day  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (Prop.  138)  designating  a  period  of  time  after 
the  Sec.  Advent,  in  itself  is  highly  expressive  of  our  view.  This 
time  so  specially  relating  to  Christ,  certainly  pertains  to  an  era  when 
His  Theocratic  reign,  as  covenanted,  is  inaugurated.  (32)  This  is 
strengthened  by  what  is  said  of  "  the  morning"  of  "  the  day  of  Christ" 
(Prop.  139)  and  the  events  connected  therewith — the  whole  being  associated 
by  the  prophets  with  the  commencement  of  such  an  age  still  future.  (33) 
"  The  rest"  or  "  Sabbatism"  (Prop.  143)  is  significant  of  such  a  The- 
ocracy, and  by  the  analogy  of  Scripture  is  connected  therewith.  (34) 
"  The  end  of  the  age"  and  the  things  preceding  and  following  (Prop.  140) 
are  expressive  of  the  beginning  and  jierpetuation   of  the  Theocratic  rule. 

(35)  The  perpetuity  of  the  earth  (Prop.  141)  and  the  perpetuity  of  the  race 
(Prop.  152),  after  the  Sec.  Advent,  so  essential  to  this  Theocratic  idea,  are 
clearly  taught  and  sustain,  in  simple  consistency,  the  glorious  Theocratic 
rule  over  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  nations.  They  are  doctrines  which  neces- 
sarily must  be  revealed  in  order  to  make  the  Theocratic  rule  practicable. 

(36)  The  New  Heavens  and  New  Earth  (Props.  148,  151)  united  by  the 
prophets  with  this  restored  Theocracy,  impressively  teach  what  kind  of  a 
government  Christ  exerts  over  the  nations.  (37)  "The  times  of  Restitu- 
tion" (Prop.  144),  "  the  Regeneration"  (Prop.  145),  the  deliverance  of 
creation  (Prop.  146)  are  all  inseparably  connected  w7ith  the  "  appearing  and 
Kingdom,"  i.e.  with  a  Kingdom  established  here  on  earth  after  the  sending 
again  of  Jesus,  that  they  strongly  corroborate  the  doctrine  here  advocated. 
(38)  The  Transfiguration  (Prop.  153),  the  Temptation  of  Christ  (Prop. 
106),  the  belief  in  the  speedy  Advent  by  the  primitive  Church  (Prop.  74), 
the  Father's  house  (Prop.  170),  the  marriage  of  the  Christ  to  the  New  Jerusa- 
lem (Prop.  169),  the  perpetuity  ascribed  to  this  Kingdom  (Prop.  159),  these 
bring  forth  additional  reasons  confirming  our  trust  in  the  plain  grammati- 
cal sense  of  the  covenants,  prophecies,  and  promises  descriptive  of  a  real 
Theocratic  government.  They  indicate  the  kind  of  Kingdom  intended, 
its  rulers,  subjects,  and  permanence.  (39)  The  visible  reign  of  the  saints 
here  on  the  earth  after  the  Advent  over  nations,  subordinate  to  the  Christ, 
plainly  reveals  (Props.  154  and  156)  not  only  the  Theocratic  rule,  but  how 
it  is  then  inaugurated  and  carried  on  in  a  perfected  form  under  per- 
fected rulers,  thus  insuring  its  stability  and  blessedness.  (40)  The  location 
of  the  Millennial  period  (Prop.  158)  after  the  Sec.  Advent,  can  only  be 
made  to  accommodate  itself  to  our  view.  To  our  Theocratic  system  it  is 
essential  ;  to  any  other  it  would  be  an  excrescence.  The  prophets  link 
their  Millennial  descriptions  with  a  restored  Theocracy.  (41)  The  non- 
conversion  of  the  world  before  the  Sec.  Advent  (Prop.  175  and  176)  is  con- 
firmatory of  our  position,  seeing  that,  in  view  of  the  direct  portraiture  of 
this  dispensation  and  of  the  Church  down  to  the  Advent  itself,  no  place  is 
found  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  Millennial  predictions  ;  and  they  must,  of 
necessity,  be  located  where  all  Scripture  places  them,  viz.,  after  the 
Advent,  and  under  the  instituted  Theocratic  ordering.  (42)  Even  the  very 
condition  of  unbelief  assumed  by  the  Church  and  the  world  (Props.  177, 
178, 180)  respecting  the  means  to  inaugurate  the  Kingdom  and  the  Kingdom 


588  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  206. 

itself,  confirms  our  faith,  seeing  that  such  a  state  of  unbelief  in  God's  pre- 
dictions, and  promises,  and  mode  of  procedure,  is  to  be  characteristic  of 
the  last  times.  Unbelief  in  the  covenanted  and  predicted  restored  Theo- 
cratic Kingdom  is  pre-eminently  characteristic  of  the  Church  and  world  to- 
day. (43)  The  translation  of  the  saints,  as  a  preparatory  measure  (Props. 
130  and  118),  is  only  in  agreement  with  a  proposed  Theocratic  ordering, 
seeing  that  such  a  translation  is  intended  to  prepare  them  for  a  rulership 
in  it.  (44)  The  rudimentary  re-organization  of  the  Theocracy  at  Mt.  Sinai 
(Prop.  166)  in  the  future,  the  Eevelation  of  the  Divine  Will  (Prop.  167) 
adapted  to  this  renewed  and  perfected  ordering,  the  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  of  fire  (Prop.  171)  then  experienced,  encourage  the  retention  of 
the  ancient  faith,  because  these  indicate  how  we  can  become  suitably  pre- 
pared to  participate  in  the  wonderful  out-goings  of  Theocratic  rule.  (45) 
The  fact  that  belief  in  this  restored  Theocracy  brings  forth  "  the  One 
Hope"  (Prop.  182)  which  sustained  a  multitude  of  believers  ;  that  it  ex- 
hibits in  this  Theocracy  a  manifested  unity  (Prop.  184)  which  never  can 
be  realized  without  it ;  that  it  is  supported  by  the  analogy  of  Scripture, 
the  analogy  of  faith,  and  the  analogy  of  tradition  (Prop.  185)  which  no 
other  system  can  claim  ;  that  it  gives  coherency  and  unity  of  design  to  the 
Gospels,  Acts,  Epistles  and  Apocalypse  (Props.  187-191) ;  that  it  forms  a 
key  to  open  Scripture  (Prop.  192)  making  much  plain  that  otherwise  would 
be  dark  ;  that  it  does  not  drive  us  to  deprive  the  Jews  of  their  retained 
faith  and.  hope  in  the  plainly  expressed  predictions  of  God's  Word  (Prop. 
193),  but  leads  us  both  by  the  grammatical  sense  to  accept  of  a  future 
Theocratic  ordering  uader  the  Messiah — these  things  have  considerable 
weight  in  influencing  us  to  follow  the  path  of  pious  Jews,  martyrs,  etc., 
who  longed  and  prayed  for  "  the  Christ"  to  come  and  set  up  His  inherited 
Kingdom.  (46)  The  world's  history  (Prop.  194)  is  a  mystery  and  incom- 
plete without  this  restored  Theocracy  ;  for  God  to  undertake  a  Theocratic 
form  of  government  and  not  to  complete  it,  and  for  Him  to  promise  its 
restoration  and  make  the  most  suitable  provision  for  it,  and  then  not  to 
manifest  it,  would  leave  a  void  fatal  to  the  happiness  of  the  individual,  of 
the  race,  and  of  the  world.  (47)  When  we  regard  the  precious  provision 
made  by  Jesus  (comp.  Prop.  195)  for  this  very  Theocratic  ordering  ;  when 
we  contemplate  the  Person  of  Jesus,  most  wonderfully  adapted  to  secure  an 
exact,  pure,  real  Theocratic  rule  (Prop.  199),  and  when  we  consider  the 
title  of  Jesus,  "  the  Messiah,"  "the  Christ"  (Prop.  205)  as  alone  applica- 
ble to  a  restored  Theocracy,  we  certainly  would  be  lacking  faith  in  God 
and  in  His  promises  if  we  refused  to  receive,  cordially  and  hopefully,  the 
belief  that,  at  the  time  determined  by  the  Father,  the  Messiah  shall  come 
again,  and  fulfil  the  covenants  and  predictions  relating  to  the  restoration 
of  a  fallen  Theocracy  in  a  state  of  glory  such  as  inspired  men  describe. 

The  reader  is  requested  to  notice  the  wonderful  harmony  of  our  doctrine.  Although 
many  things  are  requisite  to  give  it  completeness,  every  link  in  the  chain  of  connection 
is  forthcoming  and  expressed  in  a  plain,  easily  understood,  grammatical  sense — the 
strongest  proof  that  can  be  given  to  substantiate  a  doctrine.  Aside  from  the  details  (in 
which  we  may,  more  or  less,  mingle  error — being  human)  the  grand  outlines  of  the  system 
evidence  this  harmony  of  teaching.  It  is  a  great  gratification,  a  high  comfort,  to  find 
such  unity  between  the  curse  and  redemption,  the  covenants  and  their  realistic  fulfil- 
ment. 

Obs.  4.   Briefly,  reference  may  again  be  made  to  the  exceeding  desirableness 
of  this  future  Theocracy.     A  real  Theocracy  is  one  that  humanity  requires, 


PEOP.  206.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  589 

and  down  to  its  establishment,  if  we  but  credit  God's  foreknowledge  as 
presented  in  His  Word,  the  nations  of  the  earth  will  lack  a  government 
that  can  insure  continued  peace,  prosperity,  happiness,  etc.  The  sad 
condition  of  the  world  plunged  in  unbelief  and  direct  hostility  to  the  truth 
and  the  Christ  (Props.  123,  1G0,  161,  162,  163,  174,  etc.),  clearly  evinces 
what  the  efforts  of  man  at  government  will  yet  develop.  Let  the  reader 
turn  to  Prop.  202,  and  notice  how  the  Bible  represents  to  us  a  Divine 
government,  perfect  in  every  respect,  and  admirably  adapted  in  every 
particular  to  secure  stability,  blessedness,  etc.  This  is  alone  met  with  in 
a  real  TJieocracy,  which  contains  the  elements  of  a  complete  Kingdom  that 
can  lift  man  and  the  race  from  the  present  low  ground  into  a  higher  plane, 
reconciling  clashing  interests  and  removing  evils,  under  a  visible  head  and 
rulership  wholly  actuated  by  justice,  love,  and  mercy.  The  cravings  of 
humanity  for  a  stable  government  that  shall  dispense  impartial  justice  and 
extend  its  care  dver  all  its  subjects  ;  that  shall  bless  the  highest  and  the 
lowest ;  that  shall  remove  the  distress  and  evils  incident  to  present  forms  ; 
that  shall  assure  constant  and  abiding  release  from  oppression,  war,  and 
suffering  ;  that  shall  make  a  sympathizing  and  all-powerful  ruling  Headship 
constantly  accessible  to  every  subject;  that  shall  manifest  in  a  manner  to 
command  unfaltering  assent,  a  perfectly  reliable  and  infallible  rule  ;  these 
can  only  be  realized  in  a  restored  Theocracy — a  Kingdom  in  which  God — infi- 
nite in  wisdom  and  power — Himself  again  condescends  to  act  in  the  capac- 
ity of  earthly  ruler.  Who,  when  viewing  the  sad  history  of  the  nations  of 
the  earth  (a  long,  dreary  catalogue  of  jealousies,  wars,  bloodshed,  revolu- 
tions, etc.),  and  regarding  the  fearful  condition  and  troubles  still  future  (as 
delineated  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  Props.  161, 162, 163,  etc.),  does  not  earnestly 
desire  the  speedy  Coming  of  this  Theocracy.  Again,  notice  Prop.  204,  and 
see  how  this  restored  Theocracy  gives  definiteness  and  a  continued  exalta- 
tion to  David's  Son,  and  vividly  brings  before  us — as  no  other  system  of 
faith  can  possibly  do — the  majestic  relationship  that  He  sustains  through- 
out the  ages  to  the  race  of  man.  The  dignity,  honor,  and  glory  of  Jesus 
is  promoted  by  this  arrangement  ;  and  associated  rulers,  Jewish  and  Gentile 
nations,  experiencing  the  elevation  and  blessings  flowing  from  this  divinely 
instituted  government,  shall  ever  tender  to  the  Father  and  Son  and  Spirit 
ceaseless  heart-felt  ascriptions  of  praise. 

The  reply  to  those  who  allege  that  this  Coming  to  this  earth  and  condescending  to 
act  as  earthly  rider  in  the  Theocratic  order  is  degrading  to  David's  Son  and  David's 
Lord,  will  be  fonnd  in  Props.  203,  81-85,  200,  197,  etc.,  to  which  the  reader  is  referred. 
The  objection  arises  from  not  discriminating  between  the  Divine  Sovereignty  (Props.  79 
and  80)  and  this  specially  covenanted  Kingdom  to  "  the  Son  of  Man."  It  does  not  see 
that  it  is  sitting  in  judgment  upon  God's  own  former  condescension  thus  to  act,  upon 
God's  own  preference  of  government,  upon  God's  oath-bound  covenants  and  predictions 
relating  thereto,  and  upon  the  most  desirable  and  glorious  method  to  bring  God  and  man 
into  an  intimate  and  enduring  relationship,  promotive  of  the  highest  glory  of  the  One 
and  the  highest  blessedness  of  the  other.  A  believer  should  hesitate  to  question  such  a 
divine  mode  of  procedure,  which  must  — if  duly  considered — elevate  David's  Son  to  a 
most  honorable  position,  and  which  brings  glorious  deliverance  to  the  world  ;  uniting 
this  fallen  and  rebellious  earth  into  intimate  and  enduring  relationship— as  a  recovered 
province  in  which  God's  will  is  done-  with  heaven  itself,  and  that  by  sanctifying  and 
elevating  the  noblest  of  earthly  relations,  the  civil  and  religious  in  combination.  God 
again  "  tabernacling  with  men"  as  their  King,  manifesting  Himself  in  the  Person  of 
Jesus  as  Theocratic  King  ;  this  is  a  glory  inconceivably  great,  and  a  boon  so  full  of  unutter- 
able blessing  that  the  heart  of  man  desires  it  with  intense  desire.  The  old  view  (Farrar's 
Life  of  Christ,  vol.  1,  p.  28)  of  Tacitus,  Suetonius,  and  Josephus,  of  a  powerful  King  aris- 
ing in  Judea  and  ruling  over  the  world,  will  then  be  fully  verified.     Plato's  (Seiss's  Last 


590  THE   THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  206. 

Times,  p.  64)  declaration  will  come  to  pass  :  "  In  the  end,  lest  the  world  should  be 
plunged  into  an  eternal  abyss  of  confusion,  God,  the  author  of  the  primitive  order,  will 
appear  again,  and  resume  the  reins  of  empire  ;  then  He  will  change,  embellish,  and 
restore  the  whole  frame  of  nature,  and  put  an  end  to  decay  of  age,  sickness,  and  death." 
Some  (Froude's  Short  Studies,  p.  98)  "  lament  with  Father  Newman  that '  God's  control 
over  the  world  is  so  indirect  and  His  action  so  obscure  ; '  "  others  have  their  faith  sorely 
tried  by  past  and  existing  providences,  but  all  this  will  be  rectified  when  the  Theocracy 
appears.  Unbelief  levels  its  sharpest  shafts  against  the  "  Particularism"  of  the  Bible, 
the  selection  of  an  individual  and  nation,  the  neglect  apparently  of  the  heathen,  the 
incorporation  of  an  elect  body,  etc.,  but  then  the  key  to  it  all  will  be  found  in  the  con- 
templated end,  the  Theocratic  ordering,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  God  adopted  the  best 
and  most  speedy  means,  consistent  with  man's  moral  agency,  to  bring  aboiit  so  glorious 
a  result.  We  are  satisfied,  ravished  with  the  splendid  finality  portrayed  by  the  Bible,  for 
it  meets  a  longing  of  weary  ages — a  longing  impressively  expressed  in  the  oft-quoted 
sentence  of  Feuerbach  :  "  God  is  an  unutterable  sigh  out  of  the  depths  of  the  human 
heart."  It  meets  the  often  expressed  need  of  a  pure,  just,  and  powerful  government  to 
take  the  place  of  the  arbitrary,  inconsistent,  oppressive  and  changeable  ones  of  the  past. 


Obs.  5.  The  Scriptures  are  full  of  this  Theocratic  idea  (as  the  preceding 
Propositions  show),  and  many  of  its  declarations  receive  new  force  and 
beauty  when  viewed  in  its  light.  An  illustration  will  indicate  this  :  the 
expressions  relative  to  God's  dwelling  with  man,  and  of  being  their  God 
and  they  shall  be"  His  people,  convey  the  notion  of  a  Theocratic  affinity 
entered  into  by  God  and  experienced  by  man.  This  is  seen  if  several  par- 
ticulars are  noticed.  (1)  When  the  Theocracy  was  established  this  feature 
was  thus  distinctly  announced.  Even  in  Gen.  17  :  8,  it  is  promised  that 
"  I  will  be  their  God  "  when  the  land  of  Canaan  should  be  occupied.  Pre- 
viously to  this  occupation  (as  in  Gen.  17  :  6,  and  20  :  24,  and  28  :  13)  it 
had  been  announced  that  He  would  be  a  God  to  them  in  the  fulfilment  of 
covenant  promises.  The  full  significance  of  the  language  begins  to 
appear  in  Ex.  G  :  7  where  God,  in  view  of  the  Coming  Theocracy,  tells 
Moses  as  a  source  of  encouragement  :  "  I  will  take  you  to  me  for  a  people, 
and  I  will  be  to  you  a  God."  When  the  Theocratic  relationship  was  entered 
into  at  Mt.  Sinai,  then  the  idea  conveyed  in  the  expression  was  verified,  as 
stated  e.g.  in  Lev.  27  :  12  "  /  will  walk  among  you,  ami  will  be  your  God, 
and  ye  shall  be  my  people"  (comp.  Ex.  19  :  5,  6  and  29  :  45,  etc.).  It  is 
admitted  by  a  host  of  eminent  men  that  this  declaration  represents  God 'a 
peculiar  and  distinguishing  relationship  to  the  Jewish  nation  in  the  insti- 
tuted Theocratic  government.  (2)  When  the  Theocracy  was  withdrawn, 
the  throne  and  Kingdom  of  David  fallen  down,  then  this  language  was 
employed  in  connection  with  a  predicted  restoration  of  the  Davidic  throne 
and  Kingdom,  or  the  Theocracy.  The  reader  can  verify  this  by  referring 
e.g.  to  the  following  predictions  :  Ezek.  3G  :  28,  and  37  :  23,  27  ;  Zeph.  8  : 
8  ;  Ezek.  34  :  24,  30  and  11  :  20,  etc.  It  is  used  by  way  of  pleading  with 
the  nation  to  urge  them  to  repentance,  so  that  it  might  be  realized,  as  e.g. 
Ezek.  14  :  11.  (3)  In  this  dispensation  it  is  employed  to  show  that 
believers  are  brought  into  such  an  affinity  with  God  through  Christ,  that 
forming  His  temple,  etc.,  they  shall  possess  this  identical  Theocratic 
relationship  in  the  future,  as  e.g.  2  Cor.  G  :  1G  ;  Heb.  8  :  10.  For  the 
Scriptures  do  expressly  teach  (Props.  GO,  86,  118,  124,  154,  etc.)  that  this 
is  fully  and  perfectly  realized  when  they  are  exalted  in  the  Coming 
Kingdom.  (4)  When  the  Theocracy  is  re-established,  then  this  language 
is  used  as  pre-eminently  expressive'of  an  actual  realization  of  the  Theo- 
cratic idea  contained  in  it.     Thus  it  is  employed  in  Rev.  7  :  13,  "He  that 


PEOP.  206.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  591 

sittcth  upon  the  throne  shall  dwell  among  them,"  but  especially  in  Rev.  21 :  3, 
"  Behold  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  He  will  dwell  with  litem, 
and  they  shall  be  His  people,  and  God  Himself  shall  M  with  them  and  be 
their  God."  Certainly,  in  view  of  the  usage  of  this  language  in  connection 
with  a  Theocracy  as  once  established  and  with  the  predictions  of  the  same 
Theocracy  restored,  it  would  be  faithless  in  us  not  to  regard  it  as  most 
significant  and  descriptive  of  a  reed  Theocracy  ultimately  manifested  in 
splendor  and  power. 

This  indicates  the  high  calling  of  the  Kingdom  in  its  King,  associated  Rulers,  and 
subjects,  as  well  as  the  foundation  of  the  dispensed  blessings.  This  dwelling  of  God  in 
their  midst  as  Supreme  Ruler  upon  the  earth  gives  the  Theocracy  its  emcacy,  and 
adaptedness,  and  perfection.  It  throws  light  upon  Millennial  prophecies,  illustrative  of 
the  Kingdom.  Thus  :  being  Theocratic,  the  civil  as  well  as  the  religious  is  divinely 
administered,  and  hence  everything,  even  of  a  political  nature,  is  measured  by  a  divine 
standard.  Therefore,  as  under  the  withdrawn  Theocracy  (that  illustrates  the  spirit  of 
the  restored  one),  every  violation  is  not  merely  «  crime  but  a  sin,  because  opposed  to  the 
Will  of  this  Head  dwelling  among  them.  Faithfulness  to  the  laws  of  the  Kingdom — in 
every  respect  — is  faithfulness  to  God,  evincing  that  supreme  love  whose  extension  is 
ultimately  to  overthrow  all  disobedience.  The  rewards  and  the  punishments,  as  becomes 
a  Theocracy,  will  then  also  be  immediate,  because  temporal  bestowment  of  the  same  evi- 
dences the  worthiness  and  power  and  majesty  of  the  same.  The  saints,  as  we  have 
shown,  will  play  an  important  part  in  exhibiting  this  feature. 


Obs.  6.  This  Theocracy  is  a  predetermined  form  of  government,  which, 
when  the  time  arrives,  will  be  enforced  upon  "  a  willing  people.'"  It  is  not 
dependent  upon  the  choice  of  any  nation  or  nations,  for,  as  prophecy  pre- 
dicts, it  will  be  so  unwelcome  to  the  nations  of  the  earth  that,  to  establish 
it,  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  will  be  broken  to  pieces  by  it.  (thus  e.g. 
Props.  123,  100-163).  The  ambition,  pride,  self-exaltation,  and  wicked- 
ness of  earthly  kingdoms  cannot  be  induced  to  submit  to  such  a  Theocratic 
rule,  and,  therefore,  the  Scriptures  plainly  predict,  as  a  result,  that  a  fearful 
conflict  will  arise  (e.g.  Props.  162  and  163),  which  will  prove  disastrous  to 
the  kings  and  rulers  engaged  in  it.  Indeed,  a  little  reflection  will  evidence 
that  the  representations  of  the  Bible  in  this  respect  are  most  reasonable — 
the  only  ones  that  can  possibly  be  anticipated.  Just  as  the  establishment 
of  the  Theocracy  in  Palestine  brought  on  a  conflict  with  its  rulers,  so  the 
re-establish  men  t  of  a  Theocracy  in  Palestine  (as  its  centre),  destined  to 
extend  its  sway  over  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  must,  in  the  very  nature 
of  the  case,  lead  to  a  serious  contest.  It  is  not  in  the  nature  of  unsancti- 
fied  humanity  to  yield  up  its  worldly  honors,  power,  riches,  etc.,  without  a 
struggle — a  puny  one — against  the  pre-ordained  government  of  the  Most 
High  God.  The  "  willing  people"  associated  with  the  institution  of  this 
Theocracy  and  its  continuance  are  the  saints  destined  for  its  rulers,  the 
Jewish  nation  delivered  from  its  drinking  the  bitter  dregs  of  a  long- 
endured  tribulation,  and  the  Gentile  nations  which  shall  be  made  to  learn 
righteousness  when  God's  judgments  shall  fall  upon  all  who  oppose  His 
determined  Theocratic  ordering.  The  united  opposition  of  the  world,  the 
protests  of  its  rulers  and  people,  cannot  prevent  its  introduction  and 
enforcement.  Alas  !  so  blinded  is  man  that  but  few  appreciate  its  design 
and  adaptation  to  bless,  and  it  is  only  when  introduced  under  the  auspices 
of  the  Theocratic  King  and  His  associated  rulers,  amid  opposition  and  the 
fall  of  its  enemies,  that  the  eyes  of  multitudes  will  be  opened  to   the  gran- 


592  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  206. 

deur,  majesty,  blessedness,  and  glory  pertaining  to  it,  and  they  will  also 
gladly  submit  themselves  to  its  ordering. 

Some  excellent  writers  have  a  misleading  idea  of  a  Theocracy  and  of  the  manner  of 
its  establishment.  Thus  e.g.  Wines  (Com.  on  the  Laws  of  the  Ancient  Hebrews),  in  his 
efforts  to  show  that  the  American  Republic  is  modelled  after  the  Jewish  Theocracy,  ex- 
ceeds the  plain  statements  of  the  Divine  Record.  He  lays  much  stress  on  the  compact 
(Ex.  24  :  3-8  ;  Jos.  8  :  30-35  ;  Deut.  29  :  9-13,  and  ch.  24)  as  proof  that  the  nation  had 
a  voice  in  the  government,  but  overlooks  the  vital  fact  that  the  form  of  government,  and 
the  laws  proceeding  from  it,  were  determined  by  God— the  people  had  no  voice  in  estab- 
lishing- the  same.  The  appreciation  of  the  Deliverer  of  the  nation  and  of  the  Founder  of 
the  State,  with  submission  to  Him,  does  not  make  the  Theocracy  a  "  Republic."  It  is 
derogatory  to  God's  own  appointment  to  make  it  (p.  118)  "  the  type  and  model  of  our 
own  Constitution,'  seeing  that  it  is  no  type  but  a  real  form  of  government  which  God 
purposes  to  renew.  Even  with  Wines's  typical  idea  applied  to  the  American  Republic, 
the  antitype  falls  immeasurably  below  the  type  in  privilege  and  honor,  as  in  God's  con- 
descending to  act  as  the  earthly  accessible  ruling  Head.  The  foundation  of  a  Theocracy 
is  only  in  God. and  not  in  the  people — the  people  even  at  Mt.  Sinai  developed  their  unfit- 
ness for  it,  and  it  was  only  at  the  solicitation  of  Moses  that  God  was  again  merciful  and 
continued  it.  It  is  true,  as  Wines  correctly  contends,  that  human  governments  act 
wisely  in  so  far  as  they  incorporate  the  legislation  for  the  good  of  all  and  the  protection 
of  the  rights  of  all  as  evidenced  in  a  Theocracy,  but  this  does  not  elevate  an  earthly 
government  to  the  level  of  a  Theocracy,  and  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  eulogize  our  form  of 
government  at  the  expense  of  the  Theocracy. 

Obs.  7.  The  Theocratic  idea  is  so  grand  in  its  conception  and  so  sublime 
in  its  adaptation  to  man  and  its  results,  that  it  could  not  have  been  of 
human' devising.  Unbelievers  like  Rousseau  {Social  Contract,  b.  2,  ch.  7) 
make  Moses  the  founder  of  the  Theocracy,  and  laud  "  the  superior  genius 
of  the  great  man,"  and  his  "  sagacious  and  comprehensive  power  of  mind." 
Believers  in  the  Word  employ  language  in  this  direction  not  far  removed 
from  the  notion  that  Moses  by  his  own  wisdom  conceived,  and  by  his  own 
positive  spirit  practically  enforced,  the  Theocratic  idea.  Quotations  that 
are  painful  and  degrading  to  the  Record  might  be  produced,  illustrative  of 
this  loose  method  of  interpreting  the  Scripture  account.  If  Ave  turn  to  the 
Record,  while  fully  admitting  the  wisdom  and  ability  of  Moses,  yet  it  dis- 
tinctly states  that  Moses  was  simply  an  agent  in  the  hands  of  God  ;  that 
God  Himself  wns  the  direct  Founder  of  the  Theocracy,  and  Moses  acted  by 
His  command,  and  under  His  direction  (comp.  e.g.  Ex.  19  :  3-10  ;  Deut. 
6  :  20-25,  and,  in  brief,  the  entire  history  of  its  founding).  The  "  divine 
legation"  of  Moses  is  an  accepted  fact,  indisputably  supported.  This  was 
requisite,  for  Moses,  with  all  his  wisdom  and  genius,  could  never  have  de- 
vised the  Theocratic  idea  ;  as  an  honorable  man  it  could  not  have  been  his 
work.  Consider  the  God  that  Moses  worshipped,  His  exalted  attributes 
and  His  transcendent  glory,  and  how  could  he,  without  the  grossest  pre- 
sumption, have  conceived  the  idea  of  His  becoming  the  personal,  accessible 
earthly  ruler  of  the  Jewish  nation  ?  And  to  have  done  so  without  a  direct 
sanction  would  compromise  his  integrity,  insult  His  own  God,  and  found 
the  government  on  a  fearful  falsehood.  No  man  of  wisdom,  genius,  and 
honor  could  have  been  guilty  of  so  barefaced  a  fraud  as  to  palm  off  his  own 
conception  for  a  God-given  one.  Indeed,  so  pure  and  exalted  is  the  idea  in 
the  form  presented  under  the  Theocracy,  that  if  it  had  been  imitated,  it 
would  have,  under  the  moulding  influence  of  that  age  of  the  world,  been 
modified,  as  seen  in  other  ancient  governments  that  sought  adivine  sanction 
of  the  gods  to  sustain  their  polity  in  the  estimation  of  the  governed.  The 
fact  is,  that  the  conception  is  above  the  individual  and  the  age  (forming  part 


Prop.  206.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  593 

of  a  Divine  Purpose) ;  and  the  public  manner  in  which  the  idea  was  practically 
inaugurated,  and  the  continued  accessibility  of  the  Head,  etc.,  forbid  the 
notion  of  its  human  origin.  The  entire  Scriptures  constantly  refer  to  it  as 
once  established  and  as  again  restored  by  God— Re  being  its  Founder  and 
Ruler.  As  we  trace  this  Theocratic  idea,  we  find  other  distinctive  features 
beyond  the  conception  of  finite  mind.  Thus  e.g.  it  being  the  Divine  Plan 
to  perfect  this  Theocratic  idea  in  the  Person  of  the  King,  we  discover  to 
our  amazement  and  admiration  that  to  make  this  Headship  accessible  and 
in  intimate  relationship  with  humanity — to  fie  it  for  such  an  earthly  ruler- 
ship— the  Divine  is  united  with  a  David's  Son,  so  that  in  and  through  Him 
God  exercises  just  the  rule  required  in  a  Theocracy  adapted  to  man. 
Could  man  develop  this  conjunction,  when  e.g.  it  required  a  virgin  to  give 
birth  to  a  Son,  and  when  it  demanded  the  most  intimate  acquaintance  with 
the  Divine  Purpose?  Could  the  prophets  or  the  Apostles  bring  forth  such 
a  magnificent  conception  of  a  Theocratic  ordering  and  Theocratic  King? 
No  !  before  it  we  bow  in  reverence,  acknowledging  a  divine  wisdom  and 
power. 

A  Theocracy,  as  the  Bible  describes,  is  the  grand  conception  of  inspiration.  It  be- 
longs wholly  and  essentially  to  the  divine,  being  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  Purpose,  and 
strikingly  exhibiting  the  divine  in  all  the  preparatory  stages  and  measures  until  the  cul- 
mination, when  the  divine,  connected  with  humanity,  appears  in  overwhelming  grandeur 
and  glory.  "We  may  well,  therefore,  dismiss  the  vain  efforts  to  trace  the  biblical  idea  to 
Oriental  religions,  to  India,  Egypt,  etc.,  seeing  that  nothing  approaching  such  a  consecu- 
tively developed  Theocratic  Plan  is  to  be  found  anywhere  outside  of  the  Bible.  It  is 
God's  idea,  not  man's  ;  it  is  God's  work  and  not  man's  ;  to  Him  we  gratefully  and  joy- 
fully attribute  all  honor  and  praise. 

Ohs.  8.  This  Theocracy,  when  once  again  established,  is  permanent.  This 
has  been  proven  in  detail  (Prop.  159),  but  we  may  briefly  present  one  feat- 
ure which  alone  assures  us  of  its  stability.  One  source  of  the  weakness  of 
human  governments  is  the  perpetual  change  of  rulers  and  dynasties,  owing 
to  mortality,  revolutions,  etc.  Now  the  King  is  immortal  and  divine,  and 
no  change  can  be  predicated  of  Him  ;  the  associated  rulers  being  made  like 
unto  Him,  immortal  and  glorified,  their  positions  are  perpetual.  A  dis- 
tinguishing peculiarity  of  this  restored  Theocracy  is  that  the  rulers  are  all 
chosen  by  God  Himself  ;  no  one  can  ever  be  a  king  or  priest  in  it  without 
God's  direct  appointment.  The  people  have  no  voice  in  the  selection  of  the 
rulers,1  and  hence  there  is  no  possibility  of  introducing  those  who  are  un- 
worthy. God  selects  His  rulers  from  faithful  and  tried  ones — they  are  the 
true  brethren  of  the  King  (Props.  90,  154,  124,  153).  This  immeasurably 
enhances  the  efficiency  and  stability  of  the  Theocracy.  When  the  Apostles 
reign  over  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  when  the  saints  are  allotted  their 
position  of  judges,  when  the  rulers  of  the  Kingdom  disseminate  and  en- 
force the  ordering  prescribed,  there  is  no  power  capable  of  resisting  them, 
and  there  is  no  element  that  can  disturb  their  sway — being  founded  in 
Omnipotence  itself.2 

1  Wines  (Com.  on  the  Laws  of  the  Ancient  Hebrews)  makes  it  the  highest  crowning  excel- 
lence of  a  government  that  the  people  are  permitted  to  choose  the  rulers  (God,  however, 
in  view  of  the  past  history  of  nations,  judges  otherwise),  and  makes  a  desperate  effort 
(because  God  to  some  extent  allowed  this  in  the  former  Theocracy)  to  show  that  this  per- 
tains essentially  to  a  Theocracy.  We  are  certain  that  it  does  not  to  a  perfected  Theocracy  ; 
and  we  are  confident  that  it  did  not  belong  to  the  past  Theocracy  to  the  extent  that  he 
claims.     A  few  statements  will  evidence  the  latter  fact      "We  have  seen  that  the  form  of 


/ 


594  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  206. 

government  and  the  laws  came  from  God  (the  people  appointed  no  representatives  to 
choose  the  form  and  frame  the  code  under  which  they  were  to  live),  and  that  the  people 
— as  would  be  proper  under  any  form— gave  in  their  willingness  to  yield  obedience  to  the 
same.  The  next  step  was  the  appointment  of  rulers,  and,  instead  of  the  people  selecting 
the  chief  magistrate,  God  both  selects  and  commissions  Moses  as  the  chief  ruler  under 
Himself.  Moses,  by  God's  express  direction,  selects  and  commissions  Joshua.  The 
Theocracy  did  form  classes  that  held  superior  positions  and  privileges  (and  these  heredi- 
tary), it  gave  the  judges  position  for  life,  it  ultimately  incorporated  and  upheld  even  a 
hereditary  line  of  kings.  All  these  were  to  perform,  not  what  the  people  might  demand, 
but  what  God's  own  laws  required.  We  cannot  help  therefore  to  express  our  surprise  that 
"Wines  should  (p.  138)  call  the  Theocracy  "a  Republic,"  and  in  his  ardor  declare  that 
"  in  Palestine  the  nation  governed,"  and  that  "  on  the  banner  of  Palestine  flamed,  in 
living  letters,  liberty,  equality,  fraternity."  In  several  places  he  eulogizes  the  American 
Republic  as  a  copy  of  the  Theocracy,  because  as  he  asserts  both  are  based  on  "  the 
capacity  of  the  people  for  self-government,"  emphatically  declaring  that  "  men  are  capa- 
ble of  governing  themselves  ;  such  is  the  decision  of  the  infinite  intelligence  ;"  and  then 
proceeds  to  predict  a  glorious  future  for  the  world  founded  on  this  "capacity  of  self- 
government."  issuing  by  its  adoption  into  "the  political  redemption  of  the  race,"  etc. 
A  few  additional  remarks,  expressive  of  entire  dissent,  may  be  in  place.  (1)  These 
assumptions  are  based  on  a  misconception  of  the  foundation  of  a  Theocracy  ;  if  it  was  a 
Republic  then  it  could  not  be  a  Theocracy  ;  if  the  people  governed,  then  God  was  not 
the  highest  Ruler.  (2)  If  it  was  "a  Republic"  founded  on  "  self-government,"  how 
comes  it  that  the  nation  could  not  choose  the  code  or  change  it,  that  God  selected  rulers 
and  imposed  them,  and  that  ultimately  kings,  in  a  hereditary  line,  were  incorporated. 
(3)  When  the  Jewish  nation  rebelled  against  God's  government  and  determined  to  exer- 
cise its  own  judgment  in  opposition  to  God's  polity,  it  manifested  in  the  results,  no 
"  capacity  for  self-government."  (-1)  The  form  of  the  future  restored  Theocracy  as  cove- 
nanted and  predicted,  as  well  as  the  form  of  the  one  withdrawn,  evinces  "  the  decision 
of  the  infinite  Intelligence"  that  "  men  are"  not  "  capable  of  governing  themselves." 
(5)  The  history  of  the  past  sadly  evidences,  that  men,  owing  to  depravity,  are  incapable 
of  doing  it  in  a  way  to  secure  continued  prosperity,  etc.  (G)  The  American  Republic  is 
no  exception  yet,  seeing  that  it  is  only  in  its  infancy,  that  it  barely  escaped  disruption 
in  the  past,  that  elements  and  diversity  of  interests  are  at  work  which  cause  statesmen  to 
feel  that  the  capacity  of  self-government  has  not  been  sufficiently  tested  to  base  upon  it 
an  infallible  evidence  of  permanency  and  progress.  (7)  The  predictions  of  the  Bible 
positively  declare  that  instead  of  such  a  future  as  Wines  predicts,  the  exact  reverse  (in  the 
nations  being  led  by  the  Antichrist,  etc.)  shall  be  experienced,  and  this  is  amply  suffi- 
cient, for  God  alone  foreknows  the  future.  (S)  The  ending  of  Gentile  domination  and  the 
Theocratic  rule  substituted,  unmistakably  shows  what  estimate  we  are  to  place  on  such 
predictions. 

2  Owing  to  human  depravity  and  the  Theocracy  being  subordinately  ruled  by  fallible 
men,  there  was  an  element  of  danger  in  the  former  one  (pointed  out  by  Michaelis,  Com. 
on  the  Laws  of  Moses,  art.  4G,  and  by  Wines,  Com.  on  the  Laws,  etc.,  p.  509,  etc.),  viz.,  of 
two  tribes  when  becoming  more  powerful  than  others,  regarding  each  other  with  suspi- 
cion and  hatred,  or  when  one  tribe  acquired  ascendency  over  the  rest,  the  others  would  be 
excited  by  envy,  etc.  Illustrations  are  given  of  this  in  the  works  named.  But  this 
danger  shall  be  averted  in  the  future  Theocracy,  as  e.g.  plainly  predicted  by  Isaiah  11  :  13. 
The  reason  for  this  change  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the  King  and  all  the  rulers  being 
immortal,  pervaded  by  the  Spirit,  perfect,  and  perpetual  in  office,  no  place  is  given  to 
that  ambition  and  jealousy  for  position,  honors,  etc.,  that  is  so  unfortunately  and  fatally 
developed  in  earthly  kingdoms.  Jealousy,  envy,  and  rebellion  cannot  exist  ;  all,  too,  are 
under  the  sway,  counsel,  and  protection  of  perfect,  God-consecrated  rulers,  and  hence  no 
antagonism,  injustice,  oppression,  arbitrary  measures  can  exist. 

Obs.  9.  The  manner  in  which  God  regards  the  world's  history,  as  pre- 
sented in  His  Word,  indicates  the  high  estimate  that  lie  places  on  this  The- 
ocratic idea.  Infidels  have  rudely  assaulted  the  Theocracy  in  the  past 
(overlooking  that  it  only  foreshadowed  in  a  real  initiatory  form  the  grand 
Theocratic  ordering  to  he  realized),  and  Apologists  have  lamely  apologized 
(as  e.g.  suited  by  way  of  accommodation  to  a  transition  state)  in  its  behalf  ; 

but  the  reverent  student  of  the  Scriptures,  tracing  the  Divine  Purpose,  sees 
\ii  is  . 


PROP.  206.]  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  595 

in  it  the  foundation  of  Jewish  greatness,  past  and  future,  and  ultimately  the 
world's  redemption  and  glory.  Why  does  God  so  carefully  trace  the  rise 
and  progress  of  the  Jewish  nation  to  the  establishment  of  the  Theocracy, 
then  enter  into  fulness  of  detail  respecting  the  Theocracy,  its  lristory  and 
downfall ;  then  avoiding  any  connected  htstory  of  the  nation  so  long  as 
separated  from  the  form  of  government  He  Himself  instituted,  He  only 
presents  a  sufficiency  to  give  coherency  to  predictions  and  preparations 
relating  to  the  future  ?  Why  does  God  specially  single  out  this  Jewish 
nation  as  alone  worthy  of  detailed  mention,  and  pass  by  those  mighty 
nations  (with  brief  mention)  that  existed  contemporaneously?  Why  does 
He  devote  so  many  pages  to  a  special  form  of  government,  and  pass  by 
those  forms  which  largely  fill  the  pages  of  profane  history  and  which  played 
such  a  prominent  part  in  the  world's  drama?  Such  questions  are  only 
satisfactorily  answered  by  a  reference  to  the  Theocratic  ordering.  The 
Jewish  nation  being  directly  under  God's  own  Kingdom,  sustaining  to 
Him  a  near  national  relationship  as  the  Ruler,  He,  for  the  sake  of  His  own 
TJteocratic  position,  once  occupied  and  to  be  again  re-occupied,  evinces  this 
partiality  to  the  nation  in  the  recorded  history.  'When  history  shall  be 
read  and  studied  after  the  thousand  years  are  ended,  the  significancy  of  all 
this  and  the  manifest  omission  respecting  other  governments  and  nations 
of  vast  proportions  will  appear  self-evident  in  the  then  existing  grandeur 
of  the  Theocracy,  the  restoration  and  supremacy  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and 
in  the  Gentile  nations  having  participated  in  its  blessings. 

The  reason  why  God  did  not  reveal  Himself  directly  to  other  nations  as  He  did  to 
the  Jews — a  problem,  the  subject  of  much  thought  to  various  writers — is  found  in  this 
Theocratic  idea.  They  were  utterly  unfitted  for  it,  even  as  the  Jews,  although  having  a 
previous  preparation  of  wonderful  manner,  evidenced  themselves  to  be  unworthy  of  its 
permanent  retention  in  the  form  first  presented.  It  was,  therefore,  as  a  preparatory 
measure,  brought  out  in  the  Jewish  line  in  order  to  provide  for  the  Theocratic  King, 
David's  Son,  etc.  So  much  is  this  felt  that  unbelief  has  sneeringly  said,  that  the  Old 
Test,  contains  a  "Civil  Theology."  A  recent  writer  on  "Natural  Religion"  (LiiteU's 
Liv.  Age,  Oct.  28th,  1876,  p.  222),  referring  to  it  as  a  distinguishing  peculiarity  of  the 
Bible,  that  it  occupies  itself  so  much  with  the  future  on  earth,  remarks  :  "  The  future  is 
their  study,  but  not — this  is  almost  as  true  of  the  New  Test,  as  of  the  Old— the  future 
after  death.  It  is  a  kind  of  political  future  that  absorbs  them,  the  fall  of  kingdoms  and 
tyrants,  of  Babylon,  Epiphanes,  Nero,  and  the  Roman  Empire,  the  future  of  Jerusalem, 
the  expected  return  of  Christ  to  reign  upon  the  earth."  The  Theocratic  idea  gives  us  the 
full  explanation  of  such  a  position,  and  this,  so  objectionable  to  unbelief,  enforces  our 
argument  and  answers  all  objections.  Hope — prophetic  and  believing  hope — looks  for- 
ward to  a  Theocratic  Kingdom  with  an  infallible  and  majestic  Head,  with  subordinate 
rulers  glorified  and  freed  from  imperfection,  with  righteous  laws  seeking  the  interests 
and  happiness  of  all,  with  blessings  so  complete  that  the  highest  pleasure  will  be  to  do 
the  Divine  Will. 

Ols.  10.  This  Theocracy  has  &  politico-religious  constitution,  i.e.  a  consti- 
tution inseparably  connected  with  the  worship  of  God,  for  God  in  the 
Person  of  "  the  Christ"  is  King.  Hence  idolatry  is  treason,  and  will  be 
swiftly  punished,  for  it  is  aimed  directly  at  the  Divine  King  and  the  foun- 
dation of  His  government.  It  possesses  a  constituted,  manifested  unity, 
the  same  centring  in  an  infallible,  ever  just,  and  beneficent  Head,  wdiich 
seeks  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  all  classes  from  the  lowest  to  the 
highest.  This  unity  is  preserved  by  the  oneness  of  mind  and  heart, 
cemented  by  redemptive  love,  existing  between  the  King  and  His  associated 
rulers.     It  bestows  liberty,  but  only  in  the  sense  that  it  allows  whatever  the 


596  THE   THEOCliATIC    KINGDOM.  [PROP.  206. 

public  good  requires   and  whatever  pertains  to  the  good  of  the  individual 
himself,  i.e.  whatever  is  consistent  with  the  rights  of  the  State,  society,  and 
individual.     Freedom  consistent  with  the  benefit  and  happiness  of  all  is 
the  only  liberty,  as  the  greatest  of  statesmen  have  shown,  that  ought  to  per- 
tain to  a  State  striving  to  become  a  blessing  to  its  subjects.     A  perfect 
State  should  be,  in  its  ruling  Head,  in  close  sympathy  with  its  people,  and 
this  is  pre-eminently  true  of  this  Theocracy.     With  a  King  who  suffered  in 
humanity  and  died  for   man,  and  with   subordinate   rulers   who   passed 
through  the  trials  incident  to  an  earthly  pilgrimage,  we  have  a  body  of 
rulers  who  can  and  will  sympathize  Avith  the  people,  and  manifest  it  by  the 
power  exerted  in  their  behalf.     The  very  form  of  government  under  the 
guidance  of  infallibility  will  secure  the  rights,  privileges,  and  blessings  of 
all— of  rulers  to  rank  and  position,  of  subjects  to  property,  soil,  etc.,  so 
that  all  shall  feel  an  abiding  interest  in  the  perpetuity  of  the  united  State 
and  Church.     The  happiness  of  all  being  secured,  all  are  influenced  to  love 
the  polity  introduced,  which  cares  for  the  welfare  of  all.     Alienation  of 
estate,  utter  deprivation  of  property,  galling  indebtedness,  servile  vassalage 
(as  shown  by  the  Jubilee  year)  cannot  find  their  counterpart  in  this  Divine 
Polity,  for  then  "  they  shall  sit  every  man  under  his  vine  and  under  hisfiy^ 
tree,  and  none  shall  make  them  afraid  "  (Mic.  4  :  4).     The  Agrarian  law  of 
the  Theocracy,  which  divided  the  land  equally  among  all,  and  prevented 
that  enormous  accumulation  of  landed  estate  in  the  hands  of  the  few  to  the 
detriment  of  the  many,  may  reasonably  give  us  a  hint  how  in  the  future 
the  earth  will  be  occupied  by  the  subjects.     In  the  past  Theocracy  there 
were  no  standing  armies  and  no  provision  made  for  them,   because  the 
King  Himself  was  the  defence  ;  this  is  true   of  the  Coming  One,  when  the 
Omnipotent  King  and  His  rulers  inaugurate  by  their  august  presence  and 
action  an  era  when  the  nations  and  people  "shall  heal  their  swords  into 
plouyhshares,  and  their  spears  into  pruning -hoohs :  nation  shall  not  lift  up 
sword  against  tuition,  neither  shall  they  burn  war  any  more"  (Isa.  2  :  4  ; 
Mic.  4  :  3).     Public  worship  and  religious  institutions  are  an  integral  part 
of  a  Theocratic  Polity,  for  in  it  State  and  Church  are  firmly  united  and 
blended  ;  hence,  in  the  delineations  of  the  restored  Theocracy  this  feature 
assumes  a  very  deservedly  prominent  place.     All  nations  falling  under  its 
sway  and  enjoying  its  blessings  must  publicly  worship  the  Euler,  thus 
acknowledging  "their  dependence,  indebtedness,  gratitude,  love,  and  rever- 
ence as  subjects  (see  e.g.  Zech.  14  :  1G  ;  Isa.  00  :  0,  7  ;  Rev.  21  :  24  ;  Isa. 
GG  :  23,  etc.). 

Then  is  verified  what  even  men  not  Millenarian,  as  Neander  and  many  others,  have 
insisted  on  as  imperative  in  order  to  fulfil  Hie  plain  predictions  of  Scripture,  viz.,  that  the 
Church  must  come  in  possession  of  "  a  world-wide  dominion,"  but  fail  to  inform  us  how  it 
is  possible  to  possess  the  dominion  as  delineated  by  the  prophets  without  the  conjunc- 
tion of  the  civil  ;  and  how,  if  the  latter  is  once  admitted,  it  is  possible  to  co-ordinate 
them — owing  to  human  infirmity — without  this  identical  Theocratic  ordering,  seeing 
that,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  nations  shall  be  averse  to  it  down  to  the  Sec.  Advent. 
Rotlie  (so  others)  correctly  insists  on  it  that  the  highest  possible  condition  of  government  is 
a  perfect  union  of  the  Church  and  State.  Here  alone  it  can  be  realized  ;  for  vain  is  it  to 
expect  such  a  revolution  without  the  direct  intervention  of  the  appointed  Theocratic 
King.  The  Scriptures  are  too  direct  upon  this  point  to  cause  us  to  mistake  its  meaning. 
Schaff  (His.  Apos.  Gh.,  p.  15),  speaking  of  the  Church  and  its  ultimate  union  with,  and 
control  over  the  State,  says  :  "  History  in  this  view  is  to  end  in  a  Theocracy  in  which  all 
dominion  and  power  shall  be  given  to  the  saints  of  the  most  High,  all  nations  be  united 
into  one  family,  and  joyfully  yield  themselves  to  the  divine  Will  as  their  only  law."  We 
show  from  covenant  and  promise  how  this  will  be  realized.     In  the  nature  of  the  case 


Prop.  206.]  the  theocratic  kixgdom.  597 

the  legislation  of  such  a  Theocracy  cannot  be  tampered  with,  for  it  embraces  the  Divine 
"Will.  Hence  in  it  no  crushing  monopolies  can  exist  ;  men,  women,  and  children  will 
not  be  converted  into  mere  machines  to  add  to  others'  wealth  ;  it  does  not,  owing  to  its 
Supernatural  basis  of  immortal  and  glorified  rulers,  grind  down  its  subjects  with  taxes  to 
support  its  governmental  machinery  ;  it  will  not,  like  present  governments,  force  an 
opium  trade  upon  some  nation  at  the  cannon's  mouth,  or  obtain  revenues  by  indorsing 
things  which  tend  to  moral  and  social  degradation.  Religion,  inestimable  as  it  is,  is 
only  the  earnest  of  the  purity  of  that  Theocracy  which  incorporating  religion  in  its 
highest  development  with  the  magnificent  civil  pertaining  to  the  government  of  the 
world,  manifests  and  disseminates  civil  and  religious,  spiritual  and  temporal,  individual, 
social,  and  national  blessings.  The  consideration  of  personal  salvation,  however 
precious,  should  not  hinder  a  due  view  and  appreciation  of  the  Divine  Purpose  in 
Redemption  as  exhibited  in  this  Theocratic  ordering.  This  would  be  religious  selfish- 
ness, leaving  out  the  most  glorious  results.  And  we  must  not  forget  that  in  the  restora- 
tion of  the  Theocracy  important  changes,  as  predicted,  will  be  made.  The  Theocracy 
that  once  existed  was  rudimentary,  the  Theocracy  that  comes  will  be  perfected  ;  the 
Theocracy  that  was  withdrawn  only  gave  certain  outlines  to  be  filled  out,  being  accommo- 
dated, preparatory  to  Redemption,  to  the  circumstances  of  the  nation  and  the  times  ; 
while  the  Theocracy  to  be  erected  retains  the  grand  outlines  with  the  most  splendid  addi- 
tions to  adapt  it  to  the  King,  rulers,  nations,  and  new  dispensation.  Hence  in  judging 
of  the  past,  due  allowance  must  be  made  between  the  fundamentals  of  a  Theocratic  gov- 
ernment and  the  incidentals  incorporated  in  view  of  the  state  of  the  Jewish  nation  and 
the  world.  The  fundamental  niust  be  discriminated  from  the  preparatory,  typical,  and 
initiatory.  We  can  readily  perceive  certain  principles  that  underlie  such  a  government, 
which,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  never  can  be  yielded  without  destroying  the  very  idea 
of  a  Theocracy,  such  as  God  acting  in  the  capacity  of  an  earthly,  civil  ruler  ;  the  Church 
and  State  united  in  one  ;  the  subordinate  rulers  and  the  people  subjected  to  a  supreme 
perfect  Will  ;  such  a  "Will  offering  an  infallible  guidance  ;  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the 
highest  and  lowest  are  respected  and  protected  ;  that  every  one  under  its  laws  has 
access,  either  personally  or  by  chosen  representatives,  to  the  Head  of  the  government  ; 
that  the  Chief  Ruler  dwells  with  His  people  and  is  their  God  :  that  the  happiness  and 
welfare  of  all  are  duly  regarded  and  promoted.  Infidels  of  all  classes  have  made  certain 
features  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  a  reproduction  of  superstition,  or  devices  to  secure 
the  power  of  the  priesthood  and  rulers.  They  object  to  certain  laws,  and  brand  them  as 
"  detestable,  absurd,  tyrannical,"  but  such  statements,  as  writers  like  "Wines,  Michaelis, 
etc.,  show,  originate  from  a  disinclination— if  not  aversion— to  receive  the  obligations  im- 
posed by  a  concession  to  the  divine  claims  of  the  Bible,  and  from  a  persistent  refusal  to 
credit  the  simple  fact  that  the  government  as  instituted  was  rudimentary  (being  then  the 
best  adapted)  to  the  promised  future,  glorious  expansion.  So  now,  no  one  can  heartily 
accept  of  the  predicted  Theocracy  in  all  its  aspects  who  is  not  willing  to  make  God's  Will 
supreme,  or  receive  the  Divine  Purpose  as  covenanted  and  predicted,  unless  his  mind  and 
heart  is  submissive  to  revealed  truth. 

Obs.  11.  A  Theocracy,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  cannot  tolerate  any 
other  form  of  government.  If  the  earthly  King  is  the  Mighty  Creator,  the 
Redeemer,  the  Renewer,  etc.,  then  a  Kingdom  specially  designed  to  pro- 
mote His  own  glory  and  the  good  of  His  creatures  cannot  endure  the 
existence  of  kingdoms  of  human  origin  and  pervaded  by  human  infirmity. 
Even  this  feature  was  to  some  extent  manifested  in  the  initiatory  Theocracy 
of  the  past.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  the  laws  of  the  same  were  cruel,  un- 
just, etc.  Leaving  Wines  {Com.  on  Laws,  B.  1,  ch.  6),  Spring  (Oblig.  of 
the  World  to  the  Bible,  Lect.  3),  and  others  to  show,  by  contrast  with  the 
most  polished  nations,  by  the  merciful  laws  incorporated,  etc.,  that  the 
charge  is  pressed  to  an  undue  extent,  yet  they  fail  to  vindicate  the  same 
from  the  proper  Theocratic  standpoint.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the 
charge  given  by  God  was  to  utterly  root  out  and  exterminate  the  nations  of 
Canaan,  and  the  reason  actuating  the  King  of  the  Theocracy  is  plainly 
given,  in  that  the  retention  of  those  nations  and  kingdoms  with  their 
wickedness  was  in  direct  conflict  with  His  own  government,  and  would 


598  THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PBOP.  206. 

necessarily  result  in  leading  His  own  subjects  astray  and  in  open  rebellion. 
The  very  prohibition  and  apparent  cruelty  toward  the  nations  of  Palestine 
is  made  necessary  by  the  foundation  principle  of  a  Theocracy,  and  its  pres- 
ence and  requirement  is  additional  proof  of  the  actual  Theocratic  idea 
having  been  realized  and  of  the  divine  inspiration  purposing  it.  Indeed, 
the  history  of  the  nation  proves  that  the  violation  of  this  very  feature 
weakened,  and  ultimately  proved  disastrous  to,  the  Theocratic  ordering.  It 
is  in  the  nature  of  a  Theocracy  to  avoid  all  that  can  possibly  affect  due 
allegiance  to  the  Supreme  Ruler,  and,  from  the  necessity  of  self-preservation 
and  the  retention  of  its  honor,  dignity,  power,  etc.,  it  must  meet  heinous 
sin,  crime,  and  rebellion  with  merited  punishment.  This  gives  us  the  key 
to  those  terrible  predictions  relating  to  the  future,  in  which  it  is  positively 
asserted  that  the  kings  and  their  armies  shall  be  overthrown,  and  the  king- 
doms of  the  earth  shall  be  utterly  broken,  etc.  Men,  when  reading  the 
prophecies  (see  e.g.  Props.  163,  162,  161,  160,  123,  etc.)  which  describe  the 
Coming  of  the  Theocratic  King  and  His  associated  rulers  in  connection 
with  the  awful  period  of  war  (Props.  115,  103),  followed  by  the  subversion 
and  end  of  the  Gentile  domination,  vainly  imagine  that  such  a  period  of  vio- 
lence, slaughter,  and  destruction  must  be  an  Oriental  exaggeration  ;  but 
the  reverent  believer,  accepting  of  the  Theocratic  idea  to  be  again  realized, 
sees  that  in  the  establishment  of  such  a  Kingdom  it  must  necessarily  lead 
to  this  result,  because  its  nature  forbids  its  allowing  the  existence  of  gov- 
ernments that  would,  if  permitted  to  survive,  be  a  constant  invitation  to 
His  subjects  to  withdraw  from  their  allegiance,  etc.  The  setting  up  of  a 
Theocracy,  when  the  world  is  governed  by  kingdoms  under  the  sway  of 
earthly  motives  and  principles,  must  inevitably  produce  the  mighty  convul- 
sions predicted,  and  these  predictions  themselves,  so  consonant  to  reason 
and  the  Theocratic  idea,  are  evidence  of  divine  inspiration. 

Hence  the  plain  predictions  of  the  punishment  of  nations  if  they  resist  acknowledging 
allegiance,  and  even  of  their  utterly  perishing  if  they  persist  in  it,  as  seen  e.g.  in  Zech. 
14  :  12-19  ;  Isa.  60  :  12,  etc.  Therefore  it  also  will  not  tolerate  the  treason  of  the  indi- 
vidual, but  metes  out  to  him  condign  punishment,  and,  if  persevering  in  rebellion,  finally 
death.  "We  read  that  mercy  and  long-suffering  will  be  extended  to  him  for  the  time 
allotted  to  man  in  this  dispensation,  for  e.g.  Isa.  65  :  20  declares  that  in  the  New  Heavens 
and  New  Earth  •'  the  sinner  a  hundred  years  old  shall  be  accursed."  We  remind  the  critical 
student  what  light  this  throws  on  the  subject  of  the  temporal  punishments  of  the  past 
Theocracy,  and  which  are  so  unfairly  used  against  the  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.  A 
Theocracy,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  must  thus  mete  out,  in  defence  of  its  funda- 
mental idea,  these  temporal  punishments,  and  it  will  do  it  again  until  the  world  is 
brought  into  complete  subjection.  The  punishments  regarded  in  their  connection  to  the 
actual  Kingdom  of  God  existing  pertain  to  tins  earth,  and  it  is  a  most  powerful  proof  of  the 
inspiration  of  God's  Word  that  it  thus  remains  so  faithful  and  consistent  to  the  Theo- 
cratic ordering.  Mistaking  the  nature  of  the  covenants  and  Kingdom  leads  men  to 
utterly  misapprehend  the  proprieties  of  language  and  the  undeviating  exactness  to  funda- 
mental ideas. 

Obs.  12.  Another  feature  connected  with  the  Theocracy  may  be  men- 
tioned as  indicative  of  the  Divine  Power  abiding  with  it.  "  Let 'the  reader 
turn  to  Prop.  171  and  see  how  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  fire  is 
a  distinguishing  honor  and  privilege  accorded  in  this  Kingdom.  In  the 
former  Theocracy  prophets  were  raised  up,  and,  as  writers  of  eminence  have 
justly  observed,  they  were  so  directly  influenced  by  the  Theocratic  King, 
that  as  special  divine  messengers  their  authority  could  not  be  resisted 
(comp.   Wines's   Com.,  p.   624,  etc.,  who  refers  to  Coleridge,   Schlosser, 


Prop.  206.]  the  theocratic  kingdom.  599 

Home,  Alexander,  and  Milton)  "  without  abjuring  the  fundamental  princi- 
ples of  the  Theocracy."  Wines  (Com.,  B.  2,  ch.  9),  Michaelis  (Com.,  art, 
36),  Alexander  (Introd.  Isa.,  p.  12),  and  others  hold,  from  the  institution  of 
the  prophetical  order  (Deut.  18  :  9-22),  that  God  designed  "  a  constant  suc- 
cession of  inspired  men"  and  "  a  permanent  order  of  (such)  men  in  the 
Israelitish  commonwealth."  This  was  perverted  by  the  rebellion  and  per- 
versity of  the  nation,  although  God  vouchsafed  in  mercy  not  to  overlook 
them  entirely — until  after  a  sufficiency  was  given — when,  as  an  indication  of 
disapprobation,  lie  left  them  without  a  prophet.  We  believe  that  this 
position  is  eminently  correct,  viz.,  that  the  Theocratic  ordering— to  evi- 
dence the  pervading  Theocratic  influence  (which  Balaam,  when  he  came  to 
view  the  nation,  could  not  withstand),  and  to  extend  its  efficiency  (as  e.g. 
in  revealing  the  will  and  purpose  of  the  King,  etc.) — incorporates  such  a 
succession  as  part  of  its  working  instrumentalities  promotive  of  the  honor 
of  the  King  and  the  wisdom  and  good  of  His  subjects.  Thus  it  will  be 
again  (Prop.  171),  and  so  general  (Joel,  etc.)  and  continued  that  it  in  itself 
evinces  a  most  powerful  present  Theocratic  arrangement.  This  is  one  of 
the  concomitants  of  a  Theocracy,  and  affords  an  insight  into  the  splendid 
portraiture  of  the  wonderful  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  during  that 
period,  and  the  astounding  moral,  religious,  and  civil  results  flowing  from 
the  imparting  of  divine  wisdom  for  the  guidance,  instruction,  and  elevation 
of  the  nations. 

Hence  we  cannot  agree  with  those  who — without  perhaps  intending  it — virtually 
lower  the  prophetic  office  by  making  it  merely  the  concomitant  of  the  childhood  of  the 
nation,  an  accommodation  to  counteract  the  ancient  desire  and  propensity  to  look  into 
the  future,  etc.  Even  under  the  light  that  we  now  possess,  how  welcome  would  be  the 
authoritative  utterance  of  a  prophet  to  inform  us  of  the  eyact  truth  of  things  concerning 
which  the  pious  and  the  great  so  widely  differ.  The  prophetic  office  has  a  deeper  foun- 
dation than  this,  viz.,  in  the  testimony  that  it  affords  of  a  pervading  Theocratic  ordering. 
All  divine  prophecy  is  based  on  speaking  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  ;  it  is  a  revealing  that 
which  comes  from  God  Hie  rxder  of  the  Kingdom.  It  therefore  evinces  the  nearness  of 
God,  and  when  He  comes  again  to  dwell  with  men,  this  nigliness  is  evidenced  by  the 
re-bestowal  of  the  gift  of  prophecy.  The  reader  is  reminded  of  the  affiliation  of  this 
prophetic  order  with  the  Theocracy  by  the  simple  fact,  that  the  assumption  of  the  pro- 
phetical office  without  being  divinely  called,  was  (Michaelis,  Com.,  arts.  252  and  253) 
treason  to  the  State,  and  hence  the  severity  of  the  penalty,  death.  The  ordinary  reader, 
confining  his  attention  too  exclusively  to  certain  inspired  ones  (as  the  seventy  elders, 
etc.)  and  not  comparing  the  Scriptures  on  the  subject,  is  led  to  form  an  incorrect  opin- 
ion of  the  extent  of  this  order  in  the  former  commonwealth.  Writers  who  have  examined 
this  feature  (as  Michaelis  and  Wines  in  their  Corns.,  Calmet  in  "  Diss,  on  the  Schools  of 
the  Hebrews,"  sec.  11,  etc.),  say  that  they  formed  "a  numerous  body  in  the  State." 
Owing  to  the  infirmity  of  subordinate  rulers,  etc.,  we  have  intimations  of  pretenders 
arising,  which  the  future  Theocracy,  in  virtue  of  its  perfected  ordering,  is  freed  from. 

Otis.  13.  The  student  will  not  fail  to  observe  that  our  doctrine  of  the 
Kingdom,  embracing  this  realized  Theocratic  idea,  is  not  dependent  on  the 
statement  of  Rev.  20  :  1-6.  This  latter  Scripture,  so  precious  in  stating 
one  of  the  means  of  its  inauguration,  etc.,  might  be  entirely  omitted  with- 
out in  the  slightest  degree  affecting  the  abundant  proof  that  covenants,  pre- 
dictions, and  promises  afford.  Hence  we  cannot  but  regard  those  who  so 
confidently  affirm  that  our  doctrine  is  founded  on  Rev.  20  :  1-6  as  but 
slightly  acquainted  with  it.  The  numerous  Propositions  of  this  work,  the 
logical  procedure,  step  by  step,  with  the  proof  attached,  the  history  of  the 
doctrine,  with  the  declarations  of  its  ancient  and  modern  upholders,  the 
Scriptures  produced  from  the  Old  and  New  Testaments— elevate  the  Theo- 


600  THE  THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  [PROP.  206. 

cratic  idea  into  a  cardinal  and  central  one — into  such  a  majestic  proportion, 
that  it  contains  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  Purpose,  that  it  is  futile  to 
attempt  to  dwarf  it  into  the  narrow  boundary  suggested.  The  Pre-Millen- 
nial  resurrection  is  only  a  means  necessary  to  secure  a  part  of  the  rulers  of 
this  Kingdom  ;  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom  is  not  to  be  sought  for  in  the 
means  used  for  its  re-introduction,  but  lies  firmly  imbedded  in  the  oath- 
bound  covenant  of  God. 

The  Jews  always  allied  salvation  with  the  restoration  of  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  ; 
with  that  restoration  they  connected  the  resurrection  of  the  pious,  a  glorious  Redemp- 
tion. This  we  have  proven  in  former  Propositions,  is  the  Old  Test,  teaching.  Is  salva- 
tion separate  from  the  Theocratic  Kingdom  now,  or  will  the  resurrection  of  saints  be 
not  realized  at  its  re-establishment?  No  !  covenant,  prophecy,  and  promise  forbid  it. 
The  Theocracy  of  the  past  (established  to  evidence  God's  own  chosen  form  of  govern- 
ment, and  to  show  that  man  as  now  constituted  is  incapable  of  properly  appreciating 
and  perpetuating  it),  could  not  be  sustained  because  of  man's  love  for  sin  and  guilt, 
which  caused  its  withdrawal.  Before  it  can  be  restored  to  its  perfected,  covenanted  form 
to  remain  a  permanency,  there  must  be  raised  up  for  it  a  body  of  rulers  who  shall  be  per- 
manently delivered  both  from  the  love  of  sin  and  its  guilt  (Prop.  124).  The  Theocracy 
of  the  past  foreshadowed  this,  and  in  its  typical  and  sacrificial  applications  made  a 
remarkable  provision  in  this  direction.  Put  something  more  was  required  to  bring  this 
work  to  a  successful  issue,  in  order  to  vindicate  the  majesty  of  the  law  and  to  qualify 
these  rulers  for  their  future  position.  To  whom  can  this  work  be  intrusted  ?  Who  so 
well  qualified,  so  eminently  adapted,  as  the  Theocratic  King  Himself'!1  Sinless,  Divine- 
Human,  Theocratic  Head,  He  is  alone  qualified  to  raise  up  a  body  of  true  believers  to  be 
associated  with  Him  in  the  highest  and  noblest  of  relations.  This  is  implied,  predicted, 
and  promised  irrespective  of  the  Apocalypse,  the  latter  being  only  strongly  confirmatory. 
Hence  as  a  preliminary  to  the  future  Theocracy,  as  an  essential  work  to  secure  its  stabil- 
ity and  holiness,  as  a  prerequisite  to  cause  the  will  of  God  to  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is 
done  in  heaven,  He,  the  King,  tenders  Himself  as  a  sacrifice  for  His  people,  so  that  by 
faith  in  Him  they  might  be  justified,  made  holy,  receive  the  better  resurrection,  and 
obtain  the  salvation  and  glory  inseparably  connected  with  His  Kingdom.  Here  is  pre- 
sented the  amazing  condescension,  the  astounding  love  of  the  King  !  Reason  cannot 
conceive  of  a  more  matchless  demonstration,  and  yet  this  is  the  very  one  conte  miniated 
in  the  Divine  Purpose  from  the  beginning,  and  clearly  stated  in  the  Old  as  well  as  the 
New  Test. 

Obs.  14.  "We  need  not  enumerate  the  distinguishing  blessings  that  will  be 
restored  in  and  be  added  to  the  Theocracy,  for  these  have  been  given 
(Props.  36,  49,  105,  114,  110,  117,  119,  120,  122,  142,  143,  144,  140,  151, 
154,  150,  157,  159,  107,  108,  109,  171,  173,  170,  182,  184,  190,  200,  202, 
204,  and  others).  These  representations,  founded  in  God's  faithfulness, 
inspire  us  with  the  confident  hope  that  when  this  Theocracy  is  realized  we 
shall  receive  far  higher  blessings  than  we  even  forfeited  at  the  fall,  and 
this,  that  the  Mighty  King  over  us  may  Himself  be  honored  and  praised  in 
and  through  us.  Passing  over  the  Divine  Plan  as  it  culminates  in  this 
Kingdom,  we  have  found  not  merely  perfected  redemption,  but  a  redemp- 
tion which  superadds  Sonship,  Kingship,  and  Priesthood — the  highest, 
most  intimate,  and  enduring  union  with  the  Theocratic  ruler — the  most 
exalted  conceivable  relationshi])  with  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  all  this  becomes  a  priceless,  eternal  inheritance.  Under  its  light 
and  glory  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  experience  the  deliverance  and 
blessedness  that  a  Theocracy  alone  is  capable  of  bringing  to  a  burdened, 
groaning  humanity. 

Aside  from  the  gradual  removal  of  the  curse  from  the  earth,  and  the  ultimate  destruc- 
tion of  the  last  enemy  after  the  thousand  years,  etc.,  which  has  been  sufficiently  repre- 
sented, we  may  confidently  expect  that  in  the  revelation  of  t'}e  majestic  King,  in  whom 


Prop.  206.]  the  tiieoceatic  kingdom.  601 

the  divine  and  human  are  united,  and  of  the  glorified  rulers  made  "  equal  unto  angels," 
then  the  great  underlying  mysteries  which  for  ages  have  eluded  the  grasp  of  the  theolo- 
gian, philosopher,  and  scientist  will  be  revealed.  The  relation  e.g.  that  mind  sustains 
to  matter— a  mystery  in  man,  and  preserved  such  in  order  to  keep  man  humble  before 
the  higher  mystery  of  God's  Omnipresent  Will  in  and  over  natural  law— will  then  in  the 
Person  of  "the  Christ"  and  in  the  persons  of  His  associated  riders,  receive  its  long 
wished  for  solution.  The  Scriptures  indicate  this  in  the  predictions  representing  the 
manifested  power  of  the  King  and  His  subordinates.  Then,  too,  will  be  realized  what 
Eeuss  (His.  Gh.  Theol.  Apos.  Aye,  p.  29)  says  of  the  Theocracy  :  "  The  fundamental  and 
formative  idea  of  the  prophetic  teaching  was  that  of  the  Theocracy."  (AVhy  then  change 
it  by  a  substitution?).  "  The  prophets  set  forth  as  the  end  or  law  of  that  national  life,  a 
state  of  society  in  which  all  the  citizens  should  be  brought  into  a  direct  relation  with 
Jehovah,  accepting  His  Will  as  the  sole  rule  of  their  actions,  whether  collective  or  indi- 
vidual, and  receiving  in  return  for  this  unbounded  obedience,  the  promise  of  peculiar 
divine  protection.  Israel,  according  to  this  ideal  conception  of  it,  was  to  be  a  people  of 
saints  and  priests."  This  "ideal  conception,"  which  comes  from  God,  will,  as  God's 
Word  is  truth,  be  finally  practically  verified,  and  then  shall  Gen.  12  :  3  ;  18  :  18,  and 
28  :  14,  etc.,  be  accomplished  in  all  its  fulness. 

Obs.  15.  Finally  :  "  The  Christ"  is  the  crowning  excellence  of  the  The- 
ocracy ;  He  is  "  the  chief  corner-stone"  "the  Head  of  the  corner,"  the 
Stone  that  crowns  the  apex  of  the  building.  The  builders  (Matt.  21  :  42, 
43,  i.e.  the  Jewish  nation  to  whom  the  Kingdom  was  tendered  by  Jesus, 
and  upon  whose  repentance  depended  the  securing  of  this  building — see 
Props.  54-59)  rejected  this  stone,  and  therefore  others  are  called,  and  when 
the  number  pre-determined  by  God  are  gathered  (Props.  G5,  66,  124,  etc.), 
then  He  becomes  the  glorious  Head-stone.  Again  we  say,  He  is  "  all  and 
in  all  ;"  without  Him  the  Theocracy  and  its  blessings,  as  covenanted,  could 
not  possibly  exist.  In  "  the  Christship"  (Props.  205,  204,  199)  we  have 
the  fundamental  idea  of  the  Theocratic  ordering,  viz.,  God  again  ruling  as 
a  King  over  the  nations — an  actual,  real,  accessible  King.  Look  at  the 
representations  of  the  prophets  in  this  direction,  and  obtain  an  overwhelm- 
ing proof  of  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  and  a  correct  view  of  the  requirements 
essential  to  a  Theocratic  King.  He  must  indeed  be,  as  has  been  abundantly 
proven,  David's  Son,  and  thus  Human  ;  but  He  must  also  be  God,  and  thus 
able  to  rule  Theocratically.  The  prophets  insist  upon  this  human  nature, 
and  they  press  it  as  so  essential  that  all  men,  Jews  and  Gentiles,  have  fully 
admitted  that  "  the  Messiah"  must  be  a  descendant  of  David's.  This  Mes- 
siah is  to  be  the  Head  of  the  restored  Theocracy.  But  see  how  the  same 
prophets  describe  this  Euler  as  "  God,"  as  "  the  Lord  God,"  etc.,  and 
bestow  upon  Him — the  Coming  One — the  title,  dignity,  honor,  and  glory 
of  God  Himself.  A  multitude  of  passages  which,  similar  to  Zeph.  3  :  15, 
17,  declare  that  when  this  Kingdom  is  set  up  "  the  King  of  Israel,  even  the 
Lord,  is  in  the  midst  of  thee,"  "the  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is 
mighty"  clearly  show  that  this  Messiah  is  a  God-man.  The  student  will 
find  this  an  exceeding  rich  vein  from  which  to  adduce  the  divinity  of 
"  the  Christ,"  for  the  Lord  God  that  cometh  in  vengeance  and  for  redemp- 
tion is  this  self-same  appointed  Messiah.  Now,  why  do  the  prophets  bring 
forth  this  grand  conception  as  if  it  was  a  matter  so  plain  that  it  needs  no 
explanation?  Simply  because  it  is  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  Theocratic 
conception,  for  no  Theocracy  can  be  restored  without  God  being  its  acknowl- 
edged earthly  Ruler.  This  very  language,  which  unbelief  has  presented 
as  specimens  of  Oriental  exaggeration,  is  profouud  and  truthful  in  mean- 
ing. They  form  another  of  those  indirect  but  powerful  proofs  which  sus- 
tain the  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.     Now,  see  how  Jesus,  as  described  in 


602  THE  THEOCEATIC   KINGDOM.  [PeOP.  206. 

the  New  Test.,  meets  all  these  qualifications  in  His  own  Person  ;  Jwiv  such 
a  Messiah  has  actually  been  provided  ;  how  the  fulfilment  of  the  remainder 
is  postponed  to  the  Sec.  Coming  of  this  Christ  ;  how  the  builders  that  re- 
jected Him  have  borne  their  sad  punishment  for  eighteen  centuries  ;  how 
the  process  of  gathering  out  His  intended  associated  rulers  is  going  on,  etc., 
and  then  how  can  we  reject  this  Theocratic  King  and  the  contemplated,  'pre- 
determined, covenanted  Theocracy.  No  !  we  cannot  :  our  minds  and  hearts 
cleave  to  Him  and  to  His  predicted  Kingdom  with  all  our  strength.  With 
an  eye  of  faith  and  a  heart  of  hope  we  look  for  a  Theocracy — for  God  Him- 
self, in  the  Person  of  Jesus,  to  come  and  in  wonderful  condescension  and 
love  to  rule  over  the  nations  as  their  actual  earthly  Ruler.  What  honor, 
what  blessedness,  what  glory,  what  endless  joy  are  embraced  in  a  single 
word  realized,  a  Theocracy,  and  in  a  single  person  the  Head  of  the  same, 
even  Jesus  "  the  Christy  the  mighty  Theocratic  King,  "  the  Just  One," 
"Faithful  and  True." 

Jesus  Himself  will  greatly  rejoice  in  this  Theocracy.  As  David's  Son  and  Lord,  it  is 
His  inheritance  and  work.  In  it  He  sees  the  grand  result  of  the  travail  of  His  sold,  and 
He  is  satisfied.  In  it  He  realizes  "  the  joy  set  before  Him,"  and  He  is  exalted  in  honor 
and  glory.  In  it  He  is  the  centre  of  admiration  and  praise,  the  love  and  devotion  of  the 
glorified,  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  of  the  Gentiles  being  drawn  to  Him.  The  restitu- 
tion, blessings,  and  perpetuity  of  His  dominion,  the  constant  realization  that  He  Himself 
is  a  fiowing  foiintain  of  happiness  and  delight  to  ransomed  ones  and  to  the  nations  of  the 
earth,  this  enables  Him  to  rejoice  evermore,  through  "the  ages  of  ages."  Evermore 
King,  He  is  ennobled  by  His  civil  relationship  ;  evermore  Priest,  He  is  glorified  by  His 
religious  Headship  ;  evermore  King-Priest,  He  is  exalted  by  the  perfect  Theocratic  unity 
centred  in  His  own  Person  and  Reign. 


THE   THEOCRATIC   KINGDOM.  60? 


CONCLUSION. 

Thus,  by  God's  grace,  we  have  passed  over  the  great,  leading  Biblical 
doctrine  of  the  Kingdom  of  God — a  Kingdom  covenanted,  established, 
overthrown,  predicted,  preached,  postponed,  and  finally  gloriously  re-estab- 
lished under  the  mighty  Theocratic  King.  We  have,  logically  and  con- 
secutively, traced  the  Kingdom  of  God,  finding  it  based  upon  the  covenants, 
instituted  in  an  initiatory  form,  modified  in  the  Davidic  incorporation, 
overthrown  for  man's  sinfulness,  tendered  to  the  elect  nation,  but  rejected, 
postponed  to  the  period  of  the  Sec.  Advent,  and  finally  re-established  with 
great  power  and  glory  by  David's  Son  and  Lord.  In  it  is  found  an  incor- 
porated perfected  humanity  insuring  success,  a  human  society  under  divine 
guidance,  a  civil  and  religious  government  under  a  Theocracy,  a  satisfac- 
tory completion  of  redemption,  a  triumphant  conclusion  of  history  and  of 
God's  perfected  Purpose  in  "  the  Christ."  We  have  honored  the  Word  of 
God,  by  our  constant  appeal  to  it,  as  the  all-sufficient  and  infallible  rule  of 
faith  and  practice,  and  trust  that  (comp.  Luther's  and  Augustine's  declara- 
tions as  given  by  Dr.  Sprecher  in  Groundwork  of  Theology,  p.  119)  our 
deductions  and  teaching  from  the  Scriptures  may  tend  to  an  increased 
love  for  and  study  of  the  Bible  :  and  that  they  be  measured  by  the  stand- 
ard of  truth,  accepting  only  of  that  which  stands  the  test.  Our  argument 
exalts  Jesus  "  the  Christ,"  in  that  it  brings  Him  forth  distinctively  as  the 
covenanted  Messiah,  who  is  yet  to  fulfil  the  covenanted  mercies  promised  to 
the  fathers,  and  who  is  yet  to  reveal  Himself  as  the  Redeemer  of  the  world 
in  the  inauguration  of  a  government  such  as  is  pre-eminently  adapted  to 
the  wants  of  a  burdened  creation.  It  honors  the  past,  present,  and  future 
work  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  enters  heartily  into  the  consideration  of  the 
things  pertaining  to  His  glory,  with  the  joyful  hope  of  seeing  and  partici- 
pating in  the  same  ;  it  reverences  the  oath-bound  covenants,  the  prophetic 
utterances,  the  faith  of  the  ancients,  with  the  pleasing  anticipation  of  real- 
izing in  happy  experience  the  blessed  things  promised,  predicted,  and  be- 
lieved. The  Kingdom  embraces  all  our  desire — the  King,  the  Princes,  the 
Angels,  the  restored  Jews,  the  admiring  Gentiles,  the  released  Creation, 
the  Millennial  gladness,  the  Etei  nal  Ages,  and  God  over  all,  blessed  for- 
evermore.  Dr.  Bonar  (Prophet.  Landmarks)  has  so  happily  expressed  our 
thoughts  that  we  reproduce  his  remarks  as  a  fitting  conclusion  :  "  Our 
doctrine,  as  Millenarians,  pervades  the  whole  Word  of  Gocl,  from  Genesis 
to  Revelation.  It  is  not  confined  to  the  figurative  and  poetical  books.  It 
declares  itself  with  equal  fulness  in  narrative  and  epistle,  in  symbol  and  in 
type.  Like  a  thread  of  gold  it  runs  through  the  whole  web  of  Revela- 
tion, crossing  and  recrossing  it  everywhere,  and  imparting  the  richest  brill- 
iance in  the  whole  texture.  It  is  the  burden  of  all  prophecy.  It  is  the 
summing  up  as  well  as  the  unravelling  of  all  history.  It  is  the  final  and 
grand  solution  of  the  mystery  of  God's  dealings  with  this  world  of  ours. 
It  is  the  germ  of  Israel's  types.  It  is  woven  into  all  their  ordinances,  and 
rites,  and  festivals.     It  is  the  theme  of  many  a  Psalm,  the  heart  of  many 


G04  THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM. 

a  symbol,  the  subject  of  many  a  parable,  the  end  and  point  of  many  a 
promise,  the  seal  set  to  the  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  as  the  '  Gospel  of 
the  Kingdom.''  It  has  been  the  hope  of  the  Church  through  many  a  star- 
less night,  when  other  hopes  had  gone  out  one  by  one,  like  beacons  shat- 
tered by  the  tempest,  leaving  her  disconsolate  and  helpless.  And  it  is  now 
again,  in  our  day,  pressed  upon  her  notice,  as  her  strength  in  '  the  hour  of 
temptation,  which  is  coming  upon  all  the  world,'  the  only  light  which 
cannot  bo  quenched,  and  by  which  alone  she  will  be  able  to  steer  her  peril- 
ous course  through  the  gloom  of  the  thickening  storm.  It  is  no  dream  of 
carnal  enthusiasts,  enamored  of  materialism,  and  anticipating  a  paradise  of 
gross  delights.  It  is  the  calm  belief  of  spiritual  men,  resting  upon  God's 
sure  promise,  and  looking  forward  to  a  Kingdom  of  '  righteousness,  peace, 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost. '  It  is  no  hasty  conjecture,  no  novelty  of  a 
feverish  period,  rashly  caught  up,  without  consideration  and  without  evi- 
dence. It  can  produce  the  testimony  of  ages  in  its  behalf  ;  and  they  who 
have  held  it  in  our  day  have  been  men  who  studied  their  Bible  on  their 
knees,  and  have  come  to  their  conclusions  after  long,  deliberate,  and  most 
solemn  investigation.  It  is  no  fable  of  romance  ;  it  is  sober,  Scriptural 
reality,  though  far  beyond  what  fancy  ever  painted.  It  is  no  vision  of  the 
politician,  yet  it  shows  us  how,  erelong,  shall  be  exemplified  that  which 
earthly  governments  have  been  vainly  striving  to  realize — a  peaceful  and 
prosperous  world.'"  AVhatever  of  defect  or  misconception  maybe  in  the 
preceding  Propositions,  yet  the  grand  outlines,  the  precious  doctrine  of  the 
Kingdom  is  undoubtedly  true,  because  based  on  the  plain  grammatical 
sense  of  that  which  k'  is  written,1*  "  the  word  of  the  Lard.'"  It  is  no  little 
gratification,  advantage,  and  privilege  to  live  at  this  period  of  time,  way 
down  in  the  feet  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  image,  with  so  many  centuries  of 
fulfilled  prophecy,  past  and  preseiit,  and  a  solemn  and  joyful  culmination 
of  the  remainder  imminently  before  us.  The  gratification  arises  from  our 
lengthened  view  confirming  the  predictions  of  the  future  ;  the  advantage 
springs  from  the  practical  use  that  we  can  male  of  the  same,  thrilling  the 
heart  with  hope  and  joy  at  the  glorious  ju'ospects  ;  the  privilege  is  seen  in 
that  wo  still  live  in  a  period  enabling  us  to  secure  the  inestimable  blessing 
of  "  Kingship  and  priesthood."  Contemplating  the  wonderful  scheme  of 
redemption  and  the  results  of  the  Christship,  culminating  in  this  Theo- 
cratic ordering,  the  heart — realizing  "  the  earnest"  preparative — is  filled 
with  peace  in  believing  ;  "  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  "  imparting  strength 
and  weaning  us  from  the  world  ;  the  Theocratic  King  and  His  glory  giving 
us  more  ravishing  ideas  of  our  own  heirship  and  "  high  calling"  while  still 
"  pilgrims  and  strangers  ;"  appropriating  faith  beholding  Jesus  on  the 
cross  and  the  throne  makes  Him  exceedingly  precious,  and  delights  itself 
in  the  things  pertaining  to  the  love,  dominion,  and  excellent  glory  of  One 
so  dear  and  worthy.  The  Theocratic  promises  now  make  us  content  to 
await  the  time  when  God's  ways  will  be  vindicated,  when  His  providences 
will  be  light,  and  when  our  own  trials  and  sufferings  will  be  seen  as  pre- 
requisites to  qualify  us  for  our  respective  stations  in  the  Kingdom.  To 
those  who  object  to  such  a  vision  of  the  future,  to  such  views  of  a  delight- 
ful land  of  promise,  restored  Eden,  exalted,  glorified,  and  Adamic  condition, 
the  Christ's  Theocratic  grandeur,  etc.,  we  only  say  in  reply  :  ""This  is  the 
Lord's  doing  ;  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes"  (Ps.  118  :  23).  "  If  it  he  mar- 
vellous in  the  eyes  of  the  remnant  of  this  people  in  these  days,  should  it  also 
be  marvellous  in  mine  eyes  ?  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts." 


THE   THEOCRATIC    KINGDOM.  605 

It  is  pi;oper  to  acknowledge  at  the  close  of  our  labor  gratitude  to  God 
that  He  has  brought  believers  to  the  knowledge  of  such  truth,  and  that 
once  ''aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel  and  strangers  from  the 
covenants  of  promise"  we  "  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ  ;"  and 
being  "  Christ's,  then  are  Abraham's  seed  and  heirs  according  to  promise." 
We  thank  God  that  He  has  enabled  us  to  lay  hold  upon  His  oath-attested 
covenants,  and  by  faith  in  a  covenanted  Christ  to  have  confidence  and 
assurance  in  the  fulfilment  of  His  most  gracious  Word,  so  that  when 
brethren  forsook  and  reproached  us  (a  sad  trial,  to  which  the  Saviour  was 
no  exception)  we  still  had  great  comfort.  We  thank  Him  that,  unlike 
some  (Erasmus-like)  who  keep  silence,  He  put  it  into  our  heart  to  present 
His  own  rich  treasures  to  others,  as  a  token  of  gratitude,  as  a  kind  of  testi- 
mony to  the  Church  and  the  world,  as  a  source  of  encouragement  in  the 
coming  trial,  although  advised  to  sacrifice  the  best  years  of  our  life  by  com- 
mitting this  work  to  the  flames,  on  the  ground  of  the  Church's  hostility 
to  its  expressed  faith.  We  thank  Him  that  when  often  sorely  tempted, 
tried,  discouraged — when  through  poverty  much  of  this  work  was  written 
on  leaves  of  books,  old  letters,  and  waste  paper  (so  that  Jonathan  Edwards's 
straits  could  be  appreciated,  when  reduced  to  write  his  Freedom  of  the  Will 
on  backs  of  letters  and  blank  pages  of  pamphlets) — when  depressed  at  the 
prevailing  unbelief  and  the  few  in  number  with  whom  we  could  "  take 
sweet  counsel" — when  falsely  accused  of  heresy,  fanaticism,  and  held  up  to 
odium,  and  influence  sought  to  be  lessened  on  account  of  Chiliasm,  He  was 
ever  the  prayer-hearing  and  answering  God,  supplying  our  wants,  giving 
strengthening  views  of  the  unity  of  Divine  Purpose,  and  the  fulness  of 
Jesus  in  redemption  ;  imparting  hope  that  as  the  work  was  designed  to 
promote  the  Father's  honor,  the  Son's  glory,  and  the  Spirit's  praise,  He 
would  provide  for  its  publication  ;  and  allowing  the  sweet  privilege  of 
being  among  that  number  who  entertain,  confess,  and  proclaim 

"The Blessed  Hope," 

even 

"His  Appearing  and  Kingdom." 


Finis. 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


The  numbers  I.  II.  111.  denote  the  volumes,  and  the  figures  refer  to  the  pages  indicated, 
THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 


GENESIS. 

Ch.  1  :  26,  II.  581,  III.  16. 

1  :  28,  II.  142,  III.  16. 

2  :*  4,  II.  365. 

3  :15.  11.181,  489,  etc. 
3  :  16,  II.  146,  133. 
3  :  18,  19,  II.  143. 
6  :    7,  13,  17,  II.  511. 

8  :  21,  22,  II.  437. 

9  :  12-16,  II.  550. 
9  :  25-27,  HI.  406. 
9  :  27,  H.  776 

12  :  1-3.  7,  I.  293,  III.  601. 

12  :  6,  II.  771. 

13  :  14-17,  I.  293,  II.  550. 
15  :  4-21,  I.  293. 
15  :  5,  I.  303,  II.  133. 
15  :  13-21,  II.  141,  146. 
15  :  18,  I.  297. 
17  :  4-16,  I.  293,  295. 
17  :  5-8.  II.  550. 
17  :  6,  II.  576,  III.  590. 

17  :  7,  8,  I.  303.  III.  590. 

18  :  18,  III.  601. 

18  :  19,  I.  92. 

19  :  14,  III.  165. 
19  :  15,  19,  n.  619. 
22  :  11,  11.619. 
22  :  15-18,  I.  293,  II.  95. 
22  :  16-26,  I.  300,  II.  133. 

24  :  40,  II.  619. 

25  :  31-34,  II.  269, 609. 

26  :  3,  I.  300. 
26  :  4,  II.  133. 

26  :  24,  III.  590. 

27  :  29,  H.  269,  315. 

28  :  1-4,  I.  294. 
28  :  12,  II.  619. 
28  :  13,  III.  590. 
28  :  14,  II.  133,  III.  601. 
32  :  12,  II.  133. 
32  :  28,  II.  96. 


Ch.35  :11,  11.576. 
"  41  :  40,  III.  55. 
"49:1,1.  446,  II.  423. 
"  49  :  3,  II.  6D9. 
"  49  :  9,  III.  402. 
"  49  :  10,  II.  511,  HI.  398. 
"  49  :  24,  I.  670. 
"  50  :  20,  HI.  430. 


EXODUS. 

Ch.   3  :  15,  I.  296. 

"  3  :  20,  I.  92. 

"  4  :  22,  II.  609. 

"  6:4,  I.  297. 

"  6:6,  7,  I.  92,  III.  590. 

"  7  :  5,  I.  92. 

"  9:6,  II.  379. 

"  10  :  2,  I.  92. 

"  10  :  21-23,  HI.  164. 

"  12  :  48,  I.  230. 

"  13  :  12,  II.  609. 

"  14  :  13-24,  II.  759,  761. 

"  14  :  14,  II.  105. 

"  15  :  1,  I.  92. 

"  15  :  3,  I.  402. 

"  15  :  11,  I.  92. 

"  15  :  17,  II.  115,  200,  202,  III.  38,  458. 

"  18  :  46.  II.  354. 

"  19  :  3-10,  III.  592. 

"  19  :  4,  II.  320. 

"  19  :  5-8,  I.  207,  401,  II.  77,  95,  140,  008, 

III.  590. 

"  22  :  29,  II.  009. 

"  23  :  31,  I.  297,  II.  144,  146. 

"  23  :  33,  II.  771. 

"  24  :  3-8.  III.  592. 

"  24  :  5.  II.  609. 

"  29  :  45,  III.  590. 

"  34  :  12,  II.  771. 

"  34  :  19,  20,  II.  609. 

"  40  :  34,  35,  II.  568. 


608 


INDEX   OF   SCEIPTUKE. 


LEVITICUS. 


Ch.  5  : 
"  8  : 
"  10  : 
*'  13: 
"  16  : 
"    17  : 


42,  I.  178. 
2-5,  II.  009. 
11,  II.  609. 
G,  13,  II.  02. 
20,  III.  459. 
7,  I.  224. 


18  :  25,  II.  772. 

25  :  23,  I.  302,  II.  202. 
20,  II.  202,  774,  III.  99. 

26  :  7,  8,  II.  115. 
26  :  16,  II.  146. 

26  :  42-45,  I.  178,  220,  225,  288,  II.  53, 
56,  82. 

27  :  12,  III.  590. 


Ch.  3 


NUMBERS. 

:  12,  13,  40,  51, 1.  609. 
:  13,  II.  209,  315. 
:  5-20,  I.  609. 
:  14,  I.  230. 
:  25,  26,  III.  70. 
:  26,  I.  669. 
:  29,  III.  71. 
:  20,  28,  I.  177. 
:  21,  III.  33,  210. 
:  15,  I.  609. 
:  20,  III.  51. 
:  20,  III.  70. 
,  III.  401. 
:  9,  II.  56. 
:  11,  1.768. 
:  19,  I.  177. 
,  III.  402,  etc. 
:  2,  III.  70. 

:  17,  18,  I.  310,  III.  23. 
:  8,  II.  266. 
:  49,  II.  115. 


DEUTERONOMY. 

Ch.  1  :  8,  11.201. 

"  1  :  36,  II.  416. 

"  3  :  24,  I.  92. 

"  4  :  10-20,  II.  22. 

•'  4  :  12,  I.  216. 

"  4  :  20,  II.  200. 
■'  4  :  24,  III.  81. 
"  4  :  27,  28,  II.  65. 
"     4  :  32-40,  I.  92,  231. 
"  6  :  20-25,  III.  592. 
"  7  :  6,  I.  213,  II.  40. 
"  9  :  26,  29,  I.  378,  II.  200. 

"  10  :  5,  I.  401. 

"  10  :  9,  III.  51. 

"  11  -.21,  22,  1.297. 

"  11  :  24,  II.  146. 

"  11  :  41,  II.  203,  144. 

"  12  :  20,  21,  I.  224. 

"  12  :  32,  I.  216. 

"  13  :  1-3,  II.  740,  III.  258. 


Ch.  14  :  2,  I.  207,  II.  140. 
"  15  :  1,  III.  99. 
"  16  :  16,  I.  216. 
"  16:  18.1.216,  219. 
"  17  :  8-13,  I.  216,  II.  609,  610. 
"  17  :  14-20,  I.  227. 
"  18  :  1,  2,  III.  51. 
"  18  :  9-22.  III.  599. 
"  18  :  11,  III.  145. 
"  18  :  13-19,  II.  195,  III.  426. 
"  18  :  18,  19,  II.  76. 
"  18  :  21,  22,  I.  178. 
"   20  :  16.  17,  II.  771. 
"  21  :  5,  II.  610. 
"  21  :  17,  II.  269,  315,  609. 
"  22  :  29,  I.  142. 
"  24,  III.  592. 
"  25  :  13,  I.  683. 
"  26  :  18,  II.  140. 
"  28,  I.  220,  II.  447. 
"  28  :  36,  62-64,  II.  65. 
"  29  :  10-13,  I.  216,  III.  592. 
"  29  :  29,  III.  151. 
"  30  :  3,  4,  II.  66. 
"  30  :  20,  I.  224. 
"  30-33,  I.  225. 
"  31  :  16,  II.  261. 

"  32,  I.  164,  378,  408,  417,  11.202,  274. 
"  32  :  1-13,  I.  209,  II.  320. 
"  32  :  8-15,  I.  224,  II.  598. 
"  32  :  21-43,  I.  232,  393,  417,  II.  56,  59, 

68,  70,  183,  III.  185,  393,  414. 
"  32  :  22,  II.  508,  513,  519. 
"  32  :  30,  II.  115. 
"  32  :  36,  II.  95. 

"  32  :  39,  I.  297,  II.  254,  III.  393. 
"  33:1,  2,  III.  20. 
"  33  :  9.  10.  II.  009. 
"  33  :  12,  II.  366. 
"  33  :21,  1.316,  11.72. 
"  33  :27,  II.  115. 
"  33  :  29,  II.  114. 
"  34  :  2,  II.  669. 

JOSHUA. 

Ch.  1  :  3,  4,  II.  146. 

"  8  :  30-35,  III.  592. 

"  10:  11,  12,  III.  395. 

"  10  :  28,  II.  293. 

"  11  :  11,  11.266. 

"  13  :33,  III.  51. 

"  14  :  9,  II.  446. 

"  24  :  31,  III.  99. 


JUDGES. 


Ch.  2 


1-5,  II.  771. 
2  :  16-19.  II.  354. 
5  :  4,  5,  III.  21. 
5  :  13,  31,  II.  578. 
8  :  22,  23,  I.  226. 

15  :  20,  III.  99. 

16  :  31,  III.  99. 


INDEX   OF   SCEIPTUEE. 


609 


Ch. 


Ch. 


Cb 


I.  SAMUEL. 

Ch.  11  :  39,  I.  422. 

2,  n.  24. 

"   13  :  3,  4,  III.  400. 

2  :  1-10,  II.  Ill,   254,  230,  273,  582, 
III.  572. 

II.  KINGS. 

4:1,  III.  99. 

Ch.    2  :  11,  II.  487. 

6  :  20,  I,  228. 

"     6  :  17,  II.  487. 

7:10,  III.  406. 

"     8  :  19,  II.  96. 

7  :  13,  III.  99. 

"  15  :  4,  II.  96. 

7  :  23,  26,  I.  228. 

"   18  :  21,  III.  389. 

8  :  4-9,  I.  226. 

"   21  :  14,  II.  200. 

8  :  5,  6,  20,  II.  354. 

8  :  7,  I.  217. 

I.  CHRONICLES. 

8  :  11,  II.  229,  233. 

Ch.  14  :  17,  n.  379. 

8  :  17,  II.  36. 

"   16  :  14-19,  II.  355. 

8  :  19-23,  II.  154, 178,  236. 

"   16  :  30,  II.  436. 

8  :  23,  II.  240,  241,  259. 

"   17  :  11-27,  I.  313,  II.  55. 

8  :  30,  II.  240. 

"   17  :  16,  I.  314,  342,  581. 

9  :  15-27,  I.  236. 

"   17:21,  22,  1.315,  11.56. 

10  :  1-26.  I.  236. 

"   21,  I.  235. 

10  :  10,  III.  70. 

"   27,  II.  114. 

10  :  11,  II.  200. 

"   28  :  5,  I.  234. 

10  :  17-19,  I.  226. 

"   29  :  15,  L  301,  310. 

10  :  23,  I.  236. 

11  :  14,  II.  499. 

II.  CHRONICLES. 

12  :  2,  III.  99. 

Ch.   6  :  14-16,  I.  343,  II.  81. 

12  :  12,  I.  217,  226. 

"     6  :  18,  III.  445. 

12  :  16-19,  I.  226. 

"     7  :  12-22,  L  378,  IL  169,  318. 

12  :  17,  18,  in.  406. 

"     9:8,  I.  228,  234. 

13  :  12,  I.  228. 

"   13  :  8,  I.  234. 

13  :  14,  I.  236. 

*'   15  :  8,  II.  499. 

15  :  29,  I.  177,  179. 

"   20  :  7,  I.  335. 

22  :  14.  III.  406. 

"  21  :  3,  II.  609. 

23  :  1,  III.  571. 

"   24  :  2,  II.  499. 

24  :  6,  I.  234,  III.  571. 

"  36  :  21,  III.  182. 

25  :  29,  III.  341. 

26  :  19,  II.  200. 

EZRA. 

28  :  15,  I.  228. 

Ch.    1  :  5,  II.  89. 

"     4  :  13,  I.  237. 

II.  SAMUEL. 

"     6  :'17-21,  n.  89. 
•«     7  :  24,  I.  237. 

7:1,  III.  55. 

7  :  4-17,  I.  177,  215,  313,  342,  353. 

NEHEMIAH. 

7  :  16,  II.  631. 

Ch.   4:5,  III.  459. 

7  :  19,  I.  314,  581. 

"     9  :  36,  37,  II.  537. 

7  :  23,  24,  I.  315,  400,  H.  114. 

15  :  4,  II.  355. 

JOB. 

21  :  3,  II.  200. 

Ch.  3  :  13,  17,  II.  248. 

22  :  35-47,  II.  114. 

«     3  :  18,  II.  254. 

23  :  1-4,  II.  415. 

"     7  :  21,  H.  416. 

23  :  5,  I.  316. 

"   10  :  17,  II.  499. 

23  :  7,  II.  462. 

"   10:21,  22,11.256,111.389. 

24,  I.  235. 

"   19  :  25,  II.  259, 

"  21  :  30,  II.  277,  278. 

"   22  :  5-7,  I.  536. 

I.  KINGS. 

"  26  :  10, 1. 34. 

.    3  :  8-13,  I.  119,  228. 

"   27  :  19, 1.  274. 

6  :  1,  III.  99. 

"   40  :  13,  I.  274. 

6  :  12,  14,  I.  228. 
6  :  16,  I.  449. 

PSALMS. 

8,  I.  228. 

Ps.  2,  17,  22,  69,  I.  314,  615,  H. 

8  :  51,  53,  n.  200. 

189,  191,  497,  742,  752,  761 

11  :  36,  II.  96. 

416,  417. 

610 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


Ch. 


9, 
9: 
9: 
9  : 
9: 
10, 
10: 
11  : 
11  : 
12, 
14, 
14: 
1G: 
1G: 
16: 
17: 
17: 
18, 
18: 
19: 
21, 
21  : 

21  : 
22, 
22: 
22: 

22  : 
23, 
23: 
25: 
27, 
27: 
27: 
28: 
30, 
30: 
81, 
31  : 
£l 
31 
32 
32 
33 
35 
35 
36 
37, 


1  2  HI.  571  575 

2,  5,  6,  8, 1. 184,  266,  458,  577,  695, 
105,  201,  278,  775,  III.  571. 

7,  8,  II.  446,  581,  in.  189,  478. 
10-12,  III.  577. 
12,  II.  72,  113. 

5,  II.  258,  III.  389. 

6,  II.  259. 
18,  11.257. 

4,  II.  266. 

10,  II.  276. 
II.  356. 

12,  13,  III.  395. 

11.  485,  487,  589,  IH.  16. 

3,  4,  III.  445. 

5-8,  I.  572,  574,  614,  II.  142. 
H.  699. 
1-8,  III.  215. 

7,  8,  II.  355. 

13,  14,  H.  2G0,  III.  452. 
15-20,  II.  109. 
II.  757. 
15-18,  II.  105,  699. 

I,  III.  24. 
6,11.  519,  III.  394. 

II.  699. 
H.  699. 
7,  II.  72,  HI.  452. 

5,  III.  51. 

10,  II.  237,  258,  HI.  389. 
11,11.  592,599. 
7-9.  II.  326. 
15,  H.  306. 
U.  736. 
13,  III.  406. 

15,  H  189. 
I.  314,  II.  714,  768. 
7-13,  m.  215. 
11,11.  760. 

I.  304. 
G,  III.  571. 

16,  in.  415. 
:  27.  28,  I.  479,  536,  m.  215. 

HI.  388,  etc. 
:  5,  II.  582. 
:  14,  I.  307,  H.  186. 

H.  254. 
:  5,  II.  325. 
:  13,  II.  499. 
:  9,  II.  200. 

11.  204,  259,  260,  262. 
:  5.  II.  414. 

II.  251,  275. 
:  5,  III.  393. 
:  8,  III.  393. 
:  19,  20,  II.  325. 
:  6,  7,  II.  323. 
:  9,  III.  16. 
:  11,  I.  288. 
:  10,  II.  251. 
:  23.  II.  111. 
:  8.  III.  57. 

II.  274,  377,  434, 440,  752,  m.  185. 


Ch.  37  :  2-15,  n.  713. 
"  37  :  9-34,  I.  305. 
"  37  :  11,  II.  446. 
"  37  :  24,  HI.  393. 
"  37  :  38-40.  II-  323. 
"  37  :  39,  HI.  452. 
"  39  :  12, 1.  301,  310. 
"  39  :  13,  II.  290. 
"  40  :  8.  II.  162. 
"  41 :  8-10,  II.  256. 
"  42,  III.  415. 
"  42  :  5,  III.  452. 
"  43,  III.  415. 
"  44  :  19,  HI.  389. 
"  45,  I.  314,  616,  II.  139,  325,  330,  550, 

m.  406. 
"  45  :  6,  7,  n.  114,  346,  582,  637,  HL  390, 

416,518. 
*'  45  :  8,  HI.  571. 
"  45  :  16,  II.  588. 
"  46,  H.  114,  744,  III.  24,  392. 
"  46:4,1.508. 
"  46  :  4-6,  II.  761. 
"  46  :  5,  n.  416. 
"  46  :  6-11,  H.  770. 
"  47,  II.  114,  580. 
"  48,  U.  114,  III.  36,  392. 
"  48  :  1,  2,  I.  508,  m.  56. 
"  48  :  4,  II.  753. 
"  48  :  12,  I.  305,  314. 
"  49,  H.  261,  275. 
"  49  :  14,  15,  II.  415,  417,  in.  389. 
"  49  :  20,  III.  16. 
"  50,  H.  356,  737. 
"  50  :  1-6,  II.  177,  188,  242. 
"51,  II.  699. 
"  51  :  1,  III.  459. 
"  52,  II.  256,  699,  713. 
"  52  :  5,  II.  273. 
"  53,  11.721. 
"  53  :  1,  II.  723. 
"  53  :  6,  III.  452. 
"  55,  II.  69,  109,  H.  111. 
"  56,  II.  256. 
"  56  :  13,  II.  275. 
"  57  :  16,  U.  259. 
"  58  :  2,  in.  57. 
"  58  :  10,  II.  109. 
"  58  :  18,  II.  743. 
"  59,  n.  276.  711,  753. 
"  59  :  16,  II.  416. 
"  60,  n.  114. 
"  62  :  4,  II.  760. 
"  63  :  11,  U.  180. 
"  64,  II.  739,  757. 
"  64  :  2,  H.  326. 
"  65,  II.  145. 
"  65  :  4,  m.  57. 
"  65  :  7,  II.  527. 
"  66  : 1-4,  II.  616. 
"  67  :  4,  II.  353,  370. 
"  68:11.  114,  III.  19,  etc.,  392. 
"  68  :  11,  II.  610,  III.  30. 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


611 


Ch.68 

"  68 

"  68 

"  68: 

"  68: 

"  68 

"  69, 

"  69: 

"  69 

"  69: 

"  71, 

"  72: 

"  72 

"  72 

"  72 

"  72: 

"  72: 

"  72: 

"  73, 

"  74, 

"  74: 

«  74 

"  74: 

"  75, 

*'  75 

"  76, 

"  76: 

"  76: 

"  76 

"  77 

"  78 

"•  79, 

"  80, 

"  80: 

"  81 

"  81  : 

"  82 

"  83, 

"  83 

"  83: 

"  83: 

"  84: 

"  85: 

"  85: 

"  86, 

"  87 

"  88 

"  88 

"  89 

137 

"  89  : 

"  89: 

"  89  : 

"  89: 

"  89: 

"  89: 

"  89: 

"  89: 

"  89: 

"  89: 

"  89: 

"  89: 


13,  H.  593,596. 

16,  I.  303. 

17,  IH.  395. 

22,  II.  91. 

23,  H.  109. 
30,  III.  16. 

I.  243,  303,  H.  736. 
22,  23,  II.  69. 

34,  II.  514. 

35,  36.  II.  547. 

II.  257. 

1.  304,  314,  n.  437,  550,  713. 

3,  II.  580. 

4,  I.  536. 

5,  7,  17,  II.  143,  ni.  418,  479. 
7-11,  III.  191,  210,  418. 

8,  III.  404. 

15,  17,  HI.  479. 

11,  752. 
III.  452. 

2,  III.  389. 

12,  III.  33. 

14,  in.  21. 
II.  6:»9. 

10,  II.  579. 

11.  113,  708,  m.  392. 

2,  I.  305. 

3,  II.  761. 

9,  II.  356,  441. 

18,  III.  406. 

54,  II.  202  m.  38,  458. 
II.  255. 
II.  76. 

17,  18,  I.  566,  570,  II.  257. 
8-18,  I.  378,  in.  544. 

13,  16, 1.  222. 

8,  II.  355. 

11.  114,  760. 

3,  II.  326,  m.  393. 

4,  I.  149. 

12,  II.  768. 

io,  n.  611,  in.  57. 

5-7,  in.  393. 

9,  III.  452. 
II.  256. 

3,  I.  508. 
10-13,  II.  275. 

18,  H.  256,  262. 

132,  I.  180,  237,  314,  318,  U.  77. 
,  177,  250,  579,  III.  417,  418. 

3,  4  33,  I.  316.  U.  368. 

4,  29,  36,  37,  11.551,  HI.  389. 
9,  III.  394. 

15-17,  H.  593. 

17-19,  H.  93. 

20-52, 1.  247,  n.  582,  IH.  390. 

23-25.  III.  396. 

27,  III.  403. 

28,  II.  609. 
30-34.  I.  177,  313. 

34-36,  I.  199,  287,  316,  343, 11.431. 
38-45,  I.  628. 
39,  UI.  399. 


Ch.  89:48,11.266. 

"  90,  II.  260,  416. 

"  90  :  4,  II.  236,  366,  368,  HI.  92. 

"  90  :  10,  13,  II.  370. 

"  90:41,1.458. 

"  91,  II.  326. 

"  92  :  7-9,  II.  713,  752. 

"  92  :  10,  II.  582,  HI.  390. 

"  93,  III.  391. 

"  93  :  1,  n.  431. 

"  93  :  2,  III.  406. 

"  93  :  3-5,  II.  527,  III.  395. 

"  94,  II.  356,  699,  740. 

"  94  :  9,  10,  I.  38,  II.  579. 

"  94  :  12,  13,  H.  325. 

"  94  :  14,  II.  201. 

"  94  :  15,  II.  356,  580. 

"  95  :  7,  II.  441. 

"  95  :  8,  U.  365. 

"  96,  97,  98,  II.  356,  IH.  391. 

"  96:5,11.748. 

•'  96  :  10-13,  II.  353,  355,  514. 

"  97,  III.  391-2. 

"  97  :  3,  II.  507. 

"  97:7,11.183,748. 

"  98,  III.  28,  392. 

"  98  :  2,  HI.  452. 

"  98  :  5-9,  II.  353,  370,  514. 

"  99,  III.  391. 

"  99  :  15,  II.  262,  270,  294. 

"  100,  III.  391. 

"  101  :  1,  II.  471. 

"  101  :  8,  U.  416,  m.  36. 

"  102,  II.  177,  255,  260,  550. 

"  102  :  14,  III.  148. 

M  102 :  16,  n.  77. 

"  102  :  18,  II.  276. 

"  102  :  25-27,  II.  519. 

"  103  :  5,  II.  320,  499. 

"  103 :  15,  II.  260. 

"  104  :  4,  5, 1.  313.  n.  431,  436,  IH.  418. 

"  104  :  29,  30,  II.  259,  262,  483. 

"  104  :  35,  in.  185. 

"  107,  III.  36. 

"  107  :  42.  II.  96. 

"  109,  II.  276,  736,  IH.  391. 

"  110,  I.  314,  577,  II.  109,  114,  602,  714, 

768,  III.  417,  418. 

"  110  :  2,  3,  II.  415,  417,  580,  in.  389. 

"  110  :  3-6,  in.  24,  185. 

"  110  :  4,  II.  145,  601. 

"  111:  1,  11.325. 

"  111  :  2,  I.  169. 

"  111  :  9,  II.  258. 

"  112  :  9,  10,  II.  594. 

"  113,  H  553,  579,  in.  392. 

"  113  :  9,  II.  134,  m.  57. 

"  115,  II.  441,  761. 

"  115  :  16,  II.  437. 

"  115  :  17,  18,  H  275. 

*'  116,  II.  254,  441. 

"  116  :  3-8,  HI.  389. 

"  117,1.365. 


612 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


Cb.  118,  II.  256,  278,  753. 

Cb.  10  :  30,  II.  441. 

"  118  :  6-18,  HI.  389. 

"  11  :  31,  n.  441,  443. 

"  118  :  14,  III.  452. 

"  12:  7,11.441. 

"  118  :  22,  23,  I.  676,  HI.  414. 

"  12  :  23,  III.  17. 

"  118  :  24,  n.  3C5. 

"  13  :  16,  III.  17. 

"  118:26,  11.77,  162. 

"  13  :  22,  II.  143. 

"  119  :  6.  9,  n.  743. 

"  14  :  11,  19,  II.  581. 

"  119  :  12-18,  I.  7. 

"  15:2,  HI.  17. 

"  119  :  19,  L  300. 

"  15:25,11.138. 

"  119:  105,  I.  116. 

"  16  :  11,  I.  683. 

"  120,  II.  699. 

"  18  :  12,  II.  713. 

"  122,  n.  95,  III.  55. 

"  19  :  21,  H.  713. 

"   122  :  3,  m.  50. 

"  20  :  20,  II.  277. 

"  122 :  5,  HI.  33. 

"  21  :  16,  II.  273. 

"  124,  n.  61. 

"  22:4,  11.596. 

"  126,  III.  24. 

"  25  :  2,  H.  334. 

"  127:  1,2,  in.  341. 

"  128,  n.  96. 

ECCLESIASTES. 

"  130  :  5,  6,  in.  310. 
"  130  :  6,  II.  417. 

Cb.  1  :  4,  H.  431. 

"  132,  U.  201,111.  417. 

"  4  :  13,  14,  II  594. 

"  132:11-18,1.247,303,314,316. 

"  6:4,  II.  256. 
"  10  :  1,  II.  102. 

"  132  :  13,  14,  II.  776,  III.  49,  55. 

"  132  :  16,  H.  96,  in.  452. 
"  135, H.  140. 

ISAIAH. 

"  136,  II.  109.  441. 

Ch.  1  :  1-26,  III.  33,  36. 

"  136  :  4,  II.  56. 

"  1:4,  5,  HI.  391. 

"  137,  H.  736. 

"  1:9,  10,  II.  68,  290. 

"  138  :  4,  5,  U.  579,  581,  UL  30. 

"  1  :  26,  27,  I.  664,  II.  61,  142,  471,  586 

"  140,  II.  274,  699,  713. 

III.  81. 

"  140  :  7,  U.  115. 

"    2,  H  748,  III.  30,  372. 

"  142,  II.  254. 

"  2  :  1-5,  I.  193,  446,  685,  n.  99,  120,  141 

*'  143  :  3,  II.  256. 

195,  338,  423,  471,  HI.  55,  190,  338. 

"  143:3-6.11.431,437. 

"  2:3,11.  610,111.33,89. 

"  143  :  8,  II.  416. 

"  2:4,  III.  596. 

"  143  :  11,  II.  257. 

"  2  :  10-22.  II.  519,  768,  IU.  395. 

"  144,11.  114. 

"  2  :  12,  II.  368. 

"  145  :  13,  U.  414,  550,  638,  m.  16. 

"  2  :  18-20,  III.  189. 

"  146,  II.  274. 

"  2:  19,  21,  II.  374,495, 

"  146  :  10,  U.  550. 

"    3  :  9,  II.  290. 

"  147,  II.  274,  HI.  193. 

"  4:2,  6,11.89,  III.  33,  553. 

"  147  :  2,  III.  33. 

"  4  :  5,  II.  146. 

"  147  :  7,  n.  250. 

"  5  :  26-30,  II.  766,  III.  394. 

"  147:20,  I.  231. 

"  6  :  1-K),  III.  538. 

"  148,  II.  114. 

"  6  :  3-5,  I.  688. 

"  148:2,  H.  77. 

"  6:  9-13,  1.215,  615. 

"  148:14,11.93. 

"  7  :  13,  14.  III.  542. 

"  149  :  4,  III.  452. 

"  8  :  7,  S,  III.  394. 

"  149:5,11.015. 

"  8  :  8,  I.  303. 

"  149  :  5-9,.  I.  496,  n.  104,  110,  318,  322, 

"  8:9,  II.  416. 

385,  578,  III.  28,  81,  396. 

"  8:  14,  II.  91. 

"  149  :  9,  in.  394. 

"  8:20,  I.  116,  126,  205. 

"  9:1,  III.  24. 

PROVERBS. 

"  9  :  4,  5,  II.  768-9,  III.  389. 

Ch.  1  :  24-32,  U.  713. 

"  9:6,  7,  I.  315,  342,  415,  614-16,  627, 

"  2  :  21,  22,  n.  441-2. 

II.  77,  177,  355,  426,  550,  638,  III.  310 

"  3:  16,  11.599. 

416,  418,  478. 

"  3  :  25,  26,  II.  323. 

"  10  :  13,  11.699. 

"  4:8,  9,  II.  581,  593. 

"  10  :  15,  III.  342. 

"  6:30,11.266. 

"  10  :  17,  III.  81. 

"    8  :  14-16,  II.  580. 

"10:  19-21,11.574. 

"  8  :  18-21,  II.  596. 

"  10  :  22,  23,  II.  67. 

"    8  :  31,  I.  87. 

"  10  :  26-34,  H.  761. 

INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


613 


Cli.ll  :  1-16,  II.  61-2,  65,  91,  219,  471,  669, 

699,  714. 
"  li  :6,8,  n.  484,  486. 
"  11  :  9, 1.  696,  H.  142,  143,  m.  30,  183, 

190,  210. 
"  11  :  6-10, 1.  205,  233,  II.  58, 143-4,  454. 
"  11  :  13,  II.  335,  594. 
"  12  :  2,  3,  II.  142,  III.  453. 
"  12  :  6,  H.  138. 
"  13,  H.  714,  753,  in.  24. 
"  13  :  9-14,  II.  519. 
"  13  :  13,  II.  492,  495.  497. 
"  14,  II.  714. 
"  14  :  1,  2, 1.  62. 
"  14  :  2-15,  II.  497,  502. 
"  14  :  4,  5,  III.  389. 
"  14  :  9,  III.  557. 

"  14  :  24-27, 1.  179,  II.  105,  HI.  340. 
"  14  :  25,  II.  699. 
"  16  : 1-5,  III.  24,  26. 
"  16  :-3,  5,  II.  77,  326,  855. 
"  16  :  5,  III.  534. 
"  17,  II.  748. 
"  17  :  12-14,  II.  753,  765. 
"  17  :  14,  II.  416. 
"  19  :  20,  II.  144. 
"  19  :  24,  II.  94. 
"  20  :  11,  II.  502. 
"  21 :  11,  II.  414. 
"  22  :  2,  I.  193. 
"  23  :  4.  II.  580. 
"  23  :  18,  H.  143. 
"23:21,  HI.  388. 
"  24,  n.  742,  737,  768. 
"  24:4-7,  H.  492. 
"  24  :  5,  II.  365. 
"24:6,  13,  H.  547,  549. 
"  24  :  9.  HI.  396. 
"24:  19,  20.  11.513,  519,  686. 
"24:21,  III.  372. 
"  24  :  22,  I.  684. 
"  24 :  23,  I.  245,  427,  H.  142,  590,  in.  32, 

395. 
"24:25,  26,  11.274,  etc.,  104. 
"  25,  H.  142.  145,  187,  463,  714,  737,  768. 
"25:6,7,111.57,  390. 
"  25  :  6-10,  I.  684,  H.  244,  247,  260,  327, 

III.  190. 
"  25  :  7,  H.  142. 

"  25  :  8,  I.  33,  246,  248,  H.  187,  543. 
"25  :  9,  II.  142,  306,  III.  160,  310,  416, 

418,  449,  452. 
"  25  :  29-33,  H.  108. 
"  26,  H.  714. 

"  26  :  1,  2.  I.  648,  II.  142,  m.  36. 
"  26  :  5-19,  20,  21,  I.  684,  II.  104,  260, 

263,  416,  418. 
"  26  :  6,  II.  440,  449. 
"  26  :  9,  II.  543,  768,  III.  185. 
"26  :  19,  H.  250-1. 
"  26  :  20,  21,  H.  179,  247,  277,  325,  HI. 

24. 
"27:1,  in.  16. 


Cb.  27  :  6,  II.  136,  III.  191. 
"  27  :  12,  n.  144. 
'*  27  :  13,  II.  453. 
"  28  :  12,  II.  462. 
"  28:21,1.  81. 
"  28  :  22,  H.  68.  741. 
"  28  :  27,  IL  662. 
"  29,  n.  768. 
"   29  :  6,  HI.  406. 
"  29  :  8,  H.  266. 
"  29  :  10,  H.  69. 
"  29  :  11-14, 1.  81, 165. 
"  29  :  17,  I.  143. 
"  29  :  19,  20,  n.  735. 
"   29  :  22,  23,  II.  225. 
"  30  :  4-19, 1.  336,  II.  73,  84,  356. 
"  30  :  17,  n.  107. 
"  30  :  26,  n.  64,  419. 
"  31  :  10-36,  I.  336. 
"  32  :  1,  II.  112,  142,  580. 
"  32  :  3-5,  H.  143,  145. 
"  32  :  15,  16,  IL  79,  HI.  21,  67. 
"  32  :  20,  II.  486. 
"  33,1.  143,  H.  737. 
"  33  :  9,  II.  492. 
"   33  :  16-22,  HI.  453. 
"  33  :  17,  n.  553. 
"  33  :  20,  21,  II.  99,  III.  534. 
"33:  24,  H.  143. 
"  34,  II.  483,  761-2,  769,  in.  24. 
"  34  :  4,  5,  II.  446,  492,  497. 
"  34  :  17,  II.  550. 
"  35, 1.  143,  H.  462,  469,  in.  24. 
"  35  :  1-9,  IL  143.  662,  in.  389. 
"   35  :  2,  H.  374. 
"   35  :4.  H.  142,752. 
"   35  :  10,  U.  235,  258,  592,  616,  672,  m. 

390. 
"  35  :  16,  in.  21. 
"  35  :  44,  in.  396. 
"  38  :  17,  H.  392. 
"  40  :  3,  IH.  22-3,  27,  532. 
"  40  :  4,  5,  HI.  339. 
"  40  :  5.  n.  374. 
"  40  :  6,  7,  8,  H.  259. 
"  40  :  10,  11,  II.  183,  in.  338-9. 
"  40  :  14,  I.  38. 
"  40  :  31,  U.  169,  320. 
"   41,  H.  737,  769,  ni.  27,  406. 
"  41  :  15,  16, 1.  10, 12,  H.  108,  662-3,  HI. 

57. 
"  41  :  17,  II.  462. 
"  41  :  18,  HI.  389. 
"  41  :  19,  20,  IH.  21. 
"  42,1.64,  11.275. 
"  42:4,11.356. 
"  42  :  6,  I.  328. 
"  42  :  7,  H.  254. 
"  42  :  11,  IH.  24. 
"42:  13,  11.753,  759. 
"  42  :  18-20,  HI.  327. 
"  42  :  22,  U.  254. 
"  43,1.64. 


614 


INDEX   OF   SCEIPTUEE. 


Ch.  43  :  1-7,  II.  66,  114. 
"  43  :  2,  ni.  389. 
"  43  :  9,  13,  I.  169,  H.  66. 
"  43  :  17,  H.  276. 
"  43  :  18-21,  m.  22,  342. 
"  43:19,  20,11.462,  662. 
"  43  :  21,  H.  577. 
"  43  :  25,  11.84,  HI.  459. 
"  44,  H.  747. 
"  44  :  3,  in.  67. 
"  44  :  4,  H.  548. 
"   44  :  8,  II.  66. 

"   44  :  22-26,  H.  84,79,  III.  204,  459. 
"  45  :  16,  1?,  H.  747,  HI.  453. 
"45:  18,  H.  436,  HI.  443. 
"  45  :  20,  H.  547,  m.  532. 
"  45  :  21,  H.  612. 
"  45  :23,  H.  180,  300,  m.  196. 
"  46,  n.  747. 
"  46  :  9,  10, 1.  35,  38,  179. 
"  48  :3-6,  L179. 
"48:  18,  1.378. 
"  49,  I.  577,  II.  49,  99,  132,  737. 
"  49  :  1-23,  I.  629,  II.  65,  76. 
"  49  :  2,  IL  194,  203,  m.  394. 
"  49  :  3,  I.  400. 
"  49  :  3-8,  n.  77-8,  136,  207,  328,  436, 

587. 
"  49  :  8-11,  in.  453. 
"  49  :  9,  II.  254. 
"  49  :  12,  H.  112. 
"  49  :  13-17,  H.  80,  132,  136,  138. 
"  49  :  18,  H.  225. 

"  49  :  18-23,  I  615,  688,  H.  94,  133, 142-3. 
"  49  :22,  III.  192. 
"  49  :  24,  H.  254,  768,  772. 
"  49:26,  11.142,768,  772. 
"  50  :  1, 1.  133. 
"  51,  II.  143. 

"  51  :  1-3,  I.  293,  328,  427,  IL  68, 143-4. 
"  51 :  8,  H.  535,  550. 
"  51  :  9,  HI.  10. 
"  51  :  11,  H.  258,  m.  390. 
"  51  :  12,  H.  713. 
"  51  :  16,  H.  12,  436,  446,  497. 
"  51  :  17-23,  H.  61. 
"  51  :  42,  HI.  394. 
"  52,  H.  64. 
"  52  :  1,  II.  112,  142. 
"  52  :  1-10,  H.  96,  143. 
"  52  :  8,  HI.  339. 
"  52  :  9,  10,  m.  33. 
"  53,  I.  243,  H.  169,  III.  425. 
"  53  :  8,  H.  256. 

"  54,  II.  145,  187,  441,  in.  190,  548. 
"  54  :  1-17,  II.  130,  259. 
"  54  :  5,  in.  534. 
"  54  :  7,  H.  460. 
"  54  :  9,  10,  I.  245,  287. 
"  54  :  11,  12,  m.  45. 
"  54  :  12,  n.  143. 
"   54  :  13  II.  142,  304,  m.  30,  183. 
"  54  :  15,  H.  527,  753. 


Ch.  55,  I.  223,  378. 
"  55  :  3,  m.  572. 
"  55  :  4,  HI.  571. 
"  56  :  5,  HI.  57. 
"  56  :  8,  II.  76. 
"  57  :  2,  n.  249. 
"  57  :  13,  n.  441. 
"  58,  I.  222. 
"  58  :  8,  n.  417. 
"  58  :  12-14,  n.  471. 
"  59  :  16-20,  m.  24,  453. 
"  59  :  19,  m.  191. 
"  59  :  19-21,  II.  79,  734. 
"  59  :21,  m.  67. 
"  60,  I.  246,  n.  94,  99,  114,  134,  143,  145, 

152,  187,  233,  370,  441,  548,  m.  190, 

218,  236,  238,  548. 
"  60  :  1,  H.  77. 
"  60  :  1,  2,  19,  H.  374. 
"  60  :  1-22,  in.  89,  453. 
"  60  :  4,  H.  225. 
"  60  :  5-17,  II.  143. 
"  60:6-10,  1.496,  H.  596. 
"  60  :  7,  in.  57. 
"  60  :  11,  12,  m.  210. 
"  60  :  12,  n.  94,  499,  527,  HL  596. 
"  60  :  14-20,  m.  33,  45. 
"  60  :  15,  I.  428,  n.  538. 
"  60  :  17,  n.  142,  580. 
"  60  :  19,  20,  II.  419,  528. 
"  60  :21,  n.  142,  261,  435,  m.  393. 
"  61,  H.  64,  134,  143,  HI.  548. 
"  61  :  1,  11.254. 
"  61  :3,  m.  21. 
"  61  :  4-11,  U.  499,  548. 
"  61  :  6,  n.  608,  in.  89. 
"  61  :  9,  H.  93. 
"  61  :  10,  m.  453. 

"   62,  I.  233,  H.  134,  143,  417,  HI.  42. 
"  62  :  1,  2,  U.  77,  80,  93,  374,  III.  81, 

453. 
"   62  :  1-5,  H.  584,  m.  33. 
"  62  :  3,  in.  50,  394. 
"  62  :  4,  I.  428,  II.  202. 
"  62  :  5,  H.  203. 
"  62  :  6,  7,  HI.  36. 
"  62:  10,  m.  192. 
"  62  :  11,  12,  II.  662. 
"  63,  I.  180,  H.  104,  109,  194,  771. 
"   63  :  1-6,  I.  683,  686,  H.  767-8,  m.  246, 

249,  396. 
"  63  :  3,  II.  104,  743. 
"  63  :  4,  H.  145,  453. 
"  63  :  5,  m.  453. 
"  63  :  15,  16,  in.  393. 
"  63  :  17,  18,  I.  306,  H.  76,  200-1. 
"  64  :  1,  2,  m.  393. 
"  64  :  4,  II.  165. 
"  64  :5,  n.422. 
"  65,  n.  152,370. 
"  65,  66,  U.  499,  etc.,  502,  etc.,  506,  etc., 

513-14,  524,  etc.,  547,  549,  576. 
"  05  :  9,  n.  201,  226. 


INDEX   OF   SCEIPTUEE. 


615 


Ch.  65  :  11-17,  H  747,  749. 
"  65  :  17,  I.  248,  480,   686,   H.  143,  471, 

543,  547. 
"  65  :  17,  18,  in.  44,  56. 
"  65  :  17-25,  II.  74,  96,  486,  m.  255. 
"   65  :  18,  H.  146,  526. 
"   65  :  19,111.33. 
"   65  :  20,  22,  II.  548,  HI."  598. 
"  65  :  23,  II.  143,  147,  178,  180,  236. 
««  66,  II.  152. 
"   66  :5,  I.  552,  m.  327. 
"   66  :  5-24,  H  714. 
"   66  :7-9,  H.257. 
"  66  :  8-10,  H.  476, 
"   66  :  12, 1.  615,  688,  n.  94. 
"  66  :  12-16,  n.  177,  253. 
"   66  :  14,  III.  394. 
"   66  :  15-24,  H.  374.   377,  m.  186,  190, 

400. 
"   67  :  17,  II.  747. 

"  66  :  19,  20,  H  75,  87,  375,  768,  779. 
"  66  :21,  III.  89. 
"  66  :  22,  I.  218,  II.  87, 143, 178,  446,  507, 

526. 
"   66  :  23,  m.  596. 

JEREMIAH. 
Ch.    2  :  3,  HI.  24. 
"     2  :34,  11.266. 
"     3  :  1-22,  H.  133. 
"     3  :  14,  in.  40. 
"     3  :  17-19,  I.  244,  427,  H.  63, 114,  569, 

in.  32,  56. 
"     3  :  20,  H.  131. 
"     4  : 23-25,  H.  497,  519. 
"     6  :  14,  EH.  203. 
"   10,  H.  747. 
"  10  :  16,  in.  389. 
"   10  :  23,  m.  341. 
"   12  :  4,  U.  492. 
"   13  :  1-7,  I.  193. 
"   14  :  8,  m.  309. 
"   14  :  13,  14,  HI.  203. 
"   15  :  8,  n.  146. 
"   16  :  2,  I.  193. 
"   16  :  13,  U.  65. 
"   17,  7,  13,  m.  309. 
"   17  :  25,  I.  222.  343,  IH.  86. 
"   18  :  2-6,  in.  340. 
"   18  :  7-10, 1.  177. 
"    18  :23,  IH.  459. 
"    20  :  10,  IH.  238. 
"   22  :  4,  5, 1.  343,  628- 
"    22  :  30,  H  127. 
"    23:  4,  IH  388. 

"   23  :  5-8,  I.  184,  266,   315,  458,  H.  63, 
81,  142,  355-6,  471,  HI.  310,  424,  478. 
"   23  :  6,  H  89. 
"    23  :  14,  H.  290. 
"   23  :  16,  17,  IH  203. 
"    24  :  6,  7,  II.  471. 
"    24  :  14,  HI.  99. 
"    25  :  29-33,  II.  108,  753,  779. 


Ch.  30  :  4-24,  H.  56,  61, 107. 
"    30  :  6-9,11.655. 
"   30  :  7,  H.  142. 
"    30  :  9, 1.  315,  IH  572. 
"   30  :  18-20,  H.  143,  HI.  89. 
"  30  :21,H.  142. 
"   31,11.64. 

"   31  :  2,  3,  H  79,  HI.  21. 
"  31  :  5,  6,  H  143. 
"   31  :  11,  H.  259. 
"  31  :  15-17,  H  253,  597. 
«   31  :  22,  H.  108. 
"   31  :  27,  H  136. 

"  31  :  8i;  etc.,  I.  245,  322,  335,  H.  80,  84. 
"   31  :  33,  HI.  40. 
"   31  :  34,  HE.  183. 
"  31  :  35,  36-40, 1.  245,  287,  H  49,  56-7, 

63,  66,  142-3,  431. 
"   31  :  38-40,  HI.  50. 
"  32  :  37-44,  II.  57,  63, 84. 
"   32  :  39,  40,  H  550. 

33,  36, 1. 234,  H.  177. 


7-16,  II.  84,  114,  143,  550. 

9,  H.  768. 

14, 1.  240,  343,  347. 

15,  H  355. 

18-21,  HI.  89. 

19-26,  I.  245,  287,  315,  343,  H.  49, 


Ch. 


63, 136,  431,  580. 
33  :  22,  H  551. 
46 :  7,  8,  m,  394. 

46  :  28,  H  56,  65. 

47  :  2,  HI.  394. 

48  :  10,  H  114. 

48  :  17,  29,  HI.  389. 
48  :  25,  H  579. 
50  :  4,  H.  143. 

50  :  5,  m.  64. 

51  :  19,  20,  H.  108, 114. 

LAMENTATIONS. 

2  :  1,  H  502. 

2  :  15,  IH  33. 

3  :  18,  H  251. 

3  :  34,  H.  254. 

4  :  20,  III.  571. 


EZEKIEL. 

Ch.  3  :  19,  21,  m.  203. 
"  5:5,  III.  33. 

"  7  :  12,  IH  70. 

"  9  :  23-33,  IH.  406. 

"  11  :  15.  II.  64. 

"  11  :  16-20,  II.  56-7,  63. 

"  11  :  19,  II.  143,  HI.  73. 

"  11  :  20,  III.  590. 

"  12  :  15,  II.  65. 

"  12  :  22,  HI.  327. 

"  13  :  2,  6-16,  HI.  327. 

"  13  :  9,  H.  249, 

"  14  :  16-20,  H  113. 

"  14  :  22,  23, 1. 178. 


616 


INDEX   OF  SCEIPTUEE. 


Ch.  16,  I.  422,  n.  63,  80,  131, 133. 
"  16  :  20,  21.  36,  H.  131. 
"  16:35,111.42. 
"  16  :  55,  II.  290. 
'«  17  :  22-24,  II.  96. 
"  17  :  23,  III.  57. 
"  19  :  16,  III.  406. 
:  18,  in.  406. 
:  25,  I.  223. 
30,  HI.  147. 

:  33,  41-44,  II.  64,  84,  86. 
35,11.81,350,111.21. 
25-27,  I.  237,  II.  200,  446,  HI.  27, 


20 

20 

20 

20 

20 

21 

399. 

22  :  28,  IH.  203. 

23,  27,  II.  714. 

6,  HI.  394. 
14,  I.  179. 
3,  III.  16. 
3,  n.  22. 
25-27, 1.  347. 

7,  H.  497. 
6,  ni.  199,  241. 
11-31,  II.  63,  76-7,  HI.  388. 
17,  U.  375. 

23,  24,  H.  175, 207, 375,  m.  572. 

24,  30,  III.  572,  590. 

25,  II.  486. 
34  :  26-7,  H.  143. 

36,  38,  39,  H.  58,  61,  108. 

36  :  8,  29,  30.  35,  II.  63,  79,  84,  143. 

36  :10,  11,37.  38,  11.136. 

11,  12,  U.  76. 
22-24,  I.  245,  II.  53,  84. 
25,  II.  65. 

26-7, 1.  336,  615,  IH.  67,  73. 
28,  III.  590. 
29-35,  II.  143. 
34-36,  I.  427,  H.  202,  547. 

37,  II.  177. 

37  :  1-28, 1.  615,  H.  84,  86,  96,  189,250, 
,  263,  476. 

12,  II.  233. 
14,  in.  67,  73. 
17-22,  IH.  335,  389. 
21,  22, 1.  240,  245,  267,  H.  63,  83. 
22-25,  II.  175,  207,  436,  550. 
23,  27,  H.  142,  III.  590. 

38,  U.  699,  709,  761,  767-8. 

38  :  8,  19,  II.  105. 
38  :  11-13,  II.  107. 

16,  I.  303,  II.  338. 

17,  II.  709. 

38  :  21,  23,  II.  105,  519,  547. 

39,  II.  709. 

39  :  7,  III.  393. 

39  :  11-16,  II.  761,  in.  458. 

39  :  21-23,  II.  547. 

39  :  28,  29,  II.  66,  71,  189,  HI.  67. 

40-48,  II.  83,  III.  84,  etc. 

43  :  2,  III.  27. 

43  :  7-11,  in.  85. 

44  :  9,  IU.  88. 


23 
24 
29 
31 
31 
32 
33 
34 
34 
34 
34 
34 


36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 
36 


etc. 
37: 
37: 
37: 
37: 
37: 
37: 


38 
38 


Ch.  44  :  16,  III.  611. 
"  44  :  22,  ni.  87. 
"  45  :  9,  III.  87. 
"   45  :  16-25,  III.  87. 
"  46  :  2,  HI.  87. 
"46:  16,11.88. 
"  48  :  22,  23,  II.  142. 

DANIEL. 
Ch.  2:7,  I.  177,  414,  420,  608,  668,  671, 
n.  108,  115,  168,  170,  200,  208,  712, 
779,  IU.  190. 
"  2  :  19-23,  I.  92,  169. 
"  2  :  21,  II.  191,  189. 
"  2  :  28,  II.  338. 
"  2  :  34,  35, 1.  365,  660,  H.  502. 
"  2  :  35,  45,  IU.  15,  57. 
"  2  :  39,  39,  I.  369. 
"  2  :  41,  22,  43,  H.  642. 
"  2  :  43,  III.  131. 
"  2:  44,  I.  195,  208,  II.  117,  497,  631, 

III.  18,  192. 
"  4,  II.  774. 
"  4  :  13,  II.  618. 
*'  4  :  30,  III.  55. 
"  4:35,1.92. 
"  6:26,1.556. 
"  7,  11.364,  628,  688,  699,  707,  712, 

713,  718,  767-8,  III.  246. 
"  7:2,  II.  527. 
"  7:5,  III.  431. 
"  7  :  7,  19,  23,  III.  12. 
"  7:8,  24,  II.  749. 
"  7  :  9-11, 1.  681,  II.  105,  266,  320,  358, 

377,  509,  510,  519,  III.  372. 
"  7  :  12,  III.  15. 
"  7  :  11-26,  II.  704. 
"  7  :  13,  14,  I.  195,  208,  556,  565-7,  577, 

616,  660,  681,  698,  II.  117,  175,  187, 

222,  554,  631,  773,  III.  85-6,  335. 
"  7  :  14-27,  III.  335. 
"     7  :  17-23,  I.  606,  680. 
"  7  :  18.  II.  115,  440,  499,  587. 
"  7  :  21,  22,  II.  142,  574,  581,  583. 
"  7  :  25,  II.  669. 
"  7  :  27,  I.  397,  536,  660,  696,  n.  93, 

436,  583,  620,  669,  773,  III.  192,  335. 
"  8,  II.  688. 

"  8  :  5,  6,  20-22,  U.   579. 
"  8  :  7-19,  II.  619. 
"  8  :  13,  14,  III.  99. 
"  8  :  17,  I.  446. 
"  8  :  19,  II.  336. 
"  8  :  21,  I.  680. 
"  8  :  24,  II.  758. 
"     9  :  4-27,  III.  414. 
"  9:6,  I.  171. 
"  9  :  20-27,  I.  390,  693,  n.  355,  659, 

669,  741. 
"  9  :  24,  III.  101. 
"  9:25,  HI.  571. 
I  "  9  :  40,  I.  446. 
"  10  :  5,  7,  U.  331. 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


617 


Ch.  10  :  11-22,  II.  G59. 

"  10:  13,  14,  H.  619. 

"  11,  12,  II.  730,  752,  7G1,  HI.  183. 

"  11  :  35,  II.  336. 

*'  11  :  36,  II.  669. 

"  12,  II.  61,  104. 

"  12  :  1,  II.  618. 

"  12  :  2, 1.  248,  II.  245,  etc.,  258,  277- 

301,  464. 

"  12  :  3,  II.  418,  580,  592. 

"  12  :  4,  I.  173,  III.  127,  150. 

*'  12  :  6-10.  H.  330. 

"  12  :  7,  III.  99. 

"  12:9,12,  III.  97. 

"  12:  11,  III.  99. 

"  12  :  13,  I.  446,  II.  248-9,  591,  618. 


HOSEA. 

Ch.  1  :  10,  II.  68,  133,  237. 

"  2:4,  H.  131. 

"  2  :  14,  II.  64,  in.  21. 

"  2  :  18,  II.  486. 

"  2  :  19,  III.  40. 

"  2  :  21,  II.  143. 

"  2  :  23,  II.  68. 

"  3:4,  5,  I.  237,  629,    II.  72,  77,  200, 

204,  III.  400. 

"  3:5,  II.  207,  338,  in.  572. 

"  3  :  14,  II.  258. 

"  4:6,11.131,609. 

"  5:6,  HI.  393. 

"  5:7,11.131. 

"  5  :  14.  15,  H.  84,  87,  179,  417. 

"  6  :  1-3,  I.  420,  H.  87,  245,  263,  III.  99. 

"  0:2,  II.  404. 

"  6  :  3,  H.  415,  417. 

"  9  :  3,  II.  203. 

"  9  :  14-17,  II.  131. 

"  10:  1,  II   131. 

"  13  :  8,  U.  748. 

"  13  :  14,  H  235,  244.  251,  403. 

"  14:9,  I.  173,  III.  151. 


JOEL. 

Ch.  1  :  10-20,  n.  492. 
"   2,  H.  766,  III.  372. 
"    2:  10,  11.497. 
"   2  :  18,  1.303,  H.  202. 
"   2  :  20,  II.  701. 
"   2  :  21,  U.  202. 
"   2  :  28-32,  II.  29,  143,  566,  HI.  30,  64, 

73.  191. 
"   2  :  30,  31,  II.  507,  III.  162,  164. 
"   3,  I.  268,  028,  H.  104,  318,  369,  495, 

508,  054,  742.  708,  HI.  186,  191,  372. 
"   3:2,  11,  III.  389. 
"   3:2,  12,  11.761. 
"   3  :  9-21,  II.  374,  519,  753,  765. 
"   3:  11,  11.576,  582. 
"   3  :  12,  II.  177. 


Ch.  3  :  13,  II.  181,  407,  HI.  185. 

"  3  :  14,  II,  062-3. 

"  3  :  15,  II.  086,  HI.  162,  395. 

"  3  :  16,  II.  752. 

"  3  :  17,  I.  245,  427,  II.  143,  III.  32. 

"  3  :  27-30,  11.550. 

AMOS. 

Ch.  1:3,  U.  662. 

"  1:4,  in.  81. 

"  3:  2,  1.215. 

"  3:7,  H.  334. 

"  4:7,  8,  I.  173. 

"  8:9,  III.  162. 

"  9,1.234. 

"  9:5,11.519. 

"  9:8,  U.  56. 

"  9:9,11.65. 

"  9  :  11, 1.  240,  347,  029,  II.  76,  78,  200. 

"  9  :  11-15.  II.  203,  548,  UL  24. 

"  9  :  12,  II.  93. 

"  9  :  13,  n.  143. 


OBADIAH. 


Ch.  21, 1.  509. 


JONAH. 

Ch.  18  :  7-9,  I.  176. 

MICAH. 

Ch.    2  :  8,  I.  685. 
"     2  :  12,  13,  n.  79,  84,  144,  198,  235,  HL 

203,  389. 
"     3:4,  HI.  33. 
"     3  :  12,  H.  178,  HI.  55. 
'*     4,  III.  30. 
"     4  :  1-7,  I.  446,  685,  II.  142,  178,  214, 

304,  338,  423,  519,  HI.  55,  190,  355. 
"     4:2,  3,  H  93,  152,  195,  610. 
"     4:3,4,111.596. 
"     4:5-8,  I.  267,  347,  427,  II.  04,  92. 
"     4:  8,  H.  142,  291,  HI.  81. 
"     4  :  11-13,  II.  108,  663,  752,  760,  765, 

m.  396. 
'«     5:1,  II.  356,  HI.  534. 
"     5  :  2-4,  I.  629,    II.  76,   257,   IH.  403, 

417. 
"     5:5,  I.  328,  H.  714. 
"     5:7,  II.  418. 
"      5  :  8-10,  H.  108. 
"     7:7,  8,  II.  256,  306. 
"     7  :  14,  III.  389. 
"     7  :  15,  20,  I.  295,  300,  427,  U.  84,  91, 

108,  137,  144,  338. 
"     7  :  16,  17,  I.  496,  H  768,  HI.  81. 
"     8:2,  H  579. 
"     8  :  19,  U.  393. 

NAHUM. 

Ch.  1  :  2,  3, 1.  753. 
"  1:4,  HI.  394. 
"     1  :  5,  II.  519,  549. 


618 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


HABAKKUK. 

Ch.  1  :  12,  II.  278. 

"  1  :  15,  II.  757. 

"  2  :  1-4,  III.  330. 

"  2:3,  II.  753. 

"  2  :  5,  II.  699. 

"  2  :  14,  HI.  210. 

"  3, 1.  32,  II.  765,  IH.  246,  392,  etc. 

"  3:3,  III.  21. 

"  3  :  16,  II.  767. 

"  3:17,111.152. 

ZEPHANIAH. 

Ch.  1  :  12-18,  II.  72. 

"  2  :  2,  3,  n.  325,  508. 

"  2:9,  II.  290. 

"  2  :  14,  II.  379. 

"  3,  II.  369,  742. 

"  3:5,  II.  416,  417. 

"  3  :  8-20,  II.  64,  79,   84,  87,  106,  259, 

320,  374,  753,  765,  768,  in.  24,  185-6, 

372,  389,  590. 

"  3:9,  II.  143,  145,  HI.  190. 

"  3  :  10,  II.  291. 

"  3  :  14,  II.  138. 

"  3:14-20,1.427,  U.  61. 

"  3:15,  II.  198. 

"  3  :  19,  20,  II.  94. 

HAGGAI. 

Cli.  2  :  6,  II.  494,  etc. 

'<  2  :  7-9,  IH.  418. 

"  2:22,11.494. 

"  2  :  23,  II.  582. 

ZECHARIAH. 

Ch.  1  :  5,  6. 1.  179. 

»  1:9, 12,  14,  19,  n.  619. 

"  1  :  16, 17,  I.  347. 

"  1  :  20,  U.  114. 

"  2:3,  5,  II.  132,  619. 

'«  2:8,  9,  III.  399. 

"  2  :  10-13.  II.  138,  179, 189, 198,  IH.  32. 

"  2  :  11,  III.  190. 

"  2  :  12, 1.  347,  427,  II.  201,  203,  in.  50. 

"  3,  4,  II.  79. 

"  5,  11,11.705. 

"  6  :  8,  II.  180. 

"  6:12,1.615. 

"  6  :  13,  II.  602. 

"  7  :  14,  II.  60. 

"  8.  II.  64, 143,  HI.  32,  55. 

"  8  :  2-8,  II.  72-. 

"  8  :  3.  I.  427,  U.  92,  179,  m.  56. 

"  8:4,11.548. 

"  8:6,11.64. 

"  8:10,111.153. 

"  8  :  12,  II.  143. 

"  8:13,11.94,142. 

"  8  :  20-23,  II.  93,  142,  HI.  64,  190. 

"  9   II.  769. 

"  9':  4,"  I.  184,  266,  458. 

"  9:9,  H.  291,  502,  758. 


Ch.    9  :  10,  II.  142,  III.  190,  210. 
"     9  :  11-17,  II.  106,  108,  251,  256,  HI. 

395,  431. 
"     9  :  14-16,  HI.  24,  389. 
"     9:16,11.114. 
"   10,  12,  14,  I.  427,  II.  105-7,  142. 
"    10  :  2,  II.  748. 
"   10  :  3,  II.  375. 
"   10  :  3-12,  II.  108. 
"   10  :  6, 1.  215. 
"   10  :  10,  11,  II.  91. 
"   12,111.221. 

"   12  :  1-14,  II.  61,  84,  93,  104,  108. 
"   12  :  2,  II.  85. 
"   12  :  2,  3,  9,  II.  112,  752-3. 
"   12  :  6-9,  II.  115,  142,  766,  III.  81. 
"   12  :  7,  II.  85. 
"   12  :  9-14. 1.  628,  III.  414. 
"   12  :  10,  II.  81,  85,  179,  188-9,  200,  350, 

III.  191,415,532. 
"    13  :  7-9.  I.  629. 
"    13  :  9,  IH.  478. 
"   14,1.  268,  273,  420,  685,  II.  318,  345, 

365,  368,  370,  375,  549,  761,  768,  m. 

33-4.  162,  389. 
"    14  :  1,  II.  58,  350,  655,  664. 
"   14  :  1-15,  II.  61,  74, 188, 194,  519,  654-5, 

664,  710,  731,  742,  771. 
Ch.  14  :  2,  II.  85,  664-5. 
"   14  :  3-5,  II.  79,  187,  759. 
"   14  :  4,  II.  144,  178,  377,  III.  19,  27,  189, 

265. 
"    14  :  5,  I.  249,  II.  11,  175,  318,  320,  385, 

576,  766,  III.  245. 
"   14  :  5,  12,  15,  18,  III.  394. 
"   14  :  6,  7,  II.  418,  419. 
"   14  :  8,  II.  189,  III.  187. 
"   14  :  9,  I.  208,  II.  11,  117,  III.  190,  335, 

339. 
"   14  :  10,  III.  50. 
"   14  :  12-18,  II.  90,  104,  145,  IH.  81,  89, 

598. 
"   14  :  14,  II.  107. 

"   14  :  16,  III.  30,  90,  185-6,  335,339,596. 
"   14  :  17-22,  II.  142,  III.  81,  89. 
r'   14  :  18,  II.  148. 
"   14  :  20,  21,  II.  142,  486,  569,  III.  463. 


MALACHI. 

Ch.  2  :  7,  II.  609. 
"     2  :  17,  II.  332. 
4,  I.  225. 

1,  2,  II.  162,  194,  III.  418. 
2-4,  II.  84. 


3 
3 

3 

3  :  16-18,   II.  140,  259,  325,  387,  IH. 

130. 

3  :  17,  II.  592. 

4,   II.  377,  416,  442,  508,  III.  185-6. 

4  :  1,  2,  3,  II.  227,  377,  507,  III.  245. 

4  :  5,  6,  II.  87,  409,  471,  565-6,  HI.  68, 
102,  162. 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


619 


THE   NEW   TESTAMENT. 


MATTHEW. 

Ch.  1,  I.  352. 

"  1  :  28,  III.  351. 

"  1  :  23,  III.  542. 

"  2  :  4-6,  III.  571. 

"  2:5,  II.  619. 

"  2  :  13,  19,  II.  619. 

"  2  :  15,  II.  201. 

"  2  :  16,  17,  II.  195. 

"  2  :  17,  18,  II.  253. 

"  3:1,  1.42,   102,  III.  532. 

"  3:2,  I.  39.  43.  252,  278,  283,  339,  370, 

431,  633,  II.  43,  83. 

"  3  :  5,  II.  379. 

"  3  :  9,  I.  179,  209,  230,  253,  387,  396, 

III.  221. 

"  3  :  10,  I.  415. 

"  3:  11,  III.  65. 

"  3  :  16,  II.  197. 

"  4  :  1-11, 1.  698,  701. 

"  4:2,  II.  239,  299. 

"  4:3,  I.  562. 

"  4:9,  III.  188. 

"  4  :  11,  II.  618. 

"  4  :  17,  I.  263,  362,  696. 

"  4  :  23,  I.  269,  II.  43. 

"  5:3,  I.  283. 

"  5:5,  I.  589,    H.  434,  436,  439,  440, 

446,  499. 

"  5  :  10-12,  I.  13,  14,  II.  11,  13. 

"  5:11,  III.  233. 

"  5  :  12,  II.  612,  739. 

"  5  :  16,  II.  390. 

"  5  :  18,  III.  295. 

"  5  :  19,  20,  1. 39,  II.  591,  HI.  199,  226. 

"  6  :  10,  I.  89/  370,  657,  689. 

"  6  :20.  II.  391. 

"  6  :  25-34,  III.  341. 

"  6  :  32,  II.  35. 

"  6  :  33,  III.  79. 

"  7  :  8-10,  I.  53. 

"  7  :  14-23,  I.  67,  78,  132,  417. 

"  7  :  21-23,  II.  384,  411,  III.  193,  204. 

"  7  :  24-27,  I.  78. 

"  7  :  33,  II.  596.  HI.  388. 

"  8  :  5-13,  I.  357. 

"  8  :  10,  II.  67. 

"  8  :  11,  12, 1.  267.  602,  633,  II.  33,  43. 

"  8  :  13,  14,  I.  550. 

"  8  :  17,  II.  145,  III.  425. 

"  8  :  20,  II.  207. 

"  8  :  28-34,  II.  621. 

"  8  :  29,  I.  562. 

"  9:6,  III.  541. 

"  9  :  15,  I.  688,  II.  42,  III.  318. 

"  9  :  16,  I.  617,  II.  69. 

"  9  :  18,  II.  267. 

"  9  :  22,  IL  301. 


Cb.  9  :  27,  I.  354. 
"  9  :  35.  I.  269. 
"  10:1,  8,1.90,276. 
"  10  :  5,  6,  I.  356,  359. 
"  10  :  7,  I.  278. 
"  10  :  23,  II.  35,  563,  etc. 
"  10  :  27,  H.  20. 
"  10  :  28,  in.  261. 
"  10  :  29,  HI.  341. 
"  10  :  32,  33,  II.  379,  384. 
"  10  :  39,  II.  739. 
"  10  :  40-42,  II.  376. 
"  10  :  42,  II.  388. 
"  11  :  1-6,1.430. 

"  11  :  2,  3,  5,  I.  262,  283,  II.  191,  198. 
"  11  :  5,  20,  I.  90. 
"  11  :  7-15,  I.  253. 
"  11  :  11-13,  I.  39,  252-3,  264,  270,  447, 

606,  616.  U.  33,  35,  43,  593. 
"  11  :  14,  II.  566. 
"  11  :  18,  I.  264. 
"  11  :  25,  III.  33. 
"  11  :  27,  III.  532. 
"  12  :8,  in.  541. 
"  12  :  14-23,  I.  354,  410. 
"  12  :  12  :  18-21,  HI.  425. 
"  12  :  23,  III.  514. 
"  12  :  28,1.  89,  369,  370,  421,  657,  U.  28, 

42. 
"  12  :  31,  32,  II.  405,  IH.  79. 
"  12:36,  H.  385,  387. 
"  12  :  40,  I.  50. 
"  12:50,11.376. 
"  13  :  1-23,  III.  186. 
"  13  :  10,  II.  18. 

"  13  :  11-16,  I.  141,  283,  430,  H,  16,  18. 
"  13  :  19,  II.  314. 

"  13  :  24-30,  I.  39,  H.  21,  181,  HI.  175. 
"  13  :  31-33.  I.  39,  201,  657,  II.  22,  27, 

33,  237,  300,  619,  III.  175. 
"  13  :34,  35,  1.34,  11.23. 
"  13  :  39-43,  I.  577,  11.167,  176,  269,  516. 
"  13  :  40,  42,  II.  177. 
"  13  :  41-43,  I.  283,  414,  II.  167,  592, 

III.  541. 
"  13  :  44-46,  I.  39,  H.  23,  384,  408.  420-1. 
"  13:47-50,  H.  24. 
"  13  :  52,  I.  20,  39. 
"  14  :  20,  I.  617. 
"14:  33,1.562. 
"  15  :8,  9,  III.  425. 
"  15  :  9,  I.  132. 
"  15  :  21-28, 1.357. 
"  15  :22,  1.354. 
"  15  :  24-30,  I.  201,  356. 
"  16  :  3,  m.  108,  110. 
"  16  :  11-28,  I.  430.  478,  566,  568,  II.  35, 

43,  165. 
"  16  :  13-20,  I.  42,  275,  385. 


620 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


Oh.  16  :  16,  17,  I.  441,  II.  556,  III.  515,534, 

572 
"   16?18,  19,  I.  39,  602,  663.  II.  258,  299. 
"  16  :  21,  I.  375,  II.  176,  618,  739. 
"  16:25.  27,  I.  267,  560,  II.  167,  183, 

344,  374,  378,  388,  396,  554,  618,  739. 
"  16:  28,  1.283,  11.560. 
"  17  :  10,  II.  565. 
"  17  :11,I.  307. 
"  17  :20.  I.  185,111.478. 
"  17  :  26-31,  II.  105,  239. 
"  17  :  27,  II.  766. 
"  17  :  32,  11.299. 
"  18  :  3,  I.  102. 
"  18  :  10,  11.351,  618. 
"  18  :  16,  17,  I.  632. 
"  18  :  19,  20,  I.  132,  616. 
"  18  :  23,  25,  II.  24. 
"  19  :  8.  I.  223. 
"  19  :  13,  14,  in.  262. 
"  19  :  21,  II.  11. 
"  19  :  24,  I.  39. 
"  19  :  26,  I.  92. 
"  19  :  28.  I.  179,  267,  349,  373,  569,  II.  50, 

178,  182,  257-8,  266,  268,  300,  375,  473, 

etc.,  478,  583,  586-7. 
"  19  :  28-30,  II.  388-9,  III.  323. 
"  20  :  16,  I.  78. 
"20:  17-20.  1.383. 
"  20:  18,  19,1.375. 
"  20  :  20,  21,  I.  184,210,  266,  274,  283,111. 

572. 
"  20  :  20-29,  II.  388,  585. 
"  20:23,  in.  30. 
"  20  :  27,  II.  24,  269. 
"  20  :  28.  I.  275. 
"  20:  30,  31,  I.  354. 
"  21,1.  386. 
"  21  :  1-11,  II.  564. 
"  21  :  8,  9,  I.  266,  II.  191. 
"21:  15,  16,1.  349,  III.  33. 
"  21  :26,  II.  379. 
"  21  :28,  III.  323. 
"  21  :31,  1.39. 
"  21  :  33,  I.  207. 
"  21  :  42,  43,  in.  601. 
"   21 :  43,  I.  379,  392,  608,  696,  II.  577. 
"  21 :  44, 1.  673,  676,  681. 
"  22  :  1-14,  I.  379,  550,  II.  24,  392,  III. 

307. 
"  22  :  11,  III.  323. 
"  22  :  21,  I.  660. 
"  22  :  24, 1. 365. 
"  22  :  30,  I.  298,  II.  620. 
"  22  :  31,  32,  I.  297,  447,  II.  231,  299. 
"  22  :  42-45,  III.  417,  512. 
"  23  :  6,  II.  235. 
"  23  :  8, 1.  385. 
"  23:  13,  11.35. 
.  "  23:  20,  21,  1.458,464. 
"  23  :  27,  n.  79. 
"  23 :  29,  IU.  323. 
"   23 :  37-39, 1.  380,  383,  432,  628,  664,  688, 


n.  50,  51,  77,  98,  105,  178,  187, 191,  320, 
350,  HI.  55. 
Cb.  24,  I.  381,  479,  688,  692,  II.  174,  184, 

373,  424,  III.  183,  186,  215,  258. 
"  24  :  3,  I.  211,  380,  II.  420-1. 
"   24:  4,  14,  24,  25,  33,  III.  108. 
"  24 :  6-14, 1.  446,  II.  105,  375,  406,  546. 
"   24:  8,  II.  737. 
"  24:  12,  III.  138. 

"  24:  14,  II.  33, 174,  III.  104, 117, 137,192. 
"  24  :  15,  I.  48,  171,  II.  251,  278,  650,  III. 

151. 
"  24:  21.11.  731,737. 
"  24  :  23-27,  III.  323. 
"   24  :  24,  II.  740. 
"  24  :  25,  I.  194,  III.  135. 
"  24  :  28,  II.  176,  322. 
«'  24  :  29,  I.  420,  580,  II.  189,  318,  495, 

III.  68,  112,  164,  246,  372,  384-5. 
"   24  :  30,  II.  171,187,  318,  327,  357,  378, 

410,  576,  III.  175,  186,  299,  323. 
"  24:  31,  I.  412,  U.  330,  453. 
"  24  :  32,  III.  110. 
"  24  :  34,  I.  381. 
"  24  :  36-51,  II.  173,  211,  332,  378,  410, 

III.  93,  100,  108,  111,  299,  323. 
"  24  :  37-39,  III.  323. 
"  24  :  39-41,  III.  297.  323. 
"  24  :  42-44,  I.  536,  III.  139.  300,  323. 
"  24  :  46,  47,  II.  577,  III.  596. 
"  24  :  48.  II.  165. 
"  25  :  I.  240,  III.  183,  186. 
"  25  :  1-13,  II.  24,  170,  182,  III.  27,  299, 

etc.,  323. 
"  25  :  10,  II.  384. 
"  25  :  13,  III.  93,  100,  323. 
"  25  :  14-30,  II.  388. 
"  25  :  19,  I.  694,  II.  189,  577,  III.  323. 
"  25  :  21-23,  II.  387. 
"  25  :  30,  I.  463. 
"  25  :  31-34,  II.  396,  436,  473,  578,  587, 

III.  323,  541. 
"  25  :  31-46,  I.  566,  568,  585,  600,  619, 

II.  21,  177.  181,  203,  270,  318,  320,  353, 

372,  etc.,  384,  519,  542,  III.  406. 
"  25  :  34,  I.  34,  39,  244,  267,  373,  413, 414, 

UI.  310. 
"  25  :  41,111.245. 
"  26  :  2.  II.  46. 

"  26  :  6,  7,  II.  235,  253,  298-9,  305. 
"  26:  18,  11.249. 
"  26:  20,  II.  189,  191. 
"  26  :24,  II.  166. 
"  26  :  28,  I.  327,  371. 
"  26  :  29, 1.  39,  283,  323,  373,  577,  II.  37, 

548,  III.  56,  464. 
"  26  :51,  52,11.618. 
"  26  :  63,  64,  I.  367,  562,  568,  673,  II.  171, 

176,  187,  192,  374,  618,  III.  323. 
"27:  37,42,  III.  571. 
"  27  :  52,  53,  II.  229,  233,  253,  282,  315. 
"  28  :  11-20,  III.  192-3. 
"  28  :  18-20,  I.  096,  II.  375,  420. 


INDEX   OF    SCEIPTURE. 


621 


Ch.  28  :  19,  III.  65, 191. 
"  28  :  20,  HI.  478. 
"   28  :  29,  in.  532. 

MARK. 
Ch.    1-16,  in.  352. 
"     1:2,  n.  35. 
"     1  :  12,  13,  I.  689. 
"1  :  14,  15,  I.  266,  362. 
"     1  :  24,  II.  621. 
"     3:  11,  1.562. 
"     3  :  29,  III.  79. 

"     4:  11,  12  1.  141,  151,  283,  H.  16,  18. 
"     4  :  26-29  I.  114,  200. 
"     4  :  34,  n.  19,  22. 
"     5:7, 1.  562. 
"     7  :  25-30, 1.  357. 
"     8  :  20,  II.  70. 
"     8  :  29,  in.  572. 
"     8  :  35,  H.  737. 
"     8  :  38,  1. 569,  II.  166,  372,  384,  554,  619, 

HI.  323. 
"     9:  1,  I.  35,  283,  478. 
"     9  :  9,  I.  447. 
"     9:10,11,11.299. 
"     9  :  12,  I.  367. 
"     9  :  29,  II.  556. 
"      9:31,1.415. 
"     9  :  41,  U.  376,  388. 
"     9  :  47, 1.  102,  632. 
"   10  :  5,  I.  223. 
"    10  :  6,  II.  480. 
"   10  :  15,  I.  39. 
"   10  :  25,  I.  92. 
"   10  :  30,  n.  388. 
"   10  :  35-45,  II.  587. 
"    10  :  40,  II.  14. 
"  10  :  47-52,  I.  354. 
"   11  :  10,  I.  349,  632,  H.  205. 
"   11  :  12,  I.  633. 
"    12  :  10,  I.  365. 

"   12  :  26-37,  I.  74,  354,  II.  344,  378. 
"    12  :  34,  I.  370. 

"   13,  I.  381,  II.  184,  HI.  117,  186,  215. 
"   13  :  1,  2,  I.  628. 
"   13  :  6-13,  H.  105,  174. 
"13:  11.  1.74,  11.301. 
"   13:  14,  III.  151,  164. 
"   13  :  19,  II.  480. 
"   13:  23,  III.  135,  151. 
"   13:  25,  11.495,  III.  164. 
"  13:  26, 1.  567-9,  II.  187,  IH.  323. 
"   13 :  27,  I.  412. 
"   13:  28,  29,  III.  110. 
"  13:  32,  33,  I.  580,  II.  41,  in.  93,  101, 

323. 
"   13:  33-37,  in.  100,  114,  219,  253,  323. 
"  14 :  25, 1.  373,  II.  37,  548. 
"   14:  61,  62,111.323,  575. 
"  14 :  62,  L  385,  HI.  384. 
"   15  :  32,  III.  571. 
"   15  :  43,  I.  283,  367,  H.  143. 
"  16:  11,  H.  267. 


Ch.  16:  14,  I.  138. 

"   16:  15,  n.  492,  m.  191,  331. 

LUKE. 

Ch.    1-24,  ni.  353. 

"     1:1-3,  I.  72. 

"     1 :  15,  35,  41,  67,  HI.  10,  73. 

"     1 :  15,  18,  I.  257. 

"     1 :  16,  54,  68,  II.  67,  565. 

"     1 :  17,  II.  566. 

"     1 :  30-33,  I.  313,  342. 

"     1:31,1.283,111.571. 

"     1  :  32,  33,  I.  236,  240,  285,  577, 

616, 

649,  II.  50,  74,  77,  201,  203,  206, 

551, 

630-1,  III.  309,  539,  571. 

"     1  :  35,  U.  197. 

"     1  :  37,  I.  92. 

"     1  :  51-53, 1.  415. 

"     1  :  69-75, 1.  295,  in.  450. 

"      1  :  70,  I.  173. 

"     1:  71-74,    I.  183,  236,   240,  262, 

273, 

285,  458,  577,  616,  649,  U.  50,  95 

,  98, 

137,  201,  203,  206. 

"     1:76,11.351. 

"     1 :  77,  III.  450. 

"     2:1,  U.  406,  546. 

"     2  :  9-14,  II.  618. 

"     2:  11,  III.  571. 

"     2  :  25,  II.  464,  III.  70. 

"     2:  26-30,  I.  183,  IH.  70. 

"     2  :  52,  I.  580. 

"     3  :  16.  m.  65. 

"     3:  23-28,  1.353. 

"     4:  1-13,1.698. 

"     4  :  5,  II.  406,  546. 

"     4:6,1.701,111.188. 

"     4  :  18,  19,  I.  365. 

"     4:  23,1.266. 

"     4  :  34,  I.  362. 

"     4:  41,1.  562,  II.  621.  HI.  571. 

"     5  :  33-35,  I.  442,  HI.  314. 

"     6  :  20,  I.  283. 

"     6  :  22,  23,  H.  739. 

"     7:1,  etc.,  I.  357. 

"     7:  19,  II.  191. 

"     7:27,11.351. 

"     7  :  28,  I.  253. 

"      8:1,  I.  266. 

"     8:  10,11.  16. 

"     8  :  11-23,  H.  266. 

"     8 :  21,  n.  376. 

"     9  :  3,  II.  559. 

"     9  :  10,  II.  564. 

"     9  :  20,  II.  556,  III.  572. 

"     9  :  26,  I.  569,  II.  374,  554,  619,  m.  323, 

"     9  :  27,  I.  283,  478,  II.  35. 

"     9  :  28,  H.  554. 

"     9 :  30,  n.  560. 

"     9  :  56-70, 1.  102,  182,  375. 

"     9  :  62,  II.  36. 

"   10:  1,  etc,  1.361,  n.  564. 

"   10  :  9,  I.  278. 

"  10:  17,  L276,  n.  621. 

622 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


Ch.  10 :  18,  TL  12. 
"  10  :  20,  II.  13. 
"  10:  21,11.301. 
"  10 :  23,  24,  I.  371. 
"  11 :  2, 1.  370,  689. 
"  11:  13,1.117. 

"  11  :  20,  I.  362,  370,  390,  421,  II.  42. 
"11:  42,  II.  733. 
"  11  :  50,  I.  34. 
"  11-:  52,  III.  108. 
"  12,  III.  258. 
"  12 :  8,  9,  II.  618. 
"  12  :  10,  III.  79. 
"  12  :  12,  I.  77,  III.  70. 
"  12  :  13,  I.  660. 
"12:  31,  1.370,11.14,  35. 
"  12  :  32, 1.  414,  589,  632,  II.  14,  35,  in. 

57,  310. 
"  12 :  35-48,  II.  167,  189,  318,  589,  III. 

100,  301,  323. 
"  12 :  36,  III.  27. 
"12:  37-49,111.241,323. 
"  12  :  40,  III.  93. 
"  12  :  42-44,  III.  323. 
"12:  45,  III.  153,323. 
"12:  49,  1.618. 
"  12 :  51-53,  III.  196. 
"  13  :  20,  21,  II.  22. 
"  13  :  23-30,  II.  392. 
"  13 :  28,  29,  I.  267,  II.  290,  IH.  310. 
"13:  33,111.99. 
"  13:  34,  35,1.  628,  664,  II.  51,  77,  178, 

190-1,  III.  323. 
"  14:  14,  II.  227,  265-6,  269,  291-2,  299, 

302,  307,  396,  476. 
"  14  :  15-24,  I.  379,  II.  253,  300. 
"  15  :  10,  II.  619. 
"  16  :  16,  I.  252,  264,  370,  EL  35. 
"16:  31,  1.160. 
"  17:  19,  20,  11.198. 
"  17 :  20, 1.  370,  458,  660,  II.  33,  39,  etc., 

41  etc.  46. 
"  17:  8l!'L  42,  390,  560,  II.  365. 
"  17 :  22, 1.  43,  442,  651,  688,  II.  190,  351, 

412,  III.  314. 
"17:  23,24,111.323. 
"  17:  24,11.  183,  410. 
"  17 :  26-30,  II.  105,  318,  III.  112,  114, 

185,  209,  323. 
"  17 :  34-37, 1.  382,  II.  319,  etc.,  III.  323. 
"18:  1-8,111.309. 
"  18 :  7,  8,  I.  413,  634,  II.  190,  in.  115, 

116,  165,  175, 185,  217,  323,  384. 
"  18  :  27,  I.  92. 
"  18:  30,  II.  388. 
"  18  :  38,  I.  354. 
"  19  :  1  etc.  I.  357 
"  19  :  11-27, 1. 366, 577,  II.  25, 365, 387-8, 

577,  587. 
"  19  :  14,  I.  375,  HI.  327. 
"19:  17-19,11.591. 
"  19  :  39,  I.  349. 
"  19  :  41-44,  I.  380,  383. 


Ch.  20  :  25,  II.  239. 

"  20  :  34-36,  II.  238,  268,  275,  292, 

297, 

299,  307-8,  421-2,  620. 

"  20  :  37,  I.  296. 

"  21  :  I.  381,  419,  569,  II.  184,  III. 

117, 

186,  215. 

"  21  :  24,  I.  43,  II.  49,  51,  72,  98,  375 

' 

"  21  :  24-30,  II.  388,  III.  106,  139. 

"  21  :  25,  28,  II.  186,  189,  318,  724 

III. 

164,  396. 

"  21  :  26,  II.  406,  495,  546,  III.  372. 

"  21  :  27,  28,  I.  569,  II.  154,  171,  187, 

378, 

477,  III.  110,  170,  372. 

"  21  :  29,  III.  126. 

"   21  :  31,  32,  I.  882.  419,  688,  II.  46, 

365. 

"  21  :  34,  III.  100,  323-4. 

"  21  :  35,  II.  186,  III.  93. 

"  21  :  36,  II.  322,  332,  III.  24. 

"  22  :  15,  16,  III.  26. 

"  22  :  16-18,  II.  37,  225. 

"  22  :  18, 1.  373,  II.  548. 

"  22  :  28-30,  I.  267,  373,  414,  577, 

589, 

619,  632,  II.  34,  37,  191,  268,  581, 

583, 

587,  590,  592,  HI.  56,  390. 

"  22  :  32,  II.  324. 

"  22  :  36-38,  II.  115,  349. 

"  22  :  43,  II.  618. 

"  22  :  53,  II.  256. 

"  22  :  69,  II.  618. 

"  23:  2,  3.  1.396. 

"  23  :  30,  II.  195. 

"  24  :  III.  193. 

"  24  :  21,  I.  184,  274,  458,  HI.  572. 

"  24  :  23,  II.  267,  III.  202. 

"  24  :  24,  II.  758. 

"  24  :  25-27, 1.  171,  350,  II.  34,  III. 

108, 

397,  425. 

"  24  :  32,  I.  117. 

"  24  :  34,  II.  349. 

"  24  :  41,  I.  266. 

"  24  :  47,  I.  389,  416,  in.  331. 

"  24  :  49,  I.  77,  III.  191. 

JOHN. 

Ch.  1-21,  in.  354-6. 

"  1:1,  III.  532. 

"  1:3,  I.  559 

"  1  :  3-10,  III.  478,  532. 

"  1:7,  I.  257. 

"  1 :  11,  I.  302,  375,  H.  35,  207. 

"  1  :  12,  I.  403. 

"  1  :  14,  II.  559. 

"  1  :  21-24.  I.  216,  H.  566. 

"  1  :  29,  in.  391,  454. 

"  1  :  33,  III.  65. 

"  1  :  41,  in.  573. 

"  1  :  51, 1.  571,  II.  143-4,  341,  618, 

m. 

446. 

"  2  :  19,  III.  90. 

"  2  :  24,  25,  IH.  478. 

"  2  :  28,  II.  221. 

"  3:2,1.92. 

*'  3  :  3-5,  H.  35. 

INDEX   OF   SCEIPTUEE. 


623 


Ch. 


3  :  5,  I.  39: 

Ch.  12 

1-9,  H.  308. 

3  :  8,  II.  300. 

"  12: 

25,  n.  739. 

3  :  13,  I.  151,  571,  661. 

"  12: 

27-29,  H.  256,  331. 

3  :  14,  I.  50. 

"  12: 

31,  II.  359,  IH.  188-9. 

3  :  16-19,  36, 1.  67,  138, 

II. 

386,  393, 

"  12: 

32-34,  I.  383,  U.  420, 

638,  HI.  514, 

III.  281,  514. 

539 

3  :  19, 20,  IH.  279. 

"  12: 

37,  n.  35. 

3  :  24,  II.  70,  73. 

"   12: 

41,  III.  538. 

3  :  26,  II.  379. 

"  12 

45,  IH.  478. 

3  :  34,  III.  70. 

"  12  : 

47,  48,  I.  67,  H.  423 

4:  4,1.356. 

"  12 

49,  HI.  93. 

4:  22,1.398. 

"  13: 

3,  III.  479. 

4  :  23,  H.  301. 

"  13" 

19,  ni.  360. 

4  :  25,  IH.  573. 

"  13: 

31,  I.  571. 

4  :  27,  I.  571. 

"  14 

1-3,  H.  403,  532,  m. 

42,  53,  etc., 

5  :  3,  ni.  532. 

59, 

63,  323. 

5  :  18,  III.  530. 

"  14: 

7-11,  HI.  478. 

5  :  19-38,  III.  532. 

"   14 

9,  II.  637,  HI.  557. 

5  :  21-2'!,  I.  53,  II.  257-8 

m 

.532. 

"  14 

10,  HI.  532. 

5  :  22,  23,  II.  352-3,  587, 

in. 

479,  530, 

"  14: 

11,  I.  91. 

532,  535. 

"  14: 

12-14,  III.  390. 

5  :  24, 1.  138.  II.  387,  393. 

"  14 

15,21,  23,  m.  265. 

5  :  25,  26,  I.  563,  II.  234. 

252 

267. 

"  14 

16,  U.  197,  HI.  191. 

5  :  27,  I.  569,  574,  II.  587. 

"  14: 

25-28,  I.  55,  HI.  532. 

5  :  28,  29,  II.  174,  229,  278, 

290,  301, 

"  14: 

26,  IH  73. 

384. 

"  14: 

29,  I.  167. 

5  :  36-39,  I.  48,  90,  117, 

HI.  51 

"  14- 

30,  II.  142,  m.  188. 

5  :  39-4'i,  III.  108,  284. 

"  15 

10,  IH  265. 

5  :  43,  II.  723,  718. 

"  15 

IS,  III.  175. 

5  :  44-47, 1.  138,  III.  225 

"  15: 

19,  II.  514,  HI.  184. 

6  :  14,  II.  198. 

«  15 

20,  H  739. 

6  :  15,  I.  266,  376. 

"  15: 

36,  III.  73. 

6  :  30,  I.  446. 

"  16 

7-26, 1. 624,  H.  197, 344,  m.  73, 191. 

6  :  37-40,  II.  386. 

"  16 

13-15,  I.  77,  ni.  532. 

6:  39-44,  H.  230,  251,300. 

"  16 

16-33,  II.  33,  m.  314, 

323. 

6  :  40,  I.  137. 

"  16 

23,  24,  HI.  390. 

6  :  45,  II.  304,  423. 

"  16 

:  30,  ni.  478. 

6  :  54-58,  II.  256,  423. 

"  17 

2,  3,  H.  386. 

6  :  62,  63, 1.  53,  561,  IH. 

68. 

"  17 

:5,  I.  561,  m.  534. 

7  :  17,  I.  67,  in.  280. 

"  17 

8,  HI.  93. 

7  :  30,  III.  341. 

"  17 

9,  ni.  186. 

7  :  31,  in.  514. 

"  17 

10,  III.  478. 

7  :  34-44,  I.  210. 

-   17 

11-13,  H  42. 

7  :  38,  39,  IH.  73. 

«  17 

14-16,  III.  184. 

8  :  20,  III.  341. 

«  17 

16-20,  IH.  65. 

8  :  24, 1.  148. 

"  17 

20,  HI.  331. 

8  :  30,  II.  239. 

"  17 

21.  IH.  338. 

8  :  47,  I.  117. 

"  17 

22,  IH.  48. 

8  :  56, 1.  296,  309,  H.  410. 

"  17 

24,  I.  34. 

8  :  58,  III.  479,  532. 

"  17 

25,  H.  33. 

9  :  5,  n.  194. 

"  17 

:  26,  HI.  73. 

10  :  11-16,  HI.  175. 

"  18 

33,  I.  349. 

10  :  17-18,  m.  480. 

"  18 

36,  I.  367,  660,  H.  32, 

109,  514. 

10  :  25-38, 1.  90,  U.  386. 

««  18 

37,  I.  134,  H.  38. 

10  :  30,  III.  478,  530. 

«'  19 

7,  m.  530. 

10  :  35,  III.  233. 

"  19 

:  32,  III.  431. 

10  :  36,  I.  562,  HI.  530. 

"  19 

34,  37,  HI.  532. 

11 :  4,  I.  562. 

"  19 

35,  36,  HI.  360. 

11  :  24,  II.  228,  231,  251, 

299, 

432. 

"  20 

17,  11.376,444. 

11  :  25,  26,  H.  231,  314. 

"  20 

21,  III.  193. 

11  :  27,  II.  198. 

"  20 

:  27,  IH.  284, 

11  :  41-44,  H.  233. 

"  20 

:  30,  31,  1.90,  132,  m.571. 

11  :  47,  48,  I.  376. 

"  21 

:  22,  23,  I.  478,  H.  172, 

190. 

624 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


Ch. 


ACTS. 

"  8 

30-37,  III.  284. 

1  :  HI.  358. 

"  8 

32,  33,  III.  425. 

1 :  3,  I.  430,  II.  267. 

"  8 

39,  II.  314. 

1  :  5,  III.  65-6. 

"  9 

20,  22,  HI.  574,  579. 

1:6,  I.  183-4,  195,  265-6,  270,  274, 

"  9 

28,  IIL  70. 

278,  283-4,  366.  373, 414,  429,  430.  456, 

"  9 

41,  II.  267. 

458,  472,  580,  641,  665,  689,  699,  H.  16, 

"  10 

1-48,  I.  408. 

19,  22,  31,  38,  41,  72,  78,  152,  191, 

"  10 

3,  II.  619. 

204-5,  383,  421,  471,  in.  56,  245,  572-3. 

"  10 

11-15,  I.  232. 

1  :  6,  7,  HI.  93-4.  108. 

"  10 

:  36,  37,  I.  467. 

1:  7,  I.  580,  11.41,  72,  189. 

"  10 

:  40,  II.  353. 

1  :  10,  11,  12,  I.  536,  H.  165,  178,  181, 

"  10 

42,  II.  392. 

188,221,  619. 

"  10 

44-46,  IH.  65. 

1  :  11,  HI.  60,  323,  384. 

"  11 

:  I.  408. 

1  :  16,  I.  70,  74. 

"  11 

15,  17,  III.  65. 

2  :  4,  I.  92,  H.  145. 

•'  11 

28,  H.  406. 

2  :  7,  I.  8. 

"  12 

21,  II.  355. 

2  :  9-11,  m.  169. 

"  13 

III.  81. 

2  :  14-36,  I.  316,  438,  HI.  66,  69. 

"  13 

17,  II.  67. 

2  :  16,  17, 1.  446,  H.  338. 

"  13 

18-22,  HI.  99. 

2:  19-21,  HI.  323. 

"  13 

23,  I.  353. 

2  :  20,  H.  492. 

"  13 

26,  III.  450. 

2  :  22,  I.  90.  92,  H.  758. 

"  13 

33.  H.  257. 

2  :  23,  I.  383. 

"  13 

34-37,  III.  425. 

2  :  26,  30,  I.  383. 

"  13 

39,  II.  386-7,  III.  272. 

2  :  27,  31,  I.  458,  H.  258,  270,  293. 

"  13 

46,  I.  856,  389,  416. 

2  :  30,  31,  L  70,  313,  314,  339,  353,  565, 

"  13 

:  50,  II.  269. 

II.  77,  III.  579. 

"  14 

:  2,  II.  229. 

2  :  33,  m.  7:5.  191. 

"  14 

22.  I.  600,  633,  II.  36,  739,  III.  184 

2  :  34,  35,  II.  344. 

"  15 

8,  III.  65. 

2  :  38,  I.  41 S. 

"  15 

11,  III.  451. 

2:  41,  11.266,  HI.  184. 

"  15 

18  21,  1.4(19,  489,589.594,  687. 

2:42,  I.  112. 

"  15 

16-18,  I.  288,  8  17,  II.  51,  72,  74,  76 

2  :  47,  III.  451. 

179 

,  200,  201,  206,  470,  III.  454,  534. 

3  :  9-27,  II.  461,  etc.,  484. 

"  15 

18,  I.  85,  38. 

3  :  12-26,  I.  316,  413,  416,  438,  615,  II. 

"  16 

16-18,  II.  621. 

79. 

"  16 

17,  III.  450. 

3  :  19-22,  I.  389,  615,  668,  H.  51,  72, 

"  17 

2,  I.  117. 

300,  344.  350,  III.  78,  459. 

"  17 

3,  4,  I.  447,  II.  269,  III.  288. 

3  :  20,  II.  293,  492,  III.  579. 

"  17 

6-31,  11.884,400,546. 

3:  21,1.  41,578,  H.  153. 

"  17 

7.  HI.  571. 

3  :  33,  I.  266. 

"  17 

11,  I.  48,  117,  III.  288. 

4  :  10,  in.  579. 

"  17 

28,  III.  342. 

4  :  19,  m.  12. 

"  17 

30,  31,  II.  471,  III.  575. 

4  :  26-28,  I.  615,  III.  576. 

"  17 

31,  1.447,  563.IL  180. 

5  :  HI.  81. 

352 

-3.  358,  365,  III.  419,  541. 

5  :  19,  20,  II.  619,  III.  12. 

"  17 

32,  II.  229. 

5:  29-81,  1.615. 

"  18: 

4,  I.  117. 

5  :  31,  I.  570,  688. 

"  18 

5,  III.  579. 

5  :  32,  IH.  65,  68,  79. 

"  18 

28,  III.  414. 

5  :  38,  39,  III.  342. 

"  19 

4,  III.  579. 

5  :  42,  III.  579. 

"  19 

6,  III.  65. 

6  :  7, 1.  280,  III.  184. 

"  19 

13-16,  II.  621. 

7  :  5,  I.  294. 

"  19 

21,  1.416. 

7  :  14,  H.  293. 

"  19 

27,  II.  406,  546. 

7  :  35-87,  III.  426. 

"  19 

32,  I.  632. 

7  :  53,  H.  619. 

"  20 

21,111.579. 

7  :  56,  I.  576. 

'  "  20 

25,  I.  600. 

8  :  1,  I.  632. 

"  20 

26,  27,  III.  199. 

8  :  5-24,  IH.  65,  579. 

"  20 

28,  I.  632. 

8  :  12,  I.  600. 

"  20: 

29,  30,  I.  634,  IH  335. 

8  :  14-17,  IH.  70,  77. 

"  20: 

32,  I.  132. 

8  :  26,  II.  619. 

"  21 

20,  III.  184. 

INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


625 


Ch.  21  :  28,  H.  67. 
'*  22  :  3.  II.  67. 
"   22  :  28,  IH.  431. 
"   23  :  6-8,  II.  228-9. 
"  24  :  5,  II.  546. 
"   24  :  10,  II.  355. 
"24:  25,  n.  406. 
"  25  :  2,  II.  269. 
'     25  :  19,  11.267. 
"  25:  31,11.355. 
"   26  :  1-23,  I.  469. 
"   26  •  6-8,  I.  297,  446,  H  51,  67,  229,  IH. 

310,  395. 
'•  26  :  16-18,  III.  192. 
"  26  :  18,  II.  249,  591. 
"   26:  23,  23,  1.297. 
"   27  :  37,  H.  266. 
"   28  :  7,  17,  H.  269. 
"  28:  17-31.  1.388,469. 
"   28  :  20,  II.  67,  in.  310. 
"   28  :  25,  III.  70. 
"   28  :  31,  I.  600,  IH.  579. 

ROMANS. 

Ch.  1-16,  III.  361. 

"  1  :  3,  4,  I.  339,  353,  562,  II.  237,  299, 

581. 

"  1:6,  I.  416. 

"  1:8,  III.  192. 

"  1  :  16,  III.  450. 

"  1  :  20,  II.  480. 

"  1  :  25,  II.  480. 

"  2:2,  II.  387. 

"  2  :  5,  I.  466. 

"  2  :  6,  II.  388,  396. 

"  2:7,  II.  386. 

•'  2:9,  10,  I.  416,  II.  67,  391. 

"  2  :  16,  II.  365,  396,  HI.  575. 

"  2  :  28,  29.  I.  399,  404. 

"  3  :  3,  I.  297,  383. 

"  3:9,29,11.67. 

"  3  :  22-30,  III.  272. 

"  3  i  28,  III.  364. 

"  4:13,11.435,447,577. 

"  4 :  17,  I.  415,  H.  22. 

"  4  :  18,  HI.  309,  320. 

"  5:1,2.11.386,111.450. 

"  5:9,  10,  HI.  451,  456. 

"  5  :  12,  14,  17,  21,  I.  589,  II.  173. 

"  5:14-21,111.431. 

"  5:  20,111.  191. 

"  6:5,11.229. 

"  6:9,  n.  268. 

"  6:10-13.11.267. 

"  6:17,  HI.  280. 

"  6:22,11.386. 

"  8:1,  II.  386. 

"  8  :  5-16,  II.  384-5. 

"  8:6,  II.  34. 

"  8:9,  HI.  167. 

"  8  :  10,  II.  307. 

"  8  :  11, 1.  53,  U.  257-8,  308,  386,  396, 
III.  68. 


Ch.  8  :  15,  I.  403. 
"     8  :  17-23,  II.  376    395,  492-3,  546,  597, 

739 
"     8  :  19-23,  I.  413,  439,  617,  669,  H  182, 

229,  258,  270,  397,  479,  480,  etc.,  484, 

III.  322,  324. 
"     8  :  23,  III.  323. 
"     8  :  24,  III.  450. 
"     8  :  28,  IH.  341. 
"     8:29,11.257. 
"     8  :  30,  II.  34. 
"     8  :  31-34,  II.  386. 
"     8  :  38,  39,  II.  444,  480,  597,  739. 
"     9:1.1.134. 
"     9  :  3-5,  I.  213,  383. 
"     9  :  4,  I.  209,  398,  II.  237. 
"    9:5,  UI.  535. 
"     9:6, 1.  399. 
"     9  :  9-21,  III.  340. 
"     9:  10,  11,  I.  397,  401,  H.  68,  etc.,  75, 

119. 
"     9  :  11,  n.  207,  209,111.  478. 
"     9:  16,  17,  11.590. 
"     9  :  22,  III.  435. 

"     9  :  23,  24,  I.  397,  H  67,  HI.  342. 
"     9  :  27,  II.  299. 
"     9:31-33,1.383,676. 
"  10:  5,  11.546. 
"  10  :  7,  II.  308. 
"   10  :  8.  10,  12,  21,  I.  383,  II.  67,  87,  in. 

284. 
"    10:  9,  10,  ni.  280. 
"   10  :  14-17.  I.  138,  III.  284. 
"    10  :  18,  II.  406,  546,  III.  169,  192. 
"    11, 1.  213,  216,439,  II.  50,  775,  IH  191. 
"   11  :  7,  23,  H  383,  399. 
"   11:  8,  11,  12,  11.35. 
"    11  :  12-15,  I.  233,  698,  XL  142. 
"   11  :  15,  IH.  324. 
"    11  :  16,  27,1.336. 
"   11  :  18,  I.  6.7.1. 
"   11  :  20,  I.  188,  334. 
"    11  :  24,  I.  397. 
"   11  :  25-27,  I.  606,  H.  51,-  76,  79,  142, 

189,  III.  323. 
"   11  :  28,  29,  I.  179,  207,  335,  405,  H  53, 

95,  590. 
"  11  :  30-32,  I.  420. 
"  11  :  33,  I.  38. 
"  11  :  36,  I.  559. 
"  12  :  1,  HI.  89. 
"  12  :  2, 1.  589. 
"  12  :  5,  HI.  578. 
"  13  :  1-5,  HI.  12. 
"  13  :  10,  H.  70. 
"  13  :  11,  12,  I.  439,  471,  476,  H.  181, 

218,  368,  414,  IH  96,  107,  159,  450. 
"  14  :  4,  HI.  234. 
"  14  :  5,  6,  HI.  265. 
"  14  :  9-13,  I.  369,  560,  H  269,  271,  353, 

357 
"  14:10-12,  H  180,  384,  387,  IH  196, 

532,  575. 


626 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


Ch.  14  :  15,  I.  134. 

Ch.  10:28,29, 1.134. 

"   14  :  17,  H.  34-5. 

"   10:33,111.452. 

"   14  :  20,  H.  105. 

"   11  :  3, 1.  597. 

"   15  :  1,  in.  272. 

"   11  :  10,  II.  619. 

"   15  :  8,  I.  362,  373. 

"  11:  13,  1.634. 

"   15  :  13,  HI.  309. 

"  11  :  17-19,  III.  335. 

"   15  :  16,  m.  89. 

"   11  :  26,  I.  331,  III.  60,  132,  323. 

"    15  :  18,  III.  65,  70. 

"   11  :  30,  III.  431. 

"   15  :  19.  I.  92. 

"   11  :  32,  I.  589.  III.  186. 

"   16  :  12,  II.  108. 

«'   12  :  7-11, 1.  92,  119,  in.  64. 

"   16  :  17, 1.  634. 

"   12  :  8,  9,  III.  272. 

"   16  :  20,  U.  142,  582. 

"   12  :  27,  III.  578. 

"   16  :  25, 1.  144. 

"   13,  I.  333.  III.  122,  144,  274. 
"   13  :  1-3,  I.  67,  151. 

I.   CORINTHIAN! 

"   13  :  1-13,  III.  234. 

Ch.    1  :  4-10,  in.  824. 

"   13  :  8,  13,  III.  73,  176. 

"      1  :  5-8,  H.  42,  410,  HI.  241. 

"   13  :  9,  I.  193. 

"     1  :  7-8,  I.  439,  442, 

n.  169, 

m. 

167, 

"    13  :  12,  II.  351. 

322-3,  575. 

"   15,  U.  397. 

"     1:9, 1.  332. 

'*   15  :  2,  12,  I.  415,  II.  234,  m.  452. 

"     1 :  20,  I.  589. 

"   15  :  12,  21.  II.  299. 

"     1:21,111.193. 

"   15  :  19,  III.  184. 

"     1  :  23,  HI.  574,  579. 

"   15  :  20,  II.  229,  477. 

"     1  :  25-28.    I.  8,   417, 

550,  n 

.  95, 

m. 

"   15  :  21,  22,  II.  229,  363,  III.  575. 

342. 

"   15  :  23,  24,  I.  633,  675.  681,  683,  II 

211, 

"     2  :  2,  in.  579. 

229,  247,  265,  295,  299,  301-2,  630 

m. 

"     2  :  7-10,  I.  36,  144,  H 

.585. 

324,  558. 

"     2  :  8,  I.  283,  589. 

"   15  :  24-26, 1.  39,  248,   563,  U.  344, 

471, 

"     2  :  12,  13,  I.  77,  133. 

630. 

"     2  :  14,  I.  139. 

"   15  :  27,  28,  I.  447,  579,  II.  634,  III. 

431. 

"     2  :  17,  I.  52,  74,  332. 

"    15  :  32,  U.  227. 

"     2  :  41, 1.  70. 

"   15  :  34,  I.  133. 

"     3  :  8-15,  H.  592. 

"    15  :  38,  II.  391. 

"     3:9,m.  57. 

"   15  :  40,  III.  57. 

"     3  :  10-15,  H.  384,  389,  etc., 

591, 

in. 

"   15:41,  11.887,591,111.57. 

274. 

"   15  :  42-44,  51-54,  II.  46,  154,  229, 

231, 

"     3:  11,  in.  578. 

299. 

"     3  :  13,  m.  82. 

"   15  :  45-55,  I.  315,  II.  258. 

"     3  :  16,  III.  90. 

"   15  :  47,  I.  573. 

"     3  :  17,  II.  258. 

"   15  :  49,  II.  477. 

"     3  :  18,  I.  14,  59,  62. 

"   15  :  50,  I.  602,  II.  477. 

"     3  :  21-23,  II.  444. 

"   15:51,    52,  55,   n.  172,  190,229, 

291, 

"     4:3,  5,  U.  412. 

295,  301,   314,  318,  320,  324,  560, 

in. 

"     4:5,  8, 1.  439,  589,  H.  384, 

573, 

in 

159. 

323-4. 

"   15  :  54,  55,  I.  685,  II.  402,  543,  IH. 

185, 

"     4:9,  II.  619. 

190,  245. 

"     4  :  14,  II.  229. 

"   16  :  17,  II.  211. 

"     4  :  20,  I.  659,  II.  37. 

16  :  22,  n.  198,  333. 

"     5,  III.  81. 

"     5  :  5,  U.  360,  410,  HI 

452. 

II.  CORINTHIANS. 

"     6:1,  III.  193. 

Ch.  1  :  5,  I.  617. 

"     6:2,  3,  I.  589,  H.  385 

,  392,  583,  620. 

"     1:8,  U.  365. 

"     6:3,  9,  14,  I.  102,  600,  439, 

n. 

229, 

"     1  :  14, 1.  439  II.  212,  410. 

299,  376. 

"     1  :  21,  III.  578. 

"     7:8.  I.  442. 

"     1  :  22,  III.  67. 

"     7  :  29-31,  I.  476,  589, 

H.  431. 

"     2  :  14-16,  II.  20,  229. 

"     8:6, 1.  559. 

"     2  :  16, 1.  53. 

"     8  :  12,  I.  134. 

"     3:6, 1.  53,  332. 

"     8  :  15,  II.  81,  89. 

"     3:7,  8,  III.  72-3. 

"     9  :  24,  II.  390. 

"     3  :  16,  I.  75,  439. 

"     9  :  25,  II.  579. 

"     3  :  18,  II.  477. 

"   10  :  2,  4,  I.  608. 

"     4:3,  III.  193. 

"   10  :  11,  I.  212,  476,  n. 

336,  42C 

,  425. 

"     4:4,  in.  188. 

INDEX    OF    SCRIPTURE. 


627 


Ch.  4  :  5,  8,  L  439,  HI.  579. 

'•  4:7,  I.  8. 

"  4  :  14,  I.  53.  332,  II.  229,  240. 

"  4  :  17,  18,  II.  597. 

"  4  :  18,  I.  5S9. 

"  5  :  1-18,  II.  240. 

"  5:2,  II.  14,  HI.  323. 

*'  5  :  5,  I.  332,  III.  67. 

"  5  :  9-21.  H.  363,  384,  392,  401. 

"  5:10,11.355,388. 

"  5  :  15,  III.  68,  431. 

"  5  :  16,  HI.  324. 

"  5  :  17,  II.  514. 

"  G  :  2,  II.  365. 

"  6  :  16,  in.  90,  590. 

"  7:0,  7,  II.  211. 

"  9:6,11.391. 

"  9:8,  II.  390. 

"  10  :  5,  I.  560. 

"  10  :  10,  II.  211. 

"  11  :  2,  3,  II.  132,  m.  40. 

"  11  :  13,  IH.  193. 

"  13:4,  H.  267. 

GALATIANS. 
Ch.    1  :  4,  I.  439,  589,  II.  425,  IIL  184,  454. 

"  1:8,  I.  116. 

"  1  :  23,  I.  138. 

"  2:4,  I.  132. 

"  2  :  16,  U.  386. 

"  2  :  20,  I.  632,  m.  272. 

"  3  :  1,  II.  194. 

"  3:7,  I.  396. 

"  3:8.  I.  334,  383,  608. 

"  3  :  16,  I.  302-3,  307,  320,  325,  439. 

"  3  :  16-18,  H.  396,  447. 

"  3  :  17, 1.  305.  325. 

"  3  :  19,  II.  619. 

"  3  :  29,  I.  305. 

"  4,  IH.  44. 

"  4:5,6,7,1.321,403. 

"  4:10,111.265. 

"  4  :  17, 1.  53. 

"  4:24,1.50,64-5. 

"  4  :  26,  I.  283,  U.  528,  HI.  48. 

"  4  :  27,  n.  132. 

"  5  :  1-6,  HI.  88. 

«  5  :  14,  II.  70. 

"  5  :  21,  I.  601. 

"  5  :  22,  in.  272. 

"  6:7,  II.  388. 

"  6:9,  II.  391. 

"  6  :  15,  H.  514. 

EPHESIANS. 

Ch.    1,1.401. 

"  1:3,  II.  12,  580. 

"  1  :  4,  5,  I.  34,  40,  401,  403,  413. 

"  1  :  4-12,  III.  342. 

"  1:7,  I.  0:'.2.  II.  421,  451,  580. 

"  1:8,  9, 1.  38.  141. 

"  1  :  10-12,  II.  225,  276,  425 

•'  1  :  10-21, 1.  439,  590,  H.  13,  618 


Ch.  1  :  13,  II.  258,  m.  68,  450. 

"  1  :  14,  H.  241,  479.  534,  III.  67,  450. 

"  1:  15,  16.  I.  119,11.249. 

"  1 :  18,  III.  309. 

"  1 :  20,  II.  308. 

"  1 :  21-23, 1.  40,  563,  596,  H.  38,  421. 

"  1 :  23,  n.  582,  588,  HI.  578. 

"  2,  3,  I.  398. 

"  2:2,  I.  589,  in.  189. 

"  2:7,  II.  408. 

"  2:  10,  U.  390,  HI.342. 

"  2:12-19,1.333,439. 

"  2:  16,  HI.  456. 

"  2  :  19-22,  III.  57,  432. 

"  2  :  20,  21,  I.  126,  338,  608,  659,  683. 

"  3, 1.  230. 

"  3  :  2,  I.  590. 

"  3:3,  I.  141. 

"  3:  4-6.  I.  77,  151,  405,  n.  23. 

"  3:7,  m.  272. 

"  3:9-11,111.342. 

"  3  :  10,   11,  I.  36,  38,  II.  12,  408,  580, 

618. 

"  3  :  13,  I.  617. 

"  3  :  20,  I.  92. 

"  3  :  21,  II.  421,  551. 

"  4  :  12,  IH.  578. 

"  4  :  20,  H.  183. 

"  4  :  30,  I.  439,  H.  154,  229,  241. 

"  5:5,  I.  601,  in.  530. 

"  5  :  23-30, 1.  632,  n  28,  HI.  40,  431. 

"  5  :  24,  I.  597. 

"  5  :  27,  H.  132. 

"  6:2,  3,  H.  442. 

"  6:8,  n.  388. 

"  6  :  12,  II.  12,  580,  IH.  188-9. 

"  6:17,1.118. 

PHILIPPIANS. 

Ch.  1  :  6-10,  I.  439,  442,  H.  42,  169,  183, 

412,  m.  324. 

"  1:8,  28,  29,  H.  739. 

"  1:9-11,1.117,132,111.324. 

"  1  :  20-25,  I.  474,  n.  401. 

"  1:26,  n.  211. 

"  1  :  27,  29,  III.  450. 

t<  2:3   II.  211. 

"  2  :  6-ll'  I.  3*69,  581,  m.  478. 

"  2  :  10-16,  I.  439,  442.  559,  560,  II.  180, 

410,  in.  479. 

"  2  :  11,  U.  180,  259,  300,  in.  532,  535. 

"  2  :  12,  H.  390,  HI.  450. 

"  2  :  13,  in.  342. 

"  2  :  17,  m.  89. 

"  3:3,  I.  404. 

"  3  :  10-21,  I.  53,  92,  442,  536,  U.  229, 

232. 

"  3  :  8-11,  n.  265,  308. 

"  3  :  11,  H.  239,  253,  283,  298,  307. 

"  3:  14,  11.390. 

"  3  :  20,  21,  I.  589,  II.  14,  258,  344,  395, 

477,  560,  616,  IU.  100,  103,  315,  322, 

324,  457,  575. 


628 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


Ch.  4:  3,11.387. 

"  4  :  5,  I.  471,  476,  II.  218,  344,  m.  324 

"  4  :  18,  III.  89. 

"  4:19,  m.  578. 

COLOSSIANS. 

Ch.  1  :  5,  II.  14. 

"  1  :  6,  HI.  117,  169,  192. 

"  1  :  9-11.  I.  132,  II.  13. 

"  1  :  12,  H.  249,  256. 

"  1:  13,  H.35,  HI.  188. 

"  1  :  15-19,  I.  559,  II.  257,  477,  in.  447- 

8,  530. 

"  1  :  16,  II.  618,  HI.  532. 

"  1  :  17,  HI.  479,  532. 

"  1  :  22,  H.  391. 

"  1  :  23,  II.  492. 

"  1  :  24,  I.  617. 

"  1  :  26.  27,  II.  23,  III.  309,  310. 

"  1  :  28,  H.  384. 

"  2:4,  HI.  100. 

*'  2  :  5-7.  IH.  272. 

"  2:8,  I.  132. 

"  2:9,  IH.  478,  530. 

"  2  :  13,  II.  393. 

"  2  :  16,  17.  H.  454,  m.  265-6. 

•'  3  :  1-4,  IH.  324. 

"  3:4,  5,  H  177,  344,  560,  III.  100,  322, 

575. 

"  3  :  4-24,  II.  376,  387,  390,  395-6. 

"  3  :  12,  I.  401. 

"  4.  11,1.  600. 

I.    THESSALONIANS. 
Ch.   1  :  2,  3,  in.  309. 
"      1:4,  I.  401. 
"      1  :  5,  I.  413.  447,11.209. 
"     1  :  9,  10.  III.  823 
"      1  :  10,  III.  3 111.  322-3. 
"      1  :  12,  111.310. 

"     2  :  12,  I.  414,  600,  659,  n.  38,  376. 
"     2  :  19.  20,  II.  209,  211,  384,  HI.  313, 

323,  575. 
"     3:3,  H  739,  HI.  184. 
"     3  :  12,  13,  H  390,  m.  323-4,  575 
"     3:13,11.175,209,297,318. 
"     3.14-17,11.318. 
"      4:8,  IH  193. 
"      4  :  11,  I.  473. 
"      4:  13-17,   II.  240,  318,  378,407,  HI. 

323. 
"     4:  14,16,  H.  154,  175,  373. 
"     4 :  15-17,  I.  474,  478,  536,  U.  172.  191, 

209,  211,  218,  229.  233,  247,  282,  291 

295,  299,   302-3,  314,  341,  397,    560', 

576,  741. 
"     4  :  16,  III.  59. 
"     4:17,  III.  159,  323. 
"     5,  I.  420. 

"     5  :  1-8,  III.  26,  108,  250,  323. 
"     5  :  2,   3,  II.  105,  186,   318,  365,   410, 

739. 
'•      5  :  2,  23,  I.  440,  HI.  42,  209;  211. 


Ch. 


Ch 


5  :  4-9,  I.  186,  HI.  323. 
5  :  5,  6,  I.  170,  IH  100. 
5  :  8.  9,  m.  450.  595. 
5  :  21, 1.  133,  m.  288. 
5  :  23,  HI.  324. 

II.    THESSALONIANS. 

1,  2,  I.  439,  H  104,  165,  170,  184,  208, 
etc.,  210,  302. 

1  :  1 ,  2,  IH  575. 

1  :  4,  5.  H  739. 

1  :  5-11, 1.  414,  600,  617,  619,  659,  739, 

H.  105,  240,  374,  376,  m.  28,  81,  323, 

396,  450. 

1  :  6-10,  H  384. 

1  :  7-9,  H  169,  171,  174,  176-9,  324, 

396,  454,  462,  HI.  323,  396. 

1  :  8,  H  508. 

1  :  9,  III.  400. 

1-10,  II.  590,  m.  323,  452. 

2,  II.  6^9,  etc.,  698.  707,  712,  713,  718, 
747,  HI.  117.  119,  215,  323, 

2  :  1,  I.  412,  H  171.  177,  187,  209,  221, 
408,  576,  762,  IH  60. 

2  .  1,  8,  9,  H  211,  519. 

2     1-14,  HI.  183,  250,  323. 

2  :  2,  I.  473,  492,  H  316,  410,  IH.  60. 

2  :  2,  3,  II.  324. 

2  :  3-12,  II.  216,  741. 

2  :  4,  II.  696. 

2:  5,6.  I.  171.  11.668,  HI.  250. 

2    6,7,  II.  701,  etc. 

2  :  7,  II.  328,  766-7,  772,  HI.  324. 

2.8,  IL  87,   105,  171,  186,  212,' 

HI.  113,  179,  186,245. 

2  :  8,  10-12,  H.  154,  169,  217,  721,  HI. 

193. 

2  :  9,  II.  740,  758,  III.  161,  164. 

2:  13,  IH.  451. 


'220, 


17.  II.  390. 
5.1.414,  H 
10,  I.  473. 
14,  I.  132. 


209,  m.  323. 


I.    TIMOTHY. 
Ch.    1  :3,  4.1.  112. 
"      1     3-10,1.133 
"      1  .  15,11.269. 
"      1  :  17,11.411,  631 
"     2-4,111.451. 
"     2     12,  II.  436,  444,  577 
"      2    16,  II.  47i. 
"     2  .  21,  11.390. 
"     3.1,  II.  4  3. 
"      3:15,  III.  56. 
"     3  :  16,  II.  390,  m.  478. 
"     4     1-3,   I.   134,  II.  338,  374,  384,  392, 

III.  123,  175.  193,  203,  323. 
"     4:6,111.241. 

"     4:8,  II.  395-6,  418,  579,  582,  585. 
"     4  :  10,  III.  193. 
"     4:  13-16.  I.  112,  HI.  324. 
'*     4:  16,  HI.  451. 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


629 


Cb.  5  :  21,  I.  402,  II.  619. 

"  5  :  23, 1.  72. 

"  5  :  24,  II.  384. 

"  6:3,  4,  I.  133. 

"  6  :  14,  H.  211,  476,  in.  100,  324. 

"  6  :  15,  H.  412. 

"  6  :  16,  H.  237. 

II.  TIMOTHY. 

Ch.    1  :  1,  m.  310. 
•<     1:7,  II.  471. 
"     1:8,  H.  617. 
"      1  :  10,  II.  211. 
"     1  :  15,  II.  379. 
"     1  :  16,  II.  89. 
"     2:2, 1.  640. 
"     2:8.  I.  354. 
"     2:10,  III.  193,  450-1. 
"     2  :  12,  H.  36,  ni.  323. 
"     2.:  15,  I.  67,  H.  146. 
"     2:  17,  18,  H.  218,  229,  234. 
"     2  :  20,  H.  87. 
"     3 :  1-13,  I.  132,  H.  105,  186,  218,  367, 

758,  HI.  124,  134,  175,  185,  203,  209, 

323-4. 
"     3  :  5,  in.  193. 
"     3  :  11,  12,111.  184,  193. 
"     3  :  12,  U.  739. 
"     3  :  14-17, 1.  70,  74,  116,  117,  132,  161, 

163,  in.  328,  451. 
"     4  :  1,  I.  224,  268,  414,  470,  H.  25,  41, 

105,  177.  211,  227,  355,  365. 
"     4  :  1-5,  in.  147,  185,  193,  241. 
"     4:1,  2,  8,  IH.  100,  314,  315,  322. 
"     4:3,  4, 1.  491-2,  634,  U.  105,  IH.  120, 

335. 
"     4:6,11.733. 

"     4  :  8,  n.  14,  211,  332,  IH.  323. 
"     4  :  10,  I.  589. 
"     4  :  18, 1.  600. 

TITUS. 

Cb.   1  :  2,  I.  179. 
"     1:3,  IH.  478. 
"     1  :  5,  L  134. 
"     2  :  11-13,  II.  344,  390,  III.  100,  103, 

110,  113,  322,  323-4,  451,  575. 
"     2  :  13.  I.  471,  577,  692,  H.  14,  211,  322, 

388,  m.  534,  541. 
"     2  :  14,  H.  140,  in.  431. 
"     3  :  5,  6,  II.  478,  HI.  73. 
"     3:8,  II.  390. 

HEBREWS. 

Ch.    1:1,2,  I.  446,  H.  201,  338,  411,  421, 
423,  425,  in.  69.  478,  532. 
"     1:3,  IH.  479,  530. 
"     1:4,  U.  618. 
"      1:5,  6,  I.  313,  n.  183,  257,  406,  546, 

618,  HI.  479. 
"     1:7,  U.  578. 
"     1  :  8,  n.  346,  631,  637,  m.  478. 


Cb.   4  :  10-12,  II.  519. 
"     1  :  12,  II.  195,  367. 
"     1  :  12-17,  II.  752. 
"     1  r  13,  II.  109. 
"     1  :  14,  H.  619,  DX  451. 
"     1  :  16,  I.  34. 
"     1  :  17,  U.  388. 
"     2,  II.  486. 
"     2:2,  H.  619. 
"     2:' 3-5,  HI.  451. 
"     2:4,  I.  92,  II.  758,  IIL  65,  70. 
"     2  :  5-9,  L  440,  U.  346,  405,  437,  598, 
620-1. 
2  :  6,  7,  L  572,  574,  614. 

8,  II.  142. 

9-11,  11.612,613. 

12,  n.  376. 

14,  II.  562,  m.  363. 

16, 17,  H.  604,  HI.  363. 

2,  5,  6,  III.  57. 

6,  H.  582,  IIL  311. 

7,  I.  70,  n  365. 

8,  II.  365,  527. 
11-18,  U.  454. 
12,  UL  280. 
1-11,  II.  368,  454. 

4  :  2,  I.  335. 
4  :  3,  I.  34,  440. 

9, 1.  440,  H.  453,  455. 

14,  I.  562. 

15,  U.612. 
6,  10,  II.  601,  612. 

12,  I.  151. 
14,  117. 
2,  U.  299. 
5,  II.  405. 
10,  H.  376,  391,  601. 

13,  14,  II.  137. 
17-19,  I.  177,  III.  311. 
18, 1.  179. 

7, 1.  50. 

7  :  14,  H.  604,  KL  363. 

7 :  15,  16,  H.  603. 

7 :  18,  22, 1.  326. 

7  :  21-25,  n.  601,  603. 

7  :  22-27,  UL  83. 

8  :  1,  U.  602. 
8  :  2,  II.  603. 
8  :  5,  U.  568. 
8  :  6,  I.  326. 
8  :  8,  L  293,  326. 
8  :  10,  m.  590. 
8 :  13, 1.  322. 

8  :  27,  HI.  458. 

9  :  1,  m.  284. 
9  :  2,  3, 1.  668. 
9  :  8,  9, 1.  70,  295,  m.  83. 
9  :  9-13,  n.  447  603,  m.  458. 
9  :  12,  H.  603. 
9  :  14,  I.  134,  n  603-4. 
9  :  15-17,  n.  322,  331,  HI.  458. 
9  :  16,  H.  293. 
9  :  22,  m.  431. 


630 


INDEX   OF   SCRIPTURE. 


Ch.  9  :  23,  HI.  459. 
"  9  :  24,  m.  61. 
"  9  :  26,  H.  425. 
"  9  :  27,  28,  II.  385,  HI.  60,  323. 
"  9  :  28,  I.  323.  440,  II.  142,  154,  181, 

221,  332,  m.  90,  160,  449. 
"  10  :  1,  II.  568,  in.  83. 
"  10  :  1-18,  m.  83. 
"   10  :  5,  H.  546. 
"10:  10-22.  HI.  458. 
"  10  :  12,  13,  I.  578,  HI.  363. 
"  10:  15,  L  70,  U.471,  in.  68. 
"10:  17,  n.  393. 
"  10  :  22,  I.  415. 
"  10:  25-37,  I.  440,  471,  476,  n.  14,  191, 

218,508,  HI.  107,  458. 
"  10  :  26,  m.  459. 
"  10  :  36,  37,  H.  344,  HI.  107,  324. 
"  10  :  38,  39,  m.  284. 
"  11  :  3,  H.  406. 
"  11  :  5,  H.  425. 
"  11  :  8-16,  1.309. 
"  11  :  10,  11,1.296,  m.46. 
"  11  :  13,  40,1.295,301,413. 
"  11  :  16,  I.  295. 
"  11  :  17-19,  I.  296,  310. 
"  11  :  19,  n.  229. 
"   11  :  27,  I.  137. 
"11  :28,  HI.  100. 
«'  11  :  35,  H.  261,266,  292,  307. 
"  11  :  39,  40,  H.  396. 
"  11  :  46,  11.249. 
"12:  1-13,  H.  612,  m.  341. 
"  12  :  2,  I.  369,  560,  582. 
"  12  :  3-4,  HI.  363. 
"  12  :  5-12,  I.  417. 
"  12  :  22-28,  I.  415,  600,  615,  n.  13,  240, 

446,  494.  618,  620,  HL42,  44,  46,  48. 
"  12  :  23,  II.  387,  609. 
"  12  :29,  HI.  81. 
"12:  35,  U.  169. 
"  13  :  8,  II.  603,  IH.  532. 
"  13  :  12,  m,  431. 
"  13  :  14, 1.  589. 
"  13:15,  16,  n  611,  m.  89. 
"  13  :  17,  H.  384. 
"  13  :  18.  IH.  478. 
"   13  :  20,  21,  H.  308,  390,  IIL  458. 

JAMES. 


Ch.  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  2 

"  2 

450 

"  2  :  14-26,  HI.  364. 

"  5  :  1-3,  HI.  129. 

"  5:  3,  8,  L  415,  476,  n.  423. 


1,  n.  67. 

2-4, H.  612. 

5,1.  117,  119. 

12,  I.  411,  n  577,  m.  450. 

17,  I.  179. 

18,  n.  319,  m.  185. 
21,  III.  327. 
1,  5.23,  IH.364. 
5,  I.  401,  600,  H376,  577,  IU.  310, 


Ch.    5  :  7,  8,  9,  H.  211,  218,  221,  344,  397, 
421,  IH.  324,  450. 

I.  PETER, 

Ch.  1  :  1,  2,  I.  401,  in.  169. 

"  1:2-13,  I.  413,  HI.  183. 

"  1  :3,  H.  299. 

"  1:3,  7, 13,  II.  396,  739,  m.  451. 

"  1:3,21,11.308. 

"  1:4,  5,  7,  13,  H.  531,  III.  450. 

"  1  :  4-6,  I.  446,  n.  14,  447,  739. 

"  1:5.  20,  II.  423,  HI,  147. 

"  1  :  7-15,  I.  597,  617.  H  177,  388,  390, 

395,  513,  612,  IIL  323-4,  575. 

"  1  :  9,  I.  415. 

"  1  :  10,  12,  I.  169,  440,  608,  HI.  313. 

"  1  :  11,1.70.283,11.  390. 

"  1  :  12,  I.  177,  H  618,  HI.  65,  447. 

"  1  :  13,  HI.  100,  311. 

"  1  :  16,  H.344. 

"  1  :  17,  II.  387. 

"  1  :  20,  I.  34,  446,   H   195,   224,  338, 

367. 

"  1:21,1.584. 

"  1  :24,  25.  H.  260. 

"  2:2, 1.  117. 

"  2  :  4-10,  H.  57. 

"  2  :  5-8,  I.  676,  683,  n.  577,  607-8,  611 , 

IH  89,  431-2. 

"  2:9,  10,1.393,401,  II.  140. 

"  2  :  13.UI.  12. 

"  3  :  18,  I.  53,  332,   U.  233,  257-8,  HI. 

"     3  :  20,  H.  266. 

"     3  :  22,  H  618. 

"     4:4,  5,  H.  385,  392. 

"     4:7,  I.  471,  476,  692,  H.  218,  HI.  168, 

182,  323. 
"     4:9,  U.  739. 
"     4:11,1.126. 
"     4  :  12,  13,  H.  388,  395,  513,   592,  597, 

739,  in.  324,  450. 
"     4:  17,  m.  57. 
"     5  :  1-4.  ni.  323-4,  450. 
"     5:4,  H.  396,  579,  IH.  100,  388. 

II.   PETER. 

Ch.  1  :  4,  H.  492,  HI.  432. 

"  1:9,  U.  415. 

"  1:10.1.401,413. 

"  1 :  11.  I.  171,  414,  600,  H.  120,   169, 

177,  196,  211,   374,   376,  560,  631,  IIL 

56,  310. 

"  1  :  16,  n.  169,  196,  211,  HI.  534. 

"  1  :  16-18,  II.  559,  560,  HI.  534. 

"  1:19,1.116-7,161,11.775. 

"  1  :  21,  I.  70,  74,  163,  173. 

"  2  :  1,  2,  I.  134. 

"  2  :  4,  H.  584,  621. 

"  2:9,  H.  324-5. 

"  3,  H.  428,  495. 

"  3  :  1-14,  m.  183. 


INDEX    OF    SCRIPTURE. 


631 


Ch. 

3:3,  4,  I.  84,  476,   H.  186,  337 

367, 

423,  431,  480,  III.  114,  115,  147, 

175, 

203. 

" 

3  :  4-12,  n.  211. 

" 

3  :  5,  m.  392. 

" 

3  :  7,  8,  n.  236,  367. 

" 

3  :  7-12,  H.  384.  390,  471. 

" 

3  :  8,  I.  240,  II.  366,  368,  III.  92, 

97. 

" 

3  :  9, 1.  414,  IH.  96. 

" 

3  :  10-13,  I.  415,  477,  686,  II.  169,178, 

219,  410,  506.  etc.,  513,  514,  524 

560. 

" 

3  :  11,  12,  HI.  314,  323-4. 

" 

3  :  12,  U.  370,  III.  100,  103,  309. 

" 

3  :  13,  II.  396,  446,, 479,  492,  499, 

500, 

502,  III.  42,  315,  324. 

" 

3  :  14,  HI.  324. 

" 

3  :  16,  1. 151. 

" 

3  :  17,  HI.  165. 

" 

4  :  4,  5,  II.  385. 

n 

4:12,  13,1.617. 

I.  JOHN. 

Oh. 

1  :  3,  n.  615. 
1  :  5,  H.  775. 

u 

1  :  18,  m.  185-6,  532. 

<( 

2  :  8,  II.  344,  390,  IH.  575. 

ti 

2  :  15,  17,  I.  589,  II.  431,  III.  170 

tt 

2  :  18,  I.  446,  476,  II.  195,  211, 

301, 

337,  423,  668,  697. 

u 

2  :  20,  27,  IH.  578. 

" 

2  :  22,  H.  696,  698,  741,  HI.  513,  576. 

" 

2  :  23,  m.  532. 

" 

2  :  28,  II.  384,  391,  III.  324,  450. 

" 

3  :  1-3,  I.  403,  536,  II.  14,  229, 

334, 

395,  477,  560,  III.  450,  457. 

tt 

3  :  8,  I.  562,  H.  537,  HI.  454. 

" 

3  :  23.  HI.  284. 

" 

4  :  1,  2,  I.  134,  570. 

li 

4  :  3,  n.  698. 

" 

4  :  15,  m.  478. 

(1 
tt 

4  :  17,  U.  384,  390. 

5  :  1,  IH.  571. 
5  :  9,  ni.  184. 

5  :  19,  m.  186,  188. 
5  :  20,  III.  478. 
5  :  21.  H.  749. 

II.  JOHN. 

Verse  1,13,  1.402. 

•« 

7,  1. 570,  69«. 

" 

8,  H.  391,591. 

tt 

9-11,  L  112,  132. 

JUDE. 

Verse  3,  14,  21,24,  HI.  451. 
"    6,  H.  584,  621. 
"    9,  n.  562,  621. 
"     14-16, 1.  608,  H.  175,  186,  198,  318, 

578,  766,  HI.  81,  323. 
"     18,  19,  II.  105,  423. 


REVELATION. 

Ch.  1-22,  m.  366. 

"  1  :  1,  I.  476,  H.  619,  III.  374. 

"  1:3,  I.  170,  173,  U.  733,  III.  108,  167, 

386. 

"  1  :  4-8.  II.  185,  in.  379. 

"  1  :  5,  6, 1.  559,  II.  257,  577-8,  581,607, 

III.  431. 

"  1  :  6-9,  n.  415,  589,  m.  27. 

"  1:7,  II.  178,   187,  IH.  186,  190,  323, 

377,  384. 

"  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  1 

"  2 

"  2 

"  2 

"  2 

"  2 

"  2 


8,  I.  300. 

9,  H.  36. 

10,  in.  95. 

13,  17,  HI.  379,  393. 

17,  1.536,  HI.  478. 

18,  II.  320. 
20,  III.  379. 
7,  U.  386,  in.  419. 

7,  11,  17,  29,111.379. 

8,  II.  267, 271. 

10,  II.  396,  579. 

11,  I.  476. 
23,  II.  388,  m.  478. 

2  :  25,  III.  324. 

2  :  26,  27, 1.  536,  589,  II.  104,  179,  318, 
359,  578,  753,  III.  28,  81,  189,  396. 

3  :  1,  III.  73. 

3,  II.  318,  HI.  324. 

5,  II.  384,  619. 

6,  13,  22,  III.  379. 

7,  8,  II.  351.  615.  III.  205. 
8-13,  III.  479,  532,  579. 

10,  H.  323, 406,  546. 
11, 1.  210,  U.  528.  591,  HI.  324. 

12,  II.  473,  528,  580,  HI.  48,  90. 

14,  UI.  478. 
17,  m.  129. 

19,  I.  417. 

20,  m.  284. 

3  :  21,   I.  349,  563,  589,  H.  177,  204, 
355,  357,  374,  577,  602. 

4  : 1,  2,  m.  25. 

4,  II.  579. 

7,  II.  320. 

8,  II.  185. 

11,  II.  437. 

5,  I.  351. 

6, 1.  615,  H.  320,  m.  73. 
9-14,  II.  300,  III.  431. 
10,  U.  446,  573,  577,  581,  607,  HL 

324. 

5  :  11,  12,  II.  618,  619. 

5  :  13,  HI.  535. 

6,  H.  686,  742,  m.  186. 

6  :  9-11,  1.413,  H.  397. 
6  :  10,  11,  m.  186. 

6  :  13-17,  1.446,  IL  165,  195,  HL  25. 
6  :  14,  H.  12. 

6  :  15,  16,  m.  395. 

7,  n.  323. 

7  :  4-9,  I.  404. 


632 


INDEX   OF    SCRIPTURE. 


11 
11 
11 
11 


12 
12 
12 
12: 


Ch.  7  :  9-17,  II.  282,  III.  535. 
"  7  :  13,  in.  590. 
"  7  :  14,  H.  738. 
"  7  :  15-17,  II.  615,  in.  90. 
«•  7:17,  in.  389. 
"  8:9,  in.  160. 
"  8  :  13,  II.  320. 
"  9:1,  2,  H.  706. 
"  9  :  11,  II.  618. 
"  9:18,1.446. 
"  9  :  20,  21,  H.  748,  IH.  161. 
"  10  :  6,  II.  411. 
"  10  :  7, 1.  105,  144.  152,  II.  183,  190, 

18, 104,  186,  459. 
"  11,  II.  357,706. 

3-7,  II.  739,  IH.  99. 
8,  II.  290. 
13-18,  II.  497,  516. 
15-18,  I.  208,  439,  466,  577,  H. 
109,  117,  121,  170,  179,  183,  187, 
295,  436.  499,  516,  631.  636,  658, 
HI.  16,56, 104, 185-6,  382, 530,  555, 
11  :  14,  II.  715. 
11  :  17,  II.  185,  300. 
11  :  18,  U.  264,  285,  396,  759,  IH. 
245,  396-7,  576. 
11  :  19,  III.  459. 

5,  n.  285. 
6-14,  ni.  99. 

7-9,  II.  12,  406,  546,  HI.  25. 
10,  III.  16,  396. 

13,  II.  687,  712,  715,  717,  738. 
13:1,11.527. 
13  :  1-10,  11.705. 
13  :  2,  n.  704,  758. 
13  :  3,  4,  H.  644,  696,  698,  704, 

13:4,  8,' 12,  H.  698,  m.  161. 

13  :  5-8,  I.  34,  300,  II.  106,  698, 

733  739 

13  :7,  IL  698,  723,  758,  765. 

13  :  8,  II.  387. 
11-18, H.  702. 
14,  II.  267,  746,  III.  161. 
15-17,  H.  268,  300,  664,  698. 
18,  HI.  99. 

14,  II.  322,  327,  335,  700,  715,  717, 
740,  746,  III.  160,  163,  186,  264. 

14  :  1,  II.  187. 
14  :  1-5,  II.  285,  315,  658. 
14  :  3,  H.  616. 

6,  7,  n.  705.  745. 
6-12,  II.  757. 

7,  II.  323. 
14  :  8,  II.  741,  III.  120, 142. 
14  :9-13,  II.  176,  177,  179,  286, 
483,  664-5,  686,  698,  705,  715,  738, 
HI.  161,189. 

14  :  14-20,  II .  167,  175,  180,  187, 
407,  576,  767,  m.  185. 
14  :  18,  HI.  81. 

14  :  19,  20,  H.  106,  377,  408, 
761-2. 


m. 


,  33, 
200, 
779, 
575. 


189, 


706, 
707, 


13 
13 
13 
13 


14 
14 
14 


720, 


322, 
745, 

222, 


654, 


Ch.  14  :  20,  III.  23. 
"  15,  II.  143,  286.  717. 
"  15  :  2,  H.  616,  740,  760,  762,  in.  372. 
"  15  :  3,  I.  597,  H.  226,  772. 
"  15  :  3,  4,  U.  300,  548,  740,  762,  m.  185- 

6,  372. 
"  15  :  6,  HI.  535. 
'«  15  :  15-19, 1.  673. 
"  16,  II.  742. 
"  16  :  1,  2,  II.  715. 
"  16  :  2,  II.  742. 
"  16  :  2,  6,  U.  286,  740,  756,  760,  in.  372. 

4,  II.  618. 

5,  n.  185. 
12,  II.  764,  III.  27. 
13-16,  11.374,  703-4,  706,  751,  753, 


16: 
16: 
16: 
16: 

760. 


16  :  14,  n.  106,  181,  406,  546,  765,  768, 

III.  27,  161. 

16  :  15,  II.  176,  186,  322,  331,  739,  HI. 

323. 

16  :  16,  H.  105,  181.  686,  761-2. 

16  :  18-21,  II.  495,  686. 

16  :  19,  II.  742. 

17,  U.  683,  etc.,  704-5,  707,  712,  717, 
755-6. 

17  :  4,  16,  HI.  12. 
17 :  8,  I.  34,  II.  723. 
17  :  9-12,  II.  643-4. 

17:  10-14,  H.  738,  751,  758. 

17  :  11,  II.  698,  705-6. 

17:  12-24,  I.  681,  II.  664,  752. 

17 :  14,  H.  578,  698,  767. 

17:  15,  16,  H.  707,  742,  m.  120,  142, 

161. 

17  :  17,  I.  177,  H.  742,  754. 

17  :  19,  II.  696. 

18  :  15-18,  II.  742. 

19,  I.  268,  394,  579,  II.  106,  109,  208, 
222,  345,  742-3,  753,  771,  HI.  191,  596. 

19  :  20,  I.  438,  II.  168, 170,  286. 
19  :  2,  n.  104. 

19  :  5,  6,  HI.  555. 

19  :  7-9,  U.  132,  171,  173,  183,  270,  346, 

527. 

19 :'  9,  HI.  45. 

19  :  10,  I.  169. 

19  :  11-29, 1.  249,  283,  536,  672,  II.  105, 

175,  180,  220,  378-9,  519,  576,  759,  766, 

III.  323,  382. 

19:  12,  III.  189. 

19:  13,1.110. 

19:  14,  11.318,  III.  81. 

19 :  15,  II.  714,  III.  189,  190,  372. 

19:  15-21,11.751,753,767. 

19  :  16,  II.  578. 

19  :  17-20,  n.  108,  120,  177,  374,  377, 

740,  m.  372,  389,  394. 

19 :  18,  19,  HI.  23,  27,  185,  189. 

19  :  19,  20,  I.  681,  U.  181,  270,  483,  664- 

5,  702,  765,  775,  HI.  121, 161,245. 

19  :  20,  III.  394. 

19  :  21,  IH.  400. 


INDEX    OF    SCRIPTURE. 


633 


Ch.  20,  II.  370. 
"   20  :  1-6.  I.  454,  459.  466,  488,  II.  142, 

149,  152,  173,  177,  247,  249,  264,  etc  , 

285-6,  288,  291,  293,  295,  299,  307,  315, 

hl9,  528,  583,  607-8,  628,  704-5,  III. 

324,  371,  382,  599. 
"  20:  4-6,  1.439,  589.  673,  11.323,  330, 

344,  376,  397,  575,  733,  738,  III.  17,  160, 

243,  245,  324.  575. 
"  20:  4,  H.  572. 
"  20:  5,  II.  247,  in.  262. 
"  20  :  9,  ni.  47. 
"  20  :  10,  II.  377,  III.  245. 
"  20:  11-15,  II.  190,  272, 

307,  362,  374. 
"  20:  13,  14,  11.402,492,  547. 
"  21,  22,  I.  246,  H.  145,  378,  499,  etc. 
"  21 :  1,  I.  686,  II.  396,  446,  500,  502,  524, 

etc.,  III.  42,  824. 
"  21  :  2,  I.  283,  II.  14.  III.  43,  50. 
"  21  :  2,  5.  II.  473,  493. 
"  21 :  3,  HI.  534,  591. 


280,  283,290, 


Ch.  21  : 
"  21: 
"  2L: 
"  21: 
"  21: 
"  21: 
"  21: 
"  21  : 
"  21: 
"  22: 
"  22: 
"  22  : 
"  22:' 

386. 
"  22: 
"  22: 
"  22: 
"  22: 
"  22: 

539. 


4,  I.  33,  300,  m.  190. 

7,  8,  II.  384,  528,  III.  284. 

10,  III.  324. 

12,  I.  404,  III.  88. 

14,  II.  585,  III.  271. 

16,  III.  47. 

22,  III.  44,  90. 

23,  II.  528,  in.  393. 
24-27.  III.  44,  596. 
1,  2,  II.  529,  III.  50. 
2-5,  9,  14,  19,  in.  44. 

5,  II.  444. 

7-12,  I.  471,  476,  692,  III.  323,  384, 

9,  in.  44. 

10,  II.  658. 

12,  II.  344,  388,  396,  III.  323. 

14,  III.  265,  419. 

16,  I.  339,  351,  II.  415,  418,  in. 


22  :  23,  I.  577. 


INDEX   OF 

AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC., 

QUOTED,  AND  TO  WHICH  REFERENCE  IS  MADE  IN  THE  WORK. 


The  number*  I.  II.  III.  denote  the  volumes,  and  the  figures  refer  to  the  pages  indicated. 


Abbey,  I.  606,  615. 

Abbot,  II.  730. 

Abbott  and  Conant,  I.  524. 

Abbott,  I.  147,  259,  268,  629,  H.  672,  in. 
580. 

Abdiel,  II.  367,  394. 

Aben  Ezra,  II.  609. 

Abrabanel,IH.  423. 

Ackerman,in.  392. 

Active  Christian,  The,  m.  256. 

Acuin,  II.  681. 

Ada  (Leila),  IH.  417.  419,  421,426. 

Adam  (Abbot),  IH.  277. 

Adams,  III.  78. 

Adams  (J.  Q.), III.  203. 

Adams  (Relig.  World),  II.  197,  468. 

Adler,  I.  115,  H.  54,  232,  HI.  415,  441. 

Adso,  II.  681,  694. 

Advance,  The,  11.421,  IH.  250. 

jEthiopic  Ver..  II.  473. 

Agassiz,  II.  488,  III.  497,  499,  510,  512. 

Agobard,  III.  408. 

Agrippa,  II.  54. 

Aikenhead,  III.  275. 

Ainswortb,  II.  303,  m.  419. 

Alberger,  IH.  147. 

Alexander,  I.  96.  160,  179,  246,  358,  569, 
588,  687,  H.  12,  78,  118,  123,  146.  191, 
225,  238,  277,  368,  403,  416,  424,  464-5, 
503,  556.  564,  627,  637,  772,  IH.  94,  220, 
418,  467,  553. 

Alexandrinus  Codex.  II.  426. 

Alger,  I.  115,  450,  H.  155,  167,  401,  HI. 
532 

Alfierio,  TL  677,  IH.  317. 

Allord,  I.  56,  76,  112,  172,  303,  367,  382, 
546,  570,  690,  695,  H.  27,  31,  43,  103,  207, 
218,  281,  291,  317,  322,  326,  351,  378,  412, 
414,421-2,438,  459,  464,  4G7,  470,480, 


483,  496,   512,  548,   566,  606,  647,  668, 

675,679,  682,  694,   701-2,  739,  744,  III. 

94,  106,  137,   151,   159,  192,   194-5,  239, 

305-6,  313,  322,  363,  367,  372,  374,  380, 

534. 
Alioli,  HI.  301. 
Allam,  HL  152. 
Alleine,  IH.  317. 
Allgemeine  Zeitung,  I.  160. 
Alliance,  Evang.,  I.  133. 
Allison,  H.  642. 
Almaric,  II.  677. 
Alstedius,  I.  538. 
Altingius,  III.  311. 

Alzog,  I.  259,  648,  II.  98,  HI.  201,  583. 
Ambrose,  I.  691,    II.  12,  215,  300-1,    322, 

398,  445,  450,  680-1,  695. 
Ambler,  III.  154. 
Amer.  Bible  Union  Com.,  II.  412. 
Amer.  Israelite,  II.  493. 
Amer.  Tract  Soc,  1.43,  HI.  196. 
Amnion,  I.  115,  182,  286,   H.  231,  481,  HI. 

347. 
Amner,  I.  568,  677,  H.  246,  262. 
Amour  (St.),  II.  676-7. 
Ampere,  III.  497. 
Amyrant,  I.  522. 
Anc.  His.   of  the   East,   I.   217,   236,   ITL 

428. 
Anc.  Sex  Worship,  I.  109. 
Anderson,  I.  524,  535,  IH.  195. 
Andreas,  I.  499,  H.  649,  694. 
Andrews,  II.  322,  567,  HI.  346. 
Andrews  (Bh.).  n.  678. 
Andrews  (Rev.),  III.  271. 
Angelom,  I.  59. 
Anglican  Ch.  Conf.,  I.  52. 
Annet,  I.  146. 
Ansbert.  II.  185. 


636 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Anselm,  H.  431. 

Aate-Nicene  Lib.,  I.  487,  II.  27,  236, 
451,  459,  571. 

Apocrapha,  II.  236,  250,  340. 

Apocraphal  books,  II.  572,  669,  675. 

Apost.  Constitutions,  II.  6S0. 

Apost  Fathers.  II.  215. 

Apollinaris.  I.  451,  491,  496,  II.  659, 
671,  m.  84. 

Appeal,  An,  HI.  235. 

Appeal  to  Christians,  II.  770. 

Appleton'a  Cyclop.,  I.  55,  122,  449, 
487,  4S9,  522,  II.  232,  366,  567,  643, 
III.  149,  156,  270,  568. 

Appleton'a  Journal,  III.  138. 

Aquinas,  II.  562,  681. 

Arabic  Ver.,  H.  189,  260,  467,  473, 
400. 

Aravanel,  III.  400. 

Arethas  (Cses.),  II.  398. 

Aretas,  II.  649,  G94. 

Argyle,  Duke  of,  I.  92,  557. 

Aristio,  I.  494. 

Aristotle,  I.  140. 

Armory,  The,  III.  511. 

Arnobius,  III.  193. 

Arnold,  I.  93,  111,  208,  335,  650,  II. 
191,  411,  730,  749,  III.  77,  149,  151, 
132,  371,  468,  490,  551. 

Arnold  (On  Antich.),  II.  678,  707. 

Arnold  (of  Villanova),  II.  677. 

Armilf,  III.  33. 

Arnul|)lius,  II.  676. 

Artour,  III.  147. 

Ascension  of  Isaiah,  11.572 

Asgill,  11.323. 

Asher,  I.  160. 

Assutnptio  Mosis,  I.  458. 

Atbanasius,  III.  512. 

Atbenagoras,  I.  473. 

Atlantic  Monthly,  III.  155. 

Auberlen,  I.  7,  8,  11,  15,  148,  229, 
267,  285,  296,  402,  449,  499,  526, 
657,  671,  678.  680,  692,  II.  78,  149, 
227,  292,  421,  425,  428,  472,  523, 
623,  628,  646.  667,  702,  721-2,  741, 
16,  84,  88,  107,  137.  159.  179,  195, 
279,  322.  327.  379,  414,  515. 

Audaens,  II.  62. 

Audi <rier,  II.  646. 

Augsburg  Confession,  1. 123,  637,  666. 

Augustine,  I.  29,  59,  94,  211,  229,  306, 
324,  326,  329,  378,  431,  499,  508, 
601,  615,  679,  682,  691,  II.  12,  72, 
215,  246,  249,  252-3,  258-9,  322, 
398,  430,  445,  450,  475,  4S2,  488. 
495,  503-4,  517,  566,  572,  585,  625-6, 
675,  681,  689,  694,  708,  734-5,  774, 
27,  42,  78,  133,  168,  173,  316,  393, 
499. 

Auriol,  III.  333. 

Austin,  III.  99. 

Aventinus,  II.  676. 


281, 


666, 


485, 
697, 


HI. 


118, 
174, 


251, 
531, 
190, 
575, 
III. 
241, 


313, 
523, 
194, 
367, 
490, 
671, 
III. 
400, 


7?.,  II.  709. 

Baader,  HI.  501. 

Babbage,  I.  93. 

Bachman,  II.  693,  m.  500. 

Bacon,  I.  94,  118,  124,  III.  443,  510,  511. 

Bacon  (Roger),  I.  452,  II.  178. 

Baxter,  in.  374. 

Bahr.  I.  159,  III.  83. 

Bahrdt,  I.  623,  III.  347,  524. 

Bailie,  1.531,  535,  HI.  220. 

Baird,  HI.  409. 

Baldwin,  I.  210,  221,  n.  98,  259,  647,  658, 
665,  687.  764,  768,  III.  12,  38,  372,  551. 

Balfour,  II.  204,  696,  III.  99. 

Ballou,  III.  154. 

Banner  of  Light,  III.  124,  145-6. 

Barbour,  I.  363,  382,  537,  542,11.  26,  92,  99, 
121,  2U4,  249,  278,  290,  313,  334,  350,  392, 
444,  457,  467-8.  492,  498,  567,  615,  645 
647,  656,  665,  696,  III.  133,  142,  163,  269, 
272.  372,  378,  462-3. 

Barclay,  1. 119. 

Bardesan,  H.  451. 

Barker's  Bible,  III.  24. 

Barkev,  II.  464. 

Baring  Gould,  I.  217,  IIL  155. 

Barnabas,  I.  286,  324,  406,  451,  495,  601, 
643,  H.  214,  40(5,  449,  503,  525,  483,  572, 
574,  589.  670,  IH.  27,  31,  267. 

Barnard,  IIL  147. 

Barnes.  I.  36-9,  53-6,  126.  140,  164,  171-3, 
178,  253-7,  263-4,  268,  293-5,  298,  300-2, 
309.  316,  327-8,  323,  332,  338,  359,  367, 
375,  383,  419,  429,  430,  441,  572,  582,  628, 
671-5,  678,  680,  691-4,  II.  12,  27-9,  45, 
64-9,  72-6,  78.  116,  146,  155,  168.  170-3, 
175,  188-9,  205,213,  219,  222,  229,  240-3, 
245-8,  252-8-9,  261-5-8,  270-1-2,  277-9, 
2*1,  293-7,  300-2,  314, 340-1,  351-9,  362, 
379,  384,  404-5,  408-9,  410,  415,  420-3, 
424,  430-1.  436,  461-2,  464-5,  473-9, 
480-6,  495-8,  501,  510,  519,  521,  551-4, 
559,  563,  567,  576-9,  580-4,  587,  591, 
602-3,  618,  620,  626-8.  631,  634,  647, 
652-7-9,  661,  etc.,  684,  696-7,  706.  715, 
734.  741,  751,  765,  IH.  22,  25,  39,  46, 
53-9,66-7,  99,100,  103-4-5-6,115,  123- 
9,  135,  150,  164-7,  176-7,  192-6,  200, 
235-9,  244,  255,299,300-1-5,  315,  322, 
331,  367,  372-4,  377,  417,  424,  431,  553, 
679. 

Baronius,  I.  509,  520,  II.  641,  676,  HI.   253. 

Barrett,  II.  165,232. 

Barrow,  I.  40,  220,  515,  n.  253,  475,  477, 
III.  69,  336,  571,  577. 

Bascombe,  III.  510. 

Bascom,  I.  371,  H.  362. 

Bassi,  I.  132. 

Basil,  H.  157,  IH.  84,  300. 

Basnage,  II.  59,  66. 

Bastian,  IH.  506. 

Bauer,  I.  9,  32,  60,  268,  433,  448,  458.  H. 
673,  675,  720,  723,  HI.  147,  486,  520,  525. 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


637 


Bauer  (Fr.),  1.534. 

Bauer  (Rev.),  HI.  138,  338. 

Baumgarten,  I.  483,  II.  466,  470,  675,  702 

III.  84,  88,  399,  498. 
Baxter  (M.),  1.249,  511,  II.  282,  322,  329, 

647,  659,  667,  674,  683,  685-6,  688,   716, 

719,  III.  51,  149. 
Baxter  (R.),  I.  691,  697,  II.  305,  333,  353, 

430,  HI.  42,  77,  275,  277,  316. 
Bayford,  III.  306. 
Baylee,  I.  73. 
Beaconsfield,  II.  55. 
Beale,  III.  497,  526. 
Beard,  II.  672. 
Beattie,  II.  363. 
Beaven,  III.  78. 
Beaver,  I.  453,  501. 
Becai  (R.),  11.467. 
Bechino,  in.  99,  148. 
Beck,  III.  179. 
Becker,  I.  623. 
Becon,  1.534,  H.  734. 
Bede,  I.  431,  H.  680,  697,  m.  133. 
Beecher  (E.),  I.  104,  III.  145,  195. 
Beecher  (H.  W.),  I.  54,  71,   115,  425,   475, 

586,  692,  H.  395,  493,  724,  m.  63,  134, 141. 
Beecher  (L.),  ILL  196. 
Beer,  n.  666. 
Beeston,  I.  534. 
Begg,  III.  48,  83,  195. 
Begin,  of  Christianity,   I.  476,  II.  40,  173, 

232,  262. 
Belcher,  I.  96. 
Bel  f rage,  m.  187. 
Belgian  Conf.,  II.  698. 
Bell,  II.  322,  465,  575,  679,  701,  HI.  111. 
Bellarmine,  I.  110,  112,  513,  647,  662,  II. 

641,676,  697,  in.  77. 
Bellett,  H.  472,  in.  51. 
Ben  Ezra,  I.  522,  H.  675. 
Bengel,  I,  168,  300,  367,  380,  499,  511,  531, 

538-9,   680,    H.  185,   191,  218,  317,  324, 

421,  446,454.  457,  475,  480-2,  496,   504, 

577,   606,  647,  669,  672-5,  677-9.  683-4, 

687,  697,  708,  742,  HI.  94,  99,  100,  106, 

135,   137,    159,  179,  194,    239,   256,  322, 

372,  374,  380,  387. 
Benjamin  (<>t  Tudala),  n.  203. 
Bennet,  I.  482,  495. 
Bennett,  in.  492. 

Benson,  I.  541,  U.  472,  517,  m  106. 
Bentius,  H.  322. 
Berakyah(R.),H.  467. 
Berg,  I.  174,  351,  551,  568,  678,  084,  H.  296, 

627.  764,  HI.  38,  57,   73,  135,   145,  168, 

219,  555. 
Berkeley,  I.  16. 

Berlenl/urger    Bible,  I.  534,  II.   292,  666. 
Bernard,  I.  70,  113,  254,  279,  630,  690,  II. 

398,675,679,111.41,  387. 
Bertholdt,  U.  247,652,  663.734,   HI.  416. 
Beza,  I.  33,  313,  405,  577,  II.  216,  322,  465, 

474,  476,  480-2,  487,  496,  677,  IU.  67. 


Bible  Examiner,  II.  278. 

Bib.  Repository,  I.  219,  II.  292    III.  397 

Bib.  Sacra,  1. 104,  354,  523,  662,  II.  36,  238, 
272,  567,  III.  257,  271. 

Bicheno,  I.  626,  II.  59. 

Bickersteth,  I.  30,  34,  63,  112,  164,  172 
285,  296,  326,  382,  415,  450,  534,  541,  549, 
678,  H.  59,  222,  247,  265,  347,  351,  367, 
401,  435,  459,  469,  487-8,  498,  518,  537-9, 
549,  528.  659,  668,  671-2,  674-6-7-8,  680, 
697,  734,  779,  III.  30.  46,  99,  105,  111. 
137,  148,  159,  176,  195,  233,  236,  239, 
241. 

Billroth,  I.  72. 

Bingham,  II.  458. 

Birks,  I.  70,  75-6,  92,  183,  677-8,  II.  322, 
350,  382,  456,  530,  537,  599,  628,  659, 
668-9,  III.  107,  195,  239,  372,  497-8. 

Bixby,  II.  727,  m.  509. 

Black,  I.  677. 

Black  (Mess,  and  Anti-Mess.),  II.  678  IU. 
416. 

Black burne,  II.  401. 

Blackstone,  III.  151. 

Blackwood's  Mag.,  II.  16,  99,  III.  145.  507. 

Blaike,  I.  123. 

Blair,  I.  63,  U.  427. 

Blaney,  II.  109. 

Bleek,  I.  486,  II.  202,  496,  675,  in.  363, 
400. 

Bliss,  III.  99. 

Bloomfield,  I.  36,  48,  171,  295,  II.  43,  45, 
72,  116,  189,  213,  328,  405-6,  409,  422, 
454-5,462,  465, 473-4.  480,  498,  519,  520, 
551-5,  559,  584,  637,  HI.  59,  184. 

Bloomsburv,  Lent.  Lects.,  III.  148, 195,  311. 

Blumenbach,  III.  497,  500. 

Bluntschli,  I.  651. 

Bochart,  II.  609,  III.  430. 

Boehm,  II.  496. 

Bochme,  III.  538. 

Boehmen,  II.  158,  III.  501. 

Bogue,  I.  382,  II.  451,  III.  178. 

Bohemian  Conf.  11.678. 

Bohn,  II.  681,  III.  84. 

Boliugbroke,  I.  288,  435,  II.  771,  III.  187. 

Bonar,  I.  31,  285,  296,  326,  415,  450,  II.  140, 
214,  219,  242,  521,  544,  668,  672,  679,111. 
37,  46,  84,  106,  196,  204,  137,  239,  332, 
376,  603. 

Bondinet,  II.  66. 

Bonet,  I.  412. 

Bonhommc,  II.  695,  764,  766. 

Bonnet  (C),  III.  54. 

Bonnett,  1. 94,  II.  488. 

Booth  royd,  II.  426. 

Boreth,  II.  681. 

Borger,  I.  307. 

Born  em  an,  II.  45. 

Bos-net,  1.490,  513,  IL  215,  673-4,  731,  HI. 
257,  275,  336. 

Boston,  I.  320. 

Boucher,  in.  497. 


638 


INDEX   OF  AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Bowen,  I.  81,  H.  459,  m.  99,  497. 

Bowen  (Prof.),  HI.  154. 

Bower,  I.  516,  520,  662.  H.  190,  641,  649, 
657,  671,  675-6,  681,  692. 

Boyle,  I.  94,  271,  HI.  399,  443. 

Boynton,  III.  154,  513. 

Bradford,  I.  531-4,  II.  482,  672,  III.  147. 

Bradlauiih,  H.  726,  III.  147. 

Brahe,  I.  538. 

Bramhall,  II.  673. 

Brant,  H.  679. 

Braune,  I.  570,  II.  339,  422,  682-3,  697. 

Breckenridge  (Dr.),  I.  459,  H.  425,  m. 
196. 

Breckenridge  (Prcf.),  H.  230,  637. 

Bremer,  III.  510. 

Brent,  H.  679. 

Brentius,  III.  108. 

Brenz,  I.  313. 

Bretchneider,  II.  212,  427,  m.  347. 

Brethren  at  Work,  I.  536. 

Brewster,  H.  223,  667. 

Brewster  (Sir  D.),  m.  152,  443,  446,  562. 

Bridge,  1. 154. 

Bridges,  II.  116. 

Briefs  on  Froph .  Themes,  HI.  273. 

Briggs,  I.  466,  431,  489,  492,  494,  497,  507-8, 
521,  529,  532.  535,  543,  548,  551,  554,  II. 
78,  220,  III.  253. 

Brightman,  I.  538,  680,  II.  292,  472,  622, 
687,  693,  IH.  372,  378. 

Brit.  Critic,  II.  262. 

Brit.  Cyclop.,  I.  523. 

Brit.  Quart.  Rev.  I.  84,  405,  H.  501,  HI. 
146,  467,  510. 

Britten  (Mrs.),  IH.  146. 

Britton,  III.  145. 

Brookes  (Dr.  J.  H.),  1.56, 171,  382,  450,  482, 
491,  499,  523,  549,  553,  657,  II.  28,  101, 
113,  198,  206,  222,  292,  298,  300-1,  317, 
322,  324-5,  329,  367,  393,  448,  467,  469, 
488,  498,  516,  518,  530,  628,  657,  659,  661, 
660-7,  C68,  683,  694,  697,  700,  702,  717, 
725,  IH.  107,  154,  168-9,  170,  186,  195, 
201,  236,  239,  250,  253,  278,  305-6,  313, 
318,  320,  327,  329,  333,  374. 

Brooks  (Rev.  J.  W.),  I.  49,63,  149,  164, 
172,  285,  297,  326,  431,  440,  451-2,  480. 
484-7,  491,505,  514,  518,  524.  534-5,  611, 
626,  643,  678,  682,  691,  II.  33,  48,  65,  72-8, 
89,  162,  219,  246-7,  265,  349,  394-8,  441, 
448-9,  450,  469,  487.  498,  504,  511,  565-8, 
672-4,  676-7,  679,  680,  708,  731,  739,741, 
III.  48,  105,  137, 176,  195,  241. 

Brothers,  HI.  99. 

Brougl.ton,  H.  538,  672. 

Browne  (Archd.),  III.  106. 

Browne  (Bh.),  II.  76,  III.  107. 

Browne  (Fsls.),  II.  170. 

Browne  (Sir  Th.),  I.  174,  678,  H.  171,  237, 
430,  451,  523,  678,  681,  IH.  77,  101,  113, 
201,  315,  337. 

Brown  (Ch.  Sec.  Coming),  I.  98,  335,  400, 


431,  477,  489,  534,  589,  608,  615,  671,683, 
694-5-6,  II.  26,  43,  55,  76.  88,  97,  140, 
147-8,  153-5,  172,  189,  192,  117-8,  221-3, 
237,  247,  263,  272,  279,  283,  285-6,  288, 

298,  344,  349,  362,  370,  381-2,  384,  407, 
424,  436-7,  446,  455,  470,  478,  480,  510, 
514,  517,  521,  530-1,537-8,  540-2,  544, 
556,  564,  573,  587,  601,  603,  622,  626, 
637,  733,  in.  17,30,  37.  60-1,  68,  73,83, 
94.  106,  116,  135,  159,  168,  176,  183,  193, 
202,  211,  219,  221,  234-5,  244,   255,  208, 

299,  312,  314,  321,  331. 

Brown  (Evang.),  II.  27,  321,  324,  564,  682. 

Brown  (J.  Allen),  I.  478,  526,  540,  U.  237. 

Brown  (J.),  II.  104. 

Brown  (Messiah),  III.  415-6. 

Brown  (N.),  11.430. 

Brown  (Fre-Mill.),  HI.  99. 

Brownson,  HI.  509. 

Bruckner,  III.  60. 

Bruno,  II.  237,  III.  446. 

Bruys  (Peter  de),  I.  676. 

Bryant,  I.  382,  538,  III.  498. 

Bryce,  II.  643. 

Bucer,  II.  322,  677,  III.  336. 

Buchanan,  II.  66. 

Biichner,  I.  85,  III.  147,  291,  500,  506. 

Buck,  I.  488,  537,  II.  421.  452,  III.  268. 

Buck  (Harm,  and  Exp.),  III.  333. 

Buckingham,  III.  152. 

Buckland,  III.  497,  501. 

Buckle.  I.  45,  648,  II.  95,  261,  646,677,  733, 

III.  78,  141, 150,  275. 
Buddeus,  I.  120. 
Burkunin,  III.  154. 
Bull,  I.  454,  490,  II.  539,  III.  346. 
Bullinger,  I.  322,  H.  677,  IH.  176,  317. 
Bungener,  I.  601. 
Bunsen,  I.   Ill,  352,  656,11.  118,  724,  IH. 

141.210,391,  432. 
Bun  van,  I.  71,  531,  540,  687,  II.  459,  471, 

III.  36,  49,  135,  195,  270,  317. 
Burchell,  II.  541.  711. 
Burdick,  II.  272,  283,  III.  42. 
Burgh,   II.  285-6,  509,  659,  673,  675,  683, 

702,  III.  374. 
Burke,  I.  648,  II.  742. 
Burkitt,  III.  105. 
Burmeister,  III.  497-8. 
Burnet,  I.  126,  313.  450,  498,  514,  531,  697, 

II.  235,  238,  448,  451-2,  474,  521,  627, 

711,  III.  99,  270,  501. 
Burns,  I.  33. 
Burns  (Trav.),  11.66. 
Burr,  I.  145. 

Burritt.  II.  113, 192,  206,  IH.  152,  256,  300. 
Burt,  I.  227. 

Burton,  I.  20,  483,  II.  182,  535. 
Bush,  1. 15,  49,  382,  425,  427,  443,  450.  460, 

472,  477,  490-2,  505.  513,  516,  548,  II.  12, 

96,   149,  230-1-2,  235,  239,  242,  244-5, 

256,  ,265,  271-2,  278,  287,  292,  354,  368, 

379,  400-4,  424,  448,  449,  451,  462-4-5, 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


639 


467,  517,  525,  539,  554,  581-3,  587,  609 

622,  628.  635,  638,  710,  III.  135,  174,  177, 

229,  372,  399,  400,  432. 
Bushnell,  I.   101-4,   118,   II.  158.  619,  III. 

75,  134,  165,  281. 
Butler,  in.  467. 

Butler  (Apoc),  II.  284.  303,  444,  575,  697. 
Butler  (Bh.),  I.  70,  83,  93,  137,  145,  149, 

155-6,  540,    II.  239,  488,  531,  598,  III. 

208.  510. 
Buxtorf,  II.  404,  669. 
Byant,  m.  195. 
Byron,  H.  541,  HI.  284. 

Cabell,  ILL.  500. 

C.  C,  H.  321. 

Caius,  I.  454,  485,  497,  502,  HI.  367. 

Calixtus,  H.  677,  HI.  336. 

Calla,  I.  104. 

Caiman,  II.  69. 

Calmet,  L  56,  216,  682,  H.  66,  78,  215,  236, 

430,  673,  677,  706,  m.  599. 
Caiovius,  I.  313,  382,  IL  322,  474,  656. 
Calvert,  HI.  148. 
Calvin,   I.  54,  120,  325,  380,  527,  628,  649, 

667,   686,  H.  27,  29,   120,  216,  252,  277. 

322,  394,   415,    430,   435,  445,  454,  463, 

465.  480,  482,  484,  488,  512,  584,588, 672- 

3,  702,  in.  23,  60,  69,  94,  105-6,  151, 165, 

168,  175-6,  249,  275,  322. 
Cameron,  II.  399,  668. 
Campanella,  II.  124. 
Campbell,  I.  98,   145.  283,  298,   302,   406, 

566,  n.  45,  207,  430,  438,  473^,  HI.  59. 
Campbell  (Alex.).  I.  650,  H.  78. 
Campbell  (Th.),  11.541. 
Candlish,  I.  76,  299,  III.  106. 
Cano,  II.  678. 
Canstein,  I.  11. 
Carey,  H.  66. 
Carion,  III.  99. 

Carleton,  H.  246,  281,  421,  464. 
Carlisle  (Earl  of).  III.  101. 
Carlyle,  II.  720,  in.  436,  486. 
Carnovan  (Lord),  II.  750. 
Carpenter,  I.  94,  157.  H.  750,  HI.  145,  205, 

497,  506,  508. 
Carpzov,  II.  481. 
Carson,  I.  74,  H.  342,  HI.  539. 
Cartwricrht,  I.  650,  II.  322,  III.  317. 
Caryll,  I.  535. 
Casali  (Hubert  de),  H.  676. 
Cassell,  II.  481. 
Cassiodorus,  II.  571. 

Castellar,  I.  88,  221  II.  646,  720,  III.  216. 
Castellio,  I.  62,  EL  219,  474. 
Catechism,  Edw.  YI.'s,  H.  734. 
Catechism,  Luther's,  I.  269. 
Catherine  (St.),  HI.  178. 
Celsus,  I.  305,  426,  H.  56,  95,  680,  HI.  357, 

475,  483,  490,  518. 
Chadbourne,  III.  510. 
Chad  wick,  n.  726,  730. 


Chaldee  Ver.,   TL.  131,  219,  254,  277,  669, 

748,  m.  27.  4C0,  553. 
Chalmers.   I.   101,    155,  295,   540,   557,  TL. 

188,  242,  292,  430,  435,  446,  519,  770,  HI. 

36,  195,  204,  443-4,  446,  497,  510,  562. 
Chambers,  EH.  392. 
Chambers's  Cyclop.,  I.  449. 
Chambers's  Journal,  II.  429. 
Chandler,  I.  36,  307,  682,  III.  408. 
Chapell,  II.  681. 
Chaplin,  EI.  246. 
Charnock.H.  430,  485. 
Chase,  IH.  106,  149. 
Chateaubriand,  II.  751. 
Chemnitz,  II.  474,  476. 
Cheny,  TL.  730. 

Chester,  TL.  322,  679,  IH.  137. 
Chicago  Interior,  EU.  139. 
Child,  III.  510. 
Childs,  Ed.  145,  147. 
Chillingworth,  I.  56,  110,  135,    450,   452, 

458,  483,  513, 515-6. 
Choate,  III.  568. 
Ch.   Herald.  I.  432,  TL.  324,  575,  682,  688, 

741,  779,  EH.  38,  51,  100, 155-6,  273,  326, 

409. 
Ch.  Intelligencer,  I.  129,  II.  296,  344,  En. 

318. 
Ch.  Instructor,  TTL.  179,  215. 
Ch.  Ministry,  III.  193. 
Ch.  Observer,  TTL.  188. 
Ch.  Philanthropist,  II.  154. 
Ch.  Pulpit,  I.  00. 
Ch.  Review,  HI.  501. 
Ch.   Union,  I.   71,  89,   115,  129.  226,  302, 

475,  586,  692-3,  EC.  40,  111,  173,  200,  232, 

262,   446,   493,  537,  IH.  63,  66,  101,  142, 

150.  158,  201,  213,  312,  511,  512. 
Ch.  Weekly,  IH.  141. 
Ch.  World,  H.  697,  771,  IH.  201. 
Christlieb,  I.  32,  70,  76,  95,  137,  140,  II.  4C, 

110,  292,  716,  723,  725,  758,  IH.  30,  149, 

163,  196,  278,  495,  515,  524,  528. 
Christoffel,  I.  124. 
Chronicles  of  Henry   of   Huntingdon,   EL 

573. 
Chron.  of  St.  Denis,  EL  642. 
Chrysostom,  I.  382,  431,  EL  72,  189,  215, 

218,  322,  398,  430,  435-6,  445,  482,  504, 

530,  555,  568,  671,  680-1,  689,  694,  699, 

701,  746-7,  EH.  78,  94,  192,  300,  512. 
Church  of  England,  1. 110,  412. 
Chytrceus,  H.  457,  HI.  99,  176. 
Cicero,  H.  400,  521. 
Cin.  Commercial,  I.  86,  160,  352. 
Cin.  Enquirer,  I.  232,  779,  H.  428,  HI.  147, 

209. 
Cin.  Gazette,  I.  217,  425. 
Cin.  Times,  HI.  154. 
Clamagerau,  H.  231. 
Clark  (R.  W.),  II.  464. 
Clarke  (Man  Immort.),  H.  402,  433. 
Clarke  (Sac.  Lit  ),  H.  491,  496,  ILL.  206. 


040 


INDEX    OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Clarke  (Ten  Religions),  I.  288,  301,  307, 
310,  400,  II.  59,  155,  262,  521,  IH.  207, 
209,  393. 

Clarke  (On  Lact  ),  II.  458. 

Clarke  (Com.),  1.36,  313,  381,  11.44,  61, 
77-8-9,  109,  158,  213,  236,  250,  254,  256, 
266,  277,  354,  357,  404,  408,  421,  438, 
446,  457,  465,  474,  483,  488,  496,  504, 
580,  587,  593,  669.  672,  710,  732,  734, 
737,  762-3,  769,  III.  33,  35,  100,  106, 
150,  388,  392,  395-6,  399. 

Clarke  (Diss,  on  Dragon),  II.  668. 

Clarke  (Propli.  Rec),  II.  676. 

Clark  (Mill.),  in.  320,327. 

Clark  (Lit.  Liv.  Age),  III.  202. 

Clark  (D.  W.),  IH.  61. 

Clarkson,  III.  152. 

Claude,  I.  145. 

Clayton,  III.  501. 

Clergy  of  Liege,  II.  676. 

Clelland,  I.  353. 

Clemens  (Alexd.),  I.  431,  451,  496-7,  507, 
H.  452,  671,  675.753. 

Clemens  (Rom.),  H.  236. 

Clement,  I.  48,  451,  473,  482,  494,  600,  II. 
27,  194,  259,  277,  442,  450,  in.  101,  105, 
193,  406. 

Clementines,  II.  670. 

Clericus,  II.  491. 

Clifford,  II.  428,  III.  155. 

Clinton,  II.  459,  III.  99. 

Clutz,  III.  141. 

Coan,  HI.  145. 

Cobbe,  I.  566. 

Cobbe  (Miss),  III.  512. 

Cobden,  II.  770. 

Cocceius,  I.  59,  61,  285,  II.  322,  368,  472, 
474,  496,  646. 

Cochrane,  1. 354. 

Cocker,  III.  206,  500. 

Coben,  II.  779. 

Cogswell,  II.  154. 

Coke,  I.  540,  II.  472,  in.  106. 

Colani,  I.  189,  II.  165. 

Coleman  (Antiq.),  III.  33. 

Coleman  (Infid.),  HI.  492. 

Colenso,  I.  160,  286,  III.  471. 

Coleridge.  I.  66,  650,  n.  Ill,  in.  130. 

Collyer,  I.  96. 

Colyer,  III.  148. 

Commodian.  I.  491,  496,  II.  450,  565,  671. 

Communication  from  Tom.  Paine,  HI.  145. 

Comprehensive  Com.,  II.  204, 406,  470,  530. 

Compte,  II.  720,  727-8-9,  750,  IH.  130, 187, 
508. 

Conant,  II.  417. 

Concord,  Book  of,  I.  110. 

Confession  of  Neth.,  I.  110. 

Confession  Belvit.,  I.  110. 

Confession  Fr.  Ref.  Ch.,  II.  672. 

Conrad,  I.  525. 

Conrad  (of  Mantua),  HI.  178. 

Conrade,  I.  538. 


Conte,  H.  728. 

Contemp.  Review,  I.  44,  157,  692,   U.  143, 

431,  474,  723,   HI.  137,    146,    156,  158, 

206,  277.  497-8. 
Conway,  I.  160,  352. 
Convbeare  &  Howson,  I.  472,  634,  II.  324, 

III.  78. 
Cook,  I.  78,  82,   94,   217,  H.  232,  488,  779, 

HI.  510,  534. 
Cookman,  I.  557. 
Cooper,  III.  148. 
Cooper    (Rev.   Dr.),    I.  626,  II.  379,    380, 

393,  UI.  327. 
Copland,  n.  401. 
Coptic  Ver,  III.  301. 
Coqueral,  I.  62. 

Coracion,  I.  491,  496.  506,  H.  671. 
Cornhill  Mag.,  III.  201. 
Corrodi,  I.  318,  450,  486,  489,  n.  144. 
Council  of  Nice,  I.  491,  518. 
Council  of  Gap,  II.  220. 
Cowles,  n.  625,  III.  84,  392. 
Cowper,  H.  434,  459. 
Cox,  I.  482,  514,  524,  534,  II.  190,  367,  451, 

498,  504,  731,  HI.  107,  176,  195,  236,  239, 

312,  317,  400. 
Craig,  III.  583. 
Cramer,  II.  220,  491,  IH.  95. 
Cranmer,  I.  531,  541,  691,  697,  II.  216,  672, 

677. 
Cranmer  Bible,  III.  301. 
Craven  (Rev.  Dr.),   I.  40,  52,  283,  535,  549, 

557,  H.  30,  34-5,   36,  38,  43,  46,  78,  190, 

219,  220,  292;  307,  334,  366,  403,  471,  549, 

567,  581,  624,  740,  749,  III.  52,  108,  132, 

178,  320,  327,  374,  380,  384,  386. 
Craven,  HI.  147. 
Crawford,  I.  145,  II.  66. 
Creation  and  Redemption,  II.  307. 
Credner,  II.  363. 

Creed  of  Christendom,  The,  HI.  580. 
Cremer,  I.  137. 

Cressener,  I.  538.  II.  646,  668,  672. 
Crit.  Kng.  Test.,  I.  171,  II.  411,  519,  HI.  39, 

41,50,  2o«J. 
Crit.  and  Exp.  Com.,  U.  272,  658. 
Crocius,  II.  679. 
Croly,  II.  687,  693. 
Cromwell,  II.  573. 
Crooke,  III.  145. 
Crool,  I.  625,  in.  148. 
Crosby,  I.  137,535. 
Cross  I. y,  m.  36,  49,  195. 
C.  S.  B.,  U.  296. 
Cud  worth,  11.313,  III.  430. 
Camming,  I.  382,  511,  515,  678,  691,  n.  12, 

83,  433.  4-i 6,  472,  492.  498,  510,  517,  573, 

657,  695,  697,  778,  III.  28,  46,  78,  92,  107, 

137,  149,  195,  213,  289. 
Cunningham.  I.  382,   II.  195,  367,  459,  645, 

647,  668,  672,  686-7,  III.  99,  148,   169, 

195   372 
Curry,  IL  278,  HI.  338. 


INDEX   OF  AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


641 


Curtis,  m.  447. 

Cuvier,  HI.  405,  497.  500-1. 

Cvanthropos,  HI.  1H9. 

Cyclop.  Bib.  Lit..  II.  678. 

Cyril,  I.  425,  682,  II.  22,  215,  220,  568,  671, 

673,  675,  680-1-2,  694. 
Cyprian,  I.  329,  431,  491,  496,  691,   II.  215, 

450,  457,  640,  671,  III.  276,  408. 

Da  Costa.  II.  470,  HI.  148,  421. 

Dahler,  II.  259. 

Dajile,  III.  278. 

Dallas,  III.  107,  195. 

Daille,  II.  452,  487,  in.  346. 

Damascene,  John,  H.  680,  694. 

Dana,  III.  497. 

Danseus,  II.  672. 

Oanbauer,  II.  292,  481. 

Daniels,  III.  145. 

Dante,  II.  (542,  676. 

Danville  Tribune,  III.  163,  179.  204. 

Darbv,  II.  22,  668,  Gb3,  in.  312. 

Darwin,  U.  726-7,  m.  281,  291,  496-8, 
506-8. 

Darsilius,  II.  676. 

Datbius,  in.  392. 

DAubigne.  I.  54.  84,  111,  120, 125,  131,  508, 
521,  525,  649,  650,  6*0.  682,  U.  117,  216, 
642,  677,  III.  70    177,  206,  277,  551. 

Daubuz,  I.  538,  680,  II.  472,   518,  672,  693, 

ni.  57. 

Davenport,  I.  541. 

Davidson,   II.  Ill,  507,  622,   m.  135,  349, 

371,  382. 
Davies,  H.  693,  HI.  138. 
Davis,  I.  75,  351,  678,  II.  121,  418,  674,  in. 

146,  165,  372. 
Davison,  1.59,  164,  168,  305. 
Dawson,  III.  291,  497,  499,  504.  509. 
Dean  of  Westminster,  n.  415. 
Decl.  of  Faitb  (Congreg.),  I.  124. 
Decl.  of  Faitb,  H.  637. 
De  Cormenius,  U.  124. 
De  Dieu.  II.  471. 
Deems,  III.  509. 
De  Hoveden,  II.  220. 
Deitricb.II.  702. 
Delitzscb,  I.  31,  229,  285,  531.  552.  f,17,  671, 

H.  104,  14r,,  159,  224.  250,  277,  292,  416. 

417,  425  449,  469,  472,  482,  485,  496,522, 

530,  562.  582,  666,  679,  734,  743,  749,  753, 

762,  772,  779,  HI.  24.  123,   159,  189,  195, 

297,  397,  414,  497,  515. 
De  Lvra,  I.  382. 

Demarest,  II.  33,  472,  III.  107,  195. 
Denny  (Sir),  H.  659,  683,  HI.  195. 
Denton,  III.  147. 
Deprez,  I.  372,  443,  451.  622,  II.  166,  HI. 

116,  235,  241,  etc.,  867. 
Des  Cotes,  II.  231. 
De  Wette,  I.  72,  159,  286,  628,   U.  45,  72, 

237,  414,  474,  480,  482,  582,  652,  689,111. 

94,  135,  159,  301,  347,  372,  427,  486. 


Devlingius,  II.  474,  476. 

D'Hallev,  III.  501. 

Diaglott,  H.  326. 

Dick,   I.  72,  76,  H.  430,  HI.  54,  61,  446' 

562. 
Die.  Relig.  Knowl.,  I.  524. 
Didron,  I.  118. 
Dietricb,  I.  126. 
Dietlieu,  II.  415. 
D' Israeli,  I.  20,  650,  II.  775,  HI.  99,  149, 

413. 
Dillmar,  m.  501. 
Diodati,  II.  474. 
Dionvsius,  I.  454,  485,  497,  502,  506-7,  m. 

367. 
Divine  Footprints,  I.  160. 
Dixon,  I.  217. 
Dobbs,  HI.  136. 
Dod,  III.  145. 
Dodgson,  I.  483. 
Doderlein,  II.  464,  HI.  347. 
Doddridge,  I.  53,  284,  307,  U.  51,188, 

406,  446,  465,  471,  475,  480,  482-3, 

579,  672,  HI.  196. 
Dodwell,  I.  450,  482,  II.  236,  306. 
Doellinger,  1. 118,  522, 548,  677,  H.  220, 

647,  649,  673,  676-7,  681,  694,  734, 

178. 
Doellingius,  II.  734. 
Dolcino,  m.  178. 
Donaldson,  I.  470. 
Donnegan,  II.  212. 
Dorner,  I.  7,  12,  16,  19,  110,  112,  125, 

158,  166,  384,  415,  427-8,  464-5,  489, 

552,  571,  636,  II.  307,  430,  493,  630, 

270,  326,  411,  418,  534,  538,  559. 
Doten,  III.  145,  147. 
Doten  (Miss.),  III.  124. 
Douav  Ver..  III.  145,  404. 
Douglas,  I.  98. 
Douglas  (Bli.),  m.  77-8. 
Downame,  II.  672. 
Draper,  I.  78,  1G0.  II.  15,  59,  400,  443,  690, 

724,  733,  in.  134,  138, 150,  205,  257,  281, 

447,  471.  500,  503-9. 
Draseke  H.  25. 

Drummond'  L  458  538,  IH.  401. 
Dublin  Univ.  Mag..  HI.  233. 
DuBois,  Revmond.  III.  510. 
Duff,  IH.  106,  333. 
Duffield  (Dr  ),  I.  498,  540,  549,  n.  211,  219, 

540,  IH.  177,  195. 
Duffield  (Prof.),  IH.  106,  196,  327. 
Duke  of  Argyle,  III.  498,  500,  510,511. 
Duke  of  Mancbester,  II.  272,  544,  563,  ITL 

84,  195. 
Duke  of  Somerset,  1. 197,  IH.  224,  483. 
Dunn,  I.   56,  112,   115,   119,    183,  518,  H. 

227. 
Dunraven,  III.  144. 
Dnpin,  II.  518,  641. 
Dupuis,  m.522. 
Durbin,  I.  540. 


283, 
498. 


469, 

m. 


154, 
526, 

m. 


642 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,   ETC. 


Durell,  HL148. 

Durham,  H.  530. 

Durv,  III.  33G. 

Dusierdieck,  U.  627-8. 

Du  Veil.  H.  322. 

Dwiglit,  II.  231,  III.  39,  177. 

Dykes,  ni.  339. 

Eadie,  I.  76. 

Eaton,  I.  97,  145-6,  154,  200,  460,  492,  II. 
426,  720,  m.  192,  205. 

Ebaugh,  I.  450,  547. 

Eberhard,  II.  676-7. 

Ebrard,  1.68,  75,96,256,275,352,  366,  3S0, 
382,  432,  449,  458,  658,  680,  701,  II.  25, 
97,  190,  214,  291,  421,  472,  475,  530,  556, 
667,  687,  IH.  79,  106,  352,  380,  497-8, 
5L5. 

Ecce  Deus.I.  196,204,  023,  IH.  223. 

Ecce  Deus-Homo,  III.  257. 

Ecce  Homo,  I.  258,  261,  601,  621,  623-4, 
665,  699,  etc.,  700,  HI.  223,  494,  577. 

Eccles,  Mag.  III.  201. 

Eckar.lt,  III.  163. 

Eckerman,II.  231,  404,  IH.  515,  569. 

Eckbart.I.  59. 

Eclectic  Mag.,  II.  429,730,746,  III.  51,  145, 
155,  157,  446,  498. 

Eclectic  Review,  II.  59,  143. 

Edeisborn,  II.  59. 

Edelman,  I.  197. 

Edersheim,  III.  148. 

Edinburgh  Review,  1. 147,  453,  HI.  187. 

Edmonds,  in.  124,201. 

Edrehi,  II.  66. 

Edward  VI. 's  Cat.  1.34. 

Edwards,  I.  174,  195,  248,  257,285,  320,534, 
671,  II.  165,  16S,  272,  433,  4:57,  442,  444, 
488,  501,  515,  520,  530,  541,  IH.  46,  177, 
272,  538. 

Egbert,  11.412. 

Eginhard,  II.  641-2. 

Eichborn,  I.  56.  III.  371,  400. 

Eisenheimer,  III.  83. 

Eisenmenger,  I.  48,  II.  235,  669. 

Elam,  III.  498,  500. 

Ellicott,  I.  49,  59,  66,  76,  78,  II.  218,  317, 
482,  675,  701-2,  III.  107,  195. 

Eliezer,  II.  448. 

Ellinger,  HI.  566. 

Eliot  (G.),  H.  55,  IH.  148,  274. 

Eliot  (J.),  I.  541. 

Elliott,  II.  66. 

Elliott  (Hone  Apoc),  I.  70,  76,  141, 382,  485, 
505,  521,  524,  549,  611,  678,  682,  U.  216, 
292,  349,  411,  450-1,  459.  472,  498,  509, 
628,  645,  647,  652,  657,  668,  672,  686-7, 
692-3,  706,  715,  717,  765,  HI.  52,  100, 
105-6,  133,  137,  176,  178,  195,239,  241, 
367  371-2,  374. 

Ellis,  n.  678. 

Elizabetb  (Queen),  II.  647. 

Elizabeth  (Charlotte),  n.  295. 


E.  M.,  H.  467, 564,  III.  236. 

Emerson,  I.  17,  UL  29,  135. 

Encyclop.  Arner.,  I.  483,  500. 

Encyclop.  Brit.,  1.455,  490,  508,   II.  123, 

278,  281,  466,  515. 
Encyclop.  Metrop.,  II.  759. 
Encyclop.  Relig.  Knowl.,  I.  49,  62,  n.  187, 

198,  581,  609,  676,   III.  27,  57,  70,  108, 

156,  270,  301,  568. 
End  of  All  Things,  I.  551. 
Eogelhart,  I.  531,  II.  501. 
English  Independent,  III.  409. 
Enoch,  Book  of,  II.  313,  572,  675,  771. 
Epiphanius,  I.  451,  491,  HI.  145. 
Epp  Claas,  II.  326,  646,  667,  741. 
Erasmus,  1. 112,  382,  453,  II.  482,  496,  584, 

673,  678. 
Erdman,  II.  415. 
Erigena,  I.  59. 
Ernesti,  1.57,  159,  in.  569. 
Esdras,  Sec.  Book,  II.  250,  327,  442,  574, 

675. 
Esdras,  Fourth  Book,  II.  572,  IH.  265. 
Essays  and  Reviews,  I.  66,  90,  118-9,  133, 

201,426,  11.431. 
Estrange,  U.  66. 
Etheridge,  I.  300,  II.  62,  255,  270-1,  404, 

452,  710,  III.  400,  404,  416,  424. 
EthiopicVer.,  II.  189,  260. 
Eusebius,  I.  271,  451,  466,   468,  471,  483, 

485,  499,  505-6,  50T,  51.-,,  644,  II.  141,  259, 

507,511,  512,  521,111.193. 
Euthemius,  II.  322,  380,  398. 
Eustathius,  II.  675. 
Evang.  Review,  I.  354,  408,  606,  HI.  145, 

287. 
Evangelist,  The,  III.  577. 
Evangelist,  N.  Y.  I.  481,  489,  497,508,521, 

529,  535,  548,  551, II.  219, 220,  272,  283, 

317. 
Evangeliz.  of  the  World,  III.  256. 
Evans,  1.96,  II.  166,  232,  III.  568. 
Evelyn,  III.  99,  270. 
Everv  Evening,  III.  252. 
Evolution,  III.  522. 
Ewald,  I.  185,   328,  486,  628,  II.  417,  453, 

482,  551;,  622,  666,  702,  771,  III.  60,  372, 

392,  4:57,  473. 
Ewer,  IIL  193. 
Exeter,  Bishop  of,  I.  16. 
Eyre,  III.  14s. 
Ezra,  Eben,  III.  404. 
Ezra,  Fourth  Book,  11.754. 

Fabcr,  I.  57,  382,  523,  671,  677,  680,  II.  48, 
89,  106,  108,  195,  204,  249,  337,  401,  497, 
502,  518,  043-7,652,654-5-7,  668,  673-4, 
692-3,  703,  706,  715,  717,  719,  737,  747, 
763,  766,  ni.  25,  63,  69,  99,  106,  148, 
498. 

Fabri,  I.  138,  III.  497. 

Fabricius,  II.  474. 

Falconer,  II.  690. 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


643 


Fairbairn,  I.  35,  48,  56,  58,  65,  144,  157, 
163-9, 171-6-7-8,  205,  210,  216, 218,  236, 
243,  254-8,  284,  291-7-8,  302-3-5,  312, 
323,  337,  346,  360,  402,  412,  431,  439, 
446,  453,  474,  477,  507,  566,  573,  606,  615, 
625,  678,  680-2,   II.  20,  25,  43,  50-1,  63, 

78,  83-4,  88,  111,  118-9,  149,  152,  168, 
171,  262,  270-2,  279,  282,  293,  344,  362, 
407,  411,  430-2,  443-5,  453,  470,  472, 
479,  480,  484-5,  488-9,  534,  555,  567-8, 
583,  602-7,  609,  622,  657,  734,  771-2, 
III.  59,  83.  85-6,  88,  94,  135,  184,  219, 
221,  238  248,  397,  417,  418,  490,  536, 
545. 

Farmer,  L  72.  538,  II.  367,  HI.  78. 
Farrar,  I.  91,  98-9,  185,  2(35,  283,  354,  452, 

n.  19,  40,  109,  143,    200,  723,  in.  137, 

151,  569,  589. 
Fausset,    I.  172,   303,   308,   335,  397,  432, 

567,  589,  657,   679,    681,    683-4,   II.  76, 

79,  89,  130.  146,  195,  218,  241,  247, 
249,  255,  259,  299,  412,  419,  425,  445, 
478-9,  488,  496,  509,  531,  548,  551,  566, 
573-5,  582,  585-7,  590,  618,  637,  647, 
657,  667,  082-1.  B87-8,  696-7,  702,  741, 
758,  766,  769,  III.  16,  26-7,  39,  64,  69, 
85,  150,  273,  313,  372,  398,  406,  418. 

Feet,  III.  275. 

Fell,  II.  676. 

Fenelon,  III.  275. 

Fercuson,  II.  214. 

Ferrer,  II.  681. 

Feuerbach,  II.  537,  723,  m.  147,  430,  590. 

Feuerdentius,  II.  674. 

Pichte,  III.  289,  564. 

Fiddes,  11.401. 

Figuier,  I.  147,  II.  156,  225,  303,  593,  597, 

in.  54,  206,  562. 
Findlav,  II.  643. 
Finney,  HI.  147. 
FinneV  (Dr.),  III.  211. 
Fischer,  n.  237. 
Fish,  HI.  147. 
Fishbaugh,  III.  145. 
Fisher,  I.  94,  123,  493,  515,  523,  539,  551, 

611,  647,  650,  666.  II.  120,  III.  173,  331. 
Fiske,  I.  76,  98,  470.  571,  II.  154,  262,  488, 

492,  541,  727,   III.  281,    357,    483,  511, 

519. 
Flacius,  H.  322. 
Flammarion,  III.  562. 
Flavel,  I.  560,  II.  40,  222. 
Flavius.  in.  176. 
Fleck,  I.  284,  H.  45,  321. 
Fleetwood,  H.  257,  276,  in.  541. 
Fleming  HI.  100. 

Flemminff,  I.  54,  538,  n.  672,  HI.  135,195. 
Fletcher  (Rev.  J.),  I.  540,  H.  305. 
Fletcher  (Is.  Red.),  n.  66. 
Fletcher,  HI.  148. 
Flint,  HI.  339. 
Floerke,  I.  678,   680. 
Flourens,  II.  723. 


Fontanes,  n.  231,  HI.  180. 

Fontenelle  HI.  446,  562. 

For.  Quart.  Rev. ,  II.  657. 

Form  of  Concord,  I.  122,  578. 

Forsyth,  III.  107. 

Fortnightly  Rev.,  HI.  155. 

Foster,  I.  145.  III.  187,  195,  208,  500. 

Fowle,  I.  44,  II.  379,  474,  726,  UI.  158,  469, 

506,  509,  525. 
Fowler,  I.  94,  II.  27,  165,  262. 
Fox,  I.  119,  II.  28,  394,  672. 
Fox  (Prof.),  UI.  267. 
Foxton,  III.  490. 
Franklin,  I.  32,  in.  392. 
Fraser,  U.  673,  693. 

Frazer,  I.  167,  420,  II.  443,  501,  in.  39. 
Frazer  (Bl.  Lights),  III.  498. 
Frazer's  Mag.,  HI.  187-8. 
Frederick,  II.  668. 
Frederick  I.  and  II.,  U.  676. 
Freedom   and  Fellowship,  I.  457,  III.  137, 

516. 
Freeman,  II.  643. 
Freemantle,  ni.  84. 
Fremdenbhitt,  HI.  156. 
French,  I.  90. 
Frere,  I.   678,    680,  n.  647,    668,   673,  683, 

UI.  195. 
Frev,  III.  148. 
Fro'ebel,  II.  758. 
Frohshamer,  in.  467. 
Fronniiiller,  H.  454,  in.  321. 
Fiothingham,  I.  107,  134,  460,  II.  723,  730, 

III.  147.  154,  204,  283,  288,  483,  572. 
Fmude,  I.   68,  98,   129.   410,  II.  749,   HI. 

137,  141,  184, 187,  275,  391,  406,  436,  497, 

501,  590. 
Frith,  II.  672. 

Fritzsclie,  I.  286,  II.  321,  473,  m.  94. 
Fry,  II.  419,  III.   84,  497. 
Fuchs,  I.  88,  95. 
Fulke,  II.  672,  707. 
Fuller,  II.  247. 
Fuller,  I.  13,  126,  172,  267,  235,  648,  II.  73, 

259,  445,  517,  637,  IH.  443,  467,  487. 
Fulton,  II.  229,  IH.  13,  14. 
Furness,  II.  558,  III.  577. 
Fysh,  U.  663,  687,  693. 

Galaxy,  IL  72,  90,  199,  HI.  15,  500. 

Gale,  III.  322,  430. 

Galileo,  III.  446. 

Gallowav,  II.  692-3. 

Gallus,  L  538,  III.  178. 

Galton,  III.  508. 

Gannett,  III.  283. 

Garbett,  III.  230-1,  331. 

Garbett  (Pre.-Mill.),  HI.  204. 

Gardner,  HI.  145. 

Garnet,  II.  723. 

Garratt,  II.  567,  647. 

Gascoyne,  III.  372. 

Gates,  I.  60. 


044 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Gates  Ajar,  III.  53. 

Gault,  II.  672. 

Gaulter,  II.  322,  672. 

Gauntlet,  H.  647. 

Gaussen,  I.  73,  II.  692. 

Geauga  Leader,  III.  252. 

Geddes,  H.  189. 

Geekie,  III.  187. 

Geering.  II.  317. 

Geier,  II.  417,  656. 

Geikie,  III.  500. 

Gelasius,  I.  518,  530,  II.  440,  499. 

Genadius,  I.  491,  495. 

Genebrand,  II.  670. 

Gensler,  II.  673. 

Gerhard,  I.  465,  533. 

Gerhart,  III.  449. 

Gerlack,  H.  18,  440,  455,  530,  675.  741,  HI. 

192,  195,  386. 
German,  I.  72. 
Gerinanicus,  III.  138. 
Gerard,  III.  94. 
Gerohus.  I.  680. 
Gerok,  II.  465. 
Gerson,  I.  666. 
Gerundeusis,  III.  403. 
Gesenius,   II.  237,  246,  357,  589,  652,  659, 

III.  401. 
Gess,  II.  504,  716. 
Gibbon  (Th.),   II.  395. 
Gibbon  (Edw.),  I.  76,  268,  271,  407,  450-1, 
454,    460,   470,   477,    484,  488.  492.  501, 
681,  II.  59,  242,  43""),  451.  453,  573,  Old-:;, 
692,  696,  736,  750,   III.  14,  37,  77,  108, 
275,  316,  408,  416,  475,  512. 

Giesler,  1.118,  250,  264,273,483,480,  II. 
459,  III.  270. 

Giesy,  III.  195. 

Gildas.  II.  27  7,  494,  590,  III.  93-4. 

Giles,  I.  75,  III.  359. 

Gilfillan,  H.  495,  III.  195. 

Gill  (Com.).  I.  482,  683,  11.214,236,  409, 
459,  471,  485,  517,  687,  693,  III.  106,  150, 
195. 

Gill  (Evol.  and  Prog.),  III.  510. 

Gilpin,  II.  677. 

Gipps,  II.  271,  283,  287,  292,  530,  625. 

Girdlestone.  II.  676,  III.  148,  312. 

Gladden,  III.  136. 

Gladstone,  I.  615,  648,  III.  275,  418,  498, 
509. 

Glanvil,  I.  21,45. 

Glasgow,  I.  534,  II.  154,  366,  646. 

Glass,  I.  313. 

Gleig,  I.  96,  216,  277,  II.  87,  200,  III.  94, 
575. 

Gloag,  H.  471. 

Goadby,  II.  474. 

Gockel.  11.491. 

God  is  love,  II.  550,  III.  409. 

Godet,  IIL  60. 

Godwin,  HI.  152. 

Goethe,  L  635,  II.  156,  III.  289. 


Golden  Age,  The,  HI.  283. 

Goode,  I.  123. 

Goodnight.  III.  269. 

Goodwin,  (Rev.  Dr.),  I.  76,  538,  II.  727,  HI. 

250,  253,  327,  332. 
Goodwin  (Exp.    Rev.)  II.   292,    367,   406, 

472,  504,  568. 
Goodwin  (Infid.),  III.  554. 
Good  Words,  H.  415. 
Goodwyn,  II.  191. 
Gordon,  II.  33,  292,  398,  706,  HI.  107,  318, 

327. 
Gorgius.III.  178. 
Gosse,  III.  137. 
Goulbourn,  I.  127,  II.  723. 
Gould  (Baring),  II.  68J-1. 
Gouthier,  II.  676. 
Govet,  II.  673. 
(lovinus,  I.  431. 

Graff  ("  Greybeard"\  I.  57,  106,  111,  116, 
35:5,  II.  27,  147,  232,  324,  329,  393,  401, 
437,  488,  591,  HI.  50,  139,  250,  314,  319. 
Grant,  II.  66. 
Graserus,  II.  673. 

Graves  H.  417,  442,  771,  III.  16,  526. 
Graves  (Dean),  I.  229. 
Gray,  I.  633,  HI.  497,  507. 
Great  Commission,  The,  III.  256. 
Green,  I.  354,  III.  498. 
Greenabaum,  III.  20. 
Greenbank,  II.  236. 
Greenfield,  II.  212. 
Greg,  I.  71,  75,  III.  38,  155,  206. 
Gregg,  III.  137. 
Gregory,  I.  145,  275,  284,  317,  668,  691,  H. 

647,  672,  683,  III.  467. 
Gregory  (Four  Gospels),  III.  192,352,  354, 

359,  401,  575. 
Gregory  (The  Great),  I.  59,    318,  H.  430, 
517,  610,  649,  675,  691,  HI.  114, 133,  173. 
Gregory  (Naz.),  II.  215,  250. 
Gregory  (Nyssen),  I.  451,  491,  II.  190. 
Gregory  (Oxford),  II.  450. 
Gregory  (Thamat,),  I.  508. 
Greisbacb,  II.  638. 
Gresley,  I.  647. 

Greswell,  I.  57,  354,  383,  450,  452,  486,511, 
H.  29,   215,  236,421,  472,  668,  696,  698, 
III.  106.  137,  195,  461. 
Griffith,  III.  498. 
Griffin,  II.  517,  III.  62. 
Grimm,  II.  313,  425. 
Groninger  School,  I.  201. 
Grosse,  III.  326. 
Grostete,  II.  677. 

Grotius,  I.  405,   492,  505,  568,  628,  677,  II. 
149,  214-5,  246,  322,  354,  380,  464-5,  481, 
497,  609,  622,  625.  634,  637,  657,  673,  676, 
III.  60,  76,  94,  336,  371,  392. 
Grove,  11.546. 
Groves,  III.  269. 
Groiz,  I.  168,  11.727. 
Guardian,  III.  143. 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


645 


Guericke,  L  126. 

Guers.  IIL  148. 

Guesses  at  Truth,  ILL  233. 

Guiuness,  IL  530,  659,  684,  702,  716,  etc., 

774. 
Guizot,  L  523,  III.  205,  257,  275. 
Gurney,  I.  119,  LEI.  69,  152,  337. 
Gurtler,  II.  22. 
Guyot,  IIL  497. 

Habershon,  U.  607,  I  87,  774,  IIL  99,  195. 
Hackett,  II.  465,  472,  IIL  318. 
Hackel,  II.  727,  IIL  497,  500. 
Hagenbach,  I.  54,    59,   94,   110,   112,  114, 

123-4,   158,  285,  425,  450-1-2,  472,  496, 

515,  523,  595,  624,  II.  291,  361,  401,  632, 

IIL  82,  534,  538-9. 
Halm,  II.  399. 

Haldane,  L  73,  76,  IL  445,  472. 
Hale  (Sir  Math.)  III.  77. 
Hales,  I.  459,  ILL  99,  403,  424. 
Halifax,  II.  672. 
Halin.ILL  154. 
Hallam,  I.  56,  487,  526. 
Hall.  I.  57,  145,  540,  II.  118,  166,  474,  587, 

III.  332. 
Hall  (Bh.),  IIL  105. 
Hall  (Newman),  I.  551. 
Hall  (N.  Y.),  I.  464. 
Hall  (Rev.),  III.  187, 195. 
Hamberger,  IIL  501. 
Hamilton,  I.  487,  490.  520,  II.  66. 
Hamilton  (Gail),  I.  75,  III.  512. 
Hamilton  (Lamp  and  Lantern),  III.  41. 
Hammond,  II.  215,  220,  474,  476,  487,  517, 

625,  673,111.250,371. 
Hammond  (Infid.),  in.  145,  154. 
Hancock,  in.  498. 
Hand  of  Man,  The,  in.  208. 
H.  A.  R.,  11.489. 
Kardoin,  II.  474. 
Harduin,  II.  673. 
Hare,  HI.  124,  145,  483. 
Harkey,  II.  751. 
Harless,  I.  96. 
Harley,  HI.  234. 
Harms,  II.  679. 
Harmer,  I.  296,  II.  312. 
Harper's  Mag.,  I.  221,  H.  166,  646,  674,  731, 

780,  III.  137. 
Harper's  Weekly,  L  122,  in.  133,187,  409. 
Harris,  I.  76,  550,  U.  124,  145,  276,  333. 
Harris  (Post-Mill.),  HI.  204, 214. 
Harrison,  II.  726,  IIL  145. 
Harrison  (Rev.),  IIL  82. 
Hartley,  I.  511,  538,488,  775. 
Hartman,  II.  469,  HI.  441,  475,  497-8. 
Hartson,  III.  145. 
Hart  wick,  III.  498. 
Harwood,  I.  265. 
Hase,  I.  472,  484,  489,  508,  IL  600,  in.  270, 

364,  427,  575. 
Hastings,  IIL  179,  195. 


Hatch,  in.  145. 

Hatherly,  I.  160. 

Hatfield,  I.  385,  518. 

Haven,  I.  96. 

Havernach,  I.  531. 

Havernick,  I.  157,  286,  U.  424, 657,  666,  in. 
33,  399,  414,  498. 

Hayden,  II.  351. 

Haymo,  II.  191. 

Haywood,  in.  508. 

Hazard,  II.  282,  488,  627,  HI.  147. 

Heaven,  IIL  53. 

Heaven  Our  Home,  II.  505,  III.  46. 

Heber,  II.  207,  353,  430-4,  HI.  195. 

Hedge,  I.  75. 

Heding,  U.  679. 

Heefert,  1. 110. 

Heer,  III.  498. 

Hegel,  U.  101,  III.  427. 

Hegesippus,  1. 468,  471,  495. 

Heidelberg,  Cat.,  I.  110. 

Heidelberg,  Divines  of,  II.  679. 

Helvitia,  Latter  Conf.  of,  n.  735. 

Helvvig,  III.  209. 

Hemholtz,  HI.  497. 

Henderson,  I.  76,  312,  537,  H.  187-8,  418, 
UI.  68,  85, 392. 

Hengstenberg,  I.  176,  214,  227,  229,  250-2- 
3,  286,  297,  303,  313,  409,  419,  529,  539, 
624,  678,  694,  II.  72,  97,  238,  463,  585, 
623-5-6,  628,  657,  660-2-6,  680,  687,  762, 
IIL  135,  371-2,  392,  400-1,414,  415,  418, 
425,  498. 

Henke,  II.  231. 

Hennell,  I.  426,  429,  II.  724,  IIL  188,  289, 
441,  511. 

Henry  (Com.),  II.  474,  485,  556,  HI.  106, 
150,  196,  386. 

Henry  (Prof.),  III.  497. 

Hensbaw,  I.  549,  II.  265,  in.  106, 177,  195. 

Hensius,  II.  464. 

Henslow,  HI.  507. 

Heppe,  I.  285. 

Hequembourg,  II.  199,  230, 

Herald  of  the  Morning,  II.  120,  413. 

Herald  of  Progress,  The,  III.  145. 

Herbert,  I.  154. 

Herder,!.  72, 159,  160,  II.  504,  674. 

Hering,  I.  199,  623,  699. 

Hennas,  I.  451,  495,  IL  670,  734. 

Hershel,  III.  148. 

Hervev,  I.  352. 

Herzog's  Cyclop.,  I.  31,  56,  106,  449,  450, 
480,^495,  508,  526,  540,  II.  90,  235,  292, 
303,  401,  425,  453,  487,  511,  631,  668,  677, 
697,  702,  705,  HI.  33,  84,  88,  135,  159, 
367,  414,  423,  569. 

Hess,  I.  24.  30,  538,  II.  504,  531. 

Heubner,  II.  29,  III.  195. 

Hewitson,  IIL  195,  329. 

Higging,  in.  146. 

Higgins,  III.  477,  516. 

Higginson,  IL  730,  UI.  416. 


646 


IXDEX   OF  AUTHOES,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Hilarian.II.215,  675. 

Hilary,  I.  51,  II.  322,  398,  674,  6S0-1,   694, 

III.'  300. 
Hilgenfeld,  I.  185,  II.  673. 
Hill,  II.  81,  415,  in.  330,  509. 
Hine,  II.  66. 

Hints  for  Evid.  of  Spiritualism,  HI.  145. 
Hippolytus,  I.  Ill,  491,  496,  684,  II.  215, 

459.  649,  659,  666,  670,  680-1,  692,  697. 
His.  Hebrew  Monarchy,  I.  286. 
Hitchcock,  II.  428,  435,  481,  III.  106,  446, 

497. 
Hitzig,  I.  338,  H.  277,  368,  566,  666,  III. 

392. 
Hobart,  m.  23. 
Hodjre,  I.  42,  213,  325,  327.  382,  396,  427, 

437,  472,  572.  574,  616,  II.  79,  187,  230, 
234,  240,  281-2,  296,  361.  381,  384,  517, 
521,  554,  633,  III.  83.  244-5,  318,336, 
507,  509. 

Hody,  I.   298,  II.  245,  414,  422,  427,  430, 

438,  480,  483. 
Hoe,  II.  672,  734. 
Hoffman,  III.  501. 

Hofman,  I.  90,  678,  II.  660,  675,  682-3,702, 
734,  HI.  88,  107,  380,  400,  465,  498. 

Hofman  (Proph.  and  Ful.),  n.  167,  292, 
459,  496,  530. 

Holden,  I.  640,  HI.  272. 

Holmes,  I.  452,  535,  538. 

Holyoake,  in.  147. 

Homes,  II.  441,  541,  672. 

Homilist,  I.  607. 

Hooker,  I.  47,  018,  680,  HI.  545. 

Hooper,  II.  072. 

Hopkins,  I.  60,  IH  177,  179,  195. 

Horchius,  n.  679. 

Home,  I.  56-8,  60-2,  70-3,  75-6,  96,  112, 
141-6,  164,  171-2,  183,  193,  210,  216, 
323-7,  345,  485,  II.  12,  17,  39,  144,  223, 
261,  298, 354,  502,  512.  525,  570, 579,  580, 
640,  649,  m.  27,  78,  192-3,  307,  301,  307, 
393,  413,  418-9,  423^1,  467,  498. 

Horsley,  I.  171,  243,  314,  II.  173,  190,  457, 
580,  582,  657,  073,  HI,  483. 

Hosford.  II.  :;c. 

Hotho,  III.  501. 

Houbigant,  II.  76,507. 

Hovedan,  II.  623,042,  649,  681. 

Howe,  m.  69. 

Howitt,  II.  521,  563,  HI.  146. 

Hudson,  I.  103,  140,  573,11.  231,  399,  401. 

Huebner,  H.  075,  722,  741. 

Hug,  I.  485. 

Hughes,  1. 130. 

Hughs,  III.  301. 

Hugo,  II.  157,  395,  III.  149,  152,  154. 

Huidekoper,  II.  401. 

Hull,  III.  147. 

Humboldt,  II.  425,  III.  497,  500. 

Hume,  I.  98,  137,  288,  III.  270,  286,  436, 
475. 

Humphrey,  11.401. 


Hunnius,  HI.  176. 

Hunter.  II.  322. 

Hurd,  I.  57,  II.  672,  677,  697. 

Hurst,  I.  62,  192,  II.  118,  III.  135,  206,  505. 

Huss,  n.  077. 

Hutcheson,  I.  649. 

Hutchinson.  I.  54,  II.  103,  677. 

Huther,  II.  697. 

Hutter,  m.  176. 

Hutton,  II.  426,  III.  205. 

Huxlev,  11.488,  726,  HI.  159,  206,  281,475, 

497, "498,  506,  508. 
Huygen,  in.  446,  562. 
Hyacinthe,  IH.  149, 157. 
Hystaspes.  II.  521. 
Hytche,  H.  779. 

Ignatius,  I.  451,  473,  482,  495,  n.  424,  572, 
'  071,  IU.  171. 

lllvricus,  II.  474. 

Imbrie,  I.  275,  458,  II.  475,  626,  IH.  136, 
327  556 

Independent,  The,  I.  40,  475,  III.  251. 

Ingersoll,  H.  582,  723,  720,  in.  147,  155, 
492. 

Ingraham,  H.  66. 

Inner  Kingdom,  I.  41,  II.  633. 

Innes,  UL  571. 

Inquiry,  An,  IH.  145. 

Instructor,  The,  I.  452,  473,  493. 

International  Rev.,  Ill   137,  507. 

Interior,  The,  II.  51,  III.  253. 

Investigator,  The,  I.  538,  691. 

Investigator,  The  Boston,  in.  165. 

Iowa  Svnod,  II.  691. 

Isaki,  II.  417. 

Israelite  Indeed,  The,  I.  160,  370,  H.  246, 
201,  508,  085,  HI.  398,  409,  415,  410, 
424. 

Irenams,  L  47,  112,  158,  286,  304,  324, 
406,  451,  455,  464,  400,  495,  497,  506-7, 
643,  682,  H  144,  214,  250,  253,  287,  398- 
9,  433,  449.  463,  467,  482,  511,  539,  574, 
649,  659,  670,  681-2,  690,  700,  712,  754, 
HI.  38.  52,  78,  169,  193,  239,  542. 

Irons,  I.  100. 

Irving,  I.  14,  62,  295,  535,  039,  IL  517,  575, 
647.  HI.  70.  82.  273,  534. 

Italic  Ver.,  II.  473. 

J.  B.,  II.  422,  532. 

Jacobson,  III.  492. 

Jacobus,  IL474,  HI.  497-8. 

Jacopone,  II.  077. 

Jahn,  I.  227,  286,  II.  771,  III.  16,  498. 

James  I.,  II.  670,  693. 

James,  II.  517.  041,  732,  UL  127,  254. 

Jamieson,  I.  03 

Janeway,  III.  312,  327. 

Jansenius,  II.  322,  474,  476. 

Jarchi,  H.  609,  HI.  417. 

Jarvis,  I.  633,  645,  II.  459,  HL  99. 

Jay,  H  517,  HI.  177,  219. 


INDEX   OF  AUTHOES,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


647 


Jebb,  I.  452. 

Jeffries,  II.  451. 

Jenkin,  ni.  78. 

Jesus  of  History,  The,  III.  526. 

.Tevon,  III.  508. 

Jewell,  I.  648,  680,  II.  672,  675. 

Jewish  Chronicle,  I.  160,  II.  567,  III.  412. 

Jewish  Expositor,  II.  66. 

Jewish  Messenger,  III.  423. 

Jewish  Times,  III.  566. 

J.  G.  W.,  11.419,465. 

Joachim,  II.  677,  681,  III.  72,  178. 

Joachimus  (Abbas),  II.  676. 

John  (of  Paris),  II.  677. 

Johnson,  I.  104,  196,  II.  730,  III.  205. 

Johnson  (Dr.),  I.  098,  II.  275. 

Johnson  (Freed,  of  Relig.),  III.  207,  555. 

Johnson  (On  Relig.),  III.  207,  555. 

Johnston,  II.  451,  III.  178. 

Jonathan,  II.  609. 

Jones  (Cli.  His.),  I.  483,  489. 

Jones  (His.  Amer.),  II.  66. 

Jones  (Judge),  I.  252-3-4,  264,  285,  296-7, 
314,  323,  326,  352-4,  367-8,  381,  383-5, 
390,  459,  482,  516,  568,  II.  29,  34-5,  41, 
44-5,  237,  312,  378,  406,  420,  444,  463-4, 
469,  472-4-5-6,  507,  555,  563,  566,  605, 
672,  III.  137,  195,  542,  571. 

Jones  (Lee.  Apoc),  I.  490. 

Jones  (Mill.).  I.  448. 

Jonos  (Sir  W.),  III.  498. 

Jonsou  (Ben),  III.  275. 

Jordanus,  II.  677. 

Josephus,  I.  216.  228,  265,  682,  II.  66,  312, 
640,  III.  20,  589. 

Jost,  II.  59,  780. 

Journal  of  the  Disciples  of  Satan,  HI.  281. 

Journal  and  Messenger,  III.  157. 

Journal  of  Sac.  Lit.,  II.  671. 

Jovvett,  II.  673,  679,  III.  34. 

Jubilee  of  Jubilees,  II.  453. 

Jukes,  I.  75,  II.  468. 

Julius  (Africanus),  II.  659. 

Junius,  II.  496,  III.  401. 

Jurien,  I.  538. 

Justin  (Ch.  His.),  I.  454,  486. 

Justin  (Martyr),  I.  286,  304,  324,  331,  406, 
415,  450-1-2,  454-5,  464,  470-2,  480-2, 
480,  495,  643,  680,  685,  II.  187,  214,  222, 
235,  250,  258,  287,  398-9,  415.  445-6, 
449,  482-3,  504,  511,  539,  565,  574,  580-2, 
587,670,  681,  714,  753,  III.  31,  37,  52, 
77, 137,  162.  169,  193,  239,  267,  314,  409. 

Kahnis,  III.  577. 

Kalish,  III.  411. 

Kanne,  III.  501. 

Kant,  I.  58,  72.  !>4,  301,  HI.  130,  347,  427. 

Karstein,  II.  530. 

Kaye,  III.  78. 

Kay,  II.  214,  670. 

Keach,  II.  472,  672. 

Keate,  I.  111. 


Keerl,  I.  104,  II.  158,  III.  62,  188,  501. 
Keil,  I.  539,  II.  656,  666,  III.  88,  392,  497. 
Keim,  I.  185,  III.  524. 
Keith,  I.  57,  II.  242-3,  341,    364,  430,   523, 

647,  668,  672,  717,   III.  148-9,  195,  382, 

391,  397,  418,  467. 
Kellogg.  III.  168.  327,  331-2. 
Kelly,   I.  452,  493,    II.  322,  472,  683,  III. 

195,  374. 
Kelsall,  II.  659,  683. 
Kempis,  II.  729. 
Kendrick,  II.  474,  482,  555,  563,  567,  III. 

66,  363. 
Kennicott,  I.  314. 
Kentucky  Tribune,  III.  332. 
Ker,'  III.  329. 
Kern,  II.  673,  675. 
Kerk  herd  ere,  II.  247. 
Kett,  I.  57,  538,  II.  692. 
Ketina,  II.  448. 
Killen,  I.  59,  131,  263,  345,  361,   377,432, 

456,  463,  507,  625,  II.  234,  III.  78,  174, 

339,  382. 
Kimchi,  II.  277-8,  417,  457,  III.  33,  417, 

423. 
King  (Lord),  II.  458. 
King  (Mrs.),  II.  418,  III.  147. 
King  (F.  W.),  III.  501. 
King,  I.  532,  H.  34,  673. 
Kingdom  of  Grace,  I.  19,  613,  675,  II.  172, 

282.  406,  540,  634,  III.  211. 
Kingsley,  I.  601,  III.  554. 
Kirk,  I.  145. 
Kitto,  I.  56,  176,216,  226,  450,  483,  II.  236, 

III.  33,  145. 
Klee,  II.  496. 
Kleifoth,  I.  539,  II.  285. 
Kleiforth,  II.  628,  656,  666,  III.  414. 
Klethvich,  I.  539. 
Klenker,  II.  18. 
Klimr,  I.  31,  526,  540-1,  II.  292,  297,  425, 

HI.  135,  322. 
Knapp,  I.  50,  76,    96,    106,   131,   145,   161, 

179,  184-5,  195,  211,  261-6,  277,  283,  297, 

327,  400,  458,  462,  582,   655,    II.   12,   36, 

167,  189,  216,  231,  246,  258-9,  300,  340, 

352,  366,  398-9,  401-9,  410,  424,  435,  461, 

474,  481,  490,  499,  506,  581,  031,  633,  III. 

60,   78,   301,  457,  515,   542,  558,   568-9, 

571-2. 
Kniewel.III.  501. 
Knight,  II.  668. 
Knobel,  I.  687,  III.  392. 
Knox,  I.  123,  527,  II.  216,  435,  472,  504, 

67° 
Koch,'  I.  534,  539,  II.  292,  630,  666. 
Kohler,  I.  534. 
Kollner,  II.  482. 

Koppe,  I.  534,  II.  430,  472,  482,  702. 
Koran,  II.  187,  417. 
Kostlin,  II.  247. 
Kraft,  II.  464. 
Kranichfeld,  II.  247. 


648 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Krause,  n.  673. 
Krauth,  I.  124. 
Kreuzhage,   III.  501. 
Kriidener,  DI.  180. 

Krummacher,  1.701,  II.  2.7,  683,  in.  106. 
Kuenen,  III.  471. 
Kuinokl,  II.  454,  465,  471,  473-4. 
Kurtz,  I.  12,  51-6,  74,   114,   139,  168,  193, 
207,  216,  221,  229,  236,   241,  285-6,  293- 

4,  297-8,  300,  306,  312,  328,  340,  353-4, 
488,  500,  505,  525,  531,  537.  556,  571-2, 
613,  661,  700,  11.56,  96,  108,  112,  138, 
155,  167-8,  225,  240-1.  354,  423  452-3, 
469,  482,  484,  500,  504,  546,  556,  562, 
567-8,  602,  657,  772,  HI.  14,  33,  39,  41, 
51,  74,  82,  107,  132,  142,  174-8-9,  188, 
270,  275,  382,  399,  400-2-3-4,  424,  474, 
497-8,  539,  540-4-5,  549,  562. 

Lactantius,  I.  313,  406,  451,  491,  496,  505, 
560,  II.  215,  236,  259,  380,  398,  424,  450- 
1,  458,  482,  503,  539,  540,  574,  639,  649, 
671,  675,  680-1,  697,  776,  HI.  133,  171. 

Lacunza,  I.  522. 

Lamarch,  III.  498. 

Lambert,  III.  501. 

Lambert  (F.),  H.  67!). 

Lambert  (Le  Pere),  I.  522. 

Lamertine,  II.  589. 

Lamp,  TheChr.,  I.  571. 

Lampe,  in.  60. 

Lange,  I.  11,  21,  30-5,  40-1.52,  89,  94,  203, 
218,  253,  263-4,  284,  314,  327,  347,  353, 
367,  370,  382,  42:5,  461,  477,  485,526-9, 
533-9,  561-7,  527-8,  657,  668,  686,  690, 
U.  16,  17,  22-5-7-9,  64,72-8,118,  149, 
162-5,  175,  187-9,  190-8.  205-9,  218,  220, 
241-7,  253-8-9.  260,  277,  292-7-9, 300-7, 
317,  321,  324-6,  366,  370,  396,  403-4, 
408,  412,  414-5,  417-9.  420-2,  424-6,  431- 
6-8,  440-'i-9,  45:5,  403-1-5-6,  474-7-9, 
480-2-7,  491-2-6,  506,  524,  530,  553-5, 
562-7,  581-7,  598,  62:5-4-8,  634,  665-6-7- 
8,  673-4-9,  680-2-3-9,  694-7,  699,  701-2, 
705,  711.  730-4,  739,  740-1-9,  758,  763-5, 
771-9,  in.  16,  20-3-5,  33,  67,  72,  81-5-8, 
94-5-7,  108-9,  113,  129,  132-7,  147,  150-1, 
159,  182,  192-4-5,  217,  239,  297-9,  300-1- 

5,  313-4,  321-9,  363-4,  374-7-8-9,  380- 
3-4,  398,  401,  425,  497,  508,  537,  559. 

Lapide  (Cornel,   a),  II.  45,  474-6. 
Lardner,  I.  54.  157,  405,  450,453-4,  H.  264. 

312,  507,  539,  in.  78,  208. 
Latimer,  I.  531,  534,  691,  H.  451,  457,  672, 

734,  UI.  159,  317. 
Latin  Vulgate,  I.  171,  H.  216. 
Laud,  m.  275. 
Launy,  II.  474. 
Laurence.  D.  59. 
Lavater,  H.  504. 
Lavington,  HI.  275. 
Law,  I.  154,  II.  270. 
Lawrence,  I.  40,  486,  U.  754,  780. 


Layard,  H.  194. 

L.  C.  B.,  II.  548. 

Leask,  II.  173,  III.  135,  193. 195-6,  239,  250. 

Leatbes,  I.  89,  105,  263,  269,  442,  in.  567, 

574. 
Le  Bas,  I.  96. 
Lebeau,  III.  501. 

Lecbler,  I.  367,  483,  668,  n.  463,  465,  482. 
Leckv,    I.  21,  78,  113,  131-4,  201,  680,  U. 

690,  750,  III.  76,  150,  174, 206,  562. 
Leclerc,  I.  307,  452,  U.  474,  476,  481,  673, 

m.  401,  501. 
Le  Conte,  EX  507. 
Lederer,  II.  246,  261,  368,  421,  521,  in.  20- 

1,  398,  409,  415,  416,  424. 
Lee,  I.  385,  510,  n.  230,  III.  372. 
Leeser,  DX  401,  416. 
Leibnitz,  I.  106,  126,  II.  469,  488. 
Leifcbild,  m.  507. 
Leigh,  H.  212,  322. 
Leigbton,  III.  277. 
Leila  Ada,  DX  108. 
Leland,  ILL.  78.  208,  467. 
L'Empereur,  II.  666. 
Lenormant,  HI.  501. 
Leasing,  D.  460. 
Lessinger,  I.  623. 
Lester,  DX  500-1. 
Levi,  I.  378,  U.  59,  449,  HI.  412. 
Lewes,  HI.  608. 

Lewis  (Divine-Human),  HI.  535. 
Lewis  (Lucie  E.),  D.  166. 
Lewis  (Prof.),  I.  36,  U.  414,  417,  422,  425, 

457,  469,631. 
Lewis  (Taylor),  in.  497-8-9. 
Library,  The,  I.  692. 
Library  Mag.,  ni.  201. 
Library  Notes,  I.  17,  in.  262,  275. 
Liddefl  and  Scott.  U.  212, 
Liddon,  II.  723,  m.  478. 
Lightfoot,    I.   264,    296,    367,  691,  n.  235, 

247,   321,   402-5,  448,  465,  474,  515,  525, 

563,  622-3,  734,  HI.  301,  346,  416,  418. 
Lillie,  I.  458,   482,   526,    549,  570,  II.  78, 

218,  317,  421,  675.  HI.  177,  194-6,  216. 
Limbach,  D.  471,  673. 
Lincoln,  I.  403,  II.  28,  104,  324,  326,  509, 

530,  612,  637,  682,  702,  709,  740,  DX  42, 

63,  142,  Hi3,271,  374-5,  378,  560. 
Lincoln  (Bh.  of),  D.  458,  741,  DX  78. 
Lindsay,  I.  455-6,  490,  669,  D.  278,   281, 

358.  488. 
Lisco,  I.  534,  II.  18,  22,  27,  29,  472,  DX  176, 

299,  301,  326,  498. 
Litch,  D.  631.  III.  268,  374,  377. 
Literalist,  I.  52,  382,  DX  195. 
Lit.  and  Theol.  Journal,  I.  63,  422,  677,  D. 

281,  464,  466,  507,  517,  544,  567,  DX  164, 

236,  250,  446,— see  Lord,  I).  N. 
Littell's  Liv.  Age,  I.  59,  84,  380,486,  618, 

677,  D.  156,  405,  469,  724,  726,  729,  DX 

94,  187-8,  202,  233,  277,  283,  492,   501, 

507,  595. 


I7NTDEX    OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


649 


Litton,  I.  656. 

Liturgy  of  the  Jews,  I.  225. 

Livy,  H.  643. 

Lloyd,  II.  696. 

Locke,  I.  36,  53,  94,  100,  146,  U.  223,  240, 
408,  488,  400,  III.  76,  469. 

Lohe,  I.  120,  III.  108. 

London  (Bb.  of),  III.  201. 

London  Quart.  Jo  urn.  Proph.,  III.  323, 
326. 

London  Quart.  Rev.,  I.  650,  III.  197. 

London  Times,  III.  149. 

Longfellow,  II.  730. 

Longfellow  (Infid.),  HI.  207. 

Lord  (D.  N.),  I.  63-4,  73,  76,  164,  173,  285, 
332,  678,  681,  68:'.,  II.  195-6,  281-2,  284, 
290,  363,  367,  379,  384,  450,  466,  469, 
483,  487,  489,  500,  517,  519,  538,  544, 
548,  567,  602,  626,  645-6,  668,  686,  692, 
696,  703-4,  706,  715,  765.  III.  y9,  47,  57, 
83.  89,  99,  105,  133,  137,  164,  177,  195, 
236,  239,  270,  331,  3:2,  371,  377,  446,  498. 

Lord  (Eliazer).  II.  446. 

Lord  (John  King),  III.  195. 

Lord  (J.  L.),  I.  269. 

Lord  (Willis),  I.  510,  II.  720,  in.  310. 

Lorimer,  III.  322. 

Lorinus,  I.  521,  II.  is. 

Lotze,  III.  407. 

Loughborough,  H  381,  549. 

Lovell.  H.  459. 

Lowman,  H.  672,  HI.  16,  100. 

Lowne,  HI.  508. 

Lowrey,  H.  40. 

Lowth,  II.  78,  146,  106.203,253,422,737, 
762,  769,  HI.  24,  277,  392. 

Loy,  IH.  287. 

Loyola,  I.  018. 

Lubbock,  I.  107,  IH.  144,  497,  500. 

Lucan,  H.  521. 

Liicke,  I.  486,  523,  H.  242,  262,  HI.  135, 
372,  382. 

bum,  HE.  147. 

Lummis,  I.  602,  II.  35. 

Lunemann,  H.  100,  317. 

Luthardt,  I.  265,  656,  II.  79,  202,  446,  589, 
628,  675,  702,  725,  741,  HI.  60,  107,  195. 

Luthart,  HI.  515.  r,:\:). 

Luther,  I.  13,  47-8,  55,  59,  120,12  4.  133, 
295,  309,  325,  3  42,  382,  504-7,515,  527, 
569,  635,  666,  682,  691,  II.  45,  157,  190, 
215,  234,  277.  317,  322,  346,  4ol,  412,  435, 
445,  457,  466,  481-2,  484,  487,  496,504, 
584,  637,  642,  652,  656,  672,  677,  696,  712, 
714,  734,  744,  740,  700,  764,  766,  IH.  14, 
93-4,99,  105-6,  114,  133,  135,  139,  145, 
159,  175,  L78,  2  10,256,275-6,300,317, 
322,364,  366,  390,  398-9,  401,  406. 

Lutberan,  The,  I.  532. 

Lutheran  Evanjr.,  The,  I.  417,  HI.  133, 
136,  157,  201.337. 

Lutheran  Observer,  The,  I.  122,  171,  540, 
543,  658,   Ml,  684,  II.  51,  350,  395,  421, 


628,  672,  691,    779,   HI.  42,  92,  99,  107. 

136,  138-9,  142,  150,  154.   157,  165,  188, 

247,  251-2,  269,  281,  283,  332,  338,  409, 

483,  566. 
Lutheran  Quarterly,  I.  458,  478,  526,  528 

532,  II.  154,  228,  237,  401,  III.  145,  173, 

233,  499. 
Lyceum,  I.  75,  425. 
L'vell,  III.  497. 
Lyon,  II.  36,  43. 
Lytton  (Lord),  II.  113. 

31.  A.,  I.  658. 

M.  A.  B.,  HI.  399. 

Machiavelli,  H.  611,  696. 

Macaulay,  I.  538,  648,  III.  135,  187,  504. 

Maccabees  (II.).  I.  233,  299,  361. 

Macdill,  I.  451-2,  473,  489,  493,  535. 

Macgregor.  II.  677. 

Mackay,  I.  126,  543,  III.  327.  332. 

Mackay  (Prog,  of  Intel.),  III.  522. 

Mackiiinon,  I.  516. 

Macknight,  I.  212,  298,  402,  415,  II.  171, 
198,  219,  240,  297,  317,  401,  406,446,  479, 
496,  514,  III.  41. 

Maclaine,  I.  453. 

Maclaurin,  11.223. 

Macleod,  1. 129,  II.  594,  III.  277,  525. 

Macmillan's  Ma<r.,  I.  140,   II.  727,  III.  155. 

McCaul,  I.  300,  538,  III.  107,  148,  322,  415, 
424. 

McCausland,  II.  659,  IH  497. 

McClintock  and  Strong's  Cyclop  ,  I.  40,  51-2 
74,  96,  164,  186,  195,  216,  226-8,  298,  384 
432,  457-8,485-8,  493,  508,  513,  515, 523 
536-7-9,  540,  551,  649,  687,  II.  55,  228 
233,  247,  259,  262,  290,  298,  351, 401,  469 
471,  475,  500,  695-7,  702,  728.  750,  778 
III.  78,  156-9,  173,  268,  270.  275-6,  331 
367,  409,  412,  414,  421-2,  423-4-5,  501 
569. 

M'Cook,  IH  325. 

McCosb,  I.  92,  94,  354,  556,  583,  622,  663. 
II.  30,  39,  III.  500,  507,  510.  515. 

McDonald,  II.  107,  HI.  62,  145,  497. 

Mcllvaine,  I.  123,  II.  187,  HI.  106,  195. 

Mcintosh,  II.  472,  III.  105. 

McXeile,  I.  326,  415,  626,  H.  56,  66,  350, 
367,  417,  433,  435,  III.  107,  148,  179,  195. 
236,  239. 

Madan,  1.453. 

Magee,  I.  164. 

Malian  (Prest.),  HI.  93,  152. 

Mahan,  IH.  99,  145. 

Maillet,  IH  498. 

Maimonides,  II.  73,  HI.  408. 

Maitland,  II.  350,  673,  675,  683,  HI.  148 
195,  374. 

Malachi  (St.),  UL.  142. 

Maldonatus.  HI.  301,  305. 

Malebranche,  II.  488. 

Mallet,  II.  521. 

Mallery,  I.  534. 


650 


IXDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Mai  lock.  in.  283. 

Malvenda,  II.  668,  687. 

Man,  The,  HI.  283. 

Mann,  III.  99. 

Manasse  Ben  Israel,  II.  235. 

Manes,  II.  231. 

Man  ford,  I.  538. 

Manning,  I.  645. 

Mansel,  I.  94,  96,  145,  278,  426,  454,  615, 
H.  723,  III.  145,  287. 

March,  II.  623. 

Marcion,  I.  454. 

Marcus,  II.  673. 

Maresius,  II.  672-3. 

Mai-froliouth,  I.  626,  III.  107. 

Marks  (Prof.),   III.  423. 

Marks  (Hah.),  III.  410. 

Marlorat,  II.  693. 

Marochan,  III.  421. 

Marsden.n.  594. 

Marsh,  I.  286,  II.  208,  in.  194,  316. 

Marshall,  L  531. 

Marshman,  II.  66. 

Martensen,  I.  78,  98,  104,  127-8,  160,  193, 
212,216,  526,  559,571,11.  118,  123,  169, 
184,  401,  411,471,  489,  636,  III.  109,  110, 
334,  548. 

Martin,  I.  583,  II.  681. 

Martineau  (H.),  II.  156,  HI.  507. 

Martineau,  I.  460,  II.  724,  III.  498-9,  507, 
580. 

Martini,  in.  408. 

Martyr,  II.  672. 

Marvin,  III.  145,  147. 

Masculine  Cross,  The,  HI.  163,  516. 

Maskelvne.  HI.  145. 

Massillon,  II.  731,  in.  275,  317. 

Mason,  I.  615.  687,  III.  509. 

Masson,  I.  535. 

Mastricht,  II.  623. 

Mather  (C),  I.  154,  541,  680,  III.  77,  116, 
136,  182,  198. 

Mather  (I.),  I.  367,  541,  691,  II.  342.  III. 
84. 

Mather  (S),  1.541. 

Mathews,  I.  20. 

Maton,  I.  538,  II.  357,  III.  148. 

Mattison,  III.  141,  145. 

Maundeville,  II.  440,  681,  776,  in.  33. 

Maurer,  U.  130,  566. 

Maurice,  I.  102,  380,  633,  II.  434,  674,  HI. 
498. 

Maurice  (Mill.),  III.  11-. 

Maxwell,  II.  429. 

Mayer,  I.  522. 

Mede,  I.  14,  296-7,  382,  452-3,  454,481,485, 
506,  538,  671,  678,11.  62,  72,  108,  115, 
222,  235,  247,  285,  287,  292,  364,  369,381, 
409,  435,  441,  448-9,  504,  518,  539,  541, 
549,  628,  640,  645-6,  654,  657,  672,  696, 
710,  III.  17,  99,   135,  159,  372,  380. 

Meet  for  Heaven,  III.  53. 

Melanchthon,  I.  48,  112,  123,  125,  527,  635. 


666,  II.  216,  451,  456,  482,  672,  677,  III. 

94,  105,  135,  159,  176,  275,  317. 
Melito,  I.  451.  491,  495,  U.  539,  671. 
Melville,  II.  531,  III.  117. 
Member  of  the  Boston  Bar,  A,  II.  91,  683. 
Menassah  Ben  Israel,  II.  409. 
Mendelssohn,  II.  417. 
Menken,  II.  454. 
Mercersburir  Rev.,  I.  285. 
Meredith,  III.  147. 
Merrill,  1.652,11.  167. 
Messiah's  Herald,  I.  543,  m.  325. 
Methodist,  The,  II.  350, 
Meth.  Quart,  Rev..  I.  354,  II.  158. 
Meth.  Recorder,  III.  334. 
Methodius,  I.  451,  491,  496,  II.  671. 
Meurer,  I.  691,  II.  435,  496. 
Mever,  I.  45,   195,  258,  283,  339,  472,  628, 

6*90,  II.  35,  37,  72,  90,  100,  236,  272,  292, 

322.  414,446,470,  482,  502,  555,587,  HI. 

60,  94,  106,  151,  159,  301,  306,  583. 
Meyers,  III.  437.  ' 
Meyrick,  II.  680,  687,  690,  703. 
Michael,  II.  481. 
Michaelis,  I.  57,  224,  453,  H.  300,  355,  608, 

679,  771,  III.  16,  486,  594,  597,  599. 
Michelet,  I.  59,  125,  342,   507,  II.  203,  496, 

63:,  077,  726,  734,  749,  750,  III.  105, 176, 

317,  390. 
Michelet  (Bible  of  Hum.),  III.  206. 
Middlebrook.m.  146. 
Middleton,  I.  48,  453,  487,  III.  77,  346, 
Mildert  (Bli.  Van),  I.  171. 
Mill,  I.  82-3,  98,  103,  108,   189,   229,  352, 

II.  750,  III.  130,  159,  430,  441,  491,  498, 

5C8-9. 
Miller,  I.  201,11.99. 
Mill.-r  (Hugh),  II  438,  in.  497. 
Miller  (Rev.  8.),  III.  2*7,  559. 
Miller  (Sil.  of  the  Scrip.),  III.  483. 
Miller  (Sec.  Adv.),  II.  602,  III.  166. 
Miller  (Rom.  of  Astron.),  II.  428. 
Milman,  I.  48,  219,  456,  468,  488,  503,  II. 

59,  62,   73,  100,  223,  236,   261,  410,  453, 

759. 
Milner,  I.  59,  483,  526,111.  177. 
Milner(Dr.),    III.  77. 
Milton,  I.  124,  III.  317. 
Mishna,  II.  368. 

Mission  of  Inquiry,  II.  449.  III.  88,  107. 
Mistake  of  Christendom,  HI.  145. 
Mi  van,  III.  500. 
Modern  Christianity,  ni.  280. 
Moehler,  I.  513,  656. 
Mohammed,  III.  :!•!. 
Moll,  I.  31,   557,   573,  n.  431,   446,   455-6, 

606,  615,  771. 
Molesehott,  I.  104. 
Moliter,  III.  501. 
Mollock,  III.  477. 
Moltber,  I.  117. 
Molyneux,  H.  683. 
Mombert,  II.  449,  454. 


INDEX   01'   AUTHOKS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


C51 


Moneta,  I.  305. 

Montagu,  II.  676. 

Montaigne,  III.  275. 

Montesquieu,  I.  8,  224. 

Month.  Relig.  Mag.,  I.  75. 

Montholon,  III.  534. 

Moody,  III.  139.  141-2,  251. 

Moore,  I.  551,  III.  378. 

Moore  (Corn.),  I.  080,  II.  100,  188,  394,  418, 

500,  in.  392. 
Moore  (H.),I.  16. 

Moore  (Rev.  Dr.  D.),  HI.  23. 

Moore  (Lost  Tribes),  II.  (10. 

Moorehead,  I.  452,  489.  III.  24,  179,  215. 

More,  II.  045,  047,  072. 

More  (Sir  Th.),  III.  274. 

Morell,  I.  55,  71,  III.  486. 

Morgan,  I.  192,  282,  H.  726. 

Morlev  (M.  P.),  III.  157. 

Morley  (Infid.),  III.  155. 

Morris,  I.  354,  III.  94. 

Mortimore,  II.  447. 

Morus.II.  471.  III.  347. 

Mosheim,   I.  49,  56,  58,   62,  305,  407,  451. 

460,  465,   468,   483,  500,  525.  532.   538, 

550,  011,  II.  149,   640,  070,  088,  in.  51, 

69,  72,  174,  27r,. 
Motley,  III.  275-6. 
Moulton,  II.  190. 
Mountford,  I.  96. 

Mozlev,  I.  75,  101,  114,  509,  II.  723. 
M.  S.,'  III.  99. 
Mueller,  in.  500. 
Muencher,  I.  452,  483,  498. 
Miililer,  III.  338. 
Muller  (Geo.).  HI.  175,  230,  325. 
Muller  (J.),  I.  11,   104,  100,  III.  336,  497, 

500. 
Muller  (Max).  I.  289,  HI.  188,  433,  439. 
Muller,  I.  120,  101,  417,  532,  II.  594,  607, 

724. 
Munster,  II.  474,  476. 
Murdock,  I.  532,  II.  474. 
Murphv,  U.  728,  IIL  143,  498,  501,  509. 
Murray  (Rev.),  HI.  144. 
Murray,  III.  154. 
Musculus,  II.  322,  072,  HI.  23. 

Naebe,  II.  474. 

Nagelsbach,  H.  62,  04,  2G0,  277,  418,  492, 
III.  09,  72. 

Nachmonides  (R.),  II.  407. 

Napier,  II.  087,  III.  99. 

Napoleon  I.,  III.  534. 

Nast,  I.  90,  263,  283,  323,  382,  430,  433, 
484,  540.  551.  007,  051,  057,  690,  095, 
701,  II.  r,7.  107.  191),  192,  222,  228,  299, 
321,  331,  341,  397,  421,  445,  471,  492,  498, 

501,  504-5,  758,    III.  81,   134,   192,   304, 
333 

Nathaniel,  II.  259,  36S,  421,  681,10.107-8, 

571. 
Nation,  The,  II.  726. 


Nat.  Reformer,  II.  726. 

Nat.  Review,  I.  400,  II.  720,  HI.  580. 

Nead,  I.  530. 

Neal,  I.  050,  II.  59,  III.  270. 

Neale,  I.  531. 

Neander,  I.  9,  40-7-8,  56,  60,  103,  112,  113, 
195-8,  218,  250,  201-2-8,  277,  283,  318 
324,  339,  360-3,  370,  415,  425,  428,  433-6 
443-5-9,  452,  454-7,  401,  471-4,  486, 493- 
5-6,  500,  510,  559,  571,  611,  629,  630-3, 
641-2,  649,  658,  665-6,  698,  700,  II.  12, 
16,  26-9,  30-9,  45.  98,  124.  160-7,  187-9, 
194,  221,  234,  243.  400,  430,  440,  452, 
481-2.  512.  555,  558-9,  574,  584.  598,  634, 
670,  075,  III.  14,  60.  69,  78,  171-2-3,  183, 
193,  206,  267,  270,  299,  337,  371,  409,  427, 
430-1,  515,  534,  539,  549,  558-9,501,565, 
596. 

Nelson,  II.  230,  074. 

Nemours,  III.  54. 

Nepos,  I.  491,  490,  500,  II.  671. 

Nevin,  I.  16,  113,  201,  434,  508, 11.397,  073, 
III.  336,  438. 

Newcome  (Archb.),  I.  541,  II.  78,  188,  419, 
459,  497.  501,  519,  in.  392. 

Newman  (Essavs,  etc.),  III.  391,  483,  486. 

Newman  (Prof.),  III.  78. 

Newman  (F.  W.),  I.  71. 

Newman  (J.  H.),  I.  202. 

Newman,  I.  70,  113-4,  120,  202,  227,  336, 
498,  II.  675,  726,  III.  590. 

Newton  (Bh.),  I.  14,  57,  145,  172,  452,  482, 
514,  524,  678,  682,  671,  691,  696,  II.  56, 
64,  162,  213,  219,  220,  243,  272-3,  319, 
307,  393,  421,  435,  440,  448,  498,  536, 
538,  564,  588,  639,  640-3-5-7,  650,  652- 
5-7,  666-7,  671-2,  675-6,  686-7,  694, 
690-7,  700.  in.  10,  76,  78,  100,  159,  174, 
193,  195,  371,  393,  399,401,  403,  406,  418, 
443,  467. 

Newton  (Benj.),  IH.  374. 

Newton  (B.  W.),  II.  659. 

Newton  (Sir  I.),  I.  94,  169,  173,  289,  482, 
485,  538,  671,  II.  223,  457,  472,  498,  518, 
650,  686.  692,  696,  IH.  97,  159, 195. 

Newton  (Miss),  III.  333. 

Newton  (R.),  IH.  106,  117,  145. 

N.  Y.  Evangelist,  II.  625,  HI.  42,  188. 

N.  Y.  Herald,  III.  149. 

N.  Y.  Independent,  IH.  134,  267. 

N.  Y.  Observer.  I.  552. 

N.  Y.  Times,  III.  138. 

N.  Y.  Tribune,  IH.  92,  154,  252. 

N.  Y.  World.  III.  137. 

Nicholas,  I.  60. 

Nicholas,  III.  202. 

Nicholson,  II.  007,  III.  327. 

Nicolai,  II.  734. 

Nicolini,  II.  598,  HI.  77. 

Niehr.hr,  II.  749,  IH.  151,  428. 

Niernyer,  I.  123,  532. 

Nineteenth  Cent.,  III.  157,  283. 

Nippold.III.  551. 


652 


INDEX   OF   AUTHOKS,    BOOKS,    PEKIODICALS,    ETC. 


Nisbett,  H.  1G5,  230. 

Nissen,  II.  430. 

Nitsch,  III.  338. 

Nitzsch,  I.  29,  IH.  78. 

Noble,  I.  165,  366. 

Noble  Lesson,  The.  II.  G80. 

Noel,  I.  326,  415.  696,  II.  56.  433,  435,  593, 
598.  in.  46, 107,  179,  195,  328. 

Noel  (Baptist),  in.  551. 

Nordhuff,  I.  74,  571,  669. 

North  Amer.  Kev.,  H.  54,  232,  HE.  140-1, 
415. 

North  Brit,  Rev.,  I.  51,  55,  57,  71,  75-6, 
89.  98,  107,  115,  119,  124,  129,  131,  428, 
507-8,  656,  II.  514.  573,  643,  724.  728-9, 
779,  III.  141,  145,  149,  152,  155,  173,  188, 
430,  444,  446.  483,  522. 

Norton,  I.  96,  157,  III.  349,  357. 

Noyes,  I.  473,  622,  II.  146,  622,  III.  24. 

Niirmberg  Bible,  II.  624,  626. 

Oberlin  Rev.,  I.  461,  HI.  93. 

Ode,  II.  657. 

(Ecolampadius,  I.  131,  II.  656,  672. 

Oehler,  II.  453,  III.  569. 

Oettenc-er,  I.  531,  II.  675,  702,  m.  195. 

Offen,  III.  147. 

Ogilvy,  II.  509,  III.  195. 

Ok  en,  in.  498,  500. 

Old  and  New,  I.  515,  n.  424. 

Oldfleld,  m.  145. 

Olearius,  II.  474,  476. 

Oliphant,  I.  14,  62,  295,   535,   HI.  76,  82, 

273,  534. 
Olive,  U.  676. 

Olshausen,  1.29,  42,  94,  176,  178,  258,  262, 

274,  309,  359,  361,  367,  370,  378,  409, 
414,  446,  472-4,  478,  501,  619,  695,  II. 
25,  33,  40,  45,  162,  195,  218-9,  220,  317, 
321-5.  412-4,  420,  115,  459,  462,  465, 
471,474,480-2,  504,536,  551,  562-4-6, 
582,  600,  606,  649,  675,  680,  682.  689, 
701-2,  734,  737,  739,  III.  69,  106,  110, 
116,  137,  151,  159,  194,  297,  306,  317,  366, 
380. 

Onkelos,  II.  609. 

Oosterzee,  I.  16,  29,  30-1,  45,  76,  95,  106, 
113,123,127,135,151,  158,  161-2,  184, 
229,  252-4,  258,  273,  293,  353,  371,  382, 
392,  434,  436,  440,  472,  4T4,  477,  556, 
566,  571,  600,  618,  655-6,  663,  681,  II. 
43-1,  78,  165,  167,  189,  21)1.  302,  367, 
399,  401,  407,  421,  425,  477,  481,  496, 
636,  679,  723,  III.  34,  107-8,  110,  125, 
135,  147,  151,  154,  162,  182,  187,  196, 
209,  211,  238,  278,  297,  321,  323,  358, 
515,  535,  555,  569,  573,  577. 

Orcutt,  in.  147. 

Ori<ren,  1.58-9,  290,  305,  322,  324,  358 
382,  425,  451,  455,  457,  462,  497,  499,  etc., 
611,  644,  685,  II.  72,  242,  398-9,  400 
416,  430,  436,  450,  467,  490,  507.  512, 
521,  539,  541,  568,  671,  681,  III.  53,  57, 


60.  82.    109,    338,    346,    357,    423,    444, 

449,  501,  505,  539. 
Ort,  III.  249. 

Osiander,  I.  12,  II.  457,  III.  95,  176. 
Oswald,  II.  50,  81-2,  295,  III.  195. 
Ouuhtred,II.  48. 
Our  Eternal  Home,  III.  53. 
Our  Heavenly  Home,  III.  53. 
Ovid,  II.  521. 
Owen,  I.  75,  91,  98,  121,  606,  II.  40,  172, 

403,  406,  474,   496,    515,   672,    III.  124, 

147.  151,  187,  201,  206,  441,  497-8. 
Oxford  (Bishop  of),  III.  143. 
Oxford  (Chancellor  of  Univ.),  I.  111. 
Oxford  Divines,  III.  76. 
Oxley,  H.  67. 

Pallzow,  HI.  347. 

Pa<re,  HI.  498. 

Pagini.  I.  522. 

Paine,  I.  104,  II.  22,  597,  in.  347. 

Paley,  I.  90,  556,  648,  II.  208,  510. 

Pal  f rev,  n.  558. 

Palgrave,  II.  643,  III.  262. 

Palmer,  I.  531,  in.  27. 

Pallister,  H.  488. 

Panzer,  II.  678. 

Parables  ol  Enoch,  I.  570. 

Paradiso,  II.  676. 

Paraeus.  I.  511,  II.  281,  457,  497,  693,    in. 

99,  176,  336. 
Pardajus,  II.  322. 
Parker,  1.49,    60,    72.    74,    112,  118,   16s, 

200,    ni.  147,  205,  279,    486,    489,  490, 

560. 
Parker  (On  Proph.),  H.  659. 
Parkhurst,  I.  195,  11.219. 
Papias,  I.  324,  451,  466,  495,  506,  II.  419. 

511,  HI.  31,78,  239. 
Parson,  H.  741. 
Parsons,  II.  683,  UL  327,  533. 
Partridge,  III.  111. 
Pascal,  I.  104,  135,  192,  m.  287. 
Pasor,  U.  212. 
Path  to  Paradise,  III.  70. 
Paterson,  in.  332. 
Paton,  II.  120,  468. 
Patriarchs,  Twelve,  U.  540. 
Patrick,  I.  313,  IL  417,  771. 
Patrick  (St.),  II.  540. 
Patterson,  III.  231. 
Pattison,  UI.  498. 
Paulinus.  I.  451,  491. 
Paulus,  I.  382,  II.  45,  m.  521. 
Peabodv.  IH.  509. 
Pearce,*1.54,  II.  253,  299,  322. 
Pearson  (Bh.).  II.  236. 
Pearson,  I.  532,  HI.  424,  569. 
Pecaut,  I.  436. 
Peebles,  III.  147. 
Peel,  HI.  149. 
Pellican,  II.  322. 
Pelt,n.  674. 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


6c3 


Pen n,  H.  66. 

Penrose,  I.  96. 

Perm.  Monthly,  HI.  507. 

Perfectionist,  The,  I.  461. 

Perowne,  II.  111. 

Perrv,  H.  541,  711,  HI.  84. 

Persic  Ver.,  II.  473. 

Perthes  (De),  III.  497. 

Peterman,  HI.  201. 

Peterson,  I.  538. 

Petrarch.  II.  676. 

Pezron,  II.  449. 

Pfaffius,  II.  474. 

Pfeiffer,  I.  313. 

Pfleideier,  II.  292. 

Philippi,  H.  414,  480,  482,  m.  159. 

Philipson,  HI.  412. 

Phillip,  II.  343. 

Phillips,  II.  322,  683. 

Philo,  H.  106,  448,  462,  474,  HI.  187,  411, 

418. 
Philo-Judams,  n.  1)6,  521,  in.  471. 
Philostorgius,  III.  s4. 
Phil  pot,  II.  677,  III.  328. 
Photius,  I.  496. 
Physicus,  H.  726,  HI.  281. 
Plato,  H.  521,  III.  532,  589. 
Pliny,  III.  535. 
Plutarch,  II.  521,  HI.  549. 
Piazzi,  III.  99. 
Pickering,  II.  212. 
Pickets,  II.  Kill. 
Picton,  HI.  499. 
Pictorial  Bible,  H.  609. 
Pictorial  His.  Engl.,  HI.  270. 
Piers,  I.  540,  II.  322. 
Pierson,  HI.  149. 
Pinkerton,  I.  133,  537. 
Piscator,  I.  382,  534,  538,  H  472.  474,  496, 

HI.  176,  317. 
Pise,  I.  515. 

Pius  1VT.,  Creed  of,  H.  573. 
Pococke,  H.  247,  404. 
Poiret,  III.  31  6,  538. 
Polvcarp.  I.  451,  455,  473,   482,  495,   497, 

ii.  382,  400,  572,  670. 
Pol  loch.  H.  540. 
Pond,  HI.  145. 
Poole,  I.  314,  HI.  501. 
Poor,  H.  297,  396,  426,  HI.  108. 
Pope,  II.  430,  517. 
Pope  (Le  Roy),  I.  65. 
Pop.  Science  Monthly,  I.  94,   140.   H.  239, 

263,  428,  488,  724,  726-8.  750,  IH.  148-7, 

155,  158,  208,  441,  499,  506,  508-9. 
Porphvrv,  I.  52,  384,   H.  246,  657,  HI.  475. 
Porter,  I.  58-9,  157,  II.  683. 
Porter  (Pres.),  HI.  142,  251. 
Porteus.  I.  647. 
Post,  IH.  154. 
Pot  hi  mis,  I.  495. 
Potter,  I.  410,  427,  459,  H.  726,  HI.  137, 

146,  575,  577,  580. 


Powell,  I.  88,  98,  420,  HI.  499. 

Poynet,  I.  531. 

Pratt,  I.  65:i,  III.  497,  501,  509. 

Preiswerk,  I.  148. 

Pre-Mill.  Essays,  I.  275,  H.  683. 

Presbyterian,  The,  III.  105,  157,  332. 

Presbyterian  (Central),  I.  551. 

Presbyterian  Quart.  Rev.,  I.  173,   385,   TL 

283,  HI.  211. 
Prescott.  H.  750,  HI.  275. 
Press,  The,  III.  410. 
Pressense,  I.  51,  59,  81,  159,  167,  212,  267, 

295,  299,  327-8,  377,  436,  438,  44:!,  450, 

466,  468,  471,  473,  485,  584,  589,  639, 
H.  118,  284,  312,  367,  398,  447,  470, 
472,  480,  512,  679,  729,  741,  750,  HL 
154,  206,  338,  363,  382,  535,  569. 

Prideaux,  H.  149,  622,  673. 
Pridham,  II.  472,  III.  195. 
Priest,  I.  568,  II.   235,  241,  303,  451,  520, 

547,  575.  709,  710. 
Priestlev,  I.  435,  485,  H.  197,  231,  HI.  316, 

412,  522,  534. 
Primasius,  H.  659,  HI.  372. 
Prime,  IH.  108. 
Princeton  Rev.,  I.  75,  90,  96,  110,  119,  124. 

168,  456,   458,    550,   567,    598,    610,    H. 

53,  206,  326,  437,  537,    622,  626-7,  724, 

758,  III.  63.  136,  150,  157,  201,  212,  231, 

273,  278,  331-2,  397,  409,  535. 
Prize  Peace  Essays,  H.  152. 
Procter,  I.  92,  94,"  II.  429,  III.  446. 
Proph.  News,  II.  67,  779,  III.  108. 
Proph.  Times,  I.  153,  296,  382,  402,  452, 

455,  464,  484,  490,   498,  534,    540.    007. 

658,  H.   36    40,  55,  72,  112,  191,  207-8, 

241,  282,  292,   296,  298.    314,   317,    319, 

321-2,  325,  328,  335,  362,  422,  451,  465, 

467,  489,  504,  531-2.  536,  548,  564,  567, 
583,  681-2,  685,  695,  764,  766,  709,  716, 
HI.  25,  48,  96,  107-8,  111,  133,  135,  139, 
141,  152,  169,  189,  193,  195,  235-6,  243, 
250,  305,  316,  317,  322,  331,  369,  398, 
409,  410,  431,  436,  460. 

Proude,  II.  141. 

Proudhon,  IH.  187. 

Prndentius,  H.  398. 

Psalterium  Salamonis,  I.  458. 

Purden,  II.  647. 

Purdon,  II.  322,  683,  710. 

Purpose  or  Existence,  The,  HI.  536. 

Purvev,  II.  191. 

Pusev,  I.  498. 

Putnam,  III.  147. 

Quarterly  Review;    see   British,    London, 

Lutheran,  etc. 
Quatrefases,  III.  500-1. 
Quensted't.  II.  428,  HI.  176. 
Quesnel.IL  322. 
Quick,  11.678. 
Quintard,  III.  107. 
Quiuten,  I.  54. 


654 


IKDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Qurieu,  III.  99. 

Enbctt,  II.  672. 

Radcliffe,  III.  507. 

Raffles,  III.  130. 

Ralston,  II.  125,   279,  282-3,   628,  III.  35, 
73,  100,  372. 

Ramsay,  III.  145,  195. 

Ramsev,  II.  672. 

Randall,  II.  73. 

Randolph,  III.  147. 

Randolph  (Rev.  Dr.),  III.  163,  179,  204, 
331 

Ranke,  I.  680,  III.  187. 

Rapp,  I.  537. 

Raumer,  III.  500-1. 

Ravanell,  II.  322. 

Rawlandson,  III.  326. 

Rawlinson,  II.  203. 

Raynaud.  1. 13. 

Read,  III.  108. 

Read e,  I.  86,  108. 

Reade  (Infid.),  III.  147. 

Reber,  III.  134,  573. 

Rechenberg   II.  672,  691. 

Reclus,  II.  157. 

Redeemer's  Last  Com.,  III.  256. 

Reed,  II.  36. 

Rees's  Cyclop.,  I.  450,  453,  472,  508,  II.  94, 
123,681. 

Reeves,  III.  262. 

Reiche,  II.  482. 

Reichel,  III.  501. 

Reimarus,  III.  347. 

Reineke,  II.  321-2,  682,  685,  700,  710,  739, 
758,  761-2,  763,  IH.  20,  305. 

Reinbard,  II.  292,  303,  430. 

Reland,  III.  33. 

Relig.  Cyclop.,  H.  358. 

Relijr.  Philos.  Journal,  1. 137, 157, 446,  III. 
145,521-2,  568. 

Renan,  I.  13,43,  60,  92,  97,  112,  169,  190, 
199,  263,  267-8,  286,  288,  354,  260,370, 
373,  384,  398,  424,  426, 428,  433,  436,  470, 
472,  513,  568,  622,  661,665,  11.40,  164, 
223,  559,  669,  720,  726,  732,  III.  147,  155, 
188,  359,  412,  427,  480,  482,  491,  519, 
523,  534,  577. 

Repertory,  Princeton,  II.  602,  634. 

Repository,  Bib.,  II.  636,  638. 

Reubelt,  III.  535. 

Reuss,  I.  32,  147,  158,  184,  204,  218,  258, 
282,  327,  348,  354,  364,  371-2,  408,  410, 
416,  436,  440,  459,  460,  472, 479,  484,  562, 
585,660,  680,  11.50,72,  249,  261-2,  266, 
585,  631,  669,  675,  III.  60,  73,  80,  349, 
363,  367,  382,  460,  601. 
Reville,  III.  384,  560. 
Revision,  I.   209,  317,  326,  548,    551,  5S1, 

587,  638,  714,  763. 
Rice,  II.  408,  HI.  83. 
Richard  I.,  II.  681. 
Richards,  II.  567. 


Ricbers,  III.  501. 

Ricbter,  I.  534,  II.  367,  599,  630,  III.  36. 

Riddle,  I.  56,  487. 

Ridley,  II.  677,  III.  275,  317. 

Rieger,  III.  327. 

Rierck,  II.  628. 

Riggenbach,  II.   682,   687,   689,    722,  730, 

740-1,  III.  109,  195,  320,  327,  358. 
Riland,  II.  673. 
Riley,  III.  311,  406. 
Rinault,  II.  398. 
Rinck,  II.  530. 
Ripon  (Bh.  of),  III.  409. 
Rizer,  II.  55. 
Roach,  11.668. 
Roberta,  II.  67,  695-6. 
Robertson,  I.  75,  464,  566,  III.  270. 
Robinson,  I.  020,  II.  514.  588. 
Robinson  (Rev.),  III.  215. 
Robison,  I.  40,  129,  II.   169,  230,   207,   412, 

475,  477,  499,  623. 
Rochall,  III.  501. 
Rodgers,  I.  584,  II.  282,  585. 
Rogers  (H.),  III.  506. 
Rogers,  I.  86,  96,  101,   105,   140,   146,  155, 

160,  217,  291,  II.  110,  776,  III.  180,   498, 

511,  535,  577. 
Rogers  (Refor.),  II.  077. 
Rohr,  I.  88. 
Rojas,  II.  678. 
Rolle,  III.  497. 
Rollicus,  11.490. 
Rollin,  III.  400. 
Romaine,  II.  252. 
Roos  I.  534,  538,  680,  II.  214,  292,  421,  668, 

675,  670,  702,  741,  III.  416,  501. 
Roscoe,  I.  132,  639. 
Rosenmiiller,  I.  53,  307,  II.  237,  244,    277; 

471,  181-2,111.416,501. 
Ross,  II.  219,  322. 
Rossler,  1.452. 
Rothe,  I.  8,  14,   15,  112,  470,  039,  051,  050, 

II.  118,  307,  425,  445,  459,  599,  028,  037, 
111.551,596. 

Rothschild,  II.  59. 

Rougeiiient.  III.  501. 

Rousseau,  III.  144,  592. 

Row,  I.  78,  89,  96,  137,  149,  159,  433,  688, 

III.  469,  474. 

Rowe,  I.  698,  III.  48,  88. 

Ruckert,  II.  72,  482. 

Rudd,  I.  511. 

Rudolph,  III.  306. 

Ruge,  I.  425, 

Rule,  II.  59. 

Rupertus,  II.  674. 

Rupp,  I.  119,   450,   536,    547,   III.  37,  268, 

416. 
Ruskin.I.  692,  III.  156,  201. 
Russell  (Bh.),  I.  450,   483-4,  485,  490,  548, 

II.  448-9,  451,  468,  III.  177. 
Russell  (C.  T.\  II.  29,  122,  232,  278,  290, 

326,  334,  383,  638,  III.  163,  269   272  401. 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


655 


Russell  (Dr.),  I.  320,  537,  III.  231. 
Russell  (Lord  J.),  III.  148,  201. 
Rutherford.  II.  673,  III.  317. 
Rutter,  I.  259,  382,  515,  II.  43,  91,  173,  206 

321,  372,  446,  451,  556,  734,  III.  66,  94, 

217,  300. 
Rycaut,  II.  187. 
Rvckel,  II.  676. 
Ryle,  11.421,  566,  619,  III.  107,  137,  195. 


Saadias,  II.  609. 

Sabiue,  III.  136,  195. 

Saccas,  III.  504. 

Sack,  I.  313. 

Sailman,  II.  66. 

Salisbury  (Marquis  of),  II.  723. 

Salmasius.  II.  214,  III.  275. 

Salvador,  I.  469. 

Samaritan  Ver.,  II.  709,  III.  400. 

Samuel  (R),  II.  467. 

Samuels,  II.  66. 

Sanborn,  I.  312,  348,  523,  II.  196,282,302, 

456,  III.  173. 
Sander,  II.  453,  III.  99. 
Sanderson,  I.  145. 
Sandy,  III.  349. 
Sandys,  II.  677. 
Sarbieski,  II.  141. 
Saturday  Rev.,  II.  59. 
Saunders,  I.  20. 
Saurin,  1.116. 

Savage,  II.  537,  727,  III.  158,  511. 
Savonarola.  I.  639. 
Saybrook  Platform,  III.  13.1 
Scaliger,  I.  448. 
Scapula,  II.  19. 
Schaden,  III.  501. 
Schaff,  I.  110,  121, 123,   199,  253,  264,296, 

428, 470,  483,  506,  532,  567-8,  686,  690, 

II.  321,  421,  427,  436,  470,585,  736,  III. 
78,  81,  94-5,  1:39,  300,  305,  310,  376,  380, 
384,  387,  418,  488,  515.  534,  596. 

Scheckenburger,  I.  264,  II.  482,  673,  702. 

Sckelling,  I.  72,  II.  736. 

Schellwig,  III.  233. 

Schem,  I.  485,  III.  201. 

Schenkel,  I.  135,  658,  699, 11.166,  191,  III. 

520,  523-4,  527,  577. 
Schenkendorf,  II.  619. 
Schlegel,  I.   104,  197,  226,  457,  4S3,  525, 

575,  681,  II.  33.  502,  III.  171,208,  427. 
Sclileiermacber,   I.  94,  102,    112,   168,  286, 

III.  359,  427,  486,  524. 
Scblessinger,  I.  429. 
Schloegel,  I.  691. 
Scbmetzer,  II.  401. 

Scbmid,  I.  30,  43,  158,  184.  327,  360,  370, 
438,  647,  657,  II.  427,  472,  475,  481,  555, 
716,  III.  34,  60.  172. 

Schmidt,  II.  33,  44,  III,  500,  508. 

Schmoller,  II.  78,  415. 

Schmucker   (J.    G.),   I.   96,    123,  126,  170, 


207,  325,  327,  525,  637,  680,  682,  688,  II. 
155,  285,  295,  351,  593,  600,  684,  751. 

Schmucker  (S.  M.),  II.  59. 

Schmucker  (S.  S.),  II.  153,  155,  III.  202, 
336. 

Schneider,  II.  474. 

Schodde,  I.  458. 

Schoebel,  III.  501. 

Schoetgen,  II.  214,  404,  455,673,702,  HI. 
83,  418,  571. 

Scholten,  I.  436. 

Schott,  I.  351,  III.  370. 

Schroeder,  II.  63,  253,  625. 

Schultetus,  II.  212,  in.  23. 

Schulz,  II.  464. 

Schultz,  IU.  363. 

Schwenkfeld,  I.  54,  119,  571. 

Scleusuer,  II.  19,  455,  465. 

Scotch  Couf.  1. 52. 

Scott  (Com.),  I.  262,  389,  432,  II.  51,  62, 
106,  213,  218-9,  223,  247,  253,  406,  412, 
452,  457,  465,  474,  487,  501,  520,  587, 
673,  751,  III.  99,  108,  148,  177,  196,  392. 

Scott  (Infid.),  III.  521. 

Scribner's  Monthly,  I.  129,  606,  II.  430, 
m.  137,  158,  497-8,  507. 

Sear,  II.  401. 

Sears,  in.  535. 

Sedgewick,  III.  497. 

See  boh  n,  II.  643,  692. 

Seebohm,  IH.  270. 

Seely,  I.  Ill,  601,  662. 

Seiss,  I.  48,  71,  296,  342,  382.  440,  450,  482, 
487,  491,  511,  514,  519,  524,  532-3,  538, 
541,  549,  553,  II.  22,  28,  33,  144,  206,  211, 
265,  282,  285,  292.  299,  317,  322,  325, 
335,  346,  355,  367,  393,  403,  421,  430,  433, 
450-1,  457,  466,  472,  477,  488,  504,  517, 
519,  520,  659,  683,  700-1,  717,  735,  758, 
III.  24,  46,  94-5,  105,  137,  145,  151,  153, 
168-9,  170,  175-6,  177,  186,  195,  202,228, 
233,  239,  241,  276,  304-6,  308-9,  317-8, 
320,  334,  371,  374,  380,  385,  461,  561, 
589. 

Selden,  II.  609,  771. 

Selnecker,  II.  282,  292,  317. 

Selwyn,  III.  107. 

Semisch,  I.  449,  452,  480,  495,  531,  II.  303, 
445,  511,  HI.  418. 

Semler,  I.  58,  198,  425. 

Seneca,  II.  521. 

Senex,  I.  658,  II.  35. 

Septuacrint,  II.  64.  189,  260.  270,  426,  462, 
464,  580,  709,  III.  396,  400. 

Sepp,  I.  160,11.188. 

Sermonizer,  I.  694. 

Sermons  (Univ.  Ch.),  II.  428. 

Serres,  HI.  497. 

Service,  I.  75. 

Severus.  I.  407,  484,  491,  682-3,  II.  671-2. 
675,  680. 

Seward,  I.  645. 

Seyffarth,  II.  144. 


COG 


INDEX    OF    AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Shaftesbury,  III.  13. 

Shakespeare,  II.  520. 

Skarpe,  III.  99. 

Shedd,   I.   50,  59,  318,  427,  452,  453,  482, 

486,  489,  496-7,  507,  531,  534,  II.  78. 
Shefer,  III.  147. 
Sheldon,  II.  673. 
Shenkel,  III.  460,  520,  523-4,  527,  577,— see 

Schenkel. 
Sherer,  I.  62,  182. 

Sherlock,  I.  54,  57,  126,  305,  HI.  399. 
Sherwin,  I.  538. 
Shields,  HI.  510. 
Skimeall,   I.  59,   326,  385,  440,    458,  480, 

482,  489,  490-1,  495,  497,  505,  515,  524, 

531,  II.  65,   149,  444,  450,509,  510,  511, 

522,  529,  531,  533,  622,  675,  HI.  83,  99, 

176,  195,  23!),  241. 
Shopenhauer,  H.  469,  III.  441,  475. 
Shuberr,  III.  500-1. 
Sibylline   Books,   I.  458,  486,  II.  101,  220, 

23<5,   340,   407,    521,  541,  572,  631,   649, 

669.  675,  680,  754,  771. 
Sigonius,  II.  641. 
Silliman  (Anna),  II.  453. 
Silliman,  I.  300. 
Simeon  (R.),  II.  131, 
Simon,  II.  66,  474,  476. 
Simplicius,  II.  521. 
Simpson  (Bb.),  II.  771. 
Simpson.  III.  413,  41 S. 
Sirr,  II.  20,  23,  281,  285,  292,  298,  367,  419, 

464,  482,  487,  492,  498,  501,  553,  561,  564, 

582.  638,  III.  195,  400. 
Sismondi,  III.  206. 
Six  Letters,  III.  76. 
Sleidan,  II.  216. 
Smalcald  Articles,  II.  672,  691. 
Smile,  II.  103. 
Smith  (Goldwin),  H.  157,  726,  716,  III.  145, 

155. 
Smith's  Bib.   Die,  I.  56,  96,   114,216.296, 

505,  II.  235,  668-9,  673.  676-7,  680,  687- 

8-9,  690,  692,  691,  701,  703,  706,  759,  III. 

20,  301,  365,  423. 
Smith  (Key),  II.  157,    166,    283,  530,  751, 

III.  46,  386. 
Smith  (T.),  II.  498. 
Smith  (J.  D.),  III.  51. 
Smith  (On  Dan'l.),  II.  657.  in.  26. 
Smith  (Speculations),  III.  509. 
Smith  (N.  Test.  His.),  I.  484,  H.  18,  59. 
Smith  (Pavne),  I.  169. 
Smith  (Pve),  I.  30,  164,  H.  517,  IIL  415, 

425,  497,  501. 
Smith  (Jos.),  I.  114,  537,  HE.  37. 
Smith,  I.  96,  II.  652,  673. 
Smyth,  III.  99.  464. 
Smythe,  III.  507. 
Smythe  (Infid.),  III.  147. 
Snell,  II.  472,  in.  195. 
Snow,  I.  618. 
Sinvv  (Miss),  in.  271. 


Snowden,  III.  42. 

Sober  Words,  IIL  145. 

Socrates  (His.),  I.  425. 

Solomon  (R.),  11.457. 

Somerset   (Duke   of),  I.   90,  307,  378,   388, 

469,  591,  613,  645. 
Sophocles,  II.  520. 
South,  I.  145,  II.  408. 
Southard,  III.  268. 
Southern  Churchman,  IIL  409. 
Spalatin,  I.  13. 
Spangenberg,  I.  537. 
Sparkes,  U.  658. 
Sparry,  IIL  201. 
Spaulding  (Bh.),  in.  187. 
Spauldinir,  1.  542,  691,  III.  195. 
Speaker's  Com.,  III.  474. 
Spear,  I.  44,  IIL  124. 
Spectator.  I.  380,  II.  729,  III.  492. 
Speer,  III.  274. 
Speiss,  III.  152, 505. 
Spence,  II.  626. 
Spencer,  I.  129,  147,  m.  206,  281,  441,  499. 

506,  508-9. 
Spencer  (Conf.  to  Augs.  Conf),  in.  195. 
Spencer,  I.  426,  II.  157,  724,  726,  746. 
Spener,  L  54,  124,  531,  540,  552,  n.  430. 
SpesFidelium.  in.  312. 
Spicer,  III.  145. 
Spinoza,  HI.  573. 
Spiritism  in  the  Bible,  HI.  145. 
Spiritualist  Conv. .  I.  95. 
Spiritual  Mag.,  I.  75. 
Spiritual  Teh-g.,  IU.  124. 
Sprague,  II.  751. 
Sprecher,  I.  56-7,  74,  81,  89,  98,  124,  129, 

166,   326,  401.  417,  427.  11.27.427,725, 

III.  179,  277,  281,  434,  143,  444,  511,  573, 

603. 
Spring,  I.  63,  70,  III.  409,  597. 
Springfellow,  II.  101. 
Springfield  Republic,  HI.  141 ,  202. 
Spurgeon,  I.  551,  III.  106,  169,  195,  213. 
Stackliouse,  I.  465. 
Stahl,I.  129. 
Stange,  II.  237. 
Stanley,  I.  75,  123,  154,  163,  169,  217,  229, 

295-6,  301,  516,  II.  118,   261,  505,   637, 

679.  736,  769,   771,  IU.  20,  26-7,  33,  77, 

134,  151,174.  182,  277,551. 
Starke,  I.  30,  II.  292,  454,  459. 
Staudlin,  11.652. 
St.  Clair,  IIL  508. 
Stearns,  HI.  189. 
Steele,  II.  169,  363,510,  III.  235. 
Steir,   I.  72,  382,  627,  II.  33,  43,  89,  190, 

421,  454,  459,  472,  476,  482,  492,  566,  585, 

606,  III.  23,  94,  106-7,  305-6. 
Stephen,  III.  571. 
Stephen  (Infid.),  III.  155. 
Stephens,  HI.  471. 
Stephenson,  III.  50.  106. 
Steudal,  U.  504,  IU.  515. 


INDEX   OF  AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


657 


Stevenson,  I.  54,  H.  634,  III.  150. 

Stewart  (Lects.  on  Lent),  III.  330. 

Stewart  (Uns.  Univ.),  II.  429. 

Stilling,  I.  74,  H.  290,  39!),  III.  99,  233. 

Stillingfleet,  I.  145,  177,  II.  097,  HL  430, 
501. 

Stockius,  II.  212. 

Stockton,  III.  313. 

Stolz,  II.  474. 

Stone,  in.  163-4.  266. 

Storr,  I.  43,  72,  251,  280.  314,  344,  370,  556, 
330,  n.  18,  205,  357,  399,  494,  554,  635-6, 
638,  III.  304. 

Storrs,  III.  201,  269. 

Stowe,  I.  70,  77,111.  349.  412. 

Strabo,  II.  521. 

Strange,  II.  659,  683. 

Strauss,  I.  9,  60,  92,  147,  268  359,  433,  IL 
191,  559,  723,  HI.  147,  155,  159,  163,  359, 
369,  467,  475,  482-3,   512,  520,  524,  527. 

StrSbel,  III.  364. 

Strong,  I.  320. 

Stuart,  L  112,  164,  173-4,  297,  300,  323,  450, 
480,489,  490,  529,540,  077,  H.  152,  185, 
220,  241,  264-5,  267,  270,  272,  279,  298, 
311,  340,  406,  411,  414,  452,  455,  472,574, 
577,  584,  620.  622-3,  6 17,  663,  665,  069, 
675,  680,  683,  706,  743,  753,  III.  41,  116, 
129,  135,  186,  367,  372,  377. 

Stuckenberg,  I.  126,  II.  427,  III.  138,  337, 
516. 

Sturges,  III.  65. 

Stutz,  III.  498. 

Suddard,  III.  187. 

Suetonius,  III.  589. 

Suicer,  II.  212,  322. 

Summius,  II.  66. 

Sumner  (Archb.),  I.  168. 

Sumner,  III.  498. 

Sun,  The  (N.  Y.),  I.  54. 

Swart z,  IL  628,  III.  274. 

Swedetiborg,  I.  58-9.  114,  118,  174,  290, 
II.  166,  230,  367,  in.  54,  275,  539,  573-4. 

Swift,  I.  20. 

Swiss,  Ver  ,  II.  317. 

Swormstedt,  I  569,  657,  II.  223,  380,  433, 
658,  768,  XII.  99,  150, 163,  274,  373,  378. 

Symington,  L  633. 

Svmpson,  I.  354. 

Svphers,  III.  492. 

S'vriac  Ver.  II.  ls9,  260,  299,  317,462,  465, 
"467,  473,  653,  737.  in.  301,  400. 

Syrus  (Ephraim),  II.  680. 

Tacitus,  n.  643,  III.  589. 
Taine,  IH.  483. 
Tait,  H.  428,111.  499. 
Talbot,  III.  107. 
Talitskoi,  II.  674. 
Talmage,  II.  153,  242,  III.  38.  156. 
Talmud,  L  60,  II.  261,   270,  313,   404,  HI. 
400,  415,  571. 


Targums,  II.  78,  254-5,  259,  266,  270-1, 
404,  511,  III.  392,  400,  402-4,  416,  423-4. 

Tasso,  III.  35. 

Tatian,  I.  451,  473,  495. 

Taunton,  II.  659,  683. 

Tausend-jahrige  Reich,  Das,  III.  203. 

Taylor  (Bh.),  I.  483,  509,  H.  398,450,  III. 
78. 

Taylor  (Is.),  II.  110,  III.  54.  211,  346. 

Taylor  (Jer.),  II.  45,  128,  III.  275. 

Taylor  (Old  Theol.),  II.  166,  192. 

Taylor  (Syntagma),  III.  568. 

Taylor  (Voice  of  the  Church),  I.  450,  482, 
521,524,534,  536,  611,682,  II.  162,  190, 
212,  219,  220,  305,  367,  448,  450,  484,  504, 
623,  770,  in.  105,  135,  176,  195-6,  241, 
317. 

Tazewell,  II.  673. 

Teacher,  The,  III.  141. 

Teaman,  II.  22. 

Telegraph,  The,  III.  154,577. 

Telesphorus,  II.  677. 

Tennyson,  II.  746. 

Tergaud,  II.  676. 

Terry,  II.  427. 

Tertullian,  1.48, 174,281,  286,  313,  451,453, 
466,  491,  496,  506,  510,  617,  643,  691,  H 
215,  250,  259,  277,  287,  297,  398,  400,  450, 
463,  467,  482,  483,  523,  525,  565,  648,670, 
681.  694,  708,  HI.  27,  52, 58, 169, 193,  239. 

Thackeray,  II.  594,  616. 

Thamer,  I.  119. 

Theirs,  I.  81,  II.  749. 

Theiss.  IH.  374. 

Thelwall,  HI.  148. 

Theocratic  Eng.  His.,  HI.  15. 

Theodore,  II.  701 

Theodore  (Mopsuestia),  HI.  486. 

Theodoret,  II.  189,  215,  259,  328,  398,  445, 
496,  504,  568,  632,  656,  673,  680, 689,  701, 
711,  HI.  33,  193. 

Theol.  Fac.  of  Dorpat,  I.  126,  H.  176. 

Theophilus,  1.431,473. 

Theophylact,  I.  568,  II.  189,  322,  410,  496, 
568,  680,  689. 

Theurer,  I.  658. 

Thiersch,  I.  639,  H.  445,  675. 

Thirlby,  I.  452. 

Thirty-two  Wonders,  III.  145. 

Tholuck,  I.  96,  102,  309,  425,  576,  II.  72, 
290,  435,  445.  468,  480-2,  496,  504,  723, 
III.  195-6,  278,  501,  515. 

Thomas  (Dr.),  I.  54,  II.  43,  45,  91,  278,  518, 
611,  665,  668,  695,  707,  HI.  26,  41,  50,  84, 
88, 142,  148,  260,  etc.,  274,  339,  373. 

Thomas  (Bom.  Com.),  H.  373. 

Thompson  (  Archb.),  II.  723. 

Thompson,  I.  31,  92,  129,  184,  198,  250, 
298,  371,  556,  616,  619,  632,  681,  H.  231, 
236,  298,  401,  630,  III.  33,  157,  499,  507, 
510. 

Thorndyke,  II.  673. 

Thorowgood,  II.  66. 


658 


index  of  authors,  books,  periodicals,  etc. 


Thorp,  I.  285,  540,  II.  778. 

Thorpe,  III.  195. 

Thorpe  (North  Myth.),  H.  521. 

Thruston,  II.  778. 

Thucvdides,  III.  266. 

Teschendorf,  I.  561,  597,  II.  66,  121 ,  185, 278, 

295,  301,  548,  608,  683,  III.  262,  265,  349, 

357. 
Tickn'or,  II.  751. 
Tillinghast,  I.  333. 

Tillotson,  I.  452,  II.  370,  III.  94,  106,  275. 
Tilton,  III.  283. 
Time  of  the  End,  I.  524,   534,  538,  541,  II. 

449,  III.  105,  176  195. 
Times-Star,  The,  I.  118,  III.  82,  201. 
Titman,  I.  199. 
Tocqueville  (IV),  II.  749,  761. 
Todd,  II.  668,  III.  374. 
Toland,  I.  146. 
Toldoth  Jesliu,  HI.  419. 
Tomlinson,  II.  51.  242,  446,  451. 
Toplady,  1.541,  II.  485,  III.  196. 
Townsend,  II.  96,  433,  474. 
Train,  II.  723. 
Trapp,  II.  322. 
Tregelles,  I.  73,  679,  681,  694,  II.  28,  246, 

277.587,  657-8.  661,  666-9,  679, 683,687- 

8,  697,  717,  III.  26,  107,  195,  374,  382. 
Trench,  I.  98,  568,  II.  19,  22,   25,  28-9,  36, 

401,  467,  475-6,  668,  679,  696,  in.  304-5, 

318,  330,  379. 
Triglot,  II.  474. 
Troutman,  III.  78. 
Trowbridge,  III.  509. 
Truth,   The,   I.  73,  II.   28,  702,   III.   253, 

305-6. 
Truth  Seeker,  The,  III.  522. 
Tubingen  Bible,  in.  11. 
Tullock,  I.  124,  III.  507,  575. 
Turnbull,  III.  438. 
Turner.  II.  668,  681,  III.  498. 
Turretin,  I.  210,  II.  622-3. 
Tuttle,  1.628,  HI.  145,  147,  521. 
Twelve  Patriarchs,    I.  217,   571,    II.  235, 

OlO. 

Twenty  Reasons,  II.  451. 

Twesten,  I.  96,  106,  III.  428,  487. 

Twisse,  I.  531.  535,  II.  539. 

Tyerman,  1. 117,  539,  540,  11.292,  HI.  236, 

277. 
Tyndale,  I.  672,  III.  317. 
Tyndall,  I.  85,  147,  534,  II.  188,  239,  374, 

429,  485,  488,  593,  724,  726. 
Tyng,   H.  162,  328,  444,  574,  702,  in.  78, 

106-7,  196,  251,  327,  330. 
Tyso,  I.  509,  630,  in.  83,  148. 


Ubertinus,  II.  677. 
Ueberweg,  I.  51,  455,  515,  681. 
Uhden,  I.  033,  645.  III.  583. 
Uhlhorn,  I.  96,  479,  518,  II.  728,  730. 
Uhlman,  I.  119,  698,  III.  534, 


Ulhorn.III.  515. 

Ulman,  III.  515,  549,  559. 

Ulrici,  I.  140,  II.  232,  III.  440,  498. 

Umbreit,  I.  159. 

Underwood,  III.  147. 

Universalist  Quart.,  II.  234. 

Universe  No  Desert,  The,  III.  446. 

Unseen  Universe,  I.  96,  II.  429. 

Upham,  I.  96,  II.  236. 

Upham  (On  Peace),  HI.  152. 

Urban,  III.  33. 

Uri,  II.  666. 

Urwick,  I.  694,  II.  505,  517,  III.  134. 

Usher,  II.  459,  622,  III.  99,  343,  346,  430. 

Usteri.  I.  577,  II.  445,  486. 

Uzziel,  III.  392. 


Valentine,  I.  451,  491,  II.  237. 

Valpv,  III.  99. 

Van  Ess,  II.  474,  III.  301. 

Van  Laun,  II.  395,  III.  275. 

Van  Mildert,  III.  233. 

Van  Noorden,  I.  376. 

Van  Valkenburg,  II.  636,  638. 

Vance,  I.  396. 

Vares,  I.  45. 

Variorum,  II.  36  7,  190,  324. 

Varley,  II.  779,  III.  141. 

Vaticanus  Cod.,  II.  191. 

Vaughan,  III.  97,  115. 

Vaughen,  I.  123,  645,  II.  314. 

Venillot,  II.  731. 

Vicentius,  I.  130. 

Victorinus,   1.451,  491,  490,    11.398,451, 

565,  649,  659,  671,    675,    681,   714,    III. 

372,  380. 
Vienne  and  Lyons,  Churches    of,    I.  496, 

II.  259. 
Vieriri,  I.  677,  II.  646. 
Vince,  I.  9S. 
Vincent,  III.  498. 
Vinet,  I.  146. 
Vint,  II.  149. 
Virgil,  11.521. 
Vitalis,  1.491,  n.  641. 
Vitringa,  I.  246,  II.  22,  24,  27,  72,  244,  608, 

657,  672,  676,  679,  687,  693,  III.  23,  48, 

129,  178,377,  380. 
Voghst,  III.  501. 
Vogkt,  I.  104,  III.  497. 
Volch,  in.  88. 
Volck,  I.  531. 
Volk,  I.  484. 
Volkman,  I.  185. 
Volkstaat,  II.  780. 
Volney,  I.  288. 
Voltaire,  I.  169,  288,  306,  426,   II.  690,  HI. 

475. 
Voysey,  III.  147. 
Vulgate,  II.  189,  204,  260,  297-8,  300,  308. 

462,  465,  496,    551,    580,  653,  737,   III. 

301. 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


659 


Waggoner,  L  180,  563,  579,  H.  29,  49,  50, 
83,  222-3,  411,  422,  529,  531,  541,  543, 
57G,  627,  631,  647,  HI.  41,  50,  88,  164, 
212,  266-7,  369. 

Wagner  (A.),  HI.  501. 

Wagner,  III.  497-8,  575. 

Wahl,  II.  14,  212,  218, 

Wake,  I.  487. 

Wakefield,  II.  36. 

Walcb,  I.  126,  427,  II.  451,  III.  106,  175. 

Waldegrave,  I.  58,  64,  161,  312,  417,  456, 
694,  II.  206,  219,  271-2,  279,  292,  365, 
437,  510,  540,  622,  625,  628,  HI.  46,  135, 
168,  183  233,  285,  255,  328. 

Walker,  I.  101,  185,  435,  III.  510. 

Wallace,  II.  648,  III.  144,  276,  497,  500. 

Walley,  I.  541. 

Walmslev,  II.  708. 

Walsingham,  III.  276. 

Wangle,  II.  647. 

Warburton,  I.  238,  303,  310,  648,  H.  442, 
498,  672. 

Ward,  I.  264,  II.  36,  46,  406,  III.  179, 
195. 

Wardlaw,  I.  90,  96. 

Warner,  I.  298,  HI.  33,  51. 

Warren,  I.  692,  II.  221. 

Warring,  III.  498-9. 

Washburn,  I.  75,  III.  257,  509. 

Wasson,  II,  730. 

Waterland,  I.  126,  453,  HI.  346. 

Watson,  I.  354,  475. 

Watson  (Infid.).  III.  147. 

Watts,  I.  642,  II.  300,  430. 

Watts  (Infid.),  III.  147. 

Wayland,  III.  236. 

Wavmarks,  II.  6SS,  HI.  273. 

W.*E.  B..  III.  92. 

Weber,  III.  23. 

Webster,  II.  4Tf>. 

Webster  (D.),  II.  779,  III.  447. 

Webster  (On  Peace),  III.  152. 

Webster  and  Wilkenson,  I.  76,  HI.  94. 

Wedekind,  III.  338. 

Weekly,  The  (Woodlmll's),  HI.  101. 

Wegscbneider,  III.  347. 

Wei  gel,  III.  539. 

Weil,  II.  759. 

Weisenger,  I.  577. 

Weiser,  III.  139. 

Weisman,  II.  679. 

Weiss,  II.  730,  III.  147.  515. 

Wells,  III.  141. 

Wendle,  III.  157. 

Werner,  III.  501. 

Wescott,  I.  76. 

Wesley  (J.),  I.  117,  539.11.292,  367,  412, 
427,  430,  435,  446,  457,  474,  484,  488, 
521,  549,  HI.  99,  100,  106,  135,  196,  236, 
277. 

Wesley  (C),  I.  540,  II.  353,  427,  430,  434, 
HI.  196. 

West,  I.  125,  482,  4S9,  515,  524,  538,  551, 


553,  555,  n.  321,  482,  623,  628,  in.  204, 

327,  331. 
Westcott,  III.  349. 
Western  Chr.  Advocate,  I.  484,  540,  652, 

II.  565,  in.  146. 
Westminster  Ass.  Annot.,  II.  214. 
Westminster  Conf.,  I.  110,  124,  III.  168. 
Westminster  Rev,  I.  68,  91,  347,  436,  472, 

478,  II.  116.  164,  242,  253,  343,  411,  563, 

622,  723,  IU.  36,  48,  146,  180,  187,  278, 

437,  468. 
Wetstein,  I.  195,  297,  11.220,  368,  405,454, 

521,  627,674,  III.  129,  301,  371. 
Whately,  I.  76,  98,  124,  212,  271,   670,   II. 

94,  123,  282,  401,  III.  208,  483. 
Whedon,  II.  234. 
W  be  well,  in.  562. 
Whiston,  I.  486,  487,  538,   II.  66,  III.  99, 

148,  399,  501. 
Whitby,  I.  36,  262,  450,  464,  472,  482,  484, 

548,   II.  49,    76,  84,   216,   221,   265,  408, 

448,  455,  481,   498.  546,  554-5,  626,  673, 

III.  39,  177,  etc.,  239,  346. 

White,  I.  527,  II.  230  626,  657,  IU.  509. 

White  (Infid.),  III.  447. 

White  (Sev.-Uay-Adv.),  III.  142,  150,  163, 

263,  etc.,  265,  etc. 
White  (U.  S.  Min.),  HI.  138. 
Whitfield,  I.  540. 

Whiting,  I.  541,  II.  45,  246,  III.  145. 
Whittaker,  I.  634,  II.  672-3,  HI.  148. 
Whittle,  in.  332. 
Whright,  II.  727,  IU.  206. 
Wichart,  III.  501. 
Wieseler,  I.  486. 
W.  I.  G.,  1.264. 
Wigand,  II.  673. 
Wilberforce,  II.  723. 
Wilberforce  (Bh.),  III.  107. 
Wild,  I.  684,  II.  67,  153,  206,  695,   764, 

778,  III.  26,  100,  168,  274. 
Wiley,  III.  182. 
Wilkinson,  II.  414. 
Williams,  I.  127,  622. 
Williams  (Bh.),  II.  673. 
Williams  (Essays),  III.  425. 
Williams  (I.),  III.  372. 
Williamson,   I.   81,    105-6,   164,  404,  422, 

557,  II.  29,  50,  233,  469,  III.  511. 
Wilson  (Dr.).  I.  163,  633,  684,  II.  241,  314, 

564,  683,  III.  25,  48,  104,  106,   145,   236, 

331,  394,  575. 
Wilson  (His.),  II.  643. 
Wilson  (Isr.  Orig.),  II.  66. 
Wilson  (Pre-His.  Man),  III.  500. 
Winans,  III.  147. 
Winchell,  III.  509. 
Winchester  (Bh.  of),  II.  723. 
Winebrenner,  I.  536. 
Wines,  I.  217,  219,  224,   227-8,  238,  298, 

311,   II.  100-1,  126,  355,  417,  608,  610, 

777-8,  780,  HI.  16,  430,  432,  592-4. 
Wing,  II.  241. 


660 


INDEX   OF   AUTHORS,    BOOKS,    PERIODICALS,    ETC. 


Winslovv,  II.  173,  501. 

Wintlirop,  I.  63,  164,  614,  II.  246,  282,  406, 

487,  540,  638,  III.  179,  195. 
Wirt,  I.  536. 

Wisdom,  Book  of,  H.  585. 
Wise,  II.  493. 
Wise(Rab.),  III.  155,  414. 
Wiseman,  III.  498. 
Witnessing  Church,  III.  256. 
Witsius,  I.  320,  II.  279,  282,  285,  HI.  430. 
Wittie,  II.  447. 
Wittenberger,  The,   II.  153,  727,  HI.  203, 

434. 
Wolf.  I.  53,  II.  66,  471,  III.  498. 
Wolf  (Miss),  III.  135,  236. 
Wolfe,  III.  145,  421. 
Wolff,  III.  99. 
Wollaston,  I.  93. 

Wood,  I.  511,  538,  II.  488,  in.  99, 148,  331. 
Wood  (Pre-Mill.),  III.  169. 
Woodhouse,   I.  548,  H.  39,  195,  472,  687, 

III.  177,  372. 
Woods,  I.  76,  III.  204. 
Woodward,  II.  193,  III.  195. 
Woolley,  I.  60. 
Woolman,  II.  446. 
Woolsey,  I.  699. 
Woolston,  I.  54. 
Wordsworth,  I.  382,  II.  322,  334,  625,  628, 

646,  741,  III.  300,  367,  430,  498. 


World's  Salvation,  The,  HI.  256. 
Worman,  I.  488,  540,  III.  78. 
Worsley,  II.  66. 
W.  R.  D.,  11.207. 
Wright,  III.  147. 
Wiiuch,  III.  347. 
Wycliffe,  I.  123-4,  H.  678, 
Wynn,  II.  727,  III.  53. 

York  (Archb.  of),  I.  94. 

Youman,  III.  509. 

Youmans,  II.  727. 

Young,  I.  74. 

Young  (B.),  III.  271. 

Young  (Christ  of  His.),  III.  535. 

Zanchius,  II.  673. 
Zeno,  III.  549. 
Zeisius,  I.  21. 
Zeltner,  II.  191. 
Ziethe,  I.  686,  HI.  23. 
Zimmerman,  II.  643. 
Zion's  Herald,  I.  540. 
Zockler,  I.  138,  II.  249,  III.  498. 
Zollman,  I.  85,  III.  497. 
Zoroaster,  II.  155. 
Zurich,  Divines  of,  II.  679. 
Zwingli,   I.  124-5,  527,  635,   667,   II.  216, 
672,  679,  III.  105. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


The  numbers  I.  II.  III.  denote  the  volumes,  and  the  figures  refer  to  the  pages  indicated. 


Abecedarians,  I.  55. 

Ability  of  God,  II.  522-3,  552.     See  Power, 

Faithfulness. 
Abomination  of  Desolation,  II.  650. 
Abraliamic  Covenant,    I.    293,    etc.       See 
Covenant, 
essential,    I.    292, 
295,  338,  etc.,  II. 
137,     144,    444, 
III.      132,     244, 
257,      309,     etc., 
369,     383,      561, 
565. 
"  and     kingdom,     I. 

285,      etc.       See 
Cov.,  Kingdom. 
"  "  perpetuity     of,     I. 

214,      etc.       See 
Cov.,    Kingdom, 
Theocracy, 
renewed,     I.     322, 
329.      See   Cov., 
the  New. 
Abraham's  History,  III.  433,  492. 
Abuse,  personal,  III.  231-2. 
Accommodation  theory,  I.  198,  459. 
Acts,  The,  III.  358. 

Accountability,   III.   529.      See   Responsi- 
bility. 
Adam,    Second,    I.  572,  614,  II.  129,  157, 
348,  486,  488,  in.  557. 
"  "        destiny    of    restored,    II. 

467. 
"  "         dominion  of,  I.  572,  etc., 

II.  142,  195,  487-8,  581. 
Adam's  Colony,  II.  112,  468. 
Adoption,  I.  211,  403,  H.  237,  259,  HI.  368. 
Advancement  in  knowledge,  I.  16. 
Advent,  First,  I.  152,  II.  342,  III.  418,  419. 
First  and  Second,  I.  242,  282,  365, 
385,  626,  671,  II.  166,  169,  176, 
184,   187,   197,  III.  79,  218,  312, 
423,  529,  575. 


Advent,  Second,  HI.  59,  61,  245,  299,  377, 

398. 
"         apost.    teaching,    I.    471, 

etc.,  478,  H.  17,  71,161, 

316. 
denied,    I.    444,    461,    II. 

166,    343,    III.    134-5, 

141-2,  160,  165-6,  187, 

242,  258,  300,  425,  527, 

etc. 
"         Early  belief  in  nearness, 

I.   183,   470,    472,    641, 

695. 
"        explained,  I.  473,  etc.,  H. 

318.  See  Interval 
Stages. 

"  "         interval  in,  II.  318,  328, 

331,  338.     See  Interval 
Stages, 
and  kingdom,  II.  562,111. 
382,     422,    426.        See 
Kingdom,      Theocracy, 
Reign,  etc. 
"         and  the  millennium,  ill. 
98. 
and  Mt.    Sinai,    III.   18, 
etc.,  302,  305. 
"  "        nearness  of,  I.  471,  477, 

n.  170,  186,   218,  316. 

319,  331,  III.  97,  100-1, 
102-6,  119,  132-3,  141, 
159,  167-8,  180,  182, 
384,  424.     See  Signs. 

"  necessary  for  salvation, 
III.  316,  352-4,  395, 
423,  425,  503,  520,  528, 
etc.,  539,  574,  586.  See 
essential. 

"  "        opinions,    II.    164,    etc., 

168,  343. 

"  "        and  overthrow  of  Jeru- 

salem, n.  34. 

"  "         permanent,  II.  342.      See 


662 


INDEX   OF    SUBJECTS. 


Perpetuity  of  Kingdom, 
etc. 
Advent,  Second,  personal,  I.  569,  570,674, 

II.  76,  86,  139,  156, 
164,  180,  etc.,  189,  etc., 
208,  etc,  217,  etc.,  347, 
365,  410,  412,  HI.  59, 
305,  377,  384-5,  528. 
See  Visible. 

perverted,  II.  165,  220. 
See  spiritualized,  death, 
unbelief,  etc. 

"  "         Pre-Millennial,    II.     161, 

etc.,  167,  174,  etc.,  194, 
342,  514,  IH.  345.  See 
Judgeship,  Judgment- 
Day,  Reign,  Kingdom, 
Earth  renewed,  First 
resurrection,  etc. 

"  "        precious,  I.  249,  340,  385, 

467,  477,  580,  695,  II. 
74,155.  160,  167,196-7, 
388,  402,411,  444,  513, 
590,  598",  735,  737,  777, 

III.  141,  167-8,  170, 
218,  309,  312,  314,  316, 
319,  326,  330,  354,  384, 
449,  451-2,  457,  528-9, 
539,  etc.,  575-6.  See 
Hope,  Kingdom,  The- 
ocracy, Salvation,  Re- 
demption, etc. 

"  "         prominency   of,    III.   167, 

299,  etc.,*  310,313,  315, 
317,  321,354,  381,  384, 
529. 

"  "         refreshing     and     restitu- 

tion, II.  463-4-5. 

"  "         spiritualized,     III.      179, 

300, 527,  etc.  See  death, 
perversions,      unbelief, 

stages  of,   H.    315,    318, 
331-2,  4 IS,  700,  III.  18, 
102,  113,  133,  159,  160, 
164,  302,  etc.,  301,  307. 
and   time,    III.   96.    308. 
See  Chronology,  Time, 
Signs, 
visible,  III.  182,  299,  etc., 
305.     See  personal,  vis- 
ible. 
"         world's  conversion,    III. 
136,    172,    190-1,    381. 
See  Conversion  of  the 
world. 
Adventists,   in.  11,  114.     See   History   of 
the  Doctrine. 
Seventh-Day,   I.    536,    II.   79, 
323,   602-3,    575,    HI.    142, 
163-4,211,263,  etc.,  339. 
Advents,  two  future,  II.  190. 
Advocates,  Pre-Millennial, I.  See  History  of 


Chiliasm   in  Vol.    1,  p.   450, 
etc.,  and  III.  116,  135,  151, 
153,  179,  194-5,  199, 200,  232, 
238-9,  248. 
Advocates,  Jewish,  III.  408-9.     See  Jewish 

belief. 
Agag,  m.  403. 

Aire  and  ages,  II.  408.  411,  412,  425. 
Ajre,  end  of  the,  II.  420,  etc.,  424,  IH.  587. 
"     evil,  m.  184,  188. 
"     Father  of  the  coming,  II.  426. 
Ages,  King  of,  II.  411,  412. 
Age  and  resurrection,  II.  422. 

"     Solomonic,  II.  524. 
Ageda,  III.  425. 
Agrarian  Law,  the,  III.  596. 
Agreement  in  outlines,  I.  491. 
Aion,  meaning  of,  II.  421,  424,  514. 
Air  theory,  the,  II.  532-3. 
Albigenses,  I.  324,  521,  II.  265,  III.  174. 
Alexandrian   Interpretation,  I.  51,  59,  338, 
499",  507,  II.  214,  398.     See 
Interpretation. 
Philosophy,  III.  187. 
All,  usage  of,  I.  379,  II.  363,  511,  513,  549. 
Allegorical  interpretation,  I.  50,  511.     See 

Interpretation. 
American  Chiliastic  advocates,  I.  543. 
Anabaptists,  1.44,  118,  342,  529,  532,  534, 
552,  601,  639,  II.  103,  203,  216,  573,  637, 
111.11,51,  70,175,270. 
Analogy,  III.  343,  etc. 

of  Faith,  II.  512,  521. 
Ancient  of  Davs,  the,  III.  25-6. 
Anprel  of  the  Churches.  III.  378. 
Angelic  Brethren,  I.  54. 

"         communication,  III.  446. 
influence,  II.  619,  620-1. 
rule,  II.  598. 
Angels,  coming  of,  II.  176-7. 
fallen,  III.  188. 
judged,  n.  620. 
"         ministrations  of,  II.  618,  etc. 
Anglo-Israelism,  II.  66. 
Animals,  deliverance  of,  II.  483,  etc. 
Ann  Lee,  I.  204,  552. 
Anointed,  God's,  III.  540. 

Saints,  II.  579,  582. 
Anointing  with  oil,  III.  390. 
Anonymous  Chiliastic  writers,  I.  547. 
Antagonism,   III.  231.      See   Perversions, 

Unbelief. 
Anthropomorphism,  III.  573. 
Antichrist,  1. 654,  682,  II.  105. 183, 208,  etc., 
231,326,  328,377,  654-5,  656, 
658,  668,  691,  III.  134,  156, 
160,  162,  188,  586. 
"  and  army,  II.  764-5. 

"  and  cause  of  war,  II.  759. 

"  characteristics  of,  II.  691,  698, 

etc.,  712,  721,  728,  750,  758. 
"  destruction  of,    II.   713,   740, 

766-7-8. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


663 


Antichrist,  development  of.  III.  509. 

"  history  of  views,  II.  670,  etc., 

680,  etc..  690,  etc. 
march  of,  II.  760-2. 
"  meaning  of,  II.  696-7. 

miracles  of,  III.  161,  163. 
"  personal,  II.  679,  etc.,  718. 

power  of,  II.  712,  740,  751,  etc., 
765 
"  preparatory  tendencies,  II.  720, 

etc.,  748,  etc.,  770. 
"  rovelation  of,  II.  700,  750. 

"  to  whom  applied,  II.  673,  etc., 

680,  etc. 
"  various  applications  of  proph- 

ecv,   11.683,   etc.,  687,  etc., 
691,  etc. 
"  worship  of,  III.  161 

Antiochus  Epiphanes,  I.  677,  II.  249,  650, 

656-7. 
Apocalypse,  the,  III.  366.  etc.,  382,  etc. 

"  canonicity    denied,    III.  367, 

382. 
fulfilment  of,  III.  133. 
"  how  interpreted,  II.  715. 

'*  interpretation  of,  111.  371,  etc., 

378,  etc. 
reception  of,  I.  484,  II.  264. 
Apocryphal  books,  I.  416,  486,  II.  236,  III. 

572,' 669,  675. 
Apologies,  abject,  I.  492. 
Apologetics,  concessions  of,  I.  188,  460. 
Apology  A.  C,  I.  532. 

for  writing,  II.  732-3,  738-9,  745. 
Apostasy,  I.  102,  II.  689,  691,  III.  119. 
Apostles,  how  quote  prophecy,  III.  185. 

and   Kingdom,    I.  77,  433,   436, 
438,  443,   415,  459,  471.      See 
Kingdom,  theocracy. 
Apostolic  attitude,  I.  274,  280,  479,  695,  II. 
17,  19,  161. 
creed,  I.  530. 
"        brethren,  II.  676. 
Apostoolians,  I.  537. 
Argumentation,  how  conduct.    III.  243-4, 

see  Preface. 
Ark,  the  typical,  II.  487. 
Armageddon,  II.  76 2-3,  in.  24. 
Armies,  standing,  III.  149. 
"        the  two,  II.  764-5. 
Armillus,  II.  218. 
Articles,  Smalcald,  I.  532. 
Arts  and  Sciences  in  Mill,  II.  147. 
Asceticism,  I.  501. 
Asiatismus,  I.  425. 
Asmoneans,  II.  60. 
Astronomical      objections,     II.    579,     III. 

562-3. 
Assurance,  III.  359,  475. 
Assyrian,  the,  II.  714. 
Athanasian  Creed,  I.  532. 
Atonement,  III.  437.     See  Christ's  death, 
blood. 


Augsburg  Confession,  I.  123,  531-2,   637, 

666,  III.  175,  176,  202-3. 
Awake,  usage  of,  II.  256,  258. 

Babylon,  II.  707,  III.  142,  160,  272. 

"         Jewish  return  from,   II.  59,  83, 
89. 
Balaam's  prophecy.  III.  401,  etc. 
Baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,   III.  64,  etc., 
464-5,  598. 
of  fire,  III.  80,  etc. 
of  the  Holv  Ghost  and  fire,  II.  595, 
613. 
"  "    "       "         "       "     "     limited, 

III.  81. 
Baptist  Confession,  I.  531.     See  Bunyan's 

Confession. 
Baptists,  I.  687. 

Seventh-Day,  III.  11. 
Faith  of,  III.  135. 
Barbourism,  III.  269.     See  Barbour. 
Barchocheba,  I.  469. 
Barkers,  I.  54. 
Barren  woman,  II.  130,  etc. 
Battle  of  the  great  Day,  II.  751,  etc.,  767, 

etc.     See  War. 
Beaconsfield,  Lord,  II.  55,  III.  148. 
Beast,  human  government,  III.  12,  15. 
Beds,  of  Pal.  149  :  5,  II.  615. 
Belffic  Confession,  I.  531. 
Begotten,  the  first,  II.  183,  190,  257-8,  300, 

303,  477. 
Believer,  characteristic  of,  III.  322. 
Believers,  III.  76.  78,  142,  271,  339. 

judgment  of,  II.  385,  etc.,  389, 
etc. 
Berlin,  III.  157,  201. 

Bible,   book   for   the   people,  I.  116.     See 
Scripture. 
"        beginning  and  ending  of,  II.  434. 
"        to  be  reverently  studied,  I.  117. 

and  science,  the,  III.  498.     See  Sci- 
ence. 
Bigotry,  I.  417,  465,481,  550,  etc.,  635,  640, 
653,  II.  103,  226,  309,  333,  III.  139,  142, 
234,  261,273-4,275,  etc.,  327,  338-9,378. 
See  Charity,  lack  of. 
Birth,  usage  of,  II.  257,  259,  300,  477. 

future,  III.  80. 
Blessings  forfeited  and  restored,  I.  106,626, 
II.  128,   141,  etc.,   146-9,  III. 
455,  586. 
future,  III.  453,  455-6,  461,   etc. 
See   Spiritual    and    Temporal 
blessings.  , 
Blood  of  Jesns,  III.  431. 
Bockelson,  III.  178. 
I    Body,  the,  II.  320. 

"      resurection  of,  II.  228,  etc.,  236,  239, 
250,  304,  308. 
"  denied,  II.  230,  272. 
"      spiritual,  III.  461. 
Bohemian,  Prot.,  I.  521. 


664 


INDEX   OF    SUBJECTS. 


Bourignan,  Antoinette,  I.  54,  74. 
Bozrali,  in.  22,  24. 
Brethren,  the  (Dunkards).  I.  536. 
Bride,  the,  H.  132,  324,  HI.  39,  301,  305. 
Brooklyn,  III.  138,  157. 
Brothers,  R.,  H.  112. 
Biichnerism,  IH.  291.     See  Biichner. 
Bunyan's  Confession,  I.  53G,  687.    SeeBun- 
yan. 

Cabala,  I.  48. 

Call  of  the  Gentiles,  I.  211,  223,  392.  394. 
396,  etc.,  399,  402,  404,  408,  etc.,  H.  68, 
m.  526. 
Camisards,  HI.  70,  270. 
Canaan,  no  type,  IH.  61. 
Canon,  the,  HI.  363-4. 
Captive,  usage,  II.  254. 
Carcass,  the,  H.  320. 

Carnality,  charge   of,  H.  343,   436,    443-5, 
540,  571,  604,  HI.  80,  229,  230,  450,  460- 
1,  556,  589. 
Catastrophism,  II.  42^-9. 
Cathari,  II.  676,  IH.  74. 
Catholic  Apostolic  Church,  I.  536,551,  IL 

317,  324, 568,  HI.  28,  78  271. 
Cedars,  H.  580. 

Cerintlms,  I.  443,  465-6,  485,  HI.  232. 
Changes,    future,   HI.  29.     See    Blessings, 
Mill.,    New   Heavens  and   New    Earth, 
Reign,  etc. 
Charity,  I.  10,  II.  226. 

lack  of,  III.  139, 142, 144,  234,  274, 
378.     See  Bigotrv,  Persecution. 
Chastening-,  why,  II.  590,  744. 
Chicago,  IH.  138, 157. 
Child-bearing,  future.  II.  146. 
Children  of  the  Day,  H.  410. 
"  God,  IL  2!ts. 
saved,  III.  262. 
Chiliasm,  III.  326.     See  Chiliastic  history, 
Millennium, 
"         founded  on  the  Covenants,  1.326. 
See  Covenants. 
Chiliastic  history,  I.  450,  458,  461,  465, 480, 
etc.,  490,  etc.,  494,  etc., 498, 513,  524,  545, 
554, 641,  644,  665. 
Chiliasts,  apostles,    I.   267,  443,   449,  494, 
497, 
early  church.  I.  318.  324, 365,  449, 
458,    462,  480,   490,    494,  etc., 
49S,  etc.,  H.  161,  etc. 
Christadelphians,  I.   480,    537,  H.  45,  278, 
621,    634,   674,   HI.   11,   142,    260,    etc., 
339. 
Christ,  ability  of,  III.  72,  182,  354, 359, 366, 
395,  411,  473,  514,  etc.,  533,  564. 
See  power  of, 
All  in  all,  HI.  579,  601. 
"        appearance  of,  H.  560. 
"        army  of,  II.  764,  766. 

body  of,  III.  578. 
"        controverted,  I.  167. 


Christ,  Church  and  the,  I.  596.    See  Church. 

David's  Son,  HI.  370-1, 537, 557,  559, 

565,  570.     See  Davidic  Covenant. 

"        Davidic    relationship    retained,    L 

339,  346,  352,  359. 

death  of.  I.  383,  HI.  420,  438,  480-3, 

564,  571. 
Deliverer,  HI.  182-4,  188,  194,  209, 
210,  213,  214,  294,  359,  420-1,  429. 
See  temporal  deliverer. 
"        dishonoring  of,   IH.  543,   552,  577, 
589. 
divine,  I.  539,  etc..  562,  etc.,  II.  187, 
III.  354,   356,  415,  etc.,  420,  etc., 
424,  483,  530,  etc. 
"        divine-human,   1.560,  etc.,  565,  IL 
123,  199,  633,   700,111.415,  etc., 
447,  467,  477,  etc.,  512,  530,  etc., 
537,  etc. ,  552,  593,  601. 
"        enemies  of,  I.  579,  766.      See  Anti- 
christ, 
essential,  I.  78,  333. 
explained,  III.  349,   etc,  448.     See 

meaning1, 
exalted,  III.  403,  531-2,  542,  552-3, 
602.     See  greatness,  power,   etc. 
faithfulness  of,  IH.  542. 
"        foreknowledge  of,  III.  485. 
Ful filler,  I.  329,  II.  152. 
greatness  of,  I.  31,  II.  582,  766,  III. 
427,  438-9,   533,   553,   576.     See 
divine,  perfect,  reign,  etc. 
"        greatness  of  His  work,  IH.  533,550, 
etc.     See  Creation,  Redemption, 
Restitution,  Salvation,  etc. 
"        glorified  in  His  Saints,  H.  596. 
"        glorious,  I.  249.      See   appearance, 
exalted,  etc. 
honoring  of,  IH.  214,  535,  552,  etc., 
the  Hope,  HI.  310,  578-9. 
humanity  of,  III.  538-9,  541 ,  552-3, 
555,   557,   etc.,  560,   564-5.     See 
divine-human. 
Infallible  Head,  III.  550-1. 
inheritance  of,  H.  773,  IH.  34,  37, 
49,  463,  586.     See  Davidic  Cove- 
nant, David's  throne,  Inheritance 
of  Jesus. 
"        interest  in  His  person,  HI.  130,  153, 
295,  349,  356,  513,  535,  537,  554. 
Jewish  King,  I.  427,  II.  94,  205.    ■ 
"        Kingdom  of,   I.  414.     See  inherit- 
ance, kingdom,  theocracy,  Davidic 
Covenant,  reign,  etc. 
"        King  of  kings,  II.  578.    See  suprem- 
acy, etc. 
"        kingly   office   not  in  ministry,  II. 

597-8. 
"        knowledge  of  time,  HI.  93-4. 
"        law,  and  the,  I.  373. 

lives  of,  III.  560,  5«0. 
"        marriage  of,  III.  39,  etc.     See  Mar- 
riage. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


665 


Christ,  meaning  of,  I.  385,  441,447,  569,  II. 
180,  556-7,  in.  228,  350,  567,  etc., 
569,  etc. 
miracles   of,  III.  472-3,   479,   514, 
521. 

"  miracle-working,  I.  91,  93,  97,  II. 
156.  See  supernatural,  miracu- 
lous, power,  etc. 

"      name  perverted.  III.  515,  568,  etc. 

"       no  writer,  I.  271-2,  627. 

"       offices  of,  in.  584. 

"  perfect,  I.  5S4,  701,  II.  307,  431, 
433,  536,  HI.  315,  354,  356,  364, 
411,  419,  420  438,  454,  475,  479, 
514,  etc.,  531,  533,  535,  550,  596, 
600.  See  divine,  infallible  head, 
etc. 

"  personally  present,  II.  533,  561,  563, 
766.  See  Son  of  Man,  visibility, 
epiphany,  parousia. 

"  power  enforced,  when,  m.  172,  453, 
529. 

"       pre-existence  of,  III.  538. 
Priest,  II.  601,  etc. 
Priesthood  of,  in.  191,  456. 

"       prophet  like  Moses,  HI.  28,  426. 
Redeemer,  III.  449,  etc., 453-4,  529. 
See  redemption,  salvation,  curse, 
evil,  etc. 

"  reign  of,  U.  504,  532,  536.  561,  768, 
in.  213,  370,  539,  543,  548,550, 
553,  555,  586.  See  supremacy, 
Theocratic  King, Theocracy,  king- 
dom, Reign  of  the  saints,  etc. 

'*  reign  perpetual,  n.  630,  etc.  See 
kingdom,  Theocracy,  Perpetuity, 
etc. 

"      rejoicing,  HI.  602. 

"       representative  of  God,  m.  537,  etc. 

"  Restorer,  I.  250,  H.  76,  78,  152, 
etc.,  186,  195,  307,  430-1,  466, 
468,  472,  4S6,  HI.  454,  473,  478-9, 
494,  515.  See  Blessings  forf. 
and  rector. 

"  resurrection  of,  III.  438,  482-3, 
514, 523,  553. 

"       sinless,  HI.  533,  etc.     See  perfect. 

"  sin-removing,  I.  105,  333.  See 
curse,  evil,  etc. 

"  Son  of  Man,  I.  559,  565,  etc.,  577, 
581-2,  614,  U.  167,  180,  223,  327, 
341,346-7,  351-2,  355,  374,  563, 
in.  553-4.     See  humanity. 

"       Stone,  the,  I.  676.  683. 

"       supernatuial    king,  I.  80,  91,  559, 
569,  700,  H.  177,  188,  307.     See 
Supernatural,  Miracles, 
supremacy   of,   II.   618,  767.      See 
King  of  kings,  reiirn,  etc. 

"  Theocratic  King,  I.  231,  281,  351-2, 
376,  447,  559,  563,  565,  597,  701, 
n.  557,  560,  766,  ni.  353-4,  366, 
403,   429,   434,    438-9,   447,   456, 


475,  479,  512,  514,  etc.,  517,  530- 
3,  537,  541,  550,   558,    564,  570, 
575,  601-2.     See  Theocracy. 
Christ,  temporal  deliverer,  I.  273,  384,  n. 
766,  etc.,  III.  425-6,  457,  542. 
truthfulness  of,  in.  58,  421,519. 
unchangable,  U.  600,  in.  538,  etc., 
557,  etc. 
Christological  question,  the  great,  m.  512, 

etc.,  537,  etc. 
Christs,  false,  U.  758. 
Christian  system,  II.  638. 
Christianity,  changes  of,  I.  45. 

"  misinterpreted,    I.    78.      See 

Unbelief. 
Chronology,  n.  657,  665,  717,  etc.,  774,  HI. 
92,   etc.,   96,   etc.,  98,    etc., 
102,  etc.,  104,  197,  308.    Sew 
Time. 
"  and  Sahbatism,  H.  459. 

Church,  Broad  the,  III.  122,  207,  281,  468. 
Christian.    I.   405,  447,   499,    513, 

592,  596,  609,  665,  671, 684. 
complete,  IL  602. 
"        and  Daniel,  I.  672,  etc. 

divisions  of,  IU.  196. 
"  earlv  doctrine  of,  I.  318,  365,  624, 
64*1,  644,  658,  II.  348,511,  525, 
539,  III.  38-9,  58,  132,  169,  171, 
199,  222,  229,  239,  245,  249,  250, 
282.  296,  311,  317,  etc.,  322,  345- 

6,  413,  461,  486,  502,  523,  534, 
572,  579,  585. 

"  establishment  of,  HI.  526.  See 
Dispensation,  design  of,  and 
Church  Christian. 

God  of,  I.  536. 

government,  HI.  169,  335. 

Headship  of,  I.  596. 

Kingdom,  and.  I.  359,  363,  389, 
431-3-7,  469,  471,  499,  505-8, 
582-9,  591-3-6,  601-6-9,  611, 
613,  etc.,    618,    632-4-8,  641-4- 

7,  653-5,  662,  671,  684,  690,  U. 
17,  20,  23.  27,  30-2,  35,  39,  56, 
90,  94,  100,  106,  558,  III.  180- 
1-2,  223,  253,  282,  296.  370-1, 
392,  422,  483,  503,  575,  582- 
3-5. 

"        Kingdom,  and,   not   synonymous, 
I.  63 1,  HI.  585.     See   the   pro- 
ceeding and  Kingdom, 
name  of,  m.  196. 
"        New  Jerusalem,  and.  III.  39,  40. 
"        preparatory,    IU.    381,    3b3,    545. 

See  Dispensation,  design  of. 
"        present  condition    of,  I.  617,   634, 
638,  652,  687,   II.   163,  493,  IH. 
117,  118,   119,    183-4,  188,  202, 
210,  282,  335,  381,  383,  498. 
State  of,  I.  395,   653,  H.  775,   HI. 

See  present  condition. 
State,  and,  I.  207,  240,   266,  348, 


666 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


651,  603,  II.  97-8,  117,  119,  576, 
600,   607,    651,  663,  III.  14,  16, 
83,  338,  462,  545,  551,  582,  591, 
595-6. 
Church  theocracy,  no,  III.  545.     See  The- 
ocracy. 
unbelief,  and,   III.  116,  217,  etc., 
248,  etc.     See  Unbelief,  Perver- 
sions, Contradictions,  etc. 
wealth  of,  III.  129. 
Churches,  the  seven,  III.  377,  etc. 
Cincinnati,  III.  157,  201. 
City  of  God,  I.  300,  508,  615.     See  Augus- 
tine. 
Cities,  condition    of,  III.    131,    138-9,  144, 

156-7,  196,  201. 
Clay  and  iron,  III.  131. 
Cleansing  of  the  Sanctuarv,  II.  115. 
Clericalism,  I.  640,  III.  378. 
Cloeter,  II.  112, 
Clouds,  in,  II.  314. 

of  heaven,  II.  175,  187,  223. 
Colony,  Adams,  II.  112,  468. 
Colonization  schemes,  II.  88,  468. 
Coloss'uins,  III.  '.'AY-). 
Coming  One,   the,   II.    183,    191,  561,  III. 

384-5. 
Commentators,  Chiliastic,  I.  545,  etc, 
"  testimony  of,  II.  213. 

Commission,  the,  III.  191-2, 
Communism,  II.  724,  III.  154. 
Comparative  theology,  III.  504-5. 
Concessions,  futile,  II.  510. 

to  unbelief,  I.  14. 
Condemnatory,  doctrine,  II.  196. 
Conditional,  promises  not,  II.  47,  74,  79. 

"  prophecy,  how,  I.  176,  II.  48. 

Confederation,  II.  326. 

the  last,  II.  105,  752,  754, 
etc.,  757,  etc.,  760,763,111. 
13,  160,  162,  205,  293-4, 
394,  396.  See  War,  Per- 
secution, Trouble. 
Conferences,  Chiliastic,  I.  554,  III.  130, 153, 

169,  204,  222,  263,  327,  332. 
Confession  of  Peter,  I.  441. 
Confessional  exclusiveness,  1. 128,  526,  532. 
teaching:,    I.  492,   518,   527, 
530,532. 
Confessions,  III.  197,  2^1-2.     See  Creeds. 
Conflagration  of   Peter,  II.  506,  etc.,  510, 

etc. 
Conflict   of   Bible  and   Science,    m.   498, 

507-9. 
Conscience,  I.  134,  III.  285. 
Consolation,   Dav  of,  II.  404. 

of  Israel,  II.  143,  299. 
Constantine,  I.  505. 
Continuist  interpretation,  III.  372. 
Contradictions,  II.  170,  218,  252,  268,  271-2, 
293,  302,  514,  551,  in.   103-4,  182,  187, 
193,  311,  575.     See  Perversions. 
Controversial  writers,  I.  547-8. 


Controversy,  God's,  II.  742,  etc. 

"  with  Jews,  no,  III.  350.     See 

Jews. 
Conversion,  Jewish,  I.  281,11.  189,  463,  471. 
See  Jews, 
of  the  world,   I.   394,  II.  155, 
732,  736,  745, 
751,  770,  III. 
119,  134,  136, 
143.  171,  etc., 
186,  etc  ,  189, 
etc.,  196,  202, 
210,  212,  etc., 
255-0,        308, 
381,  587. 
"  "     "         ,l         and     the    early 

Church,     HI. 
171-3. 
"  "     "        "        and     the     Re- 

formers,   III. 
175-7. 
"  '     "        "        and      the     Sec. 

Advent,     III. 
172, 136,  190- 
1,  381. 
Corinthians,  Epistles  of,  III.  362. 
Cosmos,  II.  33. 

Council,  of  Rheimsburg,  II.  672. 
Councils,  I.  518. 
Covenanters,  II.  778. 

Covenant,     Abrahamic,     III.      420.      See 
Abrahamic. 
"  Davidic.     See  Davidic  Cove- 

nant, 
how  changed,  I.  324,  333-4. 
foundation  of  faith,  II.  444,  III. 
132,  244,  257,  369,   383,  561, 
564-5,  600. 
"         foundation  of  hope,  III.  309,  etc. , 

365,  383. 
"  kingdom  based   on,  I.  285,  293, 

325,    328,   334,  339,  348,  393, 
422,  427,  504,   565,  II.  53,  79, 
161,  340,  346-7.     See  Davidic 
Covenant,   Kingdom. 
"  manner  of   fulfilment,   III.  420, 

453. 
"         misconceptions  of,  1.330,  340,11. 
83. 
New,  the,  I.  322,  etc.,  329. 
with  the  Jews,  II.  657,  664. 
Covenants  and  Gospels,  III.  350. 
Creation  delivered,  II.  178,  466,   477,  479, 
etc. ,  III.  587.     See  New  Heav- 
ens and  New  Earth,  etc. 
of  man,  III.  496. 
"         of  woman,  III.  431,  etc. 
six  days  of,  II.  458,  469. 
Creator,  the,  III.  510,  etc. 
Creature,  the,  II.  480,  etc. 
Credibility  of  Scripture,  III.  467. 
Credulity,  I.  452,  II.  99,  239,  III.  291.    See 
Faith  of  unbelievers. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


667 


Creeds,  Augsburg  Conf.,1.  123,  531-2,637, 
666,  in.  175,  176,202-3. 
"       Apostolic,  I.  530. 

Apologv,  A.  C,  I.  532. 
"       Articles,  of  Smalcald,  I.  532. 
"       Athanasian,  532. 
"       Baptists,  I.  531.     See  Bunyan. 

Belgic,  I.  531,11.  678. 
"       Bohemian,  II.  678. 

Conf.  Helvitia,  I.  532,  m.  194, 
Conf.  of  Edward  VI.,  I.  531,  534. 
"       Catechism  of  Edward  VI.,  I.  531. 
Cath.  A  post.  Church,  I.  536. 
Free  Chr.  Church  (of  Italy),  I.  536. 
"       Nicene,  I.  530. 
"       Second  Adventist,  I.  536. 

Westminster,  I.  531-2,  II.  220,  III. 
175-6,  202-3. 
"       value  of,  I.  124,  etc. 
"      how  enforced,  I.  129,  530. 

teaching  of,  I.  4!i:J,  530,  532. 
"        Kingdom,  and.  I.  016. 
Criticism,  higher  ami  lower,  III.  470. 
Cross,  efficacy  of,  III.  455-6. 
Crowned,  saints  when,  H.  579. 

Paul.  IL  579, 582. 
Cup  of  the  New  Test.,  I.  327. 
Curry,  I.  204. 

Curse,  the,  II.  488,  etc.,  492-3,  517.  See 
Sin,  Evil. 
"  effects.  III.  128,  152,  184,  206. 
"  deliverance  from.  See  Blessings 
forfeited  and  restored,  Evil  re- 
moved, Creation  delivered,  New 
Heavens  and  New  Earth,  Para- 
dise, etc. 

Damasus,  I.  520. 

Daniel,  III.  490. 

Daniel's  resurrection,  II.  248. 

Darbyites,  I.  536,  III.  271.     See  Believers, 

Plymouth  Brethren. 
Darkening  of  the  sun  and  moon,  III.  151, 

164. 
Darkness,  usage  of,  II.  256. 
Dates,  chronoWical,  II.  657,  665,  774,  III. 
99,  100,  102.  104.   See  Chronology,  Time. 
Darwinism,  III.  291.   See  Darwin,  Huxley, 

Tyndall. 
David  El-Roy,  II.  203. 
"       key  of,  II.  205. 
David's  Son.    See  Christ,  DavidicCov. 
Davidic  age,  II.  524. 

Davidic  Covenant,  kingdom  based  on,  I. 
285,  313,  339,  565, 
578,  II.  51,  71,  341, 
in.  224,  244,  296, 
370-1,  565. 
"  "  how  changed,    I.  316, 

338,  347,  427,  499, 
509,  514,  571,  583, 
649,  II.  67,  79,  83, 
90,  95,  99,  161,  199, 


etc.,  204,   etc.,    340, 
347.    See  Spiritualiz- 
ing, etc. 
Davidic  throne,  Jesus  inherits,  I.  199,  etc. 
347,    etc.,     355.      See, 
Inheritance,  Covenant, 
etc. 
restoration  of,  1. 190,  270, 
279,  282,  339,  343,  347, 
350,  365,  372,  420,  422. 
429,  441,  557,  565,  570, 
578,  580,  598,  613,  627, 
II.   49,    51,  58,  76,  78, 
138,  179,  189,  200,  341, 
347,    439,    466,    532-3, 
713,  744,  760,   III.  43, 
49,  51,    296,   354,   359, 
392,  399,  422,  425,  460- 
2,  517,  528,  575. 
"         kingdom  and  the  theocracy  iden- 
tical, I.  234,  344,  348, 
390,    395,    563,    565, 
6ii4.  II.  97,  120,  121, 
187,  349.   See  Theoc- 
racy and  Kingdom. 
"         divine  nature  of,  I.  348, 
563,  565,  699,  II.  75, 
269.  See  Spiritual. 
"  "         no  type,  II.  524. 

Day,  battle  of  the  great.     See  Battle, 
children  of  the,  II.  410. 
of  Consolation,  II.  464. 
of  Judgment,  IL  358,  362,  etc.,  365, 
367,  etc..  383,  409,  516,  HI.  245,  586. 
the  dark,  III.  68,  164. 
literal,  fulfilment,  II.  686,  717,  755-6. 
the  Lord's,  III.  95. 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  II.  87,  183,  190, 

210,  368-9,  409,  410,  III.  587. 
man's,  II.  412. 
morning  of  the,  II.  87,  316,  414,  etc., 

III.  587. 
scriptural  usage  of,  I.  476,  II.  365-6, 

368. 
year,  II.  686,  717,  755-6. 
Days,  the  Ancient  of,  III.  25-6. 
"     end  of,  II.  424. 
"     of  heaven,  II.  466. 
"     the  last,  II.  195,  301,  336,  367,  421, 

423. 
"     of  Noah  and  Lot,  m.  112,  123-4, 133, 

185,  297. 
"     prophetical,  III.  99. 
"     six  of  creation,  II.  458,  469. 
"     twenty-three  hundred,  III.  99. 
' '     twelve  hundred  and  sixty,  II.  755-6. 
Dead,  extravagantly  eulogized,  II.  395. 

"      resurrection  of.   See  Resurrection. 
Death  of  Jesus,  efficacy  of,    III.  420.     See 
Cross. 
"        «      "      sublimity  of,  III.  480-1. 
"       an  enemv,  II.  170-2,  244,  306,  395, 
IH.  59,  61,  300,  312. 


008 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


Death  not  the  coming  of  Jesus,  II.  170-3, 
395. 
"       introduced,  II.  158.  228,  in.  501. 
"       in  Millennial  age,  II.  148. 
"       shadow  of,  III.  389. 
Degrading,  II.  552. 

of  the  Christ,  II.  638,  743.  See 
also,  Christ,  dishonoring  of. 
De  Gerson,  John  Charlier,  I.  56. 
Degrees,   II.   389,   391,    610.      See    Rank, 

Kings,  Reward,  etc. 
Definitions  of  the  kingdom,  I.  39,  147,  181, 

195,  690. 
Deliverer.    See  Christ  deliverer,  Temporal 

deliverance. 
Deliverance  and  the  morning,  II.  416. 
Deluge,  extent  of,  III.  501. 
Demoniacal  possessions,  III.  79. 
Demonology,  III.  145. 
Denominations,  some  in,  Chiliastic,  I.  537, 

542,  etc.,  553. 
Depravity,  human,  great,  I.  13,   144,   161. 
See  Antichrist, persecution,  war, 
wickedness. 
"  future,  II.  748,  750,  772. 

Design,  proof  from,  III.  510. 
Desire,  the,  of  women,  II.  652. 
Destiny   of   the    saints,   II.  593-6,   III.  72, 
446-7,  591-3,  600.    See  reign,  priesthood. 
Obstructionists,  III.  269. 
Detention   of  the  saints,  II.  394,  etc.,  397, 

etc. 
Development   theorv,  I.  113.  199,  339,  460, 
598,  623,  642,  G58*  etc.,  HI.  134,  143,  146, 
156,  173,  183-4,  207-8,  227,  237,  257,  311, 
346,  362,  370,  382-3,  484,  520,  560. 
Devil,  works  of  destroyed,  III.  454. 
Devils,  doctrines  of,  III.  123. 
Dew,  usage,  II.  418. 
Differences,  III.  272-3. 

"  in  the  Church,  I.  634. 

of  interpretation.     See   Inter, 
pretation. 
"  in  view,  I.  525. 

Dignity  of  man,  III.  434. 
Diseases  removed,  II.  145. 
Discernment,  spiritual,  I.  52. 
Disciples,  how  preached  the  kingdom,    I. 
182,   253,  274,  443,  436,  438, 
443,  445,  449,  471,  II.  19.    See 
Kingdom.  Theocracy. 
"       knew    the    kingdom,    III.    528. 
See  Preaching. 
Divine  and  Divine-Human.     See  Christ. 
"       Purpose,  the,   III.  287,  295-6,  340, 
347,  371,  440,  454,  469,  475,  482, 
487,  491,  493,  504,  515,  520,  593, 
597,  600.     See  Covenant,  Dispen- 
sation, Plan,  etc. 
Divisions  of  the  Church,  III.  196. 
Dispensation,  design    of,   I.  587,  590,  598, 
600,  617,  635,  642,  II.  203, 
224,   227,  588,  590-1,  596, 


778,    m.  96,    181,    187-8, 
192-3,  200,  204,  208-9,  211, 
216,  238,  517. 
Dispensation,  future,  II.  344,  367,  370,  407, 
410,  423,  etc.,  III.  31,  72, 
120,   293-4,  456,   510,  585. 
See  Day  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
Judgment   Day,  World  to 
Come,   Restitution,    Ages, 
etc. 
Docetism,  I.  501,  H.  539. 
Doctrine,  advocates  of  our,  III.  135.     See 
His.  of  Chiliasm. 
basis,  of  I.  65-6,  II.  19. 
"         condemnatory,  II.  196. 
"         diversity  of,   I.  15.     See   Perver- 
sions, Differences, 
early  Church,  I.  318,  658,  II.  19. 

See  His.  Chiliasm. 
early  Fathers,    III.  406-7.     See 
His.  Chiliasm. 
"         Jews.     See  Jewish  belief. 
"         miracles,  I.  101.     See  Miracles. 
"         necessary,  III.  226. 
"         of   the  kingdom  perpetuated,  I. 
480,  675,  II.  124. 
"     "  "        changed,  I.  60, 

147,  368,  370,  411,    423,  459, 
499,   509,  513,   524,    598,  602, 
605,   611,  621,  626,   etc.,  632, 
638,    644,  647,  655,  659,  662, 
685,  690. 
"         perversion  of,  I.  510,  511.     See 
Perversions, 
progress  of,  I.  113,  658. 
"         religion,  and,  I.  111. 
"         our,  a  solvent  of  difficulties,  m. 
406,  etc.,  430,  etc.,  476,  etc. 
Domination  of  Gentiles.     See  Gentiles. 
Dominion  and  the  morning,  II.  415. 

"  of  the  Second  Adam,  I.  572,  etc., 

II.  142,  195,  487-8,  581. 
Domitian  and  believers,  I.  468. 
Duchoborzius,  I.  54,  III.  70. 
Dust,  usage,  I.  256. 
Dutv  of  Scripture  students,  I.  16. 
"      violated,  HI.  166. 

Eaglet,  the,  II.  320,  322,  580. 

Early  belief  in  speedy  Second  Advent.    See 

Sec.  Advent. 
Earnest,  the,  III.  213,  287,  450. 
Earth,  desirable,  II.  432,  etc.,  436,  444. 
"      and  covenant,  II.  432,  etc.,  434,  445, 

516. 
"      destruction  of  by  fire,  II.  427,  etc., 

516,  521. 

"  "     "    freezing,  II.  428- 

9. 

"      inberited,  II.  434,  443-6,  480,  501, 

504,  514,  531-3,  III.  38,  62,  585- 

6.     See  Inheritance,  Reign,  New 

Heavens  and  New  Earth,  etc. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


669 


Earth,  perpetuity  of,  II.  427,  etc.,  513,  etc. 
III.  587.     See  Per- 
petuity of  the  race 
aud   of    the    king- 
dom. 
"  advocates,    II.     430, 
etc.,  432,  445,  480. 
"  concessions,  II.  430, 
480,  516. 
"      place  of   the   kingdom,  I.  35,  348, 
365,  402,  573,  643,  060,  660,  II.  13, 
33,  117,  124,  144-5,  156,  159,  251, 
263,  305,  359,  570,  etc.,  547,  etc., 
596,   617,  III.  32,  49,  51,  60,  62. 
See  Kingdom,  Reign,  Inheriting, 
etc. 
"      redeemed,  II.  432,   etc.,    437,    514. 
See    Creation,    Restitution,  Evil, 
Curse,    New    Heavens    and  New 
Earth,  and  related  subjects. 
"      renewed,  II.  148,  178,  499,  etc.,  524, 

etc. 
"      smallness  of,  III.  562 
"      usage,  II.  497,  etc.,  499,  etc. 
East,  kings  of  the,  II.  764,  III.  27. 
"      righteous  man  of  the,  III.  27. 
"      usage,  III.  2  7. 
Ebionism,  I.  486,  III.  40. 
Eden,  III.  51. 
Eden  no  tvpe,  III.  61. 
Edom,  II." 62.  104,  III.  22.  24. 
Education,  secular,  HI.  131,  158,  206. 
Egypt  (Matt.  2  :  15),  II.  201. 
Ekklesia,  1. 594,  652,  in.  196.     See  Church, 

name  of. 
Elect,  complete,  II.  542. 

"  gathering  of,  I.  412,  422,  III.  120, 
136,  224,  etc.,  329,  330,  333.  See 
Dispensation,  design  of,  First 
Resurrection,  Reign,  etc. 
"  Jewish  nation.  I.  207,  292,  392,  etc., 
399,  408,  416,  422.  II.  42,  53,  48, 
92.  95,  III.  4D2,  471,  486,  595. 
"       meaning  of,  I.  401-2. 

qualified  for  what,  II.  225. 
"       who  pertaiu   to  the,  I.  405-6-8,  417, 
II.   249,   587-9,    590,  III.  58,  95, 
120,  156,  196-7,  200,  431-2,  437, 
457.     See  First-born,  First-fruits, 
Reign,  Priesthood. 
Election,  II.  49,   209,   392,   etc.,  401,  etc., 
404,   411,  III.  368.     See  Elect,  Gentiles, 
engrafting:  of,  Jewish  nation. 
Eli  as,  coming  of,  II.  565,  etc. 
Elijah,  III.  20,  102,  162,  164,  303,  307. 

"       future  mission,  II.  87. 
End,  the,  II.  290.  336,  411,  424,  741. 
"     of  the  age.  II.  420,  III.  587. 
"      of  Days,  II.  424. 
"     of  time,  II.  424. 
"     the  time  of  the,  II.  653,  in.  97. 
"    the  wonderful, III. 442,  454,  456,  469, 
475. 


End  of  the  world,  II.  420,  etc.,  424,  427-8 

492. 
Endowments,  III.  249. 
Enemy,  usage,  II.  256. 
England,  n.  743,  778.  III.  15,139,  140. 
Engrafting,    III.    368,    486.       See    Elect, 
Gentiles, 
necessary,  III.  309,  310,  424. 
See  Elect. 
Enlightenment  professed,  III.  229. 
Enoch,  Parables  of,  I.  570. 
Ephesians,  Epistle  of  the,  III.  362. 
Epiphaneia,  11.211. 
Equality,  II.  598. 

Equity,   God's  vindicated,   II.   597.       See 
Imprecatory  Psalms,  Justice,  Curse,  etc. 
Error,  III.  276.     See  Extravagances,   Per- 
versions, etc. 
"      fruitful  source  of,  I.  621,    645,   699. 
See  Interpretation  Spiritualistic. 
Esau,  II.  609. 
Escape,  who  will,  II.  323,  325,    etc.,   327, 

331-2,  334. 
Eschatology, study  of,  III.  135, 151, 321,427. 

"  prominence  of,  III.  427. 

Eternal  life,  how  obtained,  II.  386,  388-9. 

"        usage,  II.  630. 
Euphrates,  II.  764. 
Eutychian  Theory,  III.  539. 
Evangelists,  Chiliastic,  I.  553,  III.  141. 
Everlasting    kingdom,    the,   I.   675.      See 

Kingdom,  Perpetuity. 
Evil  age,  the,  III.  184,  188. 
"     ignored,  1. 107. 
"     not  necessarv,  II.  469. 
"     removed,  I.  106,  II.  141,  etc.,  145,  147- 
8,  156,  178,  434,  416,  466,  469,  479, 
etc.,  483,  etc.,   488,    517,  535,  596, 
775-6,  III.  182-4,  425,  434-5,  455, 
etc.,  464,  475,  501,  600.     See  Bless- 
ings restored,  Curse,  Creation,  etc. 
Explains   Scripture,  the  kingdom,  II.  108, 

422,  UI.  388,  etc. 
Extravagances.  I.  552,  677,  685,  II.  99. 
191-2,  197,  206,  220-3,  249,  252,  271-2, 
282,  292,  323,  342,  345,  353,  433,  436, 
444,  446,  506,  515,  517,  520,  531,  537, 
552,  623,  658,  III.  35,  38,  51,  53,  63, 
70,  73-4,  88,  136.  140,  142,  152,  173, 
183,  206.  274,  372-3,  378.  See  Perver- 
sions, Unbelief. 
Ezekial's  last  chapters,  III.  84,  etc. 

Failure,  God  makes  none,  II.  588,  III.  544, 

etc.,  589,  590,  etc. 
Faith,  analogy  of,  III.  343,  etc. 

"  "         "    how  violated,  III.  345. 

"  appropriating,  I.  139,  333,  401,  416, 
418,  692,  II.  196,  328,  391. 

«•      believers,  of,  II.  428-9,  522. 

"  early  churches,  of,  I.  449,  etc.,  II. 
193,  348.  See  Church,  early  doc- 
trine of,  Chiliastic  History,  etc. 


670 


INDEX    OP    SUBJECTS. 


Faith,  foundations  of,  HI.  132,    222.     See 
Covenants. 
"      justifying,  in.  286. 
"      lack  of  in  the  Church.    See  Unbelief, 
Church,  Perversions,  Spiritualistic 
Interpretation,  etc. 
lack  of  in  the  world.     See  Unbelief. 
"      lack  of  predicted,  I.  290,    307,  329, 
349,  520,  II.  43,  18G,  191,  486,  552, 
HI.   217,   etc.,  221,  etc.     See  Un- 
belief. 
"      not   destructive   to  Science,   I.  140. 

See  Science. 
"      and  reason,  1. 137,  334.     See  Reason. 
"      responsibility  of,  III.  283-4. 
"      requisite,  I.  272,  291,  316,  337,  415, 
11.77,  87,  186,   196,  206,  236,  239. 
263,  334,  769,  IH.  37,  47,  159,  214, 
221,  243.  320,  358,  434,  475. 
"      and  sight,  II.  349. 
"      to  be  tested,  HI.  133.  165,  279,  etc. 
"      of  unbelievers,  II.  428-9,  522. 
"       and  works,  III.  364-5. 
Faithfulness  of  God,  I.  387,   393,   416,  422, 
581,  II.  49,  53,  65,  71,  82,  85,  130,  135, 
202,  229,  390,    427,   429,   431,  443,  522, 
536,  552,  571,    577,    IH.   221,   etc.,  233, 
411.     See  Oath  of  God,  Power  of  God, 
etc. 
Fallibility    of    man,    I.    45.      See   Gentile 

domination. 
Fall  of  man,  IH.  433.     See    Evil,   Curse, 

etc. 
False  Christs,  II.  758. 
Fanaticism,  III.  231-2,  318. 
Fasting  on  Sunday,  II.  458. 
Fathers,  Apostolic  and  Christian,    I.   443, 
451,  452,  etc.,  472,   etc.,  480,   etc.,   487, 
490,  etc.,  494,  etc.,  512,  515,  II.  214,  221, 
348,111,  346. 
Father's  house,  III.  53,  etc. 

"         Coming.     See  Ancient  of  Days. 
Fatalistic  theory,  II.  469. 
Feast  of  trumpets,  H.  452. 
Fifth-monarch v  men,   I.  44,533,    552,  639, 

III.  11,  178,  270. 
Fig-tree,  III.  110,  126. 
Figurative   interpretation.      See    Interpre 
tation. 
perversion  of,  I.  ISO,  II.  75,  99, 
200. 
Finite  and  the  Infinite,  III.  540. 
Fire,  baptism  of,  HI.  80,  etc. 
"     Jewish  belief,  H.  428,  506,  etc.,  510. 
"     future,  II.  177,  377. 
*'     of  Matt.  25  :41.  HI.  245. 
"     painting,  H.  427-9,  520. 
"      Pre-Millennial,  II.  377,  380. 
"     of  Peter,  H.  428,  506  etc.,  510   etc., 

519. 
"      Worship,  II.  758. 
"     usage,  IH.  80. 
First,  usage,  II.  269,  272. 


First-born,  II.  140,  269,  315,  318,  446,  544, 

608-9,  618,  III.  432,  458. 
First-fruits,  II.  315,  318,  319,  322,  329,380, 

413,  542,  561,  III.  24,  185,432. 
Flagellants,  II.  676. 
Flock,  small,  III.  196. 
Foreign  advocates,  Chiliastic,  I.  544,  etc. 
Forever,  usage,  I.  578,  II.  344,  538. 
Forfeited  blessings  restored,  III.  455.     See 

Blessings,  Evil,  Restitution,  etc. 
Foundations    of    doctrine    and   faith   and 

hope.     See  Covenant. 
France,  III.  139,  140. 
Frank,  Sebastian,  I.  54. 
Fratricelli,  II.  676,  III.  74. 
Freedom,  human,  I.  148. 
Freeman  tragedy,  The,  III.  252. 
Free  Italian  Church,  II.  637. 
Free  Religionists,  III.  283. 
Freezing  of  the  Earth,  II.  428-9. 
French  Prophets,  I.  74. 
French  Emperorship,  II.  643,  etc. 
Friends  of  Light,  I.  434. 
Fruitfulness,  II.  143. 
Fulfiller.     See  Christ. 
Fulfilment,  delay  of,  II.  203. 

future,  III.  72,  221,  298,  391. 
literal,  II.  488,  etc.     See  Liter- 
al Fulfilment, 
of  prophecy,   I.  69,    166,   176, 
309,  693,  II.  48,  175,  541,769, 
773,  III.  252-3,  224,  360,  414, 
419,  421,   429,  453,  489,492, 
526.      See  Prophecy,  Coven- 
ant., etc. 
time  of,  III.  391. 
Fulness,  II.  67,  75. 
Future,  as  present,  I.  415. 
Futurist  interpretation.  III.  374. 

view,  II.  686,  718,  etc.,  755-6. 

Gates  of  Hell,  II.  258,  299. 
Gathering  of  the    elect,    I.   412,  422,   HI. 
120,  136,  224,  etc. 
of  saints,  I.   412,   II.   320,  331, 
III.  96.    See  Dispensation,  de- 
sign of,  Call,  Engrafting,  etc. 
Gatherings,  the  two,  H.  763. 
Genealogies,  I.  352. 
Generation,  I.  381. 
Generations,  successive,  II.  551,  606.      See 

Race,  Perpetuity,  Kingdom,  etc. 
Genesis,  III.  492,  etc.,  498,  etc. 
Gentiles,  calling  of,  I.  68.  211,    223,   392, 
394-6,    etc.,    399,    402-4,    408, 
etc.,  HI.  526. 
domination   of,    I.   629,    681,   H. 
96,  495,  497,  etc.,  773,  etc.,  HI. 
101,586,  597-8. 
"         dominion  of,   how  portrayed,  II. 
639.      See  also   Governments, 
how   estimated,    character   of, 
etc. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


671 


Gentiles,  engrafting  of,  III.  4S6.    See  Call, 
Keys,  etc. 
high-minded,  III.  118,  230,  408, 
424. 
"         participate   in   Theocratic   bless- 
ings, I.  232,  393.      See  King- 
dom, Theocracy,  Race,  World- 
dominion,    Reign,  Jewish   Su- 
premacy, etc. 
rashness  of,  I.  329,  333,  395,  398, 
416,  425,  615,  II.  57,  73,  78,  91. 
See     Interpretation    Spiritual. 
istic. 
"         times  of,  I.  243,  406,  419,  II.  60, 
70,  87,  115,  459,  472,624,  639, 
774,  in.  12,  104,  185,  336,  505. 
Germany,  III.  15,  138,  140. 
Gideon,  II.  768. 
Glasgow,  III.  201. 
Glorification,  III.  457. 
Glorified.     See  Christ,  Saints. 
Gnostic  influence,  I.  499.  501,  II.  121,  231, 

234,  283,  400,  4:J6-7,  III.  40. 
Goal,    the   pre-determined,   III.   429,    454. 
See    Divine    Purpose,    End,    Kingdom, 
Reign,  etc. 
God,  personal  revelation  of,  III.  438,  494, 
505,  510,  550,  590,   etc.,   595,   etc. 
See  Ancient  of  Days,    Second  Ad- 
vent, Coming  One,  etc. 
"    justified,   III.   295,    391-2.      See  Di- 
vine Purpose. 

God's  anointed,  III.  540. 

"      controversv,  II.  742,  etc. 
Gog  and  Magog," II.  529,  695,  709-711. 
Gospel,  John's,  III.  354. 
"       Kingdom,  I.  607. 

of  the  kingdom,   I.  151,   182,254, 
259,  509,  607,  III.  137,  200,  202, 
219,  228-9.  231,  310,  506,  522. 
"       Luke's,  m.  353. 
"       Mark's,  III.  352-3. 

Matthew's,  III.  350-1. 
"       types,  I.  630.     See  Types. 
"       a  witness,  III.   117,  137,  141,  169, 
192-3,  197,  200,  204. 
Gospels,  the,  III.  349,  etc. 

"         and  Covenants,  III.  350. 

origin  of,  I.  197,  III.  501-2,  523. 
unity  of,  LEI.  356-7,  358-9. 
Government,  Church,  III.  169. 

"  forms  of  Church,  I.  638. 

moral,  III.  280-2,  285,  510. 
"  a  perfect  one,   III.  548,  etc., 

550. 
"  of  other  worlds,  III.  443,  etc. 

"  of  God,  no  failure,  III.  544, 

etc.,  589,  590,  etc. 
Governments,  character  of,  III.  12,  13,  16, 
550. 
"  destiny   of,    HI.  12,   13,   16, 

238,589,  591,  597-8.     See 
Gentile  domination. 


Governments,  how  estimated,  III.  11,  etc., 
16.     See  Beast. 
necessity  of,  HI.  11-13,  16. 
ordained,  II.  778-9,  in.  12, 
13. 
Grace,  God's  wonderful,  II.   588-9.      See 
Christ,    Saints,    Inheritance,    Kingdom, 
Reign,  etc. 
Greatness  of  the  Christ.     See  Christ. 

"         of  the  Kingdom.     See  Kingdom. 
Greek  Church,  I.  648. 
Groves  and  Goodnight,  III.  269. 
Guests,  the,  III.  305. 

JIackett,  I.  601. 

Hades,  I.  654,  II.  401-2. 

Haictites,  II.  187. 

Halle,  III.  139. 

Hand,  II.  580. 

Harmony  Society,  I.  537. 

Harvest,  II.  21,  26,  171,  173,  319,  322,  330, 

334,  381,  III.  185,  382. 
Hatred,  III.  144,  153-4,  165,  225,  238,  253, 
293,  325,  330-1.     See  Bigotry,  Persecu- 
tion. 
Head,  infallible,  III.  550-1. 
Headship  of  the  Church,  I.  596. 
Heads,  the  seven,  II.  643,  etc.,  646. 
Healing  of  the  nations,  II.  528,  530,  547-8. 
Heart,  power  of  the,  III.  280. 
Heathenism,  ancient  restored,  II.  728,   730, 

HI.  161,  281. 
Heaven,  figure,  II.  12. 

Kingdom  of,  I.  195,  283,  364,  II. 
11,  16. 
"         passages  referring  to,  II.  11. 

the  third,  I.  668,  II.  13,  399,  in. 
312 
Heavenlies,  II.  13.  580. 
Heavens,  usage,  II.  497,499,  etc.,  502,  766, 
III.  24-5. 
and  Earth,  new,  I.  686,  II.  148, 
178,  499, etc., 
542,  etc.,  III. 
587. 
"  "         "  "        and     early 

Church,     IL 
504,  525-6. 
"  "         "  "        perpetuity    of, 

II.  503. 
Heavenly  country,  II.  15. 
Hebrews,  Epistle  to  the,  III.  363. 
Heirs,  saints,   III.  13,  305,  437.     See  In- 
heritance, Earth,  Kingship. 
Hell,  usage,  II.  256,  258. 
"     of  Edwaid's,  II.  433,  437,  444,  515, 

III.  265. 
"     gates  of,  II.  258,  299. 
Helvitic  Confession,  I.  534. 
Hereditary  evil,  III.  144. 
Heresy,    charge   of,  I.  443.  453,  457,  465, 
481,  483,498,  512.  515,  520,  535,  551,  III. 
214,  225,  231-2,  250,  253,  450. 


072 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


Heresy  hunting,  I.  12,  466,  481.  HE.  274. 
Hidden  ones,  the,  II.  32(5,  760,  HI.  24. 
Hinderer,  the,  II.  328,  701,  etc. 
Hiding  of  saints,  II.  325. 

truth,  11.732. 
Historical  connection,  III.  343,  347. 
History  of  Abraham,  III.  432,  492. 

"       of  Jesus,  a,  III.  349. 

"       of  Antichrist.     See  Antichrist. 

"      of   Chiliasin,  I.  450,458,  461,  465, 
4S0,  etc.,   490,  etc., 

498,  513,   524,  554, 
641,644,  665. 

chronological,  I.  494, 
etc. 
"  concessions,    I.    484, 

486,  498. 
"  errors     opposed,     I. 

512. 
"  "  general  belief,  1. 554. 

"  "  Gnostic  and  Alexan- 

drian   influence,   I. 

499.  See  Gnostic 
influence. 

"      "  "  Papal    influence,     I. 

513. 
"      "  "  Eeforniiition.  1. 524. 

"       "  "  revival,  I.  555. 

"      "  "  survival,  I.  553. 

"       and  prophecv,  I.   172,  340. 
"      of    the   world,    III.   427,  etc.,  583, 
595. 
Hoker,  I.  74. 
Holland,  HI.  139. 
Holy  Ghost,  the  sect  of,  II.  647. 
Holy  Land,  the,  III.  33. 
Holy  Spirit,  I.  624,  H.  79,  III.  64,  etc.     See 
Baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
"         "      sin  airainst  the,  III.  79. 
Honor,   God's,  III.  544.     See  Oath,  Faith- 
fulness, etc. 
Honoring  God's  word,  III.  167. 
Hope,  the  Blessed,  I.   249,  340,   385,  467, 
477,  580,   695,    H.    74,    155,    160, 
167,  196-7,  388,  402,  III.  105,  116, 
167-8,  170,  268.  295,  310,  312,314, 
317,  etc.,  319,  329,  384,  419. 
"        Christ,  the.     See  Christ. 
"        Covenant  the     foundation   of.     See 

Covenant. 
"        the    Kingdom,    the,    III.    549.     See 
Kingdom. 
the  One,  III.  309,  etc.,  588. 
"        its  preciousness,  III.  314,  etc.,  319. 
substituted,  III.  310,  311. 
Horeb,  in.  20. 
Horn,  II.  93,  579. 

"       the    little,  of   Daniel  7,  II.  0S4,  693, 
095. 
Horns,  the  three,  II.  692,  718. 

"       the  ten.  I.  672,  II.  693,  696,  707, 718, 
752-5,  HI.  149. 
Hour,  II.  301,  366. 


House,  II.  496. 

"      usage,  III.  54-5,  56-7. 
"       Father's,  III.  53,  etc. 
Humanitarianism,  II.  726,  728.  III.  121, 124, 
133-4.    205,   207.  238, 
283,  288,  293-4,  509. 
worship    of,     II.    727-8, 
730,  752.    See  the  pre- 
ceding      and      Anti- 
christ. 
Humanity  of  the  Christ.     See  Christ. 

exalted,  II.  597,  613,  720,  728-9. 
Humanity  to  be  elevated.  III.  549. 
Humility  affected,  II.  702,  III.  254,  207. 
Hussites,  H.  627. 

Idumea,  II.  761,  HI.  22. 

"         desolation  ot,  II.  483. 
Ignorance,  wilful,  III.  116,  292. 
Image,  the,  II.  706,  746. 
"      of  God,  II.  348,  581. 
"      worship,  future,  II.  664,  706,  729, 
746,  etc.,  HI.  161,  163.     See  An- 
christ. 
Immanuel,  III.  542. 
Imprecatory  Psalms,  II.  110,  etc.,  736,  771, 

III.  391. 
Incarnation,  I.  571,  III.  438,  553-4.  557-9. 
Infallible  Head.  II.  193,  605,  III.  550-1. 
Infallibility,  1. 120. 
Infants,  resurrection  of,  11.597. 
Inheritance   of  Jesus,  I.  302,  321,  344,  582, 
II.   95,    199,   etc., 
201,  etc., 347,  773, 
111.34,37,  49,463. 
See  David ic  Cove- 
nant, Throne, 
Kingdom,  etc. 
"           "         "       not     destroyed,     II. 
428,    437-8,    509, 
515.     See    Perpe- 
tuity, Oath,  etc. 
of  the  Patriarchs,  I.  294,  298, 
309,413.  5S5,  11.52,96,  203, 
444,  516,  530,  534. 
of  the    saints,    I.  303,  310,  322 
392,  402,  414,  584,  600,  II.  13, 
227,  263,  330,  370,  etc  ,  374, 
376,  533-4,  577,  etc..  III.  62, 
457,  460.     See  Reign,  King- 
ship, Priesthood,  etc. 
not  typical,  I.  298,  II.  52.     See 
Canaan    no    type,    Eden    no 
type,  Kingdom  no  type,  etc. 
"          unity  of  promise,  I.  294,  etc. 
Inheritances  devised,  II.  447. 
Inheriting  and  the  advent,  II.  528. 

the  earth,  II.  434,  436,  439,  etc., 
443-6,  480,  501,  504-5,  529, 
530-3,  IH.  38,  62,  585-6.  See 
Inheritance  of  Jesus,  of  the 
Patriarchs,  of  the  saints,  and 
also  Keign,  Kingdom,  etc. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


673 


Inspiration,  I.  68,  II.  19,  150,  III.  467. 
"  definition,  I.  78. 

natural,  I.    75,    118,    203,  HI. 

204-5. 
proof  of.  III.   215,   467,    etc., 

480,  etc. 
and  signs,  III.  167. 
verbal,  I.  74. 
views  of,  HI.  486-7. 
"  Congregation,  I.  74. 

Inspirationists  of  Iowa,  I.  74,  118. 
Intermarriages  forbidden,  I.  231. 
Intermediate  state,  I.  413,  643,  669,  II.  227, 
394,  etc.,  400,  etc. 
"     early   Church    view  of, 

II.  398,400. 
"     Jewish  view  of ,  II.  399. 
Internationalism,  II.  724. 
Interpretation,  accommodating,  I.  59,  372. 
"  allegorical,  I.  50,  511. 

"  Alexandrian.  I.  51,  59,  338, 

499,  507,  H.  214,  398. 
Apoealvpse.  of  the,  II.  715. 
Consistent,  II.  521,  HI.  105, 
290,  296,  321.     See  Liter- 
al. 
Continuist,  in.  372. 
differences  of,  II.  622,  626, 
658,  683-4,   687,  690  etc. 
See    Interpretations     va- 
ried, etc. 
figurative,  II.  486-7. 
inferential,  I.  620. 
Jewish,  I.  50,  287,  464. 
literal,  I.  45.  47,  290,   310, 
314,  448,  625,  865,  II.  85, 
98.  100,   165.  169,  190-1, 
311,    447,    488,  etc.,  571, 
581,  ni.  180.  222-3,233, 
240-1.  244,  252,  274,  290, 
296,    311,    392,   410,  422, 
503,  525,  550,  562, 
"  moral,  I.  58. 

mystical,    I.  58,   370,    502, 

598,  656.  659,  H.  138, 204. 

"  Origenistic.       See    Origen, 

Spiritualistic. 
"  preterite,  III.  371. 

"  proof  of.     See  Literal  Fulfil- 

ment and  Interpretation, 
rash,  I.  174,  372,  511, H.  99, 
106,  108,  150.  See  Per- 
versions,  Extravagences, 
etc. 
Spiritualistic,  I.  52,  60,  118, 
187,  196,  204,  300,  314, 
338,  345,  348,  351,  357, 
308,370,425,429.435,448, 
502,  511,  530,  575,  578, 
583,  585,  593,  598,  619, 
623,  627,  632,  649,  656, 
660,  665,  685,  692,  II.  12, 
34,  40,  45,  63,82,91,18, 


100,  164,  168-9,  199,  204, 
206,  212,  219,  221,  252, 
309,  312,  340,  350-1,  488, 
etc.,  506,  581,  619,  625, 
700,  771,  HI.  57,  64.  173, 
179,  219,  223,  240,  244, 
252,  274,  290,  296,  383, 
397,  410,  422  etc.,  447, 
453,  461,  464-5,  453,  523, 
562,  568,  572. 

Interpretation,  varied  and  contradictory, 
III.  46,  56,  63,  85,  103, 
229,  282,  274,  296,  370, 
374-5,  378  etc.,  383,  392, 
397,  424.  See  Varied, 
Spiritualistic. 

Interval,  m.  96-7,  102,  133,  149,  150,  160, 
163,  168,  302-3,  307,  374,  387,  See 
Second  Advent,  Stages. 

Investiture  of  the  Son  of  Man,  I.  577,  n. 
587. 

Iron  and  clay,  mixture  of,  II.  704. 

Irvingites,  I.  74,  536.     See  Irving. 

Israel,  consolation  of,  II.  143,  299. 

Israel,  meaning  of,  I.  399,  II.  67,  96. 

Israel's  Identification  Society,  II.  66. 

Jacob's  trouble,  U.  737. 
James,  Epistle  of,  HI.  364. 
Jehoshaphat,  II.  761. 
Jerusalem  and  Antichrist,  II.  760-1. 
future,  III.  32,  etc.,  56. 
"  identification  of,  III.  35-6,  55. 

"  league  against,  II.  112. 

"  not  typical,  in.  32,  61. 

"  under  Gentiles,  III.  35. 

Xew,  II.  144,  III.  39,  etc. 
"  "     and  the  Church,  IH.  40, 

etc. 
"  "      literal,  ni.  41,  etc. 

"      marriage  of,  III.  39,  etc., 

52. 
"      millennial,  m.  52,  59. 
"      and  old  united,    111.   50, 
58. 
"  "      on  earth,  III.  49. 

"      size  of,  III.  47. 
"  "      splendor  of,  in.  45. 

"Jewish,"  I.  424,  457,  459,461,  463,  465, 
472,  504,  533,  621,  626,  630,  641, 
674,  691,  II.  189,  219,  260,  311, 
361,  512,  III.  142,  230,  296,  370, 
408,  etc.,  412,  etc.,  490. 
belief,  I.  183,  260,  277,  297,  308, 
"     315,  364,  409, 435,  445,  459, 
"     464,  II.  50,  72,  90,  98,  100, 
"     106,  170,  185,   187-8,   199, 
"     219,  362,  367-8,  510,   585, 
•'     G31,  669,  734,  III.  83,  86, 
"     107,  186, 350,  859, 408, 410, 
"     415,etc.,417.etc.,422,  etc., 
"    450,  502,  518,  508-9,  585, 
"    600. 


674 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


Jewish  belief,  how  sustained,  I.  190,  287, 
II.  90,  100.  See  Cove- 
nant, Oath. 

"  "       preservative,  I.  189. 

"      church,  I.  604. 

"      churches,  I.  486. 

"      concessions,  III.  425. 

"      Hope,  III.  309. 

"  interpretation,  I.  50,  287,  464,  II. 
585. 

"      King.  See  Christ,  David's  Son,  etc. 

"  Kingdom,  I.  424,  427.  See  King- 
dom, Theocracy,  Jewish  Restora- 
tion, etc. 

"      nation,  elect,  I.  207,  292,  399,  408, 

II.  48,  92,  95,  IU.  402, 
471,  486,  595.  See  Elect, 
Election,  Engrafting.Cov- 
enant,  etc. 

"  "       exaltation  of,  III.  307,  402, 

595.  See  Supremacy, 
Greatness  of,  etc. 

"  "       colonization  of,  II.  111. 

"  "       conversion  of,  II.  75,  etc., 

81,  403,  471,  III.  126,  185, 
303,  408-9,  574. 
"      greatness  of,  II.  95-6,  101, 
114,  138. 

"  "       increase  future,  III.  402. 

"  "       interest   in   the   holy  land, 

III.  126. 

"  "       kingdom  tendered  to  the,  I. 

207,  356,  362.  375,  377, 
390,  396-7,  II.  42.  See 
Kingdom,  Postponement, 
etc. 

"  "       king  of    rejected,     I.    376. 

See  Sin  of. 

"  "       kingdom    rejected,   I.  375, 

390.  See  Kingdom,  Post- 
ponement, Theocracy. 

"  "      and  miracles,  III.  473-4. 

"  "      and  the  morning,  II.  417. 

'*  "       objections  of,  I.  625,  II.  359, 

etc.,  III.  408,  etc. 

"  "       perpetuation  of,  I.  215,  351, 

II.  56.  59,  138. 
"       preaching   first  to,    I.  356. 
See  Call. 

"  "      present  power  of,  III.  148. 

"       protection  of,  II.  114. 
"      restoration  of,  I.  336,   354, 
388,  422,  427,  588,  II.  48, 
etc.,  55,  etc.,  63,  etc.,  75, 
etc.,  85,   106,    133,    etc., 
189,  252,  380,  HI.  36, 148, 
161,  244-5,  345,   368,  410, 
424,  586. 
"      riches  of,  II.  143. 
"       sin  of,  III.  421,  etc.,  426. 

"  "       and  the  Spirit,  III.  75. 

"  "       supremacy  of,   II.  92,  114, 

617,    III.   402,   422,    580. 


See  Exaltation  of,  Great- 
ness of,  etc. 
Jewish  nation  and  Theocracy  inseparable, 
I.  231,  233,  387,  II.  97. 
See  Theocracy,  Elect,  etc. 
"       times  of,  II.   80.     See  Sab- 

batism. 
"      tribulation  of,  II.  57,  60,  73, 
85,  663,   731,  736-7,   760, 
766-7,  III.  113,  126,  186, 
303. 
"      type,  no,  I.  212,  406,  II.  52. 
Jews,  antagonism  to  Gentiles,  I.  504. 
"     conversion  among  the,  III.  408-9. 

of,    I.   281,   II.    75.      See 

Jewish  nation, 
ceased,  I.  408,  509,  627. 
"     first  converts  of,  I.  467. 
"     modern,  Chiliastic,  I.  551,  II.  91. 

unbelief  of,  I.  288,  II.  54,  91, 
340,  493,  507,  III.  126. 
148,  417,  etc.,  421,  etc., 
424,  etc.,  566.  See  Unbe- 
lief of. 
"  lack  of  candor,  III.  424. 
"     no  controversy  with,  I.   467,  641,  II. 

510,  III.  350,  413. 
"     not  ignorant  of  kingdom,  I.  186,  205, 

253,  274,  280-3,  287,  356,  364,  375. 
"     not   in  kingdom  at  First  Advent,  I. 

185,  390. 
"     rebukes  to,  I.  184. 
"     unbelief  of,  I.  380,  420,  III.  240,  408, 
etc.,  410,  etc.,  417,  etc.  See  modern 
unbelief. 
"     usage   of   phrases,   I.  195,   198,    308, 
323,  364,  446,  683,  691,   II.  36,  420. 
See  Jewish  belief,  World  to  Come, 
Day,  etc. 
Joachiraites,  II.  677 
Joanna  Southcote,  III.  401. 
John,  the  Baptist,   and  his  hearers,   I.  260. 
"       "  "  and  his  ministry,  1. 262. 

"        "         "  not  ignorant,  I.  256. 

"       "         "  and  his   preaching,  III. 

533,  585. 
"       "         "  standing  of,  I.  253,  257. 

"     of  Leyden,  I.  342,  II.  637,  III.  178. 
John's  Gospel,  III.  354. 

Epistles,  III.  365. 
Jonah,  sign  of,  I.  380. 
Jordan,  type  of  what,  II.  393. 
Joshua's'miracle,  III.  395,  473. 
Jubilee,  III.  99,  182. 
Judaizers,  I.  205,  463,  466.     See  Jewish. 
Jude,  Epistle  of,  III.  365. 
Judge,  concessions  respecting,  II.  359. 
"       how  ignored,  II.  361,  364. 
"      Jesus  as,  I.  579,  II.  177,  352-3,  HI. 

586. 
"  "      "  necessary,  II.  358,  364. 

"       meaning  of,  II.  353,  etc.,  357,  583, 
590. 


INDEX   OF    SUBJECTS.  - 


675 


Judge,  perversion   of,    II.   352,    357,    3G0, 
362. 
"       Jewish  view  of,  II.  585. 
Judges,  H.  353,  392. 
Judgeship,  joyful,  II.  353,  369,  370. 

"  and  kingdom,  II.  352,  etc. 

Judging,  apostles,  II.  583,  585-6. 
Judgment,  I.  619,  583. 

antecedent,  II.  283,  306,  374-5, 

382,  385,  392. 
of  believers,   II.  385,  etc.,  389, 

etc. 
day  of,  II.  358,  362,   etc.,  365, 
367,  etc.,  383,   409,  516,  III. 
245,586. 
dav    of,    early    belief,   II.  362, 

368-9,  372,  383. 
the  general,  II.  221,  372.  381. 
the  last,  H.  367,  372. 
"  of'quick  and  dead,  II.  392. 

saints,  II.  578,   583-4,   610,  HI. 
81.     See  Kings. 
Judgments,  II.  358,  373. 

future,    HI.  81,    185-6-7,189. 
Jumpers,  I.  54. 
Justice  of  God,  II.  736,  743-4, 
"      future  time  of,  III.  189. 
Justified,  God,  III.  295,  391-2. 

Jfaraite,  I.  446. 
Key,  an  important,  I.  622. 
Keys,  the  two,  I.  IDS. 
King  of  the  ages,  1.411,412. 

"     of  kings,  III.  578.     See  Christ, 
"     and  servants,  parable  of,  II.  24. 
Kingdom  and  Acts,  III.  358. 

adaptation  of.  III.  240,  278,  297, 
4U7,  475-6,  515,  529,  537. 
"         adopted,  why,  I.  198. 

Advents,  I.  242. 
"         Advent,  linked  to   the  Second,  I. 
244,   365,  387,    414,   424,  467, 
n.  74,  509,  562,  III.  318,  328. 
"         analogy,  and.  III.  343,  etc. 
"         angels,  and,  II.  618,  etc. 
"         Anticbrist,     and,    II.  668.      See 

Antichrist. 
"         Apocalvpse,  and,   III.  366,    etc., 
382,  "etc 
Bible,  structure  of  the,  III.  477. 
blessing,  a,   II.   145,  304,   466-7, 
480,  591-5,  613,  III.  449.  453-4, 
455,  etc.,  464,  475,  555,589,  600. 
blessings  of,  I.  220,  564,  II.  466, 
480,  591,  613,  III.  240,  279,  316, 
327,  460.  etc.,  475-6,  515,  578, 
588-9,  590-1,  595-7,  599.  600. 
Christ,   and,  III.  228,    350,  449, 
etc.,  454,  etc.     See  Christ,  In- 
heritance, Reign,  etc. 
Church,  and,  IIL  180-2,  218. 
«'  "        not  the  Christian,  I.  609, 

612,  615,  618,  632,  etc. 


Kingdom,  Church  not   the  visible,  I.   647, 
662. 
"        not  the  invisible,  I.  655, 

662. 
"        and    State,  union  of,  II. 
607-8. 
"        commencements   of,   various  al- 
leged, I.  44,  368. 
"        conception   of,  proper,    III.  132, 
220,     225,    237-8,     286,    288, 
461-2. 
"        conditional,  III.  519. 
"         continued,  why  not,  I.  222,  419. 
"         controversy  with    Jews  concern- 
ing, no,  I.  280,  III.  485. 
"        covenanted,  I.  285,  290,  293,  325, 
328,   331,  334,   339,   348,  390, 
393,  422.  427,  504,  565.  II.  48, 
53,  79, 161.340,  346-7,  III.  371, 
461-2,  527,  545,  550,  582,  584- 
5,  600. 
"        covenants  based  on.     See   Cove- 
nants, Abrahamicand  Davidic. 
"        Davidic   Kingdom,   the,   I.   234, 
565.       See    Davidic  Covenant, 
Inheritance,  etc. 
"         death  of  Jesus,  and,  I.  429. 

denned,  how,  I.  39,  147,  181,  195, 

690. 
definite,  I.  195,  664,  II.  504,  513, 

53^-3 
delay  in,  II.  127,  203,  589. 
"         delivering  up  of,  II.  188,  635. 
"         described,  how,  I.  248. 

desirable,  III.  588-9.     See  bless- 
ings of,  etc. 
"         determined,  I.  34.    See  Covenant, 
Divine  Purpose, 
dignity  of,  I.  34,  393,  598,  II.  99, 
304. 
"        disciples  not  ignorant  of  the.  I. 

274,  II.  19,  III.  58. 

"         doctrine  based  on  Scripture,  I.  68. 

"         doctrine  changed,  I.  60,  147,  368, 

370,   411,   423,   459,  598,   602, 

605,  611,  621.   626,    etc.,  632, 

638,  644,    647,    655,  659,   662, 

685,  690.     See    Interpretation, 

Spiritualistic,  His.  of  Chiliasm, 

etc. 

doctrine  of,  perpetuated,  I.  480, 

675,  n.  124. 
doctrine  substituted,  I.  204,  368, 

370,  411,  445,  459,  469,  603. 
downfall  and  restoration  foretold, 

I.  240,  419,  420. 
earnest,  an,  I.  218. 
earth,  pertains  to  the,  I.  35,  348, 

365,    402,   573,  643,  660,  669, 

II.  13,  33,  117,  124,144-5,  251, 
263,  305,  359,  504,  513,  532-3, 
596,  IH.  25,  32,  etc.,  49,  51.  60, 
62,   457,   463,   465,    548,    556, 


676 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


569,  583.     See  Inheriting,  Re- 
newal, Reign,  etc. 
Kingdom,  earthly  kingdom,  no,  I.  220.   See 
God-derived. 
"         enforces    the  doctrine  of  God,  I. 

37,  II.  75. 
"        elect     nation,    offered   to  the,  I. 

207,  377,  397,  II.  42. 
"        Epiatles,  and  the,  III.  361,  etc. 

everlasting,  I.  675,  II.  503,  513, 
590,  599,  630,  etc.  See  Per- 
petuity, Stability, 
failure,  no,  I.  664,  H.  125-6, 
207,  IIL  37,  477,  544,  etc., 
582,  etc.,  584-5. 
"  faith,  and,  III.  288. 

fallen,  when,  I.  250. 
"  Father,  given   by  the,  L  577, 

n.  587. 
fundamental,   L  272,  565,  664. 
fundamentals  of,  in.  597,  600. 

See  Covenants, 
future,  L  367,  369,  379,  382, 
402,  413.  419,  440,  467,  471, 
590,  598,  621.  691,  II.  117, 
224,  374,  466,  513,  558,  562, 
574.  See  also  Postponement, 
Second  Advent,  Pre-Mill. 
Advent,  etc. 
"  future,  spiritual,    III.  80,  460, 

etc.    See  Spiritual,  Kingship, 
Priesthood,  Reign,  Blessings, 
etc. 
"  Gentiles,  and,  I.  232,  396.    See 

Gentiles,  call  of  the,  Dispen- 
sation, design  of,  etc. 
"  given    to    whom,  I.   386,  390, 

392,  396,  402,  408.  412,  415. 
422,  567,  600,  602.11.  13,  177, 
227,  263,  330,  374,  376,  574. 
See  Elect,  First-fruits,  Heirs, 
Kings,  etc. 

given  to  whom  first,  I.  230. 

given  by  Scripture,  I.  110. 

glory  of,  in.  210,  214,  240,  430. 
See  Greatness  and  glory  of, 
Power,  supremacy,  King, 
etc. 

God-derived,   IH.  16,  25,  348, 

393,  462,  527,  545.  See 
Earthly,  no,  Covenant,  Su- 
pernatural, 

goal,  the,  m.  341,  344,  366, 
454-5-6,  475,  491,  495,  504, 
576.  See  Divine  Purpose, 
End,  Reign,  Theocracy  real- 
ized, etc. 

Gospel  kingdom,  not  a,  I.  607. 

Gospel  of  the,  III.  137,  219, 
228. 

Gospels,  III.  349,  etc.,  502. 

greatness  and  glorv  of,  II.  503, 
589   592,  etc.,  595-6,  III.  44, 


218,    288,    456.   464-5,   528, 
550,  553,  555,  589.     See  Su- 
premacy,    World-dominion, 
King,  Reign,  etc. 
Kingdom,    Heaven   of,  I.  195,  283,  364,  II. 

II,  16. 

"  heaven,  not  in  the  third  heaven, 

I.  668. 
holy,    in.  461,    463,   465,  600. 
See  Spiritual,   Kings,  Priest- 
hood, Christ,  etc. 
holiness,  and,  II.  608. 
Hope,   the,  IH.  310,  311,  549, 

578,  589,  595. 
humbling,  ILL  237,  279,  288, 

292. 
idea  of  to   be  realized,  I.  223, 
664. 
"     perverted,  1. 423,  603,  605, 
665,  II.   124,  340.      See 
Substitutions,       Perver- 
sions, etc. 
importance   of,  I.   29,   272,  II. 
304.   See  Fundamental,  Cov- 
enants, 
infallible  rule,  I.  219,  IL  780, 

III.  550-1.        See    Perfect, 
Christ. 

inherited,    III.  457,   485,  585. 
See  Inheritance,  Heirs,  Kings, 
Reiffn,  etc. 
initiatory  and   completed,  III. 
597. 
"  inspiration,   and,  IH.  467,  etc. 

Jewish,    I.  424,  427,  III.  369, 
370,  422,  460. 
belief,     IH.    422,   etc. 
See  Jewish  faith,  etc. 
"        boast  of,  1.  331. 
"  "        Church,  not  the,  I.  604. 

"  "        king     subordinate,     I. 

228, 
"        nation,  tendered  to  the, 
I.  356,  362,  375,  390. 
396. 
Jews,  virtually   abandoned  by 
the,  I.  226. 
"  Jerusalem,  and.  III.  34,  etc. 

John,  not  etablished  under,   I. 
262. 
"     preaching  by,  I.  253,  256, 
260. 
"  Judges,  not  ended  with,  1. 228. 

known,  well,  I.  181,  364. 
"  meanings     applied     to.        See 

Meanings  given  to. 
leading,  HI.  428,  468,  475,  480, 
etc.,  495,  582,  etc.,  590,  etc., 
592,  etc.,  595.  See  Impor- 
tance of,  prominency  of,  ex- 
tent of,  etc. 
"  miracles,  and,  III.  473-4. 

"  Mt.  Sinai,  and,  III.  17,  etc. 


INDEX   OF    SUBJECTS. 


677 


Kingdom,    mysteries  of,  I.  141. 

nationally  nigh,  1. 363,  368,  372, 

375,  389,  574.  590. 
nearness   of,  I.  252,  266,  368, 
HI.  92,  etc.,  95,  etc.,  105,  etc. 
"  necessary,  II.  129. 

"  New  Test.,  how  introduced  in 

the,  I.  181. 
non-existence,  when  in,  L  250, 
in.  546. 
"  not  changed,   IIL  574,  584-5, 

589,  etc. 
not  6et  up  at  the  First  Advent, 
1.366,  370,  396,  421,  440,  466, 
558,  590.  See  Postpone- 
ment, Second  Advent,  Pre- 
Mill.  Advent,  etc. 
"  obscurely,  some  things  reveal- 

ed, I.  148.  275,  II.  16. 
"  Old  and    New  Tests.,  relation- 

ship of  to  the,  I.  161. 
Oneness  of.  I.  245,  11.632,  HI. 
60,  222,  463-4. 
"  pattern,  no,  IIL  15,  592.     See 

Type, 
perfect,   I.  123,  128.  225,  304, 
466-7,  480,  570,  589,  590,  776, 
778,  780,  III.  288,  415,  430, 
455,  461,  etc.,  537,  540,  548, 
etc.,  582,  etc.,  591,  etc.,  595, 
597,  599. 
perpetuity  of,  I.  233,  565,  II. 
630,  etc. 
*'  personal     relationship    to  the, 

I.  32,  393. 
perverted,    III.   520,  574,   592. 
See       Substitutions,      Com- 
mencements,       Perversions, 

phases  of,  I.  283. 
postponed,  I.  379,  etc.,  412, 
419,  etc.,  421,  433,  586,  590, 
etc.,  II.  48,  etc.,  161,  etc., 
224,  668,  III.  13,  242-3,  356, 
454, 4S4-6,  503,  517,  519,  523, 
527-9.  544,  546,  585.  See 
Postponement. 

"  power,  one  of,  I.  251,  II.  503, 

570,  etc.,    III.   68,    82,    456, 
464. 
preached,  I.  182,  443. 

"  preaching  of  the  apostles  con- 

cerning, I.  433,  436,  438,  443, 
445,  459,  471,  475,  478,  II. 
17,  19,  574. 

"  priesthood,  and  its,  II.  601,  etc., 

607.  etc. 

"  promises   relating   to,   I.   342, 

471,  687,  IL94,  128,  142,  144. 
See  Blessings,  Kings,  etc. 

"  prominency  of,  I.  32.     See  im- 

portance of,  goal,  fundamen- 
tal, covenanted,  extent,  etc. 


Kingdom,  prophecy,  and,  I.  195,  604. 
"         providence,  and,  III.  340. 
"         punishments,  and,  III.  598. 
"         purest  and  firmest  rule,  I.  571,  IL 
123,   570,    590.      See    perfect, 
infallible,     power,     greatness, 

reason,  and,  in.  288,  348. 
"         reasonable,  n.  126. 

realization  of,  L  34,  664,  687,  H. 
503,  524,  526.  See  Blessings, 
Redemption,  Restitution, 

Reign,  Salvation,  etc. 

redemption,  and,  H.  604,  in.  240, 
343,  383,  435, 475-6. 

rejected,  III.  297,  527. 
"        removed,   I.   237.     See   Restora- 
tion, etc. 
"         repentance,  and,  HI.  419. 

restored,  I.  248,  256,  393,  413, 
467,  565,  575,  687,  II.  92,  117, 
123,  199,  466,  630,  639,  in.  366, 
383,  399,  454.-460-1,  477-8,  517, 
544,  582,  585.  See  Kingdom 
set  up,  when,  Davidic  throne 
and  kingdom,  Earth,  Reign, 
Second  Advent,  Perpetuity, 
etc. 

restored  under  Fzra,  not,  I.  237. 

sacrifice,  and  the,  HI.  455-6.  See 
death. 

sacrifices,  and,  HI.  83,  etc. 

safeguards  around  the,  I.  229. 

Scripture  explained  by  the,  n. 
108,  in.  388,  etc. 

seeking  the,  HI.  388. 

set  up,  when,    I.   419,  470,  577, 

590,  II.  48,  55, 75,  102, 152,  161, 
227,  244,  362,  404,409,  414,42  >, 
461,  473,494,499,  524,622,  639, 
668,  731,  UL  17.  etc.,  484-5, 
486,  517,  567,  590,  etc.  See 
Kingdom,  nearness  of  Second 
Advent,  restored,  etc, 

sin  opposed  to  the,  I.  105. 
Spirit,  and  the,  III.  64,  etc. 
Spiritual,  and,  U.  607,  etc.,  611, 
615,111.64,  etc.,  80,460,  etc., 

591.  See  Spiritual,  Baptism 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Priesthood, 
Theocracy,  etc. 

splendor  and  glory  of,  ni.  44, 
etc., 383,  463-4,465,  477-8,528, 
530,  539,  590-1,  595.  See  glory 
of,  supremacy,  world  dominion, 

stability  of,  II.  630,  etc.,  IIL  456, 
542,  589,  etc,  593,  600.  See 
Everlasting,  Perpetuity,  etc. 

study,  demands  careful,  I.  36, 
151. 

subordinated,!.  31,  597. 

substituted,  HI.  187,   212,  218, 


678 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


etc.,  222,  231,  233, 296,  350, 352, 
400-5,  484-5.  527,  545-6,  559, 
562-3,583,  See  doctrine  sub- 
stituted, idea  perverted,  dis- 
cordant views,  doctrinechanged, 
varied,  etc. 
Kingdom,  sudden  coining  of,  III.  23. 

"  supernatural  allied  to  the,  I.  80, 
97,  365,  676,  II.  33,  80,  84,  89, 
105,  III.  28,  64,  etc.,  70,  82, 
456,  463,  473.  See  Miraculous, 
Supernatural. 

"  supernatural,  necessity  of,  I.  81, 
II.  53,  80,  89,  99,  105,  144.  147, 
152,  etc.,  156,  479,  III.  71,  73, 
184,  220,  238-9,  287-9,  295-6, 
341,  347,  440,  464-5,  472,477, 
479,  488,  503,  506,  514,  521. 

"         supremacy  of,   II.   570,  etc.,  III. 
11,  etc.,  591.  See  World-domin- 
ion,   greatness    of,  Jewish  su- 
premacv,  etc. 
type,  no,  it.  524,  526. 

"  unbelief  in  the,  HI.  217,  etc., 
225,  etc.,  238,  242,  286,  484-5, 
486-8,  502,  520,  528,  546,  572, 
575.  See  substituted,  doctrine 
changed,  etc. 

"         understood,  can  be  better,  I.  154. 
unity  of,  III.  338,  584,  595.     See 
Oneness  of. 

"  value  of,  I.  33.  See  Blessings, 
glory,  perfect,  etc. 

"  varied,  III.  233.  See  substituted, 
changed,  etc. 

"  views  of  discordant,  I.  8,  66,  372, 
649,  665,  668,  677.  See  defini- 
tions, substituted ,  doctrine 
changed,  perversions,  unbelief 
in,  etc. 
visible,  I.  351,  364,  369,  564,  569, 
573,  575,  641,  648,  651,  655, 
660,  674-5,  683,  692,11.  33,  44, 
46,  92,  97,  117,  123,  204,  340, 
343,  348,  504,  513,  532-3,  III. 
43,  etc.,  460,  etc.,  463,  465, 
528,  544-5,  518-9,  552,  582, 
584,  587. 
want,  a  felt,  111.476. 
Word,  alone  in  the.  III.  225.  See 
given  by  Scripture,  Covenants, 
based  on,  etc. 

"  work,  and  Christ's,  III.  449,  etc., 
454-5. 

"        -world-dominion,  a,  III.  460,  463, 

547,  596-7.    See  supremacy  of, 

Jewish      supremacy,      Gentile 

domination,  Reign,  etc. 

Kingdoms,  the  ten,  I.  672,  II.  693,  696,  707, 

752,  754-5,  III.  149. 
Kings,  saints,  II.  577,  etc.,  590,  etc.,  III.  30, 
58,     71,    238,    457.       See 
Reign  of  the  saints. 


Kings,  saints,  degrees  of  tank,  II.  591. 
See  Reward. 
limited,  II.  590.  See  First- 
born, First-fruits,  One 
hundred  and  forty-four 
thousand. 
"         ''  matchless  power  of,  II.  595. 

"         "  on  earth,  II.  603.     See  King- 

dom pertains  to  the  earth, 
Inheritance,  etc. 
qualified,  II.  590-1,  III.  81, 
457. 
"         "  perpetually     such,    II.   003. 

See    Kingdom,   perpetuity 
of. 
"  priesthood    of,    II.    71,  215, 

464.     See  Priests. 
"         "  representatives  of  Jesus,  IL 

596. 
of  the  East,  n.  108,  764. 
Kingship  perverted,  II.  597-8. 
Kin»s  from  Abraham,  II.  577. 
Knowledge  and  evil.  III.  144,  158. 
"  future,  III.  439. 

increase  of,   III.  127,130,  135, 
150,  153. 
"  personal,  I.  401. 

"  requisite,  III.  226. 

Kosmos,  II.  431,  514. 

Labadie,  I.  54. 

Laborers  in   the   Vineyard,  parable  of,  EL 

24,  389. 
Laodicea.     See  Churches,  seven. 
Lamb, marriage  of  the.     See  Marriage. 
Language,  future,  II.  145. 
Last  days,  II.  336. 
"    judgment,  II.  367,  372. 
"    times,  II.  337. 
Latter  days,  II.  337. 
Law,  agrarian,  the,  III.  596. 
Law  and  the  Christ,  I.  373. 
Lawgiver.       See    Judgeship,    Revelation, 

Reign. 
Law,  reign  of,  III.  511. 

"     unchangeable,  IIL  205. 
Lazarus  and  the  rich  man,  parable  of,  EL 

399. 
Lead,  Jane,  I.  74,118. 
Leaven,  parable  of  the,  I.  114,  IL  22,  HI 

190-1. 
Lee,  Ann,  I.  114,  11.139. 
Letter  killeth,  I.  53,  62,  332. 
Lexicographers,  testimony  of,  EE.  212,  220. 
Literal  fulfilment,  I.  167,  174,  243,249,  290, 
314,  317,  332,  335,  343,  349,  364, 
II.  187,  190,  204,  346,  348-9,  350, 
488,  769,  II.  36.   See  Literal  Inter- 
pretation, Fulfilment,  Future, etc. 
"      interpretation.  I.  45,   47,  290,  310, 
344,  448,  625,  665,  III.  85,  98,  100, 
165,    169,    190-1,    311,   447,   488, 
etc.,   571,   581,   HI.    180,   222-3, 


INDEX    OF   SUBJECTS. 


679 


233,  240-1,  244,252,  274,  290,  296, 
311,  392,  410,  422,  503,  525,  550, 
562. 
Literal   interpretation,   importance    of,    I. 
57, 130. 
"  meaning  of,  I.   47, 

191,  193,11.571. 
true     standard,   I. 
49,  290,  314,  332, 
H.  190. 
Lived,  usage  of,  n.  267. 
Lives  of  the  Christ,  in.  483. 
Locust  Army,  II.  766. 
Lord's  day,  III.  95. 

"       prayer,  I.  531,  618,  643,  639,  695,  II. 

436,  III.  186,  391. 
"  "      misappropriated,    I.   694-5, 

II.  37. 

"       supper.  II.  62. 

"       table,  HI.  132. 

Lollards,  I.  521. 

London,  III.  157,201. 

Loss  endured,  II.  389. 

"     how  Buffered,  III.  135,  229,  277,  328. 
Love  for  the  appearing,  III.  135,  229,  277, 
328. 
"     of  God,  H.  159. 
"     influence  of,  III.  204,  327. 
Loyola,  III.  77. 
Luke's  Gospel,  III.  353. 
Lutherans,  faith  of  the,  III.  135. 

Maccabees,  II.  60. 
Magians,  II.  836. 
Magog,  11.529,  695,  709-711. 
Mammon,  worship  <>f.  III.  129. 
Man-child,  H.  259.  285. 
"     the  Son  of,  I.  559,  565,  etc.,  577,  581- 
2,   614,  II.  167,  180,  223, 
327,    341,   346-7,    351-2, 
355,  374,   410,    563,    III. 
553-4.  See  Christ  David's 
Son,  humanity  of,  etc. 
"  "     meaning  of,  I.  566,  H.  167. 

"  '*     kingdom  given    to  the,    I. 

577,  581,  11.223. 
"  "     sisrn  of  the.     See  sign. 

"    ordained, III.  555,  563-4. 
Man's  day,  II.  412. 
"       fall.  III.  433. 
Manifestations  of    the    sons  of    God,   II. 

592. 
Mansions,  the,  III.  57. 
Maranatha,  I.  472,  II.  198. 
Mark's  Gospel,  III.  352-3. 
Marriao-e,  how  used,  II.  131,  etc.,  203,  IH. 
42,  52,  301-2. 
"  how  degraded,  II.  537,  540. 

oftheLamb,  11.171,  173,  182-3, 
190,  270,   324,    346,  527,  529, 
III.  27-8.  43,  299,  etc. 
"  supper,  III.  45,  301,  etc. 

Married  wife,  the,  II.  131,  etc. 


Martyrs,  future,  II.  738,  etc.,  741,  745  757- 
9,  770,  HI.  387.     See  Persecu- 
tion, Antichrist. 
"        resurrection  of  the,  II.  286. 
Massachusetts,  III.  201. 
Materiality,  III.  43. 
Matthew's*  Gospel,  III.  350-1. 
Mathias'sapostleship   IL  585. 
Meanings  given  to  the   kingdom,  I.  39,  44, 
60,  66,  147,  181,195,204,368,370-2,  411, 
423,  445,  459,  469,    598,  603-4-7-9,  612, 
615,  618.  626,  632-4-8,  641,  644,  647,  655, 
659,  662,  665,   668,  690.     See  Kingdom 
substituted,  varied,   definitions,  doctrine 
changed,  unbelief  in,  etc. 
Melchisedec,  II.  602. 
Memorial,  I.  296. 
Men  of  understanding,  III.  70. 
Memnonites,  I.  537. 
Merciful  God,  III.  234. 
Messages,  the  two,  II.  160. 
Messiah.     See  Christ. 
Messiahs,  false,  III.  130-1,  155-6. 
Metaphor,  II.  486. 
Methodists,  faith  of  the,  III.  135. 
Michael,  II.  655,  657. 
Michaleans,  I.  537,  554. 
Middle  wall  of  partition,  I.  213,  405. 
Midnight,  III.  94,  304. 
cry,  III.  307. 
Millennial   age,  nearness  of,  HI.  98.     See 
Sec.  Advent, 
blessings,  II.  142,  etc.,  150,  244, 
453-6,  462, 466-7,  480,  503,  508, 
591,    613,  IIL   240,   279,  316, 
327,  460,  etc.,  475-6,  515,  578, 
588-9,  590-1,  595-7,  599,  600. 
See     Reign,    Kings,    Priests, 
Creation,  Restitution,  etc. 
doctrine,  no  novelty,  L  19.     See 

History, 
predictions,  III.  190. 
seasons,  II.  528. 
Millennium,  Aujrustinian,  I.  515,  522,  525, 
527,  615,   667,  II.  149,  163, 
628,  III.  173,  178. 
Brown's,  II.  153,  III.  183. 
Burdick's,  II.  283. 
"  Bunyan's,  I.  536. 

Bush's,  II.  287,111.174. 
Constantinean,    I.    505,    529, 

534,  II.  149. 
Davis's,  IU.  165. 
"  Joachim   and   Fratracelli,    I. 

522. 
Neander's,  m.  183. 
"  Orijrenistic,    III.     173.       See 

Origen. 
Popish,   ni.    174,   178.      See 
His.  of  Doctrine. 
"  Priest's,  II.  303. 

Reformers,    IH.  174-7.      See 
His.  of  Chiliasm. 


680 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


Millennium,  Waldegrave's,  II.  292,  III. 
183. 
Whitby's,  I.  373,  525,  528, 
532-4,  547,  HI.  150,  153, 
155,  163,  215-220,  265,  284, 
378,  772,  ni.  134,  170,  etc., 
172-3,  177,  etc.,  179,  181, 
etc.,  197,  etc.,  215,  236. 
"  various  views,  I.  529,  II.  157, 

265,  282,  622,  etc.,  624,628, 
728,  732,  736,  746,  751,  770- 
2,  777,  III.  35,  203-6. 
"  location  of  the,  II.  622,  etc. 

"  order  of  the,  II.  627,  etc. 

"  perverted,   II.   141,    etc.,  149, 

153,  155,  157,  265, 271,  626- 
7.     See  Bush,  Waldegrave, 
etc. 
spiritual,  HI.  174,  178-9. 
"  and    Jewish     restoration,    II. 

628.     See  Jewish  nation. 
"  and  the  morning,  II.  418.    See 

Day  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Millerism,  I.  523,  536,  II.  55,  303,  III.  114, 

166-7,211,207. 
Ministers,  unbelief  of,  III.   250.     See  Un- 
belief of  the  Church,  Signs. 
Ministration  of  angels,  future,  II.  618. 
Ministry,  condition  of,  III.  185,  193. 

"  not  kin^s,  II.  597-8. 

Minority,  no  test,  I.  493. 
Miracle,  Joshua's,  III.  395,  473. 
Miracles,  I.  88,  97,  365,  676,  III.  472.     See 
Supernatural,  Kingdom. 
"         cessation  of,  III.  74-6. 

Christ,  of,  III.  472,  479,  514,  521. 
"         definitions  of,  I.  91. 
"         and  doctrine,  I.  101,  276. 
"         earnests,  I.  97,  II.  79.     See  signs. 
"         essential  to   the  kingdom,  I.  81, 
89,  II.  53,  80,   82,  89,  99,  105, 
144,  147,  152,  etc.,  156,  196. 
See     Kingdom,   supernatural 
allied  with  and   necessity  of, 
Supernatural,  etc. 
future,  II.  595,  738,  740,   757-8, 
760,  IH.  64,  71,  101,  163,  184, 
390.  bee  Baptism  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  Creation,  etc. 
"         and  Jewish  nation,  HI.  473.     See 
Jewish  nation,  conversion  and 
restoration  of. 
Patristic,  HI.  76-9. 
"         signs,  are,  I.  90,  96,  II.  145.     See 

also  miracles  of  Christ. 
"         solution  of,  1. 100. 
Missionaries,  III.  188,  197,  307. 

Chiliastic,     I.  553,   in.   200, 

204,  212,  235-6,  330-1-2-3. 

Missions,  III.   187-8,  200,  204,  211,  235-6, 

330,  etc. 
Mohammedans,  11.230,  704. 
Moment,  a,  III.  435. 


Monkery,  I.  517. 
Montanists,  II.  640,  III.  31. 
Moon,  usage,  II.  452. 
Moravians,  I.  537,  II.  676. 
Moral  obligations,  III.  510. 

"      qualifications,  III.  496,  556. 
Morelschiki,  III.  82. 
Moriah,  Mt,,  IH.  37,  51. 
Mori n.III.  51. 

Mormons,  I.  44,  74,  118,  537,  601,  639,  645, 
653,  II.  51,  298,  425,  573,  626, 
IH.  11,  29,  38,  77-8,  142,  208, 
236,  260,  270. 
Morning  of  the  Day,  II.  87,  316,  414,  etc. 
"         and  the  Jews,  II.  417. 

star,  II.  316,  317,  414,  418. 
Mosaic  economy.  I.  214. 
Moses,  body  of,  II.  562. 

books  of,  IH.  489,  498. 
prophet  like  unto,  III.  28,  426. 
Motives,  II.  344. 
Mountain,  usage,  III.  57,  394. 
Muggletonians,  I.  54,  III.  70. 
Multitude  of   the  saved,  II.  536, 551.     See 

Perpetuity  of  the  race,  etc. 
Miinster  Faction,  III.  178. 
Munzer,    III.  70. 
Mustard  seed,  parable  of,  II.  22. 
Mysteries,  HI.  434. 

"  of  the  Kingdom,  I.  141. 

Mystery,  meaning,  I.  141. 

"     '     remaining,  1. 142, 144, 172,  II.  16, 
182. 
extent  of,  I.  142. 
necessity  of,  1. 145. 
how  to  be  studied,  1. 146. 
general,  I.  146. 
pertaining  t<>  the  call,  I.  410. 
of  iniquitv,  I.  463. 
finished,  II.  182,  190,  IH.  185. 
Mysticism,  I.  118,  203. 
Mystics,  III.  29. 

Name  oiQod,l.  300. 
Napoleonic  dynasty,  H.  644,  etc. 
Nations,  against    the    Christ,  II.    104.  181, 
207,  374.     See  War. 
"         all,  future,  II.  374. 
"         Canaan,  of,  II.  597. 
"         future    overthrow,    II.   109,    497, 
etc.     See  Posture  of.  Unbelief, 
War,    Battle,    Antichrist,   Per- 
secution,    Sinai    Mt.,   Gentile 
domination,  etc. 
"         history  of,  II.  776-7. 
"         none  with  the  Christ  (Isa.  63),  II. 
743. 
none    Christian,   II.    778,    in.  15, 

193. 
posture  of,  III.  149,  153,  162,  186, 
591,598.     See  Antichrist,   Un- 
belief, War,  etc. 
spared,  H.  468,  482,  491,  521,  528, 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


681 


535,  etc.,  547,  768.     See  Perpet- 
uation of  the    race,  Jewish  res- 
toration and  supremacy,  Reign, 
etc. 
Nations,  usage  of,  II.  375,  379. 

when  saved,  HI.    185-6,202,213, 
458,  592,  596-7,  600.    See  Pre- 
Mill.  Advent,  etc. 
Naturalism,  I.   83,  II.  156-7,  HI.  115,  121, 
161,  207,    281,   293-4,  506, 
509. 
Natural  Reli prion,  III.  205,  509. 

signs,  m.  128,  164. 
Nature,  I.  80. 

"        confidence    in,  HI.   114,  115,  205. 

See  Unbelief. 
"        imperfectiou   of,  I.  83, 11.152,  etc. 
See  Evil,  Supernatural    neces- 
sarv,  Miracles,  Creation,  etc. 
lauded,  I.  107. 
"        repaired,    I.     81.       See    Creation, 
Earth,  Evil,  etc. 
sympathetic,  II.  498,  HI.  128,  151, 
162,  164, 395-6. 
Nearness  of  the   Advent,  I.  470,  III.  133. 
See  Second  Advent.  Si^ns. 
"  of   the    Kingdom,  III.  92,    etc., 

95,  etc.,   105,  etc.     See   King, 
dom,  Signs. 
Nero-myth  theory,  II.  675. 
Net,  parable  of  the,  II.  24. 
New,  usage  of,  I.  323,  II.  499,  514. 
"      England  Chiliasm,  I.  541. 
"      Heavens  and  New  Earth,  I.  686,  II. 

148,178, 
499,  etc. 
542,  etc. 
III.  587. 
See 
Earth, 
redeem- 
ed, etc. 
"  "  "         "        "       and    early 

Church, 

II.    504, 

525-6. 

«  >•  a         "         <<       perpetuity 

of,  II.  503.     See  Kingdom,  Race,  Reign, 

New  Jerusalem,  II.  144,  527-9,  etc. 
"  "  marriage  of,  II.  527,  etc. 

See  Marriage. 
New  Test,  begins  with  the  Kingdom,  how, 
I.  181. 
"      cup  of  the,  I.  327. 
"      theolua-v  of,  m.  132. 
New  York.  III.  157. 
New  York  Prison  Assoc..  III.  144. 

"      State  Charity  Assoc,  III.  144. 
Nicene  Creed,  I.  530. 
Night,  II.  316,  368,  414. 
Nihilism,  I.  108.  II.  724,  HI.  154. 
No-age  people,  III.  269. 


Noah  and  Lot,  days  of,  in.  112,  122-4,  133, 

185,  297. 
Nobility  of  the  saints.     See  Kings. 
Novelty,  Millenarianism  no,  I.  19. 
Number  of  the  name,  II.  706. 
Numbers,  sacred,  II.  452. 

Oath  of  God,  in.  311,411. 

"    sacredness  of  the,  I.  300,    387,  416, 
422,  657,  II.  202 
Objection  answered,  II.  521,  552. 
Objections  answered,  Jewish,   III.  408,  etc. 

See  Jewish. 
Obscurity  of  prophecy,  1. 173,  II.  287. 
Observation,  meaning  of,  II.  41,  44,  46. 
Offices  of  the  saints.     See   Kings,  Priests, 

Destiny,  Olam. 
Old  and  New  Test.,  connection   of,  I.  157, 
288,    338,    418,    II. 
51,    111,    III.     Ill, 
131,  242,  471. 
"       "       "        "      relation  to   the    King- 
dom, I.  161. 
"     Test.,  knowledge  of  requisite,  I.  188, 

11.51,111. 
"         "       lowering  of,  I.  158.     See   Un- 

helief. 
"         "       unbelieving     attack      upon,  I. 
159.       See    Genesis,    Moses, 
books   of,  Miracle,  Joshua's, 
etc. 
Omnipotence  of   God,   I.  84,  II.  522.     See 

Power. 
One  body,  I.  615. 
"    Hope,  the,  III.  309,  etc. 
"    faith  people,  I.  537,  HI.  269. 
"    hundred  and    forty-four  thousand,  II. 
322,    331,    380,   III.  126,   160,  163, 
263,  266,  375. 
"    thousand  years,  II.  409,  456,  504,  528, 
631,  638. 
Oneness  of    Father    and     Son,     II.    139. 
See    Christ    divine-human,  Re- 
presentative of  God.  etc. 
"       future,  III.  71. 

"       of  kingdom,  I.  245,  II.  632,  III.  60, 
222,  463-4. 
Opinions   varied    and    antagonistic.       See 
'Second  Advent,   Kingdom,  Millennium, 
Interpretation,  etc. 
Opponents,  writers,  1.548. 
Opposition,  III.  233.     See  History  of  Chili- 
asm. 
Optimistic,  theory,  II.  469,  III.  148. 
Order,  divine.     See  Divine  Purpose. 
Origen,  estimate  of,  I.  58,  507. 

influence     of,    I.    499,    etc.       See 
Origen,  Interpretation,  spiritual- 
istic. 
Origenistic,  interpretation,  I.  51,  305,  310, 
499,   503,  575,  593,  611,  644,  II.  17,  351, 
572,  III.  173,  244.     See  Interpretation. 
Augustinian  and  spiritualistic. 


682 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


Ottoman,  power,  III.  126,  148. 
Overthrow    of     Jerusalem    and    the    Sec. 
Advent,  II.  34. 

Pantheism,  III.  207. 
Palestine  and  Antichrist,  II.  760-1. 
"         central,  III.  33. 
"         colonization  schemes,  II.  88,  4G8. 
"         Exploration  Soc,  III.  148. 
"         future,  III.  33.     See  Jewish  res- 
toration, etc. 
"         Jewish  interest  in,  III.  126,  148. 
inherited,  II.  199,   etc.,  435,  440, 
446,  516.     See  Christ,  inheri- 
tance  of,    Inheritance    of   the 
Patriarchs,    Covenants,    Abra- 
hamic  and  Davidic. 
"         no  type,  III.  61. 
Papacy,    the,"  III.   77,    120,  142,  160,  162, 
174,  236,  311,546. 
and  Antichrist,  the,  II.  221,  678, 
683-4,  686-7,  689,  691, 703,  715- 
717,  741-2,  755-6. 
and   Chiliasm,    I.    513.   645,  062, 
666,  II.  98,  265,  383,  398,  401, 
573,  598,  <;52. 
Parable,  king  and  servants,  II.  24. 

"         laborers  in  the  vineyard,  of   the, 
II.  24,  389. 
leaven,  of  the,  I.  114,  II.  22,  III. 
190-1. 
"         marriage   of  the   king's   son,    of 

the,  III.  307. 
"         mustard  seed,  of  the,  II.  22. 
net,  of  the,  II.  24. 
nobleman,  of  the,  II.  203. 
pounds,  of  the,  II.  25,  388. 
"         rich  man  and  Lazarus,  of  the  II. 

399. 
"         royal  wedding,  of  the,  H.  24. 
"         sower,  of  the,  III.  186. 
"         supper,  of  tin;,  III.  142. 

talents,  of  the,  II.  24,  388. 
"         tares   and  wheat,   of   the,  II.  21, 
26,  171,181.  272,381. 
ten  virgins,  II.  24,  322,  III.  299, 
etc. 
Parables,  formula  of,  II.  16,  etc. 

and  kingdom,  II.  20,  223. 
perverted,  I.  20U,  657,  663,  II.  20, 
223. 
"         prophetical,  II.  18. 
Paradise,  II.  399,  401,  492,  III.  51. 

"  earthly    restored,    II.   434,    etc., 

436-7,   443-5,   480,    etc.,   484, 
etc.     See    Earth,   Inheritance, 
Kingdom,  Curse,  Reign,  Crea- 
tion, etc. 
Parochial  Schools,  III.  158. 
Parousia.  II.  211,  219,  221-2,  III.  302. 
Particularism,  III.  59') 
Pascal,  Lamb  a  type,  the,  III.  481. 
Passover,  II.  225,  in.  26. 


Patriarchs,  promises  to,   I.  294,  309,   320, 
387.      See   Covenant    Abra- 
hamic. 
inheritance  of,  I.  294,  298,  309, 
413,  585,  II.  52,  96,  263,  444, 
516,  530,  534. 
Patriotism,  III.  13,  14. 
Paulikiaus,  II.  265,  676. 
Paul's  preaching,  III.  574-5.     See  Preach- 
ing. 
Peace,  attained  when,  II.  770,  III.  596.  . 
"      Congresses,  II.  113,  770. 
"      Societies,  III.  129,  152. 
"      and  safety,  III.  114,  117,  119,  129, 
136,  140,  152,  197-8,203,258,329. 
"      and  safety  prophets,  II.  732-3.     See 
Prophet     the     false,     Whitbyan 
theory,  Unbelief,  etc. 
Pentecost,  day  of,  III.  66. 
feast  of,  II.  62. 
Perfect    Redemption,   III.  325.     See    Re- 
demption, 
when,  II.  396. 
Perfectibility,  III.  436. 
Perfection  of  God,  I.  84,  86,387,  11.88,137, 

225. 
Perfectionists,  I.  444,  473,  669,  II.  623,  HI. 

34,  69. 
Perpetuation  of  the  race,  II.  535,  etc.  See 
Transfiguration,  Jewish  su- 
premacy, Nations  spared, 
Peter's  lire,  Earth,  Reign, 
etc. 
"  of  New   Heavens   and    New 

Earth. 
Perpetuity   of  the  Covenant,  I.  322,  etc., 
329. 
of  the  earth  II.  427,  etc.,  513, 
etc.,  III.  587.     See  Perpetua- 
tion of   the  race,  Kingdom, 
Reign, 
of  the  kingdom,  I.  233,  565,  II. 
599,  630,  etc. 
"  of  the  kingship,  II.  603. 

of  the  Priesthood  of  J^sus,  II. 
601,  etc. ,  III.  456. 
"  of  the  Priesthood  of  the  Saints, 

II.  617,  III.  464. 
Perilous  times,  III.  124-5,  209,  294. 
Periodicals,  Chiliastic,  I.  553. 
Persecution,    future,   II.   328,    334-5,   377, 
700,  720,731,  etc.,  734,  etc., 
738, etc.,  745,  etc.,  749,  etc., 
751,  757-8,  III.  14,  143-4, 
153-6, 161-5,  172,  185,  188, 
197-8,  210,  293,  298.     See 
Antichrist, 
future,  Jewish  belief  in,  II. 
734. 
Person   of  Jesus,  I.  561,  etc.     See  Christ, 
interest   in    His    person,    Christological 
question,  the  great,  Christ,  the   divine- 
human,  etc. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


G8i 


Personal  abuse,  m.  231-2,  325. 

experience,  III.  280,  285,   327-8, 

475,  513. 
Second  Advent,  I.  569,  570,  674, 
II.  76,  86,  139, 
156,164,180,189, 
208,  217,  347-8, 
365,410,412,111. 
59,305,377,384-5, 
528.  See  Son  of 
Man,  Parousia, 
E  p  i  p  b  a  n  e  i  a, 
Reign,  Iuheri- 
tance,  etc. 
"  "  "         opinions  respect- 

ing, II.  164,  etc., 
168,  etc.,  343. 
See  Death,  Mil- 
lennium, Advent 
second  perverted, 
Spiritualized,  Un- 
belief of,  etc. 
"  "  «'  Pre-Millennial, 

L  470,  565,  572, 
577,  II.  117,  152, 
161,  etc.,  167, 174, 
etc,  194,199.208, 
227, 342, 352, 362, 
409,414.4:19,461, 
479.  499, 554, 570, 
622,668,111.345, 
586.    See,  Reign, 
Judgesbip,  Mar- 
riage, Mt.  Sinai, 
David ic   Throne, 
Kingdo  m,  In- 
heritance, Son  of 
Man,  etc. 
Perversions,  II.  433,  436,  444,  446,  537,  539, 
541.  III.  38,   51,  53,  152,  163,  172,  177-8, 
180,   182,   187,   193,  204,  211,   219,  etc., 
230-1,  330,  383,  423,  451,  455,  461,  575, 
577,  580,    583,   592,   594.     See   Extrava- 
gances, Unbelief. 
Pessimist  theorv.H.  469. 
Peter,  Epistle  of,  III.  365. 
"     Second  Epistle,  II.  559. 
"     Confession  of,  I.  441,  III.  515. 
Petrobrusians,  1.661. 
Petro-Joannites,  I.  54. 
Philadelphian  Soc,  I.  74. 
Philippiaus,  Epistle  of,  III.  362. 
Philo's  system  of  interpretation,  1.50. 
Philosophy,  I.  132,  502,  HI.  206,  208,  257, 
561. 
true,  III.  472. 
Pietism  and  Chiliasm,  L  538,  540. 
Piety  assumed,  II.  343. 
"    personal.  III.  322-3,  513. 
"    perverted,  III.  226,  254. 
Pilate's  judgment,  III.  571. 
Pillars,  II.  580. 
Pit,  usage,  II.  256. 


Pit  and  snare,  III.  294. 

Place    of    the    Kingdom    (location).     See 
Earth,  Kingdom  on  earth,  Inheritance, 
Patriarchs,  etc. 
"     preparation,  of  the,  III.  58. 
Plagues,  III.  162. 

Plan,  the  divine.     See  Divine  Purpose. 
P.ymouth  Brethren,   1.405,   536,554,   585, 

640.  II.  324,  III.  271. 
Poets,  Chiliastic,  I.  554. 
Poiset,I.  74. 
Poland,  HI.  15. 

Political — divine  government,  I.  207,  240, 
266,  348,  651,  II.  97-8,  117,  119, 
651,  663.  See  Davidic  throne 
tnd  Kingdom,  Covenant,  Reign, 
Church    and    State,    Inheritance, 

signs,  III.  127,  134,  153. 
Poor  encouraged,  II.  388. 
Popes,  II.  675,  691.     See  Papacy. 
Population  of  Palestine,  an  objection,  II.  52. 
Pordage,  I.  74. 

Postponement  of  the  Kingdom,  I.  379,  etc., 
412,  etc.,  419,  etc.,  421,433,  577,586,  590, 
etc.,  II.  48,  etc.,  55,  etc.,  75,  etc.,  161,  etc., 
199,  224,  etc.,  639,  etc.,  668,  III.  13, 
242-3,  356,  454,  484-6,  503,  517,  519,  523, 
527-9,  544,  546,  585.  See  Church  prepar- 
atory, Inheritance,  Kingdom,  Reign,  etc. 
Power  of  God,  III.   45,  47,    221,  239.     See 

ability  of. 
Practical  application  of  truth,  I.  54,  56, 
66,  116,  118,  477,  II.  195,333,  386. 
effect  of  Chiliasm,  I.  551-2,  698, 
II.  167,  305,  333,  344,  390,111. 103, 
110,  141,  163,  167-8, 199,  200,  228, 
232,235-7,  313,  etc.,  315,  318,  320, 
etc.,  323,  etc.,  329,  etc.,  385,  etc., 
555.  See  Advocates,  Evangelists, 
Missionaries,  History  of  Chiliasm, 
etc. 
Prayer,  1. 117. 

"      answers  to.  III.  131,  390,  474. 

for  the  Advent,  I.  49 1 ,  691-2,  695-6, 
II.  305,   333,    III.   309,  315,  etc., 
330,   384-5.      See  Advent   preci- 
ous, Hope  the  blessed,  etc. 
"      Lord's,  the,  I.  531,  618,  643,  689,  695, 
etc.,  II.  436,111.  186,  391. 
"  "       "  misapplied  694-6,  II.   37. 

Preaching,  apostles,  of  the,  I.  433,  436,  438, 
443,  445,  469,  471,   475,  478, 
II.  17,  19.    See  Paul's  preach- 
ing, His.  of  Chiliasm. 
Christ,  the,  III.  579. 
disciples,  of    the,    I.  274,    362, 

366,  430,  III.  585. 
early,  III.  245,  296,  579. 
"  first  confined  to  the  Jewish  na- 

tion, I.  356. 
future,  II.   745,   759,  HI.  160, 
166. 


084 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


Preaching,  Jesns,  of,  I.  2G6,  363,  366,  379, 
384,  446. 
John, of,  1. 253,  256, 260,111. 585. 
See  John  the  Baptist. 
Predictions  of  Balaam,  III.  401,  etc. 
"  the  Christ,  III.  414. 
"  Daniel,  I.  672,  in.  405. 
"  Isaiah,  I.  684,  HI.  405. 
"   Micah,  I.  685. 
"  "  Zechariah,  I.  685. 

Pregizerians,  I.  554. 
Prejudice,  II.  537,  718-9,  III.  552. 
Pre-Millennial  Advent.     See  Personal,  Sec. 

Advent,   Pre-Mill. 
Preparatory,  Church  is.     See  Church. 
Preparation  for  Christianity,  I.  377. 
Press,  activity  of  the,  III.  127, 135,  149, 150, 

250,  255. 
Preterite  interpretation, III.  371. 
Prey,  usage,  II.  256. 
Pride,  II.  594,  III.  279. 
Priest,  Christ  the,  II.  145,  601,  etc. 

•'  design  of,  II.  604-5. 
'  "        "    how  limited, II.  601,  etc., 

"  "       "    relates   to   humanity,    II. 

605. 
"    royal,  II.  602,  604. 
"  "       "    unchangeable,  II.  601,  etc., 

Priests,  saints,  H.  607,  etc..  III.  71,  464. 
"  "     activity  of.  11.614. 

"     bless,  II.  613. 
"        declare  the  laws,  II.  610. 
"        divinely  called,  II.  612. 

exaltation  of,  II.  608-9,  613. 
"        glorified,  II.  616. 

glorify,  the  Christ,  II.  611. 
'         gradations  of  rank  among, II.  610. 
See  Kin^rs. 
holy,  II.  612,  617. 
"        intercourse  of  the,  II.  617. 
"        judges  also,  II.  610. 
"        number  of  the,  II.  616. 
"        oneness  of  the,  II.  615. 
"        perpetually  such,  II.  617. 

place  of  the.  II.  617. 
"        sacrifices  of  the,  II.  611. 
"        singing  of  the,  II.  616. 
"        splendor  of  the,  II.  607,  616. 
"        supernatural    powers   of   the,    II. 

613,  etc..  III.  64,  etc.,  80,  etc. 
"        teachers,  II.  614. 
"        universal,  II.  607. 
Princes  of  the  Captivity,  II.  203. 
Princes,  saints  are,  II.  579.     See  Kings. 
Prison,  usage  of,  11.254,  256. 
Private  judgment,  I.  132. 
Profession,  mere,  III.  498. 
Proli,  III.  51. 

Prominence  of  Scripture,  IEE.  130. 
Prophecy,  appreciated  when,  II.  745,  770, 
775. 
"  based  on  the  covenants,  L  337, 

310. 


Prophecy,  comparison  of,  I.  171,  246,  II. 
141.  279. 
"  conditional,  III.  85. 

"  conditioned  and    unconditioned, 

I.  176,  II.  48. 
definitions   of,   I.   164,   169,   II. 
175. 
"  displays  wisdom,  I.  232. 

future,  II.  147. 

fulfilment    of,    I.  69,    166,    309, 
693,  II.  175.  III.  224,  252,  360, 
414,  419,  421,  429,   453,   489, 
492,  526. 
"  history,  and,  I.  172. 

how  dealt  with,  III.  197-8,  200, 
214,  221,    252-3.     See    Inter- 
pretation    spiritual,    Perver- 
sons,    Unbelief,    Millennium, 
etc. 
important,  I.  170,  II.  722. 
intention  of,  I.  163. 
lowering   of,  I.  64.     See  Unbe- 
lief, 
neglected,  in.  200,  414. 
obscurity  of,  I.  172,  II.  2*7. 
perverted,  I.   167,   346,  II.  103, 
130,    141,    770.      See   Perver- 
sions. 
"  predictive,  I.  165. 

"  profitable,  I.  169. 

"         proof  of,  III.  437.    See  Analogy, 
Interpretation    literal,    Cove- 
nants, fulfilment  of,  etc. 
"  scorned,  II.  770.     See  Unbelief. 

"  spiritualized,    I.   205.       See  In- 

terpretation spiritual,  Origen- 
istic     interpretation,    Augus- 
tine, etc. 

study  of,  requisite,  I.  163,  168, 
II.'  333,  III.  108,  151, 197,  200, 
213,  386,  429. 
"  Theocracy,  its  relation  to  down- 

fall and,  restoration  of  the,  I. 
240.  See  Theocracy,  King- 
dom, 
unbelief  of,  III.  131,  197-8,  221, 
414,  419.  See  Unbelief,  Per- 
versions, Persecution,  Anti- 
christ, Gentiles  high-minded, 

Prophesying  faisely,   III.  143,  152,  197-8, 
203,  206.    See  Prophets,  false,  Peace  and 
safety,  etc. 
Prophet,    the    false     (allied     with     Anti- 
christ), II.  692,  695.  702,  III.  121,  162. 
Prophets,  false,  III.  203,  258,510,  594.  See 

Prophesying. 
Prophetical,    Conferences,  I.  554,  III.  130, 
153,  169,  204,   222,  263,  327, 
332. 
"  knowledge   increased,    III.    97, 

108,  170. 
order,  in.  599. 


IXDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


680 


Providence,  1.414,  II.  596,  in.  340,  etc., 
428,  430. 

Providential  coming,  n.  1G7.  etc..  221. 
See  Advent,  Second,  perverted,  spiritual- 
ized, etc. 

Prudence,  HI.  166,  197-8,  328. 

Psalms,  imprecatorv,  II.  110,  etc.,  736,  771, 
III.  391. 

Purchased  possession,  II.  479,  534. 

Puritanism,  I.  650. 

Purpose,  the   divine.  III.  287,  295-6.  340, 

347,   371,  440,  454,    469,   475,  482,   487, 

491,  493,  504,  515,  520,  593,  597,  600. 

Quakers,  I.  118,  IH.  11,69. 

Qualifications,  moral,  I.  415,  601,  617,  II. 

75,  195,  225, 332.  386,  612,  III. 

279,  284-5,  286-7-8,  307,  327. 

See    Trial,    Firstborn,   First- 

"  fruits,  etc. 

"  of      saints      glorified.        See 

Priests,  Kings. 
Queen.     See  Bride,  Marriage  of  the  Lamb. 
Question,    the    great    Christological,    III. 

512,  etc.,  537,  etc. 
Quicken,  usage,  II.  256,  258,  299. 
Quickening  spirit,  II.  258. 
Quotations,  why  freely  employed,  I.  20. 
Quoting  prophecy,  the  apostles,  III.  185. 

Race,  antiquitv  of,  III.  500. 

"      delivered,  n.  491,  HI.  455,  584 
"     perpetuated,  II.  535,  etc.,  III.  191, 
3-21,  587. 
"  objections   to,  II.    552, 

etc. 
"      unity  of  the,  HI.  500. 
Rank,  grades  of  future,  II.  387.    See  Kings 
degrees  of  rank,  Priests,  gradations  of, 
Reward    proportioned. 
Ransomed,  II.  258. 

Rashness  of  Gentiles,  I.  329,  333,  395,  398, 
416,   425,  615,  H.  57,  73,    78,    91.     See 
Gentiles      high-minded,     Interpretation 
spiritual,  etc. 
Rationalism,  m.  207,  224,  408. 
Reason,  IH.  280-1,  286-7-8-9. 

exaltation  of,  1. 135,  in.  155,  220, 
239,  280.  289.     See  Unbelief, 
and  Faith,  IIL  286-9. 
"        perverting  the  Kingdom,  III.  220, 
288-9. 
Redeemed,  II.  258.     See  Saints,  Firstborn, 

Redeemer,  HI.  449,  etc.,  453-4,  529.     See 
Christ  perfect,  etc.,  Restorer, 
Redemption,  Evil,  etc. 
perfect,  a,  HI.   325,  529.     See 
Christ. 
Redemption,  I.  419,  H.  182,  196,  258,  307, 
410,  433,  535,  etc. 
body  of  the,   H.   229,    236-7, 
240,  397. 


Redemption,  complete,  II.  145,  149,  156, 
200,  237,  348,  370,  466,  479, 
etc.,  483,  etc.,  485,  490,  515, 

534,  etc.,  537,  604,  III.  325, 
366,  369,  436,  449,  etc.  454- 
5,  457,  493,  539,  550,  553, 
600.  See  Restitution,  Bless- 
ings forfeited.  Christ,  Re- 
storer, Evil,  Curse,  etc. 

extent  of,  II.  536,  etc.,  550, 
etc. 

imperfect,  {made,  n.  437,  537, 
543. 
"  perverted.  III.  455.  457,  562. 

plan  of.  III.  429,436,  529,  584. 
See  Divine  Purpose,  Cove- 
nant, End,  Kingdom,  etc. 

progressive,  II.  469,  435,  etc., 

535,  etc.,  547. 
purchased  possession,  II.  479, 

534. 
signs    of    the,    I.    96.        See 
Signs,    Kingdom,    nearness 
of,  Unbelief,  etc. 
Reformation,  the  I.  524,  etc.,  666. 
Reformed  Jews,  I.  376,  H.  232.     See  Jews. 
"         Presbyterian  Church,  I.  649,  II. 
778. 
Reformers,  I.  524,  II.   215,  in.  159,  175-7. 

See  Lutber,  Calvin,  Knox,  etc. 
Refreshing,  Jewish    belief   concerning,  II. 
461,467. 
"  meaning  of  the,  II.  4G2,  etc. , 

470. 
resurrection,  and,  II.  464,  471. 
"  times  of,  II.  461,  etc 

Regeneration,  II.  257,  259,  300,  473  etc.  in. 
587. 
extent  of  the,  H.  475,  477. 
"  meaning  of,  II.  473-4. 

"  resurrection,  and,  II.  275, etc. 

washing  of,  II.  478. 
Rejoicing  of  Jesus,  III.  602. 
Reign  of   the  Christ,  U.  504,  532-3,  536, 
561,  768,  m.  213, 
370,  539,  543,  548, 
550,  553,  555,  586. 
See     Supremacy, 
World  -  dominion, 
Kingdom,  Theoc- 
racy, Reiyn  of  the 
Saints,  Judgeship, 
etc. 
"         "     "         "         perpetuity  of,  I.  233, 
565,  m.  599,  630, 

6tC. 

"  "  "  visible,  I.  117,  123, 
204,  342,  348,  351, 
364,  369,  564,  569, 
573,  575,  641,  648, 
651,  655,  660, 
674-5,683,692,11. 
33,  44,  46,  92,  97. 


686 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


117, 123,  204,  340, 
343,  348,  504,  513, 
532-3.  III.  43,  etc., 
460,  etc.,  463,  465, 
528,  544-5,  548-9, 
552,  582,  584,  587. 
See  Davidic 
throne  and  King- 
dom, Inheritance, 
Son  of  Man,  Da- 
vidic Covenant, 
etc. 
Reign  of  the  Christ,  objections  to  visible, 
II.  344,  etc.,  346, 
etc.,  348.  See  also 
Christ,  dishonor- 
ing of,  etc. 

"  "  "  "  and  the  morning, 
II.  417. 
«*  "  saints,  I.  388,  536,  691,  H. 
97,  128,  134,  139, 
140.  179,  225,  304, 
316,  330,  333,  376, 
385,387,391,432-3, 
570,  577,  590.  III. 
30,58,71,215,238, 
307,587,600.  See 
Saints,  future  ex- 
altation, Inheri- 
tance, Kings, 
Priests,  Princes, 
Judges,  etc. 

"         "      "  "         blessings  of  the,  II. 

591,  593.  See 
Blessings,  King- 
dom, etc. 

"  "  "  "  degrees  in,  H.  591. 
See  Hank,  Re- 
ward, Priests,  De- 
grees. 

««  "  "  "  design  of,  II.  588, 
etc.,  593,  etc. 

*«        * earth,    on,    II.    574, 

598-9,  603.  See 
Earth,  Kingdom, 
Inheritance,  etc. 

"  "  "  "  grandeur  of  the,  II. 
570,  etc.,  574, 
578-9,  581. 

"  "  "  "  honor  of  the,  II. 
592-4,  599. 

*'  "  "  "  inaugurated,  when, 
II.  572,  etc.,  590, 
598.  See  Advent 
Second.  Hope  the 
Blessed,  etc. 

"  "  "  "  perpetuity  of  the,  II. 
603.  See  King- 
dom,perpetuity  of, 
Kings,  Priests, etc. 

"  "  "  "  perversions  of  the, 
II.  571-3,  575, 
597-8. 


Reign  of   the  saints,  priesthood  associat- 
ed   with    the,    II. 
71,  215,  464.     See 
Priests. 
"         "     "         "         qualifications,       for 
the  II.  590-1,  in. 
81,457.    See  First- 
born,  Baptism  of 
the    Holy    Ghost, 
Supernatural,  etc. 
"        "     "         "         representative        of 
Christ's  reign   II. 
596. 
"        "     ".         "         supernatural     asso- 
ciated with  the.  II. 
595.    See  Baptism 
of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
Miracles,     Super- 
natural.      Kings, 
Priests,  etc. 
"         "     "         "         who  are  engaged  in 
the  II.   590.     See 
Firstfruits,    First- 
born, One  hundred 
and  forty- four 
thousand,     Elect, 
Dispensation,    de- 
sign of  saints  gath- 
ered, etc. 
Religion,  future,  man's  II.  722,  725,  728- 
9,760,770-1.     See 
Anticlirist,     Hu- 
man itarianism, 
Unbelief,  etc. 
natural,  III.  440. 
"        universal,  III.  207. 
Religious  liberty,  future,  II.  742. 

"  unbelief.     See  under  Unbelief. 

Rellyanites,  I.  537,  II.  290. 
Rellyism,  III.  269. 
Representative  of  God,  who,   II.  349,  III. 

537,  etc. 
Reproaches,  III.  230. 
Republicanism  eulogized,  II.  777-8,  III.  12, 

592,  594. 
Responsibilitv  of  rejectors,  III.   106,  197- 
8-9,  225,  229,  230,  239, 
32S,  383. 
"   unbelief,  II.  732,  III.  294, 
528.     See  Unbelief  in- 
excusable, etc. 
Rest,  the,  II.  441,  448,  etc.,  454,  etc.,  463, 
III.  396. 
"     extent  of  the,  II.  467,  470-1. 
"     times  of  the,  II.  469. 
Restitution,  the,  I.  96, 102,  II.  141, 146,  174, 
178,  188,  300,  348,  408,  III. 
493,  587.     See  Creation,  Re- 
storer,   Curse,   Evil,   Reign, 
Kingdom,  etc. 
Jewish  view  of,  II.  461,  467. 
miraculous,  I.  100,  II.  144,  152 
etc.,  187,  195-6.     See  super- 


INDEX   OF    SUBJECTS. 


687 


natural,  necessity  of,  Crea- 
tion, etc. 
Restitution,  times  of.  II.  425,  461,  etc.,  535. 
Restitutionists,  III.  269. 
Restorer,  the,  I.  250,  II.  76,  78,   152  etc., 
186  195,   307,  430-1,  466,  468,  472,  486, 
ni.  454,  473,  47S,  494,  515.     See  under 
Christ,  Blessings  forfeited,  Evil  removed, 
Restitution,  etc 
Restoration  of  the  Jews.     See  Jewish  na- 
tion,    restoration     of,     supremacy     of, 
Election,  etc. 
Resurrection,  animals  of,  II.  484. 

"  Apocalypse,  and  the,  II.  264, 

etc.,  285,  311. 
"  belief,   the   ancient,  II.  260, 

404. 
"  earlv,  II.  228, 
235,  250,  253, 
256,  291,  304, 
308-9. 
"  Jewish,  I.  297, 
302,  II.  235-6, 
244,  247,  249, 
253,  261,  270, 
272,  290,  297, 
299,  300,  302, 
305,  308,  311, 
404,  409.  See 
Jewish  belief. 
"  believers  and,  II.  299,  385. 

birth,  a,  II.  477.     See  Birth, 

usasre  and  future, 
children  of  the,  II.  237,  298. 
"  comparison  and,  II.  302. 

"  concessions  and,  II.  241,  246, 

253,  265,  267,  271,  303,  309. 
"  corporeal,  II.   228,  etc.,    236, 

239,250,304,308. 
denied,  11.230,272. 
"  corruption  and    (Ps.    16:  10) 

II.  237. 
"  Dani.'l  and,  II.  245,  etc 

"       of,  II.  248. 
"  design  of  the,  II.  304. 

"  Ezekiel  and,  II.  250,  etc. 

first   the,    II.    174,  227,   244, 

264.  etc.,  272,  295,  311,  439, 

461,473,  554,  HI.  245,  345, 

586. 

"  general  analogy  and,  II.  308. 

"  Gospels  and  Epistles,  and  the, 

II.  295,  etc.,  311. 
"  harvest,    and    the,    II.    269, 

272 
ignored,  II.  288. 
"  Isaiah,  and,  II.  274. 

Jewish,  II.  260.  290,  297. 
"  Jews  and  the,  III.  418. 

"  Kingdom,   and  the,   II.  227, 

243. 
"  land,  and  the,  II.  251. 

life,  II.  477. 


Resurrection,  morning,  and   the,  II.   415, 
417. 
Moses  of,  II.  562. 
necessarv,   I.   296,   298,    301, 
304,  II.  170,  175,  180,  189, 
227,  etc..  232,  etc.,  244,298, 
300,  304,  m.  524. 
objections,  and,  II.  278,  etc., 

283,  301. 
Old  Test.,  and  the,   II.  244, 

etc.,  274,  etc. 
Paul,  and,  II.  244,  298. 
pledge,  a.  III.  523. 
private,  II.  314. 
"  prominence  of,  II.  228,  237. 

"  raised,  who  are,  II.  285.     See 

first. 
Rachel,  and,  II.  253,  255. 
"  refreshing,  and  the,  II.  464, 

471. 
"  restoration,  and  the,  II.  305. 

"  rest   of    the   dead,    first   and 

the,  II.  273,  etc.,  278,  288, 
290. 
smnll  children  of.    See  Rachel 

above, 
spiritual,  II.  240,  284. 
"  spiritualizing,  and,  II.  309. 

time,    of  the,    II.    285.      See 

first,  Sec.  Advent, 
unbelief,  and,  III.  524-5. 
Revelation,  divine,  III.  284-5,  287-8-9. 
future,  II.  193,  III.  29,  etc. 
"  interpret,  how,  II.  715. 

"  nature,  and,  III.  30. 

"  present,   sufficiency,  I.  626,  II. 

574,  III.  29,  287,  294. 
"  unbelief,  and.     See  Unbelief. 

Reward,  full,  a,  II.  591. 

given,  when,  II.  183,330,  376-7, 
379,  388,  394,  396.     See  future, 
Sec.  Advent,  Inheritance,  Inter- 
mediate state,  Reign,  etc. 
future,  III.  166-7,  229,  277,  306-7, 

328. 
proportioned,  II.  586-7,  591.     See 
Judgment  of  believers,  Degrees, 
Rank,  Kings,  Priests. 
Rib,  usage,  III.  431. 
Riches,  II.  143. 
Rich  man  and  Lazarus,  parable  of  the,  II. 

399. 
River,  usage  of,  III.  394. 
Rod  of  iron,  II.  753,  HI.  189. 

"     and  staff,  III.  389. 
Roman  Catholic  Church,  I.  118,  202,  513, 
645,   662,  666,   II.  98,  103,   154, 
215,  220,  205,  383,  398,  401.     See 
Papacy,  Popes. 
"      Empire,  III.  132. 

*'  divided  form,  I.  672,  677, 
II.  115,  176,  639,  etc., 
693,  754. 


688 


IXDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


Roman  Empire,  God's  estimate,  of  the,  III. 
15. 
"       headless,  in.  126. 
"       jealousy  of,  I.  270,  682,497, 
557,  II.  683,  776. 
"  "       kingdom,  and  the,  I.  468, 

614,  682. 
"  "       imiortance     of     knowing 

the,  II.  643,  685,  693,  755. 
"  "       revival  of  the,  II.  618,  etc., 

668,  693,  695. 
traced,  II.  640,  etc. 
Romans,  Epistle  to  the,  III.  361. 
Royalty,  place   of  manifestation,   III.    C2, 

etc.,  587. 
Royal  wedding,  parahle  of  the,  m.  24. 
Russia,  II.  648,  688,  695,  710. 

S  bbatarians,  III.  266. 

Sabbatliai,  II.  759. 

Sabbath,  typical,  in.  99. 

Sabbatical"  year,  II.  145,  368,  452,  487,  IH. 

90. 
Sabbatism,  the,  I.  476,  486,  527,   II.  448, 
etc.,  454,  etc..  487,  HI.  587. 
"  chronology,  and,  II.  459. 

"  contrasts,  its,  II.  457. 

early    Church   views,   II.   449, 
etc.,  456,  etc..  452,  487. 
"  Jewish  views,  II.  448,  etc.,  450, 

456. 
Sacred  numbers,  II.  452. 
Sacrifice  of  Isaac,  III.  506. 

"  Jesus,  III.  455,  600.   See  Death. 
Sacrifices,   bloody,  not  future,  II.  83,  etc., 

89,  etc. 
Saints,  association  with  angels,  II.  621. 
"       coming  of,  II.  175,  187. 
"       destiny  of,  II.  593-6,  620. 
"       future  exultation  ol,  III.  28,  51,  71, 
306-7,  447,  458,578,586,  591,593, 
600. 
"       gathering  «.f,  II.  177,  III.  96,  600. 

See  Elect.,  Call. 
"       gl°ry  °f.  **•  418.    See  Glorification, 

destiny,  etc. 
"       honor  of,  II.  588,  592,  594,  620,  740, 

766. 
"       inheriting,  I.    303,    310,    322,    392, 
402,    414,    584,  600,    602,   II.  13, 
224,  227,  263,  330,  374,  376,  439, 
570,  607,  III.  62,  457,  460,  585. 
See    Inheritance,    Earth,    King- 
dom, Rei<rn,  etc. 
"       Judges,  II.  578,  583-4,  610,  IH.  81. 
See    Judge,     Kings,    Judgment, 
etc. 
Judgment  of,  II.  385,  etc.,  389,  etc. 
Kings,  II.  577,  etc.,  590,  etc. ,  III.  30, 
58,  71.  215,  238,  307,  457,  587,  600, 
See    Kings,    Inheritance,   Reign, 
Judge,  Prince,  etc. 
"       morning,  and  the,  II.  416,  etc. 


Saints,  Most  High,  of  the,  II.  587. 
' '       not  to  be  despised,  II.  593-4. 
"       present  condition  of,  11.572. 
"       power  over  angels,  II.  620. 
"       Priests,  II.   71,  215,  464,  607,  etc. 

See  Priests. 
"      reigning  of  the,  I.  388,  536,  691,  II. 
97,  128,  134,  139,   140,  179,  225, 
304,  316,  330,  333,  376,  385,  387, 
391,  432-3,  570,    etc.,    607,  etc., 
630,  III.  30,  58,  71,  215,  238,  307, 
587,    600.       See    Reign,    Kings, 
Priests,  Kingdom,  etc. 
"       riches  of,  II.  596. 
"       supernatural  power  of, III.  64,  etc., 
71,445,447,  458. 
Salvation,  H.  142,  154.  181,  386,    391,  410. 
See     Redemption,    Blessings, 
Curse,  Evil,  Reign,  etc. 
future,  III.  395,  etc.,  529,  539, 
554.  See  Second  Advent,  Crea- 
tion, Millennium,  etc. 
great,  the,  II.  536,  III.  451,  etc. 
See  Reign,   Blessings,  Kings, 
Priests,  Race,  etc. 
"         perfected ,  II.  466.  See  Redemp- 
tion, perfected. 
"         perverted,  III.  453.   See  Perver- 
sions, Spiritualizing, 
usage  of  term,  IH.  160,  149,  150, 
453. 
Sanctuary,  II.  202,  HI.  38. 

"       "    cleaning  of   the,    II.    115,    603, 
III.  458,  etc. 
Satan,  HI.  188,  262. 

'•       bound,  H.  142,  147,  181,  292,  359. 
"       bruised,  II.    582. 
"       temptation  of,  I.  698,  etc. 
"       titles  of,  I.  701. 
"       victory,  obtains  no,  II.  433,  536. 
"       who,  II.  621. 
Saved,  the  multitude  of,  II.  536,  551. 
Science  and  the  Bible,  III.  498,  etc. 
future,  III.  439. 
"       and  Religion,  conflict  between,  EH. 
507-9. 
Scoffers,  II.  335,  431. 
Scoffing,  III.  115,  134,  136,  153,  256. 
Scottish  Church,  I.  649. 
Scripture,  analogy  of,  III.  343,  etc. 

"         comparison  of,  I.  112,  152,333. 
"         doctriue  of  Kingdom  in  it,  I.  111. 
See.  Kingdom  based  on. 
explained,  II.   108,425,11.388, 
etc. 
"         extent  of,  1. 154.   See  prominency 

of,  Covenants,  etc. 
"         how  undermined,  I.  118.    See  In- 
terpretation  spiritual,    Unbe- 
lief, Perversions,  etc. 
"         indefiniteness,  I.  149. 

infallible  guide,  I.  116,  125,  135, 
204. 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


689 


Scripture  needs  man's  agency,  I.  120. 

"         only   authoritative,   I.    110,   III. 
272,  285,  287-8. 
prominence  of,  in.  130,  153,  225. 
"        reason,  and,  I.  136.     See  Reason, 

Unbelief  and  reason. 
"        sufficiency  of,  I.  124. 
"        supremacy  of,  I.  132. 
"        whole,  as  a,  I.  158. 
Sea,  n.  500,  527,  529,  III.  394. 
Seal,  the  last,  II.  195. 
"     the  sixth,  II.  686,  689,  717,  HI.  372, 
374. 
Sealed  vision,  II.  661. 
Seasons,  Millenial,  II.  528. 
Second  Adventists,  I.  523,   536,  H.  55,  79, 

III.  268.     See  Millerism. 
Sect  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  III.  74. 
Sela,  III.  26-7. 
Self-denial,  III.  279,  284. 
Self- righteousness,  1.417. 
Senses,  the  various,  I.  58. 

"       of  prophecy,  I.  193. 
Septuagint  Chronology,  II.  163,  451. 
Serpent,  the,  II.  448,  etc. 
Servetus,  I.  54,  635. 
Seven,  II.  452. 

' '      Churches,  III.  377,  etc. 
Seventh-Day  Baptists,  III.  11. 

"    Adventists,  I.  536,  II.  79,  323, 
602-3,  575,  602-3,  627,  HI. 
142,    163-4,  211,   263,   etc., 
339. 
"  "    observed,  II.  458. 

"    question,  III.  264-5,  268. 
Seventy  weeks,  II.  659,  etc.,  718. 
Shadow  of  deatb,  HI.  389. 
Shakers,    I.    44,    54,     74,   118.    473,  488, 
552,  591,  n.  166,  232,  425,  626,  HI.  142, 
153,  236,  270. 
Shaking  of  heaven  and  earth,  n.  494,  etc. 
Sheep  and  goats,  H.  375. 
Sheol,  II.  401-2. 
Shepherd,  usage,  III.  388. 
Shepherds,  II.  580. 
Shiloh,  III.  398-9. 
Shout,  II.  331. 
Sign  of  the  Son  of  Man,  H.  327,  HI.  162, 

164. 
Signs,  I.  381,  580,  II.  46,  498,  755,  758,  HI. 
94,  109,  etc.,  132-3,  139,  160,  etc., 
163,  etc.,  199,  209,  237,  239,  509. 
"       cheering,  III.  170. 

classification     of,   IH.    113,   132-3, 
159,  160,  165. 
"       knowledge,  of  the,  HI.  110. 
"       inspiration,  and,  HI.  167. 
"       miraculous,    III.    472.      See   Anti- 
Christ,  Advent. 
"       nature  of  the,  III.  112,  etc.,  132-3, 
164. 
neglected,  III.  165. 
"       political,  IH.  127,  134,  153. 


Signs,  redemption,  and,  III.  170. 
Silence  of  Scripture,  I.  104. 
Simonians,  III.  29. 

Sinai  Mt.,  II.  326,  759,  762-3,  766,  III.  17, 
etc.,  588. 
"       "     and  investiture,  III.  25. 
"       "     and  revelation,  III.  30. 
"       "      route  from,  IH.  22,  27,  393. 
Sinaitic  Covenant,  I.  311. 
Sin,  I.  102.     See  Blessings  forfeited,  Curse, 
Evil. 
"    blotting  out  of,  III.  459. 
"    mystery,  a,  I.  103. 

"    overruled,    I.    105.     See   Redemption, 
Salvation, 
provision  for,  III.  420,  425,  431.     See 
Christ. 
"    removed,  III.  455.     See  New  Heavens, 

etc. 
"    removing.     See  under  Christ. 
"    subject    to    no.     See    Christ,    Saints, 
Kings,  Priests. 
Singing,  future,  n.  616. 
Six  days  of  Creation,  II.  458,  469. 
Sleep,  usage,  II.  256,  258,  III.  431. 
Slumbering  and  sleeping,  HI.  304. 
Smith,  Joseph,  I.  204.     See  Mormons. 
Snare,    III.   97,    102,    112.     See   Pit    and 

snare. 
Socialism,  II.  623,  724,  779. 
Society  of  Friends,  I.  118. 

"Kom,  1.537. 
Socinians,  I.  159. 
Sodom,  usage.  H.  290. 
Solomonic  age,  II.  524. 
Son  of  Man,  the,  I.  559,  565,  etc.,  582,  614, 
II.  167,  180,  223,  327,  341, 
340-7,  351-2,  355,  374,  410, 
563,  III.  553-4. 
"     "       "     kingdom  given  to  the,  I.  577, 

581,  II.  223. 
■i     (t       <i     meaning  of,  I.  566,  H.  167. 
"     "       "     sign  of  the.     See  Sign. 
Sons  of  God,  H.  581. 

"      "      "     manifestation  of  the,  H.  592. 
Southcott,  Joanna,  I.  118,  II.  139,  323. 
Soul,  usage,  II.  266,  270,  281,  293,  III.  389. 
Sovereignty,  divine,  I.  250,  556,  559,  IH. 

559  563  583 
Spared  nations,  II.  468,  482,  491,  521,  528, 
535,  etc.,  547,  768.     See  Race,  perpetua- 
tion of,   Restoration  of  Jewish   nation, 
Reign,  etc. 
Spear,  H.  706. 

Spirit,  aid  how  given,  I.  52,  66,  117,  119, 
332. 
"     earnest  of  the,  HI.  67. 
"     claimed,  how,  I.  118,  120,  172,  204. 
"     filled  with  the,  HI.  70.     See  Bap- 
tism. 
"     future  outpouring   of,   II.  147,  III 

64,  etc. 
"     and  the  Jewish  nation.  HI.  75. 


690 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


Spiritual  blessings,   I.  307,  310,  315,  331, 
365,  384,    400,   511,    575,   687, 

II.  44,  84,  90,  93,  97,  127,  141, 
144,  151,  178,  600,  III.  167-8, 
457,  460,  etc.,  463,  etc.,  590-1. 
See  Kings,  Priests,  Reign, 
Kingdom,  Redemption  perfect- 
body,  H.  233,  234,  238,  241,  350, 

III.  464. 
discernment,  I.  52,  172,  332. 
kingdom,  II.  92,  99,  121,  204. 

Spiritualistic  interpretation.  See  Interpre- 
tation spiritualistic,  Origenistic,  Alle- 
gorical, etc. 
Spirituality  of  the  Kingdom,  II.  44,  604, 
607,  etc.,  611,  615,  III.  460,  etc.,  462,  etc. 
See  Spiritual  blessings,  Kings,  Priests, 
ptf»  etc 
Spiritualism,  III.  123-4,  145-6,  155-6,  290, 

436. 
Spiritualists,   I.  75,  118,  134,  157,  684,  H. 
197,  232,  425,  563,  706,  720,  III.  29,  163, 
165. 
Spiritualizing,  III.  64,  88,219,  310,  462-3, 
525.     See    Interpretation    spiritualistic, 
etc. 
Spirituals,  II.  677. 
Star,  usage,  II.  580,  HI.  403-4. 
"     morning,   the,  II.  316,  317,   414,  IH. 
404. 
Stars,  lost,  II.  429. 
Starovers,  II.  674. 

State  and  Church,  I.  207,  240,  266,   348, 
651,  663,  H.  97-8,  117,  119,  III.  14, 
16,    83,  338,   462,   545,    551,  582, 
591,  595-6. 
"     Churches,  I.  395,  653. 
St.  Louis,  III.  201. 
Stone,  I.  676,  683. 
Storch,  IH.  70. 
Storrites,  III.  269. 
Study   of   Scripture   neglected,  I.   46,   66. 

See  Scripture,  Prophecy,  Covenant. 
Steubner,  III.  70. 
Subjects  related,  HI.  324,  etc. 
Subordination   of    the    Son,  I.   579.     See 

Christ. 
Sudden    Coming,    HI.    23.     See     Advent 

second. 
Sun,  the,  H.  317,  414. 

"    darkened,  HI.  151,  164. 
Sunday,  III.  265,  268. 

"  fasting  on,  II.  458. 
Supernatural,  the,  I.  80,  97,  365,  676,  II. 
33,  80,  84,  89,  105,  345, 
595,  613,  758,  767,  772, 
III.  28,  64,  etc.,  67,  etc., 
70,  etc.,  456,  463,  473. 
See  necessity  of  the,  Mir- 
acles, Christ,  Kings, 
Saints,  Reign,  Creation, 
Kingdom,  Baptism,  etc. 


Supernatural,  necessity  of  the,  I.  81,  II. 
53,  80,  89,  99,  105,  144, 
147,  152,  etc.,  156,  472, 
492,  498,  III.  71,  73,  184, 
220,  238-9,  287-8-9,  295- 
6,  341,  347,  440,  464,  472, 
477,  479,  488,  503,  506, 
514,  521. 
"  and  the  natural,  III.  511. 

Supremacy,  Jewish,  II.  92,  etc.,  114. 
Survival  of  Chiliasm,  I.  553. 
Swedenborgianism,   I.    74,  204,   248,   444, 
473,  488,  II.  41,   55.  165,   232,  351,  366, 
381,  425,   626,  III.  29,  39,  51,  236,  256, 
573.     See  Interpretation. 
Symbolic  (Rev.  oh.  19),  II.  345. 

language,  II.  686. 
Symbols,  how  treated,  III.  375. 
Synonymous,  Church  and  Kingdom,  not, 

I.  632. 
Switzerland,  III.  140. 

Tabernacle  of  God,  III.  591. 
typical,  II.  568. 
Tabernacles,  feast  of,  III.  90. 
Talents,  parable  of  the,  II.  24,  388. 
Talmudical  system,  III.  415. 
Tares  and  wheat,  parable  of  the,  II.  21,  26, 

171,  181,  272,  381,  III.  118,  120. 
Teleological,    importance  of,   I.   78.      See 

Divine  Purpose. 
Temperance  movement,  the,  m.  143. 
Temple,  the.  III.  90. 

of  God,  II.  707. 
typical,  II.  568. 
Temporal,  I.  305,  310,  II.  120. 

blessings,  II.  436,  442,  660,  III. 
457,   462.       See   Reign,  Crea- 
tion, Jewish  nation,  Race,  etc. 
deliverer,  I.  273, 384,  H.  776,etc, 
III.  425-6,  457,  542. 
Temptation  of  Jesus,  I.  698,  etc. 
Ten   horns,  I.  672,  H.  693,  696,  707,  718, 

752,  754-5,  III.  149. 
Ten  Kingdoms.     See  Ten  Horns. 
Ten  tribes,  II.  65,  etc. 
Testaments,  Old  and  New,  I.  157,  288,  338, 
418,  II.  51,  111,  HI.  Ill,  131,  242,  471. 
Testimony,  human,  I.  98. 
Thamer,  I.  54. 
Theism,  I.  86. 

Theocracy.     See  under  the  head  of  King- 
dom  for   all   the  particulars 
not  given  here,  the  two  being 
synonymous, 
meaning  of,  I.   216,  II.   123-4, 
in.   352,    462,   520,  540,  545, 
582-3,  592-3. 
blessings,  greatness,  glory,  etc. 
of.    See  Kingdom. 
"  fundamentals,    covenants,    etc., 

pertaining  to.     See  Kingdom 
covenants. 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


691 


Theocracy,  establishment  of.   See  Kingdom 
Restoration,    Second   Advent, 
Restitution,  etc. 
Theocratic  house,    HI.   57.     See    Davidic 
Kingdom, 
rule,  in.  88,  435,  453,  460,  462, 
495,    531,   582,   589,  590,  etc. 
See  Kingdom,  Reign,  World- 
dominion,  Supremacy,  etc. 
"        idea,   extent   of,    III.  443,  etc., 
447,  477,  479,  487-8,  495,  515, 
531,  537,  555,   558,  582,  etc., 
590,  etc.,  592,  etc.,  595. 
"        idea,  figuratively  given,  III.  43, 

45. 
"        and  the  Jewish  nation,  III.  433, 
473, 572.      See  Davidic  throne 
and  Kingdom,  Jewish  nation, 
restoration  of,  etc. 
idea  perverted,  in.  15,  16,   88, 
352,   383,  512,  520,  551,  575. 
See  Kingdom. 
Theodicy,  III.  434.     See  Sin,  Evil,  Divine 

Purpose. 
Theology,  comparative,  M.  504-5. 
Thessalonians,  Epistles  to  the,  in.  363. 
Thief-like  Coming,  H.  176,  322,  334.     See 

Advent,  stages  of,  interval,  Mt.  Sinai. 
Thousand  years,  the,  II.  409,  456,  504,  528, 
631,  638. 
"  "       Jewish  view  of,  II.  409. 

"  "       one   hundred   and   forty- 

four,  H.  322,  331,  380, 
III.  126,  160,  163,  233, 
266,  375. 
Three  unclean  spirits,  the,  in.  162,  373. 
Throne,  Davidic.    See  Davidic. 

"      the  Father's  and  Son's,  II.  355,  357. 
Thunder  storm,  III.  406. 
Time,  Christ's  death,  of,  in.  480-1. 
Christ's  knowledge  of,  HI.  93. 
end  of,  II.  424. 
exact  unknown,  IH.  93,  etc.,  99,  etc., 

104,  168. 
future,  II.  411,  IH.  92. 
how   regarded   by  God,  I.  443,  475, 
etc  ,  668.     See  also  Time,  Spirit's 
estimate  of. 
how  reserved,  I.  580. 
last,  the,  n.  423. 
mistakes  in,    HI.  92,  etc.,  99,  etc., 

104.  256-7. 
of  the  end,  II.  336,  653,  658,  HI.  97. 
Spirit's   estimate  of,   HI.  486.     See 

Time,  how  regarded  by  God. 
shortened,  H.  460. 
times  and  a  half,  III.  99. 
Times,  Gentiles,   of  the,  I.  243,  406,  419, 
H.  60,  70,  87,  115,  459,  472,  624, 
639,    774,    in.  12,   104,  185,  336, 
505. 

Messiah  of  the,  HI.  570. 
seven,  III.  99. 


Times,  refreshing,  of,  II.  461,  etc. 

"  "     Jewish  view,  II.  461, 

etc. 
"       meaning,    II.     462, 

Rest  of,  H.  469. 

restitution,  of,  II.  425,  461,  etc.,  HI. 
587. 
"  "  "  Jewish  view,  n.  461, 

etc. 
"  "  "  meaning,  n.  465. 

"  the  times,  H.  469. 
Timothy,  Epistles  to,  IH.  363. 
Titus,  Epistle  to,  IH.  363. 
Toleration,  broad,  IH.  121-2,  143-4. 
Tradition,  I.  130,  498,  513,  515,  HI.  346. 
analogy  of,  HI.  343,  etc.,  345. 
Training  school,  a,  III.  445. 
Transfiguration,  II.  194,  554,  etc. 

"  no  dream,  II.  558,  etc. 

Translation  of  saints,  II.  314,  etc.,  319,  etc., 
IH.  588. 
"       "        effect,    II.    327,   III. 

166,  304. 
"       "       known,  II.  326. 
"       "        influence  of,  II.  334. 

See  effect. 
"       "        invisible,  II.  317. 
"  "       "        scorned,  II.  335. 

several,  II.  329, 
"  "       "        value  of,  H.  333. 

"       "        why  a,  II.  332. 
Transposition  of  subjects,  II.  525. 
Trees  of  righteousness,  n.  580. 
Trials   necessary,  II.   590,   592,    612.    See 

Kings,  Priests,  Reward,  Degrees,  etc. 
Tribulation,  future,  in.  118,  154-5-6,  160- 
1,    164-5,   198,   200,   293-4, 
598.     See  Antichrist. 
Jewish,  n.  60,  181,  190,  663, 
III.  113,  126. 
Triumphal  entry,  n.  759. 
Trouble,  unparalleled,  future,  U.  655,  731, 
etc.,  734,  etc.,  737,  etc., 741,  etc.,  751,  etc., 
761,  etc.,  767-8.    See  Tribulation  future, 
Antichrist,  War,  etc. 
Trump,  U.  331. 
Trumpet,   the  seventh,  II.   183,    190,  264, 

295,  359. 
Trumpets,  feast  of,  II.  452. 
Truth,  adaptedness  of,  m.  280. 
"       divine,  I.  155. 

triumphant,  m.  209,  258. 
Turkish  Empire,  HI.  126. 
Turneyites,  I.  571. 

Twelve  hundred  and  sixty  days,  the,  n. 
755-6. 
tribes,  the,  I.  405. 
Twenty-three  hundred  and  sixty  days,  ni. 

99. 
Types,  Gospel,  I.  630. 
Typical,  ark,  the,  II.  487. 
"        Canaan  not,  HI.  61. 


692 


INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


Typical,  Covenants  not,  I.  291,  295. 

"        Davidic  throne  not,  II.  199,  etc., 
347,  etc. 
Eden  not,  II.  61. 

how  applied,  I.  305,  343,  347,  H. 
51-2,  78,  83,  99,  170,  204,  etc. 
III.  61. 
"        inheritance  not,  II.  204. 
"        Jewish  nation  not,  I.  406. 

Jordan  of  what,  II.  393. 
"        Kingdom  not,  II.  524. 

Mt.  Zion  not,  HI.  32,  37,  51. 
Sabbath,  III.  99. 
Tabernacle,  II.  568. 
Temple,  II.  568. 

Ultra-literalism,  I.  63. 
Ultramontanism,  II.  143. 
Unbelief,  Advents,  and  the,  I.  244,  372, 
443,  459,  473,  477.  II.  116, 155, 
162,  191,  III.  134,  142,  185, 
195,  198-9,  204-5,  242,  258, 
295,  486,  520,  527,  etc.,  581. 
See  Advents. 

"  Antichrist,    and    the,   HI.   679, 

700,  722,  725,  732,  759.     See 
Antichrist,  War,  etc. 

"         Apocalypse,   and  the,  III.  367, 
etc. 
attacks  of,  I.  61,  589,  H.  443,  723, 
726,  780.     See   bitterness  of, 
widespread,  destructive,  etc. 

"  bigotry,  and,  III.  497. 

bitterness  of,  III.  130, 154-5, 199, 
205,  214,  225.  234,  236-7,  238, 
242-3,  280,  294,  496,  499,  500, 
508-9,  516,  521. 
Chiliasm,  and,  I.  450,  454,  460, 
H.  150,  186,  552,  571.  See 
History  of.  Heresy,  etc. 

«•  Church,  and  the,  I.  593,  645, 
653,  661,  III.  116,  118,  155, 
199,  203-5,  207-8,  210,  217, 
etc.,  222, 225, 230, 234-6-7-8-9, 
242,  248,  etc.,  250,  etc.,  255, 
etc.,  297,  311,  318,  329,  383, 
425,  587.  See  Kingdom  and 
Church, Church, Dispensation, 
design  of,  Election,  Wall  of 
partition,  etc. 

"         concessions  to,  I.  61. 

"         conscience  and,  HI.  285-6. 

"         covenants,  and  the,  I.  286,  316, 
334,  400,  n.  138.     See  Cove- 
nants, 
credulity,  and  III.  291-3,  495-7. 
David,  and  I.  235,  268,  348,  724. 
destructive,  I.  82,  II.  288,  418, 
446,  720,  770,  780.     See  bitter- 
ness   of,     widespread,    Anti- 
christ,    Persecution     future, 
War,     Trouble,    Tribulation, 
Signs,  etc. 


Unbelief,  'development  theory,  and  the,  I. 
115,  204,  434.  438,  460,  510,  II. 
720,  726,  736,  746,  760.  See 
Humanitarianism,  Natural- 
ism, etc. 

"         diversity  of,  III.  230, 288-9,  441, 
519,  etc.     See  forms  of,  Per- 
versions, etc. 
faith,  and,  I.  138,  307,  II.  150, 
552,  727,  758,  700,  III.  283-4, 
286-8,  2H-2,   495,    497,   511. 
See  credulity  of,  reason,  etc. 
forms  of,  III.  280-1,  288-9,  290, 
430,   491.     See   diversity   of, 
Perversions,  etc. 
future,  and   the,  II.  431,  701, 
703,  722,  732,  778-9,  III.  436, 
441,  512,  577,  595.     See  wide- 
spread,   Antichrist,    Persecu- 
tion, etc. 

"  heathendom,  and,  III.  505. 

"  history,  and,  II.  776. 

"  hope,   and   its   future,  II.   429. 

See  future. 

"  humanity  of  Jesus,  and  the  II. 

700. 

"         humility,  and,  III.  497. 

"  Incarnation,  and  the,  I.  571,  III. 

526. 
Inexcusable,  111.238,241,  256, 
280,  283-4,  285, 288, 290, 292-3, 
328-9,  440,  470-1,  476,  479, 
483,  486,  489,  490,  494,  499* 
527,  etc.,  533. 
Jewish,  and,  I.  424,  427,  446,  H. 
493,  507.  See  Jewish  lor  ex- 
tension. 

"  Jewish  nation,  of  the,  III.  126. 
See  Jewish  nation. 

"  Judging,  and,  II.  360. 

Kingdom,  and  the,  I.  190,  198, 
424,429,  459,  510,  622,  629,  II. 
200,  340,  III.  484-5-6,  487-8, 
502,  520,  528,  546,  572,  575. 
See  Kingdom,  Reign,  Cove- 
nants, etc. 

"  Kingship  of  the  saints,  and  the, 
H.  593,  597. 
Messiah,  and  the,  III.  155,  295-6, 
474,  512,  513,  516,  520,  533, 
537,  etc.,  539,  567-8,  573-8, 
580-1.     See  Incarnation,  etc. 

"  miracles,  and,   II.  758,  III.  78, 

220,etc  ,  239,  281, 288-9,295-6, 
472,  521,  533.  See  Super- 
natural, Resurrection,  etc. 

"  natural  religion,  and,  II.  505. 
See  Naturalism,  Humanita- 
rianism. 

"         New  Jerusalem,  and   the,   III. 
48. 
prophecy,  and,  I.  164,  169,  233, 
278,  II.  89,  99,  149,  154,  722, 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


693 


728,  760,  in.  131.  237-8,  240, 
242,  255-6,  288,  489. 
Unbelief,  reason,    and,   III.  288-9,  291-2, 
430,  436,  441,  490,  520,  511. 
redemption,  and,  II.  703. 
reigning,  II.  571,  770. 
responsibility  of,  III.  529.      See 

inexcusable, 
resurrection,  and,  the,  I.  301,  II. 

262,  312,  III.  524-5. 
revelation,  and,  II.  574. 
salvation,  and,  III.  279,  etc. ,  288, 
etc.,  436,  441,  469,  470,  470, 
562. 
saving  of  Jesus,  and  tlie,  I.  C30. 
science,  and,  in.  468-9,  470-1, 
492,    etc.,    496,    498-9,    507- 
511. 
signs,  and,  III.  136,  165. 
supernatural,  and  the,  III.  133, 
202,  220,  etc.,  239,   278,  281, 
288-9,    291-3,    295-6.    472-4, 
476,   479,   483,  496,  506,  510. 
See  miracles. 
"         suppression,  and,  II.  288. 

Theocracv,  and  the  I.  238,  316, 
411,  428.     See  Kingdom,  Un- 
belief and  the  Kingdom. 
"         translation,  and  the,  II.  335. 

widespread,  I.   84,  II.  106,  162, 
475.  683,  720,   etc.,  723,  etc., 
779,  etc.,    in.    115,  etc.,   118, 
121-2,  130,  133-4-5-6-7-8-9, 
140-3-4-6,  154-8,  201,  205-6, 
208,   218,  etc.,  239,  248,  etc., 
251-3,   258,  278,  etc.,  292-4, 
297,  437,  440,  507,  508-9,  577. 
worship,  and,  II.  727. 
Unchangeable.       See    Christ,    Covenants, 
Oath,   Faithfulness,  Priesthood,   Kings, 
etc. 
Unclean  spirits,  the  three,  HI.  162,  373. 
United  States,  the,  II.  743,  778-9.  III.  15. 
Union  of  Church  and  State.     See   under 
Church  and  State. 
"  believers,  HI.  122,  144. 
future,  II.  745. 
"       "  saints  with  God,  II.  588,  615. 

"Old  and  New  Tests.  I.  157,288, 
338,   418,  H.  51,  111,  III.  Ill, 
131,  242,  471. 
Unitarianism,  III.  534. 
Unity,  I.  594,  II.  295. 

attained,  how,  III.  337,  595. 
Church  of  the,  I.  637. 
Epistles,  of  the,  III.  361,  etc. 
Gospels,  of  the,  III.  350,  etc. 
manifested,  III.  335,  etc.,  588. 
race,  of  the,  II.  774,  HI.  500. 
saints  of,  I.  675. 
Universalists,  II.  366,  621,  IH.  262. 
Universe,  the,  HI.  439,  446. 
Urim  and  Thummim,  I.  219,  II.  758. 


Vanity  of  worldly  expectations,  II.  22o. 

Vaticanism,  II.  154.     See  Papacy. 

Vaudois,  I.  521. 

Veil  Jewish ,  the,  II.  661. 

Vengeance,  II.  742,  etc.,  766,  768,  771-2, 
77>,  III.  22.  80,  129,  184-5,  189,391,  404, 
437.  See  War,  Antichrist,  Impre- 
catorv  Psalms,  etc. 

Verbal  inspiration.     See  under  Inspiration, 

Vials,  H.  680,  089,  717,  760,  764,  III.  372- 
3. 

Vindictiveness.  alleged,  II.  736,  771. 

Vintage,  III.  382. 

Violence  used, I.  674,  680,  686,  II.  102,  etc.. 
105,  109,  701,  740,  etc.,  776. 

Virgins,  parable  of  the  ten,  II.  24,  322. 

Visibility  of  the  Kingdom,  I.  351,  364, 
36:i,  564,  569,  573,  575,  641,  648,  651, 
655,  660,  674-5,  683,  692,  II.  33,  44,  46, 
92,  97,  117,  123,  204,  340,  343,  348,  504, 
513,  532-3,  III.  43,  etc.,  460,  etc.,  4<53, 
465,  528,  544-5,  548-9,  552,  582,  584, 
587.  See  Covenants,  Inheritance,  King- 
dom, Reign,  Kings,  etc. 

Visible   glory,    II.    146,    176,   178,    188-9, 
220,    345,    348.    351,    395.     See 
Kings,  Priests. 
"        reign,    II.    340,   etc.     See   Reign, 

Kingdom. 
"  "         objections,    II.    344,    etc., 

346,  etc.,  348. 

Vision  sealed,  II.  661, 

Voice,  II.  331. 

"       of  the  Lord,  ni.  406. 

Von  Buttler  (Eva),  HI.  51. 

Waiting,  HI.  180,  186,  322. 

Vv'aldensians,  I.  112,  324,  521,  II.  265,  076, 

680. 
Wall  of  partition,  I.  392,  405,  II.  96. 
Warning  given,  II.   186,  390,  III.  95,  108, 
110,  116,  132,  135,151,  165. 
lack  of,  III.  119,  197-8,  228. 
War,  continuing,  III.  129.  152. 
"     ended,  when,  II.  770. 
"     future,  II.   102,   etc.,   105,  109,  204, 
751,  etc.,  758,   etc.,  766,  etc.,  770, 
III.  101, 165,  391,  576.  591,  598. 
"      future  religious,  II.  655,  725,    etc., 
738,  etc.,  743,  751,  etc.,  759,  760, 
766,  768. 
"       Psalms,   II.  768.      See  Imprecatory 
Psalms. 
Washing  of  regeneration,  II.  478- 
Watch,  implication  of,  III. 94. 
Watchfulness,  caution  too,   how  violated, 
III.  101,  etc.,  116,    119, 
135-6,  165-6.168-9,197- 
8,  219,  222,  225,  227-8. 
258-9. 
enjoined.  III.  95,  97-9,  106, 
108,  119,  132-3,  135,  141, 
159,    166-7-8,    180,  236, 


694 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


258,   299,   etc.,  308,   322, 
384. 
Watching,  II.  326,  332. 
Way,  the  narrow,  III.  186. 

"      smnllness  of  the,  III.  5G2. 
Wealth,  III.  132,  152. 

"       its  influence,  III.  129,  152. 
"      of  the  church,  HI.  129. 
Wedding,  HI.  301,  etc. 
Weeks,  the  seventy,  II.  659,  etc.,  718. 
Westminster   Assembly,  I.  531-2,  II.  220, 

HI.  176,  182. 
Whitbvan  view.  I.  373,  525,  528,  530,  532- 
4,  547-9.  II.  150,  153,  155,  163,  215,  216, 
217,   220.    265,  284,  378,    772,   III.  134, 
170,  172-3, 176-7,  etc.,  179,  etc.,  181,  etc., 
197,  etc.,  199,  215,  236. 
White  Brethren,  II.  567. 
•«      horses,  II.  580. 

(Mrs.),  the  prophetess,  II.  323,  III. 
163, 264-6. 
Whore,  the,  II.  683-4,  756. 
Wicked,  dead  raised,  II.  278,  288.  _ 

"  "  "        not   with    saints,   II. 

273,  etc.,  275,  278. 

"  "  "       not  with  saints,  wliv 

delayed,     II.    289, 

290.* 

destinv  of,  II.  387,  578,  581,  595, 

743,"  772. 
morning',  and  the,  II.  416. 
removed,  III.  185,  189. 
"  salvability,  and,  II.  468. 

"  see  the  saints  honored,  594-5,  740. 

Wickedness,  future,  II.  105.   128,  186,  743, 
748,  750.    77-2.      See   Anti- 
christ, Signs,  Unbelief,  etc. 
increased.  III.  123,  127,  etc., 
131,    144,   147,    160,  164-5, 
183,   185.  188,  194,    197-8, 
293-4,    382,  437.     See  Un- 
belief  etc 
Wickliffites,  I.  521,  II.  676. 
Wilderness,  the,  EL  326,  III.  21-23. 
Wilhelminiaus,  III.  70. 
Wilkinson  (Jemima\  III.  70. 
Vill,    the   Divine.   III.    597.     See    Divine 
Purpose, 
of  God  done,  the,  HE.  444,  etc. 
\ng  people,  a,  III.  591. 
understand,  the,  HI.  97,  108,  151. 
4  and  rulership,  II.  580. 
true,  HI.  441. 
worldly,  m.  297. 

lospel  a,  III.  117,  137,  141,  169, 
192.  197,  200,204. 
the  Spirit,  I.  67. 
W.  I.  186,  238-9. 

two,  II.  706,  756. 
Won  n  of  the,  III.  431,  etc. 

Word,  is  of  the,  I.  337,  II.  82. 

s:tent   of,  in.   130.     See 
Script 


Work,  God's  accomplished,  III.  545. 
Works,  good,  a  test,  II.  387,  390. 
World  to  come,   I.  333,  614,  642,  II.  396, 
404,  420,  514,  546,  598, 
III.  587. 
"       "       "      Jewish    usage,     II.     404, 

etc..  448,  etc. 
"        "       "       meaning  of,  II.  406. 
"      conversion  of  the.     See  Conversion, 
Whitbyan   theory,    Millennium, 
etc. 
"      destruction  of  by  fire,  II.  427,  506, 
510. 
"    "  freezing,  II.  428-9. 
"      dominion,  1.361,  573,   701,    11.23, 
33,  44,   97-8,   117,  127,  440,  776. 
See    Kingdom,     Keign,     Jewish 
supremacy,  Christ,  etc. 
"      end  of  the,  II.  420,  etc.,  424,  427, 
etc.,  431,  etc.,  492. 
foundation  of  the,  I.  34,  II.  375. 
"      history  of  the,  III.  427,  etc.,  588. 
"      love  of  the,  III.  115. 
"       old  the,  meaning  of,  II.  425. 
"       perpetuity  of  the,  11.427,  etc.,  514. 

See  Earth,  etc. 
"       population  of  the,  III.  201. 
Worlds,  government  of  other,  III.  443,  etc. 
"       inhabited,  in.  443,  445,  etc.,  562. 
"       intercommunication  of,  III.  563. 
"      plurality  of.  III.  445,  562. 
Worship  of  Antichrist,  M.  161. 
"       idol,  in.  161,  163. 
"       unbelief,  and,  II.  727. 
Wrath  of  the  Lamb,  the,  HI.  22,  295,  391. 
Wrestlers,  HI.  70. 
Writer,  Jesus  no,  I.  271-2,  627. 
Writers,  Chiliastic,  I.  546. 

"       controver.-ial,  I.  547-8. 

Year-day  fulfilment,  U.  686, 717,  755-6,  III. 
133.  374. 
"    of  Jubilee,  n.  453,  IH.  182. 
"     "  the  Redeemed,  II.  768. 
"    S-.ibbatical,  the,  H.  452,  HI.  90. 
"    of  Release,  DI.  99. 
Years,  one  thousand,  the,  II.  409,  456,  504, 
528,  631,  638. 
"     one  hundred  and  forty-four  thou- 
sand, II.  322,  331,  380,   III.  126, 
160,  163,  263,  266,  375. 
"     prophetical,  IH.  99. 
Young  (Brigham),  I.  618. 

Zeal,  mistaken,  I.  13.      See  Heresy-hunt- 
ing. 

Zebedee's  children,  I.  464,  585. 

Zion,  n.  52,  72. 

"     Mt.,  no  type,  HI.  32,  37,  51. 
"       "     an  inheritance  (Christ's),  HI.  49, 
50. 

Zionites,  HI.  51. 

Zoharites,  I.  54. 


* 


