Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



3.n.iiffid by Google 



I 



iiiiq -e n^ 



3 



:,(,:,:! ,v Google 



3.n.iiffid by Google 



3.n.iiffid by Google 



THE DIRECTORY 
OF THE DEVOUT LIFE 



3,n.tiffid by Google 



3.n.iiffid by Google 



THE DIRECTORY 
OF THE DEVOUT LIFE 



F. B. MEYER, B.A, 

"THE PROPHII or HOni.' "LOVB TO THB 
" TRIH> BY F»«,' tXC., ETC. 



LONDON: MORGAN AND SCOTT 

Office of "1(w ahnatian" 

12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C. 

And may ie ordmd of any BooksetUr 
1904 



3.n.iized by Google 




3.n.iiffid by Google 



Preface. 

THERE is too much of mere BeotimeDt and emo- 
tion in what goes by the name of religion, and 
too little practical ChriBtian living. The tree 
ia not good, the inward parts are not thoroughly 
cleansed, the rule of Christ is not absolutely dominant 
in speech and life. People are willing enough to accept 
freely a forgiveness which He purchased by His blood, 
but are slow to believe that He is a King, whose law 
most be obeyed in its jots and tittles. 

We can never allow the great objective iiictB of 
Christianity, and their attendant doctrines, to sink low 
on our horizon ; but we must give equal prominence to 
the demands of Christ for a righteousness which shall 
exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, and a perfec- 
tion which shall resemble that of God. We have no 
right to be content with saying "Lord, Lord;" we must 
do the things which He says. 

In my earliest days I was reared in a school that 
loved the ''juicy" doctrines of Grace, and if a sermon 
were preached from our pulpit which laid special stress 
on Christian ethics, during our walk home it would be 
dismissed as Luther dismissed the general Epistle of 
James, as "right strawy," and as savouring too much of 
the moral essay and too Little of the Gospel. It seemed 
as though some of the audience were a little afraid of 



3.n.iized by Google 



vi Preface. 

ChriBt as a teacher *of morals, wUlst willing enoagh to 
recognise Him as Saviour. 

We imderBtand the matter better now, and have 
learnt that those who would ascend the Hill of the 
Lord, and stand in His holy place, most have clean 
hands and pure hearts, must not lift, up their souls to 
vanity nor swear deceitfully. 

Of course, the right kind of obedience is impossible, 
apart from the Cross and the Spirit. We must be 
reconciled before we can become obedient children ; 
we must be filled with the Spirit before " the fragrance 
of Christ " can be manifested through us in every place. 
The Sermon on the Mount must be read in the trans- 
figuring light which shines backwards irom the later 
events in our Lord's life. 

When, however, this is borne in mind, each sentence 
of that marvellous discourse glistens with celestial 
radiance, and rings with the music of the Gospel In 
such a spirit let ue address ourselves to the study of 
the " Directory of the Devout Life," as it is contained 
in Matt, v., vi., and vii. 



f. n. -ynju^^. 



3.n.iized by Google 



Contents. 





Introductory 


9 


I. 


Ob, tbb Blrssrdnrsb ! 


16 


II. 


The Passive Side of tbb Blessed Life... 


23 


III. 


TeB Ac?nvB Side op the Blessed Life... 


28 


IV. 


Silent Infldence 


33 


T. 


Liohtbd to Shinb 


40 


TI. 


ChEIBT the OOMFLErEMBKT OF HDMAM LIFB 


47 


Til. 


Love against Anger 


63 


Till. 


The Rule of the Eye 


60 


IX. 


Simplicity in Speech 


6T 


X. 


The Second Mile 


76 


XI. 


God's Friual Law 


84 


XII. 


"Perfect AS God" 


90 


XIU. 


"The Inwardness of True Rbugion" .. 


100 


XIV. 


The Disciples' Prayer 


110 


XV. 


The Disciples' Use of Money 


134 


XVI. 


The Intention of the Soul 


146 


XVII. 


The Lesson of Birds and Flowers 


164 


XVIII. 


"To Thbh that are Without" 


164 


XIX. 


The Eoyalty op our Life 


172 


XX. 




182 



3.n.llzedbyGOOg[C I 



3.n.iiffid by Google 



THE DIRECTORY 
OF THE DEVOUT LIFE. 



Introductory. 

(Matt. v. 1, 2.) 

ACCOMFAKIED b; Hie aewly-acquired disciples, our 
Lord had travelled tliroughout OaJilee, haetemng 
from place to place, from one eynagogne to another. 
Eveiywhere He proclaimed the Glad Tidings of the Sing- 
dom, and accompanied the preaching by mighty deeds. He 
healed the sick and cast out demons, dispelling every form 
of infirmity and disease which He encountered in His 
triumphal progress. On the sunlit path of the Prince of 
Life all the sad results of human sin fled, as the wreathed 
mists of morning before sunrise. 

It was a morning without clouds. His fame spread far 
and near throughout all Syria. The people, who, between 
the exactions of the Pharisees and the hair-splitting of the 
Scribes, were like harried sheep, welcomed Hia advent with 
a great outburst of joy. On the one hand. He was so 
accessible in His sympathy; on the other, so transcendent in 
His purity and grace. A general impulse of hope and ex- 
pectation was diffused abroad, and they sought out all who 
were sick and diseased in mind and body, to bring them 
into His gracious ant health-giving presence. In addition 
to these crowds of sympathisers and friends were groups of 
curiosity-mongers and sightseers, of inquirers and devout 
souls, who followed Him, with a great expectancy in their 



3.n.iized by Google 



10 Intboduceoet. 

hearts, from Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judtea, and beyond 
Jordaa 

When He saw the crowds increaeitig thus, He felt that 
He must withdraw temporarily from their presence. He 
could not permit the seasons of holy fellowship with His 
Father to be broken in upon even by eager appeals for 
sympathy and healing. Besides, He had reached a decisive 
moment in His career, when, as His answer to the increas- 
ing malice of the leaders of Judaism, it became necessary 
to organize His followers, and secure the consoliaation and 
perpetuation of His work, A forward step was to be 
t&keu, which demanded that He should give Himself to 
prolonged intercessory prayer, so that He might do nothing 
of Himself, but only what He saw His Father doing. He 
was to choose the men whose names, long afterwards, were 
to be engraven on the foundation stones of the New Jeru- 
salem. He must, therefore, give Himself to prayer. 

The scene of this midnight vigil, and afterwards of the 
Sermon on the Mount, is an upland rather than a moun- 
tain, which rises to about a thousand feet above the level 
of the sea, and is distinctly marked out from neighbouring 
eminences by the two boms which crown Its summit. 

Let us follow the Master's steps, as He ascended by a 
long and easy elope of unfenced common land, the grass of 
which was embroidered with daisies, white and red ane- 
mones, blue hyacinths, and the yellow-flowered clover, and 
on which the brown cattle browsed. After a gradual 
ascent of three oijfonr miles, He reached at length a great 
csrater-Iike space, with a slightly hollow floor, set in a frame 
of rough crags, and strewn with boulders and fragments of 
black basalt — as if they had been rained on the earth in a 
terrific shower (Dr. Qeikie). Above, the hill rose up into 
two high grassy knolls, some sixty feet in height, known 
as the Horns of Hattin. This is the spot, so tradition says, 



3.a.t,zsd by Google 



The CeoosmG op the Twelve. ll 

where the Master coatinued all night in prayer to God, 
He may have selected for His oratory the summit of one of 
thoee graasy knolle, whilst the disciples occupied some lower 
ridge ; and at dawn the people began to gather from the 
neighbouring villages, where they had Rpent the night, to 
crowd the vast audience-chamber, hollowed out as an 
amphitheatre below. On the south-west, the huge cone of 
Tabor ; to the north, the majestic snow-crowned summit of 
Hermon; below to the east, the glittering waters of the 
lake ; far away on ito other aide, the precipitous cliffs of 
Ctedara, rising sheer from its shores; no signs of human 
habitation j no sound of earthly toil ; no fear of intrusion, 
save from the feathered and furred denizens of air and 
earth, the free pensioners with the lilies on His Father's 
care — such was the oratory, whose soft grais was trodden 
by those blessed feet, or indented by that kneeling form. 

It was on the mountain, as Luke tells us, that He 
prayed (Luke vi. 12, 13). As the dawn broke over the 
hills, He adkd His disciples from their slumbers, and chose 
from them twelve, that they might be with Him, and that 
He might send them forth to preach, and to have authority 
to cast out demons (Mark iii. 13—15). He then appears to 
have sat down, after the recognised Eastern fashion, opened 
His mouth, and taught (Matt. v. 1, 2). Through para- 
graph after paragraph, which were to mould the minds of 
men after a new fashion, and influence the course of 
coming centuries more powerfully than those of Plato and 
Aristotle, His speech moved with the transparency and 
brightness of the River of Life, which proceedeth from the 
throne of God and of the Lamb. Then, descending with 
His chosen band of Apostles, and accompanied by the rest 
of His disciples, He came down to the level place where the 
vast congregation was awaiting Him; and lifting up His 
eyes with special tenderness on the inner circle, but in 



3.a.t.zsdt,y Google 



12 Ihtroductoet. 

tones audible to the furthest extremities of the crowd, He 
repeated in a shorter form the marvellous discourse which 
He had abeady delivered (Lute vi. 17-38). 

This discourse, laying the foundation of the Kingdom of 
Heaven, may also be called the Directory of the Devout 
Life, and we can wish for nothing better than to drink 
into its spirit, and realize its exquisite ideals. Whilst it is, 
in a literal sense, "the Sermon on the Mount," because 
uttered on one of the great natural altars of the world, 
may it not be called so in the symbolical and metaphorical 
case) Our Lord was standing on the very summit of 
spiritual experience. His own soul was fragrant with the 
Beatitudes which He uttered for His disciples. He pos- 
seesed in living human experience all that He inculcated. 
With exquisite naturalness and simplicity. He was de- 
scribing His own experiences, was reveling the secrets of 
Hia deepest nature, and was delineating in colours that can 
never fade the features of His own face. From the heights. 
He was calling to men in the lowlands of error and sin, to 
summon them to His own standpoint. This is emphatically 
the sermon of the mountain heights. 



The close similarity and contrast between this s 
and the giving of the Law from Sinai, has often been dis- 
cussed, and we need do no more than note the points that 
have been made. There, the great prophet of the Old 
Covenant received Ood's Law by the mediation of angels, 
and his feelings must have been elevated far above their 
ordinary level ; here, the Prophet of the New Covenant 
utters the revelation of God from the depths of His own 
heart, from the matured experiences of His own habitual 
condition. Tkwe, the Law was accompanied by the roll of 
thunder and the blinding hghtning flash ; here, the accom- 
paniments were soft breezes, the blue canopy of heaven, the 



3.n.iized by Google 



Moses and Cheist. 13 

lilies, and the birds of the air. There, the Iaw was written 
on tablets of stone ; htn, on the fleshy tablets of the heart. 
There, the Laws were Prohibitions ; here. Beatitudes. Th^re, 
the first tables of the Law were shattered because of the 
disobedience of the people, and the second form was equally 
stem and exacting ; here, out of tender compassion for the 
weakness of the people, onr Lord repeats the sermon with 
a somewhat slighter texture. Moses constrained to obedi- 
ence, by pronouncing the disobedient accursed; whilst 
Ghritit attracts to loving loyalty, by pronouncing the 
blessedness of the citisens of His Kingdom. Men were not 
to be driven by terror, but attracted by winaomeoees and 
sweet reasonableness. 

This was the third discourse. The first had been to 
Nicodemus, the n^aster in Israel, on the necessity of a 
spiritual union with Ood — this is the beginning of the 
devout life. The second had been to the unnamed woman 
at Sychar's well, on the nature of spiritual worship — this is 
the nurture of the devout life. The third is on the rule 
and direction of the healthy and holy soul — this may there- 
fore be called the Directory of the Devout Life. It has been 
said that there is nothing of the Cross or of Pentecost in 
this discourse ; bnt each of them is required to transform 
these precepts into living and gracious experience. There 
must be, for each sinful soul, that forgiveness and cleansing 
which are possible only through the blood of the Cross, or it 
can never enter through the white gates of pearl into this 
city of Ood. For each, too, there must be the inbreathing 
of the new life — the being bom again, not of corruptible 
seed, but of incorruptible — before that life can be cultured 
and moulded into the developments of which this Sermon 
gives outline and model. 

" How," asks the disciple in one of old Jacob Behmen's 
treatises, " shall I be able so to live « not to lose the 



3.n.iized by Google 



14 Inteoduotort. 

eternal peace amid aJtziety and tribnlatioD ? " To which 
the Master aimwers : " If thou dost once every hour throw 
thyself by faith beyond all creatures into the abysmal 
taetcj of God, into the sufieringB of our Lord, and into 
the fellowship of His intercession, and yieldest thyself fully 
aud absolutely thereto, thou shalt receive power from 
above to rule over death and the devil, and to subdue 
hell and the world under thee." Yes ; and we may add, 
then thou shalt be able to reali» the noble ideal which 
is presented in our Lord's incomparable Directory of the 
Devout Life, as presented in thet^e chapters. 



3.n.iized by Google 



Oh, the Blessedness I 

(Pba. mil 1 ; Matt. v. 1-12.) 

THEBE is a condition of soul which may be ex- 
perienced and enjoyed by every child of our race, 
which the Master calls Blessedness. He uses the 
aame word to describe it as is employed to set forth the 
Being of God and the Life of the Saints who have passed 
beyond the vail. 

" Blessed art ye" (Matt. v. 11). 

" The glorious Gospdofthe Blessed God" (1 Tim. i. U). 

"Biased are the dead which die in the Lord" (Rev.xiv. 13). 

This condition of soul, however, need not be postponed 
until we too, in our turn, paw the Gate of the City, and 
find ourselves amid "the solemn troops and sweet societies" 
of eternity. It may be entered here and now. The 
fragrance of this garden steals through the crowded and 
noi^ cities of our modem civilization like the morning 
air laden with the scent of new-mown grass. The gates of 
this city stand open, night and day, for lonely souls, in 
country and sequestered places, where the noise of our city 
life cannot reach ; and at any moment they may tread its 
thronged streets, listen to its murmured speech, and join in 
its vast convocations, of which it is written : " Te are come 
to Mount Sion, the Oily of the Living God, to myriads of 
angels, to the general assembly and church of the first- 
bom." 

Bieesedness does not depend on outward possesdona, such 
as worldly goods, or lands, or high birth, or erudite culture. 



3.n.iized by Google 



16 Ob, the Blessedness! 

Indeed, there are words of Christ which suggest that they 
who stand poesesaed of these things will find it harder to 
enter that Paradise which has not yet faded from our world, 
and to pass through the gates of that city which are before 
our eyes, if only they were opened to discern them. When 
He repeated tbie Sermon of the Mountain-Heights and of 
the Dawn, to the multitudes that stood breathless beneath 
its Bpell, He said, " Woe unto you that are rich. . . . Woe 
unto you that are full. ■ . . Woe unto you, ye that laugh," 
He did not mean that such would be necessarily excluded, 
but that entrance into blessedness would be harder for 
them ; as when, after dusk, a camel strives to get through 
the needle-eye-gate, placed in the city wall for belated 
pedestrians. 

There is no soul of man so iUiterate, so lonely, so poor 
in this world's goods, so beset with hereditary sins and 
demoniacal temptations, that may not at this moment step 
suddenly into this life of blessedness, begin to drink of the 
river which makes glad the city of God, the holy place of 
the tabernacles of the Most High. It is not necessary to 
ascend into Heaven to bring it down, or to descend into 
the Depth of the Abyss to bring it up ; it has not to be 
wrestled or wept for ; it is not to be obtained by the merit 
of holy deeds, or as the guerdon of devoted service ; it is 
not a reward which comes after long years in the council 
chamber or on the tented field. We have not to do, or 
feel, or snSer, but only to be ; to cultivate certain disposi- 
tions; to possess a nature, here carefully defined — and 
instantly blessedness begins, an unearthly light breaks on 
the soul, which is destined to increase into the full radiance 
of Heaven's high noon. " Come in, thou blessed of the 
Lord" (can you not hear the angel-voices?); "wherefore 
standest thou without 1 " 



3.n.iized by Google 



" Not Ai^ne" 17 

Our Master did not sipeak of tbia condition of soul by 
hearsay ; for tbirty years it had been His sweet and deep 
experience. During Hie life in Nazareth, had not tbe 
Lamb of Qod lain in Hia Father's bosom I Had He not 
realized that He was wrapped around with the love which 
had been His before the worlds were made 1 Had He not 
been content to let tbe great ones of the world go on their 
way of pomp and pride, because He was a^ured of a deeper 
joy, a more perfect peace, a more satisfying happiness, than 
Cssar's smile or the Imperial purple could afford} The 
well of water was springing up in His own pure heart 
before He spoke of it to tbe woman at Sychar's well. He 
knew the Father, loved the Father, fulfilled His Father's 
behests, rested in tbe Father's will, was encompassed with 
the perpetual sense of the Father's presence, breathed the 
sunny air of the Father's love. During His earthly life, as 
He confessed Himself, the Son of iMan was, therefore, 
already " in heaven " (John iii. 13). He offers us what He 
was experiencing for Himself. " J/y peace I leave with 
yon ; My peace I give unto you." " These things have 
I spoken unto you, that Mj/ joy might remain in you." 
"That the love wherewith Thoa loveat Me may be in 
them." 

Kot to tbe same degree, but after the same quality and 
kind, we may know in this life, amid difficult, tempestuous, 
and sorrowful experiences, what the Lord felt when He 
said : " He that |sent Me is with Me ; the Father hath not 
left Me alone, for I do always those things which please 
Him," 

Ths iNGKEDiXHTa OF THIS EXPERIENCE are enumerated 
thus: — 

First, it is blessed to belong to that invimMe Kingdom 
which is already in our world, including within its ever- 



3.n.iized by Google 



18 Oh, the BLESSBDIfEBS! 

expaodiDg circle all gracious souls of every race and age, 
breathing the ozone of Heaven into the stale and ezhauitted 
atmoephere of the world ; its King, the Enthroned Lamb ; 
its Bubjecte, the childlike, the Forgiving, the gentle, and the 
pure ; its lawa, love ; its advances, soft, sweet, irresistible 
as the dawn ; its duration, eternal It is a blessed thing 
to know that one has the franchise and freedom of that 
Kingdom, that one need never go out from its holy and 
strong embrace, and that men like John the Divine may 
greet us thus : " Your brother and partaker with you . . . 
in the Kingdom, . . . which is in Jesus " (Rev. i. 9, r.v.). 

Second, it is blessed to be comforted with the comfort 
vjhieh only God can give. When the eyes are wet with 
tears that refuse to be staunched, to feel a hand soft 
and strong wiping them away, and to discover that it is 
the Hand 

That can ratSe sn evening calm, 

And bears Calvary's mark od its pierced palm ; 

when the face is buried deep amid the dried flowers and 
leaves of departed joys, to hear a whisper which thrills the 
sense, growing fuller and clearer, like a flute, find to detect 
in its syllables the assurances of the Comforter Himself ; 
when the sepulchre seems to hold all that made life worth 
living, to become suddenly aware that there is a presence 
near at hand, and to find that the Gardener Himself is at 
hand to lift the drooping plant of life, unfurling its petals 
again to the hght ; to be strong in Ood's strength, com- 
forted with the paracletism of the Paraclete, to drink of 
the brook by the way — here is blessedness which eye hath 
not seen, neither the ear of ordinary man heard, nor the 
unregenerate heart perceived. Even the bereaved and 
lonely heart, sitting amid the wreckage of all its joys and 
hopes, may be aware of this. 
Third, it is blessed to inherit the earth. When that 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Secret op the Lord. 19 

condition of booI is reached of which the Master is 
speaking, 

Heaven above is sorter blue, 

Earth around is sweeUr green ; 
Something shines in every hue 

Chrutleas eyes have never aeen. 

There is a new rapture in common dgbte, a new 
meaning in common sounds; lilies are robed more sump- 
tuously than Solomon ; the winged and furred denizens 
of the woodlands become, as St. Francis found them, 
" little brothers and sisters." As Cowper said, such a man 
may be poor compared with those whose mansions glitter in 
his sight, but be calls the luxuriant prospect all his own. 
Every wind wafts him blessing ; all things work together 
for his good. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the 
world, or life, or death, or tbings present, or things to 
come — all things bring their tribute to the man who has 
leamt Christ's secret, which, like the fabled philosopher's 
stone, turns everything into gold. What inheriting the 
earth means is shown in the words of one of Christ's most 
proficient pupils, when he said : " I have learned in whatso- 
ever state I am therevrith to be content." You may own 
vast estates, and get nothing from them. You may have 
no rod or perch of land, and yet you may derive joy and 
delight from every scene, and extract nutriment from every 
incident. Newspapers, public events, journals, travels, 
pictures, architecture, literature, human life— all shall 
minister to your joy and perfecting. 

Fourth, it is blessed to be filled. In this life, as well as in 
the next, it is possible to hunger no more, neither thirst; 
any more. Not to hunger for tbe busks that the swine 
eat, because filled with tbe provisions of the Father's table I 
Kot to thirst for the heated pools at which the children of 
the world seek to quench their thirst, because the well of 



3.n.iized by Google 



20 Oh» the Blessedness! 

water, that eprings up to eternal life, is within ! Not to 
clamour for the fleehpote of EgTpt, hocause there is so 
plentiful a promion of manna. Oh, it is a blessed thing 
to be filled with the Spirit, to be full of joy and peace, to 
be fulfilled with God's grace and heavenly benediction, to be 
filled with the fruits of righteousness, to be filled with the 
knowledge of His will, to be filled unto the fulness of God. 
Tennyson says that the babble of the Wye among the hills 
lasts until the tidal wave fills up its channels to the brim ; 
and the heart is restless till it is full — but when it has 
realized this blessed fulness, dipped deep into the fulness of 
God, and lifted out dripping with fiashing drops, ah, theu, 
evil has no lure to charm, the fear of man cannot intrude, 
the fascination and blandishments of sense are neutralized. 
What more can the soul want than to be filled with Thee, 
God, who didst make us for Thyself ) Cannot a flower 
be satisfied which has a sun to shine on it, and a glader-fed 
river to wash its roots % 

Fifth, it is blessed to be the recipient of merey. There is 
never a moment of our life in which we do not stand in 
need of mercy, both at the hands of onr fellows, and, above 
all, &om the hand of God. There is no saint in the 
heavenly Kingdom who does not, at some time or other, 
need to appropriate the petitions of the man after God's 
own heart, and say : " Have mercy on me, O God, according 
to Thy loving-kindneGB, according to the multitude of Thy 
tender mercies." 

We need mercy from little children, startled by our harsh 
tones ; mercy from our servants and employes, hindered by 
oar incoDBistencies, our quick temper and imperious tones; 
mercy from husband or wife, brother or sister, neighbour 
or friend — above all, mercy from the Most Merciful ; and it 
is blessed to know that wo have it in Heaven's own 
measure, full, pressed down, and running over. So far 



3.n.iized by Google 



"As Fkibnd with FaiEND." 21 

from it making ub lax in permitting sin, it predisposes nn 
to more mercf towards the failings of others, more mer- 
oilessDess to ourselves. 

Sixth, it is blessed to have the vuton q/" God. Hot to 
terrify, as when Moees hid his face, and Elijah went into 
the covert of the cave, and John fell at Hie feet as dead ; 
bnt more after the fashion of A(r. Hewiteon's experience, 
when he says : "Our Itedeemer is no mere abstraction, no 
ideality that has its being only in oar shifting thoughts — 
He is the most personal of all persons, the moet living of 
all who live. He is 'the First and the Last, and the 
Living One.' He is so near us, as the Son of Ood, that we 
can feel His worm breath on ovu: souls ; and, as the Son of 
Man, He has a heart like these hearts of ours — a human 
heart, meek and lowly, tender, kind, and sympathizing. In 
the Word — the ahnoet viva voce utterance of Himself — His 
arm of power is stretched forth beside you, that you may 
lean on it with all your weight ; and in the Word, also, His 
love is revealed, that on the bosom of it yon may lay your 
aching head, and foi^t your sorrow in the abundance of 
His conaoUtiou. To the Living One who died we must 
look, that we may he weaned and won over to Ood, that we 
may be strengthened, spiritualized, and sanotiGed." Who 
would not desire a life like this, in which Ood should be 
the one dear Presence, the one familiar and ever-present 
object of thought, the Friend with whom an increasing 
dialogue is maintained ? A young girl employed in a shop 
told me the other day that her consciousness of Crod and 
her converse with Him had now lasted for three years, and 
that difficult things had become easy, as though Ke arranged 
all and smoothed out the creases. 

Seventh, it is blessed to be recognised at the ion of God. 
Some are undoubtedly children of Ood, who are not like 
God. It wonld^require a good deal of scrutiny to detect 



3.n.iized by Google 



22 Oh, the Blessedness! 

His image and BuperscriptioD on their faces, or the tones of 
His voice in their speech. The manners of the Heavenly 
Court are not evident in their demeanour ; the coorteey and 
tfaoughtf ulness that characterised the Son are not charac- 
teristic of their behaviour to the poor and timid, to little 
children and women. They too often break the bruised 
reed, and quench the smoking flax ; they strive and cry and 
cause their voices to be heard in the street ; they do not 
bear, believe, hope, and endure all things, or elicit the 
love of men to Him whose name and nature they ought to 
bear in every lineament. Be it ours to be imitators of God 
as dear children, to be harmless and blameless, the eons of 
God, without rebuke — to be thus is to be blessed. 

Eighth, vie come back to ike Kingdom of Heaven, For 
blessedness is like a spiral 'staircase, we are always coming 
back to the same standpoint^from a higher position on the 
circling round. When we begin to live for God we find 
ourselves in the Kingdom, and are ravished with the beauty 
of the dawn ; but after years have been spent in doing His 
will, and walking in His fellowship, there is a new depth of 
loveliness and significance in its infinite and Divine con- 
tents. 

O Christ, Thou King of Olco^, uplift us above the 
common dusty road of mortal life — lift us into Thy life, 
above the heads of our enemies, above the weight of our 
flesh, above the glamour of the world, and make us most 
blessed for ever, and glad with joy in Thy presence ! 



3.n.iized by Google 



II. 
The Passive Side of the Blessed Life. 

(Matt, y, 1-lZ) 

LET UB study our Lord's ideal of character with the 
prayer that He would graciously repeat it in us, 
and that He would be in us that which He com' 
mends ; for it is only as He gives us Himself, in all the ful- 
ness of His perfected manhood, that we can apprehend that 
for which we were apprehended, and be that which He 
desires. Do you realize this, my reader ! Have you made 
room for Him, and are you allowing Him to possess you 
wholly, till He becomes in very deed yom- life ? The vine 
must abide in the branch, or these fruits will be impossible. 
*' Apart from Him, . . . nothing." 

To be poor in spirit is to be vacant of self and waiting 
for God. To have no confidence in the flesh ; to be emptied 
of self-reliance ; to be conscious of absolute insufficiency ; 
to be thankfully dependent on the life-enei^ of the living 
dod— that is poverty of spirit ; and it has been charac- 
teristic of some of the noblest, richest, most glorious 
natures that have ever trodden the shores of Time. Happy 
are they who are conscious of a poverty which only the 
Divine indwelling can change into wealth, and who are 
willing, like the wondrous beggar of Meister Eckbart, to 
confess that they would rather be in hell and have Ood, 
than in heaven and not have Him. 

It is, indeed, remarkable that some of the most richly 
dowered in mental and moral wealth have been most eager 
to confess that they were nothing — babes in the world of 



3.a.t.zsdt,y Google 



24 The Passive Side of the Blessed Life. 

being, children picking up stones on the shores of boundloss 
ooeane, scholars on the lowest form of the school, to whom 
mature growth and knowledge seemed as yet indefinitely 
distant. 

The way to become poor in ^irit is to realize that thou 
bast no power of thine own by which to bless and help 
others, and to open thy whole being to the incoming and 
through-flowing of the wealth of the ever-blesaed God. It 
was thus that the Master Himself lived and wrought. 
Though He was rich in aU the Divine plenitude of His 
Divine nature, "He became poor," "and emptied Himself." 
In other words, He determined not to speak His own 
words, follow His own scheme and plan, or work His 
mighty works in His own might ; but became the channel 
and instrument through which His Father spoke, wronght, 
and reconciled the world nnto Himself. soul of man, 
there is no other course for thee and me ! Not to draw up 
the water with which to quench men's thirst from the 
marshes of our own souls, but to be channels through which 
the river of God may flow, as tbe water of far>away lakes is 
brought to the myriads of our great cities. To confess that 
thou art nothing, but that Christ is aU ; to know that thou 
canst do nothing effective to bless men, but that Christ 
can, and will, do it by thee — that is the secret of this 
poverty of spirit which unlocks the treasures of the king- 
dom of heaven. 

Many ancient authorities place meefcneat next, and it 
seems the natural order, for the soul that realizes its own 
nothingness and helplessness is likely to be meek. The 
meek are so occupied with their desire that God's grace 
should pass through them to their fellows, that they are 
prepared to sink all considerations of their own standing 
and position, so long as nothing may interfere with the 
efl'eot for which they long. Their only thought is to carry 



3.a.t.zsdt,y Google 



The Cure for Pride. 25 

their point, to bless men who do not want to be blessed, to 
vanquish bate hj love, and rebellion by loving-kindness 
and tender mercy. They cannot afford, therefore, to be 
always standing on their own dignity, and defending their 
own rights. These are willingly cast into the furnace to 
augment the flame, that the obdurate metal may be fused. 
" Being reviled, we bless ; being persecuted, we endure ; 
being defamed, we entreat. We are made as the filth of 
the world, the ofi&couring of all things ; but all things are 
for your sakes, that the abundant grace through the 
thanksgiving of many may abound to the glory of Ctod,'' 

The way to become meek is to be absorbingly taken up 
with the love of Christ for men. Be lowly before God, 
allowing His love to enter and fill thy heart, and thou wilt 
find it easy to be meek towards man. Thy pride will be 
driven out by the expulsive power of the new affection. 
Thou wilt be prepared to accept fiouts and sneers, if only 
thou canst bless and help others ; even as God, who answers 
not the blasphemous and hard things that are said against 
Him, but continues to send His rain and causes His sun to 
ehine, that He may bring men back in penitence to His 
heart. 

It would be a great mistake, however, to suppose that 
the meek are cowardly, deficient in strength of purpose or 
force of will: they are among the strongest and most 
strenuous of men. Always they are strong in patience, and 
strenuous in seeking the salvation of others. Let the cause 
of righteousness, justice, or truth be in question, none are 
so unbending or stalwart as they. Of the wrongs done to 
themselves, they are disposed to take no count ; but they 
dare not refrain from bearing witness, both by speech and 
act, whenever the sacred majesty of truth is assailed, and in 
danger of being trampled under foot. 

It is natural that the meek should become those that 



3.n.iized by Google 



26 The Passive Side of the Blessed Life. 

mown. They feel keenly the evil of sin and the sanctity 
of eoTTDw ; like Him who sighed as He touched the tongue 
of the dumb, groaned as He came to the grave of Hie 
friend, and wept as He beheld the city. 

Of all mourners, Jeremiah is one of the moet plaintive. 
There is no lyric on the page of history to be compared 
with the Book of Lamentations : — 

" Mine eye rwnneth down with rivers of water." 

" Mine eye poureth down am} ceateth not." 

"Mins eye affeotetft my soul." 

But as we turn from the sin of the world, the woes 
of men, the high-handed wrong of the great, and the abject 
poverty, sorrow, and anguish of heart of the oppressed, to 
the sin of our own hearts, the broken ideals, the frustrated 
purposes, the perpetual contrast between what we would be 
and what we are, surely our tears must have more salt in 
them, and cut deeper courses in their flow. 

There is surely no need to show the steps towards mourning 
such as this. Look above thee and see the Christ stand, so 
pure, so chaste, so glorious in the light in which He arrays 
Himself as with a garment, and thou wilt abhor thyself and 
repent in the dust. Look around thee, and try to estimate 
the weight of a world's apostasy, the deluge of tears, the 
hurricane of sighs, that mount up to heaven. "Ah, it's a 
sair world, my masters I " 

But the mourners are not content to shed tears only, 
they hiimger and thirst after righteousntss. St. Augustine 
says that they hunger and thirst after the Bighteous One 
— " Jesus Christ the Righteous." They were made for 
Him, and will never be satisfied until they attain to the 
fruition of all their hopes, to know Him, and the power of 
His resurrection, and the fellowship of His sufferings. 

Without doubt, such is their supreme desire ; and, as 
included in this, they hunger and thirst for the ultimate 



3.n.iized by Google 



A Noble Aspiration. 27 

triampb of righteousnesa in their own hearts and in the 
world of men. Every moan of pain, every oonsdousness of 
failiire, every temporary triumph of reactionaiy and 
destructive forces — elicits the more urgent and persistent 
prayer, "Thy Kingdom come." The personal coming of 
the Lord is desired not, primarily, heoause the Bride desires 
the Bridegroom ; but because the subject longs for the 
triumph of that Kingdom, which is righteousness, joy, and 
peace in the Holy Ghost. 

This aspiration is noble. Some hungers are ignoble, 
de^icable, and base. But this is shared in by God Himself, 
whose Spirit longs with inexpressible desire to bring to an 
end the present condition of things, in the vindication and 
manifestation of His sons. The angels, as they behold the 
evil and pain of our earth ; the champion of the rights of 
men, who wrestles with the hydra-headed and protean evil 
of his age ; the wronged womanhood of the harem and the 
street; the dumb creation, groaning and travailing with 
enormooB and cruel wrongs — all join in this blessed hunger 
and thirst, this aspiration which amoants to a sure and 
certain hope that cannot be ashamed. 

Thou needest not be taught this, for thou hast often felt 
it. Amid the violet light of a dying summer's day, when 
soft and lovely music— -songs without words — is filling the 
entranced ajid listening air, when some heroic stand for 
liberty is drowned and quenched in blood, when the white 
robes of the soul have been stained and poUuted by some 
recent fall — then the soul hungers with an intolerable pain, 
and thirsts, as the wounded hart for water-brooks, that 
righteousness should set up its blessed and all-conquering 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Active Side of the Blessed Life. 

(Matt. v. 1-12.) 

LET us iiow turn to the autive side of the Blessed Life. 
77ie merci/W are not content with bearing wrong ; 
they pity the wrong-doer, pity him with a great 
compassion, because they realize that the heart which 
inflicts wrong must itself be tortured by remorse, scourged 
with the whips of the Furies, and certain to have an 
even more terrible awakening to shame and everlastiog 
contempt. The merciful, therefore, go forth with a great 
longing to deliver the evildoer from himself. 

It was thus that the Master felt when He bore the sins 
of His murderers in His own body on the tree, prayed for 
their forgiveness, and from His throne of glory sent the 
Spirit to turn the hearts of fathers to their children, and 
of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just. 

The eyes of mercy are deep with compassionate glances, 
full of tears, the homes of prayer ; the feet of mercy are 
soft in their tread, for they will not break the bruised reed, 
nor quench the smouldering spark in the dimly-burning 
flax ; the voice of mercy is generous to the fallen, gentle to 
the weak, and gracious to the offender; from the heart of 
mercy, soothing balm flows to the wounds of sinners, of 
sufferers, and of the world. 

The only way in which thou canst become merciful is 
to remember how much mercy thou needest and hast 
obtained. "Seeing," said the Apostle, "that we have 
obtained mercy, we faint not." Ah, think of the ten 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Wat to Pdetit. 39 

thousand talents that have been tarpven thee, and thou 
wilt not take thy brother by the throat and demand the 
hundred peuce in which he is a defaulter. Hast thou 
forgotten the moment when thou heardest thy Lord say : 
' * Thy Bins, which were many, are all forgiven thee " ; and 
art thou ^ing to resent the approach of a sinful soul, 
vrhich loathes the miserable past, and longs to be emanci- 
pated from the burden of unfoi^ven dnt Remember 
thine own exceeding bitter cry which God has recorded in 
His book : " Have mercy upon me, God, according to Thy 
loving-kindiiesii : according unto the multitude of Thy 
tender mercies." 

The divinely merciful become, in the very nature of 
things, the pure in heart. They have come to estimate by 
their own inner experiences, and by the long effort which 
the inveterate Bin of others has demanded, how terrible and 
horrible a thing sin is. The mother who has nursed one of 
her children through some loathsome and painful disease 
is filled with horror at it, and will take extravagant pre- 
cautions to ward off the least germ or microbe that 
menaces her home. Only those who have been forgiven 
again and again, and who have forgiven, are quick to 
discern the first symptom of impurity, and to turn from it 
frith shuddering horror. Tee ; and to know what sin costs 
to thoee that have to deliver the sinner, is such a revelation 
of the bitter suffering of the Eedeemer, that, in view of 
what impurity costs Him, the soul flees from every taint of 
nncleonness, lest it should add one pang more to that heart 
which is already pierced through with many sorrows. 

The way to purity is by Love. Wonldst thou be pure, 
love Christ best of all, and love sinful men with a great 
pity ; and love shall be in thee Hke a fire. It is said that, 
when Adam and Eve were created and lived in Eden, 
they needed no garment of any kind, because their native 



3.n.iized by Google 



30 The Activb Side op the Blessed Life. 

iunoceitce emitted rays of light which enewathed their 
persons as aa atmosphere. As much may be said of iove, 
for where it fills the heart it sheds forth light and fire, 
which proceed from the very centre of our being, aa the fire 
of God in the midst of the burning bush. 

The pure in heart are naturally the peacemakers, because 
they cannot rest satisfied that the world of men should 
remain alienated from the life and hohnesa of God. They 
become, therefore, messengers of peace and benediction, 
seeking to reconcile between God and man, or between 
man and man, which is a most needful work, if ever the 
wrongs of time are to be righted, and earth become the 
home of love. 

The way to this is to ask God to tell thee what work He 
is doing in the world, and whether thou mayest be per- 
mitted to help Him. He will tell tbee that, having laid 
the foundations of peace in the Crosa, He is going on 
to reconcile all things to Himself, whether they be in 
heaven, or on earth, or under the earth; and if thou 
wouldst have fellowship with Him, thou must set thyself to 
deal with all that breaks peace in thyself and in others. 

Often in their prayers God's servants ask Him to ktip 
them. Without doubt the phrase can be abundantly 
justified ; but does it not suggest that God is to shape His 
activities to the mould of our schemes, and accompany us 
along our chosen path t Is it not better to realize that 
all the burden and responsibility rest upon Him who is 
mighty ; and that all working, whether to will or do, must 
emanate from Him as the fountain, and pass through us as 
the channel — submerging us as it passes forth to its blessed 
and victorious end ) 

Pre-eminently God is entitled " the God of Peace." He 
is ever engaged in healing the wounds and reconciling the 
enmities of the world. Aa nature covers the battlefield 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Wobld's Hate. 31 

with golden harveats, so does Ood seek to undo the resulte 
of feud aad strife, and lay foundations of justice for the 
temple of peace. BlesHed indeed are they whom He asso- 
ciates with Himself in such pacific ministries. 

But all such become pereemtted and hated. It cannot be 
otherwise, apparently, in such a world as this. To have 
fellowship with the Lamb, we must have fellowship in His 
rejection and suffering. The servant is not above his Lord, 
and therefore the Master said sadly : " Ye shall indeed 
drink of My cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I 
am baptized with." 

It is impossible to follow the Lord closely, and not be be- 
spattered by the mud that was cast at Him. Indeed, to 
miss it may fill us with questionings. The soldier who 
follows the colonel through the thick of the fight will 
almost certainly have some scar to carry to his after years. 
We must see to it that all the evil is said against us faJsely, 
and that we are reproached for the name of Christ, Is 
this thine experience ? Be of good cheer. Thou art on the 
track bedewed by the tears and blood of the martyrs of 
Jesus, and as they overcame so shalt thou. Be thou faith- 
ful unto death, and He shall give thee a crown of life. But 
through all thou shalt have a secret joy, a secret supply of 
strength, and a sweet intimacy with Him who before 
Pontius Filate witnessed the good confession. 

It should be noticed that these Beatitudes run in a 
parallel line with 1 Cor. ziii., and show what Love can be 
and do. 

Poverty in spirit is Love in her chosen garb of humility, 
for she vannteth not herself, and is not puffed up. Meek- 
ness is Iiove in the presence of wrong. Mourning is Iiove 
in tears. Hunger is Love's appetite. Mercy is Love on 
her errands of beneficence. Purity is Love on fire. Peace- 
making is Love's effort to adjust the wrong of the world. 



3.n.iized by Google 



32 The Active Side of the Blessed Life. 

Pfltsecution is Love's requital at the hands of thoee whom 
she would help. And Love ia all thie, intensely, peren- 
nially, constantly, because ebe cannot help it. Character 
has been defined as being what a man is in the dark : and 
Love is an this, not for fee or reward, not for notoriety or 
advertisement, but because she cannot be other. To be 
this is to be bereelf . 

But who ia sufficient for these things } How can they 
be originated and perpetuated ! What is their nutriment 
and support? There is but one reply. The Holy Spirit 
must come upon tiiee, and overshadow thee ; Christ must be 
formed in thee; Heaven must descend to thee before it 
can shine out from thee. 

It is affirmed that the evangelical side of religion is 
lacking in the Sermon on the Mount, but surely it is 
implied. The broad, much-trodden road foretells the great 
city whither it leads, and these wonderful chapters in- 
evitably conduct to Calvary and the Upper Room. 

Let a man seek to attain to Christ's ideal, and he will 
discover the infinite disparity between its crystal heights 
and his inefiectual effiirts to clamber to their majestic 
crest ; he will need the propitiation and cleansing of the 
Blood of the Cross; he will confess to the weakness and 
impotence of the Flesh; he will lie at the feet of the 
Crucified as one dead, until the life of His resurrection 
enters to infill, indwell, and empower. 

There is no hope of our being able to realize this ex- 
quisite portraiture by imitation or even by meditation. 
No; He who originally conceived this ideal, who Himself 
lived it, must incarnate Himself within us by the Holy 
Spirit, that He may reproduce in and through us that 
which He has inspired us to desire. He must give us 
what He commands j He must be in us what He pre- 
acribes. 



3.n.iized by Google 



Silent Influence. 

(Matt. v. 13-18.) 

BEING is doing. Onr greatest work for God and 
man is to be. Tbe influence of a holy life is our 
greatest contribution to tbe salvation and blessing 
of tbe world. Though yoii cannot preach, or teach, or 
engage in some sphere of Christian service, do not be 
greatly moved, if only yon can live the life of Gtod amongst 
men. Our Lord for thirty years was content to live an 
absolutely holy life, as tbe Lamb of God without blemish 
and without spot ; and His supreme work in the world was 
not only to give His life as a ransom, but to live His life 
that He might leave us an example, and that we should 
follow in Hie steps. 

Too many Christians seem to suppose that the main 
object of life is to engage in a sphere of direct service, 
whilst they leave their personal character to take care of 
itself, and to develop almost at haphazard ; whereas our 
main thought and care should be that Christ should be 
formed in us, and be revealed in every look and gesture, 
every word and act. Out of that will come naturally, 
inevitably, and blessedly, our direct Christian service. The 
beet work is that which arises out of the simplicity and 
beauty of our witness for truth and love. 

We must, of course, guard against extremes. On the 
one hand, we may attempt so much service as to neglect 
that inner culture which is priceless in its effect on service, 
and our personal inconsistencies will neutralise tbe eflect 
of our Christian activities. On the other band, we may 



3.n.iized by Google 



34 Silent Influence. 

eincerely believe tbat we are cultivating our character, 
when, in fuct, we are sinking into a dreamy lethargy, from 
which we need to be aroused by the trumpet-call of duty to 
a dying world. We are apt to forget that the development 
of the inner life is not perfect, iinlesa it iesue in such going 
about doing good, as was the flower and fruit of our 
Saviour's thirty years. 

Though Feriecuied. Our Lord had been describing 
the reception which the type of character that He had 
come to implant would certainly encounter. Instead of 
attracting men by its heavenly beauty, it would certainly 
repel them. Instead of oommendation and welcome, 
it would arouse dislike and rebuff. The great world 
of men would not appreciate the poor in spirit, the 
mourner, the meek, and merciful, the pure in l)eart, 
or the maker of peace — but would reproach, and persecute, 
and say all manner of evil faluely. But, notwithstanding 
all. He insisted that they should continue to bless the 
world by the dlent and gracious influence of holy 
lives. Reviled, they must bless; persecuted, they must 
endnre ; defamed, they must entreat ; threatened with 
death, they must still be as salt to their persecutors, and as 
light to their defamers. 

However men receive our testimony, whatever they may 
say and do against us, notwithstanding the unreasonable- 
ness of their dislike, we must continue to be what our Lord 
would have us be ; nay, we must let Him who is within us 
shine forth through us, so that men may be compelled to 
admit that the unearthly beauty of our lives is the supreme 
proof of the divinity and glory of our religion. 

You ask what is the good of being good, Your 
detractors and oppressors vaunt themselves over you, take 
every advantage of your quiet, unresisting gentleness, and 



3.n.iized by Google 



Won bt Love. 35 

mismterpret your self-reetr&int. It would almost appear 
tbat they are driven to greater extremes of wickedness, 
because of the provocatioa of your goodness. The soldiers 
of the Bomaa governor probably never mocked one of their 
ordinary victims as they did the holy, unresisting Saviour. 
The gentle and loving wife will sometimes extract the most 
malignant and bitter hatred of her husband, such as he 
irould show to no other. But you do not know bow your 
behaviour is beginning to thaw that iron-frozen soil, how 
often and deeply compunction is at work, or bow nearly the 
batred of your oppressor is being overcome by love. The 
spring warmth may seem to fall on the frozen masses of 
anew and ice in vain, but every hour of sunshine is sapping 
the reign of the ice-king, and hastening the inevitable 
break-up of his supremacy. 

That working-man who has borne the Insults of bis 
abopmates for Christ will presently have the ringleader 
come to beg his pardon, and with tears in hia eyes ask him 
to pray for him. Tbat oppressed wife will have the 
pleasure of leading her penitent husband to the cross. 
That sister will be won by her sister, who has borne 
contumely and reproach with unswerving gentleness. Be 
t^ good cheer, your sufferings will have their most blessed 
result in overcoming evil by good, as we have said. 
Bemember, the Apostle speaks of "the kingdom and 
patience of Jesus," which means tbat patient sufiering 
oltimately secures a blessed supremacy, a royalty, an 
overmastery of hardness and unkindness by gentleness, 
truth, and love. 

W]ieo the Forth Bridge was in making, the workmen 
came to a crucial point, where one of the most important 
iron girders refused by some inches to come into position 
for the bolts to be driven through — a process which was 
alMolutely essential to their union and the stability of the 



3.n.iized by Google 



36 SiLBHT Influence. 

whole fabric. Every mechanical method to bring them 
together was tried to no purpose j and finally, in despair, 
all further efforts were abandoned for the night. In 
the night a soft wind blew, and the sunshine of the 
following morning was bo hat that the great maeaea of 
metal expanded beneath the genial rays, and, by the silent 
touch of the sun, the results were achieved which had 
defied the utmost efibrta of force. So in human life, 
consistency of character, purity, gentleness, sweetness, 
such holy living as issues from the quahties which our 
Lord has enumemted, will avail when the keepers of the 
house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow them- 
selves. 

The Lord knew well the condition of the world. To 
His holy and unerring judgment it was a carcase slowly 
rotting to putrefaction, and sorely needing some influence 
to stay its corruption. There was never an epoch in the 
world's history fuller of dazzling genius than that in which 
He was bom. Some of the most brilliant names of history 
were shining still in the midnight sky when the bright and 
morning star arose over Bethlehem. But the grossness of 
the age was unparalleled and indescribable. The allusions 
made to it in the Epistles are sufficiently terrible, but the 
whole truth is only revealed in classic literature iteelf, 
which survives to show that the earth was corrupt before 
Qod, and that every ima^ation of the thoughts of man's 
heart was only evil continually. 

In our Lord's eyes, also — to advert to the other metaphor 
— the world lay under the power of thick darkness. In its 
wisdom, it knew not God. Professing themselves wise, men 
had become fools. The god of this world had blinded the 
eyes of those who believed not, and they gn^d in the 
noontide as in the murky midnight. Such has been, is, and 



3.n.iized by Google 



Salt and Light. 37 

will be, the condition of men without the GospeL The 
history of the huinan family is always repeating itself. 
We cannot be surprised either at the description given, by 
missionaries, of th ' awful condition of heathen countries, or 
at the outbreaks of lawlessness and crime in nations which 
are only nominally Christian. Our inventions, organiza- 
tions, and boasted civilisation, may affect the exterior of our 
society, but if it were not for the presence of the Church 
of the Zjord Jesus, and the witness borne by the lives and 
words of her members, there would be nothing to save it 
from the pit of corruption, which has swallowed up every 
great nation that has arisen to lead the race. 

Men rage against " Exeter Hall," and revile what is 
called " the Nonconformist Conscience," as they did against 
the Puritans of bygone centuries, not realizing that they 
evince the antagonism of corruption to the s^t, and of 
darkness to the light, and that the very existence of our 
society is more largely due than they suppose to the very 
elements they so much dislike. 

SdU. Our consistent holy living will act as an antiseptic 
to arrest the corruption around us. It is said that the 
presence of a little child, with its blue-eyed simplicity and 
purity, has often arrested the commission of dark crimes ; 
and as much should be said of the influence of a\xt own 
daily living. A sudden silence should fall on certain kinds 
of convereation when we enter the room. This or the other 
form of worldly amusement, which has entered professedly 
Ohristian homes, should be felt out of place when we are 
staying there. And right through the society in which we 
move there should he a consciousness that there is an 
incongruity between our character and all that savours of 
impurilr)r, falsehood, or selfishness. 

We do not want to impose a sense of restraint and gloom 
on social gatherings when we enter. Our presence should 



3.n.iized by Google 



38 Silent Ikplubncb. 

be an incentive to the merriment of the children, the cheer 
of the deprcBsed, the gladness of young and old. Flowers 
should burst into beauty at our steps, songs should overflow 
in our paths, and innocent laughter should be our accom- 
paniment. The mountains and the hills should break forth 
before us into singing, and all the trees of the field should 
clap their hands. Instead of the thorn should come up the 
fir-tree, and instead of the briar the myrtle-tree. But to 
all that is unseemly and unworthy our presence should act 
as an antiseptic. 

A young boy, fresh from his mother's teaching and 
prayers, was plunged suddenly into a large lawyer's office, 
where he was articled. At first he was bewildered by his 
sl^'ange surroundings, then the crimson mantled his cheek, 
and tears brimmed in his eyes. " What's the matter with 
you, youngster 1" said a coarse voice. "Do you want 
to go back to your mother's ^ron-strings i " "No," was 
the reply, " but we never s^d such things in my mother's 
home as you say here." The answer elidted a burst of 
laughter, but the head of the office said : " Gentlemen, this 
lad is right, and as long as he stays with as I must request 
that you modify your speech." And from that moment the 
whole tone of the office was altered. The lad's presence 
acted as salt. 

We may easily lose our savour. Salt left in contact with 
a damp soil ceases to be salty, and ia good for nothing but 
to be trodden under foot. It ia neither fit for the ground 
nor the dunghill. Lot is an example of this. Sodom went 
on it« way, regardless of his presence in its midst. The 
Seven Churches of Asia lost their eavonr, and, with those 
of Northern Africa, were trodden down by the Moslem. 
Nothing is so useless and worthless as an inconsistent and 
powerless Christian (Ezek. xv. 3-5). Oh, break your heart 
if sin is as shameless and reckless in your presence as in 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Past Redeemed. 39 

your absence ! What have you done to forfeit the power 
yon should exert T Bepent, and do the first works ! Yea, 
ask the Lord Jeeus to infuee into you His own strong, 
Bweet, pure nature, before whom the demons were driven 
forth, and by whose presence, through His Chun^ in the 
world, an arrest has been placed on many of those grosser 
forms of sin which disgraced the society of His time, and 
still hold sway in countries where His name is not known. 
What a comfort it is to know that our Shepherd restores 
the soul which is committed to His guardian carfc If it 
turns aside into forbidden paths, or wanders in its own 
way. He goes after it, and brings it home on His shoulder, 
i-ejoicing. He will restore the years that the cankerworm 
and caterpillar have eaten. He can make Peter, in epite of 
hiti fall, a living witness to the truth, whom none of its 
enemies could gainsay or resist. It is His by His Spirit to 
infuse the old flavour into savourless salt. 



3.n.iized by Google 



'N" 



Lighted to Shine. 

(Matt. t. 16,) 

TOT that Light." No, not even John the Baptist 
was that; there is only one true Light, "which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world," 
even He who is the Life of men. We are lights ; He is 
" that Light." We are stars that have no original glory, 
and if one differs from another in the radiance which he 
sheds forth, it is only in so far as he reflects more fully the 
liistre of that uncreated Sun. Oenturies ago that Sun 
shone in this world, without a dimming cloud between His 
glory and the world of men, save the veil of His fiesh ; but 
so far as the world was concerned there was sunset, while it 
was yet noon, on Calvary ; and we have been suuunoned to 
take up His mission and shine as stars in the midnight sky, 
or as candles in the darkened home, until the first beams of 
the eternal morning break on the Alpine summits of time, 
white with the snows of millenniuDi& 

It is interesting to apply the atuiiogt/ betteeen the BUeiplea 
of Chriat and catidles or lamps. " The spirit of man is the 
candle of the Lord " (Prov. xz. 27). By nature we are like 
so many unlighted candles. As the candle is adapted to 
catch the light, but stands dark and cold until the wick is 
ignited, so have our natures been made to bum and shine 
with the nature of God, but they are unable to produce 
light of themselves, and remain cold and dark until kindled 
from the eternal Nature of Him who is Light, and in 
" whom is no darkness at aU." It matters little what the 



3.n.iized by Google 



"Have tou bbbn Lighted?" 41 

nature of the candlestick may be. In your case it may be 
of gold, eUver, or obina. It may be exqaimtely chased, or 
of the commonest possible manufacture. The most om&te 
is incapable of producing the Light, and will be set a^de in 
favour of the commonest dip, stuck on the end of a piece of 
wood, if only that has caught the precious light of which 
the other is destitute. The Pharisees and Scribes of our 
Iiord's time were like handsome candelabra, which gave no 
ray of light to the thick darkness of their age ; whilst His 
disciples, humble fishermen, shone with a light which has 
irradiated all succeeding time. 

" Men light a candle." They place the wick against some 
burning point of light, or th^ strike a match, or in our 
days turn a switch ; and immediately there is a glow of 
light which abashes darkness, and enables the housewife to 
find her lost piece of silver. O soul of man, have you been 
lighted ) Have you come in contact with Christ, or with 
one of His servants in whom His nature has shone, or with 
His Word, which may be compared to a box of lucifer 
matches, because all its potentiality of fire and light 
Blumbera until called into requisition ? If not, stuid ex- 
pectant and eager ; cry to Him, " Light me, Light of 
Life, and let my nature henceforth have no other purpose 
than to shine on earth, as Thou shineet in the Eternal 
Glory, emitting a radiance of the same nature and yielding 
tbe same prism as Thine own." 

" Me Life was the Light " (John i. 4). Notice those words. 
Christ was the Light of men, not primarily because He 
wrought miracles and spoke wonderful words, but because 
He lived 1 He was the Light of Nazareth, because He 
lived within the circumference of its hills for thirty alent 
jears. Galilee of the Gentiles—" the people which sat in 
darkness" — saw a great Light, because "He came and 
dwelt in Capernaum, which is by the sea." The country of 



3.n.iized by Google 



42 Lighted to Shine. 

the Jews was Ulumiued, because "He went about doing 
good, and healiog all that were oppressed." The sileot 
influence of that Life, which unfolded itself in the loveli- 
ness of perfect deeds, has stolen over the world, like dawn 
over the ekj ; and if the Lord had never spoken a word, the 
testimony of His life, for Ood and Truth and Love, would 
have been the most remarkable episode in human annals. 
It must be so with us; we shine by what we are. We 
shine as there is less of the wick of ottr own nature, and 
more of the flame of ffis. We shine when we are unselfish, 
when we " do all things without murmurings and dis- 
putings " ; when we are " blameless and harmless, children 
of Ood without blemish " (Phil. ii. 14, 15, r.v.). Though 
you were never to speak a word, you might still fulfil the 
greatest mission and ministry of your life, if only you 
would live as Christ lived. 

" He teat a burning and a ahining Ught " (John v. 35), 
The Baptist shone because he burnt. His Ught cost him 
life. On one occasion he said, " I must decrease " ; and 
probably his ministry lasted but a few months. The light 
he gave was so brilliant that it exhausted him prematurely. 
There can bo no true shining without burning. The light 
that costs you nothing is hardly worth the giving. You 
ought to be burning down to the socket, as you spend and 
are spent for others. Your zeal for God's house should 
bum you up. 

Bwming also slands/or heat. John was fervent, intense, 
passionate, in his devotion. His was an ardent nature, that 
loved as few men love. The love that others give to wife 
and child and friend, in his case was expended on his Iiord. 
Mary did not more certainly break an alabaster box on the 
head and feet of Jesus, than he the rich perfume of his 
noble nature. 

See that there is fervour, ardour, passion, the fire of a 



3.n.iized by Google 



Modern Bushels. 43 

burning heart, behind your testimony for the Saviour. 
Socrates gave light ; he ehone, but did not bum. Wesley 
gave light, but he burnt ; and it ia hardly possible to read a 
page of bis sermons without being wanned at the fire of 
hie intense nature. What shall we say of the Great 
Apostle, whose nature was ignited on the road to Damascus, 
and who said that whether he seemed beside himself or 
sober, he woe maetered by one passion, and constrained by 
the love of Christ. 

The Bttshal. It would be absurd to take the trouble to 
light a lamp, and then obscure its rays by placing it 
beneath a corn-measure. The purpose of ignition would 
be counteracted and frustrated, if any inmate of the bouse 
were to cover the light. How many of God's children 
have placed bushels on the light of their daily testimony 
for Ood } The bushel of uncharitable speech ! The bushel 
of peevish and murmuring complaint ! The bushel of an 
unforgiving spirit ! The bushel of some conspicuous 
failing ! Any of these is sufficient to counteract the entire 
efTect of our testimony. On one occasion, when a mother 
was remonstrating with her grown-up eon for his not 
having become a Christian, he replied : *' Mother, you have 
always seemed so afraid of God. Whenever anything has 
gone wrong in your life, yon have been so put out, so 
fearful about the future, that you have made us think that 
we can get on as well without religion as with it." Is not 
this a specimen case of the bushels which cover our light 1 
Whenever you hear men say, " He is a very good man, 

but ; " " She is a very good woman, only ," you 

may be sure that there is some bushel in the life which is 
forbidding the outshining of the Life. 

Notice what the Master says. " Let your light shine." 
It is not for you to ignite the flame, to supply the oil, or 



3.n.iized by Google 



44 Lighted to Shinb. 

trim the wick ; yonr eimpte duty is to guard against 
anything that may obetrudi the outahining of the Life of 
God from your soul. If only you see to it tluit everything 
that might hinder the effect of your testimony and mar 
your influence is put away, Christ will see to it that your 
light shall effect the full measure of His Purpose. Permit 
those words to ring in your heart, "Let your light shine." 
Allow it to shine ; guard against everything which would 
prevent it shining. 

In contrast with the bushel is ike aland or eamSettiek. 
Not under the hnehel, but on the stand. What is your 
stand t Is it not your station in society, your position in 
the home, the sphere of your influence, your situation in 
some business-house, factory, or workshop } 

With infinite care and forethought, God has chosen the 
very place in which you can do your best work for the 
world. You may be lonely, but you have no more right to 
complain than the lamp has, which has been placed iu a 
niche to illumine a dark lauding or a flight of dangerous 
stone steps. The Master of the house may have put you in 
a very small oomer, and on a veiy humble stand ; but it is 
enough if it be His blessed wiU. Some day He will pass by, 
and you shall light His steps as He goes forth to seek and 
save that which is lost; or you shall kindle some great 
light, that shall shine like a beacon over the storm-swept 
ocean. Thus the obscure Andrew was the means of 
igniting his brother Peter, when he brought him to 
Jesus. 

What a good thing it is when a man takes his bushel off 
his light and turns it upside down, and places the light 
above it ! Suppose, for instance, a man's bushel has been 
the love of strong drink. Let him conquer it, and put it 
under his feet; let him become an apostle of total absti- 
nence; let bim win other drink-cursed lives. Then that 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Supreme Motive. 45 

which had threatened to extinguish his influence will be 
the means of extending it, for others who have been cursed 
as he has been will naturally turn to him for help. It is a 
blessed thing when the fire of Divine Love kindles the 
bushels themselves, destroTing them, and making a con- 
flagration which compels men to turn from the power of 
darkness towards its attractive glow. 

The Motive. Never forget that the one object in Holy 
living is not to convince men, but to " glorify your Father 
which is in Heaven." If you live with your thoughts 
directed towards men, even though your motive be one 
of pure beneficence on their behalf, you will have less 
influence upon them than you will exert if yotir life be 
altogeUier Qodward, and your one aim be that He may be 
glorified. 

The glory of the Father was the one motive that 
occupied the mind of our Lord, from the hour when He 
said, "I must be about My Father's business," to that 
other when He stood under the shadoiv of His Cross, and 
eaid : " Father, glorify Thy name. ... I have glorified 
Thee on the earth" (see also John ziv. 13; xv. 8). So 
live, speak, and love, that Qod may be glorified ; and count 
your life a failure unless men turn from you to Him. 
It is not enough for your light to shine ; it must so shine. 
Any shining which does not make men glorify God Is 
deficient. Good it may be, but it is not the best. Your 
light must be so managed that men may not talk about 
^ou, but about Him who has made you what you are. 

" Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye 
do, do all to the glory of Ood " (1 Cor. x. 31). 

God wiU suftply ihe lamp with oil. After all, we are but 
wicks, to the edge of which, as upon a ladder, the oil climbs 



3.n.iized by Google 



46 Lighted to Shihe. 

from the cisteFn. Who could see to read or work by the 
buming of a wick} Ko; it ia the oU that bams on the 
wick, whiht the wick slowly chars, as it yields itself to 
mediate between the fire on the one hand and the oil 
on the other. Keep on buming, Christian soul I God 
will never fail thee, however long life may be, and however 
dark the night ! God will supply thee with the oil that 
flows irom the two olive-trees that set forth Christ's dual 
work as Priest and King (Iiev. xxiv. 1-4 ; Zech. iv. 1-3). 

It is the constant fear of some Christian workers that 
they will never hold out. But that should not be their 
care. Christ ever lives, Christ ever loves, Christ is ever 
and all sufficient. Draw upon Him; let all your fresh 
springs be in Him; let Him be what God meant Him 
to be — " wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, bjuI redemp- 

God will certavfiU/ have to Prim your light. He will leave 
this sacred business to no other hand than His own ; and 
He Teserves for it " onuSers of gold " (1 Kings vii. 50). 

"Very often the soul dreads the application of Hie pro- 
vidence that seems to threaten it with extinguishment. 
It turns out, however, that the love of God was only 
cutting away something which was hindering our upright- 
ness, that the true flame might break out more completely. 
There may be limitation on the area of illumination, but 
there will be marked increase in the intensity of the 
radiance. The limitations of Paul's imprisonment meant 
the lasting power of his Epistles. The snuffers of Bedford 
Gaol produced the " Pilgrim's ProgresB." 

Ask for a radiant life, and trust Qod to take the best 
means possible in accomplishing an abundant answer to 
your request. 



3.n.iized by Google 



Christ the Completement of Human Life. 

(Matt. v. 17-20.) 

THE first question that an age aske of a new teacher is : 
" What is your relation to the past ) What have 
you to Bay of the great prophets and teachers, at 
irhose feet tor generations our forefathers hare eat 1 " To 
that question the reply has often been, " My mission is 
to destroy; you have been misled; the path by which 
former generations have travelled is by no means the 
easiest or best. I have come to suggest that we wipe the 
slate, that we obliterate the past, that we begin by laying 
new foundations on which to construct a larger and more 
commodious erection." 

This is the creed of the revolutionary. In the French 
Revolution, Robespierre and his confederates went so far 
as to ohliteratie the septennial division of time, insisting 
that the week should consist of ten rather than seven days. 
Kew namee were affixed to the days, to the streets, and to 
the o^idals of the States But it was not thus that Christ 
inaugurated His work. He answered the thotigfoa of His 
age, saying: "Think not that I am come to destroy." 
Every " jot and tittle " of the ancient code was dear to 
Him. Jesus was no iconoclast. Radical though He was 
in going to the very roots of things. He was not a revolu- 
tionary. 

As the noon fulfils the dawn, as summer fulfils the 
spring, as manhood fulfils childhood, aa the great artist 



3.n.iized by Google 



48 Cheibt the Completbmbnt op Human Lipb. 

fnlfile the atruggling ideal of the generality of men in the 
poem, the statue, or the sonata, so does Jeeus Christ gather 
np the highest ideak inepired by Ood'e Spirit in men's 
hearts or engraven by His hand on tablets of stone. 
WhereTer there is suggeetion of eternal truth, He realizes 
it, and shows men the steps by which they may climb to its 
lofty level. 

QfcowM, there vtaa a m^aetere of destruction. When the 
Epistle of the Hebrews was written, the institutfons of the 
old covenant were becoming old, waxing aged, and were 
nigb unto vanishing away (Heb. vlii. 13). But the 
destruction was only part of the natural process through 
which the ideal of[the ancient Scriptures was being fulfilled. 
It was not a destruction which left no trace, as when the 
fire destroys the artist's studio, burning sketch and picture, 
the plaster cast and the finished statue— but the destruction 
of the imperfect form in contrast with the finished and 
completed design. Thus the rough sketch is superseded by 
the finished painting, the bud by the flower, the toys and 
the leSBon-books of childhood by the interests of the mature 
man. The emblems of the kindergarten fulfil their work 
in the child's mind, by giving it conceptions of shape and 
form, and its first rudimentaiy knowledge. They are then 
cast aside ; but the conceptions that they helped to form 
are the permanent possession of the nature, which thus 
made its first trials on the tiny lake, before it launched out 
upon the mighty ocean with its boundless horizon. 

The Aaronic Priesthood was destroyed, that it might be 
fulfilled in the one unchangeable priesthood of the Son of 
Ood. The altars on which ten thousand victims had been 
consumed were destroyed, and their ashes poured out upon 
the ground, because they were fulfilled in that one Altar 
on which the supreme Propitiation was made. The Temple 



3.n.iized by Google 



OuB Lord's Bible. 49 

vas destroyed, because the Shekinah of God's FreseDCe haA 
gone forth to fulfil that temple which is composed of saved 
souls, nod of which the Apostle says that " the building 
fitly framed together groweth into a holy temple in the 
Lord." The whole system of oeremonia] observance, with 
which Leviticus is full, has been destroyed, because love 
has oome to be the inner principle of the Christian heart, 
and " Love is the fulfi llin g of the Law," 

Under the term " Lata tmd Prophete " our Lord indudes, 
by a familiar Jewish abbreviation, the entire range of the 
Old Testament (Matt, vii, 12; xrii. 40; Luke ivL 16; 
xxiv. 41; Acts xiii. 15). It is probable that He never 
possessed a copy of the Old Testament Scriptures for His 
own private use. The only Bible that was within His reach 
was that which was kept in the synagogue ; but on His 
retentive memory and heart as a child, Mary in the home, 
and the old Kabbi in the school of the synagogue, and, 
above all, the Spirit of Inspiration Himself, bad deeply 
written the whole text of Sacred Writ. It was thus that 
He knew the Scriptures, though He had never learned in 
the schools of the metropolis. 

ITothing could exceed our Lord's reverence for the 
Scriptures. He quotes or refers to them four hundred 
times. With these He parried the temptations of the 
wilderness ; met and foiled the criticisms of Pharisee and 
Scribe ; and consoled His own heart when it was fainting 
amid the shadows of Calvary. Everything that the 
Fsalmiat had said of the law and testimonies of Qod was 
literally appropriated by Jesus. They were sweet as honey 
to His taste, " yea, sweeter than honey and the honey- 
comb." In them He found the germ of the Messianic 
ideal, which He realized in altogether unexpected ways, 
and to fulfil which was His one eager purpose. It is not 



3.n.iized by Google 



50 Christ deb Cohplbtbhbnt of Huhak Life. 

without profouod significance that we are told that on the 
Cross He knew that "all things had been fimehed with the 
exception of the one Scripture, which told how the rejected 
bind of the morning " should be parched with thirst, and 
receive at the hand of its foee not water but vinegar ; then 
" that the Scripture might be accomplished," He said, " I 
thirst " (John lix. 28, e.t.). 

From first to last the life of our Lord was the fulfilment, 
in spirit and letter, of the ancient ritual. As the Son of 
the Law, He obeyed the initial rite of Judaism on the 
eighth day after birth, and there was no item of the law, 
even to the dots of the Cs or the crossing of the t's which 
He omitted or slurred. " He died for our sins according 
to the Scriptures, and He rose again the third day 
according to the Scriptiu^s." What could only be partially 
true of His Apostle was literally true of the Lord : as 
" touching the righteousness which is of the law, He was 
found blameless." 

Our Lord fulfilled the ceremonial law (Luke ii 21, 22, 
27 ; Oal. iv. 4), and fulfilled the moral law, since He was 
Jesus Christ "theIUghteou8"(l John ii. 1). Ho honoured 
the law by His obedience " even to death," atoning for its 
breach and violation by mankind, and giving, through His 
unknown sufi'erings, an answer to its just dues and de- 
mands, such as could not have been afibrded though the 
whole race had been mulcted to the uttermost farthing of 
penal consequences. His fulfilment, therefore, was not for 
Himself alone, but as the second Adam, the representative 
man, and for us all (Isa. xUi. 21). 

" The lata made notktTig perfect " (Heb. viL 19), because 
it dealt so largely with particular instances and externa) 
observances ; and men sought to satisfy it by an obedience 
which consisted almost wholly in " meats and drinks and 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Law op Love. 51 

carnal ordinancea," imposed tmtil the time of Teformation, 
A servaot in your home, who has been carefully trained, 
may fulfil all the outward demands of household work ; but 
how different is the service which is compelled by an out- 
ward rule, and compensated for by the specified wage, from 
the service which the wife and mother gives, inspired by a 
love which feeds upon the sacrifices it makes! The law 
oould not produce perfect characters, because it did not as 
yet deal with the principle of the self-life which vitiates 
our best obedience. Indeed, the ancient ritual, in most 
cases, even developed the self -principle, as in the case of 
the Pharisees ; because the accumulation of outward 
obedience was deemed to produce a larger amount of 
merit, and therefore to procure a higher place in the sight 
of God. 

Out Lord, on the other hand, came to teach that love 
would fulfil all demands of the taw and the prophets, otvI 
more. He taught that to love one's neighbour would be 
the fulfilment of the law, and that obedience to every Com- 
mandment was summed up in one word, " Thou shalt love." 
Id Christ's teaching the whole law was fulfilled in this one 
word, " Thou shalt love " (Rom. xiii. 8-10 ; Gal. v. 14). 

" Do we then make void the law through faith J " No ; 
since faith is capacity for God, it receives out of TTjb fulness 
the baptism of perfect love. More and more as we love we 
establish the law (Kom. ill. 31). In proportion as we walk 
after the Spirit of Love the requirement of the law is ful- 
filled in us (Bom. viii. 4). Thus Christ, in " shedding His 
love abroad in our heart," becomes the " end of the law for 
righteousness to all who believe ; " and we present before 
God a reverence for the ancient Scriptures, and a fulfilment 
of their precepts, which could only be produced in us by 
the Spirit of Love. 



3.n.iized by Google 



52 Chbist the Comflbtehbnt of Human Life. 

Is your soul enamoured with the lovo of sonid great 
ideal! And is it the complaint of your life that it has 
been too high for you to attain 1 Are you lying at the foot 
of the cUff, bruised and mangled by repeated failure ? Are 
you almost in despair i Be of good cheer, Christ has come 
" not to destroy, but to fulfil," to take each yearning puis 
pose and conduct it to maturity ; to show how every desire 
for goodness may be realised, how the crescent of promise 
may become the full orb of fulfilment ; and to aocomplish in 
you and for you, here and hereafter, every " jot and tittle " 
of the Divine demands. 



3.n.iized by Google 



Love against Anger. 

(Matt. t. 21-28.) 

" ' I 'HEY of old time," the philosophers and legiulators 
X of mankind, saw that murderoue anger strikes at 
the very existence of the human family, and must 
be arrested. They therefore prohibited it, and accom- 
panied their prohibition by a threat of condemnation 
before their high oaurts. "Whosoever shall kill," they 
said, "shall be in danger of the judgment." 

But neither prohibition nor threatening availed. The 
dams they built were all too weak to resist the tides of 
hatred and revenge that swept against their frail resist- 
ance. Men assented to their laws, that they were good. 
In their Bansr moments, they acquiesced and assisted. But 
when the storm arose within, they were swept headlong 
from the thought to the wish, from the wish to the fully- 
formed purpose, from purpose to word, and from word 
to aot. 

Then the Love of Ciod incarnate stood amongst men. 
His legislation began further back, in the genesis of sin. 
He does not deal with the act of murder, but sees, first, 
the explosion of wrath in speech — Fot^; then behind this 
passes to the feeling of dislike — Vam fellow; and behind this 
again the anger of the heart, concealed from all eyes but 
His. In His judgment<!hamber such anger is as evil as 
murder is at the bar of man. He metes out to it the same 
condemnation that human society allotfi to the murderer. 



3.n.iized by Google 



54 LOVB AGAINST AHGBK. 

He says that every one who is angry with his brother is in 
dftitger of the judgment-court constituted to deal with 
murder. He does not say, " Thou ahalt not kill ; " because 
He deals with the springs of will, and thought, and action, 
creating a clean heart, renewing a right spirit, removing 
the evil dispontion out of which murder springe. What 
need to tell a man that he must not kill his brother, when 
be has been led to live bim as himself 1 



Our Lord refers to two tribunals of the Jewish o 
wealth — the local magistrate's court, which had the power 
of life and death, and inflicted death by beheading; and 
the Sanhedrim, or final Court of Appeal, in Jerusalem, 
whose sentence of death was executed by stoning. There 
was a stUl more terrible fate than either, when the body of 
a criminal was cast forth as refuse into the Valley of 
Gehenna, here described as the "hell of fire," because fiires 
were always burning in its forbidding precincts, to destroy 
the rubbish and garbage that would have poisoned the 
city's health. Where there is no system of drainage, as in 
Eastern cities, the pariah dog, the fire, and the worm, are 



In Christ's Kingdom, unwarrantable anger would be 
liable to the lower court, the anger that vented itself in 
slighting and contemptuous phrase to the higher, and the 
anger that exploded in vehement and passionate epithets 
to the fate of a castaway. He did not go beyond this, 
because the crime of murder would be impossible to thoee 
in whose hearts the first sparks had been judged and 
condemned. In the legislation of Ciirist, the man that 
hates his brother is a murderer, and any that allow hate 
to smoulder unchecked and uurepented of are guilty of a 
capital offence against His laws, and forfeit all the rights 
and privileges of His Kingdom, in the same way as murder 



3.n.iized by Google 



Automatic Penalty. 55 

causes the murderer to forfeit all the rights and privileges 
of the nation, to which he belongs. 

These are solemn words. They are quick and powerful, 
and sharper than any two-edged sword. They pierce to 
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and criticise the 
thoughts and intents of the heart. They make us look up 
at this humblest and meekest of men, speaking with such 
authority, as He seta Himself above the level of those of 
old time, with His majestic "I say unto you"; and lo! 
His eyes are as a flame of fire I 

Oh, eoul of man, He looks into thee and through thee. 
Art thou angry with thy brother with the heat of a selfish 
and unjustifiable anger? Thou hast already been sum- 
moned to Christ's bar ! Art thou cherishing bitter 
contempt towards Him % Thou hast been already con- 
demned to Bufier the death of the blasphemer, for thou art 
cursing one made in the image of God I Art thou flaming 
with vehement wrath, like a burning furnace ? Thou art 
already in the hell of fire, it needs not that thou shouldest 
wait for dissolution of soul and body. The flames of hell 
have already fastened on thee. Thy sin is automatic in the 
penal suffering it inflicts. Thus from our heart we come to 
justify Christ, and realize that He is greater than the 
greatest sons of the old time. 

He goes deeper still, and shows how we may deal with 
the first motions of our spirit against the ill-feeling which, 
after long smouldering, breaks out into so great a holocaust. 

So often we are angry with people whom we have 
wronged ; there is, therefore, no better way of saving us 
from explosions of anger than by undoing the wrong, so 
soon as we become conscious of it in the clear light of Qod's 
presence. For this reason our Lord bids us find out the 
brother whom we have wronged, and make amends. 



3.n.iized by Google 



56 LOTB AGAINST AnGBR. 

Again, when we reriew the past hours in the twilight of 
ftDj ordinary day, we often become aw*re that, though we 
have not allowed our ill-feeling to have its way, yet we 
have given some manifestation of it in a cotdnesa of 
manner or change in behaviour which must have been 
noticed by our brother, our former friend, and have 
lankled deeply in his mind. The symptom of our altered 
feeling towards him may have been very slight, but quite 
sufficient to indicate, like the storm-dgnal on the coast, 
that there has been a depression in the atmosphere of our 
soul, and a storm is brewing. There is no more certain 
method of staying the progress of a tempest of anger, than 
by at once becoming reconciled to the brother over that 
one small detail in which our antagonism has revealed 
itself. 

For each of these reasons, therefore, it is according to 
the deepest philosophy of the soul that our Lord bids us go 
to anyone who may justly have some cause of complaint 
against us, because of our manner, speech, or act. 

The ahar, of which the Master speaks, denotes some act 
of self-surrender to His adorable service which we are 
eager to make. Beside it stands the High Priest, waiting 
to consummate our gift, adding to it the merit of His inter- 
cession. The light of the Shekin&h fire, which waits to 
consume the gift, is shining with intense brilliancy. All ia 
prepared for the devout act of the soul which, oonatrained 
by the mercies of God, is about to present itself a holy, 
reasonable, and living sacrifice. Suddenly our great Mel- 
chizedek turns a searching light upon the hours which have 
recently passed. Every incident stands as clearly revealed 
as the objects in a landscape illumined by the lightning flash 
at midnight. And we hear His voice saying solemnly and 
searchingly, " Has thy brother aught against thee ) " 



3.n.iized by Google 



HuMAK Reasoning. 57 

At first we shudder before the inquiry. We are con- 
scious of some hidden wrong. The stiletto with which we 
struck at him was so sharp and slender that we aesured 
ourselves against ourselves that the thrust must have 
escaped Christ's notice. But now we are aware that He, 
whose eyes carry the light with which they see, beheld it. 
We dare not deceive Him, hut we evade His inquiry by 
enumerating the many causes of complaint that we have 
against the very person who has been the subject of our 
Lord's question, 

" He has not treated me as I had every right to expect. 
He has been ungrateful, ungracious, intolerant. He has 
not considered my interests. He has taken advantage of 
my goodwill. I never can get on with bim ; his tempera- 
ment and mine are so different. Why didst Thou give him 
to me as my brother 1 Had it been anyone else, we could 
have agreed. Outwardly I have tried to do my best. Canst 
Thou wonder that I hide a grudge in my heart, and that 
almost involuntarily it betrays its presence t But, after 
all, the incident was a very slight one ; no doubt he has 
forgotten it before now. He is accustomed to give me 
ugly knocks ; probably bis skin is too thick to feel so 
slight an evideuce of my unfriendlin^s." 

Again, the searching voice inquires : " Has thy brother 
aught against thee t " 

" It depends, O Master," we reply, "in what court the 
case is tried. In any human court, so slight a thing as 
that which stands revealed in this fierce light would be 
passed over as too trivial for notice. Before a jury of 
my friends, or even of my acquaintances, it would be ad- 
mitted that I had not done anything so very wrong. It 
might be supposed that I was becoming morbid and intro- 
spective, were I to take action on such a triviality." 

Again, that dear, strong voice is heard saying : " We 



3.n.iized by Google 



58 LOTE AGAINST AhGES. 

will not quibble. Thou knoveet that thy brother is Buf- 
fering, that he 18 losing faith in thy profesiiion of religion, 
that he is being prejudiced against Me ; thy parrying of 
My question is thy condemnation. Thou knowefit what 
thou hast done. In excusing, thou accusest thyself. Leave 
here thy gift at the altar. Go first, and be reconciled to 
him. Then return ; I will await thee. Though hours may 
pBAS, thou wilt find Me here." 

"May I not ofiJer my gift now, and then discover my 
brother T My heart is full of desire. I am eager to be 
an entire bumt'ofiering to my God. Will not this fervour 
pass away, and leave me chilled } " 

" Not BO," the Master answers. " Thy present gift will 
not be acceptable to Okxi. The impetuous desire to make 
it is of the flesh, not of the Spirit. If it were of the 
Spirit, there would be no doubt about its ultimate per- 
manence. To obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken 
than the fat of lambs. Be quick. The sky is darkening 
with night. The road that remains to be traversed by tby 
brother, who has now become thine adversary, is short. 
Agree with him quickly, whilst thou art in the way ; lest 
by delay the quarrel between thee and him becomes aggra- 
vated, and thou find thyself in difficulties from which 
extrication will be impossible. Every moment of delay in- 
tensifies the sense of injustice, and makes more difficult thy 
attempt at reconciliation." 

" But he has wronged me, gracious Master. Is nothing 
to be said to him I " 

" Not in the first place," is the reply. "It is necessary 
that thon shouldest retract thy part, whatever it may be. 
Ask his forgiveness for that ruffled feeling, that unMnd and 
harsh bearing, that icy reserve. Pay him any due that he 
may rightfully claim. Ask his forgiveness as thou wouldst 
ask Ood's, and thy approach will bring a flood of repentant 



3.n.iized by Google 



Truest Music. 59 

and protesting worde, which will show that thou hast won 
thy brother. And if these do not follow, and he receives 
thine apology as his right, or without remarlc, still thou 
hast done thy part, and there is nought to be said against 
thee further, I will deal with him — then come, and offer 
thy gift." 

What music then is in that word Come I All heaven 
Bpeaks in the invitation. Come, says the Master, and 
render thyself a hving sacrifice, which is thy reasonable 
service. Come, and let Me make of thee so much as is 
possible in thy brief life. Oome, for all things are ready. 

And we discover this— that when we have acted as love 
should act, not because we fed the love, but because the 
Master bids us, and we simply obey, then the Love of Qod 
bursts up in our heart like a hot geyser spring, and we find 
ourselves able to offer our gift to Ood with an emotion of 
love that we could never have experienced otherwise. 

This is the glory of our Lord's teaching, that when we 
do what is right, altogether apart from the emotion of 
pleasure or de«re, we find ourselves glad to do it. In the 
right act, there comee the right feeling ; and in doing His 
will, we are able to say, " I rejoice to do Thy will, my 
God." 

Try it, soul of man. Be indifferent to emotion. Act. 
The emotion will burst out like the flowers that carpet the 
meadows in May. The birds will sing, the streams will 
flow, the flowers will appear, because by one act the reign 
of the Frost King is broken. 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Rule of the Eye. 

(Matt. v. SB.) 

WE have already seen that if a man permito bis heart 
to be filled with auger, that perpetually boils over 
or explodes in hard and contemptuooa expresaioDS, 
he is excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven, and cast 
away as useless — the fire of Gehenna being a well-known 
expression for the rubbish-heap. We are now led a step 
further, and taught that impurity may have the same 
terrible effect, unless its earliest motions be sternly 
repressed. Indeed, Christ teaches that what is as natural 
as a right band or eye, may, unless rigorously ruled, 
become the cause of the whole body being cast into 
Gehenna. 

The outward and inward, the expression by the body, and 
the passionate desire of the lower region of the soul {which 
we might call the animal soul), act and react on each otiier. 
The former infiuences the latter, as the pouring of oil 
arouses a smothered flame. On the other hand, through 
the combination of desire and imagination, contriving 
together in the dark caverns of the soul, the body may 
become the instrument of deeds that make the pure stars 

The legislators of the old time laid it down that no 
member of the commonwealth should commit adultery, 
and enacted terrible penalties if their prohibition were 
trampled under foot (Beut. xzii. 24) ; but the Divine Man, 
who reads the heart of man, goes back behind the deed to 
its premonitory stages, legislates about the look that may 



3.n.iized by Google 



Sin's Eaeliest Stage. 61 

m£juDe passion ; and condemns the aoul tliat does not 
instantly tarn the eye from that which allures it, to the 
All-Holy, askiag^ to be cleansed, not with tears only, but 
with blood, and pleading that the eye henceforth may be 
filmed with pity, melted into tenderness, and set on fire 
with the light of Hig eyes, that are described as being like 
a flame of fire. 

The importance of the reffim&n of the eye is acknowledged 
in many places of Scripture : " When the woman taw that 
the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the 
eyes"; . . . "Lot saw the plain of Sodom." It was to 
David's straying glances that his great sin was due 
(2 Sam. xi. 2). The Psalmist asks that his ei/ea may he 
turned away from beholding vanity. Job made a covenant 
with his eyes, and the Wise Man tells us not to look upon 
the wine when it is red, and giveth its colour in the cup. 
Each passage enforces our Lord's words. 

The first step in the religious life is to detect right and 
wrong, not in the act, but in the thought and intention. 
If sin is arrested there, it is arrested in its earliest stage. 
When the inward senses are e:cercised, and trained to 
discern good and evil, and when the soul not only discerns 
but resists, there is no fear of the life being mastered by 
the tempter. The snake is killed in the egg ; the microbe 
is destroyed before it can breed ; the enemy is defeated 
before he can become ensconced within the city walls. 

It is a remarkable t&at to how small an extent many 
professing Christians practise this discernment between 
things that differ. They will be quite willing to admit 
that the soul has senses, duplicated with those of the body ; 
that it has eyea, with which it may see God ; ears, by which 
it may hear the inner voice ; the sense of touch, and even 



3.n.iized by Google 



62 The Rule of the Etb. 

of smell, by which to distingaish between the wholeeome 
and the corrupt, between the air of Paradise and the 
breath of the pit. But they have never learned to ezendfie 
them, to note and act upon their earliest suggestion 
(Heb. V. 14). This is the cause of infinite failure, and 
keepa such Christians in the stage of babyhood. They 
never become full grown, nor partake of the solid food of 
the Word (compare also 1 Oor. iii. 1, 2). 

A curious illustration of this happened to me once. A 
Christian lady was very anxious that I should read a 
certain novel, which had just come out and was attracting 
wide interest. She assured me that I should find much 
that I would approve of and enjoy. Acting on her advice, 
I took the book to beguile some leisure hours on the 
Atlantic, and sat down one afternoon on my deck-chur to 
enjoy it. When, however, I reached page 60, 1 fiung it 
over into the ocean, as I thought its contents would injure 
the fishes less than myself. If I had continued to read 
that story, I should have been playing with fire. 

What made the difference between that Christian lady 
and myself I Was it not that my inner senses were more 
sensitive than hers, and able to discern the evil of the hook, 
which she would have unwittingly permitted to poison and 
contaminate her entire nature 1 Some of us have quicker 
natural senses than others. The coastguardsman, accus- 
tomed to survey the ocean, will detect a tiny boat which 
would escape the notice of the average landsman ; the 
experienced eye of the scout will build up a whole volume 
of useful information from the examination of a footstep, 
, or even a handful of ash, which would be of no service to 
the ordinary traveller. Similar differences hold in the 
realm of the soul ; and many receive poison into their 
systems almost before they are aware- 
It is therefore of the utmost importance to exercise the 



3.n.iized by Google 



Sin in a Look. 63 

soul in the discriminations of the inner sense, and to 
accustom it to act on its findings ; and this was probably in 
the mind of our Lord when He spoke so earnestly about the 
rule of the eye, too accustomed to move carelessly over faces 
and forms, on the spectacle of human and natural life, as it 
passes iu ceaseless panorama before as. It would not have 
been easy to speak to all the world about the senses of the 
soul. Men would not for the most part have understood 
Him. But if He could only teach them that there might 
be sin in a look, and that the unregulated look might lead 
to sin, it would be one step at least towards awakening the 
soul to watchfulness against those first yieldings to tempta- 
tion, which reveal themselves not only in the glance of the 
eye, but in the inner movement of the soul. Let a man 
begin to guard his looks, he will end by keeping his heart 
beyond all else that he keeps, since ho has come to see that 
out of it are the ifisues of life. 

We must learn, most of all, to amquer passionate desire. 
The appetites which God has implanted within us, for 
food, for sleep, for human love, and such-like things, are 
not in themselves wrong, but they are very liable to get 
wrong in two directions. Either we may desire a right 
thing too passionately, and for the mere pleasure it affords, 
rather than for the service it will enable us to do to others ; 
or we may desire satisfaction from an object which, for good 
reasons, is placed outside the circumference of our life. 

The presence of such an object may excite the passionate 
desire of our nature ; and, if it should, our Lord says we 
must not look on it. In this case, the old proverb, " Out of 
sight, out of mind," is our only safeguard. What the eye 
does not see, the heart will be less likely to desire. 

The Master goes further, and says that if we are brought 
into almost constant contact with an object that tempts us, 



3.n.iized by Google 



64 The Rule of the Eye. 

and if we cannot conqaer its inevitable fascination upon 
our temperament, it would be better for us to pluck It out 
and cast it away, though it were precious as an eye and 
useful as a foot. Of course, the best policy would be to 
acquire such an elevation and strength ot soul that we 
should be superior to the temptation of any wrong or 
hurtful snare. When a child is well fed it will not fight 
with dogs for the garbage of the streets. When we come 
from standing on the Transfiguration Mount, with the 
light of its recent glory on our faces, we shall find no 
attractions in the vanities of Vanity Fair. But, filing 
that, and as the next best thing, it were wiser, like Joseph 
of old, to leave our garment and flee, refusing eveit to be 
in the same room with the temptress. At whatever cost, 
however, we must learn to master the desire of our senses, 
and not allow our feet to wander in the directioa they 
solicit, unless it be one which Ood Himself has marked 
out for us. Even then we must tread in it with modera- 
tion, such as is imposed on the one side by the remem- 
brance that every good and perfect gift is the Father's 
gift, and therefore to be used reverently ; and, on the other, 
by the fear lest we should injure another, and forget that 
in every act we must consider the well-being of all around 
us as paramount to our own enjoyment. 

It must be, of course, always borne in mind that Hn ia iu>i 
to be viMpvied to the body. It is not the eye that sins, but 
the heart that uses it for its sin. It is not the body that 
yields itself to the entrance of evil things, but the soul 
that turns the key, unlocks the door, and permits them to 
enter. No doubt the body is a weight in the heavenly 
race, because in its subtle nervous mechanism it carries the 
record and impulse of many acts of unrestrained evil on 
the part of our ancestors. It is a chain whose links liave 



3.a.i,zed by Google 



Hbrbditt — VicroBT ! 65 

been forged by many separate acts, which have grown into 
babits. But the ultimate power is always invested in the 
spirit, which must always utter its / wiU I or its / wUl not ! 
before an act can be done which has any moral quality in 
it, of which we must give an account, and which is either 
a step upward to heaven or downward to the pit. 

If you sin, it is not your body that Bins, but you through 
your body ; and yon are transforminj^ into a pigsty what 
Ood made for His palace and temple. Strong as heredity 
may be, Christ is stronger. Vehement as the steeds are 
which are yoked to the chariot of life, the beneficent 
Creator would never have given them to you except that 
He knew that you were well able, with His grace helping 
you, to rein them in, and compel them to keep the course, 
and run the race, and win the goal. If then you want to 
arrest acta of sin in the body, it is imperative that you 
shotdd deal with the inward sense and with the desires of 
the mind. 

How THEN CAN WE FUKIFT THE DBSIBES OF THE HIND? 

(1) Wemust jruar(2a^ai?Mf tkefirst tiny thought of eml. The 
microbes float in the air, and if at any time we are off our 
guard and allow them to alight, they wUl infallibly find a 
nest in which to breed. The Holy Spirit, if we entrust 
Him with the sacred task, will make us very sensitive 
when the tiniest speck of evil is floating toward us, and 
will remind us to shelter under the Blood. Men may 
shrink from our using that mystic word, but, beliove me, 
there is no other infallible talisman of victory. "They 
overcame by ihe Blood of the Lamb." 

(2) We must ofimd the occasions of tempUUitms. It is 
tiselese to ask Ood not to lead us into temptation, if we 
thrust ourselves thither. I had once to advise a young 
artist to give up painting figures, becauBO it was impossible 



3.n.iized by Google 



66 The Bulb of the Eye- 

for him to go through the training, which is held to be 
neceesaiy, without being OTermastered by temptations 
incident to that line of study. It was the right foot, but 
it always made him stumble, and it tad to go. At another 
time I had no alternative but to advise a young girl to 
break away from an attachment dear to her as life, because 
she could not continue it without seriouB spiritual danger. 
It was the right eye, but it had to be plucked out. But 
are these losses without compensation ? Nay, verily. It 
is impossible to give up such things for Christ, without 
receiving a hundredfold in this present life. When Milton's 
eyes were closed on the scenes of earth, they were opened on 
the Throne of God and the Lamb. We are completed in 
Him. We go maimed into Lt/e I 

(3) We must appropriate the opposite grace. It is good, 
but it is not enough to turn the eyes away from beholding 
vanity, or to shut them as the ascetic might do from 
all that is right and natural and innocent. There is 
something bettor, supplied by the universal principle, 
which we are using throughout these chapters — Love. 

When our hearts are filled with love, the eyes will not 
gaze on an object for selfish enjoyment. They will look on 
the intorests of another ; will see all the agony and pain 
that may ensue if that other is turned away, as poor 
Bathsheba was, from the path of unsullied righteouBness ; 
wiU fill with tears at the very thought of bringing shame 
and dishonour into another's life ; will become tonder with 
a holy and selfless love; will be yielded as organs of 
Christ's own vision; and, out of all thcU, will come the 
transparency of a pure heart, which the Holy Spirit shall 
make Hi^ abiding-place. 

"Who among us shall dwell in the everlasting burnings" of 
the Divine purity % He that " shuttoth his eyes from look- 
ingupoQ evU, he shall dvell on high"(l8a. Txxiii. 14-I6,b.t.)- 



3.n.iized by Google 



Simplicity in Speech. 

(Matt. v. 33-S7.) 

SPEECH I What is it 1 The vibration of the air Bot in 
motion by vocal chord, tongue, and lip. Appareotiy 
mechanical, yet how spiritual. Enriched from the 
voices of nature, the dash of the breaker, the murmur of 
the breeze, the Bong of the bird, and cry of beast, yet in its 
oiiginal fountains the evident gift of the Creator. 

Speech is the utterance of the sou], and more, because 
the soul dyee and impregnates speech with its emotions and 
inspirations, so that they are communicated to others as by 
spiritual magnetism. Even when the words themselves 
are unintelligible, we catch the Divine afSatua, or our steps 
are quickened by the clarion appeal. 

Ood spake, and the visible creation emerged from the 
realm of thought into realized fa43t. By speech the Law 
was promulgated from Sinai ; and by speech He who spake 
as never man spake, and who was the Word of Ood in- 
carnate, left us thoughts that can never die. Speech has 
burned with the vehemence of Demosthenes, flashed with 
the eloquence of Cicero, trembled with the pathos of Chry- 
sostom, thundered with the emphasis of Luther, rung with 
the high note of Pitt, glittered with the brilliance of 
Sheridan, and poured like a torrent from the lips of Burke. 
What a wonderful gift is this of human speech. To what 
heights it may rise, to what depths descend. "There- 
with bless we the Lord and Father, and therewith curse 
we men, which are made after the likeness of Ood. Out 
of the same fountain proceed sweet water and bitter." 



3.n.iized by Google 



68 SiMPLicm IN Speech. 

The noblest form of speech is the reflection in dinple and 
natural words of great and good thooghts which have been 
occupying the speaker's mind. Then language becomes 
strong in itB simplicity, and majestic in its unadorned truth. 
There is nmall need for nicely-balanced sentences or highly- 
flavoured speech, when the soul of patriot, orator, or 
preacher, is aglow with exalted and inspiring conceptions. 
The volcanic fires that are burning within vent themselves 
in burning syllables, which plough their way into the 
hearts of men. When the speaker is deeply moved, his 
manuscript is crumpled in his hand, the precise wordR 
which he had carefully prepared are forgotten, and he 
makes a fresh way for himself in words that leap red-hot 
and alive from hia lipa. The yeas and nays of Christ have 
been sufiicient to revolutionize the ages, not because of 
their eloquence (as judged by human standards), but be- 
cause they are weighted with the wisdom and life of God. 
Terse, unadorned, and simple sentences — such, for instance, 
as Abraham Lincoln was wont to utter — are sufficient 
when far-reaching and profound principles of personal eon- 
duct or public policy have to be announced. 

If, then, we would obey this command of our Lord as to 
speech, and confine ourselves to pure and simple language, 
we must begin to think more deeply, to love more tenderly, 
to cultivate our souls to nobler issues, and to amass 
spiritual treasure. We can safely leave our words to ta^e 
care of themselves, if our inner life is pure, and sweet, and 
strong. Let us only imbibe our Master's spirit, and love 
God first and our neighbours as ourselves — then, from the 
pure fountain wilt flow pellucid streams like those that 
issne from the throne of God and of the Lamb. 

It must, however, be sorrowfully confessed that for the 
most part the thinking of ourselves and of others is not 



3.n.iized by Google 



"Thrbadbabb Souls!" 69 

of that order. Men are not true, or deep, or unselfifih, in 
their innermost hearts, and they know it ; and therefore 
in all ages they have endeavoured to atone for the poverty 
of their thought by the extravagance of their language. 

Men are not true. To compensate, therefore, for their 
lack of veracity, and to induce others to think that they 
were neither lying nor deceiving, they have linked their 
words with the awful name of God, daring the AU-True to 
step out of His silence and confound them, if it were not 
as they said. 

Men are not profound. To compensate, therefore, for 
their lack of deep and original thoughts, and to turn pub- 
lic attention from their threadbare and impoverished souls, 
they employ extravagant and exaggerated speech, like that 
with which a frivolous girl of the period is accustomed to 
exprras herself when, for the first time, she stands in the 
presence of the solemn majesty of the Alps, at flush of 
dawn or under the touch of the silver moon. 

Men are not unadJUh. To compensate, therefore, for 
their conscious lack of that love which forgets itself in 
its devotion to the interests of others, they will fill their 
i<peech with extravagant expressions, which may impress 
the ear and heart of those that hear them for the first 
time, but fall vain and insipid on those who know that 
the love which vaunts itself most passionately is more 
than likely to be ^^heming for its personal advantage. 

It is common enough for us to hide our nakedness, our 
untruthfulness, our selfishness, under strong asseverations 
and protestations, which call in the Supreme Being to 
witness against us if it be not as we affirm. 

The remarkable thing is that Ood keeps silent. Though 
His verdict be invoked by the habitual liar and blasphemer, 
who swears that black is white, and calls on Qod to strike 



3.n.iized by Google 



70 SiMpLiciTT IN Speech. 

him dead, or in some other way to prove that his words are 
false, yet Heaven makes no sign. No voice speaks out of 
the silence ; no thunderbolt hurtles through the air ; no sign 
is given that Ood is not mocked. Indeed, it might seem as 
though God had not heard, or that He was perfectly indif- 
ferent. 

But such is not the case. There are many examples on 
recM>rd, like that, for instance, of Ananias and Sapphira, 
where, in answer to some blasphemous appeal, Ood has 
interposed to vindicate the truth which had been shame- 
fully mis-stated. Ood is not indifferent. He is not care- 
less of the interest of truUi and righteousness. He hides 
Himself under the slow working of immutable laws. But 
He is never appealed to without sooner or later answering 
the appeal, vindicating innocence, and exposing the liar and 
the profane. With slow, silent, and inexorable precision, 
the Divine Government deals with all exaggerations, lies, 
and blasphemies, showing their hollowness, exposing their 
futility, and casting them up on the beach of the universe, 
to the derision of all pure and righteous souls. 

In order to avoid using the Name of God in their 
protestations, men have introduced into their speech 
expressions which, in fact, derived all the significance 
they possessed from their association with Him. It has 
been a mean subterfuge. They have not liked to say, 
Sjf Ood, or By the Life of Ood, and therefore they have 
substituted the phrase, Sy Heaven.. They have scrupled 
to say, May Ood strike me dead if I lie, and therefore they 
have slightly modified their speech, and said, By my life, 
or By my head, though they know perfectly well that 
life and death are ultimately only at the disposal of the 
Almighty. 

In our own speech we inherit some of these subterfuges, 
and apparently employ them without thought. 



3.n.iized by Google 



Fai£E Jewish Ideas. 71 

" Zound«" IB a contraction of "By the wounds of 
Christ." 

"My deaa-" or "Dear me," is an English form of the 
Italian, Dia'mia, my goddess. 

" Good graoioua," or " My gracioua"\v.T% clearly abbrevia- 
tions of " My graciotis God." 

"By Jove" is, of course, the Latin name for Divinity. 

"Begad," is "By God." 

Many similar expressions will occur to the minds tA my 
readers, and they all savour of the attempt to give the 
impression of solemnity and reliableness to our statements ; 
and they have no other claim for ccmsideration except that 
they are associated with the awful Name and Being of God. 

The Jews, like all Oriental nations, were especially given 
to these expletives, and sheltered themselves with the 
excuse that, so long as they did not mention the Divine 
Being, they might be excused. They said, "Thou shalt 
perform to ike Lord thine oaths " meant that oaths which 
were not definitely made to the Lord, or by the invocation 
of the name of God, were not binding. 

Our Lord shows the fallacy of this reasoning. He saj-s 
that, whatever emphasis the allusions to Heaven, or 
Jerusalem, or the hea.i, may give to our speech, is derived 
from their association with God ; and that, therefore, if we 
would avoid the charge of blasphemy, we must cease to 
interlard our speech with such expressions. They are 
needless when our hearts are pure and our words sincere ; 
tbey are objectionable, and worse, when introduced to give 
a false and unnatural emphasis to our speech. 

As the disciples of Jesus, we must avoid, in dress, in 
expenditure, in our household equipment, whatever savours 
of extravagance. In all our behaviour, as well as in our 
speed), there must be the simplicity and beauty of Jevos. 



3.n.iized by Google 



72 SiMPUciTY IN Speech. 

Perhaps there is mora truth tlian we would care to 
tidmit in the following minute of an old Friends' meeting : 
"It is the judgment of Friendg that we should rafrain 
from having fine tea-tables set with fine china, seeing it is 
mora for eight than service, and it's advised that Friends 
should not have so much china or earthenwara sett on 
their mantelpieces or on their chests of drawers, but 
rather sett them in their closets until they have occaaon to 
use tiiem. And we desire an alteration in those things 
that Truth's testimony is gone out against, viz., the 
Friends' gowns made indecently, one part over long and 
the other too short, with lead in the sleeves, and that 
Friends should come to a stability and be satisfied in the 
shape and compas that Truth leads into without changing 
as the world changes, allso that Friends' cloaths may be of 
a decent modest colour, not hair cut or powdered, and 
neither coives to be made with gathers on the forahead, 
bordering on the fashion of the world." 

This prohibition of our Lord, "Swear not at all," does not, 
in my judgment, touch on the subject of taking an oath in 
a court of law or on the assumption of high office. He is 
simply dealing with the use of expletives in ordinary 
speech. In His own trial, He did not scruple to be put 
upon His oath. When the High Priest said unto Him, 
"I adjura Thee by the living God, that Thou tell us 
whether Thou be the Christ, the Son of God," Jesus said, 
" Thou hast said." 

And on one solemn occasion the Apostle Paul de- 
liberately called God to witness that he spoke the truth 
in Christ, "his conscience bearing witness in the Holy 
Ghost." 

It is not inadmissible that on occasions of high and 
solemn importance we should bare our heads as we stand 



3.n.iized by Google 



Father akd King. 73 

before God, and 80161111117 ^^ -^''^ '^ stand with us in 
attesting the truth of the words we speak and the vows we 
maJce. But thera ia a vast difference between this and the 
incessant and thoughtless appeal to God on every small and 
frivolous occasion. 

The true and holy soul finds God everywhere and in 
everything. Heaven above is God's throne ; earth beneath, 
His footstool; Jerusalem, the holy city, the residence of 
the great King. Note these closing words — "the great 
King." We are reminded of the sublime words with which 
the last of the prophets rebuked the lax and slovenly 
vrorsbip of the chosen people : " From the rising d the sun 
even unto the going down of tbe same My Name is great 
among the Gentiles ; and in every place incense is offered 
unto My Name, and a pure offering, for I am a great King, 
saith the Lord of hosts, and My Name is terrible among 
the GentUes" (Mai. i. 11, 14). 

Let us cultivate this thought, that God is not only our 
Father, but a great King, and with all the familiarity of 
little children will be mingled reverential awe. Wherever 
we go we shall recollect the presence of Qod, and this 
will pravent us from the spirit which ia betrayed into 
extravagant speech. We shall not dream of using words 
which come within the scope of our Lord's condemnation, 
when we remember that every word is spoken in the 
presence of our Judge, and that of every idle word that we 
may speak we shall be called to give an account. 

AH harsh judgments of other people, who are God's 
creatures; all flippant reference to Scripture, to spice onr 
conversation, and suggest witticisms and conundrums ; all 
light remarks on God's dealings with men, as in a book 
once published, called "The Gomic History of England"; 
all trifling with sacred subjects, or exposing them to 



3.n.iized by Google 



74 Simplicity in Speech. 

ridicule — will be impoesible to those who invest them with 
the thought that God is great, and greatly to be feared, 
and to be had in reverence by all that are about Kim. 
The reverent use of the Day of God ; the entrance with 
devout and eacred thoughts into His House ; the wary and 
careful participation in the Lord's Supper; the loving 
handling of Scripture, and even of the Book which contains 
it; the honour with which parent and friend, old and 
young, are treated — all these admirable and beautiful 
traits, so oecessary to the perfecting of character, are due 
to the same origin and source. When Ood is treated as 
the Great King, the whole life falls into symmetry and 
order, and becomes a prolonged Yea to truth, a profound 
Nay to falsehood and error, to the gloiy of Him who is 
God's Yea and Amen to all the needs of the human soul. 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Second Mile. 

(Matt. v. 38-42.) 

11 is the second mile that tests oui* character. About 
the first there is no controversy. We must traverse it 
whether we will or not. 

Our IiOrd refers to the osage of the East in the trans- 
mission of the royal messages. They are carried forward 
by relays of messengers, much in the fashion of the Fiery 
Cross in the Highlands, as Sir Walter Scott describes it in 
*' The Lady of the I^ke." But the messengers were 
pressed men, i.e., each village or township was bound to 
forward the message to the next, and the first man that 
was happened on, however pressing his own business, was 
obliged to a£ford the use of his horses or mules, and 
go forward with the royal com'iw, giving him a mount and 
accompanying him. 

In the same way, emergencies are continually happening 
to us all. We leave our homes in the morning not 
expecting any demand for help or any other circumstance 
to interfere with the regular routine of the day's engage- 
ments ; and then, all suddenly and unexpectedly, there are 
the sounds of horses' hoofs. A great demand has burst in 
on our lives, and we are obliged to go off in & direction 
which we never contemplated. We have no option. Wo 
are compellet to go one mile, and then the question will 
arise : Kow you have performed what you were bound to 
perform, and given what any other miin would have given, 



3.n.iized by Google 



76 Trb Sbcoitd Mile. 

what are jrou going to do? The next mile is of prime 
neceesitf ; it is in your option to go or not to go, and your 
action will determine wbether or not you have entered 
into the inner heart of Christ, and are His disciple, not in 
word only but " in deed and in truth." 

What aa to the left cheek % That the right should have 
been stnick 19 an incident which baa happened to you 
altogether apart from your choice. It does not reveal your 
character in one way or the other, but your behaviour with 
respect to the left cheek will show immediately what you 

What as to your doakt Apparently your creditor can 
claim your tunic, and there is no merit in giving this up 
— anyone must have done as much ; but when that is gone, 
what win you do about your cloak % This is the test of 
what you really are, 

Sut does our Lord mean that we should do literally as 
He says ? Are we really to go the second mile, and turn 
the left cheek, and let our cloak go in the wake of our coat t 
These questions have been asked all along the ages, and 
answered as we answer them still. Each questioner must 
be fully persuaded in hie own mind ; and according to your 
faith, so it will be done unto you. 

Many saintly souls have yielded a liberal obedience to 
these precepts. It is recorded of the eccentric but devoted 
Billy Bray that in going down into the pit, shortiy after 
his remarkable conversion, an old companion gave him a 
stinging blow on the cheek. " Take that," be said, " for 
turning Methodist." In former times such an insult would 
never have been attempted, for the whole country knew 
that Billy Bray was an inveterate pugilist. All the answer 
that he gave, however, was : " The Lord forgive thee, lad, 
^ I do, and bring thee to a better mind ; I'll pray for 



3.n.iized by Google 



"Take That!" 77 

thee." Three or four days after his assail&nt came to him 
under the deepest conviction of sin, and asked his for- 
givenese. 

The head of the couBtahulary in a great district in India 
told me that when he became a Christian he found it 
neceesary to withdraw from the Qjmkana (which is the 
European club and society rendezvous in most Indian 
cities), and his action in this matter aroused very strong 
feeling against him amongst his former aasociatee. One 
day, as he was driving on the high road, a well-known 
society-man, driving past him in the other direction, rose 
up in his dog-cart and cut at him a tremendous blow with 
his whip, saying as he swore, "Take that, you ... ." 
My friend, who is a very powerful man and of commanding 
presence, took it quietly, waited his opportunity of doing 
this man a kindness, and I believe it was the means of hb 

In connection with a missionary society working among 
the tribes on the Congo, in which I am deeply interested, 
one of the missionaries resolved that he would teach a 
literal obedience to these words of our Lord, lest any 
eivasion of them might lessen their authority over the 
hearts and lives of His people. His hearers were greatly 
interested and excited, and were not slow in putting the 
missionary to the test. On one memorable day they 
gathered around his house, and began asking for the 
articles which excited their cupidity, and which he had 
brought at such cost from home. In an hour or two his 
house was literally stripped, and his vrife and he betook 
themselves to prayer, for, of course, it is impossible for 
Europeans to live in that climate without many accessories 
which are needless for the natives. But, in the evening, 
under the shadow of the night, one after another stole back 
bringing the article which he had taken away, and 



3.n.iized by Google 



73 The Second Mile. 

confeesing that it wba impossible to retain it in his poeses- 
sioQ, because of the burden which had come upon his 
heart. 

Man; such instances are probably occurring every day, 
and compel us to believe that there is a range of laws 
which should govern our dealings with our fellows, and 
which are only unfolded to those who live not by sight 
but by faith in the Son of God. Faith has been called the 
sixth sense, and lays its hands on a third key-board of the 
great organ of existence. 

Far be it from us, therefore, to judge any who feel it to 
be their duty to obey these words of the Master in all 
literality. 

But even if they are taken literally there must- be some 
reserves. For instance, when our Lord says, Se»i»t not 
evU, it is impossible to apply His words umversally. Sup- 
pose, for instance, as we pass along a road, we encounter a 
brutal man grossly maltreating a woman or a little child, 
or a gang of roughs assaulting a fellow-trnveller, it cannot 
be that we are forbidden to resist the wrong-doer to the 
utmost of our power. The whole machinery of the eternal 
and invisible world is continually being called into requisi- 
tion to succour us against " foul fiends," as Spencer puts it, 
and surely we may do as much in these scenes of human 
existence. Clearly our Lord only forbids us to strike for 
purposes of private retaliation and revenge, we are not to 
be avengers in our personal quarrels, we are to guard 
against taking the law into our own hands, lest our passion 
should drift us outside the warm zone of the love of 
Ood. 

It is the pwsonai element iu the resistance of wrong 
that our liOrd forbids ; but He would surely never arrest 
the soldier, policeman, or even the private citizen, from 



3.n.iized by Google 



"Without Malice." 79 

stopping, BO far as possible, deeds of wrong and acts of 
criminal assault. If thieves break into your home, or 
wicked men should try to injure wife or child ; or if you 
should come on some poor Jew who is set on by robbers, 
who strip him of his property, and beat him almost to 
death, you are bound to interfere with a prayer to God 
that He would succour you. 

And when the wrong hae been done, as the Lord teaches 
UB by His own behaviour, we may reprimand and remon- 
strate and appeal to the conscience and heart. When one 
of the officers of the court struck Jesus with his hand, 
Jesus answered him : " If I have spoken evil, bear witness 
of the evil ; but if well, why smitest thou Me t " But there 
we must stop. We must not say in our heart : " I will 
be even with thee, and give thee as much as thou hast 
given me." 

It is equally our duty, for the sake of others, to take 
measures to arrest and punish the wrong-doer. Supposing 
that a man has wronged you, and that you have good 
reason to believe that he is systematically wronging others ; 
if you have an opportunity of having him punished, you 
are absolutely obliged, as it seems to me, to take such 
action against him as will make it impossible for him to 
pursue his career of depredation. If your lot should be 
cast in a mining-camp in the Far West, which was domi- 
nated by some swaggering ruffian, and he assaulted you, 
I do not think that you would be contravening the law of 
Christ if you were to give him so strong a handliag that 
his power for evil would be arrested from that hoiu'. It 
being clearly understood that you put out of your heart all 
private revenge and personal malice, and are living in a 
land where it is impossible to bring the wrong-doer before 
judge or jury, you may be compelled to act in a judicial 
capacity, doing for society what society is not able to do 



3.n.iized by Google 



80 The Second Mile. 

through Uck of legaliaed officers and methods. Ezpoettila- 
tiot), ai^^nmeiit, appeals to reason, might be employed 
first; but if these failed there would be neoeesity to use 
the only other argument that might be available. 

It is clear, also, that we caooot literally obey the Lord's 
injunction to give to every one that asks. Else the 
world would become full of sturdy beggars, living on the 
hard-earned wages of the thrifty. And this would result 
in the undoing of society, and of the beggars themselves. 
Does God give to all who ask Him % Does He not often 
torn aside from the borrower ? He knows what will hurt 
or help us ; knows that to many an entreaty His kindest 
answer is a rebuff ; knows that if He were to give us all 
we ask we should repent of having asked so soon as we 
awoke in the light of eternity. So when the drunkard or 
the drone asks me for money, I steadfastly refuse. It is 
even our duty not to give money indiscriminately, and 
without full acquaintance with the applicant and his 
circumstances, for we may be giving him the means of 
forging more tightly the fetters by which be is bound 
to his sins. A piece of bread is the most we may bestow 
upon the mendicant, until we have some knowledge of his 
character, his mode of life, and his real intentions. If 
only Christian people would resist the impulse to give 
money to beggars of all kinds, and reserve themselves for 
the more modest poor who suffer without making appeals, 
how much of the evil and sorrow of our time would be 
remedied I 

What then does the Lord require of us 1 (1) Bo not 
take the lavs itUo your own hande. In the old Mosaic 
legislation it was enacted that as a man had done, so it 
should be done to him, " Eye for eye, tooth for tooth " — 
" band for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound 



3.n.iized by Google 



How TO Retaliate. 81 

for wound, stripe for sliripe " (Ezod. zxi. 24, 25). But in 
the time of our Lord this had been interpreted as con- 
ferring on a man the right to retaliation and revenge. 
The Jews conveniently ignored Lev. xix. 17, 18, wbidi 
expressly forbade the private infliction of punishment. 

When we are wronged, we must refer the wrong to the 
great orgamsed society of which we are part. Society will 
lay its hand on the wrong-doer. The judge who sits on the 
bench is not an individual, but the embodiment of society, 
the representative of law and order ; and if he condemn a 
fellow-creature to penal servitude for life, there is no kind 
of malice or vindictive feeling in his breast. 

(2) Twm retaliation into r«den»ption. When struck on 
the cheek the instant Impulse of the natural man is to 
stoike back on the cheek of the smiter. There must be a 
second blow. But the Master says if there be a second 
blow, let it fall on your other cheek. Instead of inflicting 
it, sufier it. Instead of avenging yourself on the wrong- 
doer, compel yourself to suffer a second blow, in the hope 
that when you <^poee your uncomplaining patience to his 
brutality you may effect his redemption. The first blow 
was of bis malice, the second blow will be of your lore, 
and this will set new looms at work within bis heart, 
weaving the fabric of a new life. Thus the wrongs that 
men have done to God led Him to present the other cheek 
to them, when He sent them His only begotten Son, who, 
when He was reviled, reviled not again ; when He suffered, 
He threatened not, hut committed Himself to Him that 
judgeth righteously. The patient sufferings of our Lord 
have melted the hearts of men ; and, as in His case, so in a 
lesser extent it will be in ours. 

(3) Be large-hearted. " fVeely ye have received, freely 
give." Do not be stingy and niggardly in your behaviour 
towards men. You are obliged to yield the coat, give the 



3.n.iized by Google 



82 The Second Mile. 

cloak ; you are cooipeUed to go for one mile at least, now, 
out of sincere desire to serve the purpoeee of the common- 
wealth, go another. The law compels you to give your 
cabman a shilling for two miles; but ^ve him an extra 
Bixpencfl, if he driven you to the extreme margin of that 
distance. The law compels you to pay your debts ; but if 
you have incurred them, and they are rightfully due, pay 
them without haggling. There are certAin duties in the 
home which fall to your lot to be performed : do them with 
a smile ; thai ia the leeond tnile. The husband must give 
the needed money to bis wife for household expenditure : 
let him do it without grudging ; that ia hi* second tnUe. 
The employ^ must render certain services to his employer. 
If, however, he renders these reluctantly, doing only 
what he is paid to do, not entering into the spirit of his 
work, or doing it to the utmost of his power, he is like an 
impressed labourer, carrying the messages against his wiU ; 
but as soon as be does bis duty with alacrity and eagerness, 
even staying overtime to finish a piece of necessary service, 
that is Am aeeond mile. 

(4) CvitvoaU an ungrudging, generoue spirit. " Qod loveth 
a cheerful giver," Think of God in His incessant giving. 
Giving His sun and His rain ; giving to the charl and 
the miser, the thankless and heartless, equally as to the 
loving and prayerful. That is to be our great model. 
We are to be stars, ever pouring our light on the vault of 
night ; flowers, shedding fn^;rance, though on the desert 
air ; fountains, though we rise in the lonely places of the 
earth, where only the wild things of nature come to drink. 
Always giving love and help to this thankless and needy 
world, because so sure that as we give, we shall get ; as we 
break our barley loaves and small fishes, our hands will be 
filled, and fiUed again, out of the storehouses of God. 
"Freely ye have received, freely give." "With the same 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Baptism op Love. 83 

meaaore that ye mete withal, it shall be measured to you 
again " (Luke vi. 38). 

I want to add my testimony to the literal truth of these 
words. In my life I have found repeatedly that in pro- 
portion as I have given I have gotten, and that men have 
given into my boeonl, according to heaven's own measure, 
pressed down, heaped up, and running over. 

For all thU toe need to have a new haptitm of Love. The 
love of God must be poured into our hearts by the Holy 
Spirit, who is given unto us. We must learn to unite our- 
selves with our Father's redemptive purpose, looking at the 
wrong done to us, not so much from our standpoint but 
from that of the wrong-doer, with an infinite pity for all the 
poisonous passion which is filling his heart, and an infinite 
desire to deliver and save him. One thought for his 
welfare will thus overmaster all desire for our personal 
revenge, and we shall heap on his head the hot coals of oar 
love, to melt his heart and save him from himself. 



3.n.iized by Google 



God's Primal Law. 

(Matt. v. «.) 

WHAT must be done for life — etenial life — the 
deepest and best? Everyone desires to know 
that. We all want to drink of the goblet of life, 
and to drink it to the last drop, to know everything that 
can be known in the brief limits of our existence, of true 
enjoyment. Everyone asks the question, in one form or 
another, How can I taste the inner meaning of life 1 

This is the answer — Love is life ; and every man that 
loves perfectly Qod and his fellows is already drinking of 
the River of Water of Life, that flows from the throne of 
God and the Lamb. 

You may be startled for a moment, having been wont to 
hear from the lips of teachers and preachers the formula, 
Believe and live. Is there then a contradiction when the 
Master says, Love and live t No, as you will discover so 
soon as you endeavour to live a life of perfect love without 
believing in Christ. You cannot do it. If you could, the 
Qoepel would be needless ; but because it is impossible for 
man to love like this, the Lord Jeeus came to renew our 
natures and teach us to love ; yea, He ascended on high 
to send the Holy Spirit, that He might sbed abroad the 
love of God in our hearts. Love is not indigenous to the 
children of Adam's race; it must be implanted as an exotic 
from heavenly soil. 

But when we speak of Love, we do not mean that it is 
primarily an emotion of the soul ; it is the expression of 



3.n.iized by Google 



Human, not Ditinb. 85 

the soul in action. Love cooBiBts in being wiUiog to do. 
" Thou ahalt love the Lord th; God with ail Ay strmtglh." 
Slimy are disappointed because they try to love Qod with 
their hearte, before they make Him first in their will. 

How beautiful it is to see the amemtiee of human life— 
the trust of man in his fellow, the love of parent to child, 
the devotion of wife to husband. These things, like the 
fiowers that festoon unsightly ruios, adorn the lives and 
characters and homes of men' who lay no claim to godliness. 
The abandoned woman presses her babe to her breast with 
maternal pity ; the bandit is attached to his comrade, who 
shares fais rug and spoils and plunder ; and even the grim 
tyrant is attached to the woman he calb wife. These 
virtues are the wild flowers that grow over the nigged 
nature of man. But they are not the test of our religious 
life. If you simply love those who love you, and are kind 
to those that are generous, and salute those who salute you, 
you are not doing more than those who act at the prompt- 
ing of their own human heart. 

The children of Ood must do more than this. If the 
religion of Jesus Christ does not lift ita professors ont of 
the ordinary level of mankind, into an altogether new atmo- 
sphere, to stand amid a fresh environment, and to give 
proof that they have fonnd something which others do not 
poasess— it can boast nothing better than was yielded by the 
hoary religions of the past, and is doomed to pass away. 
No ; the Lord demands that, as there are men and women 
in our social circles whom naturally we dislike, whose tem- 
perament offends us, and whose prosperity is a matter for 
which naturally we cannot pray, so we cannot attain His 
ideal until we have learnt to love, pray for, and bless them 
with a Divine and heaven-bom unselfishness. 

How many Christians form a fake estioiate of tbem- 
selvea I Their friends flatter them that they are generous 



3.n.iized by Google 



86 God's Pbimal Law. 

and kind, and with bugIi eetimateB they are only too ready 
to concur. We judge ouraelves by the way in which we 
behave to wife, child, or friend, to tboee in our own circles 
of life, where it ie easy to be open in heart and hand. 
That, however, is far from being ia adequate test of what 
we reaUy are. Men of the world can be attractive and 
winsome under similar surroundings. The only adeqiiate 
gauge of the quality of our religiouR life is furnished by our 
attitude towards those from whom we are separated by 
prejudice, temper, or the conociousneBe of unfair and un- 
kind behaviour. These relationships furnish the real test 
of what we are before God; since we are towards God what 
we are to them. Such an attitude of kindness and prayer- 
ful sympathy is impossible to men of the world. Thus 
Christ's command is a profound and searching test, when 
He reiterates the ancient law : 

" Thou bhalt lotb thy nbiohbous." 

(1) Every man love* hvmadf. That is universally true. 
The whole tendency and drift of human life, which has not 
been regenerated by the Holy Spirit, is to revolve aroimd 
the pivot and centre of one's own individuality. This is 
the result of being bom of the fimt Adam, and proves the 
necessity of being bom again of the Holy Spirit. 

(2) Every ma/n has a n«ig/thour. This is also taken for 
granted. You are not only the centre of your own life, 
but part of tlie circumference of someone else's life. That 
circumference may be a very wide and far-extended one, 
but you cannot evade the fact that you have been bom 
into a community or family of people ; and, as we shall see, 
the point is not, who is your neighbour, so much as whom 
you will neighbour. Any man whom you shaU encounter 
within the next hour on the king's highway, needing your 
help, is your neighbour. 

(3) The worlds method ia at varitMux wUh God's. The 



3.n.iized by Google 



OuE "Bights." 87 

children of this world try to limit as far as possible the 
number of their neighbours, and to admit as few att 
possible within the pale of their generosity ; whereas God's 
principle is to go forth to all who need comfort and help 
The Scribes said, " Who is my neighbour ? " (Luke x. 29), 
hoping that Christ would limit the duty of neighbourli- 
nesa within as narrow limits as possible — a blood relation, 
or such like ; whereas our Lord always taught that we 
were to be on the outlook to prove our neighbourliness. 
Go through the world exhibiting as widely as possible your 
neighbourliness. The Scribes said, " Who is my neigh- 
bour? " But the Lord answered, " Go, and show yourself 
a neighbour." 

In showing ourselves neighbours, we must remember 
that every individual has 

ThBES CHABACrSBISnC PBOPEKTIES. 

(1) Every man has his rights. There are his i-nherUed 
rights, such as his right to freedom; for no man may 
enslave hie fellow, and everyone in whose heart there is 
a part of God's love is bound, bo far as he may, to secure 
liberty for the enslaved. Every man has a right also to 
fresh air, fresh water, sufficient land for the maintenance 
of life (whether cultivated by himself or by others is not 
material). Every man also has a right to freedom of 
conscience ; so that no man is justified in imposing his 
creed or manner of Divine worship on another. 

These are rights which every individual member of the 
human family has a claim to ; and, if we would live a life 
of perfect love, we must respect these rights in every man, 
though a beggar ; in every woman, though a servant-girl. 

We alt have acquired rights, such as those of character 
and of reputation. No one has a right to take another's 
character or impair his reputation. If there is some 
blemish in another's character which calls for reprehension 



3.n.iized by Google 



88 God's Pkiual Law. 

and bUme, dare to tell it him between himself and your- 
self ; but do not filch away his reputation. 

There are also the rights of proparty. These must be 
respected. Anything like a compidtoiy division of pro- 
perty is impassible to Christ's diaciplee, thoogb we all may 
proceed on the mlmUary principle which was practised by 
the early Church, and of whkh the early chapters c^ the 
Acts tell so wonderful a story. Directly we bc^in to 
live the life of perfect love, we begin to respect the 
rights of another, and to care for them as if they were 
ouro«ni. 

(2) Jmtj/ man Am his necetniiea. How infinite the 
variety of need I The master needs the servant, quite as 
much as the servant the master. We are bound to each 
other by a network of neceesitiee, and the man in whose 
heart is Qod's perfect love learns to minister to those 
needs, whatever they may be and whenever there is an 
oppc«tunity — it being always remembered, of course, that 
a man may be compelled to turn aside from some needs he 
woold like to meet, because of bis duty to other and more 
clamant ones. 

A recent writer has contrasted the demand of Ciirist 
with the demand of the world, as the contrast between 
ministry and mastery. The devil says : " Ye shall be as 
gods." Christ says : " Ye shall be perfect, as My Father is 
perfect." But, in order to be as gods, the devil says you 
must be prepared to trample men beneath your feet. 
Christ says : " If you would be perfect, go, sell what you 
have, and give to the poor, and you shall have treasure in 
heaven." The difieronce is that one set of men go bluster- 
ing over the world, showing the strength of their arm, and 
insisting on other men serving them ; whilst the other set 
are perpetually giving themselves away in ministry, losing 
their souls to find them. 



3.n.iized by Google 



OuB Sins. 89 

(3) Every nwwt h<is his sins. We often seem to forget 
how clearly Christ has kid down our duty about our 
behaviour to such. " If thy brother trespass against thee " 
(Matt, xviii. 15), what do we do? We are cool to him, do 
not speak to him, give him a wide berth. He has done us 
a wrong, and we tell our wife and child to have no inter- 
course. with his wife and chOd. If we meet him in the 
street, we bow stiffly and pass. But Jesus says, " Oo and 
tell him his fault between thee and him alone." Go? Let 
faim come to me. Go ? Why should I ? If he should be 
in need or at the point of death, I would go, but why 
should I go now? Yet the Lord will have us go, and 
go now, that we may gain and win our brother to a better 
mind. Ah, we shall never do it until we have learned to 

Yet another text, " If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye 
which are spiritual, restore such an one " (Gal. vi. 1). Too 
often we whisper to this and the other the story of his 
sin, saying ; " Of course you will not tell." But that is not 
Qod's way. No, says the Lord; lovingly lift that fallen 
man or woman up again in the spirit of meekness, remem- 
bering how easily tempted you are, too. Then go to your 
place of secret prayer, and pray God that you may not be 
tempted to your undoing. 

Once more : " If any man see his brother sin a sin which 

is not unto death, he shall pray " (1 John v. 16). 

Instead of talking of it, let us hasten away to a secret 
place and cry to God. What will be the result? "God 
ahall give him life for those that sin not unto death." 



3.n.iized by Google 



"Perfect as God." 

(Matt. v. *3-48.) 

IN the garden the serpent suggested to our first parents 
that th«y should be as Qod, in knowing good and 
evil ; but the Master tells ua that we are to be ae Qod, 
in the character and temper of our inner life. If His 
words here are compared with the pamllel ones in Luke vi., 
we discover that He desires us to resemble our Heavenly 
Father, not in our knowledge — which would, of course, be 
impossible — but in our love and mercy. The perfection on 
which He insists is a perfection of love. Our natures are, 
of course, limited in extent and shallow in depth, aa 
compared to the ocean fulness of the Infinite Qod ; but a 
cnp may be in its measure as brimming full as an ocean 
when the tide is high. Up to our measure we may become 
as fall of Love as, in His far greater measure, our Father 
is ; and this is what Christ demands, when He says : " Be 
ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in 
heaven is perfect." 

This is the fifth illustration which He gives, that He is 
'»me, not to destroy, but to fulfil the law, by shedding 
abroad in our hearts that Love which is the f ulfilling of 
that law ; and it is interesting to notice exactly the 
change which He wrought in the ancient code. 

The precept which our Lord quotes : " Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour and hate thine enemy," cannot be found in 
the Old Testament. On the contrary, its pages are strewn 
with the most moving exhortations to Love. If any of my 



3.n.iized by Google 



Gold akd Bboss. 91 

readers would take the pains to investigate the matter, 
they would be startled to find the Dumeroua exhortations 
to Lore which are scattered through the ancient code — 
generally considered so rigorous and severe. " If," said 
Moees, " thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going 
astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again." And 
again : " If thou aee the ass of him that hateth thee lying 
under his burden, wouldat thou forbear to help him ? 
Thou ehalt surely help with him " (Exod. xxiit. 4, 6). In a 
later age the same kindly spirit appears in the injunction 
of the preacher : " Bejoice not when thine enemy falleth, 
and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth, lest the 
Lord see it, and it displease Him." When, therefore, our 
Ijord said : " Ye have heard that it hath been said, ' Love 
your neighbour and hate your enemy,' " He did not mean 
to refer to the inspired teachers of TTia people, but to those 
later Babbis and Scribes who had overlaid the pure gold of 
Moses with their own incrustations. 

There were two ways in which the teachers of the 
corrupt periods of Hebrew history had vitiated the scope of 
these ancient laws. First, they had obliterated the words, 
" as thyself ; " and whittled down the precept from, " Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyadf" to " Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour." Next, they had, out of their own bad 
hearts, added the words, " and hate thiru enemy" — lowering 
the Word of God to suit their own tradition. 

Was it not high time that the moss and grit of centuries 
should be removed from the ancient characters which the 
Spirit of God had cut in the legislation of Sinai, and that 
Christ should re-edit the old law, doing away with the 
ha'^ul additions, and enlarging the significance of that 
word " neighbour." They had delighted in limiting it. 
He rejoiced to level the wails of rehgious bigotry, jealousy, 



3.n.iized by Google 



92 "Pbefbct as Goo." 

and nation&l exclusiviem, and taught that our neighbour is 
simply aayone to whom we can show kinduess, bo that tbb 
word stands for the univereal brotherhood of man. 

Our Lord desires that we should show love and kindness 
not only to man as man, but equally to our enemies as to 
our friends ; to those that curse, hate, and despitefully use 
us, as to those who will sacrifice everything on our behalf. 

To enable ns to realize such a command He suggests the 
Inspiration of a great Nature, a great £xample, (uid a 
great Hope. 

(I) We need the inspiration of a ffreat nature. " Sons 
of your Father which is in Heaven " ; " Sons of the 
Highest " (Lube vi. 35). Men count much on ancestry. 
To be connected, however distantly, with the great of 
bygone times, is a subject of never-ceasing congratulation. 
To be able to point to some tomb, where the cross-legged 
effigy on the stone denotes the Knight Templar, or the 
shell indicates the pilgrim who crossed the seas on the 
Crusades, is of prouder boast than wealth and lands. To 
wear a coat-of-ams, which proves royal affinity — ah, how 
much is this ! And there is ground for it, because descent 
and blood undoubtedly count for something. When the 
special call comes there is something in heredity that 
answers it. 

How much, then, must it not count for, when we stand 
face to face with urgent duty, that the capacity for its due 
discharge is certainly within us by virtue of our relationship 
to God through Jesus Christ ? 

We have been bom agEiin by the Word fnd the Spirit. 
From the family of the first Adam, we have become grafted 
into the family of the Second. We are all the children of 
Ood by faith in Him, and if children then heirs, heirs of 
Ood, and jcdnt-heirs with Christ. And because we are 



3.n.iized by Google 



God's Impartial Love. 93 

sons, God bath sent forth the Spirit of TTi« Son into our 
he&rta. Since, then, we are partakers of the Divine 
nature, we have within us the capacity for Divine Love. 
"We may not be aware of its presence within us, but it is 
there, and if only we would dare to give it exercise, and 
allow it to make for itself an outlet in our kindly advances 
towards those who have served us ill, we should find that 
through the chanDek of outward expression the very 
fountains of Divine Love which are within us would pour 
their crystal tides. 

You can love as God, not in quantity, but in quality, be- 
cause God's own nature has been begotten in you, and awaits 
the opportunity of approving itself before men and angels. 

(2) But we need, also, the inspiration of a great 
example. Who is there that has not sometimes stood on 
the mountain of Transfiguration, with Hoses and EliasI 
A visit from some celestial nature, a biogn^hy, a noble 
act, a reunion which has revealed depths and emotion that 
surpass all previous experiences — these have greatly influ- 
enced our lives, and made us resolve that life should hence- 
forth be new. And so our Lord brings us face to face 
with a marvellous illustration of the Love which He desires 
us to show. 

Of course. He Himself, as He sat there, was the supreme 
instance of God's impartial Love. But the time had not 
arrived when He could speak plainly of Himself ; so He 
selected His example from the humbler book of Nature, 
which He had often studied in His highland home, and 
which lies open before all men's eyes. 

It was the month of April. Before Hia eyes was spread 
a charming landscape, on which probably the natural 
incidents to which he referred were at that moment taking 
place. 



3.a.t.zsdt,y Google 



94 "Pbbpbct as God." 

FVom its meridiBn throne the suu was ehining. It was 
the Father's sun — " He tnaketh Bit sun to shine." It was 
Sia thought, Sis creation, the inetmment of Bis benedic- 
tion. " See," BBJd the Master, " how the sun is shining on 
the children as they play their meny games, and at the 
same moment on the prison filled with hardened cri minal s ; 
ofi the casement of the cottage, to revive the sick girl's 
drooping life, and on the path of the poor fallen one, as 
she avoids it, and steals into the shade; upon the little 
patch of groimd belonging to the poor widow, which 
barely affords her a living, and the acres of the avaricious 
tyrant, who cares neither for Qod nor man, and would 
despoil her of her holding if he oould. The sun shines 
equally on them ^." 

Then the MaKter may have pointed towards the heavy 
rain-cloud, bom from the Mediterranean, which came 
trailing over the country, dropping its beneficent showers 
from its impartial buckets. Yonder lie two fields, with but 
a narrow fence between. That to the right belongs to an 
atheist of the worst type, who blasphemes God's name, 
underpays his servants, robs the widow, and browbeats the 
poor. That to the left is the holding of one who is as 
careful of Lis religious observances as the other is careless. 
The swift shadow of the cloud draws near. If it were 
steered by a human hand, it would probably be guided, so 
as to leave the one untouched whilst it poured its stores 
on the other. But there is no shade of difference in the 
distribution. The abundant and refreshing showers fall on 
either side of the fence. 

Life is like an April day. It is not all sun, nor all 
doud. The saddest lives bave some patches of blue, some 
hours of sua. The happiest have some showers, and are 
overspread now and again with shadow. And surely this 



3.n.iized by Google 



"On the Evil and the Qooj>" 95 

is beet, for those characters are not the nobUet which are 
spent always on the tableland, and never descend onto the 
valley of shadow. For Sun, you have had love at home, a 
happy childhood, a loving wife, sweet children, prosperous 
years in busineee, long spells of good health, happy episodes, 
weeks and months of covmtry or sea. For Rain, you have 
bad seasons of ill-health, of business anxiety, and of 
bereavement. Now, if we were to compare ezperienoee 
between the men and women of our acquaintance in the 
same position of life, putting away all considerations of the 
inner peace of heart which religion gives, I do not suppose 
that in the outward lifft there would be much apparent 
difference. There are thousands of homes where God's 
name is not honoured — but where goodness and mercy, like 
guardian angels, follow the inmates all the days of their lives. 

Why ? Because the course of events in this world moves 
by a blind machinery Z No. Because God has no spedat 
care whether a man be good or bad? No, But because 
God loves His enemies, blesses those that curse Him, and 
is kind to the unthankful and unloving. If anything. He 
seems more bountiful to those who oppose Him most, that 
by His mercy He may lead them to repentance. 

A man wiU sometimes speak thus: "I am one of the 
tackiest fellows living ; all my dreams have been realized ; 
I have a good wife, have not had an hour's illness, and 
have never wanted for money." Such men do not realize 
that it is God who has given them all things richly to 
enjoy, making no distinction between them and His dearest 
childien, because He longs to break in upon their shamefnl 
neglect of His claims. He gives " tain from heaven and 
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with good and gladness," 
that we may turn from vanity unto the living God, which 
made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that axe 
therein (Acts xiv. 16-17). 



3.a.t.zsdt,y Google 



96 "Pbrfbct as God." 

We might, fi'oni the experience of these men, edit a new 
edition of the parable of the Prodigal on this wise : that 
when the father in the distant home heard that his son had 
spent all that he had, instead of letting him come down to 
the herding of pigs and the eating of their husks, he sent 
him day by day supplies of sumptuous food, on each 
hamper of which these words were inscribed, " I love thee 
still ; come home, haste to come home." 

But Ood has given us another and better Sun than that 
which He has hung in heaven's porch. " He conmiendeth 
His Love towards us, in that while we were yet sinners, 
Christ died for us." And the benefits of the death of the 
Redeemer are for the world. Therefore it was possible to 
carry the Gospel, in the first instance, to Jerusalem. The 
men who had used H'"* most despitefuUy lived there, 
therefore the Master bade His disciples "to b^in at 
Jerusalem." " Tell Caiaphas, who sneered at ULy royalty 
that I love him. Tell the grey-haired Annas, the irresolute 
Pilate, and the mocking Herod, that I desire to bless them. 
Go and find out the men who drove the nails into My 
hands and laughed at My dying anguish, and say that I 
will pray for them." So the Master left us an example, 
that we should follow in His steps. 

And God has given another and better Jiain than that 
which fertilizes the fields — the rain of the Holy Spirit's 
influence and grs^e, which is for the most stubborn and 
obdurate offenders. Hid He not descend in copious 
effusion upon the city of Jerusalem at the first, though it 
had but lately crucified the world's Redeemer? Take 
heart, you who think that you have grieved Him &vre,j, who 
have done Him despite, who fear that you have committed 
the unpardonable sin ; even to you He comes with a shower 
of grace, falling with refreshing bounty. 



3.n.iized by Google 



OuE Model. 97 

This is the example that we are to follow. Nothing less 
than God's even-handed love is to be our model. We are 
to be perfect, even as our Heavenly Father is perfect. We 
are called to be imitatore of God, as dear children, walking 
in love, as Christ also hath loved us, even to the point of 
giving Himself for us (Kph. v, 1, 2), Anything short of 
this is not Christianity as oiu' Lord taught it. 

Dr. Abbott has said that he remembers, when he was a 
boy, sitting by the fireside of a little country inn in Maine, 
and hearing some men discuss the Sermon on the Mount. 
They were rough fellows, and one of them, scoffing at 
Christianity, said : " Thou shalt love thy neighbour — 
nonsense ! It is not in human nature." Exactly ; such 
love is not in human nature. Men love those who love 
them, and salute their brethren, and stop there. But it 
was in Christ's nature, and it is in the Divine nature ; and 
it is in the Divine nature to be imparted through Christ 
to those who claim it. 

(3) We require, lastly, tlie inspiration of a great Hope. 
What animates a woman to spend her life on some 
brutal husband or ungrateful son 1 Is it not the hope that, 
at last, her love will oonquer ! And is it not this, in an 
infinitely higher sphere, that leads Qod, our Father, to pour 
out the ceaseless tides of His heart on the disobedient and 
rebellious ? Does He not see the consummation, when the 
heavens and the earth shall have become new as the result 
of His unstinted love ! And ought not the same purpose 
to animate us) 

It is recorded of a certain Chinese emperor that, on 
being apprised that bis enemies had raised an insurrection 
in a distant province, he said to his officers : " Come, 
follow me, and we shall quickly destroy them." On his 
arrival the rebels submitted to him, and all expected that 



3.n.iized by Google 



98 "Pbrpkct as God." 

be would take the moBt signal ravetige. luetead of this, 
the captives were treated with the utmost humanity. 
" How I " cried his first Minister of State, " is this the 
manner in which your promise is fulfilled f Your royal 
word was gives that your enemies should be destroyed, 
and, lo, you have pardoned them all, and even some of 
them have been caiessed." " I promised," said the 
Emperor, generously, " to destroy my enemies. I have 
fulfilled my word ; for, see, they are enemies no longer ; 
I have made friends of them." 

We must henceforth amend our ways, lest we be counted 
not worthy of Christ. "We must rise to the level of Hib 
high demands, not in our own strength, but His. And lot 
us remember two things : First, not to wait for an emotion, 
but to obey by the sheer power of our will ; and, second, 
to begin with individuals. 

Have we an enemy who is always trying to curse us I 
We must be willing to bless him with the benediction of 
our goodwill. 

Is there someone in our life who envies and hates us f 
We must be willing to be kind and good, so long as we are 
sure that our behaviour is not misinterja^ted, or hurtful to 
his independence and moral life. 

Is there one who despitefully uses and persecutes usT 
We must compel ourselves to pray for him, until presently 
a warm feeling of compassion fills our hearts. 

Are there within our reach churlish and bearish people ? 
Let us salute them, when we meet, with Christian courtesy 
and grace. 

Thus you will reach perfection. It will not be the abso- 
lute and infinite perfection of God, for at the best it can 
be only relative and finite. It will not be the perfection 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Power of the Will. 99 

of angela, for they have never left their first estate. 
It will not be a perfection of knowledge, for we are all 
liable to error. It will not be freedom from temptation, 
or from such infirmities as weakness of body, dulness of 
understanding, and incoherence of thought. But it will be, 
after your measure, a Cull-orbed, equable, and loving nature, 
which shall go through the world shedding sunshine and 
rain on weary and hopeless souls, until they be led to take 
up heart and hope again. 

A little child gets into a railway carriage. In perfect 
simplicity she begins to play with some austere-looking man, 
until he relaxes and the two become friends; and from 
them the genial warmth steals through the curiage, until 
everyone begins to talk kindly with his neighbour, and the 
tedium of the journey is relaxed. Oh, to go through the 
world like that, with God's radiance on our faces and His 
love in our hearts I Eveiy day, be sunshine or rain to 
someone, and especially to your enemies, and the people 
from whom you are naturally repelled. 

You say that all this ia impossible for you. It is high ; 
you cannot attain unto it. But remember those sweet old 
words ; "When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and 
called my son out of Egypt. . . , I taught Epkraim, eUso 
to go " (Hos. xi. 1-3). Ask your Heavenly Father to teach 
you to go ; to put His Spirit within you as the foimtain 
of His life and love ; to work in you to will and to do of 
His good pleasure. 

Everything lies in the will. Are you toiUing that His 
will should be done in and through you, in respect to the 
life of love of which we have been treating ! If so, then 
yield yourself to Him, saying : " I cannot be perfect in love, 
unless Thou dost undertake to realize in me and through 
me the image of Thine own perfection." 



3.n.iized by Google 



"The Inwardness of True Religion/ 

(Matt. vi. 1-18.) 



IN the former paragraph of thia wonderful 
(w. 17-48) our Lord began by laying down a. 
general principle (v. 17), and then proceeded to 
illnetrate it by five particular instances. First, He an- 
nounced that His attitude towards the Mosaic institutions 
was not one of destruction, but of fulfilment ; and then He 
Hhowed that the love which He had brought to earth 
would realize all that Mosee asked, and more. 

The structure of the present paragraph is precisely 
similar, ag appears from a study of the b.t., which sub- 
stitutes for Abna (v 1, a.V.) the word Rtghteottmeas, so that 
the first verse is a general heading for all that follows. 
First, we have the gener^ proposition that righteousness 
should not be done for the sake of display ; and then we 
have that principle applied to alms, prayer, and fasting — 
the three departments into which the Jews divided their 
religious life. 

That word " Take heed " is very searching. We are all 
liable to the temptation to put more and better goods in 
the window than we have anywhere else in the shop, and 
to show fairer samples than we can supply in bulk. Three 
times over in these paragraphs the Lord speaks of the 
hypocrites (w. 2,8,16); and the hypocrite, as the Greek word 
intimates, is a stage-actor. We are all tempted to perform 
oitt religious duties for the show of them before others, and 
to appear in public arrayed in garments that we do not 
wear day by day. Our Lord called this q)irit " the leaven 



3.n.iized by Google 



Cloaks op Evil. 101 

of the Phamees," referring without doubt to the slight 
and subtle beginnings of unreaJity, and its rapid growth, 
filling the heart with fermentation and decay. Once you 
h^a to think that you must keep up appearancea as a 
religious man, and endeavour to do so ; once you listen, 
as Simon Stylites, to the murmur of applause which greets 
you as above the average; once you assume the robes of 
purity and piety to attract the gaie of your fellows — you 
have admitted a principle into your heart which not only 
will rob you of your reword in heaven, but will ultimately 
eat out aS the purity and loveliness of your religious life. 

We are all tempted to Outwabdkess in Beuoion. 
Some, of course, seek to acquire a reputation for piety to 
serve as a cloak for their nefarious purposes. They weave 
with assiduous care a rich vestment of alms, prayers, and 
self- privations, to hide their unhallowed nnd self-indulgent 
lives. Such people are, of course, mortified when any of 
their religious acts do not come to the front and seciu-c 
notice. And when they have built up for themselves a 
great reputation by their charitable deeds, they devour 
widows' houses, and take a mean advantage of their wardt. 
Judas was one of these people ; he had built up so great a 
reputation that none of his fellow-disciples guessed that 
he was about to do the deed of treachery. Beneath the 
cover of his reputation he was able to filch the contents of 
the bag. 

There are others, again, who, with sincere and trans- 
parent motives, began to love and serve God for Himself ; 
but as the days have passed they discover that they are 
regarded as saints, and the sense of being held in reverence 
by their fellows as " unco' guid " fascinates them. They 
become aa prond of their grace as others of their accom- 
plishmenta <n: social position. They realize that they must 



3.n.iized by Google 



102 "The Inwardness op True Religion." 

maintain their reputation at all costs. Of course, the beet 
way to maintaia and increase such a reputation is to cease 
to think about it, and live only for the Lord Jesus ; but 
directly we fail to do this, and occupy ouiselvee with our 
reputation and the long shadow it casts on the lawn, we 
are tempted to do things, not because God asks them of ub, 
but to resuscitate our waniag credit. Our native character 
is getting a little threadbare, and instead of cleaving closer 
to Qod, we put a patch on the elbow or knee, by a generous 
gift, or a call to prayer, or the assumption in tone and 
manner of special sanctity. 

(1) As to cibnt — The Jews were traioed from their earliest 
days to be merciful and charitable. The law of Moees con- 
tinually inculcated remembrance of the stranger, the 
fatherless, and the widow. Liberality to the poor was 
reckoned as port of religious duty towards God. The 
prophets never forgot to ui^ the people to deal bread to 
the hungry, to bring the outcast home, and to cover the 
naked. A row of alms-boxee stood in the Temple courts to 
receive the offerings of worshippers ; and at every Sabbath 
morning service in the synagogues, appointed officers col- 
lected money for the poor of the town, which was dis- 
tributed the same afternoon. But in our Ijord'e time men 
gave their money to secure merit with God and admiration 
from men. They bestowed their charity at the doors of the 
synagogues, where beggars congregated and passers-by 
could see ; or distributed it as they came along the 
streets. 

Mi:s. Judson, in her account of the first Burman convert, 
says : " A few days ago, I was reading with him the 
Sermon on the Mount. He was deeply impressed and 
unusually solemn. ' These words,' said he, ' take hold of 
my very heart. They make me tremble. Here God com- 
mands US to do everything in secret, and not to be seen cA 



3.n.iized by Google 



Peivatb Peatbe. 103 

men. How tmlike our religion this is ! When BurmanB 
make ofieringa at the pagodas, they make a great noise 
vith trumpets and musical instruments, that others ma; 
see how good they are. But this religion makes the mind 
fear God." " 

Probably what has been said of Jews and Burmans is 
true of us all. It is apt to make a considerable difference 
to our gift whether the open plate is handed to us, and 
our coin lies open to all eyes, or whether the offering be 
gathered in a bag. 

(2) Aa to Prayer — Our Lord, of course, is referring not 
to social, but private prayer. For the greater part of the 
day the doors of the synagogues stood open, as the doors 
of mosques or Boman Catholic churches do in foreign 
countries ; and the Pharisees, at the three hours of prayer 
observed by all pious Jews, were not content with kneeling 
in the privacy of their own homes, but deliberately left 
their homes with the avowed intention and purpose of 
being seen in the place of public prayer. They took care, 
also, to be frequently overtaken in the streets, at the hour 
of prayer, that they might go through their tedious liturgies 
within view of all passers-by. 

Amongst ourselves the tendency is certainly to conceal, 
rather than parade, our [nivate prayers ; nod yet there is a 
subtle temptation to he more reverent in our demeanour, 
more careful in saying our prayers and reading our Bibles, 
when we are in the company of religious people, than when 
we are alone. 

(3) Aa to Fasting — There were several fast-days in the 
Jewish year, in addition to the Great Day of Atonement, 
when the people were called upon to afflict their souls by 
public fasting. Tet this exercise did not always involve 
entire abstinence, but often consisted only in the sacrifice 
of a single meal. The I^arisees and others, however, 



3.n.iized by Google 



104 "The Inwabdhess op Teub Reugion." 

gave evidence of their exceptional piety by exceptional 
austerities, and took care to let it bo known that they 
were fasting, by their gloomy countenances and squalid 

Our temptation is certainly not in the directi<m of 
fasting too much, bat of never checking the indulgence of 
appetite in any d^ree or on any occasion. Probably we 
should be much healthier and stronger if now and again we 
were to reduce our meals and rest the oigans of nutrition. 
But our temptation comes in another way. We affect a 
depression, a melancholy, a concern for our country, the 
state of our churches, the anorthodozy of certain ministers, 
or a self -depreciation as miserdEtle sinners, which we do not 
really feeL It gives us a certain character amongst our 
fellows, but it is hypocrisy in the sight of God, 

There are those among us who never shed real tears of 
heartbroken grief before Ood for the state of things which 
they affect to deplore, but who pose among ue as Jeremiahs. 
There are others who never catch a glimpse of real and piu« 
fellowship with God, or of themselves, but they rush with it 
into print or speech ; and whilst they are passing through 
such experiences they congratulate themselves that now, 
at length, they have something worth narrating in the 
experience meeting or the religious press. 

This outwardness of religion is most injurious to us all. 
Plants subjected to sunlight by day and the electric light 
by night soon fade. What, is the cure for it ? 

The CuaK ton OinwABDiTEaB in Rbliqiom is the cultiva- 
tion of a filial spirit. Our Lord lived the filial life to its 
perfection, and shows us what it is. Notice bow all His 
thoughts seem to run up into the one absorbing central 
thought of the Father, " which is in Heaven." He is (Ay 
Father — His relationship to each soul is personal. He is 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Appeoval op Conscibncb. 105 

in secret, and is " thy Father, which seeth in secret," and 
He waittj "to reward openly." There is no need of vain 
repetitions with Him, because He knows what we have 
need of. All prayer is to be directed to Him, It is He 
who forgives sins. It is He who clothes and feeds ravens, 
lilies, and His children. From beginning to end, this 
chapter is full of the Father, who was the One Spectator 
axii Audience before whom our Lord lived His earthly life. 

Not only did onr Lord paint the blessedness of that filial 
life, but He came to give it to us all. This is what we are 
called to know, and He has the power to make it ours. 
Let us ask Him to do this great thing for us here and now. 
"To them who receive Him He gives the privilege of 
becoming sons of Ood, even to them that believe on His 
Kame " — " and because we are sous, Ood sends the Spirit 
of His Son into our hearts." Then the Father finds the 
child, and the child finds the Father ; and such community 
and closeness of intimacy ensue from this, finding that the 
Father's smile and good pleasure beccone all the reward 
that the child cares for. Oh, let us never be content until, 
in our inner experience, Ood our Father becomes All in 
aU! 

Then we shall never think of doing our righteousness 
before men. We shall be good, not to win the approval of 
our conscience ; not because we are inspired by an abstract 
love of rirtue, as climbers may be ambitious to climb 
some hitherto inaccessible peak ; not even out of regard for 
the welfare of others — but because we desire, above all 
things, to give pleasnre to the Father who is in secret. 

Religion will thus become a sacred inward secret. We 
shall have boldness to enter into the Holiest of AU by the 
blood of Jesus, and shall dwell in the secret place of the 
Most High. Even when no earthly temple invites us, we 
shall enter the temple of our own heart, and find Ood 



3.n.iized by Google 



106 "The Inwaedness op Tbub Religion." 

waiting there, in tlioee hidden depths which lie below con- 
edoosnesB. There we shall worship Him, who is a Spirit, 
in spirit and in truth. 

To the Christian, it haa been truly said, so far as any 
influence on hia moral condition is concOTned, privacy and 
publicity are words without meaning. He acts before men 
as he does alone, and acts alone aa he does before men ; for 
he is never " alone " from that one Spectator, who sees in 
secret, and whom he seeks to please. One presence fills, 
I, dominates him. 



Do you know what this is t Since I have been forbidden 
to use my eyes for reading in a railway train, I have learnt 
some wonderful lessons in this direction. Sitting quietly in 
the carriage I have sought to unite myself with Giod, not 
asking Him to help me, but asking if I may help Him ; not 
seeking His sanction on m; schemes, but seeking that I 
may enter into His Redemptive purposes for those whom I 
love, for Hie Church and the poor hungry, needy world. 
It has been a fruitful experience, and I see how it ia 
possible so to cultivate the sense of the presence of God, 
and the endeavour to know what is passing in His heart 
and thought, that one's absorbing impression tends to be of 
Him, and His will, and His good pleasure. 

We must cultivate this openness of heart towards Cod. 
There must be no lie in our life, no lack of transparency or 
sincerity, no concealment or withholding. All the secrets 
of heart and hfe must he naked and bare before the eyes of 
Him with whom we have to do. "We must wat«h against 
any attempt to seem more and better than we are. We 
must guard our life in secret as our most sacred jewel. 
And before we give, or pray, or fast, there must be the 
quiet gathering of the soul up before God, the silencing of 
eveiy voice, the screening of all footlights and sidelights, 



3.n.iized by Google 



ALH86ITIN0. 107 

the descent into those deepest depths which no eagle's eye 
has seen. Thus Qod's smile will become the supreme object 
of our endeavour, as we admonish ourselves, saying : " My 
soul, wait thou only upon God ; for my expectation is 
from Him." 

The manifestation of this inward fellowship wiU be 
instantly and abundantly manifest. (1) We thaU reaike the 
Brotherhood of the Fiiial Life. When we are near Ood we 
shall begin to be occupied with the condition of His 
children — our brethren and sisters ; we shall look upon 
all our possessions as given us by Him in trust for them ; 
we shall ask what He would have us expend on TT'" behalf. 
Alms-giving will at once become a sacred thing, into which 
the stranger may not intrude — it will be entirely a matter 
between the Father and His child. Even the left hand 
will not know what the right hand gives. 

Christian charity is not alms in the usual acceptation of 
the term, but devoted service to the Father. Indeed, 
Christ belittles the alms, and thinks only of the Father's 
gloiy and pleasure. Alas I that the Christian Church has 
reversed this, magnifying the alms, and not stopping to 
inquire the motive. What has been the result ? Millions 
have been given, but the miseries of the world are no less. 
We have pauperized and demoralized those whom, with the 
best intentions, we meant to help. Before our alms can 
really help men, we must get on our Lord's level. The 
alms must be fed from love to Ood, as an inland lake is fed 
from some secret bum, which pours into it waters from 
mountains far away. 

(2) We ahatl become idetUified tinth the Father's Purposes. 
Our hearts are deeply wrought upon as we continue in this 
blissful feUowship, until they pour themselves out in prayer. 
*' Ye people, pour out your heart before Him." But we 



3.n.iized by Google 



108 "The Iwaedness op Tede Religion." 

no longer pray for our way of plans. Instead of this we 
eay: "Thou art holy and precious to me; I want to see 
Thee revered and loved ; I desire that others shall see what 
I Bee ; I find Thy will my heaven, and long to see all re- 
sistance and indifiereuce brought to an end." Then daily 
bread, forgiveness, and deliverance from temptation, become 
so many means to the one common purpose and goal of our 
choice. 

The soul that reaUy gets quiet before God, realizing that 
He is in secret, is compelled to pray thus. You might as 
well stop the tide from flowing, birds from song, and 
children from laughter, as stop that soul from prayer. 



(3) We shaU be fvU of Joy. We may in our heart of 
hearts be laying aside this and the other weight, knowing 
that there is no merit in it, our only desire being to lessen 
the influence of the flesh, that we may promote the vigi- 
lance and clear vision of the spirit. It is entirely a matter 
between God and us, of which we breathe no word to 
others ; and when we meet our feUow-men, they will see a 
gladness on our face, and hear a ringing joy-note in our 
voice, that greatly commend the Gospel of our Lord. 

Is there enough of this anointed head, and the face from 
which all marks of tears have been removed, in our modem 
Christian life t How often we make no effort to be happy, 
or to make the best of things 1 We have had a bad night, 
and have no scruple about imposing oiu- miseries on a whole 
breakfast-tableful. We have a great anxiety gnawing at 
our heart, and we affect the appearance of bearing a heavy 
biwlen. I suppose there is in all of us a longing to be 
the object of our friends' solicitude ; and there are timen 
when we may freely unburden ourselves to get advice and 
sympathy ; but we have no right to add unduly to the 



3.n.iized by Google 



Pbesbnt Rbwabds. 109 

and anxieties of others, or to the travail of th« 
world. 

The life which is hid with Christ in God is a very 
radiant one, because it hands over all its burdens and 
anxieties to the Father in secret, and leaves them with 
Him. Thus it is " at leisure from itself," to enter into the 
anxieties of others. 

What the future rewards may be of that inner life I do 
not care to speculate, and what the prceent rewards are 
words fail to tell. The reward of the hypocrite is the 
gaping wonder of spectators, who smile, criticise, and forget. 
The reward of the soul that lives with God in secret 
consists not in thrones or crowns of gold, but in a growing 
sense of nearness, of affinity, and of mutual understanding 
which issue also in a growing likeness, though the saint 
wi^ not that his face shines. 



3.n.iized by Google 



XIV. 

The Disciples' Prayer. 

(MatthkwvIi 9-13.) 

DEYOUT men, as their life unfolds, increaaiogly turn 
to prayer — not praj/ert in the plural, but prayer in 
the singular ; therefore Psalm xo., which seems to 
register the mature experience of Moses, ends with the 
prayer : ** Let Thy work appear unto Thy servants, and Thy 
gloty unto their children. And let the beauty of the 
Ix)rd our God b© upon ua," It was as though, after a long 
life of intense activity in which the Great Lawgiver had 
borne the people on his bosom as a nursing father, and 
when the activities of his life were drawing to a dose, be 
was impelled to turn to prayer and catch up the yearnings, 
desires, and purpose of bis life in one constant petition. 

As we grow older, our prayeiB tend to become simpler 
and shorter, and more after the method of this prayer, 
which is so short, and yet so deep ; so brief, that we may 
say it within three minutes ; and yet so comprehensive and 
concise, that to be able to say it from the heart, and con- 
tinually, is the very consummation and climax of the 
religious life. 

This prayer has been caiied the Lor^B Prefer. It might 
be more fitly known as the Disciples' Prayer, but it bears 
for evermore the Master's touch. It has been said that it 
was not original, and that these phrases had been on the 
lips of godly men in a former time, We cannot be sur- 
prised at that, because our Lord was always meditating 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Choech's Fbayeb. Ill 

upon the prayera ot psalmists and prophets, appropriating 
them to His own needs, and weaving them into Hia own 
communion with the Father. But if the material were 
furnished Him from ancient quarries, this prayer is the 
structure of Hia own thought ; and as we tread its stately 
aisles, so severe in their simplicity, bo majestic in their 
strength and far distances, we cannot but think of the 
myriads who have stood on the same pavement, been 
moulded by the same sentences and thoughts, and have 
foimd in these seven short but comprehensive petitions 
sufficient expression for their deepest, holiest moments. 

Lonely sufferers and crowded congregations ; little 
children just clasping their hands in prayer, and the saintly 
leaders of the Ghuroh ; the Aoman Catholic and the Pro- 
testant ; the Anglican and the Nonconformist ; the servant 
and his master — all their differences of creed or station, sex 
or nationality, are forgotten, as they enter to stand together 
within the precincts of this exquisite and noble structure. 
It is resonant with their voices, saturated with their tears, 
and ringing with their adorations. If, therefore, it may 
be called the Lord's Prayer, because He wove together the 
golden threads of olden time into the exquisite pattern 
which for symmetry and beauty cannot be surpassed, it 
may also be called the Disciples' Prayer, because in its use 
the whole Church has become one. 

Twice during our Lord's ministry He recited it. In the 
first instance it was from the Mountain of Beatitudes in 
His manifesto to His disciples and the great world of men. 
On the second occasion He had been praying in a certain 
place, perhaps at early dawn. Whilst His disciples beheld 
Him rapt in devotion, they probably remained at a reverent 
distance ; but when He ceased, they came to Him, and one, 
as spokesman for the rest, said : " Lord, teach us to pray." 
What a beautiful illustration of the power of unconscious 



3.n.iized by Google 



112 The Disciples' Prater. 

ioflaence ! Chmt does not appear to have been const&ntlj' 
insisting on the necessity of prayer, but He was constantly 
praying Himeelf. His foUoven knew that in the early 
morning He would depart into a solitary place for prayer; 
and they could recall nights in which He had sent them to 
their homee, while He climbed the mountain slopes to 
be alone with God ; and had they not seen the results, in 
the transfiguring glory that stole upon His face, the com- 
posure with which He parsed through scenes of turmoil, 
the power that demons owned ? What wonder that they 
desired to possess this sacred talisman of prayer ! Happy 
will it be for the Church and the world, when the glories 
of true devotion will be so apparent, that men shall be 
attracted by the evident gains of it to say : " Teach us also 
to pray " ! 

These concise and beautiful petitions may therefore be used 
as a form of prayer. In Luke the preface is, " When ye 
pray, say." In Matthew the preface is, " After this manner, 
or fashion, pray ye." It seems undoubted, then, that our Lord 
meant His disciples to use these very words. " fTAem ye pray, 
say." Crises often arise in our experience when we are 
glad enough to know exactly what to say. It is a good 
thing to have a mould into which to pour the molten metal 
of fervent hearts. And sometimes, when the spirit of 
prayer is burning low, the soul will catch fire at the 
expressions used by those who have preceded it, and will 
sweep up into the presence of God in horses and chaxiote 
of fire. Fonns of prayer may be used as aids to devotion, 
but they must never become substitutes for the free out- 
pouring of the soul. 

But probably the loftiest use of this prayer is as a modd. 
It tells us the sort of petitions we ought to offer, and their fit 
and fair proportion to each other. We learn that requests 
for life's sustenance may fairly have a place in our daily 



3.n.iized by Google 



SUGOESTIOKS FOR PrATKK. 113 

prayer ; that we are perfectly right in talking freely to God 
about the recmriDg demands of food and clothes, about the 
common round, the daily task ; though only one place in seven 
is to be given to these. Three are to be devoted to the 
needs of our inner life, and the rest are to be surrendered 
to adoration and intercession. Then again, we learn that 
our requests for ourselves should always be subordinate to 
those we make for the coming of the Kingdom, and the 
Hallowing of the Name. Theee come first in the prayer, 
and they should come always first in our thoughts and 
lives. This prayer, therefore, seems to be a kind of copy- 
book. At the head of each page there stands a petition in 
copperplate for us to go over, repeating it exactly; and 
below there is a blank sheet for us to fill in with petitions 
of our own, formed on the model of that at the head of the 
page, and yet as different ss the Spirit of God and the 
exigencies of the moment may suggest. 

We may obtain some general BUOassnoins fob prater. 
(1) Prayer should be dtnU. The Jewish proverb said, 
" Everyone who multiplies prayer is heard." They would 
babble forth a monotony of unmeaning sound, as the 
Mohammedans incessantly repeat, " Allah," and the 
Hindoos for days together repeat the monosyllable, " Om," 
And it was this senseless, unmeaning repetition of words 
which our Lord forbade. " Use not vain repetitions, as 
the heathen do." Let your petitions be simple, direct, 
intelligent. Say what is in your heart concisely, thought- 
fully, earnestly. Gome to your Father as a child, and tell 
TTim all your desires ; and, having made your definite 
requests known, await the definite replies which He will 
certainly send. " Tour Father which seeth in secret shall 
recompense thee." 

Of course there are hours in ell lives of Gethsemane 



3.n.iized by Google 



114 The Disciples' Peatee. 

agony when the soul can only lie low and crushed before 
God, unable to formulate many pefeitious, and only able to 
repeat again and again feebly the name of Jesus, or the 
phrase He used so often in the hour of His own sorrow, 
" Thy mill be dime." But this experience makes laws for 
itself. For the most part we must be careful not to pray 
by rote or by the hour-glass. A prayer which occupies, as 
this does, only three minutes to repeat, is prayer. 

(2) Prayer must be reverent. Beverence is suggested by 
the words, " which art in heaven." Far be it from me to 
say a single word to discourage that holy familiarity with 
which the child of God approaches the Father. The 
teoderest words, the completest confidence, the closest 
intinuu^, will be welcomed and reciprocated. But let it 
ever be remembered that the meny-seat is a throne, and 
the Father a Great King. His abode is not only a home, 
but a palace, on whose floora angels tread with reverence, 
or, standing, veil their faces with their wings. Let us 
hesitate for a moment on the threshold of our prayers, and 
reverently unloose our shoes from off our feet. " Qod is in 
heaven, and thou upon earth ; be not rash with thy mouth, 
and let not thine heart be hasty to utter anything b^ore 
God." 

(3) Frayer wiMSf he tmee^ah. "When ye pray," do not 
say I, me, mine ; but vx, ua, ovr ; not my Father, but 
ow Father. Instead of teaching in abstract phrases the 
dnty of intercession, the Lord so weaves it into the struc- 
ture of this prayer that no man can use it without 
becoming a priest and pleading for his brethren. It is 
remarkable how, on the one hand, our Lord insistfi on 
lonely prayer : " Enter into thy closet and shut thy door, 
and pray to thy Father, who is in secret"; and yet a 
moment after He shows that that secret prayer is not to 
be selfish prayer, but linked with the needs of the great 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Isolation op Griep. 115 

family ontside the chamber door. The prayer that does not 
recogniae the needs of others as well as its own is not the 
loftiest prayer. A true appreciation of Fatherhood always 
involves the idea of Brotherhood. As Jesus said : I ascend 
to My Bither, but He is also your Father ; to My God, 
but He is also youra. 

For what are men batter than sheep or goata. 
That nourish a blind life in their veins, 
If, knowing Ood, the; lift not hands in prayer 
Both for thBQUelTeB and those who call them friend ! 
In the moments of conviction of sin we feel to stand 
alone — no one has sinned as we ; and we say : Ood be 
merciful to me, the sinner; I have sinned and perverted 
that which was right, and it profited me not. In hours of 
awful sorrow we feel to stand alone. Grief has a mar- 
vellous power of isolation — ^lover and friend stand afar off 
Bs we cry: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me?" But in our normal experiences we realize that we 
are drops in a great ocean, members in one body, units in 
the multitude which no man can number, and who stand 
before the throne of Him that liveth for ever and ever, 
saying, " Our Father." 

The door is always open ; and, as you enter it, be sure to 
say, " Oier Father," by which you include not simply your 
own brothers and sisters after the flesh — your mother and 
father, your wife and children, and the immediate relation- 
ships of your home — but a great company which is beyond 
estimation. The soul that can say "Father" is always 
conscious of being pat of a vast brotherhood and Bister- 
hood. Yonder is a woman who once lived to tempt, but 
now with a broken heart, in her poor, ill-fumiahed, dilapi- 
dated room, she is coming back to God, with words of 
penitence and contrition on her lips : is she included i 
Yes — " our." Yonder is a poor slave, whose flesh is quiver- 
ing from the lash, and who, not noticed by man, is turning 



3.n.iized by Google 



116 The Disciples* Pratee. 

in hie despair to Go*: ia he included? Yes — "our." 
And yonder ia a man who has always misunderstood and 
suspected you, has put unkind constructioDS upon your 
actions and words, and has imputed motives to you that 
you altogether repudiate: is he included? Yes — "our." 
Again, here is another whom you have been accustomed 
to look upon as a heretic, because he does not exactly 
pronounce your Shibboleth, though he holds the Deity and 
saving work of our Lord ; is he included ! Yea—" ovr." 

(4) The true sfmu^Kint of prayer is the honour and 
glory of God. If we take away the invocation and 
doxology, this prayer consists of seven petitions. The 
first three concern God — the hallowing of ^His Name ; the 
coming of His Eingdom ; the doing of His will. In this 
our Lord Jesus could join with His disciples. Then comes 
the single petition for daily bread. In this, again, our 
Lord could join His voice with ours. Indeed, the whole 
unfallen animal creation, and all holy beings throughout 
the universe, may in their measure add their volume of 
prayer that God would supply them with the sustenance 
they need. But, in the last three, prayers are enumerated 
for foi^veness, succour against temptation, and deliverance 
from evil, which are only applicable for ourselves as fallen 



If you desire to pray aright, enter your room, where 
God awaits you, kneel quietly before you attempt to 
address Him, that you may ^realize His presence, and the 
sights and scenes of earth cease to distract. Though it 
may take many minutes before the silt drops to the bottom 
and leaves the stream of your soul flowing pure and clear, 
the waiting will not be lost time ; it is only thus that the 
blue heaven will be mirrored in the calm surface of your 
soul. The next step is to unite yourself with God's mighty 
purpose. Do not, in the first instance, ask what you want 



3.n.iized by Google 



"FiBST Things Fibst." 117 

for yoorself. Compel the intruding crowd of daUy need 
find want to remain outside the fence with which you 
sturoond the baae of the mountain of prayer, and go up 
alone to meet God, desiriBg to look at the needs of the 
world and at your own little life as subordinate to all that 
will m&ke Him loved, honoured, and adored. Put God's 
intereets before your own. Enthrone Ood in your thoughts 
and petitions. Put first things first. Go fcoth and stand 
beneath the stars and count their number; mark their 
mighty orbits ; realize the immensity of the sweep of God's 
movements — do this before you begin to count the glow- 
worms at your foot, or the fireflies that glance around you 
in the dark. On a campaign, the true soldier is more eager 
for the safety of the whole army than he is mindful of his 
personal need ; his first thought is of that which will make 
for his countty's welfare ; and he only puts in a plea for 
himself that he may better serve the interests of his father- 
land. At first, this seems to be an impossible ideal, but it 
is, nevertheless, a true one ; and we shall come to stand 
upon this pinnacle, if we sincerely desire and intend that 
our whole aim and purpose in this mortal life should be 
to secure that God's Kame shall be hallowed. His Kingdom 
come, and His will be done. When we have poured out 
our soul in petitions for these, we may begin to urge our 
own need of daily bread and deliverance from evil. 

"OuB Fathkb." The suppliajit must recognise that 
there is a bond of nature between God and hi m self, such 
as exists between parent and child. This has only to be 
suggested for its importance to be recognised. A child 
has a peculiar claim on its father. " You brought me into 
existence ; you gave me the nature I possess ; you under- 
stand its movements, and yearnings, and instincts, by a 
quick sympathy ; you are bound by the strongest reasons 
to give me that which you know I need. I am part of 



3.n.iized by Google 



118 The Disciplbs* Pbatbb. 

yon; and therefore lay claim that, as yon nouriBb and 
cfaMiah yooraelf, so yon should nonriBh and cherish me." 
No stranger can introdnce sncb tones into his speech. He 
may {dead the claims of his need, of humanify, of gratitnde, 
of fiiendahip ; bnt he cannot speak from the jdatfonn of a 
GommoQ nature. Amid a crowd of statesmen, state officials, 
court functionaries, attached and devoted friends, stuids a 
young and slender boy ; but there la a tie between him and 
tiie monarch, who is the centre of the glittering throng, 
which no oUier person, however noble, can claim ; and his 
requests have, ther^ore, a deeper and more peromptOTy 
demand than those of others. 

It is thus JesQs teaches us, that so we should pray. There 
must be an Innemees, a filial confidence, an entrance into 
the heart of God, because He is your Father by adoption 
and grace. And whilst this must be your feeling towards 
Him, He will reciprocate it. Nay, He does not wait for 
you to approach Him thus ; He anticipates your coming. 
As Jndah said of Jacob, we may say of Ood : " His life is 
bound up in the lad's life." Like as a father pitieth His 
children, He pities us. He loves us not in a mass, but each 
alone. H'« family is not larger to Him than ours to us ; 
and, as we have a niche for each individual child, so has 
God. We may refuse to trust Him, and to avail ourselves 
of His help, but we cannot alter those words of Jesus : 
" The Father Himself loveth you." 

There are thkbs comsitiohs, in obedience to which we 
may realize that God is our Father. (Of course, there is only 
one Only-Begotten Son — One only that can spell His name 
with a capital S. All others are sons with a small a. 
There is an impassable gulf between the Divine Sonship 
and the human souship, however high, and to whatever 
degree of nearness that sonship may be raised.) 

(1) We all of us believe, with the heathen, that we have 



3.n.iized by Google 



Our Geouot) of Acceptance. 119 

^»rv/ng from God. This has been the cherished thoiight of 
man in every age and in every religioD. The word Jupiter 
is made up of the two words Zmu, pater, the heavenly 
father ; and travel where you may, under every sky, and 
amid men of every tongue, you will always find that this 
is their deepest thought — that there is an AU-I^ther 
from whom man has sprung. But this is not the 
closest relationship; and it is not by this track that 
you will come home to abide meet nearly to the Father's 
heart. 

(2) Then, also, the Jews ever chmshed the special belief 
that their nation stood in a unt^tM r^aiionthip to God as 
Father. " Surely," they cried, in hours when anxiety and 
distress lay heavy upon their land, "surely Thou ait our 
Father, " Thou^ Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel 
acknowledge us not, surely Thou art our Father." There 
was a kind of national relationship, therefore, between Ood 
and the Jews. But we cannot claim to stand with them 
on that ground, and the Lord Jesus showed that this 
sacred covenant relaticmship has been forfeited by their 
sin. "If," said He, "God were your Father," you would 
recognise Me — implying that they had no right to call 
God " Father," because they had broken the covenant tie. 
Therefore He came — and this is the very heart of 
religion — that He might, by the Holy Spirit, reproduce in 
the children His own nature and Spirit. It is only as we 
receive Him that we have the right to become sons of 
God, even as we believe in His Name (John i. 12). 

(3) The Apoetle says distinctly: "We are all sons of 
God dy/dtitA in JeeusOhrist"; and because we are sons Cfod 
hath sent the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, whereby 
we call Him Abba, Father. Moreover, in that remarkable 
Second Epistle of St. John the beloved Apostle says — and 
the words si« very significant — " He that abideth in the 



3.n.iized by Google 



120 The Discifles' Prater. 

teaching" — ^that is, of the Uoepel — "the same bath both 
the Father and the Sod." 

From all these and many similar references we may 
judge that, thongb we may belong to God as His offspring, 
we can nerer enter into the doeeet relationship until we 
are united by ^th to His Son, who was bom of a human 
mother, died on the Cross, and has now carried our natore 
to the right band of God, By His Spirit we receive that 
nature into our own, and are thus in Eving affinity with 
the Son of God, who said : " I ascend to My Father and 
your Father, to My God and your God," as though He de- 
sired us to realize that by union with Him God became our 
Father in almost though not quite the same sense in which 
He was His own. 

" Hallowzd BB Tht Nahs." The name of God is His 
nature — His attributes, the various properties that go to 
make Him what He is ; and when we ask that it should be 
hallowed, we ask that all which obscures the character of 
God should be swept away as mists before the rosy light of 
dawn. We thank God for all that is known of His won- 
derful being, for the message of Nature, for the revelations 
given to seers and prophets, for the life and death of the 
Bon, for tbe gift of the Holy Spirit. But there are still 
great unexplored places. By reason of their sinful ignor- 
ance or superstition, men have misunderstood and misrepre- 
sented the character of God ; therefore we pray that in this 
world, and in all other worlds. His glorious personality 
may be understood, appreciated, and loved. 

" Tht KraaDOH Cohe." In one of those sublime flights 
with which the EpisUes of St. Paul abound, he tells us that 
the time is coming when the Son shall deliver up the king- 
dom to God, even the Kither, when He shall have 
abolished all rule, and authority, and power. From this we 
are at liberty to infer that the kingdom was originally th« 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Triumph op CHaisr. 121 

father's ; that by man'e sin and fall, it has been alienated 
from His control ; but that for purposes of recoveiy and re- 
demption, it has been handed over to the Well-Beloved Son, 

The Lord Jesus became incarnate for the purpose of 
regaining the kingdom by His agony, blood, and tears ; 
though it ia not as yet His, it is being acquired ; and it 
shall be His, and angel-roices shall ring out the glad 
announcement that " the kingdoms of this world have be- 
come the kingdoms of our Ood and of His Christ." When, 
therefore, we pray : " Father, Thy kingdom come," we are 
asking that the complete victory of Jesus Ohrist may be 
hastened ; that He may speedily triumph over all obstacles 
and enemies ; that all tyranny may be extinguished, all cor- 
ruption exposed ; that truth may reign in government, art, 
and science ; that trade may be free_ from ohicaneij and 
fraud ; and that He may speedily send forth His angets to 
gather out of His kingdom all things that offend, and them 
that do iniquity, destroying that last enemy, Death, uid 
bringing in the golden age when all men shall know and 
love the Father, and become His obedient and loving 
children. 

" Tht Wuj. be Done, as m Heavek, so oh Eabth." 
There is a close connection between the ^ame and the Will. 
The Jfame is the Being of the Father, the nature of Ood, 
what He is in Himself ; the sum total of His Divine attri- 
butes. The ITtU is the energy of Ood, going forth peren- 
nially and omnipotently to the accomplishment of His own 
Divine and loving purpose. Clearly, then, the will and the 
name are but two sides of the same infinite, holy, and 
loving Being, who is Love. Therefore, whenever we say : 
" Thy will be done," we should begin by sa3nng, " Father " 
— " Our Father which art in heaven, Th^ will be done, as 
in heaven, so on earth." It is because people catch up this 
petition suddenly, and without ascending to it through the 



3.n.iized by Google 



122 The Disciples* Peatbe. 

r^ular gradients of the prayer, that it often eeema so stem 
and terrible ; but if only we can begin to say, " My Enther," 
then add, " Our Father," and finally think of His nature, 
which, like some mighty ocean, full, deep, and pUcid, 
mirroring upon its surface the blue sky of eternity, is 
always sending forth tides of goodwill and peace in heaven 
and on earth, painting the tiniest flower that casts its 
shadow upon the lawn, and steering the mightiest worid 
that rolls through space, always rising up in fountains of 
tendemeeB through heaven and earth — then we shall cease 
to utter this prayer as the address of the stoic, or the cry of 
the grieved heart, or the reluctant expression of resignation 
on the part of the suffering soul ; and it will become the 
anthem, the pealm of the whole life. " Father, Father, in 
all worlds, in all ogee, and in my little life, let the energy 
of Thy will work itself out to its fruition ! " 

But is not Ood's will always done, whether or no } Can 
any man resist it f Can any angel or demon overthrow it 1 
Is it of use, is it wise, does it serve any purpose, to be ever 
saying " Thy will be done " } Surely it will be done, come 
what may, " He doeth what He will among the armies of 
heaven and the inhabitants of the world, and none can stay 
His hand and say. What doest Thou 1 " True ; but are 
you quite sure that Ood's beat will is always done 1 One is 
quite prepared to admit that generally, and on the whole, 
Ood's will is done, but is His best will done 1 The Boyal 
will may be done, but is the Father's will done } And is 
not that the great difficulty in our world, that Ood's will is 
resisted, whilst something which is second or third best is 
substituted 1 The failure between Ood's best, and the beet 
which beccones possible and practical because of our resist- 
ance, is that which brings discomfort, sorrow, friction, and 
pain, into our livee. But if from to-day we would say; 
" Heavenly Father, let Thy will be wrought perfectly," 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Pobpose op Life. 123 

heaven would descend to brood iu oar breoate, and Paradise 
would come again to earth. 

How many weary faces there are, tired and broken 
hearts, lives that have not fulfilled their full purpose and 
promise ! And is not this because, though Qod has been 
working upon them for many years, He has met with 
so much tough resistance and obstinacy that He has not 
been able to realize His cherished plan } If only we would 
let the Father have His wiU with us, to what a height of 
blessedness, and peace, and strength, might we not come i 
Young men and women, if, before you take the false and 
rash step — before you have allowed your own passions and 
desires to dictate your life-couise — you would only let God 
mould you as tough iron in fire, what fitness there would 
be in that prayer : Let Thy will, the best will, the Father's 
wiU, be done, as it is done in heaven ! 

" Give ug this Day our Daily Bread." In the Greek 
language there are two words for bread — first, cytos (corn- 
bread). This, however, is not the word used by our Lord, 
but another, arlos, which is a wider word, standing for food. 
It is as though our Lord knew that this prayer of His was 
to be world-wide in its use, and, therefore, selected a term 
which would cover equally the rice of the Hindu, the 
blubber of the Esquimaux, the macaroni of the Italian, and 
the oatmeal of the Scot — a general word standing for food. 
As He bids us to ofier this prayer, several things are 



These words suggest great rest of heart about daily 
supplies ; because, if Jesus Christ taught ua to pray for 
daily bread, He implied that we had only to use the laws 
of prayer and labour, and God would supply all our need. 
He would never have put into our lips a prayer which was 
not in line with the thought and purpose of His Father. 
I know not what the anxieties of your life may be — about 



3.n.iized by Google 



124 The Disciples' Fbayeb. 

your health, or investineiits, or situatioQ — but I do assure 
jrou that eince Jeeus Christ has put this prayer into yoor 
lips, it is already a pledge on God's part that He will 
feed you with food convenient, and supply the body with 
all that it roquiree for its daUy needs. "A body Thou 
hart prepared for me " ; and since Thou hast implanted its 
daily-recurring appetites, Thou art surely responsible for 
their neceeaaiy satisfaction. 

It is possible, of coarse, to indicate many people — 
perhaps God's children — who may be suffering from hunger 
and privation. How is it that their food is so scanty and 
inconstant 1 I reply : May there not be some lack in their 
faith, and may it not be that they /uwe not because they ask 
nfa, or because they fail to exercise definite faith in Qod f 

God loves to give, not bread alone, but fish. " They saw a 
fire, and fish laid thereon, and bread " — not necesaarieB only, 
but luxuries. There is many a pang of hunger in humiux 
nature which remains when the physical deprivation and 
want have been met. In fact, a good many would find it 
comparatively ea^ to su£fer physical hunger, if they were 
delivered from suffering other unsatisfied appetites of the 
nature, which are always crying out, " Give, give." For 
instance, how many of us are hungering for Aumon love, 
sometimes to the point of absolute starvation, looking 
eagerly for one tiny crumb to fall from a beloved hand, or 
from the banquet on which others feast so bountifully ! 
Are there not some whose minds are vomcious for truth t 
They desire to understand mysteries that baffle ; to pene- 
trate the heavy mist that veils the eternal monntains. 
Theirs la the spirit of John Foster, who would talk witii 
rapture of the revelations that waited on the other side of 
death. 

Besides these, are there not some whose deepest nature 
cries out for God— for that Bread of Life that comes down 



3.n.iized by Google 



Accepting, not Snatching. 125 

from heaven ; for more of the indwellmg and the nourish- 
ment of His character ? These are they who have entered 
into the meaning of the Saviour's own words : " Man shall 
not live hy bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of God." When, therefore, we kneel 
before God in prayer and utter this petition, with some 
the words mean : Give us to-day some gleams of human 
iove ; some sign that our work is appreciated, and is telling 
upon others for good ; or truth upon which our minds may 
feed and grow strong, for they that know God are strong 
and do exploits ; and, above all, feed our spirits with Thy- 
self, for Thou hast implanted an appetite after the unseen 
and eternal, which can never be met by anything which is 
merely material and temporal. 

When we say : " Give us, graciously and freely, bread for 
to-day," do we not imply that all good and perfect gratifica- 
tion must come from God ? Do you not like to emphasize 
that word give ? JDo you not think that is a truer concep- 
tion of life than that we must snatch at any gratification 
which is within our reach ? How often we are tempted to 
make a raid on what promises to appease the yearnings of 
our affection ; to extract some word of appreciation ; to 
press into precincts where we have no right to stand, and 
to ask for gifts from men which they have no right to 
bestow. Yet, when we say this prayer from our hearts as 
Jesus meant us to say it, we look up to God's face and 
say : " lather, Thou madest oiur frame. Thou underetandest 
its appetites ; Thou art well acquainted with all the 
yesmings, hopes, and fears, that pass through our nature, 
and I, Thy child, will take satisfaction from no band but 
Thine ; give me what I really need for all the necessary 
appetites of to-day." Then wait expectantly before God, 
till there be some communication of Himself, some arrange- 
ment of His providence, some sending of Titus, or the 



3.n.iized by Google 



126 The Disciples' Fbater. 

advent of a letter, or tel^^ram, or parcel, the glint of some 
new truth, or a text from the Bible, or a paragraph in 
a biography — something in which God shall Himself give 
us our daily bread. 

Does your life seem almost intolerable in its penury, 
poverty, and precariousness of subsistence i Then turn to 
the Father and say : " I am determined to wait on Thee 
all day ; not turning the stones into bread by any aUenation 
of power or talent with which I am endued, but prepared 
to wait until Thou shalt open Thine hand and satisfy my 
need, or send Thine angels to minister," Surely God 
would never have pluced within the scope of human nature 
any hunger, which is in itself natural and innocent, without 
pledging Himself at the same time to give it due nourish- 
ment and support 1 Besides, look into Nature. The birds 
of the forest seek food which has been stored for them in 
the berries of the autumn ; the fish, as they flash from the 
lake, find the fly provided for them ; the young lions, as 
they roar through the forest and seek their meat from God, 
find that He opens His hand and gives it. And it is 
impossible to suppose that He will starve those appetites 
which He has implant«d. Yon may have to hunger a little, 
in order that more of the evil in the appetite may be 
eliminated, that its passion may die down, that what is 
wrong may be extracted ; but the desire itself, in so far as 
it is part of the native which He has given, will surely be 
gi-atified somehow, somewhen. Wait on the Lord, there- 
fore, and be of good courage ; no good thing will He with- 
hold from them that walk uprightly. 

No man has a right to utter that prayer unless he is 
prepared, so far as he can, to answer it. Obviously it 
demands that he should be prepared to work for his living ; 
that he should go forth in the morning and toil through 
the houra of the busy day, coming back weary at night. It 



3.n.iized by Google 



Hungry foe Love. 127 

implies that he should put his shoulder to the wheel. It 
implies also, too, that he should not earn for himself alone, 
but for others ; and that, in so far as in him lies, he should 
minister to their hunger. A man has no right to pray thus 
who is not also prepared to untie his purse-strings, and, 
when there is really need for bread, to give it. But in a 
deeper sense the same thought holds true. We saw just 
now that hunger is possible for affection, for appreciation, 
for truth, for God ; and when we say : " Give ue this day 
our daily bread," we really include aJl lonely hearts, all who 
weary for a smile, all who are pining for love, all who are 
seeking for truth, all who want God ; and, taking your 
stand amongst this ragged, eager, hungry crowd, you, as 
their spokesman, say : " Give all such their daily bread." 

Does it not mean, also, that if you know some weary 
soul needing a kindly word you should speak it ? That, if 
you know of one who is famishing for human love, you 
should, if possible, pass some on i That, if there are within 
your reach those who need the truth of God, and you can 
supply it, it should not be lacking ? That, if there are any 
who need that impulse of new vigour which comes from the 
touch of a spiritual man or woman, to reinvigorate, reani- 
mate, and reinspire, none of these should be wanting ? 

Answer this prayer so far as you may ; and just because 
the world is so hungry, and weary, and famishing, go forth 
and be its bread-winners and its bread-gtvers. As fiu* as 
you can, help to alleviate the despair and hopelessness, the 
misery and the sin of men, by passing on the Bread of 
God, the Bread of Life, the Bread of Love, the Bread 
of Hope, upon which you feed. Share your last crust with 
another. If you get a glint of light, flash it on. If you 
get a new truth, communicate it. If you get a baptism 
of the Holy Ghost, never rest until others rejoice in it 



3.n.iized by Google 



128 The Disciples' Pbateb. 

"And Foeoivb vb odb Dbbts, as wb Foboive oob 
Debtors." Every word in this prayer deeerres our 
thought. One might dwell at length on the conjunction 
" and," for it is remarkablfl that by it this petition is con- 
joined to that for daily brend ; tbeee only of all the peti- 
tions in this prayer are linked together. " Give us this 
day our daily bread, and forgive us our debts, as we forgive 
our debtors." 

The conclusion is an obvious one — that we need forgive- 
ness as often as we need our daily bread ; that our need 
for forgiveness is as urgent as our need for daily food ; and 
that the forgiveness of God is as lavish as His giving is, 
which stores the cornfields with the golden grain, and 
spreads so richly the repast of fruits and vegetables for 
human need. 

Do you recognise this ! Are you conscious of this deep 
need for forgiveness? Do you experience cravings for it 
— insatiable as the cravings of hunger for food ? Are you 
aware that in God's sight your soul is starving, just because 
yoD have not learned to know your own deep need f The 
anodyne of worldly engagement has made you oblivious to 
the hunger of your spirit ; but if you truly knew yoiurself 
you would never lift your heart to thank God for your 
food without pleading for forgiveness ; and there would be 
the recurrent sense, that even in your happiest, holiest 
days there are things that need to be forgiven, the blood 
needs to be applied, the sense of God needs to mantle your 
soul. " Give me daily bread — I want that ; but as often as 
I need it, grant forgiveness too." 

The Greek word used by Luke, and translated treq)asaes, 
means to miag the mark. Every one of us aims, as we hope 
truly, at the mark ; but we miss it, and we come back like 
the prodigal, saying : " Father, I have missed the mark. I 
meant to be a good and holy and dutiful son ; I aimed at 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Debt of Sin. 129 

it in my early life, but as the years have passed I have 
missed it." 

But in Matthew our Lord sets forth another thought — 
that ffin ia debt, that it is a ftiilure to pay our dues. If the 
oue is the positive, this is the negative side. IVespass ia 
positive, debt negative. "We have done the things we 
ought not," is trespass ; " we have not done the things that 
we ought," ia debt. 

Every relationship means responsibility. Eveiy tie by 
which we are bound to other men and women has its 
obligation, and there are times when the sense of our 
debts overwhelms us. Who is there of the holiest and 
beet among us that is not sometimes absolutely over- 
whelmed by the sense of the obligations which have not 
been discharged, of the grievous debts which remain unpaid "i 
There m not a single man living who hna ever perfectly 
discharged his debte to other souls, and certainly none who 
has discharged them to the Alm ighty, Warning bells are 
sometimes so constructed that they move with every move- 
ment of the waves ; some are therefore perpetually tolling, 
every surge causes them to yield their monotonous note. 
Do you not reeJize that conscience is always tolling the bell 
of ought, of obligation, of dues not realized ? 

Foi^venees in the old Anglo-Saxon is/orthgiving. It is 
what you give forth ; what you give away ; what passes from 
your hand. The Qreek word is to remit, to cancel, to dis- 
miss — so that what has existed as an obligation ceases to 
be such. Our Lord then teaches us to ask that Qod would 
so remit what has been wrong, so cancel what has been left 
unpaid, that though in a sense we shall never be able to 
make right what is wrong to our fellows, yet the guilt of it 
wilt no longer accrue to us. When a man is truly forgiven, 
he may claim not only that the guilt wilt pass off his own 
soul, but that God's repairing hand will make right what 



3.n.iized by Google 



180 Thb Disciples' Peatek. 

has been left wrong ; adjusting our undischarged obligations, 
80 that those bouIs which have been wronged by ns may, by 
His good hand, Bomehow be compensated. Sin is debt; 
but there is forgiving, remission, the putting absolutely 
away. The fact that our Lord taught us to use this prayer 
proves that we may count on an answer, because He was 
the Lamb slain before the fonudation of the world, and He 
has taken away its sin. 

When God says forgitten. He also saye realored ; and 
when the soul looks wistfully at those whom it has 
wronged, and saj^s : " How about these ? " God seems to say : 
" I know the debt incurred ; I have forgiven thee, and I 
will now repair." Then the bleesed Spirit of God reaches 
out to the souls whom we have wronged ; by a touch He 
transmutes the wrong, and into the wound potu^ the oil 
and balm. When a child of God understands that, his 
heart becomes very pitiful ; having felt the agony of his 
own indebtedness and the joy of forgiveness, he begins to 
look around, and, instead of saying me, he says owr. He 
thinks of his dear ones, and pleads, like Job, each morning, 
" Forgive the sins of my home." He thinks of the neigh- 
bourhood in which he dwells, and says : " my God, I 
pray for these men and women around me, that Thou 
wDuldst forgive them." Then, as a priest, he takee the 
whole world into his embrace uid pleads : " O Qod, for the 
sake of Thy Bon, foi^ve them; they know not what they 
do." The answer to that prayer is a Pentecost in which 
men are pricked to the heart, and led to cry for the mercy 
which God longs to show. 

" Thine ts the Kinodou, the Foweh, iks the Olobt." 
The authenticity and validity of this Dozology is ques- 
tioned. Many ancient authorities, however, add it, and it 
does seem a natural termination for this glorious prayer. 
The Kingdom is God's, thou^ His claims are set at 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Consummation. 131 

nought hj men who say, Let ue break His bands aeunder 
and cafit away Hie cords from us. Yet Ood is King. 

I never shall foi^et that archway in Damascus which for 
centuries has looked down npon the misrule of the Turk, 
but which bears the deep-cut inscription, " Thy Kingdom, 
O Christ, is an everlasting Kingdom." Let us repeat it 
again and again, " Thins ia the Kingdom." 

" Thine is tha povMr." He has the power to set up His 
Kingdom, to overcome evil with good, hate with love, and 
darkness with light. Whatever ideals He may have raised 
in the heart or for the world, to God belongeth power 
enough to make them facts in experience. 

" Thine m the glory." This is the consummation of all. 
We are told that in the campaign of the great Napoleon, 
when his soldiers were being mown down in battle, they 
would turn towards him waving their hands, and with 
the last gasp of breath cry; " Ftw VEmpere:ur!" So 
in life and death we cry: "Glory to God in the highest." 
This the climax of every prayer, the passion of life and 

Our Lord returns to one clause in the prayer empha- 
sizing the thought which was already implicated in the 
structure of the fifth position, when He told us that in ask- 
ing for forgiveness of our debtfi, we must always say : *' Am 
we have fot^ven our debtors." Kotice the alteration made 
in the Revised Version ; it is not " As we forgive," but 
" As we kaoe forgiven." This ouries ua back, of course, to 
chap. V. 24, where we are told to leave our gift at the 
altar, and to be reconciled to our brother before we ofier 
our gift. 

Our Lord does not mean, however, that Qod's forgive- 
ness is measured by our own, or that our forgiveness is the 
cause of Ood's. Neither of theae is the true rendering of 



3.n.iized by Google 



132 The Disciplbs' Prater. 

this clause ; but that GoA cannot forgive an unforgiving 
spirit. The fact is that the only sure index that our 
contrition and penitence are genuine is that we forgive. 
If we do not forgive, if our heart does not go out in 
pity and forgiving love, it proven that we must have 
been mistaken about ourBelves, and have never attained 
that true position of soul before God in which He is able 
to foi;give. 

Have you not noticed this in your own life, after the 
consciousness of for|;iveness through the Blood of the 
Atonement (which is not mentioned here but implied), that 
the joy of forgiveness sometimes dies off youi" soul, and you 
question whether it was not a phantom, a bright and 
bleened dream t You wonder whether the words of absolu- 
tion were really spoken, and wearily resume your burden. 
You cannot tell why it is, but it seems as though your sin 
had come back again on you. Let me explain ! In our 
Lord's parable the king forgave the man who owed ten 
thousand talents, and the poor debtor w.ts glad ; but 
leaving hie presence he met a debtor of his own who owed 
him two hundred pence. This man he took by the throne, 
saying : " Pay me what thou owest." The result was that 
he was brought back to the king, and his pardon cancelled, 
so that he again stood liable for the ten thousand talents. 
Why ? Because he wan unforgiving, and the unforgiving 
man loses the sense of God's forgiveness. The reason, then, 
why you have lost the sense of forgiveness is probably be- 
cause you have stood upon your rights, have insisted upon 
other men doing to you what you have failed to do to God, 
and because you have been deficient in the forgiveness that 
you have sought. It is only when we have learnt to for- 
give that the Spirit of Ood maintains in our hearts the 
blessed consciousness of forgiveness. 

How is it with yout Do yon forgive 1 Or are there 



3.n.iized by Google 



Eight the Wrong. 133 

men and women that you obdvirately refuse to forgive? 
If there are, it shows that your own soul is not right 
before Go«J ; your love to Qod ia gauged by your love to 
men ; your relationship to God is indicated by your rela- 
tionship to your feUows. The man who does not love the 
brother whom he has seen cannot love the Ood whom he 
has not seen. Discover where you are today. If there 
are men and women in your life that you refuse to pray 
for and forgive, know that your heart is wrong with God. 

Do the first thing, begin to pray for them, and say : 
" Forgive us — that man who has hurt me, that man who has 
wronged me ; he needs forgiveness, but I need it equally. 
We are both in the wrong ; I might have made it easier 
for him to do right than I have done." Begin with prayer. 
That is the first step ; compel yourself to pray " Forgive 
us both." Second, ask for the opportunity to meet him. 
Third, claim that when you meet there may be in you the 
royalty of God's grace, that you may bear yourself with 
that rare, gracious love which covers the multitude of sins. 
Be willing that through your lips Gods pitying mercy may 
pass forth in words of human kindness. 

May God, for the sake of Christ, cancel our indebted- 
ness, and mercifully go over the wrongs of one's life done 
to others and repair them ! Then, if He gives us the 
opportunity, may we use it to act justly, kindly, lovingly, 
nobly, generously, towards those whom we have wronged ! 
" Foi^ve us our debts, and help us to forgive those that 
are indebted to us ! " 



.:i.« Google 



XV. 

The Disciples* Use of Money. 

(Matt, vl lS-2*.) 

THERE are two things which distort our eyesight — 
i.e., which hinder the pure intention of the soul : 
the one is the temptation of the prosperous and 
well-to-do ; the other of the poor, reminding ns of the seed 
that was sown among the thorns. " This is he that heareth 
the word, and the carea of this world (this is the temptation 
of the poor and strugglitig), and the deceitfulneee of riches 
(this is the temptation of those who are endeavouring or 
beginning to obtain property), choke the word, and it 
becometh unfruitful." 

It is of the temptations which accrue in dealing with 
money that we have now to speak. Our message is to 
those who, to use the words of the Apostle, dtsuv to be 
rich. These are they who "fall into temptation and a 
snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which 
drown men in destruction and perdition" (1 Tim. vi. 9). 

Our Loi'd, first, alludes to ike ephemeral <md <Ustructible 
chanxoter of earthly riehet. Oriental wealth consisted 
largely of magnificently embroidered dresses ; and in a 
land where there were no banks (in our sense of the term) 
coin would be buried in the earth — often, ae in the case of 
Achan, in a hole dug within the precincts of the house. 
We are reminded also of the parable of our Lord about the 
hidden treasure in the field, the owner of which had no 



3.n.iized by Google 



For "A Rainy Dat." 135 

idea of Uie buried wealth that lay beneath the surface of 
the Boil, until the ploughshare came into collision with it, 
and the metallic ring indicated that he should stay his oxen 
in order to disentomb the jar of coins, hidden when inva- 
sion swept the country, and which the proprietor never 
returned to claim. 

Our Lord reminds His hearers that moth or rust will 
destroy all earthly treasures, and that thieves may at any 
moment break through the slight clay walls of their homes 
and carry off their hoarded stores. And surely His words 
are capable of an extended reference to that " crowned and 
sceptred thief," who shall one day dig through the clay 
walla of our mortal house, and take from us the raiment 
in which we have been attired, the wealth we may have 
amassed, the shares that stand in our name, the lands that 
we have purchased at such cost, sending us forth naked and 
despoiled, stripped of everything, into a world where we 
shall land as paupers, because we shall have failed to lay up 
treasure there. 

Our Lord could not for a moment have faemU to 
denov/aee every kind of aamng. For instance, the Apostle 
Paul enjoins on parents the duty of laying up for their 
chUdren (2 Cor. xii. 14). It is surely right for us to take 
advantage of the great laws of life insurance that we may 
make a reasonable and moderate provision against old age ; 
and especially that we should, by a snudl annual payment, 
secure for those who may survive us an adequate com- 
petence. I seriously think that every yoiuig man and 
woman should, in the early years of their life, commence to 
pay into one of our large insurance offices, so that at the 
age of fifty-five, or sixty, a sum may be forthcoming which 
will be of use to them in their declining years — the same 
sum being paid to mother, wife, or sister, in case of their 
premature death ; and I cannot for a moment believe that 



3.n.iized by Google 



136 The Disciples' Use op Monet. 

the spirit or letter of our IJord's words contradict this item 
of CbriBtian economicn. 

It seems also certaia that there is nothing in these words 
of the Master to prohibit the setting apart of a certain sum 
an capital, which may be osed for the development of busi- 
ness, and therefore in the employment of a letter number 
of operativee. Nothing eeema to me more beneficent than 
that a manufacturer should add to his capital, and therefore 
to his machinery and yearly output ; for all this means the 
widening of bis influence, and the provision of work to 
larger numbers of men, women, girls, and lads — the more 
especially if he contributes to the building up of some 
garden city, free from the facilities of drink, free from the 
confinement of the great town, free from the vices which 
are incident to every great aggregation of humanity, where 
every home is within sight of trees and flowers, where 
every working-man has his plot of land, and where the 
children breathe freah health-giving air. 

But neither of these methods of laying aside money is 
contrary to our Lord's injunction, "Treasure not treasures 
upon the earth." What He forbids is the amassing of 
money, not for the use we may make of it, nor for the 
securing of our loved ones from anxiety, but for its own 
sake, to such an extent as that the endeavour to hoard 
engrosses affections which ought to be fixed on nobler and 
diviner things, and leads to the concentration of the whole 
being upon the growing balance in the bank or the 
increase of Beal Estete. In the judgment of eternity it is 
altogether unworthy of an immortal being to imperil his 
highest interests, his vision of God, his spiritual power, his 
peace and blessedness, for things which are so lightly held 
and easily lost as riches. Granted that the things for 
which men strive are no longer to be destroyed by moth 
and rust, or stolen by the night thief, yet the uncertainty 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Bush to be Rich. 137 

of riches is proverbial ; at any moment they may take to 
themselves wings and fly away, A panic on the Btock 
Exchange, depreciation in the value of securities, some new 
invention, the diversion of trade from one port to another, 
or the competition of the foreigner, may in a va>7 brief 
space cause the carefully hoarded winnings of our lifetime 
to crumble and subside like the Venice Campanile. 

Our Lord might with good reason have denounced the 
practice of laying up treasure because of the temptation which 
the darire to gain it immheB. When a young man enters 
life with the one intention of making a fortune as quickly 
M he can, be is almost sure to begin making it according 
to the mazims and practices which prevail in the world 
around faim. From afar he sees the goal that beckons, and 
he is tempted to take the shortest cut to reach it, along a 
road strewn thick with Hee and roguery, with lost repu- 
tations and blasted characters. That road is taken by 
myriads in the mad rush to become rich, irrespective of the 
misery which may be involved to others, and the injury 
which is being wrought for themselves. Well may our 
Lord describe riches as " the unrighteous mammon " 
(Luke xvi, 11), Therefore, with the utmost urgency one 
would reiterate to all who are commencing life, in the 
words with which the great Apostle to the Gentiles closed 
one of the last Epistles ; " Oharge them that are rich in 
this present world, that they be not high-minded, nor have 
their hope set on the uncertainty of riches, but on God, 
who giveth us richly all things to enjoy." 

Let us turn now to THB bsasoits which our Lord 
adduces fob Hia UBOEMT pkohibhtoit against the amassing 
of treasure by His disciples. 



3.n.iized by Google 



138 The Disciples' Use of Monet. 

Fiifrt, the hoarding of money indaeei on inordi7uiie love 
for it. " Where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be 
altto." There in a strong temptation to the most devout 
maa who begins his life consecrated to God and to the beet 
service of his fellows, when he sees money beginning to 
accumulate in his possession, to be attracted from the main 
object of life to bis rising pile. Let young business men who 
bear the name of Christ test themselvee, and ask whether 
their hearts are not being insensibly stolen away. Tbey 
may not be avrare of what is happening. Grey hairs are 
becoming plentifully strewn upon their heads without 
their knowing it. The fascination of money is one of the 
strongest in the whole world. It is almost impossible to 
handle it, whether it has come down as eea inheritance from 
the past, or has been gained by successful trading in the 
present, without coming to like it for its own sake, to con- 
gratulate oneself when it increases, and to scheme for its 
further accumulation. Thus the heart becomes uncon- 
sciously bound by ever-tightening chains, as the balloon 
filled with the light gas, and meant to hold commerce with 
the clouds, is held down to the earth by strong hawsers 
from which it cannot get free. 

It is not difficult for onlookers to discern the process by 
which the heart is being weaned away from the unseen 
and the eternal to the temporal and transient. There is a 
slackening of interest in religious worship and Christian 
service; an absorption amid the home-circle which shows 
that the heart is no longer there ; a reluctance to part with 
money that used once to be freely given for home and 
foreign missions. It becomes increasingly difficult to 
engage the attention in anything which involves the diver- 
sion of time or thought from the bank, the factory, or the 
store. The process is very subtle ; but, on the comparison 
of years, those who love the tempted and fascinated nature, 



3.n.iized by Google 



Frra Tests. 139 

shake their heads gravely as they realize that the heart is 
being betrayed to its ruin, and that another life will soon 
be cast beneath the wheels of the terrible Juggernaut Car 
of worldly ambition and success. 

There are five tests by which we may become aware 
whether this parasite is wrapping itself around us. Let us 
dare to question our hearts, and ask God to search them by 
His Holy Spirit. These five will suffice : — 

(1) Do we find our mind going towards the little store of 
money which we have made, with a considerable amount of 
complacency, casting up again and again its amount, and 
calculating how much more may be added in the course of 
another year ? When we are sleepless at night, or sit back 
in the comer of our railway carriage, do we find ourselves 
habitually going in the one direction of that growing 
competence ? If bo, is it not clear that our heart is being 
fascinated and attracted ? 

(3) Does the thought constantly intrude in our mind 
that there is now less likelihood than ever of our spending 
the end of our days in a respectable workhouse, or being 
dependent upon others, even upon Ood Himself ! Do we 
look back upon the days of early manhood and compare 
them with the present, feeling that we are becoming 
independent? Is our trust in God less complete than it 
used to be ? Is there not danger, therefore, of our weak 
and deceitful heai't trusting in these uncertain riches, and 
being robbed of that simple faith which used to be the 
charm of earlier days, when we were content to do His 
work and trust Him for all that was necessary ? 

(3) Do we envy other men who are making money more 
rapidly than we are, and count ourselvw ill-used if we 
cannot keep pace with them ? 

(4) Do we look at every service we perform — at our 
extending knowledge of men, at every new piece of 



3.n.iized by Google 



140 Thb Disciplks' Usb of Monet. 

infonnation that we gather — in the light of their monetary 
advantage t 

(S) la it our habit to meaaura the gains of the year 
simply by what we have made, and with no reference to 
what we are, to the money we have accumulated, rather 
than the good we have done ? 

It becomes us to aak ourselves such questions as these 
reverently, as in the sight of God, and thoughtfully for our 
own highest interests ; for they will reveal to us almost cer- 
tainly whether the slow poison of an absorbing love of 
money may not be stealing through our heart, robbing it of 
its noblest attributes. It is a terrible thing for us to love 
gold for its own sake, rather than fcr the use that we may 
make of it, because the heart is liable to become like that 
which it loves. Not only is the heart buried in the place 
where the treasure is, bat inevitably it becomes like its 
treasure. Ossification is a terrible physical disease, when 
the heart turns to a bard, bony substance ; but it has a 
spiritual counterpart for those beneath whose love for gold 
the heart shrivels into something little better than metal. 

It is not neceesary for us to dwell at length on the second 
reason which our Lord adduces a^nst treasuring our 
treasures, viz., that hoarding money diverts t/ts pitre intenHon 
of the lotd and hi^tdi ait epirituai light. We all know that 
faith is only possible for the pure heart. The faculty of 
epirituai vision and receptivity depends upon the simplicity 
and int^rity of oiu: moral life. When, therefore, the heart 
is filled with thoughts of its earthly riches, it becomes 
gross and insensible to the spiritual and eternal realm. 
Things of Qod fade from the vision, the love of God 
declines from the heart, the soul is no longer single in its 
purpose, the eye becomes dim, the spiritual force abated, 
moral paralysis sets in, and the whole body becomes full of 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Two Mastbbs. 141 

darkneBs, under the cover of which evil things creep forth. 
Oh, do not let your spiritual eyee become dazzled by the 
glitter of this world's goods, lest you be unable, like 
Banyan's man with the muck<rake, to see the angel who, 
with golden crown in band, waits to bless you. Instead of 
crouching over the heap of transient treasure, rise to 
your full stature, and claim the crown that fadeth not 
away] 

The third reason that our Lord adduces is, that hoarding 
money fiaaUy emlaioea. He says that " No man can serve 
two masters ; for either he will hate the one and love the 
other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. 
Ye cannot serve Qod and Mammon." He employs two 
significant words — the one, ilwnvnivn. (an old Ghaldaic word 
for the god of wealth) ; the other, to terve, the subjection of 
the slave to the caprice of an owner. Our Lord puts in 
juxtaposition the two masters — Qod the Beneficent Father, 
and Mammon the god of wealth, and says everyone must 
choose between them. Whichever you elect to serve will 
become the supreme dominating force in your life, giving 
you no option, save the obedience of a slave. 

Notice then the peril of the Christian man who is falling 
nnder the sway of covetouMnees, which the Apostle calls 
idolatry (Col. iii. Q ; Eph. v. 5). At the end of the process, 
be it longer or shorter, he will renounce entirely the service 
of God, and become the slave of money-making. The 
slightest acquaintance with commercial circles will give 
evidence of the tyranny of Mammon, which compels its 
abject slaves to toil day and night ; demands the sacrifice of 
love and health, of home enjoyments and natural pleasures ; 
insists that every interest shall be subordinate to its all- 
consuming service; and at the end of life casts its votaty, 
bankrupt and penniless, upon the shores of eternity. 



3.n.iized by Google 



142 The DiaciPLEs' Use of Monet. 

Drink iteelf, stripping men of everything worth living for, 
is not more to be dreaded. 

What, tbbn, is the altebnative to this prohibited boai^- 
ing of money ? Are we to give a^y promiscuously and to 
everyone that asks ? I confess that I have no faith in this 
indiscriminate giving which demoralises him who gives and 
him who receives ; which creates a plentiful harvest of loaf et« 
and ne'er-do- wells, to the detriment of the thrifty and indus- 
trious poor, and which satisfies the sentiment of pity by a 
lazy dole, when it ought to set itself to a radical ameliora- 
tion of the suppliant beggar. It is comparatively tr itless 
to give a meal here and there, without endeavouring, by 
practical sympathy and helping hand, to assist families by 
putting them in the way of helping themselves. This is 
what is needed ; and to put individuals or housefuls in 
the way of standing upon their own feet and securing 
their own livelihood, is immensely more important than to 
furnish temporary relief, that supplies the need of to-day, 
but makes no permanent alteration in the circumstances of 
to-morrow or of the future. It is much more difficult to 
use our money thoughtfully and thriftily to help others 
than to place half-a-crown or a sovereign in their hands. 

Here, for instance, is a poor woman, whose case appeals to 
to your sympathy. It is, of course, quite eaey to give her 
a few shillings and to dismiss her from your mind, but the 
noblest thing would be to secure her a sewing-machine or 
a mangle, thus furnishing her with the opportunity of self- 
help. It is quite as important not to give money indis- 
criminately as it is not to hoard. The ideal method of life 
is to use what you have to help others, to regard your 
possession of money as a stewaj^hip for the welfare of the 
the world, and to consider yourself a trustee for all who 
need. Instead of letting your dresses hang in the wardrobe, 



3.n.iized by Google 



Pbopoetionate Giving. 143 

give them to the respectable poor whose own are 
threadbare, that they may be able to occupy suitably the 
positions on which their livelihood depends. This in the 
best way of keeping them free from moth. Whatever you 
have in the way of books, recreation, spare rooms, elegantly 
furnished homes, look upon them all as so many opportuni- 
ties of helping and blessing others. 

If you are in business, at the end of the year put aside 
what is needed for the maintenance of your family in the 
position to which Ood has called them; next, put aside 
what may be required for the development of your busi- 
ness ; third, be sure that by a system of life insurance you 
you are providing for the failure of old age ; but when all 
this is done, look upon the remainder as God's, to be used 
for Him. Never give God less than a tenth, but give Him 
as much more as possible. If you have money by inherit- 
ance, you have no right to give that away or squander it ; 
but pass it down as you received it, always considering, if 
you will, that the interest is God's, awaiting your adminis- 
tration as His steward and trustee. 

Let every Christian adopt the principle of giving a cer- 
tain proportion of the income to the cause of Christ, and 
whenever the fascination of money begins to assert itself, 
instantly make a handsome donation to some needy cause. 
Every time the temptation comee to look at money from a 
seMsh standpoint, meet it by looking up to Ood and saying : 
" I thank Thee that Thou hast given me these things richly 
to enjoy, and desire wisdom and grace to use them for 
Thee and Thine." 

What will be the kesdlt of a spiritual attitude like 
this ? Ah, the full blessedness cannot be put in words — but 
this you will find, you will have treasure in heaven ; for what 
you invest in ministering to others ia capital laid up in God's 



3.a.t,zsd by Google 



144 The Disciples' Use of Monet. 

Bank, the interest of which will always be acoruiog to you. 
I hftve a very distinct belief that actual interest oomeK 
from money which is being invested in doing good ; and at 
last those we have helped will welcome us into the eternal 
mansions (Luke zvi. 9). Moreover, your heart will be 
increasingly fixed where yovir b^asure is, in the Unseen 
and the Eternal. Your eye will be single, your life har- 
monious, your hold upon earthly things slender, your love 
for your Master, Ghrist, becoming a passion. Ultimately 
you will find that the yearning which you used to have 
for selfish satisfaction and comfort will pass away, as the 
bleasing of him that was ready to perish falls upon your 
head, and the thanks of the widow and orphan anticipate 
tiK " Well done t " of your Lord. 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Intention of the Soul. 

(Matt. vi. 22.) 

THE eye is the most striking and important feature in 
the face. Blue as the azure of heaven, brown as 
hazel, black as jet, it gives expression and beauty to 
the countenance, fills with tears of pity, sparkles with the 
radiance of affection, and flasheB with the fire of anger. 
By the eye we are able, therefore, to discern much of the 
thoughts and intents of the heart. 

The eye is also urgently needed to enable us to do the 
work of life. It is by the eye that we are lighted to our 
toils, discover the path in which we must tread, and look 
upon the faces of our friends, or the beauty of Ck>d's crea- 
tion. Each time we see a blind person, or pass institutions 
devoted for the recovery of sight, let us lift up our hearto 
to thank God for this priceless boon. 

It is interesting to notice the comparison which our 
Lord employs. He speaks of the eye as the " light of the 
body " ; in other places, the same Greek word is rendered 
" lamp," or " candle." In the fiftb chapter of Matthew we 
discover the same expression : " Neither do men light a 
lamp and put it under the bushel." The same word is used 
in Luke xii. : " Let your loins be girded about, and your 
lamps burning." It is the word by which John the Bap- 
tist is designated in John v. : " He was a burning aud a 
shining light" — in contradistinction to the other term, 
applied to our Lord alone : " That was the true Iiight which 



3.n.iized by Google 



146 The Intention of the Sool. 

lighteth every man that cometh into the world." The 
ministry of John was the lamp that lighted the steps of 
men until " the Sun of Righteousness arose with healing in 
Hid wings." The eye, our Lord says, is the lamp of the 
house of the body. It is as though He thought of the eye 
as hanging in the vestibule of the palace of life, casting its 
rays outwards to the busy thoroughfai>e, and inward to the 
e of the soul. 



It is obvious that there must be something in onr inner 
life which corresponds to the eye, for our Lord adverts to 
the eye as the emblem and symbol of something within. 
He is not speaking of the eye of the body only, bat of its 
correlative, the eye of the soul. 

What is that inner eye T Some have supposed that it is 
the power of a concentrated affection, for truly love sheds a 
warm glow over all the furniture of the inner life, as well 
OS upon the great world without. Others have affirmed 
that the intellect is the eye of the soul, by which we are 
able to behold the ordered process of the world, and to con- 
sider the processes of thought within us. A truer concept 
tion of our Lord's meaning, however, will lead to the 
conclusion that the eye of the body corresponds to the 
inward intention and purpose of the soul. 

If, for a moment, you will examine your inner life, 
descending to the profound depths that lie beneath the sur- 
face of your being, you will discover that there is one deep 
aim or purpose which is the real intention of your life. 
Deep down, below the ploy of emotion and intellect, and of 
engagement in various interests, there is one strong stream 
or current running perpetually through the dark ravines of 
your nature. It may be that you are hardly aware of it ; 
your nearest and dearest friends do not realize it. You 
would be startled if it were atated in so many words, but it 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Lksson op the Eye. 147 

is none the less true, that there is a unity in each human 
(^loracter which Qod perceives. In each of us He can read 
a unity of purpose and a unity of will. This is the inten- 
tion of the soul, and distinguishes each of us from every- 
one beside. 

The eye may of course be healthy or unhealthy. If 
healthy, a tiny curtain which fauigs at the back of the 
i^anism is adjusted to receive the focussed rays which 
oome from external objects. On this tiny curtain is formed 
an inverted image of all things which are visible. If you 
look into the eye of another, and especially into the eye of 
a little babe, you will see the whole panorama of the world 
presented as in a ainematoaoojK. This curtain is perpetually 
being readjusted, ao that the uublurred image of the outer 
world may be cost upon it. When we are travelling in a 
Tailv^y train it is probable that in a single hour the focus 
ia altered thousands of times, for at every jolt and oscilla- 
tion of the vehicle there must be a readjustment of the 

When the eye is in an unhealthy condition, the image is 
doubled or blurred. There are two ways in which it may 
become evil. To use a common expression, there may be 
the obliquity called a squint, such as disfigured the noble 
foce of Edward Irving. Mrs. Oliphant tells us that as a 
babe he was lead in a wooden cradle, through a hole in 
which he was able to watch the light with one eye, whilst 
the other retained its usual straightforward direction. His 
eyee, therefore, were not parallel, and it was impossible to 
focus them upon a given object. The soul's intention may 
be diverted from a single purpose in a double direction. 
We may pray with the object of gaining an answer from 
Ood, and at the aame time of receiving credit from man. 
We may tiy to amass the treasures of this world, and at 
the same time to be rich towards God. We may endeavour 



3.n.iized by Google 



148 The Intention op the Soul. 

to serve two maBters — Ood and Mamnioii. This is the 
Goimterpart in the spiritual life of a squint in the eye. 

Another source of iU-health with the eye is when the 
little veeiclea, which supply blood for the tiny curtain, be- 
come overcharged, so that it is impossible for the delicate 
nerves to adjust the lens, and the vision becomes blurred 
and indistinct. 

Yet another source of the evil eye is when a film forms 
over the surface of the pupil, so that the light cannot 
enter. 

In contradistinction to all these evils, how good it is to 
have a clear eye, with its distinct vision ; and how much 
more good it is, when the purpose and intention of the 
sou) is so undivided that the whole of life is illumined by 
the glow of a clear and beautiful radiance. AH through 
this chapter our Lord is arguing against this double vision. 
He says : " Do not profees to belong to the kingdom of 
heaven while your hearts are buried in the earth ; do not 
have two masters; do not be divided by anxious care; 
seek first the kingdom of Qod." All through this ch^ter 
He is, in fact, bidding ua to make our constant prayer the 
cry of the Psalmist ; " Unite my heart to fear Thy Name." 
Our Lord sets His whole force against any duplication of 
character bo inimitably described by John Bunyan, in Mr. 
IWiing-hoth-ways, who, with one eye on heaven and another 
on earth, sincerely professed one thing and sincerely did 
another, and from the inveteracy of his unreality was 
unable to see the contradiction of his life. " He tried to 
cheat both God and the Devil, and in reality he only 
cheated himself and his neighbours," 

There are thbee kinds op ukn. First, those who have no 
intention. Second, those who have a double intention. 
Third, those whose intention is pure and simple. 



3.n.iized by Google 



A Supreme PtJBPOSE. 149 

(1) Some ham no intentwa. They live day by day 
without purpose; the eye of the mind ie fixed definitely 
and intently upon nothing. They take each day aa it 
cornea, getting from it anything it may bring, doing the 
duty it demands ; but their existence is from hand to 
mouth, at haphazard, with no aim, no ambition, no godly 
purpose. They cannot say, with the Apostle, that they are 
leaving the things which are behind, and pressing forward 
to the things which are before, or that one thing they are 
ever engaged in doing. It is quite true that in many cases 
there may be no great cause to be championed, no subjects 
to be explored, no object in making money, because already 
there is an ample competence. Some may read these 
words who are daughters in a wealthy home, or young men, 
the heirs of a considerable fortune, or people in bumble 
life who have no urgent need to look beyond the day or 
week with its ordinary routine ; but even these should 
have a supreme purpose, to bring down the New Jerusalem 
out of heaven, to establish the kingdom of Qod amongst 
men, to hasten the coming of the day of Christ, or to be 
themselves purer and holier. To b«oome may ali^^ be 
the supreme purpose and intention of the soul; to be a 
little more like Christ ; to know and love Him better ; to 
be able to shed more of TTia sweetness and strength upon 
others. There is no life so contained within the bigb walls 
of circumstances, but it may reach up towards the pro- 
found light of the azure sky that arches above. 

Do not be content to drift through life ; do not be satis- 
fied to be a piece of flotsam, swept to and fro by the ebb 
and flow of the stream ; do not be a creature of circum- 
stance ; because it is certain that if you are not living with 
a Divine purpose for God and eternity, you are as certainly 
living for yourself, for your ease, for mere indolent enjoy- 
ment, or to get through the years with as little fret and 



3.n.iized by Google 



160 The Intention op the Soul. 

friction as poaaible. Thia, at the heart of it, and in such 
a worid as this, so abject and needy, is undiluted selfish- 
ness. To have no purpose is to have the worst puipose ; 
to have no ambition is to be living for self ; to have no 
intention is to be drifting through the wide gate, in com- 
pany with the many that go in thereat, to their own 



(2) Some have a double inlmtion. They have heard the 
call of Christ, and have received the seed of the king- 
dom ; but, BO soon as it reached their hearts, two strong 
competitors endeavoured to share with it the nutriment of 
the soul. On the one hand there were the cares cJ the 
world — these largely have place in the poor and struggling ; 
on the other hand was the deceitfulness of riches — these 
principally are found among the opulent and well to do. 
For a brief interval there was a struggle as to which of 
these should be master, but the strife soon ended in the 
victory c^ the sturdy thorns: those ruthless briganda 
seized for themselves alt the sustenance that the soil of the 
heart could supply, and grew ranker and taller, until the 
tiny com withered and failed to bring forth fruit to per- 
fection. 

Will you not examine yourself? You think that you 
are whole-hearted, whereas you may be double-hearted; 
or, to use the apt simile of the prophet, baked on one 
side and not on the other; or, to use the simile of 
tiie great dreamer, looking one way and rowing another, 
You seem to be very earnest in Ohristian work, but 
eie you quite sure that your apparent devotion does not 
arise from a masterfulness of disposition that likes to be 
independent and rule % May it not be due to a fussy 
activity, which must be engaged in many directions that the 
soul may escape from itself; or to a natural pity and 



3.n.iized by Google 



Undbbltihg Motive. 151 

sympath; for men, wbich would incite you to do a eimilkr 
deed even though you had never heard of Chriflt ? Of course, 
you Bay to yourself that your motive is pure and single, and 
that you only deeire to glorify God ; but in His sight it 
may be that you are really actuated by the natural pro- 
pensities of your nature, by your desire to be firat, or by 
your appetite for notoriety or money. The heart is so 
deceitful that it becomes us to examine ouradvee with all 
carefulness, lest at the end of life we shall find that whilst 
we appeared to be doing God's work, we were really doing 
our own ; and that whilst our friends gave us credit for 
great religious devotion, we were really borne along by a 
vain, proud, and unworthy purpose, which robbed our 
noblest service of all value in the sight of eternity. 

As the Apostle says, the one supreme intention of every 
child of God should be to please God. How few of us can 
say with him : " Whose I am and whom I serve ! " " It 
is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of 
man's judgment ; Ha that judgeth me is the Lord." 

(3) Let us see to it that we have a puire and simple 
intmivm. Our aim should be to set our whole soul upon 
one thing only — to do the will of Qod, so that the whole of 
our religious life may be spent before the Father, who seeth 
in secret ; that our alms, our prayers, our fastings, should be 
for His eye, and His alone ; and that the whole of our life 
should emanate from hidden fountains where God's Spirit 
broods, like those fountains of the Nile concealed in the 
heart of the great mountains, the secret of which has so 
long defied the research of the explorer. The lamp of a 
holy life is the pure intention of the soul, which seeks to 
gain nothing for itself ; which has no desire to please men, 
or to receive their commendation; which does not shirk 
adversity or court the sunshine, bnt which sets before it, as 



3.n.iized by Google 



152 The Intention op the Soul. 

itif All-Bufficieat goal, that Ood ms; be well-pleased, and 
that Kt tbe close of life's brief pilgrimage it may be said 
of each of us, as it was eaid of Enoch; "He bad this 
testimony, that be pleased God." 

How blessed such a life is I The light of the soul's pure 
intention iUumioatee Ood, duty, human love, the glory of 
creation, and the significance of history, literature, and art. 
I remember once in my life, at a most important crisis, 
when for weeks I was so torn between two strong conflicting 
claims, that at last 1 was compelled to put aside alt engage- 
menta and to go alone into the midst of ITature, where I 
carefully examined my heart to its very depths. I found 
that Uie cause of the difficulty to ascertain God's will arose 
because I allowed so many personal considerations to conflict 
with the inner voice ; and when I definitely put these aside, 
and stilled and quieted my life so that I became conscious 
of being impelled by one purpose only — to know and to do 
God's will — then the lamp of a pure intention shed its glow 
upon the path which I became assured was the chosen path 
for me. And since I dared from that moment to follow, all 
other things have been added. It was when Solomon asked 
that he might have a wise and understanding heart, tiiat 
he might know God's purpose, that God gave him honour, 
wealth, and length of days. Again and again these words of 
Christ ring out as amongst tbe deepest that He ever spoke : 
" Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His righteousnees, 
and all these things shall be added unto you." 

If the lamp of the pure intention of the soul is not kept 
pure and clean, " how great is the darkness ! " Our Lord 
alludes, of course, to the fact that when darkness settles 
upon the forest, the beasts steal forth, the glades resound 
to tbe roar of the lion, the cry of the jackal, the laugh 
of the hyena. Uoltitudes of beasts have lain quiet in 



3.n.iized by Google 



A Necessary Peateb. 153 

their lairs whilst the sun wbs shining creep forth : and our 
Lord says that when a man's heart is set on doing God's 
will the lower and baser passions of his nature — like so 
many beasts of prey — remain in their hiding-places ; but as 
soon aa the blur comes, and the soul ceases to live for 
the one intense purpose of pleasing God, then darkness 
steals upon the house of life, and all manner of eyil and 
unclean things, that otherwise would be shamed into silence 
and secrecy, begin to reveal themselves. " How great is 
that darkness 1 " If I am addressing men who are conscious 
that there is a darkness upon life, upon truth, upon the 
Word of God ; if they are perplexed and plagued by the 
intrusion of evil things which fill them with misgiving — let 
me urge them to ask God to " cleanse the thoughts of their 
hearts by the inspiration of His Holy Spirit, that they 
may perfectly love Him, and worthily magnify His Holy 
Name." 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Lesson of Birds and Flowers. 

(Matt. rt. 26-34.) 

THE eye — that is, the pure intention — of the soul 
ceases to be single when it is diverted hy the 
covetous desire to hoard up money. It may also be 
diverted by the constant pressure of anxiety. As, there- 
fore, our Lord has been dealing with avarice, which is the 
special temptation of the well to do and prosperous, so now 
He turns to deal with the special temptation of the poor, 
which is anxious care. 

Of course, wealth has its anxietiee as well as poverty. 
The rich man, whose wealth may be swept away in an hour 
by a panic on the Stock Exchange, may toss on a sleepless 
pillow, whilst the labouring man, who cannot see beyond 
the needs of the week, may be sleeping soundly through 
the small hours. But the anxiety of those who, in any 
event, will always be certain of being provided with the 
necessaries of life is surely less excusable than the care of 
the poor man, who has no neat-^g against a rainy day; 
who may at any moment fall sick or lose his situation, and 
who may be condemned to see first his home, and then his 
scanty wardrobe, stripped first of little comforte, and then 
of necessaries ; and, when all is gone, his wife and children 
becoming every day paler, thinner, and hungrier. 

It is to be noticed that our Lord's tone is much gentler 
and more tender as He turns to address the poor, who toil 
for their daily bread, and whose slenderly provided table 
is often shadowed with the spectre of anxiety about to- 
morrow's provision. In the former paragraph there was a 



3.n.iized by Google 



FOBESIOHT AND FOBEBODING. 155 

tone of Btem remoofitrance as He spoke of the abBordity of 
setting the heart on things which the thief might steal and 
the moth corrupt ; but here there is a touch of tender pity 
and sympathy, as He says, three times over : " Don't be 
anxious." He never foi^ot that He was the child of the 
labouring classes ; that His mother, at His birth, had 
brought the gift of the poor to the Temple ; and that, from 
boyhood. He had been accustomed to the shifts of poverty. 
His frequent speech about patching garments and using old 
bottleekins, about the price of sparrows, and the scanty 
pittance of a labourer's life, indicate that His mind was 
habituated to the experiences of the poor. Ever since He 
had left His mother's home, abandoning the trade which 
had secured slender provision for Himself and others, He 
had known what it was to have no place in which to shelter 
for the night, and to subsist on the chance gifte of charity 
and Mendship. 

The words " take no thought," in the Authorized Version, 
do not represent the true force of the phrase as used by our 
Lord. We are endowed with the faculty of foresight, of 
scanning the horizon, of anticipating the lowering storm- 
clouds, and of taking in our sails. "He that provideth 
not for his own," says the Apostle, " is worse than an 
unbeliever" — and provision involves foresight. But there 
is all the difference in the world between foresight and 
foreboding. It is the latter, not the former, that our Iiord 
chides. A wise man must lay his carefully considered 
plans, and work for their accomplishment. The farmer 
must sow in the autumn for the coming harvest. The 
importer must arrange, months beforehand, for the arrival 
of foreign produce at a given time when the home markets 
will be ripe for it. The manufacturer is already preparing 
the season's goods for next year. But when all has been 



3.n.iized by Google 



156 The Lesson op Bieds akd Fwwbes. 

done that can be done, our Lord says : " You must leave 
the resulte with God : you have done all that you could do ; 
now leave the outcome with your heavenly Father," 

The words which are suggested by the BeviBed Version, 
instead of "Take no thought," are "Be not anxious." The 
Greek word imj^ee that the mind is divided and broken 
up from the main object and purpose of existence, by the 
oouRtant pressure of foreboding care. As the force of a 
stream is lessened if the waters are diverted into two or 
three channels, so the force of heart and life dwindle when 
the perpetual dread of failure and loss calls off the soul from 
its primary intention and aim. How can a man do his best 
work if he is paralysed by foreboding as to the contents of 
to-morrow I When the mind is stricken with panic, tossed 
to and fro with distraction, and filled with pictures of 
penury and destitution; when evety sight of wife and 
family only awakens deeper dread of what may await them ; 
when paragraphs In the daily papers prophesy the pressure 
of hard times — how can the soul do its best work! It is 
divided, distracted, and torn. 

In this paragraph our Lord is dealing principally with 
food and raiment — the simple needs of an agricultural and 
pastoral people. And there are myriads around us on 
whose lips these questions are perpetual, " What shall we 
eat) What shall we drink? Wherewithal shall we be 
clothed?" Clearly wo are creatures of two worlds. Our 
minds hunger for tnith and our hearts for love. " Man 
doth not hve by bread alone," And there are anxieties for 
others, for their clothing in the garments of purity and 
holiness, for their feeding on the fare of the truth of God, 
and for their housing in the love of God, which are far 
•nore pressing and imperative than the care for their 
physical and temporal well-being. All these dividing 



3.n.iized by Google 



"The Lord will Provide." 157 

thoughts are equally forbidden when our Lord says: " Do 
not be anxious." 

Three times over we hear this sweet refrain, Be not 
anxious, 25-30; Be not ther^ore anxious, 31-33; Be tiot 
therefore atioMui, 3i. 

Do not be Anxious about Fooil, whether of the Body, 
the Mind, or the Heart. (1) " The life is m&re than the 
food " (25). When God gave life. He caused it to be de- 
pendent on the sustenance which is provided from field 
and orchard. It is by TfU own contrivance and ordering 
that we must be nourished by the fruits of the soil ; and 
surely He will not be so unreasonable aa to create the need 
and to contrive the perpetual recurrence of appetite, and 
then to fail in meeting both. If He has given life, does 
not that gift implicate its supports He must have bad 
a purpose in the donation of life to any one of us ; and 
sui'ely He will be responsible for the food which ia neces- 
sary, if His original purpose is not to be frustrated t 

(2) Are ye not of much more value than the birds of the 
hea/oen ? As our Lord was speaking, flocks of pigeons were 
flying overhead ; swallows were darting in the air for in- 
sects ; sparrows were flying, chirping, from stone to stone 
in search of food. All this wonderful and multitudinous 
bird-life, so blithe and happy, was a matter of constant 
interest to the child-heart of Jesus, and seemed to rebuke 
foreboding fear. These little feathered creatui^os do not 
perform a stroke of work for their living. They do not 
provide their food, but only take what the Creator gives, 
as He opens His band to supply their need. That which 
He giveth them they gather. You may walk for days 
through the forests and find no dead bird. I grant you 
that the wild things of the woods do perish at certain 



3.n.iized by Google 



158 Thb Lbsson of Bibds and Flowers. 

wasons ; but, before we chai^ this on any want of care on 
the part of the Creator, it would have to be shown that the 
balance of creation had not been disturbed by human inter- 
ferenoe. Do we not prognosticate the advent of a hard 
winter by the abundance of berries on the hedges, and ia 
not that the Divine provision for the birds of the air, who 
have neither storehouse nor bam t Surely, if our heavenly 
Father feeds these tiny creatures, which are the penmonerB 
on His bounty, and can do nothing to help themselves, He 
will not be unmindful of His ehildren ! " Toor heavenly 
Father feedeth them — are ye not mudi better than they t " 
(3) Besides, " WJtieh of you by bting aavxifnu eon add one 
mirit unto his statvre f " or (as the margin suggests) to his 
a^. Clearly the Lord is not speaking of our physical 
stature, for it would be an unheard-of thing, and one for 
which none would be specially solicitous, to add a foot and 
a half to his stature > He is evidently alluding to the 
length of human life, of which the Psalmist says : " Thou 
hast made my days as an handbreadth." After all, the 
length of our years has been fixed by Ood ; and we are im- 
mortal till our work is done. All our aiuriety will not add 
an inch or a yard to the path that we are destined to tread 
between onr cradle and our grave. Ood has measured it out 
with exact precision, and He will supply all our need until 
the day's march is ended, and the day's labour fulfilled. 

Do KOT BE Asxious ABOUT Glothino. (1) All the 
anifmUa have their eovermg, the lamb its wool, the kitten 
its fur, the fledgling its AaSy down — but man is bom 
naked, and requires clothing for modesty and warmth. 
This was evidently the int«ntion of the Creator, and He 
has filled the world with the materials for our supply. May 
we not hold Him responsible to meet the needs of His own 
creation! Did He not clothe Adam and Eve with the 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Floba op Palestink. 159 

skins of beasts already slain in sacrifice f Does He not 
provide for the soul the white and daEzling raiment of im- 
puted righteousnesB, with which we axe arraiyed before all 
worlds? And will He neglect the body! "The body is 
more than niiment." If He bestowH the one so curionsly 
ftod wondrously wrought, surely He will give the other. 

(3) Besides, look again into nabtre at the growth of 
the fiowera. At tiie time when Jesus spoke, the fields 
were carpeted with wild flowers. Palestine in those days 
was the land, not of milk only, beq)eaking the rich pastures, 
but of honey, because the air was redolent with the breath 
of myriads of wild fioweis, bespangling the pastures, clus- 
tering in the hedgerows, and biding in the woodland glades. 
Theirs was as careless a life as that of the birds. " They 
toil not, neither do they spin." For some, no doubt — 
the exotics of our greenhouses and nurseries — there must 
be excessive care, in the provision of greenhouse heat and 
the experienced skill of the horticulturist. The Lord was 
not alluding to these, but to the flowers of the grass, 
which grew amid tho wilds of nature or in the gardens 
of the poor, and were cut down by the scythe or gathered 
to perish quickly in the hot hand of the careless child. To 
Him these were exqttisitely beautiful. Of the Son df Man 
it may be said, with peculiar appropriateness, that "the 
meanest flower that blew awakened thoughts too deep for 
tears." The wild flowers of His native laud were, in His 
eyes, attired in garments mote rare and beautiful than the 
gorgeous magnificence of Israel's greatest king. " Solomon 
in ail his glory was not arrayed like one of these." How 
quietly they grew, far apart from the clatter of machinery, 
the throw of the shuttle, the revolution of the wheel ! 
How modestly and unobtrusively they concealed themselves 
from the glare of publicity, in dells and woodland glades I 
How simple in their chaste and lovely garb t 



3.n.iized by Google 



160 The Lesson op Bibds and Flowees. 

What do they teach 1 Was not this the lesson of their 
growth, that Ood loves the beautiful, and expends thought 
imd skill in its production 1 He might have made the 
world without a daisy, and human life without childhood. 
Considerations of stern utility might have imposed their 
rigorous Uw on the creation of all things visible and 
invisible ; but since the GrcAtor clothes with beauty the 
short-lived flowers of the wilds, the ephemeral insects of a 
summer day, the shells of the minut« creatores that build 
up the solid fabric of the rocks, by the countless myriads of 
their tiny homes, surely this prodigality, this lavisbness, 
this prolific superabundance of creativeness, must mean that 
He con and will withhold no good thing from them that fear 
Him, least of all clothes for their nakedness and warmth. 

Of course we must fulfil our part. We are not to imitate 
the careless improvident life lA the lower orders of creation. 
We must certainly sow and reap and gather into bams ; we 
must certainly toil if we are men, and spin if we are 
women ; but when we have done all, we must fall back on 
the Divine Providence, believing that it is vain for us 
to rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of 
sorrows, because our God will give us all we need, even 
whilst we sleep. He will not allow His children to starve, 
or go unsheltered, unclothed, and unshod. "Therefore, 
take no thought, saying, What shaU we eat, or what shall 
we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed I " 

Be mot Ahxious : it U EetUkmisk. " After all these 
things do the OentOes seek." The blue waters of the 
Mediterranean were almost within eight, reminding the 
Speaker of the great nations that lay around their shores, 
and Uunched their navies on their bosom. He knew that 
whilst some might be feeling after Ood, if h^ly they might 
find Him, or be found of Him, the bulk of them had 



3.n.iized by Google 



" Sons op God." 161 

refused to retom Him in their knowledge, and hod exchanged 
the Creator for the creature. He knew, moreover, that to 
moet of them either there was no God or they deemed 
Him too far removed from Bublimaiy things to hare any 
interest in their lives. Of what good, then, was it to pray 
to Him I For many the supreme conception was of fate, 
destiny, or chance, as the presiding arbiter and ruler of 
their existence. 

Amid the darkneea of such conceptions, what could be 
expected but that the grim spectre of care should haunt 
every life, and sit uninvited at every table. When man 
has DO knowledge of the Divine Fatherhood, what defence 
has he against sudden, wild alarms, or insidious corroding 
carel 

But those whom our Lord addressed had been taught 
to regard Qod as their Heavenly Father; and to us the 
revelation has been more explicit than ever to them. We 
know that we are sons of God, begotten unto a living hope, 
partakers of the Divine nature, adopted into the Divine 
family. We are conscious that the spirit of sonship is in 
our hearts, witnessing that we have been bom from above. 
We realize that we are not only sons but heirs — heirs 
of God and joint heirs with Christ. Our Father loves us, 
knows our frame, views us with paternal pitifulness, and 
longs to bring us to gloiy. He has given us His Son and 
His Spirit : surely He will not withhold the food and 
raiment of our body. He has given the infinitely great ; 
surely He will not grudge the small. " He that spared not 
His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall 
He not with Him also freely give us all thingB 1 " 

B* HOT Anxious : there are other and greater Interests 
at Slake. "Seek ye first the kingdom of Ood and His 
righteousness." It is the great object of Ood that His 



3.n.iized by Google 



162 The Lesson op Birds and Flowers. 

loDg-expected Kingdom should come ; that purity as of 
the ilnwii Hhould replace the reign of corruption and 
night; that joyous life should replace death, and love 
hatred. For this He has been at work all through the 
long centuries, nor will He stay TTjb hand till angel-volceti 
proclaim that the kingdoms of this world have become the 
kingdoms of His Christ. 

In His great kindness He ha^ called us in to help Him 
accomplish His high purpose, and lays it upon us as a 
special burden that we should not rest, nor allow Him to 
rettt, until the Kingdom come, and His will be done on 
earth as in heaven. For this we must labour and pray. 
Be anxious for this, if you will. Lie awake at night to 
mourn over the condition of lost souls, if you can. Expend 
teara and prayers in untiring supplication for the lost. 
Whilst you care for God's concerns, God will core for yours. 

The great contiactor who has undertaken a line of rail- 
way, or the construction of a vast reservoir among the 
hills, knows the necessity of providing for the well-being 
of the thousands of navvies engaged with their spades or 
trowels. If they are to do work which will not dis- 
grace him, he at least must see that their physical health 
and well-being are guaranteed. Is it likely, then, that God 
will be less careful and thoughtful of His own sons, whom 
He has called into fellowship with Himself Z Does He not 
know that we shall do oor best work when we are free 
from anxious care ? Is He so unrighteous as to forget us, 
who labour day and night for the purpose which lies so 
near His heart } It is impossible to suppose it ; but as we 
seek His Kingdom, He will seek our welfare, with both 
hands, earnestly and carefully. Kest on this promise, 
which He gave who is incarnate truth : " All these things 
shall be added." 



3.n.iized by Google 



"SUPPICIBHT UKTO THE DaT." 163 

Bs HOT Anxious : it wiU not Rob to-momno of its 
Anxiety, th&ugh it loVi deprive to-day of its Strength. 
"Take, therefore, no thought for the morrow, for the 
morrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient unto the day 
is the evil thereof." From these words it is clear that 
every morrow will have some anxiety, and every day some 
evil. No sky without some clouds to fleck its blue, no lot 
without its crook, no Paschal lamb without its bitter 
herbs. We shall never be totally free from anxiety of one 
kind or another untQ we have passed the gates of pearl. 

However much we worry to-day, in the hope of antici- 
pating and cancelling the worry of to-morrow, we shall not 
succeed. There always will be something to cause us 
annoyance, perplexity, and chagrin. But as the day, so 
will the strength be — just enough, with not one grain to 
spare. Indeed, the anxiety will be permitted to drive us 
to the strong for strength, as a hard winter will drive even 
the timid deer down to the homes of men. 

To worry, therefore, about to-morrow is to overpress the 
strength of to-day, which is enough for to-day's burden, 
but not enough for to-day's and to-morrow's also. If you 
tiy to carry to-day's burdens by actual endurance, and to- 
morrow's by anticipation, what wonder that you break 
down, ageing prematurely, and sowing plentiful silver 
among the black locks of young manhood. 

For all these reasons, let us not be anxious. " Be care- 
ful for nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplica- 
tion, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known 
unto God ; and the peace of God, which passeth all under- 
standing, shall keep your hearts and minds, through Christ 



3.n.iized by Google 



xvrii. 
"To Them that are Without." 

(Matt. viL 1-6.) 

AS long as we are in this mortal life, we shall neces- 
saril; come into coatnct witii those whose lives are 
godless and evil. Evil men and seducers will wax 
worse and worse. People will always abound who will not 
consent to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is according to godli- 
ness. There will always be perverse disputings of men 
of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, and enemies to 
whatever is pure, lovely, holy, and of good report. In this 
paragraph of the Sermon on the Mount, our Lord sets 
Himself to show us how to act towards such. It is clear 
that the Master had no desire that His servants should 
retire from humaa society, but should live amongst men as 
salt and light, arresting the progress of corruption, and 
abashing the evil deeds that hide under the cover of 
darkness; but, in addition to the quiet influence of our 
cliaracter, there will al^ys be scope for a farther exercise 
of Christian principle. In what direction, and to what 
extent, is this to take effect, and by what laws is it to be 
governed t In answer to these questions our Lord lays 
down a general principle, which is removed ea far as 
posdble from that which obtains among men. He says: 
" Whatever you do, think, or say about others must be in 
precise accordance with what you would like them to do, 
think, or say about yourself. Judge not, for with what 
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged. "With what 
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. AH 



3.n.iized by Google 



Teue Chabiti. 165 

thinga whatsoever ;e would that men ehould do onto 
jTou, do je even so to them ; and all things whatsoever 
ye would not that men should do unto you, do ye not so 
to them." 

It is clear that there are in this paragraph three circles 
of men with whom we are constantly thrown into contact, 
first, our Aasooiates and JTeighbtmrs, whose characters and 
conduct are constantly passing in review before us; 
secondly, tfie Erring Ones, whose motes trouble us ; and, 
thirdly, the Doga and Swine, which stand for the notoriously 
vicious and profane. 

As TO OUB Associates asb NxiaHBOUBS, (1) Our Lord 
aaya : " Jvdge not." We need hardly say that there is a 
sense in which we are bound to form careful judgments on 
those around us. The judgment is one of the noblest facul- 
ties of our moral life, and our surest safeguard from the 
sharks that infest tiie seas. The young girl must tiae it, of 
the man who is seeking to engage her affections ; the young 
man must use it, of the man who o£fers him a partnership ; 
the seeker after truth must use it, of the teacher who 
professes to be able to lead him. Vhexe is no prayer that 
we need more often or more fervently to make than that 
God would give us right judgment in all things. " He 
that is spiritual judgeth all things." 

But the judgment prohibited by our Lord is altogether 
different from this, and is that spirit of cenaoriousness and 
unkiudness which is always lying in wait for others, and 
making strong and uncharitable statements on the moat 
superficial view of their words and actions, without trying 
to understand the motives by which they have been 
actuated or the difficulties of their position. 

The natural man is proud, haughty, and self-opinionated. 
He has a great contempt of, and a great prejudice towards, 
those who do not belong to his own sect or party. He is. 



3.n.iized by Google 



166 "To Them that ahe Without." 

therefore, constADtl; on the wat«h for them, nuLVing faults 
where there are none, and aggravating them where they are. 
When he haa formed, however hastily, his judgment, he is 
not content with contemplating it for himself, but takes 
every opportunity of venting it in word and act. If such 
men can win anoQter to their party, they are perfectly 
willing to condone hie faulte ; otherwise they will not 
scruple to antagonise him and his influence, by poiHoning 
the minds of bis neighbours and contemporaries. This sin 
of censorious judgment is a constant peril to us all, and one 
against which we need to watch and pray. 

Beware lest you have a secret joy in seeing that another, 
who had borne an irreproachable character, has failed ! Be- 
ware lest you base your estimate of another on idle stories, 
suspicions, suggestions, and surmises, and without sufficient 
evidence t Beware of seeking after a reputation for quick- 
ness in estimating the true worth of otheis, since the desire 
to maintain such a reputation is fraught with temptation 1 
Beware of speaking of the faulta of others, except you have 
prayed about them first ! Beware of uttering your criti- 
cisms, unless there is some end to he gained in warning 
others I Beware of speaking of others ; tilt you have looked 
at home ! Eemember the proverb about glass houses ! 

There are some who seem unable of forming a generous 
estimate of any. According to them, there is always some 
evil motive behind apparent goodness, which detracts from 
all merit or virtue. "Yes, he does seem religious and 
humane, but then, you know, there is a rich old relative in 
the background, and it is all-important to keep in touch 
with him, and that sort of thing goes down well in that 
quarter." Or, " Yes, he is religious enough just now, but, 
you know, there is a lady in the question, ajid he is per- 
fectly right in the way he is taking to win her." Ah, it is 
a sad and miserable state of mind to have no eyes but for 



3.n.iized by Google 



A Misjudged Man. 167 

wounds, and bruiueK, and putrefying sores, and to find these 
"beneath the Burface when they do not appear to the eyes of 
others. There are many young men and women amongst 
us in society who can hardly indulge in any language but 
that of depreciation. 

(2) Our ignorance of most of Ihe facts should give us pause 
before passing harsh and censorious judgmeute. Take this, 
for instance : A merchant whs thought to be very selfish 
with his money. He was known to be very rich, and yet 
w~ en asked for subscriptions he gave always a small sum 
{£ >) where his neighbours thought he ought to give X20. 
He was therefore in ill odour for miserliness and greed. 
This went on for yeai's, and many closed their hearte 
a^nst him. One of his friends, however, who felt that 
there might be some other explanation, set himself, with 
careful inquiry, to ascertain the fa^^. It was with some 
difficulty that he finally discovered that this much-abused 
man was supporting handsomely a large family of poor 
relatives. He educated them well, and put them out in 
life with no niggard hand. They lived in another town, 
and DO one knew of the source of their income. Their 
benefactor never allowed his left hand to know what his 
right hand did. Here was a man whom all were mis- 
judging because they did not know the full facts. Is it a 
solitary instance % 

(3) Ths foot that we camnot judge others adx^rsdy without 
revealing ourselves may also make us hesitate. The man 
who imputes low motives to the conduct of another, is 
probably conscious of their presence within himself. He is 
already actuated by them, or would be if he were in the 
place of the man he criticises. He has no higher standard 
for another than that which rules in bis own breast, and 
almost unconsciously in his criticisms he is revealing his 
eeoret soul. 



3.n.iized by Google 



168 "To Them that abb Without." 

{4) It it inevUabU tliat our harsh jvdgmenta of oikera 
toiU ooma back on omtdvea. A. mftn receives faack what he 
givee. There is an automatic law of compenfiatioa in 
society. Kindness begets kindness, censoriousness begets 
oeusorioasneBS. Ishmael'a hand was against everyone, and 
every man's hand was against him. Adonibezek cut off 
the thtuube and great toes of seventy kings ; and as it was 
done by him it was done to him. Haman was hanged on 
the gallows which he had erected for Mordecai. The Jew, 
who banned all men as heathen dogs, is himself banned. 
The world may fitly be compared to a vast field in which 
each man drc^ his seed, and it comes back to him, not jtist 
the same that it was when he dropped it in, any more than 
in the antumn you reap from the earth the black herry 
which you hid in its broad bosom in the spring, but some- 
thing which has its true cozre^wndenoe and proportion to 
that. Every gift has its return, every act its rebound, every 
voice its echo. The Lord states the alternative in another 
discourse, closely corresponding to this, when He says : 
" Qive, and it shall be given unto you ; good measure, 
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall 
men give into your bosom. For with the same measure 
that ye mete withal it shall be messured to you again." 

"Wherefore judge nothing before the time, until the 
Lord come, who will both bring to light the hidden things 
of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts, 
and then shall each man have his praise from God" 
(1 Oor. iv, 5, E.v,). Especially guard against prgvdice — 
that is, pre-judgment. Bemember that there are dogs and 
swine in the make-up of your own heart, and you most 
see to it that their presence does not trample under feet 
what is purest, noblest, and best, and rend men and women 
who, if you but knew and understood them more fully, 
would attract your loving veneration. Remember the 



3.n.iized by Google 



"Satan rebukinq Sin!" 169 

words with which our Lord prefaced His warning against 
censorious judgment: "Be ye therefore merciful, as your 
Father also is m^viful." 

As TO THE EBRiNa — (1) Consider the beam that is in y&tir 
own eye. The beam is, of course, a log, rafter, or joist, and 
is the extreme contrast to the chip or splint of wood which 
is light enough to float in the air ; and a child con under- 
stand what our Lord means when He employs a well- 
known Jewish proYerb to give the flavour of homeliness to 
His speech. 

(2) By nature we are extremely prone to put other people 
right. We behold the mote that ia in our brother's eye 
till we can think of nothing else. All the good qualities 
he possesses weigh lighter than swansdown against that 
one inconsistency which presents itself to as at each mention 
of his name. Finally, we go to him with the fixed resolve 
of ridding him of his mote, saying : " Let me pull out the 
mote that is in thine eye." Now in all this there would be 
nothing to condemn — indeed, there would be much to 
commend — if it were done lovingly, humbly, and after the 
due confession and putting away from our own life of all 
inconsistency and sin ; but it is the height of absurdity to 
attempt to extract the mote when your own vision is dis- 
torted by the presence of the unextracted beam. How dare 
you presume to deal with the faultiness of others, when your 
own faults have not been Corrected ! It is like Satan re- 
buking sin. Well may men cry, " Physician, heal thyself." 

(3) It i» emdenOy a very delicate operation to correct the 
fmdts of others. Our Lord compares it to the extraction of 
a little piece of grit, or dust, or a minute insect, tcom an 
inflamed eye. A clumsy band may easily make the matter 
worse. Only the tenderest, strongest haJid can be trusted 
for the operation ; and, if I might choose, let me have one 



3.n.iized by Google 



170 "To Theh that are Withoiit." 

who haa )iim§elf auffered, being tempted. It is only He, 
who has been tempted in all points like as we are, thou^ 
without sin, who can be trusted to deal with our inner 
temptations, incoosigteQcies, and failures. It is the man 
whose own tranf^resaions have been forgiven according to 
the mnltitude of God's tender mercies who can teach trans- 
gressors TTia ways. 

(4) Firtt eaat out the beam out 0/ thine oten eye. There is 
a beam there, if you only knew it. We look, it has been 
said, at our neighbour's errors with a microscope, but at 
our own through the wrong end of a telescope. We have 
two sets of weights and measures — one for home use, and 
the other for foreign. Every vice has two names ; and we 
call it by the flatt«ring and minimising one when we 
commit it, and by the ugly one when our neighbour does. 
Everybody can see the hump on his friend's shoulders, but 
it takes some effort to see our own. A blind guide is bad 
enough, but a blind oculist is a still more ridiculous 
anomaly. The more we know of ourselves, the more pitdful 
we shall be of others; the less likely to form rash and 
harsh judgments ; tibe more sweet and tender we shall be 
in trying to make men better. 

(5) Then thou shall see de<wly. Only the pure heart sees ; 
and when once some heart-sin is put away a flood of light 
pours on all things in heaven and on earth. We see sin 
as we never saw it, and the love of God and the grace of 
our Lord JesuR Christ. 

Heaven sbovs ia Bofter blue, 

Eartb aroand ia Bweeter green ; 
Something sliiiiei in ereiy bus 

Christless ejes have never seen. 
Birds widi gladder songe o'erflow, 

Floorers with brighter beanties shine, 
While Christ whispers in my ear, 

I am His and He ia mine. 



3.n.iized by Google 



"Peakm bbfobb Swine." 171 

As TO DoGB AND SwiNX — Ufe a wUt discrimination. Bup- 
poee a priest, on coming out of the Temple, encounters a 
hiingiy dog — one of those yelping, Toracious, unclean 
animals, which are the scavengers and pests of Oriental 
cities— would it be aeemly for him to return to the Temple, 
take a piece of the flesh which was reserved from the 
sacrifices for the use of priests, and therefore hdy, and 
give it to the dog for food i He might relieve the creature's 
hunger, but not with aucfa food as that. Or suppose a man, 
carrying a bag of pearls through a forest, were to encounter 
a hog, would it be wise or seemly for him to place the 
pearls before it, when it needed acorns 1 Similarly, it is 
unseemly to offer the sacraments of our holy religion, or 
t^e forgiveness of Christ's Oospel, to the notoriously un- 
clean and untrue, or to discuss the sacred mysteries of the 
Epistle to the EpbesiaDS with those who are set on coarse 
and carnal pleasures. Their natures must first be changed. 
They must bo bom from above. Old things must pass 
away, and all things become new. Then, when the heart 
of stone has been removed and the heart of flesh substi- 
tuted, the soul will hunger after the Divine mysteries, and 
will be able to app'eciate them in such a way as to justify 
us in presenting them. The raven may feed on carrion, 
but the dove will return to Noah's Ark until she can find 
her natural food. 

For all this we need something which was not fully 
revealed when our Lord was speaking, but has been 
revealed since. The soul which stands before this high 
ideal iB filled with despair until it remembers — first, that 
the precious Blood cleanses from all sin and shortcoming ; 
and, second, tliat the Holy Spirit longs to make possible 
and real these heavenly ideals. May that Blood cleanse, 
and that Spirit renew and perfect thee and me t 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Royalty of our Life. 

(Katt. viL 7-12.) 

IT is inevitable, aa the Ziord has clearly implied in the 
preceding words, that, so long as we are in the world, 
we must come in contact with its evil. There will be 
inconsistencies that we shall be tempt«d to judge, motes and 
beams that we shall have to extract, and swine or dogs with 
which we must reckon. It cannot be child's play for any 
of US. And if we are to keep ourselves unspotted from the 
world, and unsubdued by the inward power of sin, we must 
have resort to the weapon of All-Prayer. Therefore it is 
that our Lord turns from the exhortations of the preceding 
paragraph to these injunctions concerning prayer. It was 
as though He said : " You will never succeed in being or 
doing what I say, unless your lives are full of persistent and 
prevailing prayer." 

It may be that there is an even wider range of thought. 
As we review this matchless conception of a holy life, so 
far removed above anything which the mind of man has 
conceived ; as we recall the Beatitudes of the opening sen- 
tences, the searching fulfilment of the older law, the warn- 
ings against an impaired intention of the soul, against osten- 
tation, covetousnees, and care— our hearts may well faint 
within us at the immensity of the task before us. And as 
we think of His demand — that we should be perfect as our 
heavenly Father is perfect, that we should be filled witii a 
Divine love, and that we should always treat others as wa 
wish that they should treat us — we might again ray : " Who 
is sufficient for these thin^l" To answer this double 



3.n.iized by Google 



Ask — Receite. 173 

attitude, which is indeed one, the Lord says : " Pray ! 
What is impossible with man is possible with God. 
Pray!" 

li.We have here two words which prove that the eatire 
paragraph is closely jointed together : " If yo then being 
evil"; "All things, £(«rB/ore, whatsoever." The eshorta- 
tion to prayer is followed by an analogy, and this by an 
injunction. 

The Exhobtatioh to Pratek. (1) Ask. Our Master 
knew well how much it would mean to us that His own lips 
should utter that word, but He did not hesitate to speak it. 
As Son of God, He knew all that asking would do for us; 
and, as Son of Man, He had often proved the value of the 
practice He enjcuned. Ask, He said. It was as though 
He loved to dwell on the word. See I He repeats it, not 
once or twice, but four times over, " Everyone that 
aak^ roceiveth " ; " if his son shall ask for a loaf " ; " if he 
shall ask for a fish " ; " good things to them that ask." It 
seems as though our Lord would do away with the formality 
and stateliness that attach to too many of our prayers, and 
teach us that praying is just asking, and asking as a child 
would ask. Men shrink from asking for a favour from 
their fellows, but a little child has no reserve with its 
father. In the simplest and most artless manner it asks 
for what it wants, and with no doubt at all that the father 
will gladly hasten to respond, "Thus," says our Lord, 
" ask God for what you want, as long ago you asked your 
parents; and do it without vehemence or self-conscious- 

" Every one that asketh receiveth." Emerson tells us 
that he preached his first sermon from these words, having 
obtained his divisions from the blunt saying of a field 
labourer, who said that men are always praying, and always 



3.n.iized by Google 



174 The Royalty of oue Life. 

being heard. His diviBions, therefore, were ae follows : — 
(1) Hen are always [irayiiig; (2) all their prayers are 
granted ; (3) we must beware, then, what we ask. The 
seoond is the doubtful one. Is it true that aH our prayers 
are granted ? Not surely in the way that we ask, as we 
shall see ; but in some way. There is no prayer that wo 
utter which is based on a real need — nothing that we 
sincerely ask for which is not answered somehow, somewhen, 
somewhere. 

With too many of us, alas ! there is a failure in the art 
of receptivenesB. We ask, but we fail to take. We send 
out our letter in the outgoing mail, but never go near the 
office to ask if there is a reply addressed to us. We send 
an ocean cabl^nram asking for a consignment of heavenly 
treasure, but never go down to the wharf to ascertain if it 
has arrived, and to claim it. 

(2) Seek. You ask for a gift ; you seek for something you 
have lost, or for some valuable treasure. The miner gropes 
along the corridors of the mine on hia quest ; the pearl- 
fisher dives in search of goodly pearls ; the woman who had 
lost her silver piece lit a candle, and swept and searched 
her house diligently till she found it. Seek, says our Lord. 
It you have lost your peace with God, the blessed con- 
sciousness of His presence, power in service, or uiy other 
spiritual gift, do not settle down, content to live without it, 
but seek it diligently until you find. " Your hearts shall 
live that seek Ood." If you have heard of some gift or 
grace which others possess, and may be equally yours as 
theirs, seek it. Seek it as men seek for hidden treasure or 
for goodly pearls, or as the philosophers were wont to seek 
for the substance which should turn everything into gold, 
as explorers seek for the secret of the North Pole, or as 
scientists search for the secrets which Nature holds back 
from all but reverent and persevering inquiry. " Seek Him 



3.n.iized by Google 



Seek — Find. 175 

that maketh the BevBii stars and Orion, and tumeth the 
shadow of death into the monung." 

" He that seeketh, findeth." " If thou erieet after know- 
ledge, and hftest ap thy voice for understanding ; If thou 
seekest her as ailTer, and searchest for her as for bid 
treasureH, then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, 
and find the knowledge of Ood." We may not always find 
just what we seek, but we shall come on something much 
better, and more satisfying. Abraham and the patriarchs 
declared plainly that they sought a country, but they all 
died in tents, the shifting memorials of their pilgrimage. 
The philoaopbers of the Middle Ages, to whom we have 
referred, did not find the golden stone, but they laid the 
foundations of modem chemistry. You may not obtain 
that special opportunity of blessing others that you have 
long desired ; but in your willingness to take a subordinate 
position, in your meekness and humility, you will certainly 
win a moral and spiritual influence incomparably greater. 
The resolute seeker finds. He starts off to raise crops 
of golden grain from the brown fields, and as patiently he 
drives his plough, the metallic chink of the share on metAl 
makes it certain that he has come on treasure-troye. 

(3) Knock. We ask for a gift ; we seek something we have 
lost ; but we knock for admittance to the house of our 
friend. A door stands between us and the master of the 
house, which can only be opened from within. Then we 
knock ; at first quietly, and titen more vehemently and 
loudly, till we hear the drawing back of bolt and bar, and 
see the door thrown open. We need the gifts of God, and 
are thankful for the Measures which are to be obtained by 
earnest, prayerful search ; but we should desire, above all, 
to have face to face friendship with Himself. Sometimes 
the door of fellowship stands wide open, and we can enter 
without let or hindrance. At other times it seems as 



3.n.iized by Google 



176 The Royalty op oue Life. 

though God had hidden His face and withdrawn Himself. 
These are the occasions when we must knock. And how 
often it has been the experience of the saints that, as they 
have stood waiting and knocking, the door has been opened 
as by an invisible hand, and the times of greatest difficulty 
at the beginning have been those of greatest liberty at the 
close! 

" To him that knocketh it shall be opened." There is no 
doubt or hesitation in our Lord's assurance. In another 
paragraph He speaks of those who shall stand without and 
knock, saying, " Lord, Lord, open unto us," and He shaJl 
say, " Depart " ; but that dread parable has nothing to do 
with the access into the presence of God, and the fellowship 
with God, of which the Ma.ster is here treating. Per- 
sistency, urgency, the holy violence which will not be 
denied, are dear to the heart of God, and are certain to 
win a loving and favourable response. " Though the vision 
tarry, wait for it : it shall come, it shall not tarry." 

An AnALOai. Bread and fish were the simple fare of 
the Galilean peasants whom our Lord addressed on the 
shores of their own beaut^ul lake—the bread as the neces- 
sary staff of life ; the fish as an appetising addition. Little 
children, in their simplicity, might sometimes mistake a 
stone for one of the small loaves of the Oriental shape 
snd fashion, or a serpent for a fish. But, even though 
the heart of a human father is fallen and evil, it cannot 
be supposed for an instant that he would give the child 
what it asked. His love would at once withhold his hand. 
He would say : " No, little one, the stone is not food ; the 
serpent would sting and poison you : but, see, here is what 
you want — bread and fish. I cannot give you those." So it 
often happens that in this mortal life of ours, where the 
shadows fall so dense and dark, and we are obliged to grope 



3.n.iized by Google 



A Mistaken Fbateb. 177 

in the twilight, we are hungry with inuneeaurable appetite, 
and think that this or the other boon will surely satisfy our 
bouIb. We clamour for a stone, thinking it to he bread ; or 
cry out for the gUttering serpent, supposing it to be a 
dainty that will titillate our palate. But as the earthly 
father refused, notwithstanding his weakness and evil, 
much more will Qod refuse. " Ko," He says ; " My child, I 
cannot, for love's sake, give it you ; but, see, here is bread 
indeed, and here the fish — eat, drink, ajid be satisfied." 

Agnin, God sometimes gives things that appear to be 
stones and serpents, but they turn out to be bread and fish. 
The mother of St. Aiigustine prayed to God that He would 
not suffer her beloved son to go to Bome, because she 
dreaded the persecutions which were threatening the city. 
He went, notwithstanding, and it was in Italy that he 
found Christ. Referring in after years to this incident in 
his life, he says : " Wbat was it, my Ood, that she sought 
of Thee with many tears ? Was it not that Thou wouldest 
not suffer me to to set sail for Bome ! But Thou, in Thy 
deep counsels, and listening to the hinge of her desire, didst 
disregard the thing which she asked for, that Thou mightest 
do in me that which she was ever asking — the conversion of 
my soul." 

Do not be surprised if there are placed on your table 
viands that threaten to break your teeth and disagree with 
your digestion. Since Ood has put them there— and He is 
good — you will find them in the highest degree nutritious. 
Though they be the reverse of the prophet's vision — bitter 
to the mouth — they will prove to be wholesome, and sweet 
to the digestion. 

Or bike a third case. Suppose a child in its hunger asks 
for bread and fish. Its father, though evil, will not 
tantalise it by giving it something which wiU defy its 
powers of assimilation. Though he were to suffer the 



3.n.iized by Google 



178 Thb Rotaijt of oue Life. 

eztremitieB of Btarration, he would cheerfully endure them 
radier than reepoud thus to his child's artiees faith. We 
may therefore go with large requests to our God, asking 
for what we need, and asking in the certain faith that He 
will only give ua good things. Each prayer we repeat will 
be answered only in giving. He wiU substitute the bless- 
ing we would crave if we knew as much as He does of the 
heart of man. What a comfort it is to know that Qod 
gives only good things. What He withholds is good ; what 
He gives is good ; what He substitutes in His answer to 
our petitions is good — nay, good is not strong enough. He 
gives always the beet. 

It should be remembered that our God gives not only 
the necessaries, but the luxuries and comforts of life. The 
Lord prepared for His hungry friends, exhausted by the 
labours of the night, not bread alone, but fish. "When 
they got out upon the land they see a fire of charcoal there, 
and fish laid thereon, and bread." It was as though, in that 
last breakfast with Him, the Master desired to teach that in 
all coming time He would give His faithful disciples the 
daily supply of their returning wants, together with the 
warmth of human love, which ministers to the sense of 
enjoyment as well as to present need. 

This is a great consolation in prayer. We can ask for 
anything and everything we want; we may be sitto that 
no good thing will be withholden from those who walk 
uprightly ; but we may also be sure that God loves us too 
well to give anything that would hurt us. 

Probably our lives are meagre and impoverished, when 
tiiey might become full of good things, because we fail to 
ask. Notice oar Lord's words : " How much more shall 
your Father which is in heaven give good things to them 
that ask Him," Is not the Apostle James right when He 
says : " Ye have not because ye ask not ? " That is the one 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Golden Rule. 179 

reason. Or, " Because ye aak amiss, that ye may consume 
it upon your lusts." That is the second reason. Either not 
to pray, or to pray from selfish motives, shuts ua out of a 
great amount of Divine helpfulness which otherwise would 
be ours. Our Lord puts into oiu" hands the key to the 
vaults in God's bank. It is our fault if all grace does not 
abound in us, and if we are poor when we might be rich. 

An iKJUWonoN. "All things, therefore, whatsoever ye 
would that men should do unto you, even bo do ye also 
unto them." With much reason this has been called "The 
Golden Kule." 

Gibbon reminds ns that, in a negative form, it was in 
vogue four centuries before the Christian Bra. Eut this is 
not to be wondered at, since Christ was in the world from 
the first. " That was the true Light, even the Light which 
lighteth every man, coming into the world. He was in the 
world, and the world was made by Him, and the world 
knew Him not." But for the positive form of this truth, 
and for the power by which it can be made operative in our 
selfish, evil hearts, we are entirely indebted to the teaching 
and inspiration of Jesus Christ. 

Translated into common English, this precept may be 
rendered: Put yourself in another's place; treat him as 
you would wish to be treated under similar circumstances ; 
do not deal with him as you would not wish to be dealt 
with. The Lord, in effect, goes back to the words which 
stand at the beginning of the chapter, Kvying : " Judge as 
you would like to be judged ; measure as you would like it 
to be measured to you." 

The principle, of course, as He says, is witnessed " by tiie 
law and the prophets." We find it stated in the second 
great commandment : " Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 
thyself." It is Jimdammitai, underpinning the whole 



3.n.iized by Google 



180 The Kotaltt of oue Life. 

structure of human society. It is egviit(^>te, because all men 
are more nearly on an equality than might be infeired from 
a ootuddenition of their outward circumstances. It is jiort- 
able, " like the two-foot rule " which the artisan carries in 
his pocket for the measurement of any work which he may 
be called to estimate. 

The Emperor SeveniH was so charmed by the excellence 
of this rule that he ordered a crier to repeat it whenever he 
had occasion to punish any person, and he caused it to be 
inscribed on the most notable parts of the palace, and on 
many of the public buildings. But though the maxim has 
attracted so much attention and admiration, it is powerless 
to effect any great reform apart from the Holy Spirit. 
Therefore it is that in the other version of this paragraph, 
in Luke xL 13, our Lord says : " How much more shall 
your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that 
ask Him ? " After all, it is only they who have stood under 
the open sky of Pentecost, who have received their share of 
that blessed enduement and infilling, which is the right of 
every believer — but which is too seldom claimed — who can go 
through the world practising always the golden rule of love. 
It is only they who by the Holy Spirit have been brought 
into living union with Christ, who receive hour by hour the 
fuU curront of His life, that can go on loving men with the 
prodigality of affection — tempered, of course, with wisdom 
and discretion such as avail to fill up to the brim the full 
measure of the requirements of the Golden Bule. Let us 
eimply, artlessly, and earnestly, ask our Father here and 
now to bestow upon us in His fulness this beet of all dona- 
tions—the Holy Spirit. 

What a royal life this is to which our Master calls us — 
on the one hand, deriving all our needed resources from 
God ; and, on the other hand, therefore, able to be generous 
and free-handed to men. " He is able to make all grace 



3.n.iized by Google 



^•Bbbak and Give!" 181 

abound towarda us, that we, having all sufficiency in all 
things, may abound to every good work." 

Too loDg have we given stones wh^'e men asked bread, 
and serpents where they asked fish. We have pelted men 
with stones, we have stung them with the poison of asps ; 
and they have turned away ftxim us and our religion with 
loathing. Henceforth let us go through life repeating in 
essence the wonderful miracle of John vi., where out of five 
barley loavee and two small fishes, broken by the hand of 
the Master, and distributed by the hand of the disciples, vast 
crowds of hungry people were satisfied. Take your bread 
and fish from Christ, and then break and give — breai: amd 
give / There will always be twelve baskets full of fragments 
left for your personal need. 



3.n.iized by Google 



Counterfeits — " Beware ! " 

(Hatt. vii. 18-27.) 

THE world is full of counterfeits, and shams abound I 
Too often we paint and Tamieli paper to look like 
marble ; we make paste jewels ; we make of paper 
the Bolee of boots ; and experts are deceived. There is great 
danger, therefore, of the same spirit creeping into the 
Church ; and our Lord, who knew the heart of man, warns 
Hia disciples against the counterfeits of true religion. 

That Keligious Experience is a Counteifeit which dobs 
MOT Ikvoltz THK Denul of Self. We must dis- 
tinguish between the denial of self and self-denial. There 
may be self-deoial which, so far from being Uie denial of 
self, leads to self-congratulation and self -aggrandisement. 
The daughter of a fashionable home may elect to fore^ the 
gossip around the afternoon tea in her mother's drawing- 
room, in order to visit an East- End slum, but in her heaji^ 
of hearts she may be exulting in an afternoon's freedom 
from conventional custom ; she may be congratulating her- 
self on the admiration which her presence may excite 
amongst the poor ; she may be desirous of building up a 
reputation, and of extracting pity for her self-denying 
labours. In all this there is a subtle ministering to self, 
which is not easy to detect ; but there is no symptom of the 
spirit of the Cross, the Strait Gate is not entered, the 
Narrow Way is not trodden. The religious spirit, which is 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Choice of Two Wats. 183 

of great price in God's sight, must cut deep into the tap- 
root of onr self -life. 

Every religion haa recognised this. A non-Ghristifui 
Hindu told me at Calcutta that Hinduisni demanded eight 
different steps in the elimination of the self-life, beginning 
with the love of woman and ending with the love of 
money. The Greeks recited the story of the Choice of 
Hercules, that when his young manhood was budding he 
was assailed by Tenus and Minerva — the fonner promising 
that she would lead him by a short and easy path to the 
enjoyment of all delights ; whilst the latter, as Ijeonu^o 
depicts her, demure and staid, in her drees of grey, offered 
him the stem tasks of duty, calling him to forego the life 
of self-indulgence. In Hebrew apocryphal literature there 
is nothing more beautiful than the sketch in the book of 
Esdras, of the city, " full of all manner of good things," 
standing in the midst of a wide plain, Altered by a single 
narrow portal, which could only be reached by crossing a 
narrow causeway — so narrow that only one could walk 
alotie — with a raging fire on the right hand and storm- 
swept water on the left. Every religion which has touched 
the heart of man has bidden him enter in by " the Strait 
Gate." 

The Lord's picture is very graphic. Each fresh genera- 
tion seems to stand in a large, open valley, full of hope and 
eager expectation ; and each unit fully intending to make 
the best of the brief spell of human existence, which is all 
that is granted, and without the opportunity of returning 
for a second trial. There are two av^iues by which that 
valley may be left ; and our Lord proceeds to contrast the 
two gates, the character and breadth of the two ways, the 
number of travellers that frequent them, and their respec- 
tive goals. 

The most popular of these two gates is one that rears its 



3.n.iized by Google 



184 COCHTKBPBITS — " BeWABE ! " 

lofty height in white marble, fair and glistemng, whose 
ample space admits a never-ceasing proceesioa of ga,y young 
forms, which fill the air with their songs and beat the 
earth with their dancing feet. FestoonB of ivy and vine 
leaves are carved in the living stone, and gates that look 
like burnished gold stand wide. It opens on a gently 
sloping sward, enamelled with flowers and crossed by 
devious tracks ; now and again the path expands into opea 
spaces and woodland glades ; but as furlong follows furlong 
the grass becomes barer, the flowers fewer, the track itself 
is lees deflned, the crowds become broken up into smaller 
and smaller groups, and these dissolve into individuals, 
until finally each finds himself in a land of pits and preci- 
pices, where destruction threatens at every step, whilst 
darkness which may be felt casts midnight shadows. No 
voice answers to the voice that piteously cries for help ; no 
hand is stretched out to catch the hand that reaches out for 
succour. How " wide is the gate and broad is the way 
that leadeth to destruction, and many there be that go in 
thereat." 

But in that valley there is another aperture — a Wicket 
Oate, that might easily be missed unless looked for ; this is 
so narrow that only one can enter at a time, divest«d of 
every encumbrance. The path, at the head of which this 
straight entrance stands, is at first steep and difficult, 
paved with flints which cut the tender feet. It climbs the 
bleak hillside — on the one hand the beetling cHfis, on Uie 
other the deep ravine, and only a ledge to walk on. It is 
trodden, not by crowds, but by individuals. The idea of 
Christiana and her children is truer in the realm of fancy 
than in fact. But the end is glorious, for that path breaks 
out at last upon the uplands, " where Ood Himself is Sun." 

{1) The entravice to Ae life of (^acipleship demands an effhi^. 
" The gate is strait." We need not work for forgiveness ; 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Path— AMD the End. 185 

this is ours hj the free grace of God. We ore not to work 
for aalvation, but from it. We do not work to be saved ; but, 
being saved, we work. There must be effort to relinquish — 
effort to be still, and to await the strong hand of our Lord, 
lifting us up from the brink of despair. To lay aside every 
weight, to refuse the tendency to self -effort, to turn one's 
back resolutely on some d'"'l'"g sin, and one's face towards 
the New Jerusalem, to choose the path of separation and 
service — ^these call for effort, which our Lord compares to 
the passage of a strait gate. You cannot drive into it in a 
carriage, or carry through it your money-bags and your 
weights. 

(2) The cotUmmmce in the path of dUmpiethip denumda 
amiimuwe effort. "Karrow is the way." The world's 
religion is easy enough. " Do as you like," is its 
motto. " Be not righteous over much," is its law. 
You may go to church, undertake some branch of religious 
philanthropy, and observe certain fasts and festivals — 
only it must be at the dictate tA your own whim, and 
be for your own self-pleasing. The path of the dis- 
ciple, on the other hand, is one of perpetual limitation 
and restraint. He does not lus own will, but the will of 
Him that sent him. He anoints his head, and washes his 
face, not appearing to men to fast ; but all the time he is 
under the strict law of Christ, which, because it is tiie law 
of love, is the most inexorable law of aU. 

The vpwaard path is lonely/. Few there be that find it. 
In the days when Christianity has been most popular the 
real disciples have been fewest. Always " a little flock." 
Always " not many " are called. Qod called Abram when 
he was but one. 

(3) But the ond u abaolutdy glorious, and more than com- 
pensates. They that tread tiiat path, saying " No " to self, 
because they are always saying "Yea" to Christ, leave 

2a 



.:i.« Google 



186 COUHTBEPBITS — " BSWAEB ! " 

behind the vallej^ where the mutsnui broods, and climb to 
the upUnd levels ot life. They do not need to wait for 
the end of their journey to realize Ood'a full gift of life ; 
but here and now, at each step and each moment, aa they 
are faithful to death, Qod gives them a crown of life ; as 
they are always delivered unto death for Jeeus' sake, the 
life of Jeeus becomes more and more manifest in their 
mortal bodies. Each step forward is into purer atmosphere 
and further vision. " It leadeth unto life." 

That Religious Experience is a Counterfeit which 
DOBS NOT Fboducb GtooD Fbuit. Our Lord applies this 
principle, first, to /alee guides. It was natural that, from 
speaking of the gat« and way, He should go on to charac- 
terise the guides, who profess to be able to guide the 
pUgrim feet by the right track to the right goal. He says, 
in effect, Do riot judge by appearcmeea, for they are very 
deceptive. The wolf, which comes to ravin, may don the 
fleece of a sheep ; thorns may produce a little black berry, 
which, in the early spring, resembles the black grape; 
thiatUs of a certain description will have a blossom not 
altogether unlike the fig-tree. "By their fruits ye shall 
know them," 

Primarily this does not mean that the doctrine is the 
tree, but the man who teaches the doctrine ; and you can 
detect his true nature, not by remarking his words and acts 
when he is conscious of being watched by many eyes, but 
by the silent and unconscious fruit of temper, disposition, 
behaviour, in the privacy of the home or amid the obscurity 
of daily common places. A good tree bringeth forth good 
fruit ; an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. 

But it may be replied, Are there not many amongst us 
who refuse the doctrines of the New Testament, but whose 
lives and characters condemn many Evangelical professors? 



3.n.iized by Google 



The Seed op Eablt Days. 187 

Does not tbe preaence of such persons in our midet dis- 
prove these words of our Lord, and prove that the life is 
no true test of doctrine) So; because the very atmo- 
sphere we breathe is saturated with Christian and Evan- 
gelical influences. We all owe more to our mothers than 
we know. The good in the persons whose case we are con- 
sidering proves that they come of a godly stock, or had, 
like Lord Shaftesbury, a devoted governess or nurse, or 
came under the influence of a Christian schoolmaster. As 
boys they may have been taken to hear the truth as it is 
in Jeeus, proclaimed by lips forever sealed in death. To 
borrow the thought of another — the momentum that carries 
the train continues long after the driver has turned off the 
steam ; the tidal wave moves onward long after it has left 
the attraction of the moon ; the radiance of the dying day 
lingers on the horiEOn long after the sun has set. 

On the whole, the worth and truth of the Gospel have 
been abundantly attested all down the ages, by the 
myriads of noble characters it has produced, which have 
been as salt to the world's corruption and as lights in its 
darkness. 

It is a solemn question for every teacher amongst us : 
"Am I bearing good or evil fruit) What is the im- 
pression which 1 am producing on those around me ) Am 
I a fruit-bearing branch in the True Vine ) If not, what- 
ever my doctrine may be, I am running a serious risk of 
being cut down and cast into the fire." To save us 
from that fate, it is not enough to teach others the condi- 
tions of fruit-bearing, not enough to refrain from bearing 
evil fruit, not enough to be a neutral or negative quan- 
tity — the failure to bring forth good fruit will caune us to 
be condemned to the axe and the bonfire. Many of those 
who condemn others for their heterodoxy, and pride them- 
selves on the straitness and strictness of their adherence 



3.n.iized by Google 



188 CoDNTEaiFBiTS — " Bbwahb ! " 

to EvMigslical doctrine, but wbo in their o^ticiBm oi otiiers 
betny a terrible deficiency of Obristian love, and in their 
domestie life give no signs of the sweetnees and hnmlHty 
of Ohriat, will find some day that their fervid zeal for 
orthodoxy of creed, which has not been accompanied by 
cwthodoxy of charactw and conduct, has not availed to 
aecore them from the fate meted out to worthless fmit- 
trees. 

Onr Iiord applies the same principle, next, to fidae pro- 
femcrt. He shows how far a man may go and be lost. 
He may have a considerable amount of reverence and 
respect for the Lord's name. He is depicted as addressisg 
the Master as " Lord, Lord " ; and as avowing, three times 
over, that the name of Obrist has been the talisman sxiA 
charm by the use of which all the miradee and mighty 
works have been accomplished. Three classes defile before 
us, only to be rejected at the judgment-seat of Christ, 
where those eyes which are as a fl&me of fire pierce the 
counterfeit disciple through and through. First come the 
prophets, not in the sense of /errs -telling, but ofybrfA-telling, 
the message of a salvation which they have never appro- 
priated for themaelvee. Next come the exorcists, who have 
cast demons out of all others than themselves. Lastiy 
come the wonder-workers. But each of these dassee is 
tnmed away. Not only does the Kmg not know them as 
they approach, hut He professes unto them that He never 
did know them, and that their works have been wm-ks of 
iniquity. Every work which is wrought in the spirit of 
vaingl<n7, and for the sake of securing a personal reward, is 
accounted as nothing by Uie Master, yea, as worse than 
nothing — it is an affront to Him. Its doer flouts His 
mercy and long-suffering, and acts as though He had never 
shed His blood, never expiated his sins, never pmvhased 
his redemption. Do those who eulogies the sublime 



3.n.iized by Google 



*' Make your Calling sueb." 189 

morality of this disconrse, but refuse to admit the Divine 
claims of the Speaker, read these doeing words I If so, 
how do they underatuid them I Does the sanity which has 
characterised the Master's utteruioee hitherto forsake them 
novfl la He reliable as a Teacher and Guide only in 
dealing with the difficult problems of human life, becoming 
a mere vi8ioDfi.ry when, without one word of explanation 
or ftpology, He assumes the right to ait upon the judgment- 
aeat and utter the verdict of eternity on the quick and 
dead ) If we accept the one set of utterancea as the very 
essence of truth, why ahonld we draw the line when He 
Bpeaks as able to bid these false disciples to depart 1 

This is He with whom you and I have to do ; and, I 
pray you, make sure work for eternity. If you are wrong 
it is surely better to find out your mistake here and now 
rather than after the die is cost. You may speak with the 
tongues of men and angels, give all your goods to feed the 
poor, and your body to be burned in your steadiest witness 
to the truth — but if you ore not inspired by a Divine love 
to Ood and man it will count for nothing ; and when once 
the Master has shut-to the door, it will be in vain for you 
to stand without and knock, saying, " Open to us." The 
door will not open. The darkness will not be riven by a 
shaft of ruddy tight issuing from within. The stem rejec- 
tion will not be succeeded by a loving rec<^nition. 

Do you feer lest such a fate should be yours T Then be 
of good cheer. Those that dread it most are safest from 
it. Those who are most self-confident have most reason 
for alarm. "Not every one that aaith unto me, Lord, 
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that 
doelh the will of My Father which is in heaven." There is 
no need to die before we can enter it ; but here and now, as 
we with many fears and failures set ourselvee to do Ood'a 
will, we may enter the Kingdom, and become citizens of its 



3.n.iized by Google 



190 CpDRTEEFBITS — " BeWAEB ! " 

metropoUH — the New JeruBalem which comes down ont of 
heAven from God being radiant with Hit glory. 

That Religious Experience is a Counterfeit which dobs 

HOT SECUBE CONTACT BETWEEN THE SoUL AND CHRIST, 

WITH A Faith lbadiho to Obbdibmce. In any of those 
Syrian valleys, which some may have visited, between 
Beyrout and Damascus, it is possible to see_ wrought out 
the '^cloeing picture of His sennon. In the summer the 
soil is baked and hard with the intense heat, and any spot 
will serve equally well as the site of a house. Ko one can 
say whether his neighbour haa built well or ill ; and only 
the builder himself knows. 

But in the winter all is altered. The country is then 
exposed to sudden and heavy storms. The stiff breese 
drives up the rain-clouds from the Mediterranean, which 
empty themselves in floods of rain, and suddenly the water- 
courses, which for months had been little better than heaps 
of stones, are filled with foaming floods from bank to brae, 
pouring down into the valleys and carrying all before 
them. 

It goes ill, under such circumstances, with the man who 
has pitched his slightly-constructed house on the sand, 
taking no heed to dig down to the rock beneath, for the 
foundations are sapped by the rushing torrent, and the 
very sand is swept into new banks and beds. But the 
builder who has excavated to the living rock, and grappled 
it in the lowest courses of his construction, can look 
without dismay at the scene of devastation around. It 
comes not nigh to him ; only with his eyes does he behold 
and see the doom of the unwary. 

Such is the contrast between the man who hears and 
does not heed, and him who hears, ponders, and obeys. 
For, in the words of the Apostle : " Kot the heu«ra of the 



3.a.i,zed by Google 



"Hbaeebs asd Dobks." 191 

law axfl just before God, but the doerB of the law shall be 
justified " ^Bom. ii. 13). 

What searching words are these. We have all heard, 
but have we done 1 Are we hearers that forget, or doers 
that work 1 Do we continue in the perfect law of liberty 1 
Have we ever come into personal and living c»ntact with 
that " Stone, that tried Stone, that precious Comer-stone," 
which God has laid before the worlds were made, for a sure 
foundation 1 To bdieve about Christ is not enough ; tee 
imut believe in Hi-m. We must come to Him as a Living 
Stone, and be made living stones (1 Peter ii. 4-ft). Then, 
and in the impulses received from Him through the Holy 
Spirit, we shaU proceed to build the stinicture of a godly 
and holy character, not with wood, hay, and stubble, but 
with gold, silver, and precious stones, and it shall grow 
imto a holy temple in the Lord (1 Cor. iii. 10-15). 

Is it to be wondered at that the people felt that the 
Master's words were fraught with a mysterious authority 
and power which were absent from the words of all other 
speakers 1 All men have borne witness to this same 
characteristic, which adds the greater condemnation to 
those who reject, but which communicates the pulse and 
thrill of the Divine Spirit to those who receive with meek- 
ness the engrafted Word that is able to save the soul. 



3.n.iized by Google 



For Me moai eitensive and comprthtnsive REPORTS of 

HOME AND FOREIGN MISSION WORK 

SEE 

(PUBLISHED EVERY THURSDAY. ONE PENNY.) 

Gmtains Helpful Artidea, Ezpoiitions. and Notes oa 
Cunent E-rents viewed from the Christian standpoint. 
Rer. F. B. Meyer^ B.A4t fumiihes the special column for 
Christian Endeavouten, and contributes ** Out Daily Biead ^ 
Exposition of the Scriptutes for daily reading; and other 
prominent writers of sections of the Church constantly 
contribute to hs pages. 

The aim of " Sftc Cfrruttan " is to develop and strengtliea 
the spiritnal life of the chnrchea, and is read with interest by 
Chrittians of all ajes— the yonng being catered for more especially 
in "The Young People's Page" of Bible-searching exercises, for 
which handsome Prizes and Certificates are periodically awarded. 

Cahom Hat H. Aitkbh : 

" I have I ireu n(inl and resptct for Sju ICtniltbin. I appndnle iB cooslstoit 
vpiHloKlity And its Imi^ compKhennvcnuA, its klndlinea of tone, uid rba abtence of 
biltcmeu uid hanhneu from Lu |wg«i. It i$ of the utmoK Krvicc aa a ctaionick of 

characKrisfld b; » stroag and robust commou Hiue. 1 mo&t heutily wisb it iia ci« 



t. T. J. Bakhabdo : 

" If one goea ia ctn 
mpUby with Christian 

%f fnt frtt dirrctjrmt 



3.n.iized by Google 



3.a.t.zsdt,y Google 



3.a.t.zsdt,y Google 



I 



L 



J Dy Google 



3.n.iiffid by Google 



