Aes Eee aecanie ttn 


o 


wea 


- 


RY 


= 
+) 


ws 


ice 


es j 
“i (Rn of 


is 
ie 


ae 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
In 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/spiritworld000O0revc 


PHILLIP & JANICE 


ns ri gee 
Jack W. Cottrell 
THE CINCINNATI BISLE SEAONARY 


a vb ars, pH Hf yf 

“incinnaii Bible Coliege & Seminan 
2700 Gienway Avenue 

P.O. Box 04320 


Cincinnati, Ohio 45204-3200 


EX 


RICE 


THE MINISTRY OF ANGELS 


“(hie 
SPIRIT WORLD 


By 
REV. CLARENCE LARKIN 


Author of the Great Book on 


“DISPENSATIONAL TRUTH” 
And Other Biblical Works 


(See inside of back cover) 


G.M. ELLIOTT LIBRARY 
Cincinnati Bible College & Seminz: 


For Sale by the 
REV. CLARENCE LARKIN EST. 
2802 N. Park Ave., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Of RY AN 


COPYRIGHTED 1921 
By Rev. CLarence Larkin 
ALL RIGHTS: RESERVED 


The Charts in this Book must not be used in 
any way without written permission 
from the Author. 


ERWIN W. MOYER CO., PRINTER 


PHILADELPHIA, PA. 


THIS BOOK IS 
DEDICATED 
TO THOSE WHO LONG TO KNOW 
ABOUT THE 
‘SOPIRITAWORED” 
AS IT IS REVEALED 
IN THE 
HOLY. SCRIPTURES 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTERS 
PAGE 
ee Hire OPIRTT VV ORLD sie sar eave tie ee Lee ee ree 1 
2 He RIO NIT Ye ORs GODS Cena Nate eee ee ene Renee 5 
3s SAT AUN Gene eee eee or ae ae TaN ne TN RPS POOR hy. got ovare Cee eye e 8 
TAS aR HALEENG ANGEL Stier vote yern Rete one eoke ole Perstorsios ere 23 
®5. DEMONISM ........ SA OR as arin EACH SOE OO CO ae SE Anns On 
OM Dobe UNDERWORLD Ma sae net ccc aera Oo ee Oe 47 
/ SCH SPIRITS EUNG RISO Neer eea aoe ee ere eee re 61 
Sh Win, ILA, ia ses Groeiar WIVORUD, 54 cca cconscaadsnooss 65 
9. RELATION OF THE “Spirit WorLp” TO THE “NATURAL WorLp” = 73 
210. Man’s RELATION TO THE SpPrrRIT WorRLD..................- 83 
LAE SOU LT SEER P crac veer eee eat ce LE Rie ier eer OO oe 90 
{i 2eeiHe Se UNTERNDEDIAT HES DATE seer errr cert icin rier eects 97 
13. RECOGNITION AND RELATIONSHIP IN THE SPIRIT WoRLD..... 105 
AE SUN AT es TATE See eran errr ars at ney poe teria ae Sn eat 103 
1S ee HEP ABOLITION ORE © WADE errr: ference tele ee tr rece ev sreey ec rrereers 114 
1 Ger OPIRT Te RANGEORNUATIONG ore eerieeirrane aire eee eee 119 
1/SeLHE Se RESURREGHIONG Serine ai een Oe eee eee: 129 
[See He RESURRECTION DODYAame acre ae etree karen 136 
19S CHE UDGMPNTS cases aces cece Be ntin oe ce taner mon toe 144 

PICTURES 
PAGE 

FRONTISPIECE. THE MINISTRY OF ANGELS 
1 SATAN: S mel ETRON Paeten cre cferecrayetticin. coe eae eaters opera ere 10 
72, SHES Oey JEU WWW Seo SHEED IDI oo ac cacooou cHocunaseoe 13 
SHE OA TA NELNGEE DE Nc Patictey seredet ons teen ce eee RTA eee eer ies 15 
ASE Oe VLE MIPDA TION ORE CEURIS Dara ener er eee eer ie tee 17 
SMES ATA NG OAS Ta OU nem crcrustrers eens sae eee eee RAE 19 
Gwe DHE SROWERSEORRRH Ew ALR acriatescrercis rae ciara ates 22, 
AMT E EOL OOD cat eestera sie erate ao oro eee ee eevee aera HoFE are SueRO OG 24 
Se ACOBISHIGADDER rsa iioryeeten eretars syescistrlels sora mies snare aie oP 28 
OS TANGELS APPEARING TO) ABRAHAM: sa ecacee secs seers aera: 31 
HOSS ry Ane MEDGBY- PANS ANGEL com oilers opeicie ete oieieies vel ante orcrene ners 33 
i CrristaOnsTINGs OUTEAGDENONG ERE mace ete ee 38 
V2 ee HLE W.LTCHS OREO NDOR ssectaererersontaie otelevae eta Pisi eco Corenecntiupe wi exe onene 41 
SSP RES URRECTIONRORSIEAZARU SURE r enna ee her eee ener 66 


CHONAMNRONS 


10. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
XSCUNSION Oa (CHINES, 4 oonooaocns Racer anise en OO 
DANIEL IN THE Lion’s. DEN...... hte cae ee a oe LO 
THE (STAR OFIBEPE LEHR Mra ic onscreen tee de 
ANGELS APPEARING TO THE SHEPHERDS....... SPutaetetae we nee 74 
Tue ANGEL GABRIEL APPEARING: TO -MARY......- Bot ace she 76 
ANGEL SUCCORING CHRIST IN GETHSEMANE siislescetistuecdieomen LO) 
INNGEL DELIVERING! Ee TERaDROMSCRISON Merit eieemerieimee 80 
STONEN GEOR MOTE PEL EIN seem er ieee ners BOO EDUC. od 
Tue Sout’s GuarRDIAN AT DEATH..... dieses aeees ae 93 
ELIRAV EINE ee erence cerns IA ae aiden Sacks ea ee oes 109 
TRANSLATION OF ELIJAH....... A atone foe eae hore ecwuerste aS 115 
Curist’s First APPEARANCE TO THE DISCIPLES...........- 118 
Tue Two Discipres AT EMMAUS.......... Soe we Noles Nosiereitne 121 
rie ARAN SEIGURATION® estrcre are cleric iaretcieie anenerstarerenctelele reweer 123 
GuRIST. WiALKINGION REE! SEAR seacs cece ere arvana rete tecntserets 125 

CHARTS 

PAGE 
DANII S CissoenwNe sanaoonooc iis halts Yora cor sParoye rave Teves roretepe Cees 2 
OENES MIEIVING! CREATURES a stlsereicltieele saint sue toley SeseeRe eaves eee 4 
SVN a Ram iDe ie DRS hin oct oe OO UPelasen she ere are pevelsos tet vernseeers 9 
FR Hie SEI PAVEINS: sue:sss ois. lle omelets creas misieiwiers SEAS Cae 49 
ETE TWO @OMUNGCSi cre cettecsiarcnerriaeitestgcrerencr ie Raye eae Sve 
Boples CELESTIAL AND TERRESTRIAL............ Bers oir 64 
(brie? ABERNIACIE: \sqase aaideeeae mea awiee yes DR atveakiereedts 82 
ian UP REEE OLDEN ATURE ORD VCAIN tetrersierstomtcnsreistcisteleiicie aisterere 8&4 
A ETOaOINDER WORLD! cxesierie esieretererel selon rere telers Seincaistnam sae 8$ 
GPisas Ab isaaa SpoNes Oo MUA oocoossn06e 2, Sine case ere 96 
AyyaE CHURCH es cence Shake ha Saari ee et: 111 
(MEE RESURRECTIONG! selec ees Je ROR rote ho timctereche eo eiele antares 131 
THE JUDGMENTS ....... Becato a Haare hol ae dedi racic eterate oremeyarevers 146 
AVisy: AD\Gifoy camehVoonpus, Oa unisds IolmID OR Son decacoeoomoboooe 148 
TUDE MENT OR NE WiARD ace avin te ert rcr tae ert i51 


DISPENSATION ® GR || oD GNUEN Ty vera cieietstnel steer ethernet rstenemtete ravers ters 154 


HeOrkeE WV ORD 


In this day of the revival of “Spiritism,’ when so 
many, through the loss of loved ones in the “Great World 
War,” are longing to communicate with the dead, and are 
resorting te forbidden means to that end; a day in which 
science is trying te discover whether there is another 
world than this, and whether men live after death, and if 
so can they communicate with the living, it seems timely 
that a book should be written to show what the Holy 
Scriptures have revealed of the “World of Spirits.” The 
Bible has much to say about the “Spirit World,” and if 
we will carefully search its pages we shall know all there 
is to be known in this life of the “World to Come.” For 
if men will not listen to Moses and the Prophets, they 
will not be persuaded though one rose or came back from 
the dead. Luke 16: 31: 

This bcok covers all phases of the “Spirit World.” It 
treats of the “Powers of Good and Evil,” of “The Under- 
WoLldsesOum Satan. then allen anoels 5 Demonism,-« 
the “Intermediate State,” and of Heaven and Hell, as well 
as the “Resurrection of the Body,” and the “Judgments” 
of the Righteous and Wicked. The numerous charts 
illuminate the descriptive matter, and beautiful pictures 
show the ministry of angels and other heavenly beings. 
The prayer of the Author is that the Holy Spirit will use 
the book to free those who are entrapped in the net of 
“Spiritism,” and cause the curious and sorrowing to turn 
to the “Word of God” for help, and the answer to their 
questioning. 

THE AUTHOR 
“Sunnyside” 
Box.Chase, Phila., Pa: 
March, 1921. 


G4ILHDIYAGOD 


5 


~WSildvg dalvM, 


,ASIidv@ auld, 
SH1uV3 AHL 


SH1LYW3Z 3HL 


- (6 5e8 Fh.) 2:1675 ) EVNID 
2ul4 Ag HLYVG Hiuva Hluvg 
HLU¥3 3H SO(TVINNATTIA 1N3S34d |OILOVHD 


NOILYAON 34 3HL 


3DY LN3S3ud GH] 


NOILVYANI939QG 
w1NIdYIS IHL JO TVUL FHI, S 
-11:9' 2:2 Hd OC HI 1E:21 NHOP 


BIV 3HL 30 SYUZMOd JH] 40 JONIUd 


¥18227 
wHL2N3A0D LVHI 
BNYIHOD GILNIONY HL 


NONLVI3A34 
BuNIdVY 


1SIUHO 40 HLdvg Jl JHd08d JHL 


1vV3SG SN3WDONC 


I 
The Spirit World 


|} 


The Scriptures are full of the “Supernatural.” The 
only cure for the “Materialism” of the present day is to 
discover what the Scriptures reveal as to the ‘Spirit 
World.” ‘There is but a step from the “Natural” World 
to the “Spirit” World. The dividing veil is our “fleshy” 
bodies. ‘he “Heavenlies” are peopled with Spirit Beings. 
They are of two classes, good and evil. They are classi- 
fied as “Seraphim,” “Cherubim,” “Angels” (Goud and 
Bad), “Principalities,”’ “Powers,” “Age ,Rulers of Dark- 
ness,” “Wicked Spirits,’ (Eph. 6:12), “Thrones,” 
“Dominions,” (Col. 1:16), “Fallen Angels,” (2 Pet. 2:4), 
“Spirits in Prison, (1 Peter 3: 18-20), ~ Demons,” —“"Se- 
ducing spiritss sel Tin: 1). 

The Angels are “innumerable in number.” Heb. 12: 
22. They are “mighty in power” but not almighty. 2 
Thess. 1:7. They excel in strength. One angel destroyed 
185,000 of the Assyrian army ina night. An angel rolled 
away the stone from the Tomb of Christ, and one angel 
shall bind Satan and cast him into the “Bottomless Pit.” 
They are. Glorious’ beings (Luke 9: 26), and have “great 
knowledge,” but are not Omniscient. The Angels are 
“Ministering Spirits” to them who are “heirs of salva- 
tone. (leb. 1 3, 14),eand ~Executioners: of * God's 
Wrath” on the “wicked.” 2 Thess. 1:7-8. Fhey will 
gather the “elect of Israel” from the four corners of the 
earth, (Matt. 24:31), and are commissioned to supply the 
physical needs of God’s people. Matt. 4:11; 1 Kings 19: 
4-8. 

Among the “Principalities and Powers” of the Spirit 
World there are three great leaders: 


1. Michael. 
He is mentioned three times in Daniel (Dan. 10: 13, 
21; 12:1), where he is called a “Prince” who stands for 
1 


EZEK.I: 4-14 


4 § And I looked, and, behold, a 10 As for the likeness of their 
whirlwind came out of the north, faces, they four had the face of a 
a great cloud, and a fire infolding man, and the face of a lion, on the 
itself, and a brightness was about it, right side: and they four had the 
and out of the midst thereof as the face of an ox on the left side; they 
colour of amber, out of the midst of four also had the face of an eagle. 
the fire. 11 Thus were their faces: and their 

5 Also out of the midst thereof came wings were stretched upward; two 
the likeness of four living creatures. wings of every one were joined one 
And this was their appearance ; they to another, and two covered their 
had the likeness of a man. bodies. 

6 And every one had four faces, and 12 And they went every one straight 
every one had four wings. forward: whither the spirit was to 

7 And their feet were straight feet; go, they went; and they turned not 
and the sole of their feet was like when they went. 
the sole of a calf’s foot: and they 13 As for the likeness of the living 
sparkled like the colour of burnished creatures, their appearance was like 
brass. burning coals of fire, and like the ap- 

8 And they had the hands of a man pearance of lamps: it went up and 
under their wings on their four sides; down among the living creatures ; 
and they four had their faces and and the fire was bright, and out of 
their wings. the fire went forth lightning. 

9 Their wings were joined one to 14 And the living creatures ran 
another ; they turned not when they and returned as fhe appearance of 
wen 3 they went every one straight a flash of lichtnine. 
orward, 


“THE SPIRIT WORLD 3 


Daniel’s People—the Jews. He is called in Jude 9 the 
Archangel. In Rev. 12:7 he is seen in command of the 
Angelic “Army of Heaven.’ His work seems to be to 
deliver God’s people, particularly the Jews, from the 
power of Satan, and finally to oust him and his angels 
from the Heavenlies, and cast them down on to the earth. 
Rev. 12:7-9. He also has something to do with the 
resurrection of the dead, for he is associated with the 
“Resurrection” mentioned in Dan. 12:1, 2, and he con- 
tested with the Devil the resurrection of Moses (Jude 9), 
and the “voice” of the Archangel that will be heard when 
the “Dead in Christ” shall rise (1 Thess. 4:16), will be 
the “voice” of Michael, for he is the only Archangel men- 
tioned in the Scriptures. 


2. Gabriel. 


He is mentioned by name four times. In Daniel 
twice, and in Luke twice. He seems to be associated with 
the redemptive work of God. He appeared to Daniel 
(Dan. 8:16; 9: 21-27), to inform him as to the “time” of 
Christ’s “First Coming,’ and when the “time had come” 
he announced to Zacharias the birth of Christ’s “Fore- 
runner’—John the Baptist, and later to Mary the birth 
Of jesus: lukesl< 19> 267 27 Hisrposition meheaven 1s 
lofty, for he said of himself to Zacharias—“I am Gabriel 
that Stand in the Presence of God.” 


SeeSatats 


We speak of Satan last not because he is the least 
of the three, for in many ways he is the greatest, but 
because of his evil character. He is the source of all the 
anarchy and rebellion in the Universe. See the Chapter 
on Satan. 

From what has been said we see that the heavens 
above us are peopled with “Principalities and Powers of 
Evil,” against which we are warned in Eph. 6:12. Job 
declared that the heavens are not clean in God’s sight. 
Job 15:15. But God will cleanse them, as we shall see, 
so that Christ and His Bride, the Church, may dweil 
there safely during the Millennial Reign of Christ. 


OHNS LIVING CREATURES 
REV.4:6-8 


6 And before the throne there 
was a sea of glass like unto crys- 
tal: and in the midst of the 
throne, and round about the 
throne, were four beasts full of 
eyes before and behind. 

7 And the first beast was like a 
lion, and the second beast like a 
calf, and the third beast had a 
face as a man, and the fourth 
beast was like a flying eagle. 

8 And tho four beasts had each 
cf them six wings about him ; 
end they were fall of eyes within: 
end they rest not day and night, 
raying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord 
God Almighty, which was, ant 
is, and is to come. 


II 
The Tri-Unity of God 


One of the great “Mysteries” of the “Spirit World” 
is the “TRI-UNITY” of God. The Scriptures clearly 
teach the distinct personality of the Father, Son, and 
Holy Spirit. At the Baptism of Jesus there was present 
the “DIVINE THREE.” The “FATHER?” was present 
and spoke, saying, “This is My Beloved Son, in Whom 
I am well pleased.” The “SON” was present in Jesus. 
And the “HOLY SPIRIT” was present in the form of 
a eeDove.* Matt, 3216-17. \ The “dri-Unity” of God. is 
alsos taught the Old “lestament. Im. Gea. 17Z0jwe 
read, “And God said, Let US make man in OUR 
Image.’ And when the “Babel Builders” were con- 
structing their “Tower,” the Lord said—“Go to, let US 
go down, and confound their language.” Gen. 11:7. 
How to reconcile this “Tri-Unity” with the “Unity” of 
Godmis the. ditticultye Are=there three “Gods, or “are 
there three “Persons” in one “God-Head?” <A simple 
illustration may help us. ‘The “Sun” of our Solar System 
is a litmity. It manifests itseli ana ~ Threetold” 
Manner, «hear. slight, and “Chemical Action.” These 
three properties of the Sun make up the Sun itself. 
Neither one or them by itselfeisethe oun. ‘The “Heat” 
Ol the. oun) is not seen, but 1s. felt- The “Light” of the 
Sum cam be seen, and tis: the: “Licht” on the Sun that 
makes the Sun VISIBLE. The “Chemical Action” of 
the Sun can neither be seen nor felt, but its power is 
revealed in the growing plant, and on the photographic 
plate. 

To apply our illustration let the “Heat” rays of the 
Sun correspond to “God the FATHER.” He cannot be 
seen, but He can be felt, for God is LOVE (1 John 4: 7- 
LG, Joni .3.16),andllove.can be feltbut not seen, “Ihe 


“Light” rays of the Sun correspond to “God the SON.” 
5 


6 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


It is the “Son of God” that makes God VISIBLE. The 
Son (Jesus) came to manifest God. 1 Tim. 3:16. Jesus 
said of Himself—‘‘I am the LIGHT OF THE WORLD.” 
John 8:12. John 1:1-14. Without the Son we would 
not know what God is like for He came to reveal God, 
so that He could say—“He that hath seen Me hath seen 
the FATHER.” John 14:9. The “Chemical Action” of 
the Sun corresponds to “God the HOLY SPIRIT.” It 
is the Holy Spirit that gives life and power, and forms 
the “Image of God” on the sensitive plate of the 
“Hhoman Héart.“] 9AS neither the “Eleat: (or the. ignt 
or the “Chemical Action” of the Sun is in itself the Sun, 
but it takes all three to make the Sun, though each has 
its separate work to perform, so the “Father,” “Son” and 
“Holy Spirit,” are not each in Himself God, but they in 
their united capacity are GOD, each performing His 
Official function in the creation and preservation of the 
Universe. 

As the “Heat,” “Light” and “Chemical Action” of 
the Sun varies according to the seasons, the “Heat” 
being more intense in summer than in winter, so each 
Person in the “God-Head” is more manifest in one Age 
or Dispensation than in another. The Father was mani- 
fest in Old Testament times. The Son was manifest 
during His earthly ministry, and the Holy Spirit is active 
in this Dispensation. This will explain the words of 
Jesus in the “Great Commission” (Matt. 28:20)—“Lo, I 
am with you always, even unto: the end of the World 
(Age).” As we have the SUN with us whenever it mani- 
fests itself in either “heat,” “light,” or “chemicalaction,. 
so we have GOD with us whenever we have Him in any 
of his manifestations. So when Jesus said—“Lo, I am 
with you,” He meant not that He would be personally 
with them, for His work now is that of a “High Priest” 
in Heaven, but that “God” would be with them in the 
person of the HOLY SPIRIT. Jesus went away that 
the Holy Spirit might come. Jchn 16:7-14. Therefore 
Jesus is not personally present with His people, but God 
is, for the “God-Head” is now represented on the earth 
by the Holy Spirit. So while there are three ‘Person- 
alities” in the “God-Head,” there is but ONE GOD. 


THE TRI- UNITY OF GOD ff 


Man is a “Trinity.” He is composed of “Spirit,” 
SsOule sand Body. I hess. 9°23. Henis. a. Erinity 
because he was made in the “Image of God.” Gen. 1: 26. 
lberetore like (Godehe is a -lhreetold’ beime, Elis 
“Spirit” corresponds with “God the Father,” it can be 
felt but not seen. His “Soul” corresponds with “God 
the Holy Spirit,” it can be neither seen nor felt. His body 
corresponds with “God the Son,” it can be both seen and 
felt, and makes the man visible. 


{It 


Satan 
| 


There are many who deny the existence of Satan. 
They claim that what we call Satan is only a “principle 
of evil’” ‘That this “evil” is a sort of “malaria,” an in- 
tangible thing like disease germs that floats about in the 
atmosphere and attacks pcople’s hearts under certain 
conditions. the existence of Satan cannot be. deter- 
mined by the opinions of men. The only source of in- 
formation is the Bible. That is the reason why Satan 
tries to discredit the Word of God. He is not a “prin- 
ciple of evil” he is a—Person. 

“Be sober, be vigilant; because your adver- 
sary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, 
seeking whom he may devour.” J Pet. 5:8. 

He “walketh,” he “roareth,” he 1s to be »chaimeds: 
Rev. 20: 1-3. These could not be said of a “principle of 
evil.” He has many names or aliases—‘Satan,” “Devil,” 
“Beelzebub,  ~" Belial, “Adversary, = * Dragon, sae oct- 
pent.” He is mentioned by one or the other of these 
names 174 times in the Bible. 

Heis a sreat Celestial Poteatate. Ele 1s 

“The Prince of the Powers of the Air.” 
phe Zita, 
“The God of this World” (Age). 
2 Cor. 4:4, 


I. His Origin. 


This is more or less shrouded in mystery. One thing 
is certain, he is a “created being,” and that of the most 
exalted type. He was before his fall 

“The Anointed Cherub That Covereth.” 


That is, he was the guardian or protector of the 
“Throne of God.” He was perfect in all his ways from 


the day that he was created, until iniquity was found in 
8 


Web Liv 
NOWWIdWaL 
SSINUNIOIM 


NOILVSN3dSIQ 


LSIBHOILNY 


OILHDIBAdOg 
VS'V AIH | 3SVHQXO4 
NIMYV] ZONIYUVI9 Ag 


NMVYQ ony G3NDISIG 


N39 
HLYV] 


HOUNHO FHL 


A 


T 


‘ 
B\, 


1NO 1SVID NVlvVS 


TVNIDSIYO 
3H1 


Hel +] 
VSI 


BIND Hd 


wSIOV1dg ATNAAVSH,, uy 

3HL NI SH1 40 SB3MO, 
a3Ssnvaig »SUIMOd IAQ, "GMO 
SN3ZAV3IH i JONIYg AH 
3H Ma a ae Say 
wtN3d¥ag FHL 40 VIVY] SHI 0350d3qg 

NVLVS 

O€-b2-21 LIV 


WOQONIM SNVLVS 


ere: 2tAay 
.NSAVGH NI UVM, 


(NIDUVIN) +7092 


.J5V STHL 40 005 3H] 


$182 79 
wNL383A09 LVAL 
ONY3IHD GILNIONY aHL, 


NVIVS 


THRONE 


Ss 


’ 


SATAN 


SATAN HL 
him. In him was the “fulness of wisdom,” and the “per- 
fection of beauty,” but it was his “beauty” that caused 
the pride that was his downfall. He was clothed in a 
garment that was covered with the most rare and pre- 
cious gems, the sardius, topaz, diamond, beryl, onyx, 
jasper, sapphire, emerald, carbuncle, all woven in with 
coldy she dwelt in den, they Garden of “God.” ~ This 
probably refers not to the earthly Eden, but to the “Para- 
dise_ of God’ on high, for Satan dwelt on the “Holy 
Mount of God.” All this we learn from Ezek. 28: 11-19, 
where the Prophet has a “foreview” of the Antichrist 
under the title of the “King of Tyrus,” and as Antichrist 
is to be an incarnation of Satan, the Prophet here de- 
scribes Satan’s original glory from which he fell. There 
never has been as yet such a King of Tyrus as is here 
described. 

The cause of Satan’s fall is given in Isa. 14: 12-20. He 
is there called— 
Lucifer, Son of the Morning. 


This was his glorious title when he was created, and 
this world of ours was made, at which time— 


“The ‘Morning Stars,’ (probably other glor- 
ious created ruling beings like himself), sang to- 
gether, and all the ‘Sons of God,’ (angels), 
shouted for joy.” Job 38:7. 


It is well to note that the one here called “Lucifer, 
Son of the Morning,” is in verse four (Isa. 14:4) also 
called the “King of Babylon.” As there never has been 
a King of Babylon like the one here described, the de- 
scription must be that of a “future” King of Babylon. 
And as “Antichrist is to have for his Capital City Baby- 
lon rebuilt,” this is probably a “foreview” by the Prophet 
of Antichrist, as indwelt by “Lucifer,” or “Satan,” in that 
day when he shall be “King of Babylon.” 

Some think that when this world was created and fit 
for habitation Satan was placed in charge of it, and it 
was then, as Isaiah declares, that Satan said in his heart— 
“T will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above 
the ‘Stars of God’ (other ruling powers) ; I will sit also 
upon the Mount of the Congregation, in the sides of the 


12 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


North. I will ascend above the clouds; I will be like 
The MOST HIGH:” and that it was ior this presumptu- 
ous act that the “Pre-Adamite World’ became a chaos, 
and ‘without form and void,’ as described in Gen. 1:2. 
This would justify the claim ot Satan that this world 
belongs to him, and that he had the right and power to 
transfer the “kingdoms of the world” to Christ, if He 
would only acknowledge Satan’s supremacy. Matt. 4: 
8, 9. And it accounts for the persistent war Satan 1s 
waging against the Almighty to retain his possession of 
the earth. 

When Satan became unwilling to rule the Original 
earth as a subordinate, and determined to rule it inde- 
pendent of God, he put his own will in opposition to the 
Will of God. That was “Treason.” That was SIN. 
There was the origin of sin. In thus exalting himself 
against God “Lucifer” became “SATAN,” for “Satan” 
means “Adversary.” To justify himself he accused God. 
In accusing God he became the “DEVIL,” for “Devil” 
signifies “Accuser.” Thus “Lucifer” became both 
“Satan” and “Devil.” This answers the question—*Why 
did God make the Devil?’ He did not make him, he 
made himself. 


THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 


God did not: create “Eyvily A -voodutreemeannot 
ring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring 
bring fortl i, fruit, tl ptet bring 
orth good fruit. att. 7: 15-18. rod did not create 
forth good fruit.” Matt. 7: 15-18. If God did not creat 
“Evil,” then how did it originate? It will not do to 
say—“An enemy hath done this,” for then the question 
will arise, “Who made the enemy’? If Satan did not 
originate evil in his own heart, then it must have been 
implanted in his heart from some outside source. This 
would require the co-existence of “Good” and “Evil” in 
the Universe, and rob God of His Sovereignty. Some 
hold that “Evil” is necessary to properly develop and 
perfect free moral agents. If this be true, then “Evil” 
must have had an eternal beginning and been in the pur- 

3 ye b) 2 5 m 66g. 

pose of God, for all of God’s creatures were created “free 
moral agents.” Ii God had made them otherwise they 


SATAN ON HIS WAY TO THE EARTH 


14 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


would have been mere machines with no will of their 
own. While it is true that overcoming evil perfects 
character, it is not true that evil is necessary for such 
perfection. To be a “free moral agent” implies that one 
has the power of “choice.” When God created the 
angels, and all the glorious beings that He originally 
created, there was no sin or “Evil” in the Universe. But 
as free moral agents they had the power of choice, not 
between “Good” and “Evil,” but between following the 
“Will of God,” or their “Own Will.” As long as Satan 
chose the “Will of God” there was no “Evil” in the Uni- 
‘verse, but the moment he chose to follow his own Will, 
then he fell, and by persuading others to follow -him he 
introduced “Evil” into the Universe. The root of sin is 
SELFISHNESS, and when Satan said—“I will ascend 
into Heaven (from the original earth over which he was 
ruling), I will exalt MY THRONE above the ‘Stars of 
God’ (other ruling powers) . . I will ascend above 
the heights of the clouds; I WILL BE LIKE THE 
MOST “HIGH” (Isa. 14: 12: 14), then Satan was guilty of 
TREASON, and started a REBELLION AGAINST 
THE GOVERNMENT OF GOD that will never cease 
until he and all his followers are cast into the “Lake of 
Fire” to spend Eternity. 


II. His Present Location. 


The common notion is that Satan and his angels are 
imprisoned in Hell. This is not true. The angels de- 
scribed in 2 Pet..2:4, and Jude 6, as having leig them 
“first estate,” and being “reserved in everlasting chains 
under darkness,” are not Satan’s angels. ‘lhey are a 
special class of angels whose sin caused the Flood. They 
are the “Spirits in Prison” of whom Peter speaks in 1 Pet. 
3: 18-20. Satan and his angels are at liberty. We read 
in the first and second chapters of Job that it was the 
custom in Job’s day for the “Sons of God” (angels), to 
appear at stated times in the presence of God to give an 
account of their stewardship, and that Satan always 
appeared with them. When the Lord said to Satan— 
“Whence comest thou?” he replied, “From going to and 


SATAN IN EDEN 


16 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


fro in the earth and from walking up and down in it.” 
Job. 1:7;2:2. Satan then was at liberty “on the earth,” 
amd had “access to God,” and was “not cast out of 
Heaven” in Job’s day, B. C. 2000, and as he has not been 
cast out since, he must still be at liberty in the heavenlies 
and on the éarth, “See Chart of Satan.” 


III. His Kingdom. 


Satan is a King, and has a Kingdom. “If Satan cast 
out Satan he is divided against himself; how shall then 
his ‘kingdom’ stand?” Matt. 12: 24-30. 


“We wrestle not against flesh and blood,-but 
against Principalities, against Powers, against 
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World (Age), 
against Spiritual Wickedness in High Places 
(tietEleavenlies)\= Ephron bZ: 


From this we see that his Kingdom consists of ‘Prin- 
cipalities;” “Powers,” “Age Rulers ot Darkness, Vand 
“Wicked. Spirits in the Heavenlies.” These “Principali- 
ties” are ruled by “Princes,” who control certain nations 
of our earth, as in the days of Daniel the Prophet, when a 
heavenly messenger was sent to Daniel, but was hindered 
“three weeks” from reaching him by the “Prince of the 
Kingdom of Persia,” Satan’s ruling “Prince of Persia,” 
until Michael the Archangel came to his rescue. Dan. 


10: 10-14. 


IV. His Methods. 
1. He Is the Deceiver of the World. 


By the “World” is meant all those who belong to the 
“Satanic System,” all those who are entangled in Satan’s 
mesh. 

“And we know that we are of God, and the 
whole World (the Satanic System), lieth in the 
Wicked One (Satan)-” 1 Johurs2lOy Re. 


Satan deceives by “blinding” the eyes of the world. 
“Tf our Gospel is hid, it is hid to them that 


‘are lost’; in whom the ‘God of this World’ 
(Satan), hath blinded the minds of them which 


Zam \ 


THE TEMPTATION OF CHRIST 


18 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel 
of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine 
unto them.” 2 Cor. 4:3, 4. 


Yo this end Satan has his preachers who preach “an- 
other gospel.” Gal. 1: 6-9. That gospel is the “doctrine 
of devils” 1 Tim. 4:1, He is the instigator of) (he 
Great Apostasy.” Peter, speaking of the “latter times” 
says— 

! “There shall be false teachers among you, 
who privily shall bring in ‘Damnable Heresies,’ 
even denying the Lord that bought them, and 
bring upon themselves swift destruction. And 
many shall follow their ‘Pernicious Ways,’ by 
reason of whom the ‘WAY OF TRUTH’ shall 
be evil spoken of.” 2 Pet. 2: 1-2. 


These “false teachers” are to be seen on every hand: 
They are those who deny the “Virgin Birth,” “Deity,” 
“Bodily Resurrection” and “Personal Premillennial Re- 
turn” of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Satan is very subtle in his methods, and if it were 
possible he would deceive the very elect. He knows all 
the great Scripture subjects that are of universal interest 
to humanity, and he 1s too wise to attack them openly, so 
he adulterates them with false doctrine. He has tried to 
rob the Church of her “Blessed Hope” of the Lord’s re- 
turn by mixing with it a lot of false teaching and “time 
setting” as seen in “Millerism,” “Seventh Day Advent- 
ism”, and “Millennial Dawnism.” To prevent mankind 
from turning to the Lord for healing, he has invented the 
systems of “Christian Science” and “New Thought.” To 
satisfy the craving of the human mind to know what is 
going on in the Spirit World, Satan invented “Spiritism.” 
Satan seeing that he could not stamp out the Church by 
violence and persecution has changed his tactics and is 
now trying to seduce her into conformity to the world, 
and to try to better an “Age” that God has doomed to 
destruction. His present purpose is to build up a “mag- 
nificent civilization,” and he has deceived the Church into 
believing that it can bring in the “Millennium,” without 
Christ, by the Betterment of Society, His hope is that 


a 


N CAST OU 


SATA 


20 ¥HE SPIRIT WORLD 


the “Gospel of Social Service” will take the place of the 
“Gospel of Grace,” and by diverting the attention of 
Christian people to “secondary” things, they will neglect 
the primary work of soul saving, and thus delay the 
evangelization of the world, and postpone the Return of 


the Lord, and his own confinement in the Bottomless 
Prt: 


2. He is the Adversary of God’s People. 


The warfare between “Good” and “Evil,” as recorded 
in the Bible from Gen. 3:15 to Rev. 20:10, is most in- 
tensely interesting reading. Satan tempts Eve. She eats 
and Adam with her. Result the Fall. Satan to prevent 
the birth of the “Promised Seed” causes Cain to kill Abel. 
To bring about the destruction of the human race Satan 
gets the “Sons of God” to marry the “Daughters of Men.” 
Result the Flood. To destroy the unity of the race Satan 
suggests the building of the “Vower of Babel.” Result 
the “Confusion of Tongues.” But the story is too long. 
All down through the Old Testament we see Satan at 
work trying to frustrate the plan of God for the “Re- 
demption of the Race.” When the time came that Christ 
was born it was Satan who prompted Herod to destroy ali 
the male children at Bethlehem under two years of age. 
It was Satan who tried to overcome Christ when weak- 
ened by fasting in the wilderness, and who suggested 
that He throw Himself down from the Pinnacle of the 
Temple. The attempt of the people to throw Christ from 
the hilltop at Nazareth, and the two storms on the sea of 
Galilee were plans of Satan to destroy Christ; and when 
foiled in these Satan renewed the fight through Priests 
and Pharisees, and succeeded at last in getting Judas to 
sell his Master. Then, amid the shades of Gethsemane, 
he sought to kill Christ by physical weakness before He 
could reach the Cross and make atonement for sin. When 
Christ was crucified Satan thought he had at last con- 
quered, but when Christ rose from the dead Satan’s rage 
knew no bounds. In all probability Satan and his angels 
contested the Ascension of Christ, and the history of the 
Christian Church is but one long story of the “Irrepress- 
ible Conflict” between Satan and God’s people. 


SATAN 21 


Vaiss) OOM 


As we have seen Satan still has his abode in the 
“Heavenlies” and has access to God. But the time is 
coming when he shall be cast out of the “Heavenlies” 
on to the earth (Rev. 12: 9-12), and there shall be great 
“WOE” on the earth because of Satan’s wrath, that he 
shall exercise through the “Beast,” the “ANTICHRIST” 
(Rev. 13:2-8), for he will then know that his time “IS 
SHORT,” only 3% years. At the close of the “Tribula- 
tion) Periods tne Beast and the “Halse: Prophet” wilt 
be cast “alive” into the “Lake of Fire,” and an angel from 
Heaven will seize Satan and bind him with a great chain, 
already forged, and cast him into the “Bottomless Pit,” 
where he shall remain for 1000 years. Rev. 20:1-3. At 
the end of which time he shall be loosed for a season, an‘ 
then with his angels he shall be cast intu the “Lake of 
lire” prepared for him in the long ago to spend the Ages 


of the Ages. Rev. 20:7-10. Matt. 25: 41. 


S OF THE AIR 


ER 


THE POW 


IV 


The Fallen Angels 


|} 
In 2 Pet. 2:4-5, we read— 


“God spared not the angels that sinned, but 
cast them down to hell (lartarus), and deliv- 
ered them into chains of darkness, to be 
reserved unto judgment: and spared not the old 
world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a 
preacher of righteousness, bringing in the Flood 
upon the world of the ungodly.” 

“The angels which kept not their ‘FIRST 
ESTATE,’ but left their own habitation, He 
hath reserved in everlasting chains under dark- 
ness unto the Judgment of the Great Day. 
(The Great White Throne Judgment.) Even 
as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about 
them in like manner, giving themselves over to 
fornication, and going after STRANGE 
FLESH, are set forth as an example, suffering 
the vengeance of Eternal Fire.” Jude 6-7. 


Who are these angels? They are not Satan’s 
angels, for his angels are free, and like him roam about, 
but these angels are in “prison,” “in darkness,” and 
“reserved in chains” for judgment. ‘The place of their 
confinement is not Hell, but Tartarus. See the Chart 
and Chapter on “The Underworld.” What was their 
sin? It was “fornication,” and fornication of an abnor- 
mal character, the unlawful sexual intercourse of angelic 
beings with “STRANGE FLESH,” that is with beings 
of a different nature. When was this sin committed? 
The text says in the “Days of Noah,” and that it was the 
cause of the Flood. For the details we must go back to 
the time before the Flood. In Gen. 6: 1-4 we read— 


“And it came to pass, when men began to 
multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters 
were born unto them, that the ‘SONS OF GOD’ 

23 


THE FLOOD 


THE FALLEN ANGELS 25 


saw the ‘Daughters of Men’ that they were fair 
(beautiful) ; and they took them wives of all 
which they chose . . . There were ‘Giants’ 
in the earth in those days; and also after that, 
when the ‘SONS OF GOD’ came in unto the 
‘Daughters of Men,’ and they brre children to 
them, the same became ‘Mighty Men’ which 
were of old, men of renown.” 


Who were these “SONS OF GOD”? Some claim 
that they were the Sons of “SETH,” and that the 
“Daughters of MEN” were the daughters of “CAIN,” 
and that what is meant is that the Sons of the sup- 
posedly godly line of Seth, intermarried with the god- 
less daughters of Cain, the result being a godless race. 
That the “Sons of God” were the descencants of Seth is 
based on the assumption that the descendants of Seth 
lived apart from the descendants of Cain up to a time 
shortly before the Flood, and that they were a pure and 
holy race, while the descendants of Cain were ungodly, 
and their women irreligious and carnal minded, and 
possessed of physical attractions that were foreign to 
the women of the tribe of Seth. Such an assumption 
has no foundation in Scripture. Be sure it says in Gen. 
abo Woy, weet eunceie wie loyiintlar Ore IOS, BL Soil Cre Sram, wee 
men began to call upon the Lord, but it does not follow 
that those men were limited to the descendants of Seth, 
nor that all the descendants of Seth from that time were 
righteous. As in the early days of the race it was nec- 
essary that brothers and sisters and near relatives should 
marry, it was very unlikely that the descendants of Seth 
and Cain did not intermarry until some time before the 
Flood, and stranger still that when they did marry their 
offspring would be a race of “giants” or “Mighty Men.” 
It is worthy of note that nothing is said of giantesses, 
or “Mighty Women,” which would have been the case 
if it were simply a union of the sons of Seth, and the 
daughters of Cain. As both the descendants of Seth 
(except 8 persons) and of Cain were destroyed in the 
Flood, it is evident that they were not separate tribes at 
that time and were equally sinners in the sight of God. 


P6 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


If the sons of Seth and the daughters of Cain were 
meant why did not Moses, who wrote the Pentateuch, 
say so? It is not sufficient to say that the men of 
Moses’ time knew what he meant. The Scriptures are 
supposed to mean what they say. When MEN, we are 
told, began to multiply cn the face of the earth, and 
daughters were born unto them, the “Sons of God” saw 
the “daughters of MEN.” ‘The use of the word MEN 
signifies the whole Adamic race, and not simply the 
descendants of Cain, thus distinguishing the “Sons of 
God” from the descendants of Adam. ‘There is no sug- 
gestion of contrast if the “Sons of God” were also men. 

Four names are used in Gen. 6:1-4. “Bne-Ha- 
Elchim,” rendered “Sons of God”; “Bnoth-Ha-Adam,” 
“daughters of men”; “Hans-Nephilim,” “giants”; “Hog- 
Gibborim, “Mighty Men.” The title “Bne-Ha-Elohim,” 
“Sons of God,” has not the same meaning in the Old 
Testament that it has in the New. In the New Testa- 
ment it apphes to those who have become the “Sons of 
God” by the New Birth. John 1:12; Rom. 8: 14-16; 
Gal 4:6; 1 Jehn 3:122. Inthe Olds Testaments st 
applies exclusively to the angels, and is so used five 
times. Twice in Genesis (Gen. 6:2-4) and three times 
in Job, where Satan, an angelic being, is classed with 
the “Sons of God.” Job 126) 2015 3657-5 As. sonmon 
God” denotes a being brought into existence by a 
creative act of God. Such were the angels, and such 
was Adam, and he is so called in Luke 3:38. Adam’s 
natural descendants are not the special creation of God. 
Adam was created in the “likeness of God” (Gen. 5:1), 
but his descendants were born in his likeness, for we 
read in Gen. 5:3, that Adam “begat a son in HIS OWN 
LIKENESS, AFTER HIS IMAGE.” Therefore all 
men born of Adam and his descendants by natural gen- 
eration are the “SONS OF MEN,” and it is only by 
being “BORN AGAIN” (John 3:3-7), which is a 
“NEW CREATION,” that they can become the “SONS 
OF GOD” in the New Testament sense. 

That the “Sons of God” of Gen. 6:1-4 were 
ANGELS was maintained by the ancient Jewish Syna- 
gogue, by Hellenistic Jews at, and before, the time of 


THE FALLEN ANGELS 27 


Christ, und by the Christian Church up until the Fourth 
Century, when the interpretation was changed to “sons 
of Seth” for two reasons. First, because the worship of 
angels had been set up, and if the “Sons of God” of Gen. 
6: 1-4 were angels and fell, then angels might fall again, 
and that possibility would affect the worship of angels. 
The second reason was, that Celibacy had become an 
institution of the Church, and if it was taught that the 
angels in heaven did not marry, and yet that some of 
them seduced by the beauty of womanhood came down 
from heaven to gratify their amorous propensities, a 
weakness of a similar kind in one of the “earthly 
angels” (Celebates) might be the more readily excused. 
In the Eighteenth Century the “Angelic Interpretation” 
was revived, and is now largely held by Biblical 
scholars. 

The objection to the “Angelic Interpretation” is 
based on the words of Jesus as to the marriage relation 
of the redeemed in Heaven, when He said—“They 
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the 
angels of God in Heaven.” Matt. 22:30, Mark 12:25, 
Luke 20:35-36. The legitimate conclusion from this 
statement is, that the Angels do not marry, but it does 
not therefore follow that they are “sexless.” I+ says 
they do not marry in Heaven, not that they do not have 
the power of procreation, but that it is not the nature of 
“Holy Angels” to seek such a relationship. But it 
does not follow that if they have the power they will not 
exercise it in a fallen state. What these passages teach 
is that angels do not multiply by procreation. Angels 
as far as we know were created ‘‘en masse,” and as they 
are immortal, and never die, there is no necessity for 
marriage among them. Marriage is a human institution 
to prevent the extinction of the race by death. If the 
bodies of the dead are to be resurrected, as the Scrip- 
tures clearly teach, the inference is that those bodies 
will be male and female. To teach otherwise is to 
declare that such a relationship as husband and wife and 
sister and brother will be unknown in Heaven. As the 
bodies of the Righteous dead after they have been 
resurrected and glorified are immortal, and shall never 


JACOB’S LADDER 


THE FALLEN ANGELS 29 


die again, there will be no necessity for the Righteous 
in Heaven to marry, and therefore the marriage rela- 
tion will be discontinued, but it does not follow hus- 
bands and wives will not know each other “as such” in 
the other world. See the Chapter on “Recognition and 
Relationship in the Spirit World.” 

Another fact worthy of note is, that the angels are 
always spoken of as of the masculine gender. We meet 
with “Bne-Ha-Elohim,” “sons of Elohim’ (God), but 
never with “Bnoth-Ha-Elohim,” “daughters of Elohim” 
(God). Ihe inference is that all the angels are of the 
masculine gender, that is are males. If this be true, the 
reason why they do not marry in Heaven is because 
there are no female angels to marry. But it does not 
follow that they do not have male generative organs and 
cannot cohabit with females of the human race. It is 
highly improbable that angels by sinking lower in the 
scale of being could acquire sexual power of which they 
had previously been destitute, and yet they have such 
power if we are to believe the statement of Gen. 6: 1-4. 
The whole thing hinges on the correspondence between 
the bodies of angels and the bodies of human beings. 

Angels and human beings are members of the great 
family of God, and this “kinship” between them implies 
a relationship that under certain conditions might result 
in a fruitful marriage union. Angels are “Spirit Beings” 
clothed in celestial bodies. These bodies are not ethereal 
in the sense that they are mere “ether,” for they have a 
materialistic form and can fly (Dan. 9:21, Rev. 14: 6-7) 
and assume the form of a man, and could eat of Abra- 
ham’s calf (Gen. 18: 1-8), and of Lot’s unleavened bread 
(Gen. 19: 1-3). Man is also a “Spirit Being” clothed 
in a material body of flesh, and hereafter, as a redeemed 
man, is to have a “Spirit body” like unto the angels. 
As someone has said man is now “half-beast” and “half- 
angel,” but some day will be all angel. “As we have 
borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the 
image of the Heavenly.” 1 Cor. 15:49. Are men and 
angels then so dissimilar that under certain conditions 
there could not be a union between them? 


30 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


Man was made in the “Image of God,” not only 
spiritually, but in a sense pliysicaily. While God is a 
“Spirit; because a Spiritual’ Dang) 1 isenotmtompe 
supposed that He has no form. We cannot conceive of 
a being that has eyes, and ears, and can speak, but what 
has a form. And the inference from the Scriptures is 
that all the “Higher Intelligences” of the Heavenly 
World, as the Seraphim, Cherubim, Angels, Archangels, 
Satan, etc., are patterned after the “Image” of God, and 
that that pattern is that of the human body, for man 
structurally is the “Masterpiece” of the Almighty. Psa. 
8:3-9. The fact that when angels appeared to men they 
always appeared in the form of a man, and not in the 
form of an animal, or bird, is inferential evidence that 
angels are men. The statement in Gen. 3:1, “Now the 
‘Serpent’ was more subtle than any BEAST of the field,” 
and the title of “DRAGON” given to Satan in Rev. 
12:7-9, imples that ‘satan when it suits his purpose 
takes the form of a beast, but he is generally spoken of 
as appearing as an “ANGEL OF LIGHT.” 2 Cor. 
Lit4: 

if man was made in the “IMAGE OF GOD,” and 
after His “LIKENESS” (Gen. 1:26-27), it stands to 
reason that when God would manifest Himself to men, 
it would be in the form of a man. ‘The assumption then 
of the human form by Jesus at His Incarnation was the 
necessary iaw of His being. He could not have 
appeared in any other form and been GODLIKE. 
When the Apostle speaks of Jesus as being in the 
“form of God,” and taking upon Himself the “form of a 
servant” and being made in the “LIKENESS OF 
MEN” (Phil. 2:5-8), he simply means that Jesus took 
upon Himself human nature and subjected Himself to 
its limitations. For the form of a servant is the same as 
the form of his master, though his knowledge may be 
less. 

When Jesus ascended He ascended as a MAN, and 
He is now in Heaven the “MAN CHRIST JESUS.” 
1 Tim. 2:5. And as a MAN John had a vision of Him 
in the midst of the “Seven Lampstands.” Rev. 1: 10-20. 
lf the human body is not made after the pattern of the 


= 


\ 


SNS 


SSS 


SSS 


ANGELS APPEARING TO ABRAHAM 


32 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


Heavenly, then Jesus in the form of a MAN in Heaven 
is out of harmony with His environment, and we have 
the anomalous condition of the second person in the 
Trinity now being different in form from the Father 
and the Holy Spirit. If Jesus came to reveal the 
Father, then what did He mean when He said—“He 
that hath seen ME, hath SEEN THE FATHER?” (John 
14: 8-11), if He was not a revelation of God in His per- 
son as well as in His works? As no mortal being in the 
flesh can look on the person of God and live (Ex. 
33: 18-23), it was necessary that Jesus should veil His 
Deity in human flesh, but the veil of the flesh became 
transparent on the Mount of Transfiguration, and three 
of His Disciples beheld His Glorious Heavenly Form, 
that of a Man. Matt. 17:1-2. John 1:14. 2 Pet. 1: 16-18. 

We know from the first three chapters of Genesis 
that God visited the “Garden of Eden” and talked with 
Adam. We also know that Satan, a “Fallen Angel,” 
also was a visitor to the Garden, for it was there that he 
tempted the first pair. May it not have been true that 
Adam and Eve had other angelic visitors, because of 
the “kinship” between them? It would be interesting 
to know what would have been the relation between the 
Adamic and Angelic races if Adam had not fallen. Is 
not the difference between them, caused by the Fall, 
more of a spiritual than a physical one, and, if so, where 
does the impossibility of physical intercourse come in? 
What effcct the Fall had upon the physical state of 
Adam and Eve is an interesting question. We are told 
that as a result of the Fall their eyes were opened, and 
they knew that they were naked. Gen. 3:7. Why did 
they not know that before? Is it true, as some have 
supposed, that before the Fall a sort of “Halo” acted as 
a veil to hide their nakedness, and by the Fall they lost 
this? While the first pair were told to be fruitful, and 
multiply, and replenish the earth (Gen. 1:28), showing 
that it had been inhabited before, the inference is that 
that union would have been of the most pure and chaste 
character, but the Fall so changed the human heart as to 
cause man to fall below the brute creation in yielding to 
lust, and if this be true of fallen man, why not true of 


L 


C0) 


AN 


AN 


EN BY 


ELIJAH F 


34 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


“Fallen Angels’? As the Fall of man did not sever 
completely the communication of angelic beings with 
the race, we see no reason why fallen angelic beings 
could not be attracted by the beauty and comeliness ot 
the females of a race, inferior, but not so far removed 
from them, and desire to have intimate companionship 
with them. 

In Rev. 12:7-12, we read that when Satan and his 
angels are cast out of the Heavenlies onto the earth 
there will be great “woe.” As this will be in the midst 
of the “Tribulation Period,’ and as we read—‘‘As it 
was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the Days 
of the Son of Man” (Luke 17:26-27), it may be that 
this new invasion of the earth by “Fallen Angels” will 
be attended with like conduct on their part as that of 
the Failen Angels of Noah’s day. 

There is a statement in Gen. 3:15, that seems to 
throw considerable light on the subject we are discuss- 
ing. It reads—‘I will put enmity between thee (Satan) 
and the woman (Eve), and between THY SEED (Anti- 
Christ) and HER SEED (Christ): IT (Christ) shall 
bruise thy head, and thou sha!t bruise His heel.” From 
this it seems clear that Satan has the power of pro- 
creation, and that he will beget a son—“THE ANTI- 
CHRIST,” called in 2 Thess. 2:3, the “SON OF PER- 
DITION.” While “Perdition” is “a. PEACE {(he,, 
17:8, 11), and also a “condition” into which men may 
tall (1 Tim. 0:93; Heb. 10739), tthesauthorm ors ies 
SATAN, and “Antichrist” in the above passage is called 
the “SON OF PERDITION” because he is the son of 
the author of “Perdition,” or SATAN. 

As Christ was born of a “virgin” by the Holy Spirit 
without the instrumentality of a human father, so it 
would appear that Antichrist, in imitation of the birth. 
of Christ, is to be born of a woman (not necessarily a 
virgin) with Satan as his father. This is no new view, 
but has been held by many of God’s spiritually minded 
children since the days of the Apostle John. See my 
book on Revelation, pages 116-118. If Satan then has 


the power of procreation, why not his and other Faller 
Angels? 


THE FALLEN ANGELS 35 


As further evidence as to the possibility of angelic 
beings having intercourse with human beings it might 
be well to cite the treatment of the angels that came to 
Sodom, by the men of Scdom, which incident is con- 
nected with the account of the “Fallen Angels” in 2 Pet. 
2:4-6, and Jude 6-7. From the account in Gen. 19: 1-11, 
it is clear that the men of Sodom sought to seize the 
two angels that came to Lot that they might commit 
the unnatural vice of Sodomy with them, as described 
in Rom. 1: 26-27, thus revealing that the angels had the 
generative organs of men. 

When Moses sent the twelve spies into Canaan 
(Num. 13: 1-33), they reported on their return—‘And 
there we saw the ‘giants’ (Nephilim), the sons of Anak, 
which come of the Giants (Nephilim) ; and we were in 
our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their 
sight.” Where did these giants, called “Nephilim,” the 
same as the “Giants” of Gen. 6: 1-4, come from? They 
did not come from the other side of the Flood, unless 
there was such blood in Noah and his sons and their 
wives, which we must believe that God prevented, for 
the purpose of the Flood was to destroy such conta:n- 
ination of the race. Does it not look as if even after the 
Flood there were some sporadic cases of angelic inter- 
course with the daughters of men, and was not this the 
reason why God called for the extermination of the 
Canaanites that He might blot out the descendants of 
the Nephilim? This interpretation is confirmed by the 
words of Gen. 6:4—“There were giants (Nephilim) in 
the earrh in those days (the days before the Flood), and 
gisow Al LER “LHAT.; What is; atter the, Flood. = Phe 
statement that the sin of the “Fallen Angels” was that 
they left their “First Estate,” the “Kingdom of the Air,” 
to descend to the earth for the purpose of going after 
“STRANGE FLESH,” ought to forever settle the char- 
acter of that sin to every one who believes the word of 
God. 

Lastly, the monstrous character of the “offspring” of 
the “Sons of God” and the “daughters of men” is proof 
that the “Sons of God” were not men. Their offspring 
were “Giants”’—““Mighty Men,’ who were so wicked 


86 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


that it is said of them, that “every imagination of the 
thoughts of their heart was only evil continually.” Gen. 
6:5. Godly men have married ungodly women, but 
their offspring have never been such “monstrosities” as 
the offspring of the “Sons of God” ana the “Daughters 
of Men” of Noah’s day. The word translated “giant” 
means the “FALLEN ONES,” which is further proof 
that the “giants” of those days were sons of “Fallen 
Angels; The Vsons or Seth sand the» “daughters or 
Cain” had doubtless often intermarried before that time, 
but no such children were born to them or they would 
have appeared before. Why do not “Mighty Men” 
spring from the union of “godly men” and “godless 
women” today? Is it not a fact that the offspring of 
such persons are not as a rule above the average size of 
mankind? But we would expect the offspring of angelic 
and human beings to be out of the ordinary, and would 
be surprised if they were not. We would expect them 
not only to be great in size, but in mentality, whereas 
in modern times “giants” are not conspicuous for men- 
tality. 

As the older nations of the earth have traditions, and 
in some cases records of the Flood, showing that they 
can trace their origin back to that catastrophe, we have 
in these traditions the source or origin whence the 
classic writers of antiquity obtained their conception of 
the “Gods” and “Demi-Gods” whose loves for members 
of the human race led to the birth of beings half human 
and half divine. Thus the writers of antiquity, who 
must have had some basis for their stories, indirectly 
confirm our contention that the “Sons of God” of Gen. 
6:1-4, whose descendants are described as “Mighty 
Men,” were more than human, that they were of heav- 
enly origin. 


Vv 


Demonism 
Ej] 


We are reading a great deal in these days about 
“Spiritualism,” or the communication of the living with 
the dead. What is called “Spiritism” is DEMONISM, 
and is forbidden in the Scriptures. Lev. 20:6, 27. Deu. 
18:10-11. Isa. 8:19 (R. V.). The “Familiar Spirits” 
of the Old Testament are the same as the “Demons” and 
“Seducing Spirits” of the New Testament. 

Of the revival of “Spiritism” in these days we have 
been fully warned in the New Testament. The Apostle 
Paul, writing to Timothy, says— 

“Now the Spirit (Holy Spirit) speaketh ex- 
pressly, that in the ‘LATTER TIMES’ (the last 
days of this Dispensation) some shall depart 
from the Faith (that is, give up the Christian 
Faith) giving heed to ‘SEDUCING SPIRITS,’ 
and ‘DOCTRINES OF DEVILS’ (Demons), 

* * * forbidding to marry, and commanding 
to abstain from meats.” 1 Tim. 4: 1-3. 


The phrase “forbidding to marry” docs not refer to 
“celibacy,” but to the abrogation of the marriage relation, 
the practice of “FREE LOVE” and the doctrine of 
“AFFINITIES,” which Spiritism leads to. The phrase 
“Abstein From Meats” is not a reference to fasting, but 
the requirement of a “vegetable diet.” It is a well-known 
fact that a “vegetable diet” renders the body more sus- 
ceptible to spiritual forces than a meat diet. 

The close connection of this warnine of the Apostle 
with the words—“Refuse profane and ‘OLD WIVES’ 
FABLES,’” in verse seven, is doubtless a reference to 
some of the “ISMS” of these last dvys. For “Christian 
Science” is but an “OLD WIFBE’S” Fable, for Mrs. Eddy 
was an “Old Wife” in the sense that she had been many 
times married. It is an indisputable fact that most of the 


“Witches” and “Mediums” of Scripture, and these “Lat- 
37 


CHRIST CASTING OUT A DEMON 


DEMONISM 39 


ter Days,” were and are women. It was through Eve 
and not Adam that Satan sought to destroy the race. 
The reason may be that the neryous and impressionable 
character of women is better adapted to demon influence. 

The revival of “Spiritism,” or “DEMONISM,” is one 
of the “Signs of the Times,” and should be a warning to 
every true child of God of the approaching end of the 
Age. The “Demons” belong to the “Powers of Dark- 
ness.” They are not few in number, but are a great 
“Martialed Host,” veterans in the service of Satan. Their 
central camp or abode is the “Bottomless Pit” from which 
they “sally forth” at the command of their leader. Rev. 
9:1-11. They are not angels. Angels have bodies. But 
the fact that demons can enter in, and take possession of, 
and control human beings and animals (swine), is proof 
that they are “Disembodied Spirits.” They are supposed 
by many to be the “spirits” of the inhabitants of the “Pre- 
Adamite Earth,” whose sin caused its wreck, and whose 
bodies were destroyed in the catastrophe that over- 
whelmed it, and their desire and purpose in entering 
human bodies is to re-embody themselves again on the 
earth where they once lived. That the “Demons” have a 
personality is clear from the fact that Jesus conversed 
with them, asked them questions, and received answers. 
Luke 8: 26-33. They are possessed of more than ordinary 
intelligence. They know that Jesus is the “Son of God,” 
and that they are finally to be confined in a place of “Tor- 
mente eaVlaties (29: 


THE POWER OF DEMONS OVER THE HUMAN 
BODY 


They can cause DUMBNESS (Matt. 9: 32-33), and 
BLINDNESS (Matt. 12:22), and INSANITY (Luke 8: 
26-35), and the SUICIDAL MANIA (Mark 9:22), and 
PERSONAL INJURIES (Mark 9:18), and impart 
SUPERNATURAL STRENGTH (Luke 8:29) and in- 
flict PHYSICAL DEFECTS AND DEFORMITIES. 
Luke 13: 11-17. Once they have got control over a human 
body they can come and go at will. Luke 11: 24-26. 

The Devilish character of “Demons” is seen 1n the use 
they make of their victims. They use them as “instru- 


40 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


ments of unrighteousness,” (Rom. 6:13), for the procla- 
mation of the “DOCTRINES OF DEVILS,” (1 Tim. 
4:1), and the teaching of “DAMNABLE HERESIES.” 
2 Pet. 2:1. ‘Vhe effect’ of such use ofthe victim isenet 
only unmoral, it is IMMORAL. It leads to vicious and 
inhuman conduct. The conduct of “demonized” men and 
women seems to indicate that the “Demon” takes posses- 
sion of them for the purpose of physical sensual gratifi- 
cation, thus letting us into the secret of the cause of the 
wreck of the Pre-Adamite Earth, the SIN OF SENSU- 
ALITY. This accounts for the desire of the victim to 
live in a state of nudity; to have lustful and licentious 
thoughts. In these days of increasing tendency to yield 
to “Seducing Spirits” it may account for the immodesty 
of fashionable attire, and the craze of dancing. The pur- 
pose of the “Demon” is often to alienate husband and 
wife, and break up homes by preaching the doctrine of 
“FREE LOVE.” In short, the “Demon,” for personal 
gratification, has the power, once he is in control of his 
victim, to derange both mind and body, and wreck the 
victim’s health, and if deliverance is not obtained by 
turning to Christ, who alone has power to cast out the 
Demon, the victim will be lost soul and bedy. 
Demon-possession must not be confounded with dis- 
eases, such as “Epilepsy,” which causes the victim to falt 
in convulsions, foam at the mouth and gnash the teeth, 
for the Scriptures make a clear distinction between 
them. Matt. 4: 24. 


inl Cons 1020-21) wemead—= 


“But I say, that the things which the Gentiles 
sacrifice, they SACRIFICE TO DEVILS 
(Demons), and not to God; and I would not that 
ye should have FELLOWSHIP WITH 
DEVILS (Demons). Ye cannot drink the Cup 
of the Lord’ (Communion Cup), and the ‘CUP 
OF DEVILS’; ye cannot be partakers of the 
‘Lord’s Table,’ and of the TABLE OF DEVILS 
(Demons).” 


This passage proves that behind all heathen worship 
there is the “Spirit of Demonism,” or “DEVIL WOR- 


eeteHy 


THE WITCH OF ENDOR 


42 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


SHIP,” and accounts for the “wild orgies” and voluptu- 
ous and licentrous mode of worship ot the heathen. 

. Satan’s angels are spoken of as “Wandering Spirits,” 
and “Lying,” and “Wicked Spirits.” They are invisible, 
and can enter homes and hear the secrets of the family. 
They can see every act of impurity. Thus through 
mediums they can give information known only to the 
individual himself. They can disclose the past, and to 
a limited extent have prescience enough to foretell the 
future. The “Demons” are different. They simply in- 
carnate themselves in human beings, take possession of 
their personality, and use them for their own base and 
unclean purposes. The “Wandering Spirits” do not 
enter in and take possession of the person, they simply 
exercise an outward “control,” as in Hypnotism. When 
the “Medium” has passed into the “hypnotic state” the 
“Control” (Wandering Spirit) directs her what to say. 
This is conveyed in the language of the Medium, and 
the character of the language is dependent on the edu- 
cation or mentality of the Medium, and accounts for 
messages purporting to come from scholarly persons 
being so unlike their language when alive. 


THE SPIRIT OF SAMUEL 


The story of Saul and the “Witch of Endor” stands 
by itself. It was put in the Bible to show how God pun- 
ishes the “Sin of Witchcraft,’ and to expose the fraudu- 
lency of Spiritism. Samuel was dead, and Saul had put 
away those that had “Familiar Spirits,” and the “Wiz- 
micas, yoke Ou avs Iemma, I Seim, Ase Ss25, IB welnem wine 
Philistines came up as a great host and pitched in 
Shunem Saul was afraid and greatly troubled, and 
enquired of the Lord, but the Lord answered hin not, 
neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets, aud so 
Saul decided to consult a “Medium,” taat is, a woman 
under the “control” of a “Familiar Spirit. Upon 
inquiry he discovered that there was such a woman at 
Endor about seven or eight miles away. Waiting for 
the shelter of the night he went in disguise, accom- 
panied by two attendants, to the Witch’s cave in the 


DEMONISM 43 


recesses of the mountains. Passing into the interior of 
the cave, dimly lighted, perhaps, by a fire of wood, King 
Saul accosted the woman in words that reveal the 
identity of her craft with that of the modern Medium, 
saying, “I pray thee, divine unto me by the ‘Familiar 
Spirit,’ and bring me him up, whom I shall name unto 
thee.” The woman was at first suspicious, fearing that 
it was a snare set for her, and replied, that Saul had for- 
bidden the practice of “Witchcraft,” but being assured 
by Saul in a strange oath, in which he swore by the 
name of the Lord, that no harm should befall her for 
breaking the law of the Lord, she said—‘Whom shall 
I bring up unto thee?” And he said, “Bring me up 
Samuel.” The woman doubtless began to make her 
usual preparations, expecting to go into a trance-like 
condition and be used by her “Control” or “Familiar 
Spirit,’ who would impersonate the person called for. 
But the usual procedure was cut short by a “Spirit’’ ris- 
ing, like a “wraith,” out of the earth, and visible only to 
the woman. So unexpected and unusual was the 
appearance of the “Spirit,” thus disclosing the fraudu- 
lency of Spiritism, that the woman shrieked in terror 
and affright and said to Saul, “Why hast thou deceived 
me? For thou art Saul.” This doubtless was made 
known to her by the “Familiar Spirit,’ who saw through 
Saul’s disguise. The king said unto her, “Be not afraid: 
for what sawest thou?’ And the woman said, “I saw 
gods ascending out of the earth.” To her terrified vis- 
ion there were many, but when Saul asked, “What form 
is he of 2” she replied, “An old man cometh up; and he is 
covered with a mantle.” At once Saul perceived it was 
Samuel, and bowing himself waited for Samuel to speak, 
which Samuel did, saying in a reproachful way—*Why 
hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up”? 

The woman’s “Familiar Spirit” was not a factor in 
the bringing up of Samuel. God took the matter out 
of his hands. “Familiar” or “Evil Spirits’ may imper- 
sonate the dead, but they cannot produce them. Only 
God can do that. And Samuel is the only one men- 
tioned in the Scriptures that God so produced. The 
case of Samuel then is no proof that a “Medium,” or her 


44 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


“Control,” can. produce the “spirit” of the dead, ~The 
fact is that as soon as the “Spirit” of Samuel appeared 
the woman and her “Familiar Spirit” were sidetracked. 
They had nothing more to do with the proceedings. 
The conversation that followed was not between Saul 
and the “Familiar Spirit,’ but between Saul and Sam- 
uel. From Genesis to Revelation this is the only 
instance in the Scriptures where God permitted the 
dead to come back and hold communication with the 
living. While there are other cases where the “spirit” 
of the dead came back, as in the raising of the daughter 
of Jairus, the widow of Nain’s son, and Lazarus, their 
mind was blank as to their experience while in the other 
world, it having faded away as a dream when the body 
awakes. They came not back as “spirits” but as raised 
persons. They did not receive their Resurrection 
bodies. They afterward died again. But Samuel’s 
“spirit” was not re-embodied, and therefore he was not 
disqualified from telling what he knew of the other 
world. 

But you ask how about those of whom it is said in 
Matt. 27: 52-53, “That many bodies of the saints which 
slept arose, and came out of the graves after His Resur- 
rection, and went into the Holy City, and appeared unto 
many,” was not that Spiritism? No. Those were resur- 
rected persons. They had their Resurrection bodies. 
With Jesus they made up. the. “Birst Bruits’ sot “the 

“Resurrection Harvest,” and ascended with Him to 
Heaven, and are now there, like Enoch, Moses, and Eli- 
jah, in their bodies. Their appearance in Jerusalem to 
those who were alive in the flesh, reveals not only the 
possibility, but the manner of communication between 
the risen saints and the people of the Millennial Earth, 
during the Millennium. The appearance of Moses and 
Elijah on the Mount of Transfiguration is no proof of 
Spiritism. They were present not as “spirits” but in 
their GLORIFIED BODIES. 

If it be urged that God broke His own law against 
“Spiritism” by permitting the “Spirit” of Samuel to 
come back from the other world, the answer is that 
Samuel was sent back to rebuke those who resort to 


DEMONISM 45 


“Familiar Spirits,” and to pronounce sentence on King 
Saul for breaking that law, for we read in 1 Chron. 
10:13, that Sail died for his transgression in asking 
counsel of one who had a “Familiar Spirit.’ 

There are some who stumble at the words of Sam- 
uel—“Tomorrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me” 
(Iv Sam. 28:19), and say, how could that ber Ii Sam- 
uel was in Paradise, Saul and his sons being wicked 
could not go there. Therefore they reason it could not 
have been the “Spirit” of Samuel that appeared to Saul, 
but an “evil spirit” from the “Underworld.” But we 
must not forget that in the time of Samuel Paradise was 
in the “Underworld,” and was separated from the Hell 
section by an impassable Gulf, so that when Saul and his 
sons were slain their souls went to the “Hell” section 
of the “Underworld,” and they were with Samuel in the 
sense that both they and Samuel were in the “Under- 
world,” though one was in the “Paradise” section while 
the others were in the “Hell” section separated only by 
a gulf. This accounts for why Samuel’s “spirit” came 
up out of the earth, and not down from Heaven. 

As further confirmation that it was really Samuel 
who appeared we have his stinging rebuke to Saul. 
Most so-called communications from the dead are vague, 
cryptic, and couched in language intended to leave a 
favorable impression. But it was not so with Samuel. 
He spoke in the severest terms to Saul, and told him 
that the Lord had rent the (Kingdom from him and 
given it to his neighbor, David, and was about to deliver 
Israel into the hands of the Philistines, and that tomor- 
row Saul and his sons would die. 1 Sam. 28: 16-19. 

Samuel disclosed nothing as to the state of those in 
the “Underworld,” except as to the state of the Right- 
eous dead, which he declared to be a state of rest and 
quietness, and that Saul had disturbed him by calling 
for him. In this statement we have a revelation of the 
state of the Righteous dead in Paradise between the 
death and resurrection of the body. 

If it is forbidden in the Scriptures for a child of God 
to have recourse to a “Familiar Spirit,” then it follows 
that it is equally wrong for the “spirits” of the Christian 


46 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


dead to try or consent to communicate with the living. 
By so doing both break the law of God. And what 1s 
true of the Righteous dead is true of the Wicked dead. 
If the persuasive pleading of the Rich Man in Hell could 
not secure the sending back of the “spirit” of Lazarus 
to the earth to warn his brethren, how can a “Medium” 
with the help of a “Familiar Spirit” prevail on the 
“spirits” ‘of the dead to return: Where is no neéd for 
us to resort to “Spiritism” to find out about the state of 
the dead, for we have a full revelation of the state of 
both the Christian and Christless dead given us in the 
Holy Scriptures. We have Moses and the Prophets, 
let us hear them. Luke 16: 29-31, “When they shall say 
unto you, Seek unto them that have ‘Familiar Spirits,’ 
and unto ‘Wizards’ that peep, and that mutter: should 
not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the 
dead? ‘To the “Law’ and to the “Testimony: if they 
speak not according to the ‘Word,’ it is because there is 
no light in them.” Isa. 8: 19-20. To tamper with “Spir- 
itism” is to put one’s-self on Satan’s ground, and to 
throw one’s-self open to invasion by a Demon, or to the 
“control” of an “Evil Spirit” from the “Dark Zone,” 
whose power it may be impossible to break. 


vi 


The Underworld 


To have a correct view of the other world, and of 
“Hell,” it is necessary that we have a Scriptural under- 
standing of— 

THE UNDERWORLD. 


The Hebrew word “SHEOL” is found 65 times in 
the Old Testament. It is translated 31 times, “HELL,” 
31 times, “GRAVE;” 3 times, “THE PIT.” The corre- 
sponding word in the Greek of the New Testament is 
“HADES.” It is translated 10 times “HELL.” “Sheol” 
and “Hades” mean “The Unseen State,” or the place to 
which the “Soul” and “Spirit” of the dead go between 
the death and the resurrection of the body. The “bodies” 
of the dead go into the “Grave,” the word for which in 
the Hebrew is “GEBER,” and in the Greek “MNE- 
MEION.” Neither “Sheol” nor “Hades” denote the 
“Hell” of final punishment of the wicked. That is called 
in the Hebrew of the Old Testament “TOPHET,” and 
in the Greek of the New Testament “GEHENNA.” 
Neither do they denote “THE BOTTOMLESS PIT” 
(Rev. 20:1-3), that is “ABUSSOS,” nor the “prison 
house’ of the “Fallen Angels” (2 Pet. 2:4, Jude 6), that 
is “TARTARUS.” Their general meaning is—“THE 
UNDERWORLD.” 

That we may the better understand the relation of 
the places mentioned above to each other let us turn to 
the Chart, “The Heavens.” The word “Sheol” means 
«a “hollow subterranean place,” therefore “Hades” must 
mean the same. It has “gates,” for Jesus said that the 
“Gates of Hell” (Hades), should not prevail against 
the Church. Matt. 16:18. And Jesus after His return 
from “The Underworld,” said—‘I am He that liveth, and 
was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; 
and have the ‘KEYS’ (of the Gates) of hell (Hades) and 


of death (the Grave).” Rev. 1:18. To get these “Keys” 
47 


48 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


Jesus had to descend into the “lower parts of the earth.” 
Eph. 4:9. The Apostolic Creed says that Jesus de- 
scended into “Hell” (Hades). Therefore Hades, or “The 
Underworld,” must be in the “heart of the earth,” and is 
so pictured on the Chart. Jesus said to the penitent 
Thief “TODAY shalt thou be with me in ‘Paradise.’ ” 
Luke 23:43. And as Jesus “that day” descended into 
“The Underworld” or “Hades,” “Paradise” must have 
been in Christ’s day in “Hades.” But as it had been 
prophesied of Jesus that His “SOUL” (for His body was 
in Joseph’s Tomb on the surface of the earth) should 
not remain in “ell” (Hades), (Psa. 16210, Acts. 2527). 
therefore, before His body could see corruption, Jesus 
came back from “Hades.” But He did not come back 
alone. He seized the “Keys of Hades,” unlocked the 
Gates of the Paradise Section (P) in which He was con- 
fined, and emptied it of its captives, and when He 
ascended on high He took them to the Paradise section 
of the “Third Heaven” (E), where they now are, and 
since then the Paradise Section of “The Underworld” 
has been empty. Eph. 4:8-10. 

In the account of the experience of the “Rich Man” 
and “Lazarus” in the other world (Luke 16: 19-31), Jesus 
gives us a description of “The Underworld” as it was in 
His day. According to the narrative, for it is not a 
parable, for parables do not give proper names as Abra- 
ham and Lazarus, both the “Rich Man” and Lazarus 
had died and their bodies had been buried, and what hap- 
pened to them in the “Underworld,” was descriptive of 
what happened to them in their “disembodied state.” 
In that state they were conscious, could see, hear, speak, 
and recognized each other. The difference was that 
Lazarus was in the “Paradise” section of the “Under- 
world” (P), typified by Abraham’s “bosom,” while the 
“Rich Man” was in the “Hell” section (H), not the final 
Hell, which is “Gehenna” (Lake of Fire), but in the sec- 
tion of the “Underworld” where the “souls” of thz 
“Wicked” dead go, and remain until the resurrection of 
the “Wicked” dead. Between the ‘Paradise’ (P) sec- 
tion,, and the “Hell” (H) section of the “Underworld” 
there is an “Impassable Gulf” (K), (Luke 16: 26), which 


a 
lf, 


Lo 


THE 
HEAVENS 


HE RIGHTEOUS SOULS CHRIST DELIVERED FROM THE UNDERWOR 


SECONDI|- 


Pp 


PARADISE 
OF CHRIST'S DAY 
Now EMPTY 


LUKE 16:19-3} 


|] THE ( J 
D/euLr|ERWORLD 


“THE: UND 


TARTARUS 
2.PET. 2:4. JUDEG 


2 
z R 
ale 
Lad |) 
eZ 
Ae 
zs] HEAVEN 
Ofec 
pa [ed 
</> 
|) 
Ze 
By) ve 
2 
tl we 
IN 


WHITE 
THRONE 


—— 


SS es 


: essser reas 
New. JERUSALEM 
REV. 21:2 


EV.20:1115 


! 


ee 


RESURRECTION OF THE WICKED 


= 
FALLEN ANGELS TO JUDGMENT. JUDE G 


iy a 


“<— THE DOOM OF THE WICKED 


50 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


reveals the fact that there is no possibility of the 
“Wicked” dead ever getting out of “Hell” into “Para- 
dise.” 

On the Chart this “Impassable Gulf” is represented 
as the entrance to the ‘Bottomless Pit,” or “ABYSS” 
(A), the “prison house! of the Demons” (Rev, 9: 1-21); 
and where Satan is to be bound for 1000 years. Rev. 20: 
1-3, 7-8. The Old Testament speaks of a place in “The 
Underworld” called in the Hebrew “ABADDON,” and 
in the Greek “APOLEIA.” The word is translated in 
the Old Testament, “DESTRUCTION” (Prov. 27:20. 
job '2626,28222~ 31312)" Pear 8S 1 le Prov 15-11) and 
the same in the New Testament (Matt. 7:13. Rom. 9: 
22. seh seo 2. Ret, 2 pon) lah rovecs enc set 
says—“Hell (Hades) and ‘Destruction’ (Abaddon) are 
never full,’ thus connecting “Abaddon” with “Hades” 
(Sheol). The inference is that “Abaddon” is a part of 
“The Underworld,” and when we turn to Rev. 9: 1-3, 11, 
this inference becomes a certainty, for there we read that 
the “Kine” ‘of the “Bottomless Pit’ is called- in; the 
Hebrew tongue “ABADDON,” but in the Greek tongue 
his mame is “APOLLYON,” that is; the King of) the 
“Bottomless Pit” is named after the Hebrew and Greek 
words that are translated—“DESTRUCTION.” Now 
the word translated “Bottomless Pit” is “ABUSSOS,” 
or “ABYSS.” Nine times do we read of this “Abyss” in 
the News Lestamentsa kone 0 Jan Revs Os le269a lie 
7, 17:8, 20:1-3. It is the place into which the Demons 
besought Christ: not to send them, Juke $731.) The 
“Bottomless Pit” or “Abyss” (A) then is a deeper 
compartment in “The Underworld” than “Paradise” (P), 
or “Hell” (H), and is the place where the “Demons” and 
baser spirits are temporarily confined until they are 
finally consigned to the “Lake of Fire” to spend eternity 
with their Master, Satan. 

To the left of the “Bottomless Pit” is “TARTARUS” 
(T), the “prison house” of the “Fallen Angels.” 2 Pet. 
2:4. Jude6. These “Angels” are not Satan’s angels, for 
they are at liberty. These “Fallen Angels” confined in 
“Tartarus” are the “Sons of God” who married the 
“Daughters of Men,” and whose abnormal sin caused the 


THE UNDERWORLD 51 


Flood. See the Chapter on “The Fallen Angels.” They 
are to remain in their “prison house” until the “Great 
White Throne” Judgment, when they with the “Wicked 
Dead” are to be judged. Jude 6. 

To the right of the “Bottomless Pit” is “GEHENNA” 
(G) this is) the Minaleilell’or “LAKE,OR KIRE? 
prepared for the Devil and his angels, into which the 
“Wicked,” after the “Great White Throne” Judgment, 
will be cast to spend eternity. Matt. 25:41. Rev. 20: 
12-15. It is called “TOPHET” in the Old Testament 
blebrew. (2 Kiness2310) Isas 3033.) fers 7 vols5Ze 19: 
6, 11-14), and in the New Testament Greek it is twelve 
times called “GEHENNA” (Matt. 5:22, 29-30. 10:28. 
18:9. 23:15, 33. Mark 9:43, 45-47. Luke 12:5. James 
3:6), and five times the “LAKE OF FIRE.” It is as yet 
Unoccipicd ss he firstepersons to get into it are the 
piséast sand) the: «False Prophet’ 7 (Rev~ 19320) then 
“SATAN” and his Angels a 1000 years later (Rev. 20: 
10), and then after the “Great White Throne” Judgment 
the “Fallen Angels,’ now confined in Tartarus, and all 
the wicked whose names are not found written in the 
mBOOKOrsluite, ™keven20 12-1565 On the south sciderot 
Jerusalem was the “Valley of Hinnom.” Ata high place 
in this valley called “Tophet,” in the times of Isaiah and 
Jeremiah, parents made their children to pass through 
the fire to Moloch. 2 Kings 23:10. This fire was kindled 
with brimstone. Isa. 30:33. The locality afterward 
became a place for the burning of garbage from the City 
of Jerusalem. The fires were kept up perpetually, and 
the decaying matter as yet unconsumed bred worms. 
Jesus took this valley called “Ge-Hinnom,” corrupted 
into “GEHENNA,” and made it a type of “Hell” or the 
“Lake of Fire,’ where “their worm dieth not, and the 
fire is not quenched.” Mark 9: 43-48. 

At the upper part of the Chart “Heaven” is shown. 
It includes the present “Paradise” (E), and the “New 
Jerusalem” (J). And also gives the relative location of 
the “Judgment Seat of Christ” (C), and the “Great White 
Throne” (W). The “Arrow” marked lines give the 
course and destiny of the “Righteous” and “Wicked” 


dead. 
G.M. ELLIOTT LIBRARY 
Cincinnat! Bible College & Seminary 


ye, THE SPIRIT WORLD 


There are those who claim that “Sheol” (Hades) and 
the “Grave” are identical, and as there is no “knowledge” 
in the grave (Ecc. 9:5, 10), therefore the soul “sleeps” 
until the resurrection of the body. But as it is only the 
“body” that goes into the “grave,” it is only the “body” 
that “sleeps” or has no knowledge. The “Soul” and 
“Spirit” of a man goes to “Sheol,” not to the “Grave.” 

Among those who teach that the “Soul” at death goes 
to “The Underworld,” are those who claim that the 
“souls” of those who are not as yet fully fit for Heaven 
go to a place called 


PURGATORY. 


The word “Purgatory” is not found in the Bible. The 
word means a “PLACE OF PURIFICATION.” The 
“Doctrine of Purgatory” was not known in the first cen- 
tury, and was not promulgated as a doctrine until 600 
years after Christ. It had its origin in the belief that the 
souls of men when they die are not fit to go immediately 
to Heaven, and so an “Intermediate Place” was invented 
where they might wait for a while and be purged of their 
sin. The instrument of purification is physical suffering. 
The Doctrine further teaches that the soul in Purgatory 
can do nothing towards its own deliverance, and is 
dependent upon “prayers” and “masses” said by the liv- 
ing. The purpose of the Doctrine was to secure revenue 
for the Church by so working on the sympathy of loved 
ones, that they would pay for “Masses” to deliver the 
souls of their relatives and friends from the torments of 
Purgatory. 

The “Doctrine of Purgatory” is unscriptural. There 
is no “INTERMEDIATE PLACE” to be seen on the 
Chart between “Paradise” and “Hell,” and the “Impass- 
able Gulf” declares that there is no possibility of the 
occupants of “Hell” ever passing over into “Paradise.” 
This nullifies the “Doctrine of Purgatory,” and also the 


RESTORATION THEORY. 


The “Restoration Theory” is that after the “Wicked” 
have suffered in Hell for a time, and been sufficiently 
punished for their sins, that they will be restored and 


THE UNDERWORLD SR 


transferred to Heaven. The “Theory” includes Satan 
and his angels and all the “Evil Powers” of the Universe, 
and the final wiping out of Hell. The Scripture the 
advocates of this “Theory” use is— 


“Whom (Christ) the Heaven must receive 
until the “Times of Restitution, of ALL 
THINGS, which God hath spoken by the mouth 
of all His Holy Prophets since the world began.” 
ENGI AIGA & 


The claim is that the “ALL THINGS” embrace 
everything in the Universe, and that therefore at the 
“Times of Restitution” (Restoration), “All Things” will 
be restored to their original glory and place. But there 
is a qualifying clause in the text which limits the “All 
Things” to what “God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
His Holy Prophets since the world began.” Now we 
must not forget that these words were spoken on the 
“Day of Pentecost” to the JEWS, and were to show the 
Jews that Christ wouid not return until they repented 
and were converted (Acts 3:19), and then He would 
restore to them the things that the Prophets had fore- 
told He would. 

What were those things? (1). Their restoration to 
the land of Palestine. Amos 9:14-15. (2). The resto- 
ration of the Hertility of the Land. Joel 2: 24-26. (3): 
The restoration of the Kingdom. Dan. 7:13-14. (4). 
The restoration of Edenic harmony in the brute crea- 
tion.. Isa. 11:6-9. (5). The restoration of Patriarchal 
years. Zech. 8:4. (6). The restoration of the earth to 
its Original condition before the Fail. Rev. 21:1. No- 
where in the Bible through the Prophets does God pro- 
mise the restoration of the “Wicked,” or the “Evil 
Powers” of the Universe, but clearly and distinctly 
states that they are to be punished FOREVER AND 
FOREVER, or unto the “Ages of the Ages.” Rev. 20: 
10. Matt. 25: 46. 

If the Wicked are to have a “Second Chance” in the 
next world who is to proclaim it? If the things that are 
used by God in this life to lead men to Himself, such as 
providence, the Bible, the preaching of the Gospel, the 


54 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


striving of the Holy Spirit have no avail here, what is to 
lead men to God in Hell where those things are absent 
and their environment wholly evil? Character deter- 
mines destiny. When character becomes fixed, condi- 
tion is settled beyond change. “He that is unjust, let 
him be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him be 
filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous 
still.’ Rev. 22:11. These words of revelation declare 
the “FIXEDNESS OF CHARACTER’ at death. 

But you say the sufferings of the Wicked, and the 
memories of the lost opportunities of this life will lead 
to repentance. It is doubtless true that they will be 
sorry for their sin, but it will not be “godly sorrow,” for 
there will be no Holy Spirit there to lead them to “godly 
repentance,” and without Him they cannot be saved. If 
punishment will turn men to God, then the Gospel is 
superfluous, and it would be better to punish men than to 
preach the Gospel to them. The fact is that punishment 
hardens criminals. The “Rich Man” in Hell (Luke 16: 
23-28) showed no repentance, he did not beg for mercy, 
nor express a desire to be out of his place of torment and 
be where Lazarus was. He simply wanted relief for his 
parched tongue. The whole teaching of the Scripture is 
that punishment hardens the wicked. In the Book of 
Revelation we read how those who suffered under the 
Plagues of the Book instead of repenting and calling on 
God, called on the rocks and mountains to fall on them 
and hide them from the face of Him that sitteth upon 
the Throne. Rev. 6:16-17. They also blasphemed God 
on account of the “Plague of Hail” (Rev. 16:21), and 
even Satan after a 1000 years of banishment in the “Bot- 
tomless Pit” comes out as bad as ever. Rev. 20:7-8. If 
men deliberately choose evil rather than righteousness in 
this world, they cannot keep Hell out of themselves, or 
themselves out of Hell. Men cannot sink so low in the 
moral scale but what they can sink lower, and the sad 
fact is that death will not retard their sinful development 
but will accelerate it, until it is beyond human concep- 
tion to what depth the wicked will descend in Hell. 

But I think I hear someone say, Is it not possible for 
God to devise some way to save the Wicked in the next 


THE UNDERWORLD 55) 


world? Does not the Bible say that God “Will have all 
men to be saved” (1 Tim. 2:4); that he has “No pleas- 
Upesinethe death» or the Wicked @ (7435211) and that 
Christ “Tasted death for every man.”? Heb. 2:9. Yes 
it says all this and much more. But it also says—‘‘Be- 
hold, NOW is the accepted time . . . NOW is the Day 
of Salvation.” 2 Cor. 6:2. I say it reverently, when 
God devised the “Plan of Salvation” through the death 
of His Son on the Cross, He went to the limit. If there 
had been any other way He would have provided it, 
rather than the Lord Jesus should suffer. 

But you ask does it not say in Phil. 2: 10-11, “That 
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things 
in ‘Heaven,’ and things in ‘Earth,’ and things ‘UNDER 
THE EARTH’ (in The Underworld); and that every 
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord?” And 
does not John in the Book of Revelation describe that 
day when he says—“And every creature which is in 
‘Heaven,’ and on the ‘Earth, and ‘UNDER THE 
EARTH,’ and such as are ‘in the sea,’ and ALL that are 
in them, heard | saying, blessing, and honor, and glory, 
and power, be unto Him that sitteth upon the Throne, 
and unto the Lamb forever and ever?” Rev. 5:13. Yes, 
the Bible says all this, but confession is not REPENT- 
ANCE. A conquered foe will admit the supremacy of 
the conqueror by virtue of necessity, but that does not 
imply a changed heart. Satan and his angels and all the 
“Powers of Evil,” in Heaven, Earth, and Hell, will con- 
fess that Jesus Christ is not only Lord, but King of 
Kings and Lord of Lords, but that will not restore them 
to Heavenly Glory. We must not forget that the issues of 
Eternity are settled in Time. Men and women are to 
be judged for what they do “IN THE BODY” (2 Cor. 
5:10), that is on this side of the grave, and not for what 
they do on the other side. Jesus said—“I go my way, 
and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins: whither 
I go YE CANNOT COME.” John 8:21. This shows 
that if men die impenitent they can never go where Jesus 
is. 

The “Doctrine of Purgatory” is the result of 


56 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


A DEFECTIVE VIEW OF THE WORK OF CHRIST 
ON THE CROSS. 


It implies that the “Death of Christ” was not suff- 
cient, for if it was sufficient then those who die in the 
faith have no need to spend any time in a “Purgatory,” 
but should go at once to “Paradise.” Whe fact that 
“MASSES” are offered for the dead shows a misconcep- 
tion of the purpose of the “Lord’s Supper.” The “Lord’s 
Supper” is not a “Sacrament.” ‘There is nothing saving 
in it. It is simply a “MEMORIAL” that looks back to 
the: “Cross, and forward to the: -Comine,> 1 Cor. 11: 
26. Between the “Fall in Eden” and “Calvary” there is 
the “ALTAR,” between “Calvary” and the “Second 
Coming” there is the “TABLE,” and between the “Sec- 
ond Coming” and the “New Heaven and Earth” there is 
the “THRONE: * See the Chart on) The wo 1Com- 
ings.” What right then has any one to set up between 
“Galvary” and the “Second Coming” an “ALTAR,” 
where Ghrist has placed a “TABLE.” To call the 
“Table” an “ALTAR” is to make that which is offered 
upon it a “SACRIFICE,” and if the “Bread” and “Wine” 
represent the REAL BODY AND BLOOD of Christ, as 
those who teach the Doctrine of “TRANSUBSTANTIA- 
TION” claim, then every time a “MASS” is offered 
Christ is “SACRIFICED,” and the partaker of the 
“Mass” is a “GOD-EATER,” and also a “CANNIBAL” 
for feasting on the FLESH AND BLOOD of the Man 
Christ Jesus. 

We must not forget the circumstances under which 
the ‘“Lord’s Supper” was instituted. It was after the 
“Passover Supper.” Jesus was about to shed His blood 
on the Cross as the “Lamb of God,” which the Passover 
typified, and as the Disciples had just eaten of the “Pass- 
over Lamb,” whose blood had been previously shed, 
Jesus wished to show them that they must feed upon 
Him by faith as the “Lamb of God.” So He took the 
“Bread” and said—‘This is (represents) my Body which 
was broken for you, this do in remembrance of me.” 
1 Cor. 11:24, “After the same manner also He took the 
‘Cup,’ when He had supped, saying, This ‘Cup’ (the 


Ay) Sibifoifg -AaLHdiarsog 
NS "YUH 'SSVHOXO4 NINN W] JONIEVID 
AG NMYNQ ony O3N9IS3IQ 


SSNINOD OMI JSHL 


92:17 YOO! 
w3WOD 3H VIL---Hivaq $0407 SAL 
AMOHS 00 ad ‘Ano SIH] YNIUO 
ONY ‘avaug SIH] 1V7 JA SY N3140 sy YO4, 

ERED ARNEL 


0 SNOUHL IHL 


— 


"it Lad 
sSONIYIIINS, 


| 
b 1) pow Slag Zee SALIL fost qo woes tae ASVUHOOSHL SHL 
a YY Joy Fury0oT ET | 18 POH Jo vowa oY 4OT TT 
aE 


O1lvVO14IYOT Noliyolilisar 
{piiow yaosoud sig oy ‘Stpo8 pow 
Dee [49q08 oat] prooqy 
om Saen( 4 paw saurpod 


»SIOY IML 3D, 


S39 3H1 40 S3Dy, 


rT 


-on Feriuap 4uqy wn Sayqoray. ZL 


NOILVONSILINVS 


ATONIDA 


2:6 _ oH 92:6°83H 
wUViddy 3H VIVHS, (,AAdVIAddy 3H H1VH, 
SNIDJ LaHd0udg 


ATzgayud 


—_+2:6'93H__ 
.8V3ddV OL MON,, 
1said 


58 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


Fruit of the Vine in it) is the New Testament (Coven- 
ant) in My Blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in 
remembrance of me. ” 1 Cor. 11:25. When Jesus offered 
His Disciples the “Cup” saying of its contents this is 
“MY BLOOD,” did He open a vein and let His life 
blood flow into the Cup? Did the Disciples that night 
actually eat the FLESH and drink the BLOOD of 
Jesus? To ask the question is to answer it. What Jesus 
meant was that the “Bread” symbolized His Body about 
to be broken on the Cross, and the “Cup” symbolized 
His Blood about to be shed. What He desired to set 
before His Disciples was the fact that His death on the 
Cross would fulfil what the “Passover Lamb” typified, 
and that they would be reminded every time they partook 
of the Lord’s Supper that all animal sacrifices had been 
done away with, and that the offering of Himself was 
“once for all,” and that there is to be “no more offering 
{Of Sits Lieb, LU 12-13. 


ANNIHILATIONISM 


Annihilationism is the Doctrine that the wicked are 
to be destroyed at death, or later after Judgment. The 
Doctrine is based on a false view of Death, and a wrong 
interpretation of the word “Destruction.” If the wicked 
are destroyed at death then there is no such thing as the 
resurrection of the wicked dead and their judgment after 
resurrection, both of which the Scriptures clearly teach. 
John 5: 28-29. Rev. 20: 12-15. We know trom) Luke 16; 
19-31, that the wicked “Rich Man” was alive in Hell, 
though as to his body he had died, and it had been buried 
on the earth. Judas died as to his body, but his soul 
went to its own place. Acts 1:25. Again we are told 
that “endless punishment” awaits the wicked, but “An- 
nihilation” would not be “endless punishment” or any 
punishment at all. The “Fallen Angels” were not an- 
nihilated, they are now in “Tartarus,” and are yet to be 
judged. Jude 6. There is no such thing as “Annihila- 
tion” in nature. Things pass into another form or con- 
dition, but are not destroyed. The word “Destruction” 
as used in the Bible never means annihilation or the 
blotting out of existence. It simply denotes “loss” or 


THE UNDERWORLD 59 


“ruin,” and that the thing “destroyed” is no longer fit for 
the purpose for which it was made or intended, and that 
the “form of its existence” is changed. ‘To illustrate, the 
servants of Pharaoh said to him—‘\Knowest thou not 
yet that Egypt is destroyed’? Ex. 10:7. But Egypt 
exists today. And Jesus said—‘Destroy this temple, and 
ime three daysy) pwillraisemt up. John 2-18-22." He 
meant the “Temple of His Body,” and though they de- 
stroyed it by “Crucifixion,” He raised it up on the third 
day. 
FUTURE PUNISHMENT ETERNAL 


In Matt. 25:46 we read—‘“And these (the Wicked) 
shall go away into ‘EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT;’ 
but the Righteous into LIFE ETERNAL.” Primarily 
these words are spoken of “The Nations” (Matt. 25: 31- 
32), but they apply to individuals. The words in this 
passage “Everlasting,” and “Eternal,” are both the same 
Greek word “AIONIOS,” and should both be translated 
“ETERNAL.” ‘The word “Aionios” comes from the 
Greek word “aion,’ which is the same as the English 
word ‘“‘aeon,’ or AGE. It has been said that the word 
means “Age-long,” that is, a “definite period” with a be- 
ginning and an ending, and not necessarily eternal in 
duration. The word “Eternal” is from the Latin word 
Zactas;; oni ence, “Nowa year isa definite: time. <1t 
has a beginning and ending. If we know its beginning 
we know that in exactly 365 days it will end. But an 
“Age” is an indefinite time. Of past “Ages” we know of 
their beginning and ending, though we may not be able 
to tell how long they were, for instance the “Creative 
Age.” But of Future Ages we do not know when they 
will begin or end. So the word “Age” is the only word 
we have to express “indefinite time,” and the phrase 
“Ages of the Ages” is the only way ve have of express- 
ing “Endless Duration,” or “ETERNITY.” 

The lifetime of the “Lord God Almighty” is said to 
be “For Ever and Ever:” Rev. 4:9-10, 5: 14, 10:6, 15:7. 
And means for the “Ages of the Ages.” And that is the 
time given for the punishment of the “Satanic Trinity” 
(Rev. 20:10), and the reign of the “Righteous.” Rev 


60 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


22°95. >And as the: Wicked “arerto existvas long asithe 
“Righteous” they are to exist for the “Ages of the Ages” 
or ior all “ETERNITY<~~ So we see if Hell’ isi tombe 
blotted out, “Heaven’’ will be blotted out, the Universe 
will become extinct, Eternity will end, and God be no 
more, a thought which is inconceivable. 

{t is a noteworthy fact that the “Doctrine of Hell” 
was mainly taught by Jesus Himself. It was He who 
said that the wicked shall be cast into the “Lake of 
Fire,” and that there should be wailing and gnashing of 
teeth. Matt. 13:49-50. Matt. 25:41. He also taught 
that the fire was quenchless, and their worm would never 
die. Mark 9: 43-48. And as the Book of Revelation is 
the “Revelation of JESUS CHRIST,’ Kev. 121,.then 
whatever it teaches of the final doom of the Wicked, is 
the teaching of Jesus Christ. 

The Ethical’ value of the “Doctrine of Hell” -and*ot 
“Endless Punishment” is beyond computation. Preach 
the doctrine of a “Second Probation” after death, that 
men and women after a life of sin here can get out of 
Hell and into Heaven by repentance and accepting the 
Gospel Plan of Salvation, and they will throw the reins 
of self-control on the neck of passion and ride at break- 
neck speed to perdition. It is the spread of such perni- 
cious teaching that is the cause of the increase of law- 
lessness in the world. If there were more preaching of 
Hell in the pulpit there would be less of hell in the 
world. But why do men want to go to Heaven via Hell 
when they can go to Heaven direct? God is love, but 
God is JUST. He must preserve the Righteous from the 
Wicked. This demands that they be separated for all 
eternity. Therefore, O reader! if you are not a child of 
God, I beseech you to fly from the Wrath to come by 
accepting God’s overtures of mercy ere it be too late. 


VII 
The Spirits in Prison 
=| oa 


Those who teach the Doctrine of a “SECOND 
CHANCE,” base it on what Peter says about—’ Preach- 
ing to the Spiits in Prison.” The passage reads thus— 

“For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, 
the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us 
to God, being put to death in the flesh, but 
quickened by the Spirit (Holy Spirit) : by which 
(the H. S.) also He went and PREACHED TO 
THE ‘SPIRITS IN PRISON’; which sometime 
(aforetime) were disobedient; when once the 
longsutfering of God waited (120 years) in the 
‘Days of Noah.’ while the Ark was a preparing, 
wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by 


Water eta or llo-20) 


Who were these “Spirits in Prison”? The word 
“spirits” by itself without any qualifying word, as 
“unclean spirits,’ “evil spirits,’ “spirits of just men” 
(Hebyel2223)) etc. always means in the Scriptures 
supernatural beings, therefore these “spirits” could not 
have been the spirits of dead men. \When were these 
“spirits’ disobedient? We are told that it was in the 
“Days of Noah.” ‘This clearly points back to the time 
of the “Flood.” Were there any “Supernatural Beings” 
on the earth at the time of the Flood? We turn to 
2 Wet. DBed.§, armel meack— 


“For if God spared not the ANGELS THAT 
SINNED, but cast them down to hell (Tar- 
tarus), and delivered them into chains of dark- 
ness, to be reserved unto Judgment: and spared 
NOAH . .... bringing in the FLOOD upon 
the world of the ungodly,” etc. 

61 


62 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


Here we are told that in the “Days of Noah” there 
were some “ANGELS” who sinned, and that their sin 
caused the “Flood.” ‘These “Angels” were not Satan’s 
Angels, for they are at liberty, and when they are men- 
tioned Satan is always mentioned with them (Matt. 
29:41. Rev. 1227-9), but these “Angels” are in a dark 
“prison house,” and confined in chains, and according to 
Jude 6-7, their sin was in leaving their “First Estate,” 
the Heavenlies, and committing fornication with 
“Strange Flesh,” that is with the “Daughters of Men.” 
Gen, 621-4. See the Chapteron (lhe PallenvAngels.” 

Then we must note that these “Angels” were not 
cast down to “Hell,” but to a “prison house” called 
TARTARUS, which, while it is in the “Underworld,” 
is a separate place from the “Hell Section” of Hades. 
See the Chart on “The Underworld.” Now Jesus when 
He went down into the “Underworld,” during the time 
between His Death and Resurrection, did not go to 
“Tartarus,’ He went to the “Paradise Section” of 
Hades, the place where the souls of the Righteous went 
before Jesus emptied it at His Resurrection, and He 
went there to meet the “Penitent Thiel, and) not to 
preach. Again we are told that Jesus Himself did not 
personally preach to the “Spirits in Prison,” but that 
He preached through the Holy Spirit. This harmon- 
izes with the account in Genesis, where God said to 
Noah, “My Spirit (Holy Spirit) shall not always strive 
with man.” Gen. 6:3. The instrument that the Holy 
Spirit used, was Noah, called in 2 Peto 2755.4 “Preacher 
of Righteousness.” The preaching then to the “Spirits 
in Prison” was not after they were imprisoned, but 
BEFORE. And it was not the “Gospel” that was 
preached to.them. Where the word “preach” is used 
without a qualifying word, it may mean anything. That 
it was not the “Gospel” that was preached to them is 
clear, for there was no “Gospel” at that time to preach, 
for Jesus had not=yet. made Atonement for “Sin,” The 
statement then that Jesus preached to the “Spirits in 
Prison” cannot mean that Jesus personally went to 
“Tartarus” and preached, but that He preached by the 
Holy Spirit through Noah. As confirmation of this 


THE SPIRITS IN PRISON 63 


interpretation we have the statement of Paul in his let- 
ter to the Ephesians, where he says, “Jesus came and 
preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them 
that were nigh.” Eph. 2:17. Now this was not liter- 
ally true, for Jesus was never at Ephesus. What the 
Apostle meant was that Jesus had preached peace to 
them through him, for he was pastor at Ephesus for 
three years. Acts 20: 17-27. Again we must not forget 
that, as that preaching was to those who were disobedi- 
ent in the “DAYS OF NOAH,” it was preaching to a 
“special class,” the “Spirits” who are now in prison, and 
was not a proclamation to the wicked dead in general. 

But I think I hear some one say, “Does it not clearly 
say in 1 Pet. 4:6, ‘For this cause was the Gospel 
preached also to them that are dead, that they might be 
judged according to men in the flesh, but live according 
to God in) the Spitite’: Yes. “But the context shows 
that there should be no chapter division, and that the 
dead here referred to were the “Spirits in Prison” of the 
preceding chapter (vs. 19-20), who, as we have seen, 
were not dead but alive when they were preached to, 
and though they were “Angels” they will be judged like 
men in the flesh for the deeds done in their bodies when 
they cohabited with the “Daughters of Men,” and after 
judgment shall survive in their “Spirit bodies.” The 
use of the word Gospel in the passage does not necessar- 
ily mean the Gospel as it is now preached, but merely 
the proclamation of “good news” of some kind. There- 
fore we have no Scriptural authority for believing or 
teaching that the “wicked dead,” since their death, ever 
had, or ever will have, the “Gospel of Salvation” 
preached to them. To teach it is to go contrary to the 
whole trend of Scripture. 


S 
ren poo” 


\ES_TERRES 
ne ay, 


Fresh OF Biros 
‘A 


oT Me 


~ 4 ails OF Mey 
ae 


a = Se == 


— FLESH OF FISHI 


DESIGNED BY 


CLARENCE LARKIN = ° ; : 
FOxCHASE, PHILA, PA pate Aeris COPYRIGHTED, 


FLESH OF BIRDS, BEASTS, MEN AND FISHES 
BODIES CELESTIAL AND TERRESTRIAL 


VIII 
Natural Law in the Spirit World 


i] c) 


The difference between “Plant” and “Animal” life is, 
that the “Plant” has not “conscious” life, while the “Ani- 
mal’ has. The difference between “Animal” life and 
“Human” life is, that while animals have “conscious” 
life, a soul, man has more; he has a LIVING soul, that 
is a soul in which dwells a “SPIRIT.” Gen. 2:7. While 
man differs from a beast in having a “Spirit,” yet he is 
as to his body only an ANIMAL. That is, his body is 
formed on the same general plan, and governed by the 
same laws, and its organs, and functions of respiration, 
digestion, and assimilation, are the same as those of an 
animal. When the Apostle Paul speaks of the “Nat- 
ural” body (1 Cor. 15:44) he refers to the “Animal” 
body, and when he speaks of the “Spiritual” bodv, he 
means a MATERIAL BODY adapted to the realm of 
thes Spit) World, tor-the “Spirit World’ “4s just: as 
much MATERIAL as the “Natural World” in which we 
dwell. We cannot imagine heavenly beings and places 
without material forms and substances. The only dif- 
ference is that the bodies of “Spirit Beings” are adapted 
to the “Spirit World,” just as the bodies of fish are 
adapted to the world of water, and the bodies of birds 
to the world of air. This is beautifully brought out by 
Paul in 1 Cor, 15:39-40. “All fesh is_not-the same 
flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of MEN, another 
flesh of BEASTS, another of FISHES, and another of 
BIRDS. There are also ‘CELESTIAL BODIES’ 
(Spirit bodies), and ‘BODIES TERRESTRIAL’ 
(Human bodies); but the glory of the CELESTIAL is 
one, and the glory of the TERRESTRIAL is another.” 
We know that there are all kinds and varieties of flesh; 
“FISH-flesh,” “BIRD-flesh,” “BEAST-flesh,” and 
“HUMAN-flesh,” and of “Beast-flesh” there is beef, 
venison, pork, mutton, etc. Why this great variety of 

65 


RESURRECTION OF LAZARUS 


NATURAL LAW IN THE SPIRIT WORLD 67 


flesh? The answer is that each kind of flesh is adapted 
to the needs and habitation of the creature to which it 
belongs. From this we see that our “Human” body is 
adapted to this physical world in which we now live, 
and at the resurrection we shall receive a body adapted 
to the “Spirit World.” The unborn child has life, but 
not conscious life, its life is suited to its habitation. As 
soon as the child is born it finds itself in a new environ- 
ment of vast extent, and with laws that completely 
change the character o its being. Through its five 
senses of sight, smell, taste, touch and hearing, it realizes 
that it is in a new world for which those senses adapt it. 

We must not forget that in the Natural world, under 
certain conditions, one law may counteract another law. 
For illustration we may lay on a table a piece of steel, 
and suspend a foot or two above it a piece of steel in the 
form of a horse-shoe magnet, to which is attached a wire 
that leads to an electric battery. As long as the magnet 
remains demagnetized, the “Law of Gravitation” will 
hold the piece of steel firmly to the table, but the moment 
we magnetize the magnet, by turning on the current from 
the electric battery, the “Law of Magnetism” will over- 
come the “Law of Gravitation” and lift the piece of steel 
from the table and hold it suspended in the air. But 
the moment we turn off the current from the battery, the 
“Law of Magnetism” is withdrawn, and the “Law of 
Gravitation,’ no longer overpowered, again comes into 
play, and the piece of steel falls to the table. Apply this 
illustration to the Resurrection of Lazarus. Lazarus 
had come under the power of the “Law of Death,” but 
when Jesus brought into play the higher law of “Resur- 
rection” Lazarus was restored to life, but when later the 
“Law of Resurrection” was withdrawn Lazarus came 
again under the “Law of Death,” and died the second 
time. 

The “Natural World” and the “Spirit World” lie 
close together and there is an overlapping of their laws. 
In fact the laws of the “Spirit World” are only “natural 
laws” of a higher order. A miracle is not something 
contrary to nature, but the working of a higher law, that, 
thus far, is contrary to our experience. When we reach 


Vy 
yy | y 


Mis, 
i, 


Wy _ yf 
_ 


ASCENSIO 


OF CHRIST 


NATURAL LAW IN THE SPIRIT’ WORLD 69 


the “Spirit World” we shall find that what we now look 
upon as miracles are simply the working of the natural 
laws of the “Spirit World.” For illustration suppose 
that we should take a trip to some tropical country in a 
submarine boat on which is a machine for manufactur- 
ing ice. Suppose the natives had never seen or heard 
of a submarine boat or an ice-machine, and a few days 
after our arrival we should invite the Chief and a few of 
the head men of the tribe to come on board. We tell 
them that in the country from which we came that at 
certain times of the year water becomes solid. They 
laugh at us and say it is impossible, for they have never 
seen it so. We show them the ice-machine and, putting 
some water in pans, we place the pans in the machine 
and in a little time take them out and empty from them 
solid cakes of ice. The natives are dumbfounded. They 
call it a miracle. Was it a miracle? No. It was sim- 
ply the working of a law with which we are familiar, but 
of which they knew nothing. If we told them that in 
our country they “imprisoned” the songs and music of 
the people on recording plates and cylinders, so they 
could be reproduced at any time, and that we could 
speak for miles over a wire, they would declare it 
impossible. But when we started a Graphophone and 
they heard the sound of the human voice, and placing 
the receiver of a Telephone at their ear they heard the 
voice of an invisible person, they would declare it a 
miracle, would it be so? If to cap the climax we should 
tell them that we were going to take a trip under water, 
they would declare it impossible. That nothing but 
fish could live under water. But while we are talking 
orders are quietly given, the hatches are closed, the 
machinery is set in motion, the vessel dives downward 
into the sea, and through the lookout portholes the 
natives see the fish and submarine animals swimming 
in the sea, and they watch as we pass by sea ferns, and 
coral beds, and survey the landscape of the ocean’s bed. 
And when after an hour’s run we rise buoyantly to the 
surface of the sea, and they find themselves almost out 
of sight of land, but safe, they call it a miracle. Was 
it? No. It was simply the working of higher laws than 


DANIEL IN THE LION’S 


DEN 


NATURAL LAW IN THE SPIRIT WORLD Ti 


those natives knew anything about. To them we seemed 
to be a higher race of beings come from another world 
with a knowledge of certain laws that they knew nothing 
about. 

Now apply these simple illustrations to the “Spirit 
World” and is it not clear that what to us appears 
miraculous is only the working of natural laws with 
which we as yet have not become acquainted. Take the 
Resurrection of Jesus. Jesus by His crucifixion came 
under the power of the “Law of Death,” but on account 
of His Deity He could not be “holden” of death (Acts 
2: 23-24), and through the greater power of the “Law of 
Resurrection” He was delivered from Joseph’s tomb. 
When Jesus Ascended we are told that He was “taken 
Ups nctss I 9-11." Bhat 1s, the “Law --of Ascension” 
overcame the “Law of Gravitation.” Jesus could no 
more have remained on earth than the buoyancy of a 
mass of cork could be overcome by piling tons of sea- 
water upon it. So we see that there is a law of “Celes- 
tial Gravitation” as well as a law of “Terrestrial Gravi- 
tation.” 


THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM 


IX 
The Relation of the Spirit World 
to the Natural World 


Se) 


Much of the miraéulous and strange phenomena of 
the Scriptures can be explained when we understand the 
relation of the “Spirit World” to the “Natural World.” 
Take for instance the “Fall” of the Walls of the City of 
Jericho. Joshua 6:1-27. We are told that the Children 
of Israel were commanded to march around the City once 
each day for six days, and on the seventh day they were 
to compass it seven times, and then a long blast on a 
“Ram’s Horn” was to be the signal for them to shout and 
the walls would fall down so they could take the city. 
This literally occurred. Now what is the explanation? 
Some claim that the walls were thrown down by an earth- 
quake that was timed to occur at the “Psychological 
Moment” when the people shouted. If this be true, 
there was never an earthquake before or since like it, for 
only the walls of the city fell down, not a dwelling house 
was disturbed, nor any persons killed, and the part of the 
wall where Rahab lived, which was protected by the 
“Red Cord” in the window lattice, a type of the “Blood,” 
was not thrown down. Others claim that the walls were 
thrown down by “Concussion,” caused by the “blare” of 
trumpets, and the “shout” of the people. That is, the 
trumpets and voices of the people were “keyed” to the 
note of the walls and caused them to vibrate until they 
fell. But the fallacy of this explanation is seen in that 
Joshua never resorted to such a method to throw down 
the walls of other cities. What then is the explanation? 
We must go back a few verses into the preceding chap- 
ter to get the setting of the miracle. In Joshua 5:13 we 
read that when Joshua was about to besiege Jericho he 
was met by a “man” with a drawn sword in His hand. 

73 


SS 
NN 
RC 


SHEPHERDS 


APPEARING TO THE 


ANGEL 


THE SPIRIT AND NATURAL WORLD 75 


When Joshua asked Him whether He was a friend or an 
enemy, He replied that He was— 


“THE CAPTAIN 
OF THE HOST OF THE LORD,” 


and as He commanded Joshua to take off his shoes, 
because the place where he stood was holy (vs. 15), the 
“MAN” was the same that commanded Moses to take 
off his shoes at the “Burning Bush’ (Ex. 3:1-6), or 
Jesus before His Incarnation. 

In the interview that followed (Joshua 6: 2-5) Joshua 
was told the part he was to play in the taking of the city, 
in which he was to be aided by the “Armies of Heaven” 
undemethe, command of their “Captain,” the “Lord of 
Hosts.” So when Joshua and the people had fulfilled 
their part, at the sound of the Trumpet, the co-operating 
and invisible angelic army under the command of their 
Captain, the “Lord of Hosts,” threw down the walls of 
the city excepting the part upon which the house of 
Rahab was built. Joshua 6: 22-25. 

As confirmation of this view we turn to 1 Chron. 
14: 13-17. The Philistines had spread themselves over 
the valley, and |King David inquired of God as to what 
to do, and God said unto him—‘“Go not up after them; 
turn away from them, and come upon them over against 
the ‘Mulberry Trees.’ And it shall be, when thou shalt 
hear a sound of ‘GOING’ in the TOPS of the ‘Mulberry 
Trees,’ that then thou shalt go out to battle: for GOD 
IS GONE FORTH BEFORE THEE TO SMITE THE 
HOST OF THE PHILISTINES.” Here we see the 
co-operation of an “Angelic Army,” whose presence 
would be made known by the sound of “going,” or 
marching of troops, in the tops of the Mulberry Trees, 
and it was really the “Angelic Army” that swept on 
before the “Army of David,” that smote the Philistines 
that day. 


THE STAR OF BETHLEHEM 


When Jesus was about to be born, some “Wise Men” 
in the East saw a peculiar “Star” in the heavens, which 
indicated to them the nearness of His birth. They at 


p y Z SSS SOL LG 
. —rrr—“—OO———h — 


Oe 


oe 


Co 
TIS S 
ou 


THE ANGEL GABRIEL APPEARING TO MARY 


THE SPIRIT AND NATURAL WORLD HFC 


once departed for Jerusalem, and naturally expecting 
that the “King of the Jews” would be born in a palace, 
they went to the home of King Herod. Not finding Him 
there they were directed to Bethlehem. When they 
started for Bethlehem the “Star” that they had seen in 
the “Eastern Country” reappeared and ‘“‘went before 
them, till it came and stood over where the young child 
was-) Matt.2:9.° The “Star” then disappeared. What, 
MWidcsethate otar © “Some claim that it was a “special 
star” that appeared for the purpose; cthers that it was 
the conjunction of three stars or planets; others that 
it was a comet or meteor, but none of these explana-! 
tions fulfil the conditions. First the “Star” must have’ 
presented some peculiar appearance to attract the atten- 
tion of the “Wise Men.” Then it must have been a mov- 
ing star, for when they left Jerusalem it reappeared and 
“went before them” as a guide to Bethlehem, and “stood” 
over the house (presumably not far above it), where the 
infant Jesus was, so as to point out the exact place, and 
then it disappeared. The only satisfactory explanation 
of the peculiar movement of the “Star” is that it was an 
“ANGEL” who assumed the form of a star. We know 
that angels were busy visiting the earth in those days. 
The angel Gabriel announced to Zacharias the birth of 
John the Baptist (Luke 1:11-17), and to Mary the birth 
of Jesus (Luke 1:26-35). And it was an angel that 
announced the birth of Jesus to the Shepherds. Luke 
2:8-11. Why not an angel then direct the “Wise Men’? 

What more appropriate form could the angel assume 
than that-of a “STAR.” The “Wise Men” were from 
the East, from Babylon and Persia, the country of the 
Captivity of Israel. They may have been of the Jewish 
remnant left there, and acquainted with the prophecies 
relating to the Messiah, among them that of Balaam, 
who foretold as a “sign” that there should come a 


“STAR OUT OF JACOB.” 
Num. 24: 15-17. 
The form of a “Star” then was the most appropriate 


the angel could assume to arouse the interest of the 
“Wise Men.” In fact only a “Star Angel” could move 


ANGEL 


SUCCORING CHRIST 


IN 


GETHSEMANE 


THE SPIRIT AND NATURAL WORLD 79 


about in the heavens and guide them to the exact spot 
where the child Jesus lay. 

This interpretation is confirmed by other instances 
in which angels assumed a “Star Form.” In the Book 
of Revelation (Rev. 9:1), we read that when the Fifth 
Angel sounded his Trumpet, that the Apostle John saw 
a “STAR?” fall from Heaven. But it was not a literal 
star, for in the same sentence he says, “to HIM (the 
star) was given the ‘Key’ of the Bottomless Pit.” A lit- 
eral star could not handle a “key” or “open a door.” So 
we see that the “Star” that guided the “Wise Men” was 
not a real star, but an “Angel,” who for prophetic rea- 
sons assumed the form of a star. 


THE MINISTRY OF ANGELS 


The “Ministry of Angels” is seen all through the 
Scriptures. They are not only sent forth to minister to 
them who shall be heirs of salvation (Heb. 1: 13-14), and 
to keep them in the way, and bear them up lest they dash 
their foot against a stone (Psa. 91: 11-12), but they min- 
ister in other ways. The Cherubim were placed as 
guardians over the Garden of Eden, lest men should 
enveteandseat onthe lreevot Life’ Gen. 3324. When 
the time came to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah two 
angels were sent to deliver Lot and destroy those two 
cities. Gen. 19:1-29. At Bethel Jacob saw the angels 
ascending and descending. Gen. 28:10-19. As Elijah 
lay under a Juniper tree despondent and praying that 
he might die, an angel brought him bread and water. 
1 Kings 19:4-8. When Elisha was besieged at Dothan 
the angelic hosts were sent to deliver him, which they 
did by smiting the enemy with blindness. 2 Kings 
6: 13-18. The Angel of the Lord smote in one night 
185,000 of the army of Sennacherib the King of Assyria. 
2 Kings 19: 32-36. When Daniel was thrown into the 
“Lions’ Den” God sent an angel to close the lions’ 
mouths. Dan. 6:19-22. It was an angel that warned 
Joseph to flee into Egypt with the child Jesus, and when 
to bring Him back. Matt. 2:13,19. After Jesus had 
fasted 40 days angels came and ministered unto Him, 


ANGEL DELIVERING PETER FROM PRISON 


THE SPIRIT AND NATURAL WORLD 81 


Matt. 4:11. And at the close of His sufferings in Geth- 
semane an angel appeared to strengthen Him. Luke 
22:43. It was an angel that liberated the Apostles from 
prison (Acts 5:19, 12: 5-10), and that notified the Apostle 
Paul that he, and all who sailed with him, would be saved 
from shipwreck. Acts 27:21-24. At the close of “The 
Great Tribulation” the Son of Man shall “send His 
angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall 
gather together His elect from the four winds, from one 
end of heaven to the other.” Matt. 24:31. At the end 
of the Age the angels shall come forth and sever the 
wicked from among the just (Matt. 13: 47-50), and when 
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, His 
“Mighty Angels” shall come with Him, and execute His 
vengeance upon them that know not God, and that obey 
Notaries Gospeorour. herd jesus Christ. 2 Thess. 
17-8. Lastly, as the heavens are peopled with the 
“Principalities and Powers of Evil,’ and Paradise the 
abode of the “Righteous Dead” is now in the “Third 
Heaven,” we shall need the convoy of “Good Angels” 
as a bodyguard to protect us from these evil and mali- 
cious Spirits, when at death our Soul takes its flight to 
Paradise. 


THE TABERNACLE 


MosT 
HOLY PLACE 


govoen[ | ALTAR 


INCENSE 


SHEW-BREAD 
TABLE 


x 
722) 
wre 

{33 
ser 
r=) 
Gs 

< 
8) 


HOLY 
PLACE 


D o eo! 
DooRWAY 


BRAZEN| 


OUTER COURT 


Xx 


Man’s Relation to the 
Spirit-W orld 
Se) 


Man in his physical and spiritual makeup, was made 
for two worlds, the Physical and the Spirit world. Writ- 
ing to the Thessalonians Paul says, 


“T pray God your whole ‘Spirit’ and ‘Soul’ and 
‘Body’ be preserved blameless unto the coming 
onour Bords\esus Christ-= sl lhese, 5.23: 


Writing to the Hebrews he says— 

“The Word of God is quick (alive), and pow- 
erful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, 
piercing even to the dividing asunder of ‘Soul’ 
and ‘Spirit,’ and of the ‘Joints and Marrow’ 
(body), and is a discerner of the thoughts and in- 
tents of the heart.” (Heb. 412. 


From these references we see that man is a Trinity, 
and is composed of “Body,” “Soul,” and “Spirit.” Man 
was made in the “Image of God” and God is a Trinity. 

The Tabernacle was a tent surrounded by a court, 
which court was enclosed by a curtain fence. (See dia- 
gram of the Tabernacle.) The tent was divided into two 
parts, one twice the length of the other, by a “veil” or 
curtain. The larger part was entered from without by 2 
curtained doorway, and contained the “Table of Shew- 
bread,” the “Altar of Incense,” and the “Seven-Branched 
Candlestick.” This part was called the “Holy Place.” The 
smaller part was entered from the “Holy Place” through 
the “veil” or dividing curtain, and contained the “Ark of 
the Covenant,” on the lid of which, between the “Cheru- 
bims,’ God took up His residence in the “Shekinah 
Glory This part was called the “Most Holy Place.” 
There were no windows in the Tabernacle, and the only 
entrance was through the curtained doorway into the 

83 


THE THREEFOLD NATURE 
OF MAN 


\.THESS. 5:23 Hes.4:12 


SOUL 
(PSYCHE) 


GARNAL 
1 CoR 351-3 


S 
ie) 
ht 
ee ENS 
Ae 


€ S 4 
Me of 
SER ms ‘cm Th 
Nos “SJ HEARING se 
Desiqneo avo OnAwn By > Are by) SG € 
Giaeence LARKIN EAR-GAT E 


FoxGrase, (nic' 
Stak es Gorrrignter 


MAN’S RELATION TO THE SPIRIT WORLD 85 


“Holy Place.” The Tabernacle and its Courtyard is a 
type of the “Threefold Nature of Man.” The “Court- 
yard” represents his Body, the “Holy Place” his Soul, and 
the “Most Holy Place” his Spirit, and as there could be 
no communication between the “Courtyard” and the 
“Most Holy Place,” only through the “Holy Place,” so 
there can be no communication between a man’s Body 
and Spirit only through his Soul. After the completion of 
the Tabernacle it remained empty of the “Presence of 
God” until the “Spirit of God” descended and took up His 
abode in the “Most Holy Place.” So a man may be com- 
plete as to body, soul and spirit, but his spiritual nature 
will remain unregenerate until the Holy Spirit enters and 
takes possession of the “spirit” compartment of his 
nature. This happens when the “New Birth” takes place. 

The “Threefold Nature of Man” is clearly brought out 
in the Diagram 


“THE THREEFOLD NATURE OF MAN,” 


The outer circle stands for the “Body” of man, the 
middle for the “Soul,” and the inner for the “Spirit,” or 
whate raulecalls the ACARNAL~ (15 Con ?31-3).> the 
“NATURAL” (1 Cor. 2:14); and the “SPIRITUAL” 
(le Corso sl), eparts oi umane iin) therouter circle athe 
“Body” is shown as touching the Material World through 
the five senses of “Sight,” “Smell,” “Hearing,” “Taste’’ 
and “Touch.” The Gates to the “Soul” are “Imagina- 
tion,’ “Conscience,” “Memory,’ “Reason” and _ the 
“Affections.” The “Spirit” receives impressions of out- 
ward and material things through the Soul. The “Spirit- 
NallaPaculties “ot the. “Spirit” are “-Baithe. ~“Elope,” 
“Reverence,” “Prayer” and “Worship.” In his unfallen 
state the “Spirit”? of man was illuminated from Heaven, 
but when the human race fell in Adam, sin closed the 
window of the Spirit, and pulled down the curtain, and 
the “chamber of the Spirit’? became a Death Chamber, 
and remains so in every unregenerate heart, until the 
“Life” and “Light” giving power of the Holy Spirit floods 
that chamber with the “Life” and “Light” giving power 
of the NEW LIFE IN CHRIST JESUS. We see then 
why the “natural” man cannot understand “spiritual” 


86 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


things. He cannot understand them until his spiritual 
nature has been renewed. 

But the Spirit of the Natural man is not only dark- 
ened, his “Will” stands as a “guard” at the door, and 
prevents the entrance of the Holy Spirit, and it is not 
until the “Will” surrenders through the power of the 
“Sword of the Spirit,” the “Word of God,” that the Holy 
Spirit can enter and take up his abode in the “Spirit” of 
man. 


THE PEACH 


The “Threefold Nature of Man” may be illustrated 
by a peach. A peach is a “trinity.” There is the meat 
of the peach corresponding to the “body” of man, the 
stone, corresponding to the “Soul,” and the kernel, corre- 
sponding to the “Spirit.” As you can remove the meat 
of the peach and the “kernel” will still have a body, the 
stone, so when a man dies his “Soul” and “Spirit” sep- 
arate from the “Body,” and the “Body” is laid in the 
grave, but the “Spirit” is not “bodiless,” it has what Paul 
calls its “PSYCHICAL” or “Soulish” body. 

As this “Soulish Body” can hear, and speak, and think, 
and feel, it must have some “tangible” form. It is not a 
“shostlike” structure. There are doubtless limitations in 
its use, or there would be no need for it to recover its 
“physical” body at the Resurrection. 

That there is such a thing as the “Soulish Body” is 
brought out in the story of the “Rich Man and Lazarus.” 
Luke 16: 19-31. The story is not a Parable, but a descrip- 
tion by Christ of something that really happened in the 
other world to his own personal knowledge. It declares 
that both Lazarus and the “Rich Man” died and were 
buried. That is, their bodies were left on the earth. 
What happened to them in the “Underworld” then, is 
descriptive of what happened to them in their “disem- 
bodied state.” In that state they were conscious and the 
Rich Man recognized Lazarus, which he could not have 
done if Lazarus had not a body, not his “physical” body, 
he left that on the earth, but his “Soulish” body. This is 
proof that the “Soulish” body is not simply a body, but 
that in its outward form and appearance it conforms to 


MAN’S RELATION TO THE SPIRIT WORLD 87 


the earthly body of the owner, otherwise he would not be 
recognizable in the other world. Again the “Rich Man” 
could see, and feel, and thirst, and talk, and remember, 
proving that he possessed his senses and had not lost his 
personality. This proves that there is no break, as “Soul 
Sleep,” in the Continuity of Existence, or Consciousness, 
in passing from the “Earth-Life” to the “Spirit-Life.” 
Sleep in the Scriptures always refers to the “Body,” not 
to the “Soul,” and the expression “Asleep in Jesus” refers 
to the Believer only. 

Det us strace: the liteot the “Soul” and “Spirit atter 
they have left the “Body.” In the account of the “Rich 
Man and Lazarus” we have a description of “THE 
UNDERWORLD.” See the Chart of “The Under- 
world.” Before the resurrection of Christ the Soul 
and Spirit of the “Righteous Dead” went to the “Para- 
dise” compartment of “The Underworld.” There Christ 
miet thes. Penitents] bef “after His death on the Cross. 
On the day of His Resurrection Christ’: Soul and Spirit 
returned from “The Underworld.” But He did not re- 
turn alone. He brought back with Him all the occupants 
of the Paradise compartment and locked it up, and He 
now has the “Keys of Death and Hades.” Rev. 1:18. 
R. Vi Here “Death” stands for the “grave” and “Hades” 
for “The Underworld.” Some of those who came back 
from “The Underworld” with Christ got their bodies, 
and ascended with Him as the “First Fruits” of the 
resurrection “from among the dead.” Matt. 27: 52-53. 
The rest were taken up to the “Third Heaven” where 
Paul was caught up. 2 Cor. 12:1-4. Paul called it 
“Paradise.” There all the “Righteous Dead” that have 
died since Christ’s resurrection go that they may be 
CWalbhe tite lOnD: Pihileic 23. 2:Cor. o3.. [here 
the souls of the “Righteous Dead” shall remain until the 
time comes for the resurrection of their bodies, then 
when Christ comes back to meet His Church in the Air, 
He will bring back the souls of the “Righteous Dead” 
from the “Paradise” of the “Third Heaven,” for we are 
told that He will bring them whose bodies “Sleep in 
Jesus” on the earth WITH HIM (1 Thess. 4:14), and 
they will continue on to the earth and get their “bodies” 


BOAR 4:2 YI13d 2 
wSTIONW N3V1V45,3HL 30 NOSIUd 
~SOBVLYVL , 


1€-61:91 397 5 
hidW3 MON SILI 
4105 NO11L99NYNSIY S1SIYHD 
oe 1V3Y9 Aung cvag sno3iHdIy 3H) 40 


GAS: 3H] SINS 3H1 40 300BY IHL 
qt: 3SIQVUVd, 


O12 wUNSIY ONOIT 
Sauvy JHL 

eo 

NS 


iS 
~ 


ay 


34, 
wSDNINVY375 IHL, 


4 
= 
m 
n 
Zz 
z 
m 
ms) 
ay 
te) 
° 
° 
ES 


SI-02AIY 
+:07-A 

iniy NOlLvoineiy 

O Siinws seis 


NOW aNeNS3ay Ise 
SINIVS NONVISMYNL 


LS3AYUVH IHL 


Ova0 O32! 


aGTYuOMUSUONN 
QHL 


S¥v34 OOO! 


LNIVS 
° 
14 1SHl4 


= 


OIWOMNIONN JHLIO IANO MOOL 


wera 
(1-89 ¥4N)Or-S + HIF 


SiN. 


MAN’S RELATION TO THE SPIRIT WORLD 89 


from the grave, and then ascend again together with the 
“Translated Saints” to meet the Lord IN THE AIR. 
So far as we know the souls of the “Wicked Dead” 
are still in the Hell Compartment’ of “[he Under- 
world,” and will remain there until the “Second Resur- 
rection,’ when they will return to the earth and get their 
bodies, and then go to the “Great White Throne” Judg- 
ment. After judgment they will be sentenced to the 
“Second Death,’ which means that they shall die again 
in the sense of losing their bodies the second time, and 
as “disembodied spirits” be cast into the “Lake of Fire,” 
(Gehenna, the “Final Hell’), to suffer in flames forever. 


XI 


soul Sleep 


Sei 


The word “Dead” as used in the Scriptures does not 
always apply to the body. The unregenerate are spoken 
of as dead. “And you hath He quickened who were dead 
in trespasses and sins.” Eph. 2:1. When the “Prodigal 
Son” came home, his father said—‘“This my son was 
diad, and is alive again.” Luke 15:24. The Apostle Paul 
in writing to Timothy said of worldly women, “She that 
liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth.” 1 Tim. 5:6. 
From these passages we see that death does not mean 
non-existence or unconsciousness, that there is a sense 
in which a person may be said to be dead and yet have a 
conscious existence. Death is not the terminus of a 
man’s existence; it is only a station. The death of the 
believer is described as “falling asleep.” But the sleep 
has reference to the body only. Jesus said of Lazarus— 
“Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I may awake 
him out of sleep. Then said His Disciples, Lord if he 
sleep, he shall do well. Howbeit Jesus spake of his 
death; but they thought that He had spoken of taking of 
rest in sleep. Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Laza- 
rus IS DEAD.” John 11:11-14. Here Jesus speaks of 
death as a sleep, but it is clear that He refers not to the 
soul but to the body of Lazarus, for He said “I go to 
awake him out of sleep,” which He did by raising his 
body from the dead. This is confirmed by the words of 
Martha, “By this time he stinketh,” showing that only 
the body and not the soul of Lazarus was in the mind of 
the Disciples as that which was asleep. 

In Matt. 27:52 it is recorded, that after the Resurrec- 
tion of Jesus—‘“Many bodies of the Saints which ‘slept’ 
arose.” The use of the word bodies implies that the 
word “slept” refers to them, and not to the soul of the 
dead, otherwise the word “bodies” would have been 
omitted and it would read “Many of the Saints which 

90 


THE STONING OF STEPHEN 


92, THE SPIRIT WORLD 


slept arose.” In Acts 7: 54-60, we have the account of 
the death of Stephen, in which we are told that Stephen 
as a result of the stoning he received “fell asleep,” that 
is, died. But the words “fell asleep” cannot mean that 
Stephen’s soul passed into a state of unconsciousness, for 
in verse 55 we read that “Being full of the Holy Ghost, he 
looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the ‘Glory of 
God,’ and JESUS standing on the right hand of God.” 
And in verse 59 we are told that Stephen in dying said— 
“Lord Jesus receive my SPIRIT.” Why such a prayer 
if the soul at death passes into a state of unconsciousness? 
In similar manner Jesus in dying commended His 
“SPIRIT” to God, and having done so, yielded up His 
“SPIRIT,” that is permitted it to depart from His body, 
while His body was afterwards taken down from the 
Cross and buried. Luke 23: 46. 

In Acts 13: 36, it is said of King David that, “after he 
had served his own generation by the will of God, he 
‘fell on sleep’ (died), and was laid unto his fathers, and 
saw CORRUPTION.” What part of David saw corrup- 
tion, his body or his soul? Surely not his soul. The 
words “fell on sleep” then refer only to David’s body. 
This is confirmed by what follows in the next verse— 
“But He (Jesus), whom God raised again, saw no cor- 
ruption.” This surely can refer only to the body of 
Jesus, for His soul did not sleep during the three days 
His body lay in Joseph’s Tomb, for when it parted from 
His body as it hung on the Cross, it went immediately to 
Paradise to meet the soul of the ~Penitent “Thief” “as 
promised. Luke 23:43. To avoid this clear evidence 
that the “Soul” of Jesus did not sleep while His body 
slept in Joseph’s Tomb, there are those who claim that 
the sentence—“Verily I say unto thee, Today shalt thou 
be with me in Paradise,” is wrongly punctuated. That 
the comma before the word “Today,” should be placed 
after it, making the sentence read—‘Verily I say unto 
thee today, shalt thou be with me in Paradise.” thus com- 
pletely altering the sense, and making the passage read 
as if Jesus said—“I make known to you today, that at 
some future time you shall be with me in Paradise.” As 
refutation of this latter interpretation it may be said, that 


SOUL SLEEP 93 


this is the only passage in which Jesus uses the word 
“Today.” In many passages He said “Verily I say unto 
you,” etc., but did not add the word ElOdays ee bl ence 
Jesus by the use of the word in the above passage must 
have meant that very day. As confirmation of this the 
Apostle Paul tells us in Eph. 4: 8-10, that Jesus before 
He Ascended, descended into the lower parts of the earth, 
that is, into the “Underworld,” and that must have 
occurred between His death and resurrection, for it was 
at that time that He fulfilled His promise to meet the 
Penitent Thief in the “Paradise” section of the “Under- 
world,” and not at some time still future. While the 
bodies of Jesus and the Penitent Thief still hung on their 
respective crosses, their spirits were in communion in 
Paradise. Christ was the “First-fruits” of them that 
SERP T= le Comslo.208 Wlerey sleep: iclearlyureters to 
the body and not the soul, for it is the RESURRECTION 
OF THE BODY that the Apostle is talking about in this 
chapter. 

Those who teach the doctrine of “Soul-Sleep” draw 
their arguments mainly from the Old Testament, where 
the light as to the state of the dead between the death 
and resurrection of the body is only in the “Twilight 
Stage.” They lay much stress on the expression “Gath- 
ered unto His People,” as if it meant the grave. “Then 
Abraham gave up the ‘Ghost’ (surrendered his ‘Spirit’), 
and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years, 
and was GATHERED TO HIS PEOPLE.” Gen. 25:8. 
The expression “Gathered to His People” has no refer- 
ence to the “Grave” or “Family Burial Place,” for in 
Abraham’s case the “Family Burial Plot” was over in 
Chaldea, while Abraham was buried in his own sepulchre, 
the “Cave of Machpelah.” What “Gathered to His Peo- 
ple” means is, that the soul of Abraham went to the 
“Underworld” (Sheol), where the souls of his ancestors 
had gone, and where he would be united to them. The 
same statement is made of Isaac (Gen. 35:29), with the 
additional statement, “and his sons BURIED HIM,” 
thus showing that while his “soul” was “Gathered to His 
People” in the “Underworld,” his body was buried in the 
“Cave of Machpelah.” Gen. 49: 29-31. When Jacob was 


94 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


led to believe that his son Joseph was dead his sons and 
daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be 
comtorted, and said—‘“I will go down into the ‘grave’ 
unto my son mourning.” Gen. 37:29-35. The word for 
“grave” in the Hebrew is “SHEOL” (the “Under- 
world”). So we see that Jacob did not mean that he 
would go into the “grave” to meet Joseph, but into the 
“Underworld.” As proof of this we know that Jacob did 
not believe that Joseph was in the grave. He thought 
that a “wild beast” had devoured him (vs. 33), and there 
would be no comfort to go down into the grave to meet 
Joseph, if he was there, if the dead know nothing. 

Of Moses and Aaron it is said that they were “Gath- 
ered unto Their People,’ yet we know that neither of 
them were buried with their people. Aaron was stripped 
of his Priestly robes by Moses on Mount Hor, and died, 
and presumably was buried there (Num. 20: 23-29), while 
Moses died on Mount Pisgah and the Lord buried him in 
a valley of the land of Moab, and no one ever knew the 
place of his sepulchre. Deu. 34:1-6. So the statement 
“Gathered unto His People” in their case must mean the 
same as in the case of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. That 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are not slumbering in the 
grave is clear from the words of Jesus to the Sadducees, 
when He declared that God said to Moses at the “Burn- 
ing Bush”—*I am the God of Abraham, and the God of 
Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” And Jesus added—‘He 
(God) is not the God of the dead, but the God of the 
LIVING.” Mark 12:26-27. In other words while the 
bodies of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob rest in the “Cave of 
Machpelah,” their souls are alive and conscious in 
Paradise. 

Such passages as the following seem to teach at first 
sight that the soul passes into a state of unconsciousness 
at death: “For in death there is no remembrance of 
Thee: in the grave who shall give Thee thanks?” 
Psa. 6:5. “The dead know not anything.” Ecc, 9-5. 
‘“Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy 
might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.” Ecc. 9: 10. 
However when we examine the context of these passages 


SOUL SLEEP 95 


we see that the writer was balancing the temporal bene- 
fits of living, with their loss by dying, and humanly speak- 
ing a dead man knows nothing of the affairs of this world, 
and neither does the soul that has departed to another 
sphere of existence. Death breaks the connection and 
cuts off all intercourse between this world and the 
COpitit] world. 2ekines 22; 20. 

The “Key” to the Book of Ecclesiastes is—“UNDER 
THE SUN.” Ecc. 1:14. In it Solomon was giving his 
estimate of life from a worldly viewpoint, and declared 
that “Under the Sun” all things were vanity, and humanly 
speaking to die was the end of knowledge. But when he 
rises “above the Sun” in the last chapter, and sees things 
from a Heavenly viewpoint, he says—‘Then shall the 
‘dust’ (the body) return to the earth as it was: and the 
‘Spirit? shall RETURN TO GOD who gave it” (Ecc. 
12:7), thus teaching that it is only the “body” that goes 
into the grave and that the “Spirit” returns to God. 

In the case of the son of the widow of Zarephath, 
whom Elijah raised from the dead, Elijah prayed—‘“O 
Lord my God, I pray Thee, let this child’s SOUL come 
into him again. And the SOUL of the Child came into 
him again, and he (his body) revived.” 1 Kings 17: 17-23. 
When Jesus raised the daughter of Jairus (Luke 8: 49-56) 
we read that—“Her SPIRIT came again.” That is, it 
returned to her body. If there is to be a resurrection of 
the body, the “soul” and “spirit” must be somewhere 
waiting to re-inhabit their body. 


GALHDIYAGOD 
KY) Vd "VAIHd '3SVHQXO4 
NIMYY] JINIYVIDO AG 
NMVYQ ONY O3NDISIO 


SI-W1:02 ‘AIRY Pee oeas usenet ‘ OL 
ETE] BOAT i NOTLOSBYNSAY,SNS3C WING f- q3oo Hy Y, 
WL ¥os 2AvUD aH A ) Javad 0 830M aL OS ,OV3AQ SNOILHDIY, IHL JO j y (4 


9 03¥9IM, BH 4O/ nog: $1N0S 3H JO IG0By ANY | S1n0S 3H{ 40 3008y AHL 


aes ‘ GSHOIM 3HL 


ISEE TT 


SNOsiHdly JHL 
Sees aa SNOSLHOIY 3HL 
W31VS0u3 MIN 


& 
ay 
D 
od 
za 
‘ 
» 
& 
Y 


NOWOZYUNSIY 
,SNS3P IONIS 
Eselaveya 


QNO93S 


NOWOTuYUNSIY 


~OIMIIM,3HL JO 


“ONS 80o" $4002 
LSIYHD 
4o 1v3as 


.G3X0IM, 
ernconat N3awdane 


,LNIWOGAC 
SNOYHL JLHM 
ivau5, 


Lieio903 
Q7IHD 3HL 40 
LIYIdS FHL 40 1N39S539 


NVW 40 SALVLS ASYHL AHL 


XII 


The Intermediate State 
Se) 


Having seen that “Soul Sleep” is not taught in the 
Bible, let us now inquire into the state of the dead in 
the “Intermediate State” between the death and _ the 
resurrection of the body. 


1. It is a State of “CONSCIOUSNESS.” 


In the account of the “Rich Man and Lazarus” (Luke 
16: 19-31) we have a description of their experience in 
the “Intermediate State.” Both had died and their bodies 
had been buried on the surface of the earth, what hap- 
pened to them then happened to them in their “disem- 
bodied state.” While nothing is said of Lazarus but that 
he was “comforted,” we know that the “Rich Man” could 
see, for he recognized Abraham and Lazarus, and that he 
could feel, and thirst, and talk, and remember, proving 
that he had not lost his personality or consciousness. 
And the same can be said of both Abraham and Lazarus. 

The promise of Jesus to the dying thief that he should 
be with Him that day in Paradise, implied that the thief 
should not only be in Paradise, but know that he was 
there, and be conscious of Christ’s presence with him, 
otherwise there would have been no comfort in the prom- 
ise. Take the words of Paul in 2 Cor. 5: 6-9, “Whilst we 
are at home in the BODY, we are absent from the Lord.” 
And he adds—“We are willing to be ABSENT from the 
body, and to be PRESENT with the Lord, wherefore we 
labor, that, whether PRESENT or ABSENT, we may 
be accepted of him.” The words “Present” and “Absent” 
as relating to the body are full of significance. The 
Apostle would not have been willing to be “absent from 
the body,” and “present with the Lord,” if he did not 
believe that in the presence of the Lord he would be con- 
scious, for what possible satisfaction could there be in 


being unconsciously present with the Lord. 
97 


THE SOUL’S GUARDIAN AT DEATH 


THE INTERMEDIATE STATE 99 


The Apostle expresses the same truth in Phil. 1: 21-24, 
where he says—“For to me to live is CHRIST, and to 
diesissGAUN Spa. = Lor leam\in avstrait betwixt two, 
having a desire to depart (die), and to be WITH 
CHRIST; which is FAR BETTER: nevertheless to 
abide IN THE FLESH is more needtul for you.” What 
did Paul mean when he said it would be “gain,” and “far 
better,” to be out of the flesh and WITH CHRIST, if 
he did not believe that he would be conscious when he 
got into Christ’s presence? Note that the “strait” Paul 
was in was “betwixt” LIFE and DEATH, and the cause 
was the desire of Paul to be WITH CHRIST. Why 
should Paul want to be “with Christ” in the “Intermedi- 
ate State” if it was not a conscious state? 

Death is not a cessation of being. It is simply a 
cessation of bodily functions that cut off the soul from 
contact with this present earth. It brings to an end the 
first “stage” of our existence that we may enter on the 
second. The cessation of the bodily functions of a man 
does not include the cessation of his “Soul” functions. 
The “Soul” does not sleep when the body does, otherwise 
we would never dream or see visions, or talk in our sleep. 
It was by dreams and visions of the night that God made 
known His will to men while they slept. The “Soul,” 
then unfettered, is clearer of vision. Matt. 1: 20-25; 
2:11-13, 19-23. Acts 27:23-24. The use of the word 
“sleep,” as applied to death, shows that death is not a 
cessation of existence, for sleep implies an awakening. 


FIRST EXPERIENCES AFTER DEATH 


Did you ever stop to think of what happens to the 
Righteous Soul during the first five minutes after death? 
Before the funeral has been held, and the body laid away 
in the cemetery, nay, before the undertaker has been sent 
for, or the neighbors and relatives notified, or the shades 
drawn, or the silent watchers at the bedside have realized 
that you are dead you have been FIVE MINUTES out 
of the body and reached Paradise and know where you 
are to spend eternity. Now what will be our experiences 
in those first five minutes? (1). Our first experience will 
be that death was so easy. That it was like falling asleep 


100 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


and awaking in a beautiful world. That there was no 
“Valley of Death,’ with its hobgoblins, satyrs, and 
demons to traverse, no “dark river’ to cross, but that 
“Ministering Angels” were waiting to convoy us to Para- 
dise as they carried Lazarus. Luke 16:22. Heb. 1:13- 
14. What a delight it will be to meet our “Guardian 
Angel,” who has watched over us in our “earth life,” and 
who will not desert us in that supreme moment when 
we shall need a guide to conduct us to our Heavenly 
Home. "(Z). Our second experience will be the con- 
sciousness that we have left behind our earthly body 
with all its weaknesses, sufferings, and limitations, and 
have a body that is absolutely well and fitted in every 
way for the spiritual realm in which it is to dwell. (3). 
Our third experience will be that we are being trans- 
ported swiftly upward through the ethereal space toward 
a beautiful country whose radiance is brighter than the 
sun, and as we approach it see coming out to meet us 
and escort us home, groups of angels who sing—“Blessed 
are they that do His Commandments, that they may have 
right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the 
gates of the city.” Rev. 22:14. (4). Our fourth exper- 
ience will be that we are in a new environment whose 
atmosphere is LOVE. That there is no discord, or lack 
of harmony in our new home, and that its chief character- 
istic is HOLINESS. (5). Our fifth experience will be 
the feeling that we are near Jesus. If we do not actually 
see Him, we shall have the consciousness of His nearness. 
(6). Our sixth experience will be that of meeting our 
loved ones. While the writer does not believe that our 
loved ones have any direct knowledge of what is going 
on on this earth, yet he believes that our “Guardian 
Angel” may communicate with our loved ones and inform 
them of our coming, and that they will be waiting to 
receive us. (7). Our seventh experience will be the 
meeting with the saints who have preceded us to glory, 
such as the patriarchs, prophets, apostles and Christian 
leaders of our own day. The experiences named may 
not all happen in the first five minutes after death, but 
they doubtless will happen before our funeral service is 
over and our body laid to rest in the tomb. 


THE INTERMEDIATE STATE 101 


eo, Ie 1S 2 Siete ©F ARID” 


“There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the 
weary be at rest.” Job 3:17. In the Book of Revela- 
tion, at the breaking of the “Fifth Seal” (Rev. 6: 9-11), 
we have a vision of the “SOULS” of the martyred dead 
of the “Tribulation Period,” and we read that they cried 
with a loud voice (they were conscious), saying—“How 
long, O Lord, Holy and True, dost Thou not judge and 
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?” And 
white robes were given unto every one of them (showing 
that the “Spirits” of the dead have “Soulish BODIES”), 
and it was said unto them, that they should REST FOR 
A SEASON, until their fellow servants also and their 
brethren, that should be killed as tney were, should be 
fulfilled. While these martyred dead are not the Mar- 
tyrs of the Christian Church, but mainly Jews of the 
“Tribulation Period,” the Church having been caught out 
before this, nevertheless the state of their existence in 
that “disembodied state,” will be the same as that of the 
Souls of the Righteous dead today. Therefore we see 
that the state of the Righteous dead in the “Intermediate 
State” is that of consciousness, and that their “Soulish 
Body” is clothed, and that they are resting. 


In Rev. 14:13, John says—“I heard a voice from 
Heaven saying unto me, Write, Blesscd are the dead 
which die in the Lord FROM HENCEFORTH: Yea. 
saith the Spirit, that they may REST from their labors: 
and their WORKS do follow them.” While this is 
spoken of those who shall die because they will not wor- 
ship the “Beast” as commanded in the previous chapter 
(Rev. 13:15), yet it is blessedly true of all the sainted 
dead. We see from the above passages that the “state” 
of the dead in their disembodied condition is that of 
REST. It will be rest from pain and weariness, from 
care and worriment, from sorrow and bereavement, and 
all the ills that flesh is heir to. It will be rest from that 
“Christian Warfare” so vividly described by the Apostle 
in Rom. 7:15-25. It will also be rest from LABOR. 
Jesus said—“I must work the works of Him that sent 
me, while it is DAY: the NIGHT cometh, when no man 


102 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


can work.” John 9:4. In this present life we are alive 
and active. As believers we are engaged in the Lord’s 
work of Evangelism, Teaching and Preaching the Gospel, 
Christian Stewardship, etc. For us itis DAY. But the 
“NIGHT OF DEATH” will come when we can no 
longer work. In 2 Cor. 5:10, we read—‘We must all 
appear before the ‘Judgment Seat of Christ’; that every 
one may receive the things done IN HIS BODY, accord- 
ing to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad.” 
The “Judgment Seat of Christ” is for the Judgment of 
the Righteous only, and is not set up until after the 
Resurrection of the Righteous. See the chapters on the 
Resurrections and Judgments. If the Righteous are to 
be judged at that Judgment for the “things” done IN 
THE BODY, then the inference is, that they do no 
WORKS in the “Intermediate State,” for if they do, why 
are not those “Works” judged as well as the works they 
did in the body? From this we see that the “Intermedi- 
ate State” is a state of REST. But by rest we must not 
think that it is a state of idleness, that we shall do nothing 
but sit and sing. There will be much to occupy our time, 
and we shall have the sweet society of our loved ones 
and the saints of all ages. 


3. Its a State of biloos 


The word “Paradise” suggests that. We are: told 
that, “BLESSED are the dead who die in the Lord.” 
Rev. 14:13. The word “blessed” means “happy,” then 
HAPPY will be the Righteous in Paradise. And as 
“happiness” is an emotion that demands consciousness 
to be experienced, the Righteous must be conscious in 
Paradise. As it was said of Lazarus that in Paradise he 
was “comforted,” we see that there will be no sadness to 
mar our happiness. The word Paradise means a “gar- 
den” or “enclosed place” like a beautiful park. If the 
earthly Eden was a Garden of “Matchless Delights,” then 
the Heavenly Paradise must be a place of “Ravishing 
Beauty.” Why did God prepare such a place of enchant- 
ing beauty for a home for the soul between the death 
and resurrection of the body, if it is nothing but a vast 
“Bedroom” with its inhabitants all asleep? No; Paradise 


THE INTERMEDIATE STATE 103 


is the “Beulah Land” in which the Righteous wait for 
the adoption, to wit, the REDEMPTION OF THEIR 
BODIES. Rom. 8:23. 


4. It isa State of “INCOMPLETENESS.” 


The “Intermediate State” is not the “FINAL State” 
of either the Righteous or the Wicked. While what we 
have said as to Paradise is true for the Righteous, the 
reverse is true for the Wicked. The Wicked shall spend 
the “Intermediate Stage” of their existence in the 
“HELL Section” of the Underworld. And if Lazarus 
was “comforted” in Paradise, the Wicked, like the “Rich 
Man,” will be “tormented” in Hell. The picture is not 
pleasant, but the implication is that the Wicked will be 
as unhappy in Hell as the Righteous are blissful in Para- 
dise. 

The “Intermediate State” is a state of INCOM- 
PLETENESS. Death does not usher us into the “Final 
State.” That is, we do not go immediately to “Heaven” 
or the “Lake of Fire’ when we die. We must first get 
our Resurrection body and be Judged before we can go 
toreither place, [hes Intermediate State isa state ot 
incompleteness because we have no physical body. In 
it we are only a “duality,” having only “soul” and 
“spirit.” We must get back our body before we can 
again be a “trinity.” This accounts for why we must 
rest and do no work in the “Intermediate State.” We 
need a physical body in which to work, for without it 
we can have no communication with this or other worlds. 
Moses and Elijah could not have appeared on the Mount 
of Transfiguration if they had not had their Resurrection 
be lies. This leads to our last thought. 


5. It is a State of HOPE. 


We speak of the “Church Militant” and the “Church 
Triumphant,” meaning the Church on earth and the 
Church in Heaven. The Apostle Paul speaks of it as the 
whole “Family” in HEAVEN AND EARTH. There is 
but one family of God. The family of the “NEW 


BORN: John 325. teb. 12723: “Part are in Heaven 


104 THE SPIRIT WORLD ‘ 


(Paradise), and part are on the Earth. They both have 
the same HOPE, the “BLESSED HOPE.” They are 
both looking for the “Glorious Appearing” of the Great 
God and our Saviour JESUS CHRIST. Titus 2: 11-14. 
The Church on earth is looking for His “Glorious 
Appearing,” that they may be “caught up” without 
dying and having to pass through the “Intermediate 
State,’ and may receive their “Glorified Bodies,” and be 
able to mock “Death” by shouting— 


“O DEATH, WHERE IS THY STING? 
O GRAVE, WHERE IS THY VICTORY?” 
1 Gorvl5-55: 


The Church in Heaven is waiting for the same event, 
for until Jesus returns there can be no Resurrection of 
the dead, and the Saints in Paradise must remain in their 
state of incompleteness, with its limitations. The 
“Blessed Hope” then is the “Hope” of both the Saints in 
Glory and the Saints on the earth. 


XIII 
Recognition and Relationship 
in the Spirit World 


i] ) 


That which makes the other world attractive to most 
of us is the thought that we shall again meet our loved 
ones there. As this hope is universal, it must have been 
implanted in the human breast by God. God would 
never have paid such a costly price as the “Life” of His 
Son for our redemption, if it did not carry with it our 
happiness in the “Spirit World,’ and our happiness 
would be incomplete without the recognition of our loved 
ones. If the inspired Psalmist could say of his son, “He 
shall not return to me, but I shall go to him,” he must 
have said it because he knew that when he should go to 
him he would recognize him. What comfort could there 
have been in the words of Christ to the dying thief, 
when He said—“This day shalt thou be with me in 
Paradise” (Luke 23:43), if there was to be no recogni- 
tion of each other there. Why did Paul say that he had 
a desire to depart and be with Christ (Phil. 1:23), if he 
were not sure he would know Him. If the disciples 
recognized Moses and Elijah on the “Mount of Trans- 
figuration,” surely they will recognize them in the world 
to come. In the story of the Rich Man and Lazarus, as 
we have seen, the Rich Man recognized both Abraham 
and Lazarus. If we have not seen our friends for years, 
and their personal appearance may have changed, we 
shall recognize them by their voice, as we so often do in 
this life. 

Some object to the doctrine of the “Recognition of 
loved ones in Heaven” on the score, that if we fail to 
meet them, we shall be made unhappy by the fear that 
they are lost. But is that concern likely to be more 


real and intense there than here? Is it not a sad fact 
105 


106 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


that the lost condition of our loved ones does not cor 
cern us much in this life; at least not enough to make us 
unhappy? While we may not forget them, and may 
miss them, we shall be reconciled to their absence, and 
cheerfully acquiesce in what we shall see to be their just 
punishment for refusing the way of Salvation. 

As proof of this we have the statement in Luke 
16225,-0f1 Lazarus that he was “COMFORTED, Ghat 
is, was not unhappy or unduly concerned about the 
affairs of this world, as was the “Rich Man” about his 
brothers. Luke 16:27-28. The “Rich Man’s” concern 
about his brothers was not so much for their salvation, 
as the fear that they would come where he was and 
upbraid him for their eternal undoing. 

Another objection to the “Recognition of our loved 
ones in Heaven” is the embarrassing position it may 
put those in who have been several times married. The 
Sadducees in Jesus’ day did not believe in the Resurrec- 
tion of the dead, and sought to ridicule the doctrine by 
asking Jesus whose wife a woman would be in the 
Resurrection who had had seven husbands in this life. 
Matt. 22: 23-30. The embarrassment 1s based on the 
supposition that the woman and all of the seven men 
she married went to the same place in the other world. 
If, however, the woman went to one place and the men 
to the other, there would be no embarrassing situation 
Jesus in a single sentence swept away the objection of 
the Sadducees by saying—‘“In the Resurrection they 
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the 
angels of God.” This statement is no proof for the sex- 
lessness of the angels. It simply declares that the 
angels do not marry. And the reason is evident, for 
angels never die. Therefore there is no need for them 
to keep up-their numbers by procreation. Now as 
those who have part in the First Resurrection “cannot 
die any more” (Luke 20: 34-36), there will be no occa- 
sion for the continuance of the “Marriage Relation” in 
Heaven. While doubtless we shall know each other in 
the same relation we bore to each other in the “Earth 
Life,’ as husband and wife, father and mother, son and 
daughter, the carnal nature will be swallowed up in the 


RECOGNITION AND RELATION 107 


Spiritual and we will be bound together by love and 
friendship, for jealousy and ill-feeling cannot exist in the 
atmosphere of Heaven, which is pure LOVE. 

If angels and evil spirits recognize each other in 
Heaven, as they do, then we when we become like 
angels should recognize each other also. The torment 
of the lost will be intensified by their recognition of the 
righteous in the others world. “There shall be weeping 
and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall SEE Abraham, 
and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, in the King- 
dom of God, and you yourselves thrust out.” Luke 
IS Sai neour hleavenly —Hather’s houses isa HOME, 
then it will have all the features of a home, and they 
include the recognition of the members of the family. 
“Now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to 
face; now I know in part; but then shall I know even as 
alsOmleameknowil« aleCor 13212. 


XIV 
The Final State 


EI) 


The Scriptures speak of two places, “Heaven” and 
“Hell,” where the “righteous” and “wicked” respectively 
are to spend eternity. The one demands the other. There 
can be no Heaven without its counterpart Hell. If there 
is no Hell there is no Heaven, for the same Book speaks 
of both. 


HEAVEN 


Heaven is a “PLACE,” it is not a state or condition. 
The New Jerusalem is not Heaven, though it is a city of 
Heaven. The Apostle John tells us that he saw it “com- 
ing down from God OUT OF HEAVEN.” Rev. 21:2. 

It is the “PLACE” that Jesus told His Disciples He 
was going away to prepare for them. John 14:2. It did 
not exist at the time Jesus was on earth. It was built 
between the time Jesus ascended in A. D. 30, and the 
time when John saw it in vision descend from Heaven 
in A. D. 96, or if not yet built, it will be built before the 
Rapture of the Church, for it is to be the Residence of 
the Bride, the Lamb’s Wife. Rev. 21:9-10. Of Abraham 
we read—‘“He looked for a City which hath foundations, 
whose ‘builder’ and ‘maker’ is GOD.” Heb. 11:10. The 
New Jerusalem is that City. The Apostle says—‘‘Here 
we have no continuing city (permanent abiding place), 
but we seek one to come.” Heb. 13:14. 

The Scriptures speak of three Heavens. 4(1)7) ine 
Heaven of the earth’s atmosphere. “God gave you rain 
from heaven.” Acts, 14717. W(2); Phe, Heavensormuuc 
Stars. The “High Places” where the “Principalities and 
Powers” of evil have their abode. Eph. 6:12. (3). The 
Heaven where God dwells. It was to this “Third Heaven” 
that the Apostle Paul was caught up, when at Lystra he 
was stoned and his spirit apparently left his body. Acts 
14: 19-20. Paul calls it both the “Third Heaven” and 
“Paradise. 2 Cor, 1271-4) The two then must be 

108 


HEAVEN 


110 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


identical, or “Paradise” be a part of the “Third Heaven.” 
It is to this “Paradise Section” of Heaven that the “Soul” 
and “Spirit” of the Righteous go since the Resurrection of 
Christ. From this we see that we must distinguish 
between Heaven proper, and its suburb Paradise, and the 
New Jerusalem. 

The description of Heaven and the New Jerusalem as 
given in the Book of Revelation from the third chapter to 
the end of the Book, is still future, and the things there 
described will not come to pass until after the Rapture 
of the Church, so what is said of the New Jerusalem and 
its occupants does not apply until after the Judgment of 
Believers. Heaven then is our “Father’s House,” it is 
a HOME, and a place of “many Mansions.” John 14:2. 
It will be delightful to go there. Some people live in fear 
of death (Heb. 2:15), and cannot bear to think of it, but 
those of us who know that Heaven is to be our Eternal 
Home ought not to fear Death,” for te is Death that 
opens the door for our “Exodus” from earth to glory. 

When Jesus comes back it will be in “Two Stages.” 
First He will descend into the atmosphere of our earth, 
bringing with Him the “Souls” of the Righteous dead 
now in Paradise. 1 Thess. 3:13, 4:14. While Jesus tar- 
ries in the upper air, the “Souls” of the Righteous dead 
will continue on down to the earth and get their bodies, 
for the “Dead in Christ” shall rise FIRST. theses: 
4:13-17. This is the First Resurrection. See the Chap- 
ter on the Resurrections. Then we (the Saints) which 
are alive and remain when Christ comes back, shall be 
“caught up” without dying (like Enoch and Elijah), with 
the Resurrected Saints to join the Lord in the air. From 
that place of meeting we shall go to the “Judgment Seat 
of Christ” (2 Cor. 5:10), where we shall be judged, not 
to find out whether we shall be saved, for that was set- 
tled at the Cross (see the Chapter on the Judgments), 
but that we may receive our reward for our earthly serv- 
ices for our Lord. From there we shall ge to the “Bridal 
Hall” of Heaven, where in the presence of the “Friends of 
the Bridegroom” (the Old Testament Saints) and the 
Angelic Hosts of Heaven, we shall be united, as the 
Church, the “Bride of Christ,” to our Heavenly 'Bride- 


HOYNHO AHL 


a a WOINNITIIAW AHL 
HLUVJ MIN 
3H1L NO 
Wa1vSnuap MIN 


Saint ,OIAVG 40 3NOUHL, 


oe 


LSIYHD HLIM ONINDI3Y 


6-L:61/A9Y 
HOUNHD 
3HL4IO 
JOVINYV HY 


WsOZABY —-CV-L:€13d°% 

,iulq Ag, 

H1LUV3 IHL IQ NOILVAONIY 
3HL DNIUNG 


N3AV3H NI 


DNIWOO LSIYH 


T 


HIVOHOD HLA 


=a 
20 
n 
o 
a 
eo 
re) 


BI-f:41°A9Y 
7 


a 


HOUNHO IWdVd 
4 


%qa5an¢ LEER 


¥, 
“hy 
2x9 


ee 
NYWOM § & 137yNVvOS; 


SI-€l-b SSIHLY 


SINIV 


<= SINIVS NONLV) 


S NOILOJuYNSIY 1SYI4 


GILHDIWAGOD 


wNYOG MIN FH peg 40 HOUNHOD IHL 7 
y €2-22:V Hd ; 


—— 


SNVUL 


HOUNHO FHL IO NIDIVO 
LitidS ATOH 3H1 40 1N39S530 


SV 


1SIWHO JO NOISNIO 


112 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


groom, the ceremony being performed by God the Father. 
After the Wedding the Bride, the Church, shall take up 
her residence in the “New Jerusalem,” and all that is 
descriptive of the inhabitants of that “Holy City,” as 
given in chapters 21 and 22 of the Book of Revelation, 
has reference to the Saints after they have received their 
Resurrection bodies and been Judged, and not to their 
condition in the “Intermediate State.” See the Chart 
of “he Caurcch.” 

When Christ returns to the earth at the second 
Stage” of His Second Coming, to rule and reign over 
the “Millennial Earth” as KING, He will bring His 
Bride, the Church, with Him; and we shall reign with 
Christ from the Heavenlies for 1000 years. This we 
could not do if we did not have our Resurrection bodies. 
After the Millennial reign of Christ we shall return with 
Him to the New Jerusalem, which will then descend 
from Heaven (Rev. 21: 1-2) and take up its position on 
the New Earth, and we shall spend the countless Ages 
of Eternity with Christ. 


THE FINAL STATE OF THE WICKED 


While the Righteous dead shall be raised at the Sec- 
ond Coming of Christ, the Wicked dead shall not rise 
until 1000 years later, that is, not until the end of the 
Millennium. The Resurrection of the Righteous is 
called the “Resurrection of LIFE,” that of the Wicked, 
the “Resurrection of DAMNATION.” John 5: 28-29. 
See the Chart on “The Resurrections.”’ Like the Right- 
eous, the Wicked as soon as they are raised are sum- 
moned to Judgment, but not to the same Judgment Seat. 
The Wicked are to be judged at the “Great White 
Throne” Judgment. The Judge is the same, but the 
Court is different. See the Chart of “The Judgments.” 
They will not be judged to see whether they are entitled 
to “Eternal Life,” for their destiny was fixed at death, 
but to ascertain the “degree” of their punishment. That 
being fixed they are sentenced to the “Lake of Fire,” 
which is the “SECOND DEATH.” Rey. 20: 11-15. 


THE FINAL STATE 113 


THE SECOND DEATH 


It is said of the “Righteous Dead” that after thcir 
resurrection they can “DIE NO MORE.” Luke 20: 36. 
But it is said of the “Wicked Dead” after their 1esurrec- 
tion and Judgment that they shall “DIE AGAIN.” Rev. 
2012-15. What.1s this “SECOND DEATH’? What 
was their “First Death’? It was the separation of their 
“Soul” and “Spirit” from their “Body,” so that their 
“Soul” and “Spirit” could exist in the flames of the “Hell 
Section” of “The Underworld” as did the “Soul” and 
“Spirit” of the “Rich Man.” Luke 16:24. But as the 
Wicked after Judgment are consigned to the “LAKE 
OF FIRE” where a physical body would be consumed, 
it is necessary that they “DIE AGAIN,” that is, lose 
their resurrection body, and go only “Soul” and “Spirit” 
into the “Lake of Fire,” for “Soul” and “Spirit” can exist 
in flames. ‘This explanation permits the “Lake of Fire” 
to be a Lake of LITERAL FIRE, and is in harmony 
with Christ’s teaching to that effect. 

From this we see that the Wicked are not to be anni- 
hilated or restored but are to survive for all Eternity in 
a disembodied form in the Lake of Fire. Dear reader, 
in which place will you spend the “Intermediate State’? 
Will it be with Christ in “Paradise” awaiting the “Resur- 
rection of Life,” or in “Hell” with the Rich Man awaiting 
the “Resurrection of Damnation”? Is your name written 
in the “Book of Life’? Will you be caught out at the 
“First Resurrection” ? 


XV 
The Abolition of Death 


ec} 


From the time when Adam and Eve bent over the 
murdered form of their son Abel, down to the present 
time, death has reigned over the human race, and no one, 
except Enoch in the Age before the Flood, and Elijah in 
the Jewish Dispensation, has escaped Death’s power, 
from the King upon the Throne, to the pauper upon the 
dunghill. But the Bible tells us that Jesus Christ— 


“HATH ABOLISHED DEATH, 
and hath brought 
LIFE and IMMORTALITY to light 
through the GOSPEL.” 
Ze lime 10) 


What is “Death”? Death is the “departure” (Exo- 
dus) of the “Soul” and “Spirit” from the “Body,” leaving 
the “Body” to corruption and dissolution. What does 
the word “Abolish” mean? The Standard Dictionary’s 
definition is—“To do away with; put an end to; annul, 
destroy.” Naturally then you ask if Jesus Christ has 
abolished Death, why do men still die? The answer is— 


DEATH HAS BEEN ABOLISHED 
BY PROCLAMATION. 


When God planted a Garden in Eden, and placed man 
in it, He promulgated a “Law” forbidding the eating of 
the fruit of the tree of the “Knowledge of Good and 
Evil.” The penalty for breaking the “Law” was 
DEATH. The “Death” was twofold. First it was “Spir- 
itual Death,” for Adam and Eve died “Spiritually” the 
moment they broke the Law, and secondly it was “Physi- 
cal Death,’ Adam dying physically 930 years after the 
Fall. Death then was introduced into the world by the 
sin of Adam—“Wherefore, as by one man (Adam) sin 
entered into the world, and ‘Death’ by sin; and so ‘Death’ 

114 


ELIJAH 


Fr 


IN 10 


TRANSLATIO 


116 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.” Rom. 
9:12. This “Law of Death” is still in force because it 
has never been repealed. A law however may be nulli- 
fied, or made of no effect (abolished) by the enactment 
of a law, that, when it goes into effect, will counteract it. 
So the “Law of Death,’ though it has never been 
repealed, has been ABOLISHED by the “Law of Resur- 
rection.” Jesus Christ abolished “Death” when He arose 
from the dead. And death will be abolished for all who 
are Christ’s at the “Rapture.” Then the “Dead in Christ” 
shall rise from their graves, and all the living “in Christ” 
shall be “caught up” with them without dying to meet 
Him who abolished Death, in the air (1 Thess. 4: 13-17), 
and those who shall be thus “caught up” shall be able 
to say— 
“O Death, where is thy STING? 
O Grave, where is thy VICTORY ?” 
1 Cormion oo: 


By slaying Christ, Death potentially slew himself, for 
he opened the door for Christ to enter into his dominions, 
the grave and the Underworld. We can picture “Death” 
saying to Captain Sepulchre, “Hold on to that man in 
Joseph’s Tomb until ‘corruption’ shall have seized upon 
Him, for if He comes out He will make a breach in the 
walls of Hades (the Underworld) through which all the 
prisoners of Hadcs will escape.” But it was not “Death” 
that had taken Christ captive. Christ simply pursued 
“Death” into his own dominions, and then conquering 
him came forth leading captivity captive, and crying— 
“IT. am the RESURRECTION and the LIFE.” And 
when Jesus appeared to John on the Isle of Patmos He 
said—‘‘Fear not; I am the First and the Last: I am He 
that LIVETH, and WAS DEAD; and, behold, I am 
ALIVE FOR EVERMORE, Amen; and have the 
‘KEYS’ of HELL (Hades) and of DEATH (the 
Grave).” Rev. 1:17-18. In this Proclamation we see 
that Christ has abolished Death, that He has the KEYS 
of “The Underworld” and of the “Grave,” and sooner or 
later He will open their “Gates” and free their captives, 
and “Death” the last enemy shall be destroyed (1 Cor. 
15:26), and there shall be no more DEATH. Rev. 21:4. 


THE ABOLITION OF DEATH 117 


THE IMMORTALITY OF THE BODY 


But Jesus not only “Abolished Death,’ He brought 
LIFE and IMMORTALITY to light through the Gospel. 
It was the immortality of the BODY, not the soul, that 
Jesus brought to light. The immortality of the soul is 
not questioned in the Old Testament, but the immortal- 
ity of the body was in doubt until Jesus revealed it, and 
proved it by His own resurrection from the dead. Once 
the bodies of the Righteous are raised they can never die 
again, “for they are equal unto the angels (that never 
die); and are the ‘Children of God,’ being the Children 
of THE (the First) Resurrection.” Luke 20:36. But 
this is not true of the bodies of the Wicked. The bodies 
of the Wicked shall rise again at the Second Resurrec- 
tion, and after Judgment shall be sentenced to the 
“SECOND DEATH.” Rev. 20:11-15. The “First 
Death” was separation of the soul from the body, and so 
will the “Second Death” be. That is, the Wicked shall 
lose their resurrection body which will be destroyed by 
the flames of the “Lake of Fire,” but their “soul” and 
USpiliteemillmexistmOLever ime thes (odkeor Mire, because 
“soul” and “spirit” are indestructible by fire. This 
throws light on Matt. 10: 28—“Fear not them which kill 
the ‘BODY,’ but are not able to kill the ‘Soul’; but 
rather fear Him who is able to destroy BOTH SOUL 
AND BODY IN HELL.” The word here translated 
“Hell” is the Greek word “GEHENNA,” which means 
the “Lake of Fire.” We must distinguish between the 
word “kill” and the word “destroy.” ‘J’o “kill” is to take 
away life or existence. To “destroy,” in the Bible use 
of the word, is not to take away existence, but to change 
the state of existence. We see then that while men can 
“kill” the BODY, God can “destroy” both SOUL AND 
BODY in the “Lake of Fire.” Destroy the “body” by 
consuming it, and causing it to pass into a gaseous state, 
and destroy the “soul” by changing the form of its moral 
existence, the permanency of which is eternal. From this 
we see that the “Second Death” disembodies the “Soul” 
of the Wicked for all Eternity, and teaches that the 
“Immortality of the Body” is conditioned on whether the 
“Soul” that indwells it is Righteous or Wicked. 


CHRIS FIRST APPEARANCE TO THE DISCIPLES 


XVI 


Spirit Transformation 
Ie] 


By “Spirit Transformation” is meant the power of 
“Spirit Beings” to change from an invisible to a visible 
form, as the angels did when they appeared to men in 
Old Testament times, and as Jesus did when He appeared 
to His Disciples after His Resurrection. Let us exam- 
ine the “Spirit Transformations” of Jesus. Take first 
His fifth appearance after His Resurrection. It was in 
the evening of the Resurrection Day. The Disciples, 
except Judas and Thomas, with a few others, were 
assembled in a house in the City of Jerusalem. They 
were intently listening to the report of the two disciples 
to whom Jesus had appeared on the road to Emmaus, 
when Jesus, in some unaccountable manner (for the doors 
were shut for fear of the Jews, John 20:19) appeared in 
their midst. At first they were “terrified and affrighted” 
and supposed that they had seen a “Spirit,” but Jesus 
said unto them—‘‘Why are ye troubled? and why do 
thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and 
my feet, that it is I MYSELF: handle me, and see; for 
a ‘spirit’ hath not FLESH and BONES, as ye see me 
have. And when He had thus spoken, He shewed them 
His hands and His feet (that they might see the nails- 
prints). And while they yet believed not for joy, and 
wondered, He said unto them, Have ye here any meat? 
And they gave Him a piece of broiled fish, and of an 
honeycomb, and He took it, and did EAT BEFORE 
THEM.” Luke 24: 37-43. 

The first question to settle is, when did Jesus get His 


GLORIFIED BODY? 


Did He get it when He arose from the dead, or not 
until His Ascension? Between the “Resurrection” and 
“Ascension” there was an interval of 40 days, during 
which time Jesus appeared 11 times to His disciples, 
every time in His human body. If Jesus was glorified 

119 


120 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


when He arose from the dead how are we to account 
for these human appearances? On the other hand, if 
He was not glorified until His Ascension, how are we to 
explain His mysterious comings and goings, and where 
did He spend the intervening time? It is the clear teach- 
ing of the Scriptures that Jesus was the “First-fruits’ 
of them that slept (1 Cor. 15: 20-23), and it is natural to 
suppose that His Resurrection was the pattern of our 
resurrection, and we know that the bodies of the Saints 
are sown in corruption, and raised in INCORRUPTION; 
they are sown in dishonor and raised in GLORY; they 
are sown in weakness, and raised in POWER; they are 
sown a natural body, and raised a SPIRITUAL body. 
1 Cor. 15:15, 42-44. Therefore if Jesus is the “First- 
fruits” of the Resurrection, and a sample of the resurrec- 
tion of the Saints, He must have received His “Glorified 
Body” when He arose from the dead. There is no state- 
ment or inference in the Scriptures that would lead us 
to believe that the resurrected bodies of the saints are 
first raised corruptible, and then after a longer or shorter 
time glorified. In fact the very opposite is taught. 
“Behold, I shew you a ‘Mystery’; we shall not all sleep, 
but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, 
and the dead shall be raised INCORRUPTIBLE, and 
we shall be changed.” 1 Cor. 15: 51-52. 

As further proof that Jesus received His “Glorified 
Body” when He arose from the dead we have the account 
of His appearing to Mary Magdalene, who, when she 
recognized her Lord, wanted to touch Him, but He for- 
bade her, saying—“Touch me not; for I am not yet 
ASCENDED TO MY FATHER.” John 20:17. Yet in 
less than an hour He met the other women returning 
from the Sepulchre and permitted them to HOLD HIS 
FEET and WORSHIP Him. Matt. 28:9. Where was 
He between those two interviews? Where could He 
have been, to be consistent with His refusal to let Mary 
touch Him until He had ascended to the Father, but to 
the Father? And how could He have made the passage 
if He had not received His “Glorified Body” when He 
arose from the dead? 


AUS 


M 


M 


S ATE 


THE TWO DISCIPLE 


122 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


This leads to the following 
PROPOSITION: 

THAT THE RESURRECTION BODY IS EN- 
DOWED WITH THE CAPACITY OF TRANS- 
FORMING ITSELF AT PLEASURE INTO A PHYS- 
ICAL BODY AND BACK AGAIN INTO A SPIRIT 
BODY. 


This is the only solution of the miraculous appear- 
ances of Jesus to His Disciples during the 40 days that 
elapsed between His Resurrection and Ascension. Take 
His fourth appearance, the one to Cleopas and his com- 
pan.on on the road to Emmaus. Jesus assumed a physi- 
cal body and walked with those two, and talked with 
them, yet they did not know Him because “their eyes 
were holden,” but when He sat down to meat with them, 
they knew Him in the breaking of bread, that is they 
recognized His physical body, probably by the pierced 
hands or by the voice, and the next moment He VAN- 
ISHED_ out of their sight. That.is He changed His 
“physical body” back into His “Spirit Body” and disap- 
peared from human vision. 

Take Jesus’ fifth appearance, when He entered the 
closed room in Jerusalem. He entered it in His “Spirit 
Body.” That was why they were “terrified and 
affrighted” and supposed that they saw a “spirit.” Luke 
24: 37-43. But when He spoke and said unto them, “Why 
are ye troubled?” He assumed His physical body, and as 
proof called on them to behold His “hands” and His 
“feet” (that had been pierced), and to “handle Him,” for 
said He a “spirit hath not FLESH and BONES, as ye 
see me have.” And as further proof that it was His physi- 
cal body that they saw He called for something to eat, 
and when it was handed to Him, He ATE BEFORE 
THEM. ‘Then after He had talked with them awhile, He 
breathed on them and said—“RECEIVE YE THE 
HOLY GHOST,” and then He disappeared as suddenly 
and mysteriously as He came. 

Take the sixth appearance of Jesus. It occurred 
eight days later. The conditions were the same. John 
20: 26-29, The Disciples were in the same room, the 


NSFIGURATION 


E TRA 


TH 


124 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


doors being shut, only this time Thomas, who had been 
absent on the first occasion, was present. Jesus entered 
as suddenly and mysteriously as before, but the Disciples 
were not surprised this time. Jesus had a twofold pur- 
pose in this second visit, first to reprove the unbelief of 
Thomas, and secondly to give additional proof that He 
had risen from the dead and was present in His physical 
body. This He did by demanding that Thomas put his 
finger in the nail holes in His hands, and thrust his hand 
into the wound in His side made by the Roman soldier’s 
spear. Then after a few words to Thomas He again dis- 
appeared as mysteriously as before. 

Without stopping to consider Jesus’ other appearances 
to His Disciples we pass to His Ascension. It clearly 
proves that He had at that time His “Glorified Body,” 
for He could not have ascended in His “physical body” 
if it had not been endowed with Resurrection POWER, 
for the change from the “physical” to the “Spirit Body” 
did not take place until after He had passed beyond the 
cloud. Acts 1:9. As the SAME Jesus is to come back 
in LIKE MANNER (Acts 1:11), He is not only to reap- 
pear from the Heavens in a cloud at His Second Coming 
(Luke 21:27), but it will be the SAME Jesus that 
ascended. That is, the physical body that Jesus shall 
assume when He comes back will be the same “nailed 
pierced” body in which He appeared to His Disciples, for 
when He comes back at the “Second Stage” of His Com- 
ing and reveals Himself at the Mount of Olives (Zech. 
14:4) to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, “every eye shall 
see Him, and they also which PIERCED Him (the 
Jews).” Rev. 1:7. The return of Jesus in His “nailed 
pierced” body is necessary for His identification by the 
Housé of Israel. Zech. 1210) John 19:37; 

While the body in which Jesus arose was the same 
body that was laid in the tomb and had not seen cor- 
ruption (Acts 2:25-27), it does not follow that our resur- 
rection body will be the same that we possessed at death, 
though it will be the same in identity. 

As further proof of the transforming power of the 
Resurrection body, we have the visit of Moses and 
Elijah to the earth, when they appeared on the Mount of 


THE SEA 


<= 
Be 


CHRIST WALKING O 


126 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


Transfiguration to Jesus and three of His Disciples. 
Luke 9: 28-36. Moses had died and been resurrected and 
had his Resurrection body (Jude 9), otherwise He could 
not have appeared with Elijah, who had been caught up 
without dying and had his “Glorified Body” (2 Kings 
2:11), for the spirits of the dead’ cannot returasto: the 
earth until they get their Resurrection body. Their 
appearance on the Mount in bodily forms that were rec- 
ognized by Peter (Mark 9:5) was proof that they could 
transform their “Spirit Bodies” into visible material 
bodies. And the fact that Jesus as He prayed was 
“Transhgured” (Transformed) before the Disciples, that 
is was seen in the “TRANSITION STAGE,” His “Soul- 
ish Spirit Body” illuminating his physical body, thus 
revealing His DEITY, just as when an electric light is 
turned on it illuminates the receptacle in which it is con- 
fined, and to whose shape it conforms, is evidence that 
Jesus, as the Son of God incarnate in the flesh, had the 
power, before He died and rose from the dead, of trans- 
forming Himself. For only on this supposition can we 
account for His walking on the sea. Note the similarity 
of His appearance on the sea, to His appearance to His 
Disciples in the upper room at Jerusalem. In both in- 
stances He first appeared as a “Spirit,” and then visual- 
ized Himself in His physical body. Matt. 14: 26-27. Mark 
6:49-50. As the sea was stormy, “tossed with waves” 
(Matt. 14:24) by reason of a “great wind” (John 6:18), 
and the Disciples were in the “midst” of the sea, or half- 
way across, the inference is that Jesus by changing from 
His “physical body” to His “Spirit Body” transported 
Himself from the shore to the middle of the Lake, and it 
was while still in His “Spirit Body” that His Disciples 
first saw Him and thought He was a “Spirit,” and then, 
as He spoke the words—“‘It is I; be not afraid,” He again 
assumed His physical body. As to His and Peter’s walk- 
ing on the water in their physical bodies, we have no 
explanation, other than it was miraculous, Jesus having 
employed some higher law of which we as yet know 
nothing. We must not forget in this connection that 
Jesus as the “ANGEL OF THE LORD” had. the power 
before His Incarnation of assuming bodily form. Gen, 
16: 7-14, and other references. 


SPIRIT TRANSFORMATION SAE 


That the power to transform or change the “Spirit 
Body” into a “physical body” and back again is a 


LAW OF THE “SPIRIT WORLD” 


is clear from the fact that all angelic beings seem to pos- 
sess it, as seen in the visits of angels to Abraham (Gen. 
leas) yeLot (Gens i9 31-3), Daniel (Dane (8 <15-17), 
Zacharias (Luke 1:11), Mary (Luke 1: 26-35), the shep- 
herds (Luke 2:8-15), the women at the Tomb (Matt. 
Zoi) meter CACtSulZ 25-10) and) john, (kev, lhl, 
17:7). The change or transformation is made some- 
where within the limits of the earth’s atmosphere. Take 
for illustration the appearance of the angel to Manoah, 
the father of Samson. Judges 13: 15-20. When the angel 
ascended he went up in the “FLAME of the altar,” show- 
ing that the change in his bodily form began as he entered 
the flame, otherwise his “physical” body would have been 
consumed. This is additional proof that the “Spirit” 
body is not affected by fire. It is also worthy of note 
that the transformation may be only of a part of the body, 
as in the case of the “Hand-writing on the Wall,” when 
only the “fingers” appeared. Dan:5:5: Back. of the 
fingers, but invisible, must have been the person of the 
one who wrote, for fingers cannot write of themselves. 
The “Law of Transformation” will also account for a 
number of occurrences otherwise unexplainable. for in- 
stance, the “Catching Away” of Philip. Acts 8: 39-40. 
After the baptism of the Ethiopian Eunuch we read that 
the “SPIRIT OF THE LORD” caught away Philip and 
transported him to Azotus, some 25 miles away. From 
this we see that the “Spirit of the Lord” has the power to 
make invisible and transport a human being from one 
place to another. This is confirmed by the experience 
of the Prophet Ezekiel. In Ezek. 3:14-15, we read— 
“The SPIRIT lifted me up, and took me away,” and the 
Prophet found himself at Tel-abib, on the river Chebar, 
among those of the Captivity. This “catching awav” of 
Philip and Ezekiel may explain how Paul was “CAUGHT 
UP” to Paradise. 2 Cor. 12:1-4. Paul tells us that when 
he was caught up he did not know whether he was “IN 
his body,” or “OUT of his body.” As Paul tells us that 


128 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


the event happened 14 years before he wrote his second 
Letter to the Corinthians, which was about the time he 
was stoned at Lystra and dragged out of the city as dead, 
but arose and re-entered the city (Acts 14: 8-20), some 
suppose that while Paul’s body lay as dead, that only his 
soul and spirit were caught up to Paradise, while his body 
remained in a state of “suspended animation,” or that he 
actually died and was resurrected. If the event occurred 
at the time of his stoning at Lystra, Paul was not caught 
up in his body, for his disciples never lost sight of his 
body (vs. 20). If however the event occurred at a time 
when there were no witnesses, Paul may have been 
“caught up” as was Enoch and Elijah and then brought 
back to the earth. 

The Apostle John while a prisoner on the Isle of 
Patmos tells us (Rev. 4: 1-2) that a “DOOR WAS 
OPENED IN HEAVEN,” and a voice said—‘COME 
UP HITHER,” and that immediately he was “IN THE 
SPIRIT,” that is, his body took on its “SPIRIT FORM” 
and he was “caught up” to Heaven. » Later on in the sev- 
enteenth chapter (Rev. 17: 1-3) John says that one of 
the “Seven Angels” which had the “Seven Vials” said to 
him—“Come hither; I will show unto thee the Judgment 
of the “Great Whore’ that sitteth upon many waters,” 
and adds—‘‘So he carried me away IN THE SPIRIT 
into the Wilderness.” The time required for John to see 
all he describes in the Book of Revelation shows that it 
was more than a mere vision, that John was transported 
“IN THE SPIRIT; that is; in his “SPIRIT BODY? sto 
Heaven, where there was revealed to Him in “Motion 
Picture” form the things that are to come to pass in the 
“Day of the Lord.” The difference however between 
Paul’s experience and John’s is, that Paul heard things 
that it was “unlawful” (forbidden) for him to utter 
(2 Cor. 12:4), while John was commanded to write what 
he saw and heard. Rev, 1:19, 


XVII 
The Resurrection 


|} 


The Scriptures speak of three kinds of resurrection. 
1. NATIONAL. ‘This refers to Israel who are now na- 
tionally dead and buried in the “Graveyard of the 
Nations,” but who are to be revived and restored to their 
own land. Hosea 6:1-2. 2. SPIRITUAL. This refers 
to those who are spiritually dead in ‘“Trespasses and 
Siisaee phe 2 lO EL pho. 45) Roms onl. hismsra 
“Present Resurrection” and is going on continually. 
Every time a soul is “born again” there is a passing from 
“death” unto “life,” a “Spiritual Resurrection.” John 
5: 24. 3. PHYSICAL. This is of the dead body. The 
“Spirit” of man does not die, it goes back to God who 
gave it. All that goes into the grave is the body, and all 
that can come out of the grave is the body. 


THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY 


Jesus clearly and distinctly taught a resurrection 
“from the grave.” 


“Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming in 
the which all that are in the graves shall hear 
His voice, and shall come forth; they that have 
done good unto the ‘Resurrection of LIFE,’ and 
they that have done evil unto the ‘Resurrection 
of DAMNATION.’” John 5: 28, 29. 


Here Jesus teaches the resurrection of both the 
“Righteous” and the “Wicked.” The Apostle Paul taught 
the same thing. 


“And have hope toward God, which they 
themselves also allow, that there shall be a resur- 
rection of the Dead, both of the Just (justified), 
and of the Unjust (unjustified).” Acts 24:15, 

129 


130 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


“For as in Adam all die (physically), even 
so in Christ shall all be made alive (physi- 
cally). 2 i Gorel S22: 


That the Apostle means “physical” death, and “phy- 
sical” resurrection here, is clear, for it is the body, and 
not the spirit that he is discoursing about, and so the 
Universalist has no “proof text” here for the doctrine oi 
“Universal Salvation.” 

These passages clearly teach that there is to be a 
resurrection of ‘all the dead,” and if we did not look any 
further, we would be led to believe that the Righteous and 
the Wicked are not only to rise, but that they are to rise 
at the “same time.” But when we turn to the Book of 
Revelation we find that the Righteous are to rise “before” 
the Wicked, and not simply precede them, but there is a 
space of a 1000 years between the two Resurrections. 
Rey. 20:4, 5. 


“And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, 

and judgment was given unto them.” 

This refers to the saints of the First Resurrection, 
who, represented by the “Four and Twenty Elders” of 
Rev. 4:4, are seen seated on thrones surrounding the 
Throne of God. 


“And I saw the souls of them that were be- 
headed for the witness of Jesus, and for the 
Word of God, and which had not worshipped 
The Beast, neither His Image, neither had re- 
ceived His Mark upon their foreheads, or in their 
hands; and they LIVED and Reigned With 


Christ a THOUSAND YEARS.” 


These are the “Tribulation Saints.” John first saw 
them in their “martyred” condition (as souls), then he 
saw them rise from the dead (they lived again), and they, 
with the First Resurrection Saints, reigned with Christ a 
Thousand Years. 


“But the rest of the dead (the wicked), lived 
not again until the “Thousand Years’ were 
finished.” 


GQ3ILHDIYAdOD 


“3 aw SHE 


MON NWunsS wg OM Am LL 


.SONINV319, 


S-¢:02° AI 
y) JO WY OY) IDET g 


62-82 S NHO(* 


.SLINY4J-1SUIS 
SINIVS 1IAe j-1Suly —s> 


1SIYHQ 40 NOILO3¥YNSIY 


Onn f: 
NOILOAUYNSIY 


NOMVINSIY AUYVAIVO 
" pial 


HOUNHO JHL 
otra 


paw aT og) Jo qI0q ‘PwEP OMT J9 NOILVSNIdSIG, LNISIY _ jec-od; 
: EMRE 


Si-v2 SLOW 


spas oq) yruD GOL FE 


BY i 
oa ee 8 ¢ 13d°2,AVG INO SV SYV3A 0001 V,, aS hes 


SNINZAQ ONTINYOW 
ee AVG NOILS NSs3 H ASS ee 
NOILOIYYNS AY & au ho ags te NOILOAYHNS3aY 


QNO93S isul4 


sey oq 03 SoTpi0998 

Seqoog 9g) u} Ud) as9K arya 

s8uiq) 990g) Jo 200 poSpoy asom —= 
PrP 9g) PUN 9In Jo yoo 247 El: 02 AIY 


Che Loa eee (lea CER el els 

Se oulsane SNOILDIUUNSIAY JH 
wa orite kas opin, SNOMH I aLinM 

“Pq paw que og aR) owoQae Bioy vay, 


Sp oo ew ie) amq pow Sa0g 
Se wT v aw | poy ir 


TSZ THE SPIRIT WORLD 


The rest of the verse—‘‘This is the ‘First Resurrec- 
tion,’ ” refers not to the “rest of the dead,” but to those in 
verse 4, who lived and reigned with Christ for a 1000 
Years, tor: 


“Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the 
First Resurrection, on such the Second Death 
(the doom of the Wicked, Rev. 20: 14, 15), hath 
no power, but they shall be Priests of God and 
of Christ, and shall Reign With Him a THOU- 
SAND YEARS.” Rev. 20:6. 


That the Dead are to rise in different bands or co- 
horts, with an “interval of time” between, is beautifully 
brought out in 1 Cor. 15: 22-24. 


“For as in Adam all die (physically), even so 
in Christ shall all be made alive (physically). 
But every man in his own order.” 


The word translated “order” is a military expression, 
and means a band, cohort, brigade or division of an 
army. Paul then gives the order: 


1. “Christ the First Fruits.” 


2. “Afterward they that Are Christ’s At His 
Coming.” 


3. “Then cometh The End.” 


Now we know that between “Christ the First Fruits,” 
and they that “are Christ’s at His Coming,” there has 
already been nearly 1900 years, and as we have seen there 
will be 1000 years between the resurrection of those that 
“are Christ’s at His Coming” and the “Wicked dead,” 
therefore there is not to be a simultaneous resurrection 
of the Righteous and the Wicked. Already there has 
been an “OUT Resurrection” from “among the dead.” 
When Jesus expired on the Cross “the earth did quake, 
and the rocks rent: and the graves were opened; and 
many BODIES OF THE SAINTS which slept AROSF. 
and came out of their graves AFTER HIS RESURREC- 
TION (they could not precede Him), and WENT INTO 
THE HOLY CITY (Jerusalem), AND APPEARED TO 
MANY.” Matt. 27: 50-53. They with Jesus made up the 


THE RESURRECTION 133 


“FIRST FRUITS,” and they are now in their resurrec- 
tion bodies with Him in glory. 

lt has been objected that the passage in Rev. 20:4, 5, 
is the “only” place in the Bible where a “length of time” 
is given between the resurrection of the Righteous and 
the Wicked, and that it is not fair to base such an im- 
portant fact upon a single statement found in such a 
symbolic Book. But we do not have to depend on Rev. 
20: 4-6 to prove that there is to be an “out” Resurrection 
“from among the dead.” ‘There are a number of passages 
reterring to the resurrection of the dead that are unex- 
plainable only on the supposition that there is a “time 
space” between the resurrection of the Righteous and 
the Wicked. 

In the reply that Jesus made to the Sudducees in 
answer to their question as to whose wife the woman 
would be in the next world who had had seven husbands 
in this, He said— 


“They which shall be accounted worthy to 
obtain that world (Age), and the resurrection 
from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in 
marriage; neither can they die any more (Sec- 
ond Death) ; for they are equal unto the angels; 
and are the ‘Children of God’ being the children 
of THE (out) Resurrection.” Luke 20: 35, 36. 


This is a very important statement. The use of the 
Greek word “Aion,” translated “world,” but which means 
“Age,” shows that Jesus is speaking of a “class of dead” 
who are to be raised “before” the next or “Millennial 
Age,” and that those thus raised can “die no more,” there 
is no “Second Death” for them. Why? Because they 
are “equal unto the angels” and are the “Children of 
God,” having been “born again,” and are the “Children of 
THE Resurrection,” the “Out FROM AMONG The 
Dead” or FIRST RESURRECTION, for only the “Chil- 
dren” of the “First Resurrection” shall live again “be- 
fore” the Millennium. 

In Luke 14:14 Jesus speaks of a “special” resurrec- 
tion that He calls the Resurrection of the “JUST.” This 
is an “Out Resurrection” from “among the dead,” and 


134 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


is only for the “Justified,” and must refer to the “First” 
Resurrection. 

The writer to the Hebrews (Heb. 11:35) speaks of a 
“better” Resurrection, and it is a significant fact that the 
Apostles preached through Jesus the Resurrection “from 
the dead.” Not the Resurrection “of” the dead, that they 
always believed, but the Resurrection “from among” the 
dead, that was a “New Doctrine.” 

There is no question but that Paul believed in the 
resurrection “of” the dead, and that he expected to rise 
“some time,” but in his letter to the Philippians (3:11) he 
expresses the hope that he might “attain unto ‘THE’ 
resurrection of the dead.” Paul must therefore have had 
in mind some “special” Resurrection. What Paul meant 
is clear when we turn to 1 Thess. 4: 15-17, where he 
speaks of the resurrection of the “dead in Christ” and 
“translation of the living saints,” at the Second Coming 
of the Lord, and as Christ is to come back to usher in 
the Millennium, then that event must “precede” the Mil- 
lennium, and be an “Out Resurrection from among the 
dead,” for the “rest of the dead” live not again until the 
1000 years “are finished.” 

But the resurrection of the Righteous and the Wicked 
is not only to be different as to “time” but as to CHAR- 
ACTER. They that have done “good” (the Righteous) 
shall rise unto the “Resurrection of LIFE,” while they 
that have done “evil” (the Wicked) shall rise unto the 
“Resurrection of DAMNATION.” John 5: 28-29. And 
we read in Rev. 20: 12-15, that those who are raised at 
the Second Resurrection, or the “Resurrection of Damna- 
tion,” must appear at the “GREAT WHITE THRONE 
JUDGMENT,” and that their names shall not be found 
written in the “Book of Life,” and thev shall be cast into 
the “Lake of Fire,” which is the “SECOND DEATH.” 


THE MANNER OF THE RESURRECTION 
It is claimed by many that the departure of the Soul 
and Spirit from the body at death is what is meant by 


the Resurrection. But that cannot be so for the dead 
(the body) are to rise from their “GRAVES.” John 5: 


THE RESURRECTION 135 


The objection to the resurrection of the body is based 
on the supposition that bodies that have been eaten by 
animals, blown to atoms, or destroyed by fire or quick- 
lime cannot be restored. But nothing is impossible with 
GOD. Luke 1:37. Acts 26:8. Paul reveals the manner 
of the Resurrection in 1 Cor. 15: 35-54, It is called— 


THE GERM THEORY. 


That is, that in every human body there isa “LIVING 
GERM” that is indestructible, and though the body turn 
to dust that “Living Germ” will continue to exist in the 
grave, or wherever it may have been deposited, and like 
the seed in the ground will spring into “immortal life” 
when the time for the resurrection of the body shall come 


XVIII 


The Resurrection Body 
—} 


The “Resurrection Body” is not a body of “Flesh” 
and “Blood,” for “flesh” and “blood” cannot inherit the 
“Kingdom of God.” 1 Cor. 15:50. Blood is the source 
of corruption and decay, therefore there can be no blood 
in the Resurrection body. To preserve a human body it 
must be drained of blood, or the blood chemically pre- 
served by an embalming fluid. The office of the blood is 
to convey to the tissues of the body, that are wasting 
away, the elements that will keep them in repair. Hunger 
and thirst are nature’s warning that the body is wasting 
away and must have food and drink to replace the waste, 
or the body will die. But when we get our Resurrection 
body we shall neither hunger nor thirst any more (Rev. 
7:16), a sign that our bodies shall no longer waste away, 
therefore we will need no blood. In Heaven there will 
be no sickness or death, both of which are caused by cor- 
ruption, and there will be no necessity for night, for 
night is for sleep, and sleep is not necessary where there 
is no need for recuperation. Neither will there be any 
more pain, for pain is caused by diseased tissue. 

But while we shall not have a body of “Flesh” and 
“Blood,” we shall have a body of “Flesh and Bones,” such 
as Jesus had after His Resurrection. Luke 24:39. Physi- 
cians tell us that the bursting of a human heart is caused 
by a draining of all the blood in the body to the heart, 
which bursts under the pressure. If this be true, then 
Christ’s heart had burst before the sac that held it was 
pierced by the Roman soldier’s spear, and so His whole 
body was drained of what blood was left in it after the 
“bloody sweat” of Gethsemane, and the hemorrhages of 
the nail pierced hands, and what was laid in the grave 
was only “FLESH” and “BONES.” But the “Flesh” of 
our Resurrection body will not be human flesh but flesh 


adapted to the “Spirit World,” and as such a body will 
136 


THE RESURRECTION BODY 137 


require a “framework,” that framework will be of bones 
suitable for a “Spirit Body.” Thus our “Spirit Body” 
will be a “vehicle” adapted to every need of our “Spirit,” 
and be able to convey us anywhere in the Universe of 
God. It will differ as much from our present body as the 
body of the “Butterfly” differs from the “Caterpillar” 
from which it rose in resurrection from the grave of the 
“cocoon.” Let us look at the character of the “Resur- 
rection Body.” The Apostle says that— 


1. “It is sown in ‘Corruption,’ it is raised in 
‘INCORRUPTION.’” 


“Tt 1s sown in corruption.” This is the truth unvar- 
nished. It is sown in foul rottenness. Says the Apostle— 
“Our conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we 
look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall 
change our ‘VILE BODY,’ that it may be fashioned like 
unto His Glorious Body.” Phil. 3: 20-21. To box a man 
up because his presence cannot possibly be tolerated in 
his own home one day longer, to convey him away in a 
hearse from his family, and friends, and society; from 
church and bank; from store and office, from shop and 
mill, and deposit his remains seven feet beneath the sod 
to protect the community from the vile odors that would 
contaminate the atmosphere, is what the Apostle means 
by “SOWN IN CORRUPTION.” When Abraham ap- 
pealed to the children of Heth, saying, “I am a stranger 
and sojourner with you: give me a possession of a bury- 
ing-place with you, that I may bury my dead OUT OF 
MY SIGHT” (Gen. 23:4), the scene is pathetic. What 
dead one was it he thus desired to put out of his sight? 
None other than that beautiful woman he delighted to 
call Sarai, my Princess. To avoid burial, and prevent 
corruption, the ancient Egyptians embalmed their dead 
and preserved their remains in expensive and beautiful 
mummy cases, a process now numbered among the lost 
arts. In order to banish the thought of corruption the 
East Indian Emperor, Shah Jehan, reared the incompara- 
ble marble palace—“TAJ MAHAL,” over the decaying 
remains of his beloved wife. And as if to rob death of 


138 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


its terrors and express a belief in the immortality of the 
body, magnificent buildings have been erected, like 
“Westminster Abbey,” in which the great and noble have 
been entombed. But all the beauties of architecture, and 
the skill of the sculptor’s chisel, cannot rob the grave ot 
its repulsiveness. 

But while the body is sown in “corruption” it is to be 
raised in “INCORRUPTION.” “It doth not yet appear 
what we shall be; but we know that, when He shall 
appear, we shall be like HIM.” 1 John 3:2. “For this 
corruptible must put on INCORRUPTION, and this 
mortal must put on IMMORTALITY.” 1 Cor. 15: 53-54. 
And when that shall take place—“Death will be SWAL- 
LOWED UP IN VICTORY.” O happy day, when the 
undressed soul shall put on the fadeless beauty and undy- 
ing glory of the Resurrection body. That will be the 
Easter of all Easters, when the voice of the Archangel 
shall summon the sainted dead to rise, and corruption 
shall put on incorruption, and we shall be caught up to 
meet the Lord in the Air. 1 Thess. 4: 13-18. 


2. “It is sown in ‘Dishonor,’ it is raised ‘IN GLORY.’ ” 


How many a body has been sown in dishonor through 
some ancestral sin or some inherited propensity, through 
some depraved appetite or unnatural passion, some physi- 
cal disfigurement or unsightly deformity that it carried 
from the cradle to the tomb. But the Resurrection will 
end all this. It shall be raised IN GLORY. No more 
shame or dishonor about it because no more sin. No 
more disfigurement or blemish, because our Resurrection 
body shall be like unto His Glorious body. 


3. “It is sown in ‘Weakness,’ it is raised in ‘POWER.’ ”’ 


A corpse is the embodiment of weakness. But if that 
lifeless body be the body of one of God’s saints He will 
raise it with power. Not only will He display power in 
its resurrection, upheaving graves, breaking into vaults, 
and shattering mausoleums if necessary, but the raised 
body will be possessed of power. This power includes 
more than physical power. It means an enlargement of 
our present faculties. 


THE RESURRECTION BODY 139 


as LGia 


Take “Sight” for example. Our present range of vis- 
ion is limited. If we want to see at a distance we take a 
telescope, if we want to examine minute objects we use 
a microscope, if we want to discover the cause of some 
disorder in the human body we resort to the “X Ray.” 
When our vision is impaired we use eye-glasses. We 
have power to see through a pane of glass, but not 
through a sheet of iron. We are surrounded on all sides 
by a universe of objects and creatures that the human 
eye cannot see. If our spiritual eyes were opened we 
would see spirit beings about us, as did the young man 
at Dothan (2 Kings 6: 15-17) and as Nebuchadnezzar saw 
one like unto the Son of God walking in the midst of the 
Burning Fiery Furnace. Dan. 3: 24-25. 


b. HEARING 


Our “Hearing” also is defective. There are sounds 
too high, and too low for the human ear. We can hear 
the footfall of a horse, but if we want to hear the foot- 
fall of a fly we must use the Microphone. We can mul- 
tiply the power of the human voice by the use of the 
Megaphone, and the Telephone increases the power of 
the human ear. If man can invent such instruments to 
augment his power of hearing, what cannot God do for 
the ear when He endows it with the power of the Resur- 
rection body? 

c. TASTE 


Taste implies a mouth, tongue, palate, and digestive 
organs. This raises the question of eating and drink- 
ing in the next world. Why not? Jesus ate in His 
Resurrection body. He said to His Disciples at the last 
supper—‘“I will drink no more of the ‘Fruit of the Vine,’ 
until that day that I drink it new in the KINGDOM OF 
GOD.” Mark 14:25. In Rev. 22:2 we read of the 
“Tree of Life” which bears twelve winds of fruit, a differ- 
ent kind for each month. The fruit of these trees are 
for “Overcomes” only (Rev. 2:7), while the leaves are 
for the healing or preservation of the Nations that shall 


140 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


occupy the New Earth. While, as we have seen, there 
will be no occasion for eating in the next world to sup- 
ply the waste of the body, yet doubtless one of the pleas- 
ures of the Heavenly World will be eating and drinking. 


d. MEMORY 


How quickly we forget! But the fault is not with 
the mind, but the brain. We all know that sickness and 
old age affect the memory. But when we reach that 
land where there is no sickness, and where the inhabi- 
tants never grow old, then the brain shall be perfect in 
its powers, and memory shall never fail or fade. The 
words of Abraham to the “Rich Man”—“SON REMEM- 
BER” (Luke 16:25) are an implication that the “worm 
that shall never die” to the wicked will be “MEMORY.” 
When we speak of having a poor memory, we mean we 
have a poor “remembrancer.”” Memory is like the record- 
ing cylinders of a Phonograph, it preserves the doings of 
our life, and at the Judgment will recall every “idle 
word” and justify the fairness of our sentence. 

If the powers of the Resurrection body shall only be 
the increasing and intensifying of our present natural 
powers, they will be surpassingly grand, but the Scrip- 
tures teach that our present faculties and powers are to 
be wonderfully multiplied. Now our means of loco- 
motion are limited. We have feet with which to walk, 
and we have multiplied our means of travel until we can, 
by the aid of the Automobile and Aeroplane, traverse 
great distances in a very short time, but in our Resur- 
rection body we shall be able to pass with the swiftness 
of the hghtning from earth to Heaven. When Daniel 
began to pray the angel Gabriel was commanded to go 
to him, and “flying swiftly” he reached Daniel’s side 
before he finished his prayer. Dan. 9: 20-23. The angels 
know where they are going and why. They know the 
highways and byways of the “Stellar Spaces,” and how 
to steer their course through the labyrinth of suns and 
systems and radiant orbs. They have “telescopic,” 
“microscopic,” and “X Ray” vision. They need neither 
the “Telephone” nor “Wireless” to communicate with 


THE RESURRECTION BODY 141 


each other. The flight of a bird is limited to the atmo- 
sphere, the flight of angels has no limit inside the boun- 
daries of the Universe. 


4. “It is sown a ‘Natural’ body, it is raised a 
‘SPIRITUAL’ body.” 


By “Spiritual” body we are not to understand some 
sort of—“Etherealized Ghostlike Structure” that has no 
substance. As we have already seen, the “Spirit Body” 
is a material body with “Spirit” qualities and faculties, 
subject to the higher natural laws of the “Spirit World.” 
Every “Force” in the Universe must have a “Motor” 
adapted to its use. We cannot utilize the power of 
“Steam” without the Steam Engine, nor the power of 
“Electricity” without the Dynamo. The motive force of 
the human body is the “Soul,” and of the “Resurrection 
Body” the “SPIRIT.” “The ‘First Adam’ was made a 
‘Living Soul’; the ‘Last Adam’ a ‘QUICKENING 
SPIRID 2) (Cor. 715045" 9 Phatuis, wer sot from the 
“First Adam” our natural body, adapted to the use of its 
“motor force” the “Soul,” and from the “Second Adam” 
we get our “Resurrection Body” adapted to its “motor 
force’ the “SPIRIT.” This is what the Apostle means 
when he says of our body—“It is sown a ‘Natural’ body, 
it is raised a ‘SPIRITUAL’ body.” 

If we are to have such gloriously endowed bodies in 
the next world, why should we so regret to part with 
these poor weak bodies of flesh? Why pamper and 
cherish, and adorn a body that is soon to feed the worms? 
While there should be no regret at parting from these 
physical bodies of ours, we must not forget that by los- 
ing them we become incomplete. That is, we are no 
longer “Body,” “Soul” and “Spirit,” but only “Soul” and 
“Spirit.” We have seen how the “Spirit” in its “Soulish 
Body” in the “Intermediate State” is conscious, but it is 
subject to limitations. The Righteous are confined to 
“Paradise” and the Wicked to “Hell.” It is not until 
the Righteous get their “Resurrection Body,” and again 
become a Trinity of “Body,” “Soul” and “Spirit,” that 
they have the freedom and powers of angelic beings to 


142 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


roam the Universe. This explains the prayer of the 
Apostle—“I pray God your WHOLE SPIRIT AND 
SOUL AND BODY be preserved blameless unto the 
COMING OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST.” 1 Thess. 
5:23. That is; the Apostle hoped that the Saints at 
Thessalonica would not die before the Lord’s return, so 
that without losing their body by death, their physical 
body would be changed to their “Glorified Body” and 
they be caught up like Enoch and Elijah to meet the 
Dorduin thegAir., See=the contextard) Ihess, 4417. 


THE RESURRECTION OF DAMNATION 


There is a dark side to the picture we have painted. 
If the Resurrection of the Righteous is unto “LIFE,” 
the Resurrection of the Wicked is unto “DAMNA- 
TION.” John 5: 28-29. There are two verses in 1 Cor. 15, 
the 37th and 38th, that throw light on the above. “That 
which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall 
be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of SOME 
OTHER GRAIN, .. . to every seed his OWN 
BODY.” 

There is a law in the natural world, that—‘‘Whatso- 
ever a man soweth that shall be also reap.” Gal. 6: 7-8. 
A man cannot sow tares and reap wheat. To every seed 
its own body. If a man die without the Christ Life, he 
cannot rise to a Christ-like resurrection. The difference 
between the “Resurrection of LIFE” and the “Resurrec- 
tion of DAMNATION?” as to character no human lan- 
guage can portray. They are as far apart as Heaven 
and Hell. Dear reader, to which of these Resurrections 
will you arise? 

As our resurrection bodies will have visible “form” 
and “shape” it stands to reason that they will have a 
framework of “flesh” and “bones,” but it will be “flesh” 
and “bones” adapted to its new environment. We must 
not forget that Enoch and Elijah went up in their 
“bodies.” Presumably their bodies were “glorified” in the 
transit, but they were not “disembodied,” and if they have 
use for a “body” in Heaven why not we? Is it reasonable 
to suppose that only those two saints shall be in Heaven 


THE RESURRECTION BODY 143 


in their bodies? Why did Michael the Archangel con- 
tend with the Devil over the “body” of Moses, if Moses 
had no further need of it? Did not he and Elijah have 
use for their bodies when they appeared on the Mt. of 
Transfiguration with Jesus? And if they were “the” two 
men that stood by in “white apparel” when Jesus ascend- 
ed (Acts 1:9-11), and are to be the “Two Witnesses” of 
Reva ll:3-6, we see that as) they are the. type “of the 
Resurrected and Translated Saints, that the Saints at the 
Rapture will have “bodies” like Moses and Elijah now 
have. 

The Resurrection of Christ with those who arose with 
Him was the “First Fruits,” the Resurrection of the 
“Righteous” is the “Harvest,” of the “Tribulation” Saints 
the “Gleanings,” and the “Wicked” are the “Tares.” 

It has been objected that if all the dead that have 
ever lived on this earth were to be raised at one time 
there would not be standing room. But as we have seen 
they are not to be all raised at the same time, for the 
Right7~ous shall rise and be taken off the earth a 1000 
years before the Wicked. But suppose they were. The 
present population of the world is 1,700,000,000. A gener- 
ation is generally counted as 33 years. Suppose for argu- 
ment there had been 1,700,000,000 on the earth in Adam’s 
day, and that that many had died every 33 years since, 
that would make the dead up to 1900 A. D., 4000 B. C. 
years + 1900 A. D. years = 5900 years + 33 = 178 
generations of 1,700,000,000 people each = 302,600,- 
000,000 dead, who if they were raised and were each given 
a square yard to stand on, could stand on less than one- 
half of the state of Texas. 


XIX 


The Judgments 


The common opinion that the Millennium is to be 
ushered in by the preaching of the Gospel, and that after 
the Millennium there is to be a “General Resurrection” 
followed by a “General Judgment,” and then the earth is 
to be destroyed by fire is not Scriptural. 

There can be no “General” Judgment because the 
Scriptures speak of one Judgment as being in the “Air” 
(1 Thess. 4: 16, 17; 2 Cor. 5: 6-10) ; another on the“Earth” 
(Matt. 25:31-46); and a third in “Heaven,” the earth 
and its atmosphere having fled away. Rev. 20: 11-15. 
And to make sure that these three separate Judgments 
should not be combined in one General Judgment scene, 
three different Thrones are mentioned. 


1 The “Judgment Seat of Christ.” 2 Cor. 5:10. 
“In the Air.” For “Believers” only. 

2 Lhe “Ihrone of Glory.~ Matts25 31,32. 
“On the Earth.” For “The Nations.” 

3. The “Great White Throne.” Rev. 20:11, 12. 
“In Heaven.” For the “Wicked Dead.” 


The Scriptures speak of 
Five Separate Judgments. 
They differ in five general aspects. As to “Subjects,” 
“Time,” “Place,” “Basis of Judgment” and “Result.” 


JUDGMENT NO. 1 


. Subjects—Believers as to “SIN.” 
. Time—A. D. 30. 
. Place—Calvary. 
. Basis of Judgment. Christ’s “FINISHED WORK.” 
Result—, 
1. Death as to Christ. 
2. Justification as to the Believer. 
144 


nNPwONH 


THE JUDGMENTS 145 


This Judgment is PAST. The Bible proofs of the 
results of this Judgment are Rom. 10: 4. 


“For Christ is the END OF THE LAW 
for righteousness to every one that Believeth.” 

“There is therefore NOW no condemnation 
(Judgment) to them which are in CHRIST 
JESUS, who walk not after the flesh, but after 
the Spirit. For the Law of the ‘SPIRIT OF 
LIFE’ in Christ Jesus hath made me FREE 
From the Law of ‘Sin and Death.” Rom. 8: 
Ne Ae 

“Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that 
heareth my word, and believeth on Him that 
sent me, HATH EVERLASTING LIFE aiid 
shall not come into condemnation (Judgment) 
but IS PASSED From Death Unto Life.” John 
5: 24. 


The “Believer’s” Judgment for Sin then is PAST, 
and was settled at the Cross. But we must not forget 
that the Judgment of the Believer is threefold. 

1) As aeguinner., 

ZAS aon. 4 

So.) AS ay oervant.” 

As we have already seen his Judgment as a “Sinner” 
is Past. Let us look at his judgment 


2. Asa “Son.” 


As soon as the sinner accepts Christ as his personal 
Saviour that settles the “Sin” question for him. For if 
our iniquities are laid on Him (Jesus), then they are not 
on Us, ‘Isa. 535, 6. But the “Sin” question, and the 
“Sins” question are two different things. Christ died on 
the Cross to atone for “sin,” to pay the penalty of Adam’s 
disobedience in the Garden of Eden. “Sin” is that tend- 
ency in mankind to do wrong which we call “Natural 
Depravity.” We do not get rid of this “tendency” by the 
“New Birth,” but we get a “counteracting force” called 
the “New Nature.” We become a “dual personality,” 
composed of the “Old” and “New Natures,” and which 


aH 


z 
Z 
m 
2 
2) 
[s) 
° 
° 
z 
‘ 

z 
> 
4 
J 
nN 
by 
ba 


ANAWDONE OL GINDIM FHL: 


NOILOIMENSIY DNOIIS 


Py 


21-102 AIY 

“wIL0m £109) &} Burpicoow 
ARO0g oO TT UAHA a19M Gorge 
Bary ovoq Jo yno pespnf cross 
Prop OM POW sos JO 3009 MY7 
# qorqas ‘pousdo #vm Jooq s9qI0 
<ae paw :pousdo udm #4009 97) 
Bite Pop eiojoq pawys Feed pte 
Team ‘prop ogy Ave PUY ZT 

*m9q 49} oow{d on paboy 
wu 0109) puv ! ome poy dosroq 
0g) paw que OT) COM SROs CIOL 


QI v0 ye 7eq) TG pow 
aries saw | poy 


.GV30 Oayx9IM 3HL 


GON 
LN3aWDONne 


ee-16:S2 Liv 


29 Treqe ayy euojq PUY FE 
Loyd ang 
yay ep aode ye oq THT 


Tre pare + 
ged yo Bog oy TUM & IS 


“x WITWSTE IL SY 


(2) > 
2 EXT oS) 
5, o™® 


H4 
\SNOILYN, SAL 
YON 
LN3WSOaNL 


LIAO 


oF 


4aH1 HiIM ONIWOD ISIMH 


O1-L:( SSAHL 2 


NOILVIZAIY 


S1iNiv 


iE 


i hep qreqqee 
Bo EQsa ‘sate eq) a} jm oy 
vaig teot yay of feud yeh 06 


12-02:42 LLIVW 


NOILWINSIaL 
1V385 
2 . 
41 wrod 


.SM4fr, 3H 
€ ON 
IN3IWDCNC 


*peq 40 pood oq" 
 22TOGA ‘Onop Meq eq 18) OF 
Buypicoee ‘Kpoq my ay emop wag? 
em aazooor fein ono Lu049 ogy 
:JEDYD Jo yoow pusuaspal ony auoy 
“9q avodde [Te wor oa 24 OT 


O1:S 40d? 


ZON 
LNaWdGN 


Li-vl bv SSIHL'I 
SINIVS NOWIIBENSIY ASyIZs 7 


NONVISNVY Li 


SINIV 
WUNidvy 


SMYOM, 404 SY3AI1N39G 


NTS, 30s S¥2AINIg 
: VON 
inawooanr 


SINaWDGONe 
FHL 


THE JUDGMENTS 147 


shall predominate depends on which we feed and which 
we starve. This explains the “warfare” that Paul describes 
as his experience, after his conversion, in Rom. 7: 1-25. 
This warfare will continue until the “Old” nature is eradi- 
cated at death. “Sins” are the outward acts of wrong- 
doing that we commit as the result of our tendency to sin. 
These sins must be put away daily by “confession.” 


‘My little children, these things write I unto 
you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we 
have an ‘Advocate’ with the Father, Jesus Christ 
theirighteous,, “1 john 2: 

“Tf we confess our sins, He is faithful and just 
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all 
unrighteousness.” 1 John 1:9. 

Our Judgment as “Sons” is for “unconfessed sins.” 
The punishment is chastisement. This explains much of 
the chastisement of Christians, and should show them 
that they are “Sons” and not “Bastards.” Heb. 12: 5-11. 
Paul says— 

“Tf we would ‘judge ourselves’ we should not 
be judged. But when we are judged we are 
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be 
condemned (Judged) with the world.” 1 Cor. 
Tiles 

Our duty then as “Sons” is to “self-judge” ourselves 
daily, “confess our sins,” and so avert the chastisement of 
our Heavenly Father 


3. Asa Servant. This leads us to— 


JUDGMENT NO. 2 


Subjects—Believers as to “WORKS.” 
Time—After The Church is caught out. 
Place—“Judgment Seat of Christ” (in the Air). 
Basis of Judgment—Their “WORKS.” 

. Result—Reward or Loss. 
This Judgment is FUTURE. 


“We must all appear before the ‘Judgment 
Seat of Christ,’ that every one may receive the 


Wd "YH 'ISYHOXOS 
NIMYY] BONSYVID AG 
NMVIQ ON o3ndisag 


O31HDIUAGOD 


5 


‘ory 4q oe 08 
ok Spoans oq [es Jjowurrg of 
qq : sso] Joys [eqs oy ‘poumq 
oq [eqs JOM e.ceM Lue Jy cy 
“PANAMA v OALooaL [TBYE oy 
‘aodnosom) yfInq Qiu oy YOIT A 
epiqe yom s.ovar dow yy FT 
ery 08 
ey yo FOAM sem Lose £14 
Tregs 914 0g} pus Sosy Aq paywos 
44 0g TENS If osBIAq YE OAE[oOp 
Treqs Aep 043 10g : 
oq [eqs yiom souM Koag gL 
Sorqqnys ‘Key ‘poos Ssouoys sno1o 
oad ‘xoapts ‘pjo3 uorepunoy si} 
uodn ppg uvw Sav yt MON ZT 
YSITGO snsa/' BT 
y avg) Ae, ue 


“qytep 
mosy O83 
SAND BY ByIT 
09) JO ATL on} JOT Z 
“qurdg 0g) 
THB 40g ‘NSB OT) JoYr 0 
oqas ‘snsa¢ 4S14 UT ele gor 
wean? 0 UoNMAMapuCS oa 
Kou oiqjoroqy a TT 


Z1:8°WOY Cv ep:€e IHNT 


6€:€2 IAN] 


SINO1G SNOIDINd 
Ava g [waaWa]zvVsOL] 


om} eajoas fear one L140 yq9 
{481199 Jo yas jaomspnt ons ox0g 
-og avadde [Jv ysnm om s0g OT 


“prq 10 pood aq 
9 1oq}oYA ‘oupp TCG oy 4 
Furpsooor ‘Apeq ery wr auop 85 


INILINIGW] q 
~sryr? 
SS0u5 ani SN 


CON LNaWwoanr ON LN3aWDGnLP 
YAAFITSG AHL JO SLNAWOAGNL OMI FHL 


THE JUDGMENTS 149 


things ‘done in the body’ according to that he 
hath done, whether it be ‘good’ or ‘bad’ (worth- 
lessee. @or..5.10) 


The pronoun “We” occurs 26 times in the chapter, 
and in every instance it means the Believer, and the 
Epistle is addressed to the “Church” and “Saints” at 
Corinth, so the Judgment here spoken of is for Believers 
“only.” The “Time” of the Judgment is when the Lord 
comes, (IS Cor 4-0); andethes Riaccmice siete airn(L 
Thess. 4:17) and before the Judgment Seat of Christ. 

It will not be a Judgment in the sense of a “trial” to 
see whether the judged are innocent (saved) or zuilty 
(lost), for it is a Judgment of the “saved only.” It will 
be like the Judges’ stand at a Fair, or Race Track, where 
rewards are distributed to the successful contestants. 
Paul describes such a scene in 1 Cor. 9: 24-27. 

It is not a Judgment for sin, but for “works.” This 
Judgment is described in 1 Cor. 3: 11-15. 


“Other foundation can no man lay than that 
is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man 
build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious 
stones (valuable building stones, as marble, etc.}, 
wood, hay, stubble; every man’s ‘Work’ shall be 
made manifest; for the ‘Day’ (Judgment Day) 
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by 
‘fire,’ and the fire shall try every man’s ‘work’ 
of what sort it is. If any man’s work ‘abide’ 
which he hath built there upon he shall receive a 
‘reward.’ If any man’s work shall be ‘burned’ 
he shall suffer ‘loss; but ‘he himself shall be 
saved ;’ yet so as by fire.” 


The result of this Judgment is “reward” or “loss.” 
All our “bad” and “dead works,” represented by the 
wood, hay and stubble, will be consumed, and only our 
“good works” shall remain. There is much which passes 
for Christian service which is merely human and secular, 
and does not count in our eternal reward. For those 
who deserve a “reward” it will be 


The Crowning Day. 


150 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


After the Grecian games were all over the runners, 
wrestlers, and successful contestants assembled before 
the “Bema,” or Judges’ stand, which was an elevated seat 
on which the Umpire sat, and the winners received a 
“corruptible crown” of “laurel leaves.” Some had no 
reward, they had lost the “Victor’s Crown.” But while 
there was no reward there was no punishment, they 
were not cast out. 

The New Testament speaks of Five Crowns. See 
Chart, the “Judgment of Reward,” next page. 


1. The Crown of “LIFE.” 
This is the “Martyr’s” crown, and is mentioned twice. 


“Blessed is the man that endureth temptation 
(testing), for when he is ‘tried’ (at the Judg- 
ment Seat of Christ), he shall receive the ‘Crown 
of Life’ which the Lord hath promised to them 
that love Him.” James 1: 12. 

“Fear none of those things which thou shalt 
suffer; behold, the Devil shall cast some of you 
into prison, that ye may be tried (tested) and 
ye shall have tribulation ten days; be thou faith- 
ful ‘unto death,’ and I will give thee a ‘Crown 
of Life’ Rey. 2: 10: 


Notice it does not say “until” death, but “unto” 
death. They were not to recant but to remain faithful 
unto a martyr’s death. To recant was to lose the crown. 
This refers to the martyrs of the Tribulation Period. 


2. The Crown of “GLORY.” 


This is the “Elder’s” or “Pastor’s” crown, given by 
the Chief Shepherd when He shall appear. But it is not 
for those who serve for “filthy lucre” or “lord it over 
God’s heritage.” 1 Pet. 52-4. 


3. The Crown of “REJOICING.” 


This is the “Soul Winner’s” crown. Those brought 
to Jesus by us will be our “crown of rejoicing” at His 
Coming.- -1 Thess. 2219220) “Prile4" 1; 


PIONSHor GILHYIMAIOD 

> VJ YUH '3SVHOROd 
NIMBY] JONIWVID 

AQ NMVEG aXv dINdIS3ag 


4-2:$ ‘L3d'1 


=x 
ry a = 
oy puoqdags Jorg? og) BQH PLY F xj™ 
Pp) 0} id a 
x FOG 2q3 01 © - a 
alm : aan req ‘ssimuon #7 OV7g AIM el~ 
% < SNinvaddy SIH "par pet soins NMOUD SHALIV A a> 
Pa bd BROT OHM ISOHL WO4 SAO," hee Jeu TURD «soy oad ma reo Fa Ds 
x|> ro an see eho Te ie ea ae eovororiraatn soe Teens Pee tle 
‘l4 ORGS CSIMLL —Faeprem yor oad tree sspat ype EEL ips oq tem adie amudesy Heo 6 WOOT ® 
ol= MHOUD SHINNIM MOS Serer Rp om Wee ee Oar) ee Nee ee eee MOND SHOLOIA TAL - 
- ft — oI : 
2 “ekeee ed fo aod 6g ay de pm to OTT eS ARS. Fo (pal aa ee en He 
ino po musesid ogy ay of cose SSINSNOTINDIYIO NMOUD TSTTIONMOUD 84S ay ae 
voniny (3oaprenyaenan 1 Bs : ; 
Top el adoq 100 m weqe 104 Gt i lopeeedinay Left een ot 8 
Dwtoloray 40 NMOUD : cA STG GES ee NMOUD JIGILENUUOON] 
: SEA (WW3a 3H1) SA 
6-4:61'A34 3 1STUHD JO LV3S LNaWDGNr Botyassaks 


HOUNHO 


awv] 


3HL 40 aH) i 
2DVINUYW ONILIAN |] 
3H] 1siaHg 


| 


duvmMay 40 
LNIWDGNL 3HL 


ont, 


Sy «SHUO wos 
451739 46 unaw 


152 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


4. The Crown of “RIGHTEOUSNESS.” 


This is the crown of those who “love His appearing” 
and will be given in “that day”—the Day of His Appear- 
ingee2, Cinteaes 


5. The Crown “INCORRUPTIBLE.” 


This is the “Victor’s’ crown, and is for those who 
“keep under their body” (1 Cor. 9: 25-27) ; who do not 
yield to their fleshly lusts. Who do not permit them- 
selves to be diverted from the Master’s work by worldly 
amusements and pleasure, nor saturate their body with 
drugs. 

If we do not want to be “ashamed at His Coming,” 
(1 John 2:28), let us see to it that we keep our body 
“under” and so live that we shall secure a crown. 


JUDGMENT NO. 3 


Subjects—The JEWS. 

Time—“The Great Tribulation.” 

Place—Jerusalem and Vicinity. 

Basis of Judgment—Rejection of the Godhead. 

Result—Their Conversion and Reception of Christ 
as Their Messiah. 


This Judgment is FUTURE. 


While the Church is being judged at the Judgment 
Seat of Christ in the air, the Jews will be judged under 
Antichrist on the earth. The Jews are an “earthly” 
people; and as all the promises to them are “earthly,” it 
follows that their Judgment must be of an “earthly” 
character. The basis of their Judgment is their “re- 
jection of the Godhead.” In the days of Samuel they 
rejected God the Father. 1 Sam. 8:7. In the days of 
Christ they rejected God the Son. Luke 23:18. In the 
days of Stephen they rejected God the Holy Spirit. Acts 
7:51, 54-60. For their sin they have been scattered 
among the nations until the “Times of the Gentiles” are 
fulfilled. When the “Times of the Gentiles” are about to 
end the Jews will be gathered back to the Holy Land 
“unconverted,” and caused to “pass under the rod,” Ez, 


OE PN 


THE JUDGMENTS 1538 


20: 34-38. They will be cast into God’s “Melting Pot” 
(Ez. 22: 19-22), and pass through an experience spoken 
of by Jeremiah and Daniel as the “TIME OF JACOB’S 
TROUBUE. lem 3024-72 Dane 1281 “Christ calle it 
“The Great Tribulation,’ and He and Zechariah the 
Prophet associate it with the “Return of the Lord.” Matt. 
24:21-31. Zech. 14:1-11. The human agent the Lord 
will use will be Antichrist, the awfulness of whose rule 
will be supplemented by the pouring out of the “Vials 
or Godisuwrath “upon the earthy ~Rev. 15: 1) 5-816: 
1-21. 

The result of these terrible Judgments will be that the 
Jews will call in their misery upon the Lord. Zech. 12: 
10. Then Christ will come back to the Mt. of Olives 
(Zech. 14:4) and the Jews will look upon Him whom 
they = pierced (Zech 12210), and a nation, the jewish 
Nation, shall be “born (converted) in a day.” Isa. 66:8. 
This will complete the Judgment of the Jews. 


JUDGMENT NO. 4 


Subjects—The NATIONS (Gentiles). 

Time—The “Revelation of Christ.” 

Place—The “Throne of His Glory.” On the Earth 
—‘‘Valley of Jehoshaphat.” 

4. Basis of Judgment—Their Treatment of Christ’s 

Brethren—The Jews. 
5. Result—Some Nations “SAVED,” Others “DE- 
STROYED.” 


This Judgment is FUTURE. 


Se 


The account of this Judgment is given in Matt. 25: 
31-46. The description of this Judgment, and of the one 
given in Rey. 20: 11-15 are combined by many, and taken 
to teach the doctrine of a general Judgment. But when 
we compare them they differ so widely that it is evident 
that they do not describe the same event. What God 
has put asunder let no man join together. The following 
comparison will show the difference in the two accounts: 


O3LHDIMACOD 


6ilz{u i) 


WOODNITY 
WINNITUW 


vd "VaInd ‘a9vng KOs 
NIMWV] 2ON3INVI9 AB 
' Navug ox osnbs3g 


Kui wv! c-¥:06 Wal '22-61:22'BE-¥E:02 29 


ASIYHOILNY, 


YION() 


Ori MOY 

01: 'Y090 2 
JLSIUHO 40 
ivag .N3aMDOt 


TVOILJHINAYWd 


4 
= 
m 
a 
> 
v 
+ 
c 
Pe) 
mm 


LNIWNDANL 40 
NOILVSN3dSIQ 
aHL 


THE JUDGMENTS 155 


Matt. 25: 31-46. 


No Resurection. 

Living Nations Judged. 

On the Earth, Joel 3-2, 

No Books Mentioned. 

Three Classes Named. “Sheep,” “Goats,” 
“Brethren.” 

Time—Before the Millennium. 


Rev. 20: 11-15. 


A Resurrection. 

Dead Judged. 

Heaven and Earth Gone. 

Books Opened. 

One Class Named. “The Dead.” 
Time—After the Millennium. 


This comparison reveals the fact that one of these 
Judgments is ‘on the earth,” the other in the “heavens,” 
and that they are separated by 1000 years. 

The Greek word “ethnos” here translated “Nations” 
occurs 158 times in the New Testament. It is translated 
“Gentiles” 92 times, “Nation” or “Nations” 61 times, and 
“The Heathen” 5 times, but it is never in any instance 
(unless it be this) applied either to the “dead” or the 
Ptesurrecteds: 

As this is a Judgment of nations only, the Jews can- 
not be in it, for they are not reckoned among the nations. 
Num. 23:9. And as the Church will be associated with 
Christ in this Judgment, for the “Saints” (the Church) 
shall judge the “World” (the Nations), (1 Cor. 6:2) the 
Church cannot be in this Judgment either. As we have 
seen the Church and the Jews have been already judged, 
so the “Judgment of the Nations” cannot be a general 
Judgment. Who then, is asked, are meant by the Sheep? 
Do they not represent the Righteous, and all the Right- 
eous from the beginning of the world to the end of Time? 
And do not the Goats in like manner represent all the 
Wicked? 

If the Sheep are the Righteous, and the Goats the 
Wicked, then who are the Brethren? If they are the 


BON 


OV 


DRONE 


156 ; THE SPIRIT WORLD 


“followers of Christ,” as some claim, they should be 
classed with the Sheep. The Scriptures teach that the 
Righteous are saved by “faith,” and the Wicked are lost 
because they “reject Christ,” but in this Judgment scene 
the Sheep inherit a “Kingdom” and the Goats are com- 
manded to “depart,” because of their treatment of certain 
Brethren. 

All the confusion is caused by trying to make a Judg- 
ment of “nations” mean a Judgment of “individuals.” 
The Sheep represent one class of Nations, and the Goats 
another class, while the Brethren represent the Jews 
(Christ’s brethren). We must bear in mind the time and 
place of this Judgment. The time is at the “Revelation 
of Christ” when He comes to set up His “Millennial 
Kingdom” on the earth The place is the “Valley of 
Jehoshaphat” in the vicinity of Jerusalem. 


“For, behold, in those days, and in that time, 
when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah 
and Jerusalem, | will also gather ALL NA- 
TIONS, and will bring them down into the 
‘Valley of Jehoshaphat,’ and will plead with them 
there for MY PEOPLE and for my heritage 
ISRAEL, whom they have scattered among the 
Nations, and parted my land.” Joel 3:1, 2. 


This prophecy clearly states that there is to be a 
“Judgment of Nations” on the earth in the “Valley of 
Jehoshaphat” at the time of the restoration of the Jews to 
their own land, and that the basis of Judgment is the 
treatment by the nations of Christ’s brethren—The Jews. 

During the “Tribulation Period” the Nations that 
treat the Jewish People kindly, feeding and clothing 
them, and visiting them in prison, will be the “Sheep 
Nations,” while those who neglect to do so will be the 
“Goat Nations.” At the “Judgment of Nations” the 
King (Christ) will say to the “Sheep Nations,” inasmuch 
as ye have been kind to My brethren (the Jews), “Come, 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared 
for you from the foundation of the world.” This King- 
dom is the “Millennial Kingdom” that the “Sheep Na- 
tions” as Nations will “inherit” and possess during the 


THE JUDGMENTS 157 


Millennium. And as they are to be among the “saved 
nations” of the New Earth (Rev. 21:24) it can be said 
of them that they, or at least the righteous individuals of 
them, shall enter into life eternal. Matt. 25:46. Christ’s 
sentence upon the “Goat Nations” will be—“Depart from 
Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil 
and his angels,” and “these shall go away into everlasting 
punishment.” The “Goat Nations” will at once be de- 
stroyed as Nations, not one of them shall get into the 
Millennium, and the wicked individuals that compose 
them will perish and be eternally lost. 


JUDGMENT NO. 5 


1. Subjects—The WICKED DEAD. 
Time—During the Renovation of the Earth by 
Hire: 
3. Place—Before “The Great White Throne.” 
4. Basis of Judgment—Their “Works.” 
5. Result—Cast Into the “Lake of Fire.” 


This Judgment is FUTURE. 


The account of it is given in Rev. 20:11-15. It will 
take place at the close of the Millennium a 1000 years 
after the Judgment of the Nations, and betore the “Great 
White Throne.” The “Great White Vhrone” will not be 
on the earth, for the “Great White Throne Judgment” 
will take place during the renovation of the earth by fire, 
for the “renovation” of this Earth is reserved or kept 
until the time of that Judgment, which Peter calls “The 
Day of Judgment and Perdition of Ungodly Men” (2 Pet. 
3:7), because the Judgment of the “Great White Throne’ 
is the Judgment of the wicked dead. 

All the Righteous dead will arise at the First Resur- 
rection. If any Righteous die between the First Resur- 
rection and the Resurrection of the “wicked” or Second 
Resurrection, they will rise with the wicked dead at that 
Resurrection. The words—“Whosoever was not found 
written in the Book of Life” (vs. 15), implv that there 
will be “some,” probably very few, Righteous at the 
Second Resurrection. 


158 THE SPIRIT WORLD 


At the close of the Millennium and just before the 
renovation of the earth by fire, the living Righteous will 
probably be translated, and the living Wicked or Un- 
godly will be destroyed in the flames that will consume 
the earth’s atmosphere and exterior surface. 

The Wicked or Ungodly will not be judged to see 
whether they are entitled to Eternal Life, but to ascertain 
the “degree” of their punishment. The sad feature of this 
Judgment will be that there will be many kind and lov- 
able people there who were not saved, and who will be 
classed among the “ungodly” because they rejected 
Christ as a Saviour. The “Books” will be opened in 
which the “Recording Angel” has kept a record of every 
person’s life, and they will be judged every man accord- 
ing to his “works.” Some will be sentenced to a more 
severe punishment than others, but none will escape. The 
worst of all is, that those who were not so bad must spend 
eternity with the ungodly, and that in the “Lake of Fire.” 
Their punishment includes the second death, which 
means that they shall lose their resurrection bodies, in 
which they were judged, and become “disembodied 
spirits” again, and so exist in the “Lake of Fire” FOR- 
EVER. 

The “Fallen Angels” (not the Devil’s angels), who 
are “reserved in everlasting chains under darkness” will 
be judged at this time, which Jude calls the Judgment of 
the “Great Day.” Jude 6. 


DEAR READER, what is your relation to the “Spirit World”? 
Are you yielding yourself to the power and control of “Evil 
Spirits,” or are you allowing the “HOLY SPIRIT” to have full 
and complete possession of your life? On your choice depends 
your Eternal State. Your soul is of priceless value. For its sal- 
vation, and the redemption of your body, the Lord, Jesus died 
upon the Cross. Without the acceptance of Him as your personal 
Saviour, you will be eternally lost. Therefore, I beseech you, 
before you lay this book aside, that you commit yourself to Him 
who is able to save, so that at His coming to receive His own, 
you shall be among those who shall rise at the First Resurrection, 
or among those who shall then be alive and be caught up to meet 
Him in the air without dying. 

THE AUTHOR. 


OTHER BOOKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR 


Dispensational ‘Truth 


or 


God’s Plan and Purpose in the Ages 


The book contains 34 chapters of descriptive matter and 42 
splendid prophetical charts 9x20 inches, 48 one page charts, and 
15 cuts. The charts and cuts are interspersed through the de- 
scriptive matter, There are 300 columns of reading matter, each 
column 414%4x8'% inches, equivalent to any ordinary book of 450 
pages. The charts are unique, simple, clear, uniform in style, 
and present every phase of “Dispensational Truth.” The book 
is bound in cloth, atlas form, size 11xll inches, and the large 
charts spread over two pages. 


The book is the result of 30 years’ study of “Dispensational 
Truth.” It is sane. Not a “time-setter.”. Contains no specula- 
tive matter. Is not made up of quotations from other writers, 
but is based solely on the Scriptures from the “Futurist” stand- 
point. It is of permanent value, and a standard authority on 
“Dispensational Truth,” and is a mine of information on “Pro- 
phetic Truth” for the busy pastor, evangelist, Bible teacher, and 
all lovers of the Word. 


This work is not an experiment. Is no longer in its elemen- 
tary form, but has been revised and enlarged and is now in its 
fourth edition, is widely circulated over the world, is highly 
commended by leading prophetical scholars, and is being used 
in many Bible schools. The author has been a preacher and 
teacher of “Dispensational Truth” for 35 years, but only recently 
has put into printed form the result of his studies, with the 
hope that they may be a blessing to the world. 


TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS 


Whe Prophetic Word—Pre-Millennialism—Mountain Peaks of 
Propheecy—The Second Coming of Christ—Rightly Dividing the 
Word—The Present Evil World—The Dispensational Work of 
Christ—The Dispensationai Work of the Holy Spirit—The Jews— 
The Gentiles—The Church—The King—The Kingdom—tThe Spirit 
W orld—Spiritism—The Resurrections—The Judgments—Satan— 
Antichrist—The Satanic Trinity—The Four Gospels—The Seven 
Churches—The Tribulation—Babylon the Great—Renovation of the 
Earth—The Covenants—The Mysteries—Types and Antitypes—The 
Feasts of the Lord—The Offerings—The Three Trees to Which 
Israel is Compared in the Scriptures—The Dispensational Teach- 
ing of the Great Pyramid—Scripture Numerics—The Signs of the 
Times- . 


TITLES OF THE CHARTS 


(Only the Prominent Ones Named) 


The Ages as Viewed From Different Standpoints—The Moun- 
tain Peaks of Prophecy—The Perspective of Prophecy—The Two 
Comings—7000 Years of Human History—Rightly Dividing the 
Word—Relation of Jew, Gentile and Church to Each Other—The 
Times and Seasons—The Creation of the Earth—Six Days of Re- 
Creation—7 Cosmic P¥®ases of the Earth—Book of Genesis—The 
World’s 7 Great Crises—The Prophetic Days of Scripture—Greater 
Life and Work of Christ—The Jews—Book of Exodus—The Royal 
Grant to Abraham—Book of Daniel—Prophetical Chronology—Dan- 
lel’s Seventy Weeks—Map of Old Roman Empire—The Gentile Na- 
tions—The Church—Failure of Christianity—The King—Kingdom 
of God Versus Kingdom of Heaven—The Kingdom—The Church 
Versus the Kingdom—Kingdom of Heaven Parables—Book of Mat- 
thew—The Millennial Land—Book of Ezekiel—The Spirit World— 
Threefold Nature of Man—The Resurrections and Judgments— 
Judgment of Reward—Satan—Antichrist and “Times of the Gen- 
tiles”—The Four Gospels—When, the New Testament Books Were 
Written—Book of Revelation—Messages to the 7 Churches—Dan- 
lel’s Seventieth Week—Daniel and Revelation Compared—The 
Covenants—The Mysteries—Types and Antitypes—The Feasts of 
the Lord—The Tabernacle—Book of Leviticus—The Great Pyramid 
—Christ and the Saints Compared to the Heavenly Bodies—The 
Weeks of Scripture—The Signs of the Times. 


The Book of Revelation 


This book is the result of 25 years’ study of the Book of 
Revelation. The Book is interpreted from the Futurist Stand- 
point The writer’s purpose is to show that the Book is to be 
taken literally, and that it is written in chronological order. The 
text of the Old Version is used, and is printed at the top of each 
subject. The text and descriptive matter is emphasized by the 
use of capitals and black type. 

The book is illustrated with over 30 charts, maps, and dia- 
grams. There are also numerous cuts of the symbols, beasts, 
etc., spoken of in the Book of Revelation, distributed through 
the book. These help to elucidate the text and add to the value 
of the book, and save much explanatory matter. The make-up 
and printing of the book is unique. The divisons and headings 
of the subjects are all printed in heavy black type. This adds 
to the cost of the book, but makes the subject matter of the book 
stand out in bold relief. While there are but 225 pages in the 
book, the size of the tvpe, and the enlarged page, 6 x 9 inches, 
make it equivalent to an ordinary book of 400 pages. 

The book is sane, contains no speculative matter, nor opin- 
ions of the writer. The book is not a commentary made up of 


quotations from other writers. The writer is neither a copyist 
nor compiler. The only Author the writer has sought to follow 
is the Author of the Book, the LORD JESUS CHRIST. us 
has simply sought to interpret the “MIND OF CHRIST” a 
revealed in the Book of Revelation. The writer’s aim has pee 
to prepare a standard work on the Book of Revelation, from the 
Futurist Standpoint, that can be used as a text-book in Theo- 
logical Seminaries and Bible Schools, and a help to Ministers, 
Missionaries, and Bible Students, generally. Its appearance at 
this time is timely, when the prophetic utterances of the Book 
of Revelation are rapidly approaching their fulfilment. 


Rightly Dividing The Word 


iit Ss BOOK FCOMPARES “INT VALUE. WITH] THE 
BOOK QIN) SID ITS IP EIN SyATDMOUN ANIL, IIR al,” IPS RGIS IS 
IS TO “RIGHTLY DIVIDE THE FUNDAMENTAL DOC- 
TRINES” IN A SERIES OF “CONTRASTS,” AS “LAW AND 
GRACE, DAL AVAN DI IWORKS, ELC: 


The author has made it the work of his ministry to preach 
the “Fundamentals.” This volume contains the cream and meat 
of his sermons and Bible lectures. The book contains twenty- 
nine chapters and fifty-five charts. The charts are one page 
charts, clear and simple, and suitable for lantern slides, or biop- 
ticon, in Bible class work. The book contains 330 pages, and is 


bound in cloth. 
CHAPTERS 


Rightly Dividing the Word—Ages and Dispensations—Jew and 
Gentile—Churech and Kingdom—The Four Gospels—The Two Ad- 
vents—The Spirit World—Satan—The Satanic Vrinity—*The Mys- 
tery of Godliness” and “The Mystery of Iniquity”’—Resurrection 
of Jesus—The Resurrection—The Judgments—The Two Adams— 
Atonement and Redemption—Sin and Salvation—Law and Grace— 
Faith and Works—The Two Natures—Standing and State—Regen- 
eration and Baptism—Election and Free-will—The Reciprocal In- 
dwelling of Christ and the Believer—The Threefold work of Christ 
—Christ Our Passover—Heaven and Hell—Judaism and Christian- 
ity—The Circles of the Christian Life—Palace Beautiful. 


CHARTS 


The Prophetic Days of Scripture—The Times and Seasons— 
Ages and Dispensations—The Three Stages of the Earth—The 
Prophetic Earth—First and Second Re-creative Days—Third and 
Fourth Re-creative Days—Fifth and Sixth Re-creative Days—The 
Dispensation of Judgment—The Jews—The Five Great World- 
Wide Kingdoms—The Gentiles—The Church—The Church Versus 
the Kingdom—Kingdom of God—Kingdom of Heaven—The Church 
—The Four Gospels—The Two Comings—The Mountain Peaks of 
Fourth Re-creative Days—Fifth and Sixth Re-creative Days—The 
Dispensation of Judgment—The Jews—The Five Great World- 
Wide Kingdoms—The Gentiles—The Church—The Church Versus 
the Kingdom—Kingdom of God—Kingdom of Heaven—The Church 
—The Four Gospels—The Two Comings—The Mountain Peaks of 
Prophecy—The Two Advents—Daniel’s “Seventy Weeks”—The 
Tabernacle—The Threefold Nature of Man—The Underworld— 


Satan—The Satanic Trinity—The Grenter Life and Work of Christ 
—The Virgin Birth—The Christ—The Antichrist—Antichrist and 
the Times of the Gentiles—The Resurrections—The Judgments— 
The Two Judgments of the Believer—The Judgment of Reward— 
The Two Adams—Law and Grace—Feeling Versus Faith—The Two 
Natures—Which is My Heart?—The Natural Man—The New Man— 
The Worldly Christian—The Sanctified Man—Standing and State— 
Believer’s Baptism—Reciprocal Indwelling of Christ and the Be- 
liever—Christ the Vine—The Threefold Work of Christ—Christ 
Our Passover—The Heavens—Judaism and Christianity—The Cir- 
cles of the Christian Life—Palace Beautiful—VFirst Floor Plan of 
Palace Beautiful—Second Floor Plan of Palace Beautiful. 


The Second Coming of Christ 


THIS IS A “BOOKLET” OF 72 PAGES, SIZE 6x9 
INCHES, AND IS ILLUSTRATED WITH EIGHT FINE 
CHARTS, 4%x8 INCHES. 


This “Booklet” was written for those who desire a little 
treatise on the “Second Coming” to circulate among _ their 
friends and to give to those who know nothing of the doctrine 
or who desire to know more. It gives a history of the doctrine, 
vividly describes the two stages of the Coming, and points out 
the “Signs of the Times.” It is timely, contains no speculative 
matter, is no “time-setter,” is of permanent value and is a sim- 


ple, clear, sane and Biblical exposition of the Blessed H 
the Lord’s Return. i eee 


The Book of Daniel 


THE CLOSING AND CROWNING WORK OF THE 
REEVE GLARE NCE LARKIN WiItHPAy PI GRU Ris Oh gEiE 
AUTHOR AND A FACSIMILE OF HIS AUTOGRAPH. The 
book contains 267 pages. 


REV. CLARENCE LARKIN ESTATE 
2802 North Park Ave., Philadelphia 32, Pa. 


4 > = 
——— 2 

- 

—- 

, 

- 2 
} ‘x ¥ 
7 ~ * 


DATE DUE 


Ni 


on T 7 : 
x eas \ 
rm 


| WAR 2g ‘02: 
JENS 


AY 
30 2f 


Demco, Inc, 38-293 


CINCINNATI BIBLE COLLEGE & SEM. LIBRARY 


— 235 L324 main 
THAT 
00082 3023 


i 


3 4 


235 L324s 
Larkin, Clarence. i 


The spirit world 


7 G.M, ELLIOTT LIBRARY 
Cincinnati Bible College & Seminary 


235 L324s 
Larkin, Clarence. 


The spirit world 


DEMCO 


i) 


“aya 
rao 


Say, ee 
BG, 


“a 


ps 


2S 


i 
rea 
Cea te 
wee 


cs 


ee A 
eee, tel 
err eet 


SANS S 


AUS 


ip 
yi 


SRSA, 
aA 


